Experiments and Observations on Different Kinds of Air (Joseph Priestley, 1774)
===============================================================================
Joseph Priestley — Vols. I-II (2nd ed., 1775) and Vol. III (1777), complete series. Public domain. Scans via Internet Archive.

* 


TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE 
Tus EARL or SHELBURNE, 


THIS TREATISE 1S 


: 


WITH THE GREATEST GRATITUDE 


AND RESPEOQT, 


INSCRIBED, 


BY HIS LORDSHIP's | 


MOST OBLIGED, 
AND OBEDIENT 


HUMBLE SERVANT, 


\ 


J. PRIESTLEY. 


| 5 — 


_ | 4. — —äꝓ—ĩä—ů ————— et ne — —— — — . — — 
—̃ — * 


T.H E 


NE reaſon for the preſent publica- 
tion has been 'the favourable recep- 
tion of thoſeof my Obſervations'on different 
kinds of air, which were publiſhed in the 
Philoſophical Tranſactions for the year 
1772; and the demand for them by per- 
ſons who did not chuſe, for the ſake of 
thoſe papers only, to purchaſe the whole 
volume in- which they- were contained. 
Another motive was the additions to my 
obſervations on this ſubject, in conſe- 
quence of which my papers grew too large 
for ſuch a publication as the Phi One 
Tranſactions. 


"\ 
\'s 


Contrary, therefore; to my intention, 
expreſſed Philoſophical Tranſactions, vol. 
64. p. 90, but with the approbation of 


the Preſident, and of my friends in the fo 
1 cietys 


vi PREFACE. 


ciety, I have determined to ſend them no 
more papers for the preſent on this ſubject, 
but to make a ſeparate and immediate 
publication of all that I have done with 


reſpect to it. 


Beſides, conſidering the attention which. 
1 am informed, is now given to this ſub- 
ect by philoſophers in all parts of Eu- 

rope, and the rapid progreſs that has al- 
ready been made, and may be expected to 
be made in this branch of knowledge, all 
unneceſſary delays in the publication of 
experiments relating to it are e peculiarly 
n ne 3 | 


When, for the ** of a little n more re- 
putation, men can keep brooding over a 
” new fact, in the diſcovery of which they 
might, poſſibly, have very little real merit, 
till they think they can aſtoniſh the world 
with a ſyſtem as complete as it is new, 
and give mankind a prodigious idea of 
their judgment and penetration ; they are 
juſtly puniſhed for their ingratitude to the 
fountain of all knowledge, and for their 
want of a genuine love of ſcience and of 

; man- 


PAEFACE  -- i 


mankind, in finding their boaſted diſco- 
veries anticipated, and the field of honeſt 
fame pre- occupied, by men, who, from a 
natural ardour of mind, engage in philo- 
ſophical purſuits, and with an ingenuous 
ſimplicity immediately communicate to 
others whatever occurs to them in their 
inquiries. | 


As to myſelf, I find it abſolutely impoſ- 
ſible to produce a work on this ſubject 


that ſhall be any thing like complete. My 


firſt publication I acknowledged to be very 
imperfect, and the preſent, I am as ready 
to acknowledge, is {till more ſo. But, pa- 
radoxical as it may ſeem, this will ever be 
the caſe in the progreſs of natural ſcience, 
ſo long as the works of God are, like him- 
ſelf, infinite and inexhauſtible. In com- 
pleting one diſcovery we never fail to get 
an imperfect knowledge of others, of 
which we could have no idea before; fo 
that we cannot ſolve one doubt without 
creating ſeveral new ones. 


Travelling on this ground reſembles 
Pope's deſcription of travelling among 
" | the 


{ 
, 
| 
: 


vii PREFACE. 
the Alps, with this difference, that here 


there is not only a ſucceſſion, but an increafe 
of new objects and new difficulties. 


So pleas'd at firſt the tow'ring Alps we try, 
Mount o'er the vales, and ſeem to tread the ſky. 


Th' eternal ſaows appear already paſt, 
And the firſt clouds and mountains ſeem the laſt, 
But thoſe attain'd, we tremble to ſurvey 
The growing labours of the lengthen'd way. 
Th' increaſing proſpect tires our wand'ring eyes, 
Hills peep o'er hills, and Alps on Alps ariſe. 
| Es8ay on CRITICISN. 


Newton, as he had very little know- 
ledge of air, fo he had few 'doubts con- 
cerning it. Had Dr. Hales, after his va- 
rious and valuable inveſtigations, given 
a liſt of all his defiderata, I am confident 
that he would not have thought of one in 
ten that had occurred to me at the time 
of my laſt publication; and my doubts, 


queries, and hints for new experiments 


are very conſiderably increaſed, after a 
ſeries of inveſtigations, which have thrown 
great light upon many things of which J 
was not able to give any explanation before. 


I would 


U JG. A... n „ 


PREFACE. * 


I would obſerve farther, that a perſon 
who means to ſerve the cauſe of ſcience 
effectually, muſt hazard his own reputa- 
tion ſo far as to riſk even miſtabes in things 


of leſs moment. Among a multiphcity 


of new objects, and new relations, ſome 
will neceſſarily paſs without ſufficient at- 
tention; but if a man be not miſtaken in 
the principal objects of his purſuits, he 
has no occaſion to diſtreſs himſelf about 
teller things. 


In the progreſs of his inquiries he will 


generally be able to rectify his ownrmiſe 
takes; or if little and envious ſouls ſhould 


take a malignant pleaſure in detecting 
them for him, and endeavouring to expoſe 
him, he is not worthy of the name of a 


philoſopher, if he has notſtrength of mind 


ſufficient to enable him not to be diſturb- 


ed at it. He who does not fooliſhly affect 


to be above the failings of humanity, will 


not be mortified when it is proved that he 
is but a man. 


i = 2p 


_— 


In this work, as well as in all my other 
philoſophical writings, I have made it a 


rale 


— —ä——ä4ä— —— 
* 


* PREFACE. 


rule not-to conceal the real views with 


which I have made experiments ; becauſe 
though, by following a contrary maxim, 
J might have acquired a character of great- 
er ſagacity, I think that two very good 
ends are anſwered by the method that I 
have adopted. For it both tends to make a 
narrative of a courſe of experiments more 
intereſting, and likewiſe encourages other 
adventurers in experimental philoſophy ; 
ſhewing them that, by purſuing even falſe 


lights, real and important truths may be 


diſcovered, ES fon OE 1 Wing 
ene. dss 


In ſome refpolss; anda this method 
makes the narrative longer, but it is by 
making it leſs tedious; and in other re- 


than is uſual with thoſe who publiſh ac- 


counts of their experiments. In this trea- 


tiſe the reader will often find the reſult of 
long proceſſes expreſied 1 in a few lines, and 
of many ſuch in a ſingle paragraph; 


each of which, if I had, with the uſual 


parade, | deſcribed it at large (explaining 
firſt the — then reciting the ex- 


periment | 


ſpects I have written much more conciſely 


PRE FACE. 


peri ment itſelf, with the reſult of it, and 
laſtly making ſuitable reflections) would 
have made as many ſections or chapters, 


and have ſwelled my book to a pompous 


and reſpectable ſize. But I have the plea- 
ſure to think that thoſe philoſophers ho 
have but little time to ſpare for reading, 
which is always the caſe with thoſe who 
do much themſelves, will thank me for 
not keeping them too long from their 
own purſuits; and that they will find ra- 
ther more in the volume, than the N e 


ance of! it er 


1 ao, not think it at all degrading to 


the buſineſs of experimental philoſophy, 


to compare it, as I often do, to the diver- 


fion of hunting, where it ſometimes hap- 
pens that thoſe who have beat the ground 
the moſt, and are conſequently the beſt 
acquainted with it, weary themſelves 
without ſtarting any game; when it may 
fall in the way of a mere paſſenger ; ſo 
that there is but little room for boaſting 


in the moſt ſucceſsful termination of the 


Chace. | 


The 


1 
—— —————— 


- 


— 


- : 
4 „ 
0 
1 — — 2 ⁵« — — — — 4 — —ñ— — — . 


| 


Xl PREFACE. 


The beſt founded praiſe is that 
which is due to the man, who, from 


a ſupreme veneration for the God of 
nature, takes pleaſure in contemplating 


his : works, and from a love of his 


fellow. creatures, as the offspring of 
the ſame all-wiſe and benevolent parent, 
with a grateful ſenſe and perfect enjoy- 
ment of the means of happineſs of which 


he is already poſſeſſed, ſeeks, with earneſt- 


neſs, but without murmuring or impa- 
tience, that greater command of the: powers 
of nature, which can only be obtained 
by. a more extenſive and more accurate 
knowledge of them; and which alone 
can enable us to avail ourſelves of the 
numerous advantages with which we are 
ſurrounded, and contribute to make our 
common fituation more ſecure and 


happy. 


Beſides, the man who believes that there 
is a governor as well as a maker of the 
world (and there 1s certainly equal reaſon 
to believe both) will acknowledge his 


providence and favour at leaſt as much 


in 


7 


70 


PREFACE. | "xi 


in a ſucceſsful purſuit of knowledge, as of 
wealth; which is a ſentiment that entirely 
cuts off all boaſting with reſpect to our- 
ſelves, and all envy and jealouſy with re- 
ſpect to others; and diſpoſes us mutu- 
ally to rejoice in every new light that we 
receive, through whoſe hands ſoever it be 
9 to us. 


I ſhall paſs for an enthuſiaſt with ſome, 
but I am perfectly eaſy under the imputa- 
tion, becauſe I am happy in thoſe views 
which ſubject me to it; but conſidering 
the amazing improvements in natural 


knowledge which have been made with- 


in the laſt century, and the many ages, 
abounding with men who had no other 
object but ſtudy, in which, however, no- 
thing of this kind was done, there ap- 
pears to me to be a very particular pro- 
vidence in the concurrence of thoſe cir- 
cumſtances which have produced ſo great 


a change; and I cannot help flattering 


myſelt that this will be inſtrumental in 
bringing about other changes in the ſtate 
of 


- * — — — 2 


4 - 
= : * 
_- x * = 1 
o ” nt r. - 8 4 pl by v.% — AAAS Bs — i 
* -#© Sch TD ——— — — - 


R r „ 
OR IVE” 


iv | PREFACE. 


of the world, of OY more conſequence 
to the improvement and happineſs of it. 


This rapid progreſs of knowledge, 
which, like the progreſs of a wave of 
the ſea, of ſound, or of light from the 
ſun, extends itſelf not this way or that 
way only, but in all directions, will, I 
doubt not, be the means, under God, 
of extirpating a error and prejudice, 
and of putting an end to all undue and 
uſurped authority in the buſineſs of re- 
iigion, as well as of ſcience; and all the 
efforts of the intereſted friends of cor- 
rupt eſtabliſhments of all kinds will be 
ineffectual for their ſupport in this en- 


lightened age: though, by retarding their 
downfal, they may make the final ruin 


of them more complete and glorious. It 
was ill policy in Leo the Xth to patro- 
nize polite literature. He was cheriſh- 
ing an enemy in diſguiſe. And the Eng- 
liſn hierarchy (if there be any thing un- 


found in its conſtitution) has equal 


reaſon to tremble even at an air- pump, 
or an electrical anne 


There 


FREFAGCE 


There certainly never was any period 
in which natural knowledge made fuch 
a progreſs as it has done of late years, 
and eſpecially in this country; and they 
who affect to ſpeak with ſupercihous con- 
tempt of the publications of the pre- 
ſent age in general, or of the Royal So- 
ciety in particular, are only thoſe who 

are themſelves engaged in the moſt tri- 
fling of all literary purſuits, who are 
anacquainted with -all real ſcience, and 
are ignorant of the progreſs and pre- 
ſent ſtate of it.“ 


It is true that the rich and the great 
in this country give leſs attention to 
theſe ſubjects than, I believe, they were 
ever known to do, ſince the time of 
Lord Bacon, and much leſs than men 
of rank and fortune in other countries 
give to them, But with us this loſs is 


* See Sir John Pringle's Di/cour/e on the different kinds 
of air, p. 29, which, if it became me to do it, I 
would recommend to the reader, as containing a juſt 
and elegant account of the ſeveral diſcoveries that 


have been ſucceſſively made, relating to the — of 
this treatiſe, 


I Q made 


: 
\ 
o 
1 
\ 
L _ 
: 
- - 
Kz« d 
- 
: . 
of . D 
* 4 
: 
\ 
i | 
* 
7 


xvi PR E FA CE. 


made up by men of leiſure, ſpirit, and 
ingenuity, in the middle ranks of life, 
which is a circumſtance that promiſes 
better for the continuance of this pro- 
greſs in uſeful knowledge than any no- 
ble or royal patronage. With us, politics 
chiefly engage the attention of thoſe who 
ſtand foremoſt in the community, which, 
indeed, ariſes from the freedom and pecu- 
har excellence of our conſtitution, with- 
out which even the ſpirit of men 
of letters in general, and of philoſo- 
phers in particular, who never directly 
interfere in matters of government, would 
languiſh. 

It is rather to be regretted, however, 
that, in ſuch a number of nobility and 
gentry, ſo very few ſhould have any taſte 
for ſcientifical purſuits, becauſe, for many 
valuable purpoſes of ſcience, wealth gives 
a decifive advantage. If extenſive and 
laſting fame be at all an object, literary, 
and eſpecially ſcientifical purſuits, are 
preferable to political ones in a variety 
of reſpects. The former are as much 
- more fayourable for the diſplay of the 
2 human 


PREFACE vil 


human faculties than the latter, as the 
em of nature is ſu perior to any poli tical 


ſf3/tem upon earth. 


If extenſive uſe fulneſs be the object, - 


ſcience has the ſame adyantage over poli- 
tics. The greateſt ſucceſs in the latter 
ſeldom extends farther than one par- 


ticular country, and one particular age; 


whereas a ſucceſsful purſuit of ſcience 
makes a man the benefactor of all man- 
kind, and of every age. How trifling 
1s the fame of any ſtateſman that this 
country has ever produced to that of 
Lord Bacon, of Newton, or of Boyle ; 
and how much greater are our obliga- 


tions to ſuch men as theſe, than to any | 


other in the whole Biographia Britannica; 
and every country, in which ſcience has 
flouriſhed, can furniſh inſtances for ſimi- 


lar obſervations. 


Here my reader will thank me, and 
the writer will, I hope, forgive me, if I 
quote a paſſage from the poſtſcript of a 
letter which I happen to have juſt re- 
ceived from that excellent, and in my 

b opI- 


xviii P R E FACE. 


opinion, not too enthuſiaſtical philoſo- 
pher, father Beccaria of Turin. > 


Mz ſpiace che il Do politico cb e pur 
tanto paſſeggero, rubbi il grande Franklin 
al mondo della natura, che non ſa ne cam- 


biare, ne mancare. In Engliſh. « Tam 


« ſorry that the political world, which is 


* ſo very tranſitory, ſhould take the 
« great Franklin from the world of na- 
e ture, Which can never change, or fail.“ 


I own it is with peculiar pleaſure that 


I quote this paſſage, reſpecting this truly 


reat man, at a time when ſome of the 
infatuated politicians of this country are 
vainly thinking to build their wretched 
and deſtructive projects, on the ruins of 
his eſtabliſhed reputation ; a reputation 
as extenſive as the ſpread of ſcience it- 
ſelf, and of which it is ſaying very lit- 
tle indeed, to pronounce that it will laſt 
and flouriſh when the names of all his 
enemies ſhall be forgotten. 


I think 


n 


PREFACE. xix 


j 
| — 


I think it proper, upon this occaſion, 
to inform my friends, and the public, 
that I have, for the preſent, ſuſpended 


my deſign of writing the hiſtory and pre- 


ſent flate of all the branches of experi- 


mental philoſophy. This has arifen not 
from any diſlike of the undertaking, but, 


in truth, becauſe I ſee no proſpect of be- 


ing reaſonably indemnified for ſo much 
labour and expence, notwithſtanding the 
ſpecimens I have already given of that 
work (in the hiſtory of electricity, and of 


the diſcoveries relating to viſion, light, 


and colours) have met with a much 
more favourable reception from the 
beſt judges both at home and abroad, 
than I expected. Immortality, if I 
ſhould have any view to it, is not 


the proper price of ſuch works as 
. theſe. 


I propoſe, however, having given ſo 
much attention to the ſubje& of air, to 
write, at my leiſure, the hiſtory and 

b 2 preſent 


— — 
— — JETS — 
” 


Ge rr wares Wong prone Sore re 


a r wenn + ot 


* 


xx P R E F A C E. 


preſent ſtate of diſcoveries relating to it; 
in which caſe I ſhall, as a part of it, re- 
print this work, with ſuch! improvements 
as ſhall have occurred to me at that time ; 
and I give this notice of! it, that no per- 
ſon who intends to purchaſe It may have 
reaſon (being thus appriſed of my inten- 
tion) to complain of buying the ſame | 
thing twice. If any perſon chuſe it, he 
may ſave his five or ſix ſhillings for the 
preſent, and wait five or ſix years longer 
(if J ſhould live fo lon g0 for the op- 
portunity, of buying the Bhs thing, pro- 
bably much enlarged, and at the ſame 
time a complete account of all that has 
been done by others relating to this ſub- 


Rt. 


Though for the plain, and 1 TG ar 
tisſactory r reaſon above mentioned, I ſhall 
probably write no other hiſtories of this. 
kind, I ſhall, as opportunity ſerves, en- 
deavour to provide materials for ſuch hi- 
ſories,: by continuing my experiments, 
keeping my eyes open to ſuch new appear- 
ances as may preſent themſelves, inveſti- 
gating them as far as I ſhall be able, and 

never 


PREFACE. * 


never failing to communicate to the pub- 
lic, by ſome channel or other, the * 
of my obſervations. a 
In the publication of this work wid 
thought that it would be agreeable to my 
readers to preſerve, in ſome meaſure, the 
order of hiſtory, and therefore I have not 
thrown together all that I have obſerved 
with reſpect to each kind of air, but have 
divided the work into uo parts; the for- 
mer containing what was publiſhed before, 
in the Philoſophical Tranſactions, with 
ſuch obſervations and corrections as ſub- 
ſequent experience. has ſuggeſted to me; 
and I have reſerved for the latter part of 
the work an account of the experiments 
which I have made ſince that publication, 
and after a pretty long interruption in 
my philoſophical purfuits, in the courſe of 
the laſt ſummer. Beſides J am ſenſible 
that in the latter part of this work a dif- 
ferent arrangement of the ſubjects will be 
more convenient, for their mutual = 
luſtration, ö 


Some 


Xxii PREFACE. 


Some perſons object to the term air, as 
applied to acid, alkaline, and even nitrous 
air; but it is certainly very convenient 
to have a common term by which to de- 
note things which have ſo many common 
properties, and thoſe ſo very ſtriking; all 
of them agreeing with the air in which 
we breathe, and with fixed air, in elaſticity, 
and tram purency, and in being alike af- 
tected: by heat or cold; ſo that to the eye 
they appear to have no difference at all. 
With much more reaſon, as it appears to 
me, might a perſon object to.the common 
term metal, as applied to things fo very 
different from one another: as gold, quick- 
ſilver, and lead. | 


Beſides, acid and allaline air do not 
differ from common air (in any reſpect that 
can countenance an objection to their 
having a common appellation) except in 
ſuch properties as are common to it with 
fixed air, though ina different degree; viz. 
that of being imbibed by water. But, in- 
deed, all kinds of air, common air itſelf 
not excepted, are capable of being im- 


bibed by water in ſome degree. 
| 1 Some 


PREFACE. xxiii 


Some may think the terms acid and al- 
kaline vapour more proper than acid and 
alkaline air. But the term vapour having 
always been applied to elaſtic matters ca- 
pable of being condenſed in the tempera- 
ture of the atmoſphere, eſpecially the va- 
pour of water, it ſeems harſh to apply it 
to any elaſtic ſubſtance, which at the ſame 
time that it is as tranſparent as the air 
we breathe, is no more affected by cold 


than it is. 


As my former papers were immediately 
tranſlated into ſeveral foreign languages, 
I may preſume that this treatiſe, having a 
better title to it, will be tranſlated alſo; 
and, upon this preſumption, 1 cannot 


help expreſſing a wiſh, that it may be done 


by perſons who have a competent know- 
ledge of the ſubject, as well as of the Eng- 
liſh language. The miſtakes made by ſome 
foreigners, have induced me to give this 
caution. 


London, Feb. 
1774 


AD VE R- 


ADVERTISEMENT. 
HE weights mentioned in the courſe 
of this treatiſe are J roy, and what 
is called an ounce meaſure of air, is the 
ſpace occupied by an ouhte weight of 
water, which is equal to 480 grains, and 
is, therefore, almoſt two cubic inches of 


—_ water ; for one cubic inch weighs 254 


grains. 


THE 


©. N T Bind 


Tux INTRODUCTION. 


Section I. A general view of PRECEDING 


DiscoveRies relating to Aix — — Page 1 
Sect. II. An Account of the ApPARATus 


with which the following Experiments were made 6 
P:\ AON 


Experiments and Obſervations made in, and 
before the Year 1992. — — — — 23 


Sect. I. Of Fixed A — — — 25 
Sect. IE Of Air in which a CanDLe, or 
Br1msTONE, has burned out — — — 43 


Sect, III. Of infLaMMABLE AIR — 55 

Sect. IV. Of Air infected with ANIMAL 
RESPIRATION, or PUTREFACTION — — 70 
| 8 Sect. 


[- | | EO NT -3.N-7T7 4. 


_ Sect. V. Of Arr in which a mixture of BR I- 
= STONE and FILINGS of IR oN has flood — 105 
N Sect. VI. Of Ni rRous A —— 108 


Sec. VII. Of Ark infected with the puns 
F BURNING CHARCOAL — — — — 129 


Sect. VIII. Of the effeft of the CALCINA- 
| TION of Marals, and of the EFFLUVIA of 
7; Paix made with WurrE-LRAD and Oil, 
on AK — —, — — 133 
Sect, IX. Of MARINE AciDd AIX — 143 
Sect. X. Miſcellaneous Obſervations — 154 


PART II. 


Fan 7 Obſervations Ne of in the 
Year 1773, and the Beginning of 1774 
Sect. I. Obſervations'0n ALKALINE AIR 163 
Sect. II. Of coumon Air diminiſred, and 
made noxious by various proceſſes — — 177 
Sect. III. Of Nitrous AR — — 203 
- Sect. IV. O/Marme ACID AI — 229 
Sect, V. Of InFLaMMaBLEt AIX — 242 
Sect, VI. Of Fixed AIR — — — 248 
Sect. VIT.MisCELLANEOUIEXPERIMENTS 252 
Sect. VIII. QUERIES, SPECULATIONS, and 
Hixrs — x — — 253 


T H E 


— 


C0: M1. N-1... 


THE APPENDIX: 


Number I. ExeeriMEnTs made by Mr. Hey ts 
prove that there is no OIL of VITRIOL in Water im- 


pregnated with FIXED Alx — — 288 
Number II., A Letter from Mr. Hey to Dr. 


PzIESTLEY, concerning the effects of fixed Air applied 
by way of Cly/ter — 292 
Number III. Obſervations on the MEDicINAL 
Uszs of FIX ED AIR. By ThoOMAs PERCIVAL, 
M. D. Fellow of the Royar SociErY, and of 
the SOCIETY of ANTIQUARIES in LONDON 300 
Number IV. Extract of a Letter from WILLIAM 
FALcoNneR, M. D. of BaTH 314 
Number V. Extract of a Letter from Mr. W1L- 
LIAM BEWLEY, of GREAT MASSINGHAMy 
NorFOLK — — — — 217 
Num. VI. A Letter from Dr. FRANKLIN 321 
Number VII. Extract of Letter from Mr. 
HenRy of Mancheſter — — 3323 


TAE 


—— 


KL — 8 N 


* 


= 
= 


: P 9 - 
* 1 
8 . . 
- 14 n a > $a „ - 


_— * 0 
_— 7 * —— —— — é . —— _— a 
N " , | 
> — : _ 
. * 7 — A 8 * 8 p þ r r 
h * 2 9 * = : 


— —— 4 > 
ä — < 2 


"IP" . — 0 8 
* —— 7 — , by - - | 

— — —— . AD N — 4 — — 
r . — — — 


, As 
* 1 


nd AA NCHAS A SAYS HEN AN =) == =/ 
Se {SN EN NNE EA = 4 = 


THE 


INTRODUCTION. 


SECTION I. 


A general view of PRECEDING DISCOVERIES re- 
lating to air. 


OR the better underſtanding of the ex- 

periments and obſervations on differenc 
kinds of air contained in this treatiſe, it will be 
uſeful to thoſe who are not acquainted with the 
hiſtory of this branch of natural philoſophy, 
to be informed of thoſe facts which had been 
diſcovered by others, before I turned my 
thoughts to the ſubject; which ſuggeſted, 
and by the help of which I was enabled to 
purſue, my inquiries, Let it be obſerved, 
however, that 1 do not profeſs to recite in this 
place al! that bad been diſcovered concerning 
air, but only thoſe diſcoveries the knowledge 
of which is neceſſary, in order to underſtand . 
what I have done myſelf ; ſo that any perſon 
who is only acquainred with the general prin- 


ciples of natural philoſophy, may be able to 
B read 


3. Tux INTRODUCTION. 


read this treatiſe, and, with proper attention, 
to underſtand every part of it. 


That the air which conſtitutes the atmo- 
ſphere 1 in which we live has weight, and that 
it is elaſtic, or conſiſts of a compreſſible and 
dilatable fluid, were ſome of the earlieſt diſ- 
coveries that were made after the dawning of 
philoſophy in this weſtern pert of the world. 


That elaſtic fluids, differing eſſentially 
from the air of the atmoſphere, but agreeing 
with it in the properties of weight, elaſticity, 
and tranſparency, . might be generated from 
ſolid ſubſtances, was diſcovered by Mr. Boyle, 
though two remarkable kinds of factitious air, 
at leaſt the effects of them, had been known 
long before to all miners. One of theſe is 
heavier than common air. It lies at the bottom 
of pits, extinguiſhes candles, and kills animals 
that breathe it, on which account it had ob- 
tained the name of the choke damp. The other 
is lighter than common air, taking its place 
near the roofs of ſubterraneous places, and be- 
cauſe it is liable to take fire, and explode, like 


gunpowder, it had been called the fire damp. 


The word damp fignifies vapour or exhalation- 
in the German and Saxon language. 


Though 


— — nn 8 ——— ence 


Tux INTRODUCTION 3 


Though the former of theſe kinds of air 
had been known to be noxious, the latter I be- 
lieve had not been diſcovered to be fo, hav- 
ing always been found in its natural ſtate, ſo 
much diluted with common air, as to be 
breathed with ſafety. Air of the former kind, 
beſides having been diſcovered in various ca- 
verns, particularly the grotta del Cane in Italy, 
had alſo been obſerved on the furface of fer- 
menting liquors, and had been called gas 
(which is the ſame with geiſt, or ſpirit) by Van 
Helmont, and other German chymiſts ; but 
afterwards it obtained the, name of fixed air, 
eſpecially after it had been diſcovered by Dr, 
Black of Edinburgh to exiſt, in a fixed ſtate, 
in alkaline ſalts, chalk, and other calcareous 


ſubſtances. 


This excellent philoſopher diſcovered that it 
is the preſence of the fixed air in theſe ſub- 
ſtances that renders them mild, and that when 
they are deprived of it, by the force of fire, or 
any other proceſs, they are in that ſtate which 
had been called cauſtic, from their corroding 
or burning animal and vegetable ſubſtances. 


Fixed air had been diſcovered by Dr. 


Macbride of Dublin, after an obſervation f 


Sir John Pringle's, which led to it, to be in a 
conſiderable degree antiſeptic ; and ſince it is 
B 2 extracted 


— 


P 2 
4 . 
G * . 
- ® : 
; «* 1 +% * «A wad 2 P 
——— F s py — -- 
* 86622 —ů—ů mo ene ww— ow SC, ——_— * 
_-R ® 7 - G \ * 4 Cc 
a * P 7. 2 2 » 
0 - n Y l 8 0 * 


4 Tur INTRODUCTION. 


extracted in great plenty from fermenting ve- 

etables, he had recommended the uſe of wort 
(that is au infuſion of malt in water) as what 
would probably give relief in the ſea ſcurvy, 
which is ſaid to be a putrid diſeaſe. 


Dr. Brownrigg had alſo diſcovered that the 
fame ſpecies of air is contained in great quanti- 
ties in the water of the Pyrmont ſpring at Spa 
in Germany, and in other mineral waters, which 
have what is called an acidulous taſte, and that 


their peculiar flavour, briſkneſs, and medicinal 


virtues, are derived from this ingredient. 


Dr. Hales, without feeming to imagine that 
there was any material difference between 


theſe kinds of air and common air, obſerved 


that certain ſubſtances and'o;\crations generate 
air, and others ab/orb it; imagining that the di- 
minution of air was ſimply a taking away 


from the common maſs, without any alteration 


in the properties of what remained. His ex- 
periments, however, are ſo numerous, and va- 
rious, that they are juſtly eſteemed to be the 
ſolid foundation of all our knowledge of this 
ſubject. 


Mr. Cavendiſh had exactly aſcertained the 
ſpecific gravities of fixed and inflammable air, 


ſhewing the former of them to be 1+ heavier 
than 


23% org 


Tur INTRODUCTION. 5 


than common air, and the latter ten times 
lighter. He alſo ſhewed that water would im- 
bibe more than its own bulk of fixed air. 


Lon 1 Oo 


Laſtly, Mr. Lane diſcovered that water thus 
impregnated with fixed air will diſſolve a con- 
ſiderable quantity of iron, and thereby become 
a ſtrong chalybeate. 


Theſe, I would obſerve, are by no means all 
the diſcoveries concerning air that have been 
made by the gentlemen whoſe names I have 
mentioned, and ſtill lefs are they all that have 
been made by others; but they compriſe all 

the previous knowledge of this ſubject that is 
neceſſary to the underſtanding of this treatiſe 
except a few particulars, which will be men- 
tioned in the courſe of the work, and which 
it is, therefore, unneceſſary to recite in this 
place. 


1 «ff = 


KS 


S 


LE 22 * », 
- * 2 * * 
R N 22 ** rh , 5 
: — 4% I. * & | ug > 
3 = | a 
. a”. 28 


* — 4 
- +" * 
1 ö 3 \ 
” — — a N 
. — 24 — S- - 
g a Y E A i 
„ BL nd . — 
1 ) — - : = p a Y 
. 7 WY 4 l 1 1 - * 5 * * a — 1 — 
r ee N 88 g 9 5 
* — 3 * p a 4 * r r 
= _ 


6 Tur INTRODUCTION. 


SECTION I. 


An account of the APPARATUS with which the fol. 
lowing experiments were made. 


Ather than deſcribe at large the manner in 

which every particular experiment that I 
{hall have occaſion to recite was made, which 
would both be very tedious, and require an un- 
neceſſary multiplicity of drawings, I think it 
more adviſeable to give, at one view, an ac- 
count of all my apparatus and inſtruments, 
or at leaſt of every thing that can require a 
deſcription, and of all the different operations 
and proceſſes in which I employ them. 


It will be ſeen that my apparatus for experi- 
ments on air is, in fact, nothing more than the 
apparatus of Dr. Hales, Dr. Brownrigg, and 
Mr. Cavendiſh, diverſified, and made a little 
more ſimple. Yet notwithſtanding the ſimpli- 
city of this apparatus, and the eaſe with 
which all the operations are conducted, I would 
not have any perſon, who is altogether without 
experience, to imagine that he ſhall be able to 
ſelect any of the following experiments, and 


immediately — it, without difficulty or 


blunder- 


Txx INTRODUCTION. „ 


Vlundering. It is known to all perſons who 
are converſant in experimental philoſophy, that 
there are many little attentions and precautions 
neceſſary to be obſerved in the conducting of 
experiments, which cannot well be deſcribed in 
words, but which it is needleſs to deſcribe, 
ſince practice will neceſſarily. ſuggeſt them; 
though, like all other arts in which the hands 
and fingers are made uſe of, it is only much 


practice that can enable a perſon to go through 


complex experiments, of this or any other kind, 
with eaſe and readineſs, 


For experiments in which air will bear to be 
confined by water, I firſtuſed an oblong trough 


made of earthen ware, as à fig. 1. about eight 


inches deep, at one end of which I put thin 


flat ſtones, b. b. about an inch, or half an inch, 


under the water, uſing more or fewer of them 


according to the quantity of water in the trough. 


But I have ſince found it more convenient to 


uſe a larger wooden trough, of the ſame gene- 
ral ſhape, eleven inches deep, two feet long, 


and 11 wide, with a ſhelf about an inch lower 
than the top, inſtead of the flat ſtones above- 
mentioned. This trough being larger than the 
former, I have no occaſion to make proviſion 


for the water being higher or lower, the bulk__ 
of a jar or two not making ſo great a difference 


as it did before. 
B 4 The 


8 Tus INTRODUCTION. 


The ſeveral kinds of air I uſually keep in 
cylindrical jars, as c, c, fig. 1, about ten inches 
long, and 2 1 wide, being ſuch as I have ge- 
nerally uſed for electrical batteries, But I have 
likewiſe veſſels of very different forms and 
ſizes, adapted to particular experiments, 


When I want to remove veſſels of air from 
the large trough, I place them in pots or diſhes, 
of various ſizes, to hold more or less water, 
according to the time that I have occaſion to 
keep the air, as fig. 2. Theſe I plunge in 
water, and ſlide the jars into them; after which 
they may be taken out together, and be ſet 
wherever it ſhall be moſt convenient. For the 
purpoſe of merely removing a jar of air from 
one place to another, where it is not to ſtand 
longer'than a few days, I make uſe of common 
tea-diſhes, which will hold water enough for that 
time, unleſs the air be in a ſtate of diminution, 
by means of any proceſs that is going on 


in it. 


If I want to try whether an animal will live 
in any kind of air, I firſt put the air into a 
ſmall veſſel, juſt large enough to give it room 
to ſtretch itſelt ; and as I generally make uſe of 
mice for this purpoſe, I have found it very 
convenient to ule the hollow part of a tall beer- 


glaſs, d fig. 1, which contains between two and 
three 


\ 


Tur INTRODUCTION. 5 


three ounce meaſures of air. In this veſſel a 
mouſe will live twenty minutes, or half an 
hour. 


For the purpoſe of theſe experiments it is 
moſt convenient to catch the mice in ſmall wire 
traps, out of which it is eaſy to take them, 


and holding them by the back of the neck, to 


paſs them through the water into the veſſel 
which contains the air. If I expect that the 
mouſe will live a conſiderable time, I take care 
to put into the veſſel ſomething on which it 
may conveniently fit, out of the reach of the 
water. If the air be good, the mouſe will ſoon 
be perfectly at its eaſe, having ſuffered nothing 
by its paſſing through the water. If the air be 


ſuppoſed to be noxious, it will be proper (if the 


operator be defirous of preſet ving the mice for 
farther uſe) to keep hold of their tails, that they 
may be withdrawn as ſoon as they begin to ſhew 
ſigns of uneaſineſs; but if the air be thoroughly 
noxious, and the mouſe happens to get a full in- 
ſpiration, it will be impoſſible to do this before 
it be abſolutely irrecoverable. 


In order to heep the mice, I put them into re- 
ceivers open at the top and bottom, ſtanding up- 
on plates of tin perforated with many holes, and 
covered with other plates of the ſame kind, held 


down by ſufficient weights, as fig. 3. Theſe 
receivers 


10 Tur INTRODUCTION. 


receivers ſtand upon a frame of wood, that the 
freſh air may have an opportunity of getting to 
the bottoms of them, and circulating through 
them. In the infide I put a quantity of paper 
or tow, which muſt be changed, and the veſſel 
waſhed and dried, every. two or three days. 
This is moſt conveniently done by having ano- 
ther receiver, ready cleaned and prepared, into 
which the mice may be transferred till the o- 


ther ſhall be cleaned. 


Mice muſt be kept in a pretty exact tempera- 
ture, for either much heat or much cold- kills 
them preſently. The place in which I have ge- - 
nerally kept them is a ſhelf oyer the Kitchen 
fire-place where, as it is uſual in Yorkſhire, the 
fire never goes out; ſo that the heat varies very 
little, and I find it to be, at a medium, about 
79 degrees of Fahrenheit's thermometer. When 
they had been made to paſs through the water, 
as they neceſſarily muſt be in order to a change 
of air, they require, and will bear a very con- 
ſiderable degree of heat, to warm and dry 
chem. 


I found, to my great ſurprize, in the courſe 
of theſe experiments, that mice will live intirely 
without water; for though I have kept them 
for three or four months, Ang have offered them 
Vater ſeveral times, they would never taſte it; 
| : and 


— — 


* *%, "PR 
— k 1 * = 
mp , % A. C * = 
— — -— — — * a * 
A * 
on . m 


n 


n 
* 


Tus INTRODUCTION. 11 


and yet they continued in perfect health and vi- 


gour. Two or three of them will live very 
peaceably together in the ſame veſſel; though 
I had one inſtance of a mouſe tearing another 
almoſt in pieces, and when there was plenty of 
proviſions for both of them. 


In the ſame manner in which a mouſe is put 
into a veſſel of any kind of air, a plant, or any 
thing elſe, may be put into it, viz. by paſſing 
it through the water; and if the plant be of a 
kind that will grow in water only, there will be 
no occaſion to ſet it in a pot of earth, which 
will otherwiſe be neceſſary. 


There may appear, at firſt ſight, ſome dif- 
ficulty in opening the mouth of a phial, con- 
taining any ſubſtance, ſolid or. liquid, to which 
water muſt not be admitted, in a jar of any 
kind of air, which is an operation that I have 
ſometimes had recourſe to; but this I eafily ef- 
fect by means of à cork cut tapering, and a ſtrong 
wire thruft through it, as in fig. 4, for in this 
form it will ſufficiently fit the mouth of any 
phial, and by holding the phial in one hand, 
and the wire in the other, and plunging both 
my hands into the trough of water, I can eaſily 
convey the phial through the water into the jar 
which muſt either be held by an aſſiſtant, or be 


faſtened by ſtrings, with its mouth projecting 
inde | over 


12 Tax INTRODUCTION. 


over the ſhelf, When the phial is thus con- 
veyed into the jar, the cork may eaſily be re- 
moved, and may alſo be put into it- again at 
pleaſure, and conveyed the ſame my out 


again. 


When any thing, as a gallipot, &c. is to be 
ſupported at a conſiderable height within a jar, 
it is convenient to have ſuch wire ſtands as are 
repreſented fig. 3. They anſwer better than 
any other, becauſe they take up but little room, 
and may be eafily bended to any ſhape or 
height, 


If I have occaſion to pour air from a veſſel 
with awide mouth into another with a very nar- 
row one, I am obliged to make uſe of a ft unnel, 

fig. 6, but by this means the operation is ex- 
ceedingly eaſy; firſt filling the veſſel into which 
the air is to be conveyed with water, and hold- 
ing the mouth of it, together with the funnel, 
both under water ** one hand, while the 
other is employed in pouring the air; which, 
aſcending through the funnel up into the veſſel, 
makes the water deſcend, and takes its place. 
Theſe tunnels are beſt made of glaſs, becauſe 
the air being viſible through them, the quantity 
of it may be more eaſily eſtimated by the eye. 
\ It 


Tur INTRODUCTION. 13 


It will be convenient to have ſeveral of theſe 
funnels of different ſizes. | 


In order to expel air from ſolid ſubſtances by 
means of heat, I ſometimes put them into a 
gun-barrel, fig. 7, and filling it up with dry 
ſand, that has been well burned, ſo that no air 
can come from it, I lute to the open end the 
ſtem of a tobacco pipe, or a imall glaſs tube. 
1 hen having put the cloſed end of the barrel, 
which contains the materials, 1ato the fire, the 
generated air, iſſuing through the tube, may 
be received in a veliel of quickſilver, with 
its mouth immerſed in a baſon of the ſame, ſuſ- 
pended all together in wires, in the manner 
_ deſcribed in the figure: or any other fluid 
ſubſtance may be uſed inſtead of quickſilver. 


But the moſt accurate method of procuring 
air from ſeveral ſubſtances, by means of hear, 
is to put them, if they will bear it, into phials 
full of quickſilver, with the mouths immerſed 
in the ſame, and then throw the focus of a 
burning mirror upon them. For this purpoſe 
the phials ſhould be made with their | bottoms 
round, and very thin, that they may not be 
liable to break with a pretty ſudden applica- 
tion of heat, 


— ' 
- c 
. s 
' — 
On 


If 


= 
r ——_— ———— Os gre + * - 


14 Tx: INTRODUCTION. 


If I want to expel air from any liquid, I 
nearly fill a phial with it, and having a cork 
perforated, I put through it, and ſecure with 
cement, a glaſs tube, bended in the manner re- 
preſented at e fig. 1. I then put the phial into 
a kettle of water, which I ſet upon the fire and 


make to boil. The air expelled by the heat, 
from the liquor contained in the phial, iſſues 


through the tube, and is received in the baſon of 
quickſilver, fig. 7. Inſtead of this ſuſpended 
baſon, I ſometimes content myſelf with tying 


a flaccid bladder to the end of the tube, in both 


theſe proceſſes, that it may receive the newly 


.generated air. 


In experiments on thoſe kinds of air which 


are readily imbibed by water, I always make 


uſe of quickſilver, in the manner repreſented 
fig. 8, in which à is the baſon of quickſilver, 


'$ a glaſs veſſel containing quickſilver, with its 


mouth immerſed in it, c a phial contain- 
ing the ingredients from which the air is to be 
produced; and d is a ſmall recipient, or glaſs 
veſſel deſigned to receive and intercept any li- 
quor that may be diſcharged along with the air, 


which is to be tranſmitted free from any moiſture 


into the veſſc] b, If there be no apprehenſion 
of moiſture, I make uſe of the glaſs tube only, 
without any recipieat, in the manner repreſented 


e ig. 1. In order to invert the veſlel h, I firſt 
All 


Tux INTRODUCTION. 13 


fill it with quickſilver, and then carefully cover 
the mouth of it with a piece of ſoft leather; after- 
which it may be turned upſide down without 
any danger of admitting the air, and the leather 
may be withdrawn when it is plunged in 15 
quickſilver. 


In order to generate air by the ſolution of 
metals, or any proceſs of a ſimilar nature, I 
put the materials into a phial, prepared in the 
manner repreſented at e fig. 1, and put the 
end of the glaſs tube under the mouth of any 
veſſel into which I want to convey the air. If 
heat be neceſſary I can eaſily apply it to a can- 
dle, or a red hot poker while it hangs in this 
poſition. 


When J have occafion to transfer air from a 
Jar ſtanding in the trough of water to a veſſel 
ſtanding in quickſilver, or in any other ſituation 
whatever, I make uſe of the contrivance repre- 
ſented fig. 9, which confiſts of a bladder, fur- 
niſhed at one end with a ſmall glaſs tube bended, 
and at the other with a cork, perforated ſo as 
juſt to admit the ſmall end of a funnel, When 
the common air is carefully preſſed out of this 
bladder, and the funnel is thruſt tightly into the 
cork, it may be filled with any kind of air as 
eafily as a glaſs jar; and then a ſiting being 
tied above the cork in which the funnel is in- | 


ſerted, 


. 
3 as 


= oy 4 '& 4" 
G — J- 
= * - — x 
* * — 
— A 
_ 
a ” 
_— —— 3 


j 
| 


5 , , 


— 


L 


16 Tur INTRODUCTION. 


ſerted, and the orifice in the other cork cloſed, 
by preſſing the bladder againſt it, it may be car- 
ried to any place, and if the tube be carefully 
wiped, the air may be conveyed quitefree from 
moiſture through a body of quickſilver, or any 
thing elſe. A little practice will make this very 
uſeful manceuvre perfectly eaſy and accurate. 


In order to impregnate fluids with any kind 


of air, as water with fixed air, I fill a phial with 


the fluid larger or leis as I have occaſion (as 4 
fig. 10;) and then inverting it, place it with 
its mouth downwards, in a bowl b, containing | 
a quantity of the ſame fluid; and having filled 


the bladder, fig. 9, with the air, I throw as 


much of it as I think proper into the phial, in 
the manner deſcribed above.. To accelerate the 
impregnation, I lay my hand on the top of the 
phial, and ſnake it as much as I think pro- 
per. 

If, without having any air previouſly gene- 
rated, I would convey it into the fluid imme- 
diately as it ariſes from the proper materials, 
I keep the fame bladder in connection with a 
Phial c fig, 10, containing the ſame materials 


(as chalk, ſalt of tartar, or pcarl aſhes in di- 
lured oil of vitriol, for the generation of fixed 


air) and taking care (leſt, in the act of effer- 


veſcence, any of the materials in the phial c 
ſhould 


Tas INTRODUCTION. ty 


ſhould get into the veſſel a, to place this phial 
on a ſtand lower than that on which the baſon 
was placed, I preſs out the newly generated air, 
and make it aſcend dire&ly into the fluid. For 


this purpoſe, and that I may more conveniently 


ſhake the phial c, which is neceſſary in ſome 
' proceſſes, eſpecially with chalk and oil of vi- 
triol, I ſotnetimes make uſe of a flexible lea- 
thern tube d, and ſometimes only a glaſs tube. 
For if the bladder be of a ſufficient length, 
it will give room for the agitation of the phial; 
or if not; it is eaſy to connect two bladders 
together by means of a perforated cork, to 
which they may .both be faſtened. 


When I want to try whether any kind of air 
will admit a candle to burn in it, I make uſe 
of a cylindrical glaſs veſſel, fig. 11. and a bit 
of wax candle a fig. 12, faſtened to the end of 
a wire b, and turned up, in ſuch-a manner as 
to be let down into the veſſel with the flame 
upwards, The veſſel ſhould be kept carefully 
covered till the moment that the candle is ad- 
mitted. In this manner I have frequently ex- 
tinguiſhed a candle more than twenty times 

ſucceſſively, in a veſſel of this kind, though it 
ls impoſſible to dip the candle into it without 


giving the external air an opportunity of mix- __ 
ing with the air in the inſide more or leſs, 


The candle c, at the other end of the wire is 
: 2 very 


F 6 


13 Tur INTRODUCTION. 


very convenient for holding under a jar ſtand- 


ing in water, in order to burn as long as the 


incloſed air can ſupply it; for the moment that 
it is extinguiſned, it may be drawn through 
the water before any ſmoke can have mixed 
n 4. 


Joicailer to draw air out of a veſſel which 
has its mouth immerſed in water, and thereby 
to raiſe the water to whatever height may be 
neceſſary, it is very convenient to make uſe 


af a glaſs Hpbon, fig. 13, putting one of the 


legs up into the veſſel, and drawing the air out 
at the other end by the mouth. If the air be. 
of a noxious quality, it may be neceſſary to 
have a ſyringe faſtened to the ſyphon, the man- 
ner of which needs no explanation. I have 
not thought it ſafe to depend upon a valve at 
the top of the veſſel, which Dr. Hales ſome- 


dimes made uſe of. 


1. -howexet, a very {malt hole be made at 
the top of a glaſs veſſel, it may be filled to 
any height by holding it under water, while 
the air is iſſuing out at the hole, which may 
chen be cloſed with * or cement. 


If the generated air r will wiahis be abſorbed 


by water, nor diminiſh common air, it may be 


convenient to put part of the materials into a 
cup, ſupported by a ſtand, and the other part 


into 


. 
— 
+ N 
177 
P 
$7 
2 


Tas INTRODUCTION. 19 


into a ſmall glaſs veſſel, placed on the edge of 
it, as at f, fig. 1. Then having, by means of a 
ſyphon, drawn the air to a convenient height, 
the ſmall glaſs veſſel may be eaſily puſhed into 
the cup, by a wire introduced through the wa- 
ter ; or it may be contrived, in a variety of 
ways, only to diſcharge | the contents of the 
| ſmall veſſel into the larger. The diſtance be- 
tween the boundary of air and water, before and 
after the operation, will ſhew the quantity of 
the generated air. The effect of procefles that 
- diminiſh air may alſo be tried by the fame ap- 
paratus. | | ry 


When I want to admit a particular kind 
of air to any thing that will not bear wetting, 
and yet cannot be conveniently put into a phial, 
and eſpecially if it be in the form of a powder, 
and muſt be placed upon a ſtand (as in thoſe 
experiments in which the focus of a burnin 
mirror 1s to be thrown upon it) I firſt exhauſt 
a receiter, in which it is previouſly placed ; 
and having a glaſs tube, bended for the pur- 
poſe, as in fig. 14, I ſcrew it to the ſtem of a 
transfer of the air pump on which the receiver 
had been exhauſted, and introducing it through 
the water into a, jar of that kind of air with 
which I would fill the receiver, I only turn 
the cock, and I gain my purpoſe. In this 
method, however, unleſs the pump be very 


C 2 good, 


«in. TA _ id hs 22 14 IE \ 
* * —_ - o * WC. 9 5 a 1 ” 
3 3 * „ Wann 76 1&8 . „ 


20 TuxzINTRODUCTION, - 


good, and ſeveral contrivances, too minute to 
8 be particularly deſcribed, be made uſe of a 
| good deal of common air will get into the re- 


ceiver . 


When I want to meaſure the. goodneſs of 
any kind of air, I put two meaſures of it into 
2 a jar ſtanding in water ; and when I have 
1% 3 marked upon the glaſs the exact place of the | 
| boundary of air and water, I put to it one | 
meaſure of nitrous air; and after waiting a ; 
proper time, note the quantity of its dimi- 
nution. If I be comparing two kinds of air 
8; that are nearly alike, after mixing them in a 
+38 Large jar, I transfer the mixture into a. long | 
| glaſs tube, by which I can lengthen my ſcale : 
to what degree I pleaſe. | | | 


1 I the quantity of the air, the goodneſs of 
| which I want to aſcertain, be exceedingly 

q ſmall, ſo as to be contained in a part of a glaſs 
=. tube, out of which water will not run ſpon- 

[| | taneouſly, as a fig. 15; I firſt meaſure with a 

} pair of compaſſes the length of the column 
| 


of air in the tube, the remaining part being 

filled with water, and lay it down upon a 

ö ſcale; and then, thruſting a wire of a proper 
thickneſs, ö, into the tube, I contrive, by 

means of a thin plate of iron, bent to a ſharp 


angle c, to 2 it out again, when the whole 
of 


0 » - 
— —— — > A. * — . , 


nm, 
- CD I 


n — 56 16. oY 
, - . 
nated 3 | * 
— —— ee, 43 nn 


Taz INTRODUCTION. ut 


' of this little apparatus has been introduced 
through the water into a jar of nitrous air; 

| and the wire being drawn out, the air from the 
os Jar muſt ſupply its place. I then meaſure 

the length of this column of nitrous air which 
J have got into the tube, and lay it alſo down 
upon the ſcale, ſo as to know the exact length 
| of both the columns. After this, holding the 
| | tube under water,- with a ſmall wire I force the 
two ſeparate columns of air into contact; and 
when they have been a ſufficient-time together, 
I meaſure the length of the whole, and com- 
pare it with the length of both the columns 
taken before. A little experience will teach 
the operator how far to thruſt the wire into 
the tube, in order to admir as much air as he 
wants and no more. 


In order to take the electric ſpark in a quan- 
tity of any kind of air, which mult be very 
ſmall, to produce a ſenſible effect upon it, in 
a ſhort time, by means of a common machine, 
I put a piece of wire into the end of a ſmall 
tube, and faſten it with hot cement, as in fig. 

16; and having got the air I want into the 
tube by means of the apparatus fig. 15, I 
place it inverted in a baſon containing either 
quickſilver, or any other fluid ſubſtance by- 

which I chuſe to have the air confined. I then, 

by the help of the air pump, drive out as much 

of the air as I think convenient, admitting the 

C 3 quick- 


* 
> — . —— r * HH — 
2 _ Ss. 76 —— _—_— + 
cy - b N l I * — 2 — - — - 


_ » — - ” 


— * 


* TY 2 . * ä a "i Py j 0 * — 2 * 
x * 2 3 "> N vl — . ants... Ae... oe. — ME) 
* „ — 


R 


„ 22 Tux INTRODUCTION, 
i | quickſilver, &c. to it, as at a, and nts J 
£1 braſs ball on the end of the wire, I take the 


ſparks or ſhocks upon it, and thereby tranſmit 
15 A the air t to the liquor in the tube, 


To take the electric ſparks in any kind of 

k fluid, as oil, &c. I uſe the fame apparatus de- 
ſeribed above, and having poured into the tube 

as much of the fluid as I conjecture I can make 

the electric ſpark pals through, I fill the reſt 

with quickfilver ; and placing it inverted in a 


. of quickſilyer, I take the ſparks as before, 


j If air be generated very faſt by this proceſs, 
: [ 8 1 uſe a tube that is narrow at the top, and grows 
1 | Wider below, as fig. 17, that the quickſilver 
' may not recede too ou beyond the ſtriking 

J | | diſtance, 


Sometimes I haye uſed a different apparatus x 
for this purpoſe, repreſented fig. 18. Taking a L 
pretty wide glaſs tube, hermetically ſealed at 
the upper-end, and open below, at about an 
inch, or at what diſtance I think convenient 
from the top, I get two holes made in it, oppoſite 
to each other. Through theſe I put two wires, 
and faſtening them with warm cement, I fix 
them at what diftance I pleaſe from each other. 
Between theſe wires I take the ſparks, and 
the bubbles of air riſe, as they are formed, to 


the top of the tube, 


PART 


* 


th EE ea. 


= = 2 
eg _ Lt = 2 P * — 
. . *Xx 3 
e 


P 1 1 1 


Experiments and Obſervations made in, and Be- 
fore the year 1772. 


— 


N uriting upon the ſubjcct of Aferent Finds of 
air, T find myſelf at a loſs for proper terms, 


by which to diſtinguiſh them, thoſe which 
have hitherto obtained being by no means ſuffi- 
_ ciently characteriſtic, or diſtinct. The only terms 


in common uſe are, fixed air, mephitic, and in- 


flammable, The laſt, indeed, ſufficiently cha- 


racterizes and diſtinguiſhes. that kind of air 
which takes fire, and explodes on the approach 
of flame; but it might have been termed fixed 
with as much propriety as- that to which Dr. 
Black and others have given that denomination, 
ſince it is originally part of ſome ſolid ſubſtance, © 
and exiſts in an unelaſtic ſtate, | 


C 4 2 All 


94 Obſervations on 


1 All theſe newly diſcovered kinds of alr 
. | may alſo be called fa#itious; and if, with 
others, we uſe the term fixable, it is ſtill obvious 
to remark, that it is applicable to them all; 
fince they are all capable of being imbibed by 
ſome ſubſtance or other, and conſequently of 
being fired in them, after they have been in an 
elaſtic ſtate, 


The term mephitic is equally applicable 
to what is called fixed air, to that which is in- 
flammable, and to many other kinds; ſince they 
are equally noxious, when breathed by animals. 
Rather, however, than either introduce new 
terms, or change the ſignification of old ones, 
T ſhall uſe the term fixed air, in the ſenſe in 
which it is now commonly uſed, and diſtinguiſh 
the other kinds by their properties, or ſome 
other periphraſis. I ſhall be under a neceſſity, 
however, of giving names to thoſe kinds of 
air, to which no names has been given by gy 
thers, as nitrous, acid, and alkaline, 


SECT. 


- Fixed Air. 25 


dB. G Ri 
Of Fixer Air. 


It was in conſequence of living for ſome 
time in the.neighbourhood of a public brewery, 
that I was induced to make experiments on 

fixed air, of which there is always a large body, 
ready formed, upon the ſurface of the ferment- 
ing liquor, generally about nine inches, or a foot 
in depth, within which any kind of ſubſtance 
may be very conveniently placed; and though, 

in theſe circumſtances, the fixed air muſt be con- 
tinually mixing with the common air, and is 
therefore far from being perfectly pure, yet 
there is a conſtant freſh ſupply from the fer- 
menting liquor, and it is pure enough for many 
purpoſes. 


A perſon, who is quite a ſtranger to the pro- 
perties of this kind of air, would be agreeably 
amuſed with extinguiſhing lighted candles, or 
chips of wood in it, as it lies upon the ſurface 
of the fermenting liquor ; for the ſmoke rea- 
dily unites with this kind of air, probably by 
means of the water which 1t contains ; ſo that 
very little or none of the ſmoke will eſcapeinto-- - 
the open air, which is incumbent upon it. It 
js remarkable, that the upper ſurface of this 

ſmoke 


26 _ Obſervationson 


ſmoke, floating in the fixed air, is ſmooth, and 
well defined ;- whereas the lower ſurface is ex- | 
ceedingly ragged, ſeveral parts hanging down to 
a confiderable diſtance within the body of the 
fixed air, and ſometimes in the form of balls, 
connected to the upper ſtratum by ſlender 
threads, as if they were ſuſpended. The ſmoke 
is alſo apt to form itſelf into broad flakes, pa- 
rallel to the ſurface of the liquor, and at diffe- 
rent diſtances from it, exactly like clouds. 
Theſe appearances will ſometimes continue a- 
bove an hour, with very little variation. When 
this fixed air is very ſtrong, the ſmoke of a 
ſmall quantity of gunpowder fired in it will be 
wholly retained by it, no 4 * cſcaping into the 
common air, 


Making a an 3 in this air, the ſurface 
of it, (which ſtill continues to be exactly de- 
fined) is thrown into the form of waves, which 
it is very amuſing to look upon ; and if, by 
this agitation, any of the fixed air be thrown 
over the fide of the veſſel, the ſmoke, which 
is mixed with it, will fall to the ground, as if 
it was ſo much water, the fixed air being 
heavier than common air. 

The red part of burning wood was extin- 
guiſhed in this air, but I could not perceive that 
a red-hot poker was ſooner cooled in it. 


Fixed 


Fixed Air, 47 


Fixed air does not inſtantly mix with com- 
mon air. Indeed if it did, it could not be 
caught upon the furface of the fermenting li- 
quor. A candle put under a large receiver, 
and immediately plunged very deep below the 
ſurface of the fixed air, will burn ſome time. 
Bur veſſels with the ſmalleſt orifices, hanging 
with their mouths downwards in the fixed air, will 


in time have the common air, which they contain, 


perfectly mixed with ir. When the fermenting 
liquor is contained in veſſels cloſe covered up, 
the fixed air, on removing the cover, readily 
affects the common air which is contiguous to it; 
ſo that, candles beld at a conſiderable diſtance 


above the ſurface will inſtantly go out. I have 


been told by the workmen, that this will ſome- 
times be the caſe, when the candles are held 
two feet above the mouth of the veſſel. 


Fixed air unites with the ſmoke of roſin, ſul- 


phur, and other electrical ſubſtances, as well 
as with the vapour of water; and yet, by hold- 
ing the wire of a charged phial among theſe 
fumes, I conld not make any electrical atmoſ- 


phere, which ſurprized me a good deal, as 


there was a large body of this ſmoke, and it 


was ſo confined, that it could not eſcape me. 


I alſo held ſome oil of vitriol in a glaſs veſ- | 


ſel 5 the fixed air, and by plunging 2 
piece 


-4 
G : 
. 
89 — — — 
a "F 5 a «. 
= — W n 


28 Obſervatians on 


piece of red-hot glaſs into it, raiſed a copious 
and thick fume. This floated upon the ſurface 


of the fixed air like other fumes, and continued 


as long. 


Conſidering the near affinity between water 
and fixed air, I concluded that if a quantity of 
water was placed near the yeaſt of the fermenting 
liquor, it could not fail to imbibe that air, and 
thereby acquire the principal properties of Pyr- 


mont, and ſome other medicinal mineral waters. 


Accordingly, I found, that when the ſurface of 
the water was conſiderable, it always acquired 
the pleaſant acidulous taſte that Pyrmont water 
has. The readieſt way of impregnating water 
with this virtue, in theſe circumſtances, is to 
take two veſſels, and to keep pouring the wa- 
ter from one into the other, when they are both 
of them held as near the yeaſt as poſſible; for 
by this means a great quantity of ſurface is ex- 
poſed to the air, and the ſurface is alſo conti- 


nually changing In this manner, I have ſome- 


times, in the ſpace of two or three minutes, 


made a glaſs of exceedingly pleaſant ſparkling 


water, which could hardly be diſtinguiſhed 
from very good Pyrmont, or rather Seltzer 
water. | 


But the moſt effectual way of impregnating 
water with fixed air is to put the veſſels which 


contain the water into glaſs jars, filled with the 
pureſt 


Fixed Air, | 29 


pureſt fixed air made by the ſolution of chalk 

in diluted oil of vitriol, ſtanding in quickſilver. 

In this manner I have, in about two days, made 

a quantity of water to imbibe more than an 

equal bulk of fixed air, ſo that, according to 

Dr. Brownrigg's experiments, it muſt have been 

much ſtronger than the beſt imported Pyrmont; 
for though he made his experiments at the 

ſpring-head, he never found that it contained 

quite ſo much as half its bulk of this air. If a 
ſufficient quantity of quickſilver cannot be pro- 

cured, oil may be uſed with ſufficient advantage, 

for this purpoſe, as it imbibes the fixed air very 

lowly. . Fixed air may be kept in veſſels ſtand- 

ing in water for a long time, if they be ſepa- 

rated by a partition of oil, about half an inch 

thick. Pyrmont water made in theſe circum- 

ſtances, is little or nothing inferior to that / 

which has ſtood in quickſilver. | 


The readieſt method of preparing this water 
for uſe is to agitate it ſtrongly with a large 
ſurface expoſed to the fixed air. By this means 
more than an equal bulk of air may be com- 
municated to a large quantity of water in the 
ſpace of a few minutes, But fince agitation 
promotes the diſſipation of fixed air from wa- 
ter, it cannot be made to imbibe ſo great a 
quantity in this method as in the former, 
where more time is taken. 


3 


Eaſy 


— 
a . . 
* Pay . 
"y ——_ 
- 
— 


renne aw - 


ry a. — — _ 
SCOUTS at, III — you tn 


30 Obſervations on 


Eaſy directions for impregnating water with 
fixed air I have publiſhed in a ſmall pamphlet, 
defigned originally for the uſe: of ſeamen in 
fong voyages, on the preſumption that it might 
be of uſe for preventing or curing the ſea 
feurvy, equally with wort, which was recom- 
mended by Dr. Macbride for this purpoſe, on 


no other account than its property of genera- 


ting fixed air, by its $ fermentation i in che ſto- 


wach. 


Water thus impregnated with fixed air rea- 
dily diſſolves iron, as Mr. Lane has diſcovered; 
ſo chat if a quantity of iron filings be put to 
it, it preſently becomes a ſtrong chalybeate, 
and of the mildeſt and moſt agreeable kind. 


I have recommended the uſe of chalk and 
oil of vitriol as the cheapeſt, and, upon the 
whole, the beſt materials for this purpoſe. But 
ſome perſons prefer pearl aſhes, pounded mar- 
ble, or other calcareous or alkaline Jubſlances, 
and perhaps with reaſon. My own experience 
has not been ſuMcient to enable me to decide 
in this . 


- Whereas ſome bebe had faſpeAtea chit” 2 
quantity of the oil of vitriol was rendered vo- 
latile by this proceſs, I examined it, by all the 
chemical methods that are in uſe; but could 
$1, 5 NOt 


Fixed Air. 31 


not find that water thus impregnated contained 
the leaſt perceivable quantity of that acid. 


Mr. Hey, indeed, who aſſiſted me in this 
examination, found that diſtilled} water, im- 
pregnated with fixed air, did not mix ſo readi- 
ly with ſoap as the diſtilled water itfelf ; but 
this was alſo the caſe when the fixed air had 
paſſed through a long glaſs tube filled with al- 
kaline ſalts, which, it may be ſuppoſed, would 
have imbibed any of the oil of vitriol that 
might have been contained in that air “. 


Fixed air. itſelf may be faid to be of the na- 
ture of an acid, though of a weak and pecu- 
lar fort —— Mr. Bergman of Upſal, who ho- 
noured me with a letter upon the ſubject, 
calls it the aerial acid, and, among other 
experiments to prove it to be an acid, he 
fays that it changes the blue juice of tourneſole 
into red. This Mr. Hey found to be true, and 
he moreover diſcovered that when water tinged 
blue with the juice of tourneſole, and then red 
with fixed air, has been expoſed to the open 
air, it recovers its blue colour again. 


| The heat of boiling water will expel all the 
fixed air, if a phial containing the impregnated 


* An account of Mr, Hey's experiments will be found 
in the Appendix to theſe papers. 


water 


— — 
— 


i 
A 
5 


2 
- bw > 46 .-1zr 
| — 
2 ” * 


— 
1 — 2 =_ 
— 


= 
- 
= 

* 

. 
* 
FA 


* 


* 
Loom 
» 
: - 


Aa. . * th. _— 
- 


32 - Obſervations on 


water be held in it but it will often require 
above half an hour to do it completely. 


Dr. Percival, who is particularly attentive 
to every improvement in the medical art, and 
who has thought ſo well of this impregnation 
as to preſcribe it in ſeveral caſes, informs me 
that it ſeems to be much ſtronger, and ſparkles 
more, like the true Pyrmont water, after it 
has been kept ſome time. This circumſtance, 
however, ſhews that, in time, the fixed air is 
more eaſily diſengaged from the water; and 
though, in this ſtate, it may affect the taſte 
more ſenſibly, it cannot be of ſo much uſe 
in the ſtomach and bowels, as when the air is 
more firmly retained by the water. 


By the proceſs deſcribed in my pamphlet, 
fixed air may be readily incorporated with wine, 
beer, and almoſt any other liquor whatever ; 
and when beer, wine, or cyder, is become 
flat or dead (which is the conſequence of the 
eſcape of the fixed air they contained) they 


may be revived by this means; but the deli- 


cate and agreeable flavour, or acidulous taſte, 
communicated by fixed air, and which is very 
manifeſt in water, can hardly be perceived in 
wine, or any liquors which have much taſte 
of their own. 


I ſhould _ 


Fixed Ar. 33 


I ſhould think that there can be no doubt, 
But that water thus impregnated with fixed air 
muſt have all the medicinal virtues of genuine 
Pyrmont or Seltzer water; ſince. theſe depend 


upon the fixed air they contain. If the genuine 
Pyrmont water derives any advantage from its 

being a natural chalybeate, this may alſo be 
obtained by providing: a common chalybeate 


water, and uſing it in theſe proceſſes, inſtead. 
of common water. 


Having ſucceeded ſo well with this artificial 


Pyrmont water, I imagined that it might be 
poſſible to give ice the ſame virtue, eſpecially 
as cold is known to promote the abſorption of 
fixed air by water ; but in this I found myſelf 
quite miſtaken, I put ſeveral pieces of ice into 
a quantity of fixed air, confined by quickſilver, 
but no part of the air was abſorbed in two days 
and two nights; but upon bringing 4 it into a 


place where the ice melted, the air e 
ed as uſual. 


I then took a quantity of ſtrong artificial 
Pyrmont water, and putting it into a thin glaſs 
phial, I ſer i it in a pot that was filled with ſhow 
and ſalt. This mixture inſtantly freeaing the 
water that was contiguous to the ſides of the 


glaſs, the air Was charged plentifully, fo © 
D 


that 


| 


24 Obſervations on 


that I catched a conſiderable quantity, in a 
bladder tied to the mouth of the phial. 


I alſo took two quantities of the fame Pyr- 
mont water, and placed one of them where it 
might freeze, keeping the other in a cold place, 


but where it would not freeze. This retained 
its acidulous taſte, though the phial which 


contained it was not corked ; whereas the other 
being brought into the ſame place, where the 
ice melted very ſlowly, had at the fame time 
the taſte of common water only. That quan- 
tity of water which had been frozen by the 
mixture of ſnow and ſalt, was almoſt as much 
like ſnow as ice, ſuch a quantity of air- bub- 
bles were contained in it, by which it was pro- 
digiouſly increaſed in bulk. 


The prefſure of the atmoſphere aſſiſts very 
conſiderably in keeping fixed air confined in 
water; for in an exhauſted receiver, Pyrmont 
water will abſolutely boil, by the copious diſ- 
charge of its air. This is alſo the reaſon why 
beer and ale froth ſo much ix vacuo, I do not 
doubt, therefore, but that, by the help of a 
condenſing engine, water might be much more 
highly impregnated with the virtues of the 


Pyrmont ſpring ; and it would not be difficult 
to contrive a method of doing it. | 


The 


| Fixed Air. 35 


1 The manner in which I made ſeveral expe- 
4 riments to aſcertain the abſorption of fixed air 
f by different fluid ſubſtances, was to put the li- 
3 quid into a diſh, and holding it within the 
3 body of the fixed air at the brewery, to ſet a 
4 glaſs veſſel into it, with its mouth inverted. 
'Þ This glaſs being neceſſarily filled with the fixed 
Y air, the liquor would riſe into it when they 
were both taken into the common air, if the 
fixed air was abſorbed at all. 


Making uſe of ether in this manner, there 
was a conſtant bubbling from under the glaſs, 
occaſioned by this fluid eaſily riſing in vapour, 
ſo that I could not, in this method, determine 
whether it imbibed the air or not. I concluded 
however, that they did incorporate, from a 
very diſagreeable circumſtance, which made me 
deſiſt from making any more experiments of 
the kind. For all the beer, over which this = 
experiment was made, contracted a peculiar 
taſte ; the fixed air impregnated with the ether 
being, I ſuppoſe, again abſorbed by the beer. 
J have alſo obſerved, that water which remain- 
ed a long time within this air has ſometimes 
acquired a very diſagreeable taſte. At one 
time it was like tar- water. How this was ac- 
quired, I was very defirous of making ſome 
experiments to aſcertain, but I was diſcouraged | 
D 2 e 8 


5 46 * Obſervations on 


by the fear of injuring the fermenting liquor. 
It could not come from the fixed air only. 


Inſects and animals which breathe very little 
are ſtifled in fixed air, hut are not ſoon quite 
killed in it. Butterflies and flies; of other 
kinds will generally become torpid, and ſeem- 
ingly dead, after being held a few minutes over 
the fermenting liquor; but they revive, again 
after being brought into the freſh air. But 
there are very great varieties with reſpe& to 
the time in which different kinds of flies will 
either become torpid in the fixed air, or die 
in it. & large firong frog was much fwelled, 
and ſeemed fo be nearly dead, after being held 
about fix minutes over the fermenting liquor 
but it recovered upon being brought into the 
common air. A ſnail treated in the ſame man- 

Der died preſently, E 


5 ixed air is preſently fatal to vegetable life. 
At leaſt ſprigs of mint growing in water, and 
placed over the fermenting liquor, will often 
become quite dead in one day, or even in a 
leſs ſpace of time; nor de they recover when 


iy are afterwards brought into the common 
I am told, however, that ſome other 


== are much more hardy in this reſpect. 


Wl os Ated 


r 


| | Fixed Air. ; 97 
A red roſe, freſh gathered, loſt its redneſs, 


and became of a purple colour, after being 


held over the fermenting liquor about twenty- 
four hours; but the tips of each leaf were 
much more affected than the reſt of it. Ano- 
ther red roſe turned perfectly white in this 
ſituation; but various other flowers of diffe- 
rent colours were very little affected. Theſe 
experiments were not repeated, as I with they 
might be done, in pure fixed air, extracted 
from chalk by means of oil of vitriol. 


For every oyrpola; in which it was neceflary 
that the fixed air ſhould be as unmixed as Poſ- 
ſible, I generally made it by pouring oil of vi- 
triol upon chalk and water, catching it in a 
bladder faſtened to the neck of the phial in 
which they were contained, taking care to 
out all the common air, and alſo the firſt, — | 
ſometimes the ſecond, produce of fixed air; ; 


and alſo, by agitation, making 1 it as quickly as 


I poſſibly could. At other times, I made it 
paſs from the phial in which it was generated 
through a glaſs tube, without the intervention 
of any bladder, which, as I found 'by experi- 


ence, will not long make a ſufficient ſeparation 


between ſeveral kinds of air and common air. 


I had once thought that the readieſt method 
of procuring fixed air, and i in ſufficient purity, 
1 would 


gs 0 © „ 
= 


» bbs. g 


38 Obſervations on 


would be by the ſimple proceſs of burning 
chalk, or pounded lime. ſtone in a gun- barrel, 
making it paſs through the ſtem of a tobacco- 
pipe, or a glaſs tube carefully luted to the 
orifice of it. In this manner I found that air 
IS produced in great plenty ; but, upon exam- 
ining it, I found, to my very great ſurpriſe, 
that little more than one half of it was fixed 
air, capable of being abſorbed by water; and 
that the reſt was inflammable, ſometimes very 


wah. but ſometimes pretty highly ſo. 


Whence this inflammability proceeds, I am 
not able to determine, the lime or chalk not 
being ſuppoſed to contain any other than fixed 
air. I conjecture, however, that it muſt pro- 
ceed from the iron, and the ſeparation of it 
from the calx may be promoted by that ſmall 
quantity of oil of vitriol, which I am informed 
is contained in chalk, if not in lime-ſtone alſo, 


But it is an objection to this hypotheſis, that 
the inflammable air produced in this manner 
burns blue, and not at all like that which is pro- 
duced from iron, or any other metal, by means 
of an acid. It alſo has not the ſmell of that kind 
of inflammable air which is produced from mi- 
neral ſubſtances. Beſides, oil of vitriol with- 
out water, will not diſſolve iron; nor can in- 


flammable air be got from it, unleſs the acid be 
con- 


2. 


1 
F 
1 


.. Acc cc 


„ LR. 


Fixed Air. 88 


conſiderably diluted; and when I mixed brim- 
ſtone with the chalk, neither the quality nor 
the quantity of the air was changed by it. In- 
deed no air, or permanently elaſtic vapour, can 
be got from brimſtone, or any oil. 


Perhaps this inflammable principle may 


come from ſome remains of the animals, from 


which it is thought that all calcareous matter 
proceeds. 


In the method in which I generally made the 
fixed air (and indeed always, unleſs the con- 
trary be particularly mentioned, viz. by diluted 
oil of vitriol and chalk) I found by experiment 
that it was as pure as Mr. Cavendiſh made it. 
For after it had paſſed through a large body of 
water in ſmall bubbles, ſtill e or v part only 
was not abſorbed by water. In order to try 
this as expeditiouſly as poſſible, I kept pouring 
the air from one glals veſſel into another, im- 
merſed in a quantity of cold water, in which 
manner I found by experience, that almoſt any 
quantity may be reduced as far as poſſible in a 
very ſhort time. But the moſt expeditious me- 
thod of making water imbibe any kind of air, 


s to confine it in a jar; and agitate it ſtrongly, in I 


the manner deſcribed in my pamphlet on the 
impregnation of water with fixed air, and re- 


preſented fig. 10. ; 
D 4 At. 


"I l Lese. N ry 
＋ ä 5 LE 4 
1 > « & 8 p "TI W 

> o * 4 
Nr r * 


— SO 
* 


0 5 0 


oO 
. =>. * 


Ow 2 
1 
— _— 


r 
= —_—_ \ 
no 
» a> 
1 7 
* 


40 Odhervationt on 


At the ſame time that I was trying the purity 


of my fixed air, I had the curioſity to endeavour 


to aſcertain whether that part of it which is not 
miſcible in water, be equally diffaſed through 
the whole maſs ; and, for this purpoſe, 'I di- 
vided a quantity of about a gallon into three 
parts, the firſt conſiſting of that which was up- 
permoſt, and the laſt of that which was the 


| loweſt, contiguous to the water; but all theſe 


parts were reduced in about an equal propor- 
tion, by paſſing through the water, ſo that the 
whole maſs had been of an uniform compo- 
fition. This I have alſo found to be the caſe 
with ſeveral kinds of air, which will not pro- 
perly incorporate, 

A mouſe will live very well, though a can» 
dle will not burn in the reſiduum of the pureſt 
Hixed air that I can make; and I once made a 
very large quantity for the ſole purpoſe of this 
experiment. This, therefore, ſeems to be one 
inſtance of the generation of genuine common 
air, though vitiated in ſome degree. It is alſo 
another proof of the reſiduum of fixed air being, 


in part at leaſt, common air, that it becomes 


turbid, and is diminiſhed by the mixture of ni- 


trous air, as will be explained hereafter. * 


That fixed air only wants ſome addition to 
make it permanent, and immiſcible with water 


2 7} . 


Fixed Ar. At 


if not in all reſpects, common air, I have been 
led to conclude, from ſeveral attepmts which I 
once made to mix it with air in which a quan- 
tity of iron filings and brimſtone, made into a 
paſte with water, had ſtood; for, in ſeveral 
mixtures of this kind, I imagined that not 
much more than half of the fixed air could be 
imbibed by water; but, not being able to re- 


peat the experiment, I conclude that I either 


deceived myſelf in it, or that I overlooked 
ſome circumſtance on which the ſacceſs of it 


depended. 


Theſe experiments, however, whether they 
were fallacious or otherwiſe, induced me to try 
whether any alteration would be made in the 
conſtitution of fixed air, by this mixture of 
iron filings and brimſtone. I therefore put a 
mixture of this kind into a quantity of as pure 
fixed air as I could make, and confined the 
whole in quickſilver, leſt the water ſhould ab- 
ſorb it before the effects of the mixture could 


take place. The conſequence was, that the 


fixed air was diminiſhed, and the quickfilver 
roſe in the veſſel, till about the fifth part was 
occupied by it; and, as near as I could judge, 
the proceſs went on, in all reſpects, as if the 
air in the infide had been common air. 


What 


—_ 
f > 6 
* ll 


IIS an 
—_—_— 
2? 


wh Ee rs + — 
& * 1 
pd r wt 
CMM "4 


nn 
0 — 


2884 


. 


12 5 = —— 
3 42 — p - 
* ar 7" — 1 8 ry * As 5 
A 
w 


CY 
w_ te 


— * 


5 
r 
2 C 


L 
» 
; 
fo 
1 
4 
£ 
| 


42 Obſervations on 


What is moſt remarkable, in the reſult of 
this experiment, is, that the fixed air, into 
which this mixture had been put, and which 
had been in part diminiſhed by it, was in part 
alſo rendered inſoluble in water by this means. I 
made this experiment four times, with the 
greateſt care, and obſerved, - that in two of 
them about one ſixth, and in the other two 
about one fourteenth, of the original quantity, 
was ſuch as could not be abſorbed by water, 


but continued permanently elaſtic. Leſt I 


ſhould have made any miſtake with reſpect to 
the purity of the fixed air, the laſt time that I 
made the experiment, I ſet part of the fixed 
air, which I made uſe of, in a ſeparate veſſel, 
and found it to be exceedingly pure, ſo as to 
be almoſt wholly abſorbed by water ; Whereas 
the other part, to which I had put the mix- 
ture, was far from being ſo. | 


In one of theſe caſes, in which fixed air was 
made immiſcible with water, it appeared to be 
not very noxious to animals; but in another 
caſe, a mouſe died in it pretty ſoon. This dif- 
ference probably aroſe from my having inadver- 
tently agitated the air in water rather more in 
one caſe than in the other. 


As the iron is reduced to a calx by this pro- 
ceſs, I once concluded, that it ĩs phlogiſton that 


fixed 


Fixed Air. 43 


fixed air wants, to make it common air; and, 
for any thing I yer know, this may be the caſe, 
though I am ignorant of the method of com- 
bining them; and when calcined a quantity 
of lead in'fixed air, in the manner which will 
be deſcribed hereafter, it did not ſeem to have 
been leſs ſoluble in water than it was before. 


SECTION EH 


Of Ax in which a CANDLE, or BRIMSTONE, bas 
burned out, 


It is well known that flame cannot ſubſiſt 
long without change of air, ſo that the com- 
mon air is neceſſary to it, except in the caſe of 
ſubſtances, into the compoſition of which nitre 
enters, for theſe will burn in vacuo, in fixed air, 


and even under water, as is evident in ſome 
rockets, which are made for this purpoſe. The 


quantity of air which even a ſmall flame re- 
quires to keep it burning is prodigious. It is 
generally ſaid, that an ordinary candle conſumes, 
as it is called, about a gallon in a minute, 
Conſidering this amazing conſumption of air, 
by fires of all kinds, volcanos, &c. it becomes 
a great object of philoſophical inquiry, to al- 
certain what change is made in the conſtitution 


of the air by flame, and to diſcover hat provi- 
| ſion 


. 1 72 4 1 pe - 2 * 2 
rr . 


1 8 + 

, 2 

* 

1 N 
a \ 8 
** — — Z wy GG eg ve * wh L 
A „ 
* Tye © * 


— = Obſervations on 


ſion there is in nature for remedying the injury 
which the atmoſphere receives by this means. 
Some of the following experiments will, per- 
haps, be thought to throw light upon the ſubject. 


The diminution of the quantity of air in 
which a candle, or brimſtone, has burned out, 
is various; But I imagine that, at a medium, 
it may be about one fifteenth, or one ſixteenth 
of the whole; which is one third as much as by 
animal or vegetable ſubſtances putrefying in it, 
by the calcination of metals, or by any of the 
other cauſes of the complete diminution of air, 

which will be mentioned hereafter. 


I have ſometimes thought, that flame dif- 
poſes the common air to depoſit the fixed air 
it contains; for if any lime-water be expoſed 
to it, it immediately becomes turbid. This is 
the cafe, when wax candles, tallow candles, 
chips of wood, ſpirit of wine, ether, and every 
other ſubſtance which I have yet tried, except 
brimſtone, is burned in a cloſe glaſs veſſel, 
ſanding in lime-Water. This precipitation of 
fixed air (if this be the caſe) may be owing to 
ſomething emitted from the burning bodies, 
*'which has a ſtronger affinity with the other con- 
ſtituent parts of the atmoſphere “. | 


by 


3 
. 
bY 

3 
1 


| 
j 


— 
* 


* The ſuppoſition, mentioned in this and other paſſages 
of the fir part of this publication, viz. that the diminution 
of 


= — vo \ \ l 
= * ——— — * «a — * — T7 , \ AT +} 22 N * * = ny N * 
rr — — ; aac. at. — — — 22 
6 * z * * « & * — 5 — < 
b K 9 * * = — * — 2 23 — W Da. ry at 5 y 
5 — 1 Y 4 be” 4 
* 9 — —— — - 
a s $ C 4 0 . 1 
- 
= m N > 
- " , pe . 4 - N 3 0 
W % * #7 FI gh ay 2 8 & „ 1 4 fd 7 — 
hd . > 
Y * N I. 2 1 N 4 * 
* 5 


& 


A AT wy, 
N 


— * 
4s n 
1 bs. C's "2 ” 
* 
— CD 


— 


— 


- - 


' 3 mr e 1 


Air in which Candles bave burned. 45 


If brimſtone be burned in the ſame circum- 
ſtances, the lime water continues tranſparent, 

but {till there may have been the fame preci- 
pitation of the fixed part of the air; but that, 
uniting with the lime and the vitriolic acid, it 
forms a ſelenetic ſalt, which is ſoluble in water. 
Having evaporated a quantity of water thus 
impregnated, by burning brimſtone a great 
number of times over it, a whitiſh powder re- 
mained, which had an acid taſte; but repeating 
the experiment with a quicker evaporation, the 
powder had no acidity, bur was very much like 
chalk. The burning of brimſtone but once 
over a quantity of lime-water, will affect it in 
ſuch a manner, that breathing into it will not 
make it turbid, which otherwiſe it always pre- 
. fently does. 


Dr. Hales ſuppoſed, that by burning brim- 
ſtone repeatedly in the fame quantity of air, the 
diminution would continue without end. But 
this I have frequently tried, and not found to 
be the caſe. Indeed, when the ignition has 
been imperfect in the firſt inſtance, 'a ſecond 
firing of the ſame ſubſtance will increaſe the 


effect of the firſt, &c. but this "Pee ſoon | 


ceales. 


of common ir, by this and other proceſſes is, in part at 
leaſl, owing to the precipitation of the fixed air from it, 


the reader will find confirmed by the experiments. and ob- - 


- fervations im the ſecond part, 


In 


. 


46 Olſervations on 


In many caſes of the diminution of air, the 
effect is not immediately apparent, even when 
it ſtands in water; for ſometimes the bulk of 
air will not be much reduced, till it has paſſed 
ſeveral times through aquantity of water, which 
has thereby a better opportunity of abſorbing 
that part of the air, which had not been per- 
fectly detatched from the reſt. I have ſome- 
times found a very great reduction of a maſs of 
air, in conſequence of paſſing but once through 
cold water. If the air has ſtood in quickſilver, 
the diminution is generally inconſiderable, till 
it has undergone this operation, there not being 
any ſubſtance expoſed to che air that could 
abſorb any part of it. 


I could not find any conſiderable alteration 
in the ſpecific gravity of the air, in which 
candles, or brimſtone, had burned out. I am 
ſatisfied, however, that it is not heavier than 
common air, which muſt have been manifeſt, 
if ſo great a diminution of the quantity. had 
been owing, as Dr. Hales and others ſuppoſed, 
to the elaſticity of the whole maſs being im- 
paired. After making ſeveral trials for this 
purpoſe, I concluded that air, thus diminiſhed 
in bulk, is rather lighter than common air, 
which favours the ſuppoſition of the fixed, or 
heavier part of the common air, having been 

precipitated, 
2 


An 


Air in which Candles have burned. 47 


An animal will live nearly, if not quite as 
long, in air in which candles have burned out, 
as in common air. This fact ſurprized me very 
greatly, having imagined that what is called 
the conſumption of air by flame, or reſpiration, 
to have been of the ſame nature, and in the 
ſame degree; but I have ſince found, that this 
fact has been obſerved by many perſons, and 
even ſo early as by Mr. Boyle. I have alſo 
obſerved, that air, in which brimſtone has 
burned, is not in the leaſt injurious to animals, 
after the fumes, which at firſt make it very 
cloudy, have intirely ſubſided. | 


I muſt, in this place, admoniſh my reader 
not to confound the ſimple b ning of brimſtone, 
or of matches (i. e. bits of wood dipped in it) 
and the burning of brimſtone with a burning 
mirror, or any foreign heat. The effect of the 
former is nothing more than that of any other 
flame, or ignited vapour, which will not burn, 
unleſs the air with which it is ſurrounded be in 
a very pure ſtate, and which is therefore ex- 
tinguiſhed when the air begins to be , much 
vitiated. Lighted brimſtone, therefore reduces 
the air to the ſame ſtate as lighted wood, But 
the focus of a burning mirror thrown for a ſuf- 
ficient time cither upon brimſtone, or wood, 
after it has ccaſed to burn of its own accord, 
and has become charcoal, will have a much 

greater 


— L 


— — 8 1 A — 6 = 
- ted N . 1 8 — — 818 — PR —— — 
18 ? — — oo 2 233 — — - —— — *% 


| a — 1 
wo * W bp * 


——  — 


* 
7 


CHEESE ˙—— 9 9 
— . . ˙ A 7 Ae oo 
— * l N n 1. 
* E : * 22 1 a 
* 4 * Oo iy 
* 
7 


48 Ob ſervations on 


greater eſſect of the ſame kind, diminiſhing the 
air to its utmoſt extent, and making it thorough- 
ly noxious. In fact, as will be ſeen hereafter, 
more phlogiſton is expelled from theſe ſub- 
ſtances in the latter caſe than in the former. 
J never, indeed, actually carried this experi- 
ment ſo far with brimſtone; but from the 
diminution of air that I did produce by this 
means, I concluded that, by continuing the 
proceſs ſome time longer, it would have been 
effected. 


Having read, in the Memoirs of the Philoſo- 
phical Socicty at Turin, vol. I. p. 41. that air in 
which candles had burned out was perfectly 
reſtored, ſo that other candles would burn in it 
again as well as ever, after having been expoſed 
to a conſiderable degree of cold, and likewiſe 
after having been compteſſed in bladders (for 
the cold had been ſuppoſed to have produced 
this effect by nothing but condenſation) I re- 
peated thoſe experiments, and did, indeed, find, 
that when I compreſſed the air in Hadders, as 
the Count de Saluce, who made the obſeryation, 
had done, the experiment ſucceeded : but having 
had ſufficient reaſon to diftruſt bladders, I com- 
preſſed the air in a glaſs veſſel ſtanding in water; 
and then I found, that this proceſs is altogether 
ineffectual for the purpoſe. I kept the air com- 
preſſed much more, and much longer, than the 
| Count 


Air in which Candles have burned. 49 


Count had done, but without producing any 
alteration in it. I alſo find, that a greater de- 
gree of cold than that which he applied, and 
of longer continuance, did by no means reſtore 
this kind of air: for when 1 had expoſed the 
phials which contairied it a whole night, in 
which the froſt was very intenſe; and alſo when 


I kept it furrounded with a mixture of ſnow 


and alt, I found it, in all reſpects, the fame 
as before. 


It is alſo adyanced, in the ſame Memoir, 
p. 41. that heat only, as the reverſe of cold, 
renders air unfit for candles burning in it. But 
I repeated the experiment of the Count for that 
purpoſe, without finding any ſuch effect from 
it. I alſo remember that, many years ago, I 
filled an exhauſted receiver with air, which had 
paſſed through a glaſs tube made red-hot, and 
found that a candle would burn in tt perfectly 
well. Alſo, rarefaction by the air- pump does 
not injure air in the leaſt degree, 


Though this experiment failed; J have been 
ſo happy, as by accident to have hit upon a 
method of reſtoring air, which has been injured 
by the burning of candles, and to have diſco- 

vered at leaſt one of the reſtoratives which na- 

ture employs for this purpoſe. It is vegetation. 
Tuis reſtoration of vitiated air, I conjecture, is 


E effected 


50 Obſervations on 


effected by plants imbibing the phlogiſtic matter 
with which it is overloaded by the burning of 


inflammable bodies, But whether there be any 


foundation for this conjecture or not, the fact 
is, I think, indiſputable. -I ſhall introduce the 
account of my experiments on this ſubject, by 
reciting ſome of the obſervations which I made 
on the growing of plants in confined air, which 
led to this diſcovery, 


One might have imagined that, ſince common 
air is neceſſary to vegetable, as well as to animal 
life, both plants and animals had affected it in 
the ſame manner ; and I own I had that expec- 
tation, when I firſt put a ſprig of mint into a 
glaſs jar, ſtanding inverted in a veſſel of water: 
but when it had continued growing there for 
ſome months, I found that the air would neither 
extinguiſh a candle, nor was it at all inconye- 
nient to a mouſe, which I put into it. 


The plant was not affected any otherwiſe than 


was the neceſſary conſequence of its confined 
ſituation ; for plants growing in ſeveral other 
kinds of air, were all affected in the very fame 
manner. Every ſucceſſion of leaves was more 


diminiſhed in ſize than the preceding, till, at 


length, they came to be no bigger than the 
heads of pretty ſmall pins. The root decayed, 


Mee ſtalk alſo, beginning from the root; 
| and 


Air in which Candles have burned, 31 


and yet the plant continued to grow upwards; 
drawing its nouriſhment through a black and 
rotten ſtern. In the third or fourth ſet of 
leaves, long and white hairy filaments grew 


from the inſertion of each leaf and ſometimes 


from the body of the ſtem, ſhooting out as fat 
as the veſſel in which it grew would permit, 
which, in my experiments, was about two in- 
ches. In this manner a ſprig of mint lived, 
the old plant decaying, and new ones ſhooting 
up in its place, but leſs and leſs continually; 
all the ſummer ſeaſon, | 


In repeating this experiment, care muſt be 
taken to draw away all the dead leaves from 
about the plant, leſt they ſhould putrefy, and 
affect the air. I have found that a freſh cab- 
bage leaf, put under a glaſs veſſel filled with 
common air, for the ſpace of one night only, 
has ſo affected the air, that a candle would not 
burn in it the next morning, and yet the leaf 
had not acquired any ſmell of putrefaction. 


Finding that candles would burn very well 
in air in which plants had grown a long time, 
and having had ſome reaſon to think, that there 
was ſomething attending vegetation, which re- 
ſtored air that had been injured by reſpiration, 
I thought it was poſſible that the ſame proceſs 


E 2 might 


mts. 0 4. it. aetur 
7 9 


— 


r 


4 


— 0 
a 


IVES 


52 Obſervations on 


might alſo reſtore the air that had been 
injured by the burning of . 


Accordingly, on the 17th 4 Auguſt 1771, 
1 puta ſprig of mint into a quantity of air, in 
which a wax candle had burned out, and found 
that, on the 27th of the ſame month, another 


candle burned. perfectly well in it. This expe- 
riment I repeated, without the leaſt variation 


in the eyent, not leſs than eight or ten times in 
the remainder of the ſummer. 


Several times I divided the quantity of air in 
which the cardle had burned out, into two 
parts, and putting the plant into one of them, 
left the other in the ſame expoſure, contained, 
alſo, in a glaſs veſſel immerſed in water, but 
without any plant; and never failed to find, 
that a candle would burn in the former, but 
not in the latter. 


I generally found that five or fix days were 


ſufficient to reſtore this air, when the plant was 


in its vigour; whereas I have kept this kind of 
air in glaſs veſſels, immerfed in water many 
months, without being able to perceive that the 
leaft alteration had been made in it. 1 have 


alfo tried a great variety of experiments upon 


it, as by condenſing, ratefying, expoſing ro the 
light and heat, &c. and throwing into it the 


effluvia 


Air in which Candles have burned. 53 
effluvia of many different ſubſtances, but Wills 
out _ effect. 


- 


riments made in - the year 1572. abun- 
. confirmed my conclufion concerning the 
reſtoration of air, in which candles had burned 
out by plants growing in it. The firſt of theſe 
experiments was made in the month of May; 
and they were frequently repeated in that and 
the two following months, without a fingle 
failure, 


For this purpoſe I uſed the flames of different 
ſubſtances, though I generally uſed wax or tal- 
low candles. On the 24th of June the expe- 
riment ſucceeded perfectly well with air in 
which ſpirit of wine had burned out, and on 
the 27th of the ſame month it ſucceeded equally 
well with air in which brimſtone matches had 
burned out, an effect of which I had re 


the preceding 885 


This reſtoration of air, I found, depended | 


upon the vegetating fate of the plant; for 


though I kept a great number of the freſh 
leaves of mint in a ſmall quantity of air in 
which candles had burned out, and changed 
them frequently, for a long ſpace of time, I 1 


could perceive no melioration in the ſtate of 


the air. 


E 3 © This 


1 Obſervations on 


This remarkable effect does not depend upon 
any thing peculiar to mint, which was the plant 
that I always made uſe of till July 1772; for 
on the 16th of that month, I found a quantity 
of this kind of air to be perfectly reſtored by 
ſprigs of balm, which had grown ip it from the 
Itch of the fame month, 


That this reſtoration of air was not owing 
to any aromatic luvia of theſe two plants, not 
only appeared by the eſſential oil of mint having 
no ſenſible effect of this kind; but from the 
Equally complete reſtoration of this vitiated air 
by the plant called ground/el, which is uſually 
ranked among the weeds, and has an offenſive 
{mell. This was the reſult of an, experiment 
made the 16th of July, when the plant had 
heen growing in the burned air from the:8th of 
the ſame month. Beſides, the plant which I 
have found to be the moſt effeftual of any that 
J have tried for this purpoſe is /ptrnach, which 
is of quick growth, but will ſeldom thrive long 
in water, One jar of burned air was perfectly 
reſtored, by this plant in four days, and another 
in two days. This laſt was obſerved on the 


24d of July, 


In general, this effect may be 3 to 
have taken place in much leſs time than I have 
mentioned; becauſe I never choſe to make a 
2 trial 


Ar in wwhich Candles have burned, 56 


trial of the air, till I was pretty ſure, from 

receding obſervations, that the event which 
| bad expected muſt have taken place, if it 
would ſucceed at all; leſt, returning back that 
part of the air on which I made the trial, and 
which, would thereby neceſſarily receive a ſmall 
mixture of common air, the experiment might 
not be judged to be quite fair; though I myſelf 


might be ſufficiently ſatisfied with reſpect to the 


allowance that was to be made for that ſmall 
imperfection. | 


S EC T TO N II. 


Of INFLAMMABLE Arx. 


I have generally made inflammable air in the 


manner deſcribed by Mr. Cavendiſh, in the Phi- 


loſophical Tranſactions, from iron, zinc, or 
tin; but chiefly from the two former metals, 


on account of the proceſs being the leaſt trou- 


bleſome : but when I extracted it from vege- 
table or animal ſubſtances, or from coals, I put 
them into a gun-barrel, to the orifice of which 
J luted a glafs tube, or the ſtem of a tobaceo- 
pipe, and to the end of this I tied a flaccid 
bladder in order to'catch the generated air ; 
or I received the air in a veſſel of quickfilver, 
in the manner repreſented Fig. 4. | 


E 4 There 


56 -— Obſervations on + 


There is not, I believe, any vegerable' or 
animal ſubſtance whatever, nor any mineral 
ſubſtance, that is infammable, but what will 
yield- great plenty of inflammable air, when 
they are treated in this manner, and urged with 
| ſtrong heat; but, in order to get the moſt 
air, the heat muſt be applied as ſuddenly, and 
as vehemently, as poſſible. For, notwithſtand- 
ing the ſame care be taken in luting, and in 
every other reſpect, fix or even ten times more 
air may be got by a ſudden heat than by a flow 
one, though the heat that is laſt applied be as 
intenſe as that which was applied ſuddenly. A 
bit of dry oak, weighing about twelve grains, 
will generally yield about a ſheep's bladder full 
of inflammable air with a briſk heat, when it 
will only give about two or three ounce mea- 
ſures, if the ſame heat be applied to it very 
gradually. To what this difference is owing, 
I cannot tell. Perhaps the phlogiſton, being 
extricated more {ſlowly may not be intirely EX» 
pelled, but form another kind of union with 
its, baſe ; fo. that charcoal made with a, heat 
lowly applied ſhall contain more phlogiſton - 
than that which is made with a ſudden heat, 
It may. be worth while to examine the proper- 
ties of the charcoal with this view, | 


| Inflammable air, when! it is made by a quick 
| proceſs, has a very ſtrong and offenſive ſmell, 
trom 


Inflammable Air. 57 


from whatever ſubſtance it be generated; but 


this ſmell is of three different kinds, according 
as the air is extracted from mineral, vegetable, 
or animal ſubſtances. The laſt is exceedingly 
ferid; and it makes no difference, whether it 
be extracted from a bone, or even an old and 
dry tooth, from ſoft muſcular fleſh; or any 
other part of the animal. The burning of any 
ſubſtance occafions the ſame ſmell: for the 
groſs fume which ariſes from them, before they 
flame, 1s the inſlammable air they contain, 
which is expelled by heat, and then readily 1 g- 
nited. The ſmell of inflammable air is the very 
ſame, as far as I am able to perceive, from 
whatever ſubſtance of the ſame kingdom ĩt be 
extracted. Thus it makes no difference whe- 
ther i it be got from 1 iron, Zinc, or tin, from any 
Kind of wood, or, as was obſerved before, from 
oy part of an animal. 


If a a quantity of inflammable air be contained 
in a glaſs veſſel ſtanding in water, and have 


been generated very ' faſt, it will ſmell 'even 


through the water, and this water will alſo ſoon 
become covered with a thin film, aſſuming all, 


the different colours. If rhe inflammable air 


have been generated from iron, this matter 
will appear to be a red okre, or the earth of 
iron, as I have found by collecting a conſi- 


derable quantity of it; and if it have been ge- 


nerated 


# Z 


2 EPO rei .... — 2 a 


1 
2460 — — . * N 
e 


Cr ES) ——— 
* — * — 


P at wt. r «4% * 
* — 4 - T*. * a 2 
8 » ” 
= . - 20, 
— e y an Jn = 
= — 


58 Obſervations on 

nerated from zinc, it is a whiuſh ſubſtance, 
which I ſuppoſe to be the calx of the metal. 
It likewiſe ſettles to the bottom of the veſſel, 
and when the water is ſtirred, it has very much 
the appearance of wool. . When water is once 
impregnated in this manner, it will continue to 
yield this ſcum for a confiderable time after the 
air is removed from it. This I have often ob- 


ſerved with reſpect to iron. 


Inflammable air, made by a violent efferve- 
ſcence, I have obſerved to be much more in- 
flammable than that which is made by a weak 
efferveſcence, whether the water or the oil of 
vitriol prevailed in the mixture. Alſo the of- 
fenfive ſmell was much ftronger in the former 


caſe than in the latter. The. greater degree of 
inflammability appeared by the greater num- 


ber of fucceſſive exploſions, when a candle was 
preſented to the neck of a phial filled with ĩt.* 
It is poſſible, however, that this diminution of 
inflammabiliry may, in ſome meaſure, ariſe 
from the air continuing ſo much longer in the 


bladder when it is made very ſlowly: though - 


. Tory this, aftor every exploſion, which immediately 


follows the preſenting of the flame, the mouth of the. phial 
ſhould be cloſed (I generally do it with à finger of the 


hand in which I hold the phial) for otherwiſe the inflam- 


mable air will continue burning, though inviſibly in * 
= time, till the whole-be conſumed, | 


I think 


„ —— — 


3 
. 


Inflammable Air. 59 


1 think the difference is too great for this cauſe 


to have produced the whole of it. It may, 
perhaps, deferve to be tried by a different pro- 


ceſs, without a bladder. 


Inflammable air is not thought to be miſci- 
ble with water, and when kept many months, 
ſeems, in general, to be as inflammable as ever. 
Indeed, when it is extracted from vegetable or 
animal ſubſtances, a part of it will be imbibed 


by the water in which. it ſtands; but it may be 


preſumed, that in this cate, there was a mixture 
of fixed. air extracted from the ſubſtance along 
with it. I have indiſputable evidence, how- 


ever, that inflammable air, ſtanding. long in 
water, has actually loſt all its inflammability, 
and even come to extinguiſh flame much more 


than that air in which candles have burned 
out. After this change it appears to be greatly 
diminiſhed in quantity, and it ſtill continues te 
kill animals the moment they are put into it. 


This very remarkable fact firſt occurred to 
my obſervation. on the twenty- fifth of May 
1771, when I was examining a quantity of in- 
flammable air, which had been made from zinc, 
near three years before. Upon this, I imme- 


diately ſet by a common quart-bottle filled with 


inflammable air from iron, and another equal 


quantity from zinc: and ex2miniag them iN 


* 
9 
6 ite. 4 
n 
— "- 


60 Obſervations on 
the beginning of December following, that 


from the iron was reduced near one half in 


quantity, if I be not greatly miſtaken; for I 
found the bottle half tull of water, and I am 
pretty clear that it was full of air when it was 
ſer by. That which had been produced from 
zinc was not altered, and filled the bottle as at 


| firſt. 


Another inſtance of this kind occurred to 
my obſervation on the 19th of June 1772, when 


a quantity of air, half of which had been in- 


flammable air from zinc, and half air in which 


mice had died, and which had been put to- 


gether the goth of July 1771, appeared not 
to be in the leaſt inflammable, bur extinguiſhed 
flame, as much as any kind of air that I had 
ever tried, I think that, in all, I have had 
four inſtances of inflammable air loſing its in- 
e while it ſtood in water. 


Though air - tainted with putrefaction extin- 
guiſhes flame, I have not found that animals 
or vegetables putrefying inflammable air ren- 
der it leſs inflammable. But one quantity. of 
inflammable air, which I had ſet by in May 
1771, along with the others above mentioned, 
had had ſome putrid fleſh in it; and this air 


had loft its inflammability, when it was exa- 


mined at the ſame time with the other in the De- 
cember 


ä _— 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


ns. 


* nf.ammable Air. 3 


cember following; The bottle in which this 
air had been kept, ſmelled exactly like very 
ſtrong Harrogate water. I do not think that 


any perſon could have diftinguiſhed them. 


I have made plants grow for ſeveral months 


in inflammable air made from zinc, and alſo 


from oak ; but, though the plants grew pretty 
well, the air ſtill continued inflammable. The 
former, indeed, was not ſo highly inflammable 
as when it was freih made, but the latter was 
quite as much ſo; and the diminution of in» 
flammability in the former caſe, I attribute to 
ſome other cauſe than the growth of the plant. 


No kind of air, on which I have yet made the ex- 
periment, will conduct electricity; but the colour 
of an electric ſpark is remarkablydifferent in ſome 
different kinds of air, which ſeems to ſhew that 
they are not equally good non -· conductors. In 
fixed air, the electric ſpark is exceedingly white; 
but in inflammable air it is of a purple, or red 
colour. Now, fince the moſt vigorous ſparks 
are always the whiteſt, and, in other cafes, when 
the ſpark is red, there is reaſon to think that the 
electric matter paſſes with difficulty, and with 
leſs rapidity : it. is poſſible that the inflammable 
air may contain particles which conduct elec- 
tricity, though very imperfectly; and that the 


whiteneſs of the ſpark in the fixed air, may be 


owing 


F wet wt — — — 


62 | Obſervations on 


owing to its meeting with no conducting parti- 


cles at all. When an exploſion was made in a 


quantity of inflammable air, it was a little white 
in the center, but the edges of it were ftill 
tinged with a beautiful purple. The degree of 


whiteneſs in this caſe was probably owing to the 


ele&ric matter ruſhing with more violence in an 
exploſion than in a common ſpark. 


laflammable air kills animals as ſuddenly 
as fixed air, and, as far as can be perceived, 
in the ſame manner, throwing them into con- 


vulſions, and thereby occaſioning preſent death. 


Thad imagihed that, by animals dying in a quan- 


rity of inflammable air, it would in time be- 
come leis noxious; but this did not appear to 
be the caſe; for I killed a great number of mice 
in a ſmall quantity of this air; which I kept ſe- 
vera] months for this purpoſe, without its being 
at all ſenſibly mended; the laſt, as well as the 
firſt mouſe, dying the moment it was put 
into it. | 


once imagined that, ſince fixed and inflam- 


mable air are the reverſe of one another, in ſe- 


veral remarkable properties, a mixture of then 


would make common air; and while I made the 


mixtures in bladders, Iimagined that I had ſuc- 
ceeded in my attempt; but I have ſince found 


chat thin bladders do not fuſſiciently prevent 


7 


nne 


— 


water. In this manner, however, I have kept 


Inflammable Air. 63. 


the air that is contained in them from mixing 
with the external air. Alſo corks will not ſuf- 
ficiently confine different kinds of air, unleſs 
the phials in which they are confined be ſet with 
their mouths downwards, and a little water lie 
in the necks of them, which, indeed, is equi- 
valent to the air ſtanding in veſſels immerſed in 


different kinds of air for ſeveral years. 


Whatever methods I took to promote the 
mixture of fixed and inflammable air, they were 
all ineffectual. I think it my duty, however, 
to recite the iſſue of an experiment or two of 
this kind, in which equal mixtures of theſe two 
kinds of air had ſtood near three years, as they 
ſeem to ſhew that they had in part affected one 
another, in that long ſpace of time. Theſe 
mixtures I examined April 27, 1771. One of 
them had ſtood in quickſilver, and the other in 
a corked phial, with a little water in it. On 
opening the latter in water, the water inſtantly 
ruſhed in, and filled almoſt half of the phial, 
and very little more was abſorbed afterwards. 
In this caſe the water in the phial had probably 
abſorbed a conſiderable part of the fixed air, 
ſo that the inflammable air was exceedingly ra- 
refied ; and yet the whole. quantity that muſt 
have been rendered non-elaſtic was ten times 


more than the bulk of the water, and it has not 
been 


— — 
2 * 


; * 
——— — ͤ— anime In + 


* 64 - Obſervations on 


been found that water can contain much more 
than its own bulk of fixed air. But in other 


caſes I have found the diminution of a quantity 
of air, and eſpecially of fixed air, to be much 
greater than I could well account for by any 
kind of abſorption. 


The phial which had ſtood immerſed in quick: 


 flilver had loſt very little of its original quantity 


of air; and being now opened in water, and 
left there, along with another phial, which was 
juſt then filled, as this had been three years be- 
fore, viz. with air half inflammable and half 


fixed, I obſerved that the quantity of both was 


diminiſhed, by the abſorption or the water, in 
the ſame proportion. 


Upon applying a candle to the mouths of 


the phials which had been kept three years, 


that which had ſtood in quickſilver went off at 
one exploſion, exactly as it would have done 
if there had been a mixture of common air 


with the inflammable. As a good deal depends 


upon the apertures of the veſſels in which the 
inflammable air is mixed, I mixed the two 
kinds of air in equal proportions in the ſame 


phial, and after letting the phial ſtand ſome 


days m water, that the fixed air might be ab- 
ſorbed, I applied a candle to it, but it made 
ten or twelve explofions (ſtopping the phial 
| after 


* — ——— - — r 


Tyflaminable Ar. 65 


after each of them) befere the inflammable 
matter was exhauſted, 


The air which had been. confined in the cork- 


ed phial exploded in the very ſame manner as 
an equal and freſh mixture of the two kinds 
of air in the ſame-phial, the experiment being 
made as ſoon as the fixed air was abſorbed, as 
before; ſo that in this caſe, the two kinds of 
air did not ſeem to have affected one another 


at all. | 


Conſidering inflammable air as air united to, 
or loaded with phlogiſton, I expoſed to it ſeve- 
ral ſubſtances, which are ſaid to have a near 
affinity with phlogiſton, as oil of vitriol, and 


ſpirit of nitre (the former for above a month), 


but without making any ſenſible alteration in it. 


I obſerved, however, that inflammable air, 


mixed with the fumes of ſmoking ſpirit of ni- 
tre, goes off at one exploſion, exactly like a 


mixture of half common and half inflammable 


air. This I tried ſeveral times, by throwing the 
inflammable air into a phial full of ſpirit of 


nitre, with its mouth immerſed in a baſon 
containing ſome of the ſame ſpirit, and then 
applying the flame of a candle to the mouth of 


the phial, the moment that it was uncovered, - 
after it had been taken out of the baſon, 


B This 


- = 
” 1 — — — — 
2 „ 
— 
— 


—_ Obſervations on "Ro 
This remarkable effect I haſtily concluded 


to have ariſen from the inflammable air having 
= - been in part deprived of its inflammability, by 
= . means of the ſtronger affinity, which the ſpirit 
þ of nitre had with phlogiſton, and therefore I 
imagined that by letting them ſtand longer in 
contact, and eſpecially by agitating them ſtrong- 
|  Iy together, I ſhould deprive the air of all its 
inflammability; but neither of theſe operations 
1 : ſucceeded, for ſtill the air was only exploded 
at once, as before. 


—— — 
— 


| And laſtly, when I paſſed a quantity of inflam- 
1] | mable air, which had been mixed with the 
fumes of ſpirit: of nitre, through a body of 
water, and received it in another veſſel, it ap- 
peared not to have undergone any change at all, 
for- it went off in ſeveral ſucceſſive exploſions, 
like the pureſt inflammable air. The effect 
abovementioned muſt, therefore, have been 
owing to the fumes of the ſpirit of nitre ſup- 
plying the place of common air for the purpoſe 
of ignition, which is analogous to other experi- 
ments with nitre. 


Having had the curioſity, on the 25th of 
July 1772, to expoſe a great variety of different 
kinds of air to water out of which the air it con- 
tained had been boiled, without any particular 
view; the reſult was, in ſeveral reſpects, alto- 

FOE» gether 


C Fort 
- 2 XY . „ 2 PP FLOP 
— — — —2— ͤ — Ä ͤvw . _—_—— ET © #8 ts 
* 2 9 . * 8 * 1 


Tiflammable Ai. 65 


gether unexpected, and led to a variety of new 
obſervations on the properties and affinities of 
feveral kinds of ait with reſpect to water. 
Among the reſt three fourths of that which 
was inflammable was abſorbed by the water in 
about two days, and the remainder was inflam- 
mable, but weakly ſo. 


Upon this, I began to agitate a quantity of 


ſtrong inflammable air in a glaſs jar, ſtanding 
in a pretty large trough of water, the ſurface 
of which was expoſed to the common air,. and 


I found that when 1 had continued the opera- 


tion about ten minutes, near one fourth of the 


quantity of air liad diſappeared ; and finding 


that the remainder made an efferveſcefice with 
nitrous air, I concluded that it muſt have be- 
come fit for reſpiration, whereas this kind of 
air is, at the firſt, as noxious as any other kind 
whatever. To aſcertain this, I put à mouſe 
into a veſſel containing 21 ounce meaſures of 
it, and obſerved that it lived in it twenty mi- 
nates, which is as long as a mouſe will gene- 
rally. live in the ſame quantity of comffion air. 
Thi mouſe was even taken out alive, and re- 
covered very well. Still alſo the air in which 
it had breathed ſo long was inflammable, though 


very weakly ſo. I have even found it to be ſo 


when a mouſe has actually died in it. In- 
flammable air thus diminiſhed” by Agitation in 
2 F 2 water, 


12282 * 
— Sv 
5 — rn . 
* * 


% 1 4 


68 Obſervations on 


water, makes but one exploſion on the approach 
of a candle, exactly like a mixture of inflam- 
mable air with common air. 


From this experiment I concluded chat, by 
continuing the ſame proceſs, I fhould deprive 


inflammable air of all its inflammability, and 


this I found to be the caſe; for, after a longer 
agitation, - it admitted a candle to burn in it, 
hike common air, only more faintly ; and in- 
deed by the teſt of nitrous air it did not appear 


to be near ſo good as common air. Continuing 


the fame. proceſs ſtill farther, the air which had 
been moſt ſtrongly inflammable a little before, 


came to extinguiſh a candle, exactly like air in 


which a candle had burned out, nor could they 
be . by the ceſt of n. trous air, | 


1 und by repeated trials, PERS it was diffi- 


cult to catch the time in which inflammable air 


obtained from metals, in coming to extinguiſh 
flame, was in the ſtate of common air, ſo that 
the tranſition from the one to the other muſt be 


very ſhort, Indeed I think that in many, per- 


haps in moſt caſes, there may be no proper me- 
dium at all, the phlogiſton paſſing at once from 


that mode of union with 1 its baſe which conſti- 


tutes inflammable air, to that which conſtitutes 


an air that extinguiſhes flame, being ſo much 


overloaded as to admit of no more. I readily, 
how- 


Inflammable Air. 69 


however, found this middle ſtate in a quantity 
of inflammable air extracted from oak, which 
air I had kept a year, and in which a plant had 
grown, though very poorly, for ſome part of 
the time. A quantity of this air, after being 
agitated in water till it was diminiſhed about 
one half, admitted a candle to burn in it ex- 
ceedingly weil, and was even hardly to be diſ- 
tinguiſhed from common air by the teſt of ni- 
trous air. 


I took ſome pains to afcertain the quantity 
of diminution, in freſh-made and very highly- 
inflammable air from iron, at which it ceaſed to 
be inflammable, and, upon the whole, I con- 
cluded that it was ſo when it was diminiſhed a 
little more than one half; for a quantity which 

was diminiſhed exactly one half had ſomething 
inflammable in it, but in the ſlighteſt degree 
imaginable, It is not improbable, however, but 
there may be great differences in the reſuſt of 
this experiment. a 


Finding that water would imbibe inflammable 


air, I endeavoured to impregnate water with it, 
by the ſame proceſs by which I had made water 
imbibe fixed air; but though I found that di- 
ſtilled water would imbibe about one fourteenth 


of its bulk of inflammable air, I could not 


perceive that the taſte of it was ſenſibly altered. 
F 3 SECT. 


79 Obſervations on 


SECTION IV. 


OF Am infected with ANIMAL RESPIRATION, or 
PUTREFACTION, 


That candles will burn only a certain time, in 
a given quantity of air is a fact nor better 
known, than it is that animals can live only a cer- 
tain time in it; but the cauſe of the death of the 
animal is not better known than that of the ex- 
tinction of flame in the ſame circumſtances; and 
when once any quantity of air has been ren- 
dered noxious by animals breathing in it as long 
as they could, I do not know that any methods 
have been diſcovered of rendering it fir for 
breathing again. It is evident, however, that 
there muſt be ſome proviſion in nature for this 
purpoſe, as well as for that of rendering the 
air fit for ſuſtaining flame; for without 1 it the 
whole maſs of the * would, in time, 
become unfit for the purpoſe of animal life; 
and yet there is no reaſon to think that it is, at 
preſent, at all leſs fit for reſpiration than it has 
ever been, I flatter myſelf, however, that I 
have hit upon two of the methods employed by 
nature for this great purpofe. How many others 
there may be, + 1 ng tell. 


\When 


Air infected with Animal Reſpiration, Sc. 71 


When animals die upon being put into air in 
which other animals have died, after breathing 
in it as long as they could, it is plain that the 
cauſe of their death is not the want of any 
pabulum vitæ, which has been ſuppoſed to be 
contained in the air, but on account of the air 
being impregnated with ſomething ſtimulating 
to their lungs ; for they almoſt always die in 
convulſions, and are ſometimes affected ſo ſud- 
denly, that they are irrecoverable after a ſingle 
inſpiration, though they be withdrawn! imme- 
diately, and every method has been taken to 
bring them to life again. They are affected in 
the ſame manner, when they are killed in any 
other kind of noxious air that I have tried, 
viz. fixed air, inflammable air, air filled. with 
the fumes of brimſtone, infected with putrid 
matter, in which a mixture of iron filings and 
brimſtone has ſtood, or in which charcoal has 
been burned, or metals calcined, or in nitrous 
air, &c. 


As it is known that convulfons weaken, = 
exhauſt the vital powers, much more than the 
moſt vigorous voluntary action of the muſcles, 
perhaps theſe univerſal coayulfians may exhauſt 
the whole of what we may call the vis vite at 
once, at leaſt that the lungs may be rendered 
abſolutely incapable of action, till the animal be 

* ſufſo. 


72 | Objervations on 


ſuffocated, - or be irrecoverable Garin want of re- 
ſpiration. + ; 


* 


If a mouſe (which is an animal that I have 
commonly made uſe of for the purpoſe of theſe 
experiments) can ſtand the firſt ſhock of this 
ſtimulus, or has been habituated to it by de- 
grees, it will live a confiderable time in air in 
which other mice will die inſtantaneouſly. I 


have frequently found that when a number of 


mice have been confined in a given quantity of 
air, leſs than half the time that they have ac- 
tually lived in it, a freſh mouſe being intro- 
duced to them has been inſtantly thrown into 


convulſions, and died. It is evident, therefore, 


that if the experiment of the Black Hole were 
to be repeated, a man would ſtand the better 
chance of ſurviving it, who ſhould enter at the 


firſt, than at the laſt hour, 


1 have alſo obſerved, that young mice will 
always live much longer than old ones, or than 
thoſe which are full grown, when they are con- 
fined in the ſame quantity of air. I have ſome- 
times known a young mouſe to live fix hours in 


the ſame circumſtances in which an old mouſe 


has not lived one. On theſe accounts, experi- 


ments with mice, and, for the ſame reaſon, no 


doubt, with other animals alſo, have a conſider- 


able degree of ulicertainty attending them ; and 
therefore, 


Air infected with Animal Reſpiration, Sc. 73 


therefore, it is neceſſary to repeat them fre- 
quently, before the reſult can be abſolutely de- 
pended upon. But every perſon of feeling will 
rejoice with me in the diſcovery of nitrous air, 
to be mentioned hereafter, which ſuperſedes 
many experiments with the reſpiration of 'ani- 
mals, being a much more accurate teſt of the 
purity of air. | 


The diſcovery of the proviſion in natu r 


reſtoring air, which has been injured by the re- 


ſpiration of animals, having long appeared to 


me to be one of the moſt important prohlems in 
natural philoſophy, I have tried a great variety 
of ſchemes in order to effect it. In theſe my guide 
has generally been to confider the influences to 
which the atmoſphere is, in fact, ex poſed; and, 
as ſome of my unſucceſsful trials may be of uſe 
to thoſe who are diſpoſed to take pains in the 
farther inveſtigation of this ſubject, 1 ſhall men- 
tion the. principal of them. 


The noxious efluvium with which air is 
loaded by animal reſpiration, is not abſorbed by 
ſtanding, without agitation; in-freſh or falt wa- 
ter. I have kept it many months infreſh water, 
when, inſtead of being meliorated, it has ſeemed 
to become even more deadly, ſo as to require 
more time to reſtore it, by the methods which 


will be explained hereafter, than air which has 


been 


n — nl eto. — 


„ 


2 CE 


r — 


a 


7 — — — 


' 


74 Obſervations on 


been lately made noxious. I have even ſpent 


ſeveral hours in pouring this air from one glaſs 
veſſel into another, in water, ſometimes as cold, 


and ſometimes as warm, as my hands could 


bear it, and have ſometimes alſo wiped the 
veſſels many times, during the courſe of the ex- 
periment, in order to take off that part of the 
noxious matter, which might adhere to the glaſs 


veſſels, and which evidently gave them an of- 


fenſive ſmell; but all theſe methods were ge- 
nerally without any ſenſible effect. The motion, 
alſo, which the air received in theſe circum- 
ſtances, it is very evident, was of no uſe for 
this purpoſe, I had not then thought of the 
ſimple, but moſt effectual method of agitating 
air in water, by putting it into a tall jar and 
ſhaking it with my hand. 


This kind of air is not reſtored by being ex- 
poſed to the light, or by any other influence to 
which it is expoſed, when confined in a thin 
phial, in the open air, for ſome months. 


Among other experiments, I tried a great va- 
riety of different Muvia, which are continually 
exhaling into the air, eſpecially of thoſe ſub- 
' ances which are known to refiſt putrefaction; 
but I could not by theſe means effect any meli- 
oration pf the noxtous quality of this kind of 
air. 2 


Having 


. 
—— — ͥ́ — —— — — — — 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| | 


— 


* 
— — 


” 
— ——— — 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


Air infeed with Animal Reſpiration, Sc. 95. 


Having read, in the memoirs of the Imperial 
Society, of a plague not affecting a particular 
village, in which there was a large ſulphur- 
work, I immediately. fumigated a quantity of 
this kind of air; or (which will hereafter ap- 
pear to be the very ſame thing) air tainted with 
putrefaction, with the fumes of burning brim- 
ſtone, but without any effect. 

I once imagined, that the nitrous acid in the 
air might- be the general reſtorative which I was 
in queſt of; and the conjecture was favoured, by 
finding that candles would burn in air extracted 
from ſaltpetre. I therefore ſpent a good deal 
of time in attempting, by a burning glaſs, and 
other means, to impregnate this noxious air, 
with ſome effluvium of ſaltpetre, and, with the 
ſame view, introduced into it the fumes of the 
ſmoaking ſpirit of nitre; but both theſe me- 
thods were altogether ineffe&tual, 


In order to try the effect of beat, I put IP 
quantity of air, in which mice had died, into a 
bladder, tied to the end of the ſtem of a to- 
bacco-pipe, at the other end of which was ano- 
ther bladder, out of which the air was carefully 
preſſed, I then put the middle part of the ſtem 
into a chafing-diſh of hot coals, ſtrongly urged 
with a pair of bellows; and, preſſing the blad- 


ders alternately, I made the air paſs ſeveral 
times 


76 Obſervations on 
times through the heated part of the pipe. I 
have alſo made this kind of air very hot, ſtand- 


ing in water before the fire. But neither of 
theſe methods were of any uſe. 


Rarefaction and condenſation by inftruments 
were alſo tried, but in vain. 


Thinking it poſſible that the earth might im- 
bibe. the noxious quality of the air, and thence 
ſupply the roots of plants with ſuch putreſcent 
matter as is known to be nutritive to them, I 
kept a quantity of air, in which mice bad died, 
in a phial, one half of which was filled with fine 
garden- mould: but, though it ſtood two 
months in theſe circumſtances, it was not the 
better for i it, 


1a once | imagined that, ſince ſeveral, kinds of 
air cannot be long ſeparated from common air, 
by being dT" in bladders, in bottles well 
corked, or even cloſed- with ground ſtopples, the 
affinity between this noxious air and the common 
air might be fo great, that they would mix 
through a budy of water interpoſed between 
them; the water continually receiving from the 


one, and giving to the other, eſpecially as wa- 


ter receives ſome kind of impregnation from, 
1 believe, e every kind of air to which it is conti- 
guous; 


Air infected with Animal Reſpiration, &c. 57 


guous; but I have ſeen no reaſon to conclude, 
that a mixture of any kind of air with the com- 
mon air can be produced in this manner. 


I have kept air in which mice have died, 
air in Which candles have burned out, and in- 
flammable air, ſeparated from the common air, 
by the ſlighteſt partition of water that I could 


well make, ſo that it might not evaporate in a 


day or two, if I ſhould happen not to attend to 
them ; but I found no change in them after a 


month or ſix weeks. The inflammable air was 


ſtil] inflammable, mice died inſtantly in the air 
in which other mice had died before, and can- 
dles would not burn where they had burned out 
before, 


Since air tainted with animal or vegetable 
putrefaction is the ſame thing with air rendered 
noxious by animal reſpiration, I ſhall now re- 
cite the obſervations which I have made upon 
this kind of air, before I treat of the method of 


reſtoring them. 


That theſe two kinds of air are, in fact, the 
ſame thing, I conclude from their having ſeve- 
ral remarkable common propertics, and from 
their differing in nothing that I have been able 


to obſerve, They equally extinguiſh - flame, 


they are equally noxious to animals, they are 
equally, 


% 
2 — * — 


—— — — 


78 Obſervations on 
equally; and in the ſame way, offenſive to the 
ſmell, and they are reſtored by theſame means. 


Since air which has paſſed through the lungs 
is the ſame thing with air tainted with animal 
putrefaction, it is probable that one uſe of the 
lungs is to carry off a putrid Ruvium, without 


which, perhaps, a living body might putrefy 
as ſoon as a dead one. 


When a mouſe putrefies in any given-quan- 
tity of air, the bulk of it is generally increaſed 
for a few days; but in a few days more it be- 
gins to ſhrink up, and in about eight or ten 
days, if the weather be pretty warm, it will be 
found to be diminiſhed 3, or + of its bulk, 
If it do not appear to be diminiſhed after this 
time, it only requires to be paſſed through wa- 
ter, and the diminution will not fail to be ſen- 
fible. I have ſometimes known almoſt the 
whole diminution to take place, upon once or 
twice paſſing through the water. The ſame is 
the caſe with air, in which animals have 
breathed as long as they could. Alſo, air in 
which candles have burned out may almoſt al- 


ways be farther reduced by this means. 


All theſe proceſſes, as I obſerved before, ſeem 
to diſpoſe the compound maſs of air to part with 
25 i ſome 


Air infected with Animal Reſpiration, &c. 79 


ſome conſtituent part belonging to it (which ap- 
pears to be the fired air that enters into its con- 


ſtitution) and this being miſcible with water, 
muſt be brought into contact with it, in order 
to mix with-it tothe moſt advantage, eſpecially 
when its union with the other conſtituent prin- 
ciples of the air 1s but partially broken. 


I have put mice into veſſels which had their 


mouths immerfed in quickſilver, and obſerved 


that the air was not much contracted after they 
were dead or cold; but upon withdrawing the 
mice, and admitting lime water to the air, it 
immediately became turbid, and was contracted 
in its dimenſions as uſual. 


J tried the ſame thing with air tainted with 


putrefaction, putting a dead mouſe to a quan- 
tity of common air, in a veſſel] which had its 
mouth immerſed in quickſilver, and after a week 
I took the mouſe out, drawing it through the 
quickſilver, and obſerved that, for ſome time, 
there was an apparent increaſe of the air per- 
haps about 26. After this, it ſtood two days 
in the quickſilver, without any ſenſible altera- 
tion; and then admitting water to it, it began 
to be abſorbed, and continued ſo, till the ori- 


ginal quantity was diminiſhed about 5, If, in- 


ſtead of common water, I had made uſe of lime- 


water 


CE EE . — 


=» Rs — 


* . 
* —— —ů ——— — 148, 5 
. 


80 Obſervations on 
water in this experiment, I make no doubt but 
it would have become turbid. ? 


I a quantity of lime-water in a phial be put 
under a glaſs veſſel ſtanding in water, it will 


not become turbid, and provided the acceſs of 


the common air be prevented, it will continue 
lime-water, I do not know how long; but if 
a mouſe be left to putrefy in the veſſel, the 
water will depoſit all its lime in a few days. 
T his is owing to the fixed air depoſited by the 
_ common air, and perhaps alſo from more fixed 
air diſcharged from the putrefying ſubſtances 


in ſome part of the res of putrefaction. 


The air that is diſcharged from apt 
ſubſtances ſeems, in ſome caſes, to be chiefly 
fixed air, with the addition of ſome other efff u- 
vium, which has the power of diminiſhing com- 
mon air. The reſemblance between the true 
putrid eMuvium and fixed air in the following 
experiment, which is as deciſive as 1 can poſ- 
ſibly contrive it, appeared to be very great; 
indeed much greater than J had expected. I 
put a dead moule into a tall glaſs veſſel, and 
having filled the remainder with quickſilver, 


and ſet it, inverted, in a pot of quickſilver, 1 


let it ſtand about two months, in which time 
the putrid effluvium iſſuing from che mouſe 


had filled the whole veſſel, and part of the dif- 
folved 


Air infeted with-Animal Reſpiration, Sc. 81 


folved blood, which lodged upon the ſur - 
face of the quickſilver, began co be thrown 
out. I then filled another glaſs veſſel, of 
the ſame ſize and ſhape, with as pure fixed 
air as I could make, and expoſed them both, 
at the ſame time, to a quantity of lime-Water. 
In both caſes the water grew turbid alike, 
it roſe equally faſt in both the veſſels, and like- 
wiſe equally high; fo that about the fame 
quantity remained unabſorbed by the water. 
One of theſe kinds of air, however, was ex- 
_ ceedingly ſweet and pleaſant, and the other in- 
ſufferably offenſive ; one of them alſo would 
have made an addition to any quantity of com- 
mon air, with which it had been mixed, and the 
other would have diminiſhed it. This, at leaſt, 
would have been the conſequence, if the mouſe 
itſelf had putrefied in any quantity of common air. 


It ſeems to depend, in fome meaſure, upon 
the time, and other circumſtances, in the diſſo- 
lution of animal or vegetable ſubſtances, whe- 
ther they yield the proper putrid effluvium, or 
fixed, or inflammable air; but the experiments 
which I have made upon this ſubject, have not 
been numerous enough to enable me to decide 
with certainty concerning thoſe circumſtances. 


Putrid cabbage, green or boiled, infects 


the air in the very ſame manner as putrid 
GT animal 


* 
-— ** % . D 
PR ou So AE FL IE . 
wa "7 © e 2 = — — ” = 3g 
FIT,” CEA TIES . DV pt ae 
— 4 FR — 


82 "Obſervations on 


animal ſubſtances. 
contracted in its dimenſions, it equally extin- 


guiſhes flame, and is equally noxious to ani- 
mals; but they affect the air very differently, 


if the heat that is applied to them be con- 
ſiderable. 


If beef or mutton, raw or boiled, be placed 
ſo near to the fire, that the heat to which it is 
expoſed ſhall equal, or rather exceed, that of 
the blood, a conſiderable quantity of air will be 
generated in a day or two, about jth of which I 
have generally found to be abſorbed by water, 
while all the reſt was inflammable ; _but air 


generated from vegetables, in the ſame circum- 
ſtances, will be almoſt all fixed air, and no part 


of it inflammable. This I have repeated again 


and again, the whole proceſs being in quick- 
filver ; ſo that neither common air nor water, 
had any acceſs to the ſubſtance on which the 
experiment was made ; and the generation of 
air, or effluvium of any kind, except what 


might be abſorbed by quickſilver, or reſorbed 


by. the ſubſtance itſelf, might be * 
noted. 


A vegetable ſubſtance, after ſtanding a day 
or two in theſe circumſtances, will yield nearly 


all the air that can be extracted from it, in that 


degree of heat; Whereas an animal ſubſtance 
Will 


Air thus tainted is equally 


3 — —— — 
ws —_ 


Air infected with. Animal Reſpiration, Sc. 8 3 


will continue to give more air, or effluvium, of 
ſome kind or other, with very little alteration, 
for many weeks. It is remarkable, however, 
that though a piece of beef or mutton, plunged 
in quickſilver, and kept in this degree of heat, 
yield air, the bulk of which is inflammable, 
and contracts no putrid ſmell (at leaſt, in a day 
or two) a mouſe treated in the ſame manner; 
yields the proper putrid effluvium, as indeed 
the ſmell ſufficiently indicates. 


That the putrid effluvium will mix with 
water ſeems to be evident from the following 
experiment. If a mouſe be put into a jar full 
of water, ſtanding with its mouth inverted in 
another veſſel of water, a conſiderable quantity 
of elaſtic matter (and which may; therefore, 
be called air) will ſoon be generated, unleſs the 
weather be ſo cold as to check all putrefaction. 
After a ſhort time, the water contracts an ex- 


i tremely fetid and offenſive ſmell, which ſeems 
. to indicate that the putrid effluvium pervades 
the water, and affects the neighbouring air; 


and ſince, after this, there is often no increaſe 

| of the air, that ſeems to be the very ſubſtance 

| which is carried off through the water, as faſt 

b as it is generated; and the offenſive ſmell is 4 

|. | ſufficient proof that it is not fixed air. For 
| | this has a very agreeable flavour, whether it be 

2 by fermentation, or extracted from 

G 2 chalk | 


$4 Obſervations on 

chalk by oil of vitriol ; affecting not only the 
mouth, but even the noſtrils, with a pungeney 
which is peculiarly pleaſing to a certain degree, 


as any perſon may eaſily ſatisfy himſelf, who 
will chuſe to make the experiments. 


If the water in which the mouſe was im- 
merſed, and which is faturated with the putrid 
air, be changed, the greater part of the putrid 
air, will, in a day or two, be abforbed, though 
the mouſe continues to yield the putrid eflu- 
vium as before; for as ſoon as this freſh water 
becomes ſaturated with it, it begins to be offen- 
five to the ſmell, and the quantity of the putrid 
air upon its ſurface increaſes as before. I kept 
a mouſe producing putrid air in this manner for 
the ſpace of ſeveral months, 


2 Six ounce meaſures of air not readily abſorbed 
by water, appeared to have been generated from 
one mouſe, which had been putrefying eleven 


days in confined air, before it was put into a 


jar which was quite filled with water, for the 
Ove of this obſervation, | 


Air thus generated from putrid mice ſtanding 
in water, without any mixture of common air, 
extinguiſhes flame, and is noxious to animals, 
but not more ſo than common air only tainted 


with putrefaction. It is exceedingly difficult 


* 
—— —— — —— * 
8 


* 


Air infected with Animal Reſpiration, &c. 83 


and tedious to collect a quantity of this putrid 
air, not miſcible in water, ſo very great a pro- 
portion of what is collected being abſorbed by 
the water in which it is kept; but what that 
proportion is, I have not endeavoured to aſcer- 
tain, It is probably the ſame proportion that 
that part of fixed air, which is not readily 
abſorbed by water, bears to the reſt; and there- 
fore this air, which I at firſt diſtinguiſhed by 
the name of the putrid Muvium, is probably the 
ſame with fixed air, mixed with the phlogiſtic 
matter, which, in this and other Proceſſes, di- 
miniſhes common air. 


Though a quantity of common air be dimi- 


niſhed by any ſubſtance putrefying in it, I have 


not yet found the ſame effect to be produced by 
a mixture of putrid air with common air; but, 
in the manner in which I have hitherto made 
the experiment, I was obliged to let the pu- 
trid air paſs through a body of water, which 
might inſtantly abſorb the phlogittic matter that 
diminiſhed the common air, 2 1700 


Inſects of various kinds live perfectly well 5 
in air tainted with animal or vegetable putre- 
faction, when a ſingle inſpiration of it would 


have inſtantly killed any other animal, I have 
frequently tried the experiment with flies and 


butterflies, The apbides alſo will thrive as well 
G 3 upon 


86 * Obſervations on 


upon plants growing in this kind of air, as in 
the open air. I have even been frequently 
obliged to take plants out of the putrid air in 
which they were growing, on purpoſe to bruſh 
away the ſwarms of theſe inſects which infected 
them; and yet ſo effectually did ſome of them 
conceal themſelves, and ſo faſt did they mul- 

tiply, in theſe circumſtances, that I could ſel- 
. dem keep the plants quite clear of them. 


When air has been freſhly and ſtrongly 
tainted with putrefaction, ſo as to ſmell through 
the water, ſprigs of mint have preſently died, 
upon being put into it, their leaves turning 
black; but if they do not die preſently, they 
thrive in a moſt ſurprizing manner. In no 
other circumſtances have I ever ſeen vegetation 
ſo vigorous as in this kind of air, which is 
immediately fatal to animal life. Though theſe 
- plants have been crouded in Jars filled with this 
air, every leaf has been full of life ; freſh ſhoots 
have branched out in various directions, and have 
grown much faſter than other fimilar plants, 
growing 1 in the lame nr: anew in common air. 


This obſeryation led me to conclude, that 
plants, inſtead of affecting the air in the ſame 
manner with animal reſpiration, reverſe the 
' effects of breathing, and tend to keep the atmo- 
ſphere 1 ſweet and wholeſome, when it is become 
/ noxious 


/ 


Air infefled with Animal Reſpiration, &c. 8 


noxious, in conſequence of animals either living 


and breathing, or dying and putrefying in it. 


In order to aſcertain this, I took a quantity 
of air, made thoroughly noxious, by mice 
breathing and dying in it, and divided it into 
two parts; one of which I put into a phial 
immerſed in water; and to the other (which 
was contained in a glaſs jar, ſtanding in water) 
I put a ſprig of mint. This was about the 
beginning of Auguſt 1771, and after eight or 
nine days, I found that a mouſe lived perfectly 
well in that part of the air, in which the ſprig 
of mint had grown, but died the moment it was 
put into the other part of the ſame original quan- 
_ tity of air; and which I had kept in the very ſame 
expoſure, but without any plant growing in it. 


This experiment I have ſeveral times re- 
peated; ſometimes uſing air in which animals 
had breathed and died, and at other times uſing 
air, tainted with vegetable or animal putrefac- 
tion; and generally with the ſame ſucceſs, 


Once, I let a mouſe live and die in a quantity 
of air which had been noxious, but which had. 
been reſtored by this proceſs, and it lived nearly 
as long as J conjectured it might have done in 
an equal quantity of freſh air ; but this is ſo 
exceedingly various, that it is not eaſy to form 

G 4 any 


83 . Obſervations on 


any judgment from it; and in this caſe the 


ſymptom of aifficult reſpiration ſeemed to begin 


earlier than it would have done in common air. 


Since the plants that 1 made uſe of manifeſtly 

ow and thrive in putrid air; ſince putrid 
matter 1s well known to affard proper nouriſh- 
ment for the roots of plants; and fince it is 
likewiſe certain that they receive nouriſhment 
by their leaves as well as by their roots, it 
ſeems to be exceedingly probable, that the 
putrid efluvium is in ſome meaſure extracted 
from the air, by means of the leaves of plants, 
and therefore that they render the remainder 

more fit for reſpiration. 


Towards the end of the year ſome experi. 
ments of this kind did not anſwer ſo well as they 
had done before, and I had inſtances of the re- 
lapſing of this reſtored, air to its former noxious 
ſtate. 1 therefore ſuſpended my judgment con- 
cerning the efficacy of plants to reſtore this kind | 
of noxious air, till I ſhould have an opportunity 
of repeating my experiments, and giving more 
attention to them. Accordingly I reſumed the 
experiments in the ſummer of the year 1772, 
when T preſently had the moſt indiſputable 
proof of the reſtoration, of putrid air by vege-+ 
tation; and as the fact is ot ſome importance, 


and the ſubſequent variation in the ſtate of this 
Feind 


Air infected with Animal Reſpiration, &c. 8g 


kind of air is a little remarkable, I think it ne- 
ceſſary to relate ſome of the facts as cir- 
cumſtantially. | 

The air, on which I made-the firſt experi- 
ments, was rendered exceedingly noxious by 
mice dying in it on the aoth of June. Into a 
jar nearly filed with one part of this air, I put 
a ſprig of mint, while I kept another part of 
it in a phial, in the ſame expoſure ; and on the 
2 5th of the ſame month, and not before, I 
made a trial of them, by introducing a mouſe 
into a glaſs veſſel, containing 2 f ounce mea 
ſures filled with each kind of air; and 1 * 
the following facts. Wt 


When the veſſel was 5 filled with the air in 
which the mint had grown, a very large monie 
lived five minutes in it, before it began to ſhew 
any fign of uneaſineſs. I then took it out, 
and found it to be as ſtrong and vigorous as 
when it was firſt put in; whereas in that air 
which had been kept in the phial only, without 
a plant growing in it, a younger mouſe con- 
tinued not longer than two or three ſeconds, 
and was taken out quite dead. It never breathed 
after, and was immediately mationleſs. After 
half an hour, in which time the larger mouſe 
(which I had kept alive, that the experiment 
might be made on both the kinds of air with 


pe very ſame animal) would have been ſuffi- 
ciently 


"_ - _ Obſervations on 


ciently recruited, ſuppoſing it to have received 
any injury by the former experiment, was put 
into the ſame veſſel of air; but though it was 
withdrawn again, after being in it hardly one 
| ſecond, it was recovered with difficulty, not 
being able to ſtir from the place for near a 
minute. After two days, I put the ſame mouſe 
into an equal quantity of common air, and 
obſerved that it continued ſeven minutes with- 
out any ſign of uneaſineſs; and being very 
uneaſy after three minutes longer, I took it out. 
Upon the whole, I concluded that the reſtored 
air wanted about one fourth of being as whole- 
ſome as common air. The fame thing alſo ap- 
| . when J applied the teſt of nitrous air. 


In the FO days, in which the mint was 
growing in this jar of noxious air, three old 
ſhoots had extended themſelves about three 
inches, and ſeveral new ones had made their 
appearance in the ſame time. Dr. Franklin and 
Sir John Pringle happened to be with me, when 
the plant had been three or four days in this 
ſtate, and took notice of its vigorous vegeta- 
tion, and remarkably healthy 3 in 
that pr 


LY 


0 the zoth of the ſame month, a mouſe 
lived fourteen minutes, breathing naturally all 
the time, and without appearing to be much 

19 unealy, 


fir infected with Animal Reſpiration, &c. 91 


uneaſy, till the laſt two minutes, in the veſſel 
containing two ounce meaſures and a half of air 
which had heen rendered noxious by mice 
breathing in it almoſt a year before, and which 
I had found to be moſt highly noxious on the 
19th of this month, a plant having grown in 
it, but not exceedingly well, theſe eleven days 
on which account I had deferred making the 
trial ſo long. The reſtored air was affected by 
a mixture of nitrous air, almoſt as much as 
common air. 1 | 


As this putrid air was thus eaſily reſtored-to 
_ a conſiderable degree of fitneſs for reſpiration, 
by plants growing in it, I was in hopes that by 
the ſame means it might in time be ſo much 
more perfectly reſtored, that a candle would 
burn it it ; and for this purpoſe I kept plants 
growing in the jars which contained this air till 
the middle of Auguſt following, but did not 
take ſufficient care to pull out all the old and 
rotten leaves. The plants, however, had grown, 
and looked ſo well upon the whole, that I had 
no doubt but that the air muſt- conſtantly have 
been in a mending ſtate; when I was exceedingly 
ſurprized to find, on the 24th of that month, 
that though the air in one of the jars had not 
grown worſe, it was no better; and that the air 
in the other jar was ſo much worſe than it had 
been, that a mouſe would have died in it in a 

few 


* 


0 
— =, of — — — —ͤů— —— — — 
— — 2 . gk j N Fr — 
* — * * 4 
* 
K « 


92 Olſervatious on 


| few ſeconds. It alſo made no efferveſcence 
wich nitrous air, as it had done before. 


Suſpecting that the ſame plant might ba 
capable of reſtoring putrid air to a certain de- 
gree only, or that plants might have a contrary 
tendency in ſome ſtages of their growth, I with · 
drew the old plant, and put a freſh one in its 
place; and found that, after ſeven days, the 


air Was reſtored to its former wholeſome ſtate. 


This fact I conſider as a very remarkable one, 
and well deſerving of a farther inveſtigation, as 
it may throw more light upon the principles of 
vegetation. It is not, however, a ſingle fact; 
for I had ſeveral inſtances of the {ame kind in 


the preceding year; but it ſeemed ſo very 


extraordinary, that air ſnould grow worſe by 
the continuance of the ſame treatment by which 
it had grown better, that, whenever I obſerved 
it, I concluded that I had not taken ſufficient 
care to ſatisfy myſelf of its previous reſto- 
ration. 


That plants are n perfectly reſtoring 
air injured by reſpiration, may, I think, be in- 
ferred with certainty from the perfect reſtora - 
tion, by this means, of air which had paſſed 
through my Jungs, fo that a candle would burn 
in it again, though it had extinguiſhed flame 
before, and a part of the ſame original quantity 


oe 
* 


Air infected with Animal Reſpiration, &c, 93 


of air ſtill continued to dd ſo. Of this one 
inſtance occurred in the year 4771, a ſprig of 
mint having grown in a jar of this kind of air, 
from the 25th of July to the 17th of Auguſt 
following; and another trial I made, with the 
ſame ſucceſs, the 7th of July 1772, the plant 
having grown in it from the 29th of June pre- 
ceding. In this caſe alſo Ifound that the effect 
was not owing to any virtue in the leayes of 
mint ; for I kept them conſtantly changed in 
a quantity of this kind of air, for a conſider- 
able time, without making any ſenſible altera- 
tion in it, 


Theſe proofs of a partial reſtoration of air 
by plants in a ſtate of vegetation, though in a 
confined and unnatural fituation, cannot but 
render it highly probable, that the injury which 
ts continually done to the atmoſphere by the 
reſpiration of ſuch a number of animals, and 
the putrefaction of ſuch maſſes of both vegetable 
and animal matter, 1s, in part at leaft, repaired 
by the vegetable creation. And, notwithſtand- 
ing the prodigious maſs of air that is corrupted 
daily by the above-mentioned cauſes ; yet, if 
we conſider the immenſe profuſion of vegetables 
upon the face of the earth, growing in places 
ſuited to their nature, and conſequently at full 
liberty to exert all their powers, both inhaling 


and exhaling, it can hardly be thought, but 
that 


94 Obſervations on 


that it may be a ſufficient counterbalance to it, 
and that the remedy is adequate to the evil. 


Dr. Franklin, who, as I have already obſerv- 
ed, ſaw ſome of my plants in a very flouriſhing 
ſtate, in highly noxious air, was pleaſed to ex- 
preſs very great ſatisfaction with the reſult of 
the experiments. In his anſwer to the letter in 
which I informed him of it, he ſays, 


| « That the vegetable creation ſhould reſtore 
ce the air which is ſpoiled by the animal part of 
it, looks like a rational ſyſtem, and ſeems to 


be of a piece with the reſt. Thus fire puri- 


« fies water all the world over. It purifies it 
« by diſtillation, when it raiſes it in vapours, 
© and lets it fall in rain; and farther ſtill by fil- 
4 tration, when, keeping it fluid, it ſuffers that 
« rain to percolate the earth. We knew be- 
« fore that putrid animal ſubſtances were con- 
< verted into ſweet vegetables, when mixed with 
« the earth, and applied as manure ; and now, 
eit ſeems, that the ſame putrid ſubſtances, 
&« mixed with the air, have a ſimilar effect. 
The ſtrong thriving ſtate of your mint in pu- 
e trid air ſeems to ſhew that the air is mended 
* by taking ſometlung from it, and not by ad- 
ding to it.” He adds, © I hope this will 
give ſome check to the rage of deſtroying, 
* trees that grow near houſes, which has 

| 46 2c 


Arr infeted with dnimal Reſpiration, Sr. 93 


ce accompanied our late improvements in 
_ « gardening, from an opinion of their being 
«© unwholeſome, I am certain, from long ob- 
« ſervation, that there is nothing unhealthy in 
& the air of woods; for we Americans have 
* every where our country habitations in the 
«© midſt of woods, and no people on earth en- 
joy better health, or are more prolific,” 


Having rendered inflammable air perfectly in- 
noxious by continued agitation in a trough of 
water, deprived of its air, I concluded that 
other kinds of noxious air might be reſtored by 
the ſame means ; and I preſently found that this 
was the caſe with putrid air, even of more than 
a year's ſtanding. I ſhall obſerve once for all, 
that this proceſs has never failed to reſtore any 
kind. of noxious air on which I have tried it, 
viz, air injured by reſpiration or putrefaction, 
air infected with the fumes of burning char- 
coal, and of calcined metals, air in which a 
mixture of iron filings and brimſtone, that in 
which paint made of white lead and oil has 
ſtood, or air which has been dimmiſhed by a 
mixture of nitrous air. Of the remarkable ef- 
fe& which this proceſs has on nitrous air itſelf, 
an account will be given in its proper place. 


If this proceſs be made in water deprived of. 
air, either by the air-pump, by boiling, or by diſ- 
tillation, 


96 Obſervations on 


tillation, or if freſh rain-water be uſed, the air 
will always be diminiſhed by the agitation ; and 


this is certainly the faireſt method of making 


the experiment. If the water be freſh pump- 
water, there will always be an increaſe of the 
air by agitation, the air contained in the water 
being ſet looſe, and joining that which is in the 
jar. In this caſe, alſo, the gir has never failed 
to be reſtored ; but then it might be ſuſpected 
that the melioration was produced by the addi- 
tion of ſome more wholeſome ingredient. As 
theſe agitations were made in jars with wide 
mouths, and in a trough which had a large ſur- 


face expoſed to the common air, T take it for 


granted that the noxious efluvia, whatever they 


be, were firſt imbibed by the water, and there- 


by tranſmitted to the common atmoſphere. In 
ſome caſes this was ſufficiently indicated by the 
diſagreeable ſmell which attended the opera- 
tion, FI 


After I had made theſe experiments, I was 
informed that an ingenious phyſician and philo- 
ſopher had kept a fowl alive twenty-four hours, 
in a quantity of air in which another fowl of the 
ſame fize had not been able to live longer than 
an hour, by contriving to make the air, which 
it breathed, paſs through no very large quan- 
tity of acidulated water, the ſurface of which 
was not expoſed to the common air; and that 

even 


Air infefted with Animal Reſpiration, Sc. 97 


even when the water was not acidulated, the 

_ fowl lived much longer than it could have done; 
if the air which it breathed had not been drawn 
through the water, 


As I ſhould not have concluded that this ex- 
periment would have ſucceeded ſo well, from 
any obſervations that I had made upon the ſub- 
ject, I took a quantity of air in which mice had 
died, and agitated it very ſtrongly, firſt in 

about five times its own quantity of diſtilled 
water, in the manner in which I had impreg- 
nated water with fixed air; but though the 
operation was continued a long time, it made 
no ſenſible change in the properties of the air. 
I alſo repeated the operation with pump-water, 
but with as little effect. In this caſe, however, 
though the air was agitated in a phial, which 
had a narrow neck, the ſurface of the water it 
the baſon was confiderably large, and expoſed 
to the common atmoſphereg which muſt have 
tended a little to favour the experiment. 


In order to judge more preciſely of the effect 
of theſe different methods of agitating air, 1 
transferred the very noxious air, which I had 
not been able to amend in the leaſt degree by 
the former method, into an open jar, ſtanding 
in a trough of water; and when J had agitated 
it till it was diminiſhed about one third, I found 

H it 


568. Obſervations on 


it to be better than air in which candles had 
burned out, as appeared by the teſt of the ni- 
trous air; and a mouſe lived in 2 ounce mea- 
ſures of it a quarter of an hour, and was not 
ſenſibly affected the firſt ten or twelve minutes. 


In order to determine whether the addition of 
any acid to the water, would make it more ca- 
pable of reſtoring putrid air, I agitated a quan- 
tity of it in a phial containing very ſtrong vi- 
negar; and after that in agua fortis, only half 
diluted with water; but by neither of theſe 
proceſſes was the air at all mended, though the 
agitation: was repeated, at intervals, during a 
Whole day, and it was moreover allowed to 
ſtand in that fituation all night. 


Since, however, water in theſe experiments 
muſt have imbibed and retained a certain por- 
tion of the noxious effluvia, before they could 
be tranſmitted to the external air, I do not think 
it improbable but that the agitation of the ſea 
and large lakes may be of ſome uſe for the pu- 
rification of the atmoſphere, and the putrid 
matter contained in water may be imbibed by 
aquatic plants, or be depoſited in ſome other 
manner. 


Having found, by ſeveral experiments above- 


mentioned, that the proper putrid effluvium 
1 


. 


— wt wy 


* 


Arr infefted with Avimal Reſpiration, &c: 99 


4s ſomethiog quite diſtinet from fixed air, and 
finding, by the experiments of Dr. Macbride, 
that fixed air corrects putrefaCtion ; - It occured 
to me, that fixed air, and air tainted with pu- 
trefaction, though equally noxious when ſepa- 
rate, might make a wholeſome mixture, the 
one correcting the other; and I was confirmed 
in this opinion by, I believe, not leſs than fifty 
or fixty inſtances, in which air, that had been 
made in the higheſt degree noxious, by reſpira- 
tion or putrefaction, was ſo far ſweetened, by 
a mixture of about four times as much fixed 
air, that afterwards mice lived in it exceedingly 


well, and in ſome cafes almoſt as long as in 


common air. I found it, indeed, to be more 
difficult to reſtore old putrid air by this means; 
but I hardly ever tailed to do it, when the two 
kinds of air had ſtood a long time together; by 
which I mean about a fortnight 6r three weeks. 


The refſon why I do not abſolutely conclude 
chat the reſtoration of air in theſe caſes was the 
effect of fixed air, is that, when I made a trial 
of the mixture, I ſometimes agitated the two 
Kinds of air pretty ſtrongly together, in a 
trough of water, or at leaſt paſſed i it ſeveral 
times through water, from one jar to ano- 
ther, that the ſuperfluous fixed air might be 
abſorbed, not ſuſpecting at that time that the 
Agitation could have any other effect. But 
: H 2 having 


7 
- -4 


* 
* 


bd * 
ie 


100 Obſervations on | 


having ſince found that very violent, a eſpe« 
cially Jong-continued agitation in water, without 
any mixture of fixed air, never failed to render 
any kind of noxious air in ſome meaſure fit for 
reſpiration (and in one particular inſtance the h 
mere transferring of the air from one veſſel to 
another through the water, though for a much 
longer time than I ever uſed for the mixtures 
of air, was of conſiderable uſe for the ſame 
purpoſe) I began to entertain ſome doubt of 
the efficacy of fixed air in this caſe. In ſome 
caſes alſo the mixture of fixed air had by no 
means ſo much effect on the putrid air as, 
from the generality of my nn. 1 
ſhould have expected. 


I was always aware, indeed, that it might be 
faid, that, the reſiduum of fixed air not being 
very noxious, ſuch an addition muſt contribute 
to mend the, putrid air; but, in order to obvi- 
ate this objection, I once mixed the reſiduum 
of as much fixed air as I had found, by a va- 
riety of trials, to be ſufficient to reſtore a given 
quantity of putrid air, with an equal quantity 
of that air, without making any ſenſible me- 
lioration of it. | 


Upon the whole, I am inclined to think thar 
this proceſs could hardly have ſucceeded ſo 
well as it did with me, and in ſo great anum- 


Air infected with Animal Reſpiration, Sc. tot 


ber of trials, unleſs fixed air have ſome ten- 
dency to correct air tainted with reſpiration or 
putrefaction; and it is perfectly agreeable to 
the analogy of Dr. Macbride's diſcoveries, and 
may naturally be expected from them, that it 
ſhould have ſuch an effect. 


By a mixture of fixed air I have made 
wholeſome the refiduum of air generated by 
putrefaction only, from mice plunged in water. 
This, one would imagine, à priori, to be the 
moſt noxious of all kinds of air, For if com- 
mon air only tainted with putrefaction be 
ſo deadly, much more might one expect that 
air to be ſo, which was generated from putre- 
faction only ; but it ſeems to be nothing more 
than common air (or at leaſt that kind of fixed 
air which is not abſorbed by water) tainted 
with putrefaction, and therefore requires no 
other proceſs to ſweeten it. In this cafe, how- 
ever, we ſeem to have an inſtance of the gene- 
ration of genuine common air, though mixed 
with ſomething that is foreign to it. Perhaps 
the reſiduum of fixed air may be another in- 
ſtance of the ſame nature, and alſo the reſiduum 
of inflammable air, and of nitrous air, eſpeci- 
ally nitrous air loaded with phlogiſton, _ 
long agitation in water, | I 


H 3 Fixed 


1 
| 
1 
| 
= \ 
= 
- | 


2324 . * * 


a, * 
r 


192 | Obſervations on 


Fixed air is equally diffuſed through the 


whole maſs of any quantity of putrid air . 


which i it is mixed: for dividing the mixture 1 

to two equal parts, they were reduced in 4 
ſame proportion by paſſing through water. But 
this is alſo the caſe with ſome of the kinds of 
air which will not incorporate, as inflammable 
air, and air in which brimſtone has burned, . 


If fixed air tend to 8 air which has 
| been injured by animal reſpiration or putre- 
faction, lime kilgs, which diſcharge great quan- 
fities of fixed air, may be wholeſome in the 
neighbourhood of populous cities, the atmo- 
ſphere of which - muſt abound with putrid ef- 
fluvia, I ſhould think alſo that phyſicians 
might avail themſelves of the application of 
fixed air in many putrid diſorders, eſpecially 
as it may be ſo eaſily adminiſtered by way of 
clyſter, where it would often find its way to 
much of the putrid matrer. Nothing is to be 
apprehended from. the diſtention of the bowels 
by this kind of air, ſince it is ſo readily ab- 
ſorbed by any fluid or moiſt ſubſtance, 


Since fixed air is not noxious per ſe, but, 
like fire, only in exceſs, I do not think it at all 
hazardous to attempt to breathe it. It is how- 
ever eaſily conveyed into the fomach, in na- 


tural or artificial Pyrmont water, in briſkly- 
| fer- 


4 


Arr infeed with Animal Reſpiration, &c. 103 


fermenting liquors, or à vegetable diet. Iris 
even poſſible, that a conſiderable quantity 
of fixed air might be imbibed by the ab- 
ſorbing veſſels of the ſkin, if the whole body, 
except the head, ſhould be ſuſpended over a 
veſſel of ſtrongly-fermenting liquor; and in 
ſome putrid diſorders this treatment might be 
very ſalutary. If the body was expoſed quite 
naked, there would be very little danger from 
the cold in this ſituation, and the air having 
freer acceſs to the ſkin might produce a greater 
effect. Being no phyſician, 1 run no riſk by 
throwing out theſe random, and perhaps whim» 
ſical propoſals,* 


Having communicated my obſervations on 
fixed air, and eſpecially my ſcheme of applying 
it by way of clyſter in putrid diſorders, to Mr, 4 
Hey, an ingenious ſurgeon in Leeds a caſe 4 
preſently occurred, in which he had an op- 
portunity of giving it a trial; and mentiohing 
it to Dr. Hird and Dr. Crowther, two phyſi- 
cians who attended the patient, they approved 
the ſcheme, and it was put in execution; both Y 
by applying the fixed air by way of clyſter, 5 
and at the ſame time making the patient drink l 
plentifully of liquors ſtrongly impregnated with 


* Some time after theſe papers were firſt printed, I was 


pleaſed to find the lame 3 in Dr. Alexander's Expe- 
rimental Eſſays. 


H 4 | | it, 


134 Obſervations on 
it. The event was ſuch, that I requeſted Mr. 
Hey to draw up a particular account of the caſe, 
deſcribing the whole of rhe treatment, that the 
public might be fatisfied that this new appli- 

cation of fixed air is perfectly ſafe, and alſo, 

have an opportunity of judging how far it had 
the effect which I expected from it; and as the 
application is new, and not unpromiſing, I ſhall 
ſubjoin his letter to me on the a by way 


of Appenaix to thele papers. 


When I began my inquires into the pro- 
perties of different kinds of air, I engaged my 
friend Dr. Percival to attend to the medicinal | 
v/es of them, being ſenfible that his knowledge 
of philoſophy as well as of medicine would give | 
him a ſingular advantage for this purpoſe, | 
The reſult of his obſervations I ſhall alſo in- 


ep! m the Appendix. 


* - + "_— 


* 
* 


Air expoſed to Tron Filings and Brimſlone. 10g 


8E CTION V. 


Of Am in which @ mixture of Br1MSTONE and 
Fos of Inox has food. 


Reading in Dr. Hales's account of his ex- 
periments, that there was a great diminution of 
the quantity of air in which @ mixture of pow- 
| dered brimſtone and filings of iron, made into 

a paſte with water, had ſtood, I repeated the 

experiment, and found the diminution greater 

than I had expected. This diminution of air 

is made as effectually, and as expeditiouſly, 

in quickſilver as in water; and it may be mea- 
ſured with the greateſt accuracy, becauſe there 
| is neither any previous expanſion or increaſe. of 
the quantity of air, and becauſe it is ſome time 
before this proceſs begins to have any ſenſible — 
effect. This diminution of air is various; but 
J have generally found it to be between one 
if fifth and,one fourth of the whole, 


- 
: PR 
—— 2 — 
oo, 


Air thus diminiſhed is not heavier, but ra- | 
ther lighter than common air; and though: | 
lime- water does not become turbid when it is | 
expoſed to this air, it is probably owing to the | 
formation of a ſelenitic ſalt, as was the caſe 
with the ſimple burning of brimſtone above- 

mens: 


Vf vo ws * * * 
„ - a . 


* 


T7 


105 Obſervations on 


mentioned. That ſomething proceeding from 
the brimſtone ſtrongly affects the water which 
is confined in the fame place with this mixture, 
is manifeſt from the very ſtrong ſmell that i it One | 
of the volatile ſpirit of nn 


I conclude that the diminution of air by this 
procels is of the ſame kind with the diminution 
of it in the other caſes, becauſe when this mix- 
ture is put into air which has been previouſly di- 
miniſhed, either by the burning of candles, by 
reſpiration, or putrefaction, thou gh it never 
fails to diminiſh it ſomething more, it is, how- 
ever, no farther than this proceſs alone would 
have done it, If a freſh mixture be introduced 
into a quantity of air which had been reduced 
by a former mixture, it has little or no farther 
effect. | 


5 I once obſerved, that when a mixture of this 


kind was taken out of a quantity of air in which 
a candle had before burned out, and in which it 
had ſtood for ſeveral days, it was quite cold 


and black, as it always becomes in a confined 


place; but it preſently grew very hot, ſmoak- 
ed copouſly, and ſmelled very offenſively ; 
and when it was cold, it was brown, like the 


| "oy of 1 8 


I once 


Air expoſed to Iron Filings and Brimflone. 107 


LI once put a mixture of this kind to a quan- 
tity of inflammable air, made from iron, by 
which means it was diminiſhed ; or % in its 
bulk ; but, as far as I could judge, it was 
ſtill as inflammable as ever. Another quan- 
tity-of inflammable air was alſo reduced in the 
fame proportion, by a mouſe putrefying in 
it; but its inflammability was not ſeemingly 
leſſened. 


Air diminiſhed by this mixture of iron filings 
and brimſtone, is exceedingly noxious to ani- 
mals, and I have not perceived that it grows 
any better by keeping in water. The ſmell of 
it is very pungent and offenſive, 


The quantity of this mixture which I made 
uſe of in the preceding experiments, was from 
two to four ounce meaſures; but I did not 
perceive, but that the diminution of the quan- 
tity of air (which was generally about twenty 
ounce meaſures) was as great with the ſmalleſt, 


as with the largeſt quantity. How ſmall a 
quantity is neceſſary to diminiſh a given quan · 


tity of air to a maximum, 1 have made no expe · 
riments to aſcertain. | 


As ſoon as this mixture of iron filings wit 
brimſtone and water, begins to ferment, it alſo 
turns black, and begins to ſwell, and it con. 


tinves 


18s Obſervations on 


tinues to do ſo, till it occupies twice as much 
ſpace as it did at firſt, The force with which 
it expands is great; but how great it is I have 
not endeavoured to determine, IR 


When this mixture is immerſed in water, it 
generates no air, though it becomes black, and 


— 


S EC T ION V. 
07 NITROUS Air. 


Ever ſince I firſt read Dr. Hales's moſt ex, 
cellent Statical Efſays, I was particularly ſtruck 
with that experiment of his, of which an ac- 
count is given, Vor. I. p. 224. and Vor. II. 
p. 280. in which common air, and air gene- 
rated from the Walton pyrites, by ſpirit of 
nitre, made a turbid red mixture, and in which 
part of the common air was abforbed ; but I 
never expected to have the ſatisfaction of ſeeing 
this remarkable appearance, ſuppoſing it to be 
peculiar to that particular mineral. Happen- 
ing to mention this ſubject to the Hon. Mr. 
Cavendiſh, when I was in London, in the il - 
ſpring of the year 1772, he ſaid that he did | 
not imagine but that other kinds of pyrites, 


or the metals might anſwer as well, and that 
| | pro- 


2 


\ 
4 
7 


d K * = 


Nitrous Ar. og 


probably the red appearance of the mixture 


depended upon the ſpirit of nitre only. This 
encouraged me to attend to the ſubject; and 


having no pyrites, I began with the ſolution of 
the different merals in ſpirit of nitre, and catch- 
ing the air which was generated in the ſolution, 
I preſently found what I Warned, and a good 
deal more. 


Beginning with the ſolution of. braſs, on the 
4th of June 1 7725 I firſt found this remark- 
able ſpecies of air, only one effe& of which, 
was caſually obſerved by Dr. Hales ; and he 
gave ſo little attention to it, and it has been 


ſo much unnoticed fince his time, that, as 
far as I know, no name has been given to it, 


I therefore found myſelf, contrary to my firſt 
reſolution, under an abſolute neceſſity of giv- 


ing a name to this kind of air myſelf, When 


J firſt began to ſpeak and write of it to 
my friends, I happened to diſtinguiſh it by 
the name of nitrous air, becauſe I had pro- 
cured it by means of ſpirit of nitre only; and 
though I cannot ſay that I altogether like the 
term, neither myſelf nor any of my friends, 
to whom [I have applied for the purpoſe, have 
been able to hit upon a better; ſo that I 
am | obliged, after all, to content myſelf 


with: | it. 
I harre 


- 
— 1 
— ͥ ññů 


* 


- 
"PEST bo PETE FT "38 
A 5 3 * . 
— « . * 
„ 


0 —_— 


re, 
gn? = 


; 


#10 Obſervations on 


1 have found that this kind of air is readily 
procured from iron, copper, braſs, tin, ſilver, 
quickſilver, biſmuth, and nickel, by the ni- 
trous acid only, and from gold and the regulus 
of antimony by aqua regia. The circum- 
ſlances attending the ſolution of each of theſe 
metals are various, but hardly worth mention- 
ing, in treating of the properties of the afr 
which they yield ; which, from what metal 2 
ever it is extracted, has, as far as I have been 

able to obſerve, the very ſame properties. 


One of the moſt conſpicuous properties of 
this kind of air is the great diminution of any 
quantity of common air with which it is mix- 
ed, attended with a turbid red, or deep orange 
colour, and a confiderable heat. The ſmell 
of it, alſo, is very ſtrong, and remarkable, 
but very much reſembling that of ſmoking ſpi- 
rit of nitre. 

The diminution of a mixture of this and 
common air is not an equal diminution of both. 
the kinds, which is all that Dr. Hales could 
obſerve, but of about one fifth of the com- 


mon air, and as much of the nitrous air as is 
neceſſary to produce that effect; which, as 1 


Have found by many trials, is about one half 
as much as the original quantity of common air. 
F or if one meaſure of nitrous air be put to two 

me- 


Nitrous Air, 13 11 
meaſures of common air, in a few minutes 
(by which time the efferveſcence will be over, 
and the mixture will have recovered its tranſ- 
parency) there will want about one ninth of 
the original two meaſures; and if both the 
kinds of air be very pure, the diminution will 
ſtill go on ſlowly, till in a day or two, the 
whole will be reduced to one fifth leſs than the 
original quantity of common air, 'This farther 
diminution, by long ſtanding, I had not obſerv- 
ed at the time of the firſt publication of theſe 
papers. | 


I hardly know any experiment that is more 
adapted to amaze and ſurprize than this is, 
which exhibits a quantity of air, which, as it 
were, devours a quantity of another kind of 
air half as large as itſelf, and yet is ſo far from 
gaining any addition to its bulk, that it is con- 
ſiderably diminiſhed by it. If, after this full 
ſaturation of common air with nitrous air, more 
nitrous air be put to it, it makes an addition 
equal to its own bulk, without producing the 
leaſt redneſs, or any other viſible effect. 


If the ſmalleſt quantity of common air be 
put to any larger quantity of nitrous air, 
though the two together will not occupy fo 
much ſpace as they did ſeparately, yet the 
quantity will ſtill be larger than that of the 
nitrous air only, One ounce meaſure of com- 

| mom 


Wa”. - Obſervations on 


mon air being put to near twenty ounce mea« 


ſures of nitrous air; made an addition to it of 


about half an ounce meaſure. This being 4 
much greater proportion than the diminution 


of common air, in the former experiment, 
proves that part of the diminution in the 


former caſe is in the nitrous air. Beſides, it - 


will preſently appear, that nitrous air is ſubjecæ 
to a moſt remarkable diminution ; and as corn- 
mon air, in a variety of other caſes; ſuffers a 
diminution from one fifth to one fourth, I 
conclude, that in this cafe alſo it does not 
exceed that proportion, and therefore that the 
remainder of the diminution reſpects the ni- 
trous air, 4 


In order to judge whether the water contri- 


buted to the diminution of this mixture of ni- 


ttous and common air, I made the whole pro- 
ceſs ſeveral times in quickfilver, uſing one third 
of nitrous, and two thirds of common air, as 
before. In this caſe the redneſs continued a 
very long time, and the diminution was not ſo 
great as when the mixtures had been made in 
water, there remaining one ſeventh more than 
the original quantity of common air. 


This mixture ſtood all night upon the quick- 
fixer; and the next morning I obſerved that it 
was no farther diminifhed upon the admiſſion 

| 333 * 


4 


* 
% 


[ 


Nitrons\ Mr. 59 


of water to it, nor by pouring it ſeveral times. 
through the water, and letting it ſtand in water 
two days. | 


Another mixture, which had ſtood about fix 


hours on the quickſilver, was diminiſhed a little 
more upon the admiſſion of water, but was never 
leſs than the original quantity of common air. 


In another caſe however, in which the mixture 
had ſtood but a very ſhort time in quickſilver, the 
farther diminution, which took place upon the 
admiſſion of water, was much more conſider- 
able; ſo that the diminution, upon the whole, 
was very nearly as great as if the a had 
been intirely in water. 


Ir is evident from theſe experiments, that 
the diminution is in part owing to the ab- 
ſorption by the water; but that when the 


mixture is kept a long time, in a ſituation in 
Which there is no water to abſorb any part of 
it, it acquires a conſtitution, by which it is 


afterwards incapable of being abſorbed by 
water, or rather, there is an addition to the quan- 


tity of air by nitrous air produced by the ſolu- 
tion of the mY | 


It will be ſeen, in the ſecond: piirt of this - 
work, that, in the decompoſition of nitrous 
air by its mixture with common air, there is 


I nothing 


* 


— 
= 


114 Op ſervationt off 


nothing at hand when the proceſs is made ity 
quickſilver, with which the acid that entered 
mto its compoſition can readily unite, 


In order to determine whether the fixed part 


of common air was depofited in the diminution: 


ol it by nitrous air, I incloſed a veſſel full of 


lime- water in the jar in which the proceſs was 
made, but it occaſioned no precipitation of the 
lime; and when the veſſel was taken out, after 
it had been in that ſituation a whole day, the 
lime was caſily precipitated by nn. into 
it as uſual. 


But though the precipitation of the lime 
was not ſenſible in this method of making the 
experiment, it is ſufficiently ſo when the whole 
proceſs is made in lime-water, as will be ſeen 
in the ſecond part of this work; ſo that we 
have here another evidence of the depoſition 
of fixed air from common air. I have made 
no alteration, however, in the preceding para- 
graph, becauſe it may not be unuſeful, as a 
caution to future experimenters. 


It is exceedingly remarkable that this effer- 


veſcence and diminution, occafioned by the 
mixture of nitrous air, is peculiar to common 


air, or air fit: for reſpiration 5 and, as far as F 


can judge, from à great number of obſerva» 


tions; 


_— 


Nitrous 45. 115 


tions, is at leaſt very nearly, if not exactly, 
in proportion to its fitneſs for this purpoſe; ſo 
that by this means the goodneſs of air may be 
| diſtinguiſhed much more accurately than it can 
be done by putting 1 mice, or any other animals, 
to breathe in it. 


This was a moſt agreeable diſcovery to me; 
as I hope it may be an ufeful one to the pub- 
lic; eſpecially as, from this time; I had no o- 
cafion for ſo large a ſtock of mice 18 1 had 
been uſed to keep for the purpoſe of theſe ex. 
periments, uſing them only in thoſe which re- 
quired to be very deciſive ; and in theſe caſes I 
have ſeldom failed to dow beforehand in What 

manner they would be affected. 


It is alſo remarkable that, on whatever ac- 
| count air is unfit for reſpiration, this ſame teſt 
is equally applicable. Thus there is not the 
teaſt efferveſcence between nitrous and fixed air; 
or inflammable air, or any ſpecies of diminiſh- 
ed air. Alſo the degree of diminution being 
from nothing at all to more than one third 
of the whole of any quantity of air, we are, 
by this means, in poſſeſſion of a prodigiouſly 
large ſcale, by which we may diſtinguiſh very 
ſmall degrees of difference i in the n * air. 


1 have not attended much to this circum” 
fance, having uſed this teſt chiefly for greater 
| Ep dif- 


>” -m——— . 
Ry TAR. A. 
f — N 4 
2 


ſome air, and into another veſſel an equal quan- 


_— 
ER . 


116 | 
differences ; but, if I did not deceive myſelf, 


T have perceived a real difference in the air of 
my ſtudy, after a few perſons have been with 


Obſervations on 


mein it, and the air on the outſide of the houſe. 


Alſo a phial of air having been ſent me, from 
the neighbourhood of York, it appeared not to 
be ſo good as the air near Leeds ; that is, it was 
not diminiſhed ſo much by an equal mixture of 
nitrous air, every other circumſtance. being as 
nearly the ſame as I corfld contrive. It may 
perhaps be poſſible, but I have not yet attempted 
it, to diſtinguiſh ſome of the different winds, 
or theair of different times of * * &c. &c. 
by this teſt. | 


By means of this teſt I was able to determine 
what I was before in doubt about, viz. the kind 
as well as the degree of injury done to air by 
candles burning in it. I could not tell with 
certainty, by means of mice, whether it was at 
all injured with reſpect to reſpiration z and yet 
if nitrous air may be depended upon for fur- 
niſhing an accurate teſt, it muſt be rather more 
than one third worſe than common air, and 
have been diminiſhed by the ſame general cauſe 
of the other diminutions of air. For when, 
after many trials, I put one meaſure of tho- 
roughly putrid and highly noxious air, into the 
ſame veſſel with two meaſures of good whole- 


tity, 


Nitrous Air. | 117 


tity, viz. three meaſures of air in which a 
candle had burned out; and then put equal 
quantities of nitrous air to each of them, the 
latter was diminiſhed rather more than the 
former. 


It agrees with. this obſervation, that burned 
air is farther diminiſhed both by putrefaction, 
and a mixture of iron filings and brimſtone; 
and [ therefore take it for granted by every 
other cauſe of the diminution of air. It is 
| probable, therefore, that burned air is air ſo far 
loaded with phlogiſton, as to be able to extin- 
guiſh a candle, which it may do long before it 
is fully ſaturated, 0 


Inflammable air with a mixture of nitrous air 
burns with a green flame, This makes a very 
pleaſing experiment when it is properly con- 


ducted, As, for ſome time, I chiefly made uſe 


of copper for the generation of nitrous air, I-firſt 
aſcribed this circumſtance to that property of 
this metal, by which it burns with a 

flame ; but I was preſently ſatisfied that it muſt 
ariſe from the ſpirit of nitre, for the effect is 
the very ſame from which ever of the metals 


the nitrous air is extracted, all of which I tried 


for this re even ſilver and gold. 


a . 


—— 
* 


. P CW 
» 9 


_— . 
» + — = 


118 Obſervations on 
A mixture of oil of vitriol and ſpirit of nitrg 


in equal proportions diſſolved iron, and the 
produce was nitrous air; : but a leſs degree of 


ſpirit of nitre in the mixture produced air that 


was inflammable, and which burned with a 
green flame, It alſo tinged common air a little | 


red, and diminiſhed it, though not much. 


The diminution of common air by a mixture 
of nitrous air, is not fo extraordinary as the 
diminution which nitrous air itſelf is ſubject to 


from-a mixture of iron filings and brimſtone, 
made into a paſte with water. This mixture, 


as I have already obſerved, diminiſhes common 


air between one fifth and one fourth, but has 
no ſuch effect upon any kind of air that has 
been diminiſhed, and rendered noxious by any 


other proceſs; but when it is put to a quantity 


of nitrous air, it diminiſhes it ſo much, that no 


more than one fourth of the original quantity 


will be left. 
The effect of this proceſs is generally per 


ceived in five or fix hours, about which time 


the viſible efferveſence of the mixture begins; 


and in a very ſhort time it advances ſo rapidly, 
that in about an hour almoſt the whole effect 


will have taken place. If it be ſuffered to 


ſtand a day or two longer, the air will ftill be 
diminiſhed farther, but only a very little farther, 


in 


Pl 
oY 
Vs 
” 


— 


Nitrous Air = 119 


in proportion to the firſt diminution. The glaſs 
jar, in which the air and this mixture have been 
conſined, has generally been ſo much heated in 
this proceſs, that I have not been able to Wnt it, 


Nitrous air thus diminiſhed has not 0 ſtrong 
a ſmell as nitrous air itfelf, but ſmells juft like 
common air in which the ſame mixture has 
ſtood z and it is not capable of being diminiſhed 


any farther, by a n mixture of iron and 


brimſtone. 


Common air ſaturated with nitrous air is alſo 
no farther diminiſhed by this mixture of iron 
filings and brimſtone, though the mixture fer- 


ments with great _ and * very much 
in it. 


Plants die very ſoon, both in nitrous air, and 
alſo in common air faturated with nitrous ally 
but eſpecially 1n the.former, 


Neither nitrous air, nor common air ſa- 
turated with nitrous air, differ in ſpecific gravity 
from common air. At leaſt, the difference 
is ſo ſmall, that I could not be ſure there 
was any ; ſometimes about three pints of it 


| ſeeming to be about half a grain heavier, and 


at other times as much lighter than common 
air. 


14 Having 


; 2 — — * 
1 Y 2 . 209 [x * — 4 — 4 
l « Fay a r 
_ cc none | 
WT "WG * 


1 


120 Obſervations on 


Having, among other kinds of air, expoſed 
A quantity of nitrous air to water out of which 
| the air had been well boiled, in the experiment 
to which I have more than once referred (as 
having been the occaſion of ſeveral new and 
important obſervations) J found that 23 of the 
whole was abſorbed. Perceiving, to my great 
ſurprize, that ſo very great a proportion of this 
kind of air was miſcible with water, I imme- 
diately began to agitate a conſiderable quantity 
of it, in a jar ſtanding in a trough of the ſame 
kind of water; and, with about four times as 
much agitation as fixed air requires, it was ſo 
far abſorbed by the water, that only about one 
fifth remained. This remainder extinguiſhed 
flame, and was noxious to animals, 


Afterwards I diminiſhed a pretty large quan- 
tity of nitrous air to one eighth of its original 
bulk, and the remainder ſtill retained much of 
its peculiar ſmell, and diminiſhed common air 


a little. A mouſe alſo died in it, but not fo 
ſuddenly as it would have done in pure nitrous 


air. In this operation the peculiar ſmell of 
F nitrous air is very manifeſt, the water being 
| | firſt impregnated with the air, and then tranf- 
mitting it to the common atmoſphere. 


This experiment gave me the hint of im- 
pregnating water with nitrous air, in the man- 
| ner 


Nitrous Air. 121 


ner in which I had before done it with fixed air; 


and I preſently found that diſtilled water would 
imbibe about one tenth of its bulk of this kind 
of air, and that it acquired a remarkably acid 


and aſtringent taſte from it. The ſmell of 


water thus impregnated is at firſt peculiarly 


pungent. I did not chuſe to ſwallow any of it, 


though, for any thing that I know, it may be 


perfectly i enn _ MEM th in ſome n | 


ME 


This kind of air is retaihed very obſtinately 
by water, In an exhauſted receiver a quantity 
of water thus ſaturated emitted a whitiſh fume, 
ſuch as ſometimes iſſues from bubbles of this air 
when it is firſt generated, and alſo ſome cir- 
bubbles ; bur though it was ſuffered to ſtand 
a long time in this fituation, it ſtill retained its 
peculiar taſte z but when it had ſtood all night 
pretty near the fire, the water was become quite 
vapid, and had depoſited a filmy kind of mat- 
ter, of which I had often collected a conſider- 
able quantity from the trough in which jars 


containing this air had ſtood. ' This I ſuppoſe / 


to be a precipitate of the metal, by the ſolution 


of which the nitrous air was generated. I have 


not given ſo much attention to it as to know, 
with certainty, in what circumſtances this de- 


poſit is made, any more than I do the matter 


depoſited from inflammable air above · mention- 
I ed; 


— — — 1 
F A ²˙ mm ̃ — —— ——  — —— — — — 


= 
.. - GO 


122 Obſervations on 


ed; for I cannot get it, at leaſt in any con- 
' fiderable quantity, when 1 pleaſe whereas [ 
have often found abundance of it, when I did 
i: expect it at all. 


The nitrous air with which I made the firſt 
impregnation of water was extracted from cop» 
per; but when I made the impregnation with 
air from quickfilver, the water had the very 
ſame taſte, though the matter depoſited from jt 
ſeemed to be of a different kind; for it was 
whitiſh, whereas the other had a yellowiſh tinge. 
Except the firſt quantity of this impregnated 
water, I could never deprive any more that I 
made of its peculiar taſte. I have even let ſome 
of it Rand more than a week, in phials with their 
mouths open, and ſometimes very near the fire, 
without producing any alteration in it F, 


Whether any of the ſpirit of nitre contained 
in the nitrous air be mixed with the water in 
this operation, I have not yet endeavoured to 
determine. This, however, may probably 
be the caſe, as the ſpirit of nitre is, in a con- 
ſiderable degree, volatile . 


1654.4 M N 
I have ſince found, that nitrous air has never failed 
ta eſeape from the water, which has been impregnated with 
it, by long expoſure to the open air. 

+ This ſuſpicion has been confirmed by the ingenious 
Mr. Bewley, of — „ in Norfolk, who has dif- 
covered 


| Nitrous Air. 123 7 


Ic will perhaps be thought, that the moſt 
 x/eful, if not the moſt remarkable, of all the .. # 
properties of this extraordinary kind of air, is 
its power of preſerying animal ſubſtances from 
putrefaction, and of reſtoring thoſe that are 
already putrid, which it poſſeſſes in a far greater, - 
degree than fixed air, My firſt obſervation of 
this was altogether caſual. Having found ni- 
trous air to ſuffer ſo great a diminution as I 
have already mentioned by a mixture of iron 
filings and brimſtone, I was willing to try wWhe . 
ther it would be equally diminiſhed by other 
cauſes of the diminution of common air, eſpe- 
cially by putrefaction; and for this purpoſe 1 
put a dead mouſe into a quantity of it, and 
placed it near the fire, where the tendency to 
putrefaction was very great. In this caſe there 
was a conſiderable diminution, viz. from 5 * to 
| 37 but not ſo great as I had expected, the 
antiſeptic power of the nitrous air having 
checked the tendency to putrefaction; for 
when, after a week, I took the mouſe out, I 


covered that the acid taſte of this water is not the neceſſary 
conſequence of its impregnation with nitrous air, but is 
the effect of the acid vapour, into which part of this air 
1s reſolved, when it is decompoſed by a mixture with com- 
mon air, This, it will be ſeen, exactly agrees with my 
own obſervation on the conſtitution of nitrous air, in the BY | 
ſecond part of this work. A more particular account of” LEE | 
Mr. Bewley' s obſervation wall be given in the Appendix. | ; if 


perceived, 


124 O?fervations on 


perceived, to my very great ſurprize, that ir 
had no offenſive rk * 


Upon this 1 bock two other mice, one of 
them juſt killed, and the other ſoft and putrid, 
| and put them both into the ſame jar of nitrous 
1 | air, ſtanding in the uſual temperature of the 
| weather, in the months of July and Auguſt of 
{ 


be | 17723 and after twenty-five days, having ob- 
Y 3 | ferved that there was little or no change in the 
1 quantity of the air, I took the mice out; and, 
eximining them, found them both perfectly 2 
fweet, even when cut'through in ſeyeral places. 
That which had been pur into the air when juſt 
dead was quite firm; and the fleſh of the other, 
which had been putrid and ſoft, was' Kill ſoft, 
| but perfeatly ſweet, 


\ 
— todd. ac wt. at 5 & . 
* n — 1 0 
- 
- « 


In order to compare the antiſeptic power of 
this kind of air with that of fixed air, IT exa- 
mined a mouſe which I had incloſed in a phial 
full of fixed air, as pure as I could make it, 
and which I had corked very cloſe ; but upon 

opening this phial i in water about a month after, 
I perceived that a large quantity of putrid efflu- 
vium had been, generated for it ruſhed with vio- 
lence out of the phial; and the ſmell that came 
from it, the moment the cork was taken out, 
was inſufferably offenſive. Indeed Dr. Macbride 


ſays, that he could only reſtore very thin pieces 
of 


C 
1 93 * . of E 
— SE w - — — ** Y OY. Av 
N . . — - a er en — — 4 . — Pn 4 
MOT co — any <0 : * 


— 


Niurous Air. 125 


of putrid fleſh by means of fixed-air. Perhaps 
the antiſeptic power of theſe kinds of air may 


be in proportion to their acidity, 


If a little pains were taken with this ſubject, 
this remarkable antiſeptic power of nitrous air 
might poſſibly be applied to various uſes, per- 
haps to the preſervation of the more delicate 
birds, fiſhes, fruits, &c. mixing it in different 
proportions with common or fixed air. Of this 
property of nitrous air anatomiſts may perhaps 
avail themſelves, as animal ſubſtances may by 
this means be preſerved in their natural foft 
ſtate ; but how long it will anſwer for this pur- 
pole, . experience only can ſhew. 


I calcined lead and tin in the manner hereafter 
deſcribed in a quantity of nitrous air, but with 
very little ſenſible effect; which rather ſurprized 
me; as, from the reſult of the experiment with 
the i iron filings and brimſtone, I had expected 
a very great diminution of the nitrous air by 
this proceſs ; the mixture of iron filings and 
brimſtone, and the calcination of metals, having 
the ſame effe&t upon common air, both of them 
diminiſhing it in nearly the ſame proportion. 
But though I made the metals fume copiouſly 
in nitrous air, there might be no real calcination, 


the phlogiſton not being ſeparated, and the pro- 


per calcination prevented by there being no fired 
air, 


—_——— CY” OW 


r 
— — 


E ²˙ͤ 1 


. . | — * 0 . 
- = - A» >, <0 Ar 


t26 Obſervations on 
- which is neceifary to the formation of the 


Nitrous air is is protured ftom all the proper 
metals by ſpirit of nitre, except lead; and from 
all the ſemi-metals that I have tried, except 
zinc. For this purpoſe I have uſed biſmuth 
and nickel; with ſpirit of nitre only, and regu- 
lus of antimony and platina, with aqua regia. 


I got little or no air from lead by ſpirit of 

nitre, and have not yet made any experiments 
to aſcertain the nature of this ſolution, With 
Zinc I have taken a little pains. 


Four penny-weights and ſeventeen grains of 
inc diſſolved in ſpirit of nitre, to which as 
much water was added, yielded about twelve 
ounce meaſures of air, which had, in ſome de- 
gree, the properties of nitrous air, making a 
flight efferveſcence with common air, and di- 
mihiſhing it about as much as nitrous air, which 
had been itſelf diminiſhed one half by waſhing; 
in water. The ſmell of them both was alſo the 
fame ; ſo that I concluded it to be the ſame 
thing, that part of the nitrous air, which 1s 1m- 
dibed by water, being retained in this ſolution. 


In order to diſcover whether this-was the caſe, 
1 made the ſolution boil in a ſand-heat. Some 


ar 


Nitrous At | 127 


atr came from it in this ſtate, which ſeemed to 
be the fame thing, with nitrous air diminiſhed 
about one fixth, or one eighth, by waſhing in 
water. When the fluid part was evaporated; 
there remained a brown fixed ſubſtance; whick 
was obſerved by Mr, Hellot, who deſcribes it, 
Ac. Par. 1735, M. p. 35. A part of this E 
threw into a ſmall red-hot crucible z and cover- 
ing it immediately with a receiver, ſtanding in 
water, I obſerved that very denſe red fumes 
roſe from it, and filled the receiver, This 
redneſs continued about as long as that which 
is occaſioned by a mixture of nitrous and com- 
mon air; the air was alſo conſiderably dimi- 
niſhed within the receiver. This ſubſtance, 
therefore, muſt certainly have contained within 
it the very ſame thing, or principle, on which 
the peculiar properties of nitrous air depend. 


It is remarkable, however, that though the 
air within the receiver was diminiſhed about 
one fifth by this proceſs, it was itſelf as much 


affected with a mixture of nitrous air, as com- 


mon air is, and a candle burned in it very well. 
This may perhaps be attributed to ſome effect 
of the ſpirit of nitre, in the compoſition of that 
brown ſubſtance. 


Nitrous air, I find, will be e coridirably di- 
miniſhed in its bulk by ſtanding a long time 
— about as much as inflam mable air is 

dimi- 


— — 3 


- 
. 1 S% 1 * _ _ _ 2 — . mud — 
Y- ” * 
- c EET On — 
* 


GI 
— 
on oo ton OE 


128 Obſervations on 


diminiſhed in the ſame circumſtances. For 
this purpoſe I kept for ſome months a quart- 
bottle full of each of theſe kinds of air; but 

as different quantities of inflammable air vary 
very much in this reſpect, it is not improbable 
but that nitrous air may vary alſo. 


\ Soy From one trial that I made, I conclude that 
1 nitrous air may be kept in a bladder much 
| | better than moſt other kinds of air. The air 
„ to which I refer was kept about a fortnight in 
| a bladder, through which the peculiar ſmell of 
r | the nitrous air was very ſenſible. for ſeveral 
3 47 days. In a day or two the bladder became 
3% 1 | red, and was much contracted in its dimen- 
1 ſſons. The air within it had loſt very little 
of its peculiar property of diminiſhing com- 
mon air. 


7 I did not endeavour to aſcertain the exact 
| quantity of nitrous air produced from given 
quantities of all the metals which yield it ; 
but the few obſervations which I did make for 

this purpoſe I ſhall recite in this place : 
dwt. gr. | 2 . 
6 © of filver yielded 171 ounce meaſures, 


5 19 of quickſilver 4+ 
4 I 2+ of copper 145 
\ 2 0 of braſs N 
b 16 
x 5 of biſmuth 6 
© 12 of nickel 


SECTION 


Ar infected with the Fumes of Charcoal, 129 


"SECTION VII. 


07 Al infeted with the puMes of BURNING. 
CHARCOAL. 


Air infected with the Runte of burning 
charcoal is well known to be noxious ; and the 
Hotiourable Mr. Cavendiſh favoured me with 
an account of ſome experiments of his, in 
which a quantity of common air was reduced 
from 180 to 162 ounce meafures, by paſſing 
through a red-hot iron tube filled with the 
duſt of charcoal. This diminution he aſcribed 
to ſuch a deftruftion of common ait as Dr. 
Hales imagined to be the conſequence of burn- 
ing. Mr. Cavendiſh alſo obſerved, that there 
had been a generation of fixed air in this pro- 
cefs, but that it was abſorbed by ſope leys. 
This experiment [ alſo repeated, with a {malt 


variation of args and with * the 
fame reſult. 


Afterwinds, 1 endeiveured to eee by 
what appears to me to be an eafier and more 
certain method, in what manner ait is —— 
with the fumes of charcoal, viz. by ſuf 
bits of charcoal within glaſs veſſels, fil b to a2 
certain height with water, and ſtanding inverted 


172 | EM in 


169: . Obſervations on 

in another veſſel of water, while I threw the fo- 
cus of a burning mirror, or lens, upon them. 
In this manner I diminiſhed a given quantity 
of air one fifth, which is nearly in the ſame 
proportion with other diminutions of air. 


If, inſtead of pure water, I uſed /ime-water 
in this proceſs, it never failed to become turbid 
by the precipitation of the lime, which could 
only be occaſioned by fixed air, either diſcharged 
from the charcoal, or depoſited by the common 
air. At firſt I concluded that it came. from the. 
charcoal; but confidering that it is not probable. 
that fixed air, confined in any ſubſtance, can, 
bear ſo great a degree of heat as is neceſſary to 
make charcoal, without being wholly expelled ;, 
and that in other diminutions af common 
air, by phlogiſton only, there appears to be a. 


depoſition of fixed air, I have now no doubt 


but that, in this caſe alſo, it is Wired from 
the e Are 


This opinion is the more probable, from 
there being the ſame precipitation of lime, in 
this proceſs, with whatever degree of heat the 
charcoal had been made. If, however, the char- 
coal had not been made with a very conſiderable 


degree of heat, there never failed to be a perma- 


nent addition of inflammable air produced 
which agrees with what I obſerved before, that, 


in 


Air infected with the Fumes of Charcoal. 131 


in converting dry wood into charcoal, the great- 
eſt part 1s d into inflammable air. 


I have ſometimes found, that charcoal which 
was made with the moſt intenſe heat of a ſmith's 
fire, which vitrified part of a common crucible 
in which the charcoal was confined, and which 
had been continued above half an hour, did not 
diminiſh the air in which the focus of a burning 
mirror was thrown upon it; a quantity of in- 
flammable air equal to the diminution of the 
common air being generated in the proceſs : 
whereas, at other times, I have not perceived 
that there was any generation of inflammable 
air, but a fimple diminution of common air, 
when the charcoal had been made with a much 
leſs degree of heat. This ſubject deſerves to * 
farther inveſtigated. 


To make the preceding experiment with ſtill 
more accuracy, I repeated it in quickſilver; 
when I perceived that there was a ſmall increaſe 
of the quantity of air, probably from a genera- 
tion of inflammable air. Thus it ſtood without 
any alteration a whole night, and part of the 
following day; when lime-water, being admit- 
red to it, it preſently became turbid, and, after 
ſome time, the whole quantity of air, which 
was about four ounce meaſures; was diminiſhed 
one _ as before. In this cafe, I carefully 

K 2 weighed 


1 _ Obſervations on 


weighed the piece of charcoal, which was ex- 
actly two grains, and could not find that it 

vas ſenſibly diminiſhed in weight by the ope - 
ration. 


* w_ diminiſhed by the fumes of burning 


charcoal not only extinguiſhes flame, but is in 


the higheſt degree noxious to animals ; it makes 
no efferveſcence with nitrous air, and is incapa- 
ble of being diminiſhed any farther by the fumes 
of more charcoal, by a mixture of iron filings 
and brimſtone, or by any other cauſe of the di- 
minution of air that F am acquainted with. 


This obſervation, which reſpects all other 
Kinds of diminiſhed air, proves that Dr. Hales 


was miſtaken in his notion of the abſorption of 


air in thoſe circumſtances in which he obſerved 
it. For he ſuppoſed that the remainder was, in 
all caſes, of the ſame nature with that which 
had been abſorbed, and that the operation of the 


ſame cauſe would not have failed to produce a 


farther diminution; whereas all my obſervations 
ſhew that air, which has once been fully 
diminiſhed by any cauſe whatever,. is not only 
incapable of any farther diminution, either from 
the ſame or from any other caule, but that it 
has likewiſe acquired new properties, moſt re- 
markably different from thoſe which it had be- 


es and that they are, in a great n. 
me 


* 
: 


Air affefted by the Calcination of Metals. 133 


Came in all the caſes. Theſe circumſtances give 
reaſon to ſuſpect, that the cauſe of diminution 
is, in reality, the ſame in all the caſes. What 


this cauſe is, may, perhaps, appear in the next 
courſe of obſervations. 


S E C T IO N 


Of the effeft of the caLeinaTion of METALS, 
and of the ExxLuvia of PainT made with 
WulrE-LzAD and Oil, on Al. 


$ 


Having been led to ſuſpect, from the expe- 
riments which I had made with charcoal, that 
the diminution of air in that caſe, and perhaps 
in other caſes alſo, ,was, in ſome way or other 
the conſequence of its having more than its 
uſual quantity of phlogiſton, it occurred to 
me, that the calcination of metals, which are 
generally ſuppoſed to conſiſt of nothing but a 1 
metallic earth united to phlogiſton, would tend I 1 
to aſcertain the fact, and be a kind of experi- 
mentum crucis in the caſe, 


9 — ——— way: * 
ww cr, www. 


Accordingly, I ſuſpended pieces of lead and 
tin in given quantities of air, in the ſame man- 4 
ner as I had before treated the charcoal; and 
throwing the focus of a burning mirror or 
lens upon them, ſo as to make them fume 

K 3 co- 


* 


8 


* 


4” æKÿ„ͤb 88. — 3 is 


* 
. ere 


© % 


rr 
9 899 INN 
* 


4 — 
* en * ——— — 4 | 
. 7 — ů — . 
- 


I bs od 


o 7 
WE 2 f s | = * * 
F IEC ˙ tb!̃··ĩ·¶· 8 
50 g N 4 " 
' R Y 
, | 


1344 Obſervations on 


copiouſly. I preſently perceived a diminu- 


tion of the air. In the, firſt trial that I made, 


IL. reduced four ounce meaſures of air to three, 
which is the greateſt diminution of common 


air that I had ever obſerved before, and which 
I account for, by ſuppoſing that, in other caſes, 
there was not only a cauſe. of diminution, but 
cauſes, of addition alſo, either of fixed or in- 
flammable air, or ſome other permanently elaſ- 
tic matter, but that the effect of the calcina- 


tion of metals being ſimply the eſcape of phlo- 
giſton, the cauſe of A —— was alone and 


uncontrouled. 


The air, which 11 had thus diminiſhed by 

calcination of lead, I transferred i into another 

clean Phial, but found that the calcination of 
more lead in it. (or at leaſt the attempt to make 


* farther calcination) had no farther effect up- 


on it. This air alſo, like that which had been 
infected with the fumes of charcoal, was in the 


| higheſt degree noxious, made no efferveſcence 
with nitrous air, was no farther diminiſhed by 


the mixture of iron filings and brimſtone, and 
was not only rendered innoxious, but alſo re- 
covered, in a great meaſure, the other proper- 
lies of common air, by waſhing in water. 


It might be ſuſpected that the noxious qua- 


lity of air in which lead was calcined, might 
be 


Air affefted by the Catcination of Metals. 135 


be owing” to ſome fumes peculiar to that me- 
tal; but I found no ſenſible difference between 
the properties of this air, and thats in which tin 
was talcined. 


| The Water over which metals are e beine 
acquires a yellowiſh tinge, and an exceedingly 
pungent ſmell and taſte, pretty much (as near 
as I can. recollect, for I did not compare them 
together) like that over which brimſtone has 


been frequently burned. Alfo a tin and whi- 


tiſh pellicle covered both the ſurface of the 
water, and likewiſe the ſides of the phial in 
which the calcination was made; inſomuch 
that, without frequently agitating the water, it 
grew ſo opaque by this conſtantly accumulating 
incruſtation, that the ſun-beams could not be 


tranſmitted through it in a quantity r to 


ane the ealeination. n 
I imagined, Wee that, even whe this 


air was transferred into a clean phial, the me- 


tals were not ſo eaſily melted or calcined as they 
were in freſh air; fot the air being once fully 
ſaturated with phlogiſton, may not ſo readily 
admit any more, though it be only to tranſmit 


it to the water. I alſo ſuſpected that metals 


were not eaſily melted or calcined in inflam- 
mable, fixed, or nitrous air, or any kind of 
| K 4 dimi- 


136 | Obſervations on 


-diminiſhed air.* None of theſe kinds of air 
ſuffered any change by this operation; nor was 
there any precipitation of lime, when charcoal 
was heated in any of theſe kinds of air ſtand- 
ing in lime- water. This furniſhes another, and 
I think a pretty deciſive proof, that, in the 
precipitation of lime by charcoal, the fixed air 
does not come from the charcoal, but from 
the common air. Otherwiſe it is hard to aſſign 
a reaſon, why the ſame degree of heat (or at 
leaſt a much greater) ſhould not expel the fixed 
air from this ſubſtance, though ſurrounded by 
theſe different kinds of air, and why the fixed 
air might not be tranſmitted 2 8 them bay 
the lime · water. 


8 Query... May not water impregnated with 
| phlogiſton from calcined metals, or by any 
other method, be of ſome uſe in medicine ? 
The effect of this impregnation is exceedingly 
remarkable; but the principle with which it is 
impregnated is volatile, and intirely eſcapes in 
a day or two, if the ſurface of the water be 
expoſed to the common atmoſphere. 


N conclude from the experiments of M. Lavoiſier, 
which were made with a much better burning lens than 1 
had an opportunity of making uſe of, that there was no 
real calcination of the metals, though they were made to 

Fume in inflammable or nitrous air; becauſe he was not 
able to produce more than a flight degree of calcination 
in any 8 quantity of common air. 


It 


Air affetted by the Calcination of Metals, 137 


It ſhould ſeem: that phlogiſton is retained 
more obſtinately by charcoal than it is by lead 
or tin; for when any given quantity of air is 
fully ſaturated with phlogiſton from charcoal, 
no heat that I have yet applied has been able 
to produce any more effect upon it; whereas, 
in the ſame circumſtances, lead and tin may 
ſtill be calcined, at leaſt be made to emit a co- 
pious fume, in which ſome part of the phlo- 
giſton may be ſet looſe. The air indeed, can 
take no more ; but the water receives it, and 
the ſides of the phjal alſo- receive an addition 
of incruſtation. This is a white powdery ſub- 
ſtance, and well deſerves to be examined. I ſhall 
endeavour to do it at my leiſure. 


Lime-water never became turbid by the cal- 
cination of metals over it, the calx immediately 
ſeizing the precipitated fixed air, in preference 
to the lime in the water ; but the colour, ſmell, 
and taſte of the water was always changed 
and the ſurface of it became covered with a 
yellow pellicle, as before. | 


Wöben this proceſs was made in quickſilver, 
the air was diminiſhed only one fifth ; and upon 
water being admitted to it, no more was ab- 
ſorbed ; which is an effect ſimilar to that of a 
mixture of nitrous and common air, which was 
mentioned before. | 


The 


138 ) Obſervations on 


T be preceding experiments on the calcina- 
tion of metals ſuggeſted to me à method of 
explaining the cauſe of the miſchief which is 
known to ariſe from freſh paint, made with 
whitezlead (which I * * ue 180 
boi _ and _ 


10 —— my impicheti, 1 firſt hat a ſmall 
15 full of this kind of paint, and afterwards 
(which anſwered much better, by expoſing a 
greater ſurface of the paint) I daubed ſeveral 
Pieces of paper with it, and put them under a 

receiver, and obſerved, that in about twenty- 
four hours, the arr was diminiſhed between one 
fifth and one fourth, for I did not meaſure it 
very exactly. This air alſo was, as I expected 
to find, in the higheſt degree noxioüs; it did 
not blferveſce with nitrous air, it was ho farther 
ditminifhed' by a" mitture of iron filings and 
britnſtone, and was made wholeſome by iu 
tion in water "deptived of all air. Hi 

I think it appears · pretty evident; Gram the 
preceding experiments on the calcination of me- 
tals that air is, ſome way or other, "diminiſhed 
in conſequence 'of being highly charged With 
phlogiſton ; and that agitation in water reſtores 
it, by imbibing a _gfeat part of the Phlogiſie 
matter. | 


That 


Air affected by the Calcination of Metals. 139 


That water has a conſiderable affinity with 
phlogiſton, is evident from the ſtrong impreg- 
nation which it receives from it. May not 
plants alſo reſtore air diminithed by putrefaction 
by abſorbing part of the phlogiſton with which 
it is loaded ? The greater part of a dry plant, 
as well as of a dry animal ſubſtance, conſiſts of 
inflammable air, or ſomething that is capable 
of being converted into inflemmable air ; and it 
ſeems to be as probable that this phlogiſtic mat- 
ter may have been imbibed by the roots and 
leaves of plants, and afterwards incorporated 
into their ſubſtance, as that it is altogether pro- 
duced by the power of vegetation. ' May not 
this phlogiſtic matter be even the moſt eſſential 
part of the food and ſupport of 88 * 
and animal bodies? 


In the experiments with metals, a Gninu⸗ 
tion of air ſeems to be the conſequence of no- — 
thing but a ſaturation with phlogiſton; and in 
all the other caſes of the diminution & air, I 
do not fee but that it may be effected by the 
ſame means. When a vegetable or animil ſub- 
ſtance is diſſolved by putrefaction, the eſcape of 
the phlogiſtic matter (which, together with all its 
other conſtituent parts, is then let looſe from it) 
may be the circumſtance that produces the dimi- 
nution of the air in which it putrefies, It is 
highly improbable that what remains after an 

| ani» 


140 Obſervations on 


animal body has been thoroughly. diſſolved by 
putrefaction, ſhould yield ſo great a quantity 
of inflammable air, as the dried animal ſub- 
ſtance would have done. Of this I have not 
made an actual trial, though I have often 
thought of doing it, and ſtill intend to do 
it; but I think chere can be no doubt of the 
reſult. 


Again, iron, by its fermentation with brim- 
ſtone and water, is evidently reduced to a calx, 
ſo that phlogiſton muſt have eſcaped- from it. 
Phlogiſton alſo muſt evidently be ſet looſe by 
the ignition of charcoal, and is not improbably 
the matter which flies off from paint, compoſed 
of white-lead and oil. Laſtly, fince ſpirit of 
nitre is known to have a very remarkable affini- 
ty with phlogiſton, it is far from being impro- 
-bable that nitrous air may alſo produce the 
_ ſame effect by the ſame means, 


; T o this hypothefis it may be objected, that, 

if diminiſhed air be air ſaturated with phlo- 
giſton, it ought to be inflammable. But this 
by no means follows; ſince its inflammability 
may depend upon ſome particular mode of com- 
bination, or degree of affinity, with which we 
are not acquainted, Beſides, inflammable air 
ſeems to conſiſt of ſome other principle, or to 
have ſome other conftituent part, beſides phlo- 
| giſton 


Air affected by the Calcination of Metals. 141 


giſton and common air, as is probable from 
that remarkable depoſit, which, as I have ob- 


ſerved, is made by inflammable air, both from 


iron and zinc. 


? 


It is not improbable, however, but that a. 


greater degree of heat may inflame that air 
which extinguiſhes a common candle, if it 
could be conveniently applied. Air that is in- 


flammable, I obſerve, extinguiſhes red-hot 


wood; and indeed inflammable ſubſtances can 
only be thoſe which, in a certain degree of 
heat, have a leſs affinity with the phlogiſton 
they contain, than the air, or ſome other con- 
tiguous ſubſtance, has with it; fo that the 
phlogiſton only quits one ſubſtance, with which 
it was before combined, and enters another, 
with which it may be combined in a very dif- 
ferent manner. This ſubſtance, however, whe- 
ther it be air or any thing elſe, being now 
fully ſaturated with phlogiſton, and not being, 
able to take any more, in the ſame circum- 
ſtances, muſt neceſſarily extinguiſh fire, and 
put a ſtop to the ignition of all other bodies, 
that is, to the farther eſcape of phlogiſton from 
them. 


That plants DE noxious air, by imbibing 
the phlogiſton with which it is loaded, is very” 


: to the conjectures of Dr. Franklin, 
made 


4 * — * 
ain a 
— * r 1 


— , 1 _ * 
. , wy D - 
E 


wet 


7 — 


* - 
1 a; \ 
2 es” of hes 


_} 


! 


ww. 

„ 

* 

] 

xk 

＋ 

ö I 
l | f 
"1 1 


142 Objervations on 


made many years ago, and expreſſed in the fol 
lowing extract from the laſt edition of his Let- 


ters, p. 346. 


I have been inclined to think that the fluid 

a He as well as the fluid air, is attracted by 
« plants in their growth; and becomes con- 

F « ſolidated with the other materials of which 
. 4 < they are formed, and makes a great part of 
1 « their ſubſtance; that, when they come to 
4 | « be digeſted, and to ſuffer in the veſſels a 
« kind of fermentation, part of the fire, as 

| « well as part of the air, recovers. its fluid 
| tc active ſtate again, and diffuſes itſelf in the 
'& body, digeſting. and ſeparating it; that the 
8 | « fire fo re-produced, by digeſtion and ſepara- 
287 | tion, continually leaving the body, its place 
E f « is ſupplied by freſh quantities, ariſing from 
* * the continual ſeparation; that whatever 
& quickens the motion of the fluids in an 

te animal, quickens the ſeparation, and re- pro- 

| &« duces more of the fire, as exerciſe ; that all 
, & the fire emitted by wood, and other com- 
| e buftibles, when burning, exiſted in them be- 
| fore in a ſolid ſtate, being only diſcovered 
WE « when ſeparating; that ſome foſſils, as ſul- 
_—}. * phur, ſea-coal, &c. contain a great deal of 
a “. ſolid fire; and that, in ſhort,- what eſcapes 

3 and is diſſipated i in the burning of bodies, 


e beſides water and earth, is generally the 
F 8 


Marine acid Air. / 143 


« air and fire, that before made parts. yo the 


* ſolid.” - 


SECTION IX. 
Of Mazins Acm Air, 


Being very much ſtruck with the reſult of 
an experiment of the Hon. Mr. Cavendiſh, re- 
lated Phil. Tranſ. Vol. LVI. p. 157, by which, 
though, he lays, he was not able to get any 
inflammable air from copper, by means of ſpi- 
rit of lalt, he got a much more remarkable 
kind of air, viz. one that loſt its elaſticity by 
coming into contact with water, I was exceed- 
ingly defirous of making myſelf acquainted 
with it. On this account, I began with mak- 
ing the experiment in quickſilver, which I 
never failed to do in any caſe in which I ſuſ- 
pected that air might either be abſorbed by 
water, or be in any other manner affected by 
it; and by this means I preſently got a much 
more diſtinct idea of the nature and effects of 
this curious ſolution. 


Having put ſome copper filings into a ſmall 
Phial, with a quantity of ſpirit of ſalt; and 


making the air (which was generated in great 


plenty, on the application of heat) aſcend into 
| a tall 


i ** 
* by © 9 
as i . Cf * - 
I 4 . = 
* * — * 
8 +a 4 an 
6 k 1 3 — "»W 
— I 
* 


I 
A as es av F# 


— — 


* 
= 


* 2 ＋ 
— a» - 
_ 22 


* 


— 


_C 


9 ny _ * 
r 


— 
— 


. — ** Py = 
+ Soy * 4.1 


a. 


\ * s : 


a 
Ad. 


144. Obſervations on 


a tall glaſs veſſel full of quiekſilver, and ſtand- 


ing in quickfilver, the whole produce conti- 
nued a conſiderable time without any change 
of dimenſions. I then introduced a ſmall 
quantity of water to it; when about three 
fourths of it (the whole being about four 
ounce meaſures) preſently, but gradually, dif- 
appeared, the quickſilver riſing in the veſſel. 
I then introduced a conſiderable quantity of 
water; but there was no farther diminution of 
the air, and the remainder I found to be in- 


flammable. 


Having frequently continued this proceſs a 
long time after the admiſſion of the 'water, I 
was much amuſed with obſerving the large bub- 
bles of the newly generated air, which came 
through the quickſilver, the ſudden diminution 
of them when they came to the water, and the 
very ſmall bubbles which went through the wa- 
ter. They made, however, a continual, though 


flow, increaſe of inflammable air, 


Fixed air, being admitted to the whole pro- 
duce of this air from copper, had no ſenfible 
effect upon it. Upon the admiſſion of water, 
a great part of the mixture preſently diſap- 
peared; another part, which I ſuppoſe to have 
been the fixed air, was abſorbed ſlowly; and 
in this particular caſe the very ſmall permanent 
TM „ reſi- 


j 


Marine acid Air. + $44 


reſiduum did nor take fire; but it 1s very poſſi- 
ble that it might have done fo, if the quantity 
had been greater. 


The ſolution of lead in the marine acid is at- 
tended with the very ſame phenomena as the 
ſolution of copper in the ſame acid; about 
three fourths of the generated air diſappearing 


on the admiſſion of water; and the remainder 
being inflammable. 


The ſolutions of iron, tin, and zinc, in the 
marine acid, were all attended with the ſame 
phenomena as the ſolutions of copper and 
lead, but in a leſs degree; for in iron one 
eighth, in tin one ſixth, and in zinc one tenth 
of the generated air diſappeared on the admiſſion 
with water. The remainder of the air from 
Iron, in this caſe, burned with a green, or very; 
light blue flame. 


I had always thought it ſomething extraor- 
dinary that a ſpecies of air ſhould Joſe its elaſti- 
city by the mere contact of any thing, and from 
the firſt ſuſpected that it muſt have been im- 
bibed by the water that was admitted to it; but 
ſo very great a quantity of this air diſappears 
ed upon the admiffion of a very ſmall quan- 


tity of water, that at firſt I could not help con- 


cluding that appearances favoured the former 
L 2 


146 Obſervations on 


hypotheſis. I found, however, that when ! 
admitted a much ſmaller quantity of water, 
confined in a narrow glaſs tube, a- part only of 
the air diſappeared, and that very ſlowly, and 
that more of it vaniſhed. upon the admiſſion of 
more water. This obſervation put it beyond 
a doubt, that this air was properly imbibed 
by the water, which, being once fully ſatu- 
rated with it, was not capable of receiving any 
more. | 


The water thus impregnated taſted very acid, 
even when it was much diluted with other wa- 
ter, through which the tube containing it was 
drawn. It even diſſolved iron very faſt, and 
generated inflammable air. This laſt obſerva- 
tion, together with another which immediately 
follows, led me to the diſcovery of the true na- 
ture of this remarkable kind of air. 


Happening, at one time, to. uſe a good deal 
of copper and a ſmall quantity of fpirit of 
falt, in the generation of this kind of air, I 
was ſurprized to find that air was produced 
long after, I could not but think that the acid 
muſt have been ſaturated with the metal; and 
I alſo found that the proportion of inflamma- 
ble air to that which was abſorbed by the water 
continually ne till, inſtead of being 

one 


_ © ey oe b 
© © * 


Marine acid Ar. 147 


one fourth of the whole, as I had firſt obſerved, 
it was not ſv much as one twentieth. Upon 
this, I concluded that this ſubtle air did not 
ariſe from the copper, but from the ſpirit of 
falt; and preſently making the experiment with 
the acid only, without any copper, or metal of "= 
any kind, this air was immediately produced i 
in as great plenty as before; ſo that this re- : 
markable kind of air is, in fact, nothing more 
than the vapour, or fumes of ſpirit of falt, | il 
which appear to be of ſuch a nature, that they | iy 
are not liable to be condenſed by cold, like the A 
vapour of water, and other fluids, and there- 
fore may be very properly called an acid air, 
or more reſtrictively, the marine acid air. 


This elaſtic acid vapour, or acid air, extin- 
guiſhes flame, and is much heavier than com- 
mon air; but how much heavier, will not be 
eaſy to aſcertain, A cylindrical glaſs veſſel, = 
about three fourths of an inch in diameter, 
and four inches deep, being filled with it, and 
turned upſide down, a lighted candle may be 
let down into it more than twenty times before 
it will burn at the bottom. It is pleaſing to 
obſerve the colour of the flame in this experi- 
ment; for both before the candle goes out, and 
alſo when it 1s firſt lighted again, it burns with 
a beautiful green, or rather light-blue flame, 
ſuch as is ſeen when common ſalt is thrown in- 
to the fire, 2>W0'Y When 


* 8 


21 


N 
= 
y = 
\ * Y 
_—_ 
7 * 4 #3 4 
4 q 
| 
: 
þ P 
4 
3 i 
- 
4 
s e 
4 "2% 1 
m_ 
| 
* 
* 
U q 
. p I's k 
9 * 
vs — +4 
Ko 
* 2, 
o hy 
<= 
4 
= - 
-. 
o 
= G | 
D * 
* 
1 
* 4 4 
F 4 
. = 
24 1 | 


148 Obſervations on 


When this air is all expelled from any quan- 
tity of ſpirit of ſalt, which is eaſily perceived 
by the ſubſequent vapour being condenſed by 
cold, the remainder is a very weak acid, barely 
capable of diſſolving iron, 


Being now in the poſſeſſion of a new ſubject 
of experiments, viz. an elaſtic acid vapour, in 
the form of a permanent air, eaſily procured, 
and effectually confined by glaſs and quickſil- 
ver, with which it did not ſeem to have any. 
affinity; I immediately began to introduce a 
variety of ſubſtances to it, in order to aſcer- 
tain 1ts peculiar properties and affinities, , and 
alſo the properties of thoſe other bodies with 
w_ tO it. 


8 with water, which, from preced- 
- ing obſervations, I knew would imbibe it, and 
become imptegnated with it ; I found that 2 
grains of rain-water abſorbed three ounce mea- 
ſures of this air, after which it was increaſed 
one third in its bulk, and weighed twice as 
much as before; ſo that thihs concentrated va- 
pour ſeems to be twice as heavy as rain-water : 
Water impregnated with it makes the ſtrongeſt 
ſpirit of ſalt that I have ſeen, diſſolving iron 
with the moſt rapidity, Conſequently, two 
thirds of the beſt ſpirit of ſalt is * more 
than mere phlegm or water. 


Irog 


Marine acid Arr. 149 


Iron filings, being admitted to this air, were 
diſſolved by it pretty faſt, half of the air diſap- 
pearing, and the other half becoming inflamma- 
ble air, nor abſorbed by water. Putting chalk 
to it, fixed air was produced, 


I had not introduced many ſubſtances to this 
air, before I diſcovered that it had an affinity 
with phlogiſton, ſo that it would deprive other 
ſubſtances of it, and form with it ſuch an 
union as conſtitutes inflammable air z which 
ſeems to ſhew, that inflammable air univerſally 
conſiſts of the union of ſome acid vapour with 
phlogiſton, 


Inflammable air was produced, when to this 
acid air I put ſpirit of wine, oil of olives, oil 
of turpentine, charcoal, phoſphorus, bees-wax, 
and even ſulphur. This laſt obſervation, I 
own, ſurprized me; for, the marine acid being 
reckoned the weakeſt of the three mineral 
acids, I did nat think that it had been capa- 
ble of diſlodging the oil of vitriol from this 
ſubſtance ; but I found that it had the very 
ſame effect both upon alum and nitre ; the vi- 
triolig acid in the former caſe, and the nitrous 


in the latter, giving place to the ſtronger va- 


pour of ſpirit of ſalt. 


— 


L 3 The 


ns 


Pd 


N 9 
* Pr In — —— ——. p 


—_— 0 * 4 
#20 FL S.< -, 


* 
2 —— 225 — — — — a— — — — 
, b * 1 
„ * 8 


 % - 
te. —— # KY 
4 * ! F 2" TY "F 
3 i nt 
+. o OP IT © - 
U 


x 7 8 » 
* 1 „ 


150  _Obſervations'01 


The ruſt of iron, and the precipitate of ni- 
trous air made from copper, alſo imbibed this 
air very faſt, and the little that remained of it 
was inflammable air; which proves, that theſe 
calces.contain phlogiſton. It ſeems alſo to be 
pretty evident, from this experiment, that the 
precipitate above mentioned is a real calx of 
the metal, by the ſolution of which the nitrous 


i mama 


As ſome remkable circumſtances attend the 
abſorption of this acid air, by the ſubſtances 
nne, I ſhall briefly mention them. 


Spirit of wine abſorbs this air as oily © as 
water itfelf, and is increaſed in bulk by that 
means. Alſo, when it is ſaturated, it diſſolves 
iron with as much rapidity, and ſtill continues 


inflammable. 


Oil of olives abſorbs this air very ſlowly, 
and at the ſame time, it turns almoſt black, and 
becomes glutinous. It is alſo leſs miſcible with 
water, and acquires a very difagreeable ſmell, 
By continuing upon the ſurface of the water, it 
became white, and its offenſive ſmell went off 
in a few days. 


Oil of turpentine abſorbed this air very faſt, 


turning brown, and almoſt black. No inflam- 
mable 


Marine acid Air. | 15 


mable air was formed, till I raiſed more of the 
acid air than the oil was able to abſorb, and let 
it ſtand a conſiderable time; and ſtill the air 
was but weakly inflammable. The ſame was 
the caſe with the oil of olives, in the laſt men- 
tioned experiment; and it ſeems to be pro- 
bable, that, the longer this acid air had con- 
tinued in contact with the oil, the more ꝓhlo- 
giſton it would have extracted from it. It is 
not wholly improbable, but that, in the inter- 
mediate ſtate, before it becomes inflammable 
air, it may be. —_ of the nature-of amnmon 
air. . 


Bees-· wax abſorbed this air very ſlowly. 
About the bigneſs of a hazel-nut of the wax 
being put to three ounce meaſures of the acid 
air, the air was diminiſhed one half in two 
days, and, upon the admiſſion of water, half 
of the remainder alſo diſappeared. Tink air was 
Wee, inflanmable. 


Charcoal abſorbed this air very faſt. About 
one fourth of it was rendered immiſcible in 
water, and was but weakly inflammable. 

A ſmall bit of phoſphorus, perhaps about 
half a grain, ſmoked, and gave light in the acid 
air, juſt as it would have done in common 
air confined. It was not ſenſibly waſted after- 

1 con- 


152 Obſervations on 


continuing about twelve hours in that ſtate, 
and the bulk of the air was very little dimi- 
niſhed. Water being admitted to it abſorbed it 
as before, except about one fifth of the whole. 
It was but r inflammable. Rv 9 


*-Puning ſeveral pieces of 8 to this air, 
it was abſorbed but ſlowly. In about twenty- 
four hours about one fifth of the quantity had 
diſappeared; and water being admitted to the 
remainder, very little more was abſorbed. The 
remainder was inflammable, and burned with 
a blue flame. 


Notwithſtanding the affinity which this acid 
air appears to have with phlogiſton, it is not 
capable of depriving all bodies of it. I found 
that dry wood, cruſts of bread, and raw fle ſh, 
very readily imbibed this air, but did not part 
with any of their phlogiſton to it. All theſe 
ſubſtances turned very brown, after they had 
been ſome time expoſed to this air, and taſted 
very ſtrongly of the acid when they were taken 
out; but the fleſh, when waſhed in water, be- 
came very white, and the fibres eaſily ſeparated 
from one another, even more than they would 

have done if it had been boiled or roaſted*, 


* I will be ſeen, in the ſecond part of this work, that, 
in ſome of theſe proceſſes, I had afterwards more ſucceſs, 


When 


Marine acid Air. / 133 

When I put a piece of ſallpetre to that is 
it was preſently ſurrounded with a white fume, 
which ſoon filled the whole veſſel, exactly like 
the fume which burſts from the bubbles of 
nitrous air, when it is generated by a vigorous 
fermentation, and ſuch as is ſeen when nitrous 
air is mixed with this acid air. In about a 
minute, the whole quantity of air was abſorbed, 
except a very little, which might be the com- 
mon air that had lodged upon the ſurface of 
the ſpirit of ſalt within the Phial. | 


A piece of alum expoſed to this air turned 


yellow, abſorbed it as faſt as the ſaltpetre had 

done, and was reduced by it to'the form of a 

powder. Common ſalt, as might be expected, 
had no effect whatever on this marine acid air, 


T had alſo imagined, that if air diminiſhed 
by the proceſſes above-mentioned was affected 
in this manner, in conſequence of its being 


ſaturated with phlogiſton, a mixture of this 


acid air might imbibe that phlogiſton, and 
render it wholeſome again; but I put about 
one fourth of this air to a quantity of air in 
which metals had been calcined, without 
making any ſenſible alteration in it. I do not, 
however, infer from this, that air is not dimi- 
niſhed by means of phlogiſton, fince the com- 
mon air, like ſome other ſubſtances, may hold 
the 


22 woo. 


m — ——— — —Q—Q8— 8 5 DS 


i 
* 


354 Miſcellaneous Obſervations 


che phlogiſton too faſt, to be deprived of it by 
this acid air. 


1 thall conclude my 1 0 of theſe experi- 


- 


ments with obſerving, that the electric ſpark i is 


viſible in acid air, exactly as it is in common air; 
and though I kept making this ſpark a con- 
ſiderable time in a quantity of it, I did not 
perceive that any. ſenſible alteration was made 
in it. A little inflammable air was produced, 
but not more than might have come from the 
two iron nails which I made uſe of in taking 


the ſparks. 


SECTION * 


. 
x 


MrscELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS. 


1. As many of the preceding obſervations 
relate to the vinous and putrefactive fermentati- 
ons, I had the curioſity to endeavour to aſcer- 


tain in what manner the air would be affected 


by the acetous fermentation. For this purpoſe 
I incloſed a phial full of ſmall beer in a jar 


ſtanding in water; and obſerved that, during 


the firſt two or three days, there was an increaſe 
of the air in the jar, but from that time it gra- 
dually decreaſed, till at length there appeared 
to be a diminution of about one tenth of the 
whole quantity. 
| During 


Mi Nee Obſervations. 135 


During this time the whole ſurface of it was 
gradually covered with a ſcum, beautifully cor- 
rugated. After this there was an increaſe of 
the air till there was more than the original 
quantity; but this muſt have been fixed air, 
not incorporated with the reſt of the maſs; for, 
withdrawing the beer, which I found to be ſour, 
after it had ftood 18 or 20 days under the jar, 
and paſſing the air ſeveral times through cold 
water, the original quantity was diminiſhed 
about one ninth. In the remainder a candle 
would not burn, and a mouſe would — died 
preſently. 


* 


The ſmell of this air was exceedingly pun- 
gent, but different from that of the putrid efflu- 
vium. A mouſe lived perfectly well in this air, 
thus affected wich the acetous fermentation z 
after it had ſtood ſeveral days mixed with er 
times the quantity of fixed air. 2M 


2. All the kinds'of Faſticions air on which. I 
have yet made the experiment are highly noxi- 
ous, except that which is extracted from ſalt- 
petre, or alum; but in this even a candle burned 

juſt as in common air*, In one quantity which 


I got 


* Experiments, of which an account will be given in 
the ſecond part of this work, make it probable, that 


though a candle burned even more than well in this air, an 
animal 


16;  - Miſcellanzous'' Obſervations 


I got from ſaltpetre a candle not only burned, 
-but the flame was increaſed, and ſomething was 
heard like a hiſſing, ſimilar to the decrepitation 

of nitre in an open fire. This experiment was 
made when the air was freſh made, and while 
it probably contained ſome particles of nitre, 
which would have been depoſited afterwards. 
The air was extracted from theſe ſubſtances 
by heating them in a gun-barrel, which was 
much corroded and fogn ſpoiled by the experi- 
ment. What effect this circumſtance may have 
had upon the air I haye not conſidered. 


November 6, 1772, I had the curioſity to 
examine the ſtate of a quantity of this air 
which had been extracted from faltpetre above 
a year, and which at firſt was perfectly whole- 
ſome ; when, to my very great ſurprize, I found 
that it was become, in the higheſt degree, 
noxious, It made no efferveſcence with nitrous 
air, and a mouſe died the moment it was put 
into it. I had not, hoyever, waſhed it in rain- 
water quite ten minutes (and perhaps leſs time 
would have been ſufficient) when I found, upon 
trial, that it was reſtored to its former perfectly 
wholeſome ſtate, It efferveſced with pjtrous air 
as much as the beſt common air ever does, and 


| animal would not have lived in it. At the time of this 
firſt publication, however, I had no idea of this being 
poſſible in nature. 8 4 
b even 


Miſeellaneois Obſervations © 155 


even a candle burned in it very well, which I had 

never before obſerved of any kind af noxious - 
air meliorated by agitation in water. This 
ſeries of facts, relating to air extracted from 
nitre, appear to me to be very extraordinary 
and important, and, in able hands, may lead 
to conſiderable diſcoveries. 


3. There are many ſubſtances which impreg- 
nate common air in a very remarkable manner, 
but without making it noxious to animals. A- 
mong other things I tried volatile alkaline ſalts, 
and camphor; the latter of which I melted with 
a burning-glaſs, in air incloſed in a phial. The 
mouſe, which was put into this air, ſneezed and 
coughed very much, eſpecially after it was 
taken out; but it preſently recovered, and did 
not appear to have been ſenſibly injured, 


4. Having made ſeveral experiments with a 
mixture of iron filings and brimſtone, kneaded | 
to a paſte with water, I had the curioſity to try 
what would be the effect of ſubſtituting braſs 
duſt in the place of the iron filings. The reſult 
was, that when this mixture had ſtood about 
three weeks, in a given quantity of air, it had 
turned black, but was not increaſed in bulk. 
The air allo was neither ſenſibly increaſed nor 
decreaſed, but the nature of it was changed; 
for it extinguiſhed flame, it would have 

Filled 


* 
— — 


- 


158 Mi ;ſcellaneous Obſervations 


killed a mouſe preſently, and was not re- 
ſtored by fixed air, which had been mixed 
with i it ſeveral days. 1 


5. I have frequently W my having, 
at one time, expoſed equal quantities of diffe- 
rent kinds of air in jars ſtanding in boiled water. 
Common air in this experiment was diminiſhed 
four ſevenths, and the remainder extinguiſhed 
flame. 'This experiment demonſtrates that water 
does not abſorb air equally, but that it decom- 


poſes it, taking one part, and leaving the reſt. 


To be quite ſure of this fact, I agitated a 
quantity of common air in boiled water, and 
when I had reduced it from eleven ounce mea- 
ſures to ſeven, I found that it extinguiſhed a 
candle; but a mouſe lived in it very well. At 
another time a candle barely went out when the 
air was diminiſhed one third, and at other times 
J have found this effect take place at other "Ry 
different degrees of diminution. . | 
This difference I attribute to the differences 
in the ſtate of the water with reſpect to the air 


_contained in it; for ſometimes it had ſtood 


longer than at other times before I made uſe of 
it. I alfo uſed diſtilled-water, rain-water, and 
water out of which the air had been pumped, 
promiſcuouſly with rain water. I even doubt, 
not but that, in a certain ſtate of the water, 

there 


— —— 


(tr; \ 
» * 


— 


n 4a ————_— —— 


Miſcellaneous Obſervations 139 


there might be no ſenſible difference in the bulk 


of the agitated air, and yet at the end of the 
proceſs it would extinguiſh a candle, air being 
ſupplied trom the water in the place of that 
part of the common air which had been ab- 
ſorbed. | 


It is certainly a little extraordinary that the 
very fame proceſs ſhould ſo far mend putrid 
air, as to reduce it to the ſtandard of air in 
which candles have burned out; and yet that it 
ſhould ſo far injure common and wholeſome air 
as to reduce it to about the ſame ſtandard : but 
ſo the fact certainly is. If air extinguiſh flame 
in conſequence of its being previouſly ſaturated 
with phlogiſton, it muſt, in this caſe, have been 
transferred from the water to the air, and it 


is by no means inconſiſtent with this hypotheſis 


to ſuppoſe, that, if the air be over ſaturated 
with phlogiſton, the water will imbibe it, till it 
be reduced to the ſame proportion that agitation 
in water would have communicated to it. 


To a quantity of common air, thus dimi- 
niſhed by agitation in water, till it extinguiſhed 
a candle, I put a plant, but it did not fo far re- 
ſtore it as that a candle would burn in it again ; 


- which to me appeared not a little extraordinary, 


as it did not feem to be in a worſe ſtate than 
air in which candles had burned out, and 
which 


Pe 


e 


_- - * 8 — > — oe. 
— 2 vx ̃ %ôÿr0 — Fun 
2 | - > 
\* 


, 1 2 A 
4 = 7 — ye F . 
N 9 2 * , * 25 A {4 5 4 A w A _ 4 ** A Us 7 4 


4 


166 Miſcellaneous Obſervations. 


which had never failed to be reſtored by the 
ſame means. 


I had no better ſucceſs with a quantity of 
permanent air which I had collected from my 
pump- water. Indeed theſe experiments were 
begun before I was acquainted with that pro- 
perty of nitrous air, which makes it ſo accu- 
rate a meaſure of the goodneſs of other kinds 
of air; and it might perhaps be rather too late 
in the year when I made the experiments. 
Having neglected theſe two jars of air, the a 
plants died and putrefied in both of them; 
and then I found the air in them both to be 
highly noxious, and to make no efferveſcence 
with nitrous air. 


I found that a pint of my pump - water 
contained abour one fourth of an ounce meaſure 
of air, one half of which was afterwards ab- 
ſorbed by ſtanding in freſh pump-water. A 
candle would not burn in this air, but a mouſe 
lived in it very well. Upon the whole, it 
ſeemed to be in about the ſame ſtate as air in 
which a candle had burned. out. 


6. I once imagined that, by mere flagnation, 
air might become unfit for reſpiration, or at leaſt 
N the 


Miſcellanzous Obſervations; 161 


the burning of candles; but if this be the caſe, 
and the change be produced gradually, i it muſt 
require a long time for the purpoſe. For on the 


22d of September 1772, I examined a quantity 
of common air, which had been kept in a 


phial, without agitation, from May 1771, and 


found it to be in no reſpect worſe than freſh air, 
even by the teſt of the nitrous air. 


7. The cryſtallization of nitre makes no 
ſenſible alteration in the air in which the pro- 
ceſs is made. For this purpoſe I diſſolved as 
much nitre as a quantity of hot water would 
contain, and let it cool under a receiver, ſtand- 
ing in water. 


8. November 6, 1772, a quantity of inflam- 
mable air, which, by long keeping, had come 
to extinguiſh flame, I obſerved to ſmell very 
much like common air in which a mixture of 
iron filings and brimſtone had ſtood, -It was 
not, however, quite ſo ſtrong, but it was equally 
noxious. 


9. Biſmuth and nickel are diſſolved in the ma- 
rine acid with the application of a conſiderable 
degree of heat; but little or no air is got from 


either of them; but, what I thought a little re- 
mark -· 


M 


- 


— —— — — > — 


P. ˙·;m ·˙³ X 
" = 


162 Miſcellaneous Obſervations. 


markable, both of them ſmelled very much like 
Harrowgate water, or liver of ſulphur. This 
ſmell I have met with ſeveral times in the courſe 
of my experiments, and in proceſſes very diffe- 
rent from one another. 


Bok in e 


N 


Experiments and Obſervations made in the Year 
1773, and the Beginning of 1774. 


SECTION I. 


CONE» on ALKALINE Am. 


FTER I had made the Ante 1 
the marine acid air, which the vapour of 
ſpirit of ſalt may properly enough be called, 
and had made thoſe experiments upon it, of 
which I have- given an account in -the for- 
mer part of this work, and others which I pro- 
poſe to recite in this part; it occurred to me, 
that, by a proceſs ſimilar to that by which this 
acid air is expelled from the ſpirit of ſalt, an 


alkaline air might be expelled from fubGances N 


F 


GN volatile alkali, 
Mz Ac: 


164 Obſervations on 


Accordingly I procured ſome volatile ſpirit of 
ſal ammoniac, and having put it into a thin 
Phial, and heated it with the flame of a candle, 
I preſently found that a great quantity of va- 
pour was diſcharged from it; and being re- 
ceived in a veſſel of quickſilver, ſtanding in a 
baſon of quickſilver, it continued in the form 
of a tranſparent and permanent air, not at all 
condenſed by cold; fo that I had the ſame op- 
portunity of making experiments upon it, as 1 
had before on the acid air, being in the ſame 
favourable circumiſtancez. 


With the ſame eaſe I alſo — this air 


from /pirit of hartſhorn, and ſal volatile either 
in a fluid or ſolid form, i. e. from thoſe volatile 


alkaline falts which are produced by the diſtil 
lation of ſal ammoniac with fixed alkalis, 
But in this caſe-T ſoon found that the alkaline 
air I procured was not pure ; for the fixed air, 
which entered into the compoſition of my ma- 
terials, was expelled along with it. Alſo, unit- 
ing again with the alkaline air, in the glaſs 
tube through which they were conveyed, they 
ſtopped it up, and were often the means of 


burſting my veſſels. 


While theſe experiments were new to me, I 
imagined that I was able to procure this air 


with peculiar advantage and in the greateſt 
abun- 


Alkaline Air. x 165 
abundance, either from the ſalts in a dry ſtate, 
when they were juſt covered with water, or in a 
perfectly fluid ſtate ; for, upon applying a can- 
dle to the phials in which they were contained, 
there was a moſt aſtoniſhing production of air 
but having examined it, I found it to be chiefly 
fixed air; eſpecially after the firſt or ſecond 
produce from the ſame materials; and remov- 
ing my apparatus to a trough of water and 
uſing the water inſtead of quickfilver, I found 
that it was not preſently abſorbed by it, 


This, however, appears to be an eaſy and 
elegant method of procuring fixed air, from a 
ſmall quantity of materials, though there muſt 
be a mixture of alkaline air along with it; as 
it is by means of its combination with this 
principle only, that it is poſſible, that ſo much 
fixed air ſhould be retained in any liquid. 
Water, at leaſt, we know, cannot be made to 
contain much more than its own bulk of fixed 


AIT. 


After this diſappointment, I confined myſelf 
to the uſe of that volatile ſpirit of ſal ammo- 
niac which is . procured by a diſtillation with 
ſlaked lime, which contains no fixed air; and 
which ſeems, in a general ſtate, to contain 
about as much alkaline air, as an equal quan- 
tity of ſpirit of ſalt contains of the acid air. 

”M M 3 Wanting 


166 Obſervations on 


| Wanting, however, to procure this air in 
greater quantities, and this method being rather 


expenſive, it occurred to me, that alkaline air 


might, probably, be procured, with the moſt 
eaſe and convenience, from the original mate- 
rials, mixed in the ſame proportions that che- 
miſts had found by experience to anſwer the 
beſt for the production of the volatile ſpirit of 
ſal ammoniac. Accordingly I mixed one fourth 


of pounded ſal ammoniac, with three fourths 


of ſlaked lime; and filling a phial with the mix- 
ture, I preſently found it completely anſwered 
my purpoſe. . The heat of a candle expelled 
from this. mixture a. prodigious quantity of al- 
kaline air; and the ſame materials (as much 
as filled an ounce phial) would ſerve me a con- 
ſiderable time, without changing; eſpecially 
when, inſtead of a glaſs phial, I made uſe of a 


ſmall iron tube, which I find much more con- 


yenient for the Purpoſe, 


As water ſoon begins to riſe in this proceſs, it 
is neceflary, if the air is intended to be conveyed 
perfectly dry into the veſſel of quickſilver, to 


have a ſmall veſſel in which this water (which 


is the common volatile ſpirit of ſal ammoniac) 
may be received. This ſmall veſſel muſt be in- 
terpoſed between the veſſel which contains the 
materials for the generation of the air, and that 


in which it is to be received, as d fig. 8. 
This 


Alkaline Air. 167 


This alkaline air being perfectly analogous to 
the acid air, I was naturally led to inveſtigate 
the properties of it in the ſame manner, and 
nearly in the ſame order. From this analogy I 


concluded, as I preſently found to be the fact, 


that this alkaline air would be readily imbibed 


by water, and, by its union with it, would form 
a volatile ſpirit of ſal ammoniac. And as 
the water, when admitted to the air in this man- 
ner, confined by quickſilver, has an opportu- 
nity of fully ſaturating itſelf with the alkaline 
vapour, it is made prodigiouſly ſtronger than 
any volatile ſpirit of ſal ammoniac that I have 
ever ſeen; and I believe ſtronger than it can 
be made in the common way. 


In order to aſcertain what addition, with re- 
ſpect to quantity and weight, water would ac- 
quire by being ſaturated with alkaline air, I put 
I ; grains of rain-water into a ſmall glaſs tube, 
cloſed at one end with cement, and open at the 
other, the column of water meaſuring 2. of 
an inch ; and having introduced it through the 
quickſilver into a veſſel containing alkaline air, 
obſerved that it abſorbed ; of an ounce meaſure 
of the air, and had then gained about half a 
grain in weight, and was increaſed to 8 tenths 
of an inch in length. I did not make a ſecond 
experiment of this kind, and therefore will not 
anſwer for the exactneſs of theſe proportions in 


M 4 future 


— 


168 Obſervations on 


; future trials, What I did ſufficiently anſwered I 
my purpoſe, in a general view of the ſub- 
ject. 4 


When I had, at one time, ſaturated a quan- 
tity of diſtilled water with alkaline air, ſo that 
a good deal of the air remained unabſorbed on 
the ſurface of the water, I obſerved that, as I 
continued to throw up more air, a conſiderable 
Proportion of it was imbibed, but not the whole ; 
and when I had let the apparatus ſtand a day, 
much more of the air that lay on the ſurface 
was imbibed. And after the water would imbibe 
no more of the old air, it imbibed new. This 
ſhews that water requires a confiderable time to 
ſaturate itſelf with this'kind of air, and that 
part of it more readily unites with water than 
the reſt, | 


The ſame is alſo, probably, the caſe with all 
the kinds of air with which water can be im- 
pregnated. Mr, Cayendiſh made this obſerva- 
tion with reſpect to fixed air, and I repeated 
the whole proceſs above-mentioned with acid 
air, and had preciſcly the ſame reſult, The al- 
kaline water which I procured in this experi- 
ment was, beyond compariſon, ſtronger to the 
ſmell, than any ſpirit of ſal ammoniac that I 


had ſeen. 


This 


Alkaline Air. 169 


This experiment led me to attempt the mak- 
ing of ſpirit of ſal ammoniac in a larger quan- 
tity, by impregnating diſtilled water with this 
alkaline air, For this purpoſe filled a piece of 
a gun-barrel with the materials above-mentioned, 
and luted to the open end of it a ſmall glaſs tube, 
one end of which' was bent, and put within the 
mouth of a glaſs veſſel, containing a quantity of 
diſtilled water upon quickſilver, ſtanding in a 
baſon of quickſilver, as in fig. 7. In theſe circum- 
ſtances the heat of the fire, applied gradually, ex- 

pelled the alkaline air, which, paſſing through 


the tube, and the quickſilver, came at laſt to the 


water, which, in time, became fully ſaturated 
with it. 


By this means I got a very ſtrong alkaline 
liquor, from which I could again expel the al- 
kaline air which I had put into it, whenever it 
happened to be more convenient to me to. get it 
in that manner, This proceſs may eafily be 
performed in a ſtill larger way; and by this 
means a liquor of the ſame nature with the vola- 
tile ſpirit of ſal ammoniac, might be made 


much ſtronger, and much cheaper, than 1 it is | 


now made, 


Having ſatisfied myſelf with reſpect 20 
relation that alkaline air bears to water, I was 


impatient to find what would be the conſequence 


of 


ny 
* 
* 
if 
| "2 
* 
pe 
LY 
"C 43 
\ 
[ : 
* 
et 
»\ _ 
diy. 
* * FF 
4 _ 
| o 4 
i » 
i 
$ | 
d 4 
* 


170 Obſervations on 


of mixing this new air with the other kinds 


with which I was acquainted before, and eſpe- 


| cially with acid air; having a notion that theſe 


two airs, being of oppoſite natures, might com- 
pole a neutral air, and perhaps the very ſame 
thing with common air. But the moment that 
theſe two kinds of air came into contact, a beau- 
tiful white cloud was formed, and preſently 
filled the whole veſſel in which they were con- 
tained. At the- ſame time the quantity of air 
began to diminiſh, and, at length, when the 
cloud was ſubſided, there appeared to be formed 
a ſolid white ſalt, which was found to be the 
common ſal ammoniac, or the marine acid united 
to the volatile alkali. 


The firſt quantity that I produced immedi- 
ately deliqueſced, upon being expoſed to the 
common air; but if it was expoſed in a very 
dry and warm place, it almoſt all evaporated, 
in a white cleud. I have, however, ſince, from 
the ſame materials, produced the ſalt abovemen- 
tioned in a ſtate not ſubject to deliqueſce or 
evaporate. This difference, I find, is owing 
to the proportion of che two kinds of air in the 
compound. It is only volatile when there is 


more than a due proportion of either of the 


conſtituent parts. In theſe caſes the ſmell of the 


Aalts is extremely pungent, but very different 


* one another; being manifeſtly acid, or al- 
kaline, 


j 


Alkaline Air. 171 


kaline, according to the prevalence of each of 
theſe airs reſpectively. 


Nitrous air admitted to alkaline air likewiſe 
occaſioned 4 whitiſh cloud, and part of the air 
was abſorbed ; butit preſently grew clear again 
leaving only a little dimneſs on the ſides of the 
veſſel. This, however, might be a kind of 
ſalt, formed by the union of the two kinds of 
air. There was no other ſalt formed that I 
could perceive. Water being admitted to this 
mixture of nitrous and-alkaline air preſently ab- 
ſorbed the latter, and left the former poſſeſſed 
of its peculiar properties, 


Fixed air admitted to alkaline air formed ob- 
long and ſlender cryftals, which croſſed one 
another, and covered the ſides of the veſſel in 
the form of net-work. Theſe cryſtals muſt 
be the ſame thing with the volatile alkalis 
which chemiſts get in a ſolid form, by the di- 
ſtillation of ſal ammoniac with fixed alkaline 


ſalts. 


_ Inflammable air admitted to alkaline air ex- 
hibited no particular appearance. Water, as 
in the former experiment, abſorbed the alka- 
line air, and left the inflammable air as it was 
before. It was remarkable, however, that'the 
water which was admitted to them became 

whitiſh, 


172 Obſervations on 


whitiſh, and that this white cloud ſettled, in 
the form of a white powder, to the bottom of 
the veſſel. 


Alkaline air mixed with common air, and 
ſtanding together ſeveral days, firſt in quick- 
filver, and then in water (which abſorbed the 
alkaline air) it did not appear that there was 
any change produced in the common air: at 
1 1 leaſt it was as much diminiſhed by nitrous air 

| | as before.. The ſame was the caſe with a mix- 
[ / ture of acid air and common air. 


| Having mixed air that had been diminiſhed 
| by the fermentation of a mixture of iron filings 
and brimſtone with alkaline air, the water ab- 
1 ſorbed the latter, but left the former, with re- 
4s ; ſpect to the teſt of nitrous air (and therefore, 

A | as I conclude, with reſpect to all its properties) 
1 the ſame that it was before. 


= Spirit of wine imbibes alkaline air as readily 
. as water, and ſeems to be as inflammable after - 
wards as before. 


—_ n. . 
oper. 
. 


2208 Alkaline air contracts no union with olive oil. 
Ef They were in contact almoſt two days, without 
[ik any diminution of the air. Oil of turpentine, 


| ON, and * oil of mint, abſorbed a very ſmall 
quantity | 


2 


4 
i 


ana * > tha of >_< e 
— 


— reno. 


„ 


Alkaline Air. 173 


quantity of alkaline air, but were not e ſenſibly 
changed by it. 


Ether, however, imbibed alkaline air pretty 
freely ; but it was afterwards as inflammable as 
before, and the colour was not changed. It 
alſo evaporated as before, but I did not attend 
to this laſt circumſtance very accurately. 


A, 


Sulphur, nitre, common ſalt, and fiints, were 


put to alkaline air without imbibing ahy-part of 
it; but charcoal, ſpunge, bits of linen cloth, and 
other ſubſtances of that nature, ſeemed to con- 
denſe this air upon their ſurfaces; for it began 
to diminiſh immediately upon their being put to 
it; and when they were taken out the alkaline 
ſmell they had contracted was ſo pungent as to 


perſons from ſwooning. - A bit of ſpunge, about 
as big as a hazel nut, preſent] y imbibed an ounce 
meaſure of alkaline air. 


A piece of the inſpiſſated juice of furnſole 
was made very dry and warm, and yet it im- 
bibed a great quantity of the air; by Which 
it contracted a moſt pungent ſmell, but the co- 
lour of it was not We 


— 
_ ——— 
%, * 


Alum 


be almoſt intolerable, eſpecially that of the 
ſpunge. Perhaps it might be of uſe to recover 


* * ah 8 
r 
ae af 
—_— „„ 
. 
—  — th 


174 Obſervatione on 


Alum undergoes a very remarkable change by 
the action of alkaline air. The outward ſhape 
and ſize remain the ſame, but the internal ſtruc- 


ture is quite changed, becoming opaque, beau- 


tifully white, and, to appearance, in all reſpects, 
like alum which had been roaſted; and ſo as 
not to be at all affected by a degree of heat that 
would have reduced it to that ſtate by roaſting. 


This effect is produced ſlowly ; and if a piece 


of alum be taken out of alkaline air before the 
operation is over, the inſide will be tranſparent, 
and the outſide, to an equal ekt will be a 
white cruſt, 


I imagine that the alkaline vapour ſeizes upon 
the warer that enters into the conſtitution of 


crude alum, and which would have been ex- 


pelled by heat. Roaſted alum alſo imbibes al- 
kaline air, and, like the raw alum that has been 
expoſed to it, acquires a taſte that is nne 
diſagreeable. 


Phoſphorus gave no light in alkaline air, and 


made no laſting change in its dimenfions, It 


varied, indeed, a little, being ſometimes in- 
creaſed and ſometimes diminiſhed, but after a 
day and a night, it wasin the ſame ſtate as at the 
firſt, Water abſorbed this air juſt as if no- 
thing had been put to it. 


Having 


Alkaline Air. 175 


Having put ſome ſpirit of ſalt to alkaline air, 
the air was preſently abſorbed, and a little of 
the white ſalt abovementioned was formed. A 
little remained unabſorbed, and tranſparent, 
but upon the admiſſion of common air to it, 
it inſtantly became white. 


Oil of witriol, alſo formed a A ſalt wick 
alkaline air, and this did not riſe in white fumes. 


Acid air, as I have obſerved in my former 
papers, extinguiſhes a candle. Alkaline air, on 
the contrary, I was ſurpcized to find, is ſlightly 
inflammable ; which, however, ſeems to con- 
firm the opinion of chemiſts, that the volatile 
alkali contains phlogiſton. 


I dipped a lighted candle into a tall cylindri- 
cal veſſel, filled with alkaline air, when it went 
out three or four times ſucceſſively ; but at each 
time the flame was confiderably enlarged, by 
the addition of another flame, of a pale yellow 
colour ; and at the laſt time this light flame de- 
ſcended from the top of the veſſel to the bot- 
tom. At another time, upon preſenting. a 
lighted candle to the mouth of the ſame veſſel, 
filled with the ſame kind of air, the yellowiſh 
flame aſcended two inches higher than the flame 
of the candle. The electric ſpark taken in al- 


176 Obſervations on 


kaline air is red, as it is in common inflamma 
dle * 


Though alkaline air be inflammable, it ap- 
peared, by the following experiment, to be 
heavier than the common inflammable air, as 
well as to contract no union with it. Into a 
veſſel containing a quantity of inflammable air, 
I put half as much alkaline air, and then about 
the ſame quantity of acid air. Theſe immedi- 
| ately formed a white cloud, but it did not riſe 
' within the ſpace that was occupied by the in- 
flammable air; ſo that this latter had kept its 
place above the alkaline air, and had not mixed 


with it. 


That alkaline air is lighter than acid air is 
evident from the appearances that attend the 
mixture, which are indeed very beautiful. When 
acid air is introduced into a veſſel containing 
alkaline air, the white cloud which they form 
appears at the bottom only, and aſcends gradu- 
ally. But when the alkaline air is put to the 
acid, the whole becomes immediately cloudy, 
quite to the top of the veſſel. 


In the laſt place, I ſhall obſerve that alkaline 
air, as well as acid, diſſolves ice as faſt as a hot 
fire can do it. This was tried when both the 
kinds of air, and every inſtrument made uſe of 


in 


Common Air made noxious, 177 


in the experiment, had been expoſed to a pret- 
ty intenſe froſt ſeveral hours, In both caſes, 
alſo, the water into which the ice was melted 


diſſolved more ice, to a conſiderable quantity. - 


8. E C , h Wi; 


Of common Air diminiſhed and made noxious 
by various proceſſes. 


It will have been obſerved that, in the firſt 
publication of my papers, I confined myſelf 
chiefly to the narration of the new facts which 
I had diſcovered, barely mentioning any po- 
_ theſes that occurred to me, and never ſeeming 
to lay much ſtreſs upon them. The reaſon 
why I was ſo much upon my guard in this re- 
ſpe& was, leſt, in conſequence of attaching my- 


ſelf to any hy potheſis too ſoon, the ſucceſs ß 


my future inquiries might be obſtructed. But 
ſubſequent experiments having thrown great 
light upon the preceding ones and having 
confirmed the few conjectures I then advanced, 
I may now venture to ſpeak of my hypotheſes 
with a little leſs difidence. Still, however, 
I ſhall be ready to relinquiſh any notions I may 
now entertain, if new facts ſhould hereafter ap- 
pear not to favour them. 


N | In 


178 Obſervations on 


In a great variety of caſes I have obſerved 
that there is a remarkable diminution of com- 
mon, or reſpirable air, in proportion to which 
it is always rendered unfit for reſpiration, in- 
diſpoſed to efferveſce with nitrous air, and in- 
capable of farther diminution from any other 
cauſe. The circumſtances which produce this 
effect J had then obſerved to be the burning of 
candles, the reſpiration of animals, the putre- 
faction of vegetables or animal ſubſtances, 
the efferveſcence of iron filings and brimſtone, 
the calcination of metals, the fumes of char- 
coal, the eſſſuvia of paint made of white- lead 
and oil, and a mixture of nitrous air. 


All theſe proceſſes, I obſerved, agree in this 
one circumſtance, and I believe in no other, 
that the principle which the chemiſts call hlo- 
giflon is ſet looſe ; and therefore I concluded 
that the diminution of the air was, in ſome 
way or other, the conſequence of the air be- 
coming overcharged with Þblogiſton,® and that 


water, and growing vegetables, tend to reſtore 
this 


Os this account, if it was thought convenient to in- 
troduce a new term (or rather make a new application of 
a term already in ofe among chemiſts) it might not be a- 
miſs to call air that has been diminiſhed, and made noxious 
by any of the proceſſes above mentioned, or others ſimilar 


to them, by the common appellation of ph/ogifticated air; 
and, 


Common Air made noris. 179 


this air to a ſtate fit for reſpiration, by im- 
bibing the ſuperfluous phlogiſton. Several ex- 
periments which I have ſince made tend to con- 
firm this ſuppoſition. 


Common air, I find, is diminiſhed, and ren- 
dered noxious, . by liver of ſ.1phur, which the 
chemiſts lay exhales Phlogiſton, and nothing 
elſe. The diminution in this caſe was one 
fifth of the whole, and afterwards, as in other 
ſimilar caſes, it made no efferveſcence with ni- 
trous air. 


1 found alſo, after Dr. Hales, that air is di- 
miniſhed by Homberg's pyrophorus, 


The ſame effect is is produced by firing gun- 
powder in air. This I tried by firing the gun- 
powder in a receiver half exhauſted, by which 
the air vras rather more injured than it would 
have been by candles burning in it. 


Air is diminiſhed by a cement made with one 
half common coarſe turpentine and half bees- 
wax. This was the reſult of a a vety caſual ob- 


and, if it was neceſſary, the particular proceſs by which it 
was phlogiſticated might be added; as common air phlo- 
giſticated by charcoal, air oblogillicered by the calcinatton 
of metals, nitroas air phlogiſticated with the liver of ſul- 
phur, &C, 


N 2 | 3 


4 
* by £'F 
= = 
JF a 1 ” Cc +444 
* Ao cw La ran, 4 7 7 , 


180 Obſervations on 


fervation. Having, in an air-pump of Mr. 


Smeaton's conſtruction, cloſed that end of the 
ſyphon- gage, which is expoſed to the outward 


air, with this cement (which I knew would 
make it perfectly air-light) inſtead of ſealing it 
hermetically ; I obſerved that, in a courſe of 
time, the quickſilver in that leg kept conti- 


nually rifing, ſo that the meaſures I marked 


upon it were of no uſe to me; and when I 
opened "that end of the tube, and cloſed it 
again, the ſame conſequence always took place. 
At length, ſuſpecting that this effect muſt have 
ariſen from the bit of cement diminiſhing the air 
to which it was expoſed, I covered all the inſide 
of a glaſs tube with it, and one end of it be- 
ing quite cloſed with the cement, I ſet it per- 


pendicular, with its open end immerſed in a 


baſon of quickſilver; and was preſently ſatis- 
fied that my conjecture was well founded: for, 
in a few days, the quickſilver roſe ſo much 
within the tube, that the air in the inſide ap- 
peared to be diminiſhed about one ſixth. 


To change this air I filled the tube with 
quickſilver, and pouring it out again, I re- 
placed the tube in its former fituation ; when 
the air was diminiſhed again, but not ſo faſt as 
before. The ſame lining of cement diminiſh- ' 
ed the air a third time. How long it will re- 
tain this power I cannot tell, This cement had 

| been 


28 K. 
Common Air made noxious. 181 


been made ſeveral months before I made this 
experiment with it. I muſt obſerve, however, 
that another quantity of this kind of cement, 
made with a finer and more liquid turpentine, 
had not the power of diminiſhing air, except 
in a very ſmall proportion. Alſo the common 
red cement has this property in the ſame ſmall 
degree. Common air, however, which had been ' 
confined in a glals veſſel lined with this cement 

about a month, was fo far injured that a candle 
would not burn in it. In a longer time it 
would, 1 doubt not, have become thoroughly 
noxious. 


Iron that has been ſuffered to ruſt in nitrous 
air diminiſhes common air very faſt, as I ſhall. 
have occaſion to mention when I give a con- 
tinuation of my experiments on nitrous air. 


Laſtly, the ſame effect, I find, is produced 
by the electric ſpark, though I had no expecta- 
tion of this event when I made the experiment. 


This experiment, however, and thoſe which 
I have made in purſuance of it, has fully con- 
firmed another of my conjectures, which re- 
lates to the manner in which air is diminiſhed 
by being overcharged with phlogiſton, viz. the 
phlogiſton having a nearer affinity with ſome of 
the conſtituent parts of the air than the fixe 


N 3 air 


= , we tt Yo rs — Poa 
cath 


4 , 
„ ry 7 
bs £5 
1 
' 
a 
Y 4 
>” * 
, N 
* 
* 
+ 
75 
* 
- 


— wu 


-—— -—— 


WW 2 way we of 
(EE LETS 3 Nee 4 — 
Are r r 


182 Obſervations on 


air which enters into the compoſition of it, in 
conſequence of which the fixed air is precipi- 
rated, 


This I firſt imagined from perceiving that 
Iime-water became turbid by burning candles 
over it, p. 44. This was alſo the caſe with lime- 
water confined in air in which an animal ſub- 
ſtance was putrefying, or in Which an animal 
died, p. 79. and that in which charcoal was 
burned, p. 81. But, in all theſe caſes, there 
was a poſſibility of the fixed air being diſ- 
charged from the candle, the putrefying ſuh- 


Nance, the lungs of the animal, or the char- 


coal. That there is a precipitation of lime 
when nitrous air is mixed with common air, I 
had not then obſerved, but I baye fince faund 
it to be the caſe. 


That there was no precipitation of lime when 
brimſtone was burned, I obſerved, p. 43. 
might be owing to the fixed air and the lime 
uniting with the vitriolic acid, and making a 
8 Which was ſoluble in water; which ſalt 
* . diſcovered by the Sh SE of the 


I alſo obſerved, p. 46,105, that diminiſhed | 
air being rather lighter than common air is a 


circumſtance in favour of the fixed, or the 


heavier 


Common Air made noxious. 183 


heavier part of the common air, having been 
precipitated, 


It was upon this idea, together with others 
ſimilar to it, that I took ſo much pains to mix 
fixed air with air diminiſhed by reſpiration or 
putrefaction, in order to make it fit for reſpira- 
tion again; and I thought that I had, in gene- 
ral, ſucceeded to a conſiderable degree, p. 99, 
&c. I will add, alſo, what I did not mention 
before, that I once endeavoured, but without 
effect, to preſerve mice alive in the ſame un- 
changed air, by ſupplying them with fixed air, 
when the air in which they were confined began 
to be injured by their reſpiration, Without 
effect, alſo, I confined for ſome months, a 
quantity of quick lime in a given quantity of 
common air, thinking it might extract the fixed 
air from it. | 


* 


The experiments which I made with elec- 4 
tricity were ſolely intended to aſcertain what 1 
has often been attempted, but, as far as J 
know, had never been fully accompliſhed, viz. | 
L to change 'the blue colour of liquors, tinged 4 
with vegetable juices, red: | 


For this purpoſe I made uſe of a glaſs tube, 
about one tenth of an inch diameter in the inſide, ; 


as in fig. 16. In one end of this I cemented 
N 4 a piece 


W Cabins ht 


9 


184 | Obſervations on 


a piece of wire b, on which I put a braſs ball. 
The lower part from 4 Was filled with water 
tinged blue, or rather purple, with the juice of 
turnſole, or archil. This is cafily done by an 
air-pump, the tube being ſet in a veſſel of the 
tinged water. 


Things being thus prepared, I perceived that, 
after I bad taken the electric ſpark, between 


the wire b, and the liquor at a, about a minute, 


the upper part of it began to look red, and in 
about two minutes it was very manifeſtly fo ; 
and the red part, which was about a quarter of 


an inch in length, did not readily mix with the 


reſt of the liquor, I obſerved alſo, that if 
the tube lay inclined while I took the ſparks, 


the redneſs extended twice as far on the lower 


fide as on the upper. 


The moſt important, though the leaſt expect- 
ed obſervation, however, was that, in proportion 
as the liquor became red, it advanced nearer to 
the wire, ſo that the ſpace of air in which the 
' ſparks were taken was diminiſhed ; and at length 
I found that the diminution was about one fifth 
of the whole ſpace ; after which more electrify- 
ing produced no ſenſible effect. 


To determine whether the cauſe of the change 


of colour was in the air, or in the elefric 
matter, 


Common Air made noxious. 185 


matter, I expanded. the air which had been di- 
miniſhed in the tube by means of an air-pump, 
till it expelled all the liquor, and admitted freſh 
blue liquor into its place; but after that, electri- 
city produced no ſenſible effect, either on the 
air, or on the liquor; ſo that it was evident 


that the electric matter had decompoſed the air, 


and had made it depoſite TY that was of 
an acid nature. Hows 


In order to determine whether the wire had 
contributed any thing to this effect, J uſed wires 
of different metals, iron, copper, braſs, and 
ſilver ; but the reſult was the very ſame with 


them all. 


. 


It was alſo the ſame when, by means of a 


bent glaſs tube, I made the electric ſpark with- 
out any wire at all, in the following manner, 
Each leg of the tube, fig. 19. ſtood in a baſon 
of quickſilver; which, by means of an air- 
pump, was made to aſcend as high as a, a, in 
each leg, while the ſpace between @ and h in 
each contained the blue liquor, and the ſpace 
between z and b contained common air. Things 
being thus diſpoſed, I made the electric ſpark 

rform the circuit from one leg to the other, 
paſling from the liquor in one leg of the tube 
to the liquor in the other leg, through the ſpace 


of air. The effect was, that the liquor, in 
both 


1 
* .; Mes * 4 2 


186 Obſervations on 


both the legs, became red, and the ſpace of air 


between them was contracted, as before. 


Air thus diminiſhed by electricity makes no 
efferveſcence with, and is no farther diminiſhed 
by a mixture of nitrous air; ſo that it muſt 
have been in the higheſt degree noxious, exactly 
like air diminiſhed by any other proceſs. 


In order to determine what the acid was, 
which was depoſited by the air, and which 
changed the colour of the blue liquor, I expoſed 


- a ſmall quantity of the liquor ſo changed to 


the common air, and found that it recovered 
its blue colour, exactly as water, tinged with 
the ſame blue, and impregnated with fixed air, 


will do. But the following experiment was till 


more deciſive to this purpoſe. Taking the 
electric ſpark upon lime mater, inſtead. of the 
blue liquor, the lime was precipitated as the air 
diminiſhed, b 
From theſe experiments it pretty clearly fol- 
lows, that the electric matter either is, or con- 
tains phlogiſton ; fince it does the very ſame 
thing that phlogiſton does. It is alſo probable, 


from theſe experiments, that the ſulphureous 


ſmell, which is occaſioned by electricity, being 


very different from that of fixed air, the phlo- 


giſton 


/ 
Common Air made noxious. 187 


giſton 1 in the electric matter itſe}f may contribute 
to it. 


It was now evident that common air dimi- 
niſhed by any one of the proceſſes abovemen- 
tioned being the ſame thing, as I have obſerved, 
with air diminiſhed by any other of them (ſince 
it is not liable to be farther diminiſhed by any 
other) the loſs which it ſuſtains, in all thę caſes, 
is, in part, that of the fixed air which entered 
into its conſtitution. The fixed air thus pre- 
cipitated from common air by means of phlo- 
giſton unites with lime, if any lime water be 
ready to receive it, unleis there be ſome other 
ſubſtance at hand, with which it has a greater 
affinity, as the calces of metals. 


If the whole of the diminution of common 
air was produced by the depoſition of fixed air, 
it would be eaſy to aſcertain the quantity of 
fixed air that is contained in any given quantity 


af common air. But it is evident that the 


whole of the diminution of common air by 
phlogiſton i is not owing to the precipitation of 
fixed air, becauſe a mixture of nitrous air will 
make a great diminution in all kinds of air 
that are fit for reſpiration, even though they 
never were common air, and though nothing 
was uſed in the proceſs for generating them that 
gan be ſuppoſed to yield fixed air. 


Indeed, 


— 


1 
<+& _— 1 OY 
DR} 
= 


— = 
| 
— * 
n 


182 _ Obſervations on 


Indeed, it aj 5ears, from ſome of the experi- 
ments, that th. diminution of ſome of theſe 
kinds of air by nitrous air is ſo great, and ap- 
proaches ſo ne: ly to the quantity of the dimi- 
nution of com non air by the ſame proceſs, as 
to ſhew that unleſs they be very differently 
affected by 1 hlogiſton, very little is to be al- 
lowed to the loſs of fixed air in the diminution 

of commor air by nitrous air. 


TI kinds of air on which this experiment 
was nade were inflammable air, nitrous air 
diminiſhed by iron filings and brimſtone, and 
nitrous air itſelf ; all of which are produced by 
the ſolution of metals in acids; and alſo on 
common air diminiſhed and made nox1ous, and 
therefore deprived of its fixed air by phlogiſtic 
proceſſes ; and they were reſtored to a great 
degree of purity by agitation in water, out of 
which its ow air had been carefully boiled. 


To five parts of inflammable air, which had 
been agitated in water till it was diminiſhed 
about one half (at which time part of it fired 
with a weak exploſion) I put one part of nitrous 
air, which diminiſhed it one eighth of the whole. 
This was done in lime-water, without any pre- 


cipitation of lime. To compare this with com- 


mon air, I mixed the ſame quantity, viz. five 


parts of 8 and one part of nitrous air: when 
| a con- 


4 
Common Air made noxious. 189 


conſiderable cruſt of lime was formed upon 
the ſurface of the lime water, though the dimi- 
nution was very little more than in the former 
proceſs. . It is poſſible, however, that the com- 
mon air might have taken more nitrous air 
before it was fully ſaturated, ſo as to begin to 
receive an addition to its bulk. 


I agitated in water a quantity of nitrous air 
phlogiſticated with iron filings and brimſtone, 
and found it to be fo far reſtored, that three 
fourths of an ounce meaſure of nitrous air being 


put to two ounce meaſures of it, made no ad- 
dition to it. 


But the moſt remarkable of theſe experiments 
is that which I made with nitrous air itſelf which 


I had no idea of the poſſibility of reducing to 


a ſtate fit for reſpiration by any proceſs what- 
ever, at the time of my former publication on 
this ſubject. This air, however, itſelf, without 
any previous phlogiſtication, is purified by agi- 
tation in water till it 1s diminiſhed by freſh 


nitrous air, and to a very conſiderable degree. 


In a pretty long time I agitated nitrous air in 
water, ſupplying it from time to time with 
more, as the former quantity diminiſhed, till 


only one eighteenth of the whole quantity 


remained ; in which ſtate it was ſo wholeſome, 


that 


/ WOT I nerio. * 


190 Obſervations oft 

that a mouſe lived in two ounce meaſures of i it 
more than ten minutes, without ſhewing any 
ſign of uneaſineſs; fo that J concluded it muſt 
have been about as good as air in which 
candles had burned' out. After agitating it 
again in water, T put one part of freſh nitrous 
arr to five parts of this air, and it was dimi- 
nifhed one ninth part, I then agitated it a third 
time, and putting more nitrous air to it, it was 
diminiſhed again in the ſame proportion, and ſo 
a fourth time; ſo that, by continually repeating 
the proceſs, it would, I doubt not, have been 
all abforbed. Theſe proceſſcs were made in 
lime- water, without forming any incruſtation 
on the ſurface of it. 


— : 


alli, rat” a quantity of common air, 
which had been diminiſhed and made noxious 
by pblogiſtic proceſſes ; and when it had been 
agitated in water, I found that it was dimi- 
niſhed by nitrous air, though not ſo much as it 
would have been at the firſt. After cleanſing 
ita ſecond time, it was diminiſhed again by the 
ſame means; and, after that, a third time; and 
thus there can be no doubt but that, in time, 
the whole quantity would have diſappeared. 
For I have never found that agitation in water, 
deprived of its own air, made any addition to 
a quantity of noxious air; though, a priori, it 
might have been imagined that, as a ſaturation 
* with 


Common Air made noxious. _ 


with phlogiſton diminiſhes air, the extraction of 
phlogiſton would increaſe the bulk of it. On 
the contrary, agitation in water always dimi- 
niſhed nox1ous air a little; indeed, if water be 
deprived of all its own air, it is impoſſible to 
agitate any kind of air in it without ſome loſs. 
Alſo, when noxious aw has been reſtored by 
plants, I never perceived that it gained any 
addition to its bulk by that means, There was 
no ineruſtation of the lime- water in the above- 
mentioned experiment. | 


* 


It is not a little remarkable, that thoſe kinds 
of air which never had been common air, as 
inflammable air, phlogiſticated nitrous air, and 
nitrous air itſelf, when rendered wholeſume by 
agitation in water, ſhould be more diminiſhed 
by freſh nitrous ait, than common air which 
had been made noxious, and. reſtored by. the 
ſame proceſs ; and yet, from the few trials that 
I have made, I could not help concluding that 
this is the caſe. | 


In this courſe of experiments Was very near 
deceiving myſelf, in conſequence of transferring 
the nitrous air which I made uſe of in a blad- 
der, in the manner deſcribed, p. 15. fig. . fo 
as to conclude that there was a precipitation of 
lime in all the above-mentioned caſes, and that 
even nitrous air itſelf produced that effect. But 
after 


192 | Obſervations on 


after repeated trials, I found that there was no 
precipitation of lime, except in the firſt dimi- 
nution of common air, when the nitrous air 
was transferred in a glaſs veſſel. 


That the calces of metals contain air, of ſome 
kind or other, and that this air contributes to 
the additional weight of the calces, above that 
of the metals from which they are made, had 
i | | been obſerved by Dr. Hales; and Mr. Hartley 
4 1 had informed me, that when red- lead is boiled 
1 in linſeed oil, there is a prodigious diſcharge of 

4 | air before they incorporate, I had likewiſe 
* found, that no weight is either gained orfoſt 
| by the calcination of tin in a cloſe glaſs veſſel ; 
| but I purpoſely deferred making any more 
experiments on the ſubject, till we ſhould have 
ſome weather in which I could make uſe of a 
large burning lens, which I had provided for 
that and other purpoſes; but, in the mean 
time, I was led to the be in a different 
manner. 


Having, by the laſt- re cited experiments, been 
| led to conſider the electric matter as phlogiſton, 
| or ſomething containing phlogiſton, I was en- 
| deavouring to revivify the calx of lead with it; 

hen I was ſurprized to perceive a conſiderable 

g generation of air. It occurred to me, that poſ- 

: ep this effect might ariſe from the Heat com- 

municated 


—— 


Common Air made noxious. 193 


municated to the red-lead by the electric ſparks, 
and therefore I immediately filled a ſmall phial 
with the red-lead, and heating it with a candle, 


I preſently expelled from it a quantity of air 


about four or five times the bulk of the lead, 
the air being received in a veſſel of quickſfilver. 
How much more air it would have yielded, L 
did not try. 


Along with the air, a ſmall quantity of water 
was likewiſe thrown out; and it immediately 
occurred to me, that this water and air together 
muſt certainly be the cauſe of the addition of 


weight in the calx. It ſtill remained to exa- 


mine what kind of air this was ; but admitting 
water to it, I found that it was imbibed by ir, 
exactly like fixed air, which I therefore imme- 
diately concluded it muſt be *. 


After this, 1 found that Mr. Lavoifier had 
completely diſcovered the ſame thing, though 
his apparatus being more complex, and leſs 


* Here it becomes me to aſk pardon of that excellent 
philoſopher Father Beccaria of Turin, for conjecturing that 
the phlogiſton, with which he revivified metals, did not 
come from the electric matter itſelf, but from what was 
diſcharged from other pieces of metal with which he made 
the experiment. See Hiſtory of Electricity, p. 277, &c. This 
revivification of metals by electricity completes the proof of 
the electric matter being, or containing phlogiſlon. 


O accurate 


— a Ae. — u 2 


= * 
* 0 * 3 = 8 A hs - 
A 2 1 W —_— Y » * * — " 
OI « fl yy * W * - * N. as — 
e 4 A * Q N P 4 * , = 
* * * * * 8 ww 
* - 4 : - * 19.0 2 1 - <®*».c; R 
* 2 , a 
* PA 7 i 5 4 
: KI f 
* A + *. — —_— 4 9 8 . _& 
— n 98 d * . 1 * 
. : TEASE 
* 4 <a 0 - 
af o — 
- 
- * 


18 


—— ——ů — — —— ern CEL * 


194 Obſervations on 


accurate than mine, he concluded that more of 
the air diſcharged from the calces of metals 
was immiſcible with water than I found it to 
be. It appeared to me that I had never ob- 
tained fixed air more pure. 05 


It being now pretty clearly determined, that 
common air is made to depoſit the fixed air 
which entered into the conſtitution of it, by 
means of phlogiſton, in all the caſes of dimi- 
niſhed air, it will follow, that in the precipi- 
tation of lime, by breathing into lime - water 


the fixed air, which incorporates with lime, 


comes not from the lungs, but from the com- 
mon air, decompoſed by the phlogiſton exhaled 
from them, and diſcharged, after having been 
taken in with the aliment, and having per- 
formed its function in the animal ſyſtem. 


Thus my conjecture is more confirmed, that 
the cauſe of the death of animals in confined 
air is not owing to the want of any pabulum 
dite, which the air had been ſuppoſed to con- 


tain, but to the want of a diſcharge of the 


phlogiſtic matter, with which the ſyſtem was 
loaded; the air, when once ſaturated with it, 


being no ſufficient menſtruum to take it up. 


be inſtantaneous death of animals put into 
air ſo vitiated, I ſtill think is owing to ſome 


flimulas, 


Common Air made noxiqus. 195 


Rimulus, which, by cauſing immediate, univer- 
ſal and violent convulſions, exhauſts the whole 


of the vis vitæ at once; becauſe, as I have ob- 


ſerved, the manner of their death is the very 
ſame in all the different kinds of noxious air. 


To this ſection on the ſubject of diminiſh- 
ed, and noxious air, or as it might have been 
called phlogiſticated air, I ſhall ſubjoin a letter 
which I addreſſed to Sir John Pringle, on the 
noxious quality of the effluvia of putrid marſhes, 
and which was read at a meeting of the Royal 
Society, December 16, 1773. | 


This letter whichis printed in the Philoſophi- 
cal Tranſactions, Vol. 74, p. 90. is immediate- 
ly followed by another paper, to which I would 
refer my reader. It was written by Dr. Price, 
who has ſo greatly diſtinguiſhed himſelf, and 
done ſuch eminent ſervice to his. country, and 


to mankind, by his calculations relating .to the 


probabilities of human life, and was ſuggeſted 


by his hearing this letter read at the Royal So- 


ciety. Itcontains a confirmation of my obſer- 
vations on the noxious effects of ſtagnant waters 
by deductions from Mr. Muret's account of the 
Bills of Mortality for a pariſh ſituated among 
marſhes, in the diſtrict of Vaud, belonging to 
the Canton of Bern in Switzerland. = 


0 2 NS 1 To 


eld the. Ev _—_— 1 W 


* 


196 ' Obſervations on 


To Sir JOHN PRINGLE, Baronet; 
DEAR SIR, 


laing purſued my experiments on different 
kinds of air conſiderably farther, in ſeveral re- 
ſpects, than I had done, when I preſented the 
laſt account of them to the Royal Society; 
and being encouraged by the favourable notice 
which the Society has been pleaſed to take of 
them, I ſhall continue my communications on 
this ſubject; but, without waiting for the re- 
ſult of a variety of proceſſes, which I have 
now going on, or of other experiments, which 
1 propoſe to make, I ſhall, from time to time, 
communicate ſuch detached articles, as I ſhall 
have given the moſt attention to, and with re- 
ſpect to which, I ſhall have been the moſt ſuc- 


ceſsful in my inquiries. 


Since the publication of my papers, I have 
read two treatiſes, written by Dr. Alexander, 
of Edinburgh, and am exceedingly pleaſed 
with the ſpirit of philoſophical inquiry, which 
they diſcover. They appear to me to contain 
many new, curious, and valuable obſervations ; 
but one of the conclufions, which he draws 
from his experiments, I am ſatisfied, from my 
own 


Air from putrid Marſhes. 197 


own obſervations, is ill founded, and from the 
nature of it, muſt be dangerous. I mean his 
maintaining, that there is nothing to be ap- 
prehended from the neighbourhood of putrid 
mgribes. 


I was particularly ſurpriſed, to meet with 
ſuch an opiniqn as this, in a book inſcribed to 
yourſelf, who have ſo clearly explained the 
great miſchief of ſuch a ſituation, in your ex- 
cellent treatiſe on the diſeaſes of the army. On 
this account, I have thought it not improper, 
to addreſs to you the following obſervations 
and experiments, which I think clearly demon- 
ſtrate the fallacy of Dr. Alexander's reaſon- 
ing, indiſputably eſtabliſh your doctrine, and 
indeed juſtify the apprehenſions of all mankind 
in this caſe. | : 


I think it probable enough, that putrid mat- 
ter, as Dr. Alexander has endeavoured ta 
prove, will preſerve other ſubſtances from pu- 
trefaction; becauſe, being already ſaturated 
with the putrid effluvium, it cannot readily 
take any more; but Dr. Alexander was not 
aware, that air thus loaded with putrid efflu- 
vium is exceedingly noxious when ta ken into 
the lungs. I have lately, however, had an op- 
portunity of fully aſcertaining how very noxious 


ſuch air 15, 
0.4. - Hap- 


198 ”" Obſervations on 


Happening to uſe at Calne, a much larger 
trough of water, for the purpoſe of my expe- 
riments, than I had done at Leeds, and not 
having freſh water ſo near at hand as I had 
there, I neglected to change it, till it turned 
black, and became offenſive, but by no means 
to ſuch a degree, as to deter me from making 
uſe of it. In this ſtate of the water, I ob- 
ſerved bubbles of air to rife from it, and eſpe- 
cially in one place, to which ſome ſhelves, 
| that I had in it, directed them; and having 

ſet an inverted glaſs veſſel to catch them, in a 

| few days I collected a confiderable quantity of 

| | | this air, which iſſued ſpontaneouſly from the 

41 putrid water; and putting nitrous air to it, I 

1 . found that no change of colour or diminution 

= - enſued, ſo that it muſt have been, in the high- 

1 | i eſt degree, noxious. I repeated the ſame ex- 

periment ſeveral times afterwards, and always 
with the ſame reſult. | 


After this, I had the curiofity to try how 
| _ wholeſome air would be affected by this water; 
1 when, to my real ſurpriſe, I found, that after 
only one minute's agitation in it, a candle would 
not burn in it; and, after three or four mi- 
nutes, it was in the ſame ſtate with the air, 
which had iſſued ſpontaneouſly from the ſame 
* io 8 2 , 


—_— — 


of - 9 I alſo 


1 * y - 
— — -— Bo... - 


" 
; 


Air from putrid Marſhes. 199 


I alſo found, that common air, confined in a 
glaſs veſſel, in contact only with this water, 
and without any agitation, would not admit a 
candle to burn in it after two days. 


Theſe facts certainly demonſtrate, that air 
which either ariſes from ſtagnant and putrid 
water, or which has been for ſome time in con- 
' tact with it, muſt be very unfit for reſpira- 
tion; and yet Dr, Alexander's opinion is ren- 
dered fo plauſible by his experiments, that it is 
very poſſible that many perſons may be render- 
ed ſecure, and thoughtleſs of danger, in a ſi- 
tuation in which they muſt neceſſarily breathe 
it. On this account, I have thought it right to 
make this communication as early as I conve- 
niently could ; and as Dr. Alexander appears 
to be an ingenious and benevolent man, I doubt 
not but he will thank me for it. | 


That air iſſuing from water, or rather from 
the ſoft earth, or mud, at the bottom of pits 
containing water, is not always unwholeſome, 
J have alſo had an opportunity of aſcertaining. 
Taking a walk, about two years ago, in the 
neighbourhood of Wakefield, in Yorkſhire, I 
obſerved bubbles of air to ariſe, in remarkably 
great plenty, from a ſmall pool of water, which, 
upon inquiry, I was informed had been the 
place, where ſome perſons had been boring the 


O & ground, 


200 Obſervations on 


ground, in order to find coal. Theſe bubbles of 
air having excited my curioſity, I preſently re- 


turned, with a baſon, and other veſſels proper for 


my purpoſe, and having ſtirred the mud with 
a long ſtick, I ſoon got about a pint of this 
air ; and, examining it, found it to be good 
common air; at leaſt a candle burned in it 
very well. I had not then diſcovered the me- 
thod of aſcertaining, the goodneſs of common 
air, by a mixture of nitrous air. Previous to 
the trial, I had ſuſpected that this air would 
have been founc to be inflammiable. 


I ſhall conclude this letter with obſerving, 
that I have found a remarkable difference in 
different kinds of water, with reſpect to their 
effect on common air agitated in them, and 
which I am not yet able to account for. If I 
agitate common air in the water of a deep well, 


near my houſe in Calne, which is hard, but 


clear and ſweet, a candle will not burn in it 
after three minutes. The ſame is the caſe with 
the rain-water, which I get from the roof of 
my houſe. But in diſtilled water, or the water 
of a ſpring-well near the houſe, I muſt agitate 
the air about twenty minutes, before it will be 
ſo much injured. It may be worth while, to 
make farther experiments with reſpect to this 
2415 of water. 


E Age 


| 
Air from putrid Marſhes 201 


In conſequence of uſing the rain- water, and 


the well- water above mentioned, I was very 


near concluding, contrary to what I have aſ- 
ſerted in this treatiſe, that common air ſuf- 
fers a decompoſition by great rarefaction. 
For when I had collected a conſiderable quan- 
tity. of air, which had been rarefied about four 
hundred times, by an excellent pump made for 
me by Mr. Smeaton, I always found, that 
if I filled my receivers with the water above 


mentioned, though I did. it ſo gradually as to 
occaſion as little agitation as poſſible, a candle 


would not burn in the air that remained in them. 
Bur when I uſed diſtilled water, or freſh {pring- 
water, I undeceived myſelf, 


1 think myſelf honoured by the attention, 
which, from the firſt, you have given to my 
experiments, and am, with the greateſt reſpect, 

Dear Sir, 
Your moſt obliged 
Humble Servant, 
London, 7 Dec. 1773. 
I. PRIESTLEY. 


= * 


A POST- 


= 
— 


MC Bb 1 —_ _ 
- % 
. 


— 9 wir» irons — = - Ac; 06-4 Red 
: 


3 


© 


e 


f 
| 
"av. —— . — 5 — * — — 


— 
— ati 
8 


„ 
„ w — —— — — —˙»—— — 
. — 6— — * = 


202 _ Obſervations on 


I cannot help expreſſing my ſurprize, that 
ſo clear and intelligible an account, of Mr. 
SMEATON's air-pump, ſhould have been before 
the public ſo long, as ever fince the publication 


of the forty-ſeventh volume of the Philoſophi- 


cal Tranſactions, printed in 17 52, and yet that 
none of our philoſophical inſtrument- makers 
ſhould uſe the conſtruction. The ſuperiority 
of this pump, to any that are made upon the 
common plan, is, indeed, prodigious. Few of 
them will rarefy more than 100 times, and, in 
a general way, not more than 60 or 70 times; 
whereas this inſtrument muſt be in a poor ſtate 
indeed, if it does not rarefy 200 or 300 times; 
and when it is in good order, it will go as far as 


2000 times, and ſometimes even much farther 


than that; beſides, this inſtrument is worked 
with' much more eaſe, than a common air- 
pump, and either exhauſts or condenſes at plea- 


ſure. In ſhort, to a perſon engaged in philo- 
ſophical purſuits, this inſtrument is an invalu- 
able acquiſition. I ſhall have occaſion to recite 


ſome experiments, which I could not have made, 


and which, indeed, I ſhould hardly have dared 


to attempt, if I had nor been poſſeſſed of ſuch 
an air-pump as this. It is much to be wiſhed, 


that ſome erſon of ſpirit in the trade would at- 


tempt 


as / 


Nitrous Ar. 203 

tempt the conſtruction of an inſrume n which | ö 
would do great credit to himſelf, as well as be 
Fa of eminent ſervice to philoſophy. | | 
J 

SECTION III. | 

| | | 

Of Nitrous Air, b 

Since the publication of my former papers | ö 

I have given more attention ro the ſubject of | 
nitrous air than to any other ſpecies of air; and | . 
having been pretty fortunate in my inquiries, J 


] ſhall be able to lay before my reader a more | 
ſatisfactory account of the curious phenomena dy 
* occaſioned by it, and alſo of its nature and | 
conſtitution, than I could do before, though 
much ſtill remains to be inveſtigated concerning 
it, and many new objects of inquiry are 


4 . ” * — 
4 
. ͤ— ay ee ee en 
-. 1 . of * —— 4 
£ * 
— — 


88 _ 
* J 
mas Ali. id 


_ — — — 1 8 
4 * CY a 
8 
a n 2 = 


3 

ſtarted. | — I 

= 

With a view to diſcover where the power of 1 Y 
nitrous air to diminiſh common air lay, I eva- i $ 

porated to dryneſs a quantity of the ſolution of 11 
copper in diluted ſpirit of nitre; and having : 
procured from it a quantity of a green preci- [ 1 


pitate, I threw the focus of a burning-glaſs 
upon it, when it was put into a veſſel of guick- "nl 
filver, ſtanding inverted in a baſon of quick- - 1 
filver. In this manner I procured air from it, | i | 

which 


204 | Obſervations on 


which appeared to be, in all reſpects, nitrous - 


air; ſo that part of the ſame principle which 
had eſcaped during the ſolution, in the form of 
air, had likewiſe been retained in it, and had 
not left it in the evaporation of the water. 


With great difficulty I alſo procured a ſmall 
quantity of the ſame kind of air from a ſolu- 
tion of iron in ſpirit of nitre, by the ſame pr 
ceſs. | 


Having, for a different purpoſe, fired ſome 


paper, which had been dipped in a ſolution of 
copper in diluted ſpirit of nitre, in nitrous air, 
I found there was a conſiderable addition to the 
quantity of it; upon which I fired ſome of the 
ſame kind of paper in quickſilver and preſently 
obſerved that air was produced from it in great 
plenty. This air, at the firſt, ſeemed to have 
ſome ſingular properties, but afterwards I found 
that it was nothing more than a mixture of ni- 
trous air, from the precipitate of the ſolution, 
and of inflammable air, from the paper ; but 
that the former was predominanr. 


In the mixture of this kind of air with com- 
mon air, in a trough of water which had been 
putrid, but which at that time ſeemed to have 
Tecovered its former ſweetneſs (for it was not in 


the leaſt degree offenſive to the ſmell) a pheno- 
* | menon 


* 


Nitrous Ar. | | 203 


menon ſometimes occurred, which for a long 
time exceedingly delighted and puzzled me; 
but which was afterwards the means'of letting 
me ſee much farther into the conſtitution of ni- 
trous air than I had been able to ſee before, 


When the diminution of the air was nearly 
completed, the veſſel in which the mixture was 
made began to be filled with the moſt beautiful 
white fumes, exactly reſembling the precipitation 
of ſome white ſubſtance in a tranſparent men- 
ſtruum, or the falling of very fine ſnow z ex- 
cept that it was much thicker below than above, 
as indeed is the caſe in all chemical precipita- 
tions. This appearance continued two or three 
minutes» 1 


At other times I went over the ſame proceſs, 
as nearly as poſſible in the ſame manner, but 
without getting this remarkable appearance, and 


was ſeveral times greatly diſappointed and cha- 


grined, when I baulked the expectations of my 
friends, to whom I had deſcribed, and meant to 
have ſhewn it. This made me give all the at- 
tention I poſſibly could to this experiment, en- 
deavouring to recollect every | circumſtance, 
which, though unſuſpected at the time, might 


have contributed to produce this new appear- 


ance ; and I took a great deal of pains to pro- 


cure a quantity of. this air from the paper 


above 


SR — 


- * 
2 — NI 
„ 


m. 2 bd I <4 4 
_ 
a Ia 
4 * > 
* 


206 _ Obſervations on 


above mentioned for the purpoſe, which, with 
a ſmall burning lens, and an uncertain ſun, is 
not a little troubleſome, But all that I obſerved 
for ſome time was, that I ſtood the beſt chance 
of ſucceeding when I warmed the veſſel in which 
the mixture was made, and agitated the air du- 
ring the efferveſcence. 


Finding, at length, that, with the ſame 
preparation and attentions, I got the ſame ap- 
pearance from a mixture of nitrous. and com- 
mon air in the ſame trough of water, I con- 
cluded that it could not depend upon any 
thing peculiar to the precipitate of the copper 
contained in the paper from which the air was 
procured, as I had at firſt imagined, but upon 
what was common to it, and pure nitrous 
air. | 


Afterwards, having, (with a view to obſerve 
whether any cryſtals would be formed by the 
union of volatile alkali, and nitrous air, fimilar 
ro thoſe formed by it and fixed air, as deſcribed 
by Mr. Smeth in his Diſſertation on fixed Air) 
opened the mouth of a phial which was half 
filled with a volatile alkaline liquor, in a jar of 
nitrous air (in the manner deſcribed p. 11. 
fig. 4.) 1 had an appearance which perfectly 
explained the preceding. All that part of the 
Phial Which was abort the liquor, and which 
. contained 


Nitrous Air. 207 


contained common air, was filled with beauti- 
ful white clouds, as if ſome fine white powder had 
been inſtantly thrown into it, and ſome of theſe 
clouds roſe within the jar of nitrous air, This 


appearance continued about a minute, and then - 


Oy ans A the air r becoming tranſpa - 
rent. 
1 | 

Withdrawing the phial, and expoſing it to 
the common air, it there alſo became turbid, 
and ſoon after the tranſparency returned. In- 
troducing it again into the nitrous air, the 
clouds appeared as before. In this manner the 
white fumes, and tranſparency, ſucceeded each 
other alternately, as often as I choſe to repeat 
the experiment, and would no doubt have con- 
tinued till the air in the jar had been thoroughly 
diluted with common air. Theſe appearances 
were the ſame with any ſubſtance that contained 
volatile alkali, fluid or ſolid. 


When, inſtead of the ſmall phial, I uſed a 
large and tall glaſs jar, this appearance was 
truly fine and ſtriking, eſpecially when the wa- 
ter in the' trough was very tranſparent. For I 
had only to put the ſmalleſt drop of a volatile 
alkaline liquor, or the ſmalleſt bit of the ſolid 
ſalt, into the jar, and the moment that the 
mouth of it was opened in a jar of nitrous 


air, the white clouds above mentioned began to 
| : be 


e 


* on” 5 


# — 


"ny JO "oY Ke 2 . — 0 I 42 
OS 2 1 — a — 8 . 
r 


208 Obſervations on 


be formed at the mouth, and preſently de- 
ſcended ro the bottom, ſo as to fill the whole, 
were it ever ſo large, as with fine ſnow. 


In conſidering this experiment, I ſoon per- 
ceived that this curious appearance muſt have 
been occaſioned by the mixture oß the nitrous 
and common air, and therefore that the white 
clouds muſt be nitrous ammoni ac, formed by the 
acid of the-nitrous air, ſet looſe in the decom- 
poſition of it by common air, while the phlo- 
giſton, which muſt be another conſtituent part 
of nitrous air, entering the common air, is the 
cauſe of the diminution it ſuffers in this proceſs ; 
as it is the cauſe of a fimilar diminution, in a 
variety of other proceſſes. 

I would obſerve, that it is not peculiar to ni» 
trous air to be a teſt of the fitneſs of air for re- 


ſpiration. Any other proceſs by which air is 


diminiſhed and made noxious anſwers the ſame 
purpoſe, ' Liver of ſulphur for inſtance, the 
calcination of metals, or a mixture of iron 
filings and brimſtone will do juſt the ſame 
thing; but the application of them is not ſo 
eaſy, or elegant, and the effect is not fo ſoon 
perceived, In fact, it is phlogiſion that is the 
teſt. If the air be ſo loaded with this principle 
that it can take no more, which is ſeen by its 


not being diminiſhed in any of the proceſſes 
above 


ad 
Nitrous Ai#. a 209g 


above mentioned, it is noxious ; and it is whole- | | 1 | 
ſome in proportion to the ; of 3 | 
; that 1 it is able to take. | ; 


1 


. 
12 


> wing ae eg.n - 
” 
l » ” > 4 — 


This, I have no doubt; is the true theory of 
the diminution of common air by nitrous air; 
the redneſs of the appearance being nothing 
more than the uſual colour of the fumes of 
ſpirit of nitre, which is how diſengaged from 
the ſuperabundant phlogiſton with which it 
was combined in the nitrous air, and ready to 
form another union with any thing that is at 


hand, and „ a it. 


moniac, water imbibes it like any other acid; 
even quickſilver is corroded. by it; but this 
action being ſlow, the redneſs in this mixture of 


nitrous and common air continues much longer 
when the proceſs is made in quickſilver, than 
when it is made in water; and the diminution, as ; 
I have alfo obſerved, is by no means fo great. | 


Wakchavehatie athens | 3 
| 
f 


I was confirmed in this opinion when I put 
a bit of volatile alkaline ſalt into the jar of 

quickſilver in which I made the mixture of 

nitrous and common air. In theſe circum- 

ſtances, the veſſel being previouſly filled with 

the alkaline fumes, the acid immediately joined | 


them, formed the white clouds above mention- 
| P ed, 


„„ P- Y 


. 
lp ona — ẽÜm0ñ M ꝗ ,], —— 

* „ 
BY "- 12 5 


Obfervations on 

ed, and the diminution proceeded almoſt as far 
as when the proceſs was made in water. That 
it did not proceed quite fo far, I attribute 
chiefly to the ſmall quantiry of calx formed by - 
the ſlight ſolution of mercury with the acid 
fumes not being able to abforb all the fixed air 
that 1s precipitated from the common air by the 


Phlogiſton. 


In part, alſo, it may be owing to the ſmall 
quantity of ſurface in the quickſilver in the 
veſſels that I made uſe of; in conſequence of 
which the acid fumes could act upon it only in 
a ſlow ſucceſſion, ſo that part of them, as 
well as of the fixed air, had an opportu- 
nity of forming Nj with the dimi- 


niſhed air. 


This, as 1 hi obſerved before, was ſo much 
the caſe when the proceſs was made in quick- 
ſilver, without any volatile alkali, that when 
water was admitted to it, after ſome time, it 
was not capable of diſſolving that union, tho? 
it would not have taken place if the proceſs had 
been in water from the firſt, 


In diverſifying this experiment, I found that 
it appeared to very great advantage when 1 
ſuſpenced a piece of volatile ſalt in the com- 


mon air, previous to the admiſſian of nitrous 
air 


— 


” „ 
Nitrous Air. 211 


air to it, incloſing it in a bit of gauze, muſlin; 
or a ſmall net of wire. For, preſently after 
the redneſs of the mixture begins to go off, the 
white cloud, like ſnow, begins to deſcend from 
the falt, as if a white powder was ſhaken out 
of the bag that contains it. This white 


cloud preſently fills the whole veſſel, and the 


appearance will laſt about five minutes; 


If the falt be not put to the mixture of theſe 
two kinds of air till it has perfectly recovered 
its tranſparency, the efferveſcence being com- 
pletely over, no white cloud will be formed ; 
and, what is rather more remarkable, there is 
nothing of this appearance when the ſalt is put 
into the nitrous air itſelf, The reaſon of this 
muſt be, that the acid of the nitrous air has a 
nearer affinity with its phlogiſton than with the 
volatile alkali; though, the phlogiſton having 
a nearer affinity with ſomething in the common 
air, the acid being thereby ſet looſe, wilt unite 


with the alkaline vapour, if it be at hand to 


unite with it, 


There is alfo very little of any white cloud 
formed upon holding a piece of the volatile 
falt within the mouth of a phial containing 
ſmoking ſpirit of nitre. Alſo when-I threw _ 
the focus of a burning mirror upon ſome fat 
ammoniac in nitrous air, and filled the whole 

P 2 veſſel 


212 | Obſervations on 


veſſel with white fumes which aroſe from it, 
they were ſoon diſperſed, and the air was nei- 
ther diminiſhed nor altered. 


I was now fully convinced, that the white 
cloud which I caſually obſerved, in the firſt 
of theſe experiments, was occaſioned by the 
volatile alkali emitted from the water, which 
was in a flight degree putrid; and that the 
warming, and agitation of the veſſels, had 
promoted the emiſſion of the putrid, or alka- 
line effluvium. 


I could not - perceive that the diminution of 
commor air by the mixture of nitrous air was 


_ ſenſibly increaſed by the preſence of the volatile 
_ alkali. - It is poflible, however, that, by aſſiſt- 


ing the water to take up the acid, ſomething leſs 
of it may be incorporated with the remaining 
diminiſhed air than would otherwiſe have been; 

but I did not give much attention to this cir- 


cumſtance. 


When the phial in which I put the alkaline 
falts contained any kind of noxious air, the 
opening of it in nitrous air was not followed by 
any thing of the appearance above mentioned. 
This was the caſe with inflammable air. But 
when, after agitating the inflammable air in 
water, I had brought it to a ſtate in which it 
1 ; ""_ 


l . 
— 2828. — 1 
- AY 
— 2 


Nitrous Air. 213 


was diminiſhed a little by the mixture of nitrous 
air, the cloudy appearance was in the ſame pro- 
portion; ſo that this appearance ſeems to be 
equally a teſt of the fitneſs of air for reſpira- 
tion, with the tedneſs which attends the mixture 
of it with nitrous air only. 


Having generally faſtened the ſmall bag which 
contained the volatile ſalt to a piece of braſs 
wire in the preceding experiment, I commonly 
found the end of it corroded, and covered with 
a blue ſubſtance. Alſo the ſalt itſelf, and ſome- 
times the bag was died blue. But finding that 
this was not the caſe when I uſed an iton wire 
in the ſame circumſtances, but that it became 
red, I was ſatisfied that both the metals had 
been diſſolved by the volatile alkali. At firſt 
I had a ſuſpicion that the blue might have 
come from the copper, out of which the nitrous 
air had been made, But when the-nitrous air 


was made from iron, the appearanceg were, in 5 


all reſpects, the ſame. 


I have obſerved, in the preceding ſection, 
that if nitrous air be mixed with common air 
in lime- water, the ſurface of the water, where 
it is contiguous to that mixture, will be covered 
with an incruſtation of lime, ſhewing that ſome 
fixed air had been depoſited in the proceſs. It 
is remarkable, however, as I there alſo juſt 

* mentioned, 


214 Obſervations on 


mentioned, that this is the caſe when nitrous 
air alone is put to a veſſel of lime- water, after 
it has been kept in a bladder, or only transferred 
from one veſſel to another by a bladder, in the 
manner K p. 15. fig. 9. 


As 1 hy uſed the ſame bladder for transfer- 
ring various kinds of air, and among the reſt 
fxed air, I firft imagined that this effect might 
have been occaſioned by a mixture of this fixed 
air with the nitrous air, and therefore took a 
freſh. bladder; but ſtill the effect was the ſame, 
To ſatisfy myſelf farther, that the bladder had 
produced this effect, I put one into a jar of 
nitrous air, and after it had continued there a 
day and a night, I found that the nitrous air in 
this jar, though it was transferred in a glaſs 
veſſel, made lime-water turbid, 


Whether there was any thing in the prepara- 
tion of theſe bladders that occaſioned their pro- 
ducing this effect, I cannot tell. They were 
ſuch as I procure from the apothecaries. The 
thing ſeems to deſerve farther examination, as 
there ſeems, in this caſe, to be the peculiar effect 
of fixed air from other cauſes, or elſe a pro- 
duction of fixed air from materials that have 

not been ſuppoſed to yield it, at leaſt not in 
circumſtances fimilar to theſe, 


- C 0 
P - 
1 cs _ 
4 * 


Nitrous Mir. 215 


As fixed air united to water diſſolves iron, 
I had the curiofity to try whether fixed air alone 
would do it; and as nitrous air is of an acid 
nature; as well as fixed air, I, at the fame time, 
expoſed a large ſurface of iron to both the 
kinds ;- firſt filling two eight ounce phials with 
nails, and then with quickſilver, and after that 
diſplacing the quickſilver in one of the phials 
by fixed air, and in the other by nitrous air ; 
then inverting them, and leaving them with 
their mouths immerſed in baſons of quickfilver, 


In theſe circumſtances the two phials ſtood 
about two months, when no ſenſible change at 
all was produced in the fixed air, or in the iron 
which had been expoſed to it, but a moſt re- 
markable, and moſt unexpected change was 
made in the nitrous air ; and in purſuing the 
experiment, it was transformed into a ſpecies of 
air, with properties which, at the time of my 
firſt publication on this ſubje&t, I ſhould not 
have heſitated to pronounce impoſſible, viz. air 
in which a candle burns quite naturally and 
freely, and which is yet in the higheſt degree 
noxious to animals, inſomuch that they die the 
moment they are put into it; whereas, in ge- 
neral, animals live with little ſenſible inconve- 
nience in air in which candles have burned out. 
Such, however, is nitrous air, after it hat been 
long expoſed to a large ſurface of iron, | 

P 4 3 


216 Obſervations on 


It is not leſs extraordinary, that a ſtill longer 
continuance of nitrous air in theſe circumſtances 
(but how long depends upon too many, and too 
minute circumſtances to be aſcertained with 
exactneſs) makes it not only to admit a candle 
to burn in it, but enables it to burn with an 
enlarged flame, hy another flame (extending every 
where to an equal diſtance from that of the 
candle, and often plainly diſtinguiſhable from | ; 
it) adhering to it. Sometimes I have perceived 
the flame of the candle, in theſe circumſtances, 
to be twice as large as it is naturally, and ſome- 
times not leſs than five or fix. times larger; and 
yet without any thing like an exploſion, as in the 
firing bi: . weakeſt inflammable air. 


Not is pe farther progreſs in the tranſmuta- 
tion of nitrous air, in theſe circumſtances, leſs 
remarkable. For when it has been brought to 
the ſtate laſt mentioned, the agitation of it in 
freſh water almoſt inſtantly takes off that pecu- 
liar kind of inflammability, ſo that it extin- 
guiſhes a candle, retaining its noxious quality. 
It alſo retains its power of diminiſhing common 


be ina very great __— 


But this noxious quality, like the noxious 
quality of all other Kinds of air that will bear 
agitation in water, is taken out of it by this 


operation, « continued about five minutes; in 
as | | which 


/ 


Nitrous Air. WJ 217 
Which proceſs it ſuffers a farther and very con- 


ſiderable diminution. It is then itſelf dimi- 


niſhed by freſh nitrous air, and animals live in 


it very well, about as well as in air in which 


candles have burned out. 


Laſtly, One quantity of nitrous air, which 
had been expoſed to iron in quickſilver, from 
December 18 to January 20, and which hap- 
pened to ſtand in water till January 31 (the iron 
ſtill continuing in the phial) was fired with an 
exploſion, exactly like a weak inflammable air. 
At the ſame time another quantity of nitrous 
air, which had likewiſe been expoſed to iron, 
ſtanding in quickſilver, till about the ſame time, 
and had then ſtood in water only, without 1 iron, 
only admitted a candle to burn in it with an 
- enlarged flame, as in the caſes above mentioned. 
But whether the difference I have mentioned in 
the circumſtances of theſe experiments contri- 
buted to this difference in the reſult, I cannot 
tell. 


Nitrous air treated in the manner above men- 
tioned 1s diminiſhed about one fourth by ſtand- 
ing in quickſilyer ; and water admitted to it will 
abſorb about half the remainder ; but if water 
only, and no quickſilver, be uſed from the be- 
ginning, the njtrous air will be diminiſhed much 
faſter and farther ; ſo that not more than one 


fourth, 


27 — — TEE re 2 
9 


. . 
a 
 _—— tt... Ale net tr nt 
\ = 
P 
_ hn. 
Oo A 


218 Obſervations os 


fourth, one ſixth, or one tenth of the original 
quantity will remain. But I do not know that 
there is any difference in the conſtitution of the 
air which remains in * two caſes. | 


The water which 15 imbibed chis nitrous air 
expoſed to iron is remarkably green, alſo the 
. phial containing it becomes deeply, and, I be- 

lieve, indelibly tinged with green; and if the 
water be put into another veſſel, it preſently 
depoſits a conſiderable quantity of matter, which 
when dry appears to be the earth or ochre of 
iron; from which it is evident, that the acid of 
the nitrous air diſſolves the iron; while the phlo- 
giſton, being ſet looſe, diminiſhes nitrous air, 
as in the proceſs of the iron filings and brim- 


ſtone. 


A Upon this hint, inſtead of uſing iron, I in- 
troduced a pot of liver of ſulphur into a jar of 
nitrous air, and preſently found, that what I 
had before done by means of iron in ſix weeks, 
or two months, I could do by liver of ſulphur 
(in conſequence, no doubt, of its giving its 
phlogiſton more freely) in leſs than twenty-four 
hours, eſpecially when the proceſs was kept 


11 is remarkable, however, that if the proceſs 
with liver of ſulphur be ſuffered to proceed, 
the 


Nitrous Air. 219 


— 


the nitrdus Air will be diminiſhed necks. | 
At one time not more than one twentieth of the 
original quantity remained, and how much far- 
ther it might have been diminiſhed, I cannot 
tell. In this gteat diminution, it does not ad- 
mit a candle to burn in it at all; and I generally 
found this to be the caſe whenever the dimi- 
nution had proceeded: beyond three fourths of 
the . quantity *. 


It is ſomething remarkable, that though the 
diminution of nitrous air by iron filings and 
brimſtone very much reſembles the diminution 
of it by iron only, or by liver of ſulphur, yet 
the iron filings and brimſtone never bring it to 
ſuch a ſtate as that a candle will burn in it; 
and alſo that, after this proceſs, it is never 
capable of diminiſhing common air. But when 
it is conſidered that theſe properties are de- 
ſtroyed by agitation in water, this difference in 
the reſult of proceſſes, in other reſpects ſimilar, 
will appear leſs extraordinary ; ; and they agree 
in this, that long agitation in water makes both 
theſe kinds of nitrous air equally fit for reſpi- 
ration, being equally diminiſhed by freſh nitrous 
air. It is poſſible that there would haye been 


he reſult of ſeveral of theſe 83 I had the 
pleaſure of trying in the preſence of the celebrated Mr. 
De Luc of Geneva, when he was upon a viſit to Lord 
Shelburne in Wiltſhire, 


a more 


poſed to the iron a week or two longer than in 


220 | Obſervations on 


a more exact agreement in the reſult of. theſe 
proceſſes, if they had been made in equal de- 
of beat; but the proceſs with iron was 


made in the ufital temperature of the atmo- 


ſphere, and that with liver of cen e 
near a fire. £44806 I, * b 


It may ceardy, I chivk; be «inferred Rom theſe 
experiments, that all the difference between 


freſh nitrous air, that ſtate of it in which it is 


partially inflammable, or wholly fo, that in 
which it again extinguiſhes candles, and that in 
which it finally becomes fit for reſpiration, de- 
pends upon ſome difference in the mode of the 
combination of its acid with Phlogiſton, or on 


the proportion between theſe two ingredients in 


its compoſition ; and it is not improbable but 
that, by a little more attention to theſe experi- 


ments, the whole myftery of this Proportion 


and combination 90 or how rear 


1 muſt not omit to obſerve that there was 
ſomething peculiar in the reſult of the firſt ex- 
periment which I made with nitrous air expo- 


fed to iron ; which was that, without any agi- 


tation in water, it was diminiſhed by freſh ni- 
trous air, and that a candle burned in it quite 
vaturally. To what this difference was owing 
J cannot tell. This air, indeed, had been ex- 


any 


any of the other caſes, but I do not imagine 
that this circumſtance could have produced 
that difference, | 


When the proceſs is in water with iron, the 
time in which the diminution is accompliſhed is 
exceedingly various; being ſometimes com- 
pleted in a few days, whereas at other times 


it has required a week or a fortnight. Some | 


kinds of iron alſo produced this effect much 
ſooner than others, but on what circumſtances 


this difference depends I do not know. What 


are the varieties in the reſult of this experi- 
ment when it is made in quickſilver I cannot 
tell, becauſe, on account of its requiring more 
time, I have not repeated it ſo often; but I 
once found that nitrous air was not ſenſibly 
changed by having been expoſed to iron in 
quickſilver nine days; whereas in water a very 
conſiderable alteration was always made i in much 
leſs than half that time. 


PO may juſt deſerve to be mentioned, that ni- 


trous air extremely rarified in an air-pump diſ- 


folves iron, and is diminiſhed by it as much 


as when it is in its native ſtate of condenſation. 


It is ſomething remarkable, though I never 
attended to it particularly before I made theſe 


laſt experiments, and it may tend to throw ſome 
light 


222 Obſervations on 


light upon them, that when a candle is extin- 
guiſhed, as it never fails to be, in nitrous air, 
the flame ſeems to be a little enlarged at its 
edges, by another bluiſh flame 50 to it, juſt 
Ty its extinction. 


| It is proper to obſerve in this place, that the 
electric ſpark taken in nitrous air diminiſhes it 
to one fourth of its original quantity, which 
is about the quantity of its diminution by iron 
filings and brimſtone, and alſo by liver of ſul- 
phur without heat. The air is alſo brought 
by electricity to the ſame ſtate as it is by iron 
filings and brimſtone, not diminiſhing common 
air. If the electric ſpark be taken in it when 
it is confined by water tinged with archil, it is 
preſently changed from blue to red, and that to 
a very great degree. 


When the iron nails or wires, which I have 
uſed to diminiſh nitrous air, had done their of- 
fice, I laid them aſide, not ſuſpecting that they 
could be of any other philoſophical uſe; but 
after having lain expoſed to the open air al- 
moſt a fortnight ; having, for ſome other pur- 
| poſe, pur ſome of them into a veſſel contain- 
ing common air, ſtanding inverted, and im- 
merſed in water, I was ſurprized to obſerve 
that the air in which they were confined was 
diminiſhed. The diminution proceeded fo faſt, 

| ; that 


© 


\Nitrous Air. 223. 


that the proceſs was completed 1 in about twen- 
ty-four hours ; for in that time the air was di- 


miniſhed about one fifth, ſo that it made no 
efferveſcence with nitrous air, and was, there- 


fore, no doubt, highly noxious, like air r 
niſhed by any other proceſs. 


This experiment I have repeated a great 


number of times, with the ſame phials, filled 
with nails or wires that have been fuffered to 
ruſt in nitrous air, but their power of diminiſh- 
ing common air grows leſs and leſs continually. 
How long it will be before it is quite exhauſted 
I cannot tell. This diminution. of air I con- 
clude muſt ariſe from the phlogiſton, either of 
the nitrous air or the iron, being ſome way en- 
tangled in the ruſt, in which the wires were en- 
cruſted, and afterwards getting looſe from it. 


To the experiments upon iron filings 
brimftone in nitrous air, I muſt add, that when 
a pot full of this mixture had abſorbed as much 


as it could of a jar of nitrous air (which is about 


three fourths of the whole) I put freſh nitrous 
air to it, and it continued to abſorb, till three 
or four jars full of it diſappeared ; but the ab- 
ſorption was exceedingly flow at the laſt. Alſo 
when I drew this pot through the water, and 


admitted freſh nitrous air to it, it abſorbed an- 
other 


and 


4 7 9H I A 
9 * # - 
—_— a> 


. * . . 
_ a . 
_ — —— e re He eee EPS A Soar en ns 


— 


4 — 


2 * _ 
_ - » 
x 
— eas,” 


— Genet <4 ͤ 2 —gCñDhͤ wn — — Roo — 


© 
224 Obſervations on 


other jar full, and then ceaſed. But when 1 
ſcraped off the outer ſurface of this mixture, 
which had been ſo long expoſed to the nitrous 
air, the remainder e more of the air. 


When I took the top + 8 which I 
had ſcraped off and threw upon it the focus of 
a burning-glaſs; the air in which it was con- 
fined was diminiſhed, and became quite noxi- 
ous; yet when I endeavoured to get air from 
this matter in a jar full of quickſilver, I was 
able to procure little or nothing. 


It is not a little remarkable that nitrous air 
diminiſhed by iron filings and brimſtone, which 
is about one fourth, cannot, by agitation in 
water, be diminiſhed much farther; whereas 
pure nitrous air may, by the ſame proceſs, be 
diminiſhed to one twentieth of its whole bulk, 
and perhaps much more. This is ſimilar to 
the effect of the ſame mixture, and of phlo- 
giſton in other caſes, on fixed air ; for it ſo far 
changes its conſtitution, that it is afterwards 
incapable of mixing with water. It is fimilar 
alſo to the effect of phlogiſton in acid air, 
which of itſelf is almoſt inſtantly abſorbed by 
water ; but by this addition it is firſt converted 
into inflammable air, which does not readily 


mix with water, and -which, by long agita- 
tion 


* 1 . | g 
Nitrous Air. 223 


tion i in water, becomes of another conſtitution, 
ſtill leſs miſcible with Water. 


1 ſhall cloſe this ſection with a few other 


obſervations of a miſcellaneous nature. 


Nitrous air is as much diminiſhed both by 


iron filings, and alſo by liver of ſulphur, 
when confined in quickfilver, as when it is ex- 
poſed to water. 


Diſtilled water tinged blue with the juice of 
turnſole becomes red on being impregnated 
with nitrous air; but by being expoſed a week 
or a fortnight to the common atmoſphere, in 


open and ſhallow veſſels, it recovers its blue 


colour; though, in that time; the greater part 
of the water wilt be evaporated. This ſhews 
that in time nitrous air eſcapes from the wa- 
ter with which it is combined, juſt as fixed air 
does, though by no means ſo readily *. 


Having diſſolved ſilver, copper, and iron in 
equal quantities of ſpirit of nitre diluted with 
water, the quantities of nitrous air produced 
from them were in the following proportion; 
from iron 8, from copper 62, from filver 6. In 


Ihave not repeated this experiment with that variation 
of circumſtances which an attention to Mr. Bewley's obſer- 


vation will ſuggeſt. 
Q about 


RR TTY 


= 
Z ˖ -, ” OI U. 
a > - 
<a q 


226 Obſervations on 


about the ſame proportion alſo it was neceſ- 

ſary to mix water with the ſpirit of nitre in 

each caſe, in order to make it diffolve theſe 

metals with equal rapidity, filver requiring the 
leaſt water, and iron the moſt, - 


+ Phoſphorus gave no light in nitrous air, 
and' did not take away from its power of di- 
miniſhing common air; only when the redneſs 
of the mixture went off, the veſſel in which 
it was made was filled with white fumes, as 
if there had been ſome volatile alkali in it. 
The phoſphorus itſelf was unchanged, 


There is ſomething remarkable in the effect 
of nitrous air on, in/e7s that are put into it. 
I obſerved before that this kind of air 1s as 
Noxious as any whatever, a mouſe dying the, 
moment it is put into it; but frogs and ſnails 
(and therefore, probably, other animals whoſe 
reſpiration is not frequent) will bear being ex- 
poſed to it a conſiderable time, though they 
die at length. A frog put into nitrous air 
ſtruggled much for two or three minutes, 
and moved now and then for a quarter of an 
hour, after which it was taken out, but did not 
recover. Waſps always died the moment they 
were put into the nitrous air. I could never 
obſerve that they made the leaſt motion in it, 


nor could they be recovered to life afterwards. 
"> _— 


/ n * 


Nitrous Air. 227 


This was alſo the caſe in general with /piders, 
flies, and butterflies. Sometimes, however, ſpi- 
ders would recover after being expoſed * 
à minute to this kind of air. | 


Conſidering how fatal nitrous air is to in- 
ſeas, and like wiſe its great antiſeptic power, 
I conceived that confiderable uſe might be 
made of it in medicine, eſpecially in the form 
of chyllers, in which fixed air had been applied 
with ſome ſucceſs ; and in order to try whether 
the bowels of an animal would bear the injec- 
tion of it, I contrived, with the help of Mr: 
Hey, to convey a quantity of it up the anus 
of a dog, But he gave manifeſt ſigns of un- 
eaſineſs, as long as he retained it, which was a 
conſiderable time, though in a few hours after- 
wards he was as lively as ever, and ſeemed to 
haye ſuffered nothing from the operation, 


Perhaps if nitrous air was diluted either 
with common air, or fixed air, the bowels 
might bear it better, and till it might be de- 
ſtructive to worms of all kinds, and be of uſe 
to check or correct putrefaction in the inteſti- 
tial canal, or other parts of the ſyſtem. I re- 
peat it once more that, being no phyſician, I 
run no riſk by ſuch propoſals as theſe ; and I 
cannot help flattering myſelf that, in time, very 
. great medicinal uſe will be made of the appli- 


Q 2 ati 


228 Obſervations on 


cation of theſe different kinds of air to the 
animal ſyſtem. Let ingenious phyſicians at- 
tend to this ſubject, and endeavour to lay hold 
of the new handle which is now preſented them, 
before it be ſeized by raſh empiricks ; who, by 
an indiſcriminate and injudicious application, 
often ruin the credit of things and proceſſes 
which might otherwiſe make an uſeful addition 
to the materia and ars medica. | 


In the firſt publication of my papers, having 
experienced the remarkable antiſeptic power of 
nitrous air, I propoſed an attempt to preſerve 
anatomical preparations, &c. by means of it; 
but Mr. Hey, who made the trial, found that, 
after ſome months, various animal ſubſtances 
were ſhriveled, and did not preſerve their natu- 
ral forms in this kind of air. 


SE C- 


Marine acid Air. | 229 


SECTION.IV: 
Of Manz Acip Arx. 


In my former experiments on this ſpecies of 
air I procured it from ſpirit of ſalt, but I have 
fince hit upon a much leſs expenſive method of 
getting it, by having recourſe to the proceſs 
by which the ſpirit of ſalt is itſelf originally 
made, For this purpoſe I fill a ſmall phial 
with common ſalt, pour upon it a ſmall 
quantity of concentrated oil of vitriol, and re- 
ceive the fumes emitted by it in a veſſel previ- 
ouſly filled with quickſilver, and ſtanding in a 
baſon of quickſilver, in which it appears in the 
form of a perfectly tranſparent air, being preciſe- 
ly the ſame thing with that which I had before 

expelled from the ſpirit of falt. 


This method of procuring acid air is the 
more convenient, as a phial, once prepared in 
this manner, will ſuffice, for common experi- 
ments, many weeks ; eſpecially if a little more 
oil of vitriol be occaſionally put to it. It only 
requires a little more heat at the laſt than at 
the firſt. Indeed, at the firſt, the heat of a 
_ perſon's hand will often be ſufficient to make it 


Q3 throw 


- + 
l \ _ 2 2 
——ͤ x ů ů ů 1 
* = 
. 2 * — 


2 30 | Obſervations on 


| throw. out the vapour. In warm weather it 


will even keep ſmoking many days without 


the.application of any other heat. 


On this account, it ſhould be placed where 
there are no inſtruments, or any thing of metal, 
that can be corroded by this acid vapour. It 
is from dear-bought experience that 1 give this 

advice. It may eafily be perceived when this 
phial is throwing | out this acid vapour, as it 
always appears, in the open air, in the form 
of a light cloud; owing, I ſuppoſe, to the 
acid attracting to itſelf, and uniting with, 
the moiſture that is in the common atmoſphere, 


By this proceſs I even made a ſtronger ſpirit 


of falt than can be procured 1 in any other way. 
For having a little water in the veſſel which 
contains the quickſilver, it imbibes the acid 


vapour, and at length becomes truly ſaturated 


with it. Having, in this manner, impreg- 
nated pure water mi acid air, 1 could after- 
wards expel the ſame air from i it, as from com- 


mon ſpirit of alt. 


{dT obſerved before that this acid vapour, or 
air, has a ſtrong affinity with pblogiſton, ſo 
that it decompoſes many ſubſtances which con- 
tain it, and with them forms a permanently in- 
fammable air, no more liable to be imbibed 
by 


* 


_ — 
5% 7 1 = 4 4 
rr es Le IE 2221 . 
, . PRE __— ks * — 2 — * . 1 
— 4 1 
1 LY F . * 3 1 = 2 - 
_ } ”_ - 


: 
—— 
* 
= 
4 
P * 


Marine acid Air. 231 


by water than inflammable air procured by 
any other Proceſs, being i in fact the very. ſame 
thing ; and that, in ſome caſes, it even diflodges 
ſpirit of nitre and oil of vitriol, which in gene- 
ral appear to be ſtronger acids than itſelf. 
I have fince obſerved that, by giving it more 
time, it will extract phlogiſton from ſubſtances 
from which I at firſt concluded that it Was not 
able to do it, as from dry wood, cruſts of 
bread not burnt, dry fleſh, and what is more 
extraordinary from flints. As there was ſome- 
thing peculiar to itſelf in the proceſs or reſult 
of each of theſe experiments, it may not be im- 
proper to mention them diſtinctly. 0 

Pieces of dry corſ wood being put to the acid 
air, a ſmall quantity remained not imbibed by 
water, and was inflammable, 


Very dry pieces of oak, being expoſed to 
this air a day and a night, after imbibing a 


conſiderable quantity of i it, produced air which 
was inflammable indeed, but in the ſlighteſt de- 
gree imaginable. It ſeemed to be very Deny 
in the ſtate of common air. 


A piece. of ivory imbibed the acid vapour 


very ſlowly, In a day and a night, however, 
about half an ounce meaſure of permanent air 


was produced, and 1t was pretty ſtrongly in- 
Q 4 flam- 


„ 4 — © ane N 
r ewe —_Os 2 OoOoe—eRe Doe _—_— CC > wr Pg — CO 
, | | e 
' of 
"4 JS 
" * 


* 


232 | Obſervations on 


flammable. The ivory was not diſcoloured, 
but was rendered ſuperficially ſoft, and clam- 
my, taſting yery acid. 


Pieces of Beef, roaſted, and made quite dry, 
bur not burnt, abſorbed the acid vapour ſlow- 
ly; and when it had continued in this ſituation 

all night, from five ounte meaſures of the air, 
half a meaſure was permanent, and pretty 
ſtrongly inflammable. This experiment ſuc- 
ceeded a ſecond time exactly in the ſame man- 
ner; but when I uſed pieces of white dry 
chicken-fleſh though I allowed the ſame time, 
and in other reſpects the proceſs ſeemed to 
go on in the ſame manner, I could not per- 
ceive that any part of the N air was 
inflammable. 


Some aces of a whitiſh kind of fint, be- 
ing put into a quantity of acid air, imbibed 
but AN little of it in a day and a night; 
but of ' 2x ounce meaſures of it, about half a 
meaſure remained unabſorbed by water, and 
this was ſtrongly inflammable, taking fire juſt 
like an equal mixture of inflammable and com- 
mon air. At another time, however, I could 
not procure any inflammable air by this means, 
but to what circumſtance theſe different reſults 
were owing [ cannot tell. | | 


: That 


Marine acid Air. _ 


That inflammable air is produced from char- 
coal in acid air I obſerved before. I have ſince 


found that it may likewiſe be procured from pit 


coal, without being charred, 


In inaable air I had alſo obſerved to ariſe 


from the expoſure of ſpirit of wine, and'various 


vily ſubſtances, to the vapour of ſpirit of ſale. 
I have fince made others of a fimilar nature, 
and as peculiar circumſtances attended fome 
of theſe experiments, I ſhall recite them more 
at large, 


Eſſential oil of mint abſorbed this air pretty 
faſt, and preſently became. of a deep brown 
colour. When it was taken out of this air it 
was of the conſiſtence of treacle, and ſunk in 
water, ſmelling differently from what it did 


before ; but ſtill the ſmell of the mint was 
predominant. Very little or none of the air 


was fixed, ſo as to become inflammable ; but 


more time would probably have produced this 


effect. | 


Oil of turpentine was alſo much thickened, 
and became of a deep browa colour, by being 
ſaturated with acid air. 


Ether abſorbed acid air very faſt, and be- 
came firſt of a turbid white, and then of a yel- 
©M | lo 


= ——_ 
— 
— 


* _— 


+> © % © 


- 


© 


: 
— 2D - 

N — . * * 33 * 

823 

— 
"* 4 "_ 
A 8 . * 
5 8 T — . 
* 8 = 


— 


- —— — 3 
— = 448 — n 
= : - 


234 Obſervations on 


low and brown colour. In one night a conſider. 
able quantity of permanent air was produced, 
and it was frongly. inflammable. 


Having, at one 3 fully ſaturated a quan- 
tity of ether with acid air, I admitted bubbles 
of common air to it, through the quickſilver, 
by which it was confined, and obſerved that 
white fumes were made in it, at the entrance of 
every bubble, for a conſiderable time. 

At another time, 4 fully e a 
ſmall quantity of ether with acid air, and 

having left the phial in which it was contained 
nearly full of the air, and inverted, it was by 
ſome accident overturned; when, inſtantly, the 
whole room was filled with a viſible fume, like a 
white cloud, which had very much the ſmell of 
ether, but peculiarly offenſive. Opening the 
door and window of the room, this light cloud 
filled a long paſſage, and another room. In the 
mean time the ether was ſeemingly all va- 
niſhed, but ſome time after the ſurface of the 
quickſilver in which the experimeut had been 
made was covered with a liquor that taſted very 
acid; ariſing, probably, from the moiſture in 
the atmoſphere attracted by the acid vapour 
with which the ether had been impregnated. 


* - 


. This 


Marine = Air. | 23 5 


"a a od > 745 


This SPE cloud 1 ** to che union 
of the moiſture 1 in the atmoſphere with the com- 
pound of the acid air and ether. I have 
fince ſaturated other quantities of ether with 
acid air, and found it to be exceedingly volatile, 
and inflammable. Its exhalation was alſo Vis. 
ſible, but not in ſo great à degree as inthe caſe 
above mentioned. 


Camphor was preſently reduced into a fluid 
ſtate by imbibing acid air, but there ſeemed to 
be ſomething of a. whitiſh ſediment in it, After 
continuing two days in this ſituation I admit 
water to it ; immediately upon which the cam- 
phor reſumed its former ſolid ſtate, and, to ap- 
pearance, was the very ſame ſubſtance that it 
had been before; but the taſte of it was acid, 
and a very ſmall part of the air was permanent, 
and ſlightly ioflammable. | Be A 


The acid air ſeemed to make no impreſ- 
fon upon a piece of Derbyſhire ſpar, of a very 
dark colour, and which, therefore, ſeemed to 
contain a good deal of phlogiſton. 


hy the BF air has ſo near an affinity with 
phlogiſton, I expected that the fumes of luer of 
fulphur, which chemiſts agree to be phlogiſtic, 
would have united with it, ſo as to form inflam- 
mahle air; but I was diſappointed in that ex- 
| pecta- 


236 {0  Obſeryations on 


pectation. This ſubſtance * half of the 
acid air to which it was introduced: one fourth 
of the remainder, after ſtanding one day in 
quickſilver, was imbibed by water, and what 
was left extinguiſhed a candle. This experi- 
ment, however, ſeems to prove that acid air 
and phlogiſton may form a permanent kind of 
air that is not inflammable. Perhaps it may be 
air in ſuch a ſtate as common air loaded with 
phlogiſton, and from which the fixed air has 
been precipitated. Or rather, it may be the 
ſame thing with inflammable air, that has loſt 
Its inflammability by long ſtanding in water. 
It well deſerves a farther examination. 


- 0 


2 


Tbe following experiments are thoſe in which 
the fironger acids were made uſe of, and there- 
fore they may aſſiſt us farther to aſcertain their 
affinities with certain ſubſtances, with reſpect to 
this marine acid in the form of air. 


I put a quantity of ſtrong concentrated oil of 
witriol to acid air, but it was not at all affected 
by it in a day and a night. In order to try 
whether it would not have more power in a 
more condenſed ſtate, I compreſſed it with an 
additional atmoſphere ; but upon taking off this 
preſſure, the air expanded again, and appeared 
to be not at all diminiſhed. I alſo put a quan- 
| tity of ſtrong Jpirit of mire to it without any 
| ſen- 


Marine acid Air. 2237 


ſenſible effect. We may conclude, therefore, 


that the marine acid, in this form of air, is not 
able to diſlodge the other acids from their union 
with water. 


Blue vitriol, which is formed by the union of 


the vitriolic acid with copper, turned to a dark 


green the moment that it was put to the acid 
air, which it abſorbed, though ſlowly. Two 
pieces, as big as ſmall nuts, abſorbed three 
ounce meaſures of the air in about half an hour. 


The green colour was very ſuperficial ; for it 
was cafily wiped or waſhed off. 


Green copperas turned to a deeper green upon 
being put into acid air, which it abſorbed 
ſlowly. White copperas abſorbed this air very 
faſt, and was diſſolved in it, 


Sal ammoniac, being the union of ſpirit of 


ſalt with volatile alkali, was no more affected 
with the acid air than, as I have obſerved before, 
common ſalt was, 


I alſo introduced to the acid air various other 
ſubſtances, without any particular expectation; 


and it may be worth while to give an account of 


the reſults, that the reader may draw from them 
ſuch concluſions as he ſhall think reaſonable. 


2 Borax 


— — 


238. Obſervations on 


Borax abſorbed acid air about as faſt as blue 
vitriol, but without any thing elſe that was ob. 
{eryable. FY 


Fine white ſugar abſorbed this air lowly, was 
thoroughly penetrated with it, became of a 
deep brown colour, and acquired a ſmell that 
vas peculiarly pungent. 

A piece of quick lime being put to about 
re or fourteen ounce meaſures of acid air, 
and continuing in that ſituation about two days, 
there remained one ounce meaſure of air that 
was not abſorbed by water, and it was very 
ſtrongly inflammable, as much ſo as a mixture 
of half inflammable and half common air. 
Very particular care was taken that no common 
air mixed with the acid air in this proceſs. At 
another time, from about half the quantity of 
acid air above mentioned, with much leſs quick- 
lime, and in the ſpace of one day, I got half 
an ounce meaſure of air that was inflammable 
in a ſlight degree only. This experiment 
proves that ſome part of the phlogiſton which 
eſcapes from the fuel, in contact with which 
the lime is burned, adheres to it, But I am 
very far from thinking that the cauſticity of 
quick-lime is at all owing to this circumſtance. 


1 have 


Marine acid A. 239 


I have made a few more experiments on the 
mixture of acid air with other kinds of air, and 
think that it may be worth while to mention 
them, though nothing of conſequence, at leaſt 
nothing but negative eoneluſions, can be drawn 
from them. 


A quantity of common air ſaturated with 
nitrous air was put to a quantity of acid air, 
and they continued together all night, without 
any ſenſible effect. The quantity of both re- 
mained the ſame, and water being admitted to 
them, it abſorbed all the acid air, and left the 
other juſt as before. | 


A mixture of two thirds of air | diminiſhed 
by iron filings and brimſtone, and one third 
acid air, were mixed together, and left to ſtand 
four weeks in quickſilver. But when the mix- 
ture was examined, water preſently imbibed all 


the acid air, and the diminiſhed air was found to 


be juſt the ſame that it was before. I had ima- 
gined that the acid air might have united with 
the phlogiſton with which the diminiſhed air 
was overcharged, ſo as to render it wholſome ; 


and I had read an account of the ſtench ariſing 


from putrid bodies being corrected by acid 
fumes. ng 


. 


The 


8 


— << 


1 , 3 
p 112 : "VE Z » 8 4 Sx * . 
m_ . — 9——2—— r FOR — en = \ 2 5 
” 3 x N U * * 4 f a x. x _ _ we'd * ai 5 a 8 *. 8 1 
7 O _ * — e . — 4 05 3 2 
e 99 o of o 4 * 1 
- a Y X n — = 
- * . d - 7 
— 8 * 1 a” EO a . 
—.. _— SO nn - l * —— ws wat» 
— -- * * 0 — AE ers <4 Mes. 2d "ne — Iz LE: _ F N * * 
o is = 4 = va? —- . — 
: - 
N = 
> 
= 
—— 
0 * 
N — - wy OR — 9 
+. * — — 2 N 
— - 
* = 
— 


ro 
1 RE 
* 
5 : 
3 
| „ 
2 
* * — — 


240 Obſervations on 


The remaining experiments, in which the 
acid air was principally concerned, are of a 


miſcellaneous nature. 


| 1 put a piece of dry ice to a quantity of acid | 
air (as was obſerved in the ſection concerning 
elkaline air) taking it with a forceps, which, as 


well as the air itſelf, and the quickſilver by 


which it had been confined, had been expoſed - 


to the open air for an hour, in a pretty ſtrong 
froſt. The moment it touched the air it was 
diſſolved as faſt as it would have been by being 
thrown into a hot fire, and the air was preſently 


imbibed. Putting freſh pieces of ice to that 


which was diſſolved before, they were alſo diſ- 
folved immediately, and the water thus procured 
did not freeze again, though it was expoſed a 


whole night, in a very intenſe froſt; 


Flies and ſpiders die in acid air, but not fo 


quickly as in nitrous air. This ſurprized me 


very much; as I had imagined that nothing 
could be more ſpeedily fatal to all animal life 
than this pure acid vapour, 


As inflammable air, I have obſerved, fires - 
at one exploſion in the vapour of ſmoking ſpirit 
of nitre, juſt like an equal mixture of -inflam- 
mable and common air, I thought it was poſſible 
that the fume which naturally riſes from com- 

mon 


Marine acid Ar. 241 


mon ſpirit of ſalt might have the ſame effect, 
but it had not. For this purpoſe I treated the 
ſpirit of ſalt, as I had before done the ſmoking 
ſpirk of nitre ; firſt filling a phial with it, then 
inverting it in a veſſel containing a quantity of 
the ſame acid; and having thrown the inflam- 
mable air into it, and thereby driven out all 
the acid, turning it with its mouth upwards, 
and immediately applying a candle to it. 


Acid air not being ſo manageable as moſt of 
the other kinds of air, I had recourſe to the fol- 
lowing peculiar method, in order to aſcertain its 
Ppeciſic gravity. Having filled an eight ounce 
phial with this air, and corked it up, I weighed 
it very accurately; and then, taking out the 
cork, I blew very ſtrongly into it with a pair 
of bellows, that the common air might take 
place of the acid; and after this I weighed it 
« again, together with the cork, but I could not 
perceive the leaſt difference in the weight, I 
conclude, however, from this experiment, that 
the acid air is heavier than the common air, 
becauſe the mouth of the phial and the inſide 
of it were evidently moiſtened by the water 
which the acid vapour had attracted from the 
air, which moiſture muſt have added to the 
weight of the phial. 


— » 


R SECTION 


% 
i 


242 Obſervations on 


SECTION V. 
Of INFLAMMABLE Air. 


It will have appeared from my former expe- 
riments, that inflammable air conſiſts chiefly, 
if not wholly, of the union of an acid vapour 


with phlogiſton ; that as much of the phlogiſton 


as contributes to make air inflammable is im- 
bibed by the water in which it is agitated; that 
in this proceſs it ſoon becomes fit for reſpiration, 


and by the continuance of it comes at length 


to extinguiſh flame, Theſe obſervations, and 
others which I have made upon this kind of 
air, have been confirmed by my later experi- 
ments, eſpecially thoſe in which I have con- 
nected electrical experiments with thoſe ori air. 


The electric PET taken in any kind of oi! 
produces inflammable air, as I was led to ob- 
ſerve in the following manner. Having 


found, as will be mentioned hereafter, that 


ether doubles the quantity of any kind of air 
to which it is admitted ; and being at that time 
engaged in a courſe of experiments to aſcertairi 
the effect of the electric matter on all the dif- 
ferent kinds of air, I had the curioſity to try 


ben it would do with common air, thus in- 
creaſed 


creaſed by means of ether. The very firſt 
ſpark, I obſerved, increaſed the quantity of this 
air very conſiderably, ſo that I had very ſoon 
ſix or eight times as much as I began with; 
and whereas water imbibes all the ether that is 
put to any kind of air, and leaves it without 
any viſible change, with reſpect to quantity or 
quality, this air, on the contrary, was not im- 
bibed by water. It was alſo very little dimi- 
niſhed by the mixture of nitrous air. From 


whence it was evident, that it had received an 


addition of ſome other kind of air, of which 
it now principally conſiſted. 


In order to determine whether this effect was 
produced by the wirez or the cement by which 
the air was confined (as I thought it poſſible 


that phlogiſton might be diſcharged from them) 


I made the experiment in a glaſs ſyphon, ſig · 19, 
and by that means 1 contrived to make the 


electric ſpark paſs from quickſilver through the 


air on which I made the experiment, and the 
effect was the ſame as before. At one time 
there happened to be a bubble of common air, 


without any ether, in one part of the ſyphon, * 


and another bubble with ether in another part 
of it; and it was very amuſing to obſerve how 
the ſame electric ſparks diminiſhing the former 
of theſe bubbles, and increaſed the latter. 


_ it 


— 
„ 
o 


a OY. 8 


— A bs. * 2 2 3 * 


244 Obſervations tn 


It being evident that the ether occaſioned the 
difference that was obſervable in theſe two caſes, 
I next proceeded to take the electric ſpark in a 
quantity of ether only, without any air what- 
ever; and obſerved that every ſpark produced 
a ſmall bubble; and though, while the ſparks. 
were taken in the ether itſelf, the generation of 
air was flow, yet when ſo much air was col- 
lected, that the ſparks were obliged to paſs 
through 'it, m order to come to the ether and 
the quickſilver on which it reſted, the increaſe 
was exceedingly rapid; ſo that, making the 
experiment in ſmall tubes, as fig. x6, the quick- 
filver ſoon receded beyond the ſtriking diſtance, 
This air, by paſſing through water, was dimi- 
niſhed to about one third, and was inflam- 


One quantity of air produced in this manner 
from ether I ſuffered to ſtand two days in water, 
and after that I transferred it ſeveral times 
through the water, from one veſſel to another, 
and ſtill found that it was very ſtrongly inflam- 
mable; fo that I have no doubt of its being 
genuine inflammable air, like that which is 
produced from metals by _— or by hd other 
chemical proceſs, 


Air produced from ether, mixed both with 
common and nitrous Air, was likewiſe inflam- 
| mable; 


Infammable Air. n 


mable; but in the caſe of the nitrous air, the 
original quantity bore a very ſmall proportion 
to the quantity generated. 


Concluding that the inflammable matter in 
this air came from the ether, as being of the 
claſs of oi/s, I tried other kinds of oil, as oil f 
olives, oil of turpentine, and eſſential oil of mint, 
taking the electric ſpark in them, without any 
air to begin with, and found that inflammable 
air was produced in this manner from them all. 
The generation of air from oil of turpentine 
was the quickeſt, and from the oil of olives the 
ſloweſt in theſe three caſes. 


By the ſame proceſs I got inflammable air 
from ſpirit of zine, and about as copiouſly as 
from the eſſential oil of mint. This air con- 
tinued in water a whole night, and when it was 
transferred into another veſſel was ſtrong] 75 
inflammable. 


In all theſe caſes the inflammable matter 
might be ſuppoſed to ariſe from the inflamma- 
ble ſubſtances on which the experiments were 
made. But finding that, by the ſame proceſs, 
I could get inflammable air from the volatile 
ſpirit of ſal ammoniac, I conclude that the phlo- 
giſton was in part ſupplied by the electric mat- 
ter itſelf, For though, as I have obſerved be- 
R 3 fore, 


246 Obſervations on 


fore, the alkaline air which is expelled from 
the ſpirit of ſal ammoniac be inflammable, it 
is ſo in a very ſlight degree, and can only be 
perceived to be ſo when there is a conſiderable 
quantity of it. 


Endeayouring | to procure air from a cauſtic 


alkaline liquor, accurately made for me by Mr. 


Lane, and alſo from ſpirit - of ſalt, I found 
that the electric ſpark could not be made viſt- 


ble in either of them; ſo that they muſt be 


much more perfect conductors of electricity 
than water, or other fluid ſubſtances. This 


experiment well deſeryes to be proſecuted, 


I obſeived before that inflammable air, by 


funding long in water, and eſpecially by agita- 
tion in water, loſes its inflammability; and that 


in the latter caſe, after paſſing through a ſtate 


in which it makes ſome approach to common 
air (juſt admitting a candle to burn in it) it 
comes to extinguiſh a candle. I have ſince made 
another obſervation of this kind, which well 
deſerves to be recited. It relates to the inflam- 
mable air generated from oak the 27th of July 


2771, of which I have made mention before. 


This air I have obſerved to have been but 
weakly inflammable ſome months after it was 
generated, and to have been converted into 


pretty 


Inflammable Air, 247 


pretty good or wholeſome air by no great de- 
gree of agitation in water ; but on the 27th " 72 
March 1773, I found the remainder of it to 

be exceedingly good air. A candle burned in 

it perfectly well, and it was diminiſhed by ni- 
trous air almoſt as much as common air, 


I ſhall conclude this ſection With a few-miſ- 
cellaneous obſervations of no great importance. 


Inflammable air is not changed by being 
made to paſs many times through a red-hot iron 
tube. It is alſo no more diminiſhed or chang- 
ed by the fumes of liver of ſulphur, or by the 
electric ſpark, than I have before ohſerved ĩt to 
have been by a mixture of iron filings and 
brimſtone. When the electrie ſpark was taken 
in it, it was confined by a quantity of water | 
tinged blue with the juice of archil, but the I 
colour remained unchanged. 1 


— 


2 | I put two o gps into inflammable air, and 
let them remain there a canfiderable time, one 
of them near an hour. They preſently ceaſed 
to move, and ſeemed to be quite dead for about 
half an hour after they were taken into the 

open air; but then they came to life again, and 
preſently after ſcemed to be 4 they 
320 been. 


R 4 : 18. 


— 


mn FI 
- — 


3 1 


„ 
— 
tr an I 
2 _ 
pe 
- 


— — — 


. — > : | 
— IE 4 a 
" ” "Pp. rar 
= 


— — 


248 Obſervations os 


SECTION VI. 
Of FrxED Alx. 


The additions I have made to my obſerva- 
tions on fixed air are neither numerous nor 
confiderable. 


The moſt important of them is a confirma- 
tion of my conzecture, that fixed air is capable 
of forming an union with Phlogiſton, and there- 
by becoming a kind of air that is not miſcible 
with water. I had produced this effect before 
by means of iron filings and brimſtone, fer- 
menting in this kind of air; but I haye ſince 
had a much more deciſive and elegant proof of 
it by electricity. For after taking 2 ſmall elec- 
tric exploſion, for about an hour, in the ſpace 
of an inch of fixed air, confined in a glaſs tube 
one tenth of an inch in diameter, fig. 16, 1 
found that when water was admitted to it, only 
one fourth of the air was imbibed. Probably 
the whole of it would haye been rendered im- 
miſcible in water, if the electrical operation had 
been continued a ſufficient time. This air con- 
tinued ſeveral days in water, and was even agi- 


tated i im water without * farther diminution. 
"ts 


Fixed Air, | 242 


It was not, however, common air, for i it was 
not diminiſhed by nitrous air. 


By means of iron filings and brimſtone I 
have, ſince my former experiments, procured a 
confiderable quantity of this Kind of air in a 
method ſomething different from that which I 
uſed before. For having placed a pot of this 
mixture under a receiver, and exhauſted it 
with a pump of Mr. Smeaton's conſtruction, I 
filled it with fixed air, and then left it plunged 
under water; ſo that no common air could 
have acceſs to it. In this manner, and in about a 
week, there was, as near as 168 recollect, one 


ſixth, or at leaſt one eighth of the whole con- 
verted into-a permanent air, not mbibed by 


water . 


From this experiment I expected that the 


fame effect would have been produced on fixed 


air by the fumes of liver of ſulphur; but I was 
diſappointed in that expectation, which ſur- 
priſed me not a little; though this cotreſponds 
in ſome meaſure, to the effect of phlogiſton ex- 
haled from this ſubſtance on acid air. Perhaps 
more time may be requiſite for this purpoſe, 
for this proceſs was not continued morg than 


a day and a _—_ | MERE: 


Iron 


— 
————ů— — L—wE— Os 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


- 
54% — 
. 


£50 Obſervations on 


Iron filings and brimſtone, I have obſerved, 
ferment with great heat in nitrous air, and I 
have ſince obſerved that this proceſs is attend- 
ed with greater heat 1 in * air than 1 in com- 
mon air. f 


Though fixed air . with water 
diſſolves iron, fixed air without water has no 


ſuch power, as I obſerved before. I imagined 
that, if it could have diſſolved iron, the phlo- 


giſton would have united with the air, and 
have made it immiſcible with water, as in the 


former inſtances ; but after being confined in a 


phial full of nails from the 15th of December 
to the 4th of October following, neither the 


iron nor the air appeared to have been * 


by cheir mutual contact. 


_ Having expoſed equal quantities of common 


and fixed air, in equal and ſimilar cylindrical 


glaſs veſſels, to equal degrees of heat, by plac- 
ing them before a fire, and frequently changing 


their ſituations, I obſerved that they were ex- 


panded exactly alike, and when removed from 


the fire they both recovered their former di- 
menſions. 


Having had ſome finall ſuſpicion that liver of 
3 beſides emitting phlogiſton, might 
alſo 


Fixed Air. 251 


alfo yield ſome fixed air (which is known. to 
be contained in the ſalt of tartar from which 
it is made) I mixed the two ingredients, viz, 
ſalt of tartar and brimſtone, and putting 
them into a thin phial, and applying the 
flame of a candle to it, ſo as to form the 
tiver of ſulphur, I received the air that 
came from it in this proceſs in a veſſel” of 
quickſilver. In this manner I procured a very 
conſiderable quantity of fixed air, ſo that 1 
judged it was all diſcharged from the tartar. 
But though it is poſſible that a ſmall quan- 
tity of it may remain in liver of ſulphur, 
when it is made in the moſt perfe& manner, 
it is not probable that it can be expelled 
without w 


; 
ö 
9 . 1 
2 . —— 9 a © 
— = 
: ws J 
5 ® 
4A 


[ 252 I 


SECTION VI. 
MisCELLANEOUS EXPERIMENTS, 


1. It is ſomething extraordinary that, though 
ether, as I found, cannot be made to aſſume 
the form of air (the vapour arifing from it by 
heat, being ſoon condenſed by cold, even in 
quickſilver) yet that a very ſmall quantity of 
ether put to any kind of air, except the acid, 
and alkaline, which it imbibes, almoſt inſtant- 


_ Jy doubles the apparent quantity of it; but 


upon paſſing this air through water, it is 


| preſently reduced to its original quantity again, 


with little or no change of quality. 


I put about the quantity of half a nut-ſhell 
full of ether, incloſed in a glaſs tube, through 
a body of quickſilver, into an ounce meaſure 
of common air, confined by quickfilver ; upon 
which it preſently began to expand, till it oc- 
cupied the ſpace of two ounce meaſures, It 
then gradually contracted about one ſixth of an 
ounce meaſure. Putting more ether to it, it 
again expanded to two ounce meaſures ; but no 
more addition of ether would make it expand 
any farther. Withdrawing the quickfilyer, and 
admitting water to this air, without any agita- 

tion, 


Miſcellaneous Experiments. 253 


tion, it began to be abſorbed ; but only about 
half an ounce meaſure had diſappeared after it 
had ſtood an hour in the water, But by once - 


paſſing it through water the air was reduced to 
its original dimenſions, Being tried by a mix- 
ture of nitrous air, it appeared not to be ſo 
good as freſh air, though the injury it had re- 


ceived was not conſiderable. 


All the phenomena of dilatation and con- 
traction were nearly the ſame, when, inſtead of 
common air, I uſed nitrous air, fixed air, in- 
flammable air, or any ſpecies of phlogiſticated 
common air. The quantity of each of theſe 
kinds of air was nearly doubled. while they 
were kept in quickſilver, but fixed air was not 


ſo much increaſed as the reſt, and phlogiſticated 


air leſs ; but after paſſing through the water, 
they appeared not to have been ſenſibly — 
by the proceſs, 


2. Spirit of wine yields no air by means of 


heat, the vapours being ſoon condenſed by cold, 
like the vapour of water; yet when, in endea- 
vduring to procure air from it, I made it boil, 
and catched the air which had reſted on the ſur- 
face of the ſpirit, and which had been expelled 
by the heat together with the vapour, in a veſſel 
of quickſilver, and afterwards admitred> acid 
air to it, the veſſel was filled with white fumes, 
* 


— — —3— . 
_—_— — ” — — —_ — 
1 


e 


LEES 
7 
> 
- — 9 
—— — ä —ä—ũ—äv 2 — —_—  — — — dr > 
— I: : * 0 2 45 


— 


* WY 4 * . 
= 
—— — a, — i — 


— 2 5 


* 
— N — 
þ _— TS _ wr —_—— . ——— — — 2 — %, 
- — 


— — — 


— _— — 


| | 

1 
* 

= 2 « * 


— — —— — 


— 


A A — 


254 Miſcellaneous Experiments: 


28 if there had been a mixture of alkaline air 


along with it. To what this appearance was 
owing J cannot tell, and indeed I did not exa- 


mine into it. 


3. Having been informed by Dr. Small and 
Mr. Bolton of Birmingham, that paper dipped 
in a ſolution of copper in ſpirit of nitre would 
take fire with a moderate heat (a fact which I 
afterwards found mentioned in the Philoſophi- 
cal Tranſactions) it occurred to me that this 
would be very convenient for experiments re- 
lating to ignition in different kinds of air; and 
indeed I found that it was eaſily fired, either by 


a burning lens, or the approach of red-hot iron 
on the outſide of the phial in which it was con- 


tained, and that any part of it being once fired, 
the whole was preſently reduced to aſnes; pro- 
vided it was previouſly made thoroughly dry, 
which, however, it is not very eaſy to do. 


With this preparation, I found that this pa- 
per burned freely in all kinds of air, but not 
in vacuo, which is alſo the caſe with gunpow- 
der; and, as I have in effect obſerved before, 
all the kinds of air in which this paper was 


. burned received an addition to their bulk, 


whieh conſiſted partly of nitrous air; from the 


nitrous precipitate, and partly of inflammable 


air, from the paper. As ſome of the circum- 
1 ſtances 


— — — 


Miſcellaneous Experiments. 298 


ſtances attending the ignition of this paper in 
ſome of the kinds of air were a little remark- 
able, I ſhall: juſt recite them. 


Firing this paper in infammable air, which 
it did without any ignition of the inflammable 
air itſelf, the quantity increaſed regularly, till 
the phial in which the proceſs was made was 
aw full; but then it began to decreaſe, till 
one third of the whole quantity diſappeared. 


A piece of this paper being put to three 
ounce meaſures of acid air, a great part of it 
preſently turned yellow, and the air was re- 
dueed to one third of the original quantity, at 
the ſame time becoming reddiſh, exactly like 
common air in a phial containing ſmoking ſpirit 
of nitre. After this, by the approach of 
hot iron, I ſet. fire to the paper; immediately 
upon which there was a production of air which 


more than filled the phial. This air appeared, 


upon examination, to be very little different 
from pure nitrous air. I repeated this 2 
ment with the ſame event. 


Paper dipped in 4 ſolution of mercury, 
zinc, or iron, in nitrous acid, has, in a ſmall 
degree, the ſame property with paper — in 
a « ſolution of NN in tlie ſame acid 


Gun- 


ww” 
= 


= 
— 
1 — ͤ— T ˙Üͤ ˙ ⁵—ΑmI re L.A. * e 
- N 
— Nee 


* RI 3 — oo 
- 


— 


? c f * 
x * "I 8 
94 F 7 L 2 3 1 
— — — renner, Ah — ww "4 — 4 l p 
” — * — 


333 
* 
333 i „ „ — . bY 


cs 


"_ | 
3 EY OI. 
E 4, 3 ©. 
* 5 
os 7 
be if 
1 
voy, — 
— "IIS * 
- 
* 


TY 
— — 


- 
— . p — 


as it was before. 


4. Gunpowder is alfo fired in all Kinds of air, 
and, in the quantity in which I tried it, did 


not make any ſenſible change i in them, except 


that the common air in which it was fired 
would not afterwards admit a candle to burn in 
it. In order to try this experiment I half ex- 
hauſted a receiver, and then with a burning- 
glaſs fired the gunpowder which had been pre- 


_ viouſly put into it. By this means I could fire a 


greater quantity of gunpowder in a ſmall quan- 
tity of air, and avoid the hazard of blowing up, 


and breaking my receiver. 


I own that I was rather afraid of firing 
gunpowder in inflammable air, but there was 
ho-reaſon for my fear; for it exploded quite 
freely in this air, leaving it, in all reſpects, juſt 


In order to make this experiment, and in- 
deed almoſt all the experiments of firing gun- 
powder in different kinds of air, I placed the 
powder upon a convenient ſtand within my re- 


ceiver, and having carefully exhauſted it by a 


pump of Mr. Smeaton's conſtruction, I filled 
the-receiver with any kind of air by the appa- 
ratus deſcribed, p. 19, fig. 14, taking the great- 


_ eſt care that the tubes, &c. which conveyed 
the air ſhould contain little or no common 


air, In the experiment with inflammable air a 
* | | con- 


— * ...12 


8 RET 
= 7 * \ & 3. lis * > "oy ed . * A 


Micellanzous Experiments. 257 


conſiderable mixture of common air would have 
been exceedingly hazardous: for, by that aſſiſt- 
ance, the inflammable air might have exploded 
in ſuch a manner, as to have been dangerous to 
the operator. Indeed, I believe I ſhould not have 
ventured to have made the experiment at all with 
any other pump beſides Mr. Smeaton's. 


Sometimes, I filled a glaſs veſſel with quick- 
filver, and introduced the air to it, when it was 
inverted ina baſonof quickſilver. By this means 
I intirely avoided any mixture of common air; 
but then it was not eaſy to convey the gunpow- 
der into it, in the exact quantity that was re- 
quiſite for my purpoſe. This, however, was 
the only method by which I could contrive 
to fire gunpowder in acid or alkaline air, in 
which it exploded juſt as it did in nitrous or 
fixed air. 


— 


I burned a confiderable quantity of gunpow- 


der in an exhauſted receiver (for it is well 


known that it will not explode in it) but the air 


I got from it was very inconſiderable, and in 
theſe circumſtances was neceſſarily mixed with 


common air. A candle would not burn in it. 


8 EC- 


— 
N . 


SECTION VIII. 


' QueRrIEs, SPECULATIONS, and HINTS. 


\ 


I begin to be apprehenfive leſt, after being 
conſidered as a dry experimenter, I ſhould paſs, 
with many of my readers, into the oppo- 
fite character of a vifonary theoriſt, A good 
deal of theory has been interſperſed in the 
courſe of this work, but, not content with 
this, I am now entering upon a long ſection, 
which contains nothing elſe. 


The conjectures that I have ventured to ad- 
vance in the body of the work will, I hope, be 
found to be pretty well ſupported by facts; but 
the preſent ſection will, I acknowledge, contain 
many random thoughts. J have, however, thrown 
them together by themſelves, that readers of leſs 
imagination, and who care not to advance be- 
yond the regions of plain fact, may, if they 
pleaſe, proceed no farther, that their delicacy 


be not offended. 


In extenuation of my offence, let it, how- 
ever, be conſidered, that theory and experiment 
ne- 


* 


« be | l he LA - 2 — — 
, 1 —_— — — — Wd — ñä-—— ——_W 


Queries, Speculations, and Hints. 259 


neceſſarily go hand in hand, every proceſs be- 
ing intended to aſcertain ſome particular po 
theſis, which, in fact, is only a conjecture con- 
cerning the circumſtances or the cauſe of 
ſome natural operation; conſequently that the 
boldeſt and moſt original experimenters are 
thoſe, who, giving free ſcope to their imagina- 
tions, admit the combination of the moſt diſtant 
ideas; and that though many of theſe aſſocia- 
tions of ideas, will be wild and chimerical, yet 
that others will have the chance of giving riſe 
to the greateſt and moſt capital diſcoveries ; 
ſuch as very cautious, timid, ſober, and ſlow- 
thinking people would nevet have come at. 


Sir Iſaac Newton himſelf, notwithſtanding 
the great advantage which he derived from a 
habit of patient thinking, indulged bold and 
excentric thoughts, of which his Queries at 
the end of his book of Optics are a ſufficient 
evidence. And a quick conception of diſtant 
analogies, which is the great key to unlock the 
ſecrets of nature, is by no means incompatible 
with the ſpirit of perſeverance, in inveſtigations 
calculated to aſcertain and purſue thoſe ana- 
jogies. 


260 Queries, Speculations, 


$ 1. Speculations concerning the CONSTITUENT 
PRINCIPLES of the different kinds of A1R, and 


the CONSTITUTION and ORIGIN of the Aro. 


SPHERE, xc. | 


| All the kinds of air that appear to me to be 
eſſentially diſtin& from each other are fixed 
air, acid and alkaline ; for theſe, and another 
principle, called phlogi/ton, which I have not 
been able to exhibit in the form of air, and 
which has never yet been exMibited by itſelf in 
any form, ſeem to conſtitute all the kinds of air 
that [ am m acquainted with, g 
Acid air and phlogifton conftitute an air 
which either extinguiſhes flame, or is itſelf in- 
flammable, according, probably, to the quantity 
of phlogiſton combined! in it, or the mode of com- 
bination. When it extinguiſhes flame, it is pro- 
bably only ſo much charged with the phlogiſtic 
matter, as to take no more from a burning can- 
dle, which muſt, therefore, neceffarily g go out 
in it. When it is inflammable, it is probably 
ſo much charged with phlogiſton, that the heat 
communicated by a burning candle makes it 
immediately ſeparate itſelf from the other prin- 
ciple with which it was united, in which ſepa- 
ration heat is produced, as in other caſes of ig- 
nition ; the action and reaction, which neceſſarily 
attends the ſeparation of the conſtituent princi- 


ples, 


and | Hints. 261 


% 


ples, - exciting probably a vibratory motion in 


homes 
Sie inflammable air, by 488890 in water, 
firſt comes to loſe its inflam mability, ſo as to be 
fit for reſpiration, and even to admit a candle 
to burn in it, and then comes to extinguiſh a 
candle; it ſeems probable that water imbibes a 


great part of this extraordinary charge of phlo- 


giſton. And that water can be impregnated 
with phlogiſton, is evident from many of my 
experiments, eſpecially thoſe in Which metals 
were calcined over it. 


Water having this affinity with phlogiſton, it 
is probable that it always contains a conſider- 
able portion of it; which Phlogiſton having a 
{tronger affinity with the acid air, which is per- 
haps the baſis of common air, may by long 
agitation be communicated to it, ſo as to leaye 
it over ſaturated, in conſequence of Which it 
will W a cangle. 


It i poſſible, howenes, that inflammable air 
and air which extinguiſhes a candle may differ 
from one another in the mode of the combina- 
tion of theſe two conſtituent principles, as well 
as in the proportional quantity of each; and 
by agitation in water, or long ſtanding, that 
mode of combination may change. This we 
8 3 know 


* E 


er gen _ 
—. = * 
7. * F 2 * 
——ä—ä—4äͤ 4 — — — ft EKE— 2 ——— 
— I =>, 
* 
= 


. 2 
— * 4 
- _—_ 
2 —— # — 
— . 
„ 7 
. 9 7A. = 
- 1 9 
. 
- 
- 


—— — 


a — 4G _—_ — 4 - er 


262 Queries, Speculations, 


know to be the caſe with other ſubſtances, as 
with milk, from which, by ſtanding only, cream 
is ſeparated ; which by agitation becomes but- 


ter. Alſo many ſubſtances, being at reſt, pu- 


trefy, and thereby become quite different from 
what they were before. If this be the caſe with 
inflammable air, the water may imbibe either 
of the conſtituent parts, whenever any propor- 
tion of it is ſpontaneouſly ſeparated from the 
reſt ; and ſhould this ever be that phlogiſton, 
with which air is but ſlightly over-charged, as 
by the burning of a candle, it will be recovered 
to a ſtate in which a candle may burn in it again. 


It will be obſerved, however, that it was only 
in one inſtance that I found that ſtrong inflam- 


mable air, in its tranſition to a ſtate in which it 
extinguiſhes a candle, would admit a candle to 


burn in it, and that was very faintly ; z that then 


the air was far from being pure, as appeared by 
the teſt of nitrous air; and that it was only from 


a'particular quantity of inflammable air which 
I got from oak, and which had ſtood a long 
time in water, that I ever got air which was as 


pure as common air. Indeed, it is much more 


caly to account for the paſſing of inflammable 
air into a ſtate in which it extinguiſhes candles, 


| without any intermediate ſtate, in which it will 
admit a candle to burn in it, than otherwiſe. 


This ſubject 1 and deſerves farther inveſ- 
ö a tigation, 


and Hints. 263 


tigation. It will alſo be well worth while to ex- 
amine what difference the agitation of air in, 
natural or artificial ſea-water will occaſion. 


Since acid air and phlogiſton make inflam- 
mable air, and ſince inflammable air is con- 
vertible into air fit for reſpiration, it ſeems not 
to be improbable, that theſe two ingredients are 
the only eſſential principles of common air. 
For this change is produced by, agitation in wa- 
ter only, without the addition of any fixed air, 
though this kind of air, like various other things 
of a foreign nature, may be combined with it. 


Conſidering alſo what prodigious quantities 
of inflammable air are produced by the burning 
of ſmall pieces of wood or pit-coal, it may 
not be improbable but that the volcanos, with 

which there are evident traces of almoſt the 

whole ſurface of the earth having been over- 
ſpread, may have been the origin of our at- 
moſphere, as well as (according to the opinion 
of ſome) of all the ſolid land. 


The ſuperfluous phlogiſton of the air, in the 
ſtate in which it iſſues from volcanos, may have 
been imbibed by the waters of the ſea, which 
it is probable originally covered the ſurface of 
the earth, though part of it might have united 
with the acid vapour exhaled from the ſea, and 

S 4 8 by 


2 64 Queries, Speculations. 


by this union have made a conſiderable and va- 
luable addition to the common maſs of air; 
and the remainder of this over. charge of phlo- 

giſton may have been imbibed by plants as ſoon 
as the earth Was ee with Wan | 


That an acid vapour is really 0 aled ow 
the ſea, by the heat of the ſun, ſeems to be 
evident from the remarkably different ftates of 
the atmoſphere, in this reſpect, in hot and cold 
climates. In Hudſon's bay, and alſo in Ruſſia, 
it is ſaid, that metals hardly ever ruft, whereas 
they are remarkably liable to ruſt in/Barbadocs, 
and other iſlands between the tropics. See 
Ellis's Voyage, p. 288. This is alſo the caſe in 
places abounding with gk as Nant- 
weh in Cheſhire. 


"The mild air mould conſiſt of parts of ſo 
very different a nature as an acid vapour and 
kent oa one of which is ſo exceedingly cor- 
roſive, will not appear ſurpriſing to a chemiſt, 
: ' who conſiders the very ſtrong affinity which 

| theſe two principles are known to have with 

| each other, and the exceedingly different pro- 
iv h perties which ſubſtances compolec by them poſ- 
| 8 | ſeſs. This is exemplified in common ſulphur, 
| 13% which is as mild as air, and may be taken into 
the ſtomach with the utmoſt ſafety, though no- 

thing can be more eee than one of its 

con- 


4 . 
2 — 
8 a wo —— 
5 


| | triol, Common air, therefore, notwithſtanding 


ples, and be a real /ulphur, 


That the fixed air which makes part of the 
atmoſphere is not preſently imbibed by the wa- 
ters of the ſea, on which it reſts, may be owing 
to the union which this kind of air alſo appears 
to be capable of forming with phlogiſton. 
For fixed air is evidently of the nature of an 
acid; and it appears, in fact, to be capable of 
being combined with phlogiſton, and thereby of 
conſtituting a ſpecies of air not liable to be im- 
bibed by water. Phlogiſton, however, having 
a ſtronger affinity with acid air, which I ſup- 
poſe to be the baſis of common air, it is not 


to the fixed air, the latter ſhould be precipi- 
tared, whenever a quantity of common air is 
made noxious by an over· charge of fle. 
_ 


: The fixed air, with which our atmoſphere 
abounds may alſo be ſupplied by volcanos, from 


earth, together with inflammable air. Alſo a 


pre- 


« — oo 


| os and Hints. 265 
conſtituent parts, ſeparately taken, viz. oil of vi- 1 


its mildneſs, may be compoſed of ſimilar princi- 


ſurpriſing that, uniting with this, in preference 


the vaſt maſſes of calcareous matter lodged in the 


part of it may be ſupplied from the fermenta- 
tion of vegetables Wy"; the . . it. At 


- 
* 
ol 


— —— ꝓä 7ääů 6 —A— 


266 Rueries, Speculations, 


preſent, as faſt as it is precipitated/and :mbibed 
by one en it may be ſet looſe by others. 


Whether there be, upon the ml an in- 
creaſe or a decreaſe of the general maſs of the 
atmoſphere is not eaſy to conjecture, but I 
ſhould imagine- that it rather increaſes. It is 
true that many proceſſes contribute to a great 


viſible diminution of common air, and that 
when by other proceſſes it is reſtored to its 
former wholeſomeneſs, it is not increaſed in its 

dimenſions ;* but volcanos and fires ſtill ſupply 
vaſt quantities of air, though in a ſtate not yet 


fit for reſpiration ; ; and it will have been ſeen in 
my experiments, that vegetable and animal ſub- 
ſtances, diſſolved by putrefaction, not only emit 
phlogiſton, but. likewiſe yield a conſiderable 
quantity of permanent elaſtic air, overloaded 
indeed with phlogiſton, as might be expected, 


but capable of being purified by thoſe pro- 


ceſſes in nature by which other noxious air is 
purified. | 


That particles are continually detaching 
themſelves from the ſurfaces of all ſolid bodies, 


even the metallic ones, and that theſe particles 


conſtitute the moſt permanent part of the at- 


. moſphere, as Sir Iſaac Newton ſuppoſed, does 
not appear to me to be at all probable. * 


— 


- 


and Hints. 267 


My readers will have obſerved, that not only 


is common air liable to be diminiſhed by a mix- 


cure of nitrous air, but likewiſe air originally 
produced from inflammable air, and even from 


nitrous air itſelf, which never contained any 
fixed air. From this it may be inferred, that 
the whole of the diminution of common air by 
phlogiſton is not owing to the precipitation of 
fixed air, but from a real contraction of its di- 
menſions, in conſequence of its union with 
phlogiſton. Perhaps an accurate attention to 
the ſpecific gravity of air procured from theſe 


different materials, and in theſe different ſtates, 


may determine this matter, and aſſiſt us in inveſ- 
tigating the nature of phlogiſton. 


In what manner air 1s diminiſhed by phlo- 
giſton, independent of the precipitation of any 
of its conſtituent parts, is not eaſy to conceive ; 


ualeſs air thus diminiſhed be heavier than air not 
diminiſhed, which I did not find to be the caſe. 


It deſerves, however, to be tried with more at- 
tention. That phlogiſton ſhould communicate 
abſolute levity to the bodies with which it is 
combined, is a ſuppoſition that Lam not willing 
to have recourſe to, though it would afford an 


eaſy ſolution of this difficulty. 


I have likewiſe obſerved, that a mouſe will 
live almoſt as long in inflammable air, when it 
A | has 


| 
l 
4 
* 
5 
4 


268 Queries, Speculations, * 


1 


has been deprived of all its inflammability, as 
in common air; and yet that in this ſtate it is 
not, perhaps, ſo much diminiſhed by nitrous air 
as common air is. In this caſe, therefore, the 
diminution ſeems to have been occafianed by 
a contraction of dimenſions, and not by x loſs 
of any conſtituent part; ſo that the air is really 
better, that is, more fit for reſpiration, than, 
by the oe of nitrous * It would ſeem to be. 


If this be the caſe (for i it is not eaſy to judge 
with accuracy by experiments with ſmall ani- 
mals) nitrous air will be an accurate teſt of the 
| goodneſs of common air only, that is, air con- 
taining a conſiderable proportion of fixed air. 
But this is the moſt valuable purpoſe for which 
a teſt of the goodneſs of air can be wanted. It 
will ſtill, indeed; ſerve for a meaſure of the 


goodneſs of air that does not contain fixed air; 


but, a ſmaller degree of diminvtion in chis 


caſe, muſt be admitted to be equivalent to a 


"_= men in ira other. eerie 


Ms I could nee, thy means if growing ve- 
| getables, bring air which had been thoroughly 
noxious to ſo pure a ſtate as that a candle would 
burn in it, it may be ſuſpected that ſomething 
elſe beſides vegetation is neceſſary to produce 

chis effect. But it ſhould be conſidered, that 


» | Y no 


has been agitated in water, and even before ĩt 


and Hints. —_ 


no part of the common atmoſphere can ever be 
in this highly noxious ſtate, or indeed in a ſtate 
in which a candle will not burn in it; but that 
even air reduced to this ſtate, either by candles 
actually burning out in it, or by breathing it, 
has never failed to be perfectly reſtored by 
vegetation, at leaſt ſo far that candles would 
burn in it again, and, to all appearance, as 


well, and as long as ever; ſo that the growing 


vegetables, with which the ſurface of the earth 
is overſpread, may, for any thing that appears 


to the contrary, be a cauſe of the purification 


of the atmoſphere ſufficiently * to che 
effect. 


It may likewiſe be ſuſpected, that ſince agi - 


tation in Tater injures pure common air, the 
agitation of the ſea may do more harm than 
good in this reſpect. But it requires a much 


more violent and longer continued agitation of 
air in water than is ever occaſioned by the waves 


of the ſea to do the leaſt ſenfible injury to it. 
Indeed a flight agitation of air in putrid water 
injures it very materially; but if the water be 
fweer, this effect is not produced, except by a 
long and tedious operation, whereas it requires 
but a-very ſhort time, in compariſon, to reſtore 
a quantity of any of the moſt noxiaus.kinds of 
air to a very great degree of wholeſomeneſs by 
the ſame procels. 


Dr. 


— 


—— 


- pay 4 7 — A 
© we 
_—_— 2 wy 
* Ty = % 
* — * - * "the 4 
0 * _ tes. |. we. 2 
— . 2 
* _— — — gs ma — 
; — 4 ke 1 2 
ö II pe — 
_ V * On 
-S = 


OE 2 


"ET. 


— I__— RS . 
— . * 
=_ 


F wo Queries, Speculations, 


Dr. Hales found that he could breathe the 
fame air much longer when, in the courſe of 
his reſpiration, it was made to paſs through 


ſeveral folds of cloth dipped in vinegar, in a 


ſolution of ſea-ſalt, or in ſalt of tartar, eſpe- 
cially the laſt. Statical Eſſays, vol. 1. p. 266. 
The experiment is valuable, and well deſerves 
to be repeated with a greater variety of circum- 


» , ſtances. I imagine that the effect was produced 


by thoſe ſubſtances, or by the water which they 
attracted from the air, imbibing the phlogiſtic 
matter diſcharged from the lungs. Perhaps the 


phlogiſton may unite with the watery part of 


the atmoſphere, in preference to any other part 


of it, and may by that means be more eaſily 


transferred to ſuch ſalts as imbibe moiſture. 


Sir Ila Newton defines flame to be 0 
candens, conſidering all ſmoke as being of the 
fame nature, and capable of ignition. But the 
ſmoke of common - fuel conſiſts of two very 
different things. That which riſes firſt is mere 
water, loaded with ſome of the groffer parts of 
the fuel, and is hardly more capable of be- 
coming red hot than water itſelf ; but the'other 
kind of ſmoke, which alone is capable of igni- 
tion, is properly inflammable air, which is alſo 
loaded with other heterogeneous matter, ſo as 


to appear like a very denſe ſmoke. A lighted 


candle ſoon ſhews them to be eſſentially diffe- 


rent 


1 


Th 


: and Hints, 271 


rent from each other. For one of them in- 
ſtantly takes fire, whereas the other extinguiſhes 


a candle. | 


It is remarkable that gunpowder will take 
fire, and explode in all kinds of air, without 
diſtinction, and that other ſubſtanees which 
contain nitre will burn freely in thoſe circum- 
ſtances. Now fince nothing can burn, unleſs 
there be ſomething at hand to receive the phlo- 
giſton, which is ſet looſe in the act of ignition, 
I do not ſee how this fact can be accounted for, 
but by ſuppoſing that the acid of nitre, being 
peculiarly formed to unite with phlogiſton, 
immediately receives it. And if the ſulphur, 
which is thereby formed, be inſtantly decom- 
poſed again, as the chemiſts in general ſay, 
thence comes the exploſion of gunpowder, 
which, however, requires the reaction of ſome 
incumbent atmoſphere, and without which the 
materials will only melt, and be diſperſed with- 
out exploſion. 


Nitrous air ſeems to conſiſt of the nitrous 
acid vapour united to phlogiſton, together, per- 
haps, with ſome ſmall portion of the metallic 
calx; juſt as inflammable air conſiſts of the 
vitriolic or marine acid, and the ſame ꝓhlogiſtic 
principle. It ſhould ſeem, however, that phlo- 
giſton has a ſtronger affinity with the marine 
, acid, 


II 8 
N N 
* * NE 
— —UQ— DA ̃ — — 


* ” # 
ET i — — en —— IT 
— 
— 


arr. 
— — ——— —— — 


I 
wa < "5 


d 
wum _ 
_—_ l 
—— — — 
_ ———32ͤ̃ IAA ES Lo er tne” 
c — ::: W 

” 

were a Pl + abit — 
— 3 9 


— 


— 


— 


— — 2 * 


— 


—— OA A | 
- - a * " oo 


—— — — ws * 
— 


—ü—U—ñẽͤ 


uw 
oy 


— 


* — * 


m_— 


272 = Queries, Speculations, 


acid, if that be the baba. of common air; for 


nitrous air being admitted to common air, it is 
immediately decompoſed; probably by the phlo- 
giſton joining with the acid principle of the 
common air, while the fixed air which it con- 


tained is precipitated, and the acid of the 


nitrous air is abſorbed by the water in which 
the mixture is made, or unites with any volatile 


alkali that happens to be at hand. 


This, indeed, is hardly agreeable to the hy- 
potheſis of moſt chemiſts, who ſuppoſe that the 
nitrous acid is ſtronger than the marine, ſo as 
to be capable of diſlodging it from any baſe 


with which it may be combined; but it agrees 


with my own experiments on marine acid air, 
which ſhew that, in many caſes, this weaker acid, 
as it is called, is capable of ſeparating both the 
vitriolic and the nitrous acids from the phlo- 
giſton with which they are combined. 


; On the other hand, the ſolution 6f metals in 


the different acids ſeem to ſhew, that the nitrous 


acid forms a cloſer union with phlogiſton than 


the other two ; becauſe the air which is formed 
by the nitrous acid is not inflammable, like 
that which is produced by the oil of vitriol, or 
the ſpirit of ſalt. . Alſo, the fame weight of 
iron does not yield half the quantity of nitrous 
air that it does of inflammable. | 
The 


Pp * db. wo" — by — 
x l — 


. 
p: 
i 
N 


and Hints. 273 


The great diminution of nitrous air by phlo- 
piſton is not eaſily accounted for, unleſs we 
ſuppoſe that its ſuperabundant acid, uniting 
more intimately with the phlogiſton, conſtitutes 
a ſpecies of ſulphur that is not eaſily perceived 
or catched ; though, in the proceſs with iron, 
and alſo in that with liver of ſulphur, part of 
the redundant phlogiſton forms ſuch an union 
with the acid as gives it a kind of inflamma- 
bility. 


| it appears to me to be very probable, that 


the ſpirit. of nitre might be exhibited in the 


form of air, if it were poſſible to find any fluid 
by which it could be confined; but it unites 
with quickſilver as well as with water, ſo that 
when, by boiling the ſpirit of nitre, the fumes 
are driven through the glaſs tube, fig. 8, they 
inſtantly ſeize upon the quickſilver through 
which they are to be conveyed, and uniting - 
with it, form a ſubſtance that ſtops up the 
tube: a circumſtance which has more than once 
expoſed me to very diſagreeable accidents, in 
conſequence of the burſting of the phials. 


I do, not know any inquiry more promiſing 
than the inveſtigation of the properties of nitre, 
the nitrous acid, and nitrous. air. Some of the 
moſt wonderful phenomena in nature are con- 


274 Queries, Speculations, i 
nectecl with them, and che ſubject ems to be 
fully within our reach.” | 


5 2. tee 10% R fad the conf deration of 
the ſimilarity of the ETECTRIC MATTER and 


© FHLOGISTON. 5 


There is nothing in the hiſtory of "hil6fophy 


city. Nothing ever appeared more trifling than 
the firſt effects which were obſerved of this 
agent in nature, as the attraction and -repulfion 
of ſtraws, and other liglit ſubſtances, It ex- 
cited more attention by the flaſhes of ght which 
it exhibited. We were more ſeriouſly alarmed 
at the electrical \/hock, and the effects of the 


electrical batzery 3 and we were aſtoniſhed to the 


higheſt degree by the diſcovery of the ſimilarity 
of electricity with lighting, and the aurora bo- 
realis with the connexion it ſeems to have with 


cwater-ſpouts, hurricanes, and earthquakes, and 


alſo with the part that is probably aſſigned to it 
in the ſyſtem of vegetation, and other the moſt 
 imporeant proceſſes in nature. 


Vet, derwiislundiag all this, we have been, | 
within a/few years, more puzzled than ever 
with the electricity of the torpedo,” and of the 
anguille temblante of Surinam, eſpecially ſince 
that moſt curious diſcovery of Mr. Walſh's, 

that 


more ſtriking than the rapid progreſs of elefiri- 


and Hints 2353 


that the former of theſe wonderful. fiſhes has 
the power of giving a proper electrical ſhock ; 
the electrical matter which proceeds from it 
performing a real circuit from one part of the 
animal to the other; while both the fiſh which 
performs this experiment and all its apparatus 


are plunged in water, which is known to be a 


conducting ſubſtance. 


Perhaps, Wk by conſidering this fact in 
connexion with''a few others, and eſpecially 
with what I have lately obſerved concerning the 
identity of electricity and phlogiſton, a lit- 
tle light may be thrown upon this ſubject, 
in conſequence of which we may be led to 
conſider electricity in a ſtill more important 
light, Many of my readers, I am aware, 
will ſmile at what I am going to advance; but 


the apprehenſion of this ſhall not interrupt my 


ſpeculations, how chimerical New ws may 
be ee to be. 


The facts, the cotifiderdtion of which 1 would 
combine with that of the electricity of the tor- 


pedo, are the following. 


F rſt, The remarkable electricity of the fea- 


thers of a paroquet, obſerved by Mr. Hart- 


mann, an account of which may be feet in Mr. 
Rozier's Journal for Sept. 1771. p. 69. This 
T 2 bird 


* 


2 — » $4 $A _—_— ——— rrwthn whe 


276 Queries, Speculations, 


bird never drinks, but often waſhes itſelf ;. but 


the perſon who attended it having neglected to 
ſupply it with water for this purpoſe, its fea- 


thers appeared to be endued with a proper elec- 
trical virtue, repelling one another, and retain- 
ing their electricity a long time after they were 
plucked from the body of the bird, juſt as 
they would have done if they had received elec- 
tricity. from an excited 2 tube. 


Secondly, The eleQric matter directed 
through the body of any muſcle forces it to 
contract. This is known to all perſons who 


attend to what is called the electrical ſhock; 


which certainly occaſions a proper convulſion, 
but has been more fully illuſtrated by Father 


Beccaria. See my Hiſtory of Electricity, p. 402. 


f Laſtly, Let it be conſidered that the proper 
nouriſhment of an animal body, from which 


the ſource and materials of all muſcular mo- 
tion muſt be derived, is probably ſome modifi- 


cation of phlogiſton. Nothing will nouriſh 
that does not contain phlogiſton, and probably 


in ſuch a ſtate as to be eaſily ſeparated from it 


by the animal functions. 


| That the ſource of muſcular motion is phlo- 
giſton is ſtill more probable, from the conſidera- 


tion of the well known effects of vinous and 
ſpirituous 


. 


and K 277 


ſpirituous liquors, which conſiſt very much of 
phlogiſton, and which inſtantly brace and 
ſtrengthen the whole nervous and muſcular 
ſyſtem ; the phlogiſton in this caſe being, per- 
haps, more eaſily extricated, and Dion a leſs 
| tedious animal . proceſs, than in the uſual me- 
thod of extracting it from mild aliments. 
Since, however, the mildeſt aliments do the 
ſame thing more ſlowly and permanently, that 
ſpirituous liquors do ſuddenly and tranſiently, 
it ſeems probable that their operation 1s ulti- 
mately the ſame, 


This conjecture is likewiſe favoured by my 
obſervation, that reſpiration and puttefaction af- 
fett common air in the ſame manner, and in 
the ſame manner in which all other proceſſes 
diminiſh air and make it noxious, and which 
agree in nothing but the emiſſion of phlogiſton. 
If this be the caſe, it ſhould ſeem that che 
phlogiſton which we take in with our aliment, 
after having diſcharged its proper function in 
the animal ſyſtem (by which it probably under- 
goes ſome unknown alteration) is diſcharged as 
effete by the lungs into the great common men- 
A the ame | 


My 88 ſuggeſted (whether . 
or not) by theſe facts, is, that animals have a 


power of converting phlogiſton, from the ſtate 
13 in 


/ 


278 Queries, Spetulations, 


in which they receive it in their nutriment, into 
that ſtate in which it is called the electrical 
fluid; that the brain, beſides its other proper 
uſes, is the great laboratory and repoſitory for 
this purpoſe; that by means of the nerves this 
great principle, thus exalted, is directed into 


the muſcles, and forces them to act, in the 


ſame manner as they are forced into action 


when the electric fluid is thrown into them ab 


exIYa, 


I farther ſuppoſe, that the generality of ani- 
mals have no power of throwing this gene- 


rated electricity any farther than the limits of 


their own ſyſtem; but that the torpedo, and 


animals of a ſimilar conſtruction, ' have like- 
, wiſe the power, by means of an additional ap- 
paratus, of throwing it farther, fo as to affect 
other animals, and other ſubſtances at a diſtance 
from them. 


In this caſe, it ſhould ſeem that the electric 


matter diſcharged from the animal ſyſtem (by 


which it is probably more exhauſted and fa- 
tigued than by ordinary muſcular motion) would 
never return to it, at leaſt ſo as to be capable 
of being made uſe of a ſecond time, and yet 


if the ſtructure of theſe animals be ſuch 


as that the electric matter ſhall | dart from 
one part of them only, while another part 


and Hints. 279 


is left ſuddenly deprived of it, it may make a 
circuit, as in the Leyden phial. : 


As to the manner in which the electric matter 
makes a muſcle contract, I do not pretend to 
have any conjecture worth mentioning, _ I 
only imagine that whatever can make the muſ- 
cular fibres recede from one another farther than 
the parts of which they conſiſt, muſt have this 

effect, 


Poſſibly, the light which is ſaid to proceed 
from ſame animals, as from cats and wild 
beaſts, when they are in purſuit of their prey 
in the night, may not only ariſe, as it has 
hitherto been ſuppoſed to do, from the friction 
of their hairs or briſtles, &c.. but that violent 
muſcular exertion may contribute to it. This 
may aſſiſt them occaſionally to catch their 
prey; as glow- worms, and other inſects, are 
provided with a conſtant light for that purpoſe, 
to the ſupply of which light their nutriment 
may alſo contribute. 


I Would not even ſay that the light which 

is ſaid to have proceeded from ſome human 
bodies, of a particular temperament, and eſpe- 
cially on ſome extraordinary occaſions, may 
not have been of the electrical kind, that is, 


produced independently of friction, or with leſs 
T 4 f riction 


280 Queries, Speculations, 


friction than would have produced it in other 
perſons ; ; as in thoſe caſes related by Bartholin 
in his treatice De luce animalium. See particu- 
larly what he ſays concerning Theodore king of 


the Goths, p. 54, concerning Gonzaga duke of 


Mantua, p. 57, and Gothofred Antonius, p. 


123. But I would not have my readers ſuppoſe 
that I lay much ſtreſs upon ſtories no better 
authenticated than theſe. | 


The electric matter in paſſing through non- 


conducting ſubſtances always emits light. This 
light I have been ſometimes inclined to ſuſpect 


might have been ſupplied from the ſubſtance 


through which it paſſes. But I find that after 
the electric ſpark has diminiſhed a quantity of 
air as much as it poſſibly can, ſo that it has 
no more viſible effect upon it, the electric light 
in that air is not at all leſſened. It is proba- 
ble, therefore, that electric light comes from 
the electric matter itſelf ; and this being a mo- 
dification of phlogiſton, it is probable that all 
light is a modification of phlogiſton alſo. Indeed, 

ſince no other ſubſtances beſides ſuch as contain 
phlogiſton are capable of ignition, and conſe- 
quently of becoming luminous, it was on this 
account pretty evident, prior to theſe deduc- 


tions from electrical phenomena, that light and 


phlogiſton are the ſame thing, in different 
forms or ſtates, 


It 


and Hints, © 281 


It appears to me that heat has no more pro- 


per connexion with phlogiſton than it has with 


water, or any other conſtituent part of bodies; 
but that it is a ſtate into which the parts of 


bodies are thrown by their action and reaction 
- with reſpect to one another; and probably (as the 
Engliſh philoſophers in general have ſuppoſed) 
the heated ſtate of bodies may conſiſt of a ſub- 


tle vibratory motion of their parts. Since the 


particles which conſtitute light are . thrown 
from luminous bodies with ſuch amazing ve- 
locity, it is evident that, whatever be the cauſe 

of ſuch a projection, the reaction conſequent 


upon it muſt be conſiderable, This may be 
ſufficient not only to keep up, but alſo to in- 


creaſe the vibration of the parts of thoſe bo- 


dies in which the phlogiſton is not very firmly 
combined; and the difference between the ſub- 
ſtances which are called infammable and others 


which alſo contain phlogiſton may be this, that 


in the former the heat, or the vibration occa- 


ſioned by the emiſſion of their own phlogiſton, 
may be ſufficient to occaſion the emiſſion of 


more, till the whole be exhauſted ; that Is, till 


the body be reduced to aſhes. Whereas in bo- 


dies which are not inflammable, the heat occa- 
ſioned by the emiſſion of their own phlogiſton 
may not be ſufficient for this purpoſe, but an 
additional heat ab extra may be neceſſary. 


Some 


282 Queries, Speculations, 0 


Some philoſophers diſlike the term phlogiſlon; 
but, for my part, I can ſee no objection to 
giving that, or any other name, to a real ſome- 


thing, the preſence or abſence of which makes 
ſo remarkable difference in bodies, as that of 


metallic calces and metals, oil of vitriol and brim- 
fone, &c. and which may be transferred from 
one ſubſtance to another, according to certain 
known laws, that is, in certain definite circum- 
ſtances. It is certainly hard to conceive how, 
-any thing that anſwers this deſcription can be 
only a mere quality, or mode of bodies, and 
not a-ſubflance itſelf, though incapable of being 
exhibited alone. At leaſt, there can be no 
-harm in giving this name to any thing, or any 
eircumſtance that is capable of producing theſe 


effects. If it ſhould hereafter appear not to be 
a ſubſtance, we may change our phraſeology, 


if we think proper. * hi 


On the other hand I diſlike the uſe of the 


term fire, as a conſtituent principle of natural 


bodies, becauſe, in conſequence of the uſe 


that has generally been made of that term, it 
includes another thing or circumſtance, viz. 
beat, and thereby becomes ambiguous, and is 


in danger of miſleading us. When I uſe the 


term phlogiſton, as a principle in the conſtitu- 
tion of bodies, I-cannot miſlead myſelf. or 
others, becauſe I uſe one and the ſame term to 


denote 


denote only one and the ſame unhnoton cauſe 
| of certain well-known effects. But if Tfay 
W 4 that fre is a principle in the conſtitution of 

bodies, I muſt, at leaſt, embarraſs myſelf with 
the diſtinction of fire in a ſtate. of action, and 


and Hints. | 283 | 
: | 
| 
| 


fire inafive, or quieſcent, Beſides I think the 
term phlogiſton preferable to that of fire, be- 
| cauſe it is not in common uſe, but confined to 
: L - philoſophy; ſo that the uſe of it may be more 
ö aſcertained. 


be the fame thing, though it cannot be exhi- 

br” bited alone, in a quieſcent ſlate, it may be ex- 

| hibited alone under one of its modifications, | 
when it is in motion. And if light be alſo phlo- 1 
giſton, or ſome modification or ſubdiviſion of 
phlogiſton, the ſame thing is capable of being 
exhibited alone in this other form alſo. | 


\ 
| 1 
; Beſides, if pblogiſtgn and the electrie matter — | | 


In my paper on the conducting pozver of char- | 
coal, (See Philoſophical Tranſactions, vol. 66. | 
p. 221) I obſerved that there is a remarkable 
reſemblance between metals and charcoal; as 
in both theſe ſubſtances there is an intimate | 
union of phlogiſton with an earthy baſe; and 
I faid that, had there been any phlogiſton in 
* water, I ſhould have concluded, that there had 
been no conducting power in nature, but in 
conſequence of an union of this principle with 
ſome 


284 Queries, Speculations, 


ſome baſe ; for while metals have phlogiſton 


they conduct electricity, bur when they are de- 


prived of it they conduct no longer. Now the 
affinity which I have obſerved between phlo- 
giſton and water leads me to conclude that wa- 


- ter, in its natural ſtate, does contain ſome por- 


tion of phlogiſton ; and according to the hypo- 
theſis juſt now mentioned they muſt be inti- 
mately united, becauſe water is not inflamma- 


ble. 4 

I think, therefore, that after this ſtate of 
hefitation and ſuſpence, I may venture to lay 
it down as a characteriſtic diſtinction between 
conduct ing and non- conducting ſubſtances, that 
the former contain phlogiſton intimately united 
with ſome baſe, and that the latter, if they con- 
tain phlogiſton at all, retain it more looſely. In 
what manner this circumſtance facilitates the 
paſſing of the electric matter through one ſub- 
ſtance, and obſtructs its paſſage through an- 
other, Ido not pretend to ſay. But it is no incon- 
ſiderable thing to have advanced but one ftep 


nearer to an explanation of ſo very capital a 


diſtinction of natural bodies, as that into con- 
. and non- conductors of 6 


beg leave to mention in this place, as s fa- 
vourable to this hypotheſis, a moſt curious diſ- 
covery made very lately by Mr. Walſh, who 
being 


— - 


and Hints. 285 


being affiſted by Mr. De Luc to make a more 
perfect vacuum in the double or arched baro- 


meter, by boiling the quickſilver in the tube, 
found that the electric ſpark or ſhock Would 


no more paſs through it, than through a ſtick 


of ſolid glaſs. He has alſo noted ſeveral cir- 
_ cumſtances that affect this vacuum in a very 
extraordinary manner. But ſuppoſing that va- 


cuum to be perfect, I do not ſee how we can 
avoid inferring from the fact, that ſome ſub- 
ſtance is neceſſary to conduct electricity; and 
that it is not capable, by its own expanſive 
power, of extending itſelf into ſpaces void of 


all matter, as has generally been ſuppoſed, on 


the idea of there being nothing to obſtru its 
paſſage. A ed e 


Indeed if this was the caſe, I do not ſee how 
the electric matter could be retained within the 
body of the earth, or any of the planets, or 
ſolid orbs of any kind. In nature we ſee it make 
the moſt ſplendid appearance in the upper and 
thinner regions of the atmoſphere, juſt as it 
does in a glaſs tube nearly exhauſted; but if 
it could expand itſelf beyond that degree of ra- 
rity, it would neceſſarily be diffuſed into the 
ſurrounding vacuum, and continue and be con- 
denſed there, at leaſt in a greater proportion 
than in or near any ſolid body, as Newton ſup- 
poſed concerning his ether. 


If 


| ; | / . * = a | 
4 1 
A 4 . e a = % . = 
* Nr „K SA 898 33 „„ W OO 3 
— — _— | 


* „ : 5 b 


286 Queries, Speculations, and Hinis. 


If that mode of vibration which conſtitutes 
heat be the means of converting phlogiſton 
, from that ſtate in chich it makes a part of ſo- 
| lid bodies, and eminently contributes to the 
42 firmneſs of their texture into that ſtate in which 
0 tit diminiſhes common air may not that pecu- 
„ liar kind of vibration by which Dr. Hartley 
1 ſuppoſes the brain to be affected, and by which 
1 be endeavours to explain all the phenomena of 
ſenſation, ideas, and muſcular motion, be the 
means by which the phlogiſton, which is con- 
121 veyed into the ſyſtem by nutriment, is convert- 
f ed into that form or modification of it of which 
3 000 fluid .confiſts. 


| 'T heſe two ſtares of ohlopifion may be con⸗ 

ceived to reſemble, in ſome meaſure, the two 
„ ſtates of fixed air, viz. ee « or nn, 
13 | 3 e. | m ahl tuft 


F{} 8. , 1 x ts 


THE 


_ * - 
. x l 
| P ; . — = „% <4 


-. 


+, rn 


APP E N DU Jo 


N this Appendix I ſhall preſent the reader 


friends on the ſubject of the preceding work. 


Among them I ſhould with pleaſure have in- 


ſerted ſome curious experiments, made by Dr. 


Hulme of Halifax, on the air extracted from 


Buxton water, and on the impregnation of ſeve- 
ral fluids, with different kinds of air; but that 
he informs me he propoſes to make a ſeparate 
publication on the ſubject, 


NUM. 


with the communications of ſeveral of my 


- 


—— —ͤ— 


2 * 


488 Tus APPENDIX. © 


NUMBER \ 


—— mak by wr. Hey to prove that 
there is no OIL of VIrRIOoL in water impreg- 
nated with Fixkop Alx, 


* 


It having been ſuggeſted, that air ariſing from a 
fermenting mixture of chalk and oil of vitrĩol might 
carry up with it a ſmall portion of the vitriolic acid, 
rendered volatile by the act of fermentation; I made 


the following experiments, in order to diſcover 


whether the acidulous taſte, which water impreg- 
nated with ſuch air affords, was owing to the pre- 
ſence of any acid, or only to the fred! air It had 
er hk 


i 
% 


FxxEZAIMExr I. 

I mixed a tea · ſpoonful of ſyrup of violets with 
an ounce of diſtilled water, ſaturated with fixed air 
procured from chalk by means of the vitriolic acid; 
but neither upon the firſt mixture, nor after ſtand- 
ing 24 hours, was the colour of the ſyrup at all 


changed, except by its ſimple dilution. 


EXPERIMENT II. 


A portion of the ſame diſtilled water, unimpreg- 
nated with fixed air, was mixed with the ſyrup in 
the ſame proportion: not the leaſt difference in 
colour could be perceived betwixt this and the 


above-mentioned mixture. 
Expz- 


Tut APPENDIX. 289 
ExPERIMENT IM. 


One drop of oil of vitriol being mixed with a pint 
of the ſame diſtilled water, an ounce of this water 
was mixed with a tea · ſpoonful of the ſyrup. This 
mixture was very diſtinguiſhable in colour from the - 
two former; having a | caſt, which the others 
wanted, 


4 7 SF a # | 
ExPERIMENT IV. 


The diſtiued water impregnated with ſo ſmall a 
quantity of vitriolie acid, having a more agreeable 
taſte than when alone, and yet manifeſting the pre- 
ſence of ah acid by means of the ſyrup of violets ; I 
ſubjected it to ſome other teſts of acidity. It formed 
curds when agitated with ſoap, lathered with difficul- 
ty, and very imperfectly; but not the leaſt ebullition 
could be diſcovered upon dropping in ſpirit of ſal am- 
moniac, or ſolution of ſalt of tartar, though I had 
taken cate to render the latter free from cauſticity by 
impregnating it with fixed air, — 


ExyERIMENT V. 


The diſtilled water ſaturated with fixed air neither 
efferveſced, nor ſhewed any clouds, when mixed with 
the fixed. or yolatile alkali. 


 ExperIMENT VI. 


No curd was formed by pouring this water upon 
an equal quantity of milk, and boiling them roge- 


U Exrx- 


— 22 r * 5 rn 


290 Tas APPENDIX, 


EXPERIMENT VII. 


When agitated with ſoap, this water produced 

cuids, and lathered with ſome difficulty; but not ſo 
much as the diſtilled water mixed with vitriolic acid 

in the very ſmall proportion above - mentioned. The \ 
ſame diſtilled water without any impregnation of fixed 
airlathered with ſoap without the leaſt previous curd- 
ling. River-water, and a pleaſant pump-water not 
remarkably hard, were compared wifh theſe. The 
former produced curds before it lathered, but not 
quite in ſo great a quantity as the diſtilled water im- 
pregnated with fixed air: the latter cauſed a ſtronger 
curd than any of the others above-mentioned, 


| Tarun VIII. 


| Apprehending that the fixed air in the diſtilled wa- 
ter occaſioned the coagulation, or ſeparation of the 
oily part of the ſoap, only by deſtroying the cauſti- 
city of the lixivium, and thereby rendering the union 
f leſs perfect betwixt that and the tallow, and not by 
the preſence of any acid; I impregnated a freſh quan- 
tity of the ſame digilled water with fixed air, which 
had paſſed through half a yard of a wide barometer- 
tube filled with ſalt of tartar; but this water cauſed 
the ſame curdling with ſoap as the former had done, 
and appeared in every reſpe@ to be exactly the ſame. 


** 
— ® 
. 


- — — — 


Exrz- 


1 
1 
37 
4 
| ; 
{ 
-% 
7 
"| 
" 


Tu: APPENDIX. 297 


EXPERIMENT IX. 


Diflilled water famed with fixed air formed a 
White cloud and precipitation, upon being mixed with 
a ſolution of ſaccharum ſaturni. I found likewiſe, that 
fixed airy after paſſing through the tube filled with 
alkaline ſalt, upon being let into a phial containing a 
ſolution of the metalic ſalt in diſtilled water, cauſed 
4 perfe& ſeparation of the lead, in the form of a 
white powder; for the water, after this precipitation, 
ſhewed no cloudineſs upon a freſh mixture of the 
ſubſtances which had before rendered it apaque. 


U2 NUM» 


” -— . - -- * — — 
— 


- ö f ]üſnsß . r ꝰ d 8 
= * 4 v Ic... 


»# 

bh 1 2 
—_— 
* 


by 


| 

4 | 
N. : 
iF 


2 2 


a, — 
- A | 4 2 _ 
, \ * a 
6 I 
5 % * Y © 
3 — R ar wr. nd > oY % 
% 


- * 
Mi 


— 


292 T A PPEN DPI X. 


NOMBER f. 


4 Letter * Mr. Hey to Dr. PRIEsTLEV, concerning 


the Effects of fixed Air applied by way of Cly/ter. 


Leeds, Feb. t5th, 1772» . | 


Reverend Sir, 


Having lately experienced the good effects of fixed 
air in a putrid fever, applied in à manner, I believe 
not heretofore made uſe of, I thought it proper to in · 
form you of the agreeable event, 2s the method of 
applying this powerful corrector of putrefaction took 
its riſe principally from your obſervations and experi- 
ments on factitious air; and now, at your requeſt, 
I ſend the particulars of the caſe I mentioned to you, 
as far as concerns the adminiſtration of this re- 


medy. x 


January 8, 1772, Mr. Lightbowne, a young gen- 


tleman who lives with me, was ſeized with a fever, 


which, after continuing about ten days, began to be 
attended with thoſe ſymptoms that indicate a putreſ- 


cent ſtate of the fluids. | 


isch, His tongue was black in the morning when 
I firſt viſited him, but the blackneſs went off in the 
day-time upon drinking: He had begun to doze much 


rhe preceding day, and now he took little notice of 


thoſe that were about him: His belly was looſe, and 


had been ſo for ſome days: his pulſe beat 110 ſtrokes 


in a minute, and was rather low: he was ordered to 
rake twenty-five grains of Peruvian, bark with five of 
tor- 


? 


y o 
n . ˙— — — : 
of” 1 * ane e ' wy 4 a - 


5 . 4 


e 


Tus APPENDIX, 293 


tormentil- root in powder every four hours, and to 
ufe red wine and water cold as his common drink. 


10th, I was called to vifit him early in the morn- 
ing, on account of a bleeding at the noſe which had 
come on: he loſt about eight ounces of blood, which 
was of a looſe texture: the hamorrhage was fap- 
preſſed, though not. without ſome” difficulty, 
means of tents made of ſoft lint, dipped in coſd wa- 
ter ſtrongly impregnated with tincture of iron, which 


were introduced within the noſtrils quite through to 


their poſterior apertures; a method which has never 
yet failed me in like caſes, His tongue was now 
covered with a thick black pellicle, which was not di- 
miniſhed by drinking: his teeth were furred with the 
ſame kind of ſordid matter, and even the roof of his 
mouth and fauces were not free from itt his loofeneſs 
and ſtupor continued, and he was almoſt inceſſantly 
muttering to himſelf : he took this day à ſcraple of 
the Peruvian bark with ten grains of tormentil every 


two or three hours: a ſtarch clyſter, containing a 


drachm of the compound powder of bole, without 
opium, was given morning and evening; a window 
was ſet open in his room, though it was a ſevere 
froſt, and the floor was frequently ſprinkled with 
vinegar. | 


* * 


20th, He continued nearly in the ſame ſtate: when 
rouſed from his dozing, he generally gave a ſenſible 


anſwer to the queſtions aſked him; but he immediate · 


ly relapſed, and repeated his muttering. His ſkin was 
dry, and harſh, but without petechiz. He ſometimes 


voided his urine and fæces into the bed, but generally 
had ſenſe enough to aſk for the bed-pan: as he now 


U 3 nauſeated 


a. 
" —_— — 


x 


— 
— 


te” 1 8 8 
2 
5 - 


_— 
N — FE 2 * fd - oh . 
Lo W L — - 
5 — — wt mo 
% 


* "Wk. < %. . „ — — 7 - 
— . þ © -— . 4 'E. + 4h = Yr a bn „ q 


"ups + > 
« 


294 Tus APPENDIX, 


nauſeated the bark in ſubſtance, it was exchanged for 
Huxham's tincture, of which he took a table ſpoon- 
ful every two hours in a cup full of cold water: he 
drank ſometimes a little of the tincture of roſes, but 
his common liquors were red wine and water, or rice- 
water and brandy acidulated with elixir of vitriol: 
before drinking, he was commonly requeſted to rinſe 
his mouth with water to which a little honey and vine - 
gar had been added. His looſeneſs rather increaſed, 
and the ſtools were watery, black, and ſœtid: It was 
judged neceſſary to moderate this diſcharge, which 
ſeemed to ſink him, by mixing a drachm of the the. 
riaca Alber with each clyſter. 5 


ail. 1 The — putrid ſymptoms remained, and a 


| ſubſultus tendinum came on: his ſtools were more fcetid; 
and fo hot, that the nurſe aſſured me ſhe could not ap- 


ply her hand to the bed-pan, immediately after they 
were diſcharged, without feeling pain on this ac- 
count: The medicine and clyſers \ were repeated. 


Reflecting upon the diſagreeable neceſſity we ſeemed 


to lie under of confining this putrid matter in the in- 


teſtines, leſt the evacuation ſhould deſtroy the vis vitæ 
before there was time to correct its bad quality, and 
overcome its bad effects, by the means we were uſing; 
I conſidered, that, if this putrid ferment could be 
more immediately corrected, a ſtop would probably 
be put to the flux, which ſeemed to ariſe from, or at 
leaſt to be encreaſed by it; and the fomes of the diſ- 
eaſe would likewiſe be in a rent meaſure removed. I 
thought nothing was ſo likely to effect this, as the in- 
troduction of fixed air into the alimentary, canal, 
which, from the experiments of Dr. Macbride, and 

thoſe 


Tus APP ENDIX. 295 


thoſe you have made ſince his publication, appears to 
be the moſt powerful corrector of putrefaction hither- 
to known, Irecollected what you had recommended 
to me as deſerving to be tried in putrid diſeaſes, I, 
mean, the injection of this kind of air by way of 
clyſter, and judged that in the preſent caſe ſuch a me- 
thod was clear] L indicated. 


The next morning I mentioned my refle&ions to 
Dr. Hird and Dr. Crowther, who kindly attended 
this young gentleman at my requeſt, and propoſed 
the following method of treatment, which, with 
their approbation, was immediately entered upon · 
We firſt gave him five grains of ipecacuanha, to eva- 
cuate in the moſt eaſy manner part of the putrid col 
luvies : he was then allowed to drink freely of briſk _ 
orange-wine, which contained a good deal of fixed 
air, yet had not loſt its ſweetneſs. The tincture of 
bark was continued as before; and the water which 
he drank along with it, was impregnated with fixed 
air from the atmoſphere of a large vat of fermenting. . 
wort, inthe manner I had learned from you. , Inſtead}. 
of the aſtringent clyſter, air alone was injected, col- 
lected from a fermenting mixture of chalk and oil of 
vitriol : he drank a bottle of ozange-wine in the courſe 
of this day, but refuſed any other liquor except Wa- 
ter and his medicine: two bladders full of air were 
thrown up i in the afternoon. 


23d. His ſtools were leſs frequent; their heat like- - 

wiſe and peculiar ſater were conſiderably diminiſhed; 
his muttering was much abated, and the ſubſultus ten- 
dinum had left him. Finding that part of the air was 
rejected when given with a bladder in the uſual way, I 
U 4 con- 


296 TAE APPENDIX. 


contrived a method of injecting it which was not ſo ſi- 
able to this inconvenience. I took the flexible tube of 
that inſtrument which is uſed for throwing up the fume 
of tobacco, and tied a ſmall bladder to the end of it 
that is connected with the box made for receiving the 
tobacco, which I had previouſly taken off from the 
tube: ] then put ſome bits of chalk into a fix 
ounce phial until it was half filled; upon theſe I 
poured ſuch a quantity of oil of vitriol as | thought 
capable o ſaturating the chalk, and immediately tied 
the bladder, which J had fixed to the tube, round the 
neck of the phial : the clyſter-pipe, which was faſ- 
tened to the other end of the tube, was introduced i in- 
to the anus before the oil of vitriol was poured upon 
the chalk. By this method the air paſſed gradually 


into the inteſtines as it was generated; the rejection 
of it was in a great 1 meaſure prevented ; and the in- 


convenience of keeping the patient uncovered during 
the operation was avoided. 


24th, He was ſo much better, that there ſeemed 
to be no neceſſity for repeating the clyſters.; the o- 
ther means were continued, The window of his 


room was now kept ſhut. oy 


25th, All the ſymptoms of putreſcency had left 
him; his tongue and teeth were clean; there remained 
no unnatural blackneſs or feter | in his ſtools, which 
had now regained their proper conſiſtence; his dozing 


and muttering were gone off; and the diſagreeable 


odour of his breath and perſpiration. was no longer 
perceived. He took nouriſhment to-day, with plea- - 
6 ſure ; ; 


Tus APPENDIX 297 


ſare; and, i in the afternoon, ſat up an hour in * 
chair. | 


His ſe ver, however, did not immediately leave him; 


but this we attributed to his having caught cold from 
being incautiouſly uncovered, when the window was 


open, and the weather extremely ſevere; for a cough, 


which had troubled him in ſome degree from the be- 


ginning, increaſed, and he became likewiſe very hoarſe 
for ſeveral days, his pulſe, at the ſame time, growing 


quicker: but theſe complaints alſo went off, and he 


recovered, without any return of the bad ſymptoms 
hope: mentioned. 


I am, 8 Sir, 
Your obliged humble Servant, 


Wm. Hey. 


ROST CRI PT. 


October 29, 1772, 


Fevers of the putrid kind have been ſa rare in this 


town, and in its neighbourhood, ſince the commence · 


ment of the preſent year, that I have not had an op- 


portunity of trying again the effects of fixed air, given 
by way of clyſter, in any caſe exactly ſimilar to Mr. 
Lightbowne s. I have twicegiven water ſaturated with 
fixed air in a fever of the putreſcent kind, and it 
agreed very well with the patients. To one of them 
the aerial clyſters were adminiftred, on account of a 

looſe» 


298 Tuz APPENDIX. 


looſeneſs, which attended the fever, though the ſtools 
were not black, nor remarkably hot or fœtid. 


Theſe clyſters did not remove the looſeneſs, though 
there was often a greater interval than uſual betwixt 
the evacuations, after the injection of them. The 
patient never complained of any uneaſy diſtention of 
the belly from the air thrown up, which, indeed, is 
not to be wondered at, conſidering how readily this 
kind of air 18 abſorbed by aqueous and other fluids, for 
which ſufficient time was given, by the gradual man- 
ner of injecting it. Both thoſe patients recovered 
though the uſe of fixed air did not produce a crifis be- 
fore the period at which ſuch fevers uſually terminate. 
They had neither of them the opportunity of drinking 
ſuch wine as Mr. Lightbowne took, after the uſe of 
fixed air was entered upon; and this, probably, was 
ſome diſadvantage to them. 


I find the methods of procuring fixed air, and im- 
pregnating water with it, which you have publiſhed, 
are preferable to thoſe I made uſe of in Mr. Light- 
| 8 caſe. 


The flexible tube uſed for conveying the fume of 
tobacco into the inteſtines, I find to be a very conve- 
nient inſtrument in this caſe, by the method before- 
mentioned (only adding water to the chalk, before the 
oil of vitriol is inftilled, as you direct) the injection 
of air may be continued at pleaſure, without any other 
in convenience to the patient, than what may ariſe 
from his continuing in one poſition during the opera- 
tion, which ſcarcely deſerves to be mentioned, or 

from 


Tut APPENDIX. 299 


from the continuance of the clyſter-pipe within the 
anus, which is but trifling, it it be not ſhaken much, 


or puſhed againſt the rectum. 7 


When I ſaid in my letter, that fixed air appeared to 
be the greateſt corrector of putrefaQtion hitherto 
known, your philoſophical reſearches had not then 
made you acquainted with that moſt remarkably anti- 
ſeptic property of nitrous air. Since you favoured me 
with a view of ſome aſtoniſhing proofs of this, I hive 
conceived hopes, that this kind of air may likewiſe be 


applied medicinally to great advantage. O c 
W. H. 


N U M- 


- 
a — OE — — 1 ——— ů — . 


goo Tux APPENDIX, 


"NUMBER II 


Obſervations on the, Mgpreinat Usts of Fixey 
AR. By Tons Pxrcivar, M. D. Fellow 
"of the RovaL SqcieTY, and of the Socizry 
F ANTIQUARIE8 i» LONDON. | 


Theſe Obſervations, on the MEpicinat Uszs or 
FixED Aix have been before publiſhed in the Se- 
cond Volume of my Eſſays ; but are here reprinted 
with conſiderable additions. They form a part of 
an experimental inquiry into this intereſling and 
curious branch of Phyfics ; in which the friend- 
ſhip of Dr. Prieſtley firſt engaged me, in concert 
with himſelf. 


Mancheſter, March 16, 1774. 
N a courſe of Experiments, which is yet unfiniſhed, 


have had frequent opportunities of obſerving 
that FIXED AIR may in no inconſiderable quantity be 


| breathed without danger or uneaſineſs. And it is a 


confirmation of this concluſion, that at Bath, where 
the waters copiouſly exhale this mineral ſpirit,* the 
bathers inſpire it with impunity. At Buxton alſo, 
where the Bath is in a cloſe vault, the effects of ſuch 
effiuvia, if noxious, muſt certainly be perceived. 


See Dr. Falconer's very uſeful and ingenious treatiſe] on the Bath 
water, 2d edit. p. 313» 


Encou - 


Tus APPENDIX. 301 


Encouraged by theſe conſiderations, and ſtill more 
by the teſtimony of a very judicious Phyfician at Staf- 
ford, in favour of this powerful entiſeptic remedy, I 
have adminiſtered fixed air in a conſiderable number of 
caſes of the PaTarsts PULMoNALLs, by directing my 
patients to inſpire the ſteams of an efferveſcing mixture 
of chalk and vinegar z or what I have lately preferred, 
of vinegar and potaſh. The hectic fever has in ſeve- 
ral inſtances heen conſiderably abated, and the matter 
expectorated has become leſs offenſive, and better di- 
geſted. I have not yet been ſo fortunate in any one 
caſe, as to effect a cure; although the uſe of me- 
phitic air has been accompanied with proper internal 
medicines. But Dr. Withering, the gentleman re- 
ferred to above, informs me, that he has been more 
ſucceſsful. One Phthifical patient under his care has 
by a fimilar courſe” intirely recovered ; another was 
rendered much better; and a third, whoſe caſe was 
truly deplorable, ſeemed to be kept alive by it more 
than two months. It may be proper to obſerve that 
fixed air can only be employed with any proſpect of 
ſucceſs, in the latter ſtages of the phihi/is pulmonalis, 


when a purulent expectoration takes place. After the. 


rupture and diſcharge of a VoMica alfo, ſuch a re- 
medy promiſes to be a powerful palliative. Antiſeptic 
futnigations and vapours have been long employed, 
and much extolled in caſes of this kind. I made the 
following experiment, to determine whether their ef- 
ficacy, in any degree, depends on the 2 of 
fixed air from their ſubſtance. | 


end of a bent tube was fixed i in » ahial full of n 


lime-water; ; the other end in a bottle of the tincture of 
myrche 


3a Tur APPENDIX. 


myrrh. The junctures were carefully luted, and the 
phial containing the tincture of myrrh was placed in 


water, heated almoſt to the boiling point, by the lamp 


of a tea-kettle. A number of air-bubbles were ſepa- 
rated, but probably not of. the mephitic kind, for no 
precipitation enſued inthe lime water. This experi- 
ment was repeated with the tinct. tolutanæ, ph. ed. and 
with /þ, vinos. camp. and the reſult was entirely the 
fame. The medicinal action therefore of the vapours 
raiſed from ſuch tinctures, cannot be aſcribed to the 
extrication of fixed air; of which it is probable bo- 
dies are deprived by chemical ſolution as well as by 
mixture. 


a 10 mephitic air be thus capable of correcting puru- 
lent matter in the lungs, we may reaſonably infer it 
will be equally uſeful when applied externally to foul 
ULCERS. And experience confirms the concluſion. 


Even the ſanies of a CANCER, when the carrot poul- 
rice ſailed, has been ſweetened by it, the pain miti- 


gated, and a better digeſtion produced. The caſes 
I refer to are now in the Mancheſter inftrmary, under 
the direction of my friend Mr. White, whoſe 1Kkill as 
a ſurgeon, and abilities as a writer are well known to 


the public. 


10 months have elapſed ſince theſe obſervations 
were written, àand the ſame remedy, during that period, 
has been aſſiduouſly applied, but without any further 
ſucceſs. The progreſs of the cancers ſeems to be 
checked by the fixed air; but it is to be feared that a 


cure will Not be effected. A palliative remedy, how- 


* May, 1778+ 


ever, 


Tuz APPENDIX. 303 


ever, in a diſeaſe ſo deſperate and loathſome, may be 
Conſidered as a very valuable acquiſition. Perhaps x 1- 
TROUS AIR Might be ſtill more efficacious. This ſpe- 
cies of ſactitious air is obtained from all the metals 
except zinc, by means of nitrous acid; and Dr. 
Prieſtley informs me, that as a ſweetener and antiſeptic 
it far ſurpaſſes fixed air. He put two mice into a quan- 
tity of it, one juſt killed, the other offenſively putrid. 
After twenty-five days they were both perfectly 
ſweet. | 


In the vLcEROUs SORE THROAT much advantage 
has been experienced from the vapours of efferveſcing 
mixtures drawn into the fauces . But this remedy 
ſhould not ſuperſede the uſe of other antiſeptic appli- 
cations. & 


A phyſician* who had a very painful aPTHous ur- 
CER at the point of his tongue, found great relief, 
when other remedies failed, from the application of 
fixed air to the part affected. He held his tongue over 

an efferveſcing mixture of potaſh and vinegar; and as 
the pain was always mitigated, and generally removed 
by this vaporiſation, he repeated it, whenever the an- 
guiſh ariſing from the ulcer was more than uſually ſe- 


*vere. He tried a combination of potaſh and oil of vi- 
triol well diluted with water; but this proved ſtimu- 


lant and increaſed his pain; probably owing to ſome 


I Vid, Mr. White's uſeful treatiſe on the management of pregnant and 
lying - in women, p. 279- | 
See the author's obſervations on the efficacy of external applications in 


the ulcerous ſore throats, Eſſays medical and experimental, Vol. I, ad edit. 


p- 377+ 
„ The author of theſe obſervations, 


particles 


Fs 
- 


— — — — 4 — 


— * —— — 
— — 


304 TH E APPENDIX. 


particles of the-acid thrown upon the tongue, by the 
violence of the efferveſcence. For a paper ſtained 
with the purple juice of radiſhes, when held at an equal 
diſtance over two veſſels, the one containing g poraſh and 
vinegar, the other the ſame alkali and 5 22 vitrioli 
fenuis, was unchanged by the former, but was ſpotted 
with red, in various parts, by the latter. 


In MALtGNANT FEVERs wines abounding with fixed 
air may be adminiſtered, to check the ſeptic fermenty 
and ſweeten the putrid colluvies in the prime vie. If 
the laxative quality of ſuch liquors be thought an ob- 
jection to the uſe of them, wines of a greater age. 
may be given, impregnated with mephitic air, by 4 
ſimple but ingenious contrivance of wy friend Dr. 
Prieſtley. + 


The patient's: .common drink might alfo be medi- 
rated in the ſame way. A putrid DIARRHEA fre- 
quently occurs in the latter ſtage of ſuch ditorders 
and it is a moſtalarming and dangerous ſymptom. If 


| the diſcharge be ſtopped by aftringents, a putrid fomes 


is retained in the body, which aggravates the deſlrium 
and increaſes the fever. On the contrary, if it be 
Tuffered to take its courfe, the firength of the patient 
muſt {gon be exhauſted, and death unavoidably enſue. 
The injection of mephitic air into the inteſtines, un- 
der theſe circumſtances, bids fair to be highly ſervice- 
able. And a caſe of this deplorable kind, has lately 
been communicated to me, in which the yapour of 


Ke 

F Directions for impregnating water with fixed air, in order to com 
municate to it the peculiar ſpirit and virtues of Pyrmont water, and 
«th or minxtal waters of a fimilar nature, 
n chalk 


Tuz APPENDIX. 305 


chalk and oil of vitriol conveyed into the body by 
the machine employed for tobacco clyſters, quickly re- 
ſtrained the diarrhea, corrected the heat and fœtor 
of the ſtools, and in two days removed every ſymp- 
tom of danger *. Two ſimilar inſtances of the ſa - 
lutary effects of mephitic air, thus adminiſtered, have 
occurred alſo in my own practice, the hiſtory of which 
I ſhall briefly lay before the reader, May we not 
preſume that the ſame remedy would be equally uſe- 
ful in the DysENTERY ? The experiment is at leaſt 
worthy of trial. 


Mr. W —, aged forty-four years, corpulent, in - 
active, with a ſhort neck, and addicted to habits of 
intemperance, was attacked on the 7th of July 1772, 
with ſymptoms which ſeemed to threaten anapoplexy. 
On the 8th, a bilious looſeneſs ſucceeded, with a 
profuſe haemorrhage from the noſe. On the gth, I 
was called to his aſhſtance. His countenance was 
bloated, his eyes heavy, his ſkin hot, and his pulſe 
hard, full, and oppreſſed. The diarrhza continued; 
his ſtools were bilious and very offenſive ; and he 
complained of griping pains in his bowels, He had 
loſt, before I ſaw him, by the direction of Mr, Hall, 
a ſurgeon of eminence in Mancheſter, eight ounces 
of blood from the arm, which was of a lax tex- 
ture ; and he had taken a ſaline mixture every 
ſixth hour. The following draught was preſcribed, 
and a doſe of rhubarb directed to be adminiſtered at 
night. 


— * * 
* o 


* Referring to the caſe communicated by My, Hey, 


X R. Age 


36s Tux APPENDIX, 


R. Ag. Cinnam. ten. 3. 

Succ. Limon. recet. 3 S5. 

Salis Nitri gr. xij. r. ? Succo Linus: 37. N. 74 1 
4118 boris ſumendus. 


ka July 11. The Diarrhea was more moderate; his - 
griping pains were abated ; and he had leſs ſtupor and 
dejection in his countenance. Pulſe go, not ſo hard or 
oppreſſed. As his ſtools continued to be fœtid, the doſe 

of rhubarb was repeated; and inſtead of ſimple cin- 
namon- water, his draughts were prepared with an 
infuſion of columbo root. 


12. The Diarrhea continued; his ſtools were in- 
voluntary; and he diſcharged in this way a quantity 
of black, grumous,-and fœtid blood. Pulſe hard and 
quick; ſkin hot; tongue covered with a dark fur; 
abdomen ſwelled ; great ſtupor. Ten grains of co- 
lumbo root, and fifteen of the Gummi rubrum aftrin- 
gens were added to each draught. Fixed air, under 
the form of clyſters, was injected every ſecond or 
third hour; and directions were given to ſupply the 
patient plentifully with water, artificially impregnated 
with mephitic air. A bliſter was alſo laid between 


his ſhoulders. 


13. The Diarrhza continued, with frequent diſ- 
charges of blood; but the ſtools hail now loſt their 
fœtor. Pulſe 120; great flatulence in the bowels, 
and fulneſs in the belly. The clyſters of fixed air 
always diminiſhed the tenſion of the Abdomen, abated 
flatulence, and made the patient more eaſy and com- 


poſed for ſome time aſter their injection. They were 
directed 


Taz APPENDIX. 307 
directed to be continued, together with the medicated 
water. The nitre was omitted, and a ſeruple of the 


Confect. Damocratis was given every fourth hour, in 
an infuſion of columbo root. 


14. The Diarrhza was now checked. His othet᷑ 
ſymptoms continued as before. Bliſters were applied 
to the arms; and a drachm and a half of the Tiuctura 
Serpentarie was added to each draught. 


I 5. His pulſe was feeble, quicker, and more irre- 
4 He doſed much; talked incoherently ; and 
aboured under a flight degree of Dyſpnæa. His urine, 
which had hitherto aſſumed no remarkable appearance, 
now became pale; Though he diſcharged wind very 
freely, his belly was much ſwelled, except for a ſhort 
time after the injection of the air- elyſters. The fol- 
lowing draughts were then preſcribed. 


R Camp boræ muci lag. G. Arab. folute gr. viij. 
Infuſ. Rad. Columbo 3Jfs Tint. Serpent. 3ij 
Confect. Card. 9j Hr. # Cort. Auram 3 i m. f. — 
Atis horis n — 


Directions were given to foment his feet frequently 
with vinegar and warm water. 


16. He has had no ſtools fince the 14th, His Abdo- 
men is tenſe. No change in the other ſymptoms, 
The Tint. Serpent. was omitted in his draughts, and 
an equal quantity of Tin#, Rhei __ ſabſtituted in Its 
. 


—— 


* 2 N 1 


— a i G 
M_—_ * „ Do ni 93 
= 


* _ 
- 8 — — — j — « * "Nei ita kt ne nt 
* 


_ 


Wh F . VVV 

38 Taz APPENDIX: 
In the evening, he had a motion to fool, of which , 
he was for the firſt time ſo ſenſible, as to give notice 


to his attendants. But the diſcharge, which was con- 
fiderable and flightly offenſive, confiſted almoſt en- 


tirely of blood, both in a coagulated and ip a liquid 
ſtate. His mediTines were therefore varied as follows: 


R. Decee?. Cort. per Zi Tinck. Core. ejuſd. 3 rj, 
Cuonfeci. Card. 3j Gum. Rubr. Alring. gr. XV, 


© Pulv. Alumin. gr. vij. m. . Hauſtus qtis boris 
A » 


Red Port wine was now given more freely in his 


a medicated water; and his nouriſhment conſiſted of 


ſago and ſalep. 


In this ſtate, with very little variation, he continued 
for ſeveral days; at one time oſtive, and at another 
diſcharging {mall quantities of faces, mixed with gru- 


mous blood. The. air-clyſters were continued, and 


the aſtringents omitted. 


20. His urine was now of an amber colour, and 
depoſited a flight ſediment, His pulſe was more regu- 
lar, and although ſtill very quick, abated in number 
ten ſtrokes in a minute. His head was leſs confuſed, 


and his fleep ſeemed to be refreſhing. No blood ap- 


peared 1 in his ſtools, which were frequent, but ſmal! 
in quantity; and his Abdomen was leſs tenſe than uſual, 
He was extremely deaf ; but gave rational anſwers to 
the few queſtions which were propoſed to him; and 
ſaid he felt no 28 


ai. H 
1 


Tur APPENDIX, 399 


* 


21. He paſſed a very reſtleſs night; his delirium 
| recurred; his pulſe beat 125 ſtrokes 'in a minute 5 
his urine was of adeep amber colour when firſt voided; 
but when cold aiſumed the appearance of cow's Whey 
The Abaamen was not very tenſe, nor had he any fur - 
ther diſcharge of blood. | FL 


Directions were given to ſhave his head, and to 
waſh it with a mixture of vinegar and brandy; the 
quantity of wine in his drink was diminiſhed; and the 


frequent uſe of the pediluvium was enjoined, The 


air-clyſters were diſcontinued, as his ſtools were not 
offenſive, and his Abdomen leſs diſtended, 


22. His pulſe was now ſmall, irregular, and beat 
130 ſtrokes in a minute. The Dyſpnea was greatly. 
increaſed ; his ſkin was hot, and bedewed with a 
clammy moilfurs; and every ſymptom ſeemed to in. 
dicate the approach of death, In this ſtate he con- 
tinued till evening, when he recruited a little, The 
next day he had ſeveral flight convulfions, His urine 
which was voided plentifully, ſtill put on the appear- 
ance of whey when cold. Cordial and antiſpaſmodic 
draughts, compoſed of camphor, tincture of caſtor, 
and Sp. vel. aromat. were now directed; and wine vas 
liberally adminittered, 


24. He roſe from his bed, and by the aſſiſtance of- 


his attendants walked acroſs the chamber. Soon after 


he was ſeized with a violent convulfion, 1 in . he 
expired. . 


— 


* 


To adduce a caſe which terminated fatally as a 
proof of the efficacy of any medicine, W 
X 3 ta 


\ 
A 
| 


30 Tus APPENDIX, 

to theattentipn of the public, may perhaps appear 
ſingular; but cannot be deemed abſurd, when that 
remedy anſwered the purpoſes for which it was ins 
tended. For in the inftance before us; fixed air was 
employed, not with an expectation that it would cure 
the fever, but to obviate the ſymptoms of putrefaction, 
and to allay the uneaſy irritation in the bowels. The 
diſeaſe was too malignant, the nervous ſyſtem too vio- 
lently affected, and the ftrength of the patient too 
much exhauſted by the diſcharges of blood which he 
ſuffered, to afford hopes of recovery from the uſe of 

the moſt powerful antiſeptics. 


But in the ſucceeding. ls the event proved more 
ene, 


Elizabeth Grundy, aged ſeventeen, was attacked 
on the 10th of December 1772, with the uſual ſymp- 
toms of a continued fever. The common method of 
cure was purſued ; but the diſeaſe increaſed, and ſoon 


aſſumed a putrid type. 


On the 2 zd I found her in a conſtant delirium, with 
a ſubſultus tendinum. Her ſkin was hot and dry, her 
tongue black, her thirſt immoderate, and her ftools 
frequent, extremely offenſive, and for the moſt part 
involuntary, , Her pulſe beat 130 ſtrokes in a minute 
ſhe doſed much; and was very deaf. I directed wine 
to be adminiſtered freely; a bliſter to be applied to 
her back; the pediluvium to be uſed ſeveral times in 
the day; and mephitic air to be injected under the 
form of a clyſter every two hours, The next day 
her ſtools were leſs frequent, had loſt their fœtor, 


and were no longer * involuntarily; her 
| | pulſe 


Tuz APPENDIX, gt 


pulſe was reduced to 110 ftrokes in the minute; and 
her delirium was much abated. Directions were given 
to repeat the clyſters, and to ſupply the patient libe- 
rally with wine. Theſe means were aſſiduouſly pur“ 
ſued ſeveral days; and the young woman was ſo re- 
cruited by the 28th, that the injections were diſcon- 
tinued. She was now quite rational, and not averſe 
to medicine. A decoction of Peruvian bark was 
therefore preſcribed, by the uſe of which ſhe ſpeedily 
recovered her health, 


I might add a third hiſtory of a eh diſeaſe, in 
which the mephitic air is now under trial, and which 
affords the ſtrongeſt proof both of the "antiſeptic, and 
of the tonic powers of this remedy ; but as the ifſue 
of the caſe remains yet undetermined (though it is 
highly probable, alas! that it will be fatal) I ſhall 
relate only a few particulars of it. Maſter D. a boy 
of about twelve years of age, endowed with an un- 
common capacity, and with the moſt amiable diſpo- 
fitions, has laboured many months under a hectic 
fever, the conſequence of ſeveral tumours in different 
parts of his body. Two of theſe tumours were laid 
open by Mr. White, anda large quantity of purulent 
matter was diſcharged from them. The wounds were 
Very properly treated by this ſkilful ſurgeon, and every 
ſuitable'remedy, which my beſt judgment could ſug. 
geſt, was aſſiduouſſy adminiſtered. But the matter 
decame Hanious, of a brown colour, and highly putrid. 
A Diarrhea ſueceeded; the patient's ſtools were into 
lexably offenſive, and __ without his knowledge 
A black fur collected about his teeth; his tongue wa 
covered with Aphthe ; and his breath was ſo fœtid, a, 
{carcely to be endured. His ſtrength was almoſt ex 

R 4 | hauſted 


312 IAE APPEND LX. 


hauſted; a fubſaltus fendinum came on; and the final 
period of his ſufferings ſeemed to be rapid] y approach - 
ing · As a laſt, but almoſt hopeleſs, effort, I adviſed 
the injection of clyſters of mephitic air. Theſe ſoon 
corrected the fœtor of the patient's ſtools ; reftrained 
his Diarrhea; and ſeemed to recruit his firength and- 
ſpirits. Within the ſpace of twenty-four-bours his 
wounds aſſumed a more favourable appearance; the 
matter diſcharged from them became of a better colour 
and conſiſtence; and was no longer ſo offenſive to the 
ſmell. The uſe of this remedy has been continued 
ſeveral days, but is now laid aſide. A large tumour 
is ſuddenly formed under the right ear; ; iwallowing 1 is 

rendered difficult and painful; and the patient refuſes 
all food and medicine. Nouriſhing clyſters are di- 
rected; but it is to be ſeared that theſe will renew 
the looſeneſs, and that this amiable youth will quickly 
ſink under: his diſorder *. 


The aſe of wort from- its ſaccharine quality, and 
diſpoſition to ſerment, has lately been propoſed as a 
remedy for the 8x A Scurvy. Water or other liquors, 
already abounding with fixed air in a ſeparate ſlate, 
ſhould ſeem to be better adapted to this purpoſe; as 
they will more quickly correct the putrid diſpoſition 
of the ſiuids, and at the ſame time, by their gentle 

ſtimulos ; increaſe the powers of digeftion, and give 
new! 1 5 the whole — n 


. He deed; about a week, and then died. 

} The vegetables which are moſt efficacious i in the cure of the rer, : 
. nen 1 
| 1 R Dro 


—_ 


Tus APPENDIX, 313 


Dr. Prieſtley, who ſuggeſted both the idea and the 
means of executing it, has under the ſanction of the 
College of Phyſicians, propoſed the ſcheme to the 
Lords of the Admiralty, who have ordered trial to be 
made of it, on board ſome of his Majeſty's ſhips 
of war. Might it not however give additional effi- 
cacy to this remedy, if inſtead of fimple water, the 
infuſion of malt wete to be employed? 


Tam perſuaded ſuch a medicinal drink might he 
preſcribed alſo with great advantage in scRoynuLOUs 
COMPLAINTS, when not attended with a hectie fever; 
and in other diſorders in which a general acrimony 
prevails, and the craſis of the blood is deſtioyed, ' 
Under ſuch circumſtances, I have ſeen vibicer which 
ſpread over the body, diſappear in a few days from 
the uſe of wort. 


* 


A gentleman who is. ſubject to a ſcorbutic eruption 
in his face, ſor which he has uſed a variety of re- 
medies with no very beneficial effect, has latel y applied 
the fumes of chalk and oil of vitriol to the parts affe&- 
ed. The operation occaſions great itching and prick- 
ing in the ſkin, and ſome degree of drowſineſs, but 
evidently abates the ſerous diſcharge, and diminiſhes 
the eruption. This patient has ſeveral ' ſymptoms 
which indicate a genuine ſcorbutic DraTHEsrs ; and 
it is probable that fixed air, taken internally, would | 
be an abun! alben in this caſe. * " 


The ſaline draughts of Riverine are ſuppoſed to 
owe their antiemetic effects to the air; Which is ſepa- 
rated from the falt of wormwood during the act of 
| efferveſcence. And the tonic powers of many mineral 
waters 


* 


3 Taz APPENDIX. 


waters ſeem to depend on this principle. I was late- 

ly defired to viſit a lady who had moſt ſevere convul- 

Fre REACHINGS. Varjous remedies had been admini- 
ſtered without effect, before Taw* Ber. Sbe earneſtly 
deſired a draught of malt liquor, and was indulzed 

with half a pint of Burton beer in briſk efferveſcence. 

The vomitings ceaſed immediately, an and. returned no A 

more. Fermenting liquors, it is well known, abound 

with fixed air. To this, and to the cordial quality of 

the beer, the ſayourable effect which it produced, may 

| -jbfily pecaſeribed, But I ſhall exceed my, deſign by 
eblarging further on this ſubjeft. What has been ad- 

vanced it is hoped, will ſuffice to excite the attention 

of phyſicians-to a remedy. Which is capable of being 

| e to 1 many important medicinal HAZEL 


Ni .ꝗ— a” C- 


=» — 1 . "4 WS £ 
; d * . +” . 4 - ” . 4 


1 Fe "KEE k Iv, - 

= | (&f | | * | | 

—_—  . Extract of a Letter from WILLIAM Far- 

1 [ij | IP CONER, M. D. off BATH. 

4 | il | 24S | | Jan. 6, 1774. | 


{ =p Reverend Sir, 


1 I⁴once obſerved the ſame taſte you mention (Philoſo- | 
== |: phical Tranſactions, p. 1 56. of this Volame, p. 35.) 
1 vize like tar water, in ſome water that T'impregnaccu 

_. with fixed air about" three years ago. 1 did not then 
5% know to what to ättribhte it, bur your experiment 

5 j 5 | ſeems to clear it up. I happened to have ſpent all my 

_—_ acid for raiſing efferveſcence, and to ſupply its place I 
1 . uſed a bottle of dulcified ſpirit of nitre, which I 

\* knew was greatly under-ſaturated with ſpirit of wine 3 

1 e | from 


Tuz APPENDIX. gig 


from whidh as analogous to your obſervation, I ima- | 
gine the effect proceeded, 


As * to the coagulation of the hlood of animals 
by fixed Air, I fear it will ſcarce ſtand the teſt of 
experiment, as this day gave it, I think, a fair 
trial, in the following manner. | 


A young healthy man, at 20 years old, received a 
cortuſion by a fall, was inſtantly carried to a neigh» , 
bouring ſurgeon, and, at my requeſt, bled in the 
following manner, 


I inſerted a glaſs funnel into the neck of a large 
clear phial about 3; x. contents, and bled him into it to 


about Z viii. By theſe means the blood was expoſed to 
the air as little a time as poſſible, as it flowed into 
the bottle as it came from the- orifice, 


As ſoon as the quantity propoſed was drawn, the 
bottle was carefully corked, and brought to me. Tt 
was then quite fluid, nor was there the leut ſepara - 


tion of its parts. 


On the ſurface of this I conveyed ſeveral ſtreams of 
fixed air (having firſt placed the bottle with the blood 
in a bowl of water, heated as nearly to the human 
heat as poſſible) from the mixture of the vitriolicacid 
and lixiv. tartar, which I uſe preferably to other alka- 


l * 


— 


V This refers, to an experiment mentioned in the firſt publication of 
theſe papers in the Philoſophical Tranſactions, but omitted in this vo- 


11 2 


lines 


316 Tus AEP END IX. 
lines, as being (as Dr. Cullen obſerves) in the mildeſt 
ſtate, and therefore moſt likely to generate moſt air. | 


4 | = * 


I ſhook thephial often, and threw many ſtreams of 
| air on the blood, as Thave often practiſed with ſucceſs 
for impregnating water; but could not perceive the 
ſmalleſt ſigns of coagulation, although 3 it ſtood in an 
atmoſphere of fixed air 20 minutes or more. I 
then uncorked the bottles, and poured off avout Zi 
to which I added about 6 or 7 gtts of ſpirit of vi- 
triol, which coagulated it immediately. L ſet the re- 
mains in a cold place and it coagulated, as near as 
I could judge, in the ſame time that blood would 
have done newly drawn from the vein, 


n 


P. 82. Perhaps the ls of putrid vege- 
tables yielding all fixed and no inflammable air may 
be che cauſes of their proving ſo antiſeptic, even when 
putrid, as appears by Mir. Alexander's Experiments. 


w_ 0 
"i * 1112 jw * — 
- — —— ——U— — - A 
— 
: 


= l G 
_ 2 5 — Fu eb - 
= - 2 — a 4 NS + N 
— N D d 
* ” * a * 
* p 4 —_ "Foe" »„— 
E Path 3 * 
9 _ Adias: - __ — 7 2 
* 8 p 
— — * 
= 
— 
— 
_- 


-— —_— 
">. — 
* 


— — 
* N 8 
„% % — 22 —ä—ä — nd — 
* — 
: 


5 | P. 86. Perhaps the putrid air continually exhaled 
may be one cauſe of the luxuriancy of Plants rowing 
on dunghills or in very rich ſoils. | 


1 5 & 7 


ASX 


P. 146. Your obſervation that inflammable air con- 

| fiſts of the union of ſome acid vapour with phlogiſton, 

45 puts me in mind buy an old obſervation of Dr. Cullen, 

| that the oil ſeparated from ſoap by an acid was much' 

more inſſammäble than before, reſembling eſſential | 
oil, and ſoluble in V. ſp. | 


- * 
— * 
— 1 _—_ ; , 
— 


3 


— —- 
— > 


bh 


— 
* — ww 


| 
4 0 | Nr 2 
=_ | ” | 1 heva tried fixed air as an antiſeptic taken in by - 
| reſpiration, but with no great ſucceſs. In one caſe it 
ſeemed to he of ſervice, 1 in two It ſeemed indifferent, 
and in one was injurious, by exciting a cough. | 


bel ; NUM. 


Tus APPENDIX 317 


NUMBER V. 


Extract of a Letter from Mr. WIILIAM BEWIEx, 
of GREAT MASSINGHAM, NORFOLK. 
ann, March 23, 1 

Dear Sir, "OW: LEE 

When I firſt received your paper, I happened to 
have a proceſs going on for the preparation of nitrous 
ether, without diftillation.* I had heretofore always 
taken for granted that the elaſtie fluid generated in that 
preparation was fixed air: but on examination I found 
this combination of the nitrous acid with inflammable 
ſpirits, produced an elaſtic fluid that had the ſame ge- 
neral properties with the air that you unwillingly, 
though very properly, in my opinion, term nitrous ; 
as I believe it is not to be procured without employ- 
ing the nitrous acid, either in a ſimple ſtate, or com- 
pounded, as in aqua regia. I ſhall ſuggeſt, however, 
by and by ſome doubts with reſpect to it's title to — 
appellation of air. = 


Water impregnated with your nitrous air certainly, 
as you ſuſpected from it's taſte, contains the nitrous 


The firſt account of this curious proceſs was, I believe, given in the 
Mem, de F. Ac, de Sc. de Paris for 1742, Though ſeemingly leſs volatile 
than the vitriolic ether, it boils with a much ſmaller degree of heat. One 
_ daylaſt ſummer, it boiled in the cooleſt room of my houſe; as it gave me 
notice by the exploſion attending its driving out the cork. To fave the 
bottle, and to prevent the total loſs of the liquor. by eyaporation, I found 
myſelf obliged inſtantly to carry it down to my cellar. 


* 


46d, 


- 


418- Taz APPENDIX. 


acid. On ſaturating a quantity of this water with 4 
fixed alcali, and then evaporating, &c. I have pro- 
- cured two chryſtals of nitre. But the principal ob- 
ſervations that have occurred to me on the ſubject of 


nitrous air are the following. My experiments have 


been few and made by ſnatches, under every diſad- 
vantage as to apparatus, &c. and with frequent inter- 
ruptions; and yet I think they are to be depended upon. 


My firſt remark is, that nitrous air does not give 
water a ſenſibly acid impregnation, unleſs it comes in- 
to contact, or is mixed with a portion of common or 
atmoſpherical air: and my ſecond, that nitrous air 
principally confiſts of the nitrous acid itſelf, reduced 
to the ſtate of a permanent vapour not condenſable by 
cold, like other vapours, but which requires the pre- 
ſence and admixture of common air to reſtore it to its 
primitive ſtate of a liquid. I am beholden for this 
idea, you will perceive, to your own very curious 
diſcovery of the true nature of Mr. Cavendiſh's marine 
vapour. 


When I firſt repeated your experiment of impreg- 
nating water with nitrous air, the water, I muſt ow 
taſted acid; as it did in one, or perhaps two trials 
| nee but, to my great aſtoniſhment, in all the 
following expeiiments, though ſome part of the facti- 
tious air, or vapour, was Vaiibly abſorbed by the wa- 
ter, I could not perceive the latter to have acquire 
any ſenſible acidity. I at length found, however, that 
J could render this ſame water very acid, by means 


only of the nitrous air already included in the phial 


with it. Taking the inverted phial out of the water, 


I remove my finger from the mouth of it, to admit a 
little 


* 


Tus APPENDIX. 319 


little of the common air, and inſtantly replace my 
| finger. The redneſs, efferyeſcence, and diminution 
take place. Again taking off my finger, and inſtantly 
replacing it, more common air ruſhes in, and the 
ſame phenomena recur. The proceſs ſometimes re- 


quires tobe ſeven or eight times repeated, before the 


whole of the nitrous vapour as I ſhall venture to call 
it) is condenſed” into nitrous acid, by the ſucceſſive 
entrance of freſh parcels of common air after each ef- 
ferveſceice ; and the water becomes evidently more 
and more acid after every ſuch freſh admiſſion of the 
external air, which at length ceaſes to enter, when 
the whole of the vapour has been condenſed, No agi- 
tation of the water 1s requiſite, except a gentle mo- 
tion, juft ſufficient to rince the ſides of the phial, in 
order to waſh off the condenſed vapour. 


The acidity which you and 1 likewiſe, at firſt) 
obſerved in the water agitated with nitrous air alone, 
I account for thus. On bringing the phial to the 
mouth, the common air meeting with the nitrous 
vapour in the neck of the phial, condevſes it, and 
impregnates the water with the acid, in the very act 
of receiving it upon the tongue. On ſtopping the 


mouth of the phial with my tongue for a ſhort time 


and afterwards withdrawing it a very little, to ſuffer 


the common air to ruth paſt it into the phial, the ſen- 


ſation of acidity has been ſometimes intolerable: but 
taking a large gulph of the water at the ſame time, it 
has been found very ſlightly acid.- The. following is 
one of the methods by which I have given water a 
very ſtrong acid impregnation, by means © 2 a mixture 
of mitrous and common air. 


Into 


/ 


— 
* 


- 
0 1 o ö . 4 
r — k dy Cn 1 * 
N 2 * N 47 * * * 1 _— at . * — * Ss » 
p HR. 248 | N — + W \ - 


— —— — — i —— — — 
4 - 
_ n at ll * 4 


- , 


INT 
— — 


* 


— —— —— — —ä— ¶——ͤ— 


— 
— 


WV 


| 
4 | 
re 


= ——O—- — — "#53 
_—  —— =_ Sy 


* * 


2 Cad 
„ — —U—— — 


— - *Q,-  <—m—_— 


NW 


* 


—— 


20 Tur AP P E N DI X, 


Into a fmall chat containing only e common air, 


I force a quantity of nitrous air at random, out of 


a bladder, and inſtantly clap my finger on the mouth 
of the bottle. I then immerſe the neck of it into 
water, a ſmall quantity of which I ſuffer to enter, 
which ſquirts into it with violence; and immediately 
replacing my finger, remove the = $2 o The water 
contained in it Is already very acid, and it becomes 
more and more ſo (if a ſufficient quantity of nitrous 
air was at firſt thrown in) on alternately ſtopping the 
mouth of the phial, and opening it, as often as freſh 
air will enter. 


Since I wrote the above, I have frequently con- 
verted a ſmall portion of water in an ounce phial into 


a weak Aqua fortts, by repeated mixtures of common 


and nitrous air; throwing in alternately the one or 
the other, according to the circumſtances ; that is, 
as long as there was a ſuperabundance of nitrous air, 
ſaffering the common air to enter and condenſe it; 
and, when that was effected, forcing in more nitrous 
air from the bladder, to the common air which now 
predominated in the phial—and ſo alternately. I have 
wanted leiſure, and conveniences, to carry on this 
proceſs to its maximum, Or to execute it in a different 
and better manner; but from what I have done, I 
think we may conclude that nitrous air conſiſts prin- 
cipally of the nitrous acid, phlogiſticated, or other- 
wiſe ſo modified, by a previous commenſtruation with 
metals, inflammable ſpirits, &c. as to be reduced into 
a durably elaſtic vapour : and that, in order to deprive 
it of its elaſticity, and reſtore it to its former ſtate, an 
addition of common air is requifite, and, as I ſuſpeR, 

of water likewiſe, or ſome other fluid: as in the 
courſe 


— — 
* 


Tax APPENDIX, 4at 


courſe of my few trials, I have not yet been able to 
eondenſe it in a perfectly dry bottle. 


N\UMB ER VI. 


A Letter froni Dr. FxANRKLIx. 


Craven Street, April 10, 1774. 
Dear Sir; 


In compliance with your requeſt, I have endea- 
voured to recolle& the circumſtances of the American 
experiments I formerly mentioned to you, of ra ĩfing 4 

flame on the ſurface of ſome waters there. 


When I paſſed through New Jerſey in 1964, I heard 
it ſeveral times mentioned, that by applying a lighted 
candle near the ſurface of ſome of their rivers, a ſud- 
| Yen flame would catch and ſpread on the water, con- 
tinuing to burn for near half a minute. But the ac- 
counts I received were ſo imperfect that I could form 
no gueſs at the cauſe of ſuch an effect; and rather 
doubted the truth of it. I had no opportunity of ſee- 
ing the experiment; but calling to ſee a friend who 
happened to be juſt returned home from making it him- 

felf, I leatned from him the manner of it; which was 
to chooſe a ſhallow place, where the bottom could be 
reached by a walking-ſtick, and vas muddy; the mud 
was firſt to be ſtirred with the ſtick, and when a num- 
ber of ſmall bubbles began to ariſe from itz the candle 
was applied. The flame was ſo ſudden and fo'ſtrong; 
that it catehed his ruffle and ſpoiled it, as I ſaw; New- 
| 1 Jerſey 


- — We. "2 - 

4 3 
EP 
— & - — * 6 : \ - 


- * A 4 
ow 


I * * 
2 — 
we — 


322 Tux AP PEN DIX. 


Jerſey having many pine- trees in different parts of it, 

1 then imagined that ſomething like a volatile oil of 
turpentine might be mixed with the waters from a 
pine-ſwamp, but this ſuppoſition did not quite ſatisfy 
me. I mentioned the fact to ſome philoſophical friends 
on my return to England, but it was not much at- 
tended to. 1 ſuppoſe I was thought a little too cre· 
dulous. 


In 1765, the Reverend Dr. Chandler received a 
letter from Dr. Finley, Preſident of the College in 
that province, relatin the ſame experiment. It was 
read at the Royal Society, Nov. 21, of that year, but 


not printed in the Tranſactions; perhaps becauſe it 


was thought too ſtrange to be true, and ſome ridicule 
might be apprehended if any member ſhould attempt 
to repeat it in order to aſcertain or refute it. The 
following i is a We. of that account. £ 


A worthy gentleman, who lives at a ſew miles 
diſtance, informed me that in a certain ſmall cove of 
2 pond, near his houſe, he was ſurprized to ſee 

e ſurface of the water blaze like inflamed ſpirits 
I ſoon after went to the place, and made the expe. 
Timent with the ſame ſucceſs. The bottom of the 
creek was muddy, ard when ftirred up, ſo as to cauſe 
a confiderable curl on the ſurface, and a lighted candle 
held within two or three inches of it, the whole ſur- 
face was in a blaze, as inſtantly as the vapour of warm 
inflammable ſpirits, and continued, when ftrongly 
agitated, for the ſpace of ſeyeral ſeconds. It was at 
firſt imagined to be peculiar to that place ; but upon 
trial it was ſoon found, that ſuch a bottom in other 


Places exhibited the ſame enen. The diſca- 


ver ! 


| 
: 
| 
| 


Tux APPENDIX $23 
very was accidentally made by one belonging to the 
mill.“ 


I have tried the experiment twice here in England, 
but without ſucceſs. The firſt was in a flow running 
water with a muddy bottom. The ſecond in a ftag- 
nant water at the bottom of a deep ditch, Being ſome 
time employed in ftirring this water, I aſcribed an in. 
termitting fever, which ſeized me a few days after, to 
my breathing too much of that foul air which I ſtirred 
up from the bottom, and which I could not avoid 
while I ſtooped in endeavouring to kindle it.— The 
diſcoveries you have lately made of the, manner in 
which inflammable air is in ſome caſes produced, may 
throw light on this experiment, and explain its ſuc- 
ceeding in ſome caſes, and not in others. With the 
higheſt eſteem and reſpect, | 


Jam, Dear Sir, 
| Your moſt obedient humble ſervant, | 


B. FRANKLIN. 


NUMBER VI. 


A 


Extras of a Letter Jrom Mr. Henzy of Mancheſter. 


It is with great pleaſure I hear of your intended 
publication en air, and I beg leave to communicate to 
you an experiment or two which I lately made. 


Dr. Percival had tried, without effect, to diſſolve 
Ny” in water impregnated with fixed air. I however 
thought 


324 Tur A P PE N D IX. 


thought it probable, that the experiment might ſuc- 
ceed with nitrous air. Ihto a quantity of water im- 
pregnated with it, I put ſeveral pieces of ſheet-lead, 
and- ſuffered them, after agitation, to continue im- 
merſed about two hours. A few drops of vol. tincture 
of ſulphur changed the water to a deep orange colour, 
but not ſo deep as when the ſame tincture was added 
to a glaſs of the ſame water, into which one drop of 
a ſolution of ſugar of lead had been inſtilled. The 
| precipitates of both in the morning, were exactly of 
the ſame kind; and the water in which the lead had 
been infuſed all night, being again tried by the ſame 
teſt, gave ſigns of a ſtill ſtronger ſaturnine impregna- 
tion Whether the nitrous air acts as an acid on the 
lead, or in the fame manner that fixed air diffolves its 
1 do not pretend to determine. Syrup of violets added 
to the nitrous water became of a pale red, but on 
ſtanding about an hour, grew of a turbid brown caſt. 


Though the nitrous. acid is not often found, except 


produced by art, yet as there is a probability that 
nitre-may be formed in the earth in large towns, and 
indeed foffile nitre has been actually found in ſuch 
ſituations, it fliould be an ae caution againſt 
the uſe of leade pumps. 1" 


I tied to diſſolve mercury by the ws means, ; but 
without ſucceſs, 


1 am, with the é Lncere efivem, 
Dear Sir, 
Your Py and obedient ſervant, 
T HO. HENR Ys 


SN "FF NT7 85 - . pts 
. | F | ERRAT A. 


%%% 
TW my 
| bo” 


10 


jt 2 N 0 


N 


my 


l! [ 
n nil 


Wk \l} 
Me 
WW mn 0 


x 


64 


NI 
| 


10 


hae 2 2 


: 
=P 


15 
| 


3 
| 


| 


| 


f 


IN 


1 


NY ' 
| * 


8 | = nim 


150 


1 


* . " 
en In | = ALLE 
199 J 


INA 
17 
994% 


; 


LG TERS 1 * ? 


— — — — 


— 


— 2 * 


＋ lhe lad fringe | 


20 


< 


To 


: 


— 
— 
— 
2 


— 


— 
— 


1 


— 


2222222222822 


222 * 


5 


> + $4 


2 — 


— 


—— — — — 


4 


— 


_— 4 222 „„ 


_— 


pins 


—0——4 


*» 


_ 
— 
_ 


nl 
LIT 
Ie | 
1 
1 
1 
III 
1 
14 G 
T 
„„ 
. 7 
FHF 2 f 
pa 


r I 


— 


1 


U 388 


— —— 


mY 
, 
J 


p. 145. 1. 1 with —— of 
p. 153. J. 1. — that is — this air 
p. 199. . = — ingenious —— ingenuous 
p. 211. I. 23. of — , if 
p. 243-1. 27. — diminiſhing —— diminiſhed 
p. 272. l. 21, — ſeem — ſeems 
p. 301. K 31.— — one end 
p. 303. J. 5. — — the nitrous 
p. 304. 1.'21, — deflrium —— delirium 
p. 306. J. 2. — 4 recet, — recent. 
| p. 308. 1. 7. — per — Peruv. 
1 p. 313-1. 27, — uſual uſeful - 
j p. 300. to 314- patſim—Diarrhza-— — — 
ly p. 316.1. 11, — remains — remainder 
1 p.524. 1, 15, — it — on. 
| 
| \ 
. 


E R R A T A. 


read to it 


it to 
— had 


has 


periments — experiment 


455 


: 
[ 
g 
( 
| 
: 


6 





==================== VOL. II ====================


Adams    191.7   v.  2 


:*'*.    fll.l<!!i! 


Tl .  I    Iv  ^ace  tne  tt^  /^tuje-. 


d/.v/,-,/, 


EXPERIMENTS 


AND 


OBSERVATIONS 


ON    DIFFERENT  KINDS    OF 


A       I       R. 


VOL.     II. 


By  JOSEPH  PRIESTLEY,  LL.  D.  F.R.9. 


Ita  res  accendunt  lumlna  rebus. 

Lucretius. 


THE    SECOND    EDITION. 


LONDON: 

Printed  for  J.  Johnson,   No.  72,   St.  Paul's 

Church-Yard. 


MDCCLXXVI, 


ADAMS 

'If 


T  O 

Sir  JOHN  PRINGLE,  Bart. 

PRESIDENT  OF  THE  ROYAL  SOCIETY, 

THIS  SECOND  VOLUME    OF 

EXPERIMENTS  and  OBSERVATIONS, 

ON  A  SUBJECT  TO  WHICH  HE  HAS  GIVEN 
PARTICULAR  ATTENTION, 

AND  IN  THE  INVESTIGATION  OF  WHICH  HE 
HAS  PUBLICKLY  AND  PRIVATELY  EN- 
COURAGED THE  AUTHOR, 

IS, 

WITH  THE  GREATEST  RESPECT,  INSCRIBED, 

BY  HIS  OBLIGED, 

■^, 

HUMBLE  SERVANT, 
London,  Nov.   1775.  J.    PRIESTLEY. 


^ 


^ 


(    V     ) 


THE 

PREFACE. 

I  HAVE  feen  abundant  reafon,  fince  the 
publication  of  my  former  volume  of 
Ohfervatmis  on  different  kinds  of  air^  to 
applaud  myfelf  for  the  little  delay  I  made 
in  putting  It  to  the  prefs  ;  the  confequence 
having  been  that,  inftead  of  ihe  experi- 
ments being  profecuted  by  myfelf  only, 
or  a  few  others,  the  fubjed:  has  now  gain- 
ed almoft  univerfal  attention  among  phl- 
lofophers,  in  every  part  of  Europe.  la 
confequence  of  this,  confiderable  difcove- 
veries  have  been  made  by  people  of  diftant 
nations;  and  this  branch  of  fcience,  of 
which  nothing,  in  a  manner,  was  known 
till  very  lately  indeed,  now  bids  fair  to  be 
farther  advanced  than  any  other  in  the 
whole  compafs  of  natural  philofophy.  The 
attention  which  my  former  volume  excited, 
has  been  a  motive  with  me  to  continue  my 
a  3  own 


vi  PREFACE. 

own  refearches,  till  I  have  been  led  to  dif- 
coveries  of  more  importance  than  any  that 
I  had  made  before,  and  of  which  I  hadjnot 
at  that  time  the  moft  diftant  idea.  It  has, 
likewife,  been  the  means  of  extending  my 
acquaintance  among  philofophers,of  whofe 
lights  I  have  availed  myfelf,  as  my  narra- 
tive will  witnefs. 

SIg.  Felice  Fontana  of  Florence,  SIg. 
Landriani  of  Milan,  and  Mr.  Lavoifier 
of  Paris,  have  already  announced,  in  their 
late  publications  on  this  fubjed:,  that  they 
have  much  more  to  follow  with  refpedl  to 
it,  and  that  they  are  at  prefent  intent  upon 
the  inveftigation  of  it.  Mr.  Montigny 
(when  I  had  the  pleafure  of  meeting  him 
at  Mr.  Trudaine*s,  as  mentioned  in  the 
courfe  of  the  work)  gave  me  an  account  of 
fome  very  curious  experiments  which  he 
had  made  on  inflammable  air,  and  which 
I  expert  he  will  fcon  communicate  to  the 
public.  That  veteran  in  philofophy,  Fa- 
ther Beccaria  of  Turin,  has  alfo  made  fome 
valuable  experimentsof  this  kind,  and  will, 
I  doubt  not,  profecute  them  with  his  ufual 
addrefs  and  fuceefs.  Mr.  Bergman  of  Upfal, 

who. 


PREFACE. 


Vll 


who,  as  I  have  faid,  wrote  to  me  formerly 
on  this  fubjedt,  has  fmce  publifhed  a  paper 
on  fixed  air  in  theSwedifli  language,  which 
I  cannot  read.  Several  ingenious  perfons, 
whofe  names  are  not  yet  known  to  the 
public,  are,  to  my  knowledge,  engaged 
in  thefe  purfuits  ;  and  we  are  not  with- 
out expectations  from  the  oldeft  living 
fathers  of  this  philofophy,  Dr.  Brownrigg 
and  Dr.  Black,  as  well  as  other  gentlemen 
in  Scotland.  Befides  thefe,  there  mufl  be, 
I  doubt  not,  at  leaft  twice  as  many  perfons 
at  work  upon  this  fubje£t,  as  I  can  have 
had  any  opportunity  of  hearing  of. 

Upon  the  whole,  there  is  not  perhaps 
an  example,  in  all  the  hiftory  of  philofo- 
phy, of  fo  much  zeal  and  emulation  be- 
ing excited  by  any  objedt.  I  even  queftion 
whether  the  fubjed  of  elediricity^  under  the 
aufpices  of  Dr.  Franklin,  ever  engaged 
more  general  attention  ;  and  now  thefe  two 
purfuits  are  happily  united,  and  admirably 
promote  each  other. 

In  reality,  this  is  not  now  a  bufinefs  of 

air  only,  as   it  was  at  the  firft  ;   but  ap- 

^  4  pears 


vlll  PREFACE* 

pears  to  be  of  much  greater  magnitude 
and  extent,  fo  as  to  drffuie  light  upon  the 
mofl  general  principles  of  natural  know- 
ledge, and  efpecially  thofe  about  which 
chymijiry  is  particularly  convcrfant.  And 
it  will  not  now  be  thought  very  alTuming 
to  fay,  that,  by  v/orking  in  a  tub  of  wa- 
ter, or  a  baion  of  quickiilver,  we  may  per- 
haps difcover  principles  of  more  extenfive 
influence  than  even  that  of  gravity  itfelf, 
the  difcovery  of  which,  in  its  full  extent, 
contributed  fo  much  to  immortalize  the 
name  of  Newton. 

Having  been  the  means  of  bringing  fo 
many  champions  into  the  field,  I  iliall  with 
peculiar  pleafure  attend  to  all  their  at- 
chievements,  in  order  to  prepare  myfelf, 
as  I  promifed  in  the  preface  to  my  laft  vo- 
lume, for  writing  the  hifiory  of  the  cam- 
paign ;  and  I  truft  that  ail  my  brethren  in 
the  fcience  will  have  confidence  in  my  ju- 
ftice  to  their  refpe^tive  merits. 

I  flatter  myfelf,  that  the  very  frank  and 
candid  manner  in  which  I  have  related  what 
I  have  done  myfelf,  will  procure  me  fufli- 

cicnt 


PREFACE.  ix 

Gient  credit  for  my  impartiality  with  refped: 
to  others.  It  will  be  very  evident,  that  I 
have  left  myfelf  hardly  any  other  merit 
than  that  oi  patient  indiifiry  and  attention^ 
and  that  of  keeping  my  mind  fo  far  de- 
tached from  the  influence  of  prejudice,  as 
to  be  able  to  purfue  fairly  fuch  cafual  ob- 
i^rvations  as  prefented  themfeives  to  rae. 

There  is  nothing  capital  in  this  volume 
from  which  I  can  hope  to  derive  any  other 
kind  of  honour,  than  that  of  being  the  in- 
ftrumentin  the  hands  of  divine  providence, 
which  makes  ufe  of  human  induftry  to 
ftrike  out,  and  difFufe,  that  knowledge  of 
the  fyflem  of  nature,  which  feems,  for  fome 
great  purpofe  that  we  cannot  as  yet  fully 
comprehend,  to  have  been  referved  for  this 
age  of  the  world ;  concerning  which  I  threw 
out  fome  farther  hints  in  my  former  pre- 
face, which  the  excellent  French  tranflator 
was  not  permitted  to  infert  in  his  verfion. 

I  even  think  that  I  may  flatter  myfelf 
fo  much,  if  it  be  any  flattery,  as  to  fay, 
that  there  is  no  hiflory  of  experiments 
more  truly  ingenimis  than  mine,  and  efpe- 

cially 


X  PREFACE. 

cially  the  Sedion-  on  the  difcovery  of  de- 
phlogifticated  air,  which  is  the  moft  im- 
portant in  the  vohime.  I  am  not  con- 
Icious  to  myfelf  of  having  concealed  the 
leaf!  hint  that  was  fuggefted  to  me  by 
any  perfon  whatever,  any  kind  of  affift- 
ance  that  has  been  given  me,  or  any 
views  or  hypothefes  by  which  the  experi- 
ments were  direcfled,  whether  they  were 
verified  by  the  refill t,  or  not. 

In  this  volume  the  reader  will  find  much 
light  thrown  upon  many  things  which 
were  inexplicable  to  me  when  I  publifhed 
the  former  volume ;  but,  on  the  other 
hand,  there  are  many  things,  in  this,  as  in- 
explicable to  me  now  as  the  others  were 
before  ;  and  for  the  elucidation  of  them  we 
mufl:  wait  for  more  experiments,  and  more 
difcoveries. 

As,  in  the  preface  to  my  former  volume, 
I  quoted  a  very  flriking  obfervation  of 
Father  Beccaria,  I  fhall,  in  this,  prefent  my 
reader  with  a  quotation  from  another  Ita- 
lian philofopher,  the  Abbe  Fontana,  which 
is  as  much  to  my  prefent  purpofe. 

"  Le 


PREFACE.  ii 

'^  Le  fifiche  ricerche  cominclate  in  quefti 
*'  ultimi  anni  con  tanto  fucceffo  dai  filo- 
*'  fofi,  forfe  per  mera  curiofita,  fopra  le 
"  diverfe  qualita  e  indole  dell'  aria  natu- 
*'  rale  e  fattizia,  potrebbero  in  breve  diven- 
"  tare  di  fomma  importanza.  E  par'  che 
*'  gia  ci  avviciniamo  ad  una  di  quelle  gran- 
**  di  epoche,  che  la  natura  conduce,  dopo 
"  un  laiTo  di  lecoli,  e  che  marca  con  qual- 
**  che  grande  fcoperta,  per  la  felicita  del 
"  genere  umano."   Ricerche  Fificbe^  p.  2 1. 

In  Englifli. 

**  The  inquiries  that  have  lately  been 
'•  fo  fuccefsfully  begun  by  philofophers, 
*'  perhaps  through  mere  curiofity,  into  the 
'*  properties  of  air,  natural  and  fadli- 
"  tious,  may  foon  come  to  be  of  the 
"  greateft  Importance.  And  v/e  feem  to 
"  be  already  approaching  to  one  of  thofe 
"  great  epocha's,  to  which  nature  con- 
*'  duds  us,  after  a  lapfe  of  ages,  and 
"  which  {he  dillinguiHies  by  Ibme  great 
"  difcovery,  for  the  benefit  of  mankind." 


To 


^11  PREFACE. 

To  this  fecond  volume  I  have  added  a 
paper  publifhed  in  the  6cth  volume  of  the 
Philofophical  TranfacStions,  on  the  con^ 
duBing  power  of  chajxoal^  becaufe  it  has 
a  near  relation  to  the  fubje^l  of  air ;  and 
becaufe  it  contains  an  account  of  many 
new  fa£ts,  of  a  very  remarkable  nature, 
to  which  I  wifh  to  draw  the  particular  at- 
tention of  phllofophers  and  chymiils. 

I  have  alfo  inferted  the  fubftance  of  the 
pamphlet  on  the  impregnation  of  water  with 
Jixed  air,  having  no  intention  to  publifh 
it  any  more  feparately ;  prefixing  to  it  a 
hiftory  of  matters  relating  to  it,  and  fub- 
joining  to  it  a  comparifon  of  this  method 
with  another  tt^at  has  been  invented  fince, 
for  the  fame  purpofe.  I  have  alio  added 
an  alphabetical  index  to  both  the  volumes. 

I  am  very  forry  to  have  had  occafion  to 
infert  in  this  volume  a  particular  fedion 
on  the  mijlakes  that  have  been  made,  with 
refped:  to  my  Obfervations  and  Experi- 
ments, by  feveral  foreign  phllofophers. 
But  they  are  fo  many,  and  fo  grofs,  and 
made  by  perfons  of  fo  much  reputation,, 

that 


PREFACE  xiii 

that  I  have  thought  it  neceflary  to  do  fo, 
both  on  my  own  account,  and  alfo  to  ob- 
viate fuch  mifreprefentations  oi  faSis^  as 
might  retard  the  progrefs  of  philofophical 
knowledge. 

For  thefe  miftakes  foreigners  may  plead 
the  want  of  a  perfed  knowledge  of  the  En- 
glifh  language  ;  and,  in  fome  meafure,  the 
plea  may  be  admitted,  though  every  per- 
fon  fhould  take  care  to  make  himfelf  fully 
acquainted  with  what  he  propofes  not  only 
to  underftand,  but  to  explain  to  others. 

I  imagine,  however,  that  both  Mr.  La- 
voifier,  and  Sig.  Landriani,  took  their 
accounts  of  my  Experiments  not  from  my 
own  work  in  Engliih,  but  from  fome  pre- 
ceding tranflations  into  French,  and  Ita- 
lian ;  taking  for  granted  that  they  were 
exad.  Sig.  Landriani,  I  am  confident,  un- 
derftands  Englifh  very  well.  He  has  lately 
informed  me,  that  he  will  undertake  the 
tranflation  of  all  that  I  have  written  on  the 
fubjed  of  air ;  and  he  will,  I  doubt  not, 
both  do  juftice  to  me,  and  credit  to  him- 
ielf.  Mr.  Gibelin,  who  has  acquitted  him- 
4  felf 


xiv  PREFACE. 

felf  fo  well  in  the  French  tranflation  of  the 
firft  volume  of  this  work,  has  undertaken 
the  fecond.  I  have,  at  his  requeft,  already 
fent  him  the  printed  fheets,  and  I  believe 
he  will  difpatch  the  work  with  all  con- 
venient expedition.  I  have  alfo  reafon  to 
think,  that  the  tranflation  of  this  work 
into  High  Dutch,  by  Dr.  Ludewig  of 
Leipfic,  will  be  very  accurate.  Upon  the 
whole,  therefore,  I  flatter  myfelf  that,  for 
the  future,  my  fenfe  will  be  fairly  re- 
prefented  ;  and  perhaps  with  more  accu- 
racy, than  if  the  miftakes  I  have  been 
obliged  to  animadvert  upon  had  not  been 
made. 

I  wifh  that  I  could  make  as  good  an 
apology  for  Mr.  B.  Wilfon,  as  for  the  fo- 
reign philofophers  above-mentioned.  This 
gentleman,  in  his  late  l^reaiije  on  phof-- 
phori,  has  animadverted  upon  m.e  for 
fpeaking,  in  my  Hijhry  of  dlfcoverles  re- 
lating to  vijion,  lights  and  colours^  of  paper 
being  red  hoty  and  cooled  again  ;  when,  in 
the  printed  errata  of  the  book,  he  would 
have  found,  "  for  red  hot,  read  very  hot'"* 
This  Vv'as  a  miftake  of  my   amanuenfis, 

and 


PREFACE.  XV 

and  I  thought  it  would  be  fufiicienlty  rec- 
tified, by  inferting  it  in  the  er7'ata,  I 
fhould  certainly  have  reprinted  the  leaf, 
if  I  could  have  fufpedted  that  fuch  an  ufe 
would  have  been  made  of  it.  Before  this 
gentleman  points  out  any  more  of  my 
miftakes,  I  hope  he  w^ill  take  the  trouble 
to  fee  whether  I  have  not  noted  them  my- 
felf;  or,  if  his  copy  of  my  books  ihould 
happen  to  want  the  printed  errata^  that 
he  will  fupply  the  place  of  it  with  a  little 
candour.  His  paragraph  relating  to  it,  p. 
10,  is  as  follows. 

"  Dr.  Prieftley,  in  his  Hijiory  of  Bec- 
*'  cari''s  difcoveries^  has  mentioned  a  very 
*^  remarkable  experiment.  He  tells  us, 
*'  that  Beccari  found  that  paper,  after  it 
*'  had  been  made  red  hot^  and  cooled  again y 
*'  was  an  excellent  phofphorus.  I  muft 
"  own  that,  upon  the  ftrideft  refearch  into 
*'  the  work  to  which  he  refers,  I  have  not 
"  been  able  to  find  any  fuch  account.  Nor 
*'  do  I  conceive  in  what  manner  paper 
"  can  be  made  red  hot^  and  after vv^ards 
"  cooled^  without  being  reduced  to  aflies. 

''  I  Ihould 


xvi  PREFACE. 

"  I  fhould,  neverthelefs,  be  greatly  obliged 
"  to  the  learned  hiftorian,  who  relates  the 
*'  experiment,  for  an  explanation  of  his 
"  meaning,  if  he  can  point  out  the  paf- 
*'  fage  to  which  his  elaborate  w^ork  re- 
"  fers." 

Befides,  except  that  the  words  red  hot 
were  not  in  the  treatife  I  was  abridging, 
I  have  nothing  to  alter  with  refped:  to 
it.  For  if  Mr.  Wilfon  does  not  know 
it  at  prefent,  he  may  fatisfy  himfelf  in 
half  a  minute,  that  white  paper  always 
becomes  red  by  heat,  before  it  is  turned 
black. 

Having  this  occaiion  to  mention  Mr. 
Wilion  and  his  book,  which  I  think  to 
be,  in  feveral  refpe^ts,  a  very  valuable . 
one,  I  muft  farther  obferve,  that  he  takes 
every  opportunity  of  cavilling  at  my  Hif- 
tory  \  when,  admitting  his  pretended  dif- 
coveries,  which  were  fubfequent  to  the 
publication  of  that  work,  it  is  not  liable 
to  the  leaft  jufl:  exception:  fince,  as  an 
hijiorian^  I  could  not  but  take  for  granted, 

that 


f  ft  E  F  A  C  fc  xvii 

that  there  was  no  fallacy  In  the  experi- 
iiients  of  Mr.  Canton  and  Father  Beccaria, 
efpecially  as  they  confirm  the  Newtonian 
dodrine  concerning  light. 

Father  Beccaria  had  advanced,  that  the 
Bolognian  phofphorus  emits  the  very  fame 
particles  of  light  which  it  had  imbibed ; 
ib  that,  if  red  rays  only  had  been  thrown 
upon  it,  it  would  appear  red,  and  if  it  had 
been  expofed  to  blue  rays  onlyj  it  wDuld 
appear  blue,  &;c.  Phil.  Tranf.  vol.  6l;  p. 
2  12.  Mr.  Wilfon  endeavoured  to  repeat 
thefe  experiments,  but  without  fuccefs  ; 
and  becaufe,  in  the  manner  in  which  he 
made  them,  all  his  phofphori  appeared 
of  the  fame  colour,  he  concludes,  contrary 
to  what  Mr.  Canton  and  Father  Beccaria 
had  fuppofed,  that  the  light  Which  the 
phofphorus  emits,  is  not  the  fame  that  it 
had  imbibed  ;  but  that  there  is  a  tranfmu- 
tation  of  the  inflammable  pririciple  of  the 
jihofphorus  itfelf  into  light* 

I  hcive  not  endeavoured  to  afcertain  this 

fa<£t,  not  having,  as  yet,  any  convenience 

for  experiments  of  that  kind  ;   but  I  will 

take  thft  liberty  to  fay,  that  a  philofopher 

■  b     .  of 


xvlil  PREFACE. 

of  fuch  a  clafs  as  Father  Beccaria,  is  Intltled 
to  the  greateft  refped: ;  and  that  his  con- 
clufions  (liould  not  have  been  controverted, 
but  upon  much  better  grounds  than  Mr. 
Wilfon*s.  For,  from  the  manner  in  which 
his  experiments  were  made,  I  cannot  but 
think  them  to  have  been  inadequate  to  the 
objeftof  them,  and  that  they  muft  be  con- 
fidered  as  indeclfive.  And  whenever  the 
experiments  fhall  be  made  with  a  ftronger 
and  purer  light,  I  have  very  little  doubt 
but  that  Father  Beccaria  will  appear  to 
have  been  in  this,  as  well  as  in  all  his  other 
numerous  experiments,  perfedly  accurate, 
and  that  the  conclufion  which  he  draws 
from  them  is  flrid:ly  juft,  though  contra- 
dicted by  Mr.  V/ilfon.  In  this,  however, 
I  may  be  miftaken. 

Having  proceeded  thus  far  in  an  account 
of  the  mifreprefentations  of  my  meaning, 
advancing  from  a  lefs  to  a  greater  c'aufe  of 
complaint,  from  fimple  admonition  to  re- 
prehenlion,  I  Ihall  go  one  ftep  farther,  to 
take  notice  of  a  wilful  and  moll:  wicked 
perverfion  of  my  meaning,  in  a  bufinefs 
of  much  more  importance  than  thofe 
which  I  have  mentioned  already.    If  it  be 

faid 


PREFACE.  xix 

faid  that  in  this  I  digrefs  too  far,  let  it  be 
confidered  that,  in  a  preface,  authors  have 
always  claimed  a  light  of  faying  whatever 
they  pleafed  concerning  themfelves ;  and 
not  to  lofe  this  right,  it  muft  now  and 
then  be  exercifed.  It  will  be  feen,  how- 
ever, that,  in  this  digreffion,  I  have  views 
not  very  foreign  to  the  fubje6l  of  a  treatife 
addrefled  to  pliilofophers. 

Notwithftanding  my  fludies  and  wri- 
tings are  chiefly  of  a  theological  nature, 
and  my  philofophical  purfuits  only  occa- 
fional ;  notwithftanding,  in  my  Lifiitictes 
of  natural  and  revealed  religion^  I  have  an 
intire  volume  on  the  evidences  of  chrifti- 
anity,  in  which  I  flatter  myfelf  I  have 
placed  feveral  parts  of  it  in  a  new  and 
flronger  light,  and  this  from  inclination 
only,  without  a  fhadow  of  inter ejl  to 
biafs  me,  I  have  been  reprefented  in  an 
artful  advertifement^  frequently  repeated 
in  all  the  Englifli  newfpapers,  as  not  be- 
lieving in  a  future  fl:ate.  The  author  of 
the  advertifement  has,  for  this  bafe  pur- 
pofe,  quoted  the  following  mutilated  fen- 
tence  from  an  Effay  of  mine  prefixed  to 
b  2  mv 


XX  PREFACE. 

my  edition  of  Dr.  Hart  ley'' s  Obfervations 
on  the  human  mind^  p.  20. 

**  I  am  rather  inclined  to  think,  though 
''  the  fubje(St  is  beyond  our  comprehenfion 
*'  at  prefent,  that  man  doth  not  confift  of 
''  two  principles  fo  efTentially  different 
'*  from  one  another  as  matter  and  Jpirit, 
"  which  are  always  defcribed  as  having 
**  no  one  common  property,  by  means  of 
*'  which  they  can  affe£t  or  a6b  upon  eacli 
*'  other,  &c.  I  rather  think  that  the  whole 
"  man  is  of  fome  uniform  compofition, 
*'  and  that  the  property  of  perceptiofty  as 
"  well  as  the  other  powers  that  are  termed 
*'  mental^  is  the  refult  (whether  neceflary 
*'  or  not)  of  fuch  an  organ ical  ftruAure 
"  as  that  of  the  brain.  Confequently  that 
*>'  the  whole  man  becomes  extind  at  death, 
"  &c." 

The  wickednefs  of  this  reprefentation 
will  appear  by  reciting  the  remainder  of 
the  fentence. 

"  at  death,  and  that  we  have  no 

•*  hope  of  furviving  the  grave,  but  what 

is 


(( 


PREFACE.  xxi 

'« Is  derived  from  the  fcheme  of  revela- 
«  tion." 

In  the  fame  page  I  alfo  obferve  that, 
though  this  dodlrine  favours  the  opinion 
of  the  lower  animals  differing  from  us  in 
degree  only,  and  not  in  kind,  '*  it  does  not 
"  neceflarily  draw  after  it  the  belief  of 
"  their  furviving  death  as  well  as  our- 
"  felves ;  this  privilege  being  derived  to 
''  us  by  a  pofitive  conjiitution^  and  depend- 
**  ing  upon  the  promife  of  God,  commu- 
**  nicated  by  expr^fs  revelation  to  man." 

This  affair  has  been  the  occafion  of 
much  exultation  among  bigots^  as  a  proof 
that  freedom  of  thinking  in  matters  of 
religion  leads  to  infidelity ;  and  unbelie'V-' 
ers,  who  have  never  read  any  but  my  phi- 
lofophical  writings,  hav6  confidered  me  as 
one  of  their  fraternity.  To  the  former  I 
fliall  fay  nothing,  becaufe  it  would  avail 
nothing.  To  the  latter,  of  whom  I  have 
more  hopes,  I  would  take  this  opportunity 
of  obferving  (and  in  this  I  addrefs  myfelf 
to  foreigners  more  than  my  own  country- 
men) that,  as  they  will  agree  with  me  in 
b  3  the 


xxii  PREFACE. 

the  opinion  o^  (ho.  natural  mortality  of  the 
foul,  which  is  agreeable  to  every  appearance 
in  nature,  it  nearly  concerns  us  to  confider 
whether  there  be  no  evidence  of  a  future 
life  of  retribution  independent  of  the  con- 
trary dodrine,  which  has  no  countenance 
from  the  fcriptures  *  ;  that  it  argues  ex- 
treme narrowncfs  of  mind,  unworthy  of 
the  fpirit  of  philofophy,  not  to  extend  our 
views  and  inquiries  beyond  the  circle  of 
thofe  objects  about  which  hatural  philo- 
fophy is  converfant,  which  terminate  in 
gaining  a  knowledge  of  the  vifible  fyftem 
of  nature  ;  and  that  it  behoves  us  to  con- 
fider whether  the  great  Author  of  nature 
has  not  afforded  us  fufficient  data  for 
knowledge  infinitely  more  interefling  to 
us,  more  immediately  refpeflmg  our  re- 

*  In  this  opinion  I  am  far  from  being  fmgular.  It  is 
known  to  have  been  the  opinion  of  Luther,  r.nd'many  of 
the  moft  eminent  of  the  fiiit  reformers.  Of  late  years  it 
has  been  mofl:  ably  fupported  by  the  prcfent  excellent 
BiAop  of  Carlifle,  and  is  now  generally  adopted  by  ra- 
tional chrillians.  The  opinion  of  the  iiatnral  immortality 
of  ihe'/cul,  had  its  origin  in  the  heathen  philofophy; 
and  having,  with  other  pagan  notions,  infinuated  itfelf 
into  chriltianity  (which  has  been  miferably  depraved  by 
tl^is  means)  hcS  been  the  great  fupport  of  the  popifh  doc- 
trines of  purgatoj-y,  and  the  -xverjhip  of  the  dead. 

lation 


PREFACE.  xxilf 

lation  to  himfelf,  and  his  gracious  provi- 
iion  for  our  improvement  and  happinefs,- 
not  only  in  this  infancy  of  our  beings  but 
to  a  period  which  has  no  bounds. 

Let  philoibphers,  as  certainly  becomes 
their  characfter,  confider  fadis^  and  the 
phenomena  of  the  human  m'md^  as  influenced 
by  fadts,  and  it  mufl:  appear  to  them  to 
be  utterly  incredible,  that  chriliianitylhould 
have  arifen,  have  been  propagated,  and 
have  eftabliOied  itfelf  in  the  world,  in  the 
circumftanccs  in  which  all  hiftory  fhews 
that  it  did  arife,  and  was  propagated,  if  it 
had  not  been  founded  on  truth  and  fadl ; 
fuch  fa(fls  as  are  llridly  the  fubjed:  of 
hiftorical  invefligation. 

The  common  objedlion  againfl:  religion 
among  philoibphers  is,  that  it  \^as  invented 
by  artful  intercfled  prufs^  or  wife  magi^ 
jlrates :  but  it  is  not  fad:  that  chrijlianky 
had  any  fuch  origin.  No  prieft  was  con- 
cerned in  the  invention  of  it,  nor  did  any 
civil  magiftrate  fofter  it :  but,  on  the  con- 
trary, it  was  violently  oppofed  by  all 
priefts,  and  all  magillrates,  wherever  it  ap- 
b  4  peared, 


xxiv  PREFACE. 

peared,  and  by  its  own  evidence  It  triurnr? 
phed  over  both.  Tbefe  2.xtfa5ls  \yorthy 
pf  the  attention  of  phjlofophers^  as  fuch. 

To  quit  this  fubje£t  for  that  with  which 
I  began  this  preface,  and  in  which  I  fhall 
be  more  attended  to  by  philofophers  \x\ 
general,  I  would  caution  my  reader  not 
to  be  too  fangui^e  in  his  expedations 
from  the  happy  train  which  this  branch 
of  philofophy  feems  tq  be  in.  Confider-? 
ing  the  unexampled  rapidity  with  which 
difcoveries  have  hitherto  been  made  in  it, 
the  number  of  perfons  in  many  and  diftant 
countries  now  engaged  in  thefe  purfults, 
and  the  emulation  that  is  neceifarily  ex- 
cited in  fuch  circumftances ;  and  confiderr 
ing,  at  the  fame  time,  how  nearly  this 
fubjedt  is  allied  to  the  moil  general  an4 
comprehenfive  laws  of  nature  with  which 
we  are  acquainted  ;  fome  may  be  apt  to 
imagine,  that  every  ypar  mufl  produce  dif- 
coveries  equal  to  all  that  were  made  by  a 
Newton  or  a  Boyle ;  and  I  am  far  from 
faying  that  this  may  not  be  the  cafe,  or 
that  it  is  very  improbable. 

But, 


PREFACE.  xxT 

But,  though  I  have  little  doubt,  from 
the  train  that  things  are  vifibly  in,  that 
philofophical  difcoveries  in  general  will  go 
on  with  an  accelerated  progrefs  (as  indeed 
they  have  done  ever  fince  the  revival  of 
letters  in  Europe)  it  would  be  too  rafti  to 
infer,  from  any  prefent  flattering  appear- 
.ances,  that  any  particular  expedition  into 
the  undifcovered  regions  of  fcience  will 
be  crowned  with  more  diftinguifhed  fuc- 
cefs  than  another.  Nothing  is  more  com- 
mon, in  the  hiftory  of  all  the  branches  of 
experimental  philofophy,  than  the  moft 
unexpeded  revolutions  of  good  or  bad 
fuccefs.  In  general,  indeed,  when  num- 
J^ers  of  ingenious  men  apply  themfelves 
to  one  fubjedt,  that  has  been  well  opened, 
the  inveftigation  proceeds  happily  and  e- 
quably.  But,  as  in  the  hiftory  of  eleBri- 
city^  and  now  in  the  difcoveries  relating 
to  air^  light  has  burft  out  from  the  moft 
unexpe(!^ed  quarters,  in  confequence  of 
which  the  greateft  mafters  of  fcience  have 
been  obliged  to  recommence  their  ftudies, 
from  new  and  fimpler  elements ;  fo  it  is 
alfo  not  uncommon  for  a  branch  of  fci- 
1  ence 


xxvi  PREFACE. 

ence  to  receive  a  check,  even  in  the  mofl 
rapid  and  promifing  ftate  of  its  growth. 

Judging,  however,  from  my  prefent 
views  of  the  fubjed,  I  am  wilUng  to  hope 
that  the  beginning  of  this  preface  will  not 
contribute  to  raife  too  high  expectations. 
The  incomplete  experime'iits^  indicated  in  the 
courfe  of  both  thefe  volumes,  and  efpeci- 
ally  in  the  fecond,  will,  alone,  furnilh  mat- 
ter for,  at  leaf!:,  as  much  experimental  in-« 
veftigation  as  all  that  I  have  yet  gone 
through  ;  and  I  need  not  tell  the  real  phi- 
lofopher,  that  many  of  them  are  of  fuch 
a  nature,  as  promife  to  reward  the  faga- 
cious  experimenter  with  the  moft  impor- 
tant difcoveries,  as  they  evidently  border 
upon,  and  may  lead  to,  much  greater 
things  than  any  that  I  have  hitherto  in- 
veftigated  ;  and  my  hints  for  other  new 
experiments,  which  1  have  not  thought 
it  worth  while  to  trouble  the  reader  with 
at  this  time,  arc  more  than  I  have  ever  had 
before  me  fince  I  began  thefe  inquiries. 
From  this  I  think  I  may  reaibnably  infer, 
that  the  fubjed  is  fo  far  from  being  ex~ 
haujicd^  that  the  moft  that  can  be  faid  of  it 

is. 


P  R  E  F  A  C  E.  xxvii 

is,  that  it  is  pretty  well  opened,  fo  as  to 
exhibit  an  inviting  profped:  to  future  in- 
veftigation. 

To  accelerate  this  inveftigation,  I  have 
hitherto  made  the  moft  early  publication 
of  my  obfervations,  and  have  concealed 
from  no  perfon  whatever  any  thing  that 
has  occurred  to  me ;  and  though  this  con- 
duct has  expofed  me  to  fome  inconveni- 
ence, I  am  not  yet  difcouraged ;  but,  who- 
ever may  avail  themfelves  of  it,  I  fhall,  for 
fome  time  longer,  at  leaf!:,  and  I  hope 
through  life,  perfift  in  the  fame  habit  of 
the  mofi:  open  and  unreferved  communica- 
tion, private  and  public. 

I  have  not  in  this  volume,  as  in  the 
former,  a  lediion  of  conjc^lures ^/peculations^ 
and  hints,  becaufe  I  have  not  yet  fuffi- 
ciently  reflected  upon  the  faBs  that  fug- 
geft  them.  The  fads,  however,  will  fur- 
nilh  abundant  matter  to  thofe  who  are 
difpofed  to  fpeculate,  and  efpecially  on  the 
fubjed;  of  the  mutual  convertibility,  and 
ultimate  identity,  of  all  the  acids  Vv^hen 
combined  with  fubflances  in  the  form  of 
4  *  air  ; 


xxviii         PREFACE. 

air ;  but  I  chufe  to  wait  for  more  fads, 
before  I  deduce  any  general  theory.  In 
the  mean  time  the  field  is  as  open  to 
others  as  to  myfqife 


THE 


THE 

CONTENTS, 

^he  Introdu^ion         —  —         xxxiii 

-Scdiofl  I,  Of  Vitriolic  add  Jir     Page  i 

Scd.  II.  Of  Vegetable  acid  Air  23 

Se<5l.  III.    Of  DEPHLOGisTicATED  Air,  mi^ 
of  the  conjiitution  of  the  Atmofphere  29 

Sc<fl.  IV.  A  more  particular  account  of  feme 
^roceffesfar  the  Produ^ion  of  depblogijticated  Air 

6z 

Sc(5t.  V.    Mifcellaneous  Ohfervations  on  the 
Properties  of  dephlogisticated  Air  91 

Sect.  VI.  Of  Air  procured  from  various  Suh- 
Jiances  by  means  of  Heat  only  — -  1 04 

Seft.  VII.  Of  Air  produced  by  the  Solution  of 
Vegetable.  S^uhftar.ces  in  Spirit,  of  Nitre  1 2 1 


CONTENTS. 

Se(fb.  VIII.  Of  Air  procured  by  the  Solution  of 
Animal  Substances  in  Spirit  of  Nitre      145 

Se(5l.  IX.  Mifcellaneous  Experiments  relating 
to  Nitre,  the  Nitrous  Acid  and  Nitrous 
Air  —  —  —  160 

SeiSt.  X.  Some  Ohfervations  on  Common  Air 

180 

Sea.  XL  Of  the  Fluor  Acid  Air  187 

Seft.  XII.  Experiments  and  Ohfervations  re- 
lating to  Fixed  Air         • —  —         213 

Sefl.  XIII.  Mifcellaneous  Ohfervations         229 

Sedl,  XIV.  Experiments  and  Ohfervations  on 
Charcoal,  firfi  puhlifloed  in  the  Philofophical 
TraniadionSj  vol.  LX.  p.  211         —         241 

Sed.  XV.  Of  the  Impregnation  of  Water 
with  Fixed  Air  —  —         263 

PARTI. 

l^he  Hijlory  of  the  Difcovery,  ibid. 

PART       II. 

DireBions  for  impregnating  Water  with 
Fixed  Air  —  —  277 

Sed. 


CONTENTS. 

Sed:.  1 .  The  Preface  to  the  Bire5fions  as  frji 
publified  —  —  —         ibid. 

Sed.  2.  The  Dire^iofts  ^—  279 

The  Preparation             —  280 

*                     The  Procefs  —  281 

Ohfervations  —  283 

PART       III. 

Of  Br.  Nooth'j  OhjeElmis  to  the  preceding 
Method  of  impregnating  Water  zvith  Fixed  Air., 
and  a  Comparifon  of  it  with  his  own  Method^ 
both  as  publifljed  by  himfelf  and  as  inipro'ved  by 
Mr.  Parker  —  —  293 

Sed.  XVI.  An  Account  of  fome  Mifreprefen- 
tations  of  the  Author's  Sentiments^  and  of  feme 
Differences  of  Opinion  with  r effect  to  the  Subje^ 
cf  Air  —  —  304 

Se6l.  XVII.  Experiments  relating  to  fome  of 
the  preceding  Se5tions^  madefnce  they  were  printed 
off  -^  ^  ^ 

The    APPENDIX. 

Number  I.  Experiments  and  Obfcrvations  re- 
lating to  fome  of  the  Chemical  Properties  cf  the 
Fluids  commonly  called  Fixed  Air  ;  and  tending 
to  prove^  that  it  is  merely  the  Vapour  cf  a  par- 
ticular Acid,  In  Two  Letters  to  the  Rev.  Dr. 
Priestlev.     By  William  B^iWLV.  337 

Numb. 


Contents. 

Numb.  li.  A  Letter  from  Dr.  PercivaL^ 
F.  R.  S.  and  S.  A.  to  the  Rev.  Dr.  Priestley, 
on  the  Solution  of  Stones  of  the  Urinary  and  of 
the  Gall  bladdery  by  Water  impregnated  with 
Fixed  Air         —  —  —         360 

Numb.  III.  A  Letter  from  Dr,  Dobson  of 
Liverpool,  /o  Dr.  Priestley        —         ^6'6 

Numb.  IV.  ExtraU  of  a  Letter  from  John 
Warren,  M.D.  of  Taunton,  to  Dr.  Priest- 
ley, with  a  medical  Cafe^  proving  the  Ufe  of 
Clyjers  of  Fixed  Aib.  in  a  putrid  Difeafe     370 


T  1 1  % 


[     xxxiii     3 
THE 

INTRODUCTION, 

CONTAINING 

An  Account  of  an  additional  Apparatus  fof 
experiments  on  Air^  and  of  the  precautions  pro-^ 
per  to  he  attended  to  in  the  ufe  of  it. 

HAVING  made  fome  improvements  in 
my  apparatus^  for  making  experiments 
on  different  kinds  of  air,  it  will  be  mofb  con- 
venient, in  purfuance  of  the  method  which 
I  took  in  the  firfl  volume  of  thefe  obferva- 
tions,  to  give  a  jfhort  account  of  the  feveral 
parts~  of  it,  previous  to  my  entering  upon  the 
detail  of  the  experiments  themfelves ;  and. 
likewife  to  be  a  little  more  particular  in  the 
account  of  fome  things  of  this  nature,  which 
I  thought  it  unneceffary  to  dwell  upon  be- 
fore, but  which  I  now  find  it  would  have  been 
ufeful  to  many  perfons,  if  I  had  explained  more 
fully  at  that  time. 

I  muft  acknowledge,  however,  that,  with 
refpedt  to  many  things,  which  thofe  who  are 
altogether  unufed  to  experiments  of  this  kind 
complain  that  they  did  not  underftand,  till 
they  faw  me  perform  the  operations  in  their 

c  prefeace. 


xxxiv     INTRODUCTION. 

prefence,  it  was  abfolutely  impofTible  that  I 
fhould  have  done  otherwife,  without  being 
veiy^4:edious,  and  even  appearing  ridiculoufly 
trifling,  to  thofe  who  were  at  all  verfed  in 
things  of  this  natu.i:e.  And  though  I  am  will- 
ling  to  facrifice  a  great  deal  to  the  defire  that 
I  have  to  facilitate  thefe  inquiries  to  begin- 
ners i  yet  as  I  do  not,  in  thefe  volumes,  pre- 
tend to  compofe  an  elementary  treatife^  for  the 
ufe  of  thofe  who  have  no  previous  knowledge 
of  the  fubjedt  (but,  beginning  where  others 
have  left  it<,  to  refume  the  inquiry,  and  extend 
the  bounds  of  our  knowledge  relating  to  it) 
propriety  requires  that  I  do  not  facrifice  /^o 
much  to  fo  foreign  an  object.  Befides,  that 
readinefs  and  certainty  in  the  ufe  of  inftru- 
ments,  which  is  acquired  by  experience,  can- 
not be  communicated  by  any  verbal  inftruc- 
tion,  but  mull  be  the  refult  of  much  pradice, 
with  refped  to  others,  as  it  was  with  myfelf ; 
and  a  variety  of  fubfidiary  helps,  which  con- 
tribute much  to  the  facility  and  elegance  of 
operating,  will  fo  certainly  occur  to  'any  per- 
fon  who  fhall  adually  go  to  work  in  this  bu- 
nefs,  that  it  is  altogether  unnecelTary  to  enter 
into  a  detail  of  them. 

Befides,  every  man  will,  in  many  things, 
have  a  method  of  his  own  •,  fo  that  two  per- 
ibns,  who  fliould  do  the  very  fame  things, 

would 


INTRODUCTION.       xxxv 

.would  fall  into  different  methods  of  doing 
them,  and  it  is  probable  that  each  of  them 
would  fancy  that  there  was  a  peculiar  ad- 
vantage in  his  own.  Leaning,  however,  as  I 
profefs  I  always  do,  to  an  inclination  to  gra- 
tify beginners,  and  to  give  them  all  the  alTift- 
ance  in  my  power,  I  fhall  be  as  particular, 
as  with  propriety  I  can  be,  in  the  delcription 
of  the  principal  inftruments,  and  mode  of 
operating,  which  I .  have  made  ufe  of  in  my 
late  experiments. 

The  figures  a,  a,  a^  reprefent  phials^  of 
which  I  have  made  very  great  ufe  in  the  whole 
courfe  of  my  experiments.  They  are  made 
.round,  and  very  thin  at  the  bottom,  and  the 
mouth  is  ground  fmooth ;  fo  that  they  may 
be  either  ufed  with  a  cork,  or,  being  filled 
with  quickfilver,  or  any  other  fluid,  will  fland 
firm  when  inverted,  and  placed  upright,  in 
bafons  containing  the  fame  fluid.  "When  they 
are  ufed  with  corks,  like  common  phials, 
they  will  bear  the  application  of  a  pretty  fud- 
den  heat  from  the  flame  of  a  candle,  or  other- 
wife,  which  the  common  phials,  being  gene- 
rally thickeft  at  the  bottom,  will  not  bear ; 
and  therefore,  before  I  got  thefe  phials,  I  ufed 
to  grind  the  bottoms  of  the  common  phials 
very  thin :  but  I  have  found  a  very  great  con- 
venience in  having  thefe  made  thin  on  pur- 
c  2  pofe; 


2ixxvi      INTRODUCTION. 

pofe-,  and  befides,  their  being  round  at  the 
bottom,  is,  on  many  accounts,  a  great  ad- 
vantage. 

"Without  veffels  of  this  form,   it  is  hardly 
pofTible  to  extra6t  air  from  any  fubftance  con- 
fined by  quickfilver,  which  is  an  operation 
that  the  reader  will  find,    in  the  courfe  of  this 
volume,   I  have  made  very  great  ufe  of ;   but 
nothing  is  eafier  in  fuch  velTels  as  thefe :  for 
{landing  with  their  mouths  downwards,   and 
the  fubftances  on  which    the    experiment   is 
made  lying  on  the  furface  of  the  quickfilver, 
juft  under  the  thinneft  part  of  the  glafs,  it  is 
very  eafy  to  prefent  them  to  the  focus  of  the 
burning  lens,  in  fuch  a  manner  that  they  fhall 
be  expofed  to  all  the  power  of  it,  without 
breaking  the  glafs.     Care,  however,  muft  be 
taken,   to  place  them  Ihort  of  the  focus  at 
firft,  that  the  greateft  degree  of  heat  may  not 
be  communicated  at  once.     In  moft  cafes  this 
moderate  heat  will  be  fufficient  to  produce  a 
confiderable  quantity  of  air  ;   and  as  there  will 
then  be  a  ipace  void  of  every  thing   but  air 
between  the  glafs  and  the  fubftance  on  which 
the  heat  is  to   be  thrown,  the  greateft  heat 
that  the  lens  .can  produce  may   be   direfted 
upon  it;  fince  the  glafs  through  which  the 
rays  are  tranfmitted,   being  at  fome  diftance 

from 


INTRODUCTION,      xxxvii 

from  the  focus,  is  In  no  danger  of  being  bro- 
ken or  melted. 

A  fkilful  operator  will  be  able  to  fill  his 
veflel  with  the  newly  generated  air  by  this 
means  •,  but,  in  general,  he  will  do  well  to 
content  himfelf  with  getting  it  half-full,  or 
lefs  •,  for  as  the  glafs  is  neceffarily  thicker  to- 
wards the  mouth,  there  will  be  fome  danger 
of  breaking  it  when  the  rays  are  tranfmitted 
near  that  place,  and  of  lofmg  the  air  that  has 
been,  perhaps,  with  great  trouble  and  diffi- 
culty, procured.  This  has  frequently  hap- 
pened to  myfelf,  and  does  fo  ftill  every  now 
and  then,  long  accuftomed  as  I  have  been  ta 
the  operation. 

If  the  fubflance  on  which  the  experiment  is 
made  be  in  the  form  of  a  poijuder,  as  red  lead, 
and  even  many  very  light  fubftances,  it  will 
be  moll  convenient  to  put  them  into  the  vef- 
fel  firft ;  and  the  quickfilver  may,  with  care, 
be  poured  upon  them  afterwards,  fo  as  to  keep 
the  fubftance  at  the  bottom  •,  and  yet,  when 
the  velTel  is  inverted,  it  will  remain  at  the 
top.  When  the  light  matter  will  not  lie  clofe, 
it  will  not  be  difficult,  fometimes,  to  inter- 
cept it  in  the  ftrait  part  of  the  phial,  at  the 
neck  j   but  it  will  often  be  moft  convenient  to 

form 


xxxviii     I N  T  R  O  D  U  C  T  I  O  N. 

form  thefe  light  matters  into  fmall  balls,  and 
put  them  into  the  veiTel,  through  the  quickfil- 
ver,  with  which  it  has  been  previoully  filled. 

I  would  obferve,  with  refpect  to  this  procefs, 
and  every  other  in  which  veflels  are  to  be  fill- 
ed with  quickfilver,  and  then  to  be  placed  in- 
verted in  bafons  of  the  fame,  that  no  ope- 
ration is  eafier  (unlefs  the  mouth  of  the  veflel 
be  exceedingly  wide)  when  the  mouth  of 
it  is  covered  with  foft  leather,  and,  if  necef- 
fary,  tied  on  with  a  firing,  before  it  be 
turned  upfide  down  ;  and  the  leather  may  be 
drawn  from  under  it  when  it  is  plunged  in 
the  quickfilver.  If  the  mouths  of  the  vefi^els 
be  very  narrow,  it  will  be  fufficient,  and  m.oft 
convenient,  to  cover  them  with  the  end  of 
oj.ie's  finger. 

In  this  procefs,  there  remains  lefs  doubt  of 
the  generated  air  coming  from  the  materials 
on  which  the  experiment  is  made,  than  when 
the  focus  of  the  lens  is  thrown  upon  them  in 
■vacuo''.,  becaufe  there  will  often  be  room  to 
fufpeft  tb.at  common  air  may  get  into  the  re- 
ceiver, in  the  courfe  of  a  long  procefs,  at  fome 
place  not  fufficiently  guarded  •,  and  befides, 
it  is  a  great  fatisfaftion  to  fee  the  quantity  of 
air  that  is  generated  at  tiny  particular  time, 
during  the  courfe  of  a  procefs  j  that  the  ope- 
rator 


INTRODUCTION.       xxxix 

rator  may  flop  when  he  fees  he  has  got  a  quan- 
tity fufKcient  for  his  purpofe :  whereas,  un- 
lefs  he  has  a  gage  connedted  with  his  tranf- 
ferer  (which  may  be  inconvenient)  he  muft 
admit  water  into  his  receiver  before  he  can 
certainly  tell  whether  he  has  procured  any  air 
or  not  •,  and  then  it  will  be  liable  to  be  affeded 
by  the  water,  or  by  the  air  contained  in  the 
water,  and  which  will  be  fet  loofe  very  copi- 
cufly  on  its  firft  admiffion  into  the  receiver. 

But  if  the  air,  difengaged  from  any  fub- 
ftance,  will  be  attradled  by  mercury,  as  is  the 
cafe  with  all  thofe  which  contain  the  nitrous 
acid,  this  procefs  cannot  be  ufed,  and  recourfe 
jnuft  be  had  to  the  vacuum  •,  and  for  this  pur- 
pofe it  is  necelfary  that  the  operator  be  pro- 
vided with  receivers  made  very  thin,  on  pur- 
pofe for  thefe  experiments.  Such  as  are  com- 
monly ufed  for  other  experiments  are  much 
too  thick  for  this  purpofe,  being  very  liable 
to  break  with  the  application  of  the  heat  pro- 
duced by  tlie  burning  lens.  In  this  procefs, 
care  fhould  be  taken  to  place  the  materials  on 
glafs,  a  piece  of  crucible,  or  fomc  other  fub- 
ftance  that  is  known  to  yield  no  air  by  heat. 

.  The  figure  b^  reprefents  a  common  glafs 
phial  with  a  ground  flopple,  with  many  fmall 
holes  in  it,  which  was  a  happy  contrivance  of 

my 


xl  INTRODUCTION. 

my  ingenious  pupil  and  friend  Mr.  Benjamin 
Vaughan.  It  is  of  excellent  ufe  to  convey 
any  liquid,  or  even  any  kind  of  air,  contained 
in  it,  through  the  water,  into  a  jar  Handing 
with  its  mouth  inverted  in  it,  without  admit- 
ting any  mixture  of  the  common  air,  or  even 
of  the  water ;  and  yet  the  air  generated  within 
it  has  a  fufhcient  out-let.  Thefe  phials  will 
be  found  ufeful  in  a  great  variety  of  experi- 
ments. 

The  figure  <:,  reprefents  a  phial  of  the  fame 
form  with  a  \  but  the  neck  is  thicker,  in  order 
to  be  fitted  with  a  ground  ftopple,  perforated, 
and  drawn  out  into  a  tube,    to  be  ufed  inftead 
of  the  phial  f,  vol.  I.  plate  i.     Till  I  hit  up- 
on this  contrivance,   which  was  executed  for 
me  by  the  diredion  of  Mr.  Parker,    I  had  a 
great  deal  of  trouble  in  perforating  common 
corks,    bending   and  fitting   tubes  to  them ; 
and,    after  all,    the  corks  themfelves,    or  the 
cement,  with  which  I  generally  found  it  con- 
venient to  cover  the  ends  of  the  tubes,  ^were 
apt  to  give  way,    and  to  be  the  occafion  of 
very  difagreeable  accidents.     Befides,  if  any 
hot  acid  was  ufed,    the  vapour  would  corrode 
the,  cork,    and  an  allowance  was  to  be  made 
for  the  effed  of  that  circumftance  on  the  air : 
whereas,  with  this  apparatus,    which  is  ex- 
ceedingly convenient  and  elegant,    the  opera- 
4  tor 


INTRODUCTION.  xli 

tor  may  be  fure  that  nothing  but  glafs  is 
contiguous  to  the  materials  he  works  upon, 
as  he  can  perfedly  exclude  every  other  fo- 
reign influence  -,  and  while  it  remains  un- 
broken, it  is  never  out  of  repair,  or  unfit  for 
ufe. 

For  many  purpofes,  however,  the  former 
method,  with  corks  and  tubes,  will  be  found 
very  fufficient,  and  much  lefs  expcnfive ;  efpe- 
cially  with  the  JIuor  add;  which  corrodes, 
glafs,  and  which  will  prefently  eat  through 
one  of  thefe  delicate  phials.  For  this  purpofe, 
therefore,  I  would  recommend  the  ufe  of  a 
common  and  very  thick  phial,  efpecially  as 
no  great  degree  of  heat,  and  never  any  fud- 
den  application  of  heat  is  wanted. 

The  phial  c,  will  be  found  fufficient  for  any 
purpofe  that  does  not  require  more  heat  than 
the  flame  of  a  candle  held  clofe  to  the  bottom 
of  it,  can  fupply  :  but  if  there  be  occafion 
to  place  the  phial  in  a  fand-heat,  and  confe- 
quently  if  it  muft  be  put  into  a  crucible  placed 
on  the  fire,  it  will  be  necefTary  to  have  the  tube, 
in  which  the  ground  flopple  terminates,  made 
as  long  as  may  be,  as  reprefented  by  e; 
otherwife  the  vefTels  that  receive  the  air  will 
be  too  near  the  fire.     Nine  or  twelve  inches, 

d  however. 


xlil  INTRODUCTION. 

however,  will  be  a  fufficient  length  for  any 
purpofe. 

I  have  great  reafon  to  congratulate  mylelf 
on  this  apparatus,  having  found  it  to  beof  moft 
admirable  ufe.  For,  in  experiments  with  air, 
where  the  greatefb  pofTible  accuracy  is  requir- 
ed, lutes  are  by  no  means  to  be  trufted,  fmce 
a  variety  of  vapours,  coming  into  contadl 
with  them,  are  confiderably  affeded  ;  whereas 
thefe  floppies  being  ground  air-tight,  the  ope- 
rator may  be  perfedly  at  eafe,  both  with  re- 
fpeft  to  the  quantity  and  the  quality  of  his 
produce.  To  exprefs  this  procefs  as  concifely 
as  poflible,  I  generally  allude  to  it,  by  faying 
that  the  phials  h^ve  ground  floppies  and  tubes. 

In  experiments  in  which  it  is  not  worth 
while  to  be  at  the  expence  of  thefe  phials  with 
ground-floppies  and  tubes,  and  yet  where  gun- 
barrels  cannot  be  trufted  to^  on  account  of  the 
materials  corroding  the  iron,  I  have-  recourfe 
to  a  kind  of  long  phial,  or  a  tube  made  nar- 
rower at  the  open  end,  nine  or  twelve  inches 
in  length,  and  of  an  equal  thicknefs  through- 
out, reprefented  fig.  d.  When  thefe  phials 
are  put  into  a  crucible  with  fand,  the  bottom 
may  be.  made  red-hot,  while  the  top  is  fo  cool, 
that  a  common  cork  (into  which  a  glafs-tube  is 
•inferted)  will  not  be  affeded  by  the  heat.     In 

faa. 


INTRODUCTION.  xliii 

fadl,  this  veflel  is  a  kind  of  gun-barrel  made 
of  glafs,  and  is  ufed  exaftly  like  the  gun- 
barrel,  except  that  it  is  not  expofed  to  fo  great 
a  degree  of  heat. 

When  the  materials  are  put  into  this  vefTel, 
it  muft  be  filled  up  to  the  mouth  with  fine 
fand,  that  will  give  no  air  by  the  application 
of  heat,  and  the  cork  muft  be  thruft  down 
clofe  upon  the  fand.  The  air  muft  be  received 
as  in  plate  2.  fig.  7.  vol.  I.  Could  this  glafs- 
velTel  bear  as  great  a  degree  of  heat,  and  as 
fuddenly  applied  as  the  gun-barrel,  it  would 
be  an  excellent  inftrument  indeed.  I  have 
fometimes  thought  of  getting  them  made  of 
that  kind  of  clay  which  is  ufed  for  making 
crucibles ;  but  thefe  of  glafs  have  been  gene- 
rally fufHcient  for  my  purpofe. 

When  a  perfon  has  a  great  many  trials  to 
make  of  the  goodnefs  of  air,  it  is  of  no  fmall 
importance  to  have  contrivances  by  which  he 
may  fave  time.  Having,  particularly,  had 
frequent  occafion  to  meafure  the  purity  of  air 
by  means  of  nitrous  air,  in  which  it  is  fome- 
times necelTary  to  put  feveral  meafures  of  one 
kind  to  one  meafure  of  the  other  •,  and  being 
wearied  with  taking  all  the  meafures  fep^ate- 
ly,  at  length  I  hit  upon  the  very  ufeful  expe- 
dient of  having  the  meafures  ready-made,  con- 

fiftijig 


xliv  INTRODUGTION. 

filling  of  veflels,  the  capacities  of  which  had  a 
known  proportion  to  each  other,  as/,/,/,  each 
vefiel  holding  twice  as  much  as  the  fize  next  lefs 
than  it.  It  is  likewife  convenient  to  have  the 
vefiels  in  which  the  mixture  of  air  is  made, 
fig.  gy  marked  in  a  manner  correfponding  to 
thefe  phials,  that  the  diminution  of  the  air 
may  be  perceived  at  once,  without  the  appli- 
cation of  any  meafure.  If  one  of  thefe  phials 
contain  an  ounce-meafure,  and  the  reft  be 
multiples  and  fubdivifions  of  it,  it  will  be 
ftill  more  convenient. 

"When  the  quantities  of  air  to  be  meafured 
are  very  fmall,  phials  will  be  too  large.  I 
have  therefore  a  fet  of  fmall  tubes,  h,  h^  h, 
bearing  the  fame  proportion  to  each  other 
with  the  phials,  the  fmalleft  of  which  contains 
very  little  indeed  ;  and  likewife  a  longer  tube, 
f,  marked  in  a  correfponding  manner,  in 
which  to  mix  the  air  contained  in  thofe  tubes. 


SECTION 


L    I    ] 


SECTION      r. 


Of  Vitriolic  Acid  Air. 

I  Had  no  fooner  exhibited  the  marine  acid 
in  the  form  of  air,  than  it  occurred  to  me 
that  it  might  be  poiTible  to  exhibit  the  other 
acids  alfo  in  the  fame  elegant  manner,  di- 
vefted  of  the  water  with  which  they  had  hi- 
therto been  combined,  and  which  muft  ne- 
celTarily  have  been  a  great  obftruclion  to  the 
difcovery  of  their  real  natures  and  affinities ; 
but  not  being  a  practical  Chemift,  and  living 
in  the  country,  where  I  had  no  acccfs  to  any 
perfon  of  that  profeffion,  and  indeed  not  be- 
ing fufficiently  able  to  explain  my  wants,  I 
met  with  many  hindrances  in  the  profecu- 
tion  of  my  inquiries  into  this  fubje^l. 

My  firft  fcheme   was  to  endeavour  to   get 

the  vitriolic  acid  in  the  form  of  air,  thinking 

B  that 


2  Of  Vitriolic  Acid  Air. 

that  It  would  probably  be  eafy  to  confine  It 
by^  quickfiiver ;  for  as  to  the  nitrous  acid, 
its  affinity  v/ith  quickfiiver  is  fo  great,  that . 
1  defpaired  of  being  able  to  confine  it  to  any 
purpofe,  as  I  have  obferved  in  the  former 
volume,  p.  273.  I  therefore  wrote  to  my 
friend  Mr.  Lane,  to  procure  me  a  quantity 
of  'volatile  'vitriolic  acid.  Which  is  the  common 
vitriolic  acid  combined  with  phlogifton,  at 
the  time  that  I  was  intent  upon  the  profecu- 
tion  of  my  former  experiments  •,  but  by  fome 
miftake  of  my  meaning,  a  different  thing 
from  what  I  intended  was  fent  me. 

Seeing  Mr.  Lane  the  winter  following,  he 
told  me  that  if  I  would  only  heat  any  oily 
or  greafy  matter  with  oil  of  vitriol,  I  fhould 
certainly  make  it  the  very  thing  I  wanted,  viz. 
the  volatile,  or  fidphiireoiis  vitriolic  acid ;  and 
accordingly  I  meant  to  have  proceeded  upon 
this  hint,  but  was  prevented  from  purfuing 
it,  by  a  variety  of  engagements,  till  after  the 
publication  of  my  late  treatife. 

Som.e  time  after  this,  I  was  in  company 
with  Lord  Shelburne  at  the  feat  of  Monf. 
Trudaine,  at  Montigny  in  France,  where, 
with  that  generous  and  liberal  fpirit  by  which 
that  noblem.an  is  diflinguillied,  he  has  a  com- 
plete apparatus  of  philofophical  inftruments, 

\vith 


Of  Vitr'icllc  Acid  Alr\  3 

with  every  other  convenience  and  affiftance 
for  piirfuing  fuch  philofophical  inquiries  as 
any  of  his  numerous  guefts  fhall  chufe  to  en- 
tertain themfelves  with.  In  this  agreeable 
retreat  I  met  with  that  eminent  philofopher 
and  chymiil,  Monf.  Montigni,  Member  of 
the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  ^  and  con- 
veriing  with  him  upon  this  fubjeft,  he  pro- 
pofed  our  trying  to  convert  oil  of  vitriol  into 
vapour,  by  boiling  it  with  a  pan  of  charcoal 
in  a  cracked  phial.  This  fcheme  not  anfwer- 
ing  our  purpofe,  he  next  propofed  our  heating 
it  together  with  oil  of  turpentine.  Accord- 
ingly we  v/ent  to  work  upon  it,  and  foon  pro- 
duced a  quantity  of  fome  kind  of  air  con- 
fined by  quickfilver  •,  but  our  recipient  being 
overturned  by  the  fuddennefs  of  the  produc- 
tion of  air,  we  were  not  able  to  catch  any 
more  than  the  firfl  produce,  which  was  little 
elfe  than  the  common  air  which  had  lodged 
on  the  furface  of  the  liquor,  and  which  ap- 
peared to  be  a  little  phlogifticated,  by  its  not 
being  much  afieded  by  a  mixture  of  nitrous 
air. 

Having   no   opportunity  of  repeating  the 

ex'periment  at  that  time,  I  did  nothing  with 

a  view  to  it  till  my  return  to  England  •,  when, 

<?n  the  26th  of  November,   1774,  I  refumed 

B  2  the 


4  Of  Vitriolic  Acid  Air, 

the  operation,  beginning  with  olive  oil^  and 
by  the  help  of  a  more  convenient  kind  of 
glafs  veiTel,  reprefented  fig.  a^  which  1  had 
procured  for  thefe  and  other  fimilar  pnrpofes, 
I  found  very  little  difficulty  in  the  profecu- 
tion  of  the  experiments.  ^ 

As  I  wifh  that  my  reader  may  enjoy  the 
benefit  of  my  experience,  I .  would  caution 
him,  if  he  chufe  to  repeat  the  experiments, 
not  to  put  too  much  oil,  or  any  other  fimilar 
fiibflance,  to  the  oil  of  vitriol,  in  order  to 
produce  this  air.  I  began  with  ufing  about 
one  fifth  part  of  common  oil,  leaving  fpace 
enough,  as  I  thought,  in  the  phial,  for  the 
ebullition  that  might  be  occafioned  by  the 
produ6tion  of  air  ;  but  as  foon  as  the  vefiel 
was  heated  to  a  certain  degree,  the  produc- 
tion of  air  was  exceedingly  rapid  ;  and  though 
I  withdrew  the  candle  v/hich  I  liad  applied  to 
it  for  that  purpofe,  the  ebullition  continued  ta 
increafe,  till,  the  capacity  of  the  tube  not 
being  fufficient  for  the  tranfmifilon  of  the  ge- 
nerated air,  the  cork  was  driven  out  of  the 
phial,  and  all  the  contents  of  it  exploded. 

After  tliis  I  only  fiightly  covered  the  fpirit 
of  vitriol  in  the  phial  v^^'th  olive  oil,  and  then 
the  phenomena  were  fimilar  to  thofe  in  the  for- 
mer experiment,  at   the  fame  time  that  the 

proceis 


Of.  Vitriolic  Acid  Air.  5 

procefs  was  more  manageable  •,  for,  by  apply- 
ing or  withdrawing  the  candle,  as  I  faw  occa- 
Iion,  I  got  what  quantity  of  air  I  pleafed  ; 
and  removing  the  phial,  in  this  frate  of  ebul- 
lition, from  one  veffel  to  anotlier,  I  filled  feve- 
ral  of  them  with  this  new  fpecies  of  air,  as 
eafily  as  I  had  been  ufed  to  do  it  v/ith  the  ma- 
rine acid  air  •,  and  tlie  whole  procefs  was  a5 
pleafing  and  as  elegant.  Indeed,  this  man- 
ner of  producing  air  from  fubftances  con- 
tained in  fmall  phials,  and  receiving  the  pro- 
duce in  quickfilver,  when  it  is  of  fuch  a 
nature  tliat  it  cannot  be  confined  by  v/ater, 
has  never  failed  to  ftrike  every  perfon  to  whom 
I  have  lliewed  it. 

The  moment  that  I  faw  the  acid  of  vitriol 
alTume  the  form  of  air  by  the  addition  of  phlo- 
gifton,  I  concluded  that  the  m.arine  acid  alfo 
muft  have  been  capable  of  being  exhibited 
in  the  fame  manner,  by  nieans  of  the  phlo- 
gifton  which  it  naturally  contains,  and  Vv^hich  is 
infeparable  from  it  •,  ai  d  moreover,  that,  pro- 
bably, fom.e  portion  of  phlogiilon  miay  be  ne- 
ceflary  to  the  volatility  and  elafticity  of  all 
fubftances  whatever  •,  fo  that  the  marine  acid 
air  may  not  be  precilely  what  I  had  be- 
fore imagined,  viz.  the  'pure  marine  acid  in  the 
form  of  air  \  but  that,  though  it  is  by  this 
means  exhibited  free  from  water,  vv'hich,  in  a 
B  3  variety 


6  Of  Vitriolic  Add  Air. 

variety  of  refpefts,  modifies  and  reftrains  its 
action  upon  various  bodies,  it  is  ftiil  combined 
with  a  portion  of  phlogillon.  Since,  how- 
ever, all  the  bodies  v/ith  which  we  are  ac- 
quainted are,  in  fome  degree,  elaftic,  being 
capable,  at  lead,  of  being  condenfed  by  cold, 
and  dilated  by  heat,  it  may  not  be  poffible  to 
feparate  this  principle  intirely  from  any  fub- 
flance  in  nature  •,  and  therefore,  in  a  fenfe  fuf- 
ficiently  near  the  truth,  it  may  ftill  be  faid 
that  the  marine  acid  air  is  nothing  but  the 
marine  acid  ;  the  phlogillon  it  contains  being 
fo  fmall,  as  not  to  be  difcoverable  by  any  of 
the  ufual  tefts  of  its  prefence. 

Before  any  air  is  produced  from  the  mixture 
of  inflammable  matter  and  oil  of  vitriol,  the 
whole  quantity  becomes  very  black-,  and  a 
quantity  of  this  fpirit,  thus  impregnated  with 
phlogifton,  will  yield  many  times  more  air 
than  an  equal  quantity  of  the  ftrongefl  fpirit 
of  fait :  but  I  never  meafured  it  with  -any  ex- 
adnefs. 

"When  the  vitriolic  acid  air  is  produced  in 
great  plenty,  the  top  of  the  phial  in  which  it 
is  generated  is  generally  filled  with  white  va- 
pours. This  air  has  alfo  the  fame  appearance 
as  it  is  tranfmitted  through  the  glafs  tube,  and 
it  is  fometimes  difcoverable  in  the  recipient. 

2  Vitriolic 


Of  Vitriolic  Acid  Air.  y 

Vitriolic  acid  air  is  equally  tranfparent  with 
marine  acid  air,  and  feems  to  have  no  more 
affinity  with  quickfilver  -,  for  when  confined 
by  quickfilver,  the  dimenfions  of  it  are  not 
liable  to  any  variation,  excepting  by  heat 
and  cold,  jufl  like  common  air;  provided 
there  be  no  moifture  in  the  recipient,  or  in  the 
quickfilver.  As  the  refemblance  between 
thefe  two  acid  airs  was  fo  great,  it  was  natural 
for  me  to  have  a  view  to  the  experiments  I  had 
made  with  the  marine  acid  air,  in  conducing 
thefe  that  relate  to  the  vitriolic  acid,  which 
the  reader  will  eafily  perceive. 

Water  being  admitted  to  the  vitriolic  acid 
air  abforbed  it  about  as  readily  as  the  ma. 
rine  acid  air ;  and  by  its  union  with  it  mufh 
have  formed  the  volatile  or  fulphureous  acid 
of  vitriol.  Indeed  the  refult  of  this  combi- 
nation was  fo  obvious,  that  I  did  not  think 
it  neccffary  to  make  the  experiment. 

Like  the  marine  acid  air,  this  vitriolic  acid 
air  extinguiilies  a  candle,  but  without  any 
peculiar  appearance  in  the  colour  of  the  flame, 
as  it  goes  out,  or  as  it  is  lighted  again,  which 
is  obfervable  when  the  experiment  is  made 
with  the  marine  acid  air.  Vitriolic  acid  air  is 
^Ifo  heavier  than  common  air  ;  for  a  candle 
being  let  down  into  a  velTel  filled  with  it,  was 
B  4  extinguifhed 


t  Of  Vitriolic  Acid  Air. 

extinguifhed  many  times  fuccefiively,  and  even 
after  it  had  flood  a  full  lioiir  with  its  mouth 
cxpofed  to  the  common  air. 

Ice  is  inftantly  diffolved  in  this,  as  well  as 
in  the  marine  acid  air,  and  the  water  impreg- 
nated with  it  continues  to  difiblve  more  ice. 
Upon  this  occafion  I  obferved  that  this  acid 
air  bears  to  be  expofed  to  cold,  without  any 
greater  diminution  of  its  bulk  than  common 
air  is  fubjedl  to  in  the  fame  circumftances ; 
which  appears  to  me  to  be  a  fufficientiy  proper 
criterion  to  dillinguifli  nir  from  vapour.  In  a 
certain  degree  of  heat,  indeed,  even  water 
may  be  exhibited  in  the  form  of  air ;  but  it 
is  a  degree  of  heat -that  far  exceeds  what  is 
iifual  in  our  atmofphere-,  and  in  other  cafe? 
terms  are  applied  to  very  great  ufe,  for  the 
diftinftion  of  bodies,  which,  if  examined  with 
ftridrnefs,  would  be  found  ultimately  to  run 
into  one  another,  the  difference  between  them 
being  in  degree  rather  than  in  kind :  but  a  very 
great  difference  in  degree  affords  a  fufRcient 
foundation  for  a  difference  in  appellation. 

The  phenomena  whicli  attend  the  mixing 
of  alkaline  air  with  the  marine  acid  air,  were 
fo  ftriking,  that  I  had  not  been  many  hours  in 
i3ofrcfrion  of  the  vitriolic  acid  air  without  try- 
ing whether  the  effed  of  the  fame  mixture  witl^ 

this 


Of  Fitrklic  Add  Air'.  9 

this  acid  air  would  not  make  a  fimilar  appear- 
ance, and  the  experiment  fully  anfwered  my 
expeflations.  A  like  beautiful  white  cloud 
was  formed  the  moment  that  thefe  two  kinds 
of  air  came  into  conta6t,  the  quantity  of  air 
was  diminifhed  as  faft  as  the  alkaline  air  was 
admitted,  and  the  quickfilver  rofe  almoft  to 
the  top  of  the  receiver. 

I  obferved  alfo,  that  when  I  put  the  alka- 
line air  to  the  vitriolic  acid  air,  the  white 
cloud  rofe  immediately  to  the  top  of  the  vef- 
fel,  as  in  tlie  experiment  with  the  marine  acid 
air;  which  proves  that  the  alkaline  air  is,  in 
both  cafes,  the  lighter  of  the  two.  In  both 
cafes  alfo,  if  the  alkaline  air  be  produced  firll, 
the  acid  air  being  admitted  to  it,  forms  a  cloud 
which  refts  upon  the  quickfilver ;  never  ex- 
tending beyond  a  very  fmall  fpace,  and  rifmg 
only  as  the  quickfilver  rifes.  The  fubftance 
that  is  formed  by  the  union  of  the  alkaline  air 
with  the  vitriolic  acid  air,  muft  neceflarily 
be  the  vitriolic  fat  amtnoriiac  -,  but  I  made  no 
experiment  to  afcertain  it.  The  quantity  of 
this  fait  with  which  my  receivers  are  coated  in 
thefe  experiments  is  readily  diffolved  in  water, 
as  in  the  experiments  v/ith  the  marine  acid  air. 
This,  however,  it  will  be  feen,  is  not  the 
cafe  with  the  fait  that  is  formed  by  another  of 
^he  acid  "airs  with  alkaline  air. 

.    The 


10  Of  Vitriolic  Acid  Air. 

The  mixture  of  other  kinds  of  air  with 
vitriolic  acid  air  produced  no  remarkable  ap^ 
pearance  whatever.  When,  however,  I  had 
put  a  quantity  of  this  acid  air  to  a  quantity  of 
common  air,  in  order  to  obferve  whether  the 
former  might  not  part  with  fome  of  its  phlo- 
gifton  to  the  latter,  though  I  perceived  no 
immediate  diminution  of  the  bulk  of  air,  as 
in  the  mixture  of  nitrous  and  common  air ;  yet 
when  they  had  continued  together  two  days, 
and  water  being  admitted  to  the  mixture  had 
^bforbed  the  acid  air,  the  common  air  which 
remained  appeared,  by  the  tefb  of  nitrous  air, 
to  be  confiderably  injured ;  fo  that  the  vitriolic 
acid  air  muft  have  communicated  fome  of  its 
phlogifton,  which  is  an  effect  that  is  not  pro- 
duced by  the  marine  acid  air  when  mixed  with 
common  air.  What  effed:  the  vitriolic  acid 
air  would  have  had  upon  other  kinds  of  air, 
had  they  continued  together  a  longer  time,  \ 
cannot  tell. 

A  quantity  of  this  acid  air  mixed  with  in- 
flammable air  (lood  fome  hours ;  but  when 
water  had  been  admitted  to  them,  I  could  not 
perceive  either  that  the  quantity  of  inflam- 
mable air  was  altered,  or  that  its  inflamma- 
|)ility  was  in  the  leafl  impaired. 

I  once 


Of  Vitriolic  Acid  Air?  .  1 1 

I  once  put  equal  quantities  of  marine  an4 
vitriolic  acid  air  into  the  fame  receiver,  and 
pbferved  that  they  miffed  without  exhibiting 
any  appearance  v/hatever  ;  and  when  alkaline 
air  was  admitted  to  them,  the  appearance  was 
the  fam.e  as  if  it  had  been  admitted  to  either 
of  them  fmgly,  the  white  cloud  rifing  inftantly 
to  the  top  of  the  veiTel.  Had  I,  after  the  ex- 
periment, examined  the  falts  which  adhered 
to  different  parts  of  the  infide  of  the  vcfTelj 
I  might  perhaps  have  difcovered  which  of  the 
two  acid  airs  was  fpecifically  lighter  than  the 
other ;  but  I  fufped  that  they  were  intimately 
mixed,  and  therefore  that  the  fait  was  fomc 
uniform  compofition,  between  the  common 
and  the  vitriolic  fal  amrnoniac. 

I  thought  it  rather  extraordinary,  that  wherc^' 
as  the  marine  acid,  which  is  reckoned  the 
weakefl  of  all  the  three  mineral  acids,  Ihould, 
when  exhibited  in  the  form  of  air,  be  able  to 
diflodge  both  the  vitriolic  and  the  nitrous  acids 
from  feveral  of  their  bales ;  yet  that  this  vi- 
triolic acid,  which  is  reckoned  the  ftrongeft 
of  the  three,  when  leemingly  exhibited  to  equal 
advantage,  by  being  divefted  of  the  water  with 
which  it  is  ufually  combined,  fhould  not,  in 
any  inftance  in  which  I  made  the  experiment, 
diflodge  either  of  the  other  acids  from  any 
t>afis  with  which  they  were  united.      Niire^ 

common 


J  2  Of  Vitriolic  Acid  Air. 

'common  fait ^  2lvA  fal  ammoniac^  were  all  intro- 
duced to  this  air,  without  either  afFedling  it, 
or  being  afFe(5led  by  it. 

Vitriolic   ether  imbibes  vitriolic  acid  ait  as 
readily  as  water  imbibes  it.     The  ether,  how- 
itver,  was   fodn  faturated  with  it,    and  after-- 
wards  was,  to  all  appearance,   both  as  tranf- 
parent,  and  as  inflammabie  as  before. 

A  piece  of  phofpborus  remained  a  day  and 
two  nights  in  vitriolic  acid  air,  without  fen- 
fibly  affefting  it.  It  gave  no  light  in  this  air ; 
'but  the  upper  furface  of  it  turned  black,  and 
thfe  furface  of  the  quickfilver  on  which  it  lay, 
had  a  deep  yellow  or  blackiih  kind  of  fcum 
upon  it,  as  if  it  had  been  in  part  difTolved  by 
tlie  acid. 

-  Iron  is  readily  diflblved  in  marine  acid  air, 
biit  is  not  at  all  affected  by  the  vitriolic  acid 
air;  though,  when  combined  with  water,  it 
is  fo  powerful  a  menftruum  for  iron.  But 
this,  indeed,  is  the  lefs  extraordinary,  as  this 
acid  ceafes  to  affe6l  iron  when  it  is  ftrongly 
concentrated.  I  kept  a  number  of  iron  nails 
in  vitriolic  acid  air  two  days,  without  any  fen- 
fible  effed  either  upon  the  air,  or  the  nails. 
There  was  no  appearance  of  tlieir  being  in  the 
leaft  corroded. 

A  piece 


Of  Vitriolic  Acid  Air.  Jj 

A  piece  of  liver  of  fulphur,  in  three  days, 
abforbed  the  v/hcle  of  a  quantity  of  this  kind 
of  air,  without  fenfibly  affe6ling  the  colour  or 
appearance  of  the  liver  of  fulphur. 

Charcoal,  which  forms  inflammable  air,  by 
being  introduced  to  marine  acid  air,  only  ab- 
forbs  the  vitriolic  acid  air ;  v/hich,  however, 
it  does  pretty  rapidly,  and  acquires  a  pungent 
fmell  from  being  expofed  to  it,  without  pro- 
ducing any  other  ^eftedt  that  I  could  perceive. 
I  made  feveral  pieces  of  charcoal  imbibe  as 
much  of  this  acid  air  as  they  could  ;  but,  after 
this,  frefli  pieces  abforbed  the  remainder,  fo 
that  the  air  had  only  been,  as  it  were,  con-. 
denfed  on  its  fi.rface.  This  I  have  obferved 
to  be  the  cafe  with  alkaline  air,  and  in  fome 
experiments  with  other  kinds  of  air  which 
cannot  be  confin-ed  but  by  quickfilver ;  and 
I  do  not  clearly  underftand  it.  The  char- 
coal, in  this  experiment,  was  made  very  dry, 
or  it  might  have  been  fufpeded  that  the  moil- 
ture  adhering  to  it  had  abforbed  the  air. 

Vitriolic  acid  air  diflblved  camphor  pretty 
readily,  and  reduced  it  to  a  tranfparent  liquor. 
Water  being  admitted  to  it,  the  camphor  re- 
affumed  its  natural  folid  form,  but  feemed  to 
have  acquired  an  acidity  in  its  tafte. 

I  I  have 


>4  Of  Plinolic  Add  Air. 

I  have  noticed  a  very  remarkable  eFect  of 
alkaline  air  upon  alum,  rendering  it  white  and 
opake,  as  if  it  had  been  calcined,  but  without 
altering  its  figure.  The  fame,  to  appearance, 
is  the  efFe6l  of  vitriolic  acid  air  upon  borax. 
This  fubftance  abforbed  a  pretty  large  quan- 
tity of  this  air  in  two  days.  What  remained 
of  the  air  extinguilhed  a  candle.  But  this 
effe(5t  v/as  probably  owing  to  a  fmall  propor- 
tion of  fixed  air  that  was  produced  at  the  fame 
time  with  the  vitriolic  acid  air.  I  repeated 
this  experiment  with  borax,  and  let  the  pro- 
€efs  continue  three  days,  when  the  effedt  v/as 
precifely  the  fame  as  before,  the  borax  retain- 
ing: its  form,  but  beino;  rendered  white  and 
opake.  The  acid  air  had,  no  doubt,  feized 
upon  the  water  which  enters  into  its  compofi- 
tion,  as  I  conje6lure  to  be  the  cafe  with  refpe(^ 
to  alkaline  air  and  alum. 

As  It  is  well  known  that  the  common  vi- 
triolic acid  is  changed  into  volatile  or  fulphu- 
reous  acid  of  vitriol  by  fumes  of  charcoal,  if 
the  velTel  in  which  it  is  heated  has  a  crack  in 
it,  through  which  the  fumes  can  have  accefs 
to  the  acid,  I  had  the  curiofity  to  try  whether 
the  fame  efFe6t  would  not  be  produced  by  heat- 
ing the  charcoal  in  the  acid.  Accordingly  I  put 
fome  bits  of  charcoal  into  my  phial,  inftead  of 
the  oil,  or  other  inflammable  matter,  which  I 

had 


Of  Vitriolic  Acid  Air.  i^ 

had  ufed  before  ;  and,  applying  the  flame  of 
a  candle,  T  prefently  found  that  the  vitriolic 
acid  air  was  produced  as  well  as  in  the  former 
procefs,  and  in  feveral  refpefts  more  con- 
veniently, the  production  of  air  being  more 
equable ;  whereby  the  difagreeable  effeCl  of  a 
fudden  explofion  is  avoided. 

It  is  necefiary,  however,  that  the  charcoal 
be  very  well  burned,  fo  that  all  air  be  expelled 
from  it ;  otherwife,  there  will  be  a  mixture 
of  fixed  or  inflammable  air  along  with  the 
acid  air,  efpecially  when  a  confiderable  degree 
of  heat  is  applied  to  produce  the  air.  Hav- 
ing often  got  vitriolic  acid  air  from  charcoal, 
on  account  of  the  eafy  and  equable  production 
of  it  in  this  m.anner,  I  feveral  times  obferved 
that  there  v/as  a  confiderable  refiduum  after 
it  had  been  expofed  to  water:  and  once  I  found 
that  the  refiduum  made  lime-v/ater  turbid; 
a  fure  fign  of  its  containing  fixed  air. 

"When  I  endeavoured  to  procure  this  air  by 
the  fame  procefs  from  ether ^  about  one  half  of 
the  produce  was  permanent  and  inflammable. 
The  oil  of  vitriol  became  perfedly  black  by 
this  means,  as  in  heating  other  phlogiftic  mat- 
ters in  it.  Afterwards,  heating  the  fame  oil 
oi  vitriol  and  ether,  about  one  fourth  of  the 
produce  only  was  inflammable  •,  and  had  I  con-. 

tinued 


10  Of  Vitmltc  Acid  Air. 

tinned  to  ufe  the  fame  mixture,  the  product' 
would  probably  have  been  lefs  and  leis  inflam- 
mable, and  more  purely  acid,  every  experiment. 

Finding  that  a  great  variety  of  fubllances, 
containing  phlogifton,  enabled  the  oil  of  vitriol 
to  throw  out  a  permanent  acid  air,  I  had  fomc 
fufpicion  that  mere  heat  might  do  the  fame ; 
but  I  did  not  find  that  there  was  any  founda- 
tion for  that  fufpicion.  When,  indeed,  I  put 
nothing  into  the  phial  along  with  the  oil  of 
vitriol,  but  only  heated  it  in  a  phial  clofed 
with  a  common  cor'k.,  air  was  produced  pretty 
faft ;  but  the  cork  was  corroded,  and  the  oil 
of  vitriol  was  as  black  as  if  the  cork  had  been 
dipped  into  it ;  fo  that  phlogifton  had  evi- 
dently come  from  the  cork.  It  was  plain, 
however,  that  fome  acid  vapour  had  rifen^  or 
the  cork  could  not  have  been  affected  by  it. 

When,  however,  by  the  help  of  Mr.  Parker^ 
I  got  glafs  phials  with  ground  ftopples,  per- 
forated, and  drawn  out  into  tubes,- fuch  as 
are  reprefented  fig.  r,  I  found  that  heating  the 
oil  of  vitriol  in  them  produced  no  air  what- 
ever ;  though,  for  a  long  time,  I  gave  a  fmall 
phial  as  much  heat  as  I  poffibly  could,  by 
keeping  it  furrounded  with  the  flames  ot  two 
laro-e  candles;  I  was  not  able  to  make  it  ac- 
tually  boil  with  this  heat,  but  a  white  vapour 

ilTued 


Of  Fiirionc  Acid  Air.  '    'ij 

iffued  from  It-,  and  circulated  in  the  top  of 
the  phial,  rifing  in  one  place,  and  being  con- 
denfed  in  another. 

But  though  I  got   no  d,ir  from  the  oil  of 
vitriol  by   this  procefsj    air  was  produced  at 
the  fame  time,   in   a  manner  that  I  little  ex- 
pelled, and  I  paid  pretty  dearly  for  the  dif- 
covery  it  occafioned.     Defpairing  to  get  any 
air  from  the  longer  application  of  my  candles, 
I  withdrew  them  -,   but  before  1  could  difen- 
gage  the  phial  from  the  veffel  of  quickfilverj 
a  little  of  it  paffed  through  the  tube  into  the 
hot  acid;    when,  inftantly,   it  was   all  fdled 
with  denfe  white  fumes,  a  prodigious  quantity 
of  air  was  generated,  the  tube  through  which  it 
Was  tranfmitted  was  broken  into  many  pieces, 
(I  fuppofe  by  the  heat  that  was  fuddenly  pro- 
duced) and  part  of  the  hot  acid  being  fpilled 
upon  my  hand,  burned  it  terribly^    fo  that  the 
effedl  of  it  is  vifible  to  this  day.     The  infide 
of  the  phial  was  coated  with  a  white  faline 
fubftance,  and  the  fmell  that  iffued  from  it 
was  extremely  fuffocating. 

This  accident  taught  me  what  I  am  fur- 
prized  I  fhould  not  have  fufpefted  before,  viz. 
that  fome  metals  will  part  with  their  phlo- 
glfton  to  hot  oil  of  vitriol,  and  tliereby  con- 
vert  it  into  a  permanent  elaftic  ^ir,  producing 
C  ^  the 


iS  Of  Vitriolic  Acid  Air, 

the  very  fame   efFe6l  with  oil,   charcoal,  or 
any  other  inflammable  fubllance. 

Not  difcouraged  by  the  difagreeable  acci- 
dent above-mentioned,  the  next  day  I  put  a 
little  quickftlver  into  the  phial  with  the  ground 
ftopple  and  tube,  along  with  the  oil  of  vi- 
triol •,  when,  long  before  it  was  boiling  hot; 
air  iffued  plentifully  from  it  •,  and  being  re- 
ceived in  a  velTel  of  quickfilver,  appeared  to 
be  genuine  vitriolic  acid  air,  exadtly  like  that 
which  I  had  procured  before  ;  being  readily 
imbibed  by  water,  and  extinguifhing  ^  candle 
in  the  fame  manner  as  the  other  had  done.  A 
white  fait  was  formed ;  but  what  1  thought  a 
little  remarkable,  was,  that,  whereas  in  all  the 
former  experiments  the  oil  of  vitriol  turned 
black  before  it  yielded  any  air  •,  this  was  not  the 
cafe  here ;  for  it  continued  colourlefs  and  tranf- 
parent  during  the  whole  procefs. 

After  this  I  repeated  the  experiment  with 
feve;al  other  metals  ;  but  with  a  confiderabie 
variety  in  the  refults. 

Putting  pieces  of  iron  wire  into  the  oil  of 
vitriol,  a  very  fmall  quantity  of  air  was  pro- 
duced without  heat;  but  this  foon  ceafmg, 
I  applied  the  candle,  when,  v/ith  a  degree  of 
heat,   feemingly  greater  than  that  at  which  the 

aif 


Of  Vitrwlic  Acid  Air.  '      19 

air  had  rifen  from  the  quickfilver  in  the  fame 
circumftances,  air  was  produced  in  great  plen- 
ty. When  I  had  got  about  three  ounce 
meafures  of  it,  I  admitted  water  to  it,  and 
about  four  fifths  of  the  whole  was  prefentiy 
abforbed.  The  remainder  was  inflammable, 
burning  very  red. 

Had  the  oil  of  vitriol  been  more  concen- 
trated, or  had  I  continued  the  prccefs  longer, 
a  greater  proportion  of  the  air  would  pro- 
bably have  been  acid,  and  lefs  of  it  inflam- 
mable. In  this  experim.ent  the  oil  of  .vitriol 
became  very  opaque,  being  of  a  deep  grey 
colour.'  The  iron  which  had  undergone  this 
procefs,  and  which  I  had  laid  alide  without 
any  expeftation,  was,  in  a  few  days,  covered 
with  a  whitifn  dull  j  and  after  it  had  been 
wiped  clean,  was  covered  again  with  the  fame 
matter.  It  is  very  much  unlike  the  rufting  of 
iron  in  other  circumftances. 

About  one  third  of  the  produce  of  air  from 
2;/»r,  was  acid,  and  the  remainder  inflam- 
mable. Indeed  it  was  evident  that  the  acid  • 
had  a  conftderabie  effed  upon  the  zinc  before 
the  application  of  the  candle,  fmall  bubbles 
of  air  continually  rifmg  from  it.  The  oil  of 
vitriol,  which  had  been  ufed  in  this  procefs, 
C  2  after 


20  Of  Vitriolic  Acid  Air. 

after  a  long  time,  depofited  a  white  matter^ 
which  I  fuppofe  to  be  x\\^jiowers  of  zinc^ 

Copper,  treated  in  the  fame  manner,  yielded 
air  very  freely,  with  about  the  fame  degree 
of  heat  that  quickfilver  had  required,  and  the 
air  continued  to  be  generated  with  very  little 
application  of  more  heat.  The  whole  pro- 
duce was  vitriolic  acid  air,  and  no  part  of  it 
inflammable.  The  oil  of  vitriol  remained  a 
long  time  turbid,  but  at  length  depofited  a 
brownilh  matter. 

*■ 

The  folution  of  ^.Iver  in  the  fame  manner^ 
had  the  very  fame  refult,  all  the  air  being  acidy 
and  no  part  of  it  inflammable.  The  oil  of  vi- 
triol acquired  a  kind  of  orange-colour,  and 
depofited  nothing. 

With  a  very  great  degree  of  heat  lead 
yielded  a  little  air,  which  was  wholly  acid, 
and  had  nothing  inflammable  in  it. 


'tj 


Gold  yielded  no  air  at  all  in  this  treatment ; 
but  the  oil  of  vitriol  acquired  the  fame  orange- 
colour  that  it  had  when  the  filver  had  been 
heated  in  it. 

Neither  had  this  treatment  of  platina  any 
■fenfible  effedl.     What  1  made  ufe  of  was  fome 

which 


Of  Vitriolic  Acid  Air.  21 

which  I  had  been  favoured  with  from  Dr.  Ir- 
ving carefully  purged  from  iron. 

In  moft  of  thefe  proceffes,  air  feems  to  ifllie 
from  the  fubftances  immediately  upon  the  ap- 
plication of  heat,  and  fometimes  without  it : 
and  this  firft  produce  of  air  forms  bubbles, 
which  continue  fome  time  on  the  furface  of  the 
liquor.  But  it  feems  to  be  nothing  more  than 
the  common  air  which  had  adhered  to  the  fur- 
faces  of  thofe  fubftances,  or  had  been  confined 
in  the  little  cavities  near  the  furface,  when  they 
happened  to  be  rough.  For  this  feeming  pro- 
duction of  air  foon  ceafes,  and  no  more  is  pro- 
duced v/ithout  a  much  greater  degree  of  heat ; 
and  when  the  genuine  acid  air  begins  to  rife, 
bubbles  formed  by  it  break  inftantly,  like 
bubbles  of  air  in  fpirit  of  wine,  and  there  is 
nothing  like  froth  on  the  furface  of  the  oil  of 
vitriol. 

As  fulphur  is  formed  by  the  union  of  phlo- 
gifton  with  oil  of  vitriol  highly  concentrated 
and  very  hot,  I  imagined  that  by  heating  fub- 
ftances containing  phlogifton  in  vitriolic  acid 
air,  I  could  not  fail  to  produce  fulphur  ;  but 
I  tried  charcoal  in  this  manner  without  the 
efFe6b  that  I  had  expected  from  it.  The  heat 
of  a  burning  lens  thrown  upon  it  in  this  acid 
air,  only  made  it  throw  out  that  quantity  of 
the  air,  which,  as  I  have  obferved  before,  is 
C  3  condenfed 


22  'Of  Vitriolic  Acid  Air. 

condenfed  upon  its  furface,  or  imbibed  by  it. 
The  air  that  was  unabforbed  ;ifter  this  opera- 
tion was  in  ^art  fixed,  and  in  part  inflam- 
mable, having  come  from  the  charcoal. 

There  was  frequently,  however,  the  ap- 
pearance of  fulphur  produced  upon  the  mix- 
ture of  alkaline  air  with  vitriolic  acid  air  ; 
for  the  infide  of  the  tube  would  be  covered 
with  a  perfectly  yellow  matter.  But  this 
colour  goes  off  in  time,  and  nothing  but  a 
white  faline  fubftance  remains-.  This  yellow 
appearance  I  firft  obferved  when  1  had  pro- 
duced the  vitriolic  acid  air  from  ether  j  but 
afterwards  I  found  the  fame  effed  when,  it  was 
produced  frorn  charcoal,  and  ftill  more  re-. 
markably  when  it  had  been  produced  from 
copper.  Why  this  yellow  colour  Ihould  not; 
be  permanent,  I  do  not  underftand. 


SEC 


Of  VegetahU  Acid  Air.  2j 

SECTION     II. 

Of  Vegetable  Acid  Air. 

Having  hit  upon  a  method  of  exhibiting 
fome  of  the  acids  in  the  form  of  air,  nothing 
could  be  eafier  than  to  extend  this  procefs  to 
the  reft.  I  had  nothing  to  do  but  either  to 
procure  the  acid  in  a  liquid  form,  viz.  com- 
bined v/ith  water,  and  then  expel  the  air  by 
heat  •,  or  to  find  fome  folid  fabftance  in  which 
it  was  combined,  and,  diflodging  it  by  fome 
ftronger  acid,  to  receive  the  generated  air  in 
quickfilver. 

To  procure  the  vegetable  acid  air^  I  was 
favoured  by  Dr.  Higgins,  with  a  quantity  of 
exceedingly  ftrong  concentrated  acid  of  vine- 
gar, from  which,  by  means  of  heat,  and  with 
the  apparatus  rep  relented  vol.  I,  plate  2.  fig.  8. 
I  could  eafily  expel  as  much  air,  as  from  an 
equal  quantity  of  fpirit  of  fait.  I  found, 
however,  that  unlefs  the  apparatus  was  fur- 
nilhed  with  a  fnall  recipient,  to  intercept  the 
liquor  that  might  .be  thrown  out  of  the  velTel 
by  boiling,  1  could  not  (except  at  the  very 
firft)  procure  this  acid  air  free  from  moifture : 
C  4  but 


24 .  Of  Vegetable  Acid  Air. 

but  with  this  provifion  I  eafily  got  the  air  as 
perfectly  dry  as  I  could  wifh. 

This  vegetable  acid  air  extina:uifhes  the 
flame  of  a  candle,  exadly  like  the  vitriolic 
acid  air,  viz.  without  any  particular  colour 
of  the   flame   in   going   out,   or   in  lighting 


Upon  putting  alkaline  air  to  vegetable  acid 
air,  the  white  cloud  obfervable  in  fimilar  mix- 
tures y/as  inftantly  formed,  and  rofe  at  once 
to  the  top  of  the  veffel,  as  in  the  cafe  of  the 
other  acid  airs.  The  fides  of  the  veflel  in 
which  this  mixture  was  made,  were  tinged 
with  yellow,  as  in  the  fame  procefs  with  vitrio- 
lic acid  air  ;  which  to  me  is  a  puzzling  fa6l, 
as  I  do  not  know  that  fuch  a  fulphur  (if  the 
fubftance  be  fulphur)  was  ever  known  to  be 
fo*mecl  v/ithout  the  vitriolic  acid.  At  firft  \ 
imagined  that  this  colour  had  come  from  fome- 
thing  contained  in  the  ingredients  for  making 
the  alkaline  air  •,  but  I  prefently  found,  that 
when  I  put  the  alkaline  air,  from  the  very 
fame  preparation,  to  marine  acid  air,  the  fait 
■formed  by  them  was  perfedlly  white,  without 
the  leafl  tinge  of  yellow. 

The  afFmities  both  of  the  marine  and  of  thp 
yitriolic  acids  in  the  form  of  air,  have  been 

feen 


Of  Vegetable  Acid  Air,  7.$ 

feen  to  be  confiderably  different  from  what 
they  are  when  combined,  as  ufual,  with  water; 
but  in  ail  the  trials  that  I  have  made,  the  ve- 
getable acid,  even  in  this  moll  advantageous 
form  of  air,  appears  to  be  weaker  than  any  of 
the  three  mineral  acids,  exadly  as  might  be 
concluded  from  what  was  known  before  con- 
cerning it.  For  this  vegetable  acid  air  was 
not  able  to  decompofe  any  fubftance  into  the 
compofition  of  which  any  of  the  mineral  acids 
entered.  It  made  no  impreffion  upon  brim- 
ftone^  falt-petre,  common  fait,  or  fal  ammoniac -,. 
nor  yet  upon  borax. 

Charcoal  imbibes  vegetable  acid  air  very 
fail,  and  afterwards  the  fmell  of  it  is  ex- 
tremely pungent  -,  but  the  air  which  remains 
feems  not  to  have  been  altered  by  any  thing 
that  it  had  got  from  the  charcoal. 

Liver  of  fidphiir  imbibes  vegetable  acid  air 
but  (lowly,  and  is  neither  difcoloured  nor  dif- 
folved  by  it.  When  only  one  tenth  part  of 
the  air  remained,  I  examined  it,  and  found  it 
to  have  nothing  inflammable  in  it,  which  was 
the  only  effect  that  I  had  expe(5ted  from  it. 

Water  imbibes  vegetable  acid  air  as  readily 
as  any  of  the  other  acid  airs.  I  once  endea- 
youred  to  afcertain  the  quantity  of  this  air  that 

a  given 


26  Of  Vegetable  Acid  Air. 

a  given  quantity  of  water  wotild  imbibe  ;  and 
to  meafure]  the  increafe  of  weight  and  bulk 
that  it  might  acquire  by  this  impregnation,  as 
I  had  in  fome  meafure  done  with  refped  to  the 
marine  acid,  and  alkaline  airs  ;  but  the  expe- 
riment did  not  fucceed  to  my  wifh  •,  and  I  did 
not  think  it  worth  my  while  to  attempt  it; 
again. 

For  this  purpofe  I  put  a  fmall  quantity  of 
water  into  a  glafs  tube ;  but  it  was  no  fooner 
introduced  to  the  acid  air,  through  the  quick- 
filver,  by  which  it  was  confined,  than  a  fmall 
bubble  of  comm.on  air  at  the  clofed  end  of  the 
tube  began  to  fwell,  and  it  continued  to  do  fo 
till  it  threw  out  all  the  water.  The  cafe  was 
the  fame  when  the  end  of  the  tube  was  her- 
metically fealed.  I  had  the  fame  refult  from 
fpirit  of  wine  introduced  into  this  acid  air,  in 
the  fame  circumftances,  only  the  effecSt  was 
produced  much  quicker.  With  oil  of  turpen- 
tine this  effed;  was  produced  more  quickly 
Hill  j    but  with  olive  oil  much  more  ilowly. 

From  this  experiment  I  was  led  to  imagine, 
that  common  air  received  a  great  expanfion  by 
the  effluvium  of  this  vegetable  acid  •,  and  I 
therefore  expeded  that  a  quantity  of  the 
liquid  acid  admitted  to  common  air,  confined 
by  quickfilver,    would  make    it  expand   as 

ether 


Of  Vegetable  Acid  Air.  27 

ether  had  done  -,  but  this  was  fo  far  from 
being  the  cafe,  that,  after  fome  time,  the  air 
appeared  to  be  diminifhed,  and  extinguifhed 
a  candle,  fo  that  it  muft  have  got  phlogifton 
from  the  acid. 

I  made  a  fecond  experiment  of  this  kind, 
the  refult  of  which  was,  that  a  quantity  of 
common  air,  which  had  been  expofed  fix  weeks 
to  the  effluvium  of  a  fmall  quantity  of  the 
liquid  vegetable  acid  (contained  in  a  cup, 
which  fwam  upon  the  furface  of  the  water,  by 
which  the  air  was  confined)  was  fo  far  in- 
jured, that  two  meafures  of  it,  and  one  of 
nitrous  air  did  not  occupy  the  fpace  of  quite 
two  meafures  ;  that  is,  it  was  almoil  as  noxi- 
ous as  it  could  be  made  by  any  phlogiftic  pro- 
cefs. 

Sufpedling  that  the  water,  which  was  rather 
foul,  might  have  contributed  to  this  injury,  I 
expofed,  for  the  laft  five  weeks  of  the  time, 
an  equal  quantity  of  common  air,  in  ajar  of 
the  fame  fize,  Handing  in  the  fame  trough  of 
water,  and  in  all  other  refpcfts  in  fimilar  cir- 
cumftances.  But  this  air,  though  a  little  in- 
jured, was  hardly  to  be  diftinguifhed  from 
common  air  ;  fo  that  there  could  be  no  doubt 
^ut  that,  in  the  laft-mcntioned  experiment, 
3  the 


7.8  Of  VegetaUe  Acid  Air. 

the  injury  which  the  air  had  received,    came 
from  the  effluvia  of  the  vegetable  acid. 

Vegetable  acid  air  is  abforbed  pretty  readily 
by  olive  oil.  A  quantity  of  this  oil  abforbed 
about  ten  times  its  bulk;  of  this  air  •,  and  from 
being  of  a  yellowilh  colour,  as  this  oil  na-. 
turally  is,  it  became  almoft  colourlefs,  like 
v/ater  j  which  I  thought  not  a  little  remarks 
able  J  as  all  the  other  acid  airs  deepen  the 
colour  of  every  fpecies  of  oil,  making  them 
brown,  and  at  the  fame  time  vifcid,  approach- 
ing to  the  confluence  of  refin ;  whereas  this 
oil,  in  the  experiment  juft  now  mentibned, 
became  rather  lefs  vifcid  than  before,  a  little 
approaching  to  the  limpidity  of  water,  or 
father,  more  refembling  an  elfential  oil, 


SEC- 


Of  Dephlogijiicated  Air,  ^c,  29 


SECTION    III. 

Of  Dephlogisticated  Air,  and  of  the  conjli- 
tution  of  the  Atr/iofphere^ 

The  contents  of  this  fedllon  will  furnifh  a 
very  ftriking  illuftration  of  the  truth  of  a 
remark,  which  I  have  more  than  once  made 
in  my  philofophical  writings,  and  which  can 
hardly  be  too  often  repeated,  as  it  tends  great- 
ly to  encourage  philofophical  inveftigations  ; 
viz.  that  more  is  owing  to  what  we  call  chance^ 
that  is,  philofophically  fpeaking,  to  the  ob- 
fervation  of  eveyits  arifing  from  unknown  caufes^ 
than  to  any  proper  defign,  or  pre-conceived 
theory  in  this  bulinefs.  This  does  not  appear 
in  the  works  of  thofe  who  write  fynthetically 
upon  thefe  fubjeiSls  ;  but  v/ould,  1  doubt  not, 
appear  very  ftrikingly  in  thofe  who  are  the 
mofl  celebrated  for  their  philofophical  acu- 
men, did  they  write  analytically  and  ingenu- 
oufly. 

For  my  own  part,  I  will  frankly  acknow- 
ledge, that,  at  the  commencement  of  the  ex- 
periments recited  ip  this  fedion,  I  v/as  fo  far 
from  having  formed  any  hypothefis  that  led  to 
the  difcoveries  I  made  in  purfuing  them,  that 

thev 


30  Of  TiephlQglfilcated  Aif^ 

they  would  have  appeared  very  improbable  to 
me  had  I  been  told  of  them  ;  and  when  the 
decilive  fads  did  at  length  obtrude  themfelves 
upon  my  notice,  it  was  very  Howly,  and  with 
great  hefitation,  that  I  yielded  to  the  evidence 
of  my  fenfes.  And  yet,  when  I  re-confider 
the  matter,  and  compare  my  laft  difcoveries 
relating  to  the  conftitution  of  the  atmofphere 
with  the  firfl,  I  fee  the  clofeft  and  the  eafieft 
connexion  in  the  world  between  them,  fo  as  to 
wonder  that  I  fhould  not  have  been  led  imme- 
diately from  the  one  to  the  other.  That  this 
was  not  the  cafe,  I  attribute  to  the  force  of 
prejudice,  which,  unknown  to  ourfeives, 
biaffes  not  only  owx  judgments^  properly  fo  cal- 
led, but  even  the  perceptions  of  our  fenfes  :  for 
we  may  take  a  maxim  fo  flrongly  for  granted, 
that  the  plaineft  evidence  of  fenfe  will  not  in- 
tirely  change,  and  often  hardly  modify  our 
perfuafions ;  and  the  more  ingenious  a  man  is, 
the  more  effedtually  he  is  entangled  in  his 
errors  ;  his  ingenuity  only  helping  him  to  de- 
ceive himfelf,  by  evading  the  force  of  truth. 

There  are,  I  believe,  very  few  maxims  in 
philofophy  that  have  laid  firmer  hold  upon 
the  mind,  than  that  air,  meaning  atmofpherical 
a:ir  (free  from  various  foreign  matters,  which 
were  always  fuppofed  to  be  diffolved,  and  in- 
termixed with  it)  is  afimple  element ary  fub fiance^ 

indeltruc- 


end  Confiitution  of  the  Almofphere. .       31 

indeftru6lible,  and  unalterable,  at  lead  as 
much  fo  as  water  is  fuppofed  to  be.  In  the 
courle  of  my  inquiries,  '  I  was,  however,  foon 
fatisiied  that  atrnofpherical  air  is  not  an  un- 
alterable thing  ;  for  that  the  phlogifbon  with 
which  it  becomes  loaded  from  bodies  burning 
in  it,  and  animals  breathing  it,  and  various 
other  chemical  proceffes,  fo  far  alters  and  de- 
praves it,  as  to  render  it  altogether  unfit  for 
inflammation,  refpiration,  and  other  purpofes 
to  which  it  is  fubfervient ;  and  I  had  difco- 
vered  that  agitation  in  water,  the  procefs  of 
vegetation,  and  probably  other  natural  pro- 
ceffes, by  taking  out  the  fuperfluous  phlo- 
gillon,  reftore  it  to  its  original  purity.  But  I 
own  I  had  no  idea  of  the  poffibility  of  going 
any  farther  in  this  way,  and  thereby  procuring 
air  purer  than  the  bell  common  air.  I  might, 
indeed,  have  naturally  imagined  that  fuch 
would  be  air  that  fnould  contain  lefs  phlogiilon 
than  the  air  of  the  atmofphere  -,  but  I  had  no 
idea  that  fuch  a  compofition  was  poffible. 

It  will  be  feen  in  my  lad  publication,  that, 
from  the  experiments  which  I  made  on  the 
marine  acid  air,  I  was  led  to  conclude,  that 
common  air  confilted  of  fome  acid  (and  I  na- 
turally inclined  to  the  acid  that  1  was  then 
operating  upon)  and  phlogiflon  ;  becaufe  the 
union  of  this  acid  vapour  and  phlogiflon  made 

inflammable 


32  t)/  Dephgifticated  Air^ 

inflammable  air ;  and  inflammable  air,  by  agi- 
tation in  water^  ceafes  to  be  inflammable,  and 
becomes  refpirable.  And  though  I  could  never 
make  it  quite  fo  good  as  common  air,  1  thought 
it  very  probable  that  vegetation,  in  more  fa- 
vourable circumftances  than  any  in  which  I 
could  apply  it,  or  fome  other  natural  procefs, 
might  render  it  more  pure. 

Upon  this,  which  no  perfon  can  fay  was  an 
improbable  fuppofition,  was  founded  my  con- 
jefture,  of  volcanos  having  given  birth  to  the 
atmofphere  of  this  planet,  fupplying  it  with  a 
permanent  air,  firft  inflammable,  then  de- 
prived of  its  inflammability  by  agitation  io 
water,  and  farther  purified  by  vegetation. 

Several  of  the  knov^m  phenomena  of  the  ni- 
trous ^7a  J  might  have  led  me  to  think^  that  this 
was  more  proper  for  the  conftitution  of  the 
atmofphere  than  the  marine  acid:  but  my 
thoughts  had  got  into  a  different  train,  and 
nothing  but  a  feries  of  obfervations,  wjiich  I 
fhall  now  difdndtly  relate,  compelled  me  to 
adopt  another  hypothefis^  and  brought  me,  in 
a  way  of  which  I  had  then  no  idea,  to  the 
folution  of  the  great  problem,  which  my  rea^ 
der  will  perceive  I  have  had  in  view  ever  fmce 
my  difcovery  that  the  atmofpherical  air  is 
alterable,  and  therefore  that  it  is  not  an  ele- 
mentary 


and  Conjiit'ution  of  the  Atmofphere:       53 

mentary  fubftance,  but  a  compofition  viz. 
what  this  compofition  is,  or  what  is  the  thing 
that  we  breathe^  and  how  is  it  to  be  made  from 
its  conftituent  principles. 

At  the  time  of  my  former  publication,  I 
was  not  pofTefTed  of  a  burning  km  of  any  confi- 
derable  force  \  and  for  want  of  one,  I  could 
not  pofTibly  make  many  of  the  experiments 
that  I  had  proje6led,  and  which,  in  theory, 
appeared  very  promifing.  I  had,  indeed,  a 
mirror  of  force  fufficient  for  my  purpofe.  But 
the  nature  of  this  inftrument  is  fuch,  that  it 
cannot  be  applied,  with  effed,  except  upon 
fubftances  that  are  capable  of  being  fufpended, 
or  refling  on  a  very  (lender  fupport.  It  can- 
not be  direded  at  all  upon  any  fubftance  in 
the  form  of  powder,  nor  hardly  upon  any  thing 
that  requires  to  be  put  into  a  velTel  of  quick- 
filver ;  which  appears  to  me  to  be  the  moft  ac- 
curate method  of  extracting  air  from  a  great 
variety  of  fubftances,  as  was  explained  in  the 
Introdu<Stion  to  this  volume.  But  having  after- 
wards procured  a  lens  of  twelve  inches  diame- 
ter, and  twenty  inches  focal  diftance,  I  pro- 
ceeded with  great  alacrity  to  examine,  by  the 
help  of  it,  what  kind  of  air  a  great  variety 
of  fubftances,  natural  and  fa<5titious,  would 
yield,  putting  them  into  the  veftels  repre- 
fented  fig,  a,  which  I  filled  with  quick- 
D  filver. 


34  Q/"  Bcphlogtfiicated  Ah\ 

filver,  aiid  kept  inverted  in  a  bafon  of  the 
fame.  Mr,  Warltire,  a  good  chymift,  and 
lefturer  in  natural  philofophy,  happening  to 
be  at  that  time  in  Calne,  I  explained  my  views 
to  him,  and  was  furnilhed  by  him  with  many 
fubftances,  which  I  could  not  otherwife  have 
procured. 

With  this  apparatus,  after  a  variety  of 
other  experiments,  an  account  of  which  will 
be  found  in  its  proper  place,  on  the  ift  of 
Auguft,  1774,  I  endeavoured  to  extra6l  air 
from  mercurius  calcinatus  per  fs  •,  and  I  prefently 
found  that,  by  means  of  this  lens,  air  was 
expelled  from  it  very  readily.  Having  got 
about  three  or  four  times  as  much  as  tlie  bulk 
of  my  materials,  I  admitted  water  to  it,  and 
found  that  it  was  not  imbibed  by  it.  But 
what  fjrprized  me  more  than  I  can  well  ex- 
prefs,  v/as,  that  a  candle  burned  in  this  air 
v/ith  a  remarkably  vigorous  flame,  very  much 
like  that  enlarged  flame  with  which  a  candle 
burns  in  nitrous  air,  expofed  to  iron  -  or  liver 
of  fulphurj  but  as  I  had  got  nothing  like 
this  remarkable  appearance  from  any  kind  of 
air  befides  this  particular  modification  of  ni- 
trous air,  and  1  knew  no  nitrous  acid  was 
ufed  in  the  preparation  of  mercurius  caki- 
naiusy  I  was  utterly  at  a  lofs  how  to  account 
for  it. 

In 


und  Conjlitutmt  of  the  Atmofphere'.       3:5 

In  this  cafe,  alfo,  though  I  did  not  give 
fufficient  attention  to  the  circumflance  ?.t  that 
time,  the  flame  of  the  candle,  befides  being 
larger,  burned  with  more  fplendor  and  heat 
than  in  that  fpecies  of  nitrous  air  ;  and  a  piece 
of  red-hot  wood  fparkled  in  it,  exactly  like 
paper  dipped  in  a  folution  of  nitre,  and  it 
confumed  very  fall;  an  experiment  which  I 
had  never  thought  of  trying  with  nitrous  air. 

At  the  fame  time  that  I  made  the  above- 
mentioned  experiment,  I  extrafted  a  quantity 
of  air,  with  the  very  fame  property,  from  the 
common  red  precipitate^  which  being  produced 
by  a  folution  of  mercury  in  fpirit  of  nitre, 
made  me  conclude  that  this  peculiar  property, 
being  fimilar  to  that  of  the  modification  of 
nitrous  air  above  mentioned,  depended  upon 
fomething  being  communicated  to  it  by  the  ni- 
trous acid  •,  and  fmce  the  mercurius  cakinattis 
is  produced  by  expofmg  mercury  to  a  certain 
degree  of  heat,  where  common  air  has  accefs 
to  it,  I  likewife  concluded  that  this  fubftance 
had  collefted  fomething  of  nitre^  in  that  ftatc 
of  heat, '  from  the  atmofphere. 

This,  however,  appearing  to  me  much  more 
extraordinary  than  it  ought  to  have  done,  I  en- 
tertained fome  fufpicion  that  the  mecurius  cal- 
^inatus,  on  which  I  had  made  my  experiments, 
D  2  leeina; 


36  Of  Dephkgifticated  Air^ 

being  bought  at  a  common  apothecary's,  might, 
in  fa6b,  be  nothing  more  than  red  precipitate ; 
though,  had  I  been  any  thing  of  a  praftical 
chymiil,  I  could  not  have  entertained  any  fuch 
fufpicion.  However,  mentioning  this  fufpi- 
cion  to  Mr.  Warltire,  he  furnillied  me  with 
fome  that  he  had  kept  for  a  fpecimen  of  the 
preparation,  and  which,  he  told  me,  he  could 
warrant  to  be  genuine.  This  being  treated 
in  the  fame  manner  as  the  former,  only  by  a 
longer  continuance  of  heat,  I  extraded  much 
more  air  from  it  than  from  the  other. 

This  experiment  might  have  fatisfied  any 
moderate  fceptic  :  but,  however,  being  at  Paris 
in  the  06lober  following,  and  knowing  that 
there  were  feveral  very  eminent  chymifts  in 
that  place,  I  did  not  omit  the  opportunity,  by 
means  of  my  friend  Mr.  Magellan,  to  get  an 
ounce  of  mercurius  calcinatus  prepared  by 
Mr.  Cadet,  of  the  genuinenefs  of  which  there 
could  not  poffibly  be  any  fufpicion ;  and  at 
the  fame  time,  I  frequently  mentioned  my  fur- 
prize  at  the  kind  of  air  which  I  had  got  from 
this  preparation  to  Mr  Lavoifier,  Mr.  le  Roy, 
and  feveral  other  philofophers,  who  honoured 
me  with  their  notice  in  that  city,  and  who,  I 
dare  fay,  cannot  fail  to  recollect  the  circum- 
(lance. 

At 


and  ConjVitution  of  the  Aimcfphere,        37 

At  the  fame  time,  I  had  no  fufpicion  that 
the  air  which  I  had  got  from  the  mercuriu^ 
calcinatus  was  even  wholefome,  fo  far  was  I 
from  knowing  what*"  it  \yas  that  I  had  really- 
found  -,  taking  it  for  granted,  that  it  was  no- 
thing more  than  fuch  kind  of  air  as  I  had 
brought  nitrous  air  to  he  by  the  procelTeq 
above  mentioned  j  and  in  this  air  I  have  ob- 
ferved  that  a  candle  would  burn  fometimes  quite 
naturally,  and  fometimes  with  a  beautiful  en- 
larged flame,  and  yet  remain  perfectly  noxi- 
ous. 

At  the  fame  time  that  I  had  got  the  air 
above  mentioned  from  mercurius  calcinatus 
and  the  red  precipitate,  I  had  got  the  fame 
kind  from  red  lead  or  minium.  In  this  procefs, 
that  part  of  the  miniurp  on  which  the  focus 
of  the  lens  had  fallen,  turned  yellow.  One 
third  of  the  air,  in  this  experiment,  was  rea- 
"dily  abforbed  by  water,  but,  in  the  remainder, 
a  candle  burned  very  fti-9ngly,  and.  with  a  crack- 
ling noife. 

That  fixed  air  is  contained  in  red  lead  I  had 
obferved  before ;  for  I  had  expelled  it  by  the 
heat  of  a  candle,  and  had  found  it  to  be  very 
pure.  See  Vol.  I.  p.  192.  I  imagine  it  re- 
quires more  heat  than  I  then  ufed  to  e:<;pel  ^ny 
9/  the  other  kind  of  air. 

P  3  This 


3  S  Of  Dephlogifticated  Air^ 

•  This  experiment  with  red  lead  confirmed 
me  more  in  my  fufpicion,  that  the  mercurius 
calcinatiis  muft  get  the  property  of  yielding 
this  kind  of  air  from  the  atmorphere,  the  pro- 
cefs  by  which  that  preparation,  and  this  of  red 
lead  is  made,  being  fimilar.  As  I  never  make 
the  leall  fecret  of  any  thing  that  I  obferve,  I 
mentioned  this  experiment  alfo,  as  well  as 
thofe  with  the  mercurius  calcinatus,  and  the 
red  precipitate,  to  all  my  philofophical  ac- 
quaintance at  Paris,  and  elfewhere  \  having  no 
idea,  at  that  time,  to  what  thefe  remarkable 
fa6ts  would  lead. 

Prefently  after  my  mturn  from  abroad,  I 
went  to  work  upon  the  mercurius  calcinatus y 
which  I  had  procured  from  Mr.  Cadet ;  and, 
with  a  very  m.oderate  degree  of  heat,  I  got 
from  about  one  fourth  of  an  ounce  of  it,  an 
ounce-meafure  of  air,  which  I  obferved  to  be 
not  readily  imbibed,  either  by  the  fjbftance 
itfeif  from  which  it  had  been  expelkd  (for 
I  fuffered  them  to  continue  a  long  t.rr.e  toge- 
ther before  I  transferred  the  air  to  any  other 
place)  or  by  water,  in  which  I  fuffered  this 
air  to  ftand  a  confiderable  time  before  I  made 
any  experiment  upon  it. 

In  this  air,   as  I  had  expeded,  a   candle 
burned  with  a  vivid  flame  j  but  what  I  ob- 

'  ferved 


and  Confiitntion  of  the  Atmofphere:       39 

lerved  new  at  this  time,  (Nov.  19,)  and  which 
furprized  me  no  lefs  than  the  fad  I  had  difco- 
vered  before,  v/as,  that,  whereas  a  few  mo- 
ments agitation  in  water  will  deprive  the  mo- 
dified nitrous  air  of  its  property  of  admitting 
a  candle  to  burn  in  it ;  yet,  after  more  than 
ten  times  as  much  agitation  as  would  be  fuffi- 
cient  to  produce  tliis  alteration  in  the  nitrous- 
air,  no  fenfible  change  was  produced  in  this. 
A  candle  ftili  burned  in  it  with  a  ftrong  flame  ; 
and  it  did  not,  in  the  lead,  diminifh  common 
air,  which  I  have  obferved  that  nitrous  air^ 
in  this  ftate,  in  fome  meafure,  does. 

But  I  was  much  more  furprized,  when» 
after  two  days,  in  which  this  air  had  conti- 
nued in  conta6t  with  water  (by  which  it  was 
diminiflied  about  one  twentieth  of  its  bulk)  I 
agitated  it  violently  in  water  about  five  mi- 
nutes, and  found  that  a  candle  ftill  burned 
in  it  as  well  as  in  common  air.  The  fame  de- 
gree of  agitation  would  have  made  phlogifti- 
cated  nitrous  air  fit  for  refpiration  indeed^ 
but  it  would  certainly  have  extinguiihed  a 
candle. 

Thefe  fafts  fully  convinced  me,  that  there 

muft  be  a  very  material  diff^^rence  between 

the  conftitution  of  the  air  from  mercurius  cal- 

cinatus,   and  that  of  phlogifticated  nitrous  air, 

D  4  notwith- 


40  Of  Dephlogijiicated  Air, 

notwithanding  their  refemblance  in  fome  par- 
ticulars. But  though  I  did  not  doubt  that 
the  air  from  mercurius  calcinatus  was  fit 
for  refpiration,  after  being  agitated  in  water, 
as  every  kind  of  air  without  exception,  on 
which  I  had  tried  the  experiment,  had  been, 
I  ftill  did  not  fufpeft  that  it  was  refpirable  in 
the  firft  inftance  \  fo  far  was  I  from  having  any 
idea  of  this  air  being,  what  it  really  was,  much 
fuperior,  in  this  refped,  to  the  air  of  the  at- 
mofphere. 

In  this  ignorance  of  the  real  nature  of  this 
kind  of  air,  I  continued  from  thistime  (Novem- 
ber) to  the  I  ft  of  March  following  j  having, 
in  the  mean  time,  been  intent  upon  my  expe- 
riments on  the  vitriolic  acid  air  above  recited, 
and  the  various  modifications  of  air  produced 
by  fpirit  of  nitre,  an  account  of  which  will  fol- 
low. But  in  the  courfe  of  this  month,  I  not 
only  afcertained  the  nature  of  this  kind  of  air, 
though  very  gradually,  but  was  led  by  it  to 
the  complete  difcovery  of  the  conftitution  of 
the  air  we  breathe. 

Till  this  ift  of  March,  1775,  I  hadfo  little 
fufpicion  of  the  air  from  mercurius  calcina- 
tus, &c.  being  wholefome,  that  I  had  not  even 
thought  of  applying  to  it  the  teft  of  nitrous 
air;  but  thinking  (as  my  reader  muft  ima- 
gine 


and  Ccnfiitution  of  the  Aimofphere'.   '    41 

gine  I  frequently  mufl  have  done)  on  the 
candle  burning  in  it  after  long  agitation 
in  water,  it  occurred  to  me  at  laft  to  make 
the  experiment  J  and  putting  one  meafure 
of  nitrous  air  to  two  meafures  of  this  air, 
I  found,  not  only  that  it  was  diminifhed,  but 
that  it  was  diminifhed  quite  as  much  as  com- 
mon air,  and  that  the  redrefs  of  the  mixture 
was  likewife  equal  to  that  of  a  fimilar  mixture 
of  nitrous  and  common  air. 

After  this  I  had  no  doubt  but  that  the  air 
from  mercurius  calcinatus  was  fit  for  refpira- 
tion,  and  that  it  had  all  the  other  properties  of 
genuine  common  air.  But  I  did  not  take 
notice  of  what  I  might  have  obferved,  if  I  had 
not  been  fo  fully  pofTefTed  by  the  notion  of 
there  being  no  air  better  than  common  air, 
that  the  rednefs  was  really  deeper,  and  the  di- 
minution fomething  greater  than  common  air 
would  have  admitted. 

Moreover,  this  advance  in  the  way  of  truth, 
in  reality,  threw  me  back  into  error,  making 
me  give  up  the  hypothefis  I  had  firll  formed, 
viz.  that  the  mercurius  calcinatus  had  extracted 
fpirit  of  nitre  from  the  air  -,  for  I  now  con- 
cluded, that  all  the  conftituent  parts  of  the  air 
were  equally,  and  in  their  proper  proportion, 
imbibed  in  the  preparation  of  this  fubftance, 

and 


4  2 .  Of  Dephlogifil  cated  Air, 

and  alfo  In  the  procefs  of  making  red  lead. 
For  at  the  fame  time  that  I  made  the  above- 
mentioned  experiment  on  the  air  from  mercu- 
rius  calcinatus,  I  likewife  obferved  that  the  air 
which  I  had  extraded  from  red  lead,  after  the 
fixed  air  was  wafhed  out  of  it,  was  of  the  fame 
nature,  being  diminifhed  by  nitrous  air  like 
common  air :  but,  at  the  fame  time,  I  was 
puzzled  to  find  that  air  from  the  red  precipi- 
tate was  diminifhed  in  the  fame  manner, 
though  the  procefs  for  making  this  fubllance 
is  quite  different  from  that  of  making  the  two 
others.  But  to  this  circumllance  I  happened 
not  to  give  much  attention, 

I  wifh  my  reader  be  not  quite  tired  with  the 
frequent  repetition  of  the  word  furprize,  and 
others  of  fimilar  import ;  but  I  mud  go  on  in 
that  ilyle  a  little  longer.  For  the  next  day  I 
was  more  furprized  than  ever  I  had  been  be- 
fore, with  finding  that,  after  the  above- 
mentioned  mixture  of  nitrous  air  and  the  air 
from  mercurius  calcinatus,  had  flood  all  night, 
(in  which  time  the  whole  diminution  muft 
have  taken  place  ;  and,  confequently,  had  it 
been  common  air,  it  muft  have  been  made 
perfeftly  noxious,  and  intirely  unfit  for  refpi- 
ration  or  inflammation)  a  candle  burned  in  it, 
and  even  better  than  in  common  air. 

I  cannot^ 


1 


and  Cnnfiitiition  of  the  Atmofphere.    '   43 

I  cannot,  at  this  diftance  of  time,  recollect 
what  it  was  that  I  had  in  view  in  making  this 
experiment  •,  but  I  know  I  had  no  expeftation 
of  the  real  iiTue  of  it.  Having  acquired  a 
confiderable  degree  of  readinefs  in  makinp-  ex- 
periments  of  this  kind,  a  very  flight  and  eva- 
nefcerit  motive  would  be  fufficient  to  induce 
m.e  to  do  it.  If,  however,  I  had  not  hap- 
pened, for  fome  other  purpofe,  to  have  had  a 
lighted  candle  before  me,  I  fliould  probably 
never  have  made  the  trial ;  and  the  whole 
train  of  my  future  experiments  relating  to  this 
kind  of  air  might  have  been  preventedi 

Still,  however,  having  no  conception  of  the 
real  caufe  of  this  phenomenon,  I  confidered 
it  as  fomething  very  extraordinary ;  but  as  a 
property  that  was  peculiar  to  air  extracted 
from  thefe  fubfcancees,  and  adventitious-,  and 
I  always  fpoke  of  the  air  to  my  acquaintance 
as  being  fubftantially  the  fame  thing  with 
common  air.  I  particularly  remember  my  tell- 
ing Dr.  Price,  that  I  was  myfelf  perfectly  fa- 
tisfied  of  its  being  common  air,  as  it  appeared 
to  be  fo  by  the  tefl  of  nitrous  au- ;  though, 
for  the  fatisfaction  of  others,  I  wanted  a  mouf« 
to  make  the  proof  quite  complete. 

Cn  the   8th   of  this  month  I  procured  a 

pioufe,   and  put  it  into  a  glafs  velTel,  contain- 

2  ins 


44  Of  Bephlogifticated  Air^ 

ing  two  ounce-meafiires  of  the  air  from  mer- 
curius  calcinatus.  Had  it  been  common  air,  a 
full-grown  moLife,  as  this  was,  would  have 
lived  in  it  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  In 
this  air,  however,  my  moufe  lived  a  full  half 
hour  ;  and  though  it  was  taken  out  feemingly 
dead,  it  appeared  to  have  been  only  exceed- 
ly  chilled ;  for,  upon  being  held  to  the  fire, 
it  prefently  revived,  and  appeared  not  to  hav^. 
i;"eceived  any  harm  from  the  experiment, 

By  this  I  was  confirmed  in  my  conclufion, 
that  the  air  extrad:ed  from  mercurius  calcina- 
tus, &c.  was,  at  leafi,  as  good  as  common 
air ;  but  I  did  not  certainly  conclude  that  it 
was  any  better  \  becaufe,  though  one  moufe 
would  live  only  a  quarter  of  an  hour  in  a  given 
quantity  of  air,  I  knew  it  was  not  impoffible 
but  that  another  moufe  might  ha,ve  lived  in  it 
half  an  hour  ;  ^o  little  accuracy  is  there  in 
this  method  of  afcertaining  the  goodnefs  of 
air :  and  indeed  I  have  never  had  recourfe  to, 
it  for  my  pwn  fatisfadion,  fince  the  dlfcovery 
of  that  moft  ready,  accurate,  and  elegant  tell 
that  nitrous  air  furnilhes.  But  in  this  cafe  I 
had  a  view  to  publifhing  the  mofl  gene'rally- 
fatisfadtory  account  of  my  experiments  that 
the  nature  of  the  thing  would  admit  of. 

This 


and  Confiitution  of  the  Atmofphere.       45 

Tills  experiment  with  the  moufe,  when  I 
]iad  refleded  upon  it  fome  time,  gave  ~me  fo 
much  fufpicion  that  the  air  into  which  I  had 
put  it  was  better  than  common  air,  that  I  was 
induced,  the  day  after,  to  apply  the  teft  of 
nitrous  air  to  a  fmall  part  of  that  very  quan- 
tity of  air  which  the  moufe  had  breathed  fo 
long  ♦,  fo  that,  had  it  been  common  air,  I  was 
fatisfied  it  muft  have  been  very  nearly,  if  not 
altogether,  as  noxious  as  poflible,  fo  as  not  to 
be  affedted  by  nitrous  air ;  when,  to  my  fur- 
prize  again,  I  found  that  though  it  had  been 
breathed  fo  long,  it  was  flill  better  than  com- 
mon air.  For  after  mixing  it  with  nitrous 
air,  in  the  ufual  proportion  of  two  to  one,  it  ^ 
was  diminilhed  in  the  proportion  of  44-  to  34 ; 
that  is,  the  nitrous  air  had  made  it  two  ninths 
lefs  than  before,  and  this  in  a  very  fhort  fpace 
of  time ;  whereas  I  had  never  found  that,  in 
the  longeft  time,  any  common  air  was  reduced 
more  than  one  fifth  of  its  bulk  by  any  propor- 
tion of  nitrous  air,  nor  more  than  one  fourth  by 
any  phlogiftic  procefs  whatever.  Thinking  of 
this  extraordinary  fa6t  upon  my  pillow,  the 
next  morning  I  put  another  meafure  of  ni- 
trous air  to  the  fame  mixture,  and,  to  my 
utter  aftonifliment,  found  that  it  was  farther 
diminifhed  to  almoft  one  half  of  its  original 
quantity.  I  then  put  a  third  meafure  to  it ; 
but  this  did  not  diminifh  it  any  farther  :  but, 
I  however. 


46  0/  Dephlogifticated  Air, 

liowever,  left  it  one  meafure  lefs  than  it  -vvas 
even  after  the  moufe  had  been  taken  out  of  it. 

Being  now  fully  fatisfied  that  this  air,  even 
after  the  moufe  had  breathed  it  half  an  hour, 
was  much  better  than  common  air  ;  and  hav- 
ing a  quantity  of  it  ftill  left,  fufficient  for  the 
experiment,  viz.  an  ounce-meafure  and  a  half, 
I  put  the  moufe  into  it ;  when  I  obferved  that 
it  feemed  to  feel  no  Ihock  upon  being  put  into 
it,  evident  figns  of  which  would  have  been 
vifible,  if  the  air  had  not  been  very  whole- 
fome ;  but  that  it  remained  perfectly  at  its 
eafe  another  full  half  hour,  when  I  took  it  out 
quite  lively  and  vigorous.  Meafuring  the.  air 
the  next  day,  I  found  it  to  be  reduced  from 
1 1^  to  ^  of  an  ounce-meafure.  And  after  this, 
if  I  remember  well  (for  in  my  regijler  of  the 
day  I  only  find  it  noted,  that  it  was  confider- 
ehly  diminijhed  by  nitrous  air)  it  was  nearly  as 
good  as  common  air.  It  was  evident,  indeed, 
from  the  moufe  having  been  taken  out  quite 
vigorous,  that  the  air  could  not  have  been 
rendered  very  noxious. 

For  my  farther  fatisfa6lion  I  procured  an- 
other moufe,  and  putting  it  into  iefs  than  two 
ounce-meafures  of  air  extraded  from  mercu- 
rius  calcinatus  and  air  from  red  precipitate 
(which,  having  found  them  to  be  of  the  fame 

quality, 


and  Conftitution  of  the  Atmofphere.        47 

quality,  I  had  mixed  together)  it  lived  three 
quarters  of  an  hour.  But  not  having  had 
the  precaution  to  fet  the  vefTel  in  a  warm 
place,  I  fufpedl  that  the  moufe  died  of  cold. 
However,  as  it  had  lived  three  times  as  long 
as  it  could  probably  have  lived  in  the  fame 
quantity  of  common  air,  and  1  did  not  expe6t 
much  accuracy  from  this  kind  of  teft,  I  did 
not  think  it  neceffary  to  make  any  more  expe- 
riments with  mice. 

Being  now  fully  fatlsfied  of  the  fuperior 
goodnefs  of  this  kind  of  air,  I  proceeded  to 
itieafure  that  degree  of  purity,  with  as  much 
accuracy  as  I  could,  by  the  teft  of  nitrous 
air ;  and  I  began  with  putting  one  meafure  of 
nitrous  air  to  two  meafures  of  this  air,  as  if  I 
had  been  examining  common  air  •,  and  now  I 
obferved  that  the  diminution  was  evidently 
greater  than  common  air  would  have  fuffered 
by  the  fame  treatment.  A  fecond  meafure  of 
nitrous  air  reduced  it  to  two  thirds  of  its  ori- 
ginal quantity,  and  a  third  meafure  to  one 
half.  Sufpefting  that  the  diminution  could 
not  proceed  much  farther,  I  then  added  only 
half  a  meafure  of  nitrous  air,  by  which  it  v/as 
diminillied  fcill  more  ;  but  not  much,  and  an- 
other half  meafure  made  it  more  than  half  of 
its  original  quantity  -,  fo  that,  in  this  cafe,  two 
meafures  of  this  air  took  more  than  two  mea- 
fures 


48  Of  Dephlogifiicated  Airj 

fures  of  nitrous  air,  and  yet  remained  lefs 
than  half  of  what  it  was.  Five  meafures 
brought  it  pretty  exadly  to  its  original  di- 
menfions* 

At  the  fame  time,  air  from  the  red  precipi- 
tate was  diminifhed  in  the  fame  proportion  as 
that  from  mercurius  calcinatus,  five  meafures 
of  nitrous  air  being  received  by  two  meafures 
of  this  without  any  increafe  of  dimenfions. 
Now  as  common  air  takes  about  one  half  of 
its  bulk  of  nitrous  air,  before  it  begins  to 
receive  any  addition  to  its  dimenfions  from 
more  nitrous  air,  and  this  air  took  more  than 
four  half-meafures  before  it  ceafed  to  be  di- 
miniflied  by  more  nitrous  air,  and  even  five 
half-meafures  made  no  addition  to  its  original 
dimenfions,  I  conclude  that  it  was  between  four 
and  five  times  as  good  as  common  air.  It  will 
be  feen  that  I  have  fince  procured  air  better 
than  this,  even  between  five  and  fix  times  as 
good  as  the  beft  common  air  that  I  have  ever 
met  with. 

Being  now  fully  fatisfied  with  refpeft  to  the 
nature  of  this  new  fpecies  of  air,  viz.  that,  be- 
ing capable  of  taking  more  phlogifton  from 
nitrous  air,  it  therefore  originally  contains  lefs 
of  this  principle ;  my  next  inquiry  was,  by 
what  means  it  comes  to  be  fo  pure,   or  philo- 

fophically 


and  the  Conjiitntim  of  the  Atmofphere.      49 

fophlcally  fpeaking,  to  be  fo  much  dephlo- 
gifiicated ;  and  fince  the  red  lead  yields  the 
fame  kind  of  air  with  mercurius  calcinatus, 
though  mixed  with  common  air,  and  is  a  much 
cheaper  material,  I  proceeded  to  examine  all 
the  preparations  of  lead,  made  by  heat  in  the 
open  air,  to  fee  what  kind  of  air  they  would 
yield,  beginning  with  the  grey  calx^  and  end- 
ing with  litharge. 

The  red  lead  which  I  \ifed  for  this  purpofe 
yielded  a  coniiderable  quantity  of  dephlogifti- 
cated  air,  and  very  little  fixed  air  •,  but  to 
what  circumftance  in  the  preparation  of  this 
lead,  or  in  the  keeping  of  it,  this  difference 
is  owing,  I  cannot  tell.  I  have  frequently 
found  a  very  remarkable  difference  between 
different  fpecimens  of  red  lead  in  this  refpedl, 
as;  well  as  in  the  purity  of  the  air  which  they 
contain.  This  difference,  however,  may  arife 
in  a  great  meafure,  from  the  care  that  is  taken 
to  extract  the  fixed  air  from  it.  In  this  expe- 
riment two  meafurcs  of  nitrous  air  being  put 
to  one  meafure  of  this  air,  reduced  it  to  one 
third  of  what  it  was  at  firfl,  and  nearly  three 
times  its  bulk  of  nitrous  air  made  very  little 
addition  to  its  original  dimenfions  ;  fo  that 
this  air  was  exceedingly  pure,  and  better  than 
any  that  I  had  procured  before. 

E  The 


50  Of  Dephlogifiicated  Air,    . 

The  preparation  called  mafficot  (which  Is 
faid  to  be  a  fbate  between  the  grey  calx  and 
the  red  lead)  alfo  yielded  a  confiderable  quan-  . 
tity  of  air,  of  which  about  one  half  was  fixed 
air,  and  the  remainder  was  fuch,  that  when 
an  equal  quantity  of  nitrous  air  was  put  to 
it,  it  was  fomething  lefs  than  at  firft  ;  fo  that 
this  air  was  about  twice  as  pure  as  common 
air. 

I  thought  it  fomething  remarkable,  that 
in  the  preparations  of  lead  by  heat,  thofe  be- 
fore and  after  thefe  two,  viz.  the  red  lead  and 
mafficot,  yielded  |only  fixed  air.  I  would  alfo 
obferve,  by  the  way,  that  a  very  fmall  quan- 
tity of  air  was  extrafted  from  lead  ore  by  the 
burning  lens.  The  bulk  of  it  was  eafily  ab- 
forbed  by  water.  The  remainder  was  not  af- 
fefted  by  nitrous  air,  and  it  extinguifhed  a 
candle. 

I  got  a  very  little  air  by  the  fame  procefs 
from  the  grey  calx  of  lead,  of  precifely  the  fame 
quality  with  the  former.  That  part  of  it 
which  was  not  afi'eded  by  nitrous  air  extin- 
guifhed a  candle,  fo  that  both  of  them  may 
be  faid  to  have  yielded  fixed  air,  only  with  a 
larger  portion  than  ufual,  of  that  part  of  it 
which  does  not  unite  with  water. 

Litharge 


and  the  Confiitution  of  the  Atmofphere-.      5 1 

Litharge  (which  is  a  ftate  that  fucceeds  the 
red  lead)  yielded  air  pretty  readily  -,  but  this 
alfo  was  fixed  air.  That  which  was  not  ab- 
forbed  by  water,  was  not  afFeded  by  nitrous 
air. 

Much  more  than  I  had  any  opportunity  of 
doing  remains  to  be  done,    in  order  to  afccr- 
tain  upon  what  circumftances,  in  thefe  prepa- 
lations  of  lead,  the  quality  of  the  air  which  they 
contain,    depends.      It  can  only  be  done   by 
fome  perfon  who  fliall  carefully  attend  to  the 
procelTes,   fo  as  to  fee  himfelf  in  what  manner 
they  are  made,  and  examine  them  in  all  their 
difierent  ftates.     I  very  much  wifhed  to  have 
attempted  fomething  of  this  kind  myfelf,   but 
I  found  it  impolTible  in  my  fituation.     How- 
ever, I  got  Dr.  Higgins  (who  furniflied  me 
with  feveral    preparations   that   I   could    not 
eafily  have  procured  elfewhere)  to  make  me  a 
quantity  of  red  lead,   that  I  might,    at  lead, 
try  it  when  frejl:)  made^   and   after   keeping  it 
fome  time  in   different    circumftances ;    and 
though,  by  the  help  of  this  preparation,   I  did 
not  do  the  thing  that  I  expe(5led,    I  did  fome- 
thing elfe,  much  more  confiderable. 

This  frefli  made  red  lead  had  a  yellowifli 
caft,   and  had  in  it  feveral  pieces  intirely  yel- 
low.    I  tried  it  immediately,  in  the  fame  man- 
E  2  .  ner 


52  Of  Dephlogifiicated  Air, 

ner  in  which  I  had  made  the  preceding  expe- 
riments, viz.  with  the  burning  lens  in  quick- 
filver,  and  found  that  it  yielded  very  little 
air,  and  with  great  difficulty ;  requiring  the 
application  of  a  very  intenfe  heat.  With  an 
equal  quantity  of  nitrous  air,  a  part  of  this 
air  was  reduced  to  one  half  of  its  original 
bulk,  and  2^  meafures  faturated  it.  The  air> 
therefore,  was  very  pure,  and  the  quantity 
that  it  yielded  being  very  fmall,  it  proved  to- 
be  in  a  very  favourable  Hate  for  afcertaining 
on  what  circumftances  its  acquiring  this  air 
depended. 

My  objed  no\v;  was  to  bring  this  frelh  made 
red  lead,  which  yielded  very  little  air,  to  that 
{late  in  which  other  red  lead  had  yielded  a  con- 
fiderable  quantity  •,  and  taking  it,  in  a  manner, 
for  granted,  in  confequence  of  the  reaibning  in- 
timated above,  that  red  lead  muft  imbibe 
from  the  atmofphere  fome  kind  of  acid,  in 
order  to  acquire  that  property,  I  took  three, 
feparate  half-ounces  of  this  fre{h  made  red 
lead,  and  moiftened  them  till  they  made  a 
kind  of  pafte,  with  each  of  the  three  mineral 
acids,  viz.  the  vitriolic,  the  marine,  and  the 
nitrous ;  and  as  I  intended  to  make  the  expe- 
riments in  a  gun-baiTel,  left  the  iron  Ihould 
be  too  much  affeded  by  them,  I  dried  all  thefe 
mixtures,  till  they  were  perfectly  hard  •,  then 
I  pulverizing 


and  the  Conjlitution  of  the  Atmofphere*     5  3 

pulverizing  them,  I  put  them  feparately  into 
my  gun-barrel,  filled  up  to  the  mouth  with 
pounded  flint,  which  I  had  found  by  trial  to 
yield  little,  or  no  air  when  treated  in  this  man- 
ner. I  had  alfo  found  that  no  quantity  of  air, 
fufEcient  to  make  an  experiment,  could  be  pro- 
cured from  an  equal  quantity  of  this  red  lead 
by  this  procefs. 

Thofe  portions  of  the  red  lead  which  had 
been  moiflened  with  the  vitriolic  and  marine 
acids  became  white  \  but  that  which  had  been 
moiftened  with  the  nitrous  acid,  had  acquired 
a  deep  brown  colour.  The  mixtures  with  the 
nitrous  and  marine  acids  dried  pretty  readily, 
but  that  with  the  vitriolic  acid  was  never 
perfectly  dry  ;  but  a  great  part  of  it  remained 
in  th^  form  of  a  foftilh  pafte. 

Neither  the  vitriolic  nor  the  marine  acid 
mixtures  gave  the  leaft  air  when  treated  in  the 
manner  above  mentioned  j  but  the  moment 
that  the  compofition  into  which  the  nitrous 
acid  had  entered  became  warm,  air  began  to 
be  produced  j  and  I  received  the  produce  in 
quickfilver.  About  one  ounce-meafure  was 
quite  tranfparent,  but  prefently  after  it  be- 
came exceedingly  red ;  and  being  fatisfied  that 
this  rednefs  was  owing  to  the  nitrous  acid  va** 
pour  having  diflblved  the  quickfilver,  I  took 
E  3  no 


54  Of  Dephhgtfiicated  Air, 

no  more  tluin  two  ounce-mcafures  in  this  way,' 
but  received  all  the  remainder,  which  was  al- 
moft  two  pints,  in  water.  Far  the  greateft 
part  of  this  was  fixed  air,  beiog  readily  ab- 
Ibrbcd  by  water,  and  extinguifhing  a  candle. 
There  was,  however,  a  confiderable  refidiium, 
in  which  the  flame  of  a  candle  burned  with  a 
crackling  noife,  from  which  I  concluded  that 
it  was  true  dephlogiflicated  air. 

In  this  experiment  I  had  moiftened  the  red 
lead  with  fpirit  of  nitre  feveral  times,  and  had 
tlried  it  again.  When  1  repeated  the  experiment, 
I  moifcencd  it  only  once  with  the  fame  acid, 
when  1  got  from  it  not  quite  a  pint  'of  air ; 
but  it  was  almoft  all  of  the  dephlogiflicated 
kind,  about  five  times  as  pure  as  common  air. 
N.  B.  All  the  acids  made  a  violent  effervef- 
ccnce  with  the  red  lead. 

Though  there  was  a  difference  in  the  refult 
of  thefe  experiments,  which  I  fhall  confider 
hereafter,  I  was  now  convinced  that  it  was  the 
nitrous  acid  wjiich  the  red  lead  had  acquired 
from  tlie  air,  and  which  had  enabled  it  to  yield 
the  dcphlogifticatcd  air,  agreeable  to  my  ori- 
ginal conjefture.  Finding  ajfo,  as  will  be  feen 
in  tlie  following  f^^tion,  that  the  fame  kind 
of  air  is  produced  by  moiflcning  witli  the  fpi- 
rit of  jiitre  any  kind  of  earth  that  is  free  from 
4  phlogillon, 


and  the  Confiitution  of  the  Atmofpherc.      ^^ 

phlogiflon,  and  treating  it  as  I  hc^d  done  the 
red  lead  in  the  laft-mentioned  experiment, 
there  remained  no  doubt  in  my  mind,  but  that 
atmofpherical  air,  or  the  thing  that  we  breathe, 
confifts  of  the  nitrous  acid  and  earthy  with  fo 
much  phlogiflon  as  is  neceflary  to  its  eladicity  •, 
and  likewife  fo  much  more  as  is  required  to 
bring  it  from  its  ftate  of  perfedl  purity  to  the 
mean  condition  in  which  we  find  it. 

For  this  purpofe  I  tried,  with  fuccefs,/<?w^rj 
of  zinc,  chalk,  quick-lime,  flacked-lime,  tobacco- 
pipe  clay,  flint  and  Mitfcovy  talck,  with  other  fimi- 
lar  fubflances,  which  will  be  found  to  com- 
prize all  the  kinds  of  earth  that  are  effentially 
diftindl  from  each  other,  according  to  their 
chymical  properties.  A  particular  account  of 
the  proccffes  with  thefe  fubflances,  I  rcferve 
for  another  feftion-,  thinking  it  fuflicient  in 
this  to  give  a  liiflory  of  the  difcovery,  and  a 
general  account  of  the  nature  of  this  dephlo- 
giflicated  air,  with  this  general  inference  from 
the  experiment,  refpefting  the  confiitution  of 
the  atmofphere. 

I  was  the  more  confirmed  in  my  idea  of  fpi- 
rit  of  nitre  and  earth  conflituting  refpirable 
air,  by  finding,  that  when  any  of  thele  mat- 
ters, on  which  I  had  tried  the  experiment,  had 
been  treated  in  the  manner  above  mentioned, 
E  4  and 


§6  Of  Dephlogifiicakd  Jir, 

and  they  had  thereby  yielded  all  the  air  that 
could  be  extraded  from  them  by  this  procefs  -, 
yet  v/hen  they  had  been  moiftened  with  frefh 
fpirit  of  nitre,  and  were  treated  in  the  fame 
manner  as  before,  they  would  yield  as  much 
dephlogifticated  air  as  at  the  firft.  This  may 
be  repeated  till  all  the  earthy  matter  be  ex- 
haufted.  It  will  be  fufficiejit  to  recite  one  or 
two  fadls  of  this  kind  from  iny  regifter. 

April  1 8,  I  took  the  remains  of  the  frelli 
made  red  lead,  out  of  which  a  great  quantity 
of  dephlogifticated  air  had  been  extradled, 
?.nd  moiftening  about  three  quarters  of  an 
ounce  of  it  a  fecond  time  with  Ij^irit  of  nitre, 
I  got  from  it  about  two  pints  of  air,  ail  of 
which  was  nearly  fix  times  as  pure  as  com- 
mon air.  This  air  was  generated  very  faft, 
and  the  glafs  tube  through  which  it  was  tranf- 
mitted  was  filled  with  red  fumes ;  the  nitrous 
acid,  I  fuppofe,  prevailing  in  the  compofition 
of  the  air,  but  being  abforbed  by  the  wa^er 
in  which  it  was  afterwards  received. 

In  this,  and  many  other  procefTes,  my  reader 
will  find  a  great  variety  [n  the  purity  of  the 
air  procured  from  the  fame  fubftances.  But 
this  will  not  be  wondered  at,  if  it  be  confidered 
that  a  fmail  quantity  of  phlogiftic  matter,  ac- 
cidentally mixing  with  the  ingredients  for  the 

compofition 


md  the  Confiitution  of  the  At  mo ff here.       57 

compofition  of  this  air,  depraves  it.  It  will 
alfo  be  unavoidably  depraved,  in  fome  mea- 
fure,  if  the  experiment  be  made  in  a  gun-barrel, 
which  I  commonly  made  ufe  of,  when,  as  was 
generally  the  cafe,  it  was  luffif  iently  exadl  for 
my  purpofe,  on  account  of  its  being  the  eafieft, 
3m^  in  many  refpeds,  the  moil  commodious 
prog^fs. 

The  reafon  of  this  is,  that  if  the  produce 
of  air  be  not  very  rapid,  there  will  be  time  for 
the  phloglfton  to  be  difengaged  from  the  iron  it- 
felf,  and  to  mix  with  the  air.  Accordingly  I 
have  feldom  failed  to  find,  that  when  I  endea- 
voured to  get  all  the  air  I  polTibly  could  from 
any  quantity  of  materials,  and  received  the 
produce  at  different  times  (as  for  miy  fatis- 
fadtion  I  generally  did)  the  laft  was  inferior 
in  purity  to  that  which  came  firfc.  Not  un- 
frequently  it  was  phlogifticated  air  ;  that  is, 
air  fo  charged  with  phlogiiton,  as  to  be  per- 
fecSlly  jioxious  ;  and  fometimes,  as  the  reader 
will  find  in  the  next  fedlion,  it  was  even  ni- 
trous air. 

On  the  fame  acx:ount  it  frequently  happen^d^ 
that  when  I  ufed  a  confidcrable  degree  of  heat, 
the  red  lead  whicli  I  ufed  in  thefe  experi- 
ments would  be  changed  into  real  lead,  from. 

which 


58  Of  Bephlogijikated  Ah\ 

which  it  was  often  very  difficult  to  get  the 
gun-barrel  perfedlly  clear. 

A  good  deal  will  alfo  depend  upon  the  in- 
gredients which  have  been  ufed  in  the  gun- 
barrel  in  preceding  experiments :  for  it  is  not 
eafy  to  get  fuch  an  inftrument  perfedily  clean 
from  all  the  matters  that  have  been  put  into 
it :  and  though  it  may  be  prefumed,  in  gene- 
ral, that  every  kind  of  air  will  be  expelled 
from  fuch  ingredients  by  making  the  tube  red- 
hot  i  yet  matters  containing  much  phlogifton, 
as  charcoal,  &c.  will  not  part  with  it  in  con- 
fequence  of  the  application  of  heat,  unlefs 
there  be  at  hand  fome  other  fubftance  with 
which  it  may  combine.  Though,  therefore, 
a  gun-barrel,  containing  fuch  fmall  pieces  of 
charcoal  as  cannot  be  eafily  wiped  out  of  it, 
be  kept  a  long  time  in  a  red  heat,  and  even 
with  its  mouth  open  •,  yet  if  it  be  of  a  confi- 
derable  length,  fom.e  part  of  the  charcoal  may 
remain  unconfumed,  and  the  effe6l  of  it  will 
be  found  in  the  fubfequent  experiment.  Of 
this  I  had  the  following  very^fatisfaclory 
proof. 

Being  defirous  to  Hiew  fome  of  my  friends 
the  a6luai  produftion  of  dephlogifcicated  air, 
and  having  no  other  apparatus  at  hand,  I  had 
recourfe  to  my  gun-barrel ;  but  apprized  them, 
that   having  ufcd  it  the  day  before  to  get  air 

from 


md  the  ConftituUon  of  the  Atmofphere,     59 

from  charcoal,  with  which  it  had  been  filled 
for  that  purpofe,  though  I  had  taken  all  the 
pains  I  could  to  get  it  all  out,  yet  fo  much 
would  probably  remain,  that  I  could  not  de- 
pend on  the  air  I  Ihould  get  from  it  being 
dcphlogifticated ;  but  that  it  would  probably 
be  of  an  inferior  quality,  and  perhaps  even 
nitrous  air.  Accordingly,  having  put  into  it 
a  mixture  of  fpirit  of  nitre  and  red  lead  (be- 
ing part  of  a  quantity  which  I  had  often  ufed 
before  for  the  fame  purpofe)  dried,  and 
pounded,  I  put  it  into  the  fire,  and  received 
the  air  in  water. 

The  firft  produce,  which  v/as  about  a  pint, 
was  fo  far  nitrous,  that  two  meafures  of  com- 
mon air,  and  one  of  this,  occupied  the  fpace 
of  little  more  than  two  meafures ;  that  is,  it 
was  almoll  as  ftrongly  nitrous  as  that  which 
is  produced  by  the  folution  of  metals  in  fpi- 
rit of  nitre.  The  fecond  pint  was  very  little 
different  from  common  air,  and  the  laft  pro- 
duce was  better  flill,  being  more  than  twice 
as  good  as  common  air.  If,  therefore,  any 
perfon  fhall  propofe  to  make  dephlogiflicated 
air,  in  large  quantities,  he  fhould  have  an 
apparatus  appropriated  to  that  purpofe;  and 
the-greateft  care  fhould  be  taken  to  keep  the 
inftruments  as  clear  as  pofTible  from  all  phlo- 
giftic  matter,  which  is  the  very  bane  of  pu- 
rity 


'€o  Of  Dephlogiflicated  Jlr, 

thy   with  relpeft  to  air,  they  being  cxadly 
][>Ius  and  minus  to  each  other. 

The  hypothecs  maintained  in  this  fecbion, 
viz.  that  atmofpherical  air  confifts  of  the  ni- 
trons acid  and  earth,  fuits  exceedingly  well 
with  the  fads  relating  to  the  prodii6lion  of 
nitre ;  for  it  is  never  generated  but  in  the  open 
air,  and  by  expofing  to  it  fuch  kinds  of  earth 
as  are  known  to  have  an  affinity  with  the  ni-^ 
trous  acid;  fo  that  by  their  union  common 
jiitre  may  be  formed. 

Hitherto  it  has  been  fuppofed  by  chymifls, 
that  this  nitrous  acid,  by  which  common  nitre 
is  formed,  exifls  in  the  atmofphere  as  an  extra- 
neous fubfiance^  like  water,  and  a  variety  of 
other  fubflances,  which  float  in  it,  in  the  form 
of  effluvia ;  but  fince  there  is  no  place  in  which 
nitre  may  not  be  made,  it  may,  I  think,  with 
more  probability  be  fuppofed,  according  to 
my  hypothefis,  that  nitre  is  formed  by  a  real 
decompojition  of  the  air  itfelf^  the  hafe.s  that  are 
prefented  to  it  having,  in  fuch  circumftances, 
a  nearer  affinity  with  the  fpirit  of  nitre  than 
that  kind  of  earth  with  which  it  is  united  in 
the  atmofpliere. 

My  theory  alfo  fupplies  an  eafy  folution  of 
what  has  always  been  a  great  difficulty  with 
Qhymifts,    with   refped   to    the  detonatioji   of 

nitre. 


and  the  Cojiftitutign  of  the  ^tmof-phere^     6t 

nitre.  The  queftion  Is,  what  becomes  of  the 
nitrous  acid  in  this  cafe  ?  The  general,  J  be- 
lieve the  univerfai,  opinion  now  is,  that  it  is 
dejiroyed ;  that  is,  that  the  acid  is  properly  de- 
compofed,  and  refolved  into  its  original  ele- 
ments, which  Stahl  fuppofed  to  be  earth  and 
water.  On  the  other  hand,  I  fiippofe  that, 
though  the  common  properties  of  the  acid,  as 
combined  with  v/ater,  difappear,  it  is  only  in 
confequence  of  its  combination  with  fomc 
earthy  or  inflammable  matter,  with  which  it 
forms  fome  of  the  many  fpecies  of  air,  into  the 
compofition  of  which  this  wonderful  acid  en- 
ters. It  m.ay  be  common  air,  it  may  be  de- 
phlogifticated  air,  or  it  may  be  nitrous  air,  or 
fome  of  the  other  kinds,  of  which  an  account 
will  be  given  in  a  fubfequent  fedtion.  That  it 
Ihould  really  be  the  nitrous  acid,  though  fo 
much  difguifed  by  its  union  with  earthy,  or 
other  matters,  will  not  appear  extraordinary 
to  any  perfon  who  fhall  confider  how  little  the 
acid  of  Vitriol  is  apparent  in  common  fui- 
phur. 

-  With  refpeft  to  mercurius  cakinatus,  and 
red  leady  their  red  colour  favours  the  fup- 
pofition  of  their  having  extraded  fpirit  of  nitre 
from  the  air. 


An 


j62       An  Account  offome  Procejfes  for  the 


SECTION     IV. 

A  more  particular  Account  of  fomc  Proceffes  for 
the  Production  of  Dephlogijiicated  Air, 

I  cannot  promife  thofe  of  my  .reader^,  whofe 
objedt  is  nothing  more  than  general  informationy 
much  pleafiire  from  the  perufai  of  this  fedlion, 
as  it  will  confift,  for  the  mod  part,  of  a  dry- 
detail  of  proceiTes,  for  procuring  dephlogifti- 
cated  air;  but  as  they  all  appeared  neceflfary, 
in  my  invefiiigation  of  the  fubjed,  I  doubt  not 
but  an  attention  to  them  will  be  of  nfe  to  fuch 
as  are  difpofed  to  purfue  the  inquiry  themfelves. 
I  might  have  contented  myfelf  with  giving  a 
general  idea  of  the  refult  of  fuch  experiments  ; 
but  that  would  have  been  to  mix  my  own  cpi- 
nions  with/^t?j,  in  fuch  a  manner  that  the  reader 
would  not  have  been  able  to  feparate  them.  At 
prefent,  if  I  Hiould  be  jniftaken  in  any  of  my 
opinions,  the  reader,  having  before  him  all  the 
facls  on  which  thofe  opinions  were  grounded, 
will  be  able  to  redtify  the  miilake,  and  pre- 
vent the  error  from  fpreading. 

Having  {^tvi   fufficient   reafon   to  conclude 
that  refpirable  air  confiils  of  nitrous  acid  and 
earth,  my  objed,   in  all  this  courfe  of  experi- 
ments. 


Produ5fion  of  Bephlogtfticated  Air.    ■     6^ 

ments,  was  fimply  to  find  what  kind  of  earth 
was  moll  proper  for  this  purpofe,  or  which  had 
the  moft  aptnefs  to  form  this  peculiar  union 
with  the  nitrous  acid.  Upon  the  whole,  I 
think  it  will  appear  that  the  metallic  earths,  if 
they  be  free  from  phlogifton,  are  the  moft 
proper,  and  next  to  them  the  calcareous  earths  -, 
but  that  a  very  great  difference  in  the  produc- 
tion of  this  kind  of  air  depends  upon  a  variety 
of  circumftances  in  which  the  experiments  are 
made. 

I  have  obferved  that  red  lead,  without  any 
addition,  yields  dephlogiilicated  air  by  heat. 
To  give  fome  idea  of  the  differences  in  the  re- 
fults,  from  what  is,  to  appearance,  the  fame 
preparation,  and  of  the  confequence  of  adding 
fpirit  of  nitre  to  the  red  lead,  I  mufl  inform 
my  reader,  that  having  weighed  two  half- 
ounces  of  red  lead,  taken  from  the  fame  par- 
cel, I  put  one  of  them,  without  any  addition, 
into  the  gun-barrel,  and  with  a  very  brif]*:  fire 
(which  is  generally  a  confiderable  advantage  for 
the  production  of  air)  I  got  no  more  than 
three  ounce-meafures,  and  it  was  vtry  little 
better  than  common  air. 

The  fecond  half-ounce  T  moiftened  with  a 
very  diluted  fpirit  of  nitre ;  and  when  it  was 
dried  and  pounded,  I  put  it  into  the  fame  gun- 
barrel  i 


64    yin  Account  of  fome  PyGceJfes  for  the 

barrel  •,  and^  in  the  fame  circuinftances  with 
the  former,  t  got  from  it  about  three  pints  of 
air,  the  firft  part  of  which  was  fo  far  dephlo- 
giilicated,  that  two  meafures  of  it,  and  five 
ef  nitrous  air,  occupied  the  fpace  of  two  mea- 
fures only  ;  of  the  fecond  quantity,  two  mea- 
fures were  not  increafe4  by  the  addition  of 
feven  meafures  of  nitrous  ^ir.  This  was  thd 
pureft  air  that  I  had  then  {t^vi.  *The  laft  pro- 
duce was  almoft  all  pure  fixed  air,  being  not 
at  all  affedled  by  nitrous  air.  extinguifhing  a 
candle,  and  precipitating  lime  in  lime-water. 
It  was,  indeed^  a  little  of  a  nitrous  nature  •, 
for  it  diminifhed  common  air  in  a  fmall  degree, 
an  efixsd  which  I  attribute  to  the  phlogifton 
comins  from  the  iron. 


o 


A  remarkable  difference  in  the  quantity  of 
the  produce  of  this  kind  of  air,  as  I  hinted 
juft  now  (and  as  I  have  obferved  in  a  former 
publication,  in  the  produce  of  inflammable  air) 
depends  upon  the  fuddennefs  with  v/hich  the 
fame  degree  of  heat  is  applied.  The  follow- 
ing muft  be  reckoned  a  remarkable  fa6t  of  this 
kind,  and  it  was  made  with  as  much  care  as 
I  could  poffibly  apply.  From  an  ounce  of 
red  lead,  by  a  fudden  and  brifk  heat,  I  got 
above  two  quarts  of  air,  a  great  part  of  which 
was  fixed  air,  and  the  reft  was  about  twice  as 
good  as  common  air  ^   and  immediately  after, 

putting 


PrcdtiSfion  of  Dephlogifikated  Air.  ■       6^ 

DUtting  the  very  fame  quantity  of  the  fame  par- 
cel of  red  lead  into  the  fame  gun-barrel,  by 
heat  very Jlowly  applied,  but  urged  vehemently 
at  laft,  I  got  no  more  than  two  ounce-meafures 
of  air,  a  great  part  of  which  was  fixed  air,  and 
the  reft  not  fo  good  as  common  air. 

I  had  been  told  that  red  lead  acquired  addi- 
tional weight  by  being  often  wailied  in  water. 
In  order  to  try  whether  this  was  the  fad:,  and 
alfo  whether  the  red  lead  acquired  its  property 
of  yielding  dephlcgifticated  air  by  this  means, 
I  wallied  a  quantity  of  that  parcel  which  I  had 
got  frefh-made,  four  times  in  diftilled  water, 
evaporating  it  to  drynefs  each  time ;  but  no 
more  air  came  from  it  than  when  it  had  not  been 
Wetted,  neither  was  it  at  all  increafed  in  weight 
by  this  means. 

1  have  obferved  that,  in  general,  thofe  fub- 
ftances  which,  without  containing  phlogifton^ 
yield  fixed  air  with  heat,  or  by  the  addition  of 
an  acid,  when  mixed  with  fpirit  of  nitre,  and 
treated  as  above,  yield  more  or  lefs  of  dephlo- 
gifticated  air ;  but  generally  with  a  confider- 
able  mixture  of  fixed  air,  though  I  profefs  not 
to  know  upon  v/hat  circumftance  it  is  that  the 
proportion  of  thefe  two  kinds  of  air,  produced 
from  thefe  fubftances,  depends, 

F  With 


66      An  Account  of  feme  Proceffcs  for  the 

With  a  very  fmall  degree  of  heat,  white  lead, 
■without  any  addition,  yields  a  very  great  qnan-- 
tity  of  pure  fixed  air.  Having  moiftened 
about  an  ounce-meafure  of  it  with  fpirit  of 
nitre,  and  having  put  it  into  a  glafs-veffel,  with 
a  ground-flopple  and  tube,  I  extrafted  from 
it,  at  five  different  times,  five  pints  of  air,  each 
of  which  I  examined  feparately,  as  ufual,  and 
the  refults  were  as  follows. 

Of  the  firft  quantity,  about  4  'y  or  y-§  was 
abforbed  by  water,  and  the  remainder  neither 
affe6led  common  air,  nor  was  affe6led  by  ni- 
trous air,  fo  that  it  was  pure  fixed  air ;  and 
confidering  the  quantity  that  would  be  necefla- 
rily  abforbed  by  the  water  in  v/hich  it  was 
received,  before  I  made  any  trial  of  the  pro- 
perties of  it,  it  may  perhaps  be  deemed  to 
have  been  as  free  from  any  foreign  mixture  as 
any  that  was  ever  procured.  Of  the  fecond 
quantity,  abo\it  twice  as  much  was  left  un- 
abforbed  by  water,  and  the  refiduum  appeared 
to  be  dephlogifticated ;  for  it  took,  about  an 
equal  meafure  of  nitrous  air  to  faturate  it ; 
and  confequently  it  was  nearly  twice  as  good  as 
common  air.  Of  the  third  quantity,  as  little 
remained  unabforbed  by  water  as  of  the  firft  -, 
but  the  refiduum  was  as  pure  as  that  of  the 
fecond  quantity.  Of  the  fourth  quantity,  one- 
fourth  remained  unabforbed  by  water,  and  it 

took 


Trodu^l'ion  of  Dephlogijiicated  Air..       Sy 

took  I  -I-  of  nitrons  air  to  faturate  it.  Of  the 
fifth  pint,  one-haif  remained  unabforbed,  and 
it  took  more  than  two  equal  meafures  of  ni- 
trous air  to  faturate  it ;  fo  that  it  was  nearly 
four  times  as  pure  as  common  air.  Laftiy,  a 
lingle  ounce-meafure,  that  came  very  flow^ly 
after  the  five  pints,  was  no  part  of  it  abforbed 
by  water,  and  it  took  i  ~  of  nitrous  air  to  fa- 
turate it,  being  about  three  times  as  pure  as 
common  air. 

From  a  quantity  of  litharge^  moiflened  with 
fpirit  of  nitre,  and  dried,  I  got,  in  a  gun- 
barrei,  a  great  quantity  of  air  -,  about  half  of 
which  was  fixed  air,  precipitating  lime  in  lime- 
water,  and  the  other  halt  was  ftrongly  nitrous ; 
but  with  a  burning  lens,  in  quickfilver,  I  got 
a  very  pure  dephlogiflicated  air  from  this  mix- 
ture. 

To  go  through  the  different  ftates  of  lead 
in  this  manner,  I  took  half  an  ounce  of  lead- 
ore.,  and  having  faturated  it  with  fpirit  of  nitre, 
1  dried  it  as  before,  put  it  into  a  gun-barrel, 
filled  up  to  the  mouth  with  pounded  flint,  and 
placed  veflels  filled  with  water  to  receive  the 
air.  The  confequencc  was,  that  as  foon  as 
this  mixture  began  to  be  warm,  air  was  gene- 
rated very  fall,  infomuch  that,  being  rather 
alarmed,  I  flood  on  one  fide  j  when  prefently 
F  2  there 


6S       An  Account  of  fo?ne  Procejfes  for  the 

there  was  a  violent  and  loud  explofion,  by 
which  all  the  contents  of  the  gun-barrel  were 
driven  out  with  great  force,  dafhing  to  pieces 
the  veffels  that  were  placed  to  receive  the  air, 
and  difperfing  the  fragments  all  over  the  room ; 
fo  thart  all  the  air  which  I  had  collc(5led,  and 
which  was  about  a  pint,  was  loft.  The  mix- 
ture, before  it  was  put  into  the  gun-barrel,  was 
betwixt  white  and  yellow,  and  had  very  much 
the  fmell  of  brimftone  ;  fo  that  it  was  in  fa6b 
a  compofition  fimilar  to  gun-powder. 

Being  defirous  to  know  what  kind  of  air  I 
had  got  by  this  procefs,  I  put  the  fame  mate- 
rials into  a  glafs-phial,  and  putting  it  into  a 
crucible  with  fand,  difpofed  the  apparatus  for 
receiving  the  air  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  the  ex- 
plofion could  not  affecl  it.  It  did  explode  as 
before,  but  the  air  was  preferved,  and  appeared 
to  be  very  ftrong  nitrous  air,  almaft  as  much, 
fo  as  that  whicii  is  procured  by  the  Iblution  of 
m^etals. 

From  the  grey  calx  of  lead^  treated  in  the 
fame  manner,  I  got  about  a  pint  of  air,  half 
of  which,  being  readily  abforbed  by  water,  I 
take  for  granted,  was  fixed  air  \  but  the  re- 
mainder was  ftrongly  nitrous.  Had  I  not 
wafhed  it  a  good  deal  in  water,  it  would  pro- 
I  bably 


Produoiion  of  Dephlogijluated  Air.        6g 

bably  have  been  as  ftrong  as  that  which  is  pro- 
cured from  metals. 

•< 
The  pureft  air  that  I  ever  procured  was  from 
powers  of  zinc^  moiftened,  as  in  the  other  pro- 
ceffes,  with  fpirit  of  nitre,  and  put  into  a  glafs- 
phial,  witli  a  ground-fliopple  and  tube.  At 
firft  I  defpaired  of  getting  any  air  at  all 
from  the  procefs;  but  at  length  it  came  in  a 
prodigious  torrent,  and  was  fo  cloudy,,  that 
the  burfting  of  every  bubble,  after  it  had  paf- 
fed  through  the  water,  refembled  the  burfting 
of  a  bag  of  flour.  The  tube  through  which  it 
was  tranfmitted  was  exceedingly  red,  and  in 
fome  degree,  the  infide  of  the  receiver  too,  as 
might  be  perceived  amidft  the  thick  cloud  that 
filled  it.  This  cloiidinefs  of  the  newly-gene- 
rated air,  I  have  often  perceived  in  the  pro- 
cefs  with  red-lead,  but  never  in  fo  great  a  de- 
gree as  in  this  cafe. 

The  quantity  of  3ir  procured  was  nearly 
three  pints,  from  about  half  an  ounce-meafure 
of  the  flowers  of  zinc  :  and  it  was  fo  hisrhlv 
dephlogifticated,  that  it  took  three  times  its 
bulk  of  nicrous  air  before  its  dimenfions  were 
increafed.  When  it  had  got  only  twice  its 
bulk  of  nitrous  air,  it  was  reduced  to  lefs  xhan 
one-fifth  of  its  original  quantity.  The  laft 
produce  came  very  flowly,  and  v/as  not  quite 
F   3  ig 


7©       An  Account  tf  Jome  Procejfes  for  the 

fo  pure.  The  flowers  of  zinc,  which  I  ufed  in 
this  experiment,  1  had  from  Dr.  Higgins. 
They  formed  a  very  hard  and  brittle  fuhllance, 
when  mixed  with  fpirit  of  nitre,  and  dried. 
After  the  procefs  it  fwelled,  and  broke  the 
phial  into  many  pieces. 

Belides  thefe,  I  tried  no  earth  of  any  metal 
except  the  ruft  of  iron  and  white  arfenic,  both  of 
which,  when  treated  in  the  manner  above  men- 
tioned, and  put  into  a  gun-barrel,  yielded  no- 
thing but  fixed  or  nitrous  air  ^  fo  that  thefe  calces 
undoubtedly  contained  much  phlogiftpn,  and 
the  flowers  of  zinc,  perhaps,  none  at  all. 

From  confiderably  lefs  than  half  an  ounce 
of  rufi  of  iron,  moiftened  with  fpirit  of  nitre, 
and  dried,  I  got  about  a  quart  of  air,  about 
one-third  of  which  was  fixed  air,  precipitating 
lime  in  lime-water,  &c.  and  the  remainder  was 
nitrous  j  fo  that  two  meafures  of  common  air 
and  one  of  this,  occupied  the  fpace  of  lefs  than 
two  meafures. 

The  ivhite  arfenic  I  procured  from  Dr. 
Higgins,  who  affured  me  that  it  contained  the 
leaft  phlogifton  pofTible.  I  moiftened  about 
an  ounce-meafure  of  it  with  fpirit  of  nitre, 
and  putting  it  into  a  phial  with  a  ground- 
ftopple  and  tube,  with  no  great  degree  of  heat, 

I  extrafled 


ProduElion  of  Dephlogijiicated  Air.        7 1 

I  extraded  from  it  four  ounce-meafures  of  air, 
and  it  was  as  ftrongly  nitrous  as  any  that  I  had 
ever  procured  from  metals.  I  increafed  the 
heat  till  the  phial  was  melted,  without  getting 
any  more  air.  The  tube  was  exceedingly  red 
during  the  tranfmiifion  of  the  air  through  it. 

Next,  to  the  metallic  earths  of  lead  and 
zinc,  I  found  the  calcareous  earths  the  moil 
proper  for  the  production  of  dephlogifticated 
air;  but  I  had  no  opportunity  of  trying  any 
great  variety  of  them.  The  belt  that  I  did 
try  was  chalk.  Having  faturated  half  an  ounce 
of  it  with  diluted  fpirit  of  nitre,  and  dried  it, 
I  got  from  it,  in  a  gun-barrel,  more  than  a 
pint  of  air,  which  was  highly  dephlogifticated. 
I  began  to  receive  this  produce  in  quickfdver, 
the  confequence  of  which  was,  that  the  nitrous 
acid,  coming  over  in  the  form  of  vapour,  dif- 
folved  the  quickfilver,  and  made  nitrous  air ; 
but  a  cruft  being  formed  upon  the  furface  of 
it»  prevented  the  lolution  of  more,  and  the  air 
continued  red  a  long  time, 

From  another  ounee-meafure  of  chalk,  treat- 
ed in  the  fame  manner,  I  got  about  a  quart  of 
air.  What  I  took  firft  was  confiderably  ni- 
trous, two  meafures  of  common  air  and  one  of 
this,  occupying  the  fpace  of  2  4-  meafures^ 
The  fecond  pint  was  dephlogifticated-,  fa  that 
F  4  two 


72       An  Account  of  fome  Procejfes  for  the 

two  meafures  of  it,  and  five  of  nitrous  air, 
occupied  the  fpace  of  two  meafures.  The 
iaft  was  lefs  dephlogifticatedj  being  about  one- 
hajf  better  than  common  air.  At  this  time 
the  air  was  generated  with  prodigious  rapi- 
dity ;  the  glafs-tube  through  which  it  was 
tranfmitted  was  exceedingly  red  ;  and  when, 
in  changing  the  velTels,  fome  of  the.  vapour 
efcaped  into  the  air,  it  had  the  reddeft  appear- 
ance of  any  thing  that  I  had  ever  {ttn  of  the 
kind. 

Having  faturated  half  an  ounce  of  exceed- 
ingly good  quick-lime  with  diluted  fpirit  of 
nitre,  dried  it,  and  put  it  intb  a  gun-barrel, - 
I  got  from  it  about  a  pint  and  half  of  air, 
the  firft  part  of  which  was  fo  far  dephlogifli- 
cated,  that  it  required  an  equal  meafure  of  ni- 
trous air  to  faturate  it.  The  fecond  was  no 
better  than  common  air,  and  the  third  was  equal 
to  the  firft.  In  this  procefs  the  air  was  pro- 
duced very  irregularly,  fometimes  coming  in 
great  quantities,  and  at  other  times  the  water 
WQuld  rufh  back  into  the  ti|be. 

I  repeated  the  experiment  on  quick-lime, 
in  a  glafs-phial  and  tube,  when  the  whole  quan- 
tity was  fo  pure,  that  it  required  twice  its  bulk 
of  nitrous  air  to  faturate  it.  The  produce  of 
air,  in  diis  experiment,  was  as  irregular  as  in 

the 


Trodiifmn  ef  Dephlo^iftiadted  Air,        73 

the  preceding.  I  could  have  wiihed  to  have 
treated  the  ftone  from  which  that  lime  was 
jnade  in  the  fan:e  nianner,  but  I  had  no  op- 
portunity. 

From  lime  fallen  in  air,  moiftened  with  fpi- 
rit  of  nitre,  and  treated  as  above,  in  a  gun- 
barrel,  I  got  near  a  pint  of  air,  the  greateft 
part  of  which  came  very  rapidly,  the  fire  being 
urged  verj''  much ;  and  it  was  fo  far  dephlo- 
giilicated,  that  two  meafures  of  it  required  five 
mealures  of  nitrous  air  to  faturate  it.  The 
iail  produce  came  very  flowly,  and  it  v/as  fo 
far  nitrous,  that  two  m.eafures  of  common  air, 
and  one  of  it,  occupied  the  fpace  of  lefs  than 
two  meafures  •,  that  is,  it  was  very  nearly  per- 
fectly nitrous. 

I  alfo  molftened  with  fpirit  of  nitre  a  quan- 
tity of  lime  that  bad  been  plunged  in  ijoater^  in 
order  to  make  lime-v/ater,  and  got  air  from  it 
in  a  gun-barrel,  very  irregularly,  as  before  : 
one  part  of  this  air,  which  came  almoit  at  once, 
was  dephlogifticated,  fo  that  two  meafures  of 
this,  and  five  of  nitrous  air  occupied  the  fpace 
of  2  ^  meafures. 

From  tv/o  ounce-meafures  of  pounded  marhle, 
treated  as  above,  in  a  gun-barrel,  1  got  about 
tliree  quarts  of  air ;    but  a  very  great  propor- 
tion 


74       ^«  Account  offome  Procejfes  for  the 

tion  of  it  was  fixed  air,  efpecially  the  laft  pro- 
duce, which  indeed  was  very  little  elle ;  but 
towards  the  beginning  of  the  procefs,  the  re- 
fiduum  was  a  little  better  than  common  air. 

Repeating  this  experiment  on  marble,  in  a 
glafs-phial  with  a  ground-ilopple  and  tube,  I 
extraded  from  an  ounce-meafurc  of  it  about 
two  pints  of  air,  the  greateft  part  of  which 
was  fo  highly  dephlogifticated,  that  it  took 
nearly  three  equal  quantities  of  nitrous  air  to 
faturate  it.  Even  the  laft  produce  was  hardly 
to  be  diftinguilhed  from  the  firft.  What  re- 
mained in  the  phial  after  the  experiment  fweiled 
and  broke  it. 

From  magnefta,  both  calcined  and  uncalcined, 
I  got,  in  a  gun-barrel,  a  confiderable  quantity 
of  air.  From  the  calcined  magnefia  it  was  not 
much  better  than  common  air  ;  from  the  un-. 
calcined  it  was  more  than  twice  as  good.  But 
very  probably  this  difference  may  not  be  in- 
variable. 

I  think  it  very  probable  that  dephlogifti- 
cated air  may  be  procured  from  any  kind  of 
earth  with  which  the  fpirit  of  nitre  will  unite ; 
efpecially  if  it  will  likewife  admit  of  a  com- 
bination with  fixed  air  or  alkaline  air,  fo  that 
the  fpirit  of  nitre  mull  expel  the  fixed  air  or 

alt 


Produ£lion  of  Dephlogijiicated  Air.        75 

alkaline  air,  before  it  can  incorporate  with 
it.  Of  fubftances  of  thefe  kinds,  befides  thofe 
above  mentioned,   I  tried  fait  of  tartar    and 

*woQd-afhcs, 

From  half  an  ounce  oifalt  of  tartar^  moiften- 
cd  with  fmoking  fpirit  of  nitre,  and  dried,  I 
got,  in  a  gun-barrel,  about  half  a  pint  of  air, 
the  greateft  part  of  which  was  fixed  air,  with 
a  refiduum  lo  far  dephlogifticated,  as  to  be 
about  three  times  as  good  as  common  air.  The 
produce  of  air,  in  this  experiment,  was  not 
very  rapid,  and  it  continued  a  long  time. 
More  would  have  been  colleded;  but  that 
part  of  it  efcaped  at  the  luting. 

I  moiftened  about  half  an  ounce-meafure 
of  afhes  of  wood,  carefully  burned,  firft  in  an 
iron-ladle,  and  then  in  a  crucible,  with  ftrong 
fmoking  fpirit  of  nitre ;  and,  in  a  gun-barrel, 
I  got  from  it  about  three  pints  of  air,  part  of 
v/hich  was  fixed,  precipitating  lime  in  lime- 
water,  &c.  and  the  reft  was  lb  pure,  that  it 
abforbed  nearly  three  times  its  bulk  of  nitrous 
air.  The  laft  produce  was  very  flow,  and  only 
about  twice  as  sood  as  common  air. 


o" 


From  an  ounce-meafure  of  aflies  of  pit-coal, 
burned  with  all  poflible  care,  and  treated  in 
the  fame  manner  as  above,   I  got  about  three 

quarts 


76       An  Account  of  foine  Procejfes  for  the 

quarts  of  air,  one-third  of  which  was  fixed 
air,  precipitating  lime  in  lime-water ;  but  the 
refiduum  was  ftrongly  nitrous,  efpecially  at  the 
laft.  It  is  obfervable  enough,  from  their  dark 
colour  (of  which  no  burning,  I  believe,  will 
diveil  them)  that,  in  general,  aflies  of  pit-coal 
contain  much  more  phlogifton  than  allies  of 
wood. 

N.  B.  In  this,  and  other  procefles,  it  will 
be  obferved,  that  fixed  air  was  procured  from 
fubllances,  which  can  hardly  be  thought  to 
have  contained  it  before  :  which  affords  a  pre- 
fumption,  that  that  it  is  not  an  3.cidfui  gene- 
ris, but  a  modification  of  the  nitrous  acid. 

Clay  is  a  fubftance  altogether  different  from 
calcareous  earth,  and  is  not  fuppofed,  I  be- 
lieve, to  contain  any  air  at  all.  Of  that  fpe- 
cies  of  it,  which  is  called  tobacco-pipe-clay^  and 
which,  I  believe,  is  the  pureft  of  all,  I  got 
from  Dr.  Higgins,  a  quantity  in  powder ;  arjd 
moiftening  it  with  fpirit  of  nitre,  I  obferved 
that  no  more  heat  or  effervefcence  was  pro- 
duced than  the  mixing  of  it  with  water  would 
have  occafioned. 

Putting  it,  when  dry,  into  a  gun-barrel,  I 
extracted  from  it,   by  a  ftrong  heat,  about  two 
ounce-meafures  of  air,  which  being  pretty  rea- 
dily 


Produ^ion  of  Bephlogifticated  Air'.       yy 

dily  abforbed  by  water,  neither  affecling  com- 
mon air,  nor  being  afFefted  by  nitrous  air,  and 
extinguijliing  a  candle,  I  concluded  to  be  fixed 
air.  Repeating  the  experiment,  I  got  the  fame 
produce,  only  obferving,  that  the  fixed  air 
made  lime-water  turbid,  the  rnoft  certain  teft, 

1  believe,  of  the  prefence  of  fixed  air  •,  and  the 
lafc  produce  was  highly  nitrous.  Imagining 
that  this  produce  might  have  come  from  the 
phlogiflon  of  the  iron,  I  refolved  to  repeat  the 
experiment  once  more,  with  all  pofiible  care, 
in  a  glafs-phialj  with  a  ground-ftopple  and 
tube. 

I  did  fo,  and  took  the  produce  at  eight  dif- 
ferent times.  The  firll  and  fecond  quantities 
had  a  good  deal  of  fixed  air  in  them  ;  the  refi- 
duum  of  the  firfl  was  a  little  diminifhed  by' 
nitrous  air,  almofl  as  much  as  air  in  which 
a  candle  had  burned  out,  which  might  be  ow- 
ing, in  part,  to  the  common  air  contained  in 
the  phial.  The  refiduum  of  the  fecond  quan- 
tity, on  the  other  hand,  diminifhed  common 
air  a  little  ;  fo  that  two  meafures  of  common 
air,    and  one  of  this,  occupied  the  fpace  of 

2  i  meafures.  Of  the  third  quantity,  two  mea- 
fures required  three  rneafures  of  nitrous  air  to 
faturate  it ;  fo  that  it  v/as  pretty  highly  de- 
phlogifticated.     Of  the  fourth,  two  meakires, 

and 


73       An  Accdunt  of  fome  Procejfes  for  the 

and  three  of  nitrous  air,  occupied  the  Ipace  of 
I  ^  meafures.  The  fifth  was  of  the  fame  qua- 
lity with  the  third.  The  fixth  required  twice 
its  quantity  of  nitrous  air  to  faturate  it.  The 
feverith  was  not  quite  fo  pure  as  the  fixth  ;  and 
the  eighth  neither  affedled  common  air,  nor 
was  affedled  by  nitrous  air,  being  what  I  term 
phlogifticated  air.  As  fome  part  of  this  produce 
was  nitrous  air,  it  is  evident  that  the  phlo- 
gifton  neceflary  to  conftitute  it  muft  have  been 
in  the  clay,  and  not  in  the  veflel  containing 
it,  which  was  of  glafs. 

Having  by  me  a  quantity  of  Sionrbridge  clay^ 
I  had  the  curiofity  to  repeat  the  experiments 
with  this  Ipecies,  to  fee  whether  there  would  be 
any  material  difference  in  the  refult.  Ufmg 
the  gun-barrel,  I  received  the  air  in  four 
portions.  The  firft  was  fixed  air,  making 
lime-water  turbid,  and  being  more  than  half- 
abforbed  by  water ;  the  fecond  was  about  as 
good  as  common  air,  and  the  fourth  was  con- 
siderably nitrous. 

To  avoid  the  effedl  of  the  gun-barrel,  I  then 
put  the  clay  into  a  phial,  with  a  glafs-ftopplt 
and  tube,  and  putting  it  into  a  fand-heat,  I  re- 
ceived the  air,  for  the  fake  of  greater  exaft- 
neft,  in  ten  different  portions,  about  one-half 
of  an  ounce-meafure  each.     The  firft  produce 

was 


Produ5fio7t  of  Dephlogifticated  Air.       79 

was  half-abforbed  by  water,  with  a  refiduum  fo 
far  nitrous,  that  two  meafures  of  common  air 
and  one  of  this,  occupied  the  fpace  of  2  4-  mea- 
fures. The  fecond  and  third  portions  were 
almoft  wholly  fixed  air,  precipitating  lime  in 
lime-water,  and  not  at  all  afFe6ting  common 
air,  or  being  affefted  by  nitrous  air.  Of 
the  fourth  I  have  no  account.  The  fifth 
was  fo  far  dephlogifticated,  that  two  meafures 
of  it,  and  three  of  nitrous  air,  occupied  the 
fpace  of  2  ^  meafures.  The  fixth  and  feventh 
produce  were,  as  nearly  as  pofTible,  common  air. 
The  ninth  was  fo  far  nitrous,  that  two  mea- 
fures of  common  air,  and  one  of  this,  occu- 
pied the  fpace  of  2  4-  meafures  ;  and  the  tenth 
diminifhed  common  air  flill  lefs. 

It  is  evident,  from  the  courfe  of  this  pro- 
cefs,  that  phlogifton  muft  have  been  contained 
in  the  clay,  and  have  been  difengaged  at  diffe- 
rent times,  according  as  the  heat  affe61:ed  dif- 
ferent parts  of  the  mixture.  Had  the  whole  of 
this  produce  been  taken  together,  it  would 
have  been  about  the  ftandard  of  common  air 
mixed  with  fixed  air  i  which  fhews  the  impor- 
tance of  taking  the  produce  in  different  veffels, 
and  examining  them  feparately  •,  a  pra<5tice 
which  the  reader  will  find  I  have  often  had  re- 
courfe  to  with  great  advantage. 

As 


So       An  Account  offome  Prccejfes  for  the 

As  a  great  degree  of  heat  cannot  be  applied 
to  any  thing  contained  in  a  glafs-veffel,  with- 
without  melting  it,  and  I  was  willing  to  know 
what  would  be  the  effe6l  of  more  heat  on  this 
very  clay  when  the  above  mentioned  experi- 
ment was  over,  I  took  it  out  of  the  phial,  and 
put  it  into  a  gun-barrel  •,  when  I  got  a  confi- 
derable  quantity  of  air  from  it.  Part  of  it  waS 
fixed  air,  precipitating  lime  in  lime-water^ 
and  the  remainder  was  like  the  renduum  of 
fixed  air,  or  phlogifticated  common  air,  ex- 
tinguifhing  a  candle,  and  being  neither  affedled 
by  nitrous  air,  nor  affetling  common  air.  I 
did  the  fame  thing  with  the  tobacco-pipe-clay, 
which  remained  after  the  experiment  above 
recited,  and  had  nearly  the  fame  refult.  The 
firfl  produce  was  of  the  fame  degree  of  purity 
with  common  air,  and  the  next  vv^as  a  little  af- 
feded  by  nitrous  air. 

From  a  quantity  of  gypfivm^  which  I  pro- 
cured in  the  form  of  pov/der,  I  got  a  quantity 
of  fixed  air  in  a  gun-barrel ;  and  from  the 
fame,  moiftened  with  fpirit  of  nitre,  and  treated 
in  the  fame  manner,  I  got  a  little  fixed  air, 
with  a  great  proportion  of  nitrous  air,  almcH' 
as  flrong  as  any.  But  fufpeding  that  this  gyp- 
fum  was  not  pure,  I  got  of  Dr.  Higgins  a  piece 
of  that  kind  of  which  thefineft  plaifter  is  made, 
and  from  this,  mixed  with  fpirit  of  nitre,  I  got 

a  confiderabie 


VrodvMion  of  Dephlogiflicated  Air.     .  8 1 

a  confiderable  quantity  of  air,  part  of  which 
was  fixed  air,  and  the  remainder  neither  afFedl- 
ed  common  air,  nor  was  afFed:ed  by  nitrous  air, 
and  extinguifhed  a  candle.  At  laft  the  air  was 
nitrous,  as  I  fulpedl,  from  the  gun-barrel. 

Being  rather  furprized  that  this  kind  of 
•arth,  which  had  the  appearance  of  being  very 
free  from  phlogillon,  fhould  yield  air  of  no 
better  quality  than  this,  I  repeated  the  expe- 
riment, by  taking  the  produce  of  air  at  feve- 
ral  times,  as  in  former  experiments,  moiftening 
the  earth  with  a  ftronger  fpirit  of  nitre  than 
before ;  and  inflead  of  a  gun-barrel,  made 
ufe  of  a  phial  with  a  ground-flcpple  and  tube. 
The  quantity  of  air  produced  in  this  m.anner, 
was  about  two  ounce-meafures,  from  an  ounce- 
meafure  of  the  plaiiler,  and  I  received  the  air 
in  four  different  parts. 

The  firft  was  a  little  diminifhed  by  nitrous 
air,  being,  I  fuppofe,  in  a  great  meafure,  com- 
mon air  not  quite  expelled  from  the  phial ;  and 
the  fecond  was  ftrong  nitrous  air,  perhaps  from 
fome  phlogifliic  matter  accidentally  mixed  with 
the  ingredients.  I  am  the  more  induced  to 
think  fo,  becaufe  the  third  and  fourth  produce 
was  fo  highly  dephlogiflicated,  that  one  mea- 
fure of  each  took  five  meafures  of  nitrous  air 
G  to 


S  2       An  Account  of  fame  Vrocejfes  for  the 

to  faturate  it  •,  fo  that  they  were  each  four  times 
as  good  as  common  air. 

After  the  preceding  experiments,  there  re- 
mained only  the  cryftallim  and  talcky  earths^ 
that  are  effentially  different  from  each  other  ; 
and  each  of  thefe  alfo  yielded  dephlogifticated 
air,  when  they  were  treated  in  the  fame  man- 
ner with  the  earths  above  mentioned,  but  in 
a  very  fmall  quantity. 

When  I  took  common  flints^  as  they  arc 
dug  out  of  the  ground,  part  white  and  part 
black,  moiftening  the  powder  of  them  with 
fpirit  of  nitre,  as  before,  and  ufmg  a  gun- 
barrel,  I  got  fixed  air,  with  a  great  proportion 
of  nitrous  air  j  that  which  came  over  the  firft 
being  like  the  refiduum  of  fixed  air,  extinguilli- 
ing  a  candle,  but  being  not  readily  abforbed 
by  water. 

After  this  I  got  fome  flints  carefully  calcined 
in  clofe  veffeh^  by  Dr.  Higgins,  and  having 
pounded  a  quantity  of  them,  and  moiftened 
the  powder  with  fpirit  of  nitre,  I  put  it  into  a 
glafs-phial  with  a  ground  ftopple  and  tube ; 
and  applying,  at  firft,  the  flame  of  a  candle 
only,  the  air  I  got  was  in  a  very  fmall  quan- 
tity-, but  it  precipitated  lime  in  lime-water, 
and  diminilhed  common  air  a  little. 

2  I  then 


Trodu5fion  cf  Bephlogifticated  Air,         83 

I  then  put  the  fame  apparatus  into  a  fand- 
heat,  when  I  got,  in  all,  r,-^  much  air  as  twice 
the  bulk  of  the  materials.  Part  of  it  preci- 
pitated lirr.e  in  lime-water,  but  the  reft  of  the 
produce  was  confiderably  better  than  common 
air ;  and  the  laft  was  fo  good,  that  it  took  two 
meafures  of  nitrous  air  to  faturate  it. 

Left  this  air  might  come  from  fome  extra- 
neous matter,  mixed  with  the  powder  of  flint, 
I  put  fome  frefti  fpirit  of  nitre  upon  the  fame 
materials,  without  taking  them  out  of  the 
phial,  after  I  had  found  that  they  would  yield 
no  more  air  from  the  firft  procefs,  and  I  re- 
placed the  phial  in  the  fame  fand-heat.  The 
air  firft  produced  in  this  fecond  procefs  was 
but  little  diminiftied  by  nitrous  air,  but  the 
reft  was  almoft  as  pure  as  any  that  I  had  ever 
got  before.  The  quantity  of  it,  however,  was 
not  more  than  the  bulk  of  the  materials. 

N.  B.  When,  in  this  experiment,  the 
bubbles  of  air  burft,  after  getting  through  the 
water,  a  whitifli  cloud  iftued  from  them,  as 
in  the  rapid  produdlion  of  nitrous  air,  -  and  as 
in  the  produce  of  dephlogifticated  air  from 
the  flowers  of  zinc  above  mentioned,  but  in  a 
much  lefs  degree. 


'O* 


G  2  I  repeated 


84       An  Account  offome  Procejfes  for  the 

I  repeated  the  fame  procefs  not  lefs  than 
half  a  dozen  times,  putting  frelh  fpirit  of 
nitre  upon  the  fame  materials,  without  taking 
them  out  of  the  phial,  but  the  refult  was  al- 
ways the  fame  ;  the  firft  produce  of  air  being 
always  phlogifticated,  then  (after  an  interval  in 
which  nothing  but  the  pure  vapour  of  fpirit 
of  nitre  came  over)  the  remainder  being  the 
dephlogifticated  air  above  mentioned. 

To  complete  this  courfe  of  experiments,  I, 
in  the  lafb  place,  put  ilrong  fpirit  of  nitre  into 
a  phial,  filled  with  tranfparent  Mufcovy  talc^ 
fuch  as  opticians  make  ufe  of  for  confining  mi- 
crofcopic  objects.  In  this  procefs  every  thing 
went  on  in  the  very  fame  manner  as  with  the 
calcined  flint ;  the  firft  produce  being  phlo- 
gifticated air,  or  air  of  fuch  quality  as  neither 
to  affe6t  common  air,  nor  be  affefted  by  ni- 
trous air,  then  the  pure  vapour  of  the  fpirit  of 
nitre  ;  and  lailly,  about  an  ounce-meafure  of 
air,  about  five  times  as  good  as  common  air. 
The  pieces  of  talc  v/hich  had.  been  contiguous 
to  the  fides  of  the  phial  appeared  to  be  a  little 
whitened  after  the  experiment,  but  the  reft 
looked  as  if  they  had  never  been  ufed  in  that 
manner;  being  as  tranfparent  as  before,  and 
of  as  firm  a  texture,  but  feemingly  more  flex- 
ible ;  fo  that  thofe  pieces,  when  handled  all  to- 
gether, felt  like  foft  feathers.    • 

4  It 


Producfion  of  Dephloglfiicatcd  Air.  '     Z^ 

It  is  fufficiently  evident  from  thefe  experi- 
ments, that  dephlogifticated  air  is  produced 
from  all  kinds  of  earth  mixed  with  fpirit  of 
nitre,  only  that  a  greater  quantity  of  air  is  pro- 
duced from  fome  than  from  others  ;  the  advan- 
tage in  this  refpedt  being  on  the  fide  of  tiie 
metallic  and  calcareous  earths. 

I  would  obferve,  that  this  pFOcefs  feems  to 
furnifh  a  pretty  accurate  teil,  perhaps  the  moil 
accurate  hitherto  known,  of  the  prefence  of 
phlogiflon  in  bodies.  Perhaps  no  fpecies  of 
air  can  be  produced  without  a  certain  portion 
of  phlogifton ;  but  probably  the  nitrous  acid 
itfelf  always  contains  fufficient  for  the  purpole 
of  dephlogifticated  air.  But  nitrous  air  con- 
tains fo  much  phlogifton,  that  I  think  it  can- 
not be  produced  unlefs  the  materials  themfelves 
contain  it  in  a  very  confiderabie  degree.  Thus 
I  have  no  doubt  but  that  white  arfenic^  though 
it  may  be  thought  to  contain  no  phlogifton, 
really  does  contain  a  confiderabie  quantity  of 
it ;  whereas,  if  the  air  be  highly  dephlogifti- 
cated, I  think  it  may  be  confidered  as  the  moft 
fatisfaftory  proof  we  are  yet  acquainted  with, 
that  the  fubftancc  contains  no  phlogifton  at 
all. 

I  fliall  clofe  this  fedtion  with  an  account  of 

the  extradion  of  pure  air  from  other  fubftances 

G  3  befides 


'86      An  Account  offome  Pfocejfes  for  the 

belides  mercurius  calcinatus,  and  red  lead,  with- 
out the  addition  of  fpirit  of  nitre.  Of  this 
kind  I  have  only  found  two  fubftances,  viz.  fe- 
dative  fait,  and  Roman  vitriol  /lightly  calcined, 
which  I  had  from  Dr.  Higgins  ^  befides  com- 
mon/j/Z-p^/rd',  which  is  knov/n  to  contain  the 
acid  of  nitre  in  itfeif.  From  the  two  former  I 
extrafted  air  by  means  of  a  burning  lens  in 
quickfilver. 

The  fedative  fait  is  not  very  manageable  in 
this  procefs  •,  but,  with  fome  difficulty,  I  did 
extraft  from  it  a  fmall  quantity  of  air,  in  which 
a  candle  burned  as  in  common  air,  and  which 
•was  diminilhed  as  much  as  common  air  by  ni- 
trous air.  At  another  time,  the  air  which  I 
extraded  from  this  fubflance  was  not  dimini- 
lhed by  nitrous  air  quite  fo  much  as  common 
air  is. 

N.  B.  The  quantity  of  air  was  always  very 
fmall,  not  more  than  the  bulk  of  the  mate- 
rials. 

From  the  Roman  vitriol  I  alfo  got  but  a 
fmall  quantity  of  air.  The  firft  that  I  got  was 
diminilhed  by  nitrous  air,  exadlly  as  much  as 
common  air.  I  repeated  the  experiment,  and 
the  air  which  I  then  got  was  diminifhed  by  ni- 
trous air  confiderably  more  than  common  air. 

The 


Prod'uBion  of  Dephlcgifiicated  Air.         By 

The  refuk  of  thefe  experiments  rather  furprizes 
me,  as,  after  many  trials  made  with  a  view  to 
it,  I  could  get  no  fuch  air  from  any  fpecies  of 
fa^ttioiis  'vitricl,  calcined  or  imcalcined. 
There  muft  certainly  have  been  fome  nitrous 
acid  in  that  Roman  vitrioL 

The  readers  of  my  former  publications  onk 
this  fubjeil  will  remember,  that  I  was  exceed- 
ingly puzzled  with  the  experiments  which  I 
made  to  extract  air  from  falt-petre  in  a  gun- 
barrel ;  the  refults  appearing  to  me  very  exira- 
o-rdinary,  and  well  worth  attending  to,  as  they 
might  lead  to  confiderable  difcoveries.  See 
Vol.  I.  p.  155.  In  fa6l,  there  was  fufficient 
reafon  for  the  conje6ture ;  but  the  method 
which  I  then  took  to  extract  air  from  this  fub- 
fiance  was  ill  adapted  to  make  it  yield  its  ge- 
nuine produce.  I  had  not,  however,  at  that 
time,  thought  of  any  other. 

'  The  air  I  firft  got  admitted  a  candle  to  burrt 
in  it  with  a  very  llrong  flame,  and  with  a  crack- 
ling noife.  Alfo,  though,  after  having  ftood 
a  whole  year  in  water,,  it  became  quite  noxious, 
yet  by  agitation  in  frefh  water,  it  was  perfedl- 
iy  reftored  •,  fo  that  a  candle  would  burn  in 
it  again.  At  the  time  of  my  laft  publication, 
I  Gonjeftured  that  this  air  was  phlogifiicated  ni- 
ii'ous  air  ■.,  but  now  I  think  it  muft  have  been. 
G  4  dcohlo- 


83       An  Account  of  fome  Procejfes  for  the 

deplogifticated  air,  though  produced  in  a  gun-< 
barrel,  in  which  the  fpirit  of  nitre,  by  diflblv- 
ing  the  iron,  would  be  very  apt  to  deprave  the 
air ;  and  accordingly,  in  repeating  this  expe- 
riment fome  time  afterwards,  I  got  air  that 
extinguifhed  a  candle. 

I  v/as  much  puzzled,  at  that  time,  to  account 
for  the  very  different  refults  of  what  was,  to 
'  appearance,  the  fame  experiment  -,  but  I  do 
not  wonder  at  it  now.  I  imagine  that,  in  the 
former  cafe,  the  air  was  produced  very  ra- 
pidly, and  therefore  that  there  was  not  time 
for  the  fpirit  of  nitre  to  aft  upon  the  iron ; 
and  confequently  the  falt-petre  gave  its  natural 
produce  :  whereas,  in  the  latter  cafe,  a  mixture 
of  nitrous  air  (produced  by  the  folution  of 
iron  in  the  nitrous  acid,  difengaged  from  the 
falt-petre)  had  thoroughly  depraved  the  air.  I 
advance  this  with  the  more  certainty,  as  I  have 
found  that  falt-petre,  heated  in  a  glafs-velTel, 
yields  very  pure  dephlogiilicated  air,  its  own 
earth,  and  the  fpirit  of  nitre  which  it-  contains, 
being  capable,  by  heat,  of  forming  that  kind 
of  union  of  thofe  two  principles  which  the  con- 
flitution  of  that  air  requires  ^  and  this,  I  think, 
is  a  pretty  remarkable  circumftance. 

It  may  be  worth  while  to  obferve,  that  I 
began  my  experiments  upon  nitre  in  quick- 

filver  ^ 


Prodti^ion  of  Dephkgifiicated  Air'.     '    Bg 

filver ;  but  that  the  air  produced  in  this  manner 
was  nitrous,  occafioned  by  the  folution  of  the 
quickfilver,  as  in  the  former  cafe,  by  the  folu- 
tion of  the  iron  in  the  fpirit  of  nitre  difengaged 
in  the  operation.  A  copious  white  fume  iffued 
from  the  nitre  in  the  courfe  of  this  experiment, 
like  that  which  attends  the  rapid  produdion 
of  nitrous  air  from  metals. 

When  I  had  recourfe  to  my  tall  glafs-veflels 
(fig.  d.)  1  ufed  an  ounce  of  falt-petre  .pounded ; 
and  filling  the  veffel  up  to  the  mouth  with 
pounded  flint,  I  took  the  produce  of  air  at 
nine  times,  each  about  three  quarters  of  an 
ounce-meafure.  The  firft  produce  was  not 
quite  fo  good  as  common  air,  the  fecond  was 
of  the  fame  degree  of  purity  with  common  air, 
the  third  rather  worfe  ;  but  the  fourth  was  fo 
far  dephlogiflicated,  that  one  meafure  of  it, 
and  two  of  nitrous  air,  occupied  the  fpace  of 
one-fifth  lefs  than  one  meafure.  The  fifth  pro- 
duce was  ftill  better  ;  for  one  meafure  of  it, 
and  two  of  nitrous  air,  occupied  the  fpace  of 
half  a  meafure.  The  ninth  was  about  the 
fame  degree  of  purity  -,  and  the  reft,  I  pre- 
fume,  were  not  much  different. 

Being  defirous  of  knowing  what  kind  of  air 
was  produced  by  the  explofion  of  gun-powder, 
I,   for  that  purpofe,  mixed  equal  quantities  of 

brimftone, 


90        'An  Acc&unt  offonie  Procejffes^  he. 

brimftone  and  falt-petre,  both  finely  pounded, 
and  put  them  into  a  tall  glafs-veffel.  The 
produdion  of  air  was  very  rapid  and  copious, 
and  fo  highly  nitrous,  that  two  meafures  of 
common  air,  and  one  of  this,  occupied  the 
fpace  oi  2~  meafures.  Since  the  produce  of 
air  from  fpirit  of  nitre  and  charcoal  is  the  very 
fame  with  this,  viz.  nitrous  air,  it  cannot  be 
doubted  but  that  nitrous  air  is  alfo  produced 
in  the  explolion  of  gun-powder,  which  is  com- 
pofed  of  thofe  ingredients  -,  the  fpirit  of  nitre 
not  being  deftroyed,  or  fo  far  decompofed  as 
that  its  acid  nature  is  loft,  but  only  entering 
into  the  compofition  of  this  fpecies  of  air. 


SEC- 


M'ifcellaneous  Ohferv aliens^  &c.       '  91 


SECTION    V. 

Mifcellaneous  Ohfervations  on  the  Properties  of 
Dephlogisticated  Air, 

I  endeavoured.  In  a  variety  of  ways,  to 
find  the  fpecific  gravity  of  dephlogifticated  air, 
by  carefully  weighing  the  materials  before  and 
after  the  production ;  and  though  this  is  by 
no  means  an  exadt  method  of  afcertaining  this 
circumflance,  and  I  had  recourfe  to  better  me- 
thods afterwards,  the  experiments  may  be  worth 
reciting.  * 

Having  put  into  a  gun-barrel  two  ounces 
four  pennyweights  of  red  lead,  I  extradled 
from  it  tweaty  ounce-meafures  of  dephlogifti- 
cated air,  receiving  it  in  water ;  and  the  refi- 
duum,  collefted  with  all  the  care  that  I  could 
apply,  weighed  i  oz.  i6dwt.  i8gr. ;  fo  that 
twenty  ounces  of  air  ought  to  have  weighed 
7  dwt.  6  gr.  which  is  beyond  all  proportion  ; 
fo  that  this  method  muft  be  very  uncertain  : 
befidcs,  no  allowance  was  made,  nor  could 
well  be  made,  for  the  fixed  air  v/hich  the  red 
lead  yielded,  and  which  is  the  heavieft  fpecies 
of  air  that  we  are  yet  acquainted  with.     At 

other 


§2         ]\£fcellaneous  Obfervaiions  on  the 

other  times  I  have  found  that  red-lead  was 
changed  into  a  real  lead,  when  I  was  attempt- 
ing the  fame  thing  in  this  way. 

A  fecond  attempt  cam.e  a  little  nearer  the 
truth.  I  weighed  an  ounce  of  red  lead,  moif- 
tened  it  with  fmoking  fpirit  of  nitre,  and  dried 
it,  when  it  weighed  i  oz.  6  dwt.  12  gr.  I 
then  divided  the  whole  quantity  into  two  equal 
parts,  and  put  one  of  them  into  a  gun-barrel, 
in  order  to  colledt  the  air,  and  the  other  I  put 
into  a  crucible,  to  be  expofed  to  the  fame  degree 
of  heat.  The  former  yielded  twenty- two  ounce- 
meafures  of  air,  after  the  fixed  air  was  pretty 
well  wailied  out  of  it.  It  was  about  five  times 
as  good  as  common  air.  The  latter  had  loft 
nineteen  grains  in  weight,  being  juft  fo  much 
Jefs  than  half  an  ounce  -,  fo  that  the  twenty- 
tvvTO  ounce-meafures  of  air  fhould  have  weighed 
nineteen  grains,  which  is  certainly  a  great  deal 
too  much :  befides,  in  this  experiment,  as  in 
the  former,  no  account  could  be  taken  of  the 
fixed  air. 

Finding  thefe  methods  to  fail,  I  had  recourfe 
to  that  vvhich  was  ufed  by  Mr.  Cavendilh  in 
weighing  fixed  and  inflammable  air,  and  which 
is  more  accurate  than  the  method  which  I  had 
ufed  before  (viz.  filling  a  Florence-flails:  with 
the  different  kinds  of  air,  and* weighing  them 

in 


Properties  of  Dephlogifticated  Air,      ,  ^3 

in  it)  becaufe,  as  the  flafls:  mud  be  firft  filled 
with  water,  one  cannot  be  fure,  though  every 
poiTible  precaution  be  taken,  that  the  water 
has  been  equally  drained  from  it  after  each  ex- 
periment :  otherwife  there  would  be  a  confi- 
derable  advantage  in  this  method  -,  becaufe  the 
quantity  of  air  may  be  accurately  known.  But 
though  this  cannot  be  done  with  preciflon  in  a 
bladder,  as  ufed  by  Mr.  Cavendifh,  becaufe  the 
degree  of  diilenfion  cannot  be  meafured  with 
much  accuracy,  yet  this  circumftance  is  more 
than  counterbalanced  by  being  able  to  change 
the  air  with  comprefTmg  the  bladder,  without 
wetting  it. 

I  therefore  took  a  glafs-tube  about  nine 
inches  long,  and  fattening  it  to  the  neck  of  a 
bladder,  which,  with  fuch  a  degree  of  diilen- 
fion as  I  could  give  it,  in  the  manner  in  which 
the  experiment  was  made,  contained  fifty-five 
ounce-meafures,  or  one  pennyweight  nine  grains 
of  common  air.  The  tube  was  fo  fattened,  that' 
I  could  take  it  out  at  pleafure ;  and  having 
the  bladder  thus  prepared,  I  carefully  com- 
prefled  it,  then  filling  it  in  part  with  that  kind 
of  air  which  I  was  about  to  weigh,  I  com- 
prefixed  it  again,  and  then  filled  it  intireiy  -, 
fo  that  I  was  pretty  confident  that  the  air 
within  the  bladder  contained  very  little  com- 
mon, or  any  other  kind  of  air.  In  this  man- 
ner 


p4        Mifcellaneous  Ohfervations  on  the 

ner  I  proceeded  to  weigh  dcphlogifiicated  -alr^ 
and  at  the  fame  time  nitrous  air^  and  air  phlo- 
gifticated  with  ircn  filings  and  hrimjicne^  which 
I  take  for  granted  is  the  fame  thing  with  air 
phlogiflicated  by  any  other  procefs. 

The  folloAving  Ihort  table  exhibits  the  refult 
of  ail  thefe  experiments  at  one  view. 

The  bladder,  filled  with  dwts.  gr. 

phlogilticated  air,  v/eighed        -     -     -     715 

— nitrous  air     -     -     -     716 

• common  air     -       -     7   ^7 

• ■ dephlogillicated  air  -   7   19 

This  refult  agrees  fufficiently  well  with  my 
former  obfervations,  though  they  were  not  made 
with  fo  much  accuracy,  viz.  that  both  nitrous 
air,  and  air  diminished  by  phlogiftic  procefTes, 
are  rather  lighter  than  common  air ;  and  it  is 
confonant  to  this,  that,  in  the  prefent  expe- 
riment, dephlogillicated  air  appears  to  be  a 
little  heavier  than  common  air. 

Comparing  thefe  obfervations  with  that  of 
the  extreme  lightnefs  of  inflammable  air,  afcer- 
tained  by  Mr.  Cavendifh,  it  fhould  feem  that 
the  lefs  phlogifton  any  kind  of  air  contains 
the  heavier  it  is,  and  the  more  phlogifton  it 

contains 


Properties  of  Depkgifiicated  Air         95 

contains  the  lighter  it  is  -,  though  this  is  by 
no  means  the  cafe  v/ith  folid  fubftances,  and 
indeed  it  is  rather  unfavourable  to  this  hypo- 
thecs, that  nitrous  air  fhould  not  be  lighter 
than  dephlogillicated  air  ;  for  it  fhould  feem, 
by  its  property  of  phlogifbicating  common  air, 
that  it  fhould  itfelf  contain  a  greater  propor-^ 
tion  of  phlogifton.  Alfo,  in  the  above  men- 
tioned procefTes  for  making  air,  the  more 
phlogiflon  there  is  in  the  fubftances  moiftened 
with  fpirit  of  nitre,  the  more  certain  it  is  that 
the  produce  will  be  nitrous  air  j  as  the  lefs 
phlogiflon  they  contain,  the  more  certain  it  is 
that  the  produce  will  be  pure  air.  But  I  fuf- 
pe6l  that  there  is  a  farther  difference  in  the 
mode  in  which  phlogifton  is  combined  with 
Ipirit  of  nitre,  in  the  conflitution  of  nitrous. 
ain 

In  this  experiment,  the  dephlogiflicated  air 
was  fo  pure,  that  one  meafure  of  it,  and  two 
of  nitrous  air,  occupied  the  fpace  of  4^  of  a 
meafure.  Had  the  air  been  more  pure,  it 
would,  no  doubt,  have  been  fpecifically  hea- 
vier ftill. 

It  fhould  be  obferved,  that  fufficient  time 
ought  to  be  allowed  to  get  dephlogiflicated  air 
intirely  free  from  fixed  air  before  it  is  weighed; 

and 


'96        Mifcellafieous  Ohfervations  on  the 

and  as  this  requires  time,  and  perhaps  may* 
never  be  done  completely,  it  may  be  fufpe6ted 
that  the  additional  weight  of  this  kind  of  air 
is  owing  to  a  mixture  of  fixed  air.  But  com- 
mon air  alfo  contains  a  great  proportion  of 
fixed  air,  and  the  dephlogifticated  air,  on  which 
I  made  this  experiment,  had  been  produced, 
at  leaft  the  far  greateft  part  of  it,  and  had 
been  expofed  to  water,  fome  weeks.  It  is, 
however,  fufficiently  evident,  that  dephlogif- 
ticated air  doth  become  better  by  Handing  in 
water ;  owing,  probably,  to  its  depofiting 
more  fixed  air  in  thofe  circumftances. 

Having  at  one  time  made  a  large  refervoir 
of  dephlogifticated  air,  for  the  purpofe  of 
experiments,  I  found  that,  in  about  ten  days, 
from  being  4  i,  it  had  become  5  4-  better  than 
common  air.  Standing  in  pure  water  muft  be 
a  furer  method  of  getting  the  pureft  dephlo- 
gifticated air,  than  agitation  in  water ;  for,' 
though  the  latter  method  will  enable  the  water 
to  abforb  the  fixed  air  fafter,  and  tlierefore  a 
little  agitation  at  the  firft  will  be  very  ufeful, 
in  order  to  expedite  the  purification  of  it; 
yet,  as  I  have  found  (vol.  I.  p.  158)  that  agi- 
tation in  the  pureft  water  will,  in  time,  injure 
common  air ;  the  fame  operation  may  be  fup- 
pofed  to  injure  dephlogifticated  air  alfo  ;  and 
indeed  I  have  already  obferved,  that  having 

agitated 


Properties  of  Dephlogifticated  Air   ■     ^y 

agitated  in  water  a  quantity  of  dephlogifticated 
air,  a  candle  burned  in  it  only  as  in  common 
air,  and  not  with  that  vivid  flame  with  which 
it  burns  in  this  air  when  it  is  purer. 

I  have  not  made  many  experiments  on  the 
mixture  of  dephlogifticated  air  with  the  other 
kinds  of  air,  becaufe  the  analogy  which  it 
bears  to  common  air  is  fo  great,  that  I  think 
any  perfon  may  know  before-hand,  what  the  re- 
fult  of  fuch  experiments  would  be.  It  is  pleaf- 
ing,  however,  to  obferve  how  readily  and  per- 
feftly  dephlogifticated  air  mixes  with  phlogif- 
ticated  air,  or  air  injured  by  refpiration,  putre- 
fadion,  &c.  each  tempering  the  other ;  fo  that 
the  purity  of  the  mixture  may  be  accurately 
known  from  the  quantity  and  qualit)^  of  the  two 
kinds  of  air  before  mixture.  Thus,  if  onemica- 
fure  of  perfe6tly  noxious  air  be  put  to  one  mea- 
fure  of  air  that  is  exadbly  twice  as  good  as  com- 
mon air,  the  mixture  will  be  precifely  of  the 
ftandard  of  common  air. 

I  obferved  alfo,  in  making  this  experiment, 
that  after  mixing  one  meafure  of  each  of  thefe 
kinds  of  air,  they  made  exa6lly  two  meafures  ; 
fo  that  there  was  neither  any  increafe  nor  dimi- 
nution of  quantity  in  confequence  of  the  mix- 
ture, as  is  the  efFe6l  of  mixing  nitrous  air  with 
eiti)er  common  or  dephlogifticated  air. 

H  It 


5^8         MifcelUnems  Ohfervctthns  on  tM. 

.  '  It  may  fience  be  inferred,  that  a-  quantity  oF 
very  pure  air  would  agreeably  qualify  the 
noxious  air  of  a  room  in  which  much  com- 
pany fhould  be  confined,  and  which  Ihould  be 
fo  fituated,  that  it  could  not  be  conveniently 
ventilated  •,  fo  that  from  being  offenfive  and 
unwholefome,  it  would  almoft  inftantly  be- 
come fweet  and  wholefbme.  This  air  might 
be  brought  into  the  room  in  cafl<:s ;  or  a  labo- 
ratory might  be  conftrucled  for  generating  the 
air,  and  throwing  it  intg  the  room  as  fall  as  it 
fhould  be  produced.  This  pure  air  would  be 
fufiiciently  cheap  for  the  purpofe  of  many  af- 
fcmblies,  and  a  very  little  ingenuity  would  be- 
fufEcient  to  reduce  the  feheme  into  pra6lice. 

I  eafily  conjecflured,  that  inflammable  air 
would  explode  w^ith  more  violence,  and  a 
louder  report,  by  the  help  of  dephlogifticated 
than  of  common  air  ;  but  the  effect  far  ex- 
ceeded my  expeftations,  and  it  has  never  failed 
to  furprize  every  perfon  before  whom  I  have, 
made  the  experiment. 

Inflammable  air  requires  about  two-thirds  of 
common  air  to  make  it  explode  to  the  greateft 
advantage  ;  and  if  a  phial,  containing  about 
an  ounce-meafure  and  half,  be  ufed  for  the  ex- 
periment, the  explofion  with  common  air  will 
be  {q  fmall,  as  not  to  be  heard  farther  than, 
.  .  perhaps. 


Proper  ties  of  Dephlogijiicated  Air, '      99 

perhaps,  fifty  or  flxty  yards ;  but  with  little 
more  than  one-third  of  highly  dephlogifticated 
air,  and  the  reft  inflammable  air,  in  the  fame 
phial,  the  report  will  be  almoft  as  loud  as  that 
of  a  fmall  piftol  j  being,  to  judge  by  the  ear, 
not  lefs  than  forty  or  fifty  times  as  loud  as  with 
common  air. 

The  orifice  of  the  phial  in  which  this  experi- 
ment is  made,  fliould  not  much  exceed  a  quarter 
of  an  inch,  and  the  phial  fhould  be  a  very  ftrong 
one ;  otherwife  it  will  certainly  burft  with  the 
explofion.  The  reperculTion  is  very  confider- 
able  •,  and  the  heat  produced  by  the  explofion 
very  fenfible  to  the  hand  that  holds  it.  I  have 
fometimes  amufed  myfelf  with  carrying  in  my 
pocket,  phials  thus  charged  with  a  mixture  of 
dephlogifticated  and  inflammable  air,  confined 
either  with  common  corks  or  ground-ftopples, 
and  I  have  perceived  no  difference  in  the  ex- 
plofion, after  keeping  them  a  long  time,  and 
carrying  them  to  any  diftance. 

The  dipping  of  a  lighted  candle  into  ajar 
filled  with  dephlogifticated  air  is  alone  a  very 
beautiful  experiment.  The  ftrength  and  viva- 
city of  the  flame  is  ftriking,  and  the  heat  pro- 
duced by  the  flame,  in  thefe  circumftances  is 
is  alfo  remarkably  great.  But  this  experiment 
is  more  pleafmg,  when  the  air  is  only  little  more 
H  2  than 


loo      AH/cellaneous  Ohfervaiions  on  the 

than  twice  as  good  as  common  air ;  for  wlien  it 
is  highly  dephlogifticated,  the  candle  burns  with 
a  crackling  noile,  as  if  it  was  full  of  fome  com- 
builiblc  matter. 

It  may  be  inferred,  from  the  very  great  ex- 
plofions  made  in  dephlogifticated  air,  that, 
were  it  poflible  to  fire  gunpowder  in  it,  lefs 
than  a  tenth  part  of  the  charge,  in  all  cafes, 
would  fuffice  ;  the  force  of  an  explofion  in  this 
kind  of  air,  far  exceeding  what  might  have 
been  expedled  from  the  purity  of  it,  as  fhewn 
in  other  kinds  of  trial.  But  I  do  not  fee  how 
it  is  poffible  to  make  this  application  of  it. 
I  lliould  not,  however,  think  it  difficult  to  con- 
fine gunpowder  in  bladders,  with  the  interflices 
of  the  grains  filled  with  this,  inftead  of  com- 
mon air ;  and  fuch  bladders  of  gunpowder 
might,  perhaps,  be  ufed  in  mines,  or  for  blow- 
ing up  rocks,   in  digging  for  metals,  &c. 

Nothing,  however,  would  be  eaficr  than  to 
augment  the  force  of  fire  to  a  prodigious  de- 
gree, by  blowing  it  with  dephlogifticated  air 
inftead  of  common  air.  This  I  have  tried, 
in  the  prefence  of  my  friend  Mr.  Magellan, 
by  filling  a  bladder  with  it,  and  puffing  it, 
through  a  fmall  glafs-tube,  upon  a  piece  of 
lighted  wood :  but  it  would  be  very  eafy  to 

fupply 


Properties  of  Dephlogifticated  Air.       i  oi 

fiipply  a  pair  of  bellows  v/ith  it  from  a  large 
refervoir. 

PofTibly  much  greater  things  might  be  ef- 
fedied  by  chymiils,  in  a  variety  of  refpeifts-, 
with  the  prodigious  heat  which  this  air  may  be 
the  means  of  affording  them.  I  had  no  fooner 
mentioned  the  difcovery  of  this  kind  of  air  to 
my  friend  Mr.  Michell,  than  this  ufe  of  it  oc- 
curred to  him.  He  obferved  that  pofllbly  pla- 
tina  might  be  melted  by  means  of  it. 

From  the  greater  ftrength  and  vivacity  of 
the  flame  of  a  candle,  in  this  pure  air,  it  may 
be  conjectured,  that  it  might  be  peculiarly  fa- 
lutary  to  the  lungs  in  certain  morbid  cafe?, 
when  the  common  air  would  not  be  fufficient 
to  carry  off  the  phlogiftic  putrid  effluvium  fafc 
enough.  But,  perhaps,  we  may  alfo  infer 
from  thefe  experiments,  that  though  pure  de- 
phlogifticated air  might  be  very  ufeful  as  a 
medicine^  it  might  not  be  fo  proper  for  us  in 
the  ufuai  healthy  ftate  of  the  body :  for,  as  a 
candle  burns  out  much  fafier  in  dephlogifti- 
cated than  in  common  air,  fo  we  might,  as 
may  be  faid,  live  cut  too  fnft^  and  the  animal 
powers  be  too  foon  exhaufted  in  this  pure  ki-nd 
of  air.  A  moralift,  at  leaft,  may  fay,  that 
the  air  which  nature  has  providcU  for  us  is  as 
good  as  we  deferve. 

H  3  My 


-10-2       Mifcellaneous  Ohfervatlons  on  the 

My  reader  will  not  wonder,  that,  after  hav- 
ing afcertained  the  fuperior  goodnefs  of  de- 
phlogifticated  air  by  mice  living  in  it,  and  the 
other  tefts  above  mentioned,  I  fliould  have 
the  curiofity  to  tafte  it  myfelf.  I  have  gra- 
tified that  curiofity,  by  breathing  it,  drawing 
it  through  a  glafs-fyphon,  and,  by  this  means, 
I  reduced  a  large  jar  full  of  it  to  the  ftandard 
of  common  air.  The  feeling  of  it  to  my  lungs 
was  not  fenfibly  different  from  that  of  common 
air  •,  but  I  fancied  that  my  breaft  felt  peculi- 
arly light  and  eafy  for  feme  time  afterwards. 
"Who  can  tell  but  that,  in  time,  this  pure  air 
may  becom.e  a  fafhionable  article  in  luxury. 
Hitherto  only  two  mice  and  myfelf  have  had 
the  privilege  of  breathing  it. 

Whether  the  air  of  the  atmofphere  was,  in 
remote  times,  or  will  be  in  future  time,  better 
or  worfe  than  it  is  at  prefent,  is  a  curious  fpe- 
culat'on  •,  but  I  have  no  theory  to  enable  me  to 
throw  any  light  upon  it.  Philofophers,  in  fu- 
ture time,  may  eafily  determine,  by  comparing 
their  obfervations  with  mine,  whether  the  air 
in  general  preferves  the  very  fame  degree  of 
purity,  or  whether  it  becomes  more  or  lefs  fit 
for  refpiration  in  a  courfe  of  time  •,  and  alfo, 
whether  the  charigcs  to  which  it  may  be  fubjc6t 
are  equable^  or  otherwife ;  and  by  this  means 
may  acquire  data^  by  wliich  to  judge  both  of 

the 


Pruperths  of  Dcphlogifik<pJ.ed  Aii\       103 

the  pafb  and  future  ilate  of  the  atmofphere. 
But  no  obfervations  of  this  kind  having  beea 
made,  in  former  times,  all  that  any  perfon  could 
now  advance  on  this  fubje^would  be  little  more 
than  random  conje6lure.  If  we  might  be  al- 
lowed to  form  any  ju4giTient  from  the  length 
of  human  life  in  different  ages,  which  feems 
to  be  the  only  datum  that  is  left  us  for  this  pur- 
pofe,  we  may  conclude  that,  in  general,  the 
air  of  the  atmofphere  has,  for  many  ages,  pre- 
ferved  the  fame  degree  of  purity.  This  datimi^ 
however,  is  by  no  means  fufficient  for  an  accur 
rate  folution  of  the  problem. 


H4  SEC- 


104  Of  Air  procured  from  various  Si^hjiances^ 


SECTION    V. 

Of  Air  procured  from  various  Suhjlances  by  Means 
of  Heat  only. 

I  have  obferved  already,  that,  in  my  former 
experiments,  I  had  not  the  ufe  of  a  burning  lens 
of  any  confiderable  force ;  and,  for  want  of 
it,  was  obliged  to  leave  many  of  the  experi- 
ments extremely  incomplete,  and  many  things 
not  even  attempted.  But  having,  foon  after 
my  late  publication,  provided  myfelf  with  a 
lens  of  fufficient  force  for  the  purpofe,  the 
firft  thing  I  did,  when  I  began  to  refume  my 
experiments,  was  to  make  ufe  of  it,  in  order 
to  fatisfy  myfelf  what  kind  of  air  certain  fub- 
fiances  would  yield  by  means  of  heat  only,  ei- 
ther in  vacuo,  or  when  confined  by  quickfilver ; 
and  it  has  been  feen  in  the  preceding  fe6lions, 
that  by  purfuing  this  method,  I  was  led  to  the 
difcovery  of  many  new  and  curious  fadts,  of 
fufficient  importance  to  be  confidered  fepa- 
rately,  and  at  lar=ge. 

In  this  fe6bion,  I  propofe  to  comprize  the 
reft  of  the  oblervations  that  occurred  to  me  in 

that 


ly  Means  of  Heat  only.  •  105 

that  courfe  of  experiments,  intermixed  with 
thofe  which  I  made  in  expelling  air  from  the 
fame  fubftances,  in  a  gun-barrel ;  having  fome- 
times  made  ufe  of  one  of  the  methods,  and 
fometimes  of  the  other,  according  to  different 
circumftances  and  views, 

Thefe  experiments  were  begun  in  June, 
1774  i  and  one  of  the  firft  obfervations  that  I 
made  was,  that  inflammable  air  may  be  pro- 
cured from  feveral  metals  by  heat  only,  with- 
out any  acid,  which  was  not  my  opinion  at 
the  time  of  my  former  publications.  I  had 
rather  thought  that,  becaufe,  when  the  ma- 
rine acid  air  had  decompofed  fubftances  con- 
taining phlogifton  (as  brimftone,  charcoal,  &c.) 
a  quantity  of  inflammable  air  was  produced, 
the  acid  air  had  contributed  to  its  formation, 
and  had  entered  into  its  conftitution  ;  and  I 
had  therefore  inferred  univerfally,  that  inflam- 
mable air  confifts  of  acid  air  and  phlogifton. 
And  becaufe  inflammable  air  may  be  deprived 
of  its  inflammability,  and  from  being  highly 
noxious,  become  refpirable  by  agitation  in 
water,  I  had  farther  conjeftured,  that  the  air 
of  the  atmofphere  might  confift  of  the  union  of 
acid  air  and  phlogifton  •,  and  I  do  not  fee  how 
any  perfon  could  have  avoided  forming  fuch  a 
conjedure  from  fuch  premifes. 

Nor 


lo6    Of  Air  procured  from  various  Suhflances^ 

Nor  indeed  am  I  now  abfolutely  certain,  that 
the  conclufion  was  wrong ;  for  the  chymical 
principles  are  fo  altered,  by  combination,  that 
many  of  them  are  known  to  exift  where  their 
prefence  is  leaft  of  all  fufpeded  :  unlefs,  how- 
ever, there  be  an  acid  in  metals,  I  do  not  fee 
how  my  former  opinion  can  be  maintained,  in 
confiftency  with  the  fads  that  will  appear  in 
this  fedtion,  viz.  that  inflammable  air  may  be 
procured  from  feveral  metals  confined  by  quick- 
filver,  with  heat  from  a  burning  lens,  without 
any  folution  of  the  metal  in  an  acid. 

It  is  evident,  however,  on  the  other  hand> 
that  inflammable  air  doth  not  confifl:  of  pure 
phlogiflion  ;  becaufe,  as  I  have  fliewn,  it  may 
be  intirely  deprived  of  its  inflammability;  and 
though  it  be  afterwards  diminifhed  in  bulk, 
yet  a  very  great  proportion  of  it  remains  •,  be- 
ing then  in  the  fame  ftate  with  the  air  in  which 
a  candle  has  burned  out,  but  fufliciently  pure 
for  refpiration.  The  quellion  is,  what  is  the 
hafis  of  inflammable  air^  or  what  is  the  chymical 
principle  to  which  the  phlogifton  is  united  in 
its  confbitution.  In  this  cafe  it  fliould  feem  to 
be  fome  new  mode  of  combination  with  the 
earth  of  the  metal.  The  fads,  however,  were 
as  follows. 

Having 


hy  Means  of  Heat  onlyl  '  ^07 

Having  put  a  quantity  of  iron-clings,  care- 
fully forted  with  a  magnet,  into  one  of  the 
glafs-veffels,  fig.  a^  I  filled  the  reft  of  the  vef- 
fel  with  quickfilver ;  and  placing  it  inverted 
in  a  bafon  of  quickfilver,  I  threw  the  focus  of 
ihe  lens  upon  the  iron-filings,  and  prefently 
air  was  produced;  which,  being  examined, 
appeared  to  be  inflammable,  though  not  very 
ftrongly  fo.  It  refembled  inflammable  air  that 
had  been  wafhed  in  water  till  its  inflammabi- 
lity was  nearly  gone.  .  I  alfo  could  not  difl:in- 
guilh  the  colour  of  the  flame,  when  I  made 
the  explofion  in  the  ufi.ial  manner,  by  the  ap- 
proach of  a  candle.  After  the  operation,  the 
iron  from  which  the  air  had  been  extraded, 
had  an  exceedingly  ftrong  finell,  exadly  like 
that  of  very  ftrong  inflammable  air  procured 
from  metals  by  acids. 

In  the  fame  manner  I  got  air  from  the  filings 
cf  waUh-fprings,  which  are  made  of  the  beft 
fteel  ;  and  it  was  not  to  be  diftinguiflied  from 
the  inflammable  air  of  the  laft  experiment. 
Thefe  filings,  as  well  as  thole  of  iron,  I  had 
carefully  forted  with  a  magnet ;  fo  that  I  be- 
lieve there  was  no  foreign  matter  mixed  with 
them.  The  greateft  care,  however,  is  requi- 
fite  for  this  purpofe,  fince,  the  leaft  bit  of  wood, 
or  any  vegetable  or  animal  matter,  hardly  difco- 
coverable  by  the  eye,  will  yield  more  inflam- 
mable 


io8  Of  Air  procured  from  various  MjlanceSy 

mable  air,  than  a  confiderable  quantity  of  iron- 
filings. 

N.  B.  The  fpot  on  which  the  focus  of  the 
lens  was  thrown,  was  much  blacker  than  any- 
other  part  of  the  filings ;  and  during  the  ap- 
plication of  the  heat,  a  quantity  of  the  filings 
would  fonietimes  be  difperfed,  as  by  an  explo- 
fion  below  the  furface  of  them  ;  owing,  I  flip- 
pofe,  to  the  fudden  generation  of  air  from  fomc 
of  the  filings  that  lay  under  the  reft,  but  where 
the  heat  could  reach  them. 

Having  thus  got  air  from  iron,  I  proceeded 
to  make  fimilar  experiments  on  other  metals. 
But  as  all  the  other  metals  have  more  or  lefs 
affinity  with  quickfilver,  I  was  obliged  to  have 
recourfe  to  a  vacuum  \  but  being  pofTeffed  of 
Mr.  Smeaton's  air-pump,  I  could  depend  upon 
the  vacuum  being  very  exad  •,  fo  that  very  little 
common  air  could  be  mixed  with  the  air  pro- 
duced. That  the  filings  of  the  different  me- 
tals might  be  perfedtly  unmixed,  I  procured 
new  files,  quite  clean,  and  ufed  one  fide  of 
each  for  each  of  the  metals. 

With  this  apparatus,  I  threw  the  focus  of 
my  lens  upon  filings  of  zinc,  and  prefently  got 
from  them  air  which  was  very  ftrongly  inflam- 
mable.    Zinc  is  faid  to  contain  more  plogifton 

than 


hy  Means  of  Heat  only]  109 

than  the  ether  metals,  and  the  difference  be- 
tween the  inflammable  air  from  zinc,  and  that 
which  I  got  from  iron,  was  very  ftriking. 

From  brafs-duft  I  got  inflammable  air  in  con- 
fiderable  plenty,  and  alfo  from  tin ;  but  this 
laft  was  very  flightly  inflammable.  I  could 
not  have  perceived  it  to  be  fo  at  all  but  by  dip- 
ping a  lighted  candle  into  a  veffei  full  of  it : 
whereas,  in  other  cafes,  I  made  the  trials  by 
prefenting  the  flame  of  a  candle  to  the  narrow 
mouth  of  a  phial  filled  with  the  air.  That 
brafs  fhould  yield  inflammable  air,  I  attribute 
to  the  zinc,  by  the  addition  of  which,  copper 
is  converted  into  brafs. 

Thus  all  the  metals  that  yield  inflammable 
air,  when  diflblved  in  acids,  give,  inflammable 
air  alfo  by  heat  only.  With  other  metals  I 
had  no  fuccefs. 

Regulus  of  Antimony,  heated  /;;  vacuol 
fmoked  very  much,  and  blackened  all  the  in* 
fide  of  my  receiver ;  but  the  air  that  I  got 
from  it  was  very  little  indeed,  and  extinguiflied 
a  candle. 

From  hifmuth,  and  nickel,  I  got  hardly  any 
air  at  all  •,  but  in  thefe  experiments  the  heat 
was  not  advantageoufly  applied,  and  the  bif- 

muth 


.110   Of  Air  procured  from  'various  Suhjiances', 

muth  foon  melted  into  large  lumps,  on  whicfv 
my  lens  had  no  power. 

I  got  no  air  from  lead  or  copper.  By  throw- 
ing the  focus  of  the  lens  upon  the  former,  the 
receiver  was  filled  with  fumes  ;  but  the  heat 
was  by  no  means  fufficient  for  the  experiment 
with  copper. 

In  the  account  of  my  former  experiments, 
I  mentioned  one  that  puzzled  me  and  my 
friends  exceedingly.  It  was  that  the  air  which 
I  got  from  chalky  in  a  gun-barrel,  was  inflam- 
mable, and  burned  with  a  blue  flame.  I  then 
conje6tured,  that  this  property  came  from  the 
iron ;  and  the  experiments  that  I  made  with 
the  burning  lens  have  confirmed  that  conjec- 
ture. But  why  this  inflammable  air  fhould 
burn  with  a  blue  flame ^  I  was  long  at  a  lofs  to 
account  for  ;  fmce  inflammable  air  from  iron 
only,  does  not  burn  in  that  manner.  At  length 
it  occurred  to  me,  to  try  what  would  be  the 
effect  of  burning  inflammable  air  mixed  with 
fixed  air,  procured  from  calcareous  fubfliances 
by  acids ',  when  I  found  It  always  burned  with 
a  blue  flame.  This  fa61:  I  muft  have  feen, 
perhaps,  a  hundred  times,  in  a  long  courfe  of 
experiments,  on  the  mixture  of  fixed  and  in- 
flammable air,  made  when  I  was  very  young  in 
thefc  inquiries,  thinking  that,  together,  they 
2  might 


hy  Means  of  Heat  onlyl  iii 

might  be  common  air  :  but  for  want  of  at- 
tending to  the  colour  of  the  flame ^  as  not  being 
the  objeft  I  had  then  in  view,  I  have  been  fo 
much  puzzled  fmce.  I  am  ftill  at  a  lofs  to 
explain  the  reafon  of  this  effedl  of  the  mixture 
of  thefe  two  kinds  of  air. 

Fixed  air  is  readily  difcharged  from  chalk 
by  any  acid ;  but  it  is  a_  very  fmall  quantity 
only,  that  mere  heat  will  expel  from  it.  How- 
ever, from  iron-filings  and  chalk,  which  I 
mixed  together,  in  order  to  refemble  the  cir- 
cumftances  of  the  experiment  with  the  chalk  in 
the  gun-barrel,  I  got  air  in  great  plenty  ;  and 
this  was  exactly  of  the  fame  kind  with  that  which 
I  had  got  from  chalk  in  the  gun-barrel.  Very 
much  of  it  was  inflammable,  and  it  burned 
with  a  blue  flame.  In  a  fecond  experiment  of 
this  kind,  I  had  the  fame  refult. 

No  cah  of  any  metal  on  which  I  made  the 
experiment  yielded  inflammable  air,  but  all  of 
them  fixed  air,  and  generally  in  great  plenty. 
Rufl:  of  iron  gave  a  great  deal  of  air,  two-thirds 
of  which  was  fixed  air,  and  the  reft  was  not 
affefted  by  nitrous  air,  and  extinguiflied  a 
candle ;  fo  that  the  whole  produce  feemed  to 
be  fixed  air,  only  with  a  larger  refiduum  of  that 
part  which  is  not  mifcible  with  water  than 
ufual.     At  another  time,   however,  I  got  from 

the 


'112  Of  Air  procured  from  'various  Suhftances, 

the  mil  of  iron  fixed  air  that  v/as  very  pure, 
there  being  little  of  it  that  was  not  mifcible 
with  water.  It  is  poiTibie,  though  I  cannot 
pretend  to  recoiled;  the  circumftances  of  the 
experiment,  that  I  might  ufe  lefs  heat  in  the 
latter  cafe  than  in  the  former. 

N.  B.  That  part  of  the  ruft  on  which  the 
focus  of  the  lens  fell,   turned  very  black. 

I  obferved  in  a  former  fe6tion,  that  both 
the^r^j  calx  of  lead^  and  litharge^  yielded  fixed 
air,  and  that  a  great  quantity  of  fixed  air  is 
contained  in  red  lead,  and  in  other  preparations 
of  that  metal. 

I  got  a  little  air  by  means  of  the  burning 
lens  in  quickfilver,  from  cinnabar  prepared  with 
antimony  ;  but  not  enough  to  form  a  judgment 
of  the  quality  of  it.  From  common  vermil- 
licn  I  got  more  air,  viz.  about  forty  times  its 
ov/n  bulk,  and  it  was  all  fixed  air,  being  rea- 
dily ablbrbed  by  water.  This  fubftance,  like 
the  ruft  of  iron,  turned  black  in  the  focus  of 
the  lens,  ' 

The  metallic  falts,  if  they  gave  any  air  at 
all,  gave  fixed  air,  which  I  find  to  be  contained 
in  moft  faline  fubftances.     I  fhall  recite  a  few 

experiments 


hy  Means  of  Heat  only,  113 

experiments  of  this  kind,   without  any  parti- 
cular regard  to  the  order  of  them. 

White  lead  yielded  air  in  great  plenty,  by 
the  heat  of  the  burning  lens,  and  it  was  all 
pure  fixed  a^r. 

I  could  get  no  air  whatever  ixomfugar  of 
lead^  or  from  nitre  of  lead.  The  former  melted 
into  a  liquid  fubftance ;  the  latter  changed  from 
white  to  a  dull  grey  colour,  and  broke  into 
powder,  with  a  crackling  noife. 

All  the  kinds  oi  copperas  gave  fixed  air.  I 
firft  tried  common  green  copperas  in  quickfilver. 
It  diflblved  into  a  great  quantity  of  water,  but 
the  air  produced  from  it  was  not  ^V  of  its  bulk. 
Half  of  this  air  was  readily  abforbed  by  water, 
and  the  remainder  was  too  fmall  to  be  exa- 
mined. I  repeated  the  experiment  on  calcined 
copperas,  both  in  a  gun-barrel,  and  likewife 
in  a  tall  glafs-veffel  filled  with  fand  ;  but  the 
produce,  in  all  the  cafes,  was  fixed  air.  Half 
an  ounce  of  calcined  copperas  yielded  near  a 
pint  of  air. 

When  I  had  extrafted  air  from  the  calx  of 

green  copperas  in  a  glafs-veflel,  I  put  the  fame 

materials  into  a  gun-barrel  \   but  ftill-I  extrac- 

I  ted 


114  Q/"  Air  procured  from  various  Suhftances^ 

ted  nothing  from  them  befides  fixed  air,  mixed 
with  acid  air,  as  appeared  by  the  extremely 
fmall  bubbles  to  which  the  large  ones  were  pre- 
iently  reduced  in  pafling  through  water. 

When  I  made  the  experiment  on  Ike  vitriol^ 
which  confifts  of  oil  of  vitriol  and  copper,  in 
quickfilver,  the  refult  was  the  fame  as  with 
the  green  copperas,  except  that  much  lefs  wa- 
ter was  produced. 

White  vitriol^  which  confifts  of  oil  of  vitriol 
and  zinc,  gave  ten"  times  as  much  air  as  the  ether 
kinds.  Half  of  it  was  abforbed  by  water, 
and  a  candle  burned  in  the  remainder.  When 
I  extracted  air  from  calcined  white  copperas, 
in  a  glafs-vcffel,  befides  fixed  air,  I  got  fome 
that  diminilhed  common  air  a  little ;  but  I 
conjefture  that  this  nitrous  property  muft  have 
come  from  fome  ether  fubftance  that  was  ac- 
cidentally mixed  with  the  vitriol. 

Mercurial  nitre  gave  a  great  quantity  of  aiir 
in  quickfilver,  and  this  was  pure  nitrous  air ; 
but  poiTibly  the  nitrous  acid  being  let  loofc 
from  this  fubftance,  had  produced  the  nitrous 
air  by  diflblving  the  quickfilver. 

From  Roman  vitriol  revivified  hy  flour,  which 
^  had  of  Dr.  Higgins,  I  got  air,  half  of  which 

was 


hy  Means  of  Heat  Cfity.  '^115 

Was  fixed,  and  the  remainder  was  not  dimini-* 
ihed  by  nitrous  air. 

'  All  the  air  that  I  was  ever  able  to  get  from 
faline  fuhfiances  was  fixed  air.  I  began  with 
abim^  and  the  firll  experiment  that  I  made 
upon  this  fubftance  was  with  the  fun-beams,  in 
quickfilver  •,  when  I  got  from  it  a  little  air, 
which  appeared  to  be  fixed  air,  by  extinguiih- 
ihg  a  candle,  and  by  being  readily  abforbed 
by  water.  1  repeated  the  experiment  with  the 
fame  refult.  The  quantity  of  air  extracted 
from  a  piece  of  alum,  was  about  one-third  of 
its  bulk  •,  but  I  imagined  that  a  little,  though 
not  much,  more  might  have  been  extracted,  by 
a  longer  continuance  of  the  operation. 

I  obferved,  upon  this  occafion,  that  1  could 
-calcine  only  a  given  quantity  of  alum  in  a 
given  quantity  of  air  •,  and  that  when  this  was 
faturated,  I  could  only  keep  the  alum  in  a 
fluid  Hate  by  heat.  But  it  was  eafily  calcined 
in  vacuo  *,  and  as  the  receivers  in  which  the 
calcination  was  made  became  very  moift,  it  is 
pretty  evident  that  this  operation  is  performed 
by  the  mere  expuliion  of  the  water  which  en- 
ters into  the  compofition  of  this  fait ;  fo  that 
when  the  furrounding  air  can  take  no  more 
water,  that  calcination  can  proceed  no  farther. 
I  alfo  obferved,  upon  this  occafion,  that  whei> 
I  2  I  had 


ii6  Of  Air  procured  fram  various  Suhftances^ 

I.  had  calcined  a  quantity  of  alum  in  a  given 
quantity  of  common  air,  the  air  was  not  di- 
minifhed,  or  in  the  fmalleft  degree  injured  by 
the  operation. 

After  this,  I  endeavoured  to  get  air  from 
talcined  aluniy  with  a  burning  lens ;  and  I  did 
get  a  little :  but  I  made  no  other  obfervation 
upon  it,  than  that  it  was  not  diminilhed  by 
nitrous  air.  But  when  I  put  a  quantity  of  cal- 
cined alum  into  a  gun- barrel,  I  got  from  it  a 
confiderable  quantity  of  air,  part  of  which  was 
£xed  air,  precipitating  lime  in  lime-water,  and 
the  remainder  did  not  differ  from  the  refiduum 
of  fixed  air,  extinguifhing  a  candle,  and  nei- 
ther affeding  common  air,  nor  being  affefted 
by  nitrous  air. 

From  half  an  ounce  of  vitriolated  tartar^ 
in  a  gun-barrel,  I  got  about  i  4:  ounce-meafure 
of  air,  which  was  chiefly  fixed  air.  The  laft 
produce  diminilhed  common  air  a  little ;  but 
this  I  attribute  to  the  gun-barrel,  Jiot  having 
been  perfedtly  cleaned  from  the  materials  ufed 
in  a  former  experiment. 

Borax  was  only  melted  by  the  burning  lens  v 

but  calcined  borax  gave  a  little  air,  about  its 

owrt  bulk  •,   and  this  air  extinguifhed  a  candle,. 

^nd  was  not  diminilhed  by  nitrous  air  5  fo  that 

4  it 


ly  Means  of  .Heat  only,  1 1 7 

it  feems  to  be  the  fame  thing  with  the  refi- 
duum  of  fixed  air  :  and  this  is,  in  fadl,  much 
the  fame  thing,  if  not  quite  the  fame  thing, 
with  common  air  phlogifticated.  I  was  in- 
duced to  make  this  experiment,  in  confe- 
qucnce  of  that  which  I  had  made  on  fedative 
fait,  which  is  made  from  borax,  and  from  which, 
as  I  have  obferved,  I  had  extra6led  air,  about 
as  good  as  common  air  i  being  in  hopes  that 
this  experiment  would  throw  fome  light  upon 
the  other  ;  but  I  was  difappointed  in  that  ex- 
pedlation. 

Having  thrown  the  focus  of  the  burning 
lens  upon  a  piece  of  volatile  fal  ammoniac,  in 
quickfilver,  a  great  quantity  of  air  was  pre- 
fently  expelled  from  it  •,  but  upon  v/ithdraw- 
ing  the  heat,  a  great  part  of  it  foon  difap- 
peared,  leaving  the  fides  of  the  veflel  co- 
vered with  flender  cryflals,  exa(5lly  like  thofe 
which  are  produced  by  a  mixture  of  fixed  air, 
and  alkaline  air.  The  remainder  was  imbibed 
by  water,    being,   no  doubt,  fixed  air. 

Among  other  things,  I  threw  the  focus  of 
the  lens  upon  a  piece  of  fine  white  fugar,  in 
quickfilver.  It  was  readily  melted,  and  con- 
verted into  a  brown  fubft:ance,  yielding  about 
two-thirds  of  its  bulk  of  air,  one-third -of  which 
was  readily  abforbed  by  water,  and  the  re- 
I  3  mainder 


1 18  Of  Air  procured  from  various  Suhftances^ 

rnainder  extinguifhed  a  candle.  I  repeated  the 
experiment  with  a  brownilh  powdered  fugar, 
with  the  fame  refult,  excepting  that  more  air 
was  generated  from  this  than  from  the  white 
fiigar,   in  proportion  to  their  bulks. 

From  common  fait ^  confined  by  quickfilver, 
I  got  no  air  at  alL 

There  has  been  a  good  deal  of  difference  of 
opinion  among  philofophers,  about  the  quality 
of  the  air  that  is  really  contained  in  chalk.  Dr. 
Black's  opinion  is,  that  it  is  properly  fixed  air  •, 
whereas  others  have  thought  that  the  acid  by 
which  the  air  is  diflodged  from  the  chalk,  re- 
ally enters  into  the  air  that  is  produced  in  the 
pirocefs,  and  accordingly,  that  the  fixed  air  pro- 
duced by  different  acids,  has  different  proper- 
ties. An  Italian  philofopher,  who  did  me  the 
honour  to  write  to  me  upon  the  fubjeft,  in^ 
forms  me,  that  he  has  difcovered  that  air  pro- 
duced from  chalk  by  heat,  is  of  a  different 
jmture  from  that  which  is  got  from  it  by  acids, 
and  particularly  that  the  former  will  not  make 
water  acidulous.  For  my  own  part,  I  muft 
aeknowledge  that  I  have  not  examined  this 
fubjeft  thoroughly,  and  have  been  fometimes 
inclining  to  one  opinion,  and  fometimes  to  an- 
other. Sometimes  I  have  thought  fixed  air  to  be 
W-.  original  acid^  and  therefore  one  uniform  inva^ 

riablq 


hy  Means  of  Heat  only.  119 

liable  thing,  from  whatever  fubllance,  arid  in 
whatever  manner  procured.  At  other  times  I 
have  been  inclined  to  think,  that  its  acidity  is 
derived  f;-om  fome  other  acid,  efpecially  the 
nitrous,  for  reafons  that  may  appear  in  a  fub- 
fequent  fection. 

At  prefent,  I  cannot  fay  that  I  am  quite  de- 
cided about  this  queftion ;  but  that  I  am  much 
inclined  to  Dr.  Black's  opinion,  and  that  all 
my  experiments  on  chalk  are  in  favour  of  it. 
For  though  I  could  get  but  very  little  air 
from  pure  chalk,  either  in  quickfilver,  or  in 
vacuo,  it  was  always  fixed  air,  though  the  re- 
fiduum  was  fometimes  more  confiderable  than 
I  have  found  it  to  be  when  the  air  was  pro- 
duced by  the  folution  of  chalk  in  an  acid. 
Once,  however,  I  got  a  fmall  quantity  of  very 
pure  fixed  air  from  chalk,  by  heat,  in  quick- 
filver, almoft  as  much  of  it  being  abforbed  by 
water,  as  when  chalk  is  made  to  give  air  by- 
means  of  an  acid. 

It  is  remarkable,  however,  that  heat  is  able 
to  expel  but  very  little  air  from  chalk.  I  kept 
a  very  fmall  quantity  of  chalk  in  the  focus  of 
my  burning  lens,  which  I  have  obferved  to  be 
twelve  inches  in  diameter,  and  twenty  inches 
focal  dillance,  more  than  half  an  hour,  when 
the  fun  was  near  its  greateft  altitude,  on  the 
I  4  2.3d 


1 20  Of  Air  procured  from  various  Suhfiances^  &c. 

23d  of  July ;  but  notwithftanding  this  long 
expofure  to  fo  intenfe  a  degree  pf  heat,  it  feem- 
ed  to  give  as  much  fixed  air  when  thrown  into 
a  veffel  of  water,  acidulated  with  oil  of  vitriol, 
as  an  equal  quantity  of  chalk  which  had  not 
been  expofed  to  any  heat  at  all.  Of  this,  how- 
ever, I  only  judged  by  the  vifible  effervefcence, 
and  did  not  make  any  attempt  to  meafure  the 
produce  of  air,  in  order  to  afcertain  the  effe6t 
oi  thefe  different  circumftances  with  accuracy. 
I  have  alfo  kept  chalk  more  than  a  quarter 
of  an  hour  in  the  ftrongeft  heat  of  a  fmith's 
forge,  in  a  crucible,  without  making  any  fen- 
fible  alteration  in  it.  But  I  believe  there  may 
be  great  differences  in  the  conftitution  of  dif- 
ferent fpecimens  of  chalk  in  this  refped:. 

When  I  put  a  quantity  of  chalk  into  a  tall 
glafs-veffel,  fig.  d,  and  kept  it  in  as  ftrong  a 
fand-heat  as  it  would  bear,  without  melting, 
I  extraded  from  it  about  its  own  bulk  of  air ; 
and  examining  the  ftate  of  it  at  fmall  intervals, 
I  always  found  that  it  precipitated  lime  in  lime- 
water,  and  that  the  refiduum,  not  abforbed  by 
water,  extinguilhed  a  candle  :  and  thefe  feem 
to  be  the  fureft  tells  of  genuine  fixed  air. 


5EC. 


0/  Air  produced  hy  Solution^  tec,         i cj  i 


SECTION    VII. 

Of  Air  'produced  hy  the  Solution  of  Vegetable  Suh^ 
fiances  in  Spirit  of  Nitre. 


The  experiments,  of  which  an  account  will 
be  given  in  this  feftion,  were  occafioncd,  in 
part,  by  a  hint  thrown  out  by  Mr.  Bewley,  in 
his  letter  to  me,  printed  in  the  Appendix  of 
my  former  volume  ;  but  more  immediately  by 
an  experiment  which  I  had  the  pleafure  to  fee 
jit  Paris,  in  the  laboratory  of  Mr.  Lavoifier, 
my  excellent  fellow-labourer  in  thefe  inquiries, 
and  to  whom,  in  a  variety  of  refpe6ts,  the  phi- 
Jofophical  part  of  the  world  has  very  great 
obligations. 


^G" 


Mr.  Bewley  fays,  that  he  had  always  taken 
it  for  granted,  that  the  elaftic  fluid,  generated 
in  the  preparation  of  nitrous  ether,  without 
diftillation,  was  fixed  air  -,  but  that,  after  fee^ 
ing  the  firft  publication  of  my  papers  relating 
to  air,  he  found,  on  examination,  that  it  had 
the  general  properties  of  nitrous  air. 

At  Mr.  Lavoifier's  I  faw,  with  great  aftonifh- 
fluent,  the  rapid  production  of,  I  believe,  near 

two 


122       Of  Air  produced  hy  the  Solution  of 

two  gallons  of  air,  from  a  mixture  of  fpirit  of 
nitre  and  fpix-it  of  wine,  heated  with  a  pan  of 
charcoal ;  and  when  that  ingenious  philofopher 
drew  this  air  out  of  the  receiver  with  a  pump, 
and  applied  the  flame  of  a  candle  to  the  orifice 
of  the  tube  through  which  it  was  conveyed  into 
the  open  air,  it  burned  with  a  blue  flame ;  and 
working  the  pump  pretty  vigoroufly,  he  made 
the  ftreams  of  blue  flame  extend  to  a  confider- 
able  diilance.  Being  very  much  fl;ruck  with  this 
experiment,  I  deterjnined  with  myfelf  to  give 
particular  attention  to  it,  and  purfue  it  after 
my  return  to  England. 

My  firft  idea  was,  that  this  air  was  the  fame 
thing  with  the  phlogifticated  nitrous  air  which 
I  had  procured  by  expofmg  pieces  of  iron  or 
3iver  of  fulphur  to  nitrous  air,  the  phlogifton 
of  the  fpirit  of  wine  being,  as  I  fuppofed,  difen- 
gaged  in  this  procefs,  and  becoming  incorpo- 
rated with  the  nitrous  acid,  in  the  fame  manner 
as  the  phlogifton  that  is  difengaged  from  the 
two  other  fubftances.  Thefe  kinds  of  air  dif- 
fered, however,  in  one  refpedl,  viz.  that  in 
Mr.  Lavoifier's  experiment  the  flame  was  blue, 
whereas  it  had  not  been  fo  in  mine.  But  this 
feemed  to  be  a  circumftance  of  no  great  im- 
portance. Indeed  I  cannot  fay,  that,  at  pre- 
fent,  my  idea  of  the  thing  is  materially  diffe- 
rent from  v/hat  it  v/as  then  5  but  I  have  fmce 

had. 


Vegetalle  Suhfiances  in  Spirit  of  Nitrt.     123 

had  an  opportunity,  by  purfuing  this  expe- 
riment, of  obferving  a  much  greater  variety 
in  the  produ6lion  of  air  by  means  of  fpirit  of 
nitre,    than  I  had  any  expectation  of  before. 

In  reality,  the  nitrous  acid  is  of  a  moft  won- 
derful nature  •,  the  more  I  confider  it,  the  more 
it  excites  rny  admiration,  and  the  more  unfa- 
thomable the  fubjecb  appears.  I  flatter  my- 
felf  that  i  have  made  confiderable  advances  in 
the  inveiligation  of  it  myfelf,  and  I  ftill  pro- 
-pofe  to  keep  it  in  view  •,  but  I  own  I  have  very 
little  expectation  of  feeing  it  thoroughly  ex- 
plained, 

In  general,  it  will  be  feen,  in  the  courfe  of 
thefc  experiments,  that  if  the  fubftance  with 
which  the  fpirit  of  nitre  is  heated,  whether  it 
be  fluid  or  folid,  contain  much  phlogifton,  the 
air  produced  from  it  will  be  nitrous  air,  or 
poflfefs  the  property  of  diminifhing  common 
air  to  a  confiderable  degree  •,  and,  in  almoft 
all  cafes,  with  a  mixture  of  fixed  air.  If  the 
fubftance  be  inflammable,  the  air  will  gene- 
rally be  fuch  as  I  faw  at  Mr.  Lavoifier's,  burn- 
ing with  a  blue  flame.  But  this  inflamma- 
bility is  of  a  very  delicate  kind,  refembling 
that  of  phlogifticated  nitrous  air  :  for  the  air 
^s  eafily  deprived  of  it  by  warning  in  water. 

A  particular 


J  24      Of  Air  produced  by  the  Solution  of 

A  particular  account  of  thefe  experiments, 
though  very  remarkable  in  their  nature,  will, 
I  forefee,  be  thought  tedious  by  fome  perfons ; 
but  the  detail  will  be  very  ufeful  to  fuch  as 
fhall  chufe  to  profecute  them ;  efpecially  on 
account  of  the  precautions  that  I  fhall  occafion- 
ally  give  to  prevent  difagreeable  accidents  from 
them.  Every  chymift  knows  how  hazardous 
it  is  to  mix  fpirit  of  nitre  vvith  inflammable 
matters ;  and  I  was  not  unapprized  of  it,  hav- 
ing feen  the  efFe6t  in  a  courfe  q^  chymical  lec- 
tures many  years  ago.  But,  being  obliged  to 
make  thefe  mixtures  in  a  very  different  manner, 
the  elfedl  could  not  be  obviated  without  a  va- 
riety of  precautions,  which  experience  only 
taught  me. 

Beginning  with  fpirit  of  wine,  in  imitation 
of  the  experiment  which  I  had  feen  at  Mr.  La- 
voifier's,  I  made  the  mixture  with  the  fpirit  of 
nitre,  in  the  manner  direded  in  the  procefs  for 
makmg  nitrous  ether;  putting  about  one- 
third  of  fpirit  of  nitre,  to  two-thirds  of  fpirit 
of  wine,  in  fuch  phial  as  e,  vol.  I.  plate  I. ; 
mixing  them  very  gradually.  Heating  this 
mixture  with  the  flame  of  a  candle,  I  received 
the  air  in  water ;  and  when  I  had  procured  a 
confiderable  quantity  of  it,  I  examined  it,  and 
found  it  to  burn  with  a  gentle  blue,  or  green- 
illi  flame,  nearly  the  fame,  as  well  as  I  could 

recollect. 


Vegetahk  Suhjiances  in  Sprit  of  Nitre.     125 

recoiled,  with  that  which  I  had  feen  at  Mr. 
Lavoifier's ;  fo  that  I  had  no  doubt  but  that 
my  procefs,  though  fomewhat  different  from 
his,  had  anfwered  perfedly  well. 

Confidering  this  flame  with  attention,  I 
thought  it  very  much  refembled  that  which  is 
produced  by  a  mixture  of  about  one-third  in- 
flammable air,  and  two-thirds  nitrous  air  •,  and 
concluded,  that  it  was  probably  compofed  of 
them  both ;  the  nitrous  acid  forming  nitrous 
air,  by  feizing  upon  the  phlogifton  of  the  fpi- 
rit  of  wine  ;  and  there  being  a  redundancy 
of  inflammable  matter,  fufiicient  to  render 
the  air  partially  inflammable. 

In  the  direftions  to  make  nitrous  ether,  I 
was  cautioned  to  pour  the  fpirit  of  nitre  upon 
the  fpirit  of  wine,  and  by  no  means  to  pour 
the  fpirit  of  wine  upon  the  fpirit  of  nitre.  But 
though  this  method  of  mixing  thefe  liquids 
may  not  anfwer  the  purpofe  of  making  nitrous 
ether,  it  anfwered  very  well  for  the  produc- 
tion of  air,  and  was  a  very  ufeful  variety  in 
the  procefs.  It  is  neceffary,  however,  that  the 
unexperienced  operator  Ihould  be  upon  his 
guard  in  thefe  experiments. 

The  fpirit  of  nitre  fhould  be  much  diluted, 
and  the  quantity  of  any  liquid  inflammable 

matter 


126      Of  Air  prodticed  hy  the  Solution  df 

matter  fhoiild  be  very  fmall,  juft  fufficient 
to  cover  the  furface  of  it :  otlierwife,  though 
the  mixture  may  exhibit  no  alarming  appear- 
ance at  firfl,  it  will,  in  a  little  time,  become 
very  black,  beginning  at  the  furface ;  the 
phial  will  then  be  filled  with  red  fumes,  the 
air  will  be  generated  in  a  prodigious  tor-- 
rent,  and,  unlefs  the  tube  through  which 
it  is  tranfinitted  be  fufficiently  wide,  and  the 
vefTel  in  which  the  mixture  is  made  be  very 
flrong,  the  whole  will  be  exploded  with  great 
violence.  Of  this  I  have  feen  but  too  many 
inftances  ;  and  fometimes  when  I  had  thought 
that  my  exDerience  had  taught  me  fufficient 
precaution.  Befides,  all  oily  matters  become 
extremely  vifcid,  by  mixing  with  fpirit  of 
nitre ;  and  this  vifcid  matter  getting  into  the 
tube,  flops  it  up,  and  much  increafes  the  ha- 
zard of  an  explofion.  But  to  recur  to  the  ex* 
periments. 

Flaving  poured  a  very  little  fpirit  of  wine 
upon  a  quantity  of  diluted  fpirit  of  nitre  in  a 
glafs-phial,  with  a  ground  flopple  and  tube, 
a  great  quantity  of  air  was  prefently  produced. 
When  a  candle  was  dipped  into  this  air,  it 
was  extinguifhed  ;  but  in  going  out  was  fur- 
rounded  with  a  flight  blue  or  green  flame,  but 
hardly  m^ore  than  is  perceived  in  nitrous  air. 
Almofl  one-half  of  this  produce  of  air  was  rea- 
2  dily 


Vegetable  Suhjiances  in  Spirit,  of  Nitre.     127 

dily  abforbed  by  water,  and  precipitated  lime 
in  lime-water ;  and  I  doubt  not  but  that,  in 
the  fubfequent  experiments,  as  well  as  in  this, 
a  great  proportion  of  the  air  produced  in  this 
manner  was  fixed  air.  The  remainder  was 
nitrous,  almoll  as  flrong  as  any. 

Upon    air  produced  in  this   manner  from 
cil  of  turpentine^  I  happened  to  make  a  few 
more  experiments,  fome   of  which  are  not  a 
little  remarkable.     When  I  ufed  the  ftrongeil 
fpirit  of  nitre  in  this  procefs,  it  was  very  dlf- 
ticult  to  get  mAich  air,  on  account  of  the  fud- 
dennefs  of  the  effervefcence  •,  but  a  great  quan- 
tity of  air  is  eafily  produced  by  diluting  the 
fmoking  fpirit  of  nitre  with  an  equal  quantity 
of  water.    At  one  time,  however,  when  I  had 
heated  this  mixture  pretty  much,   and  it  had 
yielded  a  great  deal  of  air,  though  I  v/ithdrew 
the  candle,   the  air  contijiued  to  be  produced 
fafter  and  fafter  fcr  about  a  minute.     It  then 
came  quite  in  a  torrent  •,   all  the  oil  of  turpen- 
tine was  thrown  out  of  the_  phial,  and  the  fpi- 
rit of  nitre  only  left  in  it.     This  is  likewife  the 
cafe  with  other  ftmilar  mixtures ;  fo  that  when 
it  is  neceflary  to  apply  heat,  it  fhould  be  done 
very  gradually  and    cautioully,    and   the  air 
lliould  never  be  generated  very  fait,  unlels  the 
purpofe  of  the  experiment  require  it,   and  the 
operator  be  upon  his  guard  accordingly. 

When 


128       0/  Jir  produced  hy  the  Mutton'  0f 

When  I  received  this  air  in  water,  it  €xtin* 
guifhed  a  candle,  and  did  not  diminilh  common 
air.  "When  received  in  quickfilver,  it  ftill  ex^ 
tinguifhed  a  candle ;  but  as  it  went  out  the 
third  or  fourth  time,  it  was  furrouuded  with 
a  bluiih  flame,  as  large  as  that  of  the  candle. 
And  happening,  at  one  time,  to  apply  more 
heat  than  I  intended  when  the  air  was  received 
in  water  (and  in  confequence  of  it,  the  air  was 
produced  very  fuddenly)  I  examined  it  im- 
mediately, and  a  candle  burned  in  it  with  an 
enlarged  flame,  though  not  remarkably  fo.  It 
Ihows,  however,  that  in  this  procefs  alfo,  as 
well  as  in  the  procefs  for  making  phlogifti- 
cated  nitrous  air,  the  property  of  its  admitting 
a  candle  to  burn  with  an  enlarged  flame  de- 
pends, in  a  great  meafure,  upon  the  time  at 
which  the  experiment  is  tried  after  the  air  is 
produced,  and  upon  other  delicate  circum- 
llances. 

A  quantity  of  this  air,  received  in  water, 
was  about  half-abforbed  in  one  night.-  By  agi- 
tation it  appeared  to  be  abforbed  not  fo  readily 
as  fixed  air,  nor  with  fo  much  difficulty  as 
nitrous  air,  but  in  a  medium  between  both. 
"When  this  air  v/as  reduced  to  about  one-eighth 
of  its  original  bulk,  it  was  diminiflied  by  ni- 
trous air.  But  this  is  the  cafe  with  all  the 
kinds  of  air  that  will  bear  the  experiment,  and 

even 


Vegetable  Suhfl duces  in  Spirit  of' Nitre.     129 

even  with  nitrous  air  itfelf,  as  I  have  obf^rved 
in  my  former  publication. 

At  the  time  that  I  made  the  preceding  expe- 
riments with  oil  of  turpentine,  I  had  no  lime- 
water  at  hand  ;  and  therefore  only  judged  that 
part  of  the  produce  was  fixed  air,  by  the  man- 
ner in  which  it  was  abforbed  by  water.     But, 
lefs  certain  as  this  teft  is,  a  perfon  much  ufed 
to  experiments  of  this  kind,  will  be  able  to  ap- 
ply it  with  fufficient  certainty  in  moft  cafes. 
However,    repeating  this  experiment,  when  I 
had  procured   the  glafs-phiais  with  ground- 
Hopples  and  tubes,    I  found  that  the  greatell 
part    of   this    air    was   unqueftionably    fixed 
air,  precipitating  lime  in  lime-water,   as  much 
as  any  fixed  air  whatever,  and  that  the  remain- 
der was  ftrongly  nitrous.     Attempting  at  this 
time  alfo,  to  receive  the  air  in  quickfilver,  a 
good  deal  of  the  vapour  of  the  fpirit  of  nitre 
came  over  \    and,  dilTolving  the   quickfilver, 
made   the  produce  of  air  almoil  wholly  ni- 
trous. 

I  obferved,  at  one  time,  when  I  had  pro- 
duced this  air  in  a  phial  with  a  ground-ftopple, 
that  after  the  firft  part  of  the  procefs,  in  which 
no  heat  was  applied,  the  water  rufhed  back 
into  the  phial.  Upon  this  I  applied  the  flame 
of  a  candle  to  the  diluted  mixture,  and  getting 
K  a  fecond 


130      Of  Air  produced  by  the  Solution  of 

a  fecond  produce  of  air,  examined  them  both 
feparately.  Both  of  them  contained  a  great 
proportion  of  fixed  air,  precipitating  lime  in 
lime-water  very  much  ;  and  when  the  fixed  air 
was  waflied  out  of  them,  they  both  diminilhed 
common  air,  but  the  latter  more  than  the  for- 
ifler.  Two  meafures  of  common  air,  and  one 
of  this,  occupied  the  fpace  of  little  more  than 
two  meafures. 

In  order  to  judge  how  far  an  add  prevailed 
in  this  air  from  fpirit  of  nitre,  and  oil  of  tur- 
pentine, I  put  alkaline  air  to  it  •,  when  in- 
ilantly  a  white  cloud  was  produced,  which  rofe 
to  the  top  of  the  veflel ;  but  it  was  by  no  means 
fo  denfe  as  that  which  is  produced  by  mixing 
alkaline  air  with  any  of  the  acid  airs ;  nor  did 
the  whole  quantity  of  air  difappear,  but  only 
half  of  it.  However,  all  the  infide  of  the  tube 
was  covered  with  a  faline  fubftance,  which  I 
did  not  examine,  but  fuppofed  it  to  have  been 
the  nitrous  ammoniac.  Having  the  curiofity 
to  dip  the  flame  of  a  candle,  which  happened 
to  be  at  hand,  into  the  air  that  remained  of 
this  mixture,  it  appeared  to  be  fo  far  inflam- 
mable, as  even  to  make  a  conflderable  explo- 
lion  -,  but  not  quite  fo  great  a  one  as  I  have 
obferved  to  have  been  made  by  a  quantity  of 
phlogifl:icated  nitrous  air,   vol.  I.  p.  217. 

Repeating 


Vegetable  Suhftances  in  Spirit  of  Nitre.     131 

Repeating  this  experiment  fome  time  after- 
wards, about  one-fourth  of  the  mixture  of  this 
air,  and  alkaline  air,  difappeared  upon  their 
being  put  together.  Half  of  the  remainder 
was  abforbed  by  water  ;  and  in  this  fecond  re- 
mainder, which,  by  its  rednefs,  on  being  ex- 
pofed  to  common  air,  appeared  to  be  confider- 
ably  nitrous :  a  candle  burned  with  a  beauti- 
fully enlarged  flame. 

In  thefe  cafes  the  alkaline  air  muil  have  fup- 
plied  the  phlogifton,  v/hich  the  iron  and  liver 
of  fulphur  had  before  fupplied  to  nitrous  air ; 
in  confequence  of  which  it  admitted  a  candle 
to  burn  in  it  in  the  fame  manner ;  for  neither 
of  the  component  parts  of  this  air,  viz.  the 
fixed  or  the  nitrous,  are  either  feparately,  or 
together,  inflammable.  It  is  fomething  re- 
markable, however,  that  when  I  mixed  equal 
quantities  of  nitrous  and  alkaline  air,  and  exa-  • 
mined  the  mixture  immediately,  the  nitrous 
air  feemed  not  to  have  been  at  all  afi'edted  by 
the  alkaline  air.  It  was  not  in  the  fmallefl: 
degree  inflammable.  I  had  imagined  that  al- 
kaline air  might,  in  this  manner  alfo,  have 
phlogift:icated  the  nitrous  air ;  but  it  feem^ 
that  w^hen  it  is  fo  applied,  it  has  no  fuch  ef- 
fed. 

K  2  Air 


132       Of  Air  ■produced  by  the  Solution  of 

' .  Air  produced  from  all  the  effential  oils  by  fpi- 
rit  of  nitre,  has,  I  believe,  the  fame  proper- 
ties as  that  which  is  produced  from  oil  of  tur- 
pentine. I  tried  another,  but  I  forget  which,  ^ 
in  a  phial  with  a  gfound-ftopple,  and  the  air 
produced  from  it  precipitated  lime  in  lime- 
water,  extinguifhed  a  candle,  and  diminillied 
common  air  a  little. 

Etherj  both  vitriolic  and  nitrous,  heated  in 
fpirit  of  nitre,  yields  the  fame  kind  of  air  as 
the  effential  oils,  or  fpirit  of  wine,  viz.  partly 
fixed  air,  and  partly  phlogifticated  nitrous  air. 
Equal  caution  is  alfo  neceffary  in  condufbing 
this  procefs  j  for  the  phenomena  attending  it 
are  the  fame  that  I  defcribed  in  the  beginning 
of  this  feftion,  and  in  the  higheft  degree.  I 
would  therefore  recommend  the  ufmg  of  a  very 
fmall  quantity  of  the  ether,  and  putting  it  up- 
on the  fpirit  of  nitre. 

At  firfl:,  however,  in  imitation  of  the  pro- 
cefs for  making  nitrous  ether,  I  poured  the 
fpirit  of  nitre  upon  the  ether,  as  I  had  done  at 
firft  alfo  with  fpirit  of  wine  -,  and,  heating  the 
mixture,  received  the  air,  which  it  yielded  in 
orcat  plenty,  in  quickfilver.  This  air  made 
no  cloud  with  the  mixture  of  alkaline  air  -,  it 
burned  exadtly  like  the  vapour  oi^^ether  itfelf ; 
and  when  part  of  the  mixture  had  boiled  over, 
4  .  ^  it 


Vegetable  Suhfiances  in  Spirit  of  Nitre.     133 

it  quickly  abforbed  the  air  that  had  been  ge-. 
nerated. 

Seeing  fufficient  reafon  to  difapprove  of  this 
procefs,  I  had  recourfe  to  the  other,  and  found 
that  when  I  ufed  a  very  diluted  fpirit  of  nitre, 
and  but  little  eiher,  the  experiment  was  much 
more  manageable,  and  the  air  was  produced 
in  fufEcient  plenty.  This  air  was  readily  ab- 
forbed by  water  v  and  upon  putting  alkaline 
air  to  it,  a  very  flight  cloud  rofe  to  the  top  of 
the  ve0el ;  but  there  was  no  fenfible  diminu-' 
tion  of  the  quantity  of  air  occafioned  by  it.' 
When  a  candle  was  dipped  into  this  air,  it  was 
extinguifhed  many  times,  but  always  with  a, 
beautiful  bluifh  flame,  much  larger  than  the" 
natural  flame  of  the  candle.  Towards  the  clofe 
of  the  experiment,  the  air  in  the  inflde  of  the- 
veflTel  became  red  \  a  certain  flgn  of  its  being 
confiderably  nitrous.  On  repeating  this  expe- 
riment, when  I  had  procured  the  phials  with 
the  ground-fliopples  and  tubes,  I  had  the  mofl: 
fatisfadlory  proof,  that  part  of  this  produce  of 
air  was  flxed  air,  by  its  precipitating  lime  in 
lime-water  •,  and  that  the  remainder  was  nitrous^ 
almofl:  as  fl:rong  as  any,  by  its  power  of  dimi- 
niihino;  common  air. 

The  refult  of  the  experiment  with  nitrous 

et^er  was,  in  all  refpeds,  the  very  fame  as  that 

K  3  ©f 


134      Of  Air  produced  by  the  Solution  of 

of  this  with  vitriolic  ether.  I  made  the  expe- 
riment, becaufe  it  might  have  been  expeded 
that  there  would  have  been  fome  difference  in 
the  refult,  as  the  nitrous  ether  is  the  produce 
of  fpirit  of  nitre,  with  which  it  was  i^ow  mixed. 

Spirit  of  nitre,  heated  with  olive-oil^  yields 
the  fame  kind  of  air  with  that  which  is  pro- 
duced from  effential  oils,  &c.  but  the  procefs 
is  exceedingly  troublefome,  owing  to  the  te- 
nacity of  the  oil-,  and  it  is  not  much  more 
manageable,  when  but  a  very  little  of  the  oil 
is  put  to  a  large  quantity  of  the  diluted  fpirit 
of  nitre.  The  air  which  I  got  in  this  manner 
precipitated  lime  in  limp-water. 

With  very  great  difficulty  I  got,  in  a  phial 
with  a  ground-ftopple,  a  very  fmall  quantity 
of  air  from  fpirit  of  nitre  and  tallow^  the  water 
rufhing  into  the  veffel  after  every  gufh  of  air. 
It  precipitated  lime  in  lime-water. 

The  refult  of  the  experiment  with  hees-wax^ 
was  the  very  fame  with  that  with  tallow.  Put- 
tihg  a  fmall  piece  of  bees-wax  upon  a  quantity 
of  pretty  ftrong  fpirit  of  nitre,  I  got  air  which 
made  lime-water  turbid ;  but  not  enough  to 
afcertain  its  other  properties.  This  procefs 
was  equally  difficult  with  the  preceding,   on 

account 
1 


Vegetable  Suhflances  in  Spirii  of  Nitre.     135 

account  of  the  water  rufliing  into  the  phial  af- 
t^r  every  gufh  oi'  air. 

I  had  the  curiofity  to  endeavour  to  procure 
air  from  fome  of  the  gums^  &c.  by  this  pro-^ 
cefs,  and  found  the  refult  to  be,  in  the  niain,  the 
fame  widi  ihst  ot  the  preceding  experiments. 

Gum-arabic  eafily  dilTolves  in  the  nitrous 
acid  ;  and  as  it  diHolves,  a  great  quantity  of 
air  is  produced,  making  a  beautiful  appear- 
ance; but  when  the  acid  is  nearly  faturated, 
it  becomes  vifcid,  and  the  vefTel  gets  full  of 
froth.  Part  of  this  air  was  fixed,  precipitat- 
ing lime  in  lime-water,  and  being  readily  ab^ 
forbed  by  water.  The  remainder  was  nitrous, 
almofl:  as  ftrong  as  any, 

The  refult  was  the  fame  with  gwn-copal^  ex- 
cepting that  this  fubftance  did  not  fmk  in  the 
fpirit  of  nitre,   as  the  gum-arabic  had  done. 

Camphor^  with  diluted  fpirit  of  nitre,  yielded 
very  flrong  nitrous  air  ;  but  required  a  confi- 
derable  degree  of  heat.  A  good  deal  of  the 
camphor,  which  had  been  fluid,  and  had  fwum 
on  the  furface  of  the  fpirit  of  nitre,  came  over, 
^nd  refumed  its  natural  appearance  in  water. 
I  did  not  try  whether  any  part  of  this  produce 
W^  fij^ed  air. 

K  4  J  got 


1^6      Of  Air  produced  by  the  Sclution  of 

I  'got.  fome  air  by  fpirit  of  nitre  from  amber, 
which  precipitated  lime  in  lime-water  •,  but  the 
quantity  was  too  fmall  to  be  examined  any  far- 
ther. Afterwards  I  got  a  larger  quantity  from 
a  greater  number  of  fmall  pieces  of  amber, 
heated  in  a  weak  fpirit  of  nitre,  contained  in 
a  phial  with  a  ground-ftopple.  About  one- 
third  of  this  produce  was  fixed  air,  precipitat- 
ing lime  in  lime-water,  and  being  readily  ab- 
forbed  by  water.  In  the  remainder  a  candle 
burned  with  an  enlarged  greenifh  flame.  It  alfo 
diminifhed  common  air  -,  fo  that  two  meafures 
of  common  air,  and  one  of  this,  occupied  the 
fpace   of  2  ^  meafures, 

N.  B.  Moft  of  the  pieces  of  amber  ufed  In  this 
experiment  were  turned  black  quite  through, 
the  reft  continuing  of  their  natural  colour. 

It  happened,  in  the  courfe  of  thefe  experi- 
ments, that  a  bit  of  fealing-wax  got  into  the 
phial,  and  I  obferved  air  to  ifTue  from  it  very 
copioufly.  Upon  this,  I  put  a  piece  of  feallng- 
wax  into  the  phial,  with  fpirit  of  nitre,  and 
received  the  air  at  different  times.  That  which 
came  over  firft  was,  in  the  higheft  degree,  ni- 
trous ;  but  when,  with  the  application  of  more 
heat,  I  caufed  a  copious  produftion  of  a  very 
turbid  kind  of  air  (which  however,  prefentiy 
became  tranfparent)  it  hardly  afFedled  common 

air 


Vegetahk  Suhftances  in  Spirit  of  Nitri,     i^y 

air  at  all.  It  was  then  pretty  readily  abforbed 
by  water  -,  and  though  at  firft  it  extinguiflied 
a  candle,  yet  when  it  had  been  wailied  in  wa- 
ter, a  candle  burned  in  it  with  a  blue  flame. 
Indeed  when  the  candle  was  extinguifhed  in 
it,  it  went  out  with  that  kind  of  blue  flame. 
The  courfe  of  this  experiment  will  be  found 
to  be  analogous  to  that  with  other  hard  fub- 
fiances  containing  phlogifton,  which  I  fhall  now 
recite,  though  many  of  them  were  made  before 
this. 

Having  found  that  charcoal  would  diflblve 
in  oil  of  vitriol,  and  thereby  yield  a  vitriolic 
acid  air,  I  had  the  curiofity  to  try  what  would 
be  the  effeft  of  an  attempt  to  dilTolve  this  fub- 
ftance  in  fpirit  of  nitre.  This  was  when  I  had 
made  but  little  progrefs  in  the  preceding  expe* 
riments  with  oily  and  gummy  fubfliances,  and 
I  had  no  expectation  of  the  refult.  I  began 
with  taking  the  produce  in  quickfilver,  as  I 
had  done  with  that  from  the  vitriolic  acid  ;  but 
all  that  came  over  in  this  manner,  was  the  ni- 
trous acid  vapour,  which,  feizing  upon  the 
quickfilver,  produced  nitrous  air. 

After  this,  I  received  the  produce  in  water, 
and  found  it  to  be  genuine  nitrous  air,  almoft 
as  ftrong  as  any  that  is  produced  from  metals. 
At  that  time  I  was  much  furprized  at  this  re- 
fult. 


158      Of  Ain.f^'&ducod,  by  ihe  Solution  of 

fult,  having  imagined  that  Ritrous  air  eeuld 
not  be  procured  but  by  the  folution  of  metals 
in  rpirit  of  nitre ;  and  I  confidered  this  as  an- 
other property  in  which  metals  and  charcoal 
refem.bie  each  other-,  befides  thofe  which  I 
had  noted  before,  and  an  account  of  which 
may  be  ictn  m  a  p^per  formerly  printed  in  the 
Philofophical  Tranla6lions,  and  which  I  fliall 
infert  in  this  volume.  But  prefently  after  this 
I  got  nitrous  air  equally  ftrong  from  other  hard 
fubftances,  fuch  as  dry  wood  of  various  kinds, 
&c. ;  but  in  thefc  procelTes,  the  quality  of 
the  air  alifFers  exceedingly,  according  to  the 
degree  of  heat  applied,  and  other  circumftances  : 
and  I  think  the  fubjed:  deferves  a  farther  in-^ 
veftigation.  To  promote  this,  I  fhall  recite 
the  principal  f^6ls  of  this  kind  that  have  occur-? 
red  to  my  obferv^tion, 

Having  poured  about  a  quarter  of  an  ounee- 
meafure  of  fmoking  fpirit  of  nitre,  mixed  with 
an  equal  quantity  of  water,  upon  (ome  pounded 
charcoal,  and  having  applied  to  it  the  'flame  of 
a  candle,  I  colleded  3,  large  jar  full  of  air,  in 
all  twenty-eight  ounce-meafures.  When  about 
half  of  this  quantity  of  air  was  produced,  it 
was  impoflible  to  apply  any  more  heat,  but 
the  fpirit  of  nitre  would  come  over ,  which 
it  did,  tinged  with  a  deep  black.  When  all 
the  liquor  was  come  over,  ftill  one-fourth  part 

of 


Vegetable  Suhjlances  in  Sphit  q/  Nitre.     139 

o(  the  air  was  produced  with  the  application 
pf  a  ftrong  heat.  The  air  of  this  whole  pro- 
duce, v/hich  was  not  taken  at  different  times, 
was  ftrongly  nitrous.  Two  meafures  of  com- 
mon air,  and  one  of  this,  occupied  the  fpaca 
cf  no  more  than  two  meafures. 

It  was  my  feeing  this  air  produced  in  dif- 
ferent circumftances,  viz.  before  any  of  the 
acid  came  over,  and  afterwards,  that  fuggefted 
X-O  me  the  importance  of  talking  the  air  at  differs 
rent  times,  according  to  the  change  of  circum- 
ftances  in  the  production  of  it ;  a  hint  which 
I  purfued  to  very  great  advantage  afterwards, 
as  the  reader  has  already  feen,  and  will  fee 
farther,   in  the  courfe  of  my  experiments. 

Repeating  the  experiment  with  this  viev/,  I 
examined  the  firft  produce  of  air,  which  came 
over,  while  the  heat  was  very  moderate,  and 
found  it  to  be  very  ftrong  nitrous  air,  almoft 
as  ftrong  as  that  which  is  procured  from 
metals.  Towards  the  laft  I  increafcd  the 
heat,  and  by  that  means  produced  a  very  tur- 
bid air,  of  which  I  collefted  a  prodigious 
quantity.  Sometimes,  however,  the  air  would 
be  quite  tranfparent,  and  then  turbid  again, 
feveral  times.  I  endeavoured  to  take  the  tur- 
bid air  and  the  tranfparent  feparately,  and  I 
fucceeded  pretty  well ;   but  I  found  them  both 

to 


140      Of  Air  produced  hy  the  Solution  of 

to  be  of  the  fame  quality,  extinguilliing  a 
candle,  and  diminifhing  common  air  but  very 
little  ;  two  meafures  of  common  air,  and  one 
of  this,  occupying  the  fpace  of  little  lefs  than 
three  meafures. 

At  this  time  I  made  ufe  of  the  phials  repre- 
fented  fig.  a,  with  common  corks ;  and  obferv- 
ing  that  the  corks  were  always  much  corroded 
in  thefe  experiments,  I  thought  it  would  be 
proper  to  afcertain  the  effedt  of  the  fpirit  of 
nitre  on  the  cork^  in  order  to  make  proper  al- 
lowance for  this  circumftance  in  future  expe- 
riments. I  therefore  poured  a  quantity  of  fpi- 
rit of  nitre  upon  fome  pieces  of  cork,  and 
treating  it  in  the  manner  above  mentioned,  I 
found  the  produce  of  air  to  correfpond  very 
exactly  with  that  which  I  had  got  from  the 
charcoal.  With  a  moderate  degree  of  heat  the 
air  was  ftrongly  nitrous  ;  and  with  a  great  heat 
the  air  was  turbid,  and  much  lefs  nitrous.  I 
was  not  a  little  furprized  to  find  that  nitrous 
air  was  produced  from  cork,  as  it  intirely  over- 
turned my  fyftem  of  the  produftion  of  this 
air,  depending  upon  that  property  of  the  char- 
coal by  which  it  refembies  metals.  However, 
I  prefently  found,  that  genuine  nitrous  air  was 
produced  from  a  variety  of  other  hard  fuh- 
Jiances  •,  for  at  that  time  I  had  not  difcovered 
that  it  was  produced  from  any  liquid  ones. 

The 


Vegetable  Stihjiances  in  Spirit  of  Nitre.     141 

The  correfpondence  of  an  experiment  which 
I  made  with  old  dry  oak  with  that  which  I 
made  with  charcoal  is  ftriking  enough ;  and 
one  of  them  may  a  little  illuilrate  the  other. 

I  put  about  half  an  ounce  meafure  of  the 
rafpings  of  old  dry  oak  into  one  of  the  phials 
above  mentioned,  fig.  ^,  and  poured  upon 
them  as  much  fpirit  of  nitre,  half-diluted  with 
water,  as  made  them  thoroughly  moift.  Air 
was  inftantly  produced,  without  the  applica- 
tion of  any  heat.  This  air  1  received,  toge- 
gether  with  a  little  that  was  produced  by  hold- 
ing the  flame  of  a  candle,  at  the  diftance  of 
about  a  quarter  of  an  inch,  from  the  fide  of  the 
phial.  I  then  placed  the  candle  nearer,  and 
received  the  air  at  five  difi^erent  times  ;  the 
laft  but  one  being  produced  when  the  flame 
touched  the  fide  of  the  phial,  and  the  laft, 
when  it  was  placed  clofe  under  it,  and  after 
all  the  moiflure  feemed  to  be  expelled  from  the 
phial  The  firfl  produce  was  of  the  nature  of 
nitrous  air,  the  two  next  much  more  fo,  almofl 
as  ftrong  as  any  j  but  the  two  laft  were  hardly 
nitrous  at  all.  A  candle  went  out  in  this  air, 
burning  with  a  bluifh  flame,  as  if  it  had  been 
in  part  a  mixture  of  inflammable,  nitrous,  and 
fixed  air.  That  part  of  this  produce  was  fixed 
air,  was  evident,  by  its  being  readily  abforbed 

by 


f42     -  Of  Air  produced  by  the  Solution  of 

by  water ;  but  I  did  not  apply  to  it  the  tell  of 
lime-water. 

Seeing  this  aftonilhing  difference  in  the  pro- 
duce of  air  by  fpirit  of  nitre  from  different 
fubftances,  and  even  from  the  fame  fubftance 
in  different  circumftances,  I  thought  that  it 
might  be  poffible,  by  this  means,  to  dillinguilli 
thole  fubftances  that  are  yiutritious  from  thofe 
that  are  not;  and,  in  my  imagination,  I  had 
thought  it  poffible  to  aicertain  the  quantity  of 
nutriment  that  different  fubftances  would  yield 
by  the  quality  and  quantity  of  the  air  pro- 
duced from  them  ;  but  the  experiments  by  no 
means  anfwered  fuch  fond  expeftations.  I 
found,  however,  what  I  did  not  exped:,  viz. 
a  moft  remarkable  difference  between  the  air 
produced  from  animal fuhftances  of  feveral  kinds, 
and  from  vegetables  j  for,  in  general,  the  former 
had  little  of  the  nitrous  property  •,  but  the  lat- 
ter, though  nutritious,  yielded  the  fame  kind  ' 
of  air  with  that  which  I  had  got  from  wood  or 
charcoal.  The  fads  furprized  me  very  much 
and  I  can  give  the  reader  no  clue  to  lead  him 
through  the  labyrinth. 

The  vegetable  fubftances  which  I  tried  were 
•uoh eat -flour ^  barley^  and  malt^  all  of  which 
yielded  nitrous  air  in  the  firft  part  of  the  pro- 
duce, and  air  of  the  fame  quality  with  the  laft 

produce 


p'egetahk  Suhflances  in  Spirit  of  Nitre.     143 

produce  from  charcoal,  if  the  procefs  was  con- 
tinued a  long  time,  and  with  a  ftrong  heat.  I 
had  once  fufpefted  that  the  nitrous  quality 
might  have  come  from  the  cork  with  which  the 
phial  was  clofed  •,  but  I  was  fatisfied  that  it 
came  from  the  fubftance  within  the  phial,  when, 
inftead  of  a  phial  clofed  with  a  cork  as  before, 
I  ufed  one- of  thofe  reprefented  fig.  hi,  which  I 
have  obferved  to  have  been  contrived  by  Mr. 
Vaughan.  Having  put  the  barley  and  fpirit 
of  nitre  into  this  vefiel,  I  heated  it  in  a  velTel 
full  of  water,  placed  on  the  fire,  covering  the 
phial  with  a  glafs  jar  filled  with  water,  in  or- 
der to  receive  the  air.  The  air  procured  in 
this  manner  was  ftill  ftrongly  nitrous,  though 
it  could  come  from  nothing  but  the  fpirit  of 
nitre  and  barley. 

As  I  attended  to  a  few  collateral  clrcum- 
ftances  in  the  experiment  with  the  malt^  it  may 
be  worth  while  to  recite  the  particulars.  Hav- 
ing juft  covered  one  pennyweight  of  malt  with 
diluted  fpirit  of  nitre,  I  made  it  boil,  and 
procured  from  it  two  jars  full  of  air,  each  con- 
taining near  thirty  ounce-meafures,  and  I  might 
have  colledled  more.  That  which  came  iirft, 
and  which  was  tranfparent,  diminifhed  com- 
mon air  almoft  as  much  as  the  (Irongeft  nitrous 
air.  The  air  which  came  lad,  and  which  was 
tuxbid,  hardly  diminifhed  common  air  at  all, 

and 


144      Of  Air  produced  by  Solutioiu  &c. 

and  it  was  readily  abforbed  by  water.  Before 
it  was  agitated  in  water,  it  extinguifhed  a 
candle ;  but  afterwards,  when  it  was  reduced 
to  about  one-fourth  of  its  original  quantity,  a 
candle  burned  in  it  with  a  lambent  blue  flame. 

N.  B.  Towards  the  clofe  of  this  procefs, 
part  of  the  contents  of  the  phial  were  reduced 
to  a  coal. 


SEC- 


Of  Air  procured  hy  Solution^  &c.'         f  4^ 


SECTION    Vlil. 

Of  Air  -procured  hy  the  Solution  of  Animal 
Substances  in  Spirit  of  Nitre, 

I  profefs  not  to  be  able  to  aflign  any  reafon 
for  the  difference  in  the  produce  of  air  from 
animal  and  vegetable  fabftances  ;  but  the  expe- 
riments, of  which  an  account  will  be  given  in 
this  fedion,  compared  with  thofe  recited  in  the 
laft,  will  prove,  that,  in  general,  there  is  a 
very  confiderable  one. 

It  has  been  feen  that  vegetable  fubftances^ 
diffolved  in  fpirit  of  nitre,   befides  fixed  air,* 
yielded  nitrous  air,  and  frequently  as  ftrong 
as  that  which  is  procured  by  the  folution  of 
metals  in  the  fame  acid ;   and  this  is  the  cafe 
whether  the  fpirit  of  nitre  be  much  concentrat- 
ed, or  much  diluted.     On  the  contrary,  animal 
fubllances,    in  general,    treated  in   the  fame 
manner,  yield  about  the  fame  proportion  of 
fixed  air  ;  but  the  refiduum  is  either  not  at  all, 
or  in  a  very  flight  degree,    nitrous  (except  in 
fome  cafes  where  the  fpirit  of  liitre  is  very 
ftrong)  but  is  a  kind  of  air  which,'  neither  af- 
fefting  common  air,   nor  being  affected  by  ni- 
L  trous 


14-0       Of  Air  procured  hy  the  Solution  of 

trons  air,  but  fimply  extinguilhing  a  candle, 
may  be  termed  pblogifiicated  air.  Towards 
the  end  of  i  procefs,  indeed,  when,  by  means 
of  a  ilrong  heat,  the  produce  of  air  is  very 
rapid,  and  the  air  full  of  clouds,  it  is,  like 
air  produced  from  vegetable  fubftances  in  the 
fame  circumftances,  (lightly  inflammable,  burn- 
ing with  a  lambent,  greenilh,  or  bluiih  flame. 

As  there  is  a  confiderable  variety  in  the  re- 
fult  of  thefe  procefl^es,  arifmg  from  feveral  cir- 
cumftances,  the  influence  of  which  may  not  be 
apprehended,  I  have  been  careful  to  note  every 
thing  relating  to  them,  that  appeared  to  me  at 
the  time  to  be  of  any  importance.  But,  not- 
withflanding  this,  it  is  very  pofllble  I  may  have 
made  omifTions,  of  the  eff^edl  of  which  I  was 
not  apprized ;  and  therefore  thofe  who  fhall 
endeavour  to  repeat  the  experiments  after  me 
may  not  find  precifely  the  fame  refults  that  I 
have  reported.  This  will  often  be  the  cafe  in 
experimental  inquiries  fo  new  as  thefe  ;  and  as 
no  human  care  has  yet  been  fufficient  to  pre- 
vent this  inconvenience,  it  is  the  part  of  hu- 
man candour  to  make  proper  allowance  for  it. 

I  cannot  help  flattering  myfelf,    however, 

that  thefe  experiments,  properly  purfued,  may 

be  a  means  of  throwing  light  upon  the  two 

great  natural  proceflTes  oi  vegetation  and  anima- 

I  lization  j 


'Animal  Suhfianees  in  Spirit  of  Nitre.     147 

lizalion ;  as  they  exhibit  a  new  and  ftriking 
difference  between  fubftances  formed  by  them. 
On  this  account  I  would  willingly  recommend 
them  to  the  particular  attention  of  chymifts 
and  phyficians.  The  experiments  themfelves, 
nearly  in  the  order  in  which  they  were  made, 
are  as  follows. 

I  put  equal  quantities  of  fpirit  of  nitre 
and  water  upon  fome  pieces  of  beef^  dried  till 
they  were  perfedly  hard,  but  without  being 
burned,  and  took  the  firft  produce  of  the  air, 
which  was  generated  without  the  application 
of  heat,  and  was  very  confiderable  -,  and  af- 
terwards that  which  came  over  when  the  flame 
of  a  candle  was  placed  within  about  a  quar- 
ter of  an  inch  from  the  phial ;  but  neither  of 
them  fenfibly  affefted  common  air.  Th«y  were 
both  pretty  readily  abforbed  by  water,  and  ex- 
tinguiflied  a  candle.  I  had  expedted  that  this 
air,  like  that  from  dry  wood,  would  have  been 
nitrous  air. 

This  experiment  being  made  with  the  flefhy 
part  of  a  mtifcle^  I  next  took  a  tendon  from  a 
neck  of  veal,  imagining,  from  its  firmer  tex- 
ture, that  the  air  produced  from  it  might  ap- 
proach nearer  to  that  from  wood  -,  but  the  air 
that  came  from  it  neither  diminiihed  common 
air,  nor  was  diminiflied  by  nitrous  air,  nor  was 
L  2  it 


14S      Of  Air  procured  by  the  Solution  of 

it  readily  abforbed  by  water,  and  a  candle  went 
out  in  it.  It  feemed,  upon  the  whole,  to  be 
much  the  fame  thing  with  phlogiflicated  com- 
mon air. 

I  thought  there  might  be  fome  difference 
in  this  refpe6t,  between  air  produced  from  the 
wbite^  and  from  the  brown  flefh  of  animals  ; 
but  I  made  the  experiment  with  the  breaft  and 
the  leg  of  a  turkey^  without  finding  any.  That 
which  was  produced  from  thefe  fubftances  ex- 
aftly  refembled  the  air  that  I  had  got  from  the 
tendon  of  the  calf ;  except  that  it  was  more 
readily  imbibed  by  water.  1  agitated  a  quan- 
tity of  it  in  water  five  minutes,  when  one-fourth 
of  it  was  abforbed,  but  the  remainder  ftill  ex- 
tinguifhed  a  candle,  and  did  not  difi^er  from 
what  it  was  before,  except  that  it  was  now  di- 
minifhed  by  nitrous  air,  like  all  other  kinds 
of  air  agitated  in  water.  When  all  the  flefh 
was  difiblved,  air  was  ftill  produced  in  great 
plenty,  upon  the  application  of  the  flame  of  a 
candle.  The  air  produced  in  this  manner 
was  very  turbid  at  firft  ;  but  the  quality  of  it 
was  not  fenfibly  different  from  that  which  came 
firft,  and  which  was  tranfparent. 

I  repeated  this  experiment  with  the  fame 

event,  obferving  that  the  turbidnefs  of  the  air 

depended  upon  the  degree  of  heat  with  which 

4  it 


Animal  Suhfiances  i7i  Spirit  of  Nitre,     149 

it  was  produced  •,  for,  after  producing  a  large 
quantity  of  turbid  air,  I  lefTened  the  heat,  and 
prefently  the  air  was  tranfparent  as  at  firft,  and 
upon  increafing  the  heat,  the  air  was  turbid 
again. 

Having  found  no  air  of  the  nitrous  kind 
from  the  flefh  of  an  animal  of  the  quadruped 
fpecies,  or  of  a  fowl,  I  was  willing  to  try  what 
would  be  the  produce  from  the  fleih  of  Jijhes^ 
infe5iSy  and  exanguious  animals. 

From  the  flelh  of  falmon^  made  thoroughly 
dry,  and  then  diffolved  in  fpirit  of  nitre,  I  got 
a  great  quantity  of  air,  at  firft  without  heat, 
till  the  whole  was  nearly  diflblved  ;  when  about 
a  quarter  of  an  ounce  meafure  of  this  folur 
tion  ftill  yielded  more  than  a  quart  of  air. 
At  the  laft  this  liquor,  which  had  been 
pretty  clear,  became  fuddenly  opake<,  and 
in  this  ftate  it  yielded  air  the  moft  plentifully, 
and  continued  to  do  fo  till,  all  the  moifture 
being  evaporated,  it  became  a  dry  coal.  While 
it  continued  clear,  a  ftrong  heat,  occafioned 
by  applying  the  flame  of  a  candle  clofe  to  the 
phial,  would  immediately  make  the  air  turbid, 
efpecially  toward  the  end  of  the  procefs,  juft 
before  the  liquor  became  opake.  At  this  time, 
however,  the  air  in  the  infide  of  the  phial  had 
nothing  of  that  appearance,  nothing  being  feen 
L  2  in 


1 50      Of  Air  procured  hy  the  Solution  of 

ill  It  but  the  red  fumes  of  the  fpirit  of  nitre  ;\ 
but  when  the  liquor  became  opake,    it  was 
filled  with  very  denfe  white  fumes. 

The  air,  in  all  the  ftages  of  this  experi- 
ment, was  in  part  fixed,  precipitating  lime  in 
lime-water.  In  the  middle  of  the  procefs  the 
refiduum  was  nitrous  -,  but  only  in  a  flight  de- 
gree. Towards  the  conclufion  it  had  no  fen- 
fible  effeft  on  common  air  *,  and  at  laft  it  burned 
with  a  blue  lambent  flame,  which  continued  a 
confiderable  time  after  I  had  withdrawn  the 
candle  by  which  it  had  been  fet  on  fire.  In 
the  air  that  came  juft  before  the  lafl,  a  candle 
barely  went  out,  furrounded  by  a  flight  flame 
of  that  colour. 

Repeating  the  experiment,  I  found  nothing 
nitrous,  either  in  the  firft  produce  of  air,  be- 
fore the  flefli  was  diflblved,  or  afterwards  -, 
and  at  this  time  I  was  particularly  careful  not 
to  ufe  any  of  the  flefli  that  was  turned  black, 
or  very  brown,  in  drying  j  having  fome  fuf- 
picion  that  the  nitrous  property  of  the  air  in 
the  preceding  experiment  came  from  fuch  parts 
of  the  flefli,  being  then  a  kind  of  charcoal. 

The  flefli  of  falmon  having  a  peculiar  co- 
lour and  flavour,  I  thought  it  would  not  be 
amils  to  repeat  the  experiment  with  fome  other 

kind 


Animal  Suhjiances  in  Spirit  of  Nitre i     1 5 1 

kind  of  fiHi,  the  fielh  of  which  was  white  and 
tallelefs.  I  therefore  took  the  flep  of  perch, 
and  diiTolving  it  in  fpirit  of  nitre,  I  procured 
a  large  quantity  of  air,  no  part  of  which  was 
nitrous  j  but  a  confiderable  part  of  it  was  fixed, 
precipitating  lime  in  lime-water.  The  greateil 
part  of  this  air  was  produced  after  all  the  flefu 
was  diffolved  -,  and  at  the  laft,  w^hen  T  increafed 
the  heat,  the  air  was  turbid ;  but  it  did  not 
fenfibly  differ  from  that  which  was  produced 
at  firft,  except  that  a  candle  went  out  in  it 
with  the  flame  flightly  tinged  with  green. 

A  large  ivorm,  treated  in  the  fame  manner, 
yielded  air  that  was  in  part  fixed,  making  lime- 
water  turbid.  The  refiduum  extinguilhed  a 
candle,  and  was,  in  a  fmall  degree,  nitrous ; 
owing,  perhaps,  to  fomething  on  its  ft omach  •, 
for  I  had  only  prefTed  out  the  contents  with 
my  finger. 

Air  produced  from  a  number  of  zvafps^  dif- 
folved  in  fpirit  of  nitre,  was  partly  fixed,  and 
the  refiduum  ki  far  nitrous,  tliat  two  meafures 
of  common  air,  and  one  of  this,  occupied  the 
fpace  of  2  4-  meafures.  When  the  flame  of  a 
candle  was  dipped  into  it,  it  burned  with  a 
greenilh  lambent  flame. 

L  4  J  had 


I^;2 


Of  Air  procured  by  theJSoluHon  of 


I  had  next  the  curiofity  to  try  what  kind 
of  air  rnight  be  procured  from  the  infenfible 
^xcrefcences  of  ani7nal  bodies^  as  horn^  hair,  fea- 
thers, &c.  which  are  protruded  from  the  body, 
and  feem,  at  firft  fight,  to  be  in  a  kind  of  in- 
termediate ftate  between  vegetable  and  animal 
fubftances ;  but  they  appeared  to  be  more  of 
an  animal  than  of  a  vegetable  nature,  i.  e. 
judging  by  the  air  which  I  had  hitherto  found 
thofe  fubftances  to  give, 

With  fpirit  of  nitre  and  hair  I  got  a  quan- 
tity of  air,  part  of  which  was  fixed,  precipi- 
tating lime  in  lime-water,  and  the  remainder, 
not  abforbed  by  water,  which  was  about  two- 
thirds  of  the  whole,  was  in  a  fmall  degree  ni- 
trous, 

From  a  crow-quill  I  got  air  of  the  fame  qua^ 
lity  with  that  from  the  hair  in  the  preceding 
experiment.  This  quill  was  black ;  and  think- 
ing it  pofTible  (as  the  hair  I  had  made  ufe  of 
was  alfo  in  part  black)  that  the  nitrous  pro? 
perty  of  the  air  might  come  from  the  phlor 
gifton  which  produced  that  colour,  I  repeated 
the  experiment  with  a  white  feather  ;  but  the 
refult  was  the  fame :  or,  rather,  the  air  in  this 
cafe,  was  more  nitrous  than  in  the  former^ 
Two  meafures  of  common  air,  and  one  of  this, 
pecupied  the  fpace  of  2  ^  meafures,     Had  I 

yfed 


Jnimal  Subjiances  in  Spirit  of  Nitre.     153 

ufed  a  much  diluted  fpirit  of  nitre,  it  will  ap- 
pear probable,  from  the  experiments  recited 
at  the  clofe  of  this  fe6lion,  that  the  produce 
would  have  been  lefs  nitrous.. 

Air  was  eafily  procured  by  diflblving  horn 
in  fpirit  of  nitre.  Part  of  it  was  fixed  air,  pre- 
cipitating lime  in  lime-water ;  but  a  very  great 
proportion  of  it  was  not  abforbed  by  water.  In 
this  refiduum  there  was  nothing  fenfibly  ni^ 
trous.  That  which  came  firft  extinguiflied  a 
candle,  without  any  particular  appearance ; 
but  in  that  which  came  lad,  it  burned  with  a 
beautifully  blue  lambent  flame. 

I  had  thought  that,  pofTibly,  the  infide  of  an 
cyfier-foell,  or  mother  of  pearly  "light,  together 
with  fixed  air,  yield  a  quantity  of  fuch  phlo- 
gifticated  air  as  had  been  produced  in  the  pre- 
ceding experiments  •,  but  when  they  were  dif- 
folved  in  fpirit  of  nitre,  they  each  of,  them  gave 
very  pure  fixed  air,  without  any  greater  refiduum 
than  is  found  in  the  folution  of  chalk  in  oil  of 
vifriol. 

Pieces  of  ivory  difiblved  in  a  very  beautiful 
manner,  in  hot  fpirit  of  nitre,  and  yielded  a 
great  quantity  of  air,  which,  in  every  ftage  of 
the  procefs,  precipitated  lime  in  lime-water. 
TJ^e  refiduum  was  not  nitrous,  and  extin- 
guiflied 


154      Of  Air  procured  hy  the  Solution  of 

guifhed  a  candle,  without  any  particular  colour 
of  the  flame. 


To  try  the  difference  between  the  fame  fub- 
ftance,  in  a  natural  ftate,  and  after  it  was  re- 
duced to  a  coal  by  fire,  I  diiTolved  fome  char- 
coal of  ivory  in  fpirit  of  nitre,  and  found  that 
it  yielded  plenty  of  air,  the  greateft  part  of 
which  was  fixed,  and  the  refiduum  was  confi- 
derably  nitrous.  When  the  air  was  produced 
very  faft,  the  infide  of  the  phial  was  filled 
with  a  white  fume.  This  ivory  had  been  kept 
in  a  red  heat,  covered  with  fand,  about  an 
hour. 

Eggs  do  not  rank  with  the  fubftances  above 
mentioned  •,  but  being  the  produce  of  an  ani- 
mal, and  yet  no  proper  part  of  one,  I  Ihall 
recite  the  experiments  1  made  upon  them  in 
this  place.  Both  the  white  and  the  yolk  of  an 
egg,  which  I  tried  feparately,  yielded  a  con- 
fiderable  quantity  af  air,  when  difiblved  in 
fpirit  of  nitre,  and  the  difference  between  them 
v/as  not  fenfible.  In  both  cafes  part  of  the  air 
was  fixed,  precipitatmg  lime  in  lime-water,  and 
the  refiduum  was  fo  far  nitrous,  that  two  mea- 
fures  of  common  air,  and  one  of  this,  occu- 
pied the  fpace  of  2  4-  meafures. 

It 


Jnimal  Suhfiances  in  Spirit  of  Nitre.     155 

It  occurred  to  me,  that,  pofTibly,  other  parts 
of  the  animal,  and  the  different  animal  fecre- 
tionsy  might  yield  a  different  kind  of  air  from 
that  which  the  mufcles  had  yielded ;  and  from 
the  little  that  I  have  done  in  this  way,  I  can- 
not help  thinking,  that  the  experiments  deferve 
to  be  profecuted  farther. 

From  the  crajfamentum  of  hlocd^  with  fpirit 
©f  nitre,  I  got  great  plenty  of  air,  part  of 
which  was  fixed,  but  no  part  nitrous.  At  laft 
the  air  was  turbid  ^  and,  as  is  ufual  in  this 
cafe,  a  greater  proportion  of  it  was  fixed  air. 
Towards  the  laft  alfo,  when  the  blood  was 
(Completely  difToived,  the  air  was  produced  ir- 
regularly-, for  after  an  interval  of  about  a 
quarter  of  a  minute,  there  would  be  a  fudden 
gulh  of  about  a  quarter  of  an  ounce-meafure 
of  air;  but  between  thefe  intervals  the  pro- 
duce wfas  equable. 

Spirit  of  nitre  put  to  the  ferum  of  blood,  im- 
mediately turns  it  into  a  white  coagulum. 
This  yielded  lefs  air  than  moft  other  lubftan- 
ces,  treated  in  the  fame  manner.  Part  of  it 
was  fixed  air,  precipitating  lime  in  lime-water, 
and  the  refiduum  was  not  nitrous,  and  extin- 
guilhed  a  candle  without  any  particular  ap- 
pearance. 

Milk 


X5^      Of  Air  procured  hy  the  Solution  of 

Milk  was  alfo  immediately  coagulated  by  a 
mixture  of  ftrong  fpirit  of  nitre,  anH  yielded 
air,  one-third  of  which  v/as  fixed,  precipitating 
lime  in  lime-water ;  and  the  remainder  was  fo 
far  nitrous,  that  two  meafures  of  common  air, 
and  one  of  this,  occupied  the  fpace  of  2  ^  mea- 
fures. 

From  cheefe,  which  was  pretty  old,  I  got 
air,  a  great  part  of  which  was  fixed,  and  the 
remainder  confiderably  nitrous, 

Mutton-gravy^  with  ftrong  fpirit  of  nitre,  gave 
but  little  air,  perhaps  twenty  times  as  much  as 
its  bulk.  It  was  in  part  fixed,  and  the  red- 
duum  not  fenfibly  nitrous. 

It  has  been  feen,  in  a  preceding  feAion,  that 
all  oily  matters,  of  a  vegetable  nature,  yield 
nitrous  air  in  very  great  plenty,  and  that  the 
produce  is  exceedingly  rapid;  fo  that  many 
precautions  are  neceflary  in  conduftinig  the  ex- 
periments. On  this  account  I  began  to  ufe 
the  fame  in  my  attempts  to  get  air  from  Hog*s- 
lard,  but  found  them  to  be  altogether  unne- 
ceflary  :  for  this  fubftance  is  but  little  affeded 
by  very  ftrong  and  hot  fpirit  of  nitre,  on  the 
furface  of  which  it  continues  fluid,  and  yields 
but  little  air,  perhaps  four  times  its  bulk. 
Part  of  this  was  fixed  air,  precipitating  lime 

in 


'Animal  Stthjiances  in  Spirit  of  Nitre  i     i^j 

in  lime-water,  and  the  remainder  was  fo  far 
nitrous, '  that  two  meafures  of  common  air,  and 
one  of  this,  occupied  the  fpace  of  lefs  than  two 
meafures  ;  that  is,  it  was  almoft  as  ftrongly 
nitrous  as  that  which  is  produced  from  metals. 
It  is  fomething  remarkable,  that,  of  all  ani- 
mal fubftances  on  which  I  have  made  the  ex- 
periment, that  part  which  feems  to  be  the  moft 
remote  from  a  vegetable  nature,  and  is  pecu- 
liar to  animals,  fhould  approach  the  neareft  to 
the  nature  of  a  vegetable  in  the  air  which  it 
yields  when  diffolved  in  fpirit  of  nitre.  This 
is  the  medullary  fubfiance  of  the  brain. 

From  part  of  the  brain  of  a  fheep^  diffolved 
in  ftrong  fpirit  of  nitre,  I  got  a  quantity  of  air, 
about  half  of  which  was  fixed  air,  precipitat- 
ing lime  in  lime-water,  and  the  remainder  was 
fo  far  nitrous,  that  two  meafures  of  common 
air,  and  one  of  this,  occupied  the  fpace  of  2  -^ 
meafures.  When  it  was  completely  diffolved, 
and  by  a  ftrong  heat,  the  air  came  over  very 
turbid,  and  a  candle  burned  in  it  with  a  lam- 
bent greenilli  flame. 

I  repeated  the  experiment  with  part  of  the 
fame  brain  that  was  boiled^  and  with  the  fame 
refult ;  except  that  I  did  not  continue  the  pro- 
cefs  fo  long.  The  refiduum  of  this  air,  when 
the  fixed  air  was  walhed  out  of  it,  was  fo  much 

nitrous. 


158     Of  Air  procured  from  the  SoJutioH  of 

nitrous,  that  two  meafures  of  common  air,  and 
one  of  this,  occupied  the  fpace  of  2  4-  meafures. 
This  I  tried  with  the  lail  of  the  three  portions' 
of  air  that  I  took.  The  firfl:  and  fecond  were 
not  fo  highly  nitrous  ;  and  yet  I  am  confident 
that  all  the  three  portions  were  wholly  the  pro- 
duce of  the  folution,  both  the  phial  and  the 
tube  being  filled  with  bubbles,  in  the  form 
of  froth,  before  I  took  any  air  at  all. 

After  I  had  made  thefe  experiments^  it  oc- 
curred to  me,  that  poflibly,  this  difi^erence  inr 
the  produce  of  air  from  vegetable  and  animal 
fubftances  might  arife  from  fome  difference  in 
the  fpirit  of  nitre.  But  though  I  found  that,  in 
confequenc  of  the  acid  being  more  concen- 
trated, or  more  diluted  with  water,  a  real  dif- 
ference was  occafioned  in  the  air,  ftill  very 
much  depended  upon  the  fubftances  them- 
felves,  as  will  appear  from  the  following  ex- 
periments. 

A  piece  of  hotted  mutton^  diflblved  in  very 
ftrong  fpirit  of  nitre,  yielded  air,  which  was 
partly  fixed,  with  the  refiduum  fo  far  nitrous, 
that  two  meafures  of  common  air,  and  one  of 
this,  occupied  the  fpace  of  2  y  meafures.  Dif- 
folving  a  quantity  of  the  fame  mutton.  In  the 
fame  fpirit  of  nitre,  diluted  with  an  equal  quan- 
tity of  diftilled  water,  I  procured  air,  which 

was 


Animal  Suhflances  in  Spirit  of  Nitre.     159 

was  not  half  fo  much  nitrous  as  that  in  the 
preceding  experiment.  With  the  fame  refult 
I  alfo  made  this  experiment  with  the  white  of 
an  egg,  which  gave  air  much  lefs  nitrous  when 
difTolved  in  a  diluted  fpirit  of  nitre,  than  in 
the  former  cafe. 

In  order  farther  to  fatisfy  myfelf,  whether 
the  refult  would  not  tje  the  fame  with  vege- 
table  fubftances  alfo,  I  took  fome  pieces  of 
very  dry  old  oak,  and  diffolved  them  in  exceed- 
ingly weak  fpirit  of  nitre.  I  alfo  caufed  the 
air,  by  means  of  heat,  to  be  produced  very 
rapidly ;  in  which  cafe  the  air  is  generally  lefs 
nitrous,  at  leaft  toward  the  clofe  of  an  expe- 
riment, as  the  reader  will  have  obferved  :  but 
when  the  fixed  air  was  wafhed  out  of  it,  the 
refiduum  was  almoft  as  itrongly  nitrous  as  any 
air  that  is  produced  by  the  folution  of  metals. 


S  E  C. 


i6o  Mifcdkneous  Experiments  relating  to  Nitre^ 


S  E  C  T  I  O  N     IX. 

Mifcellaneotis  Experiments  relating  to  Nitre, 
the  Nitrous  Acid  and  Nitrous  Air. 

I  have  more  than  once  fecomnieftded  the 
ftudy  of  the  nitrons  acid^  and  of  its  various 
combinations,  as  promifmg  a  fund  of  valu- 
able difcoveries,  looking  far  into  the  con— 
ftitution  of  nature  -,  and  I  flatter  myfelf,  that 
even  my  own  experiments  relating  to  this 
fubjeft,  recited  in  this  volume,  will  b'e  thought 
to  have  fufficiently  verified  the  obfervation. 
But  I  conlider  this  ample  field  of  inquiry 
as  barely  opening,  and  that  much  more  re- 
mains to  be  done  -,  and  confidering  how  eafily 
this  rich  mine  has  been  worked  hitherto,  I 
think  one  may  fairly  prefume  that  it  will  ftill 
abundantly  reward  the  diligent  labourer. 

It  has  been  the  opinion  of  feveral  eminent 
chymifts,  that  there  is  but  one  primitive  acid ; 
that  all  the  different  acids  with  which  we  are 
acquainted,  are  only  different  modifications  or 
combinations  of  it ;  and  that  the  yiitrous  acid^ 
in  particular,  differs  from  the  reft  by  a  more 
intimate  union  of  phlogifton  with  it. 

The 


the  Nitrous  Acid,  and  Nitrous  Aivi,     16 1 

The  celebrated  Mr.  Stahl  obferved,  that  by 
diftilling  iron  in  the  marine  acidj  fome  nitrous 
acid  was  produced.  Mr.  Woulfe  informs  me, 
that  he  has  done  the  fame  by  a  procefs  differ- 
ent from  that  of  Stahl  ;  and  alfo  that  he  has 
converted  the  acid  of  nitre  into  the  marine 
acid,  which  I  believe  was  never  done  before. 

This  I  confider  as  a  capital  difcovery ;   and 
whenever  this   excellent    chymift   fhall   think 
proper  to  publifh  his  procefs,   it  will,  I  doubt 
not,  be  a  great  means  of  advancing  the  bounds  J 
of  natural  knowledge. 

The  relation  that  the  nitrous  acid  bears  to 
plilogifton  is  to  me,  I  acknowledge,  a  great 
myftery.  That  this  acid  always  contains  phlo- 
giiton  is  very  evident ;  and  yet,  fuch  is  its 
avidity,  as  we  may  fay,  for  more,  that  it  takes 
phlogifton  from  moft  other  fubftances.  It  is, 
I  prefume,  by  means  of  this  property,  that 
many  fubfbances  into  which  the  nitrous  acid 
enters,  can  burn  without  the  affiftance  of  com- 
mon air ;  and  I  now  fufpeft,  that  it  is  by  the 
fame  property  that  common  air  itfelf  (which 
I  think  I  have  proved  to  confift  of  nitrous 
acid  and  earth)  is  capable  of  fuftaining  both 
flame  and  animal  life. 

M  I  hay© 


i62  Mifcellaneous  Experments  relating  to  Nitre y 

I  have  fufficient  proof,  however,  that  the 
nitrous  acid,  both  when  combined,  as  it  ge- 
nerally is,  with  water,  and  likewife  when  ex- 
hibited in  the  form  of  vapour,  or  air,  is  fo 
loaded  with  phlogiflon,  as  to  be  capable  of 
phlogifticating  both  the  common  air,  and  the 
nitrous  air,  which  are  expofed  to  it.  This  I 
think  to  be  a  fa6l  of  a  pretty  extraordinary 
kind  •,  at  leall  it  appeared  fo  much  fo  to  me, 
that  I  had  expeded  the  very  contrary  efFe6l 
from  the  experiments  that  I  made  upon  it-, 
having  imagined  that,  fmce  the  nitrous  acid 
conftitutes  the  pureft  of  all  the  kinds  of  air, 
common  air  wanted  nothing  more  than  a 
greater  proportion  of  this  aoid  to  become  de- 
phlogifticated  air  ^  and  thus  I  was  in  hopes  of 
being  mafter  of  a  procefs,  by  which  I.  could 
not  only  reftore  vitiated  air  to  its  original  pu- 
rity, but  even  improve  the  purity  of  common 
air  itfelf.  And  the  attempt  is  of  fuch  a  nature, 
that  I  am  far  from  thinking  that  any  perfon 
needs  to  defpair  of  fucceeding  in  it,  though 
the  method  which  I  took  to  accomplifli  it  did 
not  anfwer,  but  had  a  contrary  effed:. 

Among  my  random  experiments  to  reftore 
vitiated  air,  I  have  mentioned  my  having  ex- 
pofed it  to  the  fumes  of  fmoking  fpirit  of  nitre, 
but  without  any  effedl  j  vol.  I.  p.  y^.     This 
I  was 


the  Nitrous  Jcid  and  Nitrous  Air.      1 6 2 

was  only  fpirit  of  nitre  in  the  ccmmon  heat  of 
the  atmofphere,  in  a  fmail  quantity,  and  for 
no  long  fpace  of  time.  I  therefore  confidered 
the  experiment  as  inadequate  to  the  purpofe 
of  it;  and  when  I  had  got  my  phials  with 
ground-ftopples,  I  introduced  the  tube  of  one 
of  them,  into  which  I  had  put  fome  ilrong 
fpirit  of  nitre,  under  the  edge  of  a  fmall  jar, 
filled  with  air  that  had  been  injured  by  putre- 
faftion  about  a  year  before ;  and  making  it 
boil,  forced  the  hot  fumes  to  rile  into,  and  mix 
with  it,  for  a  confiderable  time,  till  the  acid 
feemed  to  be  almofb  expelled  from  it ;  but  I 
could  not  perceive  that  the  air  was  fenfibly  al- 
tered by  this  operation.  It  was  no  more  dimi- 
niihed  by  nitrous  air  than  it  had  been  before. 

It  was  on  the  very  fame  day  on  which  I  made 
the  preceding  experiment,  that  it  occurred  to 
me  that  I  had,  at  that  very  time,  a  very  good 
opportunity  of  afcertaining  the  effed:  of  the 
fumes  of  fpirit  of  nitre  on  common  air,  by 
means  of  a  quantity  of  ftrong  fmoking  fpirit 
of  nitre,  made  at  the  Apothecary's-Hall,  con- 
tained in  a  large  phial,  one-fourth  part  of 
which  was  full,  and  which  had  not  been  opened 
for  half  a  year  ;  fo  that  all  the  inclofed  air, 
which  was  three-fourths  of  the  contents  of  the 
phial,  had  been  expofed  to  the  vapour  of  the 
fpirit  of  nitre  all  that  time. 

M  z  By 


164  Mifcellaneous  Experiments  relating  lo  Nitre, 

By  lofing  the  fpirit  of  nitre,  I  might  have 
transferred  this  air  into  another  veffel,  with- 
out any  mixture  of  common  air ;  but  not  chuf- 
ing  to  do  that,  I  poured  it  into  another  phial, 
by  which  means  I  got  a  mixture,  three-fourths 
of  which  was  the  air  from  the  phial,  and  one- 
fourth  atmofpherical  air,  for  which  I  had  to 
make  an  allowance.  Examining  this  mixture 
by  the  teft  of  nitrous  air,  I  found  that  two  mea- 
fures  of  it,  and  one  of  nitrous  air,  occupied 
the  fpace  of  2  4-  meafures,  and  a  candle  would 
not  burn  in  it  -,  fo  that  the  fpirit  of  nitre  mull 
have  imparted  phlogifton  to  the  air  which  had 
been  expofed  to  it,  and  in  fo  great  a  degree, 
that  it  had  become  almoft  perfe6lly  noxious ; 
as  may  be  eafily  concluded,  by  allowing  for 
the  mixture  of  common  and  wholefome  air 
with  it  in  this  experiment. 

That  acid  fumes,  as  fuch,  have  not  this  ef- 
fect upon  common  air,  I,  at  the  fame  time, 
afcertained,  by  making  tiie  flime  experiment 
on  the  air  of  the  phial  wliich  had  contained  the 
ilrongeft  fpirit  of  fait ;  and,  I  believe,  for  a 
longer  time.  This,  however,  v/as  in  all  re- 
fpeds  as  good  as  common  air.  This  fpirit  of 
fait  was  procured  from  the  Apothecary*s-Hall, 
and  fmoked  very  much. 

Afterwards, 


the  Nitrous  Acid,  and  Nitrous  Jir.       i  ^5 

Afterv/ards,  when  I  had  contrived  to  fumi- 
gate different  kinds  of  air,  with  the  vapour  of 
fpirit  of  nitre,  by  a  fingular  kind  of  procefs, 
which  will  be  mentioned  below,  I  found  that 
it  had  no  cffc6l  whatever  upon  common  air ; 
for  in  this  cale,  I  believe,  it  contained  very 
little  phlogifton  :  but  the  experiment  was  not 
tried  to  the  greatefl  advantage. 

I  was  not  much  more  difappointed  in  my 
expedtations  from  this  experiment  than  I  was 
in  finding  that  air  was  injured  by  being  expo- 
fed  to  frefh-melted  nitre.     I  had  been  led  to 
make  this  experiment  by  obferving  that  nitre, 
when  it  is  fufed  by  heat,  yields  air.      Seeing 
this,  I  had  the  curiofity  to  try  whether  it  would 
recover  the  air  it  had  loft  by  being  expofed  to 
the  common  air,  and  at  the  fame  time  to  ob- 
ferve,   what  effed  this  expofure  would  have 
upon  the  common  air,  in  order  to  judge  what 
it  was  that  nitre,    in  thofe  circumftances,  took 
from  the  air.       And  I  find  that  common  air, 
expofed  to  nitre  in  thefe  circumftances,  is  a 
little  injured,   but  with  fuch  circumftances  at-  . 
tending  the  ^rc^/ of  it,  as  I  had  never  obferved 
before,   and  which  I  cannot  well  account  for. 
The  fads  were  as  follow* 

I  melted  about  an  ounce  of  falt-petre  in  a 

crucible,  till  all  the  air  feemed  to  be  expelled 

M  3  from 


1 66  Mifcellaneous  Experiments  relating  to  Niire^ 

from  it,  and  immediately  placed  it  under  a 
receiver  {landing  in  water,  where  it  prefently 
became  folid.  The  next  morning  I  examined 
the  air  in  which  it  had  flood,  and  found  it  to 
be  not  fo  good  as  common  air.  It  was  dimi- 
nifhed  about  -^-V  lefs  than  an  equal  quantity 
of  common  air,  which  I  tried  at  the  fame  time, 
and  with  the  fame  nitrous  air.  I  repeated  the 
experiment  feveral  times,  with  the  lame  refult. 

It  was  remarkable,  however,  that  after  thefe 
mixtures  had  remained  a  day  and  a  night,  they 
approached  nearer  to  an  equality.  This  alfo  I 
obferved  more  than  once,  and  am  much  fur- 
prized  at  the  fafb.  It  fhould  feem  that  the  air 
to  which  this  nitre  had  been  expofed  was  not 
abfolutely  fo  much  injured  as  the  firft  mixture  of 
nitrous  air  with  it  would  fhow ;  but  that  its  con- 
ftitution  was  fo  much  altered,  that  it  required 
more  time  for  the  phlogifton'  difcharged  from 
the  nitrous  air  to  ad  upon  it. 

Afterwards  I  melted  fome  falt-petre  in  a 
glafs-phial,  and  the  veffel  being  broken  by  the 
expanfion  of  the  nitre  in  cooling,  I  expofed  the 
nitre  to  a  quantity  of  air  confined  by  water, 
fo  that  the  common  air  had  accefs  to  it  on  all 
fides  i  whereas,  in  the  former  experiment,  it 
had  been  contiguous  to  it  at  its  furface  only. 
After  about  a  week  I  examined  this  air,  and 

immediately 


the  Nitrous  Acid^  and.  Nitrous  Air.     167 

immediately  after  by  the  trial  with  nitrous  air, 
found  it  to  be  confiderably  worfe  than  common 
airj  two  meafures  of  it,  and  one  of  nitrous 
air,  occupying  the  fpace  of  two  meafures  only : 
whereas  the  mixture  of  common  air  made  at 
the  fame  time,  and  with  part  of  the  fame  quan- 
tity of  nitrous  air,  was  diminilhed  as  much  as 
ufual.  I  did  not  carry  this  experiment  any  far- 
ther, as  I  did  with  another  quantity  of  com- 
mon air,  which  had  likewife  been  expofed  about 
a  week  to  melted  falt-petre  in  the  fame  circum- 
ftances. 

Two  meafures  of  this  air,  and  one  of  ni- 
trous, at  firft  occupied  the  fpace  of  little  more 
than  two  meafures  j  but  it  kept  continually 
approaching  to  the  degree  of  diminution  of 
9,  mixture  of  common  air  made  at  the  fame 
time,  till  after  four  days  the  difference  be- 
tween them  was  very  fmall.  Whether  after  a 
longer  time  thefe  two  mixtures  would  have 
been  reduced  to  the  very  fame  dimenfions,  I 
cannot  tell.  I  made  no  more  experiments  of 
this  kind,  nor  have  I,  in  any  other  refpedt, 
purfued  this  fmgular  kind  of  fa6l  any  farther. 

In  my  former  publications,   I  faid  I  had  no 
doubt  but  that  the  nitrous  acid  might  be  ex- 
hibited in  the  form   of  air,    and  that  experi- 
ments might  be  made  upon  it  with  a  great 
M  4  profpec^ 


i6S  Mifcellancous  Experiments  relating  to  Nitre, 

profpe^L  of  making  confiderable  difcoveries, 
provided  that  any  fluid  fubftance  could  be 
found  capable  of  confining  it,  I  have  fince 
made  feveral  attempts  to  diveft  this  acid  of  the 
water  with  which  it  is  generally  combined  -,  but 
though  I  have  been  favoured  by  fome  unex- 
pected circumftances,  I  have  been  far  from  fuc- 
ceeding  to  my  wilh. 

That  this  acid  is  capable  of  exiftlng  in  this 
dry  form,  I  prefently  fatisfied  myfelf  by  an 
attempt  to  expel  air  from  it,  by  the  fame  pro- 
cefs  by  which  I  had  before  expelled  the  ma- 
rine acid  air,  from  fpirit  of  fait ;  viz.  by  heat- 
ing the  fluid  in  a  phial,  and  receiving  the  air 
in  quickfilver.  For  though  the  acid  vapour 
very  foon  united  with  the  quickfilver,  yet  the 
jar  in  which  it  was  received  being  narrow,  the 
faline  cruft,  which  was  formed  on  the  furface 
of  the  quickfilver,  impeded  the  action  of  the 
acid  upon  it,  till  I  had  an  opportunity  of  ad- 
mitting water  to  the  air  that  I  had  produced, 
and  of  fatisfying  myfelf,  by  its  abforption,  of 
its  being  a  real  acid  air,  having  an  affinity  with 
water,  fimilar  to  other  acid  airs. 

In  the  firft  experiment  that  I  made  of  this 
kind,  the  rednefs  of  the  air  did  not  appear 
immediately  i  but  after  fome  time,  when  it 
fnight  be  prefumedthat  the  nitrous  vapour  had 

produced 


the  Nitrous  Acid^  and  Nitrous  Air.     1 69 

produced  nitrous  air,  by  a  folution  of  the  quick- 
filver ;  and  the  rednefs,  I  fuppofe  to  have  beeti 
theeffeft  of  the  mixture  of  this  newly-generated 
nitrous  air,  with  that  portion  of  common  air, 
which  had  been  contained  in  tlie  upper  part  of 
the  phial,  and  which  had  been  expelled  by  the 
acid  vapour.  I  did  not  admit  water  to  this  air 
till  after  an  hour  ;  and  even  then  it  was  fenfibly 
diminifhed ;  fome  of  the  acid  air  not  having 
been  feized  by  the  quickfilver.  The  laft  time 
that  I  made  this  experiment,  in  which  I  pro- 
duced about  two  ounce-meafures  of  air,  I  ad- 
mitted water  to  it  as  quickly  as  I  could,  and 
then  one-third  of  the  whole  was  imbibed  by  it* 

In  my  account  of  the  procefs  to  procure  de- 
phlogiilicated  air  from  calcined  flint,  and  alfo 
from  talck,  I  have  obfcrved  that  between  the 
produce  of  the  phlogifticated  and  dephlogifti- 
Gated  air,  there  is  a  confiderable  interval,  in 
which  nothing  comes  over  but  the  pure  vapour 
of  the  acid,  which  is  inftantly  and  wholly  im- 
bibed by  water.  This  circumftance  gave  me 
a  fine  and  unexpcded  opportunity  of  making 
Ibme  experiments  upon  this  vapour.  For  the 
orifice  of  the  tube  through  which  it  was  tranf- 
mitted  being  plunged  in  water,  and  bending 
confiderably  upwards,  I  could  eafily  put  over 
it  phials  filled  with  any  kind  of  air  that  could 
bear  to  be  confined  by  water  j   and  the  end  of 

the 


IJQ  Mifcellaneous  Experiments  relating  tQ  Nitre^ 

the  tube  rifing  a  confiderable  way  within  the 
phial,  the  vapour  muft  neceffarily  come  into 
immediate  contadl  with  the  air  contained  in  it. 

The  firft  experiment  that  I  made  upon  this 
vapour,  in  thefe  circumftances,  was  with  ni^ 
trous  air-,  and  it  appeared  to  have  the  fame 
effe6l  upon  it  that  had  been  produced  by  liver 
of  fulphur,  viz.  diminifhing  it  till  it  \yas  no. 
more  capable  of  aJfFe6ling  common  air-,  and 
the  operation  was  exceedingly  quick.     Indeed 
'the  whole  progrefs  of  this  experiment  is  not  a 
little  remarkable.     The  moment  that  the  phial 
of  nitrous  air  was  expofed  to  this  vapour,  it 
became  white,  then  tranfparent,  then  red ;  and, 
laftly,  tranfparent  again.     I  took  one  quantity 
of  this  air,  when  the  whitenefs  had  juft  gone 
off;   and  found  that  it  was  but  little  different 
from  pure  nitrous  air,  diminifhing  common  air 
almoil  as  much.     Taking  another  phial  when 
it  was  quite  red,  one-third  of  the  quantity  had 
difappeared,    and    its    power   of  diminifhing 
common  air  was  about  one-half   of  what  it 
had  been.     I  then  let  another  phial  remain  ex- 
pofed to  this  vapour,  till  I  perceived  that  the 
diminution  would  go  no  farther  ;  when  only 
^'^-  of  the  original  quantity  remained,  and  this 
did  not  affe6t  common  air  at  all. 

When 


the  Nitmts  Acid^  and  Nitrous  Air.     171 

When  this  procefs  is  quick,  that  is,  when 
the  nitrous  vapour  comes  very  fail,  the  white- 
nefs  preceding  the  rednefs,  on  mixing  the  ni- 
trous vapour  with  the  nitrous  air,  can  hardly 
be  perceived,  and  the  vefTel  containing  the  air 
becomes  exceedingly  hot,  as  well  as  the  tube 
through  which  it  is  tranfmitted.  I  obferved 
that  the  veffel  containing  nitrous  air  continued 
exceedingly  red  for  about  a  minute,  without 
any  vifible  change  of  dimenfions  in  the  air  ;  af- 
ter which  it  was  fuddenly  diminifhed  to  about 
one-fourth  of  its  original  quantity,  which  re- 
fembles  the  procefs  of  the  efiervefcence  of 
iron-tilings  and  brimftone,  defcribed  vol.  I. 
p.  118. 

I  expofed  to  this  nitrous  acid  vapour,  com- 
mon air^  inflammable  air^  2sA  fixed  air^  and  all 
of  them  for  a  confidcrable  time,  without  mak- 
ing the  leaft  fenfible  alteration  in  any  of  them. 
It  is  pofTible  that  a  longer  continuance  of  the 
procefs  might  have  affefted  them  •,  but  a  great 
deal  lefs  time  was  abundantly  fufficient  for 
this  acid  vapour  to  produce  its  utmoft  effe6t 
upon  nitrous  air.  It  fhould  feem,  therefore, 
that  though  this  acid  vapour  contained  phlo- 
gifton  enough  to  phlogifticate,  prefently  and 
completely,  a  quantity  of  nitrous  air,  it  does 
net  contain  enough  to  phlogifticate  common 

air. 


172  Mifcellaneous  Experiments  relating  to  Nitre j 

air,  at  leafl,  that  It  requires  either  more  time 
to  efted  this  pnrpofe,  or  a  different  mode  of 
application. 

As  phlogiflon  had  produced  no  cfFefb  upon 
Bxed  air,  except  in  one  particular  cafe,  viz. 
from  the  efFervefcence  of  iron-filings  and  brim- 
flone,  I  did  not  abfolutely  exped  that  it  would 
have  been  affected  in  thefe  circumflances.  Be- 
fides,  I  only  expofed  the  fixed  air  to  this  va- 
pour as  it  was  expelled  from  the  phial  by 
the  flame  of  a  candle,  when  the  vapour  is  not 
fo  copious  as  when  it  is  expelled  by  a  ftrong 
fand-heat,  furrounding  the  whole  phial  placed 
in  a  crucible. 

In  the  courfe  of  the  experiments,  I  thought 
I  faw  reafon  to  conclude  that  the  nitrous  acid 
air  is  naturally  cokurlefs,  like  the  other  acid 
airs.  For  I  obferved  that,  though  the  infide 
of  the  phial,  and  alfo  of  the  tube,  was  very 
red,  during  the  tranfmiifion  of  both  the  phlo- 
gifticated  and  dephlogifticated  air,  yet  that  in 
the  intermediate  llate,  when  the  pure  acid  came 
over,  all  the  infide  of  the  phial  was  tranfpa- 
rent ;  or  if  there  was  any  fenfible  colour,  it 
was  of  a  whitifh  cafl.  At  the  fame  time  it  was 
obfervable,  that  this  acid  vapour,  mixing  with 
any  other  kind  of  air,  produced  a  red  colour. 

As 


the  Nitrous  Acid,  and  Nitrous  Air.     173 

As  there  was  this  rednefs  in  inflammable  air, 
and  other  kinds  of  air,  for  fome  time  after  this 
vapour  was  admitted  to  them,  and  they  after- 
wards became  tranfparent,  I  expected  that  fome 
alteration  would  have  been  made  in  them  j  but 
I  was  difappointed. 

I  would  here  obferve,  that  the  young  ope- 
rator ought  to  be  very  cautious  in  condu<fting 
this  procefs,  and  efpecially  to  take  care  that 
the  tube  through  which  this  acid  vapour  is 
tranfmitted  be  fufficiently  wide  •,  by  which  I 
mean  that  the  hollow  part  of  it  fhould  be  about 
one-tenth,  or  one-twelfth  of  an  inch  in  dia- 
meter. When,  at  one  time,  I  v/as  fo  incai^- 
tious  as  to  make  ufe  of  a  tube  much  fmailer 
than  this,  almofl  capillary,  fome  particles  of 
the  flint,  as  I  fuppofe,  got  into  it,  and  Hop- 
ped it  up.  However,  there  was  a  violent  ex- 
plofion  of  the  phial,  and  of  all  its  contents, 
by  which  I  was  expofed  to  fome  danger :  but 
providentially,  at  this  time,  as  upon  many 
other  occafions,  I  efcaped  without  any  hurt. 
But,  in  lijch  a  kind  of  bufinefs  as  this,  no- 
thing can  be  ejcpedled  to  be  done  without  fuch 
rifques. 

In  my  former  publication,   p.  126,  I  hav-c 

pbferved  that  I  got  little  or  no  air  by  diffoiv- 

z  ing 


174  MifcellaneoUs  Experiments  relating  to  Nitre^ 

ing  lead  in  fpirit  of  nitre.  I  have  fince,  how- 
ever, made  another  attempt  of  this  kind,  and 
with  a  little  better  fuccefs.  I  poured  fm.ol^ing 
fpirit  of  nitre  into  a  phial  with  a  grourtd- 
ilopple  and  tube,  fig.  f,  containing  i  4  ounce- 
meafures,  filled  with  fmall  leaden  fhot,  fo  as 
to  leave  no  common  air  at  all,  either  in  the 
phial  ,or  in  the  tube ;  and  I  placed  it  fo  as  to 
receive  the  air  that  might  come  from  it  in 
water. 

After  waiting  an  liour,  in  which  little  or  no 
air  was  produced,  I  applied  the  flame  of  a 
candle,  though  not  very  near  to  it,  and  in  thefe 
circumftances  I  got  about  an  ounce-meafure  of 
air:  but  upon  fome  water  rufhing  into  the 
phial,  while  the  candle  was  withdrawn,  air  was 
produced  very  plentifully.  I  collefted,  in  all, 
about  a  quarter  of  a  pint,  and  might  probably 
have  got  much  more  ;  but  that  the  fait  formed 
by  the  folution  of  the  lead  had  fo  nearly  clofed 
up  the  tube,  that  I  thought  proper  to  difcon- 
tinue  the  procefs.  The  air,  both  of  the  firft 
and  of  the  laft  produce,  was  of  the  fame  qua- 
lity, and  fo  far  nitrous,  that  two  meafures  of 
common  air,  and  one  of  this,  occupied  the 
fpace  of  two  meafures  only ;  excepting  that  the 
very  firft  and  very  laft  produce,  mixed  with 
common  air,  took  up  a  little  more  room  than 

that 


the  Nitrous  Acid,  and  Nitrous  Air.      175 

that  which  I  got  in  the  middle  of  the  procefs. 
When  the  air  was  produced  very  faft,  it  was 
exceedingly  turbid,  as  if  it  had  been  filled  with 
a  white  powder. 

In  my  former  publication,  the  reader  will 
have  feen  the  refult  of  feveral  procefies  in  which 
nitrous  air  was  phlogifticated  with  iron  and 
liver  of  fulphur,  in  confequence  of  which  a 
candle  would  burn  in  it,  either  naturally,  as  in 
common  air,  or  with  a  beautifully  enlarged 
fiame.  As  this  air,  in  fome  refpedts,  refembles 
common  air,  though  it  be  noxious,  it  occurred 
to  me,  that  it  might  be  pofnble,  by  means 
of  fome  ingredients,  to  make  it  in  all  refpedts 
common  air  -,  and  v/ith  this,  and  other  views,  I, 
at  different  times,  filled  feveral  phials  with  ni- 
trous air,  putting  to  it  iron  or  liver  of  fulphur 
to  phlogifticate  it,  and  alfo  pieces  of  chalk,  or 
a  mixture  of  fixed  air,  in  order  to  fupply  it 
with  that  ingredient,  which  it  is  well  known 
the  atmofphere  contains  •,  and  in  other  refpedls 
alfo  I  varied  thefc  preparations,  in  order  to 
have  the  greater  chance  of  fucceeding  with  re- 
fpedl  to  the  objedl  of  the  experiment.  Thefe 
projcds,  the  reader  will  eafily  im.agine,  were 
antecedent  to  my  difccvery  of  the  real  confti- 
tution  of  the  atmofphere,  as  explained  in  a  pre- 
ceding feftion.    However,  as  the  procelTes  took 

up 


176  Mifcellaneous  Experiments  relating  to  Nitre^ 

up  a  good  deal  of  time,  and  fome  perfons,  in- 
tent upon  thefe  purfuits,  may  wilh  to  know 
what  was  the  refult  of  them,  unfuccefsful  as 
they  were  with  refpedt  to  my  main  objed,  I 
(hall  here  recite  the  particulars  of  the  principal 
.  of  them,  in  the  order  in  which  they  were  made. 

The  reader  may  alfo  have  obferved,  that. 
In  one  particular  cafe,  mentioned  vol  I.  p.  220, 
a  quantity  of  nitrous  air,  which  had  been  ex- 
pofed  two  months  to  fome  iron  nails  in  quick- 
filver,  was  diminifhed  by  a  mixture  of  frefh 
nitrous  air.     This  I  find  in  my  regifler,  writ- 
ten at  the  time  of  obfervation,  and  therefore 
can  hardly  doubt  but  that  I  muft  have  obferved 
that  appearance,   which  is  an  indication  of  a 
confiderable  degree  of  purity  in  the  air,  and  of 
its  fitnefs  for  refpiration.      But  as  in  none  of 
the  following  experiments  I  could  get  the  fame 
appearance,  I  fufpe6t  that  I  muft,  fome  way 
or  other,  have  deceived  myfelf  on  the  former 
Gccafion.     It  muft  be  obferved,  however,  that 
it  by  no  means  follows,  that  becaufe  we  can- 
not, in  a  courfe  of  experiments,  produce  the 
fame  appearance  in  what  we  imagine  to  be  the 
fame  circumftances,  that  we  were  therefore  de- 
ceived with  refped  to  the  appearance  itfelf ; 
becaufe  nothing  is  more  common  than  for  per- 
fons to  be  deceived  with  refped  to  what  they 

imagine 


the  Nitrous  Acid^  and  Nitrous  Air.     i^Jf 

imagine  to  be  the  fame  circumflances  in  an  ex- 
periment. 

June  4,  1774.  Two  quantities  of  nitrous 
air,  which  had  ftood  above  four  months  in 
contad  with  iron  in  water,  jufl:  extinguifhed  a 
candle. 


July  25.  A  candle  burned  with  an  enlarged 
flame ;  but  not  more  than  double,  in  nitrous 
air,  which  had  been  in  contadl  with  iron  in 
quickfilver,  about  fix  months.  The  appear- 
ance was  the  fame  when  the  candle  was  dip- 
ped into  it,  both  before  it  was  once  paffed 
through  the  water,  and  afterwards.  Water 
being  admitted  to  the  remainder  of  this  air^  it 
began  to  be  abforbed  as  ufuaL 

March  2,  1775.  Nitrous  air,  which  had 
been  confined  above  a  year  in  contadt  with 
iron,  {landing  in  water,  was,  in  all  refpefts, 
like  phlogifticatcd  common  air :  it  neither  di- 
minifhed  common  air,  nor  was  diminifhed  by 
nitrous  air,  and  extinguiflied  a  candle.  It  had 
alfo  the  faint  fmeil  of  phlogifticated  air.  The 
more  rufty  iron  is,  the  fafter  it  diminifhes  ni- 
trous air,  which  looks  as  if  it  took  phlogifton 
from  the  nitrous  air,  rather  than  communi- 
cated any  to  it. 

N  March 


178  Mifcellaneous  Experiments  relating  to  Nitre, 

March  4.  In  about  one  day,  and  without  any 
heat,  about  one-third  of  a  given  quantity  of 
nitrous  air  was  imbibed  by  liver  of  fulphur. 
In  the  remainder  a  candle  burned  with  an  en- 
larged flame  •,  but  it  was  not  at  all  diminifhed 
by  frefh  nitrous  air. 

March  6.  Nitrous  air,  expofed  to  liver  of 
fulphur  and  chalk,  exhibited  the  fame  pheno- 
mena as  if  no  chalk  had  been  put  to  it :  it  ad- 
mitted a  candle  to  burn  in  it  with  an  enlarged 
flame,  was  not  diminifhed  by  nitrous  air,  and 
cxtinguifhed  a  candle,  after  a  very  little  agita- 
tion in  water. 

■'.  '■;  ^ 

March  iq.  A  quantity  of  one-half  nitrous, 
and  one-half  fixed  air,  which  had  been  in  con- 
tad  with  iron,  was  reduced  one-third  in  its  di- 
menfions,  and  the  remainder  admitted  a  candle 
to  burn  in  it  with  an  enlarged  flame,  but  was 
not  diminiflied  by  nitrous  air. 

May  7.  I  examined  feveral  quantities  of  ni- 
trous air,  and  mixtures  of  nitrous  and  fixed 
air,  which  had  flood  expofed  in  quickfilver, 
to  iron,  or  to  iron  that  had  rufl:ed  in  nitrous 
air,  about  two  months.  None  of  them  were 
diminiflied  by  nitrous  air,  or  diminiflied  com- 
mon air.  In  general  they  extinguiflied  a  can- 
dle j 


-    the  Nitrous  Acid^  and  Nitrous  Air,     1 79 

die ;  but,  in  one  of  them,  a  candle  burned  na- 
turally when  the  fixed  air  had  been  walhed  out 
of  it  in  water.      One  quantity  of  nitrous  air, 
which  had  been  expofed  to  iron  that  had  rufted 
in  nitrous  air,  was  diminilhed  about  one-tenth, 
but  was  very  little  changed  ;  for  it  diminilhed 
common  air  almoft  as  much  as  frefh-made  ni- 
trous air.      Another  quantity  of  nitrous  air, 
which  had  been  eXpofed  to  iron-nails,  dimini- 
fhed  common  air  rather  lefs  than  the  preced- 
ing. 


K  2  SEC- 


i8o  Ohfervations  on  Common  Air* 


SECTION    X. 

So7ne  Ohfervations  ^«  Common  Air7 

It  is  generally  fnppofed,  and  perhaps  with 
reafon,  that  the  ufe  of  fome  metals  is  much 
iafer  than  others,  on  account  of  fome  effluvia 
ifTuing  from  them.  Copper  and  lead,  for  in- 
ftance,  are  thought  to  have  fome  noxious  qua- 
lity of  this  kind  •,  whereas  iron  is  thought  to 
be  perfeftly  harmlefs,  in  every  Ihapc,  as  Dr. 
Franklin  humoroully  obferves,  excepting  in 
that  of  a  weapon.  My  experiments  on  the  di- 
minution of  air,  by  paint,  confiding  of  white 
lead  and  oil,  by  which  it  is  rendered  perfe6t- 
ly  noxious,  have  been  interpreted  fo  as  to  fa- 
vour that  opinion  •,  and,  in  my  account  of 
thofe  experiments,  I  had  myfelf  afcribed  the 
effed  to  the  phlogifton  rcmainin-g  in  the  white 
lead. 

I  had  then,  however,  obfcrved,  that  air  Is 
as  much  diminifhed,  and  confequently  is  ren- 
dered as  completely  noxious,  by  the  calcina- 
tion of  tin^  as  by  that  of  lead ;  and  tin,  I  be- 
lieve, does  not  lie  under  any  peculiar  odium. 
2  Indeed, 


Ohfervations  on  Common  Air.  1 8  £ 

Indeed,  if  my  hypothefis  be  well  founded  (and 
fo  many  fa<5ls  have  occurred  to  my  obfervation 
in  fupport  of  it,  that  I  do  not  fee  how  it  can 
be  called  in  queftion)  viz.  that  it  is  phlogiilon 
that  diminilhes  air,  and  renders  it  noxious  ;  it 
muft  be  a  matter  of  indifference  from  which 
of  the  metals  it  is  difcharged,  and  the  calci- 
nation of  any  of  them  muft  render  the  air  in 
which  the  calcination  is  made  equally  noxious. 
Other  fadts  have  occurred  in  the  courfe  of  my 
late  obfervations  that  farther  confirm  this  opi- 
nion. 

When  I  was  making  the  experiments  on  the 
extrad:ion  of  inflammable  air  from  iron,  I 
found,  that  if  the  quantity  of  air  was  confi- 
derable,  the  throwing  of  the  focus  of  the  burn- 
ing lens  upon  iron-filings  inclofed  in  it,  had 
no  other  effedl  than  to  diminilh  the  air,  and 
make  it  noxious  ;  which  it  did,  to  as  great  a  de^ 
grec  as  the  calcination  of  lead  or  tin  had  done  : 
for  after  this  it  made  no  effervefcence,  and 
was  no  farther  diminilhed,  by  nitrous  air.  Af- 
ter this,  I  make  no  doubt,  but  that  if  the  pro- 
cefs  had  been  continued  a  fufficient  time,  there 
would  have  been  an  increafe  of  the  quantity  of 
air,  by  the  produdion  of  inflammable  air;  but 
the  firft  effed  of  the  difcharge  of  phloglflon 
from  the  iron  was  the  phlogifticating  and  di- 
jninilhing  of  the  common  air. 

N  ^  I  even 


1 82  Ohfervations  on  Common  Air. 

I  even  found  that  air  would  be  injured 
by  having  iron  confined  in  it  for  a  confider- 
able  time.  To  try  this,  I  filled  a  phial,  con- 
taining common  air,  full  of  nails,  the  i8th 
of  December,  1773,  and  left  it  inverted  in 
a  velTel  of  water  till  the  2d  of  March,  1775, 
when  I  found  that  it  was  diminifhed  one-fifth 
of  its  bulk,  and  was  not  in  the  leaft  diminifhed 
by  a  a  mixture  of  nitrous  air  ;  fo  that  it  muft 
have  been  perfedly  noxious. 

I  have  alfo  feen  reafon  to  think,  that  my 
former  opinion  concerning  the  caufe  of  the  di- 
minution of  air  by  paint,  viz.  that  it  was 
effeded  by  the  difcharge  of  phlogifton  from 
the  luhite  lea4,  was  not  well  founded.  For 
in  making  my  experiments  with  red  lead^  hav- 
ing found  before,  that  a  compofition  of  which 
turpentine  made  a  part,  had  diminifhed  com- 
mon air  (vol.1,  p.  179)  and  therefore,  fuf- 
peding  that  pofTibly  it  might  be  the  oil  of  tur- 
pentine, and  not  the  white  lead,*  that  contri- 
buted moft  to  the  diminution  of  the  air,  I  got 
a  fmall  quantity  of  ■paint  made  with  red  leady 
mixed  in  the  ufual  manner ;  and  found,  that 
when  I  had  daubed  pieces  of  paper  with  this 
paint,  and  covered  them  with  a  jar  ftanding  in 
water,  the  a,ir  was  diminifhed  jufl  as  before ; 
io  that  it  was  probably  the  phlogiflic  effluvia 

of 


Ohfervations  on  Common  Aiir.         ^tSj 

of  the  oils,  and  not  of  the  lead,  that  producx^ 
this  effed. 

In  my  former  publication,  I  obferved  that 
air,  which  had  been  expofed  to  the  effluvia  of 
the  common  red  cement,  was  injured  by  it.  For 
this  purpofe,  I  had  covered  all  the  infide  of  a 
phial  with  it,  and  placed  it,  inverted,  in  a 
vefTel  of  water.  Since  that  time  I  have  re- 
peated, or  rather  continued 'the  experiment, 
letting  the  fame  vefTel  ftand  about  nine  months 
in  that  fituation  •,  when,  upon  examining  it,  I 
found  it  was  diminiflied  one-fifth  of  its  bulk, 
and  that  it  was  not  at  all  afFeded  by  nitrous 
air. 

Having  had  fo  much  to  do  with  red  lead, 
in  the  courfe  of  my  late  experiments,  I  had  the 
curiofity  to  try  what  would  be  the  effedt  of  that 
procefs  by  which  the  grey  calx  of  lead  is  con- 
verted into  red  lead.  The  fimple  calcination 
of  lead,  I  knew  to  be  the  difcharge  of  phlogif- 
ton,  by  which  the  air  contiguous  to  it  is  dimi- 
nifhed ;  and,  as  far  as  I  have  had  an  opportu- 
nity of  obferving,  the  continuance  of  the  fame 
procefs,  by  which  the  grey  calx  is  converted 
into  red  lead,  is  of  the  fame  nature,  viz.  a  far- 
ther difcharge  of  phlogiflon,  and  confequently 
a  diminution  of  the  air.  For  I  threw  the  fo- 
cus of  a  burning  lens  upon  a  fmall  quantity 
N  4  of 


1^4  Ohfervations  on  Common  Air, 

of  the  grey  calx  of  lead,  placed  under  a  re* 
ceiver  Handing  in  water  •,  and  though  this  ope- 
ration did  not  make  it  abfolutely  red  lead,  it 
gave  it  a  reddilh  tinge ;  and  I  found,  by  the 
tefr  of  nitrous  air,  that  the  air  in  which  the 
experiment  was  performed  was  confiderably 
injured,  being  not  nearly  fo  much  afFeded  by 
nitrous  air  as  common  air  is. 

As  common  air  contains  a  confiderable  pro^ 
portion  of  fixed  air,  I  was  defirous,  from  the 
time  that  I  began  my  experiments  on  air,  to 
extract  the  fixed  air  from  a  given  quantity  of 
atmofpherical  air,  to  fee  what  it  would  be  when 
deprived  of  that  ingredient.  I  had  found,  in- 
deed, that  fixed  air  is  precipitated  from  com- 
mon air  in  phlogiftic  procefies,  and  efpecially 
by  the  eleftric  fpark  >  but  this  is  a  complex 
"  procefs  ;  fpr  at  the  fame  time  that  fixed  air  is 
difcharged,  phlogifton  is  received  by  the  air. 
But  nothing  that  I  have  yet  thought  of  has  fuc- 
cceded  fimply  to  extract  the  fixed-  air, 

As  quicklime  has  a  great  affinity  with  fixed 
air,  I  thought  it  poflible  that  confining  a  large 
quantity  of  quicklime  in  a  fmall  quantity  of 
^ir  might,  in  time,  produce  fome  effeft  of  this 
kind  i  but  the  experiment  did  not  anfv^er, 
|:hough  I  crowded  a  great  number  of  fmall 
.pieces  of  the  bed  quicklim.ethat  I  could  procure, 

JntQ 


Ohfervations  on  Common  Air.  185 

into  a  phial,  which  I  left  inverted  in  a  bafon  of 
quickfilver  a  whole  week.  It  did  not  appear 
that  the  inclofed  air  was  at  all  fenfibly  affeded. 
Had  it  been  fo  in  the  fmalleft  degree,  I  fhould 
have  repeated  the  procefs,  and  have  allowed  it 
more  time. 

Having  difcovered  that  vegetation  reftores, 
to  a  confiderable  degree  of  purity,  air  that  had 
been  injured  by  refpiration  or  putrefadtion ; 
and  alfo  that  agitation  in  water  produces  the 
fame  efFed,  I  conjedured  that  the  phlogiftic 
matter,  abforbed  by  the  water,  might  be  im- 
bibed by  plants,  as  well  as  form  other  combi- 
nations with  fubftances  under  the  water.  A 
curious  fa(5b,  which  has  fmce  been  communi- 
cated to  me,  very  much  favours  this  fuppo- 
fition. 

Mr.  Garrick  was  fo  obliging  as  to  give  me 
the  firft  intimation  of  it,  and  Mr.  Walker, 
the  ingenious  author  of  a  late  Englifh  Didion- 
ary,  from  whom  he  received  the  account,  was 
pleafed  to  take  fome  pains  in  making  farther 
inquiries  into  it  for  my  ufe.  He  informed 
me  that  Mr.  Bremner,  who  keeps  a  mulic-fhop 
oppofite  to  Somerfet-houfe,  was  at  Harwich, 
waiting  for  the  packet  j  and  obferved  that  a 
refervoir  at  the  principal  inn  was  very  foul  on 
jhc  fides.     This  made  him  afk  the  inn-keeper 

why 


.}S6  Ohfervations  on  Common  Air* 

why  he 'did  not  clean  it  out  ^  who  immediately 
aniwered,  that  he  had  done  fo  once,  but  woulcj 
i>ot  any  more  ;  for  that  after  cleanfing  the  r.e- 
fervoir,  the  water  which  was  caught  in  it  grew 
fetid,  and  unfit  for  ufe  j  and  that  it  did  not  re- 
cover its  fweetnefs  till  the  fides  and  bottom  of 
the  reiervoir  grew  very  foul  again.  Mr.  Wal- 
ker queftioned  Mr.  Bremner,  whether  there 
were  any  vegetables  growing  at  the  fides  and 
bottom  of  it ;  but  of  this  he  could  not  be  po- 
fitive.  However,  as  he  faid  it  was  covered 
with  2l green  fiihfiance,  which  is  known  to, be  ve- 
getable matter  (and  indeed  nothing  elfe  could 
well  adhere  to  tYitfides^  as  well  as  to  the  bot- 
tom of  the  refervoir)  I  think  it  will  be  deemed 
probable,  that  it  was  this  vegetating  matter 
that  preferved  the  water  fweet,  imbibing  the 
phlogiftic  matter  that  was  difcharged  in  its  ten- 
dency to  putrefadion. 

I  Ihall  be  happy,  if  the  mention  of  this  fadb 
fliould  excite  an  attention  to  things  of  this  na- 
ture. Trifling  as  they  feem  to  be,  they  have, 
in  a  philofophical  view,  the  greateft  dignity 
and  importance;  ferving  to  explain  fome  of 
the  moil  ftriking  phenomena  in  nature,  refpe6l- 
ing  the  general  plan  and  conftitution  of  the 
fyftem,  and  the  felation  that  one  part  of  it  bears 
to  another. 

SEC- 


Of  the  Fluor  Acid  Air >  iS^ 

SECTION    XL 

Of  the  Fluor  Acid  Air. 

The  philofophical  part  of  the  world  have, 
of  late,  been  highly  gratified  by  the  difcovery 
of  what  was  imagined  to  be  a  new  mineral  acid^ 
contained  in  a  fubftance  which  the  chymifts 
diftinguilh  by  the  name  oi  fluor-y  but  many 
of  my  readers  will  imderftand  me  better,  when 
I  inform  them,  that  it  is  of  that  fpecies  of  fub- 
ftance, which,  with  us,  is  called  the  DerbyJJjire 
fpar  ;  and  of  which,  at  prefent,  vafes  and  other 
ornaments  for  chimnies,  are  ufually  made.  The 
acid  is  expelled  from  this  fubftance  by  oil  of 
vitriol,  and  has  peculiar  properties,  as  remark- 
able as  any  of  the  other  three  mineral  acids 
which  we  were  acquainted  with  before. 

This  curious  difcovery  was  made  by  Mr. 
Scheele,  a  Swede ;  from  which  circumftance  the 
acid  is  often  diftinguifhed  by  the  name  of  the 
Swedijh  acid.  His  method  of  operating  upon 
this  fubftance,  and  likewife  that  of  all  who 
have  fucceeded  him  in  the  inquiry,  was  to  dif- 
til  it  in  glafs-veflels,  as  in  the  procefs  of  mak- 
ing fpirit  of  nitre  from   falt-petre  •,    and  the 

moft 


lS8  Of  the  Fluor  Acid  Air: 

mofl  remarkable  fads  that  have  been  obferved 
concerning  it  are,  that  the  veflels  in  which  the 
diftillation  is  made  are  apt  to  be  corroded  •,  fo 
that  holes  will  be  made  quite  through  them  ; 
and  that  when  there  is  water  in  the  recipient, 
the  furface  of  it  w;ili  be  covered  with  a  cruft, 
of  a  friable  ftony  matter. 

This  crufV,  which  I  fliall  diftinguifh  by  the 
name  of  the  jluor  crujl^  Mr.  Scheele  fuppofed 
to  be  quartz  j  and  therefore  concluded  that  this 
acid  and  v/ater  were  the  conftituent  parts  of 
that  foflil.  On  the  other  hand,  Mr.  Boulan- 
gcr,  who  has  taken  a  great  deal  of  pains  with 
this  fubjed:,  is  of  opinion  that  this  new  acid 
is  only  the  acid  of  fait  ^  combined  with  an  earthy 
fubftance.  For  this  opinion  he  advances  va- 
rious reafons  5  but  does  not  pretend  to  be  able 
to  produce  any  decifive  proof.  The  refult  of 
my  own  experiments,  I  think,  clearly  prove, 
that  the  fluor  acid  is  the  acid  of  vitriol^  charged 
with  fo  much  phlogifton  as  is  neceflary  to  its 
taking  the  form  of  air,  and  alfo  with  much  of 
the  earthy  matter  of  the  fpar. 

As  foon  as  I  had  exhibited  one  of  the  acids 
in  the  form  of  air^  I  had  no  doubt  but  that  all 
the  acids  might  be  exhibited  in  the  fame  man- 
ner, and  this  among  the  reft  j  but  I  imagined 
that  I  ihould  find  great  difficulty  in  procuring 

the 


Of  the  Fluor  Add  Air,  189 

the  folTil  that  contains  it  •,  fuppollng  that  it  had 
only  been  found  in  Sweden  •,  and  I  fhould  pro- 
bably have  continued  in  this  incapacity  for  mak- 
ing the  following  experiments,  had  I  not  been 
relieved  by  Mr.  Woulfe,  who,  upon  my  in- 
quiry concerning  it,  not  only  explained  to  me 
what  the  fubftance  was,  but  immediately  fur- 
nilhed  me  with  a  quantity  of  feveral  kinds  of 
it,  fufficient  for  my  purpofe.  That  with  which 
my  firfl  experiments  were  made,  was  that  v/hich 
he  called  the  white  phofphoric  fpar^  from  Saxony  \ 
but  afterwards  I  made  ufe  of  the  Derbylhire 
jlpar  J  and  the  pieces  that  I  had  by  me  were 
partly  white,  or  yellowilh,  and  partly  purple. 

All  my  advantage  in  the  inveftigation  of 
this  fubjedl,  has  arifen  from  my  peculiar  man- 
ner of  conducing  the  experiments.  For,  by 
exhibiting  the  acid  in  the  form  of  air,  free 
from  all  moifture,  I  had  an  opportunity  of 
examining  its  nature  and  affinities  with  the 
greateft  eafe  and  certainty..  In  this  manner 
alfo,  this  fpecies  of  air  exhibits  a  variety  of 
ftriking  phenomena,  which  cannot  be  produced 
in  any  other  manner  of  operating  upon  it. 

When  I  began  thefe  experiments,  I  followed 
the  direfbions  given  by  thofe  who  had  gone  be- 
fore me  in  the  inveftigation  of  this  fubjeft,  and 
who  had  procured  the  acid  in  the  common  me- 
thod 


k^6  t)/  the  Fluor  Acid  Airl 

thod  of  dlllillation,  pounding  the  fluor  (wfilcff 
I  afterwards  found  not  to  be  necefTary)  and 
pouring  oil  of  vitriol  upon  it.  This  I  did  in 
a  phial,  to  which  was  fitted  a  ground-ftoppld 
and  tube,  and  immediately  found,  that,  at 
firft,  without  any  heat,  and  afterwards  with  a 
very  fmall  degree  of  it,  air  was  produced  in 
great  plenty,  perfedly  tranfparent,  and  con- 
fined by  quickfilver,  like  the  other  acid  airs. 
The  vapour,  as  it  illiied  out  of  the  tube  into 
-the  open  air,  formed  a  permanent  white  cloud ; 
no  doubt,  by  attaching  to  itfelf  the  water  that 
floated  in  the  atmofphere,  and  the  fmell  of  it 
was  extremely  pungent. 

I  had  no  fooner  produced  this  new  kind  of 
air,  but  I  was  eager  to  fee  the  efFed:  it  would 
have  on  tvater,  and  to  produce  the  ftony 
cruft  form_ed  by  their  union,  as  defcribed  by 
Mr.  Scheele ;  and  I  was  not  difappointed  in  my 
expediations.  The  moment  the  water  came 
into  contact  with  this  air,  the  furface  of  it  be- 
came white  and  opake,  by  3.  ftony  film,  which, 
forming  a  feparation  between  the  air  above, 
and  the  water  below  it,  confiderably  retarded 
the  afcent  of  the  water,  till  the  air,  infmuat- 
ing  itfelf  through  the  pores  and  cracks  of  this 
cruft,  the  water  neceffarily  rofe  as  the  air  di- 
miniftied,  and  breaking  the  cruft,  prefented  a 
new  furface  of  water,  which,  like  the  former, 

was 


Of  ths  Fluor  Acid  Air:  ipt 

was  inftantly  covered  with  a  frefh  cruft.  Thus 
was  one  ftony  incruftation  formed  after  an- 
other, till  every  particle  of  the  air  was  united 
to  the  water,  and  the  different  films  being  col- 
ledied,  and  dried,  formed  a  white  powdery 
fubftance,  generally  a  little  acid  to  the  tafle ; 
but  when  wafhed  in  much  pure  water,  was  per- 
fedlly  infipid. 

Few  philofophical  experiments  exhibit  a 
more  pleafing  appearance  than  this,  which  can 
only  be  made,  by  firft  producing  the  air  con- 
fined by  quickfiiver,  and  then  admitting  a  large 
body  of  water  to  it.  Moll  perfons  to  whom 
1  have  fhewn  the  experiment  have  been  ex- 
ceedingly llruck  with  it.  It  is  exhibited  to  the 
moll  advantage,  when  the  velTel  that  contains 
the  air  is  pretty  wide,  by  which  I  mean  about 
an  inch  in  diameter.  In  this  cafe  the  crufl 
will  often  crack  in  the  middle,  and  a  fmall 
jet  of  water  rulhing  through  the  filTure,  will, 
to  appearance,  be  inftantly  converted  into  this 
flony  fubftance,  and  look  like  a  puff  of  white 
powder,  rifmg  fometimes  an  inch  or  two  up 
into  the  air.  Alfo  the  cryfialUzatio7is,  formed 
on  the  fides  of  the  velTel,  as  the  water  rifes  in 
it,  make  a  very  beautiful  appearance. 

The  union  of  this  acid  air  and  water  may 

alfo  be  exhibited  in  another  manner,  which, 

4  to 


1^2  Of  the  Fluor  Acid  Alrl 

to  fome  perfons,  makes  a  ftill  more  ftriking 
experiment ;  viz.  by  admitting  the  air,  as  faft 
as  it  is  generated,  to  a  large  body  of  water 
refting  on  quickfilver,  inflead  of  introducing 
the  water  to  the  air  previoufly  formed. 

For  this  purpofe,  I  ufually  put  two  or  three 
ounce-meafures  of  water  into  a  tall  cylindrical 
jar,  about  an  inch  in  diameter  (fuch  as  thofe 
which  I  generally  ufe  as  recipients  of  thofe 
kinds  of  air  that  muft  be  confined  by  quick- 
filver) and  filling  the  remainder  of  the  veflel 
with  quickfilver,  I  place  it  inverted  in  a  ba- 
fon  containing  a  quantity  of  the  fame  fluid  •, 
fo  that  the  water,  immediately  rifing  to  the  top, 
occupies  the  upper  part  of  the  veflel,  while  the 
quickfilver  occupies  the  lower  part.  I  then 
introduce  under  it  the  end  of  the  tube  pro- 
ceeding from  the  phial,  which  contains  the 
materials  for  generating  this  air.  It  is,  then, 
very  pleafing  to  obferve,  that  the  moment  any 
bubble  of  air,  after  pafilng  through  the  quick- 
filver, reaches  the  water,  it  is  inftantly,  as  it 
were,  converted  into  a  flone  ♦,  but  continuing 
hollow  for  a  fhort  fpace  of  time,  generally  rifea 
to  the  top  of  the  water,  in  the  form  of  a  bubble, 
or  a  thin  white  film.  If  the  fuccefTion  of  bub- 
bles be  rapid,  and  they  rife  freely  to  the  top 
of  the  veflel,  through  a  large  body  of  clear 
water  (which,  however,  is  not  always  the  cafe, 

a'. 


Of  the  Fluor  Acid  Air.  193 

as  they  will  fometimes  adhere  to  the  upper  fur- 
race  of  the  quickfilver)   I  have  met  with  few 
perfons  who  are  foon  weary  of  looking  at  it ; 
and  fonie  could  fit  by  it  almoft  a  whole  hour,' 
and  be  agreeably  amufed  all  the  time. 

Every  bubble  of  air,  coming  into  contadl 
with  the  water  on  every  fide  at  once,  is  like  a 
bladder,  being  hollow  v/ithin  •,  but  this  flight 
crufi:  foon  burfliing,  the  fides  collapfe,  and  it 
rifes  to  the  top  of  the  vefTel,  in  the  form,  of  a 
piece  of  thin  white  gauze  •,  but  the  water  foon 
penetrating  every  part  of  it,  the  whole  m.afs  of 
thefe  films  becomes  in  a  little  time  like  a  jelly, 
which  continually  thickens  by  the  accellion  of 
more  films,  till  at  length  the  whole  body  of 
water  feems  to  become  folid  •,  fo  that,  being 
fully  faturated,  efpecially  at  the  lower  part, 
the  air,  finding  no  more  moifture  within  its 
reach,  will  fill  all  the  lower  part  of  the  vefTel, 
expelling  the  quickfilver,  while  the  water,  in 
tlie  form  of  a  ftiff  jelly,  occupies  all  the  upper 
part  of  the  vefTel. 

As,  for  the  purpofes  to  be  mentioned  here- 
after, I  have  repeated  this  experiment  a  great 
number  of  times,  I  have  had  an  opportunity 
of  obferving  a  very  grest  variety  in  the  ap- 
pearances which  it  exhibits.  One  is  peculi- 
arly pleafing,  but  not  very  common.  A  large 
■    O  bubble 


194  Of  the  Fluor  Acid  Air, 

bubble  of  air  will  fometimes  adhere,  by  its 
lower  part,  to  the  furface  of  the  quickfilver ; 
and  another  bubble,  rifing  in  the  fame  place, 
before  the  lower  part  of  the  former  has  been 
clofed,  pufhcs  out  the  upper  part  of  it,  and 
advancing  farther  into  the  water,  extends  the 
bubble  in  length  :  another  follows,  and  does 
the  fame,  till  at  length  a  tube  is  formed  (the 
fides  alfo  growing  thicker  continually)  extend- 
ing from  the  quickfilver,  to  the  top  of  the  wa- 
ter. I  have  feen  of  them  four  inches  in  length ; 
and  others  being  formed  clofe  to  them,  the 
whole  velfel  has  been  almoft  filled  with  thefe 
tubes,  adhering  to  one  another,  of  different 
lengths,  and  not  much  unlike  the  appearance 
of  the  pipes  that  are  placed  in  the  front  of  an 


In  lefs  than  an  hour,  I  have  frequently  con- 
verted two  or  three  ounce-meafures  of  water 
into  this  folid  mafs.  When  this  is  taken  out 
of  the  velfel,  and  preffed,  it  will  be  found  -to 
contain  a  great  deal  of  an  acid  liquor;  the 
water  impregnated  with  the  acid  having  been 
intangled  in  the  interftices  of  the  jelly,  out  of 
the  reach  of  the  air  :  and  if  this  liquor  be  ufed 
in  another  procefs,  inftead  of  pure  water,  more 
of  it  will  feem  to  become  folid,  and  the  acid 
liquor  will  be  concentrated  every  time. 

By 


Of  the  Fluor  Acid  Air.  195 

By  the  repetition  of  this  procefs,  an  acid 
liquor  may  be  procured  of  a  very  confiderable 
degree  of  ftrength.  There  feems,  however, 
to  be  a  limit  to  its  ftrength ;  for  the  acid  is 
exceedingly  volatile,  as  is  evident  from  its  ex- 
tremely pungent  fmell ;  fo  that  I  have^thought 
that  I  gained  nothing  by  repeating  the  procefs 
more  than  eight  or  ten  times ;  becaufe  it  was 
impolTible  to  transfer  the  v/ater  from  one  vefTel 
to  another,  but  more  acid  would  be  loft  by 
evaporation,  than  would  be  acquired  by  an- 
other impregnation  with  the  acid  air. 

Thefe  appearances  I  explain,  by  fuppofmg 
that  the  vitriolic  acid,  in  uniting  with  the  fpar, 
is  in  part  volatilized,  by  means  of  fome  phlo- 
gifton  contained  in  it,  fo  as  to  form  a  vitriolic 
acid  air  •,  and  that  there  is  alfo  combined  with 
this  air,  a  portion  of  the  folid  earthy  part  of 
the  fpar,  which  continues  in  a  ftate  of  folution, 
till,  coming  into  contadl  with  the  water,  the 
fluid  unites  with  the  acid,  and  the  earth  is 
precipitated.  The  reafons  on  which  I  found 
this  opinion  will  appear  in  due  time  \  but  to 
make  my  reader  follow  me,  ftep  by  ftep,  in 
my  analytical  progrefs,  I  muft  firft  acquaint 
him  with  the  obfervations  I  made  upon  this 
acid  air,  in  its  compound  ftate,  before  the 
ftony  matter  was  feparated  from  it.  For  this 
union  makes  it  quite  another  thing,  giving  it 
O  2  peculiar 


1^6  Qf  the  Fluor  Acid  Air. 

peculiar  properties,  which  are  not  to  be  dif- 
covered  in  the  pure  acid  air,  divefted  of  that 
ftony  matter  •,  and  therefore,  though  it  be  a 
compound,  and  may  be  analyzed  into  its  con- 
Hituent  parts,  it  is  fufficiently  intitled  to  a 
peculiar  appellation,  viz.  that  oi  the  Fluor  add 
air. 

Before  I  proceed  to  relate  any  of  the  expe- 
riments which  I  made  with  this  acid  air,  I 
ihall  give  a  few  direiflions  and  precautions, 
which  may  be  uieful  to  perfons  on  their  firft 
entrance  upon  this  courfe. 

1.  The  tube  through  which  this  acid  va- 
pour is  conveyed  ihould  not  be  very  narrow, 
becaufe  it  is  apt  to  be  furred  up,  efpecially 
when  any  phial,  containing  materials  for  the 
production  of  this  air,  has  been  ufed  fome 
time,  and  with  a  good  deal  of  heat  \  owing, 
I  fuppofe,  to  rhe  hot  air  retaining  in  folution 
more  of  the  ftony  matter  than  it  can  do  when 
it  is  cold,  and  theretore  depofiting  it  as  it  is. 
conveyed  through  tlie  tube, 

2.  I  began  thefe  experiments  with  phial$ 
which  Iiad  ground-floppies  and  tubes,  but 
loon  found  that  it  was  too  expenfive  a  mode 
of  experimenting  with  this  kind  of  airj  for 
they  were  prefently  corroded  and  fpoiled.     Af^ 

terwards, 


Of  the  Fluor  Add  Air.  i^y 

terwards,  therefore,  I  nfed  only  common  phials, 
but  the  thickeft  that  I  could  meet  with  •,  and 
ftill  feldom  found  that  they  would  bear  the  ex- 
periment above  an  hour.  Very  frequently, 
the  thickeft  phials  that  I  could  get  would  be 
worn  quite  through  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour, 
when  the  heat  was  conliderabie,  and  the  pro-! 
duftion  of  the  air  rapid.  This  power  of  dif-r 
folving  glafs  is  a  very  remarkable  property  of 
this  air  j  but  it  leems  to  poflefs  it  only  when 
it  is  hot,    at  le^ft  in  any  confiderable  degree. 

3.  When  I  wifhed  to  produce  this  air  pretty 
faft,  I  found  it  moft  convenient  to  pound  the 
fpar,  and  pour  the  oil  of  vitriol  upon  it,  fill- 
ing one-fourth  of  the  phial  with  the  fpar,  and 
leaving  one-fourth  of  it  for  a  fpace  in  which 
the  bubbles  might  expand  themfelves,  and 
break,  fo  as  not  to  carry  any  of  the  liquor  into 
the  tube.  I  now  proceed  to  the  particular  ex- 
periments. 

Dipping  a  lighted  candle  into  a  vefTei  filled 
with  the  fluor  acid  air,  it  was  extinguifhed 
without  any  particular  colour  of  the  flame, 
which  is  obfervable  in  the  marine  acid  air. 

The  mixture  of  any  other  of  the  acid  airs, 

with  alkalinf  air,  makes  fo  beautiful  an  expex 

rimenr,  that  it  was  naturally  one   of  the  f^rft 

O  3  experiments 


19B  Of  the  Fluor  Acid  Air. 

experiments  I   thought  of  making  with  this 
new  acid  air.     Accordingly,  I  got  the  appear- 
ance that  I  had  expected  •,  a  white  cloud  be- 
ing formed  by  the  union  of  thefe  two  kinds  of 
air.     But  the  alkaline  air  did  not  mix  fo  rea- 
dily v/ith  this  as  with  the  other  kinds  of  acid 
air  ;  and  which  furprized  me  much  at  the  time, 
the  fait  formed  by  the  union  of  thefe  two  kinds 
of  air  was  not  foluble,  either  in  water  or  fpirit 
of  wine.     But,  in  fa6l,  the  proper y^//  formed 
by  the  union  of  thefe  kinds  of  air  was,    no 
doubt,  diiTolved  in  the  water  \  that  which  re- 
mained undiflblved  being,  as  I  conjedture,  the 
fiony  fuhfiance  only  which  had  been  held  in  fo- 
lution  in  the  acid  air.     This  flony  fubftance, 
being  mixed  with  the  acid  air,  is  alfo  probably 
the  reafon  why  the  alkaline  air  does  not  mix 
fo  readily  with  it  as  with  the  other  kinds  of 
acid  air  ^   fome  time  being  requifite  to  difenr 
gage  it  from  this  flony  fubftance,  in  order  to 
its  uniting  with  the  alkaline  air. 

Nitrous  air,  mixed  with  this  acid  air,  had  no 
fenfible  effed:  upon  it.  Water  abforbed  the 
acid  air,  and  left  the  nitrous  air  polTefTed  of 
its  peculiar  properties. 

Having  afcertained  the  effed  of  water  upon 
this  acid  air,  I  proceeded  to  try  oihtv  fluid  fub- 

fiances. 

Spirit 


Of  the  Fluor  Acid  Air.  199 

Spirit  of 'Ujine  imbibed  this  air  as  readily  as 
water,  but  continued  as  limpid  as  ever ;  and 
when  fatu rated  with  it,  feemed  to  be  no  lefs 
inflammable  than  before. 

Oil  of  turpentine^  did  not  imbibe  any  of  this 
air. 

Vitriolic  ether  imbibed  about  twenty  times 
its  own  bulk  of  it ;  but  was  not  fenfibly  chan- 
ged by  the  impregnation.  The  cafe  was  the 
fame  with  nitrous  ether.  But  the  firft  time  that 
I  made  the  experiment  with  nitrous  ether,  I 
imagine  a  little  water  was  mixed  with  it  (as 
much  as  thofe  fubflances  are  capable  of  being 
mixed)  for  it  coagulated  as  water  had  done, 
remaining  in  the  middle  of  the  tube,  the 
acid  air  being  both  above  and  below  it.  This 
mafs  of  coagulated  matter  ;  which  in  colour 
and  confiftence  refembled  a  brown  jelly,  being 
taken  out  of  the  vefl^el,  did  not  take  fire  at 
the  approach  of  a  candle  ;  but  when  it  had 
been  expofed  to  the  air  about  half  a  minute, 
it  grew  hot,  threw  out  a  grofs  fmoke,  and  was 
prefently  all  evaporated.  Part,  however,  of 
the  fame  mafs,  v/hich  had  been  dipped  in  wa- 
ter, did  not  grow  hot,  or  evaporate,  in  the 
open  air  ;  and  when  expofed  to  the  lire,  it 
burned  to  a  white  powdery  fubftance.  I  ima- 
gine this  efFe(5l  to  have  been  owing  to  a  mix- 
O  4  ture. 


200  Of  the  Fkcr  Acid  Air. 

ture  of  water  ;  becaufe,  with  pure  nitrous  ether, 
I   could   not  get   another  appearance  of  the 

kind.  -   .         ,  .... 

Oi  foil d  fuh fiances^  I  found  that  this  air  had 
no  effeft  upon  brimftone,  common  fait,  fal  am- 
moniac,  iron^  liver  of  fulphur^  or  gum-lac. 

Charcoal  abforhed  the  whole  of  a  quantity 
of  this  air,  and  contraded  from  it  a  ftrong 
pungent  fmell.  The  ruji  of  iron  alfo  abforbed 
it  in  like  manner. 

Alur/i  abforbed  this  air  pretty  fail,  the  fur- 
face  of  it  being  rendered  white  and  opake. 
When  it  was  taken  out  of  the  air,  it  looked 
moid,  and  was  incapable  of  the  operation  of 
roafling,  like  that  which  had  been  expofed  to 
alkaline  air.  This  air  having,  no  doubt,  like 
the  other,  feized  upon  the  water  which  enters 
into  the  compofitioh  of  alum. 

^ickhne  and  chalh,  both  abforbed  a  little  of 
this  acid  air ;  but  the  refult  was,  in  no  refped^t, 
remarkable.  The  latter  had  been  difToIved  by 
it,  and  had  produced  a  quantity  of  fixed  air, 
precipitating  lime  in  lime-water. 

In  order  to  judge  whether  there  was  any  foun- 
dation for  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Eouknger,  of  this 

acid 


0/  the  Fluor  Add  Air,     .        201 

acid  being  the  fame  v/ith  the  marine^  I  put  to 
it  a  piece  of  falt-petre,  which  I  have  obferved 
to  be  readily  diffolved  in  the  marine  acid  air ; 
and  I  muft  own  that  appearances  fo  much  fa- 
voured his  opinion,  that  I  was  at  that  time 
very  much  inclined  to  adopt  it. 

When  the  falt-petre  had  been  for  fome  time 
furrounded  with  this  air,  the  air  began  to  be 
diminiilied,  and  the  infide  of  the  veffel  was 
filled  with  red  fumes,  which  continued  about 
a  week,  the  quickfilver  rifmg  all  the  time, 
till  only  one-tenth  of  the  air  remained,  and 
the  infide  of  the  veffel  was  covered  with  a 
whitifli,  probably  a  faline  fubftance,  produced 
by  the  folution  of  mxrcury.  After  this,  the 
air  becoming  tranfparent,  I  examined  it,  and 
found  it  neither  to  affe6t  common  air,  nor  to 
be"  affected  by  nitrous  air,  and  to  extinguifli  a 
candle.  Aifo,  about  one-fourth  of  it  was 
readily  abforbed  by  water,  and  made  lime- 
water  turbid  ;  fo  that,  contrary  to  my  expec- 
tation, a  great  part  of  the  air  muft  have  been 
fixed  air,  and  not  nitrous.  This  experiment 
I  did  not  repeat ;  but  it  feems  to  exhibit  a  faft 
deferving  particular  attention,  in  the  invefti- 
gation  of  the  nature  of  fixed  air. 

I  though^t  it  might  poffibly  contribute  to  de- 
cide the  queftion  concerning  the  identity  of 

this 


2  02  Of  the  Fluor  Acid  Air, 

this  acid  and  the  marine,  if  I  put  a  quantity 
of  xhtfiuor  cruft  to  marine  acid  air  j  thinking 
that  they  might  form  an  union,  and  conftitute 
this  fiuor  acid  air :  and,  indeed,  fometliing 
fimilar  to  it  was  by  this  means  produced  \  fo 
that  another  crufu  was  formed  upon  the  admif- 
iion  of  water  to  it ;  but,  in  other  refpeds, 
feveral  circumftances,  which  I  cannot  explain, 
attended  the  experiments.  They  were  as  fol- 
lows. 

To  about  two  ounce-meafures  of  marine  acid 
air  1  put  about  a  quarter  of  a  grain  of  the 
fluor  cruft,  and  in  about  three  days  it  had  ab- 
forbed  about  half  an  ounce  meafure  of  the  air. 
Water  being  then  admitted  to  it,  left  a  quarter 
of  an  ounce-meafure  of  air  unabforbed. 

Afterwards  I  conveyed  marine  acid  air  to  a 
pretty  large  quantity  of  the  fluor  cruft,  con- 
fined by  quickfilver  •,  and,  as  the  air  was  im- 
bibed, I  continued  to  throw  up  more,  till,  af- 
ter three  or  four  days,  that  fubftance  feemed  to 
be  fully  faturated  with  the  air.  Then  admit- 
ting water  to  it,  it  was  abforbed  exadly  like 
the  fluor  acid  air  :  but  I  could  not,  at  that 
time,  very  well  diftinguifli  the  cruft  on  the  top 
of  it,  on  account  of  the  jar  being  almoft  filled 
with  the  cruft,  and  part  of  it  floating  on  the  top 
C'f  the  water.  About  three-fourths  of  this  air 
4  was 


Of  the  Fluor  Acid  Air.  203 

was  abforbed  by  the  water  -,  but  what  I  thought 
very  remarkable,  air  kept  iffuing  from  this 
fiuor-cruft,  in  large  bubbles,  till  the  quantity 
of  air  was  doubled,  and  the  jar  was  half-filled 
with  it.  This  air  neither  affeded  common 
air,  nor  was  affefted  by  nitrous  air,  and  it  ex- 
tinguifhed  a  candle. 

I  repeated  the  experiment,  with  this  only 
difference,  that  I  admitted  v/ater  to  the  air  as 
foon  as  the  fluor-cruft  ieemcd  to  be  faturated  ; 
when  the  experiment  being  made  in  a  wide 
jar,  the  cruft  on  the  furface  of  the  water  was 
as  vifible  as  in  the  experiment  with  the  fluor 
acid  air  itfelf.  At  this  time,  however,  there 
was  no  generation  of  air  from  the  faturated 
cruft,  as  before,  but  a  confiderable  quantity 
of  air,  unabforbed  by  water,  though  I  took 
care  that  the  marine  acid  air  was  as  pure  as  I 
could  procure  it. 

Having  a  quantity  of  the  fluor-cruft  fatu- 
rated with  marine  acid  air,  I  had  the  curiofity 
to  pour  fome  oil  of  vitriol  upon  it,  in  order  to 
try  whether  the  produce  would  be  pure  marine 
acid  air,  or  a  mixture  of  the  two ;  and  the  lat- 
fer  feemed  to  be  the  cafe,  though  I  think  the 
marine  acid  prevailed  in  the  mixture. 

In 


fi04  Of  the  Fluor  Acid  Aly, 

In  this  procefs  air  was  produced  in  great 
plenty,  and  the  bubbles  burft  in  the  receiver 
with  a  white  cloud  •,  but  v/hen  water  was  ad- 
mitted to  it,  it  was  abforbed  without  any  cruft 
being  formed  upon  its  furface.  In  twenty-four 
hours  a  piece  of  falt-petre  turned  yellow  in  this 
air,  and  abforbed  about  half  an  ounce-meafure 
of  it.  What  remained  unabforbed  by  water, 
was  exceedingly  ftrong  nitrous  air,  the  fpirit 
of  nitre  having  been  let  loofe  from  the  falt- 
petre  by  the  marine  acid  air,  and  having  dif- 
folved  the  quickfilver. 

A  piece  of  horay:^  in  about  a  fortnight,  ab- 
forbed about  two  ounce-meafures  of  this  air^, 
without  leaving  any  refiduum  not  abforbed  by 
water.  The  furface  of  the  borax  was  become 
foft ;  but  by  wafhing  it  in  water,  the  foft  part 
was  eafily  feparated  from  the  reft. 

At  the  very  beginning  of  my  inveftigation 
of  this  fubjed,  I  had  a  fufpicion  -that  this  new 
acid  air  might  poiTibly  be  the  vitriolic  'acid  air^ 
loaded  with  the  fparry  cruft  •,  but  not  fucceed- 
ing  in  the  experiments  which  I  thought  muft 
have  decided  the  queftion,  I  quitted  that  hy- 
pothelis  for  fome  time.  The  experiments  were 
thefe. 

I  threw 


Of  the  Fluor  Acid  Air,  205 

I  threw  the  focus  of  a  burning  lens  upon 
fome  pieces  of  the  fpar  in  vitriolic  acid  air,  con- 
fined by  quickfilver ;  thinking,  that  when  it 
was  hot,  it  might  dilTolve  fome  part  of  it,  and 
thereby  become  the  fam^  thing  with  the  fliior 
acid  air.  But  though  I  continued  this  opera- 
tion till  the  fpar  fmoked,  and  filled  the  vefiel 
with  a  white  fume,  there  was  neither  any  ad-, 
dition  made  to  the  quantity  of  air,  nor  any 
change  produced  in  the  quality  of  it.  When 
v/ater  was  admired  to  it,  no  crufb,  as  I  had 
expected,  was  formed  on  the  furface  of  it. 

In  order  to  try  whether  the  fluor  cruft  wa3 
the  fame  thing  with  the  fpar,  from  which  it 
had  been  produced,  I  got  a  quantity  of  it,  and 
treated  it  in  the  fame  manner  as  I  had  treated 
the  fpar,  pouring  oil  of  vitriol  upon  it,  and 
endeavouring  to  expel  air  from  it.  I  prefently 
found,  indeed,  that  it  yielded  great  plenty  of 
air ;  but  not  finding  it  to  be  the  thing  I  was 
then  in  queft  of,  viz.  an  acid  air,  by  means  of 
which  a  cruft  would  be  formed  on  the  furface 
of  the  water  admitted  to  it,  I  neglected  to  give 
fufficient  attention  to  it,  or  I  might  have  been 
led  to  fufpedt  that  this  fluor-cruft,  like  the 
fluor  itfelf,  cont^in$  fo  much  phlogifton,  as, 
by  incorporating  v/ith  the  oil  of  vitriol,  to  en- 
able it  to  affume  the  form  of  air,  and  become 
t,he  vitriolic  ^cid  air  j  though  the  earthy  matter, 

not 


2o6  Of  the  Pin  or  Acid  Air, 

not  incorporating  with  it,  it  could  not  become 
the  fiuor  acid  air. 

Water  admitted  to  this  acid  air,  procured 
from  the  lluor-cruft  by  oil  of  vitriol,  ablbrbed 
it  all,  but  without  having  any  cruft  upon  its 
furface. 

Alkaline  air  united  with  the  whole  of  this 
acid  air,  forming  with  it  a  white  faline  fub- 
ftance ;  and  part  of  the  infide  of  the  tube  in 
which  the  mixture  was  made,  was  tinged  with 
a  deep  yellow,  or  orange-colour,  which  difap- 
peared  after  a  few  hours  expofure  to  the  open 
air.  This  I  have  obferved  to  be  the  cale  with 
the  vitriolic  acid  air. 

This  air  did  not  at  all  Ti'Rzdi  faU-fctre  or 
horaic. 

Had  I,  however,  profecuted  thefe  experi- 
ments farther,  and  have  found,  as,  I  doubt 
not,  I  fliould  have  done,  that  this  acid  air, 
procured  by  oil  of  vitriol  from  the  fluor-cruft, 
was  genuine  vitriolic  acid  air,  it  would  have 
proved  no  more  than  that  this  fiuor-cruft  con> 
tains  phlogifton,  and  in  fuch  a  ftatc  as  to  com- 
bine with  oil  of  vitriol  by  heat,  and  enable  it 
to  take  the  form  of  air.  They  would  not  have 
proved,  that  the  air  procured  from  the  fluor 

iti^lf 


Of  the  Fluor  Acid  Air.  207 

itfelf  was  of  that  nature :  for  it  might  have 
been  faid,  that  the  peculiar  acid  of  the  fluor 
had  been  expelled  before. 

To  make  the  experimentum  cruets  in  this  cafe, 
I  faturated  a  quantity  of  water  with  the  fluor 
acid  air,  prefTmg  out  the  llony  matter  with 
which  it  was  filled  at  each  procefs,  and  im- 
pregnating it  over  and  over  again.  When 
it  appeared  to  be  fufficiently  impregnated  for 
my  purpofe,  I  put  the  liquor  into  a  phial, 
furnifhed  with  a  proper  tube  and  recipient, 
fuch  as  is  reprefented  plate  II.  fig.  8.  vol.  I. 
to  receive  any  of  the  watery  part  that  might 
be  expelled  by  heat  -,  and  applying  the  flame 
of  a  candle,  I  prefently  got  from  it  great 
plenty  of  air  -,  which,  by  every  tefl:  that  1  could 
think  of  applying,  appeared  to  have  the  very 
fame  properties  with  the  vitriolic  acid  air,  of 
which  an  account  was  given  in  the  firft  {ac- 
tion of  this  volume. 

The  air  thus  expelled  from  thfs  acid  liquor 
was  abforbed  by  water,  without  any  cruft  on 
the  furface  of  it. 

When  alkaline  air  was  admitted  to  it,  the 
fides  of  the  veflcl  were  tinged  with  the  orange- 
colour  mentioned   above,  which  vanillied  in 

about 


2o8  Of  the  Fluor  -Acid  Air. 

about  an  hour  after  it  had  been  expofed  to  the 
open  air. 

This  air  had  no  effeft  upon  fatt-petrs  -,  i. 
piece  of  which  continued  in  it  about  a  fort- 
night i  nor  yet  upon  brimftone^  alum^  or  fal- 
ammoniac. 

Liver  of  ftdphur  abforbed  it,  without  under- 
going any  fenfible  change. 

This  air  extinguiHied  a  candle,  without  any 
particular  colour  of  the  flame. 

Camphor  was  diiTolved  in  this  air,  exa6lly 
as  it  is  in  vitriolic  acid  air. 

In  thefe  properties  this  acid  air  will  be 
found,  by  comparifon,  to  agree  with  the  vitrio- 
lic acid  air;  as  alfo  in  the  two  following, 
which,  as  far  as  I  know,  are  peculiar  to  this 
fpecies  of  air. 

Phlogifbon,  as  I  have  obferved,  •  is  contained 
in  vitriolic  acid  air,  and  in  fuch  a  manner  as 
to  be  communicated  by  it  to  the  common  air* 
with  which  it  is  mixed,  and  thereby  to  phlo- 
giflicate  or  injure  it.  And  an  equal  quantity 
of  this  acid  air,  and  common  air,  having  been 
mixed,  and  left  together  twenty-four  hours, 
the  common  air  appeared  to  be  fo  far  injured, 
I  that 


Of  the  Fluor  Acid  Air,  iq() 

that  two  meafures  of  it,  and  one  of  nitrous 
air,  occupied  the  fpace  of  fomething  more  than 
two  meafures. 

The  ele5lric  /park  has  a  very  remarkable 
efFe6t  upon  the  vitriolic  acid  air,  or  rather 
upon  the  glafs-tube  in  which  the  experiment 
is  made,  as  will  be  particularly  noted  hereafter ; 
for  a  fmgle  explofion  covers  all  the  infide  fur- 
face  with  a  deep  brown  or  black  matter,  and 
the  glafs  grows  more  opake  every  flroke.  This 
very  fmgular  and  ftriking  effedl  has  the  electric 
fpark  taken  in  the  air  expelled  from  this  acid 
liquor. 

After  I  had  made  this  experiment,  I  had  no 
doubt,  but  that  thefe  two  kinds  of  air,  viz.  the 
vitriolic  acid  and  th&fluor  acid,  are,  in  reality, 
the  fame.     It  is  polTible,   however,   that  there 
may  be  fome  fmall  difference  between  them, 
in  confequence  of  the  air  from  this  acid  liquor 
ftill  containing  fome  portion  of  the  earth  of 
the  fpar.     I  conjefture  that  it  does  ;   becaufe, 
towards  the  end  of  the  experiment,  when  the 
liquor  was  made  to  boil  with  violence,   the  in- 
fide of  the  tube  immediately  connecfled  with  it, 
was  filled  with  a  fl:ony  matter.      It  happened 
twice  in  the  courfe  of  the  above  mentioned  ex- 
periments, that  the  tube  was  quite  flopped  up 
P  by 


ft  10  Of  the  Fluor  Add  Ah\ 

by  this  means,  fo  as  to  caufe  the  explofion  of 
the  phial. 

Laftly,  I  would  obferve,  that  the  tajie  of 
this  acid  liquor  affords  a  ilrong  prclumption, 
that  the  acid  which  enters  into  it  is  the  vitrio- 
lic ;  for  it  has  exactly  the  aftringency  of  alum. 

That  the  fluor  contains  phlogifton,  is  evi- 
dent, from  the  attempts  that  I  made  to  procure 
dephlogifticated  air  from  it,  by  means  of  fpi- 
rit  of  nitre  •,  for  the  air  that  I  got  from  it  was 
always  phlogifticated,  and  fometimes  even  ni- 
trous. 

At  firll  I  made  this  experiment  by  putting 
the  materials  into  a  phial  with  a  ground-ftopple 
and  tube,  and  applying  the  heat  of  a  candle 
only.  The  air  I  got  in  this  manner  neither  af- 
feded  common  air,  nor  was  affeftcd  by  nitrous 
air.  I  then  put  the  fame  apparatus  into  a  cru- 
cible ;  and,  with  a  ftrong  land-heat,  I  got  from 
it  about  two  ounce-meafures  of  air,  in  four 
portions.  The  firfl  of  thefe  was  exactly  like 
the  preceding,  being  phlogifticated  air ;  the 
fecond  made  lime-water  turbid,  and  a  great 
part  of  it  was  readily  abforbed  by  water  :  the 
third  and  fourth  portions  were  very  ftrong  ni- 
trous air. 

This 


Of  the  Fluor  Acid  AiK  2tl 

This  experiment  was  made  with  the  whitlfli 
part  of  this  fpaf,  which  therefore  probably 
contains  the  ieaft  phlogifton.  That  phlogif- 
ton  which  contributes  to  the  colour  of  this  fof- 
fil,  i  found, .  by  the  following  obfervation,  to 
be  of  a  very  volatile  nature.  When  the  co- 
loured fpaf  is  diflblved  in  oil  of  vhrioJ,  the 
fluor-cruft,  dollefted  in  the  water,  ha^  the 
fame  colour;  bufwhen  it  is  dried- near  the 
fire,  the  colour  vanlfhes,  and  the  whole  be- 
comes white  :  yet  this  white  cruft,  heated  again 
in  oil  of  vitriol,  contains,  as  was  obferved  be- 
fore, fo  much  phlogifton,  as  to  convert  oil  of 
vlfriol  into' vitriolic  acid  air. 

The  air  expelled  from  this  acid  liquor  did' 
liot  dlfTolve  the  fluor-cruji  that  was  expofed  to 
it.  A  quantity  of  it  remained  in  this  fituation 
feveral  days,  without  affefting  it,  or  being  af- 
fected by  it.  I  had  imagined  that  it  might 
have  been  dlffolved  by  this  air,  and  have  con- 
verted it  into  the  fluor  acid  air. 

Oil  of  turpentine  abforbed  about  ten  times 
its  bulk  of  this  air,  and  became  of  ari  orange- 
colour.  After  this  impregnation  it  had  a  pun- 
gent acid  fmell,  together  with  its  own.  I  ob- 
lerved  nothing  farther  refpeding  it. 

P  2  ReflefVing 


212  Of  the  Fluor  Acid  Air, 

Refiefting  upon  the  phofphoric  property  of 
the  fpar,  by  rweans  of  which  I  had  procured 
this  acid  air,  I  thought  it  was  pofiible  that 
its  property  of  enabling  oil  of  vitriol  to  yield 
this  air,  might  be  common  to  it  with  other 
fimilar  phofphoric  fubftances,  depending  upon 
that  combination  of  phlogifton  which  enables 
them  to  imbibe  and  emit  light. 

In  order  to  afcertain  this,  with  refpeft  to  one 
other  fubftance  of  this  kind,  I  made  a  quan- 
tity of  Mr.  CantoTt's  phofphorus^  and  pouring 
upon  it  fome  oil  of  vitriol,  I  got  air  that  was 
readily  abforbed  by  water,  and  with  a  cruft 
u'pon  its  furface,  exaftly  like  that  which'  is 
procured  from  the  fluor,  only  not  in  fo  great 
a  quantity.  The  effervefcence  between  this 
fubftance  and  the  oil  of  vitriol  was  very  great, 
and  alfo  the  heat  occafioned  by  it;  and  the 
vapour  efcaping  into  the  common  air,  was 
white  and  denfe,  much  like  the  vapour  of  the 
fiuor  acid. 

I  fhall  conclude  this  fe6lion  with  obferving, 
that  the  oil  of  vitriol  in  which  the  fluor  is  dif- 
folved,  becomes  thick,  like  ice,  exadly  like 
the  oil  of  vitriol  in  which  quicklime  has  been 
boiled,  as  v/ill  be  particularly  noticed  here- 
after. 

SEC- 


Experiments  and  Ohfervations^  &c.     213 


SECTION    XIL 

Experiments  and  Ohfervations  relating  to  Fixed 
Air.  , 

Fixed  air  was  the  firft  fpecies  of  air  that  was 
difcovcred,  diftinft  from  common  air ;  much 
has  been  done  towards  the  inveftigation  of  its 
properties,  and  feveral  capital  ufes  have  been 
made  of  it.  There  is  ftill,  however,  great 
difference  of  opinion  among  philolbphers  con- 
cerning it ;  and^  in  a  variety  of  refpeds, 
much  remains  to  be  done  towards  compleat- 
ing  our  knowledge  of  it,  and  efpecially  of  il;s 
relation  to  the  other  acids  with  which  we  are 
acquainted.  I  cannot  fay  that  I  have,  of  late, 
given  much  attention  to  this  kind  of  air ;  but 
feveral  things  have  occurred  to  me  in  the  courfe 
of  the  experiments  already  recited,  and  others, 
which  tend  to  throw  a  little  light  upon  the 
fubjed ;  and  a  few  more  obfervations  and  ex- 
periments, not  conneded  with  them,  I  have 
referved  for  this  feparate  fedtion. 

Having  been  informed  by  a  correfpondent 

in  Italy,  that  air,  expelled  from  lime-ftone, 

P  3  by 


214         'Experiments  and  Obfer'sations 

by  means  of  Keat,  v/ould  not  acidulate  water  ; 
from  which  he  concluded  that  its  acidity,  and 
even  its  fubllance,  v/as  derived  from  the  oil  of 
vitriol  employed  in  the  produ(5bion  of  it:  I 
filled  a  tali  glafs-vefiel,  reprefented  fig.  ^,  with 
powdered  chalk,  and  with  a  ftrong  fand-heat, 
expelled  from  it  a  confiderable  quantity  of  air, 
which  appeared  to  me  to  be  abforbed  by  water, 
exa6lly  like  fixed  air;  the  ufual  proportion 
only  remaining  unabforbed.  It  alfo  precipi- 
tated lime  in  lime-water  ;  fo  that  without  im«, 
pregnating  water  with  it,  fo  as  to  tafte  of  it,  I 
entertained  no  doubt  of  its  being  genuine  fixed 
air,  and  having  all  the  properties  of  the  air 
that  is  expelled  from  chalk  by  oil  of  vitriol. 
Mr.  Bewley,  as  the  reader  will  fee  in  my  Ap-' 
pendix,  alfo  found  that  fixed  air,  procured  by 
means  of  heat  only,  changed  the  blue  colour  of 
water  (tinged  witli  the  juice  of  turnfoie)  tq 
red. 

Air  from  wood  and  charcoal,  alfo,  is  un- 
doubtedly fixed  air,  though  no  acid  be  em- 
ployed to  expel  it,  and  it  be  mixed  with  in- 
flammable air.  I  received  air,  expelled  by 
heat,  from  two  ounce-meafures  of  charcoal  in 
a  tall  glafs-veffel,  fig.  d^  in  three  parts,  each 
containing  about  a  pint ;  and  obferved,  that 
in  every  part  of  the  procefs  the  air  made  lim^- 
lyater  turbid.     But  there  %vas  more  fixed  air  in 

;hc 


relating  to  Fixed  Air.  215 

the  firll  portion  than  afterwards ;  for  about 
one-fourth  only  of  the  firft  portion  remained 
unabforbed  by  water ;  but  of  the  tecond  and 
third  portions  one-half  nearly  was  unab- 
forbed.    The  refiduum  was  inflammable.   . 

When  heat  can  expel  no  more  fixed  air  from 
charcoal,  it  fliould  feem  that  fpirit  of  nitre  (if 
this  acid  itfelf  be  not  converted  into  fixed  air) 
can  extradb  more  from  it.  For  when  I  dif- 
folved,  in  fpirit  of  nitre,  fome  pieces  of  char- 
coal, which  had  been  made  with  the  flron^eft 
heat  of  a  fmith's  fire,  long  continued,  fo  that 
no  more  air  could  be  expelled  from  them  by 
that  means  -,  part  of  it  was  evidently  fixed  air, 
as  appeared  by  its  precipitating  lime  in  lime- 
water. 

There  are  few  fubllances  in  nature  that  do 
not  contain  fixed  air,  difcoverable  either  by 
heat,  or  by  fome  ftronger  acid.  In  general, 
acids  will  detcft  fixed  air  more  readily  than 
heat ;  but  this  is  not  the  cafe  with  refpecl  to 
clay^  except  when  it  is  ftrongly  heated  in  fpirit 
of  nitre  ;  for  it  makes  no  effcrvefcence  upon 
being  mixed  with  any  of  the  acids  :  but  a  de- 
gree of  heat  fufficient  tt)  bake  the  clay,  evi- 
dently expels  fixed  air  from  it.  In  order  to 
afcertain  this  fad,  I  filled  a  gun- barrel  with 
tobacco-pipe  clay,  and,  putting  it  into  the 
P  4-  fire. 


2 1 6         Experiments  and  Obfervations 

fire,  I  received  the  air  that  came  from  it,  ir^ 
feveral  portions  ;  but  the  whole  was  not  more 
than  about  five  times  the  bulk  of  the  clay. 
The  firft  produce  was  inflammable ;  but  after- 
wards the  air  was  fixed,  precipitating  lime  in 
lime-water,  and  being  readily  abforbed  by  wa- 
ter. I  never  met  with  purer  fixed  air  •,  but  I 
had  no  fufpicion  of  this  at  the  time  that  I  pro- 
cured dephlogifticated  air,  mixed  Avith  fixed 
air,  from  clay  made  into  a  pafte  with  fpirit 
pf  nitre. 

It  might  be  queftioned,  whether  the  fixed 
air  contained  in  our  aliments,  can  be  conveyed 
by  the  courfe  of  circulation  into  the  blood,  and 
by  that  means  impregnate  the  urine.  I  have 
found,  however,  that  it  may  do  it ;  having 
more  than  once  expelled  from  a  quantity  of 
frefh-made  urine,  by  means  'of  heat,  about 
one-fifth  of  its  bulk  of  pure  fixed  air,  as  ap* 
peared  by  its  precipitating  lime  in  lime-water, 
and  being  almoft  wholly  abforbed  by  water ; 
and  yet  a  very  good  air-pump  did  not  difcover 
that  it  contained  any  air  at  all. 

It  mull  be  obferved,  however,  that  it  re- 
quired feveral  hours  to  expel  this  air  by  heat ; 
and  after  the  procefs,  there  was  a  confiderable 
whitifh  fediment  at  the  bottom  of  the  veiTel. 
This  was,  probably,  fome  calcai*eous  matter 

with 


relating  to  Fixed  Air.  217 

with  which  the  fixed  air  had  been  united  ;  and 
by  this  fixed  air,  the  calcareous  matter,  which 
would  otherwife  have  formed  a  ftone  or  gravel, 
may  have  been  held  in  folution  •,  and  therefore, 
drinking  water  impregnated  with  fixed  air,  may, 
by  impregnating  the  urine,  enable  it  to  difiblve 
calcareous  matters  better  than  it  would  other- 
wife  have  done,  and  may  therefore  be  a  means 
of  preventing  or  diflblving  the  ftone  in  the 
bladder,  agreeable  to  the  propofal  of  my  friend 
Pr.  Percival ;  for  which  fee  the  Appendix. 

That  fixed  air  is  always  contained  in  com- 
mon air,  is  evident  from  many  obfervations, 
and  efpecially  from  the  precipitation  of  it  by 
means  of  nitrous  air,  the  eledlric  fpark,  and 
other  phlogiftic  procefles.  It  is  likewife  con- 
tained in  the  pureft  dephlogifticated  air,  as  ap- 
pears by  mixing  nitrous  air  with  it  in  lime- 
water,  which  is  thereby  rendered  flightly  tur- 
bid. It  has  alfo  been  feen,  that  when  dephlo- 
gifticated air  is  firft  procured,  by  any  procefs 
whatever,  there  is  always  a  confiderable  quan- 
tity of  fixed  air  mixed  with  it.  There  is  the 
leaft  when  it  is  got  from  mercurius  calcinatus 
ferfe\  but  I  have  always  found  fome  when 
the  air  was  expelled  from  this  fubftance  by 
a  burning  lens,  either  in  quickfilver,  or  in 
vacuo. 

In 


2 1 S         Experiments  and  Obfervations 

In  the  former  volume  I  have  faid,  that  when 
nitrous  air  is  mixed  with  common  air  that  had 
been  injured  by  fome  phlogiftic  procefs,  and 
rcftored  by  agitation  in  water,  there  was  no 
precipitation  of  fixed  air  j  but  this  muft  have 
been  a  miftake  :  for  1  have  fmce  repeated  that 
experiment  with  the  greateft  care,  and  find  a 
contrary  refult ;  and  I  have  ufed  every  precau- 
tion that  I  could  think  of,  in  order  to  guard 
againft  a  miftake  in  the  procefs  j  particularly, 
left  the  air  upon  which  I  was  operating  fiiould 
receive  a  mixture  of  any  other  kind  of  air  from 
the  water  in  which  it  was  agitated,  I  previoufly 
boiled  the  water  for  feveral  hours,  in  order  ta 
expel  all  its  own  air  from  it. 

Having  done  this,  I  obferved  that,  immedi- 
ately after  the  reftoration  of  the  npxious  air  by 
agitation  in  this  water,  it  always  made  lime- 
water  nightly  turbid  ;  but  this  was  not  the  cafe, 
after  pafling  two  or  three  times  through  the 
lime-water.  When  it  was,  by  this  means,  in- 
tirely  purged  of  fixed  air,  I  admitted  nitrous 
air  to  it  in  lime-water,  and  there  was  a  very 
evident  precipitation  of  lime,  quite  as  much 
as  when  nitrous  air  is  mixed  with  common  air 
that  has  not  been  injured  at  all. 

It  is  not  eafy  to  fay  whence  this  fixed  air 
could  come.     If  all  the  fixed  air  had  been  dif- 

charged 


relating  to  Fixed  Air,  219 

charged  by  the  firft  phlogiftic  prccefs,  that 
which  appeared  in  the  fecond  muft  either  have 
come  from  the  water,  though  it  had  been  boiled, 
which  I  do  not  think  probable,  or  from  the 
nitrous  air,  which,  though  it  be  inexplicable, 
is  perhaps  lefs  improbable  upon  the  whole. 

Mr.  Cavendifli  obfcrved,  that  a  certain 
portion  of  fixed  air  is  no  more  liable  to  be  ab- 
forbed  by  water  than  common  air.  This,  he 
ilates  at  about  one-Iixtieth  part  of  the  whole. 
J  had  the  curiofity  to  try,  whether,  if  I  fatu- 
rated'  a  quantity  of  water  with  fixed  air,  and 
expelled  it  again  by  heat,  that  very  air  which 
had  a61:ually  been  in  the  water,  would  not  be 
wholly  imbibed  by  frefh  water  •,  and  whether 
I  could  not,  by  this  means,  get  a  purer  kind 
of  fixed  air  than  that  v/hich  is  immediately 
procured  by  means  of  chalk  and  oil  of  vitriol. 
This  experiment  I  made  twice,  v/ith  all  the 
care  that  I  could  apply,  and  found,  in  both 
the  cafes,  that  even  the  fixed  air  which  had  been 
in  the  water,  contained  as  large  a  portion  of 
that  which  would  not  be  imbibed  by  water 
jigain,  as  the  air  which  had  been  immediately 
diflodged  from  chalk  by  oil  of  vitriol. 

In  order  to  be  more  fure  of  this  faft,  I  was 

more  efpecially  careful,  the  fecond  time  that  I 

niade  the  experir^iei^t,  to  \.\{q  every  precaution 

a  that 


2,20         Experiments  mid  Obfervations 

that  I  could  think  of,  in  order  to  prevent  any 
error  in  the  conclulion.  For  this  purpofe,  I 
took  rain-water,  and  boiled  it  about  two  hours, 
in  order  to  get  it  perfectly  free  froin  air ;  and 
I  began  to  impregnate  it  with  fixed  air  a  long 
time  before  it  was  cold,  and  therefore  before 
it  could  have  imbibed  any  common  air ;  and, 
in  order  to  expel  the  air  from  it,  I  put  it  into 
a  phial,  which  I  plunged  in  a  vefTel  of  water 
fet  on  the  fire  to  boil,  taking  care  that  both 
the  phial  containing  the  impregnated  water, 
and  the  glafs-tube  through  which  the  air  w£s 
to  be  tranfmitted,  were  completely  filled  ..  i 
the  water,  and  no  vifible  particle  of  common 
air  lodged  on  the  furface  of  it.  I  alfo  received 
the  expelled  air  in  water,  which  cont^'ned  very 
little  air  of  any  kind,  left  the  very  fmall  de- 
gree of  agitation  which  I  made  ufe  of,  in  order 
to  make  the  water  re-imbibe  the  air,  Ihould  dif- 
engage  any  air  from  it.  Alfo,  that  lefs  agita- 
tion, and  lefs  time,  might  be  fufficient,  I 
chiefly  made  ufe  of  lime-water  for  this  pur- 
pofe. But  notwithftanding  all  thefe  precau- 
tions, I  found  a  very  confiderable  refiduum  of 
air,  not  lefs  than  Mr.  Cavendilh  had  ftated, 
that  water  would  not  imbibe^ 

At  a  time  when  this  refiduum  of  fixed  air 
hardly  gave  the  leaft  fenfible  whitenefs  to  lime- 
water,   I  examined  the  ftate  of  it,  and  found, 

by 


relating  to  Fixed  Air,  22 i 

by  the  tell  of  nitrous  air,  that  it  was  very  little 
worfe  than  common  air  ;  two  meafures  of  this 
air,  and  one  of  nitrous  air,  occupying  the  fpacc 
of  two  meafures  only. 

This  fa6l  will  be  thought  a  pretty  remark- 
able one  •,  and  I  can  give  no  fatisfaftory  ac- 
count of  it,  unlefs  the  following  fhould  be 
deemed  to  be  fo.  Fixed  air,  phlogiilicated  with 
iron-filings  and  brimftone,  or  with  the  eleftric 
ipark,  I  have  difcovered,  vol.  I.  p.  42.  to  be- 
come, in  a  much  greater  proportion  than  ufu- 
al,  immifcible  with  water  -,  and  I  therefore  con- 
cluded that  this  acid  air  (for  fuch  fixed  air  evi- 
dently is)  by  combining  with  phlogifton,  comes 
to  be  a  kind  of  air  fimilar  to  common  air.  If 
this  be  a  juft  account  of  the  former  experiment, 
the  fixed  air  in  this  cafe  muft  get  phlogiftoil 
from  the  water  with  which  it  was  combined, 
and  thereby  become,  in  part,  immifcible  with 
water.  That  water,  even  the  pureft,  does  con- 
tain phlogifton,  is,  I  think,  evident  from  the 
experiments  which  fhew  that  air  is  injured  by 
much  agitation  in  it.  Or,  if  an  earthy  matter, 
and  not  phlogifton,  be  neceflary  to  the  confti- 
tution  of  refpirable  air,  as,  I  think,  appears 
from  my  experiments  on  dephlogifticated  air, 
there  may  be  enough  of  it  held  in  folution  in 
the  pureft  water,  and  which  it  may  impart  to 
the  fixed  air  combined  with  it. 
"4  Ail 


222        ExpertmeiUs  and  Ohjer-Jaiions 

All  water,  which  has  been  any  time  expofed 
to  the  atmofphere,  contains  more  or  lefs  air, 
part  of  which  is,  I  believe,  always  fixed  air. 
This  abounds  fo  much  in  fome  mineral  waters, 
that  their  peculiar  virtues  are  certainly  owing 
to  this  ingredient  in  their  compofition.  This 
confideration  has  led  fonie  perfons  to  afcribe 
the  virtues  of  other  mineral  waters  to  this  prin- 
ciple, though  they  contain  it  in  fo  very  fmall 
a  proportion,  as  to  make  that  opinion  very 
improbable.  Some,  for  inflance,  have  thought 
that  the  virtues  of  the  Bath  water  were  owing, 
in  a  great  meafure,  to  the  fixed  air  it  contains  -, 
and  living  at  no  great  diftance  from  that  cele- 
brated fpring,  I  thought  I  fhould  incur  a  juft 
cenfure,  if  I  did  not  endeavour  to  afcertain 
what  kind  of  air  is  contained  iti  that  water, 
and  in  what  proportion.  Accordingly,  I  made 
an  excurfion  as  far  as  Bath,  chiefly  with  that 
view,  and  made  the  following  experiments, 
which,  having  no  apparatus  of  my  own  along 
with  me,  I  was  enabled  to  perform  by  the 
friendly  zeal  and  ingenuity  of  Mr.  Painter ; 
Dr.  Gufthart,  Dr.  Falconer,  and  Dr.  Watfori 
favouring  me  with  their  prefence. 

In  order  to  afcertain  what  proportion  or  iif 
is  contained  in  the  water,  in  the  ftate  in  which 
it  is  drank,  I  filled  a  pint-phial  with  water, 
hot  from  the  pump,  and  expelled  the  air  from 

K 


relating  to  Fixed  Air,  223 

It,  by  boiling  it  about  four  hours,  receiving 
the  produce  in  quickfilver.  This  air  was  about 
•3^0  of  the  bulk  of  the  water,  and  about  one- 
half  of  it  was  fixed  air,  precipitating  lime  in 
lime-water,  and  being  readily  abforbed  by  wa- 
ter. The  reliduum  appeared,  by  the  teft  of 
nitrous  air,  to  be  rather  better  than  air  in 
which  a  candle  had  burned  out. 

The  quantity  of  fixed  air  that  appears,  by 
this  experiment,  to  be  contained  in  the  Bath- 
waters is  fo  very  fmall,  that  I  think  it  very 
improbable  that  their  virtues  fhould  be  at  all 
owing  to  it.  Few  fpring- waters,  I  believe,  con- 
tain much  lefs  fixed  air,  and  many  I  know, 
which  have  no  medicinal  virtue  at  all,  contain 
more.  The  pump-water  belonging  to  the 
houfe  in  which  I  now  live,  contains  about  -^\ 
of  its  bulk  of  fixed  air  ;  and  it  may  be  feen  in 
my  former  volume,  p.  160,  that  my  pump- 
water  at  Leeds  contained  about  -^  of  its  bulk 
of  air,  of  the  very  fame  compofition  as  the  air 
of  the  Bath-waters,  viz.  half  of  it  fixed  air, 
and  half  common  air  a  little  phlogiflicated,  fo 
as  to  be  in  about  the  fame  ftate  as  air  in  which 
'S'^hdle  had  burned  out, 

Befides,  the  length  of  time  which  the  Bath- 
waters, and  indeed  mofl  other  fpring-waters, 
require  to  expel  the  air  by  means  of  heat,  fhcws 

that 


224         Experiments  and  Ohfervations 

that  the  air  expelled  from  them,  was  not  con- 
tained in  them  in  that  flate  in  which  it  is  con- 
tained in  waters  properly  impregnated  with 
fixed  air,  out  of  which  it  may  always  be  ex- 
pelled by  the  heat  of  boiling  water  in  lefs  than 
an  hour.  In  fad,  the  fixed  air  is  not  united 
to  the  water,  but  to  fome  calcareous  matter  in 
the  water,  out  of  which  the  air  is  expelled  with 
much  more  difficulty.  Accordingly,  Dr.  Fal- 
coner informs  me,  that  there  is  a  depofit  made 
by  this  water,  after  long  boiling  ;  if  fo,  it  may 
be  prefumed,  that  thefe  waters  do  not  fo  pro- 
perly contain  fixed  air,  as  a  calcareous  earth ; 
which,  though  it  contain  fixed  air,  may  not 
part  with  it  in  the  ftomach,  unlefs  it  meet  with 
fome  acid  to  decompofe  it. 

Befides  the  air  contained  in  the  Bath-water, 
there  is  a  confiderable  quantity  of  air  continu- 
ally bubbling  up  from  almofl:  every  part  of  the 
foil,  through  the  water  in  the  bath.  When 
I  was  about  to  examine  this  air,  Dr.  Falconer 
informed  me,  that  it  had  been  done  already  'iij 
Dr.  Nooth,  and. that  an  account  of  his  expe- 
riments was  inferted  in  the  fecond  volume  of 
his  treatife  on  the  Bath-waters.  The  para- 
graph relating  to  it  is  as  follows : 

■r 

"At  the  place  where  the  fprings  rife  in  the 
5'  baths,  numerous  bubbles  of  air  are  obferved 

"  to 


delating  to  Firmed  Air.  225 

"  to  afcend  along  with  them.  A  quantity 
"  of  air  of  this  kind  was  colledled  at  the  Kino-'s 
"  Bath,  by  inverting  a  glafs,  and  holding  it 
"  over  the  bubbles  as  they  rofe,  and  then 
"  conveying  it  into  an  inverted  bottle,  which, 
"  when  full,  was  carefully  corked  up,  and 
"  carried  away.  The  air  thus  obtained  aq- 
*'  fwered  in  every  refped:  to  lixible  air,  preci- 
"  pitating  lime  in  lime-water,  and  having 
"  every  other  quality  which  that  fubilance 
«  pofTefles." 

Being  informed  of  this,  I  thought  it  un- 
neceflary  to  repeat  the  experiment  \  but  find- 
ing, upon  inquiry,  that  Dr.  Nooth  had  not 
examined  what  proportion  the  refiduum  of  the 
fixed  air  bore  to  the  v/hole,  or  of  what  quality 
that  refiduum  was,  though  he  fpeaks  of  the 
whole  as  containing  fx^^-ry  ^K^/V/y  that  fixed  air 
pojfejfesy  I  thought  it  would  not  be  amifs,  as 
I  was  upon  the  fpot,  to  make  the  trial  my- 
felf.  Accordingly,  I  took  about  a.pintof  that 
air,  in  nearly  the  fame  manner  that  Dr.  Nootli 
had  done,  and  found,  upon  examination,  that 
only  about  -^V  of  its  bulk  was  fixed  air,  pre- 
cipitating lime  iii  lime-water,  and  being  rea- 
dily abforbed  by  water.  The  reft  extinguifhed 
a  candle,  and  was  fo  far  phiogifticated,  that 
two  meafures  of  it,  and  one  of  nitrous  air,  oc- 
Q^  cupied 


226         Experiments  and  Ohfervations 

cupied  the  fpace  of  2  |  ^  of  a  meafure ;  that 
is,  it  was  almoft  perfedly  noxious. 

Had  I  had  more  leifure,  and  a  better  appa- 
ratus, the  experiments  might  have  been  made 
with  more  accuracy  ;  but  I  do  not  think  that, 
whenever  they  are  repeated,  they  will  be  found 
-to  be  materially  wide  of  the  truth,  though  it 
is  polTible  that  the  ftate  of  the  air  in  the  water, 
and  efpecially  that  which  rifes  through  the  wa- 
ter, may  be  fubje6l  to  variation.  The  mea- 
fures  were  only  eflimated  by  the  eye  ;  but  then 
all  wiio  were  preftnt  agreed  very  nearly  in  tJie 
fame  eftimation. 

Being  in  Germany  in  the  fummer  of  the 
year  1774,  we  happened  to  pafs  by  the  fa- 
mous fpring  of  Seltzer-water,  near  SchwalL 
bach,  and  alio  another  very  hot  fpring  near  the 
road  from  that  place  to  Mentz.  Through  both 
thefe  fp rings  there  was  a  bubbling  of  air,  exadly 
fmiilar  to  that  in  the  Eath-waters  •,  but  I  had 
not  time,  or  convenience,  for  making  the  fame 
experiments  upon  them,  and  therefore  con- 
tented mylelf  with  finding  that  the  air  of  both 
of  them  extinguiilied  a  candle. 

It  is  well  known  that  all  fermented  liquors, 
that  are  not  quite  flat  or  vapid,  contain  fixed 
air ;  and  I  had  the  curiofity  to  irj^  what  pror- 

portion 


relating  to  Fixed  Air',  227 

^dVtion  of  this  air  is  contained  in  different 
kinds  of  wine,  ahd  in  wines  in  different  dates. 
For  this  purpofe,  I  took  one  of  the  phials  with 
d  ground-ftopple  and  tube,  reprefented  fig.  e, 
containing  i  4-  of  an  onnce-meafure,  and  filling 
it  accurately  with  each  fpecies  of  wine^  I  plun- 
ged it  into  a  velTei  of  water,  which  was  fet  on 
the  fire  to  boil,  receiving  the  air  in  quickfil- 
ver.  The  air  that  I  got  from  all  kinds  of  fer- 
mented liqnor$  was  pure  fixed  air  \  but,  ex- 
cept ch^mpaigne  .and  cyder,  it  was  in  much 
lefs  quantity  than  I  expected  ;  the  refults  being 
as  follows. 

The  quantity  of  air  contained  in 
Madeira  j  was       -     .  -^i^  of  an  ounce- meafure." 

Port  of  6  years  old  ^  -^ '■ ^ « 

Hock  of  5  years     -     ~ • 

Barrelled  Claret     -      ~^  — ■ — -^ 

l^okay  of  16  years  -  — r 

Champaigne  of  2  years  2 — 

^ottledCyderof  1 2years3^  — 


Some  champaigne  fparkles  much  in  confe- 
quenre  of  containing  much  air  j  but  there  is 
a  kind  of  champaigne  which  does  not  fparkle, 
and  contains  very  little  air.  The  difference, 
as  I  was  informed,  when  I  made  inquiry  con- 
cerning ir,  in  that  part  of  France  where  the  wine 
is  madi*,  is  owing  to  this  •,  that  v/hen  they  v,41h 

0^2  to 


228     Experiments  and  Obfervations^  Sec. 

to  have  the  wine  fparkle,  they  check  the 
fermentation  as  much  as  pofTible  at  the  time 
that  the  wine  is  niade  •,  fo  that  the  fermenta- 
tion going  on  gradually,  the  fixed  air  produced 
by  it  is  abforbed  by  the  liquor :  whereas, 
■v^hen  they  do  not  chufe  to  have  it  fparkle, 
they  let  it  ferment  freely,  like  any  other  kind 
pf  wine. 

In  other  cafes,  therefore,  where  fermented 
liquors  contain  much  air,  as  in  mofb  kinds  of 
malt-liquor,  cyder,  and  our  Englilh  made- 
wines,  I  take  it  for,  granted,  that  the  fermen- 
tation is  either  purpofely  checked,  or  that  the 
liquor  is  of  fuch  a  nature,  that  the  fermenta- 
tion will  neceifarily  continue  a  long  time,  after 
it  is  put  into  the  caflc  or  bottle. 

I  once  found  that  a  quantity  of  port-wine 
contained  its  own  bulk  of  fixed  air ;  but  I 
now  imagine  that  the  wine  was  not  genuine, 
but  muft  have  been  made  chiefly  of  cyder.  Per- 
haps this  may  not  be  a  bad  method  of  dillin- 
guifhing  genuine  foreign  wines  from  compofi- 
tions  made  of  cyder. 


SEC- 


Mifcellaneous  ObfervationL  229 

SECTION     XIII. 

Mifcellaneous  Ohfervations. 

I. 

I  have  mentioned  a  fa6l,  which  fhews  that 
chalk  retains  fixed  air  very  obftinately  ;  fo  that 
neither  the  folar  rays,  nor  the  ftrongefl  heat  of 
a  fmith's  fire,  continued  for  a  long  time,  can 
expel  the  whole  quantity  that  it  contains.  I 
have  alfo  found,  that  a  fm.all  quantity  of  fixed 
air  was  contained  in  the  bell  quicklime  that  I 
could  procure  ^  fmce  Itrongly  concentrated 
acids  would  flill  expel  a  fmall  quantity  from 
it.  I  mention  this,  chiefly,  for  the  fake  of  an 
obfervation  v/hich  may  not.be  new,  but  which, 
if  it  be  new,  may  be  of  fome  ufe,  viz.  that  when 
I  had  heated  fome  pieces  of  quicklime  in  oil  of 
vitriol,  in  order  to  extraft  from  it  all  the  air 
that  I  pofTibly  could,  the  next  day  I  found  the 
oil  of  vitriol  Iblid  and  tranfparent,  exaftly  rc- 
fembling  a  thick  jelly ;  but  it  became  fluid 
again  with  the  heat  of  my  hand.  This  may, 
probably,  be  a  good  and  expeditious  method 
of  concentrating  this  acid,  the  quicklime  ab- 
forbing  its  water. 

a  3  "• 


'D 


?30  Mifceltaneeus  Ohfe'rvnitwnsl 


I  made  a  beginning  of  a  courfe  of  experi- 
ments, which,  I  think,  may  be  purfued  to 
confiderable  advantage^  on  the  ffate  of  the  air 
which  is  contained  in  the  bladders  offices.  It  is 
commonly  fuppofed,  that  thefe  bladders  are  of 
no  other  life  to' the  fillies  than  to  alTift  them  iri 
"rifmg  or  fmking  in  the  water  :  but  I  have  fome 
doubt  about  this  hypothecs  ;  at  leaft  they  may 
have  fome  other  ufe.  Some  fiihes,  I  believe, 
are  not  furnilhed  with  thefc  bladders.  When' 
they  are  taken  out  of  the  fifh,  the  air  cannot 
be  got  from  them  by  prelfure,  but  1  was  al- 
ways obliged  to  burft  or  cut  them ;  and  yet 
that  the  air  does  change  in  thefe  bladders,  is, 
I  think,  pretty  evident,  from  my  having  found 
it  in  different  ftates,  '  .  . 

The  firft  time  that  it  occurred  to  me  to  exa^ 
mine  the  air  contained  in  thefe  bladders,  I 
found  it,  in  a  great  number  of  them,  to  be: 
perfectly  noxious,  not  being  at  all  affecSted  by 
nitrous  air.  This  was  on  the  31ft  of  May, 
1774.  But  at  another  time,  viz.  the  30th  of 
March  following,  I  found  air  that  I  had  prefTed 
from  the  bladders  of  the  fame  kind  of  fiihes, 
viz.. roaches,  not  to  be  quite  noxious,  being 
affefted  by  nitrous  air,  though  not  to  a  great 

degree. 


Mifcellaneous  Obfervations.  i^i 

degree.  I  have  not  purfued  thefe  experiments 
any  farther  -,  but  I  fhould  think  that  it  might 
not  be  difficult,  by  diverfifying  them  pro- 
perly, to  make  fome  difcoveries  concerning  the 
animal  oeconomyof  filhes,  and  the  ufe  of  air 
to  them. 

III. 

That  excellent  anatomift,  Mr.  John  Hun- 
ter, told  me,  that  fifhes  would  not  live  in  wa- 
ter impregnated  with  fixed  air.  I  repeated  the 
experiment,  and  found  that  fmall  filhes  would 
not  live  in  this  kind  of  water  more  than  a  few 
minutes.  At  the  fame  time  I  had  the  curiofity 
to  try  how  they  would  be  affeded  by  water  im- 
pregnated with  nitrous  air^  and  obferved  that 
they  were  affedted  in  the  fame  manner,  but 
much  more  violently ;  being  thrown  into  the 
greateft  agitation  the  moment  they  were  put 
into  it,  and  moving  about  with  the  greateft 
rapidity,  till  they  became  languid  and  died. 
A  courfe  of  experiments  of  this  kind,  joined 
with  the  other,  would,  I  think,  be  very  pro- 
mifmg  to  a  perfon  who  had  an  opportunity  of 
jnaking  them  to  advantage. 

IV, 

In  fome  chymical  proceffes,  volatile  alkali 
difl^lve?  copper.     This  I  alfo  have  obferved 

Q.4  JA 


S32  Mifcellanecus  Ohfervatiam. 

in  my  account  of  the  experiments  in  which  I 
put  fome  pieces  of  volatile  alkaline  fait  to  a 
quantity  of  common  laii",  at  the  time  that  I  in- 
troduced nitrous  air  to  it,  vol.  I.  p.  213.  For, 
if  the  alkaline  fait  be  fupported  by  copper-wire, 
it  prefently  becomes^  blue,  and  is  foon  corroded. 
I  therefore  thought  that  pieces  of  copper,  fex- 
pofed  to  pure  alkaline  air^  would  have  been  af- 
fe6led  in  the  fame  manner ;  but  I  did  not  find 
this  to  be  the  cafe.  A  number  of  pieces  of 
copper-wire  remained  a  whole  night  in  alkaline 
air  without  fenfibly  affedling  it,  or  being  af- 
fefted  by  it.  That  the  alkaline  air  was  pure, 
appeared  by  its  being  wholly  abforbed  by  wa- 
ter afterwards. 

V. 
I  had  fome  expeflation  that  alkaline  air 
might  be  expelled  from  cauftic  fixed  alkali,  efr 
pecially  as  it  is  known  that  the  fixed  and  vor 
iatile  alkalis  differ  only  in  their  combinations ; 
but  I  was  difappointed  in  my  expedbations. 
Having  procured  a  quantity  of  cauftic  alkali 
from  Mr.  Lane,  who  is  known  to  prepare  it 
with  particular  accuracy,  I  treated  it  in  the 
fame  manner  as  I  had  done  the  fpirit  of  fait, 
and  found  that  the  vapour  expelled  from  it 
confifted  of  nothing  hut  water,  being  immedi- 
ately condenfed  when  it  came  to  the  cold 
quickfilver. 

VI.  I 


Mtfisllaneotii  Ohfervations.  233 

VI. 

I  have  obferved  before,  that  though  the  ma- 
rine acid  air  does  not  become  inflammable  air 
by  means  of  liver  of  fulphur,  as  it  does  by- 
means  of  many  other  fubltances  that  contain 
phlogifton  •,    yet  that  it  does  form  a  permanent 
kind  of  air,  which  appeared  to  be  phlogifti- 
cated,   by  extinguilhing  a  candle,  though  the 
quantity  which  I  then  produced  was  fo  fmall, 
that  I   did  not  pretend  to  form  an   accurate 
judgment  concerning  it.      I  have,  fmce  that, 
made  another  experiment  of  the  fame  kind,  ra- 
ther more  decifive  than  the  former.     1  put  fe- 
veral  pieces  of  liver  of  fulphur  to  a  quantity 
of  marine  acid  air ;  when  I  obferved  that  it 
prefently  began  to  be  abforbed,  and  it  conti- 
nued in  that  ilate  till  one-half  of  the  whole  had 
difappeared.      By  this    time  the  liver  of  ful- 
phur, v/hich  had  been  of  a  greenifli  or  yellow- 
lih  colour,   became  white.     Afterwards  more 
liver  of  fulphur  abforbed  more  of  this  air  •,  but 
after  two  days  the  pieces  began  to  dilfolve,  and 
at  length  they  became  one  liquid  mafs,   the  air 
ftill  diminifhing  very  gradually.     In  this  flatc 
1  admitted  water  to  the  air ;   but  by  this  very 
little  more  of  it  was  abforbed  ;  and  that  which 
remained  was  about  one-fourth  of  the  original 
quantity,  and  extinguifhed  a  candle.  The  whole 
procefs  was  three  days.    After  *.his  air  had  Hood 

a  week 


2J4-  Mifceltaneous  Ohfervathml 

a  week  in  water,  and  had  been  a  little  agitated 
in  it,  it  was  a.  litle  diminifhed  by  nitrous  air. 

VI. 

I  have  mentioned  a  courfe  of  curious  expe- 
riments on  the  mixing  of  ether  with  feveral 
kinds  of  air,  the  confequence  of  which  was, 
that  the  quantity  of  each  of  them  was  almoll 
iaftantly  doubled  by  a  fmgle  drop  of  that 
fiuid  ;  but  that  afterwards,  water  abforbed  ths: 
ether,  leaving  the  air  pofTefled  of  all  its  pecu- 
liar jproperties.  Thofe  experiments  were  made 
with  vitriolic  ether.  Having,  fince,  procured 
a  quantity  of  nitrous  ether ^  made  by  Mr.  God- 
frey, I  had  the  curiofity  to  try  whether  this 
would  produce  the  fameeffedt;  but  I  found 
that  it  increafed  common  air  only  about  one- 
lixth  of  its  bulk.  After  this  mixture  had  con- 
tinued two  days  and  a  night,  water  abforbed 
the  ether,  and  left  the  common  air  exadly,  or 
very  nearly,  the  fame  as  before,  judging  by 
the  teil  of  nitrous  air. 

VIL 

In  my  experiments  to  extra6t  air  from  frefh- 
made  red  lead,  by  mixing  it  with  fpirit  of  nitre, 
I  had  the  curiofity  to  try  what  would  be  the 
effect  of  mixing  it  in  the  fame  manner  v/ith  a 
volatile  alkaline  water  -,  but  no  air  was  pro- 
duced 


Mifcellaneous  Ohfervattons..  235 

^nced  from  it,  neitlier  did  the  red  lead  acquire 
any  additional  weight  from  the  mixture. 

VIII. 

Confidering  the  very  different  properties  of 
jhe  different  kinds  of  air  with  which  I  have 
jDcen  cojiverfant,  it  was  impoffible  not  to  think 
of  the  probability  of  their  having  different  re-- 
fra£iive  powers^  and  of  fome  method  of  afcer- 
'taining  this  circumflance.  Accordingly  I  in- 
tended to  have  done  fomething  of  this  kind 
before  the  publication  of  my  former  volume 
on  this  fubjeft  •,  but  I  was  prevented  by  an 
unexpe6ted  delay  in  the  conftruftion  of  the 
apparatus  which  I  had  contrived  for  that  pur- 
pofe.  I  have  fmce  completed  my  apparatus, 
and  have  made  the  trials  which  I  then  propo- 
fed  •,  but  1  am  forry  to  inform  my  readers,  that 
|:hey  have  been  without  any  fuccefs. 

For  this  purpofe,  I  procured  a  prifm,  con- 
fifting  of  three  plates  of  glafs,  faftened  toge- 
ther by  cement,  the  cavity  being  large  enough 
to  contain  about  a  quarter  of  a  pint.  This 
prifm  I  fixed  upon  a  ftand,  at  the  diftance  of 
ten  feet  from  a  window,  in  which  I  had  a  fmall 
apparatus,  contrived  to  throw  a  beam  of  the 
fun's  rays  into  the  room.  This  beam  was  re- 
ceived by  a  board,  furnifhed  with  a  piece  of 
brafs-work,  containing  feveral  fmall  holes, 
I  through 


.2^6  Mifcellaneous  Ohfervations. 

through  any  of  which  I  could  tranfmit  a  beam 
of  light  upon  the  prifm,  which  was  placed,  in 
a  vertical  pofition,  clofe  behind  it ;  and  the 
wall  on  which  the  image  of  the  fun  was  received 
was  twenty  feet  from  the  prifm. 

With  this  apparatus,  which  I  thought  pro- 
mifing  enough,  I  proceeded  to  try  the  refrac- 
tive powers  of  nitrous  and  inflammable  air ; 
but  I  could  perceive  no  difference  in  the  place 
of  the  image,  whether  the  beam  of  light  was 
tranfmitted  through  the  prifm,  carefully  filled 
with  either  of  thefe  kinds  of  air,  or  not  through 
it  i  allowance  being  made  for  a  fmall  degree 
of  refra6lion  occafioned  by  a  want  of  perfedt 
parallelifm  in  the  plates  of  the  prifm.  The 
refult  was  the  very  fame,  whether  it  contained 
common  air,  or  either  of,  the  two  kinds  above 
mentioned. 

Having  had  fo  little  fuccefs  with  thefe  two 
very  different  kinds  of  air,  I  thought  it  would 
be  in  vain  to  try  any  of  the  other  kinds ;  and 
therefore,  for  the  prefent,  have  defifted  from 
my  purfuit  j  but  I  am  not  without  a  defign 
to  refume  it  with  a  different  kind  of  apparatus, 
if  I  be  fo  happy  as  to  fucceed  in  the  conftruc- 
tion  of  it. 


IX. 


Mifcellaneous  Obfervations.  237 

IX. 

The  facility  with  which  the  nitrons  acid 
forms  air  of  various  kinds  is  very  remarkable ; 
efpecially  when  compared  with  the  two  other 
mineral  acids,  which  enter  into  the  compofi- 
tion  of  few  kinds  of  air  in  comparifon  with 
this.  I  was  in  hopes  that,  by  fubftituting 
thofe  acids  in  the  place  of  the  nitrous,  in  the 
experiments  which  produced  the  dephlogifti- 
cated,  and  other  kinds  of  air,  I  Ihould,  at 
lead,  have  got  fome  kind  of  air  -,  but  I  got 
none.  I  have  mentioned  my  having  tried  this 
with  red  lead.  I  alfo  made  the  fame  attempt 
with  the  marine  acid,  and  dried  flefh,  from 
which  I  got  the  peculiar  kind  of  air  defcribed 
feft  viii. ;  but  this  produced  nothing  but  the 
marine  acid  air,  in  quickfilver,  and  nothing  at 
all  in  watery  the  acid  air  being  abforbed  by 
it  as  faft  as  it  was  generated.  Trying  a  piece 
of  beef  with  the  fame  apparatus,  without  any 
acid,  it  yielded,  by  means  of  a  pretty  llrong 
heat,  from  the  flame  of  a  candle,  inflammable 
air,  as  in  the  fimilar  experiment  with  a  gun- 
barrel,  mentioned  in  my  former  publication. 

X. 

I  have  obferved,  in  the  firfl:  volume  of  this 

work,  that  when  I  had  put  a  piece  of falt-pctre 

to  a  quantity  of  marine  acid,  air,  it  was  pre- 

4  fently 


'238  Mifcellaneous  Ohfervativnsi 

fently  diflblved,  emitting  a  white  fume  ;  biit 
that  no  air>  that  I  could  examine,  remained,  thfe 
quantity  of  it  being  fo  fmall.  I  have  iince 
repeated  the  experiment  \  but  the  refult  was 
nothing  more  than  might  have  been  predicted  j 
for  the  nitrous  acid,  dillodged  from  its  bafe 
by  the  marine,  had  diflblved  fome  of  the  quick- 
fiiver,  and  formed  nitrous  air,  occupying  one- 
half  of  the  whole  fpace  that  had  been  filled  by 
the  marine  acid  air. 

Marine  acid  air  affects  borax,  in  the  very 
fame  manner  in  which  alkaline  air  affects  alumj 
rendering  it  whitifh. 

XL 

At  the  time  of  my  former  publication,  I 
had  found  that  taking  the  ele^ric  fpark  in  given 
quantities  of  feveral  kinds  of  air,  had  a  very 
remarkable  effedt  upon  them, '  that  it  dimi- 
nilhed  comm.on  air,  and  made  it  noxious,  mak- 
ing it  depofit  its  fixed  air,  exadly  like  any 
phlogiftic  procefs  -,  from  whence  I  concluded 
that  the  eledric  matter  either  is,  or  contains 
phlogifton.  It  has  alfo  the  fame  effedl  as  a 
phlogiftic  procefs  on  nitrous  air,  diminifhing 
it  very  much,  and  depriving  it  of  its  property 
of  diminifbing  common  air  I  have  fince  re- 
peated this  experiment  on  fome  other  kinds  of 
air  which  cannot  be  confined  by  water,  and  1 

find 


Mifcellaneous  Cftfervations.  239 

find  the  refults  to  be  no  lefs  remarkable,  though 
1  have  not  given  fo  much  attention  to  them  as 
to  be  able  to  explain  them.  The  fa6ts  were  as 
follows. 

Having  made  about  fifty  eleftric  explofions 
of  a  common  jar,  in  a  fmall  quantity  of  the 
marine  acid  air,  confined  in  a  glafs-fyphon  by 
quickfilver,  I  obferved  that  it  was  a  little  di^ 
minifhed,  and  that  a  fmall  part  of  the  infide  of 
the  glafs,  next  to  the  quickfilver,  was  tinged 
white.  Water  admitted  to  this  air  abforbed. 
fo  much  of  it,  that  no  experiment  could  be 
made  on  the  remainder. 

I  made  the  fame  experiment  on  the  I'/VnWiV 
aid  air  i  when  prelentiy  the  infide  of  the  glafs 
through  which  the  explofion  palled  was  uni- 
formly covered  with  a  blackifh  matter,  fo  that 
nothing  could  be  feen  through  it,  and  the  air 
feemed  to  be  rather  increafed  than  diminifhed. 
Water  being  admitted  to  it,  left  fo  little  of  it: 
unabforbed,  |hat  it  could  be  no  more  examined 
than  that  Vv'hich  remained  in  the  preceding  ex- 
periment. Part  ot  the  blackifh  matter  was 
Wjjfhed  off  by  the  water. 

1  took  the  eleflric  explofion  in  a  fmall  quan- 
tity of  alkaline  air,  in  the  fame  manner  as  in 
the  two  preceding  experiments,    and  obferved,- 

that 


440  Mifcellaneous  Ohfervations. 

that  every  ftroke  added  confiderably  to  the 
quantity  of  air  •,  and  when  water  was  admit- 
ted to  it,  juft  fo  much  remained  unabforbed  as 
had  been  added  by  the  explofions.  I  then 
took  about  an  hundred  explofions  of  the  fame 
jar,  in  a  larger  quantity  of  alkaline  air  ;  after 
which,  fo  much  of  it  remained  unabforbed  by 
water,  that  I  could  examine  it  with  the  great- 
eft  certainty.  It  neither  affed:ed  common  air, 
nor  was  affedted  by  nitrous  air,  and  was  as 
ftrongly  inflammable  as  any  air  that  I  had  ever 
procured. 

Thefe  experiments  appear  to  me  to  furnilh 
matter  for  much  fpeculation,  and  farther  ex- 
perimental inquiry.  Till  this  be  done,  all 
conjecture  concerning  them  muft  be  very  much 
at  random.  I  therefore  defer  making  any  at 
prefent. 


SEC 


Experiments  and  Ohferz-ations  on  Charcoal.  241 


SECTION     XIV. 

Experiments  and  Ohfervations  on  Charcoal, 
firji  puhlijhed  in  the  Philofophical  Tranfac- 
tions,  vol.  LX.  p.  211.  , 

Among  the  original  experiments,  publlfhed 
in  the  Hiftory  of  Eleftricity,   was  an  account 
of  the  conducing  power  of  charcoal.     This 
fubftance  had  been  conndered  by  eleflricians, 
in  no  other  light  than  that  of  more  perfedlly 
baked  wood,  which  is  known  to  be  no  conduc- 
tor of  eledricity.     I  have  even  heard  of  at- 
tempts being  made  to  excite  it-,  and  though 
thofe  attempts  were  ineffeftual,  the  failure  of 
fuccefs  was  attributed  to  other  caufes  than  that 
of  charcoal  being    no   eledlric  fubftance  •,    fo 
fixed  was  the  perfuaficn,  that  water  and  me- 
tals were  the  only  conducing  fubftances  in  na- 
ture.    The  confideration  of  the  chymical  pro- 
perties of  charcoal,  which  are,  in  many  refpedis, 
remarkably  different  from  thofe  of  the  wood  from 
which  it  Is  made,   might  have  led  philofophers 
to  fufpeft,  that  fmce,  after  its  being  reduced  to 
a  coal,    it  was  become  quite  another  thing  from 
what  it  was   before,   it  might  poffibly  differ 
R  irpin 


242  Experiments  and  Ohfervations  on  Char  coat    ■ 

from  wood  in  this  propetty ;   but  this  confide- 
ration  had  not  been  lufficiently  attended  to. 

In  the  account  of  my  former  experiments  on 
charcoal,  I  obfcrved,  that  there  were  very 
great  differences "  in  the  conducing  power  of 
charcoal,  and  particularly  of  wood-charcoal, 
though  I  could  not  determine  on  what  circum- 
fliances  in  the  preparation,  &c.  thole  differences 
depended.  I  therefore  exprelfed  a  wifh,  that 
fome  perfon,  who  had  conveniencies  for  mak- 
ing chymical  experiments,  would  profecute 
the  inquiry,  as  one  that  promifed,  not  only  to 
afcertain  the  caufe  of  the  conducing  power  of 
charcoal,  but  perhaps  of  conducing  power 
univei'fally.  Not  hearing  that  any  chymjft  or 
ele(5trician  has  attended  to  this  bufmefs,  I 
have,  at  length,  refumed  the  fubjeft,  though 
not  with  every  advantage  that  I  could  have 
wifhed.  I  have,  in  a  great  meafure,  however, 
fucceeded  in  the  principal  obje6t  of  my  in- 
quiry •,  and  I  lliall  now  lay  before  this  iociety 
the  refult  of  my  experiments  and  obfervations. 

I  Ihall  begin  with  correfting  a  miflake  I  lay 
under  at  the  time  that  I  made  .the  former  ex- 
periments. Having  been  informed  by  per- 
fons,  who  attend  tlie  making  of  pit-charcoal^ 
that  it  was  confiderably  increafed  in  bulk  after 
the  procefs ;  I  imagined  that  all  other  fubftan- 

ces 


£xpenmenSs  andOhfsrzaiions  on  Charcoal.  243 

ces  received  an  increafe  of  bulk,  v/hen  they 
V/ere  reduced  to  a  coal  •,  but  the  firft  experi- 
rnents  that  I  inade,  convinced  me  of  my  mif- 
take.  AH  vegetable  fubftances  are  confider- 
ably  contraded  in  all  their  dimenfions,  bv  the 
procefs  of  coaling,  and  the  more  perfect:  this 
procefs  is  (that  is,  as  v/ill  be  explained  here- 
after, the  greater  is  ih^  heat  that  is  applied  in 
the  courfe  of  it)  the  greater  is  the  diminution. 
i  have  even  reduced  pieces  of  wood  to  little 
more  than  one-fourtli  of  their  original  length 
and  breadth,  in  a  common  fire,  by  the  ufe  of  a 
pair  of  hand-beliov/s  only.  And  this  was  the 
caie  equally  with  wood  of  the  firmeil  texture, 
as  ebony  ;  that  of  a  middle  texture,  as  oiik  •, 
•and  that  of  the  loofeft^  as  fir,  &:c. 

As  moifture  (and,  I  believe,  fmall  degrees 
■of  heat  or  cold)  affeds  wood  much  more  fcn- 
fibly  acrofs  the  fibres  than  alo:^g  them,  it  mjght 
have  been  fuppofed,  that  vvhen  wood  was  re- 
duced to  a  coal,  by  the  application  of  a  greater 
degree  of  heat,  the  fame  rule  would  have  been 
obferved ;  but  I  found  very  little  difference  m 
this  refpe<5t.  To  afcertain  this  circumftance, 
i  took  from  the  fame  board,  two  pieces,  each 
2  4-  inches  in  length.  In  one  of  them,  the 
fibres  were  divided,  in  the  other  they  were  not  \ 
and  after  coaling  them  thoroughly  together, 
in  the  fame  ^^-ycible,  I  found  that  the  former 
R  %  meafured 


244  E^p^^i^^f^  ^nd  Obfervations  on  Charcoa^. 

meafured  2.05  inches,  and  the  latter  2.15. 
Their  conducing  power  could  not  be  diftin^ 
guillied. 

A  more  particular  account  of  the  degree,  in 
which  wood, is  Ihortened  in  coaling,  will  be  feen 
afterwards,  when  the  variations  in  this  refpedt 
are  compared  with  the  variations  in  the  power 
of  conducing  eledricity. 

To  my  great  furprize,  I  found  animal  fuh~ 
fiances  not  reduced  in  their  dimenfions  by  the 
procefs  of  coaling.  This,  at  leaft,  was  the 
cafe  with  fome  pieces  of  ivory^  feveral  inches 
in  length,  and  a  piece  of  bone.  They  bore  a 
very  intenfe  heat  for  many  hours,  and  came 
out  of  the  crucible  confiderably  diminilhed  in 
weight,  but  hardly  fo  much  as  difborted  in 
their  fhape,  as  is  remarkably  the  cafe  with  wood, 
and,   I  believe,  all  vegetable  fubftances. 

In  examining  mineral  fubftances,  I  found 
that  my  information,  mentioned  above,  was 
juft.  Coals  are  very  much  enlarged  in  their 
dimenfions  by  charring;  but  the . experiment 
muil  be  made  v/ith  great  care,  to  judge  of  this 
circumftance  •,  for,  unlcfs  the  operation  be  very 
(low,  the  coal  will  retain  nothing  of  its  former 
llnape,  having  been  made,  in  fome  meafure, 
fiuid  by  the  heati  The  infide  of  all  pieces  of 
4  pit- 


Experiments  and  Obfervatiom  on  Charcoal.  245 

pit-charcoal  is  full  of  cavities,  and  there  is  ge- 
nerally a  very  large  one  in  the  center  of  every 
piece ;  fo  that  the  dilatation  is  nothing  like 
the  extenfion  of  fibres  ;  but  is  produced  by 
the  elafbicity  of  the  new-formed  vapour,  in 
forcing  its  way  out,  while  the  fubflance  is 
foft. 

With  refped  to  the  main  objeft  of  my  in- 
quiry, I  prefently  fatisfied  myfelf,  that  the 
conducing  power  of  charcoal  depends  upon 
no  other  cireumftance  than  the  degree  of  heat, 
that  is  applied  in  the  procefs  of  making  it.  I 
had  not  fufpe6led  this ;  but  numberlefs  expe- 
riments clearly  proved  it.  Taking  an  iron- 
pot,  filled  with  fand,  and  putting  into  it  pieces 
of  wood,  cut  out  of  the  fame  plank,  mark- 
ing them,  and  carefully  noting  their  places  in 
the  pot,  I  always  found  that  thofe  pieces  came 
out  the  beft  conductors,  that  had  been  expofed 
to  the  greatefl  heat.  The  refult  was  the  fame' 
when  I  made  coals  of  bits  of  wood,  placed  one 
above  another,  in  a  gun- barrel,  one  end  of 
which  was  made  red-hot,  and  the  reft  gradu- 
ally cooler  and  cooler. 

Taking  pieces  of  charcoal  that  conduded 

very  imperfedly,   or  not  at  all,  I  never  failed 

to  give  them  the  ftrongeft  conducting  power, 

by  repeating  the  procefs. of  coaling,  either  m, 

R  3  a  crucible. 


246  Experiments  and  Ohfervations  onCharcQak 

a  crucible,  or  in  a  gun-barrel,   covered  witii, 
land,  and  kept  in  an  interne  heat. 

I  could  not  find  that  the  mere  continuancq 
of  the  fame  degree  of  heat  had  any  effeft  with 
refped  to  the  conducing  power  of  charcoal. 

Mr.  Macquer,  and  other  chyinifls,  define 
charcoal  to  be  wocd  burned^  without  being  fiif- 
fered  to  flame  ^  but,  with  refpeft  to  its  conduct- 
ing power,  and,  I  make  no  doubt,  with  refped: 
to  all  its  other  effential  properties  alfo,  it  makes 
no  difference  whether  it  flame  or  not.'  I  have 
coaled  pieces  of  wood,  both  in  gun-barrels,  and 
in  crucibles,  (lightly  covered  with  fand^-  and 
have  let  the  inHammable  vapour  that  exhaled 
from  them  take  fire,  at  various  diftances  from 
the  fubftances ;  and  I  have  alfo  put  pieces  of" 
wood  in  an  ol3en  fire,  and  urs;ed  the  heat  ap- 
plied  to  them,'  v/ith  a  pair  of  bellows  ;  and  in 
all  thefe  cafes  have  found  the  charcoal  equally 
good.  In  the  lail  method^  indeed,  very  little 
of  the  fubflance  h  preferved  •,  but  the  little 
that  doth  remain,  after  it  hath  ccafed  to  flamCj 
whether  it  be  quenched  iaimediately,  or  not, 
condutls  as  well  as  any  charcoal  v/hatever. 
But  one  can  hardly  be  fure  that  the  fame  de- 
gree of  heat  is  given  to  every  part  of  a  piece 
of  v/ood,  except  it  be  expofed  to  it  ibr  fom.e 
time ;  and  in  an  open  fire,  urged  with  a  pair 
■        ■"    ■  of 


Experiments  and  Ohfer-vations  on  Charcoal.  247 

of  bellows,  the  wood  waftes  as  faft  as  it  is  red- 
hot,  before  the  center  of  it  is  much  affeded 
with  the  heat. 

"When  once  any  degree  of  conducing  power 
is  given  to  a  piece  of  charcoal,  I  never  found 
that  it  was  afterwards  lefTened.  A  partial  con- 
fuming  of  it  in  an  open  fire  doth  not  affedl  the 
remainder,  as  I  obferved  in  the  account  of  my 
former  experiments. 

I  had  irpagined,  that  the  folidity  of  fubftances 
converted  into  charcoal,  would  have  had  a 
very  confiderable  effeft  on  their  condii6ting 
power  afterwards  j  but  the  conjecture  was  not 
confirmed  by  experiment.  Coals  made  of  the 
lighteli  woods  conduded,  as  far  as  I  could 
perceive,  as  well  as  thofe  that  were  made  from 
the  moft  Iblid,  if  they  had  been  expofed  to  the 
fame  degree  of  heat  in  the  procefs.  Fine  fliav- 
ings  of  fir,  the  fine  coats  of  an  onion,  the  light- 
eft  foot,  and  every  other  vegetable  fubftance 
that  I  tried,  conducted  eaually  with  coals  made 
of  oak  or  ebony. 

I  had  imagined,  alfo,  that  the  moment  a 
piece  of  wood  was  become  black  with  heat,  it 
was,  to  ail  intents  and  purpofes,  a  real  char- 
coal ;  and,  along  with  the  other  properties  of 
charcoal,  would  conduft  ejedricity,  more  or 
R  4  lets  i 


248  Experiments  and  Obfervatiom  on  Charcoal. 

lefs  •,  but  I  found,  by  coaling  feveral  pieces 
very  Howly,  that  they  would  not  conduft  in 
the  leafc  degree,  not  only  when  they  v/ere  made 
fuperiicially  black,  but  likewife  when  they 
were  black  quite  through,  and  had  remained 
a  long  time  in  the  heat  that  made  them  fo  ;  fo 
that  no  eye  could  diilinguifh  them  from  the 
moll  perfedt  charcoal. 

I  have  fometimes  found  charcoal  in  fuch  a 
ftate,  that  it  would  aiTifc  the  palTage  of  an  ex- 
plofion  along  its  furface,  when  it  would  not 
condu6l  a  lliock  any  other  way. 

In  order  to  fatisfy  myfelf  in  what  propor- 
tions the  diminution  of  weighty  the  decreafe  of 
biilk^  and  the  conducing  power  of  wood  and 
charcoal,  correfponded  to  one  another,  I  took 
feveral  pieces  from  the  fame 'plank,  and  hav- 
ing carefully  v/eighed  and  meafured  them,  con- 
verted them  into  coals  very  flowly,  and  by  a 
gradual  increafe  of  heat,  on  an  iron  plate,  held 
on  the  lire,  turning  them  conilantly,  to  pre- 
vent their  catching  fire.  The  following  were 
the  refi-ilts. 

A  piece  of  very  old  dry  oak,  weighing  12 
grains,  and  which  conducted  in  the  imperfedl 
manner  that  v/ood  geneially  does,  from  the 
jiioifcure  it  contains,  was,  after  the  iofs  of  about 

one 


Experiments  and  Ohfervations  on  Charcoal.  249 

one  orain,  no  conduflor  at  all ;  and  it  conti- 
nued the  fame  as  baked  wood,  till  it  was  re- 
duced tc  four  grains,  when  it  was  black  quite 
through  ;  and  even  then,  no  part  of  it  con- 
duced, except  one  corner,  where  it  had  catched 
fire. 

Another  piece  I  carefully  weighed,  and  mea- 
fured  feveral  times  in  the  courfe  of  the  procefs. 
At  firft  it  weighed 

Gr.  Length.  Bread.  Thick. 

12    when  its  dimenfions  in  inches  were   2.         .  ^r  .12 

At  8 2.        .4     .12 

—  5.5 I. 91. 4    .12 

—  3.5 1.8     .35 

It  was  now  become  an  imperfe6l  condu6lor.  I 
then  urged  it  with  a  ftrong  heat,  in  a  crucible, 
and  taking  it  out,  it  weighed  1.75  gr.  and  mea- 
fured  I  .6  in  length,  and  .3  in  the  other  dimen- 
fions.  It  was  now  a  perfedl  condudlor ;  and 
though  I  afterwards  kept  it  in  a  very  intenfe 
heat  feveral  hours,  by  which  it  was  reduced  to 
one  grain  in  weight,  its  conduding  power  was 
not  fenfibly  increafed  -,  but  it  was  become  very 
brittle,  or  friable. 

It  appears  from  thefe  experiments,  that  thefe 
pieces   of  wood  were  reduced  to  about  one- 
fourth  of  their  weight  before  they  would  con- 
dud 


tso  Experiments  and  Oh/ervatlom  m  Charceah 

dii6l  at  all  -,  though,  at  the  fame  time,  they  were 
drminifhed  in  length  (/.  e.  along  the  fibres) 
only  one-tenth.  The  breadth  and  thicknefs 
could  not  be  meafured  with  fufficient  accuracy 
in  thefe  fmall  pieces.  To  make  them  perfei^ 
condudlors,  they  were  reduced  to  about  one- 
tenth  in  wxight,   and  one-half  in  length, 

A  variety  of  circumftances  led  me  to  con- 
clude, that  the  caufe  of  blacknefs^  and  of  the 
conducing  power  in  charcoal,  is  the  oil  of 
the  plant,  made  empyreumatic,  and  burnt  to 
a  certain  degree.  I  therefore  conclude  that 
thefe  properties  are  fome  way  connected  with 
that  part  of  the  inflammable  principle,  other- 
wife  called  phlogifton,  that  is  Exed  and  united 
to  the  earth  of  the  plant,  when  the  union  is 
jftrengthened  by  an  intenfe  heat. 

The /and,  with  which  I  covered  the  fub- 
ilances  that  I  converted  into  coals,  and  alfo  the 
fipe-day  which  I  fometimes  put  over  them, 
contrafted  a  blacknefs  like  charcoal,  and  would 
often  condudl  pretty  well.  Sometimes  they 
would  condud:  a  fhock.  This  mufl  have  beer^ 
owing  to  the  oil  they  received  from  the  fub- 
itances  out  of  which  it  was  expelled  by  the 
heat.  In  the  experiment  of  the  gun-barrel 
filled  with  pieces  of  wood,  mentioned  above,  the 
uppermofl  pieces  were  not  in  the  lead  buried. 

They 


Experme^is  a'4d  OhfervatioJis  en  Charcoal.  25 1 

They  could  hardly  have  been  hot  ;  yet,  hav- 
ing contrafled  a  fuperficial  blacknefs,  from 
the  vapour  of  the  oil  expelled  from  the  piece 
"below  them,  they  would  even  conduct  a  Ihock, 
though  not  in  the  moft  perfeft  manner. 

Sometimes  thofe  fubftances  that  had  no  phlo- 
gifton  themfelves,  but  received  it  in  confe- 
quenre  of  being  placed  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  other  bodies  out  of  which  it  was  expelled, 
:!would  not  condufb  immediately ;  but  would  be 
made  to  do  fo  by  being  expofed  to  a  greater 
heat,  which  more  thoroughly  burned  the  oil 
with  which  their  pores  were  filled. 

I  put  a  piece  of  a  common  pipe  into  a  cru- 
cible, in  which  I  was  burning  fome  turpentine 
(which  will  be  mentioned  below)  and  it  came 
put  black  quite  through,  like  a  pipe  in  which 
tobacco  has  been  frequently  fmoked.  In  this 
ftate  it  would  not  condud:  at  all  -,  but  putting 
it  into  a  crucible,  covered  with  fand,  I  treated 
it  in  the  fame  manner  as  I  would  have  done  a 
piece  of  v/ood,  in  order  to  coal  it,  and  it 
came  out  a  very  good  conduftor.  Had  it  been 
burned  in  the  open  fire,  the  phlogifton  would 
have  efcaped,  and  the  pipe  would  have  been 
left  white,  as  at  firft. 

Being 


252  Experiments  and  Objervations  on  Charcoal, 

Being  convinced  that  the  conducing  power 
of  charcoal  depended  upon  the  oil,  or  rather 
the  phlogiilon  contained  in  the  oil,  and  on  the 
degree  of  heat  with  which  it  was  burned,  1  took 
feveral  methods  to  give  vegetable  fubfbances 
more  of  this  principle  ;  or  at  leaft  endeavoured 
to  make  them  retain  more  of  it  than  they  ufu- 
ally  do,  in  the  procefs  of  coaling.  But  I  had 
no  apparent  fuccefs  in  thofe  experiments. 

I  began  with  plunging  a  piece  of  old  dry  oak 
in  oil ;  and  then,  pumping  the  air  out  of  it, 
let  it  fiand  in  vacuo  a  day  and  night,  in  which 
time  it  leemed  to  difcharge  a  great  quantity  of 
air;  after  which  I  let  the  air  into  the  receiver, 
and  thereby  forced  the  oil  into  its  pores.  But 
the  coal  from  this  wood  was  not  fenfibly  bet- 
ter than  others.  The  application  of  heat  may, 
perhaps,  expel  the  phlogiilon  in' fuch  a  man- 
ner, that  the  refiduum,  being  fully  faturated, 
can  retain  no  more  than  a  certain  proportion. 
I  made  coals  of  other  pieces  of  wood,  when 
they  were  covered  with  cement ;  and  I  alfo 
coaled  feveral  pieces  together,  that  they  might 
receive  phlogifton  from  one  another ;  but,  in 
both  cafes,  without  any  fenfible  improvement 
in  the  quality  of  the  coal. 

In  order  to  prevent  the  efcape  of  the  phlo- 
gifton belonging  to  the  fubilance  to  be  reduced 

to 


jExperimenls  andOhferz^ations  on  Charcoal,  25^ 

to  a  coal,  I  put  fome  pieces  of  wood  into  a  gun- 
barrel,  and  corked  it  as  clofe  as  I  could,  at  the 
fame  time  covering  the  cork  with  cement.  In 
this  cafe  the  rarefaftion  of  the  exhaling  vapour 
never  failed  to  drive  the  cork  out ;  but  it 
muft  have  been  after  a  confiderable  refiflance 
to  its  efcape.  However,  I  could  not  perceive 
any  peculiar  excellence  in  the  charcoal  made 
in  this  manner. 

I  do  not,  indeed,  know  any  method  in  which 
differences  in  fubftances  that  conduft  fo  well 
as  thefe  can  be  accurately  tried,  at  leail  none 
that  can  be  applied  in  this  cafe.  The  charcoal 
I  can  make  in  a  common  fire,  by  the  ufe  of  a 
pair  of  hand-bellows,  I  cannot  diftinguifh,  with 
refpe6l  to  its  conducing  power,  from  the  moft 
perfe6l  metals,  gold  and  filver  ;  either  by  the 
length  of  theeleftric  fpark,  the  colour  of  it,  or 
the  found  of  the  explofion.  I  make  no  doubt 
but  that  wood,  in  the  procefs  of  coaling,  may 
eafily  have  a  degree  of  conducting  power  com- 
municated to  it,  exceeding  that  of  lead,  iron^ 
or  the  other  more  imperfedl  m^etals. 

We  may,  perhaps,  be  guided  in  our  con- 
je6tures  on  this  fubjeft,  by  confidering  the  de- 
gree of  heat  that  is  neceifary,  either  to  unite  the 
phlogiilon  to  its  bafe,  or  to  feparate  them,  both 
in  the  cafe  of  wood,  and  the  different  metals. 

Lead 


^54  Experiments  and  Ohfewations  oh  Char  coat 

Lead  is  very  eafily  calcined,  and  it  is  alfo  known 
to  condu6t  eledricity  very  imperfedly.  Iron 
foon  turns  to  mil  •,  and  its  conducing  power 
I  found  to  be  very  fmall,  in  comparifoh  with 
that  of  copper,  or  the  more  perfeft  metals. 
If,  therefore,  in  making  charcoal,  a  degree 
of  heat  be  applied  greater  than  is  neceffary  to 
calcine  or  revivify  a  metal,  we  may  perhaps 
conclude,  that  the  conducting  power  of  the 
charcoal  will  be  fuperior  to  that  of  the  metah 
As  it  may  be  poflible  to  give  charcoal,  when 
cut  off  from  any  communication  with  the  ex- 
ternal air,  a  greater  degree  of  heat  than  filver 
or  gold  would  bear  without  being  diiTipated  in 
vapour  i  it  may  even  be  poiTible  to  make  char- 
coal that  Ihall  condud  electricity  better  than 
thofe  moil  perfe6l  metals* 

Had  there  been  any  phlogiilon  in  water,  I 

fhould  have  concluded,   that  there  had  been 

no  conducing  power  in  nature,   but  in  con- 

fequence  of  fome  union  of  this  principle  with 

fome  bafe.     In  this,  metals  and  charcoal  exa6l- 

ly  agree.    While  they  have  the  phlogiilon,  they 

condudt  *,  when  deprived  of  it^  they  will  not 

condu6t  *. 

*  Having  fince  found,  that  long  agitation  iti  the  purefl 
water  injures  air,  fo  that  a  candle  will  not  burn  in  ic  af- 
terwards, which  is  precifely  the  ciFedl  oi v\\  phlogijiic  pro- 
cejfes,  I  now  conclude  that  the  maxim  fuggefted  in  this 
paragraph  is  univerfally  true.     See  vol.  I.  p.  283. 

I  believQ 


Experiments  and  Ohfervaiiom  on  Charcoal.  255 

I  believe,  however,  that  all  vegetable  or 
animal  fubflances,  that  contain  phlogifton, 
may  be  reduced  to  a  coal ;  and  if  the  heat  ap- 
plied in  the  procefs  be  fufficient,  that  coal  will 
conduft  eleftricity.  Flefh,  glue,  bones,  and 
other  parts  of  an  animal  body,  make  good 
conducing  charcoal. 

The  only  approach,  or  Teeming  approach, 
I  ever  made  towards  retaining  more  phiogifloa 
than  ufual,  in  wood  reduced  to  a  coal,  was  by 
1l\\q.  Jlownefs  of  the -procefs.  For  I  alvv'ays  found, 
that  if  the  heat  was  applied  very  gradually^ 
lefs  volatile  phlogifton,  i.  e.  lefs  inflammable 
air,  was  expelled  •,  and  therefore  I  fuppofe 
that  more  of  it  was  fixed.  I  could  never  after- 
wards, by  equal  degrees  of  heat,  make  this 
coal  to  Weigh  as  little  as  another  that  was  firit 
coaled  by  a  fudden  heat, 

I  took  two  pieces  of  di*y  oak,  the  contiguous 
parts  of  the  fam.e  ftick,  each  weighing  exactly 
fourteen  grains.  One  of  thele  I  heated  fud- 
denly.  It  yielded  eight  ounce-meafures  of  in- 
flammable air,  and  then  weighed  tv/o  grains. 
The  other  I  heated  fiov/ly,  but  as  vehemently, 
at  the  laft,  as  the  other.  It  yielded  only 
I  4-  ounce-meafures.  and  weighed  three  grains. 

I  I  r'lpeated 


^^6  Experiments  and  Ohfervations  on  Char  coal, 

I  repeated  the  fame  experiment  feveral  times, 
and  always  with  nearly  the  fame  refult. 

Examining  the  condufting  power  of  the 
pieces  of  charcoal  made  with  thefe  different 
circumftances  in  the  procefs,  I  could  not  dif- 
tinguifh  which  v/as  better.  Perhaps  a  more 
accurate  method  of  trying  them  might  jfhow, 
that  thofe  which  were  coaled  llowly  were  the 
better  conduftors  ;  unlefs,  which  is  not  im- 
probable, the  goodnefs  of  the  condufting  power 
confifts  in  the  completenefs  of  the  union  that  is 
produced  between  the  inflammable  principle 
and  its  bafe,  which  will  depend  upon  the  de- 
gree of  heat  only,  and  not  on  the  quantity  of 
phlogijlcn  thus  united  to  the  earth. 

N.  B.  To  catch  the  inflammable  air,  fet  loofe 
in  making  charcoal,  I  put  the  fubftances  into 
a  gun-barrel,  to  which  I  luted  a  long  glafs  tube, 
and  to  the  tube  I  faftened  a  bladder,  out  of 
which  the  air  was  carefully  prefTed. 

As  metals  and  charcoal  agree  in  confifting 
of  phlogifton  united  to  an  earthy  bafe,  and 
alfo  in  condu6ling  electricity,  I  fulpeded  that 
thefe  two  different  fubftances  might  alfo  agree 
in  their  readinefs  to  expand  by  heat.  Mr. 
Smeaton  was  fo  obliging  as  to  afTift  me  in  my 
attempts  to  afcertain   this   circumftance,     by 

the 


EtiCperments  and  Ohfervations  on  Charcoal.  257 

flie  application  of  his  excellent  pyrometer. 
Tliough  we  could  not  make  the  experiment 
\vith  ail  the  exaftnefs  that  we  could  have  wilhed, 
yet  the  refult  of  near  thirty  trials  was  uniform- 
ly in  favour  of  the  greater  degree  of  expanfion, 
hy  heatj  in  the  charcoal",  than  in  wood  of  the 
lame  kind  (as  we  imagined)  out  of  v/hicjj  it  v/as 
made.  In  general,  the  expanfion  of  the  char- 
coal vvas  about  double  to  that  of  the  wood. 

It  is  evident,  that  a  certain  degree  of  heat 
makes  wood  and  charcoal  expand ;  and  alfo 
that  a  greater  degree  of  heat  makes  them  con- 
tract. I  wifh  we  had  ah  inflrument  to  afcer-r 
tain  the  precife  degree  of  heat,  at  which  the  ex- 
panfion ceafes,  and  the  contraction  begins  -,  and 
whether  the  two  effefls  be  produced  by  the  fame 
gradation. 

In  tlie  coiirfe  of  thefe  experiments  on  char- 
coal; I  met  with  a  fubitance,  the  conducting 
power  of  which  is  fmgular,  and  exhibits  a  beau- 
tiful appearance.  In  order  to  fee  what  v\^ould 
remain  after  burning  a  quantity  of  turpentine 
in  a  glafs  tube,  I  covered  it  with  fand,  in  a 
crucible,  in  the  fame  manner  in  which  I  ufed 
to  make  charcoal ;  and,  after  letting  it  conti- 
nue a  fufficient  time,  in  a  very  hot  fire,  and  after 
the  flame  had  l.oi)g  ceafed,  I  examined  the 
tvibe,  and  found  that  it  had  been  melted  •,  biit, 
S  inftcad 


258  Experiments  and  Obfervations  on  Charcoal, 

inflead  of  any  thing  like  charcoal,  or  the  leaft 
blacknefs,  I  obferved  that  the  tube  was  uni- 
formly lined  with  a  whitijh  glojfy  matter^  which 
I  could  not  fcrape  off.  Upon  trying  whether  it 
would  condufl  eleflricity,  I  found  it  tranfmit- 
ted  the  fmalleft  fhocks,  to  a  confiderable  dif- 
tancej^and,  what  appeared  very  remarkable, 
the  path  of  the  explofion  was  luminous  all  the 
way,  and  feemed  to  confift  of  a  prodigious 
number  of  fmall  feparate  fparks,  fcattered  to  a 
great  diftance,  exhibiting  fuch  an  appearance 
as  would  be  made  by  firing  gunpowder  fcat- 
tered carelefsly  in  a  line.  The  explofion  very 
much  refembled  the  firing  of  a  fquib.  To 
compare  it  to  another  eleftric  appearance,  it 
was  like  the  explofion  pafTing  over*  a  thin 
furface  of  gilding. 

I  imagine  that,  though  I  could  not  perceive 
any  interruption  in  this  white  coating,  not  even 
by  the  help  of  a  microfcope,  it  muft,  in  fad, 
have  been  full  of  interftices,  and  the  eleflric 
fparks  coxild  only  be  vifible  in  pafTing  from  one 
conducing  particle  to  another. 

In  this  experiment,  I  often  got  pieces  of  glafs 
very  imperfeflly  covered,  with  intervals  in  the 
white  coating  very  large  and  vifible ;  but, 
though  I  expofed  the  fame  pieces  of  glafs  to 
catch  more  of  this  matter,  I  never  could  get 
4  a  coating 


Experiments  and  Ohfervations  on  Charcoal.  259 

a  coating  of  it  fo  thick,  but  that,  in  tranfmit- 
ting  the  eleclrical  explofion  through  it,  it  ex- 
hibited the  fame  luminous  appearance,  as  if 
there  were  interftices  in  the  circuit. 

I  got  the  fame  matter  from  oil  of  turpentine^ 
and  oil  of  olives  ;  but  not  from  bees-wax,  or 
fpermaceti  oil.  Perhaps  it  cannot  be  got  from 
any  animal  fubftance. 

In  order  to  obferve  the  progrefs  of  this  in- 
cruftation,  I  poured  oil  of  turpentine  on  fome 
flat  pieces  of  glafs,  and  burned  them  on  an  iron 
_  plate,  in  the  open  fire,  the  heat  being  mode- 
rate 5  but  the  efFeft  was  a  black  covering,  like 
foot,  which  would  not  conduct  in  the  leall. 
But  thefe  fame  pieces  of  glafs,  thus  covered 
with  the  black  coating,  being  put  into  a  cru- 
cible full  of  fand,  and  urged  with  a  ftrong 
heat,  came  out  white,  and  conduced  exactly 
as  before. 

With  a  lefs  degree  of  heat,  the  black  co- 
vering was  changed  to  white ;  but  it  did  not 
adhere  fo  firmly  to  the  glafs  as  when  the  heat 
had  been  greater ;  though  it  adhered  more 
clofely  than  the  black  covering,  which  might 
be  wiped  off  with  a  feather.  But  this  white 
coating,  produced  by  a  moderate  heat,  would 
not  conduct  at  all. 

S  2  u 


2  So  Expemnen'ts  and  Ohfervations  on  Charcoal. 

In  fome  cafes  I  have  found  this  whitifh  mat- 
to  be  difperfed  by  feveral  explofions,  as  Dr. 
Franklin  found  gilding  with  leaf-gold  to  be. 

In  whatever  manner  the  pieces  of  glafs  were 
covered,  the  coating  vanifhcd  when  it  was  made 
red-hot  in  an  open  fire  ;  and  the  glafs  that  re- 
mained would  not  conduct,  any  more  than  it 
did  before.  This  circumftance  exaftly  refem- 
bied  the  efcape  of  phlogifton  from  charcoal 
and  metal,  burned  in  the  open  air. 

In  a  microfcope,  this  whitifh  matter  looked 
exaftly  like  metal,  or  rather  fome  of  the  femi- 
metals,  having  a  bjight  polifh,  though  it  foon 
became,  as  it  were,  tarniflied. 

To  try  whether  it  was  metal,  I  dipped  the 
pieces  of  glafs  that  were  covered  with  it  m 
the  acids^  but  found  that  they  had  little  or  no 
cfie<5t  upon  it,  though  it  is  by  no  means  fixed 
in  the  pores  of  the  gl;ifs,  but  covers  it  quite 
iiiperficially. 

It  was  not  in  the  leaft  affeded  by  the  mag- 
net.  Upon  the  whole,  the  matter  that  forms 
this  coating  of  the  glafs  feems  to  be  a  kind  of 
charcoal,  only  white  inftcad  of  black. 

Confidcr- 


E^perinimts  and  Ohfervatlons  on  Charcoal,  261 

Confidering  that  metals  refemble  charcoal, 
in  that  they  confift  of  an  earth  united  to  phlo- 
gifton,  and  that  charcoal  will  not  confume 
without  burning  in  the  open  air  (there  being, 
probably,  fomething  in  the  atmofphere  with 
which  it  can  unite,  on  the  principle  of  chymi- 
cal  affinities,  the  moment  it  is  feparated  from 
the  m.etallic  bafe)  I  imagined  that  metals  mighc 
not  calcine,  or  vitrify,  except  in  the  fame  cir- 
cumflances,  and  the  event  verified  my  con- 
jedlure. 

I  took  a  certain  quantity  of  lead^  and  having 
put  it  into  an  open  crucible,  obferved  that  it 
was  all  vitrified  in  ten  minutes  •,  but  the  fame 
■quantity  of  lead,  covered  with  pipe-clay,  and 
fand,  was  kept  feveral  hours  in  a  much  hotter 
fire,  and  was  hardly  wafted  at  all,  the  bottom 
of  the  crucible  only  being  flightly  glazed  ;  it 
having  been  impolTible  v/hoily  to  exclude  all 
accefs  of  air,  and  fome  being  necefTarily  in 
conta£t  with  it  when  the  procefs  began.  Treat- 
ing charcoal  in  the  fame  manner,  I  could  never 
prevent  fome  lofs  of  weight,  when  the  crucible 
•>vas  kept  in  a  very  hot  fire,  for  feveral  hours. 

As,  by  this  procefs,  lead  v.^ill  bear  a  much 

greater  degree  of  heat  than  would  calcine,  or 

vitrify  it,  in  the  open  air,  I  fhould  think  it 

probable,  tha;  ^ead  thus  prepared  mufl  have 

^3  the 


262  Experiments  and  Ohfervations  on  Charcoal, 

the  phlogifton  more  clofely  united  to  its  earthy 
bafe,  and  be  thereby  a  better  conduftor  than 
common  lead ;  fmce  this  is  the  cafe  with  char- 
coal thus  treated.  Perhaps  lead,  and  other 
bafe  metals,  may  have  their  quality  altered, 
and  be  improved  in  other  refpefts  alfo  by  this 
procefs  •,  though  they  fhould  not  be  changed 
into  gold  by  it.  I  found,  however,  that  the 
fpecific  gravity  is  not  changed  by  this  procefs ; 
fo  that,  alas !  it  is  flill  but  lead. 


SEC 


Of  the  Impregnation  of  Water^  &c.     263 

SECTION    XV. 

Of  the  Impregnation  of  W^ter  with  Fixed  Air. 

PART    I. 

^he  Hijlory  of  the  Difcovery. 

It  often  amufcs  me  when  I  review  the  hiftory 
of  experimental  philofophy,  to  obferve  how 
very  nearly  one  difcovery  is  conne6ted  with 
another,  and  yet  that,  for  a  long  time,  no  per- 
fon  Ihall  have  perceived  that  connexion,  fo  as 
to  have  been  aftually  led  from  the  one  to  the 
other}  and  efpecially  that  he  who  made  the 
firft  difcovery  fhould  ftop  fhort  in  his  progrefs, 
and  not  advance  a  fingle  ftep  farther,  to  make 
the  other,  which  was  perhaps  of  infinitely  more 
confequence.  And  yet  the  cafe  may  be  fuch, 
that  it  fhall  be  fo  far  from  requiring  more  ge- 
nius, or  ingenuity,  to  advance  that  other  ftep, 
that  it  is  rather  a  matter  of  wonder,  how  it 
was  pofiible  for  the  moft  common  capacity  to 
ftop  fhort  of  it.  We  alfo  frequently  find  that 
they  who  make  the  moft  important  philofo- 
phical  difcoveries  overlook  the  mofl  obvious 
ufes  of  them.  Several  ftriking  examples  of 
S  4  this 


264         0/  the  hnpregnatioH  of  Water 

this  kind  will  be  found  in  my  Hijlory  of  elec^ 
tricity\  and  alfo  in  the  Hijiory  of  difcoveries  re- 
lating to  vijion^  light ^  and 'colours. 

In  fuch  cafes  as  thefe  it  behoves  an  hiftorian 
to  be  much  upon  his  guard,  left  he  Ihould 
haftily  conclude  that  to  have  been  fad  which 
he  only  imagines  muft  have  been  fo,  but  for 
which  no  diredt  evidence  can  be  produced.  As 
this  is  a  cafe  of  fome  curiofity  refp"e6ling  the 
human  mind,  I  fliall  give  an  inftance  of  it  • 
and  I  am  able  to  produce  a  very  remg.rk.able 
one  relating  to  the  fubjed:  of  this  fedion. 

"When  it  was  difcovered  that  the  acidulous 
tafte  and  peculiar  virtues  of  Pyrmont  water, 
and  other  mineral  waters  of  a  fimilar  nature,' 
were  owing  to  the  fixed  air  which  they  con- 
tained •,  when  this  air  had, been  actually  ex- 
pelled from  the  water,  and  it  was  found  that 
the  fame  water,  and  even  other  water,  would 
reimbibe  the  fame  air ;  we  are  apt  to  conclude, 
that  the  perfon  who  made  thefe  difcoveries^ 
and  efpecially  the  laft  of  them  (who  alfo  mult 
have  known  that  fixed  air  is  a  thing  very  eafy 
to  be  procured)  muft  have  immediately  gone 
to  work  to  reduce  this  theory  into  Dra^iice,  by 
a  dually  impregnating  common  water  with 
fixed  air,  in  order  to  give  it  the  peculiar  vir- 
tues of  thofe  medicinal  rnineral.  waters  which 

are 


'jjoiih  Fixed  4^r^  "265 

gre  fo  highly,  and  fo  juftly  valued,  and  which 
^re  procured  at  fo  great  an  expence,  efpecially; 
in  this  country.  Accordingly,  Dr.  Npoth  has 
advanced,  Phil.  T.ranf.  vol.  6^^  p.  c^(^^  that 
i'  the  polTibility  of  irnpregnating  water  with 
"  fixed  air  was  no  fooner  afcertained  by  expe- 
"  riment,  than  various  methods  were  con- 
*:'  trived  to  effedl  the  impregnation ;"  and  I 
^oubt  not  this  ingenious  philofopher  impofed 
upon  himfclf  in  the  manner  defcribed  above. 
This,  however,  is  fo  far  from  being  the  cafe, 
that  I  do  not  believe  it  is  polfible  to  produce 
ihe  ieaft  evidence  that  any  perfon  had  the  thing 
in  view  before  the  publication  of  my  pamphlet 
iipon  that  fubjed,  in  the  year  1772. 

Indeed,  had  this  thing  been  fo  much  as  an 
olje^  of  attention  to  philofophers,  it  is  im- 
pofTiblc  but  that  fome  of  them  muft  have  hit 
Vipon  a  method  that  would  have  fufficiently 
fucceeded.  Nay,  the  thing  is  fo  very  eafy, 
and  the  end  attairiable  in  fo  many  ways,  that 
there  muft  have  been,  in  a  very  fliort  time,  a 
great  variety  of  methods  to  impregnate  water 
with  fixed  air,  as  there  are  now-,  and  we 
ihould  certainly  have  heard  of  artificial  mineral 
waters  being  m.ade  according  to  them.  It  is 
impoffible  not  to  conclude  fo,  when  we  con- 
fider  the  time  that  has  elapfed  fince  the  pub- 
lication of  all  the  difcoveries  that  led  to  it. 

Dr, 


266        Of  the  Impregnation  of  Water 

Dr.  Brownrigg's  paper,  giving  an  account 
of  his  difcovery  of  fixed  air  in  the  Spa  water, 
was  read  at  the  Royal  Society  June  the  13  th 
1765,  and  was  publifhed  in  1766.  This  ex- 
cellent philofopher  compleatly  decompofed 
that  mineral  water,  but  he  gives  no  hint  of 
his  having  fo  much  as  attempted  to  recompofe 
it,  or  of  making  a  fimilar  water,  by  impreg- 
nating common  water  with  the  fame  volatile 
principle.  It  is  fufficiently  evident  that  he 
had  not  thought  of  this,  though  we  may  won- 
der that  he  Ihould  not  have  done  it,  becaufe 
he  has  not  mentioned  it  as  an  object  of 
purfuit. 

In  the  year  following,  Mr.  Cavendifh's 
valuable  papers  on  the  fubje6l  of  faftitious  air 
were  publifhed.  He  firft  afcertained  how 
much  fixed  air  a  given  quantity  of  water  could 
be  made  to  imbibe;  yet  it  does  not  appear 
that  he  ever  thought  of  tajiing  the  water, 
much  lefs  that  he  thought  of  making  any 
practical  ufe  of  his  difcovery. 

If  any  negative  argument  can  be  dccifive, 
•it. is  that  in  1772,  the  very  year  in  which  my 
pamphlet  came  out.  Dr.  Falconer  publifhed 
his  excellent  and  elaborate  treatife  on  the  Bath 
"jjaters^  in  which  he  treats  very  largely  of 
mineral  w^aters  in  general,  and  all  their  pofTible 

impreg^ 


with  Fixed  Air,  %6j 

impregnations  •,  and  yet,  though  he  treats  of 
fixed  air  as  one  ingredient  in  many  of  them, 
fee  p.  185,  he  drops  no  hint  about  compofmg 
fuch  water,  by  imparting  fixed  air  to  com- 
mon water.  Alfo  on  the  12  th  of  September 
in  the  fame  year,  Dr.  Rutherford  publiihed  his 
ingenious  Dijfertation  on  Fixed  Air^  in  which  he 
fpeaks  of  the  prefence  of  it  in  Pyrmont  w^ater, 
p.  3,  but  without  giving  the  leafb  hint  of  his 
being  acquainted  with  any  method  of  imitating 
them.  And  yet  Dr.  Nooth  fays,  in  fadt,  that 
from  the  year  1766,  at  the  latefr,  'various 
methods  were  contrived  to  effecb  the  impreg- 
■  nation,  though  he  allows* that  I  was  the  only 
perfon  who  "  publiflied  any  defcription  of  an 
"  apparatus  calculated  entirely  for  tliis  pur- 
"  pofe." 

According  to  this  account  of  the  matter 
there  were,  in  the  interval  between  1766  and 
1772,  a  fpace  of  fix  years,  a  variety  of  me- 
thods for  impregnating  water  with  fixed  air, 
fome  of  them  prior  to,  and  perhaps  much 
better  than  mine  (though  he  gives  no  hint  of 
his  own  having  been  invented  in  that  period, 
but  fpeaks  of  it  as  fuggefted  by  the  confider- 
ation  of  the  imperfe6lion  of  mine)  but  that  I 
happened  to  get  the  fiiart  in  the  publication. 
Dr.  Falconer,  however,  though  the  friend  of 
Dr.  Nooth  (fee  his  Treatife  on  Bath  Water, 

vol. 


Of  the  Jmpr^gnation  of  Watey^ 

^Si\.  2.  p.  323)  had  certainly  never  heard  of 
any  of  thofe  methods,  or  even  of  mine,  at 
tl'ie  very  termination  .of  that  period  \  and  tho^ 
my  Qwn  acquaintance  with  philofophical  and 
medical  people  is  pretty  extenfive,  I  neve;-. 
lieard  of  any  of  the  various  methods  that  Dr. 
Nooth  fpeaks  of;  nor  fince  the  publication  of 
my  method  have  I  heard  of  any  perfon  what- 
ever having  pretended  to  have  done  the  fame 
thing  before  •,  though  nothing  is  more  common 
than  fuch  claims,  and  very  often  on  the  moft 
f rifling  pretences. 

Mr.  Venelle,  indfed,  immediately  upon  the 
|:ranilation  of  my  pamphlet  into  French,  which 
was  within  a  few  weeks  after  the  publication 
of  it  in  Englifh  (owing  to  the  laudable  zeal  of 
Mr.  TrudainCj  for  promoting  all  philofophical 
and  ufeful  improvements)  publilhed  an  extract 
of  his  papers  from  the  Memoires  de  Mathema- 
ttque  ^  de  Phyfique^  to  vindicate  to  himfeif  not 
my  difcovery,  but,  in  fadl,  that  of  Dr.  Brown- 
rigg.  However,  what  he  pretendSj,to  have  dif- 
covered  was,  that  the  virtues  qf  the  acidulous 
waters  were  owing  to  air^  in  general,  without 
having  any  idea  of  the  difference  between  fixed 
air  and  common  air-,  fo  that  his  difcovery  was 
fo  far  from  being  the  fame  with  mine,  that  it 
could  not  polTibly  have  led  into  it.     . 

As 


with  Fixed  Air,  l6'() 

As  I  have  hitherto  only  publiilied  the  method 
of  impregnating  water  v/ith  fixed  air  in  a  fmall 
pamphlet,  for  the  ufe  of  thofe  who  might  chufe 
to  reduce  it  into  pra6lice,  without  giving  any 
account  of  the  manner  in  which  the  difcovery 
(if  it  cleferves  to  be  called  one)  was  made, 
which  has  been  my  cuftom  v/ith  relpeft  to  every 
thing  elfe,  I  fliall  do  it  here  •,  and  I  hope  the 
narrative  will  not  be  altogether  dilpleafmg,  as 
this  bufinefs  has  gained  fo  much  attention  ia 
all  parts  of  Europe,  as  well  as  in  England,  and 
promifts  in  a  fliort  time  to  fave  the  very  great 
expence  of  tranfporting  acidulous  waters  to 
confiderable  diltances,  by  fuperfe^iing,  in  a 
great  meafure,  the  ufe  of  them.  And  though 
what  I  have  done  in  this  bufmefs  has  certainly 
the  leaft  merit  pofllble  witl»  refrjecl  to  inge- 
nuity^ I  fliali  always  connder  it  as  one  of  the 
happiefi  thoughts  that  ever  occurred  to  me ; 
becaufe  it  has  proved  to  be  of  very  fignal  be- 
nefit to  mankind,  and  will,  I  doubt  not,  be 
of  much  more  confequence  in  a  courfe  of 
time. 

It  was  a  little  after  Midfummer  in  1767, 
that  I  removed  from  Warrington  to  Leeds-, 
and  living,  for  the  firft  year,  in  a  houfe  that  was 
contiguous  to  a  large  common  brewery,  fo 
good  an  opportunity  produced  in  me  an  in- 
clination to  make  fome  experiments  on  the 

fixed 


270         Of  the  Impregnation  of  Water 

fixed  air  that  was  conflantly  produced  in  it. 
Had  it  not  been  for  this  circumftance,  I  fhould, 
probably,  never  have  attended  to  the  fubjed; 
of  air  at  all.  Happening  to  have  read  Dr. 
Brownrigg's  excellent  paper  on  the  Spa  water 
about  the  fame  time,  one  of  the  firft  things 
that  I  did  in  this  brewery  was  to  place  Ihallow 
veffels  of  water  within  the  region  of  fixed  air, 
on  the  furface  of  the  fermenting  veflels  ;  and 
having  left  them  all  night,  I  generally  found, 
the  next  morning,  that  the  water  had  acquired 
a  very  fenfible  and  pleafant  impregnation ; 
and  it  was  with  peculiar  fatisfadion  that  I  firfl 
drank  of  this  water,  which  I  believe  was  the 
firft  of  its  kind  that  had  ever  been  tafted  by 
man. 

This  procefs,  however,  was  very  flow.  But 
after  fome  time  it  occurred  to  me,  that  the 
impregnation  might  be  accelerated,  by  pour- 
ing the  water  from  one  velTel  into  another, 
while  they  were  both  held  within  the  fphere  of" 
the  fixed  air ;  and  accordingly  I  found  that  I 
could  do  as  much  in  about  five  minutes  in  this 
way,  as  I  had  been  able  to  do  in  many  hours 
before.  Several  of  my  friends  who  vifited  me 
while  I  lived  in  that  houfe  will  remember  my 
taking  them  into  that  brewery,  and  giving 
them  a  glafs  of  this  artificial  Pyrmont  water, 
made  in  their  prefencc.     Among  others,  I  will 

take 


with  Fix»d  Air.  271 

take  the  liberty  to  mention  John  Lee,  Efq;  of 
Lincoln's  Inn,  who  was  particularly  ftruck 
with  the  contrivance,  and  the  efFe6t  of  it. 
This  was  in  the  fummer  of  the  year  1 768. 

One  would  naturally  think,  that  having 
aftually  impregnated  common  water  with  fixed 
air,  produced  in  a  brewery,  I  fhould  imme- 
diately have  fet  about  doing  the  fame  thing 
with  air  fet  loofe  from  chalk,  &c.  by  feme  of 
the  flronger  acids ;  and  I  do  remember  that  it 
did  occur  to  me  that  the  thing  v/as  pofTible. 
But,  eafy  as  the  pradice  proved  to  be,  no 
method  of  doing  it  at  that  time  occurred  to 
me.  I  ftill  continued  to  make  my  Pyrmont 
water  in  the  manner  abovementioned  till  I  left 
that  fituation,  which  was  about  the  end  of  the 
fummer  1768*-  and  from  that  time,  being  en- 
gaged in  other  fimilar  purfuits,  with  the  refult 
of  which  the  public  are  acquainted,  I  made 
no  more  of  the  Pyrmont  water  till  the  fpring 
of* the  year  1772. 

In  the  mean  time  I  had  acquainted  all  my 
friends  with  what  I  had  done,  and  frequently- 
expreffed  my  wiihes  that  perfons  who  had  the 
care  of  large  diftilkries  (where  I  was  told  that 
fermentation  was  much  ftronger  than  in  com- 
mon breweries)  would  contrive  to  have  vefTels 
of  water  fufpended  within  the  fixed  air,  which 

they 


27s        Of  the  Impregnation  of  Water 

they  produced,  with  a  farther  contrivance  for 
agitating  the  furface  of  the  water ;  as  I  did 
not  doubt  but  that,  by  this  meansj  they  mighty 
with  little  or  no  expence^  make  great  quanti-- 
tities  of  Pyrmont  water  \  by  which  they  might 
at  the  fame  time  both  ferre  the  Public,  and 
benefit  themfelves.  For  I  never  had  the  moft 
diftant  thought  of  making  any  advantage  of 
the  fcheme  myfelf. 

In  all  this  times,  viz;  from  1767  to  1772,  I 
never  heard  of  any  method  of  impregnating 
water  with  fixed  air  but  that  abovementioned; 
My  thinking  at  all  of  reducing  to  pradice  any 
method  of  effefting  this,  by  air  diilodged  frorri 
chalk,  and  other  calcareous  fubftancesj  was 
owing  to  a  mere  accident.  Being  at  dinner 
with  the  Duke  of  Northumberland,  in  the 
fpring  of  the  year  lafl  mentioned,  his  Grace 
produced  a  bottle  of  water  diftilled  by  Dr.  Ir- 
ving for  the  ufe  of  the  navy.  This  wate^ 
was  perfe<5lly  fweet,  but,  like  all  diftiiled 
waterj  wanted  the  briiknefs  and  fpirit  of  freDi 
fpring  water;  when  it  immediately  occurred 
to  me  that  I  could  eafily  mend  that  water  for 
the  ufe  of  the  navy^  and  perhaps  fupply  them 
with  an  eafy  and  cheap  method  of  preventing 
or  curing  the  fea  fcurvyj  viz.  by  impregna- 
ting it  with  fixed  air;  For  having  been  buff^ 
about  a  year  before  with  my  expetimetits  oh 
I  air. 


ipith  Fixed  Air.  273 

air,  in  the  courfe  of  which  I  had  afcertained 
{{it  proportional  quantity  of  feveral  kinds  of 
ixiv  that  given  quantities  of  water  would  take 
up,  I  was  at  no  lofs  for  the  method  of  doing 
I't  in  general,  viz.  inverting  a  jar  filled  v/ith 
water,  and  conveying  air  into  it  from  bladders 
previoufly  filled  with  air.  This  fcherae  I  im- 
mediately mentioned  to  the  Duke  and  the  com- 
pany, Who  all  feemed  to  be  much  pleafed  "With 
it,  and  cxprtiTed  their  wifhes  that  I  would  at- 
tend to  it,  and  endeavour  to  reduce  it  into 
pradice'i  which  I  promiied  to  do. 

The  next'  day  I  provided  a  fmall  apparatus, 
adapted  to  this  purpofc,  at  my  lodgings, 
wJiich  was  very  ealy,  as  it  required  no  other 
velTels  but  fuch  as  are  in  conftant  family  ufe, 
and  with  this  I  prelentiy  impregnated  a  quan- 
tity of  the  New  River  water,  fo  as  to  mal^e  it 
iiTibibe  about  its  bulk  of  air.  But  I  was  far 
from  having  hit  upon  the  eafteji  method  of  do- 
ing it  •,  for  my  jars  were  of  an  equal  width 
throughout.  However,  with  thefe  vefTels  the 
procels  was  compleatcd  in  about  twenty  mi- 
nutes, or  half  an  hour. 

A  few  days  after  this,  having  an  invitation 

to  wait  upon  Sir  George  Savile,  I  earned  with 

me   a  bottle  of  my  impregnated  water,    and 

told  him  the  ufe  that  m.ight  be  made  of  it, 

T  viz. 


274         Of  i^^^  Lnpregjmtlon  of  Water 

viz.  that  of  fupplying  a  pleafant  and  vvhole- 
fome  beverage  for  feamen,  and  fuch  as  might 
probably  prevent  or  cure  the  fea-fcurvy.  Sir 
George,  with  that  warmth  with  which  he 
efpoiifes  every  thing  that  he  conceives  to  be 
for  the  public  good,  infifted  upon  writing  a 
card  immediately  to  Lord  Sandwich,  propofmg 
to  introduce  me  to  him,  as  having  a  ■propofal 
for  the  ufe  of  the  na'-oy.  As  I  could  make  no 
objedtion,  the  card  was  accordingly  written, 
and  an  anfwer  was  prefently  returned  from  his 
Lordlhip,  informing  us  that  he  would  be  glad 
to  fee  us  the  next  day.  Upon  this  I  drew  up 
fomething  in  the  form  of  a  propofal^  which, 
accompanied  by  Sir  George,  I  prefented  to 
his  Lordfhip,  who  promifed  to  lay  it  before  the 
Board  of  Admiralty. 

Prefently  after  this  I  had  nptice  from  the 
Secretary  to  the  Board  of  Admiralty,  that  the 
College  of  Phyficians  were  appointed  to  examine 
my  propofal,  and  to  make  their  report  of  it 
to  the  Board,  and  an  early  day  was  fixed  for 
me  to  wait  upon  them  at  their  hall  in  War- 
wick-Lane; where,  before  a  very  full  meet- 
ing, I  produced  a  bottle  of  my  impregnated 
water,  and  alfo,  at  their  requeil,  fetched  my 
apparatus,  and  lliev/ed  them  the  manner  in 
which  I  had  impregnated  it.  There  were  pre- 
sent feveral  of  the^moft  eminent  phyficians  in 

London ; 


with  Pixed  Air*  1J^ 

London  ;  but  both  the  fcheme,  and  the  ohje^ 
of  it,  appeared  to  be  intirely  new  to  every  one 
of  them  •,  and  moft  of  them  feemed  to  be 
much  pleafed  with  it. 

Accordingly,  a  favourable  report  was  made 
to  the  Board  of  Admiralty,  and  I  v/as  ac- 
quainted by  the  Secretary,  that  the  captains 
of  the  two  jfliips  which  v/ere  juft  then  failing 
for  the  South-Seas  had  orders  to  make  trial  of 
the  impregnated  water ;  and  for  their  ufe  I 
drew  out  my  Direolions  in  writing,  and  fent  a 
drawing  of  the  necelTary  apparatus.  The  me- 
thod which  I  had  now  got  into  was  a  great 
improvement  upon  that  which  I  had  made  ufe 
of  before  the  College  of  Phyficians.  For,  in 
confequence  of  giving  more  attention  to  it,  I 
had,  by  that  time,  brought  it  to  the  ilate  in 
'  which  it  is  defcribed  in  the  pamphlet* 

In  the  mean  time,  I  had^  before  I  left  Lon- 
don, in  the  fpring  of  that  year,  niade  the  ex- 
periment of  the  impregnation  of  water  Svith 
fixed  air  in  the  prefence  of  m>oft  of  my  philofo- 
phical  acquaintance,  and  their  friends,  both 
at  my  own  lodgings,  and  in  other  places.  But 
upon  none  of  thefe  occafions  did  it  appear  that 
any  of  them  had  heard  of  any  other  perfoa 
having  had  the  fame  thing  in  view. 

T  7,  LafUy, 


276     Of  the  Impregnation  of  Water ^  Scc^ 

Laftly,  I  will  oblerve,  that  Sir  John  Pringl^, 
in  his  Difcourfe  on  different  kinds  of  air  (in 
which  he  has,  with  the  greateft  exadnefs, 
afligned  to  every  perlbn  concerned  in  thefe 
dilcoveries  their  due  fhare  of  praife)  gives  no 
hint  of  his  being  acquainted  with  any  othex 
method  of  impregnating  water  with  fixed  air, 
than  that  which  1  had  publillied.  He  certainly 
had  not  heard  of  any  of  thofe  to  which  Dr. 
Nooth  alludes. 

As  I  have  nor  to  this  day,  diredly  or  indi- 
rectly, made  the  Icaft  advantage  of  this  fcheme; 
but,  on  the  contrary,  am  juft  fo  much  a  lofer 
by  it  as  the  experiments  coll  me,  I  think  it  is 
not  too  much  for  the  Public  to  allow  me, 
what  I  believe  is  flri6tly  my  due,  the  fole  merit 
of  the  difcovery  ;  which  with  refped  to  ingenuity, 
or  fagacity,  is  next  to  nothing  •,  but  with  re- 
fpe(ft  to  its  utility  is,  unqueftionably,  of  un- 
ipeakable  value  to,  my  country  and  to  man- 
kind. 


PART 


To  impregnate  Water  with  Fixed  Air.     277 


PART         II. 

Directions  for  impregnating  ^  Pl'V  e  r 
•with  Fixed  Air. 


Sect.  i.  The  Br e face  to  the  Dire^lons  as  firfi 

publifhed. 

The  method  of  Impregnating  water  with 
Hxed  air,  of  which  a  defcription  is  given  in 
this  pamphlet,  I  hit  upon  in  a  courfe  of  exj^e- 
riments,  an  account  of  which  was  lately  com- 
municated to  the  Royal  Society  ;  containing 
obfervations  on  feveral  different  kinds  of  air, 
with  only  a  hint  of  the  method  of  combining 
this  particular  kind  with  water  or  other  fluids. 
Judging  that  water  thus  impregnated  with 
fixed  air  mlill  be  particularly  ferviceable  in 
long  voyages,  by  preventing  or  curing  the 
fea-fcurvy,  according  to  the  theory  of  Dr. 
Macbride,  and  all  the  Phyficians  of  my  ac- 
quaintance concurring  with  me  in  that  opi- 
nion, I  made  the  lirft  communication  of  it  to 
the  Lords  of  the  Admiralty,  who  referred  me 
to  the  College  of  Phyficians  •,  and  thofe  gen- 
tlemen being  pleafed  to  make  a  report  favour- 
able to  the  fcheme,  a  trial  has  been  ordered  to 
T  3  be 


2  7  §     21?  impregnate  Water  "cvith  Fixed  Air* 

be  made  of  it  on  board  fome  of  his  majefty's 
Ihips.  To  make  this  procefs  more"  generally 
known,  and  that  more  frequent  trials  may  be 
made  by  water  thus  medicated,  at  land  as  well 
as  at  fea,  I  have  been  induced  to  make  the  pre- 
fent  publication. 

Sir  John  Pringle  firft  cbferved,  that  putre-i. 
faftion  was  checked  by  fermentation,  and  Dr. 
Macbride  difcovered  that  this  effecl  was  pro- 
duced by  the  fixed  air  which  is  generated  in 
that  procefs,  and  upon  that  principle  recom- 
mended the  ufe  of  wort^  as  fuppiying  a  quan- 
tity of  thi3  fixed  air,  by  fermentation  in  the 
ftomach,  in  the  fame  manner  as  it  is  done  by 
frelh  vegetables,  for  which  he,  therefore, 
thought  that  it  would  be  a  fubftitutej  and  ex- 
perience has  confirmed  his  conjcdure.  Dr. 
Plack  found  that  lime-ilone,  and' all  calcareous 
fubftances,  contain  fixed  air,  that  the  pre- 
fence  of  it  makes  them  vv'hat  is  called  mild^ 
and  that  the  deprivation  of  it  renders  them 
cauftic-y  Dr.  Brownrigg  farther  difcovered  that 
Pyrm.ont,  and  other  mineral  waters,  which 
have  the  fame  acidulous  tafte,  contain  a  confi- 
derable  proportion  of  this  very  kind  of  air, 
and  that  upon  this  their  peculiar  fpirit  and  vir- 
tues depend  -,  and  1  think  myfelf  fortunate  in 
liaving  hit  ypon  a  very  eafy  method  of  commu- 
liicating  this  air  tp  any  kind  of  water,  or,  in- 

4eed^ 


^0  impregnaU  Water  with  Fixed  Air.    279 

deed,  to  almoft  any  fluid  fubflance.  In  fhort, 
by  this  method  this  great  antifeptic  principle 
may  be  adminiflered  in  a  variety  of  agreeable 
vehicles. 

If  this  difcOvery  (though  it  doth  not  deferve 
that  name)  be  of  any  ufe  to  my  countrymen, 
and  to  mankind  at  large,  I  fhall  have  my  re- 
ward. For  this  purpofe  I  have  made  the  com- 
munication as  early  as  I  conveniently  could, 
fmce  the  latefl  improvements  that  I  have  made 
in  the  procefs  ;  and  I  cannot  help  cxprefling 
my  willies,  that  all  perfons,  who  dilcover  any 
thing  that  promifes  to  be  generally  ufefulj 
would  adopt  the  lame  method. 


Sect.  2.    The  Directions, 

If  water  be  only  in  contafl  with  fixed  air, 
it  will  begin  to  imbibe  it,  but  the  mixture  is 
greatly  accelerated  by  agitation,  which  is  con- 
tinually bringing  frefh  particles  of  air  and 
water  into  contadt.  All  that  is  necefTary,  there- 
fore, to  make  this  procefs  expeditious  and  ef- 
fectual, is  firil  to  procure  a  fufficient  quantity 
of  this  fixed  air,  and  then  to  contrive  a  method 
by  which  the  air  and  water  may  be  ftrongly 
agitated  in  the  fame  veiTel,  without  any  danger 
of  admitting  the  common  air  to  them  j  and  this 

T  4  '  is 


28o    To  impregnate  IVater  with  Fixed  Air. 

is  eafily  done  by  firft  fill'ng  any  veflel  with 
water,  and  introducing  the  fixed  air  to  it,  while 
it  ftands  inverted  in  another  veitel  of  water* 
That  every  part  of  the  procefs  may  be  as  'n- 
telligible  as  poffible,  even  to  thofe  who  have 
no  previous  knovvledge  of  the  rubje*5l, .  I  Ihall 
defciibe  it  very  minutely,  fubjoining  feveral 
remarks  and  obfervations  relatino;  id  varieties 
in  the  procefs,  and  other  things  of  a  mifcella- 
neous  nature.  .  ^  >-     .   .. 


'The  Preparation.   - 

Take  a  glafs  Ve0el,  ^,  pi.  2 .  fig.  i .  with  a  pret- 
ty narrow  neck,  but  fo  formed,  that  it  will  (land 
upright  with  its  mouth  downwards,  and  having 
filled  it  with  water,  lay  a  flip  of  clean  paper, 
or  thin  pafteboard,  upon  it.  '1  hen,  if.  xhcj 
be  prefixed  clofe  together,  the  veltel  may  be 
turned  upfide  down,  without  danger  of  ad- 
mitting common  air  into  it ;  and  when  it  is 
thus  inverted,  it  mud  be  placed  in  another 
veffcl,  in  the  form  of  a  bowl  or  bafon,  ^,  with 
a  little  water  in  it,  fo  much  as  to  permit  the 
flip  of  paper  or  pafleooard  to  be  withdrawn. 
End  the  end  of  the  pipe  c  to  be  introduced. 

This  pipe  mufc  be  flexible,  and  air-tight, 
for  which  purpofe  it  is,  I  believe,   belt  made 

'     '*     *  -  'of 


To  impregnale  JVater  with  Fixed  Air,    281 

of  leather,  fewed  with  a  waxed  thread,  in  the 
manner  ufed  by  (hoe-makers.  Into  each  end 
of  this  pipe  a  piece  of  a  quill  fhould  be  thruft, 
to  keep  them  open,  while  one  of  them  is  in- 
troduced into  the  vefiel  of  water,  and  the  other 
into  the  bladder  ^,  the  oppofite  end  of  which 
is  tied  round  a  cork,  which  muft  be  perforated, 
the  whole  being  kept  open  by  a  quill ;  and  the 
cork  muft  fit  a  phial  e,  two  thirds  of  which 
ihould  be  filled  with  chalk  juft  covered  with 
water. 

I  have  fmce,  however,  found  it  moft  con- 
venient to  ufe  a  glafs  tube^  and  to  preferve  the 
advantage  which  I  had,  of  agitating  the  vefTel  e^ 
I  have  two  bladders^  communicating  by  a  per- 
forated cork,  to  which  they  are  both  tied.  For 
one  bladder  would  hardly  give  room  enough 
for  that  purpofe. 


'The  Procefi\ 

Things  being  thus  prepared,  and  the  phial 
containing  the  chalk  and  water  being  detached 
from  the  bladder,  and  the  pipe  alio  from  the 
vefTel  of  water,  pour  a  little  oil  of  vitriol  upon 
the  chalk  and  water  -,  and  having  carefully 
prefTed  all  the  common  air  out  of  the  bladder, 
put  the  cork  into  the  bottle  prefently  after  the 
*  ■  I  effer- 


282    ^0  impregnate  Water  with  Fined  Air, 

effervefcence  has  begun.  Alfo  prefs  the  blad- 
der once  more  after  a  little  of  the  newly  gene- 
rated air  has  got  into  it,  in  order  the  more 
efFedtually  to  clear  it  of  all  the  remains  of  the 
common  air  •,  and  then  introduce  the  end  of  the 
pipe  into  the  mouth  of  the  veffel  of  water  as 
in  the  drawing,  and  begin  to  agitate  the  chalk 
and  water  brifkly.  This  will  prefently  pro- 
duce a  confiderable  quantity  of  fixed  air,  which 
will  diftend  the  bladder ;  and  this  being  prefTed, 
the  air  will  force  its  way  through  the  pipe,  and 
afcend  into  the  veffel  of  water,  the  water  at  the 
fame  time  defcending,  and  coming  into  the 
bafon. 

When  about  one  half  of  the  water  is  forced 
out,  let  the  operator  lay  his  hand  upon  the 
uppermoft  part  of  the  veffel,  and  Ihake  it  as 
briflvly  as  he  can,  not  to  throw  the  water  out 
of  the  bafon  ;  and  in  a  few  minutes  the  water 
will  abforb  the  air  •,  and  taking  its  place,  will 
nearly  fill  the  veffel  as  at  the  firft.  Then  Ihake 
the  phial  containing  the  chalk  and  water  again, 
and  force  more  air  into  the  veffel,  till,  upon 
the  wiiole,  about  an  equal  bulk  of  air  has  been 
thrown  into  it.  Alfo  fhake  the  water  as  be- 
fore, till  no  more  of  the  air  can  be  imbibed. 
As  foon  as  this  is  perceived  to  be  the  cafe,  the 
water  is  ready  for  ufe ;  and  if  it  be  not  ufed 
immediately,  Ihould  be  put   into   a  bottle  as 

foon 


To  impregnate  Water  with  Fixed  Air.    2 S3 

foon  as  pofTible,  well  corked,  and  cemented. 
It  will  keep,  however,  very  well,  if  the  bottle 
be  only  well  corked,  and  kept  v/ith  the  mouth 
downwards. 


Ohfervations. 

1.  The  bafon  may  be  placed  inverted  upon 
the  vefTel  full  of  water,  with  a  flip  of  paper 
between  them,  and  then  both  turned  upfide 
down  together;  but  all  this  trouble  ^y ill  be 
faved  by  having  a  larger  veffel  of  water,  in 
which  both  of  them  may  be  immerfed. 

2.  If-  the  veffel  containing  the  v/ater  to  be 
agitated  be  large,  it  may  be  moil  convenient 
firft  to  place  it  inverted,  in  a  bafon  full  of 
water,  and  then  to  draw  out  the  comm^on  air 
by  means  of  a  fyphon,  either  making  ufe  of 
a  fyringe,  or  drawing  it  out  with  the  mouth. 
In  this  cafe,  alfo,  fome  kind  of  handle  fhould 
be  fallened  to  the  bottom  of  the  veffel,  for  the 
more  eafy  agitation  of  it. 

3.  A  narrow  mouthed  veffel  is  not  neceffary, 
but  it  is  the  moil:  proper  for  the  purpofe,  be- 
caufe  it  may  be  agitated  with  lefs  danger  of 
the  common  air  getting  into  it. 

4..  The 


2? 4    '^°  mpregnnte  Water  with  Fixed  Air.. 

4.  The  flexible  pipe  is  not  necelTary,  though 
I  think  it  is  exceedingly  convenient.  When 
it  is  not  iifed,  a  hent  tube,  a^  fig.  2.  (for  which 
glafs  is  the  moft  proper)  muft  be  ready  to  be 
jnferted  into  the  hole  made  in  the  cork,  when 
the  bladder  containing  the  fixed  air  is  feparatecj 
from  the  phial,  in  which  it  was  generated, 
The  extremity  of  this  tube  being  put  under  the 
yeflel  of  water,  and  the  bladder  being  com- 
prefTed,  the  air  will  be  conveyed  into  it,  as 
before. 

5.  If  the  ufe  of  a  bladder  be  objeded  to, 
though  nothing  can  be  more  inoffenfive,  the 
phial  containing  the  chalk  and  water  muft  not 
te  agitated  at  all,  or  with  the  greateft  caution ; 
unlefs  a  fmall  phial,  ^,.  ng,  3.  be  interpofed 
between  the  phial  and  the  veffel  of  water,  in 
the  manner  reprefented  in  the  -  drawing.  For 
by  this  means  the  chalk  aqd  water  that  may 
be  thrown  up  the  tube  b  will  lodge  at  the  bot- 
tom of  the  phial  a,  while  nothing  but  the  air 
will  get  into  the  pipe  <:,  and  fo  enter  the  water. 
If  the  tube  b  be  made  of  tin  or  copper,  the 
fmall  phial  a  will  not  need  any  other  fupport, 
the  cork  into  which  the  extremities  of  both 
the  tubes  are  inferted  being  made  to  fit  t^e 
phial  very  exadiy. 

6.  the 


To  impregnate  Water  with  Fixed  Ait.    2§^ 

5.  The  phial  <?,  fig.  i.  Ihould  always  be 
placed,  of  held,  confiderably  lower  than  the 
veflel  a  ;  that  if  any  part  of  the  mixture  fhould 
be  thrown  up  into  the  bladder,  it  may  remain 
in  the  lower  part  of  it,  from  which  it  may  be 
ealily  prelTed  back  again.  This,  however,  is 
not  necelTary,  fince  if  it  remain  in  the  lower 
part  of  the  bladder,  nothing  but  the  pure  air 
will  ^et  into  the  pipe,  and  fo  into  the  v.'-ater. 

7.  If  much  more  than  half  of  the  vefTel  be 
filled  with  air,  there  will  not  be  a  body  of 
water  fufficient  to  agitate,  and  the  procefs  will 
take  up  much  m.ore  time. 

8.  If  the  chalk  be  too  finely  powdered,  it 
will  yield  the  fixed  air  too  fall. 

9.  After  every  procefs,  the  water  to  which 
the  chalk  is  put  mull  be  changed. 

10.  It  will  be  proper  to  fill  the  bladder  with 
water  once  every  day,  after  it  has  been  ufed, 
that  any  of  the  oil  of  vitriol  which  may  have 
got  into  it,  and  would  be  in  danger  of  cor- 
roding it,  may  be  thoroughly  diluted. 

1 1 .  The  veflel,  which  I  have  generally  made 
ufe  of,  holds  about  three  pints,  and  the  phial 
containing  the  chalk  and  water  is  one  of  ten, 

ounces ; 


286    ^0  impregnate  Water  with  Fixed  Air* 

ounces;  and  I  find  that  a  little  more  than  a 
tea-fpoonful  of  oil  of  vitriol  is  fufficient  to 
produce  as  much  air  as  will  impregnate  that 
quantity  of  water. 

12.  If  the  veflel  containing  the  water  be 
larger,  the  phial  containing  the  chalk  and  the 
oil  of  vitriol  fhould  either  be  larger  in  pro- 
portion, or  frefh  water  and  oil  of  vitriol  muil 
be  put  to  the  chalk,  to  produce  the  requifite 
quantity  of  air. 

13.  In  general,  the  whole  procefs  does  not 
take  up  more  than  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour, 
the  agitation  not  five  minutes  ;  and  in  nearly 
the  fame  time  might  a  veflel  of  water,  con- 
taining two  or  three  gallons,  or  indeed  any 
quantity  that  a  perfon  could  well  Ihake,  be 
impregnated  with  fixed  air,  if  the  phial  con- 
taining the  chalk  and  oil  of  vitriol,  be  larger 
in  the  fame  proportion. 

14.  To  give  the  water  as  much  air  as  it  can 
receive  in  this  way,  the  procefs  may  be  repeated 
with  the  water  thus  impregnated.  I  generally 
chufe  to  do  it  two  or  three  times,  but  very 
little  will  be  gained  by  repeating  it  oftener  5 
fmce,  after  fome  time,  as  much  fixed  air  will 
efcape  from  that  part  of  the  furface  of  the 

2  water 


fto  impregnate  Water  with  Fixed  Air.    287 

water  which  is  expofed  to  the  common  air,  as 
can  be  imbibed  from  within  the  veffel. 

15.  All  calcareous  fubftance.s  contain  fixed 
air,  and  any  acids  may  be  ufed  in  order  to  fet 
it  loofe  from  them  •,  but  chalk  and  oil  of  vi- 
triol are,  both  of  them,  the  cheapell,  and, 
upon  the  whole,  the  beft  for  the  purpofe. 

16.  It  may  poflibly  be  imagined  that  part 
of  the  oil  of  vitriol  is  rendered  volatile  in  this 
procefs,  and  fo  becomes  mixed  with  the  v/ater ; 
but  it  does  not  appear,  by  the  moft  rigid  chy- 
mical  examination,  that  the  leaft  perceivable 
quantity  of  the  acid  gets  into  the  water  in  this 
way  •,  and  if  fo  fmall  a  quantity  as  a  fmgle 
drop  of  oil  of  vitriol  be  mixed  with  a  pint  of 
water  (and  a  much  greater  quantity  would  be 
far  from  making  it  lefs  wholefome)  it  might 
be  difcovered.  The  experiments  which  were 
made  to  afcertain  this  fa6l  were  made  with 
dijiilkd  water^  the  difagreeable  tafte  of  which 
is  not  taken  off,  in  any  degree,  by  the  mixture 
of  fixed  air.  Otherwife,  diftilled  water,  being 
clogged  with  no  foreign  principle,  will  imbibe 
fixed  air  fafber,  and  retain  a  greater  quantity  of 
it  than  other  water.  In  the  experiments  that 
were  made  for  this  purpofe,  I  was  afllfted  by 
Mr.  Hey,  a  furgeou  in  Leeds,   who  is  well 

IkiUed 


a  15  8    Ts  hnpregnate  PP'ater  with  Fixed  uiiH 

ikilled  in  the  methods  of  examining  the  pro? 
perties  of  mineral  waters. 

17.  Doftor  Brownrigg,  who  made  his  expe- 
riments on  Fyrmont  water  at  the  fpring  headi 
never  found  that  it  contained  fo  much  as  one 
half  of  an  equal  bulk  of  air  •,  but  in  this  me- 
thod the  water  is  eafily  made  to  imbibe  an 
equal  bulk.  For  it  muil  be  oblerved,  that  u 
confiderable  quantity  of  the  moil  foluble  part 
of  the  air  is  incorporated  with  the  water,  as 
it  firft  afcends  through  it,  before  it  occupies 
its  place  in  the  upper  part  of  the  velfel. 

18.  The  heat  of  boiling  water  will  expel  all 
the  fixed  air^  if  a  phial  containing  this  im- 
pregnated water  be  held  in  it  •,  but  it  will  often 
require  above  half  an  hour  to  effect  it  com- 
pleatly; 

19.  If  any  perfon  would  chufe  to  make  tfiis 
medicated  water  more  nearly  to  refemble  ge- 
nuine Pyrmont  water,  Sir  John  Pringle  in- 
forms me^  that  from  eight  to  ten  drops  of 
lAn^ura  Martls  cum  jpiritu  falis  mufl  be  mixed 
with  every  pint  of  it.  It  is  agreed,  however, 
on  all  hands,  that  tlie  peculiar  virtues  of  Pyr- 
mont, or  any  other  mineral  water  which  has 
the  fame  brifk  or  acidulous  tafte,  depend  not 

upon 


T'o  impreg7iate  Water  with  Fixed  Air.    289 

upon  its  being  a  chalybeate,    byt  upon  the 
fixed  air  which  it  contains, 

But  water  impregnated  with  fixed  air  does 
of  itlelf  dillblve  iron,  as  the  ingenious  Mr. 
Lane  has  difcovered  j  and  iron  filings  put  to 
this  medicated  water  make  a  ftrong  and  agree- 
able chalybeate,  fimilar  to  fome  other  natural 
chalybcates,  which  hold  the  iron  in  folution 
by  means  of  fixed  air  only,  and  not  by  means 
of  any  acid  ;  and  thefe  chalybeates,  I  am  in- 
formed, are  generally  the  moft  agreeable  to  the 
Jtomach. 

20,  By  this  procefs  may  fixed  air  be  given 
to  wine,  beer,  and  almoft  any  liquor  whatever : 
^nd  when  beer  is  become  fiat  or  dead,  it  will 
be  revived  by  this  means  \  but  the  delicate 
agreeable  flavour,  or  acidulous  taite  commu- 
nicated by  the  fixed  air,  and  which  is  manifefl 
in  water,  \yill  hardly  be  perceived  in  wine,  or 
other  liquors  which  have  much  tafte  of  their 
own. 

21.  I  would  not  interfere  with  the  province 
pf  the  phyfician,  but  I  cannot  intirely  fatisfy 
myfelf  without  taking  this  opportunity  to  fug- 
ged fuch  hints  as  have  occurred  to  myfelf,  or 
fny  friends,  with  refpedl  to  the  medicinal  ufes 

U      .  of 


290   J'o  impregnate  Water  with  Fixed  Air.  ' 

of  water  impregnated  with  fixed  air,  and  alfo 
of  fixed  air  in  other  applicatioiis. 

In  general,  the  difeafes  in  which  water  im- 
pregnated with  fixed  air  will  moft  probably  be 
ferviceable,  are  thofe  of  a  putrid  nature,  of 
which  kind  is  the  fea-fcurvy.  It  can  hardly 
be  doubted,  alfo,  but  that  this  water  muft  have 
ail  the  medicinal  virtues  of  Pyrmont  water, 
and  of  other  mineral  waters  fimilar  to  it, 
whatever  they  be  ;  efpecially  if  a  few  iron 
filings  be  put  to  it,  to  render  it  a  chalybeate, 
like  genuine  Pyrmont  water.  It  is  poflible, 
however,  that,  in  fome  cafes,  it  may  be  de- 
firable  to  have  t\iz  fixed  air  of  Pyrmont  water, 
without  the  iron  which  it  contains. 

Having  thi^  opportunity,  I  fhall  alfo  hint 
the  application  of  fixed  air  in  the  form  of 
clyjlers^  which  occurred  to  me  while  I  was  at- 
tending to  this  fubjed:,  as  what  promifes  to  be 
ufeful  to  corred  putrefadion  in  the  inteftinal 
canal,  and  other  parts  of  the  fyftem  to  which 
it  may,  by  this  channel,  be  conveyed.  It  has 
been  tried  once  by  Mr.  Hey  above-mentione4, 
and  the  recovery  of  the  patient  from  an  alarm- 
ing putrid  fever,  when  the  ftools  were  become 
black,  hot,  and  very  fetid,  was  fo  circum- 
ftanced,  that  it  is  not  improbable  but  that  it 
might  be  owing,    in  fome  meafure,  to  thofe 

clyfters. 


J'o  impregnate  TVaier  wiih  Fixed  Air.     29! 

clyfters.     The  application,  however,  appeared 
to  be  perfe6tly  ealy  and  fafe, 

I  cannot  help  thinking  that  fixed  air  might 
he  applied   externally   to  good  advantage  in 
other  cafes  of  a  putrid  nature,  even  when  the 
whole  fyftem  was  afFe6ted.     There  would  be 
no  difficulty  in  placing  the  body  fo,  that  the 
greateft  part  of  its  furface  fnould  be  expofed 
to  this  kind  of  air  ;  and  if  a  piece  of  putrid 
fiefh  will  become  firm  and  fweet  in  that  fitu- 
ation,    as  Dr.  Macbride  found,  fome  advan- 
tage, I  fhould  think,  might  be  expected  from 
the  fame  antifeptic  application,  aflifted  by  the 
'uis  vita.,  operating  internally,  to  counteract  the 
fame  putrid  tendency.     Some  Indians,  I  have 
been  informed,  bury  their  patients,  labouring 
under  putrid  difeafes,   up  to  the  chin  in  frefli 
mould,  which  is  alfo  known  to  take  off  the 
fcetor  from   flelh  meat  beginning  to  putrify. 
If  this  praftice  be  of  any  ufe,  may  it  not  be 
owing  to  the  fixed  air  imbibed  by  the  pores  of 
the  fkin  in  that  fituation  ?  Following  the  plough 
is  alfo  an  old  prefcription  for  a  confumption, 
as  alfo  is  living  near  lime  kilns'.      There  is 
often  fome  good  reafon  for  very  old  and  long 
continued  pra6lices,    though   it   is  frequently 
a  long  time  before  it  be  difcovered,  and  the 
rationale  of  them  f-itisfadlorily  explained. 


U  2  Being; 


292    ^0  impregnate  Water  with  Fixed,  Air  I 

Being  no  phyfician,  I  run  no  rifque  by 
throwing  out  thefe  random  hints  and  con^ 
jeftures.  I  fhall  think  myfelf  happy,  if  an)r 
of  them  Ihould  be  the  means  of  making  thole 
perfons,  whom  they  immediately  concern,  at- 
tend more  particularly  to  the  fubjeft.  My 
friend  Dr.  Percival  has  for  fome  time  paft  been 
employed  in  making  experiments  on  fixed  air, 
and  he  is  particularly  attentive  to  the  medi-' 
cinal  ufes  of  it ;  and  from  his  knowledge  as 
a  philofopher,  and  fl^ill  in  his  profeflionj  X 
have  very  confiderable  expedations.  ' 


PART 


Ohje£lions  to  thiJ\i£thod^  &c.  293 


PART.      III. 

0/  i>r.  Nooth'j  Obje^ions  to  the  preceding 
Method  of  impregnating  IVater  zvith  fixed  Air^ 
ayid  a  Comparifon  of  it  with  his  own  Method, 
doth  as  puMiJhed  by  himfelf  and  as  improved 
hy  Mr.  Parker, 

I  can  cafily  forgive  Dr.  Nooth  for  his  repre- 
fenting  me  as  having  no  other  merit  than  the 
firfi  publicatton  of  the  method  for  impregnating 
water  with  hxed  air,  accounting  for  it  as  I 
have  done  before ;  but  I  cannot  fo  eafily  for- 
give another  paragraph  in  his  paper,  the  ten- 
dency of  which  is  intirely  to  difcredit  a  me- 
thod", which,  though  it  is,  in  fome  refpefts, 
mterior  to  his  own^  has  neverthelefs  its  pecu- 
liar advantages  :  and  every  advantage  cannot 
poflibly  concur  in  any  one  metliod.  He  fays, 
p.  59,  "  Independent  of  the  inconveniencies 
"  attending  the  procefs,  there  was  another  ob- 
"  jedion  to  the  apparatus,  which,  with  moil 
"  people,  might  have  confiderable  weight. 
**  The  bladder,  which  formed  part  of  it,  was 
"  thought  to  render  the  water  offenfivci  and 
*'  when  the  folvent  power  of  fixed  air  is  con- 
"  fide  red  J  it  v/ill  not  appear  improbable,  that 
■  V   ^  ''  the 


2  94-  Obje5}ions  to  the  Method 

"  the  water  would  be  always  more  or  lefs 
"  tainted  by  the  bladder.  In  fome  trials  which 
"  I  made  with  Dr.  Prieftley's  apparatus,  it 
"  always  happened  that  the  water  acquired  an 
"  urinous  flavour  •,  and  this  tafte  was,  in  ge- 
"  neral,  fo  predominant,  that  it  could  not  be 
"  fwallowed  without  fome  degree  of  reluc- 
"  tance." 

That  Dr.  Nooth  did  produce  an  impreg- 
nated water  which  he  could  not  fwallow  with- 
out relu6lance,  and  even  that,  in  the  trials  to 
which  he  refers,  he  generally  produced  fuch 
water,  I  am  far  from  doubting  ^  becaufe  that 
might  happen  from  various  caufes.  But  that 
the  urinous  flavour  came  from  the  bladder^  as 
fuch,  I  will  venture  to  fay  is  not  pofTible.  For 
then  it  would  always  have  had  the  fame  effect ; 
and  not  only  myfelf  have  never  perceived  fuch 
a  flavour  as  the  Dodbor  complains  of,  but  this 
is  the  only  complaint  of  the  kind  that  I  have 
hitherto  heard  of;  though  many  perfons  of  the 
moft  delicate  tafte,  and  particularly  many  la- 
dies, have  ufed  the  water  impregnated  in  my 
method  for  months  together.  Few  perfons 
have  Iiad  to  do  v/ith  bladders,  and  fixed  air 
confined  in  bladders,  more  than  myfelf-,  and 
yet  I  have  never  feen  any  reafon  to  fufpedl  this 
■gresit  fohent  pozver  of  fixed  air  with  refpe6t  to 

them  'y 


of  impregnating  Water  with  Fixed  Air.     295 

them  •,  efpecially  fo  as  to  be  apparent  in  the 
fpace  of  a  few  minutes. 

But  fuppofmg  the  fixed  air  to  be  capable  of 
diffolving  the  whole  bladder,  and  to  carry  it 
along  with  itfelf  into  the  impregnated  water, 
no  phyfician,  or  philofopher,  will  pretend  to 
fay  that  it  could  have  any  more  tendency  to 
give  it  an  urinous  flavour,  than  if  it  had  been 
any  other  membrane  of  the  animal  body. 

Indeed,  as  the  Do6lor  himfelf  does  not  pre- 
tend to  fay  that  this  frrange  urinous  flavour 
was  the  effedt  of  ^//  the  impregnations  of  water 
made  in  my  method,  but  only  in  fame  of  them 
(though  it  was  generally  fo,  in  thofe  particular 
trials)  it  is  evident,  from  his  tacit  confefTion, 
that  it  mull  have  been  an  accidental  thing,  and 
could  not  have  come  from  the  bladder,  which 
I  fuppofe  he  made  ufe  of  in  all  trials.  For  he 
has  not  done  me  the  juftice  to  acknowledge 
that,  in  my  pamphlet,  among  the  various  me- 
thods of  effecting  the  impregnation  of  water,  I 
have  defcribed  one  in  which  no  bladder  is  made 
ufe  of.  When  the  Do6tor  fhall  once  more 
produce  this  urinous  flavour  (and  as  a  new 
and  curious  experiment,  it  is  certainly  worthy 
of  his  farther  inveltigation)  taking  care  that  no 
carelefs  fervant  fhall  have  mixed  any  urine  in 
U  4  the" 


296  Ohje^fions  to  the  Method 

the  water  that  he  calls  for,  I  Ihall  give  this 
new  objeftion  to  my  procefs  a  farther  examina- 
tion. At  prefent  I  am  inclined  to  confider 
this  as  an  experiment  of ,  the  fervant,  rather 
than  of  the  Dodtor  himfelf. 

Several  perfons  have  thought  that  fixed  air 
dikharged  from  impure  chalk  gives  the  water  that 
is  impregnated  with  it  a  diiagreeable  flavour; 
but  this  I  have  never  obferved  myfelf  •,  and 
any  other  calcareous  matter  may  be  ufed  in  my 
method,  as  well  as  in  that  of  Dr.  Nooth,  who 
recommends  chalk,  as  the  beft  upon  the  whole. 

I  fliall  conclude  thefe  animadverfions  with, 
doing  what  Dr.  Nooth  ought  to  have  done  be- 
fore me,  viz.  fairly  Hating  the  advantages 
and  difadvantages  of  our  two  methods.  His 
method  requires  lefsjkill  in  the  operator,  and  a 
lefs  confiant  attention.  It  is  alfo  more  elegant 
and  cleanly,  I  mean  with  refpe6l  to  the  cpe- 
rator  •,  for  this  does  not  at,  ail  affedt  the  im- 
pregnated  water.  On  thefe  accounts  I  gene- 
rally recommend  and  make  ufe  of  his  method 
myfelf,  efpecially  as  the  glalTes  are  made  with 
improvements  by  Mr.  Parker.  But  if  Dr. 
Nooth  be  candid,  he  niuft  acknowledge  that 
my  method  requires,  much  lefs  time.,  and  is  much 
lefs  expenf.ve  j  and  therefore  muft  be  more  pro- 
per 


of  impregnating  Water  with  F!ixed  Air.    297 

per  when  a  great  quantity  of  impregnated 
water  is  wanted  ;  and  efpecially  when  there  is 
but  little  room  to  make  it  in. 

My  method  indeed  requires  a  condant  at- 
tendance, but  I  queftion  whether,  upon  the 
whole,  more  than  is  neceflary  to  be  given  to 
Dr.  Nooth's  method  at  intervals,  if  tlie  water 
be  at  all  agitated  •,  confidering  that  mine 
does  not  require  one-tenth  part  cf  the  time. 
And  though  my  method  requires  fome  little 
fkill  and  addrefs,  it  is  not  fo  much,  but  that 
many  perlbns,  altogether  unufed  to  experi- 
ments, have,  to  my  knowledge,  fucceeded 
in  it  very  well,  and  have  made  the  im^preg- 
jnated  v/ater  in  a  conftant  v/ay  for  their  family 
ufe,  and  without  any  affiftance  befides  what 
they  got  from  the  printed  diredions.  My  ap- 
paratus coils  little  or  nothing,  becaufe  no  vcf- 
fels  are  made  for  the  purpofe  *,  and  both  the 
chalk  and  the  acids  are  made  to  go  as  far  as 
pofTible,  by  means  of  the  convenient  agita-; 
tion  of  the  vefiel  in  which  they  are  contained. 
Whereas  Dr.  Nooth's  method  requires  a  pecu- 
liar and  expenfive  apparatus,  and  more  Wafte 
is  unavoidable  in  the  ufe  of  it.  However,  for 
the  reafons  abovemientioned,  I  have  never  re- 
commended my  own  method  for  the  ufe  of  a 
family  fmce  I  have  been  acquainted  v/ith  his. 

What 


298  OhjeSfions  to  the  Method 

"What  I  have  faid  above  is  rather  applicable 
to  the  apparatus  as  it  is  made  by  Mr.  Parker, 
than  to  that  which  Dr.  Nooth  has  defcribed. 
For  Mr.  Parker's  glafles  are,  in  my  opinion, 
confiderably  improved  from  thofe  of  Dr. 
Nooth.  It  may  be  faid  that  the  improvements 
confill  in  little  things  %  but  little  things  may 
have  great  efFe6ts ;  and,  after  the  difcovery  of 
the  firft  method  of  accomplilhing  this  end,  all 
fubfequent  methods  may  be  called  little  things  ; 
and  they  may  be  endlefsly  diverfified,  without 
any  great  claim  of  merit.  I  have  feen  feveral 
very  ingenious  methods  fmce  the  publication 
of  mine,  though  none  that  I  like  fo  much, 
upon  the  whole,  as  that  of  Dr.  Nooth,  im- 
proved by  Mr.  Parker. 

In  Dr.  Nooth's  apparatus,  if  any  more  air 
than  is  wanted  be  produced,  the  water  will 
run  out  of  the  uppermofl  vefTel.  To  ufe  his 
own  words,  p.  63,  "  Should  more  air  be  ex- 
"  tricated  than  is  fufficient,  in  the  condu6t  of 
"  the  procefs,  to  fill  that  veflel,  the  water  will 
"  run  over  the  top  of  it,  and  will  continue  to 
"  run  as  long  as  any  air  afcends  in  the  middle 
"  veffel,  or  till  the  furface  of  the  water  is  be- 
"  low  the  extremity  of  the  bent  tube-,  and  in 
"  this  cafe  the  whole  would  be  wet  and  dif- 
"  agreeable."     But    this    difagreeable   confe- 

qucnce 


of  impregnating  Water  with  Fixed  Air.     299 

quence  can  never  happen  in  the  ufe  of  Mr.' 
Parker's  glafies,  becaufe  the  bent  tube  in 
which  the  uppermoft  vefTel  terminates  is  made 
of  fuch  a  length,  that  the  water  expelled  from 
the  middle  vefTel  can  do  no  more  than  nearly 
fill  the  uppermoft,  and  can  never  run  over ; 
fo  that  whereas  Dr.  Nooth's  apparatus  requires 
a  conftant  attendance,  Mr.  Parker's  requires 
none.  The  materials  being  once  put  into  it, 
the  procefs  will  go  on  of  itfelf,  without  any- 
farther  care  -,  unlefs  the  operator  ihould  chufe 
to  accelerate  the  impregnation  by  now  and 
then  letting  out  the  air  that  is  not  eafily  ab- 
forbed,  and  by  agitating  the  water.  This  I 
think  to  be  a  confiderable  advantage  gained 
by  a  very  eafy  contrivance  of  Mr.  Parker's, 
overlooked  by  Dr.  Nooth. 

Mr.  Parker  derives  another  confiderable  ad- 
vantage from  a  channel  which  he  cuts  in  the 
ftopper  of  his  uppermoft  veffel,  or  from  a 
ftopper  with  a  hole  through  the  middle,  which 
Dr.  Nooth  has  not  in  his;  fo  that  either  the 
operator  muft  be  careful  to  take  it  out  during 
the  effervefcence,  or  it  will  be  driven  out,  or 
fome  of  the  veffels  will  burft,  to  the  great  dan- 
ger of  the  by-ftanders  \  which  aftually  hap- 
pened in  one  made  by  Mr.  Parker,  before  he 
thought  of  this  method  to  prevent  it.  Whereas, 
4  through 


2pO,  Ohje^ioM  to  the  Method 

through  the  channel  in  Mr.  Parker's  apparatus^ 
the  common  air  eafily  efcapes  from  the  upper- 
moft  velTel,  to  make  room  for  the  water  to 
afcend  •  and  when,  in  the  continuance  of  the 
procefs,  the  fixed  air  rifes  through  the  bent 
tube  into  the  uppermoft  velTel,  it  lodges  upon 
the  furface  of  the  water  in  it ;  and  the  com- 
munication between  it  and  the  comition  air 
being  fo  much  obftru6ted,  they  are  fufficiently 
feparated  j  fo  that  even  the  water  in  the  up- 
f)ermoft  Veflel  has  (if  the  produ6lion  of  air  be 
copious)  almoll  as  much  advantage  for  re- 
ceiving the  impregnation;  as  that  in  the  middle 
Veflel.     This  advantage  Dr.  Nooth  lofes. 

AlfOj  when  he  chufes  to  feparate  the  two 
iippermoft  veflels  from  the  loweil^  in  order  to 
agitate  the  water,'  he  muft  either  leave  the 
mouth  of  the  uppermoil  veflel  open,  in  v/hicH 
cafe  he  can  hardly  agitate  the  water  at  all  •,  or 
(as  he  prefers  to  do  it)  he  mufi:  put  the  ftopper 
in,  and  confequently  admit  the  common  air  to 
pafs  his  valve^  and  mix  \vith  the  fixed  air^ 
which  mult  greatly  retard  the  abforptidn  of  it: 
whereas  Mr.  Parker's  veflels  may  be  agitated 
with  the  ftopper  in^  which,  admitting  the  com- 
mon air  into  the  upper  veflel,  through  the  chan- 
nel cut  in  it  (or  through  the  hole  of  the  Hopper) 
permits  the  water  to  defcend  into  the  lower,  on 

the 


qf  im-pt^gnating  Water  with  Fiined  Air.    301 

the  furface  of  which  nothing  but  fixed  air  is 
incumbent.  Should  any  common  air  enter  by 
the  valve,  which  in  this  cafe  it  hardly  would, 
the  finger  of  the  perfon  who  Ihakes  the  veflel 
may  eafily  be  placed  fo  as  to  prevent  it. 

Laftly,  I  confider  it  as  a  valuable  improve- 
ment in  Mr.  Parker's  apparatus,  that,  by 
means  of  the  openings  into  the  middle  and 
loweift  velTels,  clofed  with  ground  floppies,  the 
operator  is  enabled  to  draw  ofi^  his  water,  in 
order  to  tafte  it  occafionatly,  or  to  add  to  his 
oil  of  vitriol  or  chalk,  &c.  at  pleafure,  with- 
out giving  himfelf  the  trouble  of  feparating  the 
yelTels  from  one  another  for  thofe  purpofes. 

The  firft  apparatus  that  I  faw  of  Mr.  Par- 
ker's had  no  'valve  at  all,  but  only  a  glafs 
ftopple,  with  one  or  more  fmall  perforations, 
for  the  afcent  of  the  air  into  the  middle  veffel. 
This  1  ftill  generally  make  ufe  of,  without 
finding  any  occafion  for  a  valve ;  the  afcent 
of  the  fixed  air  fufficiently  preventing  the  de- 
fcent  of  the  water,  as  long  as  the  procefs  con- 
pnues,  efpecially  when  pounded  marble  is 
iifed.  This  fubftance  Dr.  Franklin  recom- 
mended to  me,  and  I  give  it  the  preference 
very  greatly  to  chalk,  chiefly  on  account  of 
the  length  of  time  that  is  required  to  expel  the 

air 


302  Ohje5lions  to  the  Method 

air  from  it :  For  without  any  frefh  acid,  it 
will  often  continue  to  yield  air  for  feveral 
days  together. 

That  thofe  perfons  who  are  not  poflefled  of 
the  Englifh  Philofophical  l^ranfaSiions^  and 
particularly  foreigners,  may  underftand  what 
has  preceded,  I  fhall  in  the  third  plate,  in  this 
volume,  give  a  drawing  of  Dr.  Nooth's  appa- 
ratus, as  improved  by  Mr.  Parker,  with  the 
following  general  defcription  of  it. 

In  the  loweft  veflel,  the  chalk  or  marble, 
and  the  water  acidulated  with  oil  of  vitriol, 
muft  be  put,  and  into  the  middle  veffel  the 
water  to  be  impregnated.  During  the  effer- 
vefcence,  the  fixed  air  rifes  into  the  middle 
veffel,  and  reils  upon  the  furface  of  the  water 
in  it,  while  the  water  that  is  difplaced  by  the 
air  rifes  through  the  bent  tube  into  the  upper- 
moft  veffel,  the  common  air  going  out  through 
the  channel  in  the  Hopple.  When  the  bent 
tube  is  of  a  proper  length,  the  procefs  re- 
quires no  attention  •,  and  if  the  production 
of  air  be  copious,  the  water  will  generally  be 
fufficiently  impregnated  in  five  or  fix  hours. 
At  lead,  all  the  attention  that  needs  be  given 
to  it  is  to  raife  the  uppermofl  veffel  once  or 
twice,  to  let  out  that  part  of  the  fixed   air 

which 


'Tl.I\I//.Ji^2 


'?>iu<in'dr. 


of  impregnating  Water  with  Fixed  Air,    303 

which  is  not  readily  abforbed  by  water.  If 
the  operator  chufe  to  accelerate  the  procefs, 
by  agitating  the  water,  he  muft  feparate  the 
two  uppermoft  vefTels  from  the  loweft.  For 
if  he  Ihould  agitate  them  all  together,  he  will 
occafion  too  copious  a  produ6tion  of  air;  and 
he  will  alfo  be  in  danger  of  throwing  the  li- 
quor contained  in  the  loweft  veflel  into  contact 
with  the  ftopple  which  feparates  it  from  the 
middle  veffel,  by  which  means  fome  of  the  oil 
of  vitriol  might  get  into  the  water, 


SEC- 


^04  'I^ijreprefentatiom 


SECTION    XVI. 

An  Account  of  fome  MifrefoefehtatiGns  of  tks, 
Author'* s  Sentiments^  and  of  fome  Differences 
of  Opinion  with  refpeif  to  the  St^^bjeB  of  Air. 

I  have  always  flattered  myfelfj  and  the  opi- 
nion of  others  has  concurred  to  confirm  me  in 
the  perfuafion,  that  my  writings  were  very  in- 
telligible, fo  that  few  perfons  could  well  mif- 
take  my  meaning ;  and  indeed  I  haye  no  reafon 
to  complain  of  my  countrymen  in  this  refped. 
But  I  have  beeq  fingularly  unfortunate  with 
refpedt  tp  foreigners-^  owing,  I  fuppofe,  to 
their  not  underftanding  the  Englifh  language. 
For  it  cannot  be  that  philofophers^  and  thpfe 
whom  I  confider  as  my  fellow-labourers  in 
thefe  refearches,  fhould  have  givpn  fo  little  at- 
tention to  this  bufmefs,  as  to  have  mifrepre- 
fented  my  meaning  fo  grpfsly  as  they  have 
done,  either  through  a  hafty  perufal  of  my  wri- 
tings, or  fuch  an  ignorance  of  the  fubjed,  as 
rendered  them  incapable  of  underftanding  me  •, 
much  lefs  can  it  be  fuppofed  that  any  of  them 
would  wilfully  mifreprefent  my  meaning. 

J  Suchj 


(f^he^dthor* s  Sentiments.  305 

Such,  however,  is  the  fad,  that,  I  believe 
no  example  can  be  produced  of  any  perfon 
whofe  meaning  has  been  fo  egregioufiy  mif- 
taken  as  mine  has  been,  and  even  by  phiiofo- 
pHers,  and  writers  of  great  reputation,  whofe 
works  v/iil  neceffariiy  go  into  many  hand?, 
'and  confequently  give  a  very  unjuft  and  very 
\mfavourable  idea  of  my  fentiments.  I  think 
^proper,  therefore,  in  this  feftion,  to  enume- 
rate, m  as  brief  a  manner  as  I  pofTibly  can, 
not  all  the  miftakcs  that  have  been  made  by  all 
■tJiofe  who  have  undertaken  to  give  an  account 
of  my  experiments,  for  then  I  muft  have  made 
a  book  upon  the  fubjed:,  but  thofe  of  a  few 
writers  of  reputation^ 

That  I  do  not  exaggerate  in  what  I  have  faid 
above,  will  not  be  thought  incredible  by  my 
Teader,  when  I  inform  him  that  in  Mr,  Ro- 
•fier's  tranjQation  of  my  firll  papers,  communi- 
cated to  the  Royal  Society,  which  made  no 
more  than  a  quarto  pamphlet,  the  French 
tranflator  of  the  former  volume  of  this  work 
told  me  (for  I  have  never  had  patience  to  read 
it  myfelf)  that  he  had  noted  fourfcore  faults 
which  afFefted  the  fenfe,  exclufive  of  inaccura- 
cies of  flyle.  Thefe  fourfcore  faults  I  fliall 
therefore  intirely  pafs  over^  having,  I  hope,  faid 
enough  to  caution  my  reader  not  to  look  into 
that  work  for  an  account  of  any  thing  that  I 
have  fiid  or  done.  I  Ihall  not  even  think  it 
X  worth 


206 


Mifreprefentations 


worth  v^Iiile  to  note  all  the  miftakes  of  Mr.  La- 
vpifier,  and  I  fnall  be  as  concife  as  pofiible  in  my 
remarks,  exlnbiting  what  I  have  been  repreiented 
as  faying  in  one  coltimn,  and  what  I  have  really 
faid  in  another.  Mr.  Lavoiner's  work  is  intitled, 
Gpufcules  Fhyfiqius  ci?  Chymiqites^  and  will  foon 
be  pubiifhed  in  Engiifli  •,  Sig.  Landriani's  is  called 
Ricerche  hifiche  intorno  alia  faliihrita  dalVaria.    » 


ilf;-.  La^oo'ifiers  Acccimt  of  7!iy 
Experiments  andO hjervations . 


The  true  Acccmit  of  them. ' 


Monf.  PrieMey,  p.  iii,  af-        Onthecontr;;ry,Ifaid,p.27, 
ferts  a  fad  which  would  prove    that  the  veflel  had  its  nioutk_ 
that  fixed  air  is  not  heavier  </oT.t;;z'u;^zr^j ;  from  which  a  con- 
than  common  air ;  faying  that   trary  conciufioa  will  foliow. 
a  candle  will  continue  to  burn 
in  a  vefi'el   plunged  into  an 
atracfphere  of  fixed  air  with 
its  mouth  iip'^jjards. 


P.  112,  he  fays  that  gun- 
powder has  this  peculiar  pro- 
perty, that  being  fired  in  fixed 
fir,  the  whole  of  it  will  in- 
corporate with  that  air,  and 
that  no  part  of  it  will  efcapc 
into  the  common  air. 

P.  114,  Monf.  Prieflley  af- 
ferts  as  an  extraordinary  faft, 
that  fixed  air  diminifned  by 
iron  filings  and  brimllone  is 
not  noxious  to  animals,  and 
that  it  docs  not  differ  from 
common  air. 


I  have  only  faid   that  this 

would  be  the  cafe  v/hen  the 
quantity  of  gunpowder  was 
very  fmall,  and  the  body  of 
fixed  air  on  the  furface  of  the 
fermenting  liquor  very  Ibong. 


What  I  have  faid,  p.  42,  is 
that,  in  one  cafe  only,  a  quan- 
tity of  this  air  was  not  very 
noxious  to  animals;  and  I  at- 
tribute that  degree  of  whole- 
fomenefs  in  this  air  to  my  ha- 
ving inadvertently  agitated  it 
in  water,  at  a  time  when  I 
was  not  aware  of  tiie  eli'ed  of 


ef  the  Author's  Sentiments. 


307 


fuch  agitation;  and  in  the 
fame  place  I  obferve,  that  in 
another  quantity  of  fixed  air, 
which  had  undergone  the  fame 
procefs,  a  moufe  died  pretty 
Ibcn. 


P.  115,  One  of  his  expe-  The  other  experiments  are 
riments  would  ieem  to  prove  thofe  of  Mr.  Hey,  which  were 
that  there  is  an  acid  in  fixed  not  intended  to  prove  that 
air,  whereas  others  of  his  ex-  fixed  air  is  not  an  acid;  but 
periments  contraditt  that  opi-  that  water  impregnated  with 
nion.  it  is  not  made  acid  by  any  of 

the  oil  of  vitriol  beingrendered 
volatile,   and  mixing  with  it. 

P.  116,  Snails  die  imme-  I  only  mentioned  a  Jingle 
diately  and  irrecoverably  in  expcriinent,  p.  36,  with  one 
fixed  air.  particular  fnail. 

P.  119,  He  transferred  very       In  reality  J   only  put    the 

hot  air  into  a  receiver,  and  candle  (fee  p.  49)  into  air  that 

having  placed  a  candle  in  it,  had  been   rhade  'very  hot,  but 

found  that  it  burned  as  well  which  was  then  quite  cold. 
as  in  cold  air. 

P.  122,  Inflammable  air  I  faid,  p.  63,  that  a  candle 
long  agitated  in  v/ater  ap-  burned  in  this  air  as  in  com- 
pears to  differ  in  nothing  from  mon  air,  only  more  faintly; 
common  air.  but  that,  by  the  tell;  of  nitrous 

.air,  it  did  not  appear  to  be 
near  fo  good  as  common  air; 
and  that  by  longer  agitation 
it  extin£uilhed  a  candle. 

lb.  Inflammable  air  from  I  only  faid,  p.  69,  that  I 
oak  has  this  peculiar  quality,  made  a  particular  experiment 
that  water  can  abforb  one  hiilf  with  a  quantity  of  this  air, 
of  it.  after   having   agitated   it   ia 

water  till  it  was  diminiflied 
about  one  half.     How  much 
more  it  might  have  been  di- 
X  z 


3oS 


MifreprefentationS 


minilhed,  by  longer  agitation, 
I  did  not  fay. 

P.  123.  Inflaminable  air  1  only  faid,  p.  61,  that 
does  not  injure  the  growth  of  plants  grew  pretty  well  in  one 
plants.  quantity  of  inflammable   air 

that  was  made  from  zinc,  and 
in  another  from  oak. 


P.  125,  Air  injured  by  re- 
fpiration  approaches  to  the 
Itate  of  fixed  air,  becaufe  it 
can  combine  with  lirne  ;  but 
it  differs  from  it,  becaufe  when 
mixed  with  common  air  it  di- 
minilhes  the  bulk  of  it : 
whereas  fixed  air  increafes  it. 
It  is  alfo  not  abforbed  by 
water,  like  fixed  air. 


P.  130,  He  has  made  a 
great  number  of  experiments, 
which  Ihew  that  plants  vege- 
tating in  corrupted  air  make 
it  as  proper  for  refpiration  as 
the  air  of  the  atmofphere. 


Air  injured  by  refpiration 
will  not  unite  with  lime  in 
lime  water  ;  though  when  air 
is  thus  injured  fomething  is 
precipitated  from  it,  which  has 
that  efteft.  I  have  no  where 
faid  that  air  injured  by  refpi- 
ration diminiilies  the  quantity 
of  common  air  with  which  it 
is  mixed,  though  that  princi- 
ple which  had  diminilhed  this 
air  will  diminifh  any  other 
wholefome  air.  Mr.  Lavoifier 
himfelf  quotes  me,  p.  129,  as 
faying,  that  when  1  had  mixed 
air  injured  by  putrefaftion 
with  common  air,  the  quan- 
tity was  'not  diminillied.  If 
this  injured  air  is  not  capable 
of  being  abforbed  by  water, 
which  is  the  cafe,  it  muft  differ 
very  elientially  from  fixed  air. 

I  never  pretended  to  have 
reftored  air  that  was  thoroughly 
nox foils  by  any  method,  fo  far 
as  that  a  candle  would  burn 
in  it.  Though  the  growth  of 
plants  in  air  which  had  never 
been  more  injured  than  that 
a  candle  would  go  out  in  it, 
(which  is  a  much  greater  in- 
jury than  the  general  mafs  of 
the  atmofphere   ever  fufiers) 


ef  the  Author's  Sentiments, 


309 


P.  1 3 1 ,  Monf,  Prieftley  fays, 
%ha.t  all  kin4s  of  noxious  air 
are  reftored  by  long  agitation 
in  water ;  which  fcems  to  con- 
tradid  what  he  fays  in  another 
place,  that  agitation  in  water 
was  not  fufRcient  to  deprive 
noxioys  air  of  its  deadly  qua- 
lity. 


P.  1 36,  Monf.  Prieftley  fays, 
that  nitrous  air  may  be  ab- 
forbed  by  water ;  but  with  re- 
fpedl  to  the  quantity  of  ab- 
forption,  the  refults  of  his  ex- 
periments do  not  feem  to  agree 
exa6lly» 


P.  137,  A  pafte  of  iron  fi- 
lingsand  brimilone  diminishes 
common  air  one-fourth :  but 
by  means  of  nitrous  air  this 
diminution  may  be  carried 
much  farther.  For  if  a  quan- 
tity of  nitrous  air  be  admitted 
to  this  mixture,  the  common 
fi'n  will  be  reduce4  to  pne- 
fourth  of  its  bulk. 

P.  140,  By  throwing  the 
focus  of  a  burning  mirror  on 
a  piece  of  charcoal  in  com- 


never  failed  to  rcftore  it  fb  far 
as  that  a  candle  would  burn 
in  it,  to  all  appearance,  as 
well  as  ever, 

I  faid,  in  an  account  of  an 
experiment  in  which  J  /re- 
que?itly  transferred  a  quantity 
of  noxious  air  from  one  veifel 
to  another,  that  I  did  not  find 
it  to  be  reftored  by  that  means. 
But  this  is  a  very  difi^erent  ops- 
ration  from  the  agitatioji  of  air 
in  water,  and  efpecially  when 
it  is  continued  a  long  time. 

I  have  no  where  ftated  the 
^Itimum  of  the  abforption  of 
nitrous  air  by  water.  Indeed, 
ftridtly  fpeaking,  water  de- 
prived of  all  air  will  abforb 
the  whole  of  any  kind  of  air. 
I  only  mentioned  difterent  de- 
grees of  abforption,  as  I  ob- 
ferved  them  in  circumftances 
that  were  considerably  difr 
ferent. 

What  I  have  fald  is,  that 
the  nitrous  air  itfelf,  and  not 
common  air^  was  (Jiminilhed  to 
one-fourth  of  its  bulk  by  the 
fermentation  of  that  pafte. 
No  common  air  was  concerned 
in  the  experiment. 


The  fixed  air  in  this  expe- 
riment,   in  which  there  was 
fo  great  a  diminution  of  the 
X  3 


310  Mifreprefentations 

mon    air,  it   was   diminiflied  common  air,   muft  have  been 

one-fiUh,  and  the  remainder  chieHy,    if  not  wholly,    that 

was  partly  fixed  air,  and  part-  which  was  precipitated  from 

ly  inflammable.  the   common    air.      The   re- 

'  mainder  was  fo  far  from  being 

inflammable,    that  it   extin- 

guiflied  a  candle. 

lb.  If  the  charcoal  be  made  This  was  the  cafe  in  one 
with  a  very  hot  fire,  capable  experiment,  bat  i:  only  proves 
of  melting  the  crucible,  there  that  in  fome  cafes  air  is  not  fo 
will  be  no  fenfiblc  diminution  ealily  expelled  from  charcoal 
of  the  air  in  which  it  is  heated,  as  in  others.  But  I  have  al- 
Charcoai  that  has  been  mode-  ways  reprefeated  the  very  con- 
rately  calcined  gives  no  fign  fary  of  thefe  refults  as  true 
of  inflammable  air,  in  general,  viz.  that  a  longer 

continuance  of  heat,  and  a 
greater  degree  of  it,  expels 
more  air  from  wood,  and  that 
afterwards  the  purer  will  be 
i  ti  the  phlogifton  that  is  expelled 

from  it,  and  confequently  the 
greater  probability  there  is 
that  the  air  in  which  it  is 
heated  will  be  diminiflied, 
3ud  not  increafed, 

lb.  If  the  abovementioned  This  is  only  the  cafe  when 

procefs  be  made  over  quick-  fixed  or  inflamm^'bie  air  has 

filver,    and   not  over  water,  been  fet  loofe  fiom  the  char- 

the  air  will  not  be  diminifhed.  coal  in  the  procefs. 

P.  141,  The  piece  of  char-       Jt    weighed     exaftly     two 
coal  employed  in  this  experi-    grains,  p.  132, 
ment  weighed  exaftly  twenty-r, 
nine  grains. 

Mr.  Lavoifier,  as  an  introdu£lion  to  the  account  of  his 
own  experiments,  in  the  work  abovementioned,  has  under- 
taken to  give  a  pretty  full  account  of  all  that  had  been  done 
before  him  in  the  fame  way.  I  hope  he  has  been  more  exadl 
with  jcfj.eft  to  others,   than  he  has  been  v/ith  refped  to  me. 


of  the  Author* s  Sentiments. 


3^1 


2ig.  Landriani" s  Acccunt  of  my 
hxperunents  and Objer^vaiions. 

This  writer  takes  it  for 
pranted,  through  the  wliole 
of  his  work  (fee  p.  6,  of  the 
Introduftion,  and  p.  3,  of  the 
work  itfeif)  that  I  confider  the 
fixed  air  in  the  acmofphere  as 
7in  eleimnto  di  Jaliibrita,  by 
which  1  fiippofe  he  means  that 
it  is  the  principle  in  which  its 
refpirability  coniills,  or  which 
makes  it  fit  for  refpiration. 


P.  24,  The  diminution  of 
nitrous  air  by  common  air. 
Dr.  Priellley  iuppofes,  comes 
from  the  property  that  phlo- 
gillon  ha.  to  contraft  the  di- 
menfions  of  bodies  :  but  he 
gives  no  fufiicient  proof  of 
that  fuppofiiion  ;  and  though 
he  fufpecls  that  this  contraflion 
is  a  real  levity  communicated 
to  the  air  by  phiogillon,  he 
has  not  ventured  abfolutely 
to  aifcrt  it ;  though  chemillry 


All  that  I  have  faid  that  could 
lead  to  this  ccnilrutt-on  is, 
perhaps  tha  tfixed  air,  though 
it  certainly  kills  when  it  is 
breathed  unmixed,  does  no 
fenfible  injury  to  the  lungs 
when  it  is  mixed  with  com- 
mon air  ;  as  fire  is  not  noxious 
■per  fe,  but  only  in  excefs.  I 
have  alfo  fhewn  that  when 
common  air  is  made  noxious 
by  any  phlogiftic  procefs,  the 
fixed  air  contained  in  it  is 
precipitated.  But  though  this 
is  a  circumrtance  that  always 
attends  the  corruption  of  air, 
I  never  fuppoled  that  tha 
fixed  air  which  it  depolits  was 
the  principle  of  faluhrity.  If 
fo,  I  mull  have  luppofed  that 
fixed  air  mixed  with  air  that 
had  been  injured  by  phlogilHc 
procelles  might  have  reftored 
it,  which  it  does  not  do  in 
the  leafl  degree. 

I  do  not  recollefl:  that  I 
have  any  where  faid  that 
phlogifton  contrafts  the  di- 
menfions  of  bodies.  On  the 
contrary,  I  fay  that  air  in- 
jured bv  phiogillon  is  fpccifi- 
cally  lighter  than  common  air. 
And  what  1  fay  of  tiie  princi- 
ple of  h'vity,  p.  267,  is,  that 
it  is  a  fuppcfitiou  I  am  not 
willing  to  have  recourfe  to, 
though  it  would  aitord  an 
eafy  folution  of  the  uifnculty. 
X  4 


312  Mifreprefentations. 

furninies  many  examples  of  I  might  have  cxpre/Ted  t)ayfel<ft 
this  fingular  pro^xrty  ot  phlo-  more  ftrongly ;  for  I  never hai 
giitx)n.  any  faith  at  all  in  that  doc-' 

trine  of  the  principle  of  le- 
vity. On  the  contraty,  as 
msy  be  feen,  p.  293,  I  c©n- 
fider  the  difference  of  weight 
between  a  metal  and  a  calx, 
which  has  given  occafion  to 
that  dcftrine,  as  wholly  owing 
to  the  fixed  air  and  water  im- 
bibed by  the  latter  in  the  aft 
of  calcinatloa, 

P.  3?,  Sig.  Landjiani  re-  I  have  or.Iy  faid,  p.  iio, 
prcfents  me  as  ftating  the  li-  that  after  many  trials,  I  have 
mitof  the  diminution  of  com-  found  that  the  greateft  dimi- 
mon  air  by  nitrous  air  to  be  nution  is  when  about  one- 
when  prccijtl,'  two  meafures  of  third  of  nitrous  air  is  mixed 
the  former  aremixed  with  one  with  common  air,  which  im- 
of  the  latter ;  but  fays  that  he  plies  that  I  was  aware  of  a 
has  found  that  this  depends  confiderable  variety  in  the 
upon  the  quality  of  the  two  refults  of  fuch  experiments ; 
kinds  of  air,  and  efpecially  and  the  whole  of 'my  narra- 
on  the  quantity  of  phlogifton  tive  Ihews  that  I  have  confi- 
contained  in  the  nitrous  air.     dered  a  lefs    diminution   to 

arife  fometimes  from  the  com- 
mon air  having  already  more 
phlogifton  'than  ufuaL,  and, 
lometimes  from  the  nitrous 
air  communicating  lefs.  I 
frequently  fpeak  of  different 
quantities  of  nitrous  air  as 
pofieffing  very  different  powers 
of  diminifhing  common  air, 
and  fometimes  fpeak  of  ni- 
trous air  as  reduced  to  a  ftate- 
in  which  it  had  no  power  of 
diminifhing  common  air  at 
all.  And  as  I  make  it  a 
maxim  that  common  air  is  di- 
minilhed  and  made   noxious 


gf  the  Author^ s  Sentiments.  313 

by  phlogifton   only,   I   mufl: 

neceil'arily   have    confidered, 

1  that  nitrous  air  in  this  cafe 

either  as  not  containing  phlo- 
giftpn,  or  as  not  dilpofed  to 
'  part  with  it. 

P.  32,  Dr.  Prleftley  believes  The  former  I  have  fuppofed, 
that  inflaiu  .nable  air  becomes  but  I  do  not  remember  to  have 
^eipirable  by  agitation  in  \va-  faid  any  thing  about  the  lat- 
ter, becau:^  part  of  the  phlo-  ter.  I  had,  indeed,  imagined, 
giilonisdepofitedin  thewater,  that  acid  air  and  phlogifton 
and  another  part  of  it  remains  compofed  inflammable  air; 
to  fweeten  the  acid  air,  and  and  fuppofed  part  of  the 
ina^e  it  relpirablco  phlogilton  to  be  abforbed  by 

water,  when  it  ceafes  to  be 
inflammable,  by  means  of 
agitation  in  water.  But  I 
muft  have  fuppofed,  agree- 
able to  the  maxim  above- 
mentioned,  that  the  phlo- 
gilton  which  remained  muft 
have  contributed  to  keep  the 
air  in  a  worfe  ftate  than  it 
would  be  in,  if  it  could  be 
i.  expelled  by  it,  which  is  the 

very   contrary   of  what   Sig. 
Landriani  has  afcribed  to  me. 

Laftly,  The  moft  unaccountable  miftake  con- 
cerning any  of  my  opinions  relating  to  air,  is 
that  I  fhould  he  fuppofed  to  maintain  that  /.v^i 
air  is  a  combination  of  common  air  and  phlagijlon. 
Mr.  Lavoifier  in  Rofier's  Journal  for  May  1775, 
p.  433,  fays,  "  Since  common  air  is  changed 
"  into  fixed  air  by  a  combination  with  charcoal, 
"  it  may  feem  natuial  to  conclude  that  fixed  air 

«  is 


314  Mifreprefentaticns 

"  is  nothing  but  a  combination  of  common 
*'  air  and  phlogifton.  This  opinion  is  that  of 
"  Monf.  Prieftiey." 

This,  indeed,  is  the  opinion  of  Dr.  Ruther- 
ford (Dijfertatio  de  aire  fixo,  p.  2^.)  of  an  Englilli 
Chymift,  who  probably  had  it  from  him,  and 
that  of  other  philofophers  in  this  country, 
who  may  have  adopted  it  from  them  •,  but 
every  thing  that  is  Englifn  is  not  mine.  I  have 
miftakes  enow  of  my  ov/n  to  anfwer  for,  and 
I  cannot  conceive  how  any  thing  that  I  have 
ever  advanced  on  the  fubjed:  fhould  have  been 
conftrued  to  bear  that  meaning. 

The  proportion  which  Mr.  Lavoifler  ad- 
vances in  tlie  preceding  paragraph,  on  which 
he  fappofes  the  hypcthefis  which  he  afcribes 
to  me  to  have  been  founded,  is  not  true.  I 
do  not  know  that  common  air  can,  by  any 
prccefs,  be  changed  into  fixed  air  j  and  fo  far 
am  I  from  fuppofing  that  fixed  air  is  a  com^ 
pound  of  common  air  and  phlogifton,  that, 
on  the  other  hand,  I  have  always  rather  con- 
fidered  fixed  air  as  an  elementary  fubftance, 
and  common  air  as  a  compound.  Moreover, 
having  brought  fixed  air,  by  a  fuppofed  union 
Vvith  phlogifton,  to  be  immifcible  in  water, 
and  to  have  fome  of  the  properties  of  common 
air,  T  was  then  inclined  to  think  that  fixed  air 

and 


of  the  Aufjo'/s  Sentiments,  315 

and  phlogifton  might  make  common  air,  which 
is  the  very  reverfe  of  the  opinion  that  Mr.  La- 
voifier  afcribes  to  me.  And  I  do  not  know 
that  I  have  ever  advanced  any  thing  that  comes 
nearer  to  that  opinion,  than  this  which  is  ex- 
prefsly  contrary  to  it. 

In  the  report  made  to  the  Royal  Academy 
of  Sciences  concerning  the  abovementioned 
treatife  of  Mr.  Lavoifier's  by  Mr.  De  Tru- 
daine,  Mr.  Macqiiei",  Mr.  Cadet,  and  the  Se- 
cretary M.  De  Fouchy,  thefc  gentlemen  fay, 
"  Monf  Prieflley  confiders  fixed  air  as  very 
"  nearly  of  the  fame  fpecific  .gravity  with  the 
"  air  of  the  atmofphere.'*  Now  I  have  always 
confidered  fixed  air  as  confidercUy  hea-vier  than 
common  air.  Indeed,  I  never  made  any  ob- 
fen/ation  of  my  own  on  that  fubjeft,  having 
only  adopted  the  conclufion  of  Mr.  Cavendifh, 
whofe  difcovery  it  was. 

I  imagine  thefe  gentlemen  have  miflaken 
what  I  have  faid  concerning  air  injured  air  by 
■phlogifto7i^  which  I  have  faid  was  very  nearly 
of  the  fame  fpecific  gravity  with  common  air, 
though  rather  lighter,  for  what  I  have  faid 
concerning  fixed  air.  And  it  is  poflible  that 
thefe  gentlemen,  like  Mr.  Lavoiiier,  may  have 
taken  it  for  granted  that  thefe  two  kinds  of  air 

are 


^•i^  Mifreprefe^atiom 

are  the  fame ;  though  I  always  fpeak  of  them 
as  very  different  things. 

As  Dr.  Rutherford,  when  he  publifhed  his 
Pijfertation  on  fixed  air,  had  only  heard  of  my 
experiments,  it  would  not  be  worth  while  to 
take  notice  of  his  miftakes  concerning  them  j 
but  his  treatife  being  tranilated  into  French,  in 
Mr.  Rofier's  Journal,  I  fhall  juft  obferve,  now 
tkat  I  am  upon  the  fubjed,  that  he  alfo  fup- 
pofes,  p.  25,  I  had  i-t{\:orcd  fixed  air  to  a  fit- 
nefs  for  refpiration  by  vegetation,  whereas 
it  was  air  injured  by  refpiration  or  putrefa^ion. 
But  this  author,,  as  well  as  many  others,  makes, 
no  difference  between  thefe  two  very  different 
kinds  of  air. 

No  perfon  can  lay  a  lefs  ftrefs  upon  opinions^ 
and  more  upon  fa^s,  than  I  have  done,  in  aU 
rny  philofophical  writings ;  and  the  opinions  I 
have  advanced  are  very  few  in  proportion  to 
the  new  and  important  fadts  that  I  have  difco- 
vered.  I  therefore  think  it  rather  hard,  that 
thofe  very  few  opinions  fhould  have  been  fa 
grofsly  niifreprefented  as  they  have  been. 

All  the  doubts  that  I  have  ever  entertaine4 
with  refped  to  the  conftitution  of  fixed  air  have 
little  relation  to  the  differences  of  opinion  main- 
tained by  others  concerning  it.     I  was  always; 

inclined 


N   of  the  Author^ s  Sentiments.  31^ 

inclined  to  think  fixed  air  to  be  an  acid  fui 
generis^  as  much  as  any  of  the  three  mineral 
acids.  But  as  it  is  the  opinion  of  feveral  of 
the  moll  eminent  chymifts,  that  even  theie 
three  acids,  as  well  as  all  other  acids,  are  only 
one  and  the  fame  acid,  differently  modified 
and  combined,  and  that  they  are  therefore 
tranfmutable  into  one  another,  I  have  of  late 
conjeflured  that  the  fixed  air  which  I  have 
fometimes  produced  muft  have  been  a  tranf- 
mutation  of  the  nitrous  acid  into  it,  becaufe 
no  fubilance  employed  in  tlie  experiments  can 
well  be  thought  to  have  contained  the  fixed 
air,'  notwithftanding  the  air  that  was  produced 
difcovered  the  moft  undeniable  ligns  of  it,  as 
will  have  been  feen  in  the  preceding  narrative- 
Still,  however,  I  do  not  pretend  to  have  formicd 
any  decifive  opinion  upon  the  fubjedl.  Let 
the  fads  be  confidered,  and  fpeak  for  them- 
felves. 

It  is  maintained  by  Sig,  I.andriani,  whofe 
treatife  I  did  not  receive  till  a  confiderable 
part  of  this  volume  was  printed  off,  that  fixed 
air  is  of  a  different  conllitution  according  to 
the  acid  by  v/hich  it  is  procured  from  calca- 
reous fubftances.  He  fays,  among  other  things, 
p.  48,  that  the  fait  which  is  formed  by  the 
union  of  alkaline  air  with  fixed  air  by  oil  of 

vitriol 


3 1 S  Mifreprefcntations 

vitriol  is  a  true  vitriolic  ammoniac,  and  that 
the  ialt  which  is  formed  by  alkaline  air  and 
the  air  which  is  procured  by  means  of  fpirit 
of  nitre  has  the  property  of  detonating  by  it- 
felf,  which  is  known  to  be  peculiar  to  the 
nitrous  ammoniac.  He  alfo  fays  that  fixed 
air  procured  by  the  vegetable  acids  has  not 
the  fame  pov/er  of  reddening  the  juice  of  turn* 
foie  with  that  which  is  procured  by  the  mineral 
acids.  Thefe  are  very  remarkable  experiments, 
and  deferve  to  be  repeated,  and  confidered 
witli  attention.  They  have  led  our  author  to 
conclude,  that  all  the  different  kinds  of  air 
are,  in  fad,  one  and  the  fame  thing,  which 
has  the  property  of  holding  in  folution  various 
bodies,  and  particularly  the  acids,  fee  p.  33. 
Accordingly  nitrous  air,  in  his  opinion,  is 
common  air  holding  in  folulution  a  quantity 
of  the  nitrous  acid  overcharged  with  phlo- 
gifton. 

That  excellent  pliilofopher  Felice  Fontana, 
in  his  Riccrche  Fifiche  fopra  i^aria  fijfa^  main- 
tains, that  all  the  acidity  of  fixed  air  comes 
from  the  oil  of  vitriol  dilTolved  in  it,  and 
which  is  fo  intimately  united  to  it,  as  to  be 
afterwards  infeparable  from  it ;  infomuch  that 
when  it  has  been  incorporated  with  water,  and 
expelled  from  it  again,    it  carries   away  all 

the 


»f  the  Author  s  Sentiments.  315 

the  acid  vapour  along  with  it ;  having  all  the 
fame  properties  that  it  liad  before  it  was  com- 
bined with  the  water.  The  acid  of  vitriol, 
thus  attenuated  and  exalted,  by  its  Iblution  in 
fixed  air,  is  more  penetrating,  he  fays,  and  has 
more  medicinal  virtues,  than  the  fam.e  acid  dif- 
folved  in  v/ater,  or  adminiilered  in  any  other 
form. 

Fixed  air  deprived  of  this  acidity,  v/hich  is 
foreign  to  its  nature,  he  fuppcfes  to  be  tlie 
fame  thing  with  atmofpherical  air  deprived  of 
its  peculiar  acid  by  phlogiftic  procelTes,  an 
acid  which  he  maintains  to  be  altogether  dif- 
ferent from  any  acid  v/ith  which  we  are  ac- 
quainted, and  which  lie  propofes  to  invefti- 
gatei  conceiving  this  acid  to  be  the  great 
principle  of  falubrity  in  the  atmofphere.  This 
writer  fays,  that  he  has  attempted  in  vain  to 
make  water  acidulous  by  means  of  i:xed  air 
expelled  from  fubftances  without  the  help  of 
other  acids,  as  in  putrrfadlion.  Eut  he  does 
not  appear  to  have  tried  what  he  could  have 
done  with  calcareous  fubftances  by  heat  only. 

I  take  this  early  opportunity  of  publifhing 
the  fentiments  of  fo  confiderable  a  perlon, 
though  it  will  appear  that  they  are  very  diaerenc 
from  my  ov/n,  in  order  to  promote  a  rarther  in- 
veuigai;ion  of  the  fubjecl. 

2  Having 


3^b  Mifreprefentations 

Having  mentioned  the  paper  of  Mr.  La- 
Voifier's,  publifhed  in  Mr.  Rofier's  Journal,  I 
would  obferve,  that  it  appears  by  it,  that,  after  I 
left  Paris,  where  I  procured  the  mercurius  cat- 
cinatus  abovementioned,  and  had  fpoken  of 
the  experiments  that  I  had  made,  and  that  I 
intended  to  make  with  it,  he  began  his  expe- 
riments upon  the  fame  fubftance,  and  pre- 
fently  found  what  I  hare  called  dephlogijiicated 
mr,  but  without  inveftigating  the  natilre  of  it; 
and  indeed,  without  being  fully  apprifed  of 
the  degree  of  its  purity.  For  he  had  only 
tried  it  with  one-third  of  nitrous  air,  and  ob- 
ferved  that  a  candle  burned  in  it  with  more 
Vigour  than  in  common  air;  and  though  he 
fays  it  feems  to  he  more  fit  fOr  refpiration  than 
common  air,  he  does  not  fay  that  he  had 
made  any  trial  how  long  an  animal  could  live 
in  it. 

He  therefore  inferred,  as  I  have  faid  that  I 
m.yfelf  had  once  done,  that  this  fubftance  had^ 
during  the  procefs  of  calcination,  imbibed  at- 
mofpherical  air,  not  in  part,  but  in  whole. 
But  then  he  extends  his  conclufion,  and,  as  it 
appears  to  me,  without  any  evidence,  to  all 
the  metallic  calces  •,  faying  that,  very  proba- 
bly, they  would  all  of  them  yield  only  com- 
mon air,  if,  like  mercurius  calcinatasy  they 
could  be  reduced  without  addition.     For  he 

con- 


of  the  Author's  Sentiments*  321 

confiders  the  fixed  air,  which  is  yielded  by 
moft  of  them,  to  come  from  the  charcoal, 
made  ufe  of  to  revivify  the  calx.  Whereas  it 
will  be  feen,  in  the  courfe  of  my  experiments, 
that  feveral  of  thofe  calces  yield  fixed  air  by 
heat  only,  without  any  addition  of  charcoal. 

He  adds,  that  fince  common  air  is  changed 
into  fixed  air  when  it  is"  combined  with  char- 
coal, it  would  feem  natural  to  conclude,  that 
fixed  air  is  only  a  combination  of  common  air 
and  phlogifton  (an  opinion  which,  as  has  been 
feen  before,  he  afcribcs  to  me)  and  it  is  not, 
he  fays,  without  probability  •,  but  adds,  that 
it  is  fo  often  contradicted  by  fads,  that  he  de- 
fires  philofophers  and  chymifls  to  fufpend  their 
judgments*,  hoping  that  it  will  foon  be  in  his 
power  to  explain  the  motives  of  his  doubts,  I, 
for  one,  am  waiting  with  fome  impatience  for 
this  explanation. 

Mr.  Lavoifier  alfo  concludes,  from  his  ob- 
fervations,  that  the  air  produced  by  the  deto- 
nation of  nitre  and  the  firing  of  gunpowder  is 
common  air.  When  ,he  fees  this  volume  of 
mine,  he  will,  I  doubt  not,  be  convinced  of 
the  imperfedlion  of  his  theory,  and  of  this 
miftake,  which  he  has  been  led  into  by  means 
of  it. 

Y  Mr. 


322  Mifrepreftnt  aliens 

Mr.  Lavoifier,  as  well  as  Sig.  Lan4ri&ni| 
Sig.  F.  Fontana,  and  indeed  all  other  writer^ 
except  myfeif,  feenns  to  confider  common  air 
(diyeiled  of  the  effluvia  that  fiosit  in  it,  and 
various  fubftances  that  are  dilTolved  in  it,  but 
which  are  in  reality  foreign  to  it)  as  a  fimple 
ekmmtary  body  •,  whereas  I  have,  for  a  long 
time,  confidered  it  as  a  compound-^  and  this 
notion  has  been  of  grfat  fervice  to  me  in  my 
;nqumes. 

As  a  concurrence  of  unforefeen  and  unde- 
figned  circumftances  has  favoured  me  in  this 
inquiry,  a  like  happy  concurrence  may  favour 
Mr.  Lavoifier  in  another ;  and  as,  in  this  cafe, 
truth  has  been  the  means  of  leading  him  into 
error,  error  may,  in  its  turn,  lead  him  intq 
truth.  It  will  have  been  feen,  in  the'  courfe  of 
my  wriiings,  that  both  thefe  circumftances  have 
frequently  happened  to  myfelf-,  and  indeed 
examples  of  both  of  them  will  be  found  in 
my  firil  fefticn  concerning  this  very  fubjed:  of 
dephiogifticated  air. 

It  is  pleafant  when  we  can  be  equally  amufed 
with  our  own  miftakes,  and  thofe  of  others. 
I  have  voluntarily  given  others  many  oppor- 
tunities cf  amufmg  themfelves  with  mine, 
when  it  was  entirely  in  my  power  to  havecon- 
1  cealed 


of  the  Author^ s  Sentiments.  323 

cealed  them.  But  I  was  determined  to  fhew 
how  little  myflery  there  really  is  in  the  bufinefs 
of  experimental  philofophy,  and  with  how 
\\tx\.^  fagactty^  or  even  defign^  difcoveries  (which 
fome  perfons  are  pleafed  to  confider  as  great 
and  wonderful  things)  have  been  made. 


Y  2  SEC- 


324  Qhfervations  Supple7nentd 


SECTION     XVII. 

Experiments  relating  to  fome  of  the  preceding 
Sections  madefince  they  were  printed  off. 

Having  had  an  opportunity  of  making  a 
few  farther  experiments  relating  to  fome  kinds 
of  air  mentioned  in  this  treatife,  after  the  fec- 
tions  relating  to  them  were  printed  off,  I  have 
thought  it  would  be  better  to  fubjoin  an  ac- 
count of  them  in  this  place,  rather  than  defer 
it  to  another  publication. 

I .  Of  the  'vitriolic  and  vegetable  acid  airs. 

It  will  be  feen,  by  comparing  the  firfl  and 
fecond  feftions  of  this  volume,  that  there  is  a 
remarkable  refemblance  between  the  vitriolic 
and  vegetable  acid  airs,  and  I  have  fince  ob- 
ferved  other  circumftances  of  refemblance. 

The  electric  fpark  takeii  in  vegetable  acid 
air  produces  the  very  fame  effeft  as  in  the 
vitriolic  acid  air,  tinging  the  glafs  tube  in 
which  it  is  contained  with  a  deep  brown,  or 
black  colour.  I  took  about  fifty  explofions 
of  a  comimon  jar  in  a  fmall  quantity  of  it, 
after  wliich  water  imbibed  almoft  the  whole  of  it. 

It 


and  Miscellaneous.  g  2  5 

It  is  remarkable  that  the  glafs  becomes  almoft 
as  deeply  tinged  as  it  can  be  made  by  the  ex- 
periment, after  a  very  few  of  the  explofions. 

I  alfo  obferved  the  fame  remarkable  effe6t 
of  putting  fmall  glafs  tubes  half  filled  with 
water  into  vitriolic  acid  air,  that  I  have  de- 
fcribed  p.  26,  as  obferved  in  the  vegetable 
acid  air,  viz.  that  if  a  little  air  be  left  at  the 
bottom  of  the  tube,  it  will  fwell,  and  drive 
out  all  the  water.  The  reafon  of  this  appear- 
ance I  believe  to  be,  that  the  water,  being 
prefently  faturated  with  this  acid  air,  tranf- 
mits  it  to  the  common  air  in  the  tube  -,  which, 
receiving  a  continual  increafe  of  bulk  from 
this  fource,  at  length  expels  all  the  water. 

I  obferved  this  appearance  when  I  put  the 
tubes,  thus  partially  filled  with  water,  into 
that  air  which  I  had  expelled  from  the  water 
that  had  been  faturated  with  the  fiuor  acid 
air ;  which  is  another  argument  of  the  iden- 
tity of  this  acid  with  the  vitriolic. 


Water  is  foon  impregnated  with  vitriolic 
acid  air,  but  has  little  power  of  retaining  it  •, 
fo  that  the  fmell  of  the  water  fo  impregnated 
is  the  moft  pungent  that  can  be  conceived, 
and  if  it  ftands  expofed  to  the  common  air, 
the  acid  air,  in  a  great  meafure,  prefently 
Y  3  quits 


^i6  Ohfervations  Supplemental 

quits  it.     Alfa  the  leaft  agitation  af  the  water 
promotes  the  reparation  of  the  air  from  it. 

I  have  obferved,  p,  lo,  that  a  mixture  of 
vitriolic  acid  air  injures  common  air,  and  that 
the  effluvium  of  the  concentrated  vegetable 
acid  has  the  fame  efFe6t.  I  have  fince  found 
that  a  mixture  of  the  vegetable  acid  air  itfelf 
does  fo  to.  Two  meafures  of  this  mixture, 
and  one  of  nitrous  air  occupied  the  fpace  oi 
two  meafures. 

The  only  real  difference  between  the  vege- 
table and  the  vitriolic  acid  air  (befides  the 
fmell  of  them,  in  which  refpe6t  the  difference 
is  remarkable  enough)  that  I  have  obferved, 
is,  that,  whereas  the  vitriolic  acid  air,  as  well 
as  all  the  other  acid  airs  with  which  I  am  ac- 
quainted, deepens  the  colour  of  olive  oil,  an 
impregnation  with  vegetable  acid  air  makes  it 
more  colourlefs.  In  one  experiment,  how- 
ever, vegetable  acid  air  gave  a  yellowilh  tinge 
to  oil  of  turpentine,  which  is  an  effe6t  that 
vitriolic  acid  air  has  upon  it;  though,  upon 
another  occafion,  the  refult  of  this  experiment 
was  different,  and  I  have  not  leifure  at  prefent 
to  examine  whence  this  difference  arofe. 

As  Dr.  Higgins  has  informed  me,   that  oil 
of  vitriol  was  employed  in  preparing  the  con- 
centrated 


and  Mifcellaneous.  3? 7 

centrated  vinegar  that  I  made  ufe  of  for  the 
produdion  of  vegetable  acid  air,  I  think  it 
pofTible  that  the  air  which  I  expelled  from  it 
may  have  been,  in  part,  of  the  vitriolic  kind  •, 
but  I  do  not  know  of  any  other  vcget:\ble 
acid  liquor  that  will  yield  air;  at  leail  in  a 
quantity  fufficient  for  any  experiments*  I  tried 
radical  ^vinegar  of  the  cryflo.ls  of  verdigris  re^i- 
fed^  which  was  recommended  to  me,  and  made 
for  me,  by  Mr.  Woulfe,  and  alfo  concentrated 
acid  made  from  fal  diureticus,  by  Mr.  God- 
frey; but  neither  of  thefe  acid  liquors^  though 
the  fmeil  of  them  was  extremely  pungent, 
yielded  any  air  by  heat. 

The  common  air  expelled  from  the  phial 
by  the  fteam  of  this  vinegar,  mixed  with 
whatever  acid  vapour  might  come  over  along 
with  itj  I  examined,  after  letting  it  reft  upon 
quickfilver  a  whole  night,  and  I  found  it  not 
to  differ  from  common  air. 

AVhenj  however,  I  tried  this  experiment 
with  air  that  had  lodged  on  the  furface  of 
oil  of  vitriol,  into  vrhich  I  had  put  fome 
fal  diureticus^  and  which  did  yield  a  little 
air,  the  common  air  did  appear  to  be  injured 
by  the  mixture,  as  in  tine  preceding  experi- 
ment of  the  mixture  of  common  and  vege- 
table acid  air.  But  then  oil  of  vitriol  being 
y  4  employed 


328  Ohfervations  Supplemental 

employed  in  this  experiment,  as  well  as  in  the 
preparation  of  the  concentrated  vinegar  above- 
mentioned,  it  is  liable  to  the  fame  objedion ; 
the  acid  of  vitriol  being,  perhaps,  volatilized 
by  fome  fmall  portion  ot  phlogifton. 

2*  Of  dephlogijiicated  air. 

I  have  obferved  a  great  variety  in  the  refults  / 
of  the  experiments  for  the  production  of  de- 
phlogifticated  air,  both  with  refpedt  to  the 
quantity,  and  the  quality  of  it,  efpecially  as 
mixed  with  a  greater  or  lefs  proportion  of 
fixed  air.  From  the  following  experiments  it 
will  appear  that  the  quantity  of  dephlogifti- 
cated  air  depends  upon  the  quantity  of  the 
fpirit  of  nitre  made  ufe  of  in  the  procefs,  the 
quantity  of  fixed  air  being  nearly  the  fame  in 
all  the  cafes. 

From  an  ounce  of  red  lead,  heated  in  a 
gun-barrel,  I  got  about  an  ounce  meafure  of 
air,  which  all  together  was  worfe  than  common 
air;  an  effedb  which  I  attribute,  in  a  great 
meafure,  to  phlogifton  difcharged  from  the 
iron.  I'he  production  of  air  in  this  cafe  was 
very  flow. 

From  an  ounce  meafure  of  the  fame  red 
lead,  diluted  with  half  fpirit  of  nitre  and  half 

water. 


dnd  Mifcellaneous,  1^2^ 

water,  I  got  twelve  ounce  meafures  of  air,  the 
laft  produce  of  which  was  highly  nitrous. 
Half  of  this  quantity  was  abforbed  by  water, 
and  the  remainder  was  twice  as  good  as  com- 
mon air. 

From  an  ounce  of  the  fame  red  lead,  diluted 
with  the  fame  fpirit  of  nitre,  without  water, 
I  got,  by  the  fame  treatment,  about  thirty 
ounce  meafures  of  air,  about  one-eighth  of 
which  was  abforbed  by  water,  while  the  reft 
was  highly  dephlogiflicated. 

-  From  the  fame  quantity  of  red  lead,  moifl- 
cned  with  twice  the  quantity  of  the  fame  fpirit 
of  nitre,  I  got  about  fixty  ounce  meafures  of 
air,  a  very  fmall  part  of  which  was  abforbed 
by  water,  and  the  reft  was  as  highly  dephlo- 
gifticated  as  that  in  the  laft  experiment. 

The  produce  of  air  was  quicker,  with  the 
fame  degree  of  heat,  in  proportion  as  the 
quantity  produced  was  greater;  and  in  the 
laft  procefs  the  air  was  very  red  in  the  infide 
of  the  veffel  that  received  it,  for  a  confider- 
able  time. 


2-  Of 


jga  OhferUations  Suppte'mentat 

3.  Of  the  effeSi  of  the  nitrnus  add  on  com^ 
mon  air, 

I  have  fhewiij  in  a  variety  of  experiments^ 
that  the  fumes  of  fpirit  of  nitre  injure  com- 
mon air.  I  have  found  the  fame  to  be  the 
effed:  of  the  effluvia  of  nitrous  ether.  For  the 
air  which  had  been  confined  about  a  week,  in 
a  bottle  in  which  a  quantity  of  nitrous  ether 
had  been  kept,  was  fo  much  injured^  that  twd 
meafures  of  it,  and  one  of  nitrous  air,  occu- 
pied the  fpace  of  2  ^  meafures.  As  I  let  a 
good  deal  of  common  air  into  the  phial,  at 
the  fame  time  that  (not  chufing  to  lofe  it)  I 
poured  the  ether  out  of  it  into  another  phial,  1 , 
conclude  that  the  air  in  the  phial  was  almoft 
perfectly  noxious. 

I  have  more  than  once  exprefled  an  earned 
wilh  that  I  could  meet  with  any  fluid  fubftance 
that  was  not  affeded  with  the  nitrous  acid,  as 
this  would  give  me  an  opportunity  of  confin- 
ing the  nitrous  acid  air,  in  order  to  make  ex- 
periments upon  it,  as  I  have  done  upon  other 
acid  airs  •,  and  I  almoft  flatter  myfelf  that  1 
have  accidentally  met  with  one  that  will  an- 
fwer  my  purpofe.  It  will  be  feen,  p.  156^ 
that  hog's  lard  is  very  little  afFeded  with  boil- 
ing fpirit  of  nitre.  Upon  finding  thisj  I  im- 
mediately endeavoured,  by  means  of  heat,  to 

expel 


and  Mifcelianeous^  331 

expel  nitrous  acid  air  from  a  quantity  of  flrong 
fpjrit  of  nitre;  thinking  that  it  might  be  con- 
fined in  a  veffel  filled  with  melted  hog's  lard, 
as  the  other  acid  airs  had  been  confined  by 
quickfilver.  But  though  I  made  the  fpirit  of 
nitre  boil  a  long  tim.e,  I  got  nothing  from  it 
but  the  common  air  v/hich  had  lodged  on  the 
furface  of  the  acid,  and  which  I  found  to  be 
fo  far  injured  by  thcprocefs,  that  two  meafures 
of  it,  and  one  of  nitrous  air,  occupied  the 
fpace  of  2  4-  meafures.  I  fhall  try  whetlier  I 
cannot  have  better  fuccefs  with  fome  other 
animal  oil^  as  the  fpermaceti  cil^  Sec.  making 
ibme  other  varieties  in  the  proccfs. 

4.  Of  fixed  air. 

I  have  made  an  obfervation,  p.  220,  of  the 
degree  of  the  purity  of  the  refiduum  of  fixed 
air  which  had  been  wholly  contained  in  water, 
at  a  time  when  it  hardly  made  lime  v/ater  tur- 
bid. I  afterwards  kept  the  fame  refiduum, 
wafhing  it  feveral  times  in  lim.e  water,  till  it 
had  no  effect  upon  it  whatever.  At  i\vs.  time 
two  meafures  of  it,  and  one  of  nitrous  air, 
occupied  the  fpace  of  2  -^  meafures.  In  fa<"i:, 
therefore,  the  refiduum  of  fixed  air  is,  in  the 
main,  the  fame  thing  with  phlogifticared  com- 
mon air;  though  in  this  cafe  it  was  melio- 
rated by  fo  much  v/afhing  in  water.     To  VaQ 

feline 


332  Ohfervatlons  Supplemental 

fame  flate  alfo  are  all  kinds  of  air  whatever, 
and  even  nitrous  air  itfelf,  reduced,  by  much 
agitation  in  water.  This  is  a  remarkable  fa6t,. 
and  may  furnifh  matter  for  fpeculation. 

To  my  fliort  account  of  my  obfervations  on 
the  Seltzer  fpring,  and  the  other  mineral  water 
near  Mentz,  p.  226,  I  would  add,  that  the 
bottom  of  both  of  them,  and  alfo  of  the  cur- 
rent of  water  that  ran  from  them,  was  tinged 
red  with  ochre,  fo  that  it  is  evident  they  both 
contain  iron. 

5.  Of  the  impregnation  of  water  with  fined  air. 

I  find  I  liave  exprefled  myfelf  too  ftrongly 
with  refpefb  to  the  evidence  of  other  perfons 
having  had  in  view  any  fcheme  of  the  im- 
pregnation of  water  with  fixed  air,  before  the 
publication  of  my  pamphlet  on  that  fubjeft ; 
on  the  fuppofition  that,  if  fuch  evidence  had 
exifted,  it  would  have  found  its  way  to  the 
public  by  this  time. 

My  ingenious  correfpondent  Mr.  Bewly,  on 
feeing  that  part  of  the  work,  informs  me,  that 
he  had  not  read  Dr.  Brownrigg's  paper  half 
through,  before  he  expe<51:ed  that  the  fynthefis 
would  follow  the  analyfis^  and  that  finding  his 
author  intircly  filent  on  the  fubjedt,  he  imme- 
4  diately 


and  Mifcellaneous.  ^^l 

diateiy  went  to  work  himfelf,  and  in  a  com- 
mon phial  efFeded  the  impregnation,  by  fixed 
air  let  loofe  from  fait  of  tartar  •,  and  though 
he  had  but  an  imperfect  kind  of  an  apparatus, 
he  fays  he  has  occafionally  regaled  himfelf  and 
his  friends  with  fmall  potations  of  artificial 
Pyrmont  water,  ever  fince  the  publication  of 
Dr.  Brownfigg's  paper. 

I  cannot  help  obferving  on  this  occafion,  as 
on  many  others,  that  it  is  much  to  be  regret- 
ted, that  perfons  of  a  philofophical  turn 
fliould  not  be  more  difpofed  to  communicate 
their  difcoveries  to  the  public.  In  this  cafe, 
however,  it  will  be  feen  that  I  am  not  myfelf 
without  blame,  as  I  made  no  publication  oa 
the  fubjedl  till  fome  years  after  I  had  effected 
this  impregnation,  though  Mr.  Bewly,  I  find, 
had  done  the  fame  thing  a  confiderable  time 
before  pie. 

6.  Of  the  ufe  of  terms. 

I  am  forry  to  find,  that  notwithltanding  what 
I  faid,  in  the  preface  to  my  former  volume,  on 
my  choice  of  the  term  air^  as  applied  to  the 
nitrous  J  acid,  and  alkaline  principles  exhibited 
in  that  form,  fome  perfons  are  either  fo  weak, 
or  fo  captious,  as  not  to  be  fatisfied. 

No 


334  Obfervalions  Supplemental 

No  perfon  'Vvas  ever  more  temperate,  or 
more  cautious,  than  I  have  been  in  the  intro- 
duction of  new  termsy  confidering  the  number 
of  new  fa5fs  that  I  have  difcovered.  It  was 
with  great  hefitation,  though  compelled  by 
necelTity,  that  I  did  it  at  all,  generally  with 
the  advice  of  my  moft  judicious  friends,  and 
always  adopting  fuch  as  were  analogous  to 
others  in  eftablimed  ufe.  Thus  when  I  found 
the  terms  common  or  atmojpherical  air^  fixed,  air^ 
and  ififlammahle  air,  ufed  by  all  philofophers, 
and  no  perfon  whatever  had  objeded  to  them, 
it  was  certainly  natural  for  me  to  continue  to 
apply  the  term  air  to  other  elafiic  transparent 
fiuids,  not  condenfable  by  cold,  and  to  diftin- 
guiih  them  by  other  appellations,  drawn  from 
the  peculiar  circumftances  of  their  produ6lion, 
as  nitrous  air,  acid  air,  alkaline  air,  phlogijii- 
cated  and  dephlogifticated  air-,  ufing  the  term 
air  as  exprefTive  of  the  mere  for^  m  which  a 
fubftance  is  exhibited,  without  any  confider- 
ation  of  its  being  fimple  or  compound. 

They  who  chufe  to  apply  the  term  air  to  a 
fiihfiance,  and  not  to  a  form,  are  certainly  at 
full  liberty  fo  to  do,  if  they  pieafe;  and  pro- 
vided we  underftand  one  another,  no  inconve- 
nience will  refult  from  our  ufe  of  a  different 
language.  But  then  the  fame  perfons  fhould 
be  uniform  in  their  objedlions  and  pradtice, 

and 


and  Mifcellafieous^  235 

and  call  nothing  by  the  name  of  air  that  they 
do  not  believe  to  confift  of  that  one  elementary 
Jiibjiance  to  which  they  profefs  to  appropriate 
the  term.  I  will  add  alfo,  that  fuch  perfons 
will  do  well  to  prove  that  there  is  fuch  an  ele- 
mentary fubllance,  and  to  reconcile  the  fa6ts 
that  I  have  difcovered  with  that  hypothefis.  The 
language  that  I  adopt  implies  no  attachment  to 
any  hypothefis  whatever,  and  may  ftill  be  ufed 
though  I  fliould  change  my  opinion  on  that 
fubje6t;  which  is  certainly  a  very  great  advan- 
tage in  philofophical  language. 


THE 


THE 

APPEND      IX. 

NUMBER    I. 

Experiments  and  Observations  relating  to 
fame  of  the  Che/nical  Properties  of  the  Fluids 
commonly  called  Fixed  Air  ;  and  tending  to 
prove  that  it  is  merely  the  Vapour  of  a  par- 
ticular Acid.  In  two  Letters  to  the  Reverend 
Br.  Prieftley  :  By  William  Bewly. 

N  Y  fuccefsful  inveftigation  of  tliat  part  of  philo- 
fophy,  in  which  you  have  lately  made  fo  exten- 
fi\  e  and  rapid  a  progrefs,  cannot  be  communicated 
to  the  publick  any  where  with  fo  much  propriety, 
and  advantage,  as  in  the  company  of  thofe  fmgular 
and  important  difcoveries  which  will  be  given  in 
the  new  Volume  of  your  OhfervaUons^  now  in  the 
prefs.  With  great  pleafure,  therefore,  I  comply  with 
your  late  requeft,  to  tranfmit  to  you  the  particulars  of 
my  Obfervations  on  Mepihtic  or  Fixed  Air  \  the  gene- 
ral refults  of  which  I  formerly  communicated  to  you. 
They  tend,  if  I  do  not  deceive  myfelf,  to  throw  a 
new  and  juft  light  on  the  real  nature  and  chemical 
properties  of  that  fluid ;  the  extenfive  diffufion  of 
which  throughout  the  univerfe,  where  it  forms  a  con- 
ftituent  principle  of  almoft  all  known  bodies,  renders 
it  a  fubjeiSf  deferring  of  an  accurate  and  mimite  in- 
veftigation. 

In  the  prefent  letter  I  fliall  principally  confine  my- 
felf to  thofe  Obfej-vaiions  only   which  firft  convinced 

me  of  the  exiftence  of  an  acid  in  fixed  air  : a  point 

which  has  been  contefled,  or,  at  leaft,  left  dubious, 

X  by 


338  The  APPENDIX. 

by  other  inquirers.  I'he  experiments  which  I  (hall 
relate  in  a  fubfequent  letter  will,  I  expe<5l,  fatisfadlorily 
evince,  that  this  acid  is  not  a  fubftancc  extrinfecal  to 
fixed  air,  or  cafually  floating  in  it,  and  feparable  from 
it ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  that  it  is  a  neceffarily  con- 
ftituent  principle  of  this  fluid ;  and  even  that  fixed  air 
itfelf  is  no  other  than  this  very  acid ;  or,  in  other 
words,  that  it  is  a  peculiar  and  diftin6t  acid  fpirit,  fui 
generis,  which,  on  its  being  expelled,  by  the  power 
of  a  fuperior  acid,  or  the  force  of  fire,  from  the  va- 
rious earths,  falts,  kc.  with  which  it  is  combined, 
inftantly  aiTumes  the  form  of  an  elaftic  vapour,  greatly 
Tdfembling  common  air ;  which  form  it  permanently 
retains,  till  it  meets- with  any  of  thofe  numerous  bo- 
dies which  have  an  affinity  to  it,  and  which  have 
been  deprived  of,  or  are  not  already  faturated  with  it. 
By  thefe  bodies  this  acid  vapour  is  condenfed,  or  re- 
duced into  a  liquid  or  fixed  ftate  ;  in  which  flate  it 
combines  with  them,  in  a  manner  in  no  refpe6l  differ- 
ent from  that  in  which  the  vitriohc  or  any  other  acid 
is  united  with  the  various  falts,  earths,  or  other  fub- 
flances,  with  which  they  form  neutra'l  compounds — 
Such,  at  leaft,  is  the  fyftem  which  I  have  been  natu- 
rally led  to  deduce  from  the  following  experiments. 

Even  the  bare  prcfence  of  an  acid,  /'«  fixed  air,  has, 
as  I  have  already  obferved,  been  doubted  of.  So  lately 
even  as  the  lafi  year  Dr.  Brownrigg  *,  to  whom  this 
new  branch  of  Chemical  philofophy  is  fo  highly  in- 
debted, obferved,  that  though  Mephitic  air,  imparts 
to  the  waters  impregnated  with  it  a  brifk  and  pungent 
tafte,  which  has  ufually  been  fl:iled  fuhacid ;  yet  it 
differs  from  all  acid  fpirits  in  not  flriking  a  red  colour 

*  Phil.Tranf.  vol.  64.  pari  2.  for  the  year  1774.  p.  369; 

witJi 


The  appendix.  339 

with  the  blue  tindtures  of  vegetables  ;  adding,  that 
not  only  no  change  of  this  kind  could  be  obferved  to 
have  been  effeded  by  it,  in  the  numerous  experiments 
made  by  himfelf  and  fevcral  other  gentlemen  ;  but 
likewife  that  he  had  "  for  feveral  days  fufpended 
pieces  of  linen,  that  had  been  dyed  blue  with  fre(h 
juice  of  violets,  in  the  mephitic  air  of  Spa  water, 
and  alfo  in  that  of  chalk  ;  and  when  the  linen  was 
taken  out '  of  the  faid  air,  did  not  perceive  its  blue 
colour  in  any  wife  changed,  although  the  fame 
pieces  of  dyed  linen  were  inftantly  turned  of  a  green 
colour,  when  expofed  to  the  fumes  of  the  fpirit  ot 

hartfhorn." "  Whether  therefore,"  he  adds, 

and  under  what  relations,  this  aerio-faline  fpirit 
may  merit  the  title  of  an  acid^  I  leave  to  the  de- 
termination of  others." 
In  the  Appendix  to  your  former  Volume,  your  in- 
genious correfpondent,  Mr.  Hey  f,  has  likewife  fliewn 
that  water  impregnated  with  fixed  air,  produced  no 
change  of  colour  in  the  fyrup  of  violets  ;  and  that  it 
did  not  efFervefce  with  either  the  fixed  or  the  volatile 

alcali. The  fa£t  is,  that  fixed  air  is  fo  rare  a  va- 

poury  and  the  Mephitic  Acid^  as  I  (hall  already  ven- 
ture to  call  it,  is  fo  greatly  diluted  in  water,  which  is 
even  faturatcd  with  it,  that  many  of  the  blue  juices 
refift  its  adlion  upon  them  ;  while  others,  more  fen- 
fible  tefts  of  acidity  (fuchas  infufions  of  Litmus,  Cy- 
anusy    or  Corn-flower,    and   a  few   others)    readily 

anounce  its  acid  quality. As  to  its  not  producing 

an  effervefcence  with  alcalis,  it  will  appear  from  the 
following  experiments,  that  fuch  effervefcence  is,  from 
the  very  nature  of  the  thing,  impoJIible  in  the  prelent 

f  Experiments  ?nd  Obfervations,  &c.  p.  288,  lit  edit. 

Z  %  cafe. 


^4©  ^The  appendix.' 

cafe,  in  which  the  very  contrary  of  an  effervefcencc 
muft  take  place.  In  all  other  cafes,  when  an  acid 
IS  added  to  a  mild  alkali,  the  mephitic  ac'td^  as.  being  the 
Jeaft  powerful  of  all  the  acids,  is  expellsd,  in  its  ftate 
of  vapour^  or  in  elaftic  bubbles,  which  conftitute  the 
appearance  called  an  effer\Tfcence  ;  whereas  when  the 
mephitic  acid  itfelf  is  added  to  an  alcali,  it  is  coyiden- 
Jed^  and  filently  abforbed  in  it. 

It  may  be  neceffary  to  premife  that,  in  feveral  of 
the  following  experiments,  I  found  it  moft  conve- 
nient, as  well  as  productive  of  greater  accuracy  and 
expedition,  to  take  the  inverted  phial  out  of  the  bafon, 
after  every  frefh  introdu6iion  of  fixed  air,  for  th^ 
purpofe  of  agitating  more  freely  the  liquor  contained 
in  it ;  and  that  I  took  care  to  ufe  a  bafon  or  cup  of  a 
very  fmall  diameter,  and  which  contained  a  very 
fmall  quantity  of  fiuid ;  in  order  to  guard,  as  much 
as  poffible,  againft  difTipation  of  the  fixed  air,  during 
the  procefs.  It  may  be  proper  likev/ife  to  obferve, 
that  I  may  not  incur  a  fufpicion  of  plagiarifm,  that 
fome  fcattered  hints,  relative  to  a  few  of  the  follov/- 
ing  Obfervations,  have  been  formerly  inferted  by  me 
m  a  certain  anonymous  publication. 

The  experiment,  by  which  I  firft  dete£ted  the 
prefence  of  an  acid  in  fixed  air,  fome  years  ago,,  is  as 
follows.  I  have  repeated  and  diverfified  it  on  the 
prefent  occafion,  and  with  the  fame  event. 

Experiment  I. 

Having  accurately  adapted,  to  the  mouth  of  a  phial 
containing  fpirit  of  vitriol,  a  cork,  in  which  a  glafs 
tube  was  inferted,  which  was  drawn  out  at  its  farther 
♦extremity,  fo  as  to  terminate  in  a  bore  nearly  capil- 
lary; 


The    appendix;  341 

hry ;  and  having  thrown  into  it  fome  fait  of  tartar, 
I  hailily  applied  the  cork,  and  inilantly  prelented, 
clofe  to  the  end  of  the  tube,  a  piece  of  a  particular 
kind  of  blue  paper,  ufed  for  the  covers  of  pamphlets, 
as  well  as  other  pieces  of  paper  tinged  blue  with  the 
fcrapings  of  radiihes.  When  the  efFervefcence  was 
brifk,  and  proper  expedition  was  ufed,  the  mephitic 
vapour  rufhing  out,  undiluted  with  common  air, 
and  in  a  denfe  and  fometimes  vifible  column,  in- 
ilantly changed  thofe  parts  of  the  blue  paper,  tov/ards 
which  it  was  direfted,  of  a  bright  red  colour.  On 
bringing  the  tongue  likewife  ta  the  end  of  the  tube, 
the  fenfaLlon  of  acidity  was  very  fenfible. 

Experiment  II. 

The  fuccefs  of  the  preceding  experiment  wholly 
depends  on  the  denfity  and  velocity  of  the  mephitic 
blaft.  Having  afterwards  caufed  the  fixed  air  to  pafs 
through  moift  alkaline  fait  introduced  into  the  tube, 
it  now  only,  in  general,  weakened  or  difcharged  the 
colour  of  the  blue  paper.  This  efte£l  I  was  at  firft 
inclined  to  attribute  to  the  vitriolic  acid,  phlogiflicated 
or  volatilifed,  v/hich  is  known  to  a£t  in  this  manner 
on  various  coloured  fubftances  :  but  from  the  follow- 
ing experiments  it  may  be  inferred,  that  the  change 
was  produced  by  the  mephitic  acid's  being  in  part 
neutralifed,  and  confequently  diminiflied  in  quantity. 
in  its  pafFage  through  the  alkali ;  fo  that  the  remain- 
ing vapoitr,  though  as  acid  as  before,  was  in  too  rare 
a  ftate,  and  had  not  momentum  fufficient  to  produce  the 
fed  colour. 

:  z  3  Expe: 


342  The  aJTENDIX. 

Experiment  HI. 

Six  ounces  of  a  weak  infufion  of  Litmus  in  wa- 
ter, being  impregnated  with  two  or  three  ounces  of 
fixed  air,  had  its  blue  changed  to  a  red  or  pink  co- 
lour.— A  weak  and  nearly  colourlefs  infufion  of  the 
petals  of  the  corn-flower,  as  well  as  infufions  of  two 
or  three  other  blue  field  flowers,  acquired  likewife  a 
flight  reddifli  tinge,  on  being  even  weakly  impregnated 
with  fixed  air. 

Experiment  IV. 

Having  prepared  a  Hepar  Sulphuris,  in  the  liquid 
way,  and  in  which  the  alcali  was  fully  faturated  wi-th 
the  fulphur ;  I  diluted  a  part  of  it  with  rain  water, 
and  added  to  it  a  few  ounces  of  water  faturated  with 
fixed  air.  The  impregnated  water  produced  the  ef- 
fe£ls  which  are  known  to  follow  the  addition  of  any 
acid  to  an  alcaline  folution  of  fulphur.  The  liquor 
became  milky  and  opaque  ;  and  after  fome  time  part 
of  the  fulphur  was  precipitated  :  doiibtlefs  by  the 
aftion  of  the  mephitic  acid,  which  joined  itfelf  to  the 
alcali,  and  thereby  difengaged  a  proportional  part  of 
the  fulphur  before  combined  with  it. 

Experiment  V. 

The  fucceffive  a£lion  of  the  acid  in  fixed  air  on 
fuch  of  the  blue  vegetable  juices  as  it  changes  to  red, 
or  its  gradual  entrance  into  water,  is  very  pleafmgly 
exhibited  by  filling  a  phial,  which  has  a  fmall  hole 
drilled  near  its  bottom,  with  an  infufion  of  Litmus, 
and  then  introducing  into  its  neck  a  perforated 
J  cork. 


The  appendix.  345 

cork,  to  which  is  fixed  a  bladder,  containing  fixed 
air.  Prefllng  the  bladder  till  the  liqr.or  defccnds  to 
the  broad  part  of  the  phial,  the  perforation  is  to  be 
ftopped  ;  and  the  infufion  being  fufFered  to  remain  per- 
fectly at  rcfi,  the  gradual  entrance  of  the  fixed  air  into 
It  (or  rather  the  condenfation  of  the  mephitic  acid)  will 
be  rendered  vifible,  by  the  fucceflive  change  of  colour 
in  the  liquor,  from  the  furface  downwards,  from  blue 
to  red. — This  experiment  may  be  diverfified  by  em- 
ploying the  procefles  indicated  in  Experiment  7th. 

The  fixed  air  employed  in  the  preceding  experi- 
ments was  generally  procured  from  fait  of  tartar,  by 
means  of  the  vitriolic  acid.  The  greater  part  how- 
ever of  thefe  and  the  following  experiments  were  re- 
peated with  fixed  air,  obtained  from  the  following 
fubftances,  or  combinations  ;  from  which  I  reje6ted 
tlie  nitrous  and  marine  acids,  for  obvious  reafons, 
particularly  on  account  of  their  volatility.  I  tried  the 
fixed  air  procured  from  the  vitriolic  acid  added  to 
chalk,  and  even  from  the  fame  acid  and  mild  volatile 
alcali  ;  that  flowly  obtained  from  fixed  alcali  and 
cream  of  tartar  ;  and  even  that  which  rifes  from 
wort  in  the  a*5l  of  fermentation.  The  fame  figns  of 
acidity  were  exhibited  by  the  fixed  air  obtained  from 
all  of  them. 

In  all  thefe  procefles,  however,  an  acid,  mineral  or 
vegetable,  might  be  fufpected  to  have  been  concerned 
as  an  ingredient  in  the  procefs,  in  the  produ(5lion  of 
the  effects  above  afcribed  to  the  fixed  air.  In  the 
following  experiment,  therefore,  I  ufed  fixed  air  ex- 
pelled from  a  body,  without  the  inten^ention  of  an 
acid,  and  merely  by  the  force  of  fire. 


ExPE- 


344  The  APPENDIiK:. 

Experiment  VI, 

A  phial,  to  the  mouth  of  which  a  glafs  tube  had 
been  joined,  by  means  of  the  blow  pipe,  v/as  filled 
with  Magnefia,  the  perfeii:  purity  of  which  I'had  pre- 
vioufly  afcertained.  Flaving  placed  it  in  fand  con- 
tained in  a  crucible,  which  was  fet  upon  the  fire,  the 
air  proceeding  from  it  was  ilicceffively  received  into 
fmall  phials  filled  with  infuncn  of  Litmus.  The 
firft  ounce,  which  came  over  even  before  the  Magne- 
fia could  be  thoroughly  heated,  though  neceflarily 
mixed  with  common  air,  tinged  the  infufion  of  a  red 
colour.  The  fubfequent  produce  (which  came  aver 
to  the  amount  of  eight  ounces,  v>/hen  the  apparatus 
was  accidentally  broken)  continued  to  exhibit  the 
fame  figns  of  acidity,  as  were  given  by  the  fixed  air, 
expelled  from  alkaline  falts  and  earths,  by  means  of 
acids.  It  pofl"efred  likewife  the  other  properties  of  the 
laft  mentioned  fixed  air,  v/hich  Vv'ill  be  related  in  the 
next,  and  fome  of  the  folio vs^ing  experiments. 

Finding  the  acid  in  fixed  air  not  firong  enough,  oy 
fiifficiently  concentrated,  to  3.8:  fcnfibly  on  the  gene- 
rality of  the  blue  vegetable  juices  ;  I  conceived,  that 
by  the  following  method  the  greater  part  of  them 
might  neverthelefs  be  made  to  bear  teftimony  to  its 
acid  quality. 

Experiment  VII. 

Having  diluted  fome  fynip  of  violets  with  water, 
and  prepared  difi^erent  infufions  of  fuch  of  the  blue 
vegetable  flowers  as  were  not  changed  red  by  fixed 
air  ;  there  were  added  to  each  of  them  a  few  drops  of 
z  fglution  of  fixed  alcali,  fufiicient  to  turn  them  to  a 

orecn 


The  appendix.  345 

green  colour.  A  few  drops  likewife  of  the  fame  folu- 
tion  were  added  to  an  infufion  of  Litmus.  On  im- 
pregnating thefe  different  liquors  with  fixed  air,  (from 
fpirit  of  vitriol  andchaik)  the  infufion  of  Litmus  was 
changed  red  as  before  ;  and  the  green  colour  given  to 
the  other  blue  infufions,  by  the  alkaline  fait,  was  de- 
ftroyed  by  the  fixed  air: — an  evident  proof,  that  tlie 
alcali^  by  which  the  green  colour  had  been  produced, 
liad  been  neutralifed  by  an  odd. 

The  fame  effecSls  were  produced  by  impregnating 
the  infufions  with  the  fixed  air  procured,  in  the  pre- 
ceding experiment,  from  Magnefia,  by  fimple  calcina- 
tion 3 — as  likewife  from  chalk  calcined  in  a  tobacco- 
pipe,  and  afterwards  in  a  gun-barrel  :  tho'  the  greater 
part  of  the  produce,  in  this  lafc  procefs,  was,  as  you 
have  already  noticed,  infoluble  in  water,  and  in- 
flammable. 

All  thefe  experiments,  and  others  of  a  fimilar  na- 
ture, proved  only  that  an  acid  exifi:ed  in  fixed  air. 
This  lafi:  however  induced  me  to  extend  my  views, 
and  fuggefled  a  feries  of  experiments,  which  led  me 
to  the  conclufion  announced  in  the  beginning  of  this 
letter  ; — that  fixed  air,  when  pure,  and  from  what- 
ever fubftance  obtained,  is  only  a  peculiar  acid,  in  a 
ftate  of  vapour ;  which  particular  modification  it  af- 
fumes  on  its  expulfion  from  various  bodies,  by  the 
pov/er  of  a  fuperior  acid  taking  its  place  ;  or  by  that 
of  fue.  Thefe  experiments,  which  are  as  fimple,  as 
they  appear  to  me  to  be  decifive,  fiiall  be  the  fubjeiSt 
of  another  letter. 

WltLIAM  BeWLY, 


Great  Majftngham^  Nor- 
'  folk;,  Sept.  Z^l,  1775. 


LETTER 


^46  The  APPENDIX. 

LETTER     IL 

Great  Majjingham,  Sept.  27,  1 775. 

I.have  hitherto  attempted  merely  to  afcertatn  the 
exigence  of  an  acid  in  fixed  air.  The  avowed  pur- 
pofe  of  the  prefent  letter  is  no  Icfs  than  that  of  intro-^, 
ducing  a  new  fubje6t  into  the  tribe  of  acids  ;  and  or 
fhewing  that  the  aforefaid  acid  is,  in  fait,  the  very 
fubftance  denominated  fixed  air.  1  he  following  ex- 
periments will  at  leaft,  I  flatter  myfelf,  decifively  prove 
that  it  is  ellential  to  the  conftituence  of  that  fluid  ; 
2nd  that  it  cannot  be  deprived  of  it,  without  ceafing 
to  be  fixed  air. 

Apprehending  that,  if  the  acid  detected  in  fixed 
air  were  only  a  foreign  or  contingent  principle,  cafu- 
ally  floating  in  this  fluid,  it  might  be  deprived  of 
this  adventitious  fubftance,  by  means  of  an  alcalinc 
fait,  and  yet  ftill  retain  its  othef  diftinguifliing  charac- 
tcrifl:ics,  of  ^lafticity,  abforption  in  water,  &c.  I  pur- 
fued  the  hint  fuggefted  to  me  by  the  event  of  the  laft 
experiment,  by  trying  whether  I  could  not  divert  it  of 
this  fuppofed  adventitious  acid,  and  thereb}^  procure 
and  examine  it  in  a  ftate  of  purity.  For  this  purpofe 
I  firft  made  the  following  experiment ; 

ExPERIMEfiTT    VIII. 

Filling  a  two  ounce  phial  with  a  flrong  folutlon  of 
Tni Id  fixed  alcali,  and  putting  into  a  cup  of  a  fmall 
diameter  a  very  little  quantity  of  the  fame  folution, 
barely  fufficient  to  allov;  mc  to  immerge  the  neck 

of 


The  APPENDIX.  347 

of  the  phial  into  it,  without  fuffering  the  com", 
men  air  to  enter ;  I  fourid  that,  on  throwing  about 
an  ounce  of  fixed  air  into  it  repeatedly,  and  alter- 
riately  taking  the  phial  out  of  the  cup,  and  agitating  its 
contents,  the  fixed  air  totally  *  difappeared  each  time  ; 
an^,  upon  the  whole,  in  fuch  quantities,  as  could  not 
eafily  be  accounted  for,  on  any  other  hypothefis,  than 
that  it  was  merely  the  vapour,  or  the  elaftic  fumes,  of 
an  ^r/Wfpirit,  condenfed,  and  combined  with  an  alcalu 
Several  ounce  meafures  of  fixed  air  were  thus  made  to 
iJifappear  fucceflively  ;  and  I,  at  length,  difcontinued 
the  procefs,  through  mere  laflitude. 

If  the  alcali  had  only  laid  hold  of  an  extraneous 
acid  floating  in  fixed  air,  it  might  have  been  expe£led, 
that  the  aerial  fubftance,  or  vehicle,  which  contained 
it,  might  have  remained,  with  only  fome  flight  dimi- 
nution of  its  bulk  :  but  on  twtry  frefli  introduftion  of 
fixed  air,  nearly  the  ivhole  of  it  vanilhed  ;  and  the  al- 
cali, which  was  mild,  evidently  appeared  to  a6f,  not  as 
an  abforbent  of  a  fuppofed  aerial  fubftance,  but  as  an 
j^ntacid. 

I  next  made  the  following  experiment,  with  water, 
in  which  I  diflblved  a  fmall  and  known  quantity  of 
mild  alkaline  fait ;  in  order  to  determine  how  much  of 
the  alcali  a  given  quantity  of  fixed  air  was  capable  of 
neutralifing. 

*  When  I  ufe  this  expreflion,  or  othcrj  of  a  fimihr  import,  here 
and  elfewhere,  I  fcarce  think  it  neceflary  to  obferve,  that  a  very  fmaJl 
refiduum  was  left  after  each  trial  ;  the  fpace  occnpied  by  which  I  ufu- 
ally  filled  up,  for  the  fake  of  expedition,  from  the  liquor  in  the  cup, 
I  never  coUefted  thefe  rcfidua\  which  I  confidcr  as  imj>uritics,  confift- 
ing,  in  part  at  leaft,  of  common  air  j  from  which,  and  inflammable 
air,  it  is  fcarce  polTible  to  procure  fixed  air  perfectly  free.  Whatever 
they  may  be,  they  certainly  are  net  the  fubllancc  w»  ufually  defign  by 
the  name  of  fixed  aii. 

£XPE- 


54S  The  APPENDIX. 

Experiment  IX. 

^^.'t  .■impregnated  five  ounces  of  Well-water  with  fixed 
air,  till  it  would  receive  no  more.  I  could  not  make 
it  abforb  more  than  about  four  ounces.  I  then  added 
to  tlie  water  20  grains  of  fait  of  tartar,  previouily 
diflblved  in  a  fmall  quantity  of  water ;  and  immerg- 
jng  the  mouth  of  the  phial  into  a  fmall  cup,  contain- 
ing water,  I  threw  up  into  it  about  half  its  bulk  of 
fixed  air.  On  agitating  the  liquor,  and  again  im- 
merging  the  mouth  of  the  phial,  and  then  flowly 
withdrawing  my  finger,  the  liquor  in  the  cup,  though 
the  greatefl  part  of  it  had  been  hQ^oxQ  faturated  with 
fixed  air,  ruflied  up  into  the  phial,  with  nearly  as 
much  violence  as  if  a  vactiumh.'2i6.  been  formed  in  the 
•upper  part  of  it. — The  effect  naturally  reminded  me 
of  the  condenfation  of  fteam  or  vapour  in  the  fire 
engine  ;  and  is  fcarcely  to  be  accounted  for,  without 
conlidering  it  as  proceeding  from  a  fimilar  caufe,  or 
conceiving  the  included  fixed  air,  as  a  greatly  ex- 
panded and  elaflic  vapour  of  an  acid  fpirit,  fuddehly 
condenfed^  arid  immenfely  reduced  in  its  dimenfions, 
■qus  acid,  by  the  action  of  the  alcali. — Frefh  portion^ 
of  fixed  air,  introduced  into  the  alcaline  folution,  fiif- 
cefTively  difappeared  ;  and,  upon  the  whole,  in  coii- 
fequence  of  the  addition  of  only  thefe  twenty  grains 
,of  alcaline  fait,  the  water  received  or  condenfed. about 
feven  or  eight  additional  ounces  of  fixed  air. 

Experiment  X. 

That  I  might  fee  the  progrefs  of  the  neutralifation, 

1  diverfified   the  preceding  expe'riment,  by  colouring 

7  water- 


Th-e  appendix.  349 

water  with  Litmus,  fyrup  of  violets,  and  other  blue 
infufions  ;  and  by  the  cliange  of  colour  induced,  was 
enabled  to  fee  the  action  of  the  mcphltic  acid  on  the 
dilFerent  alcalifed  hquors  ;  and  in  the  infufion  of  Lit- 
mus particularly,  could  perceive  the  final  predomi- 
nance of  the  acid,  as  in  the  7th  experiment,  by  means 
of  tlie  red  colour  given  by  it  to  the  liquor. 

Should  the  foregoing  evidence  for  the  exigence  of 
the  'mephitic  acid,  founded  on  the  vifible  changes  of 
colour  produced  by  it,  be  queftioned  ;  it  is  corrobo- 
raied,  and  indeed  rendered  unqueftionable,  by  the 
tellimony  of  another  fenfe,  in  the  following  experi- 
ment. 


Experiment  XL 

Th^-laft  experiment  was  repeated,  with  a  larger 
proportion  of  alkaline  fait  ;  each  ounce  of  water  now 
containing  fix  grains  of  alkali.  The  folution  had  in 
a  high  degree  the  well-known  acrid,  urinous,  and 
abominable  tafle  of  the  alkaline  fait.  Tailing  it,  at 
different  times  during  the  courfe  of  the  impregnation, 
the  acrid  and  lixivial  flavour  was  found  to  be  gradu- 
ally diminilhed,  in  proportion  as  the  hxed  air  was 
combined  with  it.  Towards  the  end,  the  alcaline  and 
urinous  flavour  was  completely  deflroyed,  by  the  ac- 
tion of  the  mephitic  acid  ;  and  when  the  alcali  was 
perfetStly  neutralifed,  the  fohition,  which  was  colour- 
ed with  Litmus,  en  being  well  agitated  with  {rt([-\ 
portions  of  fixed  air,  received  ftill  more  of  that  flu- 
id ;  at  the  fame  time  it  became  red,  and  its  tafte  was 
now  fimply,  and  net  difaqreeably,  faline,  and  even, 
JJubacid. 

From 


350  The  APPENDIX. 

From  thefe  and  fome  other  experiments,  I  efti- 
mated,  that  an  ounce  of  fixed  air,  or  acid  mephitic 
vapour  J  will  neutralife  between  three  and  four  grains 
of  rnild  fixed  alcali  ;  or  perhaps  fomewhat  more.  It 
was  not  indeed  eafy,  by  this  method,  to  afcertain  the 
exa<3:  quantity.  Part  of  the  mephitic  acid  was  doubt- 
lefs  neutralifed,  even  in  its  paflage,  in  fmall  bubbles, 
(as  was  the  cafe  in  my  experiments)  through  the 
alcalifed  liquor.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  difficult 
to  know  whether,  and  how  far,  this  lofs  by  condenfa- 
t'loriy  was  counterbalanced,  or  more  than  counter- 
balanced, by  the  dijfipation  at  the  furface  of  the 
liquor  in  the  bafon. 

Experiment  XII. 

EfFedls  fimilar  to  thofe  related  in  the  p^Jedlng 
experiment  were  produced,  on  adding  the  volatile 
alcah  to  water,  and  likewife  the  yi^/ alcali ;  but,  as 
might  be  expected,  in  a  lefs  degree.  It  is  fuppofed, 
that  the  latter  ovy^cs  the  principal  properties  which^ 
dirtinguilh  it  from  the  fixed  vegetable  alcali, 
to  its  containing  a  larger  proportion  of  fixed  air.  As 
it  is  likewife  frequently  impure,  if  it  fliould  contain 
any  of  the  marine  acid  capable  of  being  difengaged 
from  it ;  that  acid,  as  fuperior  to  the  mephitic,  muft 
contribute  to  prevent  fo  large  a  portion  of  the  latter 
from  entering  into  the  alkaline  folution,  as  would  be 
received  when  the  pure  vegetable  alcali  is  employed. 

Experiment  XIII. 

Having  thus  obtained  a  perfectly  new  neutral  falt^ 
(though  m  a  Hate  of  folution)  I  was  defirous  of  af- 

certaining 


The  appendix.  351 

certalning  fome  of  its  chemical  qualities  ;  and  parti- 
cularly of  trying  whether  fixed  air,  after  having  been 
neutraJifed  by  an  alcali,  might  not  be  expelled  from 
it  by  means  of  lire,  and  come  over  poflefled  of  its 
acid  quality. 

I  took  therefore  fome  of  the  produce  of  the  nth 
Experiment,  and  firft  neutralued  the  fuperabundant 
mephitic  acid,  by  dropping  in  Lixiviu?n  tartari  till 
the  folution  loft  its  red  colour,  and  became  blue. 
With  this  liquor  I  nearly  filled  a  phial,  to  which  a 
bent  tube  was  accurately  adapted,  and  well  fecured 
with  very  ftiff  cement.  Putting  it  into  a  pan  of 
water,  placed  on  burning  coals,  I  fet  a  pliial,  iilled 
with  infufion  of  Litmus,  over  the  extremity  of  the 
tube,  which  was  immerfed  in  a  bafon  of  water.  I 
was  furprifed  to  find  that  no  fenfible  part  of  the  large 
quantity  of  mephitic  air,  or  acid  vapour,  contained 
in  the  folution  in  a  condenfed  ftate,  was  expelled  from 
the  aJkali,  though  the  water  in  the  pan  was  made  to 
boil  violently  :  and  yet  innumerable  fmall  bubbles, 
probably  the  mere  vapour  of  the  heated  liquor,  were 
perceived  to  afcend  from  the  bottom  of  the  phiaL 
A  very  fmall  portion  of  air  indeed  came  over,  at  the 
beginning  of  the  procefs,  into  the  inverted  phial :  but 
00  pait  of  it  was  abforbed  by  the  infufion ;  nor  could 
any  change  of  colour  be  produced  in  the  latter  by 
agitation ;  neither  did  the  faline  folution,  though  fo 
long  fubjefted  nearly  to  a  boiling  heat,  exhibit,  when 
cold,  any  tafte  of  the  alcali  contained  in  it.  To  dif^ 
cover  whether  the  apparatus  might  not  have  deceived 
me,  I  repeated  the  experiment  in  the  fame  bottle 
with  pure  water,  faturated  folely  with  fixed  air ;  the 
greateft  part  of  which  came  freely  over,  and  afcended 
into  the  inverted  phiaJ. 

EXPE* 


35^  Tme  appendix* 

Experiment  XIV. 

Finding  the  mephitic  acid  thus  refift  nearly  a  boil- 
ing heat,  when  combined  with  the  fixed  alcali,  but 
fhut  out  from  all  communication  vv^ith  tlie  common 
air;  I  was  deilrous  of  trying  whether  the  neutral  fait, 
formed  of  thefe  two  fubliances,  might  not  poilibly 
be  procured  in  a  concrete  or  cryfcalline  form.  But^ 
on  expofing  different  coloured  folutions,  the  produ£l 
of  the  I  ith  Experiment,  in  broad  plates,  to  the  com- 
mon air,  in  a  warm  room  ;  the  early  change  of  their 
colour  fpon  convinced  me —  (though  the  great  quan- 
tity of  the  mephitic  acid,  which  slcaline  falts  contain 
in  their  common  Ihite,  fl:rongly  adheres  to  them  even 
in  a  considerable  heat — )  that  the  acid,  fuperadded  to 
that  before  combined  with  them,  has  a  much  greater 
alHnity  to  atniofpherical  air,  than  to  fixed  alcali. — In 
2  few  hours,  the  flight  of  the  mephitic  acid  was  fen- 
fible  to  the  tafte;  the  infufions  becoming  gradually 
more  fenfibly  alcaline.  Having  ufed  only  fmall 
quantities,  I  cannot  fpeak  precifely  as  to  the  particu- 
lar nature  of  the  fait  left  after  the  evaporation  of  the 
o-reater  part  of  the  water.  In  fome  of  the  plates,  very 
fmall  cryflals  were  formed  ;  but  the  greateft  part  of 
the  folution  continued  deliquefcent. — On  the  whole, 
the  remaining  fait  did  not  appear  to  be  fojjil  alcali. 

Experiment  XV. 

Finding  that  fixed  air  a£led  as  an  acid,  in  perfeftly 
neutralifmg  alcaline  falts,  I  was  naturally  led,  fronhi 
analogy,  to  expecl  that  it  might  likewife  dillblve 
calcareous  earths.  On  adding  the  finell:  powder  of 
common  chalk  to  water,  in  a  fufficient  quantity  to 

render 


f  HE  APPE  N  DIX*  353 

i'ender  it  milky  and  opaque,  I  found,  that  on  repeat- 
edly and  forcibly  agitating  the  liquor  with  freih  por- 
tions of  fixed  air,  its  milkinefs  and  opacity  gradually 
difappeared.  The  whole  of  the  earth  was  at  length 
perfectly  diflblvedj  and  the  water  became  tranfparent. 
— Pure  magnefia  was  diffolved  in  the  fame  manner. 

When  I  tried  this  experiment,  I  did  not  recoilcol 
one  made  by  the  Hon.  Mr.  Cavendifh,  in  his  obfer- 
yations  on  what  he  calls  the  unneutralifed  earth  in 
Rathbone- place  water,  and  other  waters  *  ;  by  which 
he  means  an  earth  not  dillblved  or  faturated  by  anv  of 
the  known  mineral  acids,  but  fufpended  in  water  by 
an  additional  proportion  of  fixed  air.  The  prefent 
experiment  fhevvs  that  it  is  neutralifed,  or  difiblvedj 
at  leaft,  by  the  mephitic  acid. 

It  is  remarkable,  as  he  obferves,  that  pure^  or  cal- 
cined calcareous  earth,  which  is  foluble  in  water, 
fhould,  on  being  impregnate<l  with  fixed  air,  become 
totally  infoluble  in  tlrac  fluid ;  and  that  by  adding 
a  fiill  further  portion  of  fixed  air,  it  ihould  be  again 
rendered  capable  of  being  fufpended  in  water.  Con- 
fidering  fixed  air  as  an  acid^  the  fingularity  in  a  great 
meafure  difappears.  More  than  one  infiance  in  che- 
miftry  occurs  to  me  that  refemble  the  foregoing. — 
Thus  calomel^  or  mercur)-  combined  with  the  marine 
acid,  is  almolr  totally  infoluble  in  water  (one  grain 
requiring  near  2000  times  its  weight  of  boiling  water 
to  diflblye  it)  ;  but  mercury  fuhlimate,  or  mercury 
combined  with  a  ftill  larger  portion  of  the  fame  acid, 
is  very  readily  foluble  in  the  fame  liquid  %• 

Since  I  wrote  what  goes  before,  the  idea  of  an 
experiment  occurred  to  me,  which  I  imme4iately 

*  Phil.  Tranf.  Vol.  57.  p.  104. 

I  Sec  Baume's  Cbymi-:.  Expir'mer.talt,  &c,  Tom.  2.  p.  41?,  &c. 

A  a    *  executed  J 


354  The  APPENDIX. 

executed  ;  and  the  rcfult  of  which,  though  it  comes 
in  here  rather  out  of  its  place,  is  too  material  and 
decifive  to  be  omitted. 

Experiment   XV. 

RecoUefting  that  you  had  obtained  fixed  air,  by 
means  of  fire,  from  volatile  alcaline  falts,  I  diflblvcd 
fome  of  the  volatile  fait  of  Sal  a?7;moniac  in  water, 
with  which  I  nearly  filled  a  phial  fitted  up  with  a  bent 
tube,  which  I  fet  on  the  fire  in  a  pan  of  water.  The 
fixed  air  which  was  expelled  from  this  alcaline  fait, 
without  employing  any  other  medium  than  heat,  exhi- 
bited the  very  fame  phenomena  with  that  procured  by 
the  intervention  of  foreign  acids.  Although  mucH 
volatile  alcali  muft  have  come  over  with  it,  and  neu- 
tralifed  a  confiderable  part  of  it ;  yet  the  mephitic  acid 
was  fo  much  more  abundant,  as  not  only  to  neutralife 
the  alcaline  vapours  that  rofe  along  with  it,  but  to 
be  predominant  in  the  coloured  infufion  into  which  it 
was  received.  This  liquor  was  fo  far  acidulated  with 
it,  as  to  become  of  a  bright  red  ;  and  it  required  a 
fenfible  quantity  of  fixed  alcali  to  reftore  its  blue  co- 
lour, and  neutralife  it. 

Experiment  XVI. 

In  confequence  of  the  refult  of  this  experiment, 
(though  I  had  before  found  [Experiment  XII.] 
that  fixed  air  could  not  be  recovered,  by  means  of 
heat,  from  a  combination  of  it  with  y?;^'-?^  alcah)  I 
neutralifed  feveral  ounces  of  it,  condenfed  in  wa- 
ter, with  volatile  alcaline  fait,  and  then  added  more  of 
the  fame  alcali ;  till  the  liquor  was  very  fenfibly  alca- 
line. 

Treating 


The   appendix.  355 

Treating  this  folutioii  in  the  fame  manner  as  in 
the  1 2th  and  the  preceding  experiment,  I  found, 
on  the  very  firft  application  of  the  heat  of  boiling 
water,  that  the  fixed  air  left  the  volatile  alcali,  with 
which  it  had  been  intimately  combined,  and  indeed 
fnper-faturated ;  and  afcended,  or  was  dijVilled  over 
into  the  inverted  phial,  in  copious  fliowers  ;  perfeftly 
unchanged,  from  its  union  with  the  alcali,  and  pof- 
felTed  of  its  acid,  and  all  its  other,  qualities. 

Experiment    XVII. 

Under  this  title,  I  fhall  only  recapitulate,  as  the 
general  refuit  of  all  the  experiments  I  have  made, 
with  a  view  to  analife  fixed  air,  and  particularly  to 
detach  its  acid  from  it,  by  means  of  alcalis ; — that 
this  acid  is  a  principle  ejfetitial  to  the  conftituence  of 
this  fluid  ;  if  indeed  it  does  not  conftitute  the  whole 
of  it.  If  a  fmall  quantity  of  alcali  be  employed,  the 
remaining  fixed  air,  which  has  been  agitated  with  it, 
retains  as  much  of  its  acid  quality,  as  if  it  had  never 
been  fubjedted  to  the  aflion  of  the  alcali.  On  the 
other  hand,  if  a  fuflicient  quantity  of  the  latter  has 
been  agitated  with  it,  in  order  to  neutralife  the  whole 
of  the  mephitic  ac'ul^  the  factitious  air  difappears. 
In  fhort,  fixed  air,  and  its  acid,  if  they  be  not  one 
and  the  fame  fubftance,  appear,  from  all  my  refearches 
into  the  nature  of  this  fluid,  to  be,  at  leaft,  infepa- 
rable  companions  :  they  come  and  go  together ;  fo 
that,  when  the  acid  is  deflroyed,  or  lofes  its  dii^in- 
guifhing  characleriftics,  the  air,  at  the  fame  time, 
vanifhes  from  our  notice. 


Some  of  thefe   lafl-mentioned    experiments   have 
been  fo  lately  made  ;    and  the   impreflion  of  your 

A  a  2  fccond 


)^56  The  APPENDIX. 

fecond  volume  is,  as  you  inform  me,  in  fuch  for- 
wardnefs,  that  I  have  not  time  even  to  hint  at  the 
refults  of  the  numerous  collateral  obje^ls  of  inquiry, 
which  the  confideration  of  this  intcrefting  and  fruitful 
fubjecl:  has  fuggefted  to  me  ;  and  v.'hich  I  or  others 
may  hereafter  profecutc.  I  am  pretty  confident  that 
I  have  not  been  materially  deceived  in  the  experi- 
ments above  related  ;  or  been  tempted,  by  a  predi- 
ledion  for  a  preconceived  hypothefis,  to  draw  con- 
clufions  not  fully  warranted  by  the  premifes.  On 
that  fuppofition  i  lliall  terminate  this  long  letter,  or 
rather  formal  elTay,  v.'hich  I  have  not  time,  however, 
to  (horten,  with  a  few  mifcellaneous  reflexions,  in 
the  order  in  which  t}iey  occur  to  me. 

I.  The  ultimate  dcngn  of  all  our  experimental 
refearches  into  tlie  properties  of  natural  bodies,  is, 
or  ought  to  be,  public  utility.  On  this  account, 
I  mention  in  the  firft  place  a  practical,  ufeful,  and 
perhaps  important  application  of  the  refults  of  the 
eighth,  ninth,  and  tenth  experiments.  A  medical  ufe 
may  be  m^ade  of  the  procelTes  there  defcribed,  in 
which  a  ne%v  neutral  fait  is  produced,  by  com- 
bining the  mephitic  dcid  with  alcal-ine  falts  ;  in  pu- 
trid difeafes  particularly,  and  in  all  thofe  cafes  where 
we  would  wifh  to  introduce  a  larger  quantity  of  fixed 
air  into  the.fyftem,  than  can  be  condenfed  by,  or 
combined  with,  fimple  water.  .  By  previoufly  dif- 
folving  in  this  fluid  certain  quantities  of  fixed  alcaline 
fait,  it  may  be  made  to  receive  twice  or  thrice  its 
bulk,  or  a  ftill  larger  proportion,  of  fi,\ed  air.  I  have 
not  made  any  experiments  purpofely  to  afcertain  how 
far  the  folubility  xA  the  neutral  Jiiephltic  fait  in  water 
extends  :  but  from  the  7th  experhnent  it  rtiould  feeni 
to  be  poffefTed  of  this  quality  in  an  unlimited,  or  at 
k-afl:  in  a  very  extenfive  degree.     Neither  liave  I  yet 

had 


The  appendix.  357 

had  oppoi'tunities  of  experiencing  the  qualities  of  very 
lirong  folutions  of  this  new  faline  neutral  compound. 
It  is  probable  tliat  they  will  be,  at  leaft  in  part,  de- 
compounded in  the  itomach,  or  prima  vies.  I,  once 
oiily,  drank  eight  ounces  of  alcaliied  water,  which 
had  been  neutralifed  by  about  a  pint  and  a  half  of 
rixed  air  ;  and  was  very  fenfible  of  its  etfeits,  par- 
ticularly in  my  head,  for  fome  time  afterwards.  It 
appeared  likewife  to  ail  pretty  (Irongly  as  a  diuretic. 

From  the  very  (hort  experience  I  have  yet  had  of 
Dr.  Nooth's  apparatus  (delcribed  in  the  lail  volume 
of  the  Philofophical  Tranfactions )  It  feems  to  me 
well  adapted  to  the  preparation  of  this  compound, 
or  faline  Pyrmont  water.  All  the  junctures,  how- 
ever, ought  to  be  perfectly  air-tight  3  as  it  is  of  ad- 
vantage that  the  alcalifed  v.'ater  Ihould  ftand  a  fev/ 
days  expofed  to  the  aftion  of  frefh  portions  of  fixed 
air ;  that  it  may  be  perfectly  neutralifed,  and  even 
receive  an  excefs  of  acid. 

2.  When  a  moderate  quantity  of  alcaline  fait  has 
been  diflblved  in  the  water,  as,  for  inftance,  only 
three  or  four  grains  in  each  ounce,  the  artificial  Pyr- 
mont water,  into  which  I  have  converted  this  v>'eaker 
alcaline  folution,  is  of  courfe  more  fapid,  and  appears 
to  me  more  pleafant,  than  even  that  which  has  been 
made  with  firnple  water.  It  has  the  fame  acidulous 
ta'ile,  when  the  procefs  has  been  properly  conducted  ; 
and  if  it  fhould  be  defired  to  have  it  ftill  more  pun- 
gent and  acidulous,  chemifiry  Vv'ill  furnifli  us  with 
various  expedients  for  difengaging  a  part  of  the  me- 
phitic  acid,  at  the  time  the  water  is  drank.  This 
may  be  effected  either  by  different  faline  compounds, 
or  by  naked  acids,  or  acefcent  liquors.  For  the  me- 
phitic  acid  is  let  loofe  from  its  alcaline  bafis  by  all  the 

A  a  3  acids 


358  The  APPENDIX. 

acids  which  I  have  yet  had  leifure  to  try  ;  and  even 
by  the  flight  and  latent  acid  contained  in  w^ine,  or 
other  vinous  Hquors. 

3.  Thefe  experiments  lead  us  to  confider  the  com- 
mon or  mild  alcaline  falts,  as  they  are  called,  in  a  new 
point  of  viev>r.  They  fhew,  that  the  only  true  and 
fimple  alcaline  fait  is  the  caiiftlc  alcali,  either  fixed  or 
volatile ;  which  has  been  reduced  to  a  pure  alcaline 
ftate  by  the  abftradion  of  the  mephitic  acid  com- 
bined with  it,  through  the  fuperior  affinity  or  attrac- 
tion of  pure  or  fimple^  that  is,  calcined  calcareous 
earth.  All  the  others  are  only  fubcdkcdine  falts,  more 
or  lefs  combined  with,  and  in  part  neutralifed  by,  the 
mephitic  acid  5  and  which  are  capable,  as  has  been 
fhcwn,  of  being  completely  neutralifed  by  it. 

4.  When  we  expel,  and  colIe£t,  the  mephitic  acid 
from  an  alcali,  by  means  of  the  vitriolic,  or  any  other 
acid,  the  procefs  is  perfectly  funilar  to  thofe  by  which 
we  expel  and  diftill  other  acids  from  their  alcaline, 
earthy,  or  metallic  bafes,  by  means  of  a  fuperior  acid. 
The  only  material  difference  is,  that'  the  vapours  of 
thofe  acids,  though  equally  elaftic,  are,  in  general, 
readily  condenfable,  and  come  over  reduced  into  a 
liquid  and  palpable  fiate  :  whereas  the  vapour  of  the 
mephitic  acid  more  obilinately  retains  its  elafticity  j 
which  it  preferves  liil  a  body  is  prefented  to  it,  to 
which  it  has  an  affinity,  and  with  which  it  then 
readily  unites.  Your  acid  air^  that  is,  the  marine 
acid  in  a  ftate  of  vapour,  approaches  neareft  to  it  in 
this  refpeit.  Like  mephitic  air,  it  preferves  its  elaftic 
or  aerial  qualities,  when  confined  by  glafs  and  mer- 
cury ;  and  only  dilTers  from  it  in  being  much  more 
readily  and  copiouily  condenfed,  when  water  is  pre- 
fejited  to  it.    In  that  cafe,  however,  the  phlegm  which 

condenfes 


The  appendix.  359 

condenfes  acid  air  becomes  a  ftrong  fpirit  of  fea  fait ; 
whereas  that  which  condenfes  fixed  air,  does  it  fo 
fparingly,  as  to  confcitute  only  a  Pyrmont  water,  or 
a  dilute  folution  of  mephitic  acid. 

5.  It  is  a  matter  which  may  be  worthy  of  future 
invertigation,  to  inquire  whether  pure  fixed  air  be  a 
fimple  or  compound  fubftance ;  and  whether  the  jne- 
phitic  acid  mzy  not  be  procured,  per  fe^  or  in  a  liquid, 
vifible,  or  concentrated  ftate  ;  by  the  addition  of  a 
few  drops  of  which,  water  or  other  liquors  may  be 
impregnated  with  it  to  any  degree.  From  the  expe- 
riments related  in  a  letter  of  mine  inferted  in  your 
former  volume,  [page  317,  iftedit.J  as  well  as  from 
fome  of  your  own  obfervations,  it  appeared  that 
nitrous  air  was  the  vapour  of  the  nitrous  acid, 
probably  combined  with  phlogifton,  or  fome  other 
fubftance  *  ;  to  which  it  owed  its  elafticity,  or  aerial 
form,  and  from  which  it  was  feparable  by  the  ad- 
mixture of  atmofpherical  air.  If  fixed  air  be  funply 
the  vapour  of  the  mephitic  acid,  the  tafK  of  thus  con- 
denfing  or  concentrating  it  becomes  defperate.  But  it 
may  poffibly  be  united  with  fome  volatiliftng  principle^ 
to  which  it  may  owe  its  elafticity,  and  its  being  fo 
fparingly  foluble  in  water.  Purfuing  this  idea,  I  fore- 
fee  many  refources  which  chemiftry  affords  us,  for 
accomplilhing  this  purpofe.    As  I  have  not,  however, 

*  The  union  of  this  principle  with  the  nitrous  acid  in  nitrous  air,  is 
fo  ftrift,  that  the  latter  may  be  long  and  forcibly  agitated  in  a  phial, 
not  only  with  water,  but  even  with  alcaline  folutions,  or  lime-water, 
without  being  dc-compoundei.  But  on  holding  the  phi.il  in  an  inverted 
fituation,  fo  as  to  fuffer  bubbles  of  atmofpherical  air  fucceflively  to  en- 
ter, the  decompofuion  eich  time  vifibly  takes  place  ;  and  the  rcdnefs 
and  eftervefcence  appear  on  every  frcfh  admiflion,  till  the  whole  of 
the  nitrous  acid,  hereby  diflodged  from  the  other  principle,  has  beeu 
combined  with  the  included  alcali  or  earth. 

A  a  4  had  . 


360  The  APPENDIX. 

had  time  to  realife  any  of  them,  I  lliall  not  enlarge 
this  Effay  with  any  of  my  various  fpeculations  on 
this  fubje<Sl. 

I  am,  &c.  Wm.  Bewly, 

See  Mr.  Bewly's  third  Letter^  No.  VI. 

.NUMBER      II. 

A  Letter  frmn  Dr.  Percival,  F.R.S.  and  S.A, 
to  the  Rev.  Dr.  Priestley,  on  the  Soliiticn  of 
Stones  of  the  Urinary  and  of  the  Gall  Bladder^ 
hy  impregnating  f^ater  with  Fixed  Air. 

Manchefter,  June  i,  »775. 
Dear  Sir, 

I  flatter  myfelf  that  fixed  air  is  now  become  aft 
bbjedl:  of  the  attention  of  phyficians  ;  as  it  has  beei^ 
fully  fhewn  that  it  is  capable  of  being  applied  to  many 
important  medicinal  purpofes.  In  ■pulmonic  difordersy 
the  gangrenous  fore  throat,  and  \n  malignant  fevers,  the 
happieft  efFeils  have  been  experienced' from  the  ufe  of 
it ;  and  I  know  not  a  more  powerful  remedy  (or  foul 
ulcers,  as  it  mitigates  pain,  promotes  a  good  digeftion, 
and  correfts  the  putrid  difpofition  of  the  fluids.  I 
have  related  feveral  cafes,  in  the  Appendix  to  your 
treatife  on  air,  which  evince  the  truth  of  thefe  obfer- 
vations ;  and  fince  the  piiblication  of  that  work,  a 
variety  of  fimilar  fads  have  occurred  to  my  learned 
friend.  Dr.  Dobfon,  in  his  hQfpitalr-pra6l:ice  ^t  Li- 
verpool. 

But  I  have  a  farther  and  very  interefling  difcovery, 
concerning  the  medicinal  properties  of  this  fpecies  of 
failitious  air,  to  communicate  to  you.  About  the 
end  of  I?ft  year  I  was  informed  that  Dr.  Saunders, 

^  phy- 


The  APPEND  IX.  361 

a  phyfician  in  London,  eminent  for  his  knowledge 
of  chemiftry,  had  employed  it  as  a  folvent  of  th6 
human  calculus. 

I  was  ignorant  of  the  manner  in  which  his  trials 
were  condu6led,  and  of  the  fuccefs  which  had  at- 
tended them  :  but  my  curioiity  was  excited ;  the 
acquifition  of  fuch  a  remedy  was  flattering  to  my 
hopes  ;  and  I  engaged  in  the  purfuit  of  it  almoft  with 
as  much  ardour,  as  if  it  had  been  the  philofopher's 
ftone.  I  recollecced  that  Dr.  Black  and  Mr,  Caven- 
difti  have  proved  the  folubility  of  various  earthy 
bodies  in  water,  either  by  abftraiting  from,  or  fuper- 
adding  to  the  fixed  air  which  they  contain  :  and  as 
the  human  calculus  is  diflblved  in  the  former  way  by 
lime-vv'ater  and  the  cauftic  alkali ;  it  appeared  highly 
probable,  that  the  like  effe6l  would  be  produced  on 
the  fame  fubfl:ance  by  the  latter  mode  of  operation. 
Analogy  feemed  favourable  to  the  hypothefis ;  and 
experiment  has  confirmed  it.  I  have  found  by  re- 
peated trials  that  calculi^  extradled  from  different 
fubjecls,  and  varying  in  fize,  figure,  and  texture,  are 
foluble  in  water  impregnated  with  fixed  air  ;  that  this 
menftruum  is  more  powerful  in  its  operation  even 
than  lime-water ;  and  that  though  it  is  inferior  in 
efficacy  to  the  vitriolic  acid,  and  the  cauflic  alcali, 
yet  it  is  more  univerfal  in  its  action  than  either  of 
them.  For  it  is  well  known  (fee  Dr.  Dawfon's 
Experiments,  Medical  Tranfadlions,  vol.  2.  p.  105) 
that  fome  Hones,  which  are  diflblved  by  the  caufl:ic 
alkali,  are  unchanged  by  the  vitriolic  acid,  and  vice 
verfa ;  whereas  the  mephitic  water,  as  far  as  my 
pbfervations  have  reached,  a6ls  upon  every  calculus 
which  is  fufpcnded  in  it.  And  I  have  tried  it  with 
jbofe  which  have  fuffered  no  diminution  of  weight 

from 


362  The  appendix. 

from  the  mevfinm  above-mentioned,  I  do  not  trouble 
you  with  a  detail  of  my  experiments,  becaufe  they 
would  exceed  the  bounds  of  a  letter,  and  I  Ihall  pro- 
bably publifli  them,  with  fuch  remarks  as  they  may 
fuggeft,  on  fome  future  occalion. 
,  But  I  cannot  reftrain  myfelf  from  exprefling  the 
heart-felt  fatisfa6lion  v/hich  I  enjoy  in  the  difcovery 
of  a  new  iithontriptic  medicine,  that  is  at  once  grate- 
ful to  the  palate,  ftrengthening  to  the  fcomach,  and 
falutary  to  the  whole  fyftem.  Lime-water  often  nau- 
feates  the  patient,  deftroys  his  appetite,  and  creates 
the  heart-burn  :  and  the  foap-iey  is  fo  caufdc  and 
acrimonious,  that  it  can  be  taken  only  in  the  fmallell 
quantity  j  frequently  produces  bloody  urine  ;  and  ag- 
c-ravates  the  tortures  which  it  is  intended  to  relieve. 
Both  thefe  remedies  alfo  require  a  very  fcricl  regimen 
of  diet,  and  their  qualities  are  liable  to  be  changed 
either  by  acidities,  or  the  fermentation  of  our  food 
in  the  firft  paffages.  But  the  mephitic  water  may  be 
drunk  in  the  largeft  quantity  without  fatiety  or  incon- 
venience :  it  requires  no  reftriftions  in  diet,  and  its 
medicinal  virtues  will  be  undiminifhed  in  the  ftomach 
or  bowels.  Perhaps  it  may  be  queftioned  whether 
jfixed  air  can  be  conveyed  by  the  ordinary  courfe  of 
circulation  to  the  kidneys  and  bladder  :  In  an  elallic 
ftate  it  certainly  cannot ;  but  diflblved  in  water,  it 
may  pafs  through  the  vafcular  fyftem,  without  crea- 
ting the  leaft  difturbance  or  diforder  -,  and  by  its  diu- 
retic quality,  will  be  powerfully  determined  to  the 
urinary  organs.  So  fl:rong  is  the  relation  that  fubfills 
between  mephitic  air  and  water,  that  they  remain 
firmly  combined,  although  expofed  to  confiderable 
variations  of  heat  and  cold.  You  found  that  it  re- 
quired half  an  hour,  even  when  the  boiling  heat  was 
4  employed, 


The    appendix.  363 

employsd,  to  expel  compleatly  the  fixed  air  from  a 
phiai  of  impregnated  water  ;  and  I  have  obferved  that 
it  has  retained  its  peculiar  flavour  feveral  days,  when 
left  in  a  bafon,  with  a  large  furface  open  to  the  ex- 
ternal air. 

But  to  obtain  more  fatisfactory  evidence  upon  this 
fubjed^,  I  tilled  a  bottle  with  mephitic  water,  and 
placed  it  in  a  heat  of  about  98  degrees  of  Fahrenheit's 
thermometer.  A  bent  glafs  tube,  a  quarter  of  an 
inch  in  diameter,  properly  luted  at  each  end,  formed 
a  communication  between  this  bottle  and  one  of 
lime-water,  to  the  bottom  of  v/hich  it  extended.  An 
inteiiine  m-Otion  foon  enfued ;  air-bubbles  were  flowly 
conveyed  into  the  lime-water ;  and  a  white  preci- 
pitation was  gradually  formicd. 

In  an  hour  and  a  half  the  lime-water  was  become 
turbid ;  but  was  quickly  rendered  quite  milky  by 
blowing  air  into  it  from  the  lungs.  The  mephitic 
vvater  ftill  retained  its  brifk  acidulous  talle ;  and  when 
?.  greater  degree  of  heat  ( 1 08" )  was  applied  to  the  bottle 
which  contained  it,  a  brific  inteftine  motion  was 
renewed. 

As  the  vapour  of  chalk,  and  oil  of  vitriol,  has  been 
found  fo  efficacious  in  correcting  the  Janics^  and 
abating  the  pain  of  foul  ulcers,  when  externally  ap- 
plied, we  may  reafonably  prefume  that  the  internal 
ufe  of  the  fame  remeefy  will  prove  beneficial  in  fimilar 
afFe(5tions  of  the  urinary  pafFages.  Such  complaints 
frequently  occur  in  practice,  and  may  arife  either 
from  calculi  in  the  kidneys  and  bladder ;  from  the  rc- 
cefilon  of  fcorbutic  eruptions,  which  appeared  on  the 
furface  of  the  body  ;  from  the  venereal  diieafe  j  from 
•  ftrains  ;  from  contufions  ;  or  various  other  caufes. 
And  Vy-ater  impregnated  with  fixed  air,  feems  well 
adapted,  byjts  diuretic,  healing,  and  antifeptic  powers, 

to 


364  The  appendix. 

to  wafh  ofF,  and  fweeten  the  acrid  matter,  to  abate 
the  defliixion  on  the  mucous  membrane,  to  contraft 
the  flabby  edges  of  the  ulcers,  and  to  difpofe  them  to 
a  fpeedy  granulation.  If  the  pain,  inflammation, 
and  abforption  of  pus  have  excited  a  hedic  fever,  the 
patient  may  drink  plentifully  of  Seltzer  water,  which 
is  of  a  cooling  quality,  although  it  abounds  with  me- 
phitic  air :  or  a  fmall  quantity  of  Rochelle  fait  may 
be  added  to  the  mineral  water  artificially  prepared. 
Thus  will  the  increafed  a61:ion  of  the  heart  and  arte- 
ries, which  may  arife  from  the  ftimulus  of  the  fixed 
air,  be  entirely  obviated,  without  the  leaft  diminu- 
tion of  its  medicinal  powers.  And  whilft  the  fanc- 
tion  of  experience  is  wanting,  reafon  will  juftify  the 
trial  of  a  remedy,  which  is,  at  once,  fafe,  pleafant, 
and  efiicacious. 

In  ulcers  of  the  kidneys  and  bladder,  the  urine  is 
commonly  high  coloured,  pungent,  and  of  an  offen- 
five  fmell.  To  afcertain  whether  fixed  air  would  cor- 
real thefe  qualities,  I  attempted  the  following  dif- 
agreeable  experiment. 

Repeated  ftreams  of  fixed  air  were  conveyed  into 
three  pints  of  urine,  which  had  been  kept  till  it  was 
become  very  putrid,  and  which  emitted  a  ftrong  vo- 
latile odour.  I  examined  the  fmell  of  it  from  time 
to  time,  whilft  this  procefs  was  carrying  on,  and 
compared  it  with  a  portion  of  the  fame  urine  which 
•was  referved  as  a  fiandard.  The  pungency  of  it  gra- 
dually diminifhed  j  it  acquired  a  brighter  colour,  and 
vv^as  lefs  turbid ;  but  its  putrid  odour  feemed  to  be. 
increafed.  Thefe  obfervations  were  made  in  the 
evening,  and  early  the  next  morning  I  awoke  with 
a  violent  head-ach,  which  was  attended  with  a  vo- 
miting and  a  diarrhoea.  Alarmed  at  thefe  effeits, 
I  which 


The  appendix.  365 

which  I  attributed  to  the  putrid  vapours  of  the  urine, 
I  dropped  the  protecution  of  the  experiment ;  but 
the  fucceeding  day,  Mr.  Thomas  Smith,  a  young' 
gentleman,  who  will  one  day  be  an  ornament  to  the 
profeflion  of  phyfic,  undertook  the  examination  which 
I  had  begun  :  and  after  attentively  comparing  toge- 
ther the  fcandard  and  the  urine  impregnated  with 
fixed  air,  he  found  the  latter  more  ofFenfively  putrid 
than  the  former,  but  without  any  degree  of  pun- 
gency or  volatility.  As  this  experiment  was  not  com- 
pleated,  I  am  uncertain  whether  the  urine  was  fweet- 
ened  by  the  mephiric  air.  But  it  is  evident  that  the 
volatile  alkali,  generated  by  putrefaction,  was  either 
neutralifed,  diihpated,  or  prevented  from  afcending 
by  the  atmofphere  of  fixed  air,  which  filled  die  upper 
part  of  the  veiTel.  Perhaps  this  atmofphere  might 
be  the  -:,  enftruum  of  the  putrid  effluviwn^  ernitted  by 
the  urine,  which  being  then  accumulated,  would  ap- 
pear to  have  its  foetor  increafed.  In  another  work, 
I  have  related  an  experiment  of  Mr,  Henry's  fome- 
what  fimilar  to  this,  and  which  fuggefled  to  him  the 
like  explanation.  A  piece  of  putrid  fle(h  was  fuf- 
pended  twelve  hours  in  a  three-pint  bottle  clofely 
corked,  and  filled  with  fixed  air,  which  had  been 
feparated  from  chalk  by  the  vitriolic  acid.  The  beef 
was  confiderably  fweetened,  but  the  air  in  the  bottle 
was  rendered  intolerably  ofi'enfive. 

The  waters  of  Bath,  in  Somerfetfhire,  have  been 
long  and  juftly  celebrated  for  their  efficacy  in  the 
jaundice,  and  other  hepatic  disorders.  They  abound 
with  fixed  air  ;  and  it  may  be  of  importance  to  afcer- 
tain  whether  they  derive  from  this  aiTtive  principle, 
the  pov/er  of  diiTolving  the  concretions  of  the  bile, 

and 


366  The  APPENDI^t. 

and  of  removing  the  obftru<Slions  in  the  liver,  I  was 
induced  therefore  to  try  the  fohibihty  of  gall  ftones  in 
mephitic  water.  But  I  have  yet  only  a  folitary  expe- 
riment on  the  fubjedl  to  offer  to  you.  A  gall  fcone, 
that  had  been  extracted  from  a  tumour  in  the  region 
of  the  liver,  was  divided  into  tv/o  parts.  One  of 
thefe,  which  vvciglied  fifty-one  grains  and  a  half,  was 
immerfed  four  days  in  rain  water,  Itrongly  impreg- 
nated with  fixed  air.  The  other  weighed  twenty 
grains  and  a  quarter,  and  was  macerated  in  fmiple 
rain-water  during  the  fame  fpace  of  time.  The  firfl 
fragment,  when  carefully  dried,  was  become  heavier 
by  one  grain,  having  gajned  fo  much  from  the  fixed 
air.  In  texture  and  appearance  it  remained  un- 
changed. The  fecond  fragment  had  loft  one  eighth 
of  a  grain. 

I  mean  not  to  draw  any  decifive  inference  from  a 
fmgle  experiment.  But  it  is  probable  that  the  Bath 
waters  refolve  concretions  of  the  bile,  not  fo  much 
by  a  chemical  operation,  as  by  accelerating  the  fecre- 
tions  of  the  liver,  Simulating  the  organs  of  digeliion, 
and  invigorating  the  whole  anim.al  fyft-^m.  Nature 
indeed  obfervcs  a  peculiar  oeconom.y  in  the  circulation 
of  the  blood  through  the  liver  ;  and  as  the  bile  is  one 
of  her  moll  elaborate  fluids,  it  mull  be  difficult  to 
introduce  a  foreign  and  unaffimilated  fubilance  into  it. 
From  analogy,  however,  we  may  conclude,  that  this 
is  not  impracticable.  The  milk  and  the  faliva  are 
frequently  impregnated  Vv'ith  adventitious  matters ; 
and  thefe  animal  liquors,  like  the  bile,  are  fecreted 
by  organs  of  a  particular  llruclurc,  and  for  determi- 
nate and  important  purpofes.  A  remedy  which  would 
pafs  unchanged  into  the  fyllem  of  the  liver,  and  me- 
dicate 


The  appendix.  367 

dicate  the  bile,  fo  as  to  render  it  unapt  to  coagulate, 
or  enable  it  to  refolve  the  concretions  already  formed, 
would  be  a  moft  valuable  acquifition  *  ;  and  the  ob- 
ftacles  to  the  attainment  of  it  fhould  rather  be  re- 
garded as  incitements  to  our  induftry,  than  apologies 
for  fupinenefs  and  defpair.  Such,  it  muft  be  ac- 
knowledged, they  have  proved ;  as  appears  from  the 
variety  of  diiToIvents  which  have  been  propofed  and 
tried.  Acids,  alicaiies,  foap,  ardent  and  dulcified 
fpirits,  with  frefti  vegetable  juices,  have  been  recom- 
mended. Valifnerius  found  that  a  compolition  of 
alcohol  and  oil  of  turpentine  deftroyed  the  textur* 
and  cohefion  of  gall  flones,  more  perfedly  than  any 
other  menflruwn  f  ;  and  Mr.  William  White  of 
York  has  fully  confirmed  this  obfervation,  by  a  num- 
ber of  judicious  experiments  which  he  has  commu- 
nicated to  me.  Some  time  ago  I  thought  favourably 
of  this  remedy,  and  endeavoured  to  promote  the  trial 
of  it  J  ;  but  farther  reflection  has  convinced  me,  that 
the  continued  ufe  of  it  is  more  likely  to  prove  inju- 
rious than  beneficial.  Spirituous  liquors,  of  all  forts, 
have  a  peculiarly  unfavourable  operation  on  the  liver ; 
and  it  would  be  abfard  to  feek  a  fpecific  medicine  for 
the  difeafes  of  the  bile,  in  what  experience  has  fatally 
fliewn  to  be  a  fpcdfic  poifon  to  the  organ  which  fccretes 
it.  Perhaps  fixed  air,  under  fome  form  or  other, 
may  hereafter  be  found  to  be  the  clcfidcraturn,  which 
we  have  been  fo  long  purfuing.  At  leaft,  we  may 
be  allowed  to  attribute  fome  diare  of  the  virtues  which 
the  Bath  waters  poilefs,  to  this  ingredient  in  their 
compofition ;  and  when  they  cannot  be  employed,  to 

*  Vide  Medical  Tranfaflions,  vol.  2.  p.  i6c. 
•^  Opcre,  torn,  3.  p.  6. 

1  EflViys  Medical  and  Exp<-T:ment«il,  vol.  2.  y..  232. 

rccom- 


368  The  APPENDIX. 

recommend  the  mephific  water,  as  an  innocent  and 
efficacious  fubftitute. 

I  am,  with  fincere  refpect  and  efteem. 
Dear  Sir, 
Your  moft  faithful  and  affeiSionate  friend, 

Tho.  Percival. 

P.  S.  Since  this  letter  was  written,  the  young  gen- 
tleman, whofe  name  I  have  before  mentioned  with 
refpeft,  has  at  my  defire  taken  large  quantities  of 
mephitic  water  daily,  during  the  fpace  of  a  fortnight. 
His  urine  became  impregnated  with  fixed  air,  preci- 
pitated lime-water,  and  proved  a  powerful  diflblvent 
of  the  calculi,  which  were  immerfed  in  it. 

Dr.  Saunders,  to  whom  I  have  communicated  my 
obfervations  on  the  folution  of  human  calculi  by  me- 
phitic water,  has  lately  favoured  me  with  a  general 
account  of  his  difcoveries  on  this  fubjeft.  There  is  a 
perfedl:  agreement  in  the  refult  of  our' experiments, 
and  we  propofe  to  publifh  them  together. 


N  U  M- 


The  APPENDIX.  369 


NUMBER     III. 

A  Letter  from  Dr.  Dob  son  of  Liverpool  td 
Dr.  Priestley  ;  with  Cafes  of  the  Efficacy  of 
Fixed  Air  in  putrid  Diforders. 

Liverpool,  March  29,  1775. 
Dear  Sir, 

My  friend  Dr.  Percival  has  lately  informed  me, 
that  you  are  about  to'publifh  a  fupplement  to  your 
valuable  work  on  fixed  air. 

The  gentlemen  of  the  faculty  have  not  given  that 
attention  to  the  medical  ufes  of  fixed  air,  which  I 
think  it  merits  :  and  a  late  medical  writer,  (vide  Dr. 
Lettfom's  Medical  Memoirs  of  the  Gener.  Difpenf. 
p.  334. )  doubts  whether  fixed  air  has  any  real  efficacy 
even  in  difeafes  of  a  putrid  clafs.  I  have  tranfcribed 
therefore  four  cafes  from  a  numberof  others,  which  are 
much  at  your  fervice.  If  they  are  too  late,  or  do  not 
coincide  with  the  intention  of  your  prefent  publica- 
tion, pleafe  to  return  them,  that  they  may  be  joined 
with  fome  other  cafes  and  pra6lical  obfervations, 
which  I  (hall  give  to  the  public  as  foon  as  I  have 
time  to  tranfcribe  them. 

That  Dr.  Priefiley  may  long  enjoy  health,  and  the 
world  reap  the  fraits  of  his  philofophical  labours, 
are  the  fincere  wi flies  of  his 

Refpedful  and  obedient  fervant, 
Matt.  Dobson. 

B  b  Of 


370  The  APPENDIX. 


Of  the  Efficacy  of  Fixed  Air  in  Fevers  of  tbt 
putrid  Clafs, 

Putrid  fevers  rarely  acquire  any  great  degree  of 
malignancy  in  Liverpool,  or  its  neighbourhood  ;  and 
wlien  they  do  appear,  it  is  generally  among  the  lower 
ranks  of  people.  A  fever  of  this  kind  crept  into  our 
public  hofpital  in  the  fpring  of  the  year  1773,  and 
a  confiderable  number  were  infeded. 

The  following  hiftories  are  tranfcribed  from  the 
notes,  which  were  taken  during  my  attendance  ou 
the  refpeitive  patients. 

HiJUry  I. 

Mary  Rainford,  about  15  years  of  age,  was  ad- 
mitted into  the  hofpital  on  account  of  convulfions  ; 
Ihe  was  fubje^l  likewife  every  three  or  four  weeks  to 
vomit  large  quantities  of  blood,  and  was  much  en- 
feebled by  thefe  complaints  at  the. time  of  her  being 
feifed  with  the  fever. 

She  firft  complained  of  pain  and  weight  in  the  head, 
pain  in  the  limbs  and  back,  and  a  great  degree  of 
languor  and  deje<5lion  ;  fhe  had  frequent  chills,  alter- 
nating with  flulhes  of  heat,  and  got  very  little  reft. 
The  tartar  emetic  was  twice  given,  and  operated  eafily 
and  powerfully  by  vomit ;  a  blifter  was  applied  be- 
tween the  Ihoulders ;  and  a  dofe  of  the  following 
•mixture  was  ordered  to  be  taken  every  three  hours. 

R  Sf, 


The   appendix.  371 

jfe.   Sp.  Alinderer.   %'viiji 

Saab.  Alb.  ^iij. 

Sp.  Lav.  co/fu  ^/s.  M.  Cap.  Cocb.  ij.  maj. 
tertia  quaque  bora. 

She  l\ad  for  common  drink  lemonade,  with  fvveet 
tnountain,  or  barley-water  well  acidulated  ;  the  body 
Vvas  kept  foluble  either  by  clyilers,  or  fome  gentle 
purgative,  and  the  room  was  well  aired  by  opening 
the  door  and  windows.  But  notv.'ithftanding  the 
ileady  ufe  of  thefe  means,  the  fever  became  more  and 
more  untoward,  and  was  on  the  fixth  day  accom- 
panied with  fuch  dangerous  fymptoms,  as  made  it 
necefTary  to  adopt  fome  other  method.  The  eyes 
were  heavy,  the  conjunctiva  red,  large  petechise 
fpread  over  different  parts  of  the  body,  the  tongue 
was  covered  with  a  brown  fur,  and  the  teeth  with  a 
fur  of  a  blackirti  colour ;  fne  was  very  feeble,  got  no 
fleep,  and  was  frequently  delirious,  efpecially  in  the 
night.  Hitherto  the  flate  of  the  pulfe  had  been  about 
120,  now  it  VN^as  135,   and  very  weak. 

Fixed  air  was  now  direded  in  the  following  manner. 

R.  Sr.L  Tartar.  9;. 
Aq.  Fontan.    ^  i3  . 

Saccb.  Alhi  "^j^  M.  Sumetid.  cum  Sacc.  Limon.    5^j 
incjp'iente  ebullitione  ;  et  ornni  hora  repetcnd^ 

From  the  time  (lie  entered  upon  this  plan,  the 
fymptoms  were  more  favourable,  (he  took  no  other 
medicine,  and  was  out  of  danger  in  four  days. 


B  b  2  Hijiary 


372  The  APPENDIX. 


Hijlory  II. 

Alice  Rigby  was  received  into  the  hofpital  for  a' 
fore  leg,  and  during  her  ftay  was  attacked  with  the 
fever  of  the  houfe.  The  progrefs  and  treatment  of 
the  difeafe  for  the  firfl  week,  were  nearly  the  fame 
as  in  the  preceding  cafe.  On  the  feventh  day  fhe  was 
extremely  weak,  got  no  reft  :  there  were  large  pete- 
chiae  on  many  parts  of  the  body,  the  brain  was  much 
affedted,  pulfe  125,  and  the  tongue  little  differing 
from  its  natural  appearance. 

Fixed  air  was  now  adminiftered  in  the  fame  man- 
ner as  to  the  former  patient. — The  petechiae  foon 
began  to  difappear,  Ihe  got  ftrength,  the  pulfe  became 
fuller  and  flower,  and  the  fever  was  fubdued  in  fix 
days  by  the  ufe  of  this  medicine  alone.  The  bark 
was  at  this  time  ordered,  as  an  additional  fecurity 
againft  a  relapfe. 

Hipry  III. 

March  20.  A  confultation  was  defired  for  Ann 
Knowles,  who  had  been  in  the  hofpital  for  a  con- 
liderable  time,  and  was  much  reduced  by  a  long 
continued  rheumatifm  at  the  time  flie  was  attacked 
■with  tjie  fever.  This  was  the  feventh  day  of  the 
difeafe ;  and  though  flie  had  been  very  judicioufly 
treated  by  the  gentleman  under  whofe  care  flie  had 
been  at  firft  admitted,  the  fever  grew  daily  worfe, 
and  was  now  accompanied  with  many  dangerous 
fymptoms. 

lob- 


The  APPENDIX.  373 

I  obferved  an  extreme  languor  and  dejetSlion ;  the 
eyes  heavy,  the  eye-lids  half  clofed,  and  the  con- 
junctiva inflamed.  There  was  a  ftupor,  with  a  mut- 
tering kind  of  delirium,  and  a  continual  tolfing  and 
moaning.  The  pulfe  very  weak  and  very  frequent, 
more  than  140  in  a  minute;  the  tongue  moifl  and 
clear,  and  not  altered  from  its.  natural  appearance, 
except  that  it  was  of  a  deep  red.  The  whole  body 
was  covered  with  fmall  petechiae  ;  fhe  had  frequent 
ftools,  which  were  extremely  offenfive,  and  her  little 
remains  of  ftrength  were  every  hour  ftill  more  and 
more  exhaufted. 

It  was  agreed,  that  fhe  fliould  take  the  fixed  air  in 
the  fame  way  as  I  had  ordered  it  for  the  two  preceding 
patients. 

March  2 1 .  The  good  effeiSls  of  this  medicine  were 
evident,  though  the  fymptoms  were  flill  urgent  and 
alarming  :  the  flools  lefs  frequent,  but  ofFenfive  :  the 
pulfe  130,  and  not  fo  languid  :  in  other  refpe6ls  the 
patient  was  not  much  altered. 

23.  The  petechiae  difappearing,  the  loofenefs  di- 
miniflied,  and  the  ftools  much  lefs  ofFenfive ;  pulfe 
no,  fleeps  and  gets  flrength.  The  medicine  was- 
now  to  be  given  only  every  four  hours. 

24.  Stronger  and  better,  pulfe  100,  head  much 
clearer,  and  the  tongue  has  more  of  its  natural  red. 

26.  Pulfe  85  j  and  from  this  time  the  fever  entirely 
left  her.  She  took  no  other  medicine,  and  had  no 
relapfe. 

I  have  directed  fixed  air  both  in  hofpital  and  pri- 
vate praclice  for  a  variety  of  patients,  in  difeafes  ac- 
companied with  fymptoms  of  putrefaction,  and  with 
fuccefs.  It  would  be  fuperfluous  to  enter  into  a  fur- 
ther detail  of  particular  hirtories.  The  following  ac- 
B  b  3  count, 


S74 


The  appendix. 


count,  however,  of  the  happy  effeiSls  of  fixed  air  iri 
the  fecond  fever  of  the  frnall  pox,  is  fo  ftriking  4 
proof  of  its  efficacy  in  difeafes  of  the  putrid  clafs, 
that  I  muft  tranfcribe  it. 

Hipry  IV, 

Ann  Forbes,  fervant  to  Mr-  Hume  of  York-ftreet, 
Liverpool,  had  the  confluent  fmall  pox  in  Auguft 
1773.  The  weather  was  extremely  hot,  and  the 
fymptoms  fo  very  unfavourable,  that  there  did  not 
appear  the  moft  diftant  hope  of  her  recovery.  Par- 
ticular care  was  taken  to  have  a  conftant  fupply  of 
-frefh  air,  and  the  antiphldgiftic  treatment  was  ftr!61:Iy 
purfaed  during  the  inflammatory  fever.  The  difeafe 
was  now  advancing  into  the  putrid  flage,  and  thd 
fecond  fever  comm.enced  with  little  or  no  appearance 
of  fuppuration. 

Notwithftanding  every  precaution  with  refpedl  to 
the  free  accefs  of  air,  change  of  linnen,  and  every 
circumftance  of  cleanlinefs,  the  unlimited  ufe  of 
oranges,  lemonade,  and  wine  negus,  this  poor  crea-- 
ture  was  the  moft  miferable  objedi  I  ever  beheld, 
{she  became  extremely  offenuve,  and  had  the  appear- 
ance of  one  continued  m.afs  of  putrid  ichor  :  the 
pulfe  fmall  and  rapid,  and  fhe  had  a  conftant  reilleli- 
jiefs  with  inexpreflible  anxiety. 

A  purgative  was  direfted,  and  a  glafs  of  fweet 
mountain  after  every  ftool.  The  fymptoms,  how- 
ever, became  more  and  more  alarming,  the  offcn- 
fivenefs  was  almoft  intolerable,  and  fhe  was  fre- 
quently fick,  agitated,  trembling,  and  like  one  about 
to  expire.     In  this  urgent  fituation,  I  determined  to 

try 


The  appendix.  375 

try  the  efTecls  of  fixed  air,  and  it  was  given  in  the 
manner  already  mentioned. 

The  nurfe  and  attendants  foon  obferved  an  agree- 
able change.  In  24  hours,  the  putrid  ftench  was 
much  diminifhed,  the  breath  of  the  patient  was  not 
near  fo  ofFenfive,  and  the  room  was  very  tolerable 
compared  with  what  it  had  hitherto  been.  She  was 
cooler,  had  lefs  anxiety,  and  the  pulfe  became  fuller 
and  flower.  In  two  days  more,  the  was  ftill  much- 
better  :  and  by  repeating  the  purgative,  giving  wine 
occafionally,  and  perfevering  in  the  ufe  of  the  fixed 
air,  her  recovery  was  furprizingly  fpeedy  and  perfed, 

NUMBER    IV. 

ExtraSi  of  a  Letter  from  John  Warren,  M.J}, 
of  Taunton,  to  Dr.  Priestley,  with  a  me- 
dical Cafe,  proving  the  Ufe  of  Clyfiers  of  Fixei> 
Air  in  a  putrid  Difeafe. 

Taunton,  06t.  3,  1775. 
Sir,  / 

In  compliance  with  your  requeft,  I  have  done 
jnyfelf  the  honour  of  fending  you  an  account  of  a 
medical  cafe,  in  which  the  application  of  fixed  air 
proved  fo  remarkably  fuccefsful,  as  to  leave  no 
room  to  doubt  of  the  great  advantages  the  medicai 
world  might  derive  from  its  ufe,  in  putrid  difeafes 
of  the  worft  and  moft  formidable  fpecies. 

I   have  for  many  years  paft  been  ftrongly  prepof- 

fefied  in  favour  of  the  utility  of  fixed  air  in  certain 

*  JB  b  4  inedisal 


376  The  APPENDIX. 

medical  cafes,  from  its  peculiar  virtue  verified  by  Dr. 
Macbride's  experiments,  in  fweetening  putrid  flefh, 
and  reftoring  to  it  that  texture,  which  it  muft  of 
courfe  have  loll  by  undergoing  fuch  a  change ;  nor 
have  I,  in  the  pradice  of  my  profeffion,  found  my- 
felf  difappointed  of  the  advantages  which  I  flattered 
myfelf  from  theory,  might  be  derived  from  its  ufe. 

I  have  latterly  employed  it  in  almofl  every  putrid 
cafe  that  offered ;  and  though  I  am  by  no  means  fo 
partial  to  its  virtues,  as  to  attribute  the  whole  merit 
of  a  recovery  to  it  alone,  when  probably  other  medi- 
cines, with  which  it  was  joined,  were  alfo  entitled  to 
their  (hare,  yet  I  am  thoroughly  convinced,  that  the 
fuccefs  I  have  met  with,  in  the  treatment  of  putrid 
diforders,  is,  in  a  great  meafure,  to  be  afcribed  to  the 
large  quantities  of  this  fluid  which  I  have  conftantly 
enjoined  my  patients  to  make  ufe  of. 

Various  have  been  the  modes  which  I  have  adopted 
for  introducing  it  into  the  fyftem — I  order  it  frequently 
to  be  given  by  clyfter,  fometimes  to  be  inhaled  by 
the  mouth  (particularly  in  ulcerated  fore-throats  with 
the  greateft  advantage)  and  it  is  with  the  fame  view 
alfo  of  corre6ling  putrefaction,  that  the  common 
drinks,  which  I  allow  my  patients,  are  almoft  all  of 
tliem  impregnated  with  this  fpecies  of  air,  as  Pyrmont 
water,  brifli  fmall  beer,  currant  wine,  and  the  like. 

I  would  beg  leave  here  to  fubjoin  a  pradice  I  have 
for  fome  time  pail:  found  produdive  of  the  mofl:  be- 
neficial confequences  in  the  treatment  of  putrid  di- 
fcafes  in  children — It  is  commonly  known,  that  phyfic 
of  every  kind  is  to  them  peculiarly  obnoxious,  and 
thoufands  annually  fall  a  facrifice  to  diforders  from 
a  mere  antipathy  to  it.  Therefore,  whenever  I  per- 
ceive a  child  utterly  averfe  to  take  medicine,  i^  the 

Peru- 


The    appendix.  377 

Peruvian  bark  is  proper,  I  give  it  by  clyfter,  and 
order  the  milk  (its  beft  and  moft  common  vehicle 
when  given  in  this  manner)  to  be  as  thoroughly  im- 
pregnated with  fixed  air  as  poffible. 

I  have  the  honour  to  fubfcribe  myfelf. 

Sir, 

Your  very  obedient  ferv'ant, 

John  Warren. 

The  Medical  Cafe. 

Mr.  C ,  aged  23,  a  gentleman  of  great  tem- 
perance, and  of  a  good  conftitution,  laboured  under 
an  irregular  nervous  fever  for  the  fpace  of  ten  v^eeks, 
attended  for  the  moft  part  with  delirium,  and  almoft 
conftant  watchfulnefs. 

At  the  expiration  of  this  period,  fymptoms  of  pu- 
tridity began  to  make  their  appearance,  feemingly 
however  more  owing  to  emaciation,  and  to  the  long 
continuance  of  his  difeafe,  than  to  any  original  con- 
tagionr  The  Peruvian  bark  had  from  time  to  time, 
particularly  during  the  latter  ftages  of  his  illnefs,  been 
adminiftered  to  him,  which,  on  the  appearance  of 
putrefactive  fymptoms,  was  increafed  to  the  quantity 
of  two  fcruples,  given  in  the  form  of  a  bolus,  with 
thirty  drops  of  elixir  of  vitriol,  every  two  hours. 
Everything  he  drank  was  acidulated  with  the  juice 
of  lemons  or  oranges,  and  his  common  liquor  was 
Port  wine  mixed  with  Pyrmont  water.  This  courfe 
was  perfifted  in  for  fome  days,  the  putrid  complaints 

however 


37S  The  APPENDIX. 

however  increafed,  and  fo  great  was  the  fcetor  emitted 
with  his  breath,  and  arifing  from  his  body,  that  not- 
■withftanding  his  being  fupplied  v*rith  a  conilant  fuc- 
ceffion  of  frefh  air,  and  though  large  quantities  of 
vinegar,  lavender-water,  and  rue,  with  other  odo- 
riferous fubftances,  were  conftantly  made  ufe  of  to 
purify  his  room,  yet  all  were  found  perfedly  inef- 
fc6tual.  His  ftools,  which  at  this  period  confilled  of 
Jittle  elfe  than  putrid  blood,  and  which  came  from 
him  in  great  abundance  (in  the  whole  to  the  amount 
of  many  pounds)  were  abfolutely  intolerable,  nor 
was  it  without  much  difficulty  that  the  nurfes  could 
be  induced  to  remain  any  longer  near  him. 

Univerfal  languors,  with  almoft  total  infenfibility, 
now  fupervened  :    an   earthy  coldnefs  difFufed  itfelf 
through  every  part  of  his  body,  nor  were  the  hotteft 
fomentations,    though  continued   three  hours  toge- 
ther,    capable    of  procuring    him    any   degree    of 
warmth. — Every  breath  he  drew  feemed  to  be  his 
lafl:. —  In  this   deplorable  fituation  he   continued   a 
whole  day,  his  bolufes  were  omitted  through  necef- 
•fity,  and  with  difficulty  we  could,  from  time  to  time^ 
get  him   to  fwallow  a  few  fpoonfuls  of  fome  warm 
cordial  medicine ;  v/hich,  however,  by  continually  re- 
peating, began  at  length,  in  fome  degree,  a  little,  to 
revive  him. 

I  now  ordered  him  clyfters  of  fixed  air,'^  of  which 
a.  large  bladder  full,  containing  near  two  quarts  of 
air,  was  every  three  or  four  hours  injefled,  and  his 
bark,  bqlufes  were  again  given  to  him,  as  often  as  his 
ftomach  would  allow  him  to  take  them.  In  the  fpaoe 
of  eighteen  hours,  the  cadaverous  foetor  arifing  from 
him,  began  to  abate ;  large  vibices,  or  putrid  blotches^ 
wtre  now,  for  the  hrft  time,  difcovered  on  almoft 

e^'ery 


The  appendix. 


379 


every  part  of  his  body,  his  pqlfe  howdver  was  better, 
and  his  warmth  in  Ibme  little  degree  returned  ;  the 
bolufes  and  clyfters  were  ordered  to  be  continued. 
In  four  or  live  days  the  noifome  fmell  became  im- 
perceptible, the  vibices  gradually  diminilhed,  and  his 
fever  left  him.  He  is  now  perfedly  recovered,  and 
a  living  miracle  of  what  fixed  air,  under  Divine  Pro- 
vidence, is  capable  of  effecting  on  the  human  oeco- 
nomy,  in  cafes  of  the  worft  and  mofl  putrefadtiv^ 
nature. 

John  Warren,' 

NUMBER     V. 

j/1  Letter  from  Mr.  Magellan  to  Dr,  Priest'^ 
hEY^ontheSubje^  ^/DephlogisticatedAir, 

Dear  Sir, 

Among  tlie  many  Important  difcoveries  for  which 
the  philcfophical  world  is  indebted  to  you,  chiefly  in 
that  new  and  exteniive  branch  of  natural  knowledge 
rcfpedling  diffomt  khuh  of  air,  a  very  flriking  one  is 
the  exhibiting,  in  the  form  of  this  fluid,  many  folid 
bodies,  and  m.ofi:  of  the  known  acids.  It  is  with  the 
mofl:  pleafmg  aftoniflnnent  that  I  have  always  beheld 
that  experiment,  by  which  any  unprejudiced  mind 
muft  be  convinced,  that  atmofpherical  air,  even  the 
piirefl:,  and  the  fittcft  for  animal  refpiration,  is  pro- 
duced by  heat  from  a  m.ixture  of  nitrous  acid  with 
any  dephlogiflicated  earth,  as  red  lead,  chalky  &c. 
For,  after  having  extracted  from  this  mixture  all  the 
air  that  fire  can  expel,  which  is  a  prodigious  quan- 
tity,  when  you  repeatedly  add  frelh  nitrous-acid  to 

the 


380  The  APPEND  IX, 

the  refiduum,  you  get  a  frefh  quantity  of  this  purefl 
air,  till  all  the  earthy  fubftance  difappears. 

This,  however,  being  a  very  tedious  procefs, 
when  carried  on  with  the  mofk  fcrupulous  attention, 
it  came  to  my  mind,  that  it  would  be  fufRcient  to  ex- 
amine at  the  end  of  the  firft  procefs,  whether  the  re- 
fiduum from  the  above  mixture  contained  any  part  of 
the  nitrous  acid  which  had  been  put  to  it.  To  clear 
up  this  doubt,  I  kept  for  that  purpofe,  with  your  ap- 
probation, the  very  fame  refiduum  of  that  procefs  of 
the  kind  which  we  made  a  few  days  ago,  to  fliew  this 
wonderful  kind  of  air  to  his  Highnefs  Prince  OrlofF, 
and  Vv'ith  it  I  made  the  following  experiments. 

I  put  into  a  large  phial  a  weak  blue  tindlure  of  ar- 
chil, and  after  mixing  it  well,  I  poured  two  thirds  of 
it  into  two  fmaller  phials,  in  one  of  which  I  put  a 
good  quantity  of  the  faid  refiduum,  and  into  the  other 
as  much  of  the  dried  mixture  of  red  lead,  with  ni- 
trous acid.  The  blue  colour  of  this  laft  phial  difap- 
peared  in  a  few  feconds,  leaving  the  liquor  almoft  lim- 
pid and  tranfparent ;  but  the  other  tindure,  with  the 
refiduum  out  of  which  the  air  had  been  expelled, 
jfhewed  no  change  of  colour,  when  compared  with 
the  remaining  quantity  of  the  tindure  left  in  the  large 
veffel. 

I  repeated  this  morning  the  fame  experiment  with 
the  tin6lure  of  turnefole,  and  found  the  fame  eifedt, 
with  this  only  difference,  that  the  tindure  turned  red- 
dilh  in  the  glafs,  which  contained  the  dried  mixture 
of  red  lead  with  nitrous  acid,  whilft  the  other  kept 
its  blue  colour. 

This 


The  APPENDIX.     -  381 

This  feems  to  evince,  with  the  greatefl:  certain- 
ty, that  the  nitrous  acid  in  this  experiment  is  en- 
tirely fet  free  by  the  adlion  of  the  fire,  in  the  form 
of  air,  and  being  at  the  fame  time  combined  with  fome 
part  of  the  earthy  matter,  becomes  refpirable  air. 
It  is  remarkable  that  this  air  has  no  acid  in  it,  as  may 
be  concluded  from  the  effe£l  of  fhaking  it  witli  t]ie 
above  tincture  in  a  phial,  which  I  did  :  for  it  does 
not  change  the  blue  colour  ;  whereas  if  the  fame  ope- 
ration is  made  with  fixed  air,  it  is  changed  almoll: 
inftantaneoufly- into  a  very  decided  redd ilh  colour,  as 
is  well  known. 

Now  fince  the  air  produced  from  the  mixture  of 
earth  with  nitrous  acid,  not  only  does  not  difcover 
the  leaft  acidity,  but  proves  to  be  the  pureft  and  the 
moft  wholfome  for  animal  refpiration,  it  plainly  de- 
monftrates  that  either  air  is  not  an  element^  or  acid  is 
not  one,  as  fome  chufe  to  aflert ;  fince  nitrous  acid 
is  reduced  into  air,  together  with  the  earth,  in  the  a- 
bove  experiment,  without  leaving  behind  any  acidity 
to  impart  it  to  the  air  which  comes  out  fi-om  it. 
As  to  myfelf,  I  fhould  rather  think  there  is  a  tranf- 
mutation  of  elements  into  one  another,  if  fuch  name 
may  be  ufed  in  this  cafe ;  for  we  fee  by  the  above 
experiment,  that  acid  and  earth  are  tranfmuted  in- 
to air,  and  by  the  experiments  of  Mr.  Godfrey^  pub- 
lifiied  in  1747,  it  feems  that  water  is  convertible  into 
earth. 

If  you  think  the  above  may  be  any  elucidation  or 
confirmation  of  your  experiments  on  this  fubjeiSt,  you 
are  at  liberty  to  make  what  ufe  of  them  you  pleafe. 

Dear  Sir,  Yours,  &c. 

London,  20th  Nov,  J.  H.  De  Magellan". 

1775-  4 


3&a  The  appendix:* 


NUMBER     VI. 

Air.  Bewly'j  third  Letter  to  Dr.  Priestley^ 
containing  farther  Experiments  and  Obferva' 
tions  on  the  mephitic  Acid,  Seep,  ^'^j^  ^c* 

Sir, 

On  perufihg  fome  of  the  firfl  fheets  of  your  new 
volume,  which  you  have  been  fo  obliging  as  to  tranf- 
mit  to  me,  together  with  a  few  pages  of  a  treatife  juft 
publiftied  by  Sig.  Landriani  of  Milan  *,  relative  to 
the  fubjeft  of  my  former  letters  ;  I  hnd  that  fome  of 
the  foreign  philofophers,  who  acknowledge  the  exift- 
ence  of  an  acid  in  fixed  air,  confider  it  only  as  an  ex- 
trinlical  principle  furni(hed  by  the  particular  acid  that 
has  been  ufed  in  the  procefs  for  procuring  it,  Sig. 
Landriani,  in  particular,  who,  from  the  fpeci- 
men  which  you  have  fent  me  of  his  work,  appears  to 
be  a  very  intelligent  and  accurate  inquirer,  there  af- 
firms, that  the  fixed  air  expelled  from  chalk  by  the 
njitrioUc  acid,  and  received  into  an  inverted  phial 
plunged  in  mercury,  produces,  on  the  admixture  of 
alcaline  air,  cryflals  of  vitriolic  ammoniac  ;  and  that 
Vvhen  the  nitrous  acid  has  been  employed,  a  nitrous 
ammoniac  is  formed,  which  deflagrates  v/ithout  the 
addition  of  any  phlogiftic  matter. 

The  fame  philofopher  affirms  (with  a  view  to  fhew 
that  the  acid  in  fixed  air  is  only  a  modification  of  the 
particular  acid  employed  in  generating  it)  that  a  given 

*  Intitled,  Riccrche  Fifiche  intsrno  aUaJalubritu  dJl'Ariat 

2  quan- 


The  appendix.  383 

quantity  of  the  infalion  of  turnefole,  which  will  be 
changed  red  by  a  certain  quantity  of  fixed  air  expelled 
from  chalk,  by  the  ftrong  vitriolic  acid,  will  not  have 
it's  colour  altered  by  an  equal  quantity  of  fixed  air 
procured  by  a  weak,  vegetable  acid,  as  that  of  lemons. 
He  further  afTerts,  that  fixed  air  betrays,  even  by  it's 
fmell,  and  by  the  flavour  which  it  imparts  to  the  wa- 
ter faturated  with  it,  the  particular  acid  to  which  it 
owes  it's  acidity.  He  particularifes  the  fixed  air  ex- 
pelled from  chalk  by  the  nitrous  acid,  and  that  ex- 
pelled by  the  juice  of  lemons  ;  obferving,  that  the 
particular  fmells  and  flavours  of  thefe  two  acids  may 
be  diflindlly  perceived  in  the  fixed  air  refpedtively  pro- 
cured by  them,  as  well  as  in  the  water  impregnated 
with  them. 

In  thefe  particulars  I  apprehend  that  Sig.  Lan- 
driani  has  been  deceived  by  appearances,  and  particu- 
larly by  attributing  to  fixed  air,  in  general,  the  attri- 
butes of  fixed  air  accidentally  fophijlicated  by  foreign 
admixtures.  This  fluid  undoubtedly,  like  all  other 
fluids,  is  liable  to  receive  taints  or  impregnations 
from  any  fubflances  capable  of  being  elevated  into  va- 
pour, and  of  being  diflblved  or  fufpended  in  it.  The 
hypothefis  maintained  by  him  and  by  other  philofo- 
phers  on  the  continent,  with  refpect  to  the  foreign 
or  adventitious  origin  of  the  acid  in  fixed  air,  very 
naturally  occurred  to  myfelf  at  the  begiiming  of  this 
inquiry  :  but  the  experiments  and  obfer\'ations  con- 
tained in  my  two  former  letters,  as  well  as  others  which 
I  fupprefled,  obliged  me  to  renounce  it,  and  to  con- 
fider  fixed  air  as  an  original  acid,  which  does  not 
owe  it's  acidity,  much  lefs  it's  exifience,  to  any  of  the 
acids,  or  other  media,  which  are  employed  in  ge- 
nerating it.     I  could  not  indeed  entertain  any  doubt 

of 


384  The   appendix. 

of  the  truth  of  thislaft  opinion,  when  I  had  procured 
fixed  air  (as  is  related  in  my  firft  letter)  exhibiting 
unequivocal  marks  of  acidity,  (that  is,  reddening 
the  infufion  of  litmus,  or  neutralifmg  alcalis)  when 
expelled  from  chalk,  the  pureft  magnefia,  and  vola- 
tile alcaline  falts,  by  heat  alone.  It  may  not  be  amifs 
however,  before  I  proceed  further  on  this  fubjeft,  to 
take  this  opportunity  of  adding  feme  of  my  former 
Obfervations  relating  to  it,  which  I  before  omitted 
to  mention  j  particularly  thofe  refpefting  the  nature 
of  the  acid  in  the  fixed  air  procured  from  chalk,  by 
the  vitriolic  acid,  and  which  Sig.  Landriani  calls 
vitriolic  fixed  air.  That  this  acid  is  not  vitriolic  acid, 
under  any  of  it's  modifications  known  to  us,  appear- 
ed to  me  to  be  evident  from  the  following  confidera- 
tions. 

I.  The  acid  in  fixed  air,  thus  obtained,  diffolves  a 
mild  calcareous  earth  f ,  and  on  evaporating  the  wa- 
ter by  means  of  heat,  or  adding  an  alcali,  a  mild  cal- 
careous earth  is  precipitated  ;  whereas  the  vitriolic 
acid  will  fcarce  difiblve  a  fenfible  portion  of  the  fame 
earth,  and  the  precipitate  is  a  felenite.     . 

The  common  or  fixed,  as  well  as  the  volatile  or 
fulphureous.,  vitriolic  acids,  when  neutralifed  with  ve- 
getable alcali,  form  neutral  falts  which  continue  neu- 
tral, though  expofed  to  the  air  and  to  heat  j  the  firft 
conftituting  vitriolated  tartar,  and  the  fecond,  the  fal 
fulphureus  of  Stahl  j  which  laft,  on  expofure  to  the 
air,  lofes  only  the  phlogijion  to  which  it  owed  its  vola- 
tility, and  conftantly  retains  its  neutral  quality  : 
whereas  the  neutral  mephitic  folution,  or  the  combina- 
tion of  vegetable  alcali  with  the  acid  oi  (vitriolic)  fixed 

•j-  Ste  Letter  2d,  Experiment  XV, 

air 


The   appendix,  385 

air  (in  the  i4tii  Experiment)  parts  with  that  acid  in 
the  common  temperature  of  the  atmofphere ;  and  on 
the  total  evaporation  of  the  water,  the  fixed  alcali  is 
left,  very  little  changed  by  the  experiment, 

3.  Solutions  of  vitriolic  ammoniac  will  bear  being 
evaporated  over  the  fire  to  a  pellicle  ;  and,  on  cool- 
ing, perfectly  neutral  cr}'fl:als  are  formed ;  but  the  am- 
moniacal  folution  formed  by  the  union  of  fixed  air 
(obtained  as  above)  with  volatile  alcali,  could  not  be 
made  to  fumiih  cryftals  ;  as  the  greateft  part  both  of 
the  acid  and  the  alcali  flies  off,  though  expoftd  only 
to  the  common  heat  of  the  atmofphere. 

4.  The  prefence  of  the  fmalleft  portion  of  the  vi- 
triolic acid,  combined  Vvith  alcaline  fahs  or  earths,  is 
eafily  detected  by  the  precipitation  of  a  turpeth  mine- 
ral^ on  the  addition  of  a  faturated  folution  of  mercu- 
ry in  the  nitrous  acid ;  whereas  a  flrong  neutral 
vtephitic  folution^  treated  in  the  fame  manner,  fur- 
nifhes  only  a  vrhite  precipitate. 

I  fliall  now  add  fome  other  obfer\'ations  of  a  fimi- 
lar  kind  j  as  it  may  be  alledged,  though  no  proofs 
have  been  offered  for  that  purpofe,  that  the  vitriolic 

/acid  may  polTibJy  be  volatilifed,  and  acquire  fome  new 

'Qualities,  or  may  have  its  ufual  properties  dilguiled, 
in  confequence  of  combining  it  with  calcareous  earths 
or  alcaline  falts,  in  the  common  procefs  for  obtain- 
ing fixed  air.  I  fhall  therefore  proceed  to  coniider 
the  peculiar  qualities  afcribed  by  Sig.  Landriani  to 
tlie  acid   contained  in  the  fixed  air  which  has  been 

.•^procured  from  thefe  fubftances  by  means  of  the  ni~ 
trous  acid. 

I  thought  it  very  probable,  when  I  entered  on  this 

.itivcftigation  (as  I  liave  already  hinted  in  one  of  my 

C  c  former 


386  Thp  appendix. 

former  letters,  that,  confidering  the  very  volatile  na- 
ture of  the  nitrous  acid,  fome  part  of  it  might  be 
elevated,  during  its  eifervefcence  with  the  chalk,  ei- 
ther in  the  ftate  of  a  fimple  vapour,  or  in  the  more 
compound  form  of  nitrous  air^  fo  as  to  mix  with  and 
contaminate  the  fixed  air  obtained  by  its  means.  For 
fimilar  reafons,  refpecling  the  marine  acid,  I  avoided, 
in  the  preceding  analyfis,  employing  any  fixed  air, 
procured  by  means  of  either  of  thefe  two  acids.  I 
made  however  the  following  experiments  on  the  pre- 
fent  occafion. 

Experiment  XVIII. 

Having  more  than  once  prepared  artificial  Pyrmont 
water  with  fixed  air,  obtained  by  fpirit  of  nitre  and 
chalk,  I  could  never  diftinguifh  it,  either  by  its  tafte 
or  fmell,  or  firength,  from  the  artificial  Pyrmont 
water  procured  by  means  of  the  juice  of  lemons,  or 
even  the  weak  vegetable  acid  in  cream  of  tartar,  com- 
bined with  fait  of  tartar.  On  neutralifmg  the  firft 
mentioned  waters  with  fait  of  taftar,  and  fufFer- 
ing  a  part  of  the  phlegm  to  evaporate,  I  fometimes 
found  that  paper,  dipped  into  the  liquor,  then 
dried,  and  applied  to  a  hot  cinder,  exhibited,  as 
indeed  I  expected,  fome  very  flight  fymptoms  of 
the  prefence  of  the  nitrous  acid,  by  a  faint  deflagra- 
tion. On  a  further  evaporation,  the  liquor,  which 
was  originally  neutral,  or  even  fubacid,  had  acquired 
a  tafte  manifeftly  alcaline  :  a  confiderable  part  of  the 
acid  which  had  before  neutralifed  it  (that  is,  ac- 
cording to  my  theory,  the  yncphitic  acid)  having 
flown  off  J  while  the  nitrous  or  foreign"  vapours, 
4  which 


The  appendix.         ^        387 

which  had  accidentally  been  fufpended  in  the  fixed  air, 
and  which  had  been  condenfed  by  the  water,  combined 
with  and  fixed  by  the  alcali,  appeared  to  have  pro- 
duced thefe  faint  appearances  of  deflagration. 

Experiment  XIX. 

Though  I  failed  of  procuring  cryftals  from  a  neu- 
tral, but  weak  mephitic  folution,  when  it  was  expofed 
to  the  atmofphere  *  j  I  fucceeded,  on  ufing  the 
ftrongeft  alcaline  lixivium,  and  carrying  on  the  pro- 
cefs  in  the  ?nedium  of  fixed  air. — A  large  quantity  of 
fixed  air,  procured  by  the  nitrous  acid,  having  been 
thrown  up  into  a  fmall  quantity  of  the  ftrongeft  Uxi- 
viimi  tartari  confined  by  quickfilver,  fmall  cryftals 
were  almoft  inftantly  formed  on  the  fides  of  the  glafs ; 
and  the  liquor,  after  a  repetition  of  the  procefs,  had 
condenfed  12  or  14  times  its  bulk  of  fixed  air:  but 
thefe  cryjlcils  were  not  found  to  be  nitre  ;  nor  did  they, 
or  the  liquor,  exhibit  any  ftronger  marks  of  the  pre- 
fence  of  the  nitrous  acid,  than  thofe  mentioned  in 
the  preceding  experiment.  On  the  contrary,  the  cryf- 
tals, in  particular,  being  carefully  colleiled  and  thrown 
on  a  red-hot  coal,  did  not  detonate,  but  fome  of  the 
pai^ticles  bounced,  or  flew  about ;  in  confequence, 
doubtlefs,  of  the  imprifoned  fixed  air  being  fuddenly 
let  loofe  by  the  great  heat ;  and  they  were  finally  con- 
vcTted  into  fixed  alcali.  Volatile  alcaline  fpirit,  in  the 
cauftic  ftate,  treated  in  the  fame  mamier,  prefented 
nearly  the  fame  phaenomena,  mutatis  mutandis.     In 

*  See  Ixperiment  XIV. 

C  c  2  (hort, 


0  The  appendix. 

fiiort,  the  fixed  air,  in  both  cafes,  whenever  It  exhi- 
bited any  appearances  of  the  prefence  of  the  nitrous 
acid,  feemed  only  to  have  been  adulterated  with  the 
vapour  or  fumes  of  that  acid,  fufpended  in  it,  and 
condenfed  along  with  it. 

The  obje6tion  which,  as  I  have  above  hinted, 
might  be  made  with  refpeil  to  the  vitriolic  acid,  does 
not  feem  to  be  in  any  degree  applicable  to  the  prefent 
cafe.  Sig.  Landriani  cannot  allege,  confiftently 
with  his  own  experiments,  and  his  dedudlions  from 
them,  that  the  nitrous  acid  is  fo  very  materially 
changed  in  the  a6l  of  effervefcence  with  calcareous 
fubftances,  as  to  have  its  nature  fo  far  altered,  fo  that 
on  being  afterwards  neutralifed  with  fixed  or  volatile 
alcalies,  it  fhould  be  almoft  totally  deprived  of  its 
'detonating  quality  : — as  theonly  proof  which  he  off^crs 
of  its  prefence  in  the  fixed  air  expelled  by  it-^(the  de^ 
tcnation  of  his  nitrous  ammoniac)  is  founded  on  its 
ftiil  retaining  this  very  property.  The  reader,  how- 
ever, has  feen  how  very  faintly  it  exhibited  this  crite- 
rion of  its  prefence,  in  the  two  preceding  experi- 
ments. 

With  refpedi:  to  Sig.  Landriani's  experimentis 
here  referred  to,  and  in  which  he  mixed  his  fup- 
pofed  different  fpecies  of  fixed  air  with  alcaline  air,  va 
the  dry  ■  way^  or  in  phials  ftanding  in  mercury ;  I 
fliall  only  obferve  that'I  do  not  readily  conceive  how, 
by  a  procefs  of  this  kind,  he  procured  a  fuffident 
quantity  of  nitrous  ammoniac,  fo  as  to  afcertain  its 
nature,  by  detonation ;  or  of  vitriolic  ammoniac,  fo 
as  to  analifc  it,  and  know  it  to  be  fuch.  All  that 
he  fays,  relative  to  the  laft-mentioned  procefs,  in  the 

pages 


The  APPENDIX.  389 

pages  now  before  me,  I  liave  given  below*.  I  have 
more  than  once  indeed  feen  thefe  different  airs  con- 
denfed  on  the  fides  of  a  phial,  but  have  been  con- 
tented with  amufmg  myfelf  by  viewing  the  various 
configurations  of  the  cryftals  with  a  fmall  magnifier, 
as  I  defpaired  of  being  able  to  colleil  them  in  a  fuffi^ 
cient  quantity,  to  fubjed  them  to  a  chemical  analy- 
fis.  Nor  have  I  thought  it  neceffary  to  profecute  this 
particular  mode  of  enquiring  into  the  true  nature  of 
the  acid  in  fixed  air,  even  fince  I  read  thefe  pages  of 
Sig.  Landriani,  and  thofe  Iheets  of  the  prefent  work, 
from  which  I  find  that  Sig.  Fontana,  and  other  phi- 
lofophers,  maintain  a  do£lrine  contrary  to  thai 
which  has  been  advanced  in  thefe  papers.  On  fome 
of  my  former  experiments,  and  on  one  of  them  in 
particular,  I  think  I  may  fafely  reft  the  merits  of  my 
prefent  hypothefis. 

Your  readers  will  recolle6l  that,  in  my  Vth  Expe- 
riment, a  pure  and  acid  fixed  air  was  expelled,  merely 
by  means  of  heat^  from  pure  Magnefia,  contained  in 
a  glafs  veflel  hermetically  connected  with  a  bent  tube. 
As  that  PZxperiment,  however,  was  left  fomewhat  im- 
perfefl,  by  the  accidental  rupture  of  my  apparatus, 
which  I  could  not  repair  or  renew  ;  I  thought  it  of 
fufiicient  importance  to  require  a  careful  repetition  on 
the  prefent  occafion.  I  have  accordingly  more  than 
once  repeated  it  with  the  utmoft  attention ;  and  as 

*  After  obfcrving  that  long  and  llendcr  cijftals  were  formed  on  the 
fioes  of  the  phial  in  which  the  alcaline  and  'bitrhlic  fixed  air  were  mixed, 
he  only  adds,  '  Cio  falto  ractol^anfi  quc.ti  criftalli,  e  fe  fottopongano 
}ill'  analiii,  the  fi  tioveranno  effere  iin  vero  fale  ammoniaco  vitriolico, 
a  cui  tante  maravtgliofe  viriu  altribuifce  il  chimico  Glauber.'  Ri- 
cerche  f  ifiche,  &c.  p.  48. 

C  c  3  the 


390  The  APPENDIX. 

the  fimple  apparatus  which  I  employed  for  this  pur- 
pofe  may  eafily  be  procured,  and  the  procefs  be  as 
eafily  repeated  by  any  one,  I  fhall  minutely  defcribe 
the  apparatus,  and  relate  all  the  material  circnm- 
ftances  attending  the  experiment. 

Experiment   XX. 

I  took  a  very  long,  fmall,  and  thick  green  glafs 
phial,  iuch  as  Hungary-water  is  fometimes  fold  in, 
and  adapted  to  it  a  perforated  cork,  through  which 
parted  a  bent  tube  of  a  fmall  bore.  I  filled  this  phial 
With  the  pureft  Magnefia,  preffing  it  dov/n,  that  it 
might  harbour  as  little  common  air  as  polfible,  in  the 
interftices  between  its  particles.  Having  fecured  the 
cork  with  ftiff  cement,  I  put  the  phial  into  a  crucible, 
■where  it  was  furrounded  with  fand  to  the  height  only 
of  2  or  3  inches,  and  which  was  placed  in  a  fmall 
chafing-difli  containing  lighted  charcoal.  In  confe- 
quence  of  the  tallnefs  of  the  phial,  the  apparatus  re- 
mained air-tight,  to  the  end  of  the  procefs ;  as  the 
cork  and  the  cement  were  not  affedled  by  the  heat, 
even  when  the  lower  part  of  the  phial  was  red-hot. 

Suffering  the  air  to  efcape  while  the  fand,  crucible, 
&c.  were  heating,  I  did  not  begin  to  colle<3:  any  till 
I  judged  that  the  Magnefia  was  pretty  hot.  I  conti- 
nued the  procefs  till  it  ceafed  to  emit  air.  For  va- 
rious purpofes  I  colIe£l:ed  the  produce  in  different 
phials  containing  water  or  other  liquors.  The  re- 
fults  were  as  follow  : 

I.  Though  that  part  of  the  Magnefia,  which  was 
fubjefted  to  a  moderate  red  heat,  did  not,  as  I  after- 
wards calculated,  originally  weigh  above   i   drachm 

and 


The  appendix.  391 

and  a  half;   I  eftimated  that   it  furniflied  above  30 
ounces  of  fixed  air. 

2.  Jll  the  fixed  air  contained  in  the  Magnefia 
which  occupied  the  lowell  part  of  the  phial,  was 
found  to  have  been  expelled  from  it :  at  leafi:,  on  put- 
ting fome  of  it  afterwards  into  water,  and  adding  fpirit 
of  vitriol  to  it,  it  was  diflblved  in  the  acid  jiquor  with- 
out the  leaft  appearance  of  effervefcence. 

3.  The  whole  of  this  fixed  air  (except  the  firft  3 
or  4  ounces  which  were  neceflarily  mixed  with  fome 
common  air)  pojfejfed  all  the  qualities  of  the  pur ejl  fixed 
air  procured  hy  means  of  the  firongeji  acid  fpirits.  No 
difference  could  be  perceived  in  its  properties  ;  except 
that,  probably  for  the  reafon  juft:  mentioned,  it  feemed 
to  come  over  more  and  more  pure  as  the  procefs  went 
on  ;  and  the  very  lajl  ounce  expelled  from  it  (and  which 
appears,  from  (2)  to  have  been  the  very  laft  ounce  that 
it  contained)  was  as  acid,  and  was  as  readily  and  fully 
ahforbed  by  water ^  as  any  of  thofe  that  preceded  it. — 
To  be  more  particular  ; 

4.  During  different  periods  of  the  procefs,  certain 
portions  of  this  fixed  air  neutralifed  as  great  a  quan- 
tity of  fait  of  tartar,  as  could  be  neutralifed  by  equal 
quantities  of  the  purefl  fixed  air  obtained  by  means  of 
the  flrongefl  acid  fpirits. 

5.  Towards  the  latter  q.x\^  of  the  procefs,  two  eight- 
ounce  phials  filled  with  rain-water  were  fucceffively 
agitated  with  frefh  portions  of  this  fixed  air,  till  they 
were  nearly  faturated.  Filling  up  the  fpaces  occu- 
pied by  the  reftdua  with  water,  and  throwing  up  more 
fixed  air,  I  placed  them,  inverte<l,  in  a  bafon  of  mer- 
cury. After  {landing  a  night,  during  which  they 
each  abforbed  an  additional  oimce  or  two  of  fixed  air, 

C  c  4  their 


392  The  APPENDIX, 

their  contents  were  poured  out. — I  do  not  remember 
having  evertafted  any  artificial  Pyrmont-water,  made 
with  the  vitriolic  acid,  more  brifk  and  acidulous  than 
this,  produced  by  plain  Magnefia,  without  the  inter- 
vention of  any  acid. 

As  I  cannot  avoid  laying  particular  ftrefs  on  the 
refults  of  this  fimple  calcination  of  Magnefia ;  T  think 
it  worth  while  to  trace,  from  it's  origin,  the  fixed  air 
contained  in  this  fubftance  ;  by  explaining  the  j'-atio- 
nak  of  the  procefs  by  which  Iviagnefia  is  procured, 
according  to  the  principles  afliimed  in  thefe  papers. 

The  Epfom  Salt,  from  which  Magnefia  is  ufually 
procured,  is  a  neutral  compound,  formed  of  the 
earth  of  Magnefia  combined  vvith  the  vitriolic  acid. 
From  this  fubfiance  the  Magnefia  is  precipitated,  by 
adding  to  it  a  folution  of  fait  of  tartar ;  that  is,  (ac- 
cording to  the  preceding  theory)  of  an  alcaline  fait 
combined  with  the  mephitic  acid.  On  mixing  together 
the  folutions  of  thefe  two  conipounds,  the  two  dif- 
ferent acids  change  bafes.  The  vitriolic  acid  deferts 
the  magnefia,  to  unite  with  the  alcali,  with  which  it 
form.s  a  vitriolated  tartar  ;  at  the  fame  time  expelling 
from  the  alcali  the  weaker  mephitic  acid,  wliich  in- 
flantly  occupies  its  place,  by  uniting  with  the  mag- 
nefia, now  deferted  by  the  vitriolic  acid. — So  that,  in 
fa<?t,  all  the  fixed  air,  or  mephitic  acid,  which,  in  the 
preceding  experiment,  was  expelled  from  the  miagne- 
fia  by  fire,  had  originally  refided  in  the  fait  of  tartar 
employed  in  the  preparation  of  the  magnefia  :  but  as 
fixed  air  cannot  be  expelled  from  this  fait  by  heat,  it 
was  therefore,  in  this  Experiment,  transferred  from 
it  to  another  body  (the  earth  of  magnefia)  from 
Y'hich  it  could  be  thus  expelled  with  eafe.  Tiie  Ex- 
peri- 


The   appendix.  393 

periment,  in  faft,  is  as  fatisfacftory  as  if  the  fixed  air 
had  been  immediately  and  diredly  expelled  from  the 
alcaline  fait  itfelf  by  fire. 

It  may  be  proper  to  obferve  that,  in  the  prepara- 
tion of  pure  magnefia,  the  vitriolated  tartar  above- 
mentioned  is  carefully  waflied  away  by  repeated  ab- 
lutions  with  hot   water.     But  granting,  for  argu- 
ment's fake,   that  the  magnefia  were  not  perfedlly 
free  from  this  vitriolic  fait,  or  that  fome  portion  oi 
vitriolic  acid,  fuppofed  Hill  to  adhere  to  it,  were  capa- 
ble of  being  volatilifed  by  the  fire,  and  of  being  fuf- 
pended  in  the  fixed  air ; — neither  of  which  fuppofi- 
tions  are,  however,  admiffible  j — it  is  impoffible  from 
hence  to  accoufit  for  the  large  quantity  of  acid  pro- 
cured from  the  magnefia  in  the  preceding  experiment, 
when  the  reader  recolle6ts    that  30  ounces  of  acid 
tnephitic  vapour  were  expelled  from  it,  and  calculates, 
from  the  rough  eft:imate  given  in  my  nth  Experi- 
jnent,  the  quantity  of  fait  of  tartar  that  it  would 
neutralife.     It  would  indeed  be  abfurd  to  fuppofethat 
tliis  large  quantity  of  acid  could  be  furnifhed  either 
by  any  vitriolated  tartar,  or  by  any  fuperfluous  and 
difengaged  vitriolic  acid,  ftill  adhering  to  the  mag- 
nefia.    The   fum  of  the  matter    is,    that   acid  air 
refides  in  mild  alcalis,  from  which  it  cannot  be  di- 
reSily  expelled,  but  by  other  and  fi:ronger  acids  ;  to 
which  acids,  however,  it  does  not  owe  its  acidity,  as 
Signiors  Landriani   and  Fontana   afiirm,  though  it 
may  accidentally  be  adulterated  with  them. 

This  experiment  appeared  to  me  fo  decifive  of  the 
quefiion  in  difpute  (to  fay  nothing  of  fome  others 
contained  in  my  former  letters,  particularly  thole  in 
v.hicii  add  fixed  air  is  expelled,  by  heat,  from  volatile 

alcalis) 


394  The    APPENDIX. 

alcalis)  that  I  could  not  think  it  necelTary  to  repeat 
many  fimilar  procefles  with  chalk,  or  other  calcareous 
earths.  It  happens  fortunately  that  all  the  fixed  air. 
in  magnefia  can  be  expelled^  from  it  by  fire,  even  in 
clofe  veflels  ( at  leaft  not  having  a  free  communication 
with  the  atmofphere)  and  with  a  moderate  degree  of 
heat ;  whereas  I  have  frequently  found,  as  you  have 
likewife  obferved,  p.  i  ig,  that  chalk  will  not  generally ^ 
(for  there  is  a  great  difference  in  different  fpecimens 
of  this  fubftance)  part  with  much  of  its  fixed  air, 
under  fimilar,  or  even  more  favourable  circum- 
ftances.  And  further,  the  greatefc  part  of  tl\e  fixed 
air  thus  expelled  from  it,  is  frequently  combined  with 
phlogiftic  or  other  matters,  which  difguife  it,  and 
render  only  a  fmall  part  of  it  foluble  in  water. 

I  find  neverthelefs,  from  your  prefent  work,  that 
the  foreign  philofophers  lay  much  firefs  on  the  cir- 
cumftance,  '  that  the  air  expelled  from  chalky  in  clofe 
veffels^  will  not  render  water  acidulous.*  I  have  al- 
ways however  found,  that  a  fufficient  quantity  might 
be  expelled  from  it  to  redden  the  infufion  of  litmus, 
and  fometimes  to  give  a  fenfibly  acidulous  impregna- 
tion to  a  fmall  quantity  of  water.  The  fa6t  is,  that 
calcareous  earths  cannot  be  calcined^  as  magnefia  may, 
in  clofe  vefi'els.  Since  I  perufed  your  flieets,  and  the 
above-mentioned  pages  of  Sig.  Landriani's  treatife, 
I  made  the  following  Experiment  relative  to  this  ob- 
jea. 

Experiment  XXI. 

After  having  expelled  a  few  ounces  of  air  from  2 
or  3  drachms  of  chalk,  expofed  to  a  moderate  red 

heat. 


Th£  appendix,  395 

heat,  in  a  glafsz;^/,  as  in  the  preceding  Experiment ; 
and  having  kept  the  phial  in  this  fand-heat  till  it 
would  furnifh  no  more,  I  found  that  a  part  only  of 
this  air  poiTefled  the  properties  peculiar  to  fixed  air. 
But  1  foon  difcovered  the  caufe  of  thefe  appearances. 
On  examining  the  chalk  after  it  was  cold,  I  not  only 
perceived,  as  you  too  have  obferved,  that  it  flill  effer- 
vefced  moft  violently  with  acids,  but,  v/hich  is  a 
much  more  decifive  circumftance,  I  found  that  nearly, 
the  zohcle  of  its  fixed  air  Jiill  reinained  in  it ;  for  on 
throwing  the  chalk  into  two  ounces  of  v/ater,  1  ob- 
ferved that  it  had  not  acquired  the  property  of  com- 
municating, even  to  this  fmall  portion  of  water,  the 
tailie  of  lime-water ;  nor,  after  ftanding  a  day  or  tv/o, 
was  any  perceptible  crufl:  formed  upon  its  furface. 
And  yet,  from  Dr.  Black's  well-known  experiments, 
it  is  clear,  that  if  even  a  fingle  grain  of  this  chalk 
had  been  calcined,  or  deprived  of  all  its  fixed  air,  it 
muft  have  converted  the  2  ounces  of  water  into  a 
pretty  ftrong  lime-water.  In  (hort,  it  evidently  ap- 
peared, that  the  mephitic  acid  which,  when  expelled, 
Ihould  render  the  water  acidulous,  ftill  remained  in 
the  chalk  at  the  end  of  the  experiment  j  and  that  the 
greater  part  of  the  air  that  did  come  over,  was  either 
not  fixed  air,  or  was  fixed  air  enveloped  in  phlogillic 
matters,  or  otherwife  fo  altered,  as  not  to  exhibit  its 
ufual  properties  ;  whereas  acids  expel  fixed  air  from 
calcareous  fubftances  wholly,  and  in  a  ftate  of  pu- 
rity, equal  to  that  in  which  it  is  expelled,  by  fire^ 
from  magnefia  ;  though  even  in  this  laft  cafe,  it 
fufFers  a  remarkable  change,  when  the  magnelia  is 
calcined  .in  a  gun-barrel. 

Before 


396  The   APPENDIX. 

Before  I  conclude  this  enquiry,  I  fhali  take  notice 
of  a  curious  and  difficult  problem  in  chemiftiy,  re- 
lative to  fixed  air,  and  which  no  one,  I  believe,  has 
yet  attempted  to  refolve.  In  the  decompofition  both  of 
common  and  cvh'tc  nitre,  by  deflagration  with  charcoal 
\n  a  red-hot  crucible,  it  is  very  remarkable  that  the 
alcaline  bafis  of  the  nitre  is  in  both  cafes  left,  not  in 
a  caujlic  ftate,  as  might  be  expefted,  but  replete  with 
fixed  air,  or  in  a  mild  ftate.  It  fcems,  at  lirfl  fight, 
pretty  evident  that  the  alcaline  fait  acquires  this  large 
quantity  of  fixed  air  at  the  inflant  of  the  deflagra- 
tion f  ;  and  as  there  are  only  two  fubflances  prefent 
from  which  it  can  acquire  it,  the  nitrous  acid  and  the 
charcoal,  it  may  be  conjeflured  —  (and  indeed  fome 
of  your  experiments  contained  in  this  volume  feem  to 
favour  the  idea)  —  that  fomxC  part  of  the  nitrous  acid, 
which,  as  to  fenfe,  aapears  to  be  totally  diffipated  in 
the  procefs,  may  afliime  the  modification  of  fixed  air, 
and  be  inftantly  condenfed  and  combined  with  the  al- 
cali  under  that  form. 

This  folution,  admitting  it  to  be  jufl:,  overturns 
the  hypothefis  of  Sig.  Landriani,and  the  foreign  philo- 
fophers  above  mentioned  :  for,  fuppofing  fixed  air  to 
be  afterwards  procured  from  this  alcali,  by  means  of 
oil  of  vitriol,  marine  acid,  the  acid  of  lemons,  or, 
in  fiiort,  any  other  acid  than  the  nitrous ;  their  theory 
would  oblige  them  to  afcribe  it's  acidity  to  the  parti- 
cular adventitious  acid  em.ployed  in  the  expulfion  of 

•}■  Unlefs  it  fljould  be  fuppofed  that  it  attradts  it  afterwards  from  the 
atmofphere,  during  the  fubfequent  part  of  the  procefs  ;  when  it  is  ge- 
nerally kept  in  a  red  h^at  for  half  an  hour  after  the  deflagration  is 
over :  —  a  aircumftnnce  which  1  have  not  enquired  intOj  but  whieh, 
might  be  afcertained  by  examining  it  immediately  after  the  deflagra- 
tion. 

it: 


The  appendix.  397 

it  :  v/}iereas,  according  to  this  folution,  the  acid  iii 
the  fixed  air  muft,  in  all  thefe  cafes,  b€  the  nitrous. 
I  muft  not  however  omit  to  obferve  that  it  appears, 
from  one  of  the  Iheets  of  the  prefent  volume  now 
before  me,  (page  214.)  that  charcoal  centains  a  con- 
fiderable  quantity  of  iixed  air  ;  from  which  pofhbly 
the  alcali,  deferted  by  the  nitrous  acid  during  the  de- 
flagration, may  obtain  that  principle. — The  queftion 
certainly  defer/es  to  be  further  inquired  into  ;  as  a 
juft  folution  of  it  promifes  to  throw  confiderable  light 
on  the  intimate  nature,  or  genres  of  fixed  air. 

On  the  whole,  I  think  it  will  appear  evident  from 
the  preceding  Experiments,  and  particularly  the 
XXth,  that  the  acid  contained  in  fixed  air,  procured 
in  the  ufual  method,  by  means  of  oil  of  virriol,  and 
other  acids,  is  not,  as  Sig.  Landriani  and  others  af- 
fert,  merely  the  attenuated  and  difiblved  vapour  of 
the  foreign  acid  employed  in  the  procefs ;  but  that  it 
is  a  diftincl  principle,  expelled,  in  an  acid  (late,  from 
the  body  to  which  thefe  fironger  acids  had  been  ap- 
plied. The  mephitic  acid  has,  in  all  my  Experiments, 
appeared  (impurities  excepted)  to  be  an  invariable, 
homogeneous  fubfcance,  which  does  not  exhibit  any 
of  thofe  varieties  which  might  certainly  be  expected 
in  it,  if  it  owed  its  exiftence  to  acids  differing  {o 
very  confiderably  from  each  other  in  their  properties, 
as  thofe  ufually  employed  in  the  procuring  it.  It  is 
not  my  prefent  defign  to  deduce  the  generation  of  the 
mephitic  acid,  ab  ovo  ufque — .  It  is  fufficient  to  ob* 
fer/e  that  it  appears  from  its  qualities  to  be  as  di- 
flin6t  from  tlie  vitriolic,  nitrous,  and  other  known 
acids,  as  they  are  from  each  other.  They  may  all, 
as  Becher  and  Stahl  long  ago  fuppofed,  be  only  mo- 
I  difica- 


398  t*HE  APPEND  IX. 

tlifications  of  one  and  the  fame  primitive  and  univer- 
fal  acid.  But  this  leads  to  an  enquiry  utterly  foreign 
the  obje<51:  I  propofed  to  myfelf  in  profecuting  thefe 
experiments. 

Great  Maflingham,  ' 

Nov.  27,1775.  W.  Bewly, 

P.  S.  I  willingly  lay  hold  of  this  opportunity  of  fol- 
lowing your  example,  in  redtifying  a  miftake  of  Sig. 
Landriani's  refpe6ting  myfelf,  which  occurs  at  page 
23  of  his  treatiie  above  referred  to  ;  into  which  he 
has  probably  been  led,  either  through  his  imperfect 
knowledge  of  our  language,  or  the  miftake  of  a  tranf- 
lator.  He  there  reprefents  me  as  maintaining  '  that 
nitrous  air  is  nothing  more  than  common  air.,  contain- 
ing the  nitrous  acid  difTolved  in  it,  combined  with 
phlogifton.' — On  the  contrary,  I  concluded,  from  my 
experiments  related  in  your  former  volume,  page  ^17, 
that  nitrous  air  confilled  of  the  nitrous  acid  combined 
with  phlogiilon  ;  and  fo  far  from  confidering  common 
ah"  as  a  component  principle,  or  the  bajis^  of  nitrous  air, 
I  fhewed  that  an  addition  of  common  air  was  necef- 
fary,  in  order  to  decompound  and  condenfe  it. 

I  feize  likewife  this  opportunity  of  recommending 
to  the  confideration  and  trial  of  the  faculty,  the  new 
neutral  fait  indicated  in  my  Vlllth  Experiment;  both 
as  It  is  a  new  and  untried  faline  compound,  and  as 
much  benefit  may  be  expefted  from  it,  even  a  priori^ 
from  the  known  properties  and  activity  of  fixed  air, 
largely  introduced  into  the  fyftem  ;  particularly  as  a 
febrifuge  and  antifeptic,    in  fe\Trs,    and  other  difor- 

ders. 


The  APPEN  DIX.  399 

ders,  of  a  putrid  tendency. — As  to  the  preparation  of 
it — though  I  had  before  found  that  in  proportion  as 
the  alcaline  fait  approaches  to  the  ftate  of  neutrahfa- 
tion,  it  attrads  the  mephitic  acid  more  weakly ;  yet 
lince  I  wrote  tlxe  preceding  letter,  I  have  prepared 
near  3  pints  of  a  neutral  folution  of  this  kind,  in  Dr. 
Nooth's  apparatus,  as  improved  by  Mr,  Parker, 
which  contained  10  grains  of  fait  of  tartar  in  each 
ounce  of  water.  Notwithftanding  the  unavoidable 
dilfipation  of  the  fixed  air  in  the  upper  velTel,  the  al- 
caline folution  was  rendered  perfectly  neutral  in  a- 
bout  24  hours,  in  confequence  of  frequent  agitation, 
and  the  fucceffive  addition  of  frelh  portions  of  fixed 
air  ;  and,  after  fufi'ering  it  to  fiand  two  or  three  days 
longer,  it  became  pleafant  to  the  tafte,  ftrongly  aci- 
dulous, and  even  pungent.  My  acquaintance  with 
this  neutral  julep  is  of  too  late  a  date  to  enable  me 
to  add  any  thing  material  to  what  I  have  before  faid 
of  it.  The  prefent,  indeed,  is  not  a  fit  feafon  to  quaff 
large  potations  of  cold  water,  by  way  of  experiment. 

Nov.  29,  1775. 


E  R  R  A- 


ERRATA* 

PAGE  27,  line  12  read,  tuas  confiderably  injured  hy 
it ;  leaving  out  the  Remainder  of  the  Paragraph,  in 
which  there  is  fome  Errror,  that  1  cannot  redify  with* 
out  repeating  the  Experiment. 

P.  41,  1.  8,  for  redrefs  r.  redne/s. 

P.  49,  1.  4,  for  common  r.  Jixed* 

P.  88,  1.  21,  for<3;>,  r.  a/r; 

P«  315,  1.  21,  for  injured  air  r.  injur e^^ 


tHE 


THE 

INDEX 

To  both  of  the  Volumes. 


N.  B.  11.  fignifies  the  Second  Volume,  and  where  only 
the  Page  is  mentioned,  the  Firft  Volume  is  always  to  be 
underftood. 


A. 

j^CETQ  US  fermSHtaiiofi,  its  effeft  upon  common  air, 

'54- 
^ciii,  added  to  water,  does  not  increafe  its  power  of  re- 

ftoring  noxious  air  by  agitation,  98  j  firil  exhibited  in 

the  form  of  air,   146. 

^gitation^  of  air  in  water,   39. 

jiir,  a  general  view  of  difcoveries  relating  to  it,  1  ;  hcv 
transferred  from  one  veflel  to  another,  1 5  ;  how  gene- 
rated, ib.;  how  admitted  to  fabllances  that  will  not  bear 
wetting,  19;  the  purity  of  it,  how  afcertained,  20; 
produced  by  the  putrefadlion  of  mice,  84;  nitrous, 
108  ;  how  far  injured  by  the  flame  of  a  candle,  117; 
marine  acid,  143;  alkaline,  163;  from  gunpowder, 
257  ;  iffuing  from  the  bottom  of  a  pool  of  water,  321  ; 
vitriolic  acid,  II.  i  ;  vegetable- acid,  II.  23  ;  dephlo- 
gifticated,  II.  29 ;  nitrous  acid,  II.  168;  in  iiflies 
bladders,  II.  230;  from  marine  acid  air  and  liver  of 
fulphur,  236,  il.  233  ;  the  quantity  of  it  depending 
upon  the  quicknefs  or  flownefs  of  heat  in  the  fubftance 
that  yields  it,  II.  255;  different  kinds  of ,  names  given 
to  them,  24;  conjectures  concerning  their  conlHtuenc 
parts,  26:) ;  fpecific  gravity,  II.  94  j  fee  Common  air, 
Mkaline  air,  Fixed  air,  &c.  &c. 

P  d  Altxandtr^ 


INDEX. 

Alexander^  Br.  his  conclufion  concerning  the  innoceifice 
of  ftagnant  water  refuted,   196. 

Alkali  cauftic fixed,   yields  no  air,  II.  232. 

Alkaline  air,  dilcovered,  163  ;  mixed  with  marine  add 
air,  170;  inflammable,  175  ;  makes  nitr/)us  ammoniac 
with  nitrous  air  in  common  air,  205,  208  ;  diflbives 
ice,  176;  mixed  with  vitriolic  acid  air,  II.  8;  with 
vegetable  acid  air,  II.  24;  with  fluor  acid  air,  11.  198  ; 
has  no  efFed;  upon  copper,  II.  232;  the  electric  fpark 
taken  in  it,  II.  239. 

Alum,  in  marine  acid  air,  153;  in  alkaline  air,  174;  air 
from  it,  II.  115  ;  in  fluor  acid  air,  II.  200. 

Amoer,  air  from  it  by  fpirit  of  nitre,  II.  136. 

Animals,  live  in  air  in  which  candles  have  burned  out,  47  ; 
die  in  inflammable  air,  62  ;  the  manner  of  their  death 
in  noxious  air,  7  i  ;  young  ones  live  longer  than  old  ones 
in  common  air,  72  ;  different  from  vegetables  in  fomecir- 
cumftances  of  putrefaftion,  83  ;  how  afiedted  in  fixed  air, 
36;  caufe  of  their  death  in  noxious  air,   194. 

Animal Juhfiance 5,  air  from  them  by  fpirit  of  nitre,  II. 
145  ;   how  aiFefled  by  the  procefs  of  coaling,  ll.  244. 

A.tparatus,  for  experiments  on  air  defcribed,  6,  II   xxxiii, 

Arfenic,  nuhite,  air  from  it  by  fpirit  of  nitre,  II.  70. 

AJhes,  air  from  them  by  fpirit  of  nitre.  If.  75. 

Atmofphere,  conjedlures  concerning  the  origin  of  it,  263; 
whether  the  purity  of  it  be  fubjefl  to  variation,  II.  102. 

B. 

Bath  ivater,  air  contained  in  it,  II.  222. 
Beef,  air  from  it  with  fpirit  of  nitre,  II.  247. 
Bees-nvax,  in   marine  acid  air,    151  ;    air  from  it  by  fpirit 

of  nitre,  I'.  134. 
Be-uoly,  Mr.  his  obfervations  relating  to  nitrous  air,  217  ; 

his  experiments  to  inveftigate  the  acidity  of  fixed  air, 

Ji-  337,  382. 
Black,  Dr.  his  difcoveries,  3. 
Bladder,  nitrous  air  contained  in  it,  precipitating  lime  in 

lime-water,  191,  214. 
Blood,  air  from  it  by  fpirit  of  nitre,  II.  155^. 
Borax,  in  marine  acid  air,  238  ;  in  vitriolic  acid  air,  II, 

14;  air  from  it,  II.  116. 

Boulanger^ 


INDEX. 

SouIa)ig.''r,   Mr.  his  opinion  concerning  the  fluor  acid  air, 

II.    20I. 

Boyle,  his  difcoveries,   2. 

Brain,   air  fropn  it  by  fpirit  of  nitre,  II.    157. 

BraJ's-dufi,  niade  into  a  pafte  with  fulphur,  how  it  afFefls 
common  air,    157  ;  air  from  it  by  heat,  II.  109. 

Brimjlonc,  how  it  affeds  the  air  in  which  it  is  burned,  4^^  ; 
th«  himesof  it  do  not  rellore  noxious  air,  75;  in  ma- 
rine ."cid  air,    152. 

Bronjjnrig».  Dr.  his  difcoveries,  4. 

c. 

C.ahes,  of  metals,  contain  fixed  air,   192. 

Calcination,  of  nietals  in  nitrous  air,    125. 

Camphor,  in  marine  acid  air,  235  ;  in  vitriolic  acid  air, 
II.  13  ;   air  from  it  by  fpirit  of  nitre,  II.  135.. 

Candle,  lighted,  how  it  is  put  into  different  kinds  of  air, 
17;  of  air  in  which  it  has  burned,  43  ;  reiiored  by  ve- 
getation, 49;  how  it  burns  in  nitrous  air  affefted  by 
iron,  217  ;  furrounded  with  a  blue  flame  when  extin- 
guifhed  in  nitrous  air,  222  ;  how  it  burns  in  dephlo- 
V     giilicated  air,  JI.  38,    IGI. 

Ca-vendijh,  the  honourable  Mr.  his  difcoveries,  5  ;  his  ex- 
periment on  the  folution  of  copper  in  marine  acid  air. 

Cement,  diminishes  common  air,    179, 

Chalk,  yields  inflammable  air  in  a  gun  barrel,  38  ;  air 
from  it  by  fpirit  of  nitre,  II.  70  ;  air  from  it  without 
acid,   11.  1 10,   1 18. 

Champaigne  i.vine,  thcreafon  why  fome  of  it  fparkles  and 
fome  does  net,  If.  227. 

Charcoal,  the  effed  of  burning  it  in  common  air,  I  29; 
notfenfibly  diminiihcd  in  weight  b.y  burning  in  confined 
air,  132;  retains  phlogilton  very  obllinately,  137;  in 
marine  acid  air,  151;  in  alkaline  air,  173;  in  vitrio- 
lic acid  air,  II.  13  ;  heated  in  oil  of  vitriol  yields  vi- 
triolic acid  air,  II.  14;  in  vegetable  acid  air,  II.  25; 
air  from  it  by  fpirit  of  nitre,  II.  137  ;  obfervations  on 
its  conducting  povVvT,  II.  241  ;  its  expanfion  by  heat, 
II    256. 

Clay,  air  from  it  by  fpirit  of  nitre,  II.  75. 

Cold,  does  not  relloie  air  injured  by  refpiration,  &c.  48. 
10  d  ?  Con- 


INDEX. 

Conducing  potvcr,  in  what  it  confifts,   285. 
Common  air,  its  diminution   by  phlogiiton    limited,  43  ; 
not   injured  by  heat,  49;    how  affected  by   animal  re-r 
fpiraiion  and  putrefaclion,   70  ;    in  what   manner  fiib- 
fervient  to  refpiration,   71  ;    the  phenomena  of  its  di- 
minution by  putrefadlion,  78;    injured  by  iron  filings 
and  brimllonc,   105  ;  diminiftied  by  nitrous  air,   110  ; 
the  theory  of  that  diminution,   2C9  ;  injured  by  burn- 
ing charcoal,   1295  not  abforbed  according  to  the  ideas 
of  Dr.  Haies,   132;  injured   by  calcination  of  metals, 
'33  ;     by  paint,  138  ;   how  affeLled  by  the  acetous  fer- 
mentation, 154  ;  impregnated  with  various  effluvia,  157; 
how  affeded  by  brafs-duft  and  fulphur,  ily  ;  by  agitation 
in  water,    158;   not  injured  by  ftagnation,  160;  mij;cd 
with  alkaline  air,   172;    diminiftied  by  various  phlo- 
giftx  proceffes,    177  ;  diniinifhed  by  the  cledlric  fpark, 
l8i  ;     by  liver  of  fulphur,     T79;     by   Hom,berg's  py- 
rophorus,  ib.',  by  cement,  ib.  ;  the  whole  of  its  dimi- 
nution   not  owing  to   the  precipitation    of   fixed  air 
from  it,   187;    dirninifhed    by  iron  that  had   been  ex- 
pofed  to  nitrous  air,   222  ;  injured  by  vitriolic  acid  air, 
II.  105    by  vegetable   acid  air,    II.  27  ;    the  real  con- 
llitution  of  it,  II.  55  ;  injured  by  fumes  from  fpirit  of 
nitre,  II.  162  ;  various  obfervations  concerning  it,  II. 
180;    injured    by  iron,  II.  iSi  ;  by  paint  made  with 
red  lead,  II.  182  j  by  converting  the  calx  of  lead  into 
red  lead,  II.  183  ;  by  nitrous  ether,  II.  234. 
Cork,  airfrom  it  by  fpirit  of  nitre,  II.  140. 
Copper,  difiblved  when  nitrous  air  is  mixed  with  common 
air,  containing  volatile  alkali,  213. 

D 

Damp,  choak  damp  and  fire  damp,   2. 

Pephlcgijhcatcd  air,  difcovered,  II.  29;  frpm  mercurius 
calcinatus,  II.  34;  its  purity,  II.  47  ;  from  fpirit  of 
nine  and  red  lead,  11.  53.  63  ;  from  flowers  of  zinc, 
Jl.  69  ;  from  chalk,  II.  70  ;  from  woodafhes,  T.  75  ; 
from  clay,  II.  76  ;  ifrom  flints,  II.  82  ;  from  Mufcovy 
talck,  II.  84;  various  properties  of  it,  II,  91  ;  its  fpe- 
cific  gravity,  ib.  qualities  noxious  air,  II.  98  ;  the  ex- 
plofion  of  inflammable  air  in  it,  II.  99;  applicable  to. 
;5  chemical 


INDEX. 

chemical  purpofes,  II.  loo;  how  a  candle  burns  In  it, 

II.  lOI. 
Detonation,  the  theory  of  it,  II.  60. 
Dob/on,  Dr.  his  letter,  containing  cafes  of  putrid  dlfeafe* 

caufed  by  fixed  air,  II.  369. 

E. 

Eggs,  air  from  them  bv  fpirit  of  nitre,  11.  1 54. 

EleSlric-matter^  proved  to  be,  or  to  contain  phlogiflon, 
186;  (peculations  concerning  it,  274. 

* '/park,  how  taken  in  any  kind  of  air,   21  ;  the 

colour  of  it  in  inflammable  air,  61  ;  diminilhes  com- 
mon air,  181  ;  converts  oil  into  inflammable  air,  242; 
not  viable  in  cauflic  alkali,  or  fpirit  of  fair,  246  ; 
makes  fixed  air  immifcible  in  water,  248  ;  taken  in  fe- 
veral  kinds  of  air,  II.  238. 

EJJential  oil,  in  marine  acid  air,   233. 

Ether  -vitriolic,  how  it  affecls  fixed  air,  35  ;  mixed  with 
alkaline  air,  173;  with  marine  acid  air,  233;  con- 
verted into  inflammable  air  by  the  electric  fpark,  244; 
doubles  the  quantity  of  any  kind  of  air,  250;  in, vi- 
triolic acid  air,  I[.  12  ;  in  fluor  acid  air,  II.  199  ;  air 
from  it  by  fpirit  of  nitre,  II.  132. 

Ether  nitrous,  how  it  affeds  common  air,  II.  234. 

F. 

Falconer,  Dr.  various  obfervatlons  of  his  relating  to  the 
author's  experiments,  314. 

Fat,  air  from  it  by  fpirit  of  nitre,   II.  156. 

FiJJjes,  air  from  the  flelh  of  them  by   fpirit  of  nitre,  IL 
149  ;  the  quality  of  the  air  contained  in  their  bladders,  . 
II.  230  ;  die  in  water  impregnated  with  fixed  or  nitrous 
air,  11.  231. 

Fixed  air,  experiments  upon  it,  25,  248,  II.  213;  on 
the  furfacc  of  fermented  liquors,  25  ;  does  not  inllant- 
ly  mix  with  common  air,  27;  unites  with  the  fmoke 
of  rofin,  &:c.  27  J  changes  the  juice  of  turnfole  red,  3  ; 
of  the  nature  of  an  acid, //^.  II.  337,  '582;  expelled  from 
water  by  heat,  ib. ;  not  contained  in  ice,  33  ;  how  It  af- 
fe6ls  infefts,  36  ;  eafily  imparted  to  water,  &c.  by  agi- 
tation, 39;  therefiduum  of  it  equally  diftufed  through  its 
D  a  3  mafsj 


INDEX. 

mafs,  40  ;  made  immifcible  in  water  by  iron  filings  and 
brimllone,  41,  249;  does  not  mix  with  inflammable 
air,  62  ;  precipitated  from  common  air  by  phlogiftic 
procefTes,  44,  79  ;  its  refemblance  to  the  putrid  efflu- 
vium, 80;  whether  it  reftores  noxious  air,  99;  not 
noxious /i^ry>,  102  ;  the  ufe  of  it  recommended  in  pu- 
trid diforders,  103  ;  whether  it  be  precipitated  from 
common  air  by  nitrous  air,  114;  its  fmall  antifeptic 
power,  124;  procured  from  volatile  alkaline  falts,  165; 
mixed  with  alkaline  air,  171  ;  produced  by  nitrous  air 
confined  in  a  bladder,  191,  214;  does  not  difiblve 
iron,  215,  250;  made  immifcible  in  water  by  the 
electric  fpark,  248  ;  adminiikred  in  the  form  of  a 
clyfter,  292,  306;  Dr.  Percival's  obfervacions  on  the 
medicinal  ufes  of  it,  300  ;  attempts  to  extrad  it  from 
the  common  air,  II.  184;  when  procured  by  heat  has 
the  fame  properties  as  when  procured  by  acids,  II.  213  ; 
from  wood  and  charcoal,  II.  214;  contained  in  de- 
phlogifticated  air,  II.  217;  in  refiored  common  air, 
11.  2 '  8  ;  when  expelled  from  water,  not  wholly  imbibed 
by  it  again,  11.  219;  contained  in  the  Bath  water,  II. 
222;  indifferent  kinds  of  wine,  II.  227;  water  im- 
pregnated with  it  fatal  to  fifhes,  II.  231  ;  the  method  of 
impregnating  water  with  it,  II.  263. 

Flame,  an  enlarged  one  produced  by  nitrous  air  expofed 
to  iron,  217  ;  the  colour  of  it  when  inflammable  air  is 
burned  with  fixed  air,  II.  1 10. 

Tlejl},  in  marine  acid  air,   232. 

Flints,  in  marine  acid  air,  232;  air  from  them  by  fpirit 
of  nitre,  II.  S2, 

Fluor  acid  air,  II.  187  ;  mixed  with  alkaline  air,  II.  197; 
with  vitriolic  acid  air,  II.  204. 

Fluor  cntfi,  in  marine  acid  air,  II.  202  ;  in  the  vitriolic 
acid,  II.  305. 

Fontana,  Sig.  Felice,  his  theory  of  the  dUTerent  kinds  of 
air,  II.  318. 

Fra7ikli7t,  Dr.  his  obfervations  on  the  reftoration  of  pu- 
trid air  by  vegetation,  94  ;  his  ideas  concerning  fire, 
141  5  his  obfervations  on  air  iffulng  from  the  bottom 
of  ftagnant  waters,  321. 

Gaf, 


INDEX. 

G. 

Gas,  of  Van  Helm  on  t,   3. 
Gra-vlty  fpecijic,   of  feveral  kinds  of  air,   II.  ^4. 
Gums,   air  from  them  by  fpiritof  nitre,  II.  135. 
Gunpcwder,   fired  in  all  kinds  of  air,  256. 
Gyp/um,  air  from  it  by  fpiric  of  nitre,  II.  80. 

H. 

Hair,   air  from  it  by  fpirit  of  nitre,  IF.   152. 

Hales,  T)r    his  difcoverie?,  4;    his  miftake  concerning  air 

in  which  brimftone  has  barned,  45  ;    and  concerning  the 

abforption  of  air,  132. 
Harro'wgdte-'water,    the  fmell  of  it,    16 1. 
Heat,   does  not  injure  common   air,    49  ;    does   not  meli- 
orate it,  75  ;    its  conneflioh  with  phlogifton,  281  ;    air 

expelled    from   various    Tubftances   by  means   of  it,  11. 

)o4  ;   the  degree  of  it  changes  the  conducing  power  of 

charcoal,  11.  245. 
Henry,  Mr.    his    obfervations  on  the  folution  of   lead  in 

water  impregnated  with  nitrous  air,  324. 
Hey^  Mr.    his  experiments  to  prove  diat  there   is  no  oil  of 

vitriol  in  water  impregnated  with    fixed  air,    31,288; 

applies  fixed  air  in  the  way  of  clyRer,  103,   292. 
Hunter,  Mr.  John,  his  obfervation  on   fifhes  dying  irl  wi* 

ter  impregnated  with  fixed  air,  II.  231. 

I. 

Ice,  does  not  retain  fixed  air,  33  ;  difT^Ived  in  the  ma- 
rine acid  air,  24J  ;  in  alkaline  air,  176;  in  vitriolic 
acid  air,  II.  8. 

Ignition,  of  paper  dipped  in  a  folution  of  copper  in  fpirit 
of  nitre,  254. 

Injldmmable  air,  experiments  upon  u,  55,  242  ;  its  fmell, 
56;  a  depofit  made  from  it,  17;  ilronger  and  weaker 
in  different  circumflances,  58  ;  lofes  its  inflammability 
by  long  ftanding  in  water,  59  ;  how  plants  grow  in  ir, 
61  ;  the  colour  of  ihe  eleftric  fpark  in  it,  ib.  ;  fatal  to 
animals,  62  ;  docs  not  mix  with  fixed  air,  ib. ;  does  not 
eafily  part  with  its  phlogifton  to  o:her  fubltances,  65  ; 
D  d  4  mixed 


INDEX. 

mixed  with  the  fumes  of  fpirit  of  nitre,  il>.i  made  whole- 
feme,  and  deprived  of  its  inflammability  by  agitation 
in  water,  6j,  246 ;  mixed  with  nitrous  air  burns  with 
a  green  fiarne,  117;  mixed  with  alkaline  air,  171; 
made  from  oil  by  the  eledric  fpark,  242  ;  not  fired  by 
gunpowder  exploding  in  it,  256  ;  its  explofion  in  de- 
phlogilHcated  air,  11.  gg ;  from  metals  by  means  of 
heat  only,   II.  107. 

Jtifeds,  live  in  air  tainted  with  putrefafllon,  85;  die  ia 
nitrous  air,  226  ;  in  inflammable  air,  247  ;  air  from 
them  by  fpirit  of  nitre,  II.  151. 

Iron,  the  filings  of  it  made  into  a  pafte  with  brimftone 
diminifl^es  common  air,  105;  the  phenomena  attend- 
ing its  fermentation,  108  ;  its  effefts  on  fixed  air, 
118.  250  ;  its  effect  on  nitrous  air,  215  ;  diflblved  by 
alkaline  air  in  a  mixture  of  nitrous  and  common  air, 
213;  in  vitriolic  acid  air,  11.  12;  inflammable  air 
from  it  by  heat  only,   2,    107. 

I'vory,  in  marine  acid  air,  231 ;  air  from  it  by  fpirit  of 
nitre,  II.  153. 


Landrian'i,  Slg.  his  mifreprefentation  of  the  author's  fen- 
timents,  II.  311;  his  opinion  concerning  the  confti- 
tution  of  fixed  air,  II.  317. 

Lane,  Mr.  his  difcovery,    5,  30. 

Lanjoijler,  Mr.  gets  air  from  fpirit  of  nitre  and  fpirit  of 
wine,  II.  121;  his  mifreprefentation  of  the  author's 
fentiments,  II.  306;  his  opinion  concerning  air  im- 
bibed by  the  calces  of  metals,  II.  320. 

Lead,  nit.-ous  air  from  it,  126,  II.  173;  difTolved  in  the 
marine  acid,  145;  diiTolved  in  water  impregnated  with 
nitrous  air,  324.^ 

Lead  ore,  air  from  it  by  fpirit  of  nitre,  II.  67. 
'  the  grey  calx  of  it,  air  from  it,  II.  50. 

-—— red,  or  minium,  yields  dephlogifticated  air,  II.  37; 
employed  in  the  difcovery  of  the  nature  of  dephlogifti- 
cated air,  II.  51  ;  air  injured  by  paint  made  with  it, 
11.   1S2. 

— —  nvhite,  air  from  it  by  fpirit  of  nitre,  II.  66 ;  with- 
out fpirit  of  nitre,  II.    113. 

Le'vitjf  whether  a  principle  in  bodies,  267,  293,  II.  3 1 1. 

Light, 


INDEX. 

Light,  from  animals,   perhaps  from  internal  caufes,  279," 
Ligbtbo^vne,  Mr.  cured  of  a  putrid  fever  by  fixed  air, 

292. 
Lime,  in  marine  acid  air,   238;    air  from  it  by  fpirit  of 

nitre,  II.  72. 
•— —  ivater,   becomes  turbid  by  burning  charcoal  over  it 

in  common  air,   130;  and  not  by  the  calcination  of 

metals,   137;    becomes  turbid  by  taking  the  eledlric 

fpark  over  it,  186. 
— — kilfis,  perhaps  ufeful  in  the  neighbourhood  of  large 

cities,  102. 
Liquids,  how  air  is  expelled  from  them,   14;   how  im- 
pregnated with  air,  16;  theeledric  fpark  how  taken  in 

them,  22. 
Liver  of  Julphur,  diminilhes  common  air,    179;  changes 

nitrous  air,   218;    in  marine   acid  air,  235,   II.  233; 

in  fixed  air,   249;  in  vegetable  acid  air,   Jl.  25. 
Litharge,  fixed  air  from  it,  II.  51;  dephlogifticated  air 

from  it,   il,  Gj. 
Lungs t  their  principal  ufe,  78. 

M. 

Machride,  Dr.  his  difcoveries,  3. 

Magellan,  Mr.  his  experiments  relating  to  dephlogifti* 
cated  air,  U.  379. 

Magnejia,  air  from  it  by  fpirit  of  nitre,   If.   74. 

Malt,  air  from  it  by  fpirit  of  nitre,  11.  143. 

Marble,  air  from  it  by  fpirit  of  nitre,   II.  73. 

Marine  acid  air,  experiments  upon  it,  143,  229;  extin- 
guiflies  flame  with  a  blue  colour,  147;  unites  with 
phlogiflon,  149;  mixed  with  alkaline  air,  170;  pro- 
cured from  fait  by  oil  of  vitriol,  229;  diflblves  ve- 
getable and  animal  fubftances,  231  ;  does  not  reftore 
noxious  air,  239;  diffolves  ice,  240;  its  fpecific  gra- 
vity, 241;  does  not  promote  the  firing  of  inflammable 
air,  ih.;  the  fluor  cruft  in  it,  II.  202  j  the  dearie  fpark 
in  it,  II.  239. 

MaJJicot,  yields  dephlogifticated  air,  II.  50. 

Mercurius  calduatus  pc'/e,  yields  dephlogifticated  air,  II. 
34. 

Meials, 


INDEX. 

Meials,  which  of  them  yields  nitrous  air,  126;  m  wh?ii 
quantity,  J28  ;  calcined  in  common  air,  133  ;  diffolved 
in  heated  oil   of  vitriol,   yield  vitriolic  acid  air.  It.  17; 

MicSj  the  manner  of  keeping  them  and  making  experi- 
ments with  them,  9;  live  without  water,  10;  putiify- 
ing  in  water,  84  ;   living  in  depblogillicated  air,  II.  44. 

Milk,  air  from  it  by  fpirit  of  nitre,  II.  1  56. 

Mi/celJaneous  experiments,    154,  252,   II.  229. 

Montigny,  Mr.  his  affifting  the  author  to  procilre  vitriolic 
acid  air,  II.  3. 

Mu/cular  motion,  a  conjefture  concerning  the  caufe  ofiti 
274. 

N. 

Nitre,  in  marine  acid  air,  153  ;   air  from  it,  15c;,  II.  87  ; 
the  cryftalization  of  it  does  not  aftedl  co.Titnon  air,  16  i  j 
injures  common  air  in  cooling  after  it  has  been  red  hot, 
II.  165  ;   in  fluoi-  acid  air,  U.  loi  ;  in  marine  acid  air, 
236. 
o— —  spirit  of,   air  from  vegetable  fubftances  by  means  of 
it,  II.  121  ;    air  from  animal  fubftances  by  means  of  it* 
II.  145;    mifcellaneous  experiments   relating  to  it,  II. 
160;   injures  common  air,  II.   162;  air  from   it,  IL 
168;    with  red  lead  yields  dephlogifiicated  air,  \i.  53. 
Nitrous  air,  the  difcovery  of  it,  108;   farther  experiments 
upon   it,   203  ;    diminifhes   common   air  and  makes  it 
noxious,    1 10;     the   teft  of  the   purity    of  air,    114; 
mixed  with  inflammable  air,   117;  diminifhed  by  iron 
jfilings  and  brimflone,    114.;   plants  die  in  It,   119;  its 
Tpecific  gravity,  ib.  II.  94;   impregnating  water,  120; 
its  antifceptic  power,  123  ;   metals  calcined  in  it,   125  ; 
diminifhed  by  long  Handing  in  water,    127  ;   kept  in  a 
tladder,  128  ;  in  what  proportion    yielded  by  different 
metals,  ih.;  mixed  with  alkaline  air,  171  ;  made  fit  for 
refpiration,  and  diminifhed  by  frefn  nitrous  air,    189; 
yielded  by  the  precipitate  of  the  folution   of  copper  in 
fpirit  of  nitre,  203  ;  mixed  with  common  air,  contain- 
ing volatile  alkali,    forms  a   nitrous   ammoniac,  205, 
2c8  ;  changed  by  iron,  215,  If.   175;  and  by   liver  of 
fiilphur,  218;    diminifhed  by   iron    filings   aiid  brim- 
flone, 223  ;   the  proportion  of  it   from    fi!vcr,  copper, 
and  iron,  diffolved  in  equal  quantities  of  fpirit  of  ni- 
tre. 


INDEX. 

tre,  225;  kills  infefts,  226;  its conftituent  parts,  271; 
Mr.  Bewly's  obfervations  concerning  it,  317;  phlo- 
gifticated  with  the  nitrous  acid  vapour,  II.  170. 

Nitrous  ammoniac,  formed  by  nitrous  air,  mixed  with  com- 
mon air,  containing  volatile  alkali,    205,   208,    210. 

Nooth,  Dr.  his  experiments  on  the  Bath  water,  II.  225  ; 
his  miftake  concerning  the  hiliory  of  the  impregnatiori 
of  water  with  fixed  air,  II.  265  ;  his  objections  to  the 
author's  method  of  impregnating  water  with  fixed  air, 
II.  293. 

O. 

Oak,  air  from  it  bv  fpirit  of  nitre,  II.  141. 

Oil  vegetable,  a  remarkable  kind  of  charge?.!  made  by  it, 

II.  259. 
■  0/ olives,  in  marine   acid  air,  150  ;     iifed  to  procure 

■   vitriolic  acid  air,  II.  4  ;  in  vegetable  acid  air,  II.  28. 
of  turpentine,  in  marine  acid  air,   150,   233. 


Paint,  makes  air  noxious,   138,  II.  182. 

Parker,  Mr.  his  improvements  on  Dr.  Nooth's  apparatus 
for  impregnating  water  with  fixed  air,  [I.  298. 

Ptrci-ual,  Dr.  his  obfervations  on  the  medicinal  ufes  of 
fixed  air,  3C0  ;  his  propofal  to  cure  the  Hone  by  water 
impregnated  with  fixed  air,  II.  360. 

Phlogijlicated air,  its  fpecific  gravity,  46,  105,  1 19.  II. 
94  ;  not  meliorated  by  cold  or  compreffion,  48  ;  what 
methods  failed  to  reilore  it,  73  ;  reilored  by  agitation 
in  water,  99  ;  whether  reilored  by  fixed  air,  ib.  ;  no 
farther  diminifhed  by  any  other  iimilar  procefs,  ic6. 

Phlcgifion,  retained  moll  cbftinately  by  charcoal,  137  ;  the 
principle  that  diminiihes common  air,  139,  17S  :  pre- 
cipitates fixed  air  from  common  air,  iSi  ;  proved  to 
cxill  in  the  elcclric  matter,  186  ;  necefiary  to  air,  II.  5  ; 
impairs  the  purity  of  air,  II.  58  ;  a  cjnvenient  and 
proper  term,    382. 

Pko/phorus,  in  marine  acid  air,  15  1  ;  in  alkaline  air,  174  ; 
in  nitrous  air,  226;  in  vitriolic  acid  air,  II.  12;  iVlr. 
Canton's,  yields  fluor  acid  air,  212. 

Price, 


I    N    D    E    X. 

Price,  Dr.  his  obfervations  on  the  malignant  eiFe£ls  of 
ftagnant  waters,   195. 

Prhigle,  Sir  John,  the  'author's  letter  to  him  on  the  efiecl 
of  ftagnant  water  on  air,    196. 

Putrefadion,  air  infefted  by  it,  70;  the  fame  thing  wiih 
air  infefted  by  refpiration,  yj  ;  reftored  by  vegetation, 
86;  the  produce  of  it  depends  on  various  circum* 
ftances,   81;    refifted  by  nitrous  air,    123. 

Pjropharus,  Homber£sy   diminilhes  common  air,    179. 

^erieSy  iffc.   258, 

i^ick-lime,   coagulates  oil  of  vitriol,  IT.  229. 
^ick-Jil'ver,  the  method  of  making  experiments  in  it,  14* 
^illsf  air  from  them  by  fpirit  of  nitre,  II.   152. 

R. 

Pe^ precipitate,  yields  dephlogifticated  air*  II,   34. 
Refradinjc  ponver,   of  different  kinds  of  air,  attempted  tO 

be  afcertained,   II.  235. 
Rejidiium,  of  fixed  air*  equally  difFufed  through  the  whole 

mafs  of  it,  40;    the  nature  of  it,  ib.    II.  331. 
Refpiration,  air  infefted  by  it,  70  ;    the  fame   thing  with 

air  infefted  by  putrefaftion,  77  ;    air  injured  by   it  re- 

ftored  by  vegetation,    86. 
RuJI  of  iron,  in  marine  acid  air,   i;o  ;    fixed  air  from  it, 

II.   II!;  air  from  it  by  fpirit  of  nitre.  If.  70. 
Rutherford,  Dr.  his   opinion  concerning  the   nature  of 

£xed  air,  II.  314. 

S. 

Sal  ammoniac y  the  volatile  fpirit  of  ic  converted  into  In- 
flammable air  by  the  electric  fpark,  245  ;  compofcd 
from  alkaline  air,   and  marine  acid  air,   20S. 

Salts,  metallic,    air  from  them,  11.   112. 

Scur-vy,  fea,  the  probability  of  curing  it  by  water  im- 
pregnated with  fixed  air,  II.  290. 

Sealing-nvax,  air  from  it  by  fpirit  of  nitre,  II.  126. 

Sedative  faltf  air  from  it,  11.  86, 

Smeaton^ 


INDEX. 

Smeaion,  Mr.  the  excellence  of  his  air-pump,  202  ;  his 
pyrometer  ufed  to  meafure  the  expanfioa  of  charcoal  by 
heat,  II.  256. 

Smoke,  floating  in  the  region  of  fixed  air  on  the  furface  of 
fermenting  liquor,  26. 

Spirit  of  nvir.e,  in  marine  acid  air,  150;  converted  into 
inflammable  air  by  the  eledlric  fpark,  245  ;  yields  no 
air  by  heat,  253  ;  air  from  it  by  fpirit  of  nitre,  11.  124. 

Sugar,  in  marine  acid  air,  238  ;  air  from  it,  II.  117. 

Syphon,  ufed  in  drawing  air  out  of  a  veffel,    18. 

T. 

Talc,  air  from  it  by  fpirit  of  nitre.  If.   84. 

Tartar,  fait  of,  air  from  it  by  fpirit  of  nitre,  II.  7^. 

Tin,  air  injured  by  the  calcination  of  it,   135. 

Turnfole,  the  juice  of  it  turns  red  by  taking  the   eleftrlc 

fpark  over  it  in  common  air,   185  ;  with  fixed  air,  31  j 

with  nitrous  air,   225. 
Turpentine,  oil  of,  air  from  it  by  fpirit  of  nitre,  II.   127J 

in  fluor  acid  air,  II.  211. 

U. 
Vrinet  contains  fixed  air,  II.  2 1 6. 

V. 

Vegetahles,  bow  afFefled   in  fixed  air,  36 ;  flourilh  in   air 

tainted  with  putrefadion,  86;    rellore  air  injured  by 

putrefai^ion  or  refpiration,  ib. 
Vegetable  fubjlances,  air  from  them   by  fpirit  of  nitre,  IF. 

121  ;  differ  from  nnimal  fubftances  in  tae  circumfl:ances 

attending  their  putrefaftion,  83. 
Vegetable  acid  air,  II.  23  ;   mixed  with  alkaline  air,  II.  24; 

with  water,  II.  25  ;  with  oil,  11.  28  ;  injures  common 

air,  II.  27. 
Vegetation,  rellores  air  injured  by  candles  burning  in   it, 

52;  and  by  refpiration,  49  ;  in  confined  air,  50  ;  keeps 

water  fwcet,  11.  186. 
Venelle,  Mr.  his  difcovery  of  air  in  Pyrmont  water,    11. 

aoc. 

Vitriolt 


INDEX. 

Vitriol,  oil,  or fpirit  of,  not  made  volatile  wben  poured 
upon  chalk,  30;  in  marine  acid  air,  2365  coaoulated 
by  heating  quick-lime  in  it,  II.   229. 

Vilrioly  blue,  in  marine  acid  air,  237. 

»  '  green,  in  marine  acid  air,  237. 

nxihite,  air  from  it  and  other  kinds  of  vitriol,  II. 

Reman,  air  from  it,  11.  86,    \\\. 


Vitriolated  tartar,  air  from  it,  II.   i  i6. 

Vitriolic  acid  air,  difcovered,  II.  \  ;  water  impregnated 
with  it,  \l.  7,  325;  difTolves  ice,  II.  8;  mixed  with 
alkaline  air,  \\,ib.\  injures  common  air,  II.  10;  the 
weakert  of  the  mineral  acid  airs,  li.  1 1  ;  procured  from 
charcoal,  II.  14  j  from  ether,  II.  15  ;  from  meials,  II. 
17;  not  prrduced  by  heat  only,  li.  16;  a  yellow  fub- 
ftance  produced  by  it  and  alkaline  air,  II.  22  ;  the 
fame  thing  with  the  fluor  acid  air,  II.  204  ;  the  eleftric 
ipark  taken  in  it,   II.   239. 

Volcanos,  a  conjedure  concerning  their  fuppJying  a  planet 
with  air,  263. 

W. 

Waljh,  Mr.  his  experiment  on  the  double  barometer,  285. 

Warren,  Dr.  his  cai'e  of  a  putrid  diforder  cured  by  fixed 
air,  \l. 

Water,  efFeflually  feparates  noxious  air  fiom  common  air, 
77;  air  injured  by  agitation  in  it,  99,  158;  impreg- 
nated with  nitrous  air,  120;  with  marine  acid  air,  146; 
"with  alkaline  air,  167;  with  vitriolic  acid  air.  II.  7, 
325  ;  with  fluor  acid  air,  II.  190  ;  with  vegetable  acid 
air,  II.  25  ;  affefted  by  the  calcination  of  metals  over 
it,  135;  has  an  affinity  with  phlogifton,  139;  its  effe6l 
on  air  when  ftagnant,  196;  kept  fweet  by  vegetables 
growing  in  it,  II.    185. 

■  — impregnated  nvith  fixed  air,  28;  II.  263,  II.  277; 
fparkles  more  after  being  kept  fome  time,  32;  made 
ftronger  by  a  condenfing  machine,  34  ;  no  oil  of  vitriol 
in  it,  288. 

JVirie,  the  quantity  of  fixed  air  in  difFerent  kinds  of  it, 
II.   227. 

Woody  in  marine  acid  air,  231. 

Worms^ 


INDEX. 

Worms,  in  the  bowels  might  perhaps  be  dellroyed  by  ai-f 

trous  air,   227. 
IVouJfe,  Mr.  his  tranfmutatlon  of  the  acids,  II.  161. 

Z. 

Zinc,  yields  very  little  nitrous  air,   126;  air  from  it  by 

heat  only,  II.   108. 
fo^vers  of,  yield  dephloginicated  air  by  fpirit  of 

nitre,  il.  6g, 


A  Cata- 


A  Catalogue  of  BOOKS  written  by 
JOSEPH   PRIESTLEY,  LL.D.  F.  R.  S. 

AND    PRINTED    FOR. 

J.    JOHNSON,    Bookfeller,  at  No.  72, 
St  Paul's  Church-Yard,  London. 

1.  ■'T"^  HE  History  and  Present  State  of  Elec- 
J^      tricity,  with  original  Experiments,  illuftrated 
with  Copper-Plates,    4th   Edit,  correfted  and  enlarged, 
4to.    il.  IS.     Another  Edition,  2  vols.  8vo.   jzs, 

2.  A  Familiar  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Elec- 
tricity, the  Second  Edition,   8vo.  2s.  6d. 

3.  The  History  and  Present  State  of  Disco- 
veries relating  to  Vision,  Light,  and  Colours,  2 
vols,  ^'.o,  iilullrated  with  a  great  Number  of  Copper 
Plates,    il.  us,  6d.  in  Boards. 

4.  A  Familiar  Introduction  to  the  Theory  and 
Practice  of  Perspective,  with  Copper  Plates,  Price 
5s.  in  Boards. 

5.  Directions  for  impregnating  Water  with  Fixed 
Air,  in  order  to  communicate  to  it  the  peculiar  Spirit  and 
Virtues  of  Pyrmont  Water,  and  other  Mineral  Wa- 
ters of  a  fimilar  Nature,    is. 

6.  Experiments  and  Obfervations  on  different  kinds  of 
Air,  with  Copper  Plates,  the  fecond  Edition,  5s.  in 
Boards, 

7.  A  New  Chart  of  History,  containing  a  View 
of  the  principal  Revolutions  of  Empire  that  have  taken 
Place  in  the  World;  with  a  Bookdefcribing  it,  containing 
an  Epitome  of  Univerfal  Hiftory,  the  third  Edition,  los. 
6d. 

8.  A  Chart  of  Biography,  with  a  Book,  contain- 
ing an  Explanation  of  it,  and  a  Catalogue  of  all  the 
Names  inferted  in  it,  the  fourth  Edition,  very  much  im- 
proved,   los.  6d. 

9.  An  Eflay  on  a  Courfe  of  liberal  Education  for  Civil 
and  Adlive  Life,  with  Plans  of  Ledlures  on,  i.TheStudy 
of  Hiftory  and  general  Policy.  2,  The  Hiftory  of  Eng- 
land.    3,  The  Conftitution  and  Laws  of  England. 

10.   An 


£00kS   rojnitea  ly  Dr.   ?llIEStLEY, 

10.  An  Examination  of  Dr.  Reid's  Inquiry  into 
tlie  Human  Mind  on  the  Principles  of  Commori  Senfe, 
Dr.  Beattie's  Effay  on  the  Nature  and  Immutability  of 
Truth,  and  Dr.  Oswald's  Appeal  to  Common  Senfe  in 
Behalf  of  Religion,  the  fecond  Edition,  55.  fewed. 

11.  Hartley's  Theory  of  the  Human  Mind  oa 
the  Principle  of  the  Affociation  of  Ideas,  with  Eflays  re- 
lating to  the  Subjeft  of  it,  8vo.  5$.  fewed. 

12.  The  Rudiments  of  English  Grammar,  adapt- 
ed to  the  Ufe  of  Schools,  is.  6d. 

13.  The  above  GkAMWAR,  with  Notes  and  Obferva- 
tions,  for  the  Ufe  of  thofe  who  have  made  fome  Profici- 
ency in  the  Language,  the  fourth  Edition,  3s. 

14.  An  Essay  on  the  First  Principles  of  Govern- 
ment and  on  the  Nature  of  Political,  Civil,  and 
Religious  Liberty,  the  fecond  Edition,  much  en- 
larged, 5  s. 

15.  Institutes  of  Natural  and  Revealed  Re* 
liciON,  Vol.1,  containing  the  Elements  of  Natural  Re- 
ligion; to  which  is  prefixed,  An  Eifay  on  the  belt  Me- 
thod of  communicating  religious  Knowledge  to  the  Mem- 
bers of  Chriftian  Societies,  2s.  6d.  fewed.— Vol.  II.  con*- 
taining  the  Evidences  of  the  Jewilh  and  Chriftian  Reve- 
lation, 3s.  fewed. — Vol.  III.  containing  the  Dodrinesof 
Revelation,  2s.  6d.  fewed. — Preparing  for  the  Prefs,  the 
Fourth  and  laft  Part  of  this  Work,  containing  an  Account 
of  the  Corruptions  of  Chriftianity. 

16.  A  Free  Address  to  Protestant  Dissenters 
on  the  Subjedl  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  the  third  Edition* 
with  Additions,  zs. 

17.  The  Additions  to  the  above  may  be  had  alone,   is. 

18.  An  Address  to  Protestant  Dissenters  on  the 
Subjeft  of  giving  the  Lord's  Supper  to  Children,   is. 

19.  Considerations  on  DiFFERENCEsof  Opinion 
among  Chriftians;  with  a  Letter  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Venn, 
in  Anfwer  to  his  Examination  of  the  Addrefs  to  Proteftant 
DilTenters,  is.  6d. 

20.  A  Catechism  for  ChiUren^ti^  Toung  Per/om,  the 
fecond  Edition,   3d. 

21.  A  Scripture  Cat^c~hism,  confifling  of  a  Series 
of  Queftions,  with  References  to  the  Scriptures,  inltead  of 
Anfwers,  3d. 

22.  A  Serious 


^OOKS   ivHitea  hy  Dr.   PRIESTLEY. 

22.  A  Serious  Address  to  Masters  of  FamilleSj 
with  Forms  of  Family  Prayer,   the  fecond  Edition,   6d. 

23.  A  View  of  the  Principles  and  Conduct  of  the 
Protestant  Dissenters,  with  refped  to  the  Civil  and 
Ecclefiaftical  Conilitution  of  England,  the  fecond  Edi- 
tion,   IS.  6d. 

24.  A  Free  Address  to  Protestant  Dissentersj 
on  the  Subjefl  of  Church  Discipline  ;  with  a  Preli- 
minary Difcourfe  concerning  the  Spirit  of  Chriflianity, 
and  the  Corruption  of  it  by  falfe  Notions  of  Religl#i* 
23.  6d. 

25.  A  Sermon  preached  before  the  Congregation  of 
Protestant  Dissenters,  at  Mill  Hill  Chapel,  in 
Leeds,  May  16,  1773?  on  Occalion  of  his  refigning  his 
Paltoral  Office  among  them,   is. 

26.  A  Free  AddPxEss  to  Protestant  Dissentersj 
as  fuch.  By  a  DifTenter.  A  new  Edition,. enlarged  and 
corrected,  is.  6d. — An  allowance  is  mide  to  thofe  whc> 
buy  this  Pamphlet  to  give  away. 

27.  Letters  to  the  Author  of  Remarks  on  fe^jeral  lati 
Publications  reldti-iie  to  the  Dijfenters,  in  a  Letter  to  Dr, 
Friejileyy    \s. 

28.  An  Appeal  to  the  fericus  and  candid  Profeffbrs 
of  Chriitianity,  on  the  following  Siibjeds,  viz.  i.  The 
Ufeof  Reafon  in  Matters  of  Religion.  2.  The  Power 
of  Man  to  do  the  Will  of  God.  3.  Original  Sin.  4. 
Eledion  and  Reprobation.  $.  The  Divinity  of  Chrift* 
And,  6.  Atonement  for  Sin  by  the  Death  of  Chrift,  the 
iifth  Edition,    td. 

29.  A  Familia  r  Illustration  of  certain  Paflagea 
of  Scripture  relating  to  the  fame  Subjefl,  4d.  or  35.  6d* 
per  Dozen. 

30.  The  Triumph  of  Truth  ;  being  an  Account  of 
the  Trial  of  Mr.  Elwall,  for  Herefy  and  Blafphemy,  at 
Stafford  Affizes.  before  Judge  Denton,  &c.  the  fecond 
Edition,    id. 

31.  Considerations  for  the  Use  of  Young  Men, 
and  the  Parents  of  Young  Men,  2d. 


Alfo, 


Alfo,  puhlijhed  under  the  I)ire5lion  of  Dr.  Priejileyy 

•  THE   THEOLOGICAL  RKPOSITORYj 

Confiiling  of  original  Eflays,  Hints,  Queries,  &c.  cal- 
culated to  promote  religious  Knowledge,  in  3  Vo- 
lumes, 8vo.  Price  18s.  in  Boards. 

Among  other  Articles,  too  many  to  be  enumerated  it* 
an  Advertlfement,  thefe  three  Volumes  will  be  found  to 
contain  fuch  original  and  truly  valuable  Obfervations  on 
the  Doftrine  of  the  Atonement,  the  Preexijience  of  Chrijiy 
and  the  Infpiration  of  the  Scriptures,  more  efpecially  re- 
fpefting  the  Harmony  of  the  Enjangelifs,  and  the  Reafon- 
ingof  the  Apoftle  Paul,  as  cannot  fail  to  recommend 
them  to  thofe  Perfons,  who  wifli  to  make  a  truly  free  En- 
quiry into  thefe  important  Subjefts, 

In  the  Firft  Volume,  which  is  now  reprinted,  feveral 
Articles  are  added,  particularly  Two  Letters  from  Dr. 
Thomas  Shaw  to  Dr.  Benson,  relating  to  the  PaffagQ 
of  the  Ifraelites  through  the  Red  Sea. 

♦ 

Jujl  puhlijhed, 

PHILOSOPHICAL  EMPIRICISM: 

CONTAINING 

Remarks  on  a  Charge  of  Plagiarism, 

refpefling  Dr.  H s, 

INTERSPERSED 

"With  various  Obfervations  relating  to 

DIFFERENT  KINDS  of  AIR. 


Moaned  &^  Oiled— 


I  vU 


^ 


oN    jn3MS  o 


Aywyan  ongnj   noisoq 

3W1  JO  AQOlSnO  3W1  N 





==================== VOL. III ====================


Ys 

2 8 

. 
* 


» - 


i 
7 * 
: a 4 


5 


ne 


—— — nds 


——— 


” 2 * 
- Y . „ 3 —_ 7 
7 N rh n 
K 78 $4 7 5 - d 


* 5 


rr OF) HY 


— 2 7˙ ww ˙ũcNw > 


ak 
1 


OR 


7h, overt 2 
—— 


ON DIFFERENT KINDS QF. 


W. , | . 5 


* 
f , - 
.*, 


: © Printed for J. Jounsox, No. 
Church-Vard. 


ro THE RIGHT HONOUR ABLE 
| or STANHOPE, , 


MM rTHrx LISERTIESs or HIS. COUNTRY e 


# N 1 * N j 4 5 


AND THOSE OF MANKIND; 


Vu Hs Lon DH. 


4 


95 5 MOST OBEDIENT ' © br 


\ & 2 "= % 


2 — HUMBLE SERVANT — ©. 


* F 
” 
* * 2 
_— 
+ 
- 1 4 
bY 
n 
— * 


# 5 7 4 
- 2 
- '- 
F 
„ 
CE. 4 
— 25 
=. © * 
, * 
1 8 x 
: 4 
F F 
1 
Ke. 
a 2 
> 
P 4 9 a0 # 
: #2 # 
1 - 2 - 
— pp - 
$475 N 
3 7 
* 4 2 a v 
* 
i 
" _«.. 


as 
3 
x 
a 
„ 
5 
« 
6 
+ 
— 
— 
* 
* 
a 
s + 
\ 


+ 


Yu 


5 4 
* * Ra * * 
” * of 
* 
* * " 
- , f $ pf \ 
& 
: 2 « 
* 5 3 * F 3 
| 8 8 2 
= | * — 
. . 
1 * * 
4 ; ; Hi 
— 
4. 
* 
1 * 4 * bY 
a 1 11 . 
. 5 ? 
» 
£ 
2 * 8 : 
— 3 
84 
* 
9. * N * 
— * « 3 
1 N = 
* 
mY 8 
2 
a a * „ * = * 
22 * a > 
= . 
by "RNS + % 
» * * » 


. 
— * N 
£ * * * 7 * 
» = 
* J - . 3 We. att. 
33 5 * 
+ e 
a 5 p * 
* * 
„ ® "ry 
* o . B . 
* 


; 8 8 
: . : 
? xs 
” * 
1 y 
* o 
— 
_ : : : 
3 * 
7 
* 
* 8 
84 A 
. * 
3 * 


75 


* 


1 4 * De: + 9 (4 
; z : 
s 4 
8 - 
. * 5 
, , x ** 8 
FE. z , * 
1 % 2 
- * - 
A p * 
8 1 A - * 
* 
— - : 5 
© 7 
. 
- 
. 
* 5 £4 : 
- "a 
« ” i * + F ; — 5 
hs 4 s 4 
1 * 1. 4 f 4 D 7 * - 7 
. — * 4KR49« ow E 
2 3 „ o — 3 
N 4 
a 1 
4 - 
* 1 4 . 6 


lume of this work, that 1 ſhould hav( 
materials for another to follow it ſo ſoon ; 
but being willing to complete a few tbings 

" had left particularly imperfect 


- 


* 


ning leading to another, 1414 aw 
freſh. matter accumulate, I, 0 I wa 52 as 


* 


at is now . 


merely to k | 


think, be ſ aſiciently bo hd "the 
contents of it, and the manner in which 
it is written; for it is as coneiſe a x abr | 
tive as could well be drawn up of tlie nc 
- fats. that have fallen under my notice 
ſince my laſt p. alicati | Theſe facts 


— 
* * 
; « 
* 
: 7 — # 
* £ 9 
Z hy 
» $ 2 
r 
% * 
* 2 
3 - 
Y * 
Py A 
. 
- 95 2 
g * - 
; - 
f 
* 
* 
"2 * 
* 


tion, when I publiſhed the ſecond vo- 


» 


4 - 
* 
5 2 
4% . 
Sf I th 
THESE 
F * 
2 7 
4 - 


* 
% 
* - 
* 
- 
* 
5 2 Þ 
4 
LY 
* 
— 
＋ 
* 


* 


alt preceding 70 
a that many new ſubſecks are ſtarted, for 
the complete underſtanding of which we 


vi - Taz P REF AC E. 
Will be found-to- 5 Ire numerous than 


thoſe of which an account is given in ei- 


ther of the two former volumes; and 


though few of them will appear ſo bril- 


liant, jn the eye of the general l 


many of them will, I doubt. not, be 
thought no leſs valuable by pbilg oſephers 


Hume; at thE ſame time 


malt wait for the reſult of * farther re- 


; ſearches, aud more diſcoveries: © This 
volume, however, _ is particularly diſ- 


tinguiſhed by th demonſtratich of the 
real 2% of the blood in reſpiration, a'quel- 


tion Which has been long agitated, and 


which | L hope is now lat f. egit 2 


A A my neat os ſhould' be ee at 
hy addition of « one volume after another 
on the ame ſubject, I do aſſure them that 
4 ſhall now certainly give them and my- 
Wits ſome * and deliver the torch to 


any 


* * 


and chymiſts. They throw great light up- 
| on many things, the rationale of which 
me when I wrote the 


4 


Tu PREFACE ol 
any who may: be diſpoſed. to 1 2 g 
forelecing that my attention 2 
ficicntly engaged by ſpecul: 
ry different nature; WW; 
vary to my preſent views and W 
I ſhould; ſooner than I now imagine, re- 
ſume the proſecution of any of theſe ex- 
periments, and any thing worth commu. 
nicating to the public ſhould occur, Iſthall 
Certait * take an early. opportunity of 
at home or abroad; as I ſhall think my- 
_ {#65 e e perſon, much to blame, 
de ene perſaga coſdertions, we 


fact, h niche. facit the progreſs 


which is now ſo r making in in this 
| Trang. of * 


55 "Thoſe of as readers * 7 with 
chat I would Rill give a principal attention 
to this branch of experimental philoſophy, 


will the leſs regret my diſcontiquing it, 


when they are informed with how, much 
ardour and ability 
proſecuted in very different parts of Eu- 
. 1 ſhall juſt mention the Due de 
SSE 24 Chaulnee, 


theſe purſuits are now _ 


vii Tu: PREFACE. 


| Chaulnes, beſides Mr. Lavoiſier, and 
ſeveral others, in France, the Chevalier 
: Landriani, the Ahbẽ Fontana, Sig. Volta 
and Sig. Moſcatit Italy, and Mr. Achard 
and others in ink} - alſo ſeveral of 
my friends in England; particularly Dr. 
Falconer, who has lately publiſhed a very 
uſeful work on the ſolution of many me- 
dicinal articles in water impregnated with 
fixed air, Dr. Percival, Mr. Bewly, Mr. 
Warltire, and otWs, whoſe names may 
be ſeen in my different Appendixes: The 
_ -ritings of ſome of the foreigners above 
mentioned, I have bd the ſatis faction to 
peruſe ſince the publication of my ſecond 
volume, thoſe of the rel 1 N ng 2 
a en account on 


f it. 


Tam alſo Memes by my friend Mr. 
Magellan, who frequently viſits, and. 
has a very extenſive correſp8hdence with 
the continent, ſo as to be well acquainted 
with the preſent. purſuits of philoſophers, — 
and who has himſelf taken pains to in- 
ſtruct many ingenious foreigners i in the 
- beſt methods of making experiments of 
_ * this Lind, that MW other perſons, whoſe 


8 R 1 


Ta PREFAOE is 


names are at preſent unknown. to the 

public, are at this very ti : aſſiduouſly- | 
employed on the ſame ſubject; and i it is 
ſo fruitful a one, that there can be no 
reaſonable doubt, but that, in theſe cir- 
cumſtances, many of the difficulties which 
1 have left unſolved, will very. ſoon be re- 
moved, and that ſome of the moſt curi- 
ous ſecrets of nature will be unfolded. Bar 


ol examining 1 in a leſs 0 
ſtate, and are advanced one ep nearer to 
their primitive ele I ents. "= will be.a 

great ſatisfaction to" me, after the ha . 
that J have taken in this buſineſs, to | 
Jpefator of its future progreſs, when I ſee | 
the work in o many, and ſo good hands, 
and every thing, in ſo rapid, and ſo Pro- 5 
ming a way. 1 


O ou 1 


| On taking land 506 this ſabjeas, I would 
entreat the candour and indulgence of my 
readers, for any overſights they may diſ- 


cover in me as . imper- 
5 Fections 


8 | 


have been the fubj 
aſcertaining the ſeveral ingredients that | 


| 
| 
| 


=; Tar: P R E B A C E. 


6 A. 8 A am far from 


pretending to infallibility 3. but L have the 


ſatisfaction to reflect, that, imperfect a6 
my works may be found to be, they are 


each as perfect as I was able to make 


- » 9 ho : 
C , 
* 4 7 „ ©. * 1 4 x £ p oy » Zs a>. 
* 5 7% 3%. ; 13 7 4 1 4 * 3 $ f F 3 * y f 
2 3 > whe 
* i 4 * 


Fr ** 
7 N o 


* * ” — * N 

„ F : 8 SEEN 7 F N F E 88 Bibs Mens „ 1 4 
0 i . a e out CE # 
I was very deſirous of conel diag this 


oo, laſt volume with ſomething of a general 


theory of the different kinds of air that 
ets of my experiments, 


enter into their compoſition, che cauſe 
of their combination in rhe form of air, 
and the reaſon of their reſolution. i into ſub- 


ſtances of other forms and properties. 


But in attempting to do this, I found that 
our inveſtigations are by no means fuffi- 


5 ciently advanced for any thing that would 
be tolerably complete of the kind. I have, 
therefore, contented myſelf with making 


ſuch theoretical remarks as occurred to me 
in the courſe of particular proceſſes. 1 


have been moſt particularly careful to diſ— 


tinguiſhyacis from i pot hgis; and when- 
ever I have occaſionally attempted any 


ching of this latter kind, it has — 


©} 4 2 * : | CONES. : 


: F R 4 : 
3 ; ; ; i | 
p * * , "15 . 
Tur PREFACE ai 
I «0 "YN L i * - > 
; i 2 ; * ; / 


_  diffidence,” and in ſuch à manner as it 
would give me no pain to relinquiſtr my 
own opinions, and adopt thoſe of any 
other perſon that ſhould appear to me 
mam naturally to ariſe from the ate: * 


20 „ ©, * 2 a] 1 4 2 77 17 92 
F 


CI TSH 'f uf i 1,644 
"The Abbe Fontana, who has: N 
publiſhed three" treatiſes relating to theſe 
matters, the laſt of which is I think par- 
ticularly: valuable, and yet only paige By 
a f# that are to —— largely combalts 
an opinion which I did advante in © | 
firſt publication on this ſubjelt, in the 
Philoſophical Tranſactions, viz. that in 
mixing nitrous and common ait the di- 
minution that ſueceeds is chiefly. oi the 
common air. But this was a conclufion 
that I was very ſoon ſenſible was not fair- 
ly deduced from the premiſes; and there- 
fore, when I firſt publiſhed that paper in 
a ſeparate volume, I omitted the obſerva- 
tion intirely; and it will be ſeen khar I 
always afterwards conſidered, that when 
no more nitrous air is admitted to any 
quantity of common air than is neceſſary 
to diminiſh it to the utmoſt, the nittrogs 
Air) is wholly deevinpoſed, and che dq - 


? A 


—_— — — — - ow v0 — IEEE 
— SRHve AR ue, Pn — * CD — wal — 


5 yt 


— 
—— — ——— —U . q x HO 
— 
* * * * 
Vu b 


EE CCC OO ee ee ane EE 


——— 


— on ny 


mon air alſo diminiſhed to a certain 1 
gree; ſo that he combats an opinion that 


—— ͤꝓTW2TO½—: ——kꝛũ — CCS 
% k 


e ee ern "9 — 
of 


\ 


Tux PREFACE 


in no part of my preſent men ee 


to be mine. ; 3 þ e v2 1 "$2 4 R * * EE: 


— 


— 


He will wg find that I 1 * 
pretty much at large, that, notwithſtand- 


ing 1 did ſuppoſe there was a precipitation 


of fixed air from common air phlogiſti- 

cated, there was a cauſe of diminution 
altogether independent of that circum- 

Nance ; having found that inflammable 


and nitrous air, when made wholeſome, . 
by agitation in water, were almoſt, if 

not quite, as much diminiſhed by freſh 
nitrous air, as common air had been. See 
—_ I, p. 1 8 7. 


"PL 225 F " * 2 
Ss #43 .+.5 + 2 3 


This W of tha Abbe 5 8, 3 | 


| ae me form conſiderable expectations 
from the remainder of his work, and from 5 


his farther progreſs in theſe inquiries; 3 
though. his doctrine differs from mine 

in ſeveral reſpects. Among other things 
Kt has engaged to. Prove. that there is not 


properly any fixed air in the atmoſphere. 
This I n bay ſuſpected ſince I harre 


Pro- 


as PRE 7 A 0 = ili. 


wet; 4 webe l thew," FE: 


fixed air is a modification of the nitrous 


acid, and therefore may poſſibly be ge- 
nerated in the act of decompoſing nitrous 


air by common air. But that the fü 

ſtance which then makes its appearance, 
as alſo that Which is "compoſed from the 
nitrous acid in other eaſes, is truly and 
properly fixed air, and not, as the Abbe 
calls it, a ſpecies of air, poſſeſſed gf cer 


train properties of fixed air, Lam perſuaded 
he will himſelf be convinced, by reflect- 


ing on the obſervations mente * 


une 255 


. 


05 ths tice land; j "bis Were 
th red precipitate ma 


much inclined to correct my opinion con- 
cerning the ne of dephlogiſti- 


cated air, viz. that it conſiſts of fpirit of = 
nitre and earth, and to adrpetkds opinion, Spe 


*which'is, that it conſiſts of ſpirit of nitre 


" yy e of . its eme 


My opinion Was foros on finding that 
1 could make reſpirable air from any kind 
of * and ** of nitre; and becauſe, _ 
when 


me at firſt: very 


al Tur PREFAGE 


when. I uſad este veed 8 
it holly diſappeared. His opinion he 
ſays is founded on the following very re- 
markable fact. Having converted a given 
quantity of mercury. into red precipitate, 
and then expelled from it all — 
air that it could yield, be found the verx 
ſome weight of mercury that he had uſed 
to make the precipitate. This is certainly 


wie: Ay it was made with ſufficient ac- 
curacy, ee eee 1 can ow be 


But, after having bd the expert. | 
ment with all the attention of which/} am _ 
capable, Iam ſatisfied that, notwithſtand- 
ing all the precautions the Abbe ſays he 
uſed in this — the fact is the reverſe of 
. "what he repreſents it. I diſſolved 11d vt. 
10 grs. of pure quickſilver, furniſhed by 
Mr. Woulfe, in ſtrong ſpirit of nitre, and 
.diftilling it in a tall glaſs phial, to which 
 _ was luted a glaſs tube, terminating in a 

baſon of water, through which all the air 
loſs of 1dwt. 2.grs. of the quickſibrer ; | 
14A | | as 


a very proper and fair experiment, and 


5 10 found by cairfilbpeeightogs the glaſs; 


Tux PRES A C k. „ 


a8 Well as the quickſilver itſelf, both be- 
fore and after the proceſs; and even with- 
out deducting any thing for a good dea! 
of ſand that was melted into the bottom 

of the glaſe, und for a part of the red 

ee that: Fe amen | 
; "Mioing: reli eee W 
— upon my on addreſs in experi- 


Fon 


ments of this kind, I conſulted with Mr. 


Magellan (who, indeed, firſt ſuggeſted to 
me his ſuſpicion that the Abbe muſt be 
Miſtaken in the fact) and he engaged Mr. 
Winch jun. (whoſe {kill and care in ehy- 
midaal proceſſes no perſon Who is a- 
: quhinted with him can queſtion) to make 
the experiment in the moſt accurate man. 
ner that he IE Meru... 


is 


A. > 7 is AT, an 1 
(Apothecaries weight) of the pureſt mer- 
cury, in the pureſt, nitrous acid; and both 
myſelf and: Mr. Magellan were preſent, 
when he revivified exactly one Half of 
ptoeipitate made from it in a glaſs 
| war a with live coals, in a 


Fever | 


L PREFACE = 


ag be pen Furnecds F When the * 
was wholly ſublimed into the neck of the 
retort, a very. ſmall: quantity only of a 
| browniſh matter remaining unſublimed. 
The whole being carefi — weighed, to- 
gether with the retort, which had alſo be 
. weighed before the proceſs, it a 
that there was a loſs of 88 grains, whic 
is ſomething more than one third, of the 
weight of the quickſilver- We were all 
atiahed. that it was not poſſible to make 
| ORF xpe aner with! more: farnncls. NI 

The enen with. thn: remaining. 5 
half ounce of quickſilver, Mr. Magellan 
and Mr. Winch attended; when thexyx 
found that, though the glaſs retort had 
loſt ſome weight in the operation, there 
was a conſiderable loſs of weight in the 
quickſilver itſelf, but not ſo owe as in 
the en woe 2d. TIS) = g 

11 20 doi epd al) 

"IM It will 2ppeds;« beides, in the . 5 
this volume, that the quantity of ſpirit 
of nitre, in dephlogiſticated air; is not 
great; and ſince a confiderable qi quantity 
for earth i is actually /contai 


= 1 4 * 3 4,086: k OT OO is ts ad ct bt 2 9 ** 
— . OT "rage E DIAS a A WT 18 LOWE > os 
ah KB Fl RES bo Rs PS, * — n 45, 2 4 
* bog - r * 5 m4 - e 72 
. ; N CON Ie < : C33 p 0 a Fi 
* ” OY : 7 * 3 # a . 
＋ FIT. 5 4 4 3 N 8 * 4 
. * „ * — N 


We 5 


Tir PR E FAO E. 


bot, and depefßteg chen t cok a Bout 
ſeem that it 70 retain ſore proportion 
earth ; nt Peratre ef 
| ie 
Yor ST! Crete 1331 45779 5 S0 gong 
AU gebs Ae dne eas : 
_ -earv only repeat, that it is not y Senn. 
on whieh F would” be un 
any ſtreſs. Let the new fach, from whic 
I deduce them, be'confidered as" by di 
coveries,)and let other perſons draw' better 
inferences from them if chey can. This is 
a new and a wide field of experiment and 
ſpeculation, and a premature attachment 
te h theſis is the greateſt obſtruction 
we a likely to meet with in our progreſs 
through it; and as T think T Rave been 
pretty much upon my guard myſelf, 1 
would caution others to be 1 0pm their 


* + 110 EY 1 
and too. 40199 ne 1120097 
. | 
* 171 + LY 4 


5 LEV ATI da 
bei ingenious „Abbe Nollet u 4g: 
1 example of the danger of à fond ad- 
herence to ſyſtems, and Dy. Frafllin of 
the advantage ariſing from a" Kedlity”: in 
0 forming or rejecting them as phenomena 
decur. As it "was his example and en- 
; eduragement chiefly” that led me to at- 
: _ tempt. 


* TY " ; d X 5 


* T HE, 2 pn. EA 8 K. 


| tempt philoſophical myeſtigations, it is his . 
example that I propoſe to form N 
- upon, and that I would. recommend to 
others. I am ſatisfied that no mag can 
propoſe a better. It is a diſpoſition of 
mind that ſits: the eaſieſt: upon one's ſelf, 
and is, at the ſame. time, the moſt fa= - 
vourable to the advancement of ſcience — 7 
With reſpe& to myſelf, I can truly ſay, that 
I uſed all the cireumſpection that I Was 
capable of at the time hat I made my ex 
periments, but many things which I over- 
looked at firſt haye occurred to my reflec- 
tion afterwards; and as this was frequent: 
1 the cafe before I publiſhed my obſerva» 
tions, it may alſo be the caſe after I have 
publiſhed: them—To Marr ge Ke tags 
philoſophers. - 40000 


1 

1 4 
—_ 7 
i# | 
; 3 i 
"= 
* 
1 
4 J 
+7 i 
\ . 
5 0 x; 
1 
1 8 
i . 4 
14 
1 
1 
:* + +775 
1 4 
13% 
223 - 
. , 
* 22H 
„ 
1 
„ 

+: 
_—_ 7 
= 1 
F: 

7 5 
{1 

> ö * 
ty J 

1 148 
=_ 
53 

I'S - 

: BY 
+ 

1 a 
The 

4 
+ 

#7 

17 
1 
1 

| { 
4 þ 
j | 
* 
i . 
i I 

4 4 
P 
Fi 4 

1 


— : 
> 3 o_ 
op — 


3 Moeati, « on Ts nk a | 
the Chevalier Landriani, of my obſerva- 
tions op the u/e the blood, informs me, 
thatihe' had made the ſame obleryations, 5 

with a view to prove a.conflant and rer 
gular: girculgtian of phlegifo u, as well ag 

_ of blood, in the animal cconOmy. and 
to ier, where it ne the Tyſtem, 2 


EA * 5 7 , 


o 


p PR x FA O. CE. I 72 | 
; - 
E „ x1X 


it A Ad hett it is bange bh: | 
ſo that his views Bay been much mote 1 5 

extenſive than mine. T think myſelf ha 1 5 

py that my objects And ideas Have, in any. 5 


reſpect, coincided with his 2 
1 a 5 Wy dine OE. any. ad Beek . 


Mr. Volta, a8 W. n appest, by h his letter 
to me, inn the Appendix, is very 1 AE. . 
fully employed on the ſubject G in nflatn= - 
maäble air, natur: Land Artificial. He 
alſo greatly diſtinguiſhed himſelf by his 
Experiments and obſervations in eleftrici ty, 
as appears by his publications on that fub- 
ject, and eſpecialiy by the diſcbvery of 
che truly der eleBrophoris, "hi ich, 
if live, will make'a' conſiderable güte 


in the Continuation f 1 : 2 Elec. 
er. tO Na ia dne 


74 8 
Atti gaiub age ni bas 


5 Thi Buca haillnes has diſtin inguithed | 
himſelf by his ſucecfsful SIE 
various branches of philoſophy,”"efpeciatt . 
electrielty, and the dodrine'of Ait. Thr rec 
memoits on this] laft Tub ect he h 3s bien 
ſo obligidg as a Heede 0 me, 
together with a preſent of a moſt ingenious % 
| apparatui for condufting experiments. dn 
air, both in water and in quickfilver; 
811 b 2 1 without 


8 


IF, | TAE P R E 1 ACE. 


without the neceſſity of dipping our r hands 

in either of thoſe fluids; 3 and he bas hit 

upon various contrivances . to facilitate | 
ther particylar procelſ 5 5 0 


Having had N to give this 40 
count of ſome of my fellow labourers in 
this branch of Philoſophy, I Da proceed 
ing t. to ſome of the 1 in e 
e r Wane > 471 | 


ID ad i+4/) 


* artic] cles yas 10 ce to 1 — ſome 
time with me at Calne; towards the end of 
the laſt ſummer, and to give me his aſſiſt- 5 
ance, both eee ome inſtruments 
with which I was not much acquainted, 
and in conducting ſome experiments, 


which required more/philoſophical know- 
ledge of ſame. kinds than I was maſter, of! 
Having, among other things, mentioned 
to him my wich to meaſure the. nefrafine 
| BER, &f the different Ends of air, he ſug- 
geſſed the manner gf doing it mentioned 
0 his letter, and ye made the trial with 
alle and tr ous air. But as I ex- 
_ as he, or Si would. repeat 


171 the 


3 T4. M0 I 5 . 
£ * ve — 
U 


ee Sl AE 


""- 9 Een - wg — es ind ds. | - 


2 ; Los T 2 0 
Tür PR E FACE. xi 


| * experiments with more attention, and 


extend them to all the other kinds of ait, 


Ih neglected to make any re gifter of 'whiat 
| ' we ſerved; and therefore cred him to 


ſend me the beſt account that he could 


recollect of it, as it would be better that to 
ſuppreſs it intirely. He readily complied 


with my requeſt, and, at the fame time, 


favoured me with the other curious parti- 


culars mefitioned in his letter. 1 bink 
it would not be difficult, by phlogiſticat- 
ing common air in the mafiner chat ke 

4 viz, burning inftammable air in it, 
to aſeertainthe quantity of phlogiſton con- 


tained in inflammable aif, in propoftion 


to what is contained in an equal bulk, or 


5 weight, of nitrous air; but I have not, 


at preſent, leifure to attend to it. 


I. Mr. Henry $ letter as not eier 


with x view to publication, but he War ſo 
obliging as to conſent to it at ity requeſt. 
T wiſhed' to pabliſh it, not onfy on'ac-" 


count of the greateſt part of the experi- 
ments mentioned in it, hirft are very” 
curious and valuable, but likewiſe on ac 


count of one, (No. IV.) in which the reſult 


is different from mine on the ſame ſubject, 
| b 3 vi. 


XXI ru P R E E A c ) 


viz. on the vegetation of plants in fired airs. 
this having been made with a particular 
attention to a circumſtance, which he and 
Dr. Percival had overlooked before, the 
ſtandard plant being now kept, in confines, 
and, not in the : ohm: air. 


„VV 


"7 wiſh is —_ to have the ſubjec 
fairly examined, that the truth may be 
aſcertained. I would alſo take this op- 
portunity of obſerving, , that I can eaſily 
conceive, and allow, that a ſmall propor- 
tion of fixed air may be favourable to the 
preſervation of ſome. flowers, on account 
of its antiſeptic virtue; and alſo that, by 

its gentle ſtimulus, it may promote the 
growth of plants, without ſuppoſing, 
with Dr. Percival, that it affords. them a 
proper pabulum: but how much of this 
kind of atmoſphere a plant will bear can 
only be determined by experiment. In 
this view what both of us have done may 
be equally uſeful. ,- But the reſult of my 
experiments would not, certainly, have 
been l From t the: doctrine l his 


4 7 
; Pee» 8 * 4 4 + Oi ff **- ot = * v s 4 4 
; g , ; 3 
1 ? # 4 N 
5 5 * i + ” 3 . 4 „ 5 
5 8 #4 A P F : 
- hd 3 „ 3 ö * > 1 : 4 


7 


III. and 


r 


116 PR 4E F A @# 
Tat F 


bas Laiidfiahi, and f Sigriot Volta, were 


bot ſent me with a view to their being 


made public; but I Have ſo tuch confi- 
dence in the fieddiRip of the! writers, ad 


to be fatisfled that tte will riot be di- 
pleaſed with me for the liberty T have 
| kae, as there was not tim e to evjſll 


them off the ſubjedt; | 


7 - Binge Ay were eat to wn ic jad; have 5 
fereivedl 4 very lobg letter from the Che- 


_ balier Landfial,; whikth he deſires the td 


publiſh. It contains, among other things, 


- particular deſc ription of his new, and 


ty ingenious exdioiheter; of which, he 
Mot at the ſame time. io bbliging as to 


| mike me 4 preſetit ; àhd, being the very 
inffrument Nhat he 2 als of in his 


tour through Italy Y, in order to. eſtimate | 
the ſalubrity of the air in differetit Places, 


I hall ſet a particular value upon it, But 


as the length of the letter, atid other cir- . 
cumſtances, make it inconvenieiit to me 


to publiſh it, I hope ke will excuſe my 


— ining t6 db what would otherwiſe 


ne ny oy. agreeable to me; Ken * 


LF) . 5 $24 
wo 4 & © # % * } 7 
"= „ 


E. Weil 2 
"Pty" and iy. The letters of He Cheva- 


b 4 . >; 


* 


0 


o — — - — 
— _ * X 
—_ . 


1 
$48 

Ss 
1 bh 


— ECT. — — ? , , . r — 4 4 — — 4 
g ; ; : 2 — ng "x. on — 1 4 
a o — ncy” 0 — — — — — 
— — — — — — 
er * — — — — — — ——— p — — * ITY 2 — — 
— * = N I. SOL 2 8 , 3h EN 2 N "x 7% *. * * * 
. n Mg VET . 1 0 W x; p 


cerning the acidit ity 


\ 


. Tam BB EFAGE. 


In this letter be, i in a very ingenuous 
manner, acknowledges himſelf convinced 
by the experiments of Mr, Bewly, recited 
in my laſt Appendix, of his miſtake con- 
F fixed air ; but he 
endeavours to vindicate himſelf againſt 

my charge of, his having miſtaken 8 
meaning in ſome particulars. I have no- 
thing to add to what I then obſerved on 
the ſubject; and it gives me no pain to 
be thought to have made a miſtake, by a 
perſon who is ſo truly a philoſopher ; ſo 


indulgent- to others, and fo. Aer us 


with les W -.,., 19:5 


I have. the pleaſure to r my 
readers that Mr. Gibelin, who has given 


fo good a French tranſlation of the firſt 
volume of this work; and who has alſo 
_ tranſlated the ſecond, is at work apon this i 


volume alſo. 


In the firſt volume of this 8 p. 203. 5 
WF ftrongly. recommended Mr. Smeeton's 


 Gir-pump, as greatly ſuperior to thoſe. * 5 
the common conſteuction „ and therefore 


far preferable i in any experiments relating 


to air. I have the pleaſure to find that this 
7 recom- 


# 


Tas. PREFACE. ny. 


recommendation has not- been withious 
effe&, the demand for them being nom 
pretty conſiderable; eſpecially as. Mr. | 
Nairne has been induced. to give particu- 
lar attention to this excellent inſtrument, 
ſo as to make it with very conſiderable im- 
provements. And I think it proper to 


inform my readers that, in eonſtquenee 5 


of his very cloſe ſtudy of every thing re- 
lating to this buſineſs, he has uſeertained 
the real value of the pump in a much 
more accurate manner than was ever done 
before, and has alſo made a very valuable 
diſcovery relating to the ſubject, and one 
that will enable us to know what it is that 
ve are really able to do by the help. of 
any inſtrument of this kind, of Which 
we have hitherto had Sat very it | 
idea. 


In comparing Mr. Smeaton — | 
one of the common ſort, he has been led, 
by a train of ſtriking experiments and ob- 
ſervations, an account of which he will 

ſoon lay before the public, to diſcover 
that, wien any ſubſtance, containing 4 
"ſmall quantity of moiſture, as leather, or. 
wood, ſeemingly dry, is contained with- 


** Tas BETA CE 


in tlie receive, a vapour is ehaled nem 1 
which, mixing with the air, promotes the 
expulſion of it to an aſtoniſhing degree 
ſo that by Mr. Smeaton's gage, which ap- 
pars to be the only true meaſure of the 
quantity of permanent air left within the 
receiver, not more than a twenty thous 
ſandth part will ſometimes remain ;-at the 
ſame time that the common gage, which 
appears to be a meaſure for the rarefaQtion 
of air and vapour together, ſhall ſhew that 
the force of it is diminiſhed no more than 
between 600 and 700 times; which is 
conſequently the utmoſt degree of ex- 
hauſtion that even this pump can effect 
when there is no moiſture within it. But 
this is more than double the power of the 
beſt-made pump of the common cons. 5 
ſtruction. . 5 


lt; 18, however, not a little extraotdi- 
that if wet leathers be uſed, and 
eſpecially. it there be any water in the bo- 
dy of the pump, its power of rarefaction * 
with reſpect to ar, will not, eben in Mr. 
Smeaton's pump, exceed 60 or fo times; 
and = f ſpiric Wy wine . mi xed with the 
5 i water 


” 


THE P R E F A 0 K. * 
water it will not exceed wore than 50 o. 


6 times. uh 
ö . p | 
, — , 0 ; | | ; 5 t 
C 
* * LANE + 
. 2 ' 2 
1 1 5 10 © Ks: * 
4244 2 | ; os + 
2 - 8 . 4 £ 
12 2 5 1 4 02 l i rv lag 


SIN CE Aha aa my of this 
| n was ſent to the preſs, and part 
of it printed, I have received the Reciieil 
de Memoires ſur la formation et fabrication 
die ſalpetre, par les Commiſſaires nommes par 
play ag Pour le Jugement du prix du ſal. 
Among theſe is one of Mr. La- 

5 dw in which he mentions lis having 
made the experiment recited above of the 
Abbe Fontana, and which of them made 
it the firſt does not appear. He ſays, 
however, that he diſſolved two ounces of 
mercury in ſpirit of nitre, and revivified 

the whole of it; and, in conſequence of it, 
concludes, that the pure air; procured from 
the red precipitate formed by it, was pre- 
viouſly contained in the nitrous acid, and 

that no earth enters into the coinpoſition 

of it. He alſo ſays he has no doubt but 
that pure air enters into the compoſition 
of all the e ee ee and 


k 21 | 5 1 9 # 7 £ 43 that F 


TT ESP KEEP 
S .& -# P 


— Ae 

* "= a , . 

— 1 8 * · 4 
— — — = — 
0 — N * 
& - 
— — — OE OL APIS äJUküͤ—ä—õät ——— - ˖ Arg, * 
0 


ii Tri PR'EFAOTF, 


that i it is KHiwair that eonflituies their _ 0 
dity p. 602. 


Being n 8 8 ſo 
able a phileſopher as Mr. Pavoiſier would 
advance a fact of ſo much importance, and 
draw fo general a concluſion from it, 


without ſufficient foundation, Limmedi- 


ately went to work to repeat the experi- 
ment once more. I diſſolved 17 dwts. 
13 grs. of the pureſt mercury in an equal 
weight of ſtrong ſpirit of nitre, in a re- 


tort with a long neck, the end of which 


T had bent ſo as to immerge it in a baſon 


of water; and I gave it ſo ſtrong a heat, 
as to diftil} all the mereury that was revi- 


vified into the baſon. This I weighed; 
together with all that adhered to the inſide 
of the retort, which I. broke for the pur- 


poeſe, and found that there was a cleat- 
loſs of 11 dwt. or, making every poſſible 


allowance, 15 dwt. I believe that in this, 


as in other proceſſes for e air, 


the quantity produced, and conſequently, 


the loſs of weight -in the materials, will. 


be different according to the manner in 
which the heat is applied, but that there 
Will always be'n more or leſs of loſs. It is 


very 


Tur PREFACE Rich 


very poſſible, . however, th - there. N | 
be leſs earth, and mare nitrqut geld in uin 
than I had ſuppoſed; and E dp not e 
tend to have been ahle toaſgertain tho a 
act proportion of theſe: 1 Nee 
Nr en nd r 20 DINOBtHT Jeff, 

Nido 6 5 
Mr, eee a Se eg 
that, except this one fact, wiz. the coms 
plete revivification of the metcury from a 
ſolution of it in ſpirit of nitre, all the 
other facts, from which he reaſons in this 
Memoir, were diſcovered by myſelf; but 
that the love of truth obliges him to cor - 
rect the error into which L am fallen, be 
ing of ſuch A nature, that it W 1210 ba | 
Ne e if it __ om credit. ew 


> 7 * } 'F * 


pont would obſerve; thu all thas 
L pretend to have diſcovered: is,' that the 
pureſt air is procured in diſtilling to dry- 
neſs a mixture of earth and ſpirit of nitre. 
This is certainly a fa" of importance, 
which no perſon can diſpute, thouglv no 
_ perſon had entertained theleaſtſuſpicionof 


opinion that I deduced from this fact, viz. 
that air comſiſis f earth and ſpirit of nitre, 1 


HR. 
oy - 
. — — p 8 > ana 
w ; * — — — A on — 


. 
—— 


, N 1 
„ar ——ä——m — OY — — — — . 2d 2 7 
a 
* 


— 
, de 
* 9 „ - 2 
Ny E 
__ 6 12 
P « XY bs ilar eter ns . 
" 6s hi "_ — 

. IRE 1 2 pa ———— 


——— © 


va n 
— — , — ë ER I AAR OOO 


v Tur n i EFA ot 


maybe m miſtaken, and bare no reaſon to be 
ſolicitous about it: Let others reaſon better 
from the facts with which I ſupply them 
if they: ean; T-ſhalF liſten to them witn 
attention. But L cannot forbear obſerving; 
that I ſhould be more obliged to them for 
the diſcovery of more fats from which 
to reaſon. "Speculation is a cheap commo- 
dity. Neu and important fatts are — 
eg e and e W of moſt value.” 
A To Trmnecrs ** 
oth oh lars! Karcher that Mr: La- 
| ſe! s pretended” diſcovery: obliges him 
ta deny that the phlogrton of the mercury, 
diffolved in the nitrous acid; contributes 
any thing to the nitrous air produced in 
the ſolution: for the whole of the mer - 
cury being revivified, it neceſlarily fol- 
lows, that it has loſt nothing that was 
eſſential to it. He therefote maintains, 
that nitrous air is the nitrous acid deprived 
＋ Air : and. Tater, 'P- 51 6. Nod if any 


opinion in all the modern doctrine con- 


cerning air be well-founded; it is certain 
ly this, that nitrous air is highly charged 
with phlogiſton, and that, from this quali- 
ty only, it is that it renders pure air nox- 

jous; — it in the very ſame man- 


* as all.other W : 


0 own hypotheſis, „ which is very different 


2. aß much as the air of the atmoſ- 
phere. What can be the, origin of this 


ren PREFACE xa | 


pecially that moſt ſimple one the caleina- 


tion of metals. If I have completely 


aſcertained en at eee to ales 15 
i Is this, . He OSS 


© cannot 3 | 5 an 88 it is parti- 
I; cly. extraordina that, according to 


from mine, Mr, Lavoiſier ſhould main- 
tain that there is no proper air in what I 


have called nitrous air; when, by agitation 


fu water only, it becomes reſpirable, and is 


ven diminiſhed by freſh, nunc air, 1 al- 


reſpirable air, Ia it e * the 


Ace 7 115 ä 


by . 2 * 4 4 0 1 4 75 | , 11 15 £ fft 
4 


7 , - , - 4 * 
1557 78 fy; 


Fe © with Mr. Lavoiſler: ol BESS 


der this ſubject, and repeat his experi- | 
ment with care (for he mentions only 


one that he made) and be very ſure of the is 
reality of a fact, which obliges him) to 


decide contrary to what ſeent, at leaſt, 
to be che beſt eſtabliſhed maxim relating 


to air, and alſo conſider it in connexion 
Fi his opinion that all the metallic calces 


- £ 1 8 contain | 


* EZ PREEA Cc E. 


| -nal for oy img 433: 1663; 7 +hg197 


via 1 '*} + 4 bat 3 1 | „Ali 1 1 751 & 16 e 


Air REA 0133. Ma 2 Sd 284 — Þ ak ian. is 


3 
CN . 


j 


48-1 always "with to hs. the © earliet 
opportunity of publiſhing"every-new fact, 
and ſeveral have occurred th ine finite this 
yohime has been printed off, I fhall 
inthis Place briefly mention 4 JO that 
| are of ome impo tance. bol 


25 * 4 ©; 7711 


) p 
4 G 4A £ ; * 8 
rt 5 W bon 4 Pr mg {5 f 11 474 (fy: 3 IE 111 


ah 1. Ox gal dried diſſolves e i 
trous acid with as mueh rapidity ab ve. 
getable aſtringent fubſtances, and yields 
great plenty of nitrous air; whereas/ani- 
mal ſubſtances in general yield only phlo- 
giſticated air, with a mixture of lambently 
inflammable air, by the ſame treatment. 
New it is remarkable that the gall-is 
ſecreted from the venal blood, which, ac» 
cording to my theory of the uſe of the 
blood in reſpiration, is then loaded with 
phlogiſton; while other ſecretions are 
made from the arterial blood, which _ 

Gn r e . 


74 $a 
1 —4 


E Nitrous air is dy 5 deoompo 
_ a ſolution of green varied | in Water, 
which, in conſequence of it, becomes of 
a very dark colour; 0 but becomes green 


again on being expoſed to the open 7 
In this and many other properties, the 


effect is the ſame as that of mixing a 
ſmall quantity of ſpirit of nitre with that 
ſolution. This may omg various e 
experiments. LN 


4. A more eee experiment relating 
to the generation of fixed air than that 
which is mentioned, p. 353 with wood- . 
aſhes, is one that I have ſince made with 


the aſhes of pit- coal. Pit- coal itſelf, BG - 


but only. inflammable air, which, being 
fired in a wide-mouthed jar, burns with 
a bright lambent flame, without explo- 
ſion. But the aſhes of the ſame pit- coal 
yielded much air, of which one half was 
fixed, and the reſt inflammable. When 
I had expelled. all the air that I could 


1 
4 yd 


6 V 


% —_— 


from a quantity of theſe aſhes, I mixed 


ſpirit of nitre with them, and they im- 


mediately yielded as much air as before; 
5 and of this one half was fixed, and the . 


RTE oe,” reſt 


X 


ir Tum PR. EF 40 = 


reſt nitrous, Mixing more 15 of PR 
with the fame aſhes: again, the us | 
Was the ſame as before. Wert ft. 


4 The electrie 1 or 1 
taken in common air, confined by quick- 
ſilver, in a glaſs tube, coyers the inſide 
of the tube with a black matter, whieh, 
when heated, appears to be pure quick» 
ſilver. This, therefore, may be the caſe 
with the black matter into which I ſup- 
poſed the vitrialic acid air to be e. | 
by the ſame proceſs, p. 221. though the 
effect was much more remarkable in that 
than in common air. The explofon will 
often produce the diminution of the com- 
mon air, in half the time that the Simple 
parks will do it, the machine giving the 
ſame quantity of fire in the ſame. time. 
Alſo the blackneſs of the tube is much 
Tooner produced by the ſhocks than by the 
ſparks. When the tube conſiderably ex- 
ceeds three tenths of an inch in diameter, 
it will ſometimes become very black 
without there being any ſenſible diminu- 

tion of the quantity of air——1 mention 
theſe few /a#s without any remarks, hop- 
ing that by this means I ſhall propagitt 


no > dangerous errors, - 


THE: 


- 


0 The lahm AA oe 1 1 


. 
— 0 
wt 


| * K FE %s: 8 
AN 3 Anden N 290314. 147 4 # F 6 . 
03 Aeli 240 oY AT RCA HELD 

; C3 ; 


— 
+ f - 
P * | 
* 2 * * ; 4 — TP £4 1 
a 0 C5 + - 2 2 i": #5 4 & * 
5 | | 5 
5.6 f 


4", £*% + 4 | * 5 YL 1 [ * 2 ; & 1 ; 1 
Py „ # * 9 7 . 8 4 
1 Z 41 3 2 * WW NN * i * * 


A1 N Jos oh 3$Y 1 3 * 
O N T E N T 8. 


4 * 9 
OE nd r 
I 8 — Ao ' ; K i 
, Fs [ 
Y 7 F 0 
- 1 
; 5 5 ; "i. ; 
* „ . 55 2 * ; 
t e e ee, MTV; 
ff 4% We 4:5 K 1 * 1 4 i. ++ 9 4 ; 2 * 5 * . 1 


Kion 


ection 1. Of the Prodattion of 1 Durnuibels- 8 
were Ain from the ſeveral Mæ raus 5 N 


Seck. II. Of be Phenomena which attend the 


Solution of ſome- of Hhe"SEMI-METALS: in Spirit N 
of Nitre £57 5 1 4 ; 21 1 


* 


5 


HII. Of thi Nine, DrynrLoon - 
metres Alk fron BaRTHT SUBSTANCES, 

* e with a View % determine whether De 
| 73 Air thas #3 yielded in 5505 Eee | 
be Modification of 1 the Nitrous Acid *' 0 


. — I. Au Attempt vo! oftertain the How 
tity of SPIRIT of NiTre, in Wm Qu : +4 
ff DEPRLOGISTICATED AI e GY 5 


* 
ZN 2 a l 


Sect. V. r on „Nasen, „„ EM 
, Ves of the BLood © — 35 he 


4 ; A . x * 
x 75 5 4. 
„ - ** P . 3 . : 
'* F I |: 1 , 
9. 44 : 3. I ; 
E . e. 2ööüöͤ¶ 8 
* ; ; . < : g 


— — 


. mom Wh Tot . 
22 I . ˙¹ A TIONS * IO. 
. 4 or re 

— \ ep — od * _ ay wm 

"4 * * N 8 

= 2 — 3 . 
CERES — —p——— 

Y 


—— ov tc —— — 


2 Va, * 
— « * » 
_ DDr 
— Se v a” o 
— —— —— —— — 
— — — 


— ͤͤ X ER Is $9 ee, — = 
IVE A - —— 
. ——— 2 
5 * . Det =p or = 
1 . 


8 
— 9 1 2 
a Wan r Ys . 2 
— Oe ww —_— OP * 
» 


N 
—_— * | - _ e 
— * — —2ñůä INTL 
— — — — 2 * 1 
N — 3 
CE EG So RS IE. . ů — — 2 
* v 

- 


Tur C 0 N * E N T 8. 
Set VI. We e and 


ms relating to DEPHLOGISTICATED | 


Sect, vn. of the | of the Ou, of 
2 and 2 of Mrrne 9 
Air 92 


Sect. VIII. ee Experiments 
Felating. ta Co . Ax — 100 


Sect. IX. Of. os \ Inpreguaion 175 Warn 
with Nitrous Air LY, $4241, 0 by 


, Sect, X. Of the — ir by 
O15, Sri of Wir, and Causrie 3 L 


— 


4 


EI 


880 xn. 0 the ks Pros = eh e 
Ai, is brought. into a State in which @ Candle 
will burn in it with an ENLARGED FLAME pro- 
- duced. 25 "ao == Me Metals in Lat Nitrous - 
ra 1 n 121 hs 232 = 


Sect. XIII. of 10 88 attending the 
 Diminution of Nitrous. Air by Ino Fries 
and BR IMSTONE, and {hs by. Livas: of: Sur- 
nun — 140 
ED E - 88 


re C TENTS. 1 


- Se. XIV. O the Diminution of Nitrous. 
Ari in Conſequence of its being confined in a BI An. 


DER is A Circumſtan — 1 


7 


4 GY x: 


S XV. Of the Nerkovy A e 


from Nitrous Air, by LENS e N wanne, 
._ or Os iy — bw 


<P. 4 


. To "Th; C71 
81 Seck. XVI. eee . Experiments 
relating to Nitrous Air 2 166 
A pe 7 pd 83 „ N LY 3 


Sect. XVII. an Account of Mons F 


modes in Conſequence of an Attempt to confine the 
NrrRovs Ac Varoun by means 3 8 ANIMAL 


3 Þ ot 
Oi. witty to ages, "TY, 174 


— 
1 


8 4 '# i»; : AA 


Sekt. XVII.  Oberoetios on the Nrraovs 


. 4 
* 


— 


Get. XIX. Of te banane, f Wars ER 
with Nitrous Vapour *- . I \SQ 


+ I 
ys k IS Fa 


8 Ses. XII. 


i Aem Varoun N ; v — 3 184 


| Set. XX. Of the * 5 Ons, and 
e R ane the. N ant "_ 


Seck. XXI. Of the Inprepato ft an dem, 
ben i the Nitrous Vapour =. 27 
Sect. XXII. Of the Aftion * Nitrows 74. 
your WIEN Sor SUBSTANCES 229 


* 


* 


FTrs CONTENTS 


we” Seck XXII. Karieu, Ouſar vation relating 
la ibe Procuss for. mabing Spirit of Nitne, and 
to the Nitrous Aeg itfelf : and fiſt of the 
FRCOVETION of 4 AIR in courſe of it 234 
dai Gi een ee 
Sock. XXIV. Ohh ustbn; relating: 1% n 
rn and-STRENGTH af \the-\Nittous. Heid. 
according to We in the. Proceſs 


9 ö 3 UA hed 


e 0) SAM 


| Set. XXV. of the E feats of the Solution of 
biegen h Dierfkerion W Kaden 
Ai, > Una uy 2 e arzr, Ye. - X 
Sec. XXVI Emperiments relating to I 
FLAMMABLE Alx — 2855 
290407 451, ws dn t O III X . 2 
2.2Sect. XXVIL_Olfervations ; wbb te Ya 
| TRIOLIC Acip AIR — "And 
F272 7 45 Nolde, I ry . Pi 


+08e&, XXVUL, Obſervations relating te Fuv- 


ALL 


or Acip AIR — a 425 
bs m0 » enn YO AA £5; 
+ Ke&. XXIX. Apes TURTLES * 
Acp AIR — — 298 
.Sa. XXX. Neben, on) „de kierrens 
4 * . % mas bave us mutual 
cn * Ni 28 01 TEX 5,296 


eck. EI Q Ege, rd g. * 


Tor £O 


ants * 1 3-40 2 | : Vecr- 


Tx CONTENTS. 


vas, . 1 che- of Ross Lenne 


N 


"Set. XXXI. Gib elbr male 1% the 
Produion, nnn an autour 2 


* 


13 H We 


Seck. XXXIII. Mics awzovs 1 
MENTS be * — „ 3 3 


8 Soct. xXXxIV. Euperiments 1 1⁰ ome 
of the preceding Seftions, made fince they were 
* off — 349 | 


OW OY APPENDIX. 


ä * umber 1. A Letter from Mr. J nw Wan | 
TIRE, Lefurer-in Natural Philoſophy 
7 PritsrLEyY,, relating to the refractive Power 1 


n 5 and the Decompajition, 1 1 


1 II. 4 Letter 1 Mr. * Hengy 
F. R. S. to Dr. PrifstTLEY on the Effefts of 


Fixed Arr in the TR of Plants, &c. 
S6... “ 69 


| Number III. 4 Latter Hom Mir J ("0H 
cYNTHDE MAGELLAN F. R. S. to Dr. Paixsr- 
LEY, concerning Experiments on Phoſphori, his 
method of impregnating Water with Fixed Air, 
and his Eudiometer — 376 
OS. Number 


I »%C- * 4x . — r oy ww * 
b. J * a : * . 8 
”" K . >. 7 —— . - 5 « = 6 _ you ” N D 
__ a ge - 4 4 1. 4 n 83 8 . + + — Bs þ - 
, 5 q Jews k 8 g — 1 2 3 
8 Nr — q — 4 my * 0 _—_— TRE 
- . RR "= g OE EET IS o —— 
— — . er - - —— > — - Se? gr I * 2 * 
— — toe. — — — — ak * 6 L * — v 
0 % 9 
% F 2 
* 
% 1 y 8 — 
l 4 
4 2 . : 5 


L 8 2 a 
C_Q<RXRX=CDCR_ nn rm ron 
W 5 n 


r CONTENTS. 


- Nuaiber IV. 4 Tranſlation of Part of a . 
ter from Signor Mans IL Io LANDRIAMI of Mi- 
Ws dated Nov. 1 17 0 


Number v. AT, ranſlation of Part of a Lei- 


ter from Signor ALEXANDER VOLTA * Como, 
dated Dec. I0, 1776 — 381 


Number VI. A Lane from I. Wu. Har 
. S. to Dr. PrIESTLEY, explaining his 
gon N the WOE” of Fixsp Ain 


C OE, 


wer VII. Din and Speculatio 6 
relative to Fix ED Alx, and to the ſpontaneous 


 Accenfion of Prrornor, on their expoſure to 


Atmoſpherical Air : in two Letters to the Rev. 


Dr. PrizsTLEY ; by WiLLIaM BWI x, Surgeon. 


Letter I. Obſervations on Fixx Aln 386 
Letter II. On the ſpontaneous Accenſion f Py- 
vor hon en Expyere to E Ar * 98. 


MN x," 8 
o 2 ” 
* „A . n - 


wo. £ ve 180 


INTRODUCTION. 


; . 2 
_ 25 Tf ts 


HE additions Wer 1 have made to my 
1 apparatus for making experiments on 
air, ſince my laſt publication, have not been 
very conſiderable; but, notwithſtanding this, it 
may. not be. i improper to give a ſhort deſcription. 
of them, and a general account of ſome new proceſ- 
et, as I have hitherto done in an Introduction ; 

ugh a more particular account will be given 
Flome of of them, in relating the K in 


TM they yere principally uſed. | 3 = 5 


1 


At the time of my laſt JERRY: Thad 


rays made uſe, of a boſon for quickſilver; ; 
and, on many accounts, it is, in general. more 
convenient than any other form of a reſervoir. 
But having ſince had occaſion to transfer air 
from one jar to another in quickfilver, in the 
fame manner as I had uſed to do in water, 1 
found it abſolutely neceſſary for this purpoſe, 
to make uſe of an oblong trough, fig. 1. That 
which I have commonly uſed is made of wood, 
ſeven inches long, three wide, and chte deep, 


4 7 


made cylindrical at the botton in order t- 


make the leaſt ons of * neveſ. 


Vol. co B .” "Wy -- 


* 


% 


2 INTRODUCTION. 


fary. It is only with ſuch an ayparatus as this, 
that given quantities of alkaline and acid airs 


can be mixed, as is . courſe of 
the work. a | 


* 
9 

> one ep ee ey 
— 


a 0 — 
E nt IE ES Dn nn OO er — — — 
* — ä * v . —— 
| — r —— —— 
* * 
A 
+ 
4 


- a. 
PY 9 * 


1 Bunt Wund it very conven nt to have a 
3 71 number of glaſs veſſels, ſuch as are repreſented 
ES” * 2, for the purpoſe of making a quantity 
air paſs through a body of water, or aux 
Eind of fluid, or any ſubſtance in the form of 
powder; the air entering by the tube which 
OY to the bottom of the veſſel, and being 
livered by that which is inſerted only at this = 
top. I alſo found it-necefary to have the 
veſſels of various ſizes, the largeſt containing 
about a pint, and the ſmalleſt about half an 
| ounce meaſure of water. The larger end of 
this veſſel I have generally cloſed with a cork, 
and cement; but 1 ſometimes found it neceſ- 
fary to have this part alſq-of glaſs, - with 
only two ſmall ee for the inſertion 
of glaſs tubes. 


14 have 1 had occaſion to 8 uſe 
of a great number of theſe veſſels at the ſame 
time, ſo diſpoſed, as that the ſame air might 
#5: through hem all in. ens, inthe. 
W r 


— * Y 
2 


4 
r 
7 7 3 
* 
F 


NS 
„ "Ih+ 


1 


In ſome * 4 however — it ne. 
ceſſary to exclude all cement, 

of Wikia, from an appal os of this kind 
having had all the glaſs tubes fitted their ſor 
veral holes by grinding. But this ; 
apparatus very expenſiy „and cipeaally 
repairs of it. 8 . C 


3 | "+ 
. lung phial,: a fig. 3, with a tube fitted to it by = 
grinding, and bent, ſo as to diſcharge the — 
air, or vapour, iſſuing from it, downwards. 
This kind of phial I have generally u "Th 
1 experiments with nitrous vapour. 
phial is deep, in order to admit a ſudden and 
violent efferveſcence without the danger of the 
liquour being thrown over, and the tube ſhould 
be long enough, to go to the bottom of any 
| veſſel in which the vapour is to be delivered. 


I diſtilling ſpirit of nitre, I have _ . 
made uſe of the apparatus repreſented fig. 4, 
' which was invented by Mr. Woulfe, — - 
ing of a retort a, an aludel, if neceſſary, b, 
and a receiver c, with two orifices z one * ; 
foi the diſcharge of the diſtilled acid, and the 
other e, to ſerve as an outlet for the ſu 
bundant vapour; which, paſſing through the. 
Gb tube 7, may impregnate * water in the 


1 5 2 | 5 As 


— 


| preferable to any other kind 6 5 wing in e 
experimggts. in which air ee be⸗ 
auſe the ialg yield little or no air in any 
heat; and it has the ad- 
vantage of continuing air-tight, when it is 
auite dry and hot, which is not the caſe with 
„„ only. Faving made uſe of a great variety 

| of lutes, * now almoſt confine myſelf to this. 


— 


L Vs . . 
CO p ů p ů ů ů·³ 


* 


— 


IR 


— * 
— 2 
Co 
— — 


— 


1 = 
———ĩꝛ ne 


G23 — 


” 


= 
* — 
— J 


4 


rr 


* 


* 
5 p * = - * », Ld 
% > F 


- # x 
4 » 5 £ & * v 


« FY k 
4 * 
of 1 4 — * — 
4 
Wl. | i 
7518 i ; o % 
* q > « » - 
” 4 **, 
, N 1 & "4 
14 "3 z > — — * 
. 7 
1 
3 : 
17 - 
7 * 2 
1 i , F 
2} * 1 7 
? +7 l r Fa -& - 5 £ 
T 4 * 0 > > 1 1 * ; * 
1 * * * 
* * * LIE, # * * E — 
, * 4 „ * - - 
* * — + 4 
, #*'# FAS + E 
« * 
* *% * ao. : 
1 & * 4: Ss #-% 3 
o + n % 
5 * 0 5 #7 * 
* # — 
* as a 4 
* PA. X + ; * 3 * Fl * * 
* A * N * * © — 
* . 
fe # 
wm * — 
4 1 * 7 — * of bi 
* Fa, 3.8 : F 5 * * * F r . 
, , . inn 
9 * 3 
* 7 
- a * 
Fo # - * * * * a” 4 # #3 5 
— 0 * 7 8 
* Sz * 4 1 4 % 
: , * 5 **. 
* 
* 
83 * 
* * * 1 < OJ : * * 
\ E= 4 
2 ; 1 
4 * 
4 
* * * + 
S * / « 
— . 
* * * — * 1 4 
* S 4 
. *. . * We BEA -: 
— * ” 4 S 
4 "of 
* 4 [4 : 
* F * I. 4 1 + 
E: - 
* Ba 
* * . I 
; 1 4 1 
« 4 25 pe a b ae "A * 
% — A = 8 
$ * * a a 4 85 LE ; 
* 3 . 
A * 25 * ; 4 6-4 #2 
* 
- - 
- 
* % * 
£ 1 8 3 2 * 
1 4 2 « 4 
2 : 
, 7 : 
. : q 
1 ; & * - 4 
* . . + 
fas 3 — "= * - 2 F > 
PS * 
* 
* 
* 
\ # * 
17 - a 
1 
* 
- 
* 
* $- * 
. 
* 
# 
. 
f * 
- 
4 — 
a L 
* 
* 
* 
> * 
* - 
7 % 
* 


* 
— 


4 ? 
„ * mo a 
8 ; 


Kt © »$ «- XZ PS "x. * 
* » £7 £ 1 2 
FED 1 356% pon 4+ | * Y as DF Fs 


15 Wo, [141i hy TY 269 1 


> 


; f OS 
*.. — 10 777 FE oth; iT FE! . 13 „ * S en | 2 
- : — 


N » 4 4 * 7.4 4 3 '3 5 88888 + 3 . 
, + © * "2 ES 75 S +. 4 2 I „ 4 +» Tag £4 
- ö 5 a 2358 J & " * 3 a 
Le 4 8 * yy” 7 a — WW + 4 +85 293 + & 45 * 3 W 5 TO? EF "IN 


"1 4% 'F 7 | - . we 4 
wa * f ; 75 Nn 1 4 1 WI 
2 by $8 21 * 4 * 4 N . 4 L . 4 R + * # - r = Nod is $- 1: 29 


Of Of the bal, of DzpyLocIoTIcATED/Ata. 
Eb Ante . ne 1 5 e e Sean ö 


* 
7 * 18 7 +. 13 
99 fy g "2 5 47 £3 79 F 10. 


, — 
— 


x ſj 14 4 
Mn STI+ x 4 
* %E 0 N 


T 0 be lee chat r procured 3 
dephlogitticated air from all the ſperies of _ 
earth, at I could procure, by means of ſpigh ; 
of nitfe. 1 have related ptoceſſes in whith - 
this air was yielded by all the chemical 'diftine- < 49 
tions of earth; and though I foundſorne en 2 
more rifraBory | in this reſpect than others, | 
there was not one of them from which 1 was 
275 able to procure more or leſs of this pure 

1 had at that time made trial 'of no more. 5 
hal two of the metallic earths,” viz. thoſe of 1 
lead and zinc. The reaſon why 1 did hot 9 . 8 1 
ceed any farther in this way at that time, Was, 5 
that I knew not how to procure the earths of 
the ſeveral metals in a ſtate tolerably free fre 
pblogiſton, without which I was well aware 
they would have yielded nitrous or Pp og) 
ed air, and not dephlogiſticated. 


B 3 


JG 


4 
p 


EEE - 


"OS Of Dua. 


But 1 have ſince, by accident, hit upon a. 
of coming at the pure earth of all the 
metals, with the leaſt trouble oſſible, alſo of de- 
contain, with the quantity of pure earth which 
. after all the phlogiſton is expelled, 
che quality af it, with reſpect to its con- 
vertibility into air. This is effected by diſſolv- 
ing the metals completely, and ag nk the 
. ſalution-to dryneſs in a glaſs veſſel, then em- 
ploy ing more ſpirit of nitre, till ap much as I 
7 of it be converted into air. If much 
iſton do not adhere to the calx of the 
Lo pure air will be rocured at the 4 
ff diſtillation ; but if the 1. be very 
Mee, by containing much es de the 
whole of the firſt produce w be nitrous, or 
| Phlogitticated air wa pure air may not be 
procured till the be fecend or third proceſs. 
was from copper * rt procured Air in t 
manner, as will be related preſently. ben 
0 to treat of air from wy wetal. But! 
vie, for the ſake of better order, to. 
with my accounts of the more perfer? metal | 
before 1 mention the more imperfett ones. 


Teen = diffe1ved © 4 antity of oli in 1 is, 
| e that N loſt Foe Aw As. 

During this ſblutlon it eiae an ounce mea- 
3 of air, mixed with a good deal o of acid va- 


On 


goo it did not become in the leaſt 


from it about half an ounce meaſure of ait, 


half of which, Judging by the fame Fuer, 
was acid vapour, and the remainder pure de 


mained, which, being collected as Ae 
=_ could, weighed three grains; ſo that the air 
above mentioned had been produced from one 


Ys - The pawder that remained was. pure 
old, being ſoluble in agua * 35 I found 
ſome months“ afterwards. 1 


221. | 


This anden of n was * in the com- 


marine acid and three fourths of ſpirit of nitre; 
| and it was remarkable that when I made ano- 
ther ſolution of gold in that kind of aqua regia, 

which I made by impregnaung marine acid 


powerful menſtruum for gold than the com- 
mon . 
nitre, 1 
from the ſolution was not 
The particulars of this pro- 


lows. * 


3 


1 
' AE 


* te joel lu. $1 
for when lime-water was e to it, 


bid, it abforbed more than half of the aife After 
This 1. diſtilled the ſolution to dryneſa, and got 


phlogiſticated air. A browniſh. powder re- 


grain 15 * only, and probably ſomething 


mon aqua regia, conſiſting of one fourth of 


with nitrous vapour, which is a much more 


regia, yet containing leſs ſpirit of 
great a quantity of the air procured 


were as * 


þ 97 of Depblgficated fir 


x diffolved a penny weight of gold j in his 
hut more-powerful kind of aqua 
ht ain the ſolution to 1 10 i a — 1 
Phial, with a ground ſtopple, 1 
about eight ounce meaſures of air, S which did 
not make make lime-water turbid, but was ſo 
much abſorbed by water, that not more than 
| one fourth of an ounce meaſure was left; and 
5 this was not better than common air, but ĩt 
might be a little depraved by ſome part of the 
acid vapour ſtill remaining in it. When this 
| proceſs approached to dryneſs, the recipient, 
was filled with an exceedingly thick ahd white 


cloud. In this experiment alſo the reſiduur 
Was r diſſolved by em aqua regia. 


— 


25 in lie of theſe Seed 1 imagined — 5 
all the reſſduum was not wholly di dlved"by 
agua regia, but the quantity undiffolved Was | 
exceedingly ſmall, and might be ſome imp 
in the gold that I made uſe of. However, that „ 
real calx of gold was produced i in theſe exper. 
ments, is, I think, probable, from the tinge | 
-given to the glaſs in which the proceſs was 
made, which, when the heat was conſiderable, 
. was partly purple, and partly a dark Sold co. 
1 | 9, which no acid would touch. But I muſt - 
; dſerve, that a very light tinge of the ſame 
Colour I once obſerved to be given to a glaſs 
veffl of the ſame kind, in which nitre only _ 5 


i 


ure r in ben ew 9 was a 
by the gold, . I think it by dr 
mal probable i ſuppoſnion:- bat 181 
D 19. el e ebase e is. all 
From four penny- weight fix grains of filver 
4iflbived in the nitrous acid, diluted with one 
third part of water, I got five ounce meaſures 
of nitrous air zand removing the veſſel to a ſand- 
| heat, I got a little very pure air, withour any 
mixture of fixed air; but the veſſel ban 
cannot tell how much en Opens. 
e Ae gh nnd 35 n, 270 

1913 tor otciaret „ EAT tün, . 6 3 if 
1 her dluted 1 pit of nitre upon qhick- 
ſilver, till 1 had got about three ounce mea. 


ſilver, I put the ſolutien, together with the 
cryſtals (a third part of the veſſels being filled 
with them) into a ſand heat; when got firſt fan- 
ty ounce meaſures of nitrpus air, and imm 

ately after that about the ſame quantity of the - 
pureſt dephlogiſticated air. During the rapid 
production of this air, it us exceedingly white, 
and this tube through which it was conveyed, 
was very red with the redundant nitrous vapour. . 
Towards the end of the proceſs the tube was 
tranſparent, and colourleſs though the air burſt 
in lice: clouds within the be 15 | 


heats when jgarding.ons the undi b quick- 


% 


8 —7 
chat metal, which remained after I had diſ. 
ſolved a quantity of it in oil of vitriol in order 
0 


& — 7 


Having at hand a ſmall quantity of 1 
lation of mercury in ail of witrialy which I had 
got when I procurcd the vitzjolic acid air from 
that metal, I poured ſome ſpirit of nitre upon 
it, which was attended with a violent efferve- 


| ſeence, andexceedingly red fumes z nadceatch- 


ing the air which was produced by this means, 
and was not much, it appeared tu be ftirongly 
aitrous. - I then put the materials into a ſand- 
heat, and got about ſix ounce meaſures of air; 
2 finall part of which was. fixed ait, the reſt 
ſtrongly. nitrous. But after this I got twp 


.- ounce meaſures of highly-dephlogiſticated air. 


The reſiduum was a brown friable matter, but 


yellow in the neck of the phial. 


The inſt time that f eee 
from copper, was from the calx of 


vitriolic acid air, and of which 1 
Had a pretty large quantity f n. gy 
this metal for that This 
ſubſtance, when it was well dried, en 


but on putting ſpirit eee it, 4 


«tr, of which pram was fixed air, af 


ing readily abſorbed by lime-water, and mak- 


ron the fveral . 0 


ing it ithid.3; and che cehduum * the but 
Portion was Ants. Ws bas. ee ond 


15 1 1 derbe 

aif from a calx of copper provieyſy formed, 
pouring ſpirit of aire upon it, as I had done bo- 
fore on red lead, and the flowers of zinc; but 
1 afterwards effe&ed the ſame thing immer 


manner, viz. by diſtilling to dryneſs the very 


ſolution of copper from which I had juſt. be- 
fore produced nitrous: air; which I at firſt did 
2 a view to afcertain whether there was any 
fixed air in that ſolution. It is well known 
15 that the ſolution of copper in ſpirit of nitre 
yields only nitrous air; but ſame conſidera- 
tions had led me to ſuſpect chat there might 
be fixed air in that ſolution, diſcoyerable by a 
boiling heat, in the manner in which 1 had ap- 
plied it, „ 
and various other fluid. e | 


With cis view I filed a arge phialwidhthis 
folution, having a conſiderable quantity by 
me, remaining from moſt of my experiments 

on nitrous air; having made it a rule, as much 
| as poſſible, 30 throw nothing away, if I can 
make room for it. No fixed air, however, 
vas procured from this ſolution in the manner 
ANGER rata OY | 


 - 


it boil; 5 00 ſup plying it wich geh i as 
bb piecoding evaporated, I at length got into 
the phial all the ſolid materi b of a very large 
quantity of that ſolution; and when it ap- 


+ 


t abundance. I might have caught, I be- 
liev&* ſeveral quarts.” A conſiderabſe quanti- 


ty 1 did collect, and found about half of it to 


be fixed air; and the reſiduum dephlogiſti- 


Proached to dryneſe, air came from it in very 


cated· The air Was exceedingly cloudy, and : 


mixed with much red vapour. After the pro- 
ceſs there remained a black powder. | 0 15 


g * * 7 7 
PO SOUR „ 


Ts this Mick domi 1 applied more ſpirire of 


nitre, when it preſently became very hor, and 


fumedz and being dried again aſſumed a green 


colour, attracting much moiſture from the air. 
Being again made thoroughly dry, I put it 


again into a gun-barrel, and with. * ſtrong 


heat, got from it about two pints of air, which 
I received in three portions, and obſerved that 
one half of each was fixed air, the reſiduum 
of the firſt and laſt nitrous, and that of the 


middle dephlogiſticated. That the laſt "reſi. 
duum was nitrous, I attribute to the gun · bar- 
rel, eſpecially as the air came very flowly. 


After this proceſs' INT, a of the 17297 = 5 


* remained, | 
. N 3s , 4 * „ r 2 75 
L 4 "444 Tot 34 116; 2 Pay 


"Tei is by no eee that this Wiadsa 


ſhould conſiſt of pure copper and ſpirit of nitre, 


Eo | "© in 


* 


— 


in order to ek dcpblogiſticaed i * Fork 1 
procured it, as will be ſeen id the next experi © 
ment, from very impure mixture of this 
kind, much of i having had vegetable and 1 
animal ſubſtances of - various kinds, ſome ß 
them oily and fatty ones Aiſſolved in it. Nit 
to loſe this matter entirely, 1 evaporated the 
whole to dryneſs, and putting freſn ſpirit . En, 
nitre upon the dry maſs, I got from it, ina 
glaſs phial with a ground ſtopple, a pretty 
large quantity of air, a very ſmall part of 
which was fixed air, and the reſt highly de- 
phlogiſticated· When it was firſt e 
was  cxcedingly turbid and white. o 5 231.4091 
\'y have even bobs this air ſino copper 3 
out the application of heat. For hen 1 
poured ſpirit of nitre upon the black ai abo . 
mentioned, it immediately yielded its bulk of *  Þ 
air, of which one half was faxed air, and the e 
remainder twice as good as common? air. It 
would probably have been quite pure, if all 3 
the common air had been excluded from «the - 0 
KB and 15 Ted. wr e We . 
B i n $43 {3E 26 0 N 
- wikis freſh pine e of nitre, ch DIRT of | 1 
copper in weak ſpirit of nitre, being tried . 
it had been made thoroughiy dry and hot, 
2225 a great of air; but a 
8 5 mo 


gel 6 


| 14 Of lub an, 

almoſt wholly fixed is; n Giſt. 

Of three pints which I once took of thisprocels, 

3 ————— 2 the 

pureſt fixed air, the reſiduum being not at all mw 

affcfted by nitrous. fig Of the ſecond pint | 
Red air, and! of the third 

one half; the reſiduum in theſe two caſes be- 

ing dephlogiſticated, but not more than r twice | 


as good as common ar 1 mm 


The: preceding experiment. x was made wich 
a gun: barrel. From the ſame materials con- 
2 by quickblwer, uſing a burning mirror, 

I got a conſiderable quantity of air, of which 
one twelfth part was fixed air, and the re- 
S If 1 made no miſ- 
take in this experiment, the difference of the 
reſulc from chat of the former, is nt a little | 


W 

| ke might be fuſprted ch he fxed ar from 

the copper, in the preceding experiments, 
might have been attracted by tbe ſolution from 


the common atmoſphere, to which ic had been 
a long time expoſed. This I endeavoured to 
obviate in the following experiment with iron. 
Having gat a quantity of nitrous air from iron 
in the uſnal manner, that is, in a phial with a 
ground ſtopple and tube, where the common 


air has do accels to it, 1 immediately took the 
o em, 


: , 
* % ” 
* 


relduum, e giving Jen an oppottenir of 
getting any thing by communication witk che 
external air; and, in a red ſand. heat got from 
it about rhe fame quantity of air thut it had 
before yielded of nnrous air. One half of this 
was fixed air, preci res lime in lime - water 
and being readily by bn and the 
remainder. was Age niteous. 


an evident from n e hl . 
contains more phlogiſton than copper. The 
cork, indeed, which I made uſe of in extract 
ing this air, was evidently corroded in the ex- 
periment, and might contribute a little, both to 
the fixed and the nitrous air; but the ſame cork \ 
had been uſed before in the experiment with - 
the copper, which, notwithſtanding this cir- | 
_ cumſtance, had yielded the nyo; ar. wy 


: Being determined, if poſſible, to e hl 
| Shlogiſton i in the calx of iron, by the addition 
of more ſpirit of nitre, I repeated the proceſs; 
and uſing now a glaſs phial with a ground 
ſtopple, in a Bad her, as before, I got thtee 

ounce meaſures of air, which was highly de- 
phlogiſticated. A ſmall part of this air, how. 
ever, was evidently fixed air, making lime- 
water turbid, but pot more "than 1 is uſually 


W in ee ur, as it N 


— wwe wana — — 
—— - — — 


3 — 
— — — 
— — —— 


* 
9 
——— 


— — 
— 


— 


CO A Yr NY ov 
— 0h. os ain ating 
* — r — — 
2 = 
* 
8 


— — — ag — vers ore 4 
8 — — os 
PB. 


— oY 1 
2 3 — — 7 1 nnn L 1 4 5 . 5 
n — — . < LT. p 2 ag 3 * 
— Wo. * = 4 * * 2 FS =! + xe» an a Op 
2 D 2 „re 
» — — " 


, 
þ 
4 
i ” 
> } 
ol | N 3 
4 : i 
FB bY 
1 
tt 1 
24 
4. : 
j 4 7 
© {| ILFF 
e 
45 
js ? 
71227 
7 
o {% N 
77 ag 
WP: 14 
Ip 1 
* p 
- 
[ þ 7 
7 # 
3's 
5 „ 
1 11 ? 
19 18 - 
.* 
1 - 
1 * « 
\ N 
14 
18 
i 
4 a C 
. — \ 
3 FF | 
"4 * * : 
| Ci 
1. FE } 
1 BY . 
1 1 :% 
: 
+ : 4 
. 
11 
=P, + } 
Ken 7 
N * 
o { : 
- by \ þ 
T i2 
g + Pi I 
vo 1 
4 7 5 
: . 
H 8 
4 
1 " 
= = : 
1 
9 wo 2 
© 7 : 
{ : 
ry 68 ; 
Fe 4 + } 
þ 7 ; 
2 1 
'F £4 
72 4 
f 4 
5 [en ; 
4 : 
= 75 : 
4 - 4 
x 2 
[ 4 8 
1 ; 
1 1. 
4 
_ 7 : 
1.1% 
by - : 
4 1 
2 
* , 
' 448057 : 
=_* is 
. 4 
4:48 3 
b be 8 
v . N 
oy a * ; / 
. 
ir Fx [ 
: 4 ' 
TH » . 
? 4 
: ! 
L * 
p - # 7 
\ y | 
oe | : 
8 14 
U $ 
p 1. 
ang, 
1 
18 
5 12 
1758: ' ; 
* 1 # 7 
T7 » * 
þ : 
FFP 
_ o 
od : 
=_ 4 x 
455 . 
4 , 
wa "1 
—_—_ 
* 
T7 # 7 
7 ; 
_— . 
! >] : 
® bg 
1 * 4 ot 
* 
id 
XY 4 
2 
#32 
mi, > 
47 77 
x 
781 
- 
: j 
7 
b EZ 
7 
Pn 
141 
1 
* 
1 
* 
1 
1 
11 
H 
3 
N 
0 
0 
* 
4 
l 
5 
+24 
7 
1 
- WM! 
81 4 
U 
7. 
0 


. 
= * » — 
n 


22 de < 
* 


— 

gr . 
— 
— 


9 8 — — jou 
— . 
— — 


= — — 
1 


— an. 


. a burning mirror er mercurius  calomatus 


' tf 2 i Þ v Þ 15 1 Tr 
per ſe. 5 8 "FO. # 4 4 ee * * « . 2 ky 5 64 Þ 4 4 4 * 


1 . The bulk of the pg A ain was "Rin i 8 
ſame dark brown colour with the common ruſt 
of iron; but towards the neck of the phial a 
part had been ſublimed of a light red colour, 
and above that again was a powder of an e. 
ceedingly beautiful yellow, to appearance ex- 
actly like Me bu it en Meer WT 


flame. | 
. 25 


I did not rarer to procure i depo? 


2 air from lead by a direct proceſs. But 


nce all the calces of lead yield this kind of air 


- with ſpirit of nitre, there can be no doubt bur. 
that the proceſs would have ſucceeded as well 


with this metal as with the reſt. . 1 will juſt ob- 


ſerve, however, in this place, that though, when - 


I publiſhed my ſecond volume, I was obliged 
to have recourſe to the proceſs with a burni 

mirror and quickſilver, in order to get pure 
air from litharge, I have ſince got a little of this 
kind of air from it in a -gun-barrel, together 


1 with the fixed and. nitrous fe which F had 


801 from i it before. 15 ag My 


Ot all the Weih- or bci, on which 
1 have made experiments, tin evidently con- 


tains the leaſt 9 T have obſerved 
| indeed, 


from the Terveral Metals. ws 7 5 


müss in my "firſt volume, when 1 had. Joft 
diſſolved all the metals in ſpirit of nitre,, that 
this yielded nitrous air as well as the reſt. But 
had I proſecuted the experiment, 1 ſhould | 
have found thar the proper nitrous air which 
it yields is in very ſmall quantity, that the 
greateſt part of the produce is that Kind of 
| ves air in which a candle burns. with an en- | 
larged flame; and, what is very remarkable, i is, 
that the earth of this metal, though it does give 
dephlogiſticated air, is as refractory in this 
reſpect as flint, yielding no more of this ay 
than about che ſame quantity which that ff 
cies of earth yields. This metal alſo yields no 
fixed air; but ſeveral of the circumſtances at- 
tending this ſolution, being pretty remarkable, 
and I having varied then pretty much;'it way” 
not be amis to recite ſome of them. N + 
| Tin did not diſſolve fa as to Yield" air in 
ftrong ſpirit of nitre, but was affected by ir in 
the manner that Mr. Macquer deſcribes. With 
an equal quantity of water and ſpirir of nitre, 
it diſſolved with great violence, and 5 dwts. 
6 grs. yielded about 15 ounce meaſures of air, 
about one fifth of which was abſorbed by 
water, being the nitrous vapour, fo often men- 
tioned above, diffuſed through the air. Before 
this part was waſhed out, a candle burned in 
the air naturally ; ; bur when this part had been 
IG 1 PFF 


18 of Dephiegifcated Air, 


: abſorbed by the water, a candle went aut in 
it. The former part of the produce, which 
was rlirec-fourths of the whole, was hut licht- 
I nitrous ; for two meaſures of common air 
and one of this occupied the ſpace of 21 mea- 
ſures; and the laſt part was proper phlogiſti- 
cated air, neither affecting common air, nor 
being affected by nitrous air. Had I taken 
the e in ſmall portions, the firſt produce 
0 would, 1 doubt not, have been proper nitrous. 
air, as I had firſt found, 1 particularly ob- · 
ſerved that no part of this air, though readily 
abſorbed by water, made lime-water turbid, Þ 
that it contained no fixed . 


After this, diſtilling the rf LRN to 8 
in a glaſs N with a] ground ſtopple, got 
about twelve ounce meaſures of air, in four 
parts; of which a portion of each, and eſ- 
pecially at the firſt, was readily abſorbed by 
water, but without. making lime-water turbid, 
When this ingredient was waſhed out, the air 
which had lodged within the phial was phlo- 
giſticated. Then the firſt portion of the pro- 
per produce of the materials was common air, 
the ſecond twice as good, and the nens 
portions were exceedingly more, 


Putting more ſpirit of nitre upon che reſi 
* I got only an twice its bulk of air, 
and 


— 


* 


from ihe ſeveral Metals.” „ 


and part of this was fixed air; and in all re- 
ſpects this proceſs ſeemed to reſemble that with. 
flint. After this T weighed the reſiduum, and 
found 1 it to be 5 dwts. 2 gts. 


6 1 . 2 1 


The phonotmbtis Seen dne the Solution of : 
tin being ſo very remarkable, I repeated it ſe- 
veral times, with a conſiderable variatlon of 

circumſtances; and the following appeared to 
me to be worth reciting, Idiſſolved a quanti- 
ry of tin in a quantity of ſpirit of nitre, di- 
| Jited with an equal quantity of water; when 
the ſolution was at firſt very ſlow, but after- 
' wards very rapid. In the courſe of the pro- 
ceſs 1 ſeveral times took a ſmall quantity of 
the air to lime-water, but it was not made in 
the leaſt degree turbid, though a mall part of 
the air was ablorbed by it, | 0's gr 
1 edel the whole reliobs3 in 1 Wut parts, 
and found that the firſt was ſo far nitrous, that 
two meaſures of common air and one of this 
occupied the ſpace of 2 2 meaſures ; the ſe- 
cond was a little more nitrous ;; in the third 
the ſame meaſures vecupied the ſpace. of 2 4 + 
meaſures ; but in the laſt the air was leſs ni- 
| trous, the ſame mixture occupying the ſpace | 
of 2 © meaſures,” Towards the middle of the 
proceſs, the air was very white, and continyed 
ſo a long t time. N. B. In the firſt of the por- 
E. 2 tions 


20 i of DepPiogyticures aun, G.. 
| 
tions of air above mentioned a eanile bard 


very bright, and with a crackling noiſe; in 
the ſecond and third it burned with a large | 
flame, and very ſilently, a blue flame being very 
diſtinctly perceived ſurrounding the central 
white flame; the fourth mne a candle. 


When I N get no more air without ** 8 
ditional heat, I applied the flame of a candle, 
and afterwards of two candles; and then took 
about half as much air as I had got before, in 
fix portions ; of which the firſt was nitrous, 
in about the ſame degree as the laſt part of the 
former produce; the ſecond was ſo much ni- 
trous, that two meaſures of common air and 
one of this occupied the ſpace of 2 meaſures; 

the third hardly affected common air at all; 

the fourth was twice as good as common air; 
and the fifth and ſixth portions, which were 
four times the quantity of the preceding, 
were highly dephlogiſticated. N. B. The 
third, fourth, and fifch portions were exceed- 
ingly turbid; but the laſt was quite PRES com- 
ing very flowly. 


In theſe two proceſſes, with and ha 
foreign heat, we ſee a pretty regular gradation 
from the moſt i Ae to the moſt pwe Kind 
of - 2 . 


„ 
* 


; «4 + 


SECTIO * 


Of the Phenomena which attend. Sc. 21 


SECTION u. 


of the Pe which A the Solution of 
| ſome of the SRMI-METAILs in Spirit of Nitre. © 


Metals have been denominated pure, or im- 
pure, from the property of malleability only: but 
this circumſtance ſeems to have no connection 
whateverwith their capacity of yielding any par- 
ticular kind of air, when they are diſſolved in 
any of the acids. Of the proper metals lead, cop- 
per, and mercury ſeem to be preferable to the reſt 
with reſpect to the quantity of pure air which 
they yield; that is, their earths are more eaſi- 
ly reſolvable into air than thoſe of the other 
metals; and the earth of tin is the moſt refrac- 
tory, little differing, as I have obſerved, in 
this reſpect, from * the moſt Pans ent of 
all the earths. | | 


1 1520 not ads trial of all the gane ne 
having hitherto confined my experiments to 
zinc, biſmuth and antimony, all of which yield 
a conſiderable quantity of pure air by a direct 
proceſs, biſmuth being not much inferior to 
Zinc in this reſpect ; but I have not made any 
.ceurats eee of * | 


C3 EO 


2 pls N 
22 
2 9 A. 9 6 
x oo — — — 
— - 2s 
———————— 


— tv 


— 


= — no 


* 
r 


5 n n 
4272 AAA — 


— — 3 
— —— — 


1 EDITS _- b wy — Em — — — _— . * + „ — =_ Sw —_ „nns — — — — — = = 
_ — n - \ = 3 —_— - - —- : —_— _ — . zz l r 8 8 
2 r _ a . — 2 p = I'D IF rs 0 — MR * 2 . LY — 8 —— ͥ — * — 6 Kaka — 
. * . e — poo A \ r * — YA — * * —_ * k ** — * — — 22 2 . DOES 
— 2 „ a * wy Ty 8 you 4 * — n "Far 1 * Wow. ot x Nagy 4 8 1 * * e 2 * * N * — 3 . SH 7. . ö 2 of 3 - 1 2 = = — 
1 © 3 W = 8 r = EY * 6 — C PTÞ AY — * "—_ The. ; * 3 Did TIO 1 a 7 2 - "RF * * — 
— = by — , ow . \ N 5 . —— —— Y — e dS - \ 2 * = - —_— - * reer — — 
4 Row oor ett our * 258 re * 4, jou — l = — My : \ Pray 5 2 _— 
= N — d : =_ 
, * 8 — ———— * 1 N Ar 18 » _ - . Se l _— _ 
- Py . — » 0 5 . 
iid. ot — TERED Gp, 9 <A> - — , a — K 
* - 8 wt . . 


= * * 1 A 

8 : 8 
K 2->0 0 e 
- * + wo 


— See. + can Þ FL 
— * VET —-— 
— I CS 
* 0 
2 * 7 1 
— * . ene — << ry 
' — g . 
r - 
b — . Tn nao Sand O08 30" Ie 
— — 


B II NO 


n __ = 
2 7 8 
wo * . = _—_ 
24 wo ws ve 
CT EO En 
— 


«a. Of the Phenomens which attend 


In all theſe experiments with metals, or K. 
mi- metals, the proceſs ſeems to proceed as fol- 
lows. The ſpirit of nitre, by means of the 
ſtrong affinity which it has with phlogiſton, at 
firſt ſeizes upon that principle in their compoſi - 
tion, and thereby demetalizes them, leavingthem 
mere earths, with more or leſs phlogiſton adher- 
ing to them, according their reſpective natures. 
This remaining phlogiſton in the calces, the 
ſpirit of nitre ſeizes upon next, and with it 
continues to form nitrous air, as well as with 
that phlogiſton which conſtituted the metal it 
ſelf, or the phlogiſton of any other ſubſtance 
by the ſolution of which nitraus air can be 
formed. Probably, however, a portion of the | 
earth of the metal enters into the compoſition 
of the nitrous air, as well as of the other kinds 
of air which they yield, When, by this 
means, the phlogiſton is entirely exhauſted, 
the earth and the nitrous acid together conſti⸗ 
tute dephlogiſticated air; no phlogiſton being 
contained in the pureſt of this air, except what 


may be neceſſary, if any ye neceſlary, to give 
it the form of air, 18 


of the quantity of dephlogifticared. air 

yielded by flowers of zinc an account was given 

in my laſt volume; but in this place I am 
conſidering, in a general way, the quantity 

and quality of the air en is yielded by theſe 
__. qpetals 


oY 


Mp Solution of gent ul, &% 23 


metals in all the ſtages of heir ſolution in 15 pirit 
of nitre. Judging of the compoſition of zinc 
by theſe principles it ſhould ſeem to contain 
very little phlogiſton, becauſe it is ſoon ex- 
hauſted in the proceſs, this metal yielding but 
a ſmall quantity of any impure kind of air, 
and a very great proportion of the pureſt. 

Allowance, however, muſt be made for' the 
phlogiſton that is probably contained in that 
kind of nitrous air, in which a candle burns 
with an enlarged flame, of which zinc, as well 
as tin, yield a conſiderable quantity. The 
particulars of the Pee w-ere as follows. 


1 completely ſaturated a quantity of ſpiri 
of nitre with zinc. This ſolution, while it 
was hot was fluid, but when it was cold it re- 
ſembled a whitiſh jelly Diſtilling this jelly to 
dryneſs, in a glaſs veſſel, and receiving the air 
that came from it in three parts, I obſerved 
that the firſt was the common air in the phial, 
very little phlogiſticated ; which ſhews that, 
after the common ſolution of this metal, with- 
out additional heat, very little phlogiſton re- 
mains in the ſolution. The ſecond portion 
was twice as good as common air, and the _ 
was as ue! as on chat 1 had ever met with. 


At anoches time cher 1 repeated this experi- 


. n received the air in more portions; 
| C 4 © LL but 


20 Of the Phenomena which attend 


but the general reſule was the fins; except 
that between the phlogiſticated and the pure 
air, there was a quantity of that kind of ni- 
rous air in which a candle burns with an en- 
larged flame. That it was preciſely the ſame 
| Kind of air that was procured by the direct 
| ſolution of zinc deſcribed above was evident, be- 
cauſe after that vapour (which is always the 
cauſe of this peculiar phenomenon) was waſhed 
out of it, it neither affected common air, nor 
was affected by nitrous air; being the ſame 
thing with that which I have termed phlogiſti- 
cated air, and which is always the baſis of this 
peculiar kind of nitrous air. 


This remarkable fact Felt to proye that 
this ſpecies of air contains leſs phlogiſton, in 
proportion to its bulk, than phlogiſticated air, 
and conſequently that the vapour which is the 
cauſe of this peculiar property, and which is 
readily imbibed by water, partakes chiefly of 
the nature of the nitrous acid. For, in all theſe 
_ proceſſes, every produce of air has leſs and 
leſs phlogiſton, till we came to the laſt, which 
contains the leaſt poſſible. Alſo this kind of 
air coming between the phlogiſticated and the 
pure air ſeems to ſhew that, if that which con- 
ſtitutes the enlarged flame be phlogiſton con- 
tained in the air itſelf (and indeed it can hardly 


admit of any other ee, it muſt be in 
a ſtate 


the Solution of Semi-metals; 6 2g 


A ſtate not perfectly ban with that nitrous 
acid vapour. We ſee alſo that this diffuſion 
of phlogiſton, and the looſening of its connec- 
tion with the other conſtituent parts of the air 
is that ſtate of it which immediately precedes 
its total diſappearing. For immediately after 
this kind of air, we find x the: next produce co 
have b ee at all. 


Leſt this intervention of the abies ni- 
trous air between the other kinds of air, and 
the pureſt of all, ſhould, have been occaſioned 
by ſome accident, I carefully repeated the ex- 
periment, and found it in the ſame place 8 
ſecond time. Having diſſolved a quantity of 
zinc in a quantity of one fourth ſpirit of nitre 
and three fourths water, diſtilling the ſolution, 
to dryneſs, and receiving the produce in four 
- portions, the firſt was only common air ex- 
pelled from the phial, and not ſenſibly injured;. 
the ſecond was inflanmable nitrous air (as we may. 
call that kind of nitrous air in which a candle 
burns with an enlarged flame) the third was 
8 dephlogiſticated air, about four times as pure 
as common air; and the fourth was as . | 
as any thing I have ever examined. 3 


Excep t 8 * air, which ! is | always con- 
tained boch in dephlogiſlicated and in common 
en air, as en when they. are de- 

com- 


4 


26 Of the Phenomtus which attend 


compoſed by nitrous air, no fixed air comes 
from zinc. The d ephlogiſticated air from 
biſmuth alſo has no fixed air in it. Having, 
however, diſſolved a quantity of biſmuth in 
ſtrong ſpirit of nitre, and afterwards in a mix- 
ture of half fpirit of nitre and water, I found, 
as I have noted in my regiſter, and as I think 
I ought not to omit mentioning in this place, 
a a ſmall proportion of fixed air, making lime- 
water turbid and being readily abſorbed by 
water; but I imagine that this muſt have 
been owing to ſome accidental circumſtance, 
which I did not attend to; for I have more 
than once repeated the experiment, with this 
very view, without being able to obſerve any 
fixed air in this part of the proceſs. The re- 
mainder of the air was ſtrongly nitrous, 


Putting the alt formed by the ſpirit of „ 
tte and biſmuth into a glaſs veſſel, and diftil» 
lng to dryneſs, with a ſand-heat, I procured Wa 
from it about twenty times its bulk of air, iv 
the firſt part of which there was ſome fixed 
air; but all the reſiduum was pure dephlo- 
| gilticared air, efpermily at the laſt,' 


Having poured; a e of ſtrong Piri of 
nitre upon ſome powder, and ſmall fragments 
of antimom, the whole was reduced, after 
ſome days, to a whitiſh ſubſtance, of a La 

thic 


the Solution of 


| thick conſiſtence, without yielding any air, 
A quantity of this ſolution I put into a glaſs 
veſſel, and with a very ſtrong ſand-heat I got 
from it about ten times its bulk of air, about 
one third of which was fixed air, being readi- 

f ly abſorbed by water, and making it turbid, 
and the remainder was dephlogiſticated. To- 
wards the end of the proceſs the proportion of 
the fixed air was, as is uſual, very ſmall, and 

the e eee, air was of the pon kind, 


tals, G, 27 


* 


J 


+ 21 LF: 


141 £1435 


wy . 0 1 10 N 11. 


4 
: 


© 3 7” 1 o 
* 


0 the eee, of 


- 1g view to det 


ine air was one of the firſt kinds of fac- 
titious air, the nature and properties of which 
have been tolerably inveſtigated. That it is 
an acid ſui generis, I conſider as fully deter- 
mined, eſpecially by the very ſatisfactory ex- 
periments of Mr. Bewly, related in the Ap- 
pendix to my ſecond volume. 
potheſis I intirely acquiſce. 


been the opinion of the ableſt chymiſts, that 


"4 2 


"of 


„ 
; - | 5 


e 


2 . 
* N | Ss * — 
i # 
; . 1 : * L | * 6-4 
: - : * * * A I F f N 5 5 4 
2 8 b - 
* 
? 3 25 . 647 n 
Ef A ; : 0 . 
7 


* 4 
* 5 1 ' 4 $ * 
0 e PR $2 i nh WY I. oe 
V 7 1 I EY 3 
3 Re II 9 TR * 5 r 


& x v8 
FS. 
- Ms 2 25 5 
6 „ att 25 


þ 


1 


* 
Fenn $ . % £ EP 
' „ 
* $2 * 


E ub rr e nes 1 
From EAk r SUBSTANCES, made chiefly with © 

ine whether the Freep An 
150 ' that is yielded in theſe . "by 4 Ex 
"cation Art id | 


2 25 ® 


* 


CI 
* z 


With this hy- 
But as it has 


all the acids are ultimately the ſame, under dif- 


| ferent modifications, and in different combi- 
natjons ; ſome of the experiments recited in 


my ſecond volume made me think it poſſible, 
that the acid called fixed air, may be one of the 


modifications of the nitrous acid; and as it ex- 
tinguiſhes a candle, I ſuſpected that, in this 
peculiar modification, it contains pblogiſton, 
and perhaps earth; as ys if not all other | 
kinds of aur, do. LE 


for procuring} nitrous air, / except” 


"And propeitions d | fixed: air in every 


metals; and likewiſe in al oſt all the 


ſes for procuring dephlogiſticated airs: though 7 
none of the ſubſtances, ſeparately taken, could 


be diſcovered, by any of the uſual t 


contain any fixed air, particularly ſpiritof — 


&c. And though ſome of the ſubſtances, 
from which I got dephlogiſticated air fg 
tain fixed air, the quantity that mey 


from them hy any Qs proceſs is 'nſfiing, 5 
compared with what they may be made to 
yield by ane with 1 of wire, n 


„C 


e ti vo 501. vr 55055 


| Alfo h a of 7 ſubſtances, as ok | 
calcareous earths, and red lead, do contain a 


. conſiderable quantity of fixed air, it mig t be 


preſumed that the ſtronger: acid of nitreSwith | 


which they were thoroughly moiſ 


with which they united; with a very great dest 


could not fail to expel the fixed air they on 
tained before; this being the weakeſt, and 
ſpirit of nitre one of the ſtrongeſt of. all the 
acids, eſpecially as I have found that.chall, 


and ſome other :ſubſtances, which cannot be 
decompoſed and made to part wich their fixed 5 
air by heat only, are eaſily made to part with 


it 1 oY the acids. 1285 not only do theſe fub- 


\ * 


| W 
n the | 


ſtances 


- 


Produftion'of Dephlogiſticated Air, 


ſtances yield fixed air after being made into a 
paſte with as much nitrous acid as can be 
made to combine with them ; but even when, 

by a ſtronger heat afterwards, they have been 
made to yield all the air that can be expelled 
from them by this means, both fixed and de- 
phlogiſticated, freſh ſpirit of nitre, and a re- 


petition of the , will produce more air 
al bann kinda, faced as well s the other. 


To theſe OP FILA 3 it mould 3 added, 


that dephlogiſticated mY as well as common 
air, from whatever ſubſtance it has been pro- 


cured, always contains a certain portion of 1 


fixed air, which is eaſily diſcovered when it is 
decompoſed by nitrous 1 or in oy. other 
| l n (7% | 


00 


out the ſuppoſition mentioned above, viz. the _ 


tonvertibilitiy of the nitrous acid into find aiv, 7 
ſame combination of phlogiſton 
"Jo apr 0+. Honwever, 1:fobils 36 avs aighs- 
ture to the judgment of my philoſophical 
readers, together with the following experi» 
ments, - moſt of which were made with a view 
to decide this very queſtion ; and I cannot 5 
belp thinking that the ceſult vf them will be 
thought n to * + wipe J el 
un 


. Ove 


* . 
5 * K 
d . | * | F 
. Ul * 1 
* 4 
8 * * 
n 4 13 ＋ 7 K 
* bo fa © 
= x 6 A 8 8 7 1 * 
6 © ne ES 8 7 4 * * 
$5 : 8 x * 1 > «©. 
„ av WM 3B 1 1 ö 
* 


One of the e Lon: a 
very great. quantity o an 0 
ney wrt air was wood-ſbes, burned till they 
were very white, after which procels'i it. might 
be imagined, that all the fixed. air that they _ 
contained was expelled, from them. I find. 
however, that it is no eaſy matter to expel all 
the fixed air. from wood - aſhes, at leaſt by 
burning them a long time in 2. gun-ba 1 
For after keeping a quantity of them in 2 reds 
beat in a gun-barrel, during many hours, 1 
1 5 chat 93 — I. immediately after. put 

wel. and gave 1 a greater beat, I gat from 
them a conſiderable quantity, of more fixed air, 


But endeavouring, the next 908 18 air from 5 
theſe aſhes again, I found none... 


2 14 i; a 
ERS net, 


One would imagine, therefarg, that after 
not only a complete ted-heat in a.gun-barrel, 
but when, after this proceſs, the aſhes had 
been, well moiſtened with 5555 of hitre (with 
which they unite with very great heat, and 
form a blackiſh ſubſtance) a the fixed air 
they contained muſt have been ſufficiently ex⸗ 
pelled, ſo that whatever is produced afterwards 
muſt be generated by the ſpirit of nitre, Nox 
it will appear by the following proceſs this 
this is the caſe i in a YI. e 


4 


Ni 


** — 5 : 
£ G2 

by F L 
3 


From Saen of ok, ſuch” as 1 
had from a baker, mixed with ſpiric of 1 nitre, 
1 got, in a gun- barrel, about twenty times 
their bulk of air; the firſt produce almoſt 
wholly fixed air, being readily abſorbed by 
lime-water, and making it turhid, and the re- 


mainder lightly nitrous. After this mixture 


of fixed and nitrous air, the latter of 7258 
came probably from ſmall bits of charcoal, 
and other impurities in the aſhes, the reſt,” 
rhich was by far the greateſt part, was one 
| third dephlogiſticated, given two thirds fixed 
air; the proportion of fixed air diminiſhin; 
ne the laſt, as uſual: but even then 1 
imagined it could not be leſs than one half of 
the whole. When the morn was as quick the 
air was TD: turbid. : 


"Having, by rex re epeated experiments, Teh 
all the fixed air T Ipoffibly could from a quanti- 
ty of wood-aſhes, till, without ſpirit of nitre, 
no more air of any kind would come from 
them, I diluted them with a quantity of that 
acid; and making the proceſs in a gun- barrel. 
got from them a great quantity of air, about 
half of which was fixed air, with the reſiduum 
of the firſt and laſt portions nitrous, but that 
of the middle bu ar army. At the ſame 
time, 19 850 J had I the PO lame reſult from 


: 25 ſome 


* 
3 . © 
Y 


1 


„ 
4 
be - 


of air: hf 


i 8 FR”. 2 

s * 8 1 i * £ 8 2 1 „ # 

KI; $3 „ ep 1 . * x #55 

„ + {614% 7 93 3 $7 
874 | 


in the ſan 
ity. of air, 


4 3 


of 


Set, 


5144 


22 l 17 S791 160% 
a ge wer 10 Fit 

122 881 a 8h 4 y c 11 
Sony ene, 


9 

E : 
„ *”: 
* by + 5 


Ny 


34 — — 4r, 


| Wich a greater quantity of ſpirit of nitro. 
plied to the ſame materials, and a greater heat, 
I got more air than before, one ſixth of which 
Was ed air, and the reft 'dephlogifticated. 
This alt, as in all caſes/ in which Fear Baar 
was applied, was exceedingly turbid. 'In all, 
F took at this time about thirty ounce meaſures 
of air, by repeatedly applying freſh ſpirit of 
hitre to the fame materials, Weh though 
carefully collected after each proceſt thaving 

been diminiſhed about one third, of one fourth 
every time they were uſed) were now reduced 
to about one third of an ounce meaſure. This 
being barely ſufficient ſor another experiment 


made uſe of them once _ more, and 5 


ith freſh ſpirit of nitre, 1 got more air 

deem ther, in the ſame proportion with're- 

knot quantity as before; the firſt and laſt 

| ee being nitrous, and the middle part 

„ and one third of the rhol 

— 1 0 Ow” the 3 as 
_ uſu 


* The materials being now "ey mall to e 
any more fatisfactory experiments, 1 diſcon | 
fitived the proceſs ; it having, as 1 think, a. 
bundanely anfwered my purpoſe; proving 

that the fixed air muſt hays come from the ſpi- 
rit of nitre, in ſome reſpect modified by earth 
er pblogiſton, — proceſs, It is poſũble 
4 indeed, 


experiment, but I think there is ſufficient ea 
ſon to conclude; that there would halt been 
ſome portion of fixed air produced in Every ibs 
ceſive proceſs; till the very laft JO of 
the aſhes had been exhauſted, 1 880 


Abe folowing experiment with Wy is 
of. tlie ſame nature wich the preeediig with 
wo ot 2 not carried io far. In this 


* den bee made for me by Mr, Winch 
and valoutics by « ſolution of ſilver in ſpiris 


| have bat wy in w pro farchex profecution-of the 


n of titre eee 6. 5 5 


of aire z | that it ſermetl to contain little ar 5 


no phlogiſton. It is poſſible, e | that 
this HO” not arc be the caſe. n 


A cm of this Gi of Ritre I rer ups 
* red-lead, from which as much air as paſ- 
fble had been cxpelled before by means of ſpi- 
rit of nitre; and uſing a glaſs veſſel, the firſt 
produce was fixed air, with a large reſiduum | 
of phlogiſticated air; fo that there muſt have 
been phlogiſton in ſome of the materials. Buk- 
the bulk of the air, which was about twelve 1 
ounce meaſures, was pure dephlogilticated ais. | 
In this experiment the inſide of the I plank, © 
as well as of the tube through which the ait 


MS” . 


1 
. 


dunda 


1 * 1 # wt — 1 * 
F 7 ** 
: * > 1 1 
8 
; , 


2. 


| 8 | Produttion of — . 


was tranſmitted, was exceedingly red; which 
is an appearance that is no indication of the 
. quality of the air produced, but only of a re- 
hof the nitrous acid, with ſome portion 
Mon adhering to it: for without this, 


of phl 


I preſume; that the nitrous 29-2 nne : 


4 . 


colourleſs. FFF is 


+ Movdlchigting: my having bones e- 
| phlogiſticared air from all the different kinds 


of earth, and even from the pureſt flint, I had 
no ſuſpicion at the time of my laſt publication, 


that it was poſſible to convert g/aſs into air. 
But conſidering that flint is the ſubſtance from 


which, principally, glaſs is formed, and not 


leſs hard than glaſs, I had the curioſity to make 
trial of glaſs itſelf; and the reſult has n 
Fran anſwered my expectations.” MD SUCH $606 


--"Hubitg) pounded a quantity 118 flne OY 
very fine, 1 almoſt filled with it a glaſs phial 


with a ground ſtopple, moiſtening the mate- 
rials with ſtrong ſpirit of nitre ; and with the 


heat of a candle only, I expelled from it- a 
quangity of air,' the firſt part of which 'was 


fixed air, being readily abſorbed by lime- water, 
and making 1 it turbid, while the remainder was 
ſtrongly nitrous. - The phlogiſton neceſſary to 


6.3 Tight 2 8 be ſupplied by ſome- 


"ang. 


A ce gV 18 the gu bm EY copper 
mortar in which it was pounded.” C of the ſecond”. 
produce, part alſo was fixed air; bur the re- 
mainder was highly dephlogiſticated Of the 
whole produce, aboutone fourth was ff Ra 
After this operation, the glaſs was become ex- 
ceedingly white, except at the place where the 
flame of the candle had been applied, where it 3 
was-tinged with a blue colour; which colour, - 
as well as the phlogiſton, might perhaps . 
come from the braſs mortar. Repeating 3 
proceſs, by applying freſh ſpirit of nitre to e | 
materials, without taking them Gt bf the  _ 2 

hial, bur putting it into a ſand-heat, the pro- 
58 of air was the ſame as before; but all ex- 
ceedingly pure, 1 did not attend BE the ger 
125 at this time. * 2, 1 
Let the Hale in dealt in the S8 | 
tion of flint glaſs ſhould; have bad any effecr 
in the r roduction of this air, il n the next pro- a 
ade uſe of green glaſs,” which'i is com. 5 

rock 1 alienate nothing but ſand and fixed) 
alkaline ſalts; and 1 had nearly the ſamè reſult 
as before. For about one fifth of the whole 
produce was fixed air, the reſiduum of the fir ft 
part E Bo: nieren ang of the 15 e ED - pf 

at ot DIFF” 3 


1 — 1 
* 


41 
* * . 
* 
* 
S 


„ G r 


1 * . 7 . * 2 5 s 5 
* 2 4 8 1 2 1 7 n 7 n "8 4 
\ S * 4 : 4 , 1 4 3 „ is —_ +; 3%; . Lp % , 
7 - * > 
4 


D. 
MR” 


Some 


"Sx 


Same time FR this L repeated 8 
ments with part of the ſame. glaſs that I had 


uſcd at this time, and with a particular view 
a free or that might. be produced y and 


3 


filth of the Prodvce was ungueſtionably. fixed 
air, being readily abſorbed by lime: water, and 
making it turbid, and the reſiduum was not 
_ affeted by nitrous air, But the air that came 
next was pure depblogiſticated air, and the 
firſt was exceedingly turbid and white. A 
Se eee 4 
Va ven deen. e rt 


2 


Though there is 3 kid air in 1 bd 
| imagine it will hardly be ſuſpected that there ia 
any contained in it after it is baked, 1, there- 
fore, took a quantity of white earthen-ware, | 


and pounding it very fine, moiſtened it with a 


5 5 of N 

5 mentioned; obſerving that there was a 
great heat occaſioned by the mixture, though 5 
no air was then produced. But diſtilling it tg - 

dryneſs in a glaſs veſſel, I found that the com- 
mon air which had lodged in the phial came 
cer phlogiſticated, perhaps from having 
pounded the materials in a braſs mortar, as in 

the caſe of the glaſs. But the proper producs 
Vas 08 fired air, "mg * e by 


t. Wigch's pure ſpiric of nierg 


SPY als "oh 


time-water. and ! it ; tyrbid,. nn 
ee en enen __ eo | 
. } 6810410 
E ane Farce lies | 
which Mr.Cronſtedt corifiders as a kindof earth 
different from all others, an which mn 
ligingly ſent me by Dr. Forſter, for the pur- 
poſe of examining what kind of air it would 
yield, I got three or four times its bulk of air, 
with ſpirit of nitre, and one fourth of the firſt 
produce was fixed air. But this great pro- — 
portion of fixed air, I ſuſpect, came from the 3 
cork,” which I uſed to cloſe the glaſs veſſel in 5 
the firſt experiment. Without the cork, I got 
air from the ſame zeolyte which gave but 
flight, ſigns. of its containing fixed air, and 2 
the reſt was very highly dephlogiſticated. = 
Hoo the whole, this ſubſtance, with reſpet . 
to its property of yielding air by this proceſs, 


very much reſembles flint. N. B. Spirit of 13 15 9 
nitre mixes with this ſubſtance with * ou | 1 
heat. of 


I ſhall ER OH my account of theſe exper ris 
ments on earths with one on that which is 
called int. tone, from the diſagreeable ſul- 
Phureous ſmell which it yields when it is rub-.. 

bed. The air. that 1 got from this ſubſtancl, 

with ſpirit of nitre, in a glaſs phial with a 
ground Ropple, | was chiefly d air, but 
e W4. the 


r 


— — 
— 


gas 


m was: ai little nitrous. ee 5 
meaſures of racer and one of this oc. 


cupied the ſpace of 2 + meaſures; which is x 


favour of the 


- 


r of che ay ymit 


\ 1 * 7. | 
*4 1 6 7 A 


* 


2 £2 7 : d f x o 
s + 1 4 G 7; 
15 4 


2 
” pe 
« „ 2s ICS 1 * J = 
q 7 1 z , *— iy 
a 2 gen 1 74 14 * 7 1 * 
. : 5 — 
N "Ie 24 j 
g 1 Þ + * 
os 1 Ry A 


vg nick my 
n 


5 


Ig e 


Tx * 
* * $-<# * 


£ f 15 £5 if n 4 


* "4 ** 


5 1 
4 2 FA * 


99 © *% 
A 7 
* 

4 142 


F 
- 
>» 
* 
4 * 
* 
* 
#j 
tad 
* * 


1 


* 


& 


25 2 U 2114 adn ot ee ot 
4 = $ 3 kr] CO 4 12 
. N 


8 E o T 1 0 Nv. 


Ls 


x „ T7 * I 


5 45 — 10 deen in nene if 2. * 
© Nitre, in a e Got OEMs 
Ar. . nee 


rr . I 3 as 1 fup- | 


poſed, the compoſition. of atmoſpherical : 174 on 


and had Jong that it conſiſts of //pirit of nitfe 
arth,” each of which may be meaſured: 4 


ad r 


their weight, and alſo of. phlogiſton, of Whick 


we know very little, and the preſence of which 


we have ngt-yet been able to aſcertain by 
the circumſtance of weight; it ſtruck me 
a curious problem, to aſeertain the proportion 
of ſpirit of nitre and of earth in a given quanti- 
ty of it, neglecting the conſideration" of its 
phlogiſton and I have taken no ſmall "pains 
in my attempts to, ſolve it. My ſuceefs, in- 
deed, has not been anſwerable to my wiſhes ;- 
but as my endeavours have not been wholly 
unſuccefsful, and ſeveral things extremely - 
curious and, important preſented themſelves in 
the proſecution of the experiments that I made 


with a view to it, my philoſophical readers 
de, think themſelves 'obliged 


will, 


Th 


to me 


for reciting them pretty minutely. The re- 


a5 m general, has been, that we have reaſon . 


—ͤ— 


to 


3 


* 


7 ivir of Nitre, 


to conclude, chat the great bulk of atmoſphe- 
rical air conſiſts of earth, and that the ſpirit of 
nitre is (together perhaps with its phlogiſton) 
neceſſary to enable it to aſſume the form of 

an elaſtic fluid, and chiefly to im 


that affinity with phlogiſton, on wich nw 
in reſpiration, &c. depends. 


A general method of ſolving this . 
| eaſily occurred to me. This was, to meaſure 
very carefully the quantity of earth and ſpiris' 
} of nitre that I made uſe gf in the mixzure for 6 
the generation of air, and the quantity of each 
| ſpecies of air that | procured ; preferring ſuch 
| _ as I had found to give the greateſt pro- 
portion of reſpirable air, and the leaſt of any 
other kind of air. The loſs of weight is the | 
earth would, I imagined, determine the pro- 
portion of earth in the air produced. vr | 
- to meaſure the loſs of ſpirit of nitre, I propoſed 
to make all the air that was produced pals 
through a quantity of diſtilled water, that 1 
might afterwards aſcertain the degree of aci- 
dity which it had acquired, by the quantity 
of nitrous air that it would produce, com- 
pared with the quantity which it would have 
produced before it was employed in this pro- 
ceſs ; concluding, that that which was deficient 
bad entered into the compoſition of the air. 
Theſe meaſures n to have been a 
com- 


. 


1 —— 43 
* with the quantity and ſpecific gra- 
vity She als produced, on the re 
correct the other. 


With this phauſible ſcheme I 4 went to 
work, foreſeeing nothing that could well pre- 


vent m ſucceſi. But I preſently found that 


the loſs of weight in; the earth that I em- | | ; 


' aged I ſhould never be able to aſcertain the 
quantity of that ingredient, or account of the 
much greater quantity of earth that" is always 
retained in the air when it is firſt produced, 
and conſequently vob hot, than it can con- 
tain when it is cold; in conſequence bf which 


there is always a large precipitation of it in the 
form of a white powder within the veſſel that 


receives the air; and I deſpaired of collecting 
the earth ſo depoſited, in ſuch a manner as to 
aſcertain the W N «fix 1 eee 
—_—” ; 


Wi imagined, 1 that if 1 8 
a aſcertain the exact quantity of ſpirit of 
Mitre in a given quantity of air, it would ſuffice 
for the ſolution, of my problem. For, know- 
ing the weight of the air, and that there was 
nothing to weigh in the caſe but the ſpirit of 
titre. and FE oped, the wel beck the one be: | 


Gr come at "the proper e th Giri 5 


nitre, 


- 


+ n Bap if ini Nie, 


2 992 


nitre, it would be deemec ſomething, to e * 
tain the quantity of it in a given Beater ; 
air, by oth TOP e enen beſides that 

e 2H J XTXTTu.·ĩ;ĩỹ 201 07 Of 
2 But oops OY to the pon old Feats 
lation, I found, as will be ſeen when I come! 

to recite the particulars of the proceſſes, a 
greater difficulty than ever. For the water 
which imbibed the. ſuperfluous acid produced 
more nitrous air, by the. ſolution of copper, 

than the original acid wijuld-have done. 1 
hardly rẽmember any thing, in: the whole 
courſe of my experimenting, that appeared 

. - more extraordinary than this. It ſeomed as if 

there was an increaſe, inſtead of any loſs of 
acid, after part of it muſt have been employed: 
in forming the air, and part alſo had been ne-. 
_— loſt in the courſe of the experiment. 


al. — — TS 
——ů ů ab eros 
_ —_— 
n ; , 
IVC "IM 8 C 
5 - DEER * Ro - 
. N ö 2 * 8 
. * . — 
* . * -» — - — 
4 
& 
* 2 . 
6 ; 
2 


—2 19S, + 
6 8 > * 
may — — — 3 
* — 


. 


4 FI -—_ KF. 


* 


N 
— —— 4'* 269) * — — - — 
5 


cn woe ALD > gs, > ' l — — 
— * —_— . 5 — 
Go LORD 6 — . — — 


* — -__ 
2 2 AIG = 
e e * — is 
FF r 8 
E . 3 = 3 4 rue 0 
— 
— 


oven —äd — 15s 


— — — — Ayo nes 
NE 
a 5 — 


\ Y <= * 2 — ——— Ex > — ET ů—ñ — U — -·· ̃ ˙ rꝑ: —?＋——: : . 
0 \ *_# © ri — | 
a, 4 _— A: 
— 
— 


1 confulied "FN of my chytical friekds 
upon t this ſubject; but they were all of them 
as much at a Joſs to account' for the fact as 

myſelf. At length, however, f in conſequence 
of obſerving ſeveral ſimilar facts, an account 
ef which will be given in their proper place, 
1 think I ſee reaſon to conclude that the nitrous 
acid is dephlogiſticated in tlie proceſs, and Is 
thereby rendered capable of taking up more 
Phlogiſton, and conſequently of decompoſing 
more 


1 
1 
Wh 147 
BE. [+ 
& 4 
189 
4' + 
, 
F 7 

15 

1 

1 
1 
F N 
Ft 

1 
1 
|; 
96 
13 
17 
. ö 
1 
1 
1 by 
[ 

$4 

26 

J 


des as contain phlogiſ 


chan i it was: before; or elſe that the — | 


nitre, in ſome other manner, acquires ne 


powers in conſequence of being volatilized, But 


this ſubject will be conſidered more fully here 

after. In the mean time I proceed to recite 
my proc ſſes ; and as moſt of them contain 
ſome circumſtances, an attention to which may 
be of uſe to; experimenters; in this way, and 


each of them brought me a little nearer to the 5 


de ob OL 


Va * 12 ds Bit Fe 7 {1} . 222 1 22 £ "#4 FAS 


— 1 amis, them 
5 he. | 20 11 L ble. 185 5 N . 4 be 4 ; 


© 2 


count of the eaſe with which air is procured 


from that ſubſtance, it was neceſſary to de- 
| termine, in the firſt place, both the quantity 


of air that any given quantity of it would yield, 
and alſo whether, beſides this air, it contained 


any ſuperfluous nitreus acid, which was the 


caſe with all the mixtures that I made for the 
production of the ſame kind of air which this 

ſubſtance yields; and I preſently found that 
| red-lead contains no eee acid at all. 


i 10 makes the experiment with all due i 


cumſpection, vſing the apparatus, fig. 2, 
tried it when every part of the inſtrument — 
quite * and had never been ne in 


10 by | | any 


1 4 he $0: N 3 by 
making the experiments with red. lead, on ac- 


* 


46 | 74 my os of Nie, 


art of it. The gun-barrel-alſo was perfectly 
r ed was made to 
paſs through a of diſtiled water, 
And yet, though. uſed 
red. lead, as much as could be heated in the 
gun-barrel at one time, and repeated the pre - 
ceſs with every precaution that I could think. 
of, I did not find that the water through which 
the air had paſled had acquired. che 
ſible acidity. It did even tutn the juice of 
turnſole, which I tried in one caſe, or of archi. 
which only I had by me Ein 
the ſmalleſt degree, red. 1 


The reſult of en eee 
| y favourable to my purpoſe, as I had now. 
no allowance to make for any acid n 
be in the red- lead that I made uſe of; and 
conſequently I had nothing to do but 0 com. 
pare the quantity of acid that 1 myſelf put to 
the materials, with the quantity that I fhu⁰,ꝗ 
extradt from the water, _ the ar t on. 


14 


Ther 1 * have XK 33 caſion to make 
any allowance for the air yielded by the reds 
| leaditfelf, Lbegan with making uſe of red-lead | 


@ large quantity | 


aſt ſen · 


out of which air had been extracted by y-U 


amy el nt Whatever before x ſo that there jo 
could dave been nothing acid adheting to any 


i 


acid, thar with a quantity of copper it 


f Having 
_ the ſolotion of copper in ſpi 


1 


hea or today ef hls pOWBN; Of chis 3 


I took 2 028. 14 dwts. 6 grs. wich a certain 
meaſure of ſpirit of nĩtre, and putting them 
into a gun - barrel {which I thought would be 
ſufficient for a general leading experiment, 
and. propoſing to uſe a glaſs veſſel afterwards) 
I provided ſuch a veſſel as is anger 1 5 | 
for all the air is: yy ad per 


i 


| 4 ; * 2 W 


hy 25 eee 


The Ar Weener was ex 


0 meaſures, one fifth of which was fixed air, 


and the reſt dephlogiſticated; and there re- 
mained of the red- lead 102. odwts. 17 grö. 
The water was ſo much eee eee with the 
yielded 
ſeven ounce meaſures of nitrous air, and the 
original quantity of ſpirit of nitre applied in 
che flows n. WR: fixteen ounce © mea· 


LEE. BY K 
a." #1 


ws a quantity 4s, 


which remained after diſtilling to dryneſs, and 
of 


burning the reſiduum of a [arg quantity 

of nitre, 1 
mixed with it as much ſpirit of nitre as would 
have yielded twelve ounce meaſures of nitrous 
got from this mixture ſeventeen ounce 
meaſures of air, one third of which was fixed 


lr and the. rſt, dephlogilticated - and _ 
vater through which this air had paſſed 710 x 
[? rag meaſures of nitrous air. 


"Theſe refills. encouraged. n me to ei in 
the. ſolution of my problem; for there was 
evidently a loſs of acid, which I ſuppoſed muſt 
haver entered into the compoſition of the air 
that was produced by the proceſs, though 
even at that time I could not help noticing, 
that a good deal of the acid was loſt in another 
wap, as the air above the water, through which 
the generated. air paſſed, had been Fxcordingly 
red in the courſe. of the proceſs, i and con- 
ſequently that a great part of » acid that 
cConſtituted that redneſs was neceſſarily carried 
off, along -with the generated air, into the 
baſon where the recipient was placed. I alſo 
obſerved that the water through which the air 
had paſſed emitted very copious red fumes 
when it was decanted into another veſſel, 
which muſt have been atpended with another 
very conſiderable loſs of acid. And the loſs 
on theſe accounts was, in fact, much more 
than I ſuſpected at that time. The reſult, _ 
however, convinced me, that I- had uſed too 
ſmall a quantity of water for the air to paſs 
through : for that the acid, after being em- 
ployed in this proceſs, was in a ſtate not to be 
eaſily combined with water. With this hint, 


n 550 by OBO E 
m Depblogiſticated li. 49 
f = * i +. of ns . ; £ oF © t 1 . 
in the next experiment, I came a little 
h 12 i nao g# + IK * l 8 N 8 Ls * 8 
to the truth. „„ 
N 2 11 45 433 


3 * 4 * 
| HE: - 


x IS. 3.4 * 
8 4 3 & g * 15 , [1 * 1 3 3 #43 2 F 7 1 P 25 
140.13 3 . 4 ok. . 


— 


© Mixing the ſame quantity of ſpirit of nitre 
with the reſiduum of the fed- lead in the laſt 

experiment, after which, when it was well 
dried, it weighed 102. 4 dyts, o grs. it now 
yielded fifteen ounce meaſures of air, a ſmall 
part of which was: fixed air, and the reſt de- 
phlogiſticated. The water impregnated with 
the ſuperfluous acid now yielded nine: ounce 

meaſures of air; which was two more than in 
the former experiment, and the: reſiduum 


: 


41 1406 4 Fs 4 ' 
: ; - 
Wel h 18d ts. 1 18. e 4 fp 
E 1 , 7 2. * * A * 4% 
"ES S£ n * 11 n Ferne ; 239 #3 #28 B, IJ 
Y 144 > „ $i ,t4 5 «SY: Jobs be #2 + - 45 n * 8 
* a « a 4 


- WY. 4 ©. 7 FX $ g 1 
ii F eie 


Not having now. g ſufficient quantity of this 
obſerving that three ounces of it, without the 
addition of any Ipirit of nitre, yielded twenty- 
five ounce meaſures of air, one fourth of which 
was. fixed air, and the reſt. dephlogiſticated. 
And ſuſpecting that the ſtrong yellow ſpirit of 
nitre was not ſo proper for this purpoſe, I had 
recoutſe to ſome that was quite colourleſs, 
with which Mr. Godfrey had ſupplied me, as 
being perfcAtly tres om, any chers l Of 
this 1 put upon three ounces of red-lead, as 
much as occupied the ſpace of 4 dyts. of water, 
aue Fach ith copper. ee 
ounce meaſures of nitrous air. Making all the 
Vor. III. ö air 


P 55 — . TIE Rs AE eats —_——— 


[nc EE bn ter rg 


— vet fre, o9, 


— 


— 
== ag 4 


50 The Quantity, of Spirit of Nare, | 


air that, was generated in this proceſs paſs 
chrough à large quantity of Water, this water 
was ſo much acidulated, that when it was, | 
poured upon copper, it yielded eighteen ounce 
meaſures of nitrous air, which is four, ounce 
meaſures more than the original acid would | 
have yielded. And beſidès, The acid thus Tec- _ 
tified," as I may fay, bein extremely. volatile, 
a good deal of it py *eſcaped from the 
water, both while I Was transferring it” from 
one Phial t to r and allo while it Ned 1 
the Phial. - 
In et experimeint 1 5 this kind, hen 
the quantity of nitrous air from a Wen ſpirit 
of nitre and copper was nine ounce meaſures, | 
te water through which the air produced b * 
its means had paſſed, yielded alſo exa&tly | nine 
ounce meafyres, beſides the loſs FOR! the cau 
above mentioned. pms 
Being willing to try ay "the Kinds hex irit 
of nitre-chat I had by me, Tnext wadle u ule 'of 
the pure ſpirit of nitre mentioned above, made 
by Mr. Winch. Of chis 1 mixed with three 
ounces of red-lead as much as occu pied the 
ſpace ol 8dwrs. of water, when the produce 
das forty ounce meaſures: o air, of whi about 
five ounce meaſures was fixed air. T be. water 


b EB N it had pale, after making all 
| er 


4 * * 
4 ,. 3 * * oi *%. 


0 ; a p £% + a = - y x EY „„ ; 


Oe ot Ad ain be e n aus 
in Deplog Ira Air. i 2 85 51 ; 


proper-allowanees,-and vfing a variety of pre- 
cautions in applying it to the copper; too mi- . 
nute to be mentioned here, I judged to pre- 

dute im all twenty-four ounceneaſures-of ni- 
trous airy which J found to len more 


than che >; Ina dons, of this et wor would 
1 re PP _ * 391 bh * 
The esel debe expettioents"s Ihe 
ag before I had much ſuſpieion of the og 
difference in che produce of nitroùs air a 
ſioned by: che applicaribn of beir, 46th 5 5 
ſometjmes very conſiderable, and by ne wenns 
in the ſame proportion in all eaſes; ſome Kinds 
of the acid yielding' almoſt the hole: prodtee 
witliout external heat, and other kitids yo x. 
more than one half I therefore tnbughit it 
neceſſary to go: or this proceſs' fte more 
with a view cake cireutſtants, *andithe teſult 
was ſtill the ſame as before, che water throu | 
which the generated air had paſſed ptodiicth 
more nitrous air than ehe whole” quantity bf 
the.acid employed 4n-the experiment w 
eee IA A L „ © 21503 ni 
| a" 3 i 3081 boilqqut ei doidw' 3s 
The e f ak; ald uſed at his 
time occupied the ſpace of 4 dwts. of · Water, 
and when applied to copper I could CR with 
any application of heat, male it re 
er n x ede 


*** | quantity . 


1 


— pt - 


that could be - 
of the water 


ED "PREY —_— T_T 
2 aa ran — — 2 — — * * RD N — — rr 
5 . 2 | 


5 2 T he 1 of Spirit of Mitre, 


quantity of this acid had been mixed with 


red- lead, which was afterwards put into a gun- 
barrel, and had been made to yield allo the air 
tracted from it, one ſeventh part 

rough which the air bad paſſed = 
produced two ounce meaſures of nitrous:ait:; | 
ſo that the whole quantity would have-been 
fourteen ounce meaſures ; and this was after 
the water had been decanted firſt: from the 
veſſel repreſented, fig. 2. into another Phial, 
and, ſome. time afterwards, from that into the 
ſmall phial containing the copper. And it 


ſhould be conſidered, that after this proceſs 


-(if it be continued till the water begin to emit 
air, a circumſtance of which an account will be 
given hereafter) it 18 ſgg exceedingly volatile, | 


that it is not poſſible to pour the water from 


. one veſſel to another without the diſcharge of 


very copious red fumes, in which a good deal 
of the acid muſt. be loſt. There muſt al ſo be 
ſome laſs of That Birrous air which 1 is amiteed 


-that the. increaſe i in, the, produce. of nitrous air 
in theſe experiments is from this ſource, viz. 


that which is ſupplied from the water, in con- 


ſequegce of thei Jmpregnauon with: nitrous v va- | 


aur. to 2 Ms b Io 0 * 514 4 150 211 f 
i. Jon. 'Þ LEO 2 4 Þ o Lb £22 15755 ; 

Being now convinced that 1 could get no 
Jatysfactory. concluſion; from any of 5 pureſt 


9 


Vins + - * kinds 


JJjJGSffFCTC!CVTVVVTVVTfVCC 0 ̃ ᷑ẽͥP?²ÿ )... ̃ͤ ͤ . ⁵¼pZ ]èͤ -.. a ent ] ̃ ³ͥ .]. 


4 4 $2. 11 Ba. 5 


a F Ro a> & 1 \ 


— 


4 : * Go | . . | | | | : 
1 „ Ne a; 5 S N c ; 
in Depblogiſticated Air.” © 53 


kinds of nitrous acid which had hitherto been 
commonly made, I had recourſe to the water 
which I had impregnated with nitrous vapour; 
ſuppoſing that the acid in this water was in the 
ſame volatile and active ſtate with the acid that 
had impregnated the water in theſe experi- 
ments, and therefore promiſed to be a fairer 
trial. Of this I mixed the quantity of 8 dwts. 
of water with 30zs. of red- lead; and by 
this means extracted from it forty-two ounce 
_ meaſures of air, almoſt the whole of which 
was pure dephlogiſticated air. Half the 
quantity of this acid before the pros had 
yielded: ſeventeen ounce meaſures of nitrous 
air; ſo that the whole would have yielded 
thirty-four ounce megſures'; ; and one third of 
the water impregnated by the ſuperfluous part 
of it afterwards gave eight ounce meaſures. 
The whole, therefore, would have yielded 
_ twenty-four ounee meaſures. But allowing 
for the loſs of acid in decanting the water, 
&c. I conclude that the whole, if it could 
have been eollected, might have yielded der 
thingy ounce e meaſbres. N 
« Farther Re un erpetiment, which was 

made with the moſt volatile kind of nitrous 
acid that I could procure, it was impoſſible 
for me to proceed; and though the reſult, is 
* liable to ſome uncertainty, I do not 

5 | know 


[ 
f 
L 


54 The Manig e Spir 
| know how to come at one mat ſhall be Mons 


rity of 


data, the weight of the acid vapour may be 


Oo — erage 5 3 —ů — he 
4 FE a f 
* 


ö Nit re, &c. 


certain and. ſatisfactory. 


If "3g for want af —.— 4 we * 
our eſtimate from this experiment, forty-two 


_ ounce meaſures of dephlogiſticated air, con- 


tained as much ſpirit of nitre as is employed 
to procure four qunce meaſures of nitrous air. 


From this one might compute: ahe Salt 
of nitre that might be extracted (if we Knew 
how to do it) from the whole of a given quan- 
mon air. But I do not deem the 
experiment which muſt ſupply the data for 
this curious computation to be ſufficiently ac- 
curate to make it worth apy perſon's while to 
go into it. Whenever this is done from better 


determined by the difference between the 
weight of the quantity of ſpirit. of nitre neceſ- 
ſary to produce that quantity of nitrous air, 
by the ſolution of copper, and the weight off 


the ſame bulk of diſtilled water; and the re · 


mainder of the weight of air produced would 
be the weight of the earibh that enters into it, 
no regard being here paid to the phlogifton 


_ neceſſary to bring the dephlogiſticated air down. 


Wet v 


ta 1 nd of ae e airy 0 513 


ir n „„ SA IMAins 42” 
- SECTFOMN: 


7 


„ 


454 8 


* * „ 2 * 


„ ⁰ oF - 


„ 74 TA 


| Society, lead Jan. 25 


4 
; * off p | : 
1 - * * 
Z a* * z 
. . 31 * * , , % 4 * N 
& 5 8 1 7 5 
4 © FEY ., 2 Ran 2 Fo 2 5 # a \ 
þ 2 Fo | Fe 8 > 3. 3 
A * — y 7 „ . 
: * , y 1 1 
. NEE -*% 
* 
N 4 
* * Pulp * 4 4 


9 ; 2 
3 1 
3 22 5 


81 894 
WY 4 94 
- 


SECTION v. 


oui on + Bepiretion and in and the 0 16. 


* * 


at 


Pare] is, > peck 00 ſubjett in N 


logy, and very few in philoſophy 1 in general, 
that has engaged more attention than that of 


the uſe of 1 It is evident, that with- 


out breathing moſt animals would prefently 


die; and it is alſo well known, that the fame 
air will not long anſwer the purpoſe : for if it 
has been frequently reſpired, the breathing of 5 


it is as fatal as rhe total deprivation of air. But 


by what property it is, that air contributes to 


the ſupport of animal life; and why air that 
has been much breathed wilt no more anſ\yer 
the purpoſe, ſeems not to have been diſco- 
vered by any of the many philoſophers and 
phyſicians who have — y wild upon 
the ſubject; and it might have coptinued to 


elude all direti inveſtigation, when it difcovered 


itſelf, without any trouble or thought, in the 


courſe of my reſearctes into che Properties of 


„ n n rag 7. dend io Tho Royal 
2 2 1 ot 2 


dif- 


loſophical Tränſactisgs, 


* 7 


56 On Rejdiration, and the Uſe of the Blood: | 


different kinds of "hs which had at firſt 1 . 
another object. x 7 


— 


In theſe experiments it. 3 appeared, 
that reſpiration is a phlogiſtic proceſs, affecting 
air in the very ſame manner as every other 
phlogiſtic proceſs (viz. putrefaction, the effer- 
veſcence of iron-filings and brimſtone, or the 


calcination of metals, &c.) affects it; dimi- 


niſhing the quantity of it in a certain propor- 
tion, leſſening its ſpecific gravity, and render- 


ing it unfit for reſpiration or inflammation, 


but leaving it in a ſtate capable of being re- 


ſtored to a tolerable degree of purity by agi- | 


tation in water, &c. Having diſcovered this, 


I concluded, as may be ſeen Phil, Tranſ. yol. 1 


LXII. p. 187. and of this work, vol. I. p. 78. 
277. that the uſe of the lungs is to carry off a 


putrid Muvium, or to diſcharge that phlogi- 


ſton, which had been taken into the ſyſtem 
with the aliment, and was become, as it were, 
effete ; the air that is reſpired ſerving as a men. Fe, 
Aron. for that Purpoſe. Ns . 


What I then Ws to be the we of r re- 
ſpiration in general, I have now, I think, 
proved to be effected by means of the Bod, in 
conſequence of its coming ſo nearly ints con- 
tact with the air in the lungs; the blood ap- 
: * to be a ROK: WOO, formed to 
* | 


1. 


iabilie; . ugh with; 4 ne which.” 
the chemiſts call phlogiſton, and changing ãts 
colour in conſequence of being charged with it, 
or being freed from it; and affec 

the very ſame manner, both out of che body 
and in the lungs ; and even notwithſtanding 
the interpoſition of various ſubſtances, which 
prevent its auming into ee en contact with 
the air. VVV 5 Slogan in ei toy obey 


4 ” ** 4% — 
1 W 500 B+ | the 1 
** ; 4 


As it ay: x not t be Rist ae unnſcful, 1 
ſhall, before | relate my own experiments, 
briefly recite the principal of the opinions which 
haye been held concerning the uſe of reſpira · 
tion, from Haller s excellent tem of phyfialo- 
, and ſome others of the moſt eminent writ- 
ers upon that . 


Fee e air nie as 1 
ments of the body, But it was more generally 
the opinion of the ancients, that, there being 
a kind of vital fire kept up in the heart, the 
heat of the. blood was tempered in the lungs. 
Galen alſo ſuppoſed, that there was ſomething 
equivalent to a fire conſtantly kept up in the 
heart; and that the chief uſe of the lungs was 
to carry off ſuch vapours as were equivalent to 
ſmoke thrown off from that fire. Haller, vol. 
III. p. 3 54. Deſcartes maintained the ſame 

vital fire in the heart, ſuppoſing that air was 
. neceſ-. 


* b 


n, and the . ach * the. * 


or cus! nite! ai \phyſiotogitts, ſome 
hive thought! that the air itſelf is taken into 
the blood ; others, that it is only ſomething 
extracted from the air, as the more ſubtle 
parts of that fluid, an ether, or aerial nitre; 
while others ſuppoſe it to be the air itſelf, but 


_ diffolved in water, and therefore in an unelaſ- 5 


de Ae Nia. * For: 


/ Moſt * thoſe whe think this al is Wa 


into the blood ſuppoſe it to be taken in by the 


lungs, ibid. p. 330. Some ſuppoſe, that the 


effect of the admiſſion of this air into the blood 


is a fermentation, p. 332. Others ſuppoſe, 


that it acts by its ſpring, preventing the too 
cloſe contact of the globules, and thereby pre- 
ſerving its fluidity, inteſtine motion, and heat, 
ibid. Bertier ſuppoſed, that the circulation of 


the blood was, in a great meaſure, owing to 


the admiſſion of air into it. Van Helmont 


aſcribed the volatility of the fixed elements in 


tte food to this air, p. 336. and Stevenſon 


thought, that the air which had circulated in 
the blood, and which had heated the blood 


oo 9 Was ae cd oy Jugs P- 355. 


; Orbis 8 chat the air iter is not adnile- 


2 into the blood, but only ſome active, ſpi- 
rituous, and ethereal particles; that this vital 


| ſpirit: paſſes from the lungs: to the heart and 
arteries, and at length becomes the animal ſpi- 
rits, which are by this means generated from 
the air, p. 333. Others, who do not admit 
that the animal mme From the air, 
ſtill ſay that ſome other vital principle comes 

from thence. This vital principle Malpighius 

ſuppoſes to be æ ſalne vapom; Liſter, a hot, 
inflammable, fulphupeous ſpirit; Vieuſſenius, 
a volatile acid. Tale, which keeps up the fer- 
mentation of the blood; and Bryan Robin- 
fon, the aerial acid, which: pteſerves the blood 
from puttefaction ; preſerves alſo its denſity, 
and ſtrengthens the animal. fibres. Fot this 
reaſon he ſuppoſes it is that we feel ourſelves 


refreſhed in cold air, as it abounds with a 


more plentiful acid quality, p. 334. They 


ho ſuppoſe chat nitre is taken from the ait 


into the blood, aſcribe tu that principle its 
neee its heat, and its denſity, p. 334. 


1 is 3 that one uſt of the 


lags. is to attenuate the bibod, p. 9594 and 


Malpighius adds, that by this mrans, the dit 
ferent ee of the blood become thoraughi- 


ly mixed 3 white others think that 
the I is condenſed in the lungs; and 
others, 


z 
"WE 
. 


others, that the Sibbe; amd all. the finer 
humours, receive their configuration there, 


6 o. Ages a 


Bid. Some, without conſidering the air as of 


any other uſe than to put the lungs in mo- 
tion, think, that heat is produced in the lungs 
by che attrition of the blood in paſſing through 
them, Miſc. Taurin. vol. V. p. 36. The red 
colour of the blood has been thought by ſome 
to be cauſed by this attrition in the lungs; 
but Lower refuted this notion, chiefly by ob- 
ſerving, that the attrition of the blood is greater 
in the: muſcles, from which, however, it al- 
* returns black, "hid. vol. I. P. 74. A 
Del o Hine 
— Whytt n ad was ſomething of 

2 e and ſtimulating nature derived — the 
air into the blood, by means of which it made 
ors to os hr _ I. P. 3 36. 1 
ns 
e eee . that air 1 ar 18 - 
| deadly. not on account of heat, rarefactian, 
or denſity, but for ſome moms at ee 

2 Adiſe.. Taurin. IV. P. good wi Hire 


Dr. Hales, a has 8 ch more 

ö light upon the doctrine of air than all his pre- 
deſſors, was equally ignorant of the uſe of it 
in reſpiration; and at different times ſeems to 
have . different A. eee NH it. 


17 4 1 „ 
* ins #4 * - — —— 1% * 7 * 1 91 IS * 


In 


ni: In his gere! ee 
þ | ſuppoſes; Y "eat air is ' a | 1 a 
| by the fumes of vinegar. | Were 28 


bon Adder 0e de Sbferwes, with * | 
-haave; e eg p? 100% that rie blood acquires 
its würmth chiefly- in He vüngs, 2 5 i 
moves wirh⸗-mubh. greater rapidity. than ini auy 
other capillacy veſſels of ene body, vol. II. P. 
87 but cha one uſe of The Air is to co tf 
blood, p. 94 . and hei males an eſtitnate df 
the degtee tof2i this refrigeration,” The red 
colour f che gtobules 6f blood, nie 98 
intimates their abeugchng with ſulphur ?FMe 
makes tim I more ſuſceptible and Ftertbcher of 
heat than thoſe bodies which have leſs, of it. 
ont yea ov” ag 50 „ohne, 
ke allo ſuppoſts, 5 1023. that Wfa 
5 er eule lobgs 5 attenudte l Le- 
poäarate che lobules' of blood; and that the 
floridneſs of the arterial 5159 Above the venal 
may, in à good rmeafure,” be” owitig t6 the 
ſtrong -agitar tion, friction, and comminutlon, 
el it uncergoes in paſſing chrongh weis. 
In like manner, in an ekpeflment which he 
made for 'the purpoſe, 'blovd' mph agitated i in 
w cloſe glaſg veſſel Vas obſer ed to 178 very 
1 Höridehn 6aly" bf! its” ſorf G85. büt tf 8 5 5 
| Ns MHH ufHance, hs uttefial ioc l, vo wh 5 


bono 2 12 


„He adds, : 


e Behind teſt Bl, 


N 192. 4 would obſerve, \howeyer, that i in 
this.experimens, ahe blood muſt-have acquired 
15s, florid near tn, which it was” 


agitated. | 1 TR | Jo, # tx 3 * 10 PS £3 1 1 7 1. vo | 


ba | it 181 nie blood 
may, in the lunga, receive qſome other, im- 
portant influence from the salt, hich is in 


uch. great quantities. inſpirad int them. In 


other places, howeyer, he explodas the doc- 


| arjne. of : vivehwag upinit in the air. It has 
Jong, he ſays, been the ſubject of inquiry to 


many, to find of what uſe it is in reſpiration; 
Mis though, it may in ſome, neſpedts/ be 
— — et it mult.be confeſſed. chat we are ſtill 
uch in tb r dee it, vol, II. eee 


ob 47 fs 497 0912024 WH Anti d 


 Suffocation, he ſays, vol. II. p. 271. con- 
liſts chiefly in the falling. by of the hungs, 

accalioned by. the, groſſneſs of the particles of 
A thick noxious air, they being, in that float- 
ing Rate, moſt eaſily attracted by each other, 
as we find that ſul Phur, and the elaſtic repel- 
ling particles of air are; and conſequently 
vnelaſtic, ſulphureous, ſaline, and other float- 
ing particles, will moſt. eaſily coaleſce, where- 
by they are rendered too groſs to enter the 
minute veſicles, are alſo much con- 
tlacked, as well by the ien of che elaſticity of 
* W air, as W he conan: 1 


Buy 


pours. | 


Tr 


one great deſig on of naty | urg 9 
this important an; wonderful, viſeus, Was WAS | 


7 


frame the veſicles | very minute, 2 by e. 

feQually ito, hinder che ingreſs. of — fecur 
lent particles, which might be inzuious tothe 
ane FEORODE +: ans See 13113.” {334807 


- Laftly, be concludes, "tha, : 9 2855 pu N re- 
G6 tration is to abate, and in, part, deſtroy, the 
e aſticity f the air ; and 7 | as. ls. was effected 
by ſulphureous vapour, 2 and: he coli Id breathe 
for a ſonge nger time. 3 air that had pa ed throu ̃ 
cloths dipped in a folmjon py: falt of rarrar, 


he concluded, that the air Had been” Pence ; 
| by the tartar having ſtrongly 1mpbibed. the, ſul- 
19275 . acid, and. TAO FETs vob 
Rl 2 7. 44 fs e 0 * 100 2817 "ON 
Haber, nies teciting tl che ea of all; us 
bad gone before him, ſuppoſes, with 
Hales, that, f in conſequence of the air. 
Its ſpring in the Jungs, they: cannor be 1 Nt 
 Gilated 3 and therefore, they mult coll A | 
and the circulation. of the blood be. Karre 
vol. III. p. 258. When he ſtates bis opinion 
concerning the uſe of the lungs more fully, 
he ſays, that the true uſe. of them ĩs partly in- 
wins and, bag exhaling, b. 36. 22 


3 


1 > > 


. F 
f , N | = 8 
„ 4 * 
” 8 + * * | ff # 85 . 7 f 4 , 1 4 70 Ws _—— 
PEAS Wot ny tb#T n 


Jungs 150% both water and air; but chat 
J che ff ngs he ait loſes its elaſtic property; 
16 as to'be'cafily ſoluble in Water or vapou 
P. 352. and he thinks it probable, that this 
ait ſerves as a cement to bind the eafthy parts 
together. He alſd makes no doubt, but that 5 
various other matters, miſcible with Water, are 
inhaled by the lungs; and he even thinks it 
not improbable, that the air may, carry ſome ” 
electric virtue along with it. The principal 
 exbalation of the lungs, he thinks, to be water, 

+ abounding with oily, volatile, and ſaline prin; 
ciples; and theſe oily, and ferid” vapours, he 
thi ks, to be de the Fulgines « of en and 5 

hw cients, p. 364. Ss 2 5 


34 e 35 


Nr. Cig 14 'of Turin has eien N 15 5 
tention to 1555 curious ſubjeek. as appears by ; 
two themoirs of his: one in the firſt volume 
S of the Miſcellanea Taurinenſia, in which, he; ve- 

well accounts for the florid ted colour of 
the blood; and the other, which is a much | 

more elaborate Memoir, intitled, De Reſpira- | 
tione, in the fifth volume of the ſame work, 

Juſt publiſhed, or about to be publiſhed, the 


copy of the artiele bd er been en to me * 
: the NEeop, * at dares | 


445+ 


2001 3603 7250055 


SHO. 


155 bes it for N that air nich 10 : 
- once e been breathed is unfit for farther reſp | 


ration, 


ration, on no * account aka its wi ; 
| loaded with noxious. vapours, which diſcover 
themſelves by a fetid ſmell. Miſc. Taurin. 
vol. V. p. 30. And he. takes it for granted, 
that the elaſticity of air is diminiſhed by reſpi | 
ration, though he does not conſider that di- 
minution of elaſticity as the cauſe of its noxi- 
ous quality. He therefore concludes, that air 
Which has been breathed, ſuffocates bh: means 
of the irritation which it occaſions to the lungs, 
by which the bronchia, and the lungs them- 
ſelves, are contiacted, ſo. as to; reſiſt the en- 


trance of the air; and therefore, that reſpited 


air is noxious on the ſame account as mephitic 
vapours, or thoſe of burning brimſtone, P. 313 
that, in frequently breathing the ſame air, it 
becomes ſo loaded with theſe vapours, as to 
excite a convulſion in the lungs, and thereby 

render them unfit. for vankalging: 8: 7 
P. 43.8 


. r Es = 4s <p! f? al We 


4 * „ 4 Y 
ifs web; 3 02.1 721 FO. 


This me de asc thar's air enters the 
pores of the blood, retaining its elaſtic power, ; 
P. 50. and rhat it. continues at reſt there, he- 

cauſe its endeavour. to eſgape is counteratted 
by the equal preſſure of the ambient me Fs 
p- 52. This air, he ſuppoſes to be introduced = 
into the blood by. the Ghyle,. and hexer, by the 
way of the lungs, except when, by ſome 
means or other, the equilibrium between the 

Vor. wy * F 2 air 


L 


* 
ues + : 


% 


66. Ow 2 and the Uſe m 157 5 0: 


air in the blood and the external air is loft; b. 

57. If the external air be rarer than the inter- 
nal, the air in the blood, expanding itſelf, 
will inflate the animal, and have the e 
Weed as air introduced'1 into the veins. W 


. } . os] £4 328 Et 


17 4 n 


What we are chiefly Weide to NI. en 
rg is his deciſive experiments with reſpect to 
the florid colour of the blood, which he 8 
proves to be cauſed by the contact of air; 
though he afterwards feems willing to deſert 
that hypotheſis. It was often imagined, that 
the reaſon why the lower part of a quantity of 
dee vas black, while the Turface was red, 

as, that the black particles, being heavier 
dhe reſt, ſubfided to the bottom; but this 
opmio our author clearly refutes. File found, 
that When he put a little oil upon a quantity 
of bisod, it remained black throughout; but 
that when he took away the red part, and ex- 
poſed to the air the lower laminæ, which were 
black; they: alſo became ſucceſſively; red, till 
the whole maſs acquired that colour. 1506. 
Taurin. vol. I. p. 73. "Alſo; at the requeſt of 
M. Cigna, father Beccaria tried what would 
be effect of expoſing blood in'vacto'; and * 
found, that in thoſe circumſtances, it always 
continued black; but that, by expoſing it 
again to the air, it became red, p. 68. N 


94 NME Ws wh; 
A Thos 3 5 ird, FI 9715 0 4 42 


*y 


1 = | NI. Cigna 


o, Rypration, andthe Uj of th bal 


8 M. Cigna. condiudes his firſt differtation 


of blood becomes black, whether by, the air 


Vyhich it had imbibed eſcaping from it, or 7 


its depoſiting. ſomething, faline, - teceſfary to 
contribute to its redneſa, or by the preſfure vf 


1 


the atmeſphere; but he inclines to-think, that 


air mixed with blood, and interpeſtil hetiyeen 
dhe globules, preſerves, its redueſs it but that 


by conereting it is enpelled from it, or be- 


comes ſo fixed as to be ineapabie af making 


| denſityaf concreted 


it red. This opinion, he thinks, is rendered 
in ſome meaſure probable, by the increaſed 
, and by the emiſſion 
of. air have other fluids in een on, 


tt {4 I = 


| „ ben * aa EN in 


155 firſt Memoir, yet in the ſecond, which - 


was Written ſeyeral years after it, he e 
whether the change of colour in the blood. 
takes place in the lungs: but. if it docs, he 
inclines to aſcribe this effect to the eveporation 
from the blood in the lungs: and though he 
always found; that the colour of the blood 
Vas changed by the contact uf air, yet when 
he conſidered that evaporation muſt, as He 
thought, neceſſarihy attend the contact of air, 
be e that this effect 1 equally de 
ets: 8 Fa at⸗ 


ai obſerving, that it is not eaſy to ſay ho- 
it comes to paſs, that the lower part of a mals 


% 


4 1 


. } 


68 On Reſpiration, and the Uſe of thi' Bload. 


attributed to this circumſtance. But he ac- 
knowledges, that this hypotheſis ought not to 
be received till it be confirmed by export... 
1 A 1. Taurin. vol. Vo P. 61. 8 


e hs whole, bs See, that hs 
rinks uſe of air to the hood, is to preſerve _ 
the equilibrium with the external air, and to 
prevent the veſſels from being rendered unfit . 
to tranſmit the blood, on account of the en- 
ternal preſſure ; whereas, by means of the air 
they contain, the fluids move in their proper 


veſſels as freely as in'vacue, and the mem- 


branes and viſcera alſo eaſily ſlide over each 
other, p. 63. And with reſpect to the uſe of 
the lungs, ſince he imagined that air is not in- 
troduced into the blood by means of them, 
he thinks, that becauſe ſuch lungs as thoſe of 
man are given to the warmer animals only, 2 
the chief uſe of reſpiration is exhalation, and 
en he We of the blood, . wy : 


1 he laſt writer whom I wal quote upon this 
ſubject,” is the late ingenious Mr. Hewſon'; 
who ſays; in his Experimental Inquiry into the 

Properties of Blood, p. 9, As the «colour 
of the blood is changed by air out of the 

body, it is preſumed, that the air in the 
<<, lungs. is the immediate canſe of the ſame 
266, i in the body.” That this change is 
. hs TOW. 


05 Repirabin aid the Uſe-of the Blos 


zeatly produck d in the lungs, he iniperſunded; 
he ſays, from experiments, in which: he diſ- 
tinctly ſaw. the blood of a more florid red in 

the left auricle of the heart than it Was in the 
right; but how this Os 8 e ate wu 
laps. Ihs not yet determined. 5 is 297 gui 


. 74 * 
E * * Se 4 


Since ſome of he every 1 * ew parti- 

cCularly nitre, have a ſimilar effect on the colour 

of the blood; forme, ſays he, attribute this 

difference to the: nitre abſorbed. from the air, 

while, in the lungs. But this, he adds, . is a 

0 otheſis; for air contains nd nitre, and 
moſt, ok the neutral 156 waere 15 9 
effec in lome degree. rn. 


Ye! Pi: SES 1 


17 
a 17 


7 : 99 *% 1 5 
£ þ 50 "9319 Ie. Fg 
Since, e a Buden 8. of nitre; does. pro- 5 


duce this effect upon blood, inſtantly making 
the very blackeſt of it of a beautiful florid red, 
though this effect is not peculiar to nitre (for 
a ſolution of common ſalt does nearly the ſame 
thing) I own Lam inclined to aſeribe this ef- 
fect to the air; eſpecially ſince I have proved, 
as I apprehend, that atmoſpherical air conſiſts 
of earth and ſpirit pf. nitre. Poſſibly, there- 
fore, the air we breathe may be ſo far decom- 
poſed, as to communicate ſomething of nitre 
to the e ines e ee the eing. 


SES a 


+» ** 10 i : bag : 2 5 g Fo: Iles 


by 
* 
* 
5s + w# ih 8 ; , 6 © 5 
v3.43 
5 7 l 
* x» Et t 4 : 2 * 5 1 8 | 
6 Ks a HAS Har 
ws . 4 * 2 * ol ww iF * Lek * a 
— * / 8 ” 
+ 
— 4 ft P 4 


khat among ſuch a variety of opinions'convern. = 
ing the uſe of reſpitarion, che right one ſhould 
never have been ſo much as conjectured, | 
| though unſupported by the ptoper proof. But. 
indecd, this animal künden. and the phlo- 


expoſed to any other phlogiſtic-proceſs. And 


yo On Reſpiration, and the Uſ of ibs Blood. 
ob Aer Gd review of e : 


| opinions of others on this important queſtion 5 
in_phyfoldgy, 


I ſhall proceed to recite my 
own. It may appear ſomething extraordinary, 


giſtic p roceſſes in c eſpecialhʒ that . 
of the calcination of als” which is, per- 5 


haps, the moſt ſimple of them, are to ap- | 


aries very different things; and therefore, 
it is the les to be wondered; that no perſon 


ſhould have imagined, they Woüld produce 
the ſam effect on the in which they were 1 
Perrin 1111 1G 11051 ee 


NU 11 l 


$64 13 Was FELT Oo! CT 115 gu 2 1 off * Ui 3 | 


| Thar reſpiration, however, 11 in reality, 4 | 


true phlogiſtic proceſs, cannot, I think, admit 


of a doubt; after its being found, that the 


air which haz ſerved for this purpoſe is left in 


preciſely the ſame ſtate as that which has been 


fince all the blood in che body paſſes through | 
the lungs, and, according to Mr. Hewſon's ob- 
ſervations and others, the remarkable change 


between the colour of che venal and atterial | 
blood takes place there, in can hardly be 


doubted, that it js by means of the blood * 


— 


0 nn and 4 U. 21 the Bud 21 


che air becomes phlogiſticated. in pang rome 
the lungs; and therefore, that one pen, | 
of the blood mult be.to Aihargy the phi 98 il. 
ton Wich which. | the animal ſyit em A - 
imbibing it in the. courſe, of its 18 Arg 
and imparting it to the air, 0 W 


hich it is 
nearly brought JR ERR in che lungs; the 


air thus Thi as, ö üs we La for this 
PPPs 11 n th PHY "4 s 1 8 » 8:1 


+244 % 


= of 85 a natures... 1 to. retain, 1 ths 
power of 7 5 Air when congealed, and out 
of. the Body, tha 9 It, has when: it 48, e | 
in the body ; and the experinepha, W al | 
anſwered my ee e 


"Haring taken 5 blood of _ oF ter 
it ſtand, till it was; gongulated, and the ſerum. 
was ſeparated from it (after which the, ſurface,. . 
being expoſed to the common, air, is well 
known to aſſume a :florid: red colour, while the 
inſige is of a much darker red, bordering upon 
black): L introduced pieces of the craſſamen- 
tum, contained in nets. of open gauze, or of 
| wie. eee through water, and ne 
5 VNV times 


72 On Reſdiration, and the Uſe of the Blob 


| times through quickſilver, into different Kids 
6 alf, and always found. that the blackeſt | 
parts affumed a flarid red colour in common 
air, and more eſpecially in de Wok e 5 
air, Which is purer and more fit for reſpiration 
chan comtbon air (and accordingly the 5 des 84 
always. acquired a more florid colour, and the 
change was produced in leſs time in this than 
in common air) whereas the brighteſt red blood 
became preſently black in any kind of air 8 
that war unkic for teſpiration, as in fixed air, 
inflammable air, nitrous air, or phlogiſticated 
air; and after becoming black in tſie laſt uf 
theſe kinds of air, it regained its red colbur 
upon being again expoſed to common air, or 
dephlogiſticated air; the ſame pieces — 
ing alternately black and red, by being tranſ- 
ferred from Phlogitticated to e ica 
air; and biet e 2 hs NL OSS 


. 


£8 
41% N £ . - 2 72 * 1 5 . 


3 10 0 .experiments. the blood n tie 
_ parted with its phlogiſton to the common air, 
or dephlogiſticated air, and have imbibed ir, 

and have become ſaturated with it, when ex- 
| poſed to phlogiſticated, nitrous, inflammable, 
or fixed air. The only difficulty is with re- 
ſpect to the fixed air; for all the other kinds 
certainly contain phlogiſton. Bur, x as 1 have 
obſerved in the account of my experiments on 
vitriolic wid air, Puten ſeems to be ne- 
— = ny 


CY 


On Reſpiration, * be L ref. Bl 


elary to the conſtitutiom of every kiod!of * 3 
and beſides, the 'blickheſs of the' blood may | 
_ ariſe from other cauſes chan ies acquiring phio- 
ſtone” Gaber, for inſtance, obſerves; that 
lood bl begins to putrefy, | 
rer it ic dried and hardened 
rved, ale red'blood continued land 
5 could 3 hardly fail ro obſerve alſo, that it Le. 
came) black in vacuo, where it could not hay 
imbibed phlogiſton. This 1 found to be tlie 
caſe when the blood Was coveted two inches 
and a half with ſerumz but it regained” its 
florid colour * it was ex h to eee 
air. 


55 as rex: re 


** 
% EEE 4 Ek 15 n 8 
45 3 ; ds 4# K 5 


10 general; however, A eat be bapel ed, 
that when blood has become black without 
| having received phlogiſton ab ef, it will re- 
cover its florid colour by being expoſed to the 
air. For the delicacy of its texture, and con. 
ſequently its capacity of being eaſily affected 
by phlogiſton, may be eſſentially altered? By 

internal cauſes of blackneſs. This is even the 
_ eaſe when blood has become black by being 
expoſed to nitrous and inflammable air, 
thòugh this change is Probably effected . 0 
imbibing phlopiſton, - MEDIO» 


14 £2 0 280 Oll +3 1979 17 NN 18 9 2 ; Fx Tak TY 


: g 
: ; 4 *4 4 1 i 418 
; . l * 5 pe 
5 
5 6 4 SIN 
: 


ons" and. rhe Li of the Ba 


.expoſed pieces of the ſame Wals of red 

: blood: ta theſe two: kinds of air, and alſo to 
fixed air at the ſame; gime;; „Tie all became 
hlack ; but that hich - was in the iuflamma- 
ble air was the leaſt)ſo, and nonę f them reco- 


vered their florid colour in thę pen air. But 


at another time, A. 118 i craſſamentum, 
vhich had bec lac 


ſome; meaſure, ,and. a low, | Facaver, its 


im fixed, air, did in 


florid colour in dephlogilticated air,. ebe 25 


the, pieces. that had loſt their colon in the ni: 
trous and, inflammable air might; haue oY 
vered i it by. means, of this More; Powerful mem. 
ſtroum. 5.403. 28 3 M len Gi oft a, 


- 


as . 
2. , 


Since, however, blood, after 1 „ 
black in ꝓhlogiſticated air, is always capable 
of reſuming its red colour on being again ex- 
poſed to pure air, it may be concluded, chat 
the preceding blackneſs, diſcharged in the 
pure air, and producing the conſtant effect of 
 pblogiſton, in depraying the air, was owing tai 
the phlogilton it had imbibed in the former fi-! 
ruaxion, and which it parted with m. Ie, larteg. 
And this is remarkably, the caſe, hen blood: is, 
transferred. from phlogiſticated into dephlo-, 
Siſticared air. Eyen, the circumſtancę of the 
deeper colour is ſufficient to give a chemiſt a 
ſuſpicion that it contains more e than 
blood of a lighter colour. 
When ; 


6 * % 4 - 
: , \ | : - 
- f : 
us . 
* * — * * 1 * 22 9 * 
* 2 


Wben I. had fond how readily” pieces o © 
blood changed cheir colour, according to chte. 
quality of the uir to which they were x poſed, = 
1 proceeded to''tkanſhe the Rare” of that at, 5 
„ r e a * „„ „„ Roth) OT : | 

in order to obſerve what change had rakeh — 


* 


place in it; d a> dephlogiticated ar atts” — 

of a more ſenſible change of quility than 9m. 

mon air, 1 gave it the preference in this expe- 

riment; putting a piece of craſſamentum . 

about the bigneſs of a walnut, into the quanti- l 5 
oct ance ody hoc ee 

ty of about frve ounce meaſures of this ait. 


£4*7 T +. Cute" 1 . ; e 
* — 1 LET} + 39 : Ft $- 84s 85 S | / £4 "#8 * 


— 
o 
” 


* 
4 


lieve, by dae it is evident, that this 
black blood muſt . 


25 4 7 
ni. 
; a | 
2 . 5 „4 9 5 


£ 7 & 8 
TY, 24 he {er A 4 GW 2 4 + # '£ M&-- 
ed by the ſeparation of phlogiſton 
| + * E t 7 % þ 1 "% 
, £ * * * ** 9 » * 32 bal I { ; * 4 # . v N 1 * 0 4 ** l 4 
F 4. d * * * 1 » 
12 * e 70 þ * 
3 * "Ag * : 


* Z vhs: 


71 


W jd + * 


"MS 7 .- 7 F p * 7 
* 2% 5 K +». 5 RF i „ ; n e - 8 
8 CI . * : 4 1 8 f * 1 2 1 * 
* 7 1 2 ** A&A 5 — 4 4 * # „„ 3 4 4 * E 434 je. Ve q 
7 " x 5 5 N 
; F 8 
* 


+ The next day, when of ;courſe,! the blood 


+ 1 ſtate of puttefaction, in which 


every Eind of, ſubſtance, vithout exception, 
Will injure reſpirable ait I put a quantity of 
red blopd, tinged in a few places with black, 
which 1 N not eaſily. ſeparate from it, to 
about the fame quantity of the ſame dephlo- 
giſticated air, and ſuffered it to ſtand, without 
Changing, for the ſame ſpace of time; when 
it was ſo little injured, that the meaſures 
above mentioned occupied the ſpace of on | 
two-thirds of a meaſure, 5 


That blood ba 7 5 : BY taking, phi 


"a from ai air, as. 80 K as. imparting phlogi- 
ton to air, 55 ſatisfied 5 5 by: expoling 


ad of a very beautiful 3 e to ni- 


ttrous air, inflammmable air, A Ph hlogiſticated 5 


air. The two firſt· mentioned kiuds of air were 
 confiderably diminiſhed by the proceſs, which - 
was continued two days, during which time 
the wa had been bange ave or ſix times, 


The nitrous air, py this | means, joſt a great 
e of its power of diminiſhing, that 
12. phlogiſticating, common. air. For now 
- two. meaſures of common air and one of this 


occupied the Tpace of 24, inſtead of 1 2 mea - 


ſures. The infammable air, though fill i in- 
eee was rendered in ſome degree 
 whole- 


wy How. te Bot , BB: «1 BD ny 


wholeſome by the proceſs; being, after his: | 


conſiderably Airniniſhed by nitrous air, which 


is a ſtate to which it is brought by agitation in- 


Water, and which, continued longer, deprives ] 
it of its inflammability likewiſe. It cannot be 
doubted, therefore, but that, in both theſe 


caſes, the red blood, by becoming black, re- 
nn © N from ele” two kinds of ir 4 


' 
- 


obſerved thas, after a' few hours e rl : 


the red blood, it was ſenſibly; but not much, 


diminiſhed by nitrouy air; Which otherwiſe it 


| #ould not hape been the leaſt degree. This 


AE: 


blood, how „ was: of the lighteſt colour ; 
that is, acrbrding to f my hypotheſis, themoſtfre: 
from phlogiſton, of any that I have ever ſeen ; 
and T have tried the füme thing, Without ſuce 


ceſs, with blood of a leſs florid colour, thouy 


as florid as the commonair could make'it. Buti 


| ſhould be conſidered; that the proper . 


of the blood is not to recieve phlogiſton from 
air (not meeting with any phlogiſticated air iri 
the courſe of its circulation) but to communi- 
cate phlogiſton toair; and therefore, there is 
no means the fame reaſon to expect, that a | 
will be mended by red blood, 5 that it wil be 
_— vy ene 0 e 2:9. 


2 7 * 2 
* RVA £7 * s OO 2 * 2 2⁰⁰ on 


9 


) * * 
* . yr 4 : 1. ic * J . * * 
% 15 A F an9% { x 7 r . e mm; * # p 
5 4 + 35 4 g E 8 . : 8 A } +. g ut * 3 * * LY 1 2 * * £4.54 , A. ” * wy : 7 OM t 
3 * my 2 * ; g 


bs 
1 
a 
2 
0 
= 
* 
Ft 
1 
1 
* 
{© 
_ 
os 
5s 
79 
3 
AY. 
LE 
2 
* 
* 
35 
14 
by * 
hd” 
44 
2 
5 
4 
by 
. 
125 
130 
J 
„* 
4 
„ 
\ 
= 
it 
1 
t, 
7 


Hales ſtates it, at the diſtance of no more than 
2 thouſandth part off an ineh. The. red ga- 


have Flieder if it had oy immediately ex- 
| E ſed to the open air; ſo that this membrane 
d. 


air upon the blood. In this caſe it is evident 


jectures. This experiment I repeated, with? 


4 


78. On Reſpiration, aud the Uſe of the d 


It may be oh cted to this hypotheſis, on 
cerning the uſe of the /blogd; that it never 
comes into actual contact with the air n the 
lungs, but is ſeparated. from it, though as Dr. 


bly, alſa ſwim.) 3p. a large quantity of ſerum, 
auido ka quite dienen he 


In orden do. augen the elfect of theſr cir- FT 
2 1 took. 4 large Aua of black 

ood, and put it into into a, bladde Feen 
with, a little ſerum, and tying, it very cloſe, 

ung it in A free eupefure to * nals 
in a quieſcent. tata; and the next day I found, 
up A examination, that all the; lower. ſurface 
of the. blood, which: had. been ſeparated from | 
the, 1 Bf hy. oe intervention of the 


| 9 9 animal membrane, ſuni- 
lar © 959 which, conſtitutes the veſicles of the | 
Lungs an at ee$.0 thick) and likewiſe, a 


le ſerum, b had ac 


been no impediment to. the aftion of the 


to obſerve, that the change of colour could 5 


not be owing to evaporation, as Mr. Cigna con- | 


On Repirain an 1 nb 5 


out previouſſy woiltesing che bladder, ahd : 
with tha'very Tame reſult. AV ige MG ha, 


þ 9 


: 1 * {3+ 103 30 222 big STEEN 1 1b. 


55 Leberdeh als ther whewT eut out a 2 
of the craſſamentum, and left the remainder in 
the veſſel with the ſerum, not only that pat 
of the ſurface which was expoſed to the nip, 
but that which was ſurrounded with ſtrum, and 
even covered with it to the depth of ſeveral 
inches, acquired the florid colour; ſo that 
this deep covering of ſerum, ' which muſt have 
effectually prevented all evaporation, was no 
more an impediment to the mutual action of 
the blood and the air, than the bladder had 
been. The ſerum of the blood; therefore, ap- 
pears to be as wonderfully adapted of er 5 
its purpoſe, of a vehicle for the red globules, 
as the red globules themſelves: for the Night 
covering of water, or ſaliva, effectually pre- 
vents the blood from acquiring its florid co- 
| Jour; and M. Cigna found cht chis was the 

caſe when it was covered wah oil. 


{ie (365 EEE Zn en 


85 That ac bey ds e | 
ſerum; and not the ſerum itſelf; that gives the 
florid colour eo the blood, is clearly aſcer- 
tained by the following experiment. I took 
two equal portions of black blood, and put 
them into equal eups, containing equal quanti- 


« T MPT ads” 


of half an inch. One of theſe cups a. 
in the open air, and the other being placed 
under an exhauſted receiver, the former pre- 
ently acquired a florid colour, while the other 
continued twelve hours as black as at firſt. 
Being taken out of the receiver, it ſtood all 


night in the open air without Wande red, . 


and continued black ever er n I n hs 
ſerum Was Fa off. 1 


og 36 more complecy ſatisfied wyſelf of the | 
Ae of the air upon the blood, through 
a body of ſerum, by the reverſe of this expe- 
riment. For I found that red blood became 
black through the depth of two inches of ſe- 
rum, when the veſſel containing it was expoſed 
to phlogiſticated air; ſo that the red globules 
of the blood both receive, and part with phlo- 
giſton by means of the air, notwithſtanding 
the interpoſition of a large body oh. the ag 
in which they array: float. 

It 901. not Fo hurt he: . Ae in all = 

caſes, that blood becomes black hy imbibing 
phlogiſton ab extra, - For if time be given for 
it, this change of colour may ariſe from inter- 
nal cauſes, as from putrefaction, even when, blood 
contains the leaſt phlogiſton poſſible. Totry this, 

I took a ſmall quantity of perfectly florid co- 
lored blood, and N i into a clean — 
„ 


WEISER — when! 9971 3 


that, (notwithſtanding it was by this means 
all communication with external 


cut off from 
ſubſtances; it became black in a fe days. 
And another quantity, kept in the ſame man- 


bereue ina Suat Plages He e black uc 
ſooner. 4 e ee 


-— * 


AR is . as nien Aud 
that 1 have tried, through which the air 
can;a&t, upon blood ; for black bigod became 
red when it was plunged in milk, in che ſame 
manner s if it hed been ichvered with forum. 
In urine; indeed. black blood becomes in- 
ſtantly red but this W eine tn 
of the air, chr ugh, the urine; q but to the ſaline 
nave ohhat Mags met Weiß baokd's e 
oz #547 53 aml7 Sinut e oils bit 

us fore; i muſt be; take ta dif- 
tinguiſh the floridneſs with which; ſome o de- 
tached parts of a quantity of blood) are tinged, 
from. that which penetrates the ſolid: parts of 
it. In ſaliva, and in water impregnated with 
alkaline. ſalt, fixed or volatile, and alſo in 
ſpirit of; wine, the extreme angles and edges 
of pieces of craſſamentum and ſmall detached 
parts, floating in thoſe liquors, will appear of 
a very florid red, while the compact maſs of 
continues dark. The florid colour iof 
dhe prominent and- detached you in theſe 


dts 


# 
« al a. 


a III. „ 1 caſes, 


# 


1 


© - 
f : 5 
© _— 


* 


% 


92 Ow Eee oy the „ of „% B, 


ſeems: t6 be the mere effect of the linute i- 
viſtom of iche paris of che oraſſamentum in the 
ſpuid in which thoſe parts float; when ac the 
fame time it has ne ich effect un P 

which! remein compact; nor has the — 
wer of acting onthe . the 
liquor. F | 45 0 * 


1 


bi Vhiatiinggined, hai fince black blood con- 
ins more r ere red bloed, that 
differen cewould have appeared in the Ar pro- 
_ duced from them, ; erher oy cory rf dif. | 
ſolved in Apirit of nitre, or dried and 
made into a paſte with that acid. But the dif 
ſerence Was too ſmall to be ſenſible to this kind _ 
of teſti For this purpoſe, however, 1 had 
ſome blood drawn from the vein of a ſheep, . 
and alſo took ſome that came firſt after killing 
de, as tho butchers uſualliy do, by dividing the 
carotid àrtery; but though 1 diſſolved the 
black part of the former, and the red part 
of the latter, in equal quantities of the ſame 
ſpirit of nitre, T found no ſenſible difference 
in the air that they yielded. The air chat 1 
got from them when f eried, and made into a 
| pate with ſpirit of nitre, was ke wiſr equal 
Jy indiſtinguiſhable. The quantity of air from 
this proceſs was very great, and was praduced 
arregularly, as I have obſerved it to havecbeen 
| when Faure 15 2 ſolution in * '6f oe | 
75 . 25 


the conſfi tation! Jor 


o 28 and the Us 705 the x fed 8 


without dryin See vol, I]. P. 1 


thi $ produce”) as fixed bir, and 
gifticated, except that 3 cane dle burned in it 


Half of 


ith A lambetif eee iede hident or, 


ever, rom this experiment, - Th Een 


moſt florid blood Cofftams Toh Beret quan- 


tity of phlogiſton ; ; för otherwiſe,” this nit 
g have Deen · dephlogiſ d. 

would have beep.« dephlogyl 2 Mg al 

ya contlude this pap er vid Stiel 


char 1 have degree 8 he 
i with reſpect iti ith 
property of beit 0 By the itifluchce of 
the air; ſome becoming. very ſoon of a light 


florid colour, and the ſtratum of this colqur 
ſoon growing very thick; whereas, in other 


caſes, the colour of the blacd, in the moſt fa- 
vourable circumſtances, has continued much 
darker, and the lighter colour has e p8- 
| netrated very far. . | 


5 7, 
Ik 


As the principal uſe of the blood feb to be 
derived from its power of receivingand diſcharg- 
ing phlogiſton, and the degree inwhich it poſſeſ- 


ſes this power is eaſily aſcertained by the eye, it 
might not, perhaps, be unworthy of being par- 


ticularly attended to by phyſicians. To eſti- 
mate the goodneſs of blood, acrording to this 


criterion, nothing is requiſite, but to obſerve 
the lightneſs of the colour, and the depth of 
r the 


ere pho. 


tear difference fy | 


3 —— 


. 


—— — — IOC EI I ELECT ER 


A 
» 


- * — * 7 . * 
25 . { \- £ * 
5 CIT 2, \ : . in {+ i 


$4 * 


84 On Reſpiration, and the 


* * > 
4 ' 
; 


| the light-c 
expoſed to the air fc 


but little a ffected 95 conn | 4s 
| ſeem, that. breathing a phrer air 
ſcribed with advantage. 


In general, the blood that I have been able : 
to procure, in the city has not been ſo * as 
1 have got in the country ; owing, 


ry 8 


- 
f perhaps to. the cattle having been — 
* 5 
| il 8 | 
* * 
$43.4. * 
6 oy 
i 
7 * ee 
. R 
0 £5 
— $ 
p "> 5 298 th 
% * a; * A 
- 
| 1 inn 4 
7 » , ; 3. 
T 2 15 3 * 
i 
FO. "4 . 
8 ae 
- * s Fl 1 
PS. 4 5... * 3 £ = * 4 
K „ if hat ae STi < ? 7 4 # Finn dd 1 * 4 r 
* þ : he „ 
: ; p 7 5 IG 
o * 1 
* 14 Stk fats F144 ; $57 f ns . . 
. 4 * 3 p * 1 4 
7 8 * 4 — by 14 „ 
Af L 
* 1 4 
57 N „r. j 
— 1 
* 83 $4 4 6 : 
4 * 4 gs 4M # 4 
} ; q 
- 1 5 
bu 
; % * * 
I 
* , * 5 
* *., ” 4 # * 7 4 3 
„„ E n 9s 5, | 
- , * „ . I, * p & + * 'S * 1 * 1 ; 
$ ” * 
1 x 17 . 5 4 * . 2 
7 Fx % > 4 #: 9 
* : % \ . 
* * 7 = 
, + , : 
F 7 4 2 7 A : 7 7 o 1 5 
* - * E y * 7 . 1 
* » 5 1 N 
1 5 - * 
1 1 + 11 1 % rr ; 5 # way * yy j 5 1 . EY 
4. 4% F + * $ ra 1 
« 4 » 2 + 4 4 Cant XI 
- * 2 x 
* 
5 . ; 1 p 
Fo% 19 1 # 1 i 0 4 : 
83 1 / FE 
; 8 4 N * 2 , ? * * * 
4 * ; * t 4 7 n a E 
; : _ (4 n 4 
* 7." 4 4 * 2 ? * *# * # % Ly 
z* : 1 3 ' b £ + {+ 7 
„ 8... 4 1 5 ; 4.8; : 
. * . 15 
/ * * * * 
* 4 1 : 
} g E : 
* 4 * © 4 + = 1 * * 7 q 
o N 4 1 * l 
$ F 44 £8 3 533 — 4 4 - 5 Fi 4 
0 4 


* — 1 1 2 
„ „ # 8 


555. en” 


» bo 
Ben . 
yt 5 . * 
«4 4 
. 


r 5 Fd wk 2 8 5 * + 5 . 8 EN - 3 8 ow 25 g 2 
qt + "7 5 2 en 2413 #4 
U — 4 tlic 1— $44 4 Wi ALS E217 79 Ni 


1 90 > 8 E 0 ; Fo ag 
Aantiüm 5. 7 13 E'T 1 * b 0 167 p 5 E kt 
3 Nit 204 30. lügt 275 to 1105 3447 
Nizza e s and Oltprninn 
ng to EET Air. : 
ao 5 1 nee, Dr 1 11 


I Tai: 9 * en 
ear de e 


To er 


1 

pro Ba Hi 5 Ve arge e 
Hi #n wotbig! ſtares of the: lun ngs Aud Ant Animal 
dern; Na have had“ various ſebewes for p #6: 
5 h x quantities, by'< cheap gere : 
505 na | 2 have tried 55 as 
fir, 1205 not, hoe "os delpalk; en Fund 
A perſon of 4 "haps pier” 119 5 1 6 


15 
trention 0 te es 
Je: 1 8t3 33s 2 
8 may 3 TOY 
«1b; EA ee HIT an 


5 Arie to ſoye the expenee af Hine mitre, 
. which is the mbſteofily, ingredient: im the co 
Poſition, I thought it might br 3 5 
gencrate the ſpiritrof nitre in the ſatue (proces 
withrrthe air itſdlf, by mixing oi of vitriol 
and fali petre along with the carl. ;ut ſpirit 


of mitre in this gtoctſs was ſet locſei in una 


denen e unit- 
n 


— 


86 een BH PA , 


- ing with the earth, and forming air. This 


inconvenien. may, eker, be re- 
medied by þ placing SPED h a manner, 
that the 8 of the 8 of nitre muſt he 


, Eeffarily p. Ciroogirf Ned „Kis feckBöke be 


WN Nee 


If the ex wayne par — in the Gio 


en ed e y 1 ws 


your were: Don more, cop! e i 4 
| haye done; Fay be 4 * 
this account, 89 ore. 0 ble in 

Ti 1 Fas kae chan the di: 


re ee 1 hots = 
CC TY 


= dephlogi cated ; air, , 


* "Willing;/ if poſſible, to 8 
refractoty nature 'of i d and other earths, 
rhich-Reld but firtle air by; -ſpiviti of windy] 
merh chat additioniofcrydenitre:might, 
pg ſtvem u, and thin, by this means, 
:they might .Bemore:eafily converted | into! air. 
But when mise pounded flint. and nitri ãm e- 
* maſa, amd, 
| N 


ceſſen;c:\ivhiout this Preparacion bnd ace 
make: triabobany. heran i e ein 
et ere 91M ted ee eee, 
I᷑ ds very pmbabig, -howeiver,! chat; if fiat 
Was finely po unded anch levigated. much more 
hig be converted into air in any preceſs 
thun L was able to male it yield in the coarſe 
powder that I made: of it : ſines the ſpirit of 
nitre would then haue mare ſurface to act up- 
on. It is een poſſible, that; this ſingle eir⸗ 
cumſtance may make almoſt the whale dif- 
ference: between thoſe refnactory earths as I 
have called them, and thoſe calces of metals 
which yield the moſt air for theſe are always 
in a ſoft powdery ſtate, ſo that 2 ſpirit af 


| ef diwile ſo refratory in this reſpedt, may, de, 
bat it forms itſelf into a gritty, which is in 

fact a bard, ſubſtance, on hich account it 1s 
fit for poliſhing glaſs, and other thing of the 
firmeſt texture; being, in reality, a very fine 
but: a voy: hard powders Bike SIDE: 


3 * In * to guard aint the hel 74 
the gun. barrel, in ſupplying phlogiſton 7 
materials for making pure air, und. by 


1. 


1 has 


DOT TY OS OT =p I OO 


3 4 1 * 
. .% N 5 - 

— — . ˙ Ee EE TING — > 
Z . 


| W ee, ee 


92 them with freſh" ſpirit of nitie; hich 1 
Aft 


ii eſpecially topards the end e ? 
got very: mall to ſlipimto:aã gun 
barrel; and. alſo mink: of che ſame dia- 


meter, cloſed ar:idhe> end, and: f different 


lengths thinking, that, if the materials for 
generating the air were put into them; though 
the. glaſs would, of courſe, be meltedꝭ and 


dieſtroyed, it would, at leaſt for that time, defend 
the eee within from the action of the hot 


But I found that this expedient had no 
effelt For either the glaſs was deſtroyed too 
ſoon, or the ſuperfluous ſpirit of nitre, when 
ir hall got beyond the boundary.of: the glaſs, 
ſtill diſfolved e iron, an aved Saw acy 


| ritzen 10 ee g * ty. tes ef 55 wy 


With this viewy pd and Arie ith a 


ban jer view to the Hu mentioned iin the pre- 
| at experiment, I. made the following. 


Which, on ſome acevuhrs;! may, be worth re. 
citing.” Mixing an equal quantity of pounded 
flint and pounded ſakpetre, and then moiften- 


erwards dried into à kind of hard paſte, I 
potinted it again, and putting it into 4 glaſs 


4 tube, clofed with a little clay, put it into the 
bottom of a gun-· barrel, filling it up with ſand . 


as uſual. From © theſe materials, Which in 


e were an ounce meaſure, with a red- 


led * * . ne phials with air, 


2 £55224 | 
f all 


e eee "rake ta 
| 72 8 The gefiduum of be 


as common air, 


byxishas-of che re was nitrous, which, myſt 
have dene from The iron, natwithſtagdiog,che 


eee 0 the-glals: ama} 2 4" daiw in 


eee eis Ki 1961 1b; 9.19 


4. Foncaceurate experiments on the. pre 
. duction of air of, all kinds, a glaſs veſſel is far 


preferable to a gun- barrel but I have, ſo 


times found. the: iproceſs; with a burning mis 5 : 
ror in quickGlees to anſwer better than even 


yeſſel. vith a ſand- heat. I once 


98 a. — green nitrous acid wich 
ſome ted - lead, which ithaut addition; gave 
little or no air, ant with:a-red-hot fand heat 


in a glaſa veſſel, I wes; not able to get any 


ing: ſufficient without 


Päng ebe affect of op gan we Fon when 


I put the fame: materials into a thin glaſs phial = 
with quickſilver, and applied the heat of . 


burning mirror, I got air in great plenty, one 
fifth fixed air, and the remainder highly de- 
phlogiſticatecl. I was ſurprized that the ſuper- 


fluous acid did not diſſolve the mercury, and 


deprave the air; but it ſeems that, in this caſe, 
5 am er Here * be e acid. 


Kits 1 FE 10} 0% 4 $44 « 2 in Vs 11 14 


5. Having 


W from it; the heat, as appeared, not be- 
melting the glaſs, and 


"PIES 


Io gj i 0 irie ddt 


1 mixed wird the ſame quantity of Fed-Tend, 


the more air F pfecùred and the more 
the watetials 16ſt im BvEfy- proces; 1 Was WII. 
Ang try” how fat this wool gb ; an ehe. 


3 tnixed the 1 


Spirit f 
nitre with the ſame rech lead, till I eduid not 


et it dry without the addition of heat, and 
this Pexpelled all the ai? chat it Voda yield; 
when, from weighing! 102. 1 dwrii9 Send 
Vas after it had got the ſpirit of nitie) it was | 
reduett — # 2rgrs; being carefuly raken 
out of che glaſs veſſel in which the proceſt 
was made: | Though the —— td 
be diy, or very nearly ſo, when they: were 
put into the glaſs veſſel, there came over in 
rh&diſtiflation a conſiderable quantity of fluid, 
qr 2p — nee of: nine, 2 as. 

* þ bo þ Her 52 $32.34 0 185 al Bi 145 

- In the-coutle of the precedi Expi 5 
an alſo upon other-occaſions, . obſerves chat - 
when ſtrong ſpirit of nitre was mixed-with red- 
lead (and the ſame is the caſe with moſt other 
kinds of earth with which ſpirit of nitre is ca- 
pable of uniting) the mixture was made with 
very great heat, and a copious exhalation of 
ſome fluid matter; and knowing the extreme 
volatility of the ſpirit of nitre, I had ſuſpected | 


that a conſiderable part of it was diſſipated in 


this mixture, But I ſoon found that while 


77 OE. "oy — oa „ ** 2 
es w 2 9 ” 
LO 8 * Y 4 * 
— A £ * 
4 - 
: i 4 
* 7h ” 
- 4 * 
vi * 
= ff : \ 


gr, Se. „ 


the by acid united with the earth, wich which 
5 0 have a ſtronger affirnity, the 8 
with which it had Befofe been uni. ö 
For when | coyered thiy  —.-- 
EY Witt a. feceiver,” and "chereby = "0 
collected the moi te that erhaled from it, it nin 
| Teer + to be little more than pure water. It 
is very pemble; However, of Mi Cönfiderable 
itity of iele of niere be uſed at one time, 
"the leich may de expelied by - 3 
che beat, dong With 5 Before it cou l! 
hee an opportunity of unitin with the earth. 
V ren ein Corrs . 22 W 53) oF. 
6.1 have fi ly dud that When the - 
Ron of dephlogiſticated ir is very e. 
it is ſurchargell viren gent quantity. of 5 
white podery matter. E Se celle a 
quantity of this ſabſtance; zbid found that rt 
continued in the form of a white poder; it LE 
made np efferruſdence fith'fpiritiof nitre, but IS: 
ſeemed to be in part, though not wholly, os; DT 
folved in it. To tee 25 1 15110 SHYOKTL SE) | 5 


Ti ; 
* 1 \ en 1 ; e . "uh * as 2 45, 4 De * 
& 'tf F "I a A 1 41 n F 4464 244i 3,554 „ F ? 


* 


| , « 
+24 110 „ . 3 . . 3 N . H 9 1 . n 
41. A £4 4d bit {8% $3 $434 oY » > 4 þ L138 TH: Sts ki: +8. 
* . e4 e oF 
} Wery „ e 248 2 Fr Pegs © FD peg 4 1 1 ” * 
I OC 1 131 < * 14 * / ry n + 


$8 £3 2 5 : x G , 2333. * F 3 | 
14 $4 we n La 4 2 1 1 a 1 ne 14 e 4 1 = 723 * - 8 
n ene Abd ee OT 21413 eee n 


3 x 2 144. 


0 1 ; * . 1 - p i . . a 7 
e 4 + 44 *, % ; » ws f „ 4 4 6/4 es WINES AISLE e 
411 94 125 4 19224 2 4 4 105 N 944 # & 40 44 „ Wwe r 


= * * * 
Ml 4 ; 2 . * , 3 1 1 L « * ay Fa " 
11 13 { EEE SS EA E ; 44 Terr: 5 LY } R 
Dina! e FU 55 „ 
, * 7 
- by o # + ws. 1 ; ; 
' „ N EY 2Þ, x1 4 4 
erte Gatte INT UW She 16-30% 2 


8 


4 | 7 b | | 'F | | 20S E C T 1 © N ; 
SY £7 * 3%, $ F , 1. * * - > 1 Pry * } 
wo ** ti EIN 44 . 4. Da AN . 
$5 io : 


+491) 83 K (4204 v » | $98 218 . 3 7 | Ds 3 
* th In us ER of, rr 


Sri F INE on Gommon Air. OY 
; in vil ts ent 8 f fa N N N 


of Tear, the injury done go gammon n 


2 


the ignition of inſlammable ſubſtances, i 


which. it is rendered unfit for eee, 


fected by. its receiving. an overchange gf ph: 


Lifton, . was, J think, ſufſicientiy aſcerta une 
: by the experiments of which an account was 
given in my ſirſt publication on cheſe ſubjeRs 3 
- great number of proceſles,; all of; them agree; 
ing in the, diſcharge. of phlogiſton, and lame = 
of them in nothing elſe, uniformly; producing 
the ſame effect which. is: to diminiſh tb bulk 
of air about-one-Fourth, and to leſſeh ita ſpecb 
e ere ee in ain deres 


+ * A 11 720 4155 4:74 220 41 28 of B51 Al 


| Among other things which produced, this 
effect upon air, I found white paint made with 


wWhite- lead and oil, with a mixture of oil of 

turpentine; and I then aſcribed the i injury done 
to-the air by this proceſs to the phlogiſton dif- 
charged from the calx of the lead. Bur at the 
time of my ſecond publication 1 bad found 
_ That paint made with red. lead, which contains 
. Iirtle-or no phlogiſton, and from which the 


b 


1 


pureſt ai air is Südl. had 1 Im pern | 
effect; which led me to conclude that it 10 
occaſioned by the oi which* entered into the 
compoſition of this paint, all oils contai 
much phlogiſton; and having, about the ſame 
time, found that a cement made with turpen- 
tine and bees-wax had the ſame pow 
5 juring common air, I was inclined to aſcribe 
it chiefly- to the kurpentine. T have now ob. 
ferved Rt oil. of 1 has the power 
not only of dimihiſhing, and Phlogiſticating, 
bue alſo of actually abſorbing a very great pro- 
fin © OO 
very remarkable. Long F 


75 f FEY 
IT 1 3 + $4 Pa. «# 


The fr rims ths 1 Set e 4 
to the influence of oil of turpentine” (which | | 
was about the ſame time that I was trying its 
effects upon nitrous air, and which 1 was led 
to do in conſequenc of obſerving. its re- 
markable power of decom pofipg that kind of > 
air) I found that when 1 placed à phial of oil 
of tyrpentine with its mouth'in a baſon of the 
fame, leaving about one fourth of the contents 
of the phial of common air, it was very con- 
ſiderably diminiſhed, and without any agita- 
tion, in a few hogrs, ſo that it extinguiſhed 
a candle. It had a till greater effect in 
diminiſhing dephlogifticated air. At another 
runs oil of eurpentine, applied in the lame 
5 | . 


in- 


manner, abi ws more As fourths of 1 
quantity Ry: air ; and ſome oil of tu 
pentine, 2 had before imbibed : a very large 
quantity of my air, alſo Ae Sint 


mon als. 7 PR a as a degree, 


9 


e been one, 1 1 ja; any e 
gil ſtic praceſs But that o 0 turpentine 
ab do much more than this, I had repeated 
Proof. I have ge memorandum of a quan- 
| ax of oil of. turpentine abſorbing five ſixths of 
a quantity of common air. The reſiduum in 
this experiment | Trane very particularly, 
apd found it Say „in all reſpects, the ſame | 
ing that I have d. nominated lin 
— 25 in did not make lime: water tur 
vas not affected by nitrous air, and ext r 
a candle. At the ſame time four fifths of a 
quantity of dep e air was abſorbed 
by the ſame 0 and Fe remainder ex- 
tingunned 2 C Ks god. doubt not, would 
ap if it had been mingd. * 
have deen e ee l 


1 Fo SL OR 
4b tid 44. 6 ns | - #34 . a 8 
; . 8 * 0 * 
7 L , 5 


fant hs I was wee. buzz | 
that 1 could not make a quantity of oil af _ 
| pentine abſorb more than one fourth of the 
common air to whichit-wesexpoſed;: Eten 8 
long timo, and agitation, had no more effuſt g 
and yet this was of the very fame! oil of tur . 


pentine that I: had made uſe of -before? But . 


reflecting upon the prodigious difference in 
theſe reſults, it occured to me that, poi 
the oil of t 


urpentine, in che ſtate in which 1 
firſt made uſe of it, might have been deptived 
of all air z and delve; perhaps, capable unt 
only ef imparting ptilogiſton to air, and chat: 
by of diminiſhing it in the uſual pro 
but alſo of imiibing the air in ſubſtance, it had, 


in the former caſe, produced both theſe effefts; 
whereas ha\ 


ving ſince that time been much | 
pofed to the open air, it had become ſaturated 
with it, and therefore could have no effect af 
imbibing, but oni) ly of phlogiſticatipg air, and 
conſequently of diminiſhing" ie one fourth, 


Which was the utmoſt extent of other r purely 8 


+ w.5 
4 EC a 9 2 25 * ads 


7 k * 4 


4 phlogiſtic proceſſes. | 8 
| ** "149 $9. 


In oder to ane this, Psd itn 


of the ſame oil of turpentine under the receiver = 
of an air 


Pump; and, exhauſting? it, preſently 
found that by diſcharged air in great plenty; 
and immediately after this- expoling quantity 
-of ce common Mir * in the manner mentioned 
0 5 above, 


dock out the corks ef three phials, two of 
ac cinnamon; and found that piecgs bf. reqebos | 


2 Tb n. on Wehen 


abe, I found that i in the ſphes! of TY 

one half of it wav.abſorbeds" Yori 0% 1-307 

15 11-57 no sd Sion dle vn a 
nin e to try / whether other g eſſential. ails 

| hithe: property of phlogiſticating common 

air as well as oil of turpentine, L carefully 


which contained oil of mint, and the other pil 


wood were. inſtantly extinguiſhed. in them all; 
o chat I was fully, ſatisfied that the air was 
phlogiſtic ated, without conveying i it into other 
pPhials through watef, which wee ans deen 2 
| mended wjch he loſs of bee 
2 575 +4; rs IG N n Eat It of; : 
„Being employed at the ſame x ime in — 
: 2 on cauſtic alkali, and other ſub- 
ſtances, £0, aſcertain their. effects on ſeveral 
kinds of air, I placed under the ſame receiver 
of the air - pump a quantity of oil; of turpentine, | 
of caufſtic altali, and of diſtilled water; 'T and 
found that they all. contained a 860d deal of 
air: and then, nearly filling equal phials with 
each of theſe fluids, and inverting them in 
baſons of the ſame, ſo: that equal quantities of 
common air were left in all the phials, expoſed _ 
to equal ſurfaces,;and equal quantities of the 


dee flujds x1 obſerved that the oil of tur. 

en immediately and vigorouſly, abſorbed 

ale * ſo that in 2 fey a it had —_ 
_ 


* 


— 


about one Half of 


5 ingredients i the that has an affinity . with 


perties in 


in fact, the ſame thing that produces both the 1 


| dinfinution of air by a phlogiſtic | proceſs, there 1 
is a real abſorption of one fourth part of th L 
And this is the more probable, as c Temain- 


I 
* 


125 "A 2 WET. | 
; | * 1 8 
_— Spin 


to it, wh 55 — 
i 51 e ſo = al 0% 


57 Wy 168190 aeg Ai . A. lt HAN OY i 


ey 


17 7 to A 48 be well word 5 ; das 5 P "_ | 
examine the power ok. all liquids, 3 and of ſolid . 


ſubſtandes too, both to  phloglticace, and. a 10 N 
properly to abſorb common ait, in order to af. SS TOY 
certain the cauſe of this very remarkable ä 


FO If the 5 


It Diohld 8 to veeffiard by 


the whole compound ſibſtatice'of Air. Tis . 
probable,” However, that, in all theſe. caſes, | 1 
5 whole maſs of air is hlogilticared ; at the. | 
ſame time that atly part of tis abſorbed. This, 
at leaſt, is the caſe both with Water, and oil of 
turpentine, which have theſe: powers; ; and ik 
is remarkable chat rhe latter has Böth the pro. 
equally ſtronget degree than 8 

former. It is probable, Rants that it 16, 


effects, and therefore that, in every compl . 05 


der is not heavier, but on the contrary ſpeci- ; 

fically lighter than before. Moreover, as it 

is certainly kanten that occaſions the dimi- 
Vor. III. H 1 or end nution | 


725 e i, „ 


T * The Influence vor: pe 


nution of air, and leſſens its ſpecific gray 
the fame principle may be the cauſe of 
ſorption alſo, by uniting with, its 0. with 
which it is known to have a remarkable affini- | 
ty. With this acid the phlogiſton will form 
what chymiſts, from analogy, will call a 11. 
trous ſulphur ; but then what becomes of this 
 Sylphur f This is a ſubject well worth. con- 
Leer and may not e by difficult to . 
e of vine, which en nitrous air in 
a manner ſimilar to the effect that oil of tur- 
pentine has upon it, affecis common air alſo in 
a ſimilar manner, and in both caſes alſo in a 
. much leſs degree, which favours the reaſoning | 
in the laſt paragraph. When I; agitated. a 
quantity of common air in ſpirit of wine, it 
© was not much injured, but was ſenſibly af. 
fected, as appeared by its not being quite ſo 
much diminiſhed by nitrous air, 8 * would . 
have been before, 7 j 


44 „ bs Ds 1 


5 Upon the e the I of pier Wo 
Wiles: to be very nearly the ſame with that of 
water upon common air, which is reducing i it 
to a certain ſtandard, by deprayving good air, 
5 and mending the bad, ſo as to bring both of 
them a little lower than the Randard of com- 
mon air. Accordingly 1 found that, when 


— 


7 


"a gh un, ne ; en Common 


agitated A quantity of common air, phlogiſti- 
cated with nitrous air, in ſpirit of wine, it was 
evidently mended, but not more than it would «©: 
have been by ER in water. - Nos 
Though a be 20 oil, 1 80 not find that os. 
it has any power of parting with its Phlogiſton . 1 
to common air, ſo as ſenſibly to injure it. 0 
2 phial half filled with water I put a ſmall | 
quantity of ether, and then inverted the phial — © 
in a baſon of water, ſo that the air within the 
phial was expoſed to the influence of the ether. 
Things being thus circumſtanced, 1 obſerved 
that, after ſome time, the air was diminiſhed + 
about one third; but being examined after it 
had continued a month in this ſituation, and 
all the ether had diſappeared, the air was not 
ſenſibly changed. It was diminiſhed as much 
as before by nitrous air, and was not in the 
leaft degree inflammable. The reaſon! of its 
apparent diminution could only be this, that 
the firſt effect of ether, as I obſerved a long 
time ago, is to double the bulk of any kind of 
air into which it is introduced; but that, in 
all theſe caſes, part of the increaſe always diſ- 1 
appears, probably by the abſorption of part of | 
the vapour of the ether diffuſed through it. 


70 e a 

1 7 = 1 9 > 5 1 f 

\ 2 "ET; IX, 1 7 1 * \ 
0 % i 


£4 * 28/13 3 3 d %\ 
„ | : 
- . 
* 


H2 SECTION. 


8 


W 8 
8 


1 
3 $ 
* " < TP FR Kg . 7 
5 5 ” 
- | - 1 3 
* . * 5 : py > 
N 7 1 5 7 n - 238 N e 
„ 3 85 : : * #” © 2 $ } 
. 1 = » 3 9 15 4 . * 
" * * * 5 1 
, A *, 8 8 2 . 1 91 * 
4 * „ „ "7 — a3 1 44 I Y # \ 7 : 5 5 1 73 
” : 1 * ; SO : g £2 
4 : a f - ä 3 ; . i ; a 
i « 4 : ! ; ; : . ee ag ; 
4 a : * N 4 N « w 8 I on ol 
7/7) ⁵ůͥü ̃ oe I co #47 4 fs 1 , a4; 
OE. a RYE LEE 7 . ' FEES „„ ; af, S$S#4 4 ; 
Py . * 


TR 1 | ; Ben's 
1 115 E. 0 ö * bg 0 * vw. 10017" 

. i d. % 
9 aden. brei rdatng to Com, 


- A. 0 9 »- + . = . 
7 * 5 bs 4 f 5 L, 5 8 > * % 1 „ *. 7 N * * * 
1. 5 =O 2-8 * * 1 . 1 


; FOR * * * 4A / 
% . c 


7. „ Of the Eier f gurt Ui Nerus: ani i 1.5 


Ipave abfernac that Gncki ag ſpirit of okay _ 
imparts phlogiſton to common air, and there- 
by injures it; but that when ſpirit ef nitre 
Contains little phlogiſton, it takes ſome from 

tte air, and contributes a little to mend i it, 

and that in a certain ſtate it will not produce 
any ſenſible effect upon it. This, in fact, it 
3 analogous to che effect on” water and | 

1 8 wes of wine * upon Wy ora loin. 


: 16149 255 4 

In 1 to ap the effect of hs ſame 

ſpirit of nitre on common and on dephlogiſti- 

cated air, I once, for about a fortnight, ex- 

7 poſed two half-ounce phials, nearly fled with |} 
the ſtrongeſt brown ſpirit of nitre, one of bem 

| to a quantity of common air, and the other t 

133 about an equal quantity of dephlogiſticated 5 

i air; and 1 obſerved that the air in each of 
theſe caſes was diminiſhed in about the ſame. 

proportion, and that the dephlogiſticated air 


Was eee injured. 7 ſurface of the | 


_ a b vs 
— — 
r 


3 — " 

\ B Ie, Oe 
— e — tas 
E 


_ : : 
2 oP : * p 


ſpirit of a nitre in each ber cab 
much lighter-coldured than before, ind the 
brown colour Mad, throughout, intirely difa 
peared; owing, dbb to its Haying : 8 parte 


ſomething remarkable, clouds of ſome hitiſh , 
matter, not much unlike flowers of ine, 


of — ons of ern le 


bal ee 5 


with its phlogiſton; and What 1 TR 


= on the ſurface of the ſpirit « of nitre, 
th the phials. The q antity, of acid 


Was fenſible dimitiſhed in both; and — 9 
fully 
loufed part of the acid in poll the S ith. 5 
found that they yielded nitrous'% 
the ſame proportion, Which was as Four to ne, 


poifthg' off the upper arid h olitewc 


air in nearly | | 


of what they had done before; whille”- the. 


ſtronger r part of the acid, at the bottomtt öf the 


phials, yielded nitrous alt im the ns: 
Had abi bree 


2. Of the” 4 Apitatio of- Air i and. ay | 


Bae found that all kinds — noxious het ; 


SALF oY * 


are purified, to a certain degree, by agitation 


in water; and conſidering that the greateſt 
part of the water to which the air of the at- 
moſphere is expoſed is ſalt- water, I was wil- 
ling to try whether, in this ſtate, it was better 


adapted to effect the purification of air; but 


I did not find that it was. At the ſame time 


; Falſo (ns a quantiey of noxious air in water 


Big 1 


8 2 Experiments Se. 


in which ſaltpetre had been diſſolved, but in 
both the caſes the effect ſeemed to be, upon 

the whole, the ſame with that of pure water; 
having in ſome caſes thought it to be a ge 4 
| more, and in others a little leſs. . . 


3. 4 the Ar confined i in the bollow es Ta cer- 


._ tain Plants. 


Having e 225 Rate of 9 air con- . 
fined? in the ladders of fiſhes, 1 had the curioſity 
to examine that which was confined i in certain 
hollow places in plants, where it has no viſible 
acceſs to the external air. For this purpoſe I 
tried the air contained in the pods of the Bad. 
der ſena, and alſo in the ſtalks of onions, but | 
did not find that in either of theſe. caſes; it 

| Was at all ſenſibly, different from the common 
air ; being diminiſhed v0 nitrous air * the 
ſame Norten. 8 


: 4 
6 

* % vr" 7 WF 
k * 


Tf Eh — 
4 x 0 5 ad 0 
« "| ; L De 
— 8 . 
. 5 9 
— j 3 
7 } 
* % 
" a 
1 bg a 
„ 1 14 225 
„ of : 
* ; 
T Tl 
24.19 ; x4 3 
"of? 4d LO 3 = 
s 5 5 55 x 
# 4 , & 
#5 28.4% - p 1 
SE I J £ 1 1 + 1 PM 3 8 4 ; X 
- . - * ” * - 1 
0 "1 0 5 5 F 
e „ rn ny ur” 5 WT? — £3 N #5 — EC 
1 3 ; pi * 4 4 947 7 PAS N 4 - © a2 $- e 
* * 4 * 2 4. An. 1 7 4 K * 1 | 
J ; | . 
- 4 5 e a . 7 I U 75 | 2 4h ; 
. „ r TO PIR 9 fe. 5 12 ; X AJ AV - 
4 24 9411 N 4.57 SY 4:4 „ „ . 15 * Fr 2 
* F # l < * 4 
1 * E s % 
4 $4 
4 „ : : TA v 
4 { # | 
3 


. i 10 5 e i 


o the Te „ 2 


yon of? Wares with Ni row 


* v 4 1 a 5 " #34 


tention to the ſubje& of nitrous acid, and n. 
trous air, appeared to me to be the moſt pro- 
miſing of any inquiries relating to the buſineſs 
of air: as they ſeem to have a nearer connec- 
tion with the moſt general and fundamental Fl 
principles in the conſtitution of nature, A 


Have more thi once obſerved chat! an at- IT 


conliderable part of the two preceding volumes 


of this work I employed upon it, and the 
reader will ſee that a ſtill greater proportion of 
this volume is appropriated to the ſame inveſ- 
_ tigation: and I hope he will think, with me, 
that it is not too much ; and allo that, though 
much has been done, muck more remains. ta 
be done, and that what we hitherto know of 
the ſubje& may furniſh a clue for farther and 
more e diſcoveries. „ 


+ 0 , wy 
1 . F 
5 4 * * 
4 
* 


1 order to Exhibit as diſtinct a view as. ; 
ean of what I have been able to do in this wy 
ſpe&, ſince the publication of my laſt volume, 
1 ſhall relate, as ſuccinctly as poſſible, the ſe-. 
veral new n that I have made, diſ- 


2 „„ N 


poſed under ſuch ds appear to me, den 1 


a view of the whole, to be the moſt convenient 


for the. eaſy underſtanding of them 4 deduc- 
ing, as they ſhall happen to offer themſelves, 


ſuch general concluſzang as. they "KD to au- 
thorize. 923 1 wy 


: : 15 
1 have 1 ry I; p. 1215 that water 
is capable of being impregnated with nitrous. ' 
: air, 4 well as with fixed air, that it imbibes 
about one tenth of its bulk of nitrous air, and 
that water thus impregnated is ſubject to make 
3 depoſit of what 1 ſuppoſed to be the eartin 
| of the metal. from which the nitrous air had 
been made, I have not, L own, been able by : 
any means, to ſatisfy myſelf in my farther, ; in, 
quiries into this ſubje&;z, 'but Ihave obſerved 
ſome other phenomena relating to this impreg· 
nation and depoſit, which, unintelligible as 
they are to myſelf, 1 ſhall fairly lay before mn 
| readers, that they may, Bk me ons of 12. amd | 
ticulty, if they, Ca... 0 


£ x - t P! ” 


In the beginning of the 17765 Law : 

a quantity bf diſtilled water with nitrous air 

Re rocured from þi/quth, and it happened to 
and ten days, or; a fortnight, in the phial in 


which theimpregnation Was. made, the ſpper⸗- 
fluous 1 nitrous air lying upon the ſurface of it Z 
Thev, mindful of che caution ſuggrted, by 


7 1 ”" B Mr 4 
* er i , a 4. 4. 7 
ft 8 * » * . x 4 ; ; 


* 
« 


I A 2 * OEM 
9 . I nd! * . Ia 2 FTE 
2 N 43. 7 5 8 5 n 
* 3 I'S: 2 IRE, by 
4 4A 
T's . a 
i : # 
, 
f 43% * 
* „ . 
. x * 
Wu. a 
#: ; 
. 
wm 4 
7 ” > 1 
7 * 
„ = 2 . 


, a * » * 2205 
r 
85 ans . 
* : 


= Mr; Bewly, not to admit the common alr wow * 
| | _ md, erer. air ehen any: ae. ec . „ 


; phi, in de aſtane: ane ed l 35 


| I. filled ir up wit — 
<1 E e ame ine bang had „ 
4 been inverted, ſo. that the nitrous: W 


n compoſed, owithe dutlide oß the Phil and e 1 


not within it. L have forgotten 


> KB Thad, no-expedtation of the:refule, till, 6bſerys 5 od 
| g it the dayfollowing;” I found that it hae 
rable quantity of very iubssse 
- worter, and that the water did not retain the 
= ical; 0 ee of atitlity not even turtle e 
"1 ing the juice of turnſole rod. 'Fhisexperia 
1 ment I have endeavoured to 1 ys R 


? 5 | "F643 bf , Tor 1 ? 5111 no! * . . 


1 Ab obe rime, in order to determine ether 5 
> he precipitate from water impregnited"withi = 2 
BH _ nitrous air was different according to the ein 
3 made uſe of in procuring the air, RS Es. 
2 nated: utes 999 — or nne, wir 2 TE 


iron, 1 an —— THANE - 


o 


1 caſes the water imbibed about one fixth rl e 


. 4 4 £ 2 * 
* ” 


of oo Fe * a 12. 
" 1 £ 'q *% e ; 4 1 - 3 
; HS, LY ; 7 , * 4 +8 u 1 a |; 


* 


== => > = 
33 "4 * _— 4 4a * 
— — a . 


oF 


i 


all —— ally: thertoloue pee by: 
was the ſame; viz. a dark brown.” The water 
alſo in them all was ſtill acid deb net, It hink. 

in o ; qo a cage as: ar-firſt. - ene ia hþ - 


bulk ef ths air; e ao dmprogilath 


was completed, I, as quickly as poſſible, — 1 
in the manner deſcribed in the laſt- mentioned 


experiment, filled all the phials with water 


from their re 


ſpective baſons. 


* ae euer 


* 3 * 4 . 
PAY N . . 9 
* 8 41% 115 


Imagining chat the difference Might 
upon the time that the ſuperfluous nitrous air 
had remained upon 
(during which time I had never obſerved any 


| depoſit to be made) I let ſeveral of theſe im. 
pregnations remain a fortnight, and ſome more: © 
than a month, before I inverted; the phials : 


But very little 
depoſjt was obſerved for a corfderable time, 
and the water in all the phials turned the juice 
of turnſole red;/ This impregnation was made 
on the 28th of May, and the depoſit having 
been made gradually, and as far as 1 could 
obſerve r the dey 8 it b in was | 


FRY 


the ſurface of the water 


but ſtill the depoſit was made as ſlowly as be- 


fore, and was always of a browniſh | colour. | Me 


1 ſome caſes ao ans ages ir Conlidera 6 


£ 4 
* a 
* 4 * 1 k 
. . By 8 
: „„ a 
... %%% XTC 
a A vw SETTE. be! ; 5 * pe 5 3 9 > — — $@ „ 4. : „ 
1 5 * Ll Y 1 f 4 ' Y 
5 8 * & 
 * 8 + as - b 5 ; 
HSA 5 ; 9 
* 0 f ö - 


4 3 
F 


BN a W * * 8 RE nada ov 5 = - : 15 1 1 
ST ION 8 7 3 l * *% N & *. 3 8 
e + 3 "oo x P 2 
5 * 1 z- 
a £ 73 5 * - 285 5 
5 * + ＋ 21 * 
. 


- 
. % 
i f * * 
LE - ö 7 \ A 
* * z « 2 4 ; 4 5 = £20 : 
| ENG 4 i 7 72 . * ” » ng 
1 * - 1 7 A 
| 9 5 g 1 — 0 : by bk . | ”- 
\ 4 * * 3 * * 1 ' 4 . * 2 Whos WY WO - 8 
3 \ 4 © Ws WE ag f 12 W /7 f 
61 2 * + 2 2 e cf * AF 
1 - * Y 4 # Y ; 


Yoni this water, or when I put it 
proves an exhauſted receiver, and thereby ex- 
= . from it all, — air that I cou 


wt r e ** * 3 
D 1 FFP 

9 » 4 y i 4 4 — f * 5 * * 1 
4 1 / 4 : 


1 a. large ee, of nitrous air, which I 1 
1 5 did by meapsjof common air, in a ſmall quan- 8 
acid, it made no more depoſit in a few days 1 
5 chan would have been made from water ſimply POS 
imgregnated with nitrous air. One phial of 5 1 
oF; chis water I put under an exhauſted receiver 
quantity of air was diſcharged f rom it, itmade © 
1 i ok t than the reſt. if 2 2 8 Tenet x "8% | v2 a 5 
| | © Imagining at [which —— ” EEE ug 
water 1 prevent the depo 5 © 
LE ; ing e, eſpecially as in the firſt . 
25 in which the depoſit was ſo ble, te 
water did not retain any ſen! — TAY ©, 
a little cauſtic alkali tothe imp 7 


Of thei 
but wy viſible effect followed: geln . To 


prevent all acidity: as much 28 poſſible, 1 did 
"Rene depend upon my addreſs in apply- 
he funnel, in the mater deſcribed; above, 
"ov let out the: ſuperfluous nitrous air in a 
trough: of thei ſame water that had been im- 
pꝛregnated with it, ſo that it was ĩmpoſſible for 
ab to be initha leaſt affected. by the deco po- 5 
fGition of it with the common air. But ſtill the 
f — was not at all different from what it had 


| Ly 15 1 1: Sine 9 ö 8 75 Ki. tia 
A Mr/Bowly a that that 
| acidity: of water impregnatetl wii nitrous: air 
Which is ſenfble to the: tafix, is: given to it by 


the decumpolſition vf the nitrous air in contact 


_ withiithe: impregnated; water; bu 
found, that a flight degree of acidity, not in- 


A esd ſendbis uo ch talteß but Uiſcoverable b) 


tte jvicttof turnſole, is adh communicate 
to water by its impregtatibn witk nitrous art: 
For if a phial be. filled Wich water kingec blue x; 
With the juice of turnſole, and then the nitrous - 
air be admitted to iti and agitated in it, in or- 
dkr to promote thefnprefutition; a change ef 
_ eblour will preferdly be pexteived in the Water! 
Bit rait-waref "ſo-inipregaared- (the ſuperfiu- 
ous din beings let but args ale 
£41677 5 ee een $39} £35 11.6 Abe e ere 


413 . 


«ob hade 


meren dee, bluse: 1 


2 N Fa BY; es 43 9 5643 1 wo Tam + 


- 59d eee 


bly — chang in i ——— : 
._ conſequence of its | ; 


and for-ſame time I always crpef 
tion of fixed air along with the nitrous,” from 
water ſo impregnated; but by uſing the fol. 


lowing precaution I diſcovered my miſtake. 


I carefully Pumped all the air out of a quanti- 
ty of rain-water, letting it ſtand twenty-four | 
hours in a very good vacuum, and then im- 


Fee it with nitrous air; when, immedi- 


ately g all that I could of it by che 
beat of eig water, I found no part of it 
fitted air, but all pure nitroys air, though not 
more than one fourth of the e —_ chad | 
been imbibed by WEE; 


. * 


45 


1 n 1 58 6270 given my render more 
fatisfaction with reſpect to this depoſit made by 
nitrous air; but though 1 have given more 
attention to it than perhaps to any other ſub- 
ject relating to air, I have not hitherto ſuc- 
cteded to my wiſh. Perhaps I may be more 
fortunate hereafter. I havelittle doybt, how- 
ever, bur that this precipitate conſiſts of the 
calx of the metal, by the diſſolution of which 
- Fe nitrous air is procured, and the white 


. „ 


* 


3 * 5 * 1 


ak 2 n eb 


1 


9 


- procured for 


4 ry * 
. - 7 : ; Fi . 


biſmuth may 
ariſe from a leſs portion of pblogiſton. 
ing to it than to the 
what I want is a method 
pitate at Pleaſure,” that 


mak ing the preci- 
a quantity might be 


* 


the proportion 


* A 13 4 7 * © . 
2 4 . is 5 7 * 4 % hy # N 1 's „ * 4 4 N 6 155 4 4 4% *. 
4. : 4 75 I 4 * & — « o- 4 4 4 pp 
- a ” 
of 1 * £ 4 
* 3 =» * % 7 +: be; 4 i 1 * * 4 * b 4 7 * * 
F.2 1 . & - . & -- \ 4 1 4 £ x * 7 5 
\ | 4 
* 


4 

bk: 2 4, * & - 5 F 
1 * 4. hs 79 255 * N . 4 4 « 4 F 1 ? 13 LET 8 5 1 8 
I 4 LE I YEPRTS, GCN. any | ee 0 5 IT 


; i . , ö a , ; 
0 F 33 3 
1 „ 4» * 4 # 1 2 5 * ; 8 a 4 £ „ w 
5 2 6 9 
4 ; y 7 3 NY 1 
|. 2 > „ 2 „ 1 1 * 1 * 4 pz <4 4 
. P 
z n 
- E „˖˙²§˙ ore ts 
* L 4 * . · 1 . . 
is b 
+ 1 
5 PT, 4 
4 4 ; * * ; % 
N * 
oe 7 1 
* 0 
; F _ i 
x A 2 4 „ * 1 * 
* fg = 2 ip : f * 5 * ' #5 4 F<, EIS, 
3 4 . . W FR * 4. 2 
, E F : 
* . 4 p + *% * 5 
i 4 * 6 
% 1 75 4 25 | * 8 
#945 - 4 ! 7 1 K 4 9 
45 1 0 |; Gong 4 * A 6 ; 1 Fs, 
+S 
A, - 
S1 4 * ; 4 * 
5 br 7 0 5 
# 4 1 0 
33 * p * od L F Ss, 4 4 8 


4 4 J 8 7 bs "| 05 5 < 
g r LET #5 Wn? 7 x 1 
; * 7 8 2 * 4 55-43% ww $4 He” 
ow 155 3 A 
* 5 : 
/ a . * hs 


J 22847 7 ; a0 A "nas 


2. 8 3 5 8 
daper ie Arx W my 
9 * 1 < 4 PPS”. + 4 3 abs A 
1 8 F : (91 4 *% ; : 9 1 FR TRE TO F 
N 5 th 14 vY wy Say ry. I. 3 "4 E . 0 
f ; Loh» $6545 wt 15. 44 7 5 FE * 4 - | me: 


1 | rrRovs air is 


3 
— why ſubſtances whicts 3 | 
1 gg thoſe by which lay boldof the phlo 8 
Spee There may be others wick 
ing by uniting with, RN 
" Ws enters 1 ie but of this 1 „ bo; 
-. WM the two former. 1 babe o F 
enough, and the e * ſcovery ren FFT 
ber not a ien wn, 


- 


of 
% 


7 au That water would imbibe a certain. portion 2 3 
of nitrous air, I diſcovered pretty early br 
; that oil would do i it, and eſpecially in ſuch a 
9 prodigious, quantity nd ſo. very rapidly, aas: 

& | * NOW. find they do,. not ſo. much as fuſs | = . 45 ; 


at the time of my laſt publication; and . 


the experiments will ſhew that the decompo- a ae 
£7 Ws ſition is effected by means of the affinity which 
Oils, and eſpecialiy the eſſential er known | : 
to have with the nitrous acid. . 
323 / 1 5 4 g ; 


1 


7 * 
4 ITS d 


„„ Jar | 
. of che ſame; and u = 
5 bs nig it with nitrou e | 
| - , fervedthat, without any agitation,” fl F 5 
| 3 ano f pe 1991 10 "Faſt ; that i in 1 
i | extinguiſhed da Giiidle, Si 
my or that to which nitrous air | 
Von filings and brite, k g agitation 4 ; 
| water, and other procelles, © . A 
D | ated nitrous air in dil of f 
5 Bs, "Jets « abſorbed A oi as fixed | 
©, Wifis abſorbed by water; 
N titrous air. that oil of ty 
zs vaſtly greater than the quantity of fixed air £ 
u ster can be madd{o receive,” ” 2 
85 a FE ABD) $44 N eli ER 11 2-4 "as 


5 0 What is the Emit in this caſe I cannot tell; "of 
doc chrewing away the refiduum, which could 


* 
; a * 
* 
. 
= 
* . 
Pd 
- 
a 
» 
+ * » p 1 
: * 
1 . 
7 - 
4 
1 A. 
; bY 
. * 
- 
l * 
FR 
* i K 
4 
2 2 
o 
» n 
* 
% 1 
— 
- / N 
rs E 
% * 


” 


at different times, eleyen times i 


x - a ? . 
* — 
* . 4 * * 
" 2 „ 5 8 1 p 
yy . ; bs 5 5 . ö 1 
„ * i e 's . 5 
* V 4 1 I 2 BS 1 . ; 

* * 1 91 ö 

8 * *; ** 1 ; * 4 , 1 £ * 7 * 

ky * * 


nerally a ak one OR of FO 1 
nog me as in the proceſs with iron filings/and 
binde) I made a quantity of this oil 7 2 


bulk of ni. 
trous air, and with very great . even at * 


lt i 15 not a ſo i us x the firſt. -. 


e proeny win of a Jight or Ye 


colour, and then had a e caſt, and | 


 theprogeſs part of. thi yer became of a et 
deep orange, and, ſeparating from the reſt, 
ſunk to the bottom of che veſſel. In fast, It ; 


was the nitrous acid that the oil of t x 


had extracted from the nitrous air; and it 
d probably have decompoſed more ni- 
tröbs air, till tbe whole of it had been con- 
verteU into this thick orange · coloured maſs; 
which is the ſame thing, as will be ſeen in its 
proper place, with his oil after it has Been 


Woh 


folly: impregnated with vitraus dae > el 2 $2 


 Lendeavoured to expel. air from the oll of 
turpentine which had imbibed ſuch a quantity 
of nitrous air, but though 1 applied. a conſi- 


Ae degree of beat, no air came from i 2 


Willing to know the laf fare to which the 
impregäation with nitrous air would bring oll 
of turpentine L put a {mall quantity of i it into a 
thin phial, ballancing it ſo that it would ſwim 

Vor. III. Rs 55 * | 


[] 


1 FS 5 of the Abſorption of Nitrous Air 


upright i in water, and then el it into 

a large jar of nitrous air ſtanding in water. It 
abſorbed, in all, two thirds of it; at firſt very 
ſlowly, but afterwards more rapidly ; ; the wa- 
ter riſing, more in one day than it had done in 
ſeveral days before, and the whole proceſs + 


Jafted-aweek ; after which part of the oil of 


rpentine was become orange-coloured and - 


thick, ſinking to the bottom of the phial, but 
the change of colour was made at the ſurface. 


After about ten days I took it out of this Jar, 


and put it into another jar of freſh nitrous air, 

when it began to abſorb the air very faſt, hav- 
ing imbibed about one fourth of it in one 5 
_ wilt; | 


Seeing no other appearance -than the cha ge 


| of the oil of turpentine into this dark; orange- 
coloured maſs, I at length diſcontinued the pro- 


ceſs, and expoſed the ſubſtance I had procured 
to the open air, when it became gradually | 


thicker, till, jn a month or fix weeks, it be- 
came almoſt as hard as glue. The inſide of 


the jar in which this experiment was made 


was nearly covered with ſmall ſpecks of the 


ſame'glutinous orange-coloured matter; the im- 
pregnated oil having, no doubt, been exhaled, 


and having ſettled on the ſides of the en 
an The more: e part bas eraporated. 


* 


8 
75 AED 
? L 3 
1 ; 1 = 3 33 
: | a 
, A 1 
« 
* £ 
* 


ty, Nitrous Air h oil, Ger. 5 40 1 113 
the reſt became n che conſiſtence above, men. | 
tioned... % : 


1 alſo made a Canes of FI of turpentine > 
1 imbibe nitrous acid from nitrous air, by ſatu- _ 
rating the common air in the phial in which it 
was contained. It preſently became very hot; 
was firſt green, and then of an orange- colour L 
and parts of it becoming very thick and wa 
tinous, ſunk to the bottom, exactly as the oil 5 
of turpentine which had imbibed the nitrous '\ 
air in the preceding proceſs, or the nitrous , 

vapour. N. B. After I had made ſome pro- 

greſs in this operation, it went on very rapidly. - 

For immediately after I had applied the blad-. 

der of nitrous air to the Phial, it ruſhed. into 

it, and all the nitrous air was decompoſed in 

a few ſeconds, In this circumſtance, alſo, 

there i is a remarkable reſemblance between the 

two proceſſes; the decompoſition of the ni: 
trous air in both caſes not having been effected . 
ſo rapidly at-the firſt, as ſome time afterwards, 


Ether has the fame. power of abſorbing obs 
trous air that oil of turpentine poſſeſſes. Hav- 
ing filled a phial with ether, and inverted it in 
a baſon of the ſame, I introduced a quantity We 
of nitrous air into it, in the ſame manner as 1 — 
hade done to the oil of turpentine 3. and pre- „ 
muy found * with a a . agitation, 55 


Nw 


z 


mee en 45 1 it Aion and 1 he ie 
I mainder n no nitrous p | 


Willing to ee the whole effect of boch 6 air 


upon ether, I introduced a ſmall quantity of ' 
it into 'a large jar of nitrous air, in the ſame 


manner as I had done with oil of turpentine 


in the above-mentioned experiment. For ſe- 


veral days air kept bubbling out at the bot- 
tom of the jar (the effect of ether on all kinds 
of air, as I have formerly obſerved, being to 
increaſe, and almoſt double the whole quanti- 
ty of it) but after this time the air in the jar 
began to be diminiſhed, and the water to riſe 
in it, the phial containing the ether always 
ſwimming on its ſurface. But at the end of 
the proceſs, which continued about three 
weeks, one third of the air in the jar remained. 


After this 1 perceived no alteration in its 


quantity : but, letting it remain a fortnight 


, I examined it, and found the ether 


very moch diminiſhed in quantity, though 
not changed in its appearance; but it did not 


evaporate on being expoſed to the open air as 


ether does. What was moſt remarkable was, that 


the nitrous air had loſt hardly any thing of i Its 


1 


* 


5 " peculiar property of diminiſhing' common air. 


But it may be ſuppoſed that there was not a 
quantity of ether ſufficient to produce any con- 
1 ge = ſo __ quantity of ni- 


4 | trous On 


5 Oils, | Giri of Him, . 1 uy. 


trous air 3, and the reaſon why what ena h 
of the ether, after this experiment, did not 

evaporate, might be, that the exhalation of the 
water within the jar hed mixed with It, and 


it very my * TT 


u likewiſe, inbibes 6 jtrous air, but 

not rapidly, perhaps about half as faſt as Wa- 
ter imbibes fixed air without agitation, which 8 
makes very lixtle difference in the caſe of oil on 
account of its viſcidity, and conſequentlyi its not 
being much divided by that operation. By 
lang ſtanding, a, quantity of olive: oil imbited J 
15 yo. whole of a en W of fai 8 


a N 
e 2 Fo. v1 AM; re: + 75 * dite 8 + 15 


This property of aint nitrous air, 
by Tizing upon its; acid, is nor peculiar. to oils, 
It i is likewiſe found in 7 altali, though not 


in the ſame degree, N that the pre: 
ceding oils ſeized upon the acid of nitrous air, 


and thereby decompoſed it, I imagined that 
alkalis, having the ſtrongeſt affinity Witl Acids, Te 
cauſtic, alkaline liquors,, fixed and "volatile, = 
| mult have the ſame eee . and the experiments 
975 ed my. conjectur e.. Having put a quantity 
nitrous air ts a phialof cauſtic ed alka 
immerſed in a baſon of the ſame, I obſerved that, | 
in the. ſpace oh. three. days, and without-ggl- 
: PH, 0 puck of i bad 555 ablarhed, 75 . 


13 


T 18 of the Hoke of Nitrous Air 


not more than one ſixth of the "quantiey/ re: 


mained, and after fix x days about one  iveelftſ : 


part of it only was left. 1 77 1 
An equal 8 of volatile Ala, in ſimi 
Jar circumſtances, imbibed, at the ſame time, 


but little of the nitrous air. But at another 


time, after waiting about a week, I obſerved 


that a 2 e of it had abſorbed about one 


third of à ſmall quantity of nitrous air that 


| had reſted Apo its ſurface, = 


At another time I obſerved that a quantity 
of fixed alkali abſorbed almoſt the Whole of 
about one fourth of its bulk of nitrous air; 


for the remainder could not be more than One i 


twentieth part, But when a phial was quite 


filled with nitrous air, and placed with its 


mouth in a baſon of the ſame fluid, the ab» 


ee on 705 lowly, - 


. C7 


o: 1 — - 
'1 


bulk of nitrous air, 1: obſerved that the colour 
of it was not in the leaſt ſenſibly changed; 


alſo it had no more effect upon iron han * 
had before” this proceſs,” 85 At TONY WT? $4] 46 


en triert 


cite Alkali had no kenllble fig either 
d. common or inflaymable' air, though only 


i a ſmall 


When, by means of Wen 1 hag whats a 
a quantity of fixed cauſtic. alkali imbibe its 


a tall 0 quantity o ef theſe kinds 5 eit was Foun 
in contact . a. W Af of this Maur; 


abouf geek 5 + halts 1 
* 9 3 e * * ves Din! a 
$ Wy „ 


At the 5 time chat 1 firſt EP nitrous 
air to. oil of turpentine, I, in the, ſame man- 
ner, brought i it into. contact with ſpirit of win 3 


and at that time the abſorption, without agi-. 


2 
P ' 
— 
3 


z 


tation, ſeemed. to be al moſt ag conſiderable as = 


that with the oil of turpentine. Bpt though 
this fluid imbibed the nitrous air very faſt at 


the firſt, it was ſoon. faturated, which is 9 


the caſe with oil of turpentine. By repeating 


the proceſs ſeyeral times, I made a quantity of 
ſpirit of wine imbibe its bulk of nitrous air. 


But after this it received more air with great 
difficulty ; and though I did not urge it to 


the utmoſt, I do not think that it would have 
taken much more. No change was produced | 


in the appearance of the ſpirit of wine, it be- 
ing as tranſparent as at firſt ; and, what I 
thought a little remarkable, it did not affect 
the juice of turnſole in any other manner than 


ſpirit of wine always does. The application 
of beat to the ſpirit of wine thus impregnated 5 


did not expel any air from it, any more than 


it had done from the oil of pen jmpreg- 


1 in the ſame 3 


| A ap, 0 
7 0 « 


4 
— 1 * ve” Worry 2 


a 1 
ey es "= i ts In 
* 91 * , 1 x 4 4 5 
$ a »- * * : o Le: d 3 


* 


air by ſpirit of wine and 
I filled two cylindrical glaſs veſſels, mitte dhe 
in length, one with oil of, turpentine, and the 
other with. ſpirit of wine, inverting them in 
s of the ſame.” Then, 05 e ein _ 
ith, ni- 


baſon 


qual 1 filled them both com 
trous air, and obſeryi 


and it never advanced a 


FO 
* 
ES 
4 : + 
*. 
» 


* 
1 4 1 
* 
1 
4 . 
+ 
© 6, 
7 ro 
e 2 
— 
W's 
3 * 
* — 
* 
„ 
# 
- % 
Py i 
1 


o 


= 
* 
x . 
„ 
n * 
7 
+ 
2 Ry 
; 1 
” 
„ at 
Pp 
I 
Aa 
2 "a 
1 
. 
* 
id Fl 1 2 
5 4 1 0 
* 1 3. * 
8 4 4 
* 
* 
*z 
# 
0 
5 
» 
4 
% 
* 
- 
* 
. 
t 


Pa 


* 
£ 
I 
: 
« 
* 
” 
* 
| 
+ 
- 
s, 
45 
7 
1. 
OY 
** „ © 
Py 
— 


1. 


* * 4 ** Ty hi 5 F Ss 2 1 
4 bd * * 
44 1 445 3 
.* * 
z 2 ; ; n * - < 
+ 4 $ KT * "4 4 4 b 4 1 
J 4 3 4 
a 
? * 4 W * 9 * hy 2 
k * * A . LES. ES 3% 
# 4.7 . —— * # 2 
« ” 4g 
5 „  ot)-44. 4. $8 WR 
4 « * 1 5 5 
i g 7 * „ if 4 a 2 % 
5 * 
> 26S * 
4 * — 1 OY - my. AS » 2 - F. N 
*« .. FR of. "as -< 2 iS 4 8 wa C + . 
* ; % 3 
Ä 4 
o « * * . 's at #4 + 113 | / 
x... . Wha » a 
R 1 e 8 4 * * 1 
F 
* 7 * 1 A 
= 55 b F „„ Hoke, b) i 
4 {7 * 4 + * K we * —— 
8 * 3 
\ þ 
/ 3 3m S Fc 7 * 
' 4 * 4 0 3 8 RE 4 
* | * 
«af F 1 whe * - , 
80 1 K n ** % Si 
2 £ 8 + 4 ; * 5). 
9 
1 En 
8 8 o _ " s 4. 3 * 
Fi ? 1 47 1 — n f 
„ H# # #. ® * „ if »* * * 3 x = 
* Y . 
F 7 * % £ 1 1 yy OY 
1 5 — '# 4 $ 
7 ＋ 4 
24 8 * v 
. 4 e 5 74 q, © 7 "; $ . IF f . * 
z . A we £48 S a6 i” N. N 4 5 + 
* — 
„ * — . FR 8 0 
0 i f j > 
be 25 43 J at A * * * NW. A Sf 
— « x # 
* 1 * 2 101 ; T7 ©X% 
- 3 ; 5, ; * 
„ 1 E 4 „ l N wy 
. 2 1 
FT ? 
« * | * 
E * £ » * 4 
1 4 904 $54 % 172 1 
„ 1 : L S#4.3 44433 4 £ 
. + * . 
5 a 1 3 af us > 4 i 
n 1 "4 Ft 4 5 * * * 1 
e 141 4 19th 
/ 1 
? — * 
8 : 4 
* 
* ' 
* . 
2 
* 
£ * 


pletely w 


1 


that in leſs than 4 d 
the oil of turpentine had abſorbed three fourths 
ol its air, while the ſpirit of wine had not riſen 
in the jar more than three 1 of an inch, f. 


n 3 * 4 V 9 - ets 
wy „n. . AE eb. 9 4 9 Wd N 
8 JE 0 w; ĩ + n 5 f F L _ 
JC >; * 3 e f 5* 17 5 
1 N : 34 : * % * + # 
1 | Cafe 1 
a 22 * ; . ; # x 
7% 73 * - i 
> 5 5 >, 5 28 4 4 2; 82 
2 5 is : 
4 e 2 . 
N — 
P 0 ; 
* 3 * * 7 
* ! { 25 = N I 
* n 3 3 „ 
* 
* 
* * 2 - | 
6 . * Pt "WF by &*5, 25 
* N | NN 57 +l ATh © 
* 


FS 2 4 þ : 4 \ N gn * 2 * * 14 0 1 5 $ 1 ab : | — 
24% 1 4459" 77 ( r 2417 Jr 4 1 5 eee 


85 SE C. 1 4” 0 Je 1 


„ 3. - tout An h Acts Erase 188 7 
7.36112 inen 5 9 4K 
ſs ale air is Kable 60 dee 
any ſubſkance that has à pear" affinity either 
With its phlogiſton, or wilf any ether ef ies. 
conſtituent partz, it was naturab to think f 
1 trying the effekt of the ſo Eta acide; which aww, © 
e Fug have i confiderabſe Huy inis 7 al 
Accordingly, abo the ſame me 
Sh 7 made the e periments deſcribed in ,§ 
laſt ſection, I conveyetl a quantity of nitrous air 15 
into phials previouſly filled wier the vitriolic, | 
nitrous and marine acids; and ir geen ape 
peared lit all of hem got ph ſtor from 
this air; but the quantity of it w 76h the ni. 
ttous acid} decompoſed; the quithnels/ of che | 
proceſs, and the effect of it upoir the nitrous. 
acid itſelf, were appearanees chat I viewed 
With aſtoniſhment, having ad no expectation , 
of any ſuch irfult;” and Rveral' gwod ehywhnn | 
5 of my acquaintance have enpreſſed no len 
ſürprlze at them than myſelf; though theſe: = 5 
7 facts will appear leſs extraordinary, Nhen it = : 
| be, very ſtrong is the affinity” ſe? $411 
tuen this acid and phlogiſton. This, how. 
ever, 3 


2 


aa | Of the Phenomena ning 


ever, is perhaps a more evident proof of the 
peculiar ſtrengrh of this affinity than any other ; 
fact that CIR. has im ie. | 


Avi ng; im all the other caſes, e | 
to agitate this ſpecies of, air in the fluids which 
I expected to abſorb it; the moment that 1 
introduced this air to the nittous acid, I was, 
as uſual, beginning to agitate it; but with the 
leaſt motion the abſorption was almoſt inſtan- 
taneous, being nearly as quick as the abſorp- 
tion of acid or We air . en and Nag 
: une of ni ir 


5 roapprarance abſorb almoſt excets belief. 

W ne" * e en FA very rapid, 1 ha | 
no occaſion. to introduce the air into phials 
previouſly filled with. nitrous acid, in ther man-. 
ner in which. I had done with reſpect to other. 5 
fluids, but only filled the phials with nitrous. 
air, and covering the months. of them witk 
my finger, placed them inverted in a baſon of 
the acid, when the abſorption, would. inſtantly, | 
commence, and the fluid, without any agita-. 
tion, would riſe gradually and viſib Yo. till che 
greateſt part of the air diſappeared. | Making 
the experiments. in this manner, 15 obſerved 
: ches ene part of the acid, on. which the 
Kwon Qed i ff :ofti: 301 q Pn 1 $398. 05 nitrous ; 


70 7 


avs | 


the be Hip 7, 


Mich a kette CRIT firſt of” 4 0 E 0 
| orange, and by! of a green colour. i U 


2 In order to obſetve the fall tea of FIR 
air on a given quantity of ſtrong! nitrous acid, 
1 filled a ſmall phial with it, and then intro. : 
duced it through the water into a large jar pre- 
viouſly filled with nitrous. air, and ſupported 
the pia! in ſuch a manner, as that the water 
- could never riſe ſo high as to get into it. In 
theſe circumſtances, the ſurface of the liquor; 
which was at firſt of a pale yellow, preſently | 
aſſumed a deep orange-colour, and the quan- SE 
tity of air abſorbed was indeed very great. 
I was ſo, much ſtruck with this experiment, 
that I repeated it very often; and the follow- 
ing is a diſtinct recital of all the remarkable 
appearances attending one of them, which . 
ſelect from the reſt, as I noted them more 
| e than i in any other ate of che 1 * 
8 _ Having filled. a ola containing exaftly 
the Ae of Four pay wy abs of din 


fled it Ty 15850 air; 5 and a as £1 was 55 
. 1 kept mating in e i 2 1 bt 


2117 


) 


aki hs an 5 
aſſumed a deep e Fog 1 
A 20 br 30 ounce meaſures of ait were 
abſorbed, it begin to be ſenſibly deen at the 
top ; and this green kept deſcending lower 
and lower, till it ! the. Daum of the 
Phbial. Towards the end of the proceſs, the 
eyaporation: of the acid was perceived to 1 
very great; and when I took it out, the quan- 
tity was found to have been diminiſpechexactiy | 
ane. Half: or here remained Ho more than 
the quantity of two penny-weights of water, | 
Alfa, it hap become, by means of. this. proceſs 
and the evaporation, together, . 7 
Weak, 2 and 55 rather Hue may. RO. dg 


<4 ve 43 


* The pbial of Fir of nitre in his. experi- 
ment was ſupported by an iron wire, rifing 
from a flat. Piece c of braſs; and having a at one 
time filled the receiver quite full of 14 5 
air, ſo as to leave the whole ſtand quite bare, 

I obſerved that great quantities of air iſſued 
from them, "the moiſture on their ſurface 
rendering this effect very app Parent. This muſt 
have been an additional quantity, of nitrous 


air, produced bj the. .nitrous va apour which had 


7 


| been exhaled from the Phiah or — in 


ern 88 2 * E en " 2 FR 
£ PERS os Meh ran EE * * ag AE 
1 e Noh. Fs BN wt ARE £98 
. A 7 FRE WL : ? TIT 
* 4 25 3 1 J 
- . 1 VN 8 I N 
e : x £ 5 8 
2 a 2 F : 3 
> 8 5 4 N = 4 
5 1 2. 5 2 $ 2 2941 
7 —— 4 - 84 
” * - : : 
* : 2%, 
ES \ 
. * 


= t mp. dn e 1 and mul ſt 
Wn Do conſidered ax Having beth abſorbed b XG 
4 acid in the phial, be des that which I threw 
into it. Ho much was the amount of this 
additional quantity of nittous air,, decompoſed 
by the acid in the phial, T'cannot .certaink & 
tell; but ſhould gueſs, from the circum- 
ſtances, that it could not be leſs than twenty 
ounce meaſutes; which, added to the 130 5 
Above mentioned, makes the Whole quantity 
abſorbed to have been 1 0 Ounce meaſures. 
Beſides, I withdrew the phial before the ns p- 
tion had quite « ceaſeddl. . RES: 


52 - "2 178. 
i. 0. 4 „ 4 5 


At eiher tinte 1 Was dctermin od that 2 

nitrous acid ſhould continue in nitrous air gl 1 

it could not poſſibly abſorb any more of it. „ 
- in order to obſerye what the Ae. itſelf would „„ 

: become after being fully ſaturated with phlo- 

giſton in this manner, and when it had ar the 


ſamegime exhaled as much as it could of its 
own acid in thoſe circumſtances, The conſe- 
quence was, that, in four or five days, when 
the proceſs terminated, 'the acid. Was become 5," 


— 
> 4 


pf a very light blue colour, and, as in the 1 
5 former caſe, Was reduced to half its dimen- 
Fiuons; ſo chat che evaporation of the acid in 


this confined fituation ceaſes before it becomes 
quite tranſparent, as it does by long expoſure 3 
o the open air, though it i is very poſſible, taat 

a much 1 


— 
F * 
| iS 


4 


© 2d 4 o 


a much larger continuance, even in theſe Cir | 


"FIGS, would have the Tang effect. 3 A 


The eee cdperiments. were 


des with the ſtrongeſt yelloy ſpirit of nitre, 
| which perhaps contains the moſt acid with the 


leaſt phlogiſton poſſible, | When expoſed. to 
the nitrous air a quantity of Hue ſpirit of nitre, 
the air was abſorbed, but by no means in ſo 
great a quantity as by the other acid; and the 
furface of this acid became of a deeper blue 
in theſe circumſtances. Had it been conti- 
nued longer, it would, I ſuppoſe, have returned 
to a lighter blue by the evaporation of its acid; 

in which ſtate it would have loſt irs power of 
attracting phlogiſton from the nitrous air, as 
in the laſt· mentioned experiment. The nitrous 
air which had been expoſed to this blue ſpirit 
of nitre was diminiſhed a little by es e 


air. 


Having oblrved the change that 1 
Place i in nitrous air by means of ſpirit of nitre, - 
I was defirous of knowing whether the ſpirit 
of nitre in which it was agitated acquired or loft 


ſtrength ; when I foon found that, in conſe- 


quence. of getting more phlogiſton, its power 
of diſſolving metals was diminiſhed, though it 


will be ſeen that the acid muſt have been 


weakened 


* | 

2 — %.” 4 1 $2, I. — 

*% $ ©: 8 7 * 
JS e 


i . 
* n 
6 


ment. a ff 


In ankand to effect my 3 3 15 firſt filled 


| 4 he with the nitrous acid, r was very 
pom and of a pale yellow colour; and 
placing it inverted in a baſon of the ſame, 1 


introduced to it, by means of a bladder, a 


quantity of nitrous air; and when the acid 
had abſorbed as much as it could of rhis, 4 
threw out the reſiduum of phlogiſticated air, 
and filling it up again with ſpirit of nitre from 
the ſame. Es” 1 wr it ith more ni- 


trous air. 705 


17 his 1 ee to * for: a r 
time, and obſerved that by the proceſs the acid 
became very brown, and ſmoking ; in conſe- 
quence, no doubt, of having acquired: phlo- 
giſton from the nitrous air. In diſſolving 
copper with this acid, immediately after the 
proceſs, I found that it was become weaker 
in the proportion of 5* to 7. It muſt be ob- 
ſerved, however, that the evaporation during 
the proceſs (though I made it as expeditiouſly 
as I poffibly could) muſt have weakened the 
acid a little, and alſo the end of a wet glaſs 


as I could) being dipped into it every time 


— 
7 
7 * * " 
* a ” 
- * 4 1 7 
229 N < — 
* 
7 4 4 
> N # 
F, 4 


. . 


weakened a lil in the courſe : of cn « 


tube (though I never failed to wipe it as well 


& 


4har 1 eres it with mene an, ads 
diluted it a little. - 46,5508 


- Obſerving 4berromdineſs with THY \pitrovs 


acid cont” \nitrous air, by depriving it 


of its phlogiſton, I had the curioſity to try how 
far the agitation of a quantity of this air in 


ſttrong ſpirit of nitre would depurate it; and 
it was not without ſurprize that I 'foynd chat, 
when this proceſs had continued but a very 
ſhort time, the air had become ſo far pure; by 


the loſs of its phlogiſton, that two meaſures of it 


and one of freſh nitrous air occupied the ſpate 
of 24 meaſures. I then tried the effect of this 
proceſs upon air phlogiſticated by nitrous air, 
and found that this alſo was AI Aga im- 
Raney by this means. 


7 
\ 


40 e cho air/way "= 88 5 - 
ing ſo pure as to be fit for reſpiration but 
that.any kind of air-ſhould:be redaged by this 

proceſs to a ſtate that is at een en. | 

Feetly phlogiſticated, will appeariext! 
when it is conſidered, that, namwichſtanding 
ehe affinity there is between this axid and phlo- 

Hilton, yet that the vapour of it nitverafails ao 
impart Phlogiſton to common air, lol as tode- 
prave it conſiderahly. In ſeueral cafes; I hau 
-obſerved that common air thus ex poſad td the 

influence of nitrous vapour has become per- 
. | fectly 


10 


ſalt, upon nitrous air is by no means ſo re. 


C 7 
* 4 — 2 of dy. bs 120 
ERS * 22 * 3 
No” 5 od 2, 266% £ Oi 
5 8 N 
” ffs 55 n 
. * 


. * ae ot 2 8 3 
* 5 : * N oF 
* F. 5 2 # Ss 
$305 of, * : 
- 5 4 _- * 
* P * 


Ha 


— 


— FNitrou r ly 4 


fl - 
2 


prong philogiſticated in a very hort ſpace f A 
It ſhould ſeem that the nitrous acid, - 
— n with water, has a ſtronger af- - „ 


finity with phlogiſton than it retains in the form _— 
cn" _— wo waere Wow ws 2900 
TOW 4 SRI 15 . 5 
"eine effec of vitt ah + ad: bir „ 1 


— 


markable as the effect of the nitrous acid upon 
it ; but it is ſufficiently evident that both theſe 
mineral acids do really decompoſe this ait in 
Faru and the impregnation they receive from 1 
og un gr ce 1 it is worth notice. W 


0 of wir imbibes elbe a8 i „ — 1 
trous air as water can do, and requires about — 
the ſame degree of agitation, or rather mote, - 
to effect it. Two thirds of the quantity of the „ 
air admitted to about four times as much 2 
the acid was imbibed, and the oil of * „ 
which was before quite eee amen , 
 beainiful Eng: in een NBD ele 9 
A lig e: 20 bes 
Spirit of ſalt 8 nitrous 4 very nowly, EE. 
and in a ſmall quantity; but by this ſmall im- 5 he * 
pregnation, from being of a light ſtraw colour, _ ä 
it became of a beautiful ſky-blue, very viſible N : > 0 | 
when held up to the light. The Juantit ß "0 
abſorbed was about one tweritieth f iN M 4 2 
bulk. and one third of the due ir eiployell ä 
1 III. | K | Jy . e 5 N 


* of * 


U 
* 
oy 


OF DOC ers. a 


4 [ 
2 4 
* | 2 * 1 ; 1 ; 
- W gx." Cox, Bat $8 , 4 
130 n 


in the experiment. In oider” to avail what 
proportion of nitrous air a quantity of ſpirit 
of ſalt would abſorb with long Banding, I ſuf- 
fered them to continue in contact in one caſe 
about two months, and after that time about 
two thirds of the air, which was originally 
about one fourth of the bulk of acid, was im- 
bibed; and 1 imagine that with more time, 
an more of the air will diſappear. #79) 9 go 


Nitrous! air was readily abſorbed Miele) 21 


tation by water impregnated both with vitriolic 


acid air and fluor acid air. Each took more 
than its bulk, and not more than one twen- 
tieth part of the nitrous air remained unab- 
ſorbed. How much more would have been 
abſorbed I did not try. No change of colour 
vas produced by the proceſs. N. B. Agi- 
tation only ſet looſe the vapour of theſe acid 


| liquors, and thereby increaſed the apparent 


bulk of the air. Theſe two kinds of acid air 

imbibing nitrous air in the ſame manner is an 
73 8 for e W e pou aer 
; "Path bas: al FOES the vette 

— vegetable acid with which I made thè experi- 
ments deſcribed in my ſecond volume, ab- 
os nitrous air conſiderably faſter. than wa- 


Ol hel acid 8 8 the former 


47 fo 7 * 6 * * 1 


= 
4 
% 
4 
1 
f 
4 
4 
\ 
; X 
þ 
* 2 
79 
7 
4: * 
Fl 
; 
5 
: 
ul 
F 
7 
4 
* * 
' 
. 
E 
* 
” 1 
x 
7 
* 
7 
4 
Fi 1 80 
4 
5 » 
' 
x 
Y 
x 
x 
F 
* 1 
£ 
\ 
- 
\ 
F 
0 


its tranſpareney; for though, during the agita - 
tion it ſuddenly became of a turbid white, that 
change took place on accidental admiſſion 


of a bubble or two of common air, though 
I do not underſtand how this circumſtance. 
could entrated 


vegetab acid Azad. a dark purple. in conſe- 
quence of this impregnation, very much re- 
ſembling the oil of vitriol after the ſame pro- 


- J «4 F g 4 D 
1 5 * 4 x Pu %y * 25 1 „ 7 q * 
& 1 * $ 
4 9 2, a ng 
£ 4 [ a * .* £ 5 N k 8 . 3 5 
2 . 4 1 5 P . 
5 4 rp OS « ” > þ1 7 wh, & * 8 5 85 ＋ 9 1 Ie 
1 * % 
* 7 1 
* * 4 
* 2 "hs * » 1 T's 
y . - 
* * 4 ! "WF. 5 1 + " S.- $4 
5 bs "4 Fi 3 *. 4 * 5 8 . 2 * 1 1 = * PA N Ss 
1 5 y IE - + * oe mls # ee ES 
. 
* 
's p 2 } . 
af 5:5 L be 2 9 my v4 5 ? * ; * — 9 1 0 8 * * 2 s K 
1 ; ; 12 4 1 8 CN { i k oh 9 
S * 4 * K L s * * . ** 5 at * 4 # 1 2 5 3 
. * 
F 4 x 4 " * 5 
F : . 
+ * 4 7 5 * Py » ? 7 4 
* j 8 5 3 * s z 4 * 
E * * 
/ | * 
U 4 
* p + : N 
4 * 4 y * * " * * 3 2 * 5 * * FO, 3 x 
5 5 Sa . # F 
#7 » at iy vs 8 . F 8 1 * 
x 
CT, 5 7 * ”% ma va 
1 1 + 34 8 k x 2 t "4 r * 
8 2 N ” y { 
* , LH * ' 8 * 1 * 8 : 
"5 . * — ' 
FE * 4 4 / : 
wa 85 „ 3 *% * * DE. * Þ k * op F $ 7 a : K 1 
* . 7 7 * 4 
5 * „ e 3 75 * % [ [1 > : mY # 8 
f & 
t * 
. o 
2 9 2 » * ; 
$ i « 5 7 * — 4 * 9 1 1 
1 A 5 73 1 1 14 I 45 * * * - 2 a * 1.8 F . 
1 * . . ” * wy & % \ AF — 
x 
i 
. 9 * 2 ; 
1 1 4 1 ** © 2 * 
W TY EY i | s © 25h 
. 5 1 * is * _ 0 
- ** - 
32 : "4 % N * #4 
7a: 4 3 2? +? iff 4 2 N Z - 2 8 * 
* J 1 * — * & $ > he 28'S E's 
EC 4 * 4 Is 1 * * * 41 * 
1 * M * » f: N F * Y * 7 
5 * * N i * % $ 1 i 1 * e — * * 
1 * * 4 * * $ 33 „ - 1 * 6 : 
* 1 4 * 2 * of 
wo . 
P » 4 ; b 4 
by . * 
* „ , 1 * * * * * 9 7 % * t 
.» „ * . 2 a 1 „ 
2* Y nn y . . . 
L % » n , 
* - <4 - 8 . 
_— s 24 | ; 4 5 EF 
8 . 4 7 : a £4 * *:; : ws 6 
4 * mes. 7 os . $ 4 * : 
= + — . . 
5 5 
S * 4 1 9 * 
% 7 1 n 
i { 8 6 6. * 5 9 N 5 ” hos old ws * N 
3 i 4%; * * 4 ; 0 2 
\ 3 x 
NI: - * 
*. 8 Ss - 
* * 1 * 4 I 4 * £ «7 ; . ? 
* I 1 * 1 \ . # 
* , p g * 4 Fo — 
: | 
4 * : 2 
. ; f * * : *#% & o. 3 #Þ 
= * 
po - 
h - 1 a a+ "4 5 7 * 
6 
i 
* 4 * * 1 * 2 5 ES > Fas I 1 
« ». 7 - "a: 1 8 7 
1 . * £ * #5 ©. $f 7 "A * 
. , * n 
E * 
\ * 
* * 
» 
- £ 
A 
4 N * * 
* 1 
9 7 X 2 i 2 * 8 1 K * * Bo Py 
a 
1 + * ” * * * * 83 5 * N 
» , ; ö 
* Ty * 
T 1 — © 4 - 5 7 1 
9 183 es * ** 2 „ * 
- 
* 0 
> j ' 4 
* 
4 
a F 1 
„ IO * 3 
X „ 1 
pn 5 1 
4 - 
% „ 
* . 
x * 
3 
; 
ES 
4 * 
* 
. s 
4 N * 
1 « * 
P F fl 
F " 
, 1 * . 1 
ſ 7 * > 
, * 
- 9 * 
* 
, 
# % 
f 
. % 
F : . 
=_ 
U 
ny 
% 


«< 


* 


* 


* 
Fu 
* 
> 
$ 
to 
1 5 
* 
1 
7 
1 
* 
3 
fe * 
4 4 
* 
* 
8 
4 
BY 
* 
4 
7 
* 
1 
4 
” 
£4 
” 


= 4 
** 
F — 
8 * 
* - 
1 
2 
W 
E 
_y 
* 
8 
$+ 
LF 
R 
ma 
** 
7 
. # 
*; 
_ 
7 > 
5 
Ks 
Es 
7 
on 
f 
* 
>» 
. 
A * 
$ 4 


* 

13 : Mo * 8 "7 

4 FEE 7-14 i , ga ENT FFI SEX? 4 PEI 

4 END 2 4 * r A LAS. 4 * . 4 * % ‚ Ä ͤ re ISS 18 5 


* > $ 1 1 
5 * n . 4 j- 13 oy o 8 5 12 . 
4 r Fed . * 18 75 6 . 4 * y * 1 . * * S „ 1 


"i SB: 0e. 1 1 0 * XII. al 


W- 4 22 1 4 oF 4 * 3 8 2 £ * 2 4 Key (3 E Soy 


thy; $46 FEY. 
2 the Proceſſs » which Nitrous Air is b 
ub a State in which a Candle will burn in it 
witb an Entancey 17 0 icgr ned » me. 
| e Metals in tbe Nitrous Aeid. 


l 


My W will 8 the N white" 


7] which i in its firſt ſtate extinguiſhes a candle, 
to a ſtate in which a candle burns in it quis _- 
naturally, which had always been deemed. a 
certain criterion of common and wholeſome - 
=_ . =, though this ſtill continues as noxious as 
i ever; or with a greatly enlarged flame, in which 
late it much reſembles inflammable air. This I 
; had effected by expoſing it a long time to iron, 
or a ſhorter time to liver of ſulphur. 1 hav 

now procured this kind of air by ſeveral 
other direct proceſſes, without producing pro- 
per nitrous air in the firſt place, and I have 
* . alfo obſerved various phenomena attending it; 
Vvbvby the compariſon of which the nature of 
Wo this remarkable change in the conſtitution of 


— 


13 nitrous air may be better Andere. 


1 'T he experiments ſeem to ſhew, Aber this 
_., 4 | there is a cee of. nitrous vapour in ni- 
1 . . „ trous 


= I expreſſed on having reduced nitrous air, 


elle that can imbibe phlogiſton, it ſeems to be - Ga 
impoſſible that any thing ſhould burn; Let 


* 


the @ndle ; or rather, the union. between the ._ 
phlogiſton and the acid may be in ſome mea; - 


this and the ſe&ions immediately following, 
and others, as they will oecur occaſionally in 
the account of other experiments, which hal, 


woe differen Heads.” „ 


the nitrous air is produced in this manner, 
| without foreign heat, if a candle be 8 


inflammability abovementioned. Bur I firſt 


TY” IN IP : 5 wr = os 7 Ss i Y A; 2 : 7 2 4 . * 5 23-1 
8 8 . 4 2 e 4 
. 3 D p > 2 e if 2 
; 258 is", 5; 2-92 498 : 
7 x NY „ 
2 . . 1 : 1 : 8 
* * 3 
* N 7 | | 
x * , - * 
ETD ; 4. 
+ | f % 


"in le 2 cad d., 8 5 


abs" air ibs: ed which! by means of © © 
its affinity with phlogiſton, admits bodies tg 
burn in it, or that there is a redundancy i 
phlogiſtie matter left in it which is Enited by = 


| „ | : 3 8 


ſure broken, ſo that the inflammable part, 
being ignited by heat, may immediately join 
the acid vapour, without which, or ſomething - 


the reader, however, form his own hypotheſis 755 
from the facts which I ſhall relate; ſome in 


different obfects, and therefore will be found Loo 


be ſolution of iron in 1 ef ne 
NN to produce nitrous air; but when all 


to the ſolution, more air will be 
and this will be poſſeſſed of the peeoliarikigd of 


met with this air by diſſolving iron in Wie 
firſt impregnated with vitriolic acid air ann 
then with nitrous vapour, as will be mentioned = 
n its er place. . The firſt produce ofthis  _-_ 8 

| 1 ol! 


- 


* 


7 61 * 8 
It was upon e this that 1 trie 10 1 
ſame experiment after the termination of the 
common ſolution of iron in ſpirit of nitre; 


* 


blen was nitrous air; but _ the -- 


5 ee with a natural WS: 


„ 


when, by this means, 1 got, by a direct 


celz, ſuch a kind of air as I had brought hi. 
trous air to be by expoſing it to iron, or liver 


of ſulphur; for on the firſt trial a candle burned 
in it with a much enlarged flame. At another 
time the application of a candle to air pro- 


duced in this manner was attended with 4 
real, though not a loud epjο,,; and imme . 
Aiately after this, a greeniſh- coloured flame 1 


deſcended from the top to the bottom of the 


veſſel in which the air was contained. In the 
next produce of air from the ſame proceſs die 
flame deſcended blue and very dane Frome: wy by 


OP to the bottom of the TL; 


: + 


I'fave alſo ri this kind 4 al in a 


ee proceſs by the ſolution of zinc and tin, 
the latter of which I find contains very little 
 Bhlogiſton , ſo that it may eaſily be ſuppoſed 


that there is a redundancy of a nitrous acid 
vapour in the air produced from it, ready to 
take Palogiſion from any berg in a ſtare 


. of 


194 of Nurse „ : 71 


flame of a candle, when no more air could 
he got without it, air was produced in e | 


— 


MM of Tenition. And, 1 zinc contains much 
n phlogiſton, it ſhould ſeem to have a nearer af. ES 


nitrous id, whigh- may ee * un- 
con with it. But to me it is very evi. 
dent — zinc doth not contain much phlo- ©,” 
HH gifton. And it is evident from Mr. Caren 
diſh's experiments that it contains leſs, pla. 

giſton than , . ly inflammable. W 
air. | 


* Oe a , : 
A * « ty, . 43 x x if e * 


11 ill be franc i in my firſt adn Ws 1 ä 
could f args but very little air by the. ſolu- . 
tt eon of zinc in ſpirit of nitre, though the mm. 
3 tual action of theſe two ſubſtances be ſo re 
I markably ſtrong. 4 Poſſibiy, becauſe it affords 1 
little phlogiſton to unite with the nitrous va- 3 
Pour, or becauſe its affinity with its own cake” © 
is ſo great, that the nitrous vapour cannot lay — 
hold of it; and yet there can be no earth freer al 
5 from phlogiſton than the flowers of zinc, tt 
\ BH H{caſtin ſome of oe ſtates in which I have ers. 
| mined them, 11% 1 15 1%, "8AM 2 7 1 2 ; 2 | 
15 7 order to 3 the quantity of Ar | + 
£5 produced by the ſolution of zinc in ſpirit ß 
. Wha in a more a d manner than I had » 


- # "x . * 5 & L 5 393 F 3 # ; * * : * 55 g * 1 8 * * —_ 4 
" bs f 0 N 
* 


© of 2 4 . 
4 f Cage o 
g . 


\ F 


- 


this efferveſcence might anſwer the ſame pur- 5 


caſe of the iron, viz. expellin the acid with 


Y nl 


Fe 


n Month ur 0 large WE al ach. the Wo of 


which was a quantity of ſtrong ſpirit of nitre 3 
and when T had placed them under 3 r. 


ceiver of an air-pump, I carefully ehe 
theair, and then, by means of the appatatus 
for a collar of leathers, I let down the zinc into 
the acid. Immediately upon this there was d 
moſt prodigious efferveſcence; but, the veel 


into which it was made being very Jai 85 ip. - 
part of the 11 E 0 out of i 232 eg 


By this means I. got a very confiderablo 5 


: quantity of air; and when J examined it, 1. 


appeared to be the very ſame thing with ni- 
trous air expoſed to iron or liver of Falphite: F 


and ſuch as 1 had got in the laſt- mentioned 
experiment by means of beat from the dire& - 


ſolution of iron; and the great heat attending 


poſe as the foreign heat of the candle in the 


more force, and throwing it into a ſtate into 
which it was not ſtrictly combined with Pius. 


* 0 F * *- i 


have done; owing, I ſuppoſe, to half of it 
being properly nitrous air, and the remainder 
n * neee wich r 

2 | and 


- 


| The a air thus Pee denied ish 1 
air about half as much as nitrous air would 


* 


third of this air was readily abſorbed by 
| | ſtance in favour of i its 


which is 


the nitrous; air. 21 one 


a» 


containing an acid vapour; : and a candle 


burned in it with an enlar 


twice as large as its own. proper flame, _ 
vivid; and ſurrounded with another 


a blue colour. With a very light 
in water, this air extinguiſhed. a candle „ che 
water having, by this means, 
ſorbed the acid vapour that was EY 
through i ir, F, 


” 4 
e * 


* - 
4 8 


2 "its. 


43+ 


Ct * 2 


— 


wt 1 3 ON 
* e 4 
- * 7 - 
» 4 —— 
4 D a. 


S 11 


* 


5 : 
5 3 $43 
n 

4 


to afocrigie the quantity as well s 
the quality of the air produced in this manner: 5 
J diſſolved four penny- weights of zinc in very 


ſtrong ſpirit of nitre, contained in a glaſs phial 
with a ground ſtopple, when I got about eight 
ounce meaſures of air, which 1 took at twice; 
bot neither part of this produce either affected 
common air, or was. affected by nitrous air; 


and though part of it was abſorbed 


water, 


it did not make lime-water turbid.” " Al no 


candle would burn in it. 


But I did 


4 


mine this air till about two hours afre it was 
generated, when 2 conſiderable 


Was Os abſbrbel by water. Had 1 made a trial 
of it immediately after” ir! was F prodthoed,! and 


before any part 


* 


of it 


ee, I make no doubt ber a candle would 


K 


+ 


have 


5 


6 
. 4.4 
x? 7 
A * 
5 
N + * 
3 
N 3 
j SETS = 
* 
* 3 % 75 
N 5 
n 4 


> 


} ” 
FACS f 7 
4 5 . * 
4 - 
4 
N „ * 
25 £ 2 
W N ? _ . 
* o 
* 42; 8 £ 4 * 
4 22 g RA 
” # » 
1 - 


V wad burned:n m it. For aw 1 n 0 a 
experiment, and tried both parts of the pro-. 
dauce immediately, a candle burned with an 
1 e eee eee e e 2 
eee ee eee i 1 
5 A1 r Limes, . ein, L hank, 10 no- 
thing of the peculiar kind of air above · men- 
tioned, but only ſtrong nitrous air from ſeem- 
ingly. the ſame proceſs; and I was not able o 
determine-on what circumſtances the different 
« reſults depended. I once thought that Il bad ' 
got this inflammable nitrous ait, as it may be 
_, Called, when I uſed a very large quantity of 
ſpirit of nitre, much more than was neceſſary 
to diſſolve the zinc, but at other times this ex- 
pedient failed me. When J had taken the air 
at different times, I found the laſt produce ie 
more nitrous. than the firſt, But I once di- 
| vided the produce into five parts, and found 
all of them nearly equally, and all very ſtrong- | 
ly nitrous. In fact, in order to produce this 
curious ſpecies of air, I then imagined there 
- ought always to be more acid than phlogiſton; 
and therefore when it is procured by a directe 
proceſs, the ſolution ought to be rapid, in o- 
der the more effectually to volatilize the acid. 
It will be ſeen that in the ſolution of tin, which. 
I find to contain very little, phlogiſt W 
air. is 4A Produced, as will appear \ when, 


971 | "TOM: ob 
| p i ; : 1 | ; 


wy = 


&& 


A cone to tte the passes dig 


Hh t 3 1 LPR, trad ta 


this hypotheſis, that when, after all the uncet- 
tainty of the preceding trials, I uſed only. a 
very weak ſpirit of nitre in the ſolution of 
Zinc (with a view to produce air in about the 
ſame quantity as it had been yielded by means 


of the water impregnated | firſt with vitriolic 


acid air and then with nitrous vapour) 1 


: 4 no other tin this kind of air in Which a op 


candle burned: with an enlarged flame; and 
the air was of the very ſame kind from the be- 
gining to the end of the proceſs. , „This looks 


as if mere was more phlogiſton than acid in 


this kind of air. And, indeed, all the expe· 

timents demonſtrate that the enlarged flame is 

produced principally by the aſcenſion of an 

. inflammable vapour contained within itſelf. | 

And yet there are ſome caſes in which the ap- 

pearance very much reſembles that which is 

1 occaſioned by the dipping of a lighted, candle 
8 into dephlogiſticated air; though the air, which 
1 . is the ſuby beck of this ſection, i is always hig hly 


TSS 
* nitro, air. R 
i eee Ta 90 1707 dr, 
þ * ; & 
/ 
123 F 


| ſolution: of this metal in the nitrous: acid, | 


1 


noxious, — not in the ſmalleſt Ga: affects - Of 


3 


8 n — / * Nee 2 - a # _ 
«0% l FX 8x 3 — > 8 « 2 * : * - 
” n 1 5 , 5 : N - 38 2 WP * * . J 3 


e * 3 


4 X #4 * , 2 N , 
r Art ef 9 , —»̊ ²ãůͥmuu , ]- n wt, © Uw 
80 1 2616 1 = N R DE dt SLE: ed hd r 
A +. ** , . 


x. 
vn We * 
1 N c * : b 
# * 3 # \ * 2 1 1 wh * 5 * 8 - 
* ts £ 2 14 „ . t RESET Ws +, 
* 8 10 n , FACS e C . 7" 
2 * * - * 5 * 1 4 
5 5 2 Ag * oe 4 5 27 29% 6615 115 92 ; TS 3 , e 1 
4 2 r 2 "LS 3 „ SOS 
. 
% 


SECTION. XII. ins 4 


e the Pbenomend ten the "Divination of 


n+ Air by Tron FES 2 Bain. : 
© STONE, and alfo by Ln of SULPHUR, | ee 


1 
F W 


asg firſt remarkable Ach of mY ou: 
a that T obſerved was occaſioned by the fer- 
mentation of iron filings and brimſtone, made 


into a paſte with water, This proceſs is at- 


- tended with much heat, the diminution of the 
air is exceedingly rapid, and whenever I exat | 
mined the air that remained, it always ap- 
_ peared to be ſimply. phlogiſticated air, nel- 
ther affecting common air, nor being affected 
dy nitrous air, and always extinguiſhing ' 4 
candle, And' in this laſt- mentioned prope 
it differed from nitrous air diminiſhed By i ed. 
only, or by liver of ſulphur, in which a candle 
burned with an enlarged flame before it was 
| agitated in water. I have ſince, however, ob 
ſerved that nitrous air di e _ iron bing 
und brimſtone does not really differ from that 
Whieh is diminiſhed” by the other proceſſes 3 
but that this proceſs being made in a large. 
quantity of water, either the ſuperfluous ni- 


mo Ack 7 TY” the ſuperfluous phlogiſton, 
or 


4 J * 
„ * _—— 
* N $ 


1 


* 


1 


d ET e e 
5 3 fiats: af > air, i a." 
| iminution, . from the 8 4 the 
mentation began, till it could be. mini 1 
no more by that proceſs. | In or er to get a 55 „ 
all. quantity of the air, without moving these 
the apparatus contained in 
it, I faſtened a ſmall phial, or a piece of glaſs dm 
be, to the end of a ſtiff wire; and filling it 
| wich watery put it up. into the veſſel, with 1 
its mouth downwards 3 when, | 
| ning out. it would neceſſarily 55 
oy could. then with the 8 


the air of the jar, Which 5 
ſame caſe withdraw, and e Saane nl e 


i a 2 * 4 
oat Ss 7 Wy 1 7 , 8 3 N 22 1 * x. * Fg » PX x © [2 
* 2 5 4 * 0 7 b : 4 


 Proceeding/in-this manner, found: 0 > 
in the laſt: ſtage of the diminution of this air, 
and not before, a candle burned in it with an | 
enlarged; flame, * 
exactly reſembles chat | 


of 


% 


very ſoon, before — be. 5 = 


had an opportunity to act upon it. For when 
I tried part of the ſame air the next mofning | i 


& 
— 
* 3 
p * 4 "ug 
* 
% & : 
. 
8 # 
* q 4 F 
/ 
** ; * W 
» i 5 < & * 
> , if 7 bes 
* 
- f : 
* * 
. - as „ 


(when, without an agitation, part of * had 
99; abſorbed . 5 water) it extinguiſned a 


candle; having, in the en 1 pepe 
mere phlogiſticated air. R 


oh transferred another fitiy: of nitrous air 
from quickſilver,, in which the proceſs was 
made, to lime: water, but it did not make it 
in the leaſt turbid. Indeed, but little of this? 
air was abſorbed by water, and retain Su — 
in it only naturally, without any enlargement 
of the flame. It had been diminiſhed to e 
5 one third oh its Wan in the wich chiver, 


"2 ; 4; I» 4 


10 ſha now WR) to note ae tant 
lay this proceſs,” which the philoſophical _ 
reader will eaſily perceive may be of great uſe 
in the analyſis of the ſpecies of air, as well 1 
help to explain the proceſs itſelf. In order to 
determine whether the acid, or pblagiſton, of 
the nitrous air had been ſeized upon in this 
proceſs, I made it over a quantity of ver 
pure water; thinking that, if it mould acc. 
quire any acidity, it would ſhew that the phlo- x 

giſton only had been ſeized ; but that if * 
ſhould not have become acid, it would appear 


1 


that the decompoſition had been effected by the... 


1 acid having been ſeized, and the phlogiſton by 
left. And the reſult ſeems to determine this 
queſtion in [favour of the latter ſuppoſition. 
ns. „535 


Sohn 8 ab was no ni 


the water with the - greateſt: attention, ard 5 


found not the e of acidity in it: 
It did not even turn e 6 


"xe $a. 


other hand, in the be ces ral nitrous 11. 


by 1 nitrous "acid, the water over which the di- 


minution was made, becomes much more acid 


than can be accounted for 5 the e 
1 of the acid introduced | into it. "Ib 15 25 


1 
4 * 


. it obyious, port Tt dy Sl! that | 


ora in the decompoſition of nitrous air by 
iron filings and brimſtone, c. the acid Va- 


pour is the part that is firſt ſeized upon, yet 


that ſome vapour partaking of the nitrous acid, 
(though when imbibed by water it does not 
impart to it any ſenſible acidity): muſt be left 


diſperſed through the phlogiſticated air which 
remains; and by the help of this vapour, com- 


ing from the nitrous acid, the: ſuperfluous phlo- _ 


© -giſton muſt be capable of accenſion; ſo a8 56 
, conſtitute the enlarged flame. The inveſtiga- 


tion of the nature of this vapour, Which, 
though derived from the nitrous acid, is nat 
itſelf acid, and which by its ready union witfi 


-phlogiſton in the degree of heat requiſite for 


ignition enables inflammable ſubſtances to 5 


JO muſt be a een impor- 


: r | 9 5 3 


3 
A * 
— E 
g | 5 
4 , ö 9 
* * : T i (2:44 
. 1 7 


34 tance; as it may. path nn in the 
nitrous acid which; gives it its remarkable af - 
fmity with iſton, r * x 
criminates — the other acids. * 


15 2 9 3 the experiment above recited, concern- : 
ing the diminution of nitrous air by iron filings 8 
and brimſtone over a quantity of pure water, 


. J firſt obſerved a pretty large depoſit of a 
pProwniſh kind of matter, from the water over 
* Which this proceſs had been made. If this be 

8 really the ochre of the iron employed in it, it 
S ler that the earth of the metal had been 


volatilized by the heat of the fermentation; but 
it may be that earth, which is one of the con- 


r parts of nitrous air, with ſome part of : . 
„ the phlogiſton f from that air adhering to it. 


5 That the water of my trough, in-which I | 
OY 1 made this proceſs, was diſ- 
1 coloured, and become of a browniſh A 
| both when it was .contigious to nitrous air 
in its natural ſtate, when it had ſtood a 
long time in the jars, and eſpecially. 
y when the nitrous air had been decompoſed 
over it, I had frequently obſerved. Now if 
f the matter that diſcolours the water in both 
ſtheſe caſes ſhould be the ſame, it muſt have 
deen contained in the nitrous. air itſelf, and 
5 have been the earthy matter that evidently dees 
1: enter into the 2 and muſt not 
| have 


* 


have come Rö che iron; A2 as the colour 
was the very ſame, in appearance, in both the 
daſes, I am father inclined td this hy potheſis; 
eſpecially as this ſeems to be the very ſame 
kind of matter that 1 uſed to collect from my 
trough of water, in which much nitrous air 
had been kept, and of which ſome Account is 
given in my firſt volume. 


2 


When 1 put 2 little nitrous 1 to any 
quantity of water thus diſcoloured, it became 
tranſparent; which ſeems to ſhew that this 
earthy matter was before diſſolved by the acid, 
and may account for my getting no more of 
it when 1 decompoſed that large quantity of 


nitrous air in a {mall quantity of water men- 


tioned above. For the water becoming very 
acid by this proceſs, the earthy matter precipi- 


' rated from the nitrous air might be mw dil- 
folved in it; 


At one time the water over which TY hes: 
mentation of iron filings and brimſtohe had 
been made in nitrous air, and which was be- 
come of a very brown colour, would not of 
itſelf, by long ſtanding, depoſit any thing, 
or but very little, and very ſlowly; a ſmall 
but manifeſt precipitation was made from it, 
of the ſame brown matter, in an exhauſted 
receiver. But by ma ry a 2 large 
quantity of nitrous air in the ſame proceſs, 
ä Ws” III. L throw 


14% f Nilnong dir diminibel 


throwing vp a freſh quantity. when the former 
bad been ſufficicatly dimigiſhęd, 
of the PALE: the. jar. was. b phlo- 
gilticare air (being che rehcuum of all the i- 
trous air that had. beep made uſe of in the 
i proceſs)., I, got. an immediate and conſiderable 
precipitate. On this occaſion, alſo, 1 obſerved 


that notwithſtanding the. decompoſition of ſo 
2 a quantity of nitrous air, the ſmall quan- 


tity of water over which it was made had not 


acquired the leaſt ſenfible . not OD 
1185 Juice of: turnſole red. þ 


That ihe! brows Ld.” of FER p 
comes from the phlogiſton of the nitrous air 
adhering to it, ſeems to be pretty evident 
from the following obſervation. The water 
in my trough having been at one time eceed- 
ingly foul, eſpecially with a great variety A 
metallic impregnations, and ſo as to make a 
white. depoſit when it was ſuffered to-ſtand;, 
when nitrous. air was decompoſed over it, the . 

whole depoſit was of adark-brown colour, hich 
could hardly come from any thing elſe belides | 
eee from the e nitrous air. 


That liver of ſulphur allo decompoſes a. 
air by ſeizing upon its acid ſees to be proved 
by the following experiment. I put ſome 
pieces of ker of. apa; to two quantities of 

ee 5 ; Witrous 


Ed bad. 
IPO A202 COT of 
av 


. tron Ert and ig 1 ” 5 | 


"TINY air banned by quick ſilver, and I ob« _ 
ſerved that, in about ten hours, between one 
third and one half of the air in each of them 
was abſorbed. The next day I admitted water 
to one of them, but no part of the air was. 
abſorbed, and after it had paſſed ſeveral times 
through water, a candle burned in it with an 
enlarged flame, crackling very much. Alſo a 
candle burned in the very ſame manner in the 
air contained in the other veſſel, which I had not 
made to paſs through water. In this experi- 
ment I took particular notice that there was 
no appearance of the mercury having been 
corroded, or having been in any other reſpect 
viſibly affected during the proceſs; as it would 
have been if every thing acid in the nitrous 
air had not been united to the liver of ſulphur. 
Perhaps the reaſon why the air in this experi- 
ment bore the paſſage through water without 
loſing its property of admitting a candle to 
burn in it was, that, by ſtanding a long time 
out of water, the conſtituent parts of it had 
acquired a firmer union, ſo as not to be ſo eaſi - 
ly 3 by the acceſs 4 ver my 
a ; "4008 


| 08 more decifive proof of this Jecompoſſtian 
being effected by the acid of the nitrous air 
being ſeized upon, is, that the water over which 

2 W is made does not acquire 
8180 | Ls: 7 "hy 


| 148 of Nitrous Air Aminifbed © 
the leaſt acidity, not even diſcoverable by hs 


juice of turnſole. In this caſe, alſo, there was wo 


an earthy precipitate, exactly as in the Proceſs 
with the 1 iron ane and brimſtone. | 


In many is nitrous air, that has this pro- 
perty of admitting a candle to burn in it with 
an enlarged flame, retains, in a great meaſure, 
its power of diminiſhing common air. But 1 
obſerved that a quantity of nitrous air dimi- 
niſhed by liver of ſulphur, did not retain thifs 
property in the ſmalleſt degree, though a 
candle burned in it with a much enlarged 
flame; and part of it, as is uſual with this 
kind of air, wis readily abſorbed by water. 
The reaſon of this difference muſt be, that in 
one cafe the nitrous air is more completely de- 
ret than in the other; or that the phlo- 
iſton ſeparated from it acquires a new con- 
nection, ſimilar to that which it had AS part of 9 5 
the nitrous air. 


5 


I had at one time ſome ee that, as 
part of this kind of air is readily abſorbed . 
water, exactly like fixed air, it might be, in 
part, real fixed air, and precipitate lime in 
lime- water. But in the preceding experiments, 
as well as upon other occaſions, I particularly 
attended to this circumſtance, without ever 

obſerving it to have any ſuch effect. Having 


1 = befo re 


bd... £5 nn WW 


| ſorbed by water. Before this air had paſſed 
through water, a candle burned in it with a 


* 7 | Filings ond Brimfone; x49 


fore the lat Mentiowed experiment dimi- 
niſhed a quantity of nitrous air to one third by 
liver of ſulphur, which was accompliſhed in 
twenty-four hours, 1 immediately. admitted 
lime-water to it, but it did not become in 
the leaſt degree turbid ;- though not leſs than 
one third of the whole quantity was readily ab- 


much enlarged. flame, and alſo crackled-very 


much; which is often, but not always, the 


caſe when a _ lighted candle is let down into 
this kind of air. But though, in this caſe, the 
phenomena very nearly reſemble thoſe: of de- 
phlogiſticated air, the flame is by no moans ſo 


Fs as in gr: wy pore —_ ef air. 1 


The refulk of | theſe Seren <> the 1. 
minution of nitrous air by ſubſtances which 


ſeiꝛe upon its acid, ſuggeſts a conſiderable dif- 


ficulty, viz. what becomes of the acid! ahd, with 
what ſubſtance eoncerned in the procefs is it 
united ? It is moſt obvioùs to fuppoſe, that 
it is phlogiſton, ſince that principle'is exhaled 
in all theſe caſes of the diminution of nitrous 
air. But then what kind of ſubſtance is formed 
by this union of phlogiſton with the nitrous | 
acid? and, if it may be termed: a Spe, what 

pwned of ety e ' oy i 


=» 
G T * 
. Y ; 
75 | 


* FEY 


WY a to Wat this-diffculey in a 2 
ſatisfactory manner than it can be done 
means of the proceſs with iron filings and 2 
ſtone, or with liver of ſulphur, which are ver 
compound ſubſtances, and among which it 
might not be eaſy. to find this new nitrous ſul- 
phur, I endeavoured to decompoſe nitrous air 
by means of brimſtone only ; making uſe of a 
burning mirror and quickſilver for Rink put- 
poſe, in the manner deſcribed, vol. II. p. xxxv, | 
which, however. in dt an Faly cperatians: 16 7 
7 id it Ot) | pw. 

By this means, ogetitning the proceſs a „ 
tiwe, I made the ſulphur not only melt, but 
alſo become very black, and ſmoke very 
much in the nitrous air; and, in conſequence of 
it, the air was conſiderably diminiſhed, and had 
loſt its power of di ning common air in 
ſome degree. Had the operation been con- 
_ tinued much longer, the diminution would, 
no doubt, haye been more complete, and the 
nitrous air have become nothing more than 
phlogiſticated air, as in other ſimilar proceſſes. 
That this diminution alſo was effected by 
means of the ahſorption f the nitrous acid wag 
pretty evident, becauſe the mercury was not 
ſenſibly affected by it. For if that had been 
the caſe, there would have been an acceſſion of 

e nitrous alr nne, 251719099 
| 'S ECT I VEN 


_ FUSES Int nen Janne err 
4 7 


; 8 ; 
„5 : 4 8 
>.» 1 c : f | 
"os $i 45 ; ; F 200 Pos . 8 . . : 
Sh ORE WY 21h % . n 4:51 N Y 


* 


nn 523 v003005. ener white: 


N 8 E 5 D WIV. a 


F ad 1 foe avi igely bor oy 


Of tbe Diminntion of* Nitrous: ee eee 
e iti being-confined-in x Bun imutriain, 
50 cu tances. > 07 aal s 3: eee HH 
FE a eon -nyarts Ia2i9;; 4 

Having had ai MH to put a 


h quantity of nitrous air into a Haider, in order 


to trans fer it from my trough of water to veſ- 


ſels plated in different parts of tlie room, 1 
generally left the bladder with the reminder 
of. che air id the trough of water, without 
* F your wher 1 ſhould. have occaſion for it ſoon 
ufterwafdb; and the trough being large 


it out into a Jar, eſpecially when J 


enough, it-was no incomvenience to me to let 


the bladder of nitrous air be ſwimming abqnt 


in it, while I: was intent upon others _ 


thas nitrile air kept in a bladder, in theſe cir- 
cumſtances, was liable to be impaired; and 


it did not anſwer my purpoſe in a variety of 


experiments ſo- well, as that which had been 


kept much . the She r the 


fameftrough: warn, 7! : nnd vhs! 
1 * i. 44 . Ti 112 1 112 zi + mary $2.55 24 


6.44 As to be quantity of dhe a ., T- FIN for Eh 


| Cn: given * attention £01 it; till 
L4 ſome- 


54 But ſeveral things led me to fuſpect, | 


» 


j 
j 
g 
3 


ſometimes finding i it much leſs 0 [ expeted®. 
(the bladder evidently containing bur little, 
when I perfectly recollected egi had left 


good deal in it) I was forted to attend to that 


circumftance-; but now that 1 have, in ſome 


meaſure, inveſtigated this curious fact, I.am 
ſtill exceedingly at a loſs to accoung. for: the 1 
ae circumſtances of Wy — . 


3 A +/ 1 * 2 . *. 
7 1. | F 2 


I bad the leſs folpidien of nitrous: Wande : 
going any conſiderable change in a bladder, 
from my having, as is obſerved, vol. I. p. 128. 
at one time kept a quantity of it in a bladder 


about three weeks, without. * ſenſible 4 


miami of its virtue. gas 5:40 Ni arg 


e 


Atte chis mia bee I ſhall now- 


n to preſent my reader with a view of 
the facts, juſt as they occurred to myſelf, that 


he may inveſtigate this bulineſs farcher, if he 


| ſhall think there is a ffficient: ee wal 


that purpoſe. 


On the roth of March ops 1 ri nat 
help obſerving that a large quantity of nitrous 


air, which had been left in a bladder, was 
greatly diminiſhed ; it having been left very 


buoyant, and being now almoſt ſunk under 


vater. This prompted me to examine the 


ftare of the air ene in it, when I found 
it 


Ho. 


5 . 4 5 * ; $, 2 
. os I 8 : ; 4 
py > : + * 1 - ' 
8 * ; 
z | 
U 


affecting common air, and extinguiſhing a 
candle. Nom, as part of the ſeme nitrous air 
had ſtood all the time in a glaſs jar, in the 
ſame trough of water, wüthant ſuffering any 
ſenſible change, the differes 8 

was evidently owing to — [manner rin 
which choy! had: been kept, 


la order to determine 175 what . 
diminution of nitrous air, when 
kept in a bladder; would proceed, I put a 
certain quantity of it into a bladder, and let 
it ſwim about my trough as uſual; when I 
found that, in the ſpace of one day, it was 
diminiſhed one fourth of its bulk, and the 
next day only half of it remained, when it was 
ſtill conſiderably nitrous, as it would have 
been by being only half diminiſhed hy. iron 
filings and brimſtone, by liver of ſulphur, or 
any other ſimilar proceſs. Had 1 continued 
it longer, the remainder would certainly haue 
n ae air, as before, ve 


27 
1 


+a order to * whether this remarks 
ble effect was. neceſſarily occaſioned by the 
bladder in all ciceumſtances, I thruſt a der. 
up. inta;.4 jar cantllining nitrous air; but, 
though it had ſometimes its infide,. and ſomer 


tines it outfide in contact with the air, 1 


_ Was - 


OY ; 


- Nitrow Air confined-in a Bladder, 153 
it to be mere phlagiſticated air, nat at all 


* 


: at one time kept a quantity 5 
D three weeks, eee ſenſible . 


N bladder Ki rc containir ; 
when I perfectly recollected that I had left a 
good deal in it) I was forted to attend to that 


circumſtance 3 but now that 1 have, in ſome 


meaſure, inveſtigated this curious 8 * 
ſtill exceedingly at a loſs 1 to accour 


e ee n OO WIG wk 


#+ 5 5 SA #34: © NEC 3 * ** 
Fel had the leſs ſuſpician "ako ieder 


any conſiderable change in a bladder, 
rom my Hevinis as is obſerved, vol. I. p: 128. 


of i a bladder 


2 wy 3 W 4 #4 4» 3 „ 
minution of 1 _ virtue. ai 510 1 rity 
* 4 3 2 


«+Afigrihis peter iam Ty 1 


the facts, jut as they occurred to myſelf, that 
he may inveſtigate this buſineſs farther, if he 
ſhall think there. is a nn openings or: 
rw 46 ee SiG ij e Hog cud 


F © . « 
* - 155 FE e 7 


4 


3 


On the cath of March 2776, 1 would oo 


help obſerving that a large quantity of 
air, which had been left in a ern was 
greatly diminiſhed ; it having 


| fare of the le IO when'l 


GA 


{but rie 5 


e to preſent my reader with a viem of | 


een left very 
buoyant, and being now almoſt ſunk under 
water. This prompted me to mann 


Sy 


* 


£7 


+ 8 


E 


- 


PE 
* 


1 


m onder io deten 


la order to determine 


8 21 
* 4 


nbd — 
T 


£74 of abs. * 
72 


4 


9 


ie whether t 


3 f 
Y s b 
. ; 
i 
72 * 
5 5 
25 . 
2 4 
2 
- 


affecting common air, — 
candle. : Naw,-as — — 
had ſtood all the time in a glaſs jar, in the 
fame trough of water, withaur ſuffering any 


*r 2 
ws 10 2 


air, when | 


— 


1 
» 5 


2 i 
his remasl 


f 4 1 F 
X---7 9 —— 8 Bert 2 
© Re a Wes A, > 4 5 a+ RSS \ N 5 
» 1 4 8 1 . J 33 . 15 
* 


was produced: in — air. But ee imme 
„ — — transferred. the air into the 
3 name bladder, and let it ſwim about the trough, 
| 25 uſual} the change was effected as quickly 
| a5 Before; and being ma ſhort time diminiſhed 1 
to one fourth of iis bulk, it appeared to be 
My rome 1 e e TAENY r, 


bs -. * — — quite full &f + — e 
Auch ty ing it up, conſfined it under the ſhelf. 
-& my trough, owhere ĩt was kept-entirely; co : 
— — but though it continued 1 in 5 
A un ſituatĩon a hole week, the quantity π]¾nu⸗ © 
not diminiſbad. wonnen 2 it Gi. 10 
12 ine en if it had — 5 : 
Jar the fame Tength? of ring, Av che farne # 
| air, and eying it ups andes erh lap neck 
. downwards in à ſmalt quagtity ef nter, fo 
LE that by far the greateſt part of che bladder:was | 
— expoſed | to the common air. .F — quantity | 
of this air was/impaire ae Then, | 
cut nrying either of the bladders, Vleftthem 
bHorh te ſwim! ibburtiaygarooah/:undriniore | 
cs only the air in bott of thim Oy | 
| . loft its . — eo og air; 


3 . with 


* 


2 


n 1 has 2 Sn _—_ g PE 
„„ 1 che. | ag . 
ſiad up. or deli chen 10 the water-in; the't —Y . 

2 would make any differegge in the refule of this 
21 experiment, 1 ande ih dennen, 1 OR” 
F Fo far as 1 could judge, affected. one Such | 
5 -asthe other; for neither of CM” ret 

Wh. of afeing can air, 


7 : 
KS. 2 * ; 
; 5 : 
* * - 1 f 


# ; 4 . 2 Fax . 13 I 13 5 EL « 4 * | 6. E 4 "4 Fr — 


1 3 — had: bow 


- oGoond. es EE N 
_ ta be alternately 
| | | ee, maiſt * and this'l 


; 8 
77 


655 
„ 
* ; . 
2 
A 
- & 
1 * * N |. 
* : ; 
. : 
$ 3 
+ 
* 4 
K 
A >; 
* 
# 
* 
* 
* 
= 
3 
* - 
4 * 
* ” 
* 
[ 
Fl 
. 83 
* « 4; 
> : 
3 . Hh 
a £3 
vx 
* 
oy 
4 
* 1 
1 
* * Y 
* * 
l 5 = 
* * 
1 
7 0 » 
E 3 
' 1 . 
; * 
* * ” ” 
— 
— 
[2 8 
- ; $ 3 
. * * * 
* "Es © 
4 


"8 & as 


© quite dry at intervals. After this time they 
Fo... bath k e to be ſhrunk. 0 aer, one N 
+, -»* the ſachs time another bladder wetted inthe | 
Fas." Inſide when it was filled, but not wetted an 3 | 
mam-ocre, continued fully inflateq three weeks ; "> 
„ a: being then examined, the quality of the mM 
> HD Oh air it contained was found to be very enen Th 
. oF J; LOTT. TEE KO Toe | 
TR. 2 now completly 1 2 e * 
WY + Deen in my bladders, L wiſhed * 8 
* dae te mow in vhch the water was 3 
'-  * _alfefted by that decompoſition and 1 ſoon 
. found that ir had aoquine a confiderble gen, - 
2. iy of iſton. Fot ward . e 8 
fy 2 in ho ſame ; 
. * its my IS | 
* | urs ſtanding i in "ihe: en. of water, in + which 
1B vas ſwimming a large open bladder filled with 
nitrous air, and which, as it ſubſided by the 
5 diminution of the air, had been k 8 
b freſh nitrous air from | 
= 9 „ . 
| : * | | 


to thoſe” that ſtood wholly om the ſhelf, the 
weer re of them had but little 1 6; 1” np 
4 municstion ich ebe phlogiſticated' water in 3 n 


78 


Ly 4 : ; 
3 | 5 


Ie 
0 5 in contact with which nitrous 


v7 of nde . . . 8 
when ede ph 
on, ſo that*bwth the phle n and“ 5 
acid ſeem to have been neee with the | 6 
E To es Treas oO — „ „ 
Having put rain- water into a b e 
filled it up with nitrous air, I tied it up very £8 
1 ſe, and left it to ſwim in a baſon of Err, 
| 6 taking care that the mouth of i 
under the water, After 4week,. perceiving 
. That it was ſhrunk up to about one fourth of ® 
its bulk, I opened it, carefully preſſing out Ph _ 
the water into à clean phial when I foind © 


| #4 * 0 : 2 , " * : 7 * 


3 N ; <2 9p * 2 rs 0 : : 2 "I 1 2 * the : 
5 Y : 1 x : , i | 
q i 8 % 


— 


Was always e 


: 1 
74 
; 
- 
* 
4 6 5 
28 5 * 1 
* . ö 
2 : 
— 
| * 
. 
tf 
K 
- of 7 
* N , 
{ : G | 
FA *% 
- 
: * 
: % 
2 ** 1 
— - F 
, x 
. 
% 
* 
— - - 
2 - 
. 
; — 
. 20 
; | : 8 
oY 
— 5 ; 
— - 
- 
T * 
* * i 5 3 : 
4 
* — Pd 
— 
4 
% 1 4 
g * * 
" 


1 
S. 
. 


7715 
2 84 
* 


— 


„„ be ts 5 N FR as." . h e 


: 


* 9 


4 
1 | 
. 
8 4 
4 
n * 
* S 


4 1 N * * 
* P 
$7 * 


$44. : a F oe th hy 11 . ; ws „ * 3 4 n 
e 3 5 n 1 l 


ert 50 


5, 
a air, the nitrous acid chat enters into it; and ð 
i 1 5 3 Bo S 


8 7 OM : 


A | * ' . _ F "$a. F 7 3 e is 5 44 a 125 1 * | ; g fe 5 : 2 
I is well, known that! had eee = 
'* with. as much common Ar in it nn . 
th , logiſti | | K L e on 


cially,qþ the acid. which it 


8 contains imm : 1 
x ted vapour, which is abſorbed. Water, it me 2 
„ decompoſition be made over . or  imbibed 8G 


py 


| + 


- 


* 


cook and Raving fitted a cork” to it, I p 
| forate the cork; ſo as juſt to admit the nozzle 


p 1 be made with « nahen Fan 4 


this acid, communicated by a known quantity | 


of nitrous air, it-will} be eaſy to aſcertain the 
quantity of nitfous acid tfansferred from the 
nitwous Air to the water, by finding how much 
nitrous air that acidulated water will yield; 
dy the ſolution of copper or, any other metal. 
0 * manner, at leaſt, the ſtrength of the 
u may be compared with the ſtrength of any 
mer ditrotistheid in a fuig foi gz 25 wm ; 


: "+ 
1 hes : n 7 . e * 1 93 1 Ref 7 ys 
24 vs 7; 1 | F 7 x £4 5 
TS EEE: 1 1 25 5 * . 12 
p FL 2 Yo } S 7 F F 2 1 7 + 


us Tor this experiment is very 


apps 
bp d very bar app lied. I firſt pro. 
"vide das wg of a jon Bis "He and form for : 


rate bhvanrity of nirfous air at one i 


of a ſmall funnel, when it is thruſt in pretty 


hard. I then tie this cork in the mouth of a 


bladder large enough to contain at leaſt half 
as much ait an the phial. "Bur if I uſe Ka. 


——— — — 
ou: to nun "Om. five rimes 4s much as 


#5 
a . ; ks 
HO 1 1 . 4 


convey into the bladder 


much nitrous 


%% Yo fo 


7 


— 


* 


2 
* Vs 


t 


4 


p Te wit: 


ein Id i e e 
eg 


7 * 
* 


1 


R 8 2 * * 2 K ef Fo Le! * x 5 
8 3 ww 72 V * 725 ; * * 1 2 
. * 9 * F< ky . * 
* = 7 * : * 
* , a 9 2 A 25 
; ; F2 2 
4 7 4 7 5 22 „ 7 
5 Joy * 4 7 * 5 . 
X * 5 8 7 1 1 1 8 wy g 55 gf 
: : 
: - * 4 WW 4 9 5 * hes y; 
- * y * ** 7 # LY " , # 
: % 5 7 (Ws. 
- 5 - Y 1 e þ 
; + „ 61 z 
3 a ; Y 
z 6 5 8 
4 * * ” 8 $ 4 
» * 
/ . ; k , ; 
k \ 
— , + i 
* N £ vp 
8 
N 
. 
— 
= 
- 8 
% 
4 _— 
: 
1 ; 1 % 
* 
** 
9 


with dad we ee, BN 
— chis manner, or from the ſolution of metals 
5 4 nitrous: acid, adheres to it very fight- 

6 impofſible to pour water thus 

= impregnated from one veſlel to another; but 
1 the dro ur 1 iſſue from it, 
. even ben the water is quite colourleſs, ' ſhow 
dahuat it ſuffers a great loſs of its acid. A quan- 
3 1 which I got in 
ttzhis experiment, equal in bulk to a quantity 
3 fe IO nes {- weighing four 'penny- | 


12 ounce, meaſures of nitrous air, 7 1 4 
in the common wax ig 54/4 
| res. In order to: make my 
„ FPt᷑tincipal experim it with more accuracy, 1 
vas taught by this to think- it to 


% 
* 8 
— 
© 5 
* 
- 


9 
5 
* 


„ | provide ſuch a quantity of water as would be 
5 | but i büly that the lot by 


573 


. en eee beak les in pro 


** 5 1: 5 B77 9 4 i Ki FR 8 * i £3 TY Y 77 5 a cx: 5 My. 188538 2 


Il ener 60 cnpere the quantity of ni- 
1 tous acid contained i in a given 


8 | air, with the quantity of acid 
; in an eq al bulk of red nitrous va- 
. pour procured by the ſolution of biſmuth,” 
72 F ; » , pz 
X * 5: * \ 5 ; 
A Ip! ns 5 9 ” : Py ; 4 , 
i 4 5 : : BY ; l 2 < * 
: * Is 5 | 
<4 h # 4 - 
; N * 8 * 
* 8 * 
— 5 ? 7 . : 
HE EI . f : > 4 ; » 2 | | 
: 5 | x” y * 55 
7 s ” . g 


* ; . 
* '} * ot Bye 


* 
7 * * 
1 
- 
* 5 
— 8 2 
* | O41 FP bo 2 25 
— * 
I _ I} 4 
1 
. * 1 
z * 
dp 
12 % DAE 
” 
74 , * at 
# 4 
EIS * 
* — 
Fd ; 
- 4 * 
z 
* 0 
5 - 
Mb * 
* ' ol ; 
* 
% 
+. 
* - 
* 2 
-» 


*%. 


| ol equally eye; when one of them . 


) che common air diffaledhrough Ir Conſe: 
quently; nitrous air dpes not colitain quits hat © 
de woch w w — bulk bf d 


Ec d 9 —_ 


not contain much more't 


 theorher, Coir 990d fag) D 20 ford w | 
7 9112 7 5 nn 5320; de on P8129 12 5 is FIT 


35 he-fatdration'0 of ; 
air "warn ph g experi 5 
of the great evantry dee Air 5 
by thi imeans oe proces,” the qu 
with which the decimal is m 
the viſible effect of ' the ſudden impregn 
on the water. For the ſurface of it e 
8 th TE; oil defcendi ng in andes 
om the top to the bottom of the 2 
ee m'ithe | 
1 he yelltt;” moſt re i 
e 1 fuff account wilt 1 
of en in Oo rns 21 996 bee #144; 
"DOE 07 1550 Zan mti bas ( Vain 206% 
e * 


hs * 83 7 48a nt ater or eh 4 9 * * * rar 22 J | * * LE e 5 3 
e Wale 50 eg 1. VEL OO OO YT REY . %% ³ ⅛ wm èo»rd ĩðV!ṽĩðĩö SI 
* OY p * 9 ; We ras. p 8 IF s 4, a BY wo FE PI of 3 . 5 
EE ENS N I * 7 l * ? . R S ; Mk Ss 
} 2 : ; 8 JOE e - * 9 * N 8 
ds * * 5 


* 


EE * 


o 


1 


* 


1 7 f 8 


325 ai Þ3 110 


| 62 Oh nou fa 
e 1 e 


4 


Ae 0 „i 18, 
75 * . 


7 #44 LM 2.4% 
2 Bs I, [5 $308 
J 2 
£ * - 
. ; 
2 
Fs 
. Fa” 
& --% 
> 7 4 
"Tens 8 8 Z. 
v3 
- * : 
t e 
F 5 
N 4 . * * 
— 3 | 
* 1 . 
5 7 
* wy 
* 
. . 
0 1 
. 
* 
j & ; 
. * 2 Ys 
e 
" Ss Z 4 
£ 
„ z 
by ' 
- 2) 
7 f 5 
1 * 
n 4 
ES hs 1 
5 : Fe 
: F 
* * 7 
1 * * 
ö . 
2 * 
24 2 2 
; £ 4 * THY Fe 
o * od, * * 
+ * | 
„ OS 
U 
L * 2 
_—_ TY 1 2g 
** F 72 * 
| Pr If "v7 err bots RE 
; a. * * COTE 4 TM 
* - 1 ay. "= "OW £249 # 2 28 ö 4 > 1 ö f ; a N 6 8 5 x — ** 
A 85 % +. 8 N * 4 =: 5 . "33 Cx £: 48 
| 101 55 Babe Siri! 7 1 „ | 1 9 
5 . 1 3 4 JO N * „ h 1 . 2 / 2 5 2 
Fo ; = Pope. * 3 8 " J £2 . 
X 9 7 
pub hs . 
£ 
4 £3 Ls 3 f 
* «x i 
=. 8 * 5 
7 fr 
# : ; 2 Ki | 
# 
1 1 e | 
4 _ 
4 * * 2 
N 1 ; 8 
* 
1 f - f * . 
; | i 
* 1 * 4 
* 
0 
* 
* 
* 
* I : 


Shi - ws * Ns; 
5 : 5 ; ; 
N 8 $ 7 
2. e 
FI % 
* 


- * 1 8 1 

be a * * 5 - =- 

* * Rok 

a> ot F 4 7 

4 * 3. — 4 I % 2 + 

* 4 N 

We * 4 * y 

LY 7 


# 
4 
* 


Wes as 


thi that 
flammable air 


of. OLE air. 6 Bot Wen B. 
chan litrous air; 
ſo that che 5 i pul 995 2 f mus more ez 
panded in it. It would help very much to de 
| termine rns d efforts" Sompare che pro - 
tion of phlogiſton: in the ſolution o of iron BT 
| in ſpirit o of nitre and o oil c vitriol, or | {piric "= 
„ gk 4 | 4 
109 ptipritacy. 655 18 o en 94 If | WW 
155 1 fund, at this k t.cleyen;gra K 

ee, ee vieldded w. 
axe inflammabl 5 1 


a 


e e da aden g rea 
quantity of nitrous air that 
Proportion of this kind may be ſeen; aa 8. 
p. 128. At another time I found 5 ; ya - 
Peay: weigins of item diftolved ift Hiri ot 
nitteʒ diluted with win wuter, Felge fertß⸗ 


five ounce meaſures of nitrous air, —. the 
ame quantity 'of© dure copper, tested 
in the ſame manner yielded dente Aten 


ouner eee mo ln ele enge 


. ad cob, au que ie the "EY FL 


LI NT 1 
by 8 


25 
7 
7 F 
o 7 
GL: Fe 
VEL, 
* 
* 1 
L . 
0 
3 
— 
* * 
- + 
ky 
* 


1 
* 
* n 
* 
7 hh 
4 IP 9 
= gf 
; 2 


are the. quantities of nitrous - air hat 1 
J be 5 byrther ſdlutiona of theſeme - 


% 


pul 315 aber 2b Hg. 1 Mace sn 


: 2 „H l Yo * A1 2 * T0: RING TY ii pl ooh ; 3 Sp Fr 
To Jap3Sating d J "Us dun FOUL, Wk al Sje7 W 


|  dlluted with EC N . 
2 85 
| 1 1 mall eber Saut tho - 4. 
| of this kind that the reader may e 
i l 8 5 
| „ens 1 25 208 * 3 


w., 
1 Fl 
* «<a 2 
© Mp, ” 8 
— 8 ö 
2 *. 


*. 
$ 


In cal phial, aich 6 rift efferveſs 
 eencgy dhe quantity of-four. penoyweights.of | 
water ofa; ſttong ſpirit of nitre produced R 
teen unde meiſures af nittous ait; whereas, 
in a large phial, diluted with more Water, and 
conſequently:with alefsefferyaſcence; the me 
quantity ai the ſame /acid:;yiclded only 
onũce meaſures of air. Alſo. the qu 
copper (which was ſuch. cutting a3 - 
fiers:cammonly make) ain tbe. ſmall phial; 7 
about half as much as that in the large an 
With the ſame quantity of ſpirit of nirre in 
the large phial, and with the application of 
the. haat of N candle, I; gt fiften unge me- 
ſures af ait. At anather time The Rn 
tity of ithe acid . has 
een twelve ounge me⸗ 


i is n Meg 18 N, 
1 have . that S 
| quantityi of. reid ee ee 10 produce 4 


greatly: defielent, the beiſkoelbof tha evt, 
_ cence loccaſioning a'conliderable heats Which 
is alyays fuvourable to the ſolution ot metals. 
But the application of equal gegtees of hege 
Will not make the product uf airicqual, /ugloſk! = 
other citeumſtances i be attended to. When⸗o 
ever I have compared ithę ſtrength e 
this manner I ha ſctupuloꝶſi atian 

for al could, to all rl 1 i 


4 


* 


* 


\ 


o 


"S + in ont 20 5550 


2 


che I W 
nitraug acid. Ibir0p be 


Se of the 1 


Tae 


;% 0 


8 


- 
#2 
oe 
uf 
0 
Sz 
* 
* 
* 
> 
” 
"oF 
-v 


* 
o 
% 
* 
* 


1 
* 
. 
* 
4 


5 


4 ö ae e | yo rnd by * 
8 ww 
ec nitrous eee, the bulk of the 
. acid. er ntity of Water Was poured | 
| pon the pine of ith and iron; it became 


| tion was-petceived'in dt for abouti a minute, 
wher oft At once into the moſt vi- 
7 met rome dn, rv anda” prodi- 


 diteds 605 rrioIuO UA e Ii 22 mt 
ib 27 lol od Uiw art f Hd W, 8 | 
_ ab» gu os ela (no, oN 10 


Mr. Delaval Was ſo 6bligitig] as to in 
me 4 all "aftringeit” vegetables, as galls, the 
vian bark and green ted;"diffolve with: $62 | 
U u rity in the nittous acid, in a man? 
| io une wie ſolution of ſevet of the \ 
als in the faine'acid ; and that a great quis 
F Net is gotetated in the prodefe/s icke 
dintely made ee with galls, and 
was real) y ſutprized at the effect. The ſolu ? 
tion was, indeed, "+ ingly rapid; but che 
quantity of air produced by it was not, ſeem- 
ingly, greater than would have been yield 
by the ſame bulk of any other vegetable ſub - 
ſtance, diſſolved in the ſame acid, with more 
heat. The ait ar was of the ſame: quality 
Woe that which i ed 
a . 


/ ; 
4 i 
% 
Po 
4 
% 
* 
* 
- 
* 
1 
A ; 
2 


49 Aa 


4 $ £2 
3 8 
W 8 
IM we 2 
>». 
2 % 
24 
4 
4 


and one of this occapled | © © 
ar WG nb A ß ius NY 6ths 2 


Sau . bench n „0 ek. 2 9 


t he es rem a ae b 


nt 8. 1 14 


Wr dete 712100 are i impreg ated 
trous vapour, and the metals terwards 
ſolved in them, TY 10 e an . 


4 „„ #7 


e ": . 4347 GEUP 4 Wy . 10 


; equal parts of oil, of os aſp 
f fire, diluted with . ater, . 


[hed $474 11 

the firlt 7 phages and e gre eateſt par 
Add th s inf flamimable.. | 92 
| ih all he lens air came 


— 


vey rapidly, as 


1 


wings of | 


and ſtrong ſpi of Litre; diluted by! 


which ar Arft was tlie ſame a: 


kept continually approdching 


1 45 27 


; 10 8 pi 
1 alſo put eq val e dess ai af v8 ATR 


# * 2 = if * * 
. 15 , * 2 
is 


22171 s $ TO * ON "BI 5 sg alas 


E e wh 


9 94 ' : 
. 1 bY: 


n exactly (a 
Air. 


Fg > +>: 8. 


hi nicrous va 


ur; % 
11 8 . 1 75 gs 2 


9 


EC gras My. an 
an quite t 
tant 4 | s of the | two. acids 
_ diftrigu 1 r ö as in the pr ce 
i n 0 de obſery ved, that the 
inthe jirrovs, acid yields a þ 

| a PS. - | | 
5 1255 15 eee 27 bas öde 90 


76 e „dc! gt best ; 
979 ann of an e ial quaiitity 0 A | 


ws marine acid with iron My 1 Air 


41 
#3 1 
2 


> 


— 


and inftammable ai 
lambent greeri but 


pure inflamitiable Air, "and 125 


* "Wy 


bw 4 * 4 — Ae! 4 4 1 — 5 | "1 : N. 125 2 4 A 


„ ts 


aw + 


more ſpirir. | It inta the { 
Tron I Ke px 23 Pn | N. 5 500 | 
. $i NNE KAY * ON 


2 


* : * 


8 5 5 


i 
__ 
OY. 
5 
4 


q — +4 oY 4 Wa 
. ; Faqs + * py ; p 5 
* a i 

566% I 2 3 Þ 2 
; 4 Fs $.#. 3 oF 1 19 1 [30 Þ Io; TT 

ge oth. # Ba 054 
; 7 * ; 29 2445 By i. *F *; 7 

1 1 i 4 * 2 1 
| * * 4 : 

* 9 


>; 1 
| 0 1 97! . 40 


7 


2 
* 
A 


55 df C 9. 4 4 te K 3 ö Y 
r * 1 
4 
* #4 7 * o + by 4 Fm "} 3 * 81 * 
1 * I 4. 135 5 75 * * d — 4% / - ; 
2 3 ö 3 
- 4. 4 $ 1 * 8 p X * : 
Fa; , - « : „ . $ R [ F" 8 
* y 1 4 * EF 2 : * LY. 7 5 [7 , x 4 1 by At 5 4 ws 1 55 * * © 
* 2 5 8 * 7 8 ; 5 
n . EA 13 7: a 
#4 1 wy as 
„ + 3 
eee molt 56 
E ie 7 
3s "Mt 
Sy 4 4 
5 * * 4 * * 
ii wa fb: 0h. 
SET} b 444 4 2 * 
; 4 
K 1 a 
I» 5 


| 5 Fire =d 24 2000, Cn On 
eee HOW 4.9 Haß 0e Fi You 1 15 Ai dioc 


{ 
Ly 0 6 
* * On * 
: 1 
: * 
* 
— P * 
* 
z 
* 
: * 
> z 
, 
” _ 
# b 
* 
6 
* fr ; 
* [ 
n: D 
. - b 7 
* * 
ry d þ 
a * 
9 / 2 
ry 
ol 10 ph 
4 . 1 4 * 
4 * 


x} ta he x 
kept ee phrosching 1 85 


FI a Þ 500 i 


qual tas of oil of Fea 


2 of nitre, diluted 05 n, 


! 


| ich d vapour LAY vis 
e t to the 


| uf +» pa 
5 fo be 
+I acid 


5 e 1 

1 mixture 3 an e arg had 
and marine acid with iron, u Air 
which at firft was the” ſame 18 re of nj- 
trous'and' "aflygenable ye wah '2 
lambent greeti 


＋ 
451 2 , * 
#5 


pore mtu, he e 5 


FA 
. 
] «AE 2 


3 
* 
2 17 * 
oe 
„ 
1 2; 
1 / ; 
F r 
—— 3 : * 
a4 _— 
12 2 
Wt 
2 
nn 1 
Pa: 25 F 8 
3 ' 5 var Ts [ 
<4, 1 * - 4% * 
7 
# 
"»Y "T7 
„ l 
[2 £42 4 
r 75 
1 „ +. 0 nbd 5 
0 4 „ ; 4 . 
* 8 * * ” 4 + » * Tk 
n 74 1*y- 45 * 11 1 
elne 19 ol EQ N. ii | 
a - 1 — 1 * 0 "44 iT - 
255 4 L 4 '4 bus #4 * O 1 1 1 
F 1 * 5 4 £4 1 5 
bat * N ifs FF 9 * T 11, ks £ £1 9 N q 
. ; 0 „ . bi 5 2 
e . 7 | 1 4 5 4” 4 F 
01 
1 fs | 40 


8 N WET 
W 8 1 * * x/ oY 7 1%; * 
i 3 ow: 7 444 3 
pt r 8 
. ; 


os 
L 7.0 
2 2 . 
9 EO 
* 22 


* FA 45 
* . LF 4 4 2 2 10 5 1.3 


TY * # 
2 iT» 
— 


| 155 3 Shit 2 „0 
„ Notz od thod | 


SECTION 


* 


8 5 2 * » © 
2 e 
| * . 2 6 9 Yak » wt 1 


2 F. 1 4 
? 6 ; 1 
- "—_ * 
| bus, 3 jt 7 
4 ond . 4 
* 5 1 


eee 8 2 10 2 x. 
* N 1 Fes 2 2 4 A Jen's 1161 254 3.8 9405 ry 
4 of Jome erments made in. conſe- = 


F on Attempt do hog's the Nrzzovs, 


in the ares he » Alte 
: = RA 2 


| — i in that manner; which is 1 exceed- 


4 18 4 


ingly convenient for a chymical examination 
and analyſis. Since the idea firſt occurred to 

me, I have never once loſt ſight of it being 
well aware of the unſpeakable i importance of 
it in ſuch inveſtigations as I have been en 
in; and the farther I have carried my re- 
ſearches, the more important is the part chat 1 
| find this acid to act 1 2 ies of nature. ? 


A great part even of 8 firſt publications : 


on this ſubject related to nitrous air, into which . 
this acid principally enters; the obſervations 
contained in my ſecond volume, exhibit this 
acid in a much greater variety of modifica- 
tions, as being equally a principal ingredient, _ 
both in the moſt noxious and th 


. . 21 
9 | Ome, i 
* Vi 4 a R As _ 


nt „ 


— 


— 


4 


in ſo many different ways, that our nearer 3 


1 85 neden to dBi by ſome fuld ſub. 


ſome, eee 1 ol 
' hekindsof ar; and fil beben dbet mer 1 
periments and obſervations relating to the am 
acid make no eſs a figure in the preſent. ub. B 
lication. And ſtill the. ſubject is ſo far Hm 1 
being exhauſted, that all that hag been hithetr-: 4,7. 


— 
OTE 


to inveſtigated. ſeems: to be nothing. mẽ \ Þ 


ing to ſomerhing much greater 
ng that we yet een n | 
op ar we bang aseeſs to: it 


* * \ 
1 N 


approaches Tue much facilizated.; | jw „„ - 0 
21, pr 100 U 1. congaiideq Hei vo tot Saw? „ 

Fan | EI 
reſt, has been as I have ſaidꝭ ta contrive howto; 4 
exhibit. the riteguy,. acid inthe form, of OP” "Hl 
from ang combination with Wen ami e 


. 


8 . 
22 * 
n 9 \ 
TS $I 
4 2 * 


ſtance, with which it had no affinity, as had 
been able to da with reſpect to other kinds of ) ͤ 
air, by means of water or quickſilver ; in or 
der that I: miglit introducewhateverſubſtances- 25 
I pleaſed into this air, through that fluid s 


that their affini ; with. this air might be exa- by 
mined, with the ſame eaſel and convenience 1 
cher 1 have been able to _—_ other ſimilar + © 

. | But 1 believe there is no fluid fubſftante ! : 


in nature, with Which the nitrous acid will not —— 
readily en o as to be abſorbed by Ie. 
Dr * Wat ä 


| | able roſueceede 1 wiſh, have had bach other 


e ſucces ehen ables 
1 TY Sb che aeg a0 i the' form f air, 
wien water; and co kerp it in this 3 
4 4 - 9 But nt wickodt a iture f 
mo ait, and ſoaded with phlogiſton. My: 
— now ate; t0'{eparatethnpblagift =o 
iti MP VE e HV RA To 8 I 
* 25691 1/5. 2871 Bank 10S9H1D ee ni 
„„ will ** ſeen, vol. II. p. 330 chat, at the 
ttetime of my laſt publication, I was not without 
lcepeb of being iwo in porietlien; uch aRddd 
ſubſtance as would” fully: ahfter tik views! 
adobe mentioned; expeRting; as I: then ſug- 
geſted, chat ſome of the animal oils would ſuf- 


tts hope I have found myſelf 
pid; this vapour being, 
Hy cupable of being conſmed 
| 4 by any other fluid ſabſtance whatever.” 5 we 
3 ever; as the of ſucceſs I have: met with 
WW conſequence of mp unſucceſsful attempts 
1 | | _to;gain'my'pvin t in this way; -and the experi- 

5 wenn that { made for- this purpoſe ate in 
_ theinfelves curious; and of ſome 1 
That 4 3 of g with an 


— — 


; _—_ ” N - 54 * 
8 * \ Gp 2: off » 4 
1 5 S * : 6. | „ : % 
/ : 23 wi * { 6 4.4 : ag 4 3 13 1 4 10 42 5 13 
l " i % 6 8 x 4 . „ 4 k s 5 
5 L 
' 4 : Go 


 fieletitty cotifine" the nicrovs' vapour: | But iW 


4 
a 7 2 * Fx + Ft 11 7 HS * * * y * + * 


* 


* $ * 
L r % - t 
r & 
* 0 AY 2 * » 1 
2 * 9 4 {5 PF 
. A 2 


men that whale 1 Chicks 8 3 2 
ticle, might ſerve my purpoſe of neg the th 
nitrous acid vapour, as well as any other ani- 


mal oil; 1 imagined that had only to contrive Wh” 
| how to raiſe this vapour. Merely heating the 


acid, I had found (as will be ſeen. vol. II. P. 
330) would not anſſrer; and therefore. ſome | 
more powerful means was neceſſary. to ſeparate 
it from its water, and expel it in the tam f 
air. Now, reflecting upon the exceedingly 
rapid ſolutions of ſeveral of the n 
acid ſtrongly concentrated. or with a mixture 
of a very little water; and the phenomena ate. 
tending the receiving of the air ſo produced ia 
water, when I had obſerved ver large bub- 
bles to iſſüe from the end of the tube that 
tranſmitted the air, but exceedingly: mall ones 
riſing to the top of the jar, I caught the hint 
of getting nitrous vapour by this means Fer 
the large bubbles, I Was well ſatis ed muſt 
have been the nitrous acid itſelf in the furm of 
air, but preſently abſorbed by water while 
the, ſmall bubbles were the nitrous air arhich 
was the proper produce: of the ſolution; the 
heat attending the ſolution having) been the 
means of expelling à great quantity 'of ſuper- 
abundant acid, along with the air. By ſome 


rapid ſolution of this kind, therefore, I. was. 

ſure to get a very great proportion. of nitrous 
vapour, 0 mixed with a little nitrous air, 
Vor. III. * 1 


3 


tals in this 


Nee * 1 


7 178 | 07 2 Nitrous 4 2 


1 „ „ 


Wich theſe 11 Were coußdäpble Vs 


we not without ſome fear of Apel : 
| I filled a humber of ſmall jars with my whale 


oil, and placed them, inverted, in à baſon of 


my phials, with a ground ſtopple and tube, 


I dropped my lump of biſmuth into it, pour: 


ing after it a ſmall quantity of water, to pro- 


event. But alas | nothing followed, but ex- 
actly ſuch appearances as I had before ſeen in 


orifice of the tube communicating with the 
as they thad: been in water, they were preſent- 


reduced in bulk fo much, as not to exceed 
that of the heads of ſmall pins before they 


reached the rop of the jar. I then found that 


the proper nitrous vapour was abſorbed by the 
ail as it bad been before by the water; and 


that all the Feen, air _s. I g ho *this 


Ws. 
* 


4 1 
1 Fs.» 4 FR Fg 1 * 
* . 1 5 ; * 8 L 25 - 


for which ; ſhould hore to wake an allow 
unde. „„ oe 


1 178 2 


the ſame, exactly as 1 had been ' uſed: to da 
with quickſilver, for thoſe kinds of air that are 
capable of being eonfined by it: and having a 
ſmall quantity of ſtrong nitrous acid/1 in one of 


- mote "the- ſglurion,” and eagerly expected the 


A 


water. For though the prodigjouſly large 
bubbles, which iſſued in torrents from the 


Phial, were not, indeed, fo. quickly abſorbed 


Ay contracted in their dimenſions, and were 1 


e 4 nin 863 E £4 F l Moy” ay Pay 
5 | a 


way was the mall wn ge cem at ih | 


the. a e mr ed. d., 


14 5 7 or Fo 255 Fes 508 U Len 


Seat! ' Ercumſtances wa NN: er 
chis experiment, which 7 k me. ve 55 
at chat 1 time, and were, ir ind W. wan 455 
inex plicable'to me; Rag n later aye 
hays made the theory 6 ff ih pre 


much 


thier 
1 


. 


1 2 wick, oe Sen LE 
ed 59, $5 :kvt as wc dns wot 
Thee Reit indie ele öl, the adeiion of 
eh are of | nicrous yapout and nitr wait 
to the vil, was the Bearing of ir excerflingly; and | 
99 7 it. ren, Bot when it ha food ts 
al it became e 7:4, an And Cds gulated; and When 

h with Giger Gi fr for be vir,” and 
5 to the 125 ern Uke the jero off, 
0 8 C ontinued ere, without mg with the 


\ 2 i % * J 2 F TAs © 4 2+ 27 $3 4 ; 1 . * 3. 1 
Teſt o f. ibe oi ; £: f | 
| U 1. 2 O13 F ail 


Af Let EMEA r 
18 531.5 at f 441 7616 ity IT 37 x4 

But ae 28 1 an Jas MAY 
2 hol Fi unexpected by m6; ; Was, that 
When. A th wn out all the nitraus air that 
had be 2 E in 7 BS # hd" * 
Alles, the * ls, again Vith n he, oil Only, 

kept. uing from cer pe Part of it! yery Wi 


} 
2 


oully, z ſo chat in a ffiort time 2 conlide fiderable 


4 < 2 


| et les than o uk fourth of the 608. 


* - 4 
FI , * * "4 : 4 # 
ky + $ * 4 FS . - 2 1 : 4 4 X 
{ Ef ; ; = 9 * 
* 2 5 : : 2 5 > 
2 1 : * * x 


310 0 lp F1 lech 


Y 


180 of the Nia le . | 


fents of each jar, was fe; parated from i Y 
Polling an equal bulk of oil.” "When the! Jars 
yere left in a cool place, and conſequently 4 the 
whoſe maſs of oil. was coagulated, | this p procel: | 
Was necefſarily.; at a ſtand; "but when 1 1 2 
the jars. near. the fire, ſo fo as to lic qguif 7 t oil, 
the 4 7 of f HEN, refund, anch we vente on 
ge es baore, ä 
PULL Tt W 1133\ v 


Yorks [27 14. Til I ; * 1112 ell Alec 
Ro "Art I could n „ immedia ely y n feeing 5 
this phenomenon, form any idea of he 55 
of this air; and i it requir red ſome. tim een 


— 


F 
7 


2 quantity of it,. Gulfcient for 2. 1 factory 


4 


Examination of its properties; IK Viewing | 
thi is *prod! uctioꝑ . 8 05 51 fel ble Pg 
gree of ſurprize_ and | anxious. expektstion. | 
An ong other things, . I thought it it poſh ethat\ 
. this might be the very. nitrous acid. air that : 
pad heen ſo long in queſt of, eleapi ping. from 
the oil, which had been over Haag With it, 
like water ſtrongly impregnated with fixed alr; 
and that thus, in this moſt unexpected man- 
LY [ray f in poſ eon of all e 
Wit this gags: the firſt” ikiog ow 2 þ tri ed, 
ſoon, as_1 had, by putting all the ſmall 
fon Ys (wh 1 F cod do . a 
trough. of oil that I had ptepared for the'pur- 
poſe) gotten! enough. for the experiment, was 
Ae to it A e of alk! ine 5 5 
de 


„ 


pour, and gonſequently that hope was. entirely 
blaſted... I alſo found that 
abſorbed by, water, dg nitrous vapout 80 
ee HAVE BRak 1 i % 3 88 evo; 


. .— Jar 64% 


WT lb apptarance wy any thing like , ” 
a white cloud: procuced by mixing chem + i 
that is could not have been any pure acid va- 


it this air Was not | 


* 721 3 2 ; ks . * * 
WES WT WEE + Pd 
” | 


- at 


OW Gant. 03 Vins „„ 


* — 50 nl 8d ha this e 1 


vitroxs.air, with which, as ell as with the 


nitrous vapour, this oil had been ſaturatod a 


but on admitting to it a proper quantity of 


common air, there was neither any redneſs, 


or diminution of bulk, produced. I then 


imagined that it; might poſſibly be inflammable 


air; ihe Phlogiſton of the oil, as. well as of 
the nitrous air, and nitrous vapour, having 


contributed to it; but it extinguiſhed a candle. 


And finding at the ſame time that it. did not 


make lime · Water turbid, it rd to As a 


fact,” mere e ba als ions le; 


The n ne in which * air . 


by this proceſs, and which I did not under- 


ſtand at the time that I firſt obſerved it, is, in 


ſhort, chis, All oils readily decompoſe nitrous 
air, as well as imbibe nitrous vapour, in con- 


ſequence of che affinity chat oils have,wirh this 


acid; and in all caſes in which nitrous air is : 


decoippaſed, it is reduced to the ſtate of phlo- 


N. 3 | WO. 


/% 


eifticated air.” But Rill I am n tofs 
to account for the produẽtion of ſuch a'quans 
tiy of this air from che oil thus impregnated; _ 
after the nitrous air produced by the ſolution 
of the metal had been thrown out x confider- 
| Ing that it is only a very ſmall} proportion of 
nitrous air that any fluid ſubſtance can be made 
properly to imbibe ; whereas this phlogiſti- 
cated air was ſufficient,” in quantity, to have 
been the reſiduum of ten times as much ni- 
trous air as the quantity of all the oil uſed in 
the experiment. This production of phlogiſ- 
ticated air from oil will be ſeen exactly to re- 
ſemble the production of a ſtill greater pro- 
portion of nitrous air from water, treated in 
the very ſame manner; but then I am not 
able to account err of the facts any better 
than he owe! a bx hows 33 ie | t T nns 


1b. 13 . e * 


2 Tz s 


N. B When ] ids a e of idkatice 
air paſs through this oil ſaturated with nitrous 
vapour, in order to mix it with the air which 
had iſſued from it, the oil, from 1 8 2253 

W e e bisck. „ e 

After this: I impregnated mY the kinds of o oil 
with nitrous vapour, but in a manner different 
from this, and I ſhall give an account of the 
N 5 * e Ducken are a. 


| % "A F . ta 
1 7 * * LE. 
*. 
3 j a 8 
#4 4 3 7 F 5 4 
\ 
* 


5 


— 1 WWW 8 
1 7 WS 4% * by e Ts a) 
EYRE OLA ET, FL FS, 

5 - 4 ; 
o * * — 
1 x 8 
75 b R F — 
> We 
„ 1 
* of N 
- ” F 
98 #- EE hes 
: 4 . 
%.- ry a 
I 5 þ 
j F 18 
. 
{ 
; > 4 4 g 
„ 
* 
/ 0 * 
7 
h * 


ciently remarkable, in a future ſection, ap- :- - 
propriated to that porphſe nn  e 


v . N 1 * 3 X 


1 Fi Tx * 
ws 1 * OD ' 51 h N 


. bus | ; * 
' A 23 £74 : . 
— wa TIES. ö 95 


= Thus ended my firſt attempt to procure m , ; 
trous acid air; fruitleſs, indeed, with ref] 


0 0 » * x , 
to my principal o it not quite uſeleſs - | 
% x = 
| in unn ne. reparin the wa for ſuch a de- 5 
1 8 
4 : > * * 
P 4 »t * A ” 
" E 4 7 r 1 =- 
? * 3 g Nh 
F i i , 1 4 * 5 Is - 
, ; o_ fd, 
1 ne N 1 * "hy, => 4 x 2 * 
i * br . p4 * > As © * 
E # 7 o 1 I 
5 E * * ** ” 
8 * * 4 
$ *# + 4 1 4 
ef * 7 4 - * 
* + A ; : * 4 1 
4 * a + of 8 7 * 7 , 
4 7 o C A 
A 8 4 " . ” 
2 0 — ; : 
* - of * * 
* ? 4 of 4 K * f © © 3 3 
1 ** * 7 - 1 % o 4 2. "Ws - 
p * * * 
a a 1 7 [ . * LV * 
* *. a 
LS 2 4 5 ; * 7 : J | f 1 
s > * 5 7 f = 
i a | | (54,55 1 b 5 p 
5 I * * * 
LA . ; — F 1 4 / . 
5 5 4 | 7 3 7 a * — s £ 
1 * * * * + 4 & 0) $ : ; ; J a a 4 
+ * * * 
# "FN 
i * * 9 
0 1 * * k 
ON. a2 3 7 4 
; f ; * P44 5 . 
z 4 83 y * * , 1 
% * 75 * , 7 
* 
> * 3 — 
; f ; x 4 . 1 
0 1 * 5 
; Py 1 * * 1 i 5 Fs 
f #4 4 1 3 ; | : . 
3 | 
7 { * * 7 F »* ? \ , o 
” 7 4 1 4 * 8 1 
3 . „ 1 -% 1 e i ? ; * - 
+ & * ra * i n 
þ $ x x „ * 
. z * 4 " C 
, : 5 5 * 
8 % © f ** F 9 [4 2 22 * 4 
" * e ou 4 V ;; py 
* 1 g * * — PF SIG. # 2 £ E * £ 
x g 4 
* » F 
LA "Eo 1 * — x 3 
3 . 8 1 A 
. FOE i 8 9 5 5 2 : - 14 * * 1 
4 5 . * 3 bo * . 
| 0 * - / ; 
Fs E y 2 * 9 * 8 , 
* n 14 
1 . 931 1 
E f ? 4 * 
* 4 * : 
8 7 1 » * : * . 
4 17 7 r g : « 4 0 f # % 
* * 4 14 * 4 * N F * wed 
1 0 % * 4 * o % F 
> of fr * * » 4} Ly . 
e- 0 » 
44 s: * #, 4 
* + 7 a> % * » -* 4 - n * 
* # - * > g 4 f A 
1 ws 4 2 x . * 1 + 
4 p o : © a> ry * 
* * * 
* j ; 
4 * 9 : 1 $0 * [1 1 * N 2 N 1 C ” 
= * 3 * 4 * 2 — Y 7 : % : 7 * & . ” 
Y * 1 4 * *. 3 ; * . + 
f . bh e 
5 { 
. 7 # , 0 
£ 4 2 2 7 1 5 2 „ 2 
1 1 * * * * - 3 " 
L444 4.4% 5 fb f wh & IF he”, n : 
* 2 RT. þ # 
9 + 1 
/ * 1 
* — 
* py £ * * 1 & 4 * by 
, - 8 EF 4 * . ö — ; 95 E # 
” . „ * * * 
1 2 * 4 * * 
3 1 
* . 
; 1 * f : 15 
1 5 * n 1 f > . - . 
” FS S's 2 ! $4 5t]: ; 2 ü of *. 3 x * 3 ” 
= - 42 * 5 F 3 3 4 xs 3 
; L EF 3 1 « * 
. £ f 4 1 i } 
F +6; » -< * * 1 . 
* * 77 * « * « od — A 
! 3 Ty 1 ” OS 7 * « * 1 * 5 
44 * 5 4 Y © 4 of 14 j i f 1 
x 1 5 % 4 
** — 
* 
* * +. $ 4 a . * 1 # 5 Y 7 
* 1 > 75 4 4 
ut { 3 „ 1 +3 * 1 2 5 
P 4 * 1 1 
3 * ink £3 * a * + # 4 #2 A, 71 3 * ** 8 ” 
; - FI: 7 2 
* 4 — 
i . 7 
, "BL? 4 5 2 4 24 
4 3 * 5 a 
+ Sw 7 . 
n S * ” % F . *- + © K * . 7 * - 
ip „ i x 
F * 4 
3 ; . ; 
* = 


a 0 N 
* 
P , . * * / 
* — N 
2 / ; 
. 4 f Ll 
1 5 9 3 f 
* * 
8 — * 
* 9 
F 7 
3 - 
4 5 / * * 
0 : Bo. 
F * 
7 4 


7 5 SECTION vin. 


TS 
"© 


age" ay 


ohe dale on FY Winans: eo EY 


* # 
+; 1 5 1 If 2 $74. f TS. F N Tit - 
1 7 E ol F 2 7 * 0 
4 { , 4 - * 5 $a 4 16 
- * 5 » * "4 7 Hes £44 F * 1 
4 , 0 { 1 0 


er 


* 0 5. 2 5 h N W 9 3 
5 - N 5 # : bs. | * 1 1 7 2 * XS 
. * * P — I” * oþ 


Bee diſuppojnred, 80 has been ſeen, in 


my expectations of confining the nitrous acid 
vapour by animal gil, it occurred to me, that, 
in lieu of this, it might not be wholly. without 
its uſe, if I could ſhut up this vapour in dry 
glaſs phials, with ground ſtopples. And 
though, in this method of procuring it, by 
the ſolution of biſmuth, or other things with 
which it unites moſt rapidly, there is neceſſari- 
tha mixture of nitrous air, it is inconſiderable 
in proportion to the quantity of pure nitrous 
vapour itſelf. And though a mixture of com- 
mon air alſo would neceflarily. remain in the 
Phial, it could only ſerve to dilute the acid va- 
Pour, and could not materially alter the pro- 
perties of it. Alſo, if the mouths of the phials 
were ſmall, they might be opened, and va- 


rious ſubſtances admitted to the vapour, with- 


out much loſs of the acid; eſpecially as all 
acid vapours, I had reaſon to 0008s" Were 
heavier Gan common air. 5 


939 


6 erg to Ant yk wich Fas 
1 views, I preſently. thought of an gaſß 
method of putting my deſign into execution. 
Tbis was by making the ſolution in a; 14 

phial, as 4 fig. 3, that there might be room 4 
= ebullition of the acid, Without any da 
of its being thrown out; and having the 
through which the vapour was tranſmittedi bent 
downwards, in order to be inſerted into the 
mouths of the phials that were to receive the 
vapour. I his contrivance perfectly anſwered 
my purpoſe. For I ſoon found that ag the 
ſolution was ſo very rapid, and: | conſequently 
the production of: nitrous vapour in this pro 
ceſs exceedingly copious, I; _ by -placing 


5 a number of dry; phials in a line, fill chm al 


with this red vapour in then ſpace! of a few ſe- 
conꝭ s; cloſiag ſome of them while I was fll- 
ling others; and when this was done, I could 
either keep the plüals filled with the vapbur it- 
ſelf, as long as I pleaſed, or put into them ſuch 
ſubſtances as l intended to imbibe che.yapour. 
Or, if I chought proper to do ſo, I could;firſt 
put thoſe ſubſtances, whether ſolid or liquid, 

into the 3 and then. throw; 4 den of 


| I 2 * $.300 <! I I Og 
122.90 Yay 10 i eee 19 Wd. 
ene vapou , in the manner in which 
_ procuretl it, Was always: red, I have little 
e but that n acicbitſelf, ee 


LU » 
21 - 
— - - n , = YT 7 
3 * 1 * * 
* * * 


x86 : ' Obſervations on the 


of every . foreign to it, is as . 
as tlie other acids. But in this ee it ne- 
ceſſarily acquires, - and carries off with it, a 

great portion of phlogiſton, from the metals 
| What it has diflolved. ' And other obſervations 

ſhew that it is only when the nitrous acid be- 
comes, in ſome meaſure, phlogiſticated, that 
it aſſumes a deep orange-colour.; and that the 
less phlogiſton it . the Wiſer it — 1s. 


When a phial h Filled with this bed. —_ / 
tam ſpirit of nitre, and cloſed with a ground 
ſtopple, or when it is confined in — tubes 
mites Barr ſealed at both ends, which I have 
Frequently done, it will continue red I do not 
know how long; but I have kept it many 
months in this ſtate, and i imagine it will never 
change its colour, except in conſequence of 
phlogiſtieating the common air contained in 
the phial; when the phlogiſton, which occa- 
pots 'the redneſs of this vapour, quits it, and 
loſes its colour, by being incorporated WR | 
mi air, as will be ſeen n 3 


0 | The change of colour given 0 this vapour | 
by heat is not a little remarkable, for it is al 
together independent of gravity or condenſa- 
tion. In order to make ſome experiments of 
df this kind to proper advantage, 1 procured 
| 7 9 wo three feet mes and about an 
: inch 


Pd 


* a. 


wide aper cd, ani vnn 
a ground ſtopple at the other: This tube 1 
entity filled with red vapour, in conſequence 
of its being. much heavier than mt 0 n air; 4 BE 
and cloſing the open end with the ſtoppte, 'ob=  * * 
ſerved, that that part of the'tube:-which-Iheldd  _ 
in my hand was manifeſtiy of a deeper; colourt . 
than any other part of the tube. On this: 1 ; 
held one end of it to the fire, and found that 
that end grew moſt intenſely red, three or four 
times more ſo than the reſt of the tube. The 
direction in which the tube was held made no 
difference with reſpect to the red part of it; 
4 | os nf na that was horteſt being always te 3 
= peſt coldur, whether it was held upwards — © 
or io e ſo that whether the heated v 
pour aſcended or deſcended, it did not retain | 
its colour in the ſmalleſt degree, after it had 
been oppoſite to the Bede pat wo The ; nog 
That this raclicaty redn was Pot oc- 
caſioned by the vapour being more Tarefied i in 
that particular place, appeared by the while 
tube aſſuming the ſame deep red colour, when 
the whole length of it was made equally hot: fr 
the vapour being cloſely confined, the denſity 
of it within the tube "muſt neceſſarily have 
continued the fame in all the variations of heat 
or cold. This redneſs, therefore, muſt be the - 
e effect of beat, wenn 3 
| uld - 


; % . 


- 


ſhould abe, 16f the vapour. 8 15 
this experiment very often, with the ſame 
tube, and the ſame vapour, it became alter- 
| nately of a deeper or lighter colour, according 
as it was kept hot or cold, without any 
ſenſible change, except that which depended . 
upon this ſingle circumſtance. This is really 
a ſtriking experiment, and eſpecially when the 
tube contains juſt ſo much vapour as to be 
nearly tranſparent when it is cold ſo that 
the heat N . it all che 7 8 7 aa . 
ROD WW 205 . 


= . 4 ww 7 


0 aber to e the 0 4 WY heck 
on this vapour, I placed the cloſed end of 
the tube near the fire, and bringing it gra- 
dually nearer and nearer, obſerved that the 
colour deepened uniformly with the increaſe pf 


heat, till, the glaſs actually melting, the bn. 5 


ä fine + "go burſt 1 its "oy out. 


.: 


n Gichs nibbable? fron ed Reba : 
thay if this vapour was not confined, but had 
room to expand itſelf, it would hecome co- 
lourleſs with heat. This, at leaſt, is the caſe 
when it is combined with water. The. phe-. 


nomena | refer to are very common in the 
proceſs for making dephlogiſticated air, in 
which I firſt obſerved them. But the ſame 
things ate nn in the W for pro- 


Ber . — 


— 6 common: _ for ee 

ſpirit of nitre itſelf. It is that hen the heat 

is moderate, the vapour within the glaſs tube 

or retort is red, but that, be ee 

| den me n e ee 14 92 
$745 "24-3647 N ES IP 15 © 1 8 Fi LY 

| ee for along ume 0g 


1 54 1 A 
1 . 4 4%. 


mitted was quite tranſparknt next to the fire}, 


but that near the water, Where the. dür was 
delivered it has been quite red, and ev 
within the phial itſelf, after / it had been rang 
mitted through the water. It ãs alſo ce 
ly obſerved; in the proceſs fot mak ing ſſ pirit af 


nitre, that red fumes firſt appear in thelretutt, 


8 N in the aludel, if any be uſed, arid laſtly 
in the receiver that when the heat is greateſt, 
the tetort becomes We er while che 
AMladehopgeneonjerr ce en leer apy 
How wrdnſparent,” "and. ah rv 


will be red. I have alle obſerved: 9 


8 as the heat ant aterm? 


ee, the. redneſs returns. inte che 0 radi 


as the beat incteaſes- 1 have alſo CO; 
obſerved * when there has been nothing 


bs: A % 


and is conſtantly driven back again 


u 


the -rerore! leuticoliwileſ <a 5 
water, yet that, when they have paſſed into the 
receiver, they have eee in . 
mitem eee Kaen 5 745 - MIS PU 1 * 
204% Alt t ien, agen "2 j bee 74 
2 18 is Ai” Gong hacer that, in the laſt 
| ſtage of the proceſs for making ſpirit of nitre, 
the red vapour always re-appears in the retort, 
which, at laſt, becumes moſt, intenſely ted, 
10 as to appear almoſt black ; and this. will 
be the caſe t the heat be increaſed ever 
ſo much. : tr is: probable; therefore; that heat | 
Has this power of attenuating! the nitrous va- 
pour, and making it: colourleſs, only when 
| Logs combined with water, as well as with 
Phlogiſton ; fo that it diſappears, as it were, 
and is concealed in the feam 3 but that after 
the diſtillation is over, and there is no ,moif- 
ture left for the acid vapour to combine with, 
that, ia this caſe;! as well as in chat of my long 7 
tube, heat only contributes to make the va- 
pour more red.. One would imagine, alſo, 
that; in the laſt ſtage of che proceſs for mak - 
ing ſpirit of nitre, there could be no phlo- 
\giltori- forthe nitrous vapour to unite with; 
and threfore it a not impoſſible; motwith- : 
ſtanding my conincturen above mentioned, that 
the pure nitrous v may be neceſſariby 
red, except when tombined' wick water, cor 
ſome other ſubſtances? [ene #Þ * 270 Lag: 164 EN 
„ 4 | That ; 


{4 


s -Tharihis edna of the oregon ab 
appears when the phlogiſton is combined with 
air, as well as with water, was avidens from 
ſeveral of the obſervations that I have made. 


I was led to aſcertain this circumſtance more 
particularly, by having a ſmall phial filled - 
with this red vapour, which I enerally car- 

ried about with me, in order to ſhew it to my 
friends; when I obſerved that, in the | 
of about a month, though the phial was well 
cloſed with a ground topple, © as bars 
appeared afterwards, the colour 
diſappeared 3 ſo that at laſt the Nen 4 
barely diſtinguiſhable by the a0 of 

heat, and, of courſe, it would anſwer 15 pur- 
PE. no longer. Fr . wen win S 


— * 
9 4 Wo 8 1 >; 8% mY 4 PT 4 4 5 
4 . 3 . 111 k 2 


wad & SOME 


Upon this 1 took it 600 s Nes ed, that * 
phil had not been well cloſed”; but, in order 
16 ſatisfy myſelf with reſpect to it, 1 ope ned 
the phial under water, when + 1 
ately half filled with it. Had examined 'the 
Air within the hial, it would certainly have 
been found to 175 ogiſticated. But though 1 
neglected to do We 1 that time, 1 took ſuf. 
ficient Lare hos aſcertain Tay qa 
yrards-/ . 3 * 400 cbt 1004 n 


C33 73:3 Tt 4 14.1 {iq 2 15 


io: are e eng 


+Biaj-patefonelypadent 2 L opened · under 
fer another dial which had been filled wit 


r ; „ the 


192 


caſe at leaſt, 
We with phl 


727 2 * MN 


pour about cw months before, and 


je red va 


the colour of which was evidently fainger than 


it had been, when the water immediately 
ruſhed in, and filled two thirds of it, and the 
air Within it was not at all affected y hitrous 


7 } 4 SISK bis r 12 1 e * 91 
; « 4 = $K% Y 3#& x 1 * L 8 7 5 


e At 3 1 15 made Aa very 41 aq 


clean phial but lightly red with the nitrous | 
vapour, and obſerved that this flight redneſs 
xreſently diſappeared, ſo as not to he recovered 
ven by the application of heat, which. certainly 
Apres that the phlogiſton had quitted the ni. 
ous acid, and had united itſelf to the air; and 
wo this colour appears in its union with the 
former, but not with the latter, Alſo, fince, 


in all theſe experiments, a conſiderable part of © 


Ahe phial was filled with water on being opened 


under, it, it ſhould ſeem that that proportion 
of the. contents of the phial, at leaſt a canſi- 


der; able part, of i it, had been filled with nitrous 


vapour, which remained. after the phlogiſton 


had quitted * and . that, in this 
there was real nitrous vapour 

exhibired in a proc colqurleſs ſtate, though 
ogiſticated air. 1 T2 


"Laſtly, I found, in the courſe of theſe Nee 


1 periments that the power of this red vapour to 
phlogiſticate common air was much greater, 
"and acted much quicker, GE hadimagined 


when 


I * 


when I made the firlt obſervation of the kind. 
1. filled a- 
nother phial with the red vapour, and imme- 


For after the former, obſeryations, 


diately afterwards opened it under water 
vhe the water, Füſhing in, ti, filled about half 


y ph} 1 By N 5 9 9 ing in 8 71 r my 8 8 T4 
"S: 08 SK. 2 3 2.5 et St 524 
| ni 505 Air, 2 : 
Q £ * > rr Axe; 2 N a 
e 20 NT if by 5 . Wat of. f 1 1 1 ? E.4 82 
; ö . 4 — 5 : 
4 k 53 1 hs x 5 3 * } 3 
ons firm tl 
in ormer zolume, 
1 40 my A 9. 
11 4 * - of 1 ſ wi # 
* i ” Wy 3 + 1 | * | 4x 1 E [ ' ; 4 4 
V. the effe AT nes 
he 47 33 *.# 2 Fe 5 
5 * 2 $ Al ii FLEE 18 r N $61 e attribuied 
© oe My nitrous air mixed with. th e nitrgus'y; va⸗ 
$ A — 5 £ 
aſily {c| ed, l 
n N 45 . . 
not eaſily. al certai „ e rot 
7 9 1 * 7 4 
4 5 2 - - he 8 — . 1 
WM 27 ; A r 08 IK 23 "2 48 ? : a 8 5 8 5 
* 1 + < 4 „ % K %, «%, i. FT A 
1 * 4 + 4 y # % "# Ty 4 2.” ks 5 * * a - ” 5 . 4 * mY $4 * > > ©.» 5 , S. ry 
. 1 7 . wo . * 9 
Le i Lai condo, cos „ r 54 rags A* | 7 5 i 
PTS 1. 35 STR 1 Ins bet f * of x: N x P 3 © > 
"8 ropes” 4+ ay isn *F de tnx of © KS LS 2 5 1 
bo f 2 _ , 4 N 4 7 - 
W 4 5 5 15 * 2 * ee , 8 
8 4 % * 4 1 , - 9 F 3 yt 4 2 * * „ 1 7 4 * a * F 3 
% 
wy , 7 5 8 1 * 17 * ; 
% FE Mg OY 2%? yo 7 "TIE 2% 78 „ 
ee $0 * (2021%E n 
: 2 1 * 
0 1 8 £3 1 * 
* " 3+ « i „ 1 * * 4 1 7 Sd = ty 10 1 1 « #53 n * * = 9 
„ en o 3 7 L328 oh | 7; E #7 75 9 
10 ng. n . 4 1 „„ N 1 2343 4 40 157 * I”, 
— * 8 1 *. 5 ks x 
p n * "Gn F : 45 
1 1 * — E * 5 2 
1 A Del 2%. 01% > $2. 41 2 1 V N 
„ bn ee Finnen * : 
4 * 3 Se. n — ; 
£ . pt 83 * ATP 3 
| PU „ V Pert : 34: 4. * 
M 5 Id $470 N 1 4 25 ths. * = wv 5 LO 1 22 * w# % $ z * „ TH 23 — & # »# 
A 9 
1 » : $77 4 * 1 7 
4 * * 
ty 4 f ; * * 0 F F + * P 4 A 3 Fi 7 W 
18 v6 $05 IE» ws LEED Ro „ TYLER * 
Id rome CCVVVVFVV V 
* 
þ % e * : * : 5 Ki £ — Fen : j p * 4 1 202 22 WT 3 2 * Po iT EB 
Fo Kr, 7 1 r ' „ 9 5 OY 7 j „ „ 
1 "+ ARTS WS. +33 $37; a 1 r 
11 412 93 rr if >= * n if A | f % +: W*>" | 
4 44% * . 
* 
- * * 
# 2 "4 % 
: FR £0 : 
* * * 
6 : 
y * 
g * * 
+ * ' - 
* 
* L 
* 
% % 


> 


It, 2 the remaining air was found org ef 


1 


10 


194 Of the Saturgtion of Water 
l e N A OPAL TY | 


— 8 
5 10 13 10% N 9155 very Lg if 


E N r. __ 


511 
. vg 


& the. FO IEA 45 Wark with. Mitraus 5 
03 7 = 4 75 Vapour. inte: 5117 5 12 x. 


. oof T3 4 


15 was no . in poſſeſſion of bot 7 
vapour, which is the nitrous acid a 
from its uſual combination with Vater, and 
exhibited in the form 'of à dry Alf, though | 
mixed with common alr, than 1 ſaw opene( 0 
io me an intire new feld fot experitntnts, to- 

wards Which 1 looked with" pleaſing g exp ecla. 
tion, even while the pro et Wich it a Forde 
was very indiſtinct; Rs ſatisfied,” from the 
nature of the acid, and tb. impottHt part it 

acts in the ſyſtem of nature, that it could not 

Fail amply to reward whatever labour I ſhould _ 
| beſtow upon it. And though I have yet done 
but little, in compariſon of, what I have no 

doubt may be effected by this | new mode of 
operating, my readers will find that my expec- 
tations have by no means been ARLEN 


2 


Three methods crciich occurred to me of ö 


applying this nitrous vapour, in order to form 
combinations with other ſubſtances, by which 


means only its r nature, and peculiar 
powers could be ' diſcovered, O3 wis, to 
put 


* 


- with Nhe Vapour." 195 
ben an into 2 clean phial and then 


to throw a ftream uf the vapour upbn it. 


Another was, firſt to fill the phial with the-was - 
pour, by which method the quantity of it 
might be, in ſome: meaſure, afcertained;; und 
then to introduce the ſubſtance to it at the 
mouth of the phial// Laſtly, if che ſubſtance 
was fluid, I could plunge che tube, through 
5 the v Vapour Vas tranſmitted, as deep as 
1 pleaſed into i ir, and therebyl diffuſe, che va! 
pour through the whole body of it“ Thee: 
cond ef theſe methods was the. fir 4 had rea 
eourſe ta though ! ſoon afterwards! Þupplied 
the firſt; and not longi\after/ that dhe! third! 3 
Aind as 1 could-not'well produce” this avid val! 
pour at all without generating enough tofu 
a great number of phials, I generally placed 
ſix, eight, or ten of tfemiin a oN, filing them 
with the vapour one after unëtfer, and ſöfnEl 
times ſupplying them wi eee times in the 
ne N rmrprokl eee bn STO. 
ü VI. 1 13 > (5 bp nw 645 4145-2500 ine 
But, in order to give a more dictinck „ ew 
AX my obſervations On the a plication! of this 
acid vapour, 1 hall diſtributerthem dee 
do the natmral ! claſſrs of. the ſubſtanees t 
bich applied it, beginning with the phene. 55 
mena of. the impregnation of jꝭ,L With it, 
wuüchlwill perhaps be thought not ld cdrioC,̃ 
d att chan any of them: n 
Wap Oz = have 


_ 


196 | Of the 8 uration af mae, 


| theſe are more unactountable to pie $0 
any Wege in this, whole "ooufſe | of experi- = 
* ments. Ai 144075 01 K ne 1543004 - 
12 3 


21 16 * ene act 0. ri od 
The firſt e xperiment that. Im ade: with, do 
was to pour a ſmall quantity of it into a phial 
filled wih chis vapour; when ſhakinglit n 8 
it became, as would+cafily be ſuppoſed, ge- 
| nuine ſpirit of nitrez but it was wenn e 
lourleſs. This laſt eircumſtance proves that, 25 
og pblogiſton certainly adheredito this 
nitrous: Vapour, as, appears by ins plilogiſti- 
batiggeammon air, et abat this calout intire- 
Ix diſappears when tlie neid vapbur contain- 
ing tbesphlogiſtan is nene A errtam 
1 4 * proporuon of erer Wee, Her 
4 195 lc * 14) 1 K alvidg. 3 Fe. 2175 n 25 __ 192 75 


— — 


After 5 o — — of che vapour 
T upon , mall quantity of diſtilled water, in a 
latge Phial, ſhaking it now and then, to pro- 
mote the abſorption of the vapour zowben 1 
obbſerved that the water preſently became warm, 
5 ther began to ſparkde very much, air iſſuing 
trom;all-parts: of iteverg copiouſty, and after 
thit it gſſumed a lightabluc colour; in which 
ſtage, of; the proceſs, it was I idoubt not, the 
very ſame thing that Mr. Woulfe had fduad by 
ipfegnating water wich, the ſuperatuindant 
BE: Nas, Vnpour, in his method of | dift ng 
4. WW nitte. 0 whereas he.ſays his blue 
<1 | e „ 


with Nitrous + peur. e 


liquor continued blue, L:foundithae: Mt 5 
nn lolt's its colour on e ä to: che. 


„» —˙ > 


=: inding TY in ; thi manner of impregaat- 
5 ing water, I Joon gained the point of ſatura- 
tion, by as much of the vapour eſcaping from 
it as I could readily throw into it, 1 contrived 
to impregnate the water more effetvally, in 
the following manner. I got a veſſel, & fig. * 
in the form of a phial with a ground ſtopple, - : 
and two holes in the bottom; which, Hhow- . 
ever, was to be placed uppermoſt: ben it 
was uſed, To one of theſe holes was fitted, 
by grinding, a glaſs ſyphon, one end of Which 
was fitted im the ſame manner to the long 
phial in which the ſolution of the metal for 
the production of the vapour was made, While 
the other end of it went to the bottom of the 
veſſel above mentioned, and which contained the 
water; ſo that hate ver vapour was brought into 
the veſſel by it, muſt ary N chrough | 


WE 


| hole | in this veſſel there was Fited, bv „ 
alſo, the end of a bent tube, which conveyed 
the ſuperfluous air, or vapour, into a common 
recipient. But ſometimes I had ſeveral of 

| theſe veſſels placed one after another, as re. 


preſented, fig. 3, ſo contrived, that the air 1 
| and nas diſcharged from the firſt of them 


O-2 muſt 


;:Þ 


198 Of the Saturation 75 Water 


muſt neceſſarily paſs through the water in the 
next, and that Which was diſcharged i in this 
muſt paſs through the water in the CO 


&c. 


Making the experiment- in "Shs 3 more accu- 
rate manner, ſo that the water had an oppor- 
tunity of becoming thoroughly imprcanged, 
1 made the following obſervations. - The 


Water, after becoming warm, began, as be- 


fore, to ſparkle, and emit air; after which it 
became blue, ſtill continuing to give air in 
much greater plenty than before. After this 
the water became green, about which time the 
emiſſion of air ceaſed; and laſtly, after the 
green colour had deepthed very much, fo as 
to appear almoſt black, when, viewed in the 
ſame direction with the light that fell upon it, 
a yellowiſh tinge was perceived to be diffuſed 
through the green colour; and this was the 
laſt ſtate to which I could bring g us water roy 
this impregnafion. TN: 


. alſo obſerved that, 40 "is Rr LY 
the water in the firſt of theſe veſſels became 
blue, that i in the next began to ſparkle; and 
hen the water in the firſt turned green, which 
was probably effected i in no other way than by 
the mixture of the yellow (which diſtinctly ap- 
"4 eee with the * 0 

t 9 


Seeder in We het varke! Sreaaie blue af EIN 
chat i in the following 70 ſparkle, Vee.” ens 


2 of lhe moſt extraordinary cite injtes 
in this whole proceſs, which, throughout, Is 
not a little temarkable, is 7 roduction 5 
air from the water in the two firſt ſtages of it, 1 
VIz. while it is tranſparent, and while it is WM 
blue, before it becomes green. At firſt I 
concluded that this was phlogiſticated air; 
this kind of air having been the produce of a 
ſimilar proceſs for the impregnation of oi with 
the nitrous vapour, as has been ſeen above. - 
But 1 alſo thoug he it poſſible that, as this emiſ- 
fion of air r exattly reſſetnbled' the emiſſion* 75 
with it, part of this air, at leaſt, might be 5 
of that kind. But having filled a phial . 
this water, at the time that it was diſcharging „ 
air moſt copiouſly, and having placed it in- 
verted in a baſon of the ſame, I picky got 
a conſiderable quantity of it, and found it to, - 73 
be all pure nitrous air, poſſeſſed of the pen. 
lar properties of that kind of air in as great a 5 
degree as any whatever, and that it contained _— 
mn fixed air. Fs EY iel, M p | | 


\ 


i445 | 1 85 
* The quantity, of bas 1 alr Bee in 1 00 
manner is very extraordinary. When 1 filled 
ahi with the water in the ſtate of emitting 
| O 1 air, 


7 


* 


; 32 & the Saturation if Wate 


air, 4 inverted i it in a baſs of water, it 9 
dy” almoſt filled it, expelling the water. 
But when I filled a phial with a ground ſtopple 
and tube with the water, and caught all the ar 
that came from it, with and without heat, I 
got at one time more than ten times the wa | 
of the water, all Pure nitrous air. = 


. 
8 * * 5 


— 


This will appear the. more e extraordinary, _ 
if it be conſidered, that water. cannot be made "0 
to imbibe more than about one tenth of i 1s 
bulk of nitrous air, The production of it in 
mis caſe, therefore, is quite another thing, and 
muſt have a different cauſe though, le the 
quantity of it been ſmall, it might have been 
imagined, that the nitrous air from the bil. 
muth having impregnated the water, as, in 
ſome degree, it neceſſarily muſt, this nitrous 
air might haye come from tht ſolution. Sp 

So great is this diſcharge of nitrous air, F.-Y 15 
if the impregnated water be left to itſelf, i Kt . 
will continue to emit air for a day or two; 
ſo that it is not improbable, but that it may, 
from firſt to laſt, yield fifteen or twenty times 
its bulk; On this account, if this water be 
confined in thin phials, it will endanger the 
breaking of them; and the ground ſtopples of 
ſtrong phials habe often Veen een "wy 1 
it vi 5 i © 8 0 . ye 0 ; 


* 
3 


It is, e moſt 
| | how the nitrous. air that is. produced, i in theſe 
circumſtances gets the, carth, which all nitrous 5 
air certainly does contain; ſince it is not the 
nitrous air that was yielded by the biſmuth, 
the earth of which it might have taken up; but 


1 Kg ro. conceive DE, 


muſt have come ſolely from the diſtilled water, 


and nitrous vapour. Thar. it ſhould. get phle-. 
giſton enough to compoſe i it, is not at alf ex- 
. traordinary ; ; [ſince the nitrous. vapour Pre ro- 
duced, in this manner is moſt highly phlogiſti- 7 
cated. The conſideration of this experiment 
may poſſibly, throw ſome light upon the nature _ 
of the converſion of water into earth, in the . 
2 of Mr. Gddfrey, and others. 


The air 3 is ET by. the. direct . 


lution: of zinc in ſpirit of nitre. is often but 35 


partially nitrous; but it is remarkable, that 
the air which iſſues from water impregnated 
with nitrous vapour from the ſolution of zinc 
is wholly nitrous; exactly like that which is 
procured by uling biſmuth in the above: men- 


tioned experiments. Other phenomena relat⸗ 5 


ing to the facuration of water with.1 nina Va- al | 
pour are wen worthy of cure ehe 4 


* yg = egg 


1 * 


: þ "meaſured": a quantity of WAY 5 
ter before 1 it was im regnated with the nitrous 6; 


n, T obſeryed that, after the impregna-. . 


tion, 


* 


N 202 Of the Saturation of Watir 


„on i was inercaldd enactly one third | two 


meaſures of water having become thrie, and 
agreeably to this, 1 found that à qvantity of 
the ſtrongeft ſpirit of nitre that I ebuld procute 


occupying theſpace of A dwts. of water, weighed 


odwts. The exhalation of red vapout from 85 
water thus impregnated is very great, far 
Exceeding any thing that! have eber Ken in atty 
other kind or ſþifit of nitre. When the ftop- 
ples have been thruſt very hard into the phials_ 
containing it, they have been  ſomietiries 
thrown out with great force, and the — — 
part of the phials, containing chis acid, | 
mts. exceedingly red. eee ho 
Examining the firength of a "quantity of 
deep green ſpirit of nitre, I. found that as 
much of it as occupied the ſpace of 4dwrs. of 
water yielded thirteen ounce meaſures of ni- 
trous air with copper. When a quantity of 
this acid had been expoſed to the open air 
about a week, and its c6lour had intirely "I 
_ Vaniſhed, the ſame quantity of it yielded nine 
ounce meaſures of nittous air, which is about 
the fame produce that was yielded by Mr. 
Winch's pure ſpirit of nitre mentioned above; 
and being equally colourleſs, they were pro- 
bably the very ſame. ching. N. B. No! heat 
was 9 in theſe trials. 


1 
; 1 49,0 l 1 16 
2 4 * 12 * * 1 PETS; + F4 


The 


with Mme . FED 29g. 


ie eben of the nitrous acid, in 

water ' npregnated! in this manner, is vety — 

extraordinary.” For, pouring alittle of it into 1 45 

an open glaſs, and dlowing upon it, a copi- 

ous red vapour iſſues from it; and by blow- 

ing upon it in this manner about the ſpace of 

a minute, the blue or green colour , 

1 and the water becomes of a pale yel- 

low colour, exactly like common ſpirit of 

nitre. If the acid in this ſtate (and the ſame 

is the caſe with the common ſpirit of nitre) 

be expoſed to the open air a few days, it be- 

comes quite, or very nearly, colourleſs, and 

very weak. To fee the nitrous acid thus 

blown out of a quantity of this impregnated 
water in the form of a red vapour, juſt 

went into it, is curious enough, and ms "i 
given much pleaſure to thoſe of my chymical | 
friends to whom I have ſhewn it. It is evi- 
dent from this experiment,, that the thing on 
which all theſe colours of nitrous acid "ny. vw 
is s the volatile 115 een OE +: 


__ 


Oil of 0b ig known to. incredſeh in A 

by being expoſed to the open air, from which 
it attracts a quantity of moiſture which dilutes 

it. But this is not the caſe with the nitrous 

arid, at leaſt with this. For, on the con- 

trary, it always loſes both weight and bulk by 

"_ expofure, In order to — the _— 

2 5 0 


204 | Of the Saturation of Water | 


* 


of thin loſs wit h reſpect to this volatile ſpirit of 
nitre, 1 obſerved that a quantity of it; before it 
was ſo expoſed, weighed 13 dwts. 8 grs.; and 


after a fortnight it had ſoſt i dwi.1n weight, and 


ven diminiſhed: about one ifreenth 4 in bulk. 


I found, Wehe that ow eas Jpeg: | 


"nation of water with nitrous vapour, beſides 


containing a quantity of acid mare volatile 


than uſual, retains as much of it as the ſtrongeſt 


ſpirit of nitre does after being a long time 


equally expoſed to the common air. And, 
indeed, when the green colour is blown out of 
this impregnated water, it is not to be diſ- 


\tinguiſhed, in any erke. the arte 


| 5 ſpirit of nung,, 


In onder to _— 125 what anette if. 
ferent kinds of nitrous acid would loſe ſtrength 


by expoſure to the open air, Iexpoſed in equal 


cups, equal quantities of hl e ſpirit, green, green 


tinged. with yellow, a quantity of the common 


ſort made by Mr. Godfrey, and a quantity of 
my own diſtilling, with the proportion of eight 


ounces of oil of vitriol to ten of nitre; and 


when they had about a fortnight, and 
were all become quite colourleſs, like water, 
a quantity of each of them occupying the 
ſpace of 4dwts. of water yielded nitrous air in 
the following proportions. Of the gi 
5k; | © ounce 


reen four 


Mr. Godlrey's Mer % and o eps men 
| meaſures. ' Of the ue 1 find no account. 


bj <g3 COS N Fo, 


iT hat the; ſpirit of gitre made by NY 


5 nation of Water with Wannen is a purer 
acid of the kind than the common ſpirit ot 
nicres appears. evidentiy by: irs, not. depoſizing 
any thing when it is mixed with a ſolution o 
ſilver. in the nitrous acid, in, is the caſe 
with: 450 common ſpirit of nit nd 
always ſaid to be 12 Proof, 
quantity of vitrioli ic agi 0 


W WK ( % «4 
chews 4 


But that ff pitie uf Rite made in- this infer. 
contains ths phlogiſton' than common ſpirit 
of nitre is alfo evident,” both-frotn-thel, opious . 
red fumes emitted fr fror 
circumſtances, eſpecially fronr the *phalitysy 


the air which it Nein with flowers of zine." 


» Having mibedea quantity br bib pte af 


nitre with flowers of zinc which were of a dul 


colour, and appeared from ſeveral experiments 
to contain a portion of -phlogiſton;.t er 
with the heat of a candle applied to the phial 
vuvhich contained it, ſtrong; nitrous air; hen 


che common ſpirit of nſtre applied in the ſame. 


manner gave only phlogiſticated air; the pts: - 
Gow — W % SO cle 
. irlelf, 


itz atſd Allg from other 8 


3 


ww "THR A mel 8 of it might have 1 
been 11 nitrous acid, whi | 


1 1 Ot 435827 2 #712 7 2 EY 22 
1 


1 4%. $#-% 


This experiment alſo l to prove that 


ati” earth is the baſis of nierous' air. For the | 
fame blue ſpirit of nitre, which gave nitrous 


air with theſe flowers of zinc, yielded no air at 
alb when it was — in the Ber ee 
without them. WY, £39 5600 7 | 


„ * i e n, 
1* » ; ST 4 l 7 -þ 1 1 4 £3'S fue; £4 1+ 
4 "3 * 3 3 ek £3; W —— We * kT + ow 448 1 78 

- F 
3.5 IF 


4 1 * alſo een akin ah green hit et 
nitre contains à good deal of Phlogiſton; that 
if a very brown ſmoking ſpirit of nitre, Which 
certainly contains much phlogiſton, be mixed 
with water, in a certain proportion, a green 
acid is produced. But this is not the caſe 
when the common yellow ſpirit of nitre, which 
contains leſs Ae een, is ein s c 
| manner. B 0 ah 


* 4 3 {5 ty 4 4 ; Ti” 4 +, WY ; 


2 8 of, alis kind; once 
occurred to me, in the courſe of my diſtillation 
of ſpirit of nitre. The ſaltpetre being very 
F impure (having been caſually mixed with va- 
rious phlogiſtic matters) the ſpirit: that came 
over was exceedingly: brown, and the fumes 
were uncommonly red, and copious; when, 
the fire happening — a con- 
2755 e an 


R L Py | i + 6 
2 4 n 
0 * 4 * AQ. 3 W 85 \ A Vs Js * 


and a quantity of water ruſhed; before I was 
aware of it, into the receiver, through the 


glaſs tube, F fig. 4. and this mixture of that 


ſtrong brown ſpirit of nitre and the water, 
which I ſupp ſe was three fourths of the whole, 
9 


made a perfe 
none that'F'eout 


acids after they were decanted,. ever p- 


* 5 1 * Ce + 


proached to. ie greeneſs of this. Thee 1 8 2 
was almolt as Jeep, as 1 couſd"produce ice. ce by th 


> A, 


FEI? 


ri 2M AAS IE 


ee; 4 


d green acid; 10 ; whereas 
male dy the mixture of the 


* 


ditect 1 5 re ponies of water wit th he. oo 


va a 5 31. 7 * 722 
50 W 0 39 5 A 161 NI ny TE. 7 671 


* 4 "7 2 22 th 2 
* 74 121 2% 5 bY 105 5 <2, eat * Ca 218 e 


— 4 


; R 1 F Foy : A x * — 8 % 5 q L 
. ** d e $5 4.4.5 © aF CFC Fin 8 i * 5 Ne ha 5 


* + 


£5 q {82%} 11. B trittil THI 0 10 


* 


9 


18 6. N „„ #4 0 


N 12 5 „ Aeicr Ad ot oi 55 Hind 
n, 14 bas noi 4.4 þ Ret & & 


ado 1s gn ib: $2 7 
5d Yo N 2 banthg 3 bas 8 elle $7 ac ; 


PX N 33 


I n An ils 23 V/ 


5 „ H a jou . 5 a, 10 00 N 
9 "| 155 s es fl W 3598 7 To VETS Bat 


* * 


110 weak 272 1:21 £0 7200.5 10709 YOu 
= 


5 git $3 4 $ 6-11 | CAE ER 


gw is 


4 ** R 53 * 1 e Us 4 a 10 4 2 0 
A - 


/ ; U 6-4-4 LY 
„„ * 13 ; . 


* 4 L 4 ? ; 4 We : 4 
; * Ld : I %* „ 
7 e a 4 1 en ee n «þ. Fes £% f ; — i 'S. ET R 
— 2 in 19G 11 x © £5 wt} OV 44 55 6465 9 
D 5 * TS +, . 1 wt 


4 


. 8 Ef * * 1 4 
9 4 g a n . | = 44 OSA Tx 1% Cre it $4. 46:4 BY. + 
1 144. N 3 N 4 Aer 
2 2 ty oy 11 15111 2 © - s * 7 {+ 5 1 > x A 5 4 24 MY 1 m a * 4 * 
4 ; 1 


5 


13 N 3 ; 5 : _ 1 : 1 5 5 "A ” 4 
' Ho + wad 7 Tov dey os r voy raomed 27 
f, * 8 * „ * + 14 + &S v# — * 4 145 
eil Yi WELD 34 OD 26s 1 ͤ mum : 


i | a : ” o Ky TE, 
Had 715,04 POL 55 * HOW © 1071355 15918 2 01 
+ 


E * x = N IRE 5 ö 
ILS <7 WAX. 1 2 


«+ 
EF) | 
8 
3 


* 


1 1 a . { 
a f . 


it; ogg «a 1s Ay » 111 Aids ch 
þ 3 ; „ i 1 * ont Fre! r Tere WY 4p oP 5 
4 yd 2211179 1% wen T6 104 Se 9-2f4 N. 


N * 7 "SB STN 


20 era 70 


; FRY * 31051 I. Ls Dit! mY A . 20 X.. 20618 3 Aft 

t. 1 a 45 4 Qu 1 8 44 þ FE ks XY 1 Ws 5 orgs a « 7 ow * 4x 

20e Hogs E O ＋ 10 N X 7 acts 
193277 19473. Bus Sin i 158 gt AWOT9 z Ht 


os Ihe Pra uf O 116 420 of © ; 05 55 
42 Nr the 1 trols Yapurr.,. Sn 

Tur effect "of tl the. impregnation of oils ith, 
1 vapour „. in general, the coagu- 
lation of "them and gl giving them a red colour. 
But the phenomena attending 'the proceſſes, - 
from the firſt to the laſt ſtage of the impregna- 
tion, are very vatious, and not a little remarka- 


ble. 9 5 85 / Pu „ 
a * | * * % 4 
3 j F , 1 L's NA 


Da 24 : + 4 4 ay 4 . Wo 
* - "4 £5 ** * EF: * # „ 3 © p ** * 15 N 4. * 


\ . 


Oil of ct ep Wir of a ſky- 
vie colour by this lmpregnfition, and at firſt 
was ſlightly warm. After landing all night, 
it became yellow; a nd coagulated ; and be- 
ing diſſolved by heat, it till retained its yel- 
LE, colour ; but by a freſh impregnation it 
became blue, and after that of 5 Ig orange. 


After Kabllfäg ſoink weeks, it Became al- 
1500p white and ſtiff; but was. a litcle-fluid at 
the bottom of the phial, where it alſo inclined 
to a green colour, while the upper part had 
ſomething of the appearance of froth, as if 
ſmall bubbles of air had been emitted by i it, 

id were entangled init. 


A part 8 


2 WY Is 5 n 5 a e LY gy 1 20 9. b 3 195 275 5 43 
: A part of © whale oil. has! had, been uſed. V 
in my firſt attempts to confine. the nitfous acid - FM 
vapour, and ich was of a dark red colour,. 5 — 
and coagulated, being melted, and Put into. 
another phial, and then impreghared again With . 2 
freſh. 1 5 vapour, became, of à deep i ERS: 
colour. In cooling i it became of a ny. Sn, VV 
then inclined to. yellow, W a ug Mp . 
and han vo. 11 N „ 


85 * vs. 


a 


£44 
Inf 4 3% IT'S 


3 
3 


1 . "es : | 
FT a 3 gz Fe 4 Py 12 Sy F.4 4 24 ö 2 
v = = "IwS4 #7 <Y * 928 1 ; 1 7 '3 ws yy 1 7 
$ 8 
8 4 Fog 1 rh * 4 


quantity. of | Feb wha w df 8 — 5 5 
by * mode 0! "1mpf | nation. Leaving it to 
cool, the upper part af it,. became: ſtiff, and. 
aſſumed a a light orange: colour, while t 


part till continued blue and fluid; but at length 1 
it became of a deep orange · colour, and was per- 
fect] ulated throughout. B long keep- - 

ing, the lover, part of ir, bee Hu hk | 

the upper part continued, {tif, che 

' looking | brown; but the, Buick pan part 


a a, colour than the. Wie: _ 57 0 5 
4 1 945 175 % oy 9 Fx « | £6 | 
"os ts a pen, preenl became: 29 chick 1 
cCeonbſtence, and yellawiſh. wee MWM k 
proceſs ſome time after, all the upper part 
the phial was filled with, denſe; white, fumes, . : 


and the lower part of it it became quite red and 15 | 15 
ſtiff. Fe At one time, during the proceſs, when. | 


the ream of nitrous vapour Was or 7 
ea chere was a kind 8 n 0 „„ 
Voi. III. 5 „„ 

1 8 p X 


= K 
Fiir ge - woo ener ood ow ave 2 
— : 3 __— — 4 
5 — . — * 


months 


210 Imre 


the inſide of the Phial. This ſubſtance always ; 


MPA. very tif and red. e 


: fs 2 E 3 
8.2 43S * Ef "as 3 r 


a ; * . 


| | Having put a little ale it it 175 mint into 4 a 
phial previouſiy filled with nitrous vapour, a 
violent efferveſcence, and great heat, were im- 


mediately excited ; while the oil preſently be⸗ 
came of à green colour, and the ſmell of it 


was exceedingly ſtrong. Afterwards, by 
throwing more nitrous vapour into the phial, 
this oil became of a deep orange- colour, Was 
hardly fluid, bur was ſemi-tranſparegt. 5 
long keeping, however, it became almoſt ſo- 
nd, like the oil of turpentine, but of a des 


colour; and ſo! it fill continues. gag 
e tu 
fter they were impregnated,” were 
melted by the heat of the fire, they all retained = 
the fame colour. And at this time I obſerved © 
that the ſolid part of the whale oil ſwam in the 


- When FY theſs kinds of oil, 


melted part, occaſioned perhaps by its haying 
ſome bubbles of air entangled in it, though 
none of them were viſible. Each of theſe 


kinds of oil ſtill preſerved their peculiar mel, 


| though mixed with N r of the ſpirit 4 of vitre. oy 


"Ether tected no change of colour at firſt 
by this impregnation ; but the upper part of 


the — was filled with a white fume, os 
g 


\ 


0 Oils, and Spi | of Wi Vine, 1 5 


i 


burned with 4 green flame, i like, 4 


mixture of inflammable and nitrous air. At 


length all the upper part of the 


vf a deep blue colour; and, obſerving.ir, mere 


red from the whale-oil, after being i impreg- 
nated with nitrous vapour, in my attempts 0 
confine that vapour 'Þy caeang of it, Loma 
ling to try Whether a ſimilar impregnation of 


ine would 1 the tame eker which.L | 


nitrous. aur, and leave. it in che © cron __ 
Eiſticared air, of 


ee \ more of th 
nitrous vapour than thẽ linſeed-oil, 3 but when, 
in the courſe. of the Procels, it became blue, 
as the ether had alſo done, it yielded air more 
_. copiouſly z and this, like the air from che 


5 Fn e | Whale 
f * SR 5 
* * Tag . 
* 
| + 

% 

7 + 48 

* I 5 
_ * 
y * 
= 
e U 
— 
[7 7 A 
7 4 
1 
* 
\ [ * * 


. 


i 


pit 1% , 


elbe + the linſeed: oil, was mere . 
1 gifticated/air ait, without any mixture of fixed 


air- os n novo ei bote 
. ty FIG" MHA Hel; 13 en Ant 10 2 Nie 
de Haring g 1 quantith of erber tollnglke the 
\ Speer vit this ſpecies of oll, in the ſamt 


manner as 1 had done with the others, L Con- 
Seen e with pang! it by pl ug. 


This 1 did a conſiderable time without any 
-parficutar appearance; Put at engeh the ether 
ſuddenly turned greetl, and che moment that 
this change of colour * alt began to 
inne from ir f in werfen Mee 3807 nge 
Rien T8631 il nn 1 nn 
eig 10 pla effetveſeviie 6d 
rt at one time tliat T was chaleing this 
experiment, ſome of the nitrous acid, and 
mall bits of the biſmuth, were thrown int 
the ether; where they kept diſſolving, ane 
| producing air very copiòuſiy. „This rz then - 
2 firſt obſerved it, 1 'contluded to behitrods. 
air; but when I collected a quantity of it, 
and examined it, it appoprextcsc to. be. Phlogiſti- 
cated "air only: from. which f it was Evident, 
that ether had. the pro] erty . of inſtantly con. 
vekring nitrous air int Phlogiſticated al ii 


| . „or | 


at leaſt of yielding phl6giſticated alt from i the 
"mpregnation of olrrous * ee 
Suſ- | 


I, wh; the Nitrow 7 ö ur. oo: 21 2 


2 2 5 n K A. * 


Suſp I at that time that the eee 
"thels was the caſe, and willing to try; Whether 
the other kinds of oil had the ſame property, 
1 transferred a. quantity of nitrous aig into a 


Al "obſerved, that, With a very ſmall degree of 
97 0 bſorbed very faſt; and, being 
ou 


ed to one rth of its bulk, was Found 
1 mere Phlogiſticated air. . This experi- 


ment ſuggeſted thoſe. that have alrea "5 bea 5 


recited, doncerningt the effe& of oil, of turpeh 


tine upon. nitrgus air. N. B. The impreg- 


nation of ether with nitrous vapour Lechs to 


E make i it more volatile chan i it was before. „ 


13 


wine with the nitrous vapour was conſidera- 


* 
* „ 
$K: 


pour upon a quantity of this fluid contained 

loür, and was not ſenſibly heated; but when 
the flame of a candle was preſented to the 
month of the pblal afterwards, a vapour iſſued 


in a phial, it did not ſuffer any change of co- 


| from it, which Herne. with a geen 9 0 


= 1 "frequently repeating this proceſs, A | 
quantity of genuine nitrous: etber, -abaut one 
n of the Whole, was ROPES. to oF 2 


* 
5 * itſelt ; 
TR i: *. 1 * * : 
4 I 2 TI. 25 4 7 4 a 
. W's, * 3 8 i 28 $5 S7S 51 * * 
* 9 * 
* 0 * f * 
” * 8 2 * 


5 phyal prey reviouſly filled with. oil of turpentine. ; 3 : 


Ry oh: 1 0 e ee of the n > a bf po 1 


bly different. from that of the cils above men- 85 
tioned. When I threw a ſtream of nitrous va- 


* 


grit from the qi of vin pls to beim * 


On the ſurface it. 1 Ph : 


Both the ether aid the 1 of. 9" ak 
pond extremely volatile by this proceſs, the 
vapour frequently throwing out the glaß 
ſtopples from the phials in which they were 
contained, if they were not thruſt ih yy. 


tight; and bubbles of air iffued very copioully p 


from every part of them, whenever the ſtoß⸗ 

ples were taken out, a quantity of the vapour 

ral. e at fg fame W out . the 
ial 


ads, 


When nad 291 impregnation 7% 8 5 5 


ls the tube out of which the vapour iſſued 


into a phial of this liquor, the proceſs wa; 
continued a conſiderable time before any 0 


remarkable appeared ; but at length the li. 
quor turned ſuddenly blue, and boiled with 


great violence; when, immediately inyertin 


the phial, and filling it up with freſh ſpirit ; 

ok wine, (in order to place it inyerted in a 

_ *baſbn of the ſame) all the vapour was again 
abſorbed, except à very ſmall bübble. But, 
by the help of a little warmth, more air was 


/ * 


roduced, and it expelled a great part of tbe : 


 Hquor. This air being transferred to quick- 


filver did not affect it; and upon admitting 


| Hime water to " though one N of it was f 
pre 


— 


7 J ? 0 . b 1 : 1 
A * * * 7 * = 
. a * $ : * 

i VEE TY 4 

i 9,4 : N * ** 
rh OF, # * - + = it 
" oY ; 7 8 ws, þ Fat CE 95 hens "CW . 4 þ FEY 

. * . , a! 
N 1 5 


n 1 1 water di 4. not. 3 f 85 2 0 
turbid. Ap lying the flame U i I 


the mouth of the veſſel in which it was . 
contained, it burned with a blue flame deſ- 
cending pretty rapidly from he” fag to the 

bottom of the veſſel. „ . 


Upon this 1 took a ee of pie of by 
wine partly impregnated with nitrous vapour, 
about two months before, and warming it. 
found that it yielded air, or vapour, in tde 
ſame manner as in the laſt experiment ; and 
filling a phial with this liquor, and inverting 
it in a baſon of the ſame, the vapour ifſuibg 
from it 'prefently fihed almoſt” the who wy 
the phial. Transferring this air into a veſſel 

of lime-water, -t three fourths. of it preſently. 
ö diſappeared, the lime-water was made con- 
fiderably turbid, and the reſiduum . to 
be ſlightiy inflammable. e e 


At another ume l obſerved that a air producel} 
in this manner was phlogiſticated air, mixed 
with fixed air, and alſo with the vapour of 
ether, which 1 have found to double the 
quantity of any kind of air. That fixed air may 
come from a mixture of ſpirit of wine and 
nitrous acid 1 had obſerved before, vol. II. 

127; and this ſeems to be a pretty . | 
e proof, or at leaſt a ſtrong * 

4 | 


a 
& 5 4 
5 ; 
FR OY : 5 U 5 * 8 
* 2 


* 9 85 . 216 Inprepato of on, and Spirit of Wine G. 5 


+ 2 +; at 


of Bred. air being a " modification of the 
nitrous acid. For by no other treatment, 
believe, can n ſpirit of. wine be made to oe. 
any ſign of i its containing fixed air. 


„ os 2 
+ "iS 


BR, » N. B. It may be juſt worth while e 5 


at the cloſe of this ſection, that whoale-oil- and 
4  olive-oil, impregnated with nitrous va 
> ___ Miffolved quickſilver, and produced air; bur 


. manner, did not ſeem to affect quickſilver. 
I made theſe trials by only dropping a little 
f auickſilyer into the impregnated oils, and ob- 
| We vherher any air bubbles roſe from | ir. 

; A 5 ; | ( . 185 | 

| 5 : | 5 = ; 
| > +1 ; LS e ; 1 g 

1 7 t 


the oil of turpentine impregnated in the ſame ; 


” 5 : a 0 + A A © 72 F N f 1 
a | | | | 5 | 8 E 'S T I Q N | 
n P 8 6 - 7 7 ; ; = $ 
1 , : $44 « : : 


1 


U 


4 


f the In the Acids, Ge. with th 8 
: 145 e Ne Vapour. wh 0 WAR os OR 


+ 
- — 
* 4 $ 2 ( 1 . 7 ** + tf 2 £ Hen $22.5 a 4 PR 1 N. e 
73 n 7 WE A LW Fe N . | AY LY r „ * 1 8 ' . 
£4: * 3 * E ; * 4 * 8 
af ; 6 75 
1 re. 
Born *oil of vitrios, and „re- 


« 0 


ceive an impregnation. from nitrous vapour; , 
though not in ſo great a quantity as water; 
and the effects of theſe impregnations are pret- 
remarkable, and in ſeveral reſpects conſi- 
derably different from the reſult of a mixture 
of cheſs acids, when each of them (as hitherto - _ 
2 1 1 ge: Amin uy Feridun com- 


* 
- 


& 
- 


7 ; 1 8 ; k : 2 Fr * 5 4 
LS 2s 5 * Fa * $ 1215 _ 45 9 N 2 a N 22 : WW # + | ; ; N * — 
; 7 . * s 0 8 
- Having filled a very large p phial with the n- N 


ttous vapour, 5 poured into it a little 01 14 | 
vitriol, and obſerved that the vapour was im: 
bibed, though very flowly ; b but at length the 
iſappear d, and die ir 
ruftied' into the phial when it was opened. > 
Afterwards I fully ſaturated a quantityof ſtr 
oil of vitriol with the red vapour thrown upon 
it, in a large phial, frequently making it, to 
promote the ſaturation, and repeating the pro- 
. ceſs very frequently. At length this acid. 
from being quite tranſparent, became of a 


light blue colour 5 but in other reſſ did 2 


not - differ ED to appearance, Gs — 5 
mon on of Yay » Oe 9 88 a NO VIEW | 


e 


- But 1 3 a quantity. © m im. 


pregnated oil of vitriol from one phial into 


another, and having dipped the empty Phial x 


in a trough of water, in order te. rinſe it, 1 
was {urpriled by the ſudden burſting out of a 
great quantity of red vapour, which daſhed | 
part of the water to a conſiderable diſtance, 
and alſo at a prodigious Seat, chat. dx s. inſtant. 
* produced withia the phial. L 


12 3 this I put a ſmall quantiry EY the. .. 
impregnated gil of vitriol into an of drink. 
ing glaſs, and gently pouring a little water 
upon it, obſerved no remarkable appearance; 
till, with a piece of glaſs tube, 1 began to ſtir 
and mix them; when the heat immediately 
took place, attended with the emiſſion of a 
cloud of denſe red vapour: and theſe. appear- 
ances increaſed with the agitation, and inti- 
mate mixture of the water and this i | 
nated oil of vitriol, till at length all the vi- 
trous vapour ſeemed to be expelled, and the 
oil of vicriol was left as it was at. firſt, only 
diluted with water. This experiment, when 


well conducted, is more remarkable than it 
eee Found Sh eee 3 


? 


# # — 


ance! pers been 1 nels firuck, wichi Wy 


But the impreg 


the nitrous vapour, at. the ſame; 1. . that i it is 
more eaſily effected, is of a ſtill more remarka- 
ble nature; and will. 1e A > wn | 


ble uſe; for it makes an 


parably more power in the ſolution * gold | 
ence of 
22 eee the ſpirit of falt, from be- 

ur, preſently becomes. of a 


chan the common ſort. In 


very deep orange, Buch Nerger Wan the; (pi- 


rit of nitre itſelf can ever be made and che 
F mw" * ney; oy > HO 11 — 


<8 4 £2 v, 5 — 


1% ode of the 6 wait circum- 
. attending this impregnation is that, 
whereas the common aqua regia is made in the 
beſt manner by mixing one fourth of ſpirit 


pf falt, with three fourths of ſpirit of 


nitre, this liquor, which is, in a manner, 
nothing but ſpirit of ſalt (for 1 did not per- 


ceive that the bulk of it was ſenſibly increaſed” 
by the proceſs) after having imbibed a little 
of the nitrous vapour, becames poſſeſſed of 
all the properties of that aqua regia, which 
conſiſts chielly of ſpirit of nitre, and in much 


® 


ction. For, while the com- 


E regia wil hardly aide gold wich- | 5 
out 


* 3 f 


ont the belp « of De 


aqua regia: is capable of diſſolving, in pro 


. thought it Soetllig 


L DEA, hs nn 1 1 i; 
much rapidity as 1. have almoſt ever ſeen. In 
chymical ſolution whatever, when it is 


any 
e cold." The quantſey of gold that this 


tion to its bulk, I have never aſcertained; but 


1 5 iti ſeems to exceed the common att Hi e 
| gorges 202 POD TO 7 "91 4+: 105 oo is. bb 


E n FVG i 5 4 n 71 TELL ide" 1 
0 4 0 EW much bee kind: 6f aqua 


tegia than the common ſott. For a mm 


Aqdantity of ſpirit of nitre will, by this means, 


communicate à ſufficient quantity of nitruus 
vapour to ſaturate a large quantity of ſpirit of 


Alt, Mhick ic. very cheap artieſe ; whereas, 
in the common method of making aqua . 


the bulk of it is {pirig, of ee * 
dear! in comparison. j 


. 


* 1 ; "ry 
CR r ane S 
* 17 cf * RIS: # 4 } 1 e's . + 2 # l b e 4 


+4 
? | 


wel IT > 8 

"If nitrous air be "IEcoaips my ed over a — 
of fpirit, of. falt, in the manner deſcribed | in a 
former HeRtion, | it becomes the fame” pt 


fol. aqua regia, by ſaturation. ; n. 
kraus vapour, v e had been congaiped ig 
the . 95. , „ 


— 7 


TREES wage > n 


# having made aqua regia To 


fie 
Þ Irie of Nh 40 Wh q 9 15 e 1 could * 


32 0 x b 


& ; 


me A WT TW : ö * FVV 
ok 1 Ie : 2 * 85 9527 TY * * N 8 
= Irs a e 
: . thy. F 5 * : 4 : 

"wh * * 

{IE * * 

1 5 . ; 
* 5 # 

„ x 


gf n 

5 | id, 105 e e 
"a £ m nit: a: ies | LA, ae 922 95 3 = i 

| 4 rte 1. 2 2800 22.89 „ 
e nde m anner a e 
| 7 3 5 „ 
: 8 — | . 5 1 8 85 5 : 

„ do. Was dee by wa SL 


. im imagine muſt have been a 
| did a „Uiſcharged from eit ther Wich tze 
4 | nikrous nr: £215 * IL: 2 n N * 5 ee Ls Hy A 4 KOT! 


«fi * 2. l 18 8A Ig. 125 %. * * e ite, 


z : 


as wr mee Ae 
In his 


— 17 105 t, And 
8. 1 N 


* 


bolt of the'y | 


* 
” 
- 
* 
f 
. 
7 
- 
« 
* $i 
* 7 
5 , j 
* 
* & 
2 Y 
wt 55 
— 4 
23 „ 
+; 
$ 
„ 5 
5 
3 , 
"ax 
*ſ 
1 5 1 
n a 
L F 
* 34 ſs | 
3 
1 1 
; 
* 
„ 
- 
* 
” 
[7 
4 
* 
— 
1 
* 
* 
7 
15 # 
* 
o 
* 
% 
* 
U 
* 
0 


* * «4 3 


iting bafon of the ſawe, I 


a quantity 0 it c found it * 
trous air. There woul x 


4 n : 
WS 1 "3 4. EA 
„ Ran XA 


Gaal 


A mixture 5 | 
bi 0 water 


as ſoon + as ; the operation is yer. ; 


ait, and ſuper- impregnated with nitrous, Vas 
pour, emits a copious white ws in which, 
WE hong Ne blue colour, it ſembleg oil! 
1 gould not N F 1 


leaf vitriol ky 


18 29 
„ „*. I 1 + ys 2 fo 1 * 5 


was deſirous of obſerving the effects of them 
In the /olution of metalt; and it was 


in general, that, in theſe proceſſes, as, well 43. _ | 
in. the experiments with. the mi f L 
the nitrous acid 5 


or 2 leaſt in 


** 


ed quickſilver, but withour'yie 0 ng any 
t.. But when the whole- ſeemed” tc 


the pF in 


8 


1 * 
£ 


1 * 


bet: e a candle; bu p4 
the ag I got more RY which was 


'ong: nitro a 


with zinc, produced 
durned with 


that which 


5 
* 
— 
. 
* ; ; 
* 
* 
, 4 / 8 
<> 
F - 
5 4 
5 = 
5 s 
* 
4 i ? 
* - 
* 
* . 
o 
7 % ka 
* 7 © 2 
. 
* 7 
* % * * 
„ X , 
. 4 » * 
7 * 1 


1 he flame 


* 8 us 


* $45 


. . 7 
; 4 8 
N * 
oy 
- 
* 
* 
* « 
. 2 
8 
* 
- 
» 
RP 4 
* 
"# 
* 
1 
; 8 957 
* S op, 7 
| * 
SM, M7 Ne” | 
E 
* . 
4 * 
* 
x * 
y * f 
x + 
n 
„„ 
* 
goed 
* 
4 
— 
©, 
FT * 
- 
95 
2 
* 4 
* 725 
* 1 
4 
5 
* 
# 
: * 
* 
— 
8 * 
> 
1 „ 
4 
F 1 
— 
i / 
x 
4 
1 1 
=; 
ON 
| 
j 
7 
| 1 be 
8-0 
— 
# 
* 


NON 1. is ay to 


a 8 * = —_ | 
"3 n Land”. - n 
y OE = 2 r of ets 
Ke "7 4 : 8 3 A 5 
. ” 8 * * 2 Z EL 4 Fs 
PPP GO 7 
„ 1 5 I 5 4 1 7 : 1 
1 „ Why | + 
** * 9 n * iſ 
2 8 1 3 7 the «4 oF X 
2 * N * 1 * 
EY I, 727 OF 
el RePub 3 | 
5 . « Ps — 
. . 2 


-* 24 * 45 - * 5 3 
- 1-8 fie, 70 2 3 
} 2 
Hats, . 5 s f — 2 


| ule aer ery "ig 5. 
Hz 7 5 191 a ; pretty ! arge "Tat = 
with the firſt: prodyce "of this air, 2, ick. 


| Hlver ee roſe \ chin one 100 il of the = 
top, Which 1 took for printed" hid been bo 
the ſolution of mercury int the nitrous 2 ad; _ 
and therefore I expected to find this air nicrous. . | 
ut when'T examine it, it appeared to be 5 
* mete phlogiſicated Air. There hat probably _ : 
been a production of dephlogiſticatec air, | 
which had been feduced to Phlogiſticated . 
by i mixture of nitrous ait produced b the | 
 Tolurion'of the quickfiver. After this, inthe 1 
ſame proceſß, I filled anotk ther jar half full of _ 5 
this *ait, attended, as” before, with à gre > M. 
Sörkolion of the quickſilver'; but ic roſe no | 
Higher, as it had done in the preceding ex — > | | 
ment; and hen water was admitted to 1 8 
the wi oh of ir was juſtantliy ' abſorbed, et oa | | 1 
35547 Wt e * e ; Ae g * us. 
Fe wp, 1 ee vapout th: WM 
came firſt in this es and the . wu | 
8 4 en K b en gi 18 l ef "It. bne * i 


8 ; 
SS 


t eh this 1 Upon | 
attending to the courſe of the proceſs, whit 
is as follows, The firſt. thing that comes over 
is the common air contained in the . phial, (for 
1 always made the experiment in a glaſs veſſel 
band a land heat) thafrthe fluid begins to Ain, 1 


% ' | | , Rem: 1 im- 


2 
EE robot ood ˙ ads.” Mc 


r 


l _- able. 


- ny 


ee 7 ni Sicke een . 1 
= 2 et ech od W. „%%% ͤò 
OY | It may be juſt orth hs le, at the a 6 . 

this ſection, to — thei impregnation &*& + a „„ ER 
ſolution of liver of ſulphur in water, and allo „„ 
of alkaline ee this . „„ 


5 » : 
N 4 3 7 NN” . i , rf . 


— \ * 
„ . 2 
* + 


Throwies 8 nitrous vapour upon water . 
| ſaturated with liver of ſulphur, it preſently | — nl 
became milk white; but growing clear, t 
became of a light colour, à ſubſtance in the | 
MW form of curds ſwimming at the top of it, and „ 
which was probably the ſame matter tara 
had e it e Le white and ba Ws 


— : * , ; : — 


2 
* 4 
* * 


Throwing this vapour upon che volatili ſal. 
ammoniac a white cloud was immediately pro- | „ 
duced within the phial, and it continued a +? 
85 long time; but at length it diſappeared, and 5 

WH | the liquor became firſt of a light oratige-co- 

I lour, and after ſome time was blue. In this . © ee 
bproceſs the liquor became very hot, and ſmal! 
MW bubbles of air iſſued from it in great plenty. 

MM Theſe, had I examined them, would My... 
| bably have been found to have been nitrous | 
5 air. N 


e © * - : 8 
* * 7 "Js 5 5 8 N , — 3 
y 4 
* 5 bl 3 — . 281 2 2 
# # } * y 4 % 1 : - * # > 
Fl 4 ; 7 : 4 0 
4 8 2 . 5 
ce 2 - 1 


1 — . 70 8 3 8 


— 


appearance 


remarkable in the 


1 . 
* 
3 4 Ws ” 
* s 
% =? AO * — 
* 
+ 
COS 
FLW 
** EE Sq n 
* Ss SW. 
* yea _ = 
Fe % 3 Ks 
L - % 
2 * WW 
ing at * 
— A * 
* N 4 
LO 4 3 
% 4 » © nf 
<= % * 
* 
4 * 1 
** 
* * 
» * * * 
- * 
# * is > 
et « : 
* * 
* 
7 " * ws 
<4 4 
2 — 
"Y a — * 
1 
9 * 
» 
«* k 8 
Po 
— * We . 
x. * 
of — — A & 4 : 
4 4 
4 
PRI *.. * * 
9; — 
»4 
. 4 1 
6 2 , * 8 
& & * 
* — aa — F# 
„ 2 J * 
D 4 
* D * > — 
» 1 
* 
4. 
a 4 — - 2 
*s « 7 « * 
- > % 
# oy * * 
* b s 
* — 3 af o 
- % oF 
# * . A * 
ada 
# - . - 8 
1 2 3 b 
8 „ ** 
8 — 4 * 4 * 
” "Mk ha 
5 « * 
4 . 1 
I > "7 * 
* * * * * — 
0 7 * 1 
* "= * IS 
* F yo * * 2 
— > * » 7 £ 
" 7 1 . 
a * > . * hb 
* * 
5 ; * % 
. i \ 
* _ my * 
* * 
* * 4 
oy * * 
* * 1 « 
* * * 1 » [ 
F : 5 ; 
— * * 
» f bi a 
oy 4 « 2 8 2 + 
0 * * 2 
* — % % 
\ 
"Fo * 2 o 
5 — 4 
— x * L 
4 * 
8 — 
wy A : 
- 
* 5 » 
o b * 
dy _ 
+ * 
bt F 
Ld 6 ; 
— 
8 — — 
— , 7 
— 
* 
* 5 
* - 
* = 
1 
* * 
4 
. * 
— 
. x \ 
5 
— 
4 
* — 4 
, Fo _ . * * 
* 
3 
* 
* + * J. 
? f 
af 7 8 * ; 
77 8 
2 — * 
» 
* * — 
— 


irn reſpect o 
itle of this ſe&ion, 1 have not done much; 


* 


5 f | hes w 28 ; dilodged ag x nitrous 3 3 5 
1 to the nitrous acid, in this c — 
— KB d with phlogiſton, though - 
uncon with water. The ſulphur was 
N — but ths, Sum was rden 
5 | this ck, as the alkali in F< having ſn 1 
4 oo Ot Th . 8 


- 


: fa imbibed this aur vapour; 
but whether its acid was diſlodged, or its water 
4] only was Fixed opens did yo: examine. 3 


„A ſr pirit of nitre ſake" — 1 ih 
 dephlogitticand air, I was willing to try he. % 
ther the nitrous vapour, without water, would 
have the ſame effect; and I made the trial 
with flowers of zinc, and red. lead; the former 
being of a darkiſh colour, and containing, 
I believe, more W than the-whiter 
nen of fie; 1 
Eating re th ben a eln ef an 
vapour upon a quantity of theſe' fotbers W. 
Zinc, I put them into a gun. barrel; and from 
one ounce, one penny weight, ſix grains, 
weighed after the ſaturation (for I had neglected 
to do it before) 1 expelled only fix or-eight 
© ounce meaſures of air, half of which was fixed 
air, and the remainder phlogiſticated ; oWing, 
0 perhaps, to the gun. barrel, but Perhaps ale, 
in part, to the phlogiſton contained in this | 
calx. The materials carefully collected after- 

wards weighed TR FOE. 17818. ron 
TY 74 N 4 Me Min 
| Die the effekt of this vapour 1 195 rid hats. 
: exceedingly remarkable. Common ſpirit of 
- nitre mixed with this ſubſtance makes it of a 
deeper red, till at laſt it is abmoſt black; but 
0 he EL be 


Fy N J 
5 1 : E N ; 42 3 2 «it WO $4 WE 8 we is 4 2 "ax * 8 F 57 8 : 5 25 . 
25 / 4 * 7 1 8 . . 3 
Tg , 0 IE — 0 5 © Ne 
| : * q | To 9 ö 5 if 1 8 a In „ e r. ; : * ** ; FX 8 
3 7 * > - 
n . 


ng” after m many trials; that I ſaccreded by f we 


sft lightly moiſtening the inde of a gls 
1 random ps 
| of it, giving. the jar as.thick a coating of it as 1 
8 5 ; and after this throwing the vapour i in⸗ 
5 10 it, by inſerti Ng the tube rough which. it 
| 1 iſſued very deep into the; jar. By this means 
. there was expoſed to the nitrous y apour ſurface ace 
nough to imbibe it all, without ſuffering an * 
| . part of i it to go over the mouth of the jar. It 
1 remarkable that, in this experiment, the _ 
£ | -lead that is neareſt to the glaſs becomes 
5 5 white firſt; and j it adheres to the glaſs fo cloſe- 
: 955 as to require 1 edge of a ſha F 5 


= 7 | I thought that k by filling the ſet. of pl il. : 
„ "gh 3. with red-lead, and making the vapour = 
paſs through them all in Wee I ſhould, 


| 2," in the es iel mann er, get a quanti ity of this ne | 
{indo of white te: lead. But f oaly found, after con- 
the proce $2 conſiderable time, that - 


11 
ed. ead in t the firſt phial ecame ver 
White, juſt at the bottom, where the 


5 
f 


* 
* 
' 7 ' 
— th 
4 * 
4 
— 
N : 7 
— 
* * * * : 
- 
- — . 
Bo 
, . 
. - 
* 
* 1 * * 
* 
— ; i 
* 
* » 
$ 
4 
1 * 
* 
„ — 
1 1 
5 
* 
ay * 
p < * 
- . 
* 
o 
. . 
- o 
t * 1 
« g 7 
ml * 
OF 
4 * 4 
* 4 4 Fg - 
* \ 7 
* L * , 4 * 7 
* 7 - 
* * * 
— * _ 
* 
* . * 
* * 1 


- 
o 
o 
— 
1 
* 3 


1 


circle, but 
not near ſo white, while the val of Py 
was of a darker colour, 


eilig to/Exatine what ar this whi 1 
lead would yield, 1 firſt put a ee of i - 3 
into a gun- barrel, and p ently four 
| Produce of which was nitrous, Sr the laf 
tphlogiſticated. After the proceſs the . 
bow had n dar exactly as ed-leatl 
degree of „ 5 


into a glaſ 


= 


veſſel a quantity 

this White lead, weighing 7 102. 1dwt. 17 Sl 

| The produce was forty-four ounce meaſures 1 | 

fair; af which a ſmall part at the firſt was 

phlogiſticated, but all the reſt was excceding- E 
ure. After the proc 


* 


ceſs the materials 
reighed 17 dwts. as near as 1 could eſtimate it. 
I 15 lower art of the m aterials were vitri⸗ le 
. and cou 1d not be 9 from the 


of th glaſs vg. Tk e reſt 5 the . | 

4 : > 

* 

4 © 

> 
. 

- * 
. 1 5 — 
- 1 
" * 
* 
# 
+ f 
x 
7 g 5 
% 4 7 
+ ; 4 
* „ * 
& . 5 * 8 
F 4 : 
5 Y 4 * 2 8 
* * 
5 * 4 : * # $ 
1 * Y . 

. F $ 4 

8 U 
Fl 


* 


3 


2 


wich or 


. 


5 Gt. 


that I ſhould be deſirous of thoroughly u 


„ 9 ; to. vic 


1 * 


+ * 


Lk. 1 f A 


5 8 2 TOES * 32 5 1 ; 


4 


a i l N a ; 25 f 4 , 
Ws ty G $ ob . F : 2 4 — SY nc „ ce 8 4 2 2 q ; Fats 5 ES A # . $: * 47 | & + wt VZ 7 f 4 3 
8 „ 7J!!ĩ5. he rf Wee * N 4 5 e 3 ? A age $ $5 4 if 264 1 
5 : 7 2. 4 Sy g 6 : l A * 8 . f ol WD? 2 ig 
: $ . . % EIS Fi 7 ; 48 £ 5 1 4 f 'F - , 4 # 7 * 8. Ne 2 4, „„ er Sh * 84 , 3 f ; ES 3 : 
SH 5 E > * Fe #4 q * * ” ** PE " I NE: F 2 g ö \ 5 * f % . = 8 I 2 5 * 


$ 


4 - 1 £0 I 4 8 - i 7 4 
2 * * 8 A 1 
VVA | eg 78+ E 1 fr 4. O0 N THY | 
„ | 4N 2445-22 
P * 6 ; £ 


” FIR wy G7 Z 3 # " 8 FP Fey” N 3 ; $ * — 7 25 * 
- F A x 2 42 1 574 FA 1 2 * 6 123 1 ” N . . 7 
„ 46; 5 55 BA £48: 6: „ „ Fs £44 & „ % + 1 
af * my 94d, 1 = | ? ; 3 E 74 % 25 2 i, We. EF % wy 4 I £4 
: 7 7 nd : 145 7 ” 6 


"* 7-2 15 8 % 
3 2 . 
2 F 1 
2 
s 4 7 


iu 8 4 3 
neee 356 


pY 


172 : 2 
LIE 5 FE er 


95 een to make uſe of a conlilirable gu 
„ pie of lere it will not; be 


172 


Which i it is 


ID | Kancing the chymical. 


. This „ 


2 


155 0 e to . partly to ſave expence; but 
5 e to examine with my own eyes 


ing re 


pro- 
„ cela, in order to get the acid in the ſevera! 
#:fates in which I might have 
Ag without 


T : | 
& 
+ + * . ; : | 
% z 8 « 85 k 85 8 
| 8 EF.” 72 Wah © YL Oe. 25 F ; 
= 1. W oulfe and þ 
3 * 
X 8 . 
% a 


„ Winch jun. with my wiſhes, . he former was 
ſo obliging as to furniſh me with a 
mio dious apparatus for the pu 
LE; os latter both gave me inſtry 


os 
7 e EN 33 1 8 TW 


()- 1 4 "5 4 2 . 1 be 


* £ 2 4 — 
[1 ? - 
4 } 
* * 
. # 
” 
„ 
Q % 
* * 5 
— 
. 4 > 
5 *% 
, 
= 4 * 
4 0 
- Y 
1 * t 
{ Tm - 
* 
1 
* a 8 a 
1 w 
4 
5 : £ 
* _ „ * 
5 — 
1 * 
2 , „ 
1 =, # 
— - 
{ APES; , 
[3 5 x 7 
a N 
2 by -- A — > 
/ hs . 
* # # 
FR 0 
> * 


een ating to it, and make what I 
Variations I ſhould think proper in 


—\ 
+3 


* — * * a ” 
„o 
. 4270 30 10 


* 
25 * 


14 


are W conſiderable 
| 1 now, are ori. 5 


© 2 „ 
8 { OK * "SS 
R 1 
S 4 . 1 + 
\ ; 
* 
| 
{ * 
\ 
\ ] 8 ' , . 
ern Os c ee 
1 
j 
| 'yery ry wit 1 
3 8 * f a 
. 1 2 * 
j 
* 7 — 
, 1 * > 
FE i : * , % 
* [ | ; 
. ; 4 
k 4 8 $ 
/ * 2 
8 \ 
. * 
o ' 
- 
. : = 
* ö PF . 1 
by * 
x s; F 


* 


8 
2 0 
- 4 
- 
i 
F 
* 
2 + 
* 4 
1 
N 
* 
» 
* 
- 
= 
„ 
* 
— 
7 
* 
* 
wh 


ow 


concerning the 
 irſelf, I knew, would-yicid air; and: oft very 
pure kind and though the addition of oil ner 
vitriol ene not er „ 15 * 
no. reaſon, to 18. 


came up to. what was generally ſuppoſed of 
2 great conſumption of air upon chis 5 


tion, of the common, air contained in 
| the rene 


100 „In 


roughly, from having 
ade ſpon in which. 1 bad 


# % 


: «a * £ 
2 — 
. 
* 5 | 
* 4 
* 
{ 1 
” * 
7 
* 
\ 
- 4 
=, 
# 
4 
* . 
4 : 
1 
mw 
5 
, 
* 
1 7 
- : * 7 * 
» ' 
— 


more willing . 


* 


A 


1 


CCC ? 1 r 
5 r „ ˙ „% I a8 7 
f 0 1 


_ fix/ounces of oil of! vitriol td 
— * 5 * » 2 : .. I . 0 . * eh © 
„ The generation of air was obſervable 


| every part ok che I 


= 
* 
1 - 
FI ad 


* 


* 


A che Tt perf . — TY + 
5 1 to 2, and the reſt of 2 to 1. dae com — | : 


w 


FFuaerable quantity came /afterwards; Which s? 


Pe; 3 
„ | tt 1 18.8510 abe 9 ' 
5 : 46, 07 Sanni . 
e reſult” of this fit expetiinent, 
7 1 5 ut an 4. to alt? 
Eo” 28 of the dende : b eee 2 
1 Wire, with 4 plaßs valve (oe Mr. Parker 
mamakes for his appatati | | 
- ____ Water with fixed air) adapted to the 
ZZZ of the receiver, in order to let out, and _ 
„„ whatever vir might be expelled or es ID 
| but to admit of no beta of air ts 


d . 
0 e Nee Wot che 
ollectir albthe air tat would ie 


aring this quand? 
etort andireceiver 
together, Loud not Fai 2 aſcertain: the fact 


: 2 farisfactory manner pollible abe EL 
- patriculars of the experiment were a f „ 
abundantly prove that air is not ab ? 
| | Tamron: no. ro „ 
| n we 5 eee e er n „„ ͤ OO 
| Te”; put into 1 the retort ten. comet; etre; * „„ 
and eight ounces of oil of viggol ; arid plung- „„ 


ures ; DO epi 8e Air enen 
, Herle afterwards; till near 


4 
| 
| 

= 
ö 
0 


9 


"x 


TRE: * x Ip nf, 1 5 2 
N 1 V 


E * 
5 1 4 1 1 BE N 
„ . 


— 


ths 


; 75 4 N 1 / 
Aron andy ronneg $2 F = 
F 10% 0; 88”; * $ -# 3 . 11 3 SF 3 "ok; Fae a 
Es 4 * 1 328 is 
. 1 ; 
+ 
- - 
* 
* 
3 
. 
5 ©; 
4 * 
1 7 
* 
' * + * * 


| 0 * ME mn 


- hy 
1 


eouſd 


* x 
5 3 : 
© #; 4 — N 
> & 34 + 4 * * 
* — 1 $4 : 
L 4 
» 
* i > 
- 
g * b ; 
* 4 NP * - - * 1 
# . 
/ a 
* 
* 1 — 
* * - ? . 
13 , { * t 
4 * — 9 
* & $ 
; * 1 ”= 
7 7 " . v 4 
i { 


WWW 
in ma . 8 irit „ e - F, | 
mi 28117 25 1990, 90082 b in 10 t 
Rai Ahe ain into the tecchuen when 
5 abe gie. at the Gnu, 
e conſideting hoi mc 
Ned eee gewebe bg veel 
_ were. heating alt zit pofiitile;zbd thaty 
7 cals. ſhoud not. he urgedith the laſt y, 
_ the quathity.of alt producecbimaighainboifbpplyt = 
; the Joſs occalioned hy the:dimiputiontof th 
_ common, air, ee ine ed 
ſpirit o aitre i ſtnce this diffimurienitbayibe one | 
ours of, the renek oak the. veſts i | 


cn. appear bet there is ay praperin ption 
of air * this N Wy +50 1001 By of 1 12 el 1. 25 


Fa. 


The e the al colt pio. . 
ceſſ isn vnqueſtipnablyt the poor 
united 0 A pareof ing acid and: whuh the | 
heat is very greats: I ohave; bbſtrved ah In 
this as well a9, in; rhef proneles, m genie? 


quantity of this earth vill, be carried off by 
this acid than it can hold in ſolution When it is 


cold. pon one teh” mepatic lar, Shen. 

| was diſtilling a,prevtyJatge quantity of ſpivie 

of nitre, from nitre that was not very clean, 
and when the heat was accidentally greater 
than it ought to have been, a denſe cloud of 
whitiſh matter poured from the retort into the 
receiver, quite filling the lower part of 1 it, and 
_rþh@ring it akndſt intirely opaque z "and the © 
Vol. III. R | _ pine” 


33 


- 
, 
5 
i 
” # 7 
1 
- 
» 
— 
© 
1 
3 
- 
a 
* 
* 
a 
' . 
+ 
* f 
. 
* 
* 
. 
7 
- 
” 
„ 
1 4 
— 
[7 
* 
- 
*, 
* 


24 Of the Produion g 


; ANDES WE TT ING 


ſpirit of nitre which canie over at that t 
and which 1 
Woulfe's manner, had a pretty large quantĩ 
of whitiſh ſediment; exactly like that whic 
L had ſometimes collected after the pre | | 
of dephlogiſticated air that had been 'very) - 
cloudy. I have likewiſe had a ſedimen tof the 
fame kind in various proceſſes for diſtilling 
ſpirit of nitte, though never ſo much of it a 
upon this particular occaſion. 80 
lke it is alſo generally found 8 
to dryneſs a quantity of ſp 
ing which 1 had, at one time, the nein 


appearances, and with eo account of 'them'Þ 
ſhall cloſe this ſection. ee ee e eee 


; 1 i 3 4 * ? 
wy f 7 9 f bl 4 3” 3x 


In evaporating a quantity of ſmoking 
* nitre, in a deep Phiald the fumes were firſt 
red, but; afterwards quite tranſparent within 
the phial, and a ſmall quantity of the White 
ſediment remain ee eee vnoewkes 
water was e upon i *. OE e RE 


Al received ſeparately, "1, in” ine. ; 


+ 


. $ 
* Ae * | F K 3 % 
* F 1 ; 1 oy V e 
* 3 8 5 - q £ 5 - . 
: 4 4 J 2 & 72 * 4 W 1 8 & -* + 4 4 * 


4 


There is alſo a ſmall white” reſiduum ade, = 
tb evaporation of oil of 2 8 egg ee eee = - 


ELON 


i <4 is 4 
N *e £4 ar q > i 
1 8. * * * N oe? «3 tt * 4s _— * 
, 4 a , 2 11 5 1 * 1 Oy 5 Pen * al ö "x Ber. ao 558 2,4; i * j 
2 „ e . : of 2 1 FTEFF : 2-7 
eV 1 * ” 7 1 
# I 1 e 6 28 ? 
*7 "1 F * i * A - F 
* a. $ * P . 2 * Nr 3 J. 0 70 5 1; 2 70 * >: 
+ bs [4 * 4 1 Z q 4 1 Wt * 
+ * 
- 3. * * 4 , 
* 2 * + * / 7 ; ; 
7 Nr p x * * * * E 5 * 1 5 * LA «© N * £2 Eo 4 
7 EE 5 A 
5 
* 
A ; 
4 z N N [4 * 1 ; 
* s 4 ” . * $: x 
4 „ 8 : N : 4 : wi F 
f 1 F ” 
* * 
0 & p 
* 4 7 + » * 
Fe „ 28 9 . den OE £24 * „ PRE A? ö 
WM | . » ad F * -þ 1 . 3 2 Pp * Lo N "FE 8 * 
* ” 4 is 
17 * : 4 F 8 F 
N 2 4 7 
. * 1 ; 
F) G 4 * & 
- - 
4 — - - 4 4 ; 8 
: "_ 1, ma 
a+ * * 9 7 15 > * * A 1 
\ 
1 * 
4 
/ 
* 1 
* 
* 
17 
-- 
Oo > n 


ale {367 w_ 2 
15 65 y . Autre 1 
GN * CV., Au 
(Bohn mA wor ad3ing - 
er vai 0 tb Conobn =. 
Frame 5 the Nitrous Acid; according to" 
; different  GireunfSoucetis the: Proceſs! for mak-. 
EL E15 e eee WT OAK Sf £1 
40 456 1 A HH IFY * 8 LHEW 2 t £ got 
b by no means made any cbinplete or 
regular ſect of experiments relating t. to the e. — 
lou, or firength of this acid, this not having 
been my abject; but ſome i of this 
kind L have had occalion'to obſerve ;/ and füp- 
poſing them not to be generally kndwh,” or 

not to have E mee 


frat 


rec ite them. ine volley 4:0 n ei 1 


* 4, ; * #5 : , . 35 ** jy 
745175 ar n 601 HIRE.) 101 ei! 1 Pri. 


 Itin'vbvious th Tappoſs:thit th thahe? of 
the: acid | vapour is condenſed in ahy' | peck 
tit of: fluid, the ſtronger the atid m 
and it appears vm, ebb is mile 
N the ſtrength of the act ; without” 
in'fome meaſure heightening Me Blu? oF. 
gh.:the. colour alone ande no een 
iadication of its ſtrength. Becauſe am dition 
of phlogiſton, which in fact weakens cht xvid. 
by a kind of ſaturation; [likewiſe hlightens its? 
colour ; and before I made my own Tpi rr of 
nitre, I was nn deceived gs” circu - 


oog 4 8 f 3 N 2 12 ſtance, 
0 : [1 
Fo 5 
7 
3» 
wh 
"as 
1 
{ 
* 
1 
* - 
6 $0 


* 


* 


244 . Of tby:Coltur-and\Serugrh\— e 
ſtance, and ſometimes, 'I ſuſpect, | impoſed N 


upon; having bought ſpirit of pitre of a very 
weak quality;-harttly diſtinguiſhable in colour 
from the very ſtrongeſt. In general, the light 
with:the: moſt acid, the leaſt phlogiſton but 
it ſeems to be impoſſible to procure ah (bid 0 
much exceeding the ſtrength of this beſt con- 
mon ſort, without giving it a deeper, or an 
orange goleur, But I have not made euperi- 
ments enow of the kind. ge enable me to de- 
cide abſolutely in this caſe. r 20 Fad 


COT 
2:93 10 elne 21801 339 00 Ni 100 


Fheę laſt part of every produce of ſpifit if 
nitre is, f 2 deeper colour than the reſt; and 


" this] have;always found to yield leſs nitrous 
air than the pale yellow acid that preceded! it. 
And it is remarkable, that, though theſe acids 
be. received. in the ſame yeſlel; they ilk cuin- 
 rinue.nnmixed more than a der, and the up, 
permòſt may, with leeres che paureth off from 
the lower. TS When In farſt:obſerved this, - 
thought, it ag he owing to the phlogiſton mu- 
ing 4. {pirir. of .nitze;: Which ' was highly! 
changed wich it, ſpecifically lighter thawrhiroſt)' 
and; therefore diſpoſed to remain at the top of 
its ll 1 obſerved theſſame tiring cbncerning 


„ 


comes firſt, when lubſtances; cuntaining phlo- 
ene! "Ml © proceſs, 


1 7 


Vue Nitrous aal. Ty | 


proceſs, 10 For this deep Brang e. cc edel ſpirit 
remains in the bottom of the phiab, without 
ſeeming to be at all diſpoſed to riſe, and mix 


; _— the yellow g. Werken on the top 
of it Ink 5: FT St jew io tf wu IG ad ee ov 


N „ 


oi, 221 3 40 J 4 2 7 
149 babe erase) en the * f hi- 
trous acid in the bouffe of a diſtillation at ſe- 
veral times, in order td make obſervations on 
their ſtrength, and other phenomena attend- 
ing the ſolution of metalb in them. Of one of a 
theſe ev T Kall give a particular ac- 
count, | becauſe I gave inore attention to Ethan 
to any other; though have frequently ob- . 


ſerved all e e in vatjou: ther 
Ne * 2 4485 N wy 2 Cf q | 
ub ad ue won 930] 

"th 3 a lacge qu pr of Tpirit Hoſtie 


1 1 wether” the acid 4er times. 'The firſt 
produce was very pa ale, and ſtronger p04 any 
that came afterwards.” A quantity of it 06- 
cupying the ſpace” of two bean- weigh, of 
water, Produced, without heat, 9+ ounce. 
meaſures of nitrous air. It efferveſceg Pen 
ly by mixing with water, emitting 
fumes, and its action was the ſtrongeſt at 75 15 
The ſecond x art of the roduce Barry paler, - 

and yielded 8+ ounces.c nitrous air. This alſo 

mixed'with water with efferveſcence, and. its 
action Was the —_— a little time after it 


KS ĩðͥU 


246 Of the Cour and Sen 


was e n "The: thisd: part of ds : 


| duce. was brown, it made no efferveſcence in 


mixing with water, and yielded : ounce 


meaſures of nitrous air, which came ſlowly at 
firſt but quicker afterwards. The laſt part of 


the produce was of a deep orange colour, it 


mage no efferveſcence in mixing with water, 


the air was produced "ogy wk was in 


Seas five e e OAT TENS 


SE LET EIN r 8 
8 3 3 PPP 
" I AST F 
7 7 a 
; x 


Repeating the experiments. 0 on. 9. — ES : 


5 of air with theſe acids the day following, : 


7 I found. that they all yielded conſiderably leſs, 


vithout hear, than they had dope the day be- 


— 


fore; and even a boiling. heat did not make 


them yieſd ſo much air as they had done be- 
fore without heat. The difference alſo in 


the production of air was in about the ſame 


proportion as the day, before $4 PE: the dif- 


ference between the produce of air from the 
laſt p roduce of the acid, which yielded leſs air 
oe with and without heat, was much greater 
oy n the former, which F more air. 1 


« F 5 My 4 74 "I 


0 5 and 


4 *. - * 


It was evident from this experit 


the ſame was the reſult of ſeveral others, that 


the acid which comes over firſt in diſtillation 


4s the ſtrongeſt which n may powbl, be owing. 
to its being the pure, | in con ſeqpence of con- 


1 rhe TE Hy, of Your 3 


e 7 74 
1 ; % as oy % 8 7 
5 | | * CE OY : 


=p Mr . "247 
66 u Wink much les cloudy by the mixture 


| of A ſolution of filver in the | nitrous acid. 


Thinking to procure a very ſtrong Pit e of. 


1 *nitre;*I uſed dil of vitriol highly concentrated, 


mage for me by "Mr; Winch, who, told me that 


rei ounces of e as much acid as fix- 


teen of the common ſort; ; and. T. boiled the 


ö nitre Which 1 uſed a long time in-a glaſs 'vel- 


Tel, fo as to erelude all the Water 1 could 


from the roceſs, and admit as little as | 
oflibl But though che produce Was a. 


5 Hick t of nitre ſomewhat ſtronger than: any that 


I had made ge. the difference was not con- 


-_ 


fide. 
\ D 3 f IR 
. 15 > 2 4 1 7 & # 


8 30 
Ms, "£4 


TG 45 1 in 058 am It took pont 


| Kite to Slade phie e, the whole produce 
_ was of a browniſh colour. On mixing the in- 


gtedients, a great heat was produced, and very 
red fumes preſently filled the retort; whereas, 
in the common proceſs, it is only a Whitiſn 
cloud, like vapour of water, that riſes firſt. 
On che applicgtion of heat, the retort preſently 
beeame clear,” and che red va pours paſſed into 
the Ow and receivers but bei the end 


ER of 
thi is 


e Coin 
435% ALY * 5 


5 0 ee. geen ch firſt mixing of = 
4-1 5 he ingred IENTS, did Not call UE l 5 


of the common one. 8 


2 0 


” 
if Y; 100111 1 [$4 ns | 


117 ii 
” Thar t t ce brown, 'or. 4 ep e e 5 


in the ſpirit « of. nitre is e to it by phl 5 

Steg. 5 ire by. 1 1 3 Idle 

charc ith.the oth 1 ſtil 
lations SR Poet Adel On. LORE 

15 0; ; the, conſequence, I a purpo * provid- 

ed, Were all” filled vith. copious red uche DE 

and a very l brown Þirit'© 'of f pitre.: was / produced 1. 

Mach, ohh 1 7 was e Ta 8 e . 


114 28 ; 
A FR & 4 
1 
4 


Nö 


MY in e e pirit of ; niere. : 
The ſame alſo had a few drops of ſpirit of wine, 


[= 1: and other fubſtances., Rinne Pphlogitton. 
38 ; But if much ſpirit 
5 or othet flui 


1 


af, wine, dil ef turpentine, 
2 oa ſimilar nature, 
be qa 1 of, che! zeigt, and the quantity,of „ 
Vvapou 5 9 andi che ele res: 
e Ji 249. 501 <q normme) 207 at 


410 Wogen ih olg 


Mi 346812 


Wueg I. uſed, 7 of  vigripl, that, as 8 
black, '7 found. no ſenlihie difference in the „ 
ſpirit of nitre, from that which had been an , 

from oil. See pete Ve tranſparent a the 


7 | Sh a toe necafary jo. ble: _— i 


4 


1 ” 4% 7 * * 
n = 20 9 25 es af be 7 9 9 
7 * N 3 * 1 - F . 2 — 
7 * 9 5 . z . 
* |: i Y + * 8 
+ Ra 5 ; r Rpt 2 4; 
NDF # Y 1 e 
0 4 . a+ gf * 
we f 1 * * Fl EY 
— 55 2 5 


Ky _— 4 : | 5 
of vitriol being too inconſiderable to bare any, d 
ſenſible fert in this ae 5 | 


Ti 


7 4 4 1 4 2 
2 
4 D * £ 7 1 ＋ A 
«& os A as 9 — 


4 _ = FR, 18 phlogifan 1 che , 
calour of ſpirit of nitre, but it 


* 
11 10 235 


that heat. alſo, without any addition. of phlo- 
giſton, produces the ſame el ect; Nee 


Tn — 


| a, be obſerved by h 
a > 


| coloured, ſpirix. -. 
1155 ly Gil ar to chat of t 
ed with the picrous vapour, hich alſa 1 5 
| Wi. 18 noi nie 5 e i SH you. e 
beo ee dg air tod, H e 
| 10871729 er e * 21 anr wy eve 


we 


} F. * 9 £4 4+ E 4 41 4 FY . . 4 ; | 
— 5 . BA a A 1 * Fu * «Fx 04 "%. 0 + K 
4431 wr i 7 5 0 Jann 4 2 A By 4 w. +5111 3 


54 * 5 
1 * ** „ 4 227 2 N 4 poop. 7 25 1 8 i 7 7 5 Ps 
my 7 Wig vim 9510s ene 63: wittaty . 
D Ann KL "Nt regs: en HOT: ©- EE. 
„ 


2 69 "141 Bet 215 TY t 25 5 


9% 


11 ES 

Hai Ti 5 

me 444 + 1 * + & Wo & 4+ -j A* * 8 2 11 * 217 $ { 

Lo CFD ASE ES S 571 [5 15 130455 £4, 40 Th eg + UA 10 Fiir | 

/ | S003 COT nner | ' [5 TE 2 iurand wo © e 84 \ 
4 * . F ; ; 2 , 8 85 N a * 2 o 7 £ 4 # 5 RA 2 

1 t ap IN e 2 21700 1 ii ; 


£ * * 
5 . F 8 > + „ EC Ss FREE TOE CS TY * v.--1 
- ino £162.57 nb * Fa Of Lili 
® 1 , 
* 4 : 9 A 8 e 4 | 


: „ ni be 6058440 10 10 rr, - tis "Ir er [go N 

5 Die 1 2 98 . Ae, Non itndcgde r 
1 | Gen v 0 el gs wr One babe 10 F ie 
a 85 e "bb cow qo cw". -; wick 
ai nde, 3d; 4s Arier % e en : 
9117 ed UOGEY works >HB1 OJ bacolarms e- 


noh "SS 2 * J 9 N 


* 


5 A. Ro 2 15 
lap the accbunt of my attemp 960 4 ertain 


— 


. 


ad eee eee ra- 


1 „ ale In rief 0008 00 3010 


+ 
_ 1 1 . BY. £4 1 
21 O16: tl Fog Py ths 95 Jahre! 


rern V. 


"OF: 3 2115 27 413 final 112 75115 5 TVI9IE 0: Dy 


O b Efe, af th Solf, e 
your TE ITN on the ' Nitrous . geld . 


the g quantity ty of ſpirir of nitre in a given quan: 
tity of 
_ Gant did” retained 'by the Water, "rod 
which the genefated Hi had paſſed, y yielde: d 
more nitrous air, by the ſolution of cop 


than the whole original quantity of acid would : 


have done. This is certainly a very extraor- 
dinary fact, but 1 have ſince obſerved another 


ſimilar to it, and which may help to throw 
ſome light upon it. For the ſame increaſed 
power is found in the water through which 
the nitrous vapour has paſſed after the ſolution 
"of biſmuth ; and I have ſometimes found that 


| ſpirit of nitre has ſeemingly be e this ad- 
ditional pats by diſtillation 1 


The quantity of ſpirit of nitre that! uſed in 


this experiment was as much as occupied 
the ſpace of four penny-weighits of water, 


Which, with copper, would yield twelve 
ounce meaſures of nitrous air; but when it 


was employed to raiſe nitrous vapour, by the 
5 e wolution 


air, 1 have obſerved that the ſype tabun- i 


- 


* ad Difilaios on; "Nitroiis 4 467 


- ſolution! of biſmuth, beſides the ab Ar 
that was produced by this ſolution, the water 
which was impregnated with it, being applied 
to copper, yielded more nitrous air than the 
quantity abovementioned; but 1 did not oh 
"OY note er een of che ſurplus. SO DIL 


pgs I 


123 FO TRE * 


2 5 not t think i it im probabie adicy inythis 

as well as when the acid was mixed with ted- 
lead, the additional quantity of nitrous air 
may come from the water,” in conſequence of 
its impregnation with nitrous vapour; though, 
as I have obſerved before, I do not pretend 
to N e -e e rc that wen e 

ee . ir. 


— * # 
br : > gd 4 EF 36 TEES SS, 
4” Fs F : ; : * „ — 
| Tf 4 — e | mh je; 


Some experiments, ee led me, at 
one time, to imagine that the ſpirit of nitre 
acquired this additional power of Yang hi- : 
trous air by means of ſimple volatilization, be- 
cauſe I obſerved it debut improved W 
by diſtillatian only. The facts that 1 ſhall 
ſtate are ſtrongly in ee that concluſion; 
but I have ſince ſuſpected that this difference 
may be of the ſame kind with that which is 
found between ſpirit of nitre fry/bimade; and 
that which has been Lept ſeme time, as was 


mentioned above, a:freſh diſtillation bringing 
1 | e ſtate;: ' n 


3 
8 
8 3 
* 


it back, as, ik. eie ru 


* 9 

"Ws 
> 

* 


12 — of abe Selion | 


ni on I -have thought that, if 1 bad. apple 58 
beat in all the ſolutions, the difference would 
have been little or nothing 3 for When I irſt 
made theſe experiments I was not aware of 


the difference that could be made in the pro- 


duce of. air by that circumſtance. And wen 


I afterwards repeated this experiment with this 
view, thougb not ſo accurately in ſome other 
reſpects, I chought there was no difference in 
the ſtrength of tlie acid before and after diſtil- 
lation. Iihink it: not amiſs, however, to re- 


cite the experiments that had a different reſult, 


linge on ſome other accounts they deſerve atten- 


tion; as I took a vety particular account' both 


of the phenomena attending the diſtillation, 


as well as of the e * the ſeveral 72285 25 


e e an Kori tee irn tn 


44 fl Ic * 3 1 ; 5 4 wy 74 7 — * 9 71 ; GY 5 6 Q 75 | 1 


The d * 1 ard Ab m 


Mas a very ſtrong and brown ſort; eke | 
heat. it hecame- of a ſtill deeper oblour, and 


un out a e- 2 Wunder va. 


vielded much more nitrous sir than an equal 


quantity of the original acid, but the colour d 
leſs;acid; which remained- inthe: retort, did 


not ergebe 0 7% 
50. x | : After 


: OY 


ag nt amen 50 
_ the" application of heat, bechne ep 
Dan . he in great” Fry 5. 
iſſued from it, filling the alüddel ant receiver; - 
but after ſome time the acid in the Fon t be- 
atme codurfeſs, and n o küche Ap pes iſe 

1 the produce | in hah Þortions ; 
Arf 1 he e a 5 deeper colour 19 9 

edel damen, 
an 


* c * pol, | 2 more kgs 1 15 M 


fl fo a in "es 15 N was. expe 5 . 
b the "noſtrils, © "while the Water 
riding which thoſe fumes had paſſed x retain ed 


2 cee Look T0 WIR RECEIVE 


5 on wy'to con 8 W g 10? 0 184 a 0 85 1880 x ani 

The ond hos was paler than the ori- 
ginal acid, and yielded rather more nitrous; 
air. The third was almoſt colourleſs, and 
yielded preciſely as much nitrous. air as the 
original acid. What remained in the retort 
was quite colourleſs, but in too ſmall a quan- 
tity for any experiment on the production of 
air. Upon the whole, in appears that more 
nitrous air would be - procured by previouſly 
FILL L 75 4 . n diſtilling 


— . — 


cation of 
From all thefe 


LESS 


in. 3 


8 


tlie krongeſt 
j comes over fit 


experiments, 
' tioned already, try hat A 
heat woulc id have m 


ſ irit of nitre, in, C 


1. did not, . as1 9 = 


Ke 


ug 
i ? 
* 


VE 


; and that i is in A 5 


procellts, it is. er 


latile, 85 and abt ſtate than befofe. 1 Jags 


alſo obſetved chat f 
| Wan 
Part of 
wa ; u 
a with red fumes 150 

quite Solourleſß) Was pretty 
"which remained in the retort had 


deal of acidity. 


Min 


= 


# i -- 


La Bag ger again 4 
e nitrous acid, thi 


9 
4 
* 


— 


* 
4 - + $ '. k 
5 . * „ „ 2 4 ba, * %% 5 6. . *S$ 
*# * 4 8 9 2 0 8 2 het „ i o wa 7 b. 
F +6 5 1 Md: 5 
7 $9 ; 
« 4 «A * s — 
: 1 l * ; # * 6 ; 1 P ; 8. 4 * £5 
1 $8 Pap 3 : ** | bd 4 1 „„ * > > 
4 p * 5 hf 


** « I" & - Job WED 
* Oe 3 22 9 
; FR n ; "4 r 
4 3 2 : F FN b 5 
© ; : . 
* * ; Foe — 
" | 4 - be. 
a g 933 
ä a trol ating Doe 
3 
5 ä © 23% ng. Vi 18 
* bot 


155 3 ; e eee l. AA, Is 4 85 
1806 5 0 8 51 1-1 "9.5 oi ini, 
flat oumber * e n . TR Ke 1; 
up 0. INFLAMMABLE Au 
g rl. vf12 egg N än aup Sb een we 
18 etals from Which this ſpecies of 
has been:-procured. are iron, æint di D 
found it in cepper, and laad hy fpiric of ſalt, a 
may be ſeen, vol. I. T have: alſo-proeured ip 
in various other ways; and have lately foumdi 
that gu, of anima diſſalwed in marine 
acid, with the application of heat, Nelded es 
ſmall quantity of air, which was weakly in- On 
mma ble. Biſmuth, and! nickel. were alſo dif- io 
ſolved in marine acid with the help of a ch — 
ſiderable degree of heat, but little or no Air 3 
was got from either of them. If there Ws = 
any more than the common air which had 
lodged within the phial containing che mixture, | 
I, could not perceive. that it Was inflammable: F 
but theſe matals treated in this N 15 ded 
Aa Tg ſmell of Iver 7 /alphur. 1 
%% l 3909738 5113 nn 0 955 | 
It is ſomething re . ide all. his | 1 
acids that produce any air by the ſolution f : 
metals give inflammable- air, except ſpirit ubß 
nitre only, which. forms a different Find. of 45 
union with the inſlammable principle; mak= 1 
ing nitrous air, more or leſa modified; in r 2 


2 2 
N W - * 
; 4 
| . 
44 


. 


3 8 
. 


of which moc ifications, 2 it m gi a pe l 
culiar Paper infla Phe Bee 
virriol Mc ſptrit of ſal xo 
that the anther acid 5 pores rotor 
ble/aif; by the foldtion' of metals, nut in. 
a much leſs. quantity. Perhaps the 
Gn of che ug h ff the mf cy beer. 
thined by this means: The 2oncefitritad yad 
N negar A hich I made uſe bf in: my experimenti 
N a the vegetable acid air} (of eee 5 
is given in my ſecond volume) died zine 
almoſk; as rapidlylizs ſpirit: of falt) und pre 
dudedliöflammble air. Bay Jay no” ate f 
ſtreſs, upon chis eiperiment 30 BBeiſe the att. 1 
which! this seid yiedb by heut Being! in fast BY 
nothing N Vitriolicg aid Air, 4 Hide 
madiſied, I ſuſpect that this) axicd might con! 
tribute to the production :o itherinflammable 
air in this caſe. : therefore tritib ru wes 
negan, and found this, hier is wnqueſtionn! 
bly a pur! negetable acid to have tlie ſame 
effect when applied bott vo aint: And iron. d 
ce 3 e to Itot anowft's 
In order to meaſure the ſtrength of this 
aghd, i put as much radical viheas! 
pied the ſpace of 2 dw ts: 4/prs, 14 | 
à quantity of filing of rind loted with ar 
tur, and found that it yielded bne £durrf Uf 
ani ounee meaſure of inſiaminubk dif Wider 
heat 5; and vw] oünte mesferes mere eff 


10 belt 5 | 


9 * 9 1 3 IO a 9 25 
N 3 ee 5 Co * 5 1 2 yy 
Ss EDT eISSN Tay LEM . = | x 
0 EY 99 * 2 x : * 2 * K . — 2 88 N 


< 2 oy , 7 * : 2 * I 
. „„ * 45 i. 
RR. * 5 4 ND. 95 
, * « 4 s RE 2 25 x *. 


N - 2 : 9 1 
3 L 
* 92 5 
+ * x3, N * - $ 


>: 
A 1 . 6 * 7 Py 2 * 
er - « 4 "Is { p44 ws. 
"w ho ba * - oo 4 "2 e N FEY 1 IH ASE 2 © 2 
S «5 28 n 
* > , MR - 6 ES. 
75 5 S 
— 4 s ; 2 ” £ D 
* * h * 12 * WE: Fry nr * 
5 * "324 $ i * r 72 I > 
% a - Fo F 8 5 
7 - 4 9 


= 9X 1:55, 44% A 
SEK. I F 
oF bs.” 7 
. 2 


| 3 lire * 5 1 0 have 

HH cured, iß care had h 
the liquor had boiled oven. What En. 

tie eee it of inflamma 

5 | from ſpiric, of: ſale may be 

aring. this 


. 3 . 
4 a : , 22 9 5 * 4 
* 7 2 . 4 8 7 4 * N * 7 4 
FX r . * 3 
— j N 7 : 8 : " 
h x & a $ Tz / „ 
; 2 * « ; % Be. 18 2 
* k : * POL * 1 FFF S 
E : 2 * . „ 
? 8 


«© 


Em . 


3 © >. 15 We peritents on bed l Toh Y 


that, 5 when's mird of* iron filings and brit 


ſtone, moiltened with "water, Was made 
ment in It, 4 a part of it was made ire 1 
With water, that is, that there Was in it a greater 
2 reſidupmof phlogiſticared 3 air than uſual. 1 18 
e I fup poſed to come from t e phlogiſts 
X 16k in 0 proceſs ; "thoug 4 co 14155 5 40 
that phlogiſton in any! Shes Piber Ie 


cur to me, "that, poltibly „this "mixture Kar 
might generate air, in "which, caſe the fact 1 
have been reciting would not prove that there 
had been any alteration in the co nfti vtion F - 
| the fixed air; lince there ot Have been 
real addition to 1 of al an 720 To! of; air from 
the mixture. To tiy this, en made this 
mixture to. ferment 1 2 5 58 and hed 
that f no air Mbateyer was Produced flömit. 


TL ids AI wit 


I have lee fame th in'the:beft _ 
1 vacuum that I could make with Mr.Smeaton's 


* e III. ä 8 5 e air 


Ser taken that derne 


-obſerygtion dh. 


that eff fect, At that time it outs? 90 55 . 


. 


3 


X 
* 


8 3 


ted to 8 n 
Lieceiver. I alſo made this 
| the/ matetials were buried. in ui 2 and 

in theſe circumſtances alſo no air was p 
the 


FX 


7 1 . 0 6 p 2 
Co N 0 = * 2. 1 p 


; A | 8 2 T8 WF 4 8 
* 1 7 f : ; „ 2.4. Þ# 144 1 1 „ 


hen this wo ret S 
| ir V ere and in 4 Warm place, a 
„ true] inf ammable air is generated. The erpe- 


* „ 


Fiment was made in as accurate à manner as 1 
could contrive,. and in the courſe of i it it, wilt 


| be ſeeh that | p . Fang ial 
again by the water k 
| tron an brimſtone, a 0 which is ne cel E 27 55 
5 | enable chem 8235 23255 e bt 2 ee 29 ; 12 * 


2 5 8 


„„ aving ills Foal hiat ith a wixtute | 


5 mentation 1 . and ſo r ued froſt 
the mixture, as occupied the ſpace of four 


times the bulk of the materials. In a few 
miautes che qt aticy of air diminiſned, 


£ * 
* n 
| » 4 $1 ro. 
« : * * 
* 0 _ 6 
- 
x . e ; 4 * 
- . * .* 
. 7 p « 
. * ” ' 0 - 
* x 
1 
* - 
N 
* - - — 
1 
” * 0 
T5 f 
- 
4 — 
* 
} , 
F * 4 * F * 
» 
/ 
i 
OE \ 


! 


| „ . W „ 

| ly Folic acid wait, and hav 4 — eg oy 
: | B01 bes i e Water; bot th there 7 Jai „„ — 
about. one Ar of the bulk '; of 1 dite le e 
that Wäs p permahent air; not imb d by w ah 73,2 54 
and 27 wax inlummable, 9 OUR &5 ADE ng 


* Sides zine yields been with 6 Ty 1 
Wel, "ag well 48 iron, 1 | +: "0 
fibly it might be affected as irön is by =, n 1 
of lol t looſe from the ſulpbür in in this „„ 
' proceſs,” anc 1 fund that when 1 fubſtituted PS, 
filings of Line for" the filings of iron; in tte 
eircumſtances above-mentioned, they anſwefceg 
equally well. In this experiment 4 quanfity 
of air'was produced equal to the bulk Ye 2 
materials, All ſtrongly inflammable; and at 
this time I particularly obſerved; that woe . 
3 of the prodiice was fixed air, of Which Fhad - 1 
= Eee ſome Night ſuſpicion, Whene rer 
4 any Part of 4 produce e of air, as in the lat. 
mearione W mu hn: * W 


/ 5 7 | : e 332.59. : 22-. 5 13 
1 36, "Þ DEA SOS CY 1 23 Ya A42a7is To 


4 p.7 * 7. . : # "% i : * $#-* 


"ING One of the mot condi experiments „ 
that I formerly made relating to inffamtable 
air, was the firing of it in vapour of ſpitir of '. 
nitre; in which penn it was exploded nl 
all at once, Exatitly as if it had beef füsse 


4 


With e air; Hick roves that there in 
5 ſomerhi F 8 ſpifit of nitte that 
ee _ 10 TY. hg gh 
* 413 ; N ' f 


is con Feu 2 81 Rn -. 5 a 5 


($4. 


Ales IT'S 25 FF 55 2 


} , cabling © an burn w 5 the -help 


+ 1 4 „ "hot 
. * * tes * * i 5 


jy ia, obſerved. ſeveral new circumſtances, re- 


this communication with it; that when the 
ſpirit of nitre is weak, and ph 


lating to it, and ſome of the reſults are ſuf- 
ficiently - curious. \ They: fully confirm my 
former obſervation, with, theſe additions, that 
ſpirit of nitre takes Phlogiſton from inflam- 
wable air, becoming of a deeper colour by 


ogiſticated. as 


1 hens Gas enges this ering and 5 


er 


when it is blue, or green, the inflammable air 1 


| agitated in it reſembles. a mixture of nitrous | 

and ipflammable air ; and that hen the ſpirit 

of nitre is ſtrong, and very pure, inflammable 
air agitaſed-1 in it explodes, in the ſame manner 

1 as it does in conjunction. with dephlogiſticated 1 
air. And, laſtly, what is as remarkable as any 
of theſe facts, is that this effect of the nitrous 1 5 


4 is of no e e l T he facts, as 


1 
+343 þ "ts P 
8 „ „ 5 7 


3 "$4 411. "365 


„ F6A filled a, 01 jar 19 0 "PILL "er 
| "nitrous acid, inverted in à baſon of the ſame, 
* diſplaced the hole of it, by introducing a 
quantity of inflammabſe air; and then apply- 
ing a candle to the mouth of it, the flame . 
6 . 


2 


ys 


* 


* 


. 


deſcetided from the top to the bottorh. . : i, . 
pobr „ d darf 55 pen E the enperichene 
ſeveral" times with the fame acid, the whole of 


* 


it becatne much redder than it was before 
A jar being half filled with this acid, à candle 
let down ate it burned naturally, but 'T think + - 
rather better than 1 in the open WM 5 
ee en av ef Ao DENEA . 


In the col urteſs ſpitit of nitre, which is the 
leaſt impregnated with the acid, che explaſion ' 
was not different from what it would have 
if e had been n, 


* 


B+: 4 5 SY „ , 2 
, ly. — 21 3 14 5 1 "Vie >» 8 6 4 45 * 
* 8 8 / « T : 
7a 0 Y 


: 8 8 
* 2 11 8 6 N 1 4 * 7 if 3 2 a 3 ba 7 y 4 £ * 7 #55 A 
ts 3 17 4 4 4 6 q 3 ow „ * 1 ab #4 ; - 
15 . . F f — Fe 
> 
— 


w tht this experiment was 
green or the blue ſpirit of nitre, and eſpeci 0 8 i 


the latter, which is leſs acid than the former, 


the candle burned with a blue lambent dae . 


in the neck of the phial, juſt as if a ſmall, | 
quantity of nitrous air had been w with | 
the inflammable. e Fo 7 271 . n 4 Toa ; 

In the ſpirit of nitre which is green tinged = 

with yellow, which it the utmoſt effect of the 


impregnation of water with the nitrous acid, 5 


the inflammable air went off with a loud ex- ö 


1 almoſt like a mixture of inflammable 


% 
3% $ N 
and ges hlogi icated Jr, „ Ds T8, 
* * 4 
5 4 725 ; 
: * 7 « . « K p * 2 F 
ö x E FRY | « " , * . * / e a 
n 2 19 W +, 4 A * 8 £ +S * 4 3 S, x © 2:5 1 1 
5 4 : x . 7 — * 
$ 5 po 0 hs -. — 
* 9 * 1 - S * 
> . * - 0 & F<. 
4 : S 3 . ; 2 : | 10 : ; 4 5 2 1 n : 
> Eg 
. ; * 1 ; 
. g Py * 
* 4 4 - 
ov - - 
* py 
* - * 4 
* * . 
* 
4 of awed 0 * * 
8 1 
* - - o * 
a 
5 # * 1 
— 1 * 
# 2 * 
. * * - 
. * * 
- * F 
o * 
* * 155 
8 4 } a 
% 8 — 
- "© 
1 b .% 
* 
# 7 


- 
* 
* 
TeX 
7 
o 
4 * * 


4 
* 
8 
4 * 8 
% = 
4.34 
* IF 
2 : 
4 - 
7 
* 
”. 
* — 
* 5 F 
. — 
2 1 
LAG. 
«4 * 
© 
2 
4a 


"1 


7 15 


mable air was big 4d E after i it b | 
diſplaced the ſpiri of nitre, without 2 al 3 


out agitation. In. the. following — 45 1 
* elects of thaſe circumſtances were tried. 


Having wroducks; a quantity of inflammas 1 
ble air into a phial previouſly filled with ſtreng 
ſpirit of nitre, inverted in a baſon of the ſame; 
and allowing it to continue in that ſituation, 
1 obſerved. that the air ſoon began to increaſs 7 
in bulk, and in a few hours it was one ſixth | 
more than it. had been, The next morning, 
when I obſerved that it had increaſed very 
little more, I agitated. it 0 When, in about a 
minute, it was increaſed again one fifth, but 
more agitation hardly produced: any ſenſible 
effect. Upon this I applied to it the flame of 
A candle, w when i it went off with a ve ry loud 5 
exploſion, in all reſpects like a mixture 5 de- 
phlogiſticated and inflammable air. Going 


oyer the ſame; proceſs with blue ſpirit of nitre, 


he incre 


w# © to 1 


aſe was much W and more cd 


le; 125 all, one „ of Bu Ae | ; 


+ 4-4 ; 


Bore, eat) like a mixture of - nitrous 1 i 
_ inflammable alr, 


7 
. 5 & * 
* a , 
2 . „ 
> 4 z , * p F 
* * * 
# * 


that the 


in which it | 

becomes the ſame chingthat We ee DG fe Ten 

making a great number of ſmall exploſions in 
rk S nd 


„ 


7 


i 


- us a n 1 as 24 had: 
| gas und pers upon this wenn 
, I Let: N ent the 72 
- 11 f is. ain os: remarkable chat e e | 
mable air continue long in the vapour of ſpirit 
of nitre, and be fired in it, without ever being | 
refnoved. ant Ut? it returns to its former ſtake. | 


„ 


WAI Ks 7 1 e a. Nod 75 = 


nd. e ne ad e ed 
- idfaimable air, in ſpirit of nitre (the phialj 
being inverted in a baſon of the ſame) e 1 
had ſtood about a week, and which J agitated 
a little before I tried it, hurned upon the ſpi- 
rit of nitre exactly like inflammable air 0 
other circumſtances, making a great n 1 
of exploſions. I alſo fired the air contained 
in two other phials, which had ſtood the ſame 
time without agitation,” and they were both 
exploded exactly like the Po ' The) 


i 
$ 


Th 


+ ener of he ne er e 52 " > by 


* 
F 


+" * 205 


Le dis 4iference ſhould dns ariſen” Tom- 
the quality of the ſpirit of nitre, I immediate 
I filled a phial with the very ſame ſpirit of 
nitre, and diſplacing it with inflammable air, 
found that it was fired all at once, with a very 
bright flame, as before; a the ſame tima 
another quantity, which I Radars ah ittle, 
+ ee exploſign..” eke ar eee 


N 1 
* * 5 „ © * 


F 5 | | „ 
£ * . — > ; 1 e g : 


. 223 4 
oth L £2 * N 8 
55 1 e 5 4 5 * ' F eing 
7 4 4 * 8 
« = Rigs 2” 4 
* * 


* 


1 was ſuffered. 1 -by BB 


5 


Was neceſſary to produce this cara 3 „„ 
change in che exploſion of inflammable air in EI. 


Apa 


» * 2 W 
F 4 
{tank | AD Bhs 
* . r 1 5 12 
* nonfyins 175 ea Fr gens 
—_ 2 4 * JEM k 5 x "Fa 2 ol 
met a 85 
3 82 . 
SE.” 9 


722 2. * 
* CTA * 
5 x hy - 3 
* * 
$ a I, 
— 4 


, 
7 7 a7 2 
i * * 
# 
mn x 
4 © 2 
1 E + 
IV 
f 
BY - 
* 
* 1 
- 
Ll - 
- 
- 2+ 


theſe e which contain 10 noch” pblegil 233 
decompoſe inflammable air, it “ld 
y ſeiing upon its acid, eſpecial 


of turpentine, which evi e 
nitrous air by that means. The examination, © 


of the ſtate of theſe fuids before and after the oY 
ation may perhaps: 


———— 


—UUU —ꝛ— — 22 — —— ëb᷑d CCS 


r 


4 405 
ait in oil of turpentine 
but the effect "was the. 


7 


circumſtances. of 1 inc and d 
bulk of the air in theſe ex erume! 


* 


nitrous air. In order to compare them in this 
a, I kept a quantity of inflammable air in 


eh 1778 to the 2d of March 1736, 
without finding that tHe air was in the leaſt 


S il 6 2280. 
en, d 2 reduc; ab rag its original dimen- 
[ ions, 1 then examine | and. found. it to 
burn With a lambent blue flame. Te SAM - 
ſelf. to be intirely a at a loſs. to account for 


teaſe and 


= 


6. As air ie ſuffers ; a 3 N . 


poſition, and change of conſtitution, by the 


contact of 5 but the principles of ing 


mable air ſeem in this, as well as in other 1 
„ to haye à firmer union than thoſe 


2 


1 


Phial filled with ſmall nails, from the 18th 


degree ſenſibly changed; for * yas the a 
ene een N lt BR 


85 . 


AE. oth: what I have obſerved 


ng impregnated a a 
3 which all its 


Hot or] traded by the air 
dum p) with FE Fu: air, of which i it im- 
ibed about one thirteenth of its bulk; about 

about a mont afterwards, by making it it bail 


1 
j : pe 


; * + 12 W * 5 > 
"Blk, i it 1 „ 
: , Mts . —9 4 s ig R 


+. Neither does i; 1 W ny 
e . impregnation with water, in which 


1 


mi the inflammable air. In 


* 1 
of : 


4 


flammable as it had ever been. A er thi 


7 proceſs there was a depoſit from the” water 'of 
2 filmy kind of matter, probably the earth. of , 


the ineral that had beg employed is broduc, 
oth theſe reſ- 


7 1 inflammable ait reſembles vierous a.. 


/ 


- wg: ir any 435 85 1 principle i in the conſti- 0 


tution of inflammable air, it is held in ſuch 2 
ſtrict union with its phlogiſton, that they are 
not eaſily ſeparated. Among other inſtances 
of this, I found that water impregnated! with | 
it does not turn the juice of * turnſole red, 
except perhaps in the ſlighteſt degree ng: 
nable. But perhaps much agitation will pro- 
duce a more ſenſible effect of this kind, and =. 


may deſerve to be re-examined. ' N 1 


N 4s 
* 


4 85 - — P 3 * . 10 3 0 * 4 I; . 1 * 4 + * 5 7 


When 1 put iron a i 65 marine 4 
, 1 obſerved that the inflammable air that 
was generated by this means did not ſupply 
the place of all the air; part of the acid no 
doubt being requiſite to thin the ſalt formed 
by the union of the acid and the iron. This 


experiment may deſerve to be 10 win 1 J 


as as, "4 this means, the | propo y 


; in a aphia, 1 e Gong it about 3 * 5 1” 
g be of air, and found it to be as ftrongl 


fel 


* 
7 1 ; 
VN F N : oe | enix 
* . 
* 
” 


© te. a. ad nd —— 2 


dees of — 


2 fs 


FX . 


7 A 


* 
3 
s 


* * 


d 


* 
* LO 


* 9 
. 
t AL 


7 


+, 


» ' # 
£4 vo . Su £% 
g & 30 * *, 15 9. — 8 4 


+ 1667 : 


55 e 
4 " LS 4 : K 7 
yh 3 * 4 


75 


7 . 


de bs 


35 


TY 


* * 


hegt of *. lens only, it 4 
1 Tr Fi. in theſe experi 8 me 
of any other uſe. 


7 * 
— 
* 
* 
Fd 
* 
4 x 
4 : 
« — 
PR 
. 
k f 
+, 


| ble air.” 5. 25 ALY? 30023 | 1 5 262 5. 8 0 


W 
10. lie z di BVC 


"7 — * 


er Pon 59040 ale, ES: Bas to 


* 800 neeſn; 
SOM 122 2 40. 


+ 


* 
- 
* 
7 
1 
A 
— 
* 
* 
8 


d dein i 320.146 51090 5 


N 5 . oo > . 1 * 
5 58 gas 1 1 n 50 SIRE” | 


2 Fig $ £4 $6 7 +3 Ti f 
3 0. Ann 74 Ach 34D ©: 


ah 


T0 cle 5 5 1 


f \ 
i 4 89 7 i x i J f 5 i {4 ; F : E 5 
: — 8 4 — 4 A * 85 oe . th 24 . 4 + 5 43 + 5 63.4: 4 £ * E f e #x : + 
+ * I A 4: C- 4 * 23 * 5 * 21 7 %a »- * *. a Ot iY l 2 A * Wo 8 +F 
A 15 12 * * : : & 4 e — 
| „ P 8 ; 
x % 5 "oY * 
0 * 7 * > f * 2 " 
{A * 2 - | g i ; ; 
- * . ty y 4 A 65 x N . * 
Mein r d vers” ab 
3 7 4 ENT (hw LLSTS ET TG KAR þ * * L25 5 as . 
4 4 5 l 5 * 2 Fl P - 
+ * " &; Pe * 
PT Fg CET” 3. 667 „„ e 
1 3 * n 1 11 4 * TIFF „ ‚§ „„ I +5 8 4 r * 7 
N., 5 EE : 
1 4 % CT 5 * 1 * 5 5 
IF ft „ . 1 4:25 # 2-4 WF ; „ 0 x 7 
3 3 : 4 0 5 3 2 8 2 5 1 F 933 J 4 > $8 * % £.£ 
8 „ nnn 1 „ | By N l 
bY - * 4 ” 4 
£ 4 E 
* % ; 7 ＋ * 9 1 * . ( x * 4 ; 5 
„ „„ 147 „ 2 „ . 72 — 
* A _— . - 5 : 7 3 * 85 4 SM key * CA 6 # . 2 * raft * , 
OTE / TITS. e ERS au IIS Aer 0ST OG > eel 
* * 4 7 4 EY — FR 
* « 4 x 
172 4 1 $1 a 1 "A 4 , * . 3 8 by 4 J 
7 3 7 * by, 7 2 >. * EC FF # 5 . F * 5 + I £44 Fas 2 9 # 
* Ie ff . IT'S | dt 4+ 4 A 2 ? 9 3 4 ul "Ss Tx 3 5 py . : —_ 
* * * 
a : bs * Fs 4 1 f ; . + þ 
" by r pl 1 * | — N & $ 2 + 5 nu * * * 3 
FF i 2 1 : 1 F 1 7411 7 * Fas wy 0 
# * * 5.4 N * * & * 4 1 374 * s . * * . #% 3 14 + 1 „ * i bh: ** 2 
| 1 a g 
4 * 5 * by, 8 P 4 py * 
mo 1 £ 17 J * F * > 2A bs 5 x] N * 1 2 72 1 Far * b 
. ; Ni F 444333 4 S 3 d 1 L131 Ye : FIELDS 28 43 # 
3 | 7 | 1 
* e .x * 1 * 1 N 
[7 * 1 Y * 2 5 1 
ot T" N 5 1 * 7 F : * * q * : « f f q 5 : 4 W 4s * #* + 2 * ny C1 # x * 1 A { 
* # + 4 7 L : 4 5 83 #7 & 4 4 1 515 1 . b 1 4% WS £ 3 
a % - p > . 
L — * * 
1 r , ; A. my! : a 4 "Be 8 i * 
| e, a Kn a 5 4 CC 
by * — = 
* . ** « +4 A , oY * 7 * * ; e „ 1 
: [0 2 4 * ” * ba * * * P #*; + ® * * * - " ; 1 * 1 * * 
5 : rw ; w1 t F 8 k } N N 14 res # * * * ox ; AI. 5 £2, £, A . 
* 
A % 
4 
8 
* 


1 * 
” 
* 
1 * * 
* 
7 
* 
1 * 
* 
3 
n 
n 
” 
£ 
* - 
* 
* * 
# 
* 
- 
3 
n 
25 
.* 


complains of not being able to preſerve the 


| e a given n of Wanne acid air, 


i 5 ˖ 5 6 
. el gto mf 3233 
* 75 „ 5 1 5 2 n - ** . * . N 5 44 Ws * > 
W $3.4 2 2 Sd £78 wort 15 1 13 4 Wa + A 2. 
? DES.» 


. I 281 be * Tal 3 N 4 # 73s . „ 


8 5 0 31 0 * Avi. I 


12 147 8 * 42 W RN AY * 2. 72 * 
2 3 20 * | oY 


to Vinnie AR A. . 
e e rag 9.14 267 39 + — 7 | 


Vr Io acid air, I haue eas is 


5 procured fem almoſt any _ſobGance, falid-ar 4 . 
Avid, that contains phlogiſton, when they are 
diſſolved in hot oil of vitriol; that even iron 


and zinc, which when digolved! in weak and in | 
cold oil of vitriol, yield inflammable air, 5 i 


| - this acid air when the oil of vitriol is ftrong-- Ml. 
ly concentrated, and made hot. I ſay almoſt | 
all ſubſtances, becauſe I could not procure this © | 
air from gold, or platina, on which even 
5 heated oil of vicriol had no effect of this kind. 


That moſt excelledt chymiſt Mr. dr * 


ſulphureous or, vitriolic volatile acid / in the 


ume ſtate, and of the difficulty of making ac-· 
curate experiments upon it on this account; 


though he thinks them of much importance, 


| eſpecially with reſpect to the nature of phlo- 


giſton. Now, in my method of making theſe 


: experiments, this difficulty is intirely removed; 


as a given quantity of water may be made to 


even 


1 


@ "11 


was to cm 


very thing which they have .much;wanted, © * | 
| and it is certainly worthy of a farther inveſti- Ff 


* 


my thoughts have been pr ty much employ 
can make the very great 


* + 1 


a r. 16 Judge | | 
ther could de 110 gert 2differenes Se 
them? Water i impreßnated Wick dna sti 
N Ui, in all reſf et 
the Common ſpirit of ſalt, e 
Yd may be made conſiderably f 
this manner than afty ſpitit of ſalt — . 
* Toritnon way, and that it has generslh es 
= =» » bur. © Alo water impregnated with Hitrous | 
Aa cid vapour is the ſame thing with common 
1 15 irit of nitre, except that the acid thus cc 
„„ mounzcated is tote volatile, And the colour is 
hinged, But water impregrated with vieek. ] 
J 40 air differs moſt remarkably" from oi 1 Fs 
„ bf vitriol. Its acidity i is now become ie 4 
8 What it was; and from being the moſt | 
„„ _Aixed,” and the ſtrongeſt, it is now by ect i . 
| weak |, and the moſt volatile of Al: acids; . 
the ſmell of it being intolerably * zungerit," and 
wy almoſt the whole of it ARR, when it is 
. expoſed to the open 8 £1199 {oe 5 


1 


® * 
87. A £4 T9 ; N *. 5 2 3 e! 4 * uh N 25 f 3 
3 * a „en g x 4 \ * 4 
* 93 HEE : EA S 4 i* 4 A #& N 
P . 


* 0 


Vn Ti tien Jifſerence ſeems, however) to be 
. en occaſioned by the phlogiſton ſuperad- 
ded to the vitriolic acid. This principle | 
united to the acid in a manner neütralizes 1 
forming a kind of ſulphur, in wich the aci- 
„ 1 is, in a Sent meaſure loſt. To the phlo- 


— i 7 4 1 44 


1 f j * S : = ' eden, 85 þ 
4 ; . f ” = | ; | | 


Utility, to both Which bropertles PRIOCINTO „„ 
is knoun in other caſes to contribute, The - . 
different manner in which the vitriolic and ni- 
N  frous; woke N with Ta 


1 


* 


nim rn matter for Pat 9, 
| perimental inquiry, for which we 10 5 m 
to be, excellently ew: pre} ared. - e ee e, 


a Fe or A long time I concluded that w 
n gated with vitriolic acid air Leg 3 
| incapable of diſſolving ee h ſo a8 80 1 
> + For having completely fat DO 


= Mo _ with vitriolic acid air, I let it continue pe 
vpgn the quickſilver in which the. pro. 157 
bad been made, with a conſiderable quanti 8 +: 
| wiſe, to make; if poſlible, a more 
| 5 ination of the acid with the wa- 
| nting it as gently | as 
it in A Pphial with a ſmall 


15 


wt : 
274 5 aan „, — 


of the remainder upon ſome ang; of zine; 
upon which, with the application of Wu a 
confiderable quantity of air was 


and this was all bang ane men one! 4 


. 1 
* * 
2 . E 1. 3 die 9 


41 a 7 N „ 


* 
* 
* 
3 # 


ſolve; -and obſerved that air was expelled till 


nothing! fluid remained in che phiaf, and 5 


this time the volatile acid which it had yielded 


bulk of water. The re duum was green vi- 
trol; containing the crude oil of vitriol-; un. 


eee vg leaving a galved 10 
fare 5 It A 5 4 Te a 1 FS: 4 A £4 177 121 7 


Nas, if che quantity; aba oil of wiede 
eſtimated, and this experiment be repe: 


with a little more care, the exact proportion 


of acid in the oil of vitriol, and in water fullß 

impregnated with vitriolic acid air, may be de- 
mbit When the ſalt above mentioned 
Was maſhed in water, a blackiſn matter was 
ſeparatef from it; but all the — 
oh: ofa ligh 


e 


# , 
FF 22 51 . 3 74 S FE 


Tbe quantity ef aid in water 3 
with vitriolic acid air; may, in ſome mraſure, 
be compated with the quantity of acid in the 
oibof vntiol from which it is expelled; by the 
method which I made uſe of in the following 

experiment. I put to a quantity of oil of. 
vitriol rather more copper than it could diſ- 


comp etely faturated eight or ten times its 


F P 2 * f * bd 8 
£4 1 * 
** - 2 4 4 
green # c 5 4 * ö 
, 3 N 175 ; 
1 f f . * — 2 * 
" 2 1 144 > * 12 ; 4 I LE 
E 1 8 * 38 7 8 — „ * * 8 


#4 
8 


** 


- 


— 


, 


* 


be or grey, when ir was u Ariel By 
enn 4590 l FIT) 12251 LS, of 9 Wigs 15 15 3 10 


. 7 a — * ** 
3 * * 4 5 S * 5 bo % * "1 4 . 2 * 
dS 5 . * 4 , « a 4 8 0 wy 48 | %.*' #5 * * * a. + 5 * . * Ne 11 
Fa 2 wy 3 © 'H 2s * . at Rd wit 2 


1120 - The: greater degree of ae u water 
impregnied with marine. acid air, and its 
greater power of diſſolving mee 0 
produce inflammable air, will not be wondered © | 
at, When it is conſidered how much mere ma- 
rine acid air, than of vitriolic acid ain the: 
ſame quantity of water will imbibe: In order 
to aſcertain this, I took two ſmal ä 
cloſed at one end; and put i into cab of: the, 
as nearly as poſſible, two Fe, rain. Water, 
out of which the air had: been 8 


end 


vile Su might imbibe, and chen intro- 
duced them into jars filled with each of the 
kinds of air, ſtanding in quickſilver. 1 then 
obſekyed that the water in the marine 
acid air ir imbibed-'it very faſt; and diminiſhed: 
the bulk of it, in All, 13 ou way 
whereas the w. Ti Et in the vicolie acid” air im- 
bibeck it very lowly; and, in ally” not more 
than- ccupied th e pace of 3 grs. : 5 * 
water'; ſo that water imbibes about ten times 
as much urine 5 0 air, as Lo vitriolic acid 


aif, eee 


"Ss 


4 59 4 ue 42, po wa IE F TR i 4 ag 4 Bus 2 : 55 
1 ls FL r 2 1 Bu * ad 11 1 2 WY. 2 11 : 7 4 
ö * N 2 *. v4 


* & W. Fe 


vun 5 i 1 . 2 * "pl ” DiE N. * 


enough for the water to erpund wich rea - 


1 2 2 
N 


4 | . | ; 
« wal f 2 relating >, 
2 The water ſaturated - with marine 5 010 


- +, airat this time was, as far as I could perceive, 
Aauite colourleſs, and it was fo ſtrongly im- 


In? Pregnated, that the warmth of my hand only 
maade it abſolutely boil by the eine 925 its 
FLARE and it Wackel e 
8 "+ 


| Confidering the much 3 en * N 
marine acid air, than of vitrielic acid air, 
that a quantity of water will take up, I was 
rather ſurprized to find that when water was 
ſaturated with the latter, it could not be made 
to imbibe a greater quantity of the former than 
I perceived it to do; though I was not ſor-. | 
'prized to find ' that when water was fully-i . 
pregnated with the former, it ſhould take bux 5 
| a 5585 wore of the _—_— in the b ex- | 
” Pann viiolic acid air to water « fly a 1 
n with marine acid air, it imbibed Sur. | 
-  - tle, und that very ſlowly; in all, about four 
-,__ rimes its bulk. It was obſervable, however, 
that the vitriolic acid air intirely diſcharged _ 
„ af eee W wag Oy 
8 ; | eee cinge: . ; 


\ 


. © 4 "Hari "EF a e of * 225 
1 = vierilleacid air, it would not afterwards take 
waiie acid air, except in * 


| 15 nuit 1 id | 


and very doch. N. B. The bubbles of m: 
rine acid air, which burſt in th e 


dant vitriolic acid air, which on 1 8 


Per of the Faret;, emitted a ; white fume. 
921 base d hn 030 Titi 1 
a ie 'mixed with alkaline air, the inſide of the 
glaſs veſſel in which the mixture is made is 
always tinged” with a yellow colour, exactlß 
like ſulphur ; but that this colour conſtantly 
diſappears on being expoſed: but a ſhort time 
to the open air. Being willing to try whether, 
by making repeated mixtures of theſe two 
Kinds of air, 1 could not fix this colour, and 
collect a quantity of the ſubſtance in which 
it inheres, I filled the ſame jar alternately with 
each of theſe kinds of air, till all the inſide 
of the veſſel ſeemed to have got a good coating 
of this ſubſtance. But, being expoſed to the 
open air, the colour in this caſe alſo ſoon diſ- 
appeared, and the ſaline ſubſtance with which 


_ became perfectly wn” | 4 i 


+ 41 1 1 % £ * 7 Is, 

2 ks bd > F E * 
; 

Wa 27 NR tt 


24. Oils jntbibe viteiolic ach: air, wall oretly 
rapidly, in proportion to their tenuity; z though 


they cannot be made to imbibe fo much of it 


as water can. Being willing eo ſee the utmoſt 
effect of the impregnation of ſeveral kinds of 
1 with this acid air, 1 took about equal 
474 .T 3 quantities 


- > 4 i 
. . 
3 7 
— 
2 BL : 
— mW 44 1 


all the inſide of the tube was N coat. == 


2 . 
* 
” 
A ö 
; > 
v3 
x 4 f : 
: * Y 4 
* 
7 # wa 
: * 
4 18 „ 
O k 
5 NR 
* & 
. * 4 


5 2780 | © Oberlin relating 7M 


ey quantities of oil of aretz el * 
Ms whale-ail, and gave cach of them an oppare . 
tunity of being fully ſaturated; having kept 
them conſtantly ſupplied with freſh air, When 


= N 2 had imbibed a former quantity, an q fre- | | ; | 
1 1 — Gul not imbibe, and beginning, Thee” | 


43 55 5 5 4 q 2 * Jp (3 1 b 3 * r 4 IL ; pf > » * 7 + 1 "y 4 
1 W L , t# 


| 5 EN | 

4 80 1 15 3 445 RN 434 * 5 "ro 3 . 
„ * Both the whale off _ the cine on imbibee „ 
. this air very flowly, being ſeveral hours in ij 

bpibing 1515 bulk of it; but whereas the firſt 
effect of: ' he impregnation of the whale: oil was 
imparting, to it a reddiſn golout, the olive- Oil 
became. quite colourleſs. In, all, they both 
imbibed ſix Sr. eight times de e of ahi 


9 7111 iis 48 N A 175 1441 Is 1 3 3 0 6259 1. % 


15100 3 . a 1911 £ hd 4 35 

8 Tn this. manner = they: tins in glafsljars 

confined by/quickGlyer, about. a month, whe. 

, | obſerved, that, the oil of turpentine: was bee 
come of a beautiful amber colour, the dlives 
oil was darker, and the whale-oil darker ſtillʒ 
and they all ſmelled extremely. pungent, by 

dhe eſcape of che acid air from them. Their 

| MAG: TRAN bende amen 95 cf Diet 


* 41 formerly made on vitriolie acid air was, 
| 3 that a he h ak 4s: taken in tis 
5 | | $6 (1147414 | | the | 


\ 


Uk inſide ofthe glaſs abe in 
; fined lis douered with: abjackiſty ſubſtanos 1 
* bavelfindergiveniimorgatrcurionies! sicaribus 
circumſtance, and have betn happy enaugn 
to aſcertain ſeveral: things of conſiderable im- 
pPortance relating to it, though they re ote = 
ſu 10e for A ee theory of i E. | « 
„ at ax anime; ww amfolqus rr aa bv 
My firſt .wiſt > was wo colle@t:a;quantiqy'ef 
this mutter, enough: far; a>chymiical mn: .. 
tion of itz ani for this purpeſe Lapplied „* 
my friend Mr. swhd:fdvaurdd:mnie — _ 
with his uſſiſtance, ahb the gie of bis large hy 
machine, made by Ni Nairne, on the ſame T 
6 plan witotharwhich was made for the Grand „ 
Duke io Fuſca deſcfibechdn the Ph „ 
phicak:Tranfadtions. But though wer 
good deal of time to this buſineſa, we didnt 
get a qdancity fuffciont for my purpoſa. l e 
do not, however, deſpair: of doing it ſome 1 
time or other, when I ſhall have more leifure 
for ir- 13 Wo 7 55 meretenth aids Ani EO. 
id ail en 07, Vamog 112705 i © 
I fiulgesfbn, however, 15 Conelude that - = 1 
che Whole ef the vitriolic acid air 3 ; 
into this black matter, but not by means: 
any union which it forms with RE 
fluid; but as cit ſhould ſeem, in 8 „ 
of the contiuſton given to it by the exploſion 8 1 
and cler if ic be he cat of x monte. 1 


s/ 
# 
2 


. 


— 


| ” 
. 
| 

| 
| 
| 

| 
l 
i 

l 


— ——— nA" 48 
* 
* 
% 


* 


* 


Pa 


* 


cha abged, 


riese the phlogiſton,” it is not to be. BY 4 0 
guiſhed from what metal, br indeed fron 


tin 
hat ſubſtance, of any other kind, the air 


had been extracted. Theſe particulars will 
be only: eg in the following experi- 


ments. 7 F 1 $4.45 5+ 35 :T4 + 22 5 Feen 1 "by: 5e 


PF 4 p be \ . 
« 1 2 $ * * 8 . 


141 1 4 ln 2 7 n * 17 8 7 7 n 


1 made 120 exploſions of a common jar i in 


about a quarter of an ounce meaſure of 'vitri- 
olic acid air from copper; by which. I found 


that the bulk of it was diminiſhed about one 
"third, and the remainder was — 2 not 
being all abſorbed by 

the courſe of this proceſs the air was 6 
transferred three times from one veſſel to & 
nother ; and the: laſt" veſſel in which the ex 
ploſions were made in it was, to all ap 

ance; as black as the firſt; fo that this air 
ſeems to be beer N i _— black | 


? 8 e N. „, 12 E 77 „ 
* 4 9 : Falk P # % 8 TA I 325 ; 
_ 2 : 8 7 PEN in, 7 ; * * 79 7 f ; s * 
e a (Op ed'y 5 
l Al 4 


| Thinking this ow of a vitriolic 
acid air might, poſſibly ariſe from its abſorp= 
tion by the cement, with which, the glaſs ae 
employ ed in the laſt experimen 
1 repeated it, with the variarign: only. bs — 
ting the air from quickſilver, in a glaſs Bpben. 
confined by quickſilver; and obſerved that it 
was diminiſhed, by the ſame number of ex - 
MODE in about — proportion * Tha 


+ 


- 
.4 
Pi 
; - 
% 

* k 

4 

* 

* 
8 „ > 
F * 
2 
- 
5 5 
- 4 5 
9 
— . 

4 \ — 
- 4 : 5 
* - 


ö 


| minutes, Fithour interruption, in a 
vitriolic acid air, \ 


the eleftric matter formed any union with the 
air, and this black matter had been the reſult 
of that combination, all the difference that 
could have ariſen from the ſimple. bark, or the 
explofion, could only have been a more gra- 
ne Ke. or a more formation of chat 


1 7 9 1 8 w_ 


with Nair, Foe 
af a very 


* * B, 
8 ; a 4 


5 


„ 7 
\ 
- 4 f 
4 * $ 
b A 
— 
6 KEE 
” * . 
* * 
* . 
%* 
*h f 
- 4 * - 
hy 2 
% ; F . 
2 * 
* 
id * 
„ T 4 * 
„ * 8 
< , ( : 
- * 
„ 
8 2 2 
9 . 1 
8. 4 


Jar, containing more than two 


L 


* 
— 
* * 
— 
— 
* 
* 
vas 
— 


Der! we relay to 9 2 Kg 


zo ooitedt:fodſoeg hab no effeẽ c upon i it; 
cbt Weh ihoubÞ ſbem, Watz. itp hefe Cats, 
the force of the ſhock was not eee 
the whole quaitity of air ſuch 2. SHH 4s 
-was nexeſſary to decompoſe any part vf it. 6 
«3110 9989} 307 101 out be 6 10 10 
lat one time. Ichat little doubt; but tet ne 
tees fo byocheſe exploſions in vitriolie 
— acrording vo the 
eenlxvof the metal, or other. fubſtance which 
-had-dupplied th phlogiſton of iv dt | 
tthat, together with phlogifton; ſome of the 
carthyafurtgof the ſubſtance had alſo enteretl 
7 a compo ion Dfotfie air uHðꝭe de- 
tpebreddbithis decompolition of iti in lhre fm 


oh Aipom der. Butz upon the who Epi id 


mor mib chat this conje&ore was coctified by 
ahs fach which I (bl hert reiter o h 70 


1 10 a 18 ret! 9417 4699 12 148 t Hino) 4 | 


83k badngenerafiy-andde! uſe of rypper g but 
hen d gar a quantity of this air from gaiob. 
ſilver, in the experiment mentioned. above, 
and alſo when afterwards, I, for this ve 


purppſt; procuretb tl air Mom almdfÞallithe' * 


_ kindbofiubſtance from wich it can be pr 
cbred, the eleEtrie"explolion'-rakentimgropro. 
dubed the ſame efſbet, in dbouding the tube 
with tlie black matter, nas: it had doe imethe 
air eee, copper As ſome of theſe 
c PREY 379048 £10805 cunt © "gat ORD. 


„ 43 3 
1 


j 


/ 


experiments wart attended wich preulir cir ; 
cumſtances, | W e ee os 


10 L yas mob e N Yarra Te 

to get vitrivlie; geil air r lead; N 
quantity of leadeni ſhot into a phial containing 
oil of vitriol, and applying. 'ohtty the uſual - 
degree-of heats #:copkiderable quantiey: of bp 
Was produced Fol after X though 1 


1 increaſed. "ell abe acid boiled,” "HG | 


W eee iis 3 IM 2 


matter as produced almoſt coveringuthi 


fide, of the tube. But in the korean en, 


periments with air procured from the ſutne 
Homethang adhering toit; ther 


=_— but black matter was produeed, ai 
all the other enperiments. Water being ad 
mitted to this air, there remained: Seen e 


ble reſiduum, which as very fighly ne 
mabla-. FO 30/26 ANA) 0 nden * 


1 


N 2e -bomnct en Aid s 
Vitriolic acid ain is; cxtly-prooired from 
| ſoit. of wine, the; minture becoming"! 
before. any air is * Gel a 
KO! 1 "I $ 24 2 0 


— 1 R nn 
ps Ts * 8 * * * © he 0 N hes "og . 
* 4 2 E y 1 Fo 4 2 — ** * 
754 b * | e 
A . 34 i; Fg * * 
3 $5 5 / 
"of ; OO 
« : 5 
1 . * N . 1 5 
* * 
. Nb , - 
S + tw . N , 
* 
: 
* 


„e produced, H Steck: the elbibtrio Tn, 
and in the fuſt quantity that I tried a w ; 


was leſs of: the: whitiſh matter; and at nit 


- 


1 — to, We. 


pion ken in chi air atls/produced the 
black n. me . 


— 
. 9 
— 
4 » 
- 
n 
2 4 . 


; 21 any an my ee "wy damn of 1 
throwing light upon the ſubje& of this black 
matter, it ſhould; feem to be thoſe which 1 
made with ether, by the help of which: this 
air is as eaſily procured as by any other ſyb- 
ſtance containing 3 In the air 
2 by ether the electric exploſion tinged 
the glaſs very black: I think more ſo than 
JS had obſerved in any other experiment of 
the kind; and when water had abſorbed 
what it could of rhis air, there was a reſiduum 
in which a candle burned with a lambent blue 
flame. But what is moſt 4 we gf in _ 
experiment was, that beſides il - $6 
triol becoming very black during che proceſs | 
a black ſubſtance, and of wer þ conſiſtence, 


was formed, which ſwam on the ſurface of 3 


the acid. I collected a quantity of it, but 

J have not examined it with ſufficient atten- 
tion. It may eaſily be procured by boiling + 
ether in the vitriolic acid; and I think it very 
poſſible, that the analyſis of this ſubſtance may 
be a means of throwing light upon the nature 


of the black. matter formed by electric ex- 


| in vitriolic acid air, as they ſeem tore- 
| ſemble one another very much. Bur'1 in this 
| wee „ 


SECTION | 


\ 


. pl E 4 No 7 2 2 
eee S 


* 


* * 1 ; * * 
* N ry bo : * 4 5 5 = % # 8 F Fe 3 5 
1 . — 7 


2 - 
— 
% + 
o * 5 1 ? 
15 5 , \ N 5 4 . : Re 
: wa *. + a jou * p x . 8 1 a 

5 * 8 gf : 1 * 4 > 1 2 Ty 1 4 f ? 8 ; . 5 ; 4 ; 2 2 * 1 * 

8 1 rY 0 A * 8 — 4 © 4 N I #3 l . By „ 

* £ 1 1 , — — 4 , * * 4 1 4 * o , "I. 33 

4 


Ix my former inveſtigation of the nature of. 
ü acid, I advanced an opinion, ſufficient 4 
ſupported, as 1 think, by experiments, that it is 

neither a new mineral acid, as Mr. Scheele, wo 
made the firſt diſcoveries concerni 


Boulanger has conjectured; but in fact nothing 
more than the vitriolic acid itſelf, that is em- 
ployed in the ſolution of the ſpar, exhibited 
in the form of air, by means of the phlogiſ- 
ton which it contains, and loaded with a 
quantity of fluor cruſt, is part of the 
earth of the ſpar. This additional ene 
gives the air new powers ſo long as it conti- 
nues in combination with it; but when fp 
rated from it, leaves it juſt as it would have. 
been without it, viz. mere vitriolic acid air. 


* 


x 


> " 3 8 * 9 
- 4 : ; s 3 q * 
5 5 of wh 4's 1 4 1 , 1 


This hypotheſis has not. been univerſally 
 admiteed, owing, as I imagine, to my expe- 
_ riments not having been ans age attended 
to. 1 ſhall, 
T my- argument, and then 


» 


ng it, ar. 75 
| Poſed, nor the marine acid diſguiſed, as Mr. 


e 


* 


— by other —— viz. the d-: 
| oaths ao inamate union of che fluor craft} £ 


* 


and the earth Which 


286 | Oljeroativns due, +: 


experiments, all of wick appear to me to fa- 
vour thy theory _ I 1 8 mo. _ 


FRY * 


2 


(iv; The ſpar hide contains 5 phlogiſton, 


as the well-known properties of it demon- 


ſtrate; and as appears ſtill farther from the 
air which it yielded in my experiments upon 
Ito with nitrous: acid. Conſequently, if this 


fubſtance be heated in the vitriolic acid, it 


muſt neceſſarily produce vitriolic acid air; for: 
the ſame reaſon that every other ſubſtance: 
containing phlogiſton, treated in the ſame: 


a, 3 this air: 1 un 8 n y_y 


% 27 TY 50 
15 (hs = £4 * 7 47 20 2 4 . 


1 Al, „When water is ae wiki an 5 
air, the acid part ĩs evidentiy imbibed by it 
it contained is precip i 

rated, and may be all collected. Now water 
N ſo impregnatod wich pure aid air is, in att 
reſpects, the very ſame thing with water im- 
pregnated with vitriolic acid air, encept chat 
it ſeems ill . to contain! a en quantity « of yu 


fluor cruſt. „ e RIVA ee 2 
— * 1 2 f eager 45 GODS 8 aL? TT ry 533 4 * 20415 oY . by 8 

* » s af 
3. ae TT 
aſe,” Ai efron 


water r thus impregraed we" the fluor acid, 


it 
„ 2 a 


- 9. 


* 


ke + this, from Mr. Canton's pe 99714 <a #5 


nee this a dozen different; « 

periments, to poſſeſs che very Jame properties 

with vitriolic acid air; and, as far as L cauld I 1 
diſcover, it does not ee far rde ob 1 
pect whatever, %% SG. „„ 


21192 zu mn at 12 IO n On 
The . Obfectio Cer 1. LEE 9 
can think of, to the abovę: mentioned hypo- 
theſis, are, that I have not yet beem able to make 
vitriolic acid air previou/ly formed diſſolve the 
fluor ctuſt. and with it compoſe the fluor 
acid air. Alſo, though I imagined that I 
had produced a kind of air in a ſmall degred 


(vhich in ſome reſpects reſembles this fluour/ 
Lace, when I admitted water to a quantity of 
Ar, produced from this ſubſtance by the vitri⸗ 
elig acid, a flight cruſt was viſible on the furs 
face of it, Ino believe chis might he ani 
formed in the ſolution, and ſublimed by cha 
heat of the-proceſs, and not proper fluor cruſſi 


or any thing of the ſame nature, e wee 3 
| Mr. .. Bew ly oy eee — . LY 7111 . | x : a 
| a alu} * | 


But 1 do not think that any arguments da 
Shad from ſuch conſiderations as theſe, which I 
aue all of a, a:gattve Rind, oyerhalance cha 

direct annere ſpoaibied hands : 
air. e. me may. ade. able. 60 Fen 


compo le -- 


i po Z 
f */ {> 08 


8 the fluor acid air As the rent 5 
. I ſuppoſe to conſtitute it, though wwe 
are not able to do it at preſent. It is no un- 
common thing in philoſophy to be. able to de- 
compoſe a ſubſtance very completely, without 
being able to recompoſe it from its conſti- 
tuent principles. In confirmation of the 
above — 1 ſhall now pe a nw 2 
new ee 8 | „„ 


WE Ht ute and ac Meets | 
ris, it might have been expected, that it would 
have been diſlodged from its baſe by ſome other 
of the acids, as well as the vitriolic; or that, 
. if it was of a ſtronger kind than the nitrous, ”= 
| or marine acids, it might diſlodge/them from 
_ _ their baſes: whereas no experiments whats 
euer ſhow any ſuch thing; nor can the fluor. - 


' acid be at all produced, except when the | 
iar is diffolved- in the vitriolic acid. Thie - 
4 haas, in ſome meaſure, been obſerved bß; 
1 "hers. er eee the enpe- 
3 myſelf, I WO the eee 1 
„ e „ ; 


& ke; put a ner w7 ines ral 
Y nitrous acid, in a glaſs phial with 2 . 
ſtopple, I received the produce in water, and 5 
obſerved that about one ſixth of it was fixed 
air, precipitating lime in lime - water, and mo 7 


9 


— 
er nn "IE 
= * 
— 
. 


. ˙ A FOES" NET OP | OBI aug92 * n : 
8 — 


ib aa e POE gf to „ —_—_— 

that this ſubſtance Coeli much: k phlogiſton), e 

but there was no appearance of: 5 thing like f 

| a crit on the ſurface of the water. N 3 5 

= tlie air was received in quickſilver, the Tolu- FFF 

| riofi'of the weral, aud the produkten bf fes 

nitrous air, demoififated that the'nitrous acid 

uneombined with any thing that tould alter „ 
dsp of it, came ore,” r ee eee, ñ y 


93 N * 
l 5 


3 * 1 


— 


» 


4 


5 Wen ut the mare, aaa uf 


* il effect, as hed l bern the | © , 

ttous arid) nothing was protiiiced: Ae pe e 
preroper i narins acid mr. A few of the bubbles,” © 
= - indeed, were perecived cn form” cruſty”) {40 _ 
E ff appearance was ſo:exeetdin „ 
it may well be ſuf ppoſed to have ariſe don. VV 
ad | ry ſmall quantity of oil of vitrigh in the „ | 
itt of ſalt. And this is the more 5 8 
ache air wighin the Phiat which ame over o_ oy: 
in che firſt part of tho Peoees, appenfed be 4s 
"3, WEL a little phlogiſticated ; as it would have been 2h 298 
— inixture of vitriolie acid alt} 5 2595 
is 16 3110713 G30 VI RES e ia p 5 
e, wenne; and Ian, Her 
I _ talnly; require the ſame quantity both of vitri- 


= Clic acid air, e de rüste Zh 
£0 bib l ace Wo agen nun wt '” about” | 1 


— — 


— — he Ae Spe AR 


- 


rations relajing % e 
or ten times more marine 0 Lair then * 


can of VIP 101 air. — * 18 , ft | J... * 5 id 8 $7? th "I ; "If * 
7 „ SE 8” 12 "£493 TAS RIES So. BE hy 
44 y 5 * 0 ; | * 
; 955 * 14 * 2 
2 


1 . to oy "the a of Mater, to. 
imbibe fluor acid air, I put fix grains of water | 
in a ſmall glaſs tube, cloſed at one end, into a 
jar of Ruor ack air, and ſeen grains of water oy 
another jar of the ſame air. The former im- 
bibed one ounce meaſure of the air, and the 
latter two ounce meaſures. This was in a 
wider veſſel, which was ene ah/advan- 
tage with reſpecd to the bſor : 5 
This abſorption, hawever, though certainly 

greater than in 9 of vitriolic acid air, 

is far ſhort of the quantity that would have 

been imbibed 1 marine acid air 5 ! after * 

 a;confiderable quangity. of this ach air AY =: 
that it is poſſible, that, excluſiye!/of this 

abſorption by the ſſuor gruſt, the water might | 

Bog have: med ow: of this,” "ger or 4 


certain I — Wer, * 
Finding what quantity, of water, tin ged-bl 
2 


8 


3 1 
* 144 wag e 
— g I d L 


— 1 


„ Juice of turn le; all e 
i 1 eat ach of the kinds of air wn rorg, 


£4 Keen nenh Y 4 
2 - 2 ; 
4 * f x : 5 8 o *% 
en deterniin *" 2M 
4 TM . * n 
7 * : — # Ke * 
＋ ? Ts 
” oy * 1 
— * 8 | 8 
N „ ME OE 
» FS. > * 


& ex riments 16, in ſeveral Re | 
45 inary 3, = 


:rſon Would h ave. cent 
calt it Was contrary to my expe 
theſe experiments 1 in two « 


made 
1 


1 


0 
* 
Fr 


-© 


* £4 . * r £4 
$% it into 

F 9 r 
2 3. % 191 $$ G 


ed, a.quahtiry 
chen threw i 


in 


> HP, "A Nalco” air had Rete = 3 
No „ 
5 g 1 555 . a 5 a ; : 6 


2 n. ame meaſuh ach ot 
Abo! kinds of air” aller)” wt T 125, in all 
five meaſures of each; after which hard! any 
air remained, except What Was not 05 X ed 
by witer, which was about a fourtMpart 4 
the original eee . was' very Jil @ dif- 


Ind! ons of nitrous air e the ſpat 
14 of a meaſure. Upon the whole, HE el 
| ie may ſafely be concluded from this 
8 that —— quantities" of tee e! oy 0 | 


— 


* 
T3. 7 


of oihial. 4 . air. 
4s dhe alkaline air, 1 Wan a given quan- 
tity of the latter was ſaturated; as nearly as 1 
+ could judge, by half as much of the ere 
For when they were mixed in that proportion, 
whole quantity of both kinds of air entire 
1 Ie; was in OY N s * 


"Uh Thick K yellow 3 1 3 the 5 C at or t 
mentioned above, and T which became 1 


#5 


being o n then pen ar. Ty 


4 Ot. 774. 
Mw 18 12 . x . 


7 - Making the experiment in the "tals % wan bf 
ner; 1 alſd found that a meaſure f al | 


air was c etely f a theaſure 
omplerly furrizd by hall thr 
of fb aud air air, 10 tha both incirelyRiſap> 
' of i eee Sz 4; g 115 14, l 811 22 * | : 
rats, 1 3 + e | 1 
» » 925 N 4 
7 | : : 
# . 
# by $ f 


2 8 
3 & 9 ND 
e 

* — REP 


5 6 
> 3 =- 43 2 * 
22 8 * by 25 3 br * or 
"bg, : Oo 8 's : 1 S ,-* 
2 82 Gs N 1 * : 


8 77 „ 
%% 4 a 25 „ on, #23 F 5 f 1 ; | 3 29 
* | 9 " , 5 


9 
% 3 


N * 
ve 


__ S 


* 


1 is remarkable ci cumſtance. the | 5 wo 5 

1 f or acid air and vitriolic acid air perfecti ? 

4 . agree; Which appears to me to afford a „„ 
ment of their 1 ultimate identity. 55 


rig put one meaſure of fixed air to 8 1 Ol 
os of alkaline air, the quickſilver roſe to half L 
} + meaſure; and when introduced another . F be 
5 4 meaſure of fixed air, n o more wag" al aforbed ; * e 
and water being admitted to it, imbibed al? 
1 moſt all the remainder; ſo that half a meaſure „ 
': of fixed air had ſaturated a whole meaſure of os. 
|.  alkalineair. Bur the union of theſe two kinds | i 
ol air is not effected 8 as in the other 
3 85 | wx otherwiſe the Whole of the alkaline | „„ 
3 | * v'of fixed why" hac hey admitted ü. to ir. 1 
Afterwards, — mixture very gradu. 
ally, one third of the quantity of Axed air e 
i LES the whole of ay alkaline ___ 


"> 
x pf 1 
7 IS? + 4 * 


n 2 prece tin ing. nds 1 wich * 1 
Te vapour of ſpirit of nitre, and =. 
an equal quantity, and one fourth more, 70 


F pe 
KS 

8 
FT 


* | of alkaline air; When it immediately-beeame 
= | Wo turbid and white, and the quickſilver” | „ 


z 


| within the veſſel. © Then filling te 
p gain „ with the . e . ö 


* * = ry : 
ö ' $4 £54 
” ; . 
* = Wy 7 
, F 
* » 8 * 
- — * 
— — 
SEN * 
* - 
> * 
* 
* | 
= 
* - 
= « 
* 
4 7 * 
* 
mw 
A 


been occupied by the pure 
* there had b 


„ 


7 
2 nt 
3 


In the next ſet 0 experiments; wi 
ing = meaſures bath of hs 9 
veral kinds, of acid air, I 
of the acid airs only z 


1 8 8 


* 
> 


* * 


much of it equal quantities of the ſyeral.ac 


irs would Frog The 


ne and the, dimiautian ar. 
the Jar of alkaline air (which wa careful 


# 


£ £ 


acid air was, as "nearly 8 fb] 


15 


* —yitriolic | 


$56.59 
1 
"a 


p robably have 


x ES 
24% 1 


. that 1 have unte cob bur IN the 
tons may be ſufficientiy dep ded 


88 
5 
8 
is 


& of vitriolic. 


been facurated with it. 


s leſs accurate than the other; 'as L did no! 
make allowance for che different degrees of 
dilatation of the air above the quickfilver by | 
the weight of the quickſilver in the jar above 


„ e — — 


alkaline air chan 


7 2 E — { 
4 Ae, , oy - 
8 3 — 5 "Ys » 
& *< . * 
% - 7 8 + A * > 5 * 2 3 
4 "2 3 . Vs, # : : = 
5 ft 1 8 5 . . * 1 — 
4 5 „ 
* 
* — 
122 
3 3 


reſpe 


Water will alſo take little 
U 4 > moe 


rine acid air can do, is 
agreeable enough to the obſervation of the 


reſpectively ſaturate; 
them, though much 
or in ng: caſe, being in the } 


For an equal quaniity of —— 654 5 
will imbide ten times as much marine acid 


8 
2 1» * 
1 
4 „ 24 
I 


+ 
3 


„ de 
” n 


more than its bulk of fixed air; ſo chat a 
given quantity of alkaline air ou ght, for tho 

flame reaſon, to take leſwof this, uh of — 

5 bother kind of acid air, Which agrees with tl 

experiment. And yet, conſidering the ip: 
* ,, - Sarent ſtrength of the acids, one would Ima- 5 

Sine that the vitriolic, which, in this form, is 
NMWeaker than the marine, ſhould ſaturate: le 13 

of the alkaline air, and again that the fixed 

air, being the weakeſt of all the acids, ſhould 

ſaturate. the leaſt quantity of alkaline ar-. 

But the former view, in which the expetÞ. _ 
ments do not appear at all extraordifhry, id, 

in fact, more agreeable, to the anglogy: of — | 

ſaturation of water with theſe acids; and t IE 

difference in the proportion abſorbed of each 

of them, correſponds to t e difference of the 5 

ſpecifie gravities of, water and air. 08: 
1 5 not ſee the et in this 


NR aher 5 


4 1 have only to add 10 theſe 4 op and 
experiments on the fluor acid; air, an 'inef- | 
fectual attempt that 1 made to incorp 8 
the fluor cruſt with vitriolic acid air, as I bad 1 
before attempted it with the fluor itſelf, For 
this purpoſe I pur a quantity of fluor crult 
into a Phial gontaining a quantity of vitriolie 
acid air ; and throwing, the focus of a burn- 
ing lens upon it, for a conſiderable time, 5 
| ö c of the weck with the 


: 8. 8.5 ks, $5 . 1 1 8 x 
„ . 15 r 
FTT 
6 ; > * 4 $4 der 
P * : g * * — 5 
„* 1 ; 4 . 
* ; 


keene relating to „Mes un Aew'h ' 
Iris ſomething remarkable, that, 1 


| water impregnated with vitriolic acid air is a 


very different thing from oil of vitriol, being 
much leſs acid, and more volatile, water im- 


pregnated with the marine acid air is capable 


of being more concentrated; ſo that the acid 
will be ſtronger than, I believe, it can * 
made in the common method of diſtillation. 
The only difference between them is, that com- 


mon ſpirit of ſalt is always of a pretty deep 


4 ſtraw- colour 3 W water impregnated 
with marine acich air, las generally much leſs 
x colour,, andi is s ſometimes aao W 5 A 


4 
The 8 which I 1045 to een 
the utmoſt ſtrength of water im pregnated 
with marine acid air was the following. 1 
ſaturated a quantity of water with marine acid 
air, and diluting equal quantities of this, _ 
of the beſt ſpirit of ſalt that I could procure, | 
with equal quantities of water, I applied chem Es 
ſeparately to filings of zinc in a phial with a 
* ä * the former” = 


N 


n 


Mowing more time ta 
+ Alſo 


e 70 So i 

3 I f 
t. to appe earance, 3 th. 

a and, blowing mane, tha 


wre ot it ws er 


sa uauſe of the uſual colour both of ſpirit of nitres, 
1 and of ſpirit of falt, but without obtainin 5 
. much ſatisfaction; and indeed the. reſults of 
4 the experiments that I have made with this 
view are ſo different, that I cannot well ac 
| count for them, At one time when I 


Py 


e TAG een Ane 4 7 
ö lation of a quantity of Sie irit of ſalt, 1, 
ame time, impregnated a quantity 
„„ She edundant acid vapour, in 
| ner invented by Mr. Woulfe, 1 dit 

pes Saks there was any ſenſible” 
0 he: colour of the two acids. But W 
at another time, I. made be chend acid air 

: 5 paſs through a quantity of quickſilver 


keolour, j was much ie elit chat 145 co. 
eee a It, bu ugh it was am 


* 

FJC T EF us # oh Es. 
9 % 7 2 4 x 7 7 * 2 K+ * 
4 „ 4 3 +2 of R tf BY..- Ben 
37% 1 # 25 * g F 5 * . CER. 


_ 


e S „ 2 iN + 
* „ N , 1 2 
13 4 N * wt Fora 2 
, 0 « f Ft 8 i . L wes 


— , Rr e 
— — — ” 


——— 


% < £ 8 2 A g . 
T0607 273310. 4: MEER 
3 — 0 COPE. „ 


— ¶ ͤ-—̃ ens Song oe on 


— — en. — wü 7˙—r. , 


———— 


—ä— mim 


————— ̃ -3ß3 ... re v6 Ee EO 


* 


— — 


— 


Toll ant en d din 


1s 10 Win gn - 9 tr r ona 


„Ger \ * 3 "2 


. 10 be 5 am rd 


fs * 
9 11 


much greater benden of doe 
TN than I fuſpe ed. ä 


9 
# * EF 
> 
* 2 * 
4 4. 
* 
1 
* 
— 
1 
* 
= 
: # 
* 
[ 


— 


* 


— EY A 
— — A Hy hav 


#. *% 5 


Js Z ; 1 
%% „ 
E 
. 2 th = 


nt «wr 


$066 "pf 
* - 


1 * 1 
| Y 
: 8 : 


Ls 


vw 
„ 
{ (2? 4 > 7 0 


5 
Pd 
5p 


* 


11 


3 


5 7 5 * by 
| : of $4. 


ax 


— 


— — reee 


> 2 — 


—. 


ht. 


o 


{et 
- 4 foi Rt, x 


85 £97 © 1 IP Ys 47 "0 


. + _ 


fixed and common air; 


_ 
* = 
* 
* 
* 4 4 
4 
* 
„ 
FF 
* 
5 Xx 
£ 
1 
« 
£5 
* 
1 
* 
” 
. 
- o \ 
, : 3 5 
- 5 
5 25 
. # 
1 * 
8 S * 


@ te, 


—— — ——ñͤ——-—-—̃ 


Cota 


| 
wie der} ares pai v4 
ame manner a mixture n 
/ 
1 ET Hg TEL geth | 
| |. + tities of nitrous and Fixed air, in the petforated 
Ef. and deaauting it at ſeveral times, with: | 
1 : ſaine care as before, and mixing the ſeves: 
1 ral parts with common air, could obſerve 
j no ſenſible difference in the een, pro- 
| 


h very — cate, — — 


. CC UNS NN INN 


45 N 1 * ; 
X at might not mix or blend tem 
8 1 together, 
a EF 8 ; 5 ö 
” N | p p 


_ will continue to 


is convcyed, into 
ing gommon air, {@ qUAF 


5 ke - 
4 : ON GORE: "At. 
. 1 4 . 
5 FR 5 e 


N N . 2 | 4 : * 1 ** 4 =. # ? 4 A =} 52 0 25 \ 
bei 190. 1963 ob206 5 ay 1 60 nö ð 36. nl 


Az bon 180 3 Gal 34 180010 „eb rr 53 8 7 9 755 3 


4 5 N I ed 21 5 Ws 7 5 1 
41050 1510 £764 2 $87 ao5wod? D603 me i, 1- 


— 


i * = 7 5 1 £ 
* * . ” > #4288, e 
4 EIS 25 ; X 227 a 1 c 
5 4s. 5 ah if 4. Fs 29 LF i” . N 1 #85 of 1 11 is, 25 „ 8 5 25 
* e E Wt Vos + 49 4 — 8 x : 7 4 i & a ” EP; - Mabe 51 A < hf 
2% doen ee nd Swat fawn . fp. 
1 * : | * 3 78 Ba #4 , 
vhs A 5X $5 . . 4 * * 1 * bf N 5 . {WEE 
. 2 Fe . 2 0 1 5 BE 1 © $28 wy $258 A 5 * 74 , wo : b * F, 2 ES 7 1 
4 i q i 1 „ 2 : wo BY 2 4 2 
4 1 { * 4 1 5 4 = 7 1 
1 I x : II * ; } R ” " 1 * 5 6 
0 ; . 22 0 5 5 %. F- * * — I * 7 
A 8 ky I 3 
. % o . * * * 
* * . 5 


. = * 
5 8 4 ws 4 3 ; 
4 2 5 N 
* 70 * 
* ” 
- . % 5 5 
— * 1 £ 4 
+ "a, * 
6 — 
2 N 
* * - * a 
0 a 7 "A / 


2 - - x ”y 
* 
" Ti * 4 7 
£ ; 
7 e 4 1 
7 
C4 * 0 13 
: k . 
* . re , { 2 
x - 
. 1 
1 78 
0 g . 
\ — 
» 
; * 
. % , 
y | ne Oo 4 
5 i I 4 a 3 
* 8 5 * * 
| 1 5 0 . * 
hs - 
* : 2 L ; ; 
3 > 
1 " | : ; 
I+ Y 5 A 0 IP \ , 4 ? * 1 »>, 
5 ” * 
2 « ” G 2 : 2 3 3 


—— — — 


1 — 


3 


— 


—— 


— — > mn 


— ay en. oc 4 — — 


—— 


— 


— — 


— — 4 
—— 


—— ——„-t— 


— — — — 2 >" 8 — — = 


9 — 
— — — 


—— 


—— — — 


> — 


— 


M 21 4 oy, 


361801: gti | 


a vs * LA 5 - 
td ig Tit Ti: ge, f 
Bag +4 " Fa 2 5 : x 
a N N cath, * * 1 2 der Fes of #0 J 191151 ay n "__ 
* 2 5 : 
CT 0 * abe 
: x 
6 25 > 443; $846 a4 ** Ae 27 
HE i 13 18% CY 4 IE: 1 UE. 
"i EY : 
; 2 s * 
4 
. 
z 2 
| 5 / 4 
4 % 
1 
7 — 
\ 4 
- P 
* * 9 
LA * * 3 
* 
1 
++ "I 
N \ 
4 
33 4 
a 
a ny 
* 
& > by 
* * 5 
® 
* - 
7 . 85 6 
n 1 
* 
. 
. * * 
5 * 
215 * £ 
A N U 
& , » 
„ 4 4 _ 
* 65 
; a 
* 
- - 7 
5 2 
- 
. 
* 9 Oy 
- p ep 
* 
» 
o J a 
k 5 6 
L * 
| „ 
** 
* * 
's 7 & 
* £* 
. * 1 
— * Sr, 
wh 


Within the region | 
| vats. Tobe Leute of 4 | 
/ 
4 
aun; nor d they recover when they are af. 
. terwards brought into the common air. 
I am told, however, that ſome other plants 
4 * * 
Ts ag 
0 Eo Oat „ by, 
O 18 
A . * . ; \ | — 4 ; p 
EP” „% ² | 
4 wy 5 4 4 
_— 4 : 7 ; ? 5 
4 f * ; ' 0 ; , : ere a 
* . 7 * # 
2 4 : „ a 
| : # . 5 My : ; r x | 
| 4 1 Foy | 


* 


ppeared to me of more conſequence, and in 
part, alſo, from my being well ſatisfied, that 


N t exceedingly 
that it ſhould not 


be fatal 


Mia 


” ? A 7 6 3 ; by” 
— N WY s ES > PS arr BIO. AE 


homener, whom 1 eſteem 


e 


7 2 1 8 
= * 
* 
- 4s ” 
* 
8 
4 
- 
— . * q 
* 
- 
J 
p 
” 
as 
b * 
# 
> 
0 * 
: * 
F F 4 F 
* o 
5 
3 * 
* » 
x 5 * 
- — 
* 
* 1 
* 
4 
. 2 * N 
*. 
i 2 Het 
5 * 4 
* - 


# N 
on * 7 
by . 6 
e 4 « 
N 
5 1 . 
$ $4. VL : ? * 
7 " 
* * 83 
4 
K "1 
* N 
Y * F 
7 1 1 w 
5 A 
F 
* — 
n 
" 1 
* * * FAS - LS 
* , 
F , 2 
2 
- by - - - 
f 
a 3 
w * 
» 
- * * 


4 
— - F FX 4 
- * 
7 6 
* . 
* 4 «LE 
— — 
* . . 
* 
* 1 
1. 
* 38; 
* 
e 1 
* 74 ” * 
s AT. A * n 
# * 
* 1 
A ” 
» 9 
3 55 7 
* 3 
* i e 
view o 
* 
* - + 
— 2 4 


* 2 . 2 
* 4 FL -. 
* " x 
: 2 5 
25 5 n 
P Pa 8 
* 4 
, EN " 
* 2 


* 
* — ; 
Va 5 


55 of Og fends who 


bis diſtinguiſhed merits? 0 win bis beer 
and as a philoſophery as well as his amiable 
qualities as a 4 * propoſing to repeat the | 
experiments in the manner in Which 1 had 


2 * 7 ; Wo 4 : ; 
4 ** - 
. 2 „ 0 . 3 
9 


on 3 expreſſec my wilt that they might be done 
d imagined, (ſee his laſt vol. of Phibophice) 
* = p. 189,/&c.) thar the 2 ey: 16 far 


i 


0 e l with mir {the , 


on chat it Hans” proper a wer * 


4 
* 


b e making them to flouriſh woch 
ne ore than they couid doin” other dir 
ſtances; and that, inſtead of diſcharging the 
ccolour of roſe leaves, it is a means of preſerv 
ing thetn, and all other moſt delicat 
+; the greateſt | 


_ 23s „ 194 42 2 


it neceffary over cem a Fur 
0 diſcover, if poſſible, the 75 of * 
1 very different concluſtons fro 1 proceſſes ſeem 
. of fimilar. * For 1 cou 1 Ree ee 
doubt of the reality of the facts. as Dr. Per 
cCival related them, than of thoſe to which * 
Dad been a witneſs «myſelf, and nature is \ 


 queſtſonably che "— it all 8 — che 


e 9 5 E 


3 . , , 2 


\ \ ? * 4 
; #=1 
4 
- * 
/ 4 9 
* 
1 7 1 7 
5 s „ FS 
) * * 
* „ 
0 9 
7 A . / : 
4. 
— * 
„ — 4 * 
{ , 7 
Js y . 
2 8 ; # 4 
. _ ; 4. » 
1 > * 1 po 
Der 4 Fi 4 . # 
" + £4 
« 1 WL Ps 
+, y 4 3. A 
3 : bay ? #1] 
* 5 5 7 4 


e te flowers, | 


LR” * „ 277171 4 $4 REL ls; Bk ; 


7 


F = 


+ B | agreeable to thoſe of my former, ang chi 1. Tb 
. verſe of thoſe of Dr. Percival, jr becomes ne- BO 5 I 5 3 
r ceſſa for me to 1 40 the particulars: e be 


- 
— 
* 
— 
0 


"Mr 
MY 


generally. | made. in the | midd 
| 's apparatus ff rf impr 
air; which being . 


Fi 


Fa 


1 ; 5 it 
: * > oy 
| n ai AS, Well . Cl 10 10 er veile 
* 077 40 S; 43: 5 & # > 85 ö 
955 3 5 2 , 3 » £4 * 2 1 * 
con tal ure . ol | ch | ANF woes 
2 ; | E "© e 
. 4 8 = 3 1 55 2 
N * f 8 & 
Ve ; 1 . « 1 _ 1 * * 
* = * 
* * 0 N * : : 
| 5 i l 4 ; 2 
10 1 - Va . 
* } e 
: 8 . a 8 3 5 
* . 2 by 1 6% * 
: S EW F 7 4 3 pad 
: 5 {ab 
, IE * 
3 *; ” Oe 
: 5 ns r : : N 
7 a GE IT , "4 Ly 8 
0 Mc: N 5 


: # x 5 
| 4 2 2 8 2 
1 ＋ a5 Z * 
0 * 
/ * he 7 | 
. 4 TY * 25 
38 ra i 
, * A — 1 "ar = PR * 
5 : WE 4 3 , » 3 = g 5 SE 1 4 f 
+ % , f 1 3 | 5 0 
1 7 # 8, in why | S ö 1 5 A 
j j 2 ; £6 25 . 5 2 
pe what 1 Enew to be pu e 
\_ . Whatever , proportion, « f this, aud cog 1 
, * .. * ; % 2. 
' air I le” conve in of 
2 3 8 e 
. _ through water, LON - 
; * : 
4 ey”, 
4 my former experiments on e py 
g . Wy : 
4 5 in differ t Kinds of „ On 
| * . # ent 8 9 ; * 128 2 a LE 2 


- * 
7 Is 
— — 7 * 4 5 
* * EY x 
4 3 5 
« e 
x. 3 pF oo 2 . 


+ 4 7 
4 n 
o BY FX 1 a 
1 75 e 
* . p "> 9 — 
* s - „ 
1 IG x” - 
4 Ps” 


* 
4 
* 1 &> 
+ * 
+ - 
, 4 oo. 
* 

: 3 "+ 


4 n N 
n 3 n - 22 e 
Jp ne. Ps N 9 
7 "7 4 5 2 2 Fo bein * 
* c * * 
. — 1 
7 YA +» £ 


ED of the fan ee Airs an eee | 
that the p * 
ang 1 1 Rt 1 1 $ 10 $5 A 


cog alſo 9395 the exp imerits iſ this parti. - 
cular manner with this Farther view, that if | 
the plants ſhould grow and thrive in fixed air, * 
(which, r e what I have obſeryed g 
above, I did not deem to be impoffible, and 
what, indeed, Dr. Percival's experiments | 
made me rather expe) T might, at the fame 4 
_ time, -obſerve whether any change was made 
e che 8 of e air by. their . 


2 pie 75571 "Ty, 


| hs be 5th wa Shi 17801 
at two ſpiſgs of mint into two equal Jars, 
lied to the fame height with pure Bed air, 
extracted from chalk by ol. of vitriolß; the 
lower parts of each jar containing equal quan- 5 
 tities of ehe fame rain-wuter z with ins dif. 
| ference, hat ineo one of the Kune conveyed - 

1 Ude alt, 6s Precent the ws etch ble: 
bh Trans” ir fixed air ter. OR: 

the ſame prep Pony which od the Ac 
4 Jo ab teh 1: placed another jar, faled 0 


— the water. W 


- 


D * $ Ty 
9 * 8 
* £4 


and put one of them into, a jar 
two thirds, another into one of which 


" 2 5 2 EY K S = tv 
Ny— — —— — — ee ene lo eee INS E | —ᷣT — YC TTY 
=Y ks & a 
— 5 \ » * "Wa * 
# - ; % % 
* oh FH p 
A 


gu monte; is 
e little indeed of the fixed air 
oled eo remain a long time of fo heryß 
Ua quantity; expoſed to ſo very large a 


—— 


0, even to their 


of che plantsꝭ ti 


— 
7 
. 


9 marks of decay, one of them died i in about 0 
ten days, and the other did not ſurvive more 
than ubout thfce weeks; For in ſuch a lan- 

 quiſhing / ſtate; it is not e 


time a plant muſt be ron 
e Ws Fn 133: P en 0 be 


* 


343 2 * {} 2145; vo" 30 21 10 2 ' NS 
It | 


a en oa 
POI ible, NOW! ver, that in 2 the 
. year, .-Þ 


ü 


wk C145 


4+ Coy 
7 
ba + 
tf : K. x ©2 
ih * 3 
* Ky; PA 
7, 8 


4 wy 
——— — — — PS SA LELIS<- 0nd 


lants; might pan, hems rell 
cee esche of, pos acid ee 1 
D as tO live, a d chen thr th PO 
chen ſhould be expoſe 60 ope-eight 
much , gpeater;; proportion of; NR 


expefiments were. all, made 
year; but not later than 


experiments formerly, when 4. 
agfyeredmy.purpaſe--, % l , 0015 of” 


arte L2periinants,> Yhar! 1 I-eanhor' 
| toficeit amy ching te- Be more fair, and de- 


ſore Fallicy®i in thdſes of Dr. Perbival; and, 


li] 
1 
+ 

| 
L170 
. 
„ 


5 E 4 5 ſuch 
; * f F £ Y 9 * 
1 * * * N £ 
1 I ; 
oy 
#4 
* 
+ YE 
F * 4 f 6 
— 3 4 * 
SETS 
1 Wn, * W 
; * * 35 py 7 
4 4s 
. p 3 i 
4 * . 5 
13 * 0 * ' 
* - 
* 
75 
75 3 2 
_ 2 


"ang 


5 PET — ves both of them. ſoon ſhewed evident ; 


aſy to ſay. at what 5 


cifive/*convineed me chat there m uſt have been 
13 n 1 L repeated them/with... 


water, in few-daya-thevripht'of 1 the! 


Lication-of wk ee ofthe eee Ts. 

of the common or fixed air on the 

or growth of the plant. For vrhon the effe&of/ 
any ſingle cirgumſtance is to he 

is uy nin rule in PROM 


* 3 


„ 34 4 
% the ſecond place, I was ſenũible that Dr. 
Percival neve ever had ſo much fixed air aas he 
imagined n the veſſels in which, mY 
grew, on 5 of the fixe 


out the common air from t 


place, but only, Abing it gradually 
being always, 4 in, part expelled 


- 


bes lt bes Seunbamses were the n 
es the differemt refults of our experi. 
- ents, the following facts ſufficiently derens 
mine. I cool 2 ſprig of mint, putting d 8 
root in 2 half-ounce phial of rain water, and _ 
placed ir i the wade: A Me. Parker's | . 


air ; and at the — — — 8 
plane in the ame veſſel by a thread, : withouny 


having any water in contact with its and! 
from a quantity of marble duſt and oil of vi- 0 
trial in the lower veſſel, . Js wn] | 
which nee _ plants: "with ap 2 
5 pI vie an _ in . 


Water, ao er [without water, » 
in the middle veſſel of another fimilar ſet of 
glaſſes, both having been waſhed and:cleaned; 


at the fame times, iqainefliately hefore the Xs I 


A y 
Wy, IN 
5 # by * E 3+ fl . 


{This las ha the 20th. 
of Auguſt 1776, and before at che plants | 
that were fupplied with ſtreams of 5 
were obſerved to be dark coloured, und 10 he 
| langvid; and tho next morning they were both 
manifeſtly dead,” being alwoff leck and Ae. 
cid. Examining the wir, it 2 f 
fixths'vf it only were abſorbed dy 1 
that, Las. n rifle 


$3 75 


* 


of the night too, til "ne 


>: 


| Fhole W 1 — 
Fr tix he 7 plants "th at 5 
OS VA. T conſiderable 1 time, 
fem of | lanc which had its fact i in the alt 
_ birie black, it was ill green at the top, 
| d, 16 ink, 1 5 


the Inlic e 7 whit had been 
'H e contributed to preſerve "theſe © 
ants, | | 


er into a fimilar veſſel im- : 
weg 51 5 after it had been made very 
warm the 2 1ft "of Auguſt.” by On 


13 8 


plant ; was fill. quite 5 


Fre 15 * ö fiſhed, ane 
on the 13th of hy lane montft, took it ut 


> 


of the veſſel, while the uppermoſt leaves were 
: though the: reſt had withered, and 


# "ſtalk was become black and -rotren. T 
j 5 . p Up" that. the Roe would look wo 


47 p - 4 - 
: „ + * 


t 
7 
F 
1 
t 
| 


— . 4 


. ed airs ANG, into one containing half 


: one that N 


' was wholly io 3) whereas that in the phia 


' September, took three is of wi 
-andyvichout paſſing them t hrough water, pug 
of them into a large phial filled with pure 


air, and 35 third into 
ommon air only; this alſo 
being equally moiſt on the inlide, in order to 
make every foreign circumſtance 5 much. the 
ſame, in all the caſes, as I could. e 


p : A * N 1 * . 3 x * a * p * £ 1 0 * 0 15 £ 7 15 4 
Jr Na I 8 * 1 5 FE Pe. : Q . 
+ * 33 #4 7 F 9 5 K 
, 1 45 ©; N af A WD i A+: > 3 : #, \ 7 
1 * * # #7 3 - ; j 4 $ Þ- 2 


The, next. morning, the ED in the pure 
. air was almoſt wholly black and flaccid, 
that in half fixed air was: pitt half of it af- 


# 


fected in the ſame manner, and before night 


5 


common air, continued a long time quite freſh 
| and vigorous, - and was ge quite dead till the 


4 
. — + * * % * 5 * *F'2 * / f 2 3 55 
Zint ing of O bd or von, yt rn 
4 * 1 0 E c y \ 5, 2 | s > 


bh The manner in . roſe limes area 


in fixed air is a thing of no great moment. 
However, as Dr. Percival's experiments bad, 


PR 


Nn relpect allo, a reſule intirely. n 
; f . 


b N a for 1 


Lo 1 7 # 


air. But converting Wi Ai ; „ 
acid, it was natural ee 228 it mi . 


4 


be ſufficient f itſelf to J1 jure the aves | 
delicate a" flower, DRY 4 - v0: bs 1 .” Ns 9 $233 


[4 


PR EE TERS > he 563, 60', 


S 74 


Aimee U tot pan ot the f. „ 
provi ouſly fed its 5 _- —— 
reſt 1 put in « the mokth of = +l 


filled with the ſame u 


= S 1 oh 
—_ — ¶ Aͥv.ͥ ¶ Ä * - 


— 


— — Al 0 yet rs 


- 


keſult, 1 was 1 to obſerve 


: 


| preſervation" c of this | de- 


— 


licate flower, on the « gth of September I took 


ived at the. edges 
our. in two days | 


ih, 955 
1g 4 


. Rs np et 


4* h 9 
: F js 4 5 * 7 5 
T 

* ” 


EC 3 ö * ＋ 3, : R 3 2 ; . 
Os 5 ak. Fa 8 ts 8 # "op V 4 2 724 N Io vm. * ! 
a 7 » <8 a+. PI. BY. oO . 4 W 4 $3 7: - % F 2 3 1 BE 9 ? * 
. * 1 ” 
. \ 
e 1 


. * 

3 « | 

7 3 
* * ; 
* — * 
5 * 1 
- ' 
f W 4 

4 > * 
. o is 

. * 3 

* - 


- + 
* 
5 7 
. -_- * 
; * 4 
Ly 1 2 7 
* # ö 
1 
» 
i 1 
, 4 1 { 
G : £:;xM 
L ; 
. a U 
* 
"A; 
| | 
- = 0 i 
A Wt | 
1 5 i 
; 1 
: 
5 
4 < j 
— ! 
P 
; SJ { 
* i 
f 
T | 
> . 
f þ [ 
65 [ 
7 
{| 4 * 
— - _ 
p 
0 [ N * # 
. - 5 Z 


* 
* 
* 
* 
4 
— 
** 
> 
oY 
— tw 7 FAITE 


ben inch ieh xd ar hai imagined in 
enough to dich ves t 
5 S717 8 12815 513 0 a len 2 www” 
„5 Pr Pere den bete concluded from his * 
pPetiments; chat fies dir was nutte to plante 
When applied to xheir leu proceeded to try 
hat would be the effects — heir + 
, by puteing them into water impregnated 
with fined air inſtead of common water! ad 
in this reſpoct ulſo his reſults were favoura- 
ple tc his general coneluſion concerning the | 
nl̃ malubsoũs influenct of fixed air. Wremen 
| of this kind I had not tried before; but ee 
c ing fOfar enguged in this examination, I had 
Va, he curioſity to: purſue it à little on 
repeatſtheſe: experiments as well as the reſt; 
1 dna my reſolts ndve been by no means: de- 
Geis in fayourtofifixediair as thoſe of Dr. 
Percival. But the ſubject well deſetvès a far- 
ther r proſecution at a more favourable ny. - 
x * of the year. $3 SHO 1 S067 * ems} dil: 24 
in v6 4 30 4-44 15 tt $1226 ys nn E7 Wo} bud HAY 
In one caſe, a ſprig 'of wintz in the im- . 
pregnated ver, ge- better than a fimilae FF _ 
laytin:the' ſame Watef not impregnatedwith . i. 
5 fixed nir; but another plant grew much worſe 
1 than its companion in common water. Be- b 
1 fides;>rhough-ir ſho *that, fora'time, . 
„ plant: uud: gw. better in this- kind f 1 
= He my partie” rn 5 9 


=_ . = 
—_— = * — = © l _ 
— - \ a = 
—— K — — dh — rw" wana — — * ah» we Fa * — —— 
ä 1 a 1 — * . — 4 a 1 
Wl WIE, > It 


— “ llll44&4l4l444444l - 


Ly 


if 
4 
, 
1 
} 
* 
0 
j 
: 7 
4 
4 
{4 
i 
j 


in, general, plants die Aa 


well. 


Which . . :h 
dunce phial of rain-warery and the othe | 
other ſimilar phials, filled) with the ſame water 


” 
— 


to fi 


41.44 


alf, but mig cht re 


m. 


action or any other — * And. when * He 


4 littie common. Alg or even 


+ little” ſpirit 
gitre into ile Vaten in h ich 


\.the Plants 


. 


( 1 
144 ME $7 


ries Fer pe their grow 


water impregnated with. nitrous ait, yet in one 
caſe of. this kind, when! the ſypertiyous.citrons. 


air was carefully et out. under Water, ſo. that 
no part of it was decompoſed in contact 4 


1 


the wars the, 15 5 


4 28. 
w 
*. 


. 20 >. 9 7 oy. 
V Lon 7 
3 


1 7 


Sh . 


CELTS £3 *:% "436 


Fe few obſervat 
Re, | 


* 
be ſufficient to decide the 


© queſtions; were.the | 


following On the, mY of Auguſt 76, 
1 gathered two lips. gf Alt e 


ut one of. eacl Ti into an eight 


ting at the 


Impregnated with, fixed Air z 
al ſoftclay, to 


thoſe that contained i it, and ro 1 by others, as 
Yew. J eur 


* 
\ 8 
« 48 
Py 4 * 
1 — 
— ” - 
a 7 
4 * 
4 3 
£, 
* 
. 4 / 
- 
* 
* % wh - 
8 * by * 
/ , +» % 
* 
* 


6.0 only, which: . s por pe Meg 
* Al 7 


* ft mi time, 


ediately in 


* 


x 
4 * 
9 


i 
; " i 
' 

1 


#% 45 | 


E 


ga Of mae, on bt Air 2 eee. 


. ; 
* iT if 4/3 5 . 
F { 3 


. 5 1 
KF * * 74 I £4, 7 yy „ 70 7 wr 7 . 1 3 4 11 ; "14% 


: Fr "oY PET all theſe plates 2 ee to 
flouriſh equally well; but after a week it was 
evident that the ſlip of mint in the impreg- 
nated water, grew better than its companion. 


On the th of September the plant in the fim- 


„ple water was in a dying condition, and the 
other began ſenſibly to languiſh, and was dead, | 
* think, Won week aver the other, * FOE. 


. AN 0 3 45 225 1 
3 


4 
* 
3 
3 


17 Ie PI bend with ot en vary well; . 


| bur that in the ſimple water much better than Z a 


the other; and more of the water had been 


exhaled from the phial, the reverſe' of which 


had been the caſe with the lips. On the 2 4th 


of September the plant in the fixed air was ab- 
| ſolutely dead; but the "other in fimple water 


1 Was very flouriſhing on the 28th, when I put 


an end to the experiment. Examining the DOS, 
phials of impregnated water, I found that 1 


neither of them had intirely loſt its fixed air, 


That in which the ſprig of mint had grown, 
ſtill contained one" ſixth of its bulk of Fixed | 
air, and the water in which the plant with its, 


root had grown, which was a much long r : 


| . n en however, o one e twelfth ok it. q- - 


rad 4 44+ - 81 7 CL Eg ö 
1 * 1 FP... {44 : Ng 
* 8 4 — — * * E 7 
«© © HF ns . 0 . 7 6 >- 4 R 5 j , . 7 { p 4 N "I 2 ; * 1 
e 3 bb "2 S e A — *% 1 2 r EN N. * * 8 0 | p 
* 4 . : i » 
: . ; . 1 7 5 
* : 1 » 3 t y . i | l 0 9 4 
i 8 { — , 
g { 
/ 3 
z 
. * 
7 


roots dee 1 er — cs: 
ing 14 ounce meaſures of common waters» 
ſmall quantities of common ſalt, from qne:} | 
grain to twelve, and more; In all thoſe which 
contained more than twelve grains, the plan 
died immediately, but in that phial the plant; 
lived a; feu. days, and che reſt died, in their, 
order, to that which contained three grains of 


plant in-Gwple water. Audit Na e 1 
ble that not only this plant, but alſo;.rhoſe, 

ed ſeemed to flouriſh, more. at. the, 5 
firſts. than thoſe which grew in ſimple Water: 
and that which had three grains of; ſalt, and 

allo chat which, had oge grain, .continged 1e. 
live after the Plant i in ſimple water was dead. 
in the ſame room. This was'in my labe ra- | 
tory, a place unfavourable, indeed, to any, 15 
veerntze but 8 fo to o all. | 


Sprigs of mint in 1 ounce han; coutith- 1 
ing one and even two drops of the ſtrongeſt 
nitrous acid flouriſhed very well, better, 
ſeemingly, than thoſe in mere water; but in 


water 3 more of this acid, they died. . 


inſtantly. 333 


am fir Hom pretending that theſe 7 ex- 
periments on the W of plants in water | 


.F 


— 


. 


TY — yes Hook devs "uh in their Wi 
ſilt, are neceſſary to determine this 8 

When ſome plants grow better, and ſome 
worſe it makes it probable that ch6 cifferente, 
| ia the growth depends upon ſome other cir- 

| a cumſtance than the water en 7 OT 


* % © 4 4 & 18 — 
: "Ros 5 3 54 P Ay; © P40 „ 
7 5 P ELF C413» * *. a. 4-4 4 ＋ + 24 & 1 7 e 
F g 1 * - 


1 © Befides Mr. Warltre, re, 
„ Mr. Vaughan alſo happened to be along with, | 
4 me, and aſſiſted in conductiog 

3 recite: J in lp ſet 


. 4 F 
2 - Ati * 
i we as el 
} 3 
k 
| * I 5 
\ 
- P 
| 8 | ng-ma wm 
'} p 
«} , j N 
= | ind | had no dub cir | ein conel ve in 
if: f 7 
i | fe” « 7 Ao SY CC £ % : 2 15 957 i . a 
N F ; ; he'd | 0+ 3 ö 5 23 6355.4 - ; no "3 $ %* 
ied as - 4 c | ys EC LITRE 03 Ons 
* L 2 8 50 r 1 apy 
. 7 + + 5 6 +: Fur * 7 ; The . * 
wt #:4 we "'P * So 2 pf Fs F ; 3 #4 LEY. * <8 ER a. is + g 8 M 
: : 12 {K&S 3 11 11 4 2 4 
/ - g 1 8 
* . 4 
x * 8 . N 
* + 4 Bo 4 * 
with + 1, © +. O80 ; — N ah * 
1 f 2 ph +3 1 EIn #4 3 * E ba 6. 75 1 3 b 
; 7 F 4 ? 1 - * 4 1 * 
th a ; 3 ES. + — 1 Ra * 4 . 2 8 
| n 1 * R 3 - 7 * $7 Þ x J ſ AE” * 6 
| i ca * * +» fb up” Ka © „ * 4 3 41 Py ; * 
* * * 
! # 4 * & G 1 4 
i 9 4 I F 15 1 
' * , 1 7 ; k : 
1 % T : * ö * g 
"11 - , 
i 'S * fe * 
3 g MX 4 2 ge 2 
1 . N | * 1 5 i 
14 . : 2 53 , v #24 1 * #77 Five #y5 ougry A * 
1 * K 4 F n k $0 SCN A 4 OE Bo 
J . 
19 5 , . 5 155 | < h 
= "of . * : - * ">. * 
* I 8 g 1 © #5 4 @,.: » 
\ + * 1 3 4 1 * * N * * 391 2 4 # . 4 3 , 4 
14 — * * 5 7 E „ . + U 
4 ? - e . * l 4 
4 4 of * 1 x I I 
* 8 2 5 ; } $ 2 8 
n S *: * , 4 N 
; # 1 3 . i D 
= 4 3 - 
; N i ' a x y J s K+: . REY 
- ; * — * * 
N 4 L * * 4 4 5 * N 1 4 % * FRY. 4 * * - 1 * . — 
1 i i: x * * . 4 a * 
* 5 , Bad . 1 2:4 „% A4 * 5 — 4 — 
8 i / ; 1 Wo ; 
* &. 2 4 * 4 — 1 F * * by 
- : + {FTE EE „ 5 23 - 
. . - ; ; . * 5 $3.3; 5 5 - 
P " * - * 
ö 5 ' 
! z F 7 * 2 
7 2 3 E 
5 . 5 1 
* N . . 
| 7 4 4 * % 7 by 
%, ET : * ; 
g — 1 i OY 7 
. * * 
A * 4 . g 
1 yy ; + * - F * * f * * N / 
* "=. 7 4 * 4 : * * c 4 2 * 
* 7 & — * 0 . 7 7 * 
4 L 6 * 3 8 . 
| ; #, pag, r $ * 3 2 9 n : 
” * E k - . 
I * 


4 
* / - 
1 = 
* ; 5 
% — 
* 4 
ö - 1 
* 
= 4 * * by - . N 
, j 
» ad 1 2 
— ff * .- 
. * 
5 ) 
* 
0 i ; 1 
1 = - 
. * 1 
* 1 \ a 
Oo 4 < 5 U 
/ 
$ o 
. 
N i N my : 4 * : 
. * 
8 # ; 
- * - 4 
„ : 
* 4 oy F R 
: F - ; „ 
- : 4 * 
ed * 
(i TNT . 5 * 
— 
— 0 . 7 
= * * 
— 


* * 
2 52 * 1775 75 — „ 
3 5 e 


wr 22 8 r 1% 1 {> 1 1 80 A . 4 bas. „ 
„ Fd A - Wl a 


* 1 4 15 5 * 


* 


* 
a "£7 4 3 72 3 * * FE f E 4 VE... 8 15 1 25 3 —_ 
A”. : 


W342 ha 645 
+ 


| Norerrneranomns. al 
concerning the pre 
air, we are ſtill 1 


ample, by experience, that from certain 
terials certdin kinds of air will be procut 

ocefs; but we can: 
not tell wf eben ah td tle HOW be. „ 
cured in theſe cirtumſtanpæs, and not in others 
fHimilar to them. For inſtance, ſome of the® 
ſolutions of metals yield air, but others, fillt 
lar -to them, yield no air. The reafon of th 
I have frequently thought of, but wickout” 
* able hitherto to get any light conctrnit 
it; but it may be very well worth while” 


+ \ 


S 0 „ w. „ 


; 8 f 4 4 5 | 


25 in this Jace e kilos NG £ 5 : 


5 ſome pains with this inveſtigatibn;" ad © 2 


(od 4 * 4 


perhaps! it e not Ee a roy difficult one. 1 ; 


gy ; y * 


1. 


* of. We 2 to tubes, Jad . 
tinguiſh flame, and of 


ee de, n could not but bade e 


* 


* 3 


aa. Prodattion of A. 


| e known i in all ages. But they had no vides 7 
that the ſubſtances (if, indeed, they knew that 
they were ſubRances, and not merely properties, 

and affefions of bodies which produced thoſe 

effects) were capable of being ſeparately ex- 


hibited in the form of a permanently elaſtic va: _ 


1 pour, not condenſible by cold, to which 1 8 

give the name of ain, any more than the thing . 
that conſtitutes ſmell. In fact, they knew 

nothing at all of any air beſides, common air, 
and therefore they applied the term 10 no Rage 

| ee 7 175 32 "Mc, 


* Mr. Boyle was, 1 believe, the er 60 ai 
| covered that What we, now call Fixed ai air, and 
alſo inflammable. air, are really, claft tie fluids, 
capable of being exhibired | in a ſtate. unmixed : 
with common air, a fact which nothing that 
was known before his time could have given 
| him the leaſt reaſon to expect; nor, in fact, | 
did he make the diſcoyery. by any kind of rea- 
ſoning 4 priori. It was the ae d ref yk | 
ol his eee | 1 


Beſides theſe two kinds of factitious 46. 
that which I .call nitrous air obtruded itſelf 
upon Dr. Hales; but even he had no idea of 
there being more than one kind of air, loaded 5 
vith different vapours ; and was. far from ima- 


0 1 4 7 
” n pe * 
5 
* L 
4 8 1 
A * 759 


| * eſſentially 1 


And though Mr. Boyle, Dev Hale, i 5 


others, could not but be acquainted with the 
effluvium of ſpirit of ſalt, and alſo of polatile 
altali, they could have no idea that the ſub- 
ſtance which had thoſe powers was capable of 


being ſeparated from common air, and of be- - 


ing exhibited free from moiſture, in the form 
ol a permanently elaſtic vapour, to appearance 
exactly like that which conſtitutes the com- 
mon atmoſphere. Or if any perſon, Kill with- 
in theſe. very few years, had ſuch. a notion (of 
i Which, however, I do not believe that they 


have given the leaſt intimation) it muſt have ; 


been a mere random conjeAure, , anc "what no- 
thing but e wa e could have * 


; 

f tained. F Co EAT . 15 3 n 708 „ 

3 : 5 75 246 5 ”S $4.4 8 s 
* 


"Even: Mr. Cajendits! Wnt experiments 


king! to air immediately preceded my own, 


appears not to have had ſo much as a ſuſpicion 
of this kind. For he relates an experiment of 

his, on the ſolution of copper in. the marine 
acid, as inexplicable, except on the hypothe- 


ſis of there being a kind of air that loſk its 


elaſticity by the contact of water, which ade 
mits of the eaſieſt ſolution imaginable, on the 
ſuppoſition of the ſpirit of ſalt emitting a va- 
pour, which though capable of being con- 


fg pee: by. ig: * af being by 50 


5 ,T' 4˖ “• 


Pg * N 7 - - 2 0 4 1 


7 
* 
- 


a 1 : 
4 * ? — E # 43 * * 
. * 5 8 „ 1 P 2 4 1 * * 2 13 2 
jv * = * 5 
- * g 5's ; R . x 
| pa 


means exhibitee en ene wis ie A 
I by water, which would there- _ 
upon become flefied' of the bert 
J of Cone bn of fel. . bak HOT: a 

h , £7 1 % e e 
0 Jofa, none of the pee ar to have 

ile the Jeaft idea of its being even hls * 

to ſeparate the acid or ikdline principles from 

the warer with which they are always found 
combined; and therefore, though they dig 
ſupp oſe them capable of farther concentratias, 

the till conſidered a certain portion of water, h 

as abſolutely efential” to them; and conſe- 

quently all the experiments that have hithertg 
been made on the affinities of the acids, and 
alkalis, are, in fact, nothing more than the 
affinities of compound ſubſfances, conſiſting of -- 
| the acids or alkah, and water. | have been ſo 
articular” in Kang theſe hiſtorical facts, for 

the ſake of thoſe chymifts'who can ſee nothing 

; win my experiments on the ſeyeral acids 
75 alkali, diveſted of « Wk, and xhiblied fa is | 

the form of air. * ls a a as 


Thou ph, fince the WAI? Mn: of 
the mar! arid air, ; have purpoſely fought 
for Reno and nor without ſucceſs, 'having 
found ſeveral other kinds of acid air, beſides 
the alkaline principle, which I have alſo. been 
able t to exhibit | in r ſame form, free from 


n 


An . 
— . C * 
4 P - 8 : 


— 


by combination? with 1e 47 y no means 
conclude that I har diſcovered alt the kinds 
of air that may exiſt in nature; or; in ot 
words, all the kinds of ſubſtane 
compound, that are capable o of being 
to a dry and permanently elafti 


js c of affuming that form, in a ry 
degree of beat. And notwithſtanding my ex- 
perience in theſe matters 2 * enable me to 
judge pretty well a riori what fabftances' are 
likely to yield air, ta of what kind it be, 
I have Frequently been 'exceedihg + difap- 
pointed in my expectations in this reſpect; 
and I have reſerved for this Place the 01 on 
ff feveral ſubſtances, and combinations of 
ſubſtances, which, in general, contrary to wy - 
expectations, though not always fo, yield ns 
Air that! can diſcover; and I Mall be . o 
be d by * perſon 2 they: do 


„ A * 93 i — = _ as 3 


"I Havin expelled a permanently 5 
fluid, to which 11 give the name of ar, 
ſpirit of ſalt, volatile ſpirit of al Ape, 
and other fluids, I took it for granted, that 
from radical vinegar, which is he” pure vege- 
table acid, in its ſtate teſt concentra- 
tion, 1 mould have got 4 | true vege exable acid 
air; but it certainly yields uo ſuch thing ell 
fl. Jon" of heat only. Perhaps 24 


* 


; 1 


* # , % 5 L * "I mY Ay 
5 2 ö 5 na . 


 belieye there is ne Rubin hr bug 4H 9 


may 


* 


— 


* 


6 — — — — - — — — l 9 _ ww — 8 . 
ö e206 2-4 KK eee 


— — 


_ 


5 


— 3 o l _ 
g — . —— — = — IF, 
P 
— — 1 * 8 a _—_— = 
” „ 
* 


8 of the. — of div. 


may be owing to its not containing de: 
ton 71 


for the p 


en ver ., 


„ 


F 0 10 For radical. vinegar. and. oil of v0 | 
- agree in this, that. they, both yield inflamma- 25 
ble air by the diſſolution of metallic ſubſtances. 


But then it is not certain that any of the acid 
enters into che e of: ve jaar rags 


air. * , ; . #7 Ty 
o . 8 8 n 3 8 I 


1 5 WA "= * * 


But 3 1 vinegar Fields air 155 che HE 
"Aifſolution of ſome. metallic ſubſtances, I 1 
could not make it give any air by the help of 


any other ſubſtances containing phlogiſton, 


Which is the caſe with oil of vitriol; and 1 
gave it, for this purpoſe, a boiling hear. with 
all the ſubſtances following, viz. copper, guick- 


e biſmuth, charcoal, oil of turpentine, ſpi- 


- Tit of wine, and liver of ſulphur, which laſt, 


however, yielded a little / fixed air; but this 3 
3 muſt have been e in it beide. „ 


- 


= 2. 11 was. xs hardly ever. more . than 
when 1 found that 1 could get little or no air 


from the ſmoking liquor of Libavius, though the 


fume iſſuing from it is ſo exceedingly denſe. 


I heated a conſiderable quantity of this liquor 
Prepared. by Mr. Woulfe, and which he ob- Fo 


Jigingly brought me for the ſake of the ex- 
e N he himſelf ſuggeſted, as not 
likely 


4 — 5 But little, or no- 
thing came over, beſides the common air 
vhich had lodged in the top of the, phial, _ 
which appeared not to have been in the leaſt _ 
injured after the experiment. A very ed S 


part, however, of what came over, 


be abſorbed by water; and alſo when, oe” 
preſence of Mr. Woulfe, I endeavoured tio 
convey the air that might be expelled from 995 
this liquor into a quantity of alkaline air, 
2 ſlight degree of whiteneſs. was produceds 
but both theſe effects might have been occa- 
fioned by a little redundant ipirit op alte con- | 


Lora in ans ae, N 


+4 


had been mentioned to me by Mr. Woulfe, 

vhich led us both to conclude, that air might 
be procured from it by means of a ſolution of 
iron. But when, in conſequence of this hint, 


'I endeavoured to procure air from iron by 
means of the alkalis, the experiments Which 1 
made for this purpoſe did not ſucceed. 1 


boiled a quantity of very fine iron wire in 


11117 cauſtic 


2, 1 re not yet 3 ls "wy 1 
"laden the fixed or the volatile alkali, with any 
ſubſtance whatever, fo as ta form a perma- 
nent air, though the alkaline principle itſelf 
may be exhibited in that form. Some facts 


A Cn — amrnneaagy— 7, 5 2 ines 
— * — = 1 
U 


„ U op is 


3 


been exhibited in the form of permit 


| a — ws 5 
get ſome of it remain about a month in alka- 


He air; but in all theſe caſes,” without any 
vilible effect. At the end of the laſt- men- 
mentioned proceſs, water being admitted o 


kde air, abſorbed the whole of it inſtantly, 
Which ſhewed that ãt was perfectly pure, and 
Had got nothing from the iron. Alſo, no air 


was produced from liver of ſulphur, Ary or 
moiſt, in alkaline air; e h in — 


. almoſt 255 aper 


£4 expetied 1 to Sant eee of | 
15 and at that time thought it not impoſſible 
but it might be even phlogiſton' irſelf in the 
form of air from ſpirit of wine. But, like wa- 
ter, it was only converted by heat into vapour, 
em was condenſed again in the cool reci- 


The addition 15 ee to = 12 
dad no One effect.” 


* 
* 


— F P 0 ; 
* 6 + 47 4 e 
. Z 1 . - : 4.2 * 4 8 2 
TIF SB Th 3 I * 


ww 0 Was Danes aries at one vs, 


| ar ee Tn RIG odoriferous partioles, 


which affect the ſenſe of ſmell, might have 


As well as the exhalations of acid or aK aline 
r dee but doygh Dy. made the experi. 


335 | ment 
| 


% 


others offenſive to the noſtri 


rto Heen 


ly inveſtigated, 
an inveſtigation, if ſucceſsful, would 
bly carry us a good way into the knowl 
of the ultimate conſtitution of natural. 


98 


* 


1 


4 »- 
** 
* 


19% 


- 


5 
F 
. 
i 
4 
L 


ſome that this air had been nr 5 
in the ſpace between the quickſilver and — 


* 0 * 2 * F + J ; oY * 198 R . 7 

ORE ͤv nn wt 
Laces | F . 8 | 
3 ' 3 

da, Vat: PUT EF) Get 12 U i * 

* 

wy E ©: 1 0 * * XII 
X f 
yi: * 3 
3 ; 


J Sp 4-46 


he fla. 3 
4 | Miveuuantovs x F 
Ni ab} 85 © @ A bd OSS 34 4 


* erklrt 0 5 


(34 17 PIT; eee 


Tat D ls 7a 2 K * 15 $ e 5 —_ Y n 5 G S 5 6 
4 3 Lees F fa 323 4.4 Ss "1552 37, 912 a: 15 * % 7 men 5s 
| 825 5 e e e. N 858 le ved. 
. 
891 CES e CIO SLIACIOD. r 1% 9643 430 | 


When quickfilver is boiled in a glaſs tube, 
a conſiderable quantity of air is ſec el 


* TT 
charged from i it, and it has b ee + 


glaſs, but within the pores of the quickſilver 


i If this had been the caſe, it muſt 
have been the property of quickſilver, as of 


other fluids, to imbibe air, and thetefore pro- 
bably to produce a change of quality in the 
air which it had imbibed, or in that which it 


left unimbibed. In order to aſcertain this, 


I boiled as much quickſilver as one of the 


1 largeſt of my phials with ground ſtopples and 


tubes would contain, taking care to exclude 


all the air that I could get from it by the eom - 


mon methods before this operation; and hav- 


ing got a ſmall quantity, I found it to be 


common air only, applying to it the reſt of 


nitrous air. It was probable, therefore, that 


this air had not been W _ the . 
| of. 


of the quicksiver itlelf, but ou em betnen 


che quickfilverandithe glanz. 
10 9110 bonn dien. 111 I lee 4 35723 


4 


After this, in eder to try whether” aue: 


Alvet, deprivec bl e Had the power of 
fig air," 1 Bo pletey large quamity 
of quickſilver, for near half an hour, wn 
while it was very warm, T put it into a jar, 
and inderti ting i in baſon of q ickſilver, 
In quantiry of com ot PAY 


of it. This sir was contracted wich cold 


but was not ſenſibly affected in any other man- 

ner. For after two days, en. I perceived 
that the diminution had proceeded no farther, 
I examined it, and found it to be diminiſhed 
by nitrous alt; as moch ag" 450 © 


g. * ; we \ 
whatever. a 950 TR = A 4123 — 21 C45 JI. Ft" 1 &þ | 


1 oh : T ; 4 * * N . ? * ; * 4. Js 

0 1 F 2 1 E , ; ” S, 12 * 
r 1992, 2% 8 * *% e * * N 15 8 . *** * 5 5 b a 25 27 
49 BY vans 1 „ „ 54 1 3 £54 Se 32 1 12 N FE: i 


Since dir chat PAR b ü r rol - 
ration or Putrefacrion is favourable” to the 
growth of plants, it was natural to conclude, 
that dephlogiſticated air muſtbe unfavourable 
to them. But it is remarkable that plants will | 
live tolerably well in very different kinds of air, 
even, as I have obſerved, in inflammable air. 
However, in order to form ſome general idea 
of the effect of this pure kind of air in this 


bee 10d 1 made the followin a= 


92 of | On 
| 4 4 
* * * 1 * 
< [ 
ow 
, 


. 9 4 9 1 4 4 0 « # 65444 5 * 2 a © 4 * A 
W 3: 4 1 2 ; * A 3 AA N 4 1 14 i PX 112 


by 


CE : 


— — 


* 


—— 


. ⁵ op ret Ft Pee ES" Per rea AI A 192 EV 


ſprigs of mint ; and havingrput.cach- _ 

| into a phial of rain-water, introduced o 
them into a jat of:dephlogiſticated git, leaving 
din jor of the ſane ſiae, and with, ab 
ces ſimilar, tp nt. in 


1 * 


1 20t aI7lit-ininnp I» 


+5 5 wo; 7 E 41 OE ax 


* * 
; * 72 — LON ry W 84 4 1 2 ©; E * 
* fl A * d 


55 For ſome tiwe 1 could-percoive no difference 
20th of. { Odaber followinga 


a 
* 
k 
*: 


* 


| : ated i quit ded 0d ll andthe 
ae gebe On jolt, nd he 
an This being late i in the year, when the "BAD 
8 05 vegetation is languid, and being a nge 
ecęxperimem, no general concluſion can be 
dtan from it. Hut J chink it may be work 

8 2 to malte a. number of 

= bi thi e 1 4 a Me eee 50 5.0 W b 


=, The . a 1 have e 


2 i it had & babes At dds wou 
 kaverinevitably oke their "Eohelibn With 


which ee 


2 
1 


# 


4 
* 
- 
* on: 
: 9 : 
4 


1 


| gun-powder 3 and. is Fayares! this ſ 


1 * | ol. * A 28. & 0 41. Marg anmqn b 
vhs ming v3 T eee 4d Tb on 


*. Maiftening;a quantity of rd lead very, well 
with; ſtrong; ſpirit, of niere, and putting-equal 
_ quantitics gf. it at different times into the ſame = 
12 in the firſt; grocals; L applied, he 
beat pre . And ig the focondivery © 
Sole por in the fir Lgos-chree.-rimes. as 
much air; 41h, the; others Ehe air was alſo 


_equally pute is both. theſe caſes, and con+ 
_ tained equala proportions, of: Suech air 3 but 
| tontqrds . engiofiher lower procela.the-nix 


raus. eg . 3417 10 234 Be Bet? WH: Fre "+ 
N Node os il elo. £3, e Fb tl, 
EY ®- pow 61 V 28.59% 
W e 1 441 Whey 4 EA 


| 90, thats having. 805 irou from /a ris - 

ture of. ſaltpetes 3nd; brimſtone, and alſa from 
Fedde picre, and, charcoal, I concluded d 
gitrovs.a)t out | 


that when I fired gun · powder in common air, 
theaRifs ter ina PRE 


7 


5 \ 


— 


l | er k 
e EX 


uence of being invited by N. | 
to examine the air that is produced in making 
Zan ö geh 0 brimſtone and with 


. g 4 far Agen 75 
63 12 iba if on © 10 ooh, 


4 — 
. 


e <= * SL, 


* 
9 
74 


+ 


Agen 199855 05 211 


598 


1 
7 
_— 
* 
4 
W 
12 
4 


97 fus made wh 1 Ln 5 5 Tas 
Wt of 'of fixed air, making lime-warer tur 

bid, and the remainder was 1s pile ted air. 
neither affecting common air, nor being „ 
„ fected by nitrous air, and extin inguiſhing” "a can 
de cke ar cher ae . 


- | one twentieth of fixe 

| mente d a a was 4 Miene 
ph logiſticated, that two meaſur res of it a ind 
oe of. aud air occupied the ſpace of 2 


9 
; 4 2 0 E 4 161 65 : BF. * 551 9 W474 Stel Fg bs 
4 mei | . 5 | 


n BY 13 25 z ITY 6p; e * : 
3 b SCUREN aug; ni i fates . 
— 5 ** "Þ 5 4 ” * 7 $ Ws e 1 : 
, TO ART EEE ES”, #1 1 eee e 
i is Sag ifite rein Xp wats 
- * : . 5 Wa * ; 
4 ; Jer 11 . TY ( my 4 #< $5,574 "I n f 4 As 4 $5 2 ay 2 "ON {| 8 
3 ; hs 7 4 0 ie 5 8 n 
5 4 . * 4 3.2 CY 1 1 . M _ Win i: 
*. 


nr 
1 -.. 1 have C ae "ons Valarith Bar 
vium from the puttefying ſubſtances,” into the - 
Turrounding air, This. 1 ſuppoſed" muſt be 
pplogiſton, which putrefyibg ſubſtances' cer-- 
_ =. _ tainly'do emit, 9 15 with that matter which | 
; . affects the noſtrils with the ſenſe of Tmell, 
| 4 -conicerni ing which I know nothing. But be- 
"ſides this, T have found*thar, by this means, | 
water becomes- thoroughly impregnated 'with 
_ air, diſcharged, no doubt, from the pu- 
e ſubſtance. "That this water F might 


* 


—— 7 


% 
+. 
8 
” d 
5 
wh 
4 
E 
5 


—— 2 , 8 
HR e 


. 4 . - have 
z * 
— 5 * 
r x 
i N 
4 
f 
4 7 
} \ , 
b Pl 
[ Ls 
\ . * 
FP? ) * 
# r 
= « . 
* 7 
8 * 4 
6. 5 » F 


: : impregnated with a 


O | Having put two d lead 
of water, and examining the pro Ter 4 
month, 1 found that the water was ſtrongly 
putrid effluvium, whick 
| was very offenſive, : and that ſome air, unab- 
ſorbed by the water, lodged in the top bf the 
Phial; it having been filled with water, and 
Inverted in a baſon of the ſame.” Witch the 
impregnated water I filled a phial with a 
4 4 ſtopple and tube, and making 1 it boil, 
xpelled from it about its bulk of air, which, 
| hen Examined, was found to be al pure 


and during the proceſs it 
matter, reſembling a ſoft mmucilage, wi 
ſmall ſpecks of black i in it. 


F ö A 
” « * - . 
* * * a 1 « C 
1 8 _— EY ; * 1 


— will be ſeen in the courſe of this volume, 

that T have diſcovered, as I apprehend, that the 
pPtoper uſe of the lungs, and of the Blood, is 
 todiſcharge phlogiſton from the animal ſ 
| in a ſtate proper to diminiſh Tar yep air, and 
to render it unfit for reſpiration, oy 


* 


7 + 
* 


8. . oy 4 1 4 4 , 1 ; . 14. 


. 
N * 


* 


* 


od fi oe tO 


— = _— . — 
rr rr TT =, eo 2 —_ 
—— - * P 
* 
5 8 > \ 
4 * . 


| "2 np opt i) of Pac; ang whe. 


n * 
* 
- A | $ 
* 20 5 
PAS” $-:3 I % - © 
"EF. LW. "+ * 
\ s. 4 
W 


+ 1 N 
4 n 4 . 


time, 1 1 C 
except in 
uſual mixture with gitrous. air, they itmmedi- 


1 5 ately occupied the ſpace p of le 8 than two mea- 
ſures, and after anche a few days, the _ ; 


Nos dino x: 11 7 2 wow whole a apr 


de a to, try 74 jet er 75 yd 
pot breithe as other Sh pat 
giſton to the water in which they 


0 fiſhes TED large pearch 


0 of Soil Alf 8809 n fix all 12 
Fei th fad hari Was conhiderably 
oper! non. T wo inbaſüres F 
n Us 90 Fe * nitrous, Air Ceed eb pied at ba thi 8 
5 + meaſures, At db 1 Randi ing ſeveral 


Ke 


0 275 was aire leſs than two 1 at when 


| 1 agicared By e qual [ quantity « of air in the ny | 
14 Juanticy gf ts Ne 15 in Which no fiſhes 
n 


been confined, and + or the ſame Tpace of 
10 not. app ear to have. been injured 
Uphelt degree.” For making the | 


anet as th hihe 
8 had 


been poſible for chem to breathe * 


** 
2 . I had | 
& | 929 4 : 
- 

* 

\ 
7 FA 
2 


Wiz fixed” air, making lime e. Water turbid; 2 


* 


nnn ar 


5 


Ide 4 
3 Ubitandes, in 7 5 
e Air 1 * is ig x obey aki f. 


155. Bh 


ler, ſtanding inverted in bah oF t 
placed i it near . 555 where. the 
able, but at a tt 


Ap if = * 722 24 Sy 12 5 r 


4g ounce oh pete by AQ 1. 70 Pty #* 


- The reſt was ſtrong 57 inflammable. On the 
| x6thir t had "Fielded « one third of an dunce mes 
| U Ure FE air, of which Ra air and the in- 
ammabfe were exackly 165 
(a n to one another as 
Mable air at this time was all fired at ohe ex- 
_ Ploſioh, Lake 


+. a 8. 


lat | 

om it about half an ounte meaſure of 
Ar, three fourths of which Was 
| UE inflammable, 1 5 N 


| 3nd put it into 2 Jar Med With 2 


without that redneſs in the flame 
erceived before. On the 19th 1 


fred iir, and 


- * 


— 


; . 
2 N l A 


N 


55 armoſphere, where they continued to the 13th 


heat a conſiderable time, without getting from 


the WP: ee e d that all the in- | 


"Afier this l e a il * 


filver into the common temperature of the 


of Jauuarꝝ following, in all which time very lit- 


015 tle was added to the air that had come from 


it before its removal. I chen, however, took | 
from it half an ounce meaſure of air, and.it 


was all pure fixed air, without the mixture of 


any thing inflammable in it. Then 9 


it near the fire as before it preſently yielded 5 


another half ounce meaſure in air, N was | 
. en, fixed air. 7 TRA PE. | 


* 1 7511 


| ſerying that it ſtogd. x near twenty four = 
hours after this without producing any more 
- air, though it was in the ſame degree of heat, 


I plunged the whole into 2 pan of water, and 


made it boil; by which means 1 got from it 


about one eighth of an ounce meaſure of air, 


the whole of which Was fixed ar ; 3 at leaſt 
the reſiduum was not larger than is uſual in 


pure fixed air ; for it was too ſmall a quantity 


to make an experiment upon with the flame of 1 5 
a candle. After this I kept it in a boiling 


it any air at all. It appears cherefore 
this piece of mutton Tielded! in all 22 mea: 
ſures, of air, of which hone was fixed.” ? 


OY 


N Ft. : * 
; 4h | 
l 6 


more accurate manner; and 


* 
1 
} 
* 
' 
9 : 
1 
7 
* 
& } * 

= ” 


1 4 ow” 8 = * 5 % : > 
Sb FI Aga 8 72 742 68979 we 4 wt 
1 Sas * 5 2 . E 1 * ** 4 ﬆ * * 4 1 * bh 


- x: took 4 phial, containing thirteen 01 
vey. 


meaſures of water, and filled it ſucceſſive 
Tod with all the different kinds of air, having been 
5 23 made very dry, and filled with 


Then holding the mouth of it 


* 5 u 
* * x 
FS 2 
131 £ - 
>> +, 8 * 
* 15 * * 0 
- - 
0 - 
% e 
oy 0 © ; 4 
7 
1 . 
* 
* 2 # 
= 
” ; 
* 
, 
_— 
* 1 þ 
df « a ; 
of 4 ff 
Oo 4 5 3 * 
s 4 
py 8 5 8 hg 4 
— % I 
4 % *% 
* - 
8 * 5 * * 4 if 
s % 
8 - ; oY 
P ” , 
2 5 n o : - 


. % 
— + 
- 
+ 


oy 4 
— 
$ 
IVE: 
8 
— 
* 
% 


* 
- 
* 
A. y 
” 
* 
* 
538 
* 
. 


s 
* 
: 
# 
= 
5 . 
i 
1 
: 
25% 
- 
* 
5 
il 
LY 
* 
45 
* 
3 
P 
P 
Wits 
” 
: 
A 3 
£ ' 
* 
„ 
*4 


te i et 


"157 


} 


—ͤ—— ᷣ»—ę9—ä ———ñũ⸗P 
* 
* 


* 


Ader the cl ef | 
forated cork, to vin e n rig 175 

glaſs tube, as is rep en elented, fig. 5, Wings a 
little quickſilver in t Beck of the phial, that 
the expanſion of the air mi, along 
the Tube. E This 9 5 iv 


he drive it 


ropatedl, I 


ting it remain 
ele piace in Which"it food int Tat Gegres of 
Heat, hayig 4 Faliterheits "therawmeter ac. 
Lit in each euation- F then cr 
* Tries che arm rob, and ob- 


hers « fulliGent tithe, 1 marke 


Ittved whether die guck fe roi to thr e 


plate e La cher fig! 27 lirtle 
tris 16 Pere 1 wit 

& following intervals in the plick er the - 
 Iquickfilver in the diffetent' kinds 'of zir, the 
Kite phial 3 fame CY 
in all the cafts. The Ti Sy ring to 
ten -= has capa was s male by wo Aron eg 0 
thew the proportigpal _ dt ,one caly 


; Saws * 
KHIR ok 231 


7 


5 


4 a þ 73 
, R * pats” 
£ b T OY , \ # * "0 
CY : * 8 4 
* — 5 5 1 
i F 
4 9 A 


_ z 


: " &: 3:43 £278 4 5 5 : - ; a 2, FEY 1 2 be, 4 
HOKE e 8 WY! Aka” 
. : 


Fee, WS a . * 


—Virriolic acid 32 2. 3. 4.87 
e acid N 25 „% 2. 1 4 2. —— 


The . of the al altabne a air in ee 
3 will appear extraordinary; but 1 
myſt obſerve that there was a little moiſture in 


Ae phial, en hag hp expelled from the | 


materials together with the air; and to this 
water, emitting more air by heat, I am in- 
_ clined to aſcribe the much greater dilatation of 
this than of the other kinds of air; and at that 
fime I could not conveniently 


= not haying any better materials at 


; - , * 3 ﬀ 7 : ; 
+ , Vo” „ CRE Lf #*<. 2 : ** p 
* » of P 


That inflannabl, nitrous 5 phlogiflicated | 


n than com- 


air, containing more Phlogiſto 


mon air, ſhould expand more with equal 
= of heat, is agreeable to analogy, * 


fame 


the EX=- - 


thing being obſeryed | in fluids : bur how | 


32 8 #4 15 2 


% 


L 


— 


* 3 b 


1 ; * N MA "of * * * by KM 5 N 7 . * Y 
3 n 2 ** r he $4.5 3 * * 1 


it ſhould happen that dephlogifticated air, which 
Contains leſs phlogi 
by wiſh that the 


* 
8 24 97 E * * d 
4 = of 7 
N 5 : CY 
; * * 5 
3 4 #*% y . 5 be 
6 I * F. 19 f * 4 ; * CHEF Sx 4 * Pas 
* * a dg a 5 * 15 ; a T * 


L £ 0" " 
6 1 +. Was 45 N 4 © i 2 „ T9 4 . * 2 
* 0 1 2 of & 8 * Py 
ry 5 3 ; 
. * F ; 4 5 
1 5 "Ve" $ C 4 + 2 
Nd ** . „ 1 1 ny 
2 
FE ; 5 +: i 2 
125 * ; * i, * i 3 $ # . . 1 
8 9 * 4 
3 wt x 4 X ' . 9 k 1 „ 
* 7 oY & + : 
. 1 5 A #4 7 
F 8 5 0 
7 * & i 2 » * ” , 
— 3 „ f £49 4 
A 4 who. wat F 3 - : 
15 *. 0 4 A ·ö·¾» » kk 4 e 
/ CY 
- 1. 4. * 
\ tip * — * * * 4 1 * +#* o 
g 4 3 E 1 22 9 * 5 
4 £* Þ het bn » „ * Kot 4 . « $ 1 8 wr S *6: 6, "a; 
4 * . / * — i * x * * 
pr - 
5 ; * 2 2 % ; 5 
. x * 7 
1 * 
* 
bl 8 , pe 5 2 * 
. n T4 4 1 N 1 1 N 2 4 FRI 4 v: #3 2 7 3 L W .#* * — - 
4 4 F £ 5 ag 
4 1 1 Lo BP 4 5 a v4 245 > « 2 , 4 3 2 i 5 % 4 
* F 1 by 1 , 
a» 
, = 4 4 . * * 
x - * >, © 1 f * 
113 4 * 4 2 6 I + » $ * 4 * 5 + 1 % 7 3 2 — 
. =_ £ F * „ pe. > 5 2 5 l * 
- 7 2 * oy £ ** & + & 
3 - 
„ % N * : 
r 1 * 
1 7 F a * 1 & % 1 * . "as x & "© * 
* — * y - 2 4 25 
3 4.4. 1 ** 7 8 £ * . 2 3 * 3 4 * # ®. 2 g 
. 4 . * 
5 1 + * 
2 A * # 
45 : * » 5 * „ * j > _ 3 * 4 
* 1 4 2 WA. gb 32 4 4 5 8 I : £ ; ; x * ; 4 | 
$ 4 « 5 by a * E & % + 
1 F 
7 4 1 4 
7 * 5+ 2 - * Pl Od - „ * 1 „ 51 wh 4 as ; x 
; Sf 3 4 & 4 4 4 * T 5 7 k „ - > 
” * — A < F.. t 1 F*% #5 E 4 7 
* 4. ' » * = 
- 
i 
* 


; 1 1 451. A =? Fay a TOW 1 9232 * 
Dan man 2 12 7 2 r ait 


deciſive experiments o 8 this kind, mentioned 
in the ſecond volume, was made with ſpicit of 


wine, which nobody, 1 believe, 2 to ; 


"BY water, in conſequence . : of whic| 


Ky” Wl E's. 3 ode Wel * 5 5 ct i. 4 7 J 
E. 1 23 2 7 1 N X 


enen o 1 vey ee bao Min to 


| Brporimews relating to ſome of thei preceding 


| Beffiqns, malt cs they-wert printed af. 


2H HOY: 2 „e 5 w þ „ BEA) + D Af 1 78 


ehen, relating T0 Fixan An! on 


1 HER TY nt 1)” þ & 3 3-13. 4 $M 8 10 15 
Aab py I publi he ſs roles 


Hr wor e, "opert Dad, 


Ar is a aten, N der 4 9 | 
= of the nittous acid; ing, ee 

d air, in conſiderable So from 
ſtances which did not con 
of them in ſpirit of nitre. 


{ One 0 the in 


5 


contain any fixed air. For t thou 
Jime-water turbid, Dr. Bla 
ſeryed, that this is produ 


— 


1s precipi Tate. 
however, "might be. mage, whe , the turbid 
zppearance made by the air, which, I oY 


from the ſpirit of wine was, really the ef& of 
fixed air. 1 endeavoured, 


therefore, and ain 


ſub- 
it, by folien 


8 


of lime-water, was readily abſorbed, making 


eee to Wee, Rs erin fret, and : 
I did it in the following manner: At, ri 


Nici G Winter Girk Gold ba pin bit 
of nitre, diluted with water, 1 produced 1 
part ab which, being received in a large body 


the water verꝝ qurbid... Waiting bobs quar- 
er of an hour, till the precipitated matter ſub-. 


ded,” I poured the water from it; and purding 
a very ſmall quantity of the precipitate” int 
ing water out of Wich tiie air had been well 
giled, F obferved'that it was not in the leaft 
rer  diffolyed,, a8 Ane would have” been; 
ws lire eg off pki nol. 


as fe iy ye i or l e 
 Þenvurne fixed air w acids, oy As 
Ealcareops SF eli Lied The air Py s firſt 
| —— fats ie oP ig,” An forne 9 5 
in the Pi e Wine!“ 
ed with linje waz} 


l 


_ Pris pt 9 96 32 


Hin has A 201 


ent 


1 5 Ac an 00 of a e 

eh BY N EP. 8 5 

„ wit 42 Jad * ty e | 
— ig che | 
paxticdlar a a2 0 ; 
_ the folloging agg A ar a 
ae iti on 2068 gl. 

1b or Bnub4t act: 3. th, 
| | ane 1 
| moved: the veſlyl in; which; it; w RR. L 
4 1 (hich mag a fall glals.p Pbial l into a fand- asm, 1 
ad rrcoivedithe. ain, wh Was "tranſininien 32 


cog ag. ante, lr wat wixtureof— , 
ane als ned vis min, maten 


| e „ 
| 2.995 vet conſidera and part oft . 
e eee he e berge 6 
eig che purpoſe, of che. experiment EP 
of fixed _ kept i inereafing „ 


x dne if 
Felt 6f che air Was hitrous, 
ceſs ſome of the iron was fe 


Se, + ; E 


It i is evident. . the ſolutjons of 
me of the metals in the nitrous acid,” which 
do rior "immediately yield an fred ait, will. 
d To | after they have been 


&, 


* 


< 


| © fp that the mixture oſt wei 

cape of air, Lk it was reduced to 5dwts. 37 
After this it gained weight, till it was conſi- 
derably more than the origins y, but 
how much this additional 
lected to take any accougt of. 


was made on the 25th of 
it had e veſſel till 


the 12th of Jan uary following, T diſtilled the 

eſs, in a glaſs phial; when 
1 found that one ſeventh of the air produced 
from it was fixed air, and the reſt de 
eated, - T took: i in all; ounci 


4 *. - 
$444 * * if 988 * 4x * #5 7 * 7 
E Ah Ca ES YEA} . 


| * 
4 
1 4 — 
+ 
# - 
* * F : 
# 
* 
8 
* 
5 — 
% — 
*. 
1 
* 
- 
* * 
I p * 
* 7 
* 5 . 


* 
* 
* 
* 
„ 
% * 
* 
[1 
* 
. 
4 
A 
— * 
* 
, 
+ 
3 
* 
- 
Os 
* 
5 # 
) 
* 
FP & 
* 
* 
* 
1 
4 
4 1 


bein 


and Aa veſt Breaking befor ore Uh proben 
l n 5 


„ 8 
a | 


El outer arts wit 4 £2 
far 45000 m9 e e wit will 307 


I than; ar che e ige dd qu ity of guenter 


and ſpirit of nitre mto 4 clean phil,” and df 


be to dryneſs immithiarth,” wichobr giv- 
ing it any opportunity” of 'communitating with 
the external air | ning the di 


* ed in all thirty-two ounce meaſures of Air, 
0 which the firſt fourteen were pure nitrous 


air, and the. remainder pare a hlogiſticated 


af. without the kaſt 9 re of 22. air in 
either of them. a Au, 15 


Wobckaſpes ke 45 as. or im 


bibing fixed dir from the common atmoſphere, 
but they requite confiderable time 16 do'this, 


in any. very ſenſible degree; for when they 


bar BS well Dart, F Rive ber fn that 


r 
expoſed to the open air a day or two' 
they do become ſaturated With fixed 


they yielded any air that T could collect 


Kat 


but 
air in a courſe of time, is evident 
nee eaperimeg, | 


Prot about three e of ah Gade th 


ſore of "wWovJ-ulids; froth which 1 bad, eb 5 


8 before; c as mucli air As 
. could By che greateſt heat of a 
Vor. TT common 


lation tit the ſolution was completed) Tre : 


- 1354 5 | Oljervation kanu 


5 common fire, urged. mk 2 pair of bellows;/in 

a a gun-barrel of about half an inch diamet 4 
1 got by the. ſame proceſs fifteen ounce mea- 
ſures of air, eleven of which were completely 


abſorbed by water, and the remainder burned 


with a lambent blue flame. The Phlogiſton 


requiſite for this appearance might come ei- 
ther from the gun · barrel, or from ſome im- 
2 bits of eee re in * | 


8 rom twice the. qvamtity ot. wood-aſhes, 


"which had been burned about the ſame time 


with the others, in a much wider. gun barrel, 
I got about twice the quantity of air, the 
_ greateſt, part of which, as in the former ex- 
periment, was fixed air, and the remainder 
: dures with a- W W lame. 5 


1 


4 Hing taken this air in ſeveral portes 1 

8 that the firſt contained a much greater 
Proportion of fixed air than the laſt, though 
what there was of ; it ſeemed. to „ef 
flammable. f „„ 


It will be proper to repeat this expirigient 
at different intervals of time, and alſo to ex- 
tend it to the aſhes of animal and mineral ſub. 

ſtances. I do not think it impoſſible, hut that 
; 0 eee this, TREO Nog praſe- 

„„ ing 


va...» 
R „ -. 
« hs by... 


af Wale, - 


euting it with ſorhs addreſs” we "Way be led 


by it into ſome fafther enowled; OG 
i 10 of e eee 50 40 e K 


air, but that when 1 e, the e 


I could not find any appearance 2 the kind. 


| have very lately made an obſery; 
will probably. explain, this diverſity 
pearances, and which: alſo ſhews that, unleſs 
care be taken that the water in which the ex» 
periments are made contains little or no fixed - 
air, miſtakes of this kind will certainly. be 
made. For 1 found at one time that, if any 

kind of air was made to paſs through a CY 
” tity of water contaibing much fixed air, it 
would attract a portion of it, and would not 
ealily art with it afterwards. At another 
time, (fs weyer. «a think i it was in colder wea- 
ther) 1 found that air conveyed through the 
ſame kind of water (Which was from a pump) 
did not attract any fixed air. But 1 have not 
bad time to examine the circumſtances that 
a might occaſion this difference. Or both the 
F. I am 8 bin 8 


, e * 4 7 SEG, 
if » + ; 3 1. r * 


256 


: b 3 
1 i. 2 7 1 47 * N * : 5 * 
* * * 1 N R 
TTT 
a1 AA 


47, 


- 


TY Wb L* 


ke. inn hn amet in Aa 


2. Obſeruat i ; ns relating-t0 Nrzous Ain... 4, 


14 *in 44.3 i Os | 
1. 1 have obſerved, p. 199. a very fo 41 


ble production of nitrous air from water im- 
Pregnated with nitrous vapour. In the follow- 


experiment 1 more accurately compared | 
che quantity of nitrous air produced by 


pouring the impregnated water upon copper, 5 


with the quantity produced by an equal quan- 
tity of ſpirit of nitre and copper, without" im: 
pregnating water with the by ond that the | 
_ would have yielded. | e ond: 


eh we a Ae of Liſts in ir 
4 given quantity of ſpirit of nitre, and having 
10 the pred which was raiſed by. the ſo- 
| Tution paſs through a quantity of water, 

Poured this water on ins clippings of copper 

m-a phial with a ground ftopple and abe, 
and found that it yielded one fixteenth more 


nitrous air than the ſame quantity of nitrous 


acid diluted with water, and applied to the 
copper in the ſame manner, would yield; the 
hear of a candle being applied in both theſe 
cafes tin no more air could be procured. , No 
allowance alſo was made for a confi derable 
quantity of red vapour which was loft in de- 
canting the water, or for that which remained 
in the large phial in which the ſolution was 
made, or for the acid that was united with the 
| biſmuth 


/ 


Ty cellaneois 


ADR We | aw 


Aid la in the 1 , The : air yielded by 


„ AN 


"teen e meaſu 

| biſmuth uſed mk exp Is Io e el 
with wa r, and then u | the per, 
Yielded jelded 7 6% 2butice" mea 1 5 ich” be Ss. 
Tore than. 10 75 bk ont 

ty ot the Aa WS ri, 

Mm ay be made 15 5 . bees pper | 
E 

5 Wen e del che foal mende 
5 fit DoS 370m e An 73k, Form off wot 
For my greater fiädsf aun, 1 lf peer N 
| an Experiment ſimilar to the former w 2 
impregnated with'titrous een eee 
fot mating dephlogiſticared ait fromm [ſpirit f 
nitre and 8 lad and the . 
lows. Having put 6dwts, of ſtrong pititiof 
Hitre upon 4 quantity of red- lead, and heating 
the mixture in a gun- barrel, 1 made'all the 
air, together with the ' redundant; acid, paſs 
through: a quantity of! water.; and found that 
the water," poured' upon copper, would haye 


en fournen ounce imeaſures of nitrous air, 
1 part of the water having produced nitrouns 

air in that proportion to the whole) but the 
ſame quantity of the acid, even with che af . 
fiſtance 75 yieldeck only about 21 4e 


es. * Belides, in this experiment, no- 
9 3 8 


* 
XP * 0 oy ? £® 
ww N 8 ag * 


V A 59 115 xt og? nl tet; 
bc, as 2 for * ed f | nitre which 
entered, into the FN" If of the ir. Pre- 
| (duped in ale proceſs... #2 Ade 4 Wits drum: 
5 4. 5 201 ae ppi 1 n LY © 4 . 2 by Fs 
2. He ons of ; | ning. wh ther. 
4rqus air tended, een Negree, 60 2ſpontaneo 
&5ampobition by long fand 75 Only, wichen 
being in rontact wich 1570 ſtance chat cd 
be ſuppoſed to hays 0 wh 101 con- - 
LOTTO t. part c * e 2940 4 a tas | 
this air, and corke d it, yery. ti Wh kee Bas 


ing. it 
for the moſt part with i its mout 


7 


ed in a 
veſſel of vater, but e neglected it, 


and ſuffered the water to evaporate... Ho 


ever, examining chis air after about #wo.yedrs, 
1 fougtl abat it had cha: fame power; of ,dimi- 
niſhing common air that freſh-made made nitrous 
air has. It was alſo not more, ealily decom- 
| poſed by agitation in water: and I wauld ob- 
ſerve in this place, that I haye. found great dif- 
ferences in the readineſs with which, nitrous 
1 Air „ eee a reduced ta the; date of 
-phlogifticate ally; |:cagitatiqn,.] Water, or 
by ſumply e | 
ſurface of water; g differencę depending ſome- 
times upon the Bate of; che air itſelf, and 
Jometimes on chat, ef the wier; but, I. have 
not given ſo mucſn attention 10 these cireum- 
5 e to hors. dibovend the aus. of 
them. 15 R 


Ch I have 


ge 1 have obferyedivoll I. p. aer — IM 
3 all the fixed air it had imbibed tbe 
moment that it is converted into ice. The . © * 
ſume is the caſe with water impregnated with - ' 
nitrous air, as appears by the following expe- 1 

2 made with a view both to this cireu m. 

"Nance; and alſo to che carthy- ecip 1 

b water thus impregnated, of whicra large — l 

ACC unt has been Flven in this vent :: "98 

nee e nr $34 $2 Dori 120 * ; s 

Having Acne a quantity ef water 
with nitrous air, I expoſed it to the froſt, and 
| ogbferved that it did not freeze quite ſo ſdon as 

d quantity of the ſame water which had not been 
ſo impregnated, expoſed” in the fume manner. 

The ice of the impregnated water was full of 
\ E bubbles, and when it was thawed did 

not turn the juice orf turnſole red In the ſmal- 
leſt degree. It alſo made à con | 
_ cipitate of a very white matter, fl 
that which I had: procured from the water im 
ptegnated with nitrous air from biſmuth, of De 
> which an account was given, p. 104. This A 5 g 
naitrous air, W ry had been Leere | 
Wag s 758 101 1 C319 sungen f 


Ea 


- , 


1 "x 3 
TRE. A 1 2 "TfL; «+ 
Mag? 


« Ss N 1 8 ry * * 
1 


| Hiving copteditente en ia quagtiry "of „ 
| ne hich bud bes» long 


 Pregnated with nitrous air, and ode had 
ee e 3000 WAOONE a4 . con- 


1 


2 —— 


1 depoſited a bromniſh ſediment, 
e man af the.ſage ohen. 0 ED 
7105 91 1 9 919 18.114 | ” | 
3: Obarvatins relating 10 Mondo med a 
„ $7.4 Frvon Acip Paſs hu Byte. 75 


122413 E3431-018 $3117 „ RTE ts 


eee chat 1 "have advanced 8 
pe the fluor acid, is that it is only the 
vitriolic acid in which the fluor is diſſolyed. 
volatilized, and holding in ſolution a quantity 
of dhe garch of the fluor. However, ſincr the 
ſection in this yolume relating to that ſubject 
„I have had an apportunity, in he 
are Kot of obſerving u pretty remarkable 
difference between water: imprognated with vi- 
criolic acid ir, and water impregnated. with 
the fluor acid. 1; have. obſerved indeed, that 
water impregnated with the fluor acid All 
_ - xonsaingfome fluor cruſt, and upon this, per- 
- haps,» may depend the . ee that I Wall 
. mention ; but it may be thought by ſome o be 
000 remarkableito depend upon ſuch a ci cu. - 
-iKance.. t is that water impregnated with vitri- 
lic acid air ſnaꝝ he converted into ict, whereas | 
water impregnated with fluor acid air will not 
freeze. Since, however the preſence of the 
:»fiuor.cmut | in the air enables it, as wall-beiſeen,, 
to diſſalve ice, he preſence af a ſmall quantity = 
_ Lxof R " WNT; 


Mod | - 75 18 
| I bad 8 


— 


not & at all- with Vaals add. ir. 
tireiy contrary tomy 


_reſpett; and 10 oa lom pave cl i cn 


Jt when it ds Converted into ice, water, 1 
nated with itriolie acid air, Wann 
retains it as ſtrongly er. £6/9k 


Dion Dll ni le ee 


le Lenpoſed ; in an open aa quantity 95 M- = 
ter fully impregngted with vitriolic acid air, 

- when, dhe thermometer was at 17 Negtegs, and 5 
Ober ved that it us preſentiy frozen quite. 


Through, the ell of it continuing 80 b 


tremely pungent. As it melted, che ice ſapk | 


to the bottom of the liquor, and when it was 


quite diſſalyed, the water ——— be; ſtill 


| (PAGE eee. e en 


ben, ip ger go arp aan mon moja 
in a ſituation in which none of this acid 


9 
_ air could poſſibly eſcape from it, I expoſed co 


the lame degree of cold a Quantity of water 


ſaturated with this air, remaining upon the 
A 1 e . 5 


* 


hade andlanib avfpplitinnt 3 : 
ir, and alkaline; air, that tghehadiſſole ica, 

pos 0 Mater impregnated wich ahem ten- 
eapa rp ya leaſt in ſuab a degree 

of cold as I had expoſed them to. The gage, > | 
I find, is the caſe with fluor acid air, but i it is | 


as water impregnated wich fixed air diſcharges | 


” vp 
** 


F 
. 
— 
. * i as # 
| | | E c 8 6 
- 


| — im the Wann 
had been made; but this water alſo was pre- 
ſently converted into ice, which was opaque, 
though the een "were; N Uſtinaly: =_ 
eeivable. f DO bd 1.26 4 | 
21 ot ne A 55 . TOU 3 Wi ; 455 215 5 ti cl 1 
1 Lhe” pouredd a quantity of water upon a 
quantity of the ice above mentioned, when! it 
*froze, without being ſeemingly affected by any 
effluvium of the impregnated ice. This con- 
etinued opaque, while that of the water was 
tranſparent as uſual. Both theſe kinds of i * 
«miſked: e and adhered ner 1 
n N 10731 28 137 if 397 
nes ein wor at all diſſolved i in vitriolic acid 
air. Letting it remain in this fituation all 
nieht, the next morning I found all the air 
abſorbed; but it appeared, by the form of the 
ire, chat it had been melted, and frozen again; 
for it ore the N 20 "PER veſſel; in ee it 
was confined. eee LAT. 


f 8 * 3. 1 
FF. 44 "UE; a . N TT 147 Fry 75 745 


1 


lee was reat _ FRO at fiſt in gor acid 
5 air, but afterwards very ſlowly, as might have 
been concluded from the manner in which this 
| kind of air is imbibed by water. en * 


0 the ice, which was diſſolved Mow it, 400 conti- 
"wed fluid ont _ ſurface ye 25 nnn, 


11 ; ©# 5-4 ts 


5 yy Þ: 


In 


— > - * * 
— ͤw!A ⁵˙AM ⁵ Uu. IS > . es SORE PL ARE GP Are =o A EO Bae AAR 
- . 
* 
- 


om a Water 


- water 185 it io Fully th at cou 
105 ue 2e an) Vater f from 300455 


+ > a3. 


off that Was depolited” ig It; 
KA Wot 10" the e AR 


nk 11 10 The" ino ning f found it "to. e IHtire rely 


, Preſeh 'y after Hip che oft Yoke, 


Hee 


| id Had 0 0 p8rcunity of re dearllig the'e 
Jo inn 26 2192 yl 1 57 


17711 Dod t 2 nat N vis 


2; Sobably, 


"+ 
2 er * 3h 


in this caſe there 


1 25 Arr, 5 1 ſtares 2 4 


have been a good eat of the fluor cruſt re- ; 
: Sigel, in the water, and to this circumſtance 
is probable that the, difference in the reſult 


4 the experiments was owing: but bo this 


circumſtance ſhould make that great difference ; 


T have no conception. The farther proſecu- 
tion of this experiment, and a proper attention 
to it, will 9 throw Sent * on rag 
; nature of freezing. 5 3 


i g Fiat the fluor acid air mold differ in "ks 


5 reſpect from vitriolic acid air, is not at all to | 


be wondered at, conſidering that while it con- 


\ 


rains the fluor cruſt it poſſeſſes other properties 


| imirely different from thoſe of vitriolic acid 
air ; though when it is expelled from water 
| impregnated with it, it appears to be, in all 
the reſpects In Wr 1 have "OE 5 the 


+. 


Ve 4 2 — 
1 f FE 
* , ; » 3 
3 4 


. bs 5 
: k = 
5 x 
1 
1 N . 
= 47 8 


| 


7 ſame thing. 
it yo "this xelpec. 


TI CW 
LS by ter. v N 
E fro this 


* 


Nice may try 5 as well as any other of a 
the 8 I have n relating * 
e ee LY 4} F : N bill at 
TOUT 9014 h TGT HOSE e ob 7 
24d 07 on 41% 50 ni bis 
„ t at gory D il io 1G9BGOTG ei: 


22 (437,020. e WNW O EBW n 4711 h SHE jo | 
714. #4 1 A + BL 
10 3 © W113 Aare Þ 4 zolft SICKLE tents 7115 
175 * 24 31 2 Re 70 ie” 1 * Ark 1 mel 1 Fe.” 
$24 8 Rep 1 | trad a1 Att 1 N 15¹⁰ TT dei 1 
en 1DYTG'E ator AY G%S 2165 75 r 


5 8 24 . 5 b NY... 3 71 = wy 1 ue 7 - $ > 
X12: a0 Ait 75 & $ 1 % dot {hiv OT: 
"ag FY £ 255 
gaivoynt W. NIA 
i . $4.# / ; g f t 
; Era dong * 191.38 . 51 E 
of lia Jam l 192 «Hts; 117 i ; 
3 * * 4 Fis & 3 Wo £4 g FT & * 4 +. 4 1 7 * 10 kt £5 # *, 4457 * - 


by Scene gartsb go 18 5 7 45 On 5 

432290; art % eta 2; D er 
by We 2101091 10/ ,2t900d3 et ie N 7 . 
E Za . 4 115 KR) 27 11 b 15 05 vs gen; 1 
Ani 56d * de 1 A ib Dang OE 
ST - at batt oval” 1 foil ai 594/195 9113 


of 
$4 IS 
1 7 ; * 


N 


* Y A A Pat 
: W 
he 8 * ? ; 
* 8 1 1 
3 >: 
A wn 
2 
. 
2 , 
— x 
1 
* 
A „ 
« 


RA 


2 CC ⁵ͤ Ä TEN 
5552 ue * 1 AI $15.5 C9600. 43-6646 


* ＋ * L 
OT +. 27 8 „ Da 
9 4 n N 
hs. 


* 
= 


z -—x # , v 
n A : 5 N : * 1 Aer i 88 EY YOu 
13 ner 1 2414 o K 11 * 3 MEWS * | Foo FUE 
® 


* 


4 
eh tir + ant : F 
* 1 J N 5 0 N 
3 2: 4 J 


144 e e 
„ 
„ 7 4 


# 


1 2 1 FT ELIT ad 85 N „„ 


A. Letter from V. 


Au. Jonm WanrLTRE Lefurer in 
New Philoſophy to Dr. PnznaTLET,. relating to 


* 


ee 


ae 7 Ae. G. 


7 #475 PT 


* w bd 3 
8 " "= ot " . 3 2 1 bo! 7 (FE 45 Av ES 2 1 PPS 5 
* e a | "Bhi ; p © an 1 BILE * . 9 i 23 'S 41 8 MES $9 # 
1 5 = = % - 5 4 ' 
Dear n e t Swat 
4 — 0 4 p 8 7. * I 
S%% 36S 


5 43 


we 


HAT Erreollect of the attempe 9 
che refraQive power of diffetent kinds of air, 
relates to inſlammable air enly, as; the trials, win 
any other did not give the refraction ſenſibly dif- 
ſetent from common air; and having been ever 
ſince at a diſtance from any of my inſtruments pro« 
per for ſuch experiments, I have not had an opportu- 
nity of repeating them. An hollow triangular-prifm, | 
of which the angle we uſed was of 72 degrece, W s 
placed upon a proper ſupport, ſo as to half coveria 
large object glaſs in one of Mr. Dollondꝰs perſpec 
tives, and was ſo turned round as to make the frame 
of a window, at the diſtance of 1280 feet;\ ſeen 
5 partly through the priſm and partly through com- 
mon air, appear undivided.. The inſlammable air 
vas then blown out of the priſm, but no part of the 
apparatus wus moved; when the frame of the win- 
dow ſeen through the priſm, and the common air 
*, ſeemed to ſeparate about fout inebes. 
Amongſt the variety of experiments; have: been 
lately making, I tried whether — 
dephlogiſticated air from minium noiſtened wit 
rit of nitre, by pouring upon it ſtrong ritriolic 725 


he refradtive., Power of Inflammable ans — 


| 


X 


ws 
+9 1 
77 — I, 
at 
+ wks 
4 ow '* 
* * 
23 bt] 
LL +, 
4 * ' 
Y N * 
F . 


4 
* 
j 1 — 
* 
PE 
— 
* .- 
* 
— #7 . 
K 
— * 
* 
\ 7 
4 
” 
4 
. 
* 
F 
i - 
* „ 
* ? 
Weg 
1 
- "_ £ 
% 
* 
; 
** 
* 
= 8 * 
* 
* 
* 
A,” 7 
3 
* 
— I 
= 
9 
* 
o 
- 
* 
n 
A. 


- 366, Tun A PP EN Digs We. 


„ the f to <4 the air I * > 

| diſengagei ſuddehly from the materials, in a con. 
©  Cderable quantity, without any more heat than was 
produced by that mixture. I afterwards procured 
round- bottomet phials with two necks, and adapted 
a bent tube to one; the other ſerving to pour in the 

Vvitriolie aeid, Was immediately cloſed Fi a 
of Stourbridge- clay, when the dephlogiſticated air 
roſe into the receiver without whe po, -I find a re- 
markable difference in ſpecimens of read - lead, 
ſome yielding dephlogiſticated air, by pouring upon 
it the vitriolic aeid, before it is moiſtened with ni- 
trous acid, but integer in goodneſs, and leſs in 

than when moiſtened. If I have 52 
Al myſelf, I'*find it better to im ate the mi- 
nium with the vapour riſing by heat from ſpirit of ni 


des than to Aer it upon the red-lead with all tro 
Water. ii * fy 460 * N 5010 8 


I have pub practice what 10 appole wilt 1555 
duce the ſparkling appearance in water ſimilar to the 
Seltzer. I find preſſure will actually produce that 
effect I remove the glaſs ſtopper from the upper 
part of Mr. Parker's improved machine, and inſert 
in its room a cork with a glaſs tube paſſed through 
it, eighteen or twenty inches long, the lower end 


3 


taken that the cork is air-tight, this glaſs is to be 
| placed upon the other two, and fixable air produced = 
. zs in the uſual way to impregnate the water in the 
middle glafs, which is effected ſooner” than by the 
common method, and the column of mereury that 
riſes! in the tube, acts as 4 weight upon the air col- 
kein the middle glaſs, ockaſtoning the water to 
tales up more under that Sue; cha ke 'Eaft contain 


25152 enn 8 An 1 RAE * edi, when 
lad 1 35 5 „„ 


entering a ſmall bafon of mercury. Due care being 


. * LEE 2 a 52 * 3 EEE 8 
3 * * ; Ny Ob. * * Af 
2 i . 2 8 a 
wh) ö - 8 3 a 
7 . 4 * 1 < 8 
Lal ; Py ; Fg. * 3 hg 
&. 25 
— 8 5 3 Fs 
* * * 


ee air; the. ſimple * the mewn. 
which. cauſes that ſparkling, obſerved in the natural 


1 Seltzer water. Water impregnated with fixed air, 


| with this apparatus, difſolveairon very faſt: 
7 I have, ſeveral times repeated: an ſexpetiment with 
inflammable air, that appears to me very curious; 


. 570 I fit a glaſs tube into a tapering cork, and that to 
mec Pphial, in ſuch a manner, eh 8 


à round · botto 


bend in che tube, When kung over tlie fide of à tu 
c muilar to that deſeribed in your firſt volume upon i 


be almoſt two: inches under the water, 2 5 


end may riſe four inches higher than the bend. "The 


.  phial being charged wich the proper materials for 


producing inflammable air briſkly, it muſt be lighted, 


as it diſcharges from the end of the tube, and W111i 


35 a _ continue à flame as long as any inſammable Air 
55 —_— provided care is taken to prevent any moiſture 


i 


being placed upon the edge'of the tub, a receiver; 
ſuch as for an air- pump, is to be brought over the 


dend of che tube. The in 


_  ceiver:capable of ſupporting the flame. 'The ' appear- 
ances in this experiment are very table. 


* 7 About as much inflammable, air vaniſhes as In 6qual . 


f 280 the bulk of the common air; the burning is at- 
+ ol tended with much light and beat; the common air 
NF is contracted ful a fifth bart of its original dimen. 


ſions; immediately after che flame is extinguiſhed, 55 


there appears through almoſt the whole of the re- 
ceiver, a fine i ſubſtance like a whitiſh el 

aad the air in the glaſs is left perfectly noxious, "Th be 

. bent tube ſhould be * rom under 9 receiver - 


* 


aſcending along with the air, The phial and its tube 


g air, and its edge funk: inthe water upon'the | 


| e air continues 
to burn as long as there is common air in the fe- 


1 0 
! Gt : 
4 \ 4 * } ” , f 
- 7 0 * 
5 £ 
- 


; ; 7 . 6 : 1 2 294% ex 
4 7 8 ; - WY 5 7 
: FA NES 7 ; 12 
- 4 r 
” © I 4 2 . . : 5 * 
FE 4 ip % - R Y ” LS 
Tu APP. -ND1X. N e 
4 A ye Fc L 7 < : 
. = „ - 0 
- * | 
_ N. 


— 
4 42 * 


N 7 1 7 > 
WS" 8 F 
* — * 7 
* - 
* 
7 * 
4 ; 
* 2 L 4 2 
; , | : 
” * 4 i F 
: N 1 K 
8 4 9 4 * - 5 
* J e : , 2 21 
j " | ; | f I * 
n : 1 » | 
* - : ; 7 


| Ratmimable ait ent with HE other air in 8 
5 The following edn wt ty 
| common place ane and wi f n probably M 


© * 9 
5 Ar 21 7 Sis Wa. OF N „ 
| " | 13 8 445 „* {75 S# 3.44 + 

: = * 
a 7 ' * : g 
x 7 
* 4 er T% £7 « * 75 5 by $ 4 ·˙ of * 8 ITY 4 S a (i 2 
n bf 8.4 MM. i 8 P ? 2 + E 12 28 * 


g Being about! Ft Birmingham on the 
dad to Bromſgrove; before day - liglit the morning 
foggy in drifts, I obſerved: with ſürprize, a great 
many Jack-a-lanterns, 3 ſwiſtly in an ad- 


joining eld, in, ſeveral diredtions.;/from| ſome of 
Y ſprung-up bright branches of : 


- 


| bebe, ſomething reſembling the exploſion, of a 
rocket, that contained many brilliant ſtars, if the 

* Aiſcharge was upwards inſſead of the uſual direction, 
and the den gud frees on the fide. of -ch-road 
were illuminate 

= a few. ſeconds, and then; the Jack-a-lanterns played 
We as: before. I was not in à ſituation ta diſeover 


whether this auler ne vas attended with 
f , any report. Aal a mud 01. 


If vou chink any part of the * proper for the 
Appendix to your third volume upon air, I ſhall 
; ns pores very. happy. SUTTIRTNTL aum 8 d 
I m with che poor! Weds 1 02 

Arn 1 "Your y Watt 35 ch obliged 111 Din e 
0 e _ 2 n dene Auen LF 

Es * a. Shall Sigh hols, ere, 

Jr's: 177 5. fo 74 5 OG SENT {ISI Fs + itt 5 b get 


6 5 LY = 14 K * 1 * ry "Ry. 7 - yy 9 
91 L nen ant. g Ze 5 17 TY Nb bu 
* k l * ew 2 : * * : 8 1 | Fl _—_ ; . 1 iv 8 1 x 5 U. * 
79 11331 1 i IS 3 40 E N Sth: 11 6th N 
U y * a . f 4 


971 


— . 


* uten x 4 TILT i 1 BY, ek Kah. 


This appearance continued but 


&, pos a 21 


Ahubigr pet 21 eee 


, E NE Jo POPE 1 40 4 g 1 M308: e * | 48% ait, J Oe OE 
By | | N K. ; 2 f 4 a „ * * of Or poo es : 40 1 5 . e Ft IN 
LE 575 e * wel v3 3 ; ; * £ # 9 5% 227 4 Jos 1 33 — N ES he 1 
bob A 4 mY Cry 5 5 


n 


| f 1 8. 12 e 
. on x 2 f 1 5 
6 PRIESTLE . W * pa ln rd 
; $ RO i 85 845 its: 6; 5 4 2 YN 
. ihe i 
Veſſels ane | 
1 
| > Purs fixed air, We ir "the ſeſon. 
In the ſpring I will certainly repeat them, though” 


T have not the leaſt doubt of the certainty and ac- 
curacy of your trials. It muſt be copfeſſed that in 
5 the experiment made by Dr. Perciy; „ 
ttz air employed was a mixture of common and fixed |, © © 
ais het as ie ſubje@ts were expoledito, ireams et 2 
| | the latter, wi h were long continued And copibüs ie: 
ö ſhould ſeem that though fixed air. in ard may be 5 
detrimental to vegetables; à moderate propdrtior — 
it, mixed witho common itz is-more.-favourable 0 2 
vegetation, and ta the prefer ration of veget bles than: 1 
comnion: air alone. i S601. of "bates 1x2.S5tof ao; "> 
In che experiments 1 made was/by;:nqy meer 22 5 
5 prepoſſeſtad asv go the reſt 85 had bad more . 
leiſure Ie mould have incbenſed their number, but... 155 


o mY N 
= 1 


 aogutagyitics if 5199 bar 


1 
which had a 
is 7 os 
* SY P 
wy 
- 
> 
- 
5 q * - 
4 i + 
* , « 
s 4 1 * 
% * * 
1 4 
, 
77 2 f „ 
- 
* * 
* ol L - 
5 0 = : 
. 5 4 
* * * % 
* a 5 - — 
— 
. E 
* . 
R + 
A x 
* > 
- 1 . 1 Y 
* 75 * 4 & „ 1 5 
1 2 ws 
o 7 5 
» . * A . bp 
26 i # 95 4 
— — * 927 > 
— 


was tis in the 1 af Dr. Nooth'sgnee 
chine, and ſupplied with plentiful ſtreams of fixed 


air every day; ; another oy f an Ta bunch, in 


equal preſervation witty 2 e : 
in a glaſ ee in mon air. air. . 
_ (Nth r "Th 8 "a N © Jecanter 

were in u fate int 'of the 


"ks, where others 5 e Thoſe 
| Nabe 7 continued Plump, and 9 any 
285 0 f decay til al Foc 31. The: fnoſtſbeing 
77 enk t0 freeze 8 ie water oo ; dottamyof 

machine, the ſtreams. of, air were | 
woe eds dt 


day 1 "3 44-3 IJ ian THis 2 1 c 4 E hy 2 
dect oihp2, 14 28 42 r 77 „ 4 l 4 14 2 


* * * 1 4 2 7 1 5 at th z Av 1 
32: Hiegs REL Nati WH. 4. 10 2 bLe FLARES DJ: 49] JBX 4041 Wd ; 
| | | . 44 3, 2 8 2 7 " £94 ; 
H 75 Fon balls 2 20 3146 Tk Af 2 122 11. Yo Nie 


lag 52 Ears pad NT ny II. g 60 1 5 


, x Fes a 1 5 #4 : 
Sa bog ge h Hows 2£ 6546 2023 116 'Ff 


June 23, ſexreral Selene were placed i in t the: 
middle part of Dr. Nooth's machine, and others in 
the upper part of it, fell into a bottle; as a ſtandard; ' 
Hach veſſel was igbiihyiſtopped. The ſtfawwbert 

gathered uur - the night before, and were 


. 


| not in wHivourable ſtats for preſeriatioh; Mee, 
_ =» 23d, Thoſe expoſed to the ſtreams of fixed air; 2 


and were fiapvant and well taſted. Their 


Tragen 

ſtandard not ſo ſweet ; und on the azgth more de- 
cayed and growing mouldy; whereas thoſe in fed 
air appeared "ay freſh and were well taſted;* but 


their f. 5 ; ; f 
9 EY Os f der ALES ON He a6 the 
of the kran beute 1 anderen the: , 


ing 
# 


w even théugäs to be improved Tue : 


* 


had; 2 moderate 


in 


14 


2 
Jo TTY | 


42 1 


5 VF vr * Io 
VCC i Sing d 
e ee eee een 75 


1 e 9305 asc Hoo 80 © 


hs Es 45 BP 


16 4 F * e 1 j * * x5 ; $ T x" " þ 7: A «4 5 : 6 . 1 * N Het” l 3 Sy A , % — ; 2 
of ot | 2 * E 1 5 1 | 7229. EE 7 
1 x Br p 4 | Se 4 K 3 
3 (ft 11. e . EF * a We: 0 
. 4 OE . . W 8 


i „ . a KEE "3 4 207 2 1 is | TM + 
— 8 * 4 © 8 17 N 7 £ * & - - $75 : 
* Th 8 'q 5 > . e * _ p * — A 7 - © it 1 Ez | : 2 43 


f 


772 
ws >, 2% 


"og Wan : : L "4 


w $1 6 : 
1 | 
„ 1 
2 
rh 
Py 
$5 * 
2 
* 1 - 
i 
* > 
1 8 Bk 
1 5 Ws Ms 
3 


Fug 'the eue. v 
n out and e 
Us 6 tk. The! an "ove wil 


1 8 . 29th. ir + was 


at 


4 


5 "af fon | . | \ a 7 : | 2 ; 


Another plant which 3 11 22 * 5 
wier in ewo' 1 : Haid on a tabl 


. #7 

s - 
* yo 3 * =. 
* 


* * \ Y "If i #3 „ IOEvA 1 1 


7 


* 


A . 2 BE + ; 0 +51 ® PE 1 3 gs 40 | ths N * in 
ors 78 15h 2 ? X ER 1. * r . 5 1255 1 "boy? 080 


5 


ro iD e ieee oy 2 abi Fs 24 

—  Septzraber 1, T'wo yigorous ſprigs.of mint were, 
_ plac gude gre a veſſel of com mon air, He oth x 
yr one of equal, form and 8 into whic A Cur= 
of fixed a air had bee n conye 721 for ſeveral x 1. 
ge Pe, freſh en Nig TOY, and f e 


| 3 u 5 on 75. * 3 e inn 

pM 1 5 Ria en reden out, and 
the roots being cut off, were e into the , 
1 ; 8 N 


3 e 4 A 4s 25 «ve, a 15 * 5 


x r2th. The EFF in NT _ -xhibited emp- 


toms of decay "the leaves,near the ER. : 
2 _ 5 the other veſſel continued freſh for 


OR - 


| periment,,, and it ſe | withered like che Randard,, ids 
Flowers of, various Kinds, alſo have been preſeryec 
longer i in veſſels when. expoſed. to ſtreams of 8 | : 
air, f h * , {milar ve! 1 
* only. i,, He radet eaw. 3 
Dr. Hales bas p proved that, copious 8 of air, 8 5 
paſſed 9 her free it from that bad: ſmell. 1 
Which it contracts from the putreſcent vegetables on 
which 7 are ne Gage 9 . ts to; 5 


. : 
TH : Too 811 8 
” . 45 p - ; IE - "I& y 4 u 1 AS, 4 * 


* 7 1 * n * 
5 5 5 4 f ws" ta . iy 7 1 5 2 x , — 4 
hs * Ro 8 « 4 . 8 f ; ; N * 
84 rn * E fa 4 rp £5 +75 I | * nan + . TH "152 51 4 
* 5 3 905 8 % 2 K. * * A2. * 4 BY * N CE Nr 2 is, "a e 5% "= ; * «x 4 4, a : 3 
& £2 1 & 8 ?, 4 F * ' g 1 : AS . 8 2 Rees. yy 
FP WI r 31 «EO "68 T'* =F | f TY 
A ! # . - 4 me * $a * 3 * 2 L - b , 8 FI 9 
by * 4 A 4 / * 
: # e 
; . ; Of ION + x 3 e 
; af" * % N . a 
go , ; 


- y : a g 7 72 3 
- oF. j j- 44 
Ty \ £ : 7 F HE i 1 Sox hs: 
ws. - $5 / . < "2 4 * 4 3 * OE” 
1 24S 324 ; : 2 % 45 4 $ 4 £ 
4 8 7 * 4 „ p 5 - 
"19208" ; P 
5 - * 
4 5, z — - 7 
7 p P . — 4 FR 88 ; 1 3 H 5 n ; 
" 4 4 7 « % 8 * -F +. 4 y . 3 * 3 $6 * 8 
4 N 7.4 . F 5 x „ as 7 8 4 4 of £ . S 3 . 
4 bo . 1 : 0 > £30 * 5 . fo: 5 £ 4 1 * * WA 03S" £ 7 
75 . » * : - 1 oy 0 n «x * 77 $5 W Y 
* f Z 4 p 
* 1 * * 


* 


N 


- th. Both patotls veer—Smell 46 5 7 


as part was removed. 


"ee ae . Tel Ps £ 
ww # , * 


c * * 1 WI»; 4 * 
1 HF bt n * 2 LT. . 8 Lg 


5 
>» 


* E 
925 ps 5 5 1 8 5 we 2111 


0 # 


Se ese e 294 
7 5 fam cow, were _ a 
par! to it, it'was - 
me ae air, which were 
wry Ne fame 11 


Bb 4% — 


—4— — 78 i; . 


EY e e had the ſmell pecal alk 
when newly taken from'the'cow; nr. 


8 


— 


carried 2 ont 0 


ſeenee, havi 


= 
* 
4 


nd forced too great e of of milk into the opper 


the machine fo that ſome had run over itt 
duth. The remainder was feturned ante the mids | 
> part; which not velug, 815 Er full, che' s 


"1 "40% 


2 


- , 7th; The ſtandard 


ik the pleafant * SR taſte | 
Sch. The ſtandard mo re tan Fr. 2 2 157 65 & 


"BRA 1 11 He e 


| te ets Wa . 

5 produced Ay — REY Gal WAN hall a taſte 
2 Wa and ſimilar to chat of curds 
mmon e for act Fe cheeſe. _ 


2 * 
— — 
— 
1 
* - 4s 0 1 
Fg . 
* * 
8 Wu 
— 1 8 % 
— 
- 
- 2 4 2 
8 F , 
8 — % 5 
F * * * * - : 1 Pres x 
; | ' 3 1 55 
* : s 
o * 
\ a" * 
* 7 * 
— 4 
$ 2 - 
4? ** ö 


* 77 * 
*# 
* 
* 4.5 
* F 
* „ 
> x * * — 
S573 +7 . 1 
BE bn 
* oY 0 
A 4 Ee 
3 F 
EF a 
* : — * 4 
K 55 4 
- g * £51 4 
# NE * 
2 £5 g 
- 1 - 
; 2 
= j 
; Wo 54 
$ „ 
© 7 Fx 
K b - 
* — 
* £ 
7 
* * 9 
% 
- 
% : 
4 "4 
F 54 j* 
He ; 
w-<% i 
„ * * 
9 
F 
a z 
Fg 1 
* J 
« 2 1 — 
2 — J _ » 
& * 4 
8 5 
; 
A ” 
6 * 
* 
9 5 - 
* 3 
: , - a 
IG a 
4 
2 
- 1 1 
* Ot 7 
* * 
| os « 
45 7 
* 93 4 
* 2A A 
* 
1 
* 5 
Fx 
5 
_ oF * - 
* 3 
1 v1 2 
e 
4 Y 5 
by 8 EY 
j "6 - > L 
„ 
x | "ans 
” — 


5 4 
5 $ 
CY > 1 
* * bh 
5 ; 
= 3 - % in : 
. * 
£55452 * 
þ. Wa 
5 5 
. a 8 : 
*w 7.7 * 


. 
$4 
«En; 
? 
* "> 
F 2 
4 
- 
fe ” 
g - 
3 
— 2 
2 * 4 
£ 
* 
* 
« 


* 
9 A * 
/ * : 5 * 
7 ws * 

” 

- 2 ; "4 
q 2 * 7 Q J 1 1 

*4 * 
"2 £ M * 4 # 1 — 7 * 
4 1 | | 


73th. The Landard bitter, YR cid that it wag. 
- Woven away. _ milk 25 22 air eee 
acid, e Fit N 1 wan] 


3 Was . 8 ſor the.tims. of for N ae gh 
: f 4 th 2; u. 1 denly 13. 245 ame very w | 2 3 42 5 } 5 5 
| | | Power M ＋ le meter, I was got able ta Reep 
„ 955 egilter of the degrees of t eee, 5 noel 
RT 2 . B. When the milk was. ſectly coagulated, 
| Hxivium tartari were added to à mall ortio 
Whey, which, neutralized. 71 no efferve 
enſued on the mixture. From he uſpecte 
the a acidity and coagulation were. owing to is: fxedl 
Ar; and 1 50 Was more. attached to this opinion by ab 

wes. e e og i 
FIN 4 2 5 bla Lage pb 1 


* 


% 


3 


N 


W al e at wed es "rag ea 
| . WMium tarta K R TY 4 
UN Oe _ ip i 12 5 8 For, inv i 58 8 
1 p 5 — mt from ie cow. In cooling it is 
of a yolatile. gas, Which. is, 
1 RA mow 5 4 : 


37 
65 


Rei Arelh, from the ro we da. 
1 HY be, had.?, 2805 pts 1 lin us s uf 71 © 20 £4" | 

_ Might he be alſo oabviends bo; 7 . 
of greach ſor churning 
with fixed air, When 21 are too W 95 


Rd 2 - 4. y 4 the + +. I , 


2 „ 


. * 
{ U | 8 


hy Bat by gent. 
"Air. for three days,” 2 


uch- | 


, 


$35 


1 | agita ting the machine, 5 diſſolved 4 m 


mee £ ic. power: of 
1 regnated with- xed Air, | 1 oel not appear, to 


5 b ſufficiently conclulive to watrank the 1 
X - ' * 728 5 5 + - 
; . %. : 4 3 (FL 


? W's 4 * — 34 * FB. 4 3 f 43 2 5 * . : » | * f > EY by 3 e þ ; : 4 1 « 1 & 
I * , 7 3 6 = Fs . * 3 * 8 P 4 F Te 


>, 
— 
kl 
5 
* 
2 
-S 
* 
* 
\ 
- 
A. 
— 


1 * . £ $46 
1.»x>. : - ; FO 
f 3 * j + 
* 9 $33 
: 1 ” . * 7 
4 7 ; 7 2 
PS 0 "Ja 


"VT" 5 1 x : 7 6 
Ne * 3 3 e 
0 Is s 67% $ 
" - . s We? * Ie 5 
2 . mY N 
A * 
* 4 # ; J 232 
4 - * 8 1 2 
* - #+ 4 
DE eee N 1 
F * * $3 4 
; | | 25 8 p 3 
1 . ; I a , N 4 a 5 q - FF 5 e 
. 1 * : * 84 5 . - 1. . 1308 2 4 ( "PE & 1 f 4 : 72 , 41 7 
. ; 8 * 5 ff ee „ Ks "8 5 1554411 * 5 3 
* . 7 * 4 fl 4 ; . 7. 7 0 yy * { „ = + 
u o * + #4 * f 5 1 1 * * F * J ” Ce A 
4 . e rh et, 0 1 4 0. Humax, | 3 
v 3G, ” * P 8 - 1 4 4 5 "4 Ws "Is ö 7 a „ 1 N 4 7 . n 
k 4 = by þ Py 53 5 of. 5 7 n rs 48 1 „ 1 : . Np? 7g" Is 5g of g \ 2 5 Y 
; ' 5 f ” . f ; of 4 , \ 5 7 * 4 * * 
4 ? 5 on - 
oy ; 
F * 5 92 75 
* # K 75 7 : 
ay * 4 5 3 * v 
, 7 2 l * K CES 
* 


pears that alive abſorbs rs bulk of 
Kir. . I am proceeding with. muy: fart! 


2 
** 
1 


1 1 12 * 
X 1 7 : 0 
* 288 ry 
7 ? + x Ad 
1 * 4 3 
x - * 
1 ind 
* 
* 
2 - . 8 % 
: 
1 * LI 


'P Dear Sir, * 8818 Kel” 2 


ES, N with 1 Kindneſs,” ſhewez a me . 
large eslleckien of kg 


- which I attributed to not employing ſo good glaſſes, 


Fa, with e Te 4 


Jon $i Wor 30 17764 
TRY 90017 1 e ä 
I arrived but laſt "night" + my tour See ch, | 

1 and F landers; and will not delay to ac: 

tualnt yon with apiece of philoſophical intelligence, 

whiew Tam ſure will be n6 lefs agreeable to you _ 


40 e * 
3% Sa * ef ONE 
Ilan? - 7 *; 7 Aan 


it was to me e when 1 firſt heard it. On my coming 


„ I viſited the celebrated pro fefſor Alla- 


"philoſophicat inftraments, 
ich is the beſt ſet I ever ſaw of white and _ 
d * Jaſles, cryſtals and. . diaphanous ſub- 
ſtances, nicely Gut f nto priſms, and' other ſhapes 
for dioptrical experiments, Tbis put me in mind 
of the unſucceſsful attempts made at Paris by my 


friend Abbé. Bourriot, and here in London by myſelf _ 
and Mr. B. Wilſon, to repeat that curious experi- 


ment of eb Beccaria, profeſſor at Turin, related 


in vol LXI. of Philoſ. Tranſ. via, that the ſulphu- 


reo- calcareous phoſphorus, gives the ſame coloured 
light, when brought into a dark room, which it 


mer throu colodred:glaſs expoſed' to the ſun. 


I told profeſſor Allamand how puzzled Thad been 
at not being able to ſucceed in that experiment, 


as 1 * of profeſſor 9 or * N 


1 * ” 7 
— « a 2 


. 
— 


un AP BB 


1 W 


77 


her * 


ys "of: the Cup); after their, 
2 5 of my. priſms, , and 
© Take Ras 1 ſepar Dal ate Fe, e 


5 50 poſe d, 444 wo * 
: EX f 4 2% 
* 
i 
5 7 5 
* — 
2 at the E ! ad 
1 K f n 9 
Ts 2 . 
1 
1 wel Ri 
a : $2. 6D; 

15S 125 

* * 

FN \ ” 

q s I: 
| | „ and 
| | X mpl; >yed | 

+ hi $$ F, N 

8 9 is FA 7 

R 3 ngth in Gel jar bro. 
* 


ns IF: Tp En Be 1 R 
„ EIN BENE OT 
> N 9 - 95 > ©) 


IR 8 it is; __—— 2 a kind Kipp 
(EA PAK. e ureous ſu ſtance: and on this account it is nearly t. 
| duns thing as the plioſphorus employed by profeiibr Beccaria, 


” 
* 
* 
1 
K 
10 
- 
+ 
* < 
< 


\ : 3 
* 
3 
"+ 
Jo © ek 


A 
Os 
E 
# 
£ 
1 
PO” 
W * 
72 
"F233 


7 
» 4 "4 
#2 
os 


3 
77 
N 

* 

3 

32 
ag W 
W 
+ 8 = 
#14 
7 4 
7 
ELLEN 
ES 
” 
vhs 

„ p 
INS 
- ©, 

* 
* 


\ 


= 


. : p 
f | diſti 8 +& 4 * S YOSWE- oy 
N 8 * 
/ 4 
. 4 : 5 + . & 4 


| bet by 8 4 50 


thi "firſt unk, 


chat the colours of b the een w oa 1 SEE 


to the dark room, were diſtin enough to enable 


them, to gueſs, Withdut any previous knowledge, 
what was the true colour. "of. the glaſs, through | 
. * it had been expoſed to the un. | 
Now this appears to'mefand T think alfo to e every , 
body elſe.” to be 3'itiabter of uf, which in philoſo- | 
phical matters is ac much to be depehded pon when 


| ſeen once, as if it was obſerved every day. 


1 Laid profeſſor Beccaria, that he g 
h if he had been miſtaken n b; 


I am ſorry to have ſeen, hy a printed letter "of its 6 
ve it alnioft i up, As 


eſs of the phoſ- - 
, 282 decided colour. his be fays was in 


on rien rk of Motficur Zannotti, prefident of the 
Academ 
able to 


 ftance related by Moridir Heinfetfidls, juſt non,, 


' of Bolonia, himſelf and dthers not being 
the ſame phenönfenbn. But that circum 


toned, may fully äcrbunt for our wnfuceeſsful 


| attempts: and T hope fon to have à proper quantity 


of the ſaid ſulphiirevus:calcatevys phoſphoris, pre- 


pared by myſelf, which I will ſend to profeſſor, All. 
mand deſiring him to repeat with it this experiment 


with his {good apparatus, whith Toene e = 


bays. 


/ 


h is experiment, by 6 = 


. 


5 

X's s br ap? Bo e $5 237 eee, 
thi; 1 en W # e 85 e Was 6 
u E 


4 ag A ee om AE SAS: 


6 : 

" „ 

gu e N l A „ 
* * 7 


Ki 1 6 * 2 5 
e 


1 this F L uſe a double ſet of the m niddle 
_ and | upper veſſels, with another ſtand; ſo contrived 
' with a convex bottom, that they may be eaſily agi- 

tated while they reſt upon it. 

theſe middle veſſels is properly. 
Air, I take gut t and the upper veſſel belonging 
to it, and placing them upon the ſtand, I ſhake the 
Water very well till it has abſorbed the air, while the 


from the lower vt 
Then letting out th 


n 


refiduum of fired air, 


125 


e it on che lower veſſel, that it may get a fre! 
Jupply of fixed air, while I ſhake the: other ſet, which 
is now repleniſhed. Tbis operation 1 repeat three 
ot four weed, * and this means can . 13 nabend 
nate the water in both yeſſe] 

* nn. 
Tyuhe other e e 
| taro new: exdiometers, to meaſure'the. degree of ch fo 


"4 4 4* 0 * by „ ; g _ Jubri 

7 * * 8 3 p 

ir | 

. i \ 1 
E # ; 
* 4 
= , 
” 
% LY 
* 
* 
" * 
„ bs - + 4 
* ; 8 
F 
4 ” 
9 
. 
- [ U F 
* 
* 4 0 
* — 
+ 2 - 


rating the upper veſſel from the middle one, 1 ter 


As ſoon as one of 


. 


4 
, 
„ 
2 
* i 7 
$ fot 
* 0 
1 i; 
[4 F 
- 
C 1 
1 
1 * 
* - 
x ol 
#5 4 
* - Z 
q 
* ; 
= 
1 
8 £ 
* " 
l ; 
ST 
%%* ” 
* 
a Ec *: 
7 
5 * 
— 
* 
* * 
1 * 
i > 4 »X 
k F or 
. 3 ; 
3 . 
AO - 
i S 
* f / 95 
9 * 
FF La 4 * 


f 


75 Dear Sir, 


"which I pins ths 2 — * the er, ee 
and the neater of the two, is according to the ori- 
eine idea of your experiments on this ſubject: but 
in neither of them do I make uſe of any cock; both on 
account of its being difficult to be made, and like- 
wiſe ſubject to be out of order, Thoſe of Mel; the 
Chevalier Landriani and the Abbé Fontana, ſeem 


to be liable to this, inconvenience: The experi- 
ments already made in moſt parts of Italy, e 5 


former of thoſe gentlemen, with his-own eudiometer, 
deſerve the greateſt praiſes ; and it is to be wiſhed 
that ohilofaphery would more gene rally Apply nent 
" ow? to DOOR ee —— of i ys 2411 


* 
„„. ** 81 cas he 
4. „ þ We 5 * 4 — F+ * "het 54. $7. 4, * > N by 8 
4 * 1 * 4 * * 


ro” 


a” 


2 25 $3 „„ „ 
No p Erb koS | *. ; 1 | 


3 7 6 7 74 = 
$40 PS as 


"2 % 2 * bs - £ 25 
1 


4 1 Tran ion pit of a . am 1555 t 
110 oenatingmaer? 1776. 


. HAT LE: 


2 a « 
. A * 
8K 
. 
. 


6 155 yy 


5 
15 13 11 £52 © 


- +5 15 Fa 6 4 ; 4 1 
93 


445 Le ig "a8 36 114% ry e bnag tone 
c er I wall have ſent 
e ne of the machine, in able to n 
tain with exactneſd the wholſomeneſt of the air in 
any particular place. It is the ſame inſtrument that 
I have made uſe of in my tour through Italy, in the 
courſe of which I haye Had the ſatisfaction of con- 
vincing myſelf, that the air of all thoſe places which, 
from the long experience of the inhabitants, has 
deen reputed unwholeſome, is found to be ſo, 6 
a very great degree of exactneſs, by this iaſtrument 
of mine ſo that” the an, to correſpond 
very 


— 


” ſammits; and found a remarkable difference in the: 
— Rate-of the-ainſ-ererydirat n bei 
5 EF » B ins 
ile I was at Naples). ihe vir appeared by my eulli-d 
898 ometer to become bly more vitiated· The air 
BH. of thei Pontine lakes, that of the Rcitoecho-at Remes 
_— ery unwholeſome) that of the Campatna/Roc:. 
wn, of the-Giotta-del-Ganaz*of the» 
„„ 
4 of 2 e .05-j 
EXPE rb e e ty. ae s 2er back 
e Werte 0 eee an ee e daa, 
+ UE 95 K 1117 N 88 e 465 OT e to 
- 6 e 2161. Ne Us M BER VI 0 Ni ve me" 


1 ur 7 IB i Win 24-3 es 47 30 1 4 A n What 


5 5 . 4 | 7 a Lett Jen Signor Aut. 
; Cons, dated Dec. 10, 176 


75 | ANDER- Vor ra of 
a : nyt Y RE Be ta 7 Fs 2 . 1 8 We e . vn 1 > 201 770 I 1 
3 Wien this I ſend you a ſmall-painphl, f 


| covered 9 be the uſual. product of the putrefactim 


| - ofthe treatiſc'on the ſubject of the itiflamimability of 
h % I have collected many new facts, and the whole | 
125 4 9 Ok : | EO 3 in 
1 8 Si” | 


; juſt publiſhed... It relates. to inflimmable air, 
5 | which I have found to be the moſt; common of all- 
the factitious airs in nature, and Which I have dif- 


+ decampoſition of vegetable ſubſtances 
ou will lee that I promiſe a cntinuation . 


* * 


A 


inflammahle air 


. 
5 will 8 — e 


5 er eee 1 J 18 410 1471 425 | ima e 
I fie inflammable air by he ſample ele arte ſpark; DO 

vetyl moderates which; 
i, provided! 


even when the: 1 
explains the inflammiationof the {ne fats 
they conſiſt of 'inflammable air iſſuiag from murſhy 
ground by: the help of the electricity of fageg· and 


dy falling ters whipb are very pioblibly thoughtts/ 
have an electrical origin. 1 fire the — kind 


of aii by -a-well-lighted>coal;. -wittiout' any p 
and alſo by: a: red-hot iron, ard even by a ane 
ſteel. Alb th err 


: 3 2 n | 


with a little addrefs'the-ſame way be done with they 


been told, that it is the cuſtom in ſome of 5 
mines to produce a certain degree of light by ſparks 
drawn from flints, or pyrites, for fear of making 
an exploſion: of the cnfldinrtl air if/a candle was 
made uſe of? If this be the caſe, it may be of uſe 


to know that,” according to my erperiments, tab 5 
method cannot altvays be ſafe- * V A TAO „an, 


I do not know whether you have ever tried the 
effect of thb Bolagnih pbeſphrux vn hir It pfilogiſti- 
cates it in the higheſt degree, bony ere 
which it occaſions;| takes place very quietly, and 18 
altogether! ſurpriſing: but for this pur 


x 


phorus' muſkegobd,/antothe u] not 7000 Selb Tr 
fu . 


Mr. Canton'd phoſphorus has 


with me; but perhaps it wid nöd good"of _ 
What can be the reaſon Way the "p 


We . an, ＋ ; 


Le ſe clue, Sitz as I have" 5 


| N * + ba 25 1 . r 2 N 1 MO OED AT- WY IVY 9 
* We R * . 2 9 * . yt S EY af 0 8 . 
N 2 1 n a 4 A LE 4 1 * Kt. ae ou = Lug * 
» a F * * 8 8 : 
+ v 4 . $ 1,4 2 *" * 8 * 7 n PN a ;. a 
* 4 7; ' 7 7 og 
A, = 1 N 2 n 3 31 ; 
4 3 * 1 ee? — 3 3 * 
* af . e 
* 4 ; 
* 


— be] 
5 2 5 4 * 3 
. 5 4; 1 „ 
. * * * 1 
bas = 3 
>: 2 $2 Be 
. fv HEL * Sit are 
fi! d 80 Fe 
* 2 n 796 
py 8 . | 
1 Ae * 4 * , #% i 
1. REY 
s * a4 
— * * 


2 e HOW. ende $66 cilia 081 vs 353 
1 655 ei 5 wy ie e N ts 


8 ö — N * 485 
4 IRR e 19 1 auen 2d ON: cop evo . 
8 7 4465S T's 7 8 2 bl6 ; 


e IO Lo ng "$6.15 e et e . FE Sey #24 
Ker art, N MBE NVE 405 8 
+ | 2 401298 92 5 as aha 11 . | | 
2 5 —_— — | | 


* 


Fax Au n. 1 e bucks 26-day SE 2688. * 701 9 e 8 


Bt eure, tt es OWA bat 240 2 ai mY 


Bo | e rin; e acl 2-06 ' Leedag: Januatyr tz 1 


* 
4 


10 2 My 4a eee e eee — e 
: 1 ofa Wa 9 +1561 JGhthatither emer. 5 


eee laſh 


| ea Rok your preſent publication, argſainumerouszo © | 
5 | I am;really-diſcouraged-from. indulging myſelf> =. 
. (inquiries. Beſides,, wr 8 


| ui rrelpeging fad eng ire t a purſuad arte: : 
| ch ſiiduity by men of, the greateſt. philoſ 1 ws 
p — 9 — of Europe, chase Lene | 


"NF —myſcifto bein, dayges of. walting mygime bye: © 
50 Peet be een 8 üb 

* better quali fied and of more lei e, haue. perhaps „ 
: . _— hola grit Conf | 


* 


aan 113 | FT "ENS 
ſactions, and in your firſt volume IE . „„ 
Aſt As I do not with to be thought an als | | of 


1 4 a 
f » 
s - j 
5 
A | 4 
1 - * 
% : 
_ F | 
1 4 * * 
* 
— 


— — 


—— — — 
» 


j 
3 
| 
| 
| 
* 


* 
* 


—— on which my W 547 e 
made, and of relating a few * fince, 
though eren to On CONE MF our firt vo- 


» 


ring water with : 


ondon, one or to of-the wendete upon find. 
— — e it had acquired by means of ſpirit 

of vitriol, ſuppoſed that you had only communicated 
a ſlight vitriolie impregnatibn to the water, and con- 


7 


5 cluiled that your. invention.) was of no 0 conſequence, 5 


2 4 


V pon your me 
very different —.— Which: the ce 
exitertaizied- of "you Wy; Fa 


though 


of — way "no Kemus by mes fort 
could I then procure any; but 1 — oo a1 
beſt ſyrup of violets which J could procute, _ 


ite was not very freſn. The reſult, upon 4 1 
tion of the experiments ns as T hay ' 


2. * 


_ 


I thought the experiments were ſuffeient to few, : 
chat no one need to be afraid of uſing your artificat” 


Pyrmont water on account of any ſuppoſed vitriotic * 


vation. 4h SHOT - £44k Bu DIP WO 10899}. 
Before you left Leeds, Which was in 2 2778. 1. 
2 ſeveral other "experiments reſpecking the a0. 
dity of fixed air; in Winch 1 fand, "that: 
would not only communicate a” 4 ret X 
tinged with litmus, bur 575 W 
relh juice or W of Pages 
radiſhies;” e en 


4 1 
18.4 "$331 


a” 25 


| d wit 
of, cu bib. fron! 


r e 5.84. 05 1 15. Zou oh. 1 Wane" 


7 1 * * . * 


. 
* 
> 
j 
- * 
* 
* 
_ 2 
. 
i * 
—— 
os - 
- 
4 * 
* 4 
1 
* \ 0 


ACl- 


Woe A 


* 
„ 
* 
1 
* 
EF 
*_» 
1 
Ly 
[1 
* 
7 
* 
\ 
* 
5 
5 


FE 


| an rn. ſat 


knka air, "ſoon loft its red {roll upon ans to 


the air, and it then ceaſed to precipitate the lime in 
lime-water. If this expoſure was made in wide 


and ſhallow veſſels, the water, in about ang: 


hours, became as blue as it was before its im 


nation with fixed air. If it was expoſed in 2 
drical glaſſes, or open phials, a blue circle was ſoon 


formed upon the ſurface of the water, which gra- 
dually deſcended; but in ſuch an expoſure the water 
would retain its redneſs in part for many days. The” . 


_ tinge which water, coloured with freſh juice of vio- 
lets, received from fixed air was but ſlight; however 


it was ſo clearly perceptible as to leave no doubt of 
the fact. The keſult, in all the experiments, was the 


ſame whether I made uſe of fixed air prõcured from 


| chalk and ſpirit of vitriol, or of that which I found 
floating above the ſurface of fermenting wort. Up- 
on the ſecond pouring of water, tin 


ged with litmus, © 
from one veſſel to another in the atmoſphere. of fer- 


| menting wort, the water became ſo red that no ſub- 


ſequent pouring made any perceptible addition to the 


colour; and the water, coloured with the juice or 


freſb ſyrup of violets, or with the ſcrapings of ra- 


diſhes, received as ſtrong a tinge from the air ariſing | 


from wort, as from that Daring by the elhiveſconce” 
of chalk and ſpirit of vitriol. e 

I anvinclined to think, — ſome of the relle 
Per arab ariſe along with the fired air When oil of 


| vitriol alone is poured upon an alkaline falt; but 1 
myſelf reſpecting the fact. 


i. . 
isles 


If theſe remarks are worth a place in 
Soha you will pain 
Ver. III. * 1 22129 2 


your third vo- 


8 them in any _ 
- 6h Wo ak * W 


4 2 TION x i ; "> 932 


+ &...4 
* — 
* 1 N ; 


* 


A 


386 ur AUE N DI X. 


| Le ron '. . 10 aul lee Dis wholly to wenge . 


5 * * 4 * 2 PS... - 5 
Ki 4 z 4d 2 N 3 S 4 2 : 2 7 +» 4 Fa {+4 8 ws 9 = 
5 9 
4 £ . wy 44 K „ 
„ + | F 
n Dear ir, „ 8 
Pl 2, * * : : 1 0 4 
A SJ # 4 — 7 5 1 LY 3 * 


6 ö 
Þ Nn 


5 ce 
#3 # 18 
3 3171 % iin DIS 
_ ” Reg ie; 4 
_ 1 2 YL our oblige bend As 
* ; a 
* 1 os 
(3 1 ; þ1 75 NN #%. '24$ 
: * > 1 : 4 4 + % g = + 4 a 
. 1 N N Tm © e * 4 * N £ F = * 4 * ah WWI 1. 1H | f py 4 
C 7 JE EDEN 7, 7% „ 3 54 
C33 05.23 BF fs | ; 1 7 83-4 : ? 
z * 
3. + 
#.4 5 Bae 
- 18 


e g N. 1; MBER vil. ab Hood: 
Eoin and; bee lens: to F tlio u, 
and to the ſpontaneous. Accenſion of P YROPHORI, | on 
their expoſure to Atmoſpherical Air : in two Letters to 
- the _ Dr. PRLRETLDY: 6 _ oy A 


A 4 


1 = , . 7 
, * 
— = N 8 = 


5 
= OB. we BE T T E Mo 1. rie 
4 K * *. 5 * „ e 
94 3 — * . 4 

ps 9 * a ö 
4 — J PR +; * 
22 2 1 : 4 : 5 $3: ot "jo 2 4 „ . % 

; £ +7. & 7 O Buy 2 


Las 0 2 | Objervation on F IXED Ark. . 4 
N 2610 

"When, from the ae, ſeveral "ofothe: experi. 
ments related in my three papers inſerted in your 
ſecond volume, 1 thought myſelf ſufficiently autho- 
_riſed to affirm that fixed air, or the mephitic acid, as 
16 chen ventured, and ſhall itil continue occaſianal- 
ly, to call it, was as acid ſui generis, I meant only 
. that acidity was eſſential to it, or that it was: acid 
per ſe; and that it did not owe that quality to any 


1% the acids employed in the uſual proceſſes for eu- 


pelling it from the various baſes with which it id 
combined. It might however, I then obſerved, be 
7 2 madiacation of ſome of the other acids, particu- 
flu of the n nitrous; and 1 referred to a ſingular phe- 


nomenon 


Tux APPENDIX. % 1 
nomenon . a certain . proceſs, 
which ſeemed to countenance this laſt ſuppoſition 

Tt may be proper briefly to recapitulate what, L ob». 
ſerved on this ſubject, _ „ Jo cans - 
In the deflagration of nitre with Seren Job- 
| ſerved, that the alkaline baſis of the nitre acquired a | 
very. conſiderable portion of fixed air, which un: 
dgubted]y did not reſide in it, in that form at leaſty 
before the operation. Its acquiſition of tnis 
principle might, as I then ſuggeſted, be attributed 
to one or more of the three following cauſes, | alt, 
Some of your experiments, as well as others which 8 
myſelf had made, (not to omit the mention of ſome =o 
remarkable facts, relative to this ſubject in general. 
which are related at page 28, &c. of the preſent vol.) „ 
left it, doubtſul whether the nitrous acid itſelf might | 
not aſſume this particular modification : or adly: 

the alkaline baſis of the nitre, deſerted by its own 5 
acid, might attract this other acid principle from the SEO 
atmoſphere, where it is known to abound, either 

during the deflagration, or the uſual ſubſequent . 
calcination of the matter or laſtly; it- might „ 
oeive it from the chareoal. The following experi- 
ments offered themſelves to me as likely to ſolve 

this problem. The proceſſes themſelves are not 
new; but, as they had not before been executed 

— a view to this queſtion, I repeated them more 
than once. with a particular attention to it, and 
| Gab mat . ene nee erg w of i it. 


* 


| ech 50 51 Exopminent 1 Sad hie, pp” 5 
fen me | Chon: HOIST . 2484 e 1 | | 5 - 
1 mixed ae two, ſervples: of bein add one 

of charcoal, both broken into ſmall lumps, and put 


ee 9 8 the 


7 i 


388 Tar APPENDIX. wi 


the mixture into the bowl of a large tobacco-pipe. ; 
Holding the pipe over the fire, the matter ſoon be- 
gan to deflagrate ; and withdrawing it from thence, _ 
the deflagration proceeded ſpontaneouſly during the 
ſpace of four or five ſeconds,” without any diſper- 
fion of the materials. The inftant that it ceaſed, 


the bowl of the pipe was plunged into a ſmall cup 7 


dl diſtilled water, and the liquor was ſoon afterwards - 
* decanted off into a phial, The nitre was found to 
de not wholly decompounded ; but the firft two or 
three drops of | cad nitrous acid added to it, pro- 
duced an efferveſcence; and, on a ſubſequent exa- 
| mination, the alkaline ſalt was found to be nearly as 
much impregnated with fixed air, as the tnildeſt ſalt 
of tartar, It was however phlogiſticated; for on 
making che acid predominate in the liquor, and then 
Adding to it a few drops of a ſolution of green vitriol, 
2 unn blue, of a greeniſh hue, was piecipitared. 


Exynnrment 11. 


if: 


A much larger quantity of a ſimilar mixture was | 
thrown into a red-hot crucible at intervals; and; 


when the whole had been ſucceſſively deſtagrated, 
the matter was kept in a ſtrong red-heat/ above an 


Hour, ſo as to be frequently in a ſtate of fuſion. The * 
alkali was found not to be quite in ſo jnild a ſtate as 2 


the preceding: ſo that inſtead of aequiring, it had 


loſt ſome of its fixed air by the ſubſequent# calcina- 5 7 
tion: for the firſt two or three drops of acid, added to 


_ a ſolution of it, ſcarce produced any efferveſcence - As 

the acid being firſt attracted by thoſe parts of the al- 

kali which had been rendered cauſtic by the W r | 
of their fixed air W 85 enen 


„ 01 8 r 


"4 FAY ; , 
. 5 4 p Yo 
a3 * 1 9 N 
S { 


Tos * 7 þ * N D 514. 1 350 5 5 5 


From theſe two 8 it appears tat from 


whatever ſubſtance the alkali obtains its fixed air, it 


 acquires-it at the inſtant & the deflagration. I was 
therefore naturally Jed to inquire what would be the 


ſtate of the alkaline baſis of nitre, after a deflagration 15 
produced by an inſlammable matter, which is not 


+ b * 
> = 


5 1 nee nr,” 
Fade ounces of dry powdered nitre a 


mixed with nearly an equal quantity of fine iron fil- 
ings; | The mixture was treated as in the preteding 
experiment, and was kept in the crucible an hour 
in a red-heat. After powdering the hard maſs, aer. : 


diflolving and filtering the ſaline part of it, it 


indeed found not to be perfectly cauſtic, e 8 


ſo. It rendered lime · water turbid 3 but a very ſmall 
quantity of fixed air in any fluid will: produgs that 


effect. On gradually adding diluted nitrous acid to 


2 quantity of the dried ſalt, a ſlight efferveſcence 


Al, ke lated fouls 6 quan, of fined 5 


2 28 bag WIS 


was produced hen the alkali began to approach to- 


wards a neutral ſtate.” The qu: arts air ap- 


peared, in different trials, to be 


eaſy to determine this matter accurately; and, beſides, 


about an sch 
or 1oth part of what is found to eee dne 
equal quantity of mild alkali. I did not indeed find it 


had reaſon to ſuſpect that a part of this fixed air had 
been attracted from the atmoſphere by the alkaline 


ſolution ; eſpecially during the time of its ſlouIy 4 
paſſing drop by drop, though the filtering paper, in” 


order to ſeparate it from the earth of the iron, which 
1 knew to be diſſolved in it, 1 therefore made the . 
following experiment. 

ny | £C 8 3 Ex- 


%, 


> > 
1 


/ 


\ 


390 Tax, APPEND *. 


1 


* ZR IM E ur a Fe ne 155 
A drach of nitre, begin 50 fall TIO Was 
E. with half a drachm of coarſe iron filings; and 


0 


7 


put into a ſmall crucible. As ſoon as the deflagra- 


tion began, half a drachm more of iron filings was 


* 


thrown' in; and when it was over, the red-het cru 
cible was plunged into a little veſſel of pure water. 
The ſalt was ſoon diſſolved, and the liquor was 


ſtrained as expeditiouſly as 'poſfible, © Though i it was 


+ found to contain a ſmall quantity of undecar d- 


ed nitre, it was pretty ftrongly alkaline. . On ads 


ding an acid to it, ſcarce any efferveſcence; was ex- 
aited. Leſi this cireumſtance might be owing. to 


its being largely . the acid was,made 
to predominate, and a little ſolution of green vitriol, | 


was added: but no. Pris 
Zinc was deflagra 


an blug was. precipitatel. 
with nitre in the ſame man- 


ner as the iron in the twor. laſt experiments, with. 


milar events. It may be proper juſt to menlion that 


 thealkalinefolutions of both theſe combinations were 


found to contain a portion of the metal diſſalved- in. 
each: for on adding a little more nitrous: acid to, 
them, aſter then had been (neutralized; and! then 
dropping in a little of the ſaturatad Pruſſian alkali; a 
ſenſible quantity of precipitate Was formed, of the 


colour e | 


 phltivelyho: 2 vitls wy man 26td'5 113 45) tis; we 13; of 

From the reſults of the two eee eee 
pared with thoſe of the tyro former (from which they 
"ac: o in _ ſubſtitution neo hotbed yep 


jut to obſerye that 
ee effer 


* 
% * 


ing with Acids, 3 


Li 1 * 7 — 2 dle 


F 
oj 


| alkali, faturated wa 35 


- 


The AG PLPTETN: Dr. 


bete S the-charcoal) it Gas 
evident that the fixed: airz!'with which the alkaline 


kw wt ie: ag the wry pin 8 | 
ments, acquires o dal portion v Nair, 
though it is — of both 
theſe cauſes, as the alka fr in the tw former The 
iron and zinc; though they contain'a fufße jene quay 
tity of inflaminable matic to carry off the roi ui 
from its baſis, can furniſh only a ye? ome Sap 
of mepbitie acid, or fixed dir; *to/Tapply its by 
whereas a large quantity of this Elte mentioned, Hd, 
as you have ſhown , may be expelled from charcoal 
merely by fire, in a heat greatly inferior to that which 
is excited in the deffagration of nitre; ies pufſion 
from which is, beſides, greatly "promoted by. what 
the ichymiſts term a double, affinity; that is; between 
the phlogiſton and nitroud acid on the one pait, and 
dhe alkali and wephitie acid on. the ek, or a 


$7 4 1 250 


1 may dars occaſion to refef to it hercafler, Till 
give the rationale of it more at large. eg a 
In the deflagration of nitre with egerevalz ah 
© coal is totaly and rapidly decompounded. 1 les phlo- 
giſton and mephitic acid are e ſuddently Jet 8 
their earthy! baſts, and from eath*dther. Phe pf 
giſton combines with the nitroũs Yeid} and italy 
Flies off With it in the form of Ahr, perhaps nes 
with arnoſpherical, air. Under th Pn 4 + ec — 
e "PRES ularly® "Tir the pteeefs for. 


5 pl 10 h er 
e pi; F bo 


- 280'2 Au. 1 Ne mo 775 11 
Ja : 1 8 3 $ 
** E . De” att 


. in eee Coins 1-re's 8 
5 IK N . 


- + 
; 5 * 


39 Tus APPEND IX. 


2 of altre, oſcapid the. inquiries of the chymiſts, 
till you detected it in the form of air. While the 
phlogiſton of the charcoal is thus let looſe, its whole 
maſs of fixed air, or mephitic-acid, being likewiſe 
ſuddenly diſengaged, but fill continuing in iti fixed flate, 
or that. of” @ concentrated acid, ruſbes into the, alkali 


12 deſerted by the nitrous, acid, and occupies its place; 


With it, it conſtitutes chat ſemi-neutral ſalt, or that 
combination of alkali and mephitic acid, denomi+ 
nated Mild Alkali, In ſhort, the caſe, is; perfectly 


parallel to chat of the deflagration of nitre with ſul- 


*phur., There too the phlogiſton flies off with the 
nitrous acid; and the vitriolic acid ( like the mephi- 
tic in the preceding caſe) ruſhes i into union with tje 
alkali; but conſtitutes with ĩt the perfect neutral ſalt, 
vitriolated tartar. , I have elſewhere ſhewn- [Obfer- 
vations, vol, II. p. 340, 352, and 387] that, on ac- 
count of the ſtrong affinity of the mephitic acid to 
atmoſpherical air, analkaline ſalt cannot be neutra- 
lized by it in that medium; though ĩt may be com- 
pletely neutralized by this acid, in fixed air, and 
poſſibly other media. The mild alkali is evidently 


in that particular ſtate in which the TR aſinitics | 
| balance eachother. 7 


Since the publication of my former U 1 1555 : | 


| not had the good fortune to accompliſh a' defidera- 


tum there hinted at, or to aſcertain the praQticabili- 
ty of obtaining the mephitic acid in the ſtate of a 
palpable and viſible fluig ;—or, in other words, of 
reducing fixed air, as. we can the nitrous and ſome 
other factitious airs, into the ſtate of a concentratad | 

or flrong acid ſpirit; and of being thereby enabled to 
impregnate water, &c. with it ad libitum. The other 

acid ſpirits are * united with a portion of 


k wes 4 r 


+> M $08 
* The neare! 


en wits neh of it is 15 fa L 


approach we-have made towards. condenſing the. Vas 7 


pour of the mephitic acid, is in the proceſs for the; art 
Fiat Pyrmont” water : but this can ſearcel) be the 
moſt concentrated ſtate in Which this acid is to be 
obtained. I have indeed ſhewn, 1 in the experi 


above referred to, how water may be made 10 ne 
denſe much larger quantities of i ur theſe proc elſes. 


do not ſolve the conditions of the problem. Theſe 
ftrong impregnations-are not effected US the famply 
acid, but are produced dy combining -Yigh,: a 


third body, that is, an alkaline ſalt, which..is News . 


 tralized by it. The following however, among 


conſiderations, ſill induce me 10 mit F chat 0 [nar . 


ject is not wholly himerical. Ti 7 11405 


That this acid can and does. ='% took but for 
a moment, in an uncombined and concentrated. ſtate 
15, 1 think, evident from cor 


£-© 44 


dering What muſß nes 


; ceſſarily paſs in the preceding proceſſes, w when. 1 


| P from one 7 to another; or fill b 


1 ation "of 1 


J. In this proceſs, when wie: phe oo) of. Epſom 
25 and ſalt of tartar are added together, there is un- 


val. H. page 


doubtedly an interval of time, a ſmall one indeed, in 


Which, while the witriolic acid . paſſes in_a di en 
and concentrated ſtate from the earth of ma · 
genſia to the alkali z the mephitic acid likewiſe moves 
from the alkali to the contiguous particles of earth, 
and in a ſtate equally ae, and poſſibly as ren. | 


centrated. If it aſſumed, even for a 10 its elaſtic 
or atrial form during its paſſage, i it mig ht 
that it ſhould exhibit ſome ſigns of its enlarged: bul bulk, 


be expeRied 


by] A omg intumeſcence of the liquor, in — 


; ba. | "y Yet 


Tak AP P E TOE FX = * 


Q 3 
> 
——_—_ 
— — 
3 


5 * var AF PENDIA. 


quence of its expanſion into jp bubbles e : 
x xamination but ho 
etimes app ied the mieroſcope to view 
what paſſes on bringing two contiguous. drops of 


J have fo 


readers fo ſrpiſe at, the mode of 


each folation into ntact, under my eye; or to ob- 
ferve the phenomena attending whe pan in,;2 
fmall tube nt certainly i in hopes of ſeeing either 
of the two acids in their paſſage; but to obſerve whes 
ther any bubbles were formed by the e * "Oy 
this occaſion. 'Tx never could Perceive.. 


ſeems. to ow as peaceably i into its new ba — as. 49465 2 


vittfolſc acid does into that which the wepbide acid 
has deſerted © i 7 


pad ver other Nals which induce mae to 

chifik” that ĩt may not be: an impractieable matter to 

obtain this acid, 2 or combined v With a ch 
| fmaller 2 of p gm than has hitherto been. ſeen 


+: > *% 


u Non, as you have had; reaſon 
to ſuppoſe, 1 8 pita, w ich voſatilizes he 
different ſpecies of air) and gives them their. per- 

| manentiy elaſtic quali „ we might accompli the 

rat | | ting this acid, by .dep 90 

it of that principle: ür! in che few tr fals which 


| have hitherto had an e to wake vich this = 


view, I have not face. wy 

To familiarize the Py A litile more to bis ige 2, 
1 need only mention the caſe of nitrous air, which 
is undoubtedly, the vapour « of one of. the ſtrongeſt 


mineral acid ſpitits ;—and'yet, had we philoſophers 


« 2809 


lived, and reaſoned, and I Wade our ex) criments up- 
air, or 


on it, in any other Dat than atmoſphe ric 
had we not had that Avid at hand to apply. te to it, we 
ſhould either not have confidered it as an acid—or, 


© 


ö "I 3 
. 2 F 
* J 9835 . 8 2 
1 5 . „ 
, ” + 5 $$; 7 
. ; 
W — . 5 
=; 22 
1 Wy, ALA 
Tur, 4 8 
„„ * * 4 
1 þ Bo 4 


ou ſhew in the preſent volume. (pa 
condenſe 2 105 25 : 59 = 


ald fen 


* * 


ue apable of 
. ae c Wo of j 15 A 1 ts 


as, by having oped the met od of of decompound- 


be # 


ing it, by n from it it, 1 5 to your, 985 
e 


Nba theo wg 1515 phfogifton ; ; we C wn ondeple 
and concentrate i it, 38 I f eech 400 in m firſt letter er 
| 10 ervations, 907 1. fo page Ih into 4 19 


4 Nor t [ee any rea n wh) "we. may not 


tron g nitrous f 


daten diſcove ſome ſubſtance, by means oof 285 5 


we may likewi e into q 
on 85 ile 0 e 1 5 5 0 an equal 
; £3 24H 54 8 { ie 


b &L AY Y: £ 44 at 
7 , Seat Mafing gham a e ee ods 
Juan 14, Pot” 14 „ R's Wu — 
3:3. 1345 We mat. tikey 115 . e aan; 174 4 Rt 34 


1 ; FYY 
TPP 1 PO t . e A Sa 5vy 4 5 2 


ki Mt: 779 | 105 9 E 7 T K R TW 4133+ 36 OG 


1 17 £1 LF Ins 32 Ze ad * Ig 


be pe mel, 2 Y PYR 51 11. mY 2 
pg to Hmnyphericat Ar. 


ö It 1 int W199! fg: VIS5 2 1301 0 * Se 109% 


| When a new theory is to be propoſei 
world, the author of iti advances it with: — 
when he brings im its train a number of facts and ex 
periments; the pbenbmenmd of which Can eaſilygvund- 
only; be ſolved by that hypotheſis: oſpeciatly.wheri 
no facts are known*that oppoſs'qr are 
ble with it. I propoſe the folldwinkkypotheliowith: 
ſome diffidence, becauſe I own 1 have not yet, 
through, want of, leiſure, and the unexpected diſſi- 
| culty.o che ſubjec, been. able ee 
CATH a1 of ; Gif 


, #4 iS 


8 Tur APPENDTX . | 


elle experiments i in proof oft e truth af it; 1 


t it by any other than probable dnalogical rea- 


ſoning aged on the defects of former theories, 


| ot be on bois new facts which ſeem ſtrongly to coun- 
tenance the preſent hypotheſis. | If it be juſt, it bas 
2 very near relation to.one of the pry intereſting 


objects of your inquiries 3 and would af ord almo | 
A demonſtrative proof of the truth. of; your theory, | 
concerning the conftituence of 3 pherica]. air, 
F-was led to form it, the difficulties which I long 
o perceived to PALS the received. hypotheſis with 
reſpect to that curious chymical pher o—the | 
e accenſion of Hembeg 5 Pyrophorus ; J and; 
lately by your diſcoveries relating to the nature of 
the atmoſphere. Whatever may become of the hy- 
potheſis, the facts to which it led are new, and 


the experiments may eaſily be made by any one. 


As I have no oxperimentum crucis to offer in ſup- Z 


port of this new theory, it will be proper firſt to 


give a ſhort account of 9 received hypotheſes on 
this ſubjeRt 3 and. to recite ſome of the objeQtions, 


which have occurred to me againſt it; as well as the 
reaſons which render this new * plauſible, at 


leaſt, in ſpeculation. 2 1 47 
."The lateſt and ableſt ide 5 philoſophers * 
have adopted the hypotheſis propoſed by Mr., du 


Suvigny in the Memoires de Mathematique and d- 
Phyſique, tom. III.] to account for the accenſion bf, 


the aluminous pyrophorus, on its being expoſed to 
— 0 explain this curious re a M. 


bl n ** he F &, 5 5 Ty. £ Fe * '% 
$f | G (1: 4. . #7 29 1 - 11 


larly h — . e 
„ in is valuable Dictionary, Art. rere ter 4 
dau 


yl i 1. 
* 7 8 3 74s; Mac 113 


M. du 


py fob? | + ” 2 Wiz 
bus r p. E N 5. K. Ps 
4 2 5 


du 8551955 juſtly obſerves. chet whe. viele BP, in 
the alum, . the calcination in the phial, leaves 


its earthy baſis, and unites with. the phlagi ton in the 


coal. By its union with this .inflammable m 
a part of i it is undoubtedly rendered volatile, a, 


hales partly under the form of volatile vitriolic rg | 


and partly in that of a blue ſulphureous. flame; while | 


another part of it combines likewiſe with the; phlp- 
gitter, farming a real fulphur, ot an earthy bear ſal· 


phuris; in which the ſulphur is prote 


fire by the earth with, which it is 3 a the | 
particles of which remain every where imd 7 


with thoſe of the powder. 1 5 


W. ** * 7 


„Thus far M. du Suvigny 1 by ts 


ning but he proceeds further, and ſuppoſer, that, 


and by a juſt chymical analyſis of the 5 | 


at the end of the proceſs, a part of the vitriolic 2 5 


is left, in a diſengaged, or uncombined ſtate, and highly 
concentrated. In this Rate, it is well known that 


this acid attracts moiſture, and at the ſame time ge- 


nerates a conſiderable degree of heat. When the 


pyrophorus therefore, is expoſed to the air, he again 


d, by the heat thus generated, ſets fire 


ſuppoſes that this diſengaged and concentrated acid 


ſuddenly attracts the watery particles ſloating in the 
atmoſphere, 


to the ſulphur and other inflammable matter con- 


tiained in the powder. His hypotheſis appears to be 
confirmed by this eircumſtance; — that a-pyropharus; 
whic ch is Lack i in kindling, will ſoon take ſire on 


breathi x upon it, or placing it on amoiſt. een | 


tigny extends; the ſame; reaſoning to the 


| ſeveral ot er fyrophori which he diſcovered,..ſimilat 
to that of alum ;, particularly to thoſe which are 
made. Dy: ſubtirating vitriolated | tartar, Ghauber's _ 


. It ; 
3 * 2 7 
s 2 


ERA 2 4 
3 L 4 


falt, and o. 4 ian Take with Setllke, ay, 
br alkaline baſes, in the room of alum,” 
Ik M. du Suvighy's hypotheſis were juſt, there 
could be no room for propoſing a different theory to 
explain the phenomenon : : but, waving other ob- 
jections— that it is erroneous in one very eſſential 
particular, will "appear: evident from the Tollowing 
obferydtion, 1 5 5 
From numerous oxperimints which \ Have made, 
ir appears that compounds of all the claſſes of pyro< 
pbori above mentioned, differing from them in no 
other particular, than that rhey did not contain any 
vitriolic acid, kindle as readily, on being expoſed to 
the air, as thoſe which have been impregnated with 
that principle. The detail of theſe experiments, by 
which a new gyrophorus was produced, of the ſame 
genus however with the preceding, would lead me 
into too wide a field. For the preſent therefore, the 
reader muſt give me credit for the aſſertion; the 
proof of which mat be reſerved to ſome other oc- 
ö caſion. . 5 5 
Hllaving diſcovered that ee Pyropborui 
(under which general title I include all M. du Su- 
'vigny's pyrophori, which are undoubtedly kindled on 
the ſame principle) was not kindled by moiſture, 
attracted by the vitriolig acid, at leaſt; your theory 
of the conſtituence of atmoſpherical air naturally at- 
trated my attention towards the nitrous acid in it, 
. (which from your experiments how appears to be one 
of the principal conſtituent parts of it) as thg p obable. 
agent in the production of this'phenomtnts Tbe 
ſtrong affinity which this acid has with bl Hen, 
and the heat, and even flame, which it is known 
. 1 with certain inflammable — ſhewed 
8 that 


„ + "6x ue i -w 
This gh R Ps. 


wot laing 9 


that it wa was equal! to the effect: and * NOW, en- 
«cluded the vitriolic acid from the competition, or 
from having any eſſential concern in this buſineſs, = 

problem ſeemed to be reduced to this iſlue: either 
the pyrophorus is kindled by moiſture attracted by ſome : 


of the other ingredients which compele, i it; —ar it 1 


has the power « of decompounding atmoſpherical air, by 
ſucddenly attracting its nitrous acid, and thereby 
generating a heat ſufficient to kindle the ohlogiſtic 
matter contained in it. There appeared ſomething 
very plauſible in this idea, — J conſidered that 
you produce the pureſt-reſpirable air with, this very - 
acid combined with other principles; and that this 
as well as common air, is diminiſhed; and probably 
in part decompounded,, in a; varidly. of phlogiſtic 
proceſſes, It then, the nitrous acid, as a conſtituent 
te of air, were the cauſe. of tho accenſion, 1 
aal thata ſomewhat imper mper fe pyrophorus ought 
tly to take fire on the addition of ſpirit of nitre. 
la ages of this idea I have made ſeveral expeti · 
ments; and though they cannot be ſaid. to be detifive 
| * this queſtion, the relation of them may furniſh 
5 ſome amuſement to the curious; and poſfibly con- 
vey ſome uſefi information to the chymiſt and ad bt 


3 


| e Re 


; : 1 ; Ja, © 5 wi F 8 ha * ) * 
: F „„ „„ IF > A853 6#  4f 43 
7 2 5 ; : v3 * 7 
* * A1 13 F A * 8 34 4 Ia 4 
N FE a - 
r RIMENT * 
4 Tay. 4 #7 : N 1 1 11 


** 


1 1 Heret ſome of Homberg s Prophet, 0 wich : 
: ale and charcoal) deſigning to keep it, for ſome 
time, in 2 phial looſely ſtopped, till it ſhould, jufl 
lofe its power of kindlin ng ſponrancouſly, ;, - and the 
| propofing to try 7 the effe of the nitrous acid upon it. 
If firſt part of my OW” was n oh 3 

phial' 


| phial's 3 concking whille 5 it was a cooling. 
Having ſaved the powder however i in another phial, 
1 found, on expoſing 1 it to the air, that it would not 
Eindle, "but barely grow warm. Having therefore 
put a ſmall quantity of it on a piece of paper, I drop- 
ped a little of Glauber's ſpirit of nitre upon it ; every 
drop of which, whien it' reached the powder, in- 
ſtantly converted the Ld on 1 it 5 into a 


| Mention coal. 


8 £ 18 


11 134 


—_ 


! 


Bxvnnimnnr VI. 1 
. 1 * IN A 


ling alcliteg! ſome Glauber's' Gale in an iron . 
ladle; a quantity of it was mixed with about half 
its weight of charcoal, and it was again calcined, as 
above, ina lon phial placed in a crucible, and ſur- 

' rounded with ſand. The firſt part of the powder 
that was poured out ſcarce grew ſenſibly warm, on 
expoſure to the air; but on dropping ſpirit of nitre 
upon it, it not only was kindled inftantly as before, 
wherever the ſpirit fell, but likewiſe deflagrated ii in 
a violent manner. This additional phenomenon was 
produced by the cubic nitre, extemporaneouſly formed 
by the combination of the nitrous acid with the foſſil 

alkali. The next portion acquired ſome heat, in 
the air; but did not kindle till ſpirit of nitre was ad- 
ded. The remainder of the powder, which ad- 
| hered to the bottom of the phial, and which had 
been ſubjected to a greater degree of heat, having 
been looſened by means of a wire, and poured out, 
kindled and Alightly deflagrated fpontaneouſy, after 
having been expoſed to the air about two minutes. 
Tube gradation in the Appearances exhibited by : 
. e prion of the ſame Fer, ſeems to 
Rr 


; - * . "FO 3 
— 4 = / Dr NY oP 
8 X | F 4 $3 8 1 > * 
F N , : ” hs * ak 
by , 5 < 2 3 8 . 4 * 
W Kt: ## 3 . 
V FT. . , 5 £. * 25 
8 : > as 3 
HE I — A. N 1I1I·˙ 
8th 7 5 Fa 
HEY * * - . 
2 , % . 1 F 
5 "ARS 
5 
5 8 


4 juſtify a ſuſpicion FW Fi FRE oh the lations | 
produced by the ſame cauſe as that of the two firſt. 
The firſt portion, which had not been ſufficiently 
calcined in the upper part of the phial, was not, 
we may ſuppoſe, in a condition to decompound the 
air, or attract ff? nitrous acid, ſo as to become 
tolerably warm; but on applying to it concentrated 
Nitrous acid, it was kindled. The next portion, 
which had ſuſtained a greater degree of heat, was 
rendered capable of acting upon the nitrous acid in 
the air, ſo far as to become rather hot; but till 
could not be kindled without the rng nitrous 
acid: whereas that part of the powder which was at 
the bottom of the phial, was kindled without the af- 
ſiſtance of ſpirit of nitre, and on the mere contact of 
the air; from which we wy e that i it TOE 
ly attracted that acid. | 
| "Wiſhing to repeat old diverſify. theſe experiments, 5 
1 by having it in my power to prepare, as it were, 
eutemporantouſy, an impenfect pyrophorus which 
might approach as near to a perfect one as poſſible, 
without however actually kindling on the contact of 
air, the idea of the following eaſy and expeditious 
method of executing the proceſs, in a tobacco-pipe, 
occurred to me. I ſhall here exemplify the uſe of this 
17 commodious apparatus, by firſt deſeribing the pro- 
ceſs at length, and relating the appearances as they 
occur in preparing A pyrophorus of the aluminous 
kind (improved by the addition of a little alkaline 
ſalt) which will kindle ſpontaneouſly ; only obſerv- 
ing that when I choſe to render it imperfect, I 
ſtiortened conſiderably the time of caleination; and 
that when 1 RE a ſomewhat larger quanthy, than 
uy Snag * C 


4% | Tur: AIPIPIEN Dam. 


could be contained in the bow of —— 4 


1 made 1 e ſeal eretibioanith the ſame b 


# = 


Eur VII. 


181 half or bees dan of the ber! of "ol : 


: -c0-pipe with a mixture conſiſting; of two parts of 
alum, | previouſly calcined:in:a red: heat, and of 


;powdered charcoal and ſalt of tartar each one part; 
Preſſing the matter down ſlightly, and filling the re- 


mainder of the bowl with ſine ſand. As ſoon as the 


powder becomes hot, the ſand lying over it is put | 


into a ſtate of ebullition, Which generally continues 
ſeveral minutes. This appearance ſeems, to proceed 


partly from the vitriolic: acid in the alum leaving 


its earth and expelling Sxed air from Weallalt; 
while another part of it is poſſibly converted into 
your vitriolic acid air. This phenomenen is ſucceeded 
by the appearance of a blue ſulphureous flame, pro- 


.ceeding from the combination of the ſame acid with 


che pblagiſton of the coal, and yyhieh continues about 


ten minutes or a quarter of an bour. After it 


ceaſes, no other remarkable appearance preſents itſelf, 


The matter is now to be kept in a redc heat twenty 
minutes, or half an hour; or it may continue there 


two hours lorger, if the operator pleaſes, without 
any injury to the pyrophorus. The pipe being taken 


out of the fire, the matter is knocked; out of it as 
ſoon as it becomes cool, and generally, preryvſaen | 


. afterwards takes fire ſpontaneouſly, 


.L have deſeribed this familiar apparatus : * pro- 
ceſs thus minutely for the/benefit:of thoſe, /o may 
wviſh to proſecute experiments of this kind. - It is 
| particularly commodious for trying the effects of 

f 1 | various 


”o_ 


Tub A EDI K. 16 % 


vob begebe in ſmall quantities, and in an 
expeditious manner. It is not ſubject to the acci- 
dents to Which glaſs is liable; and experiments may 
be made with it, with a very light degree of atten- 
tion, and with ſcarce any interruption to other bu- 
ſineſs. With this apparatus I have made numerous 
trials with equal facility and expedition. The re- 
ſults of ſuch of them as mote immediately relate to 


the preſent ſubject, may | be ce in the follow 


5 ing 9 


- 
1 83 1 N 4x" oy 
- 4 # 


2 * E ” 
* 
1 1 


55 "EXPERIMENT N. 


Aeg ixedforne dry powdered care ich 
doable and fometimes treble its weight of ET 
green, or white vitriols, previoufly calcined; E- 
the addition of ſome ſalt of tartar ;—or makin 
- mixture of charcoal with equal or double its nil 
of calcined vitriolated tartar, or Glauber's ſalt ;— 


eyery one of theſe different compounds (all of which | 


would have, become \perfz27 pyrophori under Proper 
treatment, or had they undergone a longer calcina- 
tion). having been calcined in the tobacco-pipe, in 
the manner above deferibed, only about ten minutes 


or * — uarter of an hour, were inſtantly kindled. 0 on 


the addition of ſpirit of nitre. The fame effect was 
produced on pyrophori perfectly analo "c 


acid, or a ſcarce: perceptible portion of that prin- 
ciple.—I. mention only as a matter of amuſement 


that, on putting a little oil of turpentine on the 


paper or card on which any. of theſe imper felt pyro- 
phori were placed, a ſingle drop, or two, of Glauber 8 
Fpirit of nitre inſtantly produced a flame. 

D d 2 As 


| 8 to the pre- 
ceding, except that they did not contain any "vitriolic . 


LPPENDIX. 


2 4% "Tus Al 

-. rea 8: it- might be ſuf zxed that the nitrous 304 
4 kindled the mere charcoal, in the preceding experi- 
ments, on the ſame principle on-which it produces 
a flame when poured on certain eflential oils, or on 
other TW when uſed in conjuction with the vitrio- 
lie e L made the following ee 


* 7} RS, 3 
9 5 „ 7 1 \ 
* 7 3 . o 


Exenxinant. IX. 


8 * 
„„ % 
. 


81 e to a ſtrong red-heat, . an ae - 
or more, ſome powdered charcoal, alone, covered 
with a layer of ſand, as in the preceding experi- 
ments. On adding nitrous acid to it when it was 

cool, ſcarce any viſible commotion was produced, 

or any heat, or other ſenſible effect, except the ap- 
pearance of ſome red fumes, qecaſioned wa ”w pro- | 
duQion 2 e nion M ey 


KN II r Mo 


1 powdered. charcoal was 1 into A 8 
with concentrated vitriolic acid, and treated as 
above. Though 1 foreſaw the event, I made the 
experiment, in /conſequence of M N du Suvigny's 
| having aſſerted, towards the end of his Memoir, that 
this e eee treated i in the common manner ſor 
producing a pyrophorus, became hot on being ex- 
poſed to the air on a piece of moiſt paper. On cal- ; 
eining it above an hour, the charcoal was found to 

be as little affected on the addition of nitrous acid as 
in the preceding experiment. On diverſifying the 
proceſs, by withdrawing the pipe from the fire even 
before it had remained there long enough to acquire 

a — 1 nnd * the x whole of the 5 


4 4 


3 


28 - 1 
REP * 
>. +3 
3 6 
_ 5 
Wh "20D I 
O's IS: | 
= 5 , bs ; 
- — 5 12 5 
2 f : 
* i | 
3 * f : 
a N 8 
- 
CA Sa” 
B 
; # 5 Hs 
0 2 . "Mi 
l k. * 1 * ; a 
* I a 1 8 


; acid had * pd. ieee eee the: . 
poder was afterwards infuſed, did not produce the f . 
Fo leaſt change in the colour of an infuſion of litmus. *' 
Other methods of proſecuting the preſent i ing quiry? . 
have occurred to me .- had ſo little leiſure 
to inveſtigate the ſubject, ſince I firſt attended to it, 
that I have not been able to ſatisfy myſelf with re- 
pect to it. I will however WOE mention , le of 
theſe methods. e 1 N 
I ſuppoſed that if the „ e 
1 nitrous acid in the air, it might poſſibly exhibit ſigns \ 
of the preſence of that acid, after having been xn 
bad for ſdme time either to the open air, or to a 
given quantity of air contained in an inverted recei-- „ 
ver ; —in ſhort, that it might attract and detain this ' © . 
acid, in ſome ſuch manner as the matrices, % nisse. 
beds, attract and lay hold of it in the common manu- 25 
factories of nitre. I have ſometimes thought that 1 
I have ſucceeded ; but my few and imperfect male 25 
do not enable me to ſpeak with confidence on this 1 
ſubject. The pyropborus, though it dots: not ns? 
fire under a doſe inverted receiver, always di 
niſtes the included air conſiderably, if it does not' _ 
| | | drcampaund i it. The queſtion. is, which of the prin nk 
e ciples that conſtitute air (ſuppoſing i it not to be dim: 
155 niſhed in its whole ſubſtance) is it, that is thus r: 
NF duced, in this and other diminutions, from its elaſ. \ 
 M tie and expanded, to a non-elaſtic and condenſed '_ _ 
1 ſtate —Indeed the method aboys indicated ſeems to 5 55 „ 
be attended with theſe difſiculties;—If I expoſe a © 
perfect pyrophorus to the air, it kindles, and te 
ſuppoſed nitrous acid muſt be diffipated : and the W 
ſuppoſed nitrous ſulphur, formed by its ſudden com- 1 
NP ries the. CES TE in the coal, muſt be 5 
erte D 3 imme- 


1 


theory, as they may thereby be incitec te renew! 


456. r Dx. 


9 barnt woe defiroybly/ in» eee 


its formation. On the other hand, if: I Ipurpbſely 
make the py! 


IS 4 


and detain its nitrous 


modes of inveſtigation, blen d have not — : 
yet had Eager to ne an apa erer 


decide. 


On the . 1 chink chat this; at heat" is ds | 
_tain;;—that M. du Suvigny's hypotheſis does not 


_—_— for the phenomenon :: and it will, be of uſe 
to philoſophers to be appriſed of the defects of his 


the inquiry into the true cauſe of ſo ſingular an ap. 
pearance as the Taman. on mate. e 


tac of r.. 


* 


As my conjectures on the betet cubjed e 
part of their cradibility or weight from: the objections 
which I have made to- M.) duiSdvigny's theory, it! 


will be neceſſary, before I terminate this paper, ta 


mperfets;'. I can'ſcarce expect g 
that it will de able todecompound am neee . 


take particular notice of a ſeemingly very weighty" 1 


objection, already alluded my . op bann mt 


the preſent hypotheſis. 
It may be objected, 


„ 


and 1 1005 cattafinly . Sg: 


e eech is lack in kindling, will readi-- 


ly take ſire on being placed on a piece of dam 


papers: 


or wilkfometimes inſtantly. kindle on breathing upon 


it. To theſe obſervations I may add that; ori drops: 


ping or gradually ſcattering- a pimb of the powder 


over a baſon of water many of the particles will be 


ſeen to take fire, under the form of ſmall red ſparæe, 
on their firſt coming into contact with the water. 
Theſe appearances, it may be alledged; (granting! _ | 


even _ truth e ent the preſene of 
i 1 vitriolie 


% 
ad 


{ 
* 


- enters inte its compoſition®,” and which may be 
© : ſuffitient to ſet fre to theinflaninable* — 08 


Ge | N likewife'ts! thiow ſome - 
om this part of N The 
made with portions of the ſame 
kindle, when lai 


| derately dry, in leſs time than a minute; and. 
\ | ſometimes: not at all, unleſs it were breathed upon. 
: EG . ; [ ; " F708 + 8 5 1 ; 3 by 
% d, 


7 N eee e „ 3 


a on 4 pieve of 


OE — Theinftant that 4 ſeams within 
| ſeven or eight inches of it, it kindled-. | 
= = Some of the: ſame . was poure 
; piece of block tin, pla 
an the ſame fite. In less than 5 — + 


*M. tm ay io ifndef 
| h heavier at the 
er ſeemns to countthance the 
155 iſe. After it has been burnt indepd 
| ion of weight; the greateſt part of wh 


4 
5 # 2 
1 ' 
L * 

5 bs bs 
& Is * 
Ti * 5 * 
4 5 3 

< + 

* * 3 

* oP 3 
<<< at 3 * "MT" 


P 


7 


eini- 


[Urs — lot ns oth 


It may;he,ſaid; however, that the _ 7 
attract moiſture with more eb he than the kabel 
and drieft ca alkali z and; that it was expoſed to. 


a. current of air — even in this warm and dry 
ſituation, might contain, and part with, a ſufficient 

quantity of humidity to kindle it.—But though I 
guarded another portion of the pyrophorus from this 
current, by ſcreening it behind. and on each fide. 
with broad vow wh ig. it 99% 8 as ee 5 
ee ene r 


1 P % 
So 9? — * ; 


k ; we irffys7 4 1 # 


TE. Re. « . p * 5 £ 5 
* 1. p # * 5 8 5 3 oF * 4 * i : 
EN EAN T xn 3 
1 7 2 
8 2 5 . „ . 3 270 ES s . $4 
x 3 23 1 ; 2 12 9 
2 


* 
* ** ks 


A chick and flat pied of ids, after SEAL, 
1 was ſuffered to cool till it would no longer 
kindle, or even fenſibly affect ſome grains of gun- 
powder, or dry flowers of ſulphur ſprinkled upon 
it. On dropping a little of the pyrophorus upon it. 
it was kindled as ſoon as it touched it. Freſh quan- 
tities were dropped upon it at intervals, with the 
ſame effect; and when the iron had even loſt. ſo 
much of its heat, that I could keep my finger upon 
it three or four ſeconds without pain, the pyrophorus 
fill took fire the inſtant that it touched it. 

In this experiment, moiſture can ſcarce be thought 
b have produced: the accenſion of the pxrophorus, 
though it undoubtedly promotes that effect in the 
common temperature of the atmoſphere. In that 
| Emperiture, -bumidiry may even be necelſary, at 


53 51% 


. © . 
30 18 


alt to b Wi the \proceſs-of ignition. | The 67 i 


Lanaslioen . 


_e 


/ 


* e an 8 
Per fecilß ary; flats: for 


rophorus, may. not double to act on each n a | 


numerous inſtances of hy i a Susie 68 to 


exert the moſt violent action on each other, by the 
intervention of humidity; but which. remain per- 
fectly at reſt, it they are in a, dry ſiate In this 


laſt experiment, heat appears to have produd the 
ſudden decompoſition, or at leaſt the accenſion f 


the pyrophorus, without the conturrence of 
ure, though the heat was greatly inferior to 


that which! is abſolutely neceſſary to produce the.ig-) | 


nition of common or vitriolic ſulpbur. On this ac 
count may we not plauſibly enough aſeribe the phe- 


nomenon to the extemporaneous production of Aa 


ſuppoſed ill more. Og Onan; a nitrous 
ulpbur 3 apo 1 


; 375 „ 15771 1 
Ze 


On the hols, 3 the experiments which: 1 
have made on this ſubject, it appears to me that the 


pyrophorus owes its ſingular property to its dan: - 


combination of earth or alkali with phlogiſton: th 


vitriolic acid, when preſent, only — — 5 


creaſing or diminiſbing the effect, according to cir- 
cumſtances. In the proceſs. of calcination, the earth 
or alkaline principle is not merely mixed, but actual- 


ly, tough looſely, combined with the phlogiſtic prin= 


 ciple. of the coal; ſo that the pyrophorus, gonſider- 
ing it in its moſt ſimple ſtate, is only a perle gig dry. | 
— phlogiflicated alkali or earth. On theſe data, the phe- 
nomena may be explained in the two following 
manners; with reſpect particularly t to the inſluenoe 


of moi tur and heat, upon the pyrophorus... u ad en 


Suppoſing either the alkaline or earth y principle 
to have a n aoity to water than to the _—_ 


ia oe 


* 


4 ru ED 
5 pitomwidewhicheſthevof choncis un 


— — 4 5 
e iey,. ail cherebyiſer che phlogiftis principle at 
_ liberty; whichn may inaiis curnz attract, ant b V! 
prog ther ſuppoſeda agvrar acid its tony afffu 
is wen known —ofy: if the reader rel 
100 this „the inammable matter may. 
betkindled; mare in conſequence of the hegt pros 
dure i by the c inntten of the ae Ge. wien! 
moiſtures :I the'!laft) experiment, the pyrophoꝰ - 
rus, aceording to myxkesryę is firſt decompounded! = 
by heut alen which ſuddenly diſengages its: phlv. 
giſtic ptineiple, anch the; ſamo Tenſtquertces follows; 
that is the phlogiſtenz whlehl is cinꝰ a peculiarly” 7 
a  atcenfible- ſtute? generates fire by! commenſtruating 
wien the acid:aforefaid;- and forming a nĩtrous ſul- 
phur :—or, if the reader ſtill prefers a different ec“ 
planatibn, it is ſunply ſet on fire by tlie warm iron; 
or by mere 'commutnunitation« with'' a+ heated 047. | 
| Diane herum? ; 
| Wim cle queſtion Limeſt takt leave of th dub ; 
je& for the preſent; not however without reealting 
the reader's attentiom ta your remarkiþle diſcoveries 
reſpecting the! nierbus acid; and your produRion 
of! the pureſt air "_ meanb. 8 ; 
facts, inn conjuti ; 
| Teens, and other which Fonts ſees trongly 


nee 3 
which combines 
ance to be kindled ( 


n0-{ulptniry- a very  unpromifing ſubs . 5 
TT in ſuch a of heat 30 | 
may be 2 to. be'e on tlis combination © gere wi 


93 © * Y *% > 
— . * 
, 
> „ 78 


of 
* 
a 
— 
1 
£ 


* 
- 
4 
p 
4, 
f 
0 


* 


the preſent inquiry. I ſubmit the whole, ak 1 


ever, merely as an hypotheſis, ſubſtituted in the 
room of a former, which theſe experiments prous to 
be defective. VVV 


5 * | 5 a 2 5 k 5 * | 3 * 


Je, Wali Bower, 


8 i : t 


7 * 4 2 ; . 
* 4 * 4 
A # a 4 FAS Oy + 1 2 1 
, | 5 ; * "OS 1 
; ; -. 


* £ 7 4 4 4 9 4 
* + a , 
% 0 + ks 
* 7 25 * 
p 4 4 I 
p 6 4 5 
; * * N 1 ; a "I 
$f on N ; 
4 
A 5 x * 2 N 932 : 4 #4 - 
f p * Fa 


1 4 a , * 4 
, : 1 
- 5 * — 
ro 4 8 
2 of 4 ; J * 1 . 4 * 
, ; 4 
Z * hag — 
4 . 
. 0 0 < 
; Fi ; — 1 hy 4 : 5 i 
4 F ! ; [ . : 
© 2 
$ I 1 » 
# — 4 4 
f * * 1 


. : A f * . 13 


> * 
8 — Ports * 
4 4 1 3 
3 14 * * 
. * 7 — 
g 4 © 
j - Py 4 o + n by 1 75 
ed 4 
, £ 4 A . : » 
* p 
„ 4 1 * p ; 
F 8 
- 
7 * 
* 
0 o * ; # 
» 
- . f * _ 
* 
U — 
- 1 * 4 . Ry 
b. 8 — 
7 
* : . 
0 F Ll ; 
. - & 
5 — - 
* 
x 
* 
2 
# * x * 4 - * 
« s * * 4 
” A 4 + 
* 1 . 
Fn 1 ; N + 
4 — \ 
o ? i * * 
» . 1 - $ b 
* | 4 7 
» 8 * 
* * . 4 
” 
4 P N 
1 5 SY f 


0 1 
* . ; - Ge 
4 # + * Y F 5 - 3 
2 £ > * ; 
2 * 8 
> 3 - 4 
„ * 8 4 1 
1 7 
| 1 
” 4 1 - 
_ — 4 FE 
* 
- 7 3 
* , 
„ ; 
* 7 * 90 1 — * 
- * ; * 
* I's 
$7 
7 7 «+ p 
5 2 
4 > 
" * — * 5 
4 = 
* 5 0 
* f F 
* * 2 


* oth 4 * 
: ; + 
* 
# 
W $ 
1 . Bl * 
on <3 Ar 
T2 = 
#" 
TR SY S : 
* 2% * 
= ö 05 7 


f 

1 45 

. 3 * 
<7 : 

F 
„% I 

2 

\ 5 > 
E- ; 


g 0 S 
+ LD 
. * y E 
: 
\ * 4 
5 N = 
% 


4 
Fi 
05 
— * 
K 
q 
* - £ 
Ks £ 
? - 
4 
+ - - 
* 2 
Fl 
* 
A © 
* * 
* 
— 
* ; 
at 
* * 
- 
# 9 
: 
* - 
7 
2 7 
- 7 
. * 
3 
3 hi 
* 
* 
— 7 
- - * 


% P 0 
* * 2 
„ 
* 
, - 
* : 
" 4 7 
<6 * # 
1.5 £4 
* x 
I 
- ww 
- = £7 — 
9 % 
- _ * — 
” 1 3 : 
- p WK 
c 4 
* % - * 
- Y 7 
; * 3 
@ 


* 


N . p 5 
17 N 0 = A s T f ; 
„ 8 TI . & l ; Ty ve 4 * * 2 2. / H E ms + 
; 0-5 + 38-> 27 2 4 2 * 1 1 4 * a $. * . : ; +. a oy" : 9 45 v 


* 
* 
U * - * 
* 89 #> n 4 4 7 5 N ** * * * - 1 Þ 75 
3 * * a Hf tf $47 % 
0 77 v 
* 


6 


CI DS, air 


x 


Acid airs, their 


o 


* F- # \F% 
4 3 F Ki 8 + LY { 
PR 1 « & 8 # 4 3 is $i 
W924 91 * * * „ 


Air, produced in making ſpirit of 


_ each other, 301; the non-prod 


_  Alkalis, cauſtic, abſorbing nitrous 


ſuddenly app 


"4 


. Fntimony,: air from it, 2. 


| Apparatus, deſcribedl, 1. Dy 
Anna regia, a new ſort of it, 219; air from it, 2. 
oed, fixed air from them 5 


. 


#> 


* 4 " 
* 7 ; , . 


A ** 1 * 


% 


&C. &c. -386 | 


7 


2 
* 7.” „ ? A 
a o 4 — ; 
> 55 1 
* n * 
* 48 4 a +5 0 p d 
ba 3 2 A 
« 4 FX ; 
* 4 — 
* o & ” 8 
* 3 ; , 
# PP ©2S% «© 4 * « « - £ 
« , 


* 77 
* 5 
* Gs * 
- £ W 
j 
* * 
* * * 
=y — 
. 
p / 
— 
4 - 
. 7 
{4 
8 = 
* 
I * — 
\ ” 
8 - 1 8 
8 4 7 
* 1 
po . 


2: * * ES Fg SY 8 A "us * 7 4 * % f 1 \ * T ; | 
| SES 3 EN Rs) 42 ; 8 7 2 * „ a "£ x . 
„ 99 A * * . 4 * 2 44 — ; 1 3 K A 42 : F I St 1 


from metals diſſolved in a mixture of ben, 

1713 8 with nitrous va I 
ifferent kinds ſaturating alkaline air, 

| ture of different kinds of it that have no agien pon 

- circumſtances, 325 ; quantity of it produced by beat 


., duced by the ſolution of any ſubſtance in them, 331. 
/ Alkaline air, ſaturated with the acid airs, 291. | 75 + 


Biſmuth, air from it, 26, ff 
Blood, the uſe of it, 55, various opinions concerning the _ © 


Bladder, blood n air through 
_ diminiſhed in it, 1506. 
e 2 EWA FO IE RES 1 


me 8 3 2 i 1 * 1 15 N "A 
EC; 3.2 3 v . 
2 44 n 1 - 1 Ep * * «© F 1 
3 4 2 ; 5 4 
K . * 9 


4 ** 
21 * * + 


1 


) : ; . 
. 1 ; 


pour, 217. 


9 
XY 


. n 5 ; #54 is 4 


7 „ 3.24 * 

C ] a my * . 
* $3 2 2 * 

nitre, 235 the mix- 


1 


uction of it in various 


— * 3 
n of the 
* : 4 
x ** > POE ET 2 A EY 25 
: 8 * 8 * 3 7 % 
* 3 5 'S 1 # 2 x oh. 8; > : 


air, 117; no air pro- 


N. 1 3 


4 735 . 3 WEI 
BEA, n n 3 * 29 3 0 
Cn 5 4 Wo fs OT "25 £ OM 1 
2 * $ = * * 3 * * WE 7 4 4% 
* - Ts 
* * 


5 
2 
[7 


\ * 
* 


$ * 


< * 


5 od f p : 
of ot HR. 4% P 
Altre, „ 


„ Hh e IS Eo$-6 {NE f PL 
= . + 


5 : ; 7, _- 


LD 


* 


LE 


. — b . 
12 2 be. 4 3 ” 7 I * 
N 2. 87 33 o . 2 
q P : 
n £4 „ #7 i} , 
© a o W i . . * % 


* 2 Yu 4 5 9 a 5 a 8 .' 
* 1 A 1 . & 1 5 48 
» *s " 
5 - * 3 . 4 I g P : 
; FA 6-1 ; A 


OM 
%— 3 d 2 


* 5 "_ 
* , #/ * 
/ * 
Ft . 
4 ** ; 1 * 
1 
. 
. * 4 1 
2 - Fo 4 
. 
1 
2 we 3+ 
* 3 [ - — 
I „ F 7 


1 : 4 
* A 4 15 7 4 * * 
8 * 1 { * 4 3/7 4 i 
28 ** : 1 * $ ON "WE 3 
. N fo, * 1. % 
*, . 7 ” : , 
— 9 - * * 5 7 
ol 4 : N 1 


5 
fi s 
£5 
* 
7 
* 
* 
5 
* 
„ 
+ 
— — 4 . y 
22 
5 * 
IL 
- 
: 
; 
"x 
B 


Tu [NDEX. 


PP ern wat wht 2 3 mths e 
NN ee x 1 * * 


Fr 8 * 
7 4 v7 as ys Ry ahi 7 5 - 
- ; . - 
* 
C. g | 
- 
* 
* * 


5 Mr. his opinion ils oſe of the blood, PIE 4 

EE us of nitre, quality of the * produced in making | 

| | * 339. 

* | Common a gir, affected by oilcof rorpenijel, 92 ; by ſpirit 

5 of wine, 98; by ether, 99; miſcellaneous experiments | 

relating to it, 100,; how affected by ſpirit of nitre, ib, ; . ; 
by ſalt water, 16.; confined in the hollow parts * . 5 


1 plants, 102. 
. e Us Ds air r from i it t by 1 1 0 of Sc e 10. 


0 * 
1 58 , © 4 *% ; & 
4 1 1 ” 34 © SA & 44 2 : . $ * 2 b. ES * 7 4 > 5 wy 


„ 
* £'*. 6 
$5 I, 4 
. * 13 1 „ 
* 


Z 


. 1 Dybig bene air, 7 a gr : 3 
* f 1441 3\ ham earcby fabliances, 15 545 che quantity oſ ſpirit - 
of nitreinit, 4; miſcellaneous:experiments-relaving 
 «toit, 85 made in large quantities, is. j che ie matter 
-,adepofited* by ĩt —— gh 19 AT Pt to 
_1Rthe.growth of plants, g %ũ½ytwunrP 
. r of nitrous acid, __ F658 (4.3? Mo $3947 - 


E | : Os 1 2 ied : . A bs | 
1 Earthy 8 air from wem by get ege n. 5 
6 Earthen ware, air from i it by f mink -nttre 5 
Fa: Fe. taken in vitriohic a gw wi FS 
5 Ether, ow it-affetts „ eee n wal us 
3 „ nn impregns with n ty vapour, 21 
- + 1hlack ſubſtance pro uced by boikin e wie 
acid, 284. 5 r 
. of Mr. uus, 8 0 i ? 
1 | 


* : * 4 „ 
1 4 % ; % F 1 
1 5 -J * * * < " 4 4 "AM A * a; 5 * 15 f 2 


IE 1 - 
* ; 7 


"Fife, | im iſton to water, 5 
. S te bete if . 
; affects the growth of plants, 306 ; and. the co- 
5 5 * of roſe lea Fe, how, plante grow in water 5 I 
| N ' impregnated with it, 320 3 a modißcat jon ot the n: 
trous acid, 349; Mr. Henry”: J experiments relating to 
it, 369 ; attracted by other air paſſing throu = water 
ED 8 with it, 355 water impregaat e's : „ 


"a 


EVE IF — 
2 * = OS 5 * 1 8 * 
x Fas >, 
TnL e 87 
g * þ 3 
$ - > 
* wo OS 
„ 
. : . 
- / 
—_ 
2 + 
i $9 
— as 4. 
: N , af 4 * 8 by 
1 . p . * 4 21 8 : 5 
q 1 / : £ . 2 ; * 2 
a ; p " , 1 5 l 4 1 f ; # = : « 
x n 1 
1 1 — — 5, 6 
8 5 788 „ — 5 : $4 74 0 
: 3 LE 25 1 
0 } * * n ab * F 2 5 2 2 
; ; . Ie 6a. T4343 AY - 1 
0 75 K 5 7 5 
„ 1 . 2 . 3 N * 1 > * N * 2 8 1 K 
; : , 


k * 


-— by n 366 21 Mr. 
- making the impregnation, 376. 
eee e te e Are 

BY Ait, 130 3 obſervation 
be the yitriolio avid air m 
| -- nated wich it, wilknot'freexe,: 366. 
1 ts wary pee oh impreg 

1 3595 15 e c, 


. wy 3 * 1 * $3 * Pl 3 


1 8 3 


e 7 2 * 
s 


Bl, air from i it 8 un of nitre, 36. 55 3 


1 3 9 2 
it GO EY n San eee r 
33 | The ©, * F - RE ” 
„ re 
3 CS 
: * * 1 * 4 e 1 1 * 
4 Ll 
4 * % . 4 8 LF rene S344 
Ko _ BW, 
. 7 * ” 4 oy 


8 . . : o A F / eg AI 
| ASE e een, e Em TA Ts 
: V2 i 5 
i 8 „ 5 3 3 ; Ss 4 « ; Uh & 
, * * , 28 ax * 0 * 3 5 ERS, BY 15 32 Wigs N 4844 * 
* 7 2 4 4} . n 3 SAILS 2 e 


. e 12. 


Halti Dr, bis opigios of the uſe'of the blood, G. 
Haller, his's inion of the uſe of the blogd, 63. a 

ear, its e = on ſpirit of mites, 248; on the dense 

| | 4+ , Vapour, I 

5 7 5 Mr. bis e relating to the eff, of fixed | 


1 | 85 e 
i ; 1 SCEY 
| | 1278 i N e e ee : 
© ckable one ſeen · by Me: Warltire; 468. 
5 b Whether it contains more phlogiſton than 
| | E air, Ke ; various experiments relating to it, 


= | 2359 A e nitre, 261; to oil of t 

| Ane, aud Pirit of wine, 265 ; not changed. by impreg- 

1 nation with water, 268; burned in common air, 367 ; 

| r. Volta's obſervation relating toi it, 381. 

| er, air from it by ſpirit of nitre, 14; diſſolved in 1 20 

. T trous acid, yields air in which a candle burns 132; 

„„ marine acid air, 2683 fixed air pre from It by. 

- \ſpitic of nitre, 351-3 nitrous air from-it, © 

, 2 lings and brimſtone, diminiſt nitrous he the 1407 in 
8 lammable air, 3 3-3 x 

1 | . = 1 . | 1 Landriati, 


4” 4 
28 


— 
Fa . * 
f * , ? 
— 5 Q K N Y 
. 3 1 
— ant 
hed 1 f — e 
5 * 8 80 
i #3 1 
/ SHES 
Ws, 
i * 4 , 
- 


wa A tos 


47 * and brimflone, . f 15 


#0 n a 2 : 4 ws — 5 
* - X 1 1 g _ 2 5 4 þ 4 4 ' . 
- 2 \ 4 2 . 15 i 
7 2 1 - P 5 * « 5 : $34 73 4 
* ? x L A — A : N : 5 8 3 3/080 I 4 
* * 8 1 04 „ * 
4 4 * 8 3 Han DH 1.4 " 1 
; z : 4: Z 3 r 5 2 2 x j f 
1 * |. SA . : * 3 EOF We 
a „ . 1 0 699 2 8 
» 2 « * BY E . F — of x 
: F PEE Th OF "$$ > 
7 n _ P i 


+5 * Nen t g. als FO EB he L. 95 * 8771 * 121 62 74 


GY >» #657 "ey 2441 17; 1 
| Landriani; Sig nt. of his toi r-thropgh Win de 
obſerre the # LEY their —— places, gu: 

Tua, dm qgor of, no air from it, 330. 


Liver pow  oiſhes nitrous air, (146 3 Gd 


in water, and impregnated with, ee . 
Tua, air dem it by:ſpiriz.of nig, i585. 


Lan, r * on air . th „„ „ 


933 Magellan, Mr. his accounts wt eri ito with - 
phori, 376. 
3 * Marine acid air, various 8 SUPER to it, 298 3 


7 the colour of water impregnated with it, 299. 
Merals,. dephlogiſticated air from them, 5.5 diſſolred in 


acids fel of with nitrous vapour, 222. 


| n oil of, ene with de vapour, 
a | b 8 * 
: - „ ; : 7 „ 3 x 1 
5 ; 1 FAMA bo F $35 24 339 1; [3 244 l 1 - . 12 2 "Ro 8 11 36 * 


Mi, Nv of,” the quantity of it in d zebllesiliested at, 
41 ; abſorbs nitrous air, 121; extracted from nitr 

Az eid, I 159; - the — h of it melires- 165 3 "44%; wh 

tions on the proceſs for making it, 234 3 obſervations 

relating to its colour and prog » 243; diſtilled, 2503 
_ » - volatilized by the ſolution of 

; ©: A on-inflammable air, 26 1. ** 

| Nitrous acid vapour, an attem pt to 


% 


2 2 i. % * 
* vA . 


e it by an 


i Or 1743 experiments: upon it, om — wih 


water, 1943 impregnating oils, 208 ; acids impreg- 


nated with. it, 217 imbibed by ſolid bee my 3 3 


does not affect ſulphur, or alum, 229... 


; Mer, air, phenomena © of 1 its impregnating. water, 193 3 


abſorbed by oils, 1113 by ſpirit of wine, 1194 by 


acid liquors, 12 1; by the nitrous acid, 15. by oil of vi- 


. triol, 129; by ſpirit of ſalt, ib: by vitriolic and fluvr 
acid air, 130; brought to a ſtate in which a. candle 


. in it, 16. diminiſhed by iron filings and brim- 


ne, 140; by, liver of ſulphur, 146 3 in a bladder, 
620 $ nitrous W n Its: 1 Ape hag Fry 


I 
/ 8 
9 5 , 
£7 k * 
% 2 
+ a. 2 RS 
* a 
*. M ». 
* 
/ 
* * 
5 


n 3505 its effects 5 


1 


. 


A 
An n attempt to e 
wo impregnated with tron y 


44 $6 Ji WC 3s I "pe 
| bibes nitro air, „„ JJ ˙A 
N N g 8 N 0 . 142 tr 21 ot ten We ES Of 1 5 | 5 \ 6b wy 


1 Aim ret tin enn Abth 


* * 5 a» 


1 
Fa 
* a - 
+ * 
27 
* 
4 4 


borftorn; u to be carried of the died 1 6 
„ lunge, 703 its den ſpirit 3 
7 * made from water impreg 


* * 


* 


» % 2 
* ac de 11 


n 
leer 


. 


JF 


# 
4 * 
54 
I 
. 
4 
1 
. * 
8 7 
® 
. 
"Y 


* 
75 * ; 
* 
£ 
CS 
7 
. 
4. 
* k * 
4 N 14 
. 1 
84 
Be 
7 


. 


; 7 Silver, _ er it 4 
| Sink | fone, air * it þ 


* 


118 . 118 dhe 9555 cha BK 1 Tein + ” 
e ir 4s 3 2 Ve NE 
n, air f m it by f 3 tre. 16. e 

© Sorpentines eile it age . 02:5 b o 
# * 4 * with nirous 


i nitraus Mr. 


95 E 422 Serene ; 


5 a 10 9 * 
4s 4 4 ? 
RT Ve :. 04 
5 8 
3 
A 


N 
79 


6 5 
* "x 
# y 
>. 
7 
5 An 
7 © * * 


IJ 3 


40 185 ibes nijroue a e vapour ic, . 

Te ee be eee ; 
Wis 72805 7 19. 1 1* 066 Lei — 8 e 
e Wal fro a then N. 17108 of dite ee Te IT 
Serin, acts upo ü i * — 1 


' \ 


<Q avis - : 


1 
. 


209. 211% ü. | air, r 
2s 2 Wo em ee Bs 
TIDES a * 
525! 2255 My” Vingst e eee 
* een hy wveter im- ; 
8 3: Wo! boblaty wig „ 
Fin air from in. 320 21 W ö | 
. ol, 2 abſorbs nitrous is 1 t 
Pitrioliæ acid air, ym 1 regnated with it . 5 ; 2 
e ry afjeink I earn 1 
ace with alkaline air, 
2773 the electtie is t _ it, 278; various ob-  _ 
nia Acids M ll = 
4 27 16 aug w__ 


40010 ate 4 en 25 4 : 
f | 8 85 "of G1 H8 - 5 
Alla. 
e with fixed air, 320. : 
with nitrous vapour, 2176s 
BY and g bn waters N - 
s an Orange-co | 
ſervations relating to it, 2. Oz quater improguated with 
ar, 


1 


- 
1 . 
„ 
95 5 yo 454 — 
1 2 + 
* 
\ 
7 : * - * e 
. 
- 5 
0 
+ 4 \ 5 
— 4 £7 k 4. : \ ; 
a . ' 155 wo 0 
8 46Y 7 8 


* 
8 5 5 


Parkive, Mr. bil c 
| air, 


take of vitriolic 
Hrs nated with 
In marin 


Wine, ſpirit of; its effet! n ca mon fir 945 ablorbs di- 1 
trous air, 1 impreg ated ith nitrous: : 


* . * 
4 f's "Wo 5 . 7 8 : . 
2 3 7 2 * 7 ? 
, : '# s OE WD 
F 5 mw 2 
8 5 5 5 * # \ 
i N 3 
. "Yo >. 
\ 7 us. ; 4 
2 f 


: . 4 2 
4 0 1 1 } . g = 5 - ? 
k 1 5 3 ; ö 5 
; s * — * 1 F £ o S g 7 0 5 * : £-# 
+ þ 5 3 1 P $$ 3 " ! 1 * % ; 
Pie 268, I. laſt fr led into it read led 
+ * * . 3 * 8 A * 
; £ oh * 
; ks i S 8 She = 4 % . of I 2s 5 ys 5 % 4 8 : 0 


h 5 


Bro, 125. 


„„ Third. Edition, Ivo. e ir 
SS 4 90 3. The RY. 3 STATE of Discoverns s 


5 5 to Vision, Liehr, and 
WG |. <- illuſtrated with 
4. in Boards. 
„ AI. A Cours 
" BE. 16m, 4to. 108. 6d. 
N = | $& Femili 


ar In 


8, -_ PhractiCE of 
= — 9 $8 in Boards, 


5 e 9. A New Cnanr of Hurozy, contain it W 
the principal Revolutions of Em — Thee — 


n 


with a Book d 


N Y " 
World; ng an” - - 22 


Ra 2 8 — : 
e 12 of _ Ji „ 

J * £3 , ; * * 7 15 2 
mn 10. A Cuanr-of Bioonarnr, | 5 


By omg of it, and a Catal 
1 


# x 


pi obs on Uh 3 .of a 2 255 


ee 


Pool. II. 3 


10. ThE Addicivns to'tht dhowe te y be A Mane” 18. 


5 . 15. 6d. 


17 a on 2 rom 175 
and At NL wit Foe gh: Leas on, - 1. The Stydy' 
of Hiſtory and gene i Folie. 2. eee 


FATTHE' 8 0 on e n of Tra 


* a 55. ſewed. 7 
B the Human Miwo bn va 

Principle of the ! Ideas, with Efſays rel 

„ it," vo. . ſewed. 8 


& Schools, 18. GW. 

15. The above Giauuar with Notes and Obſerva-' 
tions, for the Uſe of thoſe who have made f me Proficiency 
In the Language. The Fourth Edition, 36. 

16. An Ess on the Fixer Paixctrtzs of 7 9 9 9 


ur, and on the Nature of PoL IX ICA, Civis, and 


Rer1c1tovs Liypary, The "Third Edition, much en- 
Jarged, 26. &wed; © © 
„Ixsxrrurzs Were and 'Riveainp | B= 
zielen, Vol. * con Ming the Klemens of atural Ne. 
li tl to which js prefixe An Effay on the eſt h ethod + 
ny rt religt knowledge to ihe Members of 
— 3, 28. 6. Vol. II. contaf ing Fo * 
dences of the Jewiſh and Chriſtian Revelations, wi { 
ihe. Doctrine of Revelation, 28 MT : 
ſewed. The Fourth and laſt Part of this Wa will contain 
an Hiftorical' Account of the Cortuptions « 


„ Gy, 
18. A Hanxmon of the Evaxcaiiers, in Greek: To | 
which are prefixed, 3 


Cx; 8 Bistzeräries „ It 


ny * 748. in B 5 
2” Fazs Appasss to Worst DieenTaRs | 
212 dert of the Lord's Supper. The Third Edirigh, 


21. Ati Aon to PRT IAT DIN TIA on 
Subject of giving the Lord's Sap per to Chylgren, 18. . 


. Se e on, mn Drove NCEs Option 
Chriftintis7 with a Letter FI ev. ts 4 J | 


by wer to his ain ore aw 


, : 7 


Rufrug wre N Suu, adapted 


# 


* . 


. e 


Fe 
= 
D 
7 
” 
# 


4 ERA, 
Eecleßaftical Conſtitution ol. 


tion, 18. Gd. C 
h e ab te en erde 
eifrig: with 


date Subje@tbfi@uvicwl ; 
_ --.- 2 the Spirit=of 
ched" teforetthe\3 


. 1 of jt by 
28 LD” SEA 
3 rene DrssExvr x ns, at MMI Hl on 
x n oft his feſtguing K 
e er 1 


& 


* * 61 ale O07 


4 
* 


>: | | Clriſtianity, « on the following Subji ts, viz. - 1. The Uſe 
Ke of Reaſon in Matters of Religion.) 2. The Power of Man 
5 do do the Will of God. z. Original Sin. 4. Election 

and Reprobation... The Divinity ,Chriſt. 6 
1 Atonement aa TY 1 | 


Tn ge 
Here my, at Otat- 
enton. . The | nd Edition, 


N 


zitartond ſof the Uss 


* $4 72 —_ * 4 0 a 7 


8 4 * * 5 8 9. 4 4 ; * Th 2% W 1 


- 
s #5 *3 7 Nu mw p 8 
* „ 1 
2 4 * N .” 40 — : 1 4 


2 * 12 : 4 


. t Thees 228 will be found to con- | 


＋ . . 
F of, the Script | ally 1 
the Harmony of | the | Ewangelifte, and the Resſoning of + | 
we g ale Rle Paul, as cannot. fail to; recommend. them oo ; 
erſons, who wiſh to make a. 1 ieee Enquiry into 15 
4 1 "+ Lat 2 1 : 
54> +61 0431657 why. 
Finke Volume, which is n | | 
D Su aw to Dr. Baxson, rela | 
be Iſraelites ed Sen. 
Nn bi | 
44+ 4 }; 385 
; mw, 55 i 
x F Ext 7 
„ 9 
" bes NS i | 
FRF EL S299; $ 7 
. | : 515 Ws : © #4131 5 Tet 2 : ; . G 
=Y MATTER any 5 
3 Ge * 201 HM % HAM 
5 rio Which ARE ADI 
3 ; £ AN 56 C. = ab 547 | . 
1 ee aſe e 56 EW N a | 
v. . ers at - | 


= eee ee 


Lp \ : 7 ; 1 : 5 | 


. * - | Þ 1 _ . 1 . 


5 : 5 
4 
' —— } a 9 
» 
5 
4 4 F 
4 
x WY 
| a ; 
D 
; 
* 
E . 
fs n 5 4 
+ 8 ; 
. y N 
8 J | 
g 5 
* 4 ks 
; 5 
—_—_ N a 1 
7 A ; F 
- 9 * x 
\ — 
= 7 


1 27 
- 
* 


+ 2 2 WE; 
5 n 8 


.
