American Antiquities, and Discoveries in the West
=================================================
Josiah Priest — American Antiquities, and Discoveries in the West (Albany, 1833), public domain. The first popular American 'lost race' book; the mound-builder craze's founding popular text. Scan via Internet Archive.

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2015 


https://archive.org/details/americanantiquities 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES, 

AND 

DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST  i 

BEING 

AN  EXHIBITION  OF  THE  EVIDENCE 

THAT  All  ANCIENT  POPULATION  OF  PARTIALLY  CIVILIZED  NATIONS, 
DIFFERING   ENTIRELY   FROM   THOSE  OF  THE  PRESENT  IN- 
DIANS, PEOPLED  AMERICA,  MANY  CENTURIES  BEFORE 
ITS  DISCOVERY  BY  COLUMBUS. 

AND 

INQUIRIES  INTO  THEIR  ORIGIN, 

WITH  A 

COPIOUS  DESCRIPTION 
Of  many  of  their  stupendous  Works,  now  In  ruinf I 

WITH 

CONJECTURES  CONCERNING  WHAT  MAT  HAYS 
BECOME  OF  THEM. 

COMPILED 

FROM  TRAVELS,  AUTHENTIC  SOURCES,  AND  THE  RESEARCHES 

OF 

antiquarian  Societies. 

BY  JOSIAH  PRIEST. 
Third  Edition  Revised* 


ALBANY: 

PRINTED  BY  HOFFMAN  AlfO  WHITE; 

No.  71,  State-Street 
•  •  •  • 
1883. 


NORTHERN  DISTRICT  OP  NEW-YORK,  To  wit : 

Be  it  remembered,  that  on  the  twenty-first  day  of  March 
Anno  Domini,  1833,  Josiak  Priest,  of  the  said  district,  hath 
deposited  in  this  office  a  book,  the  title  of  which  is  in  the  words- 
following,  to  wit :  "  American  Antiquities,  and  Discoveries  in  the 
West  :  Being  an  exhibition  of  the  evidence  that  an  ancient  Po- 
pulation of  partially  civilized  Nations,  differing  entirely  from  those 
of  the  present  Indians,  peopled  America,  many  centuries  before  ita  discovery 
by  Columbus.  And  Inquiries  into  their  Origin,  with  a  copious  description  of 
many  of  their  stupendous  works,  now  in  ruins.  With  Conjectures  concerning 
what  may  have  become  of  them.  Compiled  from  travels,  authentic  sources , 
and  the  Researches  of  Antiquarian  Societies.  By  Josiah  Priest.35  The 
right  whereof  he  claims  as  author  and  proprietor— In  conformity  with  an  Act  of 
Congress,  entitled  An  Act  to  amend  the  several  Acts  respecting  Copy  Rights. 

RUTGER  B.  MILLER, 

Clerk  U.  S.  D  C.  A*.  D.  J\T.  F 


PREFACE. 


The  volume  now  laid  before  the  public,  is  submitted  with  the  pleas» 
~mg  hope  that  it  will  not  be  unacceptable,  although  the  subject  of  the  An- 
tiquities of  America  is  every  where  surrounded  with  its  mysteries  ;  on  which 
account,  we  have  been  compelled  to  wander  widely  in  the  field  of  conjecture, 
from  which  it  is  not  impossible  but  we  may  have  gathered  and  presented  some 
original  and  novel  opinions. 

We  have  felt  that  we  are  bound  by  the  nature  of  the  subject,  to  treat  wholly 
on  th-ose  matters  which  relate  to  ages  preceding  the  discovery  of  America  by 
Columbus  ;  as  we  apprehend  no  subject  connected  with  the  history  of 
the  continent  since,  can-,  be  entitled  to  the  appellation  of  Antiquities  of 
America. 

If  we  may  be  permitted  to  judge  from  the  liberal  subscription  this  work  has 
met  with,  notwithstanding  the  universal  prejudice  against  subscribing  for  books, 
we  should  draw  the  conclusion,  that  thi3  curious  subject,  has  not  its  only  admi- 
rers within  the  pales  of  Antiquarian  Societies. 

If  it  is  pleasing  as  well  as  useful  to  know  the  history  of  one's  country,  if  to 
feel  a  rising  interest  as  its  beginnings  are  unfolded  ;  its  sufferings,  its  wars,  its 
struggles,  and  its  victories,  delineated  ;  why  not  also,  when  the  story  of  its  an- 
tiquities, though  of  a  graver  and  more  majestic  nature,  are  attempted  to  be 
rehearsed. 

The  traits  of  the  antiquities  of  the  old  world  are  every  where  shown  by  the 
fragments  of  dilapidated  cities,  pyramids  of  stone,  and  walls  of  wondrous  length  ; 
but  here  are  the  wrecks  of  empire,  whose  beginnings  it  would  seem,  are  older 
than  any  of  these,  which  are  the  mounds  and  works  of  the  west,  towering  aloft 
as  if  their  builders  were  preparing  against  another  flood. 

We  have  undertaken  to  elicit  arguments,  from  what  we  suppose  evidence, 
that  the  first  inhabitants  who  peopled  America,  came  on  by  land,  at  certain 
places,  where  it  is  supposed  once  to  have  been  united  with  Asia,  Europe,  and 
Africa,  but  has  been  torn  asunder  by  the  force  of  earthquakes,  and  the  irrup- 
tions of  the  waters,  so  that  what  animals  had  not  passed  over  before  this  great 
physical  rupture,  were  for  ever  excluded  ;  but  not  so  with  men,  as  they  could 
resort  to  the  use  of  boats. 


{V  PREFACE 

We  have  gathered  such  evidence  as  induces  a  belief  that  America  was,  an* 
ciently,  inhabited  with  partially  civilized  and  agricultural  nations,  surpassing 
in  numbers,  its  preseftt  population.  This,  we  imagine,  we  prove,  in  the  disco- 
very of  thousands  of  the  traits  of  the  ancient  operations  of  men  over  the  entire 
cultivated  parts  of  the  continent,  in  the  forms  and  under  the  character  of  mounds 
and  fortifications,  abounding  particularly  in  the  western  regions. 

We  have  also  ventured  conjectures  respecting  what  nations,  in  some  few  in- 
stances, may  have  settled  here  ;  also  what  may  have  become  of  them.  We  have 
entered  on  an  examination  of  some  of  those  works,  and  of  some  of  the  articles 
found  on  opening  some  few  of  their  tumuli  ;  which  we  have  compared  with 
similar  articles  found  in  similar  works  in  various  parts  of  the  other  continents, 
from  which  very  curious  results  are  ascertained. 

As  it  respects  some  of  the  ancient  nations  who  may  have  found  their  way 
hither,  we  perceive  a  strong  probability,  that  not  only  Asiatic  nations,  very  soon 
after  the  flood,  but  that  also,  all  along  the  different  eras  of  time,  different  races 
of  men,  as  Polynesians,  Malays,  Australasians,  Phoenicians,  Egyptians,  Greeks, 
Romans,  Israelites,  Tartars,  Scandinavians,  Danes,  Norwegians,  Welch,  and 
Scotch,  have  colonized  different  parts  of  the  continent. 

We  have  also  attempted  to  show  that  America  was  peopled  before  the  flood  ; 
that  it  was  the  country  of  Noah,  and  the  place  where  the  ark  was  erected. 
The  highly  interesting  subject  of  American  Antiquities,  we  are  inclined  to  be- 
lieve,  is  but  just  commencing  to  be  developed.  The  immensity  of  country  yet 
beyond  the  settlements  of  men,  towards  the  Pacific,  is  yet  to  be  explored  by 
cultivation,  when  other  evidences,  and  wider  spread,  will  come  to  view,  afford- 
ing, perhaps,  more  definite  conclusions. 

As  aids  in  maturing  this  volume,  we  have  consulted  the  works  of  philosophers, 
historians,  travellers,  geographers,  and  gazetteers,  with  miscellaneous  notices  on 
this  subject,  as  found  in  the  periodicals  of  the  day.  The  subject  has  proved  as 
difficult  as  mysterious  ;  any  disorder  and  inaccuracies,  therefote,  in  point  of  in* 
ferences  which  we  have  made,  we  beg  may  not  become  the  subjects  of  the  se- 
verities of  criticism. 

If,  however,  we  should  succeed  in  awakening  a  desire  to  a  farther  investiga- 
tion of  this  curious  subject,  and  should  have  the  singular  happiness  of  securing 
any  degree  of  public  respect,  and  of  giving  the  subscriber  an  equivalent  for  his 
patronage,  the  utmost  ol  the  desire6  of  the  author  will  be  realized. 

JOSIAH  PRIEST. 


CONTENTS 


Page 


Location  of  Mount  Ararat,   9 

Traits  of  the  history  of  the  Chinese  before  the  flood,  and  their 
account  of  it,  with  other  curious  matters,   10 

The  supposed  origin  of  human  complexions,  with  the  ancient 
significations  of  the  names  of  the  three  sons  of  Noah,  see 
pages,  14,  291,294,  351 

Respecting  a  division  of  the  earth  by  Noah  among  his  three 
sons,   21 

Supposed  identity  and  real  name  of  Melchisedec  of  the  Scrip- 
tures— of  qualifications  for  the  Jewish  priesthood — and  of  the 
location  of  Paradise,   23 

Division  of  the  earth  in  the  days  of  Peleg,  and  of  the  spread- 
ing out  of  the  nations  from  Ararat,  with  other  curious  mat- 
ters,  31 

Antiquities  of  the  west,  consisting  of  mounds,  tumuli,  and  for- 
tifications,   37 

Ruins  of  a  Roman  fort  at  Marietta,  with  conjectures  how  they 
may  have  found  this  country,   41 

Discovery  of  a  subterranean  cavity  of  mason  work,  supposed 
to  have  been  erected  by  one  of  the  admirals  of  Alexander, 
in  America,  300  years  before  Christ,*  •  •  •   44 

Ireland  known  to  the  Greeks  200  years  before  Christ,   48 

Discoveries  of  subterranean  hearths  and  fire  places,  on  the 
shores  of  the  Ohio,  with  conjectures  about  their  origin,  •  •  •  •  49 

Discovery  of  a  curious  cup  of  earthen  ware,   52 

Course  of  the  Ten  lost  Tribes  of  Israel,  with  conjectures  about 
the  land  of  Asareth,  and  convulsions  of  the  globe,   55 

Traits  of  Israelites  in  Lapland,  with  accounts  of  their  theology, 
resembling  that  of  the  Jews,   62 

Traits  of  the  Jews  found  in  Pittsfield,  Mass   66 

A  late  discovery  of  a  vast  body  of  Jews  in  India,   67 


\  i  CONTENTS. 

Page 


A  farther  account  of  the  convulsions  of  the  globe,  with  the  re- 
moval of  islands,  &c.   79 

Of  the  island  Atalantis,  of  the  ancients,  supposed  to  have  been 

situated  between  Europe  and  America,  •  •  •  •   80 

Evidences  of  an  ancient  population  in  America,  different  from 

that  of  the  Indians,     83 

Discoveries  on  the  Muskingum,  of  the  traits  of  ancient  nations, 
consisting  of  mounds,  tumuli,  a  vault,  brass  rings,  a  large 
skeleton,  stone  abutments  of  ancient  bridges,  a  tesselated 
pavement,  with  articles  denoting  a  Hindoo  population,  •  •  •  •  87 

Origin  of  houses  among  men,  ■  97 

Great  works  of  the  ancient  nations  at  Zanesville,  Ohio,   99 

Discovery  of  a  quantity  of  metallic  balls  hidden  by  the  an- 
cient nations,  supposed  to  have  been  gold,  with  conjectures 

concerning  their  use,   101 

Use  of  the  sling  by  the  ancient  nations  in  America,  &c  •••"«*  104 

Remains  of  ancient  pottery  in  the  west,   106 

A  catacomb  of  embalmed  mummies  found  in  Kentucky,  sup- 
posed to  be  of  Egyptian  origin,  with  suppositions  how  they 

may  have  found  America,   110 

A  fac  simile  of  the  true  Phoenician  letters,   116 

Ancient  letters  or  alphabets  of  Africa  and  of  America,  with  a 

fac  simile  of  their  shapes,  showing  them  to  be  one  in  origin,  118 
A  further  account  of  western  antiquities,  with  antediluvian 
traits,  the  breaking  up  of  the  fountains  of  the  great  deep, 

and  of  the  building  of  the  ark  of  Noah  in  America,   125 

The  skeleton  of  a  whale  recently  found  in  Virginia,  near  an 

hundred  miles  from  the  sea,   133 

Discovery  of  an  ivory  image  in  a  bone  mound  at  Cincinnati, 

with  conjectures  respecting  it,   135 

Sculptured  hieroglyphics  found  in  a  cave  on  the  Ohio,  and  of 

the  banditti  who  inhabited  it,   138 

Accounts  of  the  bones  of  the  mammoth  in  the  west,   144 

Tracks  of  men  and  animals  in  the  rocks  of  Tennessee  and 

elsewhere,   150 

Cotubamana,  the  giant  chief  of  an  American  island,  his  tragi- 
cal end,  with  other  curious  notices,   153 

A  further  account  of  discoveries  in  the  west,  as  £iven  by  the 
Antiquarian  society  at  Cincinnati,   15S 


CONTENTS.  vil 

Page 

Vast  works  of  the  ancient  nations  on  the  east  side  of  the  Mus- 
kingum, with  a  map  of  three  fortifications  as  they  now  appear 

in  ruins,   161 

Ruins  ot  ancient  works  at  Circleville,  Ohio,   163 

Ancient  works  on  Paint  Creek,  Ohio,   166 

Ancient  wells  found  in  the  bottom  of  Paint  Creek,   168 

A  recent  discovery  of  one  of  those  ancient  works  among  the 

Alleghanies, .  i   169 

Description  of  western  tumuli  and  mounds, .  < .   170 

A  copper  cross  found  on  the  breast  of  a  skeleton,  also  traits  of 

a  Hindoo  population  in  the  west,   I8tf 

Great  works  of  the  ancient  nations  on  the  north  fork  of  Paint 

Creek,   188 

Traits  of  ancient  cities  on  the  Mississippi,   187 

Tradition  of  the  native  Mexicans,  respecting  their  migrations 

from  the  north,  *   189 

Supposed  uses  of  the  ancient  roads  found  connected  with  the 

mounds,..  *   193 

Traits  of  the  Mosaic  history  found  among  the  Azteca  Indians, 
with  an  engraving,  which  represents  men,  receiving  the 

languages  from  a  bird,  and  Noah  in  his  ark,   196 

Ceremonies  of  the  worship  of  fire  as  practised  by  certain  In- 
dian tribes  on  the  Arkansas,   209 

Origin  of  the  worship  of  fire,  212 

A  further  account  of  western  antiquities,   214 

Discovery  of  America  by  the  Norwegians,  Danes  and  Welch 

before  the  time  of  Columbus,   224 

Traditions  of  the  Florida  Indians,  that  Florida  was  once  in- 
habited by  white  people,  before  Columbus,  with  evidences 

of  the  same,  .   234 

Specimens  of  mason-work  of  the  ancient  nations,   238 

Ruins  of  the  city  of  Otolum,  in  America  of  Peruvian  origin  241 
Great  stone  calendar  of  the  Mexicans,  with  an  engraving, ....  246 

Great  stone  castle  of  Iceland,  249 

A  further  account  of  the  evidence  of  colonies  from  Europe  be- 
fore Columbus,  251 

Large  quantity  of  brass  found  in  Scipio  in  a  field  once  belong- 
ing to  the  ancient  nations,  ......  254 

A  further  account  of  western  antiquities,. ................  256 


viii  CONTENTS. 

.Page. 

A  discription  of  articles  found  in  the  tumuli,   * . .  260 

Great  size  of  some  of  the  Mexican  mounds,  267 

Predilection  of  the  ancients  to  pyramid  building,   268 

Shipping  and  voyages  of  the  Mongol  Tartars,  and  their  set- 
tlements on  the  western  coast  of  North  America,  273 

A  further  account  of  western  antiquities,   279 

Various  opinions  respecting  the  original  inhabitants  of  Ame- 
rica, 282 

Further  remarks  on  the  subject  of  human  complexions,....  291 

Still  further  remarks  on  human  complexions,   294 

Canibals  in  America,....   299 

Ancient  languages  of  the  first  inhabitants  of  America,   304 

A  fac  simile,  or  engraving  of  the  glyphs  of  Otolum,  a  city,  the 

ruins  of  which  is  found  in  South  America,  ,   307 

Languages  and  nations  of  North  America,   309 

Languages  and  nations  of  South  America,   310 

The  Atlantic  nations  of  America,   312 

Further  accounts  of  colonies  from  Europe  before  the  time  of 

Columbus,   316 

Primitive  origin  of  the  English  language,   325 

Colonies  of  the  Danes  in  America,.  333 

Chronology  of  the  the  Iroquois  Indians,   346 

African  tribe  found  in  South  America,  349 

Disappearance  of  many  of  the  western  lakes,  and  of  the  for- 
mation of  sea  coal,   352 

Further  remarks  on  the  draining  of  the  western  country  of  its 

ancient  lakes,   367 

Causes  of  the  disappearance  of  the  ancient  nations,   373 

Lake  Ontario  formed  by  a  Volcanoe,   376 

Resemblance  of  the  western  Indians  to  the  ancient  Greeks,.,.  383 

Traits  of  the  ancient  Romans  in  America,   389 

American  Indian  languages,   393 

Languages  of  Oregon  Chopunish  and  Chinuc,  •   395 

Gold  mines  in  the  Southern  States,   397 

These  mines  known  to  the  ancients  by  the  instruments  dis- 
covered, •  •.,••..«•»......,..,.•   ........  398 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 

DISCOVERIES  m  THE  WEST. 


A  lofty  summit  on  a  range  of  mountains,  called  Ararat,  in 
Asia,  furnished  the  resting  place  of  the  Ark,  which  contained  the 
progenitors  of  both  man  and  animals,  who  have  replenished  the 
Globe  since  the  era  of  the  Deluge. 

Ararat  is  a'  chain  of  mountains,  running  partly  round  the  south- 
ern end  of  the  Caspian,  and  is  situated  between  the  Caspian  and 
Black  Seas ;  in  latitude  north,  about  38  deg.  agreeing  with  the 
middle  of  the  United  States,  and  is  from  London  a  distance  of  about 
two  thousand  four  hundred  miles,  in  a  southeasterly  course,  and 
from  the  city  of  Albany,  in  the  United  States,  is  nearly  six  thou- 
sand, in  an  exact  easterly  direction,  and  the  same  latitude,  except 
a  variation  of  but  three  degrees  south. 

We  have  been  thus  particular  to  describe  the  exact  situation,  as 
generally  allowed,  of  that  range  of  mountains;  because  from  this 
place,  which  is  nearly  on  the  western  end  of  the  Asiatic  continent, 
Noah  and  his  posterity  descended,  and  spread  themselves  over  ma- 
ny parts  of  the  earth,  and,  as  we  suppose,  even  to  America,  re- 
newing the  race  of  man,  which  well  nigh  had  become  extinct  from 
the  devastation  and  ruin  of  the  universal  flood. 

But  that  the  flood  of  Noah  was  universal,  is  gravely  doubted  ;  in 
proof  of  which,  the  abettors  of  this  doubt,  bring  the  traditional  his- 
tory of  the  ancient  Chinese.  Professor  Rafinesque,  of  the  city  of 
Philadelphia,  confessedly  a  learned  and  most  able  antiquarian,  has 
recently  advanced  the  following  exceedingly  interesting  and  cu- 
rious matter. 

'  2 


10 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


"  History  of  China  before  the  Flood.  The  traditions  preserved 
by  man  y  ancient  nations  of  the  earliest  history  of  the  earth  and  man- 
kind, before  and  after  the  great  geological  floods,  which  have  deso- 
lated the  globe,  are  highly  interesting  ;  they  belong  at  once  to 
geology,  archeology,  history  and  many  other  sciences.  They  are 
the  only  glimpses  to  guide  us  where  the  fossil  remains  or  medals  of 
nature,  are  silent  or  unknown. 

Ancient  China  was  in  the  eastern  slopes  and  branches  of  the 
mountains  of  Central  Asia,  the  hoary  Imaluya,  where  it  is  as  yet 
very  doubtful  whether  the  flood  thoroughly  extended." 

But  though  this  is  doubted,  we  cannot  subscribe  to  the  opinion, 
however  great  our  deference  may  be  for  the  ability  and  research  of 
those  who  have  ventured  to  doubt  We  feel  by  far  a  greater  de- 
ference to  the  statement  of  the  author  of  the  Hebrew  Genesis ;  a 
historian  of  the  highest  accredited  antiquity.  This  author  says 
plainly,  that  $\  all  the  high  hills  ur_der  the  whole  heaven  were  cover- 
ed;*' and  that  <£  fifteen  cubits,"  and  upwards,  did  the  waters  pre- 
vail ;  and  the  mountains  were  covered.  But  not  so,  if  we  are  to 
believe  these  doubters.  A  very  large  tract  of  country  of  Central 
Asia  was  exempt  from  the  food  of  Noah,  as  also  a  part  of  South 
America. 

This  opinion,  which  contradicts  the  Bible  account  of  that  flood, 
is  founded  on  "  the  traditio:  1  history  of  China,  which  speaks  of 
two  great  floods  which  d^oLicd,  but  did  not  overflow  the  land. 
They  answer,  says  Mr.  Rafmesoue,  to  the  two  great  floods  of  Noah 
and  Peleg,  recorded  in  th  E;bie.  "  The  latter,  the  flood  of  Peleg, 
or  Yao,  in  Chin?-.,  w?  i  .- *,  ue  says,  by  volcanic  paroxysms  all 
over  the  earth;"  b>: z  -•  much  less  fatal  than  the  flood  of  Noah,  or 
Yu-ti,  in  China." 

Respecting  this  flcou,  "  the  following  detail?  are  taken  chiefly 
from  the  Chinese  nistorians,  Liu-yu  and  Lo-pi,  whose  works  are 
ealleJ  Y-tse,  and  Uai-ki,  as  partly  translated  by  Leroux."  These 
say?;  that  {<  the  flr  t  flood  happened  under  the  Sth  Ki,  or  period 
caile''  -  ''-ti,  and  the  first  emperor  of  it,"  was  "Chin-sang,  about 
i  '70  v<dh  before  Christ,"  S26,  before  the  flood. 

But  neither  can  this  be,  as  the  flood  of  Noah  took  place  1,656 
years  from  the  creation,  which  would,  therefo^,  be  but  2,344 
years  before  Christ;  being  a  mistake  of  about  826  years.  And, 
therefore,  if  there  is  any  truth  in  the  Chinese  history  at  all,  those 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IX  THE  WEST. 


historians  must  have  alluded  to  some  flood  before  that  of  Noah  \  an 
account  of  which  may  have  been  received  from  Noah  himself,  and 
preserved  in  the  Chinese  histories  written  after  the  flood. 

The  flood  alluded  to,  by  the  above  named  historian,  did  not, 
it  is  true,  overflow  the  whole  earth,  but  it  was  such  as  that  the 
waters  did  not  return  to  their  usual  channels  for  a  long  time  ;  "  the 
misery  of  mankind  was  extreme  ;  the  beasts  and  serpents  were 
very  numerous  j"  being  driven  togcthei  by  the  pursuit  of  the  wa- 
ters, and  also  "  storms  and  cold  "  had  greatly  increased.  Chin- sang 
collected  the  wandering  men  to  unite  against  the  wild  beasts,  to 
dress  their  skins  for  clothing,  and  lo  weave  their  fur  into  webs 
and  caps.  This  emperor  was  venerated  for  these  benefits,  and  be- 
gan a  Shi,  or  dynasty,  that  lasted  350  years." 

This  account  would  suit  very  well  to  the  character  of  Nimrod, 
whom  we  are  much  inclined  to  think  the  Chinese  historians  poinv 
out,  instead  of  any  king  before  the  era  of  the  flood  of  Noah. 

But  to  the  research  of  this  highly  gifted  antiquarian,  Rafinesque, 
we  are  greatly  indebted  in  one  important  respect :  It  is  well  known 
that  persons  in  the  learned  world  have  greatly  admired  the  boasted 
antiquity  of  the  Chinese  nations,  who,  by  their  records,  make  the 
earth  much  older  than  does  Moses.  But  this  philosopher  on  this 
subject  writes  as  folk  ws :  "The  two  words,  Ki  and  Shi,  trans- 
lated period  and  dynasty,  or  family,  are  of  some  importance.  As  they 
now  stand  translated,  they  would  make  the  world  very  old  ;  since 
no  less  than  ten  Ki,  or  periods,  are  enumerated,  (we  are  in  the 
10th ;)  wherein  232  Shi,  or  dynasties  of  emperors,  -Lie  said  to  ho  , 
ruled  in  China,  during  a  course  of  276,480  years  be  fort,  jurist, 
at  the  lowest  computation;  and  96,962,2;J0  before  Christ,  at  the 
highest;  with  many  intermediary  calculations,  by  variouj  authors. 

But  if  Ki,  he  says,  may  also  mean  a  dynasty,  or  division,  or  peo- 
ple's it  appears  to  do  in  some  instances,  ai>£  Shi, an  ags,oi  ztribr, 
or  reign,  the  whole  preposterous  computation  will  prove  false,  or  be 
easily  reduced  to  agree  with  those  of  &e  '  moos,  Persians  and 
Egyptians     and  come  within  the  \,~  •  earth  as  given  in  the 

Scriptures. 

If  the  central  region  of  Asia,  ana  pacts  of  South  America,  may 
have  been  exempted  from  *hat  flood,  we  may  then  safely  inquire, 
whether  other  parts  of  the  globe  l\  .iot  also  have  been  exempt ; 
where  men  and  animals  were  preserved ;  and  thus  the  account  of 


12 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


the  ark,  in  which,  as  related  by  Moses,  both  men  and  animals 
were  saved,  is  completely  overturned.  But  the  universal  traditions 
of  all  nations,  contradict  this,  while  the  earth,  every  where,  shows 
signs  of  the  operations  of  the  waters,  in  agreement  with  this  uni- 
versal tradition.  Tf  such  a  flood  never  took  place,  which  rushed 
over  the  earth  with  extraordinary  violence,  how,  it  may  be  inquired, 
are  there  found  in  Siberia,  in  north  latitude  60  and  70  deg.,  great 
masses  of  the  bones  of  the  elephant  and  rhinoceros — animals  of  the 
hot  regions  of  the  equator.  From  this  it  is  evident  that  the  flood 
which  wafted  the  bodies  of  those  animals,  rolled  exactly  over  all 
China  and  the  Hindoo  regions.  In  all  parts  of  the  earth,  even  on 
the  highest  regions  and  mountains,  are  found  oceanic  remains, 
Whales  have  been  found  in  the  mountains  of  Greenland,  and  also 
in  other  parts,  as  in  America,  far  from  the  ocean. 

Chinese  history,  it  is  true,  gives  an  account  of  many  floods, 
which  have  ruined  whole  tracts  of  that  country,  as  many  as  sixty- 
five,  one  of  which,  in  the  year  1S5  before  Christ,  it  is  said,  formed 
that  body  of  water  called  the  Yellow  Sea,  situated  between  Corea 
and  China. 

But  were  the  history  of  American  floods  written,  occasioned  by 
similar  causes;  such  as  rivers  rupturing  their  mountain  barriers; 
the  shocks  of  earthquakes,  since  the  time  of  Noah's  flood  ;  who 
could  say  there  wrould  not  be  as  many.  We  shall  have  occasion 
to  speak  of  this  subject  before  we  close  this  volume. 

It  is  said  that  the  history  of  China  gives  an  account  of  the  state 
of  mankind  before  the  flood  of  Yuti,  or  Noah,  and  represents  them 
as  having  been  happy,  ruled  by  benevolent  monarchs,  who  took  no- 
thing and  gave  much  ;  the  world  submitted  to  their  virtues  and 
good  laws  ;  they  wore  no  crowns,  but  long  hair  ;  never  made  war, 
and  put  no  one  to  death.  But  this  is  also  contrary  to  the  account 
of  Moses ;  who  says  the  earth  before  the  flood  was  corrupt  before 
God,  and  was  filled  with  violence.  But  they  carry  their  descrip- 
tion of  the  happiness  of  men  so  high,  as  to  represent  perfect  har- 
mony as  having  existed  between  men  and  animals  ;  when  men  liv- 
ed on  roots  and  the  fruits  of  the  earth ;  that  they  did  not  follow 
hunting  ;  property  was  common,  and  universal  concord  prevailed. 
From  this  high  wrought  account  of  the  pristine  happiness  of  man, 
we  are  at  once  referred  to  the  original  state  of  Adam  in  Paradise, 
and  to  his  patriarchal  government  after  his  fall ;  and  it  is  likely  also 


AT?D  DTSCOVERTEs   IK  TTTF  WEST. 


to  that  of  his  successors,  till  men  had  multiplied  in  the  earth  ;  so  as 
to  form  conflicting  interests,  when  the  rapine  and  violence  com- 
menced, as  spoken  of  by  Moses,  which  it  seems,  grew  worse  and 
worse,  till  the  flood  came  and  took  them  all  away. 

That  the  central  parts  of  Asia  were  not  overflown  by  the  deluge, 
appears  of  vast  importance  to  some  philosophers  of  the  present  day 
to  be  established.  For  if  so,  we  see,  say  they,  at  once,  how  both  men 
and  animals  were  preserved  from  that  flood ;  and  yet  this  does  not, 
they  say,  militate  against  the  Mosaic  account ;  for  the  very  word 
ark,  is,  in  the  original  language,  Theba,  and  signifies,  refuge,  and 
is  the  country  of  Thibet.  So  that  when  Moses  talked  about  an 
ark,  he  only  meant  the  central  part  of  Asia,  or  Thibet,  in  which 
men  and  animals  were  saved,  instead  of  a  vessel. 

Theba  or  Thibet,  situated  in  what  is  called  Central  Asia,  and  is 
in  size  equal  to  three-fourths  of  the  area  of  the  United  States,  is 
indeed  the  highest  part  of  that  continent,  and  produces  mountains 
higher  than  any  other  part  of  the  earth ;  yet  Moses  says,  that  the 
flood  prevailed  fifteen  cubits  and  upwards  above  the  highest  moun- 
tains. 

Thibet  is  situated  in  latitude  30  deg.  north,  exactly  between 
farther  India,  Hindostan  and  Siberia,  where  banks  of  the  bones  of 
equatorial  animals  are  found,  as  we  have  noticed  ;  by  which  we  as- 
certain that  the  deluge  rolled  over  this  very  Theea,  the  country 
supposed  to  have  been  left  dry  at  the  time  of  Noah's  flood. 

But  it  will  not  do ;  for  the  Mosaic  account  plainly  says,  that  God 
said  to  Noah,  make  thee  an  ark  of  gopher  wood.  Surely  Noah 
did  not  make  the  central  parts  of  Asia,  called  Theba,  or  Thibet ; 
neither  was  he  called  upon  to  do  so,  as  it  would  have  taken  much 
gopher  wood  to  have  formed  the  whole  or  a  part  of  so  large  a  coun- 
try. But  respecting  the  word,  which  is  translated  ark,  in  the 
Scriptures,  it  is  said  by  Adam  Clarke,  to  be  in  the  original  Tebath, 
and  not  Theba. 

The  word  Tebath,  he  says,  signifies  vessel,  and  means  no  more 
nor  less  than  a  vessel,  in  its  most  common  acceptation,  a  hollow 
place,  capable  of  containing  persons,  goods,  &c  The  idea,  there- 
fore, that  the  word  ark,  signified  the  central  parts  of  Asia,  called 
Theba,  or  Thibet,  falls  to  the  ground;  while  the  history  as  given 
by  Moses,  respecting  the  flood  of  Noah,  remains  unshaken. 


14 


AMERICA!*  ANTIQUITIES 


The  same  author  has  also  discovered  that  a  race  of  ancient  peo 
pie,  in  South  America,  called  the  Zapotecas,  boast  of  being  ante- 
diluvian in  America,  and  to  have  built  the  city  of  Coat-Ian,  so  named, 
because  this  city  was  founded  at  a  place  which  swarmed  with 
serpents  ;  therefore  named  Snake-city,  or  Coat-Ian,  built  327  years 
before  the  flood  ;  and  that,  at  the  time  of  the  flood,  a  remnant  of 
them,  together  with  their  khig,  named  Pet-ela,  (or  dog,)  saved  them- 
selves on  a  mountain  of  the  same  name,  Coat-Ian. 

But  we  consider  this  tradition  to  relate  only  to  the  first  efforts  at 
house  building  after  the  flood  of  Noah,  round  about  the  region  of 
Ararat,  and  on  the  plains  of  Shinar.  The  very  circumstance  of 
this  tribe  being  still  designated  by  that  of  the  Dog  tribe,  is  an  evi- 
dence that  they  originated  not  before  the  flood  as  a  nation,  but  in 
Asia,  since  that  era  ;  for  in  Asia,  as  in  America,  tribes  of  men  have 
also  been  thus  designated,  and  called  after  the  various  animals  of 
the  woods.  The  Snake  I  ndians  are  well  known  to  the  western 
explorers  in  America,  as  also  many  other  tribes,  who  are  named 
after  various  wild  animals. 


SUPPOSED  ORIGIN  OF  HUMAN  COMPLEXIONS..  WITH  THE 
ANCIENT  SIGNIFICATION  OF  THE  NAMES  OF  THE  THREE 
SONS  OF  NOAH,  AND  OTHER  CURIOUS  MATTER. 

The  sons  of  Noah  were  three,  as  stated  in  the  book  of  Genesis ; 
between  whose  descendants  the  whole  earth,  in  process  of  time, 
became  divided-  This  division  appears  to  have  taken  place,  in 
the  earliest  ages  of  the  first  nations  after  the  flood,  in  such  manner 
as  to  suit,  or  correspond  with  the  several  constitutions  of  those  na- 
tions, in  a  physical  sense,  as  well  as  with  a  reference  to  the  various 
complexions  of  the  descendants  of  these  three  heads  of  the  human 
race. 

This  preparation  of  the  nations,  respecting  animal  constitution 
and  colour,  at  the  fountain  head,  must  have  been  directed  by  the 
hand  of  the  Creator,  in  an  arbitrary  manner  ;  by  which  not  only  his 
Sovereignty,  as  the  Governor  of  our  earth  with  all  its  tribes,  is  mani- 
fest, but  also  his  Wisdom  ;  because  the  same  constitution  and  com- 


AND  DISCOVERIES   IN  THE  WEST-  15 

plexion,  which  is  suited  to  the  temperate  and  frigid  zones  of  the 
globe,  could  not  endure  the  burning  climates  of  the  torrid  ;  so  nei- 
ther are  the  constitutions  of  the  equatorial  nations  so  tempered  as 
to  enjoy  the  snowy  and  ice-bound  regions  in  the  high  latitudes  north 
and  south  of  the  equator. 

The  very  names,  or  words  Shem,  Ham,  and  Japheth,  were  in 
the  language  of  Noah,  which  was  probably  the  pure  Hebrew  ;  in 
some  sense,  significant  of  their  future  national  character  and  pros- 
perity. We  proceed  to  show  in  what  sense  their  names  were  de- 
scriptive, prospectively,  of  their  several  destinies  in  the  earth,  as 
well  also  as  that  Ham  was  the  very  name  of  his  color,  or  com- 
plexion. 

The  word  Shem,  says  Dr.  Clarke,  signifies  renown^  in  the  language 
of  Noah ;  which,  as  that  great  man,  now  no  more,  remarks,  has 
been  wonderfully  fulfilled,  both  in  a  temporal  and  spiritual  sense. 
In  a  temporal  sense,  first,  as  follows.  His  posterity  spread  them- 
selves over  the  finest  regions  of  Upper  and  Middle  Asia — Armenia, 
Mesopotamia,  Assyria,  Media,  Persia,  and  the  Indus,  Ganges,  and 
possibly  to  China,  still  more  eastward. 

The  word  Japheth,  which  was  the  name  of  Noah's  third  son,  has 
also  its  meaning,  and  signifies,  according  to  the  same  author,  that 
which  may  be  exceedingly  enlarged,  and  capable  of  spreading  to  a 
vast  extent. 

His  posterity  diverged  eastward  and  westward  from  Ararat, 
throughout  the  whole  extent  of  Asia,  north  of  the  great  range  of 
the  Taurus  and  Ararat  mountains,  as  far  as  the  Eastern  Ocean  ; 
whence,  as  he  supposes,  they  crossed  over  to  America,  at  the 
Straits  of  Bhering,  and  in  the  opposite  direction  from  those  moun- 
tains, throughout  Europe,  to  the  Mediterranean  Sea, south  from  Ar- 
arat ;  and  fb  the  Atlantic  Ocean  west,  from  the  same  region  ;  whence 
also  they  might  have  passed  over  to  America,  by  the  way  of  Ice- 
land, Greenland,  and  so  on  to  the  continent,  along  the  coast  of  La- 
brador, where  traces  of  early  settlements  remain,  in  parts  now  de- 
sert. Thus  did  Jppheth  enlarge  himself,  till  his  posterity  literally- 
encompassed  the  earth,  from  latitude  35  deg.  north  and  upward, 
toward  the  pole. 

The  word  Ham,  signified  that  which  was  burnt,  or  black.  The 
posterity  of  this  son  of  Noah,  peopled  the  hot  regions  of  the  earthy 
on  either  side  the  equator. 


lb 


AMERICAN  ANTIQU1TILJ- 


But  as  it  respects  the  complexions  of  these  heads  ol  the  nation 
of  the  earth,  we  remark  as  follows  :   Shem  was  undoubtedly  a  ied 
or  copper  colored  man,  which  was  the  complexion  of  all  the  Ante- 
diluvians. 

This  conclusion  is  drawn  from  the  fact,  that  the  nations  inhabit- 
ing the  countries  named  as  being  settled  or  peopled  by  the  descend- 
ants of  Shem,  have  always  been,  and  now  are,  of  that  cast.  We 
deem  this  fact  as  conclusive,  that  such  was  also  their  progenitor, 
Shem,  as  that  the  great  and  distinguishing  features  and  complexion 
of  nations  change  not,  so  as  to  disappear.  Shem  was  the  Father  of 
the  Jewish  race,  who  are  of  the  same  hue,  varying,  it  is  true,  some 
being  of  a  darker,  and  some  of  a  lighter  shade,  arising  from  secret 
and  undefinable  principles,  placed  beyond  the  research  of  man ;  and 
also,  from  amalgamation  by  marriage  with  white,  and  with  the  dark- 
er nations,  as  the  African.  But  to  corroborate  our  opinion,  that  the 
Antediluvians  were  of  a  red,  or  copper  complexion,  we  bring  the 
well  known  statement  of  Josephus,  that  Adam,  the  first  of  men, 
was  a  red  man,  made  of  red  earth,  called  virgin  earth,  because  of 
its  beauty  and  pureness.  The  word  Adam,  he  also  says,  signifies 
that  colour  which  is  red.  To  this  account,  the  tradition  of  the  Jews 
corresponds,  who,  as  they  are  the  people  most  concerned,  should  be 
allowed  to  know  most  about  it. 

Shem,  therefore,  must  have  been  a  red  man,  derived  from  the 
complexion  of  the  first  man,  Adam.  And.  his  posterity,  as  above 
described,  are  accordingly  of  the  the  same  complexion  ;  this  is  well 
known  of  all  the  Jews,  unmixed  with  those  nations  that  are  fairer, 
as  attested  by  history,  and  the  traveller  of  every  age,  in  the  coun- 
tries they  inhabit. 

The  w  ord  Ham,  which  w  as  the  name  of  the  second  son  of  Noah, 
is  die  wToid  which  was  descriptive  of  the  color  which  i^  black,  cr 
burnt.  This  we  show  from  the  testimony  of  Dr.  Hales,  of  Eng- 
land, who  was  a  celebrated  natural  philosopher  and  mathematician, 
of  the  17th  century,  who  is  quoted  by  Adam  Clarke,' to  show  that 
the  word  Ham,  in  the  language  of  Noah,  which  was  that  of  the 
Antediluvians,  was  the  term  for  that  which  Avas  black.. 

It  is  not  possible,  from  authority  so  high  and  respectable,  that 
doubts  can  exist  respecting  the  legitimacy  of  this  word,  and  of  its 
incient  application.    Accordingly,  as  best  suited  to  the  complexion 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST, 


17 


of  the  descendants  of  Ham,  the  hot  regions  of  the  equator  were 
allotted  to  those  nations. 

To  the  Cushites,  the  southern  climes  of  Asia,  along  the  coast  of 
the  Persian  Gulf,  Susiane,  or  Cushistan,  Arabia,  Canaan,  Pales- 
tine, Syria,  Egypt,  and  Lybia,  in  Africa.  These  countries  were 
settled  by  the  posterity  of  Ham,  who  were,  and  now  are,  of  a  glossy 
black. 

But  the  vast  variety  of  shades  and  hues  of  the  human  face,  are 
derived  from  amalgamations  of  the  three  original  complexions,  red, 
black,  and  white.  This  was  the  act  of  God,  giving  to  the  three 
persons,  upon  whom  the  earth's  population  depended,  by  way  of 
perpetuity, "  such  complexions,  and  animal  constitutions,  as  should 
be  best  suited  to  the  several  climates,  which  he  intended,  in  the 
progress  of  his  providence,  they  should  inhabit. 

The  people  of  these  countries,  inhabited  respectively  by  these 
heads  of  nations,  Shem,  Ham,  and  Japheth,  s/i//retain,  in  full  force, 
the  ancient,  pristine  red,  white,  and  black  complexions,  except 
where  each  have  intruded  upon  the  other,  and  became  scattered , 
and  mingled,  in  some  degree,  over  the  earth.  Accordingly,  among 
the  African  nations,  in  their  own  proper  countries,  now  and  then  a 
colony  of  whites  have  fijied  their  dwellings.  Among  the  red  na- 
tions are  found,  here  and  there,  as  in  some  of  the  islands  of  the 
Pacific,  the  pure  African  ;  and  both  the  black  and  the  red  are  found 
among  the  white  nations ;  but  now,  much  more  than  in  the  earliest 
ages,  a  general  amalgamation  of  the  three  original  colors  exists. 

Much  has  been  written  to  establish  the  doctrine  of  the  influence 
of  climate  and  food,  in  producing  the  vast  extremes  between  a  fair 
and  ruddy  white,  and  a  jet  black.  But  this  mode  of  reasoning,  to 
establish  the  origin  of  the  human  complexion,  we  imagine,  very  in- 
conclusive and  unsatisfactory  ;  as  it  is  found  that  no  distance  of 
space,  lapse  of  ages,  change  of  diet,  or  of  countries,  can  possibly 
M  remove  the  leopard's  spots,  or  change  the  Ethiopian1;,  skin  " 
No  lapse  of  ages  has  been  known  to  cVmge  a  white  man  and  kin 
posterity  to  the  exact  hue  or  shape  of  an  African,  although  the 
hottest  rays  of  the  burning  clime  of  Lybia,  may  have  scorched  him 
ages  unnumbered,  and  its  soil  have  fed  him  with  its  roots  and  ber- 
ries, an  equal  length  of  time.  It  is  granted3  however,  that  a  white 
man  with  his  posterity  will  tan  very  dark  by  the  heat  of  the  sun  ; 
but  it  never  can  altar,  as  it  never  has,  i.^terially  altered,  the  shape 

3 


I* 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


of  his  face  from  that  which  was  characteristic  of  his  nation  of 
people,  nor  the  form  of  his  limbs,  nor  his  curled  hair,  turning  it  tc_ 
a  wool,  provided  always,  the  blood  be  kept  pure  and  unmixed  by 
marriages  with  the  African. 

Power  in  the  decomposition  of  food,  by  the  human  stomach,  does 
not  exist  of  sufficient  force  to  overturn  the  deep  foundation  of  causes 
established  in  the  very  germ  of  being,  by  the  Creator.  The  cir- 
cumstance of  what  a  man  may  eat,  or  where  he  may  chance  to 
breathe,  cannot  derange  the  economy  of  first  principles.  Were  it 
so,  it  were  not  a  hard  matter  for  the  poor  African,  if  he  did  but 
know  this  choice  trait  of  philosophy,  to  take  hope  and  shake  off 
entirely  his  unfortunate  skin,  in  process  of  time,  and  no  longer  bt 
exposed,  solely  on  that  account,  to  slavery,  chains,  and  wretch- 
edness. 

But  the  inveteracy  of  complexion  against  the  operation  of  climate 
is  evinced  by  the  following,  as  related  by  Morse.  On  the  eastern 
coast  of  Africa,  in  latitude  5  deg.  north,  are  found  jet,  black,  tawny, 
olive,  and  white  inhabitants,  all  speaking  the  same  language,  which 
is  the  Arabic.  This  particular  part  of  Africa  is  called  the  Maga- 
doxo  kingdom  :  the  inhabitants  are  a  stout,  warlike  nation,  of  the 
Mahometan  religion.  Here,  it  appears,  is  permanent  evidence,  that 
climate  or  food  have  no  effect  in  materially  changing  the  hues  of 
the  complexion,  each  retaining  their  own  original  texture ;  even 
the  white  is  found  as  stubborn  in  this  torrid  sky,  as  the  black  in  the 
northern  countries. 

The  whites  found  there,  are  the  descendants  of  the  ancient  Ro- 
mans, Carthagenians,  Vandals,  and  Goths ;  who  were,  it  is  asserted 
by  John  Leo,  the  African,  who  wrote  a  description  of  Africa  in  Ara- 
bic, all  anciently  comprehended  under  the  general  name  of  Mauri 
or  Moors,  as  well  as  the  black  Moors  themselves.  (Morse's  Uni- 
versal Geo.  vol.  ii.  pp.  754.  781.) 

Shem,  according  to  the  commonly  received  opinion,  was  the  eld- 
est son  of  Noah ;  and  as  the  complexion  of  this  child  did  not  differ 
from  that  of  other  children  born  before  the  Hood,  all  of  whom  are 
supposed  to  have  been  red,  or  of  the  copper  hue,  cu  the  ground  pi 
Adam's  complexion ;  Noah  did  not,  therefore,  name  the  child  at 
first  sight,  from  any  extraordinary  impulse  arising  from  any  singu- 
lar appearance  in  the  complexion,  but  rather,  as  it  was  first  born 
*on,  he  called  him  Shem,  that  is  renown,  which  name  agrees,  in  a 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THF.  WEST- 


19 


*yarp?ising  manner,  with  what  we  have  hereafter  to  relate,  respect- 
ing this  character. 

The  impulse  in  the  mind  of  Noah,  which  moved  him  to  call  this 
first  son  of  his  Shem,  or  renown,  may  have  been  similar  to  that  of 
the  patriarch,  Jacob,  respecting  his  first  born  son.  He  says,  Reu- 
ben, thou  art  my  first  born,  my  might,  and  the  beginning  of  my 
strength,  the  excellency  of  dignity,  and  the  excellency  of  power. 
The  ideas  are  similar,  both  leading  to  the  same  consequence ;  in 
one  case,  it  is  renown  ;  in  the  other,  the  excellency  of  power,  which 
is  equivalent  to  renown  ;  all  which,  in  both  cases,  arise  from  the 
.mere  circumstance  of  those  children  being  the  first  born. 

It  is  not  unusual  for  parents  to  feel  this  sensation,  on  the  birth  of 
a  first  child,  especially  if  it  be  a  son ;  however,  it  is  not  impossible 
but  the  prophetic  spirit  moved  Noah  so  to  name  this  son  by  the  ex- 
traordinary appellation,  renown,  or  Shem  ;  and  the  chief  trait  of  ce- 
lebrity which  was  to  attach  itself  to  the  character  of  Shem  was  to 
arise  out  of  the  fact  of  his  being  the  type  of  the  Messiah ;  and  the 
time  was  to  come  when  this  person,  after  the  flood  should  have 
passed  away,  would  be  the  only  antediluvian  survivor ;  on  which 
account,  all  mankind  must,  of  necessity,  by  natural  and  mutual 
consent,  look  up  to  this  man  with  extraordinary  veneration. 

By  examining  the  chronolgical  account  of  the  Jewish  records, 
we  find  the  man  Shem  lived  five  hundred  years  after  the  flood,  and 
that  he  over-lived  Abraham  about  forty  years.  So  that  he  was  not 
only  the  oldest  man  on  the  earth  at  that  time,  but  also  the  only  sur- 
viving antediluvian,  as  well  as  the  great  typical  progenitor  of  the 
adorable  Messiah. 

Here  was  a  foundation  for  renown,  of  sufficient  solidity  to  justify 
ihe  prophetic  spirit  in  moving  Noah  to  call  him  Shem,  a  name  full 
of  import,  full  of  meaning,  pointing  its  signification,  in  a  blaze  of 
light,  to  Him  whose  birth  and  works  of  righteousness  were  to  be 
of  consequences  the  highest  in  degree  to  the  whole  race  of  Adam, 
in  the  atonement. 

But  at  the  birth  of  Ham,  it  was  different.  When  this  child  was 
born,  we  may  suppose  the  house  or  tent  to  have  been  in  an  uproar, 
on  the  account  of  his  strange  complexion  ;  the  news  of  which,  we 
may  suppose,  soon  reached  the  ear  of  the  father,  who,  on  beholding 
itj  at  once,  in  the  form  of  exclamation,  cried  out,  Ham  !  that  is,  it 
is  black  f  and  this  word  became  his  name. 


20 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


It  is  believed,  that  in  the  first  ages  of  the  world,  things  were 
named  from  their  supposed  qualities  ;  and  their  supposed  qualities 
arose  from  first  appearances.  In  this  way,  it  is  imagined,  Adam 
named  all  the  animals  at  first  sight ;  as  the  Lord  God  caused  them 
to  pass  before  him,  a  sudden  impulse  arising  in  his  mind,  from  the 
appearance  of  each  creature  ;  so  that  a  suitable  name  was  given. 

This  was  natural ;  but  not  more  so  than  it  was  for  Noah  to  call 
his  second  son  Ham,  because  he  was  black;  being  struck  by  this 
uncommon,  unheard  of,  complexion  of  his  own  child,  which  impelled 
him  at  once  to  name  him  as  he  looked. 

We  suppc  ?e  the  same  influence  governed  at  the  birth  of  Japheth  ; 
and  that  at  Oie  birth  of  this  child,  greater  surprise  still  must  have 
pervaded  the  household  of  Noah,  as  white  was  a  cast  of  complex- 
ion still  more  wonderful  than  either  red  or  black,  as  these  two  last 
named  complexions  bear  a  stronger  affinity  to  each  other,  than  to 
that  of  white. 

No  sooner,  therefore,  as  we  may  suppose,  was  the  news  of  the 
birth  of  this  third  son  carried  to  Noah,  than  being  anxious  to  em- 
brace him,  saw  with  amazement,  there  it  was  diverse  from  the  other 
two,  and  from  all  mankind ;  having  not  th  least  affinity  of  com- 
plexion with  any  of  the  huma^  race  ;  and  being  in  an  ecstacy,  at 
the  sight  of  so  fair  and  ruddy  an  infant,  beautifully  white  and  tran- 
sparent of  complexion,  cried  out,  while  under  the  influence  of  his 
joy  and  surprise,  Japheth  !  which  word  became  his  name  ;  to  this, 
however,  be  added  afterwards,  God  shall  greatly  enlarge  Japheth, 
and  he  shall  dwell  in  the  tents  of  Shem  and  Canaan ;  that  is,  Ham 
nnall  be  his  servant ;  so  that,  in  a  political  sense,  he  was  higher  than 
trie  6t^5i  two. 

But  if  our  opinion  on  this  subject  is  esteemed  not  well  support- 
ed, we  would  add  one  other  circumstance,  which  would  seem  to 
amount  to  demonstration,  in  proving  Ham  and  his  posterity  to  have 
been  black  at  the  outset. 

The  circumstance  is  as  follows  :  At  two  particular  times,  it  ap- 
pears from  Genesis,  that  Noah  declared,  Ham,  with  his  posterity, 
should  serve  or  become  servants  to  both  the  posterity  of  Shem  and 
Japheth.  If  one  were  to  inquire  whether  this  has  been  fulfilled 
or  not,  what  would  be  the  universal  answer  ?  It  would  be — it  has 
been  fulfilled.  But  in  what  way  ?  Who  are  the  people  ?  The 
universal  answer  is,  The  African  race  are  the  people.    But  how  is 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST* 


81 


this  proved,  unless  we  allow  them  to  be  the  descendants  of  Ham? 

If,  then,  they  are  his  descendants,  they  have  been  such  in  every 
age,  from  the  very  beginning and  the  same  criterion,  which  is 
their  color,  has  distinguished  them.  This  proves  their  progenitor, 
Ham,  to  have  been  black  ;  or  otherwise,  it  had  been  impossible  to 
distinguish  them  from  the  posterity  of  the  other  two,  Shem  and 
Japheth  ;  and  whether  the  denunciation  of  Noah  has  been  fulfilled 
or  not,  would  be  unknown.  But  as  it  is  known,  the  subject  is 
clear;  the  distinguishing  trait  by  which  Ham's  posterity  were 
known  ^Xfirst,  must  of  necessity  have  been,  as  it  is  now,  black. 

We  have  dwelt  thus  far  upon  the  subject  of  human  complexions, 
because  there  are  those  who  imag;ne  the  variety  now  found  among 
men,  to  have  originated  purely  from  climate,  food,  and  manner  of 
living  ;  while  others  suppose  a  plurality  of  fathers  to  have  been  the 
cause,  in  contradiction  of  the  account  in  Genesis,  where  one  man  is 
said  to  have  been  the  father  of  all  mankind.  But  on  this  curious 
subject,  respecting  the  variety  of  complexions,  see,  toward  the 
close  of  this  volume,  the  remarks  of  Professor  Mitchell,  late  of 
New- York. 


RESPECTING  A  DIVISION  OF  THE  EARTH,  BY  NOAH,  AMONG 

HIS  SONS. 

It  cannot  be  denied  but  the  whole  earth,  at  the  time  the  ark 
rested  on  mount  Ararat,  belonged  to  Noah,  he  being  the  prince, 
patriarch,  or  head  and  ruler  of  his  own  family  ;  consequently,  of  all 
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  as  there  were  none  but  his  own  house. 
This  is  more  than  can  be  said  of  any  other  man  since  the  world  be- 
gan, except  of  the  man  Adam.  Accordingly,  in  the  true  character 
of  a  Patriarchal  Prince,  as  related  by  Eusebius,  an  ecclesiastical 
writer  of  the  fourth  century,  and  by  others,  that  Noah,  being  com- 
manded of  God,  proceeded  to  make  his  will,  dividing  the  whole 
earth  between  his  three  sons,  and  their  respective  heirs  or  descend- 
ants. 

To  Shem  he  gave  all  the  East;  to  Ham,  all  Africa;  to  Japheth, 
the  continent  of  Europe,  with  its  /s/es,  and  the  northern  parts  of 


I 

22  AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 

Asia,  as  before  pointed  out.  And  may  wo  not  add  America,  wlm  fa , 
in  the  course  of  Divine  Providence,  is  now  in  the  possession  of  the 
posterity  of  Japheth,  and  it  is  not  impossible  but  this  quarter  of  the 
earth  may  have  been  known  even  to  Noah,  as  we  are  led  to  sus- 
pect from  the  statement  of  Eusebius. 

This  idea,  or  information,  is  brought  forward  by  Adam  Clarke, 
from  whose  commentary  on  the  Scriptures,  we  have  derived  it. 
That  a  knowledge  of  not  only  Africa,  Asia,  and  Europe,  was  in 
the  possession  of  Noah,  but  even  the  islands  of  Europe,  is  probable, 
or  how  could  he  have  given  them  to  the  posterity  of  his  son  Japheth, 
as  written  by  Eusebius. 

It  may  be  questioned,  possibly,  whether  these  countries,  at  so 
early  a  period,  had  yet  been  explored,  so  as  to  furnish  Noah  with 
any  degree  of  knowledge  respecting  them.  To  this  it  may  be  re- 
plied, that  he  lived  three  hundred  and  fifty  years  after  the  flood,  and 
more  than  a  hundred  and  fifty  after  the  building  of  the  tower  of 
Babel  and  the  dispersion  of  the  first  inhabitants,  by  means  of  the 
confusion  of  the  ancient  language. 

This  was  a  lapse  of  time  quite  sufficient  to  have  enabled  explor- 
ers to  have  traversed  them,  or  even  the  whole  earth,  if  companies 
had  been  sent  out  in  different  directions,  for  that  express  purpose, 
and  to  return  again  with  their  accounts  to  Noah.  If  the  supposition 
of  Adam  Clarke,  and  others,  be  correct ;  which  is,  that  at  that  time 
the  whole  land  of  the  globe  was  so  situated  that  no  continent  was 
quite  separate  from  the  others  by  water,  as  they  are  now ;  so  that 
men  could  traverse  by  land  the  whole  globe  at  their  will :  if  so, 
even  America  may  have  been  known  to  the  first  nations,  as  well  as 
other  parts  of  the  earth. 

This  doctrine  of  the  union  of  continents,  is  favored,  or  rather 
founded  on  a  passage  in  the  Book  of  Genesis,  10th  chap.  20th  ver., 
where  it  is  stated  that  one  of  the  sons  of  Eber  was  Peleg,  so  named, 
because,  in  his  days,  the  earth  was  divided ;  the  word  Peleg,  prob- 
ably signifying  division,  in  the  Noetic  language. 

The  birth  of  Peleg  was  about  an  hundred  years  after  the  flood, 
the  very  time  when  Babel  was  being  built.  But  we  do  not  im- 
agine this  great  convulsionary  division  of  the  several  quarters  of 
the  globe  took  place  till  perhaps  an  hundred  years  after  the  birth 
of  Peleg,  on  account  of  the  peculiar  latitude  of  the  expression, 
a  in  the  days  of  Peleg."    Or,  it  may  have  been  even  two  hundred 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


years  after  the  birth  of  Peleg,  as  this  person's  whole  life  was  but 
two  hundred  and  thirty -nine  years,  so  that  Noah  over-lived  him 
eleven  years. 

"In  the  days  of  Peleg,"  therefore,  may  as  well  be  argued  to 
mean,  near  the  close  of  his  life,  as  at  any  other  period ;  this  would 
give  time  for  a  very  considerable  knowledge  of  the  earth's  coun- 
tries to  have  been  obtained  ;  so  that  Noah  could  have  made  a 
judicious  division  of  it  among  the  posterity  of  his  sons. 

This  grand  division  of  the  earth,  is  supposed  by  some,  to  have 
been  only  a  political  division  ;  but  by  others,  a  physical  or  geogra- 
phical one.  This  latter  opinion  is  favored  by  Adam  Clarke.  See 
his  comment  on  the  25th  verse  of  the  10th  chapter  of  Genesis,  a& 
follows  :  "  A  separation  of  Continents  and  islands  from  the  mail* 
land,  the  earthy  parts  having  been  united  in  one  great  continent 
previous  to  the  days  of  Peleg."  But  at  this  era,  when  men  and 
animals  had  found  their  way  to  the  several  quarters  of  the  earth,  it 
seemed  good  to  the  Creator  to  break  down  those  uniting  portions  of 
land,  by  bringing  into  action  the  winds,  the  billows,  and  subtera- 
nean  fires,  which  soon,  by  their  repeated  and  united  forces,  removed 
each  isthmus,  throwing  them  along  the  coasts  of  the  several  con- 
tinents, and  forming  them  into  islands ;  thus  destroying,  for  wise 
purposes,  those  primeval  highways  of  the  nations. 


SUPPOSEDTDENTITY  AND  REAL  NAME  OF  MELCHISEDEC,  OP 

THE  SCRIPTURES. 

This  is  indeed  an  interesting  problem,  the  solution  of  which  has 
perplexed  its  thousands  ;  most  of  whom  suppose  him  to  have  been 
the  Son  of  God,  some  angelic,  or  mysterious  supernatural  person- 
age, rather  than  a  mere  man.  This  general  opinion  proceeds  on 
the  ground  of  the  Scripture  account  of  him,  as  commonly  under- 
stood, being  expressed  as  follows  :  "  Without  father,  without  mo- 
tner,  without  descent,  having  neither  beginning  of  days,  nor  end  of 
life,  but  made  like  unto  the  Son  of  God,  abideth  a  priest  continu- 
ally."   Hebrews  vii.  3. 


24 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


But,  without  further  circumlocution,  we  will  at  once  disclose  our 
opinion,  by  stating  that  we  believe  him  to  have  been  Shem,  the 
eldest  son  of  Noah,  the  immediate  progenitor  of  Abraham,  Isaac, 
Jacob,  and  the  Jews,  and  none  other  than  Shem,  "  the  man  of 
name,  or  renown." 

We  derive  this  conclusion  from  the  research  and  critical  com- 
mentary of  the  learned  and  pious  Adam  Clarke,  who  gives  us  this 
information  from  the  tradition  of  the  Jewish  Rabbins,  which,  with- 
out hesitation,  gives  this  honor  to  Shem. 

The  particular  part  of  that  Commentary  to  which  we  allude  as 
being  the  origin  of  our  belief,  on  this  subject,  is  the  preface  of  that 
author  to  the  Book  of  Job,  on  page  716,  as  follows  :  "  Shem  lived 
five  hundred  and  two  years  after  the  deluge  ;  being  still  alive,  and 
in  the  three  hundred  and  ninety-third  year  of  his  life,  when  Abra- 
ham was  born ;  therefore,  the  Jewish  tradition,  that  Shem  was  the 
Melchisedec,  or  my  righteous  king  of  Salem,"  which  word  Mel- 
chisedec,  was  "  an  epithet,  or  title  of  honor  and  respect,  not  a  pro- 
per name,  and  therefore,  as  the  head  and  father  of  his  race,  Abra- 
ham paid  tithes  to  him.  This  seems  to  be  vjell  founded,  and  the 
idea  is  confirmed  by  these  remarkable  words,  Psalms,  110,  Jehovah 
hath  sworn  and  will  not  repent,  or  change,'?*?  tah  cohenleolam  al  di- 
barte  Malkitsedek.  As  if  he  had  said,  Thou,  my  only  begotten  Son, 
first  born  of  many  brethren,  not  according  to  the  substituted  priest- 
hood of  the  sons  of  Levi,  who,  after  the  sin  of  the  golden  calf,  stood 
up  in  lieu  of  all  the  first  born  of  Israel,  invested  with  their  forfeit- 
ed rights  of  primogeniture  of  king  and  priest :  the  Lord  hath  sworn 
and  will  not  repent,  (change.)  Thou  art  a  priest  for  ever,  after 
the  (my  order  of  Melchisedec,  my  own  original  primitive)  order 
of  primogeniture  :  even  as  Shem,  the  man  of  name,  the  Shem  that 
stands  the  first  and  foremost  of  the  sons  of  Noah.  The  righteous 
Prince,  and  Priest  of  the  Most  High  God  meets  his  descendant, 
Abraham,  ?.fter  the  slaughter  of  the  kings,  with  refreshments  ; 
and  blessed  him,  as  the  head  and  father  of  his  race  ;  the  Jews  in 
particular ;  and,  as  such,  he  received  from  Abraham,  the  tithe  of  all 
the  spoil. 

How  beautifully  does  Paul  of  Tarsi1  s,  writing  to  the  Hebrews, 
point,  through  Melchisedec,  (or  Shem,  the  head  and  father  of  their 
race,)  invested  in  all  the  original  rights  of  primogeniture,  Priest  of 
the  most  High  God,  blessing  Abraham  as  such,  before  Levi  had 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST- 


£5 


existence,  and  as  such,  receiving  tithes  from  Abraham,  and  in  him 
from  Levi,  yet  in  the  loins  of  his  forefathers  :  Moses,  on  this  great 
and  solemn  occasion,  records  simply  this  : — Melchisedec,  king  of 
Salem,  jPriest  of  the  Most  High  God,  sine  genealogia  ;  his  pedi- 
gree not  mentioned,  but  standing,  as^4e?amin  St.  Luke's  genealogy, 
without  father,  and  without  mother,  Adam  of  God.  Luke  hi.  38. 
How  beautifully,  I  say,  doth  St.  Paul  point,  through  Melchisedec, 
to  Jehoshua,  our  Great  High  Priest  and  King,  Jesus  Christ,  whose 
eternal  generation  who  shall  declare  !  Ha  Mashiach,  the  Lord's 
Anointed  High  Priest  and  King,  after  the  order  of  Melchisedec  , 
only  begotten,  first  born  son." 

Thus  far  for  the  preface  on  the  subject  of  Melchisedec,  showing 
that  he  was  none  other  than  Shem,  the  son  of  Noah.  We  shall 
now  give  the  same  author's  views  of  the  same  supposed  mysterious 
character ,  Melchisedec,  as  found  in  his  notes  on  the  7th  of  Hebrews, 
commencing  at  the  third  verse. 

Without  father,  without  mother,  without  descent,  having 
neither  beginuing  of  days,  noj  end  of  life.  "  The  object  of  the 
Apostle,  in  thus  producing  the  example  of  Melchisedec,  was  to 
show — 1st.  That  Jesus  was  the  person  prophesied  of  in  the  110th 
Psaira  ;  which  psalm  the  Jews  uniformly  understood  as  predicting 
the  Messiah.  2d.  To  answer  the  objections  of  the  Jews  against 
the  legitimacy  of  the  priesthood  of  Christ,  arising  from  the  stock 
from  which  He  proceeded.  The  objection  is  this  :  if  the  Messiah 
is  a  true  Priest,  he  must  come  from  a  legitimate  stock,  as  all  the 
Priests  under  the  law  have  regularly  done  ;  otherwise  we  cannot 
acknowledge  him  to  be  a  Priest. 

But  Jesus  of  Nazareth  has  not  proceeded  from  such  a  stock ; 
therefore,  we  cannot  acknowledge  him  for  a  Priest,  the  Antitype  of 
Aaron  To  this  objection  the  Apostle  answers,  that  it  was  not 
necessary  for  the  Priest  to  come  from  a  particular  stock  ;  for  Mel- 
chisedec was  a  Priest  of  the  Most  High  God,  and  yet  was  not  of 
the  stock  either  of  Abraham  (for  Melchisedec  was  before  Abraham,) 
or  Aaron,  but  was  a  Canaanile. 

It  is  well  known  that  the  ancient  Jews,  or  Hebrews,  were  ex- 
ceedingly scrupulous  in  choosing  their  High  Priest ;  partly  by  di- 
vine command,  and  partly  from  the  tradition  of  their  ancestors, 
who  always  considered  this  office  to  be  of  the  highest  dignity.  1st. 
God  had  commanded,  Lev.  xxi.  10,  that  the  High  Priest  should  be 

4 


26 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


chosen  from  among  their  brethren  ;  that  is,  from  the  family  of 
Aaron.  2.  That  he  should  marry  a  virgin.  3d.  He  must  not 
marry  a  widow-  4th.  Nor  a  divorced  person.  5th.  Nor  a  harlot. 
6th.  Nor  one  of  another  nation.  He  who  was  found  to  have  acted 
contrary  to  these  requisitions,  was,  jure  divino,  excluded  from  the 
pontificate,  or  eligibility  to  hold  that  office. 

On  the  contrary,  it  was  necessary  that  he  who  desired  this  honor, 
should  be  able  to  prove  his  descent  from  the  family  of  Aaron  :  and 
if  he  could  not,  though  even  in  the  Priesthood,  he  was  cast  out ; 
as  we  find  from  Ezra,  ii.  62,  and  Nehem.  vii.  63.  To  these  divine 
ordinances,  the  Jews  have  added,  1st.  That  no  t  -jselyte  could  be 
a  Priest :  2d.  Nor  a  slave  :  3d.  Nor  a  bascard  :  4th.  Nor  the  son 
of  a  Nethinnim  ;  these  were  a  class  of  men  who  were  servants  to 
the  Priests  and  Levites,  (not  of  their  tribe,)  to  draw  water,  and  to 
hew  wood.    5th.  Nor  one  whose  father  exercfsed  any  base  trade. 

And  that  they  might  be  well  assured  of  all  this,  they  took  the 
utmost  care  to  preserve  their  genealogies,  which  were  regularly 
kept  in  the  archives  of  the  temple.  *  When,  if  any  person  aspired 
to  the  sacerdotal  function,  his  genealogical  table  was  carefully  in- 
'spected ;  and  if  any  of  the  above  blemishes  was  found  in  him,  he 
was  rejected." 

But  here  the  matter  comes  to  a  point,  as  it  respects  our  inquiry 
respecting  Melchisedec's  having  no  father  or  mother.  "  He  who 
could  not  support  his  pretensions  by  just  genealogical  evidences, 
was  said  to  be  without  father.  Thus  in  Bereshith  Rabba,  Sect, 
xviii.  fol.  18,  are  these  words,  For  this  cause  shall  a  man  leave 
father  and  mother.  It  is  said,  if  a  proselyte  to  the  Jewish  religion 
have  married  his  own  sister,  whether  by  the  same  father,  or  by  the 
same  mother,  they  cast  her  out,  according  to  Rabbi  Meir.  But 
the  wise  men  say,  if  she  be  of  the  same  mother,  they  cast  her  out ; 
but  if  of  the  same  father,  they  retain  her,  shein  ab  la  gai,  for  a 
Gentile  has  no  father,  that  is,  his  father  is  net  reckoned  in  the  Jew  - 
ish genealogies. 

In  this  way,  both  Christ  and  Melchisedec  were  without  father, 
and  without  mother,  had  neither  beginning  of  days,  descent  of  line- 
age, nor  end  of  life,  in  their  books  of  genealogies,  which  gave  a 
man  a  right  to  the  Priesthood,  as  derived  from  Aaron ;  that  is,  were 
not  descended  from  the  original  Jewish  sacerdotal  i:ock.  Yet  Mel- 
chisedec, who  was  a  Canaanite,  was  a  Priest  of  the  Most  High 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST 

0 


27 


God  This  sense,  Suidas*  confirms,  under  the  word  Melchisedec, 
where,  after  stating  that  he  reigned  a  prince  in  Salem,  i.  e.  Jeru- 
salem, 113  years,  he  died  a  righteous  man.  To  this  he  adds,  "  He 
is,  therefore,  said  be  without  descent  or  genealogy  t  because  he  was 
not  of  the  seed  of  Abraham,  (for  Abraham  was  his  seed,)  but  of 
Canaanitish  origin." 

We  think  this  sufficient  to  show  the  reason  why  he  is  said  to 
have  had  no  father  or  mother,  beginning  of  days,  nor  end  of  life, 
as  stated  in  Hebrews.  But  this  is  not  said  of  him  in  the  Book  of 
Genesis,  where  we  first  become  acquainted  with  this  truly  won- 
derful character. 

It  should  be  recollected,  that  the  Jewish  genealogies  went  no  far- 
ther back,  for  the  qualifications  of  theii  priestly  credentials,  or 
eligibility  to  the  pontifical  office,  than  to  the  time  and  family  of 
Aaron ;  which  was  more  than  four  hundred  years  after  that  of 
Abraham  and  Melchisedec.  No  wonder,  then,  that  Christ's  gene- 
alogy was  not  found  in  their  records,  so  as  to  give  him  a  claim  to 
that  office,,  such  as  they  might  approve. 

But  inasmuch  as  Melchisedec  was  greater  than  Abraham,  from 
whom  the  Jewish  race  immediately  originated,  he  argues  from  the 
authority  cf  the  110th  Psalm,  where  Melchisedec  is  spoken  of, 
which  the  Jews  allowed  to  be  spoken  of  Christ,  or  the  Messiah 
who  was  to  come,  and  was,  therefore,  a  Priest  after  the  order  of 
that  extraordinary  Prince  of  Peace,  and  King  of  Salem  ;  because, 
neither  had  he  such  a  claim  on  the  Jewish  genealogies,  as  required 
by  the  Jews,  so  as  to  make  him  eligible  to  their  priesthood,  for  they 
knew,  or  might  have  known,  that  Christ  did  not  come  of  the  Aa- 
ronic  race,  but  of  the  line  or  tribe  of  Judah. 

That  he  was  a  man,  a  mere  man,  born  of  a  woman,  and  came 
into  the  world  after  the  ordinary  manner,  is  attested  by  St.  PauPs 
own  extraordinary  expression.  See  Hebrews,  vii.  4 : — "  Now  con- 
sider how  great  this  man  was,  unto  whom  Abraham  gave  the  tenth 
of  the  spoils."  However  wonderfully  elevated  among  men,  and  in 
the  sight  of  God ;  however  powerful  and  rich,  wise,  holy,  and 
happy  ;  he  was,  nevertheless,  a  mere  man,  or  the  tenth  of  the  spoils 
he  would  not  have  received. 

*  Suidas,  a  Greek  Scholar  of  eminence,  who  flourished  A.  D.  975,  and  was 
an  ecclesiastical  writer  of  that  age. 


OS 


AMERICAN  ANTQUITIG9 


Bill  ilie  question  is,  what  man  w;jv  he,  and  what  was  his  name  I 
u  Now  consider  how  yreut  this  man  was,"  are  words  which  may 
possibly  led  us  to  the  same  conclusion,  which  wc  have  quoted  from 
the  preface  of  the  Book  of  Job. 

There  are  not  wantiDg  circumstances  to  elevate  this  man,  on  the 
supposition  that  he  was  Shem  in  the  scale  of  society,  far  above  a 
common  level  with  the  rest  of  he  inhabitants  of  his  country,  of  suf  - 
ficient importance  to  justify  St.  Paul  in  saying,  *' now  consider  how 
great  this  man  was." 

We  shall  recount  some  of  the  circumstances:  and  first,  at  the 
time  he  met  Abraham,  when  he  was  returning  from  the  slaughter 
of  the  kings  who  had  carried  away  Lot,  the  half  brother  of  A  bra 
ham,  with  all  his  goods,  his  wife  and  children,  and  blessed  him  ; 
he  was  the  oldest  man  then  on  the  earth-  This  circumstance  alone 
was  of  no 'small  amount,  and  highly  calculated  to  elevate  Shem  in 
the  eyes  of  mankind  ;  for  he  was  then  more  than  five  hundred.anii 
£fty  years  old. 

Second  :  He  was  then  the  only  man  on  the  earth  who  had  lived 
before  the  flood ;  and  had  been  conversant  with  the  nations,  the  in- 
stitutions, the  state  of  agriculture  and  the  arts,  as  understood  and 
practised  by«the  antediluvians. 

Third  :  He  was  the  only  man  who  could  tell  them  about  the  lo- 
cation of  the  garden  of  Eden  ;  a  question,  no  doubt,  of  great  curi- 
osity and  moment  to  those  early  nations,  so  near  the  flood  ;  the 
manner  in  which  the  fall  of  Adam  and  Eve  took  place.  He  could 
tell  them  what  sort  of  fruit  it  was,  and  how  the  tree  looked  on 
which  it  grew  ;  and  from  Shem,  it  is  more  than  probable,  the  Jews 
received  the  idea  that  the  forbidden  fruit  was  that  of  the  grape  vine. 
as  found  in  their  traditions. 

Shem  could  tell  them  what  sort  of  serpent  it  was,  whether  an 
Ourang  Outang,  as  believed  by  some,  that  the  evil  spirit  made  use 
of  to  deceive  the  woman  ;  he  could  tell  them  about  the  former 
beauty  of  the  earth,  before  it  had  become  ruined  by  the  commo- 
tion of  the  waters  of  the  flood :  the  form  and  situation  of  countries, 
and  of  the  extent  and  amount  of  human  population.  He  could  telf 
them  how  the  nations  who  filled  the  earth  with  their  violence  and 
rapine,  used  to  go  about  the  situation  of  the  happy  garden  to  which 
no  man  was  allowed  to  approach  nor  enter,  on  account  of  the  dftettd 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  TKF.  WEST. 


29 


ml  Cherubim  and  the  flaming  sword ;  and  how  they  blasphemed 
against  the  judgments  of  the  Most  High  on  that  account. 

Fourth  :  Shem  could  inform  them  about  the  progress  of  the  ark, 
where  it  was  built,  and  what  opposition  and  ridicule  his  father 
Noah  met  with  while  it  was  being  builded ;  he  could  tell  respect- 
ing the  violent  manners  of  the  antediluvians,  and  what  their  pecu- 
liar aggravated  sins  chiefly  consisted  in — what  God  meant  when 
he  said,  that  "  all  flesh  had. corrupted  its  way  before  Him,"  except 
the  single  family  of  Noah.  There  are  those  who  imagine,  from 
that  peculiar  phraseology,  "  all  flesh  hath  corrupted  its  way  on  the 
earth,"  that  the  human  form  had  become  mingled  with  that  of  ani- 
mals. If  so,  it  was  high  time  they  were  drowned,  both  man  and 
beast,  for  reasons  too  obvious  to  need  illustration  here  ;  it  was  high 
time  that  the  soil  was  purged  by  water,  and  torn  to  fragments  and 
buried  beneath  the  earthy  matter  thrown  up  from  depths  not  so 
polluted. 

It  is  not  at  all  improbable  but  from  this  strange  and  most  hor- 
rible practice,  the  first  ideas  of  the  ancient  statuaries  were  derived, 
of  delineating  sculpture  which  represents  monsters,  half  human  and 
half  animal.  This  kind  of  sculpture,  and  also  paintings,  abounded 
among  the  Egyptians,  the  Greeks,  and  the  Romans,  as  well  as 
other  nations  of  the  early  ages.  Of  these  shapes  were  many  of 
their  gods ;  being  half  lion,  half  eagle,  and  half  fish ;  according  to 
the  denomination  of  paganism  who  adored  these  images. 

Fifth  :  Shem  was  the  only  man  in  the  days  of  Abraham,  who 
could  tell  them  of  the  promised  Messiah,  of  whom  he  was  the  most 
glorious  and  expressive  type  afforded  the  men,  before  his  coming, 
as  attested  by  St.  Paul.  It  is  extremely  probable,  that  with  this 
man,  Abraham  had  enjoyed  long  and  close  acquaintance,  for  he  was 
descended  of  his  loins,  from  whom  he  learned  the  knowledge  of 
the  true  God,  in  all  probability,  in  the  midst  of  his  Chaldean, 
idolatrous  nation,  and  became  a  convert  to  the  faith  of  Melechise- 
dec  From  the  familiar  manner  with  which  Melchisedec,  or  Shem, 
who,  we  are  compelled  to  believe,  was  indeed  Melchisedec,  met 
Abraham,  and  blessed  him,  in  reference  to  the  great  Messiah,  we 
are  strongly  inclined  to  believe  them  old  acquaintance. 

Sixth :  It  appears  that  Shem,  or  Melchisedec,  had  gotten  great 
possessions  and  influence  among  men,  as  he  had  become  king  of 
Salem,  or  ancient  Jehus,  where  Jerusalem  was  afterwards  built,  and 


30 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


where  mount  Zion  reared  her  alabaster  towers,  and  was  the  only 
temple,  in  which  the  true  God  was  dnderstandingly  worshipped, 
then  on  the  earth.  It  is  not  impossible  but  the  mountainous  region 
about  Mount  Horeb,  and  the  mountains  round  about  Jerusalem, 
were,  before  the  flood,  the  base  or  foundation  of  the  country,  and 
exact  location  of  the  region  of  the  garden  called  Eden,  the  place 
where  Adam  was  created.  But  when  the  waters  of  the  deluge 
came,  they  tore  away  all  the  earthy  matter,  and  left  standing  those 
tremendous  pinnacles  and  overhanging  mountains  of  the  region  of 
Jerusalem  and  Mount  Horeb. 

By  examining  the  n>ap  on  an  artificial  globe>  it  will  be  seen,  the 
region  of  country  sit  r.ted  between  the  eastern  end  of  the  Mediter- 
ranean Sea,  the  Bla  ;k  and  Caspian  Seas,  ancl  the  Persian  Gulf, 
there  are  many  river,  running  into  these  several  waters,  all  head- 
ing toward  each  othe^  ;  among  which  is  the  Euphrates,  one  of  the 
rivers  mentioned  by  Moses,  as  deriving  its  origin  in  the  garden,  or 
country  of  Eden.  Mountainous  countries  are  the  natural  sources 
of  rivers.  From  which  we  argue  that  Eden  must  have  been  a  high 
region  of  country,  as  intimated  in  Genesis,  entirely  inaccessible  on 
all  sides,  but  the  east ;  at  which  point  the  sword  of  the  Cherubim 
was  placed  to  guard  t.ie  way  of  the  tree  of  life.  Some  have  ima- 
gined the  Persian  Guh  to  be  the  spot  where  the  garden  was  situated. 
But  this  is  impossible .  as  that  the  river  Euphrates  runs  into  that 
gulf,  from  toward  Jerusalem,  or  from  north  of  Jerusalem.  And  as 
the  region  of  Eden  was  the  source  of  four  large  rivers,  running  in 
different  directions,  so  also,  now  the  region  round  about  the  present 
head  waters  of  the  Euphrates,  is  the  source  of  many  rivers,  as  said 
above  ;  on  which  account,  there  can  be  but  little  doubt,  but  here 
the  Paradise  of  Adam  was  situated,  before  the  deluge.  If  the 
Euphrates  is  one  of  ihe  rivers  having  its  source  in  the  garden  or 
country  of  Eden,  as  Moses  has  recorded,  it  is  then  proved,  to  a 
demonstration,  that  the  region  as  above  described,  is  the  ancient 
and  primeval  site  of  the.  literal  Paradise  of  Adam. 

There  is  a  sort  of  fitness  in  the  ideas  we  are  about  to  advance, 
although  they  are  not  wholly  susceptible  of  proof,  nor  of  very- 
convincing  argument ;  yet,  there  is  no  impropriety  nor  incongruity, 
while  there  is  an  imperceptible  acquiescence  steals  over  the  mind, 
as  we  contemplate  the  subject. 

We  imagine  that  the  very  spot  where  Jesus  Christ  was  crucified 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


31 


may  have  been  the  place  where  Adam  and  Eve  were  created. 
At  whatever  place  it  was,  it  is  certain,  that  not  far  from  the  identi- 
cal place,  he  fell,  by  means  of  the  devil,  or  rather  his  own  sin,  as 
the  time  from  his  creation  till  he  fell,  was  very  short.  It  is  believed 
that  the  hill  oi"  crucifixion  was  also  the  hill  called  Mount  Moriah, 
to  which  God  sent  Abraham  to  siay  his  son  Isaac,  who  was  also  a 
type  of  the  Messiah.  Here  it  appears  Melchisedec  had  the  seat 
of  his  kingly  and  pontifical  government.  The  place  appears  to  be 
marked  with  more  than  ordinary  precision,  as  the  theatre  where 
God  chose  to  act,  or  cause  to  be  acted,  from  ^ge  to  age,  the  things 
which  pointed  to  the  awful  catastrophe — the  death  of  his  Son. 

What  is  more  natural  than  to  suppose,  that  the  Redeemer  would 
choose  for  the  scene  of  his  victory  over  the  enemy  of  man,  the  veiy 
spot  where  he  caused  his  fail.  Here,  too,  it  is  believed,  Christ 
will,  at  his  second  coming,  appear,  when,  with  the  sound  of  the 
first  trumpet,  the  righteous  dead  will  arise.  The  spot  has  been 
marked  as  the  scene  of  wonders,  above  all  other  places  on  the 
earth  ;  and  on  this  account,  is  it  not  allowable  to  imagine,  that  here 
all  nations  shall  be  gathered,  filling  the  whole  region,  not  only 
of  Jerusalem,  but  also  the  whole  surrounding  heaven,  with  the 
quickened  dead,  tc  attend  the  last  judgment,  while  the  Son  of  God 
shall  sit  on  his  triumphant  throne  in  the  mid  air,  exactly  over  the 
spot  where  he  suffered,  and,  probably,  where  man  fell. 

Thus  far  we  have  treated  on  the  subject  of  Melchisedec,  show- 
ing reasons  why  he  is  supDOsed  to  have  been  Shem,  the  son  of 
Noah,  and  reasons  why  St.  Paul  should  say,  "  Now  consider  how 
great  this  man  was."  We  will  only  add,  that  the  word  Melchisedec 
is  not  the  name  of  that  man  so  called,  but  is  only  a  termy  or  appel- 
lation, used  in  relation  to  him,  by  God  himself,  which  is  the  same 
as  to  say,  my  righteous  king.  So  that  Melchisedec  was  not  the  name 
he  received  at  his  birth,  but  was  Shtm,  as  the  Jews  inform  us  in 
their  traditions. 


32 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


DIVISION  OF  THE  EARTH  IN  THE  DAYS  OF  PELEG,  AND  OF 
THE  SPREADING  OUT  OF  THE  NATIONS,  WITH  OTHER  CU- 
RIOUS MATTER:  . 

But  to  return  to  the  subject  respecting  the  division  of  the  earth 
in  the  days  of  Peleg.  If,  then,  the  division  of  the  earth  was  a 
physical  one,  consequently  such  as  had  settled  on  its  several  parts 
before  this  division  Iflcarac  forever  separated  towards  the  four  quaf- 
ters  of  the  globe.  If  this  position  be  true,  the  mystery  is  at  once 
unriddled,  how  men  and  animals  are  found  on  all  the  earth,  not 
excepting  the  islands,  however  far  removed  from  other  lands  by  in- 
tervening seas. 

But  of  this  matter  we  shall  speak  again  towards  the  close  of  this 
work,  when  we  hope  to  throw  some  degree  of  light  upon  this  ob- 
scure, yet  exceedingly  interesting  subject. 

We  here  take  the  opportunity  to  inform  the  reader,  that  as  soon 
as  we  have  given  an  account  of  the  dispersion  of  the  inhabitants 
of  the  earth,  immediately  after  the  flood,  from  whom  sprang  the 
several  nations  mentioned  in  sacred  and  profane  ancient  history , 
we  shall  then  come  to  our  main  subject,  namely,  that  of  the  An- 
tiquities of  America. 

In  order  to  give  an  account  of  those  nations,  we  follow  the  Com- 
mentary of  Adam  Clarke,  on  the  10th  chapter  of  the  Book  of 
Genesis ;  which  is  the  only  book  to  which  we  can  resort  for  in- 
formation of  the  kind  ;  all  other  works  which  touch  this  point,  are 
only  illustrative  and  corroboratory.  Even  the  boasted  antiquity  of 
the  Chinese,  going  back  millions  of  ages,  as  often  quoted  by  the 
sceptic,  is  found,  when  rightly  understood,  to  come  quite  within 
the  account  given  by  Moses  of  the  creation. 

This  is  asserted  by  Baron  Humboldt,  an  historian  of  the  first 
order,  whose  mind  was  embellished  with  a  universal  knowledge  ot 
the  manners,  customs,  and  traits  of  science,  of  the  nations  of  the 
earth,  rarely  acquired  by  any  man. 

Their  account  of  their  first  knowledge  of  the  oldest  of  their  yo<is 
shows  their  antiquity  of  origin  to  be  no  higher  than  the  creation, 
as  related  in  Ccncsis.    Their  Shastrus,  a  book  which  gives  an  ac- 


AND  DISCOVERIES    IN  THE  WEST . 


count  of  the  incarnation  of  the  god  Vishnoo,  states,  that  his  first  in- 
carnation was  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  up  the  Vedus,  [sacred 
books,]  from  the  deep.  This  appearance  of  Vishnoo,  they  say, 
was  in  the  form  of  a  fish.  The  books,  the  fish,  and  the  deep,  are 
all  derived  from  Noah,  whose  account  of  the  creation  has  furnish- 
ed the  ground  of  this  Chinese  tradition.  In  his  second  incarna- 
tion, he  took  the  newly  created  world  on  his  back,  as  he  assumed 
the  form  of  a  tortoise,  to  make  it  stable.  This  alludes  to  the 
Mosaic  account,  which  says,  God  separated  the  water  from  the  dry 
5and,  and  assigned  them  each  their  place.  In  his  third  incarna- 
tion, he  took  the  form  of  a  wild  boar,  and  drew  the  earth  out  of 
the  sea,  into  which  it  had  sunk  during  a  periodical  destruction  of 
the  world. 

This  is  a  tradition  of  the  deluge,  and  of  the  subsiding  of  the  wa- 
ters, when  the  tops  of  the  mountains  first  appeared. 

A  fourth  incarnation  of  this  god,  was  for  the  rescue  of  a  son, 
whose  father  was  about  to  slay  him.  What  else  is  this  but  the  ac- 
count of  Abraham's  going  to  slay  his  son  Isaac,  but  was  rescued 
by  the  appearance  of  an  angel,  forbidding  the  transaction.  In  a 
fifth  incarnation,  he  destroyed  a  giant,  who  despised  the  gods,  and 
committed  violence  in  the  earth.  This  giant  was  none  other  than 
Nimrod,  the  author  of  idolatry,  the  founder  of  Babel,  who  is  called, 
even  by  the  Jews,  in  their  traditions,  a  giant. 

The  inhabitants  of  the  Tonga  Islands,  in  the  South  Pacific  ocean, 
have  a  similar  opinion  respecting  the  first  appearance  of  land,  which 
evidently  points  to  the  flood  of  Noah. 

They  say,  that  at  a  certain  time,  the  god  Tangaloa,  who  was  re- 
puted to  preside  over  arts  and  inventions,  went  forth  to  fish  in  the 
great  ocean,  and  having  from  the  sky  let  down  his  hook  and  line 
into  the  sea,  on  a  sudden  he  felt  that  something  had  fastened  to  his 
hook,  and  believing  he  had  caught  an  immense  fish,  he  exerted  all 
his  strength,  and  presently  there  appeared  above  the  surface  seve- 
ral points  of  rocks  and  mountains,  which  increased  in  number  and 
extent,  the  more  he  strained  at  his  line  to  pull  it  up. 

It  was  now  evident,  that  his  hook  had  fastened  to  the  very  bot- 
tom of  the  ocean,  and  that  he  was  fast  submerging  a  vast  continent ; 
when,  unfortunately,  the  line  broke,  having  brought  up  only  the 
Tonga  Islands,  which  remain  to  this  day. 

5 


34 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


The  name  of  this  fishing  god,  was  Tangaloa,  which  we  imagine 
is  a  very  clear  allusion  to  the  summits  of  Ararat,  which  first  ap- 
peared above  the  waters  of  the  flood  in  Asia. 

"  Now  these  are  the  generations  of  the  sons  of  Noah, — Shem, 
Ham,  and  Japheth ;  and  unto  them  were  sons  born  after  the  flood." 
Genesis  x.  1st  verse,  and  onward. 

The  sons  of  Japheth  :  "  Japheth  is  supposed  to  be  the  same  with 
Japetus  of  the  Greeks,  from  whom,  in  an  extreme  remote  antiquity, 
that  people  were  supposed  to  have  derived  their  origin.  On  this 
point  most  chronologists  are  pretty  well  agreed.  Gomer  is  sup- 
posed to  have  peopled  Galatia  ;  this  was  a  son  of  Japheth.  So 
Joseph  us,  who  says  that  the  Galatians,  (or  French  people,  derived 
from  the  ancient  Belgiac  tribes,)  were  anciently  named  Gomeritei-. 
From  him  the  Cimmerians,  or  Cimbrians,  are  supposed  to  have  de- 
rived their  origin.  Bochart,  a  learned  French  protestant,  born  at 
Rouen,  in  Normandy,  in  the  16th  century,  has  no  doubt  that  the 
Phrygians  sprung  from  this  person  ;  and  some  of  our  principal  com- 
mentators are  of  this  opinion. 

Madai,  one  of  the  sons  of  Japheth,  is  supposed  to  be  the  progen- 
itor of  the  ancient  Medes.  Javan,  was  another  of  his  sons,  from 
whom,  it  is  almost  universally  believed,  sprung  the  lonians  of  Asia 
Minor.  Tubal,  is  supposed  to  be  the  father  of  the  Iberians,  and 
that  a  part,  at  least,  of  Spain  was  peopled  by  him  and  his  descend- 
ants; and  that  Meschech,  who  is  generally  in  Scripture  joined  with 
him,  was  the  founder  of  the  Cappadocians,  from  whom  proceeded 
the  Muscovites,  or  Russians. 

Tiras  :  From  this  person,  according  to  general  consent,  the  Thra- 
cians  derived  their  origin.  Ashkenaz  ;  from  this  person  was  de- 
rived the  name  Sacagena,  a  province  of  Armenia.  Pliny,  one  of 
the  most  learned  of  the  ancient  Romans,  who  lived  immediately 
after  the  commencement  of  the  Christian  era,  mentions  a  people 
called  Ascanticos,  who  dwelt  about  the  Tannis,  or  Palus-Maeoticus ; 
and  some  suppose,  that  from  Ashkenaz  the  Euxine  or  Black  Sez 
derived  its  name  ;  but  others  suppose,  that  from  him  the  Germans 
derived  their  origin. 

Riphath  :  The  fouuder  of  the  Paphlagonians,  which  were  cal- 
led anciently,  Riphatoel.  Tog  arm  a  ;  the  inhabitants  of  Sauromates^ 
or  of  Turcomania. 


AND  DISCOVERIES    IN  THE  WEST . 


35 


Elishah:  As  Javan  peopled  a  considerable  part  of  Greece, 
it  is  in  that  region  we  must  look  for  the  settlements  of  his  descend- 
ants. Elishah  probably  was  the  first  who  settled  at  Elis,  in  Pelo- 
ponnesus. Tarshis  :  He  first  inhabited  Ciliciay  whose  capital, 
anciently,  was  the  city  of  Tarsus,  where  St.  Paul  was  born. 

Kittim  :  Some  think,  by  this  name  is  meant  Cyprus ;  others, 
the  isle  of  Chios ;  and  others,  the  Romans  ;  and  others,  the  Mace- 
donians. 

Dodanim,  or  Rodanim :  Some  suppose,  that  this  family  settled  at 
Dodana ;  others,  at  the  Rhone,  in  France ;  me  anctenl  name  of 
which  was  Rhodanus,  from  the  Scripture  Rhodanim  :  u  By  these, 
were  the  isles  of  the  Gentiles  divided  in  their  lands."  Europe  ; 
of  which  this  is  allowed  to  be  a  general  epithet,  and  comprehends 
all  those  countries  to  wrhieh  the  Hebrews  were  obliged  to  go  by 
sea ;  such  as  Spain,  Gaul  or  France,  Italy,  Greece,  and  Asia  Minor. 

Thus  far  we  have  noticed  the  spreading  out  over  many  countries, 
and  the  origin  of  many  nations,  arising  out  or  from  Japheth,  one  of 
the  sons  of  Noah ;  all  of  whom  are  white,  or  at  least  come  under 
that  class  of  complexions. 

The  descendants  of  Ham,  another  of  the  sons  of  Noah,  and  some 
of  the  nations  springing  from  him,  we  shall  next  bring  to  view. 
"  Cush,  who  peopled  the  Arabic  nowe,  or  province,  near  the  Red 
Sea,  in  Lower  Egypt.  Some  think  the  Ethiopians  sprung  from 
him. 

Mizram  :  This  family  certainly  peopled  Egypt,  and  both  in  the 
east  and  the  west,  Egypt  is  called  Mizraim. 

Phut  :  Who  first  peopled  an  Egyptian  nome,  or  district,  bor- 
dering on  Lybia.  Canaan  ;  he  who  first  peopled  the  land  so  cal- 
led ;  known  also  by  the  name  of  the  Promised  Land-  These  were 
the  nations  which  the  Jews,  w7ho  descended  from  Skem,  cast  out 
from  the  land  of  Canaan,  as  directed  by  God,  because  of  the  enor- 
mity and  brutal  nature  of  their  crimes  ;  which  were  such  as  no  man 
of  the  present  age,  blessed  with  a  Christian  education,  would  ex- 
cuse on  a  jury,  under  the  terrors  of  an  oath,  from  the  punishment 
of  death.  They  practised,  as  did  the  antediluvians  and  the  Sodom- 
ites, those  things  which  were  calculated  to  mingle  the  human  with 
the  brute.  Surely,  when  this  is  understood,  no  man,  not  even  a 
disbeliever  in  the  inspiration  of  the  Bible,  will  blame  Moses  for  his 


36 


A.MKKH  AN    ANTIQ1  I  TIES 


seeding  severity,  u,  cutting  ofl  thost  nations  with  the  besom  of 
entire  extermination. 

uSeea,  the  ibnnder  ot  th»-  Sfabeans :  There  seems  to  be  three 
different  peoph'  of  this  name,  mentioned  in  this  10th  ehapter  of 
Genesis,  and  a  fourth,  in  ehapter  25  of  the  same  book."  The  eueen 
of  Sheba  was  of  this  race,  who  came,  as  it  is  said,  from  the  utter- 
most parts  of  the  earth,  to  Jerusalem,  to  know  the  wisdom  of  Solo- 
mon, and  the  Hebrew  religion  ;  she  was,  therefore,  being  a  de- 
secendant  of  Ham's  posterity,  a  black  woman. 

Havila,  Sabtah,  Raman,  Sabtechah,  Sheba,  Dedan ;  these  are 
names  belonging  to  the  race  of  Ham,  but  the  nations  to  whom  they 
gave  rise,  is  not  interesting  to  our  subject.  Nimrod,  however, 
should  not  be  omitted,  who  was  of  the  race  of  Ham,  and  was  his 
grandson.  Of  whom  it  is  said,  that  he  was  a  mighty  hunter  before 
the  Lord  ;  meaning  not  only  his  skill  and  courage,  and  amazing 
strength  and  ferocity,  in  the  destruction  of  wild  animals  which  in- 
fested the  vast  wilds  of  the  earth  at  that  time,  but  a  destroyer  of 
men's  lives,  and  the  originator  of  idolatry. 

It  was  this  Nimrod,  who  opposed  the  righteous  Melchisedec  ; 
and  taught,  or  rather  compelled,  men  to  forsake  the  religion  of 
Shem,  or  Melchisedec,  and  to  follow  the  institutes  of  Nimrod , 
"  The  beginning  of  his  kingdom  was  Babel,  Erech,  Acad,  and 
Caheh,  in  the  land  of  Shinar.  Gen.  x.  10.  The  tower  of  Babel, 
and  city  of  Babvlou,  were  both  built  on  the  Euphrates.  Babel,  how- 
ever, was  first  built  by  Nimrod 's  agency,  whose  influence,  it  ap- 
pears, arose  much  from  the  fierceness  of  his  disposition,  and  from 
his  stature  and  great  muscular  powers  ;  qualifications,  which  ig- 
norant and  savage  nations,  in  every  age,  have  been  found  apt  to  re- 
vere. The  Septuagint  version  of  the  Scriptures,  speaks  of  Nimrod 
as  being  a  surly  giant;  this  was  a  colored  man,  and  the  first  mon- 
arch of  the  human  ~ace  since  the  flood.  But  whether  monarchical 
or  republican  forms  of  government  obtained  before  the  flopd,is  un- 
certain. Probability  wrould  seem  to  favor  neither  ;  but  rather  that 
the  Patriarchal  government  should  then  have  ruled.  Every  father, 
to  the  fourth  and  fifth  generation,  must  have  been,  in  those  days, 
the  natural  king  or  chief  of  his  clan. 

These,  after  a  while,  spreading  abroad,  would  clash  with  each 
other's  interest,  whence  petty  wars  would  arise,  till  many  tribe-, 
being,  by  the  fortune  of  war,  weakened,  that  which  had  been  most 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


37 


fortunate,  would  at  once  seize  upon  a  wider  empire.  Hence  mo- 
narchies arose.  But  whether  it  so  fell  out  before  the  flood,  can- 
not now  be  ascertained.  A  state,  however,  of  fearful  anarchy 
seems  to  be  alluded  to  in  the  Scriptures  ;  where  it  is  said,  that  the 
earth  was  "filled  with  violence"  This,  however,  was  near  the  time 
of  the  flood. 

Popular  forms  of  government,  or  those  called  republican  or  de- 
mocratical,  had  their  origin  when  a  number  of  distant  tribes  or 
clans  invade  a  district  or  country  so  situated  as  that  the  interests  of 
different  tribes  were  naturally  somewhat  blended  ;  these,  in  order 
to  repel  a  distant  or  strange  enemy's  encroachments,  would  natur- 
ally unite  under  their  respective  chiefs  or  patriarchs.  Experience 
would  soon  show  the  advantage  of  union.    Hence  arose  republics. 

The  grand  confederacy  of  the  five  nations,  which  took  place 
among  the  American  Indians,  before  their  acquaintance  with  the 
white  man,  shows  that  such  even  among  the  most  savage  of  our 
race,  may  have  often  thus  united  their  strength — out  of  which  civi- 
lization has  sometimes,  as  well  as  monarchies  and  republics,  arisen. 

Since  the  flood,  however,  it  is  found  that  the  descendants  of 
Japheth  originated  the  popular  forms  of  government  in  the  earth  ; 
as  among  the  Greeks,  the  Romans,  and  more  perfectly  among  the 
Americans,  who  are  the  descendants  of  Japheth. 

We  shall  omit  an  account  of  the  nations  arising  out  of  the  de- 
scendents  of  Shem,  (for  we  need  not  mention  the  Jewrs,  of  whom 
all  men  know  they  descended  from  him  ;)  for  the  same  reasons  as- 
signed for  the  omission  of  a  part  of  the  posterity  of  Ham,  because 
they  chiefly  settled  in  those  regions  of  Asia,  too  remote  to  answer 
our  subject  any  valuable  purpose. 

"  In  confirmation,  however,  that  all  men  have  been  derived  from 
one  family,  let  it  be  observed,  hat  there  are  many  usgaes,  both 
sacred  and  civil,  which  have  prevailed  in  all  parts  of  the  world, 
which  could  owe  their  origin  to  nothing  but  a  general  institution, 
which  could  not  have  existed,  had  not  mankind  been  of  the  same 
blood  originally,  and  instructed  in  the  same  common  notions 
before  they  were  dispersed"  from  the  mountains  of  Ararat,  and 
the  family  of  Noah.  Traits  of  this  description,  which  argue  to 
this  conclusion,  will,  in  the  course  of  this  work,  be  made  to  appear  ; 
which  to  such  as  believe  the  Bible,  will  afford  peculiar  pleasure 
and  surprise 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIEJ 


ANTIQUITIES  OF  THE  WEST. 

There  are  no  parts  of  the  kingdoms  or  countries  of  the  old 
rcorld,  but  have  celebrated  in  poetry  and  sober  history,  the  mighty 
relics  and  antiquities  of  ancient  empires,  as  Rome,  Babylon,  Greece, 
Egypt,  Hindostan,  Tartary,  Africa,  China,  Persia,  Europe,  Russia, 
and  many  of  the  islands  of  the  sea.  It  yet  remains  for  America  to 
awake  her  story  from  its  oblivious  sleep,  and  tell  the  tale  of  her 
Antiquities — the  traits  of  nations,  cojval,  perhaps,  with  the  eldest 
works  of  man  this  side  of  the  flood. 

This  curious  subject,  although  it  is  obscured  beneath  the  gloom 
of  past  ages,  of  which  but  small  record  remains  ;  beside  that  which 
is  written  in  the  dust,  in  the  form  of  mighty  mounds,  tumuli, 
strange  skeletons,  and  aboriginal  fortifications ;  and,  in  some  few 
instances,  the  bodies  of  preserved  persons,  as  sometimes  found  in 
the  nitrous  caves  of  Kentucky,  and  the  west;  affording  abundant 
premises  to  prompt  investigation  and  rational  conjecture.  The 
mounds  and  tumuli  of  the  west,  are  to  be  ranked  among  the  most 
wonderful  antiquities  of  the  world,  on  the  account  of  their  number, 
magnitude,  and  obscurity  of  origin. 

"  They  generally  are  found  on  fertile  bottoms  and  near  the  rivers. 
Several  hundreds  have  been  discovered  along  the  Valley  of  the 
Mississippi;  the  largest  of  which  stands  not  far  from  Wheeling, on 
the  Ohio.  This  mound  is  fifty  rods  in  circumference,  and  ninety 
feet  in  perpendicular  height. 

This  is  found  filled  with  thousands  of  human  skeletons,  and  was 
doubtless  a  place  of  general  deposite  of  the  dead  for  ages  ;  which 
must  have  been  contiguous  to  some  large  city,  where  dead  were 
placed  in  gradation,  one  layer  above  another,  till  it  reached  a  natu- 
ral climax,  agreeing  with  the  slope  commenced  at  its  base  or  foun- 
dation. 

It  is  not  credible,  that  this  mound  was  made  by  the  ancestors  of 
the  modern  Indians.  Its  magnitude,  and  the  vast  number  of  dead 
deposited  there,  denote  a  population  too  great  to  have  been  sup- 
ported by  mere  fishing  and  hunting,  as  the  manner  of  Indians  has 
always  been.    A  population  sufficient  to  raise  such  a  mound  as  this, 


I 


AND  DISCOVEfclES  IN  THE  WEST-  39 

0/  earth,  by  the  gradual  interment  of  deceased  inhabitants,  would 
necessarily  be  too  far  spread,  to  make  it  convenient  for  the  living  to 
transport  their  dead  to  one  single  place  of  repository.  The  modern 
Indians  have  ever  been  known,  since  the  acquaintance  of  white 
men  with  them,  to  live  only  in  small  towns ;  which  refutes  the  idea 
of  its  having  been  made  by  any  other  people  than  such  as  differ 
exceedingly  from  the  improvident  and  indolent  native  ;  and  must, 
therefore,  have  been  erected  by  a  people  more  ancient  than  what 
is  commonly  meant  by  the  Indian  aborigines,  or  wandering  tribes. 

Some  of  these  mounds  have  been  opened,  when,  not  only  vast 
quantities  of  human  bones  have  been  found,  but  also  instruments 
of  warfare,  broken  earthen  vases,  and  trinkets.  From  the  trees 
growing  on  them,  it  is  supposed,  they  have  already  existed  at  least 
six  hundred  years  ;  and  whether  these  trees  were  the  first,  second, 
or  third  crop,  is  unknown  ;  if  the  second  only,  which,  from  the  old 
and  decayed  timber,  partly  buried  in  the  vegetable  mould  and 
leaves,  seems  to  favor,  then  it  is  all  of  twelve  hundred  years  since 
they  were  abandoned,  if  not  more. 

Foreign  travellers  complain,  that  America  presents  nothing  like 
ruins  within  her  boundaries ;  no  ivy  mantled  towers,  nor  moss  cov- 
ered turrets,  as  in  the  other  quarters  of  the  earth.  Old  Fort  War- 
ren, on  the  Hudson,  rearing  its  lofty  decayed  sides  high  above 
West-Point ;  or  the  venerable  remains  of  two  wars,  at  Ticonderoga, 
upon  Lake  Champlain,  they  say,  afford  something  of  the  kind. 
But  what  are  mouldering  castles,  falling  turrets,  or  crumbling  ab- 
beys, in  comparison  with  those  ancient  and  artificial  aboriginal  hills, 
which  have  outlived  generations,  and  even  all  traditions ;  the  work- 
manship of  altogether  unknown  hands. 

Place  these  monuments  and  secret  repositories  of  the  dead,  to~ 
gether  with  the  innumerable  mounds  and  monstrous  fortifications, 
which  are  scattered  over  America,  in  England,  and  on  the  conti- 
nent of  Europe,  how  would  their  virtuosi  examine,  and  their  anti- 
quarians fill  volumes  with  their  probable  histories.  How  would 
their  fame  be  conveyed  from  learned  bodies,  and  through  literary 
volumes,  inquiring  who  were  the  builders,  of  what  age  of  the  world, 
whence  came  they,  and  their  descendants ;  if  any,  what  has  be- 
come of  them ;  these  would  be  the  themes  of  constant  speculation 
and  inquiry. 


40 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


At  Marietta,  a  place  not  only  celebrated  as  being  the  first  settle 
ment  on  the  Ohio,  but  has  also  acquired  much  celebrity,  from  the 
existence  of  those  extensive  and  supposed  fortifications,  which  are 
situated  near  the  town.  They  consist  of  walls,  and  mounds  of 
earth,  running  in  straight  lines,  from  six  to  ten  feet  high,  and  nearly 
forty  broad  at  their  base.  There  is  also,  at  this  place,  one  fort,  ot 
this  ancient  description,  which  encloses  nearly  fifty  acres  of  land. . 

There  are  openings  in  this  fortification,  which  are  supposed  to 
have  been,  when  thronged  with  its  own  busy  multitude,  "  used  as 
gateways,  with  a  passage  from  one  of  them,  formed  by  two  parallel 
walls  of  earth,  leading  towards  the  river. 

This  contrivance  was  undoubtedly  for  a  defence  against  surprise 
by  an  enemy,  while  the  inhabitants  dwelling  within  should  fetch 
water  from  the  river,  descend  thither  to  wash,  as  in  the  Ganges, 
among  the  Hindoos.  Also  the  greatness  of  this  fort  is  evidence, 
not  only  of  the  power  of  its  builders,  but  also  of  those  they  feared 
Who  can  tell  but  they  may  have,  by  intestine  feuds  and  wars,  ex- 
terminated themselves  ?  Such  instances  are  not  unfrequent  among 
petty  tribes  of  the  earth.  Witness  the  war  between  Benjamin  and 
his  brother  tribes,  when,  but  a  mere  handful  of  their  number  re- 
mained to  redeem  them  from  complete  annihilation.  Many  na- 
tions, an  account  of  whom,  as  once  existing,  is  found  on  the  page 
of  history,  now,  have  not  a  trace  left  behind.  More  than  sixty 
tribes  which  once  traversed  the  woods  of  the  west,  and  w  ho  were 
known  to  the  first  settlers  of  the  New-England  states,  are  now 
extinct. 

The  French  of  the  Mississippi  have  an  account,  that  an  exter- 
minating battle  was  fought  in  the  beginning  of  the  17th  century, 
about  one  hundred  and  thirty-two  years  ago,  on  the  ground  where 
Fort  Harrison  now  stands  ;  between  the  Indians  living  on  the  Mis- 
sissippi, and  those  of  the  Wabash.  The  bone  of  contention  was, 
the  lands  lying  between  those  rivers,  which  both  parties  claimed. 
There  were  about  1000  warriors  on  each  side.  The  condition  of 
the  fight  was,  that  the  victors  should  possess  the  lands  in  despute. 
The  grandeur  of  the  prize  was  peculiarly  calculated  to  inflame  the 
fcrdoi  of  savage  minds.  The  contest  commenced  about  sunrise. 
Both  parties  fought  desperately.  The  Wabash  warriors  came  orY 
conquerors,  having  seven  men  left  alive  at  sunset,  and  their  adver- 
saries, the  Mississippians,  but  five.    This  battle  was  fought  nearlv 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


41 


titty  years  before  their  acquaintance  with  white  men."  (Webster's 
Gazetteer,  1817,  page  69.) 

It  is  possible,  whoever  the  authors  of  these  great  works  were, 
or  however  long  they  may  have  lived  on  the  continent,  that  they 
may  have3  in  the  same  way,  by  intestine  feuds  and  wars,  weak- 
ened themselves,  so  that  wrhen  the  Tartars,  Scythians,  and  descend- 
ants of  the  ten  lost  Uribes,  came  across  the  Straits  of  Bhering,  that 
they  fell  an  easy  prey,  to  those  fierce  and  savage  northern  hordes. 

It  is  not  likely,  that  the  vast  warlike  preparations  which  extend 
over  the  whole  continent,  south  of  certain  places  in  Canada,  were 
thrown  up,  all  of  a  sudden,  on  a  first  discovery  of  a  strange  enemy  ; 
for  it  might  be  inquired,  how  should  they  know  of  such  a  mode  of 
defence,  unless  they  had  acquired  it  in  the  course  of  ages,  arising 
from  necessity  or  caprice  ;  but  it  is  probable,  they  were  constructed 
to  defend  against  the  invasions  of  each  other  ;  being  of  various 
origin  and  separate  interests,  as  was  much  the  situation  of  the  an- 
cient nations  in  every  part  of  the  world. 

Petty  tribes  of  the  same  origin,  over  the  whole  earth,  have  been 
found  to  wage  perpetual  war  against  each  other,  from  motives  of 
avarice,  ^x>wer,  or  hatred.  In  the  most  ancient  eras  of  the  history 
of  man,  little  walled  towns,  which  were  raised  for  the  security  of  a 
few  families,  under  a  chief,  king,  or  patriarch,  are  known  to  have 
existed  ;  which  is  evidence  of  the  disjointed  and  unharmonious 
state  of  human  society ;  out  of  which,  wars,  rapine,  and  plunder, 
arose  :  such  may  have  been  the  state  of  man  in  America,  before 
the  Indians  found  their  way  here  ;  the  evidence  of  which  is,  the 
innumerable  fortifications,  found  every  where  in  the  western  re- 
gions. 

Within  this  fort,  of  which  we  have  been  speaking,  found  at 
Marietta,  are  elevated  squares,  situated  at  the  corners ;  some  an 
hundred  and  eighty  feet  long,  by  an  hundred  and  thirty  broad,  nine 
feet  high,  and  level  on  the  top.  On  these  squares,  erected  at  the 
corners  of  this  great  enclosure,  were,  doubtless,  placed  some  modes 
of  annoyance  to  a  beseiging  enemy  ;  such  as  engines  to  sling  stones 
with,  or  to  throw  the  dart  and  spear,  or  whatever  might  have  been 
their  modes  of  defence. 

Outside  of  this  fort,  is  a  most  singular  mound,  differing  in  form 
from  their  general  configuration  :  its  shape  is  that  of  a  sugar  loaf, 
the  base  of  which  is  more  than  an  hundred  feet  in  circumference ; 

6 


42 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


its  height  thirty,  encompassed  by  a  ditch,  and  defended  by  a  para- 
pet, or  wall  beyond  the  ditch,  about  breast  high,  through  which  is 
a  way  toward  the  main  fort.  Human  bones  have  been  taken  from 
many  of  these  mounds,  and  charcoal,  with  fragments  of  pottery ; 
and  what  is  more  strange  than  all  the  rest,  in  one  place,  a  skeleton 
of  a  man,  buried  east  and  west  after  the  manner  of  enlightened 
nations  was  found,  as  if  they  understood  the  cardinal  points  of  the 
compass.  On  the  breast  of  this  skeleton  was  found  a  quantity  of 
isinglass,  a  substance  sometimes  used  by  the  ancient  Russians,  for 
the  purposes  that  glass  is  now  used. 


RUINS  OF  A  ROMAN  FORT  AT  MARIETTA. 

But  respecting  this  fort,  we  imagine,  that  even  the  Romans  may 
have  built  it,  however  strange  this  may  appear.  The  reader  will 
be  so  kind  as  to  have  patience  till  we  have  advanced  all  our  reasons 
for  this  strange  conjecture,  before  he  casts  it  from  him  as  im- 
possible. 

Our  reasons  for  this  idea,  arise  out  of  the  great  similarity  there 
is  between  its  form  and  fortifications,  or  camps,  built  by  the  an- 
cient Romans.  And  in  order  to  show  the  similarity,  we  have  quo- 
ted the  account  of  the  forms  of  Roman  camps  from  Josephus's  de- 
scription of  their  military  works.  See  his  works,  Book  v.  chap.  5, 
page  219,  as  follows: 

"  Nor  can  their  enemies  easily  surprise  them  with  the  sudden- 
ness of  their  incursions,  for  as  soon  as  they  have  marched  into  an 
enemy's  land,  they  do  not  begin  to  fight  till  they  have  walled  their 
camp  about ;  nor  is  the  fence  they  raise,  rashly  made,  or  uneven  ; 
nor  do  they  all  abide  in  it ;  nor  do  those  that  are  in  it,  take  their 
place  at  random  :  but  if  it  happens  that  the  ground  is  uneven,  it  is 
first  levelled." 

"  Their  camps  are  also  four  square  by  measure  ;  as  for  what 
space  is  within  the  camp,  it  is  set  apart  for  tents,  but  the  outward 
circumference  hath  the  resemblance  to  a  wall ;  and  is  adorned  with 
towers  at  equal  distances,  where,  between  the  towers  stand  the  en- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST 


43 


gmes  for  throwing  arrows  and  darts,  and  for  slinging  stones,  where 
they  lay  all  other  engines  that  can  annoy  the  enemy,  all  ready  for 
their  several  operations. 

"  They  also  erect  four  gates,  one  in  the  middle  of  each  side  of 
the  circumference,  or  square,  and  those  large  enough  for  the  en- 
trance of  beasts,  and  wide  enough  for  making  excursions,  if  oc- 
casion should  require.  Tkey  divide  the  camp  within  into  streets, 
very  conveniently,  and  place  the  tents  of  the  commanders  in  the 
middle  ;  in  the  very  midst  of  all,  is  the  general's  own  tent,  in  the 
nature  and  form  of  a  temple,  insomuch  that  it  appears  to  be  a  city, 
built  on  the  sudden,  with  its  market  place,  and  places  for  handi- 
craft trades,  and  with  seats  for  the  officers,  superior  and  inferior, 
where  if  any  differences  arise,  their  causes  are  heard  and  deter- 
mined. 

"  The  camp  and  all  that  is  in  it,  is  encompassed  with  a  wall 
round  about,  and  that  sooner  than  one  would  imagine,  and  this  by 
the  multitude  and  skill  of  the  laborers.  And  if  occasion  require, 
a  trench  is  drawn  round  the  whole,  whose  depth  is  four  cubits,  and 
its  breadth  equal,"  which  is  a  trifle  more  than  six  feet  in  depth  and 
width. 

The  similarity  between  the  Roman  camps  and  the  one  near  Ma- 
rietta, consists  as  follows :  They  are  both  four  square ;  the  one 
standing  near  the  great  fort,  and  is  connected  by  two  parallel  walls, 
as  described  ;  has  also  a  ditch  surrounding  it,  as  the  Romans  some- 
times encircled  theirs ;  and  doubtless,  when  first  constructed,  had 
a  fence  of  timber  (as  Josephus  says,  the  Romans  had,)  all  round 
it,  and  all  other  forts  of  that  description  ;  but  time  has  destroyed 
them. 

If  the  Roman  camp  had  its  elevated  squares  at  its  corners,  for 
the  purposes  of  overlooking  the  foe  and  of  shooting  stones,  darts, 
and  arrows  ;  so  had  the  fort  at  Marietta,  of  more  than  an  hundred 
feet  square,  on  an  average,  of  their  forms,  and  nine  feet  high.  Its 
parapets  and  gateways  are  similar  ;  also  the  probable  extent  of  the 
Roman  encampments  agrees  well  with  the  one  at  Marietta,  which 
embraces  near  fifty  acres  within  its  enclosure ;  a  space  sufficient  to 
have  contained  a  great  army ;  with  streets  and  elevated  squares  at 
its  corners,  like  the  Romans.  Dr.  Morse,  the  geographer,  says, 
the  war  camps  of  the  ancient  Danes,  Belgae,  and  Saxons,  as  found 
in  England,  were  universally  of  the  circular ,  while  those  of  the 


AMERICAN   A  NTMJl'  ITIES 


Romans,  in  the  same  fcotfiitryj  arv  distinguished  by  the  square  form  : 
is  not  this,  therefore,  a  trait  of  the  same  people's  work  in  America, 
as  in  England  ? 

Who  can  tell  but  during  the  four  hundred  years  the  Romans  had 
all  the  west  of  Europe  attached  to  their  empire,  but  they  may  have 
found  their  way  to  America,  as  well  as  other  nations,  the  Welch, 
and  the  Scandinavians,  in  after  ages,  as  we  shall  show,  before  we 
end  the  volume. 

Rome,  it  must  be  remembered,  was  mistress  of  the  known  world, 
as  they  supposed,  and  were  in  the  possession  of  the  arts  and  scien- 
ces ;  with  a  knowledge  of  navigation  sufficient  to  traverse  the  ocean? 
of  the  globe,  even  without  the  compass,  by  means  of  the  stars  b\ 
night,  and  the  sun  by  day. 

The  history  of  England  informs  us,  that  as  early  as  fifty-fiw 
years  before  the  Christian  era,  the  Romans  invaded  the  island  of 
Britain,  and  that  their  ships  were  so  large  and  heavy,  and  drew 
such  a  depth  of  w7ater,  that  their  soldiers  were  obliged  to  leap  into 
the  sea,  and  fight  their  way  to  the  shore,  struggling  with  the  waves 
and  the  enemy,  both  at  once,  becau.se  they  could  not  bring  their 
vessels  near  the  shore,  on  account  of  their  size. 

America  has  not  yet  been  peopled  from  Europe  so  long,  by  an 
hundred  years,  as  the  Romans  were  in  possession  of  the  Island  ot 
Britain.  Now  what  has  not  America  effected  in  enterprise,  during 
this  time  ;  and  although  her  advantages  are  superior  to  those  of  the 
Romans,  when  they  held  England  as  a  province,  yet,  we  are  not 
to  suppose  they  were  idle,  especially  when  their  character  at  that 
time,  was  a  martial  and  a  maratime  one.  In  this  character,  there- 
fore, were  they  not  exactly  fitted  to  make  discoveries  about  in  the 
northern  and  western  parts  of  the  Atlantic,  and  may,  therefore, 
have  found  America ;  made  partial  settlements  in  various  places ^ 
may  have  coasted  along  down  the  shores  of  this  country,  till  they 
came  to  the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi,  and  thence  up  that  stream- 
making  here  and  there  a  settlement.  This  supposition  is  as  natural, 
*nd  as  possible,  for  the  Romans  to  have  done,  as  that  Hudson  should 
and  the  mouth  of  the  North  River,  and  explore  it  as  far  north  BS 
to  where  the  city  of  Albany  is  now  standing. 

It  was  equally  in  their  power  to  have  found  this  coasl  by  ehan>  e 
as  the  Scandinavians  in  the  yeai  1000  or  thereabouts,  who  made  a 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST- 


45 


settlement  at  the  mouth  of  the  St.  Lawrence  ;  but  more  of  this  in 
due  time. 

To  show  the  Romans  did  actually  go  on  voyages  of  discovery, 
while  in  possession  of  Britain,  we  quote  from  the  history  of  Eng- 
land^ that  when  Julius  Agricola  was  governor  of  South  Britain,. he 
sailed  quite  around  it,  and  ascertained  it  to  be  an  island. 

This  was  about  an  hundred  years  after  their  first  subduing  the 
country,  or  fifty-two  years  after  Christ. 

But  they  may  have  had  a  knowledge  of  the  existence  of  this 
country,  prior  to  their  invasion  of  Britain.  And  lest  the  reader 
may  be  alarmed  at  such  a  position,  we  hasten  to  show  in  what  man- 
ner they  might  have  attained  it,  by  relating  a  late  discovery  of  a 
planter  in  South  America. 

"  In  the  month  of  December,  1827,  a  planter  discovered  in  a 
Held,  a  short  distance  from  Mont- Video,  a  sort  of  tomb  stone,  upon 
which  strange,  and  to  him,  unknown  signs,  or  characters,  were  en^ 
graved.  He  caused  this  stone,  which  covered  a  small  excavation 
formed  with  masonry,  to  be  raised,  when  he  found  two  exceeding- 
ly ancient  swords,  a  helmet,  and  shield,  which  had  suffered  much 
from  rust;  also  an  earthen  vessel  of  large  capacity. 

The  planter  caused  the  swords,  the  helmet,  and  earthen  amphora. 
together  with  the  stone  slab,  which  covered  the  whole,  to  be  re- 
moved to  Mont -Video,  where,  in  spite  of  the  effect  of  time, 
Greek  words  were  easily  made  out ;  which,  when  translated,  read 
is  follows :  "  During  the  dominion  of  Alexander  the  son  of  Philip, 
King  of  Macedon,  in  the  sixty-third  Olympiad,  Ptolemais,"— it 
was  impossible  to  decipher  the  rest,  on  account  of  the  ravages  of 
time  on  the  engraving  of  the  stone. 

On  the  handle  of  one  of  the  swords,  was  the  portrait  of  a  man, 
supposed  to  be  Alexander  the  Great.  On  the  helmet  there  is  sculp- 
tured work,  that  must  have  been  executed  by  the  most  exquisite 
skill,  representing  Achilles  dragging  the  corpse  of  Hector  round  the 
walls  of  Troy ;  an  account  of  which  is  familiar  to  every  classic 
scholar. 

This  discovery  was  similar  to  the  Fabula  Hieca,  the  bass  relief 
stucco,  found  in  the  ruins  of  the  Via  Appia,  at  Fratachio,  in  Spain, 
belonging  to  the  Princess  of  Colona,  which  represented  all  the  prin- 
cipal scenes  in  Iliad  and  Odyssey. 


46 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


From  this,  it  is  quite  clear,  says  the  editor  of  the  Cabinet  of  In- 
struction and  Literature,  from  which  we  have  extracted  this  ac- 
count, vol.  3,  page  99,  that  the  discovery  of  this  monumental  altar 
is  proof  that  a  cotemporary  of  Aristotle,  one  of  the  Greek  philoso- 
phers, has  dug  up  the  soil  of  Brazil  and  La  Plata,  in  South  America. 

It  is  conjectured  that  this  Ptolemaios,  mentioned  on  the  stone, 
was  the  commander  of  Alexander's  fleet,  which  is  supposed  to  have 
been  overtaken  by  a  storm  at  sea,  in  the  great  ocean,  (the  Atlantic,) 
as  the  ancients  called  it,  and  were  driven  on  to  the  coast  of  Brazil, 
or  the  South  American  coast,  where  they  doubtless  erected  the 
above  mentioned  monument,  to  preserve  the  memory  of  the  voyage 
to  so  distant  a  country and  that  it  might  not  be  lost  to  the  world, 
if  any  in  after  ages  might  chance  to  find  it,  as  at  last  it  was  per- 
mitted to  be  in  the  progress  of  events. 

The  above  conjecture,  however,  that  Ptolemaios,  a  name  found 
engraved  on  the  stone  slab  which  covered  the  mason  work  as  be- 
fore mentioned,  was  one  of  Alexander's  admirals,  is  not  well  found- 
ed, as  there  is  no  mention  of  such  an  admiral  in  the  employ  of  that 
emperor,  found  on  the  page  of  the  history  of  those  times. 

But  the  names  of  JNearchus  and  Onesicritus,  are  mentioned  as 
being  admirals  of  the  fleets  of  Alexander  the  Great;  and  the  name 
of  Pytheas,  who  lived  at  the  same  time,  is  mentioned  as  being  a 
Greek  philosopher,  geographer,  and  astronomer,  as  well  as  a  voy- 
ager, if  not  an  admira*.,  as  he  made  several  voyages  into  the  great 
Atlantic  ocean  ;  which  are  mentioned  by  Eratosthenes,  a  Greek 
philosopher,  mathematician  and  historian,  who  flourished  two  hun- 
dred years  before  Christ. 

Strabo,  a  celebrated  geographer  and  voyager,  who  lived  about 
the  time  of  the  commencement  of  the  Christian  era,  speaks  of  the 
voyages  of  Pytheas,  by  way  of  admission  ;  and  says  that  his  know- 
ledge of  Spain,  Gau  ,  Germany,  and  Britain,  and  all  the  countries 
of  the  north  of  Eur  >pe,  was  extremely  limited.  He  had  indeed 
voyaged  along  the  c  >asts  of  those  countries,  but  had  obtained  but 
an  indistinct  knowle  l^e  of  their  relative  situations. 

During  the  advei  iures  of  this  man  at  sea,  for  the  very  purpose 
of  ascertaining  the  geography  of  the  earth,  by  tracing  the  coasts  of 
countries,  there  was  a  great  liability  of  his  being  driven  off  in  a 
western  direction,  not  only  by  the  current  which  sets  always  to- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


47 


wards  America,  but  also  by  the  trade  winds,  which  blow  in  the 
same  direction  for  several  monthc  in  the  year. 

Pytheas,  therefore,  with  his  fleet,  it  is  most  probable,  either  by 
design  or  storms,  is  the  man  who  was  driven  on  the  American 
coast,  and  caused  this  subterranean  monument  of  masonry  to  be 
erected.  The  Ptolemaios,  or  Ptolemy,  mentioned  on  the  stone,  mav 
refer  to  one  of  the  four  generals  of  Alexander,  called  sometimes 
Ptolemy  Lagus,  or  Soter.  This  is  the  man  who  had  Egypt  for  his 
share  of  the  conquests  of  Alexander ;  and  it  is  likely  the  mention 
of  his  name  on  the  stone,  in  connexion  with  that  of  Alexander,  was 
caused  either  by  his  presence  at  the  time  the  stone  was  prepared, 
or  because  he  patronised  the  voyages  and  geographical  researches 
of  the  philosopher  and  navigator  Pytheas. 

Alexander  the  Great  flourished  about  three  hundred  years  before 
Christ;  he  was  a  Grecian,  the  origin  of  w.iose  nation  is  said  to 
have  been  Japetus,  a  descendant  of  Japheth,  one  of  the  sons  of 
Noah,  as  before  shown. 

Let  it  be  observed,  the  kingdom  of  Macedm,  of  which  Alexan- 
der was  the  last,  as  well  as  the  greatest  of  its  kings,  commenced 
eight  hundred  and  fourteen  years  before  Christ,  which  was  sixty- 
one  years  earlier  than  the  commencement  of  Tie  Romans. 

Well,  what  is  to  be  learned  from  all  this  stc-y  about  the  Greeks, 
respecting  any  knowledge  in  possession  of  the  Romans  about  a  con- 
tinent west  of  Europe  ?    Simply  this,  which  is  quite  sufficient  for 
our  purpose:  That  an  account  of  this  voyage,  whether  it  was  an 
accidental  one,  or  a  voyage  of  discovery,  co"i  i  not  but  be  known  to 
the  Romans,  as  well  as  to  the  Greeks,  and  ei  tered  on  the  records 
of  the  nation  on  their  return.    But  where,  then,  is  the  record?  We 
must  go  to  the  flames  of  the  Goths  and  Vandals,  who  overran  the 
Roman  empire,  in  which  the  discoveries,  both  of  countries  and  the 
histories  of  antiquity,  were  destroyed  ;  casting  over  those  countries 
which  they  subdued,  the  gloom  of  barbarous  ignorance,  congenial 
with  the  shades  of  the  dreadful  forests  of  the  north,  from  whence 
they  originated.    On  which  account,  countries,  and  the  knowledge 
of  many  arts,  anciently  known,  were  to  be  discovered  over  again, 
and  among  them,  it  is  believed,  was  America. 

When  Columbus  discovered  this  country,  and  had  returned  to 
Spain,  it  was  soon  known  to  all  Europe.  The  same  we  may  sup- 
pose of  the  discovery  pf  the  same  country  by  the  Greeks,  though 


48 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


with  iniinite  less  publicity  ;  because  the  world  at  the  time  had  uol 
the  advantage  of  printing  ;  yet,  in  some  degree,  the  discovery  must 
have  been  known,  especially  among  the  great  men  of  both  Greeks 
and  Romans. 

The  Grecian  or  Macedonian  kingdom,  after  the  death  of  Alex- 
ander, maintained  its  existence  but  a  short  time,  one  hundred  and 
forty-four  years  only ;  when  the  Romans  defeated  Perseus,  which 
ended  the  Macedonian  kingdom,  one  hundred  and  sixty-eight  years 
before  Chr  is  t. 

At  this  time,  and  thereafter,  the  Romans  held  on  their  course  of 
war  and  conquest,  till  four  hundred  and  ten  years  after  Christ ; — 
amounting  in  all,  from  their  beginning  till  Rome  was  taken  and 
plundered  by  Alaric,  king  of  the  Visigoths,  to  one  thousand  one 
hundred  and  sixty-three  years. 

Is  it  to  be  supposed  the  Romans,  a  warlike,  enlightened,  and 
enterprising  people,  who  had  found  their  way  by  sea  so  far  north 
from  Rome  as  to  the  island  of  Britain,  and  actually  sailed  all  round 
it,  would  not  explore  farther  north  and  west,  especially  as  they  had 
some  hundred  years  opportunity,  while  in  possession  of  the  north 
of  Europe? 

Morse,  the  geographer,  in  his  second  volume,  page  126,  says, — 
Ireland,  which  is  situated  west  of  England,  was  probably  discover- 
ed by  the  Phoenicians  ;  the  era  of  whose  voyages  and  maritime 
exploits  commenced  more  than  fourteen  hundred  years  before 
Christ,  and  continued  several  ages.  Their  country  was  situated 
at  the  east  end  of  the  Mediterranean  sea ;  so  that  a  voyage  to  the: 
Atlantic,  through  the  Strait  of  Gibralter  west,  would  be  a  dis- 
tance of  about  2,300  miles,  and  from  Gibralter  to  Ireland,  a  voy- 
age of  about  1,400  miles  ;  which,  in  the  whole  amount,  is  nearly 
four  thousand. 

Ireland  is  farther  north,  by  about  five  degrees,  than  Newfound- 
land, and  the  latter  only  about  1,800  miles  southwest  from  Ireland  ; 
so  that  while  the  Phoenicians  were  coasting  and  voyaging  about  in 
the  Atlantic,  in  so  high  a  northern  latitude  as  Ireland  and  England , 
may  well  be  supposed  to  have  discovered  Newfoundland,  (eitiiLi 
by  being  lost  or  driven  there  by  storm,)  which  is  very  near  the 
coast  of  America.  Phoenician  letters  are  said  to  be  engraven  on 
some  rocks  on  Taunton  river,  near  the  sea,  in  Massachusetts ;  if  so, 
this  is  proof  of  the  position 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


49 


Some  hundreds  of  years  after  the  first  historical  notice  of  the 
Phoenician  voyages,  and  two  hundred  years  before  the  birth  of 
Christ,  the  Greeks,  it  is  said,  became  acquainted  with  Irelands  and 
was  known  among  tt  m  by  the  name  of  Juverna.  Ptolemy,  the 
Egyptian  geographer,  who  flourished  about  an  hundred  years  after 
Christ,  has  given  a  mi^  of  +hat  island,  which  is  said  to  be  very 
correct. — Morse, 

Here,  we  have  satisfactory  historical  evidence,  that  Ireland,  a3 
well,  of  course,  as  all  the  coast  of  northern  Europe,  with  the  very 
islands  adjacent,  were  known — first  to  the  Phoenicians — second,  to 
the  Greeks — third  to  the  Romans — and  fourth,  to  the  Egyptians — 
in  those  early  ages,  from  which  arises  a  great  probability  that  Amer- 
ica may  have  been  well  known  to  the  ancient  nations  of  the  old 
world.  On  which  account,  when  the  Romans  had  extended  their 
conquests  so  far  north  as  nearly  to  old  Norway,  in  latitude  60  deg. 
over  the  greater  part  of  Europe — they  were  well  prepared  to  ex- 
plore the  North  Atlantic,  in  a  western  direction,  in  quest  of  new 
countries  ;  having  already  sufficient  data  to  believe  western  coun- 
tries existed. 

It  is  not  impossible,  the  Danes,  Norwegians,  and  Welsh,  may 
have  at  first  obtained  some  knowledge  of  western  lands,  islands  and 
territories,  from  the  discoveries  of  the  Romans,  or  from  their  opin- 
ions, and  handed  down  the  story,  till  the  Scandinavians  or  Norwe- 
gians discovered  Iceland,  Greenland,  and  America,  many  hundred 
years  before  the  time  of  Columbus. 

But,  however  this  may  be,  it  is  certain  those  nations  of  the  north 
of  Europe,  did  visit  this  country,  as  we  have  promised  to  show  in 
its  proper  place.  Would  Columbus  have  made  his  attempt,  if  he 
had  not  believed,  or  conjectured,  there  was  a  western  continent; 
or  by  some  means  obtained  hints  respecting  it,  or  the  probability  of 
its  existence  ?  It  is  said,  Columbus  found,  at  a  certain  time,  the 
corpse  of  two  men,  of  a  tawny  complexion,  floating  in  the  sea, 
near  the  coast  of  Spain,  which  he  knew  were  not  of  European  ori- 
gin ;  but  had  been  driven  by  the  sea  from  some  unknown  western 
country :  also  timber  and  branches  of  trees,  all  of  which  confirmed 
him  in  his  opinion  of  the  existence  of  other  countries  westward. 

If  the  Romans  may  have  found  this  country,  they  may  also  have 
attempted  its  colonization,  as  the  immense  square  forts  of  the  west, 
would  seem  to  suggest. 

7 


bo 


AM  ERIC  AN  A  NT  I  C*U  I  TIES 


In  1821,  on  the  bank  of  the  river  Desperes,  in  Missouri,  was 
found,  by  an  Indian,  a  Roman  coin,  and  presented  to  Gov.  Clarke. 
—  Gazetteer  of  Missouri,  p.  312. 

This  is  no  more  singular  than  the  discovery  of  a  Persian  coin 
near  a  spring  on  the  Ohio,  some  feet  under  ground  ;  as  we  have 
shown  in  another  place  of  this  work  ;  all  of  which  go  to  encourage 
the  conjecture  respecting  the  presence  of  the  ancient  Romans  in 
America. 

The  remains  of  former  dwellings,  found  along  the  Ohio,  where 
the  stream  has,  in  many  places,  washed  away  its  banks,  hearths  and 
fireplaces  are  brought  to  light,  from  two  to  six  feet  deep  below  the 
surface. 

Near  these  remains  are  found  immense  quantities  of  muscle  shells 
and  bones  of  animals.  From  the  depths  of  many, of  these  rem- 
nants of  chimnies,  and  from  the  fact  that  trees  as  large  as  any  in  the 
surrounding  forest,  were  found  growing  on  the  ground  above  those 
fire  places,  at  the  time  the  country  was  first  settled  by  its  present 
inhabitants,  the  conclusion  is  drawn,  that  a  Tery  long  period  has 
elapsed  since  these  subterraneous  remnants  of  the  dwellings  of  man 
were  deserted. 

Hearths  and  Fire  Places :  Are  not  these  evidences  that  build- 
ings once  towered  above  them ;  if  not  such  as  now  accommodate 
the  millions  of  America,  yet  they  may  have  been  such  as  the  an- 
cient Britons  used  at  the  time  the  Romans  first  invaded  theii 
country. 

These  were  formed  of  logs  set  up  endwise,  drawn  in  at  the  top,, 
so  that  the  smoke  might  pass  up  at  an  aperture  left  open  at  the 
summit.  They  were  not  square  on  the  ground,  as  houses  are  now 
built,  but  set  in  a  circle,  one  log  against  the  other,  with  the  hearth 
and^/we  place  in  the  centre.  At  the  opening  in  the  top,  where  the 
smoke  went  out,  the  light  came  in,  as  no  other  window  was  then 
used.  There  are  still  remaining,  in  several  parts  of  England,  the 
vestiges  of  large  stone  buildings  made  in  this  way,  i.  e.  in  a  circle. 
— Blair's  Hist,  of  England,  p.  8. 

At  Cincinnati  there  are  two  Museums,  one  of  which  contains  a 
great  variety  of  western  antiquities,  many  skulls  of  Indians,  and 
more  than  an  hundred  remains  of  what  has  been  dug  out  of  the 
aboriginal  mounds.  The  most  strange  and  curious  of  oil,  is  a  cup, 
made  of  clay,  with  three  faces  on  the  sides  of  the  cup,  each  present- 


AND  "DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


51 


5ng  regular  features  of  a  man,  aud  beautifully  delineated.  It  is  the 
same  represented  on  the  plate.    See  letter  E. 

A  great  deal  has  been  said,  and  not  a  little  written,  by  antiqua- 
rians about  this  cup.  It  was  found  in  one  of  those  mysterious 
mounds,  and  is  known  by  the  name  of  the  triune  cup ;  and  there 
are  those  who  think  the  makers  of  it  had  an  allusion  to  the  Trinity 
of  the  Godhead.    Hence  its  name,  <£  Triune  cup." 

In  this  neighborhood,  the  Yellow  Springs,  a  day's  ride  below 
Cincinnati,  stands  one  of  those  singular  mounds.  Whenever  we 
view  those  most  singular  objects  of  curiosity  and  remains  of  art,  a 
thousand  inquiries  spring  up  in  the  mind.  They  have  excited  the 
wonder  of  all  who  have  seen  or  heard  of  them.  Who  were  those 
undents  of  the  west,  and  when,  and  for  what  purpose,  these  mounds 
were  constructed,  are  questions  of  the  most  interesting  nature,  and 
have  engaged  the  researches  of  the  most  inquisitive  antiquarians. 
Abundant  evidence,  however,  can  be  procured,  that  they  are  not  of 
Indian  origin. 

With  this  sentiment  there  is  a  general  acquiescence ;  however 
we  think  it  proper,  in  this  place,  to  quote  Dr.  Beck's  remarks  on 
£his  point,  from  his  Gazetteer  of  the  States  of  Illinois  and  Missouri. 
vSee  page  30S.  "  Ancient  works  exist  on  this  river,  the  Arkansas, 
as  elsewhere.  The  remains  of  mounds  and  fortifications  are  almost 
every  where  to  be  seen.  One  of  the  largest  mounds  in  this  coun- 
try has  been  thrown  up  on  this  stream,  (the  Wabash,)  within  the 
last  thirty  or  forty  years,  by  the  Osages,  near  the  great  Osage  vil- 
lage, in  honor  of  one  of  their  deceased  chiefs.  This  fact  proves 
Conclusively  the  original  object  of  these  mounds,  and  refutes  the 
theory  that  they  must  necessarily  have  been  erected  by  a  race  of 
men  more  civilized  than  the  present  tribes  of  Indians.  Were  it 
necessary,  (says  Dr.  Beck,)  numerous  other  facts  might  be  adduced 
to  prove  that  the  mounds  are  no  other  than  the  tombs  of  their  great 
men. 

That  this  is  one  of  their  uses,  there  is  no  doubt,  but  not  their  ex- 
clusive use.  The  vast  height  of  some  of  them,  which  is  more  than 
an  hundred  feet,  would  seem  to  point  them  out  as  places -of  look- 
out, which  if  the  country,  in  the  days  when  their  builders  flourish- 
ed, was  cleared  and  cultivated,  would  overlook  the  country  to  a 
great  distance  ;  and  if  it  were  not,  still  their  towering  summits 
would  surmount  even  the  interference  of  the  forests. 


52 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


But  although  the  Osage  Indians  have  so  recently  thrown  up  one 
such  mound,  yet  it  does  not  prove  them  to  be  of  American  Indian 
origin  ;  and  as  this  is  an  isolated  case,  would  rather  argue  that  the 
Osage  tribe  have  originally  descended  from  their  more  ancient  pro- 
genitors, the  inhabitants  of  this  country,  prior  to  the  intrusions  of 
the  late  Indiaus  from  Asia. 

Before  we  close  this  work,  we  shall  attempt  to  make  this  appear 
from  their  own  traditions,  which  have  of  late  been  procured  from 
the  most  ancient  of  their  tribes,  the  Wyandots,  as  handed  down  for 
hundreds  cf  years,  and  from  other  sources. 

The  very  form  and  character  which  Dr.  Beck  has  given  the 
Osage  Indians,  argues  them  of  a  superior  -stock,  or  rather  a  different 
race  of  men,  as  follows :  "  In  person,  the  Osages  are  among  the 
largest  and  best  formed  Indians,  and  are  said  to  possess  fine  military 
capacities;  but  residing,  as  they  do,  in  villages,  and  having  made 
considerable  advances  in  agriculture,  they  seem  less  addicted  to  war 
than  their  northern  neighbors." 

The  whole  of  this  character  given  of  the  Osage  Indians,  their 
military  taste,  their  agricultural  genius,  their  noble  and  command- 
ing forms  of  person,  and  being  less  "  addicted  to  war,"  shows  them, 
it  would  seem,  exclusively  of  other  origin  than  that  of  the  com- 
mon Indians. 

It  is  supposed,  the  inhabitants  who  found  their  way  first  to  this 
country,  after  its  division,  in  the  days  of  Peleg,  and  were  here  long 
belore  the  modern  Indiaus,  came  not  by  the  way  of  Bhering's  Strait 
from  Kamskatka,  in  Asia,  but  directly  from  China,  across  the  Pa- 
cific, to  the  western  coast  of  America,  by  means  of  islands  whicfi 
abounded  anciently  in  that  ocean  between  Chinese  Tartary,  China, 
and  South  America,  even  more  than  at  present,  which  are,  how- 
ever, now  very  numerous  ;  and  also  by  the  means  of  boats,  of  which 
all  mankind  have  always  had  a  knowledge.  In  this  way,  without 
any  difficulty,  more  than  is  common,  they  could  have  found  their 
way  to  this,  as  mankind  have  to  every  part  of  the  earth. 

We  do  net  recollect  that  any  of  those  peculiar  monuments  of  an- 
tiquity appear  north  of  the  United  States  ;  Mackenzie,  in  his  over- 
land journey  to  the  Pacific,  travelling  northwest  from  Montreal  in 
Canada,  does  not  mention  a  single  vestige  of  the  kind,  nor  does 
Carver.  If,  then,  there  are  none  of  these  peculiar  kinds,  such  as 
mounds  and  forts,  farther  north  than  about  the  latitude  of  the  Cana- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


53 


das,  it  would  appear  from  this,  that  the  first  authors  of  these  works, 
especially  of  the  mounds  and  tumuli,  migrated,  not  from  Asia,  by 
way  of  Bhering's  Strait,  but  from  Europe,  east — China,  west— - 
and  from  xifrica,  south — continents  now  separated,  then  touching 
each  other,  with  islands  innumerable  between,  affording  the  means, 
If  this  supposition,  namely,  that  the  continents  in  the  first  age, 
immediately  after  the  flood,  were  united,  or  closely  connected  by 
groups  of  islands,  is  not  allowed,  how  then,  it  might  be  inquired, 
came  every  island,  yet  discovered,  of  any  size,  having  the  natural 
means  of  human  subsistence,  in  either  of  the  seas,  to  be  found  in- 
habited ? 

In  the  very  way  this  can  be  answered,  the  question  relative  to 
the  means  by  which  South  America  was  first  peopled,  can  also  be 
answered,  namely  ;  the  continents,  as  intimated  on  the  first  pages 
of  this  work,  as  quoted  from  Dr.  Clarke,  were,  at  first,  that  is,  im- 
mediately after  the  flood,  till  the  division  of  the  earth,  in  the  days 
of  Peleg,  connected  together,  so  that  mankind,  with  all  kinds  of 
animals,  might  pass  to  every  quarter  of  the  globs,  suited  to  their  na- 
tures. If  such  were  not  the  fact,  it  might  be  inquired,  how  then 
did  the  several  kinds  of  animals  get  to  every  part  of  the  earth  from 
the  ark  ?  They  could  not,  as  man,  make  use  of  the  boat,  or  ves- 
sel, nor  could  they  swim  such  distances. 

From  Dr.  Clarke's  Travel's,  it  appears,  ancient  works  exist  to 
this  day,  in  some  paits  of  Asia,  similar  to  those  of  North  America. 
His  description  of  them,  reads  as  though  he  were  contemplating 
some  of  these  western  mounds.  The  Russians  call  these  sepul- 
chres logri ;  and  vast  numbers  of  them  have  been  discovered  in  Si- 
beria and  the  deserts  bordering  on  the  empire  to  the  south.  His- 
torians mention  these  tumuli,  with  many  particulars.  In  them  were 
found  vessels,  ornaments,  trinkets,  medals,  arrows,  and  other  ar- 
ticles ;  some  of  copper,  and  even  gold  and  silver,  mingled  with  the 
ashes  and  remains  of  dead  bodies. 

When,  and  by  whom,  these  burying  places  of  Siberia  and  Tar- 
tary,  more  ancient  than  the  Tartars  themselves,  were  used,  is  ex- 
ceedingly interesting.  The  situation,  construction,  appearance,  and 
general  contents  of  these  Asiatic  tumuli,  and  the  American  mounds, 
are,  however,  so  nearly  alike,  that  there  can  be  no  hesitation  in 
ascribing  them  to  the  same  races,  in  Europe,  Asia,  Africa,  and 
America  ;  and  also  to  the  same  ages  of  time,  or  nearly  so,  which 


54  AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 

••9 

we  suppose,  was  very  soon  after  the  flood  ;  a  knowledge  of  mound 
building  was  then  among  men,  as  we  see  in  the  authors  of  Babel. 

"  The  Triune  Cup  (see  plate — letter  E.)  deposited  in  one  of 
the  museums  at  Cincinnati,  affords  some  probable  evidence,  that  a 
part,  at  least,  of  the  great  mass  of  human  population,  once  inhabit- 
ing the  Valley  of  the  Mississippi,  were  of  Hindo  origin.  It  is 
an  earthen  vessel,  perfectly  round,  and  will  hold  a  quart,  having 
three  distinct  faces,  or  heads,  joined  together  at  the  back  part  of 
each,  by  a  handle. 

The  faces  of  these  figures  strongly  resemble  the  Hindo  counte- 
nance, which  is  here  well  executed.  Now,  it  is  well  known,  that 
in  the  mythology  of  India,  three  chief  gods  constitute  the  acknowr- 
ledged  belief  of  that  people,  named  Brahma,  Vishnoo,  and  Siva. 
May  not  this  cup  be  a  symbolical  representation  of  that  belief,  and 
may  it  not  have  been  used  for  some  sacred  purpose,  here,  in  the 
Valley  of  the  Mississippi  ? 

In  this  country,  as  in  Asia,  the  mounds  are  seen  at  the  junction 
of  many  of  the  rivers,  as  along  the  Mississippi,  on  the  most  eligible 
positions  for  towns,  and  in  the  richest  lands  ;  and  the  day  may  have 
been,  when  those  great  rivers,  the  Mississippi,  the  Ohio,  the  Illi- 
nois, and  the  Muskingum,  beheld  along  their  sacred  banks,  count- 
less devotees  assembled  for  religious  rites,  such  as  now  crowd  in 
superstitious  ceremonies,  the  devoted  and  consecrated  borders  of  the 
Indus,  the  Ganges,  and  the  Burrampooter,  rivers  of  the  Indies. 

Mounds  in  the  west  are  very  numerous,  amounting  to  several 
thousands-,  none  less  than  ten  feet  high,  and  some  over  one  hun- 
dred. One  opposite  St.  Louis  measures  eight  hundred  yards  in 
circumference  at  its  base,  which  is  fifty  rods. 

r«  Sometimes  they  stand  in  groups,  and  with  their  circular  shapes, 
at  a  distance,  look  like  enormous  hay  stacks,  scattered  through  a 
meadow.  From  their  great  number,  and  occasional  stupendous 
size,  years  and  the  labors  of  tens  of  thousands  must  have  been  re- 
quired to  finish  them. 

Were  it  not,  indeed,  for  their  contents,  and  design  manifested  io 
their  erection,  they  would  hardly  be  looked  upon  as  the  w7ork  of 
human  hands.  In  this  view,  they  strike  the  traveller  with  the 
same  astonishment  as  wrould  be  felt  while  beholding  those  oldest 
monuments  of  wordly  art  and  industry,  the  Egyptian  pyramids ;  and 
like  them,  the  mounds  have  their  origin  in  the  dark  night  of  time, 
beyond  even  the  history  of  Egypt  itself. 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


65 


Whether  or  not  these  mounds  were  used  at  some  former  period,  as  "  high 
places  "  for  purposes  of  religion,  or  fortifications,  or  for  national  burying  places, 
each  of  which  theories  has  found  advocates,  one  inference,  however,  amidst  all 
the  gloom  which  surrounds  them,  remains  certain  :  the  Valley  of  the  Ohio,  was 
once  inhabited  by  an  immense  agricultural  population. 

We  can  see  their  vast  funeral  vaults,  enter  into  their  graves,  and  look  at, their 
dry  bones  ;  but  no  passage  of  history  tells  their  tale  of  life  ;  no  spirit  comes 
forth  from  their  ancient  sepulchres,  to  answer  the  inquiries  of  the  living. 

It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  Breckenridge,  in  his  interesting  travels  through 
these  regions,  calculates  that  no  less  than  Jive  thousand  villages  of  this  forgot- 
ten people  existed  ;  and  that  their  largest  city  was  situated  between  the  Mis- 
sissippi and  Missouri,  not  far  from  the  junction  of  those  rivers,  near  St.  Louis. 
In  this  region,  the  mighty  waters  of  the  Missouri  and  Illinois,  with  their  un- 
numbered tributaries,  mingle  with  the  "  father  of  rivers,"  the  Mississippi  ; 
(Mississippi,  the  word  in  the  Indian  language  means  Father  of  Rivers  ;)  a  situ- 
ation formed  by  nature,  calculated  to  invite  multitudes  of  men,  from  the  good- 
ness of  the  soil,  and  the  facilities  of  water  communications. 

The  present  race,  who  are  now  fast  peopling  the  unbounded  west,  are  ap- 
prised of  the  advantages  of  this  region.  Towns  and  cities  are  rising  on  the  very 
ground  where  the  ancient  millions  of  mankind  had  their  seats  of  empire. 

Ohio  now  contains  more  than  six  hundred  thousand  inhabitants  ;  but  at  that 
early  day,  the  same  extent  of  country,  most  probably,  was  filled  with  a  far 
greater  population  than  inhabits  it  at  the  present  time. 

Many  of  the  mounds  are  completely  occupied  with  human  skeletons,  and 
millions  of  them  must  have  been  interred  in  these  vast  cemeteries,  that  can  be 
traced  from  the  Rocky  Mountains,  on  the  west,  to  the  Alleghenies  on  the  east, 
and  into  the  province  of  the  Texas  and  New  Mexico  on  the  south  :  revolutions 
like  those  known  in  the  old  world  may  have  taken  place  here,  and  armies, 
equal  to  those  of  Cyrus,  of  Alexander  the  Great,  or  of  Tamerlene  the  powerful, 
might  have  flourished  their  trumpets,  and  marched  to  battle,  over  these  exten- 
sive plains,  filled  with  the  probable  descendants  of  that  same  race  in  Asia,, 
whom  these  proud  conquerors  vanquished  there. 


COURSE  OF  THE  TEN  LOST  TRIBES  OF  ISRAEL. 

There  is  a  strong  resemblance  between  the  northern  and  inde- 
pendent Tartar,  and  the  tribes  of  the  North  American  Indians,  but 
not  of  the  South  American.  Besides  this  reason,  there  are  others 
for  believing  our  aborigines  of  North  America  were  descended  from 
the  ancient  Scythians,  and  came  to  this  country  from  the  eastern 
part  of  Asia. 


56 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


This  view  by  no  means  invalidates  the  opinion,  that  many  tribes 
of  the  Indians  of  North  America,  are  descended  of  the  Israelites, 
because  the  Scythians,  under  this  particular  name,  existed  long  be- 
fore that  branch  of  descendants  of  the  family  of  Shem,  called  Is- 
raelites ;  who,  after  they  had  been  carried  away  by  Salmanasser, 
the  Assyrian  king,  about  700  years  B.  C,  went  aorlhivard^  as  stated 
by  Esdras,  (see  his  second  book,  thirteenth  chapter,  from  verse  40 
to  verse  45,  inclusive,)  through  a  part  of  Independent  Tartary. 
During  this  journey,  which  carried  them  among  the  Tartars,  now  so 
called,  but  were  anciently  the  Scythians,  and  probably  became 
amalgamated  with  them.  This  was  the  more  easily  effected,  on 
account  of  the  agreement  of  complexion  and  common  origin. 

If  this  may  be  supposed,  we  perceive  at  once,  how  the  North 
American  Indians  are  in  possession  of  both  Scythian  and  Jewish 
practices.  Their  Scythian  customs  are  as  follows :  "Scalping  their 
prisoners,  and  torturing  them  to  death.  Some  of  the  Indian  nations 
also  resemble  the' Tartars  in  the  construction  of  their  canoes,  imple- 
ments of  war,  and  of  the  chase,  with  the  well  known  habit  of 
marching  in  Indian  file,  and  their  treatment  of  the  aged these 
are  Scythian  customs. 

Their  Jewish  customs  are  too  many  to  be  enumerated  in  this 
work ;  for  a  particular  account  of  those  customs,  see  Smith's  View 
of  the  Hebrews.  If,  then,  our  Indians  have  evidently  the  manners 
of  both  the  Scythian  and  the  Jew,  it  proves  them  to  have  been, 
anciently,  both  Israelites  and  Scythians  ;  the  latter  being  the  more 
ancient  name  of  the  nations  now  called  Tartars,*  with  whom  the 
ten  tribes  may  have  amalgamated.  That  the  Israelites,  called  the 
ten  tribes,  who  were  carried  away  from  Judea  by  Salmanasser,  to 
the  land  of  Assyria,  went  from  that  country,  in  a  northerly  direction, 
as  quoted  from  Esdras,  above,  is  evident,  from  the  Map  of  Asia. 
Look  at  Esdras  again,  43d  verse,  chap.  13,  and  we  shall  perceive, 
they  c<  entered  into  the  Euphrates  by  the  narrow  passes  or  heads  of 
that  river,"  which  runs  from  the  north  into  the  Persian  Gulf. 

It  is  not  probable,  that  the  country  which  Esdras  called  Arsareth, 
could  possibly  be  America,  as  many  have  supposed,  because  a  vast 
company,  such  as  the  ten  tribes  were  at  the  time  they  left  Syria, 

*The  appellation  of  Tartar  was  not  known  till  the  year  A.  D.  1227,  who 
were  at  that  time,  considered  a  new  race  of  barbarians.— Morse. 


AND  DISCOVERIES   IN  THE  WEST.  57 

4 

{  which  was  about  an  hundred  years  after  their  having  been  carried 
away  from  Judea,  nearly  3000  years  ago,)  could  travel  fast  enough 
to  perform  the  journey  in  so  short  a  time  as  a  year  and  a  half. 

We  learn  from  the  map  of  Asia,  that  Syria  was  situated  at  the 
southeasterly  end  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  and  that  in  entering 
into  the  narrow  passes  of  the  Euphrates,  as  Esdras  says,  would  lead 
them  north  of  Mount  Ararat,  and  southeasterly  of  the  Black  Sea, 
through  Georgia,  over  the  Concassian  mountains,  and  so  on  to  As- 
tracan,  which  lies  north  of  the  Caspian  Sea.  We  may,  with  the 
utmost  show  of  reason,  be  permitted  to  argue,  that  this  vast  com- 
pany of  men,  women,  and  their  little  ones,  would  naturally  be  com- 
pelled to  shape  their  course  so  as  to  avoid  the  deep  rivers  which 
it  cannot  well  be  supposed  they  had  the  means  of  crossing,  except 
when  frozen.  Their  course  would  then  be  along  the  heads  of  the 
several  rivers  running  north  after  they  bad  passed  the  country  of 
Astracan.  From  thence  over  the  Ural  mountains,  or  that  part  of 
that  chain  running  along  Independent  Tartary.  Then,  after  having 
passed  over  this  mountain  near  the  northern  boundary  of  Indepen- 
dent Tartary,  they  would  find  themselves  at  the  foot  of  the  little 
Altain  mountains,  which  course  would  lead  them,  if  they  still  wished 
to  avoid  deep  and  rapid  rivers,  running  from  the  little  Altain  moun- 
tains northward,  or  north-westerly,  into  the  Northern  Ocean,  across 
the  immense  and  frozen  regions  of  Siberia.  The  names  of  those 
rivers  beginning  on  the  easterly  side  of  the  Ural  mountains,  are 
first,  the  river  Obi,  with  its  many  heads,  or  little  rivers,  forming 
at  length  the  river  Obi,  which  empties  into  the  Northern  Ocean,  at 
the  Gulf  of  Obi,  in  latitude  of  about  67  degs.  north. 

The  second,  is  the  river  Yenisei,  with  its  many  heads,  having 
their  sources  in  the  same  chain  of  mountains,  and  runs  into  the 
same  ocean,  further  north,  towards  Bhering's  Straits,  which  is  the 
point  we  are  approximating,  by  pursuing  this  course. 

A  third  river,  with  its  many  heads,  that  rises  at  the  base  of  anoth- 
er chain  of  mountains,  called  the  Yablonoy  ;  this  is  the  river  Lena, 

There  are  several  other  rivers  arising  out  of  another  chain  of 
mountains,  farther  on  northward  towards  Bhering's  Straits,  which 
have  no  name  oh  the  map  of  Asia ;  this  range  of  mountains  is  cal- 
led the  St.  Anovoya  mountains,  and  comes  to  a  point  or  end,  at  the 

8 


58 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


Strait  which  separates  Asia  from  America,  which  is  but  a  small 
distance  across,  of  about  forty  miles  only,  and  several  islands  be- 
tween. 

Allowing  the  ten  tribes,  or  if  they  may  have  become  amalgama- 
ted with  the  Tartars  as  they  passed  on  this  tremendous  journey 
toward  the  Northern  Ocean,  to  have  pursued  this  course,  the  dis- 
tance will  appear  from  Asyria  to  the  Straits,  to  be  some  hundreds 
over  six  thousand  miles.  Six  thousand  two  hundred  and  fifty-five 
miles,  which  is  the  distance,  is  more,  by  nearly  one-half,  than  such 
a  vast  body,  in  moving  on  together,  could  possibly  perform  in  a  year 
and  a  half.  Six  miles  a  day  would  be  as  great  a  distance,  as  such 
an  host  could  perform,  where  there  is  no  way  but  that  of  forests 
untraced  by  man,  and  obstructed  by  swamps,  mountains,  fallen 
trees,  and  thousands  of  nameless  hindrances.  Food  must  be  had, 
and  the  only  way  of  procuring  it,  must  have  been  by  hunting  with 
the  bow  and  arrow,  and  by  fishing.  The  sick  must  not  be  forsaken, 
the  aged  and  the  infant  must  be  cherished  ;  all  these  things  would 
delay,  so  that  a  rapid  progress  cannot  be  admitted. 

If,  then,  six  miles  a  day  is  a  reasonable  distance  to  suppose  they 
may  have  progressed,  it  follows  that  nearly  three  years,  instead  of  a 
year  and  a  half,  would  not  have  been  more  than  sufficient  to  carry 
them  from  Syria  to  Bhering's  Straits,  through  a  region  almost  of 
eternal  snow. 

This,  therefore,  cannot  have  been  the  course  of  the  Ten  Tribes 
to  the  land  of  Arsareth,  wherever  it  was :  and  that  it  was  north 
from  Syria,  we  ascertain  by  Esdras,  who  says,  they  went  into  the 
narrow  passes  of  the  Euphrates,  which  means  its  three  heads,  or 
branches,  which  arise  north  from  Syria.  From  the  head  waters  of 
this  river,  there  is  no  way  to  pass  on,  but  to  go  between  the  Black 
and  Caspian  Seas,  over  the  Concassian  mountains,  as  before  stated. 

From  this  point  they  may  have  gone  on  to  what  is  now  called 
Astracan,  as  before  rehearsed  ;  but  here  we  suppose  they  may  have 
taken  a  west  instead  of  a  north  direction,  which  would  have  been 
toward  that  part  of  Russ^  which  is  now  called  Russia  in  Europe, 
and  would  have  led  them  on  between  the  rivers  Don  and  Volga ; 
the  Don  emptying  into  the  Black  Sea,  and  the  Volga  into  the  Cas- 
pian. 

This  course  would  have  led  them  exactly  to  the  places  where 
Moscow  and  Petersburgh  now  stand,  and  from  thence  in  a  north- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


59 


westerly  direction,  along  the  south  end  of  the  White  Sea,  to  Lap- 
land, Norway,  and  Sweden,  which  lie  along  on  the  coast  of  the  North 
Atlantic  Ocean. 

Now,  the  distance  from  Syria  to  Lapland,  Norway,  and  Sweden, 
on  the  coast  of  the  Atlantic,  is  scarcely  three  thousand  miles ;  a  dis- 
tance which  may  have  easily  been  travelled  in  a  year  and  a  half, 
at  six  miles  a  day,  and  the  same  opportunity  have  been  afforded  for 
their  amalgamation  with  Scythians  or  Tartars,  as  in  the  other  course 
towards  Bhering's  Strait.  Norway,  Sweden,  and  Lapland,  may 
have  been  the  land  of  Arsareth.  • 

But  here  arises  a  question ;  how  then  did  they  get  into  America 
from  Lapland  and  Norway  ?  The  only  answer  is,  America  and 
Europe  must  have  been  at  that  time  united  by  land,  or  they  may 
have  built  boats. 

u  The  manner  by  which  the  original  inhabitants  and  animals 
reached  here,  is  easily  explained,  by  adopting  the  supposition,  which 
doubtless  is  the  most  correct,  that  the  north-western  and  western 
limits  of  America  were,  at  some  former  period,  united  to  Asia  on 
the  west,  and  to  Europe  on  the  east. 

This  was  partly  the  opinion  of  Buffon  and  other  great  naturalists. 
That  connection  has,  therefore,  been  destroyed,  among  other  great 
changes  this  earth  has  evidently  experienced  since  the  flood. 

We  have  examples  of  these  revolutions  before  our  eyes.  Florida 
has  gained  leagues  of  land  from  the  Gulf  of  Mexico ;  and  part  of 
Louisiana,  in  the  Mississippi  Valley,  has  been  formed  by  the  mud 
of  rivers.  Since  the  Falls  of  Niagara  were  first  discovered,  they 
have  receded  very  considerably ;  and  it  is  conjectured,  that  this 
sublimest  of  nature's  curiosities  was  situated  originally  where 
Queenstown  now  stands. 

Sicily  was  united  formerly  to  the  continent  of  Europe,  and  an- 
cient authors  affirm,  that  the  Straits  of  Gibralter,  which  divide  be- 
tween Europe  and  Africa,  were  formed  by  a  violent  irruption  of 
the  ocean  upon  the  land.  Ceylon,  where  our  missionaries  have  an 
establishment,  has  lost  forty  leagues  by  the  sea,  which  is  an  hun- 
dred and  twenty  miles." 

Many  such  instances  occur  in  history.  Pliny  tells  us,  that  in  his 
own  time,  the  Mountain  Cymbotus  with  the  town  of  Eurites,  which 
stood  on  its  side,  were  totally  swallowed  up.  He  records  the  like 
of  the  city  Tantelis  in  Magnesia,  and  of  the  mountain  Sopelus, 


A  M  ERIC  A  N  A  NTI  Qtf  I  Tl  ES 


both  absorbed  by  a  violent  opening  of  the  earth,  so  that  no  trace  oi 
either  remained.  Galanis  and  Garnatus,  towns  once  famous  in 
Phoenicia,  are  recorded  to  have  met  the  same  fate.  The  vast  pro- 
montory, called  Phlegium  in  Ethiopia,  after  a  violent  earthquake 
in  the  night,  was  not  to  be  seen  in  the  morning,  the  earth  having 
swallowed  it  up  and  closed  over  it. 

Like  instances  we  have  of  later  date.  The  mountain  Picus,  in 
one  of  the  Moluccas,  was  so  high,,  that  it  appeared  at  a  vast  dis- 
tancea  and  served  as  a  landmark  to  sailors.  But  during  an  earth- 
quake in  the  isle,  the  mountain  in  an  instant  sunk  into  the  bowels 
of  the  earth,  and  no  token  of  it  remained,  hut  a  lake  of  water 
The  like  happened  in  the  mountainous  parts  of  China,  in  155G 
when  a  whole  province,  with  all  its  towns,  cities,  and  inhabitants, 
was  absorbed  in  a  moment ;  an  immense  lake  of  water  remaining 
in  its  place,  even  to  this  day. 

In  they  year  1646,  during  a  terrible  earthquake  in  the  kingdom 
of  Chili,  several  whole  mountains  of  the  Andes,  one  after  another, 
were  wholly  absorbed  in  the  earth.  Probably  many  lakes  over  the 
whole  earth,  have  been  occasioned  in  this  way.  Lake  Ontario  is 
supposed  to  have  been  formed  in  this  way. 

The  greatest  earthquake  we  find  in  antiquity,  is  that  mentioned 
by  Pliny,  in  which  twelve  cities  in  Asia  Minor  were  swallowed  up 
in  one  night.    But  one  of  those  most  particularly  described  in  his- 
tory, is  that  of  the  year  1693.    It  extended  to  a  circumference  of 
two  thousand  six  hundred  leagues,  chiefly  affecting  the  sea  coasts 
and  great  rivers.    Its  motions  were  so  rapid,  that  those  who  lay  at 
their  length  were  tossed  from  side  to  side  as  upon  a  rolling  billow. 
The  walls  were  dashed  from  their  foundations,  and  no  less  than 
fifty-four  cities,  with  an  incredible  number  of  villages,  were  either 
destroyed  or  greatly  damaged.    The  city  of  Catauea,  in  particular, 
was  utterly  overthrown-    A  traveller,  who  was  on  his  way  thither, 
at  the  distance  of  some  miles,  perceived  a  black  cloud  hanging  near 
the  place.    The  sea  all  of  a  sudden  began  to  roar :  Mount  iEtna  to 
send  forth  great  spires  of  flames ;  and  soon  after,  a  shock  ensued, 
with  a  noise  as  if  all  the  artillery  in  the  world  had  been  at  once 
discharged.    Although  the  shock  did  not  continue  above  three  min- 
utes, yet  near  nineteen  thousand  of  the  inhabitants  of  Sicily  per 
ished  in  the  ruins. 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


We  have  said  above,  that  Norway,  Lapland,  and  Sweden  may 
have  been  the  very  land  called  the  land  of  Arsareth,  by  Esdras,  iu 
his  second  book,  chapter  13,  who  may,  with  the  utmost  certainty,  be 
supposed  to  know  the  very  course  and  place  where  these  Ten  Tribes 
went  to,  being  himself  a  Jew  and  an  historian,  who  at  the  present 
day  is  quoted  b}r  the  first  authors  of  the  age. 

We  have  also  said,  it  should  be  considered  impossible  for  the  Ten 
Tribes,  after  having  left  the  place  of  their  captivity,  at  the  east  end 
of  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  which  was  the  Syrian  country,  for  them 
to  have  gone  in  a  year  and  a  half  to  Bhering's  Strait,  through  the 
frozen  wilderness  of  Siberia. 

In  going  away  from  Syria,  they  cannot  be  supposed  to  have  had 
any  place  in  view,  only  they  had  conferred  among  themselves  that, 
as  Esdras  says,  "  that  they  would  leave  the  multitude  of  the  hea- 
then, and  go  forth  into  a  country  where  never  mankind  dwelt;" 
which  Esdras  called  the  land  of  Arsareth. 

Now,  it  is  not  to  be  supposed,  a  land,  or  country,  where  no  man 
dwelt  could  have  a  name,  especially  in  that  early  age  of  the  world, 
which  was  about  seven  hundred  years  before  the  Christian  era  ;  but 
on  that  very  account  we  may  suppose  the  word  Arsareth,  to  be  de- 
scriptive only  of  a  vast  wilderness  country,  where  no  man  dwelt, 
and  is  probably  a  Persian  word  of  that  signification,  for  Syria  was 
embraced  within  the  Persian  empire ;  the  Israelites  may  have,  in 
part,  lost  their  original  language,  having  been  there  in  a  state  of 
captivity  for  more  than  an  hundred  years  before  they  left  that 
country. 

Esdras  says,  that  Arsareth  was  a  land  where  no  man  dwelt ;  this 
statement  is  somewhat  corroborated  by  the  fact,  that  the  country 
which  we  have  supposed  was  Arsareth,  namely  Norway,  &c,  was 
anciently  unknown  to  mankind.  On  this  point,  see  Morse's  Geo- 
graphy, 2d  vol.  p.  28  :  "  Norway  ;  a  region  almost  as  unknown  to 
the  ancients  as  was  America."  But,  in  this  he  is  mistaken,  as  will 
appear  by  and  by,  in  the  course  of  this  work.  America  was  known 
to  the  ancients. 

Its  almost  insular  situation  ;  having  on  the  west  the  Atlantic 
Ocean,  on  the  south  end  the  North  Sea,  and  on  the  east  the  Baltic 
and  the  Gulf  of  Bothnia — these  waters  almost  surrounding  it ;  there 
being  a  narrow  connexion  of  land  with  the  European  continent  only 
on  the  north,  between  the  Gulf  of  Bothnia  and  the  White  Sea, 


62 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


which  is  Lapland,  and  was  a  reason  quite  sufficient  why  the  an- 
cients should  have  had  no  knowledge  of  that  region  of  country 
which  we  have  supposed  to  have  been  the  country  called  by  Esdras, 
the  land  of  Arsareth. 

Naturalists,  as  before  remarked,  have  supposed  that  America  was 
at  some  remote  period  before  the  Christian  era,  united  to  the  con- 
tinent of  Europe ;  and  that  some  convulsion  in  nature,  such  as 
earthquakes,  volcanoes,  or  the  irruptions  of  the  ocean,  has  shaken 
and  overwhelmed  a  whole  region  of  earth,  lying  between  Norway 
and  Baffin's  Bay,  of  which  Greenland  and  Iceland,  with  many 
other  islands,  are  the  remains. 

But  suppose  the  American  and  European  continents,  700  years 
before  the  Christian  era  were  not  united;  how  then  did  such  part 
of  the  Ten  Tribes  as  may  have  wandered  to  that  region  from  Sy- 
ria, get  into  America  from  Norway  ?  The  answer  is  easy^:  They 
may  have  crossed  over,  from  island  to  island,  in  vessels  or  boats, 
for  a  knowledge  of  navigation,  and  that  of  the  ocean  too,  was  known 
to  the  Ten  Tribes ;  for  all  the  Jews  and  civilized  nations  of  that 
age  were  acquainted  with  this  art,  derived  from  the  Egyptains. 

But  it  may  be  said,  there  are  no  traces  that  Jews  were  ever 
residents  of  Norway,  Lapland,  or  Scandinavia.  From  the  particu- 
lar shape  of  Norway,  being  surrounded  by  the  waters  of  the  sea, 
except  between  the  Gulf  of  Bothnia,  and  the  White  Sea,  we  per- 
ceive that  the  first  people,  whoever  they  wrere,  ?nust  have  approach- 
ed it  by  the  narrow  pass  between  those  two  bodies  of  water  of 
only  about  forty-five  miles  in  width,  if  they  would  go  there  by  land. 

Consequently  the  j  lace  now  designated  by  the  name  of  Lapland, 
which  is  the  northen  end  of  Norway,  was  first  peopled  before  the 
more  southern  parts.  An  inquiry,  therefore,  whether  the  ancient 
people  of  Lapland  h  d  any  customs  like  those  of  the  ancient  Jews, 
would  be  pertinent  3  our  hypothesis  respecting  the  route  of  the 
Ten  Tribes,  as  spoke  i  of  by  Esdras.  Morse,  the  geographer,  says, 
that  of  the  original  population  of  Lapland  very  little  is  known  with 
certainty.  Some  wi  ters  have  supposed  them  to  be  a  colony  of 
Fins  from  Russia  ;  others  have  thought  that  they  bore  a  stronger 
resemblance  to  the  Semoeids  of  Asia.  Their  language,  however,  is 
said  by  Leems,  to  h.ve  less  similitude  to  the  Finnish,  than  the 
Danish  to  the  German ;  and  to  be  totally  wlike  any  of  the  dialects 
of  the  Teutonic,  or  au  :estors  of  the  ancient  Germans  ;  but  accord- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


63 


ing  to  Leems,  as  quoted  by  Morse,  in  their  language  are  found 
many  Hebrew  words3  also  Greek  and  Latin. 

Hebrew  words  are  found  among  the  American  Indians  in  consid- 
erable variety.  But  how  came  Greek  and  Latin  words  to  be  in  the 
composition  of  the  Laponic  language  ? 

This  is  easily  answered,  if  we  supposed  them  to  be  derived  from 
the  Ten  Tribes  ;  as  at  the  time  they  left  Syria,  the  Greek  and 
Latin  were  languages  spoken  every  where  in  that  region,  as  well 
as  the  Syrian  and  Chaldean.  And  on  this  very  account,  it  is  likely, 
the  Ten  Tribes  had  in  part  lost  their  ancient  language  as  it  was 
spoken  at  Jerusalem,  when  Salmanasser  carried  them  away.  So 
that  by  the  time  they  left  Syria,  and  the  region  thereabouts,  to  go 
to  Arsareth,  their  language  had  become,  from  this  sort  of  mixture, 
an  entire  new  language,  as  they  had  been  enslaved  about  an  hun- 
dred years. 

So  that  allowing  the  ancient  Laplanders  derived  their  tongue 
from  a  part  of  these  Ten  wandering  Tribes  it  well  might  be  said 
by  Leems,  as  quoted  by  Morse,  that  the  language  of  Lapland,  com- 
monly called  the  Laponic,  had  no  words  in  common  with  the  Gothic 
or  Teutonic,  except  a  few  Norwegian  words,  evidently  foreign,  and 
unassociated  with  any  of  the  languages  of  .  i-sia  or  Europe  ;  these 
being  of  the  Teutonic  or  German  origin,  which  goes  back  to  with- 
in live  hundred  years  of  the  flood,  several  centuries  before  the  Ten 
Tribes  were  carried  away  by  Salmanasser. 

This  view  would  seem  to  favor  our  hypothesis.  We  shall  now 
show  a  few  particulars  respecting  their  rel  gious  notions,  which 
seem  to  have,  in  some  respects,  a  resemblance  to  those  of  the  Jews. 

Their  deities  were  of  four  kinds.  First :  Super-celestial ',  named 
as  follow :  Radien,  Atzihe,  and  Kiejdde,  tb  Creator.  Radien 
and  Atzihe,  they  considered  the  fountain  of  power,  and  Kiedde  or 
Radien  Kiedde,  the  Son,  or  Creator;  these  were  their  Supreme  gods, 
and  would  seem  to  be  borrowed  from  the  Jewsih  doctrine  of  the 
Trinity. 

Second  :  Celestial  Deities^  called  Beiwe,  the  sun,  or  as  other  an- 
cient nations  had  it,  Apollo,  which  is  the  same,  and  Ailekies,  to 
whom  Saturday  was  consecrated.  May  not  these  two  powers  be 
considered  as  the  shadows  of  the  different  orders  of  angels  as  held 
by  the  Jews  ? 

Third  :  Sub-celestial,  or  in  the  air,  and  on  the  earth :  Moderak- 


64 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


ka,  or  the  Lapland  Lucina  ;  Saderakka,  or  Venus,  to  whom  t  ri 
day  was  holy ;  and  Juks  Akka,  or  the  Nurse.    These  are  of  hea- 
then origin,  derived  from  the  nations  among  whom  they  had  been 
slaves  and  wanderers,  the  Syrians. 

Fourth :  Subterranean  Deities,  as  Saiwo  and  Saiwo-Olmak,  gods 
of  the  mountains ;  Saiwo-Guelle,  or  their  Mercury,  who  conducted 
the  shades,  or  wicked  souls,  to  the  lower  regions. 

This  idea  would  seem  to  be  equivalent  with  the  doctrine  found 
in  both  the  Jewish  and  Christian  religions,  namely,  that  Satan  con- 
ducts or  receives  the  souls  of  the  wicked  to  his  hell  in  the  subter- 
ranean fire  of  the  earth. 

They  have  another  deity,  belonging  to  the  fourth  order,  and 
him  they  call  Jabme-Akko,  or  he  who  occupied  their  Elisium  ;  in 
which  the  soul  was  furnished  with  a  new  body,  and  nobler  priv- 
ileges and  powers,  and  entitled,  at  some  future  day,  to  enjoy  the 
right  of  Radien,  the  fountain  of  power,  and  to  dwell  with  him  for- 
ever in  the  mansions  of  bliss. 

This  last  sentiment  is  certainly  equivalent  to  the  Jewish  idea  of 
heaven  and  eternal  happiness  in  Abraham's  bosom.  It  also,  under 
the  idea  of  a  new  body,  shows  a  relation  to  the  Jewish  and  Chris- 
tian doctrine  of  the  resurrection  of  the  body  at  the  last  day  ;  and  is 
indeed  wonderful. 

Fifth :  An  Infernal  Deity,  called  Rota,  who  occupied  and  reign- 
ed in  Rota-Abimo,  or  the  infernal  regions  ;  the  occupants  of  which 
had  no  hopes  of  an  escape.  He,  together  with  his  subordinates, 
Fudno,  Mubber,  and  Paha-Engel,  were  all  considered  as  evil  dis- 
posed towards  mankind. 

This  is  too  plain  not  to  be  applied  to  the  Bible  doctrine  of  one 
supreme  devil  and  his  angels,  who  are,  sure  enough,  evil  disposed 
towards  mankind. 

Added  to  all  this,  the  Laplanders  were  found  in  the  practice  of 
sacrificing  to  all  their  deities,  the  reindeer,  the  sheep,  and  some- 
times the  seal,  pouring  libations  of  milk,  whey,  and  brandy,  with 
offerings  of  cheese,  &c 

This  last  item  of  their  religious  manners,  is  too  striking  not  to 
claim  its  derivation  from  the  ancient  Jewish  worship.  The  Lap- 
landers are  a  people  but  few  in  number,  not  much  exceeding  twelve 
hundred  families  ;  which  we  imagine  is  a  circumstance  favoring 
our  idea,  that  after  they  had  remained  a  while  in  Arsareth,  or  Laj>- 


DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST.  65 

ftml  and  Norway,  which  is  much  the  same  thing;,  that  their  main 
body  may  have  passed  over  into  America,  either  in  boats,  from 
island  to  island  ;  or,  if  there  then  was,  as  is  supposed,  an  isthmus  of 
land,  connecting  the  continents,  they  passed  over  on  that,  leaving, 
as  is  natural,  in  case  of  such  a  migration,  some  individuals  or  fami- 
lies behind,  who  might  not  wish  to  accompany  them,  from  whom 
the  present  race  of  Laplanders  may  be  derived.  Their  dress  is 
much  the  same  with  that  of  our  Indians  ;  their  complexion  is  swar- 
thy, hair  black,  large  heads,  high  cheek  bones,  with  wide  mouths; 
all  of  which  is  strikingly  national.  They  -call  themselves  Same, 
their  speech  Same-giel,  and  their  country  Same-Edna.  This  last 
word  sounds  very  much  like  the  word  Eden,  and  may  be,  inasmuch 
as  it  is  the  name  of  their  country,  borrowed  from  the  name  of  the 
region  where  Adam  was  created. . 

When  men  emigrate  from  one  region  of  the  earth  to  another, 
which  is  very  distant,  and  especially  if  the  country  to  which  they 
emigrate  is  a  new  one,  or  in  a  state  of  nature,  it  is  perfectly  natural 
to  give  it  the  same  name  or  names  which  distinguished  the  country 
and  its  parts,  from  which  they  emigrated. 

Edessa^  was  the  name  of  an  ancient  city  of  Mesopotamia,  which 
was  situated  in  the  country,  or* land  of  Assyria,  between  the  rivers 
Euphrates  and  Tigris.  In  this  region  the  Ten  Tribes  were  held 
in  bondage,  who  had  been  carried  away  by  Salmanasser,  the  Assy- 
rian monarch.  We  are,  therefore,  the  more  confirmed  in  this  con- 
jecture, from  the  similarity  existing  between  the  two  namef  Edna 
and  Edessa,  both  derived,  it  is  likely,  from  the  more  ancient  word 
Eden,  which,  from  common  consent,  had  its  situation,  before  the 
deluge,  not  far  from  this  same  region  where  Turkey  is  now,  be- 
tween the  Mediterranean,  Black  Sea,  Caspian  Sea,  and  the  Persian 
Gulf,  as  before  argued. 

If  such  may  have  been  the  fact,  that  a  part  of  the  Ten  Tribes 
came  over4o  America,  in  the  way  we  have  supposed,  leaving  the 
cold  regions  of  Arsareth  behind  them,  in  quest  of  a  milder  climate, 
it  would  be  natural  to  look  for  tokens  of  the  presence  of  Jews  of 
some  sort,  along  countries  adjacent  to  the  Atlantic.  In  order  to 
this,  we  shall  here  make  an  extract  from  an  able  work,  written  ex- 
clusively on  the  subject  of  the  Ten  Tribes  having  come  from  Asia 
by  the  way  of  Bhering's  Strait,  by  the  Rev.  Ethan  Smith,  Pultney, 
Vt.,  who  relates  as  follows:  ''Joseph  Merrick,  Esq.,  a  highlv  re« 


66 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


spectable  character  in  the  church  at  Pittsfield,  gave  the  following 
account:  That  in  1815,  he  was  levelling  some  ground  under  and 
near  an  old  wood  shed,  standing  on  a  place  of  his,  situated  on  Indian 
MU. 

He  ploughed  and  conveyed  away  old  chips  and  earth  to  some 
depth.  After  the  work  was  done,  walking  over  the  place,  he  dis- 
covered, near  where  the  earth  had  been  dug  the  deepest,  a  black 
strap,  as  it  appeared,  about  six  inches  in  length,  and  one  and  an  half 
in  breadth,  and  about  the  thickness  of  a  leather  trace  to  a  harness. 

He  perceived  it  had  at  each  end  a  loop  of  some  hard  substance, 
probably  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  it.  He  conveyed  it  to  his 
house,  and  threw  it  into  an  old  tool  box.  He  afterwards  found  it 
thrown  out  of  doors,  and  he  again  conveyed  it  to  the  box.  After 
some  time,  he  thought  lie  would- examine  it ;  but  in  attempting  to 
cut  it,  found  it  as  hard  as  bone  ;  he  succeeded,  however,  in  getting 
it  open,  and  found  it  was  formed  of  two  pieces  of  thick  raw-hide, 
sewed  and  made  water  tight,  with  the  sinews  of  some  animal ;  and 
in  the  fold  was  contained  four  folded  pieces  of  parchment.  They 
were  of  a  dark  yellow  hue,  and  contained  some  kind  of  writing. 
The  neighbors  coming  in  to  see  the  strange  discovery,  tore  one  of 
the  pieces  to  atoms,  in  the  true  Hun  and  Vandal  style.  The  other 
three  pieces  Mr.  Merrick  saved,  and  sent  them  to  Cambridge, — 
where  they  were  examined,  and  discovered  to  have  been  written 
with  a,  pen  in  Hebrew,  plain  and  legible. 

The  writing  on  ihe  three  remaining  pieces  of  parchment,  was 
quotations  from  the  Old  Testament.  See  Deut.  vi.  chap,  from  the 
4th  to  the  9th  verse,  inclusive — also,  xi.  chap.  13 — 21,  inclusive — 
and  Exodus,  chap.  xiii.  11 — 16,  inclusive,  to  which  the  reader  can 
refer,  if  he  has  the  curiosity  to  read  this  most  interesting  discovery. 

These  passages,  as  quoted  above,  were  found  in  the  strap  of  raw- 
hide ;  which  unquestionably  had  been  written  on  the  very  pieces 
of  parchment  now  in  the  possession  of  the  Antiquarian  Society, 
before  Israel  left  the  land  of  Syria,  more  than  2,500  years  ago  ;  but 
it  is  not  likely  the  raw-hide  strap  in  which  they  were  found  en- 
closed, had  been  made  a  very  great  length  of  time.  This  would 
be  unnatural,  as  a  desire  to  look  at  the  sacred  characters,  would  be 
very  great,  although  they  could  not  read  them.  This  however,  was 
done  at  last,  as  it  appears,  and  buried  with  some  Chief,  on  the  place 
where  it  was  found,  called  Indian  Hill 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


67 


Dr.  West,  of  Stockbridge,  relates,  that  an  old  Indian  informed 
him,  that  his  fathers  in  this  country,  had,  not  long  since,  been  in 
the  possession  of  a  book,  which  they  had,  for  a  long  time,  carried 
with  them,  but  having  lost  the  knowledge  of  reading  it,  they  buried 
it  with  an  Indian  chief.—  View  of  the  Hebrews,  p.  223. 

It  had  been  handed  down  from  family  to  family,  or  from  chief  to 
chief,  as  a  most  precious  relic,  if  not  as  an  amulet,  charm,  or  talis- 
man, for  it  is  not  to  be  supposed,  that  a  distinct  knowledge  of  what 
was  contained  in  the  strap  could  have  long  continued  among  them, 
in  their  wandering  condition,  amid  woods  and  forests. 

u  It  is  said  by  Calmet,  that  the  above  texts  are  the  very  passages 
of  Scripture,  which  the  Jews  used  to  write  on  the  leaves  of  their 
phylacteries.  These  phylacteries  were  little  rolls  of  parchment, 
whereon  were  written  certain  words  of  the  law.  These  they  wore 
upon  their  forehead,  and  upon  the  wrist  of  the  left  arm."—  Smith's 
View  of  the  Hebrews,  p.  220. 

This  intimation  of  the  presence  of  the  Israelites  in  America,  is 
too  unequivocal  to  be  passed  unnoticed ;  and  the  circumstance  of  its 
being  found  so  near  the  Atlantic  coast,  and  at  so  vast  a  distance 
from  Bhering's  Straits,  we  are  still  inclined  to  suppose,  that  such  of 
the  Israelites  as  found  their  way  to  the  shores  of  America,  on  the 
coast  of  the  Atlantic,  may  have  come  from  Lapland,  or  Norway; — 
seeing  evident  tokeus  exist  of  their  having  once  been  there,  as  we 
have  noticed  some  few  pages  back. 

But  there  is  a  third  supposition  respecting  the  land  of  Arsareth  ; 
which  is,  that  it  is  situated  exactly  east  from  the  region  of  Syria. 
This  is  thought  to  be  the  country  now  known  in  Asia  by  the  appel- 
lation of  Little  Bucharia.  Its  distance  from  Syria  is  something 
more  than  two  thousand  miles  ;  which,  by  Esdras,  might  very  well 
be  said  to  be  a  journey  of  a  year  and  an  half,  through  an  entire 
wilderness. 

Bucharia,  the  region  of  country  of  which  we  are  about  to  speak, 
as  being  the  ancient  resort  of  a  part  of  the  lost  Ten  Tribes,  is  in 
distance  from  England,  3,475  miles;  a  little  southeast  from  the 
latitude  of  Loudon  ;  and  from  the  State  of  New- York,  exactly 
double  that  distance,  6,950  miles,  on  an  air  line,  as  measured  on  an 
artificial  globe,  and  in  nearly  the  same  latitude,  due  east  from  this 
country. 

It  is  not  impossible,  after  all  our  speculation,  and  the  speculations 


68  AMERICAN  ANTiQUlTlES 

of  olheis,  that,  instead  of  America,  or  of  Norway,  this  same  HuotA* 
ria  is,  in  truth,  the  ancient  country  of  Arsareth;  although  in  the 
country  of  old  Norway,  and  of  America,  are  abundant  evidence  of 
the  presence  of  Jews  at  some  remote  period,  no  doubt  derived  from 
this  stock,  the  Ten  Tribes. 

The  country  of  Bucbaria  is  situated  due  east  from  Syria,  where 
the  Ten  Tribes  were  placed  by  Salmanasser,  as  well  as  farther  ea<>t 
on  the  river  Gozen,  or  Ganges,  of  Hindostan.  The  distance  is 
about  two  thousand  fiv  e  hundred  miles,  and  at  that  time,  was  a  vast 
desert,  lying  beyond  the  settlements  of  men,  in  all  probability  ;  and 
in  order  to  go  there,  they  must  also  pass  through  the  narrow  passes 
of  the  river  Euphrates,  or  its  heads,  near  the  south  end  of  the  Cas- 
pian Sea,  and  then  nearly  due  east,  incliniug,  however,  a  little  to 
the  north.  Two  circumstances  lead  to  a  supposition  that  this  Bu- 
charia  is  the  Arsareth  mentioned  by  Esdras.  The  first  is,  at  this 
place  is  found  a  great  population  of  the  Jews:  Second  ;  the  word, 
Arsareth  is  similar  to  the  names  of  other  regions  of  that  country  in 
Asia  ;  as  Ararat,  Astracan,  Samarcand,  Yarkund,  Aracan,  Ala  Tau, 
Alatanian,  Aral,  Altai,  Arnu,  Korassan,  Balk,  Bactriana,  Bucharia, 
Argun,  Narrat,  Anderab  Katlan :  (this  word  is  much  like  the  Mex- 
ican names  of  places,  as  Aztalan,  Copallan,  and  so  on  ;)  Anderab; 
Aktau,  Ailak,  Names  of  countries  and  rivers  might  be  greatly 
multiplied,  which  bear  a  strong  affinity  in  sound  and  formation  to 
the  word  Arsareth,  which  is  probably  a  Persian  word,  as  well  as 
the  rest  we  have  quoted,  as  from  these- regions,  ancient  Bucharia, 
the  foundations  of  the  Persian  power  was  derived. 

The  reader  can  choose  between  the  three,  whether  Americr;. 
Norway,  or  Bucharia,  is  the  ancient  country  called  Arsareth,  as  one 
of  the  three  is,  beyond  a  doubt,  the  place  alluded  to  by  Esdras, 
to  which  the  Ten  Tribes  went ;  and  in  all  three,  the  traits  of  Jews 
are  found. 

In  this  country,  Bucharia,  many  thousand  Jews  have  been  dis-  » 
covered,  who  were  not  known  by  the  Christian  nations  to  have  ex- 
isted at  all  till  recently  •  It  would  appear  from  this  circumstance, 
that  the  Ten  Tribes  may  have  divided,  a  part  going  east,  to  the 
country  now  called  Bucharia  ;  and  a  part  west,  to  the  country  now 
railed  Norway  ;  both  of  which,  at  that  time,  were  the  region  of 
almost  endless  solitudes^  and  about  equal  distances  from  Syria :  and 
from  Bucharia  to  Bhering's  Strait  is  also  about  the  same  distance 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


In  process  of  time,  both  from  Bueharia  in  Asia,  and  Norway  in 
Europe,  the  descendants  from  these  Ten  Tribes  may  have  found 
their  way  into  America.  Those  from  Norway,  by  the  way  of 
islands,  boats  or  continent,  which  may  then  have  existed,  between 
America  and  north  of  Europe;  and  those  from  Bueharia,  by  the 
way  of  Bhering's  Strait,  which,  at  that  time,  it  is  likely,  was  no 
Strait,  but  an  isthmus,  if  not  a  country  of  great  extent,  uniting  Asia 
with  America.    The  account  of  the  Buchaiian  Jews  is  as  follows: 

"  After  having  seen,  some  years  past,  merchants  from  Tiflis,  Per- 
sia, and  Armenia,  among  the  visitors  at  Leipsic,  we  have  had,  for 
the  first  time,  (1826,)  two  traders  from  Bueharia)  with  shawls,  which 
are  there  manufactured  of  the  finest  wool  of  the  goats  of  Thibet  and 
Cashmere,  by  the  Jewish  families,  who  form  a  third  part  of  the  pop- 
ulation. In  Bueharia,  (formerly  the  capitol  of  Sogdiana,)  the  Jews 
have  been  very  numerous  ever  since  the  Babylonian  captivity,  and 
are  there  as  remakabie  for  their  industry  and  manufactures,  as  they 
are  in  England  for  their  money  transactions.  It  was  not  till  1S26, 
that  the  Russian  government  succeeded  in  extending  its  diplomatic 
mission  far  into  Bueharia.  The  above  traders  exchanged  their 
shawls  for  coarse  and  fine  woollen  cloths,  of  such  colors  as  are  most 
esteemed  in  the  e^ast." 

Much  interest  has  been  excited  by  the  information  which  this 
paragraph  conveys,  and  which  is  equally  novel  and  important.  In 
none  of  the  geographical  works  which  we  have  consulted  do  we 
find  the  least  hint  as  to  the  existence  in  Bueharia  of  such  a  body  of 
Jews  as  are  here  mentioned,  amounting  to  one  third  of  the  whole 
population  ;  but  as  the  fact  can  no  longer  be  doubted,  the  next  point 
of  inquiry  which  presents  itself  is,  whence  have  they  proceeded, 
and  how  have  they  come  to  establish  themselves  in  a  regiou  so  re- 
mote from  their  original  country  ?  This  question,  we  think,  can 
only  be  answered  by  supposing  that  these  persons  are  the  descend- 
ants of  the  long  lost  Ten  Tribes,  concerning  the  facts  of  which, 
theologians,  historians,  and  antiquarians,  have  been  alike  puzzled  : 
and  however  wild  this  hypothesis  may  at  first  appear,  there  are  not 
wanting  circumstances  to  render  it  far  from  being  improbable.  In 
the  17tli  chapter  of  the  second  book  of  Kings,  it  is  said,  u  In  the 
ninth  year  of  Hoshea  the  king  of  Assyria  took  Samaria,  and  car- 
ried Israel  away  into  Assyria,  and  placed  them  in  Helah  and  in 
Haber  by  the  river  Gozan,  and  in  the  cities  of  the  Medes  and 


70 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


in  the  subsequent  verses,  as  well  as  the  writings  of  the  prophets,  it 
is  said,  that  the  Lord  then  tC  put  away  Israel  out  of  his  sight,  and 
carried  them  away  into  the  land  of  Assyria  unto  this  day."  In  the 
Apocrypha,  2d  Esdras,  xiii.,  it  is  said,  that  the  Ten  Tribes  were 
carried  beyond  the  river,  (Euphrates,)  and  so  they  were  brought 
into  another  land,  when  they  took  counsel  together,  that  they  would 
leave  the  multitude  of  the  heathen,  and  go  forth  into  a  further  coun- 
try, where  never  mankind  dwelt ;  that  they  entered  in  at  the  nar- 
row passages  of  the  river  Euphrates,  when  the  springs  of  the  flood 
were  stayed,  and  a  went  through  the  country  a  great  journey,  even 
a  year  and  a  half;"  and  it  is  added,  that  u  there  will  they  remain, 
until  the  latter  time,  when  they  will  come  forth  again."  The  coun- 
try beyond  Bucharia  was  unknown  to  the  ancients,  and  it  is,  we 
believe,  generally  admitted,  that  the  river  Gozan,  mentioned  in  the 
book  of  Kings,  is  the  same  as  the  Ganges,  which  has  its  rise  in 
those  very  countries  in  which  the  Jews  reside,  of  which  the  Liep- 
sic  account  speaks.  The  distance  which  these  two  merchants  must 
have  travelled,  cannot,  therefore,  be  less  than  three  thousand  miles ; 
and  there  can  be  but  little  doubt  that  the  Jews,  whom  they  repre- 
sent as  a  third  part  of  the  population  of  the  country,  are  descend- 
ants of  the  Ten  Tribes  of  Israel  settled  by  the  river  Gozan. 

The  great  plain  of  Central  Asia,  forming  four  principal  sides,  viz  : 
Little  Bucharia,  Thibet,  Mongolia,  and  Mantehous,  contains  a  sur- 
face of  150,000  square  miles,  and  a  population  of  20,000,000. 
This  vast  country  is  still  very  little  known.  The  great  traits  of 
its  gigantic  formation  compose,  for  the  most  part,  all  that  we  are 
certain  of.  It  is  an  immense  plain  of  an  excessive  elevation,  in- 
tersected with  barren  rocks  and  vast  deserts  of  black  and  almost 
moving  sand.  It  is  supported  on  all  sides  by  mountains  of  granite, 
whose  elevated  summits  determine  the  different  climates  of  the 
great  continent  of  Asia,  and  form  the  division  of  its  waters.  From 
its  exterior  flow  all  the  great  rivers  of  that  part  of  the  world.  In 
the  interior  are  a  quantity  of  rivers,  having  little  declivity,  or  no  is- 
sue, which  are  lost  in  the  sands,  or  perhaps  feed  stagnant  waters. 
In  the  southern  chains  are  countries,  populous,  rich  and  civilized  ; 
Little  Bucharia,  Great  and  Little  Thibet.  The  people  of  the  north 
are  shepherds  and  wanderers.  Their  riches  consist  in  their  herds. 
Their  habitations  are  tents,  and  towns,  and  camps,  which  are  trans- 
ported according  to  the  wants  of  pasturage.    The  Buchanans  en- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


71 


joy  the  right  of  trading  to  all  parts  of  Asia,  and  the  Thibetians 
cultivate  the  earth  to  advantage.  The  ancients  had  only  a  con- 
fused idea  of  Central  Asia.  "  The  inhabitants  of  the  country,"  as 
we  learn  from  a  great  authority,  "  are  in  a  high  state  of  civiliza- 
tion ;  possessing  all  the  useful  manufactures,  and  lofty  houses  built 
with  stone.  The  Chinese  reckon  (but  this  is  evidently  an  exag- 
geration) that  Thibet  alone  contains  33,000,000  of  persons.  The 
merchants  of  Cashmere,  on  their  way  to  Yarkland  in  Little  Bu- 
charia,  pass  through  Little  Thibet.  This  country  is  scarcely  known 
to  European  geographers."  The  immense  plain  of  Central  Asia  is 
hemmed  in,  and  almost  inaccessable  by  mountain  ranges  of  the 
greatest  elevation,  which  surround  it  on  all  sides,  except  China ; 
and  when  the  watchful  jealousy  of  the  government  of  the  Celestial 
Empire  is  considered,  it  will  scarcely  be  wondered  at,  that  the  vast 
region  in  question  is  so  little  known. 

Such  is  the  country  which  these  newly  discovered  Jews  are  said 
to  inhabit  in  such  numbers.  The  following  facts  may  perhaps  serve 
to  throw  some  additional  light  on  this  interesting  subject. 

In  the  year  1822,  a  Mr.  Sargon,  who  had  been  appointed  one  of 
the  agents  of  the  London  Society,  communicated  to  England  some 
interesting  accounts  of  a  number  of  persons  resident  at  Bombay, 
Cinnamore,  and  their  vicinity,  who  are  evidently  the  descendants 
of  the  Jews,  calling  themselves  Beni  Israel,  and  bearing  almost 
uniformly  Jewish  names,  but  with  Persian  terminations.  This 
gentleman,  feeling  very  desirous  of  obtaining  all  possible  knowledge 
of  their  condition,  undertook  a  mission  for  this  purpose  to  Cinna- 
more ;  and  the  result  of  his  inquiries  was,  a  conviction  that  they 
were  not  Jews  of  the  one  tribe  and  a  half,  being  of  a  different  race 
to  the  white  and  black  Jews  at  Cochin,  and  consequently,  that  they 
were  a  remnant  of  the  long  lost  Ten  Tribes.  This  gentleman  also 
concluded,  from  the  information  he  obtained  respecting  the  Beni 
Israel,  or  sons  of  Israel,  that  they  existed  in  great  numbers  in  the 
countries  between  Cochin  and  Bomba}*,  the  north  of  Persia,  among 
the  hordes  of  Tartary,  and  in  Cashmere ;  the  very  countries  in 
which,  according  to  the  paragraph  in  the  German  paper,  they  exist 
in  such  numbers.  So  far,  then,  these  accounts  confirm  each  other, 
and  there  is  every  probability  that  the  Beni  Israel,  resident  on  the 
west  of  the  Indian  peninsula,  had  originally  proceeded  from  Bu- 
charia.    It  will,  therefore,  be  interesting  to  know  something  of  their 


12 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


moral  and  religious  character.  The  following  particulars  are  col  - 
lected from  Mr.  Sargon's  accounts:  1.  In  dress  and  manners  they 
resemble  the  natives  so  as  not  to  be  distinguished  from  them,  ex- 
cept  by  attentive  observation  and  inquiry.  2.  They  have  Hebrew 
names  of  the  same  kind,  and  with  the  same  local  termination  as 
the  Sepoys  in  the  ninth  regiment  Bombay  native  infantry.  3. 
Some  of  them  read  Hebrew,  and  they  have  a  faint  tradition  of  the 
cause  of  their  original  exodus  from  Egypt.  4.  Their  common  lan- 
guage is  the  Hindoo.  5.  They  keep  idols  and  worship  them,  and 
use  idolatrous  ceremonies  intermixed  with  Hebrew.  6.  They  cir- 
cumcise their  children.  7.  They  observe  the  Kipper,  or  great  ex- 
piation day  of  the  Hebrews,  but  not  the  Sabbath,  or  any  of  the 
feast  or  fast  days.  8.  They  call  themselves  Gorah  Jehudi,  or  white 
Jews  ;  and  they  term  the  black  Jews  Colla  Jehudi.  9.  They  speak 
of  the  Arabian  Jews  as  their  brethren,  but  do  not  acknowledge  the 
European  Jews  as  such.  They  use,  on  all  occasions,  and  under 
the  most  trivial  circumstances,  the  usual  Jewish  prayer — "  Hear, 
O  Israel,  the  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord.  "  10.  They  have  no  cohen, 
(priest)  levite,  or  kasi  among  them,  under  those  terms ;  but  they 
have  a  kasi,  (reader,)  who  performs  prayers,  and  conducts  their 
religious  ceremonies  :  and  they  appear  to  have  elders  and  a  chief 
in  each  community,  who  determine  in  their  religious  concerns.  1 1 
They  expect  the  Messiah,  and  that  they  will  one  day  return  to 
Jerusalem.  They  think  that  the  time  of  his  appearance  will  soon 
arrive,  at  which  they  much  rejoice,  believing  that  at  Jerusalem  they 
will  see  their  God,  worship  him  only,  and  be  despised  no  more. 

These  particulars,  we  should  presume,  can  scarcely  fail  to  prove 
interesting,  both  in  a  moral  and  religious,  as  well  as  in  a  geograph- 
ical point  of  view.  The  number  of  the  scattered  members  of  the 
tribes  of  Judah,  and  the  half  tribe  of  Benjamin,  rather  exceed  than 
fall  short  of  five  millions.  Now,  if  this  number  be  added  to  the 
many  other  mill-bns  to  be  found  in  the  different  countries  of  the 
east,  what  an  immense  power  would  be  brought  into  action,  were 
the  spirit  of  nationality  once  roused,  or  any  extraordinary  event  to 
occur,  which  should  induce  them  to  unite  in  claiming  possession  of 
that  land  which  was  given  to  them  for  an  heritage  forever,"  and 
lo  which,  in  every  other  clime  of  the  earth,  their  fondest  hopes  and 
their  dearest  aspirations  never  cease  to  turn." 

But  although  the  opinion,  that  the  American  Indians  are  the  de- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST.  73 

scendants  of  the  lost  Ten  Tribes,  is  bow  a  popular  one,  and  gene- 
rally believed,  yet  there  are  some  who  totally  discard  this  opinion. 
And  among  such,  as  chief,  is  Professor  Rafinesque,  whose  opinions 
on  the  subject  of  the  flood  of  Noah  not  being  universal,  and  cc  the 
ark,  we  have  introduced  on  the  first  rages  of  this  work. 

This  gentleman  is  decidedly,  we  may  say  severely,  opposed  to 
this  doctrine,  and  alleges  that  the  Ten  Tribes  were  never  lost,  but 
are  still  in  the  countries  of  the  east  about  the  region  of  ancient  Sy- 
ria, in  Asia.  He  ridicules  all  those  authors  who  have  attempted 
to  find  in  the  customs  of  the  Indians,  traits  of  the  Jews,  and  stamps 
them  with  being  egre^iously  ignorant  of  the  origin  of  things  per- 
taining to  this  subject.  Thk  is  taking  a  high  stand,  indeed,  and 
if  he  can  maintain  it,  he  has  a  right  to  the  honor  thereof.  Upon 
this  notion,  he  says,  a  new  sect  of  religion  has  arisen,  namely,  the 
Mormanites,  who  pretend  to  have  discovered  a  book  with  golden 
leaves,  in  which  is  the  history  of  the  American  Jews,  and  their 
leader,  Morman,  who  came  hither  more  than  2,000  years  ago. 
This  work  is  ridiculous  enough,  it  is  true ;  as  the  wThole  book  of 
Morman  bears  the  stamp  of  folly,  and  is  a  poor  attempt  at  an  imi- 
tation of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures,  and  is  without  connection, 
object,  or  aim  ;  shewing  every  where  language  and  phrases  of  too 
late  a  construction  to  accord  with  the  Asiatic  manner  of  composi- 
tion, which  highly  characterises  the  style  of  the  Bible. 

As  reasons,  this  philosopher  advances  as  follows,  against  the 
American  nations  being  descended  from  the  Ten  Tribes  of  ancient 
Israel : 

"  1st.  These  Ten  Tribes  are  not  lost,  as  long  supposed  ;  their 
descendants,  more  or  less  mixed  with  the  natives,  are  yet  found  in 
Media,  Iran,Taurin,  Cabulistan,  Hindostan,  and  China,  where  late 
travellers  have  traced  them,  calling  themselves  by  various  names. 

2d.  The  American  nations  knew  not  the  Sabbath,  nor  yet  the 
Sabbattical  weeks  and  years  of  the  Jews.  This  knowledge  could 
never  have  been  lost  by  the  Hebrews.  The  only  weeks  known  in 
America,  were  of  three  days,  five  days,  and  half  lunations,  (or  half 
a  moon  ;)  as  among  the  primitive  nations,  before  the  week  of  seven 
days  was  used  in  Asia,  which  was  based  upon  the  seven  planets, 
long  before  the  laws  of  Moses."  4 

Here  is  another  manifest  attempt  of  this  philosopher  to  invali- 
date the  Scriptures,  in  attempting  to'  fix  the  origin  of  the  ancient 

10 


74  AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 

Jewish  and  present  Christian  Sabbath,  on  the  observances  of  the 
ancient  nations,  respecting  the  motions  of  the  seven  primary  planets 
of  the  heavens  ;  when  it  is  emphatically  said,  in  the  Hebrew 
Scriptures,  that  the  week  of  seven  days  was  based  on  the  seven 
days'  work  of  the  Creator,  in  the  creation  of  the  world.  And  as 
the  Creation  is  older  than  the  astronomical  observations  of  the  most 
ancient  nations  of  the  earth,  it  is  evident  that  the  Scripture  account 
of  the  origin  of  the  seven-day  week  ought  to  have  the  precedence 
over  all  other  opinions  since  sprung  up. 

3d.  He  says,  "  The  Indians  hardly  knew  the  use  of  iron,  although 
common  among  the  Hebrews,  and  likely  never  to  be  lost ;  nor  did 
they,  the  Indians  of  America,  know  the  use  of  the  plough." 

u  4th.  The  same  applies  to  the  use  of  writing ;  such  an  art  is 
never  lost  when  once  known." 

"  5th.  Circumcision  was  unknown,  and  even  abhorred  by  the 
Americans,  except  two  nations,  who  used  it — the  Mayans,  of  Yu- 
catan, in  South  America,  who  worshipped  an  hundred  idols,  and 
the  Calchaquis,  of  Chaco,  of  the  same  country,  who  worshipped 
the  sun  and  stars,  believing  that  departed  souls  became  stars.  These 
beliefs  are  quite  different  from  Judaism  ;  and  besides  this,  the  rite 
of  circumcision  was  common  to  Egypt,  Ethiopia,  Edom,  and 
Chalcbis." 

But  to  this  we  reply,  supposing  circumcision  was  practised  by  all 
those  nations,  and  even  more,  this  does  not  disprove  the  rite  to  be 
of  pure  Hebrew  or  Jewish  origin,  as  we  have  an  account  of  it  in 
the  Scriptures  written  by  Moses,  as  being  in  use  quite  two  thou- 
sand years  before  Christ ;  long  enough  before  Abraham  or  his  pos- 
terity knew  any  thing  of  the  Egyptians ;  it  was  therefore,  most  un- 
doubtedly introduced  among  the  Egyptians  by  the  Jews  themselves, 
or  their  ancestors,  and  from  them  the  custom  has  gone  out  into 
many  nations  of  the  earth. 

Again,  Mr.  Rafiuesque  says,  one  tribe  there  was,  namely,  the 
Calchaquis,  who  worshipped  the  sun  and  the  stars,  supposing  them 
to  be  the  souls  of  the  departed. 

This  notion  is  not  very  far  removed  from,  or  at  least  may  have 
had  its  origin  with  the  Jews ;  for  Daniel,  one  of  their  prophets, 
who  lived  about  500  years  before  Christ,  expressly  says,  respecting 
the  souls  of  the  departed  righteous  :  u  They  that  be  wise  shall  shine 
as  the  brightness  of  the  firmament,  and  they  that  turn  many  to 


APfD  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST,  75 

righteousness,  as  the  stars,  for  ever  and  ever."  A  sentiment  of 
such  transcendant  beauty  and  consequence  is  not  easily  lost.  This 
tribe,  therefore,  as  above  named,  may  they  not  have  been  of  Jew- 
ish origin  ? 

"  6.  None  of  the  American  tribes  have  the  striking,  sharp,  Jew- 
ish features,  and  physical  confirmation."  [But  other  authors,  of 
equal  celebrity,  have  a  contrary  opinion.] 

"  7.  The  American  Indians  eat  hogs,  hares,  fish,  and  all  the  for- 
bidden animals  of  Moses,  but  each  tribe  abstain  from  their  tutelar 
animals,"  (which,  as  they  imagine,  presides  over  their  destinies,) 
"or  badges  of  families  of  some  peculiar  sort." 

But  to  this  we  reply,  most  certainly  the  Jews  did  use  fish  ;  as  in 
all  their  history,  even  in  the  Bible,  frequent  reference  is  had  to 
their  use  of  fishes,  and  to  their  fish  markets,  where  they  were  sold 
and  bought. 

"  8.  The  American  customs  of  scalping,  torturing  prisoners,  can- 
nibalism, painting  their  bodies,  and  going  naked,  even  in  very  cold 
climates,  are  totally  unlike  the  Hebrew  customs."  Scalping,  with 
several  other  customs  of  the  sort,  we  have  elsewhere  in  this  work 
shown  to  be  of  Scythian  origin ;  but  does  not,  on  that  account, 
prove,  nor  in  any  way  invalidate  the  other  opinion,  that  some  of  the 
tribes  are  indeed  of  Jewish  origin. 

"  9.  A  multitude  of  languages  exists  in  America,  which  may 
perhaps  be  reduced  to  twenty-five  radical  languages,  and  two  thou- 
sand dialects.  But  they  are  often  unlike  the  Hebrew,  in  roots, 
words,  and  grammar;  they  have,  by  far,  says  this  author,  more  an- 
alogies with  the  Sanscrit"  (the  ancient  Chinese,)  Celtic,  Bask, 
Pelasgian,  Berber,"  (in  Europe  ;)  "  Lybian,  Egyptian,"  (in  Afri- 
ca;) "  Persian,  Turan,  &c,"  (also  in  Europe;)  "or  in  fact,  all 
the  primitive  languages  of  mankind."    This  we  believe. 

"  10.  The  Americans  cannot  have  sprung  from  a  single  nation, 
because,  independently  of  the  languages,  their  features  and  com- 
plexions are  as  various  as  in  Africa  and  Asia." 

"  We  find  in  America,  white,  tawny,  brown,  yellow,  olive,  cop- 
per, and  even  black  nations,  as  in  Africa.  Also,  dwarfs  and  giants, 
handsome  and  ugly  features,  flat  and  aquiline  noses,  thick  and  thin 
lips,"  &c.    [Among  the  Jews  is  also  as  great  a  variety.] 

The  Rev.  Mr.  Smith,  of  Pulteney,  Vt,  a  few  years  since,  pub- 
lished a  work,  entitled  "  A  view  of  the  Hebrews,"  in  which  he 


76 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


labors  to  establish  that  the  American  Indians  worshipped  but  one 
God ;  the  great  Yohewah,  or  Jehovah  of  the  Scriptures.  This  is 
vehemently  opposed  by  Philosopher  Rafinesque,  as  follows,  in  re- 
ply to  him. 

"  You  say,  all  the  Americans  had  the  same  God  Yohewa;  this  is 
utterly  false.  This  was  the  god  of  the  Chactas  and  Florida  In- 
dians only  ;  many  other  tribes  had  tripple  gods,  or  trimurtis,  as  in 
Hindostan, having  names  nearly  Sanscrit."  [But  neither  does  this 
disprove  that  some  of  these  tribes  are  of  Jewish  origin.] 

"  Polytheism,"  (a  plurality  of  wives,)  "  idolatry,  and  a  complex 
mythology,  prevailed  among  all  the  most  civilized  nations"  of  this 
country. 

"  All  the  ancient  religions  were  found  in  America,"  which  have 
prevailed  in  the  old  world,  in  the  earliest  ages,  as  "  Theism,  Sa- 
baism,  Magism  Hindooism,  Shamanism,  Fetiehism,  &c,  but  na 

Judaism." 

He  says,  the  few  examples  of  the  aninity  between  the  Indian 
languages  and  the  Hebrew,  given  by  Mr.  Smith,  in  his  work,  be- 
long only  to  the  Floridan  and  Caribbean  languages.  Mr.  Rafin- 
esque  says,  he  could  show  ten  times  as  many  in  the  Aruac,  Gua- 
rian,"  (languages  of  South  America,)  "  but  what  is  that  compared 
with  the  100,000  affinities  with  the  primitive  languages." 

"  All  the  civilized  Americans  had  a  priesthood,  or  priestly  caste, 
and  so  had  the  Hindoos,  Egyptians,  Persians,  Celts,  and  Ethiopians. 
Were  tl^ey  all  Jews  ? 

"  4.  Tribes  are  found  among  all  the  ancient  nations,  Arabs,  Ber- 
bers, Celts,  Negroes,  &c,  who  are  not  Jews.  The  most  civilized 
nations  had  castes,  instead  of  tribes,  in  America  as  weil  as  Egypt 
and  India  ;  the  Mexicans,  the  Mayans,  Muhizcas,  the  Peruvians, 
&c,  had  no  tribes.  The  animal  badges  of  tribes,  are  found  among 
Negroes  and  Tartars,  as  well  as  our  Indians." 

"  5.  Arks  of  covenant  and  cities  of  refuge  are  not  peculiar  to  the 
Jews  ;  many  Asiatic  nations  had  them,  also  the  Egyptians,  and 
nine-tenths  of  our  Indian  tribes  have  none  at  all,  or  have  only  holy 
bags,"  (for  an  ark)  somewhat  like  a  talisman,  a  charm,  or  as  the 
"  Fetiches,  of  the  Africans." 

But  we  reply,  there  is  no  evidence  that  other  nations  than  the 
Jews  had  cities  of  refuge  and  imitations  of  the  ark  of  the  cov~ 
e n an t,  prior  to  the  time  of  Moses,  which  was  full  sixteen  hundred 


AJ*D  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


years  before  Christ,  and  from  whom  it  is  altogether  probable,  that 
all  the  nations  among  whom  such  traits  are  found,  derived  them  at 
first  from  the  laws  of  that  Hebrew  Legislator.  Those  nations, 
therefore,  among  whom,  at  this  distance  of  time,  those  traits  are 
found  most  resembling  the  Jews,  may  be  said,  with  some  degree 
of  propriety,  to  be  their  descendants ;  and  among  many  tribes  of 
the  western  Indians,  these  traits  are  found,  if  we  may  believe  the 
most  credible  witnesses. 

"  6.  The  religious  cry  of  aleluya,  is  not  Jewish,  says  this  au- 
thor, but  primitive,  and  found  among  the  Hindoos,  Arabs,  Greeks, 
Saxons,  Celts,  Lybians,  &c,  under  the  modification  oihulili,  yululu, 
tulujah,  6/c    Other  Americans  call  it  ululaez  guahdu,  aluyah,  &c." 

All  this  being  true,  which  we  are  willing  to  allow,  does  not  dis- 
prove, but  that  these  forms  of  speech,  which  are  directed  in  praise  and 
adoration  of  a  Supreme  or  Superior  Being  of  some  nature,  no  mat- 
ter what,  may  all  have  originated  from  the  Hebrew  Jews,  as  this 
name  of  God,  namely,  Jehovah,  was  known  among  that  nation,  be- 
fore the  existence  as  nations,  by  those  names,  of  either  the  Hindoos, 
Arabs,  Greeks,  Saxons,  Celts,  or  Lybians  ;  for  it  was  known  in  the 
family  of  Noah,  and  to  all  the  patriarchs  before  the  flood.  The 
original  word,  translated  God,  was  Jehova,  and  also  Elohim,  which 
are  generally  translated  Lord  and  God. 

In  the  2d  chapter  of  Genesis,  at  the  4th  verse,  the  word  Jehovah 
first  occurs,  says  Dr.  Clarke,  in  the  original  as  written  by  Moses; 
but  was  in  use  long  before  the  days  of  Abraham,  among  the  ances- 
tors of  that  patriarch.  From  this  word,  Jehovah,  and  Elohim,  the 
words  alleluia,  &c,  as  above,  it  is  admitted  on  all  hands,  were  at 
first  derived  ;  and  are  in  all  nations,  where  known  and  used,  di- 
rected to  the  praise  and  adoration  of  the  Almighty,  or  other  objects 
of  adoration. 

This  most  exalted  form  of  praise,  it  appears,  was  known  to  John 
the  Revelator,  for  he  says  in  chapter  19,  "I  heard  a  great  voice  of 
much  people  in  heaven,  saying,  alleluia  ;  and  again,  they  said, 
Alleluia.1''  This  form  of  praise,  says  Dr.  Clarke,  the  heathen  bor- 
rowed from  the  Jews,  as  is  evident  from  their  Pazans,  or  hymns, 
sung  in  honor  of  Apollo,  which  began  and  ended  with  eleleuie,  a 
mere  composition  of  the  Hebrew  words  alleluia  and  hallelujh.  It  is 
even  found  among  the  North  American  Indians,  and  adapted  by  them 
to  the  same  purpose,  viz.,  the  worship  of  God  or  the  Great  Spirit, 


73 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


From  what  we  have  been  able  to  show  on  this  subject,  as  above, 
we  cannot  subscribe  to  the  opinion  that  those  words  are  not  of  He- 
brew and  Jewish  origi  is  ;  consequently  being  of  Hebrew  origin, 
it  must  follow,  that  where  they  are  found  in  the  most  pure  and 
unadulterated  use,  that  the  people  so  using  them  are  most  likely  to 
be  of  Jewish  descent ;  and  this  is  found  among  the  American  In- 
dians. 

Among  some  of  their  tribes  they  have  a  place  denominated  the 
beloved  square.  Here  they  sometimes  dance  a  whole  night ;  but  al- 
ways in  a  bowing  or  worshiping  posture,  singing  continually,  hal- 
lelujah Ye-ho-wah,  Y<  -ho-vah  ;  which  last  word,  says  Clarke,  is 
probably  the  true  pronunciation  of  the  ancient  Hebrew  word  Jehovah. 

It  is  no  marvel,  then,  that  these  Jewish  customs  are  found  "  a- 
mong  nearly  all  the  u.:cient  nations  of  Asia,  Africa,  Europe  and 
Polynesia,  nay,  even  imong  the  wild  Negroes  to  this  day,"  since 
they  were  in  use  at  the  very  outset  of  the  spread  of  the  nations 
from  Ararat,  and  ai  therefore,  of  Hebre  w  primitive  origin,  but 
not  heathen  primitive  origin,  as  asserted  by  Rafinesque.  We  are 
not  tenacious,  however,  whether  the  Ten  Tribes  were  lost  or  not, 
nor  do  we  disagree  to  the  opinion,  that  they  are  found  in  almost  ail 
parts  of  the  old  world,  having  mingled  with  the  various  nations  of 
Asia  ;  but  if  so,  we  enquire,  why  may  they  not,  therefore,  be 
found  in  America  ?  c  >uld  they  not  as  easily  have  found  their  way 
hither,  as  the  other  na  ions  of  the  east?   Most  assuredly. 

It  is  not  the  object  of  this  volume,  to  contend  on  this  point ;  but 
when  we  find  attempts  to  overturn  the  Scriptures,  and,  if  possible, 
to  make  it  appear,  if  not  by  so  many  words,  yet  in  the  manner 
we  understand  this  water's  remarks,  that  the  Bible  itself  is  no- 
thing else  than  acollec  ion  of  heathenism  placed  under  the  plausible 
idea  of  primitive  words,  primitive  usages  and  primitive  religion  ;  we 
think  this  is  placing  the  {currus  bovem  trakit)  cart  before  the  horse, 
and  should  not  be  allowed  to  pass  without  reproof. 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST> 


79 


A  FURTHER  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  CONVULSIONS  OF  THE  GLOBE, 
WITH  THE  REMOVAL  OF  ISLANDS. 

If  the  supposition  of  naturalists  may  obtain  belief,  it  follows, 
that  there  may  have  been  a  whole  continent,  reaching  from  the 
north  of  Europe  to  Bhering's  Strait;  uniting,  not  only  Europe  with 
America,  on  the  east,  but  also  Asia,  on  the  north,  and  may  have 
continued  on  south  from  Bhering's  Strait,  some  way  down  the  Pa- 
cific, as  Bufibn  partly  believed,  uniting  America  and  China  on  the 
west. 

It  was  contended  by  Clavigero,  that  the  equatorial  parts  of  Afri- 
ca and  America  were  once  united.  By  which  means,  before  the 
connexion  was  torn  away  by  the  irruption  of  the  sea  on  both  sides, 
the  inhabitants  from  the  African  continent  came,  in  the  earliest 
ages,  to  South  America.  Whether  this  be  true  or  not,  the  two 
countries  approach  each  other,  in  a  remarkable  manner,  along  the 
coast  of  Guinea,  on  the  side  of  Africa,  and  the  coast  of  Pernam- 
buco,  on  the  side  of  South  America.  These  are  the  places  which, 
in  reality,  seem  to  stretch  towards  each  other,  as  if  they  had  been 
once  united. 

The  innumerable  islands  scattered  all  over  the  Pacific  ocean, 
populous  with  men,  more  than  intimates  a  period,  even  since  the 
flood,  when  all  the  different  continents  of  the  globe  w  ere  united  to- 
gether, and  the  sea  so  disposed  of,  that  they  did  not  break  this  har- 
mony so  well  calculated  to  facilitate  the  migrations  of  men  and  an- 
imals. 

Several  tribes  of  the  present  Southern  Indians,  as  they  now  are 
called,  have  traditions,  that  they  came  from  the  easty  or  through 
the  Atlantic  ocean.  Rafinesque  says,  it  is  important  to  distinguish 
the  American  nations  of  eastern  origin  from  those  of  northern,  who, 
he  says,  were  invaders  from  Tartary,  and  were  as  different  in  their 
manners  as  were  the  Romans  and  Vandals. 

The  southern  nations,  among  whom  this  tradition  is  found,  are 
the  Natchez,  Apalachians,  Talascas,  Mayans,  Myhizcas,  and  Hay- 
tians.  But  those  of  the  Algonquin  stock,  point  to  a  northwest  ori- 
gin, which  is  the  way  from  the  northern  regions  of  Asia. 


80 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


It  is  not  likely,  that  immediately  after  the  era  of  the  deluge,  there 
was  as  much  ocean  which  appeared  above  ground  as  at  the  present 
time;  but  instead  of  this,  lakes  were  more  numerous.  Conse- 
quently, on  the  surface  of  the  globe  there  was  much  more  laud 
than  at  the  present  time.  But  from  various  convulsions,  more  than 
we  have  spoken  of,  whose  history  is  now  lost,  in  past  ages,  many 
parts,  nay,  nearly  all  the  earthy  surface  is  sunken  to  the  depths 
below,  while  the  waters  have  risen  above;  nearly  three-fourths  of 
the  globe's  surface  is  known  to  be  water.  How  appalling  is  this 
reflection  ! 

The  currents  of  sea  running  through  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  by 
the  disposition  of  its  Creator,  to  promote  motion  in  the  waters,  as 
motion  is  essential  to  all  animal  life,  have,  doubtless,  by  subterra- 
nean attrition  affected  the  foundations  of  whole  islands,  which  have 
sunk  beneath  the  waters  at  different  periods.  To  such  convulsions 
as  these,  it  would  seem,  Job  has  alluded  in  his  ninth  chapter,  at 
the  5th  verse,  as  follows :  "  Which  removeth  the  mountains,  and 
they  know  not ;  which  overturneth  them- in  his  anger."  Adam 
Clarke's  comment  on  this  verse  is  as  follows  :  "This  seems  to  refer 
to  earthquakes.  By  these  strong  convulsions,  mountains,  valleys, 
hills,  even  whole  islands,  are  removed  in  an  instant:  and  to  this  latter 
circumstance  the  words,  u  they  know  not"  most  probably  refer. 
The  work  is  done  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  ;  no  warning  is  given  ; 
the  mountain  that  seemed  to  be  as  firm  as  the  earth  on  which  it 
rested,  was  in  the  same  moment  both  visible  and  invisible  ;  so  sud- 
denly was  it  swallowed  up." 

It  can  scarcely  be  supposed,  but  that  Job  was  either  personally,  or 
by  information,  acquainted  with  occurrences  of  the  kino,  in  order  to 
justify  the  thing  as  being  done  by  God  in  his  anger. 

It  is  not  impossible  but  the  fact  upon  which  the  following  storv 
is  founded  may  have  been  known  to  Job,  who  wTas  a  man  suppos- 
ed in  possession  of  every  species  of  information  calculated  to  inter- 
est the  nobler  faculties  of  the  human  miud,  if  we  may  judge  from 
the  book  bearing  his  own  name.  The  story  is  an  account  of  a  cer- 
tain island,  called  by  the  ancients  Atalantis  ;  and  for  ought  that 
can  be  urged  against  it  having  existed,  we  are  inclined  to  believe 
it  did, as  that  all  learning,  uninspired,  and  general  information,  was 
anciently  in  possession  of  heathen  philosophers  and  priests,  to  whom 
it  was  the  custom  even  for  princes  to  resort  to,  and  learn  of,  be- 


AjND  discoveries  in  the  west. 


81 


fore  they  were  considered  qualified  to  sit  on  the  thrones  of  their 
fathers.  Such  were  the  Egyptian  priests  to  the  Egyptians,  and  the 
Druids  to  the  Celtic  nations ;  the  Brahmins  to  the  Hindoos ;  the 
Magi  to  the  Persians ;  the  Philosophers  to  the  Greeks  and  Romans ; 
and  the  Prophets  of  the  Indians,  to  the  western  Tribes. 

"  This  island  is  mentioned  by  Plato,  in  his  dialogue  of  Timaeus. 
Solon,  the  Athenian  lawgiver,  is  supposed  to  have  travelled  iuto 
Egypt,"  about  six  hundred  years  before  Christ.  Plato's  time  was 
three  hundred  years  nearer  the  time  of  Christ,  who  has  mentioned 
the  travels  of  Solon  into  Egypt.  "  He  arrives  at  an  ancient  tem- 
ple on  the  Delta,  a  fertile  island  formed  by  the  Nile,  where  he  held 
a  conversation  with  certain  learned  priests,  on  the  antiquities  of  re- 
mote ages.  When  one  of  them  gave  Solon  a  description  of  the 
island  Atalantis,  and  also  of  its  destruction.  This  island,  said  the 
Egyptian  priest,  was  situated  in  the  Western  Ocean,  opposite  the 
Straits  of  Gibralter;"  which  would  place  it  exactly  between  a  part 
of  Europe,  its  southern  end,  and  the  northern  part  of  Africa  and 
the  continent  of  America. 

"  There  was,  said  the  priest,  an  easy  passage  from  this  to  other 
islands,  which  lay  adjacent  to  a  large  continent,  exceeding  in  size 
all  Europe  and  Asia."  Neptune  settled  in  this  island,  from  whose 
son  Atlas,  its  name  was  derived,  and  divided  it  Ibetween  his  ten 
sons,  who  reigned  there  in  regular  succession  for  many  ages." 

From  the  time  of  Solon's  travels  in  Egypt,  which  was  six  hun- 
dred years  before  Christ,  we  find  more  than  seventeen  hundred 
years  up  to  the  flood ;  so  that  time  enough  had  elapsed  since  the 
flood  to  justify  the  fact  of  the  island  having  existed,  and  also  of 
having  been  inhabited  and  destroyed  even  six  hundred  years  be- 
fore the  time  of  Solon  ;  which  would  make  the  time  of  its  destruc- 
tion twelve  hundred  years  before  Christ;  and  would  still  leave 
more  than  five  hundred  years  from  that  period  back  to  the  flood. 
So  that  if  King  Neptune  had  not  made  his  settlement  on  the  island 
Atalantis  tili  two  hundred  years  after  the  flood,  there  would  have 
been  time  for  the  successive  reigns  of  each  of  the  regal  lines  of  his 
sons,  amounting  to  three  hundred  years,  before  the  time  of  its  en- 
velopement  in  the  sea;  so  that  the  priest  was  justified  in  using  the 
term  antiquities,  when  he  referred  to  that  catastrophe. 

M  They  made,  i.  e.  the  Atalantians,  irruptions  into  Europe  and 
Africa ;  subduing  all  Lybia,  as  far  as  Egypt,  Europe,  and  Aua. 

11 


82  AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


Minor.  They  were  resisted,  however,  by  the  Athenians,  and 
driven  back  to  their  Atlantic  territories."  If  they  were  resisted 
aud  driven  back  by  the  Athenians,  the  era  of  the  existence  of  this 
island  is  easily  ascertained  ;  because  the  Athenians  settled  at 
Athens,  in  Greece,  fifteen  hundred  and  fifty-six  years  before  Christ, 
being  a  colony  from  Egypt,  under  their  conductor  Cecrops.  One 
hundred  years  after  their  establishment  at  Athens,  they  had  be- 
come powerful,  so  as  to  be  able  to  take  a  political  stand  among  the 
nations  of  that  region,  and  to  defend  their  country  against  invasions. 
Accordingly,  at  the  time  the  Atalantians  were  repulsed  and  com- 
pelled to  return  from  whence  they  came,  was  in  the  year  fourteen 
hundred  and  forty-three,  before  Christ. 

"  Shortly  after  this,"  says  Plato,  "  there  was  a  tremendous  earth- 
quake and  an  overflowing  of  the  sea,  which  continued  for  a  day 
and  a  night ;  in  the  course  of  which  the  vast  island  of  Atalantis, 
and  all  its  splendid  cities  and  warlike  nations,  were  swallowed  up, 
and  sunk  to  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  which,  spreading  its  waters  over 
the  chasm,  added  a  vast  region  to  the  Atlantic  Ocean.  For  a  long 
time,  however,  the  sea  was  not  navigable,  on  account  of  rocks  and 
shoals  of  mud  and  slime,  and  of  the  ruins  of  that  drowned  coun- 
try." This  occurrence,  if  the  tradition  be  true,  happened  about 
twelve  hundred  years  before  Christ,  three  hundred  years  before  the 
time  of  Job,  and  seven  hundred  and  fifty  years  after  the  flood.  At 
the  period,  therefore,  of  the  existence  of  this  island,  a  land  passage 
to  America,  from  Europe  and  Africa,  was  practicable  ;  also  by 
other  islands,  some  of  which  are  still  situated  in  the  same  direc- 
tion— the  Azores,  Madeiras,  and  TenerifTe  islands,  about  twenty  in 
number. 

For  this  story  of  the  island  of  Atalantis,  we  are  indebted  to  Ir- 
ving's  Columbus,  a  popular  work,  of  reeent  date ;  which  cannot  be 
denied  but  is  exceedingly  curious,  and  not  without  some  foundation 
of  probability.  Was  not  this  island  the  bridge,  so  called,  reaching 
from  America  to  Europe,  as  conjectured  by  Dr.  Robertson,  the  his- 
torian, but  was  destroyed  by  the  ocean,  as  he  supposes,  very  far 
back  in  the  ages  of  antiquity. 

An  allusion  to  this  same  island,  Atalantis,  is  made  by  Euclid, 
who  flourished  about  three  hundred  years  before  Christ,  in  a  con- 
venation  which  he  had  with  Anacharsis,  a  Scythian  philosopher  of 
the  same  age  ;   who  had,  in  search  of  knowledge,  travelled  from 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


33 


the  wilds  of  his  own  northern  regions,  to  Athens,  where  he  became 
acquainted  with  Euclid. 

Their  subject  was  the  convulsions  of  the  globe.  The  sea,  ac- 
cording to  every  appearance,  said  Euclid,  has  separated  Sicily  from 
Italy,  Eub&a  from  Baotia,  and  a  number  of  other  islands  from  the 
continent  of  Europe.  We  are  informed,  continued  the  philoso- 
pher, that  the  waters  of  Pontus  Euxinus,  (or  the  Black  Sea,)  having 
been  long  enclosed  in  a  basin,  (or  lake,)  shut  in  on  all  sides,  and 
continually  increasing  by  the  rivers  of  Europe  and  Asia,  rose  at 
length  above  the  high  lands  which  surrotmded  it,  forced  open  the 
passage  of  the  Bosphorus  and  Hellespont,  and  impetuously  rushing 
into  the  iEgean  or  Mediterranean  Sea,  extended  its  limits  to  the 
surrounding  shores. 

If  we  consult,  he  says,  mythology,  we  are  told  that  Hercules, 
whose  labors  have  been  confounded  with  those  of  nature,  separated 
Europe  from  Africa ;  by  which  is  meant,  no  doubt,  that  the  Atlan- 
tic Ocean  destroyed  the  isthmus,  which  once  united  those  two  paits 
of  the  earth,  and  opened  to  itself  a  communication  with  the  Medi- 
terranean Sea. 

Beyond  the  isthmus,  of  which  I  have  just  spoken,  said  Euclid, 
existed,  according  to  ancient  traditions,  &n  island  as  large  as  Africa, 
which,  with  all  its  wretched  inhabitants,  was  swallowed  up  by  an 
earthquake. 

Here,  then,  is  another  witness,  besides  Solon,  who  lived  300 
years  before  the  time  of  Euclid,  who  testifies  to  the  past  existence 
of  the  island  Atalantis. 


EVIDENCES  OF  AN  ANCIENT  POPULATION  IN  AMERICA,  DIF« 
FERENT  FROM  THAT  OF  THE  INDIANS. 

We  shall  now  attend  more  particularly  to  the  evidences  of  an 
ancient  population  in  this  country,  anterior  to  that  of  the  present 
race  of  Indians,  afforded  in  the  discovery  of  forts,  mounds,  tumuli, 
and  their  contents,  as  related  by  western  travellers,  and  the  re- 
searches of  the  Antiquarain  Society,  at  Cincinnati.  But  before  we 
proceed  to  an  account  of  the  traits  of  this  kind  of  population,  more 


S4 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


than  already  given,  we  will  remark,  that  wherever  plats  of  ground, 
struck  out  hito  circles,  squares  and  ovals,  are  found,  we  are  at  once 
referred  to  an  era  when  a  people  and  nations  existed  in  this  coun- 
try, more  civilized,  refined,  and  given  to  architectural  and  agricul- 
tural pursuits,  than  the  Indians. 

It  is  well  known,  the  presert  tribes  do  not  take  the  trouble  of 
materially  altering  the  face  of  the  ground  to  accommodate  the  erec- 
tion of  their  places  of  dwelling  ;  always  selecting  that  which  is  al- 
ready fashioned  by  nature  to  suit  their  views ;  using  the  earth, 
where  they  build  their  towns,  as  they  find  it. 

In  a  deep  and  almost  hidden  valley  among  the  mountains  of 
the  Alleghany,  on  the  road  from  Philadelphia  to  Pittsburgh,  is  one 
of  those  solitary  memorials  of  an  exterminated  race.  It  is  hid 
amidst  the  profoundest  gloom  of  the  woods  ;  and  is  found  to  consist 
of  a  regular  circle,  an  hundred  paces  in  diameter.  This  is  equal 
to  six  rods  and  four  paces;  and  twenty -two  rods  in  circumference. 
The  whole  plat  is  raised  above  the  common  level  of  the  earth 
around,  about  four  feet  high  ;  which  may  have  been  done  to  carry 
off  the  water^  when  the  snows  melted,  or  when  violent  rains  would 
otherwise  have  inundated  their  dwellings  from  the  surrounding 
bills. 

The  neighborhood  of  Brownville,  or  Redstone,  in  Pennsylvania, 
abounds  with  monuments  of  antiquity.  A  fortified  camp,  of  a  very 
com;  lete  and  curious  kind,  on  the  ramparts  of  which  is  timber  of 
live  feet  in  diameter,  stands  near  the  town  of  Brownville.  This 
camp  contains  about  thirteeen  acres,  enclosed  in  a  circle,  the  ele- 
vation of  Which  is  seven  feet  above  the  adjoining  ground  ;  this  w  as 
an  herculean  work.  Within  the  circle  a  pentagon  is  accurately 
described  ;  having  its  sides  four  feet  high,  and  its  angles  uniformly 
three  feet  from  the  outside  of  the  circle,  thus  leaving  an  unbroken 
communication  all  around.  A  pentagon  is  a  figure,  having  five 
angles  or  sides.  Each  side  of  the  pentagon  has  a  postern,  or  small 
gateway,  opening  into  the  passage  between  it  and  the  circle ;  but 
the  circle  itself  has  only  one  grand  gateway  outward.  Exactly  in 
the  centre  stands  a  mound  about  thirty  feet  high,  supposed  to  have 
been  a  place  of  lookout.  At  a  small  distance  from  this  place,  was 
found  a  stone,  eight  feet  by  five,  on  which  was  accurately  engraved 
a  representation  of  the  w  hole  work,  with  the  mound  in  the  cen- 
tre ;  whereon  was  the  likness  of  a  human  head,  which  signified 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST- 


12 


that  the  chief  who  presided  there,  lay  buried  beneath  it.  The  en- 
graving on  this  stone,  is  evidence  of  the  knowledge  of  stone  cut- 
ting as  it  was  executed  with  a  considerable  degree  of  accuracy. 

On  comparing  the  description  of  this  circular  monument  with  a 
description  of  works  of  a  similar  character,  found  in  Denmark, 
Sweden,  and  Iceland,  the  conclusion  is  drawn,  that  at  some  era  of 
time  t'ae  authors  of  this  kind  of  monumental  works,  in  either  of 
those  countries,  have  been  the  same. 

"  They  are  called  Domh-ringr,  by  the  Danes;  that  is,  literally, 
Doom  Ring,  or  Circle  of  Judgment  ;  being  the  solemn  place 
where  courts  were  held."  The  celebrated  stonehenge  in  England, 
is  built  after  the  same  fashion,  that  is,  in  a  circle,  and  is  of  Belgic 
origin;  the  second  class  of  English  antiquities,  the  era  of  which 
precedes  that  of  the  Romans  in  England ;  which  would  throw  the 
time  of  their  first  erection  back  to  a  period  of  some  hundred  years 
before  Christ. 

"  Stonehenge  :  This  noble  and  curious  monument  of  early 
times,  appears  to  have  been  formed  by  three  principal  circles  of 
stone,  the  outer  connected  together  by  an  uniform  pavement,  as  it 
were,  at  the  top,  to  which  the  chiefs  might  ascend  and  speak  to  the 
surrounding  crowd.  A  second  circle  consists  of  detached  upright 
stones,  about  five  fleet  in  height,  while  the  highest  are  eighteen. 
Within  this  is  a  grand  oval,  consisting  of  live  huge  stones,  crossed 
by  another  at  the  top,  and  enclosing  smaller  stones,  which  seem 
to  have  been  seats,  and  a  large  fiat  stone,  commonly  called  the  al- 
tar, but  which  seems  to  have  been  the  throne  or  seat  of  judgment. 
The  whole  of  the  above  described  monument,  with  ail  its  appara- 
tus, "  seems  to  be  enclosed  in  the  midst  of  a  very  extensive  circley 
or  embankment  of  earth,  sufficiently  large  to  hold  an  immense  num- 
ber; a  whole  tribe  or  nation." — Morse. 

After  the  introduction  of  Christianity  into  the  west  of  Europe, 
which  was  sixty  years  after  Christ,  these  circles  of  judgment, 
which  had  been  polluted  with  human  sacrifices  and  other  pagan 
rites,  were  abandoned,  and  other  customs,  with  other  places  of  re- 
sort, were  instituted.  This  sort  of  antiquities,  says  Morse,  the  geo- 
grapher, which  are  found  all  over  Europe,  are  of  this  character, 
that  is,  of  the  tumular  kind,  such  as  are  found  in  the  west  of  our 
country  ;  belong  entirely  to  the  first  era  of  the  settlements  of  Eu- 
rope. 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


The  Druidic  temples  in  Europe  were  numerous,  and  some  of 
them  immense,  especially  one  in  the  Isle  of  Lewis ;  in  these  the 
gods  Odin,  Thor,  Freyga,  and  other  Gothic  Deities,  were  adored  ; 
all  such  structures  were  enclosed  in  circles,  some  greater  and  some 
less,  according  to  their  importance,  or  the  numbers  of  those  who 
supported  them.  These  are  of  the  first  order  of  Antiquities  found 
in  Europe ;  or,  in  other  words,  the  eldest,  and  go  back  very  far  to- 
ward the  flood,  for  their  commencement. 

The  same  kind  of  antiquities  are  found  in  Ireland,  and  are  allow- 
ed to  be  of  Druidic  origin,  always  enclosed  in  circles,  whether  a 
simple  stone,  or  a  more  spacious  temple,  be  the  place  where  they 
worshipped.  The  Scandinavians,  who  preceded  the  Norwegians 
some  hundred  years,  enclosed  their  rude  chapels  with  circular  in- 
trenchments,  and  were  called  the  Dane's  Raths,oi  circular  intrench- 
ments. 

"  In  the  first  ages  of  the  world,  the  worship  of  God  was  exceed- 
ingly simple ;  there  were  no  temples  nor  covered  edifices  of  any 
kind.  An  altar,  sometimes  a  single  stone  ;  sometimes  it  consisted 
of  several ;  and  at  other  times  merely  of  turf,  was  all  that  was  ne- 
cessary ;  on  this  the  fire  was  lighted,  and  the  sacrifice  offered. 
Adam  Clarke. 

Such  were  the  Druids  of  Europe,  whose  name  is  derived  from 
the  kind  of  forest  in  which  they  preferred  to  worship ;  this  was  the 
oak,  which,  in  the  Greek,  is  expressed  by  the  word  Druid,  whose 
worship  and  principles  extend  even  to  Italy,  among  the  Celtic  na- 
tions, and  is  celebrated  by  Virgil,  in  the  sixth  book  of  the  iEueas, 
where  he  speaks  of  the  Misletoe,  and  calls  it  the  golden  branch,  with- 
out which,  no  one  could  return  from  the  infernal  regions. 

The  Misletoe ; — a  description  of  which  may  please  the  reader,  as 
given  by  Pliny,  who  flourished  about  A.  D.  23,  and  was  a  cele- 
brated writer  of  natural  history,  and  most  learned  of  the  ancient 
Romans.  "  The  Druids  hold  nothing  more  sacred  than  the  Misle- 
toe, and  the  tree  on  which  it  grows,  provided  it  be  the  oak.  They 
make  choice  of  groves  of  oak,  on  this  account ;  nor  do  they  per- 
form any  of  their  sacred  rites,  without  the  leaves  of  those  trees. 
And  whenever  they  find  it  on  the  oak,  they  think  it  is  sent  from 
Heaven,  and  is  a  sign  that  God  himself  has  chosen  that  tree  ;  and 
whenever  found,  is  treated  with  great  ceremony. 

"  They  call  it  by  a  name,  which,  in  ♦heir  language,  signifies  the 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST- 


87 


curer  of  ills ;  and  having  duly  prepared  their  feasts  and  sacrifices 
under  the  tree,  they  bring  to  it  two  white  bulls ;  the  priest  dressed 
in  a  white  robe,  ascends  the  tree,  and  with  a  golden  prunning  hook, 
cuts  off  the  Misletoe,  which  is  received  in  a  Sagum  or  white  sheet. 
Then  they  sacrifice  the  victims,  prayiDg  that  God  would  bless  his 
own  gift  to  those  on  whom  he  has  bestowed  it." — Clarke. 


DISCOVERIES  ON  THE  MUSKINGUM. 

In  the  neighborhood  of  Fort  Harmer,  on  the  Muskingum,  op* 
posite  Marietta,  on  the  Ohio,  were  discovered,  by  Mr.  Ash,  an  En- 
glish traveller,  1826,  several  monuments  of  the  ancient  nation. 

"  Having  made,  (says  this  traveller,)  arrangements  for  an  ab- 
sence of  a  few  days,  I  provided  myself  with  an  excellent  tinder 
box,  some  biscuit  and  salt,  and  arming  my  Indian  travelling  com- 
panion with  a  good  axe  and  rifle,  taking  myself  a  fowling  piece, 
often  tried,  and  my  faithful  dog,  I  crossed  the  ferry  of  the  Musk- 
ingum, having  learned  that  the  left  hand  side  of  that  river  was  most 
accessible  and  the  most  abundant  in  curiosities  and  other  objects 
of  my  research.  [In  another  part  of  this  work  we  shall  describe 
works  of  a  similar  sort,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  Muskingum,  as 
given  by  the  Antiquarian  Society  of  Ohio.] 

"  On  traversing  the  valley  between  Fort  Harmer  and  the  moun- 
tains, I  determined  to  take  the  high  grounds,  and  after  some  diffi- 
culty, ascended  an  eminence  which  commanded  a  view  of  the  town 
of  Marietta  and  of  the  river  up  and  down,  displaying  to  a  great 
distance,  along  the  narrow  valley  of  the  Ohio,  cultivated  plains, 
the  gardens,  and  popular  walks  of  that  beautiful  town. 

"  After  a  very  short  inspection  and  cursory  examination,  it  was 
evident,  that  the  very  spot,  or  eminence  on  which  I  stood,  had  been 
occupied  by  the  Indians,  either  as  a  place  of  observation,  or  a  strong 
hold.  The  exa<jt  summit  of  the  hill  I  found  to  be  artificial;  it  ex- 
pressed an  oval,  forty-five  feet  by  twenty-three,  and  was  composed 
apparently  of  earth  and  stone,  though  no  stone  of  a  similar  char- 
acter appeared  in  that  place. 


S8 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


"  The  base  of  the  whole  was  girded  round  about,  by  a  wall  of 
earth  in  a  state  of  too  great  decay  to  justify  any  calculation,  and 
the  whole  was  so  covered  with  heavy  timber,  that  I  despaired  of 
gaining  any  further  knowledge,  and  would  have  left  the  place,  had 
I  not  been  detained  by  my  Indian  companion,  whom  I  saw  occu- 
pied in  endeavoring  to  introduce  a  pole  into  a  small  opening  be- 
tween two  flat  stones,  near  the  root  of  a  tree3  which  grew  on-  the 
very  summit  of  this  eminence. 

"  The  stones  we  found  were  too  heavy  to  be  removed  by  the 
mere  power  of  hands.  Two  good  oak  poles  were  cut,  in  lieu  of 
levers  and  crows.  Clapping  these  into  the  orifice  first  discovered, 
we  weighed  a  large  flag  stone,  tilting  it  over,  when  we  each  as- 
sumed a  guarded  position,  in  silent  expectation  of  bearing  the  his- 
sing of  serpents,  or  the  rustling  of  the  ground  hog's  litter ;  where, 
the  Indian  had  supposed,  was  a  den  of  one  sort  or  the  other. 

u  All  was  silent.  We  resumed  our  labor,  casting  out  a  number 
of  stones,  leaves,  and  earth,  soon  clearing  a  surface  of  seven  feet  by 
five,  which  had  been  covered,  upwards  of  fifteen  inches  deep,  with 
flat  stones,  principally  lying  against  each  other,  with  their  edges  to 
the  horizon. 

"  On  the  surface  we  had  cleared,  appeared  another  difficulty, 
which  was  a  plain  superfices,  composed  of  but  three  flat  stones  of 
such  apparent  magnitude  that  the  Indian  began  to  think  that  we 
should  find  under  them  neither  snake  nor  pig,  but  having  once  be- 
gun, I  was  not  to  be  diverted  from  my  task. 

a  Stimulated  by  obstructions,  and  animated  with  other  views 
than  those  of  my  companion,  I  had  made  a  couple  of  hickory  sho- 
vels with  the  axe,  and  setting  to  work,  soon  undermined  the  surface, 
and  slid  the  stones  off  on  one  side,  aud  laid  the  space  open  to 
view. 

"  I  expected  to  find  a  cavern  :  my  imagination  was  warmed  by 
a  certain  design,  I  thought  I  discovered,  from  the  very  beginning; 
the  manner  the  stones  were  placed  led  me  to  conceive  the  existence 
of  a  vault  filled  with  the  riches  of  antiquity,  and  crowded  with  the 
treasures  of  the  most  ancient  world. 

"  A  bed  of  sand  was  all  that  appeared  under  these  flat  stones, 
which  I  cast  off,  and  as  I  knew  there  was  no  sand  nearer  than  the 
bed  of  the  MuskiDgum,  a  design  w  as  therefore  the  more  manifest, 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WS3T. 


39 


which  encouraged  rny  proceeding;  the  sand  was  about  a  foot  dee: 
which  I  soon  removed. 

"  The  design  and  labor  of  man  was  now  unequivocal.  The 
space  out  of  which  these  materials  were  taken,  left  a  hollow  in  an 
oblong  square,  lined  with  stones  on  the  end  and  sides,  and  also, 
paved  on  what  appeared  to  be  the  bottom,  with  square  stones,  of 
about  nine  inches  diameter. 

"  I  picked  these  up  with  the  nicest  care,  and  again  cane  to  a 
bed  of  sand,  which,  when  removed,  made  the  vault  about  three  feet 
deep,  presenting  another  bottom  or  surface,  composed  of  small 
square  cut  stones,  fitted  with  such  art,  that  I  had  much  difficulty 
in  discovering  many  of  the  places  where  they  met.  These  dis- 
placed, I  came  to  a  substance,  which,  on  the  most  critical  examin- 
ation, I  judged  to  be  a  mat,  or  mats,  in  a  state  of  entire  decomposi- 
tion and  decay.  My  reverence  and  care  increased  with  the  progress 
already  made  ;  I  took  up  this  impalpable  powder  with  my  hands, 
and  fanned  off  the  remaining  dust  with  my  hat,  when  there  ap- 
peared a  beautiful  tesselated  pavement  of  small,  colored  stones  ; 
the  colors  and  stones  arranged  in  such  a  manner  as  to  express  har- 
mony aud  shades,  and  portraying,  at  full  length,  the  figure  of  a  war- 
rior under  whose  feet  a  snake  was  exhibited  in  ample  folds. 

a  The  body  of  the  figures  was  composed  of  dyed  woods,  bones, 
and  a  variety  of  small  bits  of  terrous  and  testaceous  substances, 
most  of  which  crumbled  into  dust  on  being  removed  and  exposed 
to  the  open  air. 

"  My  regret  and  disappointment  were  very  great,  as  I  had  flat- 
tered myself  that  the  whole  was  stone,  and  capable  of  being  taken 
up  and  preserved.  Little  more,  however,  than  the  actual  pave- 
ment could  be  preserved,  which  was  composed  of  flat  stones,  one 
inch  deep,  and  two  inches  square.  The  prevailing  colors  were 
white,  green,  dark  blue,  and  pale  spotted  red;  all  of  which  are  pe- 
culiar to  the  lakes,  and  not  to  be  had  nearer  than  about  three  hun- 
dred miles. 

"  The  whole  was  affixed  in  a  thin  layer  of  sand,  fitted  together 
with  great  precision,  and  covered  a  piece  of  bark  in  great  decay, 
whose  removal  exposed  what  1  was  fully  prepared  to  discover,  from 
all  previous  indications,  the  remains  of  a  human  skeleton,  which 
was  of  an  uncommon  magnitude,  being  seven  feet  in  length.  With 

12 


90 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


the  skeleton  was  found,  first,  an  earthen  vessel,  or  urn,  in  which 
were  several  bones,  and  some  white  sediment. 

M  The  urn  appeared  to  be  made  of  sand  and  flint  vitrified,  and 
rung,  when  struck,  like  glass,  and  held  about  two  gallons,  had  a 
top  or  cover  of  the  sai^e  material,  and  resisted  fire  as  completely  as 
iron  or  brass.  Second  ;  a  stone  axe,  with  a  groove  round  the  pole, 
by  which  it  had  been  fastened  with  a  withe  to  the  handle.  Third  ; 
twenty-four  arrow  points,  made  of  flint  and  bone,  and  lying  in  a 
position  which  showed  they  had  belonged  to  a  quiver.  Fourth  ;  a 
quantity  of  beads,  but  not  of  glass,  round,  oval,  and  square  ;  color- 
ed green,  black,  white,  blue  and  yellow.  Fifth  ;  a  very  large 
conch  shell,  decomposed  into  a  substance  like  chalk  ;  this  shell  was 
fourteen  inches  long,  and  twenty-three  in  circumference.  The 
Hindoo  priests,  at  the  present  time,  use  this  shell  as  sacred.  It  is 
blown  to  announce  the  celebration  of  religious  festivals.  Sixth  ; 
under  a  heap  of  dust  and  tenuous  shreds  of  feathered  cloth  and 
hair,  a  parcel  of  brass  rings,  cut  out  of  a  solid  piece  of  metal,  and 
in  such  a  manner,  that  the  rings  were  suspended  from  each  other, 
without  the  aid  of  solder  or  any  other  visible  agency  whatever. 
Each  ring  was  three  inches  in  diameter,  and  the  bar  of  the  rings 
an  half  inch  thick,  and  were  square  ;  a  variety  of  characters  were 
deeply  engraved  on  the  sides  of  the  rings,  resembling  the  Chinese 
characters." 

Ward's  History  of  the  Hindoos,  page  41  and  56,  informs  us,  that 
the  god  Vishnoo,  is  represented  holding  a  sea  shell  in  his  hand, 
called  the  "  sacred  shell and,  second,  he  states,  that  "  the  uten- 
sils employed  in  the  ceremonies  of  the  temple,  are  several  dishes  to 
hold  the  offerings,  a  hand  bell,  a  lamp,  jugs  for  holding  water,  an 
incense  dish,  a  copper  cup,  a  seat  of  Kooshu  grass  for  the  priests,  a 
large  metal  plate,  used  as  a  bell.  Several  of  the  articles  found 
buiied  in  this  manner,  resemble  these  utensils,  of  the  Brahmin 
priests,  while  some  are  exactly  like  them.  The  mat  of  Kooshu 
grass  resembles  the  mat  of  hair  and  feathers;  the  earthen  dish,  the 
conch  shell,  are  the  very  same  in  kind ;  the  brass  chain  might  an- 
swer instead  of  a  bell,  or  iron  plate  to  strike  against,  which  would 
produce  a  gingling  sound.  A  quantity  of  round,  oval,  and  square 
beaas,  colored  variously,  were  found  ;  although  Mr.  Ward  does  not 
say,  that  beads  were  a  part  of  the  utensils  of  the  Hindoo  priests, 


•AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


91 


yet  we  find  them  on  the  necks  and  arms  of  both  their  gods  and 
their  mendicants. 

Pottery  of  the  same  kind  found  in  those  ancient  works,  have  al- 
so the  quality  of  enduring  the  fire.  The  art  of  making  vessels  of 
clay,  is  very  ancient ;  we  find  it  spoken  of  by  Jeremiah  the  pro- 
phet, nearly  three  thousand  years  ago. 

The  art  of  coloring  wood,  stones,  and  shells,  with  a  variety  of 
beautiful  tints,  was  also  known,  as  appears  from  the  pavement  above 
described,  and  the  colored  beads. 

In  many  parts  of  the  west,  paints  of  various  colors  have  been 
found  hidden  in  the  earth.  On  the  Chenango  river,  in  the  state  of 
New- York,  has  recently  been  found,  on  opening  of  one  of  those 
ancient  mounds,  though  of  but  small  dimensions ;  three  kinds  of 
paint,  black,  red,  and  yellow,  which  are  now  in  the  possession  of 
a  Doctor  Willard,  at  the  village  of  Greene,  in  the  county  of  Che- 
nango. 

The  Indians  of  both  China  and  America,  have,  from  time  imme- 
morial, used  paints  to  adorn  themselves  and  their  gods. 

But  the  brass  rings  and  tesselated  pavement  are  altogether  the 
most  to  be  wondered  at.  A  knowledge  of  the  method  of  manufac- 
turing brass  was  known  to  the  Antediluvians.  This  we  learn  from 
Genesis  iv.  22.  Tubal  Cain  was  an  artificer  in  brass  and  iron  about 
eleven  hundred  years  before  the  flood. 

But  how  this  article,  the  brass  chain,  of  such  curious  construc- 
tion, came  in  the  possession  of  the  chief,  interred  on  the  summit 
of  the  mountain,  is  a  question  to  be  answered,  it  would  seem,  in  but 
two  ways.  They  either  had  a  knowledge  of  the  art  of  making 
brass,  or  the  article  was  an  item  of  that  king's  peculiar  treasure, 
and  had  been  derived  either  from  his  ancestors  from  the  earliest 
ages,  or  from  South  America,  as  an  article  of  trade,  a  gift  from 
some  fellow  king,  or  a  trophy  of  some  victorious  battle  over  some 
southern  nation  ;  for,  according  to  Humboldt,  brass  was  found  a- 
mong  the  native  Mexicans,  in  great  abundance. 

But  how  the  Mexicans  came  by  this  art  in  mineralogy,  is  equally 
a  question.  Gold,  silver,  copper,  &c,  are  the  natural  product  of 
their  respective  ores  ;  and  accident  may  have  made  them  acquaint- 
ed with  these  ;  as  iron  was  discovered  among  the  Greeks,  by  fire 
in  the  woods  having  melted  the  ore.    But  brass  is  farther  removed 


92 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


from  the  knowledge  of  man,  being  a  composition  of  copper  and  the 
calamine  stone,  or  ore  of  zinc.  However,  it  is  said  by  Morse,  that 
in  Chili,  in  the  hills  of  Huilquilemu,  are  found  mines  of  native 
brass,  of  a  fine  yellow  color,  and  equally  maleable  with  the  best 
artificial  brass  ;  yet  this  is  no  common  product  of  mineralogy,  and 
would  seem  to  be  an  exception,  or  rather  a  product  extraordinary 
and,  in  a  measure,  induces  a  belief,  that  it  is  not  proper  bra3s,  but  a 
metal  similar  only  in  complexion,  while  perhaps  its  chemical  pro- 
prieties are  entirely  different,  or  it  may  have  been  produced  by  the 
fusion  of  copper  and  the  ore  of  zinc,  by  the  fire  of  some  volcano. 

Brass  was  the  metal  out  of  which  the  ancient  nations  made  all 
their  instruments  of  war,  and  defensive  armor.  The  reason  of 
this  preference  above  copper  and  iron,  even  by  the  Greeks  and 
Romans,  was  probably  on  account  of  the  excessive  bright  polish  it 
was  capable  of  receiving  ;  for  the  Greeks  and  Romans  used  it  long 
afcer  their  knowledge  of  iron.  Iron  was  discovered  by  the  Greeks 
1406  years  before  Christ.  The  ancient  Americans  must  have  de- 
rived a  knowledge  of  brass  from  their  early  acquaintance  with  na- 
t  ions  immediately  succeeding  the  flood,  who  had  it  from  the  Antedi- 
luvians, by  way  of  Noah ;  and  having  found  their  way  to  this  con- 
tinent, before  it  became  so  isolated  as  it  is  at  the  present  time, 
surrounded  on  all  sides  by  oceans,  made  use  of  the  same  metal 
here. 

But  the  tesselated  or  spotted  pavement  is- equally  curious  with 
the  brass  chain,  on  account  of  its  resemblance  to  the  Mosaic  pave- 
ments of  the  Romaics ;  being  small  pieces  of  marble,  of  various 
colors,  with  which  th  ey  ornamented  the  fronts  of  their  tents  in 
time  of  war,  but  wero  taken  up  again  whenever  they  removed. 
This  sort  of  pavement  ii  s  often  dug  up  in  England,  and  is  of  Roman 
origin. 

We  find  the  history  of  the  ancient  Britons,  mentions  the  currency 
of  iron  rings,  as  money,  w  hich  was  in  use  among  them,  before  the 
invasion  of  Julius  Cfesar.     Is  it  not  possible,  that  the  brass  chain, 
or  an  assemblage  of  tho*e  rings,  as  found  in  this  mound,  may  have 
be.  en  held  among  those  ancients  of  America  in  the  same  estimation  ■ 
The  chain,  in  their  mode  of  reckoning,  being  perhaps  of  an  immense 
amount ;  its  bein£  found  deposik  ^  with  its  owner,  who  was  a  chief 
or  kh  ig,  is  the  evidence  of  its  peculiar  value,  whether  it  had  been 
used  as  an  article  in  fjrade,  or  a*  a^acred  implement. 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST- 


93 


This  maculated  pavement,  arranged  in  such  a  manner  as  to  re- 
present in  full  size,  the  chief,  king,  or  monarch,  who  was  interred 
beneath  it,  shows  the  knowledge,  that  people  had  of  painting,  sculp- 
ture, and  descriptive  delineation :  but  most  of  all,  the  serpent 
which  lay  coiled  at  his  feet  is  surprising,  because  we  suppose  this 
transaction  could  not  have  happened  from  mere  caprice,  or  the  sport 
of  imagination. 

It  must  have  been  a  trait  of  their  theology,  and,  possibly,  an  allu- 
sion to  the  serpent,  by  whose  instrumentality  Satan  deceived  the 
first  woman,  the  mother  of  us  all :  and  its  being  beneath  his  feet, 
may  also  have  alluded  to  the  promised  seed,  who  was  to  bruise 
the  SerpenVs  head ;  all  of  which  may  easily  have  been  derived 
from  the  family  of  Noah,  and  carried  along  with  the  millions  of 
mankind,  as  they  diverged  asunder  from  Mount  Ararat,  around  the 
wide  earth.  The  Mexicans  are  found  to  have  a  clear  notion  of  this 
thing,  and  of  many  other  traits  of  the  early  history  of  man,  as  re- 
lated in  the  Hebrew  records  and  the  Scriptures,  preserved  in  their 
traditions  and  paintings,  as  we  shall  show  in  another  place. 

The  etching  on  the  square  sides  of  those  rings  of  brass,  in  char- 
acters resembling  Chinese,  shows  the  manufacturer,  and  the  nation 
of  which  he  was  a  member,  to  have  had  a  knowledge  of  engrav- 
ing, even  on  the  metals,  equal  with  artists  at  the  present  time,  of 
which  the  common  Indian  of  the  west  knows  nothing. 

The  stone  hatchet,  flint,  and  bone  arrow  points,  found  in  this 
tomb,  are  no  exclusive  evidence  that  this  was  ail  done  by  the  mod- 
ern Indians :  because  the  same  are  found  in  vast  profusion  in  all 
parts  of  the  old  world,  particularly  in  the  island  of  England ;  and 
have  been  in  use  from  remotest  antiquity. 

We  are  very  far  from  believing  the  Indians  of  the  present  time 
to  be  the  aborigines  of  America  ;  but  quite  contrary,  are  usurpers; 
have,  by  force  of  bloody  warfare,  exterminated  the  original  inhabi- 
tants, taking  possession  of  their  country,  property,  and  in  some  few- 
instances,  retaining  arts  learned  of  those  very  nations. 

The  immense  sea  shell,  which  was  fourteen  inches  long,  and 
twenty-three  inches  in  circumference,  found  in  this  tomb,  is  evi- 
dence of  this  people's  having  an  acquaintance  with  other  parts  of 
the  world  than  merely  their  own  dwellings,  because  the  shell  is  a 
marine  production,  and  the  nearest  place  where  this  element  is 


94 


AMERICA!*  ANTIQUITIES 


found  from  the  Muskingum,  is  nearly  a  thousand  miles  in  a  itrait 
lice  east  to  the  Atlantic. 

If  the  engraving  on  this  chsin  be,  in  fact,  Chinese,  or  if  they 
bear  a  strong  and  significant  analogy  to  them,  it  justifies  the  opinion 
that  a  communication  between  America  and  Asia,  by  means  of  land 
on  the  west,  once  existed,  but  has  been  destroyed  by  some  convul- 
sion in  nature.  And  also  the  characters  on  those  rings  show  the 
ancient  Americans  to  have  had  a  knowledge  of  letters.  A  knowl- 
edge of  letters,  hieroglyphics,  pictures  of  ideas,  and  of  facts,  was 
known  among  men,  200  years  before  the  time  of  Moses,  or  1822 
years  before  the  Christian  era,  among  the  Egyptians.  Nations  of 
men,  therefore,  having,  at  an  early  period,  found  their  way  to  this 
continent,  if  indeed  it  was  then  a  separate  continent ;  consequently, 
to  find  the  remains  of  such  an  art,  scattered  here  and  there  in  the 
dust  and  ashes  of  the  nations  of  America,  passed  away,  is  not  surpris- 
ing. The  mound  which  we  have  described,  was  apprehended  by 
Mr.  Ash,  to  be  only  an  advanced  guard  post,  or  a  place  of  lookout, 
in  the  direction  of  the  Muskingum  and  the  valley  of  the  Ohio ; 
accordingly,  he  wandered  farther  into  the  woods,  in  a  northwesterly 
direction,  leaving  on  his  right  the  Muskingum,  whose  course  was 
northeast  by  southwest. 

His  research  in  that  direction  had  not  long  been  continued,  be- 
fore he  discovered  strong  indications  of  his  conjecture.  He  had 
come  to  a  small  valley  between  two  mountains,  through  which  a 
small  creek  meandered  its  way  to  the  Muskingum. 

On  either  side  of  the  stream  were  evident  traits  of  a  very  large 
settlement  of  antiquity.  They  consisted,  first,  of  a  wall  oi  ram- 
part of  earth,  of  almost  nine  feet  perpendicular  elevation,  and  thirty 
feet  across  the  base.  The  rampart  was  of  a  semicircular  form,  its 
entire  circuit  being  three  hundred  paces,  or  something  over  eigh- 
teen rods,  bounded  by  the  creek.  On  the  opposite  side  of  the 
stream  was  another  rampart  of  the  same  description,  evidently  an- 
swering to  the  first;  these,  viewed  together,  made  one  grand  circle, 
of  more  than  forty  rods  circumference,  with  the  creek  runing  be- 
tween. 

After  a  minute  examination,  he  perceived  very  visibly  the  re- 
mains of  elevated  stone  abutments,  which  being  exactly  opposite 
each  other,  suggested  the  belief,  that  these  bridges  once  connected 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


95 


the  two  semicircles  ;  one  in  the  centre,  and  one  on  either  side,  at 
the  extreme  edges  of  the  ring.  The  timber  growing  on  the  ram- 
part and  within  the  circle,  was  principally  red  oak,  of  great  age 
and  magnitude,  some  of  the  trees,  being  in  a  state  of  decay,  were 
not  less  than  seven  feet  in  diameter,  and  twenty-one  in  circum- 
ference. 

Some  considerable  farther  up  the  brook,  at  the  spot  where  the 
beautiful  vale  commences,  where  the  mountain  rises  abruptly  and 
discharges  from  its  cleft  bosom  the  delightful  creek,  are  a  great 
number  of  mounds  of  earth,  standing  at  equal  distances  from  each 
other,  forming  three  grand  circles,  one  beyond  the  other,  cut  in  two 
by  the  creek,  as  the  one  described  before,  with  streets  situated  be- 
tween, forming,  as  do  the  mounds,  complete  circles.  Here,  as  at 
the  other,  the  two  half  circles  were  united,  as  would  appear,  by 
two  bridges,  the  abutments  of  which  are  distinct,  so  perfect  are 
their  remaius. 

At  a  considerable  distance,  on  the  sides  of  the  mountain,  are 
two  mounds  or  barrows,  which  are  nearly  thirty  feet  long,  twelve 
high,  and  seventeen  wide  at  the  base.  These  barrows  are  com- 
posed principally  of  stone  taken  out  of  the  creek,  on  which  are 
growing  also  very  heavy  timber.  Here  were  deposited  the  dead, 
who  had  been  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  in  the  vale.  From 
which  it  appears  that  the  mounds  forming  those  circles,  which  were 
sixty  in  number,  are  not  tumuli,  or  the  places  where  chiefs  and  dis- 
tinguished warriors  were  entombed,  but  were  the  houses,  the  actu- 
al dwellings  of  the  people  who  built  them.  However,  the  distin- 
guished dead  were  interred  in  tumuli  of  the  same  form  frequently, 
but  much  more  magnificent  and  lofty,  and  are  fewer  in  number, 
situated  on  the  highest  grounds  adjacent  to  their  towns. 

But  it  may  be  enquired,  how  could  those  mounds  of  earth  have 
ever  been  the  dwellings  of  families?  There  is  but  one  way  to  ex- 
plain it.  They  may  have,  at  the  time  of  their  construction,  re- 
ceived their  peculiar  form,  which  is  a  conical  or  sugar  loaf  form,  by 
the  erection  of  long  poles  or  logs,  set  up  in  a  circle  at  the  bottom, 
and  brought  together  at  the  top,  with  an  opening,  so  that  the  smoke 
might  pass  out-  Against  this  the  earth,  (being  brought  from  a  dis- 
tance, so  as  not  to  disturb  the  even  surface  of  the  spot  chosen  to 
build  on,)  was  thrown,  till  the  top  and  sides  were  entirely  enveloped* 


96 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


This  operation  would  naturally  cause  the  bottom,  or  base,  to 

be  of  great  thickness,  caused  by  the  natural  sliding  down  of  the 
earth,  as  it  was  thrown  on  or  against  the  timbers;  and  this  thick- 
ness would  be  in  exact  proportion  with  the  height  of  the  poles,  at 
the  ratio  of  an  angl<>  of  forty -five  degrees. 

In  this  way,  a  dwelling  of  the  most  secure  description  would  be 
the  result ;  such  as  could  not  be  easily  broken  through,  nor  set 
on  fire  ;  and  in  winter  would  be  v  ^rm,  and  in  summer  cool.  }t  is 
true,  such  rooms  would  be  rather  gloomy,  compared  with  the  mag- 
nificent and  well  lighted  houses  of  the  present  times,  yet  ac- 
corded well  with  the  usages  of  antiquity,  when  mankind  lived  in 
Claris  and  tribes,  but  few  in  number,  compared  with  the  present 
populousness  of  the  earth,  and  stood  in  fear  of  invasion  from  their 
neighbors. 

Such  houses  as  these,  built  in  circles  of  wood  at  first,  and  lastly, 
of  stone,  as  the  knowledge  of  architecture  came  on,  were  used  by 
the  ancient  inhabitants  of  Britain,  Wales,  Scotland,  Ireland,  and 
on  the  continent,  as  in  Norway.  No  mode  of  building  which  can 
be  conceived  of,  would  more  effectually  shutout  the  wind.  "Houses 
of  this  form,  made  with  upright  stones,  are  even  now  common  over 
all  the  Danish  dominions."    See  Morse's  Geography,  vol.  I,  p.  15S. 

In  the  communication  of  Mr.  Moses  Fiske,  of  Hillham,  Tennes- 
see, to  the  American  Antiquarian  Society,  1815,  respecting  the  re- 
mains and  discoveries  made  relative  to  antiquities  in  the  west,  but 
especially  in  Tennessee,  says,  that  the  description  of  mounds,  whe- 
ther round,  square  or  oblong  in  their  shapes,  which  have  flat  tops, 
were  the  most  magnificent  sort,  and  seem  contrived  lor  the  purpose 
of  building  temples  and  castles  on  their  summits ;  which  being 
thus  elevated,  were  very  imposing,  and  might  be  seen  at  a  great 
distance. 

"  Nor  must  we,"  he  continues,  "  mistake  the  ramparts  or  fortifica- 
tions, for  farming  inclosures  ;  what  people,  savage  or  civilized,  ever 
fenced  their  grounds  so  preposterously;  bearing  no  proportion  in 
quantity  necessary  for  tillage  from  which  the  support  of  a  whole 
country  was  expected;  and  further,  there  were  many  neighborhoods 
which  had  no  such  accommodations. 

He  has  also  discovered,  that  within  the  areas  encompassed  by 
these  ramparU,  are  whole  ranges  of  foundations,  on  which  dwelling 


OD  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST- 


houses  once  stood,  with  streets  running  between,  besides  mound 
and  other  works.  "The  houses  generally  stood  in  rows,  nea  v 
contiguous  to  each  other,"  as  in  all  compact  k^nsand  cities,  though 
sometimes  they  stood  in  an  irregular  and  scattered  manner.  These 
foundations  "  are  indicated  by  rings  of  the  earth,  from  three  to  five 
fathoms  in  diameter,"  which  is  equal  to  eighteen  and  thirty  feet ; 
the  remains  of  these  rings  or  foundations  are  from  ten  to  twenty 
inches  high,  and  a  yard  or  more  broad.  But  they  were  not  always 
circular  ;  some  of  which  he  had  noticed,  were  square,  and  others  al- 
so, of  the  oblong  form,  as  houses  are  now  built  by  civilzed  nations. 

"  The  flooring  of  some  is  elevated  above  the  common  level,  or 
surface  ;  that  of  others  is  depressed.  These  tokens  are  indubita- 
ble, and  overspread  the  country  ;  some  scattered  and  solitary,  but 
oftener  in  groups,  like  villages,  with  and  without  being  walled  in." 
From  which  it  is  clear,  that  whoever  they  were:,  the  pursuits  of 
agriculture  were  indispensable,  and  were  therefore  in  use  with 
those  nations. 

From  the  forms  of  the  foundations  of  dwellings  discovered  and 
described  by  Mr.  Fiske.  we  conclude,  they  were  the  efforts  of  man 
at  a  very  early  period.  We  are  directed  to  this  conclusion  by  the 
writings  of  Vetruvius,  who  lived  in  the  time  of  Julius  Caesar,  and 
is  the  most  ancient  writer  on  the  subject  of  architecture  that  anti- 
quity can  boast  of.    His  account  is  as  follows  : 

"  At  first,  for  the  walls,  men  erected  forked  stakes,  and  disposing 
twigs  between  them,  covered  them  with  loam ;  others  pulled  up 
clods  of  clay,  binding  them  wit!*  wood,  and  to  avoid  rain  and  heat, 
they  made  a  covering  with  reeds  and  boughs:  but  finding  that  this 
roof  could  not  resist  the  winter  rains,  they  made  it  t.ioping,  pointed 
at  the  top,  plastering  it  over  with  clay,  and  by  that  means  discharg- 
ing the  rain  water.  To  this  day,  says  Vetruvius,  some  foreign  na- 
tions construct  their  dwellings  of  the  same  kind  of  materials,  as  in 
Gaul,  Spain,  Lusitania,  and  Aquitain.  The  Colchiris,  in  the  king- 
dom of  Portugal,  where  they  abound  in  forests,  fix  trees  in  tho 
earth,  close  together  in  ranks,  to  the  right  and  left,  leaving  as  much 
space  between  them,  from  corner  to  corner,  as  the  length  of  the 
trees  will  permit ;  upon  the  ends  of  these,  at  the  corners,  others  are 
laid  transversely,  which  circum  dude  the  place  of  habitation  in  the 
middle ;  then  at  the  top,  the  four  angles  are  braced  together  with 
alternate  beams.    The  crevices,  which  are  large,  on  account  of  ;he 

13 


98  AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 

coarseness  of  the  materials,  are  stopped  with  chips  and  loam.  The 
roof  is  also  raised  by  beams  laid  across  from  the  extreme  angles,  or 
corners,  gradually  rising  from  the  four  sides  to  the  middle  point  at 
the  top,  (exactly  like  a  German  barrack ;)  and  then  covered  with 
boughs  and  earth.  In  this  manner  the  barbarians,  says  this  author, 
made  their  roofs  to  their  towers."  By  the  barbarians,  he  means 
the  inhabitants  of  Europe,  at  the  time  when  he  wrote  these  re- 
marks, which  was  in  the  reign  of  Julius  Caesar,  a  short  time  before 
Christ.  The  Phrygians,  who  inhabit  a  champaign  country,  being 
destitute  of  timber,  select  natural  hills,  excavate  them,  dig  an  en- 
trance, and  widen  the  space  within  as  much  as  the  nature  of  the 
place  will  permit ;  above,  they  fix  stakes  in  a  pyramidal  form,  bind 
them  together,  and  cover  them  with  reeds  or  straw,  heaping  there- 
on great  piles  of  earth.  This  kind  of  covering  renders  them  very 
warm  in  winter  and  cool  in  summer.  Some  also  cover  the  roofs 
of  their  huts  with  weeds  of  lakes ;  and  thus,  in  all  countries  and 
nations,  primeval  dwellings  are  formed  upon  similar  principles." — 
Blake's  Atlas,  p.  145. 

The  circular,  square,  and  oblong  form  of  foundations,  found  in 
the  west,  would  seem  to  argue,  the  houses  built  thereon  to  be  made 
in  the  same  way  this  author  has  described  the  mode  of  building  in 
his  time  among  the  barbarous  nations  ;  and  also  furnishes  reason  to 
believe  them  to  have  been  made  here  in  America,  much  in  the  same 
ages  of  the  world. 

Having  this  knowledge  of  the  mode  of  ancient  building,  we  are 
led  to  the  conclusion,  that  the  town  which  we  have  just  given  an 
account  of,  was  a  clan  of  some  of  the  ancient  Celtic  nations,  who, 
by  some  means,  had  found  their  way  to  this  part  of  the  earth,  and 
had  fixed  their  abode  in  this  secluded  valley.  Celtic  or  Irish,  as 
Mr.  Morse  says,  who  were  derived  from  Gaul,  or  Galatia,  which  is 
now  France,  who  descended  from  Gomer,  one  of  the  sons  of  Ja- 
pheth,  a  son  of  Noah;  to  whose  descendants  Europe,  with  its  isles, 
was  given.  And  whether  the  people  who  built  this  town  were  of 
Chinese  or  of  Celtic  origin,  it  is  much  the  same ;  because  if  we  go  far 
enough  back  in  ages  of  past  time3  we  shall  find  they  were  of  the 
same  origin,  and  had  equal  opportunities  to  perpetuate  a  remembrance 
of  the  arts,  as  known  among  men  immediately  after  the  flood,  and 
might  therefore  resemble  each  other  in  their  works. 

Here  we  may  suppose  the  gods  Odin,  Thor,  and  Friga,  were 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST, 


99 


adored  under  the  oaks  composing  American  forests,  as  taught  by 
the  Druids ;  here  their  victims,  the  deer  and  buffalo,  sent  up  to  the 
skies  their  smoking  odour,  while  the  priests  of  the  forests  invoked 
the  blessing  of  the  beneficent  Being  upon  the  votaries  of  the  mys- 
tic Misleto.  Here  were  the  means  of  mutual  defence  and  safety 
discussed ;  the  sighs  of  the  lover  breathed  on  the  winds  ;  parents 
and  children  looked  with  kindness  on  each  other;  soothed  and 
bound  the  wounds  of  such  as  returned  from  the  uncertain  fate  of 
clanular  battles  ;  but  have  been  swept  with  the  besom  of  extermi- 
nation from  this  vale,  while  no  tongue  remains  to  tell  the  story  of 
their  sufferings . 

At  the  distance  of  about  three  miles  higher  up,  and  not  far  from 
the  Muskingum,  says  Mr.  Ash,  he  perceived  an  eminence  very 
similar  to  the  one  just  described,  in  which  the  brass  chain  was 
found,  to  which  he  hastened,  and  immediately  perceived  their  like- 
ness in  form. 

On  a  comparison  of  the  two,  there  could  be  but  one  opinion, 
namely,  that  both  were  places  of  lookout  for  the  express  protection 
of  the  settlement  in  the  valley.  He  says  he  took  the  pains  of  clear- 
ing the  top  of  the  eminence,  but  could  not  discover  any  stone  or 
mark  which  might  lead  to  a  supposition  of  its  being  a  place  of  inter- 
ment. The  country  above  was  hilly,  yet  not  so  high  as  to  intercept 
the  view  for  a  presumed  distance  of  twenty  miles. 

On  these  eminences  the  "  beacon  fires  "  of  the  clan,  who  resided 
in  the  valley,  may  have  been  kindled  at  the  hour  of  midnight,  to 
show  those  who  watched  the  portentous  flame,  the  advance  or  de- 
struction of  an- enemy.  Such  fires,  on  the  heights  of  Scotland,  were 
wont  to  be  kindled  in  the  days  of  Bruce  and  Wallace,  and  ages 
before  their  time,  originated  from  the  Persians,  possibly,  who  wor- 
shipped in  this  way  the  great  Oramaze,  as  the  god  who  made  all 
things.  The  idea  of  a  Creator,  was  borrowed  from  Noah,  who  re- 
ceived the  account  of  the  creation  from  Seth,  who  had  it  from 
Adam ;  and  Adam  from  the  Almighty  himself. 

From  this  excursion  our  traveller,  after  having  returned  to  Mari- 
etta, pursued  his  way  to  Zanesville,  on  the  Muskingum  river? 
where,  learning  from  the  inhabitants  that  the  neighborhood  was 
surrounded  with  the  remains  of  antiquity,  he  proceeded  to  the  ex- 
amination of  them,  having  obtained  a  number  of  persons  to  accom- 
pany him  with  the  proper  implements  of  excavation.    They  pene- 


i 


100 


AMtJtlCAS"  AirTiftuiTnsi 


trated  the  woods  in  a  westerly  direction,  to  a  place  known  to  those 
who  accompanied  him,  about  five  miles  distance,  where  the  ruins 
of  ancient  times  were  numerous  and  magnificent  in  the  highest 
degree  ;  consisting  of  mounds,  barrows  and  ramparts,  but  of  such 
variety  and  form,  and  covering  so  immense  a  track  of  ground,  that 
it  would  have  taken  at  least  ten  days  to  have  surveyed  them 
minutely. 

These  immense  works  of  the  ancients,  it  appears,  were,  in  this 
place,  encompassed  by  outlines  of  an  entirely  different  shape  from 
any  other  described,  being  of  the  triangular  form,  and  occupying 
the  whole  plain,  situated  as  the  one  before  described,  in  a  place 
nearly  surrounded  b}T  mountains. 

But  we  pass  over  many  incidents  of  this  traveller,  and  come  im- 
mediately to  the  object  of  his  research,  which  was  tc  opfeu  3uch  of 
those  mounds  as  might  attract  his  attention.  His  rirst  operation 
was  to  penetrate  the  interior  of  a  large  barrow,  situated  at  one  ex- 
tremity of  the  vale,  which  was  its  southern.  Three  feet  below  the 
surface  was  fine  mould,  underneath  which  were  small  flat  stones, 
lying  in  regular  strata  or  gravel,  brought  from  the  mountain  in  the 
vicinity.  This  last  covered  the  remains  of  a  human  frame,  which 
foil  into  impalpable  powder  when  touched  and  exposed  to  ^ir. 

Toward  the  base  of  the  barrow,  he  came  to  three  tier  of  sub 
stances,  placed  regu'a'ly  in  rotation.  And  as  these  formed  two  rows 
four  deep,  separated  by  little  more  than  a  flag  stor.e  between  the 
feet  of  one  and  the  heed  of  another,  it  was  supposed  the  barrow 
contained  about  f,vo  thousand  skeletons,  in  a  very  great  state  of  de- 
cay, which  shows  their  extreme  antiquity. 

In  this  search  was  found  a  well  carved  stone  pipe,  expressing  a 
bear's  head,  together  with  some  fragments  of  pottery  of  fiise  tex- 
ture. Near  the  centre  of  the  whole  works,  another  opening  was 
affected,  in  a  rise  of  ground,  scarcely  higher  than  a  natural  undu- 
lation, common  to  the  general  surface  of  the  earth,  even  ou  ground 
esteemed  to  be  level.  But  there  was  one  singularity  accompany- 
ing the  spot,  which  attracted  the  attention  of  the  company,  and  this 
was,  there  was  neither  shrub  nor  tree  on  the  spot,  although  more 
than  ninety  feet  in  circumference,  but  was  adorned  with  a  multi- 
tude of  pink  and  purple  flowers. 

They  came  to  an  opinion  that  the  rise  of  ground  was  artificial, 
and  as  it  differed  in  form  and  character  from  the  common  mounds, 


AN©  BXSC0VERIE3  Hf  THE  <VK$?\ 


they  resolved  to  lay  it  open,  which  was  soon  done,  to  a  level  with 
the  plain,  but  without  the  discovery  of  any  thing  whatever.  But 
as  Ash  had  become  vexed,  having  found  nothing  to  answer  his  ex- 
pectations in  other  openings  on  the  spot,  he  jumped  from  the  hank, 
in  order  to  take  a  spade  and  encourage  the  men  to  dig  somewhat 
deeper.  At  this  instant  the  ground  gave  way,  and  involved  the 
whole  company  in  earth  and  ruin,  as  was  supposed,  for  the  moment ; 
but  was  soon  followed  by  much  mirth  and  laughter,  as  no  person 
was  hurt  by  the  fall,  which  was  but  about  three  feet. 

Ash  had  great  difficulty  to  prevail  on  any  person  to  resume  the 
labor,  and  had  to  explore  the  place  himself,  and  sor*nd  it  with  a 
pole,  before  any  man  would  Venture  to  aid  him  further,  on  account 
of  their  fright. 

But  they  soon  resumed  their  courage,  and  on  examination  found 
that  a  parcel  of  timbers  had  given  way,  which  covered  the  orifice 
of  a  square  hele  seven  feet  by  four,  and  four  feet  deep.  That  it 
was  a  sepulchre,  was  unanimously  agreed,  til!  they  found  it  in  vain 
to  look  for  bones,  or  any  substaires  similar  to  them,  in  a  state  of 
decomposition.  They  soon,  however,  struck  an  object  which  would 
neither  yield  to  the  spade,  nor  emit  any  sound ;  but  persevering 
still  further,  they  found  the  obstruction,  which  was  uniform  through 
the  pit,  to  proceed  from  rows  of  large  spherical  bodies,  at  first 
taken  to  be  stones. 

Several  of  them  were  cast  up  to  the  surface ;  they  were  exactly 
alike,  perfectly  round,  nine  inches  in  diameter,  and  of  about  twenty 
pounds  weight.  The  suoertices  of  one,  when  cleaned  and  scraped 
with  knives,  appeared  like  a  ball  of  base  metal,  so  strongly  im- 
pregnated with  the  dust  of  gold,  that  the  baseness  of  the  raetal  it- 
self was  nearly  altogether  obscured.  0;i  this  discovery,  the  cla- 
mour was  l>o  great,  and  joy  so  exuberant,  that  r.o  opinion  but  one 
was  admitted,  and  no  voice  could  be  heard,  while  the  cry  of  "  'tis 
gold  !  'tis  gold  !"  resounded  through  the  groves. 

Having  to  a  man  determined  on  this  important  point,  they  formed 
a  council  respecting  the  distribution  of  the  treasure,  and  each  indi- 
vidual, in  the  joy  of  his  heart,  declaied  publicly  the  use  he  intend- 
ed to  make  of  the  part  alloted  to  his  share. 

The  Englishman  concluded  that  he  would  return  to  England,  be- 
ing sure,  from  experience,  that  there  was  no  country  like  it.  A 
German  of  the  party  said,  he  would  never  have  quitted  the  Rhine, 


102 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


had  he  had  money  enough  to  rebuild  his  barn,  which  was  blown 
down  by  a  high  wind  ;  but  that  he  would  return  to  the  very  spot 
from  whence  he  came,  and  prove  to  his  neighbors  that<he  loved 
his  country  as  well  as  any  man,  when  he  had  the  means  of  doing 
well.  An  Irishman  swore  a  great  oath,  the  day  longer  he'd  stay 
in  America  ;  and  the  Indian  who  accompanied  Ash,  appeared  to 
think,  that  were  he  to  purchase  some  beads,  rum  and  blankets,  and 
return  to  his  own  nation,  he  might  become  Sachem,  and  keep  the 
finest  squaws  to  be  found. 

Even  Ash  himself  saw  in  the  treasure  the  sure  and  ample  means 
of  continuing  his  travels  in  such  parts  of  the  earth  as  he  had  not 
yet  visited.  The  company  returned  to  Zanesvilie  with  but  one 
ball  of  their  riches,  while  they  carefully  hid  the  residue,  till  they 
should  subject  it  to  the  ordeal  of  fire. 

They  soon  procured  a  private  room,  wheres  while  it  was  receiv- 
ing the  trial  of  fire,  they  stood  around  in  silence  almost  dreading 
to  breathe.  The  dreadful  element,  which  was  to  confirm  or  con- 
sume their  hopes,  soon  began  to  exercise  its  various  powers.  In  a 
few  moments  the  ball  turned  black,  filled  the  room  with  sulphurous 
smoke,  emitted  sparks  and  intermitted  flames,  and  burst  into  ten 
thousand  pieces ;  so  great  was  the  terror  and  suffocation,  that  all 
rushed  into  the  street,  and  gazed  on  each  other,  with  a  mixed  ex- 
pression of  doubt  and  astonishment. 

The  smoke  subsided,  when  they  were  able  to  discover  the  ele- 
ments of  the  supposed  gold,  which  consisted  of  some  very  fine 
ashes,  and  a  great  quantity  of  cinders,  exceedingly  porous  ;  the 
balls  were  nothing  but  a  sort  of  metal  called  spririte  or  pyrites,  and 
abounds  in  the  mountains  of  that  region. 

The  triangular  form  of  this  enclosure,  being  different  from  the 
general  form  of  those  ancient  works,  is  perhaps  worthy  of  notice, 
merely  on  the  account  of  its  form ;  and  might  be  supposed  to  be  of 
Chinese  origin,  as  it  is  well  known  that  the  triangular  shape  is  a 
favorite  one  of  the  nations  of  Hindostan ;  it  is  even  in  the  Hindoo 
theology,  significant  of  the  Trinity,  of  their  great  Brahmah,  or  god ; 
and  on  this  account,  might  even  characterise  the  form  of  national 
works  such  as  we  have  just  described,  under  the  notion,  that  the 
divine  protection  would  the  more  readily  be  secured.  "  One  of  the 
missionaries  at  Pekin,"  says  Adam  Clarke,  "  takes  it  for  granted, 
that  the  mystery  of  the  Trinity  was  known  among  the  ancient  Chi- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


103 


nese,  as  that  this  A  character  was  its  symbol.  It  is  remarkable  that 
Moses  and  the  prophets,  the  ancient  Chaldee  Targumists,  the  au- 
thors of  the  Zend  Avesta,  a  Chinese  book,  Plato,  a  celebrated  phi- 
losopher of  antiquity,  who  died  at  Athens,  348,  B.  C,  and  also  the 
first  philosopher  of  Greece,  and  Philo  the  Jew,  should  all  coincide 
so  perfectly  in  their  ideas  of  a  Trinity  in  the  Godhead.  This  could 
not  be  the  effect  of  accident.  Moses  and  the  prophets  received 
this  from  God  himself ;  and  all  others  have  borrowed  from  this  first 
origin." 

For  what  use  the  balls  of  which  we  have  given  an  account  were 
designed,  is  impossible  to  conjecture,  whether  to  be  thrown  by 
means  of  engines,  as  practised  by  the  Romans,  as  an  instrument  of 
warfare,  or  a  sort  of  medium  in  trade,  or  were  used  as  instruments, 
in  athletic  games,  either  to  roll  or  heave,  who  can  tell  ? 

But  one  thing  respecting  them  is  not  uncertain,  they  must  have 
been  of  great  value,  or  so  much  labor  and  care  would  not  have 
been  expended  to  secure  them.  Colonel  Ludlow,  of  Cincinnati,  a 
man,  it  is  said,  who  was  well  versed  in  the  history  of  his  country, 
though  now  deceased,  was  indefatigable  in  his  researches  after  the 
antiquities  of  America,  discovered  several  hundreds  of  those  balls 
of  pyrites,  weighing  generally  about  twenty  pounds  each,  near  an 
old  Indian  settlement,  on  the  banks  of  the  Little  Miami,  of  the 
Ohio,  and  also  another  heap  in  an  artificial  cave,  on  the  banks  of 
the  Sciota,  consisting  of  copper  pyrites,  or  quartz. 

In  that  division  of  Soutb>  America,  called  Patagonia,  which  ex- 
tends nearly  to  the  extreme  southern  point  of  that  country,  is  found 
a  people,  denominated  Patagonians,  who  are  of  a  monstrous  size 
and  height,  measuring  from  six  to  seven  feet,  many  of  them  ap- 
proaching to  eight.  Among  this  people  is  found  an  instrument  of 
war,  made  of  heavy  stones,  wore  round  by  friction ;  so  that  in  ap- 
pearance, they  are  like  a  cannon  ball.  These  they  contrive  to 
fasten  in  a  sling,  from  which  they  throw  them  with  great  dexterity 
and  force. — Morse's  Geo. 

This  kind  of  ball  was  used,  though  of  a  smaller  size,  to  capture 
and  kill  animals  with.  The  manner  of  using  them  is  as  follows  : 
They  take  three  of  those  balls,  two  of  them  three  inches,  and  one 
of  them  two  inches  in  diameter.  The  hunter  takes  the  small  ball 
in  his  right  hand,  and  swings  the  other  two,  (which  are  connected 
by  a  thong  of  a  proper  length,  fastening  also  to  the  one  in  his  hand) 


104 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


round  his  head,  till  a  sufficient  velocity  is  acquired,  at  the  same 
time  taking  aim,  when  it  is  thrown  at  the  legs  of  the  animal  he  is 
pursuing,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  entangle  its  feet  hy  the  rotary  mo- 
tion of  the  balls  ;  so  that  its  capture  is  easy. 

Conjecture  might  go  on  to  establish  it  as  a  fact,  that  these  balls 
of  pyrites,  found  in  many  parts  of  the  west,  were  indeed  a  war- 
like instrument,  thrown  by  a  sling,  out  of  which,  a  force  almost 
equivalent  to  that  of  powder,  might  be  acquired ;  and  from  the  top 
of  mounds,  or  from  the  sides  of  their  elevated  forts,  such  a  mode  of 
defence  would  be  very  terrible. 

This  mode  of  righting  was  known  to  the  Hebrew?.  David  slew 
Goliath  with  a  stone  from  a  sling.  Seven  hundred  chosen  men  out 
of  Gibea,  could  sling  a  stone  at  an  hair's  breadth.  Job  speaks  of 
this  manner  of  annoying  wild  beasts,  where  he  is  recounting  the 
strength  of  Leviathan  :  44  Slinged  stones  are  turned  with  him  into 
stubble. " 

Dr.  Adam  Clarke's  observations  on  the  use  and  force  of  the  sling, 
are  very  interesting,  and  pertinent  to  the  subject.  They  are  found 
in  his  Commentary,  1st.  Samuel,  chap.  xvii.  verse  40,  "  The  sling, 
both  among  the  Greeks  and  Hebrews,  has  been  a  most  powerful, 
offensive  weapon.  It  is  composed  of  two  strings  and  a  leather 
strap (or  as  among  the  Patagonians,  of  raw-hide,)  "  the  strap  is 
in  the  middle,  and  is  the  place  where  the  stone  or  bullet  lies.  The 
string  on  the  right  end  of  the  strap  is  firmly  fastened  to  the  hand  ; 
that  on  the  left,  is  held  between  the  thumb  arid  middle  joint  of  the 
fore  finger.  It  is  then  whirled  two  or  three  times  round  the  head ; 
and  when  discharged,  the  finger  and  thumb  let  30  their  hold  of  the 
string.  The  velocity  and  force  of  the  sling  is  in  proportion  to  the 
distance  of  the  strap  to  where  the  bullet  lies,  from  the  shoulder 
joint.  Hence,  the  ancient  Balleares,  or  inhabitants  of  Majorca  and 
Minorca,  islands  in  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  near  the  c?ast  of  Spain, 
are  said  to  have  had  three  slings  of  different  lengths ;  the  longest 
they  used  when  the  enemy  was  at  the  greatest  distance ;  the  mid- 
dle one  on  their  nearer  approach,  and  the  shortest,  when  they  came 
into  the  ordinary  fighting  distance  in  the  field.  The  shortest  is  the 
most  certain,  though  not  the  most  powerful. 

"  The  Balleareans  are  said  to  have  one  of  their  slings  constantly 
bound  about  their  head  ;  to  have  used  the  second  as  a  girdle  ;  and 
to  have  carried  the  third  always  to  their  hand- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


105 


w  In  the  use  of  the  sling,  it  requires  much  practice  to  hit  the 
mark ;  but  when  once  this  dexterity  is  acquired,  the  sling  is  nearly 
as  fatal  as  the  ball  thrown  by  the  explosion  of  powder. 

"  David  was  evidently  au  expert  marksman  ;  and  his  sling  gave 
him  greatly  the  advantage  over  Goliah  ;  an  advantage  of  which 
the  giant  does  not  seem  to  have  been  aware.  He  could  hit  him 
within  any  speaking  distance ;  if  he  missed  once,  he  had  as  many 
chances  as  he  had  stones ;  and  after  all,  being  unincumbered  with 
armor,  young  and  athletic,  he  could  have  saved  his  life  by  flight. 
But  David  saved  himself  the  trouble  of  running  away,  or  the  giant 
from  throwing  his  spear  or  javelin  at  him,  by  giving  him  the  first 
blow. 

u  Goliah  was  terribly  armed,  having  a  spear,  a  shield,  and  a  sword; 
besides,  he  was  eyery  where  invulnerable,  on  account  of  his  hel- 
met of  brass,  his  coat  of  mail,  which  was  made  also  of  brass,  in 
little  pieces,  perhaps  about  the  size  of  a  half  dollar,  and  lapped  over 
each  other,  like  the  scales  of  fishes,  so  that  no  sword,  spear,  nor  ar- 
row could  hurt  him." 

This  coat  of  mail,  when  polished  and  bright,  must  have  been 
very  glorious  to  look  upon,  especially  when  the  sun,  in  his  bright- 
ness, bent  his  beams  to  aid  the  giant  warrior's  fulgent  habiliments 
to  illumine  the  field  of  battle,  as  the  wearer  strode,  here  and  there, 
among  the  trophies  of  death. 

The  only  spot  left,  where  he  could  be  hit  to  advantage,  was  his 
broad  giant  forehead,  into  which  the  stone  of  David  sunk,  from  its 
■dreadful  impetus  received  from  the  simple  sling.  To  some,  this 
has  appeared  perfectly  improbaWe  ;  but  we  are  assured  by  ancient 
writers,  that  scarcely  any  thing  could  resist  the  force  of  the  sling. 

Diodorus  Siculus,  an  historian  who  flourished  in  the  time  of 
Julius  Caesar,  a  short  time  before  Christ,  and  was  born  in  the  island 
of  Sicily,  in  the  Mediterranean,  says,  "  the  people  of  the  islands  of 
Minorca  and  Majorca,  in  time  of  war,  could  sling  greater  stones 
than  any  other  people,  and  with  such  force,  that  they  seemed  as  if 
projected  from  a  capult,"  an  engine  used  by  the  ancients  for  this 
purpose. 

Therefore,  in  assaults  made  on  fortified  towns,  they  grieviously 
wound  the  besieged,  and  in  battle,  they  break  in  pieces  the  shields, 
helmets,  and  every  species  of  armor,  by  which  the  body  is  de- 
fended.   It  would  seem,  from  the  expertness  of  the  Patagonians, 

14 


106 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


evinced  in  the  use  of  the  sling,  that  they  may  have  been  derived 
from  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  those  islands,  who  could  as  easily 
have  found  their  way  out  of  the  Mediterranean  by  the  Strait  of 
Gibralter  into  the  Atlantic  Ocean,  and  be  driven  across  to  South 
America,  by  the  winds  from  the  east,  or  by  the  current  of  the  sea, 
as  the  Egyptians,  as  we  have  before  shown. 

The  sling  was  a  very  ancient  warlike  instrument ;  and  in  the 
hands  of  those  who  were  skilled  in  the  use  of  it,  it  produced  as- 
tonishing effects.  The  people  of  the  above  named  islands  were  the 
most  celebrated  slingers  of  antiquity.  They  did  not  permit  their 
children  to  eat  till  they  had  struck  down  their  food  from  the  top  of 
a  pole,  or  some  distant  eminence. 

Concerning  the  velocity  of  the  leaden  ball  thrown  out  of  the 
sling,  it  is  said  by  the  ancients,  to  have  melted  in  its  course.  Ovid, 
the  Roman  poet,  has  celebrated  its  speed,  in  the  following  beauti- 
ful verse : 

**  Hermes  was  fired,  as  in  the  clouds  he  hung  ; 
So  the  cold  bullet  that  with  fury  slung 
From  Balearic  engines,  mounts  on  high, 
Glows  in  the  whirl,  and  burns  along  the  sky." 

This  is  no  poetic  fiction.  Seneca,  the  stoic  philosopher  of  Rome, 
born  A.  D.  12,  says  the  same  thing ;  "  the  ball  projected  from  the 
sling,  melts,  and  is  liquified  by  the  friction  of  the  air,  as  if  it  were 
exposed  to  the  action  of  fire." 

Vegetius,  who  lived  in  the  14th  century,  and  was  also  a  Roman, 
tells  us,  that  "  slingers  could,  in  general,  hit  the  mark  at  six  hun- 
dred feet  distance,"  which  is  mq#e  than  thirty  rods.  From  this 
*  view  we  see  what  havoc  the  western  nations,  using  the  sling  or 
engine,  to  throw  stones  from  their  vast  forts  and  mounds  with,  must 
have  made,  when  engaged  in  defensive  or  offensive  war. 


DISCOVERY  OF  THE  REMAINS  OF  ANCIENT  POTTERY. 

On  the  subject  of  pottery  we  remark,  that  the  remains  of  this 
art  are  generally  found,  especially  of  any  extent,  in  the  nighbor- 
hood  of  salt  springs.    It  is  true,  that  specimens  of  earthen  ware 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


107 


are  frequently  taken  out  of  the  ancient  barrows  of  the  dead,  and 
also  are  frequently  brought  to  sight  on  the  shores  of  rivers,  where 
the  earth  has  been  suddenly  removed  by  inundations. 

A  few  years  since,  an  instance  of  this  sort  occurred  at  Tawanda, 
in  Pennsylvania.  The  Susquehannah  had  risen  very  high,  at  the 
time  we  are  speaking  of,  and  had  undermined  the  bank  on  the 
Tawanda  shore,  to  a  considerable  extent,  at  the  high  water  mark. 
On  the  receding  of  the  waters,  the  bank  was  found  to  be  carried 
away  for  the  distance  of  about  six  rods,  when  there  appeared  sev- 
eral fire  places,  made  of  the  stones  of  the  river,  with  vessels  of 
earthen,  of  a  capacity  about  equal  with  a  common  water  pail,  in  a 
very  good  state  of  preservation. 

Between  those  fire  places,  which  were  six  in  number,  were 
found  the  skeletons  of  several  human  beings,  lying  in  an  undis- 
turbed position,  as  if  they,  when  living,  had  fallen  asleep,  and  ne- 
ver waked  ;  two  of  these,  in  particular,  attracted  attention,  and 
excited  not  a  little  surprise  ;  they  were  lying  side  by  side,  with 
the  arm  of  one  of  them  under  the  neck  of  the  other,  and  the  feet 
were  mingled  in  such  a  manner  as  to  induce  the  belief  that  when 
death  came  upon  them,  they  were  asleep  in  each  other's  embraces. 
But  in  what  manner  they  came  to  their  death,  so  that  they  appear- 
ed not  to  have  moved,  from  the  fatal  moment  till  the  bank  of  Ta- 
wanda was  carried  away,  which  had  covered  them  for  ages,  is 
strange  indeed. 

It  cannot  be  supposed  they  died  all  at  once,  of  some  sickness, 
or  that  an  enemy  surprised  them  while  sleeping,  and,  silently  pass- 
ing from  couch  to  couch,  inflicted  the  deadly  blow ;  because,  in  any 
of  these  ways,  their  bones,  in  the  convulsions  of  dissolution,  must 
have  been  deranged,  so  that  the  image  and  peaceful  posture  of 
sleepers  could  not  have  characterised  their  positions,  as  they  were 
found  to  have.  It  was  conjectured,  at  the  time  of  their  discov- 
ery, that  the  period  of  their  death  had  been  at  the  season  of  the 
year  when  that  river  breaks  up  its  ice ;  in  March  or  April,  the  riv- 
er they  supposed,  may  have  been  dammed  up  below  them,  where,  it 
is  true,  the  stream  narrows  on  the  account  of  the  approach  of  the 
mountains.  Here  the  ice  having  jammed  in  between,  caused  a 
sudden  rise  of  the  river,  and  setting  back,  overflowed  them. 

But  this  cannot  be  possible,  as  the  noise  of  the  breaking  ice  would 
never  allow  them  to  sleep  ;  this  operation  of  nature  is  accompanied 


108 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


with  a  tremendous  uproar  and  grandeur,  tearing  and  rending  the 
shores  and  forests  that  grow  on  them,  multiplying  crash  on  crashf 
with  the  noise  of  thunder.  Neither  can  it  be  well  supposed,  the 
waters  came  over  them  in  the  way  suggested,  even  if  they  had 
slept  during  the  scene  we  have  just  described,  because  on  the  first 
touch  of  the  waters  to  their  bodies,  they  would  naturally  spring 
from  their  sleep  in  surprise. 

Something  must  have  happened  that  deprived  them  of  life  and 
motion  in  an  instant  of  time.  This  is  not  impossible,  because  at 
Herculaneum  and  Pompeii,  are  found,  where,  in  digging,  they  have 
penetrated  through  the  lava  down  to  those  ancient  cities,  laying 
bare  streets,  houses  and  temples,  with  their  contents,  such  as  have 
survived  the  heat  which  ruined  those  cities — skeletons,  holding 
between  their  fingers  something  they  had  in  their  hands  at  the 
moment  of  their  death,  so  that  they  do  not  appear  even  to  have 
struggled. 

Something  of  the  same  nature,  as  it  respects  suddenness,  must 
have  overtaken  these  sleepers ;  so  that  their  natural  positions  were 
not  disturbed.  If  the  place  of  their  dwellings  had  been  skirted  by 
a  steep  bank  or  hill,  it  might  then  have  been  supposed  that  a  land 
slip  or  mine  spring,  had  buried  them  alive,  but  this  is  not  the  case. 
They  were  about  four  feet  under  ground,  the  soil  which  covered 
them  was  the  same  alluvial  with  the  rest  of  the  flat ;  it  is  a  myste- 
ry, and  cannot  be  solved,  unless  we  suppose  an  explosion  of  earth, 
occasioned  by  an  accumulation  of  galnanic  principles,  which,  burst- 
ing the  earth  near  them,  suddenly  buried  them  alive. 

Dr.  Beck,  the  author  of  the  Gazetteer  of  Illinois  and  Missouri, 
suggests  the  cause  of  the  earthquakes  in  the  valley  of  the  Missis- 
sippi, in  1811  and  1812,  which,  in  many  places,  threw  up  in  an 
instant  vast  heaps  of  earth,  to  have  been  the  principle  of  galvan- 
ism bursting  from  the  depths  beneath,  in  a  perpendicular  direction, 
overwhelming,  in  a  moment  of  time,  whatever  might  be  asleep  or 
awake,  wherever  it  fell. 

Further  down  the  Susquehannah,  some  thirty  or  forty  miles  be- 
low Tawanda,  at  a  place  called  the  Black-walnut  Bottom,  on  the 
farm  of  a  Mr.  Kinney,  was  discovered  a  most  extraordinary  speci- 
men of  pottery. 

Respecting  this  discovery,  the  owner  of  the  farm  relates,  as  we 
are  informed  by  a  clergyman,  who  examined  the  article  on  th* 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


109 


spot,  though  in  a  broken  state,  that  soon  after  the  first  settlements 
on  that  river,  and  especially  on  that  farm,  a  great  freshet  took  place 
which  tore  a  channel  in  a  certain  direction  across  the  flat,  when 
the  vessel  which  we  are  about  to  describe,  was  brought  to  light. 

It  was  twelve  feet  across  the  top,  and  of  consequence,  thirty-six 
feet  in  circumference,  and  otherwise  of  proportionable  depth  and 
form.  Its  thickness  wras  three  inches,  and  appeared  to  be  made  of 
some  coarse  substance,  probably  mere  clay,  such  as  might  be  found 
on  the  spot,  as  it  was  not  glazed.  Whoever  its  makers  were,  they 
must  have  manufactured  it  on  the  spot  wThere  it  was  found,  as  it 
must  have  been  impossible  to  move  so  huge  a  vessel.  They  may 
have  easily  effected  its  construction,  by  building  it  up  by  degrees^ 
with  layers  put  on  in  succession,  till  high  enough  to  suit  the  enor- 
mous fancy  of  its  projectors,  and  then  by  piling  wTood  around,  it 
might  have  been  burnt  so  as  to  be  fit  for  use,  and  then  propped  up 
by  stones,  to  keep  it  from  falling  apart. 

But  who  can  tell  for  what  use  this  vast  vessel  was  intended  ? 
Conjecture  here  is  lost,  no  ray  of  light  dawns  upon  this  strange  rem- 
nant of  antiquity.  One  might  be  led  to  suppose,  it  was  made  in 
imitation  of  the  great  Laver  in  the  court  of  Solomon's  Temple, 
which  wTas  seventeen  feet  two  inches  in  diameter3  and  fifty  two 
feet  six  inches  in  circumference,  and  eight  feet  nine  inches  deep. — 
2  Chron.  iv.  2. 

The  discovery  of  this  vast  specimen  of  earthen  ware,  is,  at  any 
rate,  a  singularity,  and  refers  to  some  age  of  the  world  when  the  in- 
habitants used  very  large  implements  of  husbandry.  If  there  had 
been  in  its  neighborhood  a  salt  spring,  as  there  are  often  found 
farther  west,  we  should  not  be  at  a  loss  to  know  for  what  purpose 
it  was  constructed. 

Remarkable  specimens  of  pottery  are  often  brought  up  from  very 
great  depths  at  the  salt  works  in  Illinois.  Entire  pots  of  a  very 
large  capacity,  holding  from  eight  to  ten  gallons,  have  been  disin- 
terred at  the  amazing  depth  of  eighty  feet ;  others  have  been  found 
at  even  greater  depths,  and  of  greater  dimensions. — Schoolcraft. 

Upon  this  subject,  this  author  makes  the  following  remarks:  u  If 
these  antique  vessels  are  supposed  now  to  lie  in  those  depths  where 
they  were  anciently  employed,  the  surface  of  the  Ohio,  and  con- 
sequently of  the  Mississippi,  must  have  been  sixty  or  eighty 
feet  lower  than  they  are  at  present,  to  enable  the  saline  water  to 


110 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


drain  off;  and  the  ocean  itself  must  have  stood  at  a  lower  level,  or 
extended  in  an  elongated  gulf  up  the  present  valley  of  the  Mis- 
sissippi." 

Many  are  of  the  opinion,  that  much  of  this  region  of  country 
once  lay  beneath  large  lakes  of  water,  and  that  the  barriers  between 
them  and  the  ocean,  by  some  means,  are  broken  down,  when  a 
rush  of  water  swept  the  whole  country,  in  its  course  to  the  sea, 
burying  all  the  ancient  nations,  with  their  works,  at  those  depths 
beneath  the  surface,  as  low  as  where  those  fragments  of  earthen 
ware  are  found.  The  bottom  of  those  lakes  is  also  supposed  to  be 
the  true  origin  of  the  immense  prairies  of  the  west ;  and  the  rea- 
son why  they  are  not,  long  since,  grown  over  with  forest  trees,  is 
supposed  to  be  because,  from  the  rich  and  mucky  soil  found  at  the 
bottom  of  those  lakes,  a  grass  of  immense  length,  (ten  and  four- 
teen feet  high,)  peculiar  to  the  prairies,  immediately  sprung  up 
before  trees  could  take  root,  and  therefore  hindred  this  effort  of 
nature.  And  as  a  reason  why  forest  trees  have  not  been  able  to 
gain  upon  the  prairies,  it  is  alledged,  the  Indians  burn  annually  these 
boundless  meadows,  which  ministers  to  their  perpetuity.  Some  of 
these  praries  are  hundreds  of  miles  in  length  and  breadth,  and  in 
burning  over,  present,  in  the  night,  a  spectacle  too  grand,  sublime 
and  beautiful  for  adequate  description  ;  belting  the  horizon  with  a 
rim  of  fire,  th,e  farthest  ends  of  which  seem  dipped  in  the  immeas- 
urable distance,  so  that  even  contemplation,  in  its  boldest  efforts,  is 
swallowed  up  and  rendered  powerless. 


A  CATACOMB  OF  MUMMIES  FOUND  IN  KENTUCKY. 

Lexington,  in  Kentucky,  stands  nearly  on  the  site  of  an  ancient 
town,  which  was  of  great  extent  and  magnificence,  as  is  amply 
evinced  by  the  wide  range  of  its  circumrallatory  works,  and  the 
quantity  of  ground  it  once  occupied. 

There  is  connected  with  the  antiquities  of  this  place,  a  catacomb, 
formed  in  the  bowels  of  the  limestone  rock,  about  fifteen  feet  be- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


Ill 


low  the  surface  of  the  earth,  adjacent  to  the  town  of  Lexington. 
This  grand  object,  so  novel  and  extraordinary  in  this  country,  was 
discovered  in  seventeen  hundred  and  seventy-five,  by  some  of  the 
first  settlers,  whose  curiosity  was  excited  by  something  remarkable 
in  the  character  of  the  stones  which  covered  the  entrance  to  the 
cavern  within.  They  removed  these  stones,  and  came  to  others  of 
singular  appearance  for  stones  in  a  natural  state  ;  the  removal  of 
which  laid  open  the  mouth  of  a  cave,  deep,  gloomy,  and  terrific, 
as  they  supposed. 

With  augmented  numbers,  and  provided  with  light,  they  de- 
scended, and  entered,  without  obstruction,  a  spacious  apartment ; 
the  sides  and  extreme  ends  wrere  formed  into  nitches  and  compart- 
ments, and  occupied  by  figures  representing  men.  When  alarm 
subsided,  and  the  sentiment  of  dismay  and  surprise  permitted  fur- 
ther research  and  enquiry,  the  figures  were  found  to  be  Mummies, 
preserved  by  the  art  of  embalming,  to  as  great  a  state  of  perfec- 
tion, as  was  known  among  the  ancient  Egyptians,  eighteen  hundred 
years  before  the  Christian  era;  which  was  about  the  time  the 
Israelites  were  in  bondage  in  Egypt,  when  this  art  was  in  its  highest 
state  of  perfection. 

Unfortunately  for  antiquity,  science,  and  every  thing  else  held 
sacred  by  the  illumined  and  learned,  this  inestimable  discovery  was 
made  at  a  period  when  a  bloody  and  inveterate  war  was  carried  on 
between  the  Indians  and  the  whites  ;  and  the  power  of  the  natives 
was  displayed  in  so  savage  a  manner,  that  the  whites  were  filled 
with  revenge.  Animated  by  this  vindictive  spirit,  the  discoverers 
of  the  catacomb,  delighted  to  wreak  their  vengeance  even  on  the 
mummies,  supposing  them  to  be  of  the  same  Indian  race  with  whom 
they  were  at  war. 

They  dragged  them  out  to  the  open  air,  tore  the  bandages  open, 
kicked  the  bodies  into  dust,  and  made  a  general  bonfire  of  the  most 
ancient  remains  antiquity  could  boast.  The  descent  to  this  cavern 
is  gradual,  the  width  four  feet,  the  height  seven  only,  and  the 
whole  length  of  the  catacomb  was  found  to  be  eighteen  rods  and  a 
half,  by  six  and  a  half ;  and  calculating  from  the  nitches  and  shelv- 
ings  on  the  sides,  it  was  sufficiently  capacious  to  have  contained  at 
least  two  thousand  subjects. 

I  could  never,  says  Mr.  Ash,  from  whose  travels  we  have  taken 
this  account,  learn  the  exact  quantity  it  contained ;  the  answers  to 


112 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


the  inquiries  which  he  made  respecting  it  were,  "  0  !  they  burnt 
up  and  destroyed  hundreds  !"  Nor  could  he  arrive  at  any  knowl- 
edge of  the  fashion,  manner,  and  apparel  of  the  mummies,  or  re- 
ceive any  other  information  than  that  they  "  v:ere  well  lapped 
appeared  sound,  and  consumed  in  the  fire  with  a  rapid  flame.  But 
not  being  contented  with  the  uncertain  information  of  persons, 
who,  it  seems,  had  no  adequate  knowledge  of  the  value  of  this  dis- 
covery, he  caused  the  cavern  to  be  gleaned  for  such  fragments  as 
yet  remained  in  the  nitches,  on  its  shelving  sides,  and  from  the 
floor.  The  quantity  of  remains  thus  gathered  up,  amounted  to  for- 
ty or  fifty  baskets,  the  dust  of  which  was  so  light  and  pungent  as 
to  affect  the  eyes  even  to  tears,  and  the  nose  to  sneezing,  to  a  troub- 
lesome degree. 

He  then  proceeded  on  a  minute  investigation,  and  separated  from 
the  general  mass,  several  pieces  of  human  limbs,  fragments  of 
bodies,  solid,  sound,  and  apparently  capable  of  eternal  duration. 
In  a  cold  state  they  had  no  smell  whatever,  but  when  submitted  to 
the  action  of  fire,  gave  out  an  agreeable  effluvia,  but  was  like  noth- 
ing in  its  fragrance  to  which  he  could  compare  it. 

On  this  subject,  Mr.  Ash  has  the  following  reflections  :  "  How 
these  bodies  were  embalmed,  how  long  preserved,  by  what  nations, 
and  from  what  people  descended,  no  opinion  can  be  formed,  nor 
any  calculation  made,  but  what  must  result  from  speculative  fancy 
and  wild  conjecture.  For  my  part,  I  am  lost  in  the  deepest  igno- 
rance. My  reading  affords  me  no  knowledge  :  my  travels  no  light. 
I  have  neither  read  nor  known  of  any  of  the  North  American  In- 
dians who  formed  catacombs  for  their  dead,  or  who  were  acquaint- 
ed with  the  art  of  preservation  by  embalming. 

The  Egyptians,  according  to  Herodotus,  who  flourished  450 
years  before  Christ,  had  three  methods  of  embalming ;  but  Diodo- 
rus,  who  lived  before  Christ,  in  the  time  of  Julius  Caesar,  observes, 
that  the  ancient  Egyptians  had  a  fourth  method  of  far  greater  supe- 
riority. That  method  is  not  described  by  Diodorus  ;  it  had  become 
extinct  in  his  time;  and  yet  I  cannot  think  it  presumptuous  to  con- 
ceive that  the  Ameiican  mummies  were  preserved  after  that  very 
manner,  or  at  least  with  a  mode  of  equal  virtue  and  effect." 

The  Kentuckians  asserted,  that  the  features  of  the  face  and  the 
form  of  the  whole  body  were  so  well  preserved,  that  they  must  have 
been  the  exact  representations  of  the  once  living  subjects. 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


113 


This  cavern  indeed  is  similar  to  those  found  in  Egypt,  where 
the  once  polished  and  powerful  inhabitants  bestowed  their  dead, 
wrapped  up  in  the  linens,  spices  and  aromatics  of  the  east.  It  is 
1  probable  the  cave  where  these  were  found  was  partly  natural  and 
partly  artificial ;  having  found  it  suitable  to  their  purpose,  they  had 
opened  a  convenient  descent,  cleared  out  the  stones  and  rocks,  and 
fitted  it  with  nitches  for  the  reception  of  those  they  had  embalmed. 

This  custom,  it  would  seem,  is  purely  Egyptian,  and  was  prac- 
tised in  the  earliest  age  of  their  national  existence,  which  was 
about  two  thousand  years  before  Christ.  Catacombs  are  numerous 
all  over  Egypt,  vast  excavations  under  ground,  with  nitches  in 
their  sides  for  their  embalmed  dead,  exactly  such  as  the  one  we 
have  described. 

Shall  we  be  esteemed  presumptuous,  if  we  hazard  the  opinion 
that  the  people  who  made  this  cavern  and  filled  it  with  the  thou- 
sands of  their  embalmed  dead  were,  indeed,  from  Egypt  ?  If  they 
were  not,  whither  shall  we  turn  for  a  solution  of  this  mystery  ?  To 
"what  country  shall  we  travel  ?  where  are  the  archieves  of  past  ages, 
that  shall  shed  its  light  here  ? 

If  the  Egyptians  were  indeed,  reckoned  as  the  first  of  nations ; 
for  so  are  they  spoken  of,  even  in  the  Scriptures :  if  from  them  was 
derived  the  art  of  navigation,  the  knowledge  of  astronomy,  in  a 
great  degree,  also  the  unparalleled  invention  of  letters,  (from  whom 
it  is  even  probable  the  Phc3necians  derived  the  use  of  letters,)  with 
many  other  arts,  of  use  to  human  society;  such  as  architecture, 
agriculture,  with  the  science  of  government,  &c;  why  not  allow 
the  authors  of  the  antiquated  works  about  Lexington,  together  with 
the  immense  catacomb, to  have  been,  indeed,  an  Egyptian  Colony; 
seeing  the  art  of  embalming,  which  is  peculiarly  characteristic  of 
that  people,  was  found  there  in  a  state  of  perfection  not  exceeded 
by  the  mother  country  itself. 

A  trait  of  national  practices  so  strong  and  palpable,  as  is  this  pe- 
culiar art,  should  lead  the  mind)  without  hesitation,  to  a  belief,  that 
wherever  the  thing  is  practised,  we  have  found  in  its  authors  either 
a  colony  direct  from  Egypt,  or  the  descendants  of  some  nation  of 
the  countries  of  Africa  acquainted  with  the  art. 

But  if  this  be  so,  the  question  here  arises,  how  came  they  in 
America,  seeing  the  nearest  point  of  even  South  America  approach- 
es no  nearer  to  the  nearest  point  of  Africa,  than  about  seventeen 

15 


114 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


hundred  miles  ?  Those  points  are,  first,  on  the  American  side,  Cape 
St.  Roque  ;  and,  second,  on  the  African  side,  Cape  de  Verd. 

But  such  is  the  mechanism  of  the  globe,  and  the  operation  of  the 
waters,  that  from  the  west  coast  of  Africa  there  is  a  constant  cur- 
rent of  the  sea  setting  toward  South  America  ;  so  that  if  a  vessel 
were  lost,  or  if  an  eastern  storm  had  driven  it  far  into  the  ocean,  or 
South  Atlantic ;  it  would  naturally  arrive  at  last  on  the  American 
coast.  This  is  supposed  to  have  been  the  predicament  of  the  fleet 
of  Alexander  the  Great,  some  hundred  years  before  the  Christian 
era,  as  we  have  before  irelated. 

The  next  inquiry  to  be  pursued,  is,  whether  the  Egyptians  were 
ever  a  maritime  people,  or  rather,  anciently  so,  sufficient  for  our  pur- 
pose ? 

By  consulting  ancient  history,  we  find  it  mentioned  that  the 
Egyptians,  as  early  as  fourteen  hundred  and  eighty-five  years  be- 
fore Christ,  had  shipping,  and  that  one  Danus,  with  his  fifty  daugh- 
ters, sailed  into  Greece.,  and  anchored  at  Rhodes ;  which  is  three 
thousand,  three  hundred  and  eighteen  years  back  from  the  present 
year,  1833.  Eight  hundred  and  eighty-one  years  after  the  landing 
of  this  vessel  at  Rhodes,  we  find  the  Egyptians,  under  the  direc- 
tion of  Necho,  their  king,  fitting  out  some  Phoenicians  with  a  ves- 
sel, or  fleet,  with  orders  to  sail  from  the  Red  Sea,  quite  around  the 
continent  of  Africa,  and  rto  return  by  the  Mediterranean,  which 
they  effected. 

It  is  easy  to  pursue  the  very  tract  they  sailed,  in  order  to  circum- 
navigate Africa ;  sailing  from  some  port  on  the  Red  Sea,  they  pass 
down  to  the  Strait  of  Babelmandel,  into  the  Indian  Ocean ;  thence 
south,  around  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  into  the  South  Atlantic ; — 
thence  north  along  the  African  coast  on  the  west  side,  which  would 
carry  them  along  opposite,  or  east  of  South  America. 

Pursuing  this  course,  they  would  pass  into  the  Mediterranean  at 
the  Strait  of  Gibraltar,  and  m  on  to  Egypt,  mooring  at  Alexandria, 
on  the  south  end  of  the  Med  iterranean  ;  a  voyage  of  more  than  six- 
teen thousand  miles  ;  two  thirds  of  the  distance  round  the  earth 
Many  ages  after  their  first  settlement  in  Egypt,  they  were  the  lead- 
ing nation  in  maritime  skill  and  other  arts. 

It  is  true,  that  a  knowledge  of  the  compass  and  magnet,  as  aids 
to  navigation,  in  Africa  or  Europe,  was  unknown  in  those  early 
ages ;  but  to  counterbalance  t\\is  defect,  they  were,  from  necessity, 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST  IIS 

much  more  skilful  in  a  knowledge  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  as  guides 
to  their  courses,  than  men  are  at  the  present  day.  But  in  China,  it 
is  now  believed,  that  a  knowledge  of  the  magnet,  and  its  applica- 
tion to  the  great  purposes  of  navigation,  was  understood  before  the 
time  of  Abraham,  more  than  two  thousand  years  before  Christ,  of 
which  we  shall  give  a  more  particular  account  in  another  place  of 
this  work. 

But  if  we  cannot  allow  the  Egyptians  to  have  visited  South 
America,  and  all  the  islands  between,  on  voyages  of  discovery, 
which  by  no  means  can  be  supposed  chimerical,  we  are  ready  to 
admit  they  may  have  been  driven  there  by  an  eastern  storm  ;  and 
as  favoring  such  a  circumstance,  the  current  which  sets  from  the 
African  coast  toward  South  America,  should  not  be  forgotten. 

If  it  be  allowed  that  this  mode  of  reasoning  is  at  all  conclusive, 
the  same  will  apply  in  favor  of  their  having  first  hit  on  the  coast  of 
the  West  Indies,  as  this  group  of  islands,  as  they  now  exist,  is  much 
more  favorable  to  a  visit  from  that  particular  part  of  Africa,  called 
Egypt,  than  is  South  America. 

Egypt  and  the  West  Indies  are  exactly  in  the  same  latitude,  that 
is,  the  northern  parts  of  those  islands,  both  being  between  twenty 
and  thirty  degrees  north. 

Sailing  from  Egypt,  out  of  the  Mediterranean  passing  through 
the  Straits  of  Gibraltar  would  throw  a  vessel,  in  case  of  an  eastern 
storm,  aided  by  the  current,  as  high  north  as  opposite  the  Bahama 
islands.  K  blow  of  but  a  few  days  in  that  direction,  would  be  quite 
sufficient  to  have  driven  an  Egyptian  vessel,  or  boat,  or  whatever 
they  may  have  sailed  in,  entirely  on  to  the  coast  of  the  West  Indies. 
The  trade  winds  sweep  westward  across  the  Atlantic,  through  a 
space  of  50  or  60  degrees  of  longitude,  carrying  every  thing  with 
in  their  current  directly  to  the  American  coast. 

If  such  may  have  been  the  case,  they  were,  indeed, in  a  manner, 
on  the  very  continent  itself,  especially,  if  the  opinion  of  President 
Jefferson  and  others  be  allowed,  that  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  which  is 
situated  exactly  behind  those  islands,  west,  has  been  scooped  out 
by  the  current  which  makes  from  the  equator  toward  the  north. 

Kentucky  itself,  where,  we  think,  we  have  found  the  remains  of 
an  Egyptian  colony,  or  nation,  as  in  the  case  of  the  works  and 
catacomb  at  Lexington,  is  in  latitude  but  five  degrees  north  of 
Egypt.    So  that  whether  they  may  have  visited  America  on  a  voy- 


116 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


age  of  exploration,  or  have  been  driven  on  the  coast  against  then 
will ;  in  either  case,  it  would  be  perfectly  natural  that  they  should 
have  established  themselves  in  that  region. 

Traits  of  Egyptian  manners  were  found  among  many  of  the  na- 
tions of  South  America,  mingled  with  those  who  appeared  to  be  of 
other  origin ;  of  which  we  shall  speak  again  in  the  course  of  this 
work. 

But  at  Lexington  the  traits  are  too  notorious  to  allow  them  to  be 
other  than  pure  Egyptian,  in  full  possession  of  the  strongest  com- 
plexion of  their  national  character,  that  of  embalming,  which  was 
connected  with  their  religion. 

The  Mississippi,  which  disembogues  itself  into  the  Mexican 
Gulf,  is  in  the  same  north  latitude  with  Egypt,  and  may  have,  by 
its  likeness  to  the  Egyptian  Nile,  invited  those  adventurers  to  pur- 
sue its  course,  till  a  place  suited  to  their  views  or  necessities  may 
have  presented. 

The  ancient  Punic,  Phoenician,  or  Carthagenian  language,  is  all 
the  same ;  the  characters  called  Punic,  or  Phoenician,  therefore, 
are  also  the  same.  A  fac  simile  of  those  characters,  as  copied  by 
Dr.  Adam  Clarke,  are  herewith  presented.    See  No.  4. 

No.  4. 


No.  5. 

They  were  discovered  in  the  island  of  Malta,  in  the  Mediterra- 
nean, which  was  anciently  inhabited  by  the  Phoenicians,  long  be- 
fore the  Romans  existed  as  a  nation.  These  characters  were  found 
engraved  on  a  stone,  in  a  cave  of  that  island,  in  the  year  1761, 
which  was  a  sepulchral  cave,  so  used  by  the  earliest  inhabitants. 
These  characters,  being  found  in  this  ancient  repository  of  the  dead, 
it  is  believed,  marks  the  place  of  the  burial  of  that  famous  Cartha- 
genian general,  Hannibal,  as  they  explicitly  allude  to  that  char- 
acter.   The  reading  in  the  original  is  as  follows  : 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


HI 


"  Chadaf  Beth  olam  kabar  Chanibaal  Nakeh  becaleth  haveh, 
rachm  daeh  Am  beshuth  Chanilaal  ben  Bar  melee" 

Which,  being  interpreted,  is:  "  The  inner  chamber  of  the  sanc- 
tuary of  the  sepulchre  of  Hannibal,  illustrious  in  the  consummation 
of  calamity.  He  was  beloved.  The  people  lament,  when  array- 
ed in  order  of  battle,  Hannibal  the  son  of  Bar-Melee." 

This  is  one  of  the  largest  remains  of  the  Punic  or  Phoenician 
language  now  in  existence.  Characters  of  this  description  are  also 
found  on  the  rocks  in  Dighton,  Massachusetts,  near  the  sea. 

In  a  chain  of  mountains  between  the  rivers  Oronoco  and  Ama- 
zon, South  America,  are  found  engraved  in  a  cavern,  on  a  block  of 
granite,  characters  supposed  also  to  be  Punic  letters. 

A  far,  simile  of  which  is  presented  at  No.  5.  These  were  fur- 
nished by  Baron  Humboldt,  in  his  volume  of  Researches  in  South 
America  ;  between  which  and  those  given  us  above,  by  Dr.  Clarke, 
it  is  easy  to  perceive,  a  small  degree  of  similarity. 

But  if  the  Phoenician  letters,  shown  at  Nos.  4  and  5,  are  highly 
interesting,  those  which  follow,  at  Nos.  1,  2,  and  3,  are  equally  so. 
These  are  presented  to  the  public  by  Professor  Rafinesque,  in  hk> 
Atlantic  Journal,  for  1832,  with  their  meaning. 

Under  figures  1  and  2,  are  the  African  or  Lybian  characters,  the 
primitive  letters  of  the  most  ancient  nations  of  Africa.  Under 
figure  3,  are  the  American  letters,  or  letters  of  Otolum,  an  ancient 
city,  the  ruins  of  which  are  found  in  South  America,  being  so  far, 
as  yet  explored,  of  an  extent  embracing  a  circumference  of  twenty- 
four  miles,  of  which  we  shall  again  speak  in  due  time. 

The  similarity,  which  appears  between  the  African  letters  and 
the  letters  of  America,  as  in  use  perhaps  two  thousand  years  before 
Christ,  is  almost,  if  not  exact,  showing,  beyond  a  doubt,  that  the 
same  natious,  the  same  languages,  and  the  same  arts,  which  were 
known  in  ancient  Lybia  or  Africa,  were  also  known  in  America ; 
as  well  also  as  nations  from  old  China,  who  came  to  the  western 
coast  in  huge  vessels,  as  we  shall  show  in  this  work. 

W e  here  subjoin  an  account  of  those  characters,  numbered  1,  2,  3, 
by  the  author,  Prof.  Rafinesque  ;  and  also  of  the  American  Glyphs, 
which,  however,  are  not  presented  here ;  they  are,  it  appears, 
formed  by  a  combination  of  the  letters  numbered  1,  2,  3,  and  re- 
sembling very  much,  in  our  opinon,  the  Chinese  characters,  when 


116 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


grouped,  or  combined,  with  a  view  to  express  a  sentence  or  a  para- 
graph, in  their  language.    The  account  is  as  fallows : 

LYBIAN.  AMERICAN. 


A. 

EL 

IZ. 

ow. 
uw. 

IL. 

IM. 

IX. 

IR. 

IB. 

UK. 

ID  E 

IGH. 

UW. 

ES. 
ISH. 

uz. 


No.  1. 

2. 

3. 

  > 

Ear 

AIPS. 

A. 

IICKS)  5)  ■ 

Eye. 

ESH. 

E. 

i 

*G  J©  <§> 

Nose. 

IFR. 

I.  1 

m 

x 

1  /  ^  ' 

Tongue.  OMBR 

0. 

m 

Hand. 

VULD. 

u. 

w 

Earth.  LAMBD 

L. 

mi 

mm 

Sea. 

MAH. 

M. 

PI 

Air. 

NISP. 

N. 

■ 

mm- 

Fire 

RASH. 

P. 

Sun. 

BAP. 

B  p. 

m 

HI 

Moon. 

CEK. 

C.k. 

Mars. 

DOR. 

D.  t. 

ft 

rnmrnm 

Mer'y  GOREG 

G. 

/• 

Venus. 

UAF. 

V.  f. 

fit 

Saturn. 

SIASIL 

S.  sh 

m 

"ii 

Jup'r  THEUE 

Thz. 

El 

Letter  /o  jMr.  Chami'OLLIon,  on  the  Graphic  Systems  of  America, 
and  the  Glyphs  of  Otolum  o/ Palenqi  in  Central  America— 
Elements  of  the  Glyphs. 

i  have  the  pleasure  to  present  you  here,  a  tabular  and  compara- 
tive view  of  the  Atlantic  alphabets  of  the  two  Continents,  with  a 
specimen  of  the  Groups  of  Letters  or  Glyphs  of  the  monuments 
of  Otolum  or  Palenquc :  which  belong  to  my  seventh  series  of 
graphic  signs,  and  are  in  faet  words  formed  by  grouped  letters  or 
elements  as  in  Chinese  characters,  or  somewhat  like  the  cyphers 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


119 


now  yet  in  use  among  us,  formed  by  acrostical  anagrams  or  combi- 
nations of  the  first  letters  of  words  or  names. 

When  I  began  my  investigation  of  these  American  Glyphs,  and 
became  convinced  that  they  must  have  been  groups  of  letters,  I 
sought  for  the  Elementary  Letters  in  all  the  ancient  known  alpha- 
bets, the  Chinese  Sanscrit  and  Egyptian  above  all ;  but  in  vain. 
The  Chinese  characters  offered  but  few  similarities  with  these 
glyphs,  and  not  having  a  literal  but  syllabic  alphabet,  could  not 
promise  the  needful  clue.  The  Sanscrit  alphabet  and  all  its  de- 
rived branches,  including  even  the  Hebrew,  Phoenician,  Pelagic, 
Celtic  and  Cantabrian  alphabets  were  totally  unlike  in  forms  and 
combinations  of  grouping.  But  in  the  great  variety  of  Egyptian 
form  of  the  same  letters,  I  thought  that  I  could  trace  some  resem- 
blance with  our  American  glyphs.  In  fact,  I  could  see  in  them 
the  Egyptian  cross,  snake,  circle,  delta,  square,  trident,  eye, 
feather,  fiish,  hand,  &c,  but  sought  in  vain  for  the  birds,  lions, 
sphynx,  beetle,  and  100  other  nameless  signs  of  Egypt. 

However,  this  first  examination  and  approximation  of  analogy  in 
Egypt  and  Africa  was  a  great  preliminary  step  in  the  enquiry.  I 
had  always  believed  that  the  Atlantes  of  Africa  have  partly  colo- 
nized America,  as  so  many  ancient  writers  have  affirmed ;  this  be- 
lief led  me  to  search  for  any  preserved  fragments  of  the  alphabets 
of  Western  Africa,  and  Lybia,  the  land  of  the  African  Atlantes  yet 
existing  under  the  names  of  Berbers,  Tuarics,  Shelluhs,  &c.  This 
was  no  easy  task.  The  Atlantic  antiquities  are  still  more  obscure 
than  the  Egyptian.  No  Champoilion  had  raised  their  veil ;  the 
city  of  Farawana  the  Thebes  of  the  Atlantes,  whose  splendid  ruins 
exist  as  yet  in  the  Mountains  of  Atlas,  has  not  even  been  described 
properly  as  yet,  nor  its  inscriptions  delineated. 

However,  I  found  at  last  in  Gramay  (Africa  Illustrata)  an  old 
Lybian  alphabet,  which  has  been  copied  by  Purchas,  in  his  collec- 
tion of  old  alphabets,  i  v;as  delighted  to  find  it  so  explicit,  so  well 
connected  with  the  Egyptian,  being  also  an  acrostic  alphabet,  and 
above  all,  to  find  that  all  its  signs  were  to  be  seen  in  the  Glyphs  of 
Otolum.  Soon  after,  appeared  in  a  supplement  to  Claperton  and 
Denham's  travels  in  Africa,  another  old  and  obsolete  Lybian  alpha- 
bet, not  acrostical,  found  by  Denham  in  old  inscriptions  among  the 
Tuarics  of  Targih  and  Gnraat,  west  of  Fezan :  which,  although  un- 


120 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


like  the  first,  had  many  analogies,  and  also  with  the  Americao 
glyphs. 

Thinking,  then,  that  I  had  found  the  primitive  elements  of  these 
glyphs,  I  hastened  to  communicate  this  important  fact  to  Mr.  Du- 
pouceau  (in  a  printed  letter  directed  to  him  in  1828)  who  was 
struck  with  the  analogy,  and  was  ready  to  confess  that  the  glyphs 
of  Palenque,  might  be  alphabetical  words  ;  although  he  did  not 
believe  before  that  any  American  alphabets  were  extant.  But  he 
could  not  pursue  my  connection  of  ideas,  analogies  of  signs,  lan- 
guages and  traditions,  to  the  extent  which  I  desired  and  now  am 
able  to  prove. 

To  render  my  conclusions  perspicuous,  I  must  divide  the  subject 
into  several  parts:  directing  my  enquiries,  1st.  on  the  old  Lybian 
alphabet.  2dly.  On  the  Tuaric  alphabet.  3dly.  On  their  ele- 
ments in  the  American  glyphs.  4thly.  On  the  possibility  to  read 
them.  While  the  examination  of  their  language,  in  connection 
with  the  other  Atlantic  languages,  will  be  the  theme  of  my  third 
letter. 

I.  The  old  Lybian  delineated  in  the  Table  No.  1,  has  all  the  ap- 
pearance of  a  very  ancient  alphabet,  based  upon  the  acrostical  plan 
of  Egypt;  but  in  a  very  different  language,  of  which  we  have  16 
words  preserved.  This  language  may  have  been  that  of  a  branch 
of  Atlantes,  perhaps  the  Ge.tulians  (GE-TULA,  or  Tulas  of  the 
plains)  or  of  the  Ammonians,  Old  Lybians,  and  also  Atlantes. 

Out  of  these  16  words,  only  5  have  a  slight  affinity  with  the 
Egyptian,  they  are — 


Nose  Ifr-  L.  Nif.  E. 

Sea  Mah  Mauh. 

Saturn  Siash  Sev. 

Venus  Uaf  Ath. 

Ear  Aips  Ap. 
While  this  Lybian  has  a  greater  analogy  with  the  Pelagic  dia- 
lects, as  many  as  12  out  of  16  being  consimiiar. 

Eye  EshL.  Eshas  P. 

Nose  Ifr  Rinif. 

Hand  Vuld  Hul,  Chil 

Earth  Lambd  Landa, 

Sea  Mah  Marah, 

Fire  Rash  Purah, 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 

121 

Moon 

Cek 

Selka,  Kres, 

Mars 

Dor 

Hares,  Thor. 

Mercury 

Goreg  ' 

Mergor, 

Venus 

Uaf 

Uenas, 

Saturn 

Siash 

Satur,  Shiva. 

Jupiter 

Theue 

Theos. 

Therefore,  the  numerical  analogy  is  only  32  per  cent,  with  the 
Egyptiaa,  while  it  is  75  per  cent,  with  the  Pelagic.  Another 
proof,  among  many,  that  the  ancient  Atlantes  were  intimately  con- 
nected with  the  Pelagian  nations  of  Greece,  Italy,  and  Spain ;  but 
much  less  so  with  the  Egyptians,  from  whom  they  however  bor- 
rowed perhaps  their  graphic  system. 

This  system  is  very  remarkable.  1.  By  its  acrostic  form.  2. 
By  having  only  16  letters  like  most  of  the  primitive  alphabets,  but 
unlike  the  Egyptian  and  Sanscrit.  3.  By  being  susceptible  of  22 
sounds  by  modification  of  6  of  the  letters,  as  usual  among  the 
Pelagian  and  Etruscan.  6.  Above  all,  by  being  based  upon  the 
acrostics  of  3  important  series  of  physical  objects,  the  5  senses  re- 
presented by  their  agents  in  man,  the  4  elements  of  nature  and  the 
7  planets :  which  are  very  philosophical  ideas,  and  must  have  origi- 
nated in  a  civilized  nation  and  learned  priesthood.  5.  By  the 
graphic  signs  being  also  rude  delineations  of  these  physical  objects 
or  their  emblems.  The  ear,  eye,  nose,  tongue  and  hand,  for  the  5 
senses.  The  triangle  for  the  earth,  fish  for  the  sea  or  water,  snake 
for  the  air,  flame  for  fire.  A  circle  for  the  sun,  crescent  for  the 
moon,  a  sword  for  Mars,  a  purse  for  Mercury,  the  V  for  Venus, 
double  ring  for  Saturn,  and  trident  for  Jupiter.  Venus  being  the 
5th  planet,  has  nearly  the  same  sign  as  U,  the  5th  letter. 

These  physical  emblems  are  so  natural  and  obvious,  that  they 
are  sometimes  found  among  many  of  the  ancient  alphabets  ;  the 
sun  and  moon  even  among  the  Chinese.  But  in  the  Egyptian 
alphabets,  the  emblems  apply  very  often  to  different  letters,  owing 
to  the  difference  of  language  and  acrostic  feature.  Thus  the  hand 
applies  to  D  in  Egyptian  instead  of  U,  the  eye  to  R,  the  circle  to 
O,  the  snake  to  L,  &c 

II.  The  second  Lybian  alphabet  No.  2,  in  the  tables,  was  the 
ancient  alphabet  of  Tuarics,  a  modern  branch  of  the  Atlantes,  until 
superseded  by  the  Arabic.  Denham  found,  with  some  difficulty,  its 
import,  and  names  of  letters  which  are  not  acrostic  but  literal,  and 

16 


iV2 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


IS  in  number.  It  is  doubtful  whether  these  names  were  well  ap- 
plied iu  all  instances,  as  the  explainer  was  ignorant,  and  Denhana 
not  aware  of  the  importance  of  this  alphabet.  Some  appear  not 
well  named,  and  U  with  V  have  the  same  sign  W  ;  but  these  are 
always  interchangeable  in  old  language,  and  in  alphabet  No.  1, 
V  is  called  U AF  instead  of  VAF,  and  U  is  VULD  instead  of  UULD  ? 

As  we  have  it,  this  alphabet  is  sufficiently  and  obviously  derived 
from  the  first,  11  out  of  the  16  letters  being.similar  or  nearly  so, 
while  only  5  are  different,  E,  M,  R,  G  and  Z.  This  last  appears 
the  substitute  of  TH,  of  No.  1,  and  GH  represents  G.  Yet  they 
are  by  far  more  alike  than  the  Demotic  is  from  the  Hieratic  Egyp- 
tian, and  I  therefore  deem  this  No.  2  a  Demotic  form  of  the  ancient 
Lybian  or  Atlantic. 

I  might  have  given  and  compared  several  other  Lybian  alphabet* 
found  in  inscriptions ;  but  as  they  have  been  delineated  without  a 
key  or  names,  it  is  at  present  very  difficult  to  decypher  them.  I 
however,  recommend  them  to  the  attention  of  the  learned,  and  a- 
mong  others,  point  out  the  Lybian  inscription  of  Apollonia,  the  har- 
bor of  Cyrene,  given  by  Lacella,  in  his  travels  in  the  Cyrenaica. 
The  letters  of  this  inscription  appear  more  numerous  than  16  or 
even  22,  and  although  they  have  some  analogies  with  the  2  Lybian 
alphabets,  yet  approximate  still  more  to  the  Demotic  of  Egypt  and 
the  Phoenician.  But  the  inscriptions  in  Mount  Atlas  and  at  Fara- 
wan,  when  collected  and  decyphered,  will  be  found  of  much  great- 
er historical  importance. 

III.  Meantime  in  the  column  No.  3  of  the  tabular  view,  are  giv- 
en 46  Elements  of  the  Glyphs  of  Otolum  (see  page  307,  where 
there  is  a  fac  simile  of  these  glyphs)  or  Palenque,  a  few  of  these 
glyphs  being  given  also  in  column  No.  4.  These  46  elements 
are  altogether  similar  or  derived  from  the  Lybian  prototypes  of 
No.  1  and  2.  In  some  cases  they  are  absolutely  identic,  and  the 
conviction  of  their  common  origin  is  almost  complete,  particularly 
when  taken  in  connection  with  the  collateral  proofs  of  traditions 
and  languages.  These  elements  are  somewhat  involved  in  the 
grouping,  yet  they  may  easily  be  perceived  and  separated.  Some- 
times they  are  ornamented  by  double  lines  or  otherwise,  as  monu- 
mental letters  often  are.  Sometimes  united  to  outside  numbers 
represented  by  long  ellipses  meaning  10,  and  round  dots  meaning 
unities,  which  approximates  to  the  Mexican  system  of  graphic  bu- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  in  THE  WEST- 


deration.  Besides  these  46  elements,  some  others  may  be  seen  in 
the  glyphs,  which  I  left  off,  because  too  intricate ;  although  they 
appear  reducible,  if  a  larger  table  could  have  been  given.  There 
is  hardly  a  single  one  that  may  not  be  traced  to  these  forms,  or  that 
baifies  the  actual  theory.  Therefore,  the  conclusion  must  occur, 
that  such  astonishing  coincidence  cannot  be  casual,  but  it  is  the  re- 
sult of  original  derivation. 

The  following  remarks  are  of  some  importance ; 

1.  The  glyphs  of  Otolum  are  written  from  top  to  bottom,  like 
the  Chinese,  or  from  side  to  side,  indifferently,  like  the  Egyptian 
and  the  Demotic  Lybian  of  No.  2.  We  are  not  told  how  No.  1 
was  written,  but  probably  in  the  same  way.  Several  signs  were 
used  for  the  same  letter  as  in  Egypt. 

2.  Although  the  most  common  way  of  writing  the  groups  is  in 
rows,  and  each  group  separated,  yet  we  find  some  framed,  as  it 
were,  in  oblong  squares  or  tablets  like  those  of  Egypt.  See  plate 
12,  of  the  work  on  Palenque  by  Delrio  and  Caberera.  In  that  12th 
plate  there  are  also  some  singular  groups  resembling  our  musical 
notes.    Could  they  be  emblems  of  songs  or  hymns  ? 

3.  The  letter  represented  by  a  head  occurs  frequently ;  but  it  is 
remarkable  that  the  features  are  very  different  from  those  of  the  re- 
markable race  of  men  or  heroes  delineated  in  the  sculptures. 

4.  In  reducing  these  elements  to  the  alphabetical  form,  I  have 
been  guided  by  the  more  plausible  theory  envolved  by  similar 
forms.  We  have  not  here  the  more  certain  demonstration  of  Bil- 
ingual inscriptions ;  but  if  the  languages  should  uphold  this  the- 
ory, they  certainly  will  be  increased  of  the  Atlantic  origins  of 
Otolum. 

IV.  But  shall  we  be  able  to  read  these  glyphs  and  inscriptions, 
without  positively  knowing  in  what  language  they  were  written  ? 
The  attempt  will  be  arduous,  but  it  is  not  impossible.  In  Egypt, 
the  Coptic  has  been  found  such  a  close  dialect  of  the  Egyptian,  that 
it  has  enabled  you  to  read  the  oldest  hieroglyphs.  We  find  among 
the  ancient  dialects  of  Chiapa  Yucatan  and  Guatimala,the  branches 
of  the  ancient  speech  of  Otolum.  Nay,  Otolum  was  perhaps  the 
ancient  TOL  or  TOLA,  seat  of  the  Toltecas,  (people  of  Tol,)  and 
their  empire  ;  but  this  subject  will  belong  to  my  third  letter.  I 
will  now  merely  give  a  few  attempts  to  read  some  of  the  groups. 
For  instance  : 


124 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


1 .  The  group  or  word  on  the  seat  of  the  sitting  man  of  plate  4 
of  monuments  of  Palanque,  I  read  UOBAC,  being  formed  by  a 
hand,  a  tongue,  a  circle,  an  ear,  and  a  crescent.  It  is  perhaps  his 
name.  And  and  underneath  the  seat  is  an  eye  with  a  small  circle 
inside,  meaning  EB. 

2.  In  plate  5}  is  an  eye  with  two  annexed  rings,  meaning  proba- 
bly BAB,  and  perhaps  the  Sun,  which  is  BAP  in  the  Lybian  alphabet. 

3.  In  plate  7,  the  glyph  of  the  corner  with  a  head,  a  fish,  and  a 
crescent,  means  probably  KIM. 

4.  The  first  glyph  of  page  15,  is  probably  BLAKE. 

5.  I  can  make  out  many  others  reading  ICBE,  BOCOGO,  POPO, 
EPL,  PKE,  &c. 

If  these  words  and  others  (although  some  may  be  names)  can 
be  found  in  African  languages,  or  in  those  of  Central  America,  we 
shall  obtain  perhaps  the  key  of  the  whole  language  of  Old  Otolum. 
And  next  reach,  step  by  step,  to  the  desirable  knowledge  of  reading 
those  glyphs,  which  may  cover  much  historical  knowledge  of  high 
import.  Meantime  I  have  opened  the  path,  if  my  theory  and  con- 
jectures are  correct,  as  I  have  strong  reasons  to  believe. 

Besides  this  monumental  alphabet,  the  same  nation  that  built 
Otolum  had  a  Demotic  alphabet  belonging  to  my  8th  series ;  which 
which  was  found  in  Guatimala  and  Yucatan,  at  the  Spanish  con- 
quest. A  specimen  of  it  has  been  given  by  Humboldt  in  his  Amer- 
ican Researches,  plate  45,  from  the  Dresden  Library,  and  has  been 
ascertained  to  be  Guatimalan  instead  of  Mexican,  being  totally  un- 
like the  Mexican  pictorial  manuscripts.  This  page  of  Demotic  has 
letters  and  numbers,  these  represented  by  strokes  meaning  5,  and 
dots  meaning  unities,  as  the  dots  never  exceed  4.  This  is  nearly 
similar  to  the  monumental  numbers. 

These  words  are  much  less  handsome  than  the  monumental 
glyphs  ;  they  are  also  uncouth  glyphs  in  rows  formed  by  irregular  or 
flexuous  heavy  strokes,  inclosing  within  small  strokes,  nearly  the 
same  letters  as  in  the  monuments.  It  might  not  be  impossible  to 
decypher  some  of  these  manuscripts  written  on  metl  paper :  since 
they  are  written  in  languages  yet  spoken,  and  the  writing  was  un- 
derstood in  Central  America,  as  late  as  200  years  ago.  If  this  is 
done,  it  will  be  the  best  clue  to  the  monumental  inscriptions. 

C.  S.  RAFINESQUE. 

Philadelphia^  Fcbuary,  1832, 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST- 


125 


This  letter  as  above,  strongly  corroborates  our  supposition,  that 
the  authors  of  the  embalmed  mummies  found  in  the  cave  of  Lex- 
ington, were  of  Egyptian  origin. 

See  Morse's  Geography,  p.  500,  and  the  Western  Gazeteer,  p. 
103,  states  that  several  hundred  mummies  were  discovered  near 
Lexington,  in  a  cave,  but  were  wholly  destroyed  by  the  first  settlers. 


A  FURTHER  ACCOUNT  OF  WESTERN  ANTIQUITIES,  WITH 
ANTEDILUVIAN  TRAITS. 

Cincinnati  is  situated  on  one  of  those  examples  of  antiquity, 
of  great  extent.  They  are  found  on  the  upper  level  of  that  town, 
but  none  on  the  lower  one.  They  are  so  conspicuous  as  to  catch 
the  first  range  of  the  eye. 

There  is  every  reason  to  suppose,  that,  at  the  remote  period  of 
the  building  of  these  antiquities,  the  lowest  level  formed  part  of 
the  bed  of  the  Ohio.  A  gentleman  who  was  living  near  the  town 
of  Cincinnati,  in  1826,  on  the  upper  level,  had  occasion  to  sink  a 
well  for  his  accommodation,  who  presevered  in  digging  to  the  depth 
of  80  feet  without  finding  water,  but  still  persisting  in  the  attempt, 
his  workmen  found  themselves  obstructed  by  a  substance,  which 
resisted  their  labor,  though  evidently  not  stone.  They  cleared  the 
surface  and  sides  from  the  earth  bedded  around  it,  when  there  ap- 
peared the  stump  of  a  tree,  three  feet  in  diameter,  and  two  feet 
high,  which  had  been  cut  down  with  an  axe.  The  blows  of  the 
axe  were  yet  visible. 

It  was  nearly  of  the  color  and  apparent  character  of  coal,  but 
had  not  the  friable  and  fusible  quality  of  that  mineral ;  ten  feet  be- 
low, the  water  sprang  up,  and  the  well  is  now  in  constant  supply 
and  high  repute. 

Reflections  on  this  discovery  are  these,  first ;  that  the  tree  was 
undoubtedly  antediluvian.  Second  ;  that  the  river  now  called  the 
Ohio,  did  not  exist  anterior  to  the  deluge,  inasmuch  as  the  re- 
mains of  the  tree  were  found  firmly  rooted,  in  its  original  position, 
several  feet  below  the  bed  of  that  river.    Third ;  that  America  was 


12G 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


peopled  before  the  flood,  as  appears  from  the  action  of  the  axe,  in 
cutting  down  the  tree.  Fourth  ;  that  the  antediluvian  Americans 
were  acquainted  with  the  use  and  proprieties  of  iron,  as  the  rust  of 
the  axe  was  on  the  top  of  the  stump  when  discovered. 

And  why  should  they  not  be  acquainted  with  both  its  properties 
and  utility,  seeing  it  was  an  antediluvian  discovery.  Tubal  Cain, 
one  of  the  sons  of  Cain,  the  son  cf  Adam,  we  find,  according  to 
Genesis  iv.  chap.  22d  verse,  was  a  blacksmith,  and  worked  in  iron 
and  brass,  more  than  a  thousand  years  before  the  flood. 

It  was  about  five  hundred  years  from  the  creation,  when  Tubal 
Cain  is  noticed  in  the  sacred  history,  to  have  been  a  worker  in  brass 
and  iron  ;  but,  says  Dr.  Clarke,  the  commentator,  "  although  this  is 
the  first  smith  on  record,  who  taught  how  to  make  warlike  instru- 
ments and  domestic  utensils  out  of  brass  and  iron,  yet  a  knowl- 
edge of  metal  must  have  existed  long  befoie,  for  Cam  was  a  tiller 
of  the  ground,  and  so  was  Adam,  which  they  could  not  have  been, 
without  spades,  hooks,  &c." 

The  Roman  plough  was  formed  of  wood,  being  in  shape,  like 
the  anchor  to  a  vessel ;  the  ploughman  held  to  one  fluke,  so  as  to 
guide  it,  while  the  other  entered  the  ground  pointed  with  iron,  and 
as  it  was  drawn  along  by  the  stem,  it  tore  the  earth  in  a  streak, 
mellowing  it  for  the  seed. 

Such,  it  is  likely,  was  the  form  of  the  primitive  plough,  from 
which,  in  the  progress  of  ages,  improvements  have  been  made,  till 
the  present  one,  as  now  formed,  and  is  the  glory  of  the  well  tilled 
field. 

According  to  this  opinion,  it  would  appear,  that  in  the  very  first 
period  of  time,  men  were  acquainted  with  the  metals,  and  as  they 
diverged  from  the  common  centre,  which  was  near  the  garden  of 
Eden,  they  carried  with  them  a  knowledge  of  this  all-important 
discovery. 

If  the  stump  is  indeed  antediluvian,  we  learn  one  important  fact, 
and  this  is  it ;  America,  by  whatever  name  it  was  called  before  the 
deluge,  was  then  a  body  of  earth  above  the  waters;  and  also,  was 
connected  with  Asia  ;  where,  it  is  allowed  on  all  hands,  man  was 
originated. 

If  it  were  not  connected  with  Asia,  it  might  be  inquirer1,  how 
then  cam-e  men  in  America,  before  the  flood,  the  traits  of  whose  in- 
dustry, and  agricultural  pursuits,  are  discovered  in  the  feilinQ  of 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


127 


this  tree,  as  well  as  a  great  number  of  other  instances,  of  which  we 
shall  speak  by  and  by  ? 

It  is  not  probable,  that  before  the  flood,  there  was  so  small  a 
quantity  of  dry  land  on  the  earth  as  at  the  present  time  ;  the  wa- 
ters of  the  globe  being  generally  hid  beneath  the  incumbent  soil, 
so  that  an  easy  communication  of  all  countries  with  each  other  ex- 
isted ;  which  must  have  greatly  facilitated  the  progress  of  man  in 
"peopling  and  subduing  it." 

We  know  very  well,  it  is  said,  "  the  gathering  together  of  the 
waters,  called  He  seas  but  it  does  not  follow,  that  they  were  not 
subterranean;  and  it  is  more  than  intimated,  that  such  was  the  fact, 
when  it  is  said,  "  all  the  fountains  of  the  great  deep  were  broken 
up,"  on  the  day  the  flood  commenced. 

But  by  what  means  were  they  broken  up,  this  is  left  to  conjec- 
ture, as  the  Scriptures  are  higher  in  their  aim,  than  the  mere  grati- 
fication of  curious  questions  of  this  sort ;  but  in  some  way  this  was 
done.  The  very  terms,  "  broken  up,"  signify  the  exertion  of 
power  and  violence,  of  sufficient  force  to  burst  at  once,  whole  con- 
tinents from  the  face  of  the  deep,  and  also,  to  throw  out,  at  one 
wide,  rush,  the  central  waters  of  the  globe. 

But  can  we  conceive  of  any  means  made  use  of  to  effect  this, 
otier  than  the  direct  pressure  of  God's  power,  sinking  the  earth  to 
the  depths  beneath,  so  that  the  water  might  rise  above,  taking  the 
place  of  the  land?    We  imagine  we  can. 

It  is  well  known,  the  velocity  of  the  earth,  in  its  onward  motion, 
round  the  sun,  is  about  twenty  miles  a  second,  nearly  the  speed  of 
lightning.  Let  Him,  therefore,  who  at  first  imposed  this  incon- 
ceivable velocity,  slop  the  earth  in  this  motion,  suddenly  ;  what 
would  the  effect  be  ?  All  the  fluids,  that  is,  the  waters,  whether 
above  ground  or  underneath  it,  would  rush  forward,  with  a  power 
equal  to  their  weight,  which  would  be  sufficient  to  burst  away 
mountains,  or  any  impediment  whatever ;  and  rushing  round  the 
globe,  from  the  extreme  western  point,  rolling  one  half  of  the 
mighty  flood  over  this  side  of  it,  and  the  other  half  over  the  anti- 
pode  on  the  other  side,  which  is  relatively  beneath  us,  till  the  two 
half  worlds  of  water  should  meet  at  the  extreme  east,  where  heap- 
ing up,  by  their  force,  above  a  common  level,  would,  gradually, 
roll  back  to  their  original  places,  as  the  earth  should  again  go  for- 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


128 


ward ;  this  is  our  opinion  of  the  way  how  "  all  the  fountains  of  the 
great  deep  were  broken  up." 

If  the  earth  were  to  be  arrested  in  its  course  now,  the  effect 
would  be  the  same.  Suppose  we  illustrate  the  position,  for  a  mo- 
ment. Place  a  vessel  of  water  on  a  plank,  for  instance,  open  on 
the  top,  like  a  common  bowl,  fastened  to  the  plank,  so  that  it  should 
not  be  liable  to  overcast.  Cause  this  plank  to  move,  at  first  slowly, 
but  increase  its  steady,  onward  velocity,  as  much  as  the  fluid  will 
bear,  without  causing  a  re-action  ;  when,  therefore,  its  utmost 
speed  is  obtained,  stop  it  suddenly ;  the  effect  would  be,  the  water 
in  the  vessel  would  instantly  fly  over,  leaving  the  bowl  behind. 
Such,  therefore,  we  imagine  would  be  the  effect,  if  the  earth  were 
now  caused  to  stand  suddenly  still,  in  its  orbit ;  except  this  differ- 
ence, the  law  of  gravitation  would  prevent  the  waters  of  the  earth 
from  leaving  the  surface,  but  would  cause  a  rapid  current  in  the 
direction  the  earth  is  pursuing. 

That  the  waters  of  the  deluge  came  from  the  west,  is  evident 
from  the  manner  in  which  the  various  strata  of  the  earth  are  situat- 
ed, over  the  whole  of  our  country ;  and  that  its  motion  was  very 
violent,  is  also  evident  from  the  appearance  of  native  or  primitive 
rock,  being  found  on  the  top  of  that  which  is  of  secondary  forma- 
tion, and  of  gravel  and  sand  in  hills  and  smaller  eminences,  lying 
on  beds  of  clay  and  soils  of  various  kinds  below  it. 

The  effects  of  the  deluge  can  be  traced  in  all  the  earth  in  this 
way,  and  particularly  about  Albany,  Saratoga,  and  about  the  lakes, 
and  to  the  east,  showing  the  waters  flowed  in  that  direction. 

For  a  beautiful  and  able  description  of  this  subject,  see  Thomas' 
Travels,  published  at  Auburn,  under  the  head,  "  The  Deluge." 

At  the  same  time,  the  waters  above  the  firmament,  in  the  clouds, 
were  permitted  to  burst  downward,  which,  in  its  fall,  subdivided 
into  drops,  as  is  natural ;  so  that  one  vast  perpetual  storm,  for  forty 
days  and  forty  nights  rushed  with  all  the  violence  of  a  tornado,  up- 
on the  globe,  quite  around  it,  by  which,  in  so  short  a  time,  the 
highest  hills  were  buried  fifteen  cubits  deep,  and  upward  ;  this  is 
what  we  suppose  is  meant  by  the  words  "  and  the  windows  of 
heaven  were  opened." 

But  it  may  be  inquired,  from  whence  did  the  la.nds  receive  wa- 
ter to  furnish  them  with,  so  long  a  rain  as  a  storm  of  forty  days  and 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


129 


nights  ;  and  from  whence  originated  vapor  enough  to  becloud  the 
whole  circumambient  atmosphere  of  the  earth  at  once.  Surely? 
some  cau^e  more  than  existed  before  the  flood,  or  since,  must  have 
transpired  at  that  time,  to  have  produced  this  great  accumulation 
of  clouds  and  rain. 

The  answer  is,  we  apprehend — that  the  central  waters  bursting 
suddenly  from  the  great  deep,  involving  the  whole  globe,  presented 
a  greater  surface  of  that  fluid  to  the  rays  of  the  sun,  so  that  by  its 
operation  on  the  face  of  the  waters,  a  dense  mist  or  vapor  was  at 
once  produced  quite  round  the  earth,  which,  in  its  ascent,  carried 
up  incessantly  that  quantity  of  water  which  furnished  the  atmos- 
phere for  so  long  and  so  dreadful  a  storm,  and  justify  the  expression, 
"  and  the  windows  of  heaven  were  opened." 

In  this  way  the  surface  of  the  earth  was  ruined ;  a  disproportion- 
ate quantity  of  water,  caused  to  appear  on  the  surface,  while  in  the 
same  ratio  the  land  is  sunk  to  the  depths  below. 

Sixteen  hundred  years  and  rising,  was  the  space  of  time  allowed 
from  the  creation  till  the  flood  ;  a  time  quite  sufficient  to  people 
the  whole  earth,  even  if  it  were  then  enjoying  a  surface  of  d.y 
land,  twice  as  much  as  it  does  at  the  present  time,  being  but  about 
one-fourth  ;  and  America,  as  appears  from  this  one  monument,  the 
stump  of  Cincinnati,  was  a  part  of  the  earth  which  was  peopled  by 
the  Antediluvians. 

The  celebrated  antiquarian,  Samuel  L.  Mitchell,  late  of  New- 
York,  with  other  gentlemen,  eminent  for  their  knowledge  of  natu- 
ral history,  are  even  of  the  opinion^  that  America  was  the  country 
where  Adam  was  created.  In  a  letter  to  Governor  De  Witt  Clin- 
ton, in  which  this  philosopher  argued  the  common  origin  of  the 
people  of  America,  and  those  of  Asia,  he  says :  "  I  avoid  the  op- 
portunity which  this  grand  conclusion  affords  me,  of  stating,  that 
America  was  the  cradel  of  the  human  race ;  of  tracing  its  colonies 
toestward  over  the  Pacific  Ocean,  and  beyond  the  sea  of  Kamsrhat- 
ka,  to  new  settlements ;  of  following  the  emigrants  by  land  and  wa- 
ter, until  they  reached  Europe  and  Africa.  I  had  no  inclination  to 
oppose  the  current  opinions  relative  to  the  place  of  man's  creation 
and  dispersion.  I  thought  it  was  scarcely  worth  the  while  to  in- 
form an  European,  that  in  coming  to  America,  he  had  left  the  new 
world  behind  him,  for  the  purpose  of  visiting  the  old  " — American 
Antq  Society,  p.  331 

IT 


130 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


9 


But  this  opinion  cannot  obtain,  if  we  place  the  least  reliance  <m 
the  statement  of  Moses,  in  the  Book  of  Genesis;  who  gives  a  cir- 
cumstantial account  of  the  place  of  man's  creation,  by  stating  the 
names  of  the  very  rivers,  arising  out  of  the  regions  of  country  cal- 
led Paradise  ;  such  as  Pison,  Havilah,  Gihon,  Hiddekel,  and  Eu- 
phrates ;  or  as  they  now  are  called,  Phasis,  Araxes,  Tigris,  aud  Eu- 
phrates; this  last  retains  its  original  name. 

No  such  rivers  are  known  in  America,  nor  the  countries  through 
which  they  flow.  Here  are  data  to  argue  from,  but  the  position, 
or  rather  the  suggestion  of  Professor  Mitchell,  has  absolutely  no 
data  whatever.  If  but  a  tradition,  favoring  that  opinion,  were  found 
even  among  the  Indians,  it  would  afford  some  foundation ;  but  a* 
their  tradition  universally  alludes  to  some  part  of  the  earth,  far 
away,  from  whence  they  came,  it  would  seem  exceedingly  extra- 
vagant to  argue  a  contrary  belief. 

This  one  stump  of  Cincinnati,  we  consider  surpasses  in  conse- 
quence, the  magnificence  of  all  the  temples  of  antiquity,  whose 
forsaken  turrets,  dilapidated  walls,  tottering  and  fallen  pillars,  which 
speak  in  language  loud  and  mournful,  the  story  of  their  ruin  ;  be- 
cause it  is  a  remnant  of  matter,  in  form  and  fashion,  such  as  it  wasr 
before  the  earth  "  perished  by  water,"  bearing  on  its  top  the  in- 
dubitable marks  of  the  exertion  of  man,  of  so  remote  a  time. 

It  is  not  impossible  but  America  may  have  been  the  country 
where  Noah  built  his  ark,  as  directed  by  the  Most  High. 

We  know  very  well,  when  the  mind  refers  to  the  subject  of 
Noah's  Ark,  our  thoughts  are  immediately  associated  with  Mount 
Ararat,  because  it  rested  there,  on  the  subsiding  of  the  flood.  But 
this  circumstance  precludes  a  possibility  of  its  having  been  built 
there,  if  we  allow  the  waters  of  the  deluge  to  have  had  any  cur- 
rent at  all.  It  is  said  in  Genesis,  that  the  Ark  floated,  or  was 
borne  upon  the  waters  above  the  earth,  and  also,  that  the  ark 
"went  upon  the  face  of  the  waters."  From  which  fact  we  imagine 
there  must  have  been  a  current,  or  it  could  not  have  went  upon  the 
waters.  Consequently,  it  went  from  the  place  where  it  was  built, 
being  obedient  to  the  current  of  the  waters. 

Now,  if  it  had  been  built  any  where  in  the  country  called  Arme- 
nia, where  the  mountain  Ararat  is  situated  ;  and  as  it  is  found  the 
waters  had  a  general  eastern  direction,  the  Ark  in  going  on  the  face 
of  the  waters,  would  have,  during  the  time  the  waters  of  the  de- 


AND  DISCOVERIES   IN  THE  WEST. 


131 


luge  prevailed,  which  was  an  hundred  and  fifty  days,  or  five  months, 
(that  is,  prevailed  after  the  commencement  of  the  deluge,  till  its 
greatest  depth  was  effected ;)  gone  in  an  eastern  direction  as  far 
perhaps  as  the  region  of  the  islands  of  Japan,  beyond  China,  east, 
-a  distance  of  about  six  thousand  miles  from  Ararat,  which  would 
be  at  the  rate  of  about  forty  miles  a  day,  or  if  it  had  floated  faster, 
would  have  carried  it  into  the  Pacific  Ocean. 

But  if  we  may  imagine  it  was  erected  in  North  America,  or  some 
where  in  the  latitude  of  the  State  of  New- York,  or  even  farther 
west,  the  current  of  the  deluge  would  have  borne  it  easterly.  And 
suppose  it  may  have  been  carried  at  the  rate  of  forty  or  fifty  miles 
a  day,  would,  during  the  time  the  waters  prevailed,  in  which  time, 
we  may  suppose,  a  current  existed,  have  progressed  as  far  as  to 
Ararat ;  a  distance  of  nearly  six  thousand  miles  from  America, 
where  it  did  actually  rest. 

More  than  sixteen  hundred  years  had  elapsed,  when  the  ark  was 
finished,  and  it  may  fairly  be  inferred,  that  as  Noah  was  born  about 
one  thousand  years  after  the  creation  of  the  world,  that  mankind 
had  from  necessity,  arising  from  the  pressure  of  population,  gone 
very  far  away  from  the  regions  round  about  Eden ;  and  the  coun- 
try where  Noah  was  born  may  as  well  be  supposed  to  have  been 
America,  as  any  other  part  of  the  earth  ;  seeing  there  are  indubita- 
ble sigus  of  antediluvian  population  in  many  parts  of  it.  Unite 
this  circumstance  with  that  of  the  ascertained  current  of  the  deluge 
from  America,  and  with  the  fact  of  the  ark's  having  rested  in  an 
easterly  direction  from  this  country,  we  come  to  a  conclusion,  that 
here,  perhaps  in  the  very  State  of  New- York,  the  miraculous  ves- 
sel was  erected,  and  bore  away,  treasured  in  its  enormous  capacity, 
the  progenitors  of  the  human  race  renewed.  So  that  if  America 
have  not  the  honor  of  being  the  country  where  Adam  was  created, 
as  is  believed  by  some,  it  has  nevertheless  the  honor,  as  we  sup- 
pose, of  being  the  country  where  the  ark  was  erected. 

In  Morse's  Universal  Geography,  first  volume,  page  142,  the  dis- 
covery of  this  stump  is  corroborated  :  "  In  digging  a  well  in  Cin- 
cinnati, the  stump  of  a  tree  was  found  in  a  sound  state,  ninety  feet 
below  the  surface  j"  and  in  digging  another  well,  at  the  same  place, 
another  stump  was  found,  at  ninety- four  feet  below  the  surface 
which  had  evident  marks  of  the  axe  ;  and  on  its  top  there  appeared 
as  if  some  iron  tool  had  been  consumed  by  rust." 


132 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


The  axe  had,  no  doubt,  been  struck  into  the  top  of  the  stump, 
when  the  horrors  of  the  deluge  first  appeared,  in  the  bursting  forth 
of  the  waters  from  above,  that  is  from  the  windows  of  heaven  ; — 
when  sounds  terrific,  from  the  breaking  forth  of  the  waters  of  the 
great  deep,  and  from  the  shock  ail  sensitive  beings  must  have  felt 
when  the  earth  was  caused  to  stand  still  in  its  onward  course  round 
the  sun,  for  the  space  perhaps  of  a  day.  Remember  Joshua,  at 
whose  command  and  prayer,  God  stopped  the  earth  for  the  space  of 
a  whole  day,  but  not  in  its  onward  course  around  the  sun,  but  its 
diurnal  motion  only,  which  could  not  have  any  effect  on  the  fluids 
of  the  earth,  as  the  sudden  interruption  of  the  other  motion  wrould 
have  had. 

Who  would  not  flee,  when  phenomena  so  terrible,  without 
presage  or  warning,  were  changing  the  face  of  things,  and  the 
feelings  of  the  atmosphere  ;  the  earth  quivering  like  an  aspen  leaf; 
forests  leaning  to  the  east,  and  snapping  asunder  in  one  awful  crash 
over  all  the  wide  wilderness:  rocks  with  mountains  tumbling 
from  their  summits;  the  stoutest  heart  would  quail  at  such  an  hour 
as  this ;  an  axey  with  all  things  else,  would  be  left  by  the  owners, 
and  a  general  flight,  if  they  could  stand  at  all  on  their  feet,  would 
take  place,  they  knew  not  whither,  for  safety. 

In  one  of  the  communications  of  the  admired  Dr.  Samuel  L. 
Mifchell,  Professor  of  Natural  History,  to  the  American  Antiqua- 
rian Society,  he  mentions  a  certain  class  of  antiquties  as  distin- 
guished entirely  from  those  which  are  found  in  and  about  the 
mounds  of  the  west,  as  follows :  In  the  section  of  country  about 
Fredonia,  on  the  south  side  of  Lake  Erie,  are  discovered  objects 
deservedly  worthy  of  particular  and  inquisitive  research.  This 
kind  of  antiquities,  present  themselves  on  digging  from  thirty  to 
fifty  feet  below  the  present  surface  of  the  ground.  "  They  occur 
in  the  form  of  fire  brands,  split  wood,  ashes,  coals,  and  occasionally 
tools  and  utensils,  buried  to  those  depths."  This,  it  will  be  per- 
ceived, is  much  below  the  bed  of  Lake  Erie,  of  consequence  must 
have  been  antediluvian,  and  agrees  with  the  discovery  of  the  stumps 
at  Cincinnati.  "  We  are  informed,  that  in  Rhode  Island,  New 
Jersey,  Maryland,  North  Carolina,  and  in  Ohio,  such  discoveries 
have  been  made."  He  says,  u  I  wish  the  members  of  the  society 
would  exert  themselves  with  all  possible  diligence  to  ascertain  and 
colled  the  facts  of  this  description.    They  will  be  exceedingly  cu- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


133 


rious,  both  for  the  geologist  and  historian.  After  such  tacts  shall 
have  been  collected  and  methodised,  we  may  perhaps  draw  some 
satisfactory  conclusions  ;  light  may  possibly  be  shed  upon  the  re- 
mote Pelasgians,  and  upon  the  traditionary  Atlantidies"  the  in- 
habitants of  the  Island,  we  have  before  spoken  of,  Atalantes. 

Dnt  we  cannot  allow  the  discoveries  made  at  this  vast  depth,  to 
belong  to  any  age,  or  to  any  of  the  works  of  man  this  side  the  de- 
luge, as  that  time  enough  has  not  elapsed  since  that  catastrophe,  to 
allow  the  decomposition  of  vegetables,  nor  of  convulsions,  to  have 
buried  these  articles  so  deep  beneath  the  surface  extending  over  so 
great  a  tract  of  country.  The  draining  of  lakes,  however  sudden, 
could  never  have  had  so  wide  and  universal  an  effect. 

It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  we  are  compelled  to  refer  them  to 
the  works  of  man  beyond  the  flood,  which,  by  the  overflowing  of 
the  waters,  and  the  consequent  ruin  of  the  original  surface,  these 
works,  with  their  makers,  have  been  thus  buried  in  a  tomb  more 
dreadful  to  the  imagination  than  the  ordinary  recepticles  of  the 
dead. 

In  evidence,  that  the  ocean,  at  some  period  in  ages  past,  over- 
whelmed the  American  continent,  we  notice,  from  the  "  British 
Spy,"  page  112,  an  account  of  the  discovery  of  the  skeleton  of  a 
whale,  in  Virginia : 

a  Near  Williamsburgh  has  recently  been  discovered,  by  a  farm- 
er, while  digging  a  ditch  through  a  plat  of  ground,  about  five  feet 
below  the  surface,  a  considerable  portion  of  the  skeleton  of  a  whale. 
Several  fragments  of  the  ribs,  and  other  parts,  were  found,  with 
the  whole  of  the  vertebrae,  or  backbone,  regularly  arranged,  and 
very  little  impaired  as  to  figure.  The  spot  where  it  was  found  is 
about  two  miles  from  James  river,  and  about  sixty  from  the  sea. 
In  the  same  region,  at  depths  of  from  sixty  to  ninety  and  an  hun- 
dred feet,  have  been  found  the  teeth  of  sharks."  In  every  region 
of  the  earth,  as  well  as  America,  and  on  the  highest  mountains, 
are  found  the  bones  and  shells  of  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  the  sea. 
From  the  universality  of  those  appearances,  we  conclude  they  were 
deposited  and  cast  thither  by  the  billows  of  the  deluge. 

From  the  discoveries  of  articles  of  the  utensil  character,  the  bones 
of  whales,  the  teeth  of  sharks,  and  the  stumps  of  Cincinnati,  at 
various  depths,  as  stated  above ;  we  are  led  to  the  conclusion,  that 
the  original  surface,  of  what  is  now  called  America,  was  perhaps 


134  AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 

not  much  disturbed ;  but  was  rather  suddenly  overwhelmed  from 
the  west,  by  the  bursting  forth  of  the  subterranean  Pacific,  which, 
till  then,  had  been  covered  with  laud,  mountains  and  vales,  thickly 
peopled. 

The  vast  depths  of  strata  of  loam,  sand,  clay,  gravel,  and  stone, 
which  lie  over  each  other,  evincing,  from  the  unnatural  manner  of 
their  positions,  that  they  were  thrown  furiously,  by  the  agent,  wa- 
ter, over  the  whole  continent,  furnished  from  the  countries  of  the 
west. 

If  such  may  have  been  the  fact,  how  dreary,  sublime,  and  hor- 
rible, when  we  reflect  upon  the  immensity  of  the  antediluvian 
population,  west  of  America,  at  once  thrown,  with  all  their  works, 
their  wealth,  and  power,  rapidly  along  the  dreadful  current,  run- 
ning east,  broad  as  half  the  earth,  crushed  and  mingled  with  the 
ruined  world  of  their  own  country.  Here  it  may  be  supposed  at 
different  depths,  their  broken  bodies  are  buried,  together  with  the 
antediluvians  of  America;  while  above  them,  the  towns,  cities, 
and  living  world  of  the  present  times,  are  in  full  career.  As  we 
pass  along,  over  the  surface  of  the  earth,  whether  for  re-creation 
and  to  breathe  the  evening  or  the  morning  air;  enjoying  the 
pleasant  promenade,  or  roll  omvard  in  the  furious  chariot ;  to  re- 
flect that  this  soil  is  the  same  once  forming  a  part  of  the  vast  cover- 
ing of  the  Western  Ocean ;  and  that  far  beneath  us,  the  bodies  of 
our  elder  brethern  are  sleeping,  is  sad  and  mournful. 

That  such  may'indeed,  have  been  the  fact,  is  favored  from  the 
discovery  of  the  whale's  skeleton,  found  on  James  River,  which 
could  never  have  been  deposited  there  by  other  means  than  the 
flood ;  forced  onward,  till  killed  by  the  violence  and  agitation  of 
the  wood,  stone,  and  earth  encumbered  waters,  and  sunk  finally 
down,  where  it  was  recently  discovered. 

The  pottery  of  the  ancient  nationsa  mentioned  by  Schoolcraft, 
found  at  the  vast  depth  of  eighty  feet,  and  even  at  greater  depths, 
at  the  great  Saline  in  Illinois,  is  evidence  of  an  antediluvian  popu- 
lation in  America. 

At  Cincinnati  there  is  a  harrow  or  mound  of  human  bones,  situ- 
ated exactly  on  the  edge  of  the  bank,  that  overlooks  the  lower  town, 
tin;  principal  street  lending  from  the  water  is  cut  through  it,  and 
exposes  its  strata  and  remains  to  every  person  passing  by.  Seven 
tiers  of  skeletons  lay  plainly  in  sight,  where  the  barrow  had  cared 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


135 


away,  from  its  being  undermined.  Among  the  earth  thus  fallen 
down,  were  found  several  stone  hatchets,  pieces  of  pottery,  and 
fiute^  made  of  the  great  bone  of  the  human  leg.  This  is  a  very 
curious  instrument,  with  beautifully  carved  figrfreS,  representing 
birds,  squirrels,  and  small  animals,  with  perforated  holes,  in  the  old 
German  manner,  which,  when  breathed  into,  emitted  tones  of  great 
melody. 

Among  the  modern  Indians,  no  such  instrument  has  ever  been 
found.  At  the  time  when  the  street  was  opened  through  this  bar- 
row of  the  dead,  a  great  variety  of  interesting  and  valuable  relics 
were  brought  to  light ;  among  which  were  human  double  teeth, 
which,  on  a  moderate  calculation,  bespoke  men  as  large  again  as 
the  present  race.  Also  some  brass  rings,  which  were  considered 
exceedingly  curious ;  an  instance  of  which  is  similar  to  the  one 
before  mentioned  in  this  work.  Iron  rings,  as  we  have  before 
mentioned,  were  anciently  used  among  the  Britons  before  the  Chris- 
tian era,  as  money ;  and  possibly  in  this  case,  the  brass  rings 
found  iu  this  barrow,  may  be  a  specimen  of  the  ancient  money  of 
America. 


DISCOVERY  OF  AN  IVORY  IMAGE  IN  A  BONE  MOUND  AT 

CINCINNATI. 

In  the  same  barrow  of  which  I  have  been  speaking,  was  disco- 
vered an  ivory  image,  which  we  consider  more  interesting,  and 
surpasses  any  discovery  yet  mentioned.  *  It  is  said  to  be  now  in  the 
cabinet  of  rare  collections,  once  in  the  possession  of  the  illustrious 
Jefferson. 

The  account  of  the  image  is  as  follows :  It  is  seven  inches  high  ; 
the  figure  full  length ;  the  costume,  a  robe,  in  numberless  folds, 
well  expressed,  and  the  hair  displayed  in  many  ringlets;  the  child 
naked,  near  the  left  breast,  and  the  mother's  eye  bent  on  it  with  a 
strong  expression  of  affection  and  endearment. 

There  are  those  who  think  it  a  representation  of  the  mother  of 
our  Lord's  humanity  ,  with  the  child  Jesus,  in  her  arms.    The  Ro- 


136 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


man  Catholics  have  availed  themselves  of  this  image,  and  made  it 
a  testimony  of  the  antiquity  of  their  religion,  and  of  the  extensive 
range  of  their  worship,  by  attempting  to  prove  thereby,  that  the  idol 
was  nothing  lefs  flian  a  Madona  and  Child — the  Virgin  Mary,  and 
the  child  Jesus ;  and  that  the  Roman  Catholic  religion  was  the  first 
which  arose  in  the  earliest  Christian  age  in  the  east,  and  the  last 
which  set  in  the  west,  where  it  became  extinct,  by  means  of  a 
second  deluge. 

The  idea,  however,  of  a  second  deluge,  is  inadmissible,  as  it 
would  have  destroyed  every  vestige  of  the  mounds,  pyramids,  tu- 
muli, and  fortifications,  of  which  this  work  treats ;  many  of  which 
are  supposed  older  than  the  Christian  era ;  and  the  mound  in  which 
the  image  itself  was  discovered  would  also  have  been  destroyed. 

There  is,  however,  another  opinion,  which  is  not  impossible  may 
have  furnished  the  imagination  with  materials  for  the  origin  of  such 
a  representation.  The  image  may  be  of  Greek  origin,  and  taken 
from  Isaiah  the  Prophet,  7th  chap.  14th  verse,  where  it  is  said, — 
"  Behold  a  virgin  shall  conceive  and  bear  a  son."  This  prophecy 
of  Isaiah  was  known  to  the  Greeks,  for  the  Old  Testament  was 
translated  into  their  language  in  the  time  of  Ptolemy  Philadelphus, 
king  of  Egypt,  nearly  three  hundred  years  before  the  Christian 
era.  See  Adam  Clarke's  General  Preface  to  the  Old  Testament, 
page  27,  and  is  known  as  the  Septuagint  version. 

The  Greek  statuaries  may,  in  this  way,  have  easily  found  the 
beautiful  and  captivating  idea  of  a  virgin  mother,  by  reading  Isaiah 
in  the  Greek ;  a  work  fraught  with  all  the  grandeur  of  images  in- 
spired by  God  himself,  and  could  not  fail  to  challenge  the  reading 
of  every  learned  man  of  the  empire,  and  such  were  the  statuaries, 
among  the  Greeks,  the  fame  of  whose  exquisite  skill  in  this  respect, 
will  go  down  on  the  historic  page  to  latest  time. 

From  the  Greeks  such  an  image,  celebrating  the  idea  of  a  vir- 
gin mother  and  her  child,  may  have  easily  come  into  the  possession 
of  the  Romans,  as  the  Greeks  were,  soon  after  the  translation  of 
the  Hebrew  Scriptures  into  the  Greek,  subdued  by  the  Romans  ; 
who,  in  their  conquests,  here  and  there,  over  the  earth,  including 
Europe,  England,  Scotland,  and  the  northern  islands,  carrying  that 
kind  of  image  with  them  as  a  god,  or  talisman,  and  from  thence  to 
America 


DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


187 


It  is,  however,  not  impossible,  but  it  may  be  indeed  of  true  Ro- 
snan  Catholic  origin ;  as  at  the  time  the  Romans  evacuated  Europe, 

with  its  isles,  Ireland,  England,  &c,  about  the  year  450,  this  church, 
had  risen  to  great  importance  in  the  Roman  empire,  which  aided 
her  to  establish  her  altars  in  every  country  they  had  conquered. 
Consequently,  long  before  the  Scandinavians  colonized  Iceland, 
Greenland,  and  Labrador,  on  the  American  continent,  the  Christian 
religion  was  planted  in  the  north  of  Europe ;  first  in  France,  in  the 
year  496,  and  then  soon  after  in  England ;  and  so  on  farther  north 
among  the  ancient  Scandinavians,  Norwegians,  &c,  and  by  these 
to  Iceland  and  Greenland ;  who  may  have  also  brought  this  trait  of 
that  church  to  America. 

The  fort  at  Cincinnati  is  a  circle,  embracing  about  three  acres, 
with  a  wall  seven  feet  high,  and  twenty  feet  broad.  At  the  back 
part  of  the  upper  level,  at  a  distance  from  the  circular  fort,  are  two 
mounds  of  about  twenty  feet  high.  One  of  these,  by  cutting  a 
trench  from  east  to  west,  four  feet  wide,  and  at  the  depth  of  ten 
feet,  came  to  some  heavy  stones,  under  which  was  a  body  of  com- 
position resembling  plaster  of  Paris.  This  broke  with  great  diffi- 
culty, when  there  were  exposed  a  few  fragments  of  an  adult  human 
skeleton,  placed  on  a  bed  of  a  similar  nature  with  the  covering. 

It  was  determined  to  ascertain  whether  the  monument  was 
erected  in  memory  of  one  person  or  more,  the  lower  bed  of  hard 
substance  was  also  broken  through,  and  underneath  a  stratum  of 
stones,  gravel  and  earth,  found  the  fragments  of  another  skeleton, 
consisting  of  one  tibia,  or  piece  of  the  shin,  two  pieces  of  the  thigh 
bone,  and  the  right  upper,  with  the  left  under  jaw. 

This  was  the  skeleton  of  a  child,  from  which  was  derived  the 
important  fact,  that  this  mound  was  not  erected  for  one  individual 
only,  but  also  for  the  infant  chief  or  kiug ;  and  that  the  nation  who 
erected  this  mound,  in  which  the  child  was  buried,  was  governed 
by  a  line  of  hereditary  chiefs  or  kings,  as  is  evident  from  the  nature 
and  distinction  of  the  interment  of  an  infant ;  who  certainly  could 
not  have  been  an  elected  chief;  the  suffrages  of  a  nation  could  ne- 
ver be  supposed  to  elevate  an  in/ant  as  its  king  ;  but  if  it  succeed- 
ed by  right  of  lineal  descent,  it  might  have  been  their  king. 

The  next  relic  of  antiquity,  discovered  at  Cincinnati,  is  a  sphe- 
rical stone,  found  on  the  fall  of  a  large  portion  of  the  bank  of  the 
fiver.    It  is  a  green  stone,  twelve  inches  in  diameter,  divided  into 

18 


138 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


twelve  sides,  and  each  side  into  twelve  equal  parts,  and  each  part 
distinguished  by  hieroglyphical  engravings. 

This  beautiful  stone,  it  is  said,  is  lodged  in  the  cabinet  of  arts  at 
Philadelphia.  It  is  supposed  the  stone  was  formed  for  astronomi- 
cal calculations,  conveying  a  knowledge  of  the  movements  of  the 
heavenly  bodies. 

Farther  on  in  this  work,  is  an  account  of  a  still  more  wronderful 
stone,  covered  with  the  engravings  of  the  ancient  nations,  where  a 
fac  simile  of  the  stone  is  preserved. 


A  CAVERN  OF  THE  WEST,  IN  WHICH  ARE  FOUND  MANY 
INTERESTING  HIEROGLYPHICS,  SUPPOSED  TO  HAVE  BEEN 
DONE  BY  THE  ANCIENT  INHABITANTS. 

On  the  Ohio,  twenty  miles  below  the  mouth  of  the  Wabash,  is 
a  cavern,  in  which  are  found  many  hieroglyphics,  and  representa- 
tions of  such  delineations  as  would  induce  the  belief,  that  their  au- 
thors were,  indeed,  comparatively  refined  and  civilzed. 

It  is  a  cave  in  a  rock,  or  ledge  of  the  mountain,  which  presents 
itself  to  view,  a  little  above  the  water  of  the  river  when  in  flood, 
and  is  situated  close  to  the  bank.  In  the  early  settlement  of  Ohio, 
this  cave  became  possessed  by  a  party  of  Kentuckians,  called  "  Wil- 
son's Gang."  Wilson,  in  the  first  place,  brought  his  family  to  this 
cave,  and  fitted  it  up,  as  a  spacious  dwelling,  erected  a  sign-post 
on  the  water  side,  on  which  w7ere  these  words,  "  Wilson's  Liquor 
Vault,  and  House  of  Entertainment." 

The  novelty  of  such  a  tavern,  induced  almost  all  the  boats  de- 
scending the  river  to  call  for  refreshments  and  amusement.  At- 
tracted by  these  circumstances,  several  idle  characters  took  up  their 
abode  at  the  cave,  after  which  it  continually  resounded  with  the 
shouts  of  the  licentious,  the  clamor  of  the  riotous,  and  the  blas- 
phemy of  gamblers. 

Out  of  such  customers,  Wilson  found  no  difficulty  in  forming  a 
band  of  robbers,  with  whom  he  formed  the  plau  of  murdering  the 
crews  of  every  boat  that  stopped  at  his  tavern,  and  of  sending 
the  boats  manned  by  some  of  his  party,  to  New-Orleans,  and  there 
sell  their  loading  for  cash,  which  was  to  be  conveyed  to  the  cave 


AND  DISCOVERIES*  IN  THE  WEST. 


139 


by  land,  through  the  states  of  Tennessee  and  Kentucky ;  the  party 
returning  with  it  being  instructed  to  murder  and  rob,  on  all  good 
occasions,  on  the  road. 

After  a  lapse  of  time,  the  merchants  of  the  upper  country  began 
to  be  alarmed,  on  finding  their  property  make  no  returns,  and  their 
people  never  coming  back.  Several  families  and  respectable  men, 
who  had  gone  down  the  river  were  never  heard  of ;  and  the  losses 
became  so  frequent,  that  it  raised,  at  length,  a  cry  of  individual 
distress  and  general  dismay.  This  naturally  led  to  inquiry,  and 
large  rewards  wTere  offered  for  the  discovery  of  the  perpetrators  of 
such  unparalelled  crimes. 

It  soon  came  out,  that  Wilson,  with  an  organized  party  of  forty- 
five  men,  was  the  cause  of  such  waste  of  blood  and  treasure  ;  that 
he  had  a  station  at  Hurricane  Island,  to  arrest  every  boat  that  pass- 
ed by  the  mouth  of  the  cavern,  and  that  he  had  agents  at  Natchez 
and  New-Orleans,  of  presumed  respectability,  who  converted  his 
assignments  into  cash,  though  they  knew  the  goods  to  be  stolen,  or 
obtained  by  the  commission  of  murder. 

The  publicity  of  Wilson's  transactions  soon  broke  up  his  party  ; 
some  dispersed,  others  were  taken  prisoners,  and  he  himself  was 
killed  by  one  of  his  associates,  who  was  tempted  by  the  reward 
offered  for  the  head  of  the  captain  of  the  gang. 

This  cavern  measures  about  twelve  rods  in  length,  and  five  in 
width ;  its  entrance  presents  a  width  of  80  feet  at  its  base,  and  25 
feet  high.  The  interior  walls  are  smooth  rock.  The  floor  is  very 
remarkable,  being  level  through  the  whole  length  of  its  centre,  the 
sides  rising  in  stony  grades,  in  the  manner  of  seats  in  the  pit  of  a 
theatre. 

On  a  diligent  scrutiny  of  the  walls,  it  is  plainly  discerned,  that 
the  ancient  inhabitants  at  a  very  remote  period,  had  made  use  of 
the  cave  as  a  house  of  deliberation  and  council.  The  walls  bear 
many  hieroglyphics,  well  executed ;  and  some  of  them  represent 
animals,  which  have  no  resemblance  to  any  now  known  to  natural 
history. 

This  cavern  is  a  great  natural  curiosity,  as  it  is  connected  with 
another  still  more  gloomy,  which  is  situated  exactly  above,  united 
by  an  aperture  of  about  fourteen  feet ;  which,  to  ascend,  is  like  pass- 
ing up  a  chimney,  while  the  mountain  is  yet  far  above.  Not  long 
after  the  dispersion  and  arrest  of  the  robbers,  who  had  infested  it, 


140 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


in  the  upper  vault  were  found,  the  skeletons  of  about  sixty  persons, 
who  had  been  murdered  by  the  gang  of  Wilson,  as  was  supposed. 
But  the  tokens  of  antiquity  are  still  more  curious  and  important, 
than  a  description  of  the  mere  cave,  which  are  found  engraved  on 
its  sides,  within,  an  account  of  which  we  proceed  to  give. 

1st.  The  sun  in  different  stages  of  rise  and  declension  ;  the  moon 
under  various  phases  ;  a  snake,  biting  its  tail,  and  represents  an 
orb,  or  circle  ;  a  viper;  a  vulture  ;  buzzards  tearing  out  the  heart 
of  a  prostrate  man  ;  a  panther,  held  by  the  ears,  by  a  child  ;  a 
crocodile  ;  several  trees  and  shrubs ;  a  fox ;  a  curious  kind  of  hydra 
serpent ;  two  doves ;  several  bears ;  two  scorpions  ;  an  eagle ;  an 
owl ;  some  quails ;  eight  representations  of  animals  which  are  now 
unknown.  Three  out  of  the  eight  are  like  the  elephant  in  all  re- 
spects, except  the  tusk  and  the  tail.  Two  more  resemble  the  tiger, 
one  a  wild  boar,  another  a  sloth  ;  and  the  last  appears  a  creature  of 
fancy,  being  a  quadrumane,  instead  of  a  quadruped,  the  claws 
being  alike  before  and  behind,  and  in  the  act  of  conveying  some- 
thing to  the  mouth,  which  lay  in  the  centre  of  the  monster.  Be- 
sides these  were  several  fine  representations  of  men  and  women, 
not  naked,  but  clothedj  not  as  the  Indians,  but  much  in  the  costume 
of  Greece  and  Rome. 

We  must  at  once  perceive,  that  these  objects,  with  an  excep- 
tion or  two,  were  empolyed  by  the  ancient  Greeks,  to  display  the 
nature  of  the  world,  the  omnipotence  of  God,  the  attributes  of 
man,  and  the  utility  of  rendering  his  knowledge  systematic  and 
immortal. 

All  human  sciences  flourished  among  the  Egyptians  long  before 
they  were  common  to  any  other  people  ;  the  Grecians  in  the  days 
of  Solon,  about  six  hundred^years  before  Christ ;  Pythagoras,  about 
the  same  time  ;  Herodotus,  between  four  and  five  hundred  years 
before  Christ,  and  Plato,  a  little  later  ;  acquired  in  Egypt,  all  that 
knowledge  of  nature,  which  rendered  them  so  eminent  and  remark- 
able. But  the  Egyptian  priests  did  not  divulge  their  doctrines, 
but  by  the  aid  of  signs,  and  figurative  emblems.  Their  manner 
was  to  discover  to  their  auditors,  the  mysteries  of  God  and  nature, 
in  hieroglyphics ;  which  were  certain  visible  shapes  and  forms  of 
creatures,  whose  inclinations  and  dispositions  led  to  the  knowledge 
of  the  truths  intended  for  instruction.  All  their  divinity,  philoso- 
phy, and  their  greatest  secretn,  were  comprehended  in  these  in- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST- 


141 


genious  characters,  for  fear  they  should  be  profaned  by  a  familiar 
acquaintance  with  the  commonalty. 

It  requires  but  a  rapid  and  cursory  view  of  the  hieroglyphics' 
above  enumerated,  to  convince  us  of  design  ;  and  also  that  the  cav- 
ern wherein  they  are  found  engraved,  was  originally  a  place  of 
worship,  or  of  council. 

The  sun,  the  most  glorious  of  all  visible  beings,  represented  their 
chief  god,  and  received  their  adoration,  for  causing  all  the  vegeta- 
tion of  the  earth  to  bring  forth  its  increase. 

2d.  The  moon  denoted  the  next  most  beautiful  object  in  the  cre- 
ation, and  was  worshipped  for  her  own  peculiar  usefulness  ;  and 
more  particularly,  for  supplying  the  place  of  the  departed  sun. 

3d.  The  snake,  in  the  form  of  an  orb,  or  circle,  biting  its  tail, 
pointed  out  the  continual  mutation  of  creatures,  and  the  change  of 
matter,  or  the  perpetual  motion  of  the  world  itself.  If  so,  this  con- 
struction of  that  hieroglyphic,  the  snake,  agrees  with  the  Greek 
figure,  of  the  same  kind;  which  implies  that  the  world  feeds  upon 
itself,  and  receives  from  itself  in  return,  a  continual  supply  for 
renovation  and  nourishment ;  the  same  symbol  designated  the  year 
which  revolves  round,  and  ends  where  it  first  began,  like  the  ser- 
pent with  its  tail  in  its  mouth ;  it  is  believed  the  ancient  Greeks 
gave  it  this  meaning. 

4th.  The  viper,  the  most  venomous  of  all  creatures,  was  the  em- 
blem of  the  devil,  or  wicked  angel ;  for,  as  its  poison  is  quick  and 
powerful,  so  is  the  destroying  spirit,  in  bringing  on  mankind  evils, 
which  can  only  be  opposed  by  the  grace  and  power  of  God. 

5th.  The  vulture,  tearing  out  the  bowels  of  a  prostrate  man, 
seems  a  moral  intending  to  reprove  fierceness  and  cruelty.  Dr. 
Rush  says,  this  hieroglyphic  represents  intemperance,  and  by  them 
was  so  understood. 

6th.  The  panther,  held  by  the  ears  by  a  child,  was  meant  to  im- 
press a  sense  of  the  dominion  of  innocence  and  virtue  over  oppres- 
sion and  vice  ;  or  perhaps  it  bore  the  Greek  meaning,  of  a  wretch 
encompassed  with  difficulties,  which  he  vainly  attempts  to  avoid. 

7th.  The  crocodile,  from  its  power  and  might,  was  another  sym- 
bol of  the  Great  Spirit ;  or  its  being  the  only  creature  without  a 
tongue,  might  have  given  it  a  title  to  the  same  honor3  all  heathen 
nations  concur  in  representing  their  gods,  beholding  and  doiDg  all 
things,  in  heaven  an&  earth,  in  profound  silence. 


142  AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 

8th.  The  several  trees  and  shrubs  were  undoubtedly  emblemat- 
ical of  particular  virtues,  as  represented  in  this  temple,  the  cave, 
from  a  veneration  for  their  aromatic  and  healing  properties.  Among 
the  ancients,  we  know,  that  the  palm  tree  and  the  laurel  were  em- 
blems of  victory  and  deserved  honor  ;  the  myrtle,  of  pleasure  ; 
the  cedar,  of  eternity;  the  oak,  of  strength;  the  olive  tree,  of 
fruitfulness ;  the  vine,  of  delight  and  joy ;  and  the  lily,  of  beauty. 
But  what  those  in  the  cave  imply,  it  is  not  possible  to  determine, 
as  nothing  of  their  character  can  be  deduced  from  the  manner  they 
were  sketched  on  the  surface  of  a  rough  wall,  where  the  design  is 
obscured  by  smoke,  or  nearly  obliterated  from  the  effect  of  damp, 
and  the  gradual  decay  of  time. 

9th.  The  fox,  from  every  authority,  was  put  to  denote  subtlety 
and  craftiness. 

10th.  The  hydra  serpent  probably  singnified  malice  and  envy, 
passions  which  the  hieroglyphic  taught  mankind  to  avoid. 

11th.  The  two  doves  were  hieroglyphics  of  constancy  in  love  ;  all 
nations  agree  in  this,  in  admiring  the  attachment  of  doves. 

12th.  The  bears,  it  is  apprehended,  signify  industry,  labor  and 
patience ;  for  the  Indians  believe  the  cubs  of  the  bear  come  into 
the  world  with  misshapen  parts,  and  that  their  eyes,  ears  and  other 
members  are  licked  into  form  by  the  mother,  who  passes  days  in 
that  anxious  and  unceasing  employ. 

13th.  The  scorpions  were  calculated  to  inspire  a  detestation  for 
malignity  and  vice ;  even  the  present  race  of  Indians  hold  these 
animals  in  great  disgust,  healing  wounds  inflicted  by  them  with  ? 
preparation  of  their  own  blood. 

14th.  The  eagle  represents,  and  is  held  to  this  day,  as  the  em- 
blem of  a  great,  noble,  and  liberal  miud  ;  fierce  in  war,  conquering 
the  enemy,  and  protecting  his  friends  ;  he  among  the  Indians,  who 
can  do  this,  is  compared  with  the  eagle. 

15th.  The  owl  must  have  been  set  up  to  deter  men  from  deceit 
and  hypocrisy.  He  cannot  endure  the  light  of  the  sun,  nor  can 
hypocrisy  bear  that  of  truth  and  sincerity-  He  may  have  been  the 
emblem  of  death  and  wretchedness,  as  among  the  Egyptians  ;  or 
of  victory  and  prosperity,  when  in  a  flying  altitude,  as  among  the 
Greeks. 

16th.  The  quails  afford  no  clue  to  their  hireoglyphic,  unless  they 
signify  the  corn  season,  and  point  out  the  time  for  the  usage  of  some 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST- 


143 


particular  rites  and  ceremonies  of  a  religious  nature.  With  the 
Greeks,  they  were  emblematical  of  impiety,  from  a  belief  that  they 
enrage  and  torment  themselves  when  the  crescent  of  the  new  moon 
appears. 

17th.  The  representations  of  the  larger  animals,  were  doubtless, 
indicative  of  the  power  and  attributes  of  the  Great  Spirit :  The 
mammoth  showing  his  greatness ;  the  tiger,  his  strength  ;  the  boar, 
his  wrath;  the  sloth,  his  patience  ;  and  the  nondescript,  his  hidden 
virtues,  which  are  past  findiug  out. 

18th.  The  human  figures  are  more  definite,  and  afford  inferences 
more  certain,  on  account  of  the  dress  they  are  represented  in  ; 
which  resembles  the  Roman ;  the  figures  would  be  taken  for  Eu- 
ropean antiquities,  were  it  not  for  the  character  and  manner  of  the 
heads. 

The  dress  of  these  figures,  consisting  of,  1st.  A  carbasus,  or  rich 
cloak;  2d.  a  sabucala,  or  waistcoat  or  shirt;  3d,  a  supparum,  or 
breeches  open  at  the  knees  ;  4th,  solea,  or  sandals,  tied  across  the 
toes  and  heels  ;  5th,  the  head  embraced  by  a  bandean  crowned 
with  feathers. 

19th.  The  dress  of  the  females,  carved  in  this  cave,  have  a  Gre- 
cian cast,  the  hair  encircled  by  the  crown,  and  was  confined  by  a 
bodkin  ;  the  remaining  part  of  this  costume  was  Roman.  1st :  The 
garments  called  stolla,  or  perhaps  the  toga  pura,  flounced  from  the 
shoulders  to  the  ground :  2d,  an  indusium  appeared  underneath  : 
3d,  the  indusium  was  confined  under  the  breast,  by  a  zone  or  ces- 
tus  :  and,  4th,  sandals,  in  the  manner  of  those  of  the  men. 

Could  all  this  have  been  produced  by  the  mere  caprice  of  abori- 
ginal artizans — we  think  not ;  they  have,  in  this  instance,  either 
recorded  their  own  manners,  in  the  one  particular  of  costume,  or 
they  have  represented  that  of  others,  who  had  come  among  them 
as  strangers,  and  wonderfully  induces  the  belief,  that  such  were 
Greeks,  Romans,  or  some  nation  of  the  earth,  whose  mode  of  dress 
was  similar.  . 

Viewed  in  the  most  critical  manner,  this  instance  of  American 
antiquity  cannot  fail  to  excite  in  the  mind  surprise,  when  we  con- 
trast this  with  the  commonly  received  opinion,  that  Columbus  was 
the  first  discoverer  of  this  country. 

The  hieroglyphic  carved  in  this  cave,  which  represents  a  child 
holding  or  leading  a  panther,  brings  forcibly  to  the  mind  a  similar 


144 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


idea  in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures,  in  the  book  of  Isaiah,  chapter  14, 
6th  verse,  where  it  is  said,  the  wolf,  the  leopard  and  the  young  lion 
shall  be  led  by  a  child  ;  and  relates  to  the  period  when  both  natu- 
ral and  moral  evil  shall  have  no  existence  in  the  earth3  as  is  be- 
lieved by  some. 

In  this  cave,  it  appears,  there  are  sketched  on  the  rock  the  figures 
of  several  animals,  now  extinct ;  among  which  are  three,  much 
resembling  the  elephant,  the  tail  and  tusks  excepted.  It  would  be 
passing  the  bounds  of  credulity  to  suppose  the  artists  who  delineat- 
ed those  figures,  would  represent  no  less  than  eight  animals,  differ- 
ing in  their  configuration,  one  from  the  other,  which  had  in  reality 
no  being,  and  such  as  these  had  never  been  seen. 

We  suppose  the  animals  resembling  the  elephant,  to  have  been 
the  mammoth,  and  that  those  ancients  were  well  acquainted  with 
the  creature,  or  they  could  never  have  engraved  it  on  the  rock. 
Job,  of  the  Scriptures,  who  was  a  native  of  the  land  of  Uz,  in  Idu- 
mea,  which  is  situated  southwest  of  the  lake  Asphaltidese,  or  sea 
of  Sodom,  was  also  well  acquainted  with  this  animal.  See  Job, 
chapter  40  :  "  Behold  now  Behemoth,  which  I  made  with  thee  ; 
he  eateth  grass  as  an  ox.  Lo,  now  his  strength  is  in  his  loins  ;  and 
his  force  in  the  navel  of  his  belly.  He  moveth  his  tail  like  a 
cedar ;  the  sinews  of  his  loins  are  wrapped  together.  His  bones 
are  as  strong  pieces  of  brass ;  his  bones  are  like  bars  of  iron.  He 
is  the  chief  of  the  ways  of  God." 

Whoever  has  examined  the  skeleton  of  one  of  those  animals, 
now  in  the  Philadelphia  museum,  will  acknowledge  the  bones  are 
equal  to  bars  of  brass  or  iron. 

Its  height  over  the  shoulders,  is  eleven  feet ;  from  the  point  of 
the  nose  to  the  end  of  the  tail,  following  the  exterior  or  curve,  is 
twenty-one  feet ;  a  single  tooth  weighs  four  pounds  ten  ounces. 
The  rib  bones  are  six  inches  in  width,  and  in  thickness  three  ;  the 
whole  skeleton  as  it  is,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  bones,  weighs 
one  thousand  pounds. 

But  how  tremendous  must  that  animal  have  been,  to  which  the 
tooth  weighing  twenty-five  pounds,  found  in  the  earth  at  Cincin- 
nati belonged,  more  than  five  times  the  dimensions  of  the  one  de- 
scribed above  ;  arguing,  from  proportion,  that  is,  if  a  tooth  belong- 
ed to  a  skeleton  weighing  one  thousand  pounds,  was  found  to  be 
four  pounds  ten  ounces;    a  tooth  weighing  twenty-five  pounds 


A'ND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


145 


would  give  a  skeleton  of  more  than  five  thousand  pounds.  And  if 
the  calculation  be  carried  forward  in  this  sort  of  proportion,  we 
shall  produce  an  animal  more  than  forty  feet  high,  and  nearly  an 
hundred  in  length,  with  a  proportionable  thickness. 

What  would  be  the  sensation,  if  we  were  to  meet  an  animal  of 
this  sort  in  his  ancient  haunts ;  it  would  almost  appear  a  moving 
mountain  ;  but  add  to  this,  the  enormous  eyes  of  the  animal,  set  at 
a  frightful  distance  from  each  other,  with  an  amplitude  of  forehead 
between,  clothed  like  the  side  of  a  hill,  with  a  forest  of  shaggy 
hair ;  a  mouth,  gaping  like  some  dreary  cavern,  set  round  with 
teeth  sufficient  to  crush  a  buffalo  at  a  mouthful ;  its  distended  nos- 
trils emitting  vapor  like  the  puffs  of  a  steam  boat,  with  a  sound, 
when  breathing,  that  might  be  heard  afar ;  the  legs  appearing  in 
size  of  dimensions  sufficient  to  bear  a  ship  on  his  shoulders ;  and 
his  feet  or  paws  spread  out  like  a  farmer's  corn  fan,  armed  with 
claws  like  flukes  to  an  anchor  of  a  vessel  of  war ;  the  tail,  as  it  is 
said  in  Job,  waving  to  and  fro,  like  a  cedar  bending  before  the  wind. 
But  add  to  all  this,  anger  ;  let  him  but  put  his  fierceness  on,  his 
eyes  flash  fire,  his  tail  elevated  aloft,  lashing  the  ground,  here  and 
there,  at  a  dreadful  distance  from  his  body ;  his  voice  like  the 
double  rolling-of  thunder,  jarring  the  wilderness;  at  which  every 
living  thing  would  tremble,  and  drop  to  the  earth.  Such  an  ani- 
mal would  indeed  be  the  t£  chief  of  the  ways  of  God,"  it  would  be 
perfectly  safe  in  the  midst  of  a  tornado  in  the  wilderness  ;  no  tree, 
or  a  forest  of  them,  could  possibly  harm  the  monster  by  falling 
against  it;  it  would  shake  them  off,  as  mere  troublesome  insects,  as 
smaller  animals  do  the  flies  in  a  summer's  day. 

The  one  in  Peale's  museum,  of  which  we  have  spoken,  a  page 
or  two  back,  is  one  out  of  nine  skeletons  of  this  monster,  which 
were  dug  out  of  the  earth  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  Shongum 
mountain,  in  Ulster  county,  on  the  southwestern  side  of  the  State 
of  New  York,  eight  of  which  were  sent  to  Europe.  See  Spafford's 
Gazeteer  of  New  York. 

Near  Rochester,  in  the  State  of  New- York,  in  1833,  two  teeth 
of  this  animal  were  discovered,  but  a  small  depth  beneath  the  sur- 
face. They  were  found  in  the  town  of  Perrinton,  near  Fullam's 
Basin,  some  time  ago,  by  Mr.  William  Mann,  who  was  engaged  in 
digging  up  a  stump.  They  were  deposited  about  four  feet  below 
the  surface  of  the  earth.    These  were  in  a  tolerably  good  state  of 

19 


# 

146 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


preservation ;  the  roots  begin  to  crumble  a  little,  but  the  enamel  of 
the  teeth  is  in  almost  a  perfect  state.  The  teeth  were  the  grind- 
ers, and  from  their  appearance,  were  located  in  the  back  part  of  the 
upper  jaw.  The  largest  one  weighs  three  pounds  and  ten  onces, 
measuring  six  inches  lengthwise  of  the  jaw,  and  ih.  ee  inches  across 
the  top,  the  root  is  about  six  inches  long  with  several  prongs.  The 
other  tooth  is  smaller.  If  we  are  to  suppose  this  animal  to  have 
the  same  number  of  teeth  that  other  animals  commonly  have,  and 
that  the  rest  of  the  teeth  were  of  the  same  proportions,  as  to  size, 
the  circle  of  the  jaw  from  one  end  to  the  other  must  have  been  six 
feet.  Again,  if  we  were  to  estimate  the  comparative  size  of  this 
tooth  with  that  of  a  large  ox,  and  from  thence  infer  the  size  of  the 
animal  to  which  this  tooth  belonged,  we  should  probably  find  that 
its  size  was  forty  times  larger  than  our  largest  oxen. 

A  forest  of  trees  would  soon  be  nibbled  to  their  roots  by  a  herd 
of  such  animals  as  these  ;  and  the  western  continent  would  prove 
a  small  enough  pasture  for  a  moderate  number  of  them. 

Doctor  Adam  Clarke  mentions,  in  his  commentary  on  the  sub- 
ject of  this  animal,  denominated  Behemoth  in  Job,  40th  chapter, 
15th  verse,  that  he  had  weighed  one  of  the  very  smallest  grinders 
of  an  animal  of  this  supposed  extinct  race,  and  found  it,  in  its  very 
dry  state,  to  weigh  u  four  pounds  eight  ounces;"  "  the  same  grind- 
er of  an  elephant,  says  Dr.  Clarke,  I  have  weighed  also,  and  find 
it  but  two  pounds  ;  the  mammoth,  therefore,  continues  this  great 
author,  from  this  proportion,  must  have  been  as  large  as  two  ele- 
phants and  a  quarter." 

If,  then,  an  animal  of  this  kind,  having  a  tooth  weighing  only  foui 
pounds  and  eight  ounces,  was  more  than  twice  as  large  as  inordinary 
elephant,  how  unwieldy  and  monstrous  must  have  been  the  animal 
to  which  the  tooth  just  mentioned,  weighing  twenty-Jive  pounds, 
once  belonged,  arguing  from  proportion,  as  Dr.  Clarke  has  done. 

The  same  author,  in  his  Biblical  Commentary  on  the  first  book 
of  Genesis,  says,  that  from  a  considerable  part  of  a  skeleton  which 
he  had  seen  and  examined,  it  was  computed  that  the  animal,  when 
living,  must  have  been  nearly  twenty-five  feet  high  and  sixty  feet 
in  length  ;  the  bones  of  one  toe  were  entire,  and  were  something 
more  than  three  feet  long.  The  height  of  the  the  animal,  as  com- 
puted by  Dr.  Clarke,  will  agree  well  with  the  observations  ol 
travellers.  In  the  vicinity  of  May's  Lick,  or  Salt  Spring,  in  the 
State  of  Kentuckv,  there  are  several  holes,  marked  in  such  a  man- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEIT 


147 


ner  as  to  proclaim  at  once,  that  they  were  formed  by  animals  wal-; 
lowing  in  them,  after  they  had  bathed  and  satiated  themselves  with 
the  waters  of  the  fountain ;  these  were  the  works  of  buffaloes,  deer, 
and  other  small  animals. 

But  the  same  appearances  are  evident  in  some  banks  in  the  neigh- 
borhood, which  were  hollowed  in  a  semi-circular  manner,  from 
the  action  of  beasts  rubbing  against  them,  and  carrying  off  quanti- 
ties of  the  earth  on  their  hides,  forming  a  thick  coat,  to  defend 
against  the  stings  of  numberless  flies,  like  the  rhinoceros  of  Africa. 
One  of  those  scooped  out  hollow  banks,  appeared  like  the  side  of 
a  hill  from  which  an  hundred  thousand  loads  of  soil  might  have 
been  carried  off ;  the  height  of  the  wasted  bank,  where  it  was 
affected  by  attrition,  was  at  least  twenty-five  feet.  The  other  ani- 
mals, being  smaller,  could  get  down  and  up  again  from  their  wal- 
lowing, with  ease  and  quickness  ;  but  the  mammoths  were  com- 
pelled, from  their  size,  to  lean  against  some  hill  or  mountain,  so  as 
to  coat  their  hide  with  earth. 

Near  this  spot  are  often  found  the  frames  of  this  animal,  sunk  in 
the  mire.  In  the  State  of  Missouri,  between  White  River  and 
Strawberry  River,  are  certain  ranges  of  mountains,  at  whose  base, 
in  a  certain  spot,  are  found  "  large  quantities  of  these  bones  gather- 
ed in  a  small  compass,  which  collection  was  doubtless  occasioned 
by  the  appetite  which  these  animals  had  for  prey.  Attracted  in 
this  way  to  these  marshy  places,  they  were  evidently  mired  when 
they  ventured  too  far  in,  and  of  course  the  struggles  of  the  last  one 
would  sink  the  bones  of  his  predecessor  still  deeper.  Thus,  these 
collections  are  easily  accounted  for,  although,  at  first,  it  seems  very 
strange  to  see  these  bones  accumulated,  like  those  of  some  of  the 
extinct  Indian  tribes  of  the  west."  Beck's  Gazetteer  of  Illinois 
and  Missouri,  page  332. 

Adam  Clarke  supposes  the  Behemoth  to  have  been  a  carnivorous 
animal.  See  his  remarks  on  this  monster,  in  his  Commentary  on 
Job,  40th  chapter,  15th  verse  :  "  The  Behemoth,  on  the  contrary, 
(i.  e.  in  opposition  to  the  habits  of  the  hippopotamus  and  elephant,) 
is  represented  as  a  quadruped  of  a  ferocious  nature,  and  formed  for 
tyranny,  if  not  rapaci',  ;  equally  lord  of  the  floods  and  of  the 
mountains ;  rushing  with  rapidity  of  foot,  instead  of  slowness  or 
stateliness  ;  and  possessing  a  rigid  and  enormous  tail,  like  a  cedar 
tree,  instead  of  a  short  naked  tail  of  about  a  foot  long,  as  the  hip- 
popotamus, or  a  weak,  slender,  hog-shaped  tail,  as  the  elephant  '" 


148 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITir:* 


Job  says,  chap.  40th,  verse  17th,  that  he  (this  monster)  movetfj 
his  tail  like  a  cedar,  i.  e.  its  motions  were  like  those  of  a  tall  cedar 
tree  moved  slowly  one  way  and  the  other  by  the  wind ;  which  ex- 
plicitly and  emphatically  marks  the  monstronsness  of  this  creature's 
size.  "  He  moveth  his  tail  like  a  cedar,"  slowly  one  way  and  the 
other ;  exactly  as  the  lion,  the  tiger,  or  the  leopard,  in  the  motions 
of  this  limb,  especially  when  angry,  or  when  watching  for  their 
prey ;  on  which  account,  it  is  probable,  Job  has  seen  fit  to  make 
mention  of  this  peculiar  motion  of  the  animal;  and  also  it  is  an  evi- 
dence of  the  overwhelming  power  or  strength  of  the  mammoth. 
He  was,  indeed,  as  it  is  said  in  Job,  "  the  chief  of  the  ways  of 
God,"  in  the  creation  of  animals. 

At  St.  Helen's  Point,  north  of  Guayaquil,  in  the  republic  of  Co- 
lombia, South  America,  on  the  coast  of  the  Pacific,  on  the  equator, 
•are  found  the  enormous  remains  of  this  animal.  The  Peruvian 
tradition  of  those  bones  is,  that  at  this  very  point  once  landed,  from 
some  unknown  quarter,  of  the  earth,  a  colony  of  giants,  who  mutu- 
ally destroyed  each  other.  At  New  Grenada,  in  the  same  pro- 
vince, and  on  the  ridge  of  the  Mexican  Cordilleras,  vast  quantities 
of  the  remains  of  this  huge  beast  are  found. — Humboldt's  Researches 
in  South  America. 

The  remains  of  a  monster,  recently  discovered  on  the  bank  of 
the  Mississippi,  in  Louisiania,  seventeen  feet  under  ground,  may 
be  considered  as  the  greatest  wonder  of  the  west.  The  largest 
bone,  which  was  thought  to  be  the  shoulder  blade,  or  jaw  bone,  is 
twenty  feet  long,  three  broad,  and  weighed  twelve  hundred  pounds. 
The  aperture  in  the  vertebre, or  place  for  the  pith  of  the  backbone, 
is  6ix  by  nine  inches  caliber ;  supposed,  when  alive,  to  have  been 
an  hundred  and  twenty-five  in  length.  The  awful  and  tremend- 
ous size  of  what  this  creature  must  have  been,  to  which  this  shoul- 
der blade,  or  jaw  bone,  belonged,  when  alive,  is  almost  frightful  to 
think  of. 

In  President  Jefferson's  Notes  on  Virginia,  we  have  the  follow- 
ing, as  the  tradition  of  the  Indians  respecting  this  animal,  which 
they  call  the  big  buffalo,  and  assert,  that  he  is  carnivorous,  as  Dt. 
Clarke  contends,  and  still  exists  in  the  northern  parts  of  America 

"  A  delegation  of  warriors  from  the  Deleware  tribe,  visited  the 
government  of  Virginia,  during  the  Revolution,  on  matters  of  busi- 
ness; after  this  had  been  discussed,  and  ^ttled  in  council,  the 
governor  asked  some  questions  relative  to  their  country,  and,  among 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


149 


others,  what  they  knew  or  had  heard  of  the  animal  whose  bonee 
were  found  at  the  Licks  on  the  Ohio. 

"  Their  chief  speaker  immediately  put  himself  into  an  attitude  of 
oratory,  and  with  a  pomp  suited  to  what  he  conceived  the  elevation 
of  his  subject,  informed  him,  that  it  was  a  tradition  handed  down 
from  their  fathers,  that  in  ancient  times  a  herd  of  these  tremendous 
animals  came  to  the  Big  Bone  Lick,  and  began  an  universal  de- 
struction of  the  bear,  deer,  elk,  buffaloes,  and  other  animals,  which 
had  been  created  for  the  use  of  the  Indians. 

"And  that  the  Great  Man  above,  looking  down,  and  seeing  this, 
was  so  enraged,  that  he  seized  his  lightening;  descended  on  the 
earth,  seated  himself  on  a  neighboring  mountain,  on  a  certain  rock, 
where  the  print  of  his  feet  are  still  remaining,  from  whence  he 
hurled  his  bolts  among  them,  till  the  whole  were  slaughtered;  ex- 
cept the  big  bull,  who  presenting  his  forehead  to  the  shafts,  shook 
them  off  as  they  fell,  but  at  length,  one  of  them  missing  his  head, 
glanced  on  his  side,  wounding  him  sufficiently  to  make  him  mad  ; 
whereon,  springing  round,  he  bounded  over  the  Ohio,  at  a  leap, 
then  over  the  Wabash  at  another,  the  Illinois  at  a  third,  and  a  fourth 
leap,  over  the  great  lakes,  where  he  is  living  at  this  day." 

"  A  Mr.  Stanley,  taken  prisoner  by  the  Indians,  near  the  mouth 
of  the  Tennessee  river,  relates,  that  after  being  transferred  through 
several  tribes,  was  at  length  carried  over  the  mountains  west  of  the 
Missouri,  to  a  river  which  runs  westwardly  ;  that  these  bones  a- 
bounded  there  and  that  the  natioiis  described  to  him  the  animal  to 
which  these  belonged,  as  still  living  in  the  northern  parts  of  their 
country." 

Mr.  Jefferson  contends,  at  page  77,  of  his  Notes  on  Virginia,  that 
this  animal  is  not  extinct.  "  It  may  be  asked,"  says  this  philoso- 
pher, "  why  I  insert  the  mammoth  as  if  it  still  existed.  I  ask  in 
return,  why  I  should  omit  it,  as  if  it  did  not  exist.  The  northern 
and  western  parts  still  remain  in  their  aboriginal  state,  unexplored 
and  undisturbed  by  us,  or  by  others  for  us.  He  may  as  well  exist 
there  now  as  he  did  formerly,  where  we  find  his  bones.  If  he  be 
a  carnivorous  animal,  as  some  anatomists  have  conjectured,  and  the 
Indians  affirm,  his  early  retirement  to  deeper  wilds,  may  be  ac- 
counted for,  from  the  great  destruction  of  the  wild  game,  by  the 
Indians,  which  commenced  in  the  very  first  instant  of  their  connex- 
ion with  us,  for  the  purpose  of  purchasing  matchcoats,  hatchets, 
and  guns,  with  their  skins." 


150 


AMERICAN  ANTlQUITIEi 


The  description  of  this  monster's  habits,  as  given  by  the  Dela- 
ware chief,  has  a  surprising  agreement  with  the  account  of  the 
Behemoth,  given  by  Job  ;  especially  at  this  verse  :  "  Surely  the 
mountains  bring  him  forii  food,  where  all  the  beasts  of  the  field 
play."  "  He  frequenis  Ihose  places  (says  Dr.  Clarke)  where  he 
can  have  most  prey  ;  he  makes  a  mock  of  all  the  beasts  of  the  field. 
They  can  neither  resist  his  power,  nor  escape  his  agility."  "  It 
appears  (says  the  above  author)  "  to  have  been  a  many  toed  ani- 
mal ;  the  springs  which  such  a  creature  could  make,  must  have 
been  almost  incredible  j  nothing  by  swiftness  could  have  escaped 
its  pursuit.  God  seems  to  have  made  it  as  the  proof  his  power, 
and  had  it  been  prolific,  and  not  become  extinct3  it  would  have  de- 
populated the  earth  of  both  men  and  animals. 


TRACKS  OF  MEN  AI  D  ANIMALS  IN  THE  ROCKS  OF  TENNES- 
SEE, AND  ELSEWHERE. 

Among  the  subjecs  of  antiquity,  which  are  abundant  on  the 
American  continent^  \.e  give  the  following,  from  Morse's  Universal 
Geographys  which  in  point  of  mysteriousness  is  not  surpassed,  per- 
haps, on  the  globe.  In  the  State  of  Tennessee,  on  a  certain  moun- 
tain, called  the  enchanted  mountain,  situated  a  few  miles  south  of 
Braystown,  which  is  at  the  head  waters  of  the  Tennessee  river,  are 
found  impressed  in  the  surface  of  the  solid  rock,  a  great  number  of 
tracks,  as  turkies,  bean3  horses,  and  human  beings,  as  perfect  as 
they  could  be  made  on  snow  or  sand.  The  human  tracks  are  re- 
markable for  having  uniformly  six  toes  each,  Jjke  the  anakims  of 
Scripture  ;  one  only  excepted,  which  appears  to  be  the  print  of  a 
negro's  foot.  One,  among  those  tracks,  is  distinguished  from  the 
rest,  by  its  monstrousness,  being  of  no  less  dimensions  than  six- 
teen inches  in  length,  across  the  toes  thirteen  inchesj  behind  the 
toes,  where  the  foot  narrows  toward  the  instep,  seven  inches,  and 
the  heel  ball  live  inches. 

One  also  anions  the  tracks  of  the  animals,  is  distinguished  for  its 
great  size  :  it  is  the  track  of  a  horse,  measuring  eight  by  ten  inches ; 
perhaps  the  horse  which  the  great  warrior  led  when  passing  this 
mountain  with  his  army.    That  these  are  the  real  tracks  of  the 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  TTKST- 


animals  they  represent,  appears  from  the  circumstance  of  this 
horse's  foot  having  slipped  several  inches,  and  recovered  again ;  the 
figures  have  all  the  same  direction,  like  the  trail  of  a  company  on 
a  journey. 

Not  far  from  this  very  spot,  are  vast  heaps  of  stones,  which  are 
the  supposed  tombs  of  warriors,  slain,  perhaps  in  the  very  battle 
this  big  footed  warrior  was  engaged  in,  at  a  period  when  these 
mountains,  which  give  rise  to  some  branches  of  the  Tugulo,  Apa- 
lachicola,  and  Hiwassa  rivers,  were  in  a  state  of  soft  and  clayey 
texture.  On  this  range,  according  to  Mexican  tradition,  was  the 
holy  mountain ;  temple  and  cave  of  Olaimi,  where  was  also  a  city 
aud  the  seat  of  their  empire,  more  anciciit  than  that  of  Mexico. 
To  reduce  that  city,  perhaps,  was  the  ~bject  of  the  great  warior, 
whose  track  with  that  of  his  horse  and  company,  still  appear. 

We  are  of  the  opinion,  that  these  tracks,  found  sunk  in  the  sur- 
face of  the  rocks  of  this  mountain,  is  indubitable  evidence  of  their 
antiquity,  going  back  to  the  time  when  men  dispersed  over  the 
earth,  immediately  after  the  flood. 

At  the  period  when  this  troop  passed  the  summit  of  this  moun- 
tain, the  rock  was  in  a  soft  and  yielding  state  ;  time,  therefore,  suf- 
ficient for  it  to  harden  to  its  present  rock  consistency,  is  the  argu- 
ment of  the  great  distance  of  time  elapsed  since  they  went  over  it. 

It  is  probable  the  whole  of  these  mountains,  out  of  which  arise 
the  branches  of  the  rivers  above  alluded  to, ^vere,  at  the  time  when 
the  deluge  subsided,  but  a  vast  body  of  clay ;  for  even  now,  the  sur- 
face, where  it  is  not  exposed  to  the  rays  of  the  sun,  is  of  a  soft  text- 
ure, capable  of  being  cut  with  a  knife,  and  appears  to  be  of  the 
nature  of  the  pipe  stone. 

In  order  that  those  tracks  might  retain  their  shape  against  the 
operation  of  rains,  the  clay  must  have  been  of  a  tough  and  oily  na- 
ture ;  and  hardened  by  slow  degrees,  after  having  been  brought  to 
feel  the  influence  of  the  sun's  rays,  and  drying  nature  of  the  winds. 
The  changing  and  revolutionising  consequences  of  the  flood,  it  is 
likely,  unbarred  these  bodies  of  clay  from  the  depths  of  the  earth, 
by  washing  off"  all  the  other  kinds  of  strata,  not  so  adhesive  as  is 
the  nature  of  this  clay  ;  out  of  which  these  ranges  of  mountains 
have  been  made,  some  eighteen  hundred  yeirs  later  than  the  origi- 
nal creation. 

In  the  wild  and  savage  country  of  Guiaaa,  in  South  America} 
are  mountains  of  a  prodigious  height,  on  whose  smooth  and  perpen- 


\ 


152  AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 

dicular  sides,  which  seem  once  to  have  been  a  barrier  to  mighty 
waters,  are  engraved,  at  a  surprising  distance  from  their  base,  the 
figures  of  animals  ;  also  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  with  other  hiero- 
glyphical  signs. 

The  tradition  respecting  them,  among  the  natives,  is  that  their 
ancestors,  in  a  time  of  great  waters,  came  in  canoe6,  to  the  tops  of 
these  mountains,  and  that  the  stones  were  then  so  soft,  and  plastic, 
that  men  could  easily  trace  marks  on  them  with  their  lingers,  or 
with  sticks. 

These  rocks,  it  would  appear,  were  then  in  a  state  similar  to 
those  in  Tennessee,  which  also  had  retained  the  impressions  made 
on  them  by  the  feet  of  the  traveller.  But  these  mysterious  traces 
found  on  the  mountain  in  Tennessee,  are  not  the  only  impressions 
of  the  kind.  Mr.  Schoolcraft,  in  his  travels  in  the  central  parts  of 
the  Mississippi  regions,  informs  us,  that  on  the  limestone  strata  of 
rock,  which  forms  the  shores  of  the  Mississippi,  and  along  the 
neighborhood  of  St.  Louis,  were  found  tracks  of  the  human  foot, 
deeply  and  perfectly  impressed  in  the  solid  stone.  But  two  traces 
of  this  sort  have  been,  as  yet,  discovered  ;  these  are  the  same  re- 
presented on  the  plate,  as  given  by  Schoolcraft.— See  plate. 

u  The  impressions  in  the  stone  are,  to  all  appearances,  those  of  a 
man  standing  in  an  erect  posture,  with  the  left  foot  a  little  advanc- 
ed, and  the  heels  drawn  in.  The  distance  between  the  heels,  by 
accurate  measurement,  is  six  inches  and  a  quarter,  and  between  the 
extremities  of  the  toes,  thirteen  and  a  half.  The  length  of  these 
tracks  is  ten  and  a  quarter  inches,  across  the  toes  four  inches  and  a 
half,  as  spread  out,  and  but  two  and  a  half  at  the  heel.  Directly 
before  the  prints  of  these  feet,  within  a  few  inches,  is  a  well  im- 
pressed and  deep  mark,  having  some  resemblance  to  a  scroll,  or 
roll  of  parchment,  two  feet  long,  by  a  foot  in  width. 

To  account  lor  these  appearances,  two  theories  are  advanced ; 
one  is,  that  they  were  sculptured  there  b)\the  ancient  nations  :  the 
other,  that  they  were  impressed  there  at  a  time  when  the  rock  was 
in  a  plastic  state  ;  both  theories  have  their  difficulties,  but  we  in- 
cline to  the  latter,  because  the  impressions  are  strikingly  natural, 
says  Mr.  Schoolcraft,  exhitbing  even  the  muscular  marks  of  the 
foot,  with  great  precision  and  faithfulness  to  nature,  and  on  this  ac- 
count, weakens,  in  his  opinion,  the  doctrine  of  their  being  sculp- 
tured by  the  ancient  nations. 

But  why  there  are  no  others  going  to  and  from  these,  is  unac- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST, 


153 


countable,  unless  we  may  snppose  the  rest  of  this  rock3  at  that  time, 
was  buried  by  earth,  brush,  grass,  or  some  kind  of  covering.  If 
they  were  sculptured,  why  not  other  specimens  appear ;  this  one 
isolated  effort  of  the  kind,  would  seem  unnatural— See  the  plate, 
which  is  a  true  fac  simile  of  those  tracks. 


COTUBAMANA,  THE  GIANT  CHIEF. 

On  the  subject  of  the  stature  of  the  Patagonians,  we  have  the 
following  remarks  of  Morse,  the  geographer.  "  We  cannot,  with- 
out a  charge  of  unreasonable  scepticism,  deny  all  credence  to  the 
accounts  that  have  been  transmitted  to  us,  of  a  race  of  men  of  ex- 
traordinary stature,  in  the  country  about  the  Strait  of  Magellan. 

Inscrut  hie  as  are  the  ways  of  Providence,  and  as  limited  as  is 
the  progress  hitherto  made  in  the  natural  philosophy  of  the  globe 
we  inhabit,  no  bounds  can  be  assigned  to  the  endless  variety  of 
phenomena,  which  successively  apper.r.  The  man  who  can  assign 
a  reason  why  an  Irish  giant,  or  a  Polish  dwarf,  should  be  born 
amidsl  nations  of  ordinary  stature,  will  have  solved  every  problem, 
as  to  the  existence,  either  of  giganti-  Patagonians,  or  cf  pig  ay  Es- 
quimaux. 

From  an  impartial  revision  of  the  various  autuorties,  it  appears, 
as  an  established  fact,  that  the  usual  stature  of  one  or  more  uibes 
of  Indians  in  Patagonia,  is  from  six  and  a  half  to  seven  and  a  ha!f 
feet." 

When  the  Spaniards  conquered  and  destroyed  the  nations  and 
tribes  of  some  of  the  West  India  isl?  jds,  among  them  was  a  tribe 
whose  chiei  was  a  mm  of  great  stature.  Cotubamana  was  the 
name  of  this  cacique,  who  resided  with  his  nation  on  the  island 
Higuey,  adjacent  to  K^.paniola. 

This  chieftian,  as  related  by  Las  Casas,  the  historian,  was  the 
strongest  of  his  tribe,  and  more  perfectly  formed  than  one  man  of 
a  thousand,  of  any  natioL  whatever.  He  was  taller  than  the  tallest 
of  his  countrymen,  in  width  from  shoulder  to  shoulder  exceeding 
all  men?  measuring  full  three  feet,  with  the  rest  of  his  person  in 

20 


154 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


admirable  proportion.  His  aspect  was  not  handsome  ;  yet  his  coun- 
tenance was  grave,  strongly  marked  with  the  characteristics  of  a 
man  of  courage. 

His  bow  was  not  easily  bent  by  a  common  man  ;  his  arrow  was 
three  pronged,  pointed  with  the  bones  of  fishes  ;  all  his  weapons 
were  large  enough  for  a  giant ;  in  a  word,  he  was  so  nobly  propor- 
tioned as  to  be  the  admiration  of  even  the  Spaniards. 

Already  the  murderous  Spaniards  had  been  more  than  conquer- 
ors in  several  battles  which  drove  the  poor  fugitives  to  their  caves, 
and  the  fastnesses  of  the  mountains,  whither  they  had  followed  theiF 
chief.  A  daily  pursuit  was  continued,  but  chiefly  to  capture  the 
as  yet  invincible  Cotubamana. 

While  searching  in  the  woods  and  hills  of  the  island,  at  a  certain 
time,  and  having  got  on  their  trail,  they  came  at  length  to  a  place 
where  the  path  which  they  had  followed  suddenly  spread,  and 
divided  into  many,  the  whole  company  of  the  Spaniards,  except 
one  man,  chose  a  path,  which  they  pursued. 

This  one  exception,  was  a  man  aamed  Juan  Lopez,  a  powerful 
Spaniard,  and  skilful  in  the  mode  of  Indian  warfare.  He  chose 
to  proceed  alone,  in  a  blind  foot  path,  leading  off  to  the  left  of  the 
course  the  others  had  taken,  winding  among  little  hills,  so  thickly 
wooded  that  it  was  impossible  to  see  a  man  at  the  distance  of  half 
a  bow  shot. 

But  as  he  was  silently  darting  along  this  path,  he  encountered 
all  at  once,  in  a  narrow  pass,  overhung  by  rocks  and  trees,  twelve 
Indian  warriors,  armed  with  bows  and  arrows,  following  each  other 
in  Indian  file.  The  poor  natives  were  confounded  at  the  sight  of 
Lopez,  imagining  there  must  be  a  party  of  soldiers  behind  him,  or 
they  would  doubtless  have  transfixed  him  with  their  arrows. 
Lopez  demanded  of  them  where  their  chief  was  ;  they  replied,  he 
is  behind  us,  and  opening  to  let  him  pass,  he  beheld  the  dauntless 
Cotubamana  in  the  rear.  At  sight  of  the  Spaniard,  the  gallant 
cacique  bent  his  gigantic  bow,  and  was  on  the  point  of  launching 
one  of  his  three  headed  arrows  into  his  heart ;  but  Lopez  at  the 
instant,  rushed  upon  him,  and  wounded  him  with  his  sword. 

The  other  Indians,  struck  with  terror,  had  fled.  The  Spaniard 
and  Cotubamana  now  grappled  with  each  other;  Lopez  had  seized 
the  chief  by  the  hair  of  his  head  with  one  hand,  and  was  aiming 
with  the  other  a  thrust  with  his  sword  at  his  naked  body,  but  the 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


155 


thief  struck  down  the  sword  with  his  arm,  and  closed  in  with  hie 
antagonist,  and  threw  him  with  his  back  upon  the  rough  rocks. 

As  they  were  both  men  of  great  strength,  the  struggle  was  long 
and  violent.  The  sword  lay  beneath  them,  but  Cotubamana  seized 
with  his  great  hand  the  Spaniard's  throat,  and  began  to  strangle 
him,  when  the  sound  of  the  contest  brought  the  other  Spaniards  to 
the  spot.  They  found  their  companion  writhing  and  gasping  in 
the  agonies  of  death,  in  the  gripe  of  the  Indian.  The  whole  band 
now  fell  upon  him,  and  finally  succeeded  in  binding  his  noble  limbs, 
when  they  carried  him  to  St.  Domingo,  where  the  infernal  Span- 
iards hanged  him  as  if  he  had  been  a  murderer. — Irving's  Life  of 
Columbus ,  3c?  vol.  p.  159. 

Could  this  native  have  been  less  than  12  feet  in  height,  to  be  in 
proportion  with  the  breadth  of  his  back  between  his  shoulders, 
which  was  full  three  feet,  as  Las  Casas  refates?  In  reading  the 
story  of  the  miserable  death  of  this  hero  of  his  own  native  island, 
Higuey,  we  are  reminded  of  the  no  less  tragical  end  of  Wallace, 
the  Scottish  chief,  who  was,  it  is  said,  a  man  of  great  size  and 
strength,  and  was  also  executed  for  defending  his  country* 

Goliath  of  Gath  was  six  cubits  and  a  span  high,  which,  accord- 
ing to  the  estimate  of  Bishop  Cumberland,  was  eleven  feet  and  ten 
inches;  Cotubamana  and  Goliath  of  the  Philistines,  were,  it  ap- 
pears, much  of  the  same  stature,  terrible  to  look  upon,  and  irresisti- 
ble in  strength. 

There  are  those  who  imagine,  that  the  first  inhabitants  of  the 
globe,  or  the  antediluvians,  were  much  larger  than  our  race  at  the 
present  time  ;  and  although  it  is  impossible  to  prove  this  opinion,  yet 
the  subject  is  not  beyond  the  reach  of  argument  in  its  support. 

The  circumstance  of  their  immense  longevity  favors  strongly 
this  opinion  ;  our  species,  as  they  are  now  constituted,  could  not 
possibly  endure  the  pressure  of  so  many  years  ;  the  heart ,  with  all 
the  blood  vessels  of  the  body,  would  fail.  All  the  organs  of  the 
human  subject,  which  appertain  to  the  blood,  would  ossify,  and 
cease  their  action,  long  before  five,  six  and  nine  hundred  years 
should  transpire,  unless  differently  or  more  abundantly  sustained 
with  the  proper  support,  than  could  now  be  furnished  from  the  lit- 
tle bodies  of  the  present  times. 

Small  streams  sooner  feel  the  power  of  a  draught  than  a  river  or 
a  lake  ;  great  trees  are  longer  sustained  beneath  the  rays  of  a  bum- 


156  AMERICAN  ANTIQCITIEi 

ing  sky,  without  rain,  than  a  mere  weed  or  shrub  ;  and  thia  is  by 
reason  of  the  greater  quantum  of  the  juices  of  the  tree,  and  of  the 
greater  quantum  of  the  water  of  the  river  or  the  lake. 

Apply  this  reasoning  to  the  antediluvians,  and  we  arrive  at  the 
conclusion,  that  their  bodies  must  have  been  larger  than  ours,  or 
the  necessary  Juices  could  not  have  been  contained,  so  as  to  furnish 
a  heart,  and  all  the  blood  vessels,  with  a  sufficient  ratio  of  strength 
and  vigor  to  support  life  so  many  ages  in  successsion. 

Their  whole  conformation  must  have  been  of  a  larger,  looser, 
and  more  generous  texture,  as  the  flesh  and  skin  of  the  elephant, 
which  is  the  largest  as  well  as  the  longest  lived  animal  known  to 
the  science  of  zoology.  The  mammoth  was  undoubtedly  a  long 
lived  animal.  The  eagle,  the  largest  of  the  fowl  family,  lives  to  a 
great  age. 

That  the  antediluvians  were  of  great  stature,  is  strongly  support- 
ed by  a  remark  of  King  Solomon,  found  in  bis  Book  of  Wisdom, 
in  the  Apocrypha,  14th  chapter,  at  the  6th  verse,  where  he  calls  all 
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  who  were  destroyed  by  the  deluge, 
"  proud  giants"  whose  history,  by  tradition,  handed  down  from  the 
family  of  Noah,  through  the  lineage  of  Shem,  was  well  known  to 
that  king,  the  wisest  of  men  in  his  day  and  age. 

And  even  after  the  flood,  the  great  stature  of  men  is  supported 
in  the  Scriptures  in  several  places,  who  w.  e,for  some  generations, 
permitted  to  live  several  hundred  years,  and  were  all  aceordinglv 
of  great  stature.  Whole  tribes  or  nations  of  gigantic  inhabitants 
peopled  the  country  of  Canaan,  befcre  the    _ws  d.'Dve  them  out. 

Their  manners  and  customs  were  very  h<  rrible,  whom  Solomon, 
the  king,  charges  with  beir<g  r  uilty,  among  many  other  enormities, 
of  glutting  themselves  with  the  blood  and  flesh  of  human  beings; 
from  which  we  learn  they  were  cannibuls.  See  Book  of  Wisdom, 
12th  chap.  5th  verse — Apocrypha. 

The  very  circumstances  of  the  human  race,  before  the  flood,  re- 
quired that  the)  should  be  ot  greater  strength  of  body  than  BOW, 
be  car.  .  it  ii  noi  likely  so  many  useful  and  labor  saving  machines 
wore  I  en  invented  and  in  u°e  as  now.  Every  thing  was  to  be 
effected  bv  strength  of  muscle  and  bone,  which  of  course  would 
require  greater  bodies  to  produce  it 

Were  we  to  indulge  in  fancy  on  thi*  subjec  t,  we  should  judge 
Ihem  no  pigmy  race,  either  in  p«rson  or  in  temper  ;  but  terrible. 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST-  15? 

broad,  and  tall  in  stature,  loose  and  flabby  in  their  flesh  and  skin ; 
coarse  and  hideous  in  their  features,  slow  and  strong  in  their  ges- 
tures, irascible  and  ferocious  in  their  spirits,  without  pity  or  refine- 
ment ;  given  wholly  to  war,  rapine  and  plunder ;  formed  into 
bands ;  clans  and  small  bodies  of  marauders,  constantly  prowling 
round  each  other's  habitations,  outraging  all  the  charities  of  a  more 
refined  state  of  things,  measuring  all  things  by  mere  bodily  strength. 

From  such  a  state  of  things  we  should  naturally  look  for  the 
consequence  mentioned  in  the  Bible  ;  which  is,  that  the  whole 
earth  was  filled  with  violence  before  the  flood,  and  extremely 
wicked  every  way,  so  as  to  justify  the  Divine  procedure  in  their 
extermination. 

Indications  now  and  then  appear,  in  several  parts  of  the  earth, 
as  mentioned  by  the  traveller,  of  the  existence  of  fowls,  of  a  size 
compared  with  the  mammoth  itself,  considering  the  difference  in 
the  elements  each  inhabit,  and  approach  each  other  in  size  as  near- 
ly as  the  largest  fowl  now  known,  does  the  largest  animal. 

Henderson,  in  his  travels  in  New  Siberia,  met  with  the  claws  of 
a  bird,  measuring  three  feet  in  length ;  the  same  was  the  length  of 
the  toes  of  a  mammoth,  as  measured  by  Adam  Clarke. 

The  Yakuts,  inhabitants  of  the  Siberian  country,  assured  Mr. 
Henderson,  that  they  had  frequently,  in  their  hunting  excursions, 
found  the  skeleton,  and  even  the  feathers  of  this  fowl,  the  quills  of 
which  were  large  enough  to  admit  a  man's  arm  into  the  calibre, 
which  would  not  be  out  of  proportion  with  the  size  of  the  claws 
mentioned  above. 

Captain  Cook  mentions  having  seen,  during  his  voyages,  a  mon- 
strous bird's  nest  in  New  Holland,  on  a  low  sandy  island,  in  En- 
deavor  River,  with  trees  upon  it,  where  were  an  incredible  num- 
ber of  sea  fowls.  This  monstrous  nest  was  built  on  the  ground, 
with  large  sticks,  and  was  no  less  than  twenty-six  feet  in  circum- 
ference, more  than  eight  feet  across,  and  two  feet  eight  inches  high. 
Geography s  speak  of  a  species  of  eagle,  sometimes  shot  in  South 
America,  measuring  from  tip  to  tip  of  the  wings,  forty  feet.  Tiiis, 
indeed,  must  have  been  of  the  species  celebrated  in  the  tradition 
of  the  ancients,  called  the  Phcenix. 

In  various  parts  of  Ireland,  are  frequently  dug  up  enormous 
horns,  supposed  to  have  belonged  to  a  species  of  deer,  now  extinct. 
Some  of  these  horns  have  been  found,  of  the  extent  of  fourteen 


158  AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 

feet  from  tip  to  tip,  furnished  with  brow  antlers,  and  weighing  three 
hundred  pounds.  The  whole  skeleton  is  frequently  found  with 
them.  It  is  supposed  the  animal  must  have  been  about  twelve 
feet  high. — Morse's  Universal  Georj. 


A  FURTHER  ACCOUNT  OF  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE   WEST,  AS 
GIVEN  BY  THE  ANTIQUARIAN  SOCIETY  AT  CINCINNATI. 

Near  Newark,  in  the  county  of  Licking,  Ohio,  is  situated  one 
of  those  immense  works  or  fortifications.  Its  builders  chose,  with 
good  taste  and  judgment,  this  site  for  their  town,  being  exactly  on 
the  point  of  land  at  the  junction  of  Racoon  Creek  and  South 
Fork,  where  Licking  River  commences.  It  is  in  form  resembling 
somewhat  a  horse  shoe,  accommodated,  however,  to  the  sweep  of 
those  two  streams ;  embracing  in  the  whole,  a  circumference  of 
about  six  hundred  rods,  or  nearly  two  miles. 

A  wall  of  earth,  of  about  four  hundred  rods,  is  raised  on  the 
sides  of  this  fort  next  to  the  small  creek,  which  comes  down  along 
its  sides  from  the  west  and  east.  The  situation  is  beautiful,  as 
these  works  stand  on  a  large  plain,  which  is  elevated  forty  or  fifty 
feet  above  the  stream  just  noticed,  and  is  almost  perfectly  flat,  and 
as  rich  a  soil  as  can  be  found  in  that  country.  It  would  seem  the 
people  who  made  this  settlement,  undertook  to  encompass  with  a 
wall,  as  much  land  as  would  support  its  inhabitants,  and  also  suffi- 
cient to  build  their  dwellings  on,  with  several  fortilications,  arrang- 
ed in  a  proper  manner  for  its  defence. 

There  are,  within  its  ranges  four  of  those  forts,  of  different  di- 
mensions; one  contains  forty  acres,  with  a  wall  of  about  ten  feet 
high  ;  another,  containing  twent-two  acres,  also  walled  ;  but  in 
this  fort  is  an  elevated  observatory,  of  sufficient  height  to  overlook 
the  whole  country.  From  this,  there  is  the  appearance  of  a  secret 
or  subterranean  passage  to  the  water,  as  one  of  the  creeks  runs 
near  this  fort. 

A  third  fori,  containing  about  twenty-six  acres,  having  a  wall 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


159 


around  it,  thrown  out  of  a  deep  ditch  on  the  inner  side  of  the  wall. 
This  wall  is  now  from  twenty-five  to  thirty  feet  in  height. 

A  fourth  fortification,  enclosing  twenty  acres,  with  a  wall  of  about 
ten  feet  high.  Two  of  these  forts  are  perfect  circles ;  one  a  per- 
fect square  ;  another  an  octagon  or  eight  sided.  These  forts  are 
severally  connected  by  roads  running  between  parallel  walls ;  and 
also  in  the  same  way  communicate  with  the  creeks;  so  that  these 
important  points,  in  case  of  invasion,  should  not  be  deprived  of  wa- 
ter. There  are,  besides  the  forts,  four  other  small  works  of  de- 
fence, of  a  circular  form,  situated  in  such  a  manner  as  to  protect, 
in  a  measure,  the  roads  running  from  fort  to  fort. 

The  fort  which  is  of  the  eight  sided  form,  containing  the  great- 
est space  within,  has  eight  gateways,  with  a  mound  in  front  of  each 
of  them,  and  were  doubtless  placed  there  to  aid  in  a  defence  against 
invaders.  The  other  forts  have  no  gateways  connected  with  the 
roads  that  lead  to  them,  except  one,  and  this  is  a  round  fort  united 
to  the  octangular  fort,  coutaining  twenty-two  acres ;  the  gateway  to 
this  looks  toward  the  wilderness;  at  this  gate  is  also  a  mound,  sup- 
posed to  be  for  its  defence. 

On  the  southern  side  of  this  great  town,  is  a  road  running  off  to 
the  country,  which  is  also  walled  in  the  same  way ;  it  has  been 
surveyed  a  few  miles,  and  is  supposed  to  connect  other  similar 
works  on  the  Hokhoking,  thirty  miles  distance,  at  some  point  a  few 
miles  north  of  Lancaster,  as  walls  of  the  description  connected  with 
this  work,  of  ten  or  twelve  miles  in  extent,  have  been  discovered. 
It  is  supposed,  also,  that  the  walls  on  each  side  of  the  road  were 
made  for  the  double  purpose  of  answering  as  a  fence  to  their  fields, 
with  gateways  to  accommodate  their  farms,  and  for  security  in  time 
of  danger,  so  that  communion  betwe'en  friendly  settlements  might 
not  be  interrupted.  About  the  walls  of  this  place  have  been  dis- 
covered very  beautiful  rock  crystal  and  horn  stone,  suitable  for  ar- 
row and  spear  heads,  a  little  lead,  sulphur,  and  iron. 

This  kind  of  stone,  suitable  for  spears,  was,  undoubtedly,  valua- 
ble on  other  accounts,  as  axes,  knives,  mallets,  &c,  were  made  of 
it.  It  is  likely  that,  as  very  little  iron  has  been  discovered,  even 
in  its  oxydized  state,  their  vast  works  of  excavation  were  carried 
on  by  means  of  wooden  shovels  and  scrapers,  which  would  answer 
very  well  in  the  easy  and  stoneless  soil  of  that  country. 

A  second  fort,  situated  southwesterly  from  the  great  works  on 


160 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


the  Licking,  and  four  or  five  miles,  in  a  northwestern  direction 
from  Somerset,  the  seat  of  Justice  for  Perry  county,  is  found.  This 
work  encloses  about  forty  acres ;  its  wall  is  entirely  of  stone,  not 
regularly  laid  up  in  a  wall,  agreeably  to  the  rules  of  masonry,  but 
a  huge  mass  of  stones  and  rocks  of  all  shapes  and  sizes,  as  nature 
formed  them,  without  the  mark  of  an  iron  tool  upon  them.  These 
are  in  sufficient  quantity  to  form  a  wall,  if  laid  in  good  order,  of 
about  fourteen  feet  in  height,  and  three  in  thickness. 

Near  the  centre  of  the  area  of  this  enclosure,  is  a  stone  mound, 
of  a  circular  form,  fifteen  feet  high,  and  was  erected,  as  is  conjec- 
tured, for  an  altar,  on  which  were  performed  their  religious  rites, 
and  also  for  a  monument  to  perpetuate  the  memory  of  some  great 
event  in  the  history  of  its  builders.  It  is  also  believed,  that  the 
whole  of  this  vast  preparation  was  devoted  solely  to  the  purposes 
of  worship  of  some  kind ;  as  it  is  situated .  on  very  high  ground, 
where  the  soil  is  good  for  nothing,  and  may  have  been,  what  is 
called,  an  high  place  in  Scripture,  according  to  the  customs  of  the 
ancient  pagans  of  the  old  world. 

It  could  not  have  been  a  military  work,  as  no  water  is  found 
there,  nor  a  place  of  dwelling,  for  the  same  reason,  and  from  the 
poverty  of  the  soil ;  but  must  have  been  a  place  of  resort  on  great 
occasions,  such  as  a  solemn  assembly  to  propitiate  the  gods ;  and 
also  a  place  to  anoint  and  crown  their  kings,  elect  legislators,  trans- 
act national  affairs,  judge  among  the  people,  and  inflict  condign 
punishment. 

Who  will  believe  for  a  moment,  that  the  common  Indian  of  the 
west,  who  were  derived  in  part  from  the  wandering  hordes  of  the 
Northern  Tartar  race  of  Asia,  were  the  authors  of  these  works  ; 
bearing  the  marks  of  so  much  labor  and  scientific  calculation  in 
their  construction  ?   It  cannot  be. 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST*  161 


VAST  WORKS  OF  THE  ANCIENT  NATIONS  ON  THE  EAST 
SIDE  OF  THE  MUSKINGUM. 

This  fort,  town,  or  fortification,  or  whatever  it  may  have  been, 
is  between  three  and  four  hundred  rods,  or  rising  of  a  mile  in  cir- 
cumference, and  so  situated  as  to  be  nearly  surrounded  by  two 
small  brooks,  running  into  the  Muskingum.  Their  site  is  on  an 
elevated  plain,  above  the  present  bank  of  that  river,  about  a  half 
mile  from  its  junction  with  the  Ohio. 

We  give  the  account  in  the  words  of  Mr.  Atwater,  president  of 
the  Antiquarian  Society.  "  They  consist  of  walls  and  mounds  of 
earth,  in  direct  lines,  and  in  square  and  circular  forms.  The  largest 
square  fort,  by  some  called  the  town,  contains  forty  acres,  encom- 
passed by  a  wall  of  earth,  from  six  to  ten  feet  high,  and  from  twen- 
ty to  thirty  in  breadth  at  the  base. 

u  On  each  side  are  three  openings  at  equal  distances,  resembling 
twelve  gateways.  The  entrances  at  the  middle  are  the  largest, 
particularly  on  the  side  next  to  the  Muskingum.  From  this  outlet 
is  a  covert  way  formed  of  two  parallel  walls  of  earth,  two  hundred 
and  thirty-one  feet  distant  from  each  other,  measured  from  centre 
to  centre.  The  walls  at  the  most  elevated  part,  on  the  inside,  are 
twenty-one  feet  in  height,  and  forty-two  in  breadth,  at  the  base, 
but  on  the  outside  average  only  about  five  feet  in  height.  This 
forms  a  passage  of  about  twenty  rods  in  length,  leading  by  a  gradu- 
al descent  to  the  low  grounds,  where,  at  the  time  of  its  construc- 
tion, it  probably  reached  the  river.  Its  walls  commence  at  sixty 
feet  from  the  ramparts  of  the  fort,  and  increase  in  elevation  as  the 
way  descends  to  the  river ;  and  the  bottom  is  rounded  in  the  cen- 
tre, in  the  manner  of  a  well  founded  turnpike  road. 

Within  the  walls  of  the  fort,  at  its  northwest  corner,  is  an  oblong 
elevated  square,  one  hundred  and  eighty  feet  long,  one  hundred 
and  thirty-two  broad,  and  nine  feet  high,  level  on  the  summit,  and 
even  now,  nearly  perpendicular  at  the  sides.  Near  the  south  wall 
is  an  elevated  square,  an  hundred  and  fifty  by  an  hundred  and 
twenty,  and  eight  feet  high,  similar  to  the  other,  excepting,  that 
instead  of  an  ascent  to  go  up  on  the  side  next  the  wall,  there  is  a 

21 


162 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


hollow  way,  ten  feet  wide,  leading  twenty  feet  towards  the  centre, 
and  then  rising  with  a  gradual  slope  to  the  top.  This  was,  it  is 
likely,  a  secret  passage.  At  the  southeast  corner  is  a  third  elevated 
square,  of  an  hundred  and  eighty  by  fifty-four  feet,  with  ascents  at 
the  ends,  ten  feet  wide,  but  not  so  high  nor  perfect  as  the  two 
others. 

Besides  this  forty  acre  fort,  which  is  situated  within  the  great 
range  of  the  surrounding  wall,  there  is  another,  containing  twenty 
acres,  with  a  gateway  in  the  centre  of  each  side,  and  at  each  cor- 
ner these  gatewys  are  defended  by  circular  mounds. 

On  the  outside  of  the  smaller  fort  is  a  mound,  in  form  of  a  sugar 
loaf;  its  base  is  a  regular  circle,  one  hundred  aad  fifteen  feet  in 
diameter,  or  twenty-one  rods  in  circumference  ;  its  altitude  is  thirty- 
feet.  It  is  surrounded  by  a  ditch  four  feet  deep,  fifteen  feet  wide, 
ana  defended  by  a  parapet  four  feet  high,  through  which  is  a  gate- 
way towards  the  foot,  twenty  feet  in  width.  Near  one  of  the  cor- 
ners of  the  great  fort,  was  found  a  reservoir  or  well,  twenty-five  feet 
in  diameter,  and  seventy-five  in  circumference,  with  its  sides  raised 
above  the  common  level  of  the  adjoining  surface,  by  an  embank- 
ment of  earth,  three  and  four  feet  high." 

It  was,  undoubtedly,  at  first,  very  deep,  as,  since  its  discovery  by 
the  first  settlers,  they  have  frequently  thrust  poles  into  it  to  the 
depth  of  thirty  feet.  It  appears  to  run  to  a  point,  like  an  inverted 
cone  or  funnel,  and  was  undoubtedly  that  kind  of  well  used  by  the 
inhabitants  of  the  old  world,  which  were  so  large  at  their  top  as  to 
afford  an  easy  descent  down  to  the  fountain,  and  up  again  with  its 
water  in  a  vessel  borne  on  the  shoulder,  according  to  the  ancient 
custom.  See  Genesis  13th  chapter,  24th  verse :  "  And  she,  (that 
is  Rebecca,  the  daughter  of  Bethuei,)  went  down  to  the  well,  filled 
her  pitcher  and  came  up.".  Bethuei  was  an  Assyrian,  who,  it 
seems,  had  made  a  well  in  the  same  form  with  that  described 
above.  Its  sides  were  lined  with  a  stratum  of  fine  ash  colored 
clay,  eight  and  ten  inches  thick,  beyond  w!  ich  is  the  common  soil 
of  the  place.  It  is  conjectured,  that  at  the  bottom  of  this  well 
might  be  found  many  curious  articles  which  belonged  to  the  ancient 
inhabitants. 

On  both  sides  of  these  walls  are  found  fragments  of  pottery,  cu- 
riously ornamented,  made  of  shells  and  clay,  tine  gravel  and  clay, 
burnt  in  the  fire,  and  capable  of  holding  liquids     When  broken,  it 


A5TD  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST 

appears  quite  black,  with  brilliant  particles  appearing  as  it  is  held 
to  the  light. 

Several  pieces  of  copper  have  been  found  in  and  near  these  an- 
cient works,  at  various  places ;  and  one  was  in  the  form  of  a  cup, 
with  low  sides,  the  bottom  very  thick  and  strong,  showing  their 
enlarged  acquaintance  with  that  metal,  more  than  the  Indians 
ever  had. 


RUINS  OF  ANCIENT  WORKS  AT  CIRCLE VILLE 

At  Circleville,  in  Ohio,  are  the  remains  of  very  great  works  of 
this  description,  evidently  of  a  military  character,  two  of  which 
are  united  ;  one  is  exactly  square,  the  other  an  exact  circle.  The 
square  fort  is  fifty  rods  on  each  side  ;  the  round  one  is  nearly  three 
hundred  feet,  or  eighteen  rods  in  circumference  ;  the  circle  and 
square  touching  each  other,  and  communicate  at  the  very  spot 
where  they  are  united. 

The  circular  fort  is  surrounded  by  two  walls,  with  a  deep  ditch 
between  them;  the  square  fort  is  also  encompassed  by  a  wall, 
without  a  ditch.  The  walls  of  the  circular  fort  were  at  least  twen- 
ty feet  in  height,  measuring  from  the  bottom  of  the  ditch,  before 
the  town  of  Circleville  was  built.  The  inner  wall  is  formed  of 
clay,  brought  from  a  distance,  but  the  outside  one  was  formed  with 
the  earth  of  the  ditch,  as  it  was  thrown  out. 

There  were  eight  gateways,  or  openings,  leading  into  the  square 
fort,  and  only  one  into  the  circular.  Before  each  of  these  open- 
ings was  a  mound  of  earth,  about  four  feet  high,  forty  feet  in  diame- 
ter at  the  base,  and  twenty  feet  and  upwards  at  the  top,  situated 
about  two  rods  in  front  of  the  gates  ;  for  the  defence,  no  doubt,  of 
these  openings.  The  walls  of  this  work  vary  a  few  degrees  from 
north  and  south,  and  east  and  west,  but  no  more  than  the  needle 
varies;  and  not  a  few  surveyors  have,  from  this  circumstance, 
been  impressed  with  the  belief,  that  the  authors  of  these  works 
were  acquainted  with  astronomy,  and  the  four  cardinal  points. 

Within  the  great  square  fort  are  eight  small  mounds,  placed  op- 


164 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


posite  the  gateways,  for  their  defence,  or  to  give  opportunity  to  pri- 
vileged spectators  to  review  the  thousands  passing  out  to  war,  or 
coming  in  with  the  trophies  of  victory.  Such  was  the  custom  of 
ancient  times.  David,  the  most  potent  king  of  the  Jews,  stood  at 
the  gateway  of  the  city,  as  his  armies  went  to  quell  the  insurrection 
of  his  son  Absalom.  See  2d  Samuel,  18th  chapter,  4th  verse : 
"  And  the  king  stood  by  the  gate  side,  and  all  the  people  came  out 
by  hundreds  and  by  thousands."  It  cannot  be  supposed  the  king 
stood  on  the  ground,  on  a  common  level  with  his  armies.  Such  a 
situation  would  be  extremely  inconvenient,  and  defeat,  in  a  great 
measure,  the  opportunity  of  review.  How  impressivea  when 
soldiers,  fired  with  all  the  ardor  of  expected  victory,  to  behold  their 
general,  chief,  king,  or  emperor,  bending  over  them,  as  they  pass 
on,  from  some  commanding  position  near  at  hand,  giving  counsel  to 
their  captains;  drawing,  in  this  way,  large  draughts  on  the  indi- 
vidual confidence  and  love  of  the  soldiery.  Such  may  have  been 
the  spectacle  at  the  gateways  of  the  forts  of  the  west,  at  the  eras  of 
their  grandeur. 

In  musing  on  the  structure  of  these  vast  works  found  along  the 
western  rivers,  enclosing  such  immense  spaces  of  land,  the  mind 
is  irresistibly  directed  to  a  contemplation  of  ancient  Babylon,  the 
first  city  of  magnitude  built  immediately  after  the  flood.  That 
city  was  of  a  square  form,  being  fifteen  miles  distance  on  each  of 
its  sides,  and  sixty  in  circumference,  <ui  rounded  with  a  wall  eighty- 
seven  feet  in  thickness,  and  three  hundred  and  fifty  in  height. 
On  each  side  it  had  twenty-five  gateways,  amounting  in  all,  to  an 
hundred  ;  the  whole,  besides  the  wall,  surrounded  with  a  deep  and 
wide  ditch.  At  each  corner  of  this  imm< ■nse  square,  was  a  strong 
tower,  ten  feet  higher  than  the  walls.  There  were  fifty  broad 
streets,  each  fifteen  miles  long,  starting  from  each  of  its  gates,  and 
an  hundred  and  fifty  feet  broad,  crossing  each  other  at  right  angles ; 
besides  four  half  streets,  surrounding  the  whole,  two  hundred  feet 
broad.  The  whole  city  was  divided  into  six  hundred  and  seventy- 
six  squares,  four  and  a  half  furlougs  on  each  side.  In  the  centre 
of  the  city  stood  the  temple  of  Bel  us,  and  in  the  centre  of  this 
temple  stood  an  immense  tower,  six  hundred  feet  square  at  its  base, 
and  six  hundred  feet  high,  narrowing  in  the  form  of  a  pyramid  as 
it  ascended.  The  ascent  to  the  summit  was  accomplished  by  spiral 
stairs,  winding  eight  times  rouud  the  whole.    This  tower  consisted 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


165 


of  eight  distinct  parts,  each  on  the  top  of  the  other,  seventy-five 
feet  high,  till  the  whole,  in  aggregate,  finished  the  tower. 

In  the  different  stories  were  temples,  or  chapels,  for  the  worship 
of  the  sun  ;  and  on  its  top,  some  authors  say,  was  an  image  of  gold, 
forty  feet  in  height,  equal  in  value  to  three  millions  five  hundred 
thousand  dollars. — Blake's  Atlas. 

The  moddle  of  this  city3  with  its  towers  at  the  coiners,  and 
pyramid  in  its  centre,  having  been  made  at  so  early  a  period  of 
time,  beiug  not  far  from  an  hundred  years  after  the  flood,  was 
doubtless  of  sufficient  influence  to  impress  its  image  on  the  memory 
of  tradition,  so  that  the  nations  spreading  out  from  that  region  over 
all  the  earth,  may  have  copied  this  Chaldean  model  in  their  various 
works. 

This  thought  is  strengthened  when  we  compare  its  counterpart, 
the  vast  works  of  the  west,  with  this  Babylonian  prototype  of  archi- 
tectural effort,  and  imagine  we  see  in  the  latter,  the  features  and 
general  outlines  of  this  giant,  among  cities,  in  the  towers,  walls, 
and  pyramids  of  the  western  states. 

Near  the  round  fort  at  Circleville,  is  another  fort,  ninety  feet 
high,  and  was  doubtless  erected  to  overlook  the  whole  works  of 
that  enormous  military  establishment.  That  it  was  a  military  es- 
+:  blishment  is  the  decided  opinion  of  the  President  of  the  Western 
Antiquarian  Society,  Mr.  Atwater.  He  says,  the  round  fort  was 
picketed  in,  if  we  are  to  judge  from  the  appearance  of  the  ground, 
on  arfd  about  the  walls.  Halfway  up  the  outside  of  the  inner  wall, 
is  a  place  distinctly  Jo  be  seen,  where  a  row  of  pickets  once  stood, 
and  where  it  was  placed  when  this  work  of  defence  was  originally 
erected.  Finally,  this  work  about  its  walls  and  ditch,  a  few  years 
since,  presented  as  much  of  a  defensive  aspect,  as  forts  which  were 
occupied  in  our  war  with  the  French,  such  as  Oswego,  Fort  Stan- 
wix,  and  others. 

These  works  have  been  examined  by  the  first  military  men  now 
living  in  the  United  States,  and  they  have  uniformly  declared  their 
opinion  to  be,  that  they  were  military  works  of  defence. 


16G 


ANCIEIIT  WORKS  ON  PAINT  CREEK. 

On  Paint  Creek,  in  Ohio,  about  fifteen  miles  from  Chilicothe, 
are  works  of  art,  still  more  wonderful  than  any  yet  described. 
There  are  six  in  m  nber,  and  are  in  the  neighborhood  of  each 
other.  In  one  of  tho?e  grand  enclosures  are  contained  three  forts, 
one  embraces  seven?  .ien,  another  twenty-seven,  a  third  seventy- 
seven,  amounting  in  all,  to  an  hundred  and  fifteen  acres  of  land. 

One  of  those  forts  5  ?  round,  another  square,  and  a  third  is  of  an 
irregular  form,  appro?  erring  however,  nearer  to  the  circular  than 
any  other ;  and  the  will  which  embraces  the  whole,  is  so  contrived 
in  its  courses,  as  to  Kvor  those  several  forms;  the  whole  being, 
evidently,  one  work,  reparated  into  three  compartments. 

There  are  fourteen  gateways,  going  out  of  the  whole  work,  be- 
sides three  which  un'te  the  several  forts  one  with  the  other,  in- 
wardly;  all  these,  especially  those  leading  outwardly,  are  very 
wide,  being,  as  they  row  appear,  from  one  to  six  rods.  At  three 
of  those  gateways,  on  the  outside  of  the  wall,  are  as  many  ancient 
wells  ;  and  one  on  '_T  e  inside,  where  doubtless,  the  inhabitants 
procured  water.  Their  width  at  the  top  is  from  four  to  six  rods, 
but  their  depth  unknown,  as  they  are  now  nearly  filled  up.  With- 
in the  greatest  enclosure,  containing  the  seventy-seven  acres,  is  an 
eliptical  elevation  of  twenty-five  feet  in  height,  and  so  large,  that  its 
area  is  nearly  one  hundred  and  fifty  rods  in  circumference,  com- 
posed almost  entirely  of  stone  in  their  rough  and  natural  state, 
brought  from  a  hill  adjacent  to  the  place. 

This  elevated  work  is  full  of  human  bone*,  and  some  have  not 
hesitated  to  express  a  belief,  that  on  this  work,  human  beings  were 
once  sacrificed.  The  surface  is  smooth  and  level,  favoring  the 
idea  of  the  horrid  parade,  such  occasion*  would  produce ;  yet  they 
may  have  been  erected  for  the  purpose  of  mere  military  manneuvre- 
ing,  which  would  produce  a  spectacle  very  imposing,  composed  of 
thousands,  harnessed  in  their  war  attire,  with  nodding  plumes. 

About  a  mile  from  this  fort,  there  is  a  work  in  the  form  of  a  half 
moon,  set  round  the  edges  with  stones,  exactly  resembling  the  stone 
circles  of  the  Draids,  in  which  they  performed  their  mystic  rites 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST-  167 

in  Europe,  two  thousand  years  ago.  Near  this  semicircle  is  a  very 
singular  mound  of  only  five  feet  in  height,  but  ninety  feet  in  cir- 
cumference, composed  entirely  of  red  ochre ;  which  answers  well 
as  a  paint.  An  abundance  of  this  oehre  is  found  on  a  hill,  not  a 
great  distance  from  this  place  ;  from  which  circumstance,  the  stream 
which  runs  along  here,  is  called  Paint  Creek. 

So  vast  a  heap  of  this  paint  being  deposited,  is  pretty  clear  evi 
dence,  that  it  was  an  article  of  commerce  among  these  nations 
Here  may  have  been  a  store  house,  or  a  range  of  them,  attended 
by  salesmen,  or  merchants;  who  took  in  exchange  for  it,  copper, 
feathers,  bow  and  arrow  timber,  stone  for  hatchets,  spears,  and 
knives,  wooden  ploughs  and  shovels  ;  with  skins  and  furs,  for  cloth- 
ing ;  stones  for  building  their  rude  altars  and  works  ;  with  food  to 
sustain  the  populace,  as  the  manner  of  cities  of  the  present  time. 
Red  paint  in  particular,  is  used  now  among  the  Hindoos,  which 
they  mark  themselves  with,  as  well  as  their  gods.  This  vast  col- 
lection of  red  paint,  by  the  ancient  nations,  on  Paint  Creek,  favors 
the  opinion,  that  it  was  put  to  the  same  use,  by  the  same  people. 

Near  this  work  is  another,  on  the  same  creek,  enclosing  eighty- 
four  acres,  part  of  which  is  a  square  fort,  with  seven  gateways ; 
and  the  other  a  fort,  of  an  irregular  oval,  with  seven  gateways,  sur- 
rounded with  a  wall  like  the  others.  But  the  most  interesting  work 
of  the  three  contiguous  forts,  is  yet  to  be  described.  It  is  situated 
on  a  high  hill,  of  more  than  three  hundred  feet  elevation,  and  in 
many  places  almost  perpendicular.  The  wall  running  round  this 
work,  is  built  exactly  on  the  brow  of  the  precipice,  and  in  its 
courses,  is  accommodated  to  the  variations  of  this  natural  battle- 
ment, enclosing,  in  the  whole,  an  hundred  and  thirty  acres.  On 
its  south  end  the  ground  is  level,  where  the  entrance  to  the  fort  is 
easy.  At  the  north  end,  which  approaches  pretty  near  to  Paint 
Creek,  appears  to  have  been  a  gateway  descending  to  the  water, 
the  ground  favoring  it  at  this  point,  as  well  as  at  one  other,  leading 
to  a  little  stream,  which  runs  along  its  base,  on  the  east  side  of  this 
eminence,  where  is  also  another  gateway ;  these  three  places  are 
the  only  points  which  are  at  all  accessible.  The  wall  round  the 
whole  one  hundred  and  thirty  acres,  is  entirely  of  stone,  and  is  in 
sufficient  quantity,  if  laid  up  in  good  order,  to  make  it  ten  feet  high, 
and  four  thick.  At  the  north  gateway,  stores  enough  now  lie,  to 
have  built  two  considerable  round  towers,  taken  from  the  hill  itself, 
and  are  of  the  red  sand  stone  kind. 


168 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


Near  the  south  end  of  this  enclosure,  at  the  place  where  it  is 
easiest  of  access,  "  appear  to  have  been  a  row  of  furnaces,  (says 
Mr.  Atwater)  or  smith's  shops,  where  the  cinders  now  lie,  many 
feet* deep;  but  was  not  able  to  say  with  certainty,  what  manufac- 
tures were  carried  on  here,  whether  brick  or  iron,  or  both."  It 
was  a  clay,  that  had  been  exposed  to  the  action  of  fire ;  the  re- 
mains of  which  are  four  and  five  feet  in  depth  ;  which  shows  in  a 
good  degree,  the  amount  of  business  done  was  great.  <l  Iron  ore, 
in  this  country,  is  sometimes  found  in  such  clay  ;  brick  and  potter's 
ware  are  now  manufactured  out  of  it.  This  fort  is,  from  its  natural 
site,  one  of  the  strongest  positions  of  the  kind  in  the  State  of  Ohio, 
so  high  is  its  elevation,  and  so  nearly  perpendicular  are  the  sides  of 
the  hill  on  which  it  was  built."  At  the  several  angles  of  the  wall, 
and  at  the  gateways,  the  abundance  of  stone  lying  there,  leads  to 
the  belief,  that  those  points,  towers  and  battlements  once  overlook- 
ed the  country  to  an  immense  distance  ;  from  whence  stones  and 
arrows  might  have  been  launched  away,  from  engines  adapted  to 
that  purpose,  among  the  approaching  enemy,  with  dreadful  effect. 
"  No  military  man  could  have  selected  a  better  position  for  a  place 
of  protection  to  his  countrymen,  their  temples  and  their  gods," 
than  this. 


ANCIENT  WELLS  FOUND  IN  THE  BOTTOM  OF  PAINT  CREEK. 

In  the  bed  of  Paint  Creek,  which  washes  the  foot  of  the  hill, 
on  which  the  walled  town  stood,  have  been  discovered  four  wells. 
They  were  dug  through  a  pyritous  slate  rock,  which  is  very  rich 
in  iron  ore.  When  first  discovered,  by  a  person  passing  over  them 
in  a  canoe,  they  were  covered,  each  by  stones  of  about  the  size 
and  shape  of  the  common  mill  stone.  These  covers  had  holes 
through  their  centre,  through  which  a  large  pry,  or  handspike  might 
be  put  for  the  purpose  of  removing  them  oft*  and  on  the  wells. 
The  hole  through  the  centre  of  each  stom\  was  about  four  inches 
in  diameter.  The  wells  at  their  tops  were  more  than  nine  feet  in 
circumference  ;  the  stones  \wmc  well  wrought  with  tools,  so  as  to 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


169 


make  good  joints,  as  a  stone  mason  would  say,  which  were  laid 
around  them  severally,  as  a  pavement.  At  the  time  they  were  dug, 
it  is  not  likely,  Paint  Creek  run  over  these  wells.  For  what  they 
were  sunk,  is  a  mystery ;  as  that  for  the  purposes  of  water,  so 
many  so  near  each  other,  would  scarcely  appear  necessary  ;  per- 
haps for  some  kind  of  ore  or  favorite  stone,  was  the  original  object, 
perhaps  for  salt  water. 

There  is,  at  Portsmouth;  Ohio,  one  of  those  works,  which  is  very 
extensive  and  wonderful,  on  account  of  walled  roads,  a  '  high  place,' 
with  many  intricate  operations  in  its  construction. 

On  the  east  bank  of  the  Little  Miami,  about  thirty  miles  east 
from  Cincinnati,  are  vast  works  of  rMs  character ;  having  the  form 
almost  exactly  of  the  continent  of  Nor'.h  and  South  America,  at 
presented  on  the  map,  on  which  account  some  have  supposed  they 
were  made  in  imitation  of  it. 


A  RECENT  DISCOVERY  OF  ONE  OF  THOSE  ANCIENT  WORKS 
AMONG  THE  ALLEGHANIES. 

New  discoveries  are  jonstantly  making  of  these  ancient  works, 
the  farther  we  go  west,  and  the  more  minutely  the  research  is 
prosecuted,  even  in  parts  already  settled. 

During  the  last  year,  1832,  a  Mr.  Ferguson  communicated  to  the 
editor  of  the  Christian  Advocate  and  Journal,  a  discovery  of  the 
kind,  which  he  examined,  and  describes  as  follows: 

"  On  a  mountain  called  the  Lookout  mountain,  belonging  to  the 
vast  Alleghanian  chain,  running  between  the  Tennessee  and  Coos 
rivers,  rising  about  one  thousand  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sur- 
rounding valley.  The  top  of  the  mountain  is  mostly  level,  but 
presents  to  the  eye  an  almost  barren  waste.  On  this  range,  not- 
withstanding its  height,  a  river  has  its  source,  after  traversing  it 
for  about  seventy  miles,  plunges  over  a  precipice.  The  rock  from 
which  the  water  falls,  is  circular,  and  juts  over  considerably.  Im- 
mediately below  the  fall,  on  each  side  of  the  river,  are  bluffs,  which 
rise  about  two  hundred  feet.    Around  one  of  these  bluffs,  the  river 

22 


170 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


makes  a  bend,  which  gives  it  the  form  of  a  peninsula.  On  the  top 
of  this  are  the  remains  of  what  is  esteemed  fortifications ;  which 
consist  of  a  stone  wall,  built  on  the  very  brow  of  this  tremendous 
ledge.  The  whole  length  of  the  wall,  following  the  varying 
courses  of  the  brink  of  this  precipice,  as  thirty-seven  rods  and  eight 
feet,  including  about  two  acres  of  ground." 

The  only  descent  from  this  place  is  between  two  rocks,  for  about 
thirty  feet,  when  a  bench  of  the  ledge  presents  itself,  from  two  to 
five  feet  in  width,  and  ninety  feet  long.  This  bench  is  the  only 
road  or  path  up  from  the  water's  edge  to  the  summit.  But  just  at 
the  foot  of  the  two  rocks,  where  they  reach  tms  path,  and  within 
thirty  feet  of  the  top  of  the  rock,  are  five  rooms,  which  have  been 
formed  by  dint  of  labor.  The  entrance  to  these  rooms  is  very 
small,  but  when  within,  they  are  found  to  communicate  with  each 
other,  by  doors  or  apertures.  Mr.  Ferguson  thinks  them  to  have 
been  constructed  during  some  dreadful  war,  and  those  who  con- 
structed thenij  to  have  acted  on  the  defensive  ;  and  believe  that 
twenty  men  could  have  withstood  the  whole  army  of  Xerxes,  as  it 
was  impossible  for  more  than  one  to  pass  at  a  time ;  and  might  by 
the  slightest  push,  be  hurled  at  least  an  hundred  and  fifty  feet 
down  the  rocks.  The  reader  can  indulge  his  own  conjectures, 
whether,  in  the  construction  of  this  inaccessible  fortress,  he  does 
not  perceive  the  remnant  of  a  tribe  or  nation,  acquainted  with  the 
arts  of  excavation  and  defence ;  making  a  last  struggle  against  the 
invasion  of  an  overwhelming  foe  ;  where,  it  is  likely,  they  were 
reduced  by  famine,  and  perished  amid  the  yells  of  their  enemies. 


A  DESCRIPTION  OF  WESTERN  TUMULI  OR  MOUNDS. 

We  now  proceed  to  a  description  of  the  ancient  tumuli  of  the 
west,  and  of  discoveries  made  on  opening  many  of  them  ;  quoted 
from  the  Researches  of  the  Antiquarian  Society. 

Ancient  Tumuli  are  considered  a  kind  of  antiquities,  differing  in 
character  from  that  of  the  other  works ;  both  on  account  of  what  is 
frequently  discovered  in  them,  and  the  manner  of  their  construe- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST-  171 

tion.  They  are  conical  mounds,  either  of  earth  or  stones,  which 
were  intended  for  sacred  and  important  purposes.  In  many  parts 
of  the  world,  similar  mounds  were  used  as  monuments,  sepulchres, 
altars,  and  temples.  The  accounts  of  these  works,  found  in  the 
Scriptures,  show,  that  their  origin  must  be  sought  for  among  the 
Antediluvians. 

I  That  they  are  very  ancient,  and  were  used  as  places  of  sepulture, 
public  resort,  and  public  worship,  is  proved  by  all  the  writers  of 
ancient  times,  both  sacred  and  profane.  Homer  frequently  men- 
tions them,  particularly  describing  the  tumulus  of  Tydeus,  and 
the  spot  where  it  was.  In  memory  of  the  illustrious  dead,  a  se- 
pulchral mound  of  earth  was  raised  over  their  remains ;  which, 
from  that  time  forward,  became  an  altar,  whereon  to  offer  sacrifices, 
and  around  which  to  exhibit  games  of  athletic  exercise.  These  of- 
ferings and  games  were  intended  to  propitiate  their  names,  to  honor 
and  perpetuate  their  memories.  Prudentius,  a  Roman  bard,  has 
told  us,  that  there  were  in  ancient  Rome,  just  as  many  temples  of 
gods,  as  there  were  sepulchres  of  heroes  ;  implying  that  they  were 
the  same.  Need  I  mention  the  tomb  of  Anchies,  which  Virgil 
has  described,  with  the  offerings  there  presented,  and  the  games 
there  exhibited  ?  The  sanctity  of  Acropolis,  where  Cecrops  was 
inhumed  ?  The  tomb  of  the  father  of  Adonis,  at  Paphos,  whereon 
a  temple  dedicated  to  Venus,  was  erected  ?  The  grave  of  Cleoma- 
chus,  whereon  stood  a  temple  dedicated  to  the  worship  of  Apollo  ? 
Finally,  I  would  ask  the  classical  reader,  if  the  words  translated 
tomb,  and  temple,  are  not  used  as  synonymous,  by  the  poets  of 
Greece  and  Rome  ?  Virgil,  who  wrote  in  the  days  of  Augustus 
Caesar,  speaks  of  these  tumuli,  as  being  as  ancient  as  they  were 
sacred,  even  in  his  time. 

In  later  times,  after  warriors  arose  and  performed  great  and 
mighty  deeds,  the  whole  tribe  or  nation  joined  to  raise,  on  some 
'  high  place,'  generally,  a  lofty  tumulus,  for  commfemorative  and 
sacred  purposes.  At  first,  sacrfkes  might  have  been,  and  probably 
were,  offered  on  these  tumuli,  to  the  true  God,  as  the  Great  Au- 
thor and  Giver  of  life ;  but  in  later  times,  they  forgot  Him,  and 
worshipped  the  manes  of  heroes  they  had  buried  there. 

The  conical  mounds  in  Ohio,  are  either  of  stones  or  of  earth. 
The  former,  in  other  countries,  and  in  former  ages,  were  intended 
as  monuments;  for  the  purpose  of  perpetuating  the  memory  of  some 


172 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


important  event,  or  as  altars  whereon  to  offer  sacrifices.  The 
latter  were  used  as  cemeteries  and  as  altars,  whereon,  in  later 
times,  temples  were  erected,  as  among  the  people  of  Greece  and 

Rome. 

The  tumuli,  "  are  of  various  altitudes  and  dimensions,  some  be- 
ing only  four  or  five  feet,  and  but  ten  or  twelve  in  diameter,  at 
their  base;  while  others,  as  we  travel  to  the  south,  rise  to  the  height 
of  eighty,  ninety,  and  some  more  than  an  hundred  feet,  and  cover 
many  acres  of  ground.  They  are,  generally,  when  completed,  in 
the  form  of  a  cone.  Those  in  the  north  part  of  Ohio,  are  of  infe- 
rior size,  and  fewer  in  number,  than  those  along  the  river.  These 
mounds  are  believed  to  exist,  from  the  Rocky  mountains  in  the 
west,  to  the  Alleghanies  in  the  east ;  from  the  southern  shore  of 
Lake  Erie  to  the  Mexican  Gulf;  and  though  few  and  small  in  the 
north,  are  numerous  and  Ifrfty  in  the  south,  yet  exhibit  proof  of  a 
common  origin. 

On  Jonathan  creek,  in  Morgan  county,  are  found  some  mounds, 
whose  bases  are  formed  of  well  burnt  bricks,  between  four  and  five 
inches  square.  There  are  found  lying  on  the  bricks,  charcoal  cin- 
ders, and  pieces  of  calcined  human  bones.  Above  them  the  mounds 
were  composed  of  earth,  showing,  that  the  dead  had  been  buried 
in  the  manner  of  several  of  the  eastern  nations,  and  the  mounds 
raised  afterwards  to  mark  the  place  of  their  burial. 

One  of  them  is  about  twenty-four  feet  in  circumference,  and  the 
stones  yet  look  black,  as  if  stained  with  fire  and  smoke.  This  cir- 
cle of  stones  seems  to  have  been  the  nucleus  on  which  the  mound 
was  formed,  as  immediately  over  them  is  heaped  the  common  earth 
of  the  adjacent  plain.  This  mound  was  originally  about  ten  feet 
high,  and  ninety  feet  in  circumference  at  its  base;  and  has  every 
appearance  of  being  as  old  as  any  in  the  neighborhood,  and  was, 
at  the  first  settlement  of  Marietta,  covered  with  large  trees. 

A  particular  account  of  many  curious  articles,  which  go  to  show 
the  person  buried  there  was  a  member  of  civilized  society,  is  given 
farther  on  in  this  work,  under  the  head  of  M  a  description  of  im- 
plements found  in  the  tumuli." 

The  person  buried  here  was  about  six  feet  in  height,  nothing 
differing  from  other  men  in  the  form  of  his  bones,  except  the  skull, 
which  av;,s  uncommonly  thick.  The  timber  growing  0n  this  mound, 
when  it  was  cleared  off,  was  ascertained  to  Le  nearly  rive  hundred 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST 


173 


years  old,  from  counting  the  concentric  circles  or  grains  of  the 
wood  on  the  stumps.  On  the  ground  beside  them  were  other  trees 
in  a  state  of  decay,  that  had  fallen  from  old  age." 

If  we  were  to  conjecture,  from  this  sort  of  data,  how  great  a 
lapse  of  years  has  ensued  since  the  abandonment  of  this  mound, 
we  should  pursue  the  following  method.  From  the  time  when 
the  country  became  desolate  of  its  inhabitants,  till  trees  and  forests 
would  begin  to  grow,  cannot  well  be  reckoned  less  than  five  years. 
If  then  they  are  permitted  to  grow  five  hundred  years,  till  as  large 
and  as  old  as  some  of  the  trees  were  on  the  mound  when  it  was 
cleared  by  the  people  of  Marietta,  from  that  time  till  their  natural 
decay  and  fall  to  the  earth,  and  reduction  to  decayed  wood,  as  was 
found  on  the  mound,  could  not  be  less  than  three  hundred  years, 
in  decaying  so  as  to  fall,  and  then  fifty  years  to  rot  in  ;  this  would 
give  eight  hundred  and  fifty-five  years  for  the  first  growth  of  tim- 
ber. From  this  time  we  reckon  a  second  crop,  which  we  will  sup- 
pose, was  the  one  growing  when  the  mound  was  cleared  of  its  tim- 
ber ;  which  was,  according  to  Mr.  Atwater's  statement,  "  between 
four  and  five  hundred  years  add  this  to  the  age  of  the  first  crop, 
say  four  hundred  and  fifty,  and  we  have,  in  the  whole,  one  thou- 
sand three  hundred  and  five  years,  since  it  was  deserted  of  its  buil- 
ders. Dr.  Cutler  supposes  at  least  a  thousand  years.  Then  it  will 
follow,  taking  out  the  time  since  Marietta  was  settled,  and  the 
mound  cleared  of  its  timber,  that  the  countrv  was  deserted  about 
five  hundred  years  after  the  commencement  of  the  Christian  era. 

About  the  same  time,  say  from  the  year  410  to  500  of  the  Chris- 
tian era,  the  greater  part  of  Europe  was  devastated  by  the  Goths, 
the  Huns,  the  Heruli,  the  Vandals,  the  Swevri,  the  Alians,  and 
other  savage  tribes,  all  from  the  northern  wilds  of  ancient  Russia. 
By  these  the  western  empire  of  the  Romans,  comprehending  Italy, 
Germany,  France,  Spain,  and  England,  was  subverted  ;  all  litera- 
ture was  obliterated,  and  the  works  of  the  learned,  which  contained 
the  discoveries  and  improvements  of  ages,  were  annihilated. 

And  from  all  we  can  make  out  by  observing  the  growth  of  tim- 
ber, with  that  which  is  decayed,  as  found  on  the  deserted  works 
of  the  west,  we  are  inclined  to  believe,  that  about  the  same  period 
of  time  when  Europe  was  overrun  by  the  northern  hordes,  that 
the  region  now  called  the  United  States,  where  the  ancient  inhabit- 
ants had  fixed  their  abode,  was  also  overrun  by  northern  horde s 


174  AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 

from  toward  Bhering's  Straits,  who  had,  in  ages  before,  got  across 
from  Asia,  tke  Tartars,  or  Scythians,  and  had  multiplied ;  and  as 
they  multiplied,  progressed  farther  and  farther  southerly  till  they 
discovered  an  inhabited  country,  populous,  and  rich,  upon  whom 
they  fell  with  all  the  fury  of  Attila  and  his  Huns;  till,  after  many 
a  long  and  dreadful  war,  they  were  reduced  in  numbers,  and  driven 
from  their  country  far  to  the  south  ;  when  the  rich  fields,  vast 
cities,  innumerable  towns,  with  all  their  works,  were  reduced  to 
the  ancient  dominion  of  nature,  as  it  was  when  first  overgrown  im- 
mediately after  the  flood,  except  their  vast  pyramids,  fortifications, 
and  tumuli,  these  be  ng  of  the  same  nature  and  durability  of  the 
hills  and  mountains,  kwe  stood  the  shock  of  war  and  time — the 
monuments  of  power!  <i  nations  disappeared. 

"  In  clearing  out  a  spring  near  some  ancient  ruins  cf  the  west, 
on  the  bank  of  the  Little  Miami,  not  far  from  its  entrance  into  the 
Ohio,  was  found  a  cc  >per  coin,  four  feet  below  the  surface  of  the 
earth  ;  from  the  fac  simile  of  which  it  appears,  that  the  characters 
on  the  coin  are  old  Pttsian  characters. — Morse's  Universal  Geogra- 
phy ,  Vol.  lyp.  442. 

The  era  of  the  Perdans,  as  noticed  on  the  page  of  history,  was 
from  559,  after  the  flo>  J,  till  334,  before  Christ,  aiad  were  a  people 
of  great  strength,  of  enterprising  character,  and  enlightened  in  the 
arts  and  sciences ;  ana  for  aught  that  can  be  objected,  traversed 
the  globe,  planted  colo  lies,  perhaps  even  in  America,  as  the  coin, 
which  lay  so  deep  beneath  the  surface  of  the  earth,  would  seem  to 
justify ;  which  was  truly  a  Persian  coin  of  copper. 

At  Cincinnati,  a  mound,  only  eight  feet  high,  but  one  hundred 
and  twenty  long,  by  sixty  in  breadth,  has  been  opened,  and  is  now 
almost  obliterated,  by  the  construction  of  Main-street,  which  has 
furnished  many  curious  discoveries  relative  to  the  ancient  inhabi- 
tants who  built  it.  0/  the  articles  taken  from  thence, -many  have 
been  lost ;  but  the  most  worthy  of  notice  are  embraced  in  the  fol- 
lowing catalogue : 

1st.  Pieces  of  jasper,  rock  crystal,  granite  and  some  other  stones, 
cylindrical  at  the  extremes,  and  swelled  in  the  middle,  with  an  an- 
nular groove  near  the  end.  2d.  A  circular  piece  of  stone  coal,  with 
a  large  opening  in  the  centre,  as  if  for  an  axis  or  axletree,  and  a 
deep  groove  ;  the  circumference  suitable  lor  a  hand;  it  has  a  num- 
ber of  small  perforations,  disposed  in  four  equidistant  lines,  which 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST.  175 

run  from  the  circumference  towards  the  centre.  3d.  A  small  ar- 
ticle of  the  same  shape,  with  eight  lines  of  perforations,  but  com- 
posed of  argilaceous  earth,  well  polished.  4th.  A  bone  ornamented 
with  several  lines,  supposed  to  be  hieroglyphical.  5th.  A  sculp- 
tured representation  of  the  head  and  beak  of  a  rapacious  bird,  re- 
sembling the  eagle.  6th.  A  mass  of  lead  ore,  lumps  of  which  have 
been  found  in  other  tumuli.  7th.  A  quantity  of  isinglass,  (mica 
membranacea,)  several  plates  of  which  have  been  found  in  and 
about  other  mounds.  8th.  A  small  oval  piece  of  sheet  copper,  with 
two  perforations ;  a  large  oblong  piece  of  the  same  metal,  with 
longitudinal  grooves  and  ridges. 

These  articles  are  described  in  the  fourth  and  fifth  volumes  of  the 
American  Philosophical  Transactions,  by  Governeur  Sargeant  and 
Judge  Turner,  and  were  supposed,  by  Philosopher  Barton,  to  have 
been  designed,  in  part,  for  ornament,  and,  in  part,  for  superstitious 
ceremonies.  In  addition  to  which,  the  author,  (Mr.  Atwater,)  says, 
he  has  since  discovered,  in  the  same  mound,  a  number  of  beads,  or 
sections,  of  small  hollow  cylinders,  apparently  of  bone  or  shell. 

Several  large  marine  shells,  cut  in  such  a  manner  as  to  serve  for 
domestic  utensils,  and  nearly  converted  into  a  state  of  chalk ;  seve- 
ral copper  articles,  each  consisting  of  two  sets  of  circular  concavo 
convex  plates,  the  interior  of  each  set  connected  with  the  other  by 
a  hollow  axis,  around  which  had  been  wound  some  lint,  and  the 
whole  encompassed  by  the  bones  of  a  man's  hand.  About  the  pre- 
cincts of  this  town,  Cincinnati,  human  bones  have  been  found  "  of 
different  sizes  ;  sometimes  enclosed  in  rude  stone  coffins,  but 
oftener  lying  blended  with  the  earth  ;  generally  surrounded  by  a 
portion  of  ashes  and  charcoal,"  as  if  they  had  been  burnt  either 
alive  or  dead,  as  the  Hindoos  burn  both  the  dead  husband  and  the 
living  wife,  on  the  same  funeral  pile.  See  Ward's  History  of  the 
Hindoos,  page  57 ;  where  he  states,  "  that  not  less  than  five  thou- 
sand of  these  unfortunate  women,  it  is  supposed,  are  burnt  annu- 
ally." The  ancient  Jews  practised  the  same  thing ;  see  Amos,  6th 
chap.  10th  verse  :  "  And  a  man's  uncle  shall  take  him  up,  and  he 
that  burneth  him,  to  bring  out  the  bones  out  of  the  house."  The 
ancient  Edomites  burnt  the  dead  bodies  of  their  captured  enemies. 
See  Amos  2d  chap.  1st  verse :  "  He,"  that  is  Edom,  "  burned  the 
bones  of  the  king  of  Edom  into  lime."  Thi  same  may  have  been 
practised  in  America. 


176 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIE8 


Besides  these  relics  found  at  Marietta,  others,  equally  interest- 
ing, have  been  procured  from  a  mound  on  the  Little  Muskingum, 
about  four  miles  from  Marietta.  There  are  some  pieces  of  copper 
which  appear  to  have  been  the  front  part  of  a  helmet.  It  was 
originally  about  eight  inches  long  and  four  broad,  and  has  marks  of 
having  been  attached  to  leather ;  it  is  much  decayed,  and  is  now 
quite  a  thin  plate. 

The  helmet  was  worn  by  the  ancients  as  a  defence  against  the 
blows  of  the  sword,  aimed  at  the  head.  The  Greeks,  the  Ro- 
mans, with  many  other  nations  of  antiquity,  made  use  of  this  ma- 
jestic, beautiful,  warlike  covering  of  the  head.  But  how  came 
this  part  of  the  ancient  armor  in  America  ?  This  is  the  mystery, 
and  cannot  be  solved,  only  on  the  principle,  that  we  believe  the 
wearers  lived  in  those  ages  coeval  with  the  martial  exploits  of  the 
Medes,  Persians,  Carthaginians,  Egyptians,  Greeks, Romans  and  of 
the  Celtic  nations  of  Europe. 

In  the  same  mound  on  the  Muskingum,  was  found  a  copper  or- 
nament ;  this  was  on  the  forehead  of  a  human  skeleton,  no  part  of 
which  retained  its  form,  except  that  part  of  the  forehead  where 
the  copper  ornament  lay,  and  had  been  preserved  no  doubt  by  the 
salts  of  that  mineral.  In  Virginia,  near  Blacksburgh,  eighty  miles 
from  Marietta,  there  was  found  the  half  of  a  steel  bowj  which,  when 
entire,  would  measure  five  or  six  feet ;  the  other  part  was  corroded 
or  broken.  The  father  of  the  lad  who  found  the  bow,  was  a  black- 
smith, and  worked  up  this  curious  article  with  as  little  remorse  as 
he  would  an  old  gun  barrel. 

In  the  18th  Psalm,  34th  verse,  mention  is  made  by  David,  king 
of  Israel,  of  the  steel  bow,  which  must  have  been  a  powerful  in- 
strument of  death,  of  the  kind,  and  probably  well  known  to  the 
Jews,  as  superior  to  the  wooden  bow.  This  kind  of  warlike  artil- 
lery^ the  bow  and  arrow,  has  been  used  by  all  nations,  and  in  all 
ages  of  time.  The  time  of  King  David  was  about  one  thousand 
one  hundred  years  before  Christ ;  when,  he  says,  a  bow  of  steel 
was  broken  by  his  own  arm.  This  must  have  been  done  in  some 
of  his  fights  with  the  enemies  of  Saul,  as  it  is  very  probable  that 
he  fought  personally  after  he  came  to  the  kingdom  ;  and  from  his 
earnestness  in  the  fight,  drew  the  striug  of  his  bow  too  far,  so  that 
the  instrument  could  not  bear  it,  consequently  it  snapped  asunder ; 
which  circumstance  he  has  celebrated  in  the  praises  of  the  God  of 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


177 


Israel,  as  an  evidence  of  the  aid  and  strength  derived  from  Heaven 
in  the  heat  of  battle. 

But  Dr.  Clarke  supposes,  steel  is  out  of  the  question,  as  he  thinks 
the  art  of  making  steel  was  unknown  at  that  time,  and  believes  the 
bow  alluded  to,  which  was  broken  by  David,  was  a  brass  one,  but 
it  is  unknown  to  the  wrriter  of  this  work,  whether  brass  will  spring 
at  all  so  as  to  throw  an  arrow  with  any  effect.  But  why  may  not 
steel  have  been  known,  and  the  art  of  producing  it  from  iron,  in 
the  time  of  David,  as  well  as  the  art  of  making  brass,  which  is 
equally  hidden,  and  more  so  than  that  of  steel  ?  Tubal  Cain  was 
a  worker  in  brass  and  irow,  before  the  flood ;  and  we  should  sup- 
pose the  way  to  procure  steel  from  iron,  would  as  soon  have  been 
discovered  by  the  antediluvian  blacksmiths,  as  knowledge  how  to 
make  brass  from  a  union  of  copper  and  zinc. 

The  discovery  of  this  steel  bow,  in  the  west,  is  exceedingly  cu- 
rious, and  would  seem  to  justify  the  belief,  that  it  came  from  the 
old  world,  as  an  instrument  of  wTarfare  in  the  hands  of  some  of  the 
Asiatic,  African,  or  European  nations,  possibly  Danes,  as  the  pre- 
sent Indian  nations  were  found  destitute  of  every  kind  of  bow  and 
arrow,  except  that  of  wood. 

"  In  Ross  county,  near  Chilicothe,  a  few  years  since,  was  found, 
in  the  hand  of  a  skeleton,  which  lay  buried  in  a  small  mound,  an 
ornament  of  pure  gold  ;  this  curiosity,  it  is  said,  is  now  in  the  Mu- 
seum at  Philadelphia.'1 — Atwater.  The  tumuli,  in  what  is  called 
the  Sciota  country,  are  both  numerous  and  interesting.  But  south 
of  Lake  Erie,  until  we  arrive  at  Worthington,  nine  miles  north  of 
Columbus,  they  are  few  in  number,  and  of  comparatively  small 
magnitude.  Near  Columbus,  the  seat  of  government  of  Ohio,  were 
several  mounds,  one  of  which  stood  on  an  eminence  in  the  princi- 
pal street,  which  has  been  entirely  removed,  and  converted  into 
bricks.  It  contained  human  bones,  some  few  articles,  among  which 
was  an  owl  carved  in  stone,  a  rude  but  very  exact  representation. 

The  owl,  among  the  Romans,  was  the  emblem  of  wisdom,  and 
it  is  not  impossible  but  the  ancients  of  the  west,  may  have  carved 
it  in  the  stone  for  the  same  reason  ;  who  may  have  been,  in  part, 
Romans,  or  nations  derived  from  them,  or  nations  acquainted  with 
their  manners,  their  gods,  and  their  sculpture,  as  we  suppose  the 
Danes  were. 

"  In  aaother  part  of  the  town  of  Columbus,  was  a  tumulus  of 

23 


178 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


clay,  which  was  also  manufactured  into  bricks.  In  this  were 
many  human  bones  ;  but  they  lay  in  piles,  and  in  confusion," 
which  would  seem  to  elicit  the  belief,  that  these  were  the  bones 
of  an  enemy,  or  they  would  have  been  laid  in  their  accus- 
tomed order.  Or  they  may  have  been  the  bones  of  the  conquered, 
thrown  together  in  a  confused  manner,  and  buried  beneath  this 
mound. 

As  we  still  descend  the  Sciota,  through  a  most  fertile  region  of 
country,  mounds  and  other  ancient  works,  frequently  appear,  until 
we  arrive  at  Circleville.  Near  the  centre  of  the  circular  fort  at 
Circleville,  was  a  tumulus  of  earth,  about  ten  feet  high,  and  seve- 
ral rods  in  diameter  at  its  base.  On  its  eastern  side,  and  extend- 
ing six  rods  from  it,  was  a  semicircular  pavement,  composed  of 
pebbles  such  as  are  now  found  in  the  bed  of  Sciota  river,  from 
whence  they  appear  to  have  been  taken.  The  summit  of  this  tu- 
mulus was  nearly  ninety  feet  in  circumference,  with  a  raised  way 
to  it,  leading  from  the  east,  like  modern  turnpike.  The  summit 
was  level-  The  outline  of  the  semicircular  pavement,  and  the 
walk,  are  still  discernible.  Mr.  Atwater  was  present  when  this 
mound  was  removed,  and  carefully  examined  the  contents  it  de- 
veloped. They  were  as  follows :  First ;  two  skeletons,  lying  on 
what  had  been  the  original  surface  of  the  earth.  Second  ;  a  great 
quantity  of  arrow  heads,  some  of  which  were  so  large  as  to  induce 
a  belief  that  they  were  used  for  spear  heads-  Third  ;  the  handle, 
either  of  a  small  sword,  or  a  large  knife,  made  of  an  elk's  horn ; 
around  the  end  where  the  blade  had  been  inserted,  was  a  ferule  of 
silver,  which,  though  black,  was  not  much  injured  by  time  ;  though 
the  handle  showed  the  hole  where  the  blade  had  been  inserted,  yet 
no  iron  was  found,  but  an  oxyde  or  rust  remained,  of  similar  shape 
and  size.  The  swords  of  the  ancient  nations  of  the  old  world,  it 
is  known,  were  very  short.  Fourth  ;  charcoal,  and  wood  ashes,  on 
which  these  articles  lay,  were  surrounded  by  several  bricks,  very 
well  burnt.  The  skeleton  appeared  to  have  been  burnt  in  a  large 
and  very  hoi  fire,  which  had  almost  consumed  the  bones  of  the  de- 
ceased. This  skeleton  was  deposited  a  little  to  the  south  of  the 
centre  of  the  tumuius  ;  and  about  twenty  feet  to  the  north  of  it 
was  another,  with  which  was  found  a  large  mirror,  about  three  feet 
in  leugth,  one  foot  and  a  half  in  width,  and  one  inch  and  a  half  in 
thickness  ;  this  was  of  isinglass,  (mica  mcmbranacea.) 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


L78 


On  this  mirror  was  a  plate  of  iron,  which  had  become  an  oxyde ; 
but  before  it  was  disturbed  by  the  spade,  resembled  a  plate  of  cast 
iron.  The  mirror  answered  the  purpose  very  well  for  which  it  was 
intended.  This  skeleton  had  also  been  burned  like  the  former, 
and  lay  on  charcoal  and  a  considerable  quantity  of  wood  ashes;  a 
part  of  the  mirror  is  in  the  possession  of  Mr.  Atwater,  as  also  a 
piece  of  brick,  taken  from  the  spot  at  the  time.  The  knife,  or 
sword  handle,  was  sent  to  Peale?s  museum,  Philadelphia.  To  the 
southwest  of  this  tumulus,  about  forty  rods  from  it,  is  another,  more 
than  ninety  feet  in  height.  It  stands  on  a  large  hill,  which  appears 
to  be  artificial.  This  must  have  been  the  common  cemetry3  as  it 
contains  an  immense  number  of  human  skeletons,  of  all  sizes  and 
ages.  These  skeletons  are  laid  horizontally,  with  their  heads  gen- 
erally towards  the  centre,  and  the  feet  towards  the  outside  of  the 
tumulus.  In  it  have  been  found,  besides  these  skeletons,  stone 
axes  and  stone  knives,  and  several  ornaments,  with  holes  through 
them,  by  means  of  which,  with  a  cord  passing  through  these  perfo- 
rations, they  could  be  worn  by  their  owners. 

On  the  south  side  of  this  tumulus,  and  not  far  from  it,  was  a 
semicircular  fosse,  or  ditch,  six  feet  deep ;  which,  when  examin- 
ed at  the  bottom,  was  found  to  contain  a  great  quantity  of  human 
bones,  which,  it  is  believed,  wero  the  remains  of  those  who  had 
been  slain  in  some  great  and  destructive  battle ;  because  they  be- 
longed to  persons  invariably  who  had  attained  their  full  size ;  while 
those  found  in  the  mound  adjoining,  were  of  all  sizes,  great  and 
small,  but  laid  in  good  order,  while  those  in  the  ditch  were  in  the 
utmost  confusion  ;  and  were,  no  doubt,  the  conquered  invaders, 
buried  thus  ingloriously,  where  they  had  intrenched  themselves, 
and  fell  in  the  struggle. 

The  mirror  was  a  monstrous  piece  of  isinglass,  a  lucid  mineral, 
larger  than  we  recollect  to  have  ever  heard  of  before,  and  used 
among  the  rich  of  the  ancients,  for  lights  and  mirrors.  A  mirror  of 
any  kind,  in  which  men  may  be  enabled  to  contemplate  their  own 
form,  is  evidence  of  a  considerable  degree  of  advancement  in  the 
arts,  if  not  even  of  luxury  itself. 

The  Rev.  Robert  G.  Wilson,  D.  D.,  of  Chilicothe,  furnished  the 
Antiquarian  Society,  with  information  concerning  the  mound,  which 
once  stood  near  the  centre  of  that  town.  He  took  pains  to  write 
down  its  contents  at  the  time  of  its  demolition.    Its  perpendicular 


180 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


height  was  about  fifteen  feet,  and  the  circumference  of  its  base 
about  one  hundred  and  eighty  feet,  composed  of  sand.  It  was  not 
till  this  pile  of  earth  had  been  removed,  that  the  original  design  of 
its  builders  could  be  discovered.  On  a  common  level  with  the  sur- 
rounding earth,  at  the  very  bottom  of  this  mound,  they  had  devoted 
about  twenty  feet  square  ;  this  was  found  to  have  been  covered  at 
first  with  b&rk,  on  which  lay,  in  the  centre,  a  human  skeleton, 
overspread  with  a  mat,  manufactured  from  weeds  or  bark,  but 
greatly  decayed. 

On  the  breast  of  this  person  lay  what  had  been  a  piece  of  cop- 
per in  the  form  of  a  cross,  which  had  become  verdigris ;  on  the 
breast  also  lay  a  stone  ornament,  three  inches  in  length,  and  two 
and  a  half  in  width,  with  two  perforations,  one  near  each  end, 
through  which  passed  a  string,  by  means  of  which  it  was  suspend- 
ed from  the  wearer's  neck.  On  this  string,  which  appeared  to 
have  been  made  of  the  sinews  of  some  animal,  which  had  been 
cured  or  tanned,  but  were  very  much  injured  by  time,  was  strung 
a  great  many  beads,  made  of  ivory,  or  bone,  he  could  not  tell  which. 

With  these  facts  before  us,  we  are  left  to  conjecture  at  what 
time  this  individual  lived,  what  were  his  heroic  deeds  in  the  field 
of  battle  ;  his  wisdom,  his  virtues,  his  eloquence  in  the  councils 
of  his  nation  ;  for  his  cotemporaries  have  testified  in  a  manner  not 
to  be  mistaken,  that  among  them  he  was  held  in  honorable  and 
grateful  remembrance,  by  the  mound  which  was  raised  over  him 
at  his  decease. 

The  cross  on  the  breast  of  this  skeleton,  excites  the  most  sur- 
prise, as  that  the  cross  is  the  emblem  of  the  Christian  religion.  It 
is  true,  a  knowledge  of  this  badge  of  Christianity,  may  have  been 
disseminated  from  Jerusalem,  even  as  far  east  as  to  China  ;  as  we 
know  it  was  at  a  very  early  period,  made  known  in  many  countries 
of  Europe,  Africa,  and  Asia;  especially,  at  the  era  when  the  Ro- 
man emperor  Constantino,  in  the  year  331,  ordered  all  the  heathen 
temples  to  be  destroyed,  for  the  sake  of  Christianity,  throughout 
his  vast  dominion. 

The  reader  may  recollect,  we  have  elicited  an  argument,  from 
the  age  of  the  timber,  or  forest  trees,  growing  on  the  mound,  at 
Marietta,  proposing  to  show  the  probable  era  when  the  country  be- 
came depopulated ;  and  come  to  the  conclusion,  that  at  least,  about 
thirteen  hundred  years  have  passed  away  since  that  catastrophe 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST- 


181 


This  would  give  about  five  hundred  years  from  Christ  till  the 
depopulation  of  the  ancient  western  country  ;  so  that,  during  the 
lapse  of  those  five  centuries,  a  knowledge  of  what  had  been  propa- 
gated at  Jerusalem  about  Christ,  may  have  been,  easily  enough  by 
missionaries,  travelling  philosophers  of  the  Romans,  Greeks,  or  of 
other  nations,  carried  as  well  to  China,  as  to  other  distant  countries, 
as  we  know  was  the  fact. 

The  string  of  beads,  and  the  stone  on  his  breast,  which  we  take 
the  liberty  of  calling  the  Shalgramu  stone,  or  the  stone  in  which 
the  Hindoos  suppose  the  god  Vishnoo  resides  ;  together  with  the 
copper  cross  on  his  breast,  and  beads  on  his  neck,  are  circumstances, 
which  strongly  argue  that  a  mixture  of  Brahmwism  and  Christianity 
were  embraced  by  this  individual.  To  prove  that  the  wearing  of 
beads  around  the  neck,  or  on  the  arm,  for  the  purposes  of  devotion, 
is  a  religious  Hindoo  custom,  we  refer  to  Ward's  late  history  of 
those  nations,  who  was  a  Baptist  missionary,  among  that  people, 
and  died  in  that  country.  This  author  says,  page  40,  that  Brumka, 
the  grandfather  of  the  gods,  holds  in  his  hand,  a  string  of  beads, 
as  an  evidence  of  his  devotion  or  goodness.  Ungee,  the  regent  of 
fire,  is  represented  with  a  bead  roll  in  his  hand,  to  show  that  he  is 
merciful  or  propitious  to  those  who  call  upon  him. — Page  45. 

The  Hindoo  mendicants,  or  saints,  as  they  suppose  themselves, 
have  invariably,  a  string  of  beads,  made  of  bone,  teeth  of  animals, 
ivory,  stones,  or  the  seeds  of  plants,  or  of  something,  hanging  about 
their  necks,  or  on  their  arms,  which  they  recount,  calling  over  and 
over,  without  end,  the  name  of  the  god,  as  evidence  of  devotion  to 
him. — Page  422. 

The  devotions  of  the  ascetic  disciples  among  the  Hindoos,  con- 
sists in  repeating  incessantly  the  name  of  their  god,  using,  at  the 
same  time,  the  bead  roll,  or  rosary,  as  the  catholics  do. — Page  427. 

"  Strings  of  beads  were  used  for  this  purpose,  from  remotest  anti- 
quity, in  all  eastern  Asia." — Humboldt ,  p.  204. 

This  author  further  says,  u  the  rosarie"  which  is  a  string  of 
beads,  "have  been  in  use  in  Thibet  and  China,  from  time  imme- 
morial ;  and  that  the  custom  passed  from  the  east,  viz :  China,  to 
the  Christians  in  the  west,  viz  :  Europe;"  and  are  found  among 
the  catholics;  no  other  sect  of  Christians,  that  we  know  of,  have 
borrowed  any  trappings  from  the  pagans,  to  aid  their  devotions, 
but  this. 


182 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


The  stone  found  on  his  breast,  as  before  remarked,  we  assume  to 
call  the  Shalgramu  stone.  See  also,  Ward's  account  of  this  stone, 
page  41  and  44,  as  follows  : 

A  stone  called  the  Shalgramu  is  a  form  of  the  god  Vishnoo,  and 
is  in  another  case,  the  representative  of  the  god  Saoryu,  or  the 
sun. — Page  52. 

The  Shalgramu,  or  Lingu,  is  a  black  stone,  found  in  a  part  of 
the  Gundeekee  river.  They  are  mostly  perforated,  in  one  or  more 
places,  by  worms,  while  at  the  bottom  of  the  river  ;  but  the  Hin- 
doos believe  the  god  Vishnoo,  in  the  shape  of  a  reptile,  resides  in 
this  stone,  and  caused  the  holes. 

With  this  belief,  how  very  natural  it  would  be  to  wear  on  th* 
breast,  either  in  view  or  concealed,  this  stone,  as  an  amulet,  or 
charm,  as  found  on  the  breast  of  this  skeleton,  in  union  with  the 
cross. 

We  are  inclined  to  believe,  that  the  Roman  Catholic  religion, 
borrowed,  at  a  very  early  period,  after  their  peculiar  formation  and 
corruption,  subsequent  to  the  time  of  Constantine,  the  notion  of 
the  rosary,  or  bead  roll,  which  they  recount  while  saying  prayers, 
from  the  Hindoos  ;  and  that  from  Christian  missionaries,  the  Hin- 
doo Brahmins  borrowed  the  idea  of  the  cross,  which  they  might 
also  wear,  together  with  the  Lingu  stone,  as  an  amulet  or  charm. 
For  we  see  on  the  breast  of  this  person,  both  the  emblem  of  Chris- 
tianity, and  of  the  Hindoos7  superstition,  on  which  account,  we  are 
of  the  opinion,  that  the  ministers  of  the  Brahmin  religion,  lie  buried 
beneath  many  of  the  western  mounds. 

Mr.  Ward  informs  us,  page  272,  that  near  the  town  of  Dravina, 
in  Hondostan-hu,  are  shown  to  this  day,  or  at  the  time  he  lived  in 
India,  four  small  elevations,  or  mounds,  from  the  top  of  which,  the 
great  ascetic  philosopher,  Shunkuracharyu,  used  to  teach  and  ha- 
rangue the  people  and  his  disciples.  From  this  circumstance,  we 
catch  a  glimpse  of  the  orntorial  use  of  the  mounds  in  the  east ; 
and  why  not  the  same  use  be  derived  from  them  to  the  ancient 
people  of  the  west;  and  more  especially  so,  if  they  may  be  be- 
lieved to  have,  in  any  measure,  derived  themselves  from  any  na- 
tions of  the  Chinese  world 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


183 


GREAT  WORKS  OF  THE  ANCIENT  NATIONS  ON  THE  NORTH 
FORK  OF  PAINT  CREEK. 

On  the  north  branch  of  this  creek,  five  miles  from  Chilicothe, 
are  works  so  immense,  that  although  we  have  given  the  reader 
several  accounts  of  this  kind,  yet  we  cannot  well  pass  over  these. 

They  are  situated  on  an  elevated  piece  of  land,  called  the  second 
bottom.  The  first  bottom,  or  flat,  extends  from  Paint  Creek,  till 
it  is  met  by  a  bank  of  twenty-five  feet  in  height,  which  runs  in 
a  straight  line,  and  parallel  with  the  stream.  An  hundred  rods 
from  the  top  of  this  first  bank,,  is  another  bank,  of  thirty  feet  in 
height ;  the  wall  of  the  works  runs  up  this  bank,  and  twenty  rods 
beyond  it.  The  whole  land  enclosed,  is  six  hundred  and  twenty 
rods  in  circumference,  and  contains  one  humdred  and  twenty-six 
acres  of  land. 

This  second  bank,  runs  also  parallel  with  the  creek,  and  with 
the  first.  On  this  beautiful  elevation,  is  situated  this  immense 
work,  containing  within  it,  seventeen  mounds  of  different  sizes. 
Three  hundred  and  eighty  rods  of  this  fort  are  encompassed  with 
a  wall  twelve  feet  high,  a  ditch  twenty  feet  wide,  and  the  wall 
the  same  at  its  base,  Two  hundred  and  forty  rods,  running  along 
on  the  top  of  the  first  bank,  is  the  rest  of  the  wall ;  but  is  without  a 
ditch  ;  this  is  next  to  the  river  or  creek,  between  which  and  the 
water,  is  the  first  bottom  or  flat.  Within  this  great  enclosure,  is  a 
circular  work  of  an  hundred  rods  in  circumference,  with  a  wall 
and  ditch  surrounding  it,  of  the  same  height  of  the  other  wall. 
Within  this  great  circle,  are  six  mounds,  of  the  circular  form ;  these 
are  full  of  human  bones;  the  rest  of  the  mounds,  eleven  in  num- 
ber, are  for  some  other  purpose.  There  are  seven  gateways,  of 
about  five  rods  in  width  each.  "  The  immense  labor,  and  nume- 
rous cemeteries  filled  with  human  bones,  denote  a  vast  populuation, 
near  this  spot,  in  ancient  times." — Atwater. 

"  Tumuli  are  very  common  on  the  river  Ohio,  from  its  utmost 
sources  to  its  mouth,  although  on  the  Monongahela,  they  are  few, 
and  comparatively  small,  but  increase  in  number  and  size,  as  we 
descend  towards  the  mouth  of  that  stream  at  Pittsbnrgh,  where  the 


1S4  AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 

Ohio  begins;  after  this  they  are  still  more  numerous  and  of  greater 
dimensions,  till  we  arrive  at  Grave  Creek,  below  Wheeling. 

At  this  place,  situated  between  two  creeks,  which  run  into  the 
Ohio,  a  little  way  from  the  river,  is  one  of  the  most  extraordinary 
and  august  monuments  of  antiquity,  of  the  mound  description.  Its 
circumference  at  its  base,  is  fifty-six  rods,  its  perpendicular  height 
ninety  feet,  its  top  seven  rods  and  eight  feet  in  circumference. 
The  centre  at  the  summit,  appears  to  have  sunk  several  feet,  so  as 
to  form  a  kind  of  amphitheatre.  The  rim  enclosing  this  concavity 
is  seven  or  eight  feet  in  thickness  ;  on  the  south  side,  in  the  edge 
of  this  rim,  stands  a  large  beach  tree,  the  bark  of  which  is  marked 
with  the  initials  of  a  great  number  of  visitants." 

This  lofty  and  venerable  tumulus  has  been  so  far  opened  as  to 
ascertain  that  it  contains  many  thousands  of  human  skeletons,  but 
no  farther;  the  proprietor,  v\ ill  not  suffer  -its  demolition,  in  the 
smallest  degree,  for  which  he  is  highly  praise-worthy. 

Following  the  river  Ohio  downwards,  the  mounds  appear  on  both 
sides,  erected  uniformly,  on  the  highest  alluvials,  along  that  stream, 
increasing  in  numbers  all  the  way  to  the  Mississippi,  on  which 
river  they  assume  the  largest  size. 

Not  having  surveyed  them,  says  Mr.  Atwater,  we  shall  use  the 
description  of  Mr.  Breckenridge,  who  travelled  much  in  the  west, 
and  among  the  Indians,  and  devoted  much  attention  to  the  subject 
of  these  astonishing  western  antiquties. 

These  tumuli,  says  Mr.  Breckenridge,  as  well  as  the  fortifica- 
tions, are  to  be  found  at  the  junction  of  all  the  livers,  along  the 
Mississippi,  in  the  most  eligible  positions  for  towns,  and  in  the  most 
extensive  bodies  of  fertile  land.  Their  number  exceeds,  perhaps, 
three  thousand ;  the  smallest,  not  less  than  twenty  feet  in  height, 
and  three  hundred  in  circumference  at  the  base.  Their  great  num- 
ber, and  their  amazing  size,  may  be  regarded  as  furnishing,  with 
other  circumstances,  evidence  of  their  great  antiquity. 

I  have  been  sometimes  induced  to  think,  that  at  the  period  when 
these  were  constructed,  there  was  a  population  as  numerous  as  that 
which  once  animated  the  borders  of  the  Nile,  or  of  the  Euphrates. 
The  most  numerous,  as  well  as  the  most  considerable  of  these  re- 
mains, are  found  precisely  in  those  parts  of  the  country  where  the 
traces  of  a  numerous  population  might  be  looked  for,  namely,  from 
the  mouth  of  the  Ohio,  on  the  east  side  of  the  river,  to  the  Illinois, 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


i 

185 


and  on  the  west  side,  from  the  St.  Francis  to  the  Missouri.  I  am 
perfectly  satisfied  that  cities,  similar  to  those  of  ancient  Mexico,  of 
several  hundred  thousand  souls,  have  existed  in  this  western  coun- 
try . " — Breckenridge. 

From  this  view,  we  are  compelled  to  look  upon  those  nations  as 
agriculturists,  or  they  could  not  have  subsisted ;  neither  wild  game 
nor  fish  could  possibly  support  so  great  a  population.  If  agricul- 
turists, then  it  must  follow,  of  necessity,  that  many  modes  of 
building,  as  with  stone,  timber^  earth  or  clay,  were  practised  and 
known,  as  well  as  methods  of  clearing  the  earth  of  heavy  timber. 
And  if  they  had  not  a  knowledge  of  metals,  we  cannot  well  con- 
ceive how  they  could  have  removed  the  forests  for  the  purposes  of 
husbandry,  and  space  for  building.  But  if  wre  suppose  they  did 
not  build  houses  with  wood,  stone  and  brick,  but  lived  in  tents  or 
some  fragile  hut,  yet  the  use  of  metals  cannot  be  dispensed  with, 
on  account  of  the  forests  to  be  removed  for  agricultural  purposes. 
Baron  Humboldt  informs  us,  in  his  Researches  in  South  America, 
that  when  he  crossed  the  Cordillera  mountains,  by  the  way  of  Pa- 
nama and  Assuay,  and  viewed  the  enormous  masses  of  stone  cut 
from  the  porphyry  quarries  of  Pullal,  which  was  employed  in  con- 
structing the  ancient  highroads  of  the  Incas,  that  he  began  to  doubt 
whether  the  Peruvians  were  not  acquainted  with  other  tools  than 
hatchets  made  of  flint  and  stone  ;  and  that  grinding  one  stone  on 
another  to  make  them  smooth  and  level,  was  not  the  only  method 
they  had  employed  in  this  operation.  On  which  account,  he  adopt- 
ed a  new  opinion,  contrary  to  those  generally  received-  He  con- 
jectured that  they  must  have  had  tools  made  of  copper,  hardened 
with  tin,  such  as  it  is  known  the  early  nations  of  Asia  made  use  of. 
This  conjecture  was  fully  sustained  by  the  discovery  of  an  ancient 
Peruvian  mining  chisel,  in  a  silver  mine  at  Vilcabamba,  which  had 
been  worked  in  the  time  of  the  Incas.  This  instrument  of  copper 
was  twelve  centimeters  long  and  two  broad,  or  in  English  measjre, 
four  inches  long,  and  three-fourths  of  an  inch  wide  ;  which  he  car- 
ried with  him  to  Europe,  where  he  had  it  analyzed,  and  found  it 
to  contain  ninety-four  parts  of  copper  and  six  of  tin.  He  says, 
that  this  keen  copper  of  the  Peruvians  is  almost  identically  the 
same  with  that  of  the  ancient  Galic  axe,  which  cut  wood  nearly  as 
well  as  if  made  of  iron  and  steel. 

Every  where,  on  the  old  continent,  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil- 

24 


186 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


ization  of  nations,  the  use  of  copper,  mixed  with  tin,  prevailed  over 
that  of  iron,  even  in  places  where  the  latter  had  been  for  a  long 
time  known.  Antonio  de  Herera,  in  the  tenth  book  of  his  History 
of  the  West  Indies,  says,  expressly,  that  the  inhabitants  of  the 
maritime  coast  of  Zocatallan,  in  South  America,  prepared  two  sorts 
of  copper,  of  which  one  was  hard  and  cutting,  and  the  other 
maleable  ;  the  hard  copper  was  to  make  hatchets,  weapons,  and 
instruments  of  agriculture  with,  and  that  it  was  tempered  with  tin. 
— Humboldt,  vol.  1 ,  pages  260 — 26S. 

Among  a  great  variety  of  the  gods  of  the  people  of  the  Tonga 
Islands,  in  the  South  Pacific  Ocean,  is  found  one  god,  named  To-gi 
Ocummea;  which  is,  literally,  the  iron  axe.  From  which  circum- 
stance we  imagine  the  people  of  those  islands,  sometimes  called 
the  Friendly  Islands,  were,  at  some  period  before  their  having  been 
discovered  by  Captain  Cook,  acquainted  with  the  use  of  iron,  and 
consequently  in  a  more  civilized  condition.  Because  men,  in  those 
early  times,  were  apt  to  deify  almost  every  thing,  but  especially 
those  things  the  most  useful. 

Were  the  people  of  Christendom  to  lose  their  knowledge  of  the 
true  God,  and  to  fall  back  into  nature's  ignorance,  is  there  an  ar- 
ticle, within  the  compass  of  the  arts,  which  would,  from  its  useful- 
ness, have  a  higher  claim  to  deification,  than  the  metal  called  iron. 

That  group  of  islands  belongs  to  the  immense  range  shooting  out 
from  New-Holland,  in  south  latitude  about  20  degrees,  and  once 
perhaps  were  united  to  China,  forming  a  part  of  the  continent. 
But  however  this  may  be,  the  first  inhabitants  of  those  islands  were 
derived  from  China,  and  carried  with  them  a  knowledge  of  the 
arts ;  among  which  was  that  of  the  use  of  iron,  in  the  form  of  the 
axe,  which  it  appears  had  become  deified  from  its  usefulness. 

The  reason  of  the  loss  of  this  knowledge,  must  have  been  the 
separation  of  their  country  from  the  continent,  by  convulsions,  from 
age  to  age ;  which  not  only  altered  the  shape  and  condition  of  the 
land,  but  threw  the  inhabitants  into  confusion,  separating  them  far 
from  each  other,  the  sea  running  between,  so  that  they  became  re- 
duced to  savagism,  as  they  were  found  by  the  first  Christian  na- 
vigators. 


* 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


187 


TRAITS  OF  ANCIENT  CITIES  ON  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

Nearly  opposite  St.  Louis,  there  are  the  traces  of  two  ancient 
cities,  in  the  distance  of  a  few  miles,  situated  on  the  Cohokia  creek) 
which  empties  into  the  Mississippi  but  a  short  distance  below  that 
place.  Here  is  situated  one  of  those  Pyramids,  which  is  an  hun- 
dred and  fifty  rods  in  circumference  at  its  base,  (nearly  an  half 
mile,)  and  one  hundred  feet  high.  At  St.  Louis  is  one  with  two 
stages  or  landing  places,  as  the  architectural  phrase  is.  There  is 
another  with  three  stages,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Missouri,  a  few 
miles  above  St.  Louis.  With  respect  to  the  stages,  or  landing 
places  of  these  pyramids,  we  are  reminded  of  the  tower  once 
standing  in  old  Babylon,  which  had  eight  stages  from  its  base  to 
the  summit,  making  it  six  hundred  feet  high. 

At  the  mouth  of  the  Cohokia  creek,  a  short  distance  below  St. 
Louis,  are  two  groups  of  those  mounds,  of  smaller  size,  but  we  are 
not  informed  of  their  exact  number.  At  Bayeau  Manchac  and 
Baton  Rouge,  are  several  mounds,  one  of  which  is  composed  chiefly 
of  shells,  which  the  inhabitants  burn  into  lime.  There  is  a  mound 
on  Black  river,  which  has  two  stages  or  stories  ;  this  is  surrounded 
with  a  group  of  lesser  ones,  as  well  as  those  at  Bayeau  Manchac, 
and  Baton  Rouge.  There  is  one  of  those  pyramids  near  Washing- 
ton, in  the  state  of  Mississippi,  which  is  one  hundred  and  forty-six 
feet  high  ;  which  is  but  little  short  of  nine  rods  perpendicular  ele- 
vation, and  fifty-six  rods  in  circumference.  Mr.  Breckenridge  is 
of  the  opinion  that  the  largest  city,  belonging  to  this  people,  the 
authors  of  the  mounds  and  other  works,  was  situated  on  the  plains 
between  St.  Francis  and  the  Arkansas.  There  is  no  doubt  but  in 
the  neighborhood  of  St.  Louis  must  have  been  cities  or  large  towns 
of  these  ancient  people ;  as  the  number  and  size  of  the  mounds 
above  recounted  would  most  certainly  justify. 

Ffteen  miles  in  a  southwesterly  direction  from  the  town  of  St. 
Louis,  on  the  Merimac  river,  was  discovered,  by  a  Mr.  Long,  on 
lands  which  he  had  purchased  there,  several  mounds  of  the  ordi- 
nary size,  as  found  in  the  valley  of  the  Mississippi,  all  of  which 
go  to  establish  that  this  country,  lying  between  the  Missouri  and 


188 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


the  Mississippi  rivers,  below  St.  Louis,  and  between  the  junction  of 
the  Illinois  and  the  Mississippi  above,  with  the  whole  region  about 
the  union  of  those  rivers  with  each  other, — which  are  all  not  far 
from  St.  Louis-*-was  once  the  seat  of  empire  ;  equal,  if  not  sur- 
passing the  population  and  the  arts,  as  once  they  flourished  on  the 
plains  of  Shinar,  the  seat,  of  Chaldean  power,  and  on  the  banks  of 
the  Euphrates. 

It  was  on  the  lands  of  this  gentleman,  Mr.  Long,  that  the  disco- 
very of  a  buryiDg  ground,  containing  a  vast  number  of  small  tumu- 
li, or  graves,  took  place.  On  opening  these  graves,  there  were 
found  deposited,  in  stone  coffins,  composed  of  stone  slabs,  six  in 
number,  forming  the  bottom,  sides  and  top,  with  end  pieces;  the 
skeletons  of  a  race  of  human  beings  apparently  of  but  fiom  three 
to  four  feet  in  height.  This  discovery  excited  much  surprise,  and 
called  forth,  from  several  pens,  the  conjectures  of  able  men,  who 
published  a  variety  of  opinions  respecting  them.  Some  imagined 
them  to  be  the  relics  of  race  of  pigmy  inhabitants  who  had  be- 
come extinct.  Others  on  account  of  the  size  of  the  teeth,  which 
denoted  full  grown  and  adult  persons,  conjectured  them  to  be  the 
skeletons  of  a  race  of  baboons  or  monkeys,  from  the  shortness  of 
their  stature.  From  this  opinion  arose  another  conjecture,  that 
they  had  beeu  the  objects  of  worship  to  the  ancient  nations,  as  they 
had  been  sometimes  among  the  earlier  Egyptians. 

The  bones  of  these  subjects  were  entirely  destroyed,  and  re- 
duced to  ashes  of  a  white  chalky  consistency,  except  the  teeth, 
which  wire  perfect,  being  made  imperishable  from  their  enamel. 
Many  Oi  these  graves  were  opened,  and  the  inmates  found  not  to 
ex  -ied  three  and  four  feet.  At  length  one  was  opened,  and  the 
skeleton  it  contained  appeared  to  be  of  the  full  size  of  a  la?ge  man, 
except  its  length ;  however,  this,  on  close  inspection,  was  found  to 
have  had  its  legs  disjointed  at  the  knees,  and  placed  along  side  the 
thigh  bones,  which  at  once,  in  the  eyes  of  some,  accounted  for  the 
statures  of  the  whole. 

Such  a  custom  is,  indeed,  singular ;  and  among  all  the  discove- 
i  s  of  those  ancient  traits,  nothing  to  compare  with  this  has  come 
to  light.  Respecting  fhis  instance  of  short  skeletons,  it  has  been 
al>o  urged,  that  as  certain  tribes  of  the  common  Indians,  now  in- 
habiting the  upper  shores  of  the  Missouri,  place  their  dead  on 
scaflolds  and  in  baskets*  fastened  to  the  limbs  of  trees,  till  their 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST 


189 


flesh  becomes  separated  from  the  bones,  that  the  authors  of  these 
short  graves  did  the  same.  And  that  when  by  this  process,  they 
had  become  fair  and  white,  they  deposited  them  in  small  coffins,  as 
discovered  on  the  farm  of  Mr  Long.  But  although  this  is  doubt- 
less true  respecting  the  Missouri  Indians,  yet  we  nave  no  account 
of  short  graves  having  been  found  among  them.  But  as  we  are 
unable  to  cast  light  on  this  discovery,  we  shall  leave  it  as  we  found 
it — a  great  curiosity. 


TRADITION  OF  THE  MEXICAN  NATIVES  RESPECTING  THEIR 
MIGRATION  FROM  THE  NORTH. 

In  corroboration  of  Mr.  At  water's  opinion,  with  respect  to  the 
gradual  remove  of  the  ancient  people  of  the  west  toward  Mexico, 
we  subjoin  what  we  have  gathered  from  the  Researches  of  Baron 
Humboldt,  on  that  point.  See  Helen  Maria  William's  translation 
of  Humboldt's  Researches  in  South  America,  vol.  2,  p.  67.  From 
which  it  appears  the  people  inhabiting  the  vale  of  Mexico,  at  the 
time  the  Spaniard's  overrun  that  country,  were  called  Aztecks,  or 
Aztekas ;  and  were,  as  the  Spanish  history  informs  us,  usurpers, 
haying  come  from  the  north,  from  a  country  which  they  called 
Aztalan. 

This  country  of  Aztalan,  Baron  Humboldt  ssys,  "  we  must  look 
for  at  least  north  of  ihe  42d  degree  of  latitude."  He  comes  to  this 
conclusion  from  an  examination  of  the  Mexican  or  Azteca  manu- 
scripts, which  were  made  of  a  certain  kind  of  leaves,  and  of  skins 
prepared  ;  on  which,  an  account  in  painted  hieroglyphics  or  pic- 
tures, was  given  of  their  migration  from  Aztalan  to  Mexico,  and 
how  long  they  halted  at  certain  places,  which,  in  the  aggregate, 
amounts  to  u  four  hundred  and  sixteen  years." 

The  following  names  of  places  appear  on  their  account  of  their 
journeyings,  at  which  places  they  made  less  or  more  delay,  and 
built  towns,  forts,  tumuli,  &c. 

1st.  A  place  of  Humiliation,  and  a  place  of  Grottoes.  It  would 
seem  at  this  place  they  were  much  afflicted  and  humbled ;  but  in 
what  manner  is  not  related  ;  and  also  at  this  place,  from  the  term 


190 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


grottoes,  that  it  was  a  place  of  caverns  and  dens,  probably  where 
they  at  first  hid,  dwelt  till  they  built  a  town  and  cleared  the 
ground.  Here  they  built  the  places  which  they  called  Tocalcc 
and  Oztatan. 

2d  Journey  ;  they  stopped  at  a  place  of  fruit  trees  ;  probably 
meaning,  as  it  was  farther  south,  a  place  where  nature  was  abun- 
dant in  nuts,  grapes,  and  wild  fruit  trees.  Here  they  built  a  mound 
or  tumuli,  and,  in  their  language,  it  is  called  a  Teocali. 

3d  Journey  ;  when  they  stopped  at  a  place  of  herbs,  with  broad 
leaves ;  probably  meaning  a  place  where  many  succulent  plants 
grew,  denoting  a  good  soil ;  which  invited  them  to  pitch  their  tents 
here. 

4th  Journey  ;  when  they  came  to  a  place  of  human  lonet ;  where 
they,  either  during  their  stay  had  battles  wivh  each  other,  or  with 
some  enemy,  or  they  may  have  found  them  already  there,  the  relics 
of  other  nations  before  them ;  for,  according  to  Humboldt,  this  migra- 
tion of  the  Aztecas,  took  place  A.  D.  77S ;  so  that  other  nations 
certainly  had  preceded  them,  also  from  the  north. 

5th  Journey  ;  they  came  to  a  place  of  Eagles. 

6th  Journey ;  to  a  place  of  precious  stones,  and  minerals. 

7th  Journey  ;  to  a  place  of  spinning,  where  they  manufactured 
clothing  of  cotton,  barks,  or  of  something  proper  for  clothing  of 
some  sort,  and  mats  of  rushes  and  feathers. 

8th  Journey  ;  they  came  to  another  place  of  eagles,  called  the 
Eagle-mountain,  or  in  their  own  language,  Quauktli  Tepee:  Tepee, 
says  Humboldt,  in  the  Turkish  language,  is  the  word  for  mountain  ; 
which  two  words  are  so  near  alike,  tepee  and  iepe,  that  it  would 
seem  almost  an  Arab  word,  or  a  word  used  by  the  Turks. 

9th.  Jouiney  ;  when  they  came  to  a  place  of  walls,  and  the  se- 
ven grottoes  ;  winch  shows  the  place  had  been  inhabited  before, 
and  these  seven  grottoes  were  either  caves  in  the  earth,  or  were 
made  in  the  side  of  some  mountain,  by  those  who  had  preceded 
them. 

10th  Journey;  when  they  came  to  a  place  of  thistles,  saud  and 
vultures. 

11th  Journey  ;  when  they  came  to  a  place  of  Obsideon  Mirrors, 
which  is  much  the  same  with  that  of  isinglass,  scientifically  called 
micae  membranacae.  This  mineral  substance  is  frequently  iound 
in  the  tumuli  of  the  west,  and  is  called,  by  the  Mexicans,  the  shin? 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


191 


ing  god.  The  obsideon  stone,  however,  needs  polishing,  before  it 
will  answer  as  a  mirror. 

12th  Journey  ;  came  to  a  place  of  water,  probably  some  lake,  or 
beautiful  fountains,  which  invited  their  residence  there  ;  on  the  ac- 
count not  only  of  the  water,  but  for  fishing  and  game. 

13th  Journey ;  they  came  to  the  place  of  the  Divine  Monkey, 
called  in  their  own  language,  Teozomoco.  Here,  it  would  seem, 
they  set  up  the  worship  of  the  monkey,  or  baboon,  as  the  ancient 
Egyptians  are  known  to  have  done.  This  animal  is  found  in  Mex- 
ico or  New  Spain,  according  to  Humboldt. 

14th  Journey  ;  when  the  came  to  a  high  mountain,  probably 
with  table  lands  on  it;  which  they  called  Chopaltepec,  or  mountain 
of  locusts.  A  place,  says  Baron  Humboldt,  celebrated  for  the  mag- 
nificent view  from  the  top  of  this  hill ;  which,  it  appears,  is  in  the 
Mexican  country,  and  probably  not  far  from  the  vale  of  Mexico  ; 
where  they  finally  permanently  rested. 

15th  Journey  ;  when  they  came  to  the  vale  of  Mexico ;  having 
here  met  with  the  prodigy,  or  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy,  or  oracle, 
which  at  their  outset  from  the  country  of  Aztalan,  Huehuetlapallan, 
and  Amaquemecan  ;  which  was  (see  Humboldt,  2d  vol.  p..  185,) 
that  the  migrations  of  the  Aztecks  should  not  terminate  till  the 
chiefs  of  the  nation  should  meet  with  an  eagle  perched  on  a  cactus 
tree  ;  at  such  a  place  they  might  found  a  city.  This  was,  as  their 
bull-hide  books  inform  us,  in  the  vale  of  Mexico, 

We  have  related  this  account  of  the  Azteca  migration  from  the 
country  of  Aztalan,  Huehuetlapallan,  and  Amaquemecan,  from  the 
regions  of  north  latitude  42  degrees,  merely  to  show  that  the  coun- 
try, provinces,  or  districts,  so  named  in  their  books,  must  have  been 
the  country  of  Ohio,  Mississippi  and  Illinois,  with  the  whole  region 
thereabout ;  for  these  are  not  far  from  the  very  latitude  named  by 
Humboldt  as  the  region  of  Aztalan,  &c. 

The  western  country  is  now  distinguished,  by  the  general  name 
of  the  "  lake  country,"  and  why,  because  it  is  a  country  of  lakes ; 
and  for  the  same  reason,  it  was  called  the  Mexicans,  Azteca,  In- 
dians, Aztalan,  because  in  their  language,  atl  is  water,  from  which 
Aztalan  is  doubtless  a  derivitive  as  well  also  as  their  own  name  as 
a  nation,  or  title,  which  was  Astecas,  or  people  of  the  Lakes. 

This  account,  derived  from  the  Mexicans  since  their  reduction 
by  the  Spaniards,  gathered  from  the  researches  of  learned  travel- 


192 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


lers,  who  have,  for  the  very  purpose  of  learning  the  origin  of  the 
people  of  this  country,  penetrated  not  only  into  the  forest  retreats 
in  the  woods  of  Mexico,  but  into  the  mysteries  of  their  hard  lan- 
guage, their  theology,  philosophy  and  astronomy.  This  account  of 
their  migration,  as  related  above,  is  corroborated  by  the  tradition  of 
the  Wyandot  Indians. 

We  come  to  a  knowledge  of  this  tradition,  by  the  means  of  a 
Mr.  William  Walker,  some  time  Indian  agent  for  our  government ; 
who,  it  seems,  from  a  pamphlet  published,  1823,  by  Frederick 
Falley,  of  Sandusky,  giving  Mr.  Walker's  account,  that  a  great 
many  hundred  years  ago  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  America,  who 
were  the  authors  of  the  great  works  of  the  west,  were  driven  away 
from  their  country  and  possessions,  by  barbarous  and  savage  hordes 
of  warriors,  who  came  from  the  north  and  northeast;  before  whose 
power  and  skill  in  war,  they  were  compelled  to  flee,  and  went  to 
the  south. 

After  having  been  there  many  hundred  years,  a  runner  came 
back  into  the  same  country,  from  whence  the  ancient  people  had 
been  driven,  which  we  suppose  is  the  very  country  of  Aztalan,  or 
the  region  of  the  western  states ;  bringing  the  intelligence,  that  a 
dreadful  beast  had  landed  on  their  coast  along  the  sea,  which  was 
spreading  among  them  havoc  and  death,  by  means  of  fire  and  thun- 
der ;  and  that  it  would,  no  doubt,  travel  all  over  the  country,  for 
the  same  purpose  of  destruction. 

This  beast  whose  voice  was  like  thunder,  and  whose  power  to 
kill  was  like  fire,  we  have  no  doubt,  represents  the  cannon  and 
small  arms  of  the  Spaniards,  when  they  first  commenced  the  mur- 
der of  the  ancient  people  of  South  America ;  many  tribes  or  nations 
of  which  were,  from  time  to  time,  derived  from  the  northern  part 
of  our  continent,  Ion?  before  the  northern  hordes  devastated  the 
country  of  Aztalan,  Ruehuetlapan,  and  Amaq\:emecan,  and  with 
good  reason,  believed  to  be  from  Asia;  of  Tartar,  Hebrew,  and 
Scythian  origin  ;  from  their  dreadful  propensity  to  war  and  blood- 
shed, which  is  still  characteristic  of  our  northern  and  western  In- 
dians. 


JLND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WE8T 


193 


SUPPOSED  USES  OF  THE  ANCIENT  ROADS  CONNECTED  WITH 

THE  MOUNDS. 

Ancient  roads,  or  highways,  which  in  many  parts  of  the  west, 
are  found  walled  in  on  both  sides  for  many  miles,  where  the  forest 
trees  are  growing  as  abundant,  and  as  large,  and  aged,  as  in  any 
part  of  the  surrounding  woods. 

We  have  already  mentioned  several  roads  which  have  always 
been  found  connected  with  some  great  works ;  as  at  Piketon,  Ports- 
mouth, Newark,  Licking  county,  and  at  the  works  on  the  Little 
Miami  river.  These  roads  where  they  have  been  traced,  are  found 
to  communicate  with  some  mound,  or  mountain,  which  had  been 
shaped  bv  art  to  suit  the  purposes  of  those  who  originated  these 
stupendous  works.  The  circumstance  of  their  being  walled  in  by 
banks  of  earth,  leaving  from  one  to  four  and  six  rods  space  between, 
has  excited  much  inquiry,  as  to  the  reason  and  purposes  of  their 
construction.  But  may  not  this  grand  characteristic  of  the  people 
of  the  west,  in  road  building,  be  illustrated  by  comparing  a  prac- 
tice of  the  Mexicans  with  this  fact.  We  will  show  the  practice, 
and  then  draw  the  conclusion. 

"  The  Mexicans  believed,  according  to  a  very  ancient  tradition, 
that  the  end  of  the  world  would  take  place  at  the  termination  of 
every  cycle  of  fifty-two  years ;  that  the  sun  would  no  more  appear 
on  the  horizon,  and  that  mankind  would  be  devoured  by  evil 
genii  of  hideous  appearance,  known  under  the  name  of  Tzitzim- 
imes. 

On  the  last  day  of  this  great  cycle  of  time,  of  fifty-two  years, 
the  sacred  fires  were  extinguished  in  all  their  temples,  and  dwel- 
lings, and  every  where,  all  the  people  devoting  themselves  to  pray- 
er, no  person  daring  to  light  a  fire  at  the  approach  of  the  night; 
the  vessels  of  clay  were  broken,  garments  torn,  and  whatever  was 
most  precious  was  destroyed,  because  every  thing  appeared  useless 
at  the  tremendous  moment  of  the  last  day. 

Amidst  this  frantic  superstition,  pregnant  women  became  the  ob- 
jects of  peculiar  horror  to  the  men ;  they  caused  their  faces  to  be 
hidden  with  masks  made  with  paper  of  the  agscve ;  they  were  even 

25 


194 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


imprisoned  in  the  store  houses  of  maize  or  corn,  from  a  persuasion, 
that  if  the  catastrophe  took  place,  the  women  transformed  into 
tigers,  would  make  common  cause  with  the  evil  genii,  and  avenge 
themselves  of  the  injustice  of  the  men. 

As  soon  as  it  was  dark,  the  grand  procession,  called  the  festival 
of  the  new  fire,  commenced.  The  priests  took  the  dresses  of  the 
gods,  and  followed  by  an  immense  crowd  of  people,  went  in  solemn 
train  to  the  mountain  of  Huzachthcatl,  which  was  two  leagues  or 
six  miles  from  Mexico.  This  lugubrious  march  was  called  the 
march  of  the  gods ;  which  was  supposed  to  be  their  final  departure 
from  their  city,  and  possibly  never  to  return;  in  which  event,  the 
end  of  the  world  was  come.  » 

When  the  procession  had  reached  the  summit  of  the  mountain, 
it  waited  till  the  moment  when  the  Pleiades,  or  the  seven  stars,  as- 
cended the  middle  of  the  sky,  to  begin  the  horrible  sacrifice  of  a 
human  victim,  stretched  on  the  stone  of  sacrifice,  having  a  wooden 
disk  on  the  breast,  which  the  priest  inflames  by  friction.  The 
corpse,  after  having  received  a  wound  in  the  breast,  which  extin- 
guished life,  while  he  lay,  or  was  held  on  the  fatal  stone,  was  laid 
on  the  ground ;  and  the  instrument  made  use  of  to  produce  fire  by 
friction,  was  placed  on  the  wound,  which  had  been  made  with  a 
knife  of  obsidian  stone.  When  the  bits  of  wood,  by  the  rapid 
motion  of  the  cylinder,  or  machine  made  use  of  for  that  purpose, 
had  taken  fire,  an  enormous  pile,  previously  prepared  to  receive 
the  body  of  the  unfortunate  victim,  was  kindled,  the  flames  of 
which,  ascending  high  into  the  air,  were  seen  at  a  great  distance  ; 
when  the  vast  populace  of  the  city  of  Mexico,  and  surrounding 
country,  filled  the  air  with  joyful  shouts  and  acclamations. 

All  such  as  were  not  able  to  join  in  the  procession,  were  stationed 
on  the  terraces  of  houses,  and  on  the  tops  of  teocallis,  or  mounds, 
and  tumulis,  with  their  eyes  fixed  on  the  spot  where  the  flame  was 
to  appear:  which,  as  soon  as  it  was  perceived,  was  a  token  of  the 
benevolence  of  the  gods,  and  of  the  preservation  of  mankind  du- 
ring another  cycle  of  fifty-two  years. 

Messengers  posted  at  proper  distances  from  each  other,  holding 
branches  of  wood,  of  a  very  resinous  pine,  carried  the  new  fire 
from  village  to  village  to  the  distance  of  many  leagues;  and  depo- 
sited it  ;»new  in  every  temple,  from  whence  it  was  distributed  to 
all  private  dwellings.    When  the  sun  appeared  on  the  horizon,  the 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST-  195 


shouting  was  redoubled,  the  procession  went  back  from  the  moun= 
tain  to  the  city,  and  they  thought  they  could  see  their  gods  also  re- 
turning to  their  sanctuaries* 

The  women  were  then  released  from  their  prisons,  every  one 
put  on  a  new  dress,  the  temples  were  whitewashed,  their  household 
furniture  renewed,  their  plate,  and  whatever  was  necessary  for  do- 
mestic use,  "  This  secular  festival,  this  apprehension  of  the  sun 
being  extinguished  at  the  epoch  of  the  winter  solstice,  seems  to 
present  a  new  instance  of  analogy  between  the  Mexicans  and  the 
inhabitants  of  Egypt,  When  the  Egyptians  saw  the  sun  descend 
from  the  Crab  towards  Capricorn,  and  the  days  gradually  grow 
shorter,  they  were  accustomed  to  sorrow,  from  the  apprehension 
that  the  sun  was  going  to  abandon  the  earth,  but  when  the  orb  be- 
gan to  return,  and  the  duration  of  the  days  grew  longer,  they  Tobed 
themselves  in  white  garments*  and  crowned  themselves  with  flow- 
ers."— Humboldt,  p,  380,  384. 

This  Mexican  u*age  may  have  been  practised  by  the  people  of 
the  west,  as  the  roads  would  seem  to  justify,  leading  as  they  do, 
either  to  some  mountain  prepared  by  art,  or  at  some  mound :  and 
as  these  processions  took  place  in  the  night,  so  that  the  Pleiades, 
or  seven  stars,  might  be  seen,  it  was  necessary  that  the  roads  should 
be  walled  as  a  defence  against  an  enemy,  who  might  take  ad- 
vantage under  cover  of  the  night. 

After  having  examined  these  accounts  of  the  ancient  works  of 
the  west,  it  is  natural  to  ask,  who  their  authors  were :  this  can  be 
answered  only  by  comparison  and  conjecture,  more  or  less  upheld, 
as  circumstances,  features,  manners,  and  customs  of  the  nations, 
many  resemble  each  other. 

"  If  we  look  into  the  Bible,  we  shall  there  learn,  that  maakind, 
soon  after  the  deluge,  undertook  to  raise  a  tower,  high  as  heaven, 
designed  to  keep  them  together.  But  in  this  attempt  they  were 
disappointed,  and  themselves  dispersed  throughout  the  world.  Did 
they  forget  to  raise  afterwards  similar  monuments  and  places  of 
worship  ?  They  did  not,  and  to  use  the  words  of  an  inspired  wri- 
ter, "  high  places,"  of  various  altitudes  and  dimensions,  were  raised 
on  every  high  hill  throughout  the  land  of  Palestine,  and  all  the  east, 
among  the-pagan  nations.  Some  of  these  "  high  places  "  beloaged 
to  single  families  ;  some  to  mighty  chieftains,  a  petty  tribe,  a  city, 
'  or  a  whole  nation.    At  those  "  high  places,"  belonging  to  great 


196 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


nations,  great  national  affairs  were  transacted.  Here  tliey  crowned 
and  deposed  their  kings ;  here  they  concluded  peace,  and  declared 
war,  and  worshipped  their  gods. 

The  Jews,  on  many  great  occasions,  assembled  at  Gilgal ;  which 
word  signifies  "  an  heap."  Shiloh,  where  the  Jews  frequently  as- 
sembled to  transact  great  national  affairs,  and  perform  acts  of  devo- 
tion, was  on  the  top  of  a  high  hill.  When  this  was  forsaken,  the 
loftier  hill  of  Zion  was  selected  in  its  stead ;  upon  Sinai's  awful 
summit  the  law  of  God  was  promulgated.  Solomon's  temple  was 
situated  upon  a  high  hill,  by  Divine  appointment.  Samaria,  a  place 
celebrated  for  the  worship  of  idols,  was  built  upon  the  high  hill  of 
Shemer,  by  Omri,  one  of  the  kings  of  Israel,  who  was  buried  there. 
How  many  hundreds  of  mounds  in  this  country  are  situated  on  the 
highest  hills,  surrounded  by  the  most  fertile  soils. 

"  Traverse  the  counties  of  Licking,  Franklin,  Pickaway,  and 
Ross ;  examine  the  loftiest  mounds,  and  compare  them  with  those 
described  in  Palestine,  and  a  conviction  will  remain,  that  as  in  the 
earliest  ages,  men  preferred  the  summit  of  the  highest  mountains, 
as  a  love  of  the  same,  as  a  memorial  of  ancestry,  would  influence 
posterity  to  the  like  custom. 

But  the  most  extraordinary  mound  we  have  heard  of,  is  men- 
tioned in  Mr.  Schoolcraft's  Travels  in  the  west.  It  is  called  Mount 
Joliet,  and  is  situated  on  the  river  Des  Plains,  one  of  the  head  wa- 
ter rivers  of  the  Illinois.  Its  situation  is  such  as  to  give  its  size 
its  fullest  effect,  being  on  a  level  country  with  no  hill  in  sight  to 
form  a  contrast.  Its  height  is  sixty  feet,  nearly  four  rods  perpen- 
dicular, its  length  eighty-four  rods,  its  width  fourteen,  and  is  one 
hundred  and  ninety-six  rods  in  circumference  on  its  top,  but  con- 
siderably larger,  measuring  round  the  base.  It  has  been  remarked 
by  Dr.  Beck,  that  this  is  probably  the  largest  mound  within  the 
limits  of  the  United  States. 

This  mound  is  built  on  the  horizontal  lime  stone  stratum  of  the 
secondary  formation,  and  is  fronted  by  the  beautiful  lake  Joliet, 
which  is  but  fifteen  miles  long,  furnishing  the  most  u  noble  and 
picturesque  spot  in  all  America."  Schoolcraft-  This  mound  con- 
sists of  eighteen  million  two  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  solid  feet 
of  earth.  How  long  it  must  have  been  in  being  builded,  is  more 
than  can  be  made  out,  as  the  number  of  men  employed,  and  the 
facilities  to  carry  on  the  work,  are  unknown 


AND  DISCOVERIES   IN  THE  WEST. 


197 


In  England,  Scotland,  and  in  Wales,  they  are  thus  situated.  At 
Inch-Tuthel,  on  the  river  Tay,  there  is  a  mound  which  resembles 
ours  on  the  Licking,  near  Newark.  The  camp  at  Comerie  is  on  a 
water  of  Ruchel,  situated  on  a  high  alluvion,  like  ours  in  the  west. 
The  antiquities  of  Ardoch  are  on  a  water  Kneck,  their  walls  ditch- 
es, gateways,  mounds  of  defence  before  them,  and  every  thing 
about  them,  resemble  our  works  of  this  character  in  America. 

What  Pennant,  in  his  Antiquarian  Researches  in  the  north  of 
Europe,  calls  a  prcetorium,  is  exactly  like  the  circular  works  round 
our  mounds,  when  placed  within  walls  of  earth.  Catter-thun,  two 
miles  from  Angus,  is  ascribed  to  the  ancient  Caledonians,  or  Scotch. 
Such  works  are  very  common  in  Ohio.  One  on  the  river  Loden, 
or  Lowthe,  and  another  near  the  river  Emet,  are  exactly  like  those 
in  the  west.  The  strong  resemblance  between  the  works  in  Scot- 
land and  those  of  the  west,  I  think,  6ays  Mr.  Atwater,  no  man  will 
deny.  In  various  parts  of  the  British  isles,  as  well  as  England, 
Scotland,  Ireland,  and- Wales,  are  abundance  of  those  works,  which 
were  places  of  worship,  burial,  and  defence,  built  by  the  ancient 
Picts,  so  called  by  the  Romans,  because  they  painted  themselves, 
like  the  aborigines  of  this  country. 

At  a  very  early  period  of  the  globe,  a  small  mound  of  earth 
served  as  a  sepulchre  and  an  altar,  whereon  the  officiating  priest 
could  be  seen  by  the  surrounding  worshippers.  Such  sacred  works 
may  be  traced  from  Wales  to  Russia,  quite  across  that  empire 
north,  to  our  continent;  and  then  across  this  continent,  from  the 
Columbia  on  the  Pacific  Ocean,  to  the  Black  River,  on  the  east  end 
of  Lake  Ontario ;  thence  turning  in  a  southwestern  direction,  we 
find  them  extending  quite  to  the  southern  parts  of  Mexico  and 
Peru. 

"  If  there  exists,"  says  Dr.  Clarke,  "  any  thing  of  former  times 
which  may  afford  evidence  of  antediluvian  manners,  it  is  this  mode 
of  burial ;  which  seems  to  mark  the  progress  of  population  in  the 
first  ages  after  the  dispersion,  occasioned  by  the  confusion  of  lan- 
guages, at  Babel. 

Whether  under  the  form  of  a  mound  in  Scandinavia  and  Russia, 
a  barrow  in  England,  or  cairn  in  Ireland,  Scotland  and  Wales,  or 
heaps  of  earth,  which  the  modern  Greeks  and  Turks  call  Tepee, 
and  the  Mexicans,  Tepee,  and  lastly,  in  the  more  artificial  shape 
of  a  pyramid  in  Egypt ;  they  had  universally  the  same  origin." 


198 


-AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIEfc 


Here  we  have  the  unequivocal  opinion  of  a  man,  who  has  scarce- 
ly his  fellow  in  the  present  generation,  respecting  a  knowledge  of 
the  ancient  manners  of  mankind  ;  who  says,  that  the  tumnli,  found 
in  all  parts  of  the  earth,  belong  solely  to  the  age  immediately  suc- 
ceeding Noah's  flood  ;  which  greatly  favors  our  opinion,  that  this 
country  was  settled  as  early  as  the  other  parts  of  the  earth  which 
are  at  as  great  a  distance  from  Mount  Ararat 

But  what  is  the  distance  from  Mount  Ararat,  by  way  of  Bhering's 
Strait,  to  the  middle  of  the  United  States,  which  is  the  region  of 
the  Missouri  ?  It  is  something  over  ten  thousand  miles ;  nearly 
half  the  circuit  of  the  globe.  Here,  in  the  region  of  the  Western 
States,  we  have,  by  the  aid  of  Baron  Humboldt,  supposed  the 
country  of  Aztalan  was  situated  ;  where  the  great  specimens  ot 
labor  and  ancient  manners,  are  must  abundant  If  this  was  the 
way  the  first  people  came  into  America,  it  is  very  clear,  they  could 
not,  in  the  ordinary  way  of  making  a  settlement  here,  and  a 
settlement  there,  have  arrived  soon  enough,  to  show  signs  of  as 
great  antiquity,  in  their  works  in  America,  as  those  of  the  same 
sort,  found  in  the  north  of  Europe.  Some  other  way,  therefore,  we 
are  confident,  the  first  inhabitants  must  have  pursued,  so  that  their 
works  in  America,  might  compare,  in  character  and  antiquity,  with 
those  of  other  nations.  From  Ararat,  in  a  westerly  course,  passing 
through  Europe,  by  way  of  the  countries  now  situated  in  Russia 
in  Europe,  to  the  Atlantic,,  the  distance  is  scarcely  five  thousand 
miles ;  not  half  the  distance  the  route  of  Bhering's  Strait  would 
have  been.  And  if  the  Egyptian  tradition  be  true,  respecting  the 
island  Atalantis,  and  the  conjectures  of  naturalists  about  a  union  of 
Europe  and  America  on  the  north,  there  was  nothing  to  hinder 
their  settling  here,  immediately  after  their  dispersion. 

It  is  supposed  the  first  generations  immediately  succeeding  the 
flood,  were  much  more  enlightened  than  many  nations  since  that 
period  ;  the  reason  is,  they  had  not  yet  forgotten  that  which  they 
had  learned  of  the  manners  of  their  antediluvian  ancestry  from 
Noah ;  but  as  they  spread  and  diverged  asunder,  what  they  had 
learned  from  him  concerning  the  creation,  architecture,  and  the 
c  ulture  of  the  earth  before  the  flood,  they  lost,  and  so  retrograded 
to  savagism. 

It  is  true,  the  family  ot  Shem,  of  whom  were  Abraham,  Isaac, 
and  Jacob,  by  the  particular  providence  of  (iod,  retained,  unadul- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST- 


199 


terated,  the  traditional  history  of  the  creation,  and  of  man,  till  the 
time  Moses  embodied  it  in  a  book,  eight  hundred  and  fifty-seven 
years  after  the  flood.  But  the  rest  of  the  nations  were  left,  in  this 
respect,  to  mere  recollections,  which,  as  soon  as  they  divided  and 
subdivided,  become  contradictory  and  monstrous. 

But  the  authors  of  the  great  works  found  in  the  west,  seem  to 
have  retained  the  first  ideas  received  from  their  fathers  at  the  era 
of  the  building  of  Babel,  equally,  if  not  superior,  to  many  nations 
of  Europe,  as  they  were  in  the  year  eight  hundred  after  Christ. 
This  is  consented  to  on  all  hands,  and  even  contended  for  by  the 
historian,  Humboldt.  In  order  to  show  the  reader  the  propritey  of 
believing,  that  a  colony,  very  soon  after  the  confusion  of  the  lan- 
guage of  mankind,  found  their  way  to  what  is  now  called  America, 
we  give  the  tradition  of  the  Azteca  nation,  who  once  inhabited 
Aztalan,  the  country  of  the  western  states,  but  were,  at  the  era  of 
the  conquest  of  South  America,  found  inhabiting  the  vale  of  Mex- 
ico, because  they  had,  as  we  have  shown,  been  driven  away  by  the 
irruptions  of  the  Tartarian  Indians,  as  follows : 


TRAITS  OF  THE  MOSAIC  HISTORY  FOUND  AMONG  THE  AZ 

TECA  NATIONS. 

The  tradition  commences  with  an  account  of  the  deluge,  as  they 
had  preserved  it  in  books  made  of  the  buffalo  and  deer  skin,  on 
which  account  there  is  more  certainty  than  if  it  had  been  preserved 
by  mere  oral  tradition,  handed  down  from  father  to  son. 

They  begin  by  painting,  or  as  we  would  say,  by  telling  us  that 
Noah,  whom  they  call  Tezpi,  saved  himself,  with  his  wife,  whom 
they  call  Xochiquetzal,  on  a  raft  or  canoe.  Is  not  this  the  ark? 
The  raft  or  canoe  rested  on  or  at  the  foot  of  a  mountain,  which 
they  call  Colhuacan.  Is  not  this  Ararat  ?  The  men  born  after  this 
deluge  were  born  dumb.  Is  not  this  the  confusion  of  language  at 
Babel  ?  A  dove  from  the  top  of  a  tree  distributes  languages  to  them 
in  the  form  of  an  olive  leaf.  Is  not  this  the  dove  of  Noah,  which 
returned  with  that  leaf  in  her  mouth,  as  related  in  Genesis  ?  They 


200 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


say,  that  on  this  raft,  beside  Tezpi  and  his  wife,  were  several  chil- 
dren, and  animals,  with  grain,  the  preservation  of  which  was  of 
importance  to  mankind.  Is  Dot  this  in  almost  exact  accordance  with 
what  was  saved  in  the  ark  with  Noah,  as  stated  in  Genesis. 

When  the  great  spirit,  Tezcatlipoca,  ordered  the  waters  to  with- 
draw, Tezpi  sent  out  from  his  raft  a  vulture,  which  never  returned, 
on  account  of  the  great  quantities  of  dead  carcasses  which  it  found 
to  feed  upon.  Is  not  this  the  raven  of  Noah,  which  did  not  return 
when  it  was  sent  out  the  second  time,  for  the  very  reason  here  as- 
signed by  the  Mexicans?  Tezpi  sent  other  birds,  one  of  which 
was  the  humming  bird;  this  bird  alone  returned,  holding  in  its 
beak  a  branch  covered  with  leaves.  Is  not  this  the  dove  r  Tezpi 
seeing  that  fresh  verdure  now  clothed  the  earth,  quitted  his  raft 
near  the  mountain  Colhuacan.  Is  not  this  an  allusion  to  Ararat  of 
Asia  ?  They  say  the  tongues  which  the  dove  gave  to  mankind, 
were  infinitely  varied ;  which,  when  received,  they  immediately 
dispersed.  But  among  them  there  were  fifteen  heads  or  chiefs  of 
families,  which  were  permitted  to  speak  the  same  language,  and 
these  were  the  Taltecks,  the  Aculhucans,  and  Azteca  nations,  who 
embodied  themselves  together,  which  was  very  natural,  and  travel- 
ed, they  knew  not  where,  but  at  length  arriyed  in  the  country  of 
Aztalan,  or  the  lake  country. 

The  plate  or  engraving  presented  here,  is  a  surprising  represent- 
ation of  the  Deluge  of  Noah,  and  of  the  Confusion  of  the  Ancient 
Language,  at  the  building  of  the  Tower  of  Babel,  as  related  in  the 
Book  of  Genesis,  see  chap.  7  and  11. 

We  have  derived  the  subject  of  this  plate  from  Baron  Hum- 
boldt's volume  of  Researches  in  Mexico,  who  found  it  painted  on 
a  manuscript  book,  made  of  the  leaves  of  some  kind  of  tree,  suit- 
able for  the  purpose,  after  the  manner  of  the  ancient  nations  of  the 
sultry  parts  of  Asia,  around  the  Mediterranean. 

Among  the  vast  multitude  of  painted  representations  found  by 
this  author,  on  the  books  of  the  natives,  made  also  frequently  of 
prepared  skins  of  animals,  were  delineated  all  the  leading  circum- 
stances and  history  of  the  deluge,  of  the  fall  of  man,  and  of  the 
seduction  of  the  woman  by  the  means  of  the  serpent,  the  first 
murder  as  perpetrated  by  Cain,  on  the  person  of  his  brother  Abel. 

The  plate,  however,  here  presented,  shows  no  more  than  a  pic- 
ture of  the  flood,  with  Noah  afloat  on  a  raft,  or  as  the  traditions  of 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


201 


some  of  the  nations  say,  on  a  tree,  a  canoe,  and  some  say  even  in  a 
vessel  of  huge  dimensions.  It  also  shows,  by  the  group  of  men 
approaching  the  bird,  a  somewhat  obscure  history  of  the  confusion 
of  the  ancient  language,  at  the  building  of  Babel,  by  representing 
them  as  being  born  dumb,  who  receive  the  gift  of  speech  from  a 
dove,  which  flutters  in  the  branches  of  the  tree,  while  she  presents 
the  languages  to  the  mute  throng,  by  bestowing  upon  each  indivi- 
dual a  leaf  of  the  tree,  which  is  shown  in  the  form  of  small  com- 
mas suspended  from  its  beak. 

The  circumstance  of  their  being  born  dumb,  points  out  as  clearly 
as  tradition  can  be  expected  to  do,  the  confusion  of  language ;  as 
being  dumb  is  equivalent  to  their  not  being  able  to  converse  with 
each  other  ;  or  their  not  being  able  to  converse,  was  equivalent  to 
their  being  born  dumb. 

Among  the  different  nations,  according  to  Humboldt,  who  inha- 
bited Mexico,  were  found  paintings  which  represented  the  deluge, 
or  the  flood  of  Tezpi.  The  same  person  among  the  Chinese  is 
called  Fohi  and  Yu-ti,  which  is  strikingly  similar  in  sound  to  the 
Mexican  Tezpi,  in  which  they  show  how  he  saved  himself  and 
his  wife,  in  a  bark,  or  some  say,  in  a  canoe,  others,  on  a  raft,  which 
they  call,  in  their  language,  a  huahuate. 

The  painting,  of  which  the  plate  is  the  representation,  shows 
Tezpi,  or  Noah,  in  the  midst  of  the  waters,  lying  on  his  back. 
The  mountain,  the  summit  of  which  is  crowned  by  a  tree,  and  rises 
-above  the  waters,  is  the  peak  of  Colhucan,  the  Ararat  of  the  Mex- 
icans. The  horn  which  is  represented  on  the  hieroglyphic,  is  the 
mountain  Colhucan.  At  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  on  each  side, 
appear  the  heads  of  Noah  and  his  wife.  The  woman  is  known  by 
the  two  points  extending  up  from  her  forehead,  which  is  the  uni- 
versal designation  of  the  female  sex  among  the  Mexicans. 

In  the  figure  of  the  bird,  with  the  leaves  of  a  tree  in  its  beak,  is 
shown  the  circumstance  of  the  dove's  return  to  the  Ark,  when  it 
had  been  sent  out  the  second  time,  bringing  a  branch  of  the  olive 
in  its  mouth  ;  but  in  their  tradition  it  had  become  misplaced,  and 
is  made  the  author  of  the  languages.  That  birds  have  a  language, 
was  believed  by  the  nations  of  the  old  world.  Some  of  those  na- 
tions retain  a  surprising  traditional  account  of  the  deluge  ;  who  say, 
that  Noah  embarked  in  a  spacious  acalli  or  boat,  with  his  wife,  his 
children,  several  animals,  and  grain,  the  preservation  of  which  was 

26 


202 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


of  great  importance  to  mankind.  When  the  Great  Spirit,  Tezcat- 
lipoca,  ordered  the  waters  to  withdraw,  Tezpi,  or  Noah,  sent  out 
from  his  boat  a  vulture.  But  as  the  bird's  natural  food  was  that  of 
dead  carcasses,  it  did  not  return,  on  account  of  the  great  number 
of  those  carcasses  with  which  the  earth,  now  dried  in  some  places, 
abounded. 

Tezpi  sent  out  other  birds,  one  of  which  was  the  humming  bird  ; 
this  bird  alone  returned  again  to  the  boat,  holding  in  its  beak  a 
branch,  covered  with  leaves.  Tezpi  now  knowing  that  the  earth 
was  dry,  being  clothed  with  fresh  verdure,  quitted  his  bark  near 
the  mountain  Colhucan,  which  is  equivalent  to  that  of  Ararat. 

The  purity  of  this  tradition  is  evidence  of  two  things :  1st.,  that 
the  book  of  Genesis,  as  written  by  Moses,  is  not  as  some  have 
imagined,  a  cunningly  devised  fable,  as  these  Indians  caunot  be  ac- 
cused of  Christian  priestcraft,  nor  yet  of  Jewish  priestcraft,  their 
religion  being  solely  of  another  cast,  wholly  idolatrous.  And  se- 
cond, that  the  continents  of  America,  Africa,  and  Asia,  were  an- 
ciently united,  so  that  the  earlier  nations  came  directly  over  after 
the  confusion  of  the  ancient  language  and  dispersion— on  which  ac- 
count its  purity  has  been  preserved  more  than  among  the  more 
wandering  tribes  of  the  old  continents. 

As  favoring  this  idea  of  their  coming  immediately  from  the  re- 
gion of  the  tower  of  Babel,  their  tradition  goes  on  to  inform  us,  that 
the  tongues  distributed  by  this  bird  were  infinitely  various,  and 
dispersed  over  the  earth ;  but  that  it  so  happened  that  fifteen  heads 
of  families  were  permitted  to  speak  the  same  language,  these  are 
the  same  shown  on  the  plate.  These  travelled  till  they  came  to  a 
country  which  they  called  Aztalan,  supposed  to  be  in  the  regions 
of  the  now  United  States,  according  to  Humboldt.  As  favoring 
this  idea,  we  notice,  the  word  Aztalan  signifies  in  their  language, 
water,  or  a  country  of  much  water.  Now,  no  country  on  the  earth 
better  suits  this  appellation  than  the  western  country,  on  account  of 
the  vast  number  of  lakes  found  there. 

There  is  another  particular  in  this  group  of  naked,  dumb  hu- 
man beings,  worthy  of  notice,  which  is,  that  neither  their  counte- 
nances nor  form  of  their  persons  agree  at  all  with  the  countenances 
or  formation  of  the  common  Indians  ;  they  suit  far  better  to  the 
face  of  the  ancient  Britons,  Greeks,  Romans,  Carthagenians  and 
Phoenicians. 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WESf. 


203 


If  30,  it  is  evident,  that  the  Indians  are  not  the  first  people  who 
found  their  way  to  thi3  country.  Among  these  ancient  nations  are 
found  many  more  traditions  corresponding  to  the  accounts  given  by 
Moses,  respecting  the  creation,  the  fall  of  man  by  the  means  of  a 
serpent— the  murder  of  Abel  by  his  brother,  &c> ;  all  of  which 
are  denoted  in  their  paintings,  as  found  by  the  earlier  travellers 
among  them,  since  the  discovery  of  America  by  Columbus,  and 
carefully  copied  from  their  books  of  prepared  hides,  which  may  be 
called  parchment,  after  the  manner  of  the  ancients  of  the  earliest 
ages. 

We  are  pleased  when  we  find  such  evidence,  as  it  goes  to  the 
establishment  of  the  truth  of  the  historical  parts  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, evidence  so  far  removed  from  the  sceptic's  charge  of  priest- 
craft here  among  the  unsophiscated  nations  of  the  earlier  people  of 
America. 

Clavigero,  in  bis  history  of  Mexico,  says,  that  among  the  Chiap- 
anese  Indians,  was  found  an  ancient  manuscript  in  the  language  of 
that  country,  made  by  the  Indians  themselves,  in  which  it  was  said, 
according  to  their  ancient  tradition,  that  a  certain  person,  named 
Votan,  was  present  at  that  great  building,  which  was  made  by  or- 
der of  his  uncle,  in  order  to  mount  up  to  heaven ;  that  then  every 
people  was  given  its  language,  and  that  Votan  himself  was  charged 
by  God  to  make  the  division  of  the  lands  of  Anahuac— so  Noah 
divided  the  earth  among  his  sons.    Votan  may  have  been  Noah. 

Of  the  ancient  Indians  of  Cuba,  several  historians  of  America 
relate,  that  when  they  were  interrogated  by  the  Spaniards  concern- 
ing their  origin,  they  answered,  they  had  heard  from  their  ances- 
tors, that  God  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and  all  things : 
that  an  old  man  having  foreseen  the  deluge  with  which  God  de- 
signed to  chastise  the  sins  of  men,  built  a  large  canoe  and  embark- 
ed in  it  with  his  family,  ei-nd  many  animals ;  that  when  the  inun- 
dation ceased,  he  sent  out  a  raven,  which,  because  it  found  food 
suited  to  its  nature  to  feed  on,  never  returned  to  the  canoe  ;  that 
he  then  sent  out  a  pigeon,  which  soon  returned,  bearing  a  branch 
of  the  Hoba  tree,  a  certain  fruit  tree  of  America,  in  its  mouth ;  that 
when  the  old  man  saw  the  earth  dry,  he  disembarked,  and  having 
made  himself  wine  of  the  wood  grape,  he  became  intoxicated  and 
fell  asleep ;  that  then  one  of  his  sons  made  ridicule  of  his  naked- 
ness, and  that  another  son  piously  covered  him ;  that,  upon  waking, 


204 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


be  blessed  tbe  latter  and  cursed  tbe  former.  Lastly,  these  island- 
ers hel-d  that  they  had  their  origin  from  the  accursed  son,  and  there- 
fore went  almost  naked ;  that  the  Spaniards,  as  they  were  clothedy 
descended  perhaps  from  the  other. 

Many  of  the  nations  of  America,  says  Clavigero,  have  the  same 
tradition,  agreeing  nearly  to  what  we  hare  already  related.  It  was 
the  opinion  of  this  author,  that  the  nations  who  peopled  the  Mex- 
ican empire,  belonged  to  the  posterity  of  Naphtuhim — (the  same, 
we  imagine,  with  Japheth ;)  and  that  their  ancestors  having  left 
Egypt  not  long  after  the  confusion  of  the  ancient  language,  travel- 
led towards  America,  crossing  over  on  the  isthmus,  which  it  is  sup- 
posed once  united  America  with  the  African  continent,  but  since 
has  been  beaten  down  by  the  operation  of  the  waters  of  tbe  Atlantic 
on  the  north,  and  the  Southern  ocean  on  the  south,  or  by  the  ope- 
ration of  earthquakes. 

Now  we  consider  the  comparative  perfection  of  the  preservation 
of  this  Bible  account,  as  an  evidence  that  the  people  among  whom 
it  was  found  must  have  settled  in  this  country  at  a  very  early  pe- 
riod of  time  after  the  flood,  and  that  they  did  not  wander  any  more, 
but  peopled  the  continent,  cultivating  it,  building  towns  and  cities, 
after  their  manner  ;  the  vestiges  of  which  are  so  abundant  to  this 
day ;  and  on  this  account,  viz.,  their  fixedness,  their  traditionary 
history  was  not  as  liable  to  become  lost,  as  it  would  have  undoubt- 
edly been,  had  they  wandered,  as  many  other  nations  of  the  old 
world  have,  among  whom  scarcely  a  vestige  of  their  origin  is  found, 
of  credible  tradition,  compared  with  this. 

Even  the  Hindoo  nations,  who,  in  their  origin,  wandered  also 
from  Ararat,  have  not,  with  all  their  boasted  refin-eraent  and  anti- 
quity of  origin,  as  clear  an  account  of  the  first  age  of  the  earth,  as 
these  Mexicans.  But  there  is  another  additional  reason  for  it : 
those  countries  of  the  east  have  been  frequently  overrun  by  savage 
hordes  from  the  wilds  of  northern  Tartary  ;  while  the  ancient  peo- 
ple of  this  continent  have  rested  in  peace,  till  similar  hordes  found 
their  way  across  Bhering's  Strait,  in  later  years ;  and,  as  is  be- 
lieved, an  account  of  the  tradition,  both  of  some  of  the  western 
tribes,  and  of  the  Azteca  nations  in  Mexico,  were  driven  from  their 
ancient  possessions. 

If  then  we  believe,  that  the  Jirst  people  who  visited  this  country 
did  not  come  here  by  the  way  of  Bhciiug's  Sirait,  from  Tartary, 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


205 


how  then  is  it  that  we  find  such  evident  marks,  in  the  mounds  and 
tumuli  of  the  west,  of  the  presence  of  a  Hindoo  population,  as  well 
as  of  other  nations. 

Let  the  tradition  of  the  nations  of  Taltec  and  Azteca  extraction 
in  Mexico  answer  it.  These  say,  that  a  wonderful  personage, 
whom  they  name  Quetzalcoatl,  appeared  among  them,  who  was  a 
white  and  bearded  man.  This  person  assumed  the  dignity  of  act- 
ing as  a  priest  and  legislator,  and  became  the  chief  of  a  religious 
sect,  which  like  the  Songasis  and  the  Boudhists  of  Indostan,  in- 
flicted on  themselves  the  most  cruel  penances.  He  introduced  the 
custom  of  piercing  the  lips  and  ears,  and  lacerating  the  rest  of  the 
body,  with  the  prickles  of  the  agave  and  leaves,  the  throns  of  the 
cactus,  and  of  putting  reeds  into  the  wounds,  in  order  that  the  blood 
might  be  seen  to  trickle  more  copiously-  In  all  this,  says  Hum- 
boldt, we  seem  to  behold  one  of  those  Rishi,  hermits  of  the  Ganges, 
whose  pious  austerity  is  celebrated  in  the  books  of  the  Hindoos. 
§f  Jewitt,  a  native  of  Boston,  who  lately  died  at  Hartford  Conn., 
was,  some  few  years  since,  captured  with  the  crew  of  the  vessel 
in  which  he  had  sailed,  by  the  Nootka  Indians,  at  Nootka  Sound, 
on  the  Pacific.  In  his  narrative  of  his  captivity  and  sufferings,  he 
states,  that  those  Indians  had  a  religious  custom,  very  similar  to 
those  of  the  Hindoos,  now  in  use,  about  the  temple  of  Jugernaut, 
in  India;  which  was, piercing  their  sides  with  long  rods,  and  leap- 
ing about  while  the  rods  were  in  the  wound. 

Respecting  this  white  and  bearded  man,  much  is  said  in  their 
tradition,  recorded  in  their  books  of  skin,  and  among  other  things, 
that  after  a  long  stay  with  them,  he  suddenly  left  them,  promising 
to  return  again,  in  a  short  time,  to  govern  them  and  renew  their 
happiness.  This  person,  named  Tecpaltzin,  resembles,  very 
strongly,  in  his  promise  to  return  again,  the  behavior  of  Lycurgus, 
the  Spartan  lawgiver,  who,  on  his  departure  from  Lacedemon, 
bound  all  the  citizens  under  an  oath,  both  for  themselves  and  pos- 
terity, that  they  would  neither  violate  nor  abolish  his  laws  till  his 
return ;  and  soon  after,  in  the  Isle  of  Crete,  put  himself  to  death,  so 
that  his  return  became  impossible. 

It  was  the  posterity  of  this  man,  whom  the  unhappy  Montazuma 
thought  he  recognized  in  the  soldiers  of  Cortez,  the  Spanish  con- 
queror of  Mexico.  "  We  know,"  said  the  unhappy  monarch,  in 
his  first  interview  with  the  Spanish  general,  "  by  our  books,  that 


306 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


myself  and  those  who  inhabit  this  country,  are  not  natives  but 
strangers,  who  came  from  a  great  distance.  We  know,  also,  that 
the  chief  who  led  our  ancestors  hither,"  that  is  to  Aztalan,  u  re- 
turned, for  a  certain  time,  to  his  primitive  couutry,  and  thence 
came  back  to  seek  those  who  were  here  established,"  who,  after  a 
while,  returned  again,  alone.  We  always  believed  that  his  de- 
scendants would  one  day  come  to  take  possession  of  this  country. 
Since  you  arrive  from  that  region  where  the  sun  rises,  I  cannot 
doubt,  but  that  the  king  who  sends  you,  is  our  natural  master." 

This  chief  who  led  the  Azteck  tribes  first  to  Aztalan,  is  called 
Tecpaltziu,  and  seems  to  be  the  person  who,  the  monarch  says,  re- 
turned to  his  native  land,  where  the  sun  rises ;  which  is  a  strong 
allusion  to  the  country  of  Babylon,  or  some  part  of  the  old  world, 
about  the  Mediteranean,  which  is  east  from  Mexico,  where  the 
sun  rises,  the  very  country  where  the  chiefs  of  the  fifteen  tribes, 
speaking  the  same  language  with  himself,  first  received  that  lan- 
guage from  the  bird,  as  before  stated. 

But  Quetzalcoatl,  an  entire  different  character,  appears  among 
them  many  ages  after  their  settlement  at  Mexico,  as  a  religious 
teacher,  who,  Humboldt  says,  resembled  the  Boudhisis  or  Brarn- 
huns  of  Indostan,  and  the  hermits  of  the  Ganges,  whose  pious  aus- 
terities are  celebrated  in  their  Pauranas,  or  books  of  theology,  and 
that  the  Azteca  tribes  left  their  country,  Aztalan,  in  the  year  of 
our  Lord  544  ;  and  wandered  to  the  south  or  southwest,  coming  at 
last  to  the  vale  of  Mexico.  It  would  appear,  from  this  view,  that 
as  the  nations  of  Aztalan,  with  their  fellow  nations,  left  vast  works, 
and  a  vast  extent  of  country,  apparently  in  a  state  of  cultivation, 
with  cities  and  villages,  more  in  number  than  three  thousand,  as 
Breckenridge  supposed,  that  they  must,  therefore,  have  settled  here 
long  before  the  Christian  era. 

The  peculiar  doctrines  of  the  Hindoos,  we  are  informed,  were 
commenced  to  be  taught  in  the  east,  among,  what  is  now  called  the 
Hindoo  nations,  by  Zoroaster,  about  the  the  time  of  Abraham,  1449 
years  before  the  time  of  Confucius,  who  was  born  551  years  before 
Christ;  so  that  there  was  time  for  those  doctrines  of  Confucius  and 
Zoroaster  to  take  root  in  China,  and  to  become  popular,  and  also 
to  reach  America,  by  Hindoo  missionaries,  and  overspread  these 
regions  even  as  early  as  the  commencement  of  the  Christian  era. 

Of  Zoroaster,  it  is  said,  that  he  predicted  the  coming  of  the  Mes- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


207 


siab,  in  plain  words  ;  and  that  the  "  wise  men  "  of  the  east,  who 
saw  his  star,  were  of  his  disciples,  or  sect.  This  doctrine  he  must 
have  learned  of  Shera,  who,  we  have  attempted  to  sho\v}  was  Mel= 
chisedek,  or  of  Abraham,  as  it  had  been  handed  down  from  Adam, 
the  first  of  men.  But  the  peculiar  doctrine  of  Confucius,  which 
was  the  worship  of  fire,  as  well  as  that  of  the  sun,  by  Zoroaster,  it 
is  likely,  was  derived  from  the  account  he  found  among  the  ar- 
chives of  the  Jews,  respecting  the  burning  hush  of  Moses,  which 
had  taken  place  more  than  a  thousand  years  before  the  time  of 
Confucius.  From  this  originated,  in  all  probability,  as  taught  by 
Confucius,  the  burning  of  heroes,  when  dead,  among  many  na- 
tions ;  and  from  this,  that  of  immolating  widows,  as  among  the 
Hindoos,  on  the  funeral  pile,  taught  by  the  Bramhun  missionaries, 
who,  undoubtedly,  visited  Ameiica,  as  it  joins  on  to  Asia  north,  or 
as  it  was  then  possibly  called,  Amaquemecan,  &c,  and  planted 
their  belief  among  these  nations  ;  the  tokens  of  which  appear  so 
abundantly  in  the  mounds  and  tumuli  of  the  west 

And  this  Quetzalcotl,  a  celebrated  minister  of  those  opinions,  ap- 
pears to  have  been  the  first  who  announced  the  religion  of  the  east 
among  the  people  of  the  \\est  There  was  also  one  other  minister, 
or  Bramhun,  who  appeared  among  the  Mozca  tribes  in  South  Ame- 
rica, whom  they  name  Bochica.  This  personage  taught  the  wor- 
ship of  the  Sun;  and  if  we  were  to  judge,  should  pronounce  him 
a  missionary  of  the  Confucian  system,  a  worshipper  of  fire,  which 
was  the  religion  of  the  ancient  Persians,  of  whose  country  Confu- 
cius was  a  native.  This  also  is  evidence  that  the  first  inhabitants 
of  America  came  here  at  a  period  near  the  flood,  long  before  that 
worship  was  known,  or  they  would  have  had  a  knowledge  of  this 
Persian  worship,  which  was  introduced  by  Bochica,  among  the 
American  nations;  whieh,  it  seems,  they  had  not,  till  taught  by 
this  man. 

Bochica,  it  appears,  became  a  legislator  among  those  nations,  and 
changed  the  form  of  their  government  to  a  form,  the  construction 
of  which,  says  Baron  Humboldt,  bears  a  strong  analogy  to  the  go- 
vernments of  Japan  and  Thibet,  on  account  of  the  pontiffs  holding 
in  their  hands  both  the  secular  and  the  spiritual  reins.  In  Japan, 
an  island  on  the  east  of  Asia,  or  rather  many  islands,  which  com= 
pose  the  Japanese  empire,  is  found  a  religious  sect,  stiled  Sinto} 
who  do  not  believe  in  the  sanguinary  rites  of  shedding  either  hu- 


208  AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 

man  blood,  or  that  of  animals,  to  propitiate  their  gods-  They  even 
abstain  from  animal  food,  and  detest  bloodshed,  and  will  not  touch 
any  dead  body. — Morse's  Geography,  p.  522. 

There  is,  in  South  America,  a  whole  nation  who  eat  nothing  but 
vegetables,  and  who  hold  in  abhorrence  those  who  feed  on  flesh. 
— Humboldt ,  page  200.  Such  a  coincidence  in  the  religion  of  na- 
tions, can  scarcely  be  supposed  to  exist,  unless  they  are  of  one  ori- 
gin. "  I  am  not  ignorant,  says  Humboldt,  p.  199,  that  the  Tch- 
outsks  annually  crossed  Bhering's  Straits,  to  make  war  on  the  in- 
habitants of  the  northwest  coast  of  America." 

Therefore,  from  what  we  have  related  above,  and  a  few  pages 
back,  it  is  clear,  both  from  the  tradition  of  the  Aztecas,  who  lived 
in  the  western  regions  before  they  went  to  the  south,  and  from  the 
fact  that  nations  on  the  Asiatic  side  of  Bhering's  Straits,  having 
come  annually  over  the  Straits  to  fight  with  the  ancient  nations  of 
the  northwest ;  that  we,  in  this  way,  have  given  conclusive  and 
satisfactory  reasons,  why,  in  the  western  mounds  and  tumuli,  are 
found  evident  tokens  of  the  presence  of  a  Hindoo  population,  or  at 
least,  of  nations  influenced  by  the  superstitions  of  that  people, 
through  the  means  of  missionaries  of  that  cast ;  and  that  they  did 
not  bring  those  opinions  and  ceremonies  with  them  when  they  first 
left  Asia,  after  the  confusion  of  the  antediluvian  language,  as  led 
on  by  their  fifteen  chiefs  ;  till  by  some  means,  and  at  some  period, 
they  finally  found  this  country  ;  not  by  the  way  of  Bering's  Straits, 
but  some  nearer  course,  as  we  have  conjectured  in  other  places  in 
this  work. 

Perhaps  a  few  words  on  the  supposed  native  country  of  Quet- 
zalcotl,  may  be  allowed;  who,  as  we  have  stated,  is  reported  to 
have  been  a  white  and  bearded  man,  by  the  Mexican  Aztecas. 
There  is  a  vast  range  of  islands  on  the  northeast  of  Asia,  in  the  Pa- 
cific, situated  not  very  far  from  Bhering's  Straits,  in  latitude  be- 
tween 40  and  50  degrees  north.  The  inhabitants  of  these  islands, 
when  first  discovered,  were  found  to  be  far  in  advance  in  the  arts 
of  ciyilzation,  and  a  knowledge  of  governments,  of  their  continen- 
tal neighbors — the  Chinese  and  Tartars.  The  Island  of  Jesso,  in 
particular,  which,  of  itself,  is  an  empire,  comparatively,  being  very 
populous ;  and  are  also  highly  polished  in  their  manners. 

The  inhabitants  may  be  denominated  white  ;  their  women  espe- 
cially, whom  Morse,  in  his  Geography  of  the  islands  of  Japan,  Jesso 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST.  209 

and  others  in  that  range,  says  expressly,  are  white,  fair  and  ruddy. 
Humboldt  says,  they  are  a  bearded  race  of  men,  like  Europeans. 

It  appears,  the  ancient  government  of  these  islands,  especially 
that  of  Japan,  which  is  neighbor  to  that  of  Jesso,  was  in  the  hands 
of  spiritual  monarchs  and  pontiffs,  till  the  17th  century.  As  this 
was  the  form  of  government  introduced  by  Quetzalcotl,  when  he 
first  appeared  among  the  Azteca  tribes  ;  which  we  suppose  was  in 
the  country  of  Aztalan,  or  western  states,  may  it  not  be  conjectured 
that  he  was  a  native  of  some  of  those  islands,  who,  in  his  wander- 
ings, had  found  his  way  to  the  place  now  called  Bhering's  Straits ; 
for,  indeed,  anciently  there  may  have  been  only  an  isthmus  at  that 
place,  and  thence  to  this  country,  on  errands  of  benevolence  ;  as  it 
is  said  in  the  tradition  respecting  him,  that  he  preached  peace  among 
men,  and  would  not  allow  any  other  offering  to  the  divinity  than 
the  first  fruits  of  the  harvest;  which  doctrine  was  in  character  with 
the  mild  and  amiable  manners  of  the  inhabitans  of  those  islands. 

And  that  peculiar  and  striking  record,  found  painted  on  the  Mex- 
ican skin-books,  which  describes  him  to  have  been  a  white  and 
bearded  man,  is  our  other  reason  for  supposing  him  to  have  been  a 
native  of  some  of  these  islands,  and  most  probably  Jesso,  rather 
than  any  other  country. 

The  inhabitants  of  these  islands  originated  from  China,  and  with 
them  undoubtedly  carried  the  Persian  doctrines  of  the  worship  of 
the  Sun  and  Fire  ;  consequently,  we  find  it  taught  to  the  people  of 
Aztalan  and  Mexico,  by  such  as  visited  them  from  China,  or  the 
islands  above  named  ;  as  it  is  clear  the  sun  was  not  the  original  ob- 
ject of  adoration  in  Mexico,  but  rather  the  power  which  made  the 
sun.   So  Noah  worshipped. 


A  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  CEREMONIES  OF  FIRE  WORSHIP,  AS 
PRACTISED  BY  CERTAIN  TRIBES  ON  THE  ARKANSAS. 

Mr.  Ash  witnessed  an  exhibition  of  fire  worship,  or  the  worship 
of  the  sun,  as  performed  by  a  whole  tribe,  at  the  village  of  Ozark, 
near  the  mouth  of  the  Ozark,  or  Arkansas  river,  which  empties 
into  the  Mississippi,  from  the  west. 

27 


310 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


He  says,  he  arrived  at  the  village  at  a  very  fortunate  period  ;  at 
a  time  when  it  was  filled  with  Indians  and  surrounded  with  their 
camp.  They  amounted  to  about  nine  hundred,  and  were  com- 
posed of  the  remnants  of  various  nations,  and  were  worshippers  of 
the  sim. 

The  second  day  after  his  arrival  happened  to  be  the  grand  festi- 
val among  them.  He  had  the  most  favorable  opportunity  of  wit- 
nessing their  adorations,  at  three  remarkable  stages;  the  sun's  rise, 
meridian,  and  setting. 

The  morning  was  propitious,  the  air  serene,  the  horizon  clear, 
the  weather  calm. 

The  nations  divided  into  classes ;  warrior's,  young  men  and  wo- 
men, and  married  men  with  their  children.  Each  class  stood  in 
the  form  of  a  quadrant ;  that  each  individual  might  behold  the 
rising  luminary,  and  each  class  held  up  a  particular  offering  to  the 
sun,  the  instant  he  rose  in  his  glory. 

The  warriors  presented  their  arms,  the  young  men  and  women 
offered  ears  of  corn  and  branches  of  trees,  and  married  women  held 
up  to  his  light  their  infant  children.  These  acts  were  performed 
in  silence,  till  the  object  of  adoration  visibly  rose  ;  when,  with 
one  impulse,  the  nations  burst  into  praise,  and  sung  an  hymn  in 
loud  chorus. 

The  lines,  which  were  sung  with  repetitions,  and  marked  by 
pauses,  were  full  of  sublimity  and  judgment.  Their  meaning, 
when  interpreted,  is  as  follows  : 

Great  Spirit !  master  of  our  lives. 

Great  Spirit !  master  of  things  visible,  and  invisible,  and  who 
daily  makes  them  visible  and  invisible. 

Great  Spirit!  master  of  every  other  spirit,  good  or  bad;  com- 
mand the  good  to  be  favorable  to  us,  and  deter  the  bad  from  the 
commission  of  evil. 

Oh  Grand  Spirit !  preserve  the  strength  and  courage  of  our  war- 
riors, and  augment  their  number,  that  they  may  resist  the  oppres- 
sion of  the  Spanish  enemies,  and  recover  the  country,  and  the  rights 
of  our  fathers. 

Oh  Grand  Spirit!  preserve  the  lives  of  such  of  our  old  men  as 
are  inclined  to  give  counsel  and  example  to  the  young. 

Preserve  our  children,  multiply  their  number,  and  let  them  be 
the  comfort  and  support  of  declining  age. 


AND  DISCOVERIES   IH  THE  WEST. 


211 


Preserve  our  corn  and  pur  animals,  and  let  no  famine  desolate 
the  land. 

Protect  our  villages,  guard  our  lives  !  Oh  Great  Spirit,  when  you 
hide  your  light  behind  the  western  hills,  protect  us  from  the  Span- 
iards, who  violate  the  night,  and  do  evil  which  they  dare  not  com* 
mit  in  the  presence  of  your  beams. 

Good  Spirit !  make  known  to  us  your  pleasure,  by  sending  to  us 
the  Spirit  of  Dreams.  Let  the  Spirit  of  Dreams  proclaim  your  will 
in  the  night,  and  we  will  perform  it  through  the  day ;  and  if  it  say 
the  time  of  some  be  closed,  send  them,  Master  of  Life  !  to  the  great 
country  of  souls,  where  they  may  meet  their  fathers,  mothers,  chil- 
dren, and  wives,  and  where  you  are  pleased  to  shine  upon  them 
with  a  bright,  warm,  and  perpetual  blaze  ! 

Oh  Grand,  Oh  Great  Spirit !  harkeu  to  the  voice  of  nations, 
harken  to  all  thy  children,  and  remember  us  always,  for  we  are 
descended  from  thee. 

Immediately  after  this  address,  the  four  quadrants  formed  one 
immense  circle,  of  several  deep,  and  danced,  and  sung  hymns  de- 
scriptive of  the  power  of  the  sun,  till  near  ten  o'clock.  They  then 
amused  and  refreshed  themselves  in  the  village  and  camp,  but  as- 
sembled precisely  at  the  hour  of  twelve,  and  formed  a  number  of 
circles,  commenced  the  adoration  of  the  meridian  sun.  The  fol- 
lowing is  the  literal  translation  of  the  mid-day  address  : 

Courage !  nations,  courage !  the  Great  Spirit  looks  down  upon 
us  from  his  highest  seat,  and  by  his  lustre  appears  content  with  the 
children  of  his  own  power  and  greatness. 

Grand  Spirit !  how  great  are  his  works,  and  how  beautiful  are 
they  !  How  good  is  the  Great  Spirit.  He  rides  high  to  behold  us, 
*Tis  he  who  causes  all  things  to  augment,  and  to  act.  He  even 
now  stands  for  a  moment  to  harken  to  us. 

Courage,  nations !  courage !  The  Great  Spirit,  now  above  our 
heads,  wiil  make  us  vanquish  our  enemies  ;  he  will  cover  our  fields 
with  corn,  and  increase  the  animals  of  our  woods. 

He  will  see  that  the  old  be  made  happy,  and  that  the  young 
augment.  He  will  make  the  nations  prosper,  make  them  rejoice, 
and  make  them  put  up  their  voice  to  him,  while  he  rises  and  sets 
in  their  land,  and  while  his  heat  and  light  can  thus  gloriously  shine 
out. 

This  was  followed  by  dancing  and  hymns,  which  continued  from 


212 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


two  to  three  hours,  at  the  conclusion  of  which,  dinners  were  served 
and  eaten  with  great  demonstrations  of  mirth  and  hilarity.  Mr. 
Ash  says,  he  dined  in  a  circle  of  chiefs,  on  a  barbacued  hog,  and 
venison  very  well  stewed,  and  was  perfectly  pleased  with  the 

repast. 

The  dinner,  and  repose  after  it,  continued  till  the  sun  was  on  the 
point  of  setting.  On  this  being  announced  by  several  w7ho  had 
been  on  the  watch,  the  nations  assembled  in  haste,  and  formed 
themselves  into  segments  of  circles,  in  the  face  of  the  sun,  pre- 
senting their  offerings  during  the  time  of  his  descent,  and  cryiDg 
aloud,  "  The  nations  must  prosper ;  they  have  been  beheld  by  the 
Great  Spirit.  What  more  can  they  want  ?  Is  not  that  happiness 
enough  ?  See,  he  retires,  great  and  content,  after  having  visited 
his  children  with  light  and  universal  good. 

Oh  Grand  Spirit !  sleep  not  long  in  the  gloomy  west,  but  return 
and  call  your  people  once  again  to  light  and  life,  to  light  and  life, 
to  light  and  life." 

This  was  succeeded  by  dances  and  songs  of  praise,  till  eleven 
o'clock  at  night ;  at  which  hour  they  repaired  to  rest,  some  retiring 
to  the  huts  that  formed  their  camp,  and  others  to  the  vicinity  of 
fires  made  in  the  woods,  and  along  the  river's  bank.  Mr.  Ash 
took  up  his  abode  with  a  French  settler  in  the  village.  He  under- 
stood that  these  Indians  have  four  similar  festivals  in  the  year ;  one 
for  every  season. 

When  the  sun  does  not  shine,  or  appear  on  the  adoration  day, 
an  immense  fire  is  erected,  around  which  the  ceremonies  are  per- 
formed with  equal  devotion  and  care." 


ORIGIN  OF  FIRE  WORSHIP. 

For  many  ages  the  false  religions  of  the  east  had  remained  sta- 
tionary ;  but  in  this  period,  Magianism  received  considerable 
strength  from  the  writings  of  Zoroaster.  He  was  a  native  of  Me- 
dia. He  pretended  to  a  visit  in  heaven,  where  God  spake  to  him 
out  of  afire.    This  fire  he  pretended  to  bring  with  him, on  his  re- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST-  213 


turn.  It  was  considered  holy  ;  the  dwelling  of  God.  The  priests 
were  forever  to  keep  it,  and  the  people  were  to  worship  before  it. 
He  caused  fire  temples  every  where  to  be  erected,  that  storms  and 
tempests  might  not  extinguish  it.  Ashe  considered  God  as  dwell- 
ing in  the  fire,  he  made  the  sun  to  be  his  chief  residence,  and 
therefore  the  primary  object  of  worship.  He  abandoned  the  old 
system  of  two  gods,  one  good  and  the  other  evil,  and  taught  the  ex- 
istence of  one  Supreme,  who  had  under  him  a  good  and  evil  angel; 
the  immediate  authors  of  good  and  evil.  To  gain  reputation,  he 
retired  into  a  cave,  and  there  lived  a  long  time  a  recluse,  and  com- 
posed a  book  called  the  Zend  A  vesta,  which  contains  the  liturgy 
to  be  used  in  the  fire  temples,  and  the  chief  doctrines  of  his  re- 
ligion. His  success,  in  propagating  his  system,  was  astonish- 
ingly great.  Almost  all  the  eastern  world,  for  a  season,  bowed  be- 
fore him.  He  is  said  to  have  been  slain,  with  eighty  of  his  priests, 
by  a  Scythian  prince,  whom  he  attempted  to  convert  to  his  reli- 
gion. 

It  is  manifest,  that  he  derived  his  whole  system  of  God's  dwell- 
ing in  the  fire,  from  the  burning  bush,  out  of  which  God  spake  to 
Moses.  He  was  well  acquainted  with  the  Jewish  Scriptures.  He 
gave  the  same  history  of  the  creation  and  deluge  that  Moses  had 
given,  and  inserted  a  great  part  of  the  Psalms  of  David  into  his 
writings.  The  Mehestani,  his  followers,  believed,  in  the  immor- 
tality of  the  soul,  in  future  rewards  and  punishments,  and  in  the 
purification  of  the  body  by  fire,  after  which  they  would  be  united 
to  the  good. — Marsh? s  Ecclesiastical  History,  p.  7S. 

From  the  same  origin,  that  of  the  burning  bush,  it  is  altogether 
probable,  the  worship  of  fire,  for  many  ages,  obtained  over  the 
whole  habitable  earth  ;  and  is  still  to  be  traced  in  the  funeral  piles 
of  the  Hindoos,  the  beacon  fires  of  the  Scotch  and  Irish,  the  peri- 
odical midnight  fires  of  the  Mexicans,  and  the  councH  fires  of  the 
North  American  Indians,  around  which  they  dance. 

A  custom  among  the  natives  of  New  Mexico,  as  related  by  Baron 
Humboldt,  is  exactly  imitated  by  a  practice  found  still  in  some  parts 
of  Ireland,  among  the  descendants  of  the  ancient  Irish. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  month  of  November,  the  great  fire 
of  Samhuin  is  lit  up,  all  the  culinary  fires  in  the  kingdom  being 
first  extinguished,  as  it  was  deemed  sacrilege  to  awaken  the  win- 
ter's social  flame,  except  by  a  spark  snatched  from  this  sacred  fire ; 


214 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


on  which  account,  the  month  November  as  called,  in  the  Irish  Ian 
guage,  Samhuin. 

To  this  day,  the  inferior  Irish  look  upon  bonfires  as  sacred  ;  they 
say  their  prayers,  walking  round  them,  the  young  dream  upon 
their  ashes,  and  the  old  take  this  fire  to  light  up  their  domes- 
tic hearths,  imagining  some  secret  undefinable  excellence  connect- 
ed with  it. 


A  FURTHER  ACCOUNT  OF  WESTERN  ANTIQUITIES. 

"  I  have  a  brick,"  says  Mr.  Atwater,  "  now  before  me,  over 
which  lay,  when  found,  wood,  ashes,  charcoal,  and  human  bones, 
burnt  in  a  large  and  hot  lire.  And  from  what  was  found  at  Circle- 
ville,  in  the  mound  already  described,  it  would  seem  that  females 
were  sometimes  burnt  with  the  males.  I  need  not  say,  that  this 
custom  was  derived  from  Asia,  as  it  is  well  known,  that  is  the  only 
country  to  look  to  for  the  origin  of  such  a  custom.  The  Greeks 
and  Romans  practised  burning  their  illustrous  dead ;  it  wras  prac- 
tised by  the  several  other  nations,  but  they  all  derived  it  from  Asia. 

In  Dr.  Clarke's  volume  of  Travels  from  St.  Petersburgh  to  the 
Crimea,  in  the  year  1800  ;  and  in  his  Travels  in  Russia,  Tartary, 
and  Turkey,  it  is  said,  conical  mounds  of  earth,  or  tumuli,  occur 
very  frequently.  The  most  remarkable  may  be  seen  between  Ye- 
zolbisky  and  Voldai,  on  both  sides  of  the  road,  and  they  continue 
over  the  whole  country,  from  the  latter  place  to  Jedrova,  and  finally, 
over  the  whole  Russian  empire.  The  author  of  the  travels  above 
alluded  to,  says,  "  There  are  few  finer  prospects  than  that  of  Wor- 
onetz,  viewed  a  few  miles  from  the  town  on  the  road  to  Pautoosky. 
Throughout  the  whole  of  this  country,  are  seen,  dispersed  over 
immense  plains,  mounds  of  earth,  covered  with  fine  turf,  the  sepul- 
chres of  the  ancient  world,  common  to  almost  every  habitable 
country.1' 

This  country,  (Russia  in  Europe)  from  Petersburgh  to  the  Cri- 
mea, a  seaport  on  the  Black  sea,  the  region  over  which  Adam 
Clarke  travelled,  is  in  the  very  neighborhood  of  Mount  Ararat  i 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


215 


and  from  the  circumstance  of  the  likeness  existing  between  the 
mounds  and  tumuli  there,  which  Clarke  says  are  the  "  tombs  of 
the  ancient  world,"  and  those  of  the  same  character,  North  and 
South  x\merica,  we  draw  the  conclusion,  that  they  belong,  nearly 
to  one  and  the  same  era  of  time;  viz  :  that  immediately  succeeding 
the  confusion  of  language,  at  the  building  of  Babel. 

We  are  told  in  the  same  volume  of  travels,  that  u  the  Cossacks 
at  Ekaterindara,  dug  into  some  of  these  mounds,  for  the  purpose 
of  making  cellars,  and  found  in  them  several  ancient  vases,"  earth- 
en vessels,  corresponding  exactly  with  vases  found  in  the  western 
mounds.  Several  have  been  found  in  our  mounds,  which  resem- 
ble one  found  in  Scotland,  described  by  Pennant.  A  vessel  appa- 
rently made  of  clay  and  shells,  resembling  in  its  form,  a  small  keg, 
with  a  spout  on  one  side  of  it,  formed  like  the  spout  of  a  tea-kettle, 
with  a  chain  fastened  to  each  end,  made  probably  of  copper,  of 
which  Mr.  Atwater  has  not  informed  us.  This  chain  answered  as 
a  bail  or  handle  ;  exactly  on  its  top,  or  side,  under  the  range  of  the 
chain  handle,  is  an  opening  of  an  exact  circle,  which  is  the  mouth 
of  this  ancient  tea-kettle. — See  plate,  letter  A. 

In  the  Russian  tumuli  are  found  the  bones  of  various  animals, 
as  well  as  those  of  men.  In  the  western  tumuli  are  found  also, 
the  bones  of  men,  as  well  as  the  teeth  of  bears,  otters,  and  beavers. 

Thus  we  learn,  from  the  most  authentic  sources,  that  these  an- 
cient works  existing  in  Europe,  Asia,  Africa  and  America,  are  simi- 
lar in  their  construction,  in  the  materials  with  which  they  were 
raised,  and  in  the  articles  found  in  them. 

Let  those  who  are  constantly  seeking  for  some  argument  to  over- 
throw the  history  of  man  by  Moses,  consider  this  fact.  Such  per- 
sons have  affected  to  believe,  that  there  were  different  stocks  or 
races  of  men  derived  from  different  original  fathers  ;  and  in  this 
way  they  account  for  the  appearance  of  human  beings  found  on 
islands.  But  this  similarity  of  works,  of  language,  and  of  tradition, 
relating  to  the  most  ancient  history  of  man,  indicates,  nay  more, 
establishes  the  fact,  that  ail  men  sprung  from  but  one  origin,  one 
first  man  and  woman,  as  Moses  has  written  it  in  the  book  of 
Genesis. 

When  Dr.  Clarke  was  travelling  in  Tartary,  he  found  a  place 
called  Iverness,  situated  in  the  turn  of  a  river ;  he  inquired  the 
meaning  of  the  word,  and  found  that  Iverness,  in  their  language, 


216 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


signifies  in  a  turn.  Whoever  looks  into  Pennant's  Tour,  will  see 
a  plate,  representing  a  town  in  the  turn  of  a  river,  in  Scotland, 
called  by  the  same  name,  Iverness.  The  names  of  not  a  few  of 
the  rivers  in  England,  Scotland,  and  Wales,  are  the  names  also  of 
rivers  in  Tartary. 

Some  have  supposed  that  all  the  great  works  of  the  west,  of 
which  we  have  been  treating,  belong  to  our  present  race  of  Indians  ; 
but  from  continued  wars  with  each  other,  have  driven  themselves 
from  agricultural  pursuits,  and  thinned  away  their  numbers,  to  that 
degree,  that  the  wild  animals  and  fishes  of  the  rivers,  and  wild 
fruit  of  the  forests,  were  found  sufficient  to  give  them  abundant 
support ;  on  which  account,  they  were  reduced  to  savagism. 

But  this  is  answered  by  the  Antiquarian  Society,  as  follows: 
"  Have  our  present  race  of  Indians  ever  buried  their  dead  in 
mounds  by  thousands  ?  Were  they  acquainted  with  the  use  of  sil- 
ver, or  copper  ?  These  metals  curiously  wrought  have  been  found. 
Did  the  ancients  of  our  Indians  burn  the  bodies  of  distinguished 
chiefs,  on  funeral  piles,  and  then  raise  a  lofty  tumulus  over  the  urn 
containing  their  ashes  ?  Did  the  Indians  erect  any  thing  like  the 
"  walled  towns,"  on  Paint  Creek  ?  Did  they  ever  dig  such  wells 
as  are  found  at  Marietta,  Portsmouth,  and  above  all,  such  as  those 
in  Paint  Creek  ?  Did  they  manufacture  vessels  from  calcareous 
breccia,  equal  to  any  now  made  in  Italy  ?  Did  they  ever  make 
and  worship  an  idol,  representing  the  three  principal  gods  of  India, 
called  the  Triune  Cup  ? — See  plate,  letter  E. 

To  this  we  respond,  they  never  have  :  no,  not  even  their  tra- 
ditions afford  a  glimpse  of  the  existence  of  such  things,  as  forts, 
tumuli,  roads,  wells,  mounds,  walls  enclosing'  between  one  and 
two  hundred,  and  even  five  hundred  acres  of  land ;  some  of  them 
of  stone,  and  others  of  earth,  twenty  feet  in  thickness,  and  exceed- 
ing high,  are  works  requiring  too  much  labor  for  Indians  ever  to 
have  performed. 

The  skeletons  found  in  our  mounds  never  belonged  to  a  people 
like  our  Indians.  The  latter  are  a  tall,  and  rather  slender,  straight 
limbed  people  ;  but  those  found  in  the  barrows  and  tumuli,  were 
rarely  over  five  feet  high,  though  a  few  were  six.  Their  foreheads 
were  low,  cheek  bones  rather  high,  their  faces  were  very  short  and 
wide,  their  eyes  large,  and  their  chins  very  broad. 

But  Morse,  the  geographer,  says,  page  629,  the  Tartars  have 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


217 


small  eyes,  and  not  of  the  oblique  form, like  the  Monguls  and  Chi- 
nese, neither  of  which  seem  to  correspond  with  the  large  eyed  race 
who  built  the  mounds  and  tumuli  of  the  west ;  on  which  account 
we  the  more  freely  look  to  a  higher  an  more  ancient  origin  for 
these  people.  The  Indians  of  North  America,  in  features,  com- 
plexion, and  form,  and  warlike  habits,  suit  far  better  the  Tartaric 
character,  than  the  skeletons  found  in  the  mounds  of  the  west. 
The  limbs  of  our  fossils  are  short  and  thick,  resembling  the  Ger- 
mans more  than  any  other  Europeans  with  whom  we  are  acquainted. 

There  is  a  tradition  among  the  Germans,  that,  %.  ancient  times, 
some  adventurers  of  their  nations,  discovered  the  region  now  called 
America,  and  made  settlements  in  it ;  but  that,  subsequently,  they 
became  amalgamated  with  the  inhabitants  whom  they  found  alrea- 
dy here  ;  whether  of  Indian,  or  of  the  more  ancient  race  of  men 
before  them,  is  not  known. 

We  have  conversed  with  one  German  on  this  subject,  who  re- 
lates that  he  was  acquainted  with  a  family  of  Germanic  origin,  who 
once  were  in  the  possession  of  a  Bible,  printed  about  200  years 
since,  in  Germany.  In  this  Bible  was  an  account  of  the  discovery 
of  America.  We  have  taken  considerable  trouble  to  discover  this 
Bible  in  some  branch  of  the  family,  but  have  not  been  able  ;  but 
have  found  a  part  or  branch  of  the  family,  who  knew  that  such  a 
volume  was  once  in  the  possession  of  their  ancestors  ;  but  where  it 
is,  or  whether  it  is  worn  out,  they  knew  not. 

Germany  is  situated  east  of  England,  and  parts  of  it  lie  along 
the  coast  of  the  Atlantic,  or  North  Sea,  in  north  latitude  53  de- 
grees. From  whence  voyagers  may  have  passed  out  between  the 
north  end  of  Scotland  and  the  south  extremity  of  old  Norway  by 
the  Shetland  and  Faroe  islands,  directly  in  the  the  course  of  Ice- 
land, Greenland  and  the  Labrador  coast  of  America.  This  is  as 
possible  for  the  Germans  to  have  performed,  as  for  the  Norwegians, 
Danes  and  Welch,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1000,  as  shown  in  an- 
other part  of  this  work.  White  Indians,  as  found  far  to  the  west, 
must  have  had  a  white  origin. 

An  idol  found  in  a  tumulus  near  Nashville,  Tennessee,  (see 
Plate,  letter  B.)  and  now  in  the  Museum  of  Mr.  Clifford,  of  Lex- 
ington, is  made  of  clay,  peculiar  for  its  fineness.  With  this  clay- 
was  mixed  a  small  portion  of  gypsum  or  plaster  of  Paris.  This 
idol  was  made  to  represent  a  man,  in  a  state  of  nudity  or  naked- 

28 


218 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


nesi,  whose  arms  had  been  cut  off  close  to  the  body,  and  whose 
nose  and  chin  have  been  mutilated,  with  a  fillet  and  cake  upon  its 
head.  In  all  these  respects,  as  well  as  in  the  peculiar  manner  of 
plating  the  hair,  it  is  exactly  such  an  idol  as  Professor  Pallas  found 
in  his  travels  in  the  southern  part  of  the  Russian  empire. 

A  custom  among  the  ancient  Greeks,  may  have  given  rise  to  the 
formation  of  such  an  idol ;  which  was  copied  by  the  Asiatic  ances- 
tors of  the  people  who  brought  it  with  them  from  Asia  to  the  woods 
of  America.  This  custom  was — when  a  victim  was  destined  to 
be  sacrificed,  thl  sacred  fillet  was  bound  upon  the  head  of  the  idol, 
the  victim  and  priest.  The  salted  cake  was  placed  upon  the  head 
of  the  victim  only ;  it  was  called  "  Mola,"  hence  immolate,  or  im- 
molation, in  later  times  was  used  to  signify  any  kind  of  sacrifice. 

On  this  idol,  (see  the  Plate*  letter  B.,)  found  near  Nashville,  the 
sacred  fillet  and  salted  cake  are  represented  on  its  head :  it  is  sup- 
posed the  copy  of  this  god  was  borrowed  by  the  Greeks  from  the 
Persians  from  whence  it  might  also  have  been  copied,  in  later 
times,  by  the  Chinese  nations,  and  from  thence  have  been  brought 
to  America. 

"  If  the  ancestors  of  our  North  American  Indians,  were  from  the 
northern  parts  of  Tartary,  those  who  worshipped  this  idol  came 
from  a  country  lying  farther  to  the  south,  where  the  population  was 
more  dense,  and  where  the  arts  had  made  greater  progress  ;  while 
the  Tartar  of  the  north  was  a  hunter  and  a  savage,  the  Hindoo  and 
southern  Tartar  were  well  acquainted  with  most  of  the  useful  arts," 
who,  at  a  later  period  than  that  of  the  first  people  who  settled  this 
country,  came,  bringing  along  with  them  the  arts,  the  idols,  and 
the  religious  rites  of  Hindostan,  China,  and  the  Crimea. " 

The  ancestors  of  our  northern  Indians  were  mere  hunters;  while 
the  authors  of  our  tumuli  were  shepherds  and  husbandmen.  The 
tempels,  altars  and  sacred  places  of  the  Hindoos  were  always  situ- 
ated on  the  banks  of  some  stream  of  water.  The  same  observa- 
tion applies  to  the  temples,  altars  and  sacred  places  of  those  who 
erected  our  tumuli.  "  To  the  consecrated  streams  of  Hindostan 
devotees  assembled  from  all  parts  of  the  empire,  to  worship  their 
gods,  and  purify  themselves  by  bathing  in  the  sacred  waters.  In 
this  country,  their  sacred  places  were  uniformly  on  the  banks  of 
some  river ;  and  who  knows  but  the  Muskingum,  the  Sciota,  the 
Miami,  the  Ohio,  the  Cumberland,  and  the  Mississippi,  were  once 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


219 


<&ecnred  as  sacred,  and  their  banks  as  thickly  settled,  and  as  well 
cultivated,  as  are  now  those  of  the  Ganges,  the  Indus,  and  the  IV- 
rempooter." — American  Antq.  Researches. 

"Some  years  since  a  clay  vessel  was  discovered^  about  twenty 
feet  below  the  surface,  in  alluvial  earth,  in  digging  a  well  near 
Nashville,  Tennessee,  and  was  found  standing  on  a  rock,  from 
whence  a  spring  of  water  issued.  This  vessel  was  taken  to  Peale's 
Museum,  at  Philadelphia.  It  contains  about  one  gallon  ;  was  cir* 
cular  in  its  shape,  with  a  flat  bottom,  from  which  it  rises  in  a  some- 
what globose  form,  terminating  at  the  summit  with  the  figure  of  a 
female  head ;  the  place  where  the  water  was  introduced,  or  poured 
out,  was  on  the  one  side  of  it,  nearly  at  the  top  of  the  globose  part. 
The  features  of  the  face  are  Asiatic ;  the  crown  of  the  head  is 
covered  by  a  cap  of  pyramidal  figure,  with  a  flattened  circular  sum- 
mit, ending  at  the  apex>  with  a  round  button.  The  ears  are  large, 
extending  as  low  as  the  chin.  The  features  resemble  many  of 
those  engraved  for  Raffle's  history  ;  and  the  cap  resembles  Asiatic 
head  dresses." — Am.  Ani.  JResearchs. 

Another  idol  was,  a  few  years  since,  dug  up  in  Natchez,  on  the 
Mississippi,  on  a  piece  of  ground  where,  according  to  tradition,  long 
before  Europeans  visited  this  country,  stood  an  Indian  temple* 
This  idol  is  of  stone,  and  is  nineteen  inches  in  height,  nine  inches 
in  width,  and  seven  inches  thick  at  the  extremities.  On  its  breast, 
as  represented  on  the  plate  of  the  idol,  were  five  marks,  which 
were  evidently  characters  of  some  kind,  resembling,  as  supposed, 
the  Persian ;  probably  expressing,  in  the  language  of  its  authors, 
the  name  and  supposed  attributes  of  the  senseless  god  of  stone* 
See  the  Plate,  letter  G. 

It  has  been  supposed  the  present  race  of  Indians  found  their  way 
from  Asia,  by  the  way  of  Bhering's  Straits,  and  had  passed  from 
thence  along  down  the  chain  of  northern  lakes,  till  they  finally 
came  to  the  Atlantic,  south  of  Hudson's  Bay,  in.  latitude  about  50 
degrees  north;  long  before  the  people  who  made,  the  great  works 
of  the  west.  That  this  was  the  fact,  is  argued  by  those  who  con- 
tend for  its  belief,  from  their  having  greater  knowledge  of  the  arts 
diffused  among  them  than  the  Indians. 

It  is,  say  they,  among  a  dense  population,  that  these  improve- 
ments are  effected ;  it  is  here  that  necessity,  the  mother  of  inven- 
tion, prompts  man  to  subject  such  animals  to  his  dominion,  as  he 


V 


220 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


discovers  most  docile,  and  best  calculated  to  assist  him  in  his 
labors,  and  to  supply  him  with  food  and  raiment.  All  this  we 
believe  ;  and  for  this  very  reason  we  hold  the  authors  of  our  west- 
ern works  were  thus  enlightened,  before  they  came  here,  on  the 
plains  of  Srrnar,  amid  the  density  of  the  population  of  the  region 
immediately  round  about  the  tower  of  Babel.  For  it  is  evident, 
they  never,  would  have  undertaken  to  build  a  work  so  immense 
as  that  tower,  unless  their  numbers  were  considered  equal  to  it ; 
and  much  less,  unless  this  was  the  fact,  could  they  have  in  reality 
effected  it. 

While  the  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands,  who  are  employed 
in  that  work,  were  thus  engaged,  there  must  also,  for  their  sup- 
port, have  been  a  large  country,  densely  peopled,  under  contribu- 
tion. In  order  to  this,  agriculture  must  have  been  resorted  to ;  in- 
struments of  metal  were  indisnensible,  both  in  clearing  the  earth 
and  in  erecting  the  tower.  All  this  was  learned  from  Noah,  who 
had  brought,  with  himself  and  family,  the  knowledge  of  the  ante- 
diluvians ;  of  whom  it  is  said  expressly,  in  the  book  of  Genesis, 
that  they  both  understood  the  use  of  iron  and  brass,  as  well  as  agri- 
culture. Abel  was  a  tiller  of  the  ground ;  Tubal  Cain  was  a  work- 
er in  iron  and  brass. 

It  cannot,  therefore,  be  possible  that  Noah's  immediate  descend- 
ants, to  the  third  or  tenth  generations,  could  have  forgotten  these 
things.  And  such  as  wandered  least  after  the  dispersion,  after  such 
as  may  have  spoken  the  same  language,  had  found  a  place  to  settle 
in,  would  most  certainly  retain  this  antediluvian  information  more 
than  such  as  wandered,  as  the  Tartars  always  have  done. 

One  of  the  arts  known  to  the  builders  of  Babel,  was  that  of  brick 
making  ;  this  art  was  also  known  to  the  people  who  built  the  works 
in  the  west.  The  knowledge  of  copper  was  known  to  the  people 
of  the  plains  of  Shinar,  for  Noah  must  have  communicated  it,  as 
he  lived  an  hundred  and  fifty  years  among  them  after  the  flood  ; 
also  copper,  was  known  to  the  antediluvians.  Copper  was  also 
known  to  the  authors  of  the  western  monuments.  Iron  was  known 
to  the  antediluvians ;  it  was  also  known  to  the  ancients  of  the 
wrest ;  however,  it  is  evident  that  very  little  iron  was  among  them, 
as  very  few  instances  of  its  discovery  in  their  works  have  occurred  ; 
and  for  this  very  reason  we  draw  a  conclusion  that  they  came  to 
this  country  very  soon  after  the  dispersion,  and  brought  with  them 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST, 


such  few  articles  of  iron  as  have  beed  found  in  their  works  in  an 
oxydized  state. 

Copper  ore  is  very  abundant,  in  many  places  of  the  west ;  and 
therefore,  as  they  had  a  knowledge  of  it,  when  they  first  came 
here  they  knew  how  to  work  it,  and  form  it  into  tools  and  orna- 
ments. This  is  the  reason  why  so  many  articles  of  this  metal  are 
found  in  their  works  ;  and  even  if  they  had  a  ku  Dwledge  of  iron 
ore,  and  knew  how  to  work  it,  all  articles  made  of  it  must  have 
become  oxydized  as  appears  fiom  what  few  speimens  have  been 
found,  while  those  of  copper  are  more  imperishable.  Gold  orna- 
ments are  said  to  have  been  found  in  several  tumuli.  Silver,  very 
well  plated  on  copper,  has  been  found  in  several  mounds,  besides 
those  at  Circleville  and  Marietta.  An  ornament  of  copper  was 
found  in  a  stone  mound  near  Chilicothe  ;  it  was  a  bracelet  for  the 
ancle  or  wrist. 

The  ancients  of  Asia,  immediately  after  the  dispersion,  were  ac- 
quainted with  ornaments  made  of  the  various  metals ;  for  in  the 
family  of  Terah,  who  was  the  father  of  Abraham  and  Nahor,  we 
find  these  ornaments  in  use  for  the  beautifying  of  females.  See 
the  servant  of  Abraham,  at  the  well  of  Bethuel  in  the  country  of 
"  Ur  of  the  Chaldeans,"  or  Mesopotamia,  which  is  not  very  far  from 
the  place  where  Babel  stood — putting  a  jewel  of  gold  upon  the  face 
or  forehead  of  Rebecca,  weighing  half  a  shekel,  and  two  bracelets 
for  her  wrists,  or  arms.  Bracelets  for  the  same  use  have  been  found 
in  the  west ;  all  of  which  circumstances  go  to  establish  the  ac- 
quaintance of  those  who  made  those  ornaments  of  silver  and  cop- 
per found  in  the  mounds  of  the  west,  equal  with  those  of  Ur  in 
Chaldea.  The  families  of  Peleg,  Reu,  Serug,  and  Nahor,  who 
were  the  immediate  progenitors  of  Abraham,  lived  at  an  era  but 
little  after  the  flood ;  and  yet  we  find  them  in  the  possession  of 
ornaments  of  this  kind ;  from  which  we  conclude  a  knowledge 
both  of  the  metals,  and  how  to  make  ornaments,  as  above  describ- 
ed, was  brought  by  Noah  and  his  family  from  beyond  the  flood. 

A  knowledge,  therefore,  of  these  things  must  have  gone  with 
the  different  people  who  spread  themselves  over  the  whole  earth, 
and  were  retained  by  those  who  wandered  least,  as  we  suppose 
was  the  fact  in  relation  to  the  first  settlers  of  this  continent,  in  the 
regions  of  the  west.  It  is  believed  by  some  that  the  common  In- 
dian nations  came  first  to  this  conntry  to  the  northwest,  and  fol" 


222 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


lowing  the  northern  lakes,  found  their  way  to  the  Atlantic ;  while 
at  a  later  period,  they  suppose,  the  more  enlightened  nations  of 
China  came  the  same  way,  and  followed  along  down  the  shore  of 
the  Pacific,  till  they  found  a  mild  climate,  along  in  latitudes  fifty, 
forty,  and  thirty  degrees. 

But  this  is  not  possible  :  First,  because  the  Indians  were  found 
by  us  as  numerous  on  the  shores  of  the  Pacific,  as  on  the  shores  of 
the  Atlantic,  and  in  all  the  vast  country  between ;  dwelling  where 
a  people,  still  more  ancient  than  they,  once  lived,  but  had  forsaken 
their  fields,  their  houses,  their  temples,  mounds,  forts,  and  tumuli, 
and  either  were  nearly  exterminated  in  wars  with  them,  or  wander- 
ed to  the  south  ;  the  small  residue,  the  descendants  of  whom  are 
found  in  several  of  the  nations  inhabiting  South  America,  as  we 
have  shown  heretofore. 

Second  ;  it  would  seem  impossible  for  the  people,  or  nations, 
who  built  the  vast  works  of  the  west,  and  are  evidently  of  the 
shepherd  or  agricultural  cast,  to  have  crossed  the  Strait,  and  fought 
their  way  through  hostile,  opposing  and  warlike  nations,  till  they 
had  established  themselves  in  their  very  midst.  It  is,  therefore, 
much  more  agreeable  to  reason,  and  also  to  the  traditions,  both  of 
the  Azteca  nations  in  Mexico  and  the  Wyandot  tribes  in  the  west, 
to  believe  that  our  Indians  came  on  the  continent  at  a  much  later 
period  than  those  who  are  the  authors  of  the  works  we  have  de- 
scribed, and  that  they  had  many  wars  with  them,  till,  at  length, 
they  slowly  moved  to  the  south,  abandoning  forever  their  country, 
to  wrander,  they  knew  not  whither,  as  we  have  also  shown.  This 
conclusion  is  not  mere  fancy,  for  it  is  a  matter  of  historic  noticer 
that  the  "  Tchautskis  annually  crossed  Bhering's  Straits  to  make 
war  on  the  inhabitants  of  the  northwest  coast  of  America." — Hum- 
boldt, vol  l,p.  199. 

The  reader  will  recollect  our  description  of  the  walled  towns  of 
the  west,  surrounded  with  deep  ditches;  as  found  on  Paint  Creek, 
Little  Miami,  Circleville,  Marietta,  Cincinnatti,  Portsmouth,  and 
in  Perry  county,  Ohio.  There  is  an  town,  (see  Morse's  Geogra- 
phy, vol.  2,  p.  631,)  situated  in  the  regions  of  Mount  Ararat,  in 
the  ancient  country  called  Independent  Tartary,  by  the  name  of 
Khiva,  which  stands  on  a  rising  ground,  like  the  town  in  Perry 
county.  It  is  surrounded  with  a  high  wall  of  earth,  very  thick, 
and  much  higher  than  the  houses  within.    It  has  three  gateways  j 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST- 


223 


there  are  turrets  at  small  distances,  and  a  broad  deep  ditch ;  the 
town  is  large,  and  occupies  a  considerable  space,  and  commands  a 
beautiful  prospect  of  the  distant  plains,  which  the  industry  of  the 
inhabitants  has  rendered  very  fertile  ;  but  the  houses  of  this  town 
are  very  low,  and  mostly  built  of  clay,  and  the  roofs  flat,  and  cov- 
ered with  earth.  This  town,  which  so  exactly  corresponds  with 
the  ruins  of  the  west,  is  in  that  part  of  Asia,  east  of  Ararat  where  the 
primitive  inhabitants,  immediately  after  the  deluge,  made  the  first 
settlements.  And  from  this  coincidence,  we  are  led  to  a  belief, 
drawn  from  this  and  abundant  other  evidence,  that  the  antiquity  of 
the  one  is  equal  with  that  of  the  other ;  that  its  construction  is  in- 
deed of  the  primitive  form  ;  which  strengthens  our  opinion,  that 
the  first  inhabitants  of  America,  came  here  with  the  very  ideas 
relative  to  the  construction  and  security  of  towns  and  fortifications, 
that  dictated  tlie  building  of  Khiva,  It  is  allowed  on  all  hands, 
that  the  people  of  Asia  are  wholly  of  the  primitive  stamp  ;  their 
antiquities,  therefore,  are  of  the  same  character  with  those  of 
America. 

"  Proofs  of  primitive  times,"  says  Mr.  Atwater,  "  are  seen  in 
their  manners  and  customs,  in  their  modes  of  burial  and  worship, 
and  in  their  wells,  which  resemble  those  of  the  patriarchal  ages. 
Here  the  reader  has  only  to  recollect  the  one  at  Marietta,  those  at 
Portsmouth,  on  Paint  Creek,  at  Cincinnati,  and  compare  them  with 
those  described  in  Genesis.  Jacob  rolled  the  stone  from  the  well's 
mouth,"  that  is,  from  the  fountain  at  the  bottom.  "  Rachel  de- 
scended with  her  pitcher,  and  brought  up  water  for  her  future  hus- 
band, and  for  the  flocks  of  her  father." 

Before  men  were  acquainted  with  letters,  they  raised  monuments 
of  unwrought  fragments  of  rocks,  for  the  purpose  of  perpetuating 
the  memory  of  events.  Such  we  find  raised  in  America.  In  the 
patriarchal  ages,  men  were  in  the  habit  of  burying  their  dead  on 
high  mountains  and  hills,  with  mounds  or  tumuli  raised  over  them  ; 
such  we  find  in  America."  Mr.  Atwater  asks  the  question,  <c  did 
they  not  come  here  as  early  as  the  days  of  Lot  and  Abraham  ?" 
The  latter  of  whom  lived,  something  more  than  two  thousand  years 
before  Christ,  which  would  be  only  about  three  hundred  and  forty 
years  after  the  flood,  and  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  years  after 
the  confusion  of  language  at  Babel. 

If  so,  they  were  acquainted  more  or  less  with  a  knowledge  of 


224 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


the  true  God,  the  creation  of  the  world,  with  the  circumstances  of 
the  building  of  the  ark,  the  fact  of  the  deluge,  the  number  of  per- 
sons saved  in  the  ark,  or,  as  they  say,  on  a  raft ;  and  also,  with 
circumstances  which  transpired  after  the  flood,  as  mentioned  in 
Scripture ;  all  of  which  are  plainly  alluded  to  in  Mexican  tra- 
dition. 

But  other  nations  than  the  progenitors  of  the  Mexicans,  have 
also  found  this  country,  at  other  eras,  one  after  another,  as  accident 
or  design  may  have  determined. 

Fortification. — On  the  shores  of  the  Mississippi,  some  miles  be- 
low Lake  Pepin,  on  a  fine  plain,  exists  an  artificial  elevation  of 
about  four  feet  high,  extending  a  full  mile,  in  somewhat  of  a  cir- 
cular form.  It  is  sufficiently  capacious  to  have  covered  5000  men. 
Every  angle  of  the  breast  work  is  yet  traceable,  though  much  de- 
faced by  time.  Here,  it  is  likely,  conflicting  realms  as  great  as 
those  of  the  ancient  Greeks  and  Persians,  decided  the  fate  of  am- 
bitious Monarchs,  of  the  Chinese,  Mongol  descent. 

Weapons  of  brass  have  been  found  in  many  parts  of  America, 
as  in  the  Canadas,  Florida,  &c,  with  curiously  sculptured  stones, 
all  of  which  go  to  prove  that  this  country  was  once  peopled  with 
civilized,  industrious  nations, — now  traversed  the  greater  part  by 
savage  hunters. 


DISCOVERY  OF  AMERICA  BY  THE  NORWEGIANS  AND  WELCH 
BEFORE  THE  TIME  OF  COLUMBUS. 

Thic  is  contended  by  Lord  Monboddo,  a  native  of  Scotland,  and 
a  philosophical  and  metaphysical  writer  of  the  17th  century.  He 
wrote  a  dissertation  on  the  origin  and  progress  of  language,  in  which 
he  is  sure  he  has  found  among  the  nations  of  America,  who  are  of 
the  aboriginal  class,  the  ancient  Celtic  or  Gielic  dialect.  He  goes 
further,  and  supposes  that  all  the  nations  of  America,  from  the  La- 
brador Esquimaux,  to  the  natives  of  Florida,  are  derived  of  Celtic 
origin  :  but  to  this  we  cannot  subscribe,  as  that  many  nations  of 
the  common  Indians  are  evidently  of  Tartaric  or  Scythian  origin  ; 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


225 


the  descendants  of  the  race  of  Shem,  and  not  of  Japheth,  who  was 
a  white  man. 

Monboddo,  however,  argues  in  support  of  his  opinion,  from  a 
number  of  curious  circumstances.  He  says  that  when  in  France, 
he  was  acquainted  with  a  French  Jesuit,  a  man  of  great  and  cele- 
brated erudition,  who  related  to  him  that  a  companion  of  his,  who 
was  engaged  in  the  missionary  service,  with  himself,  among  the 
northern  Indians  in  America,  having  lost  his  way  in  the  woods, 
travelled  on,  he  knew  not  whither,  till  he  found  himself  among  the 
Esquimaux  Indians. 

Here  he  staid  long  enough  to  learn  their  language  ;  after  which 
he  returned  to  Quebec,  in  Canada  ;  and  happening  one  day  to  be 
walking  along  the  docks  of  that  city,  observed  among  the  crew  of 
a  ship  that  was  moored  there,  a  sailor  who  was  a  native  of  the 
country  at  the  foot  of  the  Pyrenian  mountain,  on  the  side  of  France. 

On  hearing  this  man  speak,  who  was  a  Basque,  from  his  know- 
ledge of  the  Esquimaux,  obtained  as  above  related,  he  understood 
what  he  said,  so  that  they  conversed  together  a  while.  Now,  the 
language  which  the  Basques  speak,  Lord  Monboddo  informs  us,  is 
absolutely  a  dialect  of  the  ancient  Celtic,  and  differs  but  little  from 
the  language  of  the  ancient  Highlanders  of  Scotland. 

This  opinion  is  corroborated  by  a  fact,  noticed  in  a  Scotch  publi- 
cation, respecting  an  Esquimaux  Indian,  who  acompanied  one  of 
the  English  expeditions  towards  the  north  pole,  with  a  view  to 
reach  it,  if  possible,  or  to  find  a  passage  from  the  North  Atlantic 
through  to  the  North  Pacific,  by  the  way  of  Bhering's  Strait ;  but 
did  not  succeed  on  account  of  the  ice. 

On  board  of  this  vessel  was  a  Scotch  Highlander,  a  native  of  the 
island  of  Mull,  one  of  the  Hebrides  ;  who,  in  a  few  days  time,  was 
enabled  to  converse  fluently  with  the  Esquimaux ;  which  would 
seem  to  be  a  proof  absolute,  of  the  common  origin,  both  of  the  Es- 
quimaux language,  and  that  of  the  Basque,  which  is  the  ancient 
Scotch  or  Celtic. 

Also  the  same  author  states,  that  the  Celtic  language  was  spoken 
by  many  of  the  tribes  of  Florida,  which  is  situated  at  the  north 
end  of  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  ;  and  that  he  was  well  acquainted  with 
a  gentleman,  from  the  Highlands  of  Scotland,  who  was  several 
years  in  Florida,  in  a  public  character,  and  who  stated  that  many 
of  the  tribes  with  whom  he  had  become  acquainted,  had  the  great- 

29 


226 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


e§t  affinity  with  the  Celtic  in  their  language  ;  which  appeared  par- 
ticularly, both  in  the  form  of  speech,  and  manner  of  reciprocating 
the  common  salutation,  of  u  how  do  you  do." 

But  what  is  still  more  remarkable,  in  their  war  song  he  disco- 
vered, not  only  the  sentiments,  but  several  lines,  the  very  same 
words  as  used  in  Ossian's  celebrated  majestic  poem  of  the  wars  of 
his  ancestors,  who  flourished  about  thirteen  hundred  years  ago. 
The  Indian  names  of  several  of  the  streams,  brooks,  mountains  and 
rocks  of  Florida,  are  also  the  same  which  are  given  to  similar  ob- 
jects, in  the  highlands  of  Scotland. 

This  celebrated  metaphysician  was  a  firm  believer  in  the  an- 
ciently reported  account  of  America's  having  been  visited  by  a  co- 
lony from  Wales,  long  previous  to  the  discovery  of  Columbus  ;  and 
says  the  fact  is  recorded  by  several  Welch  historians,  which  can- 
not be  contested.  It  is  reported  by  travellers  in  the  west,  that  on 
the  Red  River,  which  has  its  origin  north  of  Spanish  Texas,  but 
empties  into  the  Mississippi,  running  through  Louisiana  ;  that  on 
this  river,  very  far  to  the  southwest,  a  tribe  of  Indians  has  been 
found,  whose  manners,  in  several  respects,  resemble  the  Welch, 
especially  in  their  marriage  and  funeral  ceremonies.  They  call 
themselves  the  McCedus  tribe,  which  having  the  Mc  or  Mack  at- 
tached to  their  name,  points  evidently  to  a  European  origin,  of  the 
Celtic  description.  It  is  further  reported  by  travellers,  that  north- 
west from  the  head  waters  of  the  Red  River,  which  would  be  in 
the  region  called  the  great  American  desert,  Indians  have  come 
down  to  the  white  settlements,  some  thirty  or  forty  years  since, 
who  spoke  the  Welch  language  quite  iatelligibly.  These  Indians, 
bearing  such  strong  evidence  of  Welch  extraction,  may  possibly  be 
descended  from  the  lost  colony  from  Wales,  an  account  of  which 
is  given  in  Powel's  History  of  Wales,  in  the  12th  century  ;  which 
relates  that  Prince  Madoc,  weary  of  contending  with  a  brother  for 
their  father's  crown,  left  his  country,  and  sailed  from  Wales  a  due 
west  course,  which,  if  they  came  to  land  at  all  must  have  been 
Newfoundland,  which  lies  opposite  the  mouth  of  the  river  St. 
Lawrence,  exactly  in  latitude  50  degrees  north,  and  which  is  con- 
tiguous to  this  continent.  But  the  account  relates  that  he  disco- 
vered an  unknown  country  ;  that  he  returned  to  Wales,  and  gave 
such  a  favorable  history  of  his  discoveries  and  of  the  goodness 
of  the  land,  that  many  were  induced  to  embark  with  him  on  his 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


227 


$e\?ond  voyage,  which  he  accomplished.  He  returned  again  to 
Wales,  but  after  a  while  sailed  a  third  time  to  the  newly  disco- 
vered country,  but  has  never  since  been  heard  of. 

The  same  account  as  above,  is  here  again  related,  but  with  other 
circumstances  attending.  c<  In  the  year  1170,"  663  years  ago, 
which  was  as  before  stated,  in  the  12th  century,  "  Madoc,  son  of 
Owen  Groynwedk,  Prince  of  Wales,  dissatisfied  with  the  situation 
of  affairs  at  home,  left  his  country,  as  related  by  the  Welch  his* 
torian,  in  quest  of  some  new  place  to  settle.  And  leaving  Ireland 
to  the  north,  proceeded  west,  till  he  discovered  a  fertile  country  \ 
where  leaving  a  colony,  he  returned,  and  persuading  many  of  his 
countrymen  to  join  him,  put  to  sea  with  ten  ships,  and  was  never 
more  heard  of." 

We  are  not  in  the  belief  that  all  the  tribes  of  the  west,  who 
have  the  name  of  Indian,  are  indeed  such.  There  are  many  tribes 
which  have  been  discovered  in  the  western  regions,  as  on  the  Red 
River,  in  the  great  American  desert,  west  of  the  head  waters  of 
that  river,  and  in  wilds  west  of  the  Rocky  Mountains  ;  who  are 
evidently  not  of  the  Tartar  stock,  whose  complexion,  language, 
and  heavy  bearded  faces,  show  them  to  be  of  other  descent. 

The  Indians  who  were  living  on  the  river  Taunton,  in  Massa* 
chusetts,  when  the  whites  first  settled  there,  had  a  tradition  that 
certain  strangers  once  sailed  up  Asoonset,  or  Taunton  River,  in 
wooden  houses,  and  conquered  the  red  men.  This  tradition  does 
not  go  to  lessen  the  probability  of  the  expedition  of  the  Welch  fleet) 
as  above  related,  but  greatly  to  strengthen  it. 

This  account  of  the  Welch  expedition,  has  several  times  drawn 
the  attention  of  the  world ;  but  as  no  vestige  of  them  has  been 
found,  it  was  concluded,  perhaps  too  rashly,  to  be  a  fable  ;  or  at 
least,  that  no  remains  of  the  colony  exist.  Of  late  years,  however, 
western  settlers  have  received  frequent  accounts  of  a  nation  inhabit- 
ing at  a  great  distance  up  the  Missouri,  in  manners  and  appearance 
resembling  the  other  Indians,  by  speaking  Welch,  and  retaining 
some  ceremonies  of  the  Christian  Worship ;  and,  at  length,  says 
Imlay,  in  his  work,  entitled  Imlay's  America,  this  is  universally 
believed  to  be  a  fact, 

Near  the  falls  of  Ohio,  six  brass  ornaments,  such  as  soldiers  usu- 
ally wear  in  front  of  their  belts,  was  dug  up,  attached  to  six  skele- 
tons.    They  were  cast  metal,  and  on  one  of  them  which  was 


228  AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 

brought  to  Cincinnati,  was  represented  a  mermaid,  playing  upon  s 
harp,  which  was  the  ancient  coat  of  arms  for  the  principality  of 
Wales.  The  tradition  from  the  oldest  Indians,  is  that  it  was  at  the 
falls  of  the  Ohio,  that  the  first  white  people  were  cut  off  by  the 
natives. 

It  is  well  authenticated  that  upwards  of  thirty  years  ago,  Indians 
came  to  Kaskaskia,  in  the  territory,  now  the  State  of  Illinois,  who 
spoke  the  Welch  dialect,  and  were  perfectly  understood  by  two 
Welchmen  then  there,  who  conversed  with  them.  From  informa- 
tion to  be  relied  on3  tomb  stones,  and  other  monuments  of  the  ex- 
istence of  such  a  people,  have  been  found,  with  the  year  engraved, 
corresponding  very  near  to  that  given  above,  being  in  the  twelfth 
century. 

But  long  before  this  lost  colony  left  Wales,  Lord  Monboddo  says, 
America  was  visited  by  some  Norwegians,  from  Greenland,  who,  it 
was  well  known,  were  the  discoverers  of  Greenland,  in  A.  D.  964, 
and  on  that  very  account,  it  might  be  safely  supposed  they  would 
push  their  discoveries  still  farther  west. 

Accordingly,  his  lordship  says,  the  Norwegians  having  made  a 
settlement  in  Greenland,  in  the  end  of  the  tenth  century,  some  ad- 
venturers from  thence  about  that  time,  which  would  be  more  than 
eight  hundred  years  ago,  discovered,  or  rather  visited,  North  Amer- 
ica ;  for  this  writer  supposes  the  continent  to  have  been  known  to 
the  people  of  the  old  world,  as  early  as  the  time  of  the  seige  of 
Troy  ;  which  was  about  eleven  hundred  years  before  Christ;  about 
the  time  of  Solomon,  or  rather,  an  hundred  years  before  the  time 
of  that  king,  nearly  3000  since. 

This  is  a  point  at  which  the  publication  of  this  book  aims,  viz : 
to  establish  that  this  part  of  the  earth  was  settled  as  soon  after  the 
flood  as  any  other  country  as  far  from  Ararat,  and  perhaps  sooner. 

Lord  Monboddo  says,  these  Greenland  Norwegian  adventurers 
made  a  settlement  about  the  mouth  of  the  River  St.  Lawrence  ; 
where  having  found  wild  grapes,  a  German  among  them  named 
the  country  Vinland,  as  is  related  in  the  history  of  this  discovery. 
Mr.  Irving,  in  his  late  life  of  Columbus,  says,  that  as  the  Norwe- 
gians have  never  seen  the  grape  vine,  did  not  know  what  it  was, 
but  there  being  a  German  with  them,  who  was  acquainted  with 
the  grape  of  his  own  native  country,  told  them  its  name,  from  which 
they  named  it  as  above. 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


229 


This  account  is  recorded  in  the  Annals  of  Iceland ;  which  was 
peopled  from  Norway,  which  is  in  the  north  of  Europe  ;  and  from 
Iceland  the  colony  came  that  settled  in  Greenland,  from  thence  to 
the  mouth  of  the  River  St.  Lawrence,  about  the  year  1000  A.  D. 
If  such  was  the  fact,  there  is  nothing  more  natural,  than  that  they 
may  have  pursued  up  that  river,  even  to  the  lakes,  and  have  set- 
tled around  them,  and  on  the  islands  in  the  St.  Lawrence.  There 
is  an  island  in  that  river,  called  Chimney  Island,  so  named,  on 
account  of  the  discovery  of  ancient  cellars  and  fire  places,  evi- 
dently more  ancient  than  the  first  acquaintance  of  the  French 
with  that  country,  which  we  suppose  to  have  been  made  by  these 
Norwegians. 

This  Scottish  author,  in  his  admired  work  on  the  origin  and  pro- 
gress of  language,  as  well  as  in  other  works  of  his,  relates  a  vast 
number  of  curious  and  interesting  circumstances,  which  relate  to 
our  subject ;  one  of  the  most  remarkable,  is  an  account  of  an  In- 
dian mummy,  discovered  in  Florida,  wrapped  up  in  a  cloth  manu- 
factured from  the  bark  of  trees,  and  adorned  with  hieroglyphical 
characters,  precisely  the  same,  with  characters  engraved  on  a  metal 
plate,  found  in  an  ancient  burying  ground,  in  one  of  the  Hebride 
islands,  north  of  Scotland. 

This  country,  (Scotland)  boasts  of  the  most  ancient  line  of  kings 
that  have  reigned  in  Europe,  having  settled  in  Scotland,  more  than 
three  hundred  years  before  the  Christian  era,  in  the  time  of  Alex- 
ander the  Great.  They  are  of  Cimbrick  Chersonese  origin,  who 
are  derived  probably,  from  some  wrandering  tribe,  descended  from 
Japheth,  the  white  son  of  Noah,  whose  independence,  the  Greeks 
nor  Romans  were  never  able,  in  their  wide-spread  conquests,  to 
wrest  from  them  ;  this  was  reserved  for  the  English  to  accomplish , 
which  was  done  in  1603. 

These  islands,  therefore,  north  and  west  of  Scotland,  became 
peopled  by  their  descendants  at  an  early  day.  Their  hardiness  of 
constitution,  perseverance  of  character,  and  adventuring  disposition,, 
favors,  in  the  strongest  sense,  the  accounts  as  recorded  in  their  na- 
tional documents.  And  a  reason  why  those  documents  have  not 
come  to  light  sooner,  is,  because  they  were  penned  some  hundred 
years  before  the  invention  of  printing  ;  and  laid  up  in  the  cabinet 
of  some  Norwegian  chief,  at  a  time  when  but  few  could  read  at 
all,  and  the  means  of  information  did  not  exist,  to  be  compared  with 


230 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


the  facilities  of  the  present  time  :  therefore,  it  has  been  reserved  t<J 
this  late  era,  to  unravel,  in  any  degree,  the  mysteries  of  antiquity* 

In  the  work  entitled  "  Irving's  Life  of  Colombus,"  is  an  account 
of  the  discovery  of  this  continent,  by  those  northern  islanders,  given 
in  a  more  circumstantial  and  detailed  manner.  See  his  Appendix 
to  the  3d  vol.  p.  292,  as  follows : 

"  The  most  plausible,"  or  credible  <c  account 5'  respecting  those 
discoveries,"  is  given  by  Snoro  Sturleson,  or  Sturloins,  in  his  Saga, 
or  Chronicle  of  king  Olaus.  According  to  this  writer,  one  Biron, 
of  Iceland,  voyaging  to  Greenland  in  search  of  his  father,  from 
whom  he  had  been  separated  by  a  storm,  was  driven  by  tempestu- 
ous weather,  far  to  the  south-west,  until  he  came  in  sight  of  a  low 
country,  covered  with  woods,  with  an  island  in  its  vicinity.  The 
weather  becoming  favorable  he  turned  to  the  north-east  without 
landing,  and  arrived  safe  at  Greenland.  His  account  of  the  coun^ 
try  he  had  seen,  it  is  said,  excited  the  enterprise  of  Lief,  son  of 
Eric  Rauda,  (or  red  head)  the  first  settler  of  Greenland.  A  ves* 
sel  was  fitted  out,  and  Lief  and  Biron  departed  together  in  quest  of 
this  unknown  land.  They  found  a  rocky  and  sterile  island,  to 
which  they  gave  the  name  of  Helleiand  ;  also  a  low,  sandy  coun* 
try,  covered  with  wood,  to  which  they  gave  the  name  of  Markland  j 
and  two  days  afterwards,  they  observed  a  continuance  of  the  coast, 
with  an  island  to  the  north  of  it.  This  last  they  described  as  fer- 
tile, well  wooded,  producing  agreeable  fruits,  and  particularly 
grapes  ;  a  fruit  with  which  they  were  not  acquainted;  but  on  be- 
ing informed  by  one  of  their  companions,  a  German,  of  its  qualities 
and  name,  they  called  the  country  from  it,  Vinland. 

They  ascended  a  river  well  stored  with  fish,  particularly  salmon, 
and  came  to  a  Lake  from  which  the  river  took  its  origin,  where 
they  passed  the  winter. 

It  is  very  probable  this  river  was  the  St.  Lawrence,  as  it  abound- 
ed with  Salmon,  and  was  the  outlet  of  a  Lake,  which,  it  is  likely, 
was  Ontario ;  there  is  no  other  River  capable  of  being  navigated, 
very  far  from  its  mouth,  with  a  sea  vessel,  and  which  comes  from  a 
Lake,  and  empties  into  the  sea,  on  that  side  of  the  coast,  but  the 
St.  Lawrence. 

The  climate  appeared  to  them  mild  and  pleasant,  in  comparison* 
being  accustomed  to  the  more  rigorous  seasons  of  the  north  ;  on  the 
shortest  day  in  the  winter  the  sun  was  but  eight  hours  above  the 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


231 


horizon  ;  hence  it  has  been  concluded,  that  the  country  was  about 
the  49th  degree  of  north  latitude,  and  was  either  Newfoundland,  or 
some  part  of  the  coast  of  North  America,  about  the  Gulf  of  St. 
Lawrence.  It  is  said  in  those  Chronicles  of  Sturloins,  that  the  re- 
latives of  Lief  made  several  voyages  to  Vinland  ;  that  they  traded 
with  the  natives  for  peltry  and  furs  ;  and  that  in  1121,  922  years 
ago,  a  bishop,  named  Erie,  went  from  Greenland  to  Vinland,  to 
convert  the  inhabitants  to  Christianity. 

A  knowledge  of  Christianity  among  the  savage  Briton,  Caledo- 
nians and  the  Welch,  was  introduced,  as  is  supposed,  by  St.  Paul, 
or  some  of  his  disciples,  as  early  as  the  year  of  our  Lord  63,  more 
than  seventeen  hundred  years  since. 

"  From  this  time,  about  1121,  we  know  nothing  of  Vinland,  says 
Forester,  in  his  book  of  northern  voyages,  3d  vol.  2d  chap.,  page 
36,  as  quoted  by  Irving.  There  is  every  appearance  that  the  tribe, 
which  still  exists  in  the  interior  of  Newfoundland,  and  who  are  so 
different  from  the  other  savages  of  North  America  both  in  their  ap- 
pearance and  mode  of  living,  and  always  in  a  state  of  warfare  with 
the  Indians  of  the  northern  coast,  are  descendants  of  the  ancient 
Normans,  Scandinavians,  or  Danes." 

In  the  chronicles  of  these  northern  nations,  there  is  also  and  ac- 
count of  the  voyage  of  four  boat  crews,  in  the  year  1354,  which 
corroborates  the  foregoing  relations.  This  little  squadron  of  fishing 
boats,  u  being  overtaken  by  a  mighty  tempest,  were  driven  about 
the  sea  for  many  days,  until  a  boat,  containing  seven  persons,  was 
cast  upon  an  island,  called  Estotiland,  about  one  thousand  miles 
from  Friesland.  They  were  taken  by  the  inhabitants  and  carried 
to  a  fair  and  populous  city,  where  the  king  sent  for  many  interpre- 
ters, to  converse  with  them,  but  none  that  they  could  understand, 
until  a  man  was  found  who  likewise  had  been  cast  upon  that  coast 
some  time  before.  They  remained  several  days  upon  the  island, 
which  was  rich  and  fruitful.  The  inhabitants  were  intelligent  and 
acquainted  with  the  mechanical  arts  of  Europe :  they  cultivated 
grain,  made  beer,  and  lived  in  houses  built  of  stone. 

There  were  Latin  books  in  the  king's  library,  though  the  inhabi- 
tants had  no  knowledge  of  that  language  ;  and  in  manuscript,  as 
the  art  of  printing  was  not  yet  discovered.  They  had  many  towns 
and  castles,  and  carried  on  a  trade  with  Greenland,  for  pitch,  sul- 
phur and  peltry.    Though  much  given  to  navigation,  they  were 


232  AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 

ignorant  of  the  use  of  the  compass,  and  finding  the  Frieslanders 
acquainted  with  it,  held  them  in  great  esteem ;  and  the  king  sent 
them,  with  twelve  harks,  to  visit  a  country  to  the  south,  called 
Drogeo.  Drogeo  is,  most  likely,  a  Norman  name;  as  we  find 
JDroijo  was  a  leader  of  the  Normans  against  the  ancient  baronies  of 
Italy,  about  the  year  of  our  Lord  7S7.  Drogeo  is  supposed  to  have 
been  the  continent  of  America.  This  voyage  of  the  fishing  squa- 
dron, it  appears,  was  in  1354,  more  than  fifty  years  after  the  disco- 
very of  the  magnetic  needle,  which  was  in  1300. 

"  They  had  nearly  perished  in  this  storm,  but  were  cast  away 
upon  the  coast  of  Drogeo.  They  found  the  people  cannibals  and 
were  on  the  point  of  being  killed  and  devoured,  (these  were  our 
Indians,)  but  were  spared  on  account  of  their  great  skill  in  fishing. 
Drogeo  they  found  to  be  a  country  of  vast  extent,  or  rather  a  new 
world ;  that  the  inhabitants  were  naked  and  barbarous  ;  but  that 
far  to  the  southwest  there  was  a  more  civilized  region  and  tempe- 
rate climate,  where  the  inhabitants  had  a  knowledge  of  gold  and 
silver3  lived  in  cities,  erected  splendid  temples  to  idols,  and  sacri- 
ficed human  victims  to  them."  This  is  a  true  picture  of  the  Mex- 
icans, as  found  by  Cortez,  the  Spanish  conqueror  of  Mexico. 

"  After  the  fisherman,"  who  relates  this  account,  "  had  resided 
many  years  on  the  continent  of  Drogeo,  during  which  time  he  had 
passed  from  the  service  of  one  chieftian  to  another,  and  traversed 
various  parts  of  it,  certain  boats  of  Estotiland,  (now  supposed  to  be 
Newfoundland,)  arrived  on  the  coast  of  Drogeo.  Trie  fisherman 
got  on  board  of  them,  and  acted  as  interpreter,  and  followed  the 
trade  between  the  main  land  of  Drogeo  and  the  island  Estotiland, 
for  some  time,  until  he  became  very  rich  ;  then  he  fitted  out  a  bark 
of  his  own,  and  with  the  assistance  of  some  of  the  people  of  the 
island,  made  his  way  back  across  the  intervening  distance  between 
Drogeo  and  his  native  country,  Friesland,  in  Germany. 

The  account  he  gave  of  this  country,  determined  Zichmni,  the 
prince  of  Friesland,  to  send  an  expidition  thither  ;  and  Antonio 
Zeno,  a  Venitian,  was  to  command  it.  Just  before  starting,  the 
fisherman,  who  was  to  have  acted  as  pilot,  died ;  but  certain  mar- 
iners who  accompanied  him  from  Estotiland,  were  taken  in  his 
place.  The  expedition  sailed  under  command  of  Zichmni :  the 
Venitian  Zeno  merely  accompanied  it.  It  was  unsuccessful.  After 
having  discovered  an  island,  called  Icaria,  where  they  met  with  a 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


333 


rough  reception  from  the  inhabitants,  and  were  obliged  to  withdraw, 

the  ships  were 'driven  by  storm  to  Greenland. 

No  record  remains  of  any  farther  prosecution  of  the  enterprise. 
The  countries  mentioned  in  the  account  written  by  this  Zeno,  were 
laid  down  on  a  map  originally  on  wood.  The  island  Estotiland, 
has  been  supposed  by  M.  Malte-Brun,  to  be  Newfoundland  ;  its 
partially  civilized  inhabitants,  the  descendants  of  the  Scandinavian 
colonists  of  Vinland,  and  the  Latin  books  in  manuscript,  found  in 
the  king's  library,  to  have  belonged  to  the  remains  of  the  library 
of  the  Greenland  bishop,  who  emigrated  thither  in  1121,  922  years 
ago. 

Drogeo,  according  to  the  same  conjecture,  was  Nova  Scotia  and 
New-England ;  the  civilized  people  to  the  southwest,  who  sacri- 
ficed human  beings  in  rich  temples,  he  supposes  to  have  been  the 
Mexicans,  or  some  ancient  nations  of  Florida  or  Louisiana. 

A  distinguished  writer  of  Copenhagen,  it  is  said,  was  not  long 
since,  engaged  in  the  composition  of  a  work  on  the  early  voyages 
of  discovery  to  this  continent,  as  undertaken  by  the  inhabitants  of 
the  north  of  Europe,  more  than  eight  hundred  and  thirty  years  ago. 
He  has  in  his  hands,  genuine  ancient  documents,  the  examination 
of  which  leads  to  curious  and  surprising  results.  They  furnish  va- 
rious and  unquestionable  evidence,  not  only  that  the  coast  of  North 
America  was  discovered  soon  after  the  discovery  of  Greenland  by 
northern  explorers,  a  part  of  whom  remained  there ;  and  that  it 
was  again  visited  in  the  eleventh,  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries, 
but  also  that  Christianity  was  introduced  among  the  Indians  of 
America.  The  documents  of  this  writer  furnish  even  a  map,  cut 
in  wood,  of  the  northern  coast  of  America,  and  also  an  account  of 
the  sea  coast  south  as  far  down  as  to  the  Carolinas,  and  that  a  prin- 
cipal station  of  these  adventurers  was  at  the  mouth  of  the  river 
St.  Lawrence. 

He  says  it  was  in  the  year  985,  that  America  was  first  discover- 
ed by  Baiske  Her  Juefser,  but  that  he  did  not  land ;  and  that  in 
the  year  1000,  the  coast  was  visited  by  a  man  named  Lief,  a  son  of 
Eric  the  Red,  who  colonised  Greenland. —  Cabinet  of  Lit.  vol.  3. 

From  the  discoveries  of  Baron  Humboldt,  in  South  America,  it 
would  appear  that  the  continent  of  America  has  indeed  been  not 
only  visited  by  the  northern  nations  of  Europe,  at  a  very  early  day, 
but  also  to  have  settled  on  it,  and  to  have  beceme  the  head  of  tribes, 

80 


234 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


nations  and  kingdoms,  as  follows  :  In  the  kingdom  of  Guatimala, 
South  America,  the  descendants  of  the  original  inhabitants  pre- 
serve traditions  which  go  back  to  the  epoch  of  a  great  deluge,  after 
which  their  ancestors,  led  by  a  chief  called  Votan,  had  come  from 
a  country  lying  toward  the  north.  As  late  as  in  the  sixteenth  cen- 
tury, in  a  village  in  Guatimala,  there  were  of  the  natives  who 
boasted  their  descent  from  the  family  of  Votan,  or  Vodan.  "  They 
who  have  studied  the  history  of  Scandinavian  (old  Norway)  na- 
tions, says  Humboldt,  in  the  heroic  times,  must  be  struck  at  find- 
ing in  Mexico  a  name  which  recalls  that  of  Vodan  or  Odin,  who 
reigned  among  the  Scythians,  and  whose  race,  according  to  the 
very  remarkable  assertion  of  Bede,  (an  ecclesiastical  historian  of 
the  17th  century,)  gave  kings  to  a  great  number  of  nations." 
This  wonderfully  corroborates  the  opinion  of  America's  having  been 
settled  in  several  parts  by  Europeans,  at  a  period  more  ancient  than 
even  the  history  of  Europe  can  boast. 

The  Shawanese  tribe  of  Indians,  who  now  live  in  Ohio,  once 
lived  on  the  Suaney  river,  in  West  Florida,  near  the  shores  of  the 
southwest  end  of  the  gulf  of  Mexico ;  among  these  Indians,  says 
Mr.  Atwater,  there  is  a  tradition  that  Florida  had  once  been  inha- 
bited by  white  people,  who  had  the  use  of  iron  tools.  Their  oldest 
Indians  say,  when  children,  they  had  often  heard  it  spoken  of  by 
the  old  people  of  the  tribe,  that  anciently  stumps  of  trees,  covered 
with  earth,  were  frequently  found,  which  had  been  cut  down  by 
edged  tools. — Am.  Ant.  Re.  p.  273.  Whoever  they  were,  or  from 
whatever  country  they  may  have  originated,  the  account,  as  given 
by  Morse,  the  geographer,  of  the  subterranean  wall  found  in  North 
Carolina,  goes  very  far  to  show,  they  had  a  knowledge  of  iron  ore  ; 
and  consequently  knew  how  to  work  it,  or  they  could  not  have  had 
iron  tools,  as  the  Shawanese  Indians  relate. 

Morse's  account  is  as  follows :  "  In  Rowan  country,  North  Caro- 
lina, about  ten  miles  southwest  from  Salsbury,  two  hundred  from 
the  sea,  and  seventy  from  the  mountains  which  run  across  the  wes- 
tern end  of  the  State,  is  found  a  remarkable  subterraneous  wall.  It 
stands  on  uneven  ground,  near  a  small  brook.  The  stones  of  the 
wall  are  all  of  one  kind,  and  contain  iron  ore.  They  are  of  various 
sizes,  but  generally  weighing  about  four  pounds.  All  are  of  a  long 
figure,  commonly  seven  inches  in  length,  sometimes  twelve.  The 
ends  of  the  stones  form  the  sides  of  the  wall  ;  some  of  these  ends 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


235 


are  square,  others  nearly  of  the  form  of  a  parallelogram,  triangle, 
rhombus  or  rhomboids  :  but  most  of  them  are  irregular.  Some 
preserve  their  dimensions  through  the  whole  length,  others  ter- 
minate like  a  wedge.  The  alternate  position  of  great  and  little 
ends,  aids  in  keeping  the  work  square.  The  surface  of  some  is 
plain,  of  some  concave,  of  others  convex.  The  concave  stone  is 
furnished  with  one  convex,  so  as  to  suit  each  other.  Where  the 
stones  are  not  firm,  or  shelly,  they  are  curiously  wedged  in  with 
others.  The  most  irregular  are  thrown  into  the  middle  of  the  wall. 
Every  stone  is  covered  with  cement,  which,  next  to  the  stone,  has 
the  appearance  of  iron  rust.  Where  it  is  thin,  the  rust  has  pene- 
trated through.  Sometimes  the  cement  is  an  inch  thick,  and  where 
wet,  has  the  fine,  soft,  oily  feeling  of  putty.  The  thickness  of  the 
wall  is  uniformly  twenty-two  inches,  the  length  discovered  is  rising 
of  eighteen  rods,  and  the  height  twelve  or  fourteen  feet.  Both  sides 
of  this  are  plastered  with  the  substance  in  which  the  stones  are 
laid.  The  top  of  the  wall  appears  to  run  nearly  parallel  with  the 
top  of  the  ground,  being  generally  about  a  foot  below  the  surface. 
In  one  place  it  is  several  feet.  There  is  a  bend  or  curve  of  six  feet 
or  more,  after  which  it  proceeds  in  its  former  direction.  The 
whole  appears  to  be  formed  in  the  most  skilful  manner.  Six  or 
eight  miles  from  this  wall  another  has  been  since  discovered,  forty 
feet  long,  four  and  five  feet  high,  seven  inches  thick  only.  The 
stones  of  this  wall  are  all  of  one  length." — Universal  Geo.  p.  515. 

In  the  State  of  Tennessee,  which  is  situated  exactly  on  the  west- 
ern end  of  North  Carolina,  are  also  found  the  "  vestiges  and  re- 
mains of  ancient  dwellings,  towns  and  fortifications,  with  mounds, 
barrows,  utensils,  and  images,  wherever  the  soil  is  of  prime  quality 
and  convenient  to  water." 

The  bodies  of  two  of  these  people  were  discovered  in  the  autumn 
of  1810,  in  Warren  county,  in  the  state  of  Tennessee  ;  one  of  a 
man,  the  other  of  a  child,  to  appearance  about  four  years  old. 
They  were  four  feet  below  the  surface,  in  a  situation  perfectly  dry  ; 
there  being  a  mixture  of  copperas,  alum,  sulphur,  and  nitre,  in  the 
soil  that  covered  them.  Their  skin  was  preserved,  though  its  ori- 
ginal complexion  could  not  be  ascertained ;  but  the  hair  of  their 
heads  was  of  an  auburn  shade.  The  child  was  deposited  in  a 
basket,  well  wrought  of  smooth  splits  of  reeds,  (arundo  gigauticu,) 
and  several  singular  species  of  cloth,  as  well  as  deer  skins,  dressed 


236 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


and  undressed,  were  wrapped  round  and  deposited  with  them,  and 

two  feather  fans,  and  a  curious  belt. — Morse. 

From  the  discovery  of  those  two  bodies,  we  think  we  ascertain 
the  inhabitants  to  have  been  white,  like  the  Europeans,  from  the 
color  of  their  hair  ;  as  it  is  well  known  the  Australasians,  Polyne- 
sians and  Malays,  as  well  as  the  common  Indians,  have  univer- 
sally blacky  long  and  shining  hair.  The  body  which  is  mentioned 
by  Professor  Mitchell,  late  of  New  York,  discovered  in  a  nitrous 
cave,  in  the  western  country,  had  red  or  sandy  hair ;  such  was  the 
color  of  the  hair  of  the  Scandinavians  of  the  north  of  Europe,  and 
are  supposed,  upon  authority  indubitable,  to  have  settled  at  Onon- 
daga, and  round  about  that  region.  See  toward  the  close  of  this 
work. 

The  wrall  discovered  in  North  Carolina,  as  related  above,  is  doubt- 
less a  part  of  a  wall  built  for  the  defence  of  a  town  or  city;  the 
rest  may  have  been  thrown  down  by  an  enemy, ..or  it  may  have  been 
never  finished.  The  regular  manner  in  which  it  was  built  and 
laid  in  mortar,  shows  a  considerable  knowledge  of  masonry.  This 
is  by  no  meaus  very  extraordinary,  as  in  Europe  a  considerable 
knowledge  of  the  arts  was  in  possession  of  the  people  of  that  coun- 
try, derived  from  the  Romans,  who  had  subdued  all  the  island  of 
England,  and  abandoned  the  country,  some  hundred  years  before 
the  time  of  the  Welch  expedition  to  the  west  of  Europe,  as  we 
shall  relate  by  and  by. 

What  traits  of  iron  instruments  are  found  scattered  over  this 
country,  except  such  as  have  been  buried  or  lost  in  conflicts  and 
battles  with  the  Indians,  since  the  discovery  of  the  country  by 
Columbus,  is  to  be  attributed  to  these  Scandinavian  and  Welch 
settlers  from  the  old  country ;  the  latter  about  the  ninth  or  tenth 
century,  and  the  former  long  before. 

If  the  Welch,  as  wre  shall  show,  a  few  pages  hence,  found  this 
country  about  the  year  950,  there  was  time  enough  for  them  to 
have  established  themselves  in  many  parts,  and  to  have  built  them- 
selves towns  and  cultivated  the  earth  to  a  great  extent ;  as  from 
about  950,  till  its  discovery  by  Columbus,  in  1492,  would  be  not 
far  from  542  years  ;  a  longer  time  than  has  elapsed  since  its  last 
discovery  ;  and  also  time  enough  for  their  deserted  works  to  be- 
come covered  with  forests,  of  the  age  of  four  and  five  hundred 
years. 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


237 


According  to  Morse,  the  ancestors  of  the  "Welch  were  the  Cim- 
bri,  or  northern  Celts,  but  he  says,  the  Goths  from  Asia  having 
seized  on  Germany,  and  a  great  part  of  Gaul  or  France,  gradually 
repelled  the  Celts,  and  placed  colonies  on  the  island  of  Britain, 
three  or  four  centuries  before  the  Christian  era  ;  that  the  Romans 
found  many  tribes  of  the  Belgae,  or  ancient  Germans,  when  they 
first  invaded  that  island  ;  consequently,  not  only  the  Welch,  but 
the  English  also  had  in  part  the  Goths,  or  ancient  Germans,  for 
their  ancestors,  and  were  the  people  who  as  well  as  the  Scandina- 
vians, discovered  America,  and  settled  here.  From  this  view,  we 
see  the  propriety  in  the  tradition,  which,  in  another  place  of  this 
volume,  \ve  have  related,  as  being  printed  in  a  Dutch  Bible,  more 
than  two  hundred  years  ago  in  Germany,  where  it  is  said  the  Ger- 
mans discovered  America,  and  became  amalgamated  with  the  In- 
dians. It  may  be,  that  fiom  such  causes  as  these,  are  found,  far  to 
the  west  several  tribes  of  white  Indians,  originated  from  Welch, 
German  and  Scandinavian  ancestors  ;  who  well  might  be  supposed 
to  have  had  not  only  a  knowledge  of  masonry,  sufficient  to  build 
walls,  but  of  iron  also  ;  the  traits  of  which  are  found  in  many  parts, 
sufficiently  marked  by  oxydization,  to  throw  the  time  of  their  for- 
mation beyond  the  last  discovery  of  America. 

On  the  River  Gasconade,  which  empties  "into  the  Missouri,  on 
the  southern  side,  are  found  the  traces  of  ancient  works,  similar  to 
those  in  North  Carolina.  In  the  saltpetre  caves  of  that  region,  and 
Gasconade  county  in  particular,  was  discovered,  when  they  were 
first  visited,  axes  and  hammers  made  of  iron  ;  which  led  to  the  be- 
lief that  they  had  formerly  worked  those  caves  for  the  sake  of  the 
nitre.  Dr.  Beck,  from  whose  Gazetteer  of  Missouri  and  Illinois, 
page  234,  we  have  this  account,  remarks,  however,  "  it  is  difficult 
to  decide  whether  these  tools  were  left  thereby  the  present  race  of 
Indians,  or  a  more  civilized  race  of  people."  He  says  it  is  unusu- 
al for  the  savages  of  our  day,  to  take  up  their  residence  in  caves ; 
considering  them,  the  places  to  which  the  devil  resorts ;  and  that 
they  are  not  acquainted  with  the  uses  of  saltpetre,  and  would  rath- 
er avoid  than  collect  it.  This  author  considers  the  circumstance 
of  finding  those  tools  in  the  nitre  caves,  as  furnishing  a  degree  of 
evidence  that  the  country  of  Gasconade  River  was  formerly  settled 
by  a  race  of  men  who  were  acquainted  with  the  use  of  iron,  and 
exceeded  the  Indians  in  civilzation,  and  a  knowledge  of  the  arts. 


238 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


"  But  there  are  other  facts,"  says  he,  "  connected  with  these, 
about  which  there  can  be  no  mistake.  Not  far  from  this  cave,  is 
found  the  ruins  of  an  ancient  town.  It  appears  to  have  been  regu- 
larly laid  out,  and  the  dimensions  of  the  squares,  streets,  and  some 
of  the  houses,  can  yet  be  discovered. 

Stone  walls  are  found  in  different  parts  of  the  area,  which  are 
frequently  covered  with  huge  heaps  of  earth.  Missouri  joins  Ten- 
nessee on  the  west,  the  same  as  the  latter  does  North  Carolina  ; 
and  from  a  similarity  of  the  works  discovered,  it  would  appear, 
that  a  population,  similar  in  manners  and  pursuits,  inhabited  a  vast 
region  of  country,  from  the  Atlantic  side  of  North  Carolina,  to  the 
Missouri  Territory. 

These  discoveries  rank  with  the  architectural  works  of  Europe, 
in  the  9th  and  10th  centuries;  as  that  long  before  that  period,  the 
use  of  stone  work  had  been  introduced,  even  in  the  island  of  Bri- 
tain, by  the  all-conquering  bands  of  the  Romans. 

If,  therefore,  the  Germans,  Danes,  Welch,  Normans,  Icelanders, 
Greenlanders,  or  Scandinavians,  settled  in  this  country,  who  are 
all  of  much  the  same  origin,  there  need  be  no  great  mystery  re- 
specting these  discoveries,  as  they  are  to  be  referred  to  those  na- 
tions from  Europe,  beyond  all  doubt.  The  ancient  monuments  of 
a  country,  says  Dr.  Morse,  are  intimately  connected  with  the  epochs 
of  its  history  ;  consequently,  as  the  state  of  masonry,  or  the  knowl- 
edge of  stone  work,  discovered,  as  above  described,  in  North  Caro- 
lina, Tennessee,  and  Missouri,  is  of  the  same  character  with  those 
of  Europe,  about  the  time  of  the  9th,  10th,  11th,  and  12th  cen- 
turies, we  conclude  them  to  be  wholly  of  European  origin. 

About  ten  miles  from  the  spot  where  the  relics  of  this  town  are 
discovered,  on  the  west  side  of  the  Gasconade  River,  is  also  found 
another  stone  work,  still  more  extraordinary,  as  it  is  evident  that 
its  builders  had  indeed,  a  competent  knowledge  of  constructing 
buildings  of  that  material.  It  is  about  thirty  feet  square,  and  al- 
though in  a  dilapidated  condition  appears  to  have  been  erected 
with  a  great  degree  of  regularity.  It  is  situated  on  a  high  bold 
cliff,  which  commands  a  fine  and  extensive  view  of  the  country  on 
all  sides.  From  this  stone  work  was  found  a  foot  path,  running  a 
devious  course  down  the  clifl',  to  the  entrance  of  a  cave.  These 
antiquities  evidently  form  a  distinct  class,  says  Dr.  Beck,  of  which, 
as  yet,  he  had  seen  no  description. 


AND  DISC0VERIE3  IN  THE  WEST. 


Of  the  same  class  has  been  discovered  on  Noyer  Creek,  in  Mis- 
souri, the  foundation  of  a  large  stone  building,  fifty-six  feet  in 
length,  and  twenty-two  in  breadth,  divided  into  four  apartments. 
The  largest  room  occupies  about  one  half  of  the  whole  building, 
and  is  nearly  square  ;  a  second  in  size  is  twelve  feet  by  sixteen, 
partly  oval,  third,  four  by  sixteen,  a  fourth,  three  by  sixteen  feet. 
The  outer  wall  is  eighteen  inches  thick,  consisting  of  rough,  un- 
hewn stone ;  the  partitions  between  the  rooms  is  of  the  same  ma- 
terial, of  equal  thickness  with  the  outer  wall.  As  an  entrance  in- 
to the  largest  room,  are  two  door  ways,  the  second  size,  one,  and 
the  same  of  the  two  others. — See  at  the  bottom  of  the  Frontispiece. 

About  eighty  rods  from  this  structure,  is  also  found  the  remains 
of  the  foundation  of  a  stone  building,  nineteen  feet  by  fifteen,  in 
size,  of  the  same  character  of  architecture.  One  large  oval  room, 
twelve  feet  by  twelve  on  an  average,  occupies  the  centre,  with  a 
door  way,  and  at  each  end  of  the  room,  three  feet  by  twelve,  with- 
out any  door  way.  It  is  probable  the  largest  of  these  buildings  was 
the  palace  of  the  chief,  or  king,  of  the  tribe,  clan,  or  nation  ;  where 
was  held  the  legislative  councils,  and  the  affairs  of  Government 
were  transacted. 

The  second  building,  placed  at  the  respectful  distance  of  eighty 
rods,  was  probably  the  prison  house,  and  place  of  execution,  which 
the  small  narrow  cells,  without  any  outside  door  way,  would  seem  to 
suggest.  The  prison  in  which  St.  Paul  was  confined  at  Rome,  is 
exactly  cf  this  form  and  size ;  which  we  consider  a  remarkable  co- 
incidence, unless  it  is  allowed,  this  American  prison  house,  as  we 
have  supposed  it  was,  had  been  fashioned  after  the  same  manner. 

We  have  an  account  of  this  prison,  in  which  St.  Paul  was  con- 
fined, which  was  built  several  hundred  years  before  the  Christian 
era,  as  given  by  a  gentleman  now  making  the  tour  of  Europe.  It 
is  as  follows : 

<c  All  parts  of  Italy  are  interesting  to  the  scholar,  and  many  parts 
to  the  Christian.  Thus,  near  Naples,  at  Puteoli,  I  saw  where  Paul 
landed,  and  I  travelled  between  Naples  and  Rome  on  the  very 
same  road  over  which  he  was  led  prisoner  to  Rome  ;  and  if  he  was 
incarcerated  in  this  city,  (which  I  see  no  reason  to  doubt)  he 
doubtless  lived  the  greater  part  of  the  time  he  was  here,  in  his  own 
hired  house.  I  have  been  in  the  same  dugeon,  and  seen  the  very 
pillar  to  which  he  must  have  been  chained. 


240  AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 

The  prison  is  the  Mameilinc,  the  name  and  history  of  which,  is 
familiar  to  every  one  acquainted  with  Roman  history,  as  it  was,  for 
a  long  time,  the  only  prison  of  the  Romans.  It  consists  of  but  two 
apartments,  circular,  and  about  twelve  feet  diameter,  and  six  feet' 
in  height,  the  one  over  the  other,  both  under  ground.  The  only 
entrance  to  them  originally,  was  through  a  small  hole  in  the  top  of 
each,  through  which  the  prisoner  must  have  been  let  down  with 
rapes,  passing  through  the  upper  to  reach  the  lower  prison.  These 
dungeons  were  large  enough  for  the  Romans,  as  the  trial  soon  fol- 
lowed the  imprisonment  of  an  offender,  who,  if  found  innocent, 
was  at  once  liberated,  but  if  guilty,  immediately  executed." — Jour- 
nal and  Telegraph,  vol  IV.,  No.  191. — 1832. 

From  the  Romans  the  German  or  Belgic  tribes  may  have  derived 
their  first  ideas  of  stone  wrork,  as  from  the  Germans  the  Danes  de- 
rived the  same.  The  style  and  manner  of  this  building,  as  it  now 
appears,  in  its  ruined  state,  agrees  well  with  the  buildings  of  the 
ancient  Danes  of  the  north  of  Europe,  in  the  10th  and  11th  cen- 
turies; which  also  consisted  of  unhewn  stone,  laid  up  in  their  natu- 
ral state,  the  squarest,  and  best  formed,  selected,  of  course.  In 
these  buildings,  says  Morse,  were  displayed  the  first  elements  of 
the  Gothic  style,  in  which  the  ancient  Belgae  or  Germans  used  to 
erect  their  castles,  in  the  old  world,  eight  or  nine  hundred  years 
ago.  These  works  of  these  distinct  kind  of  antiquities,  are  nume- 
rous in  the  western  countries  ;  the  regularity,  form  and  structure 
of  which,  says  Dr.  Beck,  favors  the  conclusion  that  they  were  the 
work  of  a  more  civilized  race  than  those  who  erected  the  former, 
or  more  ancient  works  of  x\merica ;  and  that  they  were  acquaint- 
ed with  the  rules  of  architecture,  &c,  [of  Danish  and  Belgic  origin,] 
and  perhaps  with  a  perfect  system  of  warfare. 

At  present,  the  walls  of  this  trait  of  ancient  times,  are  from  two 
to  five  feet  high,  the  rooms  of  which  are  entirely  filled  with  forest 
trees  ;  one  of  which  is  an  oak,  and  was,  ten  years  ago,  nine  feet  in 
circumference. — Beckys  Gazetteer, p.  300. 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


241 


RUINS  OF  THE  CITY  OF  OTOLUM,  DISCOVERED  IN  AMERICA, 

OF  PERUVIAN  ORIGIN. 

In  a  letter  of  C.  S.  Rafinesque,  whom  we  have  before  quoted, 
to  a  correspondent  in  Europe,  we  find  the  following :  "  Some  years 
ago,  the  Society  of  Geography  in  Paris  offered  a  large  premium 
for  a  voyage  to  Guatimala,  in  South  America,  and  for  a  new  survey 
of  the  antiquities  of  Yucatan  and  Chipapa,  chiefly  those  fifteen 
miles  from  Palanque,  which  are  wrongly  called  by  that  name." 

"  I  have,"  says  this  author,  "  restored  to  them  the  true  name  of 
Otolum,  which  is  yet  the  name  of  the  stream  running  through 
the  ruins.  They  were  surveyed  by  Captain  Del  Rio,  in  1787,  an 
account  of  which  was  published  in  English,  in  1822. 

"This  account  describes  partly  the  ruins  of  a  stone  city,  of  no 
less  dimensions  than  seventy-five  miles  in  circuit;*  length  thirty- 
two,  and  breadth  twelve  miles,  full  of  palaces,  monuments,  statutes 
and  inscriptions  ;  one  of  the  earliest  seats  of  American  civilzation, 
about' equal  to  Thebes  of  ancient  Egypt. 

"  At  Boliva,  in  the  same  country,  is  another  mass  of  ancient  ruins 
and  mine  of  historical  knowledge,  which  no  late  traveller  has  visit- 
ed or  described ;"  but  have  been  partly  described  only  by  the  fast 
historians  of  those  countries  of  South  America,  the  Spaniards ;  but 
it  is  hoped  ere  long  will  be  by  some  lover  of  this  great  subject. 

When  the  Spaniards  overran  that  country,  about  three  hundred 
years  ago,  among  the  Peruvians,  whose  territory  lies  on  the  west- 
ern side  of  South  America,  were  found  statues,  obelisks,  mausolea, 
edifices,  fortresses,  all  of  stone,  equal,  fully  so,  with  the  architec- 
ture of  Egypt,  Greece,  and  Rome,  six  hundred  years  before  the 
Christian  era.  Roads  were  cut  through  the  Cordillera  mountains  ; 
gold,  silver,  copper,  and  led  mines,  were  opened  and  worked  to  a 
great  extent;  all  of  which  is  evidence  of  their  knowledge  of  archi- 
tecture, mineralogy  and  agriculture.  In  many  places  of  that  coun- 
try, are  found  the  ruins  of  noble  aqueducts,  some  of  which,  says 

*  Through  mistake,  on  page  117,  we  have  stated  these  ruins  to  be  only  24 
miles  in  circuit,  which  is  here  corrected. 

31 


242 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


Dr.  Morse,  the  geographer,  would  have  been  thought  works  of  dinS* 
culty  iu  civilized  nations.  Several  pillars  of  stone  are  now  stand- 
ing, which  were  erected  to  point  out  the  equinoxes  and  solstices. 
In  their  sepulchres  were  deposited  and  found  their  paintings,  ves- 
sels of  gold  and  silver,  implements  of  warfare,  husbandry,  and 
fishing  nets. 

To  illustrate  the  architecural  knowledge  of  the  Peruvians  as  well 
as  of  some  other  provinces  of  South  America,  we  quote  the  following 
from  Baron  Humboldt's  Researches,  1st  vol.  Eng.  trans.  Amer, 
edt,  p.  255.  "  This  plate,"  referring  to  one  which  is  found  in  one 
of  the  volumes  of  his  Researches,  in  the  French  language  ;  M  re- 
presents the  plan  and  inside  of  the  small  building  which  occupies 
the  centre  of  the  esplanade,  in  the  citadel  of  Cannar,  supposed  to 
be  a  guard  house.  I  sketched  this  drawing  with  the  greater  exact- 
ness, because  the  remains  of  Peruvian  architecture,  scattered  along 
the  ridge  of  the  Cordilleras,  from  Cuzco  to  Cajambe,  or  from  the 
13th  degree  of  north  latitude  to  the  equator,  a  distance  of  nearly  a 
thousand  miles.  What  an  empire,  and  what  works  are  these,  which 
all  bear  the  same  character,  in  the  cut  of  the  stones,  the  shape  of 
the  doors  to  their  stone  buildings,  the  symmetrical  disposal  of  the 
niches,  and  the  total  absence  of  the  exterior  ornaments.  This  uni- 
formity of  construction  is  so  great  that  all  the  stations  along  the 
high  road,  called  in  that  country  palaces  of  the  Incas,  or  kings  of 
the  Peruvians,  appear  to  have  been  copied  from  each  other  ;  sim- 
plicity, symmetry,  and  solidity,  were  the  three  characters,  by  which 
the  Peruvian  edifices  were  distinguished.  The  citadel  of  Cannar, 
and  the  square  buildings  surrounding  it,  are  not  constructed  with 
the  same  quartz  sandstone,  which  covers  the  primitive  slate,  and 
the  prophyries  of  Assuay ;  and  which  appears  at  the  surface,  in 
the  garden  of  the  Inca,  as  we  descend  toward  the  valley  of  Gulan? 
but  of  trappean  prophyry,  of  great  hardness,  enclosing  nitrous 
feldspar,  and  hornblende.  This  porphyry  was  perhaps  dug  in  the 
great  quarries  which  are  found  at  4000  metres  in  height,  (which 
is  1,200  feet  and  a  fraction,  making  two  and  a  third  miles  in  per- 
pendicular height,)  near  the  lake  of  Culebrilla,  nearly  ten  miles 
from  Cannar.  To  cut  the  stones  for  the  buildings  of  Cannar,  at  so- 
great  a  height,  and  to  bring  them  down,  and  transport  them  ten 
miles,  is  equal  with  any  of  the  works  of  the  ancients,  who  built 
the  cities  of  Pompeii,  Herculaneum,  audi  Stabia,  long  before  the 
Christian  era,  in  Naples  of  Italy. 


kNi>  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


243 


*4  We  do  not  find,  however,"  says  Humboldt,  "  in  the  ruins  of 
Cannar,  those  stones  of  enormous  size,  which  we  see  in  the  Peru- 
vian edifices  of  Cuzco  and  the  neighboring  countries.  Acosto,  he 
says,  measured  some  at  Traquanaco,  which  were  twelve  metres 
(38  feet)  long,  and  five  metres  eight  tenths,  (18  feet)  broad,  and 
one  metre  nine  tenths  (6  feet)  thick."  The  stones  made  use  of  in 
building  the  temple  of  Solomon,  were  but  a  trifle  larger  than  these, 
some  of  which  were  twenty-five  cubits,  (43  feet  9  inches)  long, 
twelve  cubits  (29  feet)  wide,  and  eight  cubits,  (14  feet  thick,) 
reckoning  twenty-one  inches  to  the  cubit. 

And  who  is  prepared  to  disallow  that  the  ancestors  of  the  Peru- 
vians m  South  America,  did  not  derive  their  knowledge  of  stone 
cutting  and  building,  from  the  Jews,  in  the  days  of  Solomon,  a 
thousand  years  before  the  Christian  era,  which  is  so  wonderfully 
imitated  in  the  palaces  of  the  Incas. 

"  One  of  the  temples  of  ancient  Egypt  is  now,  in  its  state  of 
ruin,  a  mile  and  a  half  in  circumference.  It  has  twelve  principal 
entrances.  The  body  of  the  temple  consists  of  a  prodigious  hall  or 
portico  ;  the  roof  is  supported  by  134  columns.  Four  beautiful 
obelisks  mark  the  entrance  to  the  shrine,  a  place  of  sacrifice,  which 
•contains  three  apartments,  built  entirely  of  granite.  The  temple 
of  Luxor,  probably  surpasses  in  beauty  and  splendor  all  the  other 
ruins  of  Egypt.  In  front  are  two  of  the  finest  obelisks  in  the  world  ; 
they  are  of  rose  colored  marble,  one  hundred  feet  high. 

But  the  objects  which  most  attract  attention,  are  the  sculptures 
which  cover  the  whole  of  the  northern  front.  They  contain,  on  a 
great  scale,  a  representation  of  a  victory  gained  by  one  of  the  an* 
cient  kings  of  Egypt  over  an  enemy.  The  number  of  human 
figures,  cut  in  the  solid  stone,  amounts  to  1,500  ;  of  these,  500  are 
on  foot,  and  1,000  in  chariots.  Such  are  the  remains  of  a  city, 
which  perished  long  before  the  records  of  ancient  history  had  a 
being." — Malte-Brun. 

We  are  compelled  to  ascribe  some  of  the  vast  operations  of  the 
ancient  nations  of  this  country,  to  those  ages  which  correspond  with 
the  times  and  manners  of  the  people  of  Egypt,  which  are  also  be- 
yond the  reach  of  authentic  history. 

It  should  be  recollected  that  the  fleets  of  king  Hiram  navigated 
the  seas  in  a  surprising  manner,  seeing  they  had  not,  as  is  suppos- 
ed, (but  not  proven,)  a  knowledge  of  the  magnetic  needle  ;  and  in 


'244 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


some  voyage  out  of  the  Mediterranean,  into  the  Atlantic,  they  may 
have  been  driven  to  South  America ;  where  having  found  a  coun- 
try, rich  in  all  the  resources  of  nature,  more  so  than  even  their  na- 
tive country,  founded  a  kingdom,  built  cities,  cultivated  fields,  mar- 
shalled  armies,  made  roads,  built  aqueducts,  became  rieh3  magnifi- 
cent and  powerful,  as  the  vastness  and  extent  of  the  ruins  of  Peru, 
and  other  provinces  of  South  America,  plainly  show. 

Humboldt  says,  that  he  saw  at  Pullal,  three  houses  made  of 
stone,  which  were  built  by  the  Incas,  each  of  which  was  more  than 
fifty  metres,  or  an  hundred  and  fifty  feet  long,  laid  in  a  cement,  or 
true  mortar.  This  fact,  he  says,  deserves  attention,  because  trav- 
ellers who  had  preceded  him,  had  unanimously  overlooked  this  cir- 
cumstance, asserting,  that  the  Peruvians  were  unacquainted  with 
the  use  of  mortar,  but  is  erroneous.  The  Peruvians  not  only  em- 
ployed a  mortar,  in  the  great  edifices  of  Pacaritambo,  but  made  use 
of  a  cement  of  asphaltum;  a  mode  of  construction,  which  on  the 
banks  of  the  Euphrates  and  the  Tigris,  may  be  traced  back  to  the 
remotest  antiquity.  The  tools  made  use  of  to  cut  their  stone  was 
copper,  hardened  with  tin,  the  same  the  ancients  of  the  old  world 
made  use  of  among  the  Greeks  aud  Romans,  and  other  nations,  of 
which  we  have  spoken,  in  another  place  of  this  work. 

To  show  the  genius  and  enterprise  of  the  natives  of  Mexico,  be- 
fore America  was  discovered,  we  give  the  following  as  but  a  single 
instance:  Montazuma,  the  last  king  hat  ocne  of  Mexico,  in  the 
year-1446,  forty-six  years  before  the  discovery  of  America  by  Co- 
lumbus, erected  a  dyke  to  prevent  the  overflowing  of  the  waters 
of  certain  small  lakes  in  the  vicinity  of  their  city,  which  had  sev- 
eral times  deluged  it.  This  dyke  consisted  of  a  bank  of  stones 
and  clay,  supported  on  each  side  by  a  range  of  palisadoes  ;  extend- 
ing in  its  whole  length  about  seventy  miles,  and  sixty-five  feet 
broad,  its  whole  length  sufficiently  high  to  intercept,  the  overflow- 
ings of  the  lakes,  in  times  of  high  water,  occasioned  by  the  spring 
floods.  In  Holland,  the  Dutch  have  resorted  to  the  same  means  to 
prevent  incursions  of  the  sea ;  and  the  longest  of  the  many  is  but 
forty  miles  in  extent,  nearly  one  half  short  of  the  Mexican  dyke. 
"Amidst  the  extensive  plains  of  Upper  Canada,  in  Florida,  near 
the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  and  in  the  deserts  bordered  by  the  Orinoco,  in 
Colombia,  South  America,  dykes  of  a  considerable  length,  weapons 
of  brass,  and  sculptured  stones,  are  found,  which  are  the  indica- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


245 


tions  that  those  countries  were  formerly  inhabited  by  industrious 
nations,  which  are  now  traversed  only  by  tribes  of  savage  hunters." 
Humboldt.    Samuel  R.  Brown,  author  of  the  Western  Gazetteer, 
1817,  says,  he  examined  one  of  those  remains  of  the  ancient  na- 
tions, situated  upon  the  mouth  of  the  Big  Scioto  river  on  a  high 
bank  of  the  Ohio,  a  half  mile  from  the  water.    He  has  no  doubt  it 
was  a  military  position  of  great  strength,  and  describes  it  as  follows: 
"  The  walls  are  yet  standing,  and  enclosing  as  nearly  as  I  could 
ascertain,  by  pacing  fourteen  acres  of  ground.    It  is  of  a  square 
form"  (like  the  ancient  Roman  military  works.)    u  The  officious 
hand  of  civilized  man  has  not  yet  marred  the  wood  which  shade 
these  venerable  ruins ;  nor  has  a$>y  curious  antiquarian  multilated 
the  walh  by  digging  in  search  of  hidden  treasure.    The  walls  in 
many  places  are  yet  sixteen  feet  high,  and  no  where  less  than  eight. 
At  their  base  they  are  about  thirty  feet  wide,  and  wide  enough  at 
their  top  to  admit  a  horse  team  and  waggon.    There  are  seven 
gateways,  3  on  the  west,  2  on  the  east,  and  2  on  the  north,  all 
being  about  20  feet  wide.    On  the  northwest  side  are  the  ruins  of 
a  covered  way,  extending  to  a  creek,  at  the  distance  of  280  rods. 
The  covering  is  fallen  in,  and  large  trees  are  yawning  in  the  ditch. 
On  the  west  side  are  two  covered  ways,  leading  also  to  the  same 
creek,  these  are  apart  from  each  other  about  30  feet,  and  extend- 
ing about  40  rods  till  they  reach  the  stream.    These  walls  are  as 
wide  and  as  high  as  the  walls  of  the  fort.    On  the  east  side,  are 
also  two  covered  ways  at  convenient  distances  from  each  other, 
leading  to  another  small  creek. 

Thus  the  garrison  of  this  ancient  fortification  had  five  avenues 
through  which  they  could  safely  procure  water."  This  could  nev- 
er have  been  the  work  of  the  common  Indians. 


246 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


GREAT  STONE  CALENDAR  OF  THE  MEXICANS,  BEING  A  FAC 
SIMILE  FROM  THE  SAME  IN  HUMBOLDT'S  VOLUME  OF  RE- 
SEARCHES. 


This  stone  was  found  near  the  site  of  the  present  city  of  Mexico, 
buried  some  feet  beneath  the  soil,  of  the  same  character  on  which 
was  engraven  an  almost  infinite  number  of  hieroglyphics,  signify- 
ing the  divisions  of  time,  the  motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  the 
twelve  signs  of  the  Zodiac,  with  references  to  the  feasts  and  sacri- 
fices of  the  Mexicans,  and  is  called  by  Humboldt,  the  Mexican 
Calendar,  in  relief,  on  basalt. 

This  deservedly  celebrated  historiographer  and  antio^iarian,  has 
devoted  an  hundred  pages  and  more  of  his  octavo  work,  entitled 
u  Researches  in  America,"  in  describing  the  similarity  which  ex- 
ists between  its  representations  of  astrology,  astronomy,  and  the 
divisions  of  time,  and  those  of  a  great  multitude  of  the  nations  of 
Asia ;  Chinese,  Japanese,  Calmucks,  Moghols,  Mantchaus,  and 
oilier  Tartar  nations ;  the  Egyptians,  Babylonians,  Persians,  Fhce- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


247 


nicians,  Greeks,  Romans,  Hebrews,  and  ancient  Celtic  nations  of 
Europe.  See  the  American  edition,  by  Helen  Maria  Williams,  1st 
Volume.  The  size  of  this  stone  was  very  great,  being  a  fraction 
over  twelve  feet  square,  three  feet  in  thickness,  weighing  twenty- 
four  tons.  It  is  of  the  kind  cf  s%tone  denominated  trappean  pro- 
phyry,  of  the  blackish  grey  color. 

The  place  where  it  was  found  was  more  than  thirty  miles  from 
any  quarry  of  the  kind  ;  from  which  we  discover  the  ability  of  the 
ancient  inhabitants,  not  only  to  transport  stones  of  great  size,  as 
well  as  the  ancient  Egyptians,  in  building  their  cities  and  temples 
of  Marble,  but  also  to  cut  and  engrave  on  stone,  equal  with  the 
present  age. 

It  was  discovered  in  the  vale  of  Mexico,  forty-two  years  ago,  in 
the  spot  where  Cortez  ordered  it  to  be  buried,  when,  with  his  fero- 
cious Spaniards,  that  country  was  devastated.  That  Spaniard  uni- 
versally broke  to  pieces  ail  idols  of  stone,  which  came  in  his  way, 
except  such  as  were  too  large  and  strong  to  be  quickly  and  easily 
thus  effected.  Such  he  buried,  among  which  this  sculptured  stone 
was  one.  This  was  done  to  hide  them  from  the  sight  of  the  na- 
tives, whose  strong  attachment,  whenever  they  saw  them,  counter- 
acted their  conversion  to  the  Roman  Catholic  religion. 

The  sculptured  work  on  this  stone,  is  in  circles  ;  the  outer  one 
of  all,  is  a  trifle  over  27  feet  in  circumference ;  from  which  the 
reader  can  have  a  tolerable  notion  of  its  size  and  appearance.  The 
whole  stone  is  intensely  crowded  with  an  infinity  of  representa- 
tions and  hieroglyphics ;  arranged  however,  in  order  and  harmony, 
every  way  equal  with  any  astronomical  calendar  of  the  present  day, 
It  is  further  described  by  Baron  Humboldt,  who  saw  and  examined 
it  on  the  spot. 

"  The  concentric  circles,  the  numerous  divisions  and  subdivisions, 
engraven  in  this  stone,  are  traced  with  mathematical  precision ;  the 
more  minutely  the  detail  of  this  sculpture  is  examined,  the  greater 
the  taste  we  find  in  the  repetition  of  the  same  forms.  In  the  cen- 
tre of  the  stone  is  sculptured  the  celebrated  sign  nahui-olin-Tona- 
tiuhy  the  Sun  ;  which  is  surrounded  by  eight  triangular  radii.  The 
god  Tonatiuh  or  the  Sun,  is  figured  on  this  stone,  opening  his  large 
mouth,  armed  with  teeth,  with  the  tonguex  protruded  to  a  great 
length.  This  yawning  mouth,  and  protruded  tongue,  is  like  the 
image  of  Kala,  or  in  another  work,  Time,  a  divinity  of  Hindostan, 


248 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


Its  dreadful  mouth,  armed  with  teeth,  is  meant  to  show,  that  the 
god,  Tonatiuh,  or  Time,  swallows  the  world,  opening  a  fiery  mouth 
devouring  the  years,  mouths,  and  days,  as  fast  as  they  come  into 
being.  The  same  image  we  find  under  the  name  of  Moloch,  a- 
mong  the  Phoenicians,"  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  a  part  of  Africa, 
on  the  southern  side  of  the  Mediterranean  ;  from  which  very  coun- 
try, there  can  be  but  little  doubt,  America  received  a  portion  of  its 
earliest  inhabitants  ;  hence,  a  knowledge  of  the  arts  to  great  per- 
fection, as  found  among  the  Mexicans,  was  thus  derived.  Hum- 
boldt says,  the  Mexicans,  have  evidently  followed  the  Persians,  in 
the  division  of  time,  as  represented  on  this  stone.  The  Persians 
flourished  1500  years  before  Christ. 

"  The  structure  of  the  Mexican  aqueducts,  leads  the  imagination 
at  once,  to  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean." — Thomas'  Travels, 
p.  293.  The  size,  grandeur,  and  riches,  of  the  tumuli  on  the 
European  and  Asiatic  sides  of  the  Cimmerian  Strait,"  (which  unites 
the  Black  Sea  with  the  Archipelago,  a  part  of  the  Mediterranean, 
the  region  of  ancient  Greece,  where  the  capital  of  Turkey  in  Eu- 
rope now  stands,  called  Constantinople,)  "  excite  astonishing  ideas 
of  the  wealth  and  power  of  the  people  by  whom  they  were  con- 
structed ;  and  in  view  of  labor  so  prodigious,  as  well  as  expendi- 
ture so  enormous,  for  the  mere  purpose  of  inhuming  a  single  body, 
customs  and  superstitions  which  illustrate  the  origin  of  the  pyra- 
mids of  Egypt,  the  cavern  of  Elephanta,  and  the  first  temples  of 
the  ancient  world." — Thomas''  Travels. 

But  whatever  power,  wealth,  genius,  magnitude  of  tumuli- 
mounds,  and  pyramids,  are  found  about  the  Mediterranean  ;  where 
the  Egyptian,  the  Phoenician,  Persian,  and  the  Greek,  have  dis- 
played the  monuments  of  this  most  ancient  sort  of  antiquities :  all, 
all  is  realised  in  North  and  South  America  ;  and  doubtless  under 
the  influence  of  the  same  superstition,  and  eras  of  time ;  having 
crossed  over,  as  before  argued ;  and  among  the  various  aboriginal 
nations  of  South  and  North  America,  but  especially  the  former, 
are  undoubtedly  found  the  descendants  of  the  fierce  Medes  and 
Persians,  and  other  warlike  nations  of  the  old  world. 

The  discoveries  of  travellers  in  that  country,  show,  even  at  the 
present  time,  that  the  ancient  customs,  in  relation  to  seeming  their 
habitations  with  a  wall,  still  prevails.  Towns  in  the  interior  of 
Africa,  on  the  River  Niger,  of  great  extent,  are  found  to  be  sur- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


249 


rounded  by  walls  of  earth,  in  the  same  manner  as  those  of  the  west 
in  North  America. 

See  the  account  as  given  by  Richard  Lardnei :  "  On  the  4th  of 
May  we  entered  a  town  of  prodigious  extent,  fortified  with  three 
walls,  of  little  less  than  twenty  miles  in  circuit,  with  ditches,  or 
moats  between.  This  town,  called  Boo-hoo,  and  is  in  latitude  of 
about  8  degrees  43  minutes  north,  and  longitude  5  degrees  10  min- 
utes, east.  On  the  17th  we  came  to  Roossa,  which  is  a  cluster  of 
huts  walled  with  earth." 

This  traveller  states,  that  there  is  a  kingdom  there  called  Yaorie, 
which  is  large,  powerful,  and  flourishing  ;  a  city  which  is  of  pro- 
digious extent ;  the  wall  surrounding  it  is  of  clay  or  earth,  and 
very  high,  its  circuit,  between  twenty  and  thirty  miles.  He  men- 
tions several  other  places,  enclosed  by  earth  walls  in  the  same 
manner. 

It  is  easy  to  perceive  the  resemblance  between  these  walled 
towns  in  central  Africa,  and  the  remains  of  similar  works  in  this 
country,  America. 


GREAT  STONE  CASTLE  OF  ICELAND. 

In  Iceland,  which  is  not  far  from  Greenland,  and  Greenland  is 
siot  far  from  the  coast  of  America,  has  been  found  the  remains  of 
ancient  architecture,  of  no  less  dimensions  than  two  hundred  rods 
in  circumference,  built  of  stone,  the  wall  of  which,  in  some  places, 
as  related  by  Van  Trail,  was  an  hundred  and  twenty  feet  high ;  this 
was  tne  Norwegian  castle,  of  wonderful  strength  and  magnitude, 
and  of  the  same  character  with  ruins  found  in  this  country,  and  in 
South  America. 

Iceland  is  but  an  hundred  and  twenty  miles  east  of  Greenland, 
and  Greenland  is  supposed  to  be  connected  with  America,  far  to 
the  north.  This  island  is  considerable  larger  than  the  state  of  New 
York,  being  four  hundred  miles  in  length,  and  two  hundred  and 
seventy  in  breadth.  It  was  discovered  by  a  Norwegian  pirate,  na- 
med Nardoddr,  in  the  year  861,  as  he  was  driven  out  to  sea  by  an 

32 


250 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


eastern  storm  on  his  way  from  Norway,  which  is  the  northern  part 
of  Europe,  to  the  Feroe  islands. 

Soon  after  this,  in  the  year  870,  it  was  colonized  from  Norway, 
under  the  direction  of  a  man  named  Ingalf,  and  sixty  years  after, 
which  would  bring  it  to  930,  the  whole  island  was  inhabited.  But 
they  were  without  any  regular  government,  being  distracted  with 
the  wars  of  several  chiefs,  for  a  long  series  of  years,  during  which, 
Iceland  was  a  scene  of  rapine  and  butchery.  It  is  natural  to  sup- 
pose, during  such  conflicts,  many  families,  from  time  to  time,  would 
leave  the  island,  in  quest  of  some  other  dwelling.  This  was  in 
their  power  to  do,  as  they  had  a  knowledge  of  navigation,  in  a  good 
degree,  derived  from  the  Romans,  at  the  time  they  ruled  the  most 
of  Europe,  nine  hundred  years  before. 

That  Greenland,  or  countries  lying  west  of  Iceland,  existed, 
could  but  be  known  to  the  Icelanders,  from  the  flights  of  birds  of 
passage,  and  from  driftwood,  which,  to  this  day,  is  driven,  in  large 
quantities,  from  America,  by  the  Gulf  Stream.,  and  deposited  on 
the  western  coast  of  that  island. — Morse. 

In  this  way,  it  is  highly  probable,  the  first  Europeans  found  their 
way  to  America,  and  became  the  authors  of  those  vast  ruins  built 
of  stone,  found  in  various  parts  of  America.  The  language  of  the 
Icelanders,  is,  even  now,  after  so  long  a  lapse  of  ages,  much  the 
same  with  that  spoken  in  Sweden,  Denmark,  and  Norway  ;  so  that 
they  understand  the  most  ancient  traditional  history  of  their  ances- 
tors. The  characters  they  made  use  of  were  Runic,  and  were  but 
sixteen  in  number ;  but  about  the  year  1000,  the  Latin,  or  Roman 
letters  superceded  the  use  of  the  ancient  Runic. 

Dr.  Morse  says,  the  arts  and  sciences  were  extensively  cultiva- 
ted in  Norway,  at  the  time  when  Iceland  was  first  settled  by  them  ; 
and  while  the  traces  of  literature  were  diminisheds  and  at  length 
destroyed, in  Norway,  by  the  troubles  which  shook  the  whole  north 
of  Europe  for  several  ages  ;  they  were,  on  the  contrary,  carefully 
preserved  in  Iceland. 

From  this  we  may  safely  infer,  that  America,  having  received 
its  first  European  colonies  from  Iceland  ;  who  had  not  only  a 
knowledge  of  architecture,  in  a  degree,  but  of  navigation  also,  with 
that  of  science ;  that  in  the  very  regions  where  villas,  cities,  culti- 
vated fields,  roads,  canals,  rail-ways,  with  all  the  glory  of  the  pres- 
ent age,  exist  along  the  Atlantic  coast, — also  nourished  the  works 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


251 


of  a  former  population — the  Danes,  Swedes,  and  Norwegians,  civ- 
ilized nations,  centuries  before  Columbus  was  born,  but  who  have 
passed  away,  by  the  means  of  wars,  with  the  more  ancient  nations 
of  America,  or  with  the  common  enemy  of  bpth — the  Tartar  hordes 
from  Asia,  now  called  the  American  Indians — leaving  forever  the 
labor  of  ages,  which,  here  and  there,  are  discovered,  the  relics  of 
their  architectural  knowledge. 

An  hundred  and  twenty-one  years  after  the  discovery  of  Iceland, 
Greenland  was  discovered  also,  by  the  Norwegians,  who  planted  a 
colony  there  ;  and  in  a  little  time  after,  the  country  was  provided 
with  two  Christian  churches  and  bishops;  between  wThich  and 
Norway,  the  mother  country,  a  considerable  amount  of  commerce 
was  carried  on,  till  1406  ;  a  lapse  of  years  amounting  to  about  four 
hundred  and  eighty-three,  before  the  discovery  of  America  by  Co 
lumbus ;  when  all  intercourse  between  the  two  countries  ceased, 
occasioned  probably  by  the  convulsions  and  wrars  of  Europe  at  that 
period. 

The  whole  of  that  population,  it  is  supposed,  was  lost,  as  no  tra- 
ces of  them  are  found  ;  the  climate  of  that  region,  as  is  evident, 
has  since  undergone  a  great  change,  from  an  accumulation  of  ice 
and  snow  from  the  northern  sea,  so  as  to  render  the  coast,  where 
those  settlements  were,  wholly  inaccessible. — Morse. 

Is  it  not  possible,  that  as  they  found  the  severity  of  the  weather 
increasing  rapidly  upon  them,  they  may  have  removed  to  the  coast 
of  Labrador,  and  from  thence  down  the  coast,  till  they  came  to  the 
rigion  of  the  Canadas,  where  are  discovered  the  traces  of  ancient 
nations,  in  vast  lines  of  fortications,  as  attested  to  by  the  most  ap- 
proved authority,  Humboldt  and  others. 


A  FURTHER  ACCOUNT  OF  EUROPEAN  SETTLEMENTS. 

There  are  the  remains  of  one  of  those  efforts  of  Scandinavian 
defence,  situated  on  a  hill  of  singular  form,  on  the  great  sand  plain 
between  the  Susquehannah  and  Chemung  rivers,  near  their  junc- 
tion. The  hill  is  entirely  isolated,  about  three-fourths  of  a  mile  in 
circumference,  and  more  than  an  hundred  feet  high.    It  has  been 


252 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


supposed  to  be  artificial,  and  to  belong  to  the  ancient  nations  io 
which  all  works  of  this  sort  generally  belong.  However,  the  in- 
habitants living  round  it,  do  not  believe  it  to  be  artificial,  on  ac- 
count of  large  stones  situated  on  its  sides,  too  heavy  to  have  been 
placed  there  by  art  of  man. 

In  the  surrounding  plain  are  many  deep  holes,  of  twenty  or  thir- 
ty rods  circumference,  and  twenty  feet  deep  ;  favoring  a  belief  that 
from  these,  the  earth  was  scooped  out  to  form  the  hill  with.  It  is* 
four  acres  large  on  its  top,  and  perfectly  level,  beautifully  situated 
to  overlook  the  country,  to  a  great  distance,  up  and  down  both  riv- 
ers. But  whether  the  hill  be  artificial  or  not,  there  are  on  its  top 
the  remains  of  a  wall,  formed  of  earth,  stone  and  wood,  which 
runs  round  the  whole,  exactly  on  the  brow.  The  wood  is  decayed 
and  turned  to  mould,  yet  it  is  traceable  and  easily  distinguished 
from  the  natural  earth.  Within  is  a  deep  ditch  or  entrenchment, 
running  round  the  whole  summit.  From  this  it  is  evident,  that  a 
war  was  once  waged  here ;  and  were  we  to  conjecture  between 
whom,  we  should  say,  between  the  Indians  and  Scandinavians  ; 
and  that  this  fortification,  so  advantageously  chosen,  is  of  the  same 
class  of  defensive  works  with  those  about  Onondaga,  Auburn,  and 
the  lakes  Ontario,  Cayuga,  Seneca,  Oneida,  and  Erie.  As  it  is 
known,  or  not  pretended,  that  the  Scandinavians  did  not  make  set- 
tlements on  the  continent  earlier  than  985  ;  there  cannot  be  a  doubt 
but  they  had  to  fight  their  way  among  the  Indians,  more  or  less, 
the  same  as  we  did  when  first  we  colonized  the  coast  of  the  At- 
lantic, along  the  seabord  of  the  New-England  states. 

But  as  these  Scandinavians,  Norwegians,  Scotch,  and  Welch, 
were  fewer  in  number  than  the  Indians,  and  without  the  means  of 
recruiting  from  the  mother  country,  as  was  our  case;  they  at  length 
fell  a  prey  to  this  enemy,  or  became  amalgamated  with  them,  and 
so  were  lost ;  the  traces  of  whom  appear,  now  and  then,  among 
the  tribes,  as  we  have  shown. 

We  are  strongly  inclined  to  believe  the  following  articles,  found 
in  the  town  of  Pompey,  Onondaga  county,  N.  Y  ,  are  of  Scandina- 
vian origin.  In  Pompey,  on  lot  No.  14,  is  the  site  of  an  ancient  - 
burying  ground,  upon  which,  when  the  country  was  first  settled, 
was  found  timber  growing  apparently  of  the  second  growth,  judg- 
ing from  the  old  timber,  reduced  to  mould,  lying  round,  which  was 
an  huudred  years  old,  ascertained  by  counting  the  concentric  grains- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST 


253 


In  one  of  these  graves  was  found  a  glass  bottle  about  the  size  of  a 
common  junk  bottle,  having  a  stopple  in  its  muzzle,  and  in  the 
bottle  was  a  liquid  of  some  sort,  but  was  tasteless.  This  fact  was 
related  to  us  by  a  Mr.  Higgins,  some  time  sheriff'  of  Onondaga 
county  j  who  both  saw  the  bottle  and  tasted  the  liquid  at  the  time 
it  was  discovered,  but  could  not  tell  of  what  kind,  as  it  was  tasteless. 

But  is  it  possible,  that  the  Scandinavians  could  have  had  glass  in 
their  possession,  at  so  early  a  period  as  the  year  950  and  there- 
about, so  as  to  have  brought  it  with  them  from  Europe  when  their 
first  settlements  were  made  in  this  country  ?  We  see  no  good 
reason  why  not3  as  glass  had  been  in  use  nearly  three  hundred  years 
in  Europe,  before  the  northern  Europeans  are  reputed  to  have  found 
this  country  ;  the  art  of  making  glass  having  been  discovered  in 
the  year  of  our  Lord  644.  In  the  same  grave  with  the  bottle,  was 
found  an  iroa  hatchet,  edged  with  steel.  The  eye,  or  place  for  the 
helve  was  round,  and  extended  or  projected  out,  like  the  ancient 
Swiss  or  German  axe.  On  lot  No.  9,  in  the  same  town,  was  an- 
other aboriginal  burying  ground,  covered  with  forest  trees,  as  the  oth- 
er. In  the  same  town,  on  lot  No.  17,  were  found  the  remains  of 
a  blacksmith's  forge.  At  this  spot  have  been  ploughed  up  cruci- 
bles, such  as  mineralogists  use  in  refining  metals. 

These  axes  are  similar,  and  correspond  in  character  with  those 
found  in  the  nitrous  caves  on  the  Gasconade  river,  which  empties 
into  the  Missouri,  as  mentioned  in  Professor  Beck's  Gazetteer  of 
that  country.  In  the  same  town  are  the  remains  of  two  ancient 
forts  or  fortifications,  with  redoubts,  of  a  very  extensive  and  formi- 
dable character.  Within  the  range  of  these  works,  have  been 
found  pieces  of  cast  iron,  broken  from  some  Vessel  of  considerable 
thickness.  These  articles  cannot  well  be  ascribed  to  the  era  of  the 
French  war,  as  time  enough  since  then,  till  the  region  round  about 
Onondaga  was  commenced  to  be  cultivated,  had  not  elapsed  to  give 
the  growth  of  timber  found  on  the  spot,  of  the  age  above  noticed ; 
and  added  to  this,  it  is  said,  that  the  Indians,  occupying  that  tract 
of  country,  had  no  tradition  of  their  authors. 

The  reader  will  recollect,  a  few  pages  back,  we  have  noticed 
the  discovery  of  a  place  called  Estotilaud,  supposed  to  be  Nova- 
Scotia,  in  1354,  the  inhabitants  of  which  were  Europeans,  who 
cultivated  grain,  lived  in  stone  houses,  and  manufactured  leer,  as 
in  Europe  at  that  day.    Now,  from  the  year  1354,  till  the  time  of 


254 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


the  first  settlements  made  in  Onondaga  county,  by  the  present  in- 
habitants, is  about  four  hundred  years  ;  is  it  not  possible,  therefore, 
that  this  glass  bottle;  with  some  kind  of  liquor  in  it,  may  have  been 
derived  from  this  Estotiland,  having  been  originally  brought  from 
Europe  ;  as  glass  had  been  in  use,  more  or  less,  there  from  the 
year  644,  till  the  Scandinavians  colonized  Iceland,  Greenland,  and 
Estotiland,  or  Newfoundland.  The  hatchets  or  iron  axes,  found 
here,  were  likely  of  the  same  origin  with  the  pieces  of  cast  iron. 

In  ploughing  the  earth,  digging  wells,  canals,  or  excavating  for 
salt  waters,  about  the  lakes,  new  discoveries  are  frequently  made, 
which  as  clearly  show  the  operations  of  ancient  civilization  here, 
as  the  works  of  the  present  race  would  do,  were  they  left  to  the 
operations  of  time  for  five  or  six  hundred  years  ;  especially  were 
this  country  to  be  totally  overrun  by  the  whole  consolidated  savage 
tribes  of  the  west,  exterminating  both  the  worker  and  his  works, 
as  appears  to  have  been  done  in  ages  past. 

In  Scipio,  on  Salmon  creek,  a  Mr.  Halsted  has,  from  time  to 
time,  during  ten  years  past,  ploughed  up,  on  a  certain  extent  of 
land  on  his  farm,  seven  or  eight  hundred  pounds  of  brass,  which 
appeared  to  have  once  been  formed  into  various  implements,  both 
of  husbandry  and  war ;  helmets  and  working  utensils  mingle  to- 
gether. 

The  finder  of  this  brass,  we  are  informed,  from  time  to  time,  as 
he  discovered  it  by  ploughing,  carried  it  to  Auburn,  and  sold  it  by 
the  pound,  where  it  was  worked  up  with  as  little  curiosity  attend- 
ing it,  as  though  it  had  been  but  an  ordinary  article  of  the  coun- 
try's produce  :  when  if  it  had  been  announced  in  some  public 
manner,  the  finder  would  have,  doubtless,  been  highly  rewarded 
by  some  scientific  individual  or  society  >  and  preserved  it  in  the  ca- 
binets of  the  antiquarian,  as  a  relic  of  by-gone  ages,  of  the  highest 
interest. 

On  this  field,  where  it  was  found,  the  forest  timber  was  growing 
as  abundantly,  and  had  attained  to  as  great  age  and  size  as  else- 
where in  the  heavy  timbered  country  of  the  lakes. 

In  the  same  field  was  also  found  much  wrought  iron,  which  fur- 
nished Mr.  Halsted  with  a  sufficiency  to  shoe  his  horses  for  seve- 
ral years.  Hatchets  of  iron  were  also  found  there,  formed  in  the 
manner  the  ancient  Swiss  or  German  hatchet  or  small  axe  is 
formed. 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


256 


From  the  above  account,  we  cannot  resist  the  conclusion  that  on 
this  farm  in  Scipio,  was  situated  an  European  village,  of  Danes  or 
Welch,  who  were  cut  off  and  exterminated  by  the  fortunes  of  war, 
some  hundred  years  before  the  discovery  of  America  by  Columbus ; 
when  it  is  likely  their  town  was  destroyed  by  the  fire  of  the  enemyr 
their  articles  of  brass  broken  in  pieces,  and  in  the  course  of  ages 
became  buried  by  the  earth,  by  the  increase  of  vegetable  mould, 
and  the  growth  of  the  wilderness. 

If,  then,  we  have  discovered  the  traits  of  a  clan  or  village  of 
Europeans,  who  had  a  knov\  ledge  of  the  use  of  brass  and  iron,  as 
the  Danes  certainly  had,  long  before  they  colonized  Iceland,  Green- 
land and  Labrador,  why  not  be  allowed  to  conjecture,  nay  more, 
to  believe,  that  many  others  in  different  parts  overspread  the  lake 
country  to  a  great  extent. 

On  the  Black  River,  running  from  the  northern  part  of  the  state 
of  New- York  into  Lake  Ontario,  a  man  was  digging  a  well,  when 
at  the  depth  of  several  feet,  he  came  to  a  quantity  of  China  and 
Delph  ware.    This  is  equally  surprising  with  the  field  of  brass. 

A  Mr.  Thomas  Lee  discovered,  not  long  since,  on  his  farm,  in 
Tompkins  county,  in  the  state  of  New- York,  the  entire  iron  works 
of  a  wagon,  reduced  to  rust.  From  this  discovery  much  might 
be  conjectured  respecting  the  state  of  cultivation,  as  a  wagon  de- 
notes not  only  a  knowledge  of  the  mechanic  arts,  equal,  perhaps,  in 
that  respect  with  the  present  times  ;  but  also  that  roads  existed,  or 
a  wagon  could  not  have  traversed  the  country. 

That  the  wagon  was  brought  there  by  the  Spaniards,  who  it  is 
said,  very  soon  after  the  discovery  of  America  explored  these  north- 
ern and  further  regions,  in  quest  of  minerals,  because  roads  at  that 
time  did  not  exist ;  and  for  the  same  reason  none  of  the  first  set- 
tlers of  the  New  England  coast,  had  penetrated  so  far  in  the  wilds 
with  a  wagon  as  to  give  time  for  it  to  rust  entirely  away  before  the 
late  settlement  of  the  western  country. 

If  one  wagon  existed,  there  were  doubtless  many;  which  plain- 
ly shows  a  civilized  state  of  things,  with  all  the  conveniences  of  an 
agricultural  life  ;  which  would  also  require  towns  and  places  of  re- 
sort— as  market  places  for  produce — or  a  wagon  could  not  have  been 
of  any  use  to  the  owner.  Anvils  of  iron  have  been  found  in  Pom- 
pey,  in  the  same  quarter  of  the  country  with  the  other  discoveries, 
as  above  related  ;  which  we  should  naturally  expect  to  find,  or  it 


656* 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


might  be  inquired,  how  could  axes,  and  the  iron  works  of  wagons 
be  manufactured  ? 

On  the  ilats  of  the  Genesee  River,  on  the  land  of  Mr.  Liberty 
Judd,  was  found  by  this  gentleman,  a  bit  of  silver,  about  the  length 
of  a  man's  finger,  hammered  to  a  point  at  one  end,  while  the  other 
was  square  and  smooth,  on  which  were  cut,  or  engraved,  in  Arabic 
figures^  the  year  of  our  Lord  600. 

The  discovery  of  the  remains  of  a  wagon,  as  above  stated,  goes 
also  to  prove  that  some  kind  of  animal  must  have  been  domesti- 
cated to  draw  it  with — either  the  horse,  the  ox,  or  the  buffalo. 
The  horse,  it  is  said,  was  not  known  in  America  till  the  Spaniards 
introduced  it  from  Europe  after  the  time  of  its  discovery  by  Co- 
lumbus, which  has  multiplied  prodigiously  on  the  innumerable 
wilds  and  prairies  of  both  South  and  North  America  ;  yet  the  track 
of  a  horse  is  found  on  a  mountain  of  Tennessee,  in  the  rock  of  the 
enchanted  mountain  as  before  related,  and  shows  that  horses  were 
known  in  America  in  the  earliest  ages  after  the  flood. 

It  is  likely,  however,  that  the  Danes,  who  are  believed  once  to 
have  occupied  the  whole  lake  country  3  had  domesticated  the  buffa- 
lo, as  other  nations  have  done,  by  which  they  were  aided  in  agri- 
cultural pursuits,  as  we  are  now  by  the  ox. 

From  what  we  have  related  respecting  these  European  appear- 
ances in  America,  the  traits  of  a  Scandinavian,  Welch,  and  Scotch 
population,  it  is  clear  that  the  remark  of  Professor  Beck,  was  not 
made  without  sufficient  reason  ;  which  is :  "  They  certainly  form 
a  class  of  antiquities  entirely  distinct  from  the  walled  towns,  for- 
tifications, barrows,  or  mounds."    Page  315. 


A  FURTHER  ACCOUNT  OF  WESTERN  ANTIQUITIES- 

But  as  to  the  state  of  the  arts,  among  the  more  ancient  nations 
of  America,  some  idea  may  be  gathered  from  what  has  been  already 
said.  That  they  manufactured  brick  of  a  good  quality,  is  known 
from  the  discoveries  made  on  opening  their  tumuli.  A  vast  many 
instances  of  articles  made  of  copper  and  sometimes  plated  with  sil- 
ver, have  been  met  with  on  opening  their  works.    Circular  pieces 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


257 


of  copper,  intended  either  as  medals  or  breast  plates,  have  been 
found,  several  inches  in  diameter,  very  much  injured  by  time.  In 
several  tumuli,  the  remains  of  knives  and  even  of  swords,  in  the 
form  of  rust,  have  been  discovered. 

Glass  has  not  been  discovered  in  any  of  their  works  in  the  Ohio 
except  one  ;  from  which  we  learn  at  once  that  thase  works  were 
made  at  least  more  than  eleven  hundred  and  sixty  years  ago ;  as 
the  manufacture  of  glass  was  not  discovered  till  the  year  of  our 
Lord  664.  But  there  is  no  doubt  of  their  having  inhabited  this 
country  from  the  remotest  antiquity,  drawn  from  data  heretofore 
noticed  in  this  work.  "  Mirrors  made  of  isinglass,  have  been  found 
in  as  many  as  fifty  places,  within  my  own  knowledge,  says  Mr. 
Atwater,  besides  the  large  and  very  elegant  one  at  Circleville. 
From  the  great  thickness  of  those  micac  membraneca  Mirrors,  they 
answered  the  purpose  for  which  they  were  made  very  well. 

Their  houses,  in  some  instances,  might  have  been  built  of  stone 
and  brick,  as  in  the  walled  towns  on  Paint  Creek,  and  some  few 
other  places,  yet  their  habitations  were  of  wood,  or  they  dwelt  in 
tents  ;  otherwise  their  ruins  would  be  met  with  in  every  part  of 
this  great  country. 

Along  the  Ohio,  where  the  river  is,  in  many  places,  wearing 
and  washing  away  its  banks,  hearths  and  fire  places  are  brought  to 
light,  two,  four,  and  even  six  feet  below  the  surface,  these  are  also 
found  on  the  banks  of  the  Muskingum,  at  its  mouth,  and  at  Point 
Harman,  opposite  Marietta.  Two  stone  covers  of  stone  vessels, 
were  found  in  a  stone  mound,  in  Ross  county,  in  Ohio,  ingeniously 
wrought,  and  highly  polished.  These  covers  resembled  almost  ex- 
actly, and  were  quite  equal  to  vessels  of  that  material  manufactured 
iu  Italy  at  the  present  time. 

An  urn  was  found  in  a  mound,  a  few  miles  from  Chilicothe, 
which,  a  few  years  since,  was  in  the  hands  of  a  Mr.  J.  W.  Collet, 
who  lived  in  that  place,  about  a  foot  high,  and  well  proportioned; 
it  very  much  resembles  one  found  in  a  similar  work  in  Scotland, 
mentioned  in  Pennant's  Tour,  vol.  1,  page  154,  4th  London  edition, 
1790.  It  contained  arrow  heads,  ashes,  and  calcined  or  burnt  hu- 
man bones.  In  digging  a  trench  on  the  Sandusky  river,  in  alluvial 
earth,  at  a  depth  of  six  feet,  was  found  &  pipe,  which  displays  great 
taste  in  its  execution.  The  rim  of  the  bowl  is  in  high  relief,  and 
the  front  represents  a  beautiful  female  face.    The  stone  of  which 

33 


258 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


it  is  made  the  real  talc  graphiqite  exactly  resembling  the  stone  of 
which  the  Chinese  make  their  idols.  No  talc  of  this  species  is 
known  to  exist  on  the  west  side  of  the  Alleghanies  ;  it  must,  there- 
fore, have  been  brought,  at  some  remote  period,  from  some  part  of 
the  old  world. 

Fragments  of  fishing  nets  and  mocasins,  or  shoes  made  of  a  spe- 
cies of  weed,  have  been  found  in  the  nitrous  caves  of  Kentucky. 
The  mummies  which  have  been  found  in  these  places,  were  wrap- 
ped in  a  coarse  species  of  linin  cloth,  of  about  the  consistency  and 
texture  of  cotton  bagging.  It  was  evidently  woven  by  the  same 
kind  of  process  which  is  still  practised  in  the  interior  of  Africa. 
The  warp  being  extended  by  some  slight  kind  of  machinery,  the 
woof  was  passed  across  it,  and  then  twisted,  every  two  threads  of 
warp  together,  before  the  second  passage  of  the  filling.  This  seems 
to  have  been  the  first  rude  method  of  weaving  in  Asia,  Africa  and 
America." 

If  so,  then  it  is  clear,  that  the  inhabitants  of  America,  who  had 
the  knowledge  of  this  kind  of  fabrication,  did  indeed  belong  to  an 
era  as  ancient  as  the  first  people  of  Asia  itself,  and  even  before 
the  settlement  of  Europe  ;  this  is  not  a  small  witness  in  favor  of 
our  opinion  of  the  extreme  antiquity  of  those  ancient  works  of  the 
west.  Other  nations,  however,  have,  from  time  to  time  mingled 
among  them  by  various  means,  as  we  have,  in  some  measure  re- 
counted, heretofore. 

A  second  envelope  of  these  mummies,  is  a  kind  of  net  work,  of 
coarse  threads,  formed  of  very  small  loose  meshes,  in  which  were 
fixed  the  feathers  of  various  kinds  of  birds,  so  as  to  make  a  per- 
fectly smooth  surface,  lying  all  in  one  direction.  The  art  of  this 
tedious  but  beautiful  manufacture,  was  well  understood  in  Mexico, 
and  still  exists  on  the  northwest  coast  of  America,  and  in  the  islands 
of  the  Pacific.  In  these  islands  it  is  the  state  or  court  dress.  The 
third  and  outer  envelope  of  these  mummies,  is  either  like  the  one 
first  described,  or  consists  of  leather,  sewed  together. — American 
Antq.  Society. 

The  manufacture  of  leather  from  the  hides  of  animals,  is  a  very 
ancient  invention,  known  to  almost  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  ; 
but  to  find  it  in  America,  wrapped  around  mummies,  as  in  several 
instances  found  in  nitrous  caves,  and  in  the  Kentucky  caverns, 
shows  a  knowledge  of  a  branch  of  the  arts,  in  the  possession  of  the 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST* 


259 


people  of  America,  at  an  era  coeval  with  the  Egyptians — as  the 
art  of  embalming  is  found  in  connexion  with  that  of  tanning  the 
skins  of  animals.  Respecting  the  fact  of  leather  being  the  outer 
wrapper  of  some  of  the  mummies  discovered,  Mr.  Atwater  says, 
his  authority  is  the  statement  of  Mr.  Clifford,  of  Lexington,  Ken- 
tucky who  was  also  a  member  of  the  American  Antiquarian  Society. 

There  was  a  small  vessel  found  on  the  Ohio  flats,  at  a  depth  of 
twelve  feet,  made  of  the  same  materials  with  the  mortars  now  in 
use  among  physicians  and  apothecaries,  manufactured  in  Europe. 
It  holds  about  three  quarts,  comes  to  a  point  at  its  bottom,  has  a 
groove  around  it  near  the  middle,  with  two  ears,  though  a  chain 
was  probably  inserted,  so  as  to  suspend  it  over  fire,  as  it  has  on  it 
the  marks  of  that  element,  and  was  probably  a  crucible,  for  melt- 
ing metals,  and  the  chain  handle  shows  the  ingenuity  of  its  con- 
struction, by  its  being  placed  near  the  middle  of  the  crucible,  in 
order  to  preduce  an  equipoise,  when  the  refiner  wished  to  pour  out 
his  lead,  his  iron,  or  his  silver :  However,  it  may  have  been  only 
a  culinary  vessel. 

Among  the  vast  variety  of  discoveries  made  in  the  mounds,  tu- 
muli and  fortifications  of  these  people,  have  been  found  not  only 
hatchets  made  of  stone ;  but  axes  as  large,  and  much  of  the  same 
shape  with  those  made  of  iron  at  the  present  day ;  also  pickaxes 
and  pestles,  see  plate  Nos.  11  and  12  ;  with  various  other  instru- 
ments, made  of  stone.  But  besides,  there  have  been  found  very 
well  manufactured  swords  and  kniyes  of  iron,  and  possibly  steel \ 
says  Mr.  Atwater. 

If  so,  this  also  is  an  argument  of  the  great  and  primeval  antiqui- 
ty of  those  settlements;  for  we  are  to  suppose  men  .knew  more  of 
iron  and  steel,  at  the  time  of  the  building  of  Babel,  than  in  after 
ages,  when  they  became  dispersed,  and,  from  peculiar  circumstan- 
ces, lost  that  peculiar  art,  and  therefore,  in  the  time  of  the  Greeks, 
in  the  year  1406  before  Christ,  it  was  discovered  anew.  From 
which  we  are  to  conclude,  that  the  primitive  people  of  America, 
either  discovered  the  use  of  iron  themselves,  as  the  Greeks  did,  or, 
that  they  learned  its  use  from  this  circumstance ;  or  that  they  car- 
ried a  knowledge  of  this  ore,  with  them  at  the^  time  of  their  dis- 
persion ;  as  received  from  Noah's  family,  who  brought  it  from  be- 
yond the  flood,  discovered  in  or  before  the  days  of  Tubal  Cain, 
which  was  only  about  500  years  after  the  creation. 


860 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


Dr.  Clarke  says,  that  from  the  manufacture  of  certain  articles, 
iu  the  -wilderness,  by  the  Israelites,  iron,  and  even  steel,  must  have 
been  known,  which  was  an  age  preceding  its  knowledge  among  the 
Greeks,  nearly  an  hundred  years.  If  this  was  so,  it  follows,  they 
must  have  learned  it,  or  rather  they  must  have  borrowed  the  very 
instruments  of  iron  and  steel,  when  they  left  Egypt;  as  they  had 
no  means  of  making  such  instruments  from  the  ore,  in  the  wil- 
derness. 

If,  then,  the  art  was  learned  of  the  Egyptians,  by  the  Israelites, 
the  knowledge  of  iron  and  steel  existed  among  that  people  more 
than  three  hnndred  years  before  it  was  known  among  the  Greeks, 
and  perhaps  much  earlier,  as  that  the  Egyptians  were  ahead  of  all 
other  nations  in  arts  and  inventions. 


A  DISCRETION  OF  INSTRUMENTS  FOUND  IN  THE  TUMULL 

In  removing  the  earth,  which  composed  an  ancient  mound,  si- 
tuated where  now  one  of  the  streets  of  Marietta  runs,  several  cu- 
rious articles  were  discovered  in  1819.  They  appear  to  have  been 
buried  with  the  body  of  the  person  to  whose  memory  this  mound 
was  erected. 

Lying  immediately  on  the  forehead  of  this  skeleton,  were  found 
three  large  circular  ornaments,  which  had  adorned  a  sword  belt,  or 
buckler,  and  rwere  composed  of  copper,  overlaid  with  a  plate  of 
silver;  The  fronts,  or  show  sides  were  slightly  convex,  with  a 
deep  depression,  like  a  cup,  in  the  centre,  and  measured  tw7o  inches 
and  a  quarter  across  the  face  of  each.  On  the  back  side,  opposite 
the  depressed  portion,  is  a  copper  rivet,  around  which  are  two  sep- 
arate plates,  by  which  they  were  fastened  to  the  leather  belt. 
The  two  pieces  of  leather  resembled  the  skin  of  a  mummy,  and 
seemed  to  have  been  preserved  by  the  salts  of  the  copper  ;  the 
plates  were  nearly  reduced  to  an  oxyde  or  rust.  The  silver  looked 
quite  black,  but  was  not  much  corroded,  as  on  rubbing  it  became 
bright  and  clear. 

Around  one  of  the  rivers  was  a  small  quantity,  of  what  appeared 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


261 


to  be,  flax  or  hemp,  in  a  tolerable  state  of  preservation.  Near  the 
side  of  the  body  was  found  a  plate  of  silver,  which  appeared  to 
have  been  the  upper  part  of  a  sword  scabbard;  it  was  six  inches 
long,  and  two  broad,  with  two  longitudinal  ridges,  which  probably- 
corresponded  with  the  edges  or  ridges  of  the  sword  once  sheathed 
by  it,  and  appeared  to  have  been  fastened  to  the  scabbard  by  seve- 
ral rivets,  the  holes  of  which  remain  in  the  plate. 

Two  or  three  pieces  of  a  copper  tube,  were  also  found  with  this 
body,  filled  with  iron  rust.  The  pieces,  from  their  appearances, 
composed  the  lower  end  of  the  scabbard,  near  the  point  of  the 
sword,  but  no  sign  of  the  sword  itself,  except  a  streak  of  rust  its 
whole  length. 

We  learn  from  this  that  the  person  who  was  buried  there,  was  a 
warrior,  as  the  sword  declares  ;  and  also  that  the  people,  of  whom 
he  was  an  individual,  were  acquainted  with  the  arts  of  civilized 
life,  which  appears  from  the  sheath3  the  flax,  the  copper,  and  the 
silver,  but  more  especially  as  the  silver  was  plated  on  the  copper. 
Near  the  feet  was  found  a  piece  of  copper,  weighing  three  ounces, 
which  from  its  shape,  appeared  to  have  been  used  as  a  plumb,  as 
near  one  of  the  ends  is  a  crease  or  groove,  for  tying  a  thread  ;  it 
is  round  and  two  inches  and  a  half  in  length,  one  inch  in  diame- 
ter at  the  centre,  and  an  half  inch  at  the  small  or  upper  end. 

It  was  composed  of  small  pieces  of  native  copper,  pounded  to- 
gether, and  in  the  cracks  between  the  pieces  were  stuck  several 
bits  of  silver,  one  nearly  the  size  of  a  sixpence.  This  copper 
plumb  was  covered  with  a  coat  of  green  rust,  and  was  considerably 
corroded. 

A  piece  of  red  ochre,  or  paint,  and  a  piece  of  iron  ore,  which 
had  the  appearance  of  having  been  partially  vitrified,  or  melt- 
ed, was  also  found  in  this  tumulus ;  the  bit  of  ore  was  nearly 
pure  iron. 

The  body  of  the  person  here  buried,  was  laid  on  the  surface  of 
the  earth,  with  his  face  upwards^  and  his  feet  pointing  to  the  north- 
east, and  his  head  to  the  southwest. 

From  the  appearance  of  several  pieces  of  charcoal,  and  bits  of 
partially  burnt  scacoal,  and  the  black  color  of  the  earth,  it  would 
appear  that  the  funeral  obsequies  had  been  celebrated  by  fire ;  and 
that  while  the  ashes  were  yet  hot  and  smoking,  a  circle  of  flat  stones 
had  been  laid  around  and  over  the  body,  from  which  the  tumulus 
had  been  carried  up. 


262 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


For  a  view  of  each  article,  the  reader  can  refer  to  the  Frontis- 
piece engraving,  by  observing  the  numbering  of  each  specimen. 
Nos.  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  and  6,  are  articles  found  in  the  mound  at  Ma- 
rietta, in  1819. 

No.  1.  Back  view  of  the  silver  ornament  for  a  sword  scab- 
bard. 

No.  2.  Front  view  of  the  same. 

No.  3.  Front  view  of  an  ornament  for  a  belt,  with  a  silver 
face. 

No.  4.  Back  view  of  the  same  ornament,  of  copper. 

No.  5.  A  plumb,  or  pendant,  formed  of  pieces  of  copper  pound- 
ed together,  leaving  fissures  or  openings,  which  were  filled  with 
bits  of  silver  ;  an  implement,  as  to  its  shape,  resembling  the  instru- 
ments used  by  carpenters  and  masons,  now-a-days,  to  ascertain  per- 
pendiculars with,  and  was  doubtless  used  by  these  ancients  for  the 
same  purpose. 

No.  6.  A  stone  with  seven  holes,  like  a  screw  plate,  fourteen 
inches  long,  finely  polished,  and  very  hard ;  this,  however,  was 
not  found  in  the  mound,  but  in  a  field  near  this  tumulus. 

Letter  A.  represents  a  small  keg  in  its  construction,  and  a  tea- 
kettle in  the  use  of  which  it  seems  to  have  been  put,  which  is  in- 
dicated by  its  spout ;  and  appears  to  have  been  made  of  a  compo- 
sition of  clay  and  shells. 

Letter  B.  represents  the  idol,  before  spoken  of,  on  pages  217 
and  218,  in  three  views,  a  front,  side,  and  back  view. 

Letter  C.  represents  the  idol,  or  image  of  stone,  on  page  219. 

Letter  D.  is  the  stone,  or  Shalgrumu,  described  on  pages  180, 
181,  and  182. 

Letter  E.  represents  the  Triune  Cup,  found  on  the  Cany  fork  of 
Cumberland  river,  in  an  ancient  work,  about  four  feet  below  the 
surface.  The  drawing  is  an  exact  likeness,  taken  originally  by 
Miss  Sara  Clifford,  of  Lexington,  Kentucky ;  it  is  by  some  called 
the  Triune  Idol. 

"  The  object  itself  may  be  thus  described.  It  consists  of  three 
heads  joined  together  at  the  back  part,  near  the  top,  by  a  stem  or 
handle,  which  rises  above  the  head  about  three  inches.  This 
stem  is  hollow,  six  inches  in  circumference  at  the  top,  increasing 
in  size  as  it  descends. 

The  heads  are  all  of  the  same  dimensions,  being  about  four 


AND  DISSOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


263 


inches  from  the  t«p  to  the  chin.  The  face,  at  the  eyes,  is  three 
inches  broad,  decreasing  in  breadth,  all  the  way  to  the  chin.  All 
the  strong  marks  of  the  Tartar  countenance  are  distinctly  preserved 
and  expressed  with  so  much  skill,  that  even  a  modern  artist  might 
be  proud  of  the  performance.  The  countenances  are  all  different 
from  each  other,  and  denote  one  old  person,  and  two  younger  ones. 
The  face  of  the  oldest  is  painted  around  the  eyes  with  yellow, 
shaded  with  a  streak  of  the  same  color,  begining  from  the  top  of 
the  ear,  running  in  a  semicircular  form,  to  the  ear  on  the  other  side 
of  the  head.  Another  painted  line  begins  at  the  lower  part  of  the 
eye,  and  runs  down  before  each  ear,  about  one  inch. — See  the  right 
hand  figure  on  the  cup,  or  image. 

The  face  engraved  alone,  is  the  back  view,  and  represents  a  per- 
son of  a  grave  countenance,  but  much  younger  than  the  preceding 
one,  painted  very  differently,  and  of  a  different  color.  A  streak  of 
reddish  brown  surrounds  each  eye.  Another  line  of  the  same  col- 
or, beginning  at  the  top  of  one  ear,  passes  under  the  chin,  and  ends 
at  the  top  of  the  other  ear.  The  ears  also,  are  slightly  tinged  with 
the  same  color. 

The  third  figure,  in  its  characteristical  features,  resembles,  the 
others,  representing  one  of  the  Tartar  family.  The  whole  of  the 
face  is  slightly  tinged  with  vermilion,  or  some  paint  resembling  it. 
Each  cheek  has  a  spot  on  it,  of  the  size  of  a  quarter  of  a  dollar, 
brightly  tinged  with  the  same  paint.  On  the  chin  is  a  similar  spot. 
One  circumstance  worthy  of  remark,  is,  that  though  these  colors 
must  have  been  exposed  to  the  damp  earth  for  many  centuries, 
they  have,  notwithstanding,  preserved  every  shade  in  all  its  bril- 
liancy. 

This  Triune  vessel  stands  upon  three  necks,  which  are  about  an 
inch  and  a  half  in  length.  The  whole  is  composed  of  a  fine  clay, 
of  a  light  umber  color,  which  has  been  rendered  hard  by  the  ac- 
tion of  fire.  The  heads  are  hollow,  and  the  vessel  is  of  capacity 
to  hold  about  one  quart. 

Does  not  this  cup  represent  the  three  gods  of  India — Brahma, 
Vishnoo,  and  Siva  ?  Let  the  reader  look  at  the  plate  representing 
this  vessel,  and  cousult  the  l<  Asiatic  Researches,"  by  Sir  William 
Jones  j  let  him  also  read  Buchanan's  "  Star  in  the  East,"  and  ac- 
counts there  found,  of  the  idolatry  of  the  Hindoos,  and  he  cannot 
fail  to  see  in  this  idol,  one  proof  at  least,  that  the  people  who 


264 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


raised  our  ancient  works  were  idolaters  ;  and,  that  some  of  them 
worshipped  gods  resembling  the  three  principal  deities  of  India. 
What  tends  to  strengthen  tliis  inference,  is,  that  nine  murex  shells, 
the  same  as  described  by  Sir  William  Jones,  in  his  Asiatic  Re- 
searches, and  by  Svmmes,  in  his  Embassy  to  Ava,  have  been  found 
within  twenty  miles  of  Lexington,  Kentucky,  in  an  ancient  work. 

The  murex  shell,  is  a  sea  shell  fish,  out  of  which  the  ancients 
procured  the  famous  Tyrian  purple  dye,  which  was  the  color  of  the 
royal  robes  of  kiugs,  so  celebrated  in  aucient  times.  Their  com- 
ponent parts  remained  unchanged,  and  they  were  every  way  in  an 
excellent  state  of  preservation.  These  shells,  so  rare  in  India,  are 
highly  esteemed,  and  consecrated  to  their  god,  Mahadeva,  whose 
character  is  the  same  with  the  Neptune,  of  Greece  and  Rome. 
This  shell,  among  the  Hindoos,  is  the  musical  instrument  of  their 
Tritons;  (sea  gods,  or  trumpeters  of  Neptune.)  Those,  of  the 
kind  discovered  as  above,  are  deposited  in  the  Museum,  at  Lex- 
ington. The  foot  of  the  Siamese  god,  Gudma,  or  Boodh,  is  re- 
presented by  a  sculptured  statute,  in  Ava,  of  six  feet  in  length, 
and  the  toes  of  this  god,  are  carved,  each  to  represent  a  shell  of 
the  Murex. 

These  shells  have  been  found  in  many  mounds  wrhich  have  been 
opened  in  every  part  of  this  country ;  and  this  is  a  proof  that  a 
considerable  value  was  set  upon  them  by  their  owners.  From 
these  discoveries  it  is  evident,  that  the  people  who  built  the  an- 
cient works  of  the  west,  were  idolaters  ;  it  is  also  inferred  from 
the  age  of  the  world  in  which  they  lived ;  history,  sacred  and  pro- 
fane, affords  the  fact,  that  ail  nations,  except  the  Jews,  were  idola- 
ters at  the  same  time  and  age. 

Medals,  representing  the  sun  with  its  rays  of  light,  have  been 
found  in  the  mounds,  made  of  a  very  fine  clay,  and  colored  in  the 
composition,  before  it  was  hardened  by  heat,  from  which  it  is  in- 
ferred they  worshipped  the  sun.  It  is  also  supposed,  that  they 
worshipped  the  moon,  both  from  their  semicircular  works,  which 
represent  the  new  moon  ;  and  also  from  the  discovery  of  copper 
medals,  round  like  the  moon  in  its  full,  being  smooth,  without  any 
rays  of  light,  like  those  which  represent  the  sun.  The  worship  of 
the  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  was  the  worship  of  many  nations,  in  the 
earliest  ages,  not  only  soon  after  the  flood,  but  all  along,  cotempo- 
rary  with  the  existence  of  the  Jews  as  a  nation,  and  also  succeed- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


265 


ing  the  Christian  era,  and  till  the  present  time,  as  among  the  pagan 
Mexicans. 

Nos.  8,  9,  10,  11,  and  12,  represent  the  shapes  of  the  stone 
axes,  pestle,  and  other  articles  spoken  of  a  few  pages  back. — See 
the  Plate. 

As  it  respects  the  scientific  acquirements  of  the  builders  of  the 
works  in  the  west,  now  in  ruins,  Mr.  Atwater  says,  "  when  tho- 
roughly examined,  have  furnished  matter  of  admiration  to  all  intel- 
ligent persons,  who  have  attended  to  the  subject.  Nearly  all  the 
lines  of  ancient  works  found  in  the  whole  country,  where  the  from 
of  the  ground  admits  of  it,  are  right  ones,  pointing  to  the  four  car- 
dinal points.  Where  there  are  mounds  enclosed,  the  gateways  are 
most  frequently  on  the  east  side  of  the  works,  towards  the  rising 
Sun.  Where  the  situation  admits  of  it,  in  their  military  works, 
the  openings  are  generally  towards  one  or  more  of  the  cardinal 
points.  From  which  it  is  supposed  they  must  have  had  some  know- 
ledge of  astronomy,  or  their  structures  would  not,  it  is  imagined, 
have  been  thus  arranged.  From  these  circumstances  also,  we  draw 
the  conclusion,  that  the  first  inhabitants  of  America,  emigrated  from 
Asia,  at  a  period  coeval  with  that  of  Babylon,  for  here  it  was  that 
astronomical  calculations  were  first  made,  2234  years  before  Christ. 

"  These  things  could  never  have  so  happened,  with  such  invari- 
able exactness,  in  almost  all  cases,  without  design.  "  On  the 
whole,"  says  Atwater,  "  I  am  convinced  from  an  attention  to  many 
hundreds  of  these  works,  in  every  part  of  the  west  which  I  have 
visited,  that  their  authors  had  a  knowledge  of  astronomy."  He 
strengthens  his  opinions  as  follows:  "  The  pastoral  life,  which  men 
followed  in  the  early  ages,  was  certainly  very  favorable  to  the  at- 
tainment of  such  a  knowledge.  Dwelling  in  tents,  or  in  the  open 
air,  with  the  heavenly  bodies  in  full  view,  and  much  more  liable 
to  suffer  from  changes  in  the  weather,  than  persons  dwelling  in 
comfortable  habitations,  they  would,  of  course,  direct  their  atten- 
tion to  the  prognostics  of  approaching  heat  or  cold,  stormy  or  pleas- 
ant weather.  Our  own  sailors  are  an  example  in  point.  Let  a 
person,  even  wholly  unaccustomed  to  the  seas,  be  wafted  for  a  few 
weeks  by  the  winds  and  waves,  he  will  become  all  ear  to  every 
breeze,  all  eye  to  every  part  of  the  heavens.  Thus,  in  the  earliest 
ages  of  mankind,  astronomy  was  attended  to,  partly  from  necessity ; 
hence,  a  knowledge  of  this  science  was  early  diffused  among  men, 

34 


266 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


the  proofs  of  which  are  seen  in  their  works,  not  only  heie,  but  in 
every  part  of  the  globe.  It  was  reserved,  however,  for  the 
geniuses  of  modern  times,  to  make  the  most  astonishing  discoveries 
in  this  science,  aided  by  a  knowledge  of  figures,  and  an  acquaint- 
ance with  the  telescope." 

Our  ancient  works  continued  into  Mexico,  increasing  in  size  and 
grandeur,  preserving  the  same  forms,  and  appear  to  have  been  put 
to  the  same  uses.  The  form  of  our  works  is  round,  square,  trian- 
gular, semicircular,  and  octangular  agreeing,  in  all  these  respects, 
with  those  in  Mexico.  The  first  works  built  by  the  Mexicans, 
were  mostly  of  earth,  and  not  much  superior  to  the  common  ones 
on  the  Mississippi."  The  same  may  be  said  of  the  works  of  this 
sort  over  the  whole  earth,  which  is  the  evidence  that  all  alike  be- 
long to  the  first  efforts  of  men,  in  the  very  first  ages  after  the  flood. 

"  But  afterwards  temples  were  erected  on  the  elevated  squares, 
circles,  &c,  but  were  still  like  ours,  surrounded  by  walls  of  earth. 
These  sacred  places,  in  Mexico,  were  called  "  teocalli,"  which  in 
the  vernacular  tongue  of  the  most  ancient  tribe  of  Mexicans,  signi- 
fies "  mansions  of  the  gods."  They  included  within  their  sacred 
walls,  gardens,  fountains,  habitations  of  priests,  temples,  altars,  and 
magazines  of  arms.  This  circumstance  may  account  for  many 
things  which  have  excited  some  surprise  among  those  who  have 
hastily  visited  the  works  on  Paint  Creek,  at  Portsmouth,  Marietta, 
Circleville,  Newark,  &c 

It  is  doubted  by  many  to  what  use  these  works  were  put ;  whe- 
ther they  were  used  as  forts,  camps,  cemeteries,  altars,  and  tem- 
ples ;  whereas  they  contained  all  these  either  within  their  walls,  or 
were  immediately  connected  with  them.  Many  persons  cannot 
imagine  why  the  works,  at  the  places  above  mentioned,  were  so  ex- 
tensively complicated,  differing  so  much  in  form,  size,  and  eleva- 
tion, among  themselves."  But  the  solution  is,  undoubtedly,  "  they 
contained  within  them,  altars,  temples  cemeteries,  habitations  of 
priests,  gardens,  wells,  fountains,  places  devoted  to  sacred  purposes, 
of  various  kinds,  and  the  whole  of  their  warlike  munitions,  laid 
up  in  arsenals.  These  works  were  calculated  for  defence,  and 
were  resorted  to  in  cases  of  the  last  necessity,  where  they  fought 
with  desperation.  We  are  warranted  in  this  conclusion,  by  know- 
ing that  these  works  are  exactly  similar  to  the  most  ancient  now  to 
be  seen  in  Mexico,  connected  with  the  fact,  that  the  Mexican 
works  did  contain  within  them«//  that  we  have  stated. 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


861 


GREAT  SIZE  OF  SOME  OF  THE  MEXICAN  MOUNDS. 

The  word  Teocalli,  Humboldt  says,  is  derived  from  the  name  of 
one  of  the  gods  to  which  they  were  dedicated,  Tezcatlipoca,  the 
Brahma  of  the  Mexicans.  The  pyramid  of  Cholula,  was  seated 
on  a  tumulus  with  four  stages,  and  was  dedicated  to  Quetzalcotl, 
one  the  mysterious  characters  that  appeared  among  the  ancient 
Mexicans,  said  to  have  been  a  white  and  bearded  man,  before  spo- 
ken of  in  this  work. 

The  Teocalli,  or  pyramid  of  Cholula,  is  sixty  rods  in  circumfe- 
rence, and  ten  rods  high.  In  the  vale  of  Mexico,  twenty-four  miles 
northeast  from  the  capital,  in  a  plain  that  bears  the  name  of  Mi- 
coatl,  or  the  path  of  the  dead,  is  a  group  of  pyramids,  of  several 
aundred  in  number,  generally  about  thirty  feet  high. 

In  the  midst  of  these  are  two  large  pyramids,  one  dedicated  to 
the  Sun,  the  other  to  the  Moon.  The  sun  pyramid  is  ten  rods  thir- 
teen feet  high,  and  its  length  nearly  thirty-five  rods,  and  of  a  pro- 
portionable thickness,  but  is  not  a  circle  ;  that  of  the  moon  is  eight 
rods  and  eleven  feet  in  perpendicular  height,  but  its  base  is  not 
specified  by  Humboldt ;  from  whose  Researches  in  South  America, 
we  have  derived  this  information. 

The  small  pyramids,  which  surrounded  the  two  dedicated  to  the 
sun  and  moon,  are  divided  by  spacious  streets,  runing  exactly  north 
and  south,  east  and  west,  intersecting  each  other  at  right  angles, 
forming  one  grand  palace  of  worship,  and  of  the  dead.  It  is  the 
tradition  of  the  Mexicans,  that  in  the  small  tumuli,  or  pyramids, 
were  buried  the  chiefs  of  their  tribes.  We  also  here  ascertain  that 
the  builders  of  these  two  vast  houses  of  the  sun  and  moon,  had  in- 
deed a  knowledge  of  the  cardinal  points  of  the  compass ;  for  this 
arrangement  could  never  have  taken  place  from  mere  chance,  it 
must  have  been  the  result  of  calculation,  with  the  north  star,  or 
pele,  in  view.  On  the  top  of  those  theocallis,  were  two  colossal 
statues  of  the  sun  and  moon,  made  of  stone,  and  covered  with 
plates  of  gold,  of  which  they  were  stripped  by  the  soldiers  of  Cor- 
tez.  Such  were  some  of  the  pyramids  of  Egypt,  with  colossal 
statues. 


208 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


This  tremendous  work  is  much  similar  to  one  found  in  Egypt7 
called  the  "  Cheops  and  the  Mycerinus;"  round  about  which  were 
eight  small  pyramids  ;  only  the  Egyptian  work  is  much  less  than 
the  Mexican  one,  yet  their  fashion  is  the  same. 


PREDILECTION  OF  THE  ANCIENTS  TO  PYRAMIDS. 

In  those  early  ages  of  mankind,  it  is  evident  there  existed  an  un- 
accountable ambition  among  the  nations,  seemingly  to  outdo  each 
other  in  the  height  of  their  pyramids ;  for  Humboldt  mentions  the 
pyramids  of  Porsenna,  as  related  by  Varro,  styled  the  most  learned 
of  the  Romans,  who  flourished  about  the  time  of  Christ ;  and  says 
there  were,  at  this  place,  four  pyramids,  eighty  meters  in  height, 
which  is  a  fraction  more  than  fifteen  rods  perpendicular  altitude  ; 
the  meter  is  a  French  measure,  consisting  of  3  feet  3  inches. 

Not  many  years  since  was  discovered,  by  some  Spanish  hunters, 
on  descending  the  Cordilleras,  towards  the  Gulf  Mexico,  in  the 
thick  forest,  the  pyramid  of  Papantla.  The  form  of  this  teocalli, 
or  pyramid  which  had  seven  stories,  is  more  tapering  than  any 
other  monument  of  this  kind,  yet  discovered,  but  its  height  is  not 
remarkable  ;  being  but  fifty-seven  feet,  its  base  but  twenty-five 
feet  on  each  side.  However,  it  is  remarkable  on  one  account ;  it 
is  built  entirely  of  hewn  stones,  of  an  extraordinary  size,  and  very 
beautifully  shaped.  Three  stair-cases  lead  to  its  top ;  the  steps  of 
which  were  decorated  with  hieroglyphical  sculpture  and  small 
niches,  arranged  with  great  symmetry.  The  number  of  these 
niches  seems  to  allude  to  the  three  hundred  and  eighteen  simple 
and  compound  signs  of  the  days  of  their  civil  calendar.  If  so,  this 
monument  was  erected  for  astronomical  purposes  ;  besides,  here  is 
evidence  of  the  use  of  metalic  tools  in  the  preparation  and  build- 
ing of  this  temple. 

In  those  mounds  were  sometimes  hidden  the  treasures  of  kings 
and  chiefs,  placed  there  in  tunes  of  war  and  danger.  Such  was 
found  to  be  the  fact  on  opening  the  tomb  of  a  Peruvian  prince, 
when  was  discovered  a  mass  of  pure  gold,  amounting  to  four  mil- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


269 


lions,  six  hundred  and  eighty-seven  thousand  five  hundred  dollars. 
— HumboldPs  Researches^  vol.  1  p.  92. 

The  pyramids  of  the  Ohio,  are,  in  several  instances,  built  in  the 
same  manner,  with  several  stages,  on  the  tops  of  which  were,  un- 
questionably, temples  of  wood,  in  the  day  of  their  glory,  when 
their  builders  swarmed  in  populous  ten  thousands,  over  all  the  un- 
bounded west ;  but  time  has  destroyed  all  fabrics  of  this  sort,  while 
the  mounds  on  which  they  stood,  in  giddy  grandeur,  remain,  but 
stripped  of  the  habiliments  of  architecture,  and  the  embellishments 
of  art. 

There  is,  in  South  America,  to  the  southeast  of  the  city  of  Cuer- 
nuvaea,  on  the  west  declivity  of  the  Cordillera  of  Anahuac,  an  iso- 
lated hill,  which,  together  with  the  pyramid,  raised  on  its  top  by 
the  ancients  of  that  country,  amounts  to  thirty-five  rods  ten  feet, 
in  perpendicular  height.  The  ancient  tower  of  Babel,  around 
which  the  city  Babylon  was  afterwards  built,  was  six  hundred  feet 
high,  which  is  but  thirty  feet  higher  than  the  hill  we  are  describ- 
ing ;  but  the  base  of  Babel  is  a  mere  nothing,  compared  with  the 
gigantic  work  of  Anahuac,  being  but  six  hundred  feet  square,  which 
is  one  hundred  and  fifty  rods,  or  nearly  so  ;  while  the  hill  in  South 
America,  partly  natural  and  partly  artificial,  is  at  its  base  12,006 
feet ;  this  thrown  into  rods,  gives  seven  hundred  and  fifty-four, 
and  into  miles,  is  two  and  a  quarter,  and  a  half  quarter,  wanting 
eight  rods,  which  is  five  times  greater  than  that  of  Babel. 

Th«  hill  of  Xochicalco  is  a  mass  of  rocks,  to  which  the  hand  of 
man  has  given  a  regular  conic  form,  and  which  is  divided  into  five 
stories  or  terraces,  each  of  which  is  covered  with  masonry.  These 
terraces  are  nearly  sixty  feet  in  perpendicular  height,  one  above 
the  other3  besides  the  artificial  mound  added  at  the  top,  making  its 
height  nearly  that  of  Babel ;  besides,  the  whole  is  surrounded  with 
a  deep  broad  ditch,  more  than  five  times  the  circumference  of  that 
Babylonian  tower. 

Humboldt  says,  we  ought  not  to  be  surprised  at  the  magnitude 
and  dimensions  of  this  work,  as  on  the  ridge  of  the  Cordilleras  of 
Peru,  and  on  the  other  heights,  almost  equal  to  that  of  Teueriffe, 
he  had  seen  monuments  still  more  considerable.  Also  in  Canada, 
he  had  seen  lines  of  defence,  and  entrenchments  of  extraordinary 
length,  the  work  of  some  people  belonging  to  the  early  ages  of 
time.    Those  in  Canada,  however,  we  imagine  to  be  of  the  Danish 


270 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


origin,  and  to  have  been  erected  in  the  9th.  10th,  and  Uth  centu- 
ries of  the  Christian  era,  for  reasons  hereafter  shown. 

If  then,  as  Humboldt  states,  there  were  found  on  the  plains  of 
Canada,  lines  of  defence  of  extraordinary  len?.h,  it  affords  an  argu- 
ment that  the  Norwegians  and  other  northern  nations,  may  not  only 
have  ruide  settlements  tbei^,  but  became  a  kingdom,  a  body  poli- 
tic and  military  and  waged  long  and  dreadful  wars  with  opposing 
powers,  who  were  unquestionably  the  Indians,  who  had  already 
driven  away  the  more  ancient  inhabitants  of  America,  the  authors 
of  the  western  works,  mounds  aud  tumuii.  But  respecting  the  tre- 
mendous monument  of  art,  found  by  the  hunters,  whicn  we  have 
described  above,  it  is  said  that  travellers,  who  have  attentively  ex- 
amined it,  were  struck  with  the  polish  and  cut  of  the  stones,  the 
care  with  which  they  have  been  arranged,  without  cement  between 
the  joints,  and  the  execution  of  the  sculpture,  with  which  the 
stones  are  decorated;  each  figuic:  occupying  several  stones,  and 
from  the  outlines  of  the  animals  which  they  represent,  not  being 
broken  by  the  joints  of  the  stones,  it  is  conjectured  the  engravings 
were  made  after  the  edifice  was  finished.  But  the  animals  and 
men  sculptured  on  the  stone  of  this  pyramid,  afford  a  strong  evi- 
dence of  the  country  from  which  the  ancestors  of  those  who  built 
it  came.  There  are  crocodiles  spouting  water,  and  men  sitting 
even  cross  legged,  according  to  the  custom  of  several  Asiatic  na- 
tions ;  finally,  the  whole  of  the  American  works,  of  the  most 
ancient  class,  from  Canada  to  the  extreme  parts  of  South  Ame- 
irca,  resemble  those  which  are  daily  discovered  in  the  eastern 
parts  of  Asia. 

From  the  deep  ditch,  with  which  the  greater  monument  we 
have  been  describing,  is  surrounded,  the  covering  of  the  terraces, 
the  great  number  of  subterranean  apartments,  cut  into  the  solid 
rock,  on  its  northern  side,  the  wall  that  defends  the  approach  to 
its  base, — it  is  believed  to  have  been  a  military  work  of  great 
strength. 

The  natives,  even  to  this  day,  designate  the  ruins  of  this  pyramid 
by  the  name  that  signifies  a  citadel  or  castle.  The  pyramid  of 
Mexitli,  found  in  another  part  of  Mexico,  called  the  great  temple 
of  Tenochtitlan,  contained  an  arsenal,  and  during  the  war  of  the 
Spaniards  with  the  devoted  Mexicans,  was  alternately  resorted  to 
as  a  fort  of  defence,  and  a  place  of  securitv 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


271 


Nothing,  of  the  warlike  character,  could  exceed  the  grandeur  of 
a  fight  maintained  from  the  base  to  the  summit  of  one  of  these  tre- 
mendous teocallis,  or  pyramids.  We  may  suppose  the  foe  already 
gathered  from  their  more  scattered  work  of  ruin,  and  circling,  with 
yells  of  fury,  the  immediate  precincts  of  the  mound,  while  the 
rushing  multitude  fly  from  their  burning  habitations,  toward  this 
last  resort.  The  goal  is  gained  ;  the  first  who  reach  it,  ascend 
to  its  top  ;  rank  after  rank  succeed,  till,  in  frightful  circles  of  fero- 
cious warriors,  the  whole  pyramid  is  but  one  living  mass  of  fury. 
Now  the  enemy  come  pouring  round  as  a  deluge,  and  begirt  this 
final  refuge  of  the  wailing  populace  ;  while  warrior  facing  warrior, 
each  moment  fells  its  thousands  by  the  noiseless  death  stab  of  the 
dirk  of  copper ;  while  from  the  ranks  above  the  silent,  but  venge- 
ful arrow  does  its  work  of  death.  Here,  from  the  strong  arm  and 
well  practised  sling,  stones,  with  furious  whizzing,  through  the  air, 
cover  in  showers  the  distant  squadron  with  dismay.  Circle  after 
circle,  at  the  base,  both  of  invader  and  invaded,  fall  together  in 
glorious  ruin.  Now  the  top  where  waved  such  siguals  of  defiance 
as  rude  nations  could  invent,  becomes  thinned  of  its  defenders; 
who,  pressing  downward,  as  the  lower  ranges  are  cut  in  pieces, 
renew  the  fight.  Now  the  farthest  circle  of  the  enemy  nears  the 
fatal  centre  ;  now  the  destinies  of  conflicting  nations  draw  nigh  ; 
those  of  the  pyramid  have  thrown  their  last  stone  ;  the  quiver  is 
emptied  of  its  arrows  ;  the  last  spear  of  flint  and  battle-axe,  have 
fled,  with  well-directed  aim,  amid  the  throng. 

Surrender,  captivity,  slavery,  and  death,  wind  up  the  account ; 
a  tribe  becomes  extinct,  whose  bones,  when  heaped  together, 
make  a  new  pyramid.  Such,  doubtless,  is  the  origin  of  many 
of  the  frightful  heaps  of  human  bones  found  scattered  over  all  the 
west. 

We  learn  from  Scripture,  that  in  the  earliest  times,  the  temples 
of  Asia — such  as  that  of  Baal-Berith,  at  Shechim,  in  Canaan — were 
not  only  buildings  consecrated  to  worship,  but  also  intrenchments, 
in  which  the  inhabitants  of  a  city  defended  themselves  in  times  of 
war.  The  same  may  be  said  of  the  Grecian  temples ;  for  the  wall 
which  formed  the  parabolis,  alone  afforded  an  assylum  to  the  be- 
sieged.— Humboldt. 

The  ancient  Carthegenians,  the  sworn  and  eternd  enemies  of 
the  Romans,  practised  raising  mounds  of  earth  over  their  glorious 


272 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


dead.  Hannibal,  their  famous  general,  who  for  a  while  so  success- 
fully combated  the  Roman  armies,  almost  in  sight  of  the  imperial 
city,  was  thus  honored. 

At  the  place  where  he  fell  by  his  own  hand,  having  poisoned 
himself  to  escape  the  scorn  of  his  victors,  was  raised  a  lofty  mound 
of  earth  over  his  remains,  exactly  like  the  one  which  marks  the 
place  where  sleeps  the  ashes  of  Achilles  on  the  plains  of  Troy. 

The  mound  of  Hannibal  was  erected  182  years  before  Christ, 
If  therefore,  the  Carthegenians,  the  Greeks,  the  Romans,  the  more 
ancient  Phoenicians,  the  Egyptians,  the  Jews,jtnd  all  the  first  na- 
tions immediately  succeeding  the  flood,  were  found  in  this  prac- 
tice ;  is  it  not  fairly  inferred,  that  branches  or  colonies  of  these 
same  nations  and  races  of  men,  were  also  the  authors  of  many 
of  the  mounds  of  America  found  scattered  over  its  mighty  re- 
gions. 

Clavigero,  who  was  well  acquainted  with  the  history  of  the 
Mexicans  and  Peruvians,  professes  to  point  out  the  places  from 
whence  they  emigrated,  several  places  they  stopped  at,  and  the 
times  which  they  continued  to  sojourn  there.  This,  we  under- 
stand, is  the  same  as  related  before  in  this  work,  written  by  Hum- 
boldt, and  describes  the  emigration  of  the  Azteca  tribes,  from 
Aztalan,  or  the  western  states,  to  Mexico,  which  commenced  to 
take  place  not  long  after  the  conquest  of  Judea  by  Titus.  Clavi- 
gero supposes  these  nations  of  Aztalan  came  from  Asia,  across  the 
Pacific,  from  the  region  along  the  coasts  of  the  Chinese  sea  and 
islands,  reaching  America  not  far  from  Bhering's  Straits,  and  from 
thence  followed  along  the  coast  of  the  Pacific,  till  they  came,  in 
process  of  time,  to  a  milder  climate. 

To  this  Mr.  Atwater  adds,  and  suppose  them  to  have  from 
thence  worked  across  the  continent,  as  well  as  in  other  direc- 
tions, as  far  as  the  regions  of  the  western  states  and  territories, 
where  they  may  have  lived  thousands  of  years,  as  their  works 
denote. 

Others  may  have  found  their  way  into  South  America,  by  cross- 
ing the  Pacific  and  Atlantic  at  different  times  and  places.  Green- 
landers  have  been  driven  upon  the  coast  of  Iceland,  which  is  a  dis- 
tance of  at  least  a  thousand  miles.  Thus  transported  by  winds, 
waves  and  stress  of  weather,  man  has  found  all  the  islands  of  all 
the  seas.    In  the  same  way  may  have  arriyed  persons  from  Africa, 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST.  273 

Europe, — Australasians,  Chinese,  Hindoos,  Japanese,  Birmaus, 
Kamsehadales,  and  Tartars,  on  the  coasts  of  America  in  the  first 
ages  after  the  flood. 


VOYAGES  AND  SHIPPING  OF  THE  MONGOL  TARTARS,  AND 
SETTLEMENTS  ON  THE  WESTERN  COAST  OF  AMERICA. 

The  whole  western  coast  of  the  American  continent,  from  oppo- 
site the  Japan  islands,  in  latitude  from  40  to  50  degrees  north,  down 
to  Patagonia,  in  latitude  40  south — a  distance  of  more  than  six 
thousand  miles — it  would  appear,  was  once  populous  with  such  na- 
tions as  peopled  the  Japan  islands,  and  the  eastern  shores  of  Asia, 
Chinese  Tartary,  China,  and  Farther  India ;  who  also  peopled  the 
islands  between,  with  thek  various  nations. 

A  cross  made  of  fine  marble,  beautifully  polished,  about  three 
feet  high,  and  three  ringers  in  width  and  thickness,  was  found  in 
an  Iudian  temple.  This,  it  appears,  wTas  kept  as  sacred,  in  a  pa- 
lace of  one  of  the  Incas,  and  held  in  great  veneration  by  the  na- 
tives of  South  America.  When  the  Spaniards  conquered  that 
country  they  enriched  this  cross  with  gold  jewels,  and  placed  it  in 
the  cathedral  of  Cuzco. 

But  how  came  this  emblem  of  Christianity  in  America  ?  There 
were  in  the  service  of  the  Mongols,  in  the  13th  century,  many 
Nestorians,  a  sect  of  Christians.  The  conqueror  of  the  king  of 
Eastern  Bengal,was  a  Christian,  which  was  in  1273,  A.  D. 

Under  this  king  a  part  of  an  expedition  was  sent  to  conquer  the 
islands  of  Japan,  in  large  Chinese  vessels,  and  supposed  to  have 
been  commanded  by  these  Christian  Nestorians,  as  officers  ;  being 
more  trust-worthy  and  more  expert  in  warlike  manouvres  than  the 
Mongol  natives.  This  expedition  by  some  means  found  their  way 
from  the  Japan  Islands,  (which  are  west  from  North  America,  in 
north  latitude  35  degrees,)  to  the  coast  of  America  in  the  same 
latitude,  and  landed  at  a  place  called  in  the  Mexican  language 
Culcaan,  opposite  New-California,  in  north  latitude  about  35 
degrees. 

35 


274 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


In  the  year  1273  A.  D.,  Kublai,  a  Mongol  emperor,  it  appears 
became  master  of  all  China.  At  that  time  they  were  in  the  pos- 
session of  the  knowledge  of  ship  building,  so  that  vessels  of 
enormous  size  were  constructed  by  them  ;  so  great  as  to  carry 
more  than  a  thousand  men ;  being  four  masted,  though  not  rig- 
ged as  vessels  now  are,  yet  well  adapted  to  take  advantage  of  the 
winds. 

They  were  so  solidly  and  conveniently  made,  as  to  carry  ele- 
phants on  their  decks.  The  Peruvians  had  a  tradition  that  many 
ages  before  their  conquest  by  the  Spaniards,  that  there  landed  on 
their  coast  at  St.  Helen's  Point,  vessels  manned  with  giants,  having 
no  beard  and  were  taller  from  their  knees  downward  than  a  man's 
head  ;  that  they  had  long  hair,  which  hung  loose  upon  their  shoul- 
ders, and  that  their  eyes  were  wide  apart,  and  very  big  in  other 
parts  of  their  bodies. 

This  description  is  supposed  descriptive  of  the  elephants  only, 
with  their  riders  blended  both  in  one  animal ;  as  they  did  in  after 
years,  when  the  Spaniards  rode  on  horses,  they  took  them  at  first 
to  be  all  one  animal. 

There  remains  not  a  doubt,  that  the  Mongol  Tartars  found  their 
way  from  China  to  the  west  of  America  in  shipping.  The  voyage 
is  not  so  great  as  to  render  it  impossible,  as  that  a  French  vessel  m 
the  year  1721  sailed  from  China,  and  arrived  at  a  place  called  Valle 
de  Nandras,  on  the  coast3  in  fifty  days. 

The  Phoenician  letters  were  known  among  the  Mongol  nations 
If,  therefore,  they  found  their  way  to  South  America,  we  at  once 
account  for  the  Phoenician  characters  found  in  caverns,  and  cut  in 
rocks  of  that  country. 

A  description  of  what  is  supposed  a  Chinese  Mongol  town,  to 
the  west,  in  latitude  39,  in  longitude  87,  called  by  themselves, 
when  first  visited  by  the  Spaniards  Taloimco,  is  exceedingly  curi- 
ous, and  situated  on  the  bank  of  a  river  running  into  the  Pacific 
from  the  territory  now  called  Oregon,  only  four  degrees  south  of 
Lake  Erie,  and  in  longitude  S7,  or  exactly  west  of  Ohio,  in  lati- 
tude 39. 

It  was  well  built,  and  contains  five  hundred  houses  ;  some  of 
which  are  large  and  show  well  at  a  distance.  It  was  situated  on 
the  banks  of  a  river.  Hernando  Soto  dined  with  a  cacique  named 
Guachaia,  and  was  entertained  with  as  much  civility  as  exists 


» 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST.  275 

sanong  polished  nations.  The  suit  of  servants  stood  in  a  row  with 
their  backs  against  the  wall.  This  is  an  eastern  fashion.  While 
the  cacique  was  at  dinner,  he  happened  to  sneeze,  on  which  the 
attendants  respectfully  bowed.  This  too  was  an  ancient  eastern 
usage.  After  the  repast  was  finished,  the  servants  all  dined  in 
another  hall.  The  meat  was  well  cooked,  the  fish  properly  roasted 
or  broiled. 

They  had  the  knowledge  of  dressing  furs  with  neatness,  and  deer 
skins  were  prepared  with  softness  and  delicacy,  with  which  they 
clothed  themselves. 

The  principal  pride  and  grandeur  of  this  people,  however,  con- 
sisted in  their  temple,  which  stood  in  the  town  of  Talomeco,  which 
was  also  the  sepulchre  of  their  caciques  or  chiefs. 

The  temple  Was  a  hundred  paces  long,  which  is  eighteen  rods, 
and  forty  wide,  which  is  seven  rods  and  eight  feet.  Its  doors  were 
wide  in  proportion  to  its  length.  The  roof  was  thatched  neatly 
with  split  twigs,  and  built  sloping  to  throw  off'  the  rain.  It  was 
thickly  decorated  with  different  sized  shells,  connected  together  in 
festoons,  which  shine  beautifully  in  the  sun. 

On  entering  the  temple,  there  are  twelve  wooden  statues  of  gi- 
gantic size,  with  menacing  and  savage  faces,  the  tallest  of  which 
was  eight  feet  high.  They  held  in  their  hands,  in  a  striking  pos- 
ture, clubs,  adorned  with  copper.  Some  have  copper  hatchets, 
edged  with  flint ;  others  had  bows  and  arrows,  and  some  held  long 
pikes,  pointed  with  copper. 

The  Spaniards  thought  these  statues  worthy  of  the  ancient 
Romans.  On  each  of  the  four  sides  of  the  temple,  there  was  two 
rows  of  statues,  the  size  of  life ;  the  upper  row  of  men  with  arms 
in  their  hands;  the  lower  row  of  women.  The  cornice  in  the 
temple  was  ornamented  with  large  shells  mingled  with  pearls,  and 
festoons. 

The  corpses  of  these  caciques  were  so  well  embalmed  that  there 
was  no  bad  smell ;  they  were  deposited  in  large  wooden  coffers, 
well  constructed,  and  placed  upon  benches  two  feet  from  the 
ground. 

In  smaller  coffers  and  in  baskets,  the  Spaniards  found  the  clothes 
of  the  deceased  men  and  women  ;  and  so  many  pearls,  that  they 
distributed  them  among  the  officers  and  soldiers  by  handfulls.  The 
prodigious  quantity  of  pearls  ;  the  heaps  of  colored  chamois  or  goat 


276 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


skins ;  clothes  of  marten  and  other  well  dressed  furs ;  the  thick, 
well  made  targets  of  twigs,  ornamented  with  pearls  ;  and  other 
things  found  in  this  temple  and  its  magazines,  which  consisted  of 
eight  halls  of  equal  magnitude,  made  even  the  Spaniards  who  had 
been  in  Peru,  admire  this  as  the  wonder  of  the  new  world. 

The  remains  of  cities  and  towns  of  an  ancient  population,  exists 
every  where  on  the  coast  of  the  Pacific,  which  agree  in  fashion 
with  the  works  and  ruins  found  along  the  Chinese  coasts,  exactly 
west  from  the  western  limits  of  North  America,  showing  beyond 
all  dispute,  that  in  ancient  times  the  countries  were  known  to  each 
other,  and  voyages  were  reciprocally  made. 

The  style  of  their  shipping  was  such  as  to  be  equal  to  voyages 
of  that  distance,  and  also  sufficient  to  withstand  stress  of  weather, 
even  beyond  vessels  of  the  present  times,  on  account  of  their  great 
depth  of  keel  and  size. 

"  The  Chinese  ships  have  a  single  deck,  below  the  space  of 
which  is  divided  into  a  great  number  of  cabins,  some  times  not 
less  than  sixty,  affording  accommodations  for  as  many  merchants, 
with  their  servants. 

They  have  a  good  helm,  some  of  the  larger  ships  have  besides 
the  cabin,  thirteen  bulk-heads,  or  divisions,  in  the  hold,  formed  of 
thick  planks  mortised  together.  The  object  of  this  is  to  guard 
against  springing  a  leak,  if  they  strike  on  a  rock,  or  should  be 
struck  by  a  whale,  which  not  unfrequently  occurs. 

By  this  plan,  if  an  accident  did  happen,  only  one  of  the  division 
could  be  effected  ;  the  whole  vessel  was  double  planked,  laid  over 
the  first  planking  ;  and  so  large  were  some  of  these  vessels  as  to 
require  a  crew  of  three  hundred  sailors  to  manage  them  when  at 
sea. — See  Marco  Polo,  Book  3d.,  chap.  1,  and  note  1128 — Rankin. 

In  the  year  A.  D.  1275,  the  Tartars,  under  their  general,  called 
Moko,  undertook  the  invasion  of  the  Japan  empire,  which  lies 
along  adjacent  to  China,  between  the  western  coast  of  North  Ame- 
rica and  China,  with  a  fleet  of  4000  sail,  having  on  board  two 
hundred  and  forty  thousand  men. 

But  the  expedition  proved  unsuccessful,  as  it  was  destroyed  by  a 
storm,  driven  and  scattered  about  the  Pacific  ocean. — Kcmpfer's 
History  of  Japan — Rankin. 

From  this  we  discover  the  perfect  ability  of  the  western  nations, 
that  is,  west  of  America,  to  explore  the  ocean,  as  suited  their  in- 


AND  DIS60VERIES  Iff  THE  WEST. 


277 


clinations,  in  the  earliest  ages ;  for  we  are  not  to  suppose  the  Tar- 
tars had  just  then,  in  1275,  come  to  a  knowledge  of  navigation, 
but  rather,  the  greatness  of  this  fleet  is  evidence,  that  the  art  had 
arrived  to  its  highest  state  of  perfection. 

But  had  they  a  knowledge  of  the  compass?  This  is  an  impor- 
tant enquiry.  On  this  subject  we  have  the  following  from  the  pen 
of  the  most  learned  antiquarian  of  the  age,  C.  S.  Rafinesque, 
whose  writings  we  haye  several  times  alluded  to  in  the  course  of 
this  work. 

This  author  says,  that  in  the  year  of  the  world  1200,  or  2800 
years  before  Christ,  or  450  years  before  the  flood,  the  magnetic 
needle  was  known  and  in  use,  and  that  under  the  Emperor  Hoang- 
ti,  which  was  about  130  years  nearer  the  time  of  the  flood,  reck- 
oning from  the  creation,  ships  began  to  be  invented.  He  even 
gives  the  names  of  two  ship  builders,  Kong-ku  and  Ho-ahu,  who, 
by  order  of  the  above  named  Emperor,  built  boats,  at  first  with 
hollow  trees,  and  furnished  them  with  oars,  and  were  sent  to  ex- 
plore places  where  no  man  had  ever  been. 

In  the  year  2037  before  Christ,  or  307  years  after  the  flood,  un- 
der the  Hia  dynasty,  embassies  were  sent  to  China  from  foreign 
countries,'  beyond  sea,  who  came  in  ships  to  pay  homage  to  the 
Hi  as,  or  Emperor. 

If  a  knowledge  of  the  magnet,  and  its  adaptation  to  navigation, 
was  known  before  the  flood,  as  appears  from  this  writer's  remarks, 
who  derives  this  discovery  from  a  perusal  of  the  Chinese  histories ; 
it  was,  of  necessity,  divulged  by  Noah  to  his  immediate  posterity, 
who  it  is  said,  went  soon  after  the  confusion  of  the  language  at 
Babel,  and  planted  a  colony  in  China,  or  in  that  eastern  country ; 
as  all  others  of  mankind  had  perished  in  the  flood,  consequently 
there  were  none  else  to  promulge  it  to  but  this  family. 

Dr.  Clarke  has  given  his  opinion  in  his  Comment  on  the  Book 
of  Job,  that  the  needle  was  known  to  the  ancients  of  the  east. 
He  derives  this  from  certain  expressions  of  Job,  28th  chap.  18th 
verse,  respecting  precious  stones,  which  are : — "  No  mention  shall 
be  made  of  coral  pearls  :  for  the  price  of  wisdom  is  above  rubies 
That  is,  it  is  understood,  that  the  wisdom  which  aided  man  to 
make  this  discovery,  and  to  apply  it  to  the  purposes  of  navigation, 
on  the  account  of  its  polarity,  is  that  wisdom  which  is  above  the 
price  of  rubies, 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


"  The  attractive  proprieties  of  loadstone  must  have  been  obser- 
ved I'rom  it3  first  discovery  ;  aud  there  is  every  reason  to  believe 
that  the  magnet  and  its  virtues,  were  known  in  the  cast  long  before 
they  were  discoverd  in  Europe." — Clarke. 

I>ut  it  may  be  inquired,  if  the  knowledge  of  the  magnet  and  it* 
application  to  the  great  purpose  of  navigation,  and  surveying  were 
understood  in  any  degree,  how  came  one  branch  of  the  descendants 
of  the  family  of  Noah,  those  who  went  east  from  Ararat,  to  have 
it ;  and  the  others,  who  went  in  other  directions,  to  be  ignorant  of 
it ;  and  had  to  discover  it  over  again  in  the  course  of  ages. 

We  can  answer  this,  only  by  noticing,  that  many  arts  of  the 
ancients  of  Europe  and  of  Africa  are  lost ;  but  how,  we  cannot 
tell ;  but  in  the  same  way  this  art  was  lost.  Wars,  convulsions, 
revolutions,  sweeping  diseases,  often  change  the  entire  face  and  state 
of  society ;  so  that  if  it  were  even  known  to  all  the  first  genera- 
tion, immediately  succeeding  the  flood,  a  second  generation  may 
have  lost  it,  not  dwelling  in  the  vicinity  of  great  waters  ;  having 
no  use  for  such  an  art,  would  of  necessity  loose  it,  which  remained 
lost  till  about  the  year  A.  D.  1300. 

In  the  year  1197,  before  Christ,  about  the  time  of  Job  ;  a  large 
colony  from  China,  under  the  Yu  dynasty  was  sent  to  Japan,  and 
other  western  islands,  who  drove  out  the  0;zi,  or  black  inhabitants, 
the  first  settlers  of  those  islands,  a  branch,  it  appears,  of  the  family 
of  Ham,  who  had  found  their  way  across  the  whole  continent 
of  Asia,  from  Ararat,  or  else  had,  by  sea,  coasted  along  from  the 
countries  of  the  equator,  their  natural  home,  to  those  beautiful 
islands. 

From  this  tract  of  early  settlement,  we  see  the  African,  as  he  is 
now  designated,  as  enterprising  in  the  colonizing  of  new  countries, 
as  they  were  in  the  study  of  Astronomy,  and  of  building,  and  the 
invention  of  letters,  at  the  time  the  Egyptians  first  merge  to  notice 
on  the  page  of  history.  And  if  the  Japan  islands,  a  part  of  the 
earth  as  far  from  Ararat,  the  great  starting  point  of  man  after  the 
Hood,  as  is  America,  and  much  farther,  was  found  settled  by  the 
black  race  of  Ham,  why  not  therefore  America. 

The  pure  negro  has  been  found  on  some  of  the  islands  between 
China  and  America  ;  which  would  seem  to  indicate  that  this  race 
of  people  have  preceeded  even  the  whites,  or  at  least  equalled 
them,  in  first  peopking  the  globe  after  the  deluge. 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


Hailnesque,  the  great  antiquarian,  says,  the  exact  time  when  the 
Chinese  first  discovered  or  reached  America,  is  not  given  in  their 
books,  but  it  was  known  to  them,  he  says,  and  to  the  Japanese, 
at  a  very  early  period,  and  called  by  them  Fa  Sham,  and  frequented 
for  trade. 

But  who  were  here  for  them  to  trade  with?  Our  answer  is; 
those  first  inhabitants,  the  white,  the  red  and  the  black,  the  sons 
of  the  sons  of  Noah,  Shem,  Ham  and  Japheth,  who  got  on  to  the 
continent  before  it  was  severed  from  Asia  and  Africa,  in  the  days 
of  Peleg,  one  or  two  hundred  years  after  the  flood  of  Noah. 


A  FURTHER  ACCOUNT  OF  WESTERN  DISCOVERIES, 

Six  miles  from  Lebanon,  on  the  Little  Miami,  above  the  moutii 
of  Todd's  Fork,  are  curious  remains  of  ancient  works.  The  form 
of  one  of  the  forts  is  trapezoidal  ;  the  walls  ore  of  earth,  and  gene- 
rally eight  or  ten  feet  high;  but  in  one  place,  where  it  crosses  the 
brow  of  the  hill  where  it  stands,  it  is  eighteen  feet  high.  The 
Little  Miami  passes  by  on  the  west,  on  the  north  are  deep  ravines, 
and  on  the  south  and  southeast  the  same  ravines  continue,  making 
it  a  positiou  of  great  strength.  The  area  of  the  whole  enclosure  is 
nearly  a  hundred  acres  ;  the  wall  has  numerous  angles,  retreating, 
salient  and  acute,  from  which  are  eighty  outlets  or  gateways. 

From  which  circumstance  we  learn  that  its  citizens  were  very 
great  in  number,  or  so  many  gateways  would  not  have  been  needed, 
Two  mounds  are  in  its  neighborhood,  from  which  walls  run  in  dif- 
ferent directions  to  the  adjoining  ravines.  Round  about  this  work 
are  the  traces  of  several  roads  ;  two  of  them  are  sixteen  feet  wide, 
elevated  about  three  feet  in  their  centre,  and  like  our  turnpikes. 

The  Sioux  country,  on  the  Wabispinekan,  St.  Peters,  and  Yel- 
low rivers,  abound  with  ancient  entrenchments,  mounds  and  forti- 
fications. Six  miles  from  St.  Louis  is  a  place  called  the  Valley  of 
Bones,  where  the  ground  is  promiscuously  strewed  with  human 
and  animal  bones;  some  of  the  latter  are  of  an  enormous  size, 


280 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


On  the  river  Huron,  thirty  miles  from  Detroit,  and  about  eight 
miles  from  Lake  St.  Clair,  are  a  number  of  small  mounds,  situated 
on  a  dry  plain  or  bluff  of  the  river.  Sixteen  baskets  full  of  human 
bones,  of  a  remarkable  size,  were  discovered  in  the  earth,  while 
sinking  a  cellar  on  this  plain  for  the  missionary.  Near  the  mouth 
of  this  river,  (Huron,)  on  the  east  bank,  are  ancient  works,  repre- 
senting a  fortress,  with  walls  of  earth,  thrown  up  similar  to  those  of 
Indiana  and  Ohio. 

At  Belle  Fontaine,  or  SpriDg  Wells,  three  miles  below  Detroit 
are  three  mounds,  or  tumuli,  standing  in  a  direct  line,  about  ten 
rods  apart.  One  of  these  having  been  opened,  bones,  stone  axes, 
and  arrow  heads  were  found  in  abundance.  Within  the  distance 
of  a  quarter  of  a  mile  of  these,  are  still  to  be  seen  the  remains  of 
ancient  fortifications,  a  breast  work,  in  some  places  three  and  four 
feet  high,  enclosing  several  acres  of  firm  ground,  in  the  centre  of  ai 
extensive  swamp. 

"In  the  state  of  Indiana,  Franklin  county,  near  Harrisonville, 
on  the  Whitewater  river,  eight  miles  from  its  mouth,  on  the  north 
side,  the  traces  of  an  ancient  population  literally  strew  the  earth  in 
every  direction.  On  the  bottoms  or  flats  are  a  great  nnmber  of 
meunds,  very  unequal  in  size.  The  small  ones  are  from  two  to 
four  feet  above  the  surface,  and  the  growth  of  timber  upon  them 
small,  not  being  over  an  hundred  years  old,  while  the  others  are 
from  ten  to  thirty  feet  high,  with  trees  growing  on  them  of  the  lar- 
gest and  most  aged  description." — Brown* s  Western  Gazetteer. 

Mr.  Brown,  the  author  of  the  Western  Gazetteer,  from  whose 
work  we  extract  the  following,  says  he  obtained  the  assistance  of 
the  inhabitants  for  the  purpose  of  making  a  thorough  examination 
of  the  internal  structure  of  these  mounds.  He  examined  from  fif- 
teen to  twenty  of  them,  and  found  them  all  except  one  to  have 
human  bones  in ;  some  filled  with  hundreds,  of  all  ages,  thrown 
promiscuously  together,  into  great  heaps.  He  found  several  sculls 
leg  and  thigh  bones,  which  plainly  shows  that  their  possessors  were 
persons  of  gigantic  stature. 

The  teeth  of  all  the  subjects  he  examined  were  remarkably  even, 
and  sound,  handsomely  and  firmly  planted.  The  fore  teeth  were 
very  deep,  and  not  so  wide  as  those  of  the  generality  of  white  peo- 
ple.   He  discovered  in  one  mound,  an  article  of  glass,  in  form  re- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


281 


ambling  the  bottom  of  a  tumbler,  weighing  five  ounces ;  it  was 
concave  on  both  of  its  sides. 

It  is  true,  that  although  glass  is  said  not  to  have  been  found  out 
till  644  of  the  Christian  era,  yet  it  was  known  to  the  ancient  Ro- 
mans, but  was  considered  an  article  of  too  great  value  to  be  in  com- 
mon use.  That  the  Romans  were  actually  in  possession  of  this 
knowledge,  we  learn  from  the  discoveries  made  in  the  disinterred 
cities  of  the  ancient  Romans,  Pompeii  and  Herculaneum,  buried 
by  the  volcanic  eruption  of  Mount  Vesuvius.  Among  the  vast  dis- 
coveries of  temples,  dwellings,  streets,  gardens,  paintings,  sculp- 
tures, skeletons,  with  treasures  of  gold,  has  been  found  one  bow 
window,  lighted  with  glass  of  a  green  tinge  or  colour.  The  disco- 
very of  this  article  of  glass  in  the  tumuli,  is  a  proof  of  its  being  of 
European  manufacture,  and  probably  of  the  Roman,  brought  by  its 
owner  as  a  valuable  jewel  in  those  early  times. 

In  this  mound  were  found  several  stone  axes,  such  as  are  shown 
on  the  plate,  with  grooves  near  the  heads  to  receive  a  withe,  which 
unquestionably  served  to  fasten  the  helve  on,  and  several  pieces  of 
earthen  ware.  Some  appeared  to  be  parts  of  vessels,  once  holding 
six  or  eight  gallons  ;  others  were  obviously  fragments  of  jugs,  jars, 
and  cups.  Some  were  plain,  while  others  were  curiously  orna- 
mented with  figures  of  birds  and  beasts,  drawn  while  the  clay,  or 
material  of  which  they  were  made,  was  soft,  before  the  process  of 
glazing  was  performed.  The  glazier's  art  appears  to  have  been 
well  understood  by  the  potters  who  manufactured  this  aboriginal 
crockery.  One  of  the  skulls  taken  out  of  a  mound  at  this  place, 
was  found  pierced  with  a  flint  arrow,  which  was  still  sticking  in 
the  bone  ;  it  was  about  six  inches  long. 

At  the  bottom  of  all  the  mounds  he  examined  there  was  found  a 
stratum  of  ashes,  from  six  inches  to  two  feet  thick,  which  rests  on 
the  original  soil.  These  ashes  contain  coals,  fragments  of  brands, 
and  pieces  of  calcined  or  burnt  human  bones.  It  is  somewhat  sin- 
gular to  find  that  these  people  both  buried  and  burnt  their  dead  ; 
yet  it  may  be  that  such  as  were  burnt  were  prisoners  of  war,  who 
being  bound  and  laid  in  heaps,  were  thus  reduced  to  ashes,  by 
heaping  over  them  brush  and  dry  wood. 

Near  this  place,  ( Harrison ville,)  on  the  neighboring  hills  north- 
east of  the  town,  are  a  number  of  the  remains  of  stone  houses. 
They  were  covered  with  soil,  brush,  and  full  grown  trees.  Mr. 

36 


282 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


Brown  cleared  away  the  earth,  roots  and  rubbish  from  one  of  them, 
and  found  it  to  have  been  anciently  occupied  as  a  dwelling.  It 
was  about  twelve  feet  square.  The  walls  had  fallen  nearly  to  the 
foundation,  having  been  built  with  the  rough  stone  of  nature,  like 
a  stone  wall.  At  one  end  of  the  building  was  a  regular  hearth,  on 
which  was  yet  the  ashes  and  coals  of  the  last  fire  its  owners  had 
enjoyed  ;  before  which  were  found  the  decayed  skeletons  of  eight 
persons,  of  different  ages,  from  a  small  child  to  the  heads  of  the 
family.  Their  feet  were  found  pointing  towards  the  hearth :  and 
they  were  probably  murdered  while  asleep. 

From  the  circumstance  of  the  kind  of  house  these  people  lived 
in,  (which  is  the  evidence  of  their  not  belonging  to  the  mound  in- 
habitants,) we  should  pronounce  them  to  be  a  settlement  of  Welch, 
Scandinavians  or  Scotch,  who  had  thus  wandered  to  the  west, 
from  the  first  settlements  made  along  the  Atlantic,  and  were  ex- 
terminated by  the  common  Indians,  who  had  also  destroyed  or 
driven  away  the  authors  of  the  mounds,  many  hundred  years  be- 
fore these  Europeans  came  to  this  country. 


VARIOUS  OPINIONS  OF  ANTIQUARIANS  RESPECTING  THE 
ORIGINAL  INHABITANTS  OF  AMERICA. 

But  we  hasten  to  a  conclusion  of  this  work,  by  furnishing  the 
reader  with  the  opinions  of  several  antiquarians,  who  stand  high  in 
the  estimation  of  the  lovers  of  research ;  and  among  these  is  the 
late  celebrated  Dr.  Samuel  L.  Mitchell,  Professor  of  Natural  His- 
tory. And  as  we  have  not  room  to  give  at  length  all  that  these 
gentlemen  have  published  on  this  subject,  we  shall  only  avail  our- 
selves of  extracts,  such  as  will  show  their  final  judgment  as  to 
what  nations  or  races  of  men  they  were  who  built  the  works  of 
which  we  have  given  an  account. 

In  the  following  we  have,  in  extract,  the  remarks  and  opinions 
of  Dr.  Mitchell  in  his  communication  to  the  American  Antiquarian 
society,  of  which  he  was  a  member,  1815,  as  follows  : 

"  I  offer  you  some  observations  on  a  curious  piece  of  American 
antiquity,  now  in  New- York-    It  is  a  human  body  found  in  one 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


283 


of  the  limestone  caverns  of  Kentucky.  It  is  a  perfect  exsiccation  ; 
all  the  fluids  are  dried  up.  The  skin,  bones,  and  other  firm  parts 
are  in  a  state  of  entire  preservation. 

"  In  exploring  a  calcareous  chamber,  in  the  neighborhood  of 
Glasgow,  in  the  west,  for  saltpetre,  several  human  bodies  were 
found,  enwrapped  carefully  in  skins  and  cloths.  The  outer  en- 
velope of  the  body  is  a  deer  skin,  dried  in  the  usual  way,  and  per- 
haps softened  before  its  application  by  rubbing.  The  next  cover- 
ing is  a  deer  skin,  the  hair  of  which  had  been  cut  away  by  a  sharp 
instrument,  resembling  a  hatter's  knife.  The  remnant  of  the  hair, 
and  the  gashes  in  the  skin,  nearly  resemble  a  sheared  pelt  of  hea- 
ve*. The  next  wrapper  is  of  cloth,  made  of  twine,  doubled  and 
twisted ;  but  the  threads  do  not  appear  to  have  been  formed  by 
the  wheel,  nc*  the  web  by  the  loom.  The  warp  and  filling  seem 
to  have  been  crossed  and  knotted  by  an  operation  like  that  of  the 
fabrics  of  the  northwest  coast,  and  of  the  Sandwich  islands.  The 
innermost  tegument  is  a  mantle  of  cloth  like  the  preceding,  but  is 
furnished  with  large  brown  feathers,  arranged  and  fashioned  with 
great  art,  so  as  to  be  capable  of  guarding  the  living  wearer  from  wet 
and  cold.  The  plumage  is  distinct  and  entire,  and  the  whole 
bears  a  near  similitude  to  the  feathery  cloaks  now  worn  by  the  na- 
tions of  the  northwest  coast  of  America. 

,c  The  body  is  in  a  squatting  posture,  with  the  right  arm  reclining 
forward,  and  its  hand  encircling  the  right  leg.  The  left  arm 
hangs  down  by  its  side.  The  individual  was  a  male,  supposed  to 
be  not  more  than  fourteen  at  its  death.  There  is  a  deep  and  ex- 
tensive fracture  of  the  scull  near  the  occiput,  which  probably  killed 
him.  The  skin  has  sustained  but  little  injury,  and  is  of  a  dusky 
colour,  but  the  natural  hue  cannot  be  decided  with  exactness  from 
its  present  appearance.  The  scalp,  with  small  exceptions,  is  cov- 
ered with  reddish  hair.  The  teeth  are  white  and  sound.  The 
hands  and  feet,  in  their  shrivelled  state,  are  slender  and  delicate. 

"  It  may  now,"  adds  Dr.  Mitchell,  "  be  expected  that  I  should 
offer  some  opinion  as  to  the  antiquity  and  race  of  this  singular  ex- 
siccation. First,  then,  I  am  satisfied  that  it  does  not  belong  to  the 
class  of  white  men  of  which  we  are  members.  Nor  do  I  believe 
that  it  ought  to  be  referred  to  the  bands  of  Spanish  adventurers, 
who,  between  the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  centuries  rambled  up  the 
Mississippi,  and  along  the  tributary  streams.    I  am  equally  obliged 


264 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


to  reject  the  opinion  that  it  belougcd  to  any  of  the  tribes  of  abo- 
rigines now  or  lately  inhabiting  Kentucky.  The  mantle  of  fea- 
thered work  and  the  mantle  of  twisted  threads,  so  nearly  resemble 
the  fabrics  of  the  natives  of  Wakasb,  and  the  Pacific  islands,  that  I 
refer  this  individual  to  that  era  of  time,  and  that  generation  of  men 
which  preceded  the  Indians  of  Green  River,  and  of  the  place 
where  these  relics  weFe  found." 

In  another  letter  to  the  Society,  of  a  later  date,  he  requests  the 
preservation  of  certain  papers,  "  as  worthy  of  being  recorded  in  its 
archives,  showing  the  progress  of  his  mind  in  coming  to  the  great 
conclusion  that  the  three  races,  Malays,  Tartars  and  Scandinavians, 
contributed  to  make  up  the  great  American  population,"  who  were 
the  authors  of  the  various  works  and  antiquities  found  on  the  con- 
tinent.— Am.  Antiquarian,  p.  315. 

The  fabrics  accompanying  the  Kentucky  bodies,  resemble,  very 
nearly,  those  which  encircled  the  mummies  of  Tennessee.  On 
comparing  the  two  sets  of  samples,  they  were  ascertained  to  be  as 
much  alike  as  two  pieces  of  goods  of  the  same  kind,  made  at  dif- 
ferent factories  of  this  country. 

Other  antiquities  of  the  same  class  have  come  to  light;  speci- 
mens of  cloths,  and  some  of  the  raw  materials,  all  dug  out  of  that 
unparalleled  natural  excavation,  the  Kentucky  cavern,  which  is 
found  to  extend  many  miles,  in  different  directions,  very  deep  in 
the  earth ;  has  many  vast  rooms,  one  in  particular  of  1800  feet  in 
circumference,  and  150  in  height.  For  a  very  grand  description 
of  this  cave,  see  Blake's  Atlas,  1826,  published  at  New-York,  for 
subscribers. 

The  articles  found  in  this  cave  were  sent  to  Dr.  Mitchell,  of 
the  city  of  New- York,  which  were  accompanied  with  the  following 
note  : 

"  There  will  be  found  in  this  bundle  two  moccasins,  in  the  same 
state  they  were  when  dug  out  of  the  Mammoth  cave,  about  two 
hundred  yards  within  its  mouth.  Upon  examination  it  will  be 
perceived  that  they  are  fabricated  out  of  different  materials ;  one  is 
supposed  to  be  made  of  a  species  of  flag  or  lily,  which  grows  in 
the  southern  parts  of  Kentucky  ;  the  other  of  the  bark  of  some 
tree,  probably  the  pappaw.  There  is  a  part  of  what  i^  supposed  to 
be  a  kinniconecke,  or  pouch,  two  meshes  of  a  fishing  net,  and  a 
piece  of  what  is  supposed  to  be  the  raw  material,  and  of  which  the 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


285 


fishing  net,  pouch  and  moccasins  were  made.  Also,  a  bowl,  or 
cup,  containing  about  a  pint,  cut  out  of  wood,  found  also  in  the 
cave:  and,  lately,  there  has  been  dug  out  of  it  the  skeleton  of  a 
human  body,  enveloped  in  a  matting  similar  to  that  of  the  pouch. 
This  matting  is  substantially  like  those  of  the  plain  fabric,  taken 
from  the  copperas  cave  of  Tennessee,  and  the  saltpetrous  cavern 
near  Glasgow,  in  Kentucky." 

And  what  is  highly  remarkable,  and  worthy  the  attention  of  an- 
tiquarians is,  that  they  all  have  a  perfect  resemblance  to  the  fabrics 
of  the  Sandwich,  Caroline  and  the  Fegee  islands,  in  the  Pacific. 
We  know  the  similitude  of  the  manufactured  articles  from  the  fol- 
lowing circumstance.  After  the  termination  of  the  war  in  the  isl- 
and of  Toconroba,  wherein  certain  citizens  of  the  United  States 
were  engaged  as  principals  or  allies,  many  articles  of  Fegee  manu- 
facture were  brought  to  New- York  by  the  victors.  Some  of  them 
agree  almost  exactly  with  the  fabrics  discovered  in  Kentucky  and 
Tennessee.  They  bear  a  strict  comparison,  the  marks  of  a  similar 
state  of  the  arts,  and  point  strongly  to  a  sameness  of  origiQ  in  the 
respective  people  that  prepared  them.  Notwithstanding  the  dis- 
tance of  their  several  residences,  at  the  present  time,  it  is  impossi- 
ble not  to  look  back  to  the  common  ancestry  of  the  Malays,  who 
formerly  possessed  the  country  between  the  Allegany  mountains 
and  the  Mississippi  river,  and  those  who  now  iuhabit  the  islands 
of  the  Pacific  ocean. 

All  these  considerations  lead  to  the  belief  that  colonies  of  Aus- 
tralasians, or  Malays,  landed  in  North  America,  and  penetrated 
across  the  continent,  in  process  of  time,  to  the  region  lying  between 
the  great  lakes  and  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  There  they  resided,  and 
constructed  the  fortifications,  mounds,  and  other  ancient  structures 
which  are  the  wonder  of  all  who  have  seen  them. 

What  has  become  of  them  ?  They  have  probably  been  over- 
come by  the  more  warlike  and  ferocious  hordes  that  entered  our 
hemisphere  from  the  northeast  of  Asia.  These  Tartars  of  the 
higher  latitudes  have  issued  from  the  great  hive  of  nations,  and 
desolated,  in  the  course  of  their  migrations,  the  southern  tribes  of 
America,  as  they  have  done  to  those  of  Asia  and  Europe.  The 
greater  part  of  the  present  i\merican  natives  are  of  the  Tartar  slock, 
the  descendants  of  the  hardy  warriors  who  destroyed  the  weaker 
Malays  that  preceded  them.    An  individual  of  their  exterminated 


2Sfi 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


race  now  and  then  rises  from  the  tomb,  by  which  their  identity  of 
origin  is  ascertained. 

If  the  position  is  correct,  that  the  Australasians,  Polynesians  and 
the  Malays,  who  are  all  the  same  as  to  origin,  peopled  a  part  of 
North  America,  but  were  driven  away  towards  the  south,  by  the 
northern  Tartars,  we  learn  from  whence  the  Azteca  Indians,  who 
subdued  the  native  Mexicans,  derived  their  ferocity  and  treachery 
of  character  ; — for  such  are  the  people  who  now  inhabit  those 
islands. 

The  following  is  the  character  Morse  the  geographer  has  given 
them  : — "  They  are  restless,  fond  of  navigation,  war,  plunder,  emi- 
grations, colonizing,  desperate  enterprizes,  adventures  and  gallant- 
ry. They  talk  incessantly  of  their  honor  and  their  bravery,  whilst 
they  are  universally  considered,  by  those  with  whom  they  have 
intercourse,  as  the  most  treacherous,  ferocious  people  on  the  globe  ; 
and  yet  they  speak  the  softest  language  of  Asia." — Universal  Ge- 
ography, p.  546. 

In  a  communication  of  Samuel  L.  Mitchell  to  De  Witt  Clinton, 
1826,  he  remarks,  that  "  the  parallel  between  the  people  of  Ame- 
rica and  Asia  affords  this  important  conclusion ;  that  on  both  con- 
tinents the  hordes  dwelling  in  higher  latitudes  have  overpowered 
the  more  civilized  though  feebler  inhabitants  of  the  countries  situ- 
ated towards  the  equator." 

As  the  Tartars  have  overrun  China,  so  the  Aztecas  subdued 
Mexico ;  as  the  Huns  and  Alans  desolated  Italy,  so  the  Chippe- 
was  and  Iroquois  prostrated  the  populous  settlements  on  both  banks 
of  the  Ohio.  The  surviving  race,  in  these  terrible  conflicts  be- 
tween the  different  nations  of  the  ancient  native  residents  of  North 
America,  is  evidently  that  of  the  Tartars.  The  opinion  is  founded 
upon  four  considerations. 

1st.  The  similarity  of  physiognomy  and  features.  His  excellency 
M.  Genet,  sometime  minister  plenipotentiary  from  France  to  the 
United  States,  is  well  acquainted  with  the  faces,  hues  and  figures 
of  our  Indians,  and  of  the  Asiatic  Tartars,  and  is  perfectly  satis- 
tied  of  their  national  resemblance. 

Mons.  Cazeaux,  consul  of  France  to  New- York,  has  drawn  the 
same  conclusion,  from  a  careful  examination  of  the  man  of  North 
America  and  Northern  Asia. 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


287 


M.  Smibert,  who  had  been  employed  in  executing  paintings  of 
Tartar  visages  for  the  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany,  was  so  struck  with 
the  similarity  of  their  features  to  those  of  the  Narragansett  Indians, 
that  he  pronounced  them  members  of  the  same  great  family  of  man- 
kind. This  opinion  of  the  Grand  Duke's  portrait  painter,  is  pre- 
served, with  all  its  circumstances,  in  the  fourteenth  volume  of  the 
Medical  Repository. 

I  have  examined  with  the  utmost  care  seven  or  eight  Chinese 
sailors,  who  had  assisted  in  navigating  a  ship  from  Macao  to  New- 
York.  The  thinness  of  their  beards,  the  bay  complexion,  the 
black  lank  hair,  the  aspect  of  the  eyes,  the  contour  of  the  face,  and 
in  short  the  general  external  character,  induced  every  person  who 
observed  them  to  remark  how  nearly  they  resemble  the  Mohegans 
and  Oneidas  of  New- York. 

Sidi  Mellimelli,  the  Tunisian  envoy  to  the  United  States  in 
1804,  entertained  the  same  opinion  on  beholding  the  Cherokees, 
Osages  and  Miamis,  assembled  at  the  city  of  Washington,  during 
his  residence  there.  Their  Tartar  physiognomy  struck  him  in  a 
moment. 

2d.  The  affinity  of  their  languages.  The  late  learned  and  enter- 
prising Professor  Barton  took  the  lead  in  this  inquiry.  He  collect- 
ed as  many  words  as  he  could  from  the  languages  spoken  in  Asia 
and  America,  and  concluded,  from  the  numerous  coincidences  of 
sound  and  signification,  that  there  must  have  been  a  common  origin. 

3d.  The  existence  of  corresponding  customs.  I  mean  to  state,  at 
present,  that  of  shaving  away  the  hair  of  the  scalp  from  the  fore 
part  and  sides  of  the  head,  so  that  nothing  is  left  but  a  tuft  on  the 
crown. 

The  custom  of  smoking  the  pipe  on  solemn  occasions,  to  the  four 
cardinal  points  of  the  compass,  to  the  heavens  and  to  the  earth,  is 
reported,  upon  the  most  credible  authority,  to  distinguish  equallv 
the  hordes  of  the  Asiatic  Tartars,  and  the  bands  of  the  American 
Sioux,  the  most  dreadful  warriors  of  the  west. 

4th.  The  kindred  nature  of  the  Indian  dogs  of  America  and  the 
Siberian  dogs  of  Asia.  The  animal  that  lives  with  the  natives  of 
the  two  continents  as  a  dog,  is  very  different  from  the  tame  creature 
of  the  same  name  in  Europe  and  America.  He  is  either  a  different 
species,  or  a  wide  variety  of  the  same  species.  But  the  identity 
of  the  American  and  Asiatic  curs  is  evinced  by  several  considera- 


288 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


tions.  Both  are  mostly  white;  they  have  shaggy  coats,  sharp  Lo- 
ses, and  erect  ears.  They  are  voracious,  thievish,  and,  to  a  con- 
sideiabie  degree  untameable.  They  steal  wherever  they  can,  and 
sometimes  turn  against  their  masters.  They  are  prone  to  snarl 
and  grin,  and  they  have  a  howl  instead  of  barking. 

They  are  employed  in  both  hemispheres  for  labor;  such  as  car- 
rying burdens,  drawing  sledges  over  the  snow,  and  the  like  ;  being 
yoked  and  harnessed  for  the  purpose  like  horses.  This  coinci- 
dence of  our  Indian  with  the  Canis  Siberiais,  is  a  very  important 
fact.  The  dog,  the  companion,  the  friend,  or  slave  of  man,  in  all 
his  fortunes  and  migrations,  reflects  great  light  on  this  subject,  and 
the  history  of  nations,  and  their  genealogy. 

"  In  addition  to  the  considerations  already  stated  in  favor  of  this 
opinion,  may  be  urged  the  more  recent  discoveries  concerning  the 
quadrupeds  which  inhabit  the  respective  countries.  There  is  con- 
clusive evidence,  for  example,  that  the  wild  sheep  of  Louisiana  and 
California  is  the  Tartarian  animal  of  the  same  name.  Yes,  the 
taije-taye  of  Northwestern  America  is  an  animal  of  the  same  spe- 
cies with  the  argali  of  Northern  Asia.  Our  mountain  ram,  or  big 
horn,  is  their  ovisammon." — Am.  Antq.  Soc.  p.  333. 

But  we  remark,  this  opinion  of  the  learned  antiquarian,  Professor 
Mitchell,  by  no  means  lessens  the  probability,  as  is  contended  by 
many  learned  men,  and  also  is  the  popular  belief,  that  notwith- 
standing this  Tartar  physiognomy  of  our  Indians,  that  they  are,  in 
part,  but  in  a  mixed  relation,  descended  of  the  Jews;  or  in  other 
words,  a  part  of  the  ten  lost  tribes  of  Israel ;  and  do  in  reality,  in 
many  things,  imitate  the  worship  of  the  ancient  Israelites.  Hav- 
ing taught  the  same  to  the  Tartars,  after  they  left  Syria,  in  mass, 
as  is  related  by  Esdras,  in  his  second  book,  chapter  thirteen,  from 
verse  seven  to  forty-seven  inclusive.  See  also  p.  55  of  this  work, 
and  onward. 

But  we  resume  the  remarks  of  Professor  Mitchell  to  Governor 
Clinton,  in  reference  to  the  authors  of  the  works  in  the  west. 

"  The  exterminated  race,  in  the  savage  intercourse  between  the 
nations  of  North  America,  in  ancient  days,  appears  clearly  to  have 
been  that  of  the  Malays.  The  bodies  and  afcrouds  and  clothing  of 
those  individuals  have,  within  a  few  years,  been  discovered  in  the 
caverns  of  saltpetre  and  copperas,  within  the  States  of  Kentucky 
and  Tennessee.    Their  entire  dried  or  exsiccated  condition,  ha* 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


led  intelligent  gentlemen,  who  have  seen  them,  to  call  them  mum- 

They  are  some  of  the  most  memorable  of  the  antiquities  that 
North  America  contains.  The  race,  or  nation,  to  which  they  be- 
longed is  extinct ;  but  in  preceding  ages,  occupied  the  region  situ- 
ated between  Lakes  Ontario  and  Erie,  on  the  north,  and  of  Mexi- 
co on  the  south,  and  bounded  eastwardly  by  the  Alleghany  moun- 
tains, and  westwardly  by  the  Mississippi  River. 

1  hat  they  were  similar  in  their  origin  and  character,  to  the  pre- 
sent inhabitants  of  the  Pacific  islands,  and  of  Australasia,  is  argued 
from  various  circumstances.  1st:  Th>*  sameness  of  texture  in  the 
plain  cloth  or  matting  that  enwraps  the  mummies,  and  that  which 
our  navigators  bring  from  Wakash,  the  Sandwich  islands,  and  the 
Fegees.  2d:  The  close  resemblance  there  is  between  the  feathery 
mantles  brought,  now-a-days,  from  the  islands  of  the  South  Sea, 
and  those  wrappers  which  surround  the  mummies  lately  disinterred 
in  the  western  states.  The  plumes  of  birds  are  twisted  or  tied  to 
threads,  with  peculiar  skill,  and  turn  water  like  the  back  of  a  duck. 
3d  :  Meshes  of  net  regularly  knotted  and  tied,  and  formed  of  a 
strong  and  even  twine.  4th:  Moccasins,  or  coverings  of  the  feet, 
manufactured  with  remarkable  ability,  from  the  bark  or  rind  of 
plates,  worked  into  a  sort  of  stout  matting.  5th  :  Pieces  of  antique 
sculpture,  especially  of  human  heads,  and  of  some  other  forms, 
found  where  the  exterminated  tribes  had  dwelt,  resembling 
the  carving  at  Otaheite,  New-Zealand,  and  other  places.  6th  : 
Works  of  defence  er  fortifications,  overspreading  the  fertile  tract  of 
country,  formerly  possessed  by  these  people,  who  may  be  supposed 
capable  of  building  works  of  much  greater  magnitude  than  the 
morais,  or  burial  places,  and  the  hippas,  or  fighting  stages,  of  the 
Society  Islands.  7th  :  As  far  as  observation  has  gone,  a  belief, 
that  the  shape  of  the  skull,  and  the  angle  of  the  face,  in  the  mum- 
mies, (found  in  the  west,)  correspond  with  those  of  the  living 
Malays. 

I  reject,  therefore,  the  doctrine  taught  by  the  European  natural- 
ists, that  the  man  of  western  America  differs,  in  any  material  point 
from  the  man  of  eastern  Asia.  Had  the  Robertsons,  the  BufTons, 
the  Raynals,  the  De  Pauwys,  and  the  other  speculators  upon  the 
American  character,  and  the  vilifiers  of  the  American  name,  pro- 
cured the  requisite  information  concerning  the  hemisphere  situated 

37 


290 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


west  of  us,  they  would  have  discovered  that  the  inhabitants  of  vast 
regions  of  Asia,  to  the  number  of  many  millions,  were  of  the  same 
blood  and  lineage  with  the  millions  of  America,  whom  they  affect 
to  undervalue  and  despise. 

But  notwithstanding  the  celebrity,  founded  on  the  great  erudi- 
tion and  critical  research  of  Professor  Mitchell,  we  cannot  subscribe 
to  this  opinion  respecting  the  red-headed  mummy  now  in  the  New- 
York  Museum,  found  in  a  saltpetre  cave  in  Kentucky.  It  is  a  well 
known  fact,  that  invariably  all  the  nations  of  the  earth,  who  are  of 
the  swarthy  or  black  complexion,  have  black  eyes,  together  with 
black  hair,  either  straight  or  curled. 

But  those  nations  belonging  to  the  white  class,  have  a  great  va- 
riety of  colour  in  their  eyes ;  as  blue,  light  blue,  dark  blue,  gray, 
black,  and  reddish,  with  many  shades  of  variations,  more  than  we 
have  terms  to  express.  Where  this  is  so,  the  same  variety  exists 
respecting  the  colour  of  the  hair;  black,  white,  auburn,  and  red. 
We  are  sure  this  is  a  characteristic  of  the  two  classes  of  mankind, 
the  dark  and  the  white.  If  so,  then  the  Kentucky  body,  found  in 
the  cave,  is  not  of  Malay  origin,  but  of  Scandinavian  ;  of  whom, 
as  a  nation,  it  is  said  that  the  predominant  colour  of  the  hair  of  the 
head  was  red. 

And  further,  we  object,  that  the  traits  of  ancient  population  found 
in  Canada,  between  Lakes  Ontario  and  Erie,  to  be  of  Malay  origin, 
but  rather  of  Scandinavian  also.  Our  reason  is  as  follows :  It  is 
unreasonable  to  suppose  the  Malays,  Australasian,  and  Polynesian 
nations  of  the  islands  of  the  Pacific,  who  were  originally  from  the 
eastern  coasts  of  China,  situated  in  mild  climates,  should  penetrate 
so  far  north  as  the  countries  in  Canada,  to  fix  their  habitations. 
But  it  is  perfectly  natural  that  the  Scandinavian,  the  Welch,  or 
the  Scottish  clans,  all  of  whom  inhabit  cold,  very  cold  countries, 
should  be  delighted  with  such  a  climate,  as  any  part  of  either  Up- 
per or  Lower  Canada. 

And  farther,  as  a  reason  that  the  Malay  nations  never  inhabited 
any  part  of  the  Canadas,  we  notice,  that  in  those  regions  there  are 
found  no  traces  of  their  peculiar  skill  and  labour  ascribed  to  them 
by  Professor  Mitchell,  which  are  the  great  mounds  of  the  west.  In 
Canada  we  know  not  that  any  have  been  discovered.  But  other 
works,  of  warlike  character,  abound  there  in  the  form  of  long  lines 
of  defensive  preparations,  corresponding  with  similar  works  iu  the 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


291 


&orth  of  Europe,  and  in  many  places  in  the  State  of  New- York, 
and  in  other  Atlantic  states,  as  hefore  noticed.  On  which  account, 
we  do  not  hesitate  to  ascribe  the  ancient  traits  of  a  former  civilized 
population,  found  between  Lakes  Ontario  and  Eiie,  to  be  of  Euro- 
pean, rather  than  of  Malay  origin. 


FURTHER  REMARKS  ON  THE  SUBJECT  OF  HUMAN  COMPLEX- 
IONS. 

As  to  the  curious  subject  of  the  different  complexions  of  man 
u  I  consider,  says  Dr.  Mitchell,  the  human  family  under  three  di* 
visions.  1st :  The  tawny  mau ;  comprehending  the  Tartars,  Ma- 
lays, Chinese,  the  American  Indians,  of  every  tribe,  Lascars,  and 
other  people  of  the  same  cast  and  breed. 

"  2d :  The  white  man  inhabiting  the  countries  in  Asia  and  Eu- 
rope, situated  north  of  the  Mediterranean1  Sea  ;  and,  in  the  course 
of  his  adventures,  settling  all  over  the  world.  Among  whom  I  re- 
ken  the  Greenlanders,  and  the  Esquimaux  nations. 

u  3d :  The  black  man,  whose  proper  residence  is  in  the  regions 
south  of  the  Mediterranean,  particularly  toward  the  interior  of  Afri- 
ca. The  people  of  Papua  and  Van  Dieman's  Land,  seem  to  be  of 
this  class." 

"  It  is  generally  supposed,  and  by  many  able  and  ingenuous  men, 
that  external  physical  causes,  and  combination  of  circumstances, 
which  they  call  climate,  have  wrought  all  these  changes  in  the  hu- 
man form"  and  complexion.  "  I  do  not,  however,  think  them  ca- 
pable of  explaining  the  differences  which  exist  among  the  riations," 
on  this  principle.  M  There  is  an  internal  physical  cause  of  the 
greatest  moment,  which  has  scarcely  been  mentioned.  This  is  the 
generative  influence.  If  by  the  act  of  modelling  the  constitution 
in  the  embryo  and  foetus,  a  predisposition  to  gout,  madness,  scrofula, 
and  consumption  may  be  engendered,  we  may  rationally  conclude, 
with  the  sagacious  d'Azara,  that  the  procreative  power  may  also 
shape  the  natures,  tinge  the  skin,  and  give  other  peculiarities  to  the 
form  of  man.'''' — Aim.  An(q.,p.  335. 


292 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


But  Mr.  Volney,  (see  his  View  of  America,  page  407,)  the 
Frenchman,  who,  it  is  said,  travelled  far  to  the  west  to  see  the  ex- 
traordinary sight  of  the  man  of  nature,  in  his  pureness,  unsophisti- 
cated by  Bible,  or  priestly  influence,  says  that  the  sole  cause  of  the 
difference  of  human  complexion,  is  the  rays  of  the  sun  and  climate  ; 
and  that,  "soon  or  late,  it  will  be  proved  that  the  blackness  of  the 
African  has  no  other  cause." 

To  prove  this,  he  tells  us  the  story  of  his  acquaintance  with  a  fa- 
mous Indian  chief,  the  Little  Tortoise ;  whose  skin,  he  says  was  as 
white  as  his  own,  where  it  had  not  been  exposed  to  the  sun.  Also 
that  when  he  was*amoug  the  Turks,  he  was  of  the  same  complex- 
ion with  the  Turks,  except  along  the  upper  part  of  his  forehead, 
where  the  the  turban  had  screened  the  skin  from  the  wind. 

He  farther  adds  the  story  of  the  coloured  man  in  Virginia,  by 
name  Henry  Morse,  who  a  descendant,  in  the  third  generation,  of 
Congo  parentage,  became,  in  the  course  of  six  or  seven  years,  en- 
tirely white,  with  long  sleek  brown  hair,  like  a  European.  If  this 
was  so,  all  we  can  admit  respecting  it,  is,  that  it  was  doubtless  a 
disorder  of  some  sort,  seated  in  the  skin  of  his  body,  of  a  most  for- 
tunate kind,  rather  that  afiy  predetermining  principle  in  the  air  to 
change  him  white. 

This  author  informs  us  also  that  a  rrt  gr6  chiid'is*  born  white,  but 
grows  black  within  four  and  twenty  hours.  But  we  cannot  avoid 
thinking  his  conclusions  very  singular,  when  we  recollect  that  in 
the  case  of  himself  and  Little  Tortoise,  the  chief,  that  the  air  or 
climate  caused  them,  otherwise  white  and  fair,  to  become,  so  brown 
and  twany;  while,  in  the  case  of  the  negro,  Henry  Morse,  the 
same  climate  caused  him,  in  a  short  time,  to  become  exceedingly 
white  and  fair. 

The^child  also  born  white,  of  African  parents,  becoming  black, 
in  twenty-four  hours  ;  surely  this  is  a  powerful  climate,  if  it  is  the 
sole  cause  of  the  colour  of  the  Ethiopean.  We  cannot  subscribe  to 
tliis  gentleman's  theory,  nor  to  the  theory  of  any  or  the  same  way 
of  thinking  ;  for  it  is  well  known  that  the  Indian  blood,  when  mix- 
ed with  the  white,  is  equally  inveterate,  if  not  more  so,  to  become 
eradicated  by  a  course  of  time ;  the  sly  Indian  looking  out,  here 
and  there,  for  many  generations. 

This  idea  of  the  three  original  complexions,  black,  twany,  and 
white,  we  have  supposed  was  realized  in   the  person  of  Noah's 


y 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


293 


three  sons,  Shem,  Ham  and  Japheth ;  and  although  Mr.  Mitchell 
has  not  fixed  on  a  starting  place,  he  has,  nevertheless,  admitted  the 
principle,  and  has  referred  the  cause  of  complexion  and  shape  to 
the  procreative  and  generative  act,  excluding,  totally,  any  influence 
which  climate  or  food  may  be  supposed  to  have,  as  has  been  con- 
tended by  many  ;  which,  so  far  as  we  are  able  to  understand  his 
meaning,  is  referring  the  complexions  of  the  human  race  immedi- 
ately to  the  arbitrary  act  of  God.  To  this  doctrine  we  most  cor- 
dially subscribe,  because  it  is  so  simple  and  natural,  the  very  way 
in  which  the  great  Creator  works.  First  fixing  the  principles  of 
nature,  as  gravitation  and  motion,  which  keep  the  worlds  in  their 
courses.  Were  it  not  for  these,  all  would  stand  still,  and  nature 
would  die.  Fire,  in  its  endless  variations,  breathes  through  all 
matter,  expands  the  leaves  of  all  forests,  and  adorns  them  with  all 
flowers,  gives  motion  to  the  air,  which,  in  that  motion,  is  called  the 
winds  of  heaven. 

Fire  gives  liquescency  to  the  waters  of  the  globe ;  were  it  not 
for  this,  all  fluids  that  now  move  over  the  earth  in  rivers,  brooks, 
springs,  or  oceans,  or  passes  by  subterranean  channels  through  the 
earth,  or  circulates  in  the  pores  of  trees  and  herbage,  with  the  wa- 
tery fluids  of  all  animated  life,  would  stand  still,  would  congeal, 
would  freeze  to  one  universal  mass  of  death. 

Also,  in  the  secret  embryo  of  earth's  productions,  as  in  all  vege- 
tation, all  animals,  and  all  human  beings,'  is  fixed  the  principle  of 
variety.  Were  it  not  for  this,  what  vast  confusion  would  ensue. 
If  all  human  beings  looked  alike,  and  all  human  voices  sounded 
alike,  there  would  be  an  end  to  society,  to  social  order,  to  the  dis- 
tinctions between  friend  and  foe,  relatives  and  strangers  ;  conver- 
sation would  be  misapplied,  identity  at  an  end,  subjects  of  investi- 
gation and  research,  arts  and  science,  could  have  no  objects  to  fix 
upon  ;  such  a  state  of  things  would  be  a  fearful  retrograde  toward 
a  state  of  insensibility  and  non-existence. 

And  is  it  not  also  as  evident  that  God  has  fixed,  as  well  the  se- 
cret principle  which  produces  complexion,  as  it  appears  in  an  un- 
mixed state  in  the  human  subject,  as  that  he  has  the  other  princi- 
ples just  rehearsed,  and  equally  as  abitrariiy.  Vegetation  mixes, 
and  in  this  way  gives  varieties  in  form,  colour  and  flavor,  not 
strictly  original.  Also  the  original  complexions  in  their  pure  state, 
of  black,  tawny  and  white,  have  also  by  mixtures  produced  their 


294 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


varieties,  but  at  the  outset,  in  the  embryo,  there  must  be  a  first 
pedisposing  principle  to  each  of  these  complexions,  fixed  on  a  more 
permanent  basis  than  that  of  food  and  climate ;  or  else  food  and 
climate,  after  these  had  made  a  white  race  of  men,  or  a  tawny 
race,  black,  might  be  expected  in  due  time,  if  removed  to  a  climate 
favoring,  to  change  them  all  back  again,  as  at  first;  but  this  is  con- 
trary to  all  experience  on  the  subject,  in  all  ages  and  climates  of 
the  earth.  Therefore  we  fix  on  the  idea  of  a  first  principle,  placed 
in  the  generative  powers  of  the  sons  of  Noah,  from  whom  their  se- 
veral progenies  derived  the  black,  the  red  or  tawny,  and  the  white, 
in  all  the  simplicity  and  beauty  of  natural  operations. 


FURTHER  REMARKS  RESPECTING  HUMAN  COMPLEXION  WITH 
OTHER  INTERESTING  SUBJECTS. 

In  another  communication,  which  in  part  was  on  the  same  sub- 
let, though  addressed  to  the  secretary  of  the  American  Antiqua- 
rian society,  Dr.  Mitchell,  says,  "  In  that  memoir  (alluding  to  the 
one  addressed  to  De  Witt  Clinton,)  I  maintained  the  doctrine  that 
there  were  but  three  original  varieties  of  the  human  race,  the  taw- 
ny man,  the  white  man,  and  the  black;  a  division  which  I  am 
pleased  to  observe,  the  incomparable  author  of  the  Animal  King- 
dom has  adopted,  in  France.  The  former  of  these  seems  to  have 
occupied,  in  the  earliest  days,  the  plain  watered  by  the  Euphrates 
and  the  Tigris,  while  the  white  Arab,  as  he  has  sometimes  been 
called,  was  found  in  the  regions  north  of  the  Mediterranean  sea, 
and  the  sable  Arab,  or  negro,  inhabited  to  the  south  of  that  expanse 
of  water. 

Of  the  brown,  or  tawny  variety,  aie  the  eastern  Asiatics,  and 
western  Americans,  divisible  into  two  great  stocks,  or  genealogies; 
first,  those  in  high  latitudes,  whom  1  call  Tartars;  and,  second, 
those  who  inhabit  low  or  southern  latitudes,  whom  I  consider  as 
Malays.  I  am  convinced  that  terras,  Tartar  and  Malay,  for  the 
present  purposes  of  reasoning,  are  equally  applicable  to  the  two 
:<reat  continents  ;  and  that,  with  the  exception  of  the  negro  colonies 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


293 


in  Papua,  and  a  few  other  places,  the  islanders  in  the  Pacific  are 
Malays. 

My  observations  led  me,  several  years  ago,  to  the  conclusion  that 
the  two  great  continents,  Asia  and  America,  were  peopled  by  simi- 
lar races  of  men ;  and  that  America,  as  well  as  Asia,  had  its  Tar- 
tars in  the  north,  and  its  Malays  in  the  south.  America  has  had 
her  Scythians,  her  Alans,  and  her  Huns ;  but  there  has  been  no 
historian  to  record  their  formidable  migrations,  and  their  barbarous 
achievements :  how  little  of  past  events  do  we  know. 

Since  the  first  publication  of  my  sentiments  on  this  subject,  at 
home,  they  have  been  published  at  several  places  abroad.  Mr.  E> 
Salverte,  editor  of  the  Bibliotheque  Universelle,  has  printed  them 
at  Geneva,  in  Switzerland,  with  a  learned  and  elaborate  comment. 
The  Monthly  Magazine  of  London,  contains  an  epitome  of  the 
same. 

The  comparison  of  the  language  spoken  by  these  Asiatic  and 
American  nations,  colonies  and  tribes,  respectively,  was  begun  by 
our  learned  fellow  citizen,  the  late  Dr.  B.  S.  Barton.  The  work 
has  been  continued  by  the  Adelangs  and  Vater,  distinguished  phi- 
lologists of  Germany.  Their  profound  inquiry  into  the  structure  of 
language  and  the  elements  of  speech,  embraces  a  more  correct  and 
condensed  body  of  information  concerning  the  original  tongues  of 
the  two  Americas,  than  was  ever  compiled  and  arranged  before. 
Their  Mithridates,  a  book  on  languages,  surpasses  all  similar  per- 
formances that  have  ever  been  achieved  by  man. 

One  of  my  intelligent  correspondents,  who  has  surveyed  with 
his  own  eyes  the  region  watered  by  the  Ohio,  wrote  me  very  lately 
a  letter  cantaining  the  following  paragraph : 

"  I  have  adopted  your  theory  respecting  the  Malays,  Polynesians 
and  Alleghanians.  This  last  nation,  so  called  by  the  Lenni-lenapi , 
or  primitive  stock  of  our  hunting  Indians,  was  that  which  inhabited 
the  United  States,  before  the  Tartar  tribes  came  and  destroyed 
them,  and  who  erected  the  mounds,  works,  fortifications,  and  tem- 
ples of  the  western  country.  This  historical  fact  is  now  proved 
beyond  a  doubt,  by  the  traditions  of  the  Lenni-lenapi  Indian,  pub- 
lished by  Heckewelder,  in  the  work  issued  by  the  Philosophical 
Society  of  Philadelphia.  I  may  add,  that  Mr.  Clifford,  of  Lexing- 
ton, Kentucky,  has  proved  another  identity  between  the  Allegha- 
nians and  Mexicans,  by  ascertaining  that  many  supposed  fortifica- 


296 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


tions  were  temples  ,  particularly  that  of  Circleville,  in  Ohio,  where 
human  sacrifices  we're  one  of  their  rites.  He  has  discovered  their 
similarity  with  the  ancient  Mexican  temples,  described  by  Hum- 
boldt, and  has  examined  the  bones  of  victims  in  heaps,  the  shells 
used  in  sacred  rites,  as  in  India,  and  the  idol  of  baked  clay,  con- 
sisting of  three  heads." 

This  opinion  of  human  sacrifices  was  fully  confirmed  by  the  tes- 
timony of  Mr.  Manuel  Liea3  during  the  summer  of  1818.  He,  on 
his  return  from  the  trading  posts  on  the  Upper  Missouri,  informed 
his  fellow  citizens  at  St.  Louis,  that  the  Wolf  tribe  of  the  Pawnee 
Indians  yet  followed  the  custom  of  immolating  human  victims. 
He  purchased  a  Spanish  prisoner,  a  boy  about  ten  years  old,  whom 
they  intended  to  offer  as  a  sacrifice  to  the  Great  Star  ;  and  they 
did  put  to  death,  by  transfixing  on  a  sharp  pole,  as  an  offering  to 
the  object  of  their  adoration,  the  child  of  a  Paddo  woman,  who, 
being  a  captive  herself,  and  devoted  to  that  sanguinary  and  horri- 
ble death,  made  her  escape  on  horseback,  leaving  her  new  bom 
offspring  behind. 

The  triad,  or  trinity  of  heads,  (see  the  plate,)  instantly  brings  to 
mind  a  similar  article  figured  by  the  Indians  of  Asia,  and  described 
by  Mr.  Maurice  in  bis  Oriental  Researches. 

I  received,  a  short  time  since,  directly  from  Mexico,  several 
pieces  of  cloth,  painted  in  the  manner  that  historians  have  often 
represented.  I  find  the  material  in  not  a  single  instance  to  be  cot- 
ton, as  has  been  usually  affirmed-  There  is  not  a  thread  indicating 
the  use  of  the  spinning  wheel,  nor  an  intertexture  showing  that  the 
loom  or  shuttle  was  employed.  In  strictness,  therefore,  there  is 
neither  cotton  nor  cloth  in  the  manufacture.  The  fabrics,  on  the 
contrary,  are  uniformly  composed  of  pounded  bark,  probably  of  the 
mulberry  tree3  and  resembles  the  bark  cloths  prepared  to  this  day, 
in  the  Friendly  and  Society  Islands,  in  the  Pacific  Ocean,  as  nearly 
as  one  piece  of  linen,  or  one  blanket  of  wool  resembles  another. 

I  derive  this  conclusion  from  a  comparison  of  the  several  sorts  of 
goods.  They  have  been  examined  together  by  several  excellent 
judges.  For,  at  a  meeting  of  the  New-Vork  Literary  and  Philo- 
sophical society,  in  February,  1819, 1  laid  these  specimens  of  bark 
cloth,  with  their  respective  colorings  and  paintings,  frcm  Mexico, 
Otaheite  and  Tongataboo,  upon  the  table,  for  the  examination  of 
the  members.    All  were  satisfied  that  there  was  a  most  striking 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST- 


297 


multitude  among  the  several  articles.  Not  only  the  fabric  but  the 
colors,  and  the  materials  of  which  they  apparently  consisted,  as 
well  as  the  probable  manner  of  putting  them  on,  seemed  to  me 
strong  proofs  of  the  sameness  of  origin,  in  the  different  tribes  of  a 
people  working  in  the  same  way,  and  retaining  a  sameness  in  their 
arts  of  making  a  thing,  which  answers  the  purpose  of  paper,  of 
cloth  and  a  material  for  writing  and  painting  upon. 

Soon  after  the  arrival  of  these  rolls  from  New-Spain,  filled  with 
hieroglyphics,  and  imitative  characters,  I  received  a  visit  from 
three  natives  of  South  America,  born  at  St.  Bias,  just  beyond  the 
isthmus  of  Darien,  near  the  equator.  They  were  of  the  Malay 
race,  by  their  physiognomy,  form,  and  general  appearance.  Their 
dark  brown  skins,  their  thin  beards,  the  long  black,  straight  hair 
of  their  heads,  their  small  hands  and  feet,  and  their  delicate  frame 
of  body,  all  concur  to  mark  their  near  resemblance  to  the  Austra- 
lasians ;  while  the  want  of  high  cheek  bones,  and  little  eyes, 
placed  wide  apart,  distinguished  them  sufficiently  from  the  Tartars. 
Oiher  similtudes  exist.  The  history  of  M.  de  la  Salle's  last  ex- 
pedition, and  discoveries  in  Noth  America,  as  contained  in  the  sec- 
ond volume  of  his  Travels.  "  After  travelling  over  plains,  and 
sometimes  across  torrents,  we  arrived  in  the  midst  of  a  very  extra- 
ordinary nation,  called  the  Biscatonges,  to  whom  we  gave  the  name 
of  weepers,  in  regard  that  upon  the  first  approach  of  strangers,  all 
these  people,  men  as  well  as  women,  usually  fell  a  weeping  most 
bitterly. 

That  which  is  yet  more  remarkable,  and  perhaps  very  reason- 
able in  that  custom,  is  that  they  weep  much  more  at  the  birth  of 
their  children,  than  at  their  death  ;  because  the  latter  is  esteemed 
only  by  them  as  it  were  a  journey  or  voyage,  from  whence  they 
may  return  after  the  expiration  of  a  certain  time  ;  but  they  look 
upon  their  nativity  as  an  inlet  into  an  ocean  of  dangers  aad  mis- 
fortunes. Compare  this  with  a  passage  in  the  Terpsichore  of  He- 
rodotus, who  flourished  about  450  years  before  Christ,  chap.  4th, 
where,  in  describing  the  Thracians,  he  observes,  "  that  the  Trausi 
have  a  general  uniformity  with  the  "est  of  the  Thracians,  (a  branch 
of  the  most  ancient  Greeks,)  except  what  relates  to  the  birth  of 
their  children,  and  burial  of  their  dead.  On  the  birth  of  a  child, 
it  is  placed  in  the  midst  of  a  circle  of  its  relations,  who  lau.ent 
aloud  the  evils  which,  as  a  human  being4  he  must  necessarily  ui> 

38 


29S 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


dergo  all  of  which  supposed  evils,  they  particularly  enumerate' 
to  the  child,  though  it  understand  it  not.71 — Beloe^s  translation. 

To  find  a  custom  among  one  of  the  Indian  nations,  in  America? 
which  so  strikingly  agrees  with  that  of  the  Thracian,  a  branch  of 
the  most  ancient  Greek  people,  who  existed  many  hundred  years 
before  Christ,  is  very  extraordinary,  and  would  seem  to  justify  a 
belief  that  we  have  the  descendants  of  the  Greeks  in  our  western 
forests ;  which  also  argues  that  the  ancestors  of  the  tribe  having 
this  curious  custom,  came  early  to  America,  or  they  could  not  have 
so  perfectly  retained  this  practice,  in  their  wanderings  over  Asia, 
who  would  have  inevitably  lost  their  ancient  manners,  by  amalga- 
mations. We  have  before  shown,  in  this  work,  that  Greeks  visited 
South  America,  in  the  time  of  Alexander  the  Great,  who  for  aught 
that  can  be  objected,  may  have  left  a  colony,  and  the  Biscatongues 
may  be  their  descendants. 

u  There  is  an  opinion  among  the  Seneca  nation  of  the  Iroquois 
confederacy,  to  this  day,  that  eclipses  of  the  sun  and  moon  are  cau- 
sed by  a  Manitau,  or  bad  Spirit,  who  mischievously  intercepts  the 
light  intended  to  be  shed  upon  the  earth  and  its  inhabitants.  Upon 
such  occasions,  the  greatest  solicitude  exists.     All  the  individuals 
of  the  tribe  feel  a  strong  desire  to  drive  away  the  demon,  and  to 
remove  thereby  the  impediment  to  the  transmission  of  luminous 
rays.    For  this  purpose,  they  go  forth,  and  by  crying,  shouting, 
drumming,  and  the  firing  of  guns,  endeavor  to  frighten  him,  and 
they  never  fail  in  their  object,  for  by  courage  and  perseverance, 
they  infallibly  drive  him  off.    His  retreat  is  succeeded  by  a  return 
of  the  obstructed  light.    Something  of  the  same  sort  is  practised 
among  the  Chippeways,  when  an  eclipse  happens.    The  belief 
among  them  is,  that  there  is  a  battle  between  the  sun  and  moon? 
which  intercepts  the  light.    Their  great  object,  therefore,  is  to  stop 
the  righting,  and  to  separate  the  combatants.     They  think  these 
ends  can  be  accomplished  by  withdrawing  the  attention  of  the  con- 
tending parties  from  each  other,  and  diverting  it  to  the  Chippeways 
themselves.    They  accordingly  fill  the  air  with  noise  and  outcry. 
Such  sounds  are  sure  to  attract  the  attention  of  the  warring  powers. 
Their  philosophers  have  the  satisfaction  of  knowing  that  the  strife 
never  lasted  long  after  their  clamor  and  noisy  operations  began. 
Being  thus  induced  to  be  peaceful,  the  sun  and  moon  separate  and 
light  is  restored  to  the  Chippeways. 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST- 


5ow  it  is  reported,  on  the  authority  of  one  of  the  Jesuit  fathers 
>i  the  French  mission  in  India,  that  a  certain  tribe  or  people, 
whom  he  visited  there,  ascribed  eclipses  to  the  presence  of  a  great 
dragon.  This  creature,  by  the  interposition  of  his  huge  body,  ob- 
structed the  passage  of  the  light  to  our  world  ;  they  were  persuad- 
ed they  could  drive  him  away  by  terrifying  sounds,  in  which  they 
were  always  successful,  as  the  dragon  soon  retired  in  great  alarm, 
when  the  eclipses  immediately  terminated. 

The  manner  of  depositing  the  bodies  of  distinguished  persons 
after  death,  is  remarkable.  Among  the  tribes  inhabiting  the  banks 
of  the  Columbia  river,  which  empties  into  the  Pacific  Ocean,  in  la- 
titude 47  degrees  north,  and  in  some  of  those  which  live  near  the 
waters  of  the  Missouri,  the  dead  body  of  a  great  man  is  neither 
consumed  by  fire,  nor  buried  in  the  earth,  but  it  is  placed  in  his 
canoe,  with  his  articles  of  dress,  ornament,  war,  and  hunting,  and 
suspended  in  the  canoe,  between  two  trees,  to  putrify  in  the  open 
air.  The  custom  of  exposing  bodies  to  decomposition  above  ground, 
in  the  morals,  or  places  of  deposit  for  the  dead,  among  the  Polyne- 
sians, will  immediately  occur  to  every  reader  of  the  voyages  made 
within  the  last  half  century,  through  the  Pacific  Ocean  for  the  pur- 
poses of  discovery. 


CANNIBALISM  IN  AMERICA. 

The  practice  of  cannibalism  exists  in  full  force,  in  the  Fegee 
islands.  A  particular  and  faithful  account  of  it  is  contained  in  the 
14th  volume  of  the  Medical  Repository,  chaps.  209,  and  215.  The 
History  of  the  five  Indian  nations  dependant  upon  the  government 
of  New- York,  by  Dr.  Colden,  page  185 — 6,  shows  that  the  fero- 
cious and  vindictive  spirit  of  the  conqueror  led  him  occasionally  to 
feast  upon  his  captive.  The  Ottawas  having  taken  an  Iroquois 
prisoner,  made  a  soup  of  his  flesh.  The  like  has  been  repeatedly 
done  since,  on  select  occasions,  by  other  tribes.  Governour  Cass> 
of  Michigan,  informed  me,  that  among  the  Miamis,  there  was  a 
standing  committee,  consisting  of  seven  warriors,  whose  badness  it 


300 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


was  to  perform  the  man  eating  required  by  public  authority.  The 
last  of  their  cannibal  feasts  was  on  the  body  of  a  white  man,  of 
Kentucky,  about  forty  years  ago.  The  appointment  of  the  com- 
mittee to  eat  human  flesh,  has  since  that  time,  gradually  become 
obsolete  ;  but  the  oldest  and  last  memoer  of  t-'is  cannibal  society  is 
well  remembered,  and  died  only  a  few  years  ago. 

A  very  circumstantial  description  of  a  canaibal  feast,  where  a 
soup  w  as  made  of  the  body  of  an  Englishman,  at  Michiiimackioack, 
about  the  year  1760,  is  given  by  Alexander  Henry,  Esq.,  in  his 
book  of  travels  through  Canada  and  the  iudian  territories.  Iu  that 
work  it  is  stated  that  man  eating  was  then,  and  always  had  been, 
practised  among  the  Indian  nations,  on  returning  from  war,  or  on 
overcoming  their  enemies,  for  the  purpose  of  giving  them  courage 
to  attack,  and  resolution  to  die." — Medical  Repository ,  vol.  14,  pp. 
261,  262. 

As  extraordinary  as  this  may  appear,  we  are  informed  by  Baron 
Humboldt,  in  his  personal  narrative,  that  "  in  Egypt,  in  the  13th 
century,  five  or  six  hundred  years  ago,  the  habit  of  eating  human 
flesh  pervaded  all  classes  of  society.  Extraordinary  snares  were 
spread,  for  physicians  in  particular.  They  were  called  to  auend 
persons  who  pretended  to  be  sick,  but  who  were  only  hungry,  and 
it  was  not  in  order  to  be  consulted,  but  devoured." 

Situated  west,  northwest  and  southwest  of  North  America,  in 
the  Pacific  Ocean,  are  a  vast  number  of  islands,  scattered  over  all 
that  immense  body  of  water,  extending  in  groups  quite  across  to 
China,  along  the  whole  Asiatic  coast.  The  general  character  of 
these  islanders  is  similar,  though  somewhat  diversified  in  language, 
in  complexion  are  much  the  same,  which  is  copper,  with  the  ex- 
ception only  of  now  and  then  people  of  the  African  descent,  and 
those  of  the  Japan  islands,  who  are  white. 

By  examining  Morse,  we  find  them  in  the  practice  of  scariticing 
human  beings,  and  also  of  devouring  them,  as  we  find  the  savages 
of  America  were  accustomed  to  do  from  time  immemorial ;  having 
but  recently  suspended  the  appalling  custom. 

From  this  similarity,  an  account  of  which,  however,  might  be 
extended  in  detail  to  a  vast  amount,  existing  between  these  island- 
ers, and  the  disinterred  remains  of  the  exterminated  race,  who,  as 
it  is  supposed,  built  most  of  the  works  of  the  west,  it  is  inferred 
they  are  the  same.    Their  complexion  and  manners  agree,  at  the 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


301 


present  time,  with  the  people  of  these  islands ;  we  mean  those  of 
the  Malay  race,  yet  remaining  in  South  America,  in  their  native 
state  of  Society. 

Also  the  natives  of  the  Caribbean  islands,  in  the  Caribbean  sea, 
which  is  the  same  with  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  only  this  sea  is  at  the 
southern  extremity  of  the  Gulf,  are  of  the  same  race,  who,  in  their 
migrations  from  the  Pacific  Ocean,  have  peopled  many  parts  of  the 
South  and  North  American  continent,  the  remains  of  whom  are 
found  on  those  islands,  as  well  as  among  the  unsubdued  nations  in 
the  woods  of  South  America. 

It  is  doubtless  a  fact,  that  the  earliest  tribes  who  separated  rrom 
the  immediate  regions  about  Ararat,  passed  onward  to  the  east, 
across  the  countries  now  allcu  Persia,  Bucharia,  ami  the  Chinese 
empire,  till  they  reached  the  sea,  or  Pacific  Ocean,  opposite  the 
American  continent. 

•  From  thence,  5"  process  of  time,  on  account  of  an  increase  of 
population,  tb  >y  left  the  main  continent,  in  search  of  the  islands, 
and  passing  from  one  group  to  another,  till  all  those  islands  became 
peopled,  and  until  they  reached  even  the  western  coast  of  not  only 
South  but  North  America. 

At  the  same  time,  tribes  from  the  same  region  of  Ararat,  travelled 
westward,  passing  over  all  Europe  and  southward,  filling  the  re- 
gions of  Africa,  and  the  islands  in  the  Atlantic  Ocean  opposite  the 
coasts  of  South  and  North  America,  till  they  also  reached  the  main 
land,  meeting  their  fellows,  after  having  each  of  them  circumambu- 
lated half  of  the  earth. 

And  having  started  from  the  regions  of  Ararat  and  the  tower  of 
Babel,  with  languages  differing  one  from  another,  and  having  also 
in  process  of  time,  acquired  habits  arising  from  differences  of  cir- 
cumstances, mostly  dissimilar  one  from  the  other,  wars  for  the  mas- 
tery the  most  dreadful  must  have  ensued,  each  viewing  the  others 
as  intruders,  from  whence  they  knew  not.  This  is  evident  from 
the  traditions  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  two  Americas ;  some  tribes 
pointing  to  the  east,  others  to  the  west,  and  others  again  to  the 
north,  as  the  way  from  whence  their  ancestors  came. 

According  to  Clavigero,  the  naturalist,  the  ancestors  of  the  na- 
tions which  peopled  Anahuac,  now  called  New-Spain,  might  have 
passed  from  the  northern  countries  of  Europe,  (as  Norway,)  to  the 
northern  parts  of  America,  on  the  coast  of  Labrador,  which  is  called 


3Q2 


AMKRICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


British  America  and  Canada  ;  al.«o  from  the  most  eastern  parti  of 
Ai-iu  to  the  most  western  parts  of  America.  This  conclusion  is 
founded  on  the  constant  and  general  tradition  of  those  nations, 
which  unanimously  say,  that  their  ancestors  came  into  Anahuac, 
or  New-Spain,  from  the  countries  of  the  north  and  northwest.  This 
tradition  is  confirmed  by  the  remains  of  many  ancient  edifices, 
built  by  those  people  in  their  migrations.  In  a  journey  made  by 
the  Spaniards  in  160C,  more  than  two  hundred  years  since,  from 
New-Mexico  to  the  river  which  they  call  Tizan,  six  hundred  miles 
from  Anahuac  towards  the  northwest,  they  found  there  some  large 
edifices,  and  met  with  some  Indians  who  spoke  the  Mexican  lan- 
guage, and  who  told  them  that  a  few  days'  journey  from  that  river 
towards  the  north,  was  the  kingdom  of  Tolan,  and  many  other  in- 
habited places,  from  whence  the  Mexicans  migrated.  In  fact,  the 
whole  population  of  Anahuac  have  usually  affirmed,  that  towards 
the  north  were  the  kingdoms  and  provinces  of  Tolan,  Aztalan,  C&- 
pallan,  and  several  others,  which  are  all  Mexican  names,  now  so 
designated ;  but  were  we  to  trace  these  names  to  their  origin,  they 
would  be  found  to  be  of  Mongol  or  Mogul  origin,  from  Asia.  Bo- 
turiui,  or  Bouterone,  a  learned  antiquarian  of  Paris,  of  the  17th 
century,  says,  that  in  the  ancient  paintings  of  the  Taltecas,  a  nation 
of  Mexico,  or  more  anciently  called  Anahuac,  was  represented  the 
migrations  of  their  ancestors  through  Asia,  and  the  northern  coun- 
tries of  America,  until  they  established  themselves  in  the  country 
of  Tolan.— Morse,  p.  CIS. 

This  river  Tizan  is,  unquestionably,  the  river  Columbia,  which 
belongs  to  the  territory  owned  by  the  United  States,  bordering  on 
the  coast  of  the  Pacific,  in  latitude  47  degrees  north  ;  which  from 
Anahuac,  in  Mexico,  is  just  about  that  distance  (600  miles ;  and 
this  river  being  the  only  one  of  much  size  emptying  into  the  sea  on 
that  side  of  the  Rocky  mountains,  between  the  latitude  of  Mexico 
and  the  latitude  of  the  mouth  of  the  Columbia,  is  the  reason  why 
that  river  may,  almost  with  certainty,  be  supposed  the  very  Indian 
Tizan.  But  still  farther  north,  several  days'  journey,  were  the 
kingdoms  and  provinces  of  Tolan,  Aztalan,  and  Capallan,  which 
were  probably  in  the  latitude  with  the  northern  parts  of  the  United 
States's  lands  west  of  the  Rocky  mountains,  and  tilling  all  the  re- 
gions east  as  far  as  the  head  waters  of  the  great  western  rivers  ; 
thence  down  those  streams,  peopling  the  vast  alluvials  in  Indiana, 


AND  DISGOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


303 


Missouri,  Illinois,  Northwestern  Territory,  Ohio,  Kentucky,  Mis- 
sissippi, and  so  on  to  the  Gulf  of  Mexico. 

Although  those  kingdoms  and  provinces  spoken  of  by  the  natives 
of  Tizan,  to  these  Spanish  adventurers,  had  many  hundred  years 
before  been  vacated  of  their  population  and  grandeur ;  yet  it  was 
natural  for  them  to  retain  the  tradition  of  their  numbers  and  extent : 
and  to  speak  of  them  as  then  existing,  which,  as  to  latitude  and  lo- 
cation, was  true,  although  in  a  state  of  ruin,  like  the  edifices  at  the 
Tizan,  or  Columbia. 

In  an  address  delivered  at  New-York,  before  the  College  of  Phy- 
sicians, by  Dr.  Mitchell,  which  relates  to  the  migrations  of  Malays 
Tartars  and  Scandinavians,  we  have  the  following  : 

"  A  late  German  writer,  Prof.  Vater,  has  published,  at  Leipsig, 
a  book  on  the  population  of  America.  He  lays  great  stress  on  the 
tongues  spoken  by  the  aborigines,  and  dwells  considerably  upon 
the  unity  pervading  the  whole  of  them,  from  Chili  to  the  remotest 
district  of  North  America,  whether  of  Greenland,  Chippewa,  Dela- 
ware, Natick,  Totuaka,  Cora  or  Mexico.  Though  ever  so  singu- 
lar and  diversified,  nevertheless  the  same  peculiarity  obtains  among 
them  all,  which  cannot  be  accidental,  viz :  the  whole  sagacity  of 
that  people  from  whom  the  construction  of  the  American  languages 
and  the  gradual  invention  of  their  grammatical  forms  is  derived, 
has,  as  it  were,  selected  one  object,  and  over  this  diffused  such  an 
abundance  of  forms,  that  one  is  astonished;  while  only  the  most 
able  philologist,  or  grammarian  of  languages,  by  assiduous  study, 
can  obtain  a  general  view  thereof. 

M  In  substance,  the  author  (Prof.  Vater)  says,  that  through  va- 
rious times  and  circumstances,  this  peculiar  character  is  preserved. 
Such  unity,  such  direction,  or  tendency,  compels  us  to  place  the 
origin  in  a  remote  period,  when  one  original  tribe  or  people  existed, 
whose  ingenuity  and  judgment  enabled  them  to  excogitate  or  invent 
such  intricate  formations  of  language  as  could  not  be  effaced  by 
thousands  of  years,  nor  by  the  influence  of  zones  and  climates. 

"  Mr.  Vater  has  published  a  large  work,  entitled  MithridateSy  in 
which  he  has  given  an  extensive  comparison  of  all  the  Asiatic,  Af- 
rican and  American  languages,  to  a  much  greater  extent  than  was 
done  by  our  distinguished  fellow  citizen,  Dr.  Barton,  of  Philadel- 
phia, Professor  of  Natural  History.  Mr.  Vater  concludes  by  ex- 
pressing his  desire  to  unravel  the  mysteries  which  relate  to  the  new 


304 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


and  old  continents  ;  at  least  to  contribute  the  contents  of  his  volume 
towards  the  commencement  of  a  structure,  which,  out  of  the  ruins 
of  dilacerated  human  tribes,  seeks  materials  for  an  union  of  the 
whole  human  race  in  one  origin  ;  which  some  have  disputed,  not- 
withstanding  the  plain  statement  of  the  Bible  on  that  subject, 
which  is  a  book  entitled  to  the  term  antiquity,  paramount  to  all 
other  records  now  in  existence  on  the  earth. 

"  What  this  original  and  radical  language  was,  has  very  lately 
been  the  subject  of  inquiry  by  the  learned  Mr.  Mathieu,  of  Nancy, 
in  France.  The  Chevalier  Valentine,  of  the  order  of  St.  Michael, 
renewed  by  Louis  XVIII;  informs  me  that  this  gentleman  has  exa- 
mined Mr.  Winthrop's  description  of  the  curious  characters  in- 
scribed upon  the  rock  at  Dighton,  Massachusetts,  as  published  in 
the  Transactions  of  the  Boston  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences. 
He  thinks  them  hieroglyphics,  which  he  can  interpret  and  explain- 
and  ascribes  them  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  ancient  Atlantic  island 
of  Plato,  called  by  him  Atalantis,  Mr.  Mathieu  not  only  professes 
to  give  the  sense  of  the  inscription,  but  also  to  prove  that  the 
tongues  spoken  by  the  Mexicans,  Peruvians,  and  other  occidental 
or  western  people,  as  well  as  the  Greek  itself,  with  all  its  dialects, 
and  ramifications,  were  but  derivations  from  the  language  of  the 
primitive  Ataiantians  of  the  island  of  Plato."— -See  page  80,  <Src. 


ANCIENT  LANGUAGES  OF  THE  FIRST  INHABITANTS  OF 

AMERICA. 

First  Letter  to  Mr.  Champollion,  on  the  Graphic  Systems 
of  America,  and  the  Glyphs  of  Otolum  of  Palenque,  in  Central 
America.    By  C.  S.  Rafinesque. 

You  have  become  celebrated  by  decyphering,  at  last,  the  glyphs 
and  characters  of  the  ancient  Egyptians,  which  all  your  learned 
predecessors  had  deemed  a  riddle,  and  pronounced  impossible  to 
read.  You  first  announced  your  discovery  in  a  letter.  I  am  going 
to  follow  your  footsteps  on  another  continent,  and  a  theme  equallv 
obscure  ;  to  none  but  yourself  can  I  address  with  more  propriety, 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


305 


letters  on  a  subject  so  much  alike  in  purpose  and  importance,  and 
so  similar  to  your  own  labors. 

I  sha'l  not  enter  at  present  into  any  very  elaborate  discussion. 
I  shall  merely  detail,  in  a  concise  manner,  the  object  and  result  of 
my  inquiries,  so  as  to  assert  my  claim  to  r.  discovery  of  some  im- 
portance in  a  philological  and  nistorical  point  of  view ;  which  was 
announced  as  early  as  1828  in  some  journals,  (3  letters  to  Mr.  M'- 
Culloh  on  the  American  nations,)  but  not  properly  illustrated. 
Their  full  development  would  require  a  volume,  like  that  of  your*, 
on  tae  Egyptian  antiquities,  and  may  follow  this  perhaps  at  some 
future  time. 

It  may  be  needful  to  prefix  the  i.. Mowing  principles  as  guides  to 
my  researches,  or  results  of  my  inquiiies. 

1.  America  has  been  the  land  of  false  systems  ;  all  those  made 
in  Europe  on  it  are  more  or  less  vain  and  erroneous. 

2.  The  Americans  were  equal  in  antiquity,  civilization  and  sci- 
ences to  the  nations  of  Africa  and  Europe  ;  like  them  the  children 
of  the  Asiatic  nations. 

3.  It  is  false  that  no  American  nations  had  systems  of  writing, 
glyphs  and  letters.  Several  had  various  modes  of  perpetuating 
ideas. 

4.  There  were  several  such  graphic  systems  in  America  to  ex- 
press ideas,  all  of  which  find  equivalents  in  the  east  continent. 

5.  They  may  be  ranged  in  twelve  series,  proceeding  from  the 
most  simple  to  the  most  complex. 

1st.  Series. — Pictured  symbols  or  glyphs  of  the  Toltecas,  Az- 
tecas,  Huaztecas,  Skeres,  Panos,  &c.  Similar  to  the  first  symbols 
of  the  Chinese,  invented  by  Tien-hoang,  before  the  flood  and 
earliest  Egyptian  glyphs. 

2c?.  Series. — Outlines  of  figures  or  abridged  symbols  and  glyphs, 
expressing  words  or  ideas,  used  by  almost  all  the  nations  of  Noilh 
and  South  America,  even  the  most  rude.  Similar  to  the  second 
kind  of  Egyptian  symbols,  and  the  tortoise  letters  brought  to  China 
by  the  Longma  (dragon  and  horse)  nation  of  barbarous  horsemen, 
under  Sui-gin. 

3d.  Series. — Quipos  or  knots  on  strings  used  by  the  Peruvians 
and  several  other  South  American  nations.  Similar  to  the  third 
kind  of  Chinese  glyphs  introduced  under  Yang-ching,  and  used 
also  by  many  nations  of  Africa. 

39 


306 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


4th  Series. — Wampums  or  strings  of  shells  and  beads,  used  by 
many  nations  of  North  America.  Similar  to  those  used  by  some  an- 
cient or  rude  nations  in  all  the  parts  of  the  world,  as  tokens  of  ideas. 

5th  Series. — Runic  glyphs  or  marks  and  notches  on  twigs  or 
lines,  used  by  several  nations  of  North  America.  Consimilar  to 
the  runic  glyphs  of  the  Celtic  and  Teutonic  nations. 

6th  Series. — Runic  marks  and  dots,  or  graphic  symbols,  not  on 
strings  nor  lines,  but  in  rows  ;  expressing  words  or  ideas ;  used  by 
the  ancient  nations  of  North  America  and  Mexico,  the  Talegas, 
Aztecas,  Natchez,  Powhatans,  Tuscaroras,  &c,  and  also  the  Mu- 
hizcas  of  South  America.  Similar  to  the  ancient  symbols  of  the 
Etruscans,  Egyptians,  Celts,  &c,  and  the  Ho-tuot  the  Chinese^, 
invented  by  Tsang-hie,  called  also  the  Ko-ieu-chu  letters,  which 
were  in  use  in  China  till  827  before  our  era. 

1th  Series. — Alphabetical  symbols,  expressing  syllables  or  sounds, 
not  words  but  grouped,  and  the  groups  disposed  in  rows ,  such  is 
the  graphic  system  of  the  monuments  of  Otolum,  near  Palenque, 
the  American  Thebes.  Consimilar  to  the  groups  of  alphabetical 
symbols  used  by  the  ancient  Lybians,  Egyptians,  Persians,  and  also 
the  last  graphic  system  of  the  Chinese,  called  Ventze,  invented  by 
Sse-hoang. 

8th  Series. — Cursive  symbols  in  groups,  and  the  groups  in  paral- 
lel rows,  derived  from  the  last,  (which  are  chiefly  monumental,) 
and  used  in  the  manuscripts  of  the  Mayans3  Guatamalans,  &c. 
Consimilar  to  the  actual  cursive  Chinese,  some  demotic  Egyptian, 
and  many  modifications  of  ancient  graphic  alphabets,  grouping  the 
letters  or  syllables. 

9th  Series. — Syllabic  letters,  expressing  syllables,  not  simple 
sounds,  and  disposed  in  rows.    Such  is  the  late  syllabic  alphabet 
of  the  Cherokis,  and  many  graphic  inscriptions  found  in  North  and 
South  America.    Similar  to  the  syllabic  alphabets  of  Asia,  Africa 
and  Polynesia. 

10th  Seiies. — Alphabets  or  graphic  letters,  expressing  simple 
sounds  and  disposed  in  rows.  Found  in  many  inscriptions,  medals, 
aud  coins  in  North  and  South  America,  and  lately  introduced  every 
where  by  the  European  colonists.  Similar  to  the  alphabets  of  Asia, 
Africa  and  Europe. 

11///  Series. — Abreviations,  or  letters  standing  for  whole  words, 
or  part  of  a  glyph  and  graphic  delineation,  standing  and  expressing 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST.  307 

the  whole.  Used  by  almost  all  the  writing  nations  of  North  and 
South  America,  as  well  as  Asia,  Europe  and  Africa. 

12th  iSmes.— Numeric  system  of  graphic  signs,  to  express  num- 
bers. All  the  various  kinds  of  signs,  such  as  dots,  lines,  strokes, 
circles,  glyphs,  letters,  &c,  used  by  some  nations  of  North  and 
South  America,  as  well  as  in  the  eastern  continent. 

In  my  next  letter  I  shall  chiefly  illustrate  the  7th  and  8th  series 
so  as  to  decypher  and  explain  one  of  the  most  curious  and  least 
known  of  the  American  modes  of  expressing  and  perpetuating  ideas. 
I  shall  give  a  figure  of  a  sample  of  those  monumental  symbols, 
with  comparative  figures  of  two  alphabets  of  Africa,  the  nearest  re- 
lated to  them,  and  where  the  elements  may  be  traced,  which  are 
grouped  in  those  glyphs. 

[The  characters  here  presented  are  the  glyphs  alluded  to  by  this 
author,  formed  from  the  combinations  of  the  African  and  American 
letters,  shown  and  treated  upon  page  118  of  this  work.  For  an 
account  of  those  glyphs,  see  pages  122,  123  and  124. 


At  the  first  glance,  the  most  cursory  observer  is  impressed  with 
the  idea  of  their  likeness  to  the  Chinese  glyphs,  which,  in  the  lan- 


308 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


stages  in  which  they  were  or  are  in  use,  is  equivalent  to  the  com- 
bination of  our  letter  when  grouped  so  as  to  speli  words,  and  show 
that  America,  in  its  earliest  history,  was  not  without  its  literati,  and 
means  of  improvement  by  the  use  of  letters,  but  was  lost  by  means 
oi'  revolutions  as  once  was  the  fate  of  the  Roman  empire. 

We  have  glanced  at  the  following  circumstance  before,  on  page 
241  :  we  hope  the  reader  will  excuse  its  repetition  as  we  wish  in 
this  place  to  give  the  entire  remarks  of  the  author  on  this  most  in- 
teresting subject,  the  letters  and  glyphs  of  America.] 

Some  years  ago,  the  Society  of  Geography,  of  Paris,  offered  a 
large  premium  for  a  voyage  to  Guatimala,  and  a  new  suryey  of  the 
antiquities  of  Yucatan  and  Chiapa,  chiefly  those  fifteen  miles  from 
Palenque,  which  are  wrongly  called  by  that  name.  I  have  re- 
stored to  them  the  true  name  of  Otolum,  which  is  yet  the  name  of 
the  stream  running  through  the  ruins.  I  should  have  been  inclined 
to  undertake  this  voyage  and  exploration  myself,  if  the  civil  dis- 
cords of  the  country  did  not  forbid  it  My  attention  was  drawn 
forcibly  to  this  subject  as  soon  as  the  account  of  those  ruins,  sur- 
veyed by  Captain  Del  Rio  as  early  as  1787,  but  withheld  from  the 
public  eye  by  Spain,  was  published  in  1822,  in  English. 

This  account,  which  partly  describes  the  ruins  of  a  stone  city  75 
miles  in  circuit,  (length  32  English  miles,  greatest  breadth  12 
miles,)  full  of  palaces,  monuments,  statues  and  inscriptions;  one 
of  the  earliest  seats  of  American  civilization,  about  equal  to  Thebes 
of  Egypt,  was  well  calculated  to  inspire  me  with  hopes  that  they 
would  throw  a  great  light  over  American  history,  when  mce  pro- 
perly examined. 

I  have  been  disappointed  in  finding  that  no  traveller  has  dared  to 
penetrate  again  to  that  recondite  place,  and  illustrate  all  the  ruins, 
monuments,  with  the  languages  yet  spoken  all  around.  The  So- 
ciety of  Geography  has  received  many  additional  accounts,  derived 
from  documents  preserved  in  Mexico ;  but  they  have  not  been 
deemed  worthy  of  the  reward  offered  for  a  new  survey,  and  have 
not  even  been  published.  The  same  has  happened  with  Tiahua- 
.iaco,  in  Bolivia  and  South  America,  another  mass  of  ancient  ruins 
and  mine  of  historical  knowledge,  which  no  late  traveller  has  visit- 
ed or  described. 

Being  therefore  without  hope  of  any  speedy  accession  to  our 
knowledge  of  those  places,  I  have  been  compelled  to  work  upon 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


309 


the  materials  now  extant,  which  have  happily  enabled  me  to  do  a 
great  deal,  notwithstanding  all  their  defects,  and  throw  some  light 
on  that  part  of  the  history  of  America. 

C.  S,  RAFINESQUE. 

Philadelphia,  January,  1832- 


Tabular  View  of  the  American  Generic  Languages  and  Ori- 
ginal Nations,  by  the  same  author. 

One  of  the  most  glaring  errors  of  speculative  philosophers  on  the 
subject  of  America,  is  found  in  their  assertion,  that  American  lan- 
guages and  nations  are  multiplied  beyond  conception,  and  cannot 
be  reduced  to  order.  This  misconception  arose  from  a  superficial 
kno  wledge  of  the  matter,  and  a  wish  to  assert  extraordinary  things. 
If  the  same  wish  had  been  evinced  respecting  Europe.,  they  could 
have  found  sixty  languages  and  nations  in  France,  and  one  hundred 
in  Italy,  by  considering  the  various  provincial  French  and  Italian 
dialects  as  so  many  langunges,  since  many  of  them  cannot  be  un- 
derstood by  the  respective  provincials  of  the  same  country.  And 
each  provincial  group  would  be  a  nation,  since  languages  distin- 
guish nations. 

Even  Balbi,  after  reducing  the  1500  or  1800  supposed  American 
languages  and  tribes  to  422,  has  not  attempted  to  class  them,  ex- 
cept geographically.  I  made  the  attempt  ever  since  1824,  in  the 
Cincinnati  Literary  Gazette,  and  have  since  corrected  my  classifi- 
cation, reducing  the  1800  American  dialects  to  about  25  generic 
languages,  which  belong  to  the  original  nations  of  America,  many 
of  which  have  yet  as  much  affinity  as  the  Latin  and  Greek,  or 
English  and  German. 

They  are  the  following :  fourteen  from  North,  and  eleven  from 
South  America. 

1 .  Languages  and  Nations  from  North  America. 

1.  Uslcih,  divided  into  about  30  dialects  and  tribes  ;  such  as 
Esquimaux,  Moeuts,  Chugach,  Aleutian,  Chuclii,  &c,  spoken  all 
over  Boreal  America,  from  Behring's  strait  and  Alaski  to  Labrador 
and  Greenland. 

2.  Onguy,  about  50  dialects  and  tribes  ;  Huron,  Onondaga,  Sen- 
eca, Hochelaga,  Tuscorora,  Notoway,  &c,  extending  from  the  Pa- 
cific ocean  to  Canada  and  Carolina. 


310 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


3.  Lenup,  nearly  250  dialects  and  tribes ;  such  as  Chinuc,  Din- 
neh,  Algic,  Shawan,  Miami,  Micmac,  Mohegan,  Nantico,  Pow- 
hatan, &c.j  extended  from  the  Columbia  river  on  the  Pacific  ocean 
to  Hudson  bay,  New-Eugland  and  Florida. 

4.  Wacashy  about  60  dialects  and  tribes ;  Atnah,  Chopunish, 
Coluch,  Chingita,  8;c,  sooken  from  California  to  latitude  55  in  the 
northwest  coast  of  America. 

5.  Skereh,  above  125  dialects  and  tribes^;  Panis,  Seris,  Pakis, 
Lepan,  Shoshoni,  Opata,  Uchis,  Poyay,  &c,  extending  from  Slave 
lake  to  California,  Texas,  Florida,  and  Honduras. 

6.  Nachezy  nearly  75  dialects  and  tribes ;  Cado,  Yatasih,  Wo- 
con,  Cuza,  Cataba,  &c,  extending  from  S'naloa  in  the  west,  to 
Carolina  in  the  east. 

7.  Capahdy  about  50  dialects  and  tribes ;  Washasha,  Yatani, 
Oto,  Ochagra,  Dacota,  &c,  extending  from  the  head  of  Missouri 
river  to  the  Wabash  and  Arkanzas  river.  - 

8.  Chactah,  ahove  40  dialects  and  tribes  j  Chicasa,  Yazu,  Corea. 
Humah,  Muskolgih,  Seminole,  &c,  extending  from  Texas  to 
Florida. 

9.  Otalijy  about  25  dialects  and  tribes  ;  Tsuluki  or  Cherokee*, 
Tallegha,  Talahuicas,  Talahasi,  &c,  extending  from  the  Alleghany 
mountains  to  the  mountains  of  Mexico. 

10.  Atalariy  about  35  dialects  and  tribes  ;  Tala  or  Tarasca,  Ma- 
talan,  Tulan,  Tecas,  Tolban,  Colima,  Tarahumara,  &c,  extending 
from  New-Mexico  to  Mihuacan  and  Nicaragua. 

11.  Otomi.,  about  20  dialects  and  tribes  ;  Miges,  Dotami,  Ma- 
zahuy,  &c,  extending  from  Arkanzas  to  Mexico. 

12.  Aztec,  about  20  dialects  and  tribes  ;  Tolteca,  Olmeca,  Cora, 
Pipii,  &c,  extending  from  Mexico  to  Nicaragua. 

13.  Maya,  about  40  dialects  and  tribes ;  Huazteca,  Pnconchi, 
Guichi,  &c,  extending  from  Texas  to  Yucatan,  and  Guatimala. 

14.  Chontal,  about  50  dialects  and  tribes :  Tzendal,  Choles, 
Locas,  Lencas,  Zoquea,  Quelen,  Chiapan,  &c.,  extending  from 
Chiapa  to  Panama. 

2.  Languages  and  nations  of  South  America. 

15.  Amacy  having  nearly  100  dialects  and  tribes  ;  such  as  Hay- 
tian,  Cuban,  Yucayan,  Eyeri,  Cairi,  Arara,  Cumana,  Arayas,  Ara- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


an 


goas,  &c,  extending  from  the  islands  of  Bahama  and  Cuba  to  Coro, 
Cumana,  Guyana  and  Brazil. 

16.  Calina,  about  122  dialects  and  tribes;  Carib,  Galibi,  Yaoy, 
Tamanac,  Guarivar,  Gotos,  Chaymas,  Gutacas,  &c,  spread  from 
the  Carib  islands  ;o  Darien,  Jronoco,  Guyana  and  Brazil. 

17.  Puns,  about  90  dialects  and  tribes  ;  Mavpuris,  Achaguas, 
Coropos,  Carnacan,  Partxis,  Parias,  &c,  extending  from  Paria  and 
the  Oronoco  to  Brazil  and  Paraguay. 

18.  Yaruru,,  about  25  dialects  and  tribes;  Betoy,  Arico,  Ele, 
Yaros,  Charua,  Ozomaca,  Gaun?,  &c.,  ipread  from  the  river  Oro- 
noco to  the  river  Parana  and  Popayan. 

19.  Cuna,  about  25  dialects  and  tribes;  such  as  Uraba,  Darien, 
Cunacuna,  Choco,  Coeinas,  &c,  spread  from  Panama  to  Coro  and 
Popayan. 

20.  Mayna,  about  60  dialects  and  tribes;  Yameos,  Amaonos, 
Manoa,  Cauchas,  Panos,  Managua,  Srlimos,  Aguanos,  &c,  spread 
from  Popayan  and  Quito  to  the  Maranon  and  Parana. 

21.  Maca,  about  100  dialect?  and  tribes;  Muhizcc  Yuncas, 
Zamuca,  Pancha,  Moxos,  Otomacas,  Toa,  Pinoco,  Chsco,  &c, 
spreading  throughout  South  America  from  Cundiiiamarea  to  Peru, 
and  Brazil. 

22.  Guarani,  nearly  300  dialects  and  tribes;  Tupi,  Oma^ua, 
Cocama,  Guyana,  Payugua,  &c,  spread  throughout  Brazil,  and 
from  the  Andes  to  the  Atlantic  sef»j  as  far  south  as  Buenos  Ayres. 

23.  Maran,  about  50  dialects  and  tribes ;  Quichua,  Aymaru, 
Muras,  Marahas,  Andoa.  Moratas,  Zapibo,  Cuyaba,  &c.,  spread 
from  Peru  in  the  west  to  Brazil  in  the  east,  on  both  sides  of  the 
equator. 

24.  Luley  about  25  dialects  and  tribes  ;  Vilela,  Mocobi,  Abipon, 
Toba,  Atalala,  &c,  spread  through  Chaco,  Tucuman  and  Para- 
guay. 

25.  Chili,  about  20  dialects  and  tribes ;  Puelche,  Chonos, 
Araucan,  Tehuelet,  Yacanac,  Kemenet,  &c,  spread  all  over  Aus- 
tral America  from  Chili  to  Magelania  and  the  Fuego  islands. 

Even  these  twenty-five  languages  and  original  nations  may  per- 
haps be  reduced  to  eighteen,  by  more  accurate  investigation  ;  thus 
the  4th  and  5th  may  become  united  ;  as  well  as  6  and  9,  7  and  11, 
9  and  10,  as  they  have  considerable  analogies.    The  same  may 


312 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


happen  iu  South  America  with  15  16  and  19,  also  with  17  18  and 
20,  which  approximate  by  gradual  dialects. 

C.  S.  RAFINESQUE. 

July  4th,  1829. 

Remark. — The  above  wfcs  published  :'n  the  Evening  Post;  it  is 
now  re-printed,  because  it  is  the  key  to  American  ethnology,  phi- 
lology and  history.  The  prools  would  fill  volumes.  It  is  results 
thdt  analytical  sciences  chiefly  require.  The  wide  extent  of  Na- 
tions 1,  2,  3,  12,  15,  16,  22,  were  already  acknowledged;  the 
others  depend  on  my  researches,  and  are  open  yet  to  many  im- 
provements, nay,  I  have  effected  some  since  1829. 

The  Atlantic  Nat:o?is  of  America. 

The  ocean  separating  Europe  and  Africa  from  America  is  yet 
called  the  Atlantic  ocean,  our  litoral  states  are  called  the  Atlantic 
states.  The  Atlantes  of  North  Africa,  who  gave  ^heir  name  to  the 
Atlus  mountains,  and  whose  descendants  exist  there  as  yet  under 
the  names  of  Taurics,  Berbers,  Shelluh,  Showiah,  &c,  were  one 
of  the  primitive  nations  of  both  continents.  They  came  to  Ameri- 
ca soon  after  the  flood,  if  not  before,  colonised  and  named  the  ocean 
and  the  islands  in  it,  as  well  as  America,  which  was  called  the 
Great  Atlantis,  or  rather  Atala,  meaning  the  first,  or  main  land. 
This  name  is  preserved  in  Hindu  traditions.  The  Atlantes  wrere 
not  the  only  primitive  colonists  of  America,  but  they  were  the 
most  conspicuous  and  civilized.  Their  true  name  was  Atalans. 
They  may  have  been  the  founders  of  Otolum,  and  many  other  an- 
cient cities.  Their  descendants  exist  to  this  day  in  America,  under 
the  names  of  Tolas  or  Tarascas,  Atalalas,  Matolans,  Talegawis, 
Otalis  or  Tsululds,  Talahuicas,  Chontalas  or  Tsendalas,  &c,  from 
Carolina  to  Guatimala. 

When  Columbus  discovered  again  America,  he  and  the  earliest 
explorers  were  struck  with  the  similarity  between  mauy  American 
tribes,  and  the  Guanches  of  the  Canary  islands,  remains  of  the 
Oce^ie  Atlantes,  in  features,  manners  and  speech.  Whether  the 
Haytians,  Cubans  and  Aruacs,  were  genuine  Atlantes,  is  rather 
doubtful,  because  their  language  is  more  akin  to  the  Pelagic  than 
the  Atlantic.  But  three  at  least  out  of  the  twenty-five  original  na- 
tions of  America  above  enumerated,  may  safely  be  deemed  chil- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


315 


tiren  of  the  Atlantes.  They  are  the  ninth  or  Otalis,  the  tenth  or 
Atalans,  and  the  fourteenth  or  Chontals. 

This  could  be  proved  in  many  ways,  and  by  their  languages  com- 
pared with  those  of  their  African  brethren,  Tuarics,  Guanches,  &c. 
after  a  separation  of  several  thousand  years.  But  the  proofs  would 
fill  a  volume. 

Our  actual  Cherokis  and  akin  tribes  are  the  children  of  the  first 
branch,  named  Otalis.  This  was  their  original  name.  Adair  only 
100  years  ago  says,  that  the  genuine  or  upland  Cherokis  were  cal- 
led Otalis,  which  name  meant  mountaineers  as  in  Africa.  They 
call  themselves  now  Tsulukis.  Our  name  of  Cherokis  is  derived 
from  the  word  Chelakis,  name  of  a  tribe.  They  have  not  the 
sound  of  R  in  their  speech.  Only  one  tribe  substitutes  R  to  L. 
The  interesting  history  of  this  nation  shall  deserve  our  attention 
hereafter.  The  Chontal  branch  or  nation  will  come  under  notice 
in  investigating  the  antiquities  of  Otolum  or  Palenque.  It  remains 
here  to  survey  the  genuine  branch  of  Atalans;  eldest  perhaps  of 
the  American  Atlantes. 

Among  this,  the  best  known  (and  yet  hardly  known)  are  the 
Tarascas  of  Michuacan,  in  West  Mexico ;  the  brave  nation  that 
first  asserted  the  late  Mexican  independence.  Their  true  name  is 
Tala,  and  Tala,  s,  ca,  meaning  Tala  self,  the,  or,  in  our  idiom, 
the  veryself  Tala.  They  have  no  r  in  their  speech,  and  this  name 
was  changed  by  the  Othomis  and  Mexicans  into  Tarascas.  See 
grammar  of  their  language  by  Basalenque,  Mexico,  1714. 

From  this  interesting  little  work,  some  other  account  from  Vater, 
and  the  Spanish  writers,  we  learn  something  of  their  language 
which  is  yet  spoken  and  may  be  thoroughly  studied.  We  also 
learn  that  they  formed  a  powerful  and  civilized  kingdom,  indepen- 
dent of  Mexico,  at  the  Spanish  invasion,  which  became  the  ally  of 
the  Spaniards,  but  was  by  them  subdued  by  treachery  and  infa- 
mous conduct.  But  we  learn  very  little  of  their  previous  history: 
and  the  little  known  is  buried  in  untranslated  Spanish  books.  It 
is  by  thfXr  language  that  we  can  hope  to  trace  their  origin  and  most 
remote  history.  Languages  do  not  lie,  says  Home  Tooke.  They 
reveal  what  time  has  buried  in  oblivion. 

We  shall  therefore  give  some  account  of  it,  that  the  learned  or 
curious  may  study  its  affinities.  So  far  as  we  have  done  so  alrea- 
dy, we  have  been  struck  with  its  evident  analogy  with  the  Atlan- 

40 


314 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


tic,  Coptic,  Pelagic,  Greek,  Latin  and  Italian  languages  of  Africa 
and  Europe,  both  in  words  and  structure,  in  spite  of  a  separation 
of  some  thousand  years. 

This  language  is  rich,  beautiful,  and  highly  complex.  It  amal- 
gamates particles  to  modify  the  words,  as  in  Italian.  The"  verbs 
have  fifteen  modifications,  as  in  Italian,  or  nearly  so ;  they  can  be 
compounded  as  in  Greek.  It  admits  of  all  the  Greek  rhetorical 
figures.  The  plural  is  formed  by  x.  It  has  nearly  all  the  Euro- 
pean vocal  sounds  except  /  and  r;  also  no  gw,  and  no  //;  but  it  has 
three  sibilant  ts,  tx  and  tzh. 

The  analogies  with  the  Italian  are  striking  in  the  following 
phrases,  and  some  even  appear  with  the  Saxon  English. 


English. 

Tola, 

Italian, 

1.  Thou 

Thu 

Tu 

2,  Was  (wast) 

Esca 

Sei  (fosti) 

3.  Thou  who 

Thuqui 

Tu  che 

4.  Spoke 

Vandahaca 

Favelasti 

1.  I 

Hi 

Io 

2.  Was 

Esca 

Sie  (fui) 

3.  I  who 

Hiquinini 

Io  che 

4.  Loved 

Paraphzahaca 

Amai 

1 .  Is  not 

Noxas 

Non  E 

2.  So  wise 

Mimixcti 

Amico  (savio) 

3.  As  I 

Isqui  hi 

Com'io. 

The  following  vocabulary  of  85  words,  gives  a  fair  sample  of  the 
language.  The  affinities  with  the  Pelagic  and  its  children,  Greek, 
Latin,  Etruscan  and  Italian,  are  marked  by  the  letter  P ;  those  with 
the  Atlantic  dialects  of  Africa,  with  the  letter  A.  They  amount  to 
50  out  of  85  with  the  Pelagic,  or  60  per  cent,  of  analogy  ;  and  to 
33  out  of  65  with  the  Atlantic,  or  51  per  cent.  These  are  striking 
facts,  deserving  attention,  in  spite  of  the  unbelief  some  ignorant 
or  lazy  philosophers  or  historians,  who  neglect  or  disbelieve  these 
evident  proofs.  The  sixteen  English  affinities  are  marked  by  an 
asterisk.    The  orthography  is,  of  course,  Spanish. 

English.  Tola.  English.  Tola. 

Water  A  ma,  Ma,  A.  P.       Land*       Haca,  eche,  andatze. 

Fire  Pa,  vepo,  tani,  A.  P.  A.  P. 


AND  DI8C0VER1ES  IN  THE  WEST, 


315 


Tala. 

English. 

Tala- 

otone 

1  zacapu,zampsin,  A. P. 

x  nine 

T  \\  1 1 1 C  Vi  A  X7  A  1"! 
J.  11U1LUOVC11 

Cuin,  A. 

x  ou 

i nucna. 

n 

iYleQ 

X  UCLUd ,   X  • 

X  UU  1  3 

Tnnrn8V*ri 

X  LJUcUaVCll 

TV/for!  11  P 

iviann,  r. 

vv  e 

i j ucna 

Dog 

v  lcnu,  A. 

Ours 

nucnaven 

Mountain* 

v  ata,  A. 

i  nis 

T  P 

otar 

Hosqua 

These 

IX 

Day 

Vina,  Jr. 

l  nat 

1    n         A        1  1T1.  A 

inue,  ima. 

IN  ignt 

Ahchiun,  tzire 

Mine,  own 

I — 1  n  a  U  a  rr  i 

riucne  vi 

Heaven* 

Parini,  avandu,  A.  P> 

Joe 

TT    A  P 
Hi,  A.  x  • 

House* 

U,  cnao,  jr.  a. 

Trt  Via 

10  Dc 

T?ni     A  P 

i^ni,  A-  x. 

x1  amer 

l ata,  a.  x  • 

1  am 

ijnaca,  a.  x  . 

iviotner 

i\ana,  r. 

is 

"ITefi      A  P 

JlrfSll,  A.  Jt . 

IldllUj  dim 

v/U,  AUj  /X« 

Wac 

TTUra     A  P 

X-4oCd.,   jtV.   X  • 

J?  001 

iSii  A 
UU,  A. 

Place*  earth 

*oan,  naca,  At  r 

Hoar" 

neau 

Tci  P 

1  SI,  1  • 

King 

irecna,  ja. .  x . 

Mouth* 

A.  Jr. 

Kingdom 

Arikeve,  P. 

£>eara 

Jtiapu,  l  . 

Name 

Acan,  guriqua 

"Find  tail 

XJ11U,  tall 

Vara  P 

1  did)  1 . 

Fish 

X  loll 

lVTprKnn  P 

liJLCCllUd)    X  • 

une 

i>ian 

PifT7* 

r  aiziza,  jr. 

XXlUllC 

lUdllLU 

T  IA All* 

T  "«i  vi  nn  T"r\ci 
1  dAlIUdlUd 

Tar, 

l  en 

Y,m  p 

Aam,  Jr. 

r  esiivai 

IVfof  /-if  .ocs  P 

lvieioies,  x. 

lviucn 

v^an*,  a. 

To  give 

Inspeni 

TM  Oof* 

x  ricst 

Ainijen,  x» 

itt t i f  a 
IU  WIJLc 

C!nr5»ni  P 
vydlalil,  IT. 

quinametin 

To  say 

xiarani,  Jr. 

God 

Tucapacha,  A. 

i  o  noiu 

Uhcamani 

Just 

Casipeti 

j.  o  wasn 

Hopo 

Good 

Ambaqueti 

To  think 

Hangue,  P. 

Wise,friendMimi,  P.  A. 

i  o  taKe 

Piron  P 

nran,  Jr. 

Little 

Caxeti 

i  o  come 

Hurani,  P.  Tirovi 

Tree 

Emba,  ches,  A..  P. 

X1  oou 

Caro,  aqua,  P.  A. 

Bark 

Chucari,  P. 

Drink 

Itsima,  A. 

Leaf 

Zahcuri 

Handsome 

1  zitzis,  A. 

Bread 

Curinda,  A. 

Living 

l  zipen,  x . 

Color* 

Chara,  P. 

To  live 

Tzipeni 

Plain 

Pe,  P. 

Singer 

Pireti,  P. 

Sand 

Cutza 

To  sing 

Pireni 

Peak 

Phurequa,  P. 

Not*  ' 

Nosas,  P.  A, 

31G 

AMERICAN 

ANTIQUITIES 

Tula. 

English. 

Tola 

Lvil 

Sismaraqui,  himboo 

T  ■  1   _  % 

Like,  as 

1    r> 

lsqui,  r. 

Boat 

Xu,  A. 

Love 

Jrampza,  r> 

Sell* 

S,  P. 

Speech 

Vanda,  P. 

I,  me** 

Hi,  P.  A. 

Who,  whom 

Qui,  P. 

Myself 

His,  P.  A. 

The 

Ca 

Thou* 

Thu,  P. 

FURTHER  ACCOUNTS  OF  COLONIES  FROM  EUROPE  SETTLED 

IN  AMERICA. 

On  the  Zapotecas,  and  other  Tribes  of  the  State  of  Oaxaca. 
By  C.  S.  Rafinesque. 

It  is  to  be  regretted,  that  the  author  of  the  notice  on  the  Zapote- 
cas of  Oaxaca,  and  their  temple  of  Mitctla,  inserted  in  the  Septem- 
ber No.  of  the  Journal  of  Geology,  has  remained  anonymous  :  hav- 
ing stated  some  new  historical  facts,  he  ought  to  have  given  his 
name,  since  he  has  quoted  no  authority.  For  instance  to  what  au- 
thor had  he  access  to  for  the  names  of  the  two  last  kings  of  the 
Zapotecas,  Cosi-foeza  and  Cosi-xopu?  When  did  they  cease  to 
rule,  and  is  there  a  longer  list  of  these  kings  ? 

Some  account  of  these  kings  and  their  deeds,  as  well  as  the  Za~ 
poteca  language,  which  is  hardly  known,  would  have  been  more 
acceptable  to  the  learned,  than  the  notice  on  Mictla,  called  Mitla 
by  Humboldt,  and  already  described  by  him,  with  a  figure.  Evert 
the  true  name  of  the  Zapotecas  in  their  own  language  is  unknown, 
that  name  being  merely  a  nickname  given  them  by  their  foes,  the 
Aztecas  or  Mexicans :  it  means  Apple-people,  Tecas  (People)  and 
Zapo,  or  Zapotl,  a  generic  name  for  apples.  (Tl  added  to  words 
answers  in  Azteca  to  our  article  the.)  It  is  by  these  nicknames 
that  the  American  tribes  have  been  disfigured  and  swelled  beyend- 
truth.  The  first  inquiry  in  their  history  is  to  ascertain  their  true 
national  name,  which  is  often  no  easy  task. 

My  authorities  for  the  following  account  are,  Herrera's  History 
*>f  Spanish  America  from  1492  to  155*1,  Garcia's  Ongen  delos  In- 


ANB  DISCOVERIES   IN  THE  WEST. 


317 


4ios,  Laet,  Clavigero,  Humboldt,  Diaz,  Vater,  Siguenza,  Acosta, 
Torquemada,  Touron,  Alcedo,  &c. 

Oaxaca  is  a  fine  province,  (now  state,)  south  of  Vera  Cruz,  and 
southeast  of  Mexico.  It  was  founded  in  1580  by  the  union  of  the 
two  provinces  of  Zapolecas  and  Miztecas,  the  name  being  given 
the  city  of  Guaxaca,  formerly  Huacxyacac,  and  now  softened  into 
Oaxaca)  capital  of  the  estate  of  Cortez,  who  was  made  Marquis  of 
Guaxaca,  in  reward  of  his  conquest,  or  rather  invasion  of  Mexico. 

The  Miztecas  dwelt  between  the  Zapotecas  and  Mexico ;  they 
were  a  fierce  nation,  yet  at  war  with  the  Spaniards  and  Zapotecas 
in  1572,  and  only  subdued  between  1572  and  1580.  (Laet.~)  Their 
name  has  been  spelt  also  Mixtecas,  Mictec,  Mixes,  Micos,  Mecos, 
Miges,  &c.  All  these  names,  leaving  off  teens,  which  means  peo- 
ple, imply  Lion,  or  rather  Cuguar,  an  animal  of  the  tiger  genus, 
which  was  the  emblem  or  progenitor  of  the  nation,  (M2,  tiger  ge- 
nus, in  Azteca.)  But  the  Mexicans  changed  it  by  contempt,  pro- 
bably, into  MIC,  Mix  or  Mec,  a  single  word  meaning  four  things  in 
Azteca,  which  are  connected  in  the  language :  north,  hell,  devil, 
apes.  This  is  evidently  the  root  of  Miclla,  tla  being  the  article  or 
an  abreviation  of  tian  a  place. 

It  is  by  this  apparently  trivial  examen  and  etymology  that  I  have 
come  to  the  important  conclusion,  that  the  Miztecas  and  Zapotecas 
are  the  .modern  remains  of  the  ancient  nations  of  Olmecas  and 
Xicalancas,  mentioned  in  Mexican  history  as  anterior  to  the  Tolte- 
ces  in  Anahuac  ;  and  that  the  Otomis  and  Chichhnecas  were  also 
consimilar  tribes.  Here  it  will  be  needful  to  refer  to  ancient  tra- 
ditions, which  are  not  all  lost.  Although  Zumaraga,  first  bishop 
of  Mexico,  and  extolled  for  his  zeal  by  the  monks,  behaved  in 
Mexico  as  Omar  had  done  in  Egypt,  by  burning  the  libraries  of 
Tezcuco,  the  Athens  of  Anahuac,  (those  of  Mexico  itself  had  been 
lost  in  the  siege,)  he  c«uld  not  destroy  all  the  books  scattered 
through  the  whole  of  Anahuac.  Many  are  yet  extant.  Herrera 
and  Garcias  have  given  some  of  the  traditions  of  the  Zapotecas  and 
Miztecas,  neglected  by  Clavigero  and  Humboldt.  An  English 
lord  has  lately  published  a  splendio?  work  on  some  Mexican  anti- 
quities and  manuscripts.  The  library  of  the  Philosophical  society 
of  Philadelphia  has  the  fac  similie  of  an  Azteca  manuscript  which 
I  have  decypheredi 


318  AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 

The  Zapotecas  boast  of  being  antediluvian  in  America,  to  have 
built  the  city  of  Coallan  (snake  place  in  Azteca,)  327  years  before 
the  flood,  and  to  have  escaped  the  flood  with  their  king  Petela, 
(Dog)  on  the  mountain  of  Coatlan  (Garcias.)  Which  of  the  two 
floods  of  the  Aztecas  this  was,  whether  that  of  Xelhua,  or  of  Cox- 
cox  is  hard  to  say.  The  Petela,  or  Dog  dynasty,  ruled  over  them 
ever  since  till  the  Spanish  conquest. 

The  Coatlatccas,  (Snake-people J  or  Cuitlatecas,  Cuycatecas, 
(Singing-people,)  or  Cuiscatecas,  and  the  Popaloavas,  are  tribes  of 
Zapotecas,  speaking  dialects  of  the  same  language,  of  which  Cla- 
vigero  says  there  is  a  grammar,  but  Vater  has  not  given  any  words 
of  it.  I  have  been  able  to  collect  only  twelve  words  of  it  out  of 
six  authors. 


God,  or  Creator  of  all  things, 

Ahcabohuil. 

Spirit, 

Vinac. 

House,  or  place, 

Eaa. 

^a  in  Mizteca. 

Brother, 

Him. 

Cuhua  do 

Dog, 

Petela. 

Repose,  or  death, 

Lio,  leo. 

Leob  do 

Heaven, 

Avan. 

Andevui  do 

Earth, 

Baca. 

Gnuagnuag  do 

Hell,  or  evil, 

Chevan. 

Kuachi  do 

Woman, 

Yxca. 

Eve,  or  first  woman, 

Xtmana. 

Adam,  or  first  man, 

Xchmel. 

Whereby  it  is  seen  that  out  of  six  words  which  I  have  to  com- 
pare in  Mizteca,  four  are  similar,  and  two  not  very  different 
Therefore  the  just  conclusion  is,  that  the  Mizteca  and  Zapoteca 
are  also  dialects  of  each  other,  or  languages  very  nearly  related. 
The  same  with  the  Zacalecas. 

Of  the  Mizteca,  Vater  has  given  many  words ;  he  surmises  that 
it  is  very  near  to  the  Othomiz  or  Otomi :  and  he  considers  several 
other  languages  of  Anahuac  as  dialects  of  it ;  they  are  the  Zoque, 
LacandonCj  Maine,  Zeltales  or  Celdalcs,  Chiapaneca,  Mazateca, 
Choc.hona,  besides  the  Mixe  and  Cuiscatcca  already  mentioned. 
This  if  true  would  diminish  the  number  of  languages  of  that  region 
and  extend  the  Mizteca  nation  far  to  the  south  and  east  in  Gua- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


319 


timala,  as  the  Otomi  and  Chlchimecas  will  extend  it  far  to  the 
north. 

I  have  a  good  vocabulary  before  me  of  the  Othomiz  language, 
by  De  Neve,  1767,  and  although  only  ten  words  can  be  found  in 
the  Mizteca  of  Vater,  five  of  them  are  alike  or  similar,  which  give* 
fifty  per  cent  of  mutual  affinity,  and  leaves  little  doubt  of  their 
primitive  connection.    These  words  are, 


Othomiz. 

Mizteca. 

Father 

Hta 

Dzutun 

Land 

Hay 

Gnuagnay 

Nose 

Xinu 

Dztni 

Son 

Batzi 

Dzaya 

Bread 

Thume 

Dzite 

The  ChichimecaSy  (Dog-devils,  or  Northern-dogs  in  Aztecas)  are 
not  a  nation,  but  this  appellation  was  given  to  all  the  northern  wild 
tribes  and  foes  of  the  Aztecas,  even  to  one  speaking  the  Azteca 
language,  and  lately  to  many  of  the  Apaches,  Skere  or  Pani  tribes, 
forming  a  nation  spread  from  Anahuac  to  Oregon  and  Athabasca 
lake,  among  which  the  Shoshonis  of  Oregon  bear  also  the  name  of 
Snake  Indians  as  yet. 

In  result  I  am  led  to  believe  that  the  Miztecas  and  Zapotecas 
were  once  with  the  Otomis  and  many  others,  the  Snake  nation  of 
America,  which  did  afterwards  divide  into  the  Dog  and  Cat  tribes, 
or  Zapotecas  and  Miztecas.  The  same  has  happened  in  Asia  and 
North  America,  where  many  nations  ascribe  their  origin  to  Snake- 
men,  Dog-men,  and  Cat-men,  or  people. 

The  OlmecuSy  or  Olmec,  or  Hulmecs  of  ancient  Anahuac,  whose 
name  means  Old  Devils  in  Azteca,  are  said  to  have  settled  in  Ana- 
huac after  the  Othomiz,  but  with  their  allies,  the  Xicalianeas,  or 
Xicayans,  whose  name  we  may  recognize  in  the  Cuycatecas  of 
modern  times,  and  were  probably  the  old  Zapotecas,  the  Southern 
Miztecas,  are  yet  called  Xicayans. 

Their  settlement  is  so  ancient,  that  it  is  beyond  the  Azteca,  and 
even  Tolteca  chronology.  It  happened,  after  the  sway  of  Gods, 
Giants  and  Apes,  different  nations.  They  conquered  and  expelled 
the  Giants  or  Titans  of  Anahuac,  called  Tuinametin  and  Tzocuit- 
lixeque,  and  took  the  name  of  Tequenes,  or  People  of  Tigers 
They  were  divided  into  three  tribes,  Olmecasy  "Kxcahns  and  Zaca>~ 


320 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


tecas,  speaking  jhe  same  language.  (See  Torquemada.)  They 
came  from  the  snowy  mountains,  and  united  for  this  conquest  under 
the  king  Coxanatecuhtli,  building  many  cities,  and  ruling  a  long 
while  over  Anahuac. 

Another  tradition  traces  the  origin  of  the  Hulmecas  to  Hulme- 
catl,  brother  of  Xelhua,  the  Noah  of  Anahuac,  and  indicates  seve- 
ral dynasties  ruling  successively  their  empire  :  Ulmec,  Cochoblam, 
Quetzalcoatl,  the  famous  legislator  of  Cholula,  Huemac,  and  ends 
by  Colopecthtli,  last  king,  killed  by  the  Tlascalans  towards  1196 
of  our  era,  who  drove  them  to  the  east,  settling  in  their  country. 
The  last  we  hear  of  the  Ulmecas  in  the  Aztec  history,  is  in  1457 
and  1467,  when  those  of  Cotasta,on  the  sea  shore,  were  conquered 
by  Montezuma  I.  While  this  name  disappears  from  history,  that 
of  the  Miztecas  and  Zapotecas  appears  in  the  same  place,  or  to  the 
southeast  of  Mexico,  and  thus  the  evidence  is  complete  that  they 
were  the  same  nation  under  different  names. 

In  1454  the  Miztecas  won  a  great  battle  over  the  Aztecas  and 
their  allies,  whose  real  sway  in  Anahuac  only  began  towards  1425, 
and  hardly  lasted  one  century.  In  1455  Atonaltzin,  king  of  Miz- 
tecas, although  helped  by  the  Tlascalans,  was  taken,  and  his  king- 
dom conquered.    This  king  is  elsewhere  called  Yaguitlan. 

The  Miztecas  rebelled  in  1480,  and  in  1486  the  Zapotecas  re- 
sisted the  whole  power  of  Mexico.  But  at  last  became  tributary; 
yet  in  1506  and  1507  they  both  were  at  war  again  with  Mexico. 

Although  overjoyed  at  the  downfall  of  the  Mexicans,  effected  by 
one  hundred  thousand  Tlascalans  and  allies,  among  which  were 
some  Miztecas,  and  nine  hundred  Spaniards,  under  Cortez,  they 
did  not  readily  submit  to  the  Spanish  yoke  and  tribute  after  the  fall 
of  Mexico  in  1521. 

In  1522  the  Zapotecas  defeated  Sandoval,  and  were  only  con- 
quered in  1526  by  Olmedo,  (See  Diaz)  but  they  have  often  rebelled 
against  the  Spaniards.  In  1572  the  Miztecas  were  at  war  with 
the  Spaniards  and  the  Zapotecas.  These  had  been  conciliated 
by  the  mild  rule  of  their  lord,  Cortez,  who  established  only  a  small 
quit  rent  on  laud,  without  any  forced  labor.  This  system  has 
made  Oaxaca  a  flourishing  city  and  province. 

The  Zapotecas  and  Miztecas  are  represented  as  the  handsomest 
Indians  of  Mexico,  nearly  white,  and  the  females  are  beautiful,  as 
white  as  the  Spanish  women.    This  also  happens  in  Zacatecas,  a 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  .THE  WEST. 


321 


province  of  the  former  Olmecas:  therefore  it  appears  that  this  race 
is  distinct  from  the  Azteca  or  Mexican  nation  in  features  as  well  as 
languages:  notwithstanding  that  some  writers  wrongly  assert,  that 
the  Olmecas  spoke  the  same  language  as  the  Astecas  and  Toltecas. 
The  Mixes  have  sometimes  long  beards,  and  resemble  European  : 
they  are  a  tribe  of  Miztecas.  Thus  we  find  by  investigation  that 
the  nations  and  languages  of  the  Mexican  states  are  as  easily  re- 
duced to  a  small  number,  as  those  of  the  remainder  of  North  Ame- 
rica. 

The  theogony,  cosmogony  and  religion  of  the  Miztecas  and  Za- 
potecas  was  also  very  different  from  the  Mexicans,  although  they 
had  latterly  adopted  their  bloody  rites  of  the  god  of  evil.  The 
Miztecas  of  Cuilapo  according  to  a  book  written  by  a  Spanish  monk 
in  the  Miztecas  language  and  figures,  (preserved  by  Garcias)  as- 
cribe their  oiigin  to  a  god  and  goddess  named  Lion  Snake  and  Ty- 
ger  Snake  dwelling  in  Apoala  or  heavenly  seat  of  Snakes  before 
the  flood.  They  had  two  sous  (or  nations)  an  Eagle  called  Wind  of 
9  Caves,  and  a  Dragon  or  Winged  Snake  called  Wind  of  9  Snakes. 

They  were  driven  from  Apoala  for  their  wickedness  and  perish- 
ed in  a  great  flood.  In  Apoala  we  find  the  Tlapala  or  ancient  seat 
of  the  Mexicans :  which  is  perhaps  the  Apalachi  mountains  of 
North  America,  where  was  once  the  holy  mountain,  temple  and 
cave  of  Olaimi  (see  Brigstock)  which  name  recalls  to  mind  the  Ol- 
mecas! and  all  these  names  answer  in  import  and  sound  to  the 
Olympus  of  the  Greeks. 

The  Zapotecas  had  similar  but  more  definite  ideas.  Ahcabohuil 
was  the  Creator  of  all  things;  but  a  divine  man  and  divine  woman 
Xchmel  and  Xtmana  were  the  progenitors  of  mankind  and  of  the 
3  great  gods  Avan  god  of  heaven,  Baca  god  of  earth  and  Ckevan 
god  of  hell.  These  3  brothers  are  surprisingly  alike  in  import  and 
names  with  the  Trimurti  or  triad  of  the  Hindus,  the  3  manifestations 
of  the  Deity  Vishnu,  Brama,  and  Shiven ! 

This  same  triad  was  worshipped  in  Chiapa,  Yucatan,  Hayti  and 
many  other  parts  of  America,  under  names  not  very  unlike,  such  as 

Izona,  Vacah  and  Estruah  in  Chiapa. 

Izona,  Bacab  and  Echvah  in  Yucatan. 

Bugia,  Bradama  and  Aiba  in  Hayti. 

Iao,  Isnez  and  Suroki  by  the  Apalachians. 

Yah,  Wachil  and  Wacki  by  the  Natchez. 

41 


322 


AilERlOAN  ANTIQUITIES 


Quoyoh,  Kiwas  and  Ocki  in  Virginia  and  Florida. 
Zungua,  Quexuga  and  Haraqui  by  the  Chicolas. 
Gorronhia,  Tahuisca  and  Oyaron  by  the  Hurons. 
Amane,  Vaca  and  Vochi  by  the  Tamanacs. 
Akambue,  Ichenin  and  Maboya  by  the  Caribs. 
Apu,  Churi  and  Voqui  in  Peru. 
Pillian,  Meulen  and  Wocuba  in  Chili. 
Nemque,  Zuhe  and  Bochica  by  the  Muyzcas. 
Guipanavi,  Avari  and  Caveri  by  the  Maipuris. 
Aygnan,  Tupan  and  Mabira  in  Brazil,  &c. 

Are  not  these  coincidences  very  surprising  and  interesting  for  the 
history  of  mankind  and  of  their  religions  ?  They  will  appear  still 
more  so  if  we  compare  them  with  the  different  triads  of  Asia  and 
other  parts.  Sometimes  the  Asiatic  names  are  more  dissimilar  be- 
tween themselves  than  the  American,  or  else  resemble  still  more 
some  of  them.  A  few  instances  will  be  sufficient,  to  prove  this  strange 
fact 

Asiatic  Triads, 
Brimha,  Vistnow  and  Etcheves, 
Tama,  Satua  and  Raju. 
Pramih,  Bichen  and  Sumbreh. 
Angeor,  Okar  and  Gun. 
Braham,  Naravan  and  Mahesa- 
Brahima,  Bala  and  Mahadeo. 
Brumany,  Ramana  and  Rudra. 
Primah,  Krishna  and  Iswara. 

The  above  by  the  Hindus  in  different  modern  languages  of  India, 
Decan,  and  Indostan  :  which  are  all  dialects  of  the  Sanscrit. 
Prahma,  Aug  and  Codon  in  Siam  and  Ava. 
Bahman,  Homi  and  Barzoi  of  Iran. 
Bahman,  Manister  and  Tamistar  of  the  Mahabad 
Hum,  Fo  and  Kya,  of  Thibet. 
Y,  Hi  and  Vi  of  the  Tao  religion  of  China. 
O,  Mi  and  To  of  the  Fo  religion  of  China. 
Eon,  Hesu  and  Pur  of  the  Phrygians. 
Samen,  Phegor  and  Zebu  of  the  Syrians. 

African  Triads. 
Anion,  Mouth  and  Khous  of  Egypt  and  Thebes . 
Ucharan,  Ahicanac  and  Guayota  of  the  Guanches. 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


3*8 


European  Triads. 

OIcus,  Pan  and  Ath  of  the  Cyclopians. 
Prome,  Epime,  and  Mene  of  the  Pelagians. 
Pan,  Eros  and  Methusa,  of  the  Greeks. 
Zeug,  Poseidon  and  Hades  of  the  Greeks. 
Ian,  Aesar,  and  Sancus  of  the  Etruscans. 
Aiu,  Aesar  and  Taut  of  the  Celts. 
Bram,  Amen  and  Vix  of  the  Oscana. 
Kog,  Om  and  Pax  of  the  Eleusinian  mysteries. 
Molk,  Fan  and  Taulas  of  Hibernians. 
Odin,  Vile  and  Ve  of  Scandinavians. 
Perun,  Morski  and  Nya  of  the  Slavonians. 

Polynesian  Traids, 

Biruma,  Vishnu  and  Uritram  of  Ceylon, 
Awun,  Injo  and  Niwo  of  Japan. 
Tane,  Akea  and  Miru  of  Havay. 
Tani,  Uru  and  Taroa  of  Taiti,  &c.  &c. 

The  order  of  these  divine  manifestations  is  of  little  consequence 
and  depends  upon  the  priority  of  those  mostly  worshipped,  whether 
the  God  of  Heaven,  Earth  or  Hell.  The  Hindus  have  now  two 
sects  worshipping  Vishnu  and  Shiva,  but  Brama  has  few  worshippers 
at  present. 

The  names  would  appear  still  more  strikingly  alike  if  they  all 
meant  the  same  ;  but  they  often  mean  the  past,  present  and  future, 
or  power,  life  and  death,  or  the  rising  blazing  and  setting  of  the  sun 
or  some  other  consimilar  ideas  instead  of  heaven,  earth  and  hell, 
although  they  always  apply  to  the  triple  manifestations  of  the  Deity 
distinguished  and  personified  in  creation,  preservation  and  destruc- 
tion. This  subject  which  might  be  pursued  much  further,  may  in- 
dicate a  primitive  conformity  of  religious  ideas  in  mankind  all  over 
the  world. 

H  Seventeen  languages  and  dialects  of  Anahuac  or  the  Mexican 
states  ate  said  to  have  been  reduced  to  grammars  and  dictionaries  by 
the  Spanish  missionaries ;  Vater  and  the  other  philologists  do  not 
appear  to  have  known  them  all.  In  order  to  draw  thereon  the  at- 
tention of  those  who  dwell  in  Mexico,  I  shall  attempt  to  enumerate 
all  the  Mexican  dialects  under  4  series:  1  well  known,  2  little  known, 
3  hardly  known  and  4  totally  unknown  to  the  learned  and  historians. 

J 


324 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


Jt  will  be  obvious  that  the  2  latter  series  require  chiefly  the  at- 
tention of  those  who  may  have  the  opportunity  to  travel  or  dwell 

in  Mexico. 

1st  Series. — Languages  or  dialects  well  known  of  which  we 
have  ample  vocabularies  and  grammars  known  to  the  learned  : — 
Azteca  or  true  Mexican,  Otomi,  Mizteca,  Maya,  Cora,  Totonaca, 
Pima,  Poconchi — 8. 

2d  Series. — Little  known  to  the  learned  at  least,  but  well  known 
in  Mexico  as  there  are  grammars  &c.  of  them  : — Tarasca,  Hnaste- 
ca,  Yaqui,  Popoluca,  Matlazinca,  Mixe,  Kiche,  Chachiquel,  Tara- 
humara,  Tepehuanan,  &c. — 10.  Of  these  I  have  procured  already 
ample  vocabularies  of  the  two  first. 

3d  Series. — Hardly  known,  of  which  we  possess  as  yet  but  few 
words : — Zapotecas,  Zacatecas,  Choi,  Chontal,  Pininda,  Opata, 
Endeve,  Quelene,  &c. — 8. 

4ih  Series. — Quite  unknown  for  lack  of  materials,  although  they 
are  yet  spoken  languages,  andsome  are  but  dialects  of  those  abore. 
Utlateca,  Cohuichi,  Tlahuichi,  Zoque,  Mame,  Chiapaneca,  Cho- 
chona,  Mazateca,  Cuiscateca,  Popaloava,  Tubar,  Yumas,  Seres, 
Moba,  &c — 14.  Besides  many  dialects  of  California,  Texas  and 
New  Mexico" 

Although  they  may  be  mere  dialects  it  is  needful  and  desirable 
to  L  ive  materials  on  each,  so  as  to  reduce  this  to  a  certainty  and  to 
trace  their  mutual  analogies  or  deviations,  as  well  as  the  probable 
time  of  the  separation  of  the  tribes. 

These  40  Mexican  dialects  will  thus  be  reduced  very  probably 
to  5  or  6  primitive  languages,  as  those  of  the  United  States  have 
already  been  reduced  to  seven,  the  Onguy,  Lenih,  Sliacth,  Otaly, 
Capaha,  Skere,  and  Nachez,  by  myself  in  the  manuscript  history 
of  the  American  nations.  And  in  the  whole  of  North  and  South 
America  hardly  25  original  languages  and  nations  are  met  with,  al- 
though actually  divided  in  1500  tribes  and  dialects  ;  as  the  actual 
European  languages,  only  6  in  number  originally,  are  now  divided 
into  600  dialecU,  some  of  which  are  even  deemed  peculiar  lan- 
guages at  present. 

Tims  these  original  or  mother  languages  of  Europe  are  the  Pe- 
1  l mii,  Celtic,  Cantabrian,  Teutonic  or  Gothic,  Thracian  or  Sla- 
vo  iian,  and  Finnish.  And  out  of  the  Gothic  have  sprung  the 
[\'i>hj  hi;*  h>  (urman,  Danish,  Swedish,  &c.  which  were  once 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


325 


mere  dialects,  but  are  now  become  languages,  having  many  dia= 
lects  of  their  own. 

Primitive  Origin  of  the  English  Language. 
By  C.  S.  Rafinesque. 

The  best  work  on  the  philosophy  and  affinities  of  the  English 
language  is,  at  present,  the  Introduction,  by  Noah  Webster,  to  his 
great  dictionary.  Yet  although  he  ha?  taken  enlarged  views  of 
the  subject,  and  by  far  surpassed  every  predecessor,  he  has  left 
much  to  do  to  those  future  philologists  and  philosophers  who  may 
be  inclined  to  pursue  the  subject  still  farther :  not  having  traced 
the  English  language  to  its  primitive  sources,  nor  through  all  its 
variations  and  anomalies. 

But  no  very  speedy  addition  to  this  knowledge  is  likely  to  be 
produced,  since  Mr.  Webster  has  stated,  in  a  letter  inserted  in  the 
Genesee  Farmer  of  March,  1832,  (written  to  vindicate  some  of  his 
improvements  in  orthography,)  that  no  one  has  been  found  in 
America  or  England  able  to  review  his  Introduction!  although 
many  have  been  applied  to  !  But  I  was  not  one  of  those  consulted, 
few  knowing  of  my  researches  in  languages,  else  I  could  have  done 
ample  justice  to  the  subject  and  Mr.  Webster. 

It  is  not  now  a  review  of  his  labors  that  I  undertake,  but  merely 
an  inquiry  into  the  primitive  origin  of  our  language,  extracted  from 
my  manuscript  Philosophy  of  the  English,  French  and  Italian  lan- 
guages, compared  with  all  the  other  languages  or  dialects  of  the 
whole  world,  not  less  than  3000  in  number. 

The  modern  English  has  really  only  one  imraedia'e  parent. 
The  old  English,  such  as  it  was  spoken  and  written  in  England, 
between  the  years  1000  and  1500,  lasting  about  five  hundred 
years,  which  is  the  usual  duration  of  fluctuating  languages.  Our 
actual  English  is  a  natural  deviation  or  dialect  of  it,  tegun  between 
1475  and  1525,  and  gradually  improved  and  polished  under  two 
different  forms,  the  written  English  aad  the  spoken  English,  which 
are  as  different  from  eacli  other  as  the  English  from  the  French. 
These  two  forms  have  received  great  accession  by  the  increase  of 
knowledge,  and  borrowing  from  many  akin  languages  words  un- 
known to  the  old  English.    They  are  both  subject  yet  to  fluctua- 


326 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITfES 


tions  of  orthogiaphy  and  pronunciation,  which  gradually  modify 
them  again. 

The  old  English  existed  probably  also  und»!r  these  two  forms, 
and  had  several  contemporaneous  dialects,  as  the  modern  English, 
of  which  the  Yorkshire  and  Scotch  dialects  ire  most  striking  in 
Europe,  while  Guyana,  Creole  and  West-India  Creole,  are  the 
most  remarkable  in  America.  Another  dialect,  filled  with  Bengali 
and  Hindostani  words,  is  also  forming  in  the  East-Indies. 

A  complete  comparison  of  the  old  and  modern  English  has  not 
yet  been  given.  A  few  striking  examples  will  here  be  inserted  as 
a  specimen  of  disparity. 


Written. 

Written. 

Spoken. 

Old  English. 

Mod.  English. 

Mod'  English. 

Loude 

Lande 

Land 

Sterre 

Star 

Star 

Erthe 

Earth 

Erthe 

Yle 

Island 

Ailend 

See 

Sea 

Si 

Benethen 

Beneath 

Binith 

Hewyn 

Heaven 

Hevn 

Hedde 

Head 

Hed 

As  late  as  the  year  1555,  we  find  the  English  language  very  dif- 
ferent from  the  actual,  at  least  in  orthography;  for  instance, 

Eng.  o/1555.  Writ  Mod.  Eng.  Spok.  Mod.  Eng. 
Preste                Priest  Prist 
Euyll                 Evil  Ivl 
Youe                  You  Yu 
Fyer                  Fire  Fayer 
Howse               House  Haus 

This  old  English  is  supposed  to  have  sprung  from  the  amalga- 
mation of  three^ languages:  British-Celtic,  Anglo-Saxon  and  Nor- 
man-French, between  the  years  1000  and  1200.  This  lias  been 
well  proved  by  many,  and  I  take  it  for  granted. 

But  the  successive  parents  and  the  genealogies  of  the  Celtic, 
Saxon  and  Norman,  are  not  so  well  understood.  Yet  through  their 
successive  and  gradual  dialects  springing  from  each  other,  are  to 
be  traced  the  anomalies  and  affinities  of  all  the  modern  languages 
ot  western  Europe 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


327 


By  this  investigation  it  is  found  that  these  three  parents  of  the 
English,  instead  of  being  remote  and  distinct  languages,  were  them- 
selves brothers,  sprung  from  a  common  primitive  source,  having 
undergone  fluctuations  and  changes  every  500  or  1000  years.  For 
instance,  the  Latin  of  the  time  of  Romulus,  was  quite  a  different 
language  from  that  spoken  in  the  time  of  Augustus,  although  this 
was  the  child  of  the  former,  this  of  the  Ausonian,  &c 

The  following  table  will  illustrate  this  fact,  and  the  subsequent 
remarks  prove  it. 

I.  Old  English  sprung  partly  from  the  British- Celtic. 

2d  Step  British  Celtic  of  Great  Britain,  sprung  from  the  Celtic 
of  West  Europe. 

2d  Step.  This  Celtic  from  the  Cumric  or  Kimran  of  Europe. 
4th  Step.  The  Cumric  from  the  Gomerian  of  Western  Asia. 
5th  Step.  The  Gomerian  from  the  Yavana  of  Central  Asia. 
6th  Step.  The  Yavana  was  a  dialect  of  the  Sanscrit. 

II.  The  Old  English  partly  sprung  from  the  Anglo-Saxon  of 
Britain. 

2d  Step.  The  Anglo-Saxon  sprung  from  Saxon  or  Sacacenas  of 
Germany. 

3d  Step.  The  Saxon  from  the  Teutonic  or  Gothic  of  Europe. 

4th  Step.  The  Teutonic  from  the  Getic  of  East  Europe. 

5th  Step.  The  Getic  from  the  Tiras  or  Tharaca  of  West  Asia. 
(Thracians  of  the  Greeks.) 

6th  Step.  The  Tiras  from  the  Cutic  or  Saca  of  Central  Asia, 
called  Scythian  by  the  Greeks. 

7th  Step.  The  Saca  was  a  branch  of  the  Sanscrit. 

III.  Old  Englishpartly  sprung  from  the  Norman  French. 

2d  Step.  The  Norman  French  was  sprung  from  the  Romanic  of 
France. 

3d  Step.  The  Romanic  from  the  Celtic,  Teutonic  and  Roman 
Latin. 

4th  Step.  Roman  Latin  from  the  Latin  of  Romulus. 
5th  Step.  The  Latin  from  the  Ausonian  of  Italy. 
6th  Step.  The  Ausonian  from  the  Pelagic  of  Greece  and  West 
Asia. 

7th  Step.  The  Pelagic  from  the  Palangsha  or  Pali  of  Central 
Asia. 

8th  Step.  The  Pali  was  a  branch  of  the  Sanscrit. 


328 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


Thus  we  see  all  the  sources  of  the  English  language  concen- 
trating by  gradual  steps  into  the  Sanscrit,  one  of  the  oldest  lan- 
guages of  Central  Asia,  which  has  spread  its  branches  all  over  the 
globe.  Being  the  original  language  of  that  race  of  men,  fathers  of 
the  Hindus,  Persians,  Europeans  and  Polynesians. 

All  the  affinities  between  English  and  Sanscrit,  are  direct  and 
striking,  notwithstanding  many  deviations,  and  the  lapse  of  ages. 
While  those  between  the  English  and  other  primitive  languages, 
such  as  Chinese,  Mongol,  Arabic,  Hebrew,  Coptic,  Berber,  &c, 
are  much  less  in  number  and  importance  ;  being  probably  derived 
from  the  natural  primitive  analogy  of  those  languages  with  the 
Sanrcrit  itself,  when  all  the  languages  in  Asia  were  intimately 
connected. 

Many  authors  have  studied  and  unfolded  the  English  analogies 
with  many  languages ;  but  few  if  any  have  ever  stated  their  nu- 
merical amount.  Unless  this  is  done  we  can  never  ascertain  the 
relative  amount  of  mutual  affinities.  It  would  be  a  very  laborious 
and  tedious  task  to  count  those  enumerated  in  Webster's  Dictiona- 
ry, My  numerical  rule  affoids  a  very  easy  mode  to  calculate  this 
amount  without  much  trouble. 

Thus,  to  find  the  amount  of  affinities  between  English  and  Latin, 
let  us  take  ten  important  words  at  random  in  each. 


Writ.  Eng. 

8j)ok.  Eng. 

Latin. 

Woman 

Vumehn 

Femina 

ffWater 

Vuater 

Aqua 

jEarth 

Erth 

Terra 

yGod 

God 

Deus 

tfSoul 

Sol 

Anima 

One 

Uahn 

Unum 

ffHouse 

Haus 

Do  mus 

fMoon 

Muhn 

Luna 

Star 

Star 

Aster 

fjGood 

Good 

Bonus 

We  thereby  find  three  affinities  in  ten,  or  30  per  cent ;  as  many 
analogies  or  semi-affinities,  marked  |,  equal  to  15  per  cent  more  ; 
and  four  words,  or  40  per  cent,  have  no  affinities.  This  will  pro- 
bably be  found  a  fair  average  of  the  mutual  rate  in  the  old  English, 
but  the  modern  has  received  so  many  Latin  synonyms  as  to  exceed 
perhaps  this  rate. 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST- 


329 


Of  these  analogies  it  is  remarkable  that  most  are  not  direct  from 
the  Latin,  or  even  through  the  French ;  but  are  of  Saxon  origin, 
which  had  them  with  the  Latin  previously. 

Thus  the  affinities  between  the  English  and  Greek  or  Russian, 
are  derived  through  the  Pelagic  and  Thracian3  unless  lately 
adopted. 

Boxhorn  and  Lipsius  first  noticed  the  great  affinities  of  words 
and  grammar  between  the  Persian  and  German  dialects.  Twenty- 
five  German  writers  have  written  on  this.  But  Weston,  in  a  very 
rare  work,  printed  at  Calcutta,  in  1816,  on  the  conformity  of  the 
English  and  European  languages  with  the  Persian,  has  much  en- 
larged the  subject,  and  has  given  as  many  as  480  consimilar  words 
between  Persian  and  Latin,  Greek,  English,  Gothic  and  Celtic : 
but  he  has  not  stated  the  numerical  amount  of  these  affinities.  All 
this  is  not  surprising,  since  the  Iranians  or  Persians  were  also  a 
branch  of  Hindus,  and  this  language  a  child  of  the  Zend,  a  dialect 
of  the  Sanscrit.  Hammer  has  found  as  many  as  560  affinities  be- 
tween German  and  Persian. 

But  the  late  work  of  Col.  Kennedy,  "Researches  on  the  Origin 
and  Affinity  of  the  principal  Languages  of  Asia  and  Europe"  Lon- 
don, 1828,  4to.,  is  the  most  important,  as  directly  concerning  this 
investigation  ;  notwithstanding  that  he  has  ventured  on  several 
gratuitous  assertions,  and  has  many  omissions  of  consequence. 

Kennedy  states  that  the  Sanscrit  has  2500  verbal  roots,  but  only 
566  have  distinct  meanings ;  while  each  admitting  of  25  suffixes, 
they  form  60,000  words,  and  as  they  are  susceptible  of  958  incre- 
ments, as  many  as  1,395,000  words  may  be  said  to  exist  in  this 
wonderful  language. 

Yet  out  of  these  2500  roots,  as  many  as  900  are  found  by  Ken- 
nedy in  the  Persian  and  European  languages,  although  the  Greek 
has  only  2200  roots,  and  the  Latin  2400.    Of  these  900  affinities 

339  are  found  in  the  Greek, 

319  in  Latin, 

265  in  Persian, 

262  in  German, 

251  in  English, 

527  in  Greek  or  Latin, 

181  in  both  German  and  English, 
31  in  all  the  five  languages. 

42 


380 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


This  is  something  positive  and  numerical  ;  but  unfortunately 
not  definite,  and  partly  erroneous,  as  will  be  proved  presently  lor 
the  English.  Kennedy  denies  affinities  between  the  Celtic  and 
Sanscrit;  but  the  very  words  he  has  offered  ?s  examples,  (only 
100,)  otter  many  evident  affinities.  His  opinion  that  the  Hindus 
and  Egyptians  came  from  the  Babylonians,  is  very  improbable,  it 
was  from  the  high  table  land  of  Central  Asia  thut  all  the  old  na- 
tions came. 

The  251  English  affinities  may  be  seen  in  Kennedy,  as  well  as 
the  339  Latin,  which  are  mostly  found  now  also  in  English  through 
the  words  derived  from  the  Latin.  These  two  united  would  be 
590  or  more  already  than  the  566  separate  ineaniBgs  of  the  San- 
scrit roots.  But  Kennedy  has  by  no  means  exhausted  the  Sanscrit 
etymologies  of  the  English.  Although  I  have  no  English  Sanscrit 
dictionary  at  hand,  yet  I  have  many  Sanscrit  vocabularies,  where 
I  find  many  words  omitted  by  Kennedy.  And  what  is  not  found 
in  the  Sanscrit  itself,  is  found  in  its  eastern  children,  the  modern 
languages  of  Hindostan. 

Among  my  vocabularies,  the  most  important  is  one  made  by  my- 
self, of  the  principal  words  of  the  old  Sanscrit,  met  with  and  ex- 
plained in  the  laws  of  Menu  translated  by  Jones.  In  these  old  and 
often  and  obsolete  words  are  found  the  most  striking  affinities  of 
which  I  here  give  the  greater  part 


English, 

Old  Sanscrit 

Written 

Spoken 

of  Menu, 

Mother 

Mother 

Mara 

Mind 

Maind 

Men 

Mankind 

Mehnkaind 

Manavah 

Era 

Ira 

Antara 

Hour 

Hauer 

Hora 

Virtuous 

Vaertius 

Verta 

Antique 

Antic 

Arti 

Beetle 

Bill 

Blatta 

Penny 

Peni 

Pana 

Gas 

Gas 

Akasa 

Father 

Father 

Vasus 

Play 

Pie 

Way  a 

Malice  (sin) 

Mails 

Mala 

Patriarch 

Patriark 

Path 

AND  DISCOVERIES  UH  THE  WEST, 


S3; 


English. 

Old  Sanscrit 

Written. 

Spoken 

of  Menu. 

Middle 

Midi 

Medhya 

Teacher 

Ticher 

Acliarya 

Bos  (master) 

Bos 

Bhos 

Before 

Bifor 

Purva 

Wind 

Vuind 

Pavana 

Deity 

Deiti 

Daitya 

Mouth 

Mauth 

Muc'ha 

Eyes 

Aiz 

Eshas 

Right 

Kait 

Rita 

Phantom 

Fan  torn 

Vantasa 

Wood 

Vud 

Venu 

Me,  mine 

Mi, 

Man 

Animate 

Animet 

Mahat 

Spirit 

Spirit 

Eshetra 

Being  twenty-eight  derivated  words  out  of  eighty-four  of  this 
old  vocabukry,  33  per  cent. 

Another  very  singular  vocabulary  I  have  extracted  from  the 
transactions  of  the  Literary  Society  of  Bombay,  and  Erskine's  ac- 
count of  the  Ancient  Mahabad  Religion  of  Balk  from  the  book  De- 
satir.  Some  words  are  given  there  of  the  language  of  the  Maha- 
bad empire,  the  primitive  Iran,  which  appears  to  be  a  very  early 
dialect  of  the  Sanscrit  and  Zend.  Out  of  thirty  words  twelve  have 
analogies  to  the  English,  equal  to  40  per  cent. 


English. 

Mahabad. 

Written. 

Spoken- 

of  Iran. 

Father 

Father 

Fiter 

End 

End 

Antan 

Course 

Kors 

Kur  (time) 

Nigh 

Nay 

Unim 

Amical 

Amikal 

Mitr  (friend) 

Globe 

Glob 

Gul 

Middle 

Midi 

Mad 

Sky 

$kay 

Kas 

Royal 

Royal 

Raka  (kingy- 

Ignate 

Ignet 

A$ai  (fire) 

Man 

Mehn 

Minhush 

Donation 

Doneshiohn 

Datisur 

332 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


I  could  add  hero  at  least  250  to  the  251  of  Kennedy,  if  it  werer 
not  too  tedious  and  long.  But  I  can  safely  vouch  that  all  the  566 
radical  roots  of  peculiar  meaning,  forming  the  base  of  the  Sanscrit, 
are  to  be  found  in  the  English  roots,  or  if  a  few  are  lacking  it  is 
merely  owing  to  some  having  become  obsolete  through  the  lapse  of 
nearly  5000  years,  when  the  Yavanas,  Sacas  and  Pallis  separated 
from  their  Hindu  brethren,  and  the  revolution  of  six  or  seven  suc- 
cessive dialects  formed  by  each,  till  they  met  again  in  the  English. 
Kennedy  has  even  some  obsolete  English  and  Scotch  words,  now 
out  of  use,  which  are  derived  from  the  Sanscrit. 

This  inquiry  is  not  merely  useful  to  unfold  the  origin  and  revo- 
lutions of  our  language  ;  but  it  applies  more  or  less  to  all  the  lan- 
guages of  Europe  ;  which  were  formed  in  a  similar  way  by  dialects 
of  former  languages.  Since  every  dialect  becomes  a  language 
whenever  it  is  widely  spread  and  cultivated  by  a  polished  nation. 
Thus  the  French,  Italian,  Spanish  Portuguese,  Romanic  and  Vala- 
quian  are  now  become  languages,  with  new  dialects  of  their  own, 
although  they  are  in  fact  mere  dialects  of  the  Latin  and  Celtic. 

The  physical  conformation  and  features  of  all  the  European  and 
Hindu  nations  are  well  known  to  agree,  and  naturalists  consider 
them  as  a  common  race.  The  historical  traditions  of  these  nations 
confirm  the  philological  and  physical  evidence.  Ail  the  European 
nations  came  from  the  east  or  the  west  of  the  Imaus  table  land  of 
Asia,  the  seat  of  the  ancient  Hindu  empires  of  Balk,  Cashmir  and 
Iran.  The  order  of  time  in  which  the  Asiatic  nations  entered  Eu- 
rope to  colonize  it  was  as  follows  : 

1.  or  most  ancient.    Esquas  or  Oscans  or  Iberians  or  Cantabrians. 

2.  Gomarians  or  Cuirtras  or  Celts  or  Gaels. 

3.  Geies  or  Goths  or  Scutans  or  Scythians. 

4.  Finns  or  Laps  or  Sames. 

5.  Tiras  or  Thracians  or  Illyrians  or  Slaves. 

6.  Pallis  or  Pelasgians  or  Hellenes  or  Greeks. 

The  settlement  in  Europe  of  these  last  is  so  remote  as  to  be  in- 
volved in  obscurity.  But  their  geographical  positions,  traditions 
and  languages  prove  their  relative  antiquity.  The  Greek  language 
is  one  of  those  that  has  been  most  permanent,  having  lasted  2500 
years,  from 'Homer's  time  to  the  Turkish  conquest.  Yet  it  sprung 
from  the  Pelagic  and  has  given  birth  to  the  Romaic  or  modern 
Greek  dialects. 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST- 


333 


COLONIES  OF  THE  DAi\ES  IN  AMERICA* 

But  besides  the  evidences  that  the  Malay,  Australasian  and 
Polynesian  tribes  of  the  Pacific  islands,  have,  in  remote  ages,  peo-  1 
pled  America,  from  the  west;  coming,  first  of  all, from  the  Asiatic 
shores  of  that  ocean  ;  and  also  from  the  east,  peopling  the  island 
Atalantis,  (equally  early,  as  we  believe,)  once  situated  between 
America  and  Europe,  and  from  this  to  the  continent;  yet  there  is 
another  class  of  antiquities,  or  race  of  population,  which,  says  Dr. 
Mitchell,  deserves  particularly  to  be  noticed.  "  These  are  the  emi- 
grants from  Lapland,  Norway,  and  Finland  ;  the  remotest  latitude 
north  of  Europe,  "  who,  before  the  tenth  century,  settled  them- 
selves in  Greenland,  and  passed  over  to  Labrador.  It  is  recorded 
that  these  adventurers  settled  themselves  in  a  country  which  they 
called  Vinland." 

Our  learned  regent,  Gov.  De  Witt  Clinton,  says  Dr.  Mitchell, 
who  has  out-done  Governeur  Colden,  by  writing  the  most  full  and 
able  history  of  the  Iroquois,  or  Five  Nations,  of  New- York,  men- 
tioned to  me  his  belief  that  a  part  of  the  old  forts  and  other  antiqui- 
ties at  Onondaga,  about  Auburn,  and  the  adjacent  country,  were  of 
Danish  character. 

"  I  was  at  once  penetrated  by  the  justice  of  his  remark ;  an  ad- 
ditional window  of  light  was  suddenly  opened  to  my  view  on  this 
subject.  I  perceived  at  once,  with  the  Rev.  Van  Troil,  that  the 
European  emigrants  had  passed,  during  the  horrible  commotions  of 
the  ninth  and  tenth  century,  to  Iceland.    See  History  of  England. 

The  Rev.  Mr.  Crantz  had  informed  me,  in  his  important  book, 
how  they  went  to  Greenland.  I  thought  I  could  trace  the  people 
of  Scandinavia  to  the  banks  of  the  St.  Lawrence ;  I  supposed  my 
friends  had  seen  the  Punic  inscriptions  made  by  them  here  and 
there,  in  the  places  where  they  visited.  Madoc,  prince  of  Wales, 
and  his  Cambiian  followers,  appeared,  to  my  recollection,  among 
these  bands  of  adventurers.  And  thus  the  northern  lands  of  North 
America  were  visited  by  the  hyperborean  tribes  from  the  north- 
westermost  climates  of  Europe ;  and  the  northwestern  climes  of 


334 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


North  Ameiica  bad  received  inhabitants  of  the  same  race  from  the 
northeastern  regions  of  Asia. 

The  Danes,  Fins,  or  Germans,  and  Welch  men,  performing  their 
migrations  gradually  to  the  southwest,  seem  to  have  penetrated  to 
the  country  situated  in  the  south  of  Lake  Ontario,"  which  would 
be  in  the  states  of  New- York  and  Pennsylvania,  "  and  to  have 
fortified  themselves  there ;  where  the  Tartars,  or  Samoieds,  travel- 
ling, by  slow  degrees,  from  Alaska,  on  the  Pacific,  to  the  southeast, 
finally  found  them. 

la  .heir  course,  these  Asian  colonists  probably  exterminated  the 
Malays,  who  had  penetrated  along  the  Ohio  and  its  streams,  or 
drove  them  to  caverns  abounding  in  saltpetre  and  copperas,  in  Ken- 
tucky and  Tennessee  ;  where  their  bodies,  accomDanied  with  cloths 
and  ornaments  of  their  peculiar  manufacture,  have  been  repeated- 
ly disinterred  and  examined  by  the  members  of  the  American  An- 
tiquarian Society. 

Having  achieved  this  conquest,  the  Tartars  and  their  descend- 
ants, had,  probably,  a  much  harder  task  to  perform.  This  was  to 
subdue  the  more  ferocio\?  and  warlike  European  colonists,  who 
had  intrenched  and  fcrtiiv:.i  themselves  in  the  country,  after  the 
arrival  of  the  Tartars,  or  Indians,  as  they  art  now  called,  in  the 
particular  parts  they  had  settled  themselves  in,  along  the  region  of 
the  Atlantic. 

In  Pompey,  Onondaga  county,  are  the  remains,  or  outlines,  of  a 
town,  including  more  than  five  hundred  acres.  It  appeared  pro- 
tected by  three  circular  or  elliptical  forts,  eight  miles  distant  from 
each  other ;  placed  in  such  relative  positions  as  to  form  a  triangle 
round  about  the  town,  at  those  distances. 

It  is  thought,  from  appearances,  that  this  strong  hold  was  stormed 
and  taken  on  the  line  of  the  north  side.  In  Camillus,  in  the  same 
county,  are  the  remains  of  two  forts,  one  covering  about  three 
acres,  on  a  very  high  hill ;  it  had  gateways,  one  opening  to  the  east 
and  the  other  to  the  west,  toward  a  spring  some  rods  from  the 
works;  its  shape  is  elliptical ;  it  has  a  wall,  in  some  places  ten  feet 
high,  with  a  deep  ditch.  Not  far  from  this  is  another  exactly  like  it 
only  half  as  large.  There  are  many  of  these  ancient  works  here- 
abouts ;  one  in  Scipio,  two  near  Auburn,  three  near  Canandaigua, 
and  several  between  the  Seneca  and  Cayuga  Lakes.    A  number  of 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST- 


335 


such  fortifications  and  burial  places  have  also  Leen  discovered  in 
Ridgeway,  or  the  southern  shore  of  Lake  Ontario. 

There  is  evidence  enough  that  long  and  bloody  wars  v/ere  waged 
among  the  inhabitants,  in  which  the  Scandinavian?,  or  Esquimaux, 
as  they  are  now  called,  seem  to  have  been  overpowered  and  de- 
stroyed in  New- York.  The  survivors  cf  the  defeat  and  ruin  re- 
treated to  Labrador," — a  country  lying  between  Hudson's  bay  and 
the  Atlantic ;  in  latitude  50  and  60  degrees  north,  where  they  have 
remained  secure  from  further  pursuit. 

From  the  kncwn  ferocity  of  the  ancient  Scandinavians,  who 
with  other  Europeans  of  ancient  times  we  suppose  to  be  the  au- 
thors of  the  vast  works  about  the  region  of  Onondaga,  dreadful 
wars,  with  infinite  butcheries,  must  have  crimsoned  every  hill  and 
dale  of  this  now  happy  country. 

In  corroboration  of  this  opinion,  we  give  the  following,  which 
is  an  extract  from  remarks  made  on  the  ancient  customs  ofthe  Scan- 
dinavians, by  Adam  Clarke,  in  a  volume  entitled,  "  Clarke's  Dis- 
covery," page  145. 

1st.  Odin,  or  Woden,  their  supreme  god,  is  there  termed  the 
terrible  or  severe  deity ;  the  father  of  slaughter,  who  carries  deso- 
lation and  fire ;  the  tumultuous  and  roaring  deity ;  the  giver  of 
courage  and  victory  ;  he  who  marks  out  who  shall  perish  in  battle  ; 
the  shedder  of  the  blood  of  man.  From  him  is  the  fourth  day  of 
our  week,  denominated  Wodensday,  or  Wednesday. 

2d.  Frigga,  or  Frega :  she  was  his  consort  called  also  Ferorthe, 
mother  Earth.  She  was  the  goddess  of  love  and  debauchery — the 
northern  Venus.  She  was  also  a  warrior,  and  divided  the  souls  of 
the  slain  with  her  husband,  Odin-  From  her  we  have  our  Friday, 
or  Freya's  day  ;  as  on  that  day  she  was  peculiarly  worshipped ;  as 
was  Odin  on  Wednesday. 

3d.  Thor,  the  god  of  winds  and  tempests,  thunder  and  lightning. 
He  was  the  especial  object  of  worship  in  Norway,  Iceland,  and  con* 
sequently  in  the  Zetland  isles.  From  him  we  have  the  name  of 
our  fifth  day,  Thor's  day  or  Thursday. 

4th.  Tri,  the  god  who  protects  houses.  His  day  of  worship  was 
called  Tyrsdays,  Or  Tuesday,  whence  our  Tuesday.  As  to  our 
firrtaud  second  day,  Sunday  and  Monday.  they  derived  their  names 
from  the  Sun  and  the  Moon,  to  whose  worship  ancient  idolaters 
had  consecrated  them." 


33G 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


From  this  we  learn  that  they  had  a  knowledge  of  a  small  cycle 
of  time,  called  a  week  of  seven  days,  and  must  have  been  derived, 
in  some  way,  from  the  ancient  Hebrew  scriptures,  as  here  we  have 
the  first  intimation  of  this  division  of  time.  But  among  the  Mexi- 
cans no  trait  of  a  cycle  of  seven  days  is  found,  says  Humboldt ; 
which  we  consider  an  additional  evidence  that  the  first  people  who 
found  their  way  to  these  regions,  called  North  and  South  America, 
left  Asia  at  a  period  anterior  at  least  to  the  time  of  Moses ;  which 
was  full  1600  years  before  Christ. 

But  we  continue  the  quotation  :  "All  who  die  in  battle  go  to  Vall- 
palla,  Odin's  palace,  where  they  amuse  themselves  by  going 
through  their  martial  exercises ;  then  cutting  each  other  to  pieces ; 
afterwards,  all  the  parts  healing,  they  sit  down  to  their  feasts, 
where  they  quaff'  beer  out  of  the  skulls  of  those  whom  they  had 
slain  in  battle,  and  whose  blood  they  had  before  drank  out  of  the 
same  skulls,  when  they  had  slain  them. 

The  Scandinavians  offered  different  kinds  of  sacrifices,  but  espe- 
cially human ;  and  from  these  they  drew  iheir  auguries,  by  the 
velocity  with  which  the  blood  flowed,  when  they  cut  their  throats, 
and  from  the  appearance  of  the  intestines,  and  especially  the  heart. 
It  was  a  custom  in  Denmark  to  offer  annually,  in  January,  a  sacri- 
fice of  ninety-nine-cocks,  ninety-nine  dogs,  ninety-nine  horses,  and 
ninety-nine  men ;  besides  other  human  sacrifices,"  on  various  oc- 
casions. a 

Such  being  the  fact,  it  is  fairly  presumable  that  as  the  Danes, 
Scandinavians,  and  Lapponiac  nations,  found  their  way  from  the 
north  of  Europe  to  Iceland,  Greenland  and  Labrador;  and  from 
thence  about  the  regions  of  the  western  lakes,  especially  Ontario ; 
that  the  terrific  worship  of  the  Celtic  gods,  has  been  practised  in 
America,  at  least  in  the  State  of  New- York.  And  it  is  not  impos- 
sible but  tfois  custom  may  have  pervaded  the  whole  continent,  for 
the  name  of  one  of  these  very  gods,  namely  Odin,  is  found  among 
the  South  Americans,  and  the  tops  of  the  pyramids  may  have  been 
the  altars  of  sacrifice. 

*'  We  have  already  fixed  the  attention  of  the  reader,"  says  Baron 
Humboldt,  "  on  Votan,  or  Wodan,  an  American,  who  seems  to  be 
a  member  of  the  same  family  with  the  Woads,  or  Odins,  of  the 
Goths,  and  nations  of  the  Celtic  origin." 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST.  337 

The  same  names,  he  says,  are  celebrated  in  India,  Scandinavia, 
and  Mexico,  all  of  which  is,  by  tradition,  believed  to  point  to  none 
other  than  to  Noah  and  his  sons.  For,  according  to  the  traditions 
of  the  Mexicans,  as  collected  by  Bishop  Francis  Nunez  de  la  Ve*a 
their  Wodan  was  grandson  to  that  illustrious  old  man,  who,  at  the 
time  of  the  great  deluge,  was  saved  on  a  raft  with  his  family.  He 
was  also  at  the  building  of  the  great  edifice,  aud  co-operated  with 
the  builder,  which  had  been  undertaken  by  men  to  reach  the  skies. 
The  execution  of  this  rash  project  was  interrupted;  each  family 
receiving  from  that  time  a  different  language;  when  the  Great 
Spirit,  or  Teatl,  ordered  Wodan  to  go  and  people  the  country  of 
Anahuac,  which  is  in  America. 

"  Think  (says  Dr.  Mitchell)  what  a  memorable  spot  is  our  On- 
ondaga, where  men  of  the  Malay  race,  from  the  southwest,  and 
of  the  Tartar  blood  from  the  northwest,  and  of  the  Gothic  'stock 
from  the  northeast,  have  successively  contended  for  the  supremacv 
and  rule,  and  which  may  be  considered  as  having  been  possessed 
by  each  long  enough  before  »  Columbus  was  born,  or  the  navigat- 
ing of  the  western  ocean  thought  ©f. 

"John  De  Let,  a  Flemish  writer,  says,  that  Madoc,  one  of  the 
sons  of  Prince  Owen  Gynnith,  being  disgusted  with  the  civil  wars 
which  broke  out  between  his  brothers,  after  the  death  of  their 
father,  fitted  out  several  vessels,  and  having  provided  them  with 
every  thing  necessary  for  a  long  voyage,  went  in  quest  of  new  lands 
to  the  westward pf  Ireland.  There  he  discovered  very  fertile  coun- 
tries »  where  he  settled  ;  and  it  is  very  probable  Onondaga,  and 
the  country  along  the  St.  Lawrence,  and  around  Lakes  Ontario  and 
Erie,  were  the  regions  of  their  improvements—  Carver,  p.  108 

"  We  learn  from  the  historian  Charlevoix,  that  the  Eries,  an  in- 
digenous nation  of  the  Malay  race,  who  formerly  inhabited  the 
lands  south  of  Lake  Erie,  where  the  western  district  of  Pennsyl- 
vania and  the  state  of  Ohio  now  are.  And  Lewis  Evens,  a  former 
resident  of  the  city  of  New-Yoik,  has  shown  us  in  his  map  of  the 
Middle  Colonies,  that  the  hunting  grounds  of  the  Iroquois  extend 
ed  over  that  very  region.  The  Iroquois  were  of  the  Tartar  stock 
and  they  converted  the  country  of  the  exterminated  Eries  or  Ma' 
lays,  into  a  range  for  the  wild  beasts  of  the  west,  and  a  region  for 
their  own  hunters." 

43 


338 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


He  says,  the  Scandinavians  emigrated  about  the  tenth  century  of 
the  Christian  era,  if  not  earlier ;  and  that  they  may  be  considered  as 
not  only  having  discovered  this  continent,  but  to  have  explored  its 
northern  climes  to  a  great  extent,  and  also  to  have  peopled  them. 

In  the  fourteenth  township,  fourth  range  of  the  Holland  Compa- 
ny's lands  in  the  state  of  New- York,  near  the  Ridge  road  leading 
from  Buffalo  to  Niagara  Falls,  is  an  ancient  fort,  situated  in  a  large 
swamp  ;  it  covers  about  five  acres  of  ground  ;  large  trees  are  stand- 
ing upon  it.  The  earth  which  forms  this  fort  was  evidently  brought 
from  a  distance,  as  that  the  soil  of  the  marsh  is  quite  of  another 
kind,  wet  and  miry,  while  the  site  of  the  fort  is  dry  gravel  and 
loam.  The  site  of  this  fortification  is  singular,  unless  we  suppose 
it  to  have  been  a  last  resort  or  hiding  place  from  an  enemy. 

The  distance  to  the  margin  of  the  marsh  is  about  half  a  mile, 
where  large  quantities  of  human  bones  have  been  found,  on  open- 
ing the  earth,  of  an  extraordinary  size  :  the  thigh  bones,  about  two 
inches  longer  than  a  common  sized  man's :  the  jaw  or  chin  bone 
will  cover  a  large  man's  face  :  the  skull  bones  are  of  an  enormous 
thickness:  the  breast  and  hip  bones  are  also  very  large.  On  be- 
ing exposed  to  the  air  they  soon  moulder  away,  which  denotes  the 
great  length  of  time  since  their  interment.  The  disorderly  manner 
in  which  these  bone;,  were  found  to  lie,  being  crosswise,  commixed 
and  mingled  with  every  trait  of  confusion,  show  them  to  have  been 
deposited  by  a  conquering  enemy,  and  not  by  friends,  who  would 
have  laid  them,  as  the  custom  of  all  nations  always  has  been,  in  a 
more  deferential  mode. 

There  was  no  appearance  of  a  bullet  having  been  the  instrument 
of  their  destruction,  the  evidence  of  which  would  have  been  bro- 
ken limbs.  Smaller  works  of  the  same  kind  abound  in  the  coun- 
try about  Lake  Ontario,  but  the  one  of  which  we  have  just  spoken 
is  the  most  remarkable.  This  work,  it  is  likely,  was  a  last  effort 
of  the  Scandinavians. 

North  of  the  mountain,  or  great  slope  toward  the  lake,  there  are 
no  remains  of  ancient  works  or  tumuli,  which  strongly  argues,  that 
the  mountain  or  ridgeway  once  was  the  southern  boundary  or  shore 
of  lake  Ontario  :  The  waters  having  receded  from  three  to  seven 
miles  irom  its  ancient  shore,  nearly  the  whole  length  of  the  lake, 
occasioned  by  some  strange  convulsion  in  nature,  redeeming  much 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


339 


of  the  lands  of  the  west  from  the  water  that  had  covered  it  from  the 
time  of  the  deluge. 

The  following  is  the  opinion  of  Morse,  the  geographer,  on  the 
curious  subject  of  the  original  inhabitants  or  population  of  America. 
He  says,"  without  detailing  the  numerous  opinions  of  philosophers, 
respecting  the  original  population  of  this  continent,  he  will,  in  few 
words,  state  the  result  of  his  own  inquiries  on  the  subject,  and  the 
facts  from  which  the  result  is  deduced. 

"  The  Greenlanders  and  Esquimaux,"  which  are  one  in  origin, 
"  were  emigrants  from  the  northwest  of  Europe,"  which  is  Nor- 
way and  Lapland.  A  colony  of  Norwegians  was  planted  in  Ice- 
land, in  874,  which  is  almost  a  thousand  years  ago.  Greenland, 
which  is  separated  from  the  American  continent  only  by  Davis' 
Strait,  which,  in  several  places,  is  of  no  great  width,  was  settled  by 
Eric  Rufus,  a  young  Norwegian,  in  982 ;  and  before  the  11th  cen- 
tury, churches  were  founded  and  a  bishopric  erected,  at  Grade,  the 
capital  of  the  settlement. 

Soon  after  this,  Bairn,  an  Icelandic  navigator,  by  accident,  dis- 
covered land  to  the  west  of  Greenland.  This  land  received  the 
name  of  Vineland.  It  was  settled  by  a  colony  of  Norwegians  in 
1002,  and  from  the  description  given  of  its  situation  and  produc- 
tions, must  have  been  Labrador,  which  is  on  the  American  conti- 
nent, or  Newfoundland,  which  is  but  a  little  way  from  the  conti- 
nent, separated  by  the  narrow  strait  of  Bellisle,  at  the  north  end  of 
the  Gulf  of  St.  Lawrence,  a  river  of  Canada.  Vineland  was  west 
of  Greenland,  and  not  very  far  to  the  south  of  it.  It  also  produced 
grape  vines  spontaneously.  Mr.  Elis,  in  his  voyage  to  Hudson's 
Bay,  informs  us  that  the  vine  grows  spontaneously  at  Labrador,  and 
compares  the  fruit  of  it  to  the  currants  of  the  Levant. 

Several  missionaries  of  the  Moravians,  prompted  by  a  zeal  for 
propagating  Christianity,  settled  in  Greenland ;  from  whom  we 
learn  that  the  Esquimaux  perfectly  resemble  the  natives  of  the  two 
countries,  and  have  intercourse  with  one  another  ;  that  a  few  sail- 
ors, who  had  acquired  the  knowledge  of  a  few  Greenland  words, 
reported,  that  these  were  understood  by  the  Esquimaux  ;  that  at 
length  a  Moravian  missionary,  well  acquainted  with  the  language 
of  Greenland,  having  visited  the  country  of  the  Esquimaux,  found 
to  his  astonishment  that  they  spoke  the  same  language  with  the 
Greenlanders     which  of  course  was  the  same  with  the  language 


340 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


of  Iceland,  and  also  of  Norway }  which  is  in  Europe,  lying  along  on 
the  coast  of  the  Atlantic  ;  as  that  the  first  colony  of  Iceland  was 
from  Norway,  and  Iceland  a  first  colony  settled  on  Greenland, 
from  inence  to  Labrador,  which  is  the  continent;  showing  that  the 
language  of  the  Esquimaux  is  that  of  the  ancient  Norse  of  Europe, 
derived  from  the  more  ancient  Celtic  nations,  who  were  derived 
from  the  descendants  of  Japheth,  the  son  of  Noah  ;  from  which  we 
perceive  that  both  from  country  and  lineal  descent,  the  present  in- 
habitants are  brothers  to  the  Esquimaux  (Indians,  as  they  are  im- 
properly called)  who  also  are  white,  and  not  copper  colored,  like 
the  red  men,  or  common  Indians,  who  are  of  the  Tartar  stock. 

The  missionary  found,  u  that  there  was  abundant  evidence  of 
their  being  of  the  same  race,  and  he  was  accordingly  received  and 
entertained  by  them  as  a  friend  and  brother."  These  facts  prove 
the  settlement  of  Greenland  by  an  Icelandic  colony,  and  the  con- 
sanguinity of  the  Greenlanders  and  Esquimaux. 

Iceland  is  only  about  one  thousand  miles  west  from  Norway,  in 
Europe,  with  more  than  twenty  islands  between  ;  so  that  there  is 
no  difficulty  in  the  way  of  this  history  to  render  it  improbable  that 
the  early  navigators  from  Norway  may  have  easily  found  Iceland, 
and  colonized  it. 

"  The  enterprize,  skill  in  navigation,  even  without  the  compass, 
and  roving  habits,  possessed  by  these  early  navigators,  renders  it 
highly  probable  also,  that  at  some  period  more  remote  than  the  10th 
century,  they  had  pursued  the  same  route  to  Greenlaud,  and  plant- 
ed colonies  there,  which  is  but  six  hundred  miles  west  of  Iceland. 
Their  descendants  the  present  Greenlanders  and  Esquimaux,  re- 
taining somewhat  of  the  enterprize  of  their  ancestors,  have  always 
preserved  a  communication  with  each  other,  by  crossing  and  re- 
crossing  Davis's  Strait.  The  distance  of  oceaa  between  Ame- 
rica and  Europe  on  the  east,  or  America  and  China  on  the  west,  is 
no  objection  to  the  passage  of  navigators,  either  from  design  or 
stress  of  weather  ;  as  that  Coxe,  in  his  Russian  JJiscoveries,  men- 
tions that  several  Kamschadale  vessels,  in  1745,  were  driven  out 
to  sea,  and  forced,  by  stress  of  weather,  to  take  shelter  among  the 
Aleutian  islands,  in  the  Pacific,  a  distance  of  several  hundred  miles; 
and  also  Captain  Cook,  in  oue  of  his  voyages,  found  some  natives 
of  one  of  the  islands  of  the  same  ocean,  in  their  war  canoes,  six 
hundred  miles  from  land." — Morse. 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


341 


In  the  year  1789,  Captain  Bligh  was  sent  out  under  the  direction 
of  the  government  of  England,  to  the  Friendly  Islands,  in  the  Pa- 
cific, in  quest  of  the  bread  fruit  plant,  with  the  view  of  planting  it 
in  the  West  Indies. 

But  having  got  into  the  Pacific  ocean,  his  crew  mutined,  and 
put  him,  with  eighteen  of  his  men,  on  board  of  a  boat  of  but  thirty- 
two  feet  in  length,  with  one  hundred  and  fifty  pounds  of  bread, 
twenty-eight  gallons  of  water,  twenty  pounds  of  pork,  three  bottles 
of  wine  and  fifteen  quarts  of  rum.  With  this  scanty  provision  he 
was  turned  adrift  in  the  open  sea,  when  the  vessel  sailed,  and  left 
them  to  their  fate.  Captain  Bligh  then  sailed  for  the  island  of  To- 
foa,  but  being  resisted  by  the  islanders  with  stones,  and  threatened 
with  death,  was  compelled  to  steer  from  mere  recollection,  (for  he 
was  acquainted  with  those  parts  of  that  ocean,)  lor  a  port  in  the 
East  Indies  called  Tima,  belonging  to  the  Dutch.  He  had  been 
with  the  noted  Captain  Cook,  in  his  voyages.  The  reason  the  na- 
tives were  so  bold  as  to  pelt  them  with  stones  as  they  attempted  to 
land,  was  because  they  pereeived  them  to  be  without  arms.  This 
voyage,  however,  they  performed  in  forty-six  days,  suffering  in 
a  most  incredible  manner,  a  distance  of  four  thousand  miles,  losing 
but  one  man,  who  was  killed  by  the  stones  of  the  savages,  in  at- 
tempting to  get  clear  from  the  shore  of  an  island,  where  they  had 
landed  to  look  for  water. 

"  In  1797,  the  slaves  of  a  ship  from  the  coast  of  Africa,  having 
risen  on  the  crew,  twelve  of  the  latter  leaped  into  a  boat,  and  made 
their  escape.  On  the  thirty-eighth  day  three  still  survived,  and 
drifted  ashore  at  Barbadoes,  in  the  West  Indies. 

In  1799,  six  men  in  a  boat  from  St.  flelena,  lost  their  course, 
and  nearly  a  month  after,  five  of  them  surviving,  reached  the  coast 
of  South  America,  a  distance  of  two  thousand  seven  hundred  and 
sixty  miles." — Thomas'9  Travels,  p.  283. 

This  author,  Mr.  David  Thomas,  whose  work  was  published  at 
Auburn,  1819,  is  of  the  opinion  that  "the  Mexicans  and  Peruvians 
derived  their  origin  in  arriving  in  wrecks  from  the  sea  coast  without 
the  Strait  of  Gibraltar,  soon  after  the  commencement  of  navigation, 
driven  thither  by  the  current  and  trade  winds." 

But  as  to  the  Peruvians,  being  originally  from  about  the  Medi- 
terranean, we  should  suppose  rather  improbable,  as  that  Peru  is  situ- 


342 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


ated  on  the  Pacific  in  South  America,  and  Mexico  on  the  Pacific  in 
North  America 

It  would  have  been  more  natural  for  them  to  have  fixed  their 
abode  where  they  first  landed,  rather  than  to  have  travelled  across 
the  continent.  The  Peruvians  were  doub;hss  from  China  origin- 
ally, and  the  Mexicans  from  a  more  northern  region,  Mongol,  Tar- 
tary  and  the  Japan  islands. 

He  says,  "If  we  consider  in  what  an  early  age  navigation  was 
practised,  and  consequently  how  soon  after  that  era  America  would 
receive  inhabitants  within  its  torrid  zone,  it  will  appear  probable 
that  the  Mexicans  were  a  great  nation  before  either  the  Tartars  or 
Esquimaux  arrived  on  the  northern  part  of  this  continent." 

Navigation  was  indeed  commenced  at  an  early  age,  by  the 
Egyptians  aud  Phcenicians,  probably  more  than  sixteen  hundred 
years  before  the  time  of  Christ,  (See  Morse's  Chronology^)  aud 
doubtless,  from  time  to  time,  as  in  later  ages,  arrivals,  either  from 
design  or  from  being  driven  to  sea  by  storm,  took  place,  so  that 
EgyptianSj  Phcenicians,  and  individuals  of  other  nations  of  that  age, 
unquestionably  found  their  w7ay  to  South  America,  and  also  to  the 
southern  parts  of  North  America,  from  the  east,  and  also  from  the 
west,  across  the  Pacific,  in  shipping. 

But  we  entertain  the  opinion,  that  even  sooner  than  this,  the 
woods  of  the  Americas  had  received  inhabitants,  as  we  huve  before 
endeavored  to  argue  in  this  work,  at  a  time  when  there  was  more 
land,  either  the  form  of  islands  in  groups,  or  in  bodies,  ap- 
proaching to  that  of  continents,  situated  both  in  the  Pacific  and  At- 
lantic oceans  ;  but  especially  that  of  Atalantis,  once  in  the  Atlan- 
tic, between  America  and  the  coast  of  Gibraltar. 
-tIn  the  remarks  of  Carver  on  this  subject,  through  the  interior 
parts  of  Northwestern  America,  we  have  the  following  : — "  Many 
of  the  ancients  are  supposed  to  have  known  that  this  quarter  of  the 
globe  not  only  existed,  but  also  that  it  was  inhabited." 

Plato,  who  wrote  about  five  hundred  years  before  Christ,  in  his 
book  entitled  TimaeuS)  has  asserted  tljat  beyond  the  island  which 
he  calls  Atalautis,  as  learned  from  the  Egyptian  priests,  and  which 
according  to  his  description  was  situated  in  the  Western  ocean,  op- 
posite, as  we  have  before  said,  to  the  Strait  of  Gibraltar,  there  were 
i  {.'reat  number  of  other  islands,  and  I  ehind  those  a  vast  continent 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST.  343 

If  some  have  affected  to  treat  the  tradition  of  the  existence  of 
this  island  as  a  chimera,  we  would  ask,  how  should  the  priests  be 
able  to  tell  us  that  behind  that  island,  farther  west,  was  a  vast  con- 
tinent, which  proves  to  be  true,  for  that  continent  is  America ;  or 
rather,  as  a  continent  is  spoken  of  by  Plato  at  all,  lying  west  of 
Europe,  we  are  of  the  opinion  that  this  fact  should  carry  conviction 
that  the  island  also  existed,  as  well  as  the  continent ;  and  why  not 
Atalantis  ?  If  Plato  knew  of  the  one  did  he  not  of  the  other  ? 

If  the  Egyptian  priests  had  told  Plato  that  anciently  there  existed 
a  certain  island,  with  a  continent  on  the  west  of  it,  and  the  Strait  of 
Gibraltar  on  the  e?st  of  it5  and  it  was  found,  in  succeeding  ages, 
that  neither  the  strait  nor  the  continent  were  ever  known  to  exist,  it 
would  ue,  indeed,  clearly  inferred,  that  neither  was  the  island 
known  to  them.  But  as  the  strait  does  exist,  and  the  western  con- 
tinent also,  is  it  very  absurd  to  suppose  that  Atalantis  was  indeed 
situated  between  these  two  facte,  or  parts  of  the  earth  now  known 
to  all  the  world  ? 

Carver  says  that  Oviedo,  a  celebrated  Spanisli  author,  the  same 
who  became  the  friend  of  Ccl'irabus.  whom  he  accompanied  on  his 
second  voyage  to  the  new  world,  has  made  no  scruple  to  affirm,  that 
the  Antilles  are  the  famous  Hesperides,  so  often  mentioned  by  the 
poets,  which  are  at  length  restored  to  the  King  of  Spain,  the  de- 
scendants of  King  Hesperus,  who  lived  upwards  of  3000  .years  ago, 
and  from  whom  these  islands  received  their  name. 

De  Laet,  a  Flemish  writer,  says  it  is  related  by  Pliny  the  elder, 
one  of  the  most  learned  of  the  ancient  Roman  writers,  who  was 
born  twenty-three  years  after  the  time  of  Christ,  and  left  behind 
him  no  less  than  thirty-seven  volumes  on  natural  history,  ana  some 
other  writers,  that  on  many  of  the  islands  near  the  western  coast  of 
Africa,  particularly  on  the  Canaries,  some  ancient  ed;fices  were 
seen  ;  even  caKed  ancient  by  Pliny,  a  term  which  would  throw  the 
time  of  their  erection  back  to  a  period  perhaps  five  or  six  hundred 
years  before  Christ. 

"  From  this  it  is  highly  probable,"  says  Mr.  Carver,  u  that  the 
inhabitants  having  deserted  those  edifices,  even  in  the  time  of  Pliny, 
may  have  passed  over  to  South  America,  the  passage  being  neither 
long  nor  difficult.  This  migration,  according  to  the  calculation  of 
those  authors,  must  have  taken  place  more  than  two  hundred  years 
before  the  Christian  era,  at  a  time  when  the  people  of  Spain  were 


344  AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 

much  troubled  by  the  Carthagenians,  and  might  have  retired  to  the 
Antilles,  by  the  way  of  the  Western  Isles,  which  were  exactly  half 
way  in  their  voyage  to  South  America.'* 

Emanuel  de  Morez,  a  Portuguese,  in  his  history  of  Brazil,  a  pro- 
vince of  South  America,  asserts  that  America  has  been  wholly  peo- 
pled by  the  Carthagenians  and  Israelites.  He  brings,  as  a  proof  of 
this  assertion,  the  discoveries  the  former  are  known  to  have  made, 
at  a  great  distance  beyond  the  western  coast  of  Africa.  The  far- 
ther progress  of  which  being  put  a  stop  toby  the  senate  of  Carthage^ 
some  hundred  years  before  Christ,  those  who  happened  to  be  then 
in  the  newly  discovered  countries,  being  cut  off"  from  all  communi- 
cations with  their  countrymen,  and  destitute  of  many  necessaries  of 
life,  fell  into  a  state  of  barbarism. 

George  De  Horn,  a  learned  Dutchman,  who  has  written  on  the 
subject  of  the  first  peopling  of  America,  maintains  that  the  first 
founders  of  the  colonies  of  this  country  were  Scythians,  who  were 
much  more  ancient  than  the  Tartars,  but  were  derived  from  the 
Scythians  ;  as  the  term  Tartar  is  but  of  recent  date  when  compared 
with  the  far  more  ancient  appellation  of  Scythian,  the  descendants 
of  Shem,  the  great  progenitor  of  the  Jews. 

He  also  believes  that  the  Phoenicians  and  Carthagenians  after- 
wards got  footing  in  America,  by  crossing  the  Atlantic,  and  like- 
wise the  Chinese,  by  way  of  the  Pacific.  These  Phoenician  and 
Carthagerrian  migrations  he  supposes  to  have  been  before  the  time 
of  Solomon,  king  of  Israel,  who  flourished  a  thousand  years  before 
Christ. 

Mr.  Thomas,  of  Auburn,  in  his  volume  entitled,  Travels  through 
the  Western  Country,  has  devoted  some  twenty  pages  to  the  subject 
of  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  America,  with  ability  evidencing  an 
enlarged  degree  of  acquaintance  with  it.  He  says  explicitly,  on 
page  288,  that  u  the  Phoenicians  were  early  acquainted  with  those 
shores,'5  "  believes  that  vessels,  sailing  out  of  the  Mediterranean, 
may  have  been  wrecked  on  the  American  shores ;  also  colonies 
from  the  west  of  Europe,  and  from  Africa,  in  the  same  w  ay.  Sup- 
poses that  Egyptians  and  Syrians  settled  in  Mexico;  the  former 
the  authors  of  the  pyramids  of  South  America,  and  that  the  Syrians 
are  the  same  with  the  Jews;  wanting  nothing  to  complete  this  fact 
but  the  rite  of  circumcision.    Says  the  Greeks  were  the  only,  or 


AND  DISCOVERIES   IN  THE  WEST. 


345 


first  people,  who  practised  raising  tumuli  around  the  urns  which 
contained  the  ashes  of  their  heroes." 

And,  as  we  know,  tumuli  are  in  abundance  in  the  west,  raised 
over  the  ashes,  as  we  suppose,  of  their  heroes  ;  should  we  not  in- 
fer that  the  practice  was  borrowed  from  that  people  ?  This  would 
prove  some  of  them,  at  least,  oiigiually  from  about  the  Mediter- 
ranean. 

But  notwithstanding  our  agreement  with  this  writer  that  many 
nations,  the  Greeks,  the  Egyptians,  the  Syrians,  the  Phoenicians, 
Carthagenians,  Europeans,  Romans,  Asiatics,  Scythians  and  Tar- 
tars, have,  in  different  eras  of  time,  contributed  to  the  peopling  of 
America;  yet  we  believe,  with  the  great  and  celebrated  naturalist, 
Dr.  Mitchell,  that  the  ancestors  of  the  people  known  by  the  appel- 
lation of  the  Malays,  now  peopling  the  islands  of  the  Pacific,  were 
nearly  among  the  first  who  set  foot  on  the  coasts  of  America.  And 
that  the  people  who  settled  on  the  islands  of  the  Atlantic,  and  es- 
pecially that  of  Atalantis,  now  no  more,  immediately  after  the  dis- 
persion, were  they  who,  first  of  all,  and  the  Malay  second,  filled  all 
America  with  their  descendants  in  the  first  ages. 

But  in  process  of  time,  as  the  arts  came  on,  navigation,  with  or 
without  the  compass,  was  practised,  if  not  as  systematically  as  at 
the  present  time,  yet  with  nearly  as  wide  a  range  ;  and  as  convul- 
sions in  the  earth,  such  as  divided  one  part  of  it  from  another,  as  in 
the  days  of  Peleg,  removing  islands,  changing  the  shape  of  conti- 
nents, and  separating  the  inhabitants  of  distant  places  from  each 
other,  by  destroying  the  land  or  islands  between,  so  that  when 
shipping,  whether  large  or  small,  as  in  the  time  of  the  Phoenicians, 
Tvii^ns  of  King  Solomon,  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  came  to  navi- 
gate the  seas,  America  was  found,  visited  and  colonized  anew.  In 
this  way  we  account  for  the  introduction  of  arts  among  the  more 
ancient  inhabitants  whom  they  found  there;  which  arts  are  clearly 
spoken  of  in  the  traditions  of  the  Mexicans,  who  tell  us  of  white 
and  bearded  men,  as  related  by  Humboldt,  who  came  from  the 
sun,  (as  they  supposed  the  Spaniards  did,)  changed  or  reduced  the 
wandering  millions  of  the  woods  to  order  and  government,  intro- 
duced among  them  the  art  of  agriculture,  a  knowledge  of  metals, 
with  that  of  architecture ;  so  that  when  Columbus  discovered 
America,  it  was  filled  with  cities,  towns,  cultivated  fields  and  coun- 
tries ;  palaces,  aqueducts,  and  roads,  and  highways  of  the  nations, 

44 


346 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


equal  with,  if  not  exceeding,  in  some  respects,  even  the  people  of 
the  Roman  countries,  before  the  time  of  Christ. 

But  as  learning  and  a  knowledge  of  the  shape  of  the  earth,  in 
the  times  of  the  nations  we  have  spoken  of  above,  was  not  in  gene- 
ral use  among  men ;  and  from  incessant  wars  and  revolutions  of 
nations,  what  discoveries  may  have  been  made,  were  lost  to  man- 
kind ;  so  that  some  of  the  very  countries  once  known,  have  in  later 
ages  been  discovered  over  again. 

We  will  produce  one  instance  of  a  discovery  which  has  been 
lost — the  land  of  Ophir — where  the  Tyrian  fleets  went  for  gold,  in 
the  days  of  Solomon.  Where  is  it  ?  The  most  learned  do  not 
know,  cannot  agree.  It  is  lost  as  to  identity.  Some  think  it  in* 
Africa  ;  some  in  the  islands  of  the  South  Atlantic,  and  some  in 
South  America ;  and  although  it  is,  wherever  it  may  be,  undoubt- 
edly an  inhabited  country,  yet  as  to  certainty  about  its  location,  it 
is  unknown. 


ANCIENT  CHRONOLOGY  OF  THE  ONGUYS  OR  IROQUOIS 

INDIANS. 

By  David  Cusick. 
In  the  traditions  of  the  Tuscaroras  published  by  Cusick  in  1827?. 
few  dates  are  found ;  but  these  few  are,  nevertheless,  precious  for 
history. 

A  small  volume  has  been  printed  this  year  by  the  Sunday  School 
Union,  on  the  History  of  the  Delaware  and  the  Iroquois  Indians,  in 
which  their  joint  traditions  are  totally  neglected,  as  usual  with  our 
actual  book  makers. 

Although  Cusick's  dates  may  be  vague  and  doubtful,  they  de- 
serve attention,  and  they  shall  be  noticed  here. 

Anterior  to  any  date  the  Eagwehoewe,  (pronounced  Yayuyhohuy) 
meaning  real  people,  dwelt  north  of  the  lakes,  and  formed  only  one 
nation.  After  many  years  a  body  of  them  settled  on  the  river  Ka- 
nawag,  now  the  St.  Lawrence,  and  after  a  long  time  a  foreign  peo- 
ple came  by  sea  and  settled  south  of  the  lake. 

First  date.  Towards  2500  winters  before  Columbus7  discovery 
of  America,  or  1008  years  before  our  era,  total  overthrow  of  the 
Towancas,  nations  of  giants  come  from  the  north,  by  the  king  of  the 
Onguys,  Donhtonha  and  the  hero  Yatatart 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST- 


347 


2d.  Three  hundred  winters  after,  or  708  before  our  era,  the 
northern  nations  form  a  confederacy,  appoint  a  king,  who  goes  to 
visit  the  great  Emperor  of  the  Golden  City,  south  of  the  lakes;  but 
afterwards  quarrels  arise,  and  a  war  of  100  years  with  this  empire 
of  the  south,  long  civil  wars  in  the  north,  &c  A  body  of  people 
escaped  in  the  mountain  of  Oswego,  &c 

3d.  1500  years  before  Columbus,  or  in  the  year  S  of  our  era, 
Tarenyawagon,  the  first  legislator  leads  bis  people  out  of  the  moun- 
tains to  the  river  Yenonatateh,  now  Mohawk,  where  six  tribes 
form  an  alliance  called  the  Long-house,  Agoneaseah.  Afterwards 
reduced  to  five,  the  sixth  spreading  west  and  south.  The  Kautanoh 
since  Tuscarora,  came  from  this.  Some  went  as  far  as  the  Onau- 
weyoka,  now  Mississippi. 

4th.  In  108  the  Konearawyeneh,  or  Flying  Heads,  invade  the 
Five  Nations. 

5th.  In  242  the  Shakanahih,  or  Stone  Giants,  a  branch  of  the 
western  tribe,  become  cannibals,  return  and  desolate  the  country ; 
but  they  are  overthrown  and  driven  north  by  Tarenyawagon  II. 

6th.  Towards  350  Tarenyawagon  III.  defeats  other  foes,  called 
Snakes. 

7th.  In  492  Atotarho  I.,  king  of  the  Onondagas,  quells  civil  wars, 
begins  a  dynasty  ruling  over  all  the  Five  Nations,  till  Atotarho  IX. 
who  ruled  yet  in  1142.    Events  are  since  referred  to  their  reigns. 

Sth.  Under  Atotarho  II.,  a  Tarenyawagon  IV.  appears  to  help 
him  to  destroy  Oyalk-guhoer,  or  the  Big-bear. 

9th.  Under  Atotarho  III.  a  tyrant,  Sohnanrowah,  arises  on  the 
Kaunaseh,  now  Susquehannah  river,  which  makes  war  on  the  Sah- 
wanug. 

10th.  In  602,  under  Atotarho  IV.,  the  Towancas,  now  Mississau- 
gers,  cede  to  the  Senecas  the  lands  east  of  the  River  Niagara,  who 
settle  on  it. 

11th.  Under  Atotarho  V.  war  between  the  Senecas  and  Otawahs 
of  Sandusky. 

12th.  Towards  852  under  Atotarho  VI.  the  Senecas  reach  the 
Ohio  river3  compel  the  Otawahs  to  sue  for  peace. 

13th.  Atotarho  VII.  sent  embassies  to  the  west,  the  Kentakeh 
nation  dwelt  south  of  the  Ohio,  the  Chipiwas  on  the  Mississippi. 
14th.  Towards  1042,  under  Atotarho  VIII.,  war  with  the  To- 
t  wancas,  and  a  foreign  stranger  visits  the  Tuscaroras  of  Neuse  river, 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


who  are  divided  into  three  tribes,  and  at  war  with  the  Nanticokes 

and  Totalis. 

1.0th.  In  1143,  under  Atotarho  IX.,  first  civil  war  between  the 
Erians  of  Lake  Erie,  sprung  from  the  Senecas,  and  the  Five  Na- 
tions. 

Here  end  these  traditions. 

C.  S.  RAFINESQUE. 

The  foregoing  is  a  curious  trait  of  the  ancient  history  of  the  wars 
and  revolutions  which  have  transpired  in  America. 

It  would  appear  that  at  the  time  of  the  overthrow  of  the  Tawan- 
cas,  1008  years  before  Christ,  called  in  the  tradition  a  nation  of 
giants,  that  it  was  about  the  time  the  temple  of  Solomon  was  fin- 
ished ;  showing  clearly  that  as  they  had  become  powerful  in  this 
country  they  had  settled  here  at  a  very  early  period,  probably 
about  the  time  of  Abraham,  within  three  hundred  and  forty  years  of 
the  flood. 

The  hero  who  conquered  them  was  called  Yatatany  king  of  the 
Onguys,  names  which  refer  them,  as  to  origin,  to  the  ancient  Scyth- 
ians of  Asia. 

Three  hundred  winters  after  this,  or  708  years  before  Christ, 
about  the  time  of  the  commencement  of  the  Roman  empire  by  Rom- 
ulus, the  northern  nations  form  a  grand  confederacy  and  appoint  a 
king,  who  went  on  a  visit  to  the  great  emperor  of  the  Golden  city, 
south  of  the  western  lakes. 

Were  wc  to  conjecture  where  this  Golden  city  vvas  situated,  we 
should  say  on  the  Mississippi,  where  the  Missouri  forms  a  junction 
with  that  river,  at  or  near  St.  Louis,  as  at  this  place  and  around  its 
precincts  are  the  remains  of  an  immense  population.  This  is  likely 
the  city  to  which  the  seven  persons  who  were  cast  away  on  the. 
island  Estotiland,  as  before  related,  were  carried  to  ;  being  far  to 
the  southwest  from  that  island,  supposed  to  be  Newfoundland, — St. 
Louis  being  in  that  direction. 

This  visit  of  Yatatan  to  the  Golden  city,  it  appear*,  was  the 
occasion  of  a  civil  war  of  one  hundred  years,  which  ended  in  the 
ruin  of  the  Golden  city.  A  body  of  the  citizens  escaping,  fled  far 
to  the  east,  and  hid  themselves  in  the  mountains  of  Oswego,  along 
the  southern  shores  of  Lake  Ontario,  where  they  remained  about 
seven  hundred  years,  till  a  great  leader  arose  among  them,  called 
Tarenyawagon,  who  led  them  to  settle  on  the  Mohawk  ;  this  was  «■ 
tight  years  after  the  birth  of  Christ. 


AND  DISCOVERIES   IN  THE  WEST. 


349 


These  refugees  from  the  Golden  city,  had  now  multiplied  so  that 
they  had  become  several  nations,  whence  the  grand  confederacy  of 
six  nations  was  formed.  Upon  these,  a  nation  called  Flying  Heads 
made  war  but  were  unsuccessful  ;  also,  in  242  years  after  Christ,  a 
nation  called  Stone  Giants,  made  an  attempt  to  destroy  them  but 
f tiled.  They  were  successfal  in  other  wars  against  the  Snake  In- 
dians, a  more  western  tribe. 

About  the  time  of  the  commencement  of  Mahomet's  career  in 
602,  a  great  tyrant  arose  on  the  Susquehannah  river,  who  waged 
war  with  the  surrounding  nations,  from  which  it  appears,  that  while 
in  Africa,  Europe,  and  Asia,  revolution  succeeded  revolution,  em- 
pires rising  on  the  ruins  of  empires,  that  in  America  the  same 
scenes  were  acting  on  as  great  a  scale  ;  cultivated  regions,  popu- 
lous cities  awd  towns,  were  reduced  to  a  wilderness,  as  in  the  other 
continents. 


EVIDENCE  THAT  A  NATION  OF  AFRICANS,  THE  DESCEND- 
ANTS OF  HAM,  NOW  INHABIT  A  DISTRICT  OF  S.  AMERICA. 

By  C.  S.  Rafinfsque. 

The  Yarura  nation  of  the  Oronoco  regions,  (also  called  Jarura, 
Jaros,  Worrow,  Guarau,  &c)  is  one  of  the  darkest  and  ugliest  in 
South  America,  some  tribes  of  it  are  quite  black  like  negroes  and 
are  called  monkeys.  They  are  widely  spread  from  Guyana  to 
Choco.  The  following  35  words  of  their  language  collected  from 
Chili,  Hervas  and  Vater,  have  enabled  me  to  trace  their  origin  to 
Africa. 


MGod 

Conomeh  Anderh 

H Heaven 

Andeh 

Earth 

Dabu,  D  hu 

Water 

Uy,  Uvi 

River 

Nicua 

l\Sun  and  day 

Doh 

Moon 

Goppeh 

Star 

Boeboe 

300 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


Fire 

Condeh 

Soul 

Yuaneh 

Wood 

Yuay 

Plain 

Chiri 

^  Bread 

Tarab,  Tainbeh 

Name 

Kuen 

Give 

Yero 

Come 

Manatedi 

Mayzc 

Pueh 

MMan 

Pumeh 

Woman 

Ibi 

Father 

Aya 

Motlier 

Aini 

Head 

Pachu 

Eyes 

Yondeh 

Nappeh 

Tongue 

Topeno 

Feet 

Tao 

Evil 

Chatandra 

Being 

Abechin.  Conoin 

Our 

Ibba 

Will 

Ea 

Power 

Bdi 

1 

Canameh 

2 

Noeni 

TT3 

Tarani 

Those  marked  IT  or  7  out  of  34  have  some  analogy  with  the  Eng- 
lish, equal  to  19  per  cent. 

The  language  of  the  Gahunas,  negroes  of  Choco  and  Popayan 
has  50  per  cent  analogy  with  the  Yarura,  since  out  of  8  words  to 
be  compared,  4  are  similar. 


God  Conomeh  Y  Copamo  G 

Man  Pumeh  Mehora 

One  Canameh  Amba 

Two  Noeni  Numi 


While  the  Ashanty  or  Fanty,  negro  language  widely  spread  in 
West  Africa  has  40  per  cent  of  affinity  with  the  Yarura  or  six 
words  similar  in  fifteen  comparable. 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST.  351 

Earth  Dabu.y  Dade  A 

Mother  Aini  Mina 

Woman  Ibi  Bis 

Father  Aya  Aga 

Eyes  Yondeh  Lie  well 

Water  Uy  Uyaba 

This  is  the  maximum  in  Africa.  But  the  language  oi  the  Pa- 
puas  of  New  Guinea  in  Polynesia  has  50  per  cent  of  Analogy,  or 
six  words  out  of  twelve,  which  is  the  maximum  with  the  Asiatic 
and  Polynesic  negroes. 

Man  MehofaG  \  Ameneh  P 

Woman  Ibi  Bienih 

Mother  Aini  Nana 

Water  Uy  Uar 

Evil  Chatandra  Tarada 

^  Canameh  )  .    ,  , 

One  AmbaG.   \  Amboher 

It  may  have  happened  that  the  Gahunas  came  from  the  Papuas 
through  the  Pacific ;  but  the  Yaruras  from  the  Ashantis  through 
the  Atlantic :  yet  have  been  once  two  branches  of  a  single  black 
nation. 

<c  In  support  of  the  doctrine  that  the  three  sons  of  Noah  were 
red,  black  and  white,  we  bring  the  tradition  of  the  Marabous,  the 
priests  of  the  most  ancient  race  of  Africans,  which  says  that  after 
the  death  of  Noah  his  three  sons  one  of  whom  was  white,  the 
second  tawny  or  red,  the  third  black,  agreed  to  divide  his  property 
fairly,  which  consisted  of  gold  and  silver,  vestments  of  silk,  linen 
and  wool,  horses,  cattle,  camels,  dromedaries,  sheep  and  goats, 
arms,  furniture,  corn  and  other  provisions,  besides  tobacco  and 
pipes. 

"  Having  spent  the  greater  part  of  the  day  in  assorting  these  dif- 
ferent things,  the  three  sons  were  obliged  to  defer  the  partition  of 
the  goods  till  the  next  morning.  They  therefore  smoked  a  friendly 
pipe  together,  and  there  retired  to  rest,  each  in  his  own  tent. 

u  After  some  hours  sleep,  the  white  brother  awoke  before  the 
other  two,  being  moved  by  avarice,  arose  and  seized  the  gold  and 
silver,  together  with  the  precious  stones,  and  most  beautiful  vest- 
ments, and  having  loaded  the  best  camels  with  them,  pursued  his 


352 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


way  to  that  country  which  his  white  posterity  have  ever  since  in- 
habited. 

"  The  Moor,  or  tawny  brother,  awaking  soon  afterwards,  with 
the  same  intentions,  and  being  surprised  that  he  had  been  antici- 
pated by  his  white  brother,  secured  in  great  haste  the  remainder 
of  the  horses,  oxen  and  camels,  and  retired  to  another  part  of  the 
world,  leaving  only  some  coarse  vestments  of  cotton,  pipes  and  to- 
bacco, millet,  rice,  and  a  few  other  things  of  but  small  value. 

"  The  last  lot  ef  stuff  fell  to  the  share  of  the  black  son,  the  laziest 
of  the  three  brothers,  who  took  up  his  pipe  with  a  melancholy  air, 
and  while  he  sat  smoking  in  a  pensive  mood,  swore  to  be  revenged." 
— AnquetiPs  Universal  History,  vol.  6,  p.  117,  118. 

We  have  inserted  this  tradition,  not  because  we  think  it  circum- 
stantially true,  with  respect  to  the  goods,  &c,  but  because  we  find 
in  it  this  one  important  trait,  viz  :  The  origin  of  human  complex- 
ions in  the  family  of  Noah :  and  if  the  tradition  is  supposed  alto- 
gether a  fiction,  we  would  ask,  how  came  these  Africans  the  most 
degraded  and  ignorant  of  the  human  race — by  so  important  a  trait 
of  ancient  history — as  that  such  a  man,  with  three  sons,  ever  ex- 
isted, from  whom  the  three  races  descended,  if  it  were  not  so. 


DISAPPEARANCE  OF  MANY  ANCIENT  LAKES  OF  THE  WEST, 
AND  OF  THE  FORMATION  OF  SEA  COAL. 

This  description  of  American  antiquities  is  more  captivating  than 
the  accounts  already  given  ;  because  to  know  that  the  millions  of 
mankind,  with  their  multifarious  works,  covering  the  vales  of  all 
our  rivers,  many  of  which  were  once  the  bottoms  of  immense  lakes, 
and  where  the  tops  of  the  tallest  forests  peer  to  the  skies,  or  where 
the  towering  spires  of  many  a  Christian  temple  makes  glad  the 
heart  of  civilized  man,  and  where  the  smoking  chimnies  of  his 
widespread  habitations — once  sported  the  lake  serpent,  and  the 
tinny  tribes,  as  birds  passing  in  scaly  waves  along  the  horizon. 

We  look  to  the  soil  where  graze  the  peaceful  flock  ;  to  the  fields 
where  wave  a  thousand  harvests;  to  the  air  above,  where  play  the 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST.  353 

wings  of  innumerable  fowls ;  and  to  the  road  where  the  sound 
of  passing  wheels  denote  the  course  of  men ;  and  say,  can  this 
be  so  ?  Was  all  this  space  once  the  home  of  the  waves  ?  Where 
eels  and  shell  fish  once  congregated  in  their  houses  of  mud  is 
now  fixed  the  foundation  of  many  a  stately  mansion,  the  dwell- 
ing of  man.  Such  the  mutation  of  matter,  and  the  change  of  habi- 
tation ! 

We  forbear  to  ramble  farther  in  this  field  of  speculation,  which 
opens  before  us  with  such  immensity  of  prospect,  to  give  an  ac- 
count of  the  disappearance  of  lakes  supposed  to  have  existed  in 
the  west. 

To  do  this,  we  shall  avail  ourselves  of  the  opinions  of  several 
distinguished  authors,  as  Volney,  in  his  travels  in  America ;  School- 
craft, in  his  travels  in  the  central  parts  of  the  valley  of  the  Mis- 
sissippi ;  and  Professor  Beck,  in  his  Gazetteer  of  Illinois  and 
Missouri. 

We  commence  with  the  gifted  and  highly  classical  writer,  C 
F.  Volney ;  who,  although  we  do  not  subscribe  to  his  notions  of 
theology,  yet  as  a  naturalist  we  esteem  him  of  the  highest  class, 
and  his  statements,  with  his  deductions,  to  be  wrorthy  of  attention. 

He  commences  by  saying,  that  in  the  structure  of  the  mountains 
of  the  United  States,  exists  a  fact  more  strikingly  apparent  than  in 
any  other  part  of  the  world,  which  must  singularly  have  increased 
the  action  and  varied  the  movements  of  the  waters.  If  we  atten- 
tively examine  the  land,  or  even  the  maps  of  this  country,  we  must 
perceive  that  the  principal  chains  or  ridges  of  the  Alleghanies, 
Blue  Ridge,  &c,  all  run  in  a  transverse  or  cross  direction,  to  the 
course  of  all  the  great  rivers ;  and  that  these  rivers  have  been 
forced  to  rupture  their  mounds  or  barriers,  and  break  through  these 
ridges,  in  order  to  make  their  way  to  the  sea  from  the  bosoms  of 
the  valleys. 

This  is  evident  in  the  Potomac,  Susquehannah,  Delaware  and 
James  rivers,  and  others,  where  they  issue  from  the  confines  of  the 
mountains  to  enter  the  lower  country. 

But  the  example  which  most  attracted  his  attention  on  the  spot, 
was  that  of  the  Potomac,  three  miles  below  the  mouth  of  the  She- 
nandoa.  He  was  coming  from  Fredericktown,  about  twenty  miles 
distant,  and  travelling  from  the  southeast  towards  the  northwest, 
through  a  woody  country,  with  gentle  ascents  ?.nd  descents.  After 

45 


354 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIE8 


he  had  crossed  one  ridge,  pretty  distinctly  marked,  though  by  no 
means  steep,  began  to  see  before  him,  eleven  or  twelve  miles  west- 
ward, the  chain  ot  the  Blue  Ridge,  reserabliDg  a  lofty  rampart, 
covered  with  forests,  and  having  a  breach  through  it  from  top  to 
bottom.  He  again  descended  into  the  undulating  wood  country, 
which  separated  him  from  it ;  and  at  length,  on  approaching  it,  he 
found  himself  at  the  foot  of  this  great  mountainous  rampart,  which 
he  had  to  cross,  and  ascertained  to  be.  about  three  hundred  and 
fifty  yards  high,  or  one  hundred  and  twenty  rods,  (nearly  half  a 
mile)  deep. 

On  emerging  from  the  wood,  he  had  a  full  view  of  this  tremen- 
dous breach,  which  he  judged  to  be  about  twelve  hundred  yards 
wide,  or  two  hundred  aud  twenty-five  rods,  which  is  about  three 
fourths  of  a  mile.  Through  the  bottom  of  this  breach  ran  the  Po- 
tomac, leaving  on  its  left  a  passable  btuk  or  slope,  and  on  its  right 
washing  the  foot  of  the  breach.  On  both  sides  of  the  chasm,  from 
top  to  bottom,  many  trees  were  then  growing  among  the  rocks,  and 
in  part  concealed  the  place  of  the  rupture  ;  but  about  two-thirds  of 
the  way  up,  on  the  right  side  of  the  river,  a  large  perpendicular 
space  remains  quite  bare,  and  displays  plainly  the  traces  and  scars 
of  the  ancient  land,  or  natural  wall,  which  once  dammed  up  this 
river,  formed  of  gray  quartz,  which  the  victorious  river  has  over- 
thrown, rolling  its  fragments  a  considerable  distance  down  its  course. 
Some  large  blocks  that  have  resisted  its  force,  still  remain  as  testi- 
monials of  the  convulsion. 

The  bed  of  this  river,  at  this  place,  is  rugged,  with  fixed  rocks, 
which  are,  however,  gradually  wearing  away.  Its  rapid  waters 
boil  and  foam  through  these  obstacles,  which,  for  a  distance  of  two 
miles  form  very  dangerous  falls  or  rapids.  From  the  height  of  the 
mountain  on  each  side  of  the  river,  and  from  attending  circumstan- 
ces, the  rapids  below  the  gap  and  the  narrows,  for  several  miles 
above  the  immediate  place  of  rupture,  are  sufficient  evidence  that 
at  this  place  was  originally  a  mountain  dam  to  the  river  ;  conse- 
quently a  lake  above  must  have  been  the  effect,  with  falls  of  the 
most  magnificent  description,  which  had  thundered  in  their  descent 
from  the  time  of  Noah's  flood  till  the  rupture  of  the  ridge  took 
place. 

At  the  end  of  three  miles  he  came  to  the  confluence  of  the  river 
Shenandoa,  which  issued  out  suddenly  from  the  steep  mountain  ot 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST.  335 


the  Blue  Ridge.  This  river  is  but  about  one-third,  as  wide  as  the 
Potomac ;  having,  like  that  river,  also  broken  through  a  part  of 
the  same  ridge. 

He  says,  "  the  more  he  considered  this  spot  and  its  circumstan- 
ces, the  more  he  was  confirmed  in  the  belief  that  formerly  the 
chain  of  the  Blue  Ridge,  in  its  entire  state,  completely  denied  the 
Potomac  a  passage  onward ;  and  that  then  all  the  waters  of  the  up- 
per part  of  the  river,  having  no  issue,  formed  several  considerable 
lakes  The  numerous  transverse  chains  that  succeed  each  other 
beyond  Fort  Cumberland,  could  not  fail  to  occasion  several  more 
west  of  North  Mountain. 

"  On  the  other  hand,  all  the  valley  of  the  Shenandoa  and  Coni- 
gocheague,  must  have  been  the  basin  of  a  single  lake,  extending 
from  Staunton  to  Chambersburg ;  and  as  the  level  of  the  hills, 
even  those  from  which  these  two  rivers  derive  their  source,  is 
much  below  the  chains  of  the  Blue  Ridge  and  North  Mountain,  it 
is  evident  that  this  lake  must  have  been  bounded  at  first  only  by 
the  general  line  of  the  summit  of  these  two  great  chains  ;  so  that 
in  the  earliest  ages  it  must  have  spread,  like  them,  toward  the  south, 
as  far  as  the  great  Alleghanies." 

At  that  period,  the  two  upper  branches  of  James  river,  equally 
bounded  by  the  Blue  Ridge,  would  have  swelled  it  with  all  their 
waters ;  while  toward  the  north,  the  general  level  of  the  lake,  find- 
ing no  obstacles,  must  have  spread  itself  between  the  Blue  Ridge 
and  the  chain  of  Kittatinny,  not  only  to  the  Susquehannah  and 
Schuylkill,  but  beyond  the  Schuylkill,  and  even  the  Delaware. 

Then  all  the  lower  country,  lying  between  the  Blue  Ridge  and 
the  sea,  had  only  smaller  streams,  furnished  by  the  eastern  declivi- 
ties of  that  ridge,  and  the  overflowing  of  the  lake,  pouring  from  its 
summit  over  the  brow  of  the  ridge;  in  many  places  forming  cas- 
cades of  beauty,  which  marked  the  scenery  of  primeval  landscape, 
immediately  after  the  deluge. 

u  In  consequence,  the  river  there  being  less,  and  the  land  gene- 
rally more  flat,  the  ridge  of  talc  granite  must  have  stopped  the 
waters,  and  formed  marshy  lakes.  The  sea  must  have  come  up  to 
the  vicinity  of  this  ridge,  and  there  occasioned  other  marshes  of  the 
same  kind,  as  the  Dismal  Swamp,  near  Norfolk;"  being  partly  in 
the  states  of  Virginia  and  North  Carolina. ,  "  And  if  the  reader  re- 
collect, the  stratum  of  black  mud  mingled  with  osier  and  trees, 


356 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


winch  is  found  every  where  in  boring  on  the  coast,  he  will  see  it»  it 

a  proof  of  the  truth  of  this  hypothesis." 

But  when  the  great  embankment  gave  away,  by  the  weight  of 
the  waters  above,  or  by  attrition,  convulsion,  or  whatever  may  have 
been  the  cause  of  their  rupture,  the  rush  of  the  waters  brought 
from  above,  all  that  stratum  of  earth  now  lying  on  the  top  of  these 
subterranean  trees,  osiers  and  mud  above  noticed. 

"  This  operation  must  have  been  so  much  the  easier,  as  Blue 
Ridge  in  general  is  not  a  homogeneous  mass  crystalized  in  vast 
strata,  but  a  heap  of  detached  blocks,  of  different  magnitudes,  mix- 
ed with  vegetable  mould,  easily  diffusable  in  water  ;  it  is  in  fact  a 
wall,  the  stones  of  which  are  imbedded  in  clay ;  and  as  its  declivi- 
ties are  very  steep,  it  frequently  happens  that  thaws  and  heavy  rains, 
by  carrying  away  the  earth,  deprive  the  masses  of  stones  of  their 
support,  and  then  the  fall  of  one  or  mare  of  these,  occasions  very 
considerable  stone  slips  or  avalanches,  which  continue  sometimes 
for  several  hours. 

"  From  this  circumstance,  the  falls  from  the  lake  must  have  act- 
ed with  the  more  effect  and  rapidity.  Their  first  attempts  have 
left  traces  in  those  gaps  with  which  the  line  of  summits  is  indented 
from  space  to  space,  or  from  ridge  to  rinVe.  It  may  be  clearly  per- 
ceived on  the  spot,  that  these  places  were  the  first  drains  of  the  sur- 
plus waters  subsequently  abandoned  for  others,  where  the  work  of 
demolition  was  more  easy. 

"  It  is  obvious  that  the  lakes  flowing  off  must  have  changed  the 
whole  face  of  the  lower  country.  By  this  were  brought  down  all 
these  earths  of  a  secondary  formation,  that  compose  the  present 
plain.  The  ridge  of  talcky  granite,  pressed  by  more  frequent  and 
voluminous  inundations,  gave  way  in  several  points,  and  its  marshes 
added  their  mud  to  the  black  mud  of  the  shore,  which,  at  present, 
we  find  buried  under  the  alluvial  earth,  afterward  brought  down 
by  the  enlarged  rivers." 

In  the  valley  between  the  Blue  Ridge  and  North  Mountaiu,  the 
chaiiges  that  took  place  were  conformable  to  the  mode  in  which  the 
water  flowed  off.  Several  breaches  having,  at  once  or  in  succes- 
sion, given  a  passage  to  the  streams  of  water  now  called  James, 
Potomac,  Susquehannah,  Schuylkill  and  Delaware,  their  general 
and  common  reservoir  was  divided  into  as  many  distinct  lakes,  sep- 
arated by  the  risings  of  the  ground  that  exceeded  this  level.  Each 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST 


357 


of  these  lakes  had  its  particular  drain,  and  this  drain  being  at  length 
.  worn  down  to  the  lowest  level,  the  land  was  left  completely  un- 
covered. 

This  must  have  occurred  earlier  with  James,  Susquehannah, 
and  Delaware,  because  their  basins  are  more  elevated,  and  it  must 
have  happened  more  recently  with  the  Potomac,  for  the  opposite 
reason,  its  basin  being  the  deepest  of  all." 

How  far  the  Delaware  then  extended,  the  reflux  of  its  waters 
toward  the  east,  he  could  not  ascertain ;  however,  it  appears  its 
basin  was  bounded  by  the  ridge  that  accompanies  its  left  bank,  and 
which  is  the  apparent  continuation  of  the  Blue  Ridge,  and  North 
Mountain.  It  is  probable  that  its  basin  has  always  been  separate 
from  that  of  the  Hudson,  as  it  is  certain  that  the  Hudson  has  al- 
wTays  had  a  distinct  basin,  the  limit  and  mound  of  which  were 
above  West-Point,  at  the  place  called  the  Highlands,  commencing 
immediately  below  Newburgh. 

To  every  one  who  views  this  spot,  it  seems  incontestible,  that 
the  transverse  chain  bearing  the  name  of  the  Highlands,  was  for- 
merly a  bar  to  the  course  of  the  entire  river,  and  kept  its  waters  at 
a  considerable  height ;  and  considering  that  the  tide  flows  as  far  as 
ten  miles  above  Albany,  is  the  proof  that  the  level  above  the 
ridge,  was  a  lake,  which  reached  as  far  as  to  the  rapids  on  Fort 
Edward. 

At  that  time,  therefore,  the  Cohoes,  or  falls  of  the  Mohawk,  did 
not  appear,  and  till  this  lake  was  drained  off  through  the  gap  at 
West-Point,  the  sound  of  those  fails  was  not  heard. 

The  existence  of  this  lake  explains  the  cause  of  the  alluvials, 
petrified  she!Is5  and  strata  of  schist  and  clay,  mentioned  by  Dr. 
Mitchell,  and  proves  the  justice  of  the  opinions  of  this  judicious 
observer,  respecting  the  stationary  presence  of  waters  in  ages  past, 
along  the  valley  of  many  of  the  American  rivers.  These  ancient 
lakes,  now  drained  by  the  rupture  of  their  mounds3  explains  ano- 
ther appearance  which  is  observed  in  the  valley  of  such  rivers  as 
are  supposed  to  have  been  once  lakes,  as  the  Tennessee,  the  Ken- 
tucky, the  Mississippi,  the  Kanhaway,  and  the  Ohio.  This  ap- 
pearance is  the  several  stages  or  flats  observed  on  the  banks  of 
these  rivers,  and  most  of  the  rivers  of  America,  as  if  the  water 
once  was  higher  than  at  subsequent  periods,  and  by  some  means 
were  drained  off  more  :  so  that  the  volume  of  water  fell  lower 


S5S 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


when  a  new  mark  of  embankment  would  be  formed,  marking  tbe 
original  heights  of  the  shores  of  these  rivers. 

In  none  is  this  appearance  more  perceptible  than  the  Ohio,  at 
the  place  called  Cincinnati,  or  Fort  Washington  ;  here  the  original 
or  first  bank  is  nearly  fifty  feet  high,  and  runs  along  parallel  with 
the  river,  at  the  distance  of  about  seventy-five  rods.  The  high 
floods  sometimes  even  now  overflow  this  first  level. 

At  other  places  the  banks  are  marked,  not  with  so  high  an  an- 
cient shore,  but  then  the  lowness  of  the  country,  in  such  places, 
admitted  the  spread  of  the  waters  to  the  foot  of  the  hills  of  nature. 
When  we  examine  the  arrangement  of  these  flats,  which  are  pre- 
sented in  the  form  of  stages  along  this  river,  we  remain  convinced 
that  even  the  most  elevated  part  of  the  plain,  or  highest  level  about 
Cincinnati,  has  been  once  the  seat  of  waters,  and  even  the  primi- 
tive bed  of  the  river,  which  appears  to  have  had  three  different  pe- 
riods of  decline,  till  it  has  sunken  to  its  present  bed  or  place  of  its 
current. 

The  first  of  the  periods  was  the  time  when  the  transverse  ridges 
of  the  hills,  yet  entire,  barred  up  the  course  of  the  Ohio,  and  acting 
as  mounds  to  it,  kept  the  water  level  witb  their  summits.  All  the 
country  within  this  level  was  then  one  immense  lake,  or  marsh  of 
stagnant  water.  In  lapse  of  time,  and  from  the  periodical  action 
of  the  floods,  occasioned  by  the  annua!  melting,  of  the  snows,  some 
feeble  parts  of  the  mound  were  worn  away  by  the  water. 

One  of  the  gaps  having  at  length  given  away  to  the  current,  the 
whole  effort  of  the  waters  was  collected  in  that  point,  which  soon 
hollowed  out  for  itself  a  greater  deptVi,  and  thus  sunk  the  lake  se- 
veral yards.  The  first  operation  uncovered  the  upper  or  first  level 
on  which  the  wraters  had  stood,  from  the  time  of  the  subsiding  of 
the  deluge,  till  the  first  rupture  took  place. 

From  the  appearance  of  the  shores  of  the  river,  it  seems  to  have 
maintained  its  position  after  the  first  draining  some  length  of  lime, 
so  as  distinctly  to  mark  the  position  of  the  waters  when  a  second 
draining  took  place,  because  the  waters  had,  by  their  action,  re- 
moved whatever  may  have  oppost  d  the  first  attempt  to  break  down 
their  mound  or  barrier. 

The  third  and  last  rent  of  the  barrier  took  place  at  length,  when 
the  fall  of  the  water  became  more  furious,  being  now  more  concen- 
trated, scooped  out  for  itself  a  narrower  and  deeper  channel,  which 


A.ND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST- 


859 


is  its  present  bed,  leaving  ail  the  immense  alluvial  regions  of  the 
Ohio  bare,  and  exposed  to  the  rays  of  the  suu. 

It  is  probable  that  the  Ohio  has  been  obstructed  at  more  places 
than  one,  from  Pittsburgh  to  the  rapids  of  Louisville,  as  that  below 
Silver  creek,  about  five  miles  from  the  rapids  of  the  Ohio,  and 
towards  Galliopolis  and  the  Scioto,  several  transverse  chains  of 
mountains  exist,  very  capable  of  answering  this  purpose.  Volney 
says  it  was  not  till  his  return  from  Fort  Vincent,  on  the  Wabash, 
that  he  was  struck  with  tke  disposition  of  a  chain  of  hills  below 
Silver  creek. 

This  ridge  crosses  the  basin  of  the  Ohio  from  north  to  south,  and 
has  obliged  the  river  to  change  its  direction  from  the  east  toward 
the  west,  to  seek  an  issue,  which  in  fact  it  finds  at  the  confluence 
of  Salt  river ;  and  it  may  even  be  said,  that  it  required  the  copious 
and  rapid  waters  of  this  river  and  its  numerous  branches,  to  force 
the  mound  that  opposed  its  way  at  this  place. 

The  steep  declivity  of  these  ridges  requires  about  a  quarter  of  an 
hour  to  descend  it  by  the  way  of  the  road,  though  it  is  good  and 
commodious,  and  by  comparison  with  other  hiils  around,  he  con- 
ceived the  perpendicular  height  to  be  about  four  hundred  feet,  or 
twenty-five  rods.  The  summit  cf  those  hills,  when  Volney  exa- 
mined them,  "  was  too  thickly  covered  with  wood  for  the  lateral 
course  of  the  chain  to  be  seen but,  so  far  as  he  could  ascertain, 
"  perceived  that  it  runs  very  far  north  and  south,  and  closes  the  ba- 
sin of  the  Ohio  throughout  its  whole  breadth." 

This  basin,  viewed  from  the  summit  of  this  range,  exhibits  the 
appearance  and  form  of  a  lake  so  strongly,  that  the  idea  of  the  an- 
cient existence  of  one  here  is  indubitable. 

Other  circumstances  tend  to  confirm  this  idea,  for  he  observed 
from  this  chain  to  White  river,  eight  miles  from  Fort  Vincent,  that 
the  country  is  interspersed  by  a  number  of  ridges,  many  of  them 
steep,  and  even  lofty  ;  they  are  particularly  so  beyond  Blue  Ridge, 
and  on  both  banks  of  White  river,  and  their  direction  is  every  where 
such,  that  they  meet  the  Ohio  transversely. 

On  the  other  hand,  he  found  at  Louisville  that  the  south  or  Ken- 
tucky bank  of  the  river,  corresponding  to  them,  had  similar  ridges  ; 
so  that  in  this  part  is  a  succession  of  ridges  capable  of  opposing 
powerful  obstacles  to  the  waters.  It  is  not  till  lower  down  the  river 
that  the  country  becomes  flat,  and  the  ample  savannahs  of  the  Wa- 


360 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


bash  and  Green  river  commence,  which  extending  to  the  Mississippi, 
exclude  every  idea  of  any  other  mou:  d  or  barrier  to  the  waters  on 
that  side  of  the  river. 

There  is  another  fact  in  favor  of  u  these  western  rivers  having 
been,  in  many  places,  lakes,  found  in  this  country  ;  and  is  noticed 
as  a  great  singularity.  In  Kentucky,  all  the  rivers  of  that  country 
flow  more  slowly  near  their  sources  than  at  their  mouths  ;  which  is 
directly  the  reverse  of  what  takes  place  in  most  rivers  of  other  parts 
of  the  world  ;  whence  it  is  inferred  that  the  upper  bed  of  the  rivers 
of  Kentucky  is  a  flat  country,  and  that  the  lower  bed,  at  the  en- 
trances of  the  vale  of  the  Ohio,  is  a  descending  slope." 

Now  this  perfectly  accords  with  the  idea  of  an  ancient  lake ;  for 
at  the  time  when  this  lake  extended  to  the  foot  of  the  Alleghanies, 
its  bottom,  particularly  towards  its  mouth,  must  have  been  nearly 
smooth  and  level,  its  surface  being  broken  by  no  action  of  the  wa- 
ters ;  but  when  the  mounds  or  hills,  which  confined  this  tranquil 
body  of  water,  were  broken  down,  the  soil,  laid  bare,  began  to  be 
furrowed  and  cut  into  sluices  by  its  drains,  and  when  at  length 
the  current  became  concentrated  m  the  vale  of  the  Ohio,  and  de- 
molished its  dyke  more  rapidly,  the  soil  of  this  vale  washed  away 
with  violence,  leaving  a  vast  channel,  the  shpes  of  which  occasion- 
ed the  waters  of  the  plain  to  flow  to  it  more  quickly  ;  and  hence 
this  current,  which,  notwithstanding  the  alterations  that  have  been 
going  on  ever  since,  have  continued  more  rapid  to  the  present 
day." 

"  Admitting,  then,  that  the  Ohio  has  been  barred  up,  either  by 
the  chain  of  Silver  creek,  or  any  other  contiguous  to  it,  a  lake 
of  great  extent  must  have  been  the  result.  From  Pittsburgh  the 
ground  slopes  so  gently  that  the  river,  when  low,  does  not  run  two 
miles  an  hour  ;  which  indicates  a  fall  of  four  inches  to  the  mile. 

tl  The  whole  distance  from  Pittsburgh  to  the  rapids  of  Louisville, 
following  all  the  windings  of  the  river,  does  net  exceed  six  hundred 
miles.  From  these  data  we  have  a  difference  of  level  amounting 
to  two  hundred  feet,"  which  does  not  exceed  the  elevation  of  the 
ranges  of  hills  supposed  to  have  once  dammed  up  the  Ohio  river  at 
that  place.  Such  a  mound  could  check  the  waters  and  turn  them 
back  as  far  as  to  Pittsburgh. 

Such  having  been  the  fact  what  an  immense  space  of  the  west- 
ern country  must  have  lain  under  water,  from  the  subsiding  of  the 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


361 


flood  till  this  mound  was  broken  down.  This  is  made  apparent  by 
the  spring  freshets  of  the  Ohio,  at  the  present  time,  which  rising 
only  to  the  height  of  fifty  feet,  keeps  back  the  water  of  the  Great 
Miami,  as  far  as  Greenville,  a  distance  of  seventy  miles  up  the 
country  to  the  north,  where  it  occasions  a  stagnation  of  that  river, 
and  even  an  inundation  of  its  shores  to  a  great  extent." 

In  the  vernal  inundations,  the  north  branch  of  the  Great  Miami 
forms  but  one  with  the  south  branch  of  the  Miami ;  the  space  be- 
tween becomes  one  body  of  water.  "  The  south  branch  runs  into 
Lake  Erie,  and  is  sometimes  called  St.  Mary's  river.  The  carry- 
ing place  or  portage  between  the  heads  of  these  two  rivers  is  but  three 
miles,  and  in  high  water  the  space  can  be  passed  over  in  a  boat, 
from  the  one  which  runs  into  the  Ohio  to  the  other  which  runs  into 
Lake  Erie." 

This  Mr.  Volney  states  to  have  been  the  fact,  as  witnessed  by 
himself  on  the  spot,  in  the  year  1796  ;  so  near  are  all  these  waters 
on  a  level  with  each  other.  He  says,  that  "  during  the  year  1792, 
a  mercantile  house  at  Fort  Detroit,  which  is  at  the  head  of  Lake 
Erie  despatched  two  canoes,  which  passed  immediately,  without 
carrying,  from  the  river  Huron,  running  into  Lake  Erie,  to  Grand 
river,  which  runs  into  Lake  Michigan,  by  the  waters  overflowing 
at  the  head  of  each  of  these  river?.  The  Muskingum,  which  runs 
into  the  Ohio,  also  communicates,  by  means  of  its  sources  and  of 
small  lakes,  with  the  waters  of  the  river  Cayahoga,  which  flows 
into  Lake  Erie." 

From  ail  these  facts  united,  it  follows  that  the  surface  of  the  level 
country  between  Lake  Erie  and  the  Ohio,  cannot  exceed  the  level 
of  the  flat  next  to  the  water  of  the  Ohio  more  than  one  hundred 
feet,  nor  that  of  the  second  flat  or  level,  which  is  the  general  surface 
of  the  country,  more  than  seventy  feet ;  consequently,  a  mound,  or 
rauge  of  mountain,  of  two  hundred  feet,  at  Silver  creek,  six  hun- 
dred miles  down  the  Ohio  from  Pittsburgh,  would  have  been  suffi- 
cient to  keep  back  its  waters,  not  only  as  far  as  Lake  Erie,  but 
even  to  spread  them  from  the  last  slopes  of  the  Alleghanies,  to  the 
north  of  Lake  Superior. 

"  But  whatever  elevation  we  allow  this  natural  monnd,  or  if  we 
suppose  there  were  several  in  different  places,  keeping  back  the 
water  in  succession,  the  existence  of  sedentary  waters  in  this  west- 
ern country,  and  ancient  lakes,  such  as  we  have  pointed  out  be- 

46 


3GU 


■ 

AMERICAN  A2fTI(ty71TIEf 


tweeu  Blue  Ridge  and  North  Mountain,  is  not  the  less  an  incontro- 
vertible fact,  as  must  appear  to  every  one  who  contemplates  the 
country  ;  and  this  fact  explains,  in  a  simple  and  satisfactory  manner, 
a  number  of  local  circumstances,  which,  on  the  other  hand,  serve 
as  proofs  of  the  fact.  For  instance,  these  ancient  lakes  explain 
why,  in  every  part  of  the  basin  of  the  Ohio,  the  land  is  always  le- 
velled in  horizontal  beds  or  different  heights  ;  why  these  beds  are 
placed  in  the  order  of  their  specific  gravity ;  and  why  we  find  in 
various  places  the  remains  of  trees,  of  osier,  and  of  other  plants* 
They  also  happily  and  naturally  account  for  the  formation  of  the 
immense  beds  of  seacoal  found  in  the  western  country,  in  certain 
situations  and  particular  districts.  In  fact,  from  the  researches 
which  the  inhabitants  have  made,  it  appears  that  the  principal  seat 
of  coal  is  above  Pittsburgh,  in  the  space  between  the  Laurel  moun- 
tain and  the  rivers  Alleghany  and  Monongahela,  where  exists,  al- 
most throughout,  a -stratum,  at  the  average  depth  of  twelve  and  six- 
teen feet.  This  stratum  is  supported  by  the  horizontal  bed  of  cal- 
careous stones,  and  covered  with  strata  of  schists  and  slate  ;  it  rises 
and  falls  with  these  on  the  hills  and  in  the  valleys,  being  thicker 
as  it  rises  with  the  hills,  but  thinner  in  the  vales. 

"  On  considering  its  local  situation,  we  see  it  occupies  the  lower 
basin  of  the  two  rivers  we  have  mentioned,  and  of  their  branches, 
the  Yohogany  and  Kiskemauitaus,  all  of  which  flow  through  a 
nearly  flat  country,  into  the  Ohio  below  Pittsburgh. 

"  Now  on  the  hypothesis  of  the  great  lake  of  which  we  have 
spoken,  this  part  will  be  found  to  have  been  originally  the  lower 
extremity  of  the  lake,  and  the  part  where  its  being  kept  back  would 
have  occasioned  still  water.  It  is  admitted  by  naturalists  that  coal 
is  formed  of  heaps  of  trees  carried  away  by  rivers  aud  floods,  and 
afterwards  covered  with  earth." 

These  heaps  are  not  accumulated  in  the  course  of  the  stream, 
but  in  parts  out  of  it,  where  they  are  left  to  their  own  weight ; 
which  becomes  saturated  with  water,  within  a  sufficient  lapse  of 
time,  so  as  to  increase  their  gravity  sufficient  to  sink  to  the  depths 
below. 

"  This  process  may  be  observed,  even  now,  in  many  river  of 
America,  particularly  in  the  Mississippi,  which  annually  carries 
along  with  its  current  a  great  number  of  trees.  Some  of  these 
trees  are  deposited  in  the  bays  and  eddies,  and  there  left  in  still 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


363 


water  to  sink  ;  but  the  greater  part  reach  tLe  borders  of  the  ocean, 
%vhere  the  current  being  balanced  by  the  tide,  they  are  rendered 
stationary  and  buried  under  the  mud  and  sand,  by  the  double  ac- 
tion of  the  stream  of  the  river  and  the  reflux  of  the  sea. 

"  In  the  same  manner,  anciently,  the  rivers  that  flow  from  the 
Alleghany  and  Laurel  mountains  into  tlie  basin  of  the  Ohio,  find- 
ing, towards  Pittsburgh,  the  dead  waters  and  tail  of  the  great  lake, 
there  deposited  the  trees  and  drift  wood  which  they  still  carry 
away  by  thousands,  when  the  frost  breaks  up,  and  the  snows  melt 
in  the  spring.  These  trees  were  accumulated  in  strata,  level  as 
the  fluid  that  bore  them  ;  and  the  mound  of  the  lakes  sinking  grad- 
ually, as  we  have  before  explained,  its  tail  was  likewise  lowered 
by  degrees,  and  the  place  of  deposit  changed  as  the  lake  receded  ; 
forming  that  vast  bed  which,  in  the  lapse  of  ages,  has  been  subse- 
quently covered  with  earth  and  gravel,  and  acquired  the  mineral 
qualities  of  coal,  the  state  in  which  we  find  it. 

"  Coal  is  found  in  several  other  parts  of  the  United  States,  and 
always  in  circumstances  analogous  to  those  we  have  just  described* 
In  the  year  1784,  at  the  mouth  of  the  livulet  Laminskicola,  which 
runs  into  the  Muskingum,  the  stratum  of  coal  there  took  fire,  and 
burnt  for  a  whole  year.  This  mine  is  a  part  of  the  mass  of  which 
we  have  been  speaking;  and  almost  all  the  great  rivers  that  run. 
into  the  Ohio,  must  have  deposits  of  this  kind  in  their  Hat  and  long 
levels,  and  in  the  places  of  their  eddies. 

"  The  upper  branches  of  the  Potomac,  above  and  to  the  left  of 
Fort  Cumberland,  have  been  celebrated  some  years  for  their  strata 
of  coal  embedded  along  their  shores,  so  that  boats  can  lie  at  their 
banks  and  load. 

u  Now  this  part  of  the  country  has  every  appearance  of  having 
been  once  a  lake,  produced  by  one  or  more  of  the  numerous  trans- 
verse ridges  that  bound  the  Potomac,  above  and  below  Fort  Cum- 
berland. 

"  In  Virginia,  the  bed  of  James  river  rests  on  a  very  considerable 
bed  of  coal.  At  two  or  three  places  where  shafts  have  been  sunk, 
on  its  left  bank,  after  digging  a  hundred  and  twenty  feet  through 
red  clay,  a  bed  of  coal,  about  twenty-four  feet  thick,  has  been 
found,  on  an  inclined  stratum  of  granite.  It  is  evident  that  at  the. 
rapids,  lower  down,  where  the  course  of  the  river  is  still  eheefced, 
it  was  once  completely  obstructed:  and  then  there  must  have 
been  a  standing  water,  arid  verv  prcbaolv  a  lake." 


3C4 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


"  The  reader  will  observe,  that  wherever  there  is  a  rapid,  a  stag- 
nation takes  place  in  the  sheet  of  water  above,  just  as  there  is  at  a 
mill  head ;  consequently  the  drifted  trees  must  have  accumulated 
there,  and  when  the  outlet  of  the  lake  had  hollowed  out  for  itself  a 
gap,  and  sunk  its  level,  tbe  annual  floods  brought  down  with  them 
and  deposited  the  red  clay  now  found  there  ;  as  it  is  evident  that 
f  Ids  clay  w7as  brought  from  some  other  place,  for  the  earth  of  such 
a  quality  belongs  to  the  upper  part  of  the  course  of  the  river,  par- 
ticularly to  tbe  ridge  called  Southwest. 

"  It  is  possible  that  veins  or  mines  of  coal,  not  adapted  to  this 
theory,  may  be  mentioned  or  discovered  on  the  coast  of  the  Atlan- 
tic. But  one  or  more  such  instances  will  not  be  sufficient  to  sub- 
vert this  theory  ;  for  the  whole  of  this  coast,  or  all  the  land  between 
the  ocean  and  the  Alleghanies,  from  the  St.  Lawrence  to  the  West 
Indies,  has  been  destroyed  by  earthquakes  ;  the  traces  of  which  are 
every  where  to  be  seen,  and  these  earthquakes  have  altered  the  ar- 
rangement of  strata  throughout  the  wThole  of  this  "space." 

This  account,  as  given  by  Breckenride,  of  the  appearance  of  a 
portion  of  the  country  between  two  forks  of  a  small  branch  of  the 
Arkansas  river  favors  this  supposition. 

"  There  is  a  tract  of  country,"  he  says,  "  of  about  seventy-five 
miles  square,  in  which  nature  has  displayed  a  great  variety  of  the 
most  strange  and  whimsical  vagaries.  It  is  an  assemblage  of  beau- 
tiful meadows,  verdant  ridges,  and  misshapen  piles  of  red  clay, 
thrown  together  in  the  utmost  apparent  confusion  ;  yet  affording  the 
most  pleasing  harmonies,  and  presenting  in  every  direction  an  end- 
less variety  of  curious  and  interesting  objects. 

u  After  winding  along  for  a  few  miles  on  the  high  ridges,  you 
suddenly  descend  an  almost  perpendicular  declivity  of  rocks  and 
clay,  into  a  series  of  level,  fertile  meadows,  watered  by  some  beau- 
tiful rivulets,  and  here  and  there  adorned  with  shrubbery,  cotton 
trees,  elms  and  cedars. 

"  These  natural  meadows  are  divided  by  chains  formed  of  red 
clay,  and  huge  masses  of  gypsum,  with  here  and  there  a  pyramid 
of  gravel.  One  might  imagine  himself  surrounded  by  the  ruins  of 
some  ancient  city,  and  the  plains  to  have  been  sunk  by  some  con- 
vulsions of  nature,  more  than  a  hundred  feet  below  its  former  level, 
for  some  of  the  huge  columns  of  red  clay  rise  to  the  height  of  two 
hundred  feet  perpendicular,  capped  with  rocks  of  gypsum."  This 
is  supposed  to  have  been  the  work  of  an  earthquake. 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST- 


365 


Thus  far  we  have  given  the  view  of  this  great  naturalist  (Volney) 
respecting  the  existence  of  ancient  lakes  to  the  west,  and  of  the 
formation  of  the  strata  of  sea  coal  in  those  regions.  If  then  it  be 
allowed  that  timber  being  deposited  deep  in  the  earth,  becomes  the 
origin  of  that  mineral,  we  discover  at  once  the  chief  material  which 
feeds  the  internal  fires  of  the  globe. 

The  earth,  at  the  era  of  the  great  deluge  being  covered  with  an 
immensity  of  forests,  more  than  it  now  presents,  furnished  the  ma- 
terial, when  sunk  and  plunged  to  the  unknown  depths  of  the  then 
soft  and  pulpy  globe,  for  exhaustless  strata  of  sea  coal. 

This,  by  some  means,  having  taken  fire,  continues  to  burn,  and 
descending  deeper  and  deeper,  spreading  farther  and  farther,  till 
the  conquerless  element  has  even  under  sunk  the  ocean  ;  from 
whence  it  frequently  bursts  forth  in  the  very  middle  of  the  sea,  ac- 
companied with  all  the  grandeur  of  display  and  phenomena  of  fire 
and  water,  mingled  in  unbounded  warfare.  This  internal  opera- 
tion of  fire  feeding  on  the  unctious  minerals  of  the  globe,  among 
which,  as  chief,  is  seacoal,  becomes  the  parent  of  many  a  new  isl- 
and, thrown  up  by  the  violence  of  that  clement. 

We  connot  but  call  to  recollection  in  this  place,  the  remarkable 
allusion  of  Isaiah  at  chap,  xxx.,  33,  which  is  so  phrased  as  al- 
most induces  a  belief  that  he  had  reference  to  this  very  circum- 
stance, that  of  the  internal  fires  of  the  globe  being  fed  by  wood  car- 
bonated or  turned  to  coal.  "  For  Tophet  is  ordained  of  old.  *  * 
He  hath  made  it  deep  and  large ;  the  pile  thereof  is  fire  and  much 
wood  ;  the  breath  of  the  Lord,  like  a  stream  of  brimstone  doth  kin- 
dle it." 

Various  accidents  are  supposeable  by  which  seacoal  may  have, 
at  first,  taken  fire,  so  as  to  commence  the  first  volcano ;  and  in  its 
operations  to  have  ignited  other  mineral  substances,  as  sulphur, 
saltpetre,  bitumen,  and  salts  of  various  kinds.  An  instance  of  the 
ignition  of  seacoal  by  accident,  is  mentioned  in  Dr.  Beck's  Gazet- 
teer, to  have  taken  place  on  a  tract  of  country  called  the  American 
Bottom,  situated  between  the  Kaskaskia  river  and  the  mouth  of  the 
Missouri.  On  this  great  alluvion,  which  embraces  a  body  of  land 
equal  to  five  hundred  square  miles,  seacoal  abounds,  and  was  first 
discovered  in  a  very  singular  manner.  In  clearing  the  ground  of 
its  timber,  a  tree  took  fire  which  was  standing  and  was  dry,  which 


A  M  E  R I  C  A  N   A  N  T I  QU  i  T  i  E  S 


comsnuntcdted  to  the  roots,  but  continued  to  bum  much  longer  than 
wa?  buffi jitrnt  to  exhaust  the  tree,  roots  and  all. 

But  upon  examination,  it  was  found  to  have  taken  hold  of  a  bed 
of  coal,  which  continued  to  buru  until  the  fire  was  smothered  by 
the  failing  in  of  a  large  body  of  earth,  which  the  fire  had  under- 
mined by  destroying  the  coal  and  causing  a  cavity.  This  is  a  vol- 
cano in  miniature,  and  how  long  it  might  have  continued  its  rava- 
ges with  increased  violence,  is  unknown,  had  it  not  have  so  oppor- 
tunely been  extinguished. 

But  this  class  of  strata  of  that  mineral  lies,  of  necessity,  much 
deeper  in  many  places  than  any  other  of  the  kind,  deposited  since 
the  flood,  by  the  operation  of  rivers  and  lakes.  If,  as  we  have  sup- 
posed in  this  volume,  the  earth,  previous  to  the  flood  of  Noah,  had 
a  greater  land  surface  than  at  the  present  time,  we  find  in  this  sup- 
position a  sufficiency  of  wood,  the  deposition  of  which  being 
thrown  into  immense  heaps  by  the  whirls,  waves  and  eddies  of  the 
waters,  to  make  whole  subterranean  ranges  of  this  coal  equal  in 
size  to  the  largest  and  longest  mountains  of  the  globe. 

These  ranges,  in  many  places,  rise  even  above  the  ordinary  sur- 
face of  the  land,  having  been  bared,  since  the  flood,  by  the  violence 
of  convulsions  occasioned  by  both  volcanic  fires  and  the  irruptions 
of  bodies  of  water  and  incessent  rains. 

If  those  philosophers  who  affect  to  despise  the  writings  of  Moses, 
as  found  in  the  Book  of  Genesis,  who  has  given  us  an  account  of 
the  deluge,  would  think  of  this  fact,  the  origin  of  seacoal,  they 
could  not  but  subscribe  to  this  one  account  at  least,  which  that 
book  has  given  of  the  flood. 

The  insignificant  depositions  of  timber,  occasioned  by  the  draw- 
ing off  of  lakes,  or  change  of  water  courses,  since  the  flood,  can- 
not be  supposed  to  be  in  sufficient  quantities  to  furnish  the  vast 
magazines  of  this  mineral,  compared  with  that  of  the  universal  flood. 
These  strata  of  coal  appearing  too  in  such  situation  as  to  preclude 
all  idea  of  their  having  been  formed  by  the  operation  of  water 
since  the  flood,  so  that  we  are  driven,  by  indubitable  deduction  of 
fair  and  logical  argument,  to  resort  to  just  such  cm  occurance  as  the 
deluge,  the  account  of  which  is  given  by  Moses  in  the  Scrpiture. 
So  that  if  there  were  never  an  universal  flood,  as  stated  in  the 
Bible,  the  ingenuity  of  sceptical  philosophy  would  be  sadly  per- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


3G7 


plexed  as  V\  ell  as  all  others,  to  account  for  the  deposition  of  wood 
enough  to  furnish  all  the  mines  of  this  article  found  over  the  whole 
earth,  in  its  several  locations. 

If  another  flood  were  to  drown  the  world,  its  deposits  of  timber 
dould  not  equal,  by  one  half,  the  deposits  of  the  Noachian  deluge, 
on  account  of  the  land  surface  of  the  earth  having,  uuder  the  influ- 
ence of  that  flood,  been  greatly  diminished.  If  it  be  truly  said  in 
the  Bible,  that  the  earth  perished  by  water,  and  also  that  the  foun- 
tains of  the  great  deep,  (subterranean  seas,)  were  broken  up,  we 
arrive  at  the  conclusion,  that  there  was  more  wood  devoted  to  the 
purpose  of  coal  creation,  because  there  wes,  it  is  likely,  double  the 
quantity  of  surface  of  dry  land  for  the  forest  to  grow  upon. 


FURTHER  REMARKS  ON  THE  DRAINING  OF  THE  WESTERN" 
COUNTRY  OF  ITS  ANCIENT  LAKES. 

In  corroboration  of  the  theory  of  Mr.  Volney  on  this  subject, 
we  give  the  brief  remarks  of  that  accurate  and  pleasing  writer,  Mr. 
Schoolcraft,  well  known  to  the  reading  c!as3  of  the  public.  He 
says,  while  treating  on  the  subject  of  the  appearance  of  the  two 
prints  of  human  feet,  in  the  limestone  strata  along  the  shore  of  the 
Mississippi,  at  St.  Louis:  "  May  we  not  suppose  a  barrier  to  have 
once  existed  across  the  lower  part  of  the  Mississippi,  converting  its 
immense  valley  into  an  interior  sea,  whose  action  was  adequate  to 
the  production  and  deposition  of  calcareous  strata.     We  do  not 
consider  such  a*  supposition  incompatible  with  the  existence  of 
transition  rocks  in  this  valley ;  the  position  of  the  latter  being  be- 
neath the  secondary.    Are  not  the  great  northern  lakes  the  remains 
of  such  an  ocean  ?    And  did  not  the  sudden  demolition  of  this  an- 
cient barrier  enable  this  powerful  stream  to  carry  its  banks,  as  it 
has  manifestly  done,  a  hundred  miles  into  the  gulf  of  Mexico. 

We  think  such  an  hypothesis  much  more  probable,  than  that  the 
every-day  deposits  of  this  river  should  have  that  effect  on  the  gulf, 
We  have  been  acquainted  with  the  mouths  of  the  Mississippi  for 
more  thau  a  century  ;  and  yet  its  several  channels,  to  all  appear- 
ance, are  essentially  the  same  as  when  first  discovered. 


368 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


Favoring  the  same  position,  or  theory,  we  give  from  Dr.  Beck's 
Gazetteer,  a  quotation  from  Siiliman's  Journal,  3d  volume,  quoted 
by  that  author  from  Bringier,  on  the  Region  of  the  Mississippi,  who 
says,  that  "  between  White  river  and  the  Missouri,  are  three  paral- 
lel prophyry  ranges,  running  circularly  from  the  west  to  the  north- 
east. 

These  three  mountains  are  twenty-eight  miles  across,  and  seem 
to  have  been  above  water,  when  the  whole  country  around  was 
covered  by  an  ocean." 

At  the  foot  of  one  of  these  ranges  was  found  the  tooth  of  some 
tremendous  monster,  supposed  to  be  the  mammoth,  twice  as  large 
as  any  found  at  the  Big-bone  lick.  An  account  of  this  creature, 
so  far  as  we  are  able  to  give  it,  has  already  been  done,  commencing 
on  page  144  to  150  inclusive,  of  this  work ;  yet  we  feel  it  incum- 
bent to  insert  a  recent  discovery  respecting  this  monster,  which  we 
had  not  seen  when  those  pages  went  to  press.  The  account  is  as 
follows : 

There  were  lately  dug  up  at  Massillion,  "Starke  county,  Ohio, 
two  large  tusks,  measuring  each  nine  feet  six  inches  in  length,  and 
eight  inches  diameter,  being  two  feet  in  girth  at  the  largest  ends. 
The  weight  of  one  is  as  much  as  two  men  could  lift.  The  outside 
covering  is  as  rirm  and  hard  as  ivory,  but  the  inner  parts  were  con- 
siderably decayed.  They  were  found  in  a  swamp,  about  two  feet 
below  the  surface,  and  were  similar  to  those  found  some  time  ago 
at  Bone-lick,  in  Kentucky,  the  size  of  which  animal,  judging  from 
the  bones  found,  was  not  less  than  sixty  feet  in  length,  and  twenty- 
two  in  height,  and  twelve  across  the  hips.  Each  tooth  of  the  crea- 
ture's mouth  which  was  found  weighed  eleven  pounds. —  Clearfield 
Banner,  1832. 

This  is,  indeed,  realizing  the  entire  calculation  made  by  Adam 
Clarke,  the  commentator,  who  tells,  as  before  remarked,  that  haviag 
examined  one  toe  of  the  creature  supposed  to  be  the  mammoth,  he 
found  it  of  sufficient  size  and  length  to  give,  according  to  the  rule 
of  animal  proportion,  an  animal  at  least  sixty  feet  in  length,  and 
twenty-five  feet  high. 

It  would  seem  that  in  nature,  whether  of  animate  or  inanimate 
things,  each  has  its  giant.  Of  the  materials  composing  the  globe, 
the  waters  are  the  giant ;  among  the  continents,  Asia  ;  among  fishes, 
the  whale  ;  among  serpents,  the  great  Li  Boa,  of  Africa ;  among 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST- 


3G9 


quadrupeds,  the  mammoth  ;  among  birds,  the  condor;  among  men, 
the  Patagonians ;  among  trees,  the  banyan  of  the  east ;  among  herbs, 
the  mustard  of  Palestine.  But  among  quadrupeds,  the  giant  of  that 
section  of  uature,  it  would  appear,  has  become  extinct,  by  wh.it 
meaus  is  unknown  :  whether  a  change  in  the  climate,  a  want  of 
food — whether  by  disease  or  the  arts  of  the  ancient  nations — all  is 
locked  in  the  fathomless  depths  of  oblivion. 

The  animal,  hjwever,  must  have  come  down,  in  its  species 
from  the  very  outset  of  time,  with  all  other  animals.  A  male  and 
female  of  this  enormous  beast  must  have  been  saved  in  the  ark  ; 
but  it  is  likely  the  Divine  Providence  directed  a  pair  that  were 
young,  and  therefore  not  as  large  and  ferocious  as  such  as  were  full 
grown  would  be.  The  finding  of  this  animal  in  America  is,  it 
would  appear,  incontrovertible  evidence  that  the  continent  was,  at 
some  period,  united  with  the  old  world  at  some  place  or  places,  as 
has  been  contended  in  this  work;  as  so  large  an  animal  could  nei- 
ther have  been  brought  hither  by  men,  in  any  sort  of  craft  hitherto 
known,  except  the  ark ;  nor  could  they  have  swam  so  far,  even  if 
they  were  addicted  to  the  water. 

But  to  return  to  the  subject  of  western  lakes.  How  great  a 
lapse  of  time  took  place  from  the  subsiding  of  the  flood  of  Noah, 
till  the  bursting  away  of  the  several  barriers  is  unknown.  The 
emptying  out  of  such  vast  bodies  of  water,  as  held  an  almost  bound- 
less region  of  the  west  in  a  state  of  complete  submergency,  must 
of  necessity  have  raised  the  Atlantic,  so  as  to  envelope  in  its  increase 
many  a  fair  and  level  country  along  its  coasts,  both  on  this  continent 
and  those  of  Europe  and  Africa. 

In  such  an  emerency,  all  islands  which  were  low  on  the  suiface, 
and  not  much  elevated  above  the  sea,  must  have  been  drowned,  or 
parts  of  them,  so  that  their  hills,  if  any  they  had,  would  only  be 
left,  a  sad  and  small  memorial  of  their  ancient  domains. 

It  may  have  been,  that  the  rush  of  these  mighty  waters  from  the 
west,  flowing  to^the  sea  at  once,  down  the  channels  of  so  many  ri- 
vers, which  at  first  broke  up  and  enveloped  the  land  between  the 
range  of  the  West  India  islands  and  the  shores  of  the  Gulf  of  Mex- 
ico. It  is  conjectured  by  naturalists,  that  the  time  was  when  fir^e 
islands  were  in  reality  the  Atlantic  coast  of  the  continent.  Some 
convulsion,  therefore,  must  have  transpired  to  bring  about  so  greai 
a  change. 


370  AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 

If,  as  Schoolcraft  has  suggested,  the  Mississippi,  in  bursting 
down  its  barriers,  drove  the  earthy  matter  which  accompanied  it 
in  that  occurrence  a  hundred  miles  into  the  sea,  it  may  well  be  sup- 
posed that  if  all  that  space,  now  the  gulf,  was  then  a  low  tract  of 
country,  which  is  natural  to  suppose,  as  its  shores  are  so  now,  that 
it  was  overwhelmed,  while  the  higher  parts  of  the  coast,  now  the 
West  India  islands,  are  all  that  remains  of  that  drowned  country. 

The  Gulf  of  Mexico  is  full  of  low  islands,  scarcely  above  the  le- 
vel of  the  sea,  which  have  been,  from  the  earliest  history  of  that 
coast,  the  resort  of  pirates.  Their  peculiar  situation  in  this  respect, 
would  favor  the  opinion,  that  the  once  low  and  level  shores  were, 
by  the  rush  and  overflowing  of  the  waters,  buried  to  a  great  extent 
in  the  country,  leaving  above  water  every  eminence,  which  are 
now  the  islands  of  the  gulf. 

From  an  examination  of  the  lakes  Seneca,  Cayuga  and  Erie,  it 
is  evident  from  their  banks,  that  anciently  the  water  stood  in  them 
ten  and  twelve  feet  higher  than  at  present ;  these  also,  therefore, 
have  been  drained  a  second  time  since  those  of  which  we  have 
been  speaking,  of  which  these  were  once  a  part. 

It  is  evident  from  the  remarks  of  Breckenridge,  which  are  the 
result  of  actual  observations  of  that  traveller,  that  there  was  for- 
merly an  outlet  from  Lake  Michigan  to  the  Mississippi,  by  the  way 
of  the  Illinois  river,  which  heads  near  the  southern  end  of  that  lake. 

This  is  supported  by  the  well  known  facts,  that  the  waters  of  all 
the  lakes  drained  by  the  St.  Lawrence,  has  sunk  many  feet.  The 
Illinois  shows  plainly  the  marks  of  having  once  conveyed  a  much 
greater  body  of  water  between  its  shores  than  at  the  present  time. 

All  the  western  lakes,  Superior,  Michigan,  Huron,  Lake  of  the 
Woods,  Erie,  Seneca,  Cayuga,  and  many  lesser  ones,  are  the  mere 
remnants  of  the  great  inland  sea  which  once  existed  in  this  region, 
and  the  time  may  come,  when  all  these  lakes  will  be  again  drained 
off  to  the  north  by  the  way  of  the  St.  Lawrence,  and  to  the  south 
by  other  rivers,  to  the  sea,  adding  a  country  of  land  freed  in  a  mea- 
sure from  these  waters,  as  great  in  extent  as  all  the  lakes  put  to- 
gether. 

It  is  believed  by  the  most  observing  naturalists,  that  the  falls  of 
Niagara  were  once  as  low  down  the  river  as  where  Queenstown  is 
situated,  which  is  six  or  eight  miles  below  the  fall.  If  so,  the  time 
may  come,  and  none  can  tell  how  soon,  when  the  falls  shall  have 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


371 


worn  through  the  stone  ridge  or  precipice,  over  which  the  Niagara 
is  precipitated,  and  coming  to  a  softer  barrier  of  mere  earth,  the 
power  of  the  water  would  not  be  long  in  rending  for  itself  a  more 
level  channel,  extending  to  the  foot  of  Lake  Erie,  on  an  inclined 
plane  of  considerable  steepness.  One  shock  of  an  earthquake,  such 
as  happened  in  Virginia,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  coal  mines,  1833, 
would  probably  fracture  the  falls  of  Niagara,  so  as  to  force  the  wa- 
ters in  its  subterranean  work,  and  undermine  the  falls. 

This  would  affect  Lake  Erie,  causing  an  increased  current  in  its 
waters,  and  the  lowering  of  its  bed,  which  would  also  have  the 
same  effect  on  lakes  Michigan,  Huron  and  Superior,  with  all  the 
rest  of  a  lesser  magnitude ,  changing  them  from  the  character  they 
now  bear,  which  is  that  of  lakes,  to  that  of  mere  rivers,  like  the 
Ohio.  In  the  mean  time,  Ontario  would  become  enlarged,  so  as  to 
rise,  perhaps,  to  a  level  with  the  top  of  the  falls,  which  is  one  hun- 
dred and  fifty  feet. 

Lake  Ontario  is  but  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet  below  the 
city  of  Utica,  and  Utica  is  fout  hundred  feet  above  the  valley  of  the 
Hudson  river  •  consequently,  deducting  the  hundred  and  fifty  feet, 
which  is  the  fall  of  land  from  the  long  level,  as  it  is  called,  on  which 
Utica  stands,  to  the  lake,  there  will  be  left  two  hundred  and  fifty 
feet  elevation  of  Lake  Ontario  above  the  vale  of  the  Hudson. 

That  lake,  therefore,  need  to  be  raised  but  a  little  more  than  one 
hundred  and  fifty  feet,  when  it  would  immediately  inundate  a 
greater  part  of  the  state  of  New- York,  as  well  as  a  part  of  Upper 
and  all  of  Lower  Canada,  till  the  waters  should  be  carried  off  by 
the  way  of  the  several  rivers  now  existing,  on  the  easterly  and 
southerly  side  of  the  lake,  and  by  new  channels,  such  a  catastro- 
phe would  most  certainly  cut  for  itself,  in  many  directions,  in  its 
descent  to  the  Atlantic. 

But  we  trust  such  an  occurrence  may  never  take  place  ;  yet  it  is 
equally  possible,  as  was  the  draining  of  the  more  ancient  lakes  of 
the  west.  And  however  secure  the  ancient  inhabitants  may  have 
felt  themselves,  who  had  settled  below  the  barriers,  yet  that  inland 
sea  suddenly  took  up  its  line  of  march,  to  wage  war  with,  or  to  be- 
come united  to,  its  counterpart,  the  Atlantic,  and  in  its  travel  bore 
away  the  country,  and  the  nations  dwelling  thereon. 

It  is  scarcely  to  be  doubted,  but  the  same  effects  were  experi- 
enced by  the  ancient  inhabitants  settled  between  the  Euxine  or 


372 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


Black  sea  and  the  Mediterranean,  and  the  whole  coast  of  that  in- 
land ocean,  where  its  shores  were  skirted  by  low  countries. 

It  is  stated  by  Euclid,  in  a  conversation  that  philosopher  had 
with  Anacharsis,  of  whom  we  have  before  spoken  in  this  work, 
that  the  Black  sea  was  once  entirely  surrounded  by  natural  em- 
bankments, but  that  many  rivers  running  into  it  from  Europe  and 
Asia,  at  length  overflowed  its  barriers,  cutting  for  itself  a  deep  chan- 
nel, tore  out  the  whole  distance  from  its  own  shore  to  that  of  the 
Arcliipelago,  a  branch  of  the  Mediterranean,  which  is  something 
more  than  a  hundred  miles,  now  called  the  Bosphorus. 

It  is  not  impossible  but  from  the  rush  of  all  these  waters  at  once, 
into  the  Mediterranean,  that  at  that  time  the  isthmus  which  united 
Europe  and  Africa  where  now  is  situated  the  Strait  of  Gibraltar, 
was  then  torn  away.  It  is  true  that  the  ancients  attributed  this  se- 
paration to  the  power  of  Hercules,  which  circumstance,  thcrugh  we 
do  not  believe  in  the  strength  of  this  Grecian  hero,  points  out 
clearly  that  an  isthmus  once  was  there. 

By  examining  the  map  of  the  Black  sea,  we  rind  that  beside  the 
outlet  of  the  Bosphorus,  there  is  none  other ;  so  that  previous  to  the 
time  of  that  rupture  it  had  no  visible  outlet.  Some  internal  con- 
vulsions, therefore,  must  have  taken  place,  so  that  its  subterranean 
channels  became  obstructed,  and  caused  it  at  once  to  overflow  its 
lowest  embankment,  which  it  appears  was  toward  the  Archipelago, 
or  the  west. 

The  Caspian  sea,  in  the  same  country,  has  no  outlet,  though 
many  large  rivers  flow  into  it.  If,  therefore,  this  body  of  water, 
wliich  is  nearly  700  miles  long,  and  nearly  300  wide,  were  to  be 
deranged  in  its  subterranean  outlets,  it  would  also  soon  overflow  at 
its  lowest  points,  which  is  also  on  its  western  side,  at  its  southern 
end,  and  rushing  on  between  the  Georgian  or  Circassian  and  Tau- 
rus mountains,  would  plough  for  itself  a  channel  to  the  Black  sea. 

From  this  view,  the  rupturing  of  the  ancient  embankments  of 
l  ikes  in  Europe,  Asia  and  America,  it  appears  that  the  waters  of 
the  Atlantic  are  now,  of  necessity,  much  deeper  than  anciently;  on 
which  account  many  fair  countries  and  large  islands,  once  thickly 
peopled,  and  covered  with  cities,  towns  and  cultivated  regions,  lie 
now  where  sea  monsters  sport  above  them,  while  whole  tracts  of 
country  once  merged  in  other  parts  of  the  earth  beneath  the  waters, 
have  lifted  hills  and  dales  to  the  light  and  influence  of  the  sun,  and 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST- 


873 


spread  out  the  lap  of  happy  countries,  whereon  whole  nations  of 
men  now  live,  where  cuce  the  wind  drove  onward  the  terrific 
billows. 


CAUSES  OF  THE  DISAPPEARANCE  OF  THE  ANCIENT 

NATIONS. 

But  what  has  finally  become  of  these  nations,  and  where  are 
their  descendants,  are  questions,  which,  could  they  be  answered, 
would  be  highly  gratifying. 

On  opening  a  mound,  below  Wheeling  on  the  Ohio,  a  few  years 
since,  a  stone  was  found,  having  on  it  a  brand  exactly  similar  to  the 
one  commonly  used  by  the  Mexican  nations  in  marking  their  cattle 
and  horses. 

From  this  it  is  evident,  that  the  ancient  nations  were  not  savages, 
or  a  trait  of  the  domestication  of  animals  would  not  be  found  in 
the  country,  they  once  inhabited.  The  head  of  the  Sustajases,  or 
Mexican  hog,  cut  off  square,  was  found  in  a  saltpetre  cave  in  Ken- 
tucky not  long  since  by  Dr.  Brown.  This  circumstance  is  men- 
tioned by  Dr.  Drake,  in  his  "  Picture  of  Cincinnati."  The  nitre 
had  preserved  it.  It  h?d  been  deposited  there  by  the  ancient  in- 
habitants where  it  must  have  lain  for  ages. 

This  animal  is  not  found,  it  is  said,  north  of  the  Mexican  coun- 
try, the  northern  line  of  which,  is  about  on  the  40th  degree  of  north 
latitude,  and  the  presumption  is  that  the  inhabitants  took  these  ani- 
mals along  with  them  in  their  migrations,  until  they  finally  settled 
in  Mexico.  Other  animals,  as  the  elk,  the  moose  and  the  buffa- 
lo were  doubtless  domesticated  by  them,  and  used  for  agricultural 
purposes,  as  the  ox,  the  horse  and  various  other  animals  are  now  in 
use  among  us. 

The  wild  sheep  of  Oregon,  Louisania,  California  and  the  Rocky 
Mountains,  the  same  found  in  the  north  of  Asia.  May  be  the 
remnants  of  the  flocks  of  that  animal  once  domesticated  all  over 
these  regions,  by  those  people,  and  used  for  food. 

One  means  of  their  disappearance  may  have  been  the  noxious 
effluvia  which  would  inevitably  arise  from  the  bottoms  of  those 
vast  bodies  of  water,  which  must  have  had  a  pestilential  effect  on 


874 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


the  people  settled  around  them.  This  position  needs  no  elucida- 
tion, as  it  is  known  that  the  heat  of  the  sun,  in  its  action  on  swamps 
and  marshy  grounds,  fills  the  region  round  them  with  a  deathly 
scent,  acting  directly  on  the  economy  and  constitution  of  the  hu- 
man subject,  while  animals  of  coarser  habits  escape. 

Who  has  not  experienced  this  on  the  sudden  draining  of  stag- 
nant waters,  or  even  those  of  a  mill  pond.  The  reason  is,  the  filth 
settled  at  the  bottoms  of  such  places,  becomes  exposed  by  having 
the  cover  taken  away,  which  wss  the  waters,  and  the  winds  imme- 
diately wafting  the  deleterious  vapors  ;  the  surrounding  atmosphere 
becomes  corrupted  ;  disease  follows  with  death  in  its  train. 

But  on  the  suddeu  draining  of  so  great  a  body  of  water,  from 
such  immense  tracts  of  land,  which  had  been  accumulating  filth, 
formed  of  decayed  vegetation  and  animals,  from  the  time  of  the 
deluge  till  their  passage  off  at  that  time,  the  stench  must  have  been 
beyond  all  conception,  dreadful. 

Such  is  the  fact  on  the  subsiding  of  the  waters  of  the  Nile  in 
Egypt,  which,  after  having  overflown  the  whole  valley  of  that  riv- 
er, about  500  miles  in  length,  and  from  15  to  25  in  width,  leaves 
an  insufferable  stench,  and  is  the  true  origin  of  the  plague,  which 
sweeps  to  eternity  anuuaily,  its  thousands  in  that  country. 

It  is  not,  therefore.,  impossible  nor  improbable,  but  by  this  very 
means,  the  ancient  nations  settled  roand  these  waters,  may  have, 
indeed,  been  exterminated  ;  or  if  they  were  not  exterminated,  must 
have  been  exceedingly  reduced  in  numbers,  so  as  to  induce  the  re- 
sidue to  flee  from  so  dangerous  a  country^  far  to  the  south,  or  any 
where,  from  the  effects  of  the  dreadful  effluvia,  arisiug  from  the 
newly  exposed  chasms  and  gulfs. 

Such,  also,  would  be  the  effect  on  the  present  inhabitants,  should 
the  falls  of  Niagara  at  length  undermine  and  wear  down  that  strata 
of  rock  over  which  it  now  plunges,  and  drain  the  lakes  of  the  west, 
the  remnant  of  the  greater  bodies  of  water  which  once  rested  there. 
In  the  event  of  such  a  catastrophe,  it  would  be  natural,  that  the 
waters  should  immediately  flow  Into  the  head  water  channels  of  all 
the  rivers  northeast  and  south  from  Lake  Ontario,  after  coming  on 
a  level  with  the  heads  of  the  short  streams  passing  into  that  lake 
on  its  easterly  side. 

The  rivers  running  southeast  and  north  from  that  part  of  Lake 
Ontario  as  high  up  as  the  village  of  Lyons,  are  a  part  of  the  Che- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


375 


mung,  the  Chenango,  the  Unadilla,  the  Susquehannah,  the  Dela- 
ware, the  Mohawk,  the  Schoharie,  the  Au  Sable,  and  the  St.  Law- 
rence, with  all  their  smaller  head  water  streams. 

The  vallies  of  these  streams  would  become  the  drains  of  such  a 
discharge  of  the  western  lakes,  overwhelming  and  sweeping  away 
all  the  works  of  men  in  those  directions,  as  well  as  in  many  other 
directions,  where  the  lowness  of  the  country-should  be  favorable 
to  a  rush  of  the  wTaters,  leaving  isolated  tracts  of  high  lands,  with 
the  mountains  as  islands,  till  the  work  of  submersion  should  be 
over. 

All  this,  it  is  likely,  will  appear  extremely  visionary,  but  it  should 
not  be  forgotten,  that  we  have  predicated  it  on  the  supposed  demo- 
lition of  Niagara  falls,  which  is  as  likely  to  ensue,  as  that  the  bar- 
riers of  the  ancient  lakes  should  have  given  away,  where  the  re- 
spective falls  of  the  rivers  which  issued  from  them,  poured  over 
their  precipices. 

"  Whoever  will  examine  all  the  circumstances,"  says  Volney, 
"  will  clearly  perceive,  that  at  the  place  where  the  village  of 
Queenstown  now  stands,  the  fall  at  first  commenced,  and  that  the 
river,  by  sawing  down  the  bed  of  the  rock,  has  hollowed  out  the 
chasm,  and  continued  carrying  back  its  breach,  from  age  to  age, 
till  it  has  at  length  reached  the  spot  where  the  cascade  now  is. 
There  it  continues  its  secular  labors  with  slow  but  incessant  ac- 
tivity. The  oldest  inhabitants  of  the  country  remember  having 
seen  the  cataract  several  paces  beyond  its  present  place."  The 
frosts  of  winter  have  the  effect  continually  of  cracking  the  project- 
ing parts  of  the  strata,  and  the  thaws  of  spring,  with  the  increased 
powers  of  the  augmented  waters,  loosen,  and  tumble  large  blocks 
of  the  rock  into  the  chasm  below. 

Dr.  Barton,  who  examined  the  thickness  of  the  stratum  of  stone, 
and  estimates  it  at  sixteen  feet,  believes  it  rests  on  that  of  blue 
schist,  which  he  supposes  forms  the  bed  of  the  river,  as  well  as  the 
falls,  up  to  the  Erie.  "  Some  ages  hence,  if  the  river,  continuing 
its  untiring  operations,  may  cease  to  find  the  calcareous  rock  that 
now  checks  it,  and  finding  a  softer  strata,  the  fall  will  ultimately 
arrive  at  Lake  Erie  ;  and  then  one  of  those  great  desications  will 
take  place,  of  which  the  valleys  of  the  Potomac,  Hudson,  and 
Ohio,  afford  instances  in  times  past." 


376 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


LAKE  ONTARIO  FORMED  BY  A  VOLCANO. 

Though  the  northern  parts  of  America  have  been  known  to  us 
but  about  two  centuries,  yet  this  interval,  short  as  it  is  in  the  an- 
nals of  nature,  has  already, says  Volney,been  sufficient  to  convince 
us,  by  numerous  examples,  that  earthquakes  must  have  been  fre- 
quent and  violent  here,  in  times  past.  And  that  they  have  been 
the  principal  cause  of  the  derangements  of  which  the  Atlantic 
coast  presents  such  general  and  striking  marks. 

To  go  back  no  farther  than  the  year  1628,  the  time  of  the  arri- 
val of  the  first  English  settlers,  and  end  with  1782,  a  lapse  of  154 
years,  in  which  time  there  occurred  no  less  than  forty-five  earth- 
quakes. These  were  always  preceded  by  a  noise  resembling  that 
of  a  violent  wind,  or  of  a  chimney  on  fire  ;  they  often  threw  down 
chimnies,  sometimes  even  bouses,  and  burst  open  doors  and  win- 
dows; suddenly  dried  up  wells,  and  even  several  brooks  and 
streams  of  water ;  imparting  to  the  waters  a  turbid  color,  and  the 
fcetied  smell  of  liver  of  sulphur,  throwing  up  out  of  great  chinks, 
sand  with  a  similar  smell.  The  shocks  of  t^ese  earthquakes  seem- 
ed to  proceed  from  an  internal  focus,  which  raised  the  earth  up  from 
belaw,  the  principal  line  of  which  run  northeast  and  southwest, 
foliowing  the  course  of  the  River  Merrimack,  extending  southward 
to  the  Potomac,  and  northward  beyond  the  St.  Lawrence,  particu- 
larly affecting  the  direction  of  Lake  Ontario. 

Respecting  these  earthquakes,  Volney  says,  he  was  indebted  to 
a  work  written  by  a  Mr.  Williams,  from  whose  curious  researches 
he  had  derived  the  most  authentic  records.  But  the  language  and 
phrases  he  employs  are  remarkable,  says  Mr.  Volney,  for  the  analo- 
gy they  bear  to  local  facts,  noticed  by  himself,  respecting  the  ap- 
pearance of  schists  on  the  shores  of  Lake  Erie  ;  and  about  the  falls 
of  Niagara ;  and  by  Dr.  Barton,  who  supposed  it  to  form  the  bed 
on  which  the  rock  of  the  falls  rests. 

He  quotes  him  as  follows  : — "  Did  not  that  smell  of  liver  sul- 
phur, imparted  to  the  water  and  sand  vomited  up  from  the  bowels 
of  the  earth  through  great  chinks,  originate  from  the  stratum  of 
schist  which  we  found  at  Niagara,  beneath  the  limestone,  and  which 


AND  DISCOVERIES   IN  THE  WEST. 


377 


when  submitted  to  the  action  of  fire,  emits  a  strong  smell  of  sul- 
phur ?" 

It  is  true,  says  Volney,  that  this  is  but  one  of  the  elements  of 
the  substance  mentioned,  composing  schist,  but  an  accurate  analy- 
sis might  detect  the  other.  This  stratum  of  schist  is  found  under 
the  bed  of  the  Hudson,  and  appears  in  many  places  in  the  states  of 
New- York  and  Pennsylvania,  among  the  sand  stones  and  granites ; 
and  we  have  reason  to  presume  that  it  exists  round  Lake  Ontario, 
and  beneath  Lake  Erie,  and  consequently,  that  it  forms  one  of  the 
floors  of  the  country,  in  which  was  the  principal  focus  of  the  earth- 
quakes mentioned  by  Mr.  Williams. 

The  line  of  this  focus  running  norJ.kwest  and  southeast,  particu- 
larly affected  the  direction  of  the  Atlantic  to  Lake  Ontario.  This 
predilection  is  remarkable,  on  account  of  the  singular  structure  of 
this  lake.  The  rest  of  the  western  lakes  notwithstanding  their 
magnitude,  have  no  great  depth.  Lake  Erie  no  where  exceeds  a 
hundred  or  a  hundred  and  thirty  feet,  and  the  bottom  of  Lake  Su- 
perior is  visible  in  many  places. 

The  Ontario,  on  the  contrary,  is  in  general  very  deep ;  that  is  to 
say,  upwards  of  forty-five  or  fifty  fathoms,  three  hundred  feet,  and 
so  on  ;  and  in  considerable  extent,  no  bottom  could  be  found  with 
a  line  of  a  hundred  and  ten  fathoms,  which  is  a  fraction  less  than 
forty  reds  in  depth, 

This  is  the  case  in  some  places  near  its  shores,  and  these  circum- 
stances pretty  clearly  indicate  that  the  basin  of  this  lake  was  once 
the  crater  of  a  volcano  now  extinct.  This  inference  is  confirmed 
by  the  Volcanic  productions  already  found  on  its  borders,  and  do 
doubt  the  experienced  eye  will  discover  many  more,  by  examining 
the  form  of  the  great  talu$>  or  slope,  that  surrounds  this  lake  alraost 
circularly,  and  anuouiices  in  all  parts,  to  the  eye  as  well  as  to  the 
understanding,  that  formerly  the  flat  of  Niagara  expended  almost 
as  far  as  the  middle  of  Lake  Ontario,  where  it  was  sunk  znd  swal- 
lowed up  by  the  action  of  a  volcano,  then  in  its  vigor. 

The  existence  of  this  subterranean  fire,  accords  perfectly  with 
the  earthquakes  mentioned  by  Williams,  as  above,  and  these  two 
agents,  which  we  find  here  united,  while  they  confirm  on  the  one 
hand,  that  of  a  grand  subterranean  focus,  at  an  unknown  depth,  on 
the  other,  afford  a  happy  and  plausable  explanation  of  the  confusion 
of  all  the  strata  of  the  earth  and  stones,  which  occurs  throughout 

48  ' 


378  AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 

the  Atlantic  coast.  It  explains,  too,  why  the  calcareous,  and  even 
gianite  strata  there,  are  inclined  in  the  horizon  in  angles  of  forty- 
five  degrees  and  upward,  even  as  far  as  eighty,  almost  perpendicu- 
lar, or  endwise,  their  fragments  remaining  in  the  vacuities  formed 
by  the  vast  explosions.  To  this  fracture  of  the  stratum  of  granite, 
are  owing  its  little  cascades  ;  and  this  fact  indicates  that  formerly 
the  focus  extended  south  beyond  the  Potomac,  as  also  does  this 
stratum.  No  doubt  it  communicated  with  that  of  the  West  India 
islands. 

As  favoring  this  supposition  of  Monsieur  Volney,  we  recollect 
the  dreadful  earthquakes  of  181.1  and~1812,  on  the  Mississippi,  in 
the  very  neighborhood  of  the  country  supposed  to  have  been  the 
scenes  of  the  effects  of  those  early  shocks,  of  probably  the  same 
internal  cause,  working  now  beneath  the  continent,  and  sooner  or 
later  may  make  again  the  northern  parts  of  it  its  place  of  vengeance, 
instead  of  the  more  southerly,  as  among  the  Andes,  and  the  Cor- 
dilleras of  South  America. 

The  earthquakes  of  1811  and  1812  took  place  at  New-Madrid; 
on  the  Mississippi,  where  its  effects  were  dreadful,  having  thrown 
up  vast  heaps  of  earth,  destroying  the  whole  plain  upon  which 
that  town  was  laid  out.  Houses,  gardens,  and  the  fields  were 
swallowed  up  ;  many  of  the  inhabitants  were  forced  to  flee,  ex- 
posed to  the  horrors  of  the  scenes  passing  around,  and  to  the  incle- 
mencies of  the  storms,  without  shelter  or  protection.  The  earth 
rolled  under  their  feet,  like  the  waves  of  the  sea.  The  shocks  of 
this  subterranean  convulsion  were  felt  two  hundred  miles  around. 

And,  further,  in  evidence  of  the  action  of  volcanic  fires  in  the 
west  of  this  country,  we  have  the  following,  from  Dr  Beck's 
Gazetteer  of  Illinois : 

"  I  visited  Fort  Clark  in  1820,  and  obtained  a  specimen  of  na- 
tive copper  in  its  vicinity.  It  weighed  about  two  pounds,  and  is 
similar  to  that  found  on  Lake  Superior,  of  which  the  following  de- 
scription was  given  at  the  mint  of  Utrecht,  in  the  Netherlands,  at 
the  request  of  Dr.  Eustis.  From  every  appearance,  that  piece  of 
copper  seems  to  have  been  taken  from  a  mass  that  had  undergone 
fusion.  The  melting  was,  however,  not  an  operation  of  art,  but  a 
uatural  effect,  caused  by  a  volcanic  eruption. 

"  The  stream  of  lava  probably  carried  in  its  course  the  aforesaid 
body  of  copper,  that  formed  into  one  collection  as  fast  as  it  wa? 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST-  379 

heated  enough  to  run  from  all  parts  of  the  mine.  The  united  mass 
was,  probably,  borne  in  this  manner  to  the  place  where  it  now  rests 
in  the  soil.  Thus  we  see  that  even  America,  in  its  northern  parts, 
as  well  as  many  parts  of  the  old  world,  as  it  is  called,  has  felt  the 
shock  of  that  engine,  which  is,  comparatively  speaking,  boundless 
in  power,  capable  of  new  modelling  the  face  of  whole  tracts  of 
country,  in  «  few  days,  if  not  hours." 

That  many  parts  of  the  western  country  have  once  been  the 
scene  of  the  devastating  power  of  volcanos,  is  also  maintained  by 
that  distinguished  philosopher,  Rafinesque. — See  Atlantic  Journal, 
No.  4,  p.  138,  1832. 

He  says :— <l  The  great  geological  question  of  the  igneous  or 
aqueous  origin  of  the  globe,  and  the  primitive  formation,  is  now 
pretty  much  at  rest.  It  is  become  more  important  to  ascertain  the 
origin  of  the  secondary  formations,  with  the  immense  stores  of  life 
and  organic  remains  therein  entombed, 

"  No  one  can  be  a  good  geologist  without  having  seen  volcanos, 
or,  at  least,  without  having  studied  well  their  actual  operations 
throughout  the  globe.  After  seeing  the  huge  volcanos  of  South 
America,  throwing  yet  streams  of  water,  mud,  clay,  sand,  marl, 
bitumite,  pitchstone,  &c,  instead  of  melted  stones,  while  the  same 
happens  also  in  Java,  Spain,  Sicily  and  Russia." 

If  by  this  agent  water  is  thrown  out  from  the  bowels  of  the  earth , 
so  as  to  change  the  entire  surface  of  large  disctricts  in  many  parts 
of  the  old  world,  why  not  in  America,  if  the  tokens  of  such  opera- 
tions are  found  here  ? 

Volney  was  the  first  to  call  Lake  Ontario  a  volcano,  and  to  notice 
our  ancient  mountain  lakes,  now  dried  up  by  eruptions  or  convul- 
sions, each  having  a  breach  or  water  gap.  I  am  induced  to  amplify 
his  views,  by  deeming  nearly  all  our  lakes  as  many  volcanic  out- 
lets, which  have  not  merely  thrown  water  in  later  periods,  but  in 
more  ancient  periods  have  formed  nearly  all  our  secondary  strata > 
by  eruptions  of  muddy  water,  mud,  clay,  liquid  coal,  basalts,  trap. 
This  was  when  the  ocean  covered  yet  the  land. 

Submarine  or  oceanic  volcanoes  exist  as  yet  every  where  in  the 
ocean,  and  their  effects  are  known.  They  must  of  course  be  hol- 
low outlets  under  water,  that  would  become  lakes  if  the  ocean  was 
dried  up.  We  can  form  an  idea  of  their  large  nuniber  and  extent 
by  the  late  but  natural  discovery,  that  all  the  Lagoon  islands,  and 


380 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


circular  clusters  of  islands  in  the  Atlantic,  Pacific,  and  Indian 
oceans,  are  volcanic  craters.  This  is  now  admitted,  even  in  Eng- 
land ;  and  the  coral  reef  often  crowning  those  clusters,  are  later 
superincumbent  formations  by  insects.  The  Bahama  islands  in  the 
Atlantic,  the  Maldives,  near  India,  and  the  coral  islands  all  over  the 
Pacific,  are  the  most  striking  of  these  singular  volcanic  clusters, 
nearly  at  a  level  with  the  ocean.  Some  of  them  are  of  immense 
extent,  from  sixty  to  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles  in  circuit,  or  even 
more. 

.Some  circular  bays  and  gulfs  of  the  sea  appear  to  be  similar,  dif- 
fering by  having  only  one  breach.  The  Bav  of  Naples  is  one  also, 
an  ancient  enter,  with  islands  in  front. 

The  analogy  between  lakes  and  volcanic  craters  is  obvious.  Al- 
most all  fiery  craters  become  lakts  filled  wivth  water,  when  their 
igneous  activity  is  spent. 

All  springs  are  smaller  outlets  of  water,  while  the  fumaroles  and 
holes  of  igneous  volcanos  are  small  outlets  of  smoke,  fire,  air,  gases, 
hot  mud,  &c.  I  can  perceive  no  essential  difference  between  them 
or  any  other  eruptive  basin,  except  in  degree  of  caloric  or  kind  of 
matter  which  they  emit.  They  may  both  be  quiescent  or  in  acti- 
vity. Springs  vary  as  much  as  volcanos.  We  have  few  pure 
springs ;  they  commonly  hold  mineral  substances.  They  are  cold, 
warm,  hot,  salt,  bitter,  saline,  bituminous,  limpid,  colored,  muddy; 
perpetual  or  periodical,  flowing  or  spouting.  Just  like  volcanic 
outlets. 

Therefore  volcanos  are  properly  igneous  springs,  and  springs  or 
lakes  are  aqueous  volcanos  ! 

Under  this  view,  we  have  no  lack  of  volcanic  outlets  in  North 
America,  since  one-half  of  it,  the  whole  boreal  portion,  from  New 
Ei^land  and  Labrador  in  tne  east,  to  North  Oregon  and  Alaska  in 
the  west,  a. id  from  Lake  Erie  to  the  boreal  ocean,  is  filled  with 
tiiem,  being  eminently  a  reg:on  of  "lakes  and  springs;  covered  with 
ten  thousand  lakes  at  least. 

To  these  as  vTell  as  to  the  dry  lakes  of  our  mountains,  the  lime- 
stone cirters  and  sinks,  may  be  traced  BS  the  original  outlets  of  our 
secondary  formations,  in  a  liquid  state,  under  the  ocean,  imbedding 
our  fossils.  The  basaltic,  trapic,  and  carbonic  formations  have  the 
same  origin,  since  they  are  intermingled.  But  some  kinds  of  sands 
and  clays  have  been  ejected  since  this  continent  became  dry  land. 


AND   DISCOVERIES  IN   THE  WEST. 


38l 


To  trace  all  these  formations  to  their  sources,  delineate  their 
streams  or  banks,  ascertain  their  ages,  and  ravage  on  organized  be- 
ings, will  require  time,  assiduity,  zeal,  and  accurate  observations. 

What  connection  there  is  between  lakes  or  dry  basins  of  primi- 
tive regions  and  their  formations,  is  not  well  ascertained,  Some 
are  evidently  the  produce  of  crystalization ;  but  others  forming 
streams,  veins,  banks  and  ridges  may  have  been  ejected  in  a  fluid 
or  soft  state,  before  organic  life  had  begun,  and  thus  spread  into 
their  actual  shapes.  Many  streams  of  primitive  limestone,  ant.hra- 
cite,  wacke,  grit — are  probably  so  formed  and  expanded.  Hollows 
in  the  primitive  ocean  must  have  been  the  outlets  of  these  ?sub- 
stances,  now  become  lakes,  after  the  land  became  dry 

The  power  which  rises  and  ejects  out  of  the  bowels  of  the  earth, 
watery,  muddy  and  solid  substances,  either  cold  or  inflamed,  is  one 
of  the  secrets  of  nature ;  but  we  know  that  suei  a  power  or  cause 
exists,  since  we  see  it  in  operation.  Water  rises  in  lakes  and 
springs  much  above  the  level  of  the  ocean,  while  the  Caspian,  sea 
is  under  that  level.  There  is  then  no  uniform  level  fcr  wate  r  on 
the  globe,  nor  uniform  aerial  pressure  over  them.  -tLother  cause 
operates  within  the  bowels  of  the  earth  to  generate  and  expel  li- 
quid and  solid  substances,™ perhaps  many  causes  and  po.vers  are 
combined  there.  Galvanism  is  probably  one  of  the  main  agents. 
A  living  power  of  organic  circulation,  would  explain  many  PTt.hly 
phenomena. 

The  great  astronomer  Kepler,  and  other  philosophers,  surmised 
that  the  earth  was  a  great  living  body,  a  kind  of  organized  animal 
rolling  in  space.  According  to  this  theory,  lakes  and  springs  would 
be  the  outward  pores,  vents  and  outlets  of  this  huge  being,  volca- 
noes inflamed  sores  and  exuvia,  water  the  blood  or  sap  of  the  earth, 
mountains  the  ribs,  rivers  the  veins.  This  whimsical  conceit  is  not 
preposterous,  since  we  know  of  animals  perfectly  globular,  and 
somevvhat  like  our  globe — the  lethya  and  volvox  for  instance.  But 
it  is  only  a  theoretical  surmise,  I  merely  mention  it  as  an  illustra- 
tion, and  the  conception  of  some  great  minds  ;  perhaps  a  more  ra- 
tional idea  than  the  theories  deeming  this  globe  a  mass  of  inert 
matter,  a  globular  crystal,  or  a  hollow  sphere  suspended  in  space, 
or  a  rolling  ball  whirling  rouud  the  sun. 

Considering,  therefore,  the  omnipotency  of  the  two  agents,  fire 
and  water,  so  created  by  Kim  who  is  more  omnipotent,  what  chan- 


382  AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 

ges  -of  surface  <aid  of  inhabitants  may  not  have  taken  place  in  the 
western  regions,  as  well  as  in  the  other  pats  of  America. 

We  cannot  cbse  this  subject  better  than  by  introducing  an  Ara- 
bian fable,  styled  the  Revolutions  of  Time.  The  narrator  is  sup- 
posed to  have  lived  three  thousand  years  on  the  earth,  and  to  have 
travelled  much  in  the  course  of  his  life,  and  to  have  noted  down 
the  various  changes  which  took  place  with  respect  to  the  surface 
of  the  globe  in  many  places,  and  to  have  been  conversant  with  the 
various  generations  of  men  that  succeeded  each  other. 

1  'his  fable  we  consider  illustrative  of  the  antiquities  of  all  coun- 
tries, as  well  as  of  the  changes  which  have  most  certainly  taken 
pla  ee  in  our  own,  as  it  relates  to  surface  and  inhabitants.  The 
name  of  the  traveller  was  Khidr,  and  his  story  is  as  follows : 

I  was  passing,  says  Khidr,  a  populous  city,  and  I  asked  one  of 
the.-  inhabitants,  "  How  long  has  this  city  been  built  ?"  But  he 
sai  d,  "  This  city  is  an  ancient  city ;  we  know  not  at  what  time  it 
wa1/  built:  neither  we  nor  our  fathers." 

Then  I  passed  by  after  five  hundred  years,  and  not  a  trace  of  the 
affof  was  to  be  seen  ;  but  I  found  a  man  gathering  herbs,  and  I  ask- 
ed him,  "  How  long  has  this  city  been  destroyed  ?"  But  he  said, 
"The  country  has  always  been  thus."  And  I  said,  "  But  there 
was  a  city  here."  Then  he  said,  "  We  have  seen  no  city  here, 
no  r  have  we  heard  of  such  from  our  fathers." 

After  five  hundred  years,  I  again  passed  that  way,  and  found  a 
lak  e,  and  met  there  a  company  of  fishermen,  and  asked  them, 
"  When  did  this  land  become  a  lake  ?"  And  they  said,  "  How 
can  a  man  like  you  ask  such  a  question  ?  The  place  was  never 
othf^rthan  it  is."  "  But  heretofore,"  said  I,  "  it  was  dry  land."  And 
they  said,  u  We  never  saw  it  so,  nor  heard  of  it  from  our  fathers." 

Then  after  five  hundred  years,  I  returned,  and  behold,  the  lake 
was  dried  up ;  and  I  met  a  solitary  man,  and  said  to  him,  "  When 
did  this  spot  become  dry  land  ?"  And  he  saiJ,  "  It  was  always 
thus."  "  But  formerly,"  I  said,  "it  was  a  lake  "  And  he  said, 
"  We  never  saw  it,  nor  heard  of  it  before." 

And  five  hundred  years  afterwards  I  again  parsed  by,  and  again 
found  a  populous  und  beautiful  city,  and  finer  than  I  had  at  first 
seen  it;  and  I  asked  one  of  the  inhabitants,  "When  was  this  city 
built  ?"  And  he  said,  "  Truly  it  is  an  ancient  place,  and  we  know 
not  the  date  of  its  building,  neither  we  nor  our  fathers." 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


383 


The  human  race  has  every  where  experienced  terrible  revolu- 
tions. Pestilence,  wars  and  the  convulsions  of  the  globe,  have  an- 
nihilated the  proudest  works,  and  rendered  vain  the  noblest  efforts 
of  man. 

"  Ask  not  the  sage,  when  and  by  whom  were  erected  those  lin- 
gering ruins  of  the  west,  the  imperishable  memorials  of  age*.,  long 
since  swallowed  up  in  the  ocean  of  time  ;  ask  not  the  wild  Arab 
where  may  be  found  the  owner  of  the  superl)  palace,  within  whose 
broken  walls  he  casts  his  tent ;  ask  not  the  poor  fisherman,  as  he 
spreads  his  nets,  or  the  ploughman,  who  whistles  over  the  fields, 
where  is  Carthage  ?  where  is  Troy  ?  of  whose  splendor  historians 
and  poets  have  so  much  boasted  !  Alas  !  they  have  vanished  from 
the  things  that  be  and  have  left  but  the  melancholy  lesson  of  the 
instability  of  the  most  stupendous  labors  of  our  race." 


RESEMBLANCE  OF  THE  WESTERN  INDIANS  TO  THE 
ANCIENT  GREEKS. 

T^:  reader  may  recollect  we  have  shown  on  page  44,  that  the 
Greek  fleet  once  moored  on  the  coast  of  Brazil,  South  America, 
said  to  be  the  fleet  of  Alexander  the  Great,  and  also  the  supposed 
Greek  carving,  or  sculpture,  in  the  cave  on  the  Ohio  river.  See 
page  140. 

In  addition,  we  give  from  Mr.  Volney's  View  of  America,  his 
comparison  of  the  ancient  Greek  tribes  with  the  tribes  of  the  west- 
ern Indians.  He  says  the  limits  of  his  work  would  not  allow  him 
to  enter  into  all  the  minutEe  of  this  interesting  subject ;  and,  there- 
fore, should  content  himself  with  saying,  that  the  more  deeply  we 
examine  the  history  and  way  cf  sava£  life,  the  more  ideas  we  ac- 
quire that  illustrate  the  nature  of  man  in  general,  the  gradual  form- 
ation of  societies,  and  the  character  nnd  manners  of  the  nations  of 
antiquity. 

While  this  author  was  among  the  Indians  of  the  west,  he  was 
particularly  struck  with  the  analogy  between  the  savages  of  North 
America  and  the  so  much  vaunted  ancient  nations  of  Greece  and 
Italy.    In  the  Greeks  of  Homer,  particularly  in  those  of  his  Iliad, 


384 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


be  found  tne  customs  ana  mauuers  of  the  Iroquois,  Delaware*,  and 
Miamas,  strikingly  exemplified.  The  tragedies  of  Sophocles  and 
Euripides,  paint  almost  literally  the  sentiments  of  the  rod  men  re- 
specting necessity,  fatality,  the  .viiseries  of  human  life,  and  the  rigor 
of  blind  destiny.  But  the  piece  most  remarkable  for  variety, 
combination  of  features  and  resemblance,  is  the  beginning  of  the 
history  of  Thucydides,  in  Which  he  briefly  traces  the  habits  and 
way  of  life  of  the  Greeks,  before  and  after  the  Trojan  war,  up  to 
the  age  in  which  he  wrote.  This  fragment  of  their  history  appears 
so  well  adapted,  that  we  are  persuaded  the  reader  will  be  pleased 
at  having  it  laid  before  him,  so  that  he  can  make  the  comparison 
for  himself. 

"  It  is  certain  that  the  region  now  known  by  the  name  of  Greece 
was  not  formerly  possessed  by  any  fixed  inhabitants,  but  was  sub- 
ject to  frequent  migrations,  as  constantly  every  distinct  people  or 
tribe  yielded  up  their  seats  to  the  violence  of  a  larger  supervening 
numSer.  For,  as  to  commerce,  there  was  none,  and  mutual  fear 
prevented  intercourse,  both  by  land  sea  ;  as  then  the  only  view 
of  culture  was  barely  to  procure  a  penurious  subsistence,  as  super- 
fluous wealth  was  a  thing  unknown." 

"  Planting  was  not  their  employment,  it  being  uncertain  howsoon 
an  invader  might  come  and  dislodge  them  from  their  unfortiflea  ha- 
bitations ;  and  as  they  thought  they  might  every  where  find  their 
daily  support,  they  hesitated  but  little  about  shifting  their  habita- 
tions. And  for  this  reason  they  ne  er  flourished  in  the  greatness 
of  their  cities,  or  any  other  circumstance  of  power.  But  the  rich- 
est tracts  of  country  were  ever  more  particularly  liable  to  this  fre- 
quent change  of  inhabitants,  such  as  that  now  called  Thessaly  and 
Bceotia,  and  Peloponesus  chiefly,  except  Arcadia,  and  in  general 
the  most  fertile  parts  of  Greece.  For  the  natural  wealth  of  their 
soil,  in  particular  districts,  increased  the  power  of  some  amongst 
them  ;  that  power  raised  civil  dissentions,  which  ended  in  their 
ruin,  and  at  the  same  time  exposed  them  the  more  to  foreign  at- 
tacks 

It  was  only  the  barrenness  of  the  soil  that  preserved  Atticx 
through  the  longest  space  of  time,  quiet  and  undisturbed,  in  one 
uninterrupted  series  of  possessors.  One,  and  not  the  least  con- 
vincing proof  of  this  is,  that  other  parts  of  Greece,  because  of  the 
fluctuating  condition  of  the  inhabitants,  could  by  uo  means,  in  their 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


385 


growth  keep  pace  with  Attica.  The  most  powerful  of  those  who 
were  driven  from  the  other  parts  of  Greece,  by  war  or  sedition,  be- 
took themselves  to  the  Athenians  for  secure  refuge,  and  as  they  ob- 
tained the  privilege  of  citizens,  have  constantly,  from  remote  timej 
continued  to  enlarge  that  city  with  fresh  accessions  of  inhabitants  ; 
insomuch,  that,  at  last,  Attica,  being  insufficient  to  support  its  num- 
bers, they  sent  over  colonies  to  Ionia. 

The  custom  of  wearing  weapons,  once  prevailed  all  over  Greece, 
as  their  houses  had  no  manner  of  defence,  as  travelling  was  full  of 
hazard,  and  their  whole  lives  were  passed  in  armour,  like  barba- 
rians. A  proof  of  this,  is  the  continuance  still,  in  some  parts  of 
Greece,  of  those  manners  which  were  once,  with  uniformity,  com- 
mon to  all.  The  Athenians  were  the  first  who  discontinued  the 
custom  of  wearing  their  swords,  and  who  passed  from  the  savage 
life  into  more  polite  and  elegant  manners.  Sparta  is  not  closely 
built ;  the  temples  and  public  edifices  by  no  means  sumptuous,  and 
ihe  houses  detached  from  each  other,  after  the  old  mode  of  Greece. 

In  their  war  manners  they  resembled  the  Indians  of  America,  for 
after  a  certain  engagement  they  had  with  an  enemy,  and  being  victo- 
rious, they  erected  a  trophy  upon  Leucinna,  a  promontory  of  Cor- 
cyra,  and  put  to  death  all  the  prisonners  they  had  taken,  except 
one,  who  was  a  Corinthian. 

The  pretended  golden  age  of  those  nations  was  nothing  better 
ihm  to  wander  naked  in  the  forests. of  Hellas  and  Thessaly,  living 
on  herbs  and  acorns  ;  by  which  we  perceive  that  the  ancient  Greeks 
were  truly  savages  of  the  same  kind  as  those  in  America,  and  plac- 
ed in  nearly  similar  circumstances  of  climate,  since  Greece  cover- 
ed with  forests,  was  then  much  colder  than  at  present  Hence  we 
infer,  that  the  name  of  Pelasgian,  believed  to  belong  to  one  and 
the  same  people,  wandering  and  dispersed  about  from  the  Crimea 
to  the  Alps,  was  only  the  generic  appellation  of  the  savage  hordes 
of  the  first  inhabitants,  roaming  in  the  same  manner  as  the  Hurons 
and  Algonquins,  or  as  the  old  Germans  and  Celts 

And  we  should  presume,  with  reason,  that  colonies  of  foreigners, 
farther  advanced  in  civilization,  coming  from  the  coasts  of  Asia, 
Phoenicia,  and  even  Egypt,  and  settling  on  those  of  Greece  and 
Latium,  had  nearly  the. same  kind  of  intercourse  with  these  abori- 
gines ;  sometimes  friendly,  sometimes  hostile ,  as  the  fij&t  English 


3SC 


AxMERICAN  antiquities 


settlers  in  Virginia  and  New-England  had  with  the  American  sa- 
vages. 

By  these  comparisons  we  should  explain  both  the  intermixture 
and  disappearance  of  some  of  those  nations,  the  manners  and  cus- 
toms of  those  inhospitable  times,  when  every  stranger  was  an  ene- 
my, and  every  robber  a  hero  ;  when  there  was  no  law  but  force, 
no  virtue  but  bravery  in  war  ;  when  every  tribe  was  a  nation,  and 
every  assemblage  of  huts  a  metropolis. 

In  this  period  of  anarchy  and  disorder,  of  savage  life,  we  should 
see  the  origin  of  that  character  of  pride  and  boasting,  perfidiousness 
and  cruelty,  dissimulation  and  injustice,  sedition  and  tyranny,  that 
the  Greeks  display  throughout  the  whole  course  of  their  history  ; 
we  should  perceive  the  source  of  those  false  ideas  of  virtue  and 
glory,  sanctioned  by  the  poets  and  orators  of  those  ferocious  days ; 
who  have  made  wrar  and  its  melancholy  trophies,  the  loftiest  aim 
of  man's  ambition,  the  most  shining  road  to  renown,  and  the  most 
dazzling  object  of  ambition  to  the  ignorant  and  cheated  multitude. 
And  since  the  polished  and  civilized  people  of  Christendom  have 
made  a  point  of  imitating  these  nations,  and  consider  their  poli- 
tics and  morals,  like  their  poetry  and  arts,  the  types  of  all  per- 
fection ;  it  follows  that  our  homage,  our  patronage,  and  veneration, 
are  addressed  to  the  manners  and  spirit  of  barbarous  and  savage 
times. 

The  grounds  of  comparison  are  so  true,  that  the  analogy  reaches 
even  to  their  philosophical  and  religious  opinions  ;  for  all  the  prin- 
ciples of  the  stoic  school  of  the  Greeks  are  found  in  the  practice  of 
the  American  savages  ;  and  if  any  should  lay  hold  of  this  circum- 
stance to  impute  to  the  savages  the'merit  of  being  philosophers,  we 
retort  the  supposition,  and  say,  we  ought,  on  the  contrary,  to  con- 
clude, that  a  state  of  society,  in  which  precepts  so  repugnant  to  hu- 
man nature  were  invented  for  the  purpose  of  rendering  life  support- 
able, must  have  been  an  order  of  things,  and  of  government,  not 
less  miserable  than  the  savage  state.  This  opinion  is  supported  by 
the  whole  history  of  these  Grecian  times,  even  in  their  most  bril- 
liant periods,  and  by  the  uninterrupted  series  of  their  own  wars,  se- 
ditions, massacres,  and  tyrannical  proscriptions,  down  to  the  time  of 
their  subjugation  by  those  other  savages  of  Italy,  called  the  Romans  ; 
who,  in  their  character,  politics,  and  aggrandizement,  have  a  strik- 
ing resemblance  to  the  Six  Nations. 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


387 


With  regard  to  religious  notions,  these  do  not  form  a  regular  sys- 
tern  among  the  savages,  because  every  individual  in  his  indepen- 
dent state,  makes  himself  a  creed  after  bis  own  fancy.  If  we  may 
judge  from  the  accounts  of  the  historians  of  the  first  settlers,  and 
those  of  late  travellers  in  the  northwest,  it  appears  that  the  Indians 
compose  their  mythology  in  the  following  manner  : 

First  :  a  Great  Manitou,  or  superior  being  ;  who  governs  the 
earth  and  the  aerial  meteors,  the  visible  w7hole  of  which  constitutes 
the  universe  of  a  savage.  This  Great  Manitou,  residing  on  high, 
without  his  having  any  clear  idea  where,  rules  the  world,  without 
giving  himself  much  trouble  ;  sends  rain,  wind,  or  fair  weather, 
according  to  his  fancy  ;  sometimes  makes  a  noise,  which  is  the 
thunder,  to  amuse  himself;  concerns  himself  as  little  abou^the  af- 
fairs of  men  as  about  those  of  other  living  beings  that  people  the 
earth ;  does  good,  without  taking  any  thought  about  it  ;  suffers  ill 
to  be  perpetrated  without  its  disturbing  his  repose,  and  in  the  mean 
time,  leaves  the  world  to  a  destiny,  or  fatality,  the  laws  of  which 
are  anterior,  and  paramount,  to  all  things. 

Under  his  command  are  subordinate  Manitous,  or  genii,  innume- 
rable, who  people  earth  and  air,  preside  over  every  thing  that  hap- 
pens, and  have  each  a  separate  employment.  Of  these  genii,  some 
are  good  ;  and  these  do  all  the  good  that  takes  place  in  nature  ; 
others  are  bad,  and  these  occasion  all  the  evil  that  happens  to  liv- 
ing beings. 

It  is  to  the  latter  chiefly,  and  almost  exclusively,  that  the  savages 
address  their  prayers,  their  propitiatory  offerings,  and  what  religious 
worship  they  have  ;  the  object  of  which  is,  to  appease  the  malice 
of  these  Manitous,  as  men  appease  the  ill  humour  of  morose,  bad 
men.  This  fear  of  genii  is  one  of  their  most  habitual  thought,  and 
that  by  which  they  are  most  tormented.  Their  most  intrepid  war- 
riors are,  in  this  respect,  no  better  than  their  women  ;  a  dream,  a 
phantom  seen  at  night  in  the  woods,  or  a  sinister  cry,  equally  alarms 
their  credulous,  superstitious  minds. 

Their  magicians,  or,  as  we  more  properly  call  them,  jugglers, 
pretend  to  very  familiar  intercourse  with  these  genii ;  they  are, 
however,  greatly  puzzled  to  explain  their  nature,  form,  and  aspect. 
Not  having  our  ideas  of  pure  spirit,  they  suppose  them  to  be  com- 
posed of  substances,  yet  light,  volatile,  and  invisible,  true  shadows 
and  manes,  after  the  manner  of  the  ancients.    Sometimes  they  se- 


388 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


Icct  some  one  of  these  genii,  whom  they  suppose  to  reside  in  a  tr<> 
a  serpent,  a  rock,  a  cataract,  and  this  they  make  their  fetih,or  god, 
to  which  they  resort,  like  the  African.  The  notion  of  another  life 
is  a  pretty  general  belief  among  the  savages.  They  imagine  that 
aftef  death  they  shall  go  into  another  climate  and  country,  where 
game  and  fish  abound,  where  they  can  hunt  without  being  fatigued, 
walk  about  without  fear  of  an  enemy,  eat  very  fat  meat,  and  live 
without  care  or  trouble.  The  Indians  of  the  north,  place  this  cli- 
mate toward  the  southwest,  because  the  summer  winds,  and  the 
most  pleasing  and  genial  temperature,  come  from  that  quarter. 

This  sketch  of  Indian  manners,  is  supposed  sufficient  by  Mr. 
Volney,  to  prove  that  there  is  a  real  analogy  between  the  mytholo- 
gical id^as  of  the  Indians  of  North  America  and  those  of  the  Asiatic 
Tartars,  as  they  have  been  described  to  us  by  the  learned  Russians, 
who  have  visited  them  not  many  years  since. 

The  analogy  between  them  and  the  notions-  of  the  Greeks,  is 
equally  evident.  We  discern  the  Great  Manitou  of  the  savages,  in 
the  Jupiter  of  the  heroic  ages,  or  their  savage  times ;  with  this  dif- 
ference only,  that  the  Manitou  of  the  Americans,  leads  a  melan- 
choly, poor,  and  wearisome  life,  like  themselves  ;  while  the  Jupiter 
of  Homer,  and  of  Hesiod,  displays  all  the  magnificence  of  the  court 
of  Hecatompylean  Thebes,  the  wonderful  secrets  of  which'  have 
been  disclosed  to  us  in  the  present  age.  See  the  elegant  work  of 
Mr.  Denon,  on  the  high  degree  of  taste,  learning,  and  perfection, 
at  which  the  arts  had  arrived  in  that  Thebes,  which  was  buried  in 
the  night  of  history,  before  Greece  or  Italy  were  known. 

In  the  lesser  Manitous  of  the  Indians,  are  equally  evident  the 
subordinate  deities  of  Greece  ;  the  genii  of  the  woods  and  foun- 
tains, and  the  demons  honored  with  a  similar  superstitious  worship. 

The  conclusion  Volney  draws  from  all  this,  is  not  that  the  In- 
dians have  derived  their  notions  from  Greece,  but  rather  are  deriv- 
able from  Shamanism,  or  the  Lamic  system  of  Eudda,  which  spread 
itself  from  Hindostan  among  all  the  savages  of  the  old  world,  where 
it  is  found  even  to  the  extremities  of  Spain,  and  Scotland,  and  Cim- 
brica. 

Yet  as  traits  of  the  Grecian  nations  are  found,  especially  in  South 
America,  as  in  the  discovery  of  the  subterranean  cavity  of  mason 
work,  noticed  on  page  44,  and  in  the  cave  on  the  Ohio,  as  noticed 
on  pa*e  143,  it  is  not  impossible,  but  that  from  the  Greeks,  some- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST  389 

time  in  this  country  before  the  Indians  found  their  way  here,  they 
may  have  communicated  their  mythological  notions  to  the  more 
ancient  inhabitants,  from  whom  the  Tartars,  or  our  Indians,  when 
they  conquered  or  drove  away  that  people,  imbibed  their  opinions; 
as  it  is  not  without  precedent,  that  the  conquered  have  given  to  the 
conqueror  their  religion  as  well  as  their  country. 


TRAITS  OF  ANCIENT  ROMANS  IN  AMERICA. 

On  pages  40  and  59  inclusive,  of  this  work,  wTe  have  ventured 
the  conjecture,  that  the  Romans  colonized  various  parts  of  America. 
We  still  imagine  such  a  conjecture  by  no  means  impossible,  as  to- 
kens of  their  presence  are  evidently  yet  extant  in  the  vale  of  Mex- 
ico. See  page  269,  where  is  an  account  of  a  temple,  which 
was  built  and  dedicated  as  sacred  to  the  worship  of  the  sun  and 
moon. 

The  religions  of  nations  furnish,  it  is  presumed,  the  strongest 
possible  evidence  of  origin.  On  this  account,  the  temples  of  the 
sun  and  moon  in  Mexico,  exactly  answer  to  the  same  objects  of  de- 
votion, worshipped  by  the  ancient  Romans. 

That  they  are  similar  in  both  countries,  we  prove  from  Gibbon's 
Roman  empire,  page  233,  Vol.  1st,  as  follows  : — The  sun  was  wor- 
shipped at  Emesa,  by  the  Romans,  under  the  name  of  Elagabalus, 
or  God,  under  the  form  of  a  black  conical  stone,  which,  it  was  uni- 
versally believed,  had  fallen  from  heaven,  on  that  sacred  place. 

This  stone,  we  observe,  was  undoubtedly  what  is  termed  an  ae.ro- 
lithis,  a  copious  account  of  which  is  given  by  Dr.  Adam  Clarke,  as 
being  thrown  out  of  the  moon  by  the  force  of  volcanic  eruptions  in 
that  planet,  which,  as  soon  as  they  had  passed  out  of  the  moon's 
attraction,  fell  immediately  to  the  eartji,  being  drawn  hither  by  the 
stronger  force  of  the  centripetal  power.  A  stone  falling  to  the  earth 
under  such  circumstances,  was  quite  sufficient  to  challenge  the  ado- 
ration of  the  pagan  nations  as  coming  down  from  the  gods,  or  from 
the  sun,  as  a  representative  of  that  luminary. 


AMERICAN  ANTQUITIES 


Accordingly,  this  lone  became  deified,  and  was  setup  to  be  wor- 
shipped, as  the  sun's  vicegerent  among  men.  Gibbon  says  that  to 
this  protecting  deity,  the  stone,  Antonius,  not  without  some  reason, 
ascribed  his  elevatioL  to  the  throne  of  the  Roman  empire.  The 
triumph  of  this  stone  god  over  all  the  religions  of  the  earth,  was 
the  great  object  of  this  emperor's  zeal  and  vanity  :  and  the  appel- 
lation of  Elegabalus,  which  he  had  bestowed  on  the  aerolithis,  was 
dearer  to  that  emperor  than  all  the  titles  of  imperial  greatness. 

In  a  solemn  proces  sion  through  the  streets  of  Rome,  the  way 
was  strewed  with  gok.  dust  ;  the  black  stone  set  in  precious  gems, 
was  placed  on  a  chariot  drawn  by  six  milk  white  Horses,  richly  ca- 
parisoned. The  pious  emperor  held  the  reins,  and  supported  by 
his  ministers,  moved  slowly,  with  his  face  toward  the  image,  that 
he  might  perpetually  enjoy  the  felicity  of  the  divine  presence. 

In  a  magnificent  temple,  raised  on  the  Palatine  Mount,  the  sacri- 
fices of  the  god  Elagabalus  were  celebrated  with  every  circum- 
stance of  cost  and  solemnity.  The  richest  wines,  the  most  extra- 
ordinary victims,  and  the  rarest  aromatics,  were  profusely  consumed 
on  his  altar.  Around  him  a  chorus  of  Syrian  damsels  performed 
their  lascivious  dances  to  the  sound  of  barbarian  music,  whilst  the 
gravest  personages  of  the  state  and  army,  clothed  in  long  Phoenician 
tunics,  officiated  in  the  meanest  functions,  with  affected  zeal,  and 
secret  indignation. 

To  this  temple,  as  to  a  common  centre  of  religious  worship,  the 
imperial  fanatic  attempted  to  remove  the  Ancilia,  the  Palladium, 
and  all  the  sacred  pledges  of  the  faith  of  Numa.  A  crowd  of  in- 
ferior deities  attained  in  various  stations,  the  majesty  of  the  god 
of  Emesa,  Elegabalus. 

But  the  -court  of  this  god  was  still  imperfect,  till  a  female  of  dis- 
tinguished rank  was  admitted  to  his  bed.  Pallas  had  been  first 
chosen  for  his  consort ;  but  as  it  was  dreaded  lest  her  warlike  ter- 
rors might  affright  the  soft  delicacy  of  a  Syrian  deity,  the  moon  ado- 
red by  the  Africans,  under  the  name  of  Astarte,  was  deemed  a  more 
suitable  companion  for  the  sun.  Her  image,  with  the  rich  offerings 
of  her  temple  as  a  marriage  portion,  was  transported,  with  solemn 
pomp,  from  Carthage  to  Rome  ;  and  the  day  of  these  mystic  nup- 
tials was  a  general  festival  in  the  capital,  and  throughout  the  em- 
pire. 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST.  391 

Here  then,  at  Emesa,  in  Italy,  the  Romans  worshipped  the  sun 
and  moon  ;  so  did  the  Mexicans,  with  equal  pomp  and  costliness, 
in  the  vale  of  Mexico.  If,  therefore,  in  the  two  countries,  the 
same  identical  religion,  having  the  same  identical  objects  of  wor- 
ship, existed,  it  would  seem,  no  great  stretch  of  credulity,  or  exer- 
tion of  fancy,  to  suppose  them  practised  by  the  same  people  in  ei- 
ther country. 

The  ancient  Romans,  or  rather,  the  Romans  after  they  had  risen 
to  great  consequence,  and  had  founded  and  built  many  cities,  were 
remarkable  in  one  particular,  over  and  above  all  other  particulars, 
and  this  was,  in  the  construction  of  a  grand  national  road,  of  three 
thousand  seven  hundred  and  forty  English  miles  in  length.  This 
national  road,  issued  from  the  Forum  of  Rome,  traversed  Italy, 
pervaded  the  provinces,  and  terminated  only  by  the  frontiers  of 
the  Empire,  and  was  divided  off  into  distinct  miles,  by  a  stone  be- 
ing set  up  at  the  termination  of  each,  as  in  the  present  times.  The 
same  was  the  case  with  ancient  people  of  South  America,  in  the 
times  of  the  Incas  ;  who,  as  Humboldt  informs  us,  had  one  grand 
road,  which  is  even  traceable  at  the  present  time,  of  a  thousand 
leagues  in  length,  running  along  on  the  high  ground  of  the  Cor- 
dileras,  and  was  paved  with  large  flat  stones  the  whole  length.  In 
this  very  respect,  that  is,  of  paving  their  roads  with  large  stones 
the  Romans  and  the  South  Americans  were  alike.    For  Gibbon 
says,  that  in  the  construction  of  the  Roman  national  highway,  they 
not  only  perforated  mountains,  raised  bold  arches  over  the  broadest 
and  most  rapid  streams,  but  paved  it  with  large  stones,  and  in  some 
places  even  with  granite. 

In  another  respect  they  are  alike  ;  the  Romans  raised  this  road 
so  as  to  be  able  to  overlook  the  country  as  it  was  travelled :  so  also 
did  the  Americans,  in  choosing  the  high  grounds  of  the  Cordileras 
to  build  it  upon. 

It  would  seem  also,  that  in  the  very  construction  of  their  cities, 
towns,  and  palaces,  as  found  scattered  over  many  parts  of  South 
America,  even  along  on  the  coasts  of  the  Pacific,  according  to  Hum- 
boldt and  more  recent  researches,  they  modelled  them,  in  some 
sense,  after  the  manner  of  the  Romans;  especially  in  the  vastness 
of  their  capacity,  or  area  which  they  occupied. 

However,  it  is  clear,  that  as  the  American  architecture  did  not 
partake  of  the  refinement  of  taste  in  the  finish  of  their  buildings, 


392 


AM  LIU  CAN  ANTIQUITIES 


which  characterise  those  of  the  Romans,  that  they,  the  former,  arc 
the  elder  of  the  two ;  and  that  the  American  nations  in  the  persons 
of  their  ancestors  came  from  Africa,  and  about  the  country  of  the 
Mediterranean,  in  the  very  first  age  of  their  improvement,  or  de- 
parture from  barbarism.  From  all  this  it  cannot  but  be  inferred, 
that  the  continent  is  indebted  to  that  part  of  the  old  world  for  that 
class  of  inhabitants,  who  introduced  among  the  first  nations  of  the 
continent,  the  arts  as  found  in  practice  by  Columbus,  when  he 
landed  on  its  shores. 

With  this  view,  we  think  there  is  light  thrown  on  the  curious 
subject  of  the  Mexican  tradition,  with  respect  to  the  white  and 
bearded  men  before  spoken  of  in  this  volume  ;  who,  as  they  say, 
came  among  them  from  the  rising  sun,  and  became  their  legislators. 
And  as  the  Romans  were  a  maritime  people,  and  had  become  re- 
fined, long  before  the  savages  of  the  north  of  Europe,  and  made, 
according  to  Gibbon,  prodigious  voyages,  they  may  have  been  the 
very  people  who  colonized  the  island  of  Jesso  and  Japan,  who 
were  a  white  and  bearded  race,  from  whom,  in  another  part  of  this 
work,  we  have  supposed  these  Mexican  legislators  may  have  been 
derived ;  in  either  case,  there  is  no  difficulty;  the  origin  is  the 
same. 

We  are  firm  in  the  belief  that  the  Carthaginians,  Phoenicians, 
Roman  and  Greek  nations  of  antiquity,  have  had  more  to  do  in  the 
peopling  of  the  wilds  of  America,  as  well  also  as  the  Europeans, 
after  their  civilization,  than  is  generally  supposed. 

There  was  found  among  the  nations  of  Mexico,  another  trait  of 
character  strongly  resembling  a"Roman  practice  ;  and  this  was,  that 
of  single  combat  with  deadly  instruments,  called  the  fight  of  the 
Gladiators.  This  among  the  Romans  was  carried  to  so  shameful 
and  murderous  a  degree,  that  Commodus,  one  of  their  eraperois  , 
killed,  with  his  own  hands,  as  a  gladiator,  seven  hundred  and  thir- 
ty-five persons. 

Of  this  emperor,  Gibbon  says,  that  being  elated  with  the  praises 
ol  the  multitude,  which  gradually  extinguished  the  innate  sense  of 
shame,  Commodus  resolved  to  exhibit  before  the  eyes  of  the  Ro- 
man people,  those  exercises,  which  till  then  he  had  decently  con- 
fined within  the  walls  of  his  palace,  and  to  the  presence  of  his  fa- 
vorites. 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST-  393 

On  the  appointed  day,  the  various  motives  of  flattery,  fear,  and 
uriosity,  attracted  to  the  amphitheatre  an  innumerable  multitude 
of  spectators  ;  and  some  degree  of  applause  was  deservedly  bestow- 
ed on  the  uncommon  skill  of  the  imperial  performer.  Whether  he 
aimed  at  the  head  or  heart  of  the  animal,  the  wound  was  alike  cer- 
tain and  mortal.  With  arrows  whose  point  was  shaped  in  the 
form  of  a  crescent,  Commodus  often  intercepted  the  rapid  career, 
and  cut  asunder  the  long  and  bony  neck  of  the  ostrich. 

A  panther  was  let  loose,  and  the  archer  waited  till  he  had  leap- 
ed upon  a  trembling  malefactor.  In  the  same  instant  the  shaft 
flew,  the  beast  dropt  dead,  and  the  man  remained  unhurt  The 
dens  of  the  amphitheatre  disgorged  at  once  a  hundred  lions ;  a  hun- 
dred darts  in  succession,  from  the  unerring  hand  of  Commodus,  laid 
them  dead  as  they  ran  raging  around  the  arena,  Such  it  appears 
were  the  prowess  and  the  sports  of  the  ancient  Romans,  whose 
counterpart,  as  it  respects  this  peculiar  trait,  the  fight  of  the  gladia- 
tor, was  found  among  the  Mexican  usages  of  North  America. 

Again,  when  the  Romans  first  got  footing  in  the  island  of  Britain, 
they  erected,  or  laid  the  foundation  of  a  town,  which  they  named 
Verulam,  which  soon  took  the  title  and  rank  of  a  city.  This  town, 
according  to  their  peculiar  manner,  was  at  first  circumscribed  by  a 
wall,  including  about  an  hundred  acres,  the  traits  of  which  still 
appear. 

These  square  inclosures  are  found  in  America,  as  treated  upon 
in  our  account  of  the  Roman  squares  at  or  near  Marietta  ;  strength- 
ening the  belief  that  Roman  colonies  have,  in  former  ages,  settled 
in  America. 


AMERICAN  LANGUAGES — WAHTANI  OR  MANDAN. 

The  vocabularies  of  languages  collected  by  Lewis  and  Clarke, 
in  their  memorable  journey  to  the  Pacific  Ocean,  appear  to  have 
been  lost  and  never  published.  It  is  said  they  were  put  into  the 
hands  of  Dr.  Benj.  Barton,  who  made  no  use  of  them  ;  since  his 
death  they  have  disappeared,  and  cannot  be  traced  any  where. 

I  met  in  Lexington,  Ky.  Mr,  George  Shannon  who  was  one  of 

-.he  companion;  of  Lewis  in  that  voyage,  and  who  furnished  me 

50 


394 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


with  some  words  of  the  Mandans  on  the  Upper  Missouri,  who  he 
said  call  themselves  Whatanis,  these  added  to  a  few  scattered  in 
Lewis'  Travels,  form  the  following  32  words. 


*  Father 

Papa 

Black 

Sia  npra 

Mother 

Nayeh 

Red 

*  Mnn 

JLTJLLLrb 

li  U.illuivCJ.1 

\TqV»p>V> 

xVicineii 

It  f)int1ft 

f  r  until  if 

J.TX1K.1JC11 

liU 

IX  ICObll 

Water 

Minih 

Big 

Ahin  ah 

God 

Hupanish 

Little 

Hami 

Hill 

Naweh 

Fox 

Ohhaw 

Village 

Ahnah 

Cat 

Poscop 

Meat 

Mascopi 

Wild  Sheep 

Ahsatah 

Corn 

Cohanteh 

Mocasin 

Orup 

Cold 

Shinihush 

Wolf 

Shekeh 

White 

Shahar 

1 

Mahanah 

6 

Kim  ah 

2 

Nupah 

7 

Kupah 

3 

Nameni 

8 

Tetoki 

4 

Topah 

*9 

Macpeb 

5 

Kehun 

10 

Pirokeh. 

The  4  words  marked  *  have  some  analogy  with  the  English, 
through  remote  courses  as  usual,  equal  to  12  per  cent,  of  mutual 
affinity. 

This  language  is  totally  new  to  the  learned,  it  is  found  in  none 
of  the  great  philological  works.  It  is  stated  by  Lewis  to  dilier 
widely  from  the  Minitari,  allies  and  neighbors  of  the  Mandans,  al- 
though a  dialect  of  it;  both  are  referred  to  the  great  Pakhi  family 
of  the  North,  themselves  a  branch  of  the  Skereh  or  Panis  group 
of  nations  and  languages.  But  this  surmise  appears  to  me  errone- 
ous, I  can  see  but  little  analogy  with  the  Panis  and  Recara  dia- 
lects ;  but  instead,  many  similarities  with  the  Yancton  and  Konzas 
dialects  of  the  Missouri  tribes.  The  Wahtasuns  or  Ahnahaways 
of  Lewis,  called  Ayawahs  by  Shannon,  are  a  branch  of  the  Otos 
and  Ayowehs  of  lower  Missouri,  although  settled  near  the  Man- 
dans, and  speaking  an  akin  dialect. 

The  word  mini  for  water  is  found  in  all  the  Missouri  tribes.  In 
comparing  the  10  Mandan  numbers  with  the  list  of  decimals  in  50 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


395 


N.  A.  dialects  in  Tanner's  Narrative,  the  greatest  amount  of  analo- 
gies are  found  in  the 

Konza  1.  Meakche,  2  Nonpah,  3  Topah.  Analogy  30  per  ct. 
nearly  the  same  in  Omawah. 

Yancton  1  Wanchah,  2  Nonpah  3  Yahmene,  4  Topah.  Equal 
to  40  per  ct.  the  same  in  the  Dakotah  or  Sioux. 

Minitari  2  Nohopah,  3  Nahme,  4  Topah,  5  Chehoh,  6  Acahme, 
7  Chappo.    Equal  to  60  per  cent,  of  analogy. 

While  the  Pani  has  only  10  p.  cent  of  analogy  by  the  single 
number  2  Patko.  The  Muscogih  so  far  to  the  S.  E.  has  even 
more  or  20  per  ct.  in  1  Homai,  10  Pekole ;  but  they  are  very 
remote. 

Mr.  Catlin,  who  has  visited  the  Mandans  this  year,  1832,  says 
they  are  properly  called  Siposka-nukaki  meaning  people  of  the 
pheasant !  thus  we  have  3  names  for  this  nation,  this  is  not  unusual, 
each  nation  having  many  nick-names  in  N.  America.  He  says 
they  are  reduced  to  1800  souls,  and  that  the  Minitari  speak  a  dia- 
lect of  the  Upsaroka  or  Crow  Indians. 

C.  S.  RAFINESQUE. 


Languages  of  Oregon — Chopunish  and  Chinuc. 

Mr.  Shannon  confirmed  the  fact  that  only  3  languages  were  met 
with  in  the  Oregon  mts  and  country.  1  The  Shoshonis  in  the  mts, 
2  Chopunise  from  mts  to  the  falls  of  the  Oregon  or  Columbia  R.  3 
Chinuc  from  hence  to  the  Pacific  Ocean.  But  they  are  spoken  in 
a  multitude  of  dialects. 

The  Shoshoni  is  pretty  well  known  to  be  a  branch  of  the  Alie- 
tan  or  Western  Skereh,  spoken  as  far  as  Mexico.  The  other  two 
are  less  known.  Mr.  S.  could  only  furnish  12  words  of  Chopun- 
ish, a  few  more  met  with  in  Lewis  and  Cox  enable  me  to  give  24 
words  of  it. 


Sky 

Tetoh 

^Faramay 

Wayot 

Water 

Mekish 

■\Nose 

Nashne 

River 

Ishkit 

Arm 

Tunashe 

Land 

Kaimo 

~\Head,  top 

Chop 

-\Father 

Papa 

Flat 

Unish 

Son 

Illim 

Cut 

Pakehuk 

Spokan 

Broken 

Mutult 

396 


Road 
Buff  oh 


Ahish 
Cokala 

Fall 

1  Nox 

2  Lappit 

3  Mutat 


H  AN  %N$J9UXTIJ£i 


Tim. 
4  Pilapt 
0  Quis 
flO  Potemt 


It  is  singular  that  this  uncouth  language  lias  six  aualogies  |  out 
of  24  with  the  English,  by  primitive  connection,  equal  to  25  per 
cent.    It  is  therefore  Asiatic  like  the  Saca  or  old  Saxon. 

I  am  at  a  loss  to  refer  it  to  any  group  of  American  languages,  I 
had  put  it  among  the  Wakssh  or  Nutka  group  in  my  table ;  but  it 
is  widely  separated  from  it.    New  to  science  as  well  as  the  next 

Of  the  Chinuc  I  have  collected  33  words  from  Cox,  Lewis, 
and  other  sources.    Cox  calls  it  unutterable  and  says  it  lacks  F 
V.  R. 


Chief 

Tia,  Taye 

t  Whale 

Ecola 

Good 

Clouch 

Money 

Haiqua 

\Cake 

P&eheco 

Beads 

Comoshuk 

^Island 

Ela 

Bog 

Camus 

Gods 

Etaiapass 

Deer 

Mulak,  Lap 

Etanemi 

Bear 

Host 

Men 

Tillikum 

Salmon 

Equannat 

Give 

Pattach 

Tobacco 

Quayenuit 

fj,  me 

Maik 

Pipe 

Kulama 

There 

Kok 

Gun 

Sakqualal 

Sit  down 

Mittait 

Blanket 

Poclishqua 

I  do  not  understand  Wake  Comatox 

The  decimals  I  have  in  two  dialects. 

1 

Ect,  Icht 

§ 

TiH;kum,  Tackut 

2 

Moxt,  Makust 

7 

Sinanixi,  Sinbakust 

3 

Clunc,  Thlown 

8 

Stutkin,  Stuktekan 

4 

Uct,  Lakut 

9 

Quayefc,  Quayust 

5 

Quanim, 

quanum 

10 

Taitlelum,  Italilum. 

The  4  marks  f 

indicate  4  in 

33  of  analogy  with  the  EJagb 

equal  to  12  per  cent. 

3  words,  man,  9  and  10  have  a  slight  analogy  with  the  Chopun- 
ish  out  of  9  in  the  two  lists,  which  gives  S3  per  cent  of  ana- 
logy 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST 


39f 


ISoith  oi  the  Chinuc  and  Chopunish,  are  found  the  Wakash  and 
Atnah  tribei  and  languages,  the  last  has  many  dialects  connected 
with  the  western  Lenilenap  group  and  it  appears  that  both  the 
Chinuc  and  Chopunish  have  more  analogies  with  them  than  with 
the  Wakash  :  the  word  man  is  an  instance  and  proof  of  it. 

In  the  Wakash  the  numbers  have  some  slight  affinities  with 
those  of  the  Onguys  and  Wiyandots  of  the  East,  while  in  the 
Chinuc  and  the  others,  these  decimals  resemble  the  Shawani  and 
other  Eastern  Lenilenap  Dialects.  Examples. 

Musqnaki.  1  Nekot,  4  Kotwauskik,  5.  Kotwauswa,  9.  Shaunk. 
4  in  10  or  40  per  cent,  with  Chinuc. 

Shawani.  1  Nguti,  5.  Ninlanwi,  6.  Kukatswi,  10.  Matatswi, 
also  40  per  cent. 

Mohegan.  1  Ugwito,  5.  Nunon  6  Ugwitus,  10  Neteumit  also  40 
per  cent. 

I  conclude  therefore  that  the  Chinuc  (and  perhaps  the  Chopun- 
ish also)  is  one  of  the  Lenapian  languages  of  the  West,  one  of  the 
fragments  of  that  vast  ancient  nation  that  has  spread  from  the  Pa- 
cific to  the  Atlantic  Ocean  in  200  Nations  and  tribes.  The  Ainus 
of  Eastern  Asia  appear  to  be  their  ancestors. 

C.  S.  RAFINESQUE. 


THE  GOLD  REGIONS  IN  THE  SOUTHERN  STATES. 

From  the  American  Journal  of  Science  and  Arts,  we  have  a 
highly  interesting  description  of  the  gold  districts  in  Georgia  and 
North  Carolina,  extending  west  even  into  the  state  of  Tennessee. 
Jfn  this  Journal,  gold  is  treated  upon  as  being  extremely  abundant, 
and  from  the  situation  of  the  veins,  is  far  more  eligible  to  the  ope- 
rations of  the  miner,  than  the  gold  mines  of  South  Amerca;  these 
having,  as  is  supposed,  been  greatly  deranged  in  places,  and  buried 
deep  by  the  operations  of  volcanoes  ;  while  those  in  the  states  are 
still  in  their  primitive  state  of  formation. 

Gold  is  found  connected  with  various  formations  of  slate,  with 
red  clay,  and  in  the  bottoms  of  streams,  mingled  with  the  sand  and 
gravel.  It  is  found  with  the  heavy  gravelly  earth  of  the  moun- 
tains, but  most  of  all,  in  the  kind  of  rock  called  quartz,  which  is 
also  mingled  with  slate.  In  North  Carolina,  on  Valley  River,  gold 
h  found  in  abundance,  connected  with  the  quartz  rock,  which  also. 


395 


AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 


abounds  with  chrystal,  running  in  veins  in  every  direction,  in  tis- 
sues from  the  size  of  a  straw  to  that  of  a  man's  arm.  The  quartz 
is  in  great  masses  very  compact,  and  of  a  yellow  golden  hue,  from 
the  abundant  presence  of  the  metal.  In  the  bottom  of  this  rivei 
much  deposited  gold  is  found  in  strata. 

It  would  appear,  from  the  evidences  yet  remaining,  that  the  an- 
cient inhabitants  were  not  insensible  to  the  existence  of  the  golden 
mines  here,  nor,  of  course,  of  its  value  ;  for,  "  in  the  vicinity  were 
found  the  remains  of  ancient  works;  many  shafts  have  been  sunk 
by  them  in  pursuit  of  the  ore,  and  judging  from  the  masses  thrown 
up,  one  of  them  penetrated  a  quartz  rock  to  a  great  depth,  as  about 
thirty  feet  still  lies  open  to  view. 

There  is  also  a  deep  and  difficult  cut  across  a  very  bold  vein  of 
this  rock,  in  pursuit  of  metal,  but  it  is  now  much  filled  up,  having 
been  used  subsequently  for  an  Indian  burying  ground.  At  this 
place,  says  the  Journal,  nothing  short  of  the  steel  pickaxe,  could 
have  left  the  traces  on  the  stone  which  are  found  here. 

Not  far  from  this  place,  have  been  found  the  remains  of  a  small 
furnace,  the  walls  of  which  had  been  formed  of  soap  stone,  so  as 
to  endure  the  heat  without  being  fractured.  In  the  county  of  Ha- 
bersham, in  North  Carolina,  was  lately  dug  out  of  the  earth,  at  a 
place  where  the  gold  ore  is  found,  a  small  vessel  in  the  form  of  a 
ckillet.  It  was  fifteen  feet  under  ground,  made  of  a  compound  of 
tin  and  copper,  with  a  trace  of  iron.  The  copper  and  tin  in  its  com- 
position, are  undoubtedly  the  evidence  of  its  antiquity.  See  the 
plate  at  letter  G,  where  an  exact  facsimile  of  this  vessel  is  engraved 
taken  from  the  Journal  of  Science  and  Arts,  conducted  by  Profes- 
sor Silliman. 

Crucibles  of  earthen  ware,  and  far  better  than  those  now  in  use, 
are  frequently  found  by  the  miners  who  are  now  working  the  mines 
of  North  Carolina.  By  actual  experiment  they  are  found  to  en- 
dure the  heat  three  times  as  long  as  the  Hessian  crucibles,  which 
are  the  best  now  in  use.  Bits  of  machinery,  such  as  is  necessary 
in  elevating  the  ore  from  the  depths,  as  used  by  the  ancient  na- 
tions, are  also  frequently  found  in  the  earth  where  those  mines 
exist,  which  clearly  shows  those  ancients  acquainted  with  the 
minerals. 

On  the  top  of  Yecna  mountain,  in  the  same  region,  still  exist 
the  remains  of  a  stone  wall,  which  exhibit  the  angles  of  a  fortifica- 


AND  DISCOVERIES  IN  THE  WEST. 


399 


tion,  and  guard  the  only  accessible  points  of  ascent  to  its  summit. 
Timber  in  the  Cherokee  country,  bearing  marks  of  the  axe,  (not 
of  stone,)  have  been  taken  up  at  the  depth  of  ten  feet  below  the 
surface.  Indian  tradition,  says  Mr.  Silliman,  gives  no  account  of 
these  remains.  This  article,  which  was  found  in  the  gold  mine  in 
Habersham  county,  formed  of  copper  and  tin,  is  in  this  respect,  like 
the  mining  chissel  described  by  Humboldt,  on  page  185  of  this 
work.  The  timber  found  ten  feet  beneath  the  surface,  in  Georgia 
and  North  Carolina,  bearing  the  marks  of  having  been  cut  down 
and  cut  in  two  with  axes  of  metal,  are  to  be  referred  to  the  opera- 
tions of  the  Europeans — the  Danes,  Welch,  &c,  of  whom  we  have 
already  spoken  in  severel  parts  of  this  volume.  We  consider  them 
the  same  with  the  authors  of  the  stone  walls  which  we  have  men- 
tioned that  were  found  in  North  Carolina,  anci  also  with  the  authors 
of  the  iron  axes,  found  in  a  saltpetre  cave,  on  the  river  Gasconade, 
far  to  the  west,  as  mentioned  in  Beck's  Gazetteer  ;  and  also  the 
same  with  the  authors  of  the  stone  buildings,  a  foundation  of  one 
of  which  is  represented  on  the  plate.    See  Frontispiece. 

It  would  appear  from  all  this,  that  these  Europeans  had  made 
extensive  settlements  in  various  places,  extending  over  an  immense 
range  of  this  country,  before  they  were  cut  off  by  the  Indians ;  as 
we  cannot  suppose  any  other  enemy  capable  of  so  dreadful  and  ge- 
neral a  slaughter. 

It  is  said  that  the  ancient  Phoenicians  first  discovered  the  ait  of 
manufacturing  tools  from  the  union  of  copper  and  tin,  the  same  of 
which  this  skillet  is  found  to  be  formed  ;  and  that  of  the  Phoeni- 
cians, the  Greeks  and  Romans,  learned  the  art,  who  it  is  likely 
.communicated  the  same  to  the  ancient  Britons  ;  and  from  these,  in 
process  of  time,  the  Danes,  tke  Welch,  the  Scotch,  and  the  Norwe- 
gians, brought  it  with  them  to  the  wilds  of  America.  Or  if  we  re- 
ject this,  we  may  refer  the  working  of  those  mines  of  gold,  not  to 
the  Malays,  Polynesian,  and  Australasian  tribes  ;  but  rather  to  the 
more  enlightened  nations  of  Egypt,  Phoenicia,  Greece,  Rome,  Me- 
dia, Persia,  Germany,  all  of  whom,  as  we  believe,  have  from  time 
to  time — from  era  to  era — furnished  emigrants  to  this  country. 

In  evidence,  in  part,  of  this  belief,  we  refer  the  reader  to  such 
parts  of  this  volume  as  attempt  to  make  this  appear,  and  especially 
to  page  116  ;  where  an  account  of  the  Phoenician  characters,  as 
having  been  discovered  in  America,  is  mentioned.    But  how  the 


400  AMERICAN  ANTIQUITIES 

article  of  copper,  of  which  we  have  spoken,  and  is  engraved  on  the  plate,  an', 
how  the  timber,  which  bears  the  mark  of  the  axe,lound  buried  in  various  place-) 
in  North  Carolina,  came  to  be  buried  so  deep,  is  a  question  of  no  small  moment 

Surely  the  natural  increase  of  earth,  by  the  decay  of  vegetables,  and  forests, 
could  never  have  buried  them  thus  deep;  their  position  would  rather  argue  that 
they  have  been  submerged  by  the  the  sudden  rush  of  waters.  As  favoring  this 
opinion,  we  notice,  that  the  mountain  ranges  here  are  such  as  cross  the  rivers 
flowing  from  the  west,  which  pass  off  to  the  sea,  through  North  Carolina,  South 
Carolina,  and  Georgia.  See  the  map  of  those  states,  when  at  once  this  appears 
to  be  the  real  formation  and  course  of  the  mountains. 

One  of  these  ranges  is  denominated  the  Yeona  range  ;  which  gives  off  three 
separate  sections  \  one  in  Tennessee,  one  in  western  North  Carolina,  and  one 
ro  Georgia,  all  running  along  the  western  ends  of  these  states,  which  lie  along 
the  Atlantic.  The  Blue  Ridge  and  the  Wuaka  mountains  approach  each  other, 
and  form  jointly  the  separation  of  the  E.  from  the  W.  waters.  As  this  range  contin- 
ues from  the  west ;  another  range,  not  less  formidable,  approaches  from  the  north. 
These  are  the  Waldeus  ridge,  and  Cumberland  mountains,  which  uuite  them- 
selves with  the  former;  when  this  union  takes  the  name  of  Lookout  Mountain 
At  this  point  of  intersection,  where  the  union  of  immense  mountains  on  either 
side,  formed  a  barrier  to  the  streams  which  flowed  from  fifty  thousand  square 
miles  of  country,  the  waters  broke  through. 

The  evidence  at  this  place,  of  the  war  of  the  elements,  is  the  admiration  of 
ail  who  pass  the  broken  mountain,  through  what  is  called  the  suck,  and  boiling 
chaldron,  near  the  confines  of  the  state  of  Tennessee.  At  this  place,  the  vast 
accumulation  of  waters,  it  is  evident,  broke  through,  and  deluged  the  country 
below,  toward  the  sea,  overwhelming  whatever  settlements  the  Danes,  or  other 
people  of  the  old  world,  may  have  made  there,  especially  along  the  lowest 
grounds,  till  the  waters  were  drained  to  the  Atlantic.  This  position  easily  ac- 
counts for  the  appearances  of  such  articles  as  have  been  disintered,  with  that 
of  timber,  from  the  depths  mentioned  in  the  Journal  of  Science.  Such  a  cir- 
cumstance may  have  gone  far  to  weaken  the  prowess  of  those  nations.  So  that 
they  could  not,  from  the  survivors  dwelling  on  the  highest  grounds,  soon  recov- 
er their  numbers,  their  order,  their  state  of  defence  and  security,  against  the 
Indians  farther  west,  who  it  is  likely,  watched  all  opportunities  to  destroy  them 

Finally,  from  all  we  can  gather  on  this  momentuous  subject,  we  are  compel- 
led, from  the  overwhelming  amount  of  evidence  to  admit  that  mighty  nations, 
with  almost  unbounded  empire,  with  various  degrees  of  improvement,  have  oc- 
cupied the  continent,  and  that,  as  in  the  old  world,  empire  has  succeeded 
empire,  rising  one  out  of  the  other,  from  the  jarring  interests  of  the  unwieldy 
ind  ferocious  mass:    So  also  in  this. 

And,  also,  that  convulsion  has  succeeded  convulsion,  deluge  succeeded  de- 
luge, breaking  down  mountains,  the  barriers  of  rivers,  deranging,  and  destroy 
ing  the  ancient  nations,  till  it  has,  at  length,  assumed  a  settled  and  more  perma- 
nent state  of  things,  where  the  happy  millions  of  the  present  race  now  in- 
habit in  great  America.
