THE PRINCIPLE OF RELATIVITY: A COLLECTION OF ORIGINAL MEMOIRS ON THE SPECIAL AND GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY
H. A. Lorentz, A. Einstein, H. Minkowski, H. Weyl; notes by A. Sommerfeld
Translated by W. Perrett and G. B. Jeffery. Translation first published London: Methuen & Co., 1923. (This copy: Dover Publications reprint.)
Source scan: Internet Archive, identifier principleofrelat0000halo_e0d2.
Prepared for the Tower of Babel library: scan artifacts trimmed and whitespace normalized per the VIEW TEXT standard. Public domain.

THE PRINCIPLE OF RELATIVITY

0

ELVIF

‘

x

‘SINS

a

i
3

*

me be

rs

»

€

THE PRINCIPLE OF
RELATIVITY

A COLLECTION OF ORIGINAL MEMOIRS ON THE
SPECIAL AND GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY

H. A. |LORENTZ, A. EINSTEIN
H. MINKOWSKI AND H. WEYL

WITH NOTES BY

A. SOMMERFELD

W. PERRETT AND G. B. JEFFERY

WITH SEVEN DIAGRAMS

DOVER PUBLICATIONS, INC.

ASTRONCMY LIBRARY

This Translation First Published in 1923

PRINTED AND BOUND IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

A fe
i f
4/7 Lok 3

wi ee

i
ASTRONOMY
LIBRARY

TRANSLATORS’ PREFACE

subject of two main lines of inquiry: there is

an endeavour to express its principles in logical
and concise form, and there is the struggle with ana-
lytical difficulties which stand in the way of further
progress. In the midst of such problems it is easy
to forget the way in which the theory gradually grew
under the stimulus of physical experiment, and thus
to miss much of its meaning. It is this growth which
the present collection of papers is designed chiefly
to exhibit. In the earlier papers there are some
things which the authors would no doubt now ex-
press differently ; the later papers deal with problems
which are not by any means yet fully solved. At
the end we must confess that Relativity is still very
much of a problem—and therefore worthy of our
study. ;

The authors of the papers are still actively at
work on the subject—all save Minkowski. His paper
on “Space and Time” is a measure of the loss which
mathematical physics suffered by his untimely death.

The translations. have been made from the text,
as published in a German collection, under the title
“Des Relativitatsprinzip” (Teubner, 4th ed., 1922).

v

M7? 3806

| alee: Theory of Relativity is at the moment the

vi THE PRINCIPLE OF RELATIVITY

The second paper by Lorentz is an exception to this.
It is reprinted from the original English version in
the Proceedings of the Amsterdam Academy. Some
minor changes have been made, and the notation has
been brought more nearly into conformity with that
employed in the other papers.

a gis ee

(Bae

TABLE OF CONTENTS

J. Micuetson’s INTERFERENCE Experiment. By H. A. Lorentz .
§1. Theexperiment. §2. Thecontraction hypothesis. §§ 3-4.
The contraction in relation to molecular forces.
II. ELzectromaGNETIC PHENOMENA IN A SystEM Movine WITH ANY
VELOCITY LESS THAN THAT OF Liacut. By H. A. Lorentz .
§ 1. Experimental evidence. § 2. Poincaré’s criticism of the
contraction hypothesis. § 3. Maxwell’s equations for
moving axes. § 4. The modified vectors. § 5. Retarded
potentials. § 6. Electrostatic fields. § 7. A polarized
particle. § 8. Corresponding states. § 9. Momentum of
an electron. §10. The influence of the earth’s motion on
optical phenomena. §11. Applications. §12. Molecular
motions. § 13. Kaufmann’s experiments.
III. On tan Exzcrropynamics oF Movine Boprzs. By A. Einstein.
Kinematican Part. § 1. Definition of simultaneity. § 2. On
the relativity of lengths and times. (§ 3. The transforma-
tion of co-ordinates and times. § 4. Physical meaning of
the equations. § 5. The composition of velocities.
ELECTRODYNAMICAL Part. § 6. Transformation of the Max-
well-Hertz equations. § 7. Doppler’s principle and aber-
ration. § 8. The energy of light rays and the pressure of
radiation. § 9. Transformation of the equations with
convection currents. § 10. Dynamics of the slowly accel-
erated electron.
IV. Dozs THE INERTIA OF A BODY DEPEND UPON ITS ENERGY-
‘ CoNTENT? By A. Hinstein
'Y. Spacz anp Time. By H. Minkowski . :
I. The invariance of the Newtonian equations and its pepresen-
tation in four dimensional space. II. The world-postulate.
III. The representation of motion in the continuum. IV.
The new mechanics. V. The motion of one and two
electrons.
Notes on this paper. By A. Sommerfeld .
VI. On tHe INFLUENCE OF GRAVITATION ON THE PROPAGATION OF
Liant. By A. Hinstein
§ 1. The physical nature of gravitation. “g2. The imaitatien
of energy. § 3. The velocity of light. § 4. Bending of
light-rays.

7

vii

PAGES
1-7

9-34

35-65

67-71
73-91

92-96

97-108

viii THE PRINCIPLE OF RELATIVITY

VII. Toe FounpDATION oF THE GENERAL THuORY OF ReLAtivity. By

PAGES

A, Hinstein . fs . 109-164

A, FUNDAMENTAL ConsIDERATIONS ON THE ‘PosTuLaTE OF REta-
TiviTy. § 1. Observations on thespecial theory. § 2. The
need for an extension of the postulate of relativity. § 3.
The space-time continuum; general co-variance. § 4.
Measurement in Space and Time.

B, MaruemaricaL AIDs TO THE FORMULATION OF GENERALLY
Covariant Equations. § 5. Contravariant and covariant
four-vectors. § 6. Tensors of the second and higher ranks.
§ 7. Multiplication of tensors. § 8. The fundamental
tensor guy. § 9. The equation of the geodetic line. § 10.
The formation of tensors by differentiation. § 11. Some
cases of specialimportance. §12. The Riemann-Christoffel
tensor.

C. THEoRY OF THE GRAVITATIONAL anit § 13. Equations
of motion of a material point. § 14. The field equations
of gravitation in the absence of matter. § 15. The Hamil-
tonian function for the gravitational field. Laws of
momentum and energy. § 16. The general form of the
field equations. § 17. The laws of conservation. § 18.
The laws of momentum and energy.

D. Marerian PHENoMENA. § 19. Huler’s equations for a fluid.
§ 20. Maxwell’s equations for free space.

HE, APPLICATIONS OF THE THEORY. § 21. Newton’s theory as
a first approximation. § 22. Behaviour of rods and clocks
in a static gravitational field. Bending of light rays.
Motion of the perihelion of a planetary orbit.

VIII, Hamuton’s. PRINCIPLE AND THE GENERAL THEORY OF RELA-

tivity. By A. Hinstein 2 3 - 165-173

§ 1. The principle of variation and: the field. aquatonk: § 2.
Separate existence of the gravitational field. § 3. Pro-
perties of the field equations conditioned by the theory of
invariants.

IX. CosmotocicaL CONSIDERATIONS ON THE GENERAL THEORY OF

Rewativiry. By A. Hinstein . : . 175-188

§ 1. The Newtonian theory. § 2. The boundary iooudions
according to the general theory of relativity. § 3. The
spatially finite universe. § 4. On an additional term for
the field equations of gravitation. § 5. Calculation and
result.

X. Do Gravitational Frenps Pray an Essentian Part IN THE
STRUCTURE OF THE ELEMENTARY ParTIcLEs oF Marrer ?

By A. Hinstein . 4 - 189-198

§ 1. Defects of the present view. § 2, The field éqietors freed
of scalars. § 3. On the cosmological question. § 4. Con-
cluding remarks.

XI. Gravitation anp Exxcrriciry. By H. Weyl . f : - 200-216

MICHELSON’S
INTERFERENCE EXPERIMENT

BY

H. A. LORENTZ

Translated from ‘‘ Versuch einer Theorie der elektrischen
und optischen Erscheinungen in bewegten Kérpern,”
Leiden, 1895, §§ 89-92.

ua
heres hes .

ach oe a . , , ‘
Fike Bad a . SA

MICHELSON’S INTERFERENCE EXPERIMENT
By H. A. LORENTZ

1. S Maxwell first remarked and as follows from a

Avs simple calculation, the time required by a ray

of light to travel from a point A to a point B and

back to A must vary when the two points together undergo

a displacement without carrying the ether with them. The

difference is, certainly, a magnitude of second order; but it

is sufficiently great to be detected by a sensitive interference
method.

The experiment was carried out by Michelson in 1881.*
His apparatus, a kind of interferometer, had two horizontal
arms, P and Q, of equal length and at right angles one to
the other. Of the two mutually interfering rays of light the
one passed along the arm P and back, the other along the
arm Q and back. The whole instrument, including the
source of light and the arrangement for taking observations,
could be revolved about a vertical axis; and those two
positions come especially under consideration in which the
arm P or the arm Q lay as nearly as possible in the direction
of the Earth’s motion. On the basis of Fresnel’s theory it
was anticipated that when the apparatus was revolved from
one of these principal positions into the other there would
be a displacement of the interference fringes.

But of such a displacement—for the sake of brevity we
will call it the Maxwell displacement—conditioned by the
change in the times of propagation, no trace was discovered,
and accordingly Michelson thought himself justified in con-
cluding that while the Earth is moving, the ether does not
remain at rest. The correctness of this inference was soon
brought into question, for by an oversight Michelson had

Michelson, American Journal of Science, 22, 1881, p. 120.
3

4 MICHELSON’S EXPERIMENT

taken the change in the phase difference, which was to be
expected in accordance with the theory, at twice its proper
value. If we make the necessary correction, we arrive at
displacements no greater than might be masked by errors of
observation.

Subsequently Michelson * took up the investigation anew
in collaboration with Morley, enhancing the delicacy of the
experiment by causing each pencil to be reflected to and fro
between a number of mirrors, thereby obtaining the same
advantage as if the arms of the earlier apparatus had been
considerably lengthened. The mirrors were mounted on a
massive stone disc, floating on mercury, and therefore easily
revolved. ach pencil now had to travel a total distance of
22 meters, and on Fresnel’s theory the displacement to be
expected in passing from the one principal position to the
other would be 0°4 of the distance between the interference
fringes. Nevertheless the rotation produced displacements
not exceeding 0 02 of this distance, and these might well be
ascribed to errors of observation.

. Now, does this result entitle us to assume that the ether
takes part in the motion of the Earth, and therefore that the
theory of aberration given by Stokes is the correct one?
The difficulties which this theory encounters in explaining
aberration seem too great for me to share this opinion, and
I would rather try to remove the contradiction between
Fresnel’s theory and Michelson’s result. An hypothesis
which I brought forward some time ago,+ and which, as I
subsequently learned, has also occurred to Fitzgerald,t enables
us to do this. The next paragraph will set out this hypo-
thesis.

2. To simplify matters we will assume that we are work-
ing with apparatus as employed in the first experiments, and
that in:the one principal position the arm P lies exactly in

* Michelson and Morley, American Journal of Science, 34, 1887, p. 383;
Phil. Mag., 24, 1887, p. 449.

+ Lorentz, Zittingsverslagen der Akad. v. Wet. te Amsterdam, 1892-93
p. 74.

+ As Fitzgerald kindly tells me, he has for a long time dealt with his
hypothesis in his lectures. The only published reference which I can find to
reper is by Lodge, “ Aberration Problems,” Phil. Trans. R.S., 184
A, 1892

H. A. LORENTZ 5

the direction of the motion of the Earth. Let v be the
velocity of this motion, L the length of either arm, and hence
21 the path traversed by the rays of light. According to the
theory,* the turning of the apparatus through 90° causes the
time in which the one pencil travels along P and back to be
longer than the time which the other pencil takes to complete
its journey by
Lv?

fous

There would be this same difference if the translation had no
influence and the arm P were longer than the arm Q by
$Liv?/c2. Similarly with the second principal position.

Thus we see that the phase differences expected by the
theory might also arise if, when the apparatus is revolved, first
the one arm and then the other arm were the longer. It
follows that the phase differences can be compensated by
contrary changes of the dimensions.

If we assume the arm which lies in the direction of the
Earth’s motion to be shorter than the other by $Lv*/c?, and,
at the same time, that the translation has the influence which
Fresnel’s theory allows it, then the result of the Michelson
experiment is explained completely.

Thus one would have to imagine that the motion of a
solid body (such as a brass rod or the stone disc employed in
the later experiments) through the resting ether exerts upon
the dimensions of that body an influence which varies accord-
ing to the orientation of the body with respect to the direction
of motion. If, for example, the dimensions parallel. to this
direction were changed in the proportion of 1 to 1+ 6, and
those perpendicular in the proportion of 1 to 1 + e, then we
should have the equation

e- 8 = 45 : é , .» (1)

in which the value of one of the quantities 6 and ¢ would
remain undetermined. It might be that e = 0,5 = — 4v?/c’,
but also ¢ = 4v?/c?, 6 = 0, ore = 4y2/c?, and 8 = - 4y?/c?.

3. Surprising as this hypothesis may appear at first sight,

* Cf, Lorentz, Arch. Néerl., 2, 1887, pp- 168-176.

6 MICHELSON’S EXPERIMENT

yet we shall have to admit that it is by no means far-fetched,
&$ soon a8 we assume that molecular forces are also trans-
mitted through the ether, like the electric and magnetic forces
of which we are able at the present time to make this as-
sertion definitely. If they are so transmitted, the translation
will very probably affect the action between two molecules or
atoms in a manner resembling the attraction or repulsion be-
tween charged particles. Now, since the form and dimensions
of a solid body are ultimately conditioned by the intensity of
molecular actions, there cannot fail to be a change of di-
mensions as well.

From the theoretical side, therefore, there would be no
objection to the hypothesis. As regards its experimental
proof, we must first of all note that the lengthenings and
shortenings in question are extraordinarily small. We have
v’/c? = 10-8, and thus, if e = 0, the shortening of the one
diameter of the Earth would amount to about 6% cm.
The length of a meter rod would change, when moved from
one principal position into the other, by about zoo Micron.
One could hardly hope for success in trying to perceive such
small quantities except by means of an interference method.
We should have to operate with two perpendicular rods, and
with two mutually interfering pencils of light, allowing the
one to travel to and fro along the first rod, and the other
along the second rod. But in this way we should come back
once more to the Michelson experiment, and revolving the
apparatus we should perceive no displacement of the fringes.
Reversing a previous remark, we might now say that the dis-
placement produced by the alterations of length is com-
pensated by the Maxwell displacement.

4. It is worth noticing that we are led to just the same
changes of dimensions as have been presumed above if we,
firstly, without taking molecular movement into consider-
ation, assume that in a solid body left to itself the forces, at-
tractions or repulsions, acting upon any molecule maintain
one another in equilibrium, and, secondly—though to be sure,
there is no reason for doing so—if we apply to these molecular
forces the law which in another place* we deduced for

* Viz., § 23 of the book, ‘ Versuch einer Theorie der elektrischen und opti-
schen Erscheinungen in bewegten Kérpern.”’

H. A. LORENTZ “

electrostatic actions. For if we now understand by S, and
S, not, as formerly, two systems of charged particles, but two
systems of molecules—the second at rest and the first moving
with a velocity v in the direction of the axis of z—between the
dimensions of which the relationship subsists as previously
stated; and if we assume that in both systems the z com-
ponents of the forces are the same, while the y and z com-
ponents differ from one another by the factor /1 — v*/c, then
it is clear that the forces in 8, will be in equilibrium when-
ever they aresoin§,. If therefore S, is the state of equilibrium
of a solid body at rest, then the molecules in §, have precisely
those positions in which they can persist under the influence
oftranslation. The displacement would naturally bring about
this disposition of the molecules of its own accord, and
thus effect a shortening in the direction of motion in the
proportion of 1 to,/1 — v*/c?, in accordance with the formule
given in the above-mentioned paragraph. This leads to the
values

yy
a e = 0

in agreement with (1).

In reality the molecules of a body are not at rest, but in
every ‘‘ state of equilibrium ” there is a stationary movement.
What influence this circumstance may have in the phe-
nomenon which we have been considering is a question which
we do not here touch upon; in any case the experiments of
Michelson and Morley, in consequence of unavoidable errors
of observation, afford considerable latitude for the values of
6 and «.

Tare this
z ses

adres estoy Cae
Ad dakiw to ooabeggealll
Mite ty = oa

. > i, he
12 FISK: Al eaiirs
'

ry =
i

Ot table ig aR
(a BHA Pe ripeya es
are Parra gag 3a yarn Biles:
aw ee pitt Manis =
Su? s Ran ‘ste ae gal

on aa” Ritu eh Ye Huse Sh sa +) nad
ars nt Are celeb: ey: e ;

ELECTROMAGNETIC PHENOMENA IN
A SYSTEM MOVING WITH ANY VELO-
CITY LESS THAN THAT OF LIGHT

BY

H. A. LORENTZ

Reprinted from the English version in Proceedings of the
Academy of Sciences of Amsterdam, 6, 1904.

2 s teh ueaEt's mt eee

5: nue

ne

ELECTROMAGNETIC PHENOMENA IN A SYSTEM
MOVING WITH ANY VELOCITY LESS THAN
THAT OF LIGHT

By H. A. LORENTZ

§1. sk problem of determining the influence exerted
on electric and optical phenomenabyatranslation,
such as all systems have in virtue of the Harth’s
annual motion, admits of a comparatively simple solution, so
long as only those terms need be taken into account, which
are proportional to the first power of the ratio between the
' velocity of translation v and the velocity of light c. Cases in
which quantities of the second order, i.e. of the order v'/c?,
may be perceptible, present more difficulties. The first ex-
ample of this kind is Michelson’s well-known interference-
experiment, the negative result of which has led Fitzgerald
and myself to the conclusion that the dimensions of solid
bodies are slightly altered by their motion through the ether.
Some new experiments, in which a second order effect was
sought for, have recently been published. Rayleigh * and
Brace + have examined the question whether the Earth’s
motion may cause a body to become doubly refracting. At
first sight this might be expected, if the just mentioned |
change of dimensions is admitted. Both physicists, how-
ever, have obtained a negative result.

In the second place Trouton and Noble { have endeavoured
to detect a turning couple acting on a charged condenser,
the plates of which make a certain angle with the direction of
translation. The theory of electrons, unless it be modified
by some new hypothesis, would undoubtedly require the

* Rayleigh, Phil. Mag. (6), 4, 1902, p. 678.

+ Brace, Phil. Mag. (6), 7, 1904, p. 817.

+ Trouton and Noble, Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond., A 202, 1903, p. 165.
11

12 ELECTROMAGNETIC PHENOMENA

existence of such a couple. In order to see this, it will suffice
to consider a condenser with ether as dielectric. It may be
shown that in every electrostatic system, moving with a
velocity v,* there is a certain amount of ‘“ electromagnetic
momentum.’ If we represent this, in direction and magni-
tude, by a vector G, the couple in question will be determined
by the vector product +

[G.v] . : ; ; ,

Now, if the axis of z is chosen perpendicular to the con-
denser plates, the velocity v having any direction we like:
and if Uis the energy of the condenser, calculated in the
ordinary way, the components of G are given t by the follow-
ing formule, which are exact up to the first order,

Gz ae Gy = chia G, = 0.

Substituting these values in (1), we get for the compon-
ents of the couple, up to terms of the second order,

2U 2U

Ge Cyl — a Vers, 0.

These expressions show that the axis of the cou ple lies in
the plane of the plates, perpendicular to the translation. If
a is the angle between the velocity and the normal to the
plates, the moment of the couple will be U(v/c)? sin 2a; it
tends to turn the condenser into such a position that the
plates are parallel to the Harth’s motion.

In the apparatus of Trouton and Noble the condenser was
fixed to the beam of a torsion-balance, sufficiently delicate to
be deflected by a couple of the above order of magnitude.
No effect could however be observed.

§ 2. The experiments of which I have spoken are not the
only reason for which a new examination of the problems
connected with the motion of the Earth is desirable. Poin-

* A vector will be denoted by a Clarendon letter, its magnitude by the cor-
responding Latin letter,

+See my article: « Weiterbildung der Maxwell’schen Theorie. Electron- .
entheorie,” Mathem. Encyclopiidie, V, 14, § 21, a. (This article will be quoted
as ‘‘M.H,”’)

“MLE,” § 56, o.

H. A. LORENTZ 13

caré * has objected to the existing theory of electric and optical
phenomena in moving bodies that, in order to explain Michel-
son’s negative result, the introduction of a new hypothesis
has been required, and that the same necessity may occur
each time new facts will be brought to light. Surely this
course of inventing special hypotheses for each new experi-
mental result is somewhat artificial. It would be more
satisfactory if it were possible to show by means of certain
fundamental assumptions and without neglecting terms of
one order of magnitude or another, that many electromagnetic
actions are entirely independent of the motion of the system.
Some years ago, I already sought to frame a theory of this
kind.+ I believe it is now possible to treat the subject with
a better result. The only restriction as regards the velocity
will be that it be less than that of light.

§ 3. I shall start from the fundamental equations of the
theory of electrons.{ Let D be the dielectric displacement in
the ether, H the magnetic force, p the volume-density of the
charge of an electron, v the velocity of a point of such a
particle, and F the ponderomotive force, i.e. the force,
reckoned per unit charge, which is exerted by the ether on a
volume-element of an electron. Then, if we use a fixed
system of co-ordinates,

div D = p, div H = 0,
curl H = 1 & + pv),

bia 10H ee te

I
I
]

F=D++[v.H]

I shall now suppose that the system as a whole moves in
the direction of x with a constant velocity v, and I shall
denote by u any velocity which a point of an electron may
have in addition to this, so that

Vx =U+t Uz, Vy = Uy, Vz = Ux

* Poincaré, Rapports du Congrés de physique de 1900, Paris, 1, pp. 22, 23,

+ Lorentz, Zittingsverslag Akad. v. Wet., 7, 1899, p. 507; Amsterdam
Proc., 1898-99, p. 427.

+‘ M.E.,” § 2.

14 ELECTROMAGNETIC PHENOMENA

If the equations (2) are at the same time referred to axes
moving with the system, they become

div D =p, div H = 0,

= v— )Dz + p(w + Uz),

eS see E 4

dy dz c\dt ox

a % ae fe (2 2 vs, )Dy “i Fs aA
Het a cs “(2 “8 v= D, + -pUz,
af ae ny “(2 + oe \He,

s
ox oy c\dt "da H,,

Fy = Dz + “(wH: = uzHy),
i 1
F, = Dy, ee oO: + _(u@He = UzHs),

ie - Dp; + *yHy + *(weHy = tyHr).

§ 4. We shall further transform these formule by a change
of variables. Putting

C2

ae Oe get sane

and understanding by J another numerical quantity, to be
determined further on, I take as new independent variables

@ = Bla, y' = ly, z = he oe. : . (4)
pila v
ts Be Te Alaa, e . : ‘ (5)

and I define two new vectors D’ and H’ by the formule

H. A. LORENTZ 15
qrer_th vate =) v A OB v
D'z = GD, Diy = G(Dy - SH) Dee E(D. + 2Hy),

oes: fel aS v eects v
H; = pHe, H’, = (Hy nF °p), Hy = (a. a °Dy),
for which, on account of (3), we may also write
_— p2Ty — R72( Ty’ User — anl tT’, —-°H’
ID = l Dz; D, Bl (Dy ae ou 2 Dz Bl (D: oH 4 lee

ll

H, = PH's, Hy = 6C(Hy - 2D%), H. = 61:(H'.+°D'y)

As to the coefficient J, it is to be considered as a function
of v, whose value is 1 for v = 0, and which, for small values
of v, differs from unity no more than by a quantity of the
second order.

The variable ¢’ may be called the “local time”; indeed,
for 8 = 1, 1 = 1 it becomes identical with what I formerly
denoted by this name.

If, finally, we put

1 F
Buy = U'x, Bly = U'y, Buz = Uy - . (8)

these latter quantities being considered as the components of
a new vector u’, the equations take the following form :—

: »
div D' = ¢ - ee) p, div’ H' = 4
1/dD’
t Bh date (do , 9
curl’ H “(3 + pu’), | (9)
raga 1 0H’
eats Digebnie sf }
Fr=2{D'2+ “(wy — W2H'y) + “(w'yD'y +u'zD',)}, |
ig , r , , , ’ tL) , 10
Fy = G{D'y+ <(wH's - w'pH's) — 2D y}, (10)
Fess eke wpe = a0 e's) |
z B ade y-~byOoe eS Eg ;

The meaning of the symbols div’ and curl’ in (9) is similar

16 ELECTROMAGNETIC PHENOMENA

to that of div and curl in (2); only, the differentiations with
respect to 2, y, z are to be replaced by the corresponding
ones with respect to 2’, y’, 2’.

§ 5. The equations (9) lead to the conclusion that the
vectors D’ and H’ may be represented by means of a scalar
potential $’ and a vector potential A’. These potentials
satisfy the equations *

1 d°¢’ ;

AK Sie 33>) Bee . - (11)
ie ee. eet
vie = a ro = Pe he : = (12)
and in terms of them D’ and H’ are given by
; 1 3A’ 1 ee soge
D= - vs ae oe grad te) os red A’z . (13)
H’ = curl’ A’ . ; : . (14)
‘The symbol v7 is an abbreviation for o- + 2 ue
Uae Hee ae act * 3 + 37,

and grad’ ¢' denotes a vector whose components are
oq’ aq’ dd’
The expression grad’ A’, has a similar meaning.

In order to obtain the solution of (11) and (12) in a
simple form, we may take 2’, y', 2’ as the co-ordinates of a
point P’ in a space 8’, and ascribe to this point, for each
value of ¢’, the values of 9’, u’, ¢', A’, belonging to the corre-
sponding point P (2, y, z) of the electromagnetic system.
For a definite value t’ of the fourth independent variable, the
potentials ¢' and A’ at the point P of the system or at the
corresponding point P’ of the space 8‘, are given by +

a z|\las reo at oe
F 1 ([p’ '
Al oe a) eta : : ‘ (16)

‘M.KE.,”’ §§ 4 and 10, + Ibid., §§ 5 and 10.

H. A. LORENTZ 17

Here dS’ is an element of the space S’,7’ its distance from
P’, and the brackets serve to denote the quantity p' and the
vector p'u’ such as they are in the element dS’, for the value
t’ = r/c of the fourth independent variable.

Instead of (15) and (16) we may also write, taking into
account (4) and (7),

#- g(a... aD
,_ 1 [pul
4 = Fel oS , goede wt 618)

the integrations now extending over the electromagnetic
system itself. It should be kept in mind that in these
formule 7’ does not denote the distance between the element
dS and the point (2, y, z) for which the calculation is to be
performed. If the element lies at the point (2, Y,, %), we
must take

eo = bf PKS — 23) + Y= Yi + (@ — 4).

It is also to be remembered that, if we wish to determine
¢' and A’ for the instant at which the local time in P is ¢’, we
must take p and pu’, such as they are in the element dS at
the instant at which the local time of that element is ¢ — 9'/c.

§ 6. Jt will suffice for our purpose to consider two special
cases. The first is that of an electrostatic system, le. a
system having no other motion but the translation with the
velocity v. In this case u' = 0, and therefore, by (12), A’ = 0.
Also, ¢’ is independent of t', so that the equations (11), (13),
and (14) reduce to

set “Seas P , ,
D’ = - grad ¢, ; UES)
H’ =

After having determined the vector D’ by means of these
equations, we know also the ponderomotive force acting on
electrons that belong to the system. For these the formule
(10) become, since u’ = 0,

1?

U / Ne ,
F, = PD's, F = AY Fz = Bo : . (20)

18 ELECTROMAGNETIC PHENOMENA

The result may be put in a simple form if we compare the
moving system ¥, with which we are concerned, to another
electrostatic system 5’ which remains at rest, and into which
% is changed if the dimensions parallel to the axis of z are
multiplied by 81, and the dimensions which have the direction
of y or that of z, by l—a deformation for which (Bl, l,l) is an
appropriate symbol. In this new system, which we may
suppose to be placed in the above-mentioned space S’, we
shall give to the density the value p, determined by (7), so
that the charges of corresponding elements of volume and of
corresponding electrons are the same in ¥ and >’. Then we
shall obtain the forces acting on the electrons of the moving
system >, if we first determine the corresponding forces in
>’, and next multiply their components in the direction of
the axis of « by J, and their components perpendicular to

2
that axis by 5 This is conveniently expressed by the

formula

le

= Bi pee, oa ,

F(3) (2 + APE) aoe
It is further to be remarked that, after having found D’ by

(19), we can easily calculate the electromagnetic momentum

in the moving system, or rather its component in the
direction of the motion. Indeed, the formula

Gis : | [D. H]aS
shows that

Ge — ‘\/H. sen D-H,)d8.

Therefore, by (6), since H’ = 0

274
Ge = = (Dy + D,”)d8 = a (Dy® + Dz)d8’. (22)

§ 7. Our second special case is that of a particle having
an electric moment, i.e. a small space §S, with a total charge

[eas = 0, but with such a distribution of density that the

H. A. LORENTZ 19

integrals [exd8, evas, [exas have values differing from 0.

Let £, w, € be the co-ordinates, taken relatively to a fixed
point A of the particle, which may be.called its centre, and
let the electric moment be defined as a vector P whose com-
ponents are

ae feéas, Py = Jonas, Pec fecas Ee) AREY oR

dPx
dt

= [ouedS, a Jouyas, ices [owas (24)

Of course, if £, 7, € are treated as infinitely small, wx, Uy, Uz
must be so likewise. We shall neglect squares and products
of these six quantities.

We shall now apply the equation (17) to the determination
of the scalar potential ¢’ for an exterior point P (a, y, 2), at a
finite distance from the polarized particle, and for the instant
at which the local time of this point has some definite value
t’. In doing so, we shall give the symbol [p], which, in (17),
relates to the instamt at which the local time indS ist’ - 7'/c,
a slightly different meaning. Distinguishing by 7’, the value
of r for the centre A, we shall understand by [p] the value
of the density existing in the element dS at the point
(E, n, ¢), at the instant 7 at which the local time of A is
t' - rife.

It may be seen from (5) that this instant precedes that
for which we have to take the numerator in (17) by
vE Ber — 7) _ gv& . 8 or or dr"
aed vculery Uh at eels Aare re

units of time. In this last expression we may put for the
differential coefficients their values at the point A.

In (17) we have now to replace [p] by

2). (era + OB] ow
le] + Pal alt nGe Poh oi: a cd ee
where [2 | relates again to the time ¢). Now, the value of ¢

for which the calculations are to be performed having been

20 ELECTROMAGNETIC PHENOMENA

chosen, this time ¢, will be a function of the co-ordinates 2,
y, 2 of the exterior point P. The value of [p] will therefore
depend on these co-ordinates in such a way that

Ae] _ SA

ied ie).

by which (25) becomes o>.
vE[ dp Le], Ae], 2p]
el + oS] - (Aes Die ae.
Again, if henceforth we understand by r’ what has above

been called r’,, the factor ; must be replaced by

7 ~ () ~ (7) - eG).

so that after all, in the integral (17), the element dS is
multiplied by

[6] , Btoér2e) _ 2 Ho] _ > ale] _ > Lo)
ce cr’ | dt wr oy 7 or

This is simpler than the primitive form, because. neither
r, nor the time for which the quantities enclosed in brackets
are to be taken, depend on z, y, 2 Using (28) and re-

membering that ik pdS = 0, we get

¢' = ee rel by O° [Ea] ee Pel 86 04Rs)

~ Ape’ 3t 1 ~ 4pldn 7’ oy eh deere

a formula in which all the enclosed quantities are to be
taken for the instant at which the local time of the centre of
the particle is t' — r'/e,

We shall conclude these calculations by introducing a new
vector P’, whose components are

1245 i BIPz, P’y — lPy, P= LP, . . (26)

passing at the same time to 2’, y', 2’, tas independent vari-
ables. The final result is

6a he AP el le { 2 [Pz], 2 [Py] +2 a}
4pe*r’ ot’ 4p\odu’ r’ DY, Sl dale Qe) eared C

H. A. LORENTZ 21

As to the formula (18) for the vector potential, its trans-
formation is less complicated, because it contains the in-
finitely small vector u’. Having regard to (8), (24), (26), and
(5), I find

Nat a Ls

~ 4arcr’ ot

The field produced by the polarized particle is now wholly
determined. The formula (13) leads to

D’= 1 2 [P'] i grad’ > [P’2] ets 2 [Py] a va (27)

a FELT RI ee AS 7 7 7 7 7
dace? ot? r 4a ee yr ee

and the vector H’ is given by (14). We may further use the
equations (20), instead of the original formule (10), if we
wish to consider the forces exerted by the polarized particle
on a similar one placed at some distance. Indeed, in the
second particle, as well as in the first, the velocities u may be
held to be infinitely small.

It is to be remarked that the formule for a system
without translation are implied in what precedes. For |
such a system the quantities with accents become identical
to the corresponding ones without accents ; also 8 = 1 and
1=1. The components of (27) are at the same time those
of the electric force which is exerted by one polarized particle
on another.

§ 8. Thus far we have used only the fundamental
equations without any new assumptions. I shall now suppose
that the electrons, which I take to be spheres of radius Rin
the state of rest, have their dimensions changed by the effect
of a translation, the dimensions in the direction of motion
becoming Bl times and those in perpendicular directions 1
times smaller.

In this deformation, which may be represented by
(e ys

BVI’ 1
its charge.

Our assumption amounts to saying that in an electro-
static system %, moving with a velocity v, all electrons are
flattened ellipsoids with their smaller axes in the direction of

3 each element of volume is understood to preserve

22 ELECTROMAGNETIC PHENOMENA

motion. If now, in order to apply the theorem of § 6, we
subject the system to the deformation (8l, l, 1), we shall
have again spherical electrons of radius R. Hence, if we
alter the relative position of the centres of the electrons in >
by applying the deformation (i, J, 1), and if, in the points
thus obtained, we place the centres of electrons that remain
at rest, we shall get a system, identical to the imaginary
system 2’, of which we have spoken in § 6. The forces in
this system and those in & will bear to each other the rela-
tion expressed by (21).

In the second place I shall suppose that the forces be-
tween uncharged particles, as well as those between such
particles and electrons, are influenced by a translation in
quite the same way as the electric forces in an electrostatic
system. In other terms, whatever be the nature of the
particles composing a ponderable body, so long as they do
not move relatively to each other, we shall have between the
forces acting in a system (>) without, and the same system
(2) with a translation, the relation specified in (21), if, as re-
gards the relative position of the particles, S’ is got from >
by the deformation (i, J, 1), or 5 from 3” by the deformation

(gp 17):

We see by this that, as soon as the resulting force is zero
for a particle in &’, the same must be true for the correspond-
ing particle in 2. Consequently, if, neglecting the effects of
molecular motion, we suppose each particle of a solid body
to be in equilibrium under the action of the attractions and
repulsions exerted by its neighbours, and if we take for
granted that there is but one configuration of equilibrium, we
may draw the conclusion that the system &’, if the velocity v
is imparted to it, will of itself change into the system %. In
other terms, the translation will produce the deformation

(ar D7):

The case of molecular motion will be considered in § 12.
It will easily be seen that the hypothesis which was
formerly advanced in connexion with Michelson’s experi-
ment, is implied in what has now been said. However,
the present hypothesis is more general, because the only

H. A. LORENTZ 23

limitation imposed on the motion is that its velocity be less
than that of light.

§ 9. We are now in a position to calculate the electro-
magnetic momentum of a single electron. For simplicity’s
sake I shall suppose the charge e to be uniformly distributed
over the surface, so long as the electron remains at rest.
Then a distribution of the same kind will exist in the system

>’ with which we are concerned in the last integral of (22).
Hence

I eos | Beare e* (dr e
D*, + D*)d - 2 345 = ls =
\ 2 uae pele ~ 6rd 67 R’

and
e?

Ger = ézoRe”:

It must be observed that the product Al is a function of v
and that, for reasons of symmetry, the vector G has the
direction of the translation. In general, representing by v
the velocity of this motion, we have the vector equation

e
G= éroRe¥ . . . ° (28)

Now, every change in the motion of a system will entail
a corresponding change in the electromagnetic momentum
and will therefore require a certain force, which is given in
direction and magnitude by

ple Shy Se Scenes SO gy

Strictly speaking, the formula (28) may only be applied
in the case of a uniform rectilinear translation. On account
of this circumstance—though (29) is always true—the theory
of rapidly varying motions of an electron becomes very com-
plicated, the more so, because the hypothesis of § 8 would
imply that the direction and amount of the deformation are
continually changing. It is, indeed, hardly probable that the
form of the electron will be determined solely by the velocity
existing at the moment considered.

Nevertheless, provided the changes in the state of motion

24 ELECTROMAGNETIC PHENOMENA

be sufficiently slow, we shall get a satisfactory approximation
by using (28) at every instant. The application of (29) to
such a quasi-stationary translation, as it has been called by
Abraham,* is a very simple matter. Let, at a certain instant,
a, be the acceleration in the direction of the path, and a, the
acceleration perpendicular to it. Then the force F will con-
sist of two components, having the directions of these acce-
lerations and which are given by
F, = ma, and F, = m,a,,
if
e d(Blv e
my = gE) and my = =a Bl.. (80)

Hence, in phenomena in which there is an acceleration
in the direction of motion, the electron behaves as if it
had a mass m,; in those in which the acceleration is normal
to the path, as if the mass were m,. These quantities m,
and mz may therefore properly be called the “ longitudinal ”
and “ transverse ” electromagnetic masses of the electron. I
shall suppose that there is no other, no “true” or
“material ’”’ mass.

Since f and / differ from unity by quantities of the order
v?/c?, we find for very small velocities

jk tanith eset
Ln Saath

This is the mass with which we are concerned, if there
are small vibratory motions of the electrons in a system
without translation. If, on the contrary, motions of this
kind are going on in a body moving with the velocity v in the
direction of the axis of z, we shall have to reckon with the
mass ™,, a8 given by (30), if we consider the vibrations
parallel to that axis, and with the mass m,, if we treat of
those that are parallel to OY or OZ. Therefore, in short
terms, referring by the index 3 to a moving system and by
>’ to one that remains at rest,

m(S) = (AB), Bl, Bl)m(S) . . (31)

* Abraham, Wied. Ann., 10, 1903, p. 105.

H. A. LORENTZ 25

§ 10. We can now proceed to examine the influence of the
Earth’s motion on optical phenomena in a system of trans-
parent bodies. In discussing this problem we shall fix our
attention on the variable electric moments in the particles or
atoms” of the system. To these moments we may apply
what has been said in §7. For the sake of simplicity we
shall suppose that, in each particle, the charge is concentrated
in a certain number of separate electrons, and that the
“elastic” forces that act on one of these, and, conjointly
with the electric forces, determine its motion, have their
origin within the bounds of the same atom.

T shall show that, if we start from any given state of
motion in a system without translation, we may deduce from
it a corresponding state that can exist in the same system
after a translation has been imparted to it, the kind of corre-
spondence being as specified in what follows.

(a) Let A‘, A’s, A's, ete., be the centres of the particles in
the system without translation (=); neglecting molecular
motions we shall assume these points to remain at rest. The
system of points A, A,, Az, etc., formed by the centres of the
particles in the moving system %, is obtained from A‘, A’,
A’,, etc., by means of @ deformation Gi = *). According to
what has been said in § 8, the centres will of themselves take
these positions A’, A’, A’,, ete., if originally, before there
was @ translation, they occupied the positions A,, Ag, As,
etc.

We may conceive any point P’ in the space of the
system & to be displaced by the above deformation, so that
a definite point P of > corresponds to it. For two corre-
sponding points P’ and P we shall define corresponding
instants, the one belonging to P’, the other to P, by stating
that the true time at the first instant is equal to the local
time, as determined by (5) for the point P, at the second
instant. By corresponding times for two corresponding
particles we shall understand times that may be said to
correspond, if we fix our attention on the centres A’ and A of
these particles.

(b) As regards the interior state of the atoms, we shall as-
sume that the configuration of a particle A in 3 at a certain

26 ELECTROMAGNETIC PHENOMENA

: : psig t
time may be derived by means of the deformation (a r? *)
from the configuration of the corresponding particle in >’,
such as it is at the corresponding instant. In so far as
this assumption relates to the form of the electrons them-
selves, it is implied in the first hypothesis of § 8.

Obviously, if we start from a state really existing in the
system 3’, we have now completely defined a state of the
moving system >. The question remains, however, whether
this state will likewise be a possible one.

In order to judge of this, we may remark in the first place
that the electric moments which we have supposed to exist
in the moving system and which we shall denote by P, will
be certain definite functions of the co-ordinates x,y, z of the
centres A of the particles, or, as we shall say, of the co-
ordinates of the particles themselves, and of the time t. The
equations which express the relations between P on one hand
and x,y, z, t on the other, may be replaced by other equations
containing the vectors P’ defined by (26) and the quantities
x,y’, z,t defined by (4) and (5). Now, by the above as-
sumptions a and 8, if in a particle A of the moving system,
whose co-ordinates are z, y, 2, we find an electric moment P
at the time ¢, or at the local time t', the vector P’ given by
(26) will be the moment which exists in the other system at
the true time ¢’ in a particle whose co-ordinates are Miss
It appears in this way that the equations between P’, 2’, y’,
z’, ’ are the same for both systems, the difference being only
this, that for the system >’ without translation these symbols
indicate the moment, the co-ordinates, and the true time,
whereas their meaning is different for the moving system, P’,
Os eelgal being here related to the moment P, the eo-ordin-
ates x, y, z and the general time ¢ in the manner expressed
by (26), (4), and (5).

It has already been stated that the equation (27) applies
to both systems. The vector D’ will therefore be the same
in }’ and &, provided we always compare: corresponding
places and times. However, this vector has not the same
meaning in the two cases. In >’ it represents the electric
force, in > it is related to this force in the way expressed by
(20). We may therefore conclude that the ponderomotive

H. A. LORENTZ 27

forces acting, in = and in >’, on corresponding particles at
corresponding instants, bear to each other the relation deter-
mined by (21). In virtue of our assumption (0d), taken in con-
nexion with the second hypothesis of § 8, the same relation
will exist between the “elastic’’ forces; consequently, the
formula (21) may also be regarded as indicating the relation
between the total forces, acting on corresponding electrons,
at corresponding instants.

It'is clear that the state we have supposed to exist in the
moving system will really be possible if, in } and &’, the pro-
ducts of the mass m and the acceleration of an electron are
to each other in the same relation as the forces, ie. if

ma(z) =(P,¢ 1B 5 gyal ae) : By,
Now, we have for the accelerations
a(=) = (ae 3 Be 7)8 F191) eeptceeanbbetnaild Es)

as may be deduced from (4) and (5), and combining this with.
(32), we find for the masses

m(Z) = (8°, Bl, Bl)m().

If this is compared with (81), it appears that, whatever be
the value of J, the condition is always satisfied, as regards the
masses with which we have to reckon when we consider
vibrations perpendicular to the translation. The only con-
dition we have to impose on / is therefore

a1B0) _ gy)
But, on account of ass

UBv) _ gs

dv 8 ,

so that we must put

— = 0, / = const.

The value of the constant must be unity, because we know
already that, for v = 0,7 = 1.

28 ELECTROMAGNETIC PHENOMENA

We are therefore led to suppose that the influence of a
translation on the dimensions (of the separate electrons and
of a ponderable body as a whole) is confined to those that
have the direction of the motion, these becoming B times
smaller than they are in the state of rest. If this hypothesis
is added to those we have already made, we may be sure that
two states, the one in the moving system, the other in the
same system while at rest, corresponding as stated above,
may both be possible. Moreover, this correspondence is not
limited to the electric moments of the particles. In corre-
sponding points that are situated either in the ether between
the particles, or in that surrounding the ponderable bodies,
we shall find at corresponding times the same vector D’ and,
as is easily shown, the same vector H’. We may sum up by
saying: If, in the system without translation, there is a state
of motion in which, at a definite place, the components of P,
D, and H are certain functions of the time, then the same
system after it has been put in motion (and thereby deformed)
can be the seat of a state of motion in which, at the corre-
sponding place, the components of P’, D’, and H’ are the same
functions of the local time.

There is one point which requires further consideration.
The values of the masses m, and m, having been deduced
from the theory of quasi-stationary motion, the question
arises, whether we are justified in reckoning with them in
the case of the rapid vibrations of light. Now it is found on
closer examination that the motion of an electron may be
treated as quasi-stationary if it changes very little during the
time a light-wave takes to travel over a distance equal to the
diameter. This condition is fulfilled in optical phenomena,
because the diameter of an electron is extremely small in com-
parison with the wave-length.

§ 11. It is easily seen that the proposed theory can
account for a large number of facts.

Let us take in the first place the case of a system without
translation, in some parts of which we have continually
P=0,D=0,H=0. Then, in the corresponding state for
the moving system, we shall have in corresponding parts (or,
as We may say, in the same parts of the deformed system)
P’= 0, D’= 0, H’=0. These equations implying P = 0

’

H. A. LORENTZ 29

D = 0, H = 0,as is seen by (26) and (6), it appears that those
parts which are dark while the system is at rest, will remain
so after it has been put in motion. It will therefore be im-
possible to detect an influence of the Earth’s motion on any
optical experiment, made with a terrestrial source of light,
in which the geometrical distribution of light and darkness is
observed. Many experiments on interference and diffraction
belong to this class.

__In the second place, if, in two points of a system, rays of
light of the same state of polarization are propagated in the
same direction, the ratio between the amplitudes in these
points may be shown not to be altered. by a translation.
The latter remark applies to those experiments in which the
intensities in adjacent parts of the field of view are compared.

The above conclusions confirm the results which I formerly
obtained by a similar train of reasoning, in which, however,
the terms of the second order were neglected. They also
contain an explanation of Michelson’s negative result, more
general than the one previously given, and of a somewhat
different form; and they show why Rayleigh and Brace could
find no signs of double refraction produced by the motion of
the Earth.

As to the experiments of Trouton and Noble, their
negative result becomes at once clear, if we admit the hypo-
theses of § 8. It may be inferred from these and from our
last assumption (§ 10) that the only effect of the translation
must have been a contraction of the whole system of elec-
trons and other particles constituting the charged condenser
and the beam and thread of the torsion-balance. Such a
contraction does not give rise to a sensible change of
direction.

It need hardly be said that the present theory is put for-
ward with all due reserve. Though it seems to me that it
can account for all well-established facts, it leads to some
consequences that cannot as yet be put to the test of experi-
ment. One of these is that the result of Michelson’s experi-
ment must remain negative, if the interfering rays of light
are made to travel through some ponderable transparent
body.

Our assumption about the contraction of the electrons

30 ELECTROMAGNETIC PHENOMENA

cannot in itself be pronounced to be either plausible or in-
admissible. What we know about the nature of electrons
is very little, and the only means of pushing our way farther
will be to test such hypotheses as I have here made. Of
course, there will be difficulties, e.g. as soon as we come to
consider the rotation of electrons. Perhaps we shall have to
suppose that in those phenomena in which, if there is no
translation, spherical electrons rotate about a diameter, the
points of the electrons in the moving system will describe
elliptic paths, corresponding, in the manner specified in § 10,
to the circular paths described in the other case.

§ 12, There remain to be said a few words about molecular
motion. We may conceive that bodies in which this has
a sensible influence or even predominates, undergo the same
deformation as the systems of particlés of constant relative
position of which alone we have spoken till now. Indeed, in
two systems of molecules > and &, the first without and the
second with a translation, we may imagine molecular motions
corresponding to each other in such a way that, if a particle
in 3" has a certain position at a definite instant, a particle in
2 occupies at the corresponding instant the corresponding
position. This being assumed, we may use the relation (33)
between the accelerations in all those cases in which the
velocity of molecular motion is very small as compared with v.
In these cases the molecular forces may be taken to be deter-
mined by the relative positions, independently of the velocities
of molecular motion. If, finally, we suppose these forces to
be limited to such small distances that, for particles acting
on each other, the difference of local times may be neglected,
one of the particles, together with those which lie in its
sphere of attraction or repulsion, will form a system which
undergoes the often mentioned deformation. In virtue of
the second hypothesis of § 8 we may therefore apply to the
resulting ‘molecular force acting on a particle, the equation
(21). Consequently, the proper relation between the forces
and the accelerations will exist in the two cases, if we sup-
pose that the masses of all particles are influenced by a trans-
lation to the same degree as the electromagnetic masses of the
electrons.

§ 18. The values (30), which I have found for the longi-

H. A. LORENTZ 31

tudinal and transverse masses of an electron, expressed in
terms of its velocity, are not the same as those that had
been previously obtained by Abraham. The ground for this
difference is to be sought solely in the circumstance that, in
his theory, the electrons are treated as spheres of invariable
dimensions. Now, as regards the transverse mass, the re-
sults of Abraham have been confirmed in a most remarkable
way by Kaufmann’s measurements of the deflexion of
radium-rays in electric and magnetic fields. Therefore, if
there is not to be a most serious objection to the theory I
have now proposed, it must be possible to show that those
measurements agree with my values nearly as well as with
those of Abraham.

I shall begin by discussing two of the series of measure-
ments published by Kaufmann * in 1902. From each series
he has deduced two quantities » and &, the ‘‘ reduced ’’
electric and magnetic deflexions, which are related as follows
to the ratio y = v/¢:— :

F Y)
y= ie Wy) = i ee a (34)

Here w (y) is such a function, that the transverse mass is

given by

3 e ,
Me = i‘ 6aeRY™: ; : . (35)

whereas k, and k, are constant in each series.

It appears from the second of the formule (30) that my
theory leads likewise to an equation of the form (35); only
Abraham’s function ¥ (y) must be replaced by

36 - 30 - v-"*

Hence, my theory requires that, if we substitute this
value for + (vy) in (84), these equations shall still hold. Of
course, in seeking to obtain a good agreement, we shall be
justified in giving to k, and & other values than those of
Kaufmann, and in taking for every measurement a proper

value of the velocity v, or of the ratio y. Writing sh, k's

*Kaufmann, Physik, Zeitschr., 4, 1902, p. 55.

32 ELECTROMAGNETIC PHENOMENA
and yy’ for the new values, we may put (34) in the form

f= sh See eh eee

and

West ee Ui
1 - y?%)—*#s ve : an GY)
Kaufmann has tested his equations by choosing for kh,
such a value that, calculating y and k, by means of (34), he
obtained values for this latter number which, as well as might
be, remained constant in each series. This constancy was
the proof of a sufficient agreement.
I have followed a similar method, using, however, some
of the numbers calculated by Kaufmann. I have computed
for each measurement the value of the expression

Ky = - oy eb(y)ha, . - (38)
that may be got from (37) combined with the second of the
equations (34). The values of  (y) and k, have been taken
from Kaufmann’s tables, and for y I have substituted the
value he has found for y, multiplied by s, the latter coefficient
being chosen with a view to obtaining a good constancy of
(38). The results are contained in the tables on opnosite
page, corresponding to the Tables III and IV in Kaufmann’s
paper.

The constancy of k’, is seen to come out no less satis-
factorily than that of k,, the more so as in each case the value
of s has been determined by means of only two measure-
ments. The coefficient has been so chosen that for these two
observations, which were in Table III the first and the last
but one, and in Table IV the first and the last, the values of
k’, should be proportional to those of fy.

I shall next consider two series from a later publication
by Kaufmann,* which have been calculated by Runge + by
means of the method of least squares, the coefficients k,
and k, having been determined in such a way that the
values of 7, calculated, for each observed ¢, from Kaufmann’s
equations (34), agree as closely as may be with the observed
values of 7.

* Kaufmann, Gétt. Nachr. Math. phys, Kl., 1903, p. 90.
t Runge, ibid., p. 326.

H. A. LORENTZ 33

III. s = 0-933.

¥ Wy). ka y k's
0°851 2°147 1-721 0°794 2-246
0°766 1:86 1‘736 0°715 2258
0°727 1°78 1°725 0°678 2:256
0°6615 1:66 1:727 0°617 2256
0°6075 1°595 1 655 0-567 2175

IV. s = 0°954.

Y Wy) ky. y k's
0:963 3-28 8°12 0-919 10°36
0-949 2:86 7-99 0-905 9-70
0:933 273 | 7-46 0:890 9:28
0:883 2°31 8°32 0°842 10°36
0-860 2°195 809 0-820 10°15
0°830 2-06 8138 0°792 10°23
0-801 1-96 8:13 0°764 10:28
0-777 1:89 8-04 0-741 10-20
0°752 1:83 8-02 0°717 10°22
0°732 1°785 7:97 0°698 10°18

I have determined by the same condition, likewise using
the method of least squares, the constants a and bin the

formula -
nt = alt + bE,

which may be deduced from my equations (86) and (37).
Knowing a and 6,1 find y for each measurement by means
of the relation

Y= Jae

For two plates on which Kaufmann had measured the
electric and magnetic deflexions, the results are as follows
(p. 34), the deflexions being given in centimetres.

T have not found time for calculating the other tables in
Kaufmann’s paper. As they begin, like the table for Plate
15 (next page) with a rather large negative difference be-
tween the values of 7 which have been deduced from the
observations and calculated by Runge, we may expect a satis-
factory agreement with my formule.

34 ELECTROMAGNETIC PHENOMENA

Plate No. 15. a = 006489, b = 0°3039.

ul Y

¢ Calculated b
Calculated : Calculated | - y. y
Observed. by. B. Diff. by L. Diff. R. L.
0°1495 00388 0°0404 -— 16 0°0400 -— 12 0°987 0:951
0:199 0:0548 0°:0550 - 2 0:0552 - 4 0-9%4 0-918
0:2475 0°:0716 0:0710 + 6 00715 + 1 0-930 0-881
0:296 0:0896 0:0887 + 9 0:0895 + 1 0-889 0°842
0 3435 0°1080 0°1081 - il 0-1090 - 10 0°847 0°803
0°391 0°1290 0°1297 - 7 0°1305 - 15 0°804 0-763
0°487 0°1524 0°1527 - 3 0°1532 - 8 0:763 0-727
0:4 25 0°1788 0°1777 +11 O°1777 +11 0°724 0-692
0°5265 0°2033 0°2039 - 6 0°2033 0 0°688 0°660
Plate No. 19. a = 0-05867, 6 = 0°2591.
n Y
: Calculated’ ° Calculated : Calculated by
Observed. by R. Diff. by Te Diff. R. it?

0°1495 00404 0:0388 + 16 0:0379 + 25 0-990 0°954
0-199 0°0529 0°0527 + 2 0°0522 + 7 0-969 0-923
0°247 0:0678 0:0675 + 8 0-0674 + 4 0-939 0-888
0°296 0°0834 0:0842 - 8 0°0544 - 10 0-902 0°849
0°3435 0°1019 0°1022 - 8 0°1026 - 7 0-862 0°811
0-391 0°1219 071222 - 8 0°1226 - 7 0°822 0°773
0°437 0°1429 0°1434 - 6 0°1487 - 8 0-782 0°736
0°4825 0°1660 0°1665 - 6 O-1664 | - 4 0°744 0-702
0°5265 0°1916 0°1906 +10 0°1902 +14 0-709 0°671

i

ON THE ELECTRODYNAMICS OF
MOVING BODIES

BY
A. EINSTEIN

Translated from “Zur Elektrodynamik bewegter Kérper,”
Annalen der Phystk, 17, 1905.

Fe a

3Bte A ci. te Past e ate a we

RHEE OOF Aeood® iki
! omreg eh the Riaheiee

~

ON THE ELECTRODYNAMICS OF MOVING
~ BODIES

By A. EINSTEIN

ally understood at the present time—when applied

to moving bodies, leads to asymmetries which do not
appear to be inherent in the phenomena. Take, for example,
the reciprocal electrodynamic action of a magnet and a con-
ductor. The observable phenomenon here depends only on
the relative motion of the conductor and the magnet, where-
as the customary view draws a sharp distinction between the
two cases in which either the one or the other of these bodies
is in motion. For if the magnet is in motion and the con-
‘ductor at rest, there arises in the neighbourhood of the
magnet an electric field with a certain definite energy, pro-
ducing a current at the places where parts of the conductor
are situated. But if the magnet is stationary and the con-
ductor in motion, no electric field arises in the neighbour-
hood of the magnet. In the conductor, however, we find an
electromotive force, to which in itself there is no correspond-
ing energy, but which gives rise—assuming equality of
relative motion in the two cases discussed—to electric currents
of the same path and intensity as those produced by the
electric forces in the former case.

Examples of this sort, together with the unsuccessful at-
tempts to discover any motion of the earth relatively to the
“light medium,” suggest that the phenomena of electro-
dynamics as well as of mechanics possess no properties corre-
sponding to the idea of absolute rest. They suggest rather
that, as has already been shown to the first order of small
quantities, the same laws of electrodynamics and optics will

be valid for all frames of reference for which the equations of
37

I: is known that Maxwell’s electrodynamics—as usu-

38 ELECTRODYNAMICS

mechanics hold good.* We will raise this conjecture (the
purport of which will hereafter be called the “‘ Principle of
Relativity ”) to the status of a postulate, and also introduce
another postulate, which is only apparently irreconcilable
with the former, namely, that light is always propagated in
empty space with a definite velocity c which is independent
of the state of motion of the emitting body. These two
postulates suffice for the attainment of a simple and consistent
theory of the electrodynamics of moving bodies based on
Maxwell’s theory for stationary bodies. The introduction of a
“luminiferous ether ” will prove to be superfluous inasmuch
as the view here to be developed will not require an “ ab-
solutely stationary space” provided with special properties,
nor assign a velocity-vector to a point of the empty space in
which electromagnetic processes take place.

The theory to be developed is based—like all electro-
dynamics—on the kinematics of the rigid body, since the
assertions of any such theory have to do with the relation-
ships between rigid bodies (systems of co-ordinates), clocks,
and electromagnetic processes. Insufficient consideration of
this circumstance lies at the root of the difficulties which the
electrodynamics of moving bodies at present encounters.

I. KIneMAtTIcaL Part

§ 1. Definition of Simultaneity

Let us take a system of co-ordinates in which the
equations of Newtonian mechanics hold good.+ In order to
render our presentation more precise and to distinguish this
system of co-ordinates verbally from others which will be
introduced hereafter, we call it the “ stationary system.”

If a material point is at rest relatively to this system of
co-ordinates, its position can be defined relatively thereto by
the employment of rigid standards of measurement and the
methods of Euclidean geometry, and can be expressed in
Cartesian co-ordinates,

If we wish to describe the motion of a material point, we

*The preceding memoir by Lorentz was not at this time known to the
author, :
ti.e. to the first approximation,

A. EINSTEIN 39

give the values of its co-ordinates as functions of the time.
Now we must bear carefully in mind that a mathematical
description of this kind has no physical meaning unless we
are quite clear as to what we understand by “time.” We
have to take into account that all our judgments in which
time plays a part are always judgments of simultaneous
events. If, for instance, I say, “ That train arrives here at
7 o'clock,” I mean something like this: ‘‘ The pointing of
the small hand of my watch to 7 and the arrival of the train
are simultaneous events.” *

It might appear possible to overcome all the difficulties
attending the definition of ‘‘time”’ by substituting “ the
position of the small hand of my watch ” for “ time.” And
in fact such a definition is satisfactory when we are concerned
with defining a time exclusively for the place where the
watch is located; but it is no longer satisfactory when we
have to connect in time series of events occurring at different
places, or—what comes to the same thing—to evaluate the
times of events occurring at places remote from the watch.

We might, of course, content ourselves with time values
determined by an observer stationed together with the watch
at the origin of the co-ordinates, and co-ordinating the corre-
sponding positions of the hands with light signals, given out
by every event to be timed, and reaching him through empty
space. But this co-ordination has the disadvantage that it is
not independent of the standpoint of the observer with the
watch or clock, as we know from experience. We arrive at
a much more practical determination along the following line
of thought.

If at the point A of space there is a clock, an observer at
A can determine the time values of events in the immediate
proximity of A by finding the positions of the hands which
are simultaneous with these events. If there is at the point
B of space another clock in all respects resembling the one at
A, it is possible for an observer at B to determine the time
values of events in the immediate neighbourhood of B. But
it is not possible without further assumption to compare, in

* We shall not here discuss the inexactitude which lurks in the concept
of simultaneity of two events at approximately the same place, which -can
only be removed by an abstraction.

40 ELECTRODYNAMICS

respect of time, an event at A with an event at B. We have
so far defined only an ‘A time” and a “B time.” We
have not defined a common “time” for A and B, for the
latter cannot be defined at all unless we establish by definition
that the “‘ time” required by light to travel from A to B
equals the ‘‘time” it requires to travel from B to A.
Let a ray of light start at the ‘A time” ¢, from A towards
B, let it at the ‘‘ B time” tg be reflected at B in the direction
of A, and arrive again at A at the “A time” ft,’

In accordance with definition the two clocks synchronize
if

ty — tg = ta — tp.

We assume that this definition of synchronism is free
from contradictions, and possible for any number of points ;
and that the following relations are universally valid :—

1. If the clock at B synchronizes with the clock at A, the
clock at A synchronizes with the clock at B.

2. If the clock at A synchronizes with the clock at B and
also with the clock at C, the clocks at B and C also syn-
chronize with each other.

Thus with the help of certain imaginary physical experi-
ments we have settled what is to be understood by synchron-
ous stationary clocks located at different places, and have
evidently obtained a definition of “simultaneous,” br “ syn-
chronous,” and of “time.” The “time’’ of an event is
that which is given simultaneously with the event by a
stationary clock located at the place of the event, this clock
being synchronous, and indeed synchronous for all time deter-
minations, with a specified stationary clock.

In agreement with experience we further assume the
quantity

OA De oe
faimte
to be a universal constant—the velocity of light in empty
space.

It is essential to have time defined by means of stationary
clocks in the stationary system, and the time now defined
being appropriate to the stationary system we call it “the
time of the stationary system.”

A. EINSTEIN 41
§ 2. On the Relativity of Lengths and Times

__ The following reflexions are based on the principle of
relativity and on the principle of the constancy of the
velocity of light. These two principles we define as
follows :—

1. The laws by which the states of physical systems
undergo change are not affected, whether these changes of
state be referred to the one or the other of two systems of co-
ordinates in uniform translatory motion.

2. Any ray of light moves in the “‘ stationary ” system of
co-ordinates with the determined velocity c, whether the ray
be emitted by a stationary or by a moving body. Hence

light path

] j Se
oo time interval

eT time interval is to be taken in the sense of the definition
in § 1.

Let there be given a stationary rigid rod; and let its
length be J as measured by a measuring-rod which is also
stationary. We now imagine the axis of the rod lying
along the axis of z of the stationary system of co-ordinates,
and that a uniform motion of parallel translation with velocity
v along the axis of x in the direction of increasing « is then
imparted to the rod. We now inquire as to the length of the
moving rod, and imagine its length to be ascertained by the
following two operations :—

(a) The observer moves together with the given measur-
ing-rod and the rod to be measured, and measures the length
of the rod directly by superposing the measuring-rod, in
just the same way as if all three were at rest.

(b) By means of stationary clocks set up in the stationary
system and synchronizing in accordance with § 1, the ob-
server ascertains at what points ‘of the stationary system the
two ends of the rod to be measured are located at a definite
time. The distance between these two points, measured by the
measuring-rod already employed, which in this case is at rest,
is also a length which may be designated ‘‘ the length of the
rod.”

In accordance with the principle of relativity the length

42 ELECTRODYNAMICS

to be discovered by the operation (a)—we will call it “the
length of the rod in the moving system ”—must be equal to
the length / of the stationary rod.

The length to be discovered by the operation (6) we will
call ‘‘ the length of the (moving) rod in the stationary system.”
This we shall determine on the basis of our two principles,
and we shall find that it differs from J.

Current kinematics tacitly assumes that the lengths deter-
mined by these two operations are precisely equal, or in other
words, that a moving rigid body at the epoch ¢ may in geo-
metrical respects be perfectly represented by the same body
at rest in a definite position. vei

We imagine further that at the two ends A and B of the
rod, clocks are placed which synchronize with the clocks of
the stationary system, that is to say that their indications
correspond at any instant to the “time of the stationary
system” at the places where they happen tobe. These clocks
are therefore ‘‘ synchronous in the stationary system.”

We imagine further that with each clock there is a mov-
ing observer, and that these observers apply to both clocks
the criterion established in § 1 for the synchronization of two
clocks. Let a ray of light depart from A at the time * ¢q, let
it be reflected at B at the time ts, and reach A again at the
time ¢’4. Taking into consideration the principle of the con-
stancy of the velocity of light we find that

TAB , TsaB
tp - ta = and t,4 — tg =
- - C Uv s 2 Cr YU

where rap denotes the length of the moving rod—measured
in the stationary system. Observers moving with the moving
rod would thus find that the two clocks were not synchronous,
while observers in the stationary system would declare the
clocks to be synchronous.

So we see that we cannot attach any absolute signification
to the concept of simultaneity, but that two events which,
viewed from a system of co-ordinates, are simultaneous, can
no longer be looked upon as simultaneous events when en-

*« Time” here denotes “ time of the stationary system’ and also “ posi-
tion of hands of the moving clock situated at the place under discussion.”

A. EINSTEIN 43

visaged from a system which is in motion relatively to that
system.

§ 3. Theory of the Transformation of Co-ordinates and
Times from a Stationary System to another System
in Uniform Motion~ef _ Translation Relatively to the
Former

Let us in “stationary” space take two systems of co-
ordinates, i.e. two systems, each of three rigid material lines,
perpendicular to one another, and issuing from a point. Let
the axes of X of the two systems coincide, and their axes of
Yand Z respectively be parallel. Let each system be provided
with a rigid measuring-rod and a number of clocks, and let
the two measuring-rods, and likewise all the clocks of the two
systems, be in all respects alike.

Now to the origin of one of the two systems (4) let a con-
stant velocity v be imparted in the direction of the increasing
z of the other stationary system (K), and let this velocity be
communicated to the axes of the co-ordinates, the relevant
measuring-rod, and theclocks. To any time of the stationary
system K there then will correspond a definite position of the
axes of the moving system, and from reasons of symmetry
we are entitled to assume that the motion of k may be
such that the axes of the moving system are at the time ¢
(this ‘‘t” always denotes a time of the stationary system)
parallel to the axes of the stationary system.

We now imagine space to be measured from the stationary
system K by means of the stationary measuring-rod, and also
from the moving system k by means of the measuring-rod
moving with it; and that we thus obtain the co-ordinates
z, y, z, and &, 7, € respectively. Further, let the time ¢ of
the stationary system be determined for all points thereof
at which there are clocks by means of light signals in the
manner indicated in § 1; similarly let the time 7 of the
moving system be determined for all points of the moving
system at which there are clocks at rest relatively to that
system by applying the method, given in § 1, of light signals
between the points at which the latter clocks are located.

To any system of values 2, y, z, t, which completely defines
the place and time of an event in the stationary system, there

44 _ ELECTRODYNAMICS

belongs a system of values &, 7, €, 7, determining that event
relatively to the system %, and our task is now to find the
system of equations connecting these quantities.

In the first place it is clear that the equations must be
linear on account of the properties of homogeneity which we
attribute to space and time.

If we place z’ = x — vt, itis clear that a point at rest in
the system k must have a system of values 2’, y, z, inde-
pendent of time. We first define 7 as a function of 2’, y, z,’
and ¢. ‘To do this we have to express in equations that 7 is
nothing else than the summary of the data of clocks at rest
in system k, which have been synchronized according to the
rule given in § 1.

From the origin of system k let a ray be emitted at the
time 7, along the X-axis to 2’, and at the time 7, be reflected
thence to the origin of the co-ordinates, arriving there at the
time 7,; we then must have $ (7) + 7,) = 7;, or, by inserting
the arguments of the function r and applying the principle
of the constancy of the velocity of light in the stationary
system :—

‘

i[ 70,0, 0, 9+ 1(0,0,0,¢4-% + 2.) ] (00,0142),
C-v C+D” C_v
Hence, if z’ be chosen infinitesimally small,

1( 1 1 eee 1dr
c-v c+v/dt ds c— vd’

or
OT v oT

mw te ee 7?

It is to be noted that instead of the origin of the co-ordin-
ates we might have chosen any other point for the point of
origin of the ray, and the equation just obtained is therefore
valid for all values of a’, y, z.

An analogous consideration—applied to the axes of Y and
Z—it being borne in mind that light is always propagated
along these axes, when viewed from the stationary system,
with the velocity ,/(c? - v?), gives us

OT oT

Sy Tinggi

A. EINSTEIN A5

Since 7 is a linear function, it follows from these equations

that
T= a(t = a3’)
‘Ca "0

where a is a function ¢(v) at present unknown, and where
for brevity it is assumed that at the origin of k, r = 0, when
t= 0.

With the help of this result we easily determine the
quantities &, », ¢ by expressing in equations that light (as re-
quired by the principle of the constancy of the velocity of
light, in combination with the principle of relativity) 1s also
propagated with velocity c when measured in the moving
system. or a ray of light emitted at the time r = 0 in the
direction of the increasing &

v '
E= cror&é = ao(t md a’).
But the ray moves relatively to the initial point of k, when

measured in the stationary system, with the velocity c — »,
so that

If we insert this value of ¢ in the equation for £, we obtain

Ces
— = Cs Bea ed é
In an analogous manner we find, by considering rays moving
along the two other axes, that

ac(t y z)
n CC - v?

when

z =0.

ie
/(c? -.v’)
Thus
Cc Cc
Gp) = ee ia Wet — wy

Substituting for 2’ its value, we obtain

46 ELECTRODYNAMICS

tT = Pw)B(E — v2/c’),
E= dv)A(x — vt),

Yi = p(v)y,

a on p(v)z,

1
B= Ta ae¥fe)’

and ¢ is an as yet unknown function of v. If no assumption
whatever be made as to the initial position of the moving
system and as to the zero point of 7, an additive constant is
to be placed on the right side of each of these equations.

We now have to prove that any ray of light, measured in
the moving system, is propagated with the velocity c, if, as
we have assumed, this is the case in the stationary system ; for
we have not as yet furnished the proof that the principle of
the constancy of the velocity of light is compatible with the
principle of relativity.

At the time t = rt = 0, when the origin of the co-ordinates
is common to the two systems, let a spherical wave be
emitted therefrom, and be propagated with the velocity ¢ in
system K. If (a, y, z) be a point just attained by this wave,
then

where

ety? + 2? = cP?,

Transforming this equation with the aid of our equations
of transformation we obtain after a simple calculation

B+ yn? + C8 = ¢7?,

The wave under consideration is therefore no less a
spherical wave with velocity of propagation c when viewed
in the moving system. This shows that our two funda-
mental principles are compatible.*

In the equations of transformation which have been de-
veloped there enters an unknown function ¢ of v, which
we will now determine.

For this purpose we introduce a third system of co-ordin-

*The equations of the Lorentz transformation may be more simply de-
duced directly from the condition that in virtue of those equations the re-
lation x? + y* + 2? = c%J? shall have as its consequence the second relation
B+ 2 + Cm 072, :

A. EINSTEIN | «AT

ates K’, which relatively to the system & is in a state of
parallel translatory motion parallel to the axis of X, such that
the origin of co-ordinates of system k moves with velocity
— v onthe axisof X. At the time ¢ = 0 let all three origins
coincide, and when ¢ = z = y = z = O let the time #’ of the
system K’ be zero. We call the co-ordinates, measured in
the system K, 2’, y’, 2’, and by a twofold application of our
equations of transformation we obtain
t=¢
a He v)B( - o€. + v7), = oe — v)z,

fa tl lest

Since the relations between. 2’, y’, 2’ and a, y, z do not
contain the time ¢, the systems K and K’ are at rest with re-
spect to one another, and it is clear that the transformation
from K to K’ must be the identical transformation. Thus

g(v)o( - v) = 1

We now inquire into the signification of ¢(v). We give our
attention to that part of the axis of Y of system & which lies
between £ = 0, 7 = 0, € = Oand £=0,n =l1,¢=0. This
part of the axis of Y isarod moving perpendicularly to its axis
with velocity v relatively to system K. Its ends possess in K
the co-ordinates

I :
and Zo — vt, Y2 Lene? 0, Zo ~ 0.

‘The length of the rod measured in K is therefore J/¢(v) ; and
this gives us the meaning of the function g¢(v). From
reasons of symmetry it is now evident that the length of a
given rod moving perpendicularly to its axis, measured in
the stationary system, must depend only on the velocity and
not on the direction and the sense of the motion. The
length of the moving rod measured in the stationary system
does not change, therefore, if v and — v are interchanged.
Hence follows that 1/$(v) = U/¢( — »), or

ov) = $( - 2»)

It follows from this relation and the one previously found

48 ELECTRODYNAMICS

that $(v) = 1, so that the transformation equations which
have been found become

ia Bt “i vz/c?),

& = A(z - vt),

Y;

Z,

|

n
g
B= WJ - o/c)

§ 4. Physical Meaning of the Equations Obtained in Re-
spect to Moving Rigid Bodies and Moving Clocks

where

We envisage a rigid sphere * of radius R, at rest relatively
to the moving system k, and with its centre at the origin of
co-ordinates of k. The equation of the surface of this sphere
moving relatively to the system K with velocity v is

B+ + oF = R?:

The equation of this surface expressed in z, y, z at the time
t= 0Ois
a

(JO - oye ti + = Be

. Arigid body which, measured in a state of rest, has the form
of a sphere, therefore has in a state of motion—viewed from
the stationary system—the form of an ellipsoid of revolution
with the axes

RJ/(1 - v/c?), R, BR.

Thus, whereas the Y and Z dimensions of the sphere (and
therefore of every rigid body of no matter what form) do not
appear modified by the motion, the X dimension appears
shortened in the ratio 1:,/(1 - v'/c*), i.e. the greater the
value of v, the greater the shortening. For v = ¢ all moving
objects—viewed from the “stationary ” system—shrivel up
into plain figures. For velocities greater than that of light
our deliberations become meaningless ; we shall, however,
find in what follows, that the velocity of light in our

theory plays the part, physically, of an infinitely great
velocity.

* That is, a body possessing spherical form when examined at rest.

A. EINSTEIN ys

It is clear that the same results hold good of bodies at rest
in the “ stationary ” system, viewed from asystem in uniform
motion.

Further, we imagine one of the clocks which are qualified
to mark the time ¢ when at rest relatively to the stationary
system, and the time + when at rest relatively to the moving
system, to be located at the origin of the co-ordinates of k,
and so adjusted that it marks the time r. What is the rate
of this clock, when viewed from the stationary system ?

Between the quantities z, ¢, and r, which refer to the
position of the clock, we have, evidently, z = vt and

1 :
T= Ja - ve" = vxc*).

Therefore,
reat/(l - ve) =t-d- J/0 - ve)

whence it follows that the time marked by the clock (viewed
in the stationary system) isslow by 1 - ./(1 — v’*/c*) seconds
per, second, or—neglecting magnitudes of fourth and higher
order—by 4v?/c’.

From this there ensues the following peculiar consequence.
If at the points A and B of K there are stationary clocks
which, viewed in the stationary system, are synchronous; and
if the clock at A is moved with the velocity v along the line
AB to B, then on its arrival at B the two clocks no longer
synchronize, but the clock moved from A to B lags behind
the other which has remained at B by 4tv?/c? (up to magni-
tudes of fourth and higher order), ¢ being the time occupied .
in the journey from A to B.

It is at once apparent that this result still holds good if
the clock moves from A to B in any polygonal line, and also
when the points A and B coincide.

If we assume that the result proved for a polygonal line
is also valid for a continuously curved line, we arrive at this
result : If one of two synchronous clocks at A is moved in a
closed curve with constant velocity until it returns to A, the
journey lasting ¢ seconds, then by the clock which has
remained at rest the travelled clock on its arrival at A
will be }tv?/c? second slow. Thence we conclude that a

50 ELECTRODYNAMICS

balance-clock * at the equator must go more slowly, by a
very small amount, than a precisely similar clock situated at
one of the poles under otherwise identical conditions.

§ 5. The Composition of Velocities

In the system & moving along the axis of X of the system
K with velocity v, let a point move in accordance with the
equations
E = wit, 7 = 0,7, §.= 0,

where wé and w, denote constants.

Required : the motion of the point relatively to the system
K. If with the help of the equations of transformation de-
veloped in § 3 we introduce the quantities z, y, z, t into the
equations of motion of the point, we obtain

Scio
sae Int vw,|c*”
rJ/( = v?/c?)
~ 1 + vw,/c? ia
z= 0

Thus the law of the parallelogram of velocities is valid ac-
cording to our theory only to a first approximation. We set

(2) + BY.

w? = we + wry’,
a. = tan —} wy/we,

_a is then to be looked upon as the angle between the velocities
vand w. After a simple calculation we obtain

y — Vite’ + wi + 20m cos a) — (ow sin a/ct)"]
: 1 + vw cos afc?

It is worthy of remark that v and w enter into the expression
for the resultant velocity in a symmetrical manner, If w also
has the direction of the axis of X, we get

V+ w
V = ——_.,
1 + vw/c?

* Not a pendulum-clock, which is physically a system to which the Earth
belongs. This case had to be excluded.

A. EINSTEIN 51

It follows from this equation that from a composition of two’
velocities which are less than c, there always results a velocity
less than c. For if we set v=c-—- «,w=c-—A,x«and r»r
being positive and less than c, then

Q9-—-K—-2X

ee ee NT ate

ifr

It follows, further, that the velocity of light ¢ cannot be
altered by composition with a velocity less than that of light.
For this case we obtain

We might also have obtained the formula for V, for the case
when v and w have the same direction, by compounding
two transformations in accordance with § 3. Ifin addition
to the systems K and k figuring in § 3 we introduce still
another system of co-ordinates k’ moving parallel to &, its
initial point moving on the axis of X with the velocity w, we
obtain equations between the quantities z, y, z, ¢ and the
corresponding quantities of k’, which differ from the equations
found in § 8 only in that the place of ‘‘v” is taken by the
quantity
vtw.
1 + vw/c®’

from which we see that such parallel transformations—neces-
sarily—form a group.

We have now deduced the requisite laws of the theory of
kinematics corresponding to our two principles, and we pro-
ceed to show their application to electrodynamics.

IL ELEcTRODYNAMICAL PART

§ 6. Transformation of the Maxwell-Hertz Equations for
Empty Space. On the Nature of the Electromotive
Forces Occurring in a Magnetic Field During Motion

Let the Maxwell-Hertz equations for empty space hold
good for the stationary system K, so that we have

52 ELECTRODYNAMICS

1X WN eM 1% ow w
Cudt sv BY) >) DB2) enDtl Sedeund Wy?
10¥_% WN 12M _ 2% xX
o.0t Og aa 6 0b. = den eae:
12% _oM aL 12N _ 0X _ oY
edt de dy’ ct dy da”

where (X, Y, Z) denotes the vector of the electric force, and
(L, M, N) that of the magnetic force. .

If we apply to these equations the transformation de-
veloped in § 3, by referring the electromagnetic processes to
the system of co-ordinates there introduced, moving with the
velocity v, we obtain the equations

S35 2s £9)} - aor + 22)

seem} Bal -2)x}
2 (2+ 2) 3fa(a + £2)}

TF Role 28)}- 2ola +20)
2 3l0(t+ £2) = 2(a(z+ tn) 2

zal" -S)}- - fale Bu)

B= I/J/(l. - v*/c?).

Now the principle of relativity requires that if the
Maxwell-Hertz equations for empty space hold good in
system K, they also hold good in system k; that is to say that
the vectors of the electric and the magnetic force—(X’, Y’, Z’)
and (L’, M’, N’)}—of the moving system k, which are defined
by their ponderomotive effects on electric or magnetic masses
respectively, satisfy the following equations :— 3

A. EINSTEIN 53
one ON GON) Leali-— 3Yo 0%

c OT mm ~©=6OL?—se «(OT wt | «Odn’
Doyen dies ON LOM” 8’. ox’

2a, ye Pe eee ee
Lag’ _aM! ali 1 aN’ _ ox’ oY
c dr & On i 6 lor on dE

Evidently the two systems of equations found for system
k must express exactly the same thing, since both systems of
equations are equivalent to the Maxwell-Hertz equations for
system K. Since, further, the equations of the two systems
agree, with the exception of the symbols for the vectors, it
follows that the functions occurring in the systems of equa-
_ tions at corresponding places must agree, with the exception
of a factor y(v), which is common for all functions of the
one system of equations, and is independent of & 7, ¢ and r
but depends upon v. Thus we have the relations

X' = Wo)X, Li’ = Woy,
Y = ¥0)6(¥ - 2N), M’ = y(oa(M + 2),

Zi = ¥A(Z + 2M), N’ = ¥oa(N - 2y),

If we now form the reciprocal of this system of equations,
firstly by solving the equations just obtained, and secondly
by applying the equations to the inverse transformation (from
k to K), which is characterized by the velocity - v, it follows,
when we.consider that the two systems of equations thus ob-
tained must be identical, that y(v)y( - v) = 1. Further,
from reasons of symmetry * y(v) = ¥( — v), and therefore

v(v) = 1,

and our equations assume the form
*If, for example X=Y=2Z=L=M=0O, and N=+0, then from
reasons of symmetry It is clear that when v changes sign without changing

its numerical value, Y’ must also change sign without changing its numerical
value. :

54 ELECTRODYNAMICS
X” = X, Li = BL,

Y= ,(¥ - °N), M’ = a(M + 2),

7)

yi a(Z if °M), N= a(N Z a)

“As to the interpretation of these equations we make the
following remarks: Let a point charge of electricity have
the magnitude “one” when measured in the stationary
system K, i.e. let it when at rest in the stationary system
exert a force of one dyne upon an equal quantity of electricity
at a distance of onecm. By the principle of relativity this
electric charge is also of the magnitude “one” when
measured in the moving system. If this quantity of elec-
tricity is at rest relatively to the stationary system, then by
definition the vector (X, Y, Z) is equal to the force acting
upon it. If the quantity of electricity is at rest relatively to
the moving system (at least at the relevant instant), then the
force acting upon it, measured in the moving system, is equal
to the vector (X’, Y’, Z’). Consequently the first three
equations above allow themselves to be clothed in words in
the two following ways :—

1. If a unit electric point charge is in motion in an
electromagnetic field, there acts upon it, in addition to the
electric force, an “‘ electromotive force” which, if we neglect
the terms multiplied by the second and higher powers of v/c,
is equal to the vector-product of the velocity of the charge
and the magnetic force, divided by the velocity of light.
(Old manner of expression.)

2. If a unit electric point charge is in motion in an
electromagnetic field, the force acting upon it is equal to the
electric force which is present at the locality of the charge,
and which we ascertain by transformation of the field to
a system of co-ordinates at rest relatively to the electrical
charge. (New manner of expression.)

The analogy holds with “ magnetomotive forces.” We
see that electromotive force plays in the developed theory
merely the part of an auxiliary concept, which owes its intro- |
duction to the cireumstance that electric and magnetic forces

A. EINSTEIN 55

do not exist independently of the state of motion of the
system of co-ordinates.

Furthermore it is clear that the asymmetry mentioned in
the introduction as arising when we consider the currents
produced by the relative motion of a magnet and aconductor,
now disappears. Moreover, questions as to the “seat” of
electrodynamic electromotive forces (unipolar machines) now
have no point.

§ 7. Theory of Doppler’s Principle and of Aberration

In the system K, very far from the origin of ¢o-ordinates,
let there be a source of electrodynamic waves, which in a
part of space containing the origin of co-ordinates may be
represented to a sufficient degree of approximation by the
equations

X =X,sin®, L =L,sin®,
Y = Y,sin®, M = M, sin ,
Z=Z,sin®, N =N,sin®,
where
1
®@ = wt - ale + my + nz)}.

Here (X,, Y,, Z,) and (Lip, My, N,) are the vectors defining
the amplitude of the wave-train, and J, m,n the direction-
cosines of the wave-normals. We wish to know the consti-
tution of these waves, when they are examined by an
observer at rest in the moving system k.

Applying the equations of transformation found in § 6 for
electric and magnetic forces, and those found in § 3 for the
co-ordinates and the time, we obtain directly

X’ = X, sin ©, L’ = L,sin ®,
Y’ = A(X, — oN,/c) sin ®’, M’ = A(M, + vZ,/c) sin &,
Z' = B(Z, + vM,/c) sin ®, N’ = B(N, — vY,/c) sin ©’,

o Tippee li» ve |
@ = a'[r - VE + min + nb),

56 ELECTRODYNAMICS

where
wo = of(1 — lv/o),
fe lL — v/e
~~ 1-dbie

‘

m
™ = Bd — lacy’

A nN
“Bd = lee)’

From the equation for w’ it follows that if an observer is
moving with velocity v relatively to an infinitely distant
source of light of frequency v, in such a way that the connect-
ing line ‘‘ source—observer”’ makes the angle ¢ with the
velocity of the observer referred to a system of co-ordinates
which isat rest relatively to the source of light, the frequency
v' of the light perceived by the observer is given by the
equation

nN

»_ 1 -cos¢.ovfe
y= Fay Beye = oie)
This is Doppler’s principle for any velocities whatever.
When ¢ = 0 the equation assumes the perspicuous form
1 — vfe
1l+o/¢

,
yp =)

We see that, in contrast with the customary view, whe
DO == ¢)'p = oO,
If we call the angle between the wave-normal (direction
of the ray) in the moving system and the connecting line
“source—observer ” ¢’, the equation for J’ assumes the form

cos ¢ — v/c
1 - cos g. u/c

This equation expresses the law of aberration in its most
general form. If ¢ = 47, the equation becomes simply

cos ¢ =

cos ¢ = — v/c.

We still have to find the amplitude of the waves, as it
appears in the moving system. If we call the amplitude of
the electric or magnetic force A or A’ respectively, accordingly

A. EINSTEIN 57

as it is measured in the stationary system or in the moving
system, we obtain

A? = ree: — cos g. v/c)?

1 - v'/¢
which equation, if ¢ = 0, simplifies into
; 1 - o/c
eae)
S 2 1 + v/¢

It follows from these results that to an observer approach-
ing a source of light with the velocity c, this source of light
must appear of infinite intensity.

§ 8. Transformation of the Energy of Light Rays. Theory
of the Pressure of Radiation Exerted on Perfect

Reflectors

Since A2/87 equals the energy of light per unit of volume,
we have to regard A’?/8:r, by the principle of relativity, as the
energy of light in the moving system. Thus A?/A® would
be the ratio of the “‘ measured in motion” to the “ measured

at rest” energy of a given light complex, if the volume
of a light complex were the same, whether measured in
K or in &. But this is not the case. If J, m, nm are the
direction-cosines of the wave-normals of the light in the |
stationary system, no energy passes through the surface
elements of a spherical surface moving with the velocity of
light :—

(a — Ict)? + (y — met)? + (2 — net)? = R?.

We may therefore say that this surface permanently encloses
the same light complex. We inquire as to the quantity of
energy enclosed by this surface, viewed in system k, that
is, as to the energy of the light complex relatively to the
system k.

The spherical surface—viewed in the moving system—is
an ellipsoidal surface, the equation for which, at the time
7 = 0,18

(BE — IBEv/c)? + (n - mBEv/c? + (F - nBévice = RB.
If § is the volume of the sphere, and S’ that of this ellipsoid,

58 ELECTRODYNAMICS

then by a simple calculation
S Jl =~ ele

8 ~I - cos ¢$. o/c

Thus, if we call the light energy enclosed by this surface E
when it is measured in the stationary system, and E’ when
measured in the moving system, we obtain

KH’ _ A’s’ - 1 —-cos $. o/c
E AS xf = vie)’

and this formula, when as = 0, simplifies into
at Reh) - vie
1 +/¢

It is remarkable that the energy and the frequency of a
light complex vary with the state of motion of the observer
in accordance with the same law.

Now let the co-ordinate plane & = 0 be a perfectly reflect-
ing surface, at which the plane waves consideréd in § 7 are
reflected. We seek for the pressure of light exerted on the
reflecting surface, and for the direction, frequency, and in-
tensity of the light after reflexion.

Let the incidental light be defined by the quantities A,

cos ¢, v (referred to system K). Viewed from k the corre-
sponding quantities are

»_ al - cos ¢.»/c
nes gg i — v"/c?)’

, cosh — o/c
DO aa Fe cos }. u/c’
; 1 - cos $d. v/¢

p=

" aJ/(L — v*I/c*) *

For the reflected light, referring the process to system k, we
obtain

iA ees A’
cos $” = — cos ¢’
Mt ¢
v=p

Finally, by transforming back to the stationary system E,
we obtain for the reflected light

A. EINSTEIN 59
A” 2 a: + cos ¢” . v/c Al - 2cos d.v/c + vilet

/U - ve) ~ 1 — v*/c?
Boe eh” = cos¢" + v/e _ _— (1 + v*/c*) cos d - 2v/c
1+cos¢’.vfe 1-2cosd.oec + ve

Bh yi + cos d'v/e_ 1 - 2cosg.vfe + vile
Ue /iie= v'/c*) A 1 - w/c?

The energy (measured i in the stationary system) which is
incident upon unit area of the mirror in unit time is evidently
A*(c cos @ — v)/87. The energy Jeaving the unit of surface
of the mirror in the unit of time is A”"(- c cos $” + v)/87.
The difference of these two expressions is, by the principle of
energy, the work done by the pressure of light in the unit of
time. If we set down this work as equal to the product Pw,
where P is the pressure of light, we obtain

_ A’ (cos ¢ — v/c)?
ote 1 - v#/¢e
In agreement with experiment and with other theories, we
obtain to a first approximation

= A’ 2
P=2. S008 ¢.

All problems in the optics of moving bodies can be solved
by the method here employed. What is essential is, that the
electric and magnetic force of the light which is influenced
by a moving body, be transformed into a system of co-ordin-
ates at rest relatively tothe body. By this meansall problems
in the optics of moving bodies will be reduced to a series of
problems in the optics of stationary bodies.

§ 9. Transformation of the Maxwell-Hertz Equations when

Convection-Currents are Taken into Account
We start from the equations

aR }-a_-" Bold f3X cy 0h
SOF 6 6 Ob? 0k OY.
Heli ck AM ay PE
dz noe my ery: Oerenz
ah } mM dL LON dX ~ oY

_—— ee

Py nn) A | ee Y

60 ELECTRODYNAMICS

where
= 0m OL EOS

tr +) 0 bean
denotes. 47 times the density of electricity, and (wz, uy, Uz)
the velocity-vector of the charge. If we imagine the electric
charges to be invariably coupled to small rigid bodies (ions,
electrons), these equations are the electromagnetic basis of
the Lorentzian electrodynamics and optics of moving bodies.
Let these equations be valid in the system K, and trans-
form them, with the assistance of the equations of transform-
ation given in §§ 3 and 6, to the system k. We then obtain
the equations

ees lic ON. Ob ap obi nay a
on 00.7 or ar dn’

2) 22s 5 go iy WaOL NAL OM ae ee
cl Wr wf Me RE hEOTL SOE Eames

102 yi) 2M dL LIN _ ox _ oe
Clon ek 9 On’ cdr. on OE’
where
_ Ue - 0
ME 1 ugvle
a8 Uy
“1 BO = uz0]c)
w Uz .
“= BO — Uzv/c*)’
and

an dX’ anu oY’ fe oz!
PS 3E. t Rigas BB
BU. - uzv/c*) p.

Since—as follows from the theorem of addition of velocities
(§ 5)—the vector (wz, uy, ug) is nothing else than the velocity
of the electric charge, measured in the system k, we have the
proof that, on the basis of our kinematical principles, the
electrodynamic foundation of Lorentz’s theory of the electro-
dynamics of moving bodies is in agreement with the prin-
ciple of relativity.

In addition I may briefly remark that the following import-

A. EINSTEIN 61

ant law may easily be deduced from the developed equations :
If an electrically charged body is in motion anywhere in
space without altering its charge when regarded from a
system of co-ordinates moving with the body, its charge also
remains—when regarded from the “stationary” system K—
constant,

§ 10. Dynamics of the Slowly Accelerated Electron

Let there be in motion in an electromagnetic field an
electrically charged particle (in the sequel called an “ elec-
tron”), for the law of motion of which we assume as
follows :—

If the electron is at rest at a given epoch, the motion of
the electron ensues in the next instant of time according to
the equations

2
mon = eX
ay —
maze = e
2

where z, y, z denote the co-ordinates of the electron, and ™
the mass of the electron, as long as its motion is slow.

Now, secondly, let the velocity of the electron at a given
epoch be v. We seek the law of motion of the electron in the
immediately ensuing instants of time.

Without affecting the general character of our consider-
ations, we may and will assume that the electron, at the
moment when we give it our attention, is at the origin of
the co-ordinates, and moves with the velocity v along the
axis of X of the system K. It is then clear that at the given
moment (¢ = 0) the electron is at rest relatively to a system
of co-ordinates which is in parallel motion with velocity v
along the axis of X.

From the above assumption, in combination with the
principle of relativity, it is clear that in the immediately en-
suing time (for small values of t) the electron, viewed from
the system /, moves in accordance with the equations

62 ELECTRODYNAMICS

2

mos cat #, te
2

m1 ad eve
2

m55 = Eis

in which the symbols £, », ¢, r, X’, Y', Z refer to the system
_k. Tf, further, we decide that when ¢ = x=y=2=O0then
t= &= 7 = [= 0, the transformation equations of §§ 3 and
6 hold good, so that we have

~ &€ = Be — vl), n=y,f=2,7 = Bt — v2]c*)
X’ = X, Y’ = B(Y - wN/c), Z’ = B(Z + vM/c).

With the help of these equations we transform the above
equations of motion from system k to system K, and obtain

a*z €

de ~ m Bre

ay eé v

ae = mp\X - SN) a Apa
a?z € v

dt aAE is -M)

Taking the ordinary point of view we now inquire as
to the “longitudinal” and the “ transverse ” mass of the
moving electron. We write the equations (A) in the form

mB = eX = eX’,

d*y | v

2 a oa ha ES 72
mere = a(¥ 2N) = «Y%,
meee A(z + *M) SVs

and remark firstly that eX’, eY’, eZ’ are the components of
the ponderomotive force acting upon the electron, and are so
indeed as viewed in a system moving at the moment with the
electron, with the same velocity as the electron. (This force
might be measured, for example, by a spring balance at rest

A. EINSTEIN 63

in the last-mentioned system.) Now if we call this force
simply ‘‘ the force acting upon the electron,” * and maintain
the equation—mass x acceleration = force—and if we also
decide that the accelerations are to be measured in the
stationary system K, we derive from the above equations

Longitudinal mass = Siena Fi cls
; 8 (/1 - v?/c?)?
: m
Transverse mass = Powe

With a different definition of force and acceleration we
should naturally obtain other values for the masses, This
shows us that in comparing different theories of the motion
of the electron we must proceed very cautiously.

Weremark that these results as to the mass are also valid ~
for ponderable material points, because a ponderable material
point can be made into an electron (in our sense of the word)
by the addition of an electric charge, no matter how small.

We will now determine the kinetic energy of the electron.
If an electron moves from rest at the origin of co-ordinates of
the system K along the axis of X under the action of an
electrostatic force X, it is clear that the energy withdrawn

from the electrostatic field has the value if eXdz. As the elec-

tron is to be slowly accelerated, and consequently may not give
off any energy in the form of radiation, the energy withdrawn
from the electrostatic field must be put down as equal to the
energy of motion W of the electron. Bearing in mind that
during the whole process of motion which we are considering,
the first of the equations (A) applies, we therefore obtain

WwW i eXdz =m il sBivdv

l|

ll
>
3
fon)
no
—
|

1
aE = 1 A
L/1 - v/e
Thus, when v =c, W becomes infinite. Velocities
* The definition of force here given is not advantageous, as was first shown

by M. Planck. It is more to the point to define force in such a way that the
laws of momentum and energy assume the simplest form.

64 ELECTRODYNAMICS

greater than that of light have—as in our previous results—
no possibility of existence.

This expression for the kinetic energy must also, by
virtue of the argument stated above, apply to ponderable
masses as well.

We will now enumerate the properties of the motion of
the electron which result from the system of equations (A),
and are accessible to experiment.

1. From the second equation of the system (A) it follows
that an electric force Y and a magnetic force N have an
equally strong deflective action on an electron moving with
the velocity v, when Y = Nv/c. Thus we see that it is pos-
sible by our theory to determine the velocity of the electron
from the ratio of the magnetic power of deflexion A» to the
electric power of deflexion Az, for any velocity, by apply-
ing the law

This relationship may be tested experimentally, since the
velocity of the electron can be directly measured, e.g. by
means of rapidly oscillating electric and magnetic fields.

2. From the deduction for the kinetic energy of the
electron it follows that between the potential difference, P,
traversed and the acquired velocity v of the electron there
must be the relationship :

P= [Xae = Tr - 1

€

3. We calculate the radius of curvature of the path of
the electron when a magnetic force N is present (as the only
deflective force), acting perpendicularly to the velocity of the
electron. From the second of the equations (A) we obtain

2
£°n,f1 -%
mec Cc

or

These three relationships are a complete expression for

ELECTRODYNAMICS 65

the laws according to which, by the theory here advanced,
the electron must move.

In conclusion I wish to say that in working at the
problem here dealt with I have had the loyal assistance of my
friend and colleague M. Besso, and that I am indebted to
him for several valuable suggestions.

iv YY UORT wale

ts - ot Owe hi ra Dries Wa
5 ad

ed 2 oh BR f yw LC sb? SS Ree ee
fF ley SO Ah : : r oT Aare fia NIA Beh ae
i Se we } or DB saad ~, oj gitios Beg bake
Avoae Yar at

is
“
*
t
Is

ae a)
™~
e
: . ,
ashes
* \ “—
A a
> ~s
= 3 “ oat
‘ Thiet wh | mea i!
+ oe . We Rey ee akg
= Re
byt: *
4
‘

Pile ) TE Stee hs Sad ayes impenleaa -
esp Sapunais Ct har he whi ae oy Ciealt lien
2 Qyetued rephsig ween digg ae “age Gee en ers pee

i. : bi Youn hae Seaien Pee Bo eins
me iw aptie ee St co a |
ae ide Med ce res

DOES THE INERTIA OF A BODY DEPEND
UPON ITS ENERGY-CONTENT?

BY
A. EINSTEIN
Franslated from “Ist die Trdgheit eines Korpers von seinem

Energiegehalt abhdngig?” Annalen der Physik, 1%,
1905.

(ES VOR A AO APL ae pate
ee ae 1 THO. FORA OTT WOU ae

ya” s< ~

niarevna As

~\ _

HUMANS Weer Wey ‘A ea ;
Lee <0 on Va oui A!

meal > relate

i ony

Enc tan, - “A ok :
7 t) s —9 7

ee ws

DOES THE INERTIA OF A BODY DEPEND UPON
ITS ENERGY-CONTENT ?

By A. EINSTEIN

HE results of the previous investigation lead to
a very interesting conclusion, which is here to be
deduced.

I based that investigation on the Maxwell-Hertz equa-
tions for empty space, together with the Maxwellian
expression for the electromagnetic energy of space, and in
addition the principle that :—

The laws by which the states of physical systems alter are
independent of the alternative, to which of two systems of co-
ordinates, in uniform motion of parallel translation relatively
to each other, these alterations of state are referred (principle
of relativity).

With these principles * as my basis I deduced inter alia
the following result (§ 8) :—

Let a system of plane waves of light, referred to the
system of co-ordinates (a, y, 2), possess the energy 1; let the
direction of the ray (the wave-normal) make an angle ¢ with
the axis of 2 of the system. If we introduce a new system of
co-ordinates (£, 7, §) moving in uniform parallel translation
with respect to the system (2, y, z), and having its origin of
co-ordinates in motion along the axis of 2 with the velocity v,
then this quantity of light—measured in the system (E, 7; £)
—possesses the energy

1 --cos¢
oe ae ee ee ee
Jil - v*e?

*The principle of the constancy of the velocity of light is of course
contained in Maxwell’s equations.

69

70 INERTIA AND ENERGY

where c denotes the velocity of light. We shall make use of
this result in what follows.

Let there be a stationary body in the system (2, y, 2),
and let its energy—referred to the system (z, y, z)—be E,.
Let the energy of the body relative to the system (E, », £),
moving as above with the velocity v, be Hy.

Let this body send out, in a direction making an angle ¢
with the axis of 2, plane waves of light, of energy $L
measured relatively to (2, y, z), and simultaneously an equal
quantity of light in the opposite direction. Meanwhile the
body remains at rest with respect to the system (z, y,z). The
principle of energy must apply to this process, and in fact
(by the principle of relativity) with respect to both systems
of co-ordinates. If we call the energy of the body after the
emission of light E, or H, respectively, measured relatively to
the system (2, y, 2) or (&, 7, & respectively, then by employ-
ing the relation given above we obtain

E, = E, + 4L + 40,

1 - cos ¢$ 1+ cos ¢
J/1 = v?/c? J1 - v?/c?

xt L

= + ———____
eiigyye= v"/c*
By subtraction we obtain from these equations
1
H, - EB, - (H, - E) = Wa = 1}.

The two differences of the form H — E occurring in this ex-

pression have simple physical significations. H and E are
energy values of the same body referred to two systems of

co-ordinates which are in motion relatively to each other, the

body being at rest in one of the two systems (system (2, Y, 2)).

Thus it is clear that the difference H — E can differ from the
kinetic energy K of the body, with respect to the other
system (£, 7, £), only by an additive constant C, which de-
pends on the choice of the arbitrary additive constants of the
energies H and E. Thus we may place

A. EINSTEIN i

H, - E, = K, +,
H, - BR, = K, +6,

since C does not change during the emission of light. So we
have

eae K, - ifs si

The kinetic energy of the body with respect to (&, 7, &)
diminishes asa result of the emission of light, and the amount
of diminution is independent of the properties of the body.
Moreover, the difference K, — Ky, like the kinetic energy of
the electron (§ 10), depends on the velocity.

Neglecting magnitudes of fourth and higher orders we
may place

From this equation it directly follows that :—
If a body gives off the energy L in the form of radiation,
its mass diminishes by L/c?. The fact that the energy with-

drawn from the body becomes energy of radiation evidently

makes no difference, so that we are led to the more general
conclusion that

The mass of a body is a measure of its energy-content ; if
the energy changes by L, the mass changes in the same sense
by L/9 x 10”, the energy being measured in ergs, and the
mass In grammes.

It is not impossible that with bodies whose energy-con-
tent is variable to a high degree (e.g. with radium salts) the
theory may be successfully put to the test.

If the theory corresponds to the facts, radiation conveys
inertia between the emitting and absorbing bodies.

\ ‘
Ib ¢ tes ah |

| Un A
\ mR =E,* L r _s
an? ZF <= YF Vb
NOV €e d =
Ye
&
er Last Ko* tol
}} j
MN th= Hy, +Ly
€ ne) Bs es
> inte (+e+e2) op gare *
Lea Pa st D xa lee ) La )

a
he

AY
a

SPACE AND TIME
BY
H. MINKOWSKI
A Translation of an Address delivered at the 80th Assembly

of German Natural Scientists and Physicians, at Cologne,
21 September, 1908.

= .
& ps
, ~
~
ee “ss
= ae 2 ,
Bat
<2, x - ‘
> - 3: 47s} ss Ce
. | i fx oF cc
ee ox 4g ae f a i
= ea FORUM x Ber
‘ %, WHEEL: G35) Bay Bese, 7a e align pe Ye BG

2 . os 168.3 sgt itr Ne hai

SPACE AND TIME
By H. MINKOWSKI

HE views of space and time which I wish to lay be-
fore you have sprung from the soil of experimental
physics, and therein lies their strength. They are
radical. Henceforth space by itself, and time by itself, are

doomed to fade away into mere shadows, and only a kind
of union of the two will preserve an independent reality.

7

First. of all I should like to show how it might be possible,
setting out from the accepted mechanics of the present day,
along a purely mathematical line of thought, to arrive at
changed ideas of spaceand time. The equations of Newton’s
mechanics exhibit a two-fold invariance. Their form re-
mains unaltered, firstly, if we subject the underlying system
of spatial co-ordinates to any arbitrary change of position ;
secondly, if we change its state of motion, namely, by impart-
ing to it any uniform translatory motion ; furthermore, the
zero point of time is given no part to play. We are ac-
customed to look upon the axioms of geometry as finished with,
when we feel ripe for the axioms of mechanics, and for that
reason the two invariances are probably rarely mentioned in
the same breath. Each of them by itself signifies, for the
differential equations of mechanics, a certain group of trans-
formations. The existence of the first group is looked upon
as a fundamental characteristic of space. The second group
is preferably treated with disdain, so that we with un-
troubled minds may overcome the difficulty of never being
able to decide, from physical phenomena, whether space,
which is supposed to be sianioney, may not be‘after all in a

76 SPACE AND TIME

state of uniform translation. Thus the two groups, side by side,
lead their lives entirely apart. Their utterly heterogeneous
character may have discouraged any attempt to compound
them. But it is precisely when they are compounded that
the complete group, as a whole, gives us to think.
We will try to visualize the state of things by the graphic
method. Let z, y, z be rectangular co-ordinates for space,
and let ¢ denote time. The objects of our perception invari-
ably include places and times in combination. - Nobody has

ever noticed a place except at a time, or a time except at a

place. But I still respect the dogma that both space and
time have independent significance. A point of space at a
point of-time, that is, a system of values 2, y, z, t, I will call

a world-point. The multiplicity of all thinkable z, y, z, ¢

systems of values we will christen the world. With this
most valiant piece of chalk I might project upon the blackboard
four world-axes. Since merely one chalky axis, as it is, con-
sists of molecules all a-thrill, and moreover is taking part in
the earth’s travels in the universe, it already affords us ample
scope for abstraction ; the somewhat greater abstraction as-
sociated with the number four is for the mathematician no
infliction. Not to leave a yawning void anywhere, we will
imagine that everywhere and everywhen there is something
perceptible. To avoid saying “ matter ” or “ electricity ” I
will use for this something the word “substance.” We fix
our attention on the substantial point which is at the world-
point z, y, z, t, and imagine that we are able to recognize this
substantial point at any other time. Let'the variations dz,
dy, dz of the space co-ordinates of this substantial point

‘correspond to a time element dt. Then we obtain, as

an image, so to speak, of the everlasting career of the sub-
stantial point, a curve in the world, a world-line, the points
of which can be referred unequivocally to the parameter ¢
from - © to + «©. The whole universe is seen to resolve
itself into similar world-lines, and I would fain anticipate
myself by saying that in my opinion physical laws might find
their most perfect expression as reciprocal relations between
these world-lines.

. The concepts, space and time, cause the z, y, 2-manifold
¢ = 0 and its two sides ¢>0 and ¢<0 to fall asunder. if,

H. MINKOWSKI 77

for simplicity, we retain the same zero point of space and
time, the first-mentioned group signifies in mechanics that
we may subject the axes of 2, y,z at t = 0 to any rotation we
choose about the origin, corresponding to the homogeneous
linear transformations of the expression

ae ay? + 27

But the second group means that we may—also without
changing the expression of the laws of mechanics—replace
z, y,2%,t by z — at,y — Bt, z - yt, t with any constant values
of a, B, y. Hence we may give to the time axis whatever
direction we choose towards the upper half of the world,
_t>0. Now what has the requirement of orthogonality in
* space to do with this perfect freedom of the time axis in an
upward direction ?
' To establish the connexion, let us take a positive para-
meter c, and consider the graphical representation of

ef - a -y- 2@=l.

It consists of two surfaces separated by ¢ = 0, on the analogy
of a hyperboloid of two sheets. We consider the sheet in
the region t>0, and now take those homogeneous linear
transformations of 2, y, 2, t into four new variables 2’, y’, z’, ¢’,
for which the expression for this sheet in the new variables
is of the same form. It is evident that the rotations of
space about the origin pertain to these transformations.
Thus we gain full comprehension of the rest of the
transformations simply by taking into consideration one
among them, such that y and z remain unchanged. We draw
(Fig. 1) the section of this sheet by the plane of the axes of x
and t—the upper branch of the hyperbola 0? - 2’ = 1, with
its asymptotes. From the origin O we draw any radius
vector OA’ of this branch of the hyperbola; draw the tangent
to the hyperbola at A’ to cut the asymptote on the right at B’;
complete the parallelogram OA'BC ; and finally, for subse-
quent use, produce BC’ to cut the axis of z at D’. Nowif
we take OC’ and OA’ as axes of oblique co-ordinates 2’, ¢,
with the measures OC’ = 1, OA’ = 1/c, then that branch of
the hyperbola again acquires the expression et? - 2? =1,
t’>0, and the transition from 2, y, 2, t to z’,y', 2, t is one of

78 SPACE AND TIME

the transformations in question. With these transformations
we now associate the arbitrary displacements of the zero
point of space and time, and thereby constitute a group of
transformations, which is also, evidently, dependent on the
parameter c. ‘This group I denote by Ge.

If we now allow c to increase to infinity, and 1/c therefore
to converge towards zero, we see from the figure that the

Fig. 1.

branch of the hyperbola bends more and more towards the
axis of 2, the angle of the asymptotes becomes more and more
obtuse, and that in the limit this special transformation
changes into one in which the axis of ¢’ may have any up-
ward direction whatever, while 2’ approaches more and more
exactly to z. In view of this it is clear that group G- in the
limit when c = 0, that is the group G,,, becomes no other
than that complete group which is appropriate to Newtonian

H. MINKOWSKI 79

mechanics. This being so, and since Ge is mathematically )
more intelligible than G,,, it looks as though the thought |

might have struck some mathematician, fancy-free, that after
all, as a matter of fact, natural phenomena do not possess an
invariance with the group G,,, but rather with a group Ge, ¢

being finite and determinate, but in ordinary units of measure, /

extremely great. Such a premonition would have been an
extraordinary triumph for pure mathematics. Well, mathe-
matics, though it now can display only staircase-wit, has the
satisfaction of being wise after the event, and is able, thanks
to its happy antecedents, with its senses sharpened by an un-
hampered outlook to far horizons, to grasp forthwith the
far-reaching consequences of such a metamorphosis of our
concept of nature.

I will state at once what is the value of c with which we
shall finally be dealing. It is the velocity of the propagation
of light in empty space. To avoid speaking either of space or
of emptiness, we may define this magnitude in another way,
as the ratio of the electromagnetic to the electrostatic unit of
electricity.

The existence of the invariance of natural laws for the
relevant group Ge- would have to be taken, then, in this
way :—

From the totality of natural phenomena it is possible, by
successively enhanced approximations, to derive more and
more exactly a system of reference 2, y, z, t, space and time,
by means of which these phenomena then present themselves
in agreement with definite laws. But when this is done,
this system of reference is by no means unequivocally deter-
mined by the phenomena. It is stil possible to make any

i

change in the system of reference that is in conformity with }

the transformations of the group Gc, and leave the expression
of the laws of nature unaltered.

For example, in correspondence with the figure described
above, we may also designate time ¢’, but then must of neces-
sity, in connexion therewith, define space by the manifold of
the three parameters 2’, y, 2, in which case physical laws
would be expressed in exactly the same way by means of
a’, y, 2, t as by means of &, y, 2, t. We should then have in
the world no longer space, but an infinite number of spaces,

80 SPACE AND TIME

analogously as there are in three-dimensional space an infinite
number of planes. Three-dimensional geometry becomes a
chapter in four-dimensional physics. Now you know why I
said at the outset that space and time are to fade away into
shadows, and only a world in itself will subsist.

II

The question now is, what are the circumstances which
force this changed conception of space and time upon us?
Does it actually never contradict experience? And finally, is
it advantageous for describing phenomena ?

Before going into these questions, I must make an im-
portant remark. If we have in any way individualized space
and time, we have, as a world-line corresponding toa stationary
substantial point, a straight line parallel to the axis of ¢ :
corresponding to a substantial point in uniform motion, a
straight line at an angle to the axis of ¢; to a substantial
point in varying motion, a world-line in some form of acurve.
If at any world-point 2, y, z, t we take the world-line passing
through that point, and find it parallel to any radius vector
OA’ of the above-mentioned hyperboloidal sheet, we can
introduce OA’ as a new axis of time, and with the new con-
cepts of space and time thus given, the substance at the
world-point concerned appears as at rest. We will now intro-
duce this fundamental axiom :—

The substance at any world-point may always, with the
appropriate determination of space and tume, be looked upon
as at rest.

The axiom signifies that at any world-point the expression

c'dt? — da? — dy? — dz?

always has a positive value, or, what comes to the same thing,
that any velocity v always proves less than c. Accordingly c
would stand as the upper limit for all substantial velocities,
and that is precisely what would reveal the deeper significance
of the magnitude c. In this second form the first impression
made by the axiom is not altogether pleasing. But we must
bear in mind that a modified form of mechanics, in which the
square root of this quadratic differential expression appears,

H. MINKOWSKI 8]

will now make its way, so that cases with a velocity greater
than that of light will henceforward play only some such
part as that of figures with imaginary co-ordinates in
geometry.

Now the impulse and true motive for assuming the group
G, came from the fact that the differential equation for the
propagation of light in empty space possesses that group Ge.*
On.the other hand, the concept of rigid bodies has meaning
only in mechanics satisfying the group G,. If we have a
theory of optics with Ge, and if on the other hand there were
rigid bodies, it is easy to see that one and the same direction
of ¢ would be distinguished by the two hyperboloidal sheets
appropriate to Ge and G,,, and this would have the further
consequence, that we should be able, by employing suitable
rigid optical instruments in the laboratory, to perceive some
alteration in the phenomena when the orientation with re-
spect to the direction of the earth’s motion is changed. But
all efforts directed towards this goal, in particular the famous
interference experiment of Michelson, have had a negative
result. To explain this failure, H. A. Lorentz set up an hypo-
thesis, the success of which lies in this very invariance in
optics for the group Ge. According to Lorentz any moving
body must have undergone a contraction in the direction of
its motion, and in fact with a velocity v, a contraction in the
ratio

1:,/1 - v*/c*.

This hypothesis sounds extremely fantastical, for the con-
traction is not to be looked upon as a consequence of resist-
ances in the ether, or anything of that kind, but simply as a
gift from above,—as an accompanying circumstance of the
circumstance of motion.

Iwill nowshow by our figure that the Lorentzian hypothesis’
is completely equivalent to the new conception of space and
time, which, indeed, makes the hypothesis much more intelli-
gible. If for simplicity we disregard y and z, and imagine a
world of onespatial dimension, then a parallel band, upright like
the axis of ¢,and another inclining to the axis of ¢ (see Fig. 1)

*An application of this fact in its essentials has already been given by
W. Voigt, Gottinger Nachrichten, 1887, p. 41.

82 SPACE AND TIME

represent, respectively, the career of a body at rest or in uni-
form motion, preserving in each case a constant spatial extent.
If OA’ is parallel to the second band, we can introduce f’ as
the time, and 2’ as the space co-ordinate, and then the second
body appears at rest, the first in uniform motion. We now
assume that the first body, envisaged as at rest, has the
length /, that is, the cross section PP of the first band on the
axis of wis equal to 2.00, where OC denotes the unit of
measure on the axis of z; and on the other hand, that the
second body, envisaged as at rest, has the same length J,
which then means that the cross section Q‘Q’ of the second
band, measured parallel to the axis of x’, is equal tol. OC’.
We now have in these two bodies images of two equal
Lorentzian electrons, one at rest and one in uniform motion.
But if we retain the original co-ordinates 2, t, we must give
as the extent of the second electron the cross section of its
appropriate band parallel to the axis of z. Now since Q'Q’
= 1.OC’, it is evident that QQ=1.0D’. If dz/dt for the
second band is equal to v, an easy calculation gives

OD’ = OC YI - ve,

therefore also PP: QQ = 1:,/1 — v’/c*. But this is the
meaning of Lorentz’s hypothesis of the contraction of
electrons in motion. If on the other hand we envisage the
second electron as at rest, and therefore adopt the system of
reference w’' t’, the length of the first must be denoted by the
cross section P’P’ of its band parallel to OC’, and we should
find the first electron in comparison with the second to be
contracted in exactly the same proportion ; for in the figure
PP’: Q'Q' = OD: 0C’ = OD’: 0C = QQ: PP.
Lorentz called the ¢’ combination of x and ¢ the local time
of the electron in uniform motion, and applied a physical
_ construction of this concept, for the better understanding of
the hypothesis of contraction. But the credit of first recog-
nizing clearly that the time of the one electron is just as good
as that of the other, that is to say, that ¢ and ¢’ are to be
treated identically, belongs to A. Einstein,* Thus time, as a

* A. Hinstein, Ann. d. Phys., 17, 1905, p. 891; Jahrb. d. Radioaktivitiat
und Elektronik, 4, 1907, p. 411.

H. MINKOWSKI 83

concept unequivocally determined by phenomena, was first
deposed from its high seat. Neither Einstein nor Lorentz
made any attack on the concept of space, perhaps because in
the above-mentioned special transformation, where the plane
of 2’, t’ coincides with the plane of 2, ¢, an interpretation
is possible by saying that the z-axis of space maintains its
position. One may expect to find a corresponding violation
of the concept of space appraised as another act of audacity
on the part of the higher mathematics. Nevertheless, this
further step is indispensable for the true understanding of
the group Ge, and when it has been taken, the word relativity-
postulate for the requirement of an invariance with the group
G- seems to me very feeble. Since the postulate comes to
mean that only the four-dimensional world in space and time
is given by phenomena, but that the projection in space and in
time may still be undertaken with a certain degree of freedom,
I prefer to call it the postulate of the absolute world (or briefly,
the world-postulate).

Til

The world-postulate permits identical treatment of the
four co-ordinates z, y, 2,¢. By this means, as I shall now
show, the forms in which the laws of physics are displayed
gain in intelligibility. In particular the idea of acceleration
acquires a clear-cut character.

I will use a geometrical manner of expression, which sug-
gests itself at once if we tacitly disregard z in the triplex
z,y,2. I take any world-point O as the zero-point of space-
time. ‘The cone c?¢? — x? — y? — 2? = 0 with apex 0 (Fig. 2)
consists of two parts, one with values t<0, the other with
values t>0. The former, the front cone of O, consists, let
us say, of all the world-points which ‘‘ send light to O,” the
latter, the back cone of O, of all the world-points which “ re-
ceive light from O.” The territory bounded by the front cone
alone, we may call ‘‘ before” O, that which is bounded by
the back cone alone, “after” O. The hyperboloidal sheet
already discussed

Fac@—-22-y-#=1, t>0
lies after O- The territory between the cones is filled by the

84 SPACE AND TIME

one-sheeted hyperboloidal figures
-FPFeaex2+7¥+7-CH=K8

for all constant positive values of k. We are specially
interested in the hyperbolas with O as centre, lying on the
latter figures. The single branches of these hyperbolas
may be called briefly the internal hyperbolas with centre O.
One of these branches, regarded as a world-line, would repre-
sent a motion which, for t= - © and ¢t = +o, rises
asymptotically to the velocity of light, c.

If we now, on the analogy of vectors in space, call a
directed length in the manifold of a, y, z, t a vector, we have
to distinguish between the time-like vectors with directions
from O tothe sheet + F = 1,t>0, and the space-like vectors

Space- Like,
~~ Vector

BeforeO

Fig. 2.

with directions from O to - F = 1. The time axis may run
parallel to any vector of the former kind. Any world-point
between the front and back cones of O can be arranged by
means of the system of reference so as to be simultaneous
with O, but also just as well so as to be earlier than O or
later than O. Any world-point within the front cone of O is
necessarily always before O; any world-point within the
back cone of O necessarily always after O. Corresponding to
passing to the limit, ¢ = o , there would be a complete flatten-
ing out of the wedge-shaped segment between the cones into
the plane manifold ¢= 0. In the figures this segment is
intentionally drawn with different widths.

We divide up any vector we choose, e.g. that from O to
z, y, 2, t, into the four components 2, y,z,t. If the directions

H. MINKOWSKI 85

of two vectors are, respectively, that of a radius vector OR
from O to one of the surfaces = F = 1, and that of a tangent
RS at the point R of the same surface, the vectors are said
to be normal to one another. Thus the condition that the
vectors with components 2, y, z, t and a, ¥, 2, may be
normal to each other is

ett, — xt, — YY, — 24, = 0.

For the measurement of vectors in different directions the
units of measure are to be fixed by assigning to a space-like
vector from O to - F = lalways the magnitude 1, and toa
time-like vector from O to + F = 1,¢>0 always the magni-
tude 1/c.

If we imagine at a world-point P (a, y, z, t) the world-
line of a substantial point running through that point, the
magnitude corresponding to the time-like vector dx, dy, dz,
dt laid off along the line is therefore

dr = 1 Jdde — da = dp = ae

The integral {dt = 7 of this amount, taken along the world-
line from any fixed starting-point P, to the variable end-
point P, we call the proper time of the substantial point at P.
On the world-line we regard 2, y, z, (the components of the
vector OP—as functions of the proper time T; denote their
first differential coefficients with respect to r by &, y, Bk,
their second differential coefficients with respect to T by
Z, y, 2, €; and give names to the appropriate vectors, calling
the derivative of the vector OP with respect to 7 the velocity
vector at P, and the derivative of this velocity vector with
respect to 7 the acceleration vector at P. Hence, since

: ee —-g-yP-@=0,

we have pies D8. eee ee

et - wz - yy - 2 = 9,

i.e. the velocity vector is the time-like vector of unit magni-
tude in the direction of the world-line at P, and the accelera-
tion vector at P is normal to the velocity vector at P, and is

therefore in any case a space-like vector. —
Now, as is readily seen, there is a definite hyperbola

86 SPACE AND TIME

which has three infinitely proximate points in common with
the world-line at P, and whose asymptotes are generators of
a “‘ front cone”’ and a ‘‘ back cone” (Fig. 3).
Let this hyperbola be called the hyperbola
of curvature at P. If M is the centre of this
hyperbola, we here have to do with an in-
ternal hyperbola with centre M. Let p be
the magnitude of the vector MP: then we
recognize the acceleration vector at P as the
vector in the direction MP of magnitude
c?/p.
If &, y, 2, ¢ are all zero, the hyperbola of
curvature reduces to the straight line touch-
' kag ing the world-line in P, and we must put
t vA p=oO.

‘y IV

To show that the assumption of group
G._ for the laws of physics never leads to a
contradiction, it is unavoidable to undertake a revision of
the whole of physics on the basis of this assumption. This
revision has to some extent already been successfully carried
out for questions of thermodynamics and heat radiation,* for
electromagnetic processes, and finally, with the retention of
the concept of mass, for mechanics.+

For this last branch of physics it is of prime importance
to raise the question—When a force with the components
X, Y, Z parallel to the axes of space acts at a world-point P
(x, y, 2, t), where the velocity vector is 2, y, 2, t, what must
we take this force to be when the system of reference is in
any way changed? Now there exist certain approved state-
ments as to the ponderomotive force in the electromagnetic
field in the cases where the group Ge is undoubtedly admis-
sible. These statements lead up to the simple rule :—When
the system of reference is changed, the force in question
transforms into a force in the new space co-ordinates in such
a way that the appropriate vector with the components éX,

*M. Planck, “‘ Zur Dynamik bewegter Systeme,’’ Berliner Berichte, 1907,
p. 542; also in Ann. d. Phys., 26, 1908, p. 1.

+H. Minkowski, “ Die Grundgleichungen fiir die elektromagnetischen
Vorginge in bewegten Kérpern,” Géttinger Nachrichten, 1908, p. 53.

Fia. 3.

H. MINKOWSKI — 87
tY, ¢Z, ¢T, where

T= 3 (2x + 4y + *2)

is the rate at which work is done by the force at the world-
point divided byc, remains unchanged. This vector is ‘always
normal to the velocity vector at P. A force vector of this
kind, corresponding to a force at P, is to be called a “ motive
. force vector” at P.

I shall now describe the world-line of a substantial point
with constant mechanical mass m, passing through P. Let
the velocity vector at P, multiplied by m, be called the
“‘momentum vector” at P, and the acceleration vector at P,
multiplied by m, be called the “ force vector” of the motion
at P. With these definitions, the law of motion of a point
of mass with given motive force vector runs thus :— * The
Force Vector of Motion is Equal to the Motive Force Vector.
This assertion comprises four equations for the components
corresponding to the four axes, and since both vectors men-
tioned are a prior? normal to the velocity vector, the fourth
equation may be looked upon as a consequence of the other
three. In accordance with the above signification of T, the
fourth equation undoubtedly represents the law of energy.
Therefore the component of the momentum vector along the
axis of ¢, multiplied by c, is to be defined as the kinetic
energy of the point mass. The expression for this is

mors! = me%[ JT = #72,

i.e., after removal of the additive constant mc’, the expression
4mv? of Newtonian mechanics down to magnitudes of the
order 1/c2. It comes out very clearly in this way, how the
energy depends on the system of reference. But as the axis
of ¢ may be laid in the direction of any time-like vector, the
law of energy, framed for all possible systems of reference,
already contains, on the other hand, the whole system of the
equations of motion. At the limiting transition which we
have discussed, to c = ©, this fact retains its importance for

*H. Minkowski, loc. cit., p 107. Cf. also M. Planck, Verhandlungen
der physikalischen Gesellschaft, 4, 1906, p. 136.

88 SPACE AND TIME

the axiomatic structure of Newtonian mechanics as well, and
has already been appreciated in this sense by I. R. Schiitz.*

We can determine the ratio of the units of length and
time beforehand in such a way that the natural limit of
velocity becomes c=1. If we then introduce, further,
»/ - 1 ¢=s in place of #, the quadratic differential ex-
pression

dr? = - dz’? - dy? - dz - ds*

thus becomes perfectly symmetrical in 2, y, 2, s; and this
symmetry is communicated to any law which does not contra-
dict the world-posiulate. Thus the essence of this postulate
may be clothed mathematically in a very pregnant manner in
the mystic formula

3.10° km = ,/ - 1 secs.

Vv

The advantages afforded by the world-postulate will per-
haps be most strikingly exemplified by indicating the effects
proceeding from a point charge in any kind of motion accord-
ing to the Maxwell-Lorentz theory.
Let us imagine the world-line of such
a point electron with the charge e, and
introduce upon it the proper time +
from any initial point. In order to find
the field caused by the electron at any
world-point P,, we construct the front
cone belonging to P, (Fig. 4). Thecone
evidently meets the world-line, since the
directions of the line are everywhere
those of time-like vectors, at the single
point P. We draw the tangent to the
world-line at P, and construct through

Fic. 4. P, the normal P,Q to this tangent.

Let the length of P,Q be r. Then, by

the definition of a front cone, the length of PQ must be r/c.
Now the vector in the direction PQ of magnitude e/r repre-

*I. R. Schiitz, “Das Prinzip der absoluten Erhaltung der Energie,” -
Gottinger Nachr., 1897, p. 110,

H. MINKOWSKI 89

sents by its components along the axes of 2, y, 2, the vector
potential multiplied by c, and by the component along the
axis of t, the scalar potential of the field excited by e at the
world-point P. Herein lie the elementary laws formulated
by A. Liénard and E. Wiechert.*

Then in the description of the field produced by the
electron we see that the separation of the field into electric
and magnetic force is a relative one with regard to the under-
lying time axis; the most perspicuous way of describing the
two forces together is on a certain analogy with the wrench
in mechanics, though the analogy is not complete.

I will now describe the ponderomotive avtion of a moving
point charge on another moving point charge. Let us
imagine the world-line of a second point electron of the
charge’ e,, passing through the world-point P,. We define P,
Q, r as before, then construct (Fig. 4) the centre M of the
hyperbola of curvature at P, and finally the normal MN from
M toa straight line imagined through P parallel toQP,. With
P as starting-point we now determine a system of reference
as follows :—The axis of t in the direction PQ, the axis of a
in direction QP,, the axis of y in direction MN, whereby
finally the direction of the axis of 2 is also defined as normal
to the axes of ¢, z, y. Let the acceleration vector at P be
2, ¥, 2, t, the velocity vector at P, be %,%, %1,h. The motive
force vector exerted at P, by the first moving electron e on
the second moving electron e, now takes the form

ps
~ ee,(t, - 1) 9,

where the components &z, ty, Kz, &: of the vector & satisfy
the three relations
1 y
cRt - Re = = Ry = cr? Kz = 0,

and where, fourthly, this vector & is normal to the velocity
vector at P,, and through this circumstance alone stands in
dependence on the latter velocity vector.

* A, Liénard, “ Champ électrique et magnétique produit par une charge
concentrée en un point et animée d’un mouvement quelconque,” L’Hclairage

Electrique, 16, 1898, pp. 5, 58, 106; E. Wiechert, “ Elektrodynamische
Elementargesetze,” Arch. Néerl. (2), 5, 1900, p. 549.

90 SPACE AND TIME

When we compare this statement with previous formu-
lations * of the same elementary law of the ponderomotive
action of moving point charges on one another, we are com-
pelled to admit that it is only in four dimensions that the
relations here taken under consideration reveal their inner
being in full simplicity, and that on a three dimensional
space forced upon us a@ priori they cast only a very com-
plicated projection.

In mechanics as reformed in accordance with the world-
postulate, the disturbing lack of harmony between Newtonian
mechanics and modern electrodynamics disappears of its own
accord: Before concluding I will just touch upon the attitude
of Newton’s law of attraction toward this postulate. I shall
assume that when two points of mass m, m, describe their
world-lines, a motive force vector is exerted by m on m,, of
exactly the same form as that just given in the case of
electrons, except that + mm, must now take the place of
- ee, We now specially consider the case where the ac-
celeration vector of m is constantly zero. Let us then intro-
duce ¢ in such a way that m is to be taken as at rest, and let
only m, move under the motive force vector which proceeds
from m. If we now modify this given vector in the first
place by adding the factor ¢-1 = ,/1 — v*/c?, which, to the
order of 1/c?, is equal to 1, it will be seen } that for the posi-
tions 2,, y,, 4, of m, and their variations in time, we should
arrive exactly at Kepler’s laws again, except that the proper
times 7, of m, would take the place of the times t. From
this simple remark it may then be seen that the proposed
law of attraction combined with the new mechanics is no less
well adapted to explain astronomical observations than the
Newtonian law of attraction combined with Newtonian
mechanics.

The fundamental equations for electromagnetic processes
in ponderable bodies also fit in completely with the world-
postulate. As TI shall show elsewhere, it is not even by any
means necessary to abandon the derivation of these funda-

*K. Schwarzwald, Géttinger Nachr., 1903, p. 182; H. A. Lorentz,

Enzykl. d. math. Wissensch., V, Art. 14, p- 199.
+ H. Minkowski, loc. cit., p. 110,

H. MINKOWSKI 91

mental equations from ideas of the electronic theory, as
taught by Lorentz, in order to adapt them to the world-
postulate.

The validity without exception of the world-postulate, I
like to think, is the true nucleus of an electromagnetic image
of the world, which, discovered by Lorentz, and further re-
vealed by Hinstein, now lies open in the full -light of day. In
the development of its mathematical consequences there will
be ample suggestions for experimental verifications of the
postulate, which will suffice to conciliate even those to whom
the abandonment of old-established views is unsympathetic
or painful, by the idea of a pre-established harmony between
pure mathematics and physics.

NOTES
by
A. SOMMERFELD

The following notes are given in an appendix so as to interfere in no way
with Minkowski’s text, They are by no means essential, having no other pur-
pose than that of removing certain small formal mathematical difficulties
which might hinder the comprehension of Minkowski’s great thoughts. The
bibliographical references are confined to the literature dealing expressly with
the subject of his address: From the physical point of view there is nothing
in what Minkowski says that must now be withdrawn, with the exception of
the final remark on Newton’s law of attraction. What will be the epistemo-
logical attitude towards Minkowski’s conception of the time-space problem is
another question, but, as it seems to me, a question which does not essentially
touch his physics.

(1) Page 81, line 8. ‘On the other hand, the concept of rigid bodies has
meaning only in mechanics satisfying the groupG,,.”’ This sentence was con-
firmed in the widest sense in a discussion on a paper by his disciple M. Born,
a year after Minkowski’s death. Born (Ann. d. Physik, 30, 1909, p. 1)
had defined a relatively rigid body as one in which every element of volume,
even in accelerated motions, undergoes the Lorentzian contraction appropriate
to its velocity. Ehrenfest (Phys. Zeitschr.} 10, 1909, p. 918) showed that
such a body cannot be set in rotation ; Herglotz (Ann. d. Phys., 31, 1910,
p. 393) and F'. Nother (Ann. d. Phys., 31, 1910, p. 919) that it has only three
degrees of freedom of movement, The attempt was also made to define a
relatively rigid body with six or nine degrees of freedom. But Planck
(Phys. Zeitschr., 11, 1910, p. 294) expressed the view that the theory of
relativity can operate only with more or less elastic bodies, and Laue (Phys.
Zeitschr., 12, 1911, p. 48), employing Minkowski’s methods, and his Fig, 2
in the text above, proved that in the theory of relativity every solid body must
have an infinite number of degrees of freedom. Finally Herglotz (Ann. d.
Physik, 86, 1911, p. 453) developed a relativistic theory of elasticity, accord-
ing to which elastic tensions always occur if the motion of the body is not rela-
tively rigid in Born’s sense. Thus the relatively rigid body plays the same
part in this theory of elasticity as the ordinary rigid body plays in the ordinary
theory of elasticity,

(2) Page 82, line 18. ‘If dax/dt for the second band is equal to v, an easy
calculation gives OD’ = OC V1 — vic.” In Fig. 1, leta = “A‘OA, B = £B/OA’
= <C’OB’, in which the equality of the last two angles follows from the sym-
metrical position of the asymptotes with respect to the new axes of co-ordin-
ates (conjugate diameters of the hyperbola).* Since « + B=}, ;

sin 28 = cos 2a.

"Sommerfeld seems to take ct asa co-ordinate in the graph in place of t as

used by Minkowski.—Trans.
92

A. SOMMERFELD 93

In the triangle OD’O’ the law of sines gives
OD’ _ sin 28 _ cos 2a

OC’ cos a cos a
or, as OC’ = OA’,
Ops sO EL” = At cometl saben! a))cisbey erie Sark)
cos a

If x, t are the co-ordinates of the point A’ in the a, ¢ system, and therefore
x. OA and ct. OC = ct. OA respectively are the corresponding distances from
the axes of co-ordinates, we have
a.OA=sina.OA’, ct.OA = cosa. OA’, <= (en ote ante)
c

Inserting these values of x and ct in the equation of the hyperbola, we find

OA
cos a a/(1 — tan? a)

(3)

OA?(cos* a — sin? a) = OA?, OA’ =
therefore, on account of (1) and (2),
OD’ = OA,/(1 — tan? a) = OA,/(1 — v?/c?).

This, because OA = OO, is the formula to be proved.
Further, in the right-angled triangle OCD,

OC _ OA

Cosa cosa

Equation (3) may therefore be also written in this way,

oD oD of
piteeine 08 200d. a ee
Jl = tan? a) ©" Oa’ Ni] (a ai):

This, together with (4), gives the proportion,
OD: OA’ = OD’: OA,
which, as OA’ = OC’ and OA = OC, is identical with '
OD: OC’ = OD’: OC
employed on page 82, line 29.

(3) Page 84, line 15. ‘‘ Any world-point between the front and back cones
of O can be arranged, by means of the system of reference, so as to be simultane-
ous with O, but also just as well so as to be earlier than O, or later than O.”
M. Laue (Phys. Zeitschr., 12, 1911, p. 48) traces to this observation the
proof of Hinstein’s theorem : In the theory of relativity no process of causality
can be propagated with a velocity greater than that of light (‘ Signal velocity
<c’’). Assume that an event O causes another event P, and that the world-
point P lies in the region between the cones of O. In this case the effect would
have been conveyed from O to P with a velocity greater than that of light, rela-
tively to the system of reference-x, ¢ in question, in which, of course, the effect
P is assumed to be later than the cause O, tp>O0. But now, in accordance
with the words quoted above, the system of reference may be changed, so that
P comes to be earlier than O, that is to say, a system x’, t’ may be chosen in

94 NOTES

infinitely many ways so that t’p becomes <0. This is irreconcilable with the
idea of causality. P must therefore lie either ‘after’? O or on the back
cone of O, i.e. the velocity of propagation of a signal to be sent from O, which
is to cause a second event at the world-point P, must of necessity be <e. (Of
course it is possible, even in the theory of relativity, to define processes propa-
gated with velocity greater than light. This can be done geometrically, for
example, in a very simple way. But such processes can never serve as signals,
i.e. it is impossible to introduce them arbitrarily and by them, for example, to
set a relay in motion at a distant place. There may be e.g. optical media, in
which the ‘velocity of light” is greater than c. But in that case what is
understood by the velocity of light is the propagation of phases in an infinite
periodic wave-train. These can never be used for signalling. On the other
hand a wave-front is propagated, in all circumstances and with any con-
stitution of the optical medium, with the velocity c; cf. e.g. A. Sommerfeld,
“Festschrift Heinrich Weber,” Leipzig, Teubner, 1912, p. 338, or Ann.
d. Physik, 44, 1914, p. 177.

(4) Page 85, line 18, As Minkowski once remarked to me, the element of
proper time dr is not a complete differential. Thus if we connect two world-
points O and P by two different world-lines 1 and 2, then

§,ar = )247-

If 1 runs parallel to the ¢-axis, so that the first transition in the chosen system
of reference signifies rest, it is evident that

fide =t, Sadr <t.

On this depends the retardation of the moving clock compared with the clock
at rest. The assertion is based, as Einstein has pointed out, on the unprov-
able assumption that the clock in motion actually indicates its own proper
time, i.e. that it always gives the time corresponding to the state of velocity,
regarded as constant, at any instant. The moving clock must naturally have
been moved with acceleration (with changes of speed or direction) in order
to be compared with the stationary clock at the world-point P. The retard-
ation of the moving clock does not therefore actually indicate ‘‘ motion,”’ but
‘accelerated motion.” Hence this does. not contradict the principle of
relativity.

(5) Page 86, line 4. The term ‘‘ hyperbola of curvature’”’ is formed exactly
on the model of the elementary concept of the circle of curvature. The analogy
become analytical identity if instead of the real co-ordinate of time ¢ the
imaginary « = ict is employed, that is, c times the co-ordinate employed by
Minkowski, page 88, line 6.

e By page 84 an internal hyperbola in the 2, ¢-plane has the equation, with
=?
a? — cf? = p?,
therefore in the x, w plane
hed + w= pre

Hence it may be written in parametric form, when @ denotes a purely imagin-
ary angle,
vm pcos , U=psin ¢.

A. SOMMERFELD 95

So, as I suggested in the Ann. d. Phys., 33, p. 649, § 8, hyperbolic motion may
also be denoted as “‘ cyclic motion,” whereby its chief properties (convection of
the field, occurrence of a kind of centrifugal force) are characterised with
particular clearness. For the hyperbolic motion we have

1
dr = Fa|( — dut — dat) =2 | dg |

and thus
ihe soatenratele. - au ,
r= — = -€3IN dg, U = — = + € COS
dr T
A hh ee Sud mes
v= — = — cos u=—=—-—S5D ®g.
dr. p % dr p ?

The magnitude of the acceleration vector in hyperbolic motion is therefore c?/p.
Since any given world-line is touched by the hyperbola of curvature at three
points, it has the same acceleration vector as the hyperbolic motion, and
its magnitude is c*/p, as indicated on page 86, line 11.

The centre M of the cyclic motion x? + wu? = p? is evidently the point

= 0, ~ = 0, and from this centre all points of the hyperbola have the con-

stant ‘ distance,” i.e, a constant magnitude of the radius vector. ‘Therefore p
denotes the interval marked MP in Fig. 3. ;

(6) Page 87, line 1. A force X, Y, Z, to be made into a ‘‘ force vector,”
must be multiplied by ¢ = dt/dr. This may be explained as follows.

According to Minkowski, page 87, line 10, the momentum vector is defined
by ma, my, m2, mt, where m denotes the ‘ constant mechanical mass,” or, as
Minkowski says more plainly elsewhere, the ‘rest mass,” If we retain
Newton’s law of motion (time rate of change of momentum equal to force), we
have to set

£ (mi) ==, S mi) = ys S mi) =f

Multiplication by ¢ makes the left-hand sides into vector components in
Minkowski’s sense. Therefore iX, £Y, iZ are also the first three components
of the ‘‘ force vector.’”” The fourth component T follows without ambiguity
from the requirement that the force vector is to be normal to the motion
vector. Minkowski’s equations for the mechanics of the mass point are there-
fore, with constant rest mass,

mi =iX, my =tY, mz =iZ, mi = iT.

The assumption of constancy of rest. mass can only be maintained, however,
when the energy-content of the body is not changed in its motion, or in the
words of Planck, when the motion ensues “‘ adiabatically and isochorically.”’
(7) Pages 88 and 89. What is characteristic of the constructions here given,
is their complete independence of any special system of reference. They give,
as Minkowski postulates on page 88, ‘‘ reciprocal relations between world-lines ”’
(or world-points) as ‘‘ the most perfect expression of physical laws.” On page 89,
for example, the electrodynamic potential (four-potential) is not referred to the
axes of co-ordinates #, y, z, ¢ until it is to be conventionally divided into a
scalar and a vector portion, which have no independent invariant meaning
from the relativistic standpoint.
By way of commentary to Minkowski I have deduced, from Maxwell’s

96 NOTES

equations, by Minkowski’s methods, an invariant analytical form for the four-
potential and the ponderomotive action between two electrons, and so given
another view of these constructions of Minkowski. Instead of going into de-
tails here, I may refer to my article in Ann. d. Phys., 33, 1910, p. 649, § 7,
or to M. Laue, ‘‘ Das Relativitatsprinzip,” Braunschweig, Vieweg, 1913, § 19.
Compare also Minkowski’s address on the principle of relativity, edited by my-
self, in Ann, d. Phys., 47, 1915, p. 927, where the four-potential is placed at
the head of electrodynamics, and this theory thus reduced to its simplest form.

(8) Page 89, line6. The invariant representation of the electromagnetic field
by a “ vector of the second kind” (or, as I proposed to call it, a ‘‘ six-vector,” a
term which seems to be winning acceptance) is a particularly important part
of Minkowski’s view of electrodynamics. Whereas Minkowski’s ideas on the
vector of the first kind, or four-vector, were in part anticipated by Poincaré
(Rend. Circ. Mat. Palermo, 21, 1906), the introduction of the six-vector is
new. Like the six-vector, the wrench of mechanics (standing for a single force
and a couple) depends on six independent parameters. And as in the electro-
magnetic field ‘‘ the separation into electric and magnetic force is a relative
one,’”’ so with the wrench, as is well known, the division into single force
and couple can be made in very many ways.

(9) Page 90, line 9. Minkowski’s relativistic form of Newton’s law for the
special case of zero acceleration mentioned in the text is included in the more
general form proposed by Poincaré (loc. cit.). On the other hand, in taking ac-
celeration into consideration, it goes further than the latter. Minkowski’s or
Poincaré’s formulation of the law of gravitation shows that it is Possible in
many ways to reconcile Newton’s law with the theory of relativity. That law
is viewed as a point law, and gravitation therefore in a certain sense as action
at a distance, The general theory of relativity, which Einstein has been
developing from 1907 on, gets a deeper grip of the problem of gravitation,
Gravitation is not only regarded as a field action and described by space-time
differential equations—which seems from the present standpoint irrefutable—
but it is also united organically with the principle of relativity extended to any
transformations, whereas Minkowski and Poincaré had adapted it to the postu-
late of relativity ina more external manner, In the general theory of relativity
the space-time structure is determined, from or together with, gravitation. Thus
the principle of relativity, by an extension of Minkowski’s ideas, is so formu-
lated that it postulates the co-variance of physical quantities with reference to
all point transformations, so that the coefficients of the invariant linear element
enter into the laws of physics. :

(10) Page 90, line 83. The ‘fundamental equations for electromagnetic
processes in ponderable bodies”? are developed by Minkowski in Géttinger
Nachrichten, 1907. It was not granted him to complete the ‘deduction of
this equation on the basis of the theory of electrons.” His essays in this
direction have been worked out by M. Born, and together with the “ Funda-
mental Equations” make up the first volume of the series of monographs edited
by Otto Blumenthal (Leipzig, 1910),

ON THE INFLUENCE OF GRAVITATION
ON THE PROPAGATION OF LIGHT
BY
A. EINSTEIN
Translated from “ Uber den Einfluss der Schwerkraft auf

die Ausbreitung des Lichies,’’ Annalen der Physik, 35,
actt.

— e Fy . heat:
“\

Ue ERT ASD DY A Tana Tite
: s ves Pei : 10) Petree 7 FESON ait Ls At Bir:

lay PAE od ety shhwathcs

eas ee Wak seeips Oi
he ~ ES A ‘delta eed i'n ‘roe
hie ata nee bar Waresarayé

ve 4 ee Me -

ate aes ie ™ a » : Ps ye 7

me at oF Me aise 54

ON THE INFLUENCE OF GRAVITATION ON THE
PROPAGATION OF LIGHT

By A. EINSTEIN

the question whether the propagation of light is 1n-

fluenced by gravitation. I return to this theme, because:
my previous presentation of the subject does not satisfy
me, and for a stronger reason, because I now see that one of
the most important consequences of my former treatment
is capable of being tested experimentally. or it follows
from the theory here to be brought forward, that rays of
light, passing close to the sun, are deflected by its gravita-
tional field, so that the angular distance between the sun and
a fixed star appearing near to it is apparently increased by
nearly a second of arc.

In the course of these reflexions further results are yielded
which relate to gravitation. But as the exposition of the
entire group of considerations would be rather difficult to
follow, only a few quite elementary reflexions will be given
in the following pages, from which the reader will readily be
able to inform himself as to the suppositions of the theory
and its line of thought. The relations here deduced, even if
the theoretical foundation is sound, are valid only to a first —
approximation.

I: a memoir published four years ago * I tried to answer

§ 1. A Hypothesis as to the Physical Nature of the
Gravitational Field ~
In a homogeneous gravitational field (acceleration of
gravity vy) let there be a stationary system of co-ordinates K,
orientated so that the lines of force of the gravitational field
run in the negative direction of the axis of z. In a space free

* A, BKinstein, Jahrbuch ftir Lao pea und Elektronik, 4, 1907,
9

100 GRAVITATION AND LIGHT

of gravitational fields let there be a second system of co-
ordinates K’; moving with uniform acceleration (y) in the
positive direction of its axis of z. To avoid unnecessary com-
plications, let us for the present disregard the theory of
relativity, and regard both systems from the customary point
of view of kinematics, and the movements occurring in them
from that of ordinary mechanics.

Relatively to K, as well as relatively to K’, material points
which are not subjected to the action of other material points,
move in keeping with the equations

din d# at. dary ot

For the accelerated system K’ this follows directly from
Galileo’s principle, but for the system K, at rest in a homo-
geneous gravitational field, from the experience that all bodies
in such a field are equally and uniformly accelerated. This
experience, of the equal falling of all bodies in the gravi-
tational field, is one of the most universal which the obser-
vation of nature has yielded ; but in spite of that the law
has not found any place in the foundations of our edifice of
the physical universe.

But we arrive at a very satisfactory interpretation of this
law of experience, if we assume that the systems K and K’ are
physically exactly equivalent, that is, if we assume that we
may just as well regard the system K as being in a space free
from gravitational fields, if we then regard K as uniformly
accelerated. This assumption of exact physical equivalence
makes it impossible for us to speak of the absolute accelera-
tion of the system of reference, just as the usual theory of
relativity forbids us to talk of the absolute velocity of a
system; * and it makes the equal falling of all bodies in a
gravitational field seem a matter of course.

As long as we restrict ourselves to purely mechanical pro-
cesses in the realm where Newton’s mechanics holds sway,
we are certain of the equivalence of the systems K and K’.

* Of course we cannot replace any arbitrary gravitational field by a state of
motion of the system without a gravitational field, any more than, by a trans-
formation of relativity, we can transform all points of medium in any kind of
motion to rest.

A. EINSTEIN 101

But this view of ours will not have any deeper significance
unless the systems K and K’ are equivalent with respect to
all physical processes, that is, unless the laws of nature with
respect to K are in entire agreement with those with respect
to K’. By assuming this to be so, we arrive at a principle
which, if it is really true, has great heuristic importance.
For by theoretical consideration of processes which take place
relatively to a system of reference with uniform acceleration,
we obtain information as to the career of processes in a homo-
geneous gravitational field. We shall now show, first of all,
from the standpoint of the ordinary theory of relativity, what
degree of probability is inherent in our hypothesis.

§ 2. On the Gravitation of Energy

One result yielded by the theory of relativity is that the
inertia mass of a body increases with the energy it contains ;
if the increase of energy amounts to H, the increase in inertia
mass is equal to E/c?, when c denotes the velocity of light.
Now is there an increase of gravitating mass corresponding
to this increase of inertia mass? If not, then a body would
fall in the same gravitational field with varying acceleration
according to the energy it contained. That highly satisfactory
‘result of the theory of relativity by which the law of the con-
servation of mass is merged in the law of conservation of
energy could not be maintained, because it would compel us
to abandon the law of the conservation of mass in its old
form for inertia mass, and maintain it for gravitating mass.

But this must be regarded as very improbable. On the
other hand, the usual theory of relativity does not provide us
with any argument from which to infer that the weight of a
body depends on the energy contained in it. But we shall
show that our hypothesis of the equivalence of the systems
K and K’ gives us gravitation of energy as a necessary Con”
sequence.

Let the two material systems§, and S,,provided withinstru-
ments of measurement, be situated on the z-axis of K at the
distance / from each other,* so that the gravitation potential
in 8, is greater than that in 8, by yh. Let a definite quantity

* The dimensions of 9, and S, are regarded as infinitely small in compari-
son with h.

102 GRAVITATION AND LIGHT

of energy E be emitted from S, towards 8,. Let the quantities
of energy in S, and S, be measured by contrivances which—
brought to one place in the system z and there compared—
shall be perfectly alike. As to the process of this conveyance
of energy by radiation we can make noa priori assertion, be-
cause we do not know the influence of the gravitational field
on the radiation and the measuring instruments in S, and §,.

But by our postulate of the equivalence of K and K’ we
are able, in place of the system K in a homogeneous gravi-
tational field, to set the gravitation-free system K’, which
moves with uniform acceleration in the direction of positive
z, and with the z-axis of which the material systems 8, and
S, are rigidly connected.

We judge of the process of the transference of energy by
radiation from 8, to S, from a system K,,
which is to be free from acceleration. At
the moment when the radiation energy E,
is emitted from §, toward 8,, let the
velocity of K’ relatively to K, be zero.
The radiation will arrive at S, when the
time h/c has elapsed (to a first approxi-
mation). But at this moment the velo-
city of 8, relatively to Ky is yh/e = »v.
Therefore by the ordinary theory of re-
lativity the radiation arriving at S, does
not possess the energy E,, but a greater
energy E,, which is related to EK, to a
first approximation by the equation *

Ey E,(1 rs ‘) = E,(1 + 12) 8 'y stengtth)

By our assumption exactly the same relation holds if the
same process takes place in the system K, which is not acceler-
ated, but is provided with a gravitational field. In this case
we may replace yh by the potential ® of the gravitation vector
in §,, if the arbitrary constant of ® in 8, is equated to zero.
We then have the equation

E, = E, + Bp Sane wat ol

*See above, pp. 69-71,

A. EINSTEIN 103

This equation expresses the law of energy for the process
under observation. The energy E, arriving at §, is greater
than the energy E,, measured by the same means, which was
emitted in §,, the excess being the potential energy of the
mass E,/c? in the gravitational field. It thus proves that for
the fulfilment of the principle of energy we have to ascribe
_ to the energy H, before its emission in 8,, a potential energy
due to gravity, which corresponds to the gravitational mass
B/c?. Our assumption of the equivalence of K and K’ thus
removes the difficulty mentioned at the beginning of this
paragraph which is left. unsolved by the ordinary theory of
relativity.

The meaning of this result is shown particularly clearly if
we consider the following cycle of. operations :—

1. The energy E, as measured in 8,, is emitted in the form
of radiation in S, towards §,, where, by the result just ob-
tained, the energy E(1 +-yh/c?), as measured in §,, is ab-
sorbed.

2. A body W of mass M is lowered from 8, to §,, work
Myf being done in the process.

3. The energy E is transferred from 8, to the body W
while W isin §,. Let the gravitational mass M be thereby
changed so that it acquires the value M’.

4. Let W be again raised to S,, work M'yh being done
in the process.

5. Let E be transferred from W back to §,.

The effect of this cycle is simply that S, has undergone
the increase of energy Eyh/c’, and that the quantity of
energy M’yh — Myf has been conveyed to the system in the
form of mechanical work. By the principle of energy, we
must therefore have

By = M’yh - Myh,

or
PIR aa EET,

The increase in gravitational mass is thus equal to E/c?, and
therefore equal to the increase in inertia mass as given by the
theory of relativity.

The result emerges stili more directly from the equivalence

104 GRAVITATION AND LIGHT

of the systems K and K’, according to which the gravitational
mass in respect of K is exactly equal to the inertia mass in
respect of K’; energy must therefore possess a gravitational
mass which is equal to its inertia mass. If a mass M, be
suspended on a spring balance in the system K’, the balance
will indicate the apparent weight M,y on account of the
inertia of M,. If the quantity of energy E be transferred
to M,, the spring balance, by the law of the inertia of
energy, will indicate (M, + E/c”)y. By reason of our funda-
mental assumption exactly the same thing must occur when
the experiment is repeated in the system K, that is, in the
gravitational field.

§ 3. Time and the Velocity of Light in the Gravitational
Field

If the radiation emitted in the uniformly accelerated
system K’ in S, toward 8, had the frequency », relatively to
the clock in §;, then, relatively to §,, at its arrival in §, it no
longer has the frequency », relatively to an identical clock in
S,, but a greater frequency »,, such that to a first approxi-
mation

h
Dyes (1 + 13) } é : . (2)

For if we again introduce the unaccelerated system of refer-
ence K), relatively to which, at the time of the emission of
light, K’ has no velocity, then 8,, at the time of arrival of the
radiation at S,, has, relatively to Ky, the velocity yh/c, from
which, by Doppler’s principle, the relation as given results
immediately.

In agreement with our assumption of the equivalence of
the systems K’ and K, this equation also holds for the
stationary system of co-ordinates K, provided with a uniform
gravitational field, if in it the transference by radiation takes
place as described. It follows, then, that a ray of light
emitted in 8, with a definite gravitational potential, and pos-
sessing at its emission the frequency »,—compared with a
clock in §,—will, at its arrival in §,, possess a different fre-
quency v;—measured by an identical clock in §,. For yh we
substitute the gravitational potential ® of S.—that of S,

A. EINSTEIN 105

being taken as zero—and assume that the relation which we
have deduced for the homogeneous gravitational field also
holds for other forms of field. Then

nan(l+S) mit oh. Stade)

This result (which by our deduction is valid to a first ap-
proximation) permits, in the first place, of the following appli-
cation. Let v, be the vibration-number of an elementary
light-generator, measured by a delicate clock at the same
place. Let us imagine them both at a place on the surface
of the Sun (where our 8, is located). Of the light there
emitted, a portion reaches the Earth (8,), where we measure
the frequency of the arriving light with a clock U im all re-
spects resembling the one just mentioned. Then by (2a),

v= no(1 + *).

where ® is the (negative) difference of gravitational potential
between the surface of the Sun and the Earth. Thus accord-
ing to our view the spectral lines of sunlight, as compared
with the corresponding spectral lines of terrestrial sources of
light, must be somewhat displaced toward the red, in fact by
the relative amount
ee Sr ns
Vo : ;

If the conditions under which the solar bands arise were
exactly known, this shifting would be susceptible of measure-
ment. But as other influences (pressure, temperature) affect
the position of the centres of the spectral lines, it is difficult
to discover whether the inferred influence of the gravitational
potential really exists.*

On a superficial consideration equation (2), or (2a),
respectively, seems to assert an absurdity. If there is con-
stant transmission of light from §, to §,, how can any other
number of periods per second arrive in 8, than is emitted

*L, F, Jewell (Journ. de Phys., 6, 1897, p. 84) and particularly Ch.
Fabry and H. Boisson (Comptes rendus, 148, 1909, pp. 688-690) have actually
found such displacements of fine spectral lines toward the red end of the
spectrum, of the order of magnitude here calculated, but have ascribed them
to an effect of pressure in the absorbing layer.

106 GRAVITATION AND LIGHT

in 8,? But the answer is simple. We cannot regard v, or
respectively v, simply as frequencies (as the number of periods
per second) since we have not yet determined the time in
system K. What v, denotes is the number of periods with
reference to the time-unit of the clock U in §,, while vy, de-
notes the number of periods per second with reference to the
identical clock in §,. Nothing compels us to assume that the
clocks U in different gravitation potentials must be regarded
as going at the same rate. On the contrary, we must certainly
define the time in K in such a way that the number of wave
crests and troughs between §, and §, is independent of the
absolute value of time; for the process under observation is
by nature a stationary one. If we did not satisfy this con-
dition, we should arrive at a definition of time by the appli-
cation of which time would merge explicitly into the laws
of nature, and this would certainly be unnatural and un-
practical. Therefore the two clocks in S, and 8, do not both
give the “time” correctly. If we measure time in 8, with
the clock U, then we must measure time in S, with a clock
which goes 1 + ®/c? times more slowly than the clock U when
compared with U at one and the same place. For when
measured by such a clock the frequency of the ray of light
which is considered above is at its emission in 8,

(049)

and is therefore, by (2a), equal to the frequency v, of the same
ray of light on its arrival in §,.

This has a consequence which is of fundamental impor-
tance for our theory. For if we measure the velocity of light
at different places in the accelerated, gravitation-free.system
K’, employing clocks U of identical constitution, we obtain
the same magnitude at all these places. The same holds
good, by our fundamental assumption, for the system K as
well. But from what has just been said we must use clocks
of unlike constitution, for measuring time at places with
differing gravitation potential. For measuring time at a
place which, relatively to the origin of the co-ordinates, has
the gravitation potential ®, we must employ a clock which—
when removed to the origin of co-ordinates—goes (1 + ®/c?)
times more slowly than the clock used for measuring time at

A. EINSTEIN 107

the origin of co-ordinates. If we call the velocity of light at
the origin of co-ordinates ¢), then the velocity of light c at a
place with the gravitation potential ® will be given by the
relation

c= (1 + “ , : ; » (3)

The principle of the constancy of the velocity of light holds
good according to this theory in a different form from that
which usually underlies the ordinary theory of relativity.

§ 4. Bending of Light-Rays in the Gravitational Field
From the proposition which has just been proved, that the
velocity of light in the gravitational field is a function of the
place, we may easily infer, by means of Huyghens’s principle,
that light-rays propagated across a gravitational field undergo
deflexion. For let E be a wave front of a plane light-wave at
the time ¢, and let P, and P, be two points in that plane at

Fia. 6.

unit distance from each other. P, and P, lie in the plane of
the paper, which is chosen so that the differential coefficient
of ®, taken in the direction of the normal to the plane,
vanishes, and therefore also that of c. We obtain the corre-
sponding wave front at time ¢ + dt, or, rather, its line
of section with the plane of the paper, by describing circles
round the points P, and P, with radii c,dt and c,dt respectively,
where c, and c, denote the velocity of light at the points P,
and P, respectively, and by drawing the tangent to these
circles. The angle through which the light-ray is deflected
in the path cdt is therefore

0c
Cr =. C_)at Sie eee spitts

if we calculate the angle positively when the ray is bent to-
ward the side of increasing ». The angle of deflexion per
unit of path of the light-ray is thus

ee c, or by (3) -

P) 1 0b
con

108 GRAVITATION AND LIGHT

Finally, we obtain for the deflexion which a light-ray experi-
ences toward the side n’ on any path (s) the expression

1 eds a gaa

We might have obtained the same result by directly consider-
ing the propagation of a ray of light in the uniformly acceler-
ated system K’, and transferring the result to the system K,
and thence to the case of a gravitational field of any form.

By equation (4) a ray of light passing along by a heavenly
body suffers a deflexion to the side of the diminishing gravi-
tational potential, that is, on the side directed toward the
heavenly body, of the magnitude

where k denotes the constant of gravitation, M the mass of
the heavenly body, A the distance of the
ray from the centre of the body. A ray
of light going past the Sun would accord-
ingly undergo deflexion to the amount of
4°10 - § = ‘83 seconds of arc. The angu-
lar distance of the star from the centre of
the Sun appears to be increased by this
amount. As the fixed stars in the parts
of the sky near the Sun are visible
during total eclipses of the Sun, this
consequence of the theory may be com-
pared with experience. With the planet
_ Jupiter the displacement to be expected
reaches to about z35 of the amount
given. It would be a most desirable thing if astronomers
would take up the question here raised. For apart from
any theory there is the question whether it is possible with
the equipment at present available to detect an influence of
gravitational fields on the propagation of light.

Fig. 7.

THE FOUNDATION OF THE GENERAL
THEORY OF RELATIVITY
BY

A. EINSTEIN

Translated from ‘‘ Die Grundlage der aligemeinen Rela-
tivitdtstheorie,” Annalen der Physik, 49, 1916.

+e hulk g sie ‘Teo! Bs

aye ; st can wehe Retina
; a *

THE FOUNDATION OF THE GENERAL THEORY
OF RELATIVITY

By A. EINSTEIN

A. FUNDAMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS ON THE POSTULATE OF
RELATIVITY

§ 1. Observations on the Special Theory of Relativity

HE special theory of relativity is based on the
following postulate, which is also satisfied by the
mechanics of Galileo and Newton.

If a system of co-ordinates K is chosen so that, in re-
lation to it, physical laws hold good in their simplest form,
the same laws also hold good in relation to any other system
of co-ordinates K’ moving in uniform translation relatively
to K. ‘This postulate we call the ‘special principle of
relativity.” The word “special” is meant to intimate
that the principle is restricted to the case when K’ has a
motion of uniform translation relatively to K, but that the
equivalence of K’ and K does not extend to the case of non-
uniform motion of K’ relatively to K.

Thus/the special theory of relativity does not depart from
classical mechanics through the postulate of relativity, but
through the postulate of the constancy of the velocity of light
in vacuo, from which, in combination with the special prin-
ciple of relativity, there follow, in the well-known way, the
relativity of simultaneity, the Lorentzian transformation, and
the related laws for the behaviour of moving bodies and
clocks.

The modification to which the special theory of relativity
has subjected the theory of space and time is indeed far-
reaching, but one wovosant point has remained unaffected.

112 THE GENERAL THEORY

For the laws of geometry, even according to the special theory
of relativity, are to be interpreted directly as laws relating to
the possible relative positions of solid bodies at rest; and, in
a more general way, the laws of kinematics are to be inter-
preted as laws which describe the relations of measuring
bodies and clocks. To two selected material points of a
stationary rigid body there always corresponds a distance of
quite definite length, which is independent of the locality and
orientation of the body, and is also independent of the time.
To two selected positions of the hands of a clock at rest
relatively to the privileged system of reference there always
corresponds an interval of time of a definite length, which is
independent of place and time. We shall soon see that the
general theory of relativity cannot adhere to this simple
physical interpretation of space and time.

§ 2..The Need for an Extension of the Postulate of
Relativity

In classical mechanics, and no less in the special theory
of relativity, there is an inherent epistemological defect which
was, perhaps for the first time, clearly pointed out by Ernst
Mach. We will elucidate it by the following example :—Two
fluid bodies of the same size and nature hover freely in space
at so great a distance from each other and from all other
masses that only those gravitational forces need be taken into
account which arise from the interaction of different parts of
the same body. Let the distance between the two bodies be
invariable, and in neither of the bodies let there be any
relative movements of the parts with respect to one another.
But let either mass, as judged by an observer at rest
relatively to the other mass, rotate with constant angular —
velocity about the line joining the masses. This is a verifi-
able relative motion of the two bodies. Now let us imagine
that each of the bodies has been surveyed by means of
measuring instruments at rest relatively to itself, and let the
surface of 8, prove to be a sphere, and that of 8, an ellipsoid
of revolution. Thereupon we put the question—What is the
reason for this difference in the two bodies? No answer can

A. EINSTEIN 113

be admitted as epistemologically satisfactory,* unless the
reason given is an observable fact of experience. The law of
causality has not the significance of a statement as to the
world of experience, except when observable facts ultimately
appear as causes and effects.

Newtonian mechanics does not give a satisfactory answer
to this question. It pronounces as follows :—The laws of

_mechanics apply to the space R,, in respect to which the body
S, is at rest, but not to the space R,, in respect to which the
body S, is at rest. But the privileged space R, of Galileo,
thus introduced, is a merely factitiows cause, and not a thing
that can be observed. It is therefore clear that Newton's
mechanics does not really satisfy the requirement of causality
in the case under consideration, but only apparently does so,
since it makes the factitious cause R, responsible for the ob-
servable difference in the bodies 8, and S,.

The only satisfactory answer must be that the physical
system consisting of 8, and S, reveals within itself no imagin-
able cause to which the differing behaviour of S, and 8, can
be referred. The cause must therefore lie outside this system.
We have to take it that the general laws of motion, which in
particular determine the shapes of 8, and S,, must be such
that the mechanical behaviour of S, and 8, is partly con-
ditioned, in quite essential respects, by distant masses which
we have not included in the system under consideration.
These distant masses and their motions relative to S, and
§, must then be regarded as the seat of the causes (which
must be susceptible to observation) of the different behaviour
of our two bodies 8, and §,. They take over the réle of the
factitious cause R,. Of all imaginable spaces R,, R,, etc., in
any kind of motion relatively to one another, there is none
which we may look upon as privileged a priori without re-
viving the above-mentioned epistemological objection. The
laws of physics must be of such a nature that they apply to
systems of reference in any kind of motion. Along this road
we arrive at an extension of the postulate of relativity.

In addition to this weighty argument from the theory of

* Of course an answer may be satisfactory from the point of view of episte-
mology, and yet be unsound physically, if it isin conflict with other experi-
ences.

114 THE GENERAL THEORY

knowledge, there is a well-known physical fact which favours
an extension of the theory of relativity. Let K be a Galilean
system of reference, i.e. a system relatively to which (at least
in the four-dimensional region under consideration) a mass,
sufficiently distant from other masses, 1s moving with uniform
motion in a straight line. Let K’ be a second system of
reference which is moving relatively to K in uniformly
accelerated translation. Then, relatively to K’, a mass
sufficiently distant from other masses would have an acceler-
ated motion such that its acceleration and direction of
acceleration are independent of the material composition and
physical state of the mass.

Does this permit an observer at rest relatively to K’ to
infer that he is ona “ really ” accelerated system of reference ?
The answer is in the negative; for the above-mentioned
relation of freely movable masses to K’ may be interpreted
equally well in the following way. The system of reference
K’ is unaccelerated, but the Space-time territory in question
is under the sway of a gravitational field, which generates the
accelerated motion of the bodies relatively to K’.

This view is made possible for us by the teaching of
experience as to the existence of a field of force, namely, the
gravitational field, which possesses the remarkable property
of imparting the same acceleration to all bodies.* The
mechanical behaviour of bodies relatively to K’ is the same
as presents itself to experience in the case of systems which
we are wont to regard as “ stationary” or as “ privileged.”
Therefore, from the physical standpoint, the assumption
readily suggests itself that the systems K and K’ may both
with equal right be looked upon as “stationary,” that is to
say, they have an equal title as systems of reference for the
physical description of phenomena.

It will be seen from these reflexions that in pursuing the
general theory of relativity we shall be led to a theory of
gravitation, since we are able to “produce” a gravitational
field merely by changing the system of co-ordinates. It will
also be obvious that the principle of the constancy of the
velocity of light in vacuo must be modified, since we easily

* Hétvés has proved experimentally that the gravitational field has this
property in great accuracy,

A. EINSTEIN 115

recognize that the path of a ray of light with respect to K’
must in general be curvilinear, if with respect to K light is
propagated in a straight line with a definite constant velocity.

§ 3. The Space-Time Continuum. Requirement of General
Co=Variance for the Equations Expressing General
Laws of Nature

In classical mechanics, as well as in the special theory of
relativity, the co-ordinates of space and time have a direct
physical meaning. To say that a point-event has the X; co-
ordinate z, means that the projection of the point-event on the
axis of Xj, determined by rigid rods and in accordance with the.
rules of Euclidean geometry, is obtained by measuring off a
given rod (the unit of length) z, times from the origin of co-
ordinates along the axis of X, To say that a point-event
has the X, co-ordinate 2, = ¢, means that a standard clock,
made to measure time in a definite unit period, and which is
stationary relatively to the system of co-ordinates and practic-
ally coincident in space with the point-event,* will have
measured off x, = ¢ periods at the occurrence of the event.

This view of space and time has always been in the minds
of physicists, even if, as a rule, they have been unconscious
of it. This is clear from the part which these concepts play

‘in physical measurements ; it must also have underlain the
reader's reflexions on the preceding paragraph (§ 2) for
him to connect any meaning with what he there read. But
we shall now show that we must put it aside and replace it
by a more general view, in order to be able to carry through
the postulate of general relativity, if the special theory of
relativity applies to the special case of the absence of a gravi-
tational field.

In a space which is free of gravitational fields we introduce

- a Galilean system of reference K (a, y, 2, t), and also a system

of co-ordinates K’ (a’, y’, 2’, ¢’) in uniform rotation relatively
to K. Let the origins of both systems, as well as their axes

* We assume the possibility of verifying “ simultaneity ”’ for events im-
mediately proximate in space, or—to speak more precisely—for immediate
proximity or coincidence in space-time, without giving definition of this
fundamental concept.

116 THE GENERAL THEORY

of Z, permanently coincide. We shall show that fora space-
time measurement in the system K’ the above definition of
the physical meaning of lengths and times cannot be main-
tained. For reasons of symmetry it is clear that a circle
around the origin in the X, Y plane of K may at the same
time be regarded as a circle in the X’, Y’ plane of K’. We
suppose that the circumference and diameter of this circle
have been measured with a unit measure infinitely small
compared with the radius, and that we have the quotient of
the two results. If this experiment were performed with a
measuring-rod at-rest relatively to the Galilean system K, the
quotient would be 7. Witha measuring-rod at rest relatively
to K’, the quotient would be greater than 7.. This is readily
understood if we envisage the whole process of measuring
from the ‘‘ stationary ’’ system K, and-take into consideration
that the measuring-rod applied to the periphery undergoes
a Lorentzian contraction, while the one applied along the
radius does not. Hence Euclidean geometry does not apply
to K’. The notion of co-ordinates defined above, which pre-
supposes the validity of Euclidean geometry, therefore breaks
down iri relation to the system K’. So, too, we are unable
to introduce a time corresponding to physical requirements
in K’, indicated by clocks at rest relatively to K’.. To
convince ourselves of this impossibility, let us imagine two
clocks of identical constitution placed, one at the origin of
co-ordinates, and the other at the circumference of the
circle, and both envisaged from the “ stationary” system
K. - By a familiar result of the special theory of relativity,
the clock at the circumference—judged from K—goes more
slowly than the other, because the former is in motion and
the latter at rest. An observer at the common origin of
co-ordinates, capable of observing the clock at the circum-
ference by means of light, would therefore see it lagging be-
hind the clock beside him. As he will not make up his mind
to let the velocity of light along the path in question depend
explicitly on the time, he will interpret his observations as
showing that the clock at the circumference “really ”’ goes
more slowly than the clock at the origin. So he will be
obliged to define time in such a way that the rate of a clock
depends upon where the clock may be,

A. EINSTEIN 117

_ We therefore reach this result :—In the general theory of
relativity, space and time cannot be defined in such a way
that differences of the spatial co-ordinates can be directly
measured by the unit measuring-rod, or differences in the
time co-ordinate by a standard clock.

The method hitherto employed for laying co-ordinates
into the space-time continuum in a definite manner thus breaks
down, and there seems to be no other way which would allow
us to adapt systems of co-ordinates to the four-dimensional
universe so that we might expect from their application a
particularly simple formulation of the laws of nature. So
there is nothing for it but to regard all imaginable systems
of co-ordinates, on principle, as equally suitable for the
description of nature. This comes to requiring that :—

The general laws of nature are to be expressed by equations
which hold good for all systems of co-ordinates, that 1s, are
co-variant with respect to any substitutions whatever (generally
co-variant).

It is clear that a physical theory which satisfies this
postulate will also be suitable for the general postulate of
relativity. For the sum of all substitutions in any case in-
cludes those which correspond to all relative motions of three-
dimensional systems of co-ordinates. That this requirement
of general co-variance, which takes away-from space and
time the last remnant of physical objectivity, is a natural
one, will be seen from the following reflexion. All our
space-time verifications invariably amount to a determination
of space-time coincidences. If, for example, events consisted
merely in the motion of material points, then ultimately
nothing would be observable but the meetings of two or more
of these points. Moreover, the results of our measurings are
nothing but verifications of such meetings of the material
points of our measuring instruments with other material
points, coincidences between the hands of a clock and points
on the clock dial, and observed point-events happening at the
same place at the same time.

The introduction of a system of reference serves no other
purpose than to facilitate the description of the totality of such
coincidences. We allot to the universe four space-time vari-
‘ables «,, 2, 23, %,in such a way that for every point-event

118 THE GENERAL THEORY

there is a corresponding system of values of the variables
Z,...2, To two coincident point-events there corre-
sponds one system of values of the variables z, . . . a, i.e.
coincidence is characterized by the identity of the co-ordinates.
If, in place of the variables/z, . . . 24, we introduce functions
of them, x’), 2',, 23, 24, aS @ new system of co-ordinates, so
that the systems of values are made to correspond to one
another without ambiguity, the equality of all four co-ordin-
ates in the new system will also serve as an expression for
the space-time coincidence of the two point-events. As all
our physical experience can be ultimately reduced to such
coincidences, there is no immediate reason for preferring
certain systems of co-ordinates to others, that is to say, we
arrive at the requirement of general co-variance.

§ 4. The Relation of the Four Co-ordinates to Measure-
ment in Space and Time

It is not my purpose in this discussion to represent the
general theory of relativity as a system that is as simple and
logical as possible, and with the minimum number of axioms ;
but my main object is to develop this theory in such a way
that the reader will feel that the path we have entered upon
is psychologically the natural one, and that the underlying
assumptions will seem to have the highest possible degree
of security. With this aim in view let it now be granted
that :—

For infinitely small four-dimensional regions the theory
of relativity in the restricted sense is appropriate, if the co-
ordinates are suitably chosen.

For this purpose we must choose the acceleration of the
infinitely small (‘local ”’) system of co-ordinates so that no
gravitational field occurs; this is possible for an infinitely
small region. Let X,, X., X,, be the co-ordinates of space,
and X, the appertaining co-ordinate of time measured in the
appropriate unit.* If a rigid rod is imagined to be given as
the unit measure, the co-ordinates, with. a given orientation
of the system of co-ordinates, have a direct physical meaning

* The unit of time is to be chosen so that the velocity of light in vacuo as
measured in the “local” system of co-ordinates is to be equal to unity,

A. EINSTEIN 119

in the sense of the special theory of relativity. By the
special theory of relativity the expression

da) XN dk dks dX eS (DD

then has a value which is independent of the orientation of
the local system of co-ordinates, and is ascertainable by
measurements of space and time. The magnitude of the
linear element pertaining to points of the four-dimensional
continuum in infinite proximity, we call ds. If the ds belong-
ing to the element dX, ... dX, is positive, we follow
Minkowski in calling it time-like ; if it is negative, we call it
space-like,

To the “linear element ” in question, or to the two infin-
itely .proximate point-events, there will also correspond
definite differentials dz, ... dz, of the four-dimensional
co-ordinates of any chosen system of reference. If this
system, as well as the “local ”’ system, is given for the region
under consideration, the dX, will allow themselves to be
represented here by definite linear homogeneous expressions
of the dzg:—

dXy = 2dyodea ; ‘ re?

Inserting these expressions in (1), we obtain

ds? = X9ordXodaxr, . ; : . (8)
TO

where the gor will be functions of the x. These can ‘no
longer! be dependent on the orientation and the state of
motion of the “local” system of co-ordinates, for ds* is a
quantity ascertainable by rod-clock measurement of point-
events infinitely proximate in space-time, and defined inde-
pendently of any particular choice of co-ordinates. The gor
are to be chosen here so that gor = gro; the summation is
to extend over all values of o and 7, so that the sum consists
of 4.x 4 terms, of which twelve are equal in pairs.

The case of the ordinary theory of relativity arises out of
the case here considered, if it is possible, by reason of the

120 THE GENERAL THEORY

-1 0 0 0

0.-—1 0 0

0 0 -1 0 ; ; a!
0 0 te 2P8 I

We shall find hereafter that the choice of such co-ordinates
is, in general, not possible for a finite region.

From the considerations of § 2 and § 3 it follows that
the quantities g;¢ are to be regarded from the physical stand-

. point as the quantities which describe the gravitational

field in relation to the chosen system of reference. For, if
we now assume the special theory of relativity to apply to a
certain four-dimensional region with the co-ordinates properly
chosen, then the go, have the values given in (4). A free
material point then moves, relatively to this system, with
uniform motion in a straight line. Then if we introduce new
space-time co-ordinates a, x2, x3, 2,, by means of any substi-
tution we choose, the g7 in this new system will no longer

~ be constants, but functions of Space and time. At the same
» time the motion of the free material point will present itself
‘in the new co-ordinates as a curvilinear non-uniform motion,

and the law of this motion will be independent of the nature
of the moving particle. We shall therefore interpret this

‘motion as a motion under the influence of a gravitational
field. We thus find the occurrence of a gravitational field

connected with a space-time variability of the gz . So, too,
in the general case, when we are no longer able by a suitable

“ choice of co-ordinates to apply the special theory of relativity

to a finite region, we shall hold fast to the view that the Jor
describe the gravitational field.

Thus, according to the general theory of relativity, gravi-
tation occupies an exceptional position with regard to other
forces, particularly the electromagnetic forces, since the ten
functions representing the gravitational field at the same time
define the metrical properties of the space measured.

B. MatTHEmatican Arps To THE HORMULATION OF
GENERALLY COVARIANT EQUATIONS

Having seen in the foregoing that the general postulate
of relativity leads to the Tequirement that the equations of

A. EINSTEIN 121

physics shall be covariant in the face of any substitution of
the co-ordinates x, .. . 24, we have to consider how such
generally covariant equations can be found. We now turn
to this purely mathematical task, and we shall find that in its
solution a fundamental réle is played by the invariant ds
given in equation (3), which, borrowing from Gauss’s theory
of surfaces, we have called the “ linear element.”

The fundamental idea of this general theory of covariants”
is the following :—Let certain things (“tensors”) be defined
‘with respect to any system of co-ordinates by a number of
functions of the co-ordinates, called the “ components” of
the tensor. There are then certain rules by which these
components can be calculated for a new system of co-ordin-
ates, if they are known for the original system of co-ordinates,
and if the transformation connecting the two systems is
known. The things hereafter called tensors are further
characterized by the fact that the) equations of transformation |
for their components are linear dnd homogeneous. / Accord- |
ingly, all the-components in the new system vanish, if they |
all vanish in the original system. If, therefore, a law~ of]
nature is expressed by equating all the coi components of a tensor |
to zero, it is generally covariant. By examining the laws |
of the formation of tensors, we acquire the means of formu-_
lating generally covariant laws.

§ 5. Contravariant and Covariant Four-vectors

Contravariant Four-vectors.—The linear element is de-
fined by the four “components” dz,, for which the law of

transformation is expressed by the equation
dec 7 = 3a, ae gt eR ES

vy OLy

The dx’, are expressed as linear and homogeneous tieaten
of the dz, Hence we may look upon these co-ordinate differ-
entials as the components of a ‘‘tensor”’ of the particular
kind which we call a contravariant four-vector. Any thing
which is defined relatively to the system of co-ordinates by
four quantities A’, and which is transformed by the same law

on’ can
= 25, 4° : : . (a)

..

122 THE GENERAL THEORY

we also call a contravariant four-vector. From (5a) it
follows at once that the sums A’ + B’ are also components
of a four-vector, if A and B’ are such. Corresponding rela-
tions hold for all ‘‘ tensors” subsequently to be introduced.
(Rule for the addition and subtraction of tensors.)

Covariant Four-vectors.—We call four quantities A, the
components of a covariant four-vector, if for any arbitrary
choice of the contravariant four-vector B”

A,B’ = Invariant : : - (6)

The law of transformation of a covariant four-vector follows
from this definition. For if we replace B” on the right-hand
side of the equation

A'-B" = SA,B’

by the expression resulting from the inversion of (5a),

= 3h Be

ete

we obtain

‘o OLy = 5 40 AS
EBVSS% Ay = SBA.

Since this equation is true for arbitrary values of the Bert
follows that the law of transformation is

Ai ci yen PRUE maa

= dn’

Note on a Simplified Way of Writing the Expressions.—
A glance at the equations of this paragraph shows that there
is always a summation with respect to the indices which
occur twice under a sign of summation (e.g. the index v in
(5)), and only with respect to indices which occur twice. It
is therefore possible, without loss of clearness, to omit the sign
of summation. In its place we introduce the convention :—
If an index occurs twice in one term of an expression, it is
always to be summed unless the contrary is expressly stated.

The difference between covariant and contravariant four-
vectors lies in the law of transformation ((7) or (5) respectively).
Both forms are tensors in the sense of the general remark
above. Therein lies their importance. Following Ricci and

A. EINSTEIN 123

Levi-Civita, we denote the contravariant character by placing
the index above, the covariant by placing it below.

§ 6. Tensors of the Second and Higher Ranks

Contravariant Tensors.—If{ we form all the sixteen pro-
ducts A”” of the components A“ and B” of two contravariant

four-vectors
A” = A*B’ : ; : aes)

then by (8) and (5a) A” satisfies the law of transformation

. sot du’ 027, my F

We call a thing which is described relatively to any system
of reference by sixteen quantities, satisfying the law of trans-
formation (9), a contravariant tensor of the second rank. Not
every such tensor allows itself to be formed in accordance
with (8) from two four-vectors, but it is easily shown that
any given sixteen A”” can be represented as the sums of the
A*“B’ of four appropriately selected pairs of four-vectors.
Hence we can prove nearly all the laws which apply to the
tensor of the second rank defined by (9) in the simplest
manner by demonstrating them for the special tensors of the
type (8).

Contravariant Tensors of Any Rank.—lt 1s clear that, on
the lines of (8) and (9), contravariant tensors of the third and
higher ranks may also be defined with 4* components, and so
on. In the same way it follows from (8) and (9) that the
contravariant four-vector may be taken in this sense as a
contravariant tensor of the first rank.

Covariant Tensors.—On the other hand, if we take the
sixteen products Ay, of two covariant four-vectors A, and B,,

Aw = AuB», . . . . (10)
the law of transformation for these is
1 Op Oy :
A or As 02'¢ In’ Ayy . . . (11)

This law of transformation defines the covariant tensor of
the second rank. All our previous remarks on contravariant
tensors apply equally to covariant tensors.

\\ ‘
(tote ty}

124 THE GENERAL THEORY

NorE.—It is convenient to treat the scalar (or invariant)
both as a contravariant and a covariant tensor of zero rank.
Mixed Tensors.—We may also define a tensor of the
second rank of the type 5
Al, = A,B’. 3 , aoe (12h
which is covariant with respect to the index yu, amd contra-
variant with respect to the index v. Its law of transforma-
tion is
‘7 ay Pye Lu v
Av = 0g, rae ; { . 4€13)

Naturally there are mixed tensors with any number of
indices of covariant character, and any number of indices of
contravariant character. Covariant and contravariant tensors
may be looked upon as special cases of mixed tensors.

Symmetrical Tensors.—A contravariant, or a covariant
tensor, of the second or higher rank is said to be symmetrical
if two components, which are obtained the one from the other
by the interchange of two indices, are equal. The tensor A’,
or the tensor A,,, is thus symmetrical if for any combination

of the indices yp, v,
AMom Ale & é : . (14)

Aue = Avi os int) aes Rete

It has to be proved that the symmetry thus defined is a
property which is independent of the system of reference.
It follows in fact from (9), when (14) is taken into consider-

ation, that
ior = Wa heya We hep Dele Draw
OLu day Ly Wy Oy Iu

or respectively,

= AT,

The last equation but one depends upon the interchange of
the summation indices w and », i.e. merely on a change of
notation. :

Antisymmetrical Tensors.—A contravariant or a covariant
tensor of the second, third, or fourth rank is said to be anti-.
symmetrical if two components, which are obtained the one
from the other by the interchange of two indices, are equal
and of opposite sign. The tensor A”, or the tensor Ay, is
therefore antisymmetrical, if always

A. EINSTEIN 125
ieee on nme ate Lies see S415)

or respectively,
Ay = —An . at Set . (15a)

Of the sixteen components A*’, the four components A™
vanish; the rest are equal and of opposite sign in pairs, so
that there are only six components numerically different (a
six-vector). Similarly we see that the antisymmetrical tensor | ¥
of the third rank A””’ has only four numerically different *
components, while the antisymmetrical tensor A” has only |
one. There are no antisymmetrical tensors of higher rank_ :
than the fourth in a continuum of four dimensions. eave

AACE

§ 7. Multiplication of Tensors

Outer Multiplication of Tensors.—We obtain from the
components of a tensor of rank m and of a tensor of rank m
the components of a tensor of rank m + m by multiplying
each component of the one tensor by each component of the
other. Thus, for example, the tensors T arise out of the
tensors A and B of different kinds,

Tyre = Auy Cs)
Rees = NEARS

’
T7 = AwB”.

The proof of the tensor character of T is given directly
by the representations (8), (10), (12), or by the laws of trans-
formation (9), (11), (18). The equations (8), (10), (12) are
themselves examples of outer multiplication of tensors of the
first rank.

“ Contraction” of a Mixed Tensor.—From any mixed
tensor we may form a tensor whose rank is less by two, by
equating an index of covariant with one of contravariant
character, and summing with respect to this index (“ con-
traction”). Thus, for example, from the mixed tensor of the

fourth rank 1 hoe we obtain the mixed tensor of the second

rank,
ret ete 3A)
and from this, by a second contraction, the tensor of zero

rank,
caged Wa c=td at

126 THE GENERAL THEORY

The proof that the result of contraction really possesses
the tensor character is given either by the representation of a
tensor according to the generalization of (12) in combination
with (6), or by the generalization of (13).

Inner and Mixed Multiplication of Tensors.—These consist
in a combination of outer multiplication with contraction.

Ezamples.—From the covariant tensor of the second rank
Au, and the contravariant tensor of the first rank B’ we form
by outer multiplication the mixed tensor

Di, = AwB’.

On contraction with respect to the indices »v and oc, we obtain
the-covariant four-vector

Dz =e De — AyyB”.

This we call the inner product of the tensors Ay and BY’,
Analogously we form from the tensors Ay, and B”, by outer
multiplication and double contraction, the inner product
A,B’. By outer multiplication and one contraction, we
obtain from A,, and B” the mixed tensor of the second rank
D;. = AwB”. This operation may be aptly characterized as
a mixed one, being ‘‘ outer” with respect to the indices be
and 7, and “inner” with respect to the indices v and c.

We now prove a proposition which is often useful as evi-
dence of tensor character. From what has just been ex-
plained, A,,B”” is a scalar if Ay, and B’ are tensors. But
we may also make the following assertion: If AywB”” is
a scalar for any choice of the tensor B*”, then A, has tensor
character. For, by hypothesis, for any substitution,

ya a Aube
But by an inversion of (9)

wy _ Lp Wy Ber
ong 02,

This, inserted in the above equation, gives

This can only be satisfied for arbitrary values of B’”’ if the

A. EINSTEIN 127

bracket vanishes. The result then follows by equation. (11).
This rule applies correspondingly to tensors of any rank and
character, and the proof is analogous in all cases.

The rule may also be demonstrated in this form: If B*
and C” are any vectors, and if, for all values of these, the
inner product A,yB*C” is a scalar, then Ay, is a covariant
tensor. This latter proposition also holds good even if only
the more special assertion is correct, that with any choice of
the four-vector B“ the inner product A,,B“B’ is a scalar, if
in addition it is known that A,, satisfies the condition of
symmetry Aw = A, For by the method given above we
prove the tensor character of (Aw + A,,), and from this the
tensor character of A,» follows on account of symmetry.
This also can be easily generalized to the case of covariant
and contravariant tensors of any rank.

Finally, there follows from what has been proved, this
law, which may also be generalized for any tensors: If for
any choice of the four-vector B” the quantities A,,B’ form a
tensor of the first rank, then Ay is a tensor of the second
rank. For, if C* is any four-vector, then on account of the
tensor character of A,,»B’, the inner product A,B’C" is a
scalar for any choice of the two four-vectors B” and C*. From
which the proposition follows.

§ 8. Some Aspects of the Fundamental Tensor gy,

The Covariant Fundamental Tensor.—In the invariant
expression for the square of the linear element,

ds? = Qyydtyd2y,

the part played by the dz, is that of a contravariant vector
which may be chosen at will. Since further, guy = Jou, it
follows from the considerations of the preceding paragraph
that gy, is a covariant tensor of the second rank. We call
it the “fundamental tensor.” In what follows we deduce
some properties of this tensor which, it is true, apply to any
tensor of the second rank. But as the fundamental tensor
plays a special part in our theory, which has its physical basis
in the peculiar effects of gravitation, it so happens that the
relations to be developed are of importance to us only in the
case of the fundamental tensor.

fb

128 THE GENERAL THEORY

The Contravariant Fundamental Tensor.—lIf in the deter-

\| minant formed by the elements g,,, we take the co-factor of
| each of the gy» and divide it by the determinant g = | gy |,
we obtain certain quantities g#( = g#) which, as we shall

demonstrate, form a contravariant tensor.
By a known property of determinants

Grogs Sor ieg wi sal egy
where the symbol 8% denotes 1 or 0, according as = v or
+ vp,
Instead of the above expression for ds? we may thus write
Quod, Aa pdity
or, by (16)
JuoJurg?" Ax pdx,

But, by the multiplication rules of the preceding paragraphs,
the quantities
dé, a= Gucd 2,

form a covariant four-vector, and in fact an arbitrary vector,
since the dz, are arbitrary. By introducing this into our ex-
pression we obtain

ds* = g°"d&,dE€,.

Since this, with the arbitrary choice of the vector dés, is a
scalar, and g°7 by its definition is symmetrical in the indices
o and 7, it follows from the results of the preceding paragraph
that g°7 is a contravariant tensor,

It further follows from (16) that 6, is also a tensor, which
we may call the mixed fundamental tensor.

The Determinant of the Fundamental T'ensor.—By the
rule for the multiplication of determinants

| Guag” | = | gual x | ge].
On the other hand
| Guay | = |S] =1.
It therefore follows that
[ Parise! gem, OR ccniloomee, a1 TS

The Volume Scalar.—We seek first the law of transfor-

A. EINSTEIN 129

Seria’ of the determinant g = | gu |. In accordance with
1 | dy ey
I = | de") 3279” 15;

Hence, by a double application of the rule for the multipli-
cation of determinants, it follows that

oLy
02's

1 Patt | dee |*
a akawel se Pa Le a Fai

or
gets RC od ee oe
JI | 5a’, | Vo:

On the other hand, the law of transformation of the element
of volume

dt = [aridesdargdn
is, in accordance with the theorem of Jacobi,

ee cg : dr’ = dt.

By multiplication of the last two equations, we obtain
Jog dt = J/gdr Viger igg mel O88) ps

Instead of J/9) we introduce in what follows the quantity

/- g, Which is always real on account of the hyperbolic
character of thespace-timecontinuum. Theinvariant J - gat
is equal to the magnitude of the four-dimensional element
of volume in the ‘local’ system of reference, a8 measured
with rigid rods and clocks in the sense of the special theory
of relativity.

Note on the Character of the Space-time Continuum.—Our
assumption that the special theory of relativity can always
be applied to an infinitely small region, implies that ds’ can
~ always be expressed in accordance with (1) by means of real
quantities dX, .. - dX, If we denote by dr, the “ natural”
element of volume dX,, dX, dX, dX4, then

dt, = J - gat : , , (18a)

130 THE GENERAL THEORY

If ./- g were to vanish at a point of the four-dimensional
continuum, it would mean that at this point an infinitely small
“natural” volume would correspond to a finite volume in
the co-ordinates. Let us assume that this is never the case.
Then g cannot change sign. We will assume that, in the
sense of the special theory of relativity, g always has a finite
negative value. This is a hypothesis as to the physical
nature of the continuum under consideration, and at the same
time a convention as to the choice of co-ordinates. '

Butif — gis always finite and positive, it is natural to settle
the choice of co-ordinates a posteriori in such a way that this
quantity is always equal to unity. We shall see later that
by such a restriction of the choice of co-ordinates it is possible
to achieve an important simplification of the laws of nature.

In place of (18), we then have simply dr’ = dr, from
which, in view of Jacobi’s theorem, it follows that

| da’¢
Pie eee 1 ey. : ita

Thus, with this choice of co-ordinates, only substitutions for -
which the determinant is unity are permissible,

But it would be erroneous to believe that this step indicates
a partial abandonment of the general postulate of relativity.
We do not ask ‘‘ What are the laws of nature which are co-
variant in face of all substitutions for which the determinant
is unity ?” but our question is ‘“‘ What are the generally co-
variant laws of nature?” It is not until we have formulated
these that we’ simplify their expression by a particular choice
of the system of reference.

The Formation of New Tensors by Means of the Funda-
mental Tensor.—Inner, outer, and mixed multiplication of a
tensor by the fundamental tensor give tensors of different
character and rank. For example,

A* = g us Ag,
A = guA™.

The following forms may be specially noted :—

AM = guagrBA ap,
Aw = JuagvpA*?

A. EINSTEIN 131

(the “‘ complements ”’ of covariant and contravariant tensors
respectively), and
Bu = Gurg*® Aap.

We call B,, the reduced tensor associated with Ay. Similarly,
BY = ggapA”.

It may be noted that gv” is nothing more than the comple-
ment of guy, since

guagrBgas = gtad, = gr.

§ 9. The Equation of the Geodetic Line. The Motion of a
Particle

As the linear element ds is defined independently of the
system of co-ordinates, the line drawn between two points P
and P’ of the four-dimensional continuum in such a way that
\ds is stationary—a geodetic line—has a meaning which also
is independent of the choice of co-ordinates. Its equation is

p’
5 1 kn | ee ; pac 20)
iS ;

Carrying out the variation in the usual way, we obtain

from this equation four differential equations which define the

geodetic line ; this operation will be inserted here for the sake |
of completeness. Let » be a function of the co-ordinates ay,
and let this define a family of surfaces which intersect the

required geodetic line as well as all the lines in immediate

proximity to it which are drawn through the points P and P’.

Any such line may then be supposed to be given by expres-

sing its co-ordinates Zy as functions of ». Let the symbol 6

indicate the transition from a point of the required geodetic

to the point corresponding to the same A on a neighbouring

line. Then for (20) we may substitute

[dud = 0
1 dat des) 7 . . (20a)

wh = $6 Gn ad
But since

132 THE GENERAL THEORY

1f1 9, dz, dz, dit, =) }
bw = O12 dae dh au Ome + Ie ales ;

and
dz,

d
é *) = qyloee),

we obtain from (20a), after a partial integration,

| t,bxdy = 0;
Al
where

_ 4 Gu» a 1 Wy» dz, dx,
yatta me rN oh)

Inlw adrJ ~ 2wdx, dr dr
Since the values of Sz, are arbitrary, it follows from this that
a : : . (20c)

are the equations of the geodetic line.

If ds does not vanish along the geodetic line we may
choose the “length of the arc’ s, measured along the geodetic
line, for the parameter X. Then w = 1, and in place of (20c)
we obtain

Pry, Wud, dz, 1 War At, dz, 0
ASUS SOC MC RRR eo
or, by a mere change of notation,

az, dz, dz,
Serge tlie cla gs

yO bac oeetoDe)

where, following Christoffel, we have written

rs 5 (cee WJro _ Gur
Liege |S B\2z, * ut, an i ie

Finally, if we multiply (204) by g°7 (outer multiplication with
respect to 7, inner with respect to o), we obtain the equations
of the geodetic line in the form

@n, die, de,
ae Petia 0 ae,

where, following Christoffel, we have set

(uv, tT} = 97 [u,a] . . (28)

A. EINSTEIN 133

§ 10. The Formation of Tensors by Differentiation

With the help of the equation of the geodetic line we can
now easily deduce the laws by which new tensors can be
formed from old by differentiation. By this means we are
able for the first time to formulate generally covariant
differential equations. We reach this goal by repeated appli-
cation of the following simple law :—

If in our continuum a curve is given, the points of which
are specified by the arcual distance s measured from a fixed
point on the curve, and if, further, ¢ is an invariant function
of space, then d¢/ds is also an invariant. The proof les in
this, that ds is an invariant as well as d¢.

As
dh _ $$ din
ds da, ds
therefore
pyc
ous dz, ds

is also an invariant, and an invariant for all curves starting
from a point of the continuum, that is, for any choice of the
vector dz,. Hence it immediately follows that
op
a enn ee (24)
is a covariant four-vector—the ‘‘ gradient” of ¢.
According to our rule, the differential quotient
dy
1 ane FF
taken on @ curve, is similarly an invariant. Inserting the
value of yr, we obtain in the first place
_ 2b dey dey , 24 Pay
xX da,02, ds ds © dx, ds**
The existence of a tensor cannot be deduced from this forth-
with. But if we may take the curve along which we have
differentiated to be a geodetic, we obtain on substitution for
dx,/ds* from (22),
Oe) dp )Ge day
x Gere ms eee ds ds’
Since we may interchange the order of the differentiations,

-

134 THE GENERAL THEORY

and since by (28) and (21) {uv, 7} is symmetrical in B and v,
it follows that the expression in brackets is symmetrical in
and ». Since a geodetic line can be drawn in any direction
from a.point of the continuum, and therefore dz,/ds is a four-
vector with the ratio of its components arbitrary, it follows
from the results of § 7 that

ed od 25

sa caele Pe es = {EY, TrSpt : : ( )

is a covariant tensor of the second rank. We have therefore
come to this result: from the covariant tensor of the first

rank
og
A, = ize
we can, by differentiation, form a covariant tensor of the
second rank

Any = SS* — ty, Ae Bey Sey

We call the tensor A,, the “ extension ” (covariant derivative)
of the tensor A, In the first place we can readily show that
the operation leads to a tensor, even if the vector A, cannot
be represented as a gradient. To see this, we first observe
that

dy

is @ covariant vector, if y and ¢ are scalars. The sum of
four such terms

: a) Ih)

8. = yo tate yo,

is also a covariant vector, if ¥, 6) . 2. bY, 6 are scalars.

But it is clear that any covariant vector can be represented

in the form §,. For, if A, is a vector whose components are
any given functions of the ty, we have only to put (in terms

of the selected system of co-ordinates)

in order to ensure that-S, shall be equal to Ax

A. EINSTEIN 135

Therefore, in order to demonstrate that A,, is a tensor if
any covariant vector is inserted on the right-hand side for A,,
we only need show that this is so for the vector S,. But for
this latter purpose it is sufficient, as a glance at the right-
hand side of (26) teaches us, to furnish the proof for the case

ree
Ay = Wu
Now the right-hand side of (25) multiplied by y,
vp op
Migeiaa F {Hv, Dae
isa tensor. Similarly
Laan
OL, WLy

being the outer product of two vectors, is a tensor. By ad-
dition, there follows the tensor character of

> (yp 2P) - ur, (32).

OL OD ‘Ly

As a glance at (26) will show, this completes the demon-
stration for the vector

and consequently, from what has already been proved, for any
vector A,.

By means of the extension of the vector, we may easily
define the “extension” of a covariant tensor of any rank.
This operation is a generalization of the extension of a vector.
We restrict ourselves to the case of a tensor of the second
rank, since this suffices to give a clear idea of the law of
formation.

As has already been observed, any covariant tensor of the
second rank can be represented * as the sum of tensors of the

* By outer multiplication of the vector with arbitrary components Aj, Ajs,

Ais, Aig by the vector with components 1, 0, 0, 0, we produce a tensor with
components
Ayn Ay Ais Ais
Ong Ope O24 0
O70 SF 0 0
@® OF OW &
By the addition of four tensors of this type, we obtain the tensor Auy with any

ssigned components,

136 THE GENERAL THEORY

type A,B,. It will therefore be sufficient to deduce the ex-
pression for the extension of a tensor of this special type.
By (26) the expressions

dA,

ite = {om, TIA,,
te — {ov, T}B,,
OL

are tensors. On outer multiplication of the first by B,, and
of the second by A,, we obtain in each case a tensor of the
third rank. By adding these, we have the tensor of the third
rank

vara = a - {op, TIAL, oa {ov, T}Aur . . (27)

where we have put A,, = A,B, As the right-hand side
of (27) is linear and homogeneous in the A,, and their first
derivatives, this law of formation leads to a tensor, not only
in the case of a tensor of the type A,B,, but also in the case
of asum of such tensors, ie. in the case of any covariant
tensor of the second rank. We call Awe the extension of the
tensor A,,.

It is clear that (26) and (24) concern only special cases
of extension (the extension of the tensors of rank one and
zero respectively).

In general, all special laws of formation of tensors are in-
cluded in (27) in combination with the multiplication of
tensors.

§ 11. Some Cases of Special Importance

The Fundamental Tensor.—We will first prove’ some
lemmas which will be useful hereafter. By the rule for the
differentiation of determinants

dg = g"*9dguy = — gugdgr wis ofc, (28)

The last member is obtained from the last but one, if we bear
in mind that g,,g” = ov, 80 that g,g” = 4, and conse-
quently

Judge” + gdgu, = 0.

A. EINSTEIN 137
From (28), it follows that

J - We We

“Gee

Seo $9 -. (29)

(30)

From these, by mixed multiplication by g7” and g,, re-
spectively, and a change of notation for the indices, we have

dg = — gg’ dgag
LT ARES RIN ET) PE (31)
We g"9 We

and
Gav = — JueJvp dg8 (32)
Our _ og
wz, = — JuaJvp Wr

The relation (31) admits of a transformation, of which we
also have frequently to make use. From (21)

sit — fac, A) + [Ro,a]. - (38)

Inserting this in age second formula of (31), we obtain, in
view of (23)

MY a
2g" = — git{ro, »} - g{ro, wh « (84)
Substituting the right-hand side of (34) in (29), we have
aw eer 20e
PGs dz, - {yuo, B} . : (29a)

The ‘ Divergence” of a Contravariant Vector.—lf we
take the inner product of (26) by the contravariant funda-
mental tensor g#”, the right-hand side, after a transformation
of the first term, assumes the form

= ra(2Jua , Wra yr) yy
=o" An) = A - 49 (ae oF wp “Geo A;.

138 THE GENERAL THEORY

In accordance with (31) and (29), the last term of this ex-
pression may be written

22,4 ua, = Uj cn

As the symbols of the indices of summation are immaterial,
the first two terms of this expression cancel the second of the
one above. If we then write g*”A, = A”, so that A” like Ay
is an arbitrary vector, we finally obtain

E r) ——,y
This scalar is the divergence of the contravarian vector A’.
The “‘ Curl” of a Covariant Vector—The second term in
(26) is symmetrical in the indices » and v. Therefore
uw — A, is a particularly simply constructed antisym-
metrical tensor. We obtain

DA, _ dA,
oz, ote

ye (36)

Antisymmetrical Extension of a Siax-vector—Applying
(27) to an antisymmetrical tensor of the second rank Aw,
forming in addition the two equations which arise through
cyclic permutations of the indices, and adding these three
equations, we obtain the tensor of the third rank

ts _ dAw , dAre , 0Acn

Bize a Ace ats Asan - Pony = (re a Vay dz,
which it is easy to prove is saaignanan ee

The Divergence of a Siz-vector—Taking the mixed pro-
duct of (27) by g**g’*, we also obtain a tensor. The first
term on the right-hand side of (27) may be written in the
form

(37)

“a

vB
s(oteg "BAL, >) al ee og ~Awy = gi 7 pee

If we write A® for guagBAyy and A°* for g¥*g’8A,,, and in
the transformed first term replace

dgv8 dgu
rye and We

A. EINSTEIN 139

by their values as given by (34), there results from the right-
hand side of (27) an expression consisting of seven terms, of
which four cancel, and there remains
ap
Ag = — + {oy, aJAY? + {oy, BJA. (38)

This is the expression for the extension of a contravariant
tensor of the second rank, and corresponding expressions for
the extension of contravariant tensors of higher and lower
rank may also be formed.

We note that in an analogous way we may also form the
extension of a mixed tensor :—

Ale = oe — {op, TAS + {or, aA, . SEED)

On contracting (38) with respect to the indices 8 and o
(inner multiplication by 83), we obtain the vector

a OA a B
Ac = 5 + (8x, BIA + (By, a A™.

_ On account of the symmetry of {8y, a} with respect to the in-
dices 8 and y, the third term on the right-hand side vanishes,
if A** is, as we will assume, an antisymmetrical tensor. The
second term allows itself to be transformed in accordance
with (29a). Thus we obtain

poaesile ts DINE Ie alvin’ fel cag)
EER a Ce
This is the expression for the divergence of a contravariant
six-vector.
The Divergence of a Mixed Tensor of the Second Rank.—
Contracting (89) with respect to the indices a and a, and

taking (29a) into consideration, we obtain
—— (/ - gA. —— co
J Ghy = In) — top, rf = GAT. (AL)

If we introduce the contravariant tensor A°” = grtA? in the
last term, it assumes the form

— [on, pl/ — gare.

140 THE GENERAL THEORY

If, further, the tensor Ar’ is symmetrical, this reduces to

7 Jor y po
- $,/ = OP aaat “
Had we introduced, instead of A®’, the covariant tensor
Apo = YpagopA**, which is also symmetrical, the last term, by
virtue of (31), would assume the form

og’?
$/ az Gy, Wu gad

In the case of symmetry in question, (41) may therefore be
replaced by the two forms

Tart hg ape wee Soe) ila igh . (41a)
Le Lu

oe — gAr og°7
SG ae I ae +42 GA » (AID)
Le Tu
which we have to employ later on.

§ 12. The Riemann-Christoffel Tensor

We now seek the tensor which can be obtained from the
fundamental tensor alone, by differentiation. At first sight
the solution seems obvious. We place the fundamental
tensor of the g,, in (27) instead of any given tensor A,», and
thus have a new tensor, namely, the extension of the funda-
mental tensor. But we easily convince ourselves that this
extension vanishes identically. We reach our goal, however,
in the following way. In (27) place

vA
Aw = ae — (uy, phAp,

i.e. the extension of the four-vector A, Then (with a some-
what different naming of the indices) we get the tensor of the
third rank

vA Lerak ry 2A
fags nila aie Bes ital oe xs
ner = Dapag pees Pe, ur, } day 177 Bt dp

+ [ = aus, p} + {ur, ab{ac, p} + {or, a}{o, p} |.

A. EINSTEIN 141

This expression suggests forming the tensor Ayor — Ayro-
For, if we do so, the following terms of the expression for
Ayor cancel those of Ayr, the first, the fourth, and the
member corresponding to the last term in square brackets ;
because all these are symmetrical in o and 7. The same
holds good for the sum of the second and third terms. Thus
we obtain

APs = Bice == BrorAs . * A (42)

where
p P) P)
Bust = - =r Pet on et p} — {yo, a}{ar, p}

+ {u7, a}{ac, p} (43)

The essential feature of the result is that on the right side of
(42) the A, occur alone, without their derivatives. From the
tensor character of Ayer — Ayre 1n conjunction with the fact
that A, is an arbitrary vector, it follows, by reason of § 7,

‘that BY, is a tensor (the Riemann-Christoffel tensor).
The mathematical importance of this tensor 1s as follows :
If the continuum is of such a nature that there is a co-ordinate

system with reference to which the g,, are constants, then

all the BY,, vanish. If we choose any new system of co-
ordinates in place of the original ones,. the g,, referred
thereto will not be constants, but in consequence of its tensor
nature, the transformed components of Bf,,, will still vanish
in the new system. Thus the vanishing of the Riemann
tensor is a necessary condition that, by an appropriate choice
of the system of reference, the g,, may be constants. In our
problem this corresponds to the case in which,* with a
suitable choice of the system of reference, the special
theory of relativity holds good for a finite region of the
continuum.

Contracting (43) with respect to the indices 7 and p we
obtain the covariant tensor of second rank

*The mathematicians have proved that this is also a sufficient condition,

142 THE GENERAL THEORY

Gi BEBE, as ee hue

BVp

where
Ry = - stan, a} + {ua, B} WB, a} ”
_ Plog /=9 1, 42108 /=9
So Smtrpete rire tp i) ee ey,

Note on the Choice of Co-ordinates.—It has already been
observed in § 8, in connexion with equation (18a), that the
choice of co-ordinates may with advantage be made so that
/-g=1. A glance at the equations obtained in the last
two sections shows that by such a choice the laws of forma-
tion of tensors undergo an important simplification. This
applies particularly to G,,, the tensor just developed, which
plays a fundamental part in the theory to be set forth. For
this specialization of the choice of co-ordinates brings about
the vanishing of S,,, so that the tensor G,, reduces to Ry.

On this account I shall hereafter give all relations in the
simplified form which this specialization of the choice of co-
ordinates brings with it. It will then be an easy matter to
revert to the generally covariant equations, if this seems
desirable in a special case.

C. THEORY OF THE GRAVITATIONAL FIELD

§ 13. Equations of Motion of a Material Point in the
Gravitational Field. Expression for the Field-com-
ponents of Gravitation

A freely movable body not subjected to external forces
- moves, according to the special theory of relativity, in a
straight line and uniformly. This is also the case, according
to the general theory of relativity, for a part of four-di-
mensional space in which the system of co-ordinates Ky), may
be, and is, so chosen that they have the special constant
values given in (4).

If we consider precisely this movement from any chosen
system of co-ordinates K,, the body, observed from K,, moves,
according to the considerations in § 2, in a gravitational field.
The law of motion with respect to K, results without diffi-

A. EINSTEIN 143

culty from the following consideration. With respect to K,
the law of motion corresponds to a four-dimensional straight
line, ie. to a geodetic line. Now since the geodetic line
is defined independently of the system of reference, its
equations will also be the equation of motion of the material
point with respect to K,. If we set
T= - tr}... GB)
the equation of the motion of the point with respect to K,,
becomes
OB: Sn

ds? ds ds

(46)

We now make the assumption, which readily suggests itself,
that this covariant system of equations also defines the motion
of the point in the gravitational field in the case when there
is no system of reference K,, with respect to which the
special theory of relativity holds good in a finite region.
We have all the more justification for this assumption as (46)
contains only first derivatives of the g,,», between which even
in the special case of the existence of K,, no relations sub-
sist. *

If the Ij, vanish, then the point moves uniformly in a
straight line. These quantities therefore condition the devi-
ation of the motion from uniforniity. They are the com-
ponents of the gravitational field.

§ 14. The Field Equations of Gravitation in the Absence
of Matter

We make a distinction hereafter between “‘ gravitational
field’ and “ matter” in this way, that we denote everything
but the gravitational field as “ matter.” Our use of the word
therefore includes not only matter in the ordinary sense, but
the electromagnetic field as well.

Our next task is to find the field equations of gravitation
in the absence of matter. Here we again apply the method

*It is only between the second (and first) derivatives that, by § 12, the
relations Bi or = 0 subsist.

144 THE GENERAL THEORY

employed in the preceding paragraph in formulating the
equations of motion of the material point. A special case in
which the required equations must in any case be satisfied is
that of the special theory of relativity, in which the g,, have
certain constant values. Let this be the case in a certain
finite space in relation to a definite system of co-ordinates Ky.
Relatively to this system all the components of the Riemann

tensor B Vis defined in (43), vanish. For the space under
consideration they then vanish, also in any other system of
co-ordinates.

Thus the required equations of the matter-free gravita-
tional field must in any case be satisfied if all B,f, Vanish.
But this condition goes too far. For it is clear that, e.g., the
gravitational field generated by a material point in its environ-
ment certainly cannot be ‘‘transformed away ” by any choice
of the system of co-ordinates, i.e. it cannot be transformed to
the case of constant gy». .

This prompts us to require for the matter-free gravitational
field that the symmetrical tensor G,,, derived from the tensor
BJ Shall vanish. Thus we obtain ten equations for the ten
quantities g,,, which are satisfied in the special case of the
vanishing of all B,?. With the choice which we have made

of a system of co-ordinates, and taking (44) into considera-
tion, the equations for the matter-free field are

bs
v Peres
3, * Duele = 4

J -g=1
It must be pointed out that there is only a minimum of
arbitrariness in the choice of these equations. For besides
G,, there is no tensor of second rank which is formed from
the g,, and its derivatives, contains no derivations higher than

second, and is linear in these derivatives.*

These equations, which proceed, by the method of pure

(47)

* Properly speaking, this can be affirmed only of the tensor
Gig sb VI? Gag,
where A is a constant. If, however, we set this tensor = 0, we come back again
to the equations Guy = 0.

A. EINSTEIN 145

mathematics, from the requirement of the general theory of
relativity, give us, in combination with the equations of
motion (46), to a first approximation Newton’s law of at-
traction, and to a second approximation the explanation of
the motion of the perihelion of the planet Mercury discovered
by Leverrier (as it remains after corrections for perturbation
have been made). These facts must, in my opinion, be
taken as a convincing proof of the correctness of the theory.

§ 15. The Hamiltonian Function for the Gravitational
Field. Laws of Momentum and Energy

To show that the field equations correspond to the laws of
momentum and energy, it is most convenient to write them
in the following Hamiltonian form :—

3{Har = 0
H = gt I%, T°. Gis)
mht

where, on the boundary of the finite four-dimensional region

of integration which we have in view, the variations vanish.
We first have to show that the form (47a) is equivalent

to the equations (47). For this purpose we regard H as a

function of the g*” and the g*” (= dg+”/dx~).

Then in the first place

SH = F%4,T%, Sgt” + 2g”’Tig dT vn

me Tee, gh” + OFS, 8(gtT sa)-
But

ype ae v BA Gua OGar = ae)
(a T*.) a 48] 99 or a ears), |

The terms arising from the last two terms in round brackets
are of different sign, and result from each other (since the de-
nomination of the summation indices is immaterial) through
interchange of the indices » and 8. They cancel each other
in the expression for 5H, because they are multiplied by the

146 THE GENERAL THEORY

quantity [,, which is symmetrical with respect to the in-
dices »and 8. Thus there remains only the first term in
round brackets to be considered, so that, taking (31) into ac-
count, we obtain

SH = — TeglO9"" + Vagdg.

Thus
dH
ager Til va
dH p : : . (48)
Cpe nae
Carrying out the variation in (47a), we get in the first place
0 /oH oH
Seclagat) ~ agen © Ge

which, on account of (48), agrees with (47), as was to be
proved.

If we multiply (47b) by g*’, then because

pees (=) ome (0°55) Ss oH age”
i ogny ogre” peo ;

we obtain the equation

3%, dH O =a
Sa pn) oe
Ore ;
at ‘ |
oa ane 4) paar)
—20t, = sH|
ogi” Cc

where, on account of (48), the second equation of (47), and
(34)

ad Rs Ein! Nyt DFR. gM Pah 2 (0)

* The reason for the introduction of the factor — 2x will be apparent later.

A. EINSTEIN 147

It is to be noticed that ¢* is not a tensor; on the other
hand (49) applies to all systems of co-ordinates for which
/- 9 =1. This equation expresses the law of conservation
of momentum and of energy for the gravitational field.
Actually the integration of this equation over a three-
dimensional volume V yields the four equations

co jeav = [(ue, + mt? + nti)d8. . (49a)
dx,

where 1, m, n denote the direction-cosines of direction of the
inward drawn normal at the element dS of the bounding sur-
face (in the sense of Euclidean geometry). We recognize in
this the expression of the laws of conservation in their usual
form. The quantities ¢* we call the “ energy components ”
of the gravitational field.

I will now give equations (47) in a third form, which is
particularly useful for a vivid grasp of our subject. By
multiplication of the field equations (47) by g’* these are ob-
tained in the ‘‘ mixed” form. Note that

Gl peo Dg
pe a nal goals) on sels

0Le Oe

which quantity, by reason of (34), is equal to ‘
ry) v aya
=--(g"Tw») — g?Tepluv - 9° Tp. wr,

OL,

or (with different symbols for the’ summation indices)

Y)
5 (9"T'a) — gD yD’, — 9’ Thal ve

02a

The third term of this expression cancels with the one aris-
ing from the second term of the field equations (47); using
relation (50), the second term may be written ;

w(t, a 4871),
where ¢ = ¢%. Thus instead of equations (47) we obtain
r)
eS (hy AE = — he 67t
ad Tea) by — 9% | Reel}
Pe EN NN

148 THE GENERAL THEORY

§ 16. The General Form of the Field Equations o
Gravitation

The field equations for matter-free space formulated in
§ 15 are to be compared with the field equation

Vo = 0

of Newton’s theory. We require the equation corresponding
to Poisson’s equation
Vid = Arp,

where p denotes the density of matter.

The special theory of relativity has led to the conclusion
that inért mass is nothing more or less than energy, which
finds its complete mathematical expression in a symmetrical
tensor of second rank, the energy-tensor. Thus in the
general theory of relativity we must introduce a correspond-

ing energy-tensor of matter T*, which, like the energy-com-

ponents ¢, [equations (49) and (50)] of the gravitational field,
will have mixed character, but will pertain to a symmetrical
covariant tensor.*

The system of equation (51) shows how this energy-tensor
(corresponding to the density p in Poisson’s equation) is to
be introduced into the field equations of gravitation. For if
we consider a complete system (e.g. the solar system), the
total mass of the system, and therefore its total gravitating
action as well, will depend on the total energy of the system,
and therefore on the ponderable energy together with the
gravitational energy. This will allow itself to be expressed
by introducing into (51), in place of the energy-components
of the gravitational field alone, the sums t, + Tiof theenergy-

components of matter and of gravitational field. Thus instead
of (51) we obtain the tensor equation

3 io o o o
39 Ens) = - alte + Th) — 480¢ + TY),

Nt
where we have set T = TY (Laue’s scalar). These are the

. (52)

*JarT* = Tor and g7bT? = TF are to be symmetrical tensors,

A. EINSTEIN 149

required general field equations of gravitation in mixed form.
Working back from these, we have in place of (47)

Olas a
elt + Pealh, = - (Tor - “| sae,
i - gt

It must be admitted that this introduction of the energy-
tensor of matter is not justified by the relativity postulate
‘alone. For this reason we have here deduced it from the
requirement that the energy of the gravitational field shall
act gravitatively in the same way as any other kind of energy.
But the strongest reason for the choice of these equations
lies in their consequence, that the equations of conservation
of momentum and energy, corresponding exactly to equations
(49) and (49a), hold good for the components of the total
energy. This will be shown in § 17.

§ 17. The Laws of Conservation in the General Case
Equation (52) may readily be transformed so that the
second term on the right-hand side vanishes. Contract (52)
with respect to the indices yw and a, and after multiplying the
resulting equation by 407, subtract it from equation (52).
This gives
P) a 4 o o
5069 Eos = 48u.g**T yp) =n K(ty a Dey: d (52a)

On this equation we perform the operation 2/dz¢. We have

2A ae) FL op aaa( Jura , Ger _ Jus |
era f is) ae era °9 ses sy Sern tr )
The first and third terms of the round brackets yield con-
tributions which cancel one another, as may be seen by
interchanging, in the contribution of the third term, the
summation indices a and o on the one hand, and @ and X
on the other. The second term may be re-modelled by (81),
so that we have

ee ee

: OLE0e >, 200g 0Ly

The second term on the left-hand side of (52a) yields in the

150 THE GENERAL THEORY

first place ;
r) AB
= toon (9 Tis)

re ies Ge Gap eae |
<———-| g\hg@ {oh pond eee
laa 9 Lg Z OZ ozs

or

With the choice of co-ordinates which we have made, the
term deriving from the last term in round brackets disappears
by reason of (29). The other two may be combined, and
together, by (81), they give
d8qa8
a Wadlprt,

so that in consideration of (54), we have the identity

0? o a
span (o"ue s $859) =O00. . (55)
From (55) and (52a), it follows that

vty + TY?) af

56
5 (56)

Thus it results from our field equations of gravitation
that the laws of conservation of momentum and energy are
satisfied. This may be seen most easily from the consider-
ation which leads to equation (49a) ; except that here, instead
of the energy components ¢’ of the gravitational field, we have
to introduce the totality of the energy components cf matter
and gravitational field.

§ 18. The Laws of Momentum and Energy for Matter, as
a Consequence of the Field Equations
Multiplying (53) by dg*”/dz-, we obtain, by the method
adopted in § 15, in view of the vanishing of

agi
Iw
the equation
ote 4 39"'T., a4 yh
One C2

A. EINSTEIN 151
or, in view of (56),

is dguy
Teck eves) y= 0 e ‘
Wa Lars 2 (ot)

Comparison with (41b) shows that with the choice of
system of co-ordinates which we have made, this equation
predicates nothing more or less than the vanishing of di-
vergence of the material energy-tensor. Physically, the
occurrence of the second term on the left-hand side shows
that laws of conservation of momentum and energy do not
apply in the strict sense for matter alone, or else that they
apply only when the g*” are constant, 1.e. when the field in-
tensities of gravitation vanish. This second term is an ex-
pression for momentum, and for energy, as transferred per
unit of volume and time from the gravitational field to matter.
This is brought out still more clearly by re-writing (57) in the
sense of (41) as

Pid bes A ;
ore Tee Tees MONS TR)
The right side expresses the energetic effect of the gravita-
tional field on matter.

Thus the field equations of gravitation contain four con-
ditions which govern the course of material phenomena.
They give the equations of material phenomena completely,
if the latter is capable of being characterized by four differ-
ential equations independent of one another.*

D. MATERIAL PHENOMENA

The mathematical aids developed in part B enable us
forthwith to generalize the physical laws of matter (hydro-
dynamics, Maxwell’s electrodynamics), as they are formulated
in the special theory of relativity, so that they will fit in with
the general theory of relativity. When this is done, the
general principle of relativity does not indeed afford us a
further limitation of possibilities ; but it makes us acquainted
with the influence of the gravitational field on all processes,

*QOn this question cf. H. Hilbert, Nachr. d. K. Gesellsch. d. Wiss. zu
Gottingen, Math.-phys. Klasse, 1915, p. 3.

152 THE GENERAL THEORY

without our having to introduce any new hypothesis what-
ever.

Hence it comes about that it is not necessary to. introduce
definite assumptions as to the physical nature of matter (in
the narrower sense). In particular it may remain an open
question whether the theory of the electromagnetic field in
conjunction with that of the gravitational field furnishes a
sufficient basis for the theory of matter or not. The general
postulate of relativity is unable on principle to tell us anything
about this. It must remain to be seen, during the working
out of the theory, whether electromagnetics and the doctrine
of gravitation are. able in collaboration to perform what the
former by itself is unable to do. ;

§ 19. Euler’s Equations for a Frictionless Adiabatic Fluid

Let p and p be two scalars, the former of which we call
the “‘ pressure,” the latter the ‘density ” of a fluid; and let
an equation subsist between them. Let the contravariant
symmetrical tensor

dz, dx
eB o pap ehh tard
T ea a ae wa (58)

be the contravariant energy-tensor of the fluid. ‘To it belongs
the covariant tensor

dz, az
Tw = - Jupp + JuaG usa. ae . (58a)
as well as the mixed tensor *
da, dx, ;
Th= MSlorkwedge tquPantadtan waOeR

Inserting the right-hand side of (58b) in (57a), we obtain the
Eulerian hydrodynamical equations of the general theory of
relativity. They give, in theory, a complete solution of the
problem of motion, since the four equations (57a), together

* For an observer using a system of reference in the sense of the special]
theory of relativity for an infinitely small region, and moving with it, the
density of energy 1 equals p— p. This gives the definition of p. Thus p is
not constant for an incompressible fluid.

A. EINSTEIN 153

with the given equation between p and p, and the equation

dz. dig _
9:8 Gs ds —

are sufficient, gag being given, to define the six unknowns

dz, aL» dts dis

Pi Pi Gs? “ds? ds’ ds’
If the g,, are also unknown, the equations (53) are
brought in. These are eleven equations for defining the ten
functions g,,, so that these functions appear over-defined.
We must remember, however, that the equations (57a) are
already contained in the equations (53), so that the latter
represent only seven independent equations. There is good
reason for this lack of definition, in that the wide freedom of
the choice of co-ordinates causes the problem to remain
mathematically undefined to such a degree that three of the
functions of space may be chosen at will.*

§ 20. Maxwell’s Electromagnetic Field Equations for Free
Space

Let ¢, be the components of a covariant vector—the

electromagnetic potential vector. From them we form, in

accordance with (36), the components Fy, of the covariant

six-vector of the electromagnetic field, in accordance with
the system of equations

ee - Ppp = 2g. 5 . > (59)

0fe OL

It follows from (59) that the system of equations

dF oe oF. Ores SS
a + a + oe i : Pe "€60)

is satisfied, its left side being, by (37), an antisymmetrical
tensor of the third rank. System (60) thus contains essenti-
ally four equations which are written out as follows :—

*On the abandonment of the choice of co-ordinates with g = — 1, there
remain four functions of space with liberty of choice, corresponding to the four
arbitrary functions at our disposal in the choice of co-ordinates.

154 THE GENERAL THEORY
Fn, Fu, Fe _

—— = 0

0%, = O29 O23

oF 3, ¥ oF y is dF is ay,

On, 0X3 or, 4 . (60a)
dF a ms dF, +3 oF 4 arg

OL OL, Ons

dF OFes | Fs, |

oz5 wry a Date ase

This system corresponds to the second of Maxwell’s
systems of equations. We recognize this at once by setting

F.; = Ha, FY, = Ez
Py, = Hy, By = Ey (61)

Fy, = Hz, F;, = E,
Then in place of (60a) we may set, in the usual notation of
three-dimensional vector analysis,

0H
divH =0

We obtain Maxwell’s first system by generalizing the

form given by Minkowski. We introduce the contravariant
six- vector associated with F8

Fer. guegetlt gr 10 ea)

and also the contravariant vector J“ of the density of the
electric current. Then, taking (40) into consideration, the
following equations will be invariant for any substitution
whose invariant is unity (in agreement with the cHosen co-
ordinates) :—

n)

Nes Sa ee ' : . (63)
Let
Fr3 ne eos, ap se gre
FF? =.H',, F4%= - i} (64)
FV = A, F4#= - BW,

which quantities are equal to the quantities H, ... Kein

A. EINSTEIN 155

the special case of the restricted theory of relativity ; and in
addition

Sear) = Jy, Jems J! p,

we obtain in place of (63)

Ut
div EK’ = p

The equations (60), (62), and (63) thus form the generali-
zation of Maxwell’s field equations for free space, with the
convention which we have established with respect to the
choice of co-ordinates. :

The Energy-components of the Electromagnetic Field.—
We form the inner product

ee Eee Sel a oe OS)

By (61) its components, written in the three-dimensional
manner, are

I

Ky

pEx + [ #] 5 je Vad
; ; : (65a)
t, = — GE)
Kg ig a covariant vector the components of which are
equal to the negative momentum, or, respectively, the energy,
which is transferred from the electric masses to the electro-
magnetic field per unit of time and volume. If the electric
masses are free, that is, under the sole influence of the
electromagnetic field, the covariant vector «g will vanish.
To obtain the energy-components T” of the electromagnetic

field, we need only give to equation x, = 0 the form of
equation (57). From (63) and (65) we have in the first place

Py ca WPoy
8 DNs day”

Q y
Ke = EF = 5, E on B) - FY
The second term of the right-hand side, by reason of (60),
permits the transformation
ee ON
BF 20 2B

BY
ip Le

ey ace 29"*9"? Pop

oF.
nee

156 THE GENERAL THEORY

which latter expression may, for reasons of symmetry, also
be written in the form

PN ye oF,
a 3| 99°F ore aes ghegrs Fw |.

But for this we may set

P) P)
— 457-(9"*9"*FapF an) + $F apB uns (9"*9"*).
The first of these terms is written more briefly
3 a 2
= 45,-(EYEw) 5

the second, after the differentiation is carried out, and after
some reduction, results in

T 30 oT
ax 4k" Fg so
Taking all three terms together we obtain the relation
ore = OF uv
hae ea pL erga! bs ' : . (66)
where
Ty = - F..F" + 48°F pF.

Equation (66), if x, vanishes, is, on account of (80),
equivalent to (57) or (57a) respectively. Therefore the T”
are the energy-components of the electromagnetic field.
With the help of (61) and (64), it is easy to show that these
energy-components of the electromagnetic field in the case
of the special theory of relativity give the well-known Maxwell-
Poynting expressions. 5

We have now deduced the general laws which are satisfied
by the gravitational field and matter, by consistently using a
system of co-ordinates for which ,/- g=1. We have
thereby achieved a considerable simplification of formule
and calculations, without failing to comply with the require-
ment of general covariance ; for we have drawn our equations
from generally covariant equations by specializing the system
of co-ordinates.

A. EINSTEIN 157

_ Still the question is not without a formal interest, whether
with a correspondingly generalized definition of the energy-
components of gravitational field and matter, even without
specializing the system of co-ordinates, it is possible to formu-
late laws of conservation in the form of equation (56), and
field equations of gravitation of the same nature as (52) or
(52a), in such amanner that on the left we have a divergence
(in the ordinary sense), and on the right the sum of the
energy-components of matter and gravitation. I have found
that in both cases this is actually so. But I do not think
that the communication of my somewhat extensive reflexions
on this subject would be worth while, because after all they
do not give us anything that is materially new.

E
§ 21. Newton’s Theory as a First Approximation

As has already been mentioned more than once, the
special theory of relativity as a special case of the general
theory is-characterized by the g,, having the constant values
(4). From what has already been said, this means complete
neglect of the effects of gravitation. We arrive at a closer
approximation to reality by considering the case where the
Ju» differ from the values of (4) by quantities which are small
compared with 1, and neglecting small quantities of second
and higher order. (First point of view of approximation. )

It is further to be assumed that in the space-time territory
under consideration the g,, at spatial infinity, with a suitable
choice of co-ordinates, tend toward the values (4) ; i.e. we are
considering gravitational fields which may be regarded as
generated exclusively by matter in the finite region.

It might be thought that these approximations must lead
us to Newton’s theory. But to that end we still need to ap-
proximate the fundamental equations from a second point of
view. We give our attention to the motion of a material
point in accordance with the equations (16). In the case of
the special theory of relativity the components

dx, dx, dz;

ds’ ds’ ds

158 THE GENERAL THEORY

may take on any values. This signifies that any velocity

= l(ae) + Gaet) © Ge)
koe (2) ce ax, i dx,
may occur, which is less than the velocity of light in vacuo.
If we restrict ourselves to the case which almost exclusively
offers itself to our experience, of v being small as compared
with the velocity of light, this denotes that the components
dz, dt, dz;
dads” ae
are to be treated as small quantities, while dz,/ds, to the
second order of small quantities, is equal to one. (Second
point of view of approximation.)

Now we remark that from the first point of view of ap-
proximation the magnitudes I’, are all small magnitudes of
at least the first order. A glance at (46) thus shows that in
this equation, from the second point of view of approximation,
we have to consider only terms for which » =v = 4. Re-
stricting ourselves to terms of lowest order we first obtain in
place of (46) the equations !

d*x,
de | Th

where we have set ds = da, = dt; or with restriction to terms
which from the first point of view of approximation are of
first, order :—

2.

oe = [44,7] (7 = 1,2, 3)
dx
Tat = - 144, 4)

If in addition we suppose the gravitational field to bea quasi-
static field, by confining ourselves to the case where the
motion of the matter generating the gravitational field is but
slow (in comparison with the velocity of the propagation of
light), we may neglect on the right-hand side differentiations
with respect to the time in comparison with those with re-
spect to the space co-ordinates, so that we have

A. EINSTEIN 159

= —~$2% (r=1,2,38) .  . (67)

This is the equation of motion of the material point accord-
ing to Newton’s theory, in which }gq, plays the part of the
gravitational potential. What is remarkable in this result
is that the component g,, of the fundamental tensor alone
defines, to a first approximation, the motion of the material
point.

We now turn to the field equations (53). Here we
have to take into consideration that the energy-tensor of
“matter” is almost exclusively defined by the density of
matter in the narrower sense, i.e. by the second term of the
right-hand side of (58) for, respectively, (58a) or (58b)].
If we form the approximation in question, all the components
vanish with the one exception of T,,= p= T. On the left-
hand side of (53) the second term is a small quantity of
second order; .the first yields, to the approximation in
question,

P) m) r) Q)
3a, lM 1] + meee 2} + yea 3] - Lie 4}.

For » = v = 4, this gives, with the omission of terms differ-
entiated with respect to time,

OG Ogu O9u\s - jae
- +( Dat eat Oat ) = EV Sate

The last of equations (58) thus yields
V'gu = Kp. : . . (68)

The equations (67) and (68) together are equivalent to
Newton’s law of gravitation.

By (67) and (68) the expression for the gravitational
potential becomes

Beet ee ; ; : . (68a)

while Newton’s theory, with the unit of time which we have
chosen, gives

160 THE GENERAL THEORY

in which K denotes the constant 6°7 x 10-8, usually called
the constant of gravitation. By comparison we obtain

- SmK

k= —— =
C2

1:87 x 10-77 (69)

§ 22. Behaviour of Rods and Clocks in the Static Gravi-
tational Field. Bending of Light-rays. Motion of
the Perihelion of a Planetary Orbit

To arrive at Newton’s theory as a first approximation we
had to calculate only one component, 944, of the ten g,, of the
gravitational field, since this component alone enters into the
first approximation, (67), of the equation for the motion of the
material point in the gravitational field. From this, however,
it is already apparent that other components of the g,, must
differ from the values given in (4) by small quantities of the
first order. This is required by the condition g = - 1.

For a field-producing point mass at the origin of co-ordin-
ates, we obtain, to the first approximation, the radially
symmetrical solution ys
Jor = — Spo — aS (p, ¢ =.1, 2, 3)

Jos = Isp = O ; (p= I> 2,3) < (70)

Jug = Lege

where Sy, is 1 or 0, respectively, accordingly asp = corp +o,
and ris the quantity + ./x;+2}+ 27 On account of (68a)
a ak Oy ee . (70a)

4a’
if M denotes the field-producing mass. It is easy to verify
that the field equations (outside the mass) are satisfied to the
first order of small quantities.
We now examine the influence exerted by the field of the
mass M upon the metrical properties of space. The relation

ds? = gydX,dty.

always holds between the “ locally ” (§ 4) measured lengths
and times ds on the one hand, and the differences of co-ordin-
ates dz, on the other hand.

A. EINSTEIN 161

For a unit-measure of length laid “ parallel” to the axis
of x, for example, we should have to set ds? = - 1; dz, = da;
=dz,=0. Therefore - 1 = 9,,dz?. If, in addition, the

unit-measure lies on the axis of z, the first of equations (70)

gives
Inu = - (1 + *).

From these two relations it follows that, correct to a first
order of small quantities,

a
de-itg.~ 2 . (7)

The unit measuring-rod thus appears a little shortened in
relation to the system of co-ordinates by the presence of the
gravitational field, if the rod is laid along a radius.

In an analogous manner we obtain the length of co-
ordinates in tangential direction if, for example, we set

ds*= —1; dz, = dz, =dm=0; 4, =7,% = %;= 0.
The result is

~1= 9dr; = - dx. : . (71a)

With the tangential position, therefore, the gravitational
field of the point of mass has no influence on the length of a
rod.

Thus Euclidean geometry does not hold even to a first ap-
proximation in the gravitational field, if we wish to take one
and the same rod, independently of its place and orientation,
as a realization of the same interval ; although, to be sure, a
glance at (70a) and (69) shows that the deviations to be ex-
pected are much too slight to be noticeable in measurements
of the earth’s surface.

Further, let us examine the rate of a unit clock, which is
arranged to be at rest in a static gravitational field. Here we

have for a clock period ds = 1; dz, = da, = dz; =

Therefore
i= Gas; ; >

dey = F= = Sagar) ~ hiitga-c1)

162 THE GENERAL THEORY

or
da=1+ 9 (°C 0 GPT

Thus the clock goes more slowly if set up in the neighbour-
hood of ponderable masses. From this it follows that the
spectral lines of light reaching us from the surface of large
stars must appear displaced towards the red end of the
spectrum.*

We now examine the course of light-rays in the static
gravitational field. By the special theory of relativity the
velocity of light is given by the equation

~ dx} - dx, - dz} + dz, =0

and therefore by the general theory of relativity by the
equation
5), 1G 80,0, = Oe, : . (78)

If the direction, i.e. the ratio dz, : dx, : dx, is given, equation
(73) gives the quantities

dz, diz, dz,

dz, dz,’ dx,
and accordingly the velocity

az. da,\* ie ie
V (3) aA I aa) alt
defined in the sense of Euclidean geometry. We easily
recognize that the course of the light-rays must be bent with
regard to the system of co-ordinates, if the g,, are not con-
stant. If n is a direction perpendicular to the propagation of
light, the Huyghens principle shows that the light-ray, en-
visaged in the plane (vy, ”), has the curvature — dy/dn.

We examine the curvature undergone by a ray of light
passing by a mass M at the distance A. If we choose the
system of co-ordinates in agreement with the accompanying
diagram, the total bending of the ray (calculated positively if

* According to E. Freundlich, spectroscopical observations on fixed stars of
certain types indicate the existence of an effect of this kind, but a crucial
test of this consequence has not yet been made.

A. EINSTEIN 168

concave towards the origin) is given in sufficient approxi-
mation by

while (73) and (70) give

a et 4
. =i gay m1 ee a).

Carrying out the calculation, this gives ©

2a «kM
xX,
Dennen comet 2
A
Fia. 8.

According to this, a ray of light going past the sun under-
goes a deflexion of 17”; and a ray going past the planet
Jupiter a deflexion of about ‘02”.

If we calculate the gravitational field to a higher degree
of approximation, and likewise with corresponding accuracy
the orbital motion of a material point of relatively infinitely
small mass, we find a deviation of the following kind from
the Kepler-Newton laws of planetary motion. The orbital
ellipse of a planet undergoes a slow rotation, in the direction
of motion, of amount

6 = 243 (75)

a
Te%(1 — e?)

164 =THE GENERAL THEORY

per revolution. In this formula a denotes the major semi-
axis, c the velocity of light in the usual measurement, e the
eccentricity, T the time of revolution in seconds.*

Calculation gives for the planet Mercury a rotation of the
orbit of 43” per century, corresponding exactly to astronomical
observation (Leverrier); for the astronomers have discovered
in the motion of the perihelion of this planet, after allowing
for disturbances by other planets, an inexplicable remainder
of this magnitude.

*For the calculation I refer to the original papers: A. Hinstein,

Sitzungsber. d, Preuss, Akad. d. Wiss., 1915, p. 831; K. Schwarzschild,
ibid., 1916, p. 189.

HAMILTON’S PRINCIPLE AND THE
GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY
A. EINSTEIN

Translated from ‘‘ Hamiltonsches Princip und allgemeine
Relativitdtstheorie,’ Sitzungsberichte der Preusst-
schen Akad. d. Wissenschaften, 1916.

HAMILTON’S PRINCIPLE AND THE GENERAL
THEORY OF RELATIVITY

By A. EINSTEIN

[oes general theory of relativity has recently been
given in a particularly clear form by H. A. Lorentz
and D. Hilbert,* who have deduced its equations
from one single principle of variation. The same thing
will be done in the present paper. But my purpose here —
is to present the fundamental connexions in as perspicuous
a manner as possible, and in as general terms as is per-
missible from the point of view of the general theory of
relativity. In particular we shall make as few specializing
assumptions as possible, in marked contrast to Hilbert’s
treatment of the subject. On the other hand, in antithesis —
to my own most recent treatment of the subject, there is to
be complete liberty in the choice of the system of co-ordinates.
§ 1. The Principle of Variation and the Field-equations of
Gravitation and Matter

Let the gravitational field be described as usual by the
tensor t of the gy, (or the g*”); and matter, including the
electromagnetic field, by any number of space-time functions
Qi). How these functions may be characterized in the theory
of invariants does not concern us. Further, let ) be a function
of the

pe ot(= 322) andor = 2A) tread ae(~ Be)

* Four papers by Lorentz in the Publications of the Koninkl, Akad. van
Wetensch. te Amsterdam, 1915 and 1916; D. Hilbert, Gottinger Nachr., 1915,
Part 3.

+No use is made for the present of the tensor character of the guy.

167

168 HAMILTON’S PRINCIPLE

The principle of variation

3 Gar = 0 ee

then gives us as many differential equations as there are
functions g,, and qj) to be defined, if the g*” and qj) are
varied independently of one another, and in such a way that

0
at the limits of integration the dq), dg”, and Fi (89ur) all
vanish.
We will now assume that S is linear in the g,_, and that

the coefficients of the g*” depend only on the g"”. We may

then replace the principle of variation (1) by one which is
more convenient for us. For by appropriate partial integra-
tion we obtain

[Sar = [ 9*ar + F | ono ray

where F denotes an integral over the boundary of the domain
in question, and H* depends only on the g*”, g*”, Ye)» Toya, aNd
no longer on the g*”. From (2) we obtain, for such vari-
ations as are of interest to us,

[Gar = 6 J Cr aC

so that we may replace our principle of variation (1) by the
more convenient form

8 G*ar = 0. ak; 4 Sees

By carrying out the variation of the g*” and the Qe) We
obtain, as field-equations of gravitation and matter, the
equations +

2 (2H*\  3H* _ :
mie i Sess eeoh eAniaeate
{OOP MED in
aoe cer mame ces

t+ For brevity the summation symbols are omitted in the formule. In-
dices occurring twice in a term are always to be taken as summed. Thus in

(4), for example, a( os denotes the term pee (ea)

A. EINSTEIN 169

§ 2. Separate Existence of the Gravitational Field

If we make no restrictive assumption as to the manner in
which § depends on the g*”, 9%”, go”, Gio) Vina, the energy-com-
ponents cannot be divided into two parts, one belonging to
the gravitational field, the other to matter. To ensure this
feature of the theory, we make the following assumption

H=GiM . ‘ : mani)

where © is to depend only on the gu, g*”, g#”, and IN only on
g#”, Vp) Y(pjae Equations (4), (4a) then assume the form

d (d3G* 3G* mM
Sakae) $e oguy + ogHy . : . (7)
d / OM IM
= = 0 ; : as (3:
ler 9(p) 8)

Here &* stands in the same relation to © as H* to H.

It is to be noted carefully that equations (8) or (5) would
have to give way to others, if we were to assume IM or H to be
also dependent on derivatives of the q,) of order higher than
the first. Likewise it might be imaginable that the gq.) would
have to be taken, not as independent of one another, but as
connected by conditional equations. All this is of no im-
portance for the following developments, as these are based
solely on the equations (7), which have been found by vary-
ing our integral with respect to the g*’.

§ 3. Properties of the Field Equations of Gravitation
Conditioned by the Theory of Invariants

We now introduce the assumption that
dS = Ginvhl ty, . ; ; . Q)

is an invariant. This determines the transformational char-
acter of the g,,. As to the transformational character of the
Yo), Which describe matter, we make no supposition. On the

other hand, let the functions H = 2 as well as

Wee

170 HAMILTON’S PRINCIPLE

G= 129 2 and M = oe be invariants in relation to any

= g af =
substitutions of space-time co-ordinates. From these assump-
tions follows the general covariance of the equations (7) and
(8), deduced from (1). It further follows that G (apart from
a constant factor) must be equal to the scalar of Riemann’s
tensor of curvature ; because there is no other invariant with
the properties required for G.{ Thereby @* is also perfectly
determined, and consequently the left-hand side of field
equation (7) as well.{

From the general postulate of relativity there follow
certain properties of the function @* which we shall now de-
duce. For this purpose we carry through an infinitesimal
transformation of the co-ordinates, by setting

Ly = 2, + Lae. ' A . (10)
where the Az, are arbitrary, infinitely small functions of the
co-ordinates, and x’, are the co-ordinates, in the new system,
of the world-point having the co-ordinates z, in the original
system. As for the co-ordinates, so too for any other magni-
tude y, a law of transformation holds good, of the type

vy’ a Ay,
where Ay must always be expressible by the Az, From
the covariant property of the g*” we easily deduce for the gt’

and g’; the laws of transformation
wy adAzy) ae Tp)
Agr = gt Sec star g) areca : : eae
(Agu) yo (Axa)
wy a ;
Ag i Crag : . + (12)

Since @* depends only on the g** and g'z, it is possible, with

the help of (11) and (12), to calculate AG*. We thus obtain
the equation

sae @* RICUD) WG*_ — VAz,

J - gA( ) Prmct chn ne age OL ydLq’

J/ -

+ Herein is to be found the reason why the general postulate of relativity
leads to a very definite theory of gravitation.
} By performing partial integration we obtain

G* = J ~ 9 gur[{ua, B} (vB, a} — {uv, a} {aB, B}).

(13)

A. EINSTEIN 171

where for brevity we have set

2G 2G
ogi”

3@*
gh” + Gt - 2 gia (14)

i}
ogt
From these two equations we draw two inferences which are

important for what follows. We know that ou is an in-

variant with respect to any substitution, but we do not know

*
this of eae It is easy to demonstrate, however, that the

latter quantity is an invariant with respect to any linear
substitutions of the co-ordinates. Hence it follows that the

2
right side of (13) must always vanish if all ie vanish.
Consequently &* must satisfy the identity
S*¥=0 ; : : e153)

If, further, we choose the Az, so that they differ from
zero only in the interior of a given domain, but in infinitesimal
proximity to the boundary they vanish, then, with the trans-
formation in question, the value of the boundary integral oc-
curring in equation (2) does not change. Therefore AF = 0,
and, in consequence, f

AJ Gar aK | @*dr.

But the left-hand side of the equation must vanish, since

right-hand side also vanishes. Thus, taking (14), (15), and
(16) into consideration, we obtain, in the first place, the
equation

both rer and ,/— g dr are invariants. Consequently the

IG* (Are), _ ,
gue Sern Ire : 5 a (LO)

Transforming this equation by two partial integrations, and
having regard to the liberty of choice of the Az,, we obtain

} By the introduction of the quantities G and G* instead of H and H*.

172 HAMILTON’S PRINCIPLE
the identity

a (gx?) =0 oe ae

Lye agit? Load

From the two identities (16) and (17), which result from

the invariance of _ and therefore from the postulate of

general relativity, we now have to draw conclusions.

We first transform the field equations (7) of gravitation
by mixed multiplication by g**. We then obtain (by inter-
changing the indices o and v), as equivalents of the field
equations (7), the equations

P) G*
a ee) a (to ty oS eee
where we have set
IM
oO gue (19)
oS pian oG* oG* ; 4 IG* i
2 =~ Gopat + agnor”) = #(0%8: ~ Soave) (20

The last expression for t? is vindicated by (14) and (15). By
differentiation of (18) with respect to 2,, and summation for p,
there follows, in view of (17),

r)
3z,ete +) = 0 : 3 ee

Equation (21) expresses the conservation of momentum and
energy. We call 2; the components of the energy of matter,t”
the components of the energy of the gravitational field.
Having regard to (20), there follows from the field equations
(7) of gravitation, by multiplication by g*” and summation
with respect to w and »,
oY uy OM

Soh toe
dey 4g og"

= 0,

A. EINSTEIN 173
or, in view of (19) and (21),

0s”
o 4 Tos ek ; : « (22)
OL,

where %,, denotes the quantities g,.%7. These are four
equations which the energy-components of matter have to
satisfy.

It is to be emphasized that the (generally covariant) laws
of conservation (21) and (22) are deduced from the field equa-
tions (7) of gravitation, in combination with the postulate of
general covariance (relativity) alone, without using the field
equations (8) for material phenomena.

COSMOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS ON
THE GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY

A. EINSTEIN

Translated from “ Kosmologische Betrachtungen zur allge-
meinen Relativitdtstheorie,’ Sitzwngsberichte der Preus-
sischen Akad. d. Wissenschaften, 1917.

COSMOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS ON THE
GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY

By A. EINSTEIN

V’d =47Kp_ . ; GL)
in combination with the equations of motion of a material
point is not as yet a perfect substitute for Newton’s theory
of action at adistance. There is still to be taken into account
the condition that at spatial infinity the potential ¢ tends
toward a fixed limiting value. There is an analogous state
of things in the theory of gravitation in general relativity. .
Here, too, we must supplement the differential equations by
limiting conditions at spatial infinity, if we really have to
regard the universe as being of infinite spatial extent.

In my treatment of the planetary problem I chose these
limiting conditions in the form of the following assumption :
it is possible to select a system of reference so that at spatial
infinity all the gravitational potentials g,, become constant.
But it is by no means evident a priori that we may lay down
the same limiting conditions when we wish to take larger
portions of the physical universe into consideration. In the
following pages the reflexions will be given which, up to the
present, I have made on this fundamentally important

question.

I. is well known that Poisson’s equation

§ 1. The Newtonian Theory

Tt is well known that Newton’s limiting condition of the
constant limit for ¢ at spatial infinity leads to the view that
the density of matter becomes zero at infinity. For we
imagine that there may be a place in universal space round
about which the gravitational field of matter, viewed on a
large scale, possesses spherical symmetry. It then follows
from Poisson’s equation ee a order that ¢ may tend to a

178 COSMOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS

limit at infinity, the mean density p must decrease toward
zero more rapidly than l/r? as the distance r from the
centre increases.* In this sense, therefore, the universe
according to Newton is finite, although it may possess an
infinitely great total mass.

From this it follows in the first place that the radiation
emitted by the heavenly bodies will, in part, leave the
Newtonian system of the universe, passing radially outwards,
to become ineffective and lost in the infinite May not ~
entire heavenly bodies fare likewise? It is hardly possible
to give a negative answer to this question. For it follows
from the assumption of a finite limit for ¢ at spatial infinity
that a heavenly body with finite kinetic energy is able to
reach spatial infinity by overcoming the Newtonian forces of
attraction. By statistical mechanics this case must occur
from time to time, as long as the total energy of the stellar
system—transferred to one single star—is great enough to
send that star on its journey to infinity, whence it never can
return.

We might try to avoid this peculiar difficulty by assuming
a very high value for the limiting potential at infinity. That
would be a possible way, if the value of the gravitational
potential were not itself necessarily conditioned by the
heavenly bodies. The truth is that we are compelled to
regard the occurrence of any great differences of potential of
the gravitational field as contradicting the facts. These
differences must really be of so low an order of magnitude
that the stellar velocities generated by them do not exceed
the velocities actually observed.

If we apply Boltzmann’s law of distribution for gas
molecules to the stars, by comparing the stellar system with
a gas in thermal equilibrium, we find that the Newtonian
stellar system cannot exist at all. For there is a finite ratio
of densities corresponding to the finite difference of potential
between the centre and spatial infinity. A vanishing of the
density at infinity thus implies a vanishing of the density
at the centre.

“pis the mean density of matter, calculated for a region which is large as
compared with the distance between neighbouring fixed stars, but small in
comparison with the dimensions of the whole stellar system.

A. EINSTEIN 179

It seems hardly possible to surmount these difficulties on
the basis of the Newtonian theory. We may ask ourselves
the question whether they can be removed by a modification
of the Newtonian theory. First of all we will indicate a
method which does not in itself claim to be taken seriously ;
it merely serves as a foil for what is to follow. In place of
Poisson’s equation we write

V'o — Ad = 4rKp é : » -(2)
where 2. denotes a universal constant. If p, be the uniform
density of a distribution of mass, then

=- ane ‘ : : . (8)
is a solution of equation (2). This solution would correspond
to the case in which the matter of the fixed stars was dis-
tributed uniformly through space, if the density p. is equal
to the actual mean density of the matter in the universe.
The solution then corresponds to an infinite, extension of
the central space, filled uniformly with matter. If, without
making any change in the mean density, we imagine matter
to be non-uniformly distributed locally, there will be, over
and above the ¢ with the constant value of equation (3), an
additional ¢, which in the neighbourhood of denser masses
will so much the more resemble the Newtonian field as Ad is
smaller in comparison with 47xp.

A universe so constituted would have, with respect to its
gravitational field, no centre. A decrease of density in spatial
infinity would not have to be assumed, but both the mean
potential and mean density would remain constant to infinity.
The conflict with statistical mechanics which we found in
the case of the Newtonian theory is not repeated. With a
definite but extremely small density, matter is in equilibrium,
without any internal material forces (pressures) being required
to maintain equilibrium.

§ 2. The Boundary Conditions According to the General
Theory of Relativity

In the present paragraph I shall conduct the reader over

the road that I have myself travelled, rather a rough and

winding road, because otherwise I cannot hope that he will

‘180 COSMOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS

take much interest in the result at the end of the journey.
The conclusion I shall arrive at is that the field equations of
gravitation which I have championed hitherto still need a
slight modification, so that on the basis of the general theory
of relativity those fundamental difficulties may be avoided
which have been set forth in § 1 as confronting the Newtonian
theory. This modification corresponds perfectly to the transi-
tion from Poisson’s equation (1) to equation (2) of §1. We
finally infer that boundary conditions in spatial infinity fall
away altogether, because the universal continuum in respect
of its spatial dimensions is to be viewed as a self-contained
continuum of finite spatial (three-dimensional) volume.

The opinion which I entertained until recently, as to the
limiting conditions to be laid down in spatial infinity, took
its stand on the following considerations. In a consistent
theory of relativity there can be no inertia relatively to “ space,”
but only an inertia of masses relatively to one another. If,
therefore, I have a mass at a sufficient distance from all other
masses in the universe, its inertia must fall to zero. We will
try to formulate this condition mathematically.

According to the general theory of relativity the negative
momentum is given by the first three components, the energy
by the last component of the covariant tensor multiplied by

w= 9

dia
LN ae ee ee ee (4)
where, as always, we set
ds* = g,,dz,da, . : ' ets

In the particularly perspicuous case of the possibility of
choosing the system of co-ordinates so that the gravitational
field at every point is spatially isotropic, we have more simply
ds? = - A(dz; + dx, + dx;) + Bdzi.
If, moreover, at the same time
/-9=1=.,/A5B
we obtain from (4), to a first approximation for small

velocities,
A de; XX dz, Kaz,
™/B da, "JB da "JB dz,

A. EINSTEIN 181

for the components of momentum, and for the energy (in the
static case)
m/B.

From the expressions for the momentum, it follows that
A
MTR plays the part of the rest mass. As m is a constant

peculiar to the point of mass, independently of its position,
this expression, if we retain the condition ./g - =1 at
spatial infinity, can vanish only when A diminishes to zero,
while B increases to infinity. It seems, therefore, that such
a degeneration of the co-efficients g,, is required by the postu-
late of relativity of all inertia. This requirement implies
that the potential energy m,/B becomes infinitely great at
infinity. Thus a point of mass can never leave the system ;
and a more detailed investigation shows that the same thing
applies to light-rays. A system of the universe with such
behaviour of the gravitational potentials at infinity would not
therefore run the risk of wasting away which was mooted
just now in connexion with the Newtonian theory.

I wish to point out that the simplifying assumptions as
to the gravitational potentials on which this reasoning is based,
have been introduced merely for the sake of lucidity. It is
possible to find general formulations for the behaviour of the
guy at infinity which express the essentials of the question
without further restrictive assumptions.

At this stage, with the kind assistance of the mathe-
matician J. Grommer, I investigated centrally symmetrical,
static gravitational fields, degenerating at infinity in the way
mentioned. ’ The grayitational potentials g,, were applied, and
from them the energy-tensor T,,, of matter was calculated on
the basis of the field equations of gravitation. But here it
proved that for the system of the fixed stars no boundary con-
ditions of the kind can come into question at all, as was also
rightly emphasized by the astronomer de Sitter recently.

For the contravariant. energy-tensor T”” of ponderable
matter is given by

, _ day, diy
~ Pads ds’

where p is the density of matter in natural measure. With

diag

182 COSMOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS

an appropriate choice of the system of co-ordinates the
stellar velocities are very smal] in comparison with that of
light. We may, therefore, substitute ./g,, dx, for ds. This
shows us that all components of T*” must be very small in
comparison with the last component T“*. But it was quite
impossible to reconcile this condition with thechosen boundary
conditions. In the retrospect this result does not appear
astonishing. The fact of the small velocities of the stars
allows the conclusion that wherever there are fixed stars, the
gravitational potential (in our case ,/B) can never be much
greater than here on earth. This follows from statistical
reasoning, exactly as in the case of the Newtonian theory.
At any rate, our calculations have convinced me that such
conditions of degeneration for the g,, in spatial infinity may
not be postulated.

After the failure of this attempt, two possibilities next
present themselves.

(a) We may require, as in the problem of the planets,
that, with a suitable choice of the system of reference, the guy
in spatial infinity approximate to the values

eee! 0 0 0
0 -1 0 0
0 0-1 0
0 0 0 1

(b) We may refrain entirely from laying down boundary
conditions for spatial infinity claiming general validity ; but
at the spatial limit of the domain under consideration we
have to give the g,, separately in each individual case, as
hitherto we were accustomed to give the initial conditions
for time separately.

The possibility (6) holds out no hope of solving the prob-
lem, but amounts to giving it up. This is an incontestable
position, which is taken up at the present time by de Sitter.*
But I must confess that such a complete resignation in this
fundamental question is for me a difficult thing. I should
not make up my mind to it until every effort to make head-
way toward a satisfactory view had proved to be vain.

Possibility (a) is unsatisfactory in more respects than one.

*de Sitter, Akad. van Wetensch. te Amsterdam, 8 Noy., 1916.

A. EINSTEIN 183

In the first place those boundary conditions pre-suppose a
definite choice of the system of reference, which is contrary
to the spirit of the relativity principle. Secondly, if we adopt
this view, we fail to comply with the requirement of the
relativity of inertia. For the inertia of a material point of
mass m (in natural measure) depends upon the g,,; but
these differ but little from their postulated values, as given
above, for spatial infinity. Thus inertia would indeed be
influenced, but would not be conditioned by matter (present
in finite space). If only one single point of mass were present,
according to this view, it would possess inertia, and in fact
an inertia almost as great as when it is surrounded by the
other masses of the actual universe. Finally, those statistical
objections must be raised against this view which were
mentioned in respect of the Newtonian theory.

From what has now been said it will be seen that I have
not succeeded in formulatmg boundary conditions for spatial
infinity. Nevertheless, there is still a possible way out,
without resigning as suggested under (b). For if it were
possible to regard the universe as a continuum which is
Jinite (closed) with respect to its spatial dimensions, we should
have no need at all of any such boundary conditions. We
shall proceed to show that both the general postulate of
relativity and the fact of the small stellar velocities are com-
patible with the hypothesis of a spatially finite universe ;
though certainly, in order to carry through this idea, we need
a generalizing modification of the field equations of gravitation.

§ 3. The Spatially Finite Universe with a Uniform
Distribution of Matter

According to the general theory of relativity the metrical
character (curvature) of the four-dimensional space-time con-
tinuum is defined at every point by the matter at that point
and the state of that matter. Therefore, on account of the
lack of uniformity in the distribution of matter, the metrical
structure of this continuum must necessarily be extremely
complicated. But if we are concerned with the structure
only on a large scale, we may represent matter to ourselves
as being uniformly distributed over enormous spaces, so that
its density of distribution is a variable function which varies

184. COSMOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS

extremely slowly. Thus our procedure will somewhat re-
semble that of the geodesists who, by means of an ellipsoid,
approximate to the shape of the earth’s surface, which on a
small scale is extremely complicated.

The most important fact that we draw from experience
as to the distribution of matter is that the relative velocities
of the stars are very small as compared with the velocity of
light. So I think that for the present we may base our
reasoning upon the following approximative assumption.
There is a system of reference relatively to which matter
may be looked upon as being permanently at rest. With
respect to this system, therefore, the contravariant energy-
tensor T”” of matter is, by reason of (5), of the simple form

0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 ; . AG)

geal NERY, Saat

The scalar p of the (mean) density of distribution may be
a priort a function of the space co-ordinates. But if we
assume the universe to be spatially finite, we are prompted
to the hypothesis that p is to be independent of locality.
On this hypothesis we base the following considerations.

As concerns the gravitational field, it follows from the
equation of motion of the material point

da, die dag _
SPM ol TLE Sr rete ih

that a material point in a static gravitational field can remain
at rest only when g,, is independent of locality. Since, further,
we presuppose independence of the time co-ordinate x, for
all’ magnitudes, we may demand for the required solution
that, for all z,,

Daa vas 1 . . . . (7)
Further, as always, with static problems, we shall have to set
91s = 92s = Jsq = O Br as . (8)

It remains now to determine those components of the
gravitational potential which define the purely spatial-geo-
metrical relations of our continuum (91,915, . . . 933). From

A. EINSTEIN 185

our assumption as to the uniformity of distribution of the
masses generating the field, it follows that the curvature of
the required space must be constant. With this distribution
of mass, therefore, the required finite continuum of the
@1, X2, Xs, with constant z,, will be a spherical space.

We arrive at such a space, for example, in the following
way. We start from a Euclidean space of four dimensions,
E,, &, & &, with a linear element dc; let, therefore,

da? = dE + dt + dt, +dk. --- . (9)
In this space we consider the hyper-surface
R=-f+8+8+8.- 2. . (10)

where R denotes a constant. The points of this hyper-surface
form a three-dimensional continuum, a spherical space of
radius of curvature R.

The four-dimensional Euclidean space with which we
started serves only for a convenient definition of our hyper-
surface. Only those points of the hyper-surface are of
interest to us which have metrical properties in agreement
with those of physical space with a uniform distribution of
matter. For the description of this three-dimensional con-
tinuum we may employ the co-ordinates &,, &, & (the pro-
jection upon the hyper-plane £, = 0) since, by reason of (10),
&, can be expressed in terms of &,, &,, ,. Eliminating £, from
(9), we obtain for the linear element of the spherical space

the expression
do* = wd Ede,
ugy (11)

Yuv = Ons + R? Ge p?

where §,, = 1, ify =v; 6, = 0,ifw + v,andp? = £) + £ + E..
The co-ordinates chosen are convenient when it is a question
of examining the environment of one of the two points
co f2-— £5 =U. : E .

Now the linear element of the required four-dimensional
space-time universe is also given us. For the potential g,,,
both indices of which differ from 4, we have to set

es ee 7 ee ) 9
Juv (3. wERi (ci + a) + 2) ae

186 COSMOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS

which equation, in combination with (7) and (8), perfectly
defines the behaviour of measuring-rods, clocks, and light-
rays.

§ 4. On an Additional Term for the Field Equations of
Gravitation

My proposed field equations of gravitation for any chosen
system of co-ordinates run as-follows :—

ce aa aay (Ty zt $9uvT),

r)
Gn = — 5 tur, a} + {ua, B} {v8, a} (13)
Ylog /-g9 . 2 log /= 9
IGE eee my, a} ote

The system of equations (13) is by no means satisfied
when we insert for the g,, the values given in (7), (8), and
(12), and for the (contravariant) energy-tensor of matter the
values indicated in (6). It will be shown in the next para-
graph how this calculation may conveniently be made. So
that, if it were certain that the field equations (13) which I
have hitherto employed were the only ones compatible with
the postulate of general relativity, we should probably have
to conclude that the theory of relativity does not admit the
hypothesis of a spatially finite universe.

However, the system of equations (14) allows a readily
suggested extension which is compatible with the relativity
postulate, and is perfectly analogous to the extension of
Poisson’s equation given by equation (2). For on the left-
hand side of field equation (13) we may add the fundamental
tensor g,,, multiplied by a universal constant, — A, at present
unknown, without destroying the general covariance. In
place of field equation (13) we write

Gur ~ AGur = — KCl py — 8G nek) . (18a)
This field equation, with » sufficiently small, is in any case
also compatible with the facts of experience derived from
the solar system. It also satisfies laws of conservation of
momentum and energy, because we arrive at (13a) in place
of (13) by introducing into Hamilton’s principle, instead
of the scalar of Riemann’s tensor, this scalar increased by a

A. EINSTEIN 187

universal constant; and Hamilton’s principle, of course,
guarantees the validity of laws of conservation. It will be
shown in § 5 that field equation (13a) is compatible with
our conjectures on field and matter.

§ 5. Calculation and Result
Since all points of our continuum are on an equal footing,

it is sufficient to carry through the calculation for one point,
e.g. for one of the two points with the co-ordinates

j= %= 2%, = a4, = 0.

Then for the g,, in (13a) we have to insert the values
-1 0.550 0
0-1 0 0

0 Oat 0
0 0 0 1

wherever they appear differentiated only once or not at all.
We thus obtain in the first place

Go = selon, 1) + selon, 2] + 5o-[uw, 8] + Mea =o
Ox, OL pIBy

From this we 2 ee discover, taking (7), (8), and (18) into
account, that all equations (13a) are satisfied if the two
relations

= Ti tA 2” 9”

u
I
|
|
>
u
|
|

-or
r

ll

fee nt Een 9 ne, (18)

are fulfilled.

Thus the newly introduced universal constant > defines
both the mean density of distribution p which can remain in
equilibrium and also the radius R and the volume 27’R? of
spherical space. The total mass M of the universe, accord-
ing to our view, is finite, and is in fact

PON te Bae = 9/2 a. FSB)

Thus the theoretical view of the actual universe, if it is in
correspondence with our reasoning, is the following. The

188 COSMOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS

curvature of space is variable in time and place, according to
the distribution of matter, but we may roughly approximate
to it by means of a spherical space. At any rate, this view is
logically consistent, and from the standpoint of the general
theory of relativity lies nearest at hand; whether, from the
standpoint of present astronomical knowledge, it is tenable,
will not here be discussed. In order to arrive at this con-
sistent view, we admittedly had to introduce an extension of
the field equations of gravitation which is not justified by our
actual knowledge of gravitation. It is to be emphasized,
however, that a positive curvature of space is given by our
resulis, even if the supplementary term is not introduced.
That term is necessary only for the purpose of making
possible a quasi-static distribution of matter, as required by
the fact of the small velocities of the stars.

DO GRAVITATIONAL FIELDS PLAY AN
ESSENTIAL PART IN THE STRUC-
TURE OF THE ELEMENTARY PAR-
TICLES OF MATTER?

BY

A. EINSTEIN

Translated from “ Spielen Gravitationsfelder im Aufber der
materiellen Hlementarteilchen eine wesentliche Rolle?”
Sitzungsberichte der Preussischen Akad. d. Wissen-
schaften, 1919.

ea to
-— x :
<
Biel Fgh eke ‘i ae
ah rie het ‘

AEA ae Guaie 1d ole AG ‘ES
" HATTA, 42 ea Ca

DO GRAVITATIONAL FIELDS PLAY AN ESSENTIAL
PART IN THE STRUCTURE OF THE ELEMEN-
TARY PARTICLES OF MATTER?

By A. EINSTEIN

EITHER the Newtonian nor the relativistic theory
N of gravitation has so far led to any advance in the
theory of the constitution of matter. In view of this
fact it will be shown in the following pages that there are

reasons for thinking that the elementary formations which go
to make up the atom are held together by gravitational forces.

§ 1. Defects of the Present View

Great pains have been taken to elaborate a theory which
will account for the equilibrium of the electricity constituting
the electron. G. Mie, in particular, has devoted deep re-
searches to this question. His theory, which has found con-
siderable support among theoretical physicists, is based
mainly on the introduction into the energy-tensor of sup-
plementary terms depending on the components of the
electro-dynamic potential, in addition to the energy terms of
the Maxwell-Lorentz theory. These new terms, which in
outside space are unimportant, are nevertheless effective in
the interior of the electrons in maintaining equilibrium
against the electric forces of repulsion. In spite of the
beauty of the formal structure of this theory, as erected by
Mie, Hilbert, and Weyl, its physical results have hitherto
been unsatisfactory. On the one hand the multiplicity of
possibilities is discouraging, and on the other hand those
additional terms have not as yet allowed themselves to be
framed in such a simple form that the solution could be

satisfactory. ve
ii

192 ATOMIC STRUCTURE

So far the general theory of relativity has made no change
in this state of the question. If we for the moment disregard
the additional cosmological term, the field equations take the

form
Gigs foe $9u,G Ie aad Fadl Woes e . ° (1)

where G,, denotes the contracted Riemann tensor of curva-
ture, G the scalar of curvature formed by repeated contraction,
and T,, the energy-tensor of ‘‘ matter.’”’ The assumption
that the T,,, do not depend on the derivatives of the g,, is in
keeping with the historical development of these equations.
For these quantities are, of course, the energy-components in
the sense of the special theory of relativity, in which variable
gu do not occur. The second term on the left-hand side
of the equation is so chosen that the divergence of the left-
hand side of (1) vanishes identically, so that taking the
divergence of (1), we obtain the equation

oe + 497 Lor =0 é . : (2)

Le

which in the limiting case of the special theory of relativity
gives the complete equations of conservation

oT
ory

= 0.

Therein lies the physical foundation for the second term of
the left-hand side of (1). It is by no means settled a priori
that a limiting transition of this kind has any possible mean-
ing. For if gravitational fields do play an essential part in
the structure of the particles of matter, the transition to the
limiting case of constant g,, would, for them, lose its justifi-
cation, for indeed, with constant g,, there could not be any
particles of matter. So if we wish to contemplate the possi-
bility that gravitation may take part in the structure of the
fields which constitute the corpuscles, we cannot regard
equation (1) as confirmed.

Placing in (1) the Maxwell-Lorentz energy-components of
the electromagnetic field ¢,,,

Lee = 49 uvPorp”” ay Puchrg”’ . : (3)

A. EINSTEIN 193

we obtain for (2), by taking the divergence, and after some
reduction,*

hurd” = 0 : : . . (4)
where, for brevity, we have set
3 hie o vt of” ‘
Sa = F bug" 9") = 55 SF or)

Tn the calculation we have employed the second of Maxwell’s
systems of equations

ur dre pu

RE ge baa o f ‘ an.(G)
We see from (4) that the current-density 3” must everywhere
vanish. Therefore, by equation (1), we cannot arrive at a
theory of the electron by restricting ourselves to the electro-
magnetic components of the Maxwell-Lorentz theory, as has
long been known. Thus if we hold to (1) we are driven on
to the path of Mie’s theory.t

Not only the problem of matter, but the cosmological

problem as well, leads to doubt as to equation (1). As Ihave
shown in the previous paper, the general theory of relativity
requires that the universe be spatially finite. But this view
of the universe necessitated an extension of equations (1),
with the introduction of a new universal constant X, standing
in a fixed relation to the total mass of the universe (or, re-
spectively, to the equilibrium density of matter). This is
gravely detrimental to the formal beauty of the theory.

§ 2. The Field Equations Freed of Scalars

The difficulties set forth above are removed by setting in
place of field equations (1) the field equations

Chis = Gg Gea yee rat) blows Ca)

where T,,, denotes the energy-tensor of the electromagnetic
field given by (8).
The formal justification for the factor — }in the second

* Cf. e.g. A. Hinstein, Sitzungsber. d. Preuss. Akad. 4. Wiss., 1916,

pp. 187, 188.
+ Cf. D. Hilbert, Géttinger Nachr., 20 Nov., 1915.

194 ATOMIC STRUCTURE

term of this equation lies in its causing the scalar of. the left-
hand side,
oC a 49u,G),

to vanish identically, as the scalar g”T,, of the right-hand
side does by reason of (3). If we had reasoned on the basis
of equations (1) instead of (1a), we should, on the contrary,
have obtained the condition G = 0, which would have to
hold good everywhere for the g,,, independently of the electric
field. It is clear that the system of equations [(1a), (3)] is
a consequence of the system [(1), (3)], but not conversely.

We might at first sight feel doubtful whether (1a) together
with (6) sufficiently define the entire field’ In a generally
relativistic theory we need » — 4 differential equations, in-
dependent of one another, for the definition of m independent
variables, since in the solution, on account of the liberty of
choice of the co-ordinates, four quite arbitrary functions
of all co-ordinates must naturally occur. Thus to define
the sixteen independent quantities g,, and du we require
twelve equations, all independent of one another. But as it
happens, nine of the equations (1a), and three of the equations
(6) are independent of one another.

Forming the divergence of (1a), and taking into account
that the divergence of Gy, — 49y,G vanishes, we obtain

doad* ae — 0 : . . (4a)

From this we recognize first of all that the scalar of curvature
G in the four-dimensional domains in which the density of
electricity vanishes, is constant. If we assume that all these
parts of space are connected, and therefore that the density
of electricity differs from zero only in separate ‘‘ world-
threads,” then the scalar of curvature, everywhere outside
these world-threads, possesses a constant value G). But
equation (4a) also allows an important conclusion as to the
behaviour of G within the domains having a density of elec-
tricity other than zero. If, as is customary, we regard elec-
tricity as a moving density of charge, by setting
dey We dite
J ap gree Pas? : : Gi

A. EINSTEIN 195

we obtain from (4a) by inner multiplication by J’, on account
of the antisymmetry of ¢,,, the relation

oG dz,

SELES os mers. d -r(8)
Thus the scalar of curvature is constant on every world-line
of the motion of electricity. Equation (4a) can be interpreted
in a graphic manner by the statement: The scalar of curva-
ture plays the part of a negative pressure which, outside of
the electric corpuscles, has a constant value Gy. In the in-
terior of every corpuscle there subsists a negative pressure
(positive G — G,) the fall of which maintains the electro-
dynamic force in equilibrium. The minimum of pressure, or,
respectively, the maximum of the scalar of curvature, does
not change with time in the interior of the corpuscle.

We now write the field equations (1a) in the form

(Gur = 490) + AgoGy = - «(Tn + Egu(G - Gy) (9)

On the other hand, we transform the equations supplied with
the cosmological term as already given

Guy — uy = — Tw - $9uT).

Subtracting the scalar equation multiplied by 4, we next

obtain
(Guy — 29uvG) + Jur = = KT yy

Now in regions where only electrical and gravitational fields
are present, the right-hand side of this equation vanishes.
For such regions we obtain, by forming the scalar,

-G+4r=0.

In such regions, therefore, the scalar of curvature is constant,
so that X may be replaced by ~G). Thus we may write the
earlier field equation (1) in the form

ie hae Gag aCe nur Tass yar (10)

Comparing (9) with (10), we see that there is no difference
between the new field equations and the earlier ones, except
that instead of T,,, as tensor of ‘‘ gravitating mass ” there now

196 ATOMIC STRUCTURE

occurs Ty, + - gu(G - G,) which is independent of the

scalar of curvature. But the new formulation has this great
advantage, that the quantity \ appears in the fundamental
equations as a constant of integration, and no longer as a
universal constant peculiar to'the fundamental law.

§ 3. On the Cosmological Question

The last result already permits the surnfise that with our
new formulation the universe may be regarded as spatially
finite, without any necessity for an additional hypothesis.
As in the preceding paper I shall again show that with a
uniform distribution of matter, a spherical world is compatible
with the equations.

In the first place we set

ds? = — yindaidz, + da, (i, k = 1, 2, 3) (t))

Then if Pz and P are, respectively, the curvature tensor of
the second rank and the curvature scalar in three-dimensional

space, we have *,
Gu= Pa i,k = 1,2;8)
Cr Ob Oa
G=-P
gh

It therefore follows for our case that

Git - t9:%G = Pi - dyxP (2, k = 1; 2, 8)

Ga — iguG = 7P.
We pursue our reflexions, from this point on, in two ways.
Firstly, with the support of equation (la). Here Ty, denotes
the energy-tensor of the electro-magnetic field, arising from
the electrical particles constituting matter. For this field
we have everywhere

Si + 3+ 33+ T= 0
The individual Fe are quantities which vary Baas with posi-
tion; but for our purpose we no doubt may replace them by
their mean values. We therefore have to choose
a, = 332 B= -1t= seit

Tr = 0 (for uw + v), (12)

A. EINSTEIN 197

and therefore

x $3
Tx = tS yu, Ty = 4.
JY he a/¥

In consideration of what has been shown hitherto, we obtain
in place of (1a)

Piz - fyizP = - sat ; (13) |
ai
Ps < : 14

The scalar of equation (13) agrees with (14). Itis on this
account that our fundamental equations permit the idea of a
spherical universe. For from (13) and (14) follows

4indy
PBA eR Oe ey Lem OS

aay (15)
and it is known* that this system is satisfied by a (three-
dimensional) spherical universe.

But we may also base our reflexions on the equations (9).
On the right-hand side of (9) stand those terms which, from
the phenomenological point of view, are to be replaced by the
energy-tensor of matter; that is, they are to be replaced by

Os 00
Vea O nae: 10
Casey Oey out 0 che 20
0 0 0 p

where p denotes the mean density of matter assumed to be
at rest. We thus obtain the equations

Piz - 4yikP - dyuxG, = 0 : out}
*P+4Go= -x«p . : : oa 1 dL)
From the scalar of equation (16) and from (17) we obtain
G, = — #P = 2x«p, ; a . C18)
and consequently from (16)
Pix -— xpyik = 0 : : . (19)

* Cf, H. Weyl, ‘‘Raum, Zeit, Materie,”’ § 33.

198 ATOMIC STRUCTURE

which equation, with the exception of the expression for the
co-efficient, agrees with (15). By comparison we obtain

a = dpr/y. . é , . (2

This equation signifies that of the energy constituting matter
three-quarters is to be ascribed to the electromagnetic field,
and one-quarter to the gravitational field.

§ 4. Concluding Remarks

The above reflexions show the possibility of a theoretical
construction of matter out of gravitational field and electro-
magnetic field alone, without the introduction of hypothetical
supplementary terms on the lines of Mie’s theory. This
possibility appears particularly promising in that it frees us
from the necessity of introducing a special constant » for the
solution of the cosmological problem. On the other hand,
there is a peculiar difficulty. For, if we specialize (1) for the |
spherically symmetrical static case we obtain one equation
too few for defining the g,, and ¢,,, with the result that any
spherically symmetrical distribution of electricity appears
capable of remaining in equilibrium. Thus the problem of
the constitution of the elementary quanta cannot yet be
solved on the immediate basis of the given field equations.

GRAVITATION AND ELECTRICITY

BY
H. WEYL

Translated from “ Gravitation und Elektriticitat,” Sitzungs-
berichte der Preussischen Akad. d. Wissenschaften, 1918.

GRAVITATION AND ELECTRICITY *
By H. WEYL

\ CCORDING to Riemann,}+ geometry is based upon

the following two facts :—

1. Space is a Three-dimensional Continuum.—The
manifold of its points may therefore be consistently repre-
sented by the values of three co-ordinates 2, 2, 23.

2. (Pythagorean Theorem).—The square of the distance ds
between two infinitely proximate points
P = (2), 2, 3) and P’ = (2, + dz,, x, + dz, 2; + da) (1)
(any co-ordinates being employed) is a quadratic form of the
relative co-ordinates dz, :—

ds? = 2GwdE dz, (Juv = Ju) . - (2)
py

The second of these facts may be briefly stated by saying
that space is a metrical continuum. In complete accord with
the spirit of the physics of immediate action we assume the
Pythagorean theorem to be strictly valid only in the limit
when the distances are infinitely small.

The special theory of relativity led to the discovery that
tyme is associated as a fourth co-ordinate (2,) on an equal
footing with the three co-ordinates of space, and that the
scene of material events, the world, is therefore a four-dimen-
stonal, metrical continuum. And so the quadratic form (2),
which defines the metrical properties of the world, is not
necessarily positive as in the case of the geometry of three-
dimensional space, but has the index of inertia 3.t Riemann

* The footnotes in square brackets are later additions by the author,

+Math. Werke (2nd ed., Leipzig, 1892), No. XII, p. 282.

That is to say that if the co-ordinates are chosen so that at one particular
point of the continuum ds? = + da; + dxx + dx; + dai, then in every case

three of the signs will be + and one — (TRans.).
201

202 GRAVITATION AND ELECTRICITY

himself did not fail to point out that this quadratic form was
to be regarded as a physical reality, since it reveals itself, e.g.
in centrifugal forces, as the origin of real effects upon matter,
and that matter therefore presumably reacts upon it. Until
then all geometricians and philosophers had looked upon the
metrical properties of space as pertaining to space itself, in-
dependently of the matter which it contained. It is upon this
idea, which it was quite impossible for Riemann in his day to
carry through, that Einstein in our own time, independently
of Riemann, has raised the imposing edifice of his general
theory of relativity. According to Einstein the phenomena
of gravitation must also be placed to the account of geometry,
and the laws by which matter affects measurements are no
other than the laws of gravitation: the g,, in (2) form the
components of the gravitational potential. While the gravi-
tational potential thus consists of an invariant quadratic
differential form, electromagnetic phenomena are governed by
a four-potential of which the components ¢, together com-
pose an invariant linear differential form ¥¢,dz,. But so
far the two classes of phenomena, gravitation and electricity,
stand side by side, the one separate from the other.

The later work of- Levi-Civita,* Hessenberg,t and the
author } shows quite plainly that the fundamental conception —
on which the development of Riemann’s geometry must be
based if it is to be in agreement with nature, is that of the
infinitesimal parallel displacement of a vector. If P and P*
are any two points connected by a curve, a given vector at P
can be moved parallel to itself along this curve from P to P*.
But, generally speaking, this conveyance of a vector from P
to P* is not integrable, that is to say, the vector at P* at
which we arrive depends upon the path along which the dis-
placement travels. Itis only in Euclidean “ gravitationless ”
geometry thatintegrability obtains. The Riemannian geometry
referred to above still contains a residual element of finite
geometry—without any substantial reason, as far as I can see.

*“Nozione di parallelismo . . .”, Rend. del Circ. Matem. di Palermo,
Vol. 42 (1917).

+‘ Vektorielle Begriindung der Differentialgeometrie,” Math, Ann., Vol.
78 (1917).

+‘ Space, Time, and Matter ’’ (1st ed., Berlin, 1918), § 14.

H. WEYL 203

It seems to be due to the accidental origin of this geometry
in the theory of surfaces. The quadratic form (2) enables us
to compare, with respect to their length, not only two vectors
at the same point, but also the vectors at any two points.
But a truly infinitesimal geometry must recognize only the
principle of the transference of a length from one point to
another point infinitely near to the first. This forbids us to
assume that the problem of the transference of length from
one point to another at a finite distance is integrable, more
particularly as the problem of the transference of direction has
proved to be non-integrable. Such an assumption being re-
cognized as false, a geometry comes into being, which, when
applied to the world, explains in a surprising manner not
only the phenomena of gravitation, but also those of the elec-
tromagnetic field. According to the theory which now takes
shape, both classes of phenomena spring from the same
source, and in fact we cannot in general make any arbitrary
separation of electricity from gravitation. In this theory
all physical quantities have a meaning in world geometry.
In particular the quantities denoting physical effects appear
at once as pure numbers. The theory leads to a world-law
which in its essentials is defined without ambiguity. It even
permits us in a certain sense to comprehend why the world
has four dimensions. I shall now first of all give a sketch of
the structure of the amended geometry of Riemann without
any thought of its physical interpretation. Its application to
physics will then follow of its own accord.

In a given system of co-ordinates the relative co-ordinates
dx, of a point P’ infinitely near to P—see (1)—are the com-
ponents of the infinitesimal displacement PP’. The transition
from one system of co-ordinates to another is expressed by
definite formule of transformation,

* * *
Pb ae gt ae gy © bel SARA, poy idd- 2;

which determine the connexion between the co-ordinates of
the same point in the two systems. Then between the com-
ponents dz, and the components da, of the same infinitesimal

displacement of the point P we have the linear formule of

transformation
Ady = Baydz* . : : aa)
Vv

204 GRAVITATION AND ELECTRICITY

oz
on,
P. A contravariant vector x at the point P referred to either
system of co-ordinates has m known numbers & for its com-
ponents, which in the transition to another system are trans-
formed in exactly the same way (3) as the components of an
infinitesimal displacement. I denote the totality of vectors
at the point P as the vector-space at P. It is, firstly, linear
or affine, 1.e. by multiplication-of a vector at P by a number,,
and by addition of two such vectors, there always arises a
vector at P; and, secondly, it is metrical, i.e. by the sym-
metrical bilinear form belonging to (2) a scalar product

in which a,, are the values of the derivatives —% at the point

X.Y y. x= SouF"7"
py

is invariantly assigned to each pair. of vectors x and y with
components £&", 7". We take it, however, that this form is
determined only as far as to a positive factor of proportion-
ality, which remains arbitrary. If the manifold of points of
space is represented by co-ordinates z,, the g,, are determined
by the metrical properties at the point P only to the extent
of their proportionality. In the physical sense, too, it is only
the ratios of the g,, that has an immediate tangible meaning.

For the equation
SGwdx,dx, = 0
py

is satisfied, when P is a given origin, by those infinitely
proximate world-points which are reached by a light signal
emitted at P. For the purpose of analytical presentation we
_ have firstly to choose a definite system of co-ordinates, and
secondly at each point P to determine the arbitrary factor of
proportionality with which the g,, are endowed. Accordingly
the formule which emerge must possess a double property of
invariance: they must be invariant with respect to any con-
tinuous transformations of co-ordinates, and they must remain
unaltered if Ag,,, where A is an arbitrary continuous function
of position, is substituted for the g,,. The supervention of
this second property of invariance is characteristic of our
theory.

If P, P* are any two points, and if to each vector x at Pa
vector x* at P* is assigned in such a way that in general ax

H. WEYL 205

becomes ax*, and x + y becomes x* + y* (a being any as-
signed number), and the vector zero at P is the only one to
which the vector zero at P* corresponds, we then have made an
affine or linear replica of the vector-space at P on the vector-
spaceatP*, This replica has a particularly close resemblance
when the scalar product of the vectors x*, y* at P* is propor-
tional to that of x and y at P for all pairs of vectors x, y. (In
our view it is only this idea of a similar replica that has
an objective sense ; the previous theory permitted the more
definite conception of a congruent replica.) The meaning of
tne parallel displacement of a vector at the point P to a
neighbouring point P’ is settled by the two axiomatic postu-
lates.

1. By the parallel displacement of the vectors at the point
P to the neighbouring point P’ a similar image of the vector-
space at P is made upon the vector-space at P’.

2. If P,, P, are.two points in the neighbourhood of P, and
the infinitesimal vector PP, at P is transformed into P,P,
by a parallel displacement to the point P,, while PP, at P is
transformed into P,P,, by parallel displacement to P,, then
P,:, Py, coincide, i.e. infinitesimal parallel displacements are
commutative.

That part of postulate 1 which says that the parallel dis-
placement is an affine transposition of the vector-space from
P to P’, is expressed analytically as follows: the vector & at
P= (a, 2, ..2%n) is by displacement transformed into a
vector & + d&":at. P = (x, + dz,, 2 + dz, . ...2n + dtn)
the components of which are in a linear relation to &*,—

d&* = — Sdyté . ; . (4)
The second postulate teaches that the dy‘ are linear differ-
ential forms
dys = ZT Ypdxp,
p
the coefficients of which possess the symmetrical property
Y= ' : : . (5)

If two vectors &, n* at P are transformed by parallel dis-
placement at P’ into & + dé, n* + dn", then the postulate

206 GRAVITATION AND ELECTRICITY

of similarity stated under 1 above, which goes beyond affinity,
tells us that : :

X(Gur + Agu KE" + d&*\n” + dn’)

BY

must be proportional to
2 uvk"n”.

If we call the factor of proportionality, which differs infinit-
esimally from 1, 1 + d¢, and define the reduction of an index
in the usual way by the formula

Oy, = 2Gurd",
2 3

we obtain
guy — (dyn + Ayyy) = Jud aN : (6)
From this it follows that dd is a linear differential form
db = 3o,dr, . : : Rati e's
Ta

If this is known, the equation (6) or

OF uv
t vp a ES Pre — oa 7 TuvPo;

together with the condition for symmetry (5), gives unequivo-
cally the quantities I. The internal metrical connexion of
space thus depends on a linear form (7) besides the quadratic
form (2)—which is determined except as to an arbitrary
factor of proportionality.* If we substitute g,, for gy, with-

*(I have now modified this structure in the following points (cf. the final
presentation in ed, 4 of ‘‘ Raum, Zeit, Materie,” 1921, §§ 13, 18). (a) In place
of postulates 1 and 2, which the parallel displacement has to fulfil, there is
now one postulate: Let there be a system of co-ordinates at the point P, by
the employment of which the components of every vector at P are not altered
by parallel displacement to any point in infinite proximity to P. This postu-
late characterizes the essence of the parallel displacement as that of a trans-
position, concerning which it may be correctly asserted that it leaves the
vectors ‘‘unaltered.” (b) To the metrics at the single point P, according to
which there is attached to every vector x = {“ at P a tract of such a kind that
two vectors define the same tract when, and only when, they possess the same
measure-number J = 3g,,¢"¢", there must now be added the metrical con-
nexion of P with the points in its neighbourhood : by congruent transposition
to the infinitely near point P’ a tract at P passes over into a definite tract at Be
If we make a requirement of this concept of congruent transposition of tracts
analogous to that which has just been postulated, under (a), of the concept of
paralle] displacement of vectors, we see that this process (in which the measure-
number J of the tract is increased by dl) is expressed in the equations

dl = ldo; dp = 2,02,.

H. WEYL 207

out changing the system of co-ordinates, the quantities dy;

do not change, dy,, assumes the factor ’, and dg,, becomes
Addu + Judd. Equation (6) then shows that df becomes

dg + = dg + d (log n).

What remains undetermined, therefore, in the linear form
y¢,dz, isnot a factor of proportionality which would have
to be settled by an arbitrary choice of a unit of measurement,
but, rather, the arbitrary element inherent in it consists in an
additive total differential. For the analytical representation
of geometry the forms

Gade Ary a ar, : . (8)
are on an equal footing with
X.Gudt,at, and d.dx, + d(logr) . met at)

where 2 is any positive function of position. Hence there is
invariant significance in the anti-symmetrical tensor with the
components

Hint te sea avi! setand Jardi0)

Fy 00 a a

i.e. the form
Ey = G8,05,-=-FE py ASpy

which depends bilinearly on two arbitrary displacements dz
and dz at the point P—or, rather, depends linearly on the
surface element with the components Az,, = dz,da, - dz,d2,
which is defined by these two displacements. The special
case of the theory as hitherto developed, in which the
arbitrarily chosen unit of length at the origin allows itself
to be transferred by parallel displacement to all points of
space in a manner which is independent of the path traversed
—this special case occurs when the g,, can be absolutely

determined in such a way that the d, vanish. The IY, are

In these circumstances the metrics and the metrical connexion determine the
“ affine” connexion (parallel displacement) without ambiguity—and indeed,
according to my present view of the problem of space this is the most funda-
mental fact of geometry—whereas according to the presentation given in the
text it is the linear form d®@ that remains arbitrary in the given metrics at
the parallel displacement. ]

208 GRAVITATION AND ELECTRICITY

then nothing else than the Christoffel three-indices symbols.
The necessary and sufficient invariant condition for the
occurrence of this case consists in the identical vanishing of
the tensor F,,,.

This naturally suggests interpreting ¢, in world-geometry
as the four-potential, and the tensor F consequently as electro-
magnetic field. For the absence of an electromagnetic field
is the necessary condition for the validity of Einstein’s theory,
which, up to the present, accounts for the phenomena of
gravitation only. If this view is accepted, it will be seen
that the electric quantities are of such a nature that their char-
acterization by numbers in a definite system of co-ordinates
does not depend on the arbitrary choice of a unit of measure-
ment. In fact, in the question of the unit of measurement
and of dimension there must be a new orientation of the
theory. Hitherto a quantity has been spoken of as, Cg., &
tensor of the second rank, if a single value of the quantity
determines a matrix of numbers a,, in each system of co-
ordinates after an arbitrary unit of measurement has been
selected, these numbers forming the coefficients of an in-
variant bilinear form of two arbitrary, infinitesimal displace-
ments

Carer ee. f : moos Oi

But here we speak of a tensor, if, with a system of co-ordin-
ates taken as a base, and after definite selection of the factor
of proportionality contained in the Juv, the components a,,
are determined without ambiguity and in such a way that on
transforming the co-ordinates the form (11) remains invariant,
but on replacing gy, by Xg,, the Gy become rLa,,. We then
say that the tensor has the weight e, or, ascribing to the linear
element ds the dimension “ length = J,” that itis of dimension
e. Only those tensors of weight 0 are absolutely invariant.
The field tensor with the components H,, is of this kind. By
(10) it satisfies the first system of the Maxwell equations

oF,, ms oF Ay a oF,
OL, oz, Lp

= 0.

When once the idea of parallel displacement is clear, geometry
and the tensor calculus can be established without difficulty.

H. WEYL 209

(a) Geodetic Lines.—Given a point P and at that point a
vector, the geodetic line from P in the direction of this vector
is given by continuously moving the vector parallel to itself
in its own direction. Employing a suitable parameter + the
differential equation of the geodetic line is

U'hy Mo dity dk, ae
sEid ay Rise

(Of course it cannot be characterized as the line of smallest
length, because the notion of curve-length has no meaning.)

(b) Tensor Calculus.—To deduce, for example, a tensor field
of rank 2 by differentiation from a covariant tensor field of
rank 1 and weight 0 with components f,, we call in the help
of an arbitrary vector & at the point P, form the invariant
j.é" and its infinitely small alteration on transition from the
point P with the co-ordinates z, to the neighbouring point P’
with the co-ordinates z, + dz, by shifting the vector along a
parallel to itself during this transition. For this alteration

we have
fu aha

7,0 at + fod& = (se =-Ty 7) &an,

Ly

The quantities in brackets on the right are therefore the com-
ponents of a tensor field of rank 2 and weight 0, which is
formed from the field f in a perfectly invariant manner.
(c) Curvature.—To construct the analogue to Riemann’s
tensor of curvature, let us begin with the figure employed
above, of an infinitely small parallelogram, consisting of the
points P, P;, P,, and P,, = Py.* If we displace a vector
x = & at P parallel to itself, to P, and from there to P,,., and
a second time first to P, and thence to P,, then, since Py,
and P,, coincide, there is a meaning in forming the difference
Ax of the two vectors obtained at this point. For their com-

ponents we have
A# = ARE. : é 7 (12)

where the AR* are independent of the displaced vector x, but

* (Here it is not essential that opposite sides of the infinitely small “ paral-
lelogram ’’ are produced by parallel displacement one from the other; we are
concerned only with the coincidence of the points P,, and P,,.]

210 GRAVITATION AND ELECTRICITY

on the other hand depend linearly on the surface-element
defined by the two displacements PP, = dz,, PP, = d2,.
Thus

ARS. = Ri cdtpte = 4 RypahZpc-
The components of curvature R“,,, depending solely on the
place P, possess the two properties of symmetry that
(1) they change sign on the interchange of the last two indices
p and o, and (2), if we perform the three cylic interchanges
vpo, and add up the appropriate components, the result is 0.
Reducing the index p, we obtain at Ruy the components of
a covariant tensor of rank 4 and weight 1. Even without
calculation we see that R divides in a natural, invariant
manner into two parts,

Re, = PY, - 4OF,. (8 =1lifw=v; = Oifp + v), (13)

of which the first, Pra! is anti-symmetrical, not only in the in-
dices po, but also in wand». Whereas the equations F,, = 0
characterize our space as one without an electromagnetic
field, ie. as one in which the problem of the conveyance of
length is integrable, the equations Pro = Oare, as (13) shows,
the invariant conditions for the absence of a gravitational field,
i.e. for the problem of the conveyance of direction to be
integrable. The Euclidean space alone is one which at the
same time is free of electricity and of gravitation.

The simplest invariant of a linear copy like (12), which to
each vector x assigns a vector Ax, is its “ spur ”

Ly ae

. -ARi.

For this, by (13), we obtain in the present case the form
- $F ,.dz,62,

which we ate already encountered above. The simplest in-
variant of a tensor like — 4F,, is the ‘‘ square of its magni-

tude ”’
Lic 40... : ; (14)

I is evidently an invariant of weight — 2, because the tensor
F has weight 0. If g is the negative determinant of the Suns
and

= / gda,dz,da,dz, = ,/ gd

H. WEYL 211

the volume of an infinitely small element of volume, it is
known that the Maxwell theory is governed by the quantity
of electrical action, which is equal to the integral {Ld of this
simplest invariant, extended over any chosen territory, and
indeed is governed in the sense that, with any variations of
the g,, and ¢,, which vanish at the limits of world-territory,
we have

ai Tlie: | (Stdd, + T"3gu)de,
where
1 o/gF")
SI Br

are the left-hand sides of the generalized Maxwellian
equations (the right-hand sides of which are the components
of the four-current), and the T“”” form the energy-momentum
tensor of the electromagnetic field. As L is an invariant of
weight — 2, whereas the volume-element in n-dimensional
geometry is an invariant of weight 4n, the integral has
significance only when the number of dimensions n = 4.
Thus on our interpretation the possibility of the Maxwell
theory is restricted to the case of four dimensions. In the
four-dimensional world, however, the quantity of electro-
magnetic action becomes a pure number. Nevertheless, the
magnitude of the quantity 1 cannot be ascertained in the
traditional units of the e.g.s. system until a physical problem,
to be tested by observation (as for example the electron), has
been calculated on the basis of our theory.

Passing now from geometry to physics, we have to assume,
following the precedent of Mie’s theory,* that all the laws of
nature rest upon a definite integral invariant, the action-
quantity

Ge =

| Wae - [Bae, W = Wig,

in such a way that the real world is distinguished from all
other possible four-dimensional metrical spaces by the char-
acteristic that for it the action-quantity contained in any part
of its domain assumes a stationary value in relation to such
variations of the potentials gy», ¢, a8 vanish at the limits of

* Ann, d. Physik, 37, 39, 40, 1912-13.

212 GRAVITATION AND ELECTRICITY

the territory in question. W, the world-density of the action,
must be an invariant of weight - 2. The action-quantity is
in any case a pure number; thus our theory at once accounts
for that atomistic structure of the world to which current
views attach the most fundamental importance—the action-
quantum. The simplest and most natural conjecture which

we can make for W, 1s
Waa Re Be vile

“
For this we also have, by (138),
W= | P|?+ 41.

(There could be no doubt about anything here except perhaps
the factor 4, with which the electric term Li is added to the
first.) But even without particularizing the action-quantity
‘we can draw some general conclusions from the principle of
action. For we shall show that as, according to investiga-
tions by Hilbert, Lorentz, Hinstein, Klein, and the author,*
the four laws of the conservation of matter (the energy-
momentum tensor) are connected with the invariance of the
action quantity (containing four arbitrary functions) with re-
spect to transformations of co-ordinates, so in the same way
the law of the conservation of electricity is connected with
_ the ‘‘ measure-invariance ” [transition from (8) to (9)] which
here makes its appearance for the first time, introducing a
fifth arbitrary function. The manner in which the latter as-
sociates itself with the principles of energy and momentum
seems to me one of the strongest general arguments in favour
of the theory here set out—so far as there can be any ques-
tion at all of confirmation in purely speculative matters.

For any variation which vanishes at the limits of the
world-territory under consideration we have

8) War = | (Way, + w'dg,)de ("= 3) (15)

* Hilbert, ‘ Die Grundlagen der Physik,” Géttinger Nachrichten, 20
Nov., 1915; H. A. Lorentz in four papers in the Versl K. Ak. van
Wetensch., Amsterdam, 1915-16; A. Einstein, Berl. Ber., 1916, pp. 1111-6;
F. Klein, Gott. Nachr., 25 Jan., 1918; H. Weyl, Ann. d. Physik, 54, 1917,
pp. 121-5.

H. WEYL 213

The laws of nature then take the form
Ww” = 0, w* = : . . (16)

The former may be regarded as the laws of the gravitational
field, the latter as those of the electromagnetic field. The

quantities WY, w* defined by
se /JgW!, we = a/ gw"

are the mixed or, respectively, the contravariant components
of a tensor of rank 2 or 1 respectively, and of weight - 2.
In the system of equations (16) there are five which are re-
dundant, in accordance with the properties of invariance.
This is expressed in the following five invariant identities,
which subsist between their left-hand sides :—

om
ea : : F ; ; G7)
2 TBE... (8)

The first results from the measure-invariance. For if in
the transition from (8) to (9) we assume for log ) an in-
finitely small function of position 8p, we obtain the variation
a6 )

89 uv = Juv, doy = mee) i
For this variation (15) must vanish. at the second place if
we utilize the invariance of the action-quantity with respect
to transformations of co-ordinates by means of an infinitely
small deformation of the world - continuum,* we obtain the
identities

2

were aoeeqp i (se Deis )= =

which cats into (18) when, by (17) dw*/dz, is replaced by

JopB

ee the gravitational laws alone therefore we already obtain
owe 7
ae Osim , ; edo)

* Weyl, Ann. d. Physik, 54, 1917, pp. 121-5; F. Klein, Gott. Nachr.,
25 Jan., 1918.

214 GRAVITATION AND ELECTRICITY

and from the laws of the electromagnetic field alone
Re Taps Oe a
Wy ei

In Maxwell’s theory ty" has the form

b= ene - 3", $*= / 9s"

where s* denotes the four-current. Since the first part here
satisfies the equation (19) identically, this equation gives us
the law of conservation of electricity

1 Ad/ 98") _ 9
SGI 2

Similarly in Einstein’s theory of gravitation Y* consists of
two terms, the first of which satisfies equation (20) identi-
cally, and the second is equal to the mixed components
of the energy-momentum tensor T“ multiplied by ,/g.
Thus equations (20) lead to the four laws of the conservation
of matter. Quite analogous circumstances hold good in our
theory if we choose the form (14) for the action-quantity.
The five principles of conservation are ‘“eliminants”’ of the
field laws, i.e. they follow from them in a twofold manner,
and thus demonstrate that among them there are five which
are redundant.

With the form (14) for the action-quantity the Maxwell
equations run, for example :—

he MAGE aie
J/g es, — Ss, . . . (21)

and the current is

where R denotes that invariant of weight - 1 which arises
from R’, if we first contract with respect to #, p and then

with respect tov and o. If R* denotes Riemann’s invariant
of curvature constructed solely from the gy, calculation

H. WEYL | 215

gives
3 A/9¢") , 3
= gn “ss ESNet + aD es
Beir Sere ees ZPuh
In the static case, where the space components of the electro-

magnetic potential disappear, and all quantities are inde-
pendent of the time 2, by (21) we must have

R = R¥ + =do¢" = const.

But in a world-territory in which R +0 we may make
R = const. = + 1 everywhere, by appropriate determination
of the unit of length. Only we have to expect, under con-
ditions which are variable with time, surfaces R = 0, which
evidently will play some singular part. R cannot be used as
density of action (represented by R* in Einstein’s theory of
gravitation) because it has not the weight - 2. The conse-
quence is that though our theory leads to Maxwell’s electro-
magnetic equations, it does not lead to Hinstein’s gravitation
equations. In their place appear differential equations of
order 4. But indeed it is very improbable that Hinstein’s
equations of gravitation are strictly correct, because, above
all things, the gravitation constant occurring in them is not
at all in the picture with the other constants of nature, the
gravitation radius of the charge and mass of an electron, for
example, being of an entirely different order of magnitude
(10? or 10% times as small) from that of the radius of the
electron itself.*

It was my intention here merely to develop briefly the
general principles of the theory.t| The problem naturally

* Of, Weyl, Ann. d. Physik, 54, 1917, p. 133.

+ [The problem of defining all W invariants allowable as action-quantities,
under the requirement that they should contain the derivatives of the g,, only
to the second order at most, and those of the ¢, only to the first order, was
solved by R. Weitzenbéck (Sitzungsber. d. Akad. d. Wissensch. in Wien,
129, 1920; 130, 1921). If we omit the invariants W for which the variation
3{Wdw vanishes identically, there remain according to a later calculation by
R. Bach (Math. Zeitschrift, 9, 1921, pp. 125 and 189) only three combina-
tions, The real W seems to be a linear combination of Maxwell’s L and the
square of R. This conjecture has been tested more carefully by W. Pauli
(Physik. Zeitschrift., 20, 1919, pp. 457-67) and myself; in particular we
succeeded in advancing so far on this basis as to deduce the equations of

216 GRAVITATION AND ELECTRICITY

presents itself of deducing the physical consequences of the
theory on the basis of the special form for the action-quantity
given in (14), and of comparing these with experience, exam-
ining particularly whether the existence of the electron and
the peculiarities of the hitherto unexplained processes in the
atom can be deduced from the theory.* The task is extra-
ordinarily complicated from the mathematical point of view,
because it is impossible to obtain approximate solutions if we
restrict ourselves to the linear terms; for since it is certainly
not permissible to neglect terms of higher order in the
interior of the electron, the linear equations obtained by
neglecting these may have, in general, only the solution 0.
I propose to return to all these matters in greater detail in ~
another place.

motion of a material particle. The invariant (14) selected above, at hazard
in the first place, seems on the contrary to play no part in nature. Cf. Raum,
“ Zeit, Materie,” ed. 4, §§ 35, 36, or Weyl, Physik. Zeitschr., 22, 1921, pp.
473-80. ]

* [Meanwhile I have quite abandoned these hopes, raised by Mie’s theory ;
I do not believe that the problem of matter is to be solved by a mere field
theory. Cf. on this subject my article “ Feld und Materie,” Ann. d. Physik,
65, 1921, pp. 541-63.]
