THE COMMENTARIES OF PROCLUS ON THE TIMAEUS OF PLATO, IN FIVE BOOKS
Vol. I (Books I-III)
Translated from the Greek by Thomas Taylor
London: Printed for the translator, 1820

[Transcribed from the Internet Archive scan (proclusontimaeus01procuoft; University of Toronto copy). Raw OCR, not proofread. Public domain: published 1820; translator d. 1835.]

ae

ἡ ὁ
“ean
dhile
ey"
i
*

ots

Pere

.

εἰ τὸ πὶ
a

ey

as

τ 8
af :

iat

ἐδ ΕΝ

me

Ye. Lee 4 tad rch ile {7 -ὁ

THE er ee

COMMENTARIES OF PROCLUS

ON THE
TIMAZUS OF PLATO,
IN FIVE BOOKS 5

CONTAINING A TREASURY OF

| 5001
PYTHAGORIC AND PLATONIC PHYSIOLOGY.
TRANSLATED FROM THE GREEK,
BY THOMAS TAYLOR.
Epos wpos ptAogopous ἐστι φιλια" προς μεντοι σοζιστας, ἡ γραμματιστας, ἢ Υϑιονῆο yeros εἐτέρον
ανθρωπὼων κακοδαιμονων, οντε νυν core φιλια, μητε νστερον wore γένοιτο. .
Apollonius Ty aneus.
TWO VOLUMES.
se VOL. i. ες
London:

PRINTED FOR AND SOLD BY THE AUTHOR, NO. 9, MANOR PLACE, 5 fhe

WALWORTH, SURREY,
BY A. J. VALPY, RED LION COURT, FLEET STREET.

Sn NB mes

1820.

. Ἀ]


TINE 24

Reproduced by
DUOPAGE PROCESS
inthe

U.S. of America

Micro Photo Division
Bell & Howell Company
Cleveland 12, Ohio

INTRODUCTION.

OF that golden chain of philosophers, who, having themselves happily pene-
trated, luminously unfolded to others the profundities of the philosophy of Plato,

Proclus ts indisputably the largest and most refulgent link. Born with a genius

transcendently ereat, and accompanied throuch life with a fortune sincularl
δ δ tad

good, he exhibited in his own person a union of the rarest kind, in which power
concurred with will, the benetit resulting from genuine philosophy with the ability
of imparting it, and in which Wisdom was inseparable from Prosperity. The eulo-
gium therefore of Ammonius Hermeas, “ that Proclus possessed the power of un-
folding the opinions of the ancients, and a scientific judgment of the nature of
things,in the highest perfection posstale tohumanity,”' will be immediately assented
to by every one, who is an adept in the writings of this incomparable man.

I rejoice therefore, in the opportunity which is now afforded me of presenting
to the English reader a translation of one of the greatest productions of this Cory-
phean philosopher ; though unfortunately like most of his other works, it has been
transmitted to us in a mutilated state. For these Commentaries scarcely explain
a third part of the Timeus ; and from a passage in Olympiodorus On the Meteors
of Anstotle,” there is every reason to believe that Proclus left nu part of the

* Fa δὲ τι και ἡμεῖς δυνηθειημεν εισένεγκειν περι τὴν τὸν βιβλίον σαφηνειαν, απονημονένσαντες των
εζηγησεων row θειον ἡμων διδάσκαλον LpoxXov τον πλατωνίκον διαδοχον, Tov εἰς axpoy τῆς αγθρωπινηε φυσεωε
τὴν τε εξηγητικὴν τῶν δοκουντῶν τοῖς παλαιοις δνναμιν, καὶ τὴν ἐπιστημονίκην rns φυσεως τῶν Ὄντων κρισιν
ἀσκησαντος, πολλὴν av τῷ λογιῳ Dew χαριν ομολογησαιμεν- Ammon, de luterpret. p. 1.

For important particularsrespecting this extraordinary man, see my translation of his Commentary en
the first book of Euclid. He was born about the year 412 of Christ.

* See this passage in the notes to my translation of the Meteors of Aristotle.

΄

ΠῚ INTRODUCTION.

Timzus without his masterly elucidations. This is likewise more than probable,
from what Marinus says in his life of him, ‘that he was a man laborious to a
miracle ;” for it cannot be supposed that such a man would leave the greater
part of one of the most important dialogues of Plato unelucidated, and particu-
Jarly as these Commentaries were written by him (as the same Marinus informs
us) in the flower of his age, and that he preferred them beyond all his other works."
Fortunately however, the most important part of this work is preserved ; or that
part in which the demiurgic, paradigmatic, and final causes of the universe are-
unfolded ; the corporeal nature of it is represented as fabricated with forms and
demiurgic sections, and distributed with divine numbers ; and soul is produced
from the Demiurgus, and is filied with harmonic ratios, and divine and fabriea-
tive symbols. The whole mandane animal too, is here shown to be connected, ac-
cording to the united comprehension which subsists in the intelligible world ; and
the parts which it contains are so disposed as to harmonize with the wiole, both
such as are corporeal, and such as are vital. For partial souls such as ours, are
introduced into its spacious receptacle, are placed about the mundane Gods, and
hecome mundane through the luciform vehicles with which they are connected.
The progression of the cloments likewise from their first incorporeal subsistence to
their subterranean termination, and the mature of the heavens and heavenly
bodies, are beautifully developed. And as the result of the most scientific rea-
that the fixed
stars have periodic revolutions on their axes, though the length of their duration is

2

soning, it is shown that every planet is surrounded with satellites,

tous unknown; and that the stars, which at times disappear and again: become
visible, are the satellites of other fixed stars of amore primary dignity, behind the
splendors of which they are occasionally concealed.’ These and many other
Inost interesting particulars, are unfolded in’ these Commentaries, with an accu-
racy and perspicuity which have seldom been equalled, and have never been ex-
celled.

' The late Dr. Charles Burney, on being once asked by me, whether he had ever read these Com-
mentaries, candidly replied, ‘that they were too much for hin; atthe same time eaclaiming, ‘‘ What a
giant was Proclus compared to Longinus!” ‘This confession, as the Doctor had never studied the philo-
sophy of Plato, displayed a degree of good serse, which is seldom to be met with in a grammarian and
philologist, om such an occasion; aud his cundour is still more remarkable, when it is considered that
he had been a Reviewer.

* See p. 270. Vol. 2. in which itis saia, “ that in each of the planetary spheres, a number analogous
to the choir of the fixed stars, subsists with appropriate circulations.” Sce also p. 2650 and 281, of the
same volume, in which this is more fully asserted.

3 See p. 299. Vol. 2.

INTRODUCTION. v

When T speak however, of the perspicuity with which these particulars are
developed, Ido not mean that they are delivered in such a way, as to be obvious
to every one, or that they may be apprehended as soon as read ς for this pertains
only to the fungous and frivolous productions of the present day ; but my mean-
ing is, that they are written with all the clearness, which they are naturally capa-
ble of admitting, or Which a genuine student of the philosophy! of Plato can desire.
And this leads me to make some remarks on the iniquitous opinion which, since
the revival of letters, has been generally entertained of the writtigs of Proclus and
other philosophers, who are distinguished by the appellation of the latter Plato-
nists, and to show the cause from which it origmated,

The opinion to which T allude is this, that Plotinus and his followers, or in
other words, all the Platonists that existed from his time to the fall of the Roman
empire, and the destruction of the schools of the philosophers by Justinian, cor-
rupted the philosophy of Plato, by filling it with jargon and revery, and by
ascribing dogmas to him, which are not to be found in his writings, and which
are perfectly absurd. It might naturally be supposed that the authors of this
calumny were men deeply skilled in the philosophy, the corruptors of which they
profess to have detected ; and that they had studied the writings of the men whom
they so grossly defame. This however is very far from being the case. For
since the philosophy of Plato, as 1 have elsewhere shown, is the offspring of the
most consummate science, all the dogmas of it being deduced by a series of
geometrical reasoning, some of them ranking as prior, and others as posterior,
and the latter depending on the former, like the propositions in’ Eucla, certain
preparatory disciplines are requisite to the perfect comprehension of these doc-
trines. Hence a legitimate student of this philosophy must be skilled in mathe-
matics, have been exercised in all the logical methods, and not be unacquainted
with physics. [16 must also be an adept in the writings of Aristotle, as pre-
paratory to the more sublime speculations of Plato. And in addition to all this, he
must possess those qualifications enumerated by Plato in the 7th book of his Re-
public; viz. he must have naturally a good memory, learn with facility, be magnifi-
cent and orderly, and the friend and ally of justice, truth, fortitude, and temperance.
Since the revival of letters however, this philosophy has not been studied by men,
who have had the smallest conception that these requisites were indispensably

1 Itis well said by Petwin, alluding to this philosuphy, ‘that there are certain truths acquired by
a long exercise of reason, both in particular, and likewise in those subjects that are most general, as
much, perhaps, out of the reach of the greatest mathematician, as the speculations of Newton are above
the capacity of some that are now called matbematicians.”

vi INTRODUCTION.

necessary, or who have attempted the acquisition of it, in this regular and scienti-
fic method. Hence, they have presumed to decide on the excellence of works,
with the true ments of which, as they were thus unqualified, they were wholly
unacquainted, and to calumniate what they could not understand, They appear
likewise to have been ignorant, that Plato, conformably to all the other great
philosophers of antiquity, wrote in such a way as to conceal the sublimest of
his doctrines from the vulgar, as well knowing, that they would only be profaned by
them without being understood; the eye of the multitude, as he says, not being
sufficiently strong to bear the Jight of truth. Hence, as Proclus well observes, !
“it is needless to mention, that it is unbecoming to speak of the most divine of
dogmas before the multitude, Plato himself asserting that all these are ridiculous
to the many, butin an admirable manner are esteemed by the wise. Thus also,
the Pythagoreans said, that of discourses some are mystical, but others adapted to
be delivered openly. With the Peripatetics likewise, some are esoteric, and others
exoteric; and Parmenides himself, wrete some things co.formable to truth, but
others to opinion; and Zeno calls some assertions true, but others adapted to
the necessary purposes of life.” The men therefore, who have defamed the latter
Platonists, being thus unqualified, and thus ignorant of the mode of writing
adupted by the great ancients, finding from a superficial perusal of the most
genuine disciples of Plato many dogmas which were not immediately obvious in his
writings, and which were to them incomprehensible, confidently asserted that
these dogmas were spurious, that the authors of them were delirious, and that
they had completely corrupted and polluted the philosophy of their master. It
may also be added, as Olympiodorus justly observes, that the writings of Plato
like those of Homer, are to be considered physically, ethically, theologically, and
in short, multifariously; and that he who does not thus consider them, will in vain
attempt to unfold the latent meaning they contain. By the latter Platonists
however, they have been explored in this way, and he who is capable of availing
himself of the clucidations of these most benevolent and most sagacious men, will
find the arduous sublimities of Plato accessible, his mystic narrations conformable
to scientific deductions, and his apparent obscurity, the veil of conceptions, truly

* Ore de azxpern ra Oewrara των Soyparwy ἐστιν, εἰς ἀκοὰς φερομέναᾳ τῶν woAwY, οὐδὲν dec λεγειν,
avrov WAarwios εἰπονῦτον, ws παντα ravra καταγέλαστα μεν ἐστι τοις πολλοῖς, θαυμαστως δὲ alia τοις

ovgus. ovrw be και οι luda yope (ut τῶν λυγων TOUS μεν εφασκον εἰναι μυστικους, TOUS δε νπαιθριονς, καὶ οἱ

ex τὸν Tlepexarov, τοὺς μεν ἐσωτερικονς, τους δε εξωτερικους, και avtos Παρμενίδης, τα per xpos αληθειαν
: E

eypaye, ta be xpos Solar, καὶ o Zyvwy ke rovs μεν adnfers exader των λόγων, τοὺς δε χρειωξεις.

Procl. MS. Comment. in Parmenid,

INTRODUCTION, vik

luminous and divine. And thus much as to the cause of the prevailing iniqui-
tous opinion, respecting the writings of the latter Platonists; for the authors of jt,
I have not been able to discover. But of this I am certain, and posterity will
confirm the decision, that whoever they were, they were no less ignorant than
arrogant, no less contemptible than obscure.

With respect to the following translation, 1 have only to observe, that [have
endeavoured to the utmost of my ability to unite in it faithfulness with perspicuity,
and to preserve the manner as well as the matter of the original, Independent
of the difliculties snseparable from such an undertaking, and which arise from the
abstruseness of the subjects that are discussed in this work, the original abounds
with errors, not of a trifling, but of the most important nature; errors, which so
materially affect the sense, that no one can read these Commentaries, unless he
corrects them, and yet no one can correct the greater part of them, unless he is
well acquainted with the philosophy of Plato. Of this the reader may be con-
vinced by perusing the notes which accompany this translation, in which he will
find upwards of eleven hundred necessary emendations. I call them necessary,
because they are not the offspring of conjecture, but such as the sense indubitably
demands, Of translations too, of this work, I could not avail myself; for ofthe
whole of it there are none; and a Latin translation of a part of the 3d book. by
Nicholwus Leonicus Thomeus," is the only aid that has been afforded me in this
arduous undertaking, From this translation I have been able, as the learned
reader will perceive, to give many important emendations of the printed original,
and not unfrequently to add to it, not only particular words, but entire sentences
that were wanting.

And now 1 shall conclude with observing, that though like most others who
have laboured greatly for the good, not merely of their country, but of all man-
kind, I have only met with ingratitude from the public for those labours ; and that
though on this account Iam not much indebted, yet I sincerely wish well to my
native Jand, and to every individual in it. That 1 have neither been influ-
enced by the expectation of sordid emolument, nor of the honours of the multi-
tude, in the prosecution of these labours, must be evident from the nature of them,
to the most careiess observer. The most perfect conviction indeed, that a greater.
good than the philosophy of Plato and Aristotle was never imparted by divinity

* This translation forms the last part of the Opuscula of Thomzus, printed at Venice in the year
1525 ; which work is so scarce, that Fabricius in his account of the Life and Writings of Proclus,
(Biblioth. Grec. Tom, 8.) says, he never sav it.

* According to Plato in the 7th Book of his Republic, “that which springs up spontaneously, should
not be forward to pay any one for its nurture.”

vill INTRODUCTION.

to man, and the consequent persuasion, that 1 could not confer a more real bene-
‘fiton the present age and posterity than by a dissemination of it in my native
tongue, as they induced me to engage in such a difficult undertaking, have also
been attended with the purest delight, froma conviction that 1 was acting rightly,
and therefore ina way pleasing to divinity. Hence in accomplishing this Hercu-
lean task, I have been satisfied with exploring myself, and imparting to others,
the treasures of ancient wisdom ; and with endeavouring to deserve the favourable
regard of that ineffable principle, whose approbation is not only the highest honour
that either mortals or immortals can obtain, but the most durable and substan-

tial gain.

Ιχ

NAMES OF THE PHILOSOPHERS QUOTED BY PROCLUS
IN THESE COMMENTARIES.

Aprastus APHRUDISIENSIS, one of the genuine Peripatetics, according to Simplicius On the
Categories of Aristotle.

AGLAOPHEMUS, one who initiated Pythagoras in the mysteries of Orpheus.

Αὐδιν 5, a Platonic philosopher, who flourished about the time of Galen.

ALEXANDER APHRODISIENSIS, ἃ Peripatetic philosopher, who flourished under the Empero™
Severus.

Ametivs, a Platonic philosopher, and a disciple of Plotinus.

AmMonius Saccas, the preceptor of Plotinus.

ANAXAGORAS, the Clazomenian, flourished about the 70th Olympiad.

ANTONINUS, a disciple of Ammonius Saccas.

ArIsToTLF, the disciple of Plato, was born in the first year of the 99th Olympiad.

Aristot1s, the Rhodian.

Atticus, a Platonic philosopher, who flourished under Marcus Antoninus.

Curysiprus, a celebrated Stoic philosopher, died in the 145rd Olympiad.

Crantor SoOtensis, the first interpreter of Plato, also a fellow disciple with Nenocrates of
Plato, and an auditor of Polemo.

Democritvs, the celebrated philosopher of Abdera, flourished about the 80th Olympiad.

Empenoc.es, the celebrated Pythagorean philosopher, was an auditor when a young man of
Pythagoras.

Ericurvs, was born in the 109th Olympiad.

Evpemus, the Rhodian, a disciple of Aristotle, and to whom Aristotle inscribed his Eudemian
Ethics.

EurymMacnves, the Epicurean,

Ga en, the physician, who was also a Platonist. Ele wrote 200 Volumes, most of which were
burnt in the temple of Peace, and flourished under the Emperor Adr-an.

HarpvocratTion, the Platonist, an Argive, and the familiar of Augustus Cesar.

Hrraciipes Ponticus, a disciple of Plato and Speusippus.

Heracuitvus Ernesivs, surnamed the obscure, flourished about the 70th. Olympiad.

Hermes TrismMeGistus.

Juan, the Theurgist, who flourished under Marcus Antoninus.

IamBticnus, a Platonic philosopher, surnamed the ditine, flourished under the Emperor Con-
stantine.

Tim. Plat. Vou. i. h

Χ

Nicomacnes, the Pythagorean, was, according to Fabricius, somewhat posterior to the age of
Antoninus Pius.
Numentus, a Pythagoric and Platonic philosopher, flourished prior to Plotinus.
Oce ius Lucanvs, an auditor of Pythagoras, and one of his most eminent disciples,
OriGen, (not a father of the Church,) a disciple of Plotinus.
ParmeENtpES, the Elean, a Pythagoric philosopher, flourished about the 70th Olympiad.
Puerecybes, the Syrian, the preceptor of Pythagoras.
Puiroravs, of Tarentum, an eminent Pythagorean philosopher, and ai auditor of Pythagoras.
Pato, was born in the 4th year of the 88th Olympiad, and died in the 108th Olympiad.
Protinus, one of the most eminent of the Platonic philosophers, flourished under the [Emperors
Gordian and Galieuus.
Piurancn, of Charonea, in Baotia, the preceptor of Trajan, and the celebrated biographer.
Porruyry, a disciple of Plotinus, aud distinguished by the appellation of the pAilosopher,
Posivonivus, a Stoic philosopher, flourished under the reign of Julius Cxsar.
PRAXIPHANES, adisciple of TPheophrastus.
Procius MaLtores, is mentioned by our Proclus as one of the ancient philosophers,
Pytnacoras, the father of philosophy, flourished about the Goth Olympiad,
Severus, a Platonist, but the time in which be flourished is not known,
Socrates, the celebrated preceptor of Plato, was born in the 4th year of the 77th Olympiad.
Socrates, the Platonist, was posterior in time to Amelius.
Soton, the Legislator, fluurished about the 46ch Olympiad.
Srrato LaAMPSACENUS, an auditor and successor of ‘Mheophirastus.
Synianus, the preceptor of Proclus, See the notes to this work,
Tuaces, was bom in the firt year of the 35th Olympiad, and died in the 58th Olympiad.
Tneoponus, Asin evs, a disciple of Plotinus, and surnamed the great.
Turornrastus, the celebrated disciple and successor of Aristotle,
Xexanenes, ἃ Peripatetic philosopher, and the frend of Augustus Cusar.
Xenocrates, a disciple, and successor of Plato.
Xexopnanes, the Colophonian, author of the Eleatic method of reasoning, flourshed in
the Goth Olempiad. For an account of this method, see the additional notes on this work,
Zeno ELeares was an auditor of Parmenides, and flourished about the 86th Olympiad.
N. B. The Olympic games were restored by Iphicus, 442 years after their first institution, and about 777
years before Christ. From this last institution the Greeks began to reckon by Olyimpiads, cach vf which con-
tained the space of a years. Aud this continued even to the reign of Constantine,

she eR PRE I ας στον

ain nite aaa Accs ts

.
κι

AN EXPLANATION OF CERTAIN TERMS USED BY
PROCLUS IN THIS WORK.

το ανχγωγιχον. Tur Anacocic. That which elevates the soul from sensibles to intelligibles.

αλλοιωσις:. ALLIATION. Change in quality.

axoxaractasi;. APOCATASTASIS. Lestitution to a pristine form, or condition of being.

τὸ γενεσιουργικον. Tne Grnesiurcic. ‘That which is effective of generation.

ο δαιμόνιος Δριστοτέλης. THe Damoniacat AristotLe. This philosophez was thus de-
nominated by the ancients, from his transcendent physiological knowledge; nature being
proximately governed by demons, or those powers that subsist between Gods and men.

γένεσις. GENERATION. A flowing condition of being, or a subsistence in becoming to be.
Hence, ro yryverdas signifies am extension in subsistence, or a tendency to being.

δημιουργὸς τῶν ode. THe Desmiturcus or Wuores. The maker of the universe is thus
denominated, because he produces the universe, so far as itis a whole, and likewise all the
wholes it contains, by his uwn immediate energy, other subordinate powers co-operating with
him in the production of parts. Llence be produces the universe totally and at once.

διανοια. Ditanosa. ‘Vhe discursive energy of reason; or it is that power which reasons scienti-
ficall, deriving the principles of its reasoning from inteliect.

Sofa. Opinion. Is the last of the gnostic powers of the rational soul; and knows that
a thing is, but is ignorant of the cause of it, or why it is. For the knowledge of the és, or
why a thing 1s, belongs to διάνοια,

τὸ ἐπιθυμητικὸν μέρος τῆ; ψυχης. ‘Tue Epituymetic Part oF THE Sout, or that part of the
soul which is the principle of all-various desires. But desire is well defined, by the Pythago-
reans, to be a certain tendency, impulse, and appetite of the soul, in order to be filled with
something, or to enjoy something present, or to be disposed according to some seusitive energy.
They add, that there is also a desire of the contraries to these, and this 1s a desire of the evacua-
tion and absence, and of having no sensible perception of certain things.

εἰκονιχως. IcCoNICALLY. Δ thing is said to subsist iconically, when it subsists after the manner.
of an image.

εἰδολιχως. Ipouicauty. Adumbratively.

εἐνδιαστικω;. ENTHEASTICALLY. In adivinely-inspired manner.

ἐνιαιω;. Unicanry. In away conformable to the nature of (he one.

ro ἐτερηχιγήτον. THE ALTER-MOTIVR. ‘That which is moved by another thing, and not by.
itself,

ὄυμος. ANGER. An appetite of the soul directed to the avengement of incidental molestations..

doy. Reasons. Productive principles or powers; aud they also signify forms.

μορῷη. Morerne. Pertains to the colour, figure, and magnitude of superficies..

ΧΗ
πολυδυναμος. MULTIPOTENT. Possessing much power,
vorpa επιβολη. INTELLECTUAL Prosecrion. The immediate energy of intellect is thus
denominated, because it is an intujtive perception, or an immediate darting forth, as it were, to

its proper object, the intelligible.
νους. Interteer. In the human soul is the summit of dianoia, and is that power by the hght

proceeding from which, we perceive the truth of axioms. But in divine natures itis a self--

subsistent, impartible, eternal essence, perceiving all things at once.

chorrs, Wuobrness. A whole which has a perpetual subsistence, and which comprehends in
itself all the multitude of which it 15 the cause.

πλήρωμα. PLENITUDE, OR Compreteness. Is a whole which gives completion to the
universe. :

τὸ vonroy, % wees, ᾿ ψυχικὸν αἀλατο;. THE [yTrLLIGIBLE, oR INTELLECTUAL, OR Psycuicar
Breaptu; i.e. the extent of the progression of the istelligible, of intellect and of soul,
and of each of these according to its own order, and not according to a progression into an in-
ferior order.

τὸ cuvgercy. Tur Composite. L have used the word composite instead of compounded, because
the latter rather denotes the mingling, than the contiguous union of one thing with another,
which the former through its derivation from the Latin word compositus, solely denotes.

τελεστικη τέχνη. ΤῊΣ Trvestic Ant. Is the art pertaiming to mystic operations.

φιλυπολεμικός. Puitorotemic. An epithet of Minerva, signifying that she 1s a dover of war ;
just as she is also called philosophic, as being a lover of wisdom,

νπαρξις- ΠΥΡΑΆΧΙΒ. The first principle, or :.undation, a3 it were, of the essence of a thing.

Hence also, it is the summit of essence.

]
i
|
1

PROCLUS

THE TIM/EUS OF PLATO.

BOOK I.

THAT the desizn of the Platonic Timeus embraces the whole of physiology,
and that it pertains to the theory of the universe, discussing this trom the be-
ginning to the end, appears to me to be clearly evident to. those who are not
entirely illiterate, For this very treatise of the Pythagoric Timawus Concerning
Nature, is written after the Pythagoric manner; and Plato being thence impelled,
applied himself to write the Timwus, according to Sillographus." On this account
we have pretixed the treatise of Timaus to these Commentaries, in order that we
may know what the Timeus of Plato says that is the same with what is asserted
in the treatise of Tinzeus (the Loecrian], what it adds, and in what it dissents.
And that we may investizate not in a careless manner the cause of this disagree-
ment. All this dialogue, likewise, through the whole of itself, has physiology tor
its scope, surveying the same things in images and in’ paradigms, in wholes and
in parts. For it is filled with all the most beautifal boundaries * of physiology,
assuming things simple for the sake of such as are composite, parts for the sake
of wholes, and images for the sake of paradigms, leaving none of the principal
causes of nature uninvestigated.

* Viz. Timon, who was so called from writing scurrilous comic poems. * J. ε. Final intentions.

Tim. Plat. Vou. 1. ' A

2 PROCLUS ON TITF [BOOK 1.

But that the dialogue deservedly embraces a design of this kind, and that Plato
alone preserving the Pythagoric mode in the theory concerning nature, has pro-
secuted with great subtilty the proposed doctrine,—ought to be considered by
those who are more sagacious and acute. Por since, in short, physiology receives
a threefold division, and one part of it is conversant with matter and material
causes, but another part also adds the investigation of form, and evinces that this
is the more principal cause; and again, since a third part demonstrates that these
have not the relation of causes, but of concauses, and admits that there are other
causes, Which are properly so called, of things generated by nature, viz. the eflec-
tive, paradigmatic and final cause ;—this being the case, among the multitude of
physiologists prior to Plato, that directed their attention to matter, there was ἃ
diversity of Opinion respecting the subject of things, For Anaxagoras, who
appears to have seen, while the rest were asleep, that intellect is the first cause
of generated natures, made no use of intellect in his explaination of things, but
rather employed certain airs and iethers as the causes of things that are generated,
as Soerates says in the Phiedo. But of those posterior to) Plato, who were the
patrons of a sect, not all, but such of them as were more accurate than the rest,
thought fit to survey physical form in conjunction with matter, referring the prin-
ciples of bodies to matter and form. Porif they any where mention the pro-
ducing cause, as when they say that nature is a principle of motion, they rather
take away its efficacious and properly effective power (than allow the existence of
it] by not granting that it contains the reasons [or productive principles} of the
things effected by it, but admitting that many things are generated casually.
To which we may add, that they do not acnnowledge that there is a pre-existing
producing cause of, in short, all physical things, but of those only that are borne
along in generation. Por of eternal natures they clearly say, that there is no
effective cause; im asserting whieh they are ignorant that they must either give
subsistence to the whole of heaven from chance, or evince Chat whats casual is
Itself productive of itsell.

Plato however alone, following the Pythagoreans, delivers indeed, as the cons
causes of natural things, a tiiversal reeipient, and material form, which are sub-
servient to causes properly so called, ino the generation of things. Bat prior to
these, he investigates principal causes, viz. the producing cause, the paradigm,
and the final cause. ‘Through these also, he places a demiurgic intellect over

Viz. Anstotle, and his followers,

ποοκ 1. TIMZEUS OF PLATO. 3

the universe, and an intelligible cause in which the universe primarily subsists,
and the good, which is established prior to the producing cause, in the order of
the desirable. Tor since that which is moved by another thing, is suspended
from the power of that which moves, as it is evidently not adapted either to pro-
duce, or perfect, or save itself, in all these it is in want of a producing cause, and
ix conducted by it. Tt is 1+ therefore, that the concauses of natural things,
should be suspended from true causes, from which they are produced, with a
view to which they were fabricated by the father of all things, and for
the sake of which they were generated. Justly, therefore, are all these delivered,
and investigated with accuracy by Plato; and the remaining two, form and the
subject-matter, suspended from these. For this world is not the same with the
intellizible or intellectual worlds, which, according to some, subsist in pure forms ;
but one thing in it has the relation of reason and form, and another, of a subject.
But that Plato very properly delivers all these causes of the fabrication of the
world, viz. the good, the intelligible paradigm, the maker, form, and the subject
nature, is evident from the following considerations. Vor if he had spoken con-
cerning the intelligible Gods, he would have evinced that the good alone is the
cause of these ; for the intelligible number is from this cause. But if concerning
the intellectual Gods, he would have shown that he good and the intellizible are
the causes‘ of these. For the intellectual multitude proceeds from the intelligible
unities, and the one fountain of beings. And if he had spoken concerning the
supermundane Gods, he would have produced them from the intellectual and
total fabrication, from the intelligible Gods, and from the cause of all things,
For this cause gives subsistence to all things of which secondary natures are
generative, but ina primary, ineflable, and inconceivable manner. But since he
discusses mundaie affairs and the whole world, he gives to it matter and form,
descending into it from the supermundane Gods, suspends it from the total *
fabrication, assimilates it to intelligible animal, and demonstrates it to be a God
by the participation of the good; and thus he renders the whole world an inte!-
lectual, animated God, This, therefore, and such as this, is, as we have said, the
scope of the Timienus,

This however being the case, the order of the universe is appropriately indi-
cated in the beginning of the dialogue, through images; but in the middle of it,

* Tustead of ἀντι τουτων in this place, it is necessary to read αἰτίας rourwy.

> For wAns bere, it is necessary to read ολην.-

4 PROCLUS ON THE [nook &

the whole fabrication of the world. is delivered ; and in the end, partial natures,
and the extremities of fabrication, are woven together with wholes. For the
resumption of the discourse about a polity, and the narration respecting the
Atlantic island, unfold through images the theory of the world, For if we direct
our attention to the union and multitude of mundane natures, we must say that
the polity which Socrates summarily discusses, is an image of their union, esta-
Hlishing as its end the communion which pervades through all things; but that the
war ofthe Atlantics with the Athenians, whieh Critias narrates, is an image of
the division of mundane natures, and especially of the opposition according to
the two co-ordinations of thirgs. Bat if we divide the universe into the celestial
and sublunary regions, we Ν᾽ say that the [Socratic] polity, ts assimilated to
the celestial order ; for Socrates savs, that the paradigms of it is established in the
heavens; but the warof the Athintics, to eeneration, which subsists through con-
trariety and mutation. “Phese things therefore, for the reasons we lave mentioned,
precede the whole of physiology.

Butatter this, the demiursie, paradigmatic and final causes of the universe are
unfolded, in consequence of the pre existence of whieh, the universe is fabricated
both according to the whole and the parts of it. Por the corporeal nature of it iN
fashioned with forms, and divided by divine numbers; soul also ts produced from
the Demiurgus, and is filled with harmonic reasons, and divine and demiurgic
syinbols ; and the whole animal is woven together conformably to the united
comprehension of it inthe intelfeible world. “Phe parts likewise of at, are ar-
ranged ina becoming manner in the whole, both such as are corporeal and such
as are vital For partial souls being introduced into. the world, are arranged
about their leading Gods, and through their vehicles become mundane, toitating
their presiding deities, Mortal animals likewise, are fabricated and vivitied by
the eclestial Gods: where also mau is surveyed, and the mode of his subsistence,
and throuh what causes he was constituted, Man indecd ts considered prior to
other things, cither because the theory respecting him pertains to us who make
him the subject of discussion, and are ourselves men; or because man is ἃ micro-
cosin, and all sueh things subsist in him partially, its the world contains divinely
and totally. For there isan intellect ino us which is in energy, and a rational

non! procoeding from the same® father, and Che sane Vivifie Goddess, as the soul

' Vor arribeaes here, itis obviously requisite to re ad αὐ τιῆε σέων,

Vor αὐτὴν rarpos here, 1 ᾿ν neeessary to read aurov marpos,

nook 1.) TIMAEUS OF PLATO. 5

of the universe ; also an etherial vehicle analogous to the heavens, and a terres-
trial boay derived from the four elements, and with which likewise it- is co-ordt-
nate. Tf therefore, it is necessary that the universe should) be surveved multifa-
viously, in the intelligible, and in the sensible world, paradigmatically, iconically,
totally and partially, it will be well, if the nature of man is perfectly discussed
in the theory of the universe,

You may also say that conformably to the Pythazoric custom, it is necessary
to connect the discussion of that which surveys with that which is surveyed. For
since we are informed what the world is, it is requisite T think to add also, whiat
that is which considers these things, and makes them the subject of rational anim-
adversion. But that Plato directs his attention likewise to this, is evident froin
what he says near the end of the dialogue, that it is necessary that the intellect of
him who intends to obtain a happy life, should be assimilated to the object of his
intelleetion. For the universe is always happy; and our soul will likewise be
happy, When itis assimilated to the universes for thus it will be led) back to its
cause, Foras the sensible man is to the universe, so is) the intelligible man_ to
animal itself, But there secondary natures always adhere to such as are first, and
parts subsist in unproceeding union with their wholes, and are established in them.
Hence, when the sensible man is assimilated to the universe, he also imitates: his
paradigm after an appropriate manner, becoming a world through similitude to
the world, and happy through resemblance to that blessed) god [the universe. }
The ends also of fabrication are subtilely elaborated by Plato, according to genus
and species, and also what pertains to meteors, together with productions in the
earth, and in animals. such things as are preternataral, and such as are accord-
ing tonature; in which part of the Timawus, likewise, the principles of medicine
are unfelded. For the physiologist ends αἱ these; since he is a surveyor of
nature. Fora subsistence aceordiig to nature, exists together with nature; but
the preternatural is a departure trom nature, It is the business, therefore, of the
physiologist to understand in how many modes this aberration subsists, and how
it becomes terminated in moderation and a natural condition. But itis the pro-
vince of the medical art to unfold) such particulars as are consequent to these.
Aud in these things especially, Plato has something in common with other
physiologists, For they were conversant with the most material, and the ultimate
works of nature, neglecting the whole heaven, aud the orders of the mundane
Gods, in consequence of directing their attention to matter; but they bade
farewell to forms and primary causes.

6 PROCLUS ON THE (Book 1,

It also appears to me that the demoniacal Aristotle, emulating as much as
possible the doctrine of Plato, thus arranges the whole of his discussion concern-
ing nature, perceiving that the things which are common to every thing that has
a natural subsistence are, form and a subject, that from whence the principle of
motion is derived, motion, time, and place; al! which are delivered by Plato in
this dialogue, viz. interval, and time which is the image of eternity, and is con-
subsistent with the universe; the various species of motion; and the concauscs of
things which have a natural subsistence. But with respect to the things peculiar
to substances according to an essential division, of these Aristotle discusses in
the first place such as pertain to the heavens, ina way conformably to Plato; 50
far as he calls the heaven unbegotten, and a fifth essence. Lor what diflerence is
there between calling it a fifth clement, or a fifth world, and ἃ fifth figure, as
Plato denominates it?) But in the seeond place, he discusses such things as are
commoy to every thing that has a generated: subsistence, And) with respect to
things of this hind, Plato deserves to be admired, for having surveyed with much
accuracy the essence and powers of them, and for having rightly preserved their
harmony and cgntrarieties. And of these, such indeed as pertain to meteors,
Plato has delivered the principles, but Aristotle has extended the doctrine
respecting them beyond what is fit. But such as pertain to the theory of aumals,
are distinguished by Plato according te all final causes and concauses, but by
Aristotle are scarcely, and bat in few Instances, surveyed according to form.
For his discussion for the most part stops at matter; and making bis exposition
of things that have ao natural subsistence from this, he shows to us that
he deserts the doctrine of lis preceptor, gand thus much concerning these par-
ticulars.

In the next place it is requisite to speak of the form and character of the dia-
logue, and to show what they are. It is universally acknowledged, then, that
Plato receiving the treatise of the Pythagoric Timiwus, which was composed by
him after the Pythagoric manner, began to write his Timwus. Again, it is - also
acknowledged by those who are in the smallest degree conversant with the writ-
ings of Plato, that his manner is Socratic, philanthropic, and demonstrative. 10,
therefore, he has any where mingled the Pythagoric and Socratic peculiarity, he
appears to have done this in the present dialogue. For there are in it from the
Pythayorie custom, elevation of conception, the intellectual, the divinely inspired,
the suspending every thing from intetligibles, the bounding wholes in numbers, the
indicating things mystically and symbolically, the anagogic, the transcending

nooK 1. TIMAUS OF PLATO. 7

partial conceptions, and the enunciative or unfolding into light. But from the
Socratic philanthropy, the sociable, the mild, the demonstrative, the contemplat-
ing beings through images, the ethical, and every thing of this kind. Hence it is
a venerable dialogue ; forms its conceptions supernally from the first principles ;
and mingles the demonstrative with the enunciative. It also prepares us to under-
stand physies, not only physically, but likewise theologically. For Nature herself
who is the leader of the universe, being suspended from, and inspired by the
Gods, governs the corporeal-formed essence. And she neither ranks as a God-
dess, nor is without a divine peculiarity, but is illuminated by the truly-existing
Gods.

If, likewise, it be requisite that discourses should be assimilated to the things
of which they are the interpreters, as Timeus himself says, it will be fit that this
dialogue also should have the physical, and should also have the theological ς
imitating nature, which is the object of its contemplation, Fartier still, acvording
to the Pythagoric doctrine, things receive a threefold division into intelligibles, ἢ
things physical, and such as are the media between these, and which are usually
called mathematical, But all things may be appropriately surveyed in all. For/
such things as are media, and such as are last! presubsist in intelligibles after a
primordial manner, and both these subsist in the mathematical cenera ; first natures
indeed iconically, but such as rank as the third, peradigmatically, In physical
entities, also, there are images of the essences prior to them. This, therefore, being
the case, Timieus, when he constitute? the soul, very properly indicates its powers,
its productive principles, and its elements through mathematical names. But
Plato defines its peculiarities by geomc.tical figures, and leaves the causes of all
these primordially pre-existing in the intelligible and demiurgic intellect. And
thus much concerning these things ; since when we descend to particulars, we
shall be able to know more perfectly the manner of the dialogue. But the hypo-
thesis of it ix as follows :

Socrates having come to the Pirwus for the sake of the Bendidian festival and
solemn procession, discoursed there concerning a polity with Polemarchus, the
son of Cephalus, Glanco and Adimantus, and likewise Thrasymachus the sophist.
But on the day after this, he narrates the conference in the Pirwus, as it is laid
down in the Republic, in the city, to Timaus, Hermocrates and Criteas, and to
another fourth anonymous person. Having, however, made this narration, he calls
upon the other associates, to feast him in return on the day after this, with the
banquet of discourse. The auditors therefore and speakers assembled together

Ἷ

f

8 PROCLUS ON THE [Rook 1.

on this day, which was the third from the conference in the Pireus. For in the
Republic it is said, “* T went down yesterday to the Pirwus 37 but in this dialogue,
“ Of those who were received by me yesterday at a banquet of discourse, but who
ought now in their turn to repay me with a similar repast.” Not all of them how-
ever, Were present at this audition, but the fourth was wanting through indispost-
tion, What, therefore, you will say, are these three auditors of a discussion about
the whole world? Treply, that itis fit the father of the discussion should be con-
sidered as analogous to [the Demiurgus, or] the father of works. For the fabrica-
tion of the world in words, is the image of the fabrication of it according to intel-
lect. Bat the triad of those that receive the discussion of Timieus, is analozous
to the demiurgic triad which receives the one and total motion of the father; of
which triad Socrates is the summit, through an alliance of life immediately con-
Jolming himself to Tinieus, just as the first of the paradigmatic triad is united to
the fatter, who is prior to the tuiad, These things, however, if the Gods please,
we shall render more manifest through what follows. As we have therefore
spoken concerning the scope and management of the dialogue, have shown low
admirable the character of itis, and what is the whole of the hypothesis, and have
indicated the adaptation of the persons to the present discussion, twill be proper
that, betaking ourselves to the words of απ, we should investigate every par-
Hieular to the utinost of our power,

Since, however, the word nature, being diflerently understood by different: per-
sons, disturbs those who love to contemplate the conceptions of Plato, let us in
the first place show what it appeared to him: to he, and what his opinion was of
Its essence. For the hnowledge of what nature is, whence it proceeds, and how
far itextends to productions, will be adapted) τὸ the dialogue, which bas for its
object the physical theory. For of the ancients, some indeed, as Antipho, called
iatter nature; but others form, as Aristotle, in many places. Others again called
the whole of things nature, as some prior to Plato, of whom he speaks ino the
Laws. Others’ denominated nature things which subsist by nature. But others
gave the appellation of nature to physical powers, such as gravity and levity,
rarity and density, as some of the Peripatetics, and still more ancient: pliysiolo-
vists. Others called things which have a natural subsistence the art of God 5
others soul; and others something else of this kind. Plato, however, does not

think fit to give the appellation of nature primarily, either to matter, or material

' For ore δὴ here, it is necessary to read οἱ dy,

ROOK 1] TIM-LEUS OF PLATO. 9

form, or body, or physical powers, but is averse to call it immediately soul.
Placing, however, the essence of it in the middle of beth, I mean, between soul
and corporeal powers, the latter being inferior to it, in consequence of being divided
about bodies, and incapable of being converted to themselves, but nature surpass-
ing things posterior to if, through containing the reasons or productive principles
of all of them, and generating and vivifving all things, he has delivered to us the
most accurate theory concerning it. For, according to common conceptions,
nature is one thing, and that which subsists according to, and by nature, another,
For that which is artificial, is something diflerent from art, and the intellectual
soul is one thing, and nature another. For nature, indeed, verges to bodies, and
is inseparable from them, But the intellectual soul is separate from bodics, is esta-
blished in herself, and at one and the same time belongs to herselfand to another.
She belongs to another, indeed, in consequence of being participated, but to herself,
through not verging to the participant; just as the father of soul is of himself
being imparticipable, and, if yon are willing, prior to him the intelligible paradigm
itself of the whole world. For these follow each other, viz. itse/; of itself; of’
itself and of another ; of another ; another. And with respect to the last of these,
it is evident that it is every thing sensible, in which there is interval and all-various
division. But of the next to this, (viz. that which is of another,] it is nature
which is inseparable from bodies, That which immediately precedes this [viz.
that which is both of itself and of another,] is soul which subsists in herself, and
imparts by illumination a secondary life to another thing. The next to this [or
that which is of itself.) is the demiurgie intellect who abides Cas Plato says] in
himself in his own accustomed manner. And the next to this Cor itself] is the
intelligible cause of all things, which is the paradigm of the productions of the
Demiurgus, and which Plato on this account thinks fit to call animal itself.
Nature, therefore, is the last of the causes which fabricate this corporeal-formed
and sensible essence. She is also the boundary of the extent of ineorporeal
essences, and is full of reasons and powers through which she directs and governs
mundane beings. And she is a Goddess indeed, in consequence of being deified,
but she has not immediately the subsistence of a deity. For we call divine bodies
Gods, as being tle statues of Gods. But she governs the whole world by her
powers, containing the heavens indeed in the summit of herself, but ruling. over
generation through the heavens; and every where weaving together partial natures
with wholes. Being however such, she proceeds from the vivific Goddess [Rhea.}
[For according to the Chaldwan oracle] “ Immense Nature is suspended from the
Tim. Plat. Vou. I. Bb

10 PROCLUS ON TIE [Book 1.

back of the Goddess ;” from whom all life is derived, both that which is intellee-
tual, and that which is inseparable from the subjects of its government. Hence,
being suspended from thence, she pervades without impediment through, and
inspires all things; so that through her, the most inanimate beings participate of
a certain soul, and such things as are corraptible, remain perpetually in the world,
being held together by the causes of forms which she contains. For again the
Oracle says, “ Unwearied Nature rules over the worlds and works, and draws
downward, that Heaven may run an eternal course,” kc. So that if some one of
those who assert that there are three demiurgi, is willing to refer them to these
principles, viz. to the demiurgic intellect, to soul, and to total nature Lor to nature
considered as a ἡ 016,7 he will speak rightly, through the causes which have
been already enumerated. But he will speak erroneously, if he supposes that
there are three other demiurgi of the universe, beyond soul. For the Demiurgus
of wholes is one, but more partial powers, distribute his whole fabrication into
parts. We must not therefore admit such an assertion, whether ibe Amelius or
‘Theodorus (Asinwus} who wishes to make this arrangement; but we must be
careful to remain in Platonic and Orplic hypotheses.

Moreover, those who call nature demiurgic art, if indeed they mean the nature
which abides in the Demiurgus, they do not speak rightly; but their assertion. is
right, if they mean the nature which proceeds from him, Jor we must conceive
that artis triple, one kind subsisting in the artist, in unproceeding union ; another,
proceeding indeed, but being converted to him; and a third being that which has now
proceeded from the artist, and subsists in another thing. The art therefore, which is
in the Demiurgus, abides in him, and is himself, according to which the sensible
world ' is denominated the work of the artificer, and the work of the artificer of
the fiery world. But the intellectual soul is art indeed, yet art which at the same
time both abides and proceeds. And nature is art which proceeds alone; on
which account also it Is said to be the organ of the Gods, not destitute of life, nor
alone alter-motive, but having in a certain respeet the selfmotive, through the
ability of energizing from itself, Por the organs of the Gods are essentialized in
eflicacious reasons, are vital, and concur with the energies of the Gods.

As we have therefore shown what nature is according to Plato, that it is an
incorporeal essence, inseparable from bodies, containing the reasons or productive
principles of them, and incapable of perceiving itself, and as it is evident from

* It appears to me, that the words roy αἰσθητὸν κόσμον, are wanting bere in the origival.

BOOK 1 TIMA:US OF PLATO. ii

these things that the dialogue is physical, which teaches us conceraing the whole
mundane fabrication,—it remains that we should connect what is consequent with
what has been said. For since the whole of philosophy is divided into the theory
concerning intelligible and mundane natures, and this very properly, because
there is also a twofold world, the intelligible and the sensible, as Plato himself
says in the course of the dialogue,—this being the case, the Parmenides compre-
hends the discussion of intellizgibles, but the Timaus that of mundane natures.
For the former delivers to us all the divine orders, but the latter all the progres-
sions of mundane essences. Bat neither does the former entirely omit the theory
of the natures contained in the universe, nor the latter the theory of intelligibles ;
because sensibles are in intelligibles paradigmatically, and intelligibles in sensibles
iconically. But the one is exuberant about that which is physical, and the other
about that which is theological, ina manner appropriate to the men from whom
the dialogues are denominated: to Timeus, for he wrote a treatise of this kind
about the universe; and to Parmenides, for he wrote about truly-existing beings.
The divine Iamblichus, therefore, says rightly, that the whole theory of Plato is
comprehended in these two dialogues, the Timieus and Parmenides. For every
thing pertaining to mundane and supermundane natures, obtains its most excellent
end in these, and no order of beings is left uninvestigated. To those also who do
not carelessly inspect these dialogues, the similitude of discussion in the Timeus
to that in the Parmenides, will be apparent. For as Timius refers the cause of
every thing in the world to the first Demiurgus, so Parmenides suspends the pro-
gression of all beings from the one. And this is effected by the former, so far as
all things participate of the demiurgic providence; but by the latter, so far as
beings participate of a uniform hyparxis, [or of an hyparxis which has the form of
the one.) Farther still, as Timus, prior to physiology, extends through images
the theory of mundane natures, so Parmenides excites the investigation of imma-
terial forms, prior to theology. For it is requisite after having been exercised in
discussions about the best polity, to be !ed to the knowledge of the universe; and
after having contended with strenuous doubts about forms, to be sent to the mystic
theory of the unities (of beings.) Tlaving however, said thus much, it is now time

to consider the words of Plato, and investigate their meaning to the utmost of our

ability.
“TI see] One, two, three, but where, fricnd Timieus,’ is the fourth

* In all the editions of the Timzus, ἡμῖν follows after gure Τίμαιε, but is wanting in these Commen-
taries of Proclus.

12 PROCLUS ON THE- {nook τ.

person of those who having been received by me yesterday at a banquet
of discussion, ought now to repay me with a similar repast δ᾽

Plato here, together with the grace and beauty of the words, raises and exalts
the whole period. Praxiphanes however, the disciple of Theophrastus, blames
Plato, first because he makes an enumeration of one, two, three, ina thing which
is Manifest to sense and known to Socrates. For what occasion had Socrates to
numerate, in order that he might know the multitude of those that assembled to
this conference? In the second place he blames him, because he makes a change
in using the word foxrth, and in su doing, does not accord with what had been
sald before. For the word four, is consequent to one, two, three; but to the

Jourth, the frst, second, and third are consequent. These, therefore, are the objec-
tions of Praxiphanes. The philosopher Porphyry however directly replies to
him, and in answer to his second objection observes, that this is the Grecian
custom, for the purpose of producing beauty in the diction, Homer! therefore

has said many things of this kind:

Full of the brass descending from above,
Through six bull hides the furious weapon drove,
Till in the secenté it fix’d.

And in ἃ similar manner in many other places. Here also the mutation has a
cause. For to numerate the persons that were present, was to point them out.
For to say one, two, three, is indicative; but he signifies the person that was
absent (since it Was Impossible to point him out) through the fourth. For we use
the term the fourth, of one that is absent. But to the former objection Porphyry
replies, thataif as imany had been present as was requisite, it would have been
superfluous to nunerate them, but one of them being absent, of whos? name we
are ignorant, the enumeration of those that are present contains a representation
of the one that is wanting, as desiring that which rema‘nas, and as being in want
of a part of the whole number, Plato therefore indicating this, represents Socrates
“enumerating the persons that were present, and requiring him who was wanting,
For it he had known him, and had been able to manifest him by name, he would
perhaps have said, J see Critias, and Timeus, and Hlermocrates, but that man I
do not see. Since however, he who was absent was a stranger, and unknown to

ε Vil. 247:

ποῦκ 1 TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 13

him, he only knew through number that he was wanting, and manifests to us
that so many were present. All these observations, therefore, are elegant, and
such others of the like kind as may be devised by some in subserviency to the
theory of the words before us. But it is necessary to remember that the dialogue
is Pythagorean, and that it is requisite interpretations should be made in a way
adapted to the philosophers of that sect.

Such ethical Pythagoric dogmas therefore, as the following, may be denved
from the present text: Those men established friendship and a concordant life, as
the scope of all their philosophy. Hence Socrates prior to every thing else
adduces this, by giving Timeus the appellation of friend. In the second place,
they thought that the compacts which they made with each other, should be
stably preserved by them; and for the fulfillment of these, Socrates desires the
presence of the fourth person. In the third place, they embraced communion in
the invention of dogmas, and the writings of one, were common to all of them.
This also Socrates establishes, calling on them to become both guests and hosts,
those that fill, and those that are filled, those that teach, and those that learn,
Others, therefore, have written arts concerning disciplines through which they
think they shall improve the manners of those that are instructed by them; but
Plato delineates the forms of appropriate manners, through the imitation of the
most eveellent men, which have much greater efficacy than those which are de-
posited in mere rules alone. For imitation disposes the lives of the auditors,
conformably to its own peculiarity. Hence, through these things it is evident
what that is about which the philosopher is especially abundant, that it is about
the hearing of discussions, and what he conceived to be a true feast; that it is not
such as the multitude fancy it to be; for this is of an animal and brutal nature ;
but that which banquets in us the [true] man. Hence too, there is much in Plato
about the feast of discourse. ‘These therefore, and such particulars as these, are
ethical.

But the physical Pythagorie dogmas are as follow: They said that every phy-
sical production was held together by numbers, and that all the fabrications of
nature subsisted conformably to numbers. These numbers however are partici-
pated, just as all mundane forms are participable. Very properly, therefore, does
the dialogue at its commencement proceed through numbers, and use numbers
as things numbered, and not those very things themselves of which they partici-
pate. For the monad, duad, and triad are one thing, and one, two, three,
another. For the former are simple, and each of these subsists itself by itself;

14 PROCLUS ON THE [Βοοκ |.

but the latter participate of the former. Aristotle therefore, is not right in assert-
ing, that these men considered numbers as subsisting in sensibles, For how
could this be admitted by those who celebrate number as the father of Gods and
men, and the tetractys, as the fountain of ever-flowing nature? But since the dia-
logue iy physical, it makes ity commencement from participated numbers, such as
are ΑἸ γα {πὰ} αὐτὸ physical PBarther stl, these men venerated physical
communion, both that whieh isin generation, wecording to whieh all Chines are
rendered effable and commensurate with each other, and that whichis in celestial
natures. For these impart to each other their proper powers, Rightly therefore,
and in away acapted to the thing proposed, does Socrates think fit, that the same
persons should become both hosts and guests.

From these things also, you may survey such theological conceptions as the
following: These men generated all things through the first numbers, and which
also rank as rulers and leaders; and from three Gods, gave subsistence to all
mundane natures, Of these three, the monad, duad and triad, are indicative; so
that it is requisite to begin from these, and that be why surveys nature inwardly
should look to these, Farther still, the concauses of mataral Chings were also
contemplated) by other philosophers, as by Anaxagoras and Zeno; bat the final,
the paradigmatic, and the producing ' cause, were peculiarly investigated by Plato,
These causes therefore are manifested through the above numbers, Phe final,
indeed, through the monad ; for it presides over numbers in the order of the good.
But the paradigmatic through the duad; for the difference of beings separates the
primary causes of wholes. And besides this, the duad is the principle of the
tetractys of intelligible paradigms. But the producing cause is signified through
the triad. For intellect is adapted to the triad, since itis the third from being
through life as the medium, or from the father through power, or from the intelli-
gible through intelligence. Por as the monad is to the duad, so is being to life,
father to power, and the intelligible to intelligence. Βα ἀν the duad is to the
triad, so is life, and also power and intelligence, to intellect. Again, all divine
natures are 'nall, and are united to each other, so that all of them are in one, and
each is in all, and they are connected together through divine friendship, The
sphere also which is there, comprehends the one union of Gods. Hence Socrates
who looks to divinity, very properly begins from) communion and concord, and
likewise calls the other persons of the dialogue to this. Moreover, the words

* Por warpoaow here, it is necessary to read ποιητίκον.

BOOK 1.] TIM-EUS OF PLATO. 15

Jeasting and banguet, are words adapted to the Gods, and especially to the mun-
dane Gods. For they proceed together with the liberated Gods to the banquet
and delicate food, as Socrates says in the Phadrus: and the feasting on the nati-
- vity of Venus, was in conjunction with the great Jupiter. These things therefore,
Socrates thinks should subsist analogously with them, in their mutual participa-
tions of divine conceptions, And itis not at all wonderful that Timaus should
feast others, and be feasted by them. Farther still, communications and partici-
pations of powers are celebrated by theologists, divine natures filling and being
filled by each other, For thus we hear from poets inspired by Phabus, that the
Gods communicate with each other in intellectual or providential energies in the
works which they effect in the universe.

In golden cups the Gods each other pledge,
And while they drink their eyes are fix’d on Troy. *

They also know and intellectually perceive each other.
For Gods are to each other not unknown. *

But the intelligible according to the Chaldzan oracle is nutriment to that which
is intellective. From all which it is evident, that a reciprocation of banqueting,
subsists primarily in the Gods. And of men, those that are more wise, imitating
in this respect the Gods, impart to each other in unenvying abundance, their own
proper intellectual conceptions.

“Tim. A certain infirmity has befallen him, Socrates: for he would not
willingly be absent from such an association as the present.”

The philosopher Porphyry says, that what is apposite is delineated in these
words: that this is the one cause with wise men of relinquishing such like associa-
lions, viz, infirmity of body; and that it is requisite to think that every thing of

this kind depends on circumstances and is involuntary. Another thing also is
delineated, that friends should make fit apologies for friends, when they appear to
have done any thing rightly, which is contrary to common opinion. The present

᾿ liad Iv. 2 seq. " Οὐγ95. Υ, 79.

16 PROCLUS ON THE [Book 1.

words therefore, comprehend both these, indicating the manners of Timiwus, and
the necessity of one being absent; exhibiting the former as mild and friendly to
truth, but the latter, as an impediment to the life of a lover of learning. But the

divine Tamblichus speaking lottily on. these words, says that those who are exer-

cised in the survey of intelligibles, are unadapted to the discussion of sensibles ;
as also Socrates himself says in the Republic, + that those who are nurtured in
pure splendor, have their eyes darkened when they descend into the cavert
through the obscurity which is there; Just as it likewise happens to those who
ascend from the cavern, through their Inability to look directly τὸ the hieht.”
Through this cause therefore, the fourth person is wanting, as being adapted to
another contemplation, that of intelligibles. 1 is also necessary: that this his
infirmity, should be a transcendeney of power, aecording to which he surpasses
the present theory, Lor as the power of the wicked, is rather impoteney thane
power, thus also imbecillity with respect to things of a sccondary mature, Is tran
scendency of power. According to famblichus therefore, the person who is
wanting, is absent in consequence of betng incommensurate to physical discus-
sions; but he would have been willingly present, if intelligibles were to have been
considered, And nearly with respect to every thing [in this dialogue} prior te
physiology, one of these, i.e. Porphyry, interprets every thing in amore political
inanner, referring what is said to the virtues, but the other, Tamblichus, ina more
physical way. Por itis necessary, that every thing should accord with the pro-
posed scope : but the dialowue is physical, and not ethical, Such therefore, are
the conclusions of the philosophers about these particulars. Por TP omit to men-
tion those who labour to evince, that this fourth person was "Thewtetus, because
he was known to those who came out of the Eleatic* school, and because we are
informed felsewhere} that be was all Pence he is said to have been now absent
on necount of iiness, Por this Aristocles: infers, that the absent: person wits
Theatetus, who a little before the death of Socrates, beewme hnown to Socrates,
and to the Elean stranger, Bat admitting that he had been Leng before known
to the latter, What is there in common between Timwus and hin? ‘Phe Platonic
Prolomy however, thinks that the absent person was Clitophon: for in the dia-
logue which bears hiv name, he is not thought deserving of an answer by Socrates,
But Dereyilides is of opinion that it was Plato: for he was absent through illness,
* See the beginning of the 7th book of the Republic.
> Por eXeyaruov here, it eppears to me to be pecessary to read EXearjauv.

BOOK 1.] TIM/EUS OF PLATO. 17

when Socrates died. These, therefore, as I have said, I omit; since it is well
observed by those prior to us, that these men neither investigate what is worthy of
investigation, nor assert any thing that can be depended on. All of them, like-
wise, attempt a thing which is of a slippery nature, and which is nothing to the
purpose, even if we should discover that which is the object of their search. For
to say that it was either Theaxtetus or Plato, on account of illness, does not
accord with the times. For of these, the former is said to have been ill when
Socrates was judged, but the latter when Socrates was dead. But to say it was
Clitophon is perfectly absurd. For he was not present on the preceding day,
when Socrates narrates what Clitophon said the day before, during the conference
in the Pirewus; except that thus much is rightly signified by Atticus, that the
absent person appears to have been one of those strangers [or guests] that were
with Timeus. Hence Socrates asks Timzus where that fourth person was; and
Timezus apologizes for him, as a friend, and shows that his absence was neces-
sary, and contrary to his will. And thus much for what is said by the more
ancient interpreters,

What, however, our preceptor [Syrianus] has decided on this subject, must be
narrated by us, since it is remarkably conformable to the mind of Plato. He says,
therefo-e, that in proportion as the auditions are about things of a more venerable
and elevated nature, in such proportion the multitude of hearers is diminished.
But the discussion in the Timeus becomes, as it proceeds, more mystic and
arcane. TLence in the former discussion of a polity during the conference in the
Pirwus, the hearers were many, and those who had names were six. But in
the second conference, which is narrated by Socrates, those who receive the nar
ration are four in number, And in the present conference, the fourth person is
wanting; but the auditors are three. And by how much the discussion is more
pure, and more intellectual, by so much the more is the number of auditors con-
tracted. For every where that which is discussed is a monad.—But at one time,
it is accompanied with contention; on which account also, the auditors have the
indefinite, and the definite is extended into multitude, in which the odd is com-
plicated with the even. At another time, however, the discussion is narrative,
yet is not liberated from opposition, and dialectic contests. Hence also, the
auditors are four in number; the tetrad through its tetragonic nature, and alliance
to the monad, possessing similitude and sameness ; but through the nature of the
even, possessing difference and multitude. And at another time' the discussion

* It is necessary to supply in this place, the words owov δε.
Tim. Plat. Vou. I. Cc

18 PROCLUS ON THE [poox 1.

is exempt from all agonistic doctrine, the theory being unfolded enunciatively,
and narrafively. Hence, the triad is adapted to the recipients of it, since this
number is in every respect connascent with the monad, is the first odd number,
and is perfect. For as of the virtues, some of them subsist in souls the parts of
which are in a state of hostility to each other, and measure the hostility of these
parts ; but others separate indeed from this hostility, yet are not perfectly liberated
from it; and others are entirely separated from it;—thus also ‘of discussions,
some indeed are agonistic, others are enunciative, and others are in a certain
respect media between both. Some, indeed, being adapted to intellectual tran-
quillity, and to the intellectual energy of the soul; but others to doxastic ener-
gies; and others to the lives that subsist between these. Moreover, of auditors
likewise, some are commensurate to more elevated auditions, but others to such
as are of a more groveling nature. And the auditors indeed of grander subjects,
are also capable of attending to such as are subordinate; but those who are
naturally adapted to subjects of less importance, are unable to understand such
as are more venerable. Thus also with respeet to the virtues, he who has the
greater possesses likewise the less; but he who is adorned with the inferior, is
not entirely a partaker also of the more perfect virtues,

Why, therefore, is it any longer wonderful, if an auditor of discussions about a
polity, should not be admitted to hear the discussion about the universe? Or
rather, is it not necessary that in more profound disquisitions, the auditors should
be fewer in number? Is it not likewise Pythagoric, to define different: measures
of auditions? For of those who caine to the homacoion (or common auditory of
the Pythagoreans] some were partakers of more profound, but others of more
superticial dogmas. Does not this also accord with Plato, who assigns infirmity
as the cause of the absence of this fourth person? For the imbecility of the soul
with respect to more divine conceptions, separates us from more elevated con-
ferences, in which case the involuntary also takes place. For every thing which
benefits us in a less degree, is not conformable to our will. But the falling off
from more perfect good is involuntary; or rather it is itself not voluntary. But
the falling off which not only separates us from greater goods, but leads us to the
infinity of vice, is involuntary. Hence also Timwus says, that this fourth person
was absent not willingly from this conference. For he was not absent in such a
way as to be perfectly abhorrent from the theory, but as unable to be initiated in
evreater speculations. It is possible, therefore, for an auditor of disquisitions
about the fabrication of the world, to be also an auditor of discussions about a

BOOK 1.) TIMEUS OF PLATO. 19

polity. But it is among the number of things impossible, that one who is adapted
to receive political discourses, should through transcendency of power, omit to be
present at auditions about the universe. This fourth person, therefore, was
absent through indigence, and not as some say, through transcendency of power.
And it must be said, that the imbecility was not the incommensuration of the
others fo him, but the inferiority of him to the others. For let there be an imbe-

_cility both of those that descend from the intelligible, and of those that ascend

from the speculation of sensibles, such as Socrates relates in the Republic; yet
he who becomes an auditor of political discussions, cannot through a tran-
scendency unknown to those that are present, be absent from the theory of
physics. It likewise appears to me, that the words “ has befallen him,” sufficiently
represent to us the diflerence between him and those that were present, with
respect to discussions, and not with respect to transcendency. His being anony-
mous also, scems to signify, not his being exempt from and circumscribed by
those that were present, but the indefiniteness and inferiority of his habit. Plato,
therefore, is accustomed to do this in many places. Thus in the Phado, he does
not think him deserving of a name, who in that dialogue answered badly. He
also mentions indetinitely,' the father of Critobulus, who was absent from the
discussion of the subjects that were then considered ; and likewise very many
others. An auditor therefore of this kind would in vain* have been present at
these discussions; since of those that were present, Critias indeed himself says
something; but Hermocrates is silently present, differing only from him who is
absent in a greater aptitude to hear, but being inferior to all the rest, through his
inability to speak.

“Soc. It is your business, therefore, O Timus, and that of the com-
pany present, to fill up the part of this absent person.”

This also accords with what we have said. For in natures which are more
causal and divine, quantity is always contracted, and multitude diminished, but
power transcends. And this also is a dogma of the Pythagoreans, with whom
the triad is more venerable than the tetrad, the tetrad than the decad, and all the
numbers within, than those posterior to the decad: And in short, that which is

* For ἀρίστως here, it is necessary to read αοριστως.
* Instead of o bn rotovros axpoarns, ov parny ay παρεγένετο ros Aoyous, it appears to me to be neces-
sary to read ὁ δὴ rovovros ἀκροατὴς ovy, parny κ.λ.

20 PROCLUS ON THE [Βοοκ 1.

nearer to the principle, has a more primordial nature. But that which is more
primordial is more powerful; since all power is antecedently comprehended in
the principle, and from the principle is imparted to other things, If, therefore,
the principle of things was multitude, it would be requisite that what is more
multitudinous, should be more primordial and powerful than what is less so.
Since, however, the principle is a monad, that which is more monadic, is more
excellent and more powerful than things which are more separated from their
cause. Hence Socrates very properly makes a diminution of number to bea
symbol of superior perfection, which antecedently comprehends according to
power all secondary natures, and fills up their deficiency. But since, as we
have before observed, Socrates is the summit of this triad of auditors, and he
conjoins himself to the monad that disposes the conference, conformably to the
image of demiurgic Gods, it is worth while to observe, how he exempts Timwus
from the rest, and how he is extended to him, as to the dispensator of the whole
discussion. He conjoins, however, the other auditors to himself, as being inferior
to him in desert. For these things may be referred to divine causes, in which the
first of the [demiurgic] triad is united to the primary monad, and extends the
other parts of the triad to it. Tt also calls forth, indeed, the productive energy of
the monad, but excites the energies of the rest to fabrication. These things,
therefore, are conformable to what has been before said. But according to Por-
phyry, the ethical doctrine contained in these words is this, that friends ought to
endure all things for each other, both in words and deeds, and to supply their
wants, and cause them to be unindigent, by filling up their deficiency.’ For
these are the peculiarities of pure and genuine friendship. Tamblichus, however,
having supposed that the anonymous person was superior to those that were
present, and was a lover of the contemplation of intelligibles, says, that Socrates
indicates by these words, that though generated fall short of the nature of truly-
existing beings, yet a certain sinulitude is divulsed from these beings. And
conformably to this, the theory which is conversant with nature, participates ina
certain respect of the science of intelligibles, and this the filling up the part of the

absent person manifests.

“Tim. Entirely so, Socrates. And we shall endeavour to the utmost
of our ability, to leave nothing belonging to such an employment

* For τὸ ἐκείνων here, it is necessary to read ro e\Aciwor.

BOOK 1.) TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 21

unaccomplished. For it would not be just, that we, who were yesterday
entertained by you, in such a manner as guests ought to be received,
should not return the hospitality with readiness and delight.”

The manners of Timeus are indicated by these words; for they are shown
to be superb and modest, elevated and elegant, friendly and philanthropic.
For the words “ Entirely so,” indicate his promptitude respecting the absent
person, and the perfection of the science according to which he is readily dis-
posed to fill up what is wanting in others; and they also indicate his genuine
sincerity. But the words, “ We shall endeavour to the utmost of our ability, to leave
nothing belonging to such an employment unaccomplished,” sufficiently present to our
view, his firmness in the fulfilment of his promises, and his modesty in speaking
of himself. Such, therefore, are the ethical indications that may be surveyed in
these words. But the physical indications are these, that the remuneration of
discussion, conveys an image of tiie communion and compensation of powers,
through which all things are co-ordinated, and contribute to the one harmony of
the universe. Likewise, that the energies of nature are changed according to
time, different energies operating at different times on different subjects. For to
these indications the words, “return the hospitality to you, by whom we were yesterday
entertained in such a manner as guests ought to be received,” are similar. That which
is theologically indicated is this, that the demiurgic cause proceeds through, and
fills all things, aad cuts off every deficiency through his own power, and his pro-
lific abundance, according to which he leaves nothing destitute of himself. For
he is characterised by the super-plenary, the sufficient, and the all-perfect. More-
over, the expression, return the hospitality, is derived from the banqueting in
divine fables, according to which the Gods pledge each other:

In golden goblets they each other pledge. Iliad IV. v. 2.

being filled with nectar from the mighty Jupiter. Nor is it simply said, to feast,
but fo return the hospitality (or to feast in return). For a reciprocation of feasting,"
comprehends the entire, and completely perfect plenitude of banqueting. But
this also is scen in wholes. For the visible orders of things call forth invisible
powers, through their own consummate aptitude; and the latter through tran-
scendency of goodness perfect the former. All these likewise, are conjoined with
each other, and the communication of perfection, becomes the retnbution of

* For αφεστιασις here, it is necessary to read αγταφεστιασιε.

22 PROCLUS ON THE (Book 1.

calling forth. Farther still, to do all these things, accompanied with justice,
conveys an image of the Justice which arranges all things in conjunction with
Jupiter. But the becoming {or in such ἃ manner as guests ought to be received] is
an image of the cause which illuminates wholes with demiurgic beauty. And the
term guests, is an image of the variety which is defined according to divine pecu-
liarities. For each of the divine natures possesses appropriate powers and
energies. As therefore Socrates feasted Timeus with the discourses of his own
philosophy, thus also each of the Gods, energizing conformably to his proper
powers, contributes to the one and transcendent providential attention of the
Demiurgus to the whole of things. And_ these particulars are exhibited as an
exercise to the theory of things, which presents itself to the view! after the
manner of an image, in the introduction to the dialogue,

From these things likewise, the times of the dialogues, the Republic, and the
Timwus, are manifest; since the one Is supposed to have taken place during the
Bendidian festival in the Pirwus, but the other on the following day of the fes-
ἀνα]. For that the Bendidian festival was celebrated in the Pirwus on the 19th
of April, is acknowledged by those who have written concerning festivals, so that
the Timwus must be supposed to have taken place on the 20th of the same month,
But if, as will be observed in what follows, this dialogue is supposed to have
taken place during the Vanathenwan festival, it is evident that this was the less
Panathenwa. For the greater were celebrated on the 28th of June, according to
the narration of those whom we have just mentioned,

“Soc. Do you remember, therefore, the magnitude and quality of the
things which I proposed to you to explain £”

In the first place, it is requisite to attend to the order of the heads of what is
said, of which, that concerning the multitude of those that form the conference,
is the leader. The next to this pertains to the filling up the part of him who ts
absent. And the third is that which is now added, and respects the explication
of the things proposed to be discussed. But these are in continuity with each
other. And with reference to the order, it is requisite to understand the accuracy
of the words. For the words “ Do you remember,” exhibit distributed knowledge
in the participations of discourse, Lor in the Demiurgus the recollection of all

' For eugawopeva in this place, I read engancuerns.

BOOK 1. ΠΕ ΕΌΒ OF PLATO. 23

things, is a separate, exempt, and uniform knowledge, according to the Mnemo-
syne which he contains, and which is the firm establishment of divine intelligence.
And this in the secondary Gods, is a subordinate intellection; of both which the
present persons are images. Through this memory likewise, which pre-exists
in the universe, whole souls are established in intelligibles, and the demiurgic rea-
sons, [or productive principles} possess an imrautable and an immoveable nature ;
so that such" beings as are deprived of it, as is the case with partial souls, and
the natures of things that are generated, fall off from their proper causes. But the
terms “ such things,” and “about which,” are indicative of the quantity and quality
of the productive principles, which proceed indeed from the total fabrication, and
also proceed trom more partial Gods. And with respect to the words “which 2
proposed to you to caplain,” if they were addressed to Critias and Hermocrates, it
is evident how they are to be referred to things, and to the principles of the fabri-
cation of the world; but if also to Timeus, they are not a symbol of transcen-
dency [in Socrates}, but of an evocation of the intellectual conceptions of Timzus.
Besides these things, however, let us survey the answer of Timaus.

“Tim. Some things indeed, I recollect ; but such as I have forgotten,
do you recall into my memory.”

That which is ethical in these words, you will find to be this, as Porphyry says,
that they are amedium between irony and arrogance. For Timus does not
say that he recollects every thing, nor that he recollects nothing; but that he
recollects some things, and not others. That which is logical in them is, that
they afford a pretext for the summary repetition of the problems: for to do this is
the province of dialectic. The physical indication of the words is this, that phy-
sical productive principles always remain, and are always refluxive, just as the
present remembrance [of Timius] is partly preserved, and partly lost. For what
is said by the man must be transferred to the whole of nature. And the theologi-
cal indication is, that the one fabrication [which is that of the Demiurgus] pos-
sesses indeed from itself, the immutable and undefiled in its generations ; but
through secondary and third powers, is sustained as it proceeds, and is in itself
separate ; these powers attending it as guards, and running as it were before it
repress the tumult of generated natures. Or rather, that this fabrication is such,

* For oens here, it is necessary to read oea.

24 PROCLUS ON THE [Boom t.

through placing secondary powers over the subjects ofits government. Farther
still, the recalling into the memory, brings with it an image of the renovation of the
productive principles in the universe. For that which is effluxive in them, is cir-
cularly recalled to the same, and the similar. And the order of generation re-
mains never-failing, through the circular motion of the heavens. But this motion
subsists always after the same manner through intellect which connectedly con-
tains and adorns all its circulation, by intellectual powers. It is very properly,
therefore, Socrates that recalls into the memory the discussions, who is the nar-
-rator of the polity, of which the celestial is the paradigm.

“ Orrather, if it be not too much trouble, run over the whole in a
cursory manner from the beginning, that it may be more firmly establish-

ed in our memory.”

The polity [of Socrates] being triple, the first description of it was truly dith-
cult on account of sophistical contests; the second was easier than that which
preceded it; but the third was [perfectly] easy ; containing in itself contractedly
every species of a polity. The recapitulation however of it pertains to physical
things, through the regeneration which jis in them, and the circular return to the
same form; from which also, forms permanently remain in the world, revolution
recalling their efllux and their destruction, Through this cause likewise, the hea-
vens are perpetually moved, and evolving many periods, return to the same life.
What, however, is the reason that in the [first] narration of a polity, Socrates nel-
ther makes mention of the persons, nor the promises, but here adds both these?
It is because in wholes, paradigms indeed comprehend all the productive princi-
ples of images, but the things which proceed from them, have not strength sufhi-
cient to comprehend all the power of theircauses, As, therefore, in the second
description of a polity, mention is made of the persons that were in the first con-
ference in the Pirsus, thus also in the third, he commemorates those that were
passed over in silence in the first. For effects may be surveyed more perfectly in
their more superior causes. You may also say theologically, that Timeus, as
being established analogous to the total fabrication, comprehends all the persons,
the promises, and the discussions themselves. But Socrates in the Republic,
heing arranged analogous to the summit' of the triple fabrication, fashions only

* For axAornri here, it is necessary to read ἀκροτητι.

ποοκ 1.) TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 25

the form of a polity, tis form being celestial. Here, therefore, as in one all-per-
fect animal, all things are comprehended, viz. things tirst, middle, and last, and
all the evolution of wholes, But how, and through what cause is a polity nar-
rated the third time? Is it because the life also ' of the soul is triple? The first
indeed, being that which represses and adorns the irrational * part by justice,
and governs it ina becoming manner. But the second being that which is con-
verted to itself, and desires to perceive itself intellectually, in consequence of
subsisting according to its own justice. And the third ascending to its causes,
and establishing in them its proper energies. To which may be added, thai “to
speak “in a cursory manner,” brings with it an image of a life conspiring to one
intellect, which comprehends all things through an intelligible essence. The
words also “ run over the whole” afford an admirable indication of an elevation to
the highest end, of perfection, and if you are willing s0 to speak, of a more
eternal intelligence. For this signifies to be more established, and to possess
that which is more firm and more eternal about the same things.

“Soc. Let it be so. And to begin: the sum of what was said by me
yesterday is this, What kind of polity appeared to me to be the best, and
of what sort of men sucha polity ought to consist.”

Some, considering the resumption of a polity ina more ethical point of view,
say thatit indicates to us, that those who apply themselves to the theory of wholes,
ought to be adorned in their manners. But others think that it is placed before
us as an image of the orderly distribution of the universe. And others, as an indi-
cation' of the whole of theology. Zor id τοῖς usual with the Pythagoreans, prior to
scientific doctrine, to render manifest the proposed objects of enquiry, through simili-
tudes and images ; and after this, to introduce through symbols the arcane indication
respecting them. For thus, after the excitation of the intellection of the soul, and
the purification of its eye, it is requisite to introduce the whole science of the
things which are the subjects of discussion. Here, therefore, the concise narra-

For ac rns ψνχη»ν, it is requisite to read καὶ τὴς Lunes.

> For τὸν Aoyor here, we must read τὸν adoyor.

2 Inthe original oc δὲ αζιουσιν ws εἰκονα τῆς Του παντὸς διακοσμήσεως προκέεισϑθαι THs συμπασης BeoXo-
yias. But this, in the latter part, is evidently defective. Aficr προκεῖσθαι therefore, it appears to ine
to be necessary to add the words, οἱ δὲ ws ἐγξειξιν, agreeably to the above translation.

Tim. Plat. VoL. I. D

25 PROCLUS ON THE [Boox ft.

tion of a polity, prior to physiology, iconically places us in the fabrication of the
universe ; but the history of the Atlantics accomplishes this symbolically. For it
is usual with fables to indicate many things through symbo!s. So that the phy-
siologic character pervades through the whole of the dialogue ; but differently in
different places, according to the different modes of the doctrine which is deli-
vered. And thus much concerning the scope of the proposed words.

That in the present discussion, however, the summary repetition of a polity
very properly takes place, may be multifariously inferred. For the political sei-
ence subsists primarily in the Demiurgus of the universe, as we may learn in the
Protagoras. And true virtue shines forth in this sensible world. Hence also ‘Ti-
meus says, that the * world is known and js friendly to itself through virtue. Far-
ther still, the polity of Socrates being triple, and the first being referred to the total
fabrication, as we have elsewhere shown, the form of this is very properly deli-
vered here contractedly, where it is proposed to survey the whole Demiurgus, gene-
raung and adorning the universe. These things, therefore, are capable of being
still farther discussed. Let us however return to the teat, and the words of So-
crates. But in these, there is mach contention among the interpreters, who op-
pose each other about a certain punctuation, and with reference to this differently
explain the scope of the discussion. For some, making a stop at the word polity,
define the scope of it to be conformable to the inscription, and adduce Plato as
a witness that it is concerning a polity. Others again, making a stop at the words
what was said, evince that the scope of itis about justice ; and that Soerates has
given a certain summary of what was said about justice, which is concerning a
polity. If, however, itis requisite not to trifle in asserting and contradicting, it
must be said that both concur with each other, For the discourse concerning
Justice, Is a disquisition of the polity whichis within the soul. Por it rightly dis-
poses the communion of the powers that we contain. The discourse, likewise,
about a polity, is a discussion of the justice which subsists in multitude. — Both,
therefore, pertain to the same thing, And the same thing ts indeed justice in’ the
soul, a polity na city, and gracefulness in the world. Nor is it fit to separate from
each other, things which are conjoined by nature, And thas much for this par-
ticular.

* By an unaccountable mistake the original has Σωκρατὴν instead of coopoy in this place, which lat-

tcr is evidently the teue reading.

noox 11] ΤΙΜ ΖΚ OF PLATO. .7

Longinus however and Origen contend with each other from another principle,
about what kind of polity Socrates speaks, in these words; whether about the first,
orthe middle polity. For in the latter, the polity is seen living physically, politi-
cally, and intellectually. Longinus therefore thinks, that what is here said per-
tains to the middle polity, because Socrates calls the assistants guardians, and
says that the guardians are warriors. But Origen is of opinion that what is said
respects the first polity. For in this Soerates delivers disciplines to the guar-
dians. We however say in answer to such-like assertions, that it is not proper to
divulse the one polity ; nor to separate the continuity of life from itself. For the
polity is one, perfecting itself, and co-augmenting itself by more perfect additions.
But the whole polity possesses the physical in the mercenaries, the warlike in the
ausiliaries, and the intellectual in the guardians. So that the discussion is about
the whole polity. And itis not proper to contend about these things, but rather
to consider this, how the polity may very properly be said to be both subordinate
to, and superior to physiology." For so faras it has for its matter human con-
cerns, and is desirous of adorning these, it has an order secondary to, and more
partial than physiology. But so far as it subsists in universal reasonings, and is
arranged incorporeally, and immatenally, it is superior to, and more total than
physiology. The world also is a certain polity, and a partial polity [with reference
to the imelligible world], because every body is partial. In short, the polity pre-
exists indeed in the intelligible, but exists in the heavens, and subsists in the Jast
place in human lives. So that if it is superior to physical fabrication, it was very
properly discussed prior to the Timieus; but ifit is inferior to it, because it is an
ethical world, but the other is mundane and all-perfect, we are very properly re-
quired to recur from things subordinate to such as are of a more venerable nature.
Aud both are true, through the above-mentioned causes. Since, however, as we
have said, the form of the polity is universal, and is impressed in a partial matter,
hence also Socrates employs the words what kind for the sake of the form, but the
words of what sort of men on account of the matter.

— ©Try. And what was said, Socrates, was in the opinion of all of us very
conformable to intellect.”

A narration conformable to intellect, but neither conformable to pleasure, nor

* Here also the original has erroneously θεολογίας instead of φυσιολογιαι.

28 PROCLUS ON THE [ROOK 1.

the decision of the vulgar, indicates the admirable perfection and intellectual na-
ture of the discussion [contained in it), And prior to this, it obscurely signifies
the concordant congress of all secondary causes about one intellect, and one
united fabrication. The word very too, which is added, unfolds the transcendent
union, through which all demiurgic causes converge as to one centre, and one

paternal cause of all things.

“Soc. Did we not then, in the first place, separate husbandmen and
other artificers from the belligerent genus?”

The discourse about a polity, and the conglomerated and concise repetition, in
asummary Way, of the genera contained in it, contributes to the whole narration
of the mundane fabrication, For itis possible from these as images to recur to
wholes. This very thing also was ina remarkable degree adopted by the Pytha-
roreans, Who investigated the similitades of beings from analogies, and betook
themsclves from images to paradigms ; which likewise is now in a prefatory man-
ner eflected by Plato, who points out to us, and gives us to survey in human lives
those things which take place in the universe. Por the polities of worthy men
are assimilated to the celestial order. Ttis necessary, therefore, that we also should
refer the images which are now mentioned (to their paradigms), and in the first
place, what is said about the division of the genera. For this section of genera,
imitates the demiurgic division in the world, according to which incorporeal nas
tures are not able to pass into the nature of bodies, nor mortal bodies to leave their
own essence, and migrate into an incorporeal hypostasis. According to which,
also, mortal natures remain mortal; immortal natures eternally continue τὸ. be
never-failing ; and the diferent orders of them have paradigmatic causes pre-sub-
sisting in wholes. For if you are willing to arrange the whole city analogous to
the whole world ; since itmust not be said that man is ἃ microcosin, and a city
not; and to divide it into two parts, the upper city and the lower, and to assimilate
the former to the heavens, and the latter to generation, vou will find that the ana-
logy is perfectly appropriate. Likewise, according to a division of it into three
parts, you may assume in the city, the mercenary, the military, and the guardian :
butin the soul, the epithymetic part, which procures the necessities of the body ;
the irascible part, whose office is to expel whatever is injurious to the animal, and
is also ministrant to our ruling power; and the rational part, which os essentially
philosophic and has a regal authority over the whole of our life. In every multi-

ὩΣ τοι Oe PRI πὰς Ὁ κ

SEER OE 9 Be τον

ἐών

pooK 1] TIMGEUS OF PLATO. 29

tude of souls, however, there are, that whieh performs the partof a mercenary
about generation, that whoech is ministrant to the mundane providence of the
Gods, and that which is elevated to the intelligible. But in all mundane natures,

‘ and the order of

there are, in short, the tribe of mortals, the tribe of damons,
the celestial Gods ς for they are truly the guardians and saviours of the whole of

things. And again, damons precede as in asolemn procession the fabrication

of the celestial Gods, and suppress all the confusion and disorder in the world.

There ts likewise a certain physical providence of mortal natures, which gene-
rates and comprehends them contormably to a divine intellect.

Farther sal, according to another division, the agricultural tribe of the city is
analogous to the Moon, which comprehends the sacred laws of nature, the cause
of generation. But the inspective guardian of the common marriages, is analo-
sous to Venus, who is the cause of all harmony, and of the union of the male
with the female, and of form with matter, That which providentially attends to
clegant allotinents, is analocous to Termes, on account of the lots of which the
God is the guardian, and also on account of the fraud which they contain, But
that which is disciplinative and judicial in the city, is analogous to the Sun, with
whom, according to theologists, the mundane Dice, the elevator and the seven-fold
reside, And that whieh is belligerent, is analogous to the order proceeding from
Mars,* which governs all the coutraricuics of the world, and the diversity of the
mniverse. That which is royal, is analogous to Jupiter, who is the supplier of
ruling prudence, and of the practical and adorning intellect. But that which is
philosophic, is analogous to Saturn, so far as he is an intellectual God, and
ascends as far as to the first cause. These things, therefore, may thus be

cassumed through analogies. Plato, however, appears to have divided the city

into two parts, and to have established as one genus, that which is agricultural
and that which pertains to the arts, which is called demiurgic τ but that which is
belligerent, as another; not that he now recapitulates the military polity, as
Longinus says, but because through the word dedligerent, he comprehends the
auxiliaries and the guardians. For of these, the former war with their hands, but
the latter by their counsels. Just as also among the Greeks, Ajax indeed fights,
as being the barrier of the Greeks, and Nestor likewise fights, who is the guardian
of the Greeks ; the latter as a defender, repelling the enemy by his counsels ; but
the former, by employing his hands. Unless it should be said, that Plato now

' For ro δαιμὸν φυλον in this place, it is necessary to read τὸ δαιμονὼν φυλον.
* For yewpyuy, which occurs here by a strange mistake, it is obviously necessary to read ἀρηΐκῃ.

30 PROCLUS ON THE {nook t.

peculiarly makes mention of the military tribe, because he wishes to narrate the
warlike actions of a polity of this kind.

“Soc. And when we had assigned to every one that which is accom-
modated to his nature, and had prescribed one employment only to each
of the arts,’ we likewise assigned to the military tribe one province only.”

In the first place, there is a two-fold reading of these words. For it either is
“And when we had prescribed one employment conformable to nature to each
of the citizens, in order that each might perform his proper work,” or, “ When we
had presenbed to each to pursue an employment conformable to nature, which: is
adapted to each according to the present aptitude of his nature.” In the next
place, it must be enquired through what cause Socrates makes such a division, or
on what account he says, “that each employmentis rightly pursued by hin who ts
naturally adapted to it, and who ina becoming manner engages init.” For neither
is diligent attention, when deprived of aptitude, able to accomplish with rectitude
any thing perfect, nor can dexterity without diligent attention proceed into
energy. The end, therefore, is from both. Tf, however, this be the case, it is not
possible for him who engages in many works, to be similarly adapted to all of
them, or to pay attention similarly to all; in consequence of his ardor being
divided about a multitude of things. Hence in this case, the pursuits of the
citizens must necessarily appear to be of a viler nature. But if this is not right,
one employment should be assigned to each of the citizens, to which he to whom
it is distributed is adapted, and he should be ordered to extend all his care and
attention to one thing. For he who is properly adapted to this particular life,
and pursues it in a becoming manner conformably to nature, will, itis likely,
perform in the best way his proper work. In human polities, therefore, it is easy
to survey a division of this kind ; for our nature is partible. But how is this true
with respect to the Gods?) For a divine nature ts all-powerful and all-perfect.
Or may we not say that with the Gods all things are in all of them, but that each
is all things according to the peculiarity of himself, and possesses the cause of
all things, one after a Solar, but another after a Mercurial manner? For pecu-
liarity originating from the divine unities, proceeds through intellectual essences,

through divine souls, and through the bodies of these souls. Hence of these,

a
5

* The words exaory τέχνῃ are omitted in the text of Proclus.

iti prpocmnte tienen

PE ASW ee ασα

Bee wane

PER A ARS EE aI

ROOK 1. TIMMUs OF PLATO. 31

some participate of demiurgic, others of prolific, others of connective, and others
ofa dividing power. And after this manner they energize about generation, In
divine natures themselves therefore peculiarity pre-exists, defining the unities
according to the infinity which is there, and the divine duad. But in intellects,
difference is pre-existent, which separates wholes) and parts, and = distributes
intellectual powers, imparting a different peculiar order to a diflerent intellect,
through which the purity of intellects is not confounded. In souls progression
and division pre-subsist, according to a different life in different souls, some of
them being allotted a divine, others an angelic, others a damoniacal, and others
adiflerenthyparxis. But in bodies, interval pre-exists, producing diferent powers
in different bodies, For in these, there are ultimate representations of intelligi-
bles, according to which this particular body is effective of this thing, but another
ofthat. And this body has a sympathy with this thing, but another sympathizes
with something else. As, therefore, in this universe, each thing acts according
to nature upon that which it was arranged by the fabrication of things to act
upon; thus also in the city, the employments of the citizens are divided, and each
is arranged to perform that for which he is naturally adapted. What, therefore,
the works are of the military tribe, ‘Timaus clearly shows in what follows :

“Ἱ mean that they ought to be only guardians of the city, so as to pro-
tect it from the hostile incursions both of external and internal enemies ;
but yet in such a manner as to administer justice mildly to the subjects
of their government, as being naturally friends, and to behave with war-
like fierceness towards their enemies in battle.”

In these words Plato is willing that the euardians and auxiliaries should be
judges of those that act ill within the city, but contenders against those that are
out of it; in one way the auxiliaries, and in another the guardians, as we have
before observed. To be only guardians, however, is not a diminution of power.
For when we assert of the first cause that he is one alone, we do not by this
diminish him, and entirely enclose him within narrow bounds; since neither is
that which is only the most excellent, diminished by being so. But on the con-
trary, every addition to a thing of this kind is a diminution ; so that by asserting
not only of athing which was such from the beginning, you diminish its excellence.
And thus much for such-like particulars.

Again, however, it is requisite to consider how we may survey what is now

/ bal 4
«. γ᾽

42 PROCLUs ON THE [nook 1.

said in wholes. For what is that which is external in the universe?) And how
can it be said that the universe does not comprehend all things? May we not
reply, that evil has a two-fold subsistence in the world, viz. in souls and i
bodies? And it is necessary that those who exterminate confusion and ses
from the universe, should extend justice and measure to souls, but should be
antagonists to the unstable nature of matter. For some souls, indeed, are
naturally adapted to the intelligible, on which account, also, they may be said to
be internal, and to belong to the extent of the intelligible umverse ; but others,
being material and remote from the Gods, are in a Certain: respect aliens,
strangers, and external. Hence, those who are the accomplishers of justice,
use the former mildly, as being naturally friends ; but are severe to those that are
borne along in bodies in a confused and disorderly manner, as being incommen-
surate towards them, and as entirely abolishing their privation of order, and
amputating the inexhaustible avidity of matter, For some things, indeed, cannot
sustain ornament of this kind, but immediately vanish into non-entitv. But

others whieh are moved confusedly and disorderly, are repressed by the justice

which prevails in the universe, and by the invincible’ strength of the order of

euardian powers. Ifence he now says, that they are severe to those who are
hostile to the city. For they are such as cannot endure to behold them. [ἢ
short, there are elevating and cathartic powers about souls, and also inspective
euardians of judgment and justice. And itis evident, that some of these are
analogous to guardians, but others to auailiaries. About bodies, tuo, some are
connective, but others dissolving powers : and it is manifest that some of these
are analogous to guardians, but others to those that are belligerent. Por these
powers expand into the universe, things which are no longer able to remain in
their proper series, in order that all things may have an arrangement, and that
nothing may be indefinite or confused. If, likewise, you direct your attention to

the Demiurgus himself of wholes,.and to the mmmutable and invariable nature of

the intellects, which divine poetry calls the guards of Jupiter, you will also have
in the father (of the universe] the pre-existent cause of these two-fold) genera.
For through the demiurgic being which he contains, he adorns all things ; but
through the immutable guard which is established in himself, every eternal order
remains, all disorder being entirely abolished. You may also see there Justice
governing all things in conjunction with Jupiter. For Jastice follows him, being

* For ανταγωνίστεν here, it is necessary to read avavraywrtorov,

aha

noox 1.) TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 33

the avenger of the divine Jaw. At the same time too, you may perceive the
armed order with which he arranges the universe, as those assert who have
written the wars of the Titans and Giants. These things, however, we shall
hereafter discuss,

The words, however, external and internal, may be understood as follows :
The confused and disordered tlux of bodies, at one time arises from the impo-
tence of the reasons, [or productive principles participated by bodies,] and at
another, from the inexhaustible avidity of matter. Reasons, however, are fami-
liar and allied to producing causes ; but matter, through the indefiniteness of itself,
and the remoteness of its diminution, is a stranger to its adorning causes. Hence,
the invincible strength of the Gods, and the immutable guard of fabrication,
all-variously subverting its confusion, renovates the reasons of matter, and reme-
dies their imbecility; but vanquishes the avarice of matter. Not that matter
resists the Gods who produced it, but that because on account of its indefiniteness
it flies from ornament, it is vanquished by forms through the demiurgie guard,
against which nothing is able to prevail. But itis necessary that all things in
the world should be obedient to it, in order that they may perpetually remain,
and that the Demiurgus may be the father of eternal natures.

“Soc. For we asserted, I think, that the souls of the guardians should
be of sucha nature, as at the same time to be both irascible and philoso-
phic in a remarkable degree; so that they might be mild to their friends,
and severe to their enemies.”

The philosophic and the irascible comprehend both the genera, viz. the
auxiliary, and that which is peculiarly called the guardian genus, just as the
epithymetic accords with the third genus, which is called the mercenary. For
because Socrates distinguishes the upper from the lower city, he manifests by
these two-fold names the differences of the orders contained in the city ; just as
if some one having divided the world into heaven and generation, should say
that in the former there are dwmoniacal and divine orders, and should call both
of them the guardians of generation and the universe. For the universe is
suarded by the Gods, and it is also guarded by daemons. By the former indeed
totally, unically, and exemptly ; but by the latter partially, multitudinously, and
in a Manner more proximate to the natures that are guarded by them. For about
every God a multitude of demons is arranged, which divides his one and total

Tim. Plat. Vou. I. Ὁ

54 PROCLUS ON THE ο΄ [RooK 1.

providence. The term philosophic, therefore, pertains to the Gods, so far as they
are united to the intelligible, and so far as they are filled with being. But the
irascible pertains to diemons, so far as they exterminate all confusion from the
universe, and so far as they are the saviours of the divine laws, and of the sacred
institutions of Adrastia. Through these causes, however, they are mild to their
familiars, aptly applying a remedy to their imbecility, as being allied to them by
nature, but severe to those that are external fi. e. to those that are strangers to
them} as abolishing the indefiniteness of their nature, in an exempt manner, and

according to supreme transcendency.

“Soc. But what did we assert concerning their education ? Was it not
that they should be instructed in gymnastic exercises, in music, and all
other becoming disciplines?”

The assertions that have been already made, are certain common types,
extending to all things, according to the denuurgic allotment, and. divine ditfer-
ence, defining employments adapted to every one, and distributing powers
appropriately τὸ the recipients. But in the present words, the lite of the citizens
is unfolded, through education, employments, communion, and the procreation
of children, proceeding in a becoming manner from the beginning to the end.
What then is education, and how is it assimilated to the universe? For in’ the
[Socratic] city, it is the discipline of the soul, rightly adorning the irrational part

through music and gymnastic, the former giving remission to the streneth of

anger, but the latter exciting desire, and rendering it) as it were elegant and
commensurate with anger, in consequence of its being vehemently remiss, and
through its descent to a material nature, filled from thence with a privation of
life. But this discipline adorns reason through the mathematical sciences, which
have something of an attractive mature, are capable of exciting ἢ αν the recol-
lection of true being, and elevate our intellectial part) to that which is itself the
most splendid of being. All which is evident to those who are not entirely
forgetful of the arrangements in the Socratic republic.

It is now, however, our business to investigate, what education, eyminastic and
music are in the universe, and what the disciplines are of the guardians of the
universe. Perhaps, therefore, we shall speak rightly if we say, that education is
the perfection which fills each thing with the good pertaining to it, and causes it
to be sufficient to itself, according to intellectual perceptions and providential

i ans WOE. eit Rae σῶς δὶ

ποοκ 1. TIM.LUS OF PLATO. 30

energies. But with respeet to music and gymnastic, that the former canses the
lives in the universe to be harmonious, and the latter renders divine motion ryth-
mical and elegant, so as always to preserve the same form, and the same immu-
table habit of the divine vehicles. For through these things Plato elsewhere calls
divine souls Sirens, and shows that the celestial motion is harmoniously elegant ;
for gymnastic is indeed in them. But medicine is in things sublunary in’ conse-
quence of their receiving that which is preternatural. If, therefore, we assert these
things, we shall, as I have betore observed, perhaps speak rightly. For powers
proceed supernally from intelligibles to all heaven, and impart to the celestial
lives by illumination the most excellent harmony, and to their vehicles undecay-
ing strengih. But the disciplines which are in the universe, are the intellectual
perceptions of souls, and of celestial natures, according to which they run back
to the intelligible, following the mighty Jupiter, and) surveying number charac-
terized by unity, the truly-existing heaven, and intellectual figure. Hence you
may say, that the most trae arithmetic, astronomy and geometry are in them.
Por they behold swifthess itself) and slowness itself, which are the paradigms of
the celestial periods. And, in short, they survey the primordial and intellectual
circulation, divine number, and intellectual figures. You may likewise say, that
prior to these, they contain dialectic, according to which they intellectually
perceive the whole of an intelligible essence, and are united to the one cause of
all the unities. And if it is necessary to speak by making a division, we may say,
that through such like disciplines they energize about first natures; but through
gymnastic, preside over things secondary with undefiled purity; and through
music, harmonically contain the colligation of wholes. ἢ

“δος. We likewise established, that those who were so educated,
should neither consider gold, nor silver, nor any other possessions of a
similar kind, as their own private property.”

Those things which are to be ordained in a city governed by the most equita-
ble laws, have an evident cause, and were mentioned by Socrates in the Republic.
Bat how ean we transfer them to the heavens?) Must it not be by. surveying
through what cause men pursue the acquisition of gold and silver, and from what
conceptions they are induced to cherish this infinite love? It is evident that it is
because they wish to supply their wants, and desire to procure such things as
may administer to their pleasures. For on this account, they are stupidly astonished

a

>

36 PROCLUS ON THE {Book 1.

about much-beloved wealth. They say, therefore, conformably to Cephalus, that
the rich have many consolations. If, however, these things thus subsist, the
perfection of the celestial Gods, since it is sufficient to itself, and is converted to
the beautiful and the good, is not at all in want of this adventitious and apparent
self-sufliciency, nor docs it look to convenience, or regard as its scope vulgar
utility; but being established remote from all indigence and material necessity,
and replete with good, it has a leading and ruling order in the universe, —More-
over, it does not admit partible and divided good. But it pursues that which is
common and impartible, and extends to wholes, and is especially characterized
according to this. Hence it harmonizes with what is now said, “that those who
are so educated should neither consider gold, nor silver, nor any other possessions of a
similar hind, as their own private properly.”

If you are willing also, it may be said, that gold and silver, and each of the
metals, as likewise other things, grow in the earth, from the celestial Gods, and from
an εἰ μα τον thence derived. Ut is said therefore that gold pertains to the Sun,
silver to the Moon, lead to Saturn, and iron to Mars, Hence these are gene-
rated from thence. But they subsist in the earth, and not in the celestial Gods
who emit the effuxions. For they do not receive any thing from material natures,
And all things there, are indecd from all, but at the same time a different pecu-
liarity has dominion in’ a different divinity,—here, ina Saturnian, bat there, inva
solar manner; to which those who love to contemplate these things directing
their attention, refer one material substance to this, but another to a different

power. These things, therefore, are not the private, but the common property of

the Gods ; for they are the progeny of all of them, Nor do they subsist in them,
For as they produced them, they are not in want of them; but the metals which
are here, derive their concretion from the efflurions of the celestial Gods. Why,
therefore, are these things earnestly pursued by men ina partible manner? [tis
because they have a material life, and are extended to a partial nature, upostatiz-
ing from the whole. For on this account there is much among them of mime and
not mine. But they abandon the union and communion of lite.

“ But that rather, after the manner of auxiliaries, they should receive
the wages of guardianship from those whom they defend and_ preserve ;
and that their recompense should be as much as is sufficient for tempe-
rate men. ‘hat besides this, they should spend their stipend in com-

Βοοκ 1] TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 37

mon, and live cohabiting with each other, and neglecting other pursuits
should pay attention to virtue alone.”

It is not at all wonderful that in human lives there should be donation and re-
tribution, and a reward of beneficence. For it is well said by Socrates in the Re-
public, that the mark at which he aims is to render the whole city happy, but
not one particular genus of it, such as the guardian. If, however, this be right,
it will be requisite that some persons in the city should be the saviours of it by
their providential care and prudence, but that others by ministrant aid and servi-
tude, should supply the saviours of the polity with the necessaries of life; just as
the nature which is in us, by fashioning and preserving the organ, prepares milk
for the energies adapted to it. But in the world, what retribution can there be,
or what recompense can be made by mortals to the celestial Gods? For may we
not say that these are the peculiarities of human imbecility, in consequence of not
possessing self-sufliciency, but that every God is suflicient to himself, and in con-
Junction with the self suflicient is superfull?" Pence through the union of super-
plenitude with selfsufliciency, he fills all secondary natures with good, but re-

-ceives nothing from them. Or it may be said, that though divinity receives
‘nothing, as being sutlicient and unindigent, yet at the same time he requires cer-

tain remunerations from us, retributions of beneticence, the acknowledgment of
thanks, and equity, through which we are converted to him, and are filled) with
greater good. For being good,’ he is desirous that all things should look to him,

-and should remember that all things are from him and on account of him. For

the preservation of the natures posterior to him, is for each of them to be suspend-
ed froma divine cause. If, however, we interpret these things after this manner,
referring remunerations to conversions, and the acknowledgment of thanks, how
can it still further be inferred, that the Gods cohabit with us in common, and spend
a remuneration of this hind? It is better, therefore, to understand remuneration
ina more physical way. For since efluaions proceed from the heavens to the
mortal place, but exhalations ascend thither, and through these the fabrication of
the Gods about mortal natures receives its completion, hence Socrates calls such-
like mutations and tronsitions of terrestrial natures, remunerations or wages from
sublunary matter,’ which are perfected by the heavens, in order that generation

* It is necessary afler ry avrapver here to supply the word ureprAnpes.
* For ayadwy yap or, it is obviously requisite to read ἀγαθὸν, «. A.
1 Instead of απο rns oAns in this place, I read ἀπὸ τὴν wAns τὴν νποσεληνῆν,

48 PROCLUS ON THE [poox 1.

may never fail. But it must be said, that the cohabiting in common, is the one
conspiration of divine fabrication, and the concordant providence of the celestial
Gods, through which every thing that undergoes a mutation from the earth is
consumed, and generation is variously changed through the harmonious dance
of the celestial divinities ; to which also Timawus looking says, “ that the whole
world is friendly and known to itself through virtue, and that its corruption ts the
source of its nutriment, in consequence of effecting all things in, and suffering all
things from itself”

What then is the end of this one and common life of the citizens? Socrates says
virtue, viz. divine virtue. Por virtue subsists first with the Gods; afterwards from
them, in the genera superior 10. man ; and a certain portion of it descends also to
us. The guardians of the world, therefore, living contormably to. this, are also
unoccupied by other pursuits. Por they do not look to convenience, nor to ex-
ternals ; for all things are within’ themsclyes. They likewise are the saviours of
all things, and fill them with whatis beautiful and wood, being ministrant to, and
co-operating with the one father and Demiurgus of wholes. Since, however, they
give measure to the mutations of the earth, notin so doing departing from, but
being converted to themselves, and subsisting in themselves, on this account So-
crates says, “ a@ recompense such as ty sufficient for temperate men. For beme tem-
perate and pradent in what relates to themselves, they measure secondary nae
tures, comprehending their all-various mutations in the simplicity ot their own
life. Thus therefore what is said may be explained in this way. Butin another
way we may say, that piety and a conversion to the Gods, especially coutain a
measure, and are occupied by the good. This measure, however, is defined by
the Gods themselves according to divine prudence, since the Gods are able

both to save themselves and others.

“ Soc. Of women too we asserted, that they should be educated in
such a manner that their natures might be aptly conformed so as to be
similar to those of men; with whom they should perform im common
both the duties of war, and whatever else belongs to the business of life.”

Plato very properly thought that the virtues of men and women are common,
since he evinces that both have one human form, but not the male one, and the
female another. For things which have a different perfection according to form,
are also different in species. But things which are the same in species, have like-

BOOK 1. TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 39

wise one and the same perfection. This, however, is denied by others, who as-
sert that there is a diflercnce according to form between men and women, though
Plato has shown that itis both possible and advantageous for women to have the
same virtues as men. It is possible, indeed, because this, history contirms. For
there have been found well-educated women, who have been far superior to men.
But itis advantageous, because it is better to live double than half the number of
those who exhibit virtue in their works. As therefore we form the male guar-
dians from such a particular education, and from such particular disciplines, thus
also we form the female guardians from the same: and in a similar manner, the
female warriors from the same institutes as the male.

In order, however, that we may admire in a greater degree the conceptions of
Plato, we must betake ourselves to wholes, and to the order of the universe, where
we may survey a wonderful conspiration of the male and female nature. For in
the Gods, indeed, these are so connascent with each other, that the same divinity
is called both male and female, as is the case with the Sun and Mercury, and
certain other Gods. Where also they are distinguished from each other, the
works of the male and female that are of the same order, are common, so as that
they primarily proceed from the male, but in an inferior degree from the female.
Hence, likewise, in mortals, nature evinces that the female is more imbecile in all
things than the male. Whatever, therefore, proceeds from the male, this the female
also can produce ina diminished degree. Hence Juno proceeds together with
Jupiter, generating all things in conjunction with the father. TTence, too, she is
said to be equal in rank with Jupiter, as is likewise Rhea with Saturn. For this
Goddess is the bosom of all the Saturnian power. Earth also is equal in dignity
with Heaven. For Earth is the mother of all things, of which Heaven is the fa-
ther. Δ prior to these clements, if we direct our attention to bound and infi-
nity, Which rank in the order of principles, we shall find that all things whatever,
which proceed into existence, are generated from both these. You have there-
fore, in the intelhiible, in the intellectual, and in the supermundane Gods, the har-
monious conjunction of the male with the female. You may also see the same
in the heavens. For the whole of generation is governed by the Sun and Moon 3
in a greater and paternal degree by the former; but secondarily, by the latter.
Hfence also, the Moon is denominated by some, a lesser Sun. And among the
male divinities in the Sun, there are likewise lunar Gods, and analogous orders. But
if you direct your attention to demons, you will every where see the providence of
these two-fold genera conjoined. For divine female dwmons, unitedly effect all

40 . PROCLUS ON THE [BooK 1.

things in a secondary degree, which are accomplished by divine male damons
primarily, Female psychical likewise, and female corporeal demons, have to the.
males the relation of mothers to fathers, and of duads to monads. For they ge-
nerate all things with diminution, which the males produce paternally and united-
ly. If therefore we before rightly assimilated the guardians to the celestial Gods,
but the auxiliaries to dwmons their attendants, and who are ministrant to their
providential energies, Plato very properly embraces in these genera, a similar
conjunction of the mate with the female, and imparts to both common virtue, and
common employments ; just as Nature binds these genera to, and causes them to
procreate the same things in conjunction with each other, But she does not
divide the one from the other, since whatever is generated from both is unprolitic,
when either of them is separated ; though there is a greater difference in the phy-
sical organs than in the lives of these; yet at the same time in these also, Nature
makes the work of them to be common. Much more, therefore, does the commu-
nion of them in their employments, and the whole of their life, deserve to be

honoured.

“Soc. But what did we establish concerning the procreation of chil-
dren? Though perhaps you easily remember this on account of its novel-

ty. For we ordered that the marriages and children should be common;
as we were particularly carcful that none might be able to distinguish
their own children, but that all might consider all as their kindred. ‘That
hence those of an equal age might regard themselves as brothers and sis-
ters; but that the younger might reverence the elder as their parents and
grandfathers, and the elder might esteem the younger as their children
and grandsons.
“Tia. These things indeed, as you say, are easily remembered.”

Ifsome one should inquire why that which is unusual is easily remembered,
it is not difficult to reply, that it excites our phantasy inse ereater degree as being
unexpected ; and inserts in us a clearer impression of itself. Moreover, it is easy
conformably to Plato, to show how what is here said of marriages and children
being common, applies to: women. For he wished, according to the intention of

* In the text of Proclus, αληθείαν is erroneously printe 1 for anfecay.

Pn αν .......ὅ

BOOK 1.] TIMZUS OF PLATO. 4l

the rulers, that their connexion with men should take place in definite times,
accompanied with sacnifices and prayers; and that the woman that had con-
nexion with a man, should not be the property of any one man, but should be
separated after connexion, and dwell apart, and again at other times should be
copulated with that man whom the guardians might approve. But. these things
are thus indicated in what is said in the Republic.

Referring, however, the theory of these particulars to nature, let us show how
they pertain to the order of the universe. For these things by a much greater
priority exist in the Gods, on account of the union of the divinities. For all things!
are the progeny of all the Gods, though different things are characterized by a
different peculiarity. All the Gods likewise are in all, and all are united to
all, in conjunction with an unmingled purity adapted to all, to which Socrates di-
recting his attention, embraces this communion, and this distribution of employ-
ments, assigning one to each of the arts, conformably to nature. For not to know
their own progeny as peculiarly their own, takes place with the Gods. On which
account, indeed, their intellectual perceptions, and also. their productions are
common. Each of them, however, benefits and preserves that which is generated,
as being the common offspring of all of them. Moreover, to consider all those as
brothers and sisters that are of an equal age, those that are elder as fathers and
grandfathers, and the younger as children and grandsons, originates from. the
Gods, and is transferred from thence to this polity. For similitude of essence,
derived from the same cause, is that which is fraternal in them. But prolific cause,
is in them that which is analogous to father and grandfather. And an efflux of
essence proceeding into a second and third serics, exhibits the form of offspring.
For that the same Goddess is conjoined with diflerent Gods, or the same Gud
with many Goddesses, may be assumed from mystical treatises, and from what are
called Sacred Marriages in the mysteries, which Plato as much as possible imitat-
ing in what he ordains about politics and marriages, calls the marriages sacred.
In physical productive powers also, we may sce that there is one and the same
recipient of different powers ; and one productive power presenting itself to the
view in a multitude of recipients, and pervading through many receptacles, But
forms are analogous to males, and receptacles to females. Why therefore is
this very thing beheld in the universe, but is paradoxical in human lives! 1 say
it is because these lives are cut off from wholes, and every human soul is partible.

* For ravra here, it is necessary to read παντγα.

Tim. Plat. τ Vou. 1. ὰὼ

42 PROCLUS ON THE {Book 1.

Hence the dogmas which embrace this communion appear to it most difficult to
be admitted. If, therefore, some one should take away the condition of lis pre-
sent subsistence, and elevate himself to the whole of things, he would immediate-
ly admit this communion, and despise the sympathy whichis divided by the mul-
titude. So far, however, as each of us is extended, and minutely distributed
about a part, and thus relinquishes the whole and one, so far also he leaps toa
life of this kind, which is an unrestrained habitude, a disorderly arrangement, and

an indivisible division.

“Soc. But that they might from their birth acquire a natural disposi-
tion as far as possible the best, we decreed that the rulers whom we placed
over the marriage rites should, through the means of certain lots, take
care that in the nuptial league, the worthy were mingled with the worthy ;
that no discord may arise in this connexion, when it does not prove
prosperous in the end, but that all the blame may be referred to fortune,

and not to the guardians of such a conjunction.”

Plato particularly assumes in his Republic similitude, sameness, and geometri-
cal, In conjunction with arithmetical equality, ino order that the similitude of it
to the heavens, as in sensibles, or to the intelligible, as in supereclestial lives, may
be perfectly preserved. For through this cause, in marriages also, he preserves
the union of the best woman with the best man, and of the less excellent: woman
with the less excellent man. For in the Gods likewise, primary natures are more
connascent with those of the first rank, and secondary with those of the second
rank ; and together with union there is unmingled purity. Tfence in the second
genera after the Gods, a distribution of this kind conformably to the intention of
the Gods, is effected according to desert. On this account, divine femate die-
mons are co-arranged with divine male dimons, psychical female with psychical
inale, and material female with material male dwmons. And every where, the
analogous in order proceeds as far as to the last of things. Po which we may
add that the rulers contriving that this connexion may take plaice litently, sufh-
ciently adumbrates to us that the cause of such a conjunction of genera sub-
sists unapparently with the Gods; being thence primarily derived, bat) seconda-
rily from damons,' and from the order of each, which ¢he lot indicates; possess-

It is necessary here to insert the words, ἀπὸ τὼν δαιμόνων.

BOOK 1.] TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 43

ing the power of colligation from similitude of life, according to which each is
co-arranged with the similar, the divine with the divine, the material with the
material, and that which has a middle subsistence, with the middle. On this
account, likewise, all sedition and dissension is removed from divine natures,
each loving that which is allied to itself, according to its own order, perceiving
that this order is spontaneous, and not adventitious and devised; of all which,
the citizens being conjoined in marriage by lot, and not looking to elegance and
ornament in the connexion, is an image, For in natural things, also, receptacles
are distributed to forms appropriately; and each form may ascribe the cause of
its own co-ordination to material variety. At the same time, likewise, this is
eflected according to causes ' which preside over the whole fabrication of things,
and which are analogous to guardians. And thus much, therefore, has been said,
tor the sake of the theory of wholes.

Longinus, however, doubts here, whether Plato was of opinion, that souls are
emitted together with the seed: for in order that they may become most excellent,
he conjoins similars with similars. And Porphyry replies indeed to the doubt,
but not satisfactorily. Our preceptor, however, thinks that in’ the first place it
should be observed, that Plato himself adds, “ In order that they might acquire a
natural disposition as far as possible the best.” For children receice a physical
stmilitude from their parents, and participate of a certain dignity and excellence from
their begetters, according to the physical virtues. In the next place, it must be
observed, that though it is not true that souls are emitted together with the seed,
yet there is a distribution of the organs according to desert. For all souls are not
introduced into casual organs, but each into that organ which is adapted to it.

ezira μὲν ἐσῆλος ebuve, χείρα Ce χείρονι δοσκεν,"

says Homer. Farther still, as an initiator into the mysteries, by placing certain sym-
bols about statues, renders them more adapted to the participation of supcrior powers,
thus also total nature fashioning bodies, by physical productive powers, the statues of
souls, disseminates a different aptitude in different bodies for the reception of different

* For ra atriara here, it is requisite to read ra αἰτία.

* Iliad, χιν, vs, 382. i.e. ‘* He gave the good [i. e. the brave] man, good things, but the less ex-
cellent character, things of a less excellent nature. In the text of Proclus it is erroneously eofAa μὲν
εσθλα eduve, x. Xr.

44 PROCLUS ON THE : [Boox 1.

souls, the better and the worse ; which the politician likewise rightly understand-
ing, pays attention to the emission of seed in the city, and to all physical aptitude,
in order that the most excellent souls may be generated for him in the most excel-
lent natures. And thus much in answer to the doubt of Longinus. But why
does Plato conceive it is better to think that Fortune is the cause of this distribu-
tion to the citizens? Shall we say it is, because it is advantageous to us to know
the cause of things which we think to be good, but better to conceive the presence
of such as we apprehend to be evil, to be causcless, than to accuse the cause
which distributes these [seeming evils] for a good purpose? For this excites to a
contempt, or rather to a hatred of the giver; because every one avoids that which
becomes to him productive of evil.

“Soc. Moreover, we ordered that the children of the good should be
educated, but that those of the bad should be secretly sent to some other
Cie:

These things also are established in the Republic, but by a much greater prior-
ity take place in the universe. With respect, therefore, to the productions of
Gods and Dwimons, some genera abide in them, pure and remote from generation,
which on this account are called undefiled; but others descend into generation,
not being able to remain in the heavens without a downward inclination. And
some of these are the offspring of good, but others of less excellent powers. lor
the term dad is indicative of less excellent. ‘The horses, therefore, and charioteers
of the Gods, are all of them good; but those of partial souls are of a mixed
nature.t Hence in these, there is preponderation, a verging downward, and a
defluxion of wings, which the celestial Gods send into generation, and diemons
who preside over the descent of souls, The celestial and undefiled genera of
souls, therefore, are nourished following the Gods to the banquet and delicious
food, as it is said in the Phedrus. And those that are subservient to generation,
communicate with it, being latently sent into it from the heavens, as Socrates
says, indicating by the word Jafent the invisible and occult cause in the Gods of
the psychical descents, and that souls which thence descend, become subject
[latently] to another providential inspection, and to other guardians who preside
over generation.

' This is asserted inthe Phadrus. See this explained, in the notes at the end of this Translation.

δας A καράβι, ει, RN αὶ

Boox 1] 'TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 45

* Yet so that such of the adult among these as should be found to be
of a good disposition, should be recalled from exile; while, on the con-
trary, those who were retained from the first in the city as good, but
proved afterwards bad, should be similarly banished.”

In the Republic, Socrates makes a transition not only from those that were
distributed from the upper into the lower city, but also from those of the golden
race that were born there. Here, however, the reference is made to those who
are recalled from exile. Do these things, therefore, accord with each other? Per-
haps, indeed, it is possible to reconcile what is here said, with what is there deter-
mined, if we understand the word adult, as not only pertaining to those sent from
the upper city, but likewise to all those that are educated in the lower city. For,
in short, the natural disposition is to be considered of those adults who were born
in the lower city, or of those who were sent from the upper into the lower city, and
thus those that are worthy are to be recalled from exile. Butif some one is will-
ing to understand the words according to our first explanation of them, it: must
be said, that what Socrates now delivers is conformable to the things proposed
to be considered. For descending [rational] souls again ascend, but not such
souls as had their .ypostasis from the beginning in generation, and about matter,
such as are the multitude of irrational souls. And thus much for the words
themselves. See, however, how the same things take place in wholes, as. those
Which Socrates ordains in his polity. For some things always have the same
order in the heavens, remaining divine and immutable; but others are always
conversant with generation ; and others are in a certain respect the media between
both ; at one time, indeed, being suspended from divine natures themselves, but
at another being mingled with those that embrace generation. It is not, therefore,
the damoniacal genus which ascends or descends, nor is this to be asserted of
multiform lives, nor are dwemons subject to death, but partial souls, which are at
one time conversant with generation, and at another are transferred into a divine
demoniacal allotment; which things being known by Socrates in the Republic,
he legislatively ordains that which is analogous to them. — For the celestial Jupiter
presides over the Gods in the heavens, over damons that elevate partial souls [to
their paternal port}, and also over others that lead souls into generation, in order
that the ascents and descents of souls may be never failing in the universe. “ For
though you should see this particular soul restored to its pristine perfection, yet

46 PROCLUS ON THE - [Book 1.

the father sends another to be annumerated,” according to the divinely-inspired
indication‘ about these things.

“Soc. Have we, therefore, again sufficiently resumed the epitome of
the discussion of yesterday, or do we require any thing further, friend
Timeus, which has been omitted ἢ

The resumption of the polity teaches us, through images, how the universe is
filled with the most excellent productive powers. For generated natures in it are
separated from each other, and each communicating with other things, energizes
according to its own peculiarity. And primary, indeed, are exempt from: secon-
dary natures, yet employ their energies, as necessary to: the completion of the
universe. But secondary are adorned by primary natures. Phe most excellent,
however, of mundane beings, are connascently conjoined with the most excellent,
middle with middle, and last with such as are dast. Bat the same productive
powers pervade through many subjects, and the same recipients participate of
many productive powers. Lives, also, at different times have different allotments,
according to their desert. All these particulars, therefore, sufficiently place be-
fore our view the order of the universe. For in detinite heads, Socrates has, ina
becoming manner, epitomized every form of the polity, recurring to intellectual
Impartibility, in order that he might imitate the God who adorns the celestial
polity intelligibly and paternally. But since every where measures and perfec-
tion are detinitely imparted to secondary natures from [primary 7 eases, on this
account also Socrates requests Tinieus to inform him, whether he has compre.
hended fin his epitome} every ἤσαν οὐ the polity. Por every intellect being firmly
fixed in the deity prior to itself, defines itself by looking to it. To which we may
add, that to speak) summarily is a syvinbol of the first parts, and the head of the
universe being adorned by the fabricator of the heavens; which the Demiurgus
of the universe adorns ina more perfect manner, looking to the whole, and the
one life of the world. And thus much respecting the analogy of partial natures
to wholes.

The investigation, however, is not attended with any difficulty, whether the
words inean, “ Slave we now epitomized the polity which we discussed yesterday ?” or
“ Have we again epitomized to-day, the polity which we epitomized yesterday?” For

δ, ον, According to the Chaldean Oracles.

ποοκ 1. TIMAUS OF PLATO. 47

whether yesterday Socrates spoke more diffusely, but now summarily, or he
spoke summarily in both, the divine Tamblichus approves of either of the read-
ings, and we do not at all difler from him. | Perhaps, however, the latter con-
struction is more consonant, For again to discuss the polity summarily, mani-
fests thatit was summarily discussed yesterday. And it is not at all wonderful,
that the summary discussion which took place in the Republic, should not be
brought to light. For many other things which are asserted here, as being said
on the former day, are not to be found in that dialogue. Unless it should be said
that the word again, does not refer to the epitomizing, but to resuming the discus-
sion. For he resumes, who narrates at great lencth what had been before said ;
but he again resumes, who summarily contracts the narration. But whichever of
the constructions is adopted, neither of them is attended with any difliculty.

“Soc. Hear now, then, how I am affected towards this polity which
we have discussed.”

What Socrates says in the words that follow, comprehends, that I may speak
summarily, these five particulars. First, what that is which in what has been
said, he desires should take place, after the narration of the polity. Secondly,
that he is not sufficient to effect this himself. Thirdly, that neither is any one of
the poets sufficient. Fourthly, that it is not proper to commit a work of this
kind to the sophists, Fitthly, that the anditors alone can accomplish that which
is earnestly desired by Socrates, ina becoming manner. What, therefore, is
this? Por it is necessary, ino the first: place, to speak concerning that: which
Socrates desires to sec after this polity, viz. to see, as he says, a city of this kind
In motion, engaging in contests and labors, and warlike actions, in order that
after the peaceful lite which he had delivered, he might have to narrate the ener-
gies of the city arising from circumstances of times and places. This, therefore,
is What he wishes to see accomplished.

Some one, however, may doubt to what the desire of Socrates is directed, and
on what account he wishes this to be accomplished. Porphyry therefore dis-
solves the doubt by saving, that energies perfect habits, not only those energies
that are prior to habits, but also those that proceed from them. For the pertee-
tion in habit, is in conjunction with energy, since otherwise habit will be in
a certain respect in capacity, and at rest through remission of energy. Socrates
therefore, in order that he may survey the polity truly perfect, requires that in

48 PROCLUS ON THE [Book ι-

words it may be beheld in motion, engaged in warlike actions, and contending
with others, And it appears, says he, from hence, to be manifest that Plato does
not admit that the habit of virtue by itself, but. when energizing, is sufficient to
felicity. It may, however, be said, in answer to Porphyry, that if the end was
military, it would be requisite to assert that war gives perfection to the polity.
But ifthe end of it is peace, what occasion is there to solve Platonic doubts by
introducing Peripatetic explanations? Or though the end is not military, νοὶ
war exhibits the magnitude of virtue in a greater degree than peace, just as
mighty waves and a tempest, show in a stronger light the skill of the pilots art.
And in short, this is eflected by circumstances, as the Stoies also are accustomed
to say, “ Give circumstances, and take the man.” For that which is not subdued
by things which enslave others, manitests a life in every respect worthy, — Perhaps,
however, it is absurd to refer the cause to these things alone, though they have a
political reason, and not to look to the whole scope of Plato, according to which
the God who adorns the polity in the heavens, Is ling also that generation
should be governed by the celestial Gods, and that the war of forms in matter
should always subsist ; in order that the cirele of generation may adambrate the
celestial circulation. Aud this itis to see the eity excited to war, to see genera-
tion co-arranged with the celestial regions, and the whole of it governed from
thence. Ttappears likewise, that this 15 analogous to what is shortly after said
by the Demiurgus of the universe, © That when the generating futher understood
that ths wencrated resemblance [the workd| of the eternal Gods moved and lived, he
was delizhtd with his work.” In asimilar manner, therefore, Socraies wished
to see his city moving and energizing 5 just as the God who comprehends the
celestial polity wished to behold: the natures whieh it contains energizing, and
adorning the contrariety produced by generation, Such an analogy, thetefore,
as this, takes phice in the present instince,

If, however, we arranged before, the lower city as analoyous lo ceneration, but
now as analogous to war, you must not wonder, Por the same things may be
safely arranged among diflerent things according to different analogies. Por
generation also, according to the lives in it which are inseparable from matter,
resembles the lower city; but according to its contrarieties and material tumult,
it is similar to war, and warlike dissensions, That we may, however, co-adapt
every thing to the theory of mundane wholes, prior to the consideration of every
particular, let us direct our attention to the second thing said by Socrates, and
see how it accords with this theory. For since Socrates is analogous to the first

BOOK t.] TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 49

of the three fathers who adorn the first of things, he says he is not sufficient to
fashion what follows. For the divinity who gives subsistence to all things, is
different from him who constitutes toings of a middle nature ; and this God again
is different from him who is the cause of things that rank as the third. But the
third particular is, that neither are the poets sufficient for this purpose. Nor, in
the fourth place, the sophists. The former, indeed, because they imitate the things
in which they have been nourished ; but the latter, because they are wanderers,
and not at one and the same tine, philosophers and politicians.

Again, therefore, let us see how these things are conformable to what has been
before said. For it is necessary that the powers that are to preside over genera-
tion should not be separable’ from material natures, but conversant with them,
For these powers are analogous to poets who invent fables, and to imitators.
For these are employed about images, alone praise material and partible natures
which they only know, and are unable to ascend from matter. Nor is it fit that
these powers should be inseparable,’ and very mutable, at diflerent times ascend-
ing or descending to different orders, such as are partial souls, who are assimi-
lated to sophists ; because they also possess all-beautifal productive powers, but
at different times wander to different parts of the world. [lence it is necessary
that the powers that connectedly contain generation, which is governed by the
heavens, should at one and the same time be philosophical and political; in
order that through the philosophic characteristic, they may be separate from the
subjects of their government, but may energize providentially through the political
peculiarity, performing the duties pertaining to their allotments according te
intellect. For that which is physical, being productive, is inseparable from
matter, but the form of partial souls: being sophistical, is abundantly wandering.
Its necessary, however, prior to things which are moved, that there should be
the invariable and perpetually-permanent providence of the Gods, and immutable
prior to mutable allotments. In the Ἐπ place, therefore, Socrates delivers to us
who those are, that are able to effect this. For these things are to be transferred
from words to deeds ; because the Demiurgus of the universe, and the rest of the
fathers, fabricate totally and exemptly ; the second of which fathers zives subsist-
ence to middle, but the third to last natures. And to these Timeus, Critias, and

* For axwpiorous here, it is necessary to read ywporovs, and to supply adda, 50 as instead of cure
axwpiorovs aurwy εἰναι dei, και εν avrais orpegoueras, to read oure ywprorovs avrwy εἰναι det, ἀλλα και κ΄ A.

* Hence for χωριστας in this place, it is necessary to read axwporas.

Tim. Plat. Vou. I. ᾿ G

50 PROCLUS ON THE [nook 1.

Hermocrates, are analogous. But of these, the first is praised in an admirable
manner, Socrates also adding, “in my opinion;” but the second, in a middle way,
conformably to his order; and the third, in the last degree, te. according to the
testimony of others. |

“ For J will illustrate the affair by a similitude. Suppose then that
some one, on beholding beautiful animals, whether represented in ἃ
picture or really alive, but in ἃ state of rest, should desire to behold
them in motion, and engaging in some one of those contests which per-

8

tain to bodies.

Longinus says, that Plato here decorates and beautifies his diction, through
similitudes and the gracefulness of the words. But Longinus says this in answer
to certain Platonists, who contend, that this mode of expression is spontaneous,
and not the result of art. For Plato, he observes, pays attention to the selection
of words, and does not employ them casually. It may, however, be said, that
Plato made choice of this form of words from a mode of diction which was at that
time common and usual, and that he was very attentive to what was customary.
For the atoms of Epicurns would more rapidly by their concurrence produce the
world, than nouns and verbs would form a correct sentence by a casual compo-
sition. Bat some blame Plato for employing metaphors in’ the use of words 5
though with respect to composition, all admire him, At the same time, however,
it may be inferred, not from this cireumstance alone, but from such care and
industry as are exhibited in the present words, that he paid great attention to
diction. For Socrates does not simply say, that he desires to see this accoms
plished by those that were with Pinwus; but he speaks like one decorating his
words and alluring the hearer, when he says: ‘Lor 7 will dlustrate the affair by
a δἰ μος. Suppose that some one on beholling beautiful animals, whether repres
sented ina picture, or really alive,” &e. And thus much for Longinus.

Origen, however, grants indeed, that Plato is attentive to the grace of diction,
not as regarding that which is pleasing, as the end of it, but that he employs this.
image for the sake of exhibiting the manner in which he was himse!faflected.

' The text of Proclus haus, erroneously, καὶ rot των row σωμάσι δυκουντῶν ἀνήκειν Kara τὴν ἀγωνίαν

αθλενν Tw, instead of καὶ re γὼν τοῖς σωμασι δοκυνντων προσήκειν κατὰ Τὴν αγωγια) αθλονντα.

ROOK 1 TIMAEUS OF PLATO. δ]

And we say, that this similitnde was written for the sake of the imitation of divine
natures; that the grace of the words presents to us an image of the grace im-
parted by the Deminurgus to celestial natures; and that the artitice of the diction,
Which is mingled with the spontaneous, adumbrates divine production, which
has indeed a boundary from itself, and also a progression from being and
essence. Tf, likewise, you direct your attention to the image itself, beautiful
animals manifest those natures that are resplendent with [divine] beanty ; but those
represented in a picture, or really alive, indicate corporal images, and true lives
prior to these imitations, For the figures of the Gods are resemblances of the
animals that are in them, But those that are ina state of rest exhibit to us the
natures that are fall of intellectual arrangement, and of an equable and continued
life; those that are in motion such as proceed into another order, and a second
fabrication ; and those which engage in some one of the contests pertaining to bodies,
are images of those that impart to more imperfect natures their own proper
eflluxions and powers, and operate by their own powers on other things. And
thus much respecting the image. But the words whcther represented in a picture
or really alive, ave rightly asserted in both respects of divine bodies. For they are
depicted by the dodecahedron, and they possess eflicacious and demiurgic lives.
If, however, you consider the words separately, they will signify that the before-
mentioned polity is indeed fashioned in words, and is assimilated to the heavens,
but evists, tf not in human, yet in true or demoniacal lives. Farther still, ἐὸ desire ta
see the city in motion, is analogous to the words {in another part of this dialogue]
“as soon as the father saw the universe moving, he was delighted, and wished to assi-
milate it ina still greater degree to its paradigm.” For thus also the adorner of
the heavens wished to see them in motion, and through motion governing the
war of generation, But the words “engaging in some one of the contests pertaining
to bodies,” are employed, because of contests some belong to souls, but others to
bodies ; and the latter are such as running, wrestling, and gymnastic.

Ta such a manner am I also affected towards the city which we
have discussed. For I should gladly hear any one relating the contests
of our city with other cities, when it engages in a becoming manner in
war, and acts during such an engagement in a way worthy of its educa-
tion and discipline, both with respect to practical. achievements, and
verbal negociations.”

52 _PROCLUS ON THE [RooK 1.

We have before shown through what cause, and with reference to what para-
digm, Socrates wished to see his republic contending in war. Because cities,
however, employ against their enemies both works and words; words indeed in
embassies, in compacts, in exhortations to battle, and inevery thing of this kind ;
but works in the pitching of camps, in spears, and the hurling of missive weapons;
on this account Socrates wishes that a city of this kind should be celebrated
according to both these. In words indeed, as prudent, cautions, magnanimous,
and strenuous; but in deeds, as brave, vehement, and well exercised. For thus,
according to both, it will imitate its paradigm, who, shining with physical and
intellectual productions, adorns all the war of generation,

“ For, indeed, O Critias and Hermocrates, I am conscious of my
own inability to praise such men and such a city according to their
desert.”

This is the second of the proposed heads, of which we have before assigned the
cause, and shall now again explore it according to another method. For now
some of the more ancient [interpreters] have said, that the encomiastic form of
writing is robust, superb, and magnificent; but the Socratic character of diction
is slender, accurate, and dialectic. The latter, therefore, is contrary to the
former. Hence (say they} Socrates avoids panegyric, as knowing the power he
possessed, and the subjects to which it was naturally adapted. Those, however,
who assert this, in addition to their being directly refuted by the Menexenus,
appear to me not to have perceived the magnificence of the diction of Socrates in
the Phiedrus. There are also those who say it is fit that the artificer of such-like
encomiums, should be skilled in warlike affairs. Hence many historians err in their
disposition of armies, through ignorance of tactics. But Socrates having fought
at Delos and Potidiwa, was not unskilled in all such-like particulars. Others
avain assert, that Socrates speaks ironically, Just as he said with respect to other
things, that he was ignorant of them, so here he says, that he did not know how to
praise this city according to its desert. The irony, however, of Socrates was
employed against sophists and young men, and not against wise and scientific
men. It is better, therefore, instead of these things to say, that he guards against
becoming the third from the truth. For the works of a rightly instituted city, are
the third from the paradigm of truth fi. e. of the true or intelligible polity}. Hence,
wishing to remain in the second from the truth, he says, he is not able to bear the

book 1 TIMEUS OF PLATO. 53

descent to the third species of life. And an impotency of this kind is an abund-
ance of power. For to be able to abide in paradigms, is eflected through power
which ts transcendent. You may likewise see how this accords with what has
been before said by us respecting the analogy of these things to wholes. For the
second fabrication ts assimilated: to the first, and on this account is proximate to
it. For the whole demiurgic series is one, possessing union together with separ-
ation. Very properly, therefore, is Socrates precedaneously extended to Critias
and Hermocrates, and he rightly thinks it fit that they should weave together the
particulars that are next in order, For Timaus is about to deliver these things in
a more universal and elevated manner, and not through images, in consequence of
directly preserving his analogy to the Demiurgus of wholes, who paints the
heavens with the dodecahedron, but generation with appropriate figures.

Indeed, that I should be incapable of such an undertaking is not
wondertul, since the same inbecility seems to have attended poets, both of
the pastand presentage. Not that [ despise the poetic genus; but it is
pertectly evident, that the imitative tribe easily and in the best manner
imitate things ino which they have been educated. But that which is
foreign to the education of any one, it is difficult to imitate well in deeds,
and still more dithcult in words.”

This is the third of the before-mentioned heads of discussion, in which Socrates
shows that none of the poets have been adequate to the praise of men and cities
of this kind, which have casually been engaged in warlike actions. Longinus,
however, and Origen, donbt, whether Plato comprehends Homer among the
poets, when he says, that he has not only the same opinion of the poets then
existing (for this is nothing novel), but likewise of those of former times, so that
Porphyry informs us that Origen passed three whole days exclaiming, blushing and
toiling, asserting that the hypothesis and the doubt were great, and being ambi-
tious to show that the imitation in the poetry of Homer is sufficient for virtuous
actions, For who speaks more magnificently than Llomer, who, representing the
Gods as contending and fighting with each other, does not err in his imitation,
but speaks loftily conformably to the nature of things? Porphyry, however, in
reply, says, that Homer is indeed sufficient to give magnitude and elevation to the
passions, and to excite actions to an imaginative bulk, but that he is not capable

54 PROCLUsS ON THE {BooK 1.

of delivering an impassivity which is intellectual, and which energizes according to
a philosophic life. But YT should wonder if Homer is not sufficient for these
things, but Critias is, or Hermocrates, and should be thought fit to speak about
them. It appears, therefore, to me, that Plato divides poetry into the divinely-
inspired, and the artificial, And having made this division, he refers the magni-
ficent diction and sublimity derived from inspiration, to the Gods. For oracles in
a remarkable degree possess grandeur, vehemence, and magnificence of language.
But he evinces that the poetry proceeding from human art, is not adequate to the
praise of the fortitude of this city, and of the great deeds of the men that are
educated init. For if there is any artificial sublimity 1m some one of the poets, it
has much of contrivance in it, and grandeur of diction, and makes great use
of metaphors, as is the case with Antimachus. But Socrates requires a pane-
gyrist, who exlubits in his pratse a spontaneous sublimity, and a magnificence of
language, which 15 free from compulsion and pure; justas actions Cin bis Republic]
have magnificence, not casually, bat adapted to the education and discipline of
the men, That Socrates, however, does not reject’ the divinely-inspired poet,
nor the whole of poetry, but that only which is artiticul, he manifests, PE think,
when he says, “that he docs not despise the poetic genus.” The poctic genus,
therefore, is divine, as he elsewhere says. But he despises the imitative species of
poetry; nor yet Uns simply ; but that whieh ts nourished in depraved manners and
laws. For this, in consequence of verging to things of a less excellent nature, is
not naturally adapted to be imitative of more exalted manners. And thus much
in answer to the doubt.

The last part, however of the words of Socrates, being ina certain respect dif-
ficult, may be rendered perspicuous as follows: But the words are, that which ts
Sorcign to the education of any one, itis dificult to imitate well in deeds, and still more
difficult in werds.” Por it scems to be easy to imitate words or deeds. Not a
few, therefore, act suphistically, by exlibiting virtue as far as words, bat in deeds
being entirely alienated from it. Willit not, therefore, be better to interpret these
words thus, viz.: To suppose the most excellent education is implied in the words,
that which ts foreign to the education of any one; but to assume, in decds and in
words, as equivalent to, conformably to deeds, and conformably to words ; and to imi-
fate well, as having the same meaning with fo be τε εὐ imitated 2. And thus we may
collect from all these, that for that which is most excellent to be well imitated,
itis difficult mdeed according to deeds, but it is still more dullicult for it to be
well imitated according to words in a written work. For this is the thing

BOOK 1. TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 55

proposed to be effected in poetry. And you may see how this accords with
things themselves. For he who in a written work narrates the deeds of the most
excellent men, composes a history. But he who narrates the speeches of these men,
ifhe intends to preserve the manners of the speaker, assumes a disposition similar
io the speaker. For words are seen to difler according to the inward dispositions.
For thas we deride most of those, except Plato, who have written the Apology of
Socrates, as not preserving the Socratic manner in their composition. Though
the narration of this very thing, that Socrates was accused, made an apology, and
was sentenced to die, would not be thought worthy of laughter, but the dissimili-
tude of imitation in the composition, renders the imitators ridiculous. — Since, also»
to say of Aclilles, that he came forth armed after such a manner, and that he
performed such deeds, is not dificalt; but to narrate copiously what he said»
when detained in the river, is not easy. But this is the province of one who is
able to assume the manners of the hero, and to write conformably to what he
would have said. This also is evident from Socrates in the Republic, very much
Dblamine Homer respecting the imitation of words. But as to the Gods, it is said
to be easy by language to uifa/e the words or the deeds of the Gods. For who
can delineate their works according to their desert? Or it may be said that it is
the same thing with respect to the Gods, to imitate their words or deeds. For
since their words are intellections, and their intellections are productions, the
imitator of their words is also the imitator of their productions, So that by how
much he fails in the one, by so much also is he deficient in the imitation of the
other. Longinus, however, has the following doubts with respect to the proposed
words. For if poets are not worthy imitators of the works pertaining to such a
city as this, because they are not educated in the manners of the city, neither will
Critias and his associates be able to effect this. For neither did they live perform-
ing the office of magistrates in it. But if it is because they have not science, but
are imitators alone, why by receiving types from us, may they not be able to imi-
tate, since they possess an imitative power? In answer to these doubts, it may be
said, that the imitation of such a polity proceeds through a life concordant with
its paradigms. For he who does not live according to virtue, is incapable of
adducing words adapted to worthy men. It is not, therefore, sufficient merely
to hear what form of life the polity possesses, in order to imitate it, as the doubt
of Longinus says itis, Bat Porphyry adds, that as all things, such for instance
as the diurnal light, are not imitated by painters, so neither is the life of the most
excellent polity imitated by poets, in consequence of transcending their power.

56 — PROCLUS ON THE [BooK 1.

“ But with respect to the tribe of sophists, though I consider them as
skilled both in the art of speaking, and in many other beautiful arts, yet
as they have no settled abode, but wander daily through a multitude of
cities, IT am afraid, lest with respect to the institutions of philoso-
phers and politicians, they should not be able to conjecture the qua-
lity and magnitude of those concerns, which wise and politic men are
engaged in with individuals in warlike undertakings, both in deeds and

»
words.

With respect to the sophists, some of them frequently pretended to be skilled in
astronomy, others in geometry, others in politics, and others in the art of dividing.
Hence they are now said to be skilled in many beautiful arts. Since, however,
they did not possess a scientific knowledge of these, it is added, that they are
skilled in them. For skil! manifests an irrational occupation in’ mere words,
unaccompanied with the Knowledge of the why. Because, however, they
not only lived at different times in different cities, but were full of deception, of
false opinion, and unscientific wandering, they are justly called wanderers. But as
they led a disorderly and inerudite life, energizing according to passion, they are
very properly said not to have a settled abode ; since it is requisite that every one
should arrange himself prior to other things. For all such particutars, as ave ina
family and a city, are Likewise in manners, and these prior to externals ought to
be titly governed. Who then are the proper imitators of the deeds and words of
the best polity, if neither the poets nor the sophists are? Phey are such as are
both politicians and philosophers. For the union of both these is necessary, in
order that through the political character they may be able to perceive the works
of the citizens ; but through the philosophic, their words, te consequence of
inwardly pre-assuming their life. And through the former, indeed, they com-
prehend their practical wisdom, but through the latter, the intellectual energy of
the rulers. But from these images we should make a transition to demiurgic
causes. For it is necessary that these also should) be total and Intellectual, mn
order that the universe may be consummately perfect, and that generation may

possess ironically such things as the heavens primarily contain.

“ The genus, therefore, of your habit remains, which at one and the
same time participates of both these, by nature and by education.”

BOOK 1. TIMZUS OF PLATO. 57

Longinus, not disdaining to survey these words, and those that precede them, —
says, that in that part of them beginning with, “ But with respect to the tribe of
sophists, Lam afraid, as they are wanderers,” &c. there is a difference of expression
through the desire of dignity and gravity in the diction. That in the words that
follow, “ Lest with respect to the institutions of philosophers and politicians, they
should not be able to conjecture the quality and magnitude of those concerns,” &e.
there is a distortion of phrase from what is natural. And that the third part,
“ The genus therefore of your habit remains,” &c. is perfectly unusual. For it is
not at all dissimilar to the strength of Hercules, to sey ig Τελεμαάχοιο, the sacred
strength of Telemachus,” and other such like expressions. But Origen admits,
that the form of expression in the proposed words, is conformable to the manner
of historians. For such like periphrases are adapted to a narration of this kind,
as well as to poetry. We, however, say, that Plato everywhere changes his
mode of diction, so as to be adapted to his subjects; and in unusual things, stu-
dies mutations of expression. But we do not admit that the proposed words are a
periphrasis. For they do not manifest the same thing as the expression you, like
the strength of Hercules ; from which there would only be an ability of giving that
which is adapted to the imitation of the best polity. For those who are both
philosophers and politicians, by energizing according to the habit which they
possess, and which differs from the poetical and sophistical habit, will be
able to effect that which Socrates desires. And thus much for the words
themselves,

Looking, however, to the conceptions which they contain, we must say, that So-
crates excites Critias and [lermocrates to what remains to be accomplished in the
polity. But he likewise calls on Timieus to assist the undertaking. And this is
the fifth head of the things proposed for elucidation. You may also see how
magnificently Socrates celebrates the men from the very beginning, calling [the
wisdom which they possess] a Aabit, in order that he may exempt them from so-
phistical wandering. But he says that they are partakers of the political science,
both by nature and education, in order that you may contradistinguish it from
poetical imitation, which is nourished by less excellent laws. And he designates
the perfect from nature and educaiion ; lest depriving nature of education, you should
cause it to be lame ;* or you should think that education ought to be thrown into an

* Odyss. 11. 409.
* For xoAny here, it is necessary to read χωλην,

Tim. Plat. το α, te

58 | PROCLUS ON THE > [BOOK 1.

unapt and incongruous recipient. And thus much has been said in common re-
specting the men, But if you wish to speak, proceeding to paradigins, the demi-
urgic genus, which is total and intellectual, remains to be arranged according to a
providential attention to wholes. Let us, however, survey separately every parti-
cular.

“ For Timzus here of Locris, an Italian city, governed by the best of
laws, exclusive of his not being inferior to any of his fellow-citizens in
wealth and nobility, has obtained in his own city the greatest honours,
and the highest posts of government; and, in my opinion, has arrived at
the summit of all philosophy.”

What testimony, therefore, can be more admirable than this, or what praise can
be greater? Does it not, in the first place, evince that Timiwus was a political
character; in the second place, that he possessed intellectual knowledge {ina
most eminent degree], by saying, that he had arrived at the summit of all phuilo-
sophy; and adding, in my opinion, which places a colophon on all the panegyrics ?
What other image also than this among men, is more carable of being assimilated
to the one Demiurgus? For, in the first place, by the poutical and the philosophic,
the image is Jovian. In the next place, by asserting that Timiwus belonged toa
city governed by the best of laws, it imitates the god who was nurtured in the in-
tellizible by Adrastia. And by Timwus excelling in nobility of birth, it adum-
brates the total, intellectual, and unical nature of the god. For all these the De-
miurgus possesses, by participating of the fathers prior to himself. By asserting
also that Timwus had obtained the highest posts of government, it represents to us
the royal power of the Demiurgus, and which has dominion over wholes ; his
sceptre, according to theologists, consisting of four and twenty measures. But to
add likewise that he had enjoyed the greatest honours, presents us with an image
of that transcendency which is exempt from wholes, both in dignity and power.
It is the Demiurgus, therefore, who also distributes honours to others. And it
may be said, that the assertion that Timius had arrived at the summit of philoso-
phy, assimilates him to the god, who at once perfectly contains all knowledge in
himself. So that, from all that has been said, you may apprehend, as from ima-
ses, who the Demiurgus of the universe is; that he is an intellect comprehensive
of many intellects, and arranged among the intellectual Gods ; that he is full of

BOOK 1.J TIM.ZUS OF PLATO. 59

the first intelligibles ; and that he has a royal establishment, as surpassing in dig-
nity the other demiurgic gods. If, however, Plato calls the city of Timaus Lo-
cris, it not being usual with the Greeks thus to denominate it, but to call it Locri
only, in order to distinguish it from the Locris opposite to Eubcea, we must not
wonder. For Plato changes many things for the purpose of signifying in a clearer
manner the thing proposed. But that the Locrians were governed by the best
laws is evident ; for their legislator was Zaleucus.

“ Besides, we all know that Critias is not ignorant of any of the parti-
culars of which we are now speaking.”

Critias, indeed, was of a generous and grand nature. He likewise engaged in
philosophic conferences, and was called, as history informs us, an ideot among
philosophers, but a philosopher among ideots. He tyrannized also, being one of
the thirty. Itis not, however, just to accuse Socrates on this account, because he
now thinks him deserving of a certain praise. For, in the first place, we should
attend to the manner in which he praises him. For he says, that “ he is not igno-
rant of any of the particulars of which we are now speaking,” both on account of his
natural disposition, and his association with philosophers. In the next place, we
should observe, that the tyrannical character is an argument of an excellent na-
ture, as we learn from the fable in the [10th book of the] Republic, which parti-
cularly leads souls descending from the heavens to a tyrannical life. For being
accustomed there to revolve with the Gods, and to govern the universe in conjunc-
tion with them, in these terrestrial regions also, they pursue apparent power ; just
as those who possess the remembrance of intelligible beauty, embrace visible
beauty. That Critias, however, pertains, according to analogy, to the middle
fabrication of things, may be learnt, in the first place, from his succeeding to the
discourse of Socrates ; in the next place, from his narrating the Atlantic history,
the Atlantics being the progeny of Neptune; and, in the third place, from his
own proper life, Bor the ruling peculiarity, and that which extends to many
things, are the characteristics of this life. Power, likewise pertains to media, and
therefore he possesses the middle place in the encomiums. For to assert of him,
that he was not one of the vulgar, but a partaker of the prerogatives of Timeus,
shows his inferiority to the first person of the dialogue. But that he was not en-
tirely removed from him, indicates his alliance to him,

60 PROCLUS ON THE (soox 1.

“ Nor is this to be doubted of Hermocrates, since a multitude of cir-
cumstances evince that he is, both by nature and education, adapted to
411 such concerns.”

Hermocrates was a Syracusan general, desirous of living conformably to law.
Hence also he participates, in a certain respect, of the political science and philo-
sophy. He must be * referred, therefore, according to analogy, to tle third fabri-
cation * of things. For the command of an army is a power allied to the god,
who arranges the last and most disorderly parts ΟΥ̓ mundane fabrication ; and fo
be testified by a multitude of circumstances, indicates an analogy to the power that
produces fabrication into all multitude, and an ultimate division. We therefore
make this arrangement, in order that the men may have an analogy to the things.
But others arrange Critias as inferior to Hermocrates ; though the absent person
was neither adapted to speak nor to hear, and of those that are present Lat a
conference], he who is an auditor, indeed, but is silent, is secondary to lim who
is both an auditor and a speaker, and in this respect: imitates those that are about
Socrates and Timwus. In the next place, this also must be considered, that So-
crates gives the preference to Critias, in what he says, praising him immediately
after Timewus. There are likewise those who attribute such an order as the fol-
lowing to these persons, viz. they arrange Timanus according to the paradigmatic
cause, Socrates aceording to the efficient, and Critias according to the formal
cause; for he Jeads into energy those that have been rightly educated ; but: Her-
mocrates according to the material cause. Hence also he is adapted indeed to
hear, but not to speak. For matter receives productive powers externally, but is
not naturally adapted to generate. And this arrangement indeed will be found
to be very reasonable, if we abandon the former conceptions [relative to the ana-
logy of the men].

* Instead of So καὶ πολιτικῆς πως pererxe, καὶ φιλοσοφιαι evexey οὖν «κ᾿ A., iL is Necessary to read διο
και πολιτικὴς ἴων μετειχέ καὶ φιλυσυφιαι. ενεέγκεν οὖν K. A,

* Timeus is analogous to Jupiter, the Demiurgus of the universe; but Socrates, Critias, and Her-
mocrates, are analogous to the three ruling fathers, or demiurgi, Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto, who
form the summit of the supermundane order of Gods. For, according to the arcana of the Grecian
theology, there is a twofold Jupiter; one being the Demiurgus, and existing at the extremity of the
intellectual order; but the other being the first of the supermundane demiurgic triad. See the oth
Book of my translation of Proclus on the Theology of Plato.

ORAS Os < AMO βε"

BOOK 1.] TIM.£US OF PLATO. ΟἹ

“Hence when you yesterday requested me to discuss what pertains to
a polity, I readily complied with your request; being persuaded that the
remainder of the discourse could not be more conveniently explained by
any one than by you, if you were but willing to engage in its discussion.
For when you have properly adapted the city for warlike purposes, there
is no one in the present age but you from whom it can acquire every
thing fit for it to receive. As I have, therefore, hitherto complied with
your request, I shall now require you to comply with mine in the above-
mentioned particulars. Nor have you, indeed, refused this employment ;
but have, with common consent, determined to repay my hospitality with
the banquet of discourse. I now, therefore, stand prepared, in a deco-
rous manner, to receive the promised feast.”

The summary repetition of the polity appears, indeed, as Socrates now says, to
have been made for the sake of the discussion of the contests in war of a rightly
constituted city. Both the concise comprehension, however, of the polity, and
the Atlantie war, refer us to the one fabrication of the world. For, as we have
before observed, it is better, prior to the whole fabrication, and all the form of the
production of the world, to make a survey from parts and images. Socrates, there-
fore, resuming the polity in certain forms, and, first, through this imitating the
universe, very properly establishes himself, as it were, in essence; but excites
others to the discussion, who celebrate the power of such a city, and imitate those
who arrange the universe according to the middle demiurgic form, and uniformly
comprehend the contrarieties and multiform motions which it contains. As,
therefore, Jupiter, in Homer, being seated in his citadel on the summit of Olym-
pus, and abiding in his own accustomed unity, sends the Gods who preside over
the mundane contrariety to the Grecian war; thus also Socrates, being purely
established in the intelligible form of a polity, prepares those after him that are
able, to celebrate the motion and power of this polity, calling forth, indeed, the
science of Timezus, to the survey of wholes totally, but preparing the others to the
total and concise comprehension of partial natures. For as he had discussed the
polity totally, after this manner also, he wishes that the power of it should be cele-
brated by the rest. Since, however, all these discourses bring with them an image
of demiurgic works, and the whole conference adumbrates the fabrication of the

02 PROCLUS ON THE [βοοκ 1.

world, Socrates very properly says, ‘ that he stands prepared, in a decorous manner;
to receive the promised feast,” his words being invested with modesty, as a form
adapted to virtue.

“ FTerm. But we, O Socrates, as Timeus just now signified, shall
cheerfully engage in the execution of your desire; for we cannot offer
any excuse sufficient to justify neglect in this affair. Yor yesterday, when
we departed from hence, and went to the lodging of Critias, where we are
accustomed to reside, both in his apartment and in the way thither, we

discoursed on this very particular.”

It was requisite that Hermocrates should say something, and not be silently
present, like the unemployed persons ina comedy. Hence also he ts represented
speaking to Socrates. And this indeed is logographic for pertaining to the art of
writing); but it is hkewise adapted to what has been before said. For it repre-
sents to us, asin an image, that the last parts, of the fabrication of things, follow
the one father of wholes, and, through similitude to him, converge to the one
providence of the world. For Hermocrates, following Socrates, says, that no-
thing shall be wanting, either of alacrity or power, to the accomplishment of the
narrations investigated by Socrates. For these two things become especially im-
pediments to us in our mutual energies, viz. our indolence, and any external im-
pediment. Removing, therefore, both these, he says, that there cannot be any ex-
cuse sufficient to justify their neglect, or prevent them from accomplishing the
mandate of Socrates. Very properly, therefore, does he call upon Critias for the
narration respecting the city of the ancient Athenians, in which the mandate of
Socrates terminates ; just as Socrates calls on Timwus, and makes himself a par-
taker of his discourse. For on the preceding day, Hermocrates says, they dis-
coursed on this very particular together with Critias, just as the third Demiurgus
in the universe communicates with the production of the second. For the whole
of generation is entirely in want of returns from the subterranean world. If, how-
ever, these things subsist after this manner, the Atlantic Iistory will appear to
have had the third narration. But those numbers, the duad and the triad, are
said to be adapted to the middle fabrication, the former through power, and the
latter through its demiurgic providence, and which is also perfective of mundane
natures. So that whether you assign to this history a double or a triple narration

MP 5 SNS ANE Sa SA I BE DLN OLE LILES ES

nas a

BOOK 1.] TIMEUS OF PLATO. 63

you will, from either of the numbers, be able to recur to the conception of the in-
tervening medium.

“He therefore narrated to us the following particulars from ancient
rumour, which I wish, O Critias, you would now repeat to Socrates, that
he may judge whether it any way conduces to the fulfilment of his re-
quest.

“Cri. Itis requisite to comply, if agreeable to Timaus, the third as-
sociate of our undertaking.

“Trim. I assent to your compliance.”

You will find in these words an admirable indication, as in images, of divine
natures. For, as in them, such as are secondary call forth the prolific powers of
such as are primary, and produce them to the providential inspection of the sub-
jects of their government; thus also here Hermocrates calls on Critias to speak,
and gives completion to what was promised to Socrates. And as, among divine
natures, effects convert themselves to the reception of their causes, thus also here,
Hermocrates is extended to Critias, but Critias looks to the mandate of Socrates.
As likewise all demiurgic causes are suspended from the one father of the uni-
verse, and govern all things conformably to his will; after the same manner here
also all the persons tly to Timeus, and to his nod, or consent, or will, in order
that, being impelled from that as from a root, they may dispose their narration
agreeably to his desire. For thus what is going to be said will contribute to the
discourse about the whole fabrication of the world. Moreover, the words “ from
ancient rumour,” if the narration is historicel, signify ancient according to time.
But if they are an indication of what takes place in the universe, they will ob-
scurcly signify the reasons or productive powers which are from eternity inherent
insouls. And if, likewise, they bring with them an image of divine causes, they
show that these demiurgic causes, being supernally filled from more ancient Gods,
impart also to secondary natures their own providential energies.

“Cri. Hear, then, O Socrates, a narration surprising indeed in the
extreme, yet in every respect true, which was once delivered by Solon, the
wisest of the seven wise men.”

64 PROCLUS ON THE [βοοκ !.

With respect τὸ the whole of this narration about the Atlantics, some say, that
it is a mere history, which was the opinion of Crantor, the first interpreter of Plato,
who says, that Plato was derided by those of his time, as not being the inventor
of the Republic, but transcribing what the Exyptians had written on this subject;
and that he so far regards what is said by these deriders as to refer to the Exyp-
tians this history about the Athenians and Atlanties, and to believe that the Athe-
nians once lived conformably to this polity. Crantor adds, that this is testified
by the prophets of the Exyptians, who assert that these particulars (which are
narrated by Plato} are written on pillars which are still preserved. Others
again, say, that this narration Is a fable, and a fictitious account of things, which
by no means had an existence, but which bring with them an indication of natures
which are perpetual, or are cenerated in the world 5 not attending to Plato, who
exclaims, “ that the narration is surprising in the extreme, yet ts in every respect
true.” For that which is in every respect true, is not partly true, and partly not
true, nor is it false according to the apparent, but true according to the inward
meaning; since a thing of this kind would not be perfectly trac. Others do not
deny that these transactions took place after this manner, but think that they are
now assumed as images of the contrarictics that pre-cxist in’ the universe, lor
war, say they, Is the father of all things, as Heraclitus also asserted. And of
these, some refer the analysis to the fixed stars and planets τ so that they assume
the Athenians as analogous to the fixed: stars, but the Athantics to the planets.
They Ekewise say, that these stars fight on account of the opposition in their cir-
culation, but that the fixed stars vanquish the planets on account of the one con-
volution of the world. ΟΥ̓ this opinion, therefore, is the illustrious Ameliis, who
vehemently contends that this must be the case, because it is clearly said in the
Critias, that the Atlantic island was divided into seven circles. But I do not
know of any other who is of the same cGpimion., Others, again, as Origen, refer
the analysis to the opposit on of certain dwmons, some of them being more, but
others less, excellent. And some of them being superior in mulutude, but others
in power: some of them vanquishing, but others being vanquished. But others
refer it to the discord of souls, the more excellent being the pupils of Minerva,
but the inferior kind being subservient to generation; who also pertain to the
God that presides over generation [i, e.to Neptune]. And this is the interpreta-
tion of Numenius. Others, mingling, as they fancy, the opinions of Origen and
Numenius together, say, that the narration refers to the opposition of souls to
damons, the latter drawing down, but the former being drawn down. And

“......5....ὕ..ὄ

BOOK 1.} TIMAUS OF PLATO. 65

with these men, demon has a triple subsistence. For they say, that one kind is
that of divine dwmons ; another, of diemons according to habitude, to which par-
tial sonls give completion, when they obtain a damoniacal allotment; and
another is that of depraved diemons, who are also noxious to sonls, Daemons,
therefore, of this last kind, wage this war against souls, in their descent into
generation, And that, say they, which ancient theologists refer to Osiris and
Typhon, or to Bacchus and the Titans, this, Plato, from motives of piety, refers
to the Athenians and Atlantics. Before, however, souls descend into solid
bodies, those theologists and Plato, deliver the war of them with material daemons
who are adapted to the west; since the west, as the Egyptians say, is the place of
noxious demons.’ Of this opinion is the philosopher Porphyry, respecting whom,
it would be wonderful, if he asserted any thing different from the doctrine of
Numenius. These [philosophers] however, are in my opinion, very * excellently
corrected by the most divine Tamblichus.

According to him, therefore, and also to our preceptor Syrianus, this con-
trariety and opposition are not introduced for the purpose of rejecting the narra-
tion, since on the contrary, this is to be admitted as an account of transactions
that actnally happened; but, as we are accustomed to do, we must refer that
which precedes the subject of the dialogue, to the scope itself of the dialogue.
Hence, they are of opinion, that this contrariety which is derived from human
affairs, should, according to a similar form, be extended through the whole world,
and especially through the realms of generation, That in consequence of this,
we should survey every where how things participate of contrariety, according to
the variety of powers. For since all things are from the one, and from the duad
after the one, are in a certain respect united to each other, and have an opposite
nature; as in the genera of being, there is a certain: opposition of sameness to
difference, and of motion to permanency, but all things participate of these ge-
nera ;—this being the case, we must survey after what manner mundane natures
possess the contrariety which pervades through all things.

Moreover, if we consider the polity of Plato as analogous in every respect to
the world, it is necessary that we should survey this war as existing in every
nature. For the polity is analogous to existence and essences, but war, to the
powers of these essences, and as Plato says, to their motions, We must, like-

' For exc καὶ ἡ dusts, here it is necessary to read ἐπεὶ καὶ Svors, and for caswricor, κακωτίκων,
3. Instead of κομηδει in this place, it is requisite to read κομεδῃ.

Tim. Plat. Vo a ]

66 PROCLUS ON THE [Book 1,

wise, refer the polity, by making it common to all things, to the whole union of
things ; but it must be said, that war is to be assimilated to the mundane division,
and’ to the empire of victory, Whether, therefore, you give a twofold division
tu the universe, by separating it into the Incorporeal and the corporeal; and
again divide the incorporeal into the more intellectual and the more material
natures, and the corporeal into heaven and generation ; and heaven, into contrary
periods, but generation into opposite powers; or in whatever way you assume
this opposite life, whether in the mundane Gods, or in daemons, in souls, or in
bodies,—you may every where transter the analogies from men to things. For
of the Gods themselves, the divine Homer makes oppositions 3 representing
Apollo as hostilely opposed to Neptune, Mars to: Minerva, the river Nanthus to
Vulcan, Hermes to Latona, and Juno to Diana, For it is requisite to survey
generauion in incorporeal natures, in bodies, and in both. ΖἴἜΤ is likewise necessary
to consider Neptune and Apollo as the fabricators of the whole of generation, the one
totally, but the other partially, But Juno and Diana, as the suppliers of vivipication,
the former rationally, but the latter physically. Minerva and Mars, as the causes
of the contrariety which pervades through both evistence and life; the former, of
that which ts defined accurding to intellect; but the latter, of that which is more ma-
terial and passive. Hermes and Latona, as presiding over the twofold perfection of
suuls; the former, indeed, over the perfection which is obtained through the gnostic
powers,* and the evolution into light of productive principles ; but the latter, over the
sn.ooth, spontancous, and voluntary elevation which is acquired through the vital
powers, Vulcan and Nanthus, as the primary leaders of the whole of a corporcal con-
Sttiution, and of the powers it contains , the former, of those that are more cficacious
but the latter of those that are more passive, and as there more material. But he
leaves Venus by herself, in order that she may tlluminate all things with union and
harmony, and represents her as fighting on the worse side, because THE ONE. in those
that belovy to us sule, ts less eaceltent than multitude. Vor all contraricty is sur-
veyed ina becoming manner in conjunction with a unity, whieh is either prior to
it, Or Connascent with, or isin a certain respect an adjunct posterior to it. And
Plato, as well as theologists, rightly perceiving that this is the case, have delivered

a multitudinous contrariety prior to the one fabrication of the world, and parts

* cae is omitted in the original, aud the omission of it, reuders the latter part of the sentence very
ambiguous.

* For δυνάμεως here, it is requisite to read dur ἀμεων.

ne cacao EE

HOOK 4.) TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 67

prior to wholes, Finding, likewise, these things in images prior to paradigms, he

surveys this contrariety ino men, which also has an analogous subsistence in
wholes, neither being in want of Titannic or Gizantic wars. For how could he
narrate such wars to Socrates, who on the preceding day had blamed the poets
for devising things of this kind?) Reeeiving, therefore, ransactions from history,
in order that he might not assert of the Gods that they fight with each other, he
ascribes these battles to men, but throneh a cautious and pious analogy, transfers
them also to the Gods, For such like wars are delivered by divinely-inspired
poets, prior to the one order of things. Their mode, however, of narrating them,
is adapted to them, but the present mode to Plato; the latter, in conjunction
with the political science, being more moderate, but the former, in conjunction
with the telestic art, being more replete with divine inspiration, And thus much
concerning the whole of the text.

In what is said by Critias, however, the word “hear” is proverbial, and is
employed in those things to which we wish to call the attention of the hearer.
The word hear, therefore, is equivalent to receive what is worthy of attention. But
the word “ surprizing” (aroxov) manifests that which happens contrary to expec-
tation, as in the Gorgias, “ [tis surprizing, O Socrates,” (arora ys w Σωκρατηςνὶ
or that which is paradoxical, as in the Crito, What a surprising dream, So-
crates ; (wg ατόπον ενυπνίὴν ὦ Σωκχρατης); or the wouderfal, as in the Theatetus,
© And itis not at all surprising, but it would be much more wonderful, if it were not
a thing of this kind.” (και οὐδὲν γε ατοπον, κλλὰ πολυ Savuarroresoy εἰ μη τοιουτῆς TY.)
But here it is assumed as that which deserves admiration. This, however, is evi-
dent irom what follows, in which it is said, “ that the decas of this city were great
and admirable” Moreover, the word © narration” (Asyos), Manilests the truth of
what is going to be related. For thus it is said in the Gorgias, that a fable differs
from Asya; [because the latteris true, but the former is ποῖ. ΤΕ is also very
properly said, that “ Solon was the wisest of the seven wise men ;~ as being asserted
of one who was related to Plato; as being said to another Athenian, and in the
Panathenaie 5 and as indicating that the ensuing narration extends to all wisdom.
Nor is it requisite to wonder how Solon is said to be the wisest of all the seven
wise men, nor to be anxious to know, how he can be said to be the wisest of other
men, but one of the wise men, when all of them were most wise. For what ab-
surdity is there, mecalling a man the wisest of those that are of the same order
with himself? But his legislation, his pretended insanity at Salamis, his armed
attack of Pisistratus the tyrant, who said he was more prudent than those that

68 PROCLUS ON THE {Book 5.

were absent, and more brave than those that were present, his conference also with
Croesus, and his answer to one who said, that he had established most beautiful
laws; for he replied, that he had not established the most beautiful, but) powerful
laws, and that he knew laws that were more excellent than these ;—all these par-
ticulars bear testimony to his wisdom. There is, likewise, a story told of a tripod
that was dragged up in’ a net by certain young men, though it is not related by
all historians, and that the oracle (of Apollo} being consulted on the oceasion,
the God answered, that it should be given: to the wisest: man, That im conse-
quence of this, it) was offered to Thales, but he sent it to another of the seven
wise men, this again to another, and so on, till at last it came to Solon, all of
them yielding it to him, Solon, however, sent it to the God, saying, that he was
the wisest of beings. Solon, also, is said to have found, that the lunar month
does not consist of thirty days, and on this account he was the first that called it
ἐν vey "ὦ new one, and ysag niew. And, in short, the discovery, that the numbers of
the days revert frum the twenticth day, is ascribed) to him. Some, also, assert,
that pricr to Anaxagoras, Solon showed that intellect presided over the whole of
things. From all which it is evident, that he was a paruicipant of a certain

wisdom.

“ Solon, then, was the familiar and intimate friend of our great-grand-
father Dropides, as he himself frequently? relates in his poems. But he
once declared to our grandfather Critias (as the old man himself informed
us) that great and admirable actions had once been achieved by this city,
which nevertheless were buried in oblivion through length of time, and
the destruction of mankind.”

The history of the race of Solon, and of the alliance of Plato to him, is as fol-
lows: The children of Execestides were, Solon and Dropides, and of Dropides
Critias was the son, who is mentioned by Solon in his poems, where he sings,

Bid Critias with the yellow locks,
Attention to his father pay,

* The same story is also told of Solon, by Diogenes Laertius, in his life of Thales.
2 In the original ἐνυν, which I conceive to be erroneously transcribed for ev veer.
3 πολλαχὸν is omitted in the text of Proclus.

BOOK 1.] TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 69

Por by revering what he says,
No faulty Jeader he'll obey.
Bat Callescrus and Glauco were the sons of Critias: and again the Critias of the
present dialogue was the son of Calliescrus. This, however, is evident from Cri-
tias in the Charmides, calling the father of Charmides, his uncle. But Charmides
and Perictione were the offspring of Glauco: and Perictione was the mother of
Plato. So that Glauco was the uncle of Critias, but the father of Charmides.
And Charmides was the uncle of Plato, but Solon was the brother of the great-
grandfather of Critias. Such, therefore, is the truth (respecting the race of Solon.}
The divine Tamblichus, however, gives a different account of the succession of
his race. Vor he immediately makes Glauco to be the son of Dropides. But
others, as the Platonic Theon, assert, that Critias and Glauco were the sons of
Callwserus; though in the Charmides, Critias says, that “ Charmides ts the son of
Glauco our uncle, but is my couzin” Uence Glauco is not the son of Dropides,
nor the brother of the younger Critias. To a man, however, who pays attention
to things, itis of no consequence in whatever manner these particulars may sub-
sist. Passing on, therefore, to things, you may assume from these particulars as
Images, that all the discord of the world, and the twofold co-ordinations that are
Init, are suspended from: proximate demiurgie causes, and are referred to other
more Intellectual and anetent causes; that the causes of this motion are conti-
nuous and united, and suspended from one cause; that the superior causes: are
More ancient in intellection ; and that secondary receive the production of primary
natures, difler from and yet have a connascent communion with them, [ἢ addi-
tion to these things also, you may assume, that a twofold oblivion ix produced in
souls of the theory of great and admirable wholes, arising either frem having abandoned
for along tinea life of that hind, or through having fallen immodcrately into gene-
tion. Tor ths is for the real man to be truly corrupted. But souls that have been
recently perfected, and retain the memory of things ino the intelligible world, in
consequence of not falling into matter, easily acquire a reminiscence of the trath.
And thus much for these particalars. We must not, however, wonder, if Critias
calls Solon simply a λων αν. For we not only call those with whom we asso-
ciate, but also our kindred, favulars. But by likewise adding, ‘ and an intimate
Jricnd,” he indicates, that there was not merely a communion of race, but a same-
ness and similitude of lite, in the ancestors of Plato. The prior Critias, also, is
called an old man, which signilies his possession of prudence and intellect, and his
being adapted to many disciplines.

70 PROCLUS ON THE (Boox 1.

“Jn particular, he informed me of one undertaking surpassing in
magnitude all the rest, which I now think proper to relate to you, both
that I may repay my obligations, and that by such a relation I may offer
my tribute of praise to the Goddess in the present solemnity, by cele-
brating her divinity, as it were, with hymns, justly, and in a manner
agreeable to truth.”

Longinus doubts what was the intention of Plato in the insertion of this narra-
tion, For he does not introduce it either for the purpose of giving respite to the
auditors, or as being in want of it. And he dissolves the doubt, as he thinks, by
saying, that it is assumed by Plato prior to: physiolozy, in order to allure the
reader, and soften the severity of that hind of writing, But Origen says, that the
narration is indeed a tietion, and so far he agrees with Numenius and lus fol-
lowers, but he does not admit: with Loneinus, that it was devised for the sake of
pleasure. {0 does not, however, add the cause of the fiction, We, therefore,
have frequently said, that it contributes to the whole theory of mature 5 and we
likewise sav, that in these words, Plato calls the one and common productive
principle of the twofold co-ordinations ino the world, and the one contrariety
which pervades through wholes, the greatest and most admirable of works, as
containing the other fabrication of things in infrangible bonds, this) fabrication
consisting of participations of the contraries, bound and infinity, as Philolaus
says, and as Plato also asserts in the Philebus. Por he there says, “ (hat there is
much bound and much infinity inthe world, which are things most coutrary tocach other,
and give completion to this universe.” Since, however, all things that contribute to
the production of the world, are said to recompense the benefits bestowed by total
causes, Critias says very properly, that it becomes him to repay fis obligations to
Socrates, who excited both the second and third powers. These things, there-
fore, may be immediately assumed (from the words betore us. |

But will vou not say, that the Minerval solemnity las an indication of demi-
urgic works?) For the Goddess herself indeed, connectedly contains all the mun-
dane fabrication, and possesses intellectual lives in herself} according to which
she weaves together the universe, and unifying powers, according to which she
governs all the mundane oppositions, “Phe Minerval solemnity, however, indi-
cates the gift of the Goddess which pervades through all things, and fills all
things with herself, and likewise the union which extends through all variety.

Book 1.] TIMEUS OF PLATO. 71

For in solemnities, we especially embrace a common and concordant life. If,
however, we have asserted these things rightly, we may from these transfer our-
selves to the various and one life of the world, and survey the diflerence between
the Parmenides and this dialogue. | Por both have their hypothesis in the Pana-
thenway but the former in the greater, and the latter in the lesser of these solem-
nities. Por they were celebrated about the same time with the Bendidian festival ;
and this very properly. For since the productions of Minerva are twofold, total
and partial, sapermundane and mundane, intelligible and sensible ; the former of
these solemnities, indeed, pertains to the exempt productions of the Goddess,
unfolding into light the intelligible series of the Gods, but the latter to her sub-
ordinate productions, interpreting the powers of the Gods about the world. And
the Bendidian festival, indeed, appears to manifest the suppression of the con-
trariety externally acceding to the universe from a = Barbarric tempest, by the
Gods who are the inspective guardians of the festival. Hence it is said to have
been celebrated in the Pirwus, as being most adapted to the extremities, and
material parts of the universe. But the Panathenwan festival, exhibits the esta-
blished order which proceeds into the world) from intellect, and the unconfused
separation of mundane contrarietes, Por this Goddess is at one and the same
time, a lover of wisdom, and a loverof war. Another veil, therefore, was referred
to the Goddess fin the Bendidian festival.) representing the war in which the
pupils of Minerva were victorious; just as the veil in the Panathenwan solemnity,
represented the Gants vanquished by the Olympian Gods. The Goddess, how-
ever, Is celebrated with hymns, justly and with truth; jast/y, indeed, because it is
necessary that every thing which has proceeded, should be converted to its pro-
per principle; but with (ruth, because the hymn is assumed through things and
through beings, And because of hymns, some celebrate the essence, but others

the providence of the Gods, and others praise the works that proceed from them,'

cand a hymn of this hind is the last form of celebration 5 (for the praise of the

divine essence precedes all other panegyrics, as Socrates asserts in the Banquet)
—this being the case, the words “ celebrating as it were,” are very properly
added. For he wishes to celebrate the Goddess from the deeds performed
by the Athenians, But that the Panathenwean followed the Bendidian fes-
tivals, is asserted both by the commentators, and by Aristotle the Rhodian.
For they say, that the Bendidia were celebrated in’ the Pireus on the

* For ax’ αὐτὸν here, it is necessary to read ax’ avurwr.

72 PROCLUS ON THE [Rook 1.

twentieth day of April; but that the festival sacred to Minerva followed
these.

“ Soc, You speak well. But what is this ancient achievement, which
Critias once heard from Solon, and which is not narrated in history, but
was once actually accomplished by this city.”

Socrates exciting Critias to narration, requests that he would relate the mighty
undertaking which the ancient Critias said he had heard from Solon, and which
though not much celebrated, yet was really performed, Τὰ which, this in the first
place deserves to be considered, that wany things happen in the universe of which
the multitude are ignorant. And inthis, worthy men differ from others, that
they sce things of this hind, and understand the events that take place, sat
it is worth while secondly to observe, that the more perfect causes, rejoice in sim
plicity, and proceed from things of a composite nature, to such as are test, But
subordinate beings on the contrary, descend from things simple to things compo-
site. For thus also here Socrates recurs from that which is downward as far as
to Solon, in an ascending progression; but Critias on the contrary, descends

from Solon to the mention of himself.

“Cri. 1 will acquaint you with that ancient history, which 1 did not
indeed receive from a youth, but from aman very much advanced in
years.”

Longinus here again observes, that Plato pays attention to elegance of diction,
by narrating the same things differently. For he ealls the wudertaking ἀρχαιον,
but the narration sara, and the man, nota youth; though as he sienifies the
same thing through all these, he anight have denominated all of them: after the
same manner. Longinus, therefore, as Plotinus said of him, was a philologist,
but nota philosopher. Origen, however, docs not admit that Plato is studious of
artificial delight and certain ornaments of diction, but that he pays attention to
spontaneous and unadorned credibility, and accuracy in imitations. ‘This mode
also ofexpression has spontaneity, as being adapted to erudition. For it was
rightly said by Aristoxenus, the lyric poet, that the dispositions of philosophers
extend as faras to sounds, and exhibit in all things the arrangement which they
possess 3 just 7 think, as this mighty heaven, exhibits tn its transfigurations clear

BOOK 1.) TIM.LZUS OF PLATO. 73

images of the splendor of intellectual perceptions ; being moved in conjunction with
the unapparent periods of intellectual natures."| The great Iamblichus, however,
thinks that we should rather refer the variety of the words to things, and see how
in nature contranies are vanquished by the one; how the one is varied, and how
great a mutation the same productive principles exlibit; subsisting in one way
in the intellect of the universe, in another, in soul, in another, in nature, and in
the last place, subsisting in matter. And again, unfolding about matter a most
abundant difference in conjunction with similitude. For these observations are
worthy the conceptions of Plato, and not a solicitous attention to diction.

“ For at that time Critias, as he himself declared, was almost ninety
years old, and I was about ten.”

These three persons are assumed, as having preserved this history, or mytho-
logy, Solon, the ancient Critias, and this junior Critias; because perfect causes
precede the fabrication of the world, and perfective causes are antecedent to the
subjects of their government. The elder Critias, however, heard this narration
from Solon, one from one; from the elder Critias it was heard by the junior Cri-
tias and Amynander; and from the junior Critias three persons received it. For
the monad_ proceeds through the duad to the perfective providence of wholes.
The numbers also of the ages, have much alliance to the things themselves. For
the decad manifests the converston of all mundane natures to the one ; and nincty the
restitution again to the monad, in conjunction with progression. But both numbers
are symbolical of the world. You may say, therefore, that Solon is analogous to
the cause of permanency; but the former Critias, to the cause which supplies
progression ; and the present Critias to the cause which converts and conjoins
things which have proceeded, to their causes. And the first of these, indeed,
preserves the relation ofa ruling and leading cause ; the second, of the cause which
comes into contact with mundane fabrication in a liberated manner; and the
third, of that which now pays attention to the universe, and governs the mundane
war.

“ When, therefore, that solemnity was celebrated among us, which is
known by the name of Cureotis Apaturiorum, nothing was omitted which

* Instead of ovyxwovpevas ταῖς εἰκονων agavess περιοδοις, it is necessary to read, σνγκινουμενας ras

ecewwwr, κι Δ.

Tim. Plat. Vou. J. K

74 PROCLUS ON THE {noox 1.

boys during that festivity are accustomed to perform. For when our
parents had set before us the rewards proposed for the contest of singing
verses, both a multitude of verses of many poets were recited, and many
of us especially sung the poems of Solon, because they were at that time

enurely new.”

The Apaturia was a festival sacred to Bacchus, on account of the duel between
Melanthus and Xanthus the Bootian, and the victory of Melanthus through
deception ; the Bavotians and Athenians waging war with each other for
CEnoe. But this festival was celebrated for three days; of which the first day
was called avazcuris, because many sacrifices were performed in tt ; and the victims
were called avaccuuara, because they were drawn upward, and sacrificed. The second
day was called dogma; for on this day there were splendid banquets and much
feasting. But the third day was called κουρεώτις 3 fur on tis day boys, three or
four years old, were enrolled in their tribes. On this day also, such boys as were
more sagacious than the rest, sung certain poems, and those were victorious who
retained the greater number of them in their memory, They sang, however, the
poems of the ancients. Bat with respect to the tribes, it must be observed, that
after Jon there were four families, but from Clisthenes ten, and that after these,
each twelve of the families was divided into three: the tribes were arranged into
the same family and company, as being allied to each other: the cnrolment of the
boys was into these tribes; and this day, as we have before observed, was called
Cureotis, from the boys that were enrolled. And such is the information derived
from history.

Again, however, let us direct our attention to things, and behold these in the
particulars that have been narrated, as in images. “The festival, therefore, of the
Apaturia, which had for its preteat the victory of the Athenians, pertains to the
hypothesis according to which the Athenians conquered [the Atlantics}, and all
intellectual subdue material natures. Deception, likewise, is adapted to mundane
forms, Which separate themselves from impartble and inumaterial principles, and
become apparent, instead of truly-existing beings. But the enrolment of the
boys, imitates the arrangements of partial souls into their proper allotments, and
their descents into different) generations. The festival Is an imitation of the
eternal hilarity in the world: for if it is filled with Gods, it celebrates a perpetual
festival. But the contests of rhapsody, are analogous to the contests which souls
sustain, weaving their own ΠΡ together with the universe. And the rhapsody

BOOK 1. ΤΙΝῸΣ PLATO. 75

uself, resembles the above-mentioned woven life of the universe. For this has an
imitation of intellectual forms, in the same manner as the contests of rhapsody
have of heroic actions and manners, possessing together with an harmonious
conjunction, a connected series. The many poems of many poets, adumbrate the
many natures, and many circum-mundane productive powers,’ and, in short, the
division of physical imitations, But the new poems, are images of forms which
are perpetually flourishing, always perfect and prolific, and able to operate efhiea-
ciously on other things. And thus much concerning these particulars.

Mention, however, is made of the poems of Solon, not as of a poct in the popu-
lar sense of the word, but as of one who mingled philosophy with poetry. For of
mundane works likewise, and whole productions, a royal intellect is the leader.
And the praise is related as being mentioned to another person, i.e. to Amynan-
der, because, as we learn in the Phadrus, that which judges diflers from that
which makes and generates. Referring, however, all that has been said, to the
universe, we may infer as from images, that partial souls, partial natures, and
partible forms, and of these, those especially that are always new and efficacious,
contribute to the mundase war. But all these are connected together by the
Gods, who are the inspective guardians of fabrication, and are co-arranged with
one world, one harmony, and one kindred life.

ee

ut then one of our tribe, whether he was willing to gratify Critias,
or whether it was his real opinion, affirmed that Solon appeared to him
to be most wise in other concerns, and in things respecting poetry, the
most ingenuous and free of all poets. Upon hearing this, the old man
(for I very well remember) was vehemently delighted ; and said, laughing
—If Solon, O Amynander, had not engaged in poetry as a casual affair,
but had made it as others do a serious employment ; and if through sedi-
tions and other fluctuations of the state in which he found his country
involved, he had not been compelled to neglect the completion of the
history which he brought from Egypt, I do not think that cither [Hesiod
or Homer, or any other poet, would have acquired greater glory and
renown.” ° /

Here again, the lovers of diction may indicate to their admirers, that Plato

* The word Aoyovs is, | conceive, omitted in the original in this place.

78 PROCLUS ON THE . [βΒοοκ 1.

cautiously praises the poetry of Solon, since he represents the praise as bestowed
by a private individual, and for the sake of others, and not as given by one who
spoke conformably to intellect and reason. For Plato, if any one, was a most
excellent judge of pocts, as Longinus also admits. Heraclides Ponticus there-
fore says, that Cheerilus and Antimachus being at that time most renowned,
Plato preferred the poems of the latter to those of the former, and that he per-
suaded Heraclides at Colophon, to collect the poems of Antimachus. Tn vain,
therefore, is it futilely observed by Callimachus and Duris, that Plato was nota
sufficient judge of poets. Hence, what is here said manifests the judgment of the
philosopher, and it may be considered in a more historical point of view. The
investigator, however, of things, will think it requisite to show how all the
causes of the orderly distribution of the universe, and also the causes that are
connective of contrariety, are extended to one principle, and how the last
adhere through media to the first of things. For thus those who receive the
narration of the ancient Critias, are extended to him, but he looks to Solon.
And he, indeed, admires the poctic power of Solon ; but they, through Critias as
a medium, are referred to the poetry of Solon. For gratifying the former [1. e.
Critias], they praise the poctry of the latter. But what is it that Critias says
respecting Solon? That he was subordinate to divinely-inspired pocts, from
these two causes; because he engaged in poetry as a casual affair; and because
when he came from Egypt, he found the city of the Athenians in a state of sedi-
tion, and that he was not able, his country being involved in difficulties, to com-
plete the history, which he brought from thence hither. What the history there-
fore was, he informs us as he proceeds.

From these things, however, as images, Plato manifests, that what is primanly
demiurgic, and every thing effective, have other primary energies ; but that their
secondary energy is the production of secondary things. Likewise, that the con-
fused, disorderly, and unstable nature of matter, frequently does not receive
ornament from more divine causes, but subsists without symmetry’ to the gift
which proceeds from them. Hence, second and third powers are unfolded into
light, which proximately adorn its formless nature. Solon, therefore, being most
ingenuous, and imitating exempt causes, did not deliver through poetry the
Atlantic war. But Critias, and those posterior to him, transmit the account of
this war to others, imitating second and third causes, who produce the variety of

‘ For ἀλλα ovpperpws in this place, it is necessary to read, αλλ᾽ aovpperpes.

200K 1.) TIMEUS OF PLATO. 77

effective principles, and the orderly distribution of things, which is harmonized
from contraries into a visible subsistence. Moreover, the assertion that Solon
was the wisest of the seven wise men, exhibits his analogy to the first principles.
And his being most free, adumbrates the power which is exempt, and established
in itself, and which fills all things in a hberated manner. A thing of this kind
likewise concurs with the wise man, as being immaterial, without a master, and
of itself. The ancient Critias, also, being said to be old, indicates a cause which
is intellectual, and remote from generation. For “ wisdom,” says Plato, “ and true
opinions are most desirable things to himwho has arrived at old age.” Again, the
assertion of Critias, that he very well remembers, exhibits to our view the salvation
of eternal productive powers, and the stable energy of secondary causes, about
such as are first. But Solon engaging in poetry asa casual affair, represents to us
that productions into secondary natures, have only a secondary rank among first
causes. For their first energies are intellectual, according to which they are united to
the beings prior to themselces.

If, however, some one omiiting the survey of things, should consider through
what cause Plato introduced’ these particulars, according to their apparent’
meaning, he will very properly find that they contributed to the thing proposed.
For the design of Plato was to narrate the Atlantic war. But it was requisite
that the messenger of this history should neither deceive nor be deceived.
Hence also, Solon is said to have been most wise, and intimately acquainted
with those about Critias. For as a wise man, he was not déceived, and as being
an intimate acquaintance, he would not deceive. It was likewise requisite, that
the receiver of this history should neither have been aged, in order that the narra-
tion may appear to be ancient, nor yet so young, as to be forgetful. Hence, Cri-
tias is supposed to have been a youth, but sufficiently able to remember, and in
consequence of this, to have contended with others in rhapsody, in which much
memory is necessary.

Farther still, it was requisite, that the ancient Critias should not commit such-
like narrations to very young men, lest they should appear to them to be con-
temptible. Ience, it is very properly said, that some one of the tribes, by enquiry
of Solon, heard the history. But it was requisite that he also should, in a certain
respect, have been familiar with Solon, in order that the old man might oppor-
tunely relate all the history to him. Hence, likewise, the praises of the poetry of

* For παρεισκεκληκεν read παρεισκνκλ yeer.

78 PROCLUS ON THE [Boox 1.

Solon precede the history 5 the praise being given by Amynander in order to gra-
tify Critias. And thus much concerning the disposition of what is said in the
text.

That Solon, however, went to Egypt, not only for the purpose of obtaining
the Atlantic history, but likewise that the Athenians, during his absence, obeyed
his laws, which he had bound them by an oath not to violate, is evident. Por
during this time, also, he associated with Crarsus, and sailed to Egypt; but on his
return, he became master of the city, which was ina tumultuous condition through
the Pisistratida. And thus much we have derived from history. Origen, how-
ever, doubts how Plato calls Solon most free: for this is not an encomium adapt
ed toa poet. And he dissolves the doubt by saying, that he is so called, either
because he spent his money (ideral/y, or because he used the greatest freedom of
speceh; and that on this account he was free, without any timidity in his poetical
compositions. Or he was 50 denominated, as being in lis poetry remiss and un-
compelled. But Tamblichus says, that no one of these solutions is true, but that
through this appellation, the Uderated condition of the intellect of Solon, the τις
servile nature of his virtue, and that which was venerable in his character, and
which transcended all other things, are signified. The same interpreter also says,
that the daughter of Critias manifests a generative progression from causes, perfect,
and rejoicing inits progeny. But the remembering well, indicates the salvation of
effective principles in the world. Why, therefore, was Solon anxious to deliver
the Atlantic war in verse?) Because, says he, all natural works and the mundane
contrariety subsist through imitation, Por this is analogous to its effective and
primary Causes; just as Critias is analogous to proximate and secondary causes.
But why was he prevented by sedition? Because material motions and material
tumult become an impediment, as we have before observed, to the productive

powers of mundane Causes.

“Tn consequence of this, Amynander enquired of Critias what that
history was. ‘To which he answered, that it was concerning an athair,
which ought most justly to be the greatest and most renowned which this
city ever accomplished ; though through length of time, and the destrac-
tion of those by whom it was undertaken, the fame of its execution has
not reached the present age.”

Longinus says, that something is wanting here to render the sense complete

ROOK 1. TIMEUS OF PLATO. 79

For the word considered is wanting to the words most justly to he, because these
are required in what follows, but not the word overs, being. Porphyry, however,
says, that Longinus did not perceive, that, in consequence of the undertaking
being the greatest, but not yet celebrated, Plato adds, “ ought most justly to be
most renowned.” But we, directing our attention to things, say, that Plato calls it
the greatest undertaking, as bringing with it an image of all contrariety, extending
itself every where. And that he denominates it most renowned, as contributing to
the visible fabrication of things. For thus, also, the works of nature are called by

Orpheus renowned.

Boundless eternity, and nature’s works Ἧ
Renown'd, remain.

“Relate this affair, O Critias, says Amynander, from the beginning,
and inform us what that transaction was, how it was accomplished, and
from whom Solon having heard it, narrated it asa fact.’

Joe. Relate what this admirable deed was, how, or after what manner. it
was performed, how it became Known to, and by whom being preserved, it reach-
ed the hearing of Solon. Plato appears, through this, to investigate the whole
forin of contraricty, how it was effected, or may be known, and from what causes,
tous invisible, itis suspended, Before, therefore, he recurred through relatives
to the narration of Solon; but now he investigates the superior histories of it, or,
that ITmay speak clearer, the principles of the fabrication of this contrariety. And
by directing your attention to this narration, you may survey, as in images, through
certain symbols, all the principles of this fabrication, as far as to the first causes
of it.

“ There is, then, says he, a certain region of M.gypt, called Delta, about
the summit of which the streams of the Nile are divided, and i in which
there is a province called Saitical.”

In the first place, itis worth while to observe how the narration always delivers

things comprehended, proceeding from such as are more comprehensive ; from

Egypt, indeed, the river, from this Delta, from this the Saitic province, and from
this Sais, sacred to Minerva. In the next place, having observed this, it will be

80 PROCLUS ON THE {poo τ.

proper to ascend through the analogy of these things, to the first and most com-
prehensive causes of fabrication. For you may perceive this supernally compre-
hended by more total causes, and proceeding as far as to the last of things ; com-
prehending causes every where preceding such as are comprehended ; the more
total, such as are more partial; and the impartible fabrication, that which is parti
ble, and is denominated recent ; to which also the present words refer the father
of the narration. And this fabrication, indeed, is filled from these causes, and
particularly participates of the undefiled power of Minerva. For, in short, since
we refer this war, for the sake of which the whole narration 15 excited, to the
mundane contrariety, it will be well, preceeding in the same way, to assimilate
all the knowledge of the Egyptian priests to the former [or impartible] fabrica-
tion, which stably comprehends the productive powers contained in the universe 5
but the history of Solon, which is always recent, and placed in mutations, to the
more novcl fabrication, and which administers the all-various circulations of mun-
dane natures. We shall also be benefited by perceiving how, in images, the dif-
ference between human and divine fabrications becomes apparent; and how, i
these, Solon, indeed, calls on the priest to the developement of ancient transac-
tions, but the priest knows both such events as are reckoned ancient by the
Greeks, and prior to these, such as are truly ancient. For thus also, in’ divine
fabrications, that which is recent or junior, is converted to that which Is more an-
cient, and is perfected by it; but the latter antecedently Comprehends the causes
of the former, and is established above it, by still greater and more perfect intel-
Jectual perceptions and powers, And thus much concerning the whole of the
text.

It is necessary, however, to discuss every particular. With respect to Egypt,
therefore, some call it an image of matter; others of the whole earth, as being
divided analogously to it; and others of the intelligible, and the intelligible es-
sence. But we say, that in what is here asserted, it is assimilated τὸ the whole
invisible order, which is the principle of visible natures. With respect to Delta
also, itis produced from the Nile, being divided about the Saitic province, so as
to make its egress from one right line to the right and left, and to the sea, the
sea forming the hypothenuse of the triangle, which Plato calls the Saitic province 5
indicating, in what he here says, that it is that about which the stream of the Nile
is divided. It is, however, analogous to the one vivific fountain of all divine life,
and, in visible natures, to the celestial triangle which is connective of all generation,
heing proximate to the ram, which the Egyptians particularly honor, on account

BOOK 1.} TIMLUS OF PLATO. 81

of Ammon having the face of a ram, and also because the ram is the principle of
gencration, and is moved with the greatest celerity, as being among the constellations
established about the equinoctial. The mention, therefore, of Delta is here very
appropriate τ since the triangle, as we shall learn in what follows, is the principle
of the hypostasis of the mundane elements. But the Nile is to be arranged ana-
lozous to the zodiac, as being situated under it, having an inclination similar to
it, and imitating, through its divisions, the obliquity of it, and its division about
the equinoctial points, The Nile also ts a symbol of the life which is poured on the
whole world. Moreover, the two sides of the Nile, which ran into the sea from the
summit fof Delta], may be, ina certain respect, assimilated to the two co-ordina-
tions, Which proceed from one root as far as to generation, and of which genera-
tion is the recipient. So that a triangle is produced from them and their common
receptacle, into which they conjointly flow. But the Saitic province, which forms
agreat part of Delta, participates also of a great portion of the celestial regions.
Sais, therefore, must be sacerdotally referred to the constellation called the Bear,
not becanse it is situated under it, nor on account of its coldness, but as partici-
pating of a certain peculiar ettlux of the God [who presides over that constellation].
Hence likewise Sais is not shaken by earthquakes, in consequence of receiving a
firm establishment on account of the place about the pole.

“ Of this provinee, the greatest city is Sais, from which also king Ama-
sis derived his origin. The city has a presiding divinity, whose name is,
in the Egyptian tongue, Neith, but in the Greek Athena, or Minerva.
The inhabitants of this city were very friendly to the Athenians, to whom
also they said they were after a certain manner allied.”

The word νομὸς, or province, derived its appellation from the distribution of
land. For thus the Egyptians called divisions of the great parts of Egypt. But
from the city the whole province was denominated Saitic, just as Sebennytic is
denominated from Sebennetus, and Canobic from Canobus. Amasis, however, is
now assumed analogous to Solon. For he paid attention to wisdom and justice
beyond all the {other Egyptian) kings. He is therefore conjoined with Solon,
and has the same relation to him, which the city has to Athens ; in order that we
may survey the cities and the men adomed by the Goddess [Minerva] as from
one monad, and secondary natures always perfected from such as are more per-

Tim. Plat. Vou. I. L

. 82 PROCLUS ON THE [BooK 1.

fect. Callisthenes, however, and Phanodemus relate, that the Athenians were
the fathers of the Saite. But Theopompus, on the contrary, says, that they were
acolony of them. The Platonic Atticus says, that Theopompus altered the his-
_ tory through envy. For, according to him, some of the inhabitants of Sais came
to renew their alliance with the Athenians. But Plato only says thus much con-
cerning them, “that the Suite were very friendly to the Athenians, and after a cer-
tain manner allied to them.” \t is possible, however, that he might say this on
account of the tutelar Goddess of the city being the same with the Minerva of the
Athenians.

With respect, however, to this Goddess the guardian of the two cities, itis
requisite to know, that proceeding from intelligible and intellectual causes through
the supercelestial orders, to certain parts of the celestial regions and) terrene dis-
tributions, she is allotted places adapted to herself; not imparting an adventitious
government of herself, but antecedently comprebending the essence and form of
it, and thus possessing this allotment in a manner adapted to herself, “Phat the
government, however, of this Goddess extends supernally as far as to the last
of things, the Greeks manifest by asserting that she was venerated from the head
of Jupiter, But the Egyptians relate, that in the adytum of the Goddess there
Was this inscription, Zam the things that are, that will be, and that have been.
No one has ever laid open the garment by which Tam concealed. The fruit which I
brought forth was the sun. Che Goddess, therefore, being demiurgic, and at the
same time apparent and unapparent, has an allotinent in the heavens, and tllu-
minates generation with forms. Lor of the signs of the sudiac, the ram ts
ascribed to the Goddess, and the equinoctial circle itself, where especially a power
motive of the universe is established. She is very properly, therefore, called by
Plato a lover of wisdom, and a lover of war, and he now denominates her the
leader of these allotments in the earth. In the tirst place, Iykewise, he honours
the Goddess in the language of his country. For the Athenians dcnominate the
tutelar Goddess of the city cIrchevetes, or the leader, celebrating her surname,
and her presiding power. Jn the next place, he indicates the uniform: pre-
established comprehension in herself, of the allotments which are governed by
her. And besides this he clearly represents to us, that it is possible for the same

* The former part of this inscription is to be found in Plutarch’s treatise on Isis and Osiris; but
the latter part of it, viz. the fruit which 1 brough! forth was the sun, is only to be found in these

Commentaries of Proclus. The original of this part is, ov eyw καρπὸν erexoy ἡλίὸς Eyevero.

βοοκ 1.) ᾿ TIMGEUS OF PLATO. 83

things to be signitied through many words, since words are images of the things
signified by them. For many statues may be formed of one thing froin different
materials; so that the Ezyptians preserve the analogous,” because they call the
Goddess by a name which has the same signification with that of the Greeks.
Nor is it at all wonderful that both should denominate her rightly, in consequence
of establishing the name according to one science. If, therefore, there is one
tutelar Goddess of the two cities Sais and Athens, the inhabitants of Sais are
very properly said to be lovers of the Athenians, as being ina certain respect
allied to them: for the aflinity is not wholly perfect. For some may participate
more and others less of the same providence. And some may participate of one,
but others of another power contained in the Goddess. Jur again, it ts likewise
necessary to hnow this, that a variation is produced in different nations from the places
which they severally inhabit, from the temperature of the air, from habitude to the
heavens, and sll more partially from spermatic productive powers, But you may say,
that they especially differ according to the gregal government of the Gods, and the
diversities of the tutelar powers, from which you will find a difference in colour, figure,
voice, and motion, in different places. So that those who migrate into other countries

Srequently chanse, by dielling in those countries, their colour and voice; just as

plants are changed together with the quality of the region, when they are trans-
planted ina foreign land,

* Tn this country Solon, on his arrival thither, was, as he himself
relates, very honourably received. And on his inquiring about ancient
affairs of those priests who possessed a knowledge of such particulars
superior to others, he perceived that neither himself, nor any one of the
Grecks (as he himself declared), had any knowledge of things of this

kind.”

Solon, on account of his political wisdom, and on account of the dignity and
worth of his city, justly appeared to be deserving of honor to the priests of Sais.
But he found, with respect to memory and history, among the Greeks, that
neither himself, nor any other Grecian, had any knowledge of very ancient
transactions. The remembrance, however, of such transactions, contributes
indeed to political virtue, and also contributes to the theory of the mundane

* For &weovew ἀπολογον in this place, I read σωδσυσιν avadoyor.

84 PROCLUS ON THE [Book 1.

periods, which Solon being desirous to know, and interrogating for this purpose
the priests, found that he was perfectly deficient in knowledge of this kind.
These things, likewise, are symbols of divine concerns. For a certain fabrication
or workmanship, is called by theologists recent. But this 15. particularly
honoured [as being suspended): from the father of wholes, and from the intelligi-
ble Gods, with whom there are intellectual perceptions exempt from other things,
and which have more eternal natures for their objects. But those intellectual
perceptions are more partial and less excellent, which are in secondary natures.
And farther still, there is such a difference in demiurgic principles, that some of
them are comprehensive of more total, but others of more partial forms. And
some of them precede in dignity and power, but others are recent as with refe-
rence to them, and possess a subordinate power.

“* Hence, when he once desired to excite them to the relation of pris-
tine transactions, he for this purpose began to discourse about those most
ancient events which formerly happened among us. 1 mean the tradi-
tions concerning the first Phoroneus and Niobe ; and after the deluge, of
Deucalion and Pyrrha (as described by the mythologists), together with
their posterity ; at the same time paying a proper attention to the diffe-
rent ages in which these events are said to have taken place.”

Ofsuch a nature as this are all divine causes : for they call forth more divine
powers, and through this evocation, are filled from them with more divine and
total intellections ; such as is now also effected by Solon. For extending to the
Egyptian priests the most ancient transactions of the Greeks, he ina certain
respect leads them to the narration of their antiyuities ; of which the Egyptians
participate in a remarkable degree, as they survey without impediment the celestial
bodies, through the purity of the air, and preserve ancient memorials, in consequcnce of
not being destroyed ether by water or fire. But the Assyrians, says Iamblichus, have
not only preserved the memorials of seven and twenty myriads of years, as LHipparchus
says they have, but likexcise of the whole apocatastases and periods of the seven rulers of
the world, So that this being admitted, there is stll less reason to compare with
these memorials the much-celebrated archwology of the Greeks > from which

" The words ws εξηρτημενὴ appear to me to be wanting in this place in the original.

ἢ
Ἷ
I
Ϊ

KOUK 4.) TIMAUS OF PLATO. 85

likewise it is evident, that the present narration does not look to that which is
small, but to the whole and the universe. :

Farther still, the archwology of the Greeks is different with different [Grecian
cities}. For with the Athenians it proceeds as far as to Erichthonius, who was a
native of Athens: but with the Argives, as far as to Phoroneus and Niobe. For
these two are with the Greeks the most ancient. For Argos descended from
Niobe; but from him Tasos and Pelasgos, from whom Argos was denominated
Pelasgic. The particulars, however, respecting Denecalion and Pyrrha, that a
deluge taking place, they were preserved in Parnassus, and how migrating from
thence, they restored the human race, are manifest, and also that antiquity with
the Thessalians is as far as to these. But according to some, the Argolie race
begins from Inachus, but that of the Athenians from Cecrops, each of whom was
prior to Deucalion. Solon, therefore, relating these and such-like particulars,
causes the Egyptian priests to narrate their antiquities. We shall however see,
what one of the ancient priests said respecting the narration of Solon. And these
things, indeed, will be evident through what follows. Solon, however, met at
Sais with a priest called Pateneit ; but at Heliopolis, witha priest called Ochlapi ;
and at Sebennytus, with one whose name was Ethimon, as we learn from the
histories of the Egyptians. And perhaps it was the priest of Sais, who says as
follows to Solon :

“ But upon this, one of those more ancient priests exclaimed, O
Solon, Solon, you Grecks are always children, nor is there an aged
Greck among you.”

The Egyptian priest is ancient, in order that while he reproves he may not be
intolerable, and may have a probable reason for teaching about archeology. But
he employs a repetition of the name of Solon, not only as striving beyond measure
in what he is about to say, but also for the purpose of indicating the circulation of
things from the same to the same, which the more total causes of things cene-
rated in the universe, comprehend stably and intellectually, through indelible
knowledge ; to which causes the priest is analogous. IIe accuses, however, the
Greeks as being always children, because they have not acquired the all-various
wisdom of the Egyptians, but bear servile hairs in their soul. Juvenility, there-

fore, indicates their want of wisdom. © Or this privation of wisdom arises from

the frequent destructions of them, so that before they become truly ancient, they

80 PROCLUS ON THE [ΒοοΚ 1,

become again juvenile through destruction. Or it is because ancient deeds are
not preserved by them ; but their knowledge ts always confined to present events,
and such as sense apprehends. But with the Egyptians, past transactions are
always present through memory, as if they were recent. And the remembrance
is through history. But the history is fiom pillars, in which things paradoxical
and worthy of admiration, whether in actions or inventions, are inscribed. Why,
however, it may be said, does this priest accuse the Greeks with such sey erity ?
For what is there admirable in his narration, since, asthe noble Heraclitus says,
avery learned knowledge of past transactions does not produce intellect? But
if that which Eudoxus says is true, that the Egyptians calla month a year,
the enumeration of many of these vears, will not be attended with any thing won-
derful. Tt was idle, therefore, in the Egyptian priest to think highly of himself for
the knowledge of transactions in these. Or, though, as Aristotle Says, it ts IMposst-
ble that memory and sense should be effective of science, yet at the same time it must be
admitted, that they contribute to the reminiscence of wholes. Por by relating in many
things many similar ciretinstances, we produce one form of them, and finding
frequently from history concordant apocatastases of many things, we recur to the
one cause of them. Por thus the observations of the aflections of the air were
framed by Calippus, and the Knowledge from astrology of the celestial motions.
And thus much inanswer to the doubt.

Again, however, let us recur to the theory of wholes, and there survey the junior
Sobrication, held together by Minerva, and titled fiom more ancient and primoge-
nial causes. For from: thence this fabrication possessing stability. proceeds,’ on
account of an exempt cause, and contributes to the mundane contrariety. Por
every thing in the demiureie progression which is distributed inte parts and mal-
tiphied, proceeds on account of that principle, As, therefore, there are causes in
the world, some of which are eflective of the regencration of things, bat others are
guardians of the coherence of productive powers, the priest, indeed, must be
assumed as analogous to these latter causes, but: Solon to the former, Tlence,
the one exhibits a transcendent remembrance of antiquity, but the other is said to
have related various mutations, eencrations, and corruptions. It hKewise appears
to me, that the arrangement of the elder prior to the younger person, is assumed
ina way adapted to the orderly distribution of the universe. For in the fabrica-
tion of Jupiter, they have this order with reference to each other ; Just as the

‘ ; :
Tustead of Wpus τὸ ἐφζφηρημένον here, I read, καὶ TPOKLAL διὰ ro «ςηρημέενον αἰΤιο}.

ὑσιωυττε Ble ee σνεατασος στ

BOOK 1. TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 87

Klean guest {in Plato] says, that those who live in the Saturnian period, proceed
from being older to being younger; but those that live in the period of Jupiter,
proceed ina contrary direction, And _ in this dialogue, Timieus says, respecting
the soul, that the Demiurgus produced it more ancient than the body, and on this
account constituted it of amore principal nature. Now, therefore, the priest, who
is the guardian of divine institutions, excels through antiquity, though that which is
Junior proceeds from a higher order; just as Solon comes from a city, which per-
tains ina greater degree to Minerva. In mundane works, however, that which
is more ancient possesses a great dignity.

“To whom the priest :-—Because all your souls are juvenile ; neither
containing any ancient opinion derived from remote tradition, nor any
discipline hoary from its existence in former periods of time.”

Sucenility of soul, in what is here said, is analogous to renovation of life, and to
more partial causes; but remote tradition, to stable intelligence, and to more an-
cient principles. And hoary discipline is analogous to the comprehension, which
is united and always the same, of the nature and composition of all that the world
contains; through which, indeed, the first and most divine of mundane natures
comprehend totally and exemptly the causes of all generated beings, and eternal-
ly and antecedently contain in themselves temporal natures ; but comprehend
things more proximate to the universe partially and subordinately, as falling short
of the unical intelligence of wholes. Hence to some of the Gods hoariness is
adapted, but to others juvenility. For hoariness is a symbol of intelligence and
an undefiled life, and which is remote from generation; but juvenility of more
partial knowledge, and which now comes into contact with generated natures.

** But the reason of this is the multitude and variety of destructions of
the human race, which formerly have been, and. again will be: the great-

est of these, indeed, arising from fire and water ; but the lesser from ten
thousand other contingencies.”

In what is here said, an inquiry is made, why the Greeks are always children,
but there is no discipline with them hoary from its existence in former periods of
time? Or, if you wish to survey the paradigms of these things, the enquiry is,

88 PROCLUS ON THE {Book 1.

through what cause the junior fabrication presides over variety, generated natures
always rising into existence, and such as are ancient becoming renovated? Be-
fore, however, he discovers the cause of such-like doubts, he first discusses the
periods in the universe, and pots out the variety ef them; of which the first
principles of the Gods, indeed, have an antecedent Knowledge, stably and uni-
tedly ; but the second principles partially, and in such a way as to come into
contact with the nature of the things which they govern; for this it is always to
know what is present. But to retain in the memory things that are absent, is
analogous to the perception of wholes separately and stably. Phere are, there-
fore, certain various periods of things in the world ; but it must be admitted, that
there is always generation and always corruption in the universe. For that which
is sensible is rising into existence, and tending to corruption, but never (rudy is.
This generation, however, and destruction, must he surveyed im one way in the
heavens, and in another in material natures. Por, in the former, a mutation of
fizures, and the motion of perpetually generated: bodies, pre-exist. But) genera-
tion, being governed through the mutations of these bodies, evolves its own circle,
In this cirele, however, different Clements have dominion at different times, And
wholes, indecd, always preserve the same and a similar order according to na-
ture; but the different parts of these wholes subsist at different times, either con.
formably to nature, or preternaturally, ina becoming manner, Por ὁ either the
wholes and the parts always subsist according to nature; or both, on a certain
time, have a preternatural subsistence; or the one has a preternatural, but the
other a natural subsistence, and this ina twofold respect. If, therefore, all things
[perpetually] existed according to nature, the variecy of generation would be dis-
sipated, perpetual natures would be the extremities of beings, and the first es-
sences would be the last of all things. But if all things were disposed preternatu-
rally, there would be nothing stable; from which an invariable sameness of sub-
sistence might be present with mutable natures; nor would the circle of genera-
tion be preserved. And it is impossible that wholes should have a preternatural,
but parts a natural, subsistence ; for parts follow wholes, and wholes are compre-
hensive of parts. Hence it is impossible that the former should, at a certain time,
exist preternaturally, but the latter remain in a condition conformable to nature.
For neither is it possible, when the whole of our animal nature is moved, and its
order destroyed, that any one of its parts should still exist according to nature.

* Tap is omitted here in the original,

arene ESD ANEURIN κα σκάρος ον «μα:

satan esr

BOOK 1.] TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 89

It remains, therefore, that wholes being established in a natural subsistence, the
parts at one time following the wholes, are disposed conformably to nature, but at
another time have a preternatural tendency. But as of partial animals, each is
indeed always generated and corrupted, on account of the efflux of them in the
universe; but one is more generated, and another is more corrupted than another,
and one is more adapted to existence, but another to corruption; thus also the
several parts of the earth, receiving both a natural and preternatural subsistence,
some of the parts are more able to subsist conformably to nature, but others are
more adapted to sustain deviations into a preternatural condition of being ; this,
indeed, on account of a different temperament, but afterwards on account of the
position being different of diferent parts, and in the next place, on account of ha-
bitude to the heavens. For different parts of the earth are adapted to different
parts of the heavens, though they are preserved by other figures [or configurations}
And in addition to all that has been said, on account of the power of the inspec-
tive Gods, and of the divinities who preside over climates, and who are allotted
different peculiarities ; some rejcicing more in motion, but others in permanency,
seme in sameness, but others in difference; abundant corruptions likewise of par-
tial natures being produced in different places; the forms or species of the uni-
verse have a never-failing subsistence. For man is always, the earth is always,
and each of the clements always is. For since corruption and generation pro-
ceed from the celestial figures; but these are imitations of divine intellections,
and the intellections are suspended from intellectual forms, but from these stabi-
lity is derived ;—this being the case, continuity is produced in mundane forms,
and the visible figures are preservative of species, but corruptive of parts, so as to
cause things which are generated in time, to be also dissolved in time, according
to a circular progression. For the universe does not envy salvation to such things
as are able to exist in conjunction with it; but that which is incapable of being
administered together with the universe, is not able to abide in it. The law of
Jupiter, however, expels ' from essence every thing of this kind as disgraceful,
For it is perfectly impossible that what is disgraceful should remain in the uni-
verse. But that whichis deprived of order in the universe is disgraceful. We
have shown therefore why * abundant and partial corruptions are produced in
different places of the earth,

* For εἐμβαλλει here, it is necessary to read εκβαλλει.
* For tore in this place, read δια τι.

Tim. Plat. Vouk 0. M

90 PR@CLUS ON THE [βοοκ 1.

In the next place it must be shown why the greatest of destructions are
through the predominance of fire and water, and not through that of the other
elements. Fire, therefore, has an efficacious and productive order in the elements,
is sufficiently able to proceed through all other things, and is naturally adapted
to divide them. But water, is indeed moved with greater facility than earth, yet
is more difficultly passive than air. Aud by its facility of motion, indeed, it is able
to operate ; but through being passive with difficulty, it is not affected by violence,
nor becomes imbecile when dissipated, like air; so that it reasonably follows, that
violent, and the greatest destructions are effected by deluges and conflagrations.
You may also say, that the remaining two elements are more adapted to us.
For we are pedestrious, and allied to earth; and as we are on all sides compre-
hended by air, in which we live, and which we respire, itis evident that our bodies
are of a kindred nature with it. [fence these elements, as being more alhed
to, are less destructive of us; but the others, which are contrary to these, bring.
with them more violent destructions. © Farther sull, according to another mode of
survey also, these clements earth and air, together with suflering themselves, and
sufleting prior to us, appear to operate on us. For air when it becomes putrid,
produces pestilence ; and earth when divulsed, abundant absorptions, But) pes-
tilence is a passion of air, and chasms and earthquakes are passions of earth,
Fire, however, and water are able to operate on us, without being previously af
fected themselves ; the former by permeating, but the latter by external impulsion,
Hence they are capable of producing more extended destructions, as being more
vigorous and powerful than the other elements, in consequence of not corrupting
through being themselves distempered, Deluges, therefore, and contlagrations
are the greatest destructions. But famine and pestilence, earthquakes and wars,
and other such-like partial calamities, may be produced from other causes. And
of all these, the effective cause indeed is the order of the universe, and prior to
this, the junior fabrication, which always makes new effects, and at different times
produces the generation of different things. For this is asserted by the fables of the
Greeks, and is indicated by the tradition of the Egyptians, which mystically says of the
sun, that he assumes different forms in the signs of the zodiac. Itis not, therefore,
atall wonderfal, ifthough there are many destructions, and inanany places, yet man
and every form always exist, through the tmmutable progression of divine forms.
For through these, the productive principles in’ the universe possess an invariable

* See this explained further on, in one of the notes on the 4th book;

BOOK 1. TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 91

sameness of subsistence, because every thing which is generated from an immove-
able cause, is always suspended from its cause.

“ For the relation subsisting among you, that Phaeton the offspring of
the Sun, on a certain time attempting to drive the chariot of his father,
and not being able to keep the track observed by his parent, burnt up
the natures belonging to the earth, and perished himself blasted by
thunder, is indeed said to have. the form of a fable.”

That the first principles of beings comprehend! indeed things which are
moved, stably, things multiplied, unitedly, partial natures, totally, and such as
are divided according to time, eternally, is evident. And it is likewise well
known, that theologists refer the causes of periods, and of the psychical ascents
and descents, and of all multiplied and divided life, to the principles that are
proximately established above the world. Hence it appears to me, that what is
now said, refers the mythology about Phaeton to the Greeks, and the knowledge
of Solon, For all such-like corruptions and generations derive their completion
from the junior fabrication, [or the fabrication of the junior, or mundane Gods,]}
from which also the circulation of forms, and the variety of corporeal and psychical
periods, is perfected. As, however, in divine natures, things secondary remaining,
perfection is imparted to them from such as are first; thus also, the Egyptian pre- .
serving what is related by the Greeks, teaches Solon from this concerning things
of which he had a knowledge prior to Solon. What therefore does this narration
obscurely signify ? That psychical lives, and the nature of bodies, have still multiform
mutations. And over these, indeed, the supermundane powers preside; but they
are connectedly comprehended by the intelligible orders of the Gods. And of
the former, indeed, the apparent meaning of the narration being historically deli-
vered by the Greeks, is a symbol; but of the latter, the priest investigating the real
meaning of the history, and unfolding it into light, to Solon. And thus much
has been said by us for the sake of the whole theory, and in order to show that
the narration is not discordant with the things proposed to be discussed.

The fable respecting Phaeton, however, requires a manifold discussion. For
in the first place, it is necessary to consider it historically; in the second place,
physically; and in the third place, philosophically. Llistory therefore says, that

* For παρέχουσι here, it is necessary to read περιέχουσι.

92 PROCLUS ON THE {noox 1.

Phaeton was the offspring of the Sun, and of Clymene the daughter of Ocean,
and that driving the chariot of his father, he deviated from the proper track. That
Jupiter also fearing for the safety of the universe, destroyed him by thnnder; but
he being blasted by thunder, fell about Eridanus, The fire likewise proceeding
from him burnt every thing that was nourished by the earth: and his sisters, the
Heliades, lamented his fall, And such is the historical account of the fable. Tt
is, however, necessary to adinit thata conflagration took place; for the whole nar-
ration is introduced for the sake of this; and, also, that the cause of it is neither an
impossibility, nor a certain thing which may easily happen. But at will be im-
possible if some one fancies that the Sunat one time drives his own chariot, and
at another time being changed ceases to drive it, and) commits his proper em-
ployment to another. And ait will be among the number of things which may be
easily accomplished, if itis supposed that this Phacton wasa comet, which being
dissolved produced an intolerable dryness trom: vehement heat. Por this sup.
position is generally adopted. Porphyry therefore says, that certain signs may be
assumed from the motion of comets. For when this motion ts towards the southern
parts, it ts indicative of tempests, towards the north, of dryness from excessive
heat, towards the east, of pestilence, and towards the west, of fertility. The dis-
appearance likewise of the comet, is said τὸ be the destruction by thunder.
If, however, it be requisite to dissolve the fable ina more physical way, it is
better to adopt the explanation of our associate: Dommninus, that sometimes so
great a quantity of dry exhalation is collected together, as to be easily enkindled
by the solar heat. But this being enkindled, itis not at all wonderful, that it
should burn all that part of the earth which is situated under it, and produce
such a conflagration as that of which the fable speaks. In consequence, therefore,
of the inflammation being produced by the San, the authors of fables were
induced to call Phaeton the offspring of the Sun; denominating this offspring
amale, on account of the efheacy of the power of fire, and because likewise it
is usual to call fire a male, in the same manner as earth a female; and to deno-
minate the one matter, but the other form. But because this exhalation did not
proceed ina path parallel to that of the San, Mythologists assert, that Phaeton
did not drive the chariot conformably to the track of his father. Phe dissolution
of the cloud about the earth, was called by them, the fall! of Phaeton ; and the
extinction of this cloud, the thundering of Jupiter, But the abundance of
rain after the extinction of the cloud, (for this takes place after great conflagras
tions) is the lamentation of the sisters, or the wet exhalations, inasmuch as

ΠΡ manana

BOOK 1.) TIM.EUS OF PLATO. : 93

those that weep, pour forth moisture. And the exhalations, both the dry
and the wet, have one cause, the Sun. But to the latter the female pertains, and
to the former the male, These explanations, therefore, are more physical.

It is however possible, that the fable may indicate something more sublime;
that partial souls proceed indeed from the father of wholes, but are disseminated
about the mundane Gods, in order that they may not only be intellectual, come
into contact with intelligibies, and recede from bodies, but also that they may
have a mundane hypostasis. As, therefore, divine and demoniacal souls are
arranged under secondary leaders ; some indeed under the divinity of the Earth,
others under the Moon, and others under the Sun; some, under the government
of Jupiter, but others under that of Mars; that which is disseminated being of
divine origin, every where receives something from the nature of that in which it
is sown: just as things sown in the earth, receive something from the earth; but
those sown in an animal, receive something from the nature of the animal: so that
of offspring, some express the peculiarity of places, but others the similitude of
the mother, Tlence also, sonls that are disseminated about their kindred stars,
receive a certain peculiarity of life, from their leaders; so that each is not only
soul, but a soul of a certain kind, such for instance as Martial, or Jovian, or
Lunar. For whether the God is of an immutable characteristic, or is demiurgic,
or vivific, a certain representation of the peculiarity of the allotted deity accedes
to' the souls that are arranged under it. And why is this wonderful, since the
peculiarity of presiding Gods extends as far as to herbs and stones? And there
is a stone, and also a herb suspended from the solar power, whether you are
willing to call them heliotropes, or by any other name. A similar reasoning
likewise must be extended to the other Gods,

Of these souls therefore, those indeed that are undefiled, remain always
suspended from the Gods to whom they are allied, and govern the universe in
conjunction with them. But others descend, yet are not filled with genesiurgic
vice [or the depravity which is offspring of the realms of generation]. And others
receive a certain defilement from the subjects of their government. Vor this is
the last form of life. The first of these souls, therefore, are truly sons of the Gods,
as not proceeding out of their fathers, being, as it were, fashioned by and remain-
ing within them, running before the Gods, and having the order of guards or
attendants. The souls that have the middle rank, are indeed called sons of the

* For νπὸ rus vrorerayperas αὐτῳ Yuxas, it is requisite to read ewe ras vworeraypesas, κ᾿ Xr.

PY PROCLUS ON 'THE [noox »

Gods, but receive also a secondary life, and become the sons of Gods and men.
And souls of the third rank, are also sons of the Gods, but are not called genuine
sons, as not preserving the form of their proper God, but verge to matter, and
become oblivious of their genuine fathers. Whether, therefore, the authors of
fables call Tityus the son of Earth, or Phaeton the offspring of the San, or Musiweus
the son of the Moon, they thus denominate them after this manner, and others
difttrently conformably to the before-mentioned causes. With respeet) to other
sons of the Gods, however, we shall elsewhere speak,

But again, Phaeton is indeed the offspring of the Sun, as being of the solar
series. Ifence also he has a solar name. Since however, abiding on high, he
revolved and governed the universe in conjunction with his father, he is said to
have driven the chariot of his father. For the velncle of Phacton belongs to the
solar chariots; since that also is entirely solar form. Bat when he fell into gene-
ration, for he did not rank among the first of souls, he is suid τὸ have been de-
struyed by the thunder of Jupiter. Por thander fi. e. lizhtning} is a symbol of
fabrication, proceeding through all things without contact,’ and vivifying all things;
but is not the cause of the dissolution of the spirit: in which the soul is) carried,
But there are: many transpositions of souls into different polites, and from one
clement into anothers; some being transferred from earth to the sphere of fire; but
others from the sphere of fire to earth ; and some inorder; but others heaped
tovether, and accompanied with mach tumult and disorderly motion, such as
Phacton is said to have suffered. Mor being borne alone on high collectively,
and attracting empyrean vestients, he was moved throneh these ina disorderly
manner, When he proceeded to earth, and produced in certain parts of ita contla-
eration. For souls in descending become invested with many garments acrial or
aquatic; and some have empyrean vestments, ΟἹ these also, some have the
vigorous,’ but others the vehement and the percussive, from: fire. And some
indeed, when they become situated in air, lay aside these garments, and assume
others that are more gross, but others preserve them even as far as to the earth.
I know, therefore, that the Chwronean Platareh relates, that in one of the islands
of Britain, which appears to be sacred, and on this account is considered by the
rulers of it as an asylum, the inhabitants frequently assert, when prodigtuus rains
or thunder and lightning take place, that some one of the more excellent natures

* Por avagws here, itis necessary to read avagys.

2 frstead of ἀμυδρὸν in this place, read axpatore

ποοκ 1. . TiIMAUS OF PLATO. 95

fails, they being accustomed to passions of this kind. But they denominate souls
that are transferred into bodies, and that relinquish a certain generation, more
excellent natures." Tt ust not, however, be denied that such-like circumstances
befall souls descending into bodies, and especially those that ave magnilicent, and
are allotted a more diemoniacal essence, such as the fable obscurely sicnities the
soulof Phacton to have been, But it is not at all wonderful, that descending
souls should be in a greater degree co-passive with those elements which
are analogous to their presiding Gods, and should attract and become invested
with a greater number of such-like elementary garments; so that Saturnian souls
should ina greater degree rejoice in humid and aqueous vestments, and solar
souls in such as are empyrean, each being desirous of obtaining a material and
ponderous body, instead of immaterial garments; the Gods also employing these
as organs, in the same manner as they use material demons, int heir productions
about the earth. Through these souls likewise the Gods produce conflagrations,
or pestilence, or intlict certain other calamities on those who deserve to suffer
them, and employing souls that are allied to them as ministrant to the causes of
the eflects that take place in the heavens, they accomplish that which they effect.
Por it is nothing wonderful, that there should be many causes of the same things,
some producing in one, and others in another way. Phaeton therefore, being borne
along about the earth, and after a certain dwmoniacal manner, burning those
places to which he approached, through the stream of fire (for partial souls
effect many things out of the body, being then the instruments of avenging
or punfying demons); he was lamented by the Heliades, who were certain
solar souls, whence also they were said to be the sisters of Phaeton. But
they lamented him, not as alone commiserating him on account of his
descent into generation, but providentially inspecting him, in order that they
might in an undefiled manner pay attention to things which are generated
and corrupted. For the river Eridanus, and the falling into it, indicate the
lapse of the soul into the river of generation; in which being situated, she
requires the providential care of the genera allied to herself, and the aid of
souls that are in a permanent condition. Theologists also signify the exten-
sion of the solar providence to mortal natures through tears.

The much-enduring race of men thy tears -
Excite.

* Plutarch relates this, in his treatise On the Failure of the Oracles.

96 PROCLUS ON THE [noox 1.

So that the fable very properly manifests through tears, in a symbolical manner,
the providential attention to Phacton of souls that are of the solar order. Again,
therefore, this corollary may be assumed from the fable, that the descents of
souls are effected through impotency. And that not only souls, but likewise
their vehicles participate of the peculiarity of their leading Gods ; so that from
these divinities, some of them are denominated Solar, others Martial, and
others receive an appellation from some other God. It may also be inferred that
destructions are effected by the providence of the Gods. For Jupiter was the
cause of the conflagration, by hurling the thunder at Phaeton, And lkewise,
that the descents of souls are suspended from the one fabrication of things. °
Ilence Timieus teaches us not only about the essence, but also about the ascents

and descents, the lives and all-various elections of souls.

“ But the truth is, that it indicates the mutation of the bodies τὸ
volving in the heavens about the carth ; and signifies that through long
periods of time, a destruction of terrestrial natures ensucs from the
devastations of fire.”

The Egyptian priest only unfolds thus much of the fable that contnbutes to the
proposed discussion, that abundant destructions ΟΥ̓ terrestrial natures are
produced through fire, in consequence of the mutation of the bodies that
revolve in the heavens about the earth. But through mutation he signifies either
the incommensuration of things in the earth to celestial natures: for all things while
they subsist commensurately to the celestial efuxions, are able to remain, but
when they are incommensurate to them, are corrupted. For things which are able
to sustain the dividing power of Mars, are preserved; but such as are too imbecile
to endure his effective energy, are easily dissolved; just as ΠῚ your eye not being
able to endure the solar light, should be blinded by its effulgence, though some
other eve may be capable of looking directly to it) without pain. And ἃ similar
reasoning must be adopted with respect to the other Gods and their configurations,
For the universe is one animal, and its parts sympathizing with each other, it
preserves different things by different parts; nor is any thing which is generated
in it preternatural to the whole. For the natures which are generated in it, are
generated through it; and it is the world itself which operates, and operates on
itself. Or it may be said that this mutation is just as if a good father,
who is always benevolently disposed towards his son, should on a time

BOOK 1.) TIM-EUS OF PLATO. 97

chastise him for the sake of his good; for in so doing he will appear to have |
changed his accustomed mode of treatment. Or this mutation may he the
Various configuration of the celestial bodies. For these are the bodies that revolve
in the heavens about the earth, and at different times exlubit different figures,
through the various intellectual perceptions of their informing souls. For the
conficurations are the letters of these souls, and certain efficacious impressions produced
through them. Again, however, both these are true. For the mutation of these
bodies, and the incommensuration of earthly natures, are the leading causes of
such-like destructions. But if it is necessary to call the fall of Phaeton from the
heavens to the earth, a certain mutation of some one of the bodies that revolve
in the heavens, it is not atall wonderful. For the mutation of the celestial Gods is
one thing, since this is an impassive transfiguration; but another, that of the souls
that revolve together with them, this being a habitude to terrestrial natures, from
a life without habitude: and that of places about the earth, is different from either
of the former, since it is a certain corruptive mutation; according to which neither
souls are changed, nor much less the Gods, the leaders of souls. Such-like cor-
ruptions, therefore, of terrestrial natures are eflected through partial souls; but are
also eflected through dwmons alone. And as through these, destructions adapted
to their scries are produced, the like also takes place through souls. For the
souls that when on high are delighted to illuminate immaterially, betake themselves
to sublunary conflagrations.

Why, however, do copious destructions of the human race happen through
long periods of time; is it because a concurrence of many things is necessary
in order that such a destruction may take place? For it is requisite that there
should be both the peculiar and common habit of the things that suffer, and a
conspiration of the agents. For what if that which is corruptive of one thing,
should be preservative of another? Itis also necessary that there should be an apti-
tude of matter, and a preparation of instruments and times. For these also take
place in partial destructions, but more rarely in such as are common; and this rea-
sonably. ΕΓ is necessary that the progression from an incorruptible nature to
one that is easily corruptible, should be through things which are corrupted with
difficulty. If, therefore, wholes are always incorruptible, but more partial
natures are easily corrupted, the media between these may be very properly
arranged among things which are corrupted with difliculty, and which become
destroyed in long periods of times For wholes which remain during the

Tim. Plat. Vou. I, N

98 PROCLUS ON THE {woox 1,

mundane period, are incorruptible and indestructible. For no configuration of
the stars is destructive of them, since all things are evolved in the whole period
of the universe. But partial natures and individuals receive an easy dissolution.
Copious destructions, however, of partial natures are eflected through long periods
of time; but such natures are nevertheless dissolved. For there is a life of a
certain genus, as there is of one man, and of a city, and a nation. And as
Aristotle says, there are periods of these, of some, more, but of others, less
extended.

“ Hence those who either dwell on mountains, or in lofty and dry
places, perish more abundantly than those who dwell near rivers or
the sea.”

This is likely to happen in the visible destructions through fire: for those
who dwell near water, are defended from the devastation of fire. The phi-
Josopher Porphyry, however, transfers what is here said, from the phanomena
to souls; and says, that in these the irascible part is at one time effervescent,
and this inflammation is the destruction of the man within us. Thus Homer
represents the eyes of Agamemnon when he was enraged with Achilles, as
“ shining like fire.” But at another time, the epithymetic part, being deluged by
genesiurgic moisture, is enervated, and merged in the streams of matter. For, as
Heraclitus says, “ another death of intellectual souls ts occasioned by moisture.”
But if these things are rightly asserted, those will be inexperienced in the pertur-
bations arising from anger, who have the irascible part in a relaxed condition, and
commensurate to a proper attention to secondary concerns. For this is signified
ly hollow places, and such as are near to water, But those are inexperienced in the
perturbations of desire, who have the epithymetic part in a more strenuous condi-
tion, and excited from the somnolency of matter. For this ts indicated by lofty
places. For in a certain respect, the irascible part is adapted to be easily moved,
and to be etlicacious; but desire is languid and imbecile. A musician, therefore,
will be requisite, in order to relax the strenuous nature of anger, and give inten-
tion to the inertness of desire. The philosopher Jamblichus, however, thinks fit
to survey these things physically, and not ethically. Ile says, therefore, that when
a conflagration takes place, those perish more abundantly that dwell on lofty
mountains, as being more remote from the exhalations arising from water ; for these
exhalations are not much elevated on account of the weight of the moist substance.

est NATE TERA IASI IIIT

BOOK 1.]} TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 99

Hence the air that surrounds them is not wet but dry, and becomes fuel to fire,
which naturally tends upward. But the contrary takes place in deluges. For
those that dwell in hollow situations, are more abundantly destroyed, since all
heavy substances naturally tend downward.

“To us, indeed, the Nile is a saviour in other respects, and also be-
cause it liberates us from this destruction.”

According to the apparent signification of what is here said, the Nile is the
cause to the Egyptians of many and all-various goods, viz. of geometry, of the
generation of fruits, and likewise of avoiding conflagrations. Its water also
preserves their bodies, and the divinity that connectedly contains this body,
clevates their souls. But from these things you may assume, that first causes,
being full of life and prolitic power, connect themselves, and remain eternally, and
also think fit to impart connexion from themselves to other things, which are in a
flowing and dissipated condition; so thatthe name of saviour, adumbrates divine
and exempt providence; from which also the light that is in the intelligible’ Gods,
illuminates all the intellectual and demiurgic causes.

“ἢ But when the Gods, purifying the earth by water, deluge its surface,
then the herdsmen and shepherds inhabiting the mountains are preserved,
while those that dwell in your cities are hurried away to the sea, by the
Hypetuous inundation of the rivers.”

In what is here said, the efficient cause is clearly ascribed to the Gods. And this
also may be asserted of contlagrations. For purification is at one time effected
through water, and at another through fire. But every where purification to
secondary is from piimary natures. Hence likewise in Orpheus, Jupiter is ex-
horted to bring purifications from Crete. For it is usual with theologists to ar-
range Crete for the intelligible. But the material cause of purification is here
ascribed to the incursion of water. For each of these {t. e. fire and water]
produces without deliberation and involuntarily, being borne along according to
its own natural tendency. It is necessary, therefore, that there should be a
pre-existent cause which employs them to beneficial purposes, and operates for

* The words νοητοῖς φως are wanting in the original.

100 PROCLUS ON THE [Βοοκ |.

the sake of good; which cause is beautifully ascribed to the Gods. But if there
are certain purifications in wholes, there are also powers that preside over these
purifications, operating as purifiers on wholes priorto partial natures. There are
likewise divine mysteries, some powers initiating, and others being initiated ;
nor will these ever desert the universe. The Egyptian priest likewise knowing
this to be the case, calls the destructions through water and fire by a sacerdotal
name, purifications, but not corruptions, as he would have done if he alone phy-
siologized.

“On the contrary, in our region, neither then, nor at any other time,
did the water descending from on high pour with desolation on the
plains ; but, the whole of it is capable of returning from the bosom of the
earth. And hence, and through these causes, the traditions which are
preserved here, are said to be most ancient.”

Though rain may sometimes happen in Egypt, yet it does not happen in the
whole of it, but usually takes place about the lower parts. This, however, says
Aristotle, is evidently the work of the river. But the upper parts do not receive
an afflux of this kind. Whence, therefore, does the Nile return?) Porphyry indeed
says, it was an ancient opinion of the Egyptians, that the water issued upward
from beneath, by the ascent of the Nile; on which account also they called the
Nile, the waterer of the earth; and that it returned from beneath; manifesting by
this, that what is dissolved in Egypt preserves the Nile. Not that the snow
being dissolved produces the quantity of its water; but that it is loosened from its
own fountains, and proceeds so as to become visible, being prior to this impeded
and detained. We however understand the term dissolved, with reference to
doubt : for speaking Attically, the Nile is dissolved, because it liberates us from
doubt. For it is not true that from snow being dissolved the Nile is increased.
for where in southern places, such as those through which the Nile flows, is there
«1 collection of snow?) = Nor does this river emerze from rarefied earth. Tor the
rarity of the earth, does not give to the water a motion upward, — But itis entirely
necessary that there should be something else, which impels it from cavities to
lofty places. And thus much with respect to the Exyptian opinion,

Others, however, say, that the Nile is increased from certain rains that are poured
into it, as is clearly asserted by Eratosthenes. Hence to return does not now sig-
nify tu spring from beneath, but for the water, being elsewhere increased, to

μοοκ 1. TIMEUS OF PLATO. 101

proceed above the earth ; streams of water being poured into the Nile from other
places. But Tamblichus says, it is not requisite to investigate a thing of this kind,
but to understand in a more simple way the return of the water from beneath, as
equivalent to what is usually called the ascent of water; and he assigns a two-fold
cause, through which the Egyptians avoid dryness, from excessive heat, and
deluges. And this is manifest from what he says when examining the increase
from rains. For he says, that the first cause of the salvation of the Ezyptians, is
the will of their presiding Gods, and the boundary from the first of fabrication.
But the second cause is the temperature of the air. For the seasons there are con-
trary to those in the antarctic " regions, from which the Nile flows to these places ;
and in them the generation of dryness from violent heat, and of great rains, reci-
procates. If, however, some one should blame this explanation, because the rains
being increased the increase is not regular, it must be said, that rain frequently
happens when there is no descent for disappearance} of the Nile. At the same
tine, the uninterrupted succession of rain, and the magnitude of the mountains
in which the fountains of the Nile are contained, are the causes of the unceasing
increase ofthe water. For these mountains, receiving in all their sides the rain
impelled against them from the annual clouds, pour it incessantly into the foun-
tains of the Nile. But these fountains becoming exuberant increase the river.
For this, says Theophrastus, is one cause of rain, viz. the pressure of clouds against
a mountain. Moreover, it ix not at all wonderful, if clouds are not seen about
the cataracts. Lor the stream of the Nile is not first poured from these, but from
the Lunar mountains, which are thus denominated from their altitude. And the
clouds when present being collected about the mountains, impede the cataracts
by their superior magnitude. And thus much against the Egyptian oration of
Anistides,

Eratosthenes, however, says, it is no longer requisite to investigate the cause of
the increase of the Nile, when we direct our attention to certain waters and rains
that run into it, so as to corroborate what is said by Aristotle. These things, there-
fore, we have concisely indicated on this subject. But from these particulars the
Egyptians infer, that their land will never experience either a deluge or a confla-
gration. That it should however fail from other causes, is not at all wonderful ;
since, as Aristotle rightly observes, every part of the earth becomes sea in the
infinity of time, and the same place is at one time continent, and at another, sea.

* For avricoss here, it is necessary to read avraperecoss. |

102 PROCLUS ON THE [Βοοκ 1.

And looking to the infinity of time, it must not be denied that the water of the
Nile may fail. For what if the annual winds, blowing less vehemently, should not
impel the clouds against the mountains ? What also, if the mountains should fall,
in which there is a collection of clouds; the wind from subterranean places burst-
ing them, through which, likewise, the oracles say, that succeeding cittes shall be de-
stroyed? And the clouds not being collected, the stream always becoming less and
less, will be absorbed by the earth which is dry.

“ But the truth is, thatan all places, where neither intense cold nor
immoderate heat prevails, the race of men is always preserved, though it
is sometimes more, and at other times less numerous.”

The pricst has spoken concerning the mundane periods, aad the different
mutations fin them], and has observed that the safety of the Egyptians is derived
from the position of the region, and the providence of the Nile. Now, therefore,
he infers in common respecting places of the earth, that every place which is tree
from deluges and contlagrations, has always the race of wen remaining, more or
less numerous. For the greatest destructions are through fire and water, as was
before asserted. Some one, however, may say, that the race of men failina different
way. For at present there are none who inhabit these very places of the Attic land
[which were formerly so populous), though neither a deluge nor a conflegration has
happened, but acertain dire impiety, which has entirely obliterated the race of men."
Or it may be said that Plato now calls climates, places. He says, therefore, that
every climate has men, though there should not have been a deluge or a contla-
gration, atone time more, and at another less numerous. Some however will
also be saved ina deluge, as Deucalion, who was preserved, when the climate
of Greece was deluged. After this manner, therefore, some unfold the meaning
of the passage.

But according to our associate (Domninus), Plito means, that every place his
always a greater or less number of men, whichis not excessively cold, or immo-
derately dry through heat. Por mathematicians say, Chat there are certain places
Which are uninhabitable through excess of heat or cold, Every place, therefore,
which is adapted to the habitation of men, and every climate, has a greater or
Jess number of men, And this interpretation is reasonable, and conformable to

‘ oo. . . . .
Tu my copy of the original of these Commentaries, a certain annotator observes in the margin,
that * Proclus alludes, in what he here says, to the Christian religion,”

> ee NEN STI
ΝῊ

nook 1 TIMEUS OF PLATO. 103

the words of the text. For the words, “where neither intense cold, nor immo-
derate heat prevails,” appear to signify, where nether of the contrarics being exces-
sive, impedes habitation, And, in short, since Plato had before observed, that
the transactions of the Egyptians were said to be most ancient, he very properly
adds, that in reality, every climate which is commensurate to the habitation of
men, has always men more or less numerous. For not only mathematicians assert
that not every climate of the earth has men, but Orpheus also, who says:

The Demiurgus for th’ abode of men,
A seat apart from the immortals gave,
Where turns the Sun's mid axis stretching wide ;

Between excessive cold and heat a mean.

And this likewise Plato now asserts, when he says, “where neither intense cold,
nor immoderate heat prevails, the race of men iy always preserved, though it is some-
dimes more, and at other times less numerous.” With other nations, however, there
is an oblivion of ancient transactions, not through the failure of men, but in con-
sequence of frequent destructions taking place, certain illiterate and rustic persons
alone remain. But with us [says the priest] many most ancient transactions are
said to be preserved, in consequence of every thing being committed to writing
in our temples.

* But Vhatever has been transacted either by us, or by you, or in any
other place, beautiful or great, or containing any thing uncommon, of
which we have heard the report,—every thing of this kind is to be found
described in our temples, and preserved to the present day.”

As the situation of the country and its guardian Goddess impart safety to the
Egyptians, thus also the preservation of past transactions is effected by their own
eare and attention, through which they apply a remedy to the oblivion produced
by time. But they are assisted in this by their temples, in which ali great and won-
derful actions are recorded, both of their own people and of others, and also para-
doxical events of things. For this is the meaning of the words, “or containing any
thing uncommon.” The history, however, of these things contributes to their know-
ledge of similar events; from which the reminiscence of wholes is produced, and
also to the knowledge of futurity. For through observations of this kind, they dis-
cover the effective powers of the ¢clestial configurations. For assuming that certain

104 PROCLUS ON THE [BOOK τ.

things happen from certain things existing, they are able syllogistically to collect,
from the same signs, the causes of future events. It appears also to me, that the
doctrine of the Pythagoreans which prepares souls to remember their former lives,
imitates such a history as this of the Egyptians. For as itis fit to assume different
lives of one man, or rather of one soul, thus also different periods must be
assumed of one nation. Hence, as in the one, the recollections of the transac-
tions of a furmer life are perfective of souls, so in the other, the histories of former
periods afford the greatest assistance to the acquisition of wisdom. Farther still,
such observations are assimilated to the orderly distribution of the universe. Por
they imitate the stable productive powers of nature, through which remaining lin-
inoveable, order is ingenerated in things that are mutable. If, therefore, the world
is a most sacred temple, in which the productive powers that connect the universe Ὁ
eternally remain, the recording of ancient deeds in temples will be an Image οἵ
the subsistence of these powers. And what is asserted by the Egyptians may
δι σαν, that whatever in sensibles is stable, of a firtn consistence, and always sub-
sisting after the same manner, proceeds from the intelligible Gods ; but that what-
ever is moved, and at different times is generated and corrupted ina different
mannez, is derived from the junior fabrication, For the sacerdotal genus by
which mention is made of ancient transactions, conveys an image of the divine
order, which is connective of wholes and of stability, and which guards all things
by divine memory, and from which the junior fabrication being filled, imparts by
illumination to things of a very mutable nature, sameness, Connexion, and per-
manency.

“ While on the contrary, you and other nations, commit only recent
transactions to writing, and to other contrivances which cities have em-
ployed for transmitting information to posterity.”

Contrivance is a symbol of the cause which always fabricates new things, pro-
duces things which are not yet in existence, and co-adapts all things to the one
perfection of the world. For in our domestic concerns, we call the preparation .
of every thing necessary, contrivance. And such also in cities, are literature and
arts, forums and baths, and the like. But in the universe, coutrivances are such
things as receive a temporal and partial composition. As, therefore, temples sig-
nify the receptacles of perpetual productive powers, and also of such as are of a
connective and guardian nature ; thus likewise cities manifest hypostases convist-

nook 1. TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 105

ing of many, dissimilar, and mortal powers. But recent transactions only being
committed to writing, evinces that the existence of such writings and arts, is of a
more recent nature, ᾿

“And so again in accustomed years,a celestial efluxion rushes on
them like a disease.”

This also is evidentin men. For deluges destroy their race, being excited indeed
from the celestial periods, but having water for their matter, Tlence the whole of
this is called a celestial edlusxion, and, as it were, a disease, because it is corrup-
tive of other things. ‘That, however, which is corruptive, is indeed to a partial
nature evil, but to the whole of things good. But Plato says, “in accustomed ycars,”
because such like destructions are accomplished conformably to certain circula-
tions, Which also have themselves a certain consecutive order with reference to. the
whole period of a divinely generated [or perpetually circulating] nature. This also
seems to be manifested through these particulars, that such things as are alone
generated from wholes are necessarily consummated according to mundane petiods,
which are detined by the same number; but that such things as happen from
certain partial causes, will not entirely happen to be the same, though the
configurations of the period are the same. In the universe, however, you may
survey the same thing, by understanding that all generated natures are corrupted,
and yield to the mundane periods, and to the circulations of the whole life [of the
world, and that the periods are conjoined to each other, and accomplish one
continued lite.

 Tenee those among you who survive, are illiterate and unacquainted
with the Muses. And thus it happens that you become juvenile again,
and ignorant of the transactions of ancient times, as well of those among
us, as of those in the regions which you inhabit.”

- For from a deluge, Plato says, that herdsmen and shepherds are left, but that
the inhabitants of cities are destroyed. Hence those that remain are illiterate
and without the Muses, And on account of the former, indecd, they are unable
through writing to transmit: memorials of the pre-existent period 5 but on account
of the latter, they are not sufliciently capable of preserving in verse or melody the
events that happened prior to the deluge, Lence they become oblivious of all

Tim. Plat. Vou. I. . O

106 PROCLUS ON ΗΒ. [Book τ.

things. But through oblivion they return to the life of children, For an ignorant
old man, says Aristotle, does not at all differ from a child in understanding. A
thing of this kind, however, happens to souls that have recently descended into
generation. For having exchanged for the former period, which was intellectual, " ἃ
certain, secondary and genesiurgic condition of being, they become oblivious of
intelligibles, through the deluge arising from matter, Such representations also
of intelligibles, as they once had from the vision of them they lose in the progres-
sions of time. Thus, therefore, every thing in the world returns to juvenility from
juvenility through regeneration being borne along differently at diflerent: times, in
consequence of the form of it naturally subsisting in motion. Moreover, the
assertion that mutations taking place, those that remain, are illiterate and unac-
quainted with the Muses, Indicates to those who consider it physically, that) the
analysis of bodies takes place as far as to that which is formless and without
morphe; and also that in this mutation, the destruction of the elements happens,
wich is manifested through the word με αἰ, and the dissolution of harmony,
which again the Gods who are the inspective guardians of renovation, easily

remedy, and restore co a condition according to nature,

“The transactions therefore, OG Solon, which you relate from your
antiquities, ditier very little from puerile fables.”

The Egyptian priest compares the venerable and very ancient narrations of
Solon to the fables of children, Por the fables of the wise are about things
ofan cternal nature; but those of children about temporal things and which
are of small consequence. And the former, indeed, contain intellectual concealed
truth; but the latter, truth of a grovelling nature, end which indicates nothing
elevated. To the latter fables therefore, the histories of Solon are analogous ;
but to the former, the histories of the Eeyvptians. Por the one look to that which
is small, but the other have a most extended survey, And the one are only
histories, but the other coutribute to science. Prom these things, therefore, the
paradigms also of them are to be surveyed. Phe effects, indeed, of the junior
fabrication, are called the sports of the Gods, and resemble fables. | For they are
the imaves of beings, and participate of forms in an ultimate degree. But the
things which primarily derive their subsistence from intelligibles, are intellectual,

eternal, and stable, aad have the essence of themselves concealed,

* Por seapas here, it is necessary to read soepus.

ὄπα

BOOK 11] ΤΙΣ 5 OF PLATO. 107

“Tor, in the first place, you only mention one deluge of the earth,
though in former times there have been many.”

Por the deluge of Deucalion is much celebrated by the Greeks, though as
the Egyptian says, there were many others prior to it. Thus also in wholes, the
junior fabrication gives completion to wholes partially, and multitudinously, and
renders that which is present in a good condition through regeneration. But in
intelligibles, the causes of the first subsistence and of the circulation of forms,
are antecedently comprehended unically Cor according to the nature of the one].

“ And,in the next place, you are ignorant of a most beautiful and
excellent race of men, who once inhabited your country ; from whence
you and the whole of your city descended, though a small seed only
of this adimirable people once remained. But your ignorance in this
atfair is owing to the posterity of this people, who for many ages were
destitute of literature, and became as it were dumb.”

The Egyptian wishes to conjoin the second to the former period, and to show
that there is one connexion and life of the first Athenians, and of those that now
exist, through a small seed, as he says, remaining. For thus also in’ the world
the seeds of a former period conjoin that which succeeds it to its principles,
throuch the essence of causes, the unceasing motion of the universe, and as some
one says, its immutable inutation. We must not, however, wonder if the priest
now indeed says, that Solon is the offspring of those excellent men. For we
must again direct our attention to the cause of all mundane contrariety. For
Solon, so far as he is an animal, possesses from them the genus; but 50 far as he
is ἃ partial intellect, receiving the narration of a war, he is analogous to the divi-
nity, who transports the productive principle of mundane contrariety, supernally
from intelligibles to the sensible region. — Nor is it proper to be disturbed by such
like objections, but to know the nature of analogies ; and that the same things
through analogy, become first, middle, and last.

“ or prior to that greatest destruction by water, there was a most
excellent city of Athenians, which surpassed all others in war, and was in
every respect governed by the most equitable laws, and whose deeds and
polities are said to have becn the most beautitul of all that we have receiv-
ed the knowledge of by the hearing, under the heavens.”

108 PROCLUS ON THE [Book 1.

Plato does not perhaps mean by the greatest destruction, the deluge of Deuca-
lion, but some one of the deluges prior to it. But he calls the city of the Athenians
most warlike, and governed by the most equitable laws, as being an imitation
of its guardian Goddess, whom he afterwards says, is both philosophic and
philopolemic. For the Athenians partake of the warlike from the philopolemic,
and of equitable legislation from the philosophic. By the most beautiful deeds
he means the victory over the Atlanties. But by the most beautiful polities
he does not intend to signify that they changed many of them, but he thus speaks,
because one polity may be called the number of many polities ; just as one world
is connective of many worlds. Por if the lite ofeach maividual is a certain polity,
but the common life is the communion of many partial lives, the one polity will
consist of many polities, the beauty of it depending on its union, Tle also adds,
the most beautiful of all that we lnovw under the heavens, Weeause itis the first inita-
tion of the polity of the world; so that you may say, itis the best of those under
the heavens; for the paradigm of it is inthe heavens. And thus much forpar-
ticulars,

Again, however, we should remind ourselves respecting the whole deed of the
Athenians, that it is neither called a fable, nor a mere history ; some indeed
receiving What is narrated as a history, but others, as a fable. And some assert-
ing, that, in the first place, the developement of these, and such dike narrations,
appeared τὸ Plato himself tobe the province of a certain laborious and not
very fortunate man;' and in the second place, that what is delivered by
Plato is not a thing of such an enigmatical mature, as the doctrine of
Phereeydes, but that he teaches with perspicuity concerning most of his dogmas,
Neither, therefore, say they, should we force him to analyse, since the man
proposes to instructus without ambiguity. Phey also add, in the third place, that
neither is a developement in the present: instance necessary. Per the cause of
the insertion of this narration is known to be the deleht and allurement of the
reader. And in the fourth place, that fwe analyse all things, we shall safler the
same as those who ina slippery mannerare conversant with) Tomer, Others
again think that the developement of this history should be referred to physical
harmony, from what Plato savs of the narration about Phaeton, thatat has mdeed
the form of a fable, bat: that at} manifests a certain matural event; saice the

Ug yptians also, who, as Plato says, were the fathers of this relation, obscurely signified
the arcana of nature through fable. So that the developement of this narration

* Plato says this in the Phwdrus of the man who does uot adapt the eapliations of fables to divine

concerns, but interprets them plysically,

nooKx 1} TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 109

will be adapted to him, who speaks in the person of the Egyptians. For as
Timwus himself, contormably to the philosophy of the Pythagoreans, makes his
discussion from numbers and figures, as interpreting nature throuch images ; thus,
also, the Egyptian priest will teach the trath of things through symbols adapted
to himself. Po which may be added, that Plato himself elsewhere accuses
those who speak every thing from what is at hand, in order, says he, that they
may render their wisdom manifest, even to shoemakers. So that he who delivers
true assertions through enigmas, is not foreign from the mind of Plato. And
such are the arguments of each.

We however, say, that all these particulars are a history, and also an indication
of the mundane contrariety, and the whole order of things; the history, indeed,
narrating the past transactions of men, but symbolically comprehending in itself
those things which are comprehended in the universe, and the mundane contra-
riety. For the progression according to opposition, commencing from the first
intelligibles, divides the world by powers that are eppositely arranged. And if
you are willing, we will divide the universe according to the divine orders, which
are In uninterrupted succession, and survey, conformably to the Pythagoreans, the
co-ordinations that it contains. From the two principles, therefore, it is divided
into bound and infinity, or rather into things allied to bound and_ the infinite.
Tor of things that are mixed, some pertain to the former, but others to the latter
principle. But from that which is unfolded into light as the third after these
principles, the universe is divided into the united and the multiplied." For there
multitude first subsists unitedly. From the triad that is next to this, it is divided
into things perpetual, and things corruptible.? For the measure of existence to
all things is derived from thence, From the third triad it is divided into the male
and female:! for in this each of these primarily subsists: But from the first triad
of the next order, itis divided according to the even and the odd; for number
characterized by unity — there.4 From the second triad, it is divided into the
partial and the total.’ And from the third,’ into the straight and the cireular. Again,
of the intellectual triads, it is divided, according to the first, into things that are

This third thing, after the two principles bound and infinity, is being ilself.
> This triad constitutes intelligible life, or eternity itself,

ω

This triad forms intelligible intellect, or [avro2wor] animal itself.
This tnad is the summit of the order which is called intelligible, and at the same time intellectual.

>

> The second triad of the above order is denominated [Jeaven, by Plato in the Phadrus.

® Aud the third triad of this order, is called by Plato in the Phadrus, the eub-celestial arch.

110 PROCLUS ON THE [nook τ.

in themselves, and things that are in others. According to the second, into
things animated and things inanimate, into things stable and things which are
moved. But according to the third, into things that are the same and things

* indeed, it as divided into

that are diflerent.'” And from the order of Rulers,
things which rejoice in similitude, and things allied to dissimilitude., But) from
the liberated? order, it receives a division into the separate and the inseparable.
These things, therefore, which have an arrangement elsewhere, have now also been
as it were explored by us. For according to each division, the goodness of
better natures, desiring to fill things subordinate, and to take away depravity,
produces war, But the desire of less excellent matures, τὸ. divalse a certain
portion of beings, of amore excellent condition, excites the apparent opposition
of things; since in war, also, those that contend against each other, wish to reduce
into their own power the property of their opponents, and entirely destroy them,
These things, therefore, are evident,

We may, however, understand the opposition of powers in the universe, by
making a division after the following manner, into the adorming and adorned,
And, in the first place, indeed, into things super-essential amd essences. Por the
venus of the Gods is super-essential, Tn the next place, by divide essences ito
eternal lives, and those which energize according to time. Likewise, those which
energize according to time, ito souls and bodies. And bodies, into such as are
celestial, and such as subsistin generation, These, likewise, we must divide into
wholes and parts. For the division extends as far as to these extremes, And,
again, we must divide super-essential natures into the divine pecatiaritics, such as
the male and the female, the odd and the even, that which unites, and that whieh
separates, the stable and the motive. Bat eternal natures must be divided into
total and) partial essences. And such as are total, into the divine and angelic.
Souls are to be divided into the divine, and the attendants on the divine. And
divine souls, into the celestial, and those that pay a providential attentton to
weneration, Souls, likewise, that follow the Gods, must be divided into those that
follow them perpetually, and those that are frequently separated from them. And
the division of those that are separated from therm, is into those that preside over
generation with undefiled purity, aud those that become detiled with vice. For

* The intellectual triad consists of Saturn, Rhea, aud Jupiter.

> The order of Rulers, is (he supermundane order of Gods.

> ‘The liberated which immediately follows the supermundane order, is itself immediately followed
by the mundane order of Gods. See my translation of Proclus on the Theology of Plato,

3 i SNP ORES

BOOK 1.] TIMAEUS OF PLATO. 1

the descent is far as to these. Moreover, the celestial bodies must be divided
into. the inerratic and erratic. And these, into such as are moved with a simple,
and such as are moved with a various motion. The latter, also, must be divided
into the peculiarities of powers. And universally the division in all the above
mentioned orders, is into that which adorns, and that which is adorned, that
which fills, and that which is filled.

If, however, 1 be requisite, not to look to apart, but to adhere to the intellec-
tual conception of wholes, it must be admitted that this opposition subsists every
where. For it is in Gods, and in intellects, in souls, and in bodies. For in the
first of these, there is bound and infinity 5 in intellects, sameness and difference ;
in souls, the circle of the same, and the circle of the diflerent ; and in bodies,
heaven and generation. But) secondary natures are always arranged with
reference to' such as are more excellent. Tence, also, we say that this narration
ix useful to the whole theory of nature, as indicating to us the mundane contra-
riety from energies and = motions. For all the teachers of physiology begin
from contraries, and make these to be principles; which Plato also knowing,
delivers to us, through symbols and enigmas, what the contrariety is of the genera
in the universe, and how less are subjugated to more excellent natures, through
the intellectual energy of Minerva. Farther still, Plato very properly calls
the polity the work of the Athenians, because it is requisite that such an
analogy as this which the junior fabrication connects, should proceed through
all things ; but that total powers should by a much greater priority eflect this,
from which also the junior fabrication being filled, gives subsistence to mundane
intellects, to souls andbodies, conformably to the pec ularity of itself.

* Solon, therefore, on hearing tais, said that he was astonished, and
burning with the most ardent desire, entreated the priests to narrate every
thing pertaining to his ancient fellow citizens.”

This, likewise, is the peculiarity of divine natures, viz. for such as are secon-
dary, genuinely to adhere to such as are first, and to be established in their un-
defiled intellectual perceptions ; but for such as are first, to impart by illumination
their own plenitude to such as are secondary, through * unenvying exuberant

' For πρὸ τῶν ἀμεινόνων, it is necessary to read xpos τῶν ἀμεινονων.

> Instead of ra Se xpwra, ἕνναμεων αφθονων, cat ἀγαθότητι, rows Sevreps επιλαμπειν τὴν ag’ cavTw,

112 PROCLUS ON THE (Boo 5.

power and goodness. Wonder, therefore, precedes, because in us, also, this is the
beginning of the knowledge of wholes. But in divine natures, it conjoins that
which wonders with the object of wonder, Hence, likewise, those who are wise
in divine concerns celebrate 7hawnas, (whose name is derived from = thawna,
wonder,] as one of the greatest of the Gods, who through wonder inclines secon-
dary to primary natures. But ardent request follows, rendering that which ought
to partake of more perfect goods, adapted to the participation of them.

«That afterwards, one of the priests said :—Nothing of envy, Ὁ
Solon, prevents us from complying with your request. But tor your
sake and that of your city, I will relate the whole; and especially on
account of the Goddess.”

Solon being an Athenian, has a resemblance to the Tutelar Goddess Minerva,
so faras he adheres to more perfect intellectual pereeptions. And the priest re-
sembles one speaking, as 1 were, from a certain adytam, For he teaches what
Was committed to writing in the temples 5 and) presents to us an Imitation of
the middle orders of the junior fabrication, and of the whole paternal cause 5
which orders transmitting the gifts of a more elevated to a subordinate cause,
fill from that as froma certain fountain the divine order. All things, likewise,
are clegantly effected by the speaker. For Solon is perfected, the city is praised,
and the Goddess is celebrated. Phe ascent also is from Solon to the Goddess
through the city as a medium; imitating the convertive power of the Goddess,
And. this, likewise, is indeed beneticent; viz. to energize for the sake of the

‘

perfection of secondary natures: for it imitates ‘ providence, and the super-
plenary power of divine beings. But it is in a still greater degree beneficent, to
energize for the sake of the city: for the energy is more ample, and embraces
a greater power. Besides this, it is stl more divine to extend all the nar-
ration to the Goddess, and to terminate the whole energy in her; all) which,
the unenvying communication of the priest genuinely represents to us, not
only indicating the privation of envy, but the divine and prompt generation
of good.

Again, however, we must not be ignorantly disturbed, if now indeed the priest
as being the dispensator of the narration, is said to adumbrate a greater and more
divine cause; bat at another time, the Athenians being the ancestors of Solon,

πληρωσιν in this place, it is necessary to read ra de rpwra δια δυναμεων agOorwr, καὶ ayabornros, κ. ἃ.

* For ποίρίγαι here, it is necessary to read pupecrac,

nook 1. TIMEUS OF PLATO. 113

are more ancient than the inhabitants of Sais; the Athenians being arranged ac-
cording to the mundane causes of the whole contrariety of things. For so far as
pertains to the narration, they have this order; but so far as pertains to physical
progression, they bring with them an image of certain more elevated and divine
orders, And if you are willing so to speak, since all fabrication, and the mun-
dane contraricty, are antecedently comprehended in the father of wholes, together
with adorning causes, and things which are adorned, you may there also assume
according to analogy, the paradigmatic cause of the Athenians in intellectual
lives, For again, the veil (of Minerva] is the last image of the whole contrariety
of things. But in the universe, the true works of the Gods have a precedency,
and likewise in the productive and primary causes of them; where also it is said,
Minerva became apparent, invested with armour. Or rather, the veil is the last
work of the weaving art, containing in itself an image of the mundane war, and
of the demiurgic order proceeding from the Goddess into the universe; which
veil she wove in conjunction with her father. A better image however of this, is
that which in the narration of Plato, and in enigmas, represents to us the whole
contrariety of things, and of the works of Minerva; which narration contributes
to the whole (deseriptive) fabrication of the world, in the same manner as the veil
to the splendid precession of the Goddess, and the whole of the solemnity. Fur
the Panathenaa is aninage of the Minerval fabrication in the universe. The veil,
however, is superior to both these, which is woven in the universe, in the intellec-
tual dight of Minerva. For contrariety is spread under the one life of the
world, and the war is apart of the fabrication of things, which the ruling art of
Minerva arranges in a becoming manner. And prior to all these, is the veil,
Which is pre-established in paradigmatic causes and the intelligible, and is com-
prehended in the one intellectual perception of Minerva, — For,

In weaving, all th’ immortals she excels,

says Orpheus, Hence, the weaving art is there primarily, and the vetl of the
essence of this Goddess, which essence is all things intellectually, that the uni-

_ Verse is according to a mundane eharacteristic. For in ruling over the war of the

universe, she does not look any where else than into herself.

That we may however recur to the thing proposed to be considered, ‘the Egyp-
lian priest directly imitates the unenvying providence of the Demiurgus, about
which Plato a litde farther on says, “ FHe was good, but envy never subsists in him
who ts good, about any thing.” For the orders which exist proximately with him,

Tim. Plat. νοις 1, ᾿

114 PROCLUS ON THE [poox τ.

have from him, and on account of him, an unenvying participation of good. And
through this privation of envy, the priest fills indeed the mind of Solon, but
praises the city, and celebrates the tutelar Goddess ; conjoining partial and
total’ natures, uniting things contained to the things that contain them, and sus-
pending all things from the Goddess, according to one bond and one series.

“Who is allotted the guardianship both of your city and ours, and by
whom they have been nourished and educated.”

The Egyptian, after a certain admirable manner, converts all things to the God-
dess, and produces them from, and again converts them to her. For recurring
froma citizen through the city to the power who presides over it, he makes this con-
version. But again proceeding from the Goddess to the natures that primarily,
and also to those that secondarily participate of her, he imitates the progression of
things from her divinity, Again also asserting that the participants are nourished
and disciplined by the Goddess, he likewise converts these to her. How is it
possible, therefore, that these particulars should notin an admirable manner imi-
tate demiurgic powers, which are established in natures prior to themselves, and
generate those posterior to, and convert them to the causes of themselves? And
thus much concerning these particulars.

What, however, is the meaning of this allotment? And how are the Gods said
to be distributed into the universe? Of allotments therefore, some are those of
partial souls, and others, of the undefiled genera. Some are diemoniacal, others
angelic, and others, of the Gods themselves. Porat the father of the universe was
one alone, and there was only one providence and one law, there would be no
need of allotments, nor of divine distribution. Since, however, after the one father
there is a triad, after the uniform a multiform providence, and after one law a
multitude of fatal laws, it is also necessary that there should be a division of the
subjects of government, and another providence and order about other things.
Through this cause therefore the universe is divided by demiurgic numbers, viz. by the
duad, triad, tetrad, pentad, ebdomad, and dodecad. — For after the one fabrication, the
section ofthe universe into two, heaven and generation, constitutes two-fold allot-
ments, the celestialand genesinrgic. After this, the triad divides the universe,
about which Neptune in [Lomer* says,

‘To me by lot belongs the hoary deep,
‘The spacious heaven to Jove, to Pluto, Hades dark.

* For v\usa here, it is necessary to read oda.

* iad av, vs. 190, δ,

NOOK 1. TIMMUS OF PLATO. 11

The tetradic distribution follows the tiple order; giving a four-fold) arranzement

to the elements in the universe, as the Pythagoreans say, celestially and ethereatiy,

above the earth, and under the earth. Next to this is the five-fold division. For

the world is one, consists of five parts, and is appropriately divided by celes- ὁ
tial, empyreal, aerial, aquatic, and terrestrial figures, and presiding Gods. After

this allotment, the division into seven parts follows. For the heptad beginning

supernally from the inerratic sphere, proceeds through all the elements. And

after all these, is the allotment of the universe defined in the dodecad. From the

divine allotments, however, the allotments of anzels and dimons are suspended

and have more various distributions. For one divine allotment is comprehensive

of many angelical, and of a still greater number of demoniacal allotments. For

every angel rules over a multitude of daemons, and every angelical allotment has

about itself many dawmoniacalallotments. For what a monad is in the Gods, that a

tribe is to each allotmentin daemons. Instead of atriad, therefore, we must assume

three companies, and instead of the tetrad or dodecad, four numbers and twelve

choirs, following their respective leaders. And thus we shall always preserve

the higher allotments. For as in essences, as in powers, as in energies, progres-
sions generate multitude, thus also in allotments, those that rank as the first, have
a precedency in power, but are diminished in quantity; as being more proxi-
inate to the one father, and to the total and one providence. But those that are
the second in rank, are allotted a diminished power, and an increased multitude.
These things therefore are to be considered in common about allotments.

Since, however, we have divided allotments according to a section into two,
into the celestial and sublunary, concerning the former indeed there can be no
doubt respecting the nature of them, and whether they always remain invariably
the same. But the sublunary allotments are deservedly subjects of admiration,
whether they are said to be perpetual, or not. For if they are perpetual, how is
this possible? For how, since every thing in generation is mutable and tlowing,
ean the energies of the powers that providentially inspect it, be perpetual? For
the things that are in generation, are not perpetual. And if these energies are nut
perpetual, how ts it that divine inspection subsists diflerently at diflerent times?
For an allotment is neither a certain separate energy of the Gods, in order {πα΄
things in generation being changed into another condition, Us energy may remain
exempt and immutable; nor is it alone that which is governed, in order that no
absurdity may follow from the allotment flowing, and sustaining all-varieus muta-
lions; but itis an assigned state, providence, and unrestrained government of

divinity, about these sublunary concerns. And on account indeed of the subject

of government, the definition of perpetuity cannot be applied to it; but on account
of its being [always] present, it is destitute of corruption, in order that we may not
ascribe to the Gods the passion of partial souls, by assigning them different allot-
ments at different times. [ence it remaing for us to show, how allotment is to be
explained, so as to preserve the immutable in the Gods, and mutability to. things
in weneration.

Perhaps therefore the discussion of this affair will be easy, by having recourse
to that theory, which we have frequently elsewhere employed, viz. that every
thing in generation, and generation itself, must not be considered as alone con-
sisting of mutable and flowing things, but there is also in these something tmmu-
table, and naturally adapted to remain always the same. For the interval, which
receives all the parts of the world, comprehends them in itself, and is extended
through all bodies, is immoveable, lest, if it belonged to things which are moved,
it should also itself require another receptacle, and this should be the case ad
infinitum. The ethereal vehicles likewise of divine souls, with which these souls
are circularly invested, and which imitate the lives in the heavens, have a per-
petual essence, and are eternally suspended from divine souls, being full of pro-
lific power, and performing acircular motion,’ according to a certain secondary
circle of the celestial orbs. And in the third place, the wholeness of the elements
remains always the same, though the parts sustain anall-vartous corruption, For
itis necessary that each form of the universe should be never-failing, im order
that the universe may be perfect, and that being generated from an immoveable
cause it may be immoveable according to essence, But ecery wholeness is a form,
ov rather it is that which itis said to be, through the participation of oue entire form,

And here you may see, how the nature of bodies proceeds in’ fa becoming]
order. For one thing fi. e. the interval of the universe) is immoveable according
to every motion ; but another thing, fie. the velicles of divine souls) receives
motion only according to place. For this is most remote from essential mutation.
And another thing, [1. e. the wholeness of the elements] admits of other mutations
in its parts, but the whole remains entirely immutable. And the celestial allot-
inents Indeed, proximately dividing the interval, divide also together with it the
heavens, But with respect to the sublunary allotinents, in the first) place indeed
they are allotted portions in the interval of the universe, In the next place, they
inake a distribution according to the definite vehicles of souls. And in the third?

* Ynstead oferta πλήρη, καὶ yoruiou δυνάμεως κινησιν eysvaloy mowupera, itis necessary to read cra

xXnpn yoripou ov pews, και κινησιν, KAY

* For «pecrroy, read rpiroy.

BOOK 1. TIMAUS OF PLATO. 117

place, they remain always invariably the same, according to the whole parts of
generation. The allotments of the Gods therefore do not change, nor subsist
diflerently at diflerent times. For they have not proximately their bypostasis in
that which is changed. Tlow, therefore, do the illumunations of the Gods take
place in these? [low are the dissolutions of sacred rites elected?) And how is the
same place, at diflerent times occupied by different spirits)’ May we not say, that
the Gods possessing perpetual allotments, and dividing the earth according to
divine numbers, similarly to the sections of the heavens, these divisions of the
earth also are illuminated, so far as they possess aptitude? But the circulation of
the celestial orbs produces indeed this aptitude, through certain configurations;
divine illumination,' at the same time, imparting a power more excellent than the
then existing nature. Total nature likewise (or nature considered as a whole}
produces this aptitude, inserting divine impressions in each of the things illami-
nated, through which these spontaneously participate of the Gods. For she inserts
diferent images of the divinities in diflerent laminated parts, in consequence
of these parts being suspended from the Gods. Times also effect: something,
according to which the conditions of other things are governed. The good
temperament of the air too co-operates. And, in short, every thing about us
contributes: to the increase and diminution of this aptitude. When, therefore,
according to a concurrence of these many causes, aptitude to the participation of
the Gods is ingenerated in some one of the things naturally disposed to be
changed, then divinity is unfolded into light, even in these mutable natures, he
being before concealed through the inaptitude of the recipients; possessing indeed
eternally his proper allotment, and always extending the participation of himself,
but not being always received by these terrestrial places, on account of their
maptitude. But in the same manner as of partial souls, which choose different
lives at diferent times, some choose such as are adapted to their proper Gods, but
others such as are foreign, through an oblivion of the divinities to whom they are
allied; thus, also, of sacred places, some are adapted to the power that has there
lis allotinent, but others are suspended from another order, And on this account,

says the Athenian guest, some are acenstomed to be more prosperous, but others

nore unfortunate. Whether, therefore, the telestic or legislative art dedicates this
particular city to the divinity who, according to an eternal allotment from the
beginning, received this portion [οὐ the earth), the life (of the inhabitants] is through
this ina greater degree assimilated to the tutelar deity, and the works of him (who

* [tappears to me that the words θειας edAap ews are wanting in this place.

118 PROCLUS ON THE {BooK 1.

looks to this divinity in effecting them] are rendered more correctly great anc
admirable than those of the man who is not impelled to action from ἃ. principle
of this kind. And he who chooses a life conformable to that of the allotted
deity, acts with greater rectitude than he does who transfers himself to another
order. .

Conformably to this mode therefore, the Egyptian says, that Minerva ts allotted
the city which is named after her, and also his own city Sais; inferring this per-
haps from the great similitude of the life of the citizens to the Goddess; and per-
haps also perceiving that there was an allotment of this kind, from the telestic art,
and sacerdotal works. For as of the other Gods, so likewise of Minerva, there
is an allotment proceeding supernally from intellectnal causes to the place of the
earth. Her allotment therefore is tirst in her father; but in the ruling Gods accord-
ing toa second order. In the twelve liberated Gods, it makes a third: progres-
sion; but after this, it unfolds itselfinto lightin the heavens, with unrestrained
authority. _In one way indeed, in the inerratic sphere. Por there a certain allot-
ment of this Goddess is expanded, whether it be the place about the Ram, or that
about the Virgin, or whether it be some one of the northern stars, as some say it
is the Electra, which is there. But in another way, it ts unfolded into lightin the
Sun. For there, according to theologists, an admirable power, and a Minerval
order, govern wholes in conjunction with the Sun, And again, in another way
inthe Moon: for Minerva is the monad of the triad’ whichis there, But in
another way in the earth, according to the similitude of the allotments of the earth
to the celestial distributions. And lastly, about the earth ditterently in different
places, according to the peculiarities of providence. It is not therefore at all
wonderful, if one divinity should be said) to be allotted both Athens and Sais.
For the same thing must not be supposed to take place about the Gods, as about
partial souls, which are not adapted to dwell in two bodies at the same time,
because they exert a providential energy in conjunction with habitude; but there
is indeed a participation of the same power tn diterent places; and in the one
power there is also maltitude. Phis power likewise is differently participated by
different places. And in some, sameness ts more abundantly participated; but in
others, difference.

These things therefore are truly asserted, and the allotuicuts of the Gods are
perpetually established in the universe, ‘These likewise existing, there are different

. This triad consists of Minerva, Proserpine, and Diana,

"οὐκ 1.} TIMASUS OF PLATO. 110

temporal evolutions of them into light, according to diflerent places. Ancient
theology also manifests the perpetual essence of the allotments; as when it is said
in Homer,

‘To me in ocean's hoary deeps to dwell,
Alzwoys, by lot belongs,’

For the word always is signiticant of perpetuity, And in short, since it is necessary
that prior to things which sometimes, there should be natures which a&ecays, parti-
cipate of the Gods, it is likewise necessary that perpetual allotments should exist
prior to such as are temporal. For as diemons prior to partial souls follow the
Gods, thus also there are perpetual allotments suspended from the Gods, prior to
partial illuminations. And the mundane Gods comprehend these allotments;
the terrestrial Gods, such as are terrestrial; the aquatic, such as are aquatic; and
the aerial, suchas pertain to the air. These Gods likewise, prior to visible
bodies, ride in ethereal vehicles, conformably to the Gods in the heavens. But
whether it must be admitted, that there are other sublunary allotments, proceeding
from on high in conjunction with divine light, must be elsewhere considered: for
what has been said, is sufficient for the present.

“ Yours indeed, by a priority to ours of a thousand years, receiving
the seed of your race from Vulean and the Earth.”

With respect to the fabrication of Vulcan, how may some one decide, so as not
perfectly to fail im his conceptions of the power of the God? For the assertions of
the multitude concerning him, belong to things which must be entirely rejected,
But that which is said by those whose notions are more intellectual’ is indeed
true, but requires no small degree of confirmation. We shall therefore introduce
to our discussion from theologists, credibility concerning this divinity. That
Vulcan then is of the demiurgic, but not of the vivific, or connective, or any
other series, is manifested by theologists, when they represent him as fashioning
things from brass, employing the bellows, and, in short, when they call him the
artificer. But that he is the fabricator of sensible, and not of psychical, or
intellectual works, is also manifested by them. For the formation of a mirror,

* Πα xv. vs. 190.
Instead of o¢ vewrepor in this place, it appears to me to be uccessary to read o« roepwrepor.

120 PROCLUS ON THE [Book 1,

the exercise of the brazier’s art, lameness, and every thing of this kind, are syinbols
of his productive energy about a sensible nature. Moreover, that he is the maker
of all sensibles, is evident from the same theologists, who say that he was hurled
from Olympus as far as to the earth, and who make all the receptacles of the
mundane Gods, to have been elaborated by Vulean. Vf, therefore, we admit that
these things are true, this God will be the fabricator totally of every corporeal-formed
substance; preparing for the Gods their visible seats, rendering all things subservient
to the one harmony of the world; jilling all fabrications with corporeal life ; and
adorning and connecting with forms the resisting and gross nature of matter. On
this account also he is said by theologists to fashion things from brass, as being
the artificer of resisting solids. And because the heavens are [said to be} brazen,
as being an imitation of the intelligible, the maker of the heavens is likewise
[fabled to be] a brazier. But he is lame in both his feet,{ as being the fabricator
of things that are Jastin the progressions of being; for such are bodies ; and also
as being no longer able to proceed into another order. Likewise, because he ts
the maker of the universe, which, as “Pimieus says, is without legs. And he was
hurled from on high to earth, as extending his fabrication through the whole of
a sensible essence. Whether, therefore, there are said to be certain: physical
productive principles in the universe, or whether there are spermatic principles,
the cause of all these must be referred to this God. For that which mature cllects
by verging to bodies, this God fashions divinely and exemptly, excitine nature,
and using her as an instrument to her own fabrication, Por innate heat is
Vuleanian, being generated by Vulean as subservient to corporeal production,
The productive cause therefore of generated natures is referred, ino what) Plato
says, to this God.

Since however matter is necessary to things that are generated; for the Gods
in the heavens borrow parts from the universe, as things which will be again
returned, for the generation of mortal animals; this also Plato delivers to us, ina
very adimirable manner, through earth. Por in seed teelf, there are productive
powers, and a subject. And the former are derived fourm the στ οὐ Valeans, but
the Jatter from earth, Por by earth, we must now understand every nraterial

cause; not that the Athenians sprang from the carth; but because it is usual to

' Ttamust be carefully observed, that defects when ascribed to divine natures adumbrate Gounseenden.
cies: just as those whose eves are filled with the solar light, are said to be incapable of perceiving
mundane objects; for this incapacity is nothing more than transcendency of vision, In like mauner,

the lameuess of Vulcan, symbolically indicates his exemption from any defective progression,

Ce a ea

BOOK 1.] TIMUS OF PLATO. me 0}

call all generation earth, and every thing material, earthly. Fire, therefore, is a
Vulcanian instrument; but earth is matter, which is excited and vivified through
fire, since itis of itself lifeless. Hence also, in consequence of this being filled,
the material order is now assumed in conjunction with Vulcan. And on this
account it is said that the seed of Vulcan, together with earth, gave subsistence to
the generation of the Athenians. For according to the fable also, Vulcan being
in love with Minerva, emitted his seed on the earth, and from thence the race of
the Athenians blossomed forth. In short, therefore, Vulcan is always in love
with Minerva, imitating her intellectual nature, in the fabrication' of sensibles.
But Minerval souls, according to this energy of Vulcan, especially receive
vehicles from him, and are introduced into bodies from the productive powers
of Vulcan, and the hypostasis* of earth; the productive powers receiving
Minerval impressions. For this God, prior to nature, is the perfecter of bodies,
inserting in different bodies, different symbols of the divinities.

What however are the thousand years, according to which the Athenians are
prior to the inhabitants of Sais? This, therefore, may be said historically. But
it seems also to signify the temporal priority of the life of the Athenians, and in
short, that itis necessary their life should be more elevated than that of the Saitans,
For as in the invisible orders of things, many genera are suspended from the same
leader, some indeed more proximately, but others more subordinately ; after the
same manner also, of Minerval souls descending into generation, some are assi-
milated to Minerva, according to the hizhest degree of excellence; but others
subsist proximately after these. A thousand years, therefore, signify this excellence.
For they are the measure of a perfect genesiurgic period, on account of a thousand
being a cubic number, Hence this number is very properly adapted to a life
superior according to generation, and which is in a greater degree assimilated to _
the {tutelar Goddess. If also you wish to transfer these things to the universe,
you may there behold all the visible fabrication which is Vulcanian, and adorning
causes and adorned eflects ; some of which are more total, but others more partial.
And some being analogous to the Athenians, but others to the Saitans. For

* Instead of ro γοερὸν aurns των αἰσθητων pipovperos in this place, which is evidently defective, I read
τὸ νοερὸν aurns εν τῇ δημιουργιᾷ των αιἰσθητων μιμουμενος.

* For τὴς γῆς νποστασιν των λόγων, αθηναΐκα συγθηματα λαβοντων, it seems necessary to read rns γης:
vrooracews, τῶν λόγων αθηναΐκα, «. A.

Tim. Plat, Vou. I. | Q

122 PROCLUS ON THE fBooK ft.

nothing hinders, but that the same things may be surveyed analogously, in
demiurgic causes, 1n the universe, and in an historical narration,

The divine Iamblichus however doubts, how the gods are said to be allotted
certain places, according to definite times ; as for instance, Minerva was. first
allotted Athens, and) afterwards Sais. For if, their allotment commences from
acertain time, it will also αἱ ἃ certain time cease. Por whatever is measured
by time, is a thing of this kind. Farther still, with respect to the place which
they are allotted at a certain time, was it without a ruler, w hen it fell to their lot,
or was itunder the dominion of other Gods ? For if, indeed, it was without a
ruler, how is it possible that any thing belonging to the universe can be perfectly
destitute of divinity? How, in short, can any place remain without the guardian
protection of more excellent natures? Or how, if itis sutlicient: to the preserva-
tion of itself, can it afterwards become the allotment of some one of the Gods?
But if it is under the dominion of another leader, it will also fall to the allotment
of another God, and thus an absurdity will ensue. For the second God does not
divulse the prefecture and allotment of the former divinity. Nor do the Gods
alternately receive the places of each other; nor do dawmons change their allot-
ments. Tamblichus having thus doubted, dissolves the doubts by saying, that
theallotwents of the Gods are perpetually established, but that the participants
of them, atone time derive advantage from the guardianship of the rulers, and
at another time reap no benefit from it. Ele adds, that these are the participations
which are measured hy time, and which sacred institutions frequently call the birth-
days of the Gods. Wt has however been observed by us, that this resembles that
which happens about souls, ΓῸΓ every soul has entirely a tutelar God. And
certain souls choose lives adapted to other Gods. Thus, therefore. every place ts
the allotment ofa certain God, and there is atime when it becomes the allotment
of some other divinity, who renders it adapted through a certain period, or through
certain mystic rites established by men. For allotment is twofold, the one being
essential, but the other subsisting according to habitude. Bat let us direct our

attention to what follows.

“ But an account of the transactions of this our city, during the space

of eight thousand years, is preserved in our sacred writings.”

The priest assigns to the Athenians the number nine thousand, receiving this

Boox 1] TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 123

also from history; but to the Saitans the number eight thousand ; measuring the
lives of the citizens by the chiliad, conformably to the writings in the temples.
for by this number, as the philosopher Porphyry says, damons also measure tine.
Farther still, the priest makes this narration from the sacred writings ; which
manifests, as Tamblichus would say, the stable guard of the mundane divine
guardians. These numbers, however, happen to lives according to a probable
reason. For eight thousand isa cube ona cube ;* but nine thousand isa tetragonic
superficies on a cube." Hence the one’ gives depth to a superficies, and. this
through the indefinite duad ; but the other preserves the superticies itself in itself,
in similitade and perfection from the triad.4 But it is the symbol of a better lite, to
remain in itself, and to adorn secondary natures. And it is an indication of a
more imperfect life, to descend to secondary natures, to be assimilated to them,
and to be filled with a certain indetiniteness. Since however even a secondary
nature is not entirely deprived of similitude to divinity, the descent is through a
cube, in which there is a tetradic similitude.’ But it is better to imitate more
excellent nature through a more simple life, than through a life which is more
compounded, And a square is more simple than a cube. [f however you
should say, that the number nine thousand is adapted to those that have their
hypostasis from Earth and Vulcan; for a thousand is terrestrial, as being a
cube, but nine pertains to Vulcan,

With them IT many artificial forms

For nine years fashion'd

says Vulcan [in Homer, °} in thus speaking, you will not wander from the
truth. But, in short, a cube is adapted to the terrestrial allotments of Minerva;
since the decad is attributed to the heavens, and the last progression of the decad
gives subsistence to the solid number one thousand. For the Gods make their
progression from the celestial allotments to the terrestrial, as the last. This
therefore must be said by us.

The philosopher Porphyry however, in interpreting . these things, supposes

‘For 1000 is acube, and 80 likewise is 8.

5 For 9is a square, and 1000 isa cube.

7 8000 gives — to the superficies 20. For 20x 20x 20=8000. and this is through the
duad, because 20=2 x 10.

* For 9000 is the cube of 30.

Si. e. The descent is through 9000, in which there is a tetradic similitude, because as Prochus
had before observed, it is a square superticies ov a cube.

6 jliad. |. 18. vs. 400,

124 PROCLUS ON THE [Book 1.

Vulean to be the intellect that presides over art, but earth to be the lunar sphere. Fur
this ts called by the Egyptiansethereal earth, We says therefore that souls which
derive their subsistence from divinity, but participate of the artificial for Vuleanic}
intellect, are disseminated in the body of the moon; souls that give themselves
to the arts, dwelling there; and that they have bodies which are etHuxtons of the
ethereal bodies. That nine thousand years, also, are adapted to these souls, after
the following manner. A inyriad of years is, says he, the period of the soub
which ascends and descends through the five stars, in order that each may have
two chiliads, yet not successive. Time indeed is successive according to concep-
tion; for it is not without continuity. Hence all the stars have nine lives ; which
is obscurely signified through nine thousand years. Ninths also are performed
to the dead. And ina similar manner, some give names to those that are born,
in the ninth year; employing as symbols the periods of generation and production,
The priest, however, does not now assume a myriad of years, but the number of
nine thousand, in order that those of whom he is speaking may still be terrene, but
approvimating to the period of a myriad of years, All this interpretation, however,
the divine Tamblichus rejects, and says thatthe discussion here is not about hives,
but about the diflereat measures of Minerval participation, Its absurd, therefore,
to make mention of the periods spoken of in the Phwedrus. But if it be requisite
to narrate what follows from the conception of Porphyry, it must be said, that
the soul lives indeed intellectually and Saturnally on high, bat descends first to
the conception of a political life, whichis Jovian. Afterwards, she excites anger,
and lives ainbitiously, But anger is Martial. Τὰ the next place, she proceeds
in her descent to desire, and venereal lives; and at last, exerts physical reasons
{or productive powers]. Butall reasons are Hermaic. And Hermes is the
Inspective guardian of physical reasons. Through these, however, she is bound to
body. And again, receiving a body, she first lives physically, being the supplier
of nutriment and increase to the body. Afterwards, she lives epithymetically,
exciting genesiurgic powers. In the next place, she lives under the intlucnce of
anger, rising against her former habits, but entering into an ambitious life. After-
wards, she lives politically, moderating the passions. And in the last place, she
lives intellectually. If therefore she is restored to her pristine state, her life is
mtellectual, and the myriad is terminated. But in generation, though she is
conversant with it in the best manner, she lives according to a deficiency by the
chiliad. And of this the number nine thousand is a symbol, being adapted to the
Lest polity of the Athenians.

BOOK 1.] TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 125

“1 will therefore bricfly unfold to you the laws, and the most beautiful
of the deeds of those citizens that existed nine thousand years ago. For
when we are more at leisure, we shall accurately discuss every particular,
receiving for this purpose the sacred writings themselves.”

If you wish to refer what is here said to the whole order of things, the number
nine thousand will manifest the total progression as far as to a cube, and terrestrial
works, and likewise the life which pervades through all things. But through the
word briefly, the union of many productive powers, and the comprehension of
them according to intellect, are indicated. For the synoptical is an image of
intellectual impartbility ; but that which departs into multitude, of prolific
power; multiplying, producing, and dividing forms into minute parts, through
diversity. The laws are images of the divided fabrication, which is united accord-
ing to intellect. But) the most beautiful work is an adumbration of the orderly
distribution of things which is extended to one beantiful end. For beauty
subsisting according to the united, proceeds from intelligibles to the visible fabri-
cation. And _ the resumption of the sacred writings, Indicates the recurrence to the
paradigms of them, from which also the priest being filled, delivers these things
to Solon. The narration, therefore, will be concerning the divided and multiplied
fabrication, which is connected by intellect, and extends as far as to terrestrial
works, as may be inferred from all that has been said.

“Tn the first place then, consider the laws of these people, and compare
them with ours. Tor you: will now find here many paradigms of things
which then subsisted in your city.”

As Socrates summarily discussed his own polity, thus also the priest brietly
discusses the laws ofthe ancient Athenians, in order that the latter may have dimi-
nution with reference "τὸ the former, and also a similitude to it. And this very pro-
perly. For the one is more universal, but the other more partial. And the one is
the work of dianoia, but the other of the phantasy. This diminution indeed may be
surveyed, so far as Socrates has described a polity, but the priest laws. A polity, how-
ever, ts the union and comrion bond of the life of citizens ; but legislation is order pro-
ceeding into multitude and division, And the former is more analogous to the providen-
tial cause, but the latter to fate. But there is a similitude between Socrates and the

* Instead of vgeow exp ravra cat execva, it seems necessary to read vpeow ἐχὴ ravra καὶ xpos exewva-

126 PROCLUS ON THE (woo 1.
priest, 80 far as’ both assert that they deliver the multitude of their words con-
tractedly.

Again, therefore, these things embrace wholes and divine causes. For the
middle is suspended from the first fabrication, and is assimilated to it. And
each indeed pertains to the universe ; but) the latter according to union, and one
sameness 3 and the former according to progression and the difference of the
things fabricated. Just as the third ‘fabrication subsists according to conversion.*
And the first fabrication connects the war in generation celestially ; but) the
second subordinately and according to diminution ; just as the third? connects
the extremities of the universe. Very properly therefore does Socrates summarily
deliver the laws, and the whole life of the Athentans, in the samme manner as the
priest. And these things may be assumed from what the priest now says. But
he calls images paradigms, because the Saitans participate secondarily of those
things, of which the Athenians participate primarily. For though archetypes
rank among the first of beings, yetimages have the first: order with reference
to our knowledge. As therefore things secondary by nature are said to be first,
thus also they are said to be paradigms to the things that are elevated from them,
and which know through them the natures prior to them. Hflere also, what
pertains to the Athenians, indicates a more total, but what pertains to the Saitans,
amore partial order. ‘These things likewise are analogous, both in partial natures
and in wholes. So that the polity which is about to be delivered, pertains to
the city of the Athenians, or rather to the whole orderly distribution of things ;
and the laws extend to the whole world) from Minerva. Por every law is said
to be the distribution of intellect, and is rightly said to be so. But the laws of
the Athenians, being established conformably to the tutelar Goddess, exhibit the
distribution of the Minervalintelleet. But of this kind are the laws in the universe
which are defined conformably to one demturgic intellect, and the one providence
of Minerva.

‘Por the race of the priests was separated from the rest of the inhabi-
tants.”

That in a certain respect all this order of the polity of the priest is more partial
and more divided than that of Socrates, imitating the middle fabrication, may be

‘ For xpwrn here, it is necessary to read τρίτη.
* The nature of these three fabrications is uufolded farther on.
Ὁ Here also for xpwrn, it is necessary to read τρίτη,

cove nia Dae

BOOK 17} TIM.LUS OF PLATO. 127

learnt from the multitude and quality of the genera in the city. For in the polity
of Socrates, there were three genera, the guardian, the auxiliary, and) the merce.
nary. Por the triad is allied to the demiurgie monad. But here there are the double
of these, the sacerdotal, and the military; the demiurgic, for pertaining to
artificers; and = the pastoral; the venatic and the agricultural, For the middle
fabrication has at one and the same time the duadic, and the triadie; and both
these numbers are adapted to Minerva. But one of these indeed, viz. the triad,
is immediately adapted to the Goddess; but the other according to generation,
For the hexad is a triangle from the triad.’ By the trigonic therefore, and by the
hexad from the triad, the diminution and at the same time alliance to the Goddess
are manifested. For though every fabrication participates of Minerva, yet the
first and supreme parts of the universe, and the first fabrication, and the first
father, are filled from her in a more abundant degree. Thus therefore, if
you alone select these genera, you will find) the number adapted to the Goddess,
Buotif you add, the presiding over wisdom, you will entirely find the heptad,
which is ofa Minerval characteristic. And this is one of the things that are of
great notoriety. The feminine nature likewise of the heptad is celebrated, and
that itis produced fromthe monad alone. The monad also, the triad, and the hep-
tad, are said to be espectally imazes of Minerva; the first, indeed, as being intellectual ;
the second, as converting the monad to itself ; and the third, as proceeding from the
father alone. After this manner, therefore, you may infer from numbers,

It is necessary however, from the quality of the genera, to survey the diminution
and transcendency of these. For the sacerdotal is subordinate to the guardian
genus, Which ascends as far as to the first cause. * For Plato himselfin the Politi-
cus arranges the priests under the politician, and does not impart to them political
power. The military also is subordinate to the auxiliary genus. For the latter
arranges ina becoming manner, and sufficiently disciplines the inhabitants of the
city. Butthe former pursues war alone, and things pertaining to it, and partici-
pates of this study alone. And the mercenary tribe is divided into the remaining
genera. The polity of Socrates therefore surpasses that of the priest, as being
more comprehensive, and after a manner co-adapted to the genera prior to it.
So that both froin number and quality, it becomes evident to us that the polity

' For 6 is a triangular number, and is the double of 3.

* Plato asserts this of the guardians, in bis Republic,

128 PROCLUS ON THE [ΒβΒοοκ 1.

second after it. We establish, however, the analogies of the polity of Socrates
to the universe, to be as follows. The genus of guardians we arrange as analo-
gous to the celestial Gods. The aunihary genus to those more excellent natures,
the attendants on the celestial Gods, and the defenders of the universe. And the
mercenary genus, to those powers that connect a material nature with partial
souls. The first of these also, ts analogous to the fined stars, the second to the
planets, and the third to material natures, We may likewise assume in the celes-
tial Gods themselves, all these according to analocy,

Here, however, itis worth while to survey how, and after what manner, these
cenera Lenumerated by the priest) are to be assumed in’ the universe, Vor the
philosopher Porphyry arranges them as follows: That the priests are analogous
to the archangels inthe heavens, who are converted to the Gods, of whom
they are the messengers. But the soldiers are analogous to souls descend-
ing into bodies. Again, the shepherds are analogous to the powers that are arranged
over the herds of animals ; which in arcane narrations are said to be souls that
are frustrated of the human intellect, but have a propensity towards animals. Vor
there is also a certain curator of the herd of men. And there are likewise certain
partial curators; some being the inspectors of nations; others of cities ; and
others of individuals. But the hunters are analogous to those powers that
hunt after souls, and inclose them in bodies. ‘There are likewise powers who
delight in the hunting of animals, such as Diana is said to be, and another mul-
titude together with her of venatic demons. And the husbandmen are analogous
to those powers that preside over fruits. ΔἸ] this administration therefore of
snblunary damons is said by Plato to receive many demiurgic distributions, in
consequence of looking to the efleet which now is, or is becoming to be. The
divine Tamblichus, however, reprehends these assertions, as neither Platonic nor
true. For archangels are not any where mentioned by Plato, uor does the mi-
litary genus pertain to souls verging to bodies. For it is not proper to oppose
these to gods or diemons. For we should act absurdly, in arranging these in
the middle genus, but Gods and demons among the last artificers. Nor must
it be admitted, that those are shepherds, who are frustrated of human intellect,
but have a certain sympathy to ammals. Por the existence of damons who
zovern the mortal nature, is not derived from men; nor are those powers hunters,
who inclose the soul in body, as ina nets since the soul is not thus conjoined to
Which is now delivered, is subordinate to that of Socrates, and will rank as the

aI LTT OE

800K 1] TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 129

tothe body. Nor ts this mode of theory philosophic, but full of Barbarie arrogance."
Nor are husbandmen to be referred to Ceres: for the Gods are exempt from the
proximate causes of nature. Reprehending, therefore, these assertions, he consi-
ders the priests as analogous through similitude to all such secondary essences
and powers, as honour and worship the causes prior to themselves, But the shep-
herds, as analogous to all those mundane powers, that are allotted the government
of the life which verges to body, and of the most irrational powers, and who dis-
tribute these in an orderly manner. The hunters he places as analogous to those
universal powers who adorn secondary natures through the investigation of [real]
being. But the husbandmen, as corresponding to the powers that yive efficacy
to the seeds that descend from the heavens to the earth. And the soldiers, to
the powers that subvert every thing atheistical, and corroborate that which is
divine. After this manner, therefore, the divine Tamblichus [interprets what is said
by the priest.) But it is common to both these philosophers, that they divide the
fabricative genus into the pastoral, the venatic, and the agricultural ; but they
do not produce the four genera from one. Forno one, who rightly considers the
affair, can place either the pastoral or the venatic under the fabricative genus.
Will it not therefore be better to interpret the passage conformably to our
preceptor, by admitting that the sacerdotal and military tribes form one duad,
but the fabricative and agricultural another, and the pastoral and venatic a third |
duad; and assuming an order of this kind, to investigate the paradigms of them.
For the sacerdotal genus subsists in the anagogic Gods, the military in’ the
guardian, and the fabricative in the Gods who separate all the forms, and the pro-
ductive principles of mundane natures, But the agricultural genus subsists in
those Gods that supernally excite nature, and disseminate souls about generation.
For Plato, likewise, denominates the lapse of the soul into generation, a dissemi-
nation, But to sow is most adapted to husbandmen, as is, also, to collect pro-
ductions of nature. The pastoral genus subsists in the Gods that govern
distinctly all the forms of life that revolve in generation. For Plato, in the
Politicus, delivers to us certain divine shepherda. And the venatic subsists in
the divinities that give an orderly distribution to all: material spirits. For it is usual
with theologists to call these Gods hunters. All these genera likewise pertain to
the middle fabrication, viz. the convertive genus, the guardian, that which ad-

"It is somewhat singular, that Porphyry, who called the Christian religion Bapjapor τολμημα, @
barbarously bold wickedness, should have adopted this theory,
Tim. Plat. Vou. I. R

130 PROCLUS ON THE [Βοοκ 1,

ministers the psychical allotments, that which governs the genesiurgic forms of
life, every thing which fabricates and gives form to material natures, and that
which arranges the last order of spirits. ‘That, however, which pays attention to
wisdom, and that which is contemplative, must be considered as different from all
these genera, and which the Egyptian also celebrates above all the rest, making
mention in the first place, as being a priest, of the sacerdotal genus. All the
wenera, therefore, are seven, and the monad is exempt from the hexad. And
the monad, indeed, is analogous to the one intelleet which connects all the fabri-
cation of generated natures ς but the hexad is analogous to the more partial orders
‘under this intellect, viz. to the anagegic, guardian, formalizing, and vivifying
orders, and also to those that are the leaders of the herds ofa tame fife, and to
those that rule over the brutal nature, which orders in the universe likewise are
separated from the fined stars. Moreover, he says, that these orders may be scen
among men, in the firstplace, among the Athenians, but ins the second: place,
amon the Saitans, according to the division of genera, each accomplishing its
proper work ina detinite manner. For he manifests this by saying, separate from
others, in order that we may understand the unmingled purity of the genera,

proceeding supernally through dimimution, as far as to the last of things.

“The artificers, also, exercised their arts insuch a manner, that each
was engaged in hisown employment without mingling with that of other
artists. The same method was likewise adopted by shepherds, hunters,

and husbandmen.”

The whole of this tetractys has, indeed, the third order, according to a section
of the genera into: three, but is now enumerated by Plato as the second; in
order that through this, whats said may imitate the universe, inowhich the last
is the middle, comprehended on all sides by more divine natures. Por that which
is most material and gross, is enclosed by fabrication in the middle. Por thus
alone’ can it be preserved, being adorned and guarded according to the whole of
itself by all the comprehending natures [in the universe). But again, it is here
added, that the fabricative art was not mingled with the other arts, mor ina simile
lar manner any one of the others with the rest, but that each remained by itself,
and inits own purity. Por this not only produces accuracy and rectitude in

* For podes here, itis necessary to read porws.

AE EERIE ESE OE

nook 1] TIM.TEUS OF PLATO. “ΠΡ

appropriate works, but likewise efleets the sympathy of the citizens. For all will
thus be in want of all, in consequence of cach not exercising many arts. For the
builder will be in want of the husbandman, the husbandman_ of the shepherd, the
shepherd of the hunter, and the lmnter of the builder; and thus each being in
want of the rest, will not be unmingled with them; hence, there is sameness in
conjunction with difference, and separation accompanied with union.

“The warlike genus too, you will find was separated from all the other
genera, and was ordered by law to engage in nothing but what pertained

to war.”

Every where indeed, but especially in the warlike genus, the unmingled and
the separate are appropriate. For they have an alliance to the highest order,
which cuts offevery thing material, and obliterates that which is disorderly and
confused, Very properly therefore does this genus pay attention to the concerns
of war. For on account of this, the city remains free from external and injurious
incursions ; and this invests it with a guard from itself, imitating the guardian
order. For as a guardian. deity is present with the first, so likewise with the mid-
dle of the demiurgi. This, therefore, may be assumed from theology. But by
Jaw in the universe, we must understand the divine institutions proceeding from
the one demiurgie intellection, For prior to mundane natures is the demiurgic
law, whichis seated by Jupiter, and distributes together with him in an orderly
manner all the providential inspection which exists in the universe.

“© A similar armour too, such as that of shields and darts was employed
by each. These we first used in Asia ; the Goddess in those places, as
likewise happened to you, first pointing them out to our use.”

The narration extends the energy of Minerva supernally from paradigms,
as far as to the last genera. For there are things connascent with this energy,
participating of undefiled powers, more total and more partial, and which arrange
the mundane genera from the middle fabrication. Analogously also to this, they
comprehend and are comprehended, are vanquished by the Minerval energies,
and remain perpetually undefiled with invariable sameness through it, in the uni-
yerse. It is requisite, therefore, to know these things in common about all these

192 PROCLUS ON THE [nook 1.

particulars. We must however show what the armour, the shields, and the
spears, are, and how these are antecedently comprehended in the Goddess.
Porphyry, indeed, calling the body the shield, assumes anger for the spear.
But these pertain to souls falling into generation and to material things, and
are not the instruments of immutable safety, but ofa venesiurgic life, corrupting

the purity of intellect, and destroying the life which subsists according to

reason. The divine Tamblichus, however, explains these in a divinely Inspired
manner, For since itis requisite that every thing divine should operate and
not suffer, in order that by operating it may not have the ineflicacious, which
is assimilated to matter, and that by not suffering it may not have an eflicacious
power resembling that of material natures, which actin conjunction with passion ;—
in order that both these may be accomplished, he says, that sliclds are powers
through which a divine nature remains impassive and undetiled, surrounding itself
with an inftangible guard. But spears are the powers according to which it pro-
ceeds through all things without contact,” and operates on all things, cutting off
that which is material, and giving aid to every genesiurgic form, These powers,
however, are first seen about Minerva. Hence in the statues of her she is) repre-
sented with a spear and shicld. Por she vanquishes all things, and according to
theologists, remains without declination, and with undetiled purity, in her father:
But these have a secondary subsistence, in both the total and partial Minerval
powers. For as the Jovian and demiurgic multitude, mitates Its monad, and as
the prophetic and Apolloniacal multitude participates of the Apollomacal pecu-
larity ; thus, also, the Minerval number, adtunbrates the undefiled and unmingled
nature of Minerva. This, also, takes place in an ultimate degree in Minerval souls,
For in these, likewise, the shield is the untamed and uninclining power of reason;
but the spear is that power which amputates matter and liberates the soul from
damoniacal or fatal passions ; of which powers the Athenians participate ina
purer manner, bat the Sattans ina secondary degree, receiving these through the

measure of alliance to the Goddess.

“You may perceive, too, what great attention was paid immediately
from the beginning by the laws to prudence and modesty, and besides
these, to divination and medicine, as subservient to the preservation of
health. And from these, which are divine goods, the laws, proceeding

* For ἀνάψω, here, itis necessary to read avagns.

REI AOR OL EE RTE

ROOK 1. TIM US OF PLATO. 133

tothe invention of such as are merely human, procured all such other
disciplines as follow from those we have just enumerated.”

A little farther on, he calls the Goddess both a lover of wisdom and a lover of
war, in order that the arrangement of the polity of the Athenians and Saitans
might be produced conformably to her as a paradigm. And what indeed pertains
to the exercise of war, is sufficiently indicated trom what has been said ; but that
which pertains to wisdom, he exhibits to us in the present words ; in order that
by the one, the philopolemie, and by the other, the philosophic nature of
Minerva might be adumbrated. What then is this prudence?) The theory of
wholes and of supermundane natures, from which, after the first of goods which
are perfective of souls, a certain facility is obtained in the concerns of human life,
proceeding in conjunction with divination and medicine. And in one way, indeed,
this prudence is the source of disciplines in invisible causes, in another way, about
the world, and in the last place, about human affairs. For since the Goddess her-
selfis immaterial and separate wisdom, on this account, to the natures that are
allied to her, she unfolds into light all the parts of divine and human prudence.
Por with respect to divination, also, one kind must be admitted to exist in the
intellectual, and another in the mundane Gods. And of the latter, one kind
proceeds from the Gods, another from dawmons, and another from the discuar-
sive energy of the human soul, existing rather as something artificial and con-
jectural, Ina similar manner also with respect to medicine, one kind indeed
exists in the Gods themselves, and this is ofa Psconian nature ; but another kind,
in demons, being ministrant and subservient to the Gods, from whom likewise
matter and instruments are procured for the advents of the Gods. For as there
are many dwmons about Love, thus also about Esculapius, some are allotted
the order of attendants, but others that of forerunners of the God, And ano-
ther kind exists in human lives, being that which is noparted from theorems
and experience, according to which some are adapted ina greater, and others
in a less degree to divine medicine. But there is also a mixture of these two
kinds of prudence, viz. the prophetic and the medicinal, with the Egyptians ;
because the causes of these are antecedently comprehended in one divinity, and
from one fountain many streams are distributed about the world. And thus
much has been said in common about the prudence which is now menioneddl.

In order, however, to unfold each particular more fully, we must say, that daw,
indeed, is the order proceeding from the one intellect of Minerva; but adlention,

134 PROCLUS ON THE [Rook τ.

the providence pervading from wholes as far as to material natures 3 and immedi-
ately from the deginning, the nataral aptitude of Minerval souls to prudence. For
that which is neither adventitious nor foreign, appears to be signified by these
words, But if some one should) refer what is said to the mundane order,
because the distribution of things does not proceed from the imperfeet to the
perfect, but is always arranged and accompanied in its progression with that
which is excellent, it appears to me that this is manifested by the words unmedi-
ately from the beginning. The words, however, must be referred to the order of the
whole world, because there are invisible causes of the natures that are arranged in the
world, whieh perfect pradence (i.e. wisdom) primarily contemplates, Por the
form of prudence is not, as Porphyry says it ts, artificial, or adapted to the arts.
For this, as Tamblichus observes, is the gift of Valean, but not of Minerva. But
attention was also paid to divination and medicine, heeause itis fit, in the first place,
to contemplate the other powers of the mundane Gods, and thus afterwards, their
prophetic and) sanative production; since we are allotted the government of a
generated body, and to us who are enclosed in body, futurity is immanitest.
For a material life exhibits much of the contingent, end of an hyparsis diflerently
moved at different times. But by such other disciplines as follow from these, he
doubtless means geometry, astronomy, lowistic, arithmetic, and the sciences
allied to these; all which the law having established, led the Athenians and Saitans
to the possession of an admirable prudence. And thus much concerning these
particulars,

Porphyry, however, says, that medicine very properly proceeds from Minerva,
because Eseulapius is the lunar intelleet, inthe same manner as Apollo is the
solar intellect. But the divine Tamblichus blames this assertion, as confounding
the essences of the Gods, and as not always rightly distributing according to pre
sent circumstances the intellects and souls of the mundane Gods, For it must
be admitted that) Esculapins exists inthe sun, and that he proceeds from: that
luminary about the generated place; in order that as the heavens, ΝῸ likewise
veneration may be connected by this divinity, according to a second participation,

and may be tilled from it with symmetry, and good temperament.

“ According to all this orderly distribution therefore, and co-arranges
ment, the Goddess first established and adorned your city.”

Vhe word αἱ manifests the united comprehension in the Goddess of all the
natures that are adorned by her, and that neither is any thing pretermitted by

nook 1] TIM:GUS OF PLATO. 135

her, nor the multitude in her suffered to exist in a divided state. But the word
διακοσμησις, Indicates the orderly distribution of the Minerval providence. And
the word co-arrangement signifies the union of these, and their alliance to one
world. Farther still, the word διακόσμησις signifies the progression of wholes
from the Goddess; but co-arrangement, the conversion of them to herself. Since,
however, of the natures in the universe, some are total, but others are partial, and
some are analogous to monads, but others to numbers, and both participate of the
Minerval providence, but primarily such as are total and monadic,—on this ac-
count what is at present said, attributes the more ancient and leading order to
the Athenians, but that which is secondary and diminished to the Sattans,

Choosing for this purpose the placein which you were born ; as she
foresaw, that from the excellent temperature of the seasons it would

produce the most sagacious men.”

Prior to this, the Goddess was said to have been a/lotfed the Attic region; but it
is now said that she chose it. Both, however, concur, and neither is the being allot-
ted contrary to her will, nor is her choice disorderly, as is the case with a partial
soul Por divine nece sity concurs with divine wall, chotee with allotinent,
and to choose with to. be allotted. What this place, however, is, has been betore
shown by us, viz. that it is interval, and that which is truly place. For the divi-
sions of divine allotments, are divisions of these, in order that they may be esta-
blished with invariable sameness prior to things which subsist according to time.
But it must now be added, that the soul of the universe possessing the productive
principles of all divine {mundane} natures, and being suspended from the essences
prior to herself, inserts in diferent: parts of the interval an allance to different
powers, and certain symbols of the divine orders in the Gods. For this interval
is proximately suspended from: her, and is an instrument Connascent with her,
As she is, therefore, a rational and psychieal world, she also renders this [sensible]
world endued with interval, and vital through divine impressions. ence the
interval itself, though it is said to be continued and inimoveable, yet is not
entirely without diflerence with reference to itself; since neither is the soul of the
universe perfectly without difference in’ itself towards itself, but one part [as 1
were] of it, isthe circle of the same, and another, the circle of the different. And —
why do [assert this of the soul? for neither is much celebrated intellect without
diflerence in itself, though all things in it are, as it were, of the same colour. For

136 PROCLUS ON THE [Boox 1.

all things do not possess an equal power in intellect, hut some are more total, and
others more partial. Nor is this wonderfol. For the Demiurgus himself contains
in himself, first, middle, and last orders. Whence, also, Pthink Orpheus, indicating
the order of his powers, says, ‘ that his head is the refulgent heaven, but his eves
are the sun, and the opposing moon.” Though, therefore, this interval should have
one essence, unattended with difference, yet the power of soul, and the allot-
ted orders of dawimons, and prior to these, the Gods, dividing it, according to the
demiurgic order, and the allotments of justice, demonstrate that there is much
diflerence in the parts of it. Tlence itmast be admitted, that the choice becomes
Internal, and from the essence of the Gods, and that itis not such as we see in
partial souls, Por the former is essential; buat the latter is atone detined aceord-
ing to the present life. And the former is eternal, but the latter temporal.

By place, therefore, We must not understand the earth or this air, but prior to
these, the immoveable interval, which is always illumiuated after the same man-
ner by the Gods, and divided by the allotments of justice. Por these material
natures are atone time adapted, and at another unadapted, to the participation
of the Gods, And itis necessary that prior to things which sometimes participate,
there should be those which are always suspended: atter the same manner from
the Gods. And thusimuch may sutlice respecting these particulars,

With respect, however, τὸ the excellent: temperature of the seasons, which is
productive of sagacious men, Panwtius, and certain other Phatonists, understand
the words according to their apparent Ineanine, viz. that the Atte region, on
acccunt of the excellent temperature of the seasons of the year, is adapted to the
production of sagacious men, But Longinas doubts the truth of their assertion,
For the contrary is seen to be the case, since about this place, there is a great
want of symmetry in dryness from excessive heat, and cold tempestuous weather.
Nor if the place was of this kind, would they yet be able to preserve the immor-
tality of souls, if sagacity was implanted in them through the excellent tempera-
ture of the seasons, But he says, that this excellent temperature is not. to be
referred to the condition of the air, but that it) isa certain nameless peculiarity of
the region contributing to sagacity. For as certain waters are prophetic, and
certain places are productive of disease, and are pestilential, thus, also, itis not
at all wonderful that a certain peculiarity of country should contribute to prudence
and sagacity. Origen, however, refers this excellent temperature to the cireua-
tion of the heavens ; for from thence the fertility and sterility of souls are derived,
as Socrates says, in the Republic. He, however, apprehends the truth in a more

SSeS TENS A MATT AIOE?

parses ce

BOOK 1.) TIMAEUS OF PLATO. 137

partial manner. But Longzinusis ignorant that he makes the peculiarity to be corpo-
real, and that he is entangled in the doubts which Porphyry proposes to him. For
how can one peculiarity of air render men adapted to different pursuits? Ans in the
next place, a similar peculiarity stil! remaining, how comes it to pass that there
is now no longer the same natural excellence in the genius of the inhabitants 7
Bat if the peculiarity is corruptible, it must be shown what it is that is corruptive
of it. It is however better to say, that the Gods having divided the whole of
space conformably to the demiurgic order, each portion of place receives souls
adapted to it; that portion indeed which is Martial, receiving souls of a more
animated and irascible nature ; that which is Apolloniacal, prophetic souls; that
which is Esculapian, medical; and that which is Minerval, prudent and
sagacious souls. But this is effected through a certain quality, or rather each
portion of place possesses a power of this kind from its allotted divinity ; and
Plato calls this adaptation, excellence of temperature; since there are many
physical, psychical, deemoniacal, and angelical powers in each portion of place,
but each unity of the allotted divinity unites and mingles all these in an unmingled
manner. Since however the Seasons are allotted from the Father, the guardian-
ship of these portions of place and allotments, to whose care, as Llomer ' says,
“the mighty Heaven and Olympus are committed,” and according to which, the
co-adaptations of souls similiar to places is effected ; hence Plato suspends this
excellent temperature froin the Seasons, the whole of it deriving from thence its
subsistence. :

The Goddess therefore perceiving that the [Attic] portion of interval which is
always guarded by the Seasons, is adapted to the reception of sagacious souls,
selected it for this purpose; not that this place was once deprived of Minerva,
but at another time was under her allotted guardianship; for the text demonstrates
the contrary ; but because there are also in the interval itself, different aptitudes
to the reception of divine illuminations, according to different parts; which
aptitudes were inserted by the whole Demiurgus, who uniformly comprehends
the powers of all the Gods posterior to himself. ‘These powers, however, are
corroborated and perfected by, or rather proceed from, the presiding Gods. As,
therefore, with respect to the elections of lives, the soul that chooses its proper life,
acts with rectitude ; after the same manner, also, the soul which is arranged in a

: © had. V. v. 750.
Tim. Plat. Vou. I. : Ss

128 PROCLUS ON THE [Book 1.

place conformable to the choice of its life, energizes in a greater degree than the
soul which is disseminated ina foreign place. But to this arrangement, the one
circulation of the heavens contributes, which introduces a fertility and. sterility. of
souls. In fertile periods, therefore, there is a greater, but in barren periods, a less
nember of sagacious men. Elence, as when a husbandiman chooses good land
for the etheacious growth of the seeds, Knowing that when the season is fertile,
be shall reap greater benefit, but when itis barren less, on account: of the power
of the earth; thas also the test says, that the Goddess chose this place, as pro-
ductive of sagactous men, in order that when the period is fertile it may have
more; and when the period is barren, may have less! of prudent and
sagacious men, in consequence of falling off from a fife adapted to the place.
We must not however wonder, if Plato praises the excellent: temperature of
the visible Seasons. 9 For there is) one excellent temperature with reference
to the health of bodies, and another contributing to the reception of sagacious
souls, such as is that of the Attie region. Por though there is not always the
same sagacity ins those that inhabit this region, yet there is always a certain
greater abundance of it through the peculiarity of the place, and the aptitude of
the Seasons. Such, therefore, is our opinion respecting these particulars,

The divine Tamblichus, however, does not understand by place, one corporeal-
formed condition, but an incorporeal cause pervading through the earth, sus-
taining bodies by hfe, and comprehending all interval, Por ina place of this
kind, he says the Goddess fashions truly good men, and causes them to inhabit.
But whether he accords with the words of Plato, may be surveyed from what
has been said. Tf, however, it be requisite, desisting trom these things, to con-
template wholes according to the analogous, it imust be said that this Goddess
fabricating and weaving the universe in conjunction with her father, every where
distributes to wholes, and to things of the better co-ordination, a more perfect
allotipent. But these are more replete with wisdom than their upposites, and are
more adapted to the Goddess. We shall show, therefore, from the following
words of Plato, how that which excels in prudence is of a more Minerval

characteristic.

“The Goddess, therefore, being a lover both of war and wisdom, first
~clected this place for the habitation of en most similar to herself.”

* Justead yf καὶ agupias EON, Tw eXarroy ατυπιπτέιν THs KaTa TOY TOKUY exunsecas Zens, in this place,

it ds necessary to read, και UMOPIAS NTTOY, Tw ὠπυπιπτει», κα. ee

ee

poor 11] TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 139

In what is here said, Plato delivers to us the most accurate conception respecting
this greatest divinity, unfolding to those who are sufficiently able to perceive his
meaning, the indications of theologists, Different interpreters however betake
themselves to diflerent arrangements of the Goddess ; some indeed narrating their
opinion more enigmatically, but others more clearly, yet not confirming what they
assert. For Porphyry, placing Minerva in the Moon, says that souls descend
from thence, which possess atone and the same time irascibility and mildness sand
that on this account, the mystagogues in Eleusis are lovers of wisdom and lovers of
wary; since it is said that the race of those who are kaders of the mysteries in
Eleusis, is derived from Musaus, the offspring of the Moon; and also that. the
Hermes there subsists about the Moon, from which also the race of the Cryers is
derived. The divine Tamblichus, however, blames these assertions, as not well
preserving the analogy. For he interprets iar as that which entirely subverts
the whole of a disorderly, confused, and material nature ; but wisdom as immate-
rial and separate intelligence. He also says, that this Goddess ‘ is the cause -
of both these; which likewise the Athenians imitate through a prudent and
warlike life, He adds, that the Athenian region is well adapted to the τὸς
ception of such-like souls.

If, however, it be requisite that the conceptions of these men should become
manifest, and prior to these, that what is delivered by Plato should be shown
to accord in the highest degree with theologists, we must assert as follows :
deriving what we say from a supernal ongin. In the Demiurgus and father of
the whole world, many orders of Gods that have the form of the one, present
themselves to the view. And these are of a guardian, or demiurgic, or eleva-
ting, or connective, or perfective: characteristic. But the undefiled and un-
tamed deity Minerva, is one of the first intellectual unities: subsisting in’ the
Deniureus, according to whieh he himself remains firm and imiutable, and all
things proceeding from him participate of inflesible power; and through which,
he intellectually perceives every thing, and is separate in an exempt manner from
all beings. All theologists, therefore, call this) divinity Minerva, as) being
brought forth indeed from the summit of her father, and abiding in him; being
adcmiurgic, separate, and immaterial intelligence.

Hence Socrates, in the Cratylus, celebrates her as ¢heonoe (4eovoy] or deific intel-
lection, But theologists, also, consider her as in conjunction with other divinities

' Instead of των θεων here, it is necessary to read την θεον.

140 PROCLUS ON ‘THE {Rook ".

sustaining all things in the one Demiurgus, and arranging wholes together with
her father. Hence through the first of these, they denominate her philosophic,
bat through the second philopolemic, For she, who according to the (τ of the
one, connectedly contains all the paternal wisdom, is a pAilosopher, And she, who
invariably rules over all contrariety, may be properly called a lover of war.
Hence Orpheus speaking of her birth says, that Jupiter generated her from

hes head,

With armour shining like a brazen flower,

Since, however, it was necessary that she should proceed into second and third
orders, she appears in the order to which Proserpine belongs, according to the
undefiled heptad; but she generates every virtue from herself, ἀπ clevating
powers; and illuminates secondary natures with intellect, and an undetiled life.
Hence she is called Core Tritogencs. She likewise appears among the liberated
Gods, umting the lunar order with intellectual and demuurgic light, causing the
productions of those divinities to be undefiled, and demonstrating the one unity
of them to be unmingled with their depending powers. She also appears in the
heavens and the sublanary region; and according to the united gift of herself
nnparts the cause both of the philosophic and the philopolemte power. For
her inflexibility is intellectual, and her separate wisdom is pare and unmingled
with secondary natures ; and the one characteristic peculiarity of Minerval
providence, extends as far as to the last orders. Por since wherever there are
partial souls that resemble her divinity, they exert an admirable prudence, and
exlibit an unconquerable strength, what ought we to say of her attendant choirs
"of damons, or divine, mundane, liberated, and ruling orders? For all these
receive as from a fountain the twofold peculiarity of this Goddess. Hence also,
the divine poct (Homer) indicating both these powers of Minerva, in conjunction

with fabulous devices says,

‘The radiant veil her sacred fingers wove
Floats in nich waves, and spreads the court of Jove.

Her father’s warlike robe her limbs invest. * ‘

- ' For χορευτῶν in this place, it is necessary to τόδ χορὼν των. * Thad. vit.

1
|
:
ἃ

Book 1.) TIMAUS OF PLATO. Lal

Tn which verses by the veil which she wove, and to which she gave subsistence
by her intellections, her intellectual wisdom is signified. But by the warlike robe
of Jupiter, we must understand her demiurgic providence, which immutably
takes care of mundane natures, and prepares more divine beings always to have
dominion in the world. Hence, also, Ε think Homer represents her as an asso-
ciate in battle with the Greeks against the Barbarians; just as Plato here relates
that she was an associate with the Greeks against the inhabitants of the Atlantic
island; in order that every where more intellectual and divine natures may

“rule over such as are more irrational and vile. For Mars, also, is a friend to
warand contrarieties, but with a separation and division more adapted to the
things themseives, Minerva, however, connects contrariety, and illuminates the
subjects of her government with union, Hence, likewise, she is said to be

plilopolemic, For,
Strife, fighting, war, she always loves.

And she is a friend to war, indeed, because she is allotted the summit of se-
paration; but she is a lover of contrarieties, because these are in a certain respect
congregated through this goddess, in consequence of better natures having
dominion. On this account, likewise, the ancients co-arranged Victory with
Minerva.

If, therefore, these things are nghtly asserted, she is philosophic indeed, as
being demiurgic intelligence, and as separate and immaterial wisdom. Hence,
alsoy she is called Metis by the Gods. But) she is philopolemic, as con-
necting the contrarietics in wholes, and as an untamed and inflexible deity,
On this account, likewise, she preserves Bacchus undetiled, but vanquishes the
giants in conjunction with her father. She too alone shakes the το σία, without
waiting for the mandate of Jupiter. She also hurls the javelin ;—

Shook by her arm, the massy javelin bends ;
Hluge, ponderous, strong! that when her fury burns,

Whole ranke of heroes tames and overturns. "

Again, she is Phosphoros, as every way extending intellectual light; the Sa-
viour, as establishing every partial intellect in the total intellections of her father ;

* Tad. viii.

142 PROCLUS ON THE [BOOK 1.

Ergane, or the artificer, as presiding over demiurgic works. Hence the the-
ologist Orpheus says, that the father produced her,

That she the queen might be of mighty works.

But she is Calliergos, or the beautiful fabricator, as connecting by beauty all
the works of the father; a /reim, as exerting an undefiled and unmingled purity,
und diviochos, or wgis-beaving, as moving the whole of fate, and betne the leader
of its productions. We should, also, discuss the remaining appellations of the
Goddess, if, what we have already said might not appear to be prolin through my
sympathy with the discussion, Again, therefore, recurring to the thing proposed
we must say, that Plato calls both these divinities, Love and) Minerva, philo-
suphers, not for the same reason; but he thus denominates the former, as being
the middle of wholes, and as leading to intelligible wisdom ; and the latter as
the summit of wholes, and as the union of demiurgic wisdom, Por the Demiurgus
is “ Metis the first generator and much-pleasing Love.” And as Metis, indeed,
he brings forth Minerva; but as Love, he generates the amatory series.

“ The ancient Athenians, therefore, using these laws, and being formed
by good institutions in a still greater degree than I have mentioned,
inhabited this region ; surpassing all men in every virtue, as it becomes
those to do, who are the progeny and pupils of the Gods.”

We learn from history that the affiirs of the Athenians are more ancient than
those of the Saitans; that the establishment of their city is prior; and that their
laws are more proximate to Minerva. But in the mundane paradigms, also,
wholes are prior to parts 5 and there is an order in them which is more divine, a
power which is greater, and a form of virtue which is truly Minerval. Por the
genus of virtue is adapted to this greatest divinity, as being virtue herself, For
abiding in the Demiurgus, she is wisdom and immutable intelligence, and in’ the
ruling (or supermundane] Gods, she unfolds the power of virtue.

By virtue’s worthy uame she’s called,

says Orpheus. It is evident, however, that things which are more divine in the
universe, may be called the progeny and pupils of the Gods, For they derive

Fl IN IIE ti Hn

ον οί

Seu sient

nook 1] TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 143

their subsistence and are perfected, or rather they are always perfect, through the
fabrication of the Gods, and the undefiled production of Minerva. Every thing,
therefore, which is suspended and originates from the Gods, and is converted to
them, exhibits transcendent virtue. But this, also, is in wholes ; since it must be
admitted that there is divine virtue in the universe. And it is likewise in human
lives, according to a similitude to wholes. Henee what is now said is applied to
the Athenians, But making the lite of the Athenians to be one and continued,
it conjoins Solon to the ancient inhabitants of Athens. Vor it says, they
“inhabited this region.” For the paradigm of them is one, and in continuity
with itself; since the whole of the Minerval series being one, extends as far as
to the last of things, and originates supernally from the supermundane orders.

“ Many,and mighty deeds, therefore, of your city are recorded in our
temples, and are the subject of admiration; yet there is one which
surpasses all of them in magnitude and virtue.”

The priest having promised summarily to relate the laws and deeds of the
Athenians, he delivered, indeed, their laws according toa division of genera;
and it, therefore, remained for him to celebrate their deeds, through which an
encomiuin is passed on the city, and the tutelar Goddess is praised. Since, how-
ever, of deeds there is a number, and there is also one unity comprehensive of
them, according to which the whole form of the polity is exhibited, he announces
that he shall narrate the greatest deed, and which surpasses all the rest in virtue ;
this deed not being one of the many, but one prior to the many. For such a
method of narration subsists appropriately with reference to the universe, in which
wholes accomplsh, and connectedly contain one life, and collect many con-
trarieties into one union with the Goddess. Hence, as there were many and
great deeds of the city, the priest very properly relates one deed which was
recorded in the temples. For there is, also, an intellectual paradigin of it, so far
as it is surveyed in the world, and which transcends in’ magnitude and
virtue; transcendency according to magnitude presenting to our view that
which is fotal, but according to virtue that which is intelectual. For wholes
and the more divine of mundane natures have. many energies of the great-
est magnitude, and accomplish one life and polity, conformably to which

. fighting under Minerva, they vanquish all subordinate beings. After this

* For pepuas here, it is necessary to read μεγίστας.

144 PROCLUS ON THE [RooK 1.

manner, therefore, we must explain what is said. Porphyry, however, by
great and admirable deeds, understands such as are accomplished by souls
against matter, and material modes. But he calls demons material modes. For,
according to him, there are two species of dwmons, of which the one consists of
suuls, but the other of modes: and these are material powers, which are noxious
to the soul. For these dogmas, however, he is corrected by the interpreter that
came after him.'

“ Por these writings relate, what a mighty power your city once
tamed, which rushing from the Atlantic sea, spread itself with hostile
fury overall Europe and Asia.”

Plato in what is here said, neither omits any thing of encomiastic «augment, if
the war of the Athenians against the Atlanties is considered as a mere history 5 nor
fails in theological accuracy in Conjunction with caution, ifany one is) willing to
pass from partial natures to wholes, and to proceed from images to paradigms.
As itis usual, therefore, in Panathenaic orations to celebrate most amply the Per-
sian expedition, and the victories of the Athemians both by land and sea, with
which more recent orators fill their orations 3 Plato in praising the Athenians,
neither delivers the Persian invasion nor any other similar deed, but introducing
the Atlantic war against the parts inhabited by us, and which rushed from. the
ex<ternal sea with a force capable of entirely destroying these parts, he informs us |
thatthe Athenians were victorious, and that they subdued this mighty power.
Since, however, the Persian expedition came from the east against the Grecks, and
particularly against the Athenians, Plato introduces the Atlantic war from the
west, inorder that you may survey the city of the Athenians as from a centre,
castgating a Barbaric multitade pouring against ton each side in’ a disorderly
manner. “To which may be added, that in the institutes delivered by the ancestors
of the Athenians, and also in the mysteries, the Gigantic war is celebrated, and
the victory of Minerva over the Giants, because in conjunction with ber father
she vanquished these and the Titans, Plato, however, does not think it safe im-
mnediately to introduce war against the Gods; for this is the very thing which he
Hlamesintheancient poets; and itwould beabsurd that Critias or’Timwus, who were

auditors of what Socrates said against the poets on the preceding day, should

ἐν ον By the divine Jamblichus.

ἥ

ERE φπδν FNRI S PO ES ih

ROOK 1.] TIMAUS OF PLATO. 145

again ascribe wars and seditions to the Gods. But through the analogy of human
to divine concerns, he delivers this Atlantic war prior to the fabrication of the
world, assuming the Athenians instead of Minerva and the Olympian Gods, and
the Atlanties instead of the Titans and Giants. For it is possible to survey the
same things in images as in wholes, And that I] may remind you of the analogy,
through thename of the Athenians, he refers his readers to the Olympian co-ordina-
tion which fought under the command of Minerva; but through that of the Atlan-
tics, to the Titanic Gods. For the mighty Atlas was one of the Titans. Theo-
logists also after the laceration of Bacchus, which manifests the divisible progression
into the universe under Jupiter from the impartible fabrication, say that the other
Titans had different allotments, but that-Atlas was established in the weslera
parts, sustaining the heavens.

By strong necessity the wide-spread heay'n

In carth’s extremes, by Atlas was sustain’d,

Farther still, the victories of Minerva are eclebrated by the Athenians, and there
is a festival sacred to the Goddess, in consequence of her having vanquished Nep-
tune, and from the genesiurgic being subdued by the intellectual order, and those
that inhabit this region betaking themselves to a life according to intellect, after
the procurement of necessaries. Tor Neptune presules over generation ; but
Minerva is the inspective guardian of an intellectual life. The things proposed
therefore will contribute in the greatest degree to these analogies. For the Athe-
nians bearing the name of the Goddess, are analogous to her; and the Atlantics
through inhabiting an island, and through being called the progeny of Neptune,
preserve an analogy to this God ; so that it is evident from these things that tle
Atlantic war indicates the middle fabrication, according to which the second
father (Neptune) being tilled by Minerva, and the other invisible causes, governs
diviner natures ina more powerful manner, and subjects all such things as have
a mulliplied, divisible, and more material hypostasis, to intellectual natures. For
the Gods themselves, indeed, are eternally united; but the beings which are go-
yerned by them, are filled with this kind of division. After this manner, therefore,
these things must be separately understood, |

In order however that we may pre-assume certain definite forms' of the pro-
posed analysis, it must be admitted, that the habitations within the pillars of Her-

* For rovrovs here, it is necessary to read rvrovs.

Tim. Plat. Vou. I. T

146 PROCLUS ON THE faced.

cules, are analogous to the whole of the more excellent, but those external to them,
to the whole of the inferior co-ordination, and that of this, there is one continued,
and variously proceeding lite. Whether, therefore, beginning from the Gods, you
speak of the Olympian and Titanic divinities 5 or beginning from intellect, of per-
manency and motion, or sameness and difference; or from souls, you speak of the
rational and irrational; or from bodies, of heaven and generation ; or in whatever
other way you may divide essences, according to all divisions, all the genus of
those within the pillars of Hercules will be analogous to the better, but of those
without to the less excellent: co-ordination of things. © For the true sea of dissimi-
litude, and the whole of a material life which proceeds into interval and multitude
from the one, are there. Hence, whether you are willing Orphically to arrange
the Olympian and ‘Titanic genera in opposition to each other, and τὸ celebrate
the former as subduing the latter; or Pythagorically, to perceive the two co-ordi-
nations proceeding from on high, as far as to the last of things, and the better
adorning the subordinate rank; or Platonically, to survey much of infinity
and much of bound in the universe, as we learn im the Philebus, and the whole
of infinity in conjunction with the measures of bound, producing generation,
which extends through all mundane natures,—from all these, you may assume
one thing, that the whole composition of the world is co-harmonized from this con-
traricty. And if the illustrious Heraclitus looking to this said, that war ts the
Sather of allthings, he did not speak absurdly.

Porphyry, therefore, here refers the theory to demons and souls, and makes
mention of the fabulous Titanic war, adducing some things to what 1s proposed
to be considered, with probability, but others, without it. Phe divine Iambli-
chus however, against those who adopt a more partial assignation of the cause of
the analysis, is of Opinion after a certain wonderful manner, that what is said is
only to be understood according to the apparent meaning, though in’ the pre-
face he himself delivers to us auxiliaries for the solution of such-like narrations.
May that divine man however, who has instructed us in many other particulars,
and also in these, be propitious to us. Betaking ourselves, therefore, to the inter-
pretation of the words of Plato, we think it fit to remind ourselves, of the before-
mentioned forms of analysis; and that we must arrange the Atlantics accord-
ing to all the total natures of the inferior co-ordination. For in these, also,
some things are wholes, but others parts. But we must arrange their ansoleny

“mpustice, according to progression, a division through diminution, and a proximity
to matter, Por matter is truly infinity and baseness. Hence through nearness

δ PEE

ROOK 1. TIMAUS OF PLATO. 147

to, and being in a certain respect in it, they are said to have acted injuriously from
iusolence. For the paradigm of them is manifested by the theologist, through
these names, when he says of them, “that their mind is replete with evil counsels,
and their heart is insolent.” And we must arrange the rushing from external
parts according to a defection and separation remote from. the Gods, and things
of a diviner nature in the universe. For the external does not indicate compre-
hension of powers, but an hypostasis departing from every thing stable, im-
material, pure, and united. But the Atlantic sea must be arranged according to
matter itself, whether you call it the abyss, or the sea of dissimilitude, or in whatever
other way you may be willing to denominate it. For matter receives the appella-
tions of the inferior co-ordination, being called infinity and darkness, irrationality
and immoderation, the principle of diversity and the duad; just as from. the
Atlantic sea, the Atlantic island is denominated. For thus receiving the analogies
in order, we shall understand that the whole of the inferior co-ordination, and the
more total and partial genera in it, are characterised by progression and division,
and a conversion to matter, and that thus it proceeds through all things, presenting
itself to the view appropriately in each, and appearing analogously in each nature,
viz. the divine and intellectual, the psychical and corporeal. Being however
such, itis adorned and arranged by the better order, which you may properly
say is Minerval, as being undefiled, and subduing through its power things of a
subordinate nature. But the inferior co-ordination becoming adorned, ceases
from its abundant division and infinity; the genus of the Titans being connected
by the Olympian Gods; but difference being united by sameness, motion by
permanency, irrational by rational souls, generation by the heavens, and in a
similar manner in all things. It must not however be supposed from this, that
two-fold divided principles of things are to be admitted. For we say that these
two co-ordinations are of a kindred nature. But the one precedes all contrariety,
as the Pythagoreans also say. Since, however, after the one cause of all, a
duad of principles is unfolded into light, and in these.the monad is more cxcel-
lent than the duad, or, if you wish to speak Orphically, ather than chaos, the
divisions are accomplished after this manner in the Gods prior to the world, and
also in the mundane Gods, as far as to the extremity of things. For among the
supermundane Gods the demiurgic and connective orders are under the monad,
lmut the vivific and the generative orders are under the duad. But among the
mundane Gods the Olympian genus is under the monad, but the Titanic under
the duad. And sameness, permanency, reason and form, are under the more

148 PROCLUS ON THE [poox 1,

ancient, but difference, motion, irrationality, and matter, are under the other of
these principles. For as far as to these the diminution of the two principles
proceeds, Since however the one 1s beyond the first duad, things which appear
to be contraries are collected together, and are co-arranged with a view to one
orderly distribution of things. For in the universe there are these two-fold
venera of Gods, the oppositely divided genera οἵ being, the various genera of
souls, and the contrary wenera of bodies. But the subordinate are vanquished by
the more divine, and the world is rendered one, being harmonised from contraries,
since it subsists according to Philolaus from things that bound, and from
things that are infinite. And according to the infinite, indeed, which it contains,
it derives its subsistence from the indefinite duad, or the nature of the infinite ;
but according to the things that bound, from the intelligible monad, or the nature
of bound. And according to a subsistence from all these, it becomes one whole
and all-perfect form from the one. Vor it is God, as Socrates says in the Plilebus,

who gives subsistence to that which is mixed,

“ Porat that time the Atlantic sea was navigable, and had an island
before that mouth which is called by you the Pillars of Hercules. But
this island was greater than both Libya and Asia together, and afforded
an casy passage to other neighbouring islands 5 as it was likewise casy to
pass from those islands to all the opposite continent which surrounded
that true sea.”

That such and so great an island once existed, is evident from what is said
by certain historians respecting what pertains to the external sea, For according
to them, there were seven islands in that sea, in their times, sacred to Proserpine,
and also three others of an Immense extent, one of which was sacred to Pluto,
another to Ammon, and the middle (or second] of these to Neptune, the magni-
tude of which was a thousand stadia, They also add, that the inhabitants of it
preserved the remembrance from their ancestors, of the Atlantic island which
existed there, and was truly prodigiously great; which for many periods had
dominion over all the islands in the Atlantic sea, and was itself likewise sacred
to Neptune. These things, therefore, Marcellus writes in his Ethiopic Llistory. It
however this be the ease, and such an island once existed, it Is possible to receive
what is said about itas abistory, and also as an image ofa certain mature among

ee

nook 1.] TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 149

wholes. Unfolding likewise the similitude of this, we may gradually accustom
those who survey things of this kind, to the whole theory of mundane natures.
Por it is possible to behold the same analogies ina more partial, and in a more
comprehensive way. Butitis necessary that doctrine proceeding from universals
to the subtle elaboration of particulars, should thus give respite to theory. You
must not therefore wonder, if before we assumed this analogy more generally, but
now aiter another manner, and that we explore the same thing with an accuracy
adapted to the things themselves, For since, as we have. said, there is a two-fold
co-ordination in: the universe, which originates from the Gods, and is terminated
in matter and material form; and since each possesses things more total, and
things more partial, [for this we have before said]; but other things are the middles
of both these co-ordinations ; for the divine genera are comprehensive of all things,
and the last elements are the vilest of all things; and the intellectual and
psychical genera subsist between these ;—this being the case, we think fit in’ the
lirst place to divide in a three-fold) manner the inferior co-ordination, and to
assuine in it some things as most total genera, others as middle, and others as
last genera. And to some things, we shall arrange the Atlantics as analogous, to
others the other islands, and to others all the opposite continent. But we shall
consider the deep, and the Atlantic sea, as analogous to matter. For all the
inferior co-ordination is material, and proceeds into multitude and division. But
it also has, with respect. to itself, transcendency and deticiency. Hence Plato
says that the Atlantics spread themselves externally, as being more remote from
the one and nearer to matter; but that they inbabited an island larger than both
Libya and Asia, as proceeding into bulk and interval. For all things that are
more remote from the one, are diminished according to power, but transcend
according to quantity; just as such as are nearer to (he one, are contracted * in
quantity, but possess an admirable power. Here, therefore, magnitude is sig-
nificant of diminution, and of progression and extension to every thing. But the
sea Was then navigable, since more total natures proceed as far as_ to the last of
things, and adorn matter, but having arrived at the end of the order, they stop,
and that which remains beyond it is infinite, For that which in no respect has
a subsistence is successive to the boundaries of being. But the addition of those,
has an indication that total causes proceed without impediment through matter,
and adorn it, but that we do not always subdue it, but are merged in an infinite

> For σννέσταμενα here, it is necessary to read σνυνεσταλμενα.

150 PROCLUS ΟΝ THE {Wook 1,

and indefinite nature. Since however the progression of things is continued, and
no vacuum! any where intervenes, but a well-ordered dininution is surveved from
more total to middJe natures, which comprehend and are comprehended 5 ane
from middles to the last and vilestnatares;s—on this account he says, there wii a
passage from the Atlantic island to the other islands, and from these τὸ the
opposite continent. And that the Atlantic was one, but the other islands many,
and the continent was the greatest. Por the monad is adapted to the first genun
in every thing 5 but number and multitude to the second, Por multitude subsists
tovether with the duad, And magnitade is adapted to the third genus, on
account of the progression of inagnitude to the Gad. Since, however, the extremities
of the worse co-ordivation are inmost material, he manifests through the term
opposite, that they are at the greatest possible distance from more excellent matures,
And he does not alone use the term eafernal, as he does of the Athanties, and
which evinces that they belong to the other part, but he also adds the word
opposite, that he may indicate the most extreme diminution, But he signifies by
the words about that true sea, the hy postasis of them about matter, and the last of
mundane natures. For the true sea is analogous to that Which is truly fidse,
and truly matter, which in the Politicus he calls the sea of πε τὰν = More-
over, because it’ is necessary that: these two-fold co-ordinations should be sepa-
rated from each other without confasion, and guarded by demiurgic boundaries, on
this account he says, that the Pillars of Hercules separated the internal from the
external habitable part. For he denomimates flourishing demiurgic production,
and the divine separation of genera in the wniverse, the latter of which always remains
stably and strenuously the same, the Pillars ef Hercules. Vis Uereules theretore
is Jovian ; but the one prior to thix, and who is divine, is allotted) the guardian
order of the generative series. Hence from both the demiurgic division, which

cuards these two separate parts of the universe, mast be assumed.

“ Por the waters which are beheld within the mouth we have just
now mentioned, have the form of a port with a narrow entrance ; but
the mouth itself is a true sea. And the Jand which surrounds it may

be in every respect truly denominated the continent.”

The waters within the mouth indicate the genera of the better co-ordination,

' For μενον i this place, the sense requires we should read μενον.

οτος TNS ANT να

HOOK 4.] ᾿ TIMALUS OF PLALO. 15]

as being converted to themselves, and rejoicing ina stable and) uniting power,
For the mouth symbolically manttests the cause which defines and separates the
two portions of mundane natures, But the port with a narrow entrance,
signifies the convolved, sclGeouverging, arranged, and ΜΔ ΤΟΥ ΑΙ hyparais of
these mundane portions. Por through ¢he narrow entrance {ΠΝ signified that
interval and extension proceed froma the worse co-ordination. But through the
port an hyparxis is indicated, exempt from the confused and disorderly motion of
material natures. For such are ports affording a protection from the tamults in
the sea. If, however, some one should say, that an elevation to the more intel-
lectual and divine natures in the universe becomes a port to souls, he will not be
far from the truth.

“Tn this Atlantic island there was a combination of kings, who with
great and admirable power subdued the whole island, together with
many other islands and parts of the continent; and = besides this sube

jected to their dominion all Libya as far as to Migypt, and Lurope as

far as to the ‘T'vrrhene sea.”

lu what is here said it is requisite to recolleet the Platonic hypotheses about
the earth, that Plato does not measure the magnitude of it conformably to ma-
thematicians ; but apprehends the interval of it to be greater than they admit it
to be, as Socrates says in the Phaedo; and that he supposes there are many
habitable parts similar to the part which we inhabit. Tlence he relates that there
isanisland and a continent of so great a magnitude in the external sea. For
in short, if the earth is naturally spherical, 10 is necessary that it should be so
according to the greater part of it. That portion of it, however, which is inha-
bited by us, exhibits great inequality by its cavities and prominencies. Hence
there is elsewhere an expanded plane of the earth, and an interval extended on
high. For, according to Heraclitus, he who passes through a region very difficult
of aceess, will arrive at the Atlantic mountain, the magnitude of which is said to
be so great by the Ethiopic historians, thatit reaches to the wther, and sends forth
a shadow as far as to five thousand stadia. For the sun is concealed by it from
the ninth hour of the day ull it entirely sets. Nor is this at all) wonderful. For.
Athos, a Macedonian mountain, emits a shadow as far as to Lemnos, which is
distant from it seven hundred stadia. And Marcellus, who wrote the Ethiopic
history, not only relates that the Atlantic mountain was of such a great height,

159 PROCLUS ON THE [Roon 4,

hut Ptolemy also says that the Lunar mountains are immensely high, and Aristo-
tle informs us that Caucasus is illuminated by the sular rays during the third
part of the night after the setting, and also forthe third part before the rising, of
the sun. And he who looks to the whole magnitude of the earth, bounded by
its elevated parts, will infer that it ix truly immense, according to the assertion of
Plato. So that we are not now in want of certain mathematical methods to the
development of what is said about the earth, nor do we attempt to recur to them.
For these methods measure the carth according to the surface which ts ithabited by us ;
but Plato says that we dwellin a cavity, and that the whole earth is elevated, which
also the sacred rumor of the Eguplians asserts, Aud thus much concerning what
is related of the magnitude of the Athintic istund, in order to show that it is not
proper to disbelieve what is said by Plato, though it should be received as a mere
history. But with respect to the power of this island, that there were ten kines in
it who begat five male twins, and thatit ruled over the other islands, certain parts
of the continent, and some parts within” the Pillars of Herceules,—all these par-
ticalars are clearly related in the Critias.

Now however, for it is proposed to make an analysis of the particulars, the
power is said to be great and admirable, according to a reference to the universe,
hecause it’ procecds to every thing, and comprehends totally the whole of the
second co-ordination, For it is held) together by ten hinges, because the decad
comprehends the rulers of the two co-ordinations ; since the Pythagoreans also
say, that all opposites are comprehended in’ the deead. But they were twins, so
that there are five duads, twins being five times begotten from Neptune and
Clites; because according to the measures of justice, there ts Jikewtse an orderly
distribution of this co-ordination, of which the pentad isan image. ‘Phe pro-
eression of it however is through the duad, just as that of the better co-ordination
is through the monad. Moreover, all of them are the descendants of Neptune,
because all the connexion of contraries, and the mundane war, belong to the
middle fabrication, For as this God presides over the contraricty which every
where exists, he Jikewise rules over generation and corruption, and all-various
notion. But these kings subdued the Atantic island: as comprehending all the
first and most total genera of the worse co-ordination, And they subdued the
other islands, as likewise comprehending middles through the wholeness of them.
But they also vanquished parts of the continent, as adorning as much as possible
the last of things. And they had dominion over certain parts) of the internal
habitable region, because the last parts of the better are subservicnt lo the first parts

ἐυσοωκαν eae Ste

BooK 1.] TIMUsS OF PLATO. 153

of the worse co-ordination. Nor is this at all wonderful ; since certain demons
are in subjection to certain heroes, and partial souls which belong to the intelii-
gible portion of things are frequently slaves to fate. Such also is the Titanic
order with the Gods to which Atlas belongs. And the first of these ten kings
was called Atlas, and as it is said in the Atlanticus gave the name to the
island. The summits, therefore, of the second co-ordination, are adorned
indeed by the Olympian Gods, of whom Minerva is the leader; but they
subdue the whole of the essence which is subordinate to the Gods, but ter-
minates in the worse co-ordination; such as the essence of irrational souls,
of material masses, and of matter itself. Plato also appears to have called
the power of the Atlantics great and admirable, because Thaumas and
Bias are said by ancient theologists to have belonged to this order. Per-
haps too, he so denominated it, because the whole of the second co-or-
dination is the progeny of infinity, which we say is the first [power'], just
as the better co-ordination is the offspring of bound. On this account he
celebrates the power of the Atlantics, just as he does the virtue of the
Athenians, which belongs to * bound : for it is the measure of those that possess it,
After this manner therefore, I think we may be able to make the analysis
according to the Pythagorean principles.

The words of Plato likewise, have a great augment, in order to exhibit the
work of the victors in a greater and more splendid point of view. For he says
δύναμιν τε, through the union of the particle re augmenting δύναμιν power. And he
also adds, great, and admirable. But each of these is different from the other.
For power may be great though it is nothing else, but it is said to be admirable
from othér things. And by how much the more admirable that is which is van-
quished, by so much’ greater is the victor demonstrated to be. Besides this
also, indicating through divisions the multitude subdued by this power, he
evinces that it is multitudinous and transcendent.

** But then all this power being collected into one, endeavoured to
enslave our region and yours, and likewise every place situated within
the mouth of the Atlantic sca.”

* Avray is omitted in the original.’
* Instead of προ τον πέρατος in this place, it is necessary to read wpos του weparos.
? For ro rovrp here, read τοσσυτῳ.

Tim. Plat. in '(.) an 6 U

154 PROCLUS ON ΤῊΝ {noox 1,

Plato docs not say that there was once sedition among divine natures, or that
subordinate subducd more excellent beings. But let these things indeed be true
in homan affairs : the present narration however, Indicates, that the most total
of the genera in the second co-ordination of things in the universe procced
through all things. For there are both in the heavens and every where, a sepa-
rating and uniting power, and nothing is destitute of these. In more excellent
natures however, these powers do not subsist with division, nor multitudinously,
but collected into one, and with one impulse; but this is, umitedly, and ac-
cording to one and a continued life, For as in the worse co-ordination
the one is multiplied, thus also in the better, multitude is united. Llence mul-
titude is every where, and is vanquished through union, Of these things
the Atlantics wishing to subdue every place within the mouth of the Atlan-
tic sea, all their powers being collected into one, but at the same time being
vanguished by the Athenians, are an Image, Por multitude and) separation,
though they may be surveyed in the better co-ordination, yet they will be
seen to subsist’ there unitedly; multitude not being there victorious, but
sameness, and in short, the better genera.

“Then it was, O Solon, that the power of your city was conspicuous
to all men for its virtue and strength.”

Plato opposes to the power of the Atlantics, the power of the Athenians ;
preferring this appellation, as heing adapted to the middle fabrication. And
he celebrates the more excellent power for its virtue and strength 3 in order that
through virtue, he may indicate its alliance τὸ the philosophic nature of

Minerva; (for another theology, ‘and not the Orphic only, calls her virtue,)
but through strength its alliance to her plulopolemic nature. But he ealls
the power conspicuous, because it is mundane, and contributes to the fabri-
cation of sensibles: and to the Atlanties indeed, he alone attributes power,
and this continually, beeause they are arranged under infinity, But he
says that the Athenians vanquished this power, through virtue, Por as they
belong to the co-ordination of bound; they are characterized by virtue,

which measures the passions, and uses powers in a becoming manner.

* i.e, The Chaldean theology.

net

TAR ες“ “νυ RS

nooK τι] TIMEUS OF PLATO. 155

“For as its armies surpassed all others, both ia magnanimity and
military arts, so with respect to its contests, whether it) was assisted
by the rest of the Grecks, over whom it sometimes presided in
wathke affairs, or whether it was deserted by them through the
incursions of the cnemics, and thus was in extreme danger, yet still”
it remained triumphant. In the mean time, those who were not
yet enslaved, it liberated from danger; and procured the most ample
liberty for all those of us who dwell within the Pillars of ITler-
cules.”

As we have triply divided the inferior co-ordination, into first, middle, and
last boundaries, thus also we must divide the superior, into the most total,
and the most partial genera, and those that subsist between these. And
having made this division, we shall arrange the Athenians as analogous to
the first genera; but the other Grecks who were not yet enslaved, to the
middle; and those who were now slaves, to the last genera. For according to
this arrangement, those that belong to the Minerval series, vanquish those that
belong to the series of Neptune; those that rank as first, subduing those that
rank as second,’ the monadic, the dyadic, and in short, the better vanquishing
the worse. But the middle genera eternally preserve their own order, and are
not vanquished by the worse co-ordination, on account of the union of them-
selves, and the stable genus of power. They likewise liberate from slavery those
that are enslaved, recalling them to union and permanency. Tor some things
indeed, are always in matter, others are always separated from it, and others,
sometimes become situated under the material genera, and sometimes have an
arrangement in a separate life. Just as in the drama pertaining to us; at one
time we are arranged under the Titanic, and at another, under the Olympian
order; and at one time our course terminates in gencration, but at another, in the
heavens. This however happens to partial souls, through the invariably perma-
nent providence of the Gods, which leads back souls to their pristine felicity.
For as in consequence of there being genesiurgic Gods, souls descend, in sub-
serviency to their will, thus also, through the prior subsistence of anagogic causes,
the ascent of our souls from the realms of generation is elected. And thus much

* For xpwrwy here, it scems necessary to read Sevrepwr,

156 PROCLUS ON THE {(pooxt.

concerning the whole meaning of the words before us. Let us however, concisely
discuss each particular,

The words therefore, surpassed all others, manifest the total comprehension of
the first genera of the more divine part. But the words im magnantnity, and
military arts, have the same meaning as Minervatlly. Por through mag nanimily, they
imitate the philosophic characteristic of the Goddess, but through warlike arts,
her philopolemic characteristic. And the words, whether it was assisted by the
rest of the Greeks, over whom it sometimes presided tn warlike affairs, or whether it
was deserted by them through the incursions of the enemies, signify that first and
total causes, produce some things in conjunction with second and middle causes,
but others by themselves, beyond the production of these, and being alone in their
energy. For the genus of the Gods, and that which is posterior to the Gods, do
not produce equally, but the eflective power of the Gods proceeds to a greater
extent; since every where more divine causes energize prior to, together with,
and posterior to their effects. Credibility therefore of this may be multifariously
produced. But the extreme danger manifests the last production of the: first
genera. And the ¢rophics signify that the second co-ordination is perfected
under the first, being adorned by it; that it is in a certain respect converted by
the power of it; and that there are in the last of things invariably permanent
indications of the conversion of less excellent natures, proceeding from the first of
things. For whatever is arranged in the worse co-ordination, and invested with
form, material causes receding, affords a suflicient indication of the inspective
care' of the better order, which is especially the peculiarity of trophies. But the
most ample liberty, is an indication of the divine and iiberated order, proceeding
from on high to all things; which liberty the Athenians imparted to the Greeks,
by vanquishing the Atlantics; or rather the Olympic, by subduing the ‘Titanic
genera, For thus the demiurgic will is accomplished, and the worse is vanquish-
ed by the better co-ordination; in partial natures indeed the Atlantics by the
Athenians, but in wholes, the Titans by the Olympian Gods,“ Though they are
robust, and oppose the better order, through pernicious pride, and insolent impro-
hity,” says the theologist; whom Plato emulating, asserts that the Atlantics inso-
lently proceeded against the Athenians.

“ But in succeeding times prodigious earthquakes and deluges taking

* For extorparcas here, it is necessary to read exoraoias.

πο ses er στον

ROOK 1.} ἘΠΕ OF PLATO. 157

place, and bringing with them desolation, in the space of one dreadful
day and night, all that warhke race of Athenians was at once merged
under the earth ; and the Atlantic island itself, being absorbed in the sea,
entirely disappeared. And hence that sea is at present innavigable, from
the impeding mud which the subsiding island produced.” *

That what is here said has a physical deduction, is evident to those who are
not entirely ignorent of the physical theory. For it is not wonderful that there
should have been an earthquake so great, as to have destroyed sucha large island ;
since an earthquake that happened a little before our time, shook both Egypt and
Bithynia, and it is not at all paradoxical, that a deluge should follow an earth-
quake, For this usually happens in great earthquakes, as Aristotle relates, who
at the same time adds the cause. For where a deluge takes place together with
earthquakes, the waves are the vause of this passion. For when the spirit which
produces the earthquake, does not yet flow towards the earth, and is not able to
drive backward the sea which is impelled by a certain contrary spirit, urging it in
acontrary direction, through the wind which propels it, but nevertheless stops
the sea by hindering its progression, it is the eause of much sea which js impelled
by the spirit contrary to this, becoming collected together. Then however, the
sea thus collected flowing most abundantly, the spirit impelling it ina contrary
direction, enters under the earth and produces an earthquake. But the sea deluges
the place, For after this manner also about Achaia, there was an earthquake accom-
panied with an ingress of the waves of the sea, which deluged the maritime cities,
Bouras and Helice ;; so that neither will any physiologist reject this narration, who
considers the affair rightly. Moreover, that the same place may become pervious
and impervious, continent and sea, is among the things admitted by physiologists,
according to Aristotle, and which history demonstrates. Aristotle also relates,
{in his Meteors,] that there was mud in the external sea, after the mouth of it, and
that the place there was marshy ; so that if ro πηλοῦ xapra Bpayeng signifies marshy,
it is not wonderful. For even now rocks concealed under the sea, and having
water on their surface, are called breakers. Why therefore should any one con
tending for the truth of these things be disturbed?

That these particulars however, have reference to the admirable and orderly
distribution of the universe, we shall be convinced by recollecting what is said by

" The text of Plato in this place is in the Commentaries of Proclus very erroneous, as the Jearned
reader will immediately perceive by comparing it with any of the editions of the Timzus.

158 PROCLUS ON THE leven.
Orpheus about the hurling into Tartarus, near the end of the fabrication of things,—
For he delivering the demiurgic opposition between the Olympian and. ‘Titanic
Gods," terminates the whole ordorly distribution in the extremities of the universe,
and imparts to these also the undefiled providence of the Gods, — Plato, therefore,
knowing this, and delivering to us wholes in images, extends and leads into the

invisible, these twofold genera, and through this disappearing, imitates the Orphic

precipitation into Tartaras, Por in order that the last of things may be adorned,
and participate of divine providence, it is requisite that both the superior and infe-
rior co-ordination, should extend their production from on high as far as fo the
mundane extremity. Each however, effects this in a manner adapted τὸ itself;
the one being shaken, and entering under the earth, which is the same as proceed-
ing stably and solidly ; but the other disappearing, whieh is the same as becom-
ing material, disorderly, and formless 3 raider the earth, being a symbol of the
firm and the stable; but ἐλ the sea, of that which is very mutable, disorderly and
flowing. Forin the last of things, permanency and generation are from the better 5
but corruption, mutation, and disorderly motion are from the worse co-ordina-
tion. Since however these things are adorned, both the invisible and visible fabri-
cation receiving their completion, on this account Plato says, they happened in
one dreadful day and night, aight indicating the invisible causes, but day the visi-
ble, and the dreadfulness, signifying opposing power, the inflexible, and that which
proceeds through all things. But because all these are accomplished according
to demiurgic powers, earthquakes and deluges took place, Which are adapted to
the middle fabrication. Por if he wished to signity Jovian powers or energies, he
would have said, thunders and lightnings happened. But since he delivers Nep-
tunian demiurgic energies, he asstmilates them to earthquakes or delauges. Por
it is usual to call this God earth-shaker, and the source of marine walter (κυανοχετὴν).
And because time signifies a progression in order, and a well-arranged diminu-
tion, he says that all these events took place in succeeding time. Its not there-
fore proper to say, that he who destroys an argument, takes away also the sub-
jects, as Homer says of the Phieaceans, and of the wall which the Greeks raised ;
since the things which are now asserted are not fictitious, but true. Por many
parts of the earth are deluged by the sea; and what he says happened is not at
all impossible. Nor again, does he relate it'as a mere history ; but he mtroduces
it for the purpose of indicating the providence which proceeds through all things,

and extends even to the last of things.

* Instead of τὴν των Ολυμπίων θεων, καὶ την Tiraviny παραουν δημιουργικὴν artreou in this place,

Tread σὴν των Ολυμπίων θεω», καὶ τὴν τῶν Τιταγίκων, κι δ.

BaP

BOOK 1.) TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 159

In short, it is necessary to assert, since the whole orderly distribution of things
receives its completion from the visible and invisible fabrication, that for the
purpose of giving perfection to the demiurgie productions of the second father,
the gifts both of the better and the worse co-ordination, proceed as far as to the
last of beings; the former vanquishing the subjects [of its powec] through the
warlike genus, and illuminating a stable! power, through entering under the carth,
li. 6. through proceeding firmly and solidly 2] but the latter producing ultimate
division, and connecting the most material and indefinite motion of Tartarus.
But these things being adorned, it reasonably follows that what remains is an
impervious * and uninvestizable place of the sea. For there is no other passage and
progression of the adorning genera of the universe, but this is that which is truly
mud; and whichis mentioned by Socrates in the Phado, when he is teaching us
concerning the subterranean places. For the place under the earth obscurely
retains the forms of corporeity, which it possesses through the inferior co-ordina-
tion subsiding, and proceeding to the end of the orderly distribution of things.
For the Titanic order being driven by Jupiter as far as to Tartarus, fills what is
there contained with deiform guards.

“ And this, O Socrates, is the sum of what the elder Critias repeated
from the narration of Solon. But when yesterday you were speaking
about a polity and its citizens, I was surprised on recollecting the present
history. For I pereeived how divinely from a certain fortune, and not
wandering from the mark, you collected many things agreeing with the
narration of Solon.” .

That the war of the Atlantics and Athenians contributes to [the theory of] the
whole fabrication of the world, and that the mundane contrariety is connected by
the middle fabrication proceeding from on high, from the first to the last of things,
the Minerval series adorning all things stably, and in a ruling and victorious
manner, expanding indeed the natures which are detained in matter, but pre-
serving those undetiled that are separated? from matter ;.and also, that the other
fabrication imparts appropriately, * motion, division, and diflerence, to the things
fabricated, and proceeds supernally to the end ;—all this has been sufficiently

* For γονεμον here, it is necessary to read μονέμον,
* For axeqos here, itis necessary to read ἀποροῖ.

ἢ Instead of καὶ χωυρέσμενα read κεχωρισμένα.

4 For προσφωνων, read προσῴορωε.

—S

100 PROCLUS ON: THE [Boox 1,

shown and recalled to the memory by us, in what we have before said. Since
however, he by whom this narration is made, ts analogous to the God who
connects this contrariety, he, in a certain respect imitates him. And through a
recurrence to the fathers of the narration, through what was heard by Critias and
Solon, he ascends to the Egyptians; conformably to what pre-exists in the
paradigm, which is filled from first causes, and fills things posterior to itself, with
demiurgic power, Farther still, since he brings with him an image of the second,
which proceeds from another fabrication, hence he says, that he recollected the
history through the discourse of Socrates. For the recollection itself, is nota
transition from images to paradigms, but from universal conceptions to more
partial actions. Hence, also it is adapted to the progression of the whole
fabrication of things. For since all things are in intelligibles, every demiurgic
cause distributes total productions according to its: proper order,

Again, if you consider what is said after another manner, you will find that
the Athenians are praised in an admirable manner, and that the polity of Socrates
is fitly celebrated. For that it ts possible for this polity to exist, is demonstrated
through the life of the (ancient) Athenians, and also that tt ts productive of the great-
est good to those who belong to itt; which also Socrates thinks fit to demonstrate in
his Republic. But he is likewise of opinion that those who live according to the
best form of a polity, should be shown to deserve the greatest admiration, — For
those who are fashioned according to the first paradigm are truly admirable ;
since of mundane natures also, the more divine which transcendently receive the
whole form of their paradigms, are said to be, and are monadic; but material
natures Which have the same form in many subjects, possess the last order. This
therefore, which in’ the fabrication of things, belongs to the Gods, viz. to partake
transcendentiy of their proper paradigm, the city of the Athenians also exhibits,
by applying itself in the most excellent manner to the best measure of life,

Moreover, the circle of benefits, imitates the mundane ἡ circle. For the Egyp-
tians are benetited by the Athenians, through warlike works; and the Athe-
nians are benefited by the Exyptians through sacerdotal narrations. For the
communication of an unwritten action, was a return of favour. But in addition
to this, the doctrinal narration of the deeds of their ancestors, exhibits a multi-
plied retribution. The mention also of fortune and divinity, and the excitation
of our reasoning powers, are worthy of the theory of Plato. For fortune and her

' For ro ἐγκωμιον here, it is necessary to read τὸν ἐγκοσμιίον.

nooK 1] TIM-EUS OF PLATO. 161

gifts are not without a scope, or indefinite ; but sheis a power collective of many dis-
persed causes, adorning things that are without arrangement, and giving completion to
what is allotted to each individual from the universe. Why then did Socrates
collect many things which agree with the narration of Solon? I answer, an
account of the cause which collects many dispersed causes, and on account of
the one divinity ἡ who connects the common intellect of Socrates and Solon. For,
being of a Minerval characteristic, they are excited as it were from one fountain,
their tutelar Goddess, to similar conceptions.

“Yet Iwas unwilling to disclose these particulars immediately, as,
from the great interval of time since I first received them, my remem-
brance of them was not sufficiently accurate for the purpose of repetition.
] consider it therefore necessary, that [ should first diligently revolve the
whole in my mind.”

These things may also be surveyed in the universe; viz. that the demiurgic
cause of beings which are generated according to time, gives subsistence to his
own progeny prior to that of partial natures." And that the hypostatic cause
of things generated, first? intellectually perceiving himself, and seeing in himself
the causes of his productions, thus gives also to other things a progression from
himself; in order that he, being sufficient and perfect, may impart his own power
to secondary natures. Conception therefore and resumption, and every thing of
this kind, manifest the comprehension of demiurgic productive principles in one.

“And on this account, I yesterday immediately complied with your
demands; for I perceived that we should not want the ability of pre-
senting a discourse accommodated to your wishes, which in things of
this kind is of principal importance. In consequence of this, as Her-
mocrates has informed you, as soon as we departed from hence, by com-
municating these particulars with my friends here present, for the purpose

' For jay dewy in this place, read μιὰν Ocov.

* The erroneousness of the punctuation here, perverts the meaning of Procius. For the original is,

ravra καὶ ew τῷ wavre Oearcoy, πρὸ των μερικων. TO δημιουργικον αἰτιον τῶν γιγνομένων κατὰ yporoy
νφιστησι τα eavrov γεννήματα. But the punctuation ought to be as follows: ravra καὶ ἐν ry παντι

θεατεον. πρὸ τῶν μερικων, ro δημιονργικον αἰτιον, κ᾿ ἃ,
? Instead οἵ προ των io this place, it is necessary to read πρωτον.

Tim. Plat, Vou. I. X

162 PROCLUS ON THE [moox 1,

of refreshing my memory, and afterwards revolving them in my mind by
night, I nearly acquired a complete recollection of" the affair.”

Why did Critias nearly remember? For he promised to accomplish what was
enjoined him. Because he did not accurately remember. But he first revolved
the affair in his mind, conceiving that in mandates of this kind, such as that in
which Socrates wished to sce his polity in motion, the greatest undertaking is to
find an hypothesis from which it is possible to give what is adapted to the man-
dates. And this Critias accomplishes, by receiving from history the war of the
Atlantics and Athenians, as a thing capable of exhibiting a life productive of the
best polity. He also revolved this narration by might, in order that he might
impart it to his associates without error,

Again therefore, from these things, let us betake ourselves to wholes. For
there the demiurgic cause being filled from an invisible cause (since all intellectual
causes are there primarily, to which he is united ἡ according to the highest trans-
cendency), produces the power of himself into the visible world, conformably to
their will and judgment. Farther still, not to give the narration immediately,
but afterwards, isa symbol of the preparatory apparatus of nature, from which
perfection is produced in physical effects. You may also consider the caution
of Critias ethically. For it is not proper to attempt things of sucha magnitude
rashly, without first revolving the whole undertaking by ourselves, in order that
we may bring them forth as froma treasury through speech, which is truly the
messenger of internal reasons. Moreover, the repeating the narration to himself,
imitates the conversion of demiurgic reasons to themselves, according to which
{the soul] surveys in herself (by participation] the productive principles of beings,
And to present a discourse accommodated to the wishes of those who enjuined it, in-
dicates in the fabrication of things the suspension of visible effects from their

causes.

“ And, indeed, according to the proverb, what we Jearn in childhood,
abides in the memory with a wonderful stability. For with respect to
inyself, for instance, Lam not certain that I could recollect the whole of
yesterday’s discourse ; yet I should be very much astonished if any thing
should escape my remembrance, which 1 had heard in some past time very

* For wenrac here, it is necessary to read exwrac.

BOOK 1. TIMZUS OF PLATO. 163

distant from the present. Thus, as to the history which I have just now
related, I received it from the old man with great pleasure and delight ;
who on his part very readily complied with my request, and frequently
gratified me with a repetition of it. And hence, as the marks of letters
deeply burnt in, remain indelible, so all these particulars became firmly
established in my memory.”

That children remember better than men is seen in works, and has many
probable causes. One indeed, as Porphyry says, because the souls of children
hare not anexperience of human evils. Hence, as they are neither distracted nor
disturbed by extemals, their imagination js void of impressions ; but their reasoning
power is more sluggish. For experience renders this power more acute. But
another cause is this, that the rational life in children is in a greater degree min-
gled with the phantasy. As therefore, in consequence of the soul being co-passive,
and co-mingled with the body, the body becomes stronger and more vital ; after
the same manner also, the phantasy is strengthened through the habitude of
reason. And being strengthened, it has more stable impressions, from receiving
through its own power reason in a greater degree; just as the body is more
powerful, in consequence of being more vital, through a more abundant commu-
nion with the soul. A third cause in addition to these is, that the same things
appear to be greater to the imaginations of children. TIence they are in a
greater degree admired by them, so that they are more co-passive with them, and
on this account especially remember them. For we deposit in the memory things
which vehemently pain, or vehemently delight us. They therefore operate on us
ina greater degree. Tlence ἀν that which suffers in a greater degree from fire,
preserves fora longer time the heat imparted to it; after the same manner, that
which suffers more from the external object of the phantasy, retains the impression
ina greater degree, Moreover the imagination of children suffers more, on ac-
count of the same things appearing to us to be greater during our childhood,
Hence children in a greater degree retain the impression, as suflering in a greater
degree from the same things. And it appears to me that Critias indicates this
when he says, that he heard this history from the old man with great delight, and
that on this account it became firmly established in his memory, like the marks
of letters deeply burnt in. But as Socrates in the recapitulation of his polity
asserts, that the cause of memory to us is the unusualness ' of the things which

* For αληθειαν here, it is necessary to read αηθειαν.

164 PROCLUS ON THE [poox τ.

we hear, thus Critias, in what is here said, ascribes this cause to the age of children.
For every thing that occurs to children at first, appears to be unusual. And
perhaps this brings with it an indication, that the prolific fabrication of Gods of
the second rank is suspended from the stable sameness of those of the first order ;
just as the memory of a boy is the cause of memory to the associates of Critias.
If some one however, in addition to these solutions, should adhere to the whole
theory of things, let him hear Janublichus asserting, that the memory of children
indicates the ever new, flourishing, and stable production of reasons; the
indelibility of the letters, the perpetually-tlowing and never-failing fabrication ; and
the alacrity of the teacher, the unenvying and abundant supply afforded by more
ancient canses to secondary natures. Por these things also have ἃ place in con-

junction with the before-mentionced solutions,

“ In consequence of this, as soon as it was day, I repeated the narra-
tion to my friends, that together with myself they might be better pre-
pared for the purposes of the present association, But now with respect
to that for which this narration was undertaken, IT am prepared, O Socra-
tes, to speak not only summarily, but so as to descend to the particulars
of every thing which 1 heard. We shall transfer, however, to reality the
citizens and city which you fashioned yesterday as ina fable ; consider-
ing that city which you established as no other than’ this Athenian
city, and the citizens which you conceived, as no other than those ances-
tors of ours described by the Egyptian priest. And indeed the aair
will harmonize in every respect ; nor will it be forergn from the purpose
to assert, that your citizens are those very people who existed at that
time. Ilfence, distributing the affair in) common among us, we will en-
deavour, to the utmost of our ability, to accomplish ina becoming man-
ner the employment which you have assigned us. It is requisite there-
fore to consider, O Socrates, whether this discourse 15 reasonable, or whe-
ther we should lay it aside, and seck after another.”

Before, Critias made his associates partakers of his narration ; but now, he calls
on them to accomplish in conjunction with him, the employment assigned them.
Because in the paradigms all things indeed are united on high, and fill each
other with intellectual powers; but in the demturgie world for in’ the world

in the intelleet of the Demiurgas,} they subsist with each other, according to

a certain divine and total conspiration ; conformably to which, and through

partes πον 5 ν

BOOK ν.} ΤΙΝ Ό5 OF PLATO. 162

which, all things are every where appropriately in each. Hence ἴῃ the
heavens the paradigms of generated natures pre-exist, and in generation there
are images of celestial natures. Since, however, wholeness every where pre-
cedes parts, this also may be seen in the second fabrication. On this account
Critias first summarily discusses the war; but afterwards he endeavours to
explain more copiously every particular, narrating all the polity of the At-
lantics, and the principle of their generation; how they turned to injustice,
how the Athenians proceeded to war; from what apparatus, from what le-
gations, through what ways, with whom they were co-arranged, and such
things as are consequent to these. The genuine polity, therefore, (of Socrates]
is an imitation of the first fabrication. Hence indicating the mystic nature
of it, and its pre-existence in pure reason, he says, that it was fashioned as
it were ina fable. But the hypothesis of the Athenians has an indication,
as in images,’ of the second fabrication; in which that) which is more
partial presents itself to the view; and what remains consists of contrariety and
motion, and that which is circumscribed in’ place. Since, however, the
second is suspended from the first fabrication, and is in continuity with
it, hence he says, “ that the affair will harmonize in cwery respect, and
that it will not be foreign to the purpose to assert, that the citizens in the Re-
public of Socrates are the very people who existed at that time.”

“Socrates. But what other, O Critias, should we reccive in _ prefers
ence to this? Por your discourse, through a certain affinity, is particularly
adapted to the present sacrifice to the Goddess. And besides this,
we should consider, as a thing of the greatest moment, ¢hat your rela-
fion is not a mere fable, but a true history of transcendent magnitude.
It is impossible, therefore, to say how and from whence, neglecting
your narration, we should find another more convenient.”

Socrates approves the narration of Critias, in the first place as adapted
to the festival of the Athenians; for the [Atlantic] war is an image of mundane

wars; and as a hymn accommodated to the sacrifice to Minerva. For if

speech is of any advantage to men, it should be employed in hymns. And besides
this, since the Goddess is the cause of both theory and action; through

* For ws exeiswy ostwy in this place, it is necessary to read ws εἰκογων orrwr.

166 PROCLUS ON THE {[poox ἣν

sacrifice, indeed, we imitate her practical energy, but through the hymn her
theoretic energy. But, in the second place, Socrates approves the narration
as bearing witness to the possibility of his polity. For this, in his discourse
about it, he thought worthy of demonstration. For it was sufficient for him
that this scheme of a polity existed in the heavens, and in one man; since all
things that have an external, have an internal subsistence, and that) which
is truly law, begins from the internal life itself. If also he shows, that this
polity once prevailed among the Athenians, he certainly demonstrates the
possibility of it. This, therefore, has such-like causes as these, Again how-
ever it may be assumed from these things, that the narration about the At-
lantics is not a fiction, as some have supposed it to be; but a history
indeed, yet having an affinity to the whole fabrication of the world. So
that such things as Plato discusses about the magnitude of the Atlantic island,
1uust not be rejected as fabulous and _ fictitious on account of those who en-
close the earth in a very narrow space.

“ Hence it is requisite that you should speak with good Fortune,
but that I on account of my discourse yesterday, should now rest
from speaking, and be attentive to what you have to say.”

Plato does not, like the Stoics, assert, that the worthy man has no need of
Fortune; but he is of opinion that our dianoetic energies, since they are com-
plicated with corporeal energies, according to external progression, should be
inspired by good Fortune, in order that they may proceed fortunately, and
that their effect upon others may be friendly to divinity. And as Nemesis is the
inspector of light words, thus also good Fortune directs the words both of
those that receive and of him that utters them, to a good purpose, in order
that the former may receive benevolently and sympathetically, but the latter
may impart ina divinely inspired manner, that which is adapted to every one.
Thus, therefore, in partial natures. But in wholes, good Fortune signities a
divine allotment, according to which each thing 15 allotted an order adapted
to it, from the one father, and the whole fabrication. Moreover, for So-
crates to rest from speaking, and to be attentive to what may be said, has
indeed an appropriate retribution. For the other persous of the dialogue did
this, when he narrated his polity. But this shows from analogy, how all
demiurgic causes being united to each other, have at the same time separate

rasa

ΒΟΟΚ 1. TIMAUS OF PLATO. 167

productions. Jor to hear is indicative of receiving through each other. And
for the others to rest, when one speaks, signifies the unmingled purity ac-
cording to which each demiurgic cause produces and generates secondary natures
from its own peculiarity.

“ Crit. But now consider, Socrates, the manner of our disposing the
mutual banquet of discussion. Tor it seems proper to us that ‘Timeus,
who is the most astronomical of us all, and is eminently knowing in the
nature of the universe, should speak the first; commencing his discourse
from the generation of the world, and ending in the nature of men. But
that I after him, receiving the men which he has mentally produced, but
which have been excellently educated by you, and introducing them to
you according to the narration and law of Solon, as to proper judges,
should render them members of this city; as being in reality no other
than those Athenians which were described as unknown to us, in the
report of the sacred writings. And that in future we shall discourse
concerning them, as about citizens and Athenians,”

The intention of this arrangement is to make Timaus a summit, and at the same
time a middle. Forhespeaks after Socrates and Critias, and prior to Critias and Her-
mocrates. And thus,indeed, heis amiddle; but in another respect,he is a summit,
according to science, and because he generates the men, whom Socrates indeed edu-
cates, but Critias arms. This, however, is also a manifest symbol of total fabrication,
which is at one and the same time a summit and a middle. For it is exempt
from all mundane natures, and is equally present to all. The summits likewise,
and the middle of the universe, belong to the Demiurgus, according to the doctrine
of the Pythagoreans. For the tower of Jupiter is, as they say, situated there.
But Critias, who spoke as the middle after Socrates, now again summarily speaks
prior to Hermocrates. For the duadic pertains to the middle fabrication, and also
the whole in conjunction with parts ; just as the whole [prior to parts] belongs to the
first, but parts to the last fabrication, Wence Socrates summarily delivered his
polity, and Hermocrates contributed to the parts of the history which was about
to be narrated by Critias. And thus much concerning the whole arrangement.

Some one, however, may doubt, what will be left for Ilermocrates to accomplish
after Timeus has delivered the generation of the men, Socrates their education,

108 PROCLUS ΟΝ THE [Boox 1.

and Critias their actions. For to these things there is nothing successive. May
it not be said that Hermocrates is the adjutor of Critias in his narration ; for the
relation of the history was a mixture of deeds and words. And Critias himself
promised to make a discussion of the actions, but calls on Hermocrates to assist
him in the words. For the imitation of these is difficult, as was before observed.
Hence in the Atlanticus, Critias having assembled the Gods, as consulting about
the punishment of the Atanties, he says ‘ Jupiler thus addressed them.” And he
thus terminates the dialuzue, as delivering to Hermocrates the imitation of the
words. But there is no absurdity in his not discussing (in the Athanticus] the
remainder of the deeds. For, in short, having assembled the Gods, for the purpose
of chastising the insolence of the Atlanties, he has every thing consequent to this
comprehended in the Gods being thus collected, viz. the preparation of the
Athenians, their egress, and their victory. Timwus, therefore, generates the men,
Socrates educates them, Critias leads them forth to actions, and Hermocrates to
words ; the first of these, imitating the paternal cause; the second, the suppher of
stable intelligence; the third, the supplier of motion and progression to secondary
natures; and the fourth, imitating the cause which converts the last of things to
their principles through the imitation of reasons (i. e. of productive powers]. Thus,
therefore, these particulars may be symbolically understood, and, perhaps, in no
very supertluous manner,

Some one, also, may doubt why the Timzus had not an arrangeinent prior to
the Republic, since in the former dialogue the generation of the world, and also
of the human race, is delivered. For it is necessary, as Timwus says, that men
should be generated; and also, that they should be educated, which Socrates
effects in the Republic ; and that they should energize in ἃ manner worthy of
their education, which in a certain respect the Atlanticus exhibits. And if, indeed,
Plato beginning from the end proceeded to the ‘Timeus, which is first by nature,
it will be asserting, what is usual to say, that for the sake of doctrine, things that
are first to us, though posterior by nature, are first’ delivered ; but that now he
appears to have arranged the middle as the first, and the first as the middle.
And if, indeed, this arrangement had been adopted by those who are studious of
ornament, it would have been less wonderful; but now Plato himselfappears to
have acted in this manner, Προ, therefore, there is a recapitulation of the polity,
as having been already summarily narrated in the shortest: manner, In answer
tu this doubt it must be said, that if all hypotheses were assumed from the nature
of things now in existence, or which were formerly, it would be necessary that the.

Book 1} TIMEUS OF PLATO. 169

doubt should be valid, and that the Timeus is not rightly ranked in the second
place. If also, all the narrations were devised from hypothesis, it thus would be
requisite that such things as are first according to nature, should be first assumed.
Bat since the hypothesis of Socrates subsists in words alone, and surveying the
universal, applies itself to the nurture and education of men, but the hypothesis
consequent to this discusses beings and things in generation, these are very
properly conjoined to each other; while the hypothesis of Socrates, as only
subsisting in words, and being on this account accurate, has an arrangement prior
to the rest. Perhaps, likewise, Plato wished to indicate this to us, that such things
as divine (human) souls, and which are ascending to the intelligible, produce, these
are some time or other effected on the earth, according to certain prosperous
vicissitudes of circulations, As Critias therefore asserts this, bearing testimony
to Socrates, we must say that those true ancestors of ours of which the priest
spoke, perfectly accord with those citizens which Socrates mentally conceived,
and our opinion is not to be rejected that they were those who existed at that
time. Ifhowever the Republic is inferior to the Timzus, because it is conversant
with that which is partial, and to discuss mortal affairs is to dwell on an image, ἢ
yet the universal prevails init. For the same form of life exhibits indeed in the soul
Justice, but ina city a polity, and in the world, fabrication,

Farther still, the deliberate choice of virtue is free, but the energy which is di-
rected to externals, requires the mundane order, and hence the Atlanticus is pos-
terior to the Timaus. But the habit of the citizens shows that virtue is without a
master. Plato also manifests through these things, (hat the soul when she is of
herself [and does not depend on another] is superior to every physical hypostasis, and
runs above Fate ; but when she verges to actions, is vanquished by physical laws, and
is in subjection to Fate. In addition also to what has been said, it is requisite to
know this, that from the order of human life delivered in the Republic, the con-
nexion of these dialogues, may be obtained. For in that dialogue the men are
first educated and instructed through disciplines. Afterwards, they ascend to
the contemplation of [true] beings ; and in the third place, descend from thence
to a providential attention to the city. Conformably to this congruity, the Re-
public has an arrangement prior to the Timeus; and the Timaus to the Atlanti-
cus. For the men being instructed by the Republic, and elevated according to
theory by the Timaus, will, living happily, wisely’ perform such actions, as the

' For exporws bere, 1 read ἐμφρονωε.
Tim. Plat. Vou. I. -

170 PROCLUS ON THE ioe.

Atlanticus narrates. After this manner therefore, we dissolve the doubt. The
philosopher Porphyry however, not directly for the sake of this doubt, but dis-
cussing something else, affords us the following aid in its solution ; that those who
wish' to apprehend the whole theory genuinely, ought first to be instructed in the
form of it, in order that being similar to the object of intellection, they may be in
a becoming manner co-adapted to the knowledge of the truth. This therefore,
the order itself of the dialogues demonstrates. For the auditors of the Timaus
ought first to have been benefited by the Republic, and having been adorned
through it, to attend afterwards to the dogmas concerning the world, evincing
themselves to be most similar through erudition to the excellent order of the uni-
verse. And thus much in answer to this doubt.

Each particular however of the text must be considered, ‘Timiwus therefore,
is now said to be most astronomical, not as directing his attention to the rapidity
of the celestial motions, nor as collecting the measures of the courses of the
sun,* nor as being conversant with the works of Fate, but as astronomizing above
the heavens, conformably to the coryphwus in the Phewtetus, and contemplating
the invisible causes which are properly stars. TLenee Socrates does not exhibit
the visible man, but the man that is purely essentialized ino reason; and he
does this as imitating the whole demiurgus, in) whom the heavens and all
the stars subsist, as the theologist says, intellectually, “Timieus begins however,
from the generation of the world, and ends in man; because man is a mi-
crocosm, possessing all things partially, which the universe does totally, as
Socrates demonstrates in’ the Philebus. But there are certain persons educated
by Socrates in the most excellent manner, who also educates the whole city,
and these are the guardians and auxiliaries. Forin the universe, that) which
transcendently participates of intellect is heaven, which also imitates intellect
through its motion. The men however, are introduced by Critias, conformably
to the law and conceptions of Solon, because Solon narrates, that the Athenians
were once thus governed, and established laws how children ought to be intro-

duced into the polity, and into the tribes, and how they ought τὸ be registered 5

* For pevovras inthis place, it appears to me to be necessary to read ἐθέλων ταν,

* Proclus here alludes to the following Chaldaan oracle: ‘ Direct not your attention to the immense
measures of the earth; for the plant of truth is not in the earth. Nor measure the dimensions of the
sun by means of collected rules; for it revolves by the eternal willof the father, and not for your sake.
Dismiss the sounding course of the moon; for it perpetually runs through the exertions of necessity.
The advancing procession of the [fixed] stars, was not generated for yoursahe,” Ac. See my collection
of these Oracles, in No. XAVII, of the Classical Journal.

ete AEN SRAM δος σον, TL ον

BOOK 1.] TIM EUS OF PLATO. 171

and likewise, by what kind of judges, they should be tried, in one place from the
tribes, but in another, from other appropriate persons, As Critias therefore admits»
that the-men educated by Socrates were Athenians, he follows the conceptions
and the law of Solon, conformably to which certain persons are introduced into
the polity.

Soc. “ I seem to behold a perfect and splendid banquet of discussion
set before me. It belongs therefore, now to you, O ‘Timaus, to begin the
discourse; having first of all, as is fit, invoked the Gods according to
law.”

The perfection and the splendor of the narration indicate the supernatural pro-
duction of things on account of their paradigms, and which takes place universally.
And to these the words of Socrates refer. The banquet of discussion indicates
the perfect plenitude of demiurgic forms ; but the calling on Timaus, the conversion
of partial causes to the whole, and an evocation of the goods thence derived ;
and the invocation of the Gods, the fabrication: supernally suspended from intel-
ligibles. For the expression according to law, is not such as many of the Ttalic
or Attic interpreters suppose it to be, butait has the same meaning as the words
usually employed by the Pythagereans, “ [loner in the first place, the immortal
Gods, as they are disposed by law.” For law manifests the divine order, accord-
ing to which secondary are always suspended from prior causes, and are filled
from them. But law thus beginning from intelligibles, extends τὸ the demiurgic
cause, and from this proceeds, and is divided about the universe, At the same
time, however, Socrates indicates through these things, that the Pythagoric doc-
trine requires that physiology should commence from a divine cause, and that it
should not be such as that which he reprobates in the Phado, which blinds: the
eye of the soul, by assigning airs and wthers as causes, conformably to Anaxa-
goras. Por itis necessary that true physiology should be suspended from theo-
logy, in the same manner as nature is suspended from the Gods, and is divided
according to the total orders of them; so that words may be imitators of the things
of which they are significant. For mythologists also narrate that Vulean who
presides over nature was in love with Minerva, who weaves the order of intellec-
tual forms, and is the supplier of intelligence to all mundane essences. As far as
to this therefore, the preface of the Timiwus receives its completion; of which
Severus, indeed, did not think fit to give any interpretation; but Longinus does
not say that the whole is supertluous, but only such particulars as are introduced

7 ΞΖ

172 PROCLUS ON THE TIM.EUS OF PLATO. [Book τ.

about the Atlantics, and the narration of the Egyptian; so that he is accustomed
to conjoin with the request of Socrates, the promise of Critias. I mean, he con-
nects with the words, ‘ J now therefore stand prepared to receive the promised feast,”
the words, “ But now consider, Socrates, the manner of our disposing the mutual ban-
quet of discussion.” But Porphyry and Jamblichus show that this preface accords
with the whole design of the dialogue, the one indeed more partially, but the
other with more profound intuition ; so that we also shall here finish the book in
conformity to Plato, having adopted their order.

173

BOOK, ἢ.

Tut preface of the Timieus consists of two heads sa recapitulation of the polity
of Socrates, and a concise narration of the war of the Athenians against the
Atlantics, and the victory which they obtained over them. Each of these, how-
ever, contributes in the greatest degree to the consummation of the whole theory of
the world. For the form of the [Socratic] polity, considered by itself, is primarily
adapted to the orderly distribution of the heavens. But the narration of the
war and the victory, becomes a symbol to us of the mundane contrariety. And the
former describes in images the first fabrication, but the latter the second. Or, if
you are willing, the former describes the formal, but the latter the material cause.
For all physiologists make principles to be contraries, and constitute the world
from the harmonious conjunction of contraries. And harmony indeed, and
order are derived trom form, which in the recapitulation is shown to proceed from

the polity in common, and to extend in an orderly progression to every multitude.

For it is one thing to deliver the polity whichis in the soul, another, that which is
inmen, and another, that which is mundane. But the recapitulation of Socrates,
describing the form itself of every polity separately, exhibits to us primarily the
polity in the universe, to which also it entirely hastens to refer (the polities that
rank as] parts,

Farther still, if also you are willing to consider the aflair after another manner,
the polity may be arranged as analogous to the heavens, but the war to genera-
tion. For the polity extends as far as to the last of things; since all things are
arranged conformably to the series which proceeds from the demiurgus as far as to
mundane natures. Contrariety also pre-exists after a manner in the heavens;

174 PROCLUS ON TUF. [BooK ιν.

either according to the two-fold circulations of the celestial bodies, viz. to the
right hand, and to the left; or according to the two-fold. circles of souls, the
circle of sameness, and the circle of difference; or according to the genera of
being, permanency ἡ and motion; or according to the divine peculiarities, the male
and the female; or according to any other such-like division, “The polity there-
fore, is more allied to the heavens, but the war to veneration, Lenee the former
is Jovian, but the latter pertains to the allotment of Neptune, After however
the theory of parts, it is necessary through images to he extended to the Know-
ledge of the whole. And after the survey of images themselves, it 1s requisite to
adhere to their paradigms, from small being initiated ino greater [objects of con-
templation). Por the former have the relation of things preparatory to initiation,
and of small mysteries, exciting the eye of the soul to the comprehension of the
whole and the universe, and τὸ the contemplation of the one cause, and the one
progression of all inundane natures, For every thing is from: the one, and the
universe with having in different: parts of it, more partial presiding powers,
proceeds vice versa to the one cause of its subsistence.

Timawus however, prior to entering on the whole discussion, converts himself to
the invocations of, and prayers to the Gods, imitating in this the maker of the
universe, who prior to the whole fabrication of things, Is said) to have approached
to the oracle of night, to have been there filled with divine intellectual concep-
tions, to have received: the principles of fabrication, and there to dissolve, if it be
lawful so to speak, all his doubts, To night also, who calls on the father, (Jupiter]
to enzage in the fabrication of the universe, Jupiter is represented by the theola-

gist as ΒΆΝ ΤΠ,

Maia, supreme of all the powers divine,
Immortal Night! how with unconquer'd timd

Must | the source of the immortals fix ?

And he receives this answer from her,

All things receive inclos’d on ev'ry side,
In wther’s wide ineffable embrace ;

Then in the midst of ather place the heav'n, *

* For σνστασιν here, itis necessary to read στασιν:

* For ovpary here, it is necessary to read ουρανον.

noon tJ TIMALUS OF PLATO. 175

And he is instructed by her in all the consequent fabrication of the world. But
again to Saturn, after the bonds, Jupiter al but praying says,

Damon, most fam'd, our progeny direct.

And in all that follows, he calls forth the benevolence of his father. For how
could he otherwise fill all things with Gods and assimilate the sensible world to
animal itself, (or the intelligible paradigm) than by extending himself to the invisible

causes of wholes, from which being himself filled,

Ile from his (sacred) heart may godlike works

Again produce.

It is necessary therefore, prior to all other tings, that we should know some-
thing manifest concerning prayer, what its essence is, and what. its perfection,
and whenee itis imparted to souls, For the philosopher Porphyry indeed, de-
scribing those among the ancients that admitted prayer, and those that did not,
leads us from one opinion to another, and says in short, that neither those who
are diseased according to the first kind ofimpiety, derive any benetit from prayer,
since they do not admit that there are Gods, nor those who labour under the
second kind, and entirely subvert providence, granting indeed that there are
Gods, but denying their providential energies. Nor are they benefited by it,
who admit indeed the providence of the Gods, but assert that all things are
produced by them from necessity. For there is no longer any advantage to be
derived from prayer, if things of a contingent nature have not! any existence,
But such as assert that the Gods providentially attend to all things, and that
many things that are generated are contingent and may subsist otherwise, these
very properly admit the necessity of prayers, and acknowledge that they correct
our life. Porphyry also adds, that prayer especially pertains to worthy men,
because it isa contact with divinity. But the similar loves to be conjoined to the
similar: and the worthy man is most similar to the Gods. - Because likewise
those who embrace virtue are in custody, and are inclosed in the body as in a
prison, they ought to request the Gods that they may migrate from hence.
Besides, since we are as children torn from our parents, it is fit we should pray

* For add\ws γινέσθαι ovrwy here, it is necessary to read, adAws γιγεσθαι μὴ οντων.

176 PROCLUS ON THE {Boox 13,

that we may return to our true parents the Gods. Those also resemble such as
are deprived of their fathers and mothers, who do not think it requisite to pray
and be converted to the Gods, ΔἸ nations likewise, that have excelled) in
wisdom, have diligently apphed themselves to prayer; among the Indians the
Brachmans, among the Persians the Magi, and of the Greeks the taost theolo-
gical, who instituted initiatory rites and mysteries, But) the Chaldeans venerate
every other divinity, and likewise the virtue itself of the Gods, which they deno-
minate a Goddess χ᾽ so far are they from despising sacred) worship, on account
of the possession of virtue. And in addition to all this, as we are parts of the
Universe itis fit that we should be in want of the universe. ΕῸΓ a conversion to
the whole imparts salvation to every thing, Tf therefore you possess virtue, you
should invoke that which antecedently comprehends all virtue, For that
which is all-good, will also be the cause to you of appropriate good. Or τ you
explore a certain corporeal good, there is a power in the world which compre-
hends all body. It is necessary therefore that perfection should) from thence be
derived to the parts. And this is the sum of whatis said by Porphyry on this
subject.

The divine Tamblichus however, does not think that a history of this kind
pertains to whatis here proposed to be considered, For Placo is not now speaking
about atheistical men, but about such as are wise, and able to converse with the
Gods. Nor does he speak of such as are dubious about the works of piety 3 dué
fo such as wish to be saved by those who are the saviours of wholes, he delivers the
power of prayer, and tts aumirable and supernatural perfection which transcends all
ca pectation.

It is fit however, that transferring what he says to what is more usual and more
known to the reader, we should render his meaning clear, and assign arguments
concerning prayer which accord with the doctrme of Plato. From hence there-
fore we must begin: All beings aie the progeny of the Gods, by whom they are
produced without a medium, and in whom they are firmly established. For the
progression of things which perpetually subsist, and cohere from permanent causes,
is not alone perfected by a certain continuation, bat immediately subsists from
the Gods, from whence all things are generated, however distant they may be
from the divinities. And this is no tess true, even though asserted of matter itself.

Fora divine nature is not absent from any thing, but is equally present to all

' Yor θέων in this place, it is requisite to read Beov.

BOOK 11. TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 177

things. Hence though. you should assume the last of beings, in these also you
will find divinity. Por the one is every where; and in consequence of its absolute
dominion, every thing receives its nature and coherence from the Gods. — As all
things however proceed, so likewise, they are not separated from the Gods, but
radically abide in them, as the causes and sustainers of their existence. For where
can they recede, since the Gods primarily comprehend all things in their embrace ?
For whatever is placed as separate from the Gods has not any kind of sub-
sistence. But all beings are contained by the Gods and reside in their natures, after
the mannerofa circular comprehension. Hence, bya wonderful mode of subsistence,
all things proceed, and yet are not, nor indeed can be separated from the Gods;
because all oflsypring when torn from their parents, immediately recur to the
immense vastness of non-entity. But in a certain respect they are established in
them; and in short, proceed in themselves, but abide in the Gods. Since how-
ever, haying proceeded, it is requisite that they should be converted and return,
imitating the evolution into light, and conversion of the Gods to their cause, in
order that these being arranged conformably to the perfective triad, may again
be contained by the Gods and_ the first unities,—-hence they receive from them a
certain secondary perfection, by which they may be able to convert themselves to .
the goodness of the divinities, in order that being at first rooted in, they may
again through conversion be established in them, forming a certain circle, which
originates from and terminates inthe Gods.

All things therefore, both abide in, and convert themselves to the Gods, receiv-
ing this power from the divinities, together with two-fold impressions according
to essence; the one, that they may abide there, but the other that, having
proceeded, they may convert themselves [to their causes). And these things we
may survey not only in souls, but also in inanimate natures. Lor what else
ingenerates in these a sympathy with other powers, but the symbols which they
are allotted by nature, some of which are allied to éhis, but others to that series
of Gods? For nature being supernally suspended from the Gods, and distributed
from their orders, inserts also in bodies impressions of their alliance to the
divinities. In some indeed, inserting solar, but in others lunar impressions, and in
others again, the symbol] of some other God. And these indeed, convert them-
selves to the Gods; some, as to the Gods simply, but others as to particular
Gods ; nature thus perfecting her progeny according to different peculiarities of

* For παρ᾽ core here, read xapeore.

Tim. Plat. ; Vou. ἢ Z

178 PROCLUS ON THE [BooK IF

the divinities. The Demiurgus of the universe therefore, by a much greater
priority, impressed these symbols in souls, by which they might be able to abide
in themselves, and again convert themselves to the sources of their being. And
through the symbol of unity indeed he conferred on them stability ; but through
intellect, he imparted to them the power of conversion,

But to this conversion prayer is of the greatest utility. For it attracts to itself
the bencticence of the Gods, through those incflable symbols which the father of
souls has disseminated in them. ΠῚ likewise unites those who pray with those to
whom prayer is addressed ; conjoins the intellect of the Gods with the words of
those who pray ; excites the will of those who perfectly comprehend good to the
abundant communication of its is the fabricator of divine persuasion; and esta-
blishes in the Gods all that we possess.

Toa perfect and trae prayer however, there is required in the first place, a
knowledee of all the divine orders to which he who prays approaches. For no
one will accede τὸ the Gods ina proper manner, unless he has a knowledge of
their peculiarities. Hence also the oracle admonishes, that a fire-heated conception
has the prst order in sacred worship. But in the second place, there is required a
conformation of our life with that which is divine ; and this accompanied with all
purity, chastity, discipline, and order, through which our concerns being intro-
duced to the Gods, we shall attract their beneficence, and our souls will become
subject to them. (In the third place, contact is necessary, according to which we
touch the divine essence with the sumimitof our soul, and verge to a union with
it.) Bat there is vet farther required, an approximating adhesion Σ for thus the
oracle calls it, whenit says, he mortal approvimating to fire τὶ il possess alight from
the Gods. For this imparts to us a greater communion with, and a more muanti-
fest. participation of the light of the Gods. In the last place, union succeeds
establishing the one of the soul in the one of the Gods, and causing our energy to
hecome one with divine energy ; according to which we are no longer ourselves,
but are absorbed as it were ia the Gods, abiding in’ divine ieht, and cireukarly
comprehended by it. And this is the best end of true prayer, in order that the
conversion of the soul may be"conjoined with its permanency, and that every thing
which proceeds from dhe one of the Gods, may aga.n be established in ¢he one, and
the light which is inus may be comprehended in the light of the Gods.

Prayer therefore, is no small part of the whole ascent of souls. / Nor is he who
possesses virtue superior to the want of the ood which proceeds from prayer 5
but on the contrary the ascent of the soul is effected through it, and together with
this, piety to the Gods, which is the summit of virtue, ΔῸΣ δὲ short, ought any

BOOK 11. TIMAEUS OF PLATO. 179

other to pray than he who is transcendently good, as the Athenian guest {in Plato}
says. For to such aone, converse with the Gods becomes most efficacious lo the attain-
ment ofa happy life. But the contrary is naturally adapted to befal the vicious.
For it isnot lawful for the pure to be touched by the impure. Hence, it is neces-
sary that he who generously enters on the exercise of prayer, should render the
Gods propitions to him, and should excite in himself conceptions full of intellec-
tual light. For the faver and benignity of more exalted beings, is the most eflec-
tual incentive to their communication with ournatures, And it is requisite to
continue without mtermission in the worship of divinity. For [according to the
oracle} the rapid ' Gods perfect the mortal constantly employed ino prayer. It
is also necessary to. observe a stable order in the performance of divine works ;

to exert those virtues which purify and elevate the soul from generation, together, 7.0)"

with faith, truth, and love ; to preserve this triad and hope of good, this immutable :
reception of divine light, and segregation from every other pursuit, that thus be-
coming alone, we may associate with solitary deity, and not * endeavour to conjoin
ourselves with multitude to (he one. For he who attempts this, efleets the very
contrary, and separates himself from the Gods. For as it is not lawful in con-
junction with non-entity to associate with being ; so neither is it possible with multi-
tude to be conjoined with theone. Such therefore are the particulars which ought
lirst to be known concerning prayer; viz. that the essence of it congregates and
binds souls to the Gods, or rather, that it unites all secondary to primary natures. -
For as the great Theodorus says, all things pray except the first.

The perfection however of prayer, beginning from more common ἡ goods, ends
in divine union, and gradually accustoms the soul to divine light. But its eflica-
cious energy both replenishes us with good, and) causes our concerns to be com-
mon with those of the Gods. With respect to the causes of prayer too, we may
infer, that so faras they are efectice, they are the efficacious powers of the Gods,
converting and calling upwards the soul to the Gods themselves, But that so far
as they are final or pertective, they are the immaculate goods of the soul, which
they derive as the fruits of being established in the Gods. That so far also as
they are paradigmatical, they are the primordial causes of beings, which proceed
from the good, and are united to it, according to one ineffable union. πὶ that so
far as they are formal, they assimilate souls to the Gods, and ‘give perfection to
the whole of their life. And that so far as they are material, they are the imprese

Tie. The intelligible Gods.
* Forcar pera πληθους here, it is necessary to read καὶ μὴ μέτα πληθουν.
* For κοιλογερων in this place, itis requisite to read κοεγοτέμων.

μὰ

150 PROCLUS ΟΝ ‘THE [MOOK Ut

sions or symbols inserted by the Demiurgus in the essences of souls, in order that
they may be excited to a reminiscence of the Gods who produced them, and
whatever else exists.

Moreover, we may likewise define the modes of prayer which are va-
rious, according to the genera and species of the Gods. Por prayer is cither
demiurgic, or cathartic, or vivitie, And the demiurgic is suchas that which
is offered for the sake of showers and winds. For the demturgi are the
causes of the generation of these. And the prayers of the Athenians for
winds procuring serenity of weather are addressed to these Gods. But the
cathartic prayer is that which is offered forthe purpose of averting diseases
originating from) pestilence, and other contagious distempers ; such as we
have written ino our temples. And the vieyie prayer is that with whieh we
worship the Gods, who are the causes of vivifieation, on vecount of the
origin and maturity of fruits, Henee prayers are of a perfective nature,
because they clevate us to these orders of the Gods. And he who considers
such prayers in a different manner, fails ino properly apprehending: the nature
and eflicacy of prayer. Bat again, with reference to the things for which we
pray; those prayers, which regard the salvation of the soul, obtain the first
place: those whieh pertain to the rood temperament of the body, the second 5
and those rank in the third) place, which are offered for the sake of ex-
ternal concerns. And lastly, with respect to the division: of the times in
which we offer up prayers, it is either according to the seasons of the year,
or the centers of the solar revolution; or we establish niultiforim prayers ac-
cording to other such-like conceptions.

Tra. “ But, O Socrates, all such as participate but in the least
degree of temperance, Oi. e. wisdom] in the impulse to every un-
dertaking, whether small or great, always invoke divinity.”

Do you see what kind ofan hypothesis Plato refers to the Timwus; what kind of
an auditor of it he introduces, viz. Socrates ;and what a beginning of the discus-
sion he has described? For the hy pothesis indeed, refers to the whole fabrication of
things ; but the auditor is prepared to be led to it contormably to the one intellect
‘and onetheory of wholes. Hence also heexcites ‘Pimiwus to prayer, But the bezin-
ning of the discussion, beingimpelled from the invocation of the Gods, thus imitates
the progressionofbeings, which first abiding in the Gods, arethus allotted a generation
fromthem. Since however, it is said, that “alliho in the least degree participate of

ROOK 11. TIMAUS OF PLATO. 181

temperance always invoke divinity in the impulse to every undertaking, whether
if be small or great, let us see from what kind of conception they make this
invocation of the Gods in every thing in which they engage. For it is not pro-
bable that these who are temperate will not make real bemg the scope to
which they tend. And those who establish a pure intellect as the leader of their
theory; who deposit the beautiful and the good in the prerogatives of the soul,
and not in human afiairs, nor in external fortunes; and who perceive ἡ the power
of providence extending through all beings, and = harmonizing all things to
the universe, so that both the whole and the parts may subsist most) beautifully,
and that nothing may be destitute of the providence which proceeds from
deity to all things ; these will genuinely apprehend the science concerning the
Gods. But again, perceiving this to be the case, they will very properiy in each
action, aud according to each energy, call on divinity as the co-adjutor of their im-
pulse, introducing their productions to the universe in conjunction with wholes,
and establishing themselves in the goodness of the Gods. For things which appear
to be small, enjoy the providence of the Gods, and are great so far as they are sus-
pended from them ; just again, as things which are great in their own nature, when
they separate themselves from divinity, areseento be perfectly small, and of no worth.

These things therefore, temperance imparts to souls, not being a certain human
habit, nor approaching to what is called continence, but a divinely inspired
energy of the soul, converting herself to herself and to divinity, perceiving the
causes of all things in the Gods, and from thence surveying both other things,
and such as proceed [into a visible subsistence], through which as auniliaries, *
we also may be able to reenr to the Gods, by means of the gifts which they insert
inus, The soul also, when thus converted to herself, finds symbols of the
Gods in each even of the smallest things, and through these renders every
thing familiar and allied to the Gods. Since however, the Gods produced the |
whole of our essence and gave us a selfmotive nature in order to the choice |
of good, their producing power is particularly manifested in our external ener- |
cies; though when we consult, we require their providential attention ; (which
the Athemans manifest by honoring Jupiter the Counsellor) and when we
choose, we are in want of their assistance; in’ order that by consulting, we may
discover what is advantageous; and that in choosing, we may not through
passion verge to that which is worse; butrather, that both when acting, and when

' For καθαρ τε here, read καθόρωσι.
* For agoopew tv this place, it is necessary to read agoppwr.

189 PROCLUS ON THE ~ [ROOK 4.

impelled, we may perceive that the sclfmotive nature possesses the smallest
power, and that the whole of it is suspended from the providence of the Gods.
Hence Timieus also says, that those who are temperate always invoke the Gods,
in the nnpulse to every undertaking. Por in our elections indeed, we are more
able to separate providence from that which is in ear power, Hut Weare ted
pable of doing this in our imprilses | heeatise in these we have tess of the self
motive enerey. Por that which is in our power iy not se extended us the pro-
vidence of the Gods; but as we have frequently said, superior energize prior to
secondary matures, and together with and posterior to them, and on all sides
comprehend the energies of subordinate beimes. But, says the Epicurean Eur-
imachus, how can we avoid proceeding to infinity, * if in the impulse to every
small thing, we require prayer: for though we should) pray, we shall be in
want of another prayer, and we shall no where stop? And) Porphyry dissolves
the doubt as follows: that it) is mot said it is necessary to pray on account: of
every thing, but in the impulse to every thing, We are impelled: therefore: to
things, but we are notimpelled to impulses, so that there is not a progression to
infinity. Or does not the doubt still remain? Por we are impelled to prayer, so
that in this we shall again require prayer, and an impulse to this again to imfinity,
Hence it is better to say, that he who prays respecting any thing, prior to this,
acknowledges to the Gods, that he is allotted a power from them of conversion
to them, and that to other things indeed good is imparted through prayer, but to
prayer through itself, Tt does not therefore require another prayer, since it com-

prehends good in itself, and procures communion with a divine mature,

“Tt is necessary therefore, that we should do this, who are about to
speak in a certain respect: concerning the universe, whether it was gene-
rated, or is without generation, unless we are perfectly unwise.”

Timzus evinces how very admirable the hypothesis is, but elegantly preserves
himself in the order of a pradent man, pursuing the medium between irony and
arrozance. For having before said, that those who in the smallest degree partici
pate of temperance, invoke divinity in the impulse to every great or small under-

: Instead of διακριναι yup επι μεν Των aipediws’, THY προνοιαν aro Tov ey ἡμιν αδυγάτουμεν, επι δε Των
ὅρμων, μαλλὸν δυνάμεθα in this place, it is necessary to read, ccaxporae yap ἐπὶ μὲν των ἀμεέσιων, τὴν
προνοιαν aro tov ey’ ἡμιν μαλλον δυνάμεθα, ἐπι δε των ὁρμων, αδυνατουμεν.

* For axopuy here, read ἀπειρον.

wooK 11. TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 183

taking, he very much exalts his proposed subject of discussion, by opposing a
discourse about the wnaiverse to a small thing. But he cautiously says, not that
he has himself arrived αὐ the summit of temperance (i. ον of wisdom]; for this is
the contrary, to the participation of temperance in the smallest decree; but that
he is net perfectly unwise. And this he says from the hypothesis, in order that
he may have to show, that the power and science which he possesses, are from
the work itself, but not from his own discussions. His theory therefore, will be
concerning the universe, so far as it is: produced by the Gods. For the world
may be multifariously surveyed ; etiher according to its corporeal-formed nature,
orso far as it is full of partial and total souls," or so far as it participates of
intellect. “Fimiwus however, considers the nature of the universe, not according
to these modes only, but particularly according to its progression from: the Demi-
urgus ; where also physiology appears to be acertain’ theology ; because things
Which have a natural subsistence, have ina certain respeet a divine hyparxis, so
far as they are generated from the Gods. And thus this must be determined,

It is usual however to doubt, why Plato here adds ina certain respect: for he
says, “© Those who are about to speak ina certam respect concerning the universe.” And
the more superficial indeed of the interpreters say, that the universe is δὲ a certain
respect unbegotten, and in a certain respect generated. TTence the discussion
of it is very properly in a certain respect, as of that which is unbegotten, and
in a certain respect as of that which is generated. Though Plato does not co-
arrange ἡ τὸ πὴ ina certain respect, with the words unbegotten and gencrated, but with
the words about to speak. But the divine Tamblichus says that the discussion is ina
certain respect about the universe, and ina certain respect not; for matter, as being
indefinite in the world, may be variously considered. To this interpretation
however, it mat be said, that ry, is co-arranged with something else, and not with
the universe. Will it not therefore, be better to say with our preceptor, that words
are multifariousty enunciated, For the demiurgic words proceeding from intellect
are of one kind, such as the Demiurgus utters to the junior. Gods: for Plato says,
“ that the soul speaks, being moved to itself.” Those words which are surveyed in
science, are of another kind, And those are of another kind which are allotted
the third hypostasis from intellect, and which proceed externally for the sake of
discipline and communication with others. Hence Timaus knowing that those

' Instead of καθ᾿ οσον πληρες ἐστι ψνχίκὼν re καὶ ολιζων in this place, itis necessary to read, caf evo

πληρεν ἐστι ψυχων μερικων re καὶ ολικων, :
> For καὶ τε γε ο [lAarwy ev τῳ ἀγένει here, it is requisite to read και τοι γε o Πλατων μη ev, «. 2d.

184 PROCLUS ON THE [BOOK τι.

are demiurgic words which the Demiurgus employs, but that those are scientific
which he is now about to generate, but which he pre-assumes in himself, and that
he makes use of external words for the sake of Socrates alone, on this account he
says that he shall employ words in a certain respect about the universe. For it is
one thing to use them intellectually, another scientifically, and another, for the sake
of discipline; and xy indicates these differences of words,

Again therefore, with respect to the words, “whether it was generated, or is with-
out generation,” those interpreters read the former with an aspirate, but) the latter

with a soft breathing, who say that) Plato speaks about the universe, so far as it

mR?
Was generated from a cause, or is unbegotten, inorder that survecing it as gene-
rated, we may perceive the nature which it contains. And the Platonic Albinus
thinks, that according to: Plato the world being perpetual, δ has a beginning of
generation, by which also it is more redundant than being; sinee this indeed
always is, but the world in addition to existing always, has a beginning of gene-
ration, in order that it may exist always, and be generated. Not that it is
generated after such a manner as to be so according to time; for im this case it
would not always exist; butin short, it has the relation of generation, on account
of its composition from things many and dissimilar, And it is necessary to refer
its hypostasis to another cause more ancient than itself, through which always
existing primarily, the world is ia certain respect, and always is, and is not only
generated, but is also unbegotten. [This therefore is asserted by Albinus],
thenueh Plato no where in what follows says, that the universe is ina certain
respect generated, and ina certain respect unbegotten. Others again, read both
the parts with an aspirate, in order that Timawus may say, de rs about to speak con-
cerning the universe so far as itis generated, and so far asit is unbegotten serving in
the same way as those prior to them; unless indeed they assert that the universe
was generated according to forin, but unbegotten according to Is nurse (matter).
For thus also Timiwus says, hat its nurse is unbegotten, but that the world was
generated, as receiving form from divinity. But Porphyry and Tamblichus read
both the parts with a soft breathing, in order that what is said may be whether the
universe was generated or is unikcgotten. For this is to be considered, prior to all
other things; since it contributes in the highest degree to the consummation of
the whole of physiology, rightly to admit that the world was generated or is un-
begotten, Por from this hypothesis we shall be able to see what the nature is of

* For ayeryroy here, Lead αἰδιον.

BOOK 11.) TIM-£EUS OF PLATO. 185

its essence and powers, as will be manifest to us shortly after, The discussion |
therefore, concerning the universe, will be for the sake of discipline, and will pro- ὦ
ceed from this principle, whether the world was generated, or is without genera-
tion; and from this, other things must be woven together in a consequent order.

“ΤῸ is necessary, therefore, that invoking all the Gods and Goddesses,
we should pray that what we assert may especially be agreeable to their
divinities, and that in the ensuing discourse we may be consistent with
ourselves.”

The division of male and female comprchends in itself all the plenitudes of the
divine orders. For the cause of stable power and sameness, the supplier of being.
and that which ts the first principle of conversion to all things, are comprehended
in the male. But that which emits from itself all-various progressions and sepa-
rations, measures of life and prolific powers, is contained in the female. Hence,
Timirus, elevating himself to all the Gods, very properly comprehends the whole
orders of them, in a division into these genera. Such a division, likewise, 1s most
adapted to the proposed theory. For this universe is full of these twofold divine
genera. For heaven has to earth (that we may assume the extremes) the order of
the male to the female; becanse the motion of heaven imparts productive princi-
ples and powers to every thing [sublunary]; and earth receiving the effluxions
thence proceeding, is parturient with and generates all-various animals and plants.
Of the Gods also in the heavens, some are distinguished according to the male,
but others according to the female. And of those powers that govern generation
in an unbegotten manner, some are of the former, but others of the latter co-or-
dination. In short, the demiurgic choir is abundant in the universe, and there
are many rivers of life, some of which exhibit the form of the male, but others of
the female characteristic. And what occasion is there to say much on this sub-
ject? For from the liberated unities," both masculine and feminine, various
orders proceed into the universe. Hence, he who is entering on the discussion
of the universe, very properly invokes the Gods and Goddesses, from both which
the universe receives its completion, and beseeches them that what he asserts may
be consistent, and particularly that it may be agreeable to their divinities. For
this is the sublimest end of theory, to run upward to a divine intellect ; and as all

* For efadwy here, it is necessary to read πα

᾿ς ‘Tim. Plat. Vou. 1. 2A

136 PROCLUsS ON THE [Βοοκ 11.

things are unifurmly comprehended in it, to arrange the discussion of things agree-
ably to this causal comprehension. Βαϊ that whichis the second end, and is con-
sequent to this is, for the whole theory to receive its completion conformably to
human intellect and the light of science. For the whole, the perfect, and the
uniform, pre-exist ina divine ‘ntelleet; but that which is partial and falls short
of divine simplicity, subsists about a mortal intellect.

Why however, does Timwus say, that itis necessary to pray, and magnifi-
cently proclaim that the Gods and Goddesses should be invoked, yet does not
pray, though an opportunity for so doing presents itself, but immediately converts
himself to the proposed discussion? We reply, itis because some things have
theirend comprehended inthe very will itself; bat others, distuibute! another
enerzy after the will, and through action accomplish that which was the object
ofthe will. And a life indecd, conformable to philosophy, depends on our wall,
and a deficiency init, is contrary to the will [But the consequences resulting
from a life conversant with external actions, are not dependent ou our will;] for
the end of thems not placed in us. We may tustly, therefore, rank prayer among
the number of things which have all their perfection in the will Dor the wish to
pray, isa desire of conversion to the Gods. And Us desire itself conducts: the
desiring soul, and conjoins it to divinity, which as the first: work of prayer."
Hence it is not proper first to wish, and afterwards to pray, but he that wishes to
pray, will at the same time have prayer as the measure of his wish, one person
indeed in a greater, but another ina less degree. Parther still, this also is: the
work of a true prayer, for those things for which we pray to be common to the
Gods, both according to powers and energies, and for us to eflect them im con-

junction with the Gods.—-Thus if some one should pray to the powers that ampu-

tate matter, and obliterate the stains arising from generation, but should himself

particularly endeavour to effect this, through the cathartic virtues; such a one in
conjunction with the Gods, would entirely accomplish a dissolution of his mate-
rial bonds. ‘This therefore Timaus here effects. For those things which he prays
to the Gods to accomplish, he himsclf completes, disposing the whole discourse
according to human intellect, but so as to be in conformity to the intellect of the

Gods.

And such is my prayer to the Gods with reference to mysclf; but as

' Por axovecec in this place, we must read ἀπονέμει,

> For ψνχὴν bere, itis obviously necessary to τὰ ad euyyp.

BUOK 11.} TIM. EUS OF PLATO. 187

to what respects you, it is requisite to pray that you may easily learn,
and that I may be able to exhibit what I scientifically conceive, in the
clearest manner about the proposed subjects of discussion. [According to
my opinion therefore, the following division must first be made. ]""’

The exhortation of the auditors, is a thing consequent to the prayers* {of
Timrus]. For it is necessary that the replenishing source being suspended from
its proper causes, should previously excite its recipients, and convert them to
itself, prior’ to the plenitude which it confers; in order that becoming more
adapted, they may happily receive the intellectual conceptions which it imparts.
For thus the participation will become more perfect to them,’ and the gift will be
rendered more easy to the giver. Moreover, this very circumstance of facility,
is adapted to those that imitate the whole fabrication ; from which abiding and
rejoicing in itself, all things proceed to the effects which it excites. Farther still,
to produce one series, through the contact of secondary with prior natures, adum-
brates the demiurgic series, which proceeds as far as to the last of things. For
if the anditors receive what is said conformably to the intellect of Timaus, but
Timeus disposes the whole discussion conformably to the intellect of the Gods,
it will happen that the whole conference will in reality be referred to one intellect,
and one intellectual conception. Besides this also, the self-motive nature of souls
is sufficiently indicated, that being moved by the Gods, they also move themselves,
and produce from themselves sciences. For the words, “ what [screntifical'y con-
ceive,” exhibit the energy which is impelled from a life whose power is free.

According to my opinion therefore, these things are first to be considered ;
that Timeus being a Pythagorean, and preserving the form of Pythagorie dis-
cussions, is immediately exhibited to us as such, from the very beginning.
For Socrates does not enunciatively declare his opinions to -others, but having
dialectically purified their conceptions, unfolds trath into light; who also said
to them, that he knew nothing except to make an assertion for give a reason]
aud receive one. But Timaus, as also addressing his discourse to men, says
that he shall enunciate his own dogmas, not at all busying himself with foreign opi-

* The original of the words within the brackets belongs to the text, but is not to be found in the
commentaries of Proclus, though as the reader may see, he comments on these words.

* For yvyxars here also, it is necessary to read evyass.

2. Instead of xpos τῆς πληρώτεωε in this place, we must read πρὸ rns πληρωσεωε.

4 For ro yap avrow, read rows yap avruss.

188 PROCLUS ON THE τς [poox πὶ

nions, but pursuing one path of science. Moreover, the word ἐδοξα,' i.e. Lam
of opinion, is assumed here very aptly, and appropriately to what has been before
suid. For of the whole rational soul, one part ts intellect, another ts dianoia, and a third
is opinion. And the first of these indeed, ts conjoined to the Gods, the second produces the
sciences, and the third imparts them toothers. This man therefore, knowing these
things, through prayer adapts his own intellect to the intellect of the Gods. For
this is manifested by the words, “ that what we assert may especially be agreeable to
their divinities, and that in the ensuing discourse we may be consistent with ourselves.”
But through exhortations, he excites the dianoetic part of the souls of his auditors,
For the words, what I scientifically concerve, have an indication of this kind. The
doxastic part therefore remains, which receiving a scientific division from dianoia,
delivers the streams of it to others. This however is not ambiguous, nur divided
about sensibles, nor does the formal distinction of it consist in hypolepsis * alone ;
but itis filled from intellect and dianoia, surveys the demiurgic reason, and
distinguishes the nature of things. These particulars also, are sufliciently assimi-
lated to the paradigm?’ of the speaker. For there, a royal intellect precedes,
according to which the paradigm is united to intelligibles; a dianota, containing
in itself the plenitudes of forms ; and the first and uniform cause of opimon.
Hence, the paradigm contains intelligibles in intellect, but mtroduces sense to the worlds,
as the Oracle says; or as Plato, “ such ideas therefore, as intellect perceived to be
inherent in animal itself, so many he diancetically saw this universe ought to possess.”
Moreover, the distinction between beings and things generated, Is consentaneous
to what has been before said. For after the Gods and Goddesses, and the
ineffable peculiarity which is in them, the separation of thesetwo genera, 1. δὲ of being
and generation, takes place. Por being is allied to the more excellent order of divine
natures, Which is always established in invariable sameness, and is intelligible.
But veneration is alhed to the inferior order, from which, infinite progression, and
all-various mutation, derive their subsistence. What then is this division, and after
what manner was it produced? Was it nade as if it were the section of a certain
whole inty parts, or as genus is divided into species, or as the division of one
word into many significations, or as that of essence Into accidents, Or vice versa,

'-This word is not to be found in any edition of the ‘Timus of Plato; but from this comment of
Proclus, it appears that it originally belonged to it.

> viz. Inu the apprehension of each of the terms of which a syllogism Consists.

+ i. εἰ To Jupiter the Demiurgus of the world.

BOOK 11. ἘΙΜΞΟΒΟΟΣ PLATO. 189

that of accident into essences; for these are the species of division which some
persons are accustomed to applaud. It is ridiculous therefore, to divide being
and generation, cither as accident into essences, or as essence into accidents.
For accident by no means pertains to perpetual being. Nor again must they be
divided as a word into its significations. For what word is there which Plato
assuming as common, divides into perpetual being, and that which is generated ;
unless some one should say that τι, 1. e. α certain thing, is thus divided by him? This
division however, is not Platonic, but is derived from the Stoic custom. Is the
division therefore, as that of a whole into parts?) But what is that whole which
consists of perpetual being, and that which is generated? Or how can paradigm
and image give completion to one composition! How likewise can perpetual
being be a part of a certain thing, since it is impartible, united, and simple? For
the impartible is not a part of any thing which does not consist of all impartibles.
But that which is generated is not impartible. lence there is not a common
genus of perpetual being, and that which is generated. For perpetual being
precedes according to cause that whichis generated ; and the former is when the
latter is not. But perpetual being not existing, which it is not lawful to suppose,
ceneration also would vanish. How likewise, is there one genus of the first, and
the last of things? For the division of genera into species, takes place in the
middle psychical reasons {i. e. productive powers}. But things prior to soul, subsist
in more excellent genera; and things posterior to soul, have their essence in
co-ordinate natures. How therefore, can being itself and that which is generated,
be arranged under one genus? What also will this genus be? For it is not being,
lest that which is generated, and which never [truly] is, should be arranged in
being. Nor will being itself be the oxe. Because every genus is divided by its
proper diflerences, and antecedently assumes the differences, either in capacity, or
in energy. But it is not lawful that she ove should have differences either in capa-
city, lest it should be more imperfect than secondary natures 3 or in energy,
lest it should have multitude, But as it is in short demonstrated to be superior
both to power and energy, it cannot in any way whatever have diflerences ; so
that neither will there in short, be a division of the one.

What then shall we say?) Must it not be this, that Plato does not now make
any division whatever, but that he proposes to detine separately what cach of
these two, perpetual being, and that which is generated, is? For it appears to me
that the word é:aszereov has the same signification with διακρινητεον. For since he
discourses about the world, the Demiurgus, and the paradigm of the world, he

190 PROCLUS ON THE (BOOK 11,

wishes separately to define perpetual being, and separately that which is generated,
in order that through the given definitions we may know where the world, where
the Demiurgus, and where the paradigm are to be arranged 3 and that we may
not confound the orders of things, but may separate them from each other, so far
as they are severally adapted to be separated. He likewise docs the very same
thing in the Philebus. For inquiring concerning intellect, pleasure and the mixed
life, which is the best of these, he assumes the genera of them, viz, bound, infinity,
and that which is mingled from bound and the infinite. For thus the order of
each will become apparent, and he will manifest the peculiarity of them trom their
genera, There however, hound and infinity beginning from the Gods, proceed
throuzh all beings of whatever Kind they may be. Mor these also were in intelligibles
according to the stable and generative cause of intelligibles. They were lkewise
in the intellectual order according to the paternal and material principle of the
intellectual Gods. And they were in the supermundane order, according to the
demiurgic monad and vivifie duad, and in the last place, according to effective
and prolific powers, Here however, being and that which is generated, do not
bevin from the Gods; for the unities of the Gods are superior to being, and prior
tu these the one itself is exempt from all beings, because the first God is one,” but
the other Gods are wniticy. Nor are being and that which is generated) things
which are participated by the Gods, in the same manner as the unities which are
posterior to the Gods, are said tobe and are participated by being. Nor do they
extend as faras to the last ofthings, For neither is it possible to say that matter
is perpetual being, since we are accustomed to call it non-being ; nor that which
is generated, which is not able even to sufler being, lest perishing by so doing, it
should entirely vanish. This therefore, will again be asserted by us. It is how-
ever, [evident]* that the division is not of one certain thing, and that the proposed
theory has necessarily, prior to other things, the definition of these two-fold genera,
in order that the discussion proceeding as if from geometrical hypotheses to the
investigation of things consequent, may Giscover the nature of the universe, and
the paternal and paradigmatic Catse ofit. For if the universe was generated, it
was generated by a cause. ‘There is therefore a denuargic cause of the universe,
[fthere isa Demiurgus, there is also a paradigm of the world, with reference to

which he who constituted the universe fabricated. And thus in a consequent

’ For ov here, itis obviously necessary to read er,

* φανερὸν is omitted in the original.

BOOK 11. TIMAUS OF PLATO. 191

order the discussion about these things is introduced, and the physical theory
beautifully terminates for us in theology.

* What that is which is always being, but is without generation, and
what that is which is generated indeed, [or consists in becoming to be]

but is never [real] being.”

According to some, all beings whatever, whether they subsist paradigmatically
or iconically, are comprehended in this distinction ; but not all beings according
to others, And the interpreters contradict each other respecting this, not a little.
We however, cannot know which of these assertions it is fit to adopt, unless we
examine each of them by itself, Let us then consider from the beginning, what
power each of the words fof Plato] possesses in itself.

In the first place, therefore, τὸ τι, or the what is definitive. For we are accus-
tomed to give rs an antecedent arrangement in definitions. But it is not a genus,
as the Platonic Severus thought it was, who says that ro τί is the genus of being
and that which is generated; and that the all is signified by it. For thus that
which is generated, and likewise perpetual being, will be all. It was also doubted
by some that preceded us, why Plato did not demonstrate ἐλ αν there is such a
thing as perpetual being, prior to the inquiry what it is. For whence is the
subsistence of perpetual being evident? And it is the law in demonstrative dis-
cussions, to consider if a thing is previous to the investigation, what itis. In
answer to this doubt it may be said, that perhaps Timeus did not think this was
requisite to his purpose; as the day before, it was shown by Socrates in what he
said about the soul, that the soul is unbegotten and incorruptible, and that it
philosephises through its alliance to real beings, with which it comes into contact.

And likewise, as it was shown by him, that what is perfectly being, and tmily
the object of science, is one thing; that what is partly being, and partly non-
being, is another, and on this account is of a doxastic nature; and that what in
no respect is being, and is entirely unknown, is another. This was also granted
to Timwus by Socrates, when he divides a line into four parts, the intelligible, the
dianoetic, the sensible, and the conjectural; where likewise speaking about the
good he says, that it reigns in the intelligible place, in the same manner as the sun
in the visible region." And farther still, the introduction of prayer previous to the
discussion, is a demonstration of the existence of being which always is. For if

* See the latter end of the 6th book of the Republic, where all this is asserted,

192 PROCLUS ON THE [s0ox It.

“

there are Gods, it is necessary that there should be truly existing being: for this
is united to the Gods; but not that which is generated and which perishes, but
is never ¢ruly being. Or rather prior to these things it may be said, that the exis-
tence of something which always is, is deposited in our common conceptions.
For whence was that which is generated produced except from perpetual being?
For if this also was generated, it must have been venerated from some other being.
And this must either be perpetual being, or must likewise have been itself generat-
ed. So that we must either proceed to infinity, or generation 1s In acircle, or
perpetual being has a subsistence. But it isnot lawful to proceed to infinity.
For from one principle which is te one, all things originate. Nor is generation in
a circle, lest the same things should be both better and worse, causes and eiects.
Hence it remains that (true) being always is. Why then, it may be said, is not
generation from the one? Because, we reply, itis absurd that multitude should
be entirely produced without being. Itis necessary therefore, that there should
be truly existing being, which primarily proceeds from ¢he one, in order that the
first principle may not be alone the cause of the last of things, but prior to these
may be the cause of being, from which also generation proceeds. After all that has
been said, however, the most true solution of the doubt 15, that Plato now assuming
as an hypothesis that there is perpetual being, defines it. But after the discussion
about the fabrication of the world, resuming this very thing, he demonstrates that
perpetual being has a subsistence. Preserving however, what pertains to phy-
siology, he proceeds from this hypothesis, and demonstrates such things as are
consequent to it. For science itself also is from hypothesis, and requires that hy-
potheses should be assumed prior to its demonstrations. In what he says there-
fore about matter, he demonstrates not only that matter is, but also that being 15.
But a little after, from one of the hypotheses, i. e. from the third, demonstrating that
there is a Demiurgus of the world, he obtains also from this that perpetual being
subsists prior to that which is generated. And again from the fourth hypothesis
he evinces, that the Demiurgus fabricated the universe, looking to an eternal
paradigm. But in the place we have mentioned, be demonstrates that perpetual
being is itself by itself prior to generated natures. And thus much for this par-
ticular.

With respect however, to. perpetual being itself, whether does it signify the
whole intelligible world, or the Demiurgus, or the paradigm of the universe? for it
is diflurently assumed by different interpreters. And if indeed, it is the whole
intelligible world, whence does the intelligible breadth begin, and where does it

μονρ γα ρα τον

BUOK 11.} TIMAUS OF PLATO. 193

proceed? But if it is the paradigm, how comes it to pass that the Deminrgus 1.
not perpetual being, if the paradigm is one thing, and the Demiurgus another?
And if it is the Demiurgus, whence is it that the paradigm ts not a thing of this
kind? That the paradigmatic cause, therefore, is ta be arranged in perpetual being,
is clearly evident from Plato when he says, “ According to which of the paradigms did
the artificer fabricate the world? Was it according to that which subsists with
tnvariahle sameness, or according to that which was gencrated 2?” And he immediately
decides by saying, “ Jfthe world indeed is beautiful, and the Demiurgus ws good, tt
is evident that he looked to an eternal paradigm. But if the world is not beautiful,
and the Demiurgus is not good, which ibis not lawfullo assert, then he looked to a
generated paradigm.” If therefore itis not lawful to assert this, the paradigm of
the universe is perpetual being. But that this is also true of the Demiurgus, is evi-
dent from this; that Plato calls the soul, which the Demiurgus constitutes, the
first of generated natures, and delivers the generation of it. The Demiurgus, how-
ever, Is prior to soul, so that he belongs to eternal beings. Hence also Plato says
concerning him, “ Afler this manner therefore was there truly an eternal reasoning
of the God.” And how is it possible that being a divine intellect he should not
rank among eternal beings? Is therefore every intelligible world perpetual being ?
The divine Tamblichus, however, strenuously contends on this subject, evineing
that eternal being is superior both to the genera and the species of being; and
establishes itat the summit of the intelligible essence, as that which primarily part:
cipates of the one, But whatis written in the Parmenides concerning the one
being Cor being characterized by ¢he one}, and also in the Sophista, bears testimony
to these things. For there Plato arranges the one being prior to whole, and prior
to the intelligible all; though the whole and the all are intelligible. Here, however,
Plato clearly ealls the paradigm’ perpetual being, and a whole, and all-perfect.
For he denominates it all-pertect animal ; and a whole, when he says, ‘ of which
other animals are parts according to one, and according to genera.” So that if the
paradigm isa whole and all-perfect, but that which is primarily being is above
whole and all, the paradizm and that being will not be the same.

Will it not, therefore, be better to say, that there is indeed such an order of
being, as that divine man (lamblichus] has delivered, and such as Plato else-
where surveys; but that now Plato thus denominates every cternal world?
Nor is this at all wonderful. For, at one time, the intelligible is asserted of every Pr.
petual and invisible nature, as when itis said that the soul also is intelligible, as by
Socrates in the Phxdo. But at another time it is asserted of the natures that

Tim, Plat. Vou. I. 25

194 PROCLUS ON THE [BooKx 41,

are more excellent than every psychical essence, as the division in the Repub-
lic manifests. And at another time, it is asserted of the first triads of being,
as is evident from what ‘Timweus a little after says of them. After the same
manner, therefore, being in the Sophista, indeed, manifests the order of the one
being; but here it signifies the whole eternal world, — For it is evident that being
which is primarily being, is the summit of the intelligible breadth, and the
monad of all beings, Forevery where, that whieh is primarily betng in’ tts
own series, has the highest order; since if it ranked as the second, it would not
have the same form; for it would no longer be primarily that which itis. As
therefore, virtue itself possesses the bighest phice in the series of the virtues, as
the equal itself in equals, and animal itself in animals, thus also beiy itself
which is primarily being, ix the summit of all beings, and frome at all beings
procecd.! But every intelligible and intellectual being, ἀπ whatever ap-
pears to exist, has * the appellation of being, yet being and perpetual being
are not the same. For the one being is beyond eternity, Por eternity par-
ticipates of being. Henee all such things as participate of eternity, have also
a certain portion of being, but not all such things as participate of being, par-
ticipate Likewise of eternity. The natures therefore that exist in time, participate
also of being, so that what is primarily being is beyond the order of eternity.
But perpetual berg is eternal, Tlenee the reasoning demonstrates: the very
contrary, that every thing is rather to be assumed trom perpetual bene, than
the one being. For this latter ty better than ἐπ creer, as subsisting between dhe
one and eternity, and prior Co eternity being denominated one ΠΟΙ

Vf, therefore, it be requisite that I should say what appears to me to he the
truth, Plato now precedancously asstanes every thing which is clernally being ;
beginning, indeed, from the nature of animal itself, Pur dus ts pronwarily elcrnal ;
but ending in partial intellects, But the one being, he perhaps omits, in con-
sequence of its existing as the? monad of these, and as being ineffable, and
conjoined to the one. Hence Plato will now speak in reality of every intelligible,
that intelligible is mot assumed which is oceult, is) the highest, and does not
depart from the one. He says, therefore, shortly after this, that animal itself is the
inost beautiful of intelligibles, in consequence of the natures prior to this, bein:

"An the orizinal curw δηπον καὶ τὸ aurcor, © πρωτωφεἐστιον, ὁ κυρνψη Των ΟΙΤῸΝ COTE GRA) των, καὶ ἀπ᾿ dure
᾿ ΠΡ
πρυεισιν, After az’ αὐτὸν therefore, the words πάντα ra ovra muot be suy pled,
* eyecis Wanting here in the original.
Χχ = δ

4 30} μονα here, read μονα».

nook 11.} TIM.EUS OF PLATO. | 195

through excess of union, superior to a subsistence as objects of intellect. Unless
he says that animal itselfis the most beautiful ofall the objects of intellect, both
animal itself and the one being existing as objects of intellect also, the latter as
being causally ever, eternity as being so according to Ayparvis, and animalitself or the
eternal, as existing always, according to participation. Hence, if these things are
admitted, in that which always exists, eternity, animal itself, and the Demiur-
gus will be comprehended, and likewise the one being itself, which possesses the
ocenltcause of eternity. So that it is evident from this, that perpetual being
comprehends every nature prior to souls, whether it be intelligible, or intellec- |
tual; beginning indeed trom being itself, but ending in a partial intellect, and that
it does not alone comprehend, as Tamblichus says it does, the summit of all
beings, such as the being is which is characterized by the one, or the one being,
through which all beings are said to be beings, and to which the one itself alone,
and the principles of being [bound and infinity] are superior. Zhe one, therefore,
is better than that which is self-subsistent. For it is necessary that it should be
exempt from all multitude. Perpetual being, however, 15. self-subsistent indeed,
but possesses the power of being so through the one. But that which is posterior
to it, such as is our nature, ts self-subsistent, and at the same time derives its
subsistence from another producing cause. And the last of things proceed '
indeed into existence from amore excellent cause, but are not. self-subsistent.
It is not however yet time for these observations.

But with respect to perpetual being, it must not be supposed, that it is partly
being, and partly non-being ; for if it were, it would be a composite, and consist-
ing of things of this kind, it would be dissimilarly a composite. Nor is it at one
time being, and at another non-being ; for itis said to be advays being. But it is
simply and eternally being, and is unmingled with every thing whatever it may
be, thatis of a contrary nature, For it appears to me that the addition of the
words, “ but not having generation,” indicates the unmingled and undefiled purity
of perpetual being, according to which it is exempt from every hypostasis which is
borne along in the images of being, and is changed by time. Not as some assert,
that perpetual being is said, for the sake of perspicuity, to be without generation ;
nor according to others, that Plato was willing to speak of it both affirmatively
and negatively ; but that it is necessary perpetual being should be intellectually
perceived subsisting by itself, remote from al! temporal mutation. For soul

* For wapeco: in this place, it is requisite to read xpoecm.

198 PROCLUS ON THE [RmooK 11.

participates of time, and the heavens are allotted a life which is evolved accod-
ing to time; but the intelligible nature alone is, according to the whole of itself,
eternal. Hence, some of the ancients call the intelligible breadth truly existing
being; the psychical truly evisting and at the same time not truly evisting
being ;* the sensible not truly existing being ; and matter, truly non-being. After
what manner, however, they made this arrangement, we shall elsewhere inves-
tigate. But that the addition of “ sot having veneration,’ is for the sake of indi-
cating the separate essence of perpetual being, is 1 think evident from what
has been said.
> Inthe next place, with respect to that which is generated, whether does 1 sig-
nify the whole world, or a material and perfectly mutable composition? For
some of the ancients explain this in one way, and others in another. But we un-
derstand by it every corporeal formed nature, and not the soul of the universe 5 so
faras this nature is of itself indeed unadorned, but is always or at a certain
time, arranged by another. For the soul of the universe ts, in acertain respect,
perpetual being. Much less is intelleet that which is generated: for this ts im-
mediately perpetaal being. But body alone is that which is generated, and is
truly never real being. For body is always in) want of the world-producing
cause, and is always deriving from it the representation of existence. Why
then it may be said, did not Plato add, always, and that which is generated,
in the same manner as dei, or at a certain time, in order that he might
have whatts generated entirely opposed to perpetual being? May we not say
that Plato devised this mode of expression, Jooking to the various nature of
that which is) generated, and taking away from eternal being the existence
ata certain time, and the perpetuity ofa generated nature? Lor the wholes of such a
nature are generated always, but the parts ata certain time, Aud atter another man-
ner of considermg the ΠῚ with respect to forms, seine are inseparable from
matter, and are always generated from that whichis truly always ybut others are in
time, and depart from matter. Lor corporicty, indecd, is aleays generated and its always
about matter ; but the form of pure, or of air, enters tntoand departs from matter, becom-
mg separated from it and perishing, through the domination of a contrary nature, Vout
ifthe perpetuity which detams matter is always generated, it never therefore is ;
and if the existence ata certain time is generated, it ts never being, νοῦν thing

* After ovrws pew ον καλευσιν τὸ γεητυν πλατοι, instead Of Cua οὐτῶν δε cy τὸ ἐυχίκον, it ts neces:

sary to read ores καὶ μὰ cvs orrws or.

SSE EA a

ROOK II.) TIMZEUS OF PLATO. 197

however, which is generated, is either always generated, or at a certain time.
Hence, every thing which is generated, is never {real} being.

These things, therefore, having been said, let us, recurring to the discussion from
the beginning, show whether perpetual being in this place is asserted of all. beings,
or not ofall. For if, indeed, we admit that perpetual being indicates an eternal
nature alone, having the eternal according to the whole of itself, it is not asserted
of all bings. For neither the being prior to eternity, nor the order of eternity,
nor again, such things as have indeed an eternal essence, but produce energies
according to time, ean be arranged under this being. But if we assume every
thing whatever that is eternal, and which always is, either according to the whole |
of itself, or partially, then soul also ranks among eternal natures, and also that /
Which contains in itselfthe causes ofall things, unically, as itis said, and univer-
sally. For the ease is as follows: one thing (i.e. being itself] is super-eternal ;
(another thing is eternity 3") another is simply eternal, and another is in a certain
respect eternal, With respect, however, to each of these perpetual beings, the
first is as the power and fountain of the ever ; the second, as that which is prima-
rily always being, and the ever tse/f, and not according to participation ; but the
third is always, as participating of the ecer, and as primarily wholly eternal; and
the fourth, is as that which in a certain respect participates of a peculiarity of this
hind, For each thing subsists triply, either according to cause, or according to
hyparnis, or according to participation. And the one being, indeed, is being alone
according to hyparxis, but is perpetual being according to cause. Eternity is per-
petual being according to hyparxis, but: δοίη, according to participation. And
the eternal is perpetual beng according to participation, but according to hy-
parxis isa certain other intelligible, or intelligible and intellectual, or intellectual
fonly). And if the last of these, it is either total or partial; and if this, it is either
supermundane or mundane, and if this, itis ether divine, or is posterior to the
Gods, and is each of these either according to existence alone, or according to
power and energy, and as far as to the perpetual being of things which are in a
certain respect eternal,

Again therefore, with respect to that which is generated, if we assume the uni-
versal, we must assume generation all-variously changed τ but ifevery thing gene-
rated, in whatever way it may be, we shall find that the heavens also are gene.
rated, so far as they partake of motion and mutation, and that soul is the first of
generated natures, so far as it ives in time, and time is connascent with its ener-

" The words ro δε aw», are wanting in the original, but must necessaiily be supplied.

198 PROCLUS ON THE (Book τι.

gies. And thus ascending froin beneath, we shall end in soul as the first of things
that are generated ; and descending from above, we shall again terminate our pro-
gression in soul, as the last of eternal natures. For though a certain person’
rightly says that the heavens always exist, yet their being is always generated by
something else; but soul possesses its own essence from itself. Hence also,
Socrates in the Phwdrus says, that it is unbegotten, and at the same time self
moved, as being indeed the principle of all generation, but generating and vivify-
ing itself. If therefore we say, that itis both unbegotten aud generated, eternal
and not eternal, we shall speak rightly. Hence too the Athenian guest® thinks
fitto call the soul indestructible, but not eternal, because it is in a certain respect
oniy eternal, and not according to the whole of itself, in the same manner as
truly existing being. Por it is one thing to de always, and another to be generated
always. And the heavens, indeed, are generated always ; for they do not possess
being from themselves. Butsoul is always ; for it possesses being from itself. And
every thing prior to soul is not venerated from a cause, butiy froma cause, Por
generation Is alone in things which derive their subsistence from others. Through
these things therefore it will be manifest after what manner there Is a comprehen-
sion of all beings in the before-tmmentioned portions of division, and after what
manner all beings are not comprehended in thei. There is not a comprehension
ofall beings, because that which is eternal only, and that which is generated
only, are assumed ; one of which is prior to, but the other is posterior to soul,
And there is a comprehension of all beings, because the extremes being assumed,
It is possible from these to find the middle, which is at one and the same time
both being and that'which is generated. «

That these distinctions, however, of that which always is, and of that which is
generated, ,are necessarily made prior to all other axioms, it is easy to learn; by
observing that this is the first of the problems which it is requisite to consider
about the universe in the beginning, i.e. whether it always was, having no bexinning
of generation, or whether it was generated, For if this is the first of the things to
he investigated, then what that is which is generated, and what that is which is
eternal, have very properly the first order in’ the axioms, Por the other axioms
follow these, just as the remaining problems follow the problem respecting the
geueration of the world. And if it be requisite that resuming the discussion about
the hypotheses, 1 should more fully explain what appears to me on the pulyect,

* i.e. Aristotle.
> In the 10th book of the Laws.

ποοκ 11.} TIMEUS OF PLATO. 199

Plato in the same manner as georetricians, employs definitions and hypotheses
prior to demonstrations, through which he frames his demonstrations, and ante-
cedently assumes the principles of the whole of physiology. For as the principles
of music are different from the principles of medicine, and ina similar manner
there are diferent principles of arithmetic and mechanics ; thus also there are
certain principles of the whole of physiology, which Plato now delivers to us;
[and these are as follow :] Zrulu existing being ts that which may be comprehended
by intelligence in conjunction with reason. That which is gencrated is to be apprehended
by opinion in conjunction with irrational sense. Every thing generated, is generated
by a cause. That which does not derive its subststence from a cause, is not generated.
That of which the paradigm is eternal being, ts necessarily beautiful. That, of which
the paradigm is generated, is not beautiful. Let the universe be called heaven or the

world. Vor from these principles he produces all that follows. And it appears

to me, that on this account he shows what perpetual being ts, and also whae that
is which is generated, but does not show us that each of them is. For the geo-

ees we

metrician informs us wat a point is, and what a line is, prior to his demonstra-‘

tions, but he by no means teaches us ¢hat each of these is. For how can he bea
geometrician, if he discusses his own principles? After the same manner also,
the physiologist says what perpetual being is, for the sake of the demonstrations
he is about to make, but he by ne means shows (fat it is; for in so doing, he
would go beyond physiology. But since, as we have before observed, Timeus
does not resemble other physiologists, being a Pythagorean physiologist, and
Plato exhibits in this dialogne the highest science, hence he afterwards very
divinely proves ¢hat truly existing being is. For his present purpose, however,
it is sufficient for him to admit (hat itis, preserving the boundaries of physiology.
He appears also to investigate the definition of perpetual being and of that which
is generated, in order that he may discover the causes which give completion to
the universe, viz. form and matter: for that which is generated is in want of these.
He assumes, however, the third hypothesis, in order that he may discover the
producing cause; butthe fourth, that he may be able to infer that the universe was
generated according to a paradigmatic’ cause; and the fifth, which is concerning
the name of the universe, in order that he may investigate the participation of
the good and the ineffable by the world, as will be shown in what follows.

It appears also to me, that Aristotle in his Physics, imitating Plato, assumes one

* For παραξειγμα airioy here, read παραξειγματικον αἰτιον.

200 PROCLUS ON THE [Βοοκ τι. -

hypothesis, when he says, it is supposed by us with respect to things which have a
natural subsistence, that either all or some of them are moved. For it is entirely
necessary that there should be motion, if the discussion of the physical theory ts
to proceed with success ; since nature is a principle of motion. But in his trea-
tise On the Heavens, prior to every thing else, he assumes those hypotheses con-
cerning which Plotinus says, that Aristotle will tind no ditiiculty in his discussion
if his hypotheses about the fifth body are admitted, meaning these five 3 that the
motion is simple of a simple body ; that a simple body has a certain simple motion accord-
ing to nature ; that there are two simple motions ; that one motion is contrary to
one ; and that the thing which has not a contrary, has not that which can corrupt it.
From which hypotheses, he frames bis demonstrations concerning the fifth body.
Aristotle, however, shows that the universe is unbegotten, from the hypotheses ς
but Plato that it is generated. Whether therefore, they are discordant or not,
will shortly atter be manitest to us. And this, indeed, will again be considered,
Why, however, does Plato, who is accustomed to employ, when speaking of
intelligibles, the terms αὐτὸ ἐπεί, and ὁπερ that which, now assume neither of these,
but rather prefers the term ass aleays, as connascent with being. Vor this also is
attended with a doubt, through what cause he employs the third of these terms, 1. e.
always, ax better adapted to signify the nature of truly existing being. In answer
to this it may be said, that the term itself manifests the simplicity of mitellisibles, a
subsistence according to hyparais, and an evistence which is pronary, which
is asserted conformably to the peculiarity, according to which imtellizibles are
primarily that which they are, and jill secondary natures with the participation of
themselves. But the term that which ws, indicates purity, the unmingled, and
the not being filled with a contrary nature. And the ever manifests the eternal,
the immutable, and the invariable, according to hypostasis. Thus for instance,
when we say the beaatiful ‘vse/f, and the just σεν, we survey beauty which is
not so by the participation of the beautiful, and justice which is not so by the par-
ticipation of the just; but that which is primarily beautiful, and that which is
primarily just. But when we say that which is beautiful we mean that whieh is
not mingled with deformity, nor contaminated by its contrary, such as is material
beauty, which is situated in deformity, and is itself replete with its subject nature,
And when we use the term cver or a/ways)we indicate beauty which is not at one
_tme beautiful, and at another not, but which is eternally beautiful. So that the
“first of these terms manifests the simplicity of intelligibles, and the sepplyimg all
other things from themselves. For such is the beantifal ἠδ by which

BOOK 11.j TIM.£2ZUs OF PLATO. 201

all beautiful things are beautiful, and the equal itse//, by which alLequal things are
equal, and in asimilar manner in other things ofthis kind. But the Second of these
terms, indicates onlyness and purity, the unmingled and the undefiled. For the
that which is this, i, e. itis something which is not various, and which does not at-
tract to itself any thing of a foreign nature. And the erer manifests immutability,
for the ever is this. Yet it does not simply indicate immutability, but a perma-
nency in eternity. Fora ¢emporal ever is one thing, and an efernal ever, another ;
the latter being every thing collectively and at once; but the former being co-ex-
tended with the whole continuity of time, and being infinite. And the latter
subsisting in the now, but the former, in interval, the interval being unceasing, and
always in generation, or becoming tobe. The term therefore itself, is derived to >
beings from the paradigm. For that is the cause of simplicity to beings, and ot!
imparting to other things that which it primarily possesses. But the term that)”
which is, is derived from the one being. For that is primarily exempt from non-
being, and privation ; because it is primarily being, and all things subsists in it
occultly and indivisibly. And the term ever, is derived from eternity. For
as the one being is the supplier of existence,‘ so eternity imparts perpetuity to
intelligibles. Tleuce, if Plato had been speaking about participants and things
participated, and: for this purpose had required being, he would have inquired
what being thself is. And αὐ he had been discussing things unmingled, and things
that are mingled, he would have used the term that which is. But since he dis-
courses about) generation and the unbezotten, and for this purpose requires these
definitions, he very properly inquires what that ts which is always being. For this!
distinguishes the eternal from that which is temporal, in the same manner as the >
unbegotten distinguishes eternity. Hence also the nature of animal itself, which.
is comprehensive ofall intelligible animals, is eternal; but time was generated
together with heaven, as Plato says in the course of the dialogue.

Moreover, though perpetual being is said to proceed from a cause, yet it must - \ Se

not beasserted that it is generated according toall causes, but that it is according to }
them. For itis δὲ ο, that onaccount of which, and προς 0, that with relation to which,
and υφ᾽ ov, that by which. For perpetual being is self-subsistent, and is not gene-
rated by itself, lest not existing at a certain time, it should be geuerated. For
that which is generated, when it is becoming to be is not. Nor is it gene-
rated with relation to itself, lest it should be a composite. Nor on ac-

‘ Instead of ws yap πον εἰναι ro ev ov, it is necessary toread ws yap rov εἰναι κ. A.

Tim. Plat. Voi. τὺ

209 PROCLUS ON THE [ποοκ i-

count of itself, \est it should be imperfect. But that which is generated is sus-
pended from another thing, and has its progression from other causes ; and such
is every corporeal-formed nature. After what manner however, js that which is
generated never being, concerning which Plato speaks clearly in the Sophista?
Not that it is non-being,’ but that it is never ¢ru/y being. Now, however, it is
said to be never at any time being, because being has a prior arrangement In an eter-
nal nature; but that which is generated, is never that which always ts. Mf, therefore,
existence, so far as it is being, is unreceptive of non-existence, itis evident: that
what is generated, since it has the being which is init, of Whatever kind it may be,
mingled with non-being, is never at any time being, soas to be genuinely being 5
and being which subsists by itself, since this pertains to real existence alone, which
has notin a certain respect non-existence in conjunction with existence, at one

and the same time being and not being.

“ The former of these, indeed, is comprehended by intelligence in cone
junction with reason, since it always subsists with invariable sameness,
But the latter is perceived by opinion, in conjunction with irrational sense,
since it is generated and corrupted, and never truly is.”

“#9? To theseit happens, that they err in tiany otherrespects, and that they coim-
prehend in the definitions the things defined. Por what perpetual being is, which
the first definition assumes is explained, and is said to be that which always sub-
sists with Invariable sameness; and this the second definition assumes, saying
it is that which is generated and corrupted, but never truly is. This, however,
ix to accuse both themselves and Plato of unskilfulness in) dialectic. But others
dividing the sentence, show that imeach of the colons there are definition, and
the thing defined. For in’ the former colon, the words, “ ¢hat which is (0))}}-
prehended by intelligence in conjunction wth reason, are ἃ deimition ; but) the
words, “ since it always subsists with invartable sameness,’ are the thine defined.
And in the second colon, the words ‘is perceived by opanion in conjunction with
irrational sense,” are given as adetinition; but the remaiming part ofthe sentence,
is the thing defined. To these men it will be found our preceptor vas well replied.
For by a little transposition of the words, the whole will be immediately apparent as
follows: That which aleays subsists with. invariable sanieness, is comprehended
by intelligence in conjunction with reason: but that which is generated and cor-

Me Porcuy ore τὸ μὲν ον ἐστιν, i this place, itis requisite to read οὐχ ore τὸ μὴ ov ἐστιν.

The beginning of this commentary, ts unfortunately wanting.

Book 11} TIM-EUS OF PLATO. 203

rupted, and never truly is, is perceived by opinion, in conjunction with irrational
sense. For these things are consequent to what was before said, “what is that which
ts always being but is without generation,” and “ what is that which is generated,
but is never [real] being 3” that which always subsists with invariable SAMENCSS,
signifying the same thing as, that which is without generation ; and that which is
gencrated, but is never (reall, being, having the same signification as, that which
never truly is, though they are more obscurely announced. And through the
addition of ¢ru/y Plato indieates that so far indeed as it is generated, it is not; but
that so far as it brings with it an image of being, so far it is not generated. For
in the definitions, he renders the things defined more clear through the additions.
Thus, one of the definitions says, “which is aleays being,” in order that by the
term akeays we may not understand temporal perpetuity, but the elernal. For
this is all at once, and subsists with invariable sameness. But temporal per-
petuity, is co-extended with the infinity of time. Thus, too, the other definition
has, “ that which is generated,” and together with it also says, “and is corrupted,”
in order that we may not understand by generations simp/y progressions, which
are also aseribed to the Gods who are beyond being, but progressions which are
co-ordinate with destruction. The assigned definitions, therefore, are such as.
follow: Perpetual being, is that which is comprehended by intelligence in conjunction
with reason, That which is gencrated is perceived by opinion in conjunction with
irrational sense.

Por these detinitions, however, it is usual to accuse Plato, in the first place,
indeed, that he does not assume genus, as the rules of definitions require. In the
next place, that he does not manifest what the nature is of the things defined, but
It is necessary, however, prior to this

distinguishes them by our knowledge.
But [in defence of Plato]

habitude, to consider things themselves by themselves.
we shall demonstrate the very contrary, viz. that those who are accustomed thus
to doubt perfectly err. For what kind of genus has a place in being, which
comprehends every intelligible essence? For if essence has no genus prior to itself,
nor definition, since it is most generic, what can you say respecting being which
is comprehensive of every essence, and of all powers and energics? Neither, a
fore, is being the genus of eternal being: for if it was, it would not be simply |
being, but a certain being. Nor is non-being the genus of eternal being lest we /
should ignorantly make eternal non-being. For every where genera are predicated
of species. Hence, there is not a gents of being. Besides, is not a definition

derived from knowledge adapted to theory, and to the proposed definitions? For if,

204 PROCLUS ON THE. [ΒΟΟΧ 11.

as we said before, Plato wished to use these axioms and hypotheses in the demon-
strations which he intended to make, it was necessary that they should be known
and manifest to us. If, indeed, he had exhorted us to mvestigate the nature of
things, itselfin itself, he would have ignorantly filled the whole of his doctrine de-
finitions with obscurity. But as he wished to make known through definitions
being and that which is gencrated, he produced the demonstri ions through things
that are known, and clearly represents to us the peculiarity of them, in order that
being excited and perfected, we may more manife stly survey what each of them
is. Forsince every thing gnostte, is either the thing known itself, or perceives,
or possesses the thing known ; for intellect, indeed, is the intelligible, but sense perceives

what is sensible, and dianoia possesses in itself the dianoetic object ; aud as we are not
naturally adapted to become the intelligible, but know itthrough the power im us
which is conjoined with it; this being the case, we require this power, and through
this the nature of being ts macs ntous. After this manner, therefore, we answer
the doubts. ᾿

Itis requisite, however, to observe how Plato proposing to himself the problems,
renders each of them manifest, both affirmatively and negatively. But viving an
answer to each, in perpetual being, indeed, he assumes the affirmative alone, but
in that which is generated, the negative, adding to italso, * ad which is destroyed.”
He, also, explains the words, * but which is never being,” through the assumption
of, “ never truly is.” For since being is characterized by existence alone, but that
which is generated by non-existence, he assumes the one, alone defining it, and
says, subsisting invariably the same; but he assumes the other together with
hegation, yet not with negation alone, because definitions respect affirmations,
and signify that which in each thing is inherent. Itis not, however, wonderful,
if he not only says * which is generated,” ut also, “ and corrupted.” Vor as he
adds to beimg, the words, “ subsisting with meariable sameness,” and not only
says, if is akeays ; 50. likewise to that which ty venerated he adds, “ and corrupt-
ed.” For this so faras it is generated, is different from perpetual bemg; but so
far as it is corrupted, it differs from that which is invariably the same, Por that
which is generated, so far as it is generated and corrupted, is incapable of con-
necting itself; since if it were, it would also be able to produce itself. Assuming
therefore each by itself, i.e. being and that which is generated, he assumes the
former as that which is above generation, but the latter, ἀπ. that which is not
indestructible. So that when the representation of being accedes to that which is
generated, it is able after a certain manner to abide in a condition of always
becoming to be.

voox tt] TIMAUS OF PLATO. 205

Let us however, consider each of the words by itself, through which he ccm-
poses the propositions ; and in the first place, let us see in how many ways intelli-
gence subsists, and collect by a reasoning process the other progressions of it.
The first intelligence therefore, is the intelligible, which passes into the same with
the intelligible, and is not any thing different from it. This also is essential
intelligence, and essence itself, because every thing in the intelligible subsists
after this manner, viz. essentially and intelligibly. The second intelligence is that
which®onjoins intellect with the intelligible, possessing a peculiarity which is con-
nective and collective of the extremes, and existing as life and power, filling
indeed intellect from the intelligible, but establishing it in the intelligible. The
third is the®eonjoined intelligence in a divine intellect" itself, being the energy
of intellect, through which it comprehends the intelligible it contains, and accord-
ing to which it intellectually perceives, and is what itis. Por this intelligence is
energy, and intelligence itself, but is not intelligible intelligence. Nor does it
exist as power, but (as we have said), as energy, and intellectual intelligence.
The Yntellige ‘nce of partial intellects has the fourth order. For each of these

possesses this *

and entirely contains in itself a certain conjoined intelligible and
intelligence. Or rather each has all these partially, viz. intellect, intelligence,
and the intelhetble, through which also it is conjoined to total intellects, intellec-
tually perceives each of these, and likewise the whole intellizible world. The fitth :
intelligence is that of the rational soul. For as the rational soul is called intellect,
thus also the knowledge of it is intelligence, and transitive intelligence, and has time
connascent with ᾿ self. But the sixth intelligence, if you are willing also to con-
numerate this, isphantastic knowledze, or the knowledge of the imagination, which
by some is denominated intelligence; and the phantasy is called by them passive
intellect, δ because it knows such things as it does know, inwardly, and accompa-
med with resemblances and figures. For itis common to all intelligence lo have the
chjects of tts knowledge inward. For in this also intelligence diflers from. sense.
In one order however, intelligence is the thing known itself. In another it ranks
asx the second, but sees that which is first totally. In another it is partially the
thing Known, but sees wholes also through that which is partial. In another it
sces indeed wholes, but at the same time partially and not at once, And in

* Ta the original, τρίτη δε ἢ ev avty Geup συξυγος vonoes, But it is necessary alter θείῳ to supply oy.
* For τοῦτον here, it is requisite to read ravrny.
ὁ The phantasy is thus called by Aristotle.

206 PROCLUS ON THE [Βοοκ 1}.

another, the vision is accompanied with passion. So many therefore, are the
differences of intelligence.

Now, however, phantastic intelligence must not be assumed ; since this is not
naturally adapted to know truly existing being. For it is indefinite, because it
knows the object of its perception accompanied with figure and morphe. But
perpetual being is unfigured. And in short, no irrational knowledge is able to
survey being itself, since neither is adapted to perceive that which is universal.
Nor must the intelligence in the rational soul be assumed. For it does not
possess the at-once-collected, and that which is co-ordinate with eternal natares ;
but it proceeds according to time. Nor must we assume total intellections ; for
these are exempt from our Knowledge. But Timwus co-arranges intelligence
with reason. The intelligence, therefore, of a partial intellect, must now be
assumed. Por it is in conjunction with this, that we some tine or other perceive
real being. Por as sense is in the second duad betow the rationel soul, so intelli-
gence is inthe duad above i. Por @ partial inteliect ts proximate’y established above
our essence, elevaling and perfecting it, townich we are converted when purifed
through philosophy, and when we conjoin our own mitellectual power with the intellt-
gence of this intellect. But what this partial tntellees ts, and that it ty not as one to one
rational soul, but is participated through souls which akeays energize according to tt,
through which also partial sows sometimes partuctpate of intelectual light, we have
elsewhere aistinctly and coptousyy discussed. Now, however, Uius nuch must be assumed,
thatit is participated indeed by ad other proammate damontacal souls, but tllumimates
ours, when we convert ourselves tott, and render the reason whichis inus intellectual, And
as tn the Phadrus Plato calls thts the governor of the soul, and says that tt alone intel.
lectually perceives real being, but that the soul percetves tt together with thas mtellect,
when she is nourished by intellect and science ; thus also it must be satd that this mtel-
ligence 1s prior to soul, and is truly that intelligence (mentioned by Plato) but
that itis participated by soul when reason energizes intellectually, Hence Plato
says in the following part of this dialogue, that intellect ts indeed in the Gods, but
that a certain small genus [ο΄ πιο] participates of tt. And it seems that in what he
says unfolding the Anowledge of perpetual being, he first calls it intelligence ;
but that we may not apprehend it to be that alone, he adds to intelligence
reason, distinguishing by a transitive energy the latter from the former, So
that when reason intellectually perceives perpetual beans, as reason tndeed, tt
energizes transitively, but as perceiving intellectually, with simplicity ; undcrstand-
ing cach thing as simple at once, yet not all things at once, but passing from some to

nUOK 11 TIMAELS OF PLATO. | 207

others. It transitively however perceives intellectually cvery thing which it perceives
ay one thing, and avy simple.

After the definition of intelligence however, let us see what reason is, and how
itis connascent with intelligence, In the Theatetus therefore, rsyos, reason, 18
said to havea three-fold subsistence ; for itis either enuneiative, ora discursive
procession through the elements (of speech]; or that which exhibits the differences
of each thing with respect to ethers. All these signitications however, are conver-
sant with compositions and divisions, and are unadapted to the comprehension
of eternal being. For the similar is naturally adapted to be apprehended by the
sinilar, But eternal being is simple and indivisible, and is exempt from every
thing which is contrary to these. Again, after another manner, one kind of
reason is said to be doxastic, another scientific, and another intellectual,
For since there are in us opinion, dianoia, and intellect; but 4 call intellect here,
the summit of dianoia ; and since the whole of our essence is reason, in each of
these reason must be diflvrently surveyed. Opinion however, is not naturally
adapted to be united to the intelligence of intellect in energy + for on the contrary
it is conjoined to irrational kKnowledze. Noris dianoia, so far as it proceeds into
multitude and division, able to recur to intellect; but on the contrary through the
Variciy of its discursive energies, it is separated from intellectual impartbility.
It remains, therefore, that the summit of the soul, and that in it which has most
the form of ¢he one, is established in the intelligence of a partial intellect, being
threweh alliance united to it. Hence this is the reason which intellectually per-
ceives the intelligibles co-ordinate to our nature, and the energy of which’ Soera-
tes in the Republic says is intelligence 3 just as dianoia ts the knowledge of Uungs
which subsist between intellizibles and the objects of opinion. It, however, intelh-~
gence is the energy of this reason, it will be a certain intellect. Plato in the fol-
lowing Mart of this dialogue says, that ¢his reason in the same manner as science, ts
mgencrated in the soul, when it is moved about the intelligible. But that science has
amore various energy, apprehending some things through others, and intellect a
more simple energy, intuitively surveying beings themselves. This highest there-
fore, and most impartthle portion of our nature, Piato now deneminales reason, as
unfolding to us intelicct, and an intelligthb’e nature. For when the soul abandons
phantasy and opinion, and various and indefinite knowledge, but recurs to its own
impartibility, according to whieh it is rooted ina partial intellect, and having run
back to this, conjoins the energy of itself with the intelligence of that intellect, then

* Instead of καὶ ov ὁ εν coreg Σωκράτης, γοησιν εἰπε τὴν ἐνέργειαν iv this place, itis uecessary to

ἃ ᾿
ecad καὶ οὗ o ἐν πολιτείᾳ Lwaparns vonow εἰχε τὴν Evepyetay,

208 PROCLUS ON THE | [Book τ".

it intellectually perceives eternal being together with it, its energy being both one,
and twofold, and both sameness and separation being inherent in its intellections,
For then the intelligence of the soul becomes more collected, and nearer to eternal
things, in order that it may apprehend the intelligible together with intellect, and
that the reason which is in us may like a less light, energize in conjunction with
one that is greater. For our reason in conjunction with intelligence, sees the
intelligible ; but the intelhgence of intellect always sees it, and always is; and
\conjoins reason to if, When reason acquires the form of intellect.

After what manner however, 15 truly existing being comprehended by a partial
intellect, or by reason? For this is still more admirable. May we not say, that
though the intelligible itself cannot be comprehended by intellect and reason,
because itis superior to all comprehension, and comprehends all things exemptly,
yet intellect possessing its own intelligible, 15 also on this aceourt said to compre-

“hend the whole fof an intelligible nature}. But reason through the intellect which
is co-ordinate to itself, receiving the conceptions of real beings, is thus through
these said to comprehend being. Perhaps also it signifies, that reason running
round the intelligible, and energizing and being moved as about a centre, thus
surveys it; intelligence indeed knowing it intransitively and impartibly, but

vreason dancing as it were round the essence of it in a circle, and evolving the
united hypostasis init of all things,

In the next place, letus direct our attention to opinion, and consider what it is.
That itis therefore the boundary of the whole rational life, and that it is conjoined
to the summit of the irrational life, is frequently acknowledged. But we shall
now unfold such things as are the peculiarities of the Platonic doctrine; and
which are as follow: That the doxastic part comprehends the reasons ' [or pro-
ductive principles] of sensibles; thatit this is also which knows the essences of
them; and that it knows the ors, or that a thing is, but is ignorant of the cause of
it. For since dianoia knows at one and the same time both the essences and the
causes of sensibles, but sense knows neither of these; for itis clearly shown in
the Thewtetus that sense does not know the essence of a thing, and that it is
perfectly ignorant of the cause of the objects of its knowledge 5 it is necessary

that opinion being arranged between sense and diangia, should know the essences
fon) > ’

* These reasons in a divine soul, subsist both gnostically and fabricatively, and inthe human soul also,
taey thus subsist, when it revolves on high in conjunction with the Gods; but during tue union of the

soul with this outward body, they subsist in it gnostically onls.

ΠΟΟΚ 11.} TIMAEUS OF PLATO. 209

of sensibles, through the reasons which it contains, but should be ignorant of the
causes of them. For thus right opinion will differ from science in this, that it
alone knows that a thing is, science being able to survey likewise the cause of it.
But sense adheres to opinion, being also itself a medium between the instrument
of sense and opinion. For the instrument of sense apprehends sensibles accom-
panied with passion, TTence also it is corrupted through the excess of sensibles.
But opinion possesses knowledge undefiled with passion, Sense however partici-
pates in a certain respect of passion, but has also something gnostic, so far as it is
established in the doxastic part, is laminated by it, and) partakes of the form of
reason, since it isin itself irrational. In this, therefore, the series of gnostic powers
is terminated, of which indecd intelligence is the leader, which is above reason,
and is without transition. But reason has the second order which is the intelli-
gence of our soul, transitively coming into contact with real beings. Opinion
has the third order, being a knowledge of sensibles conformable to reason. And
sense has the fourth order, being an irrational knowledge of sensibles. For
dianoia, being a medium between intelligence and opinion, is gnostic of middle
forms, which require a more obscure apprehension than that of intelligence, but a
clearer pereeption than that of opinion; as Socrates said on the preceding day,
when he defined the ditferent kinds of knowledge by the objects of knowledge.

It must be said, therefore, that opinion is according to reason, because it
possesses gnostic reasons of the essences of things, but that it is otherwise irrational,
as being ignorant of causes. For Socrates in the Banquet, speaking of it says,
“since it is an irrational thing, how can it be science?” But it must be admitted
that sense is entirely irrational. For in short, since each of the senses knows the
passion produced about the animal by the object of sense, hence intelligence is
an intransitive, but dianoia and reason a transitive knowledge ; opinion a know-
ledge in conjunction with reason but without the assignation of cause; sense an
irrational Knowledge of passions; and the instrument of sense passion enly.
Thus, for instance, when an apple is presented to us, the sight indeed knows that it
is red from the passion about the eye, the smell that it is fragrant from the pas-
sion about the nostrils, the taste that it is sweet, and the touch that it is smooth.
What then is it which says that the thing presented to us is an apple? For it is

not any one of the partial senses; since each of these knows one certain thing

only about the apple, and not the whole of it; nor does even the common sense

know this. For this alone distinguishes the differences of the passions; but it

does not know that the thing which possesses an essence of such a kind is the
Tim. Piat, Vou. I. 2D

210 PROCLUS ON THE [BOOK 11-

whole thing. Hence, it is evident that there is a certain power superior to the
senses, which knowing the whole prior to the things which are as it were parts,
and surveying the form of it, is impartibly connective of these many powers.
This power, therefore, Plato calls opinion, and on this account, he denominates
that which is sensible doxastic. ‘

Farther still, since the senses frequently announce various passions, and not
such as things of this kind are in themselves, what is it in us which judges and
says, that the sight is deceived when it asserts that the sun is but a foot in
diameter, and that the taste which pronounces honey to be bitter, is the taste of
those that are diseased?) For it is entirely evident that in these, and all such-lke
particulars, the senses announce indeed their own passions, and are not perfectly
deceived. For they say what the passion is ubout the instruments of sense, and
itis athing of such a kind as they assert it to be; but that which says what the
cause is of the passion, and forms a judgment of it, is something different from
sense, Hence, there is acertain power of the soul superior to sense, which no
longer knows sensibles through an instrument but through itself, and corrects the
wrossness of sensible information, And this) power indeed which is reason as
with reference to sense, is irrational as with reference to the knowledge of trily
existing beings. But sense is simply irrational, On this account, Plato in’ the
Republic calling this power opinion, shows that it is a medium between
hnowledge and ignorance: for it is indeed a rational knowledge, but it is
mingled with irrationality, knowing sensibles in’ conjunction with sense, But
sense is alone irrational, as ‘Timwus also denominates it; i the first place,
because it is also inherent in irrational animals, and is characteristic of every
irrational life; for by these things, what is said in the Theatetus distinguishes
it from science. In the second place, because in contradistinction to all the parts
of the irrational soul, it is disobedient to reason. For the irascible and epithy-
metic parts, are obedient to reason and its mandates, and receive from it erudi-
tion. But sense though it should hear reason ten thousand times asserting that
the sun is greater than the earth, yet would) still see it to be a foot in diameter,
and would not otherwise announce itto us. In the third place, because neither
does it [accurately] know that which it knows. For it is not naturally adapted
to see the essence of it. For it does not know what a white thing is, butit knows
through passion that it is white. It likewise is not separated from the instrument
of sense,’ and is therefore on this account irrational. For thus in the Georgias,

* Instead of διακέκριται δε ro acaOnrnpior in this place, it is necessary to read ov &caxexpiraa δὲ τὸν
αισθητηριον.

ROOK 11. TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 211

irrational knowledge is defined to be not scientific, but conjectural. [n the fourth
place, sense is alone irrational, because it is the boundary ofthe whole series of
knowledge, possesses an essence most remote from reason and intellect, pertains
to externals, and eflects its apprehension of things through body. For all these
particulars demonstrate its irrationality.

Every thing generated therefore is apprehended by opinion in conjunction with
sense; the latter announcing passions, but the former producing from itself the rea-
sons of them, and knowing the essences of sensibles. And as reason when in con-
tact with intelligence sees theintelligible, thus also opinion co-arranged with sense,
knows that which is generated. For since the soul is of a middle essence it gives
completion to a subsistence between intellect and irrationality. For by its sum-
mit it is present with intellect, but by its ultimate partit verges to sense. Hence
also Tiinwus in the former conjunction, arranges intelligence prior to. reason, as
being more excellent; but in the second he places opinion before sense. For
there indeed, reason is posterior to intelligence, as being a less intellect; but) here
opinion is prior to sense, as being rational sense. Opinion however, and reason
circumscribe the whole breadth of the rational essence. But intellect is our king,
and sense our messenger, says the great Plotinus. Reason indeed, togetuer
with intellect, sees the intelligible; bat by itselfit: surveys reasons or forms that
have a middle subsistence, And opinion in conjunction with sense, sees that
which is generated ; but by itself it contemplates all the forms it contains, con-
cerning which we have elsewhere spoken, have shown how these forms subsist,
how the place of them is the doxastic part of the soul, and that the intelligible
ix apprehended by reason, but by opinion, the intelligible is seen as a doxastic
object. For the object of its knowledge is external to, and not withinit, as the
intelligible is within reason. Hence the object is not comprehended by it, but
is called epinable aud not sensible; because opinion knows indeed the essences
of things, but sense does not. [lence too, it receives the appellation of a clearer
knowledge, which knows wha¢ a thing is, but not alone ¢hat it is, which latter we
say is the employment of sense; and in’ consequence of this Timieus very pro--
perly calls that which is generated the object of opinion. For this is Pythagoric ;
since Parmenides also considered the discussion of sensibles, ἡ as a discussion
according to opinion; sensibles being in their own nature perceptible by this

' Instead of exec και o ev Llappercder, την περι των αἰσθητων xpayparcwy in this place, it is necessary
to read eres caco Παρμενίδης, την πέρι των αἰσθητων πραγματειαν.

412 PROCLUS ON TITE [βοοκ 11.

power of the saul. Hence it is not proper to call that which is generated sensi-
hie alone, because sense is not gnostic of any essence, nor the object of opinion,
without the addition of sense.

Ifere however, Aristotle particularly blames the second assertion of Timzus.
For where is it [universally] true that what is perceived by opinion in conjunction
with sense is generated and corrupted?) — For heaven is uabegotten and indes-
tructible, though itis perceived by opinion in conjunction with sense. And
Timiwus inthe course of this dialogue, inquires whether the whole heaven was
venerated. At present, therefore, it must be said by us, that generation and cor-
ruption subsist according to analogy in the heavens, not only according to the
motions and mutations of figures, but also because a celestial body is not pre-
duced by itself, but alone subsists from another cause. [ence it is generated
as having the cause of its subsistence suspended from another thing (different
from itself. Since, however, it not only subsists from, but is connected by another,
not being able to connect itself, and is corrupted according to its own proper
reason, on this account it assumes generation co-ordinately with corruption. — Por
truly existing and) eternal beings generate themselves, and are connected by
themselves, whence also they are said to be in their own nature unbegotten and
indestructible. Tf, however, truly existing being is unbegotten, and therefore sub-
sists from itself, that which does not subsist from itself will not) be truly unbe-
eotten. And if that which is truly indestructible is naturally adapted to connect
itself, that which is not naturally adapted to connect itself will not be truly
indestructible. Heaven, however, but I mean by heaven the corporeal-formed
nature of it alone, is neither adapted to produce nor to connect itself, ΕῸΓ every
thing of this kind which produces and connects itself, is impartible, Hence it is
neither truly unbegotten ' nor truly indestructible, but so far as pertains to its
corporeal nature, It is generated and made. Farther still, as Aristotle himself
says, and clearly and generously demonstrates, no finite body possesses an infi-
nite power. But the eclestial body is finite, and therefore does not possess an
infinite power. The indestructible, however, so far as indestructible, possesses an
infinite power. Hence body, so far as body, is not indestructible. So that from
the reasoning of Aristotle 11 is demonstrated to be a thing of this kind. But after
what manner the heaven is unbegotten and perpetual, will be manifest to us

* Instead of ove apa οντων γενητὸς ἐστιν in this place, it is obviously necessary to read ove apa orrws

ayernros ἐστιν.

BOOK 11. TIM-EUS OF PLATO. 213

shortly after. Now, however, this alone is evident from what has been sald, that
every thing corporeal, is of itself, or in its own nature generated and corrupted,
but never truly is, as Plato also says in the Politicus. For he there observes
“ that to subsist always invariably the same, alone pertains tothe most divine of all
things. But the nature of body ts not of this order. That, however, which we de-
nominate heaven or the world, possesses indeed many and blessed prerogatives from
its generator ; but, as it partakes of body, it is impossible that it should be
entirely free from mutation.” We have shown, therefore, how the heaven falls
under the above-mentioned distinctions,

Ifhowever, the damoniacal Aristotle, should again doubt respecting what is
said of eternal being, not enduring to say that every thing which always is, is
comprehended by intelligence in conjunction with reason; since the most divine
of visible objects always * exist; we think it fit, that he should not confound the
eternal, and that which subsists through the whole of time. For he also distin.
cuishes eternity from time ; and attributes the former indeed to intellect, but the
latter to heaven, and the motion of heaven. That always-existing being, there-
fore, the eternal, is a thing of such a kind as Timiwus defines it to be. The
most divine, however, of visible objects, are afier another manner perpetual, and
not according to an eternal permanency. But they are produced in the whole of
time from their causes, and the whole of their existence is in becoming to be.
This also is said by Aristotle, that eternity is connascent with intelligibles, pos-
sessing and comprehending in itself infinite time ; and therefore the eternal is truly
intelligible.” Jf, however, that which akcays is, signifies the eternal, why is it ne-
cessary to refer the nature of heaven to this perpetual being, and why should we
not say that it is always generated, or becoming to be, as being co-extended with
the perpetuity of time? So that we shall thus dissolve the objections from his ar-
guments, which he urges against these definitions. Since, however, we have
replied to this inquiry, we shall dismiss it; for it will be spoken of hereafter.

But, in short, the opinion of Plato concerning criteria, may from these things
be assumed. Vor diflerent persons admitting a different criterion, some asserting
that it is sense, as the Protagoreans, others opinion, as he who said,

Opinion is in all things fram'd;
* Itis necessary here, to supply the word ae.

* Instead of ro awytov vonroy ovros ἐστιν in this place, it appears to me that we should read cae

TO αἰωγίον apa vonToy οὕτως €or.

214 PROCLUS ON THE [Book 11.

others that it,is reason, and others that it is intellect; Plato divides the essence of
the criteria conformably to things themselves, attributing intellect to intelligibles,
dianoia to dianoetic objects, opinion to doxastic objects, and sense to sen-
cibles. You must not however fancy that the criteria are on this account di-
vulsed according to him from each other. — For the soul is both one and amul-
titude. If, therefore, the soul which judgesis both one ἡ anda multitude, the judicial
power will also be both uniform and multiform. Some one therefore may say,
what is this one power? We reply, reason. For this, when it proceeds to the
survey of intelligibles, uses both itself and intelligence ; not that intelhgence in-
deed is the instrument, and reason that which uses it, as the Platonic Severus
thought, considering intelligence as inferior to reason, but that intelligence is the
licht of reason, perfecting and elecating it, and Uluminating its gnostic power.

But when it forms a judgment of middle reasons, it alone uses dianoia and
itself, and through this is converted to itself. When also it decides on objects
of opinion, it moves opinion ; but in judging of objects of imagination, it excites
the phantasy, and in judging of sensibles, sense. For when it considers the
sensible essence of forms, such as is every sensible object, it uses opinion as the
co-adjutor of its speculation, Vor in this the reasons of sensibles subsist. But
when it directs its attention to the position or figure of a certain thing, as for in-
stance, to the manner in which the earth 15 posited, which has in its summit a
habitude to the heavens, it then excites the phantasy, in order that it may
survey the object of its inquiry accompanied with interval and morphe, as it Is.
And when it considers an eclipse, it employs sense as an adjutor in its obser-
vations. At one time also, it admits the judgments of the second powers ; but
at another, it blames the errors which they frequently happen to commit on ac-
count of the instruments. Concerning the criteria therefore, thus much may
sutlice for the present; for we have discussed these things more copiously in our
Commentaries on the Thewtetus. From what has been said, however, the great
accuracy of the before-mentioned definitions is evident.

But if you are willing, we will also survey the same thing according to another
method. I say, therefore, that the mature which is primarily perpetual being, is
that which is eternal according to all things, viz. according to essence, power,
and energy. And that the nature which is simply generated, 1s that which re-
ceives }} " its essence, power and energy in time, For itis necessary that the

‘ It is requisite here to supply the word ἐν.

> For ragwy here, read πάσαν.

ROOK τι TIM.EUS OF PLATO, 215

former should) be wholly eternal, but the latter wholly temporal. And that the
former should be at once every thing in a self-subsistent manner, but that the
latter should have its hypostasis suspended elsewhere than from itself, and con-
sisting Inan extension’ of existence. Since these, however, are the extremes,
the media are, things which in a certain respect participate of a portion of being,
and ina certain respect communicate with generation. But again, there are two
natures which participate of neither of these, one in consequence of being su-
perior, but the other through being inferior to them. For matter is neither being,
nor that which is generated. For it is neither comprehended by intelligence, nor
is sensible. And this also is true of the one, as Parmenides demonstrates of both
these, of the latter in the first, and of the former in the fifth hypothesis,
Perpetual being, therefore, is the whole of the intelligible, and the whole of the
intellectual genus, every supermundane intellect, every intellect participated hy
divine souls, and every intellect which is called partial, and is participated by an-
gels, and diemons ; and by partial souls, through angels and daemons as media.
And as far as to this, perpetual being extends. For every intellect enerzizes
eternally, and is measured in the whole of itself by eternity. But that which is
generated, is every thing which is moved in a confused and disorderly manner, and
which in conception is surveyed prior to the production of the world ; likewise
every thing which is) properly generated and corrupted, heaven, and all these
sensible and visible natures. “Timius also detines that which is simply generated,
and that which is simply perpetual being, to be these. But the intermediate
natures are those which communicate with both these; and on each side of them
are the natures which participate of neither of these. Hence Timeus proposes
hoth of them affirmatively and negatively, as for instance, perpetual being, and
without generation, and again, that which is generated, and is necer real being, in
order that through the affirmations he may separate them from things which
are the recipients of neither, but that through the negations they may be distin-
guished from things which ina certain respect participate of both.

As these, therefore, are the extremes, viz. every intelligible and intellectual
essence, and every sensible essence, let us direct our attention to the intermediate
nature. For Timeus calls both time and the soul generated. And it is evident
that these, as not being sensible, are in a certain respect beings, and in a certain
respect generated, but perfectly neither of these. Porphyry, therefore, rightly
observes, that Plato now defines the extremes, viz. that which is primarily being,

* For xapagrace here, read παρατασει.

216 PROCLUS ON THE [Βοοκ as

and that which is alone generated, and that he omits the media; such for instance
as, that which is at one and the same time deing and a generated nature, or that which
is both generated and being ; of which being and gencrated are adapted to the nature
of souls, but vice versa that which is generated and being, are allied to the summit
of generated natures. Such as this, however, is the nature of the universe which
vivifies the universe. For this nature so far as itis divisible about bodies, ts
venerated, but so far as itis entirely incorporeal, is unbegotten, But it is absurd
to say that matter is both generated and being. For thus it: would be superior to
generated sensible natures, since these are eenerated alone, but matter would also
participate of being. Andif you are willing separately to assume that whichis alone
perpetual being, and that which is alone venerated, by taking away from one of
the definitions intellect, and from the other sense; you will produce the definition
of the medium. For this is known by reason and opinion, For reason knows
both itself and opinion, and opinion knows itself an reason 3 the former indeed
both in conjunction with cause; but the latter both, without cause. Vor in this
reason and opinion differ from each other. Opinion also is known by reason, and
reason by opinion, And the whole [rational] soul subsists through both these
which are media. Thus too, by assuming the worse of the two upward terms,
viz. reason, and making it to be spurious reason, and of the two downward terms
sense, and making it to be insensible sense, you will then have the manner in which
Plato thought matter may be known, viz. by spurious reason, and insensible sense.
Assuming likewise analogously in each, that which is the better of the two, and
mahing it to be spurious according to that which is more excellent, you will
Lave the manner in which ¢he one is known, viz. by a spurious intellect, and
spurious opinion. Henee it is not properly simple, and is not known from cause.
It is known therefore by a spurious knowledge, because it is known in a superior
manner according to each. For opinion does not know from cause, and the one
is not known from cause, but from not having a cause. And intellect knows that
which is simple; but a spurious intellect: knows the one, because it is superior to
intellectual perception. The superior therefore, here, is spurious as with reference
to intellect, as de one’ also is more excellent than that which is simple, such as
that is which is intelligible to truly existing intelleet, and to which intelleet ts
allied and is not spurious. It perceives therefore, the one, by that in itself which is not
intellect. But this is the ove in it, according to which also it is a God.

ee Ste F :
For ἐκεῖνος liere, it is necessary to read eseau. For Proclus is speaking of the τὸ Ἂν».

BOOK 11.} TIMAUs OF PLATO. 217

“ Ievery thing however, which is generated, is from necessity generated
by a certain cause. [or it is pertectly impossible that it should have
generation without a cause.”

Timeus, in a manner truly conformable to the geometric method, after the
definitions assumes these axioms. For having said what being and what that which
ts gencrated are, he adds these other common conceptions ; that the thing which
is gencrated, is entirely generated by a cause; but that the thing which is not
generated by a cause, cannot have generation. From these axioms also it is
evident that ro διαιρετον, does not signify the dividing method, but that the
hypotheses are to be defined. For the assertion that every thing which is generat-
ed, is necessarily generated by a certain cause, and that it is impossible for it to
have generation without a cause, and also the following axiom, that what is
generated according to an eternal paradigm is rendered beautiful, all these being
axioms, are to be considered as belonging to the term διοριστέον, and not to be
parts of division. Since however one of the present axioms is more clear, but the
other is less known and clear, hence Timieus places the one as the middle term,
but the other as the conclusion. For the axiom, every thing which is generated,
is necessarily generated by a certain cause, is the conclusion. But the axiom,
it is entirely impossible that it should have generation without a cause, is the
iniddle, in order that the syllogism may be categoric, and may be in the first
figure, as follows: It is impossible for that which is generated to be generated
without a cause. But this is necessarily generated by a certain cause. Every
thing therefore which is generated, is from necessity generated by a certain cause.
For it is better to collect: what is said after this manner, as the divine Jamblichus
also thinks we ought, than to make, as some other persons do, the syWogism to
be hypothetical. But how is the middle more known than the conclusion? For
it is evident that a thing must necessarily be, which it is impossible should not be,
and that itis impossible a thing should not be, which necessarily is. Or ina
certain respect each of these is the same. But frequently it is not known that a
thing necessarily is, but that it is impossible for it not to be, is known. Thus for
instance, the physician says [to his patient] it is necessary you should be
nourished, and he will in a less degree persuade the sick man. But if he says, it
is impossible to live without being nourished, this will now compel the paticnt [to
take nutriment}. And again, death is necessary through a certain cause: for it
is impossible not to die [i 6. to avoid death}, And, it is necessary to give money

Tim. Plat. Vou. I. 2£

218 : PROCLUS ON THE [BOOK 11.

that is owing to a tyrant: for itis impossible not to give it, And in a great
variety of other instances, you may in asimilar manner see, that one of these is
more ubscure, but the other more known, though both may appear to signify the
saine thing.

How, therefore, in the words before us, is the one clearer than the other? For
what if in some things this should be true, but in others not? May we not say,
that here also it is easy to learn how that which is generated, when it is separated
from its cause, is powerless and imbecile? For not being able tu preserve itself,
neither is it connected by itself. But as it derives from its cause alone its preser-
yation and connexion, if it is separated from its cause, itis evident that it becomes
of itself powerless, and being dissipated, departs into non-entity, which also
demonstrates that what is generated, catnot be venerated without a cause. lor
if it is generated, it is generated by a certoin maker. Hence it is rightly said in
the Philebus, that whatis generated ts made, but that which makes is the cause to
/that which is made! (of its being made]. If, however, this be the case, itis either
generated by itself, or by another. Butat’ ly itself, it passes into the same with
perpetual being ; and thus that which is generated, and that which always is, will
be the same, and a generated nature will rank among things that have an eternal
subsistence. But if it is not generated by itself, it is entirely generated by another,
For it is necessary that what is generated, should be generated by something, if
it is that which is generated, and not [real] being. Por not connecting itself, nor
making itself in energy, it will suffer this from something else. And being itself
by itself imbecile, it will derive power from another, Farther still, though the
same thing should both act and suffer, so far indeed as it is that which suflers, it
suflers from another, and so faras itis ctlective it operates on another, That also
which is generated, so far as itis generated: sutlers, Bat if it sutlers, it suffers
from something else: for itis not naturally adapted to generate itself. For it
would be before itis generated, and would bein energy prior to subsisting in
capacity. For itis necessary that what operates should operate in energy on
that which is in capacity. Plato, therefore, conjoining that which is generated to
cause, which he does in the conclusion, very properly uses the term from necessity.
Kor firmness and stability accompanied by persuasion accede to that which is
venerated, from its cause: just as he says inthe Politicus, that arenovated tmmor-

ality is imparted to the world from its father. But separating that which is

Por τῷ yeyropery here, it is requisite to read ry ποιουμένῳ.

anok wd TIMEUS OF PLATO. 219

renerated from its cause, which he does in the middle, he uses the term impossible.
For that which is generated, surveyed by itself, is inefhicacious and imperfect.

Moreover, in employing the word cause, he indicates the uniform power of {πθ΄
demiurgic principle; calling the demiurgic cause, not simply that which gives
subsistence to another thing ; for Socrates says that the good is the cause of intelli-
cibles, but it is not the demiurgic cause of them. For the demiurgic is attributed
to veneration as Plato says in the Philebus, “ that the demiurgic refers to that
which ts gencrated.” Hence, prior to the world, there are different causes of
different things, but there are not demiurgic causes of generated natures. If
therefore, there are many demiurgic causes, there is also one such cause [prior to
the many]. For in short, if that which is generated is one, union must accede to
it from its cause, and therefore itis much more necessary that its cause should be
uniform and connective of multitude, in order that what is generated may become
one conformably to the union pre-existing in its cause. And thus much con-
cerning these particulars,

It is here, however, usual to enumerate all the causes, and the differences of
causes according to Aristotle ; nor is this done immethodically. For it is requi-
site to say that every cause is either essential or accidental, fand this proximately
or remotely,] and that these subsist in a two-fold respect, either simple or complex.
All these, likewise, have a two-fold subsistence ; as they are either in capacity, or
in energy. For thus the multitude of them may be surveyed. For on account of
the essential and accidental, there are two modes of the explication of causes.
But on account of these being attributed in a two-fold respect, either proximately
or remotely, there are four modes, And again, on account of all these subsisting
ina two-fold respect, either as simple or complicated with each other, there are
eight modes, Through these also being two-fold, either in energy, or in capacity,
there are sixteen modes, But on account of causes being predicated in a four-fold
respect according to Aristotle, but according to Plato, causes subsisting in a three-
fold,’ and con-causes also, though in a different way, in a three-fold respect,—hence
according to the former, there will be sixty-four modes of causes ; [but according
to the latter there will be forty-eight modes of causes,] and the same number of
con-causes. For thus the assumption will become perfectly methodical ; though
that of Plato is usually omitted by the interpreters, who having enumerated causes

* These causes are, the producing, the paradigmatic, and the final ; and the con-causes are, maller,
matcrial causes, and form.

220 PROCLUS ON ΤῊ [ποοκ 4t.

according to Aristotle, enquire how it is said that every thing which is generated,
is generated by acertain cause. We, however, omitting all this superfluous discus-
sion, say that Timeus is here speaking about the eflective cause. Hence he uses the
words, by a certain cause. For the term by which, is adapted to that which is
effective. But he adds a@ certain cause. For the intellect of the universe, soul
and nature, are said to be producing causes, and prior to these, other causes have
this dignity, yet as many things are generated, and there are many causes, thoueh
not of each particular, the word certain is very properly added. | For each par-
ticular is generated by a certain cause, and not by all causes. These things
therefore are manifest.

This axiom, however, is entirely derided by the Epicureans, who make the
whole world, and the most divine of visible natures to be the work of chance.
Bat by the Aristotelians, for the name alone itis thought worthy of reverence,
For they say indeed, that what is generated, is) entirely generated by a certain
cause, but they undesignedly make the cause to be causeless, when they enumerate
chance with causes. Por chance is this very thing, (he causeless. But Plato alone,
following the Pythagoreans, rightly says that every thing which ts generated, ix
generated by a cause, and places over generated natures, Fate and God. For
though generated natures are many, and separated from cach other, and which
also on this account are generated from many causes, producing in ἃ different
manner, yet there is one cause collective and connective of the makers, in
order that there may be nothing in vain, or adventitious in the universe. Jor it
is not proper that beings should be governed badly. Let there, however, be one
ruler, one cause ofall things, one providence, and one chain of beings ; let there be
also together with the monad an appropriate multitude, many Kings, various
causes, a multiform providence, and a different order; yet every where multitude
has a co-arrangement about the monad, things various about that which is simple,
things multiform about that which js uniform, and things different about that
which is common, in order that a traly golden chain may have dominion over all
things, and that all things may be constituted ina becoming manner, For if, as
Aristotle says, all things are co-arranged with a view to form, itis necessary that
there should be a cause of the co-ordination, and that nothing which is in vain
should have a place in the universe, but that what appears to be in’ vain to a part,
should be advantageous to che whole, These observations, however, have been

made elsewhere.

* These are the words of Anstotle, in the 12th book of his Metaphysics.

HOOK ti] TIM.UEUS OF PLATO. ba |

But what is said in the Philecbus appears to be more universal than this axiom,
viz. that every thing which is mixed, subsists froma certain cause of the mixture.
‘For if things which are mingled, are not to be mingled casually, it is necessary there
should be one cause collective of the separated natures, and imparting union to
the mingled form. . This cause, however, is in one mixture God, in another intel-
lect, in another soul, in another nature, and in another a certain art, imitating
nature, Indeed, every thing which is generated, is mingled, but not every thing
which is mingled is generated. For the first of beings, bound and infinity, subsist
mingled with each other. From these, therefore, Plato says other things, and also
bodies derive their subsistence, All that is said here therefore, is analogous to all
that is said in the Philebus, viz. the Demiurgus to the one, form to bound, matter /
to the infinite, and that which is generated to that which is mixed. But the latter:
are more universal than the former; because the latter [viz. the one, bound, the
infinite, and that whichis mixed,] are beheld in all things, but the former (viz. the
Demiurgus, form, matter, and that which is generated} are seen in mundane natures
only, For intellect is mixed, as being knowledge, and as possessing infinite
power, and also soul, as being at one and the same time impartible and partible.
Hlenee, a certain cause, is the cause of that which is generated, just as that which
is generated is a cer¢ain mixture, and not every mixture; by which also it is evi-
dent that the Demiurgus is subordinate to the one, since he produces indeed a
mixture, but a mixture which is generated. For since the causes of the world
are these, the final, the paradigmatic, the effective, the organic,’ the formal, and
the material, Timzus indeed points out to us afterwards, from reason and demon-
stration, the final cause, but delivers the organic, the formal, and the material
eause, from the former before-mentioned axioms. For if the universe is not [real]
being, but that which is generated, itis a form participated by matter, and by |
the orzanie, formal, and material causes is proximately moved, But Timeus
unfolds to us the effective cause from what is now said. For if the universe is
~ generated, there is an effective cause of it. And he unfolds the paradigmatic cause
in what will be said afterwards. For if the world is beautiful it was generated
according to an eternal paradigm. So that through these axioms investigating
for us the causes of the universe, he delivers all things in order. And the hypo-
theses afford him this utility,

“When therefore, an artificer looking to that which possesses an inva-
riable sameness of subsistence, and always employing’ a certain paradigm

* There is an omission here, in the original, of ro οργανίκον.
* For xporxoperos in this place, it isnecessary to read xporxpwperos.

222 PROCLUS ON THE [Boox 11.

of this kind, expresses in his work the idea and power of it, then it is
necessary that the whole should be a beautiful effect; but when he looks

to that which is generated, employing a generated paradigm, then his
work will not be beautiful.”

This also is in continuity with what has been said. For the paradigmatic is
investigated after the effective cause; except that the before-mentioned axioms
contribute to our discovering that there is a demiurgic cause of the universe, but
the present axioms do not contribute to the discovery that there is a paradigma-
tic cause of the world, but to the knowledge of what kind of a paradigm it is,
whether eternal or generated. For from there being an effective cause, it follows
that there is also a paradigm, either pre-existing in the maker himself, or external
to him, and either superior, or inferior to, or of the same rank with him, For
universally, that which makes, being extended to a certain form, makes that
which it wishes to insert in the thing made. This therefore follows. It is neces-
sary however to find that which is next in order, viz. whether the mundane para-
diem is eternal, or generated. But to this the proposed axioms contribute: and
the whole of what is said, will be truly consentaneous to itself. If the universe is
generated, there is a Demiurgus of it; if thereis a Demiurgus of the universe, there
is alsoa paradigm. And ifindeed that which is generated is beautiful, it was gene-
rated on account of aneternal paradigm. But if it was not, that whichis generated
is not beautiful. So that acontinued syllogism such as the following ts produced,
The world was generated. Every thing generated, has a demiurgic cause. Every
thing having a demiurgic, has also a paradigmatic cause. The world, therefore, has
both a demiurgic and paradigmatic cause. And as in the first axioms there were two
hypotheses, what perpetual being is, and what that is which is generated, and
two other in the second axioms, viz. every thing which Is generated has a cause,
that which has not a cause, is not generated ; thus also in these, there are two
common conceptions, that which is generated on account of an ‘atelligible para-
digm is beautiful, that which is generated on account of a generated paradigm is
not beautiful.

Each also of these is perfectly true. For he who makes on account of the intel-
ligible, either similarly, or dissimilarly, imitates it. And if indeed similarly, he
makes the imitation beautiful: for there, that which is primarily beautiful, sub-
sists. Butifdissimilarly, he does not make on account of the intelligible: for on the
contrary, he falls off from the similitude. And he who makes any thing on account

nook 1] TIMAUS OF PLATO. pa as |

of that which is generated, if he truly directs his attention to it, evidently does
not make that which is beautiful. For this very thing is full of dissimilitude, and
is not that which is primarily beautiful; whence that which is generated on
account of it, is much more separated from beauty. Hence Phidias also, who
made the [eclebrated] statue of Jupiter, would not have arrived at the conception
of the Jupiter in ILomer, if he had looked at a generated resemblance of the God.
And if he had been able to extend himself to the intellectual Jupiter, it is evident
that he would have rendered his work still more beautiful. For from the para-
digm indeed, beauty or the want of beauty accedes to the image; but from the
maker, similitude or dissimilitude to the archetype is derived. With reference to
both however, the image is said to be the image of the paradigm, but the work
an eflect of the maker. On this account also Timeus, when he speaks of the
paradigm, conjoins with itits image: for he says, “ Thus therefore we must speak
concerning the paradigm and its image.” But when he speaks of the Demiurgus,
he conjoins with hin his work : for he then says, “ Of whom [am the Demiurgus
and father of works.”

Since however paradizms are triple; for there is either an eternal paradigm of
an cternal thing, or an eternal paradigm of a generated thing, or a generated pa-
γα ταν Of a generated thing ;—hence when there is an eternal paradigm of an
eternal thing, that which is entirely eternal is the paradigm of that which is so in
a certain respect, as intellect of soul. But when there is an eternal paradigm of
a generated nature, this paradigm also is in a certain respect eternal, i.e. according
to infinite time. And when there is an entirely generated paradigm of a generated
nature, this falls off from eternity. For it is not possible that what is essentially
generated, should be productive of eternal natares. ‘The former, therefore, par-
ticipate froin their paradigms of beauty and order, as being imitations of a stable
nature ; but the latter, as deriving their subsistence from things mutable and in
motion, are not beautiful, and vet are not entirely deformed, but are alone mani-
fested through the negation of beauty. Such things, therefore, as are the beautiful
progeny of art, are not beautiful when compared with the beauty which ac-
cedes from an eternal paradigm to sensible paradigms." And perhaps on this
account also, ‘Timwus does not say that what derives its subsistence according to
a generated paradigm, is entirely deformed, but only that it is not beautiful. For
that which is constituted according to artificial reason, does not subsist confonn-

* For ονύμασι here, it scems necessary to read, παραδειγμασι.

a4 PROCLUS ON THE (Book 11. |

ably to an eternal form, since there are not in intellect paradigms of things
artificial. Hence, they are not simply beautiful, nor yet are they deformed,
because in short, they derive their subsistence according to reason, [or that pro-
ductive principle which ts in the mind, of the artist.) That these axioms there-
fure are true, we may through these observations be reminded.

Some however doubt, how Plato assumes as a thing acknowledged, that there
is a Demiurgus of the universe who looks to a paradigm: for there is not a De
miurgus of it say they who directs his attention to that which is invariably the
same. And many of the ancients indeed are the patrons of this assertion ; among
whom are the Epicureans, who entirely deny the existence of that which is per-
fectly eternal. The Stoics admit that there is a Demiurgus, but assert that he
is inseparable from matter. And the Peripateties grant indeed, that there is some-
thing which is separate from matter, yet do not allow that it is a producing, but
that itis a final cause. Hence they also take away paradigms, and place over
the whole of things an intellect void of multtude. Plato however and the
Pythagoreans celebrate a separate and exempt Demiurgus of the universe, a pro-
ducing cause of all things, and a providence that is attentive to the welfare of
wholes; and this with the greatest propriety; for if the world, as Aristotle says,
aspires after intellect, and is moved towards it, whence does it derive this desire ?
For since the world is not the first of things, it is necessary that it should possess
this tendeney, from a cause which excites it to desire. For he also says that the
appetible is motive of that which is appetitive. But if this is true, and the world
by its very being and according to nature is appetitive of intellect, it is evident
that the whole of its existence is from thence, whence also its being appetitive
is derived. Whence likewise is the world, since it is finite, moved ad infinitum?
For every body possesses, as he says, a finite power. Whence therefore does the
universe derive this infinite power, since it is not from chance, as Epicurus says
it is? In short, if intellect is the cause of a motion which ts infinite, uninterrupted,
and one, there is something which is productive of the eternal. But if this be
the case, what should hinder the world from being perp πα}, and deriving: its
subsistence from a paternal cause; for as it receives an infinite: power of being
moved, from the appetible, through which it is moved ad intinitum, thus also it
will entirely receive from thence an infinitive power of existing, through the pro-
position which says, that in a finite body there is not at any time an infinite
power. Ether therefore, it has not a power through which it is connected, and

HOOK τι} TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 225

how is this possible? For every thing partible, has something impartible which
connects it, as Aristotle himself somewhere says, and the universe also is an
animal. He therefore says that God is an eternal animal, but every animal is
connected by the life which is init. Or the universe has, indeed, a power which
connects it, but this power is finite, This, however, is impossible: for if it is finite,
it will fail. Or it possesses an infinite power. And again, it will not have this
from itself, Something else, therefore, imparts to it the power of existing, and
imparts not the whole at once. For it is not receptive of the whole at one time.
Hlence it imparts this power by influx, and the influx is perpetual, and always as
much as the world is able to receive. So that the world is always becoming to be,
and never ts.

But if intellect is the Demiurgus of the world, whether does it make that which
it makes, by a reasoning process, or by its very being? If indeed by consulting,
an absurdity follows. For there will be a mutation about it, and the passions of
a partial soul. It will not therefore consult. And if it should consult, it
must entirely antecedently assume in itself the work about which it consults ;
Just as every one does who consults before he energizes, But if it makes by
its very being, it makes that which is similar to itself And if it does this,
it will contain the paradigms of the things that are generated. And again,
we must investizate, whether these paradigms subsist: primarily init, or not, and
whence it derives this paradigmatic cause of wholes. Farther still, after what
manner do we see artificers that are here produce? Ts it not by possessing the
reasons cr productive principles of their effects? This, therefore, the damoniacal
Aristotle will also grant. But if art imitates nature, it is necessary that natnre,
much prior to art, should contain the reasons of the things which she generates.
And if nature does this, we must inquire whence she is moved, and whence she is
perfected? For she is irrational ; and thus ascending, we must say that the causes
of all things are in intellect. In opposition to Aristotle, indeed, much has
been said by many ; but our business, at present, is to explore what Plato says.

In the first place, therefore, let us investigate from what cause he introduces to
cenerated natures the beautiful and the not beautiful, from the paradigm, and not
from the producing cause. It might then have been said, that there are two-fold
demiurgic causes, viz. the generated and the intelligible, the latter being effective
of beautiful things, but the former of things that are not beautiful. But Plato
does: not speak after this manner, but says that intelligible paradigms are the
paradigms of beautifal eflects, hut generated paradigms, of such as are pot beau-

Tim. Plat. Vou. I. 2F

226 PROCLUS ON THE [poo 11.

tiful. It may however be said, that what is here asserted contributes to erudition,
exhorting us not to reject beautiful actions. Por if he had said that what is gene-
rated, is not effective of beauty, perhaps he might have rendered us more sluggish
with respect to beautiful actions. But it will be better and more physical, it we
say that it is possible for the same eflective cause to look to two-fold paradigms,
and to make a certain thing beautiful, and acertain thing not beautiful, Por
soul looking to intellect, generates truth and science, but looking to generation,
she procreates imaginations, and passive appetites, But itis tipossible for the
same paradigm to be the cause of beautiful and not beautifal effects. Very properly
therefore is it asserted, that from this cause beauty and deformity accede to genes
rated natures. As the paradigm however of this universe is beautiful, itis evident
that it is intelheible, and always subsists invariably the same; to Which also the
Demiurgus looking, adorns the universe, If, theretore, itas the supplier of beauty,
it has the highest order among eternal beings, and belongs to the first intelligibles,
Hence the cause eflective of beauty is there, through which all things are beautiful,
intellect, soul, and the nature of body. Again, therefore, the Demiurgus, indeed, ts
the cause of form, but the paradigni of beauty, and the “οὐ of union, And the last
of these. supplies all things at once, but the paradigm is the suppher of beauty and
form, and the demiurgic cause, so far as it is Intellectual, of torm: and essence.
Moreover, the demiurgie cause looking to the intelligible ts multiform. For
the whole Demiurgus fabricates in one way ἡ looking toil. He, therefore, is united
to it according to supreme transcendency. But the demiurgic triad fabricates in
another way. And of this triad indeed, the first (i. οὐ Jupiter) fibricates uniformly 3
the second fi. e. Neptune} generatively, and the last (i.e. Pluto} convertively.

And in one way in the ruling, in another in the liberated and in another, in the

mundane order. But after this triad, we must survey fabrication proceeding after |

a different manner to the many demiursie Gods, who from these receive and are
allotted paternal powers. After these, also, it proceeds In one way to demiurgie
angels, but in another to demiurzic damons, the attendants of this order.
farther still, we must likewise survey the undefiled forms of life, which contribute
to the demiurgic series, and the genera of partial souls, which follow. the demi-
urgic choir, For the peculiarity and the mode of production, and of looking
to the intelligible, extend diflerently to diflcrent natures, as far as to these, Itis also
necessary to admire this in Plato, that he does not sity that what is generated on

' Por a\\q@ here, itis necessary to read adiwo.

Book 11.} ΤΊΜΕῸΝΟΕΡΙΑΤΟ. v7

account of! an eternal paradigm is Jwautiful, but that what is generated by the
Demiurgus who looks to it. is most beautiful; since that which is confused and
disordered is generated, for it is visible and sensible. But every thing of this
kind is and was generated, as he says further on, receiving from the intelligible
certain vestiges of forms prior to fabrication, and is not most beautiful, though it
is ina certain respect beautiful, as with reference to the formless nature of matter.
Hence that which is generated on account of an eternal paradigm, such for
instance as that disorderly and confused nature, is not simply beautifal, but that
which was generated by the Demiurgus looking to it. For from that confused
nature the Demiurgus was absent; but the intelligible prior to the Demiurgus,
uminated that disorderly essence. So far, however, as it was generated by the
Demiurgus, it was also generated by the eternal paradigm, energizing on it through
the Demiurgus as a medinm. And so far indeed as it was generated by the
paradigm, it was invested with form, but so far as by the Demiurgus, it was
arranged, For the Demiurgus is the cause of order ; but the paradigm is simply the
cause of form to its participants.

Farther still, from the paradigm itself the difference of demiurgic powers may
be assumed. For some of these powers, indecd, looking to the whole of intelli-
gibles, produce according to the whole of them ; but others produce partially. And
some, indeed, survey the whole of intelligibles through union 3. but others through
intelligence. Some, again, do not produce according to the whole of the intelli-
gible; but some are divided according to the four primary causes ; others proceed
into a greater number; and others make the last forms the paradigms of their
productions, Hence through these, there is one shepherd of men, but another of
horses, as Plato says in the Politicus, and in a similar manner in’ other forms.
As the demiurgie series therefore is various, and there are different paradizins of
diferent things, some of which are more total, but others more partial, Timwus
very properly does not say, that he who uses this intelligible paradigm, makes that
which is generated to be beautiful, bnt he who uses a paradigm of this kind. In
the intelligible paradigms therefore, the part is in a certain respect the whole, on
account of the union of intelligibles; and the multitude is most similar to the
monad, through the domination of sameness. Since also the whole Demiurgus
looks indeed to the intelligible and all-perfect animal, but employs the paradigm
which is in himself, possessing intellectually the intelligible ; which paradigm also

' For προαιωνίον in this place, we must read προς awwrior.

298 PROCLUS ON THE [poox 15,

-

is such as the intelligible through similitude to it, but is of a more partial nature ;
hence Timwus adds the words a certain to a thing of this kind. Yor these intel-
ligibles participate of the eternal paradigm, and are more partial than all-perfect
animal.. Hence, too, he calls idea, τὸ, a certain thing, assimilating that which is
vencrated to the paradigm. But fabrication imparts essences and powers to the
things that are generated. Why, however, of eternal being does he say “ employing
a paradigm of this kind,” but of that whichis generated, he no longer adds the ex-
pression ‘ of this kind,” but instead of this, adduces the term venerated? Is it
not because the intelligible has something similar to itself, as having the highest
rank, but that which is generated being the last of things, has nothing else
similar to itself? For that which is produced on account of it, is generated, and
to this the dissimilar is appropriate ; but to the intelligible, the similar, the same,
and every thing of this kind, is athed. And = thus much concerning these parti-
eilars, But) the term αὐδάν must be conjoined: to aw subsistence according to
mameness, In order that there may be that whieh looks to a nature always possess-
Ing a sameness of subsistence, For thus the plulosopher Porphyry properly
decides. Por Tinwus does not say that the Deniurgus in fabricating all things,
always beholds, as Atticus thought, but that the intelligible always subsists after the
same manner. Untess it should be said, that on this account he assumes the
beholding always, lest by seeing at one time, but at another not, he should
latently introduce into his production, that which is not beautiful. The Demi-
urgus, therefore, looks to that whichis eternal, in order that he may produce that

which is similar to it, and beautiful.

“Let therefore this universe be denominated by us, all heaven, or
the world, or whatever other appellation it may be especially adapted
to receive.”

This is the last of the axioms, giving a name to the subject [of discussion) con-
formably to geometricians, When they speak about the gnomon in parallelograms,
for they say any one thing consisting of two complements ts to” be called a gno-
mon, For since Plato intends to call the same thing both heaven and the
world, in order that you may not think he disturbs the doctrine, by employing
at different times different names, he previously determines something about the

' Vor ews yap hese, read eres yup.

ὍΟΟΚ 11.) TIM-ZUS OF PLATO. 299

names. For it must be observed that these names had great ambiguity with the
ancients; some of them calling the sublunary region alone the world, but the
region above it, heaven ; but others denominating heaven a part of the world.
And some defined it to extend as far as to the moon; but others called the sum-
mits of generation heaven :

The wide-spread heav'n in wther and the clouds
Fell to the lot of Jove."

Hence Plato very properly determines concerning these names, prior to the whole
theory, calling the universe heaven and the world, and saying all heaven, that you
may not fancy he says, ὦ divine body alone is denominated by us the world, or
by whatever other name it may rejoice to be called. And it seems, indeed, that he
calls the universe Aeaven, conformably to the opinion of all men, but the world,
according to his own opinion. Tor he says, let it be called by us heaven and
the world. For the name of world is adapted to it as a certain fabrication ; though
itis also possible to call it both heaven and the world : Acaven, indeed, as behold-
ing the things above,* as surveying the intelligible, and as_ participating of an
intellectual essence ς but dhe world, as being always tilled and adorned by truly
existing beings. It may also be called /eaven, as being converted [to its prin-
ple], but he world as proceeding from it. For it is generated by, and is convert-
ed to real being. But as of statues established by the telestic art, some things
pertaining to them are manifest,’ but others are inwardly concealed, being
symbolical 4 of the presence of the Gods, and which are only known to the mystic
artists themselves ; after the same manner, the world being a statue of the intelligi-
ble, and perfected by the father, has indeed some things which are visible indi-
cations of its divinity ; but others, which are the invisible impressions of the par-
ticipation of being § received by it from the father who gave it perfection, in order
that ° through these it may be eternally rooted in real being. Heaven, indced,

"Thad. xv. vs. 102.

* This is asserted in the Cratylus.

} For apavn here, it is necessary to read ἐμφανη.

* Instead of cuppoduns των θεων παρουσίας in this place, it is necessary to read, σνμβολικα της των
θεων rapovacas. -

> Instead of της τὸν οντως μετοχῆς in this place, it is necessary to read rns τὸν ovros peroyns.

5 In the words wn μὴ δὲ ἀντων ἐρριϑωμενον ῃ διαιωνίω: ev τῷ οντι, it is obvious that μη ought to be

expunged,

240 PROCLUS ON THE [Βοοκ i.

and the world, are names significant of the powers in the universe; the latter so
far as it proceeds from the intelligible, but the former so far as it is converted to it.

It is however necessary to know that the divine name of its abiding power, and
which ia a symbol of the impression of the Demiurgus, according to which it does
not proceed out of being, is ineffable and arcane, and known only to the Gods
themselves. For there are names adapted to every order of things ; those indeed
that are adapted to divine natures being divine, to the objects: of diangia, being
dianoetic, and to the objects of opinion, doxastic. This also Plato says in the
Cratylus, where he embraces what ig asserted by Homer on this subject, who ad-
wits that names of the same things with the Gods, are different from those that

subsist in the opinions of men,

Xanthus by Gods, by men Scamander σα} ὦ,"

And,
Which the Gods Chalcis, men Cymindis call. *

And in asimilar manner in many other names. For as the knowledge of the
Gods is different from that of partial souls, thus also the names of the one are

different from those of the other; since divine names unfold the whole essence of

the things named, but those of men only partially come into contact with them.
Plato therefore knowing that this pre-eaists in the world, omits the divine and
ineffable name itself, which is diflerent from the apparent name, and with the
greatest caution introduces it as a symLol of the divine impression which the world
contains. For the words, “ or whatever other appellation,” and “it may receive,”
are alatent hymn of the mundane name, as ineffable, and allotted a divine es-
sence ; in order that it may be co-ordinate to what is signified by it. Hence, also,
divine mundane names are delivered by Theurgists ; some of which are called by
them ineffable, but others effible ; aud some being significant of the invisible
powers in the world, but others of the visible elements from which it derives its
completion. Through these things, therefore, as hypotheses, the mundane form,
the demiurgie cause and paradigm, and the apparent and unapparent name of
the world, are delivered. And the former name indeed is duadic, but the latter
monadic. For the words “ whatever other” are significant of oneness. You may
also consider the ineffable name of the universe, [as significant’) of its abiding in

‘liad xax.vs. 74
* Nliad xiv. vs, 291.

> In the original in this place, σημαντικον is omitted.

nook Oh] ἍΜ ΟΝ OF PLATO, 931

the father; but the name world, as indicative of its progression ; and heaven, of its
conversion, But through the three, you have the final cause, on account of which
itis full of good; abiding ineflably, proceeding perfectly, and converting itself to
the good as the antecedent object of desire. It is fit, however, to engage in the
discussion of the rest of the theory, terminating what follows by the principles,

“ Tn the first place, therefore, that as an hypothesis, must be considered
respecting it, which oughtin the beginning to be surveyed about every

᾽ν

thing.

After the prayer, the exhortation to the auditors, and the delivery of the
hypotheses, nothing else remains than to dispose the whole discussion conforma-
ly to the hypotheses themselves. Of this, however, that head is the leader, whe-
ther the world was generated, or is unbegotten, having no beginning of generation.
Por in what was asserted prior to the hypotheses, Timiavus said, “7? is necessary
thatwe who are about to speak concerning the universe, whether it was generated or
ἐκ μη οποίον, should invoke the Gods and Goddesses,” as from hence commencing the
theory. And in the hypotheses, “ [hat that is which is akecays being, but is without
gencration, and what that is which is generated, but is never [real] being,” were the
things which were first assumed. This therefore must first be considered, as it
was the first thing supposed in the principles. It is necessary, however, as Socra-
tes savs in the Phiedrus, respecting every thing, to consider in the first place what
itis. But this is the form of the object of investigation, And the generated and
the unbegotten give distinction to the mundane form, So that this is very pro-
perly thought to be the first thing that deserves an appropriate consideration, to
which also Timieus immediately after this directs his attention. But since most
of the Platonists understand by the words περὶ πάντοὸς, that Plato means about
erery thing, conformably to what is said inthe Phiedrus, but Porphyry understands
the words as signifying about the universe, it being fit to speak first concerning
the universe, and to show whether itis naturally unbegotten or generated,—it is
requisite to Know that the former interpretation has in a greater degree the spon-
tancous. For to assume τὸ παντὸς for τὸ πῆι tov πάντος, is a forced assumption.

That, however, these things are simply to be investigated concerning every thing,
we may previously assuine from common conceptions, and the first hypotheses. The
addition also of whether the universe aleays was, having no beginning of generation,
or whether it was generated,” shows that what is said is asserted more generally of
ihe universe. For with reference to the world, it is demonstrated that it has a

228 PROCLUS ON ΤῊΣ (BOOK 1|.

beginning of generation, and that it is visible and tangible, but not with reference
to the universe. This, therefore, is manifest. But since it is also necessary to
discover in the first place the mundane form, whether itis to be arranged among
eternal, or among generated natures, let us see what arguments the philosopher
employs, and follow him in his demonstrations whether it always was, having no
beginning of generation, or was generated from a certain principle ; for we shall
find that he uses all the dialectic! methods in the hypotheses, "Thus he divides
being from that which 1s generated, and definitively and also analytically assigns
what each of them is. For he recurs from generated natures 10. the demiurgic
and paradigmatic causes of them, Moreover, having indicated to us the truth
concerning ineffable and effable names, in perfect conformity to the doctrine of
Pythagoras, who said that number was the wisest of things, but that he was the
next in wisdom who gave names to things,—he afterw ards converts himself to the
demonstrations of the problems concerning the world. And in the first: place,
he endeavours to find the form of it, and whether it: must be admitted to bea
portion of perpetual being, or ofa venerated nature. And on this account he
Inquires whether it has a certain principle of generation, or has none, not asking
whether it belongs to eternal beings, or to generated natures 5 for he might have
said that it was a mediom between both these, in the same manner as soul. But
he asks whether it always was, having no principle whatever of generation, or
whether it was in some way or other generated, in order that he might apprehend
the medium between both these to be that which has a certain principle of
generation, and yet always is. Afterwards having shown that the world is alone
generated according to its body, he grants it according to a certain other thing to
be unbegotten, according to which also itis ἃ God, as will be evident as we
proceed,

Such therefore being the inquiry, Plutarch, Atticus, and many other of the
Platonists, conceiving the generation here mentioned to be temporal, say that the
inquiry is, whether the world is unbegotten or cenerated according to time, Por
they assert that prior to the fabneation of the world, there was a disorderly
motion, But time entirely subsists together with motion ; so that there was time

prior to the universe, Time, however, was also generated together with the

* As the dialectic of Plato is perfectly scientific, as we have shown in the notes on the Parmenides,
and employs the dividing, defining, analysing, and demonstrative methods, it is evident that instead of
διαλογιίκαις μεθοδοιν in this place, we should read διαλεκτίκαις μεθυδοι». This is also evident from what
follows,

BOOK 11. TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 233

universe, being the number of the motion of the universe; so that the former time
was prior to the fabrication of the world, being the number of a disorderly motion.
But the interpreters of Plato that follow Crantor, say that the world is said to be
generated, as being produced by another cause, and not being self-begotten, nor
self-subsistent. And Plotinus, and the philosophers afler Plotinus, viz. Porphyry
and Tamblichus, say that the composite nature is here called that which is
cenerated, and that with this,’ generation from another cause is con-subsistent.
We however say, that all these assertions are most true; and that the world is
gencrated, both as a composite, and as being indigent of other causes to its existence.
For every thing which has interval is a thing of this kind, and that which is
sensible, is allotted such a nature as this. We think it fit however, that these
philosophers should look to other generated natures, I mean time and soul,
survey what is common in them, and extend it to these significations, and say,
that [real] being indeed is that, which eternally possesses a stable essence, power

~and energy. But that which is simply, or absolutely generated, is that which

receives all these according to time. And that which is in a certain respect
generated, possesses its energy In motion and extension. For it has been before
observed by us, that Plato defined the extremes to be, that which 15. simply
perpetual being, and that which is simply generated. But in what is here said,
he comprehends the media. Hence, that which does not possess at once, the whole
of its essence, or energy established in unity, is denominated gencrated. A thing of
this kind also, entirely subsists through generation, and its existence is generated,
or becoming to be, but is not [real] being. This sensible world likewise, time
among things that are moved, and the transitive intelligence of souls, are things
of this kind. But it is manifest that all motion subsists according to a part, and
that the whole of it is not at once.

If, however, the essence of the world has generation, and the perpetuity of it
subsists according to temporal infinity, some one by considering this may syllo-
gize as follows: First, that it is necessary between things that are eternally per
petual, and things which are generated in a part of time, the medium should be an
hypostasis which is generated infinitely. And that this should be two-fold, either
having the whole perpetual, through the whole of time, but the parts in the parts

‘of time, as is the case with these elements, or having both the whole and the parts

co-extended with the perpetuity of the whole of time, as is the case with the celestial

' For revro here, it is necessary to read rovry.

Tim. Plat. Vai, 7... 2G

|

234 ' PROCLUS ON THE [Rook 11.

bodies. For there is not the same perpetuity according to eternity and the whole
of time; since neither is there the same infinity of time and eternity, because eter-
nity and time are not the same. In the second place, that what is measured by
eternity, and exists in eternity, 1s necessarily impartible. For how can that which
is partible be fixed, and haye its essence established in the impartible? In the
third place, that soul energizes according to time, and that body subsists entirely in
time. For the energy of soul is nearer to eternal natures, than the essence of body.
What is it then, by which we may infer that the essence of the celestial bodies
is thus perpetual according to time? Itis this, that it cannot be separated from the
cause that adorns it. For this makes it evident that it is allotted a renovated per-
petuity, and is always generated from a source external to itself. For if it received
the whole of its proper essence from itself, it would be sufficient to itself, sepa-
jrate from that which makes it, and imparts to it essence.. The intention indeed
lof Plato is to show, that the world is simply generated, as having its essence,
power, and energy, and also its perpetuity co-extended with the whole of time.
But he inquires from the first, whether it is eternal being, or belongs to things
which are perfected by time. For the expression always was, signifies with Plato
the intelligible, as we have before observed. If, however, he says further on, that

| the term was is not adapted to eternal natures, but the term ἐσ, we must not be

disturbed. For prior to a distinct evolution, he follows the accustomed mode of
speaking. Hence also, when celebrating the Demurgus he says, “he was good,”
though the Demiurgus ranks among eternal natures. And speaking of the
paradigm, he collects both these together at once: for he says, “Zhe nature of
animal itself therefore was being eternal ;” together with αἰώνιος, ovra being eternal,
assuming τὸ eruyyave was. And in addition to all that has been said, because the
power of every finite body is not infinite, as Aristotle has demonstrated, but eter-
nity is an infinite power, hence every finite body is incapable of receiving eternity.
It is necessary therefore that it should not always Je, but should always be gene-
rated, or becoming to be, receiving as much as possible a flowing existence.

Being, therefore, as 1 have said, and perpetual being, manifest the eternal.
But “ that which was generated,” signifies the being allotted an hypostasis, mea-
sured by time, such as is a sensible nature, which also 1s apprehended by opinion
in conjunction with sense. It has however been already said by us, that the intel-
ligible is sclf-subsistent and eternal; but that the sensible nature is produced by
something different from itself, and is con-subsistent with time. For the eternal in
number is one thing, and the temporal another. And the former is in number,

BOOK 11. TIM.TUS OF PLATO. 935

but the latter iy generated in number. For to the former eternity is conjoined, but
to the latter time. That which is generated likewise, thouch it is said to be per-
petual, has an hypostasis co-extended with ali time, and which is always gene-
rated, and always adorned by its producing cause. If therefore, perpetual being
manifests the eternal, but that which has a principle of generation signifies that
which is produced by another cause ; for such is that which is always generated ;
but Plato always inquires, whether the world always was, or has the principle of
acertain generation ;—this being the case, an inquiry of this kind will be the
same asx an investigation. whether the world belongs to eternal natures, or to
things which are generated according to the whole of time; and whether it
belongs to self-subsistent natures, or to things which are adorned by another
cause,

Farther still, that which is generated belongs to things which are multifariously
predicated, For this very thing which has a temporal beginning, and is so much
spoken of, is called generated, whether it arrives at being through generation, or
without generation, as Aristotle says. Every thing likewise which proceeds from _
a cause, is called generated, that also which is essentially a composite, and that
which has a generable nature (or which is naturally capable of being generated]
though itshould not have been generated 3 such asis that which has a visible nature,
thoughit should not be seen. That which is generated therefore, being predicated
multifariously, that which is generated according to time, has all the generations.
For it proceeds from a cause, is a composite, and has a generable nature. Tt does
not, however, entircly follow that what is generated after another manner, has all
the generations. [If therefore Plato had inquired whether the universe has all the
gencrations,} or not all," we should say that he investigated whether itis generated
according to time, or has not a temporal principle of generation. Since, however,
this is not the case, but he asks whether it has no principle whatever of generation,
or has a certain principle of it, he renders it manifest to those who have the smal-
lest degree of intelligence, that he does not doubt about its temporal beginning,
but whether the universe, since there are many generations, has a certain princi-
ple of generation. For if it has no principle whatever of generation, it belongs
to eternal and self-subsistent natures, in which there is not generation, because
neither is there time. For though we sometimes speak of the generations of the

+ It seems that the following words are wanting in this place in the original: εἰ τοινυν ecnre 9

πλατων ποήέρον Τὸ παν πασαξέχει PAS γενεσειξ.

236 PROCLUS ON THE [BOOK 11.

Gods, yet we say this indicating their ineffable progression, and the difference of
secondary natures with reference to the causes of them. Theologists, however,
previously subverting all such doubts, in order that the generations of the Gods
may be rationally devised by them, call the first principle of things Time, because
it is ft that where there is generation, time should precede, according to which
and on account of which generation subsists. With these, therefore, cause and
time are the same; since also with them progression is the same as generation.
That however which is truly generated, is that which does not generate itself, but
is generated by another, becomes the image of another thing, 15 composed of
many dissimilar things, and always receives a renovated hypostasis; with which
also time is conjoined. It Vkewise has a never-failing generation, co-extended
with the infinity of time, and is always becoming to be one and the same in num-
ber, but is not one according to an eternal subsistence. But that which is. thus
generated you may say proceeds from non-being. For that which is self-subsis-
tent, being generated by itself, does not proceed from non-being. For though
youmay divide it by conception into cause and effect, yet it proceeds from being.
For the maker and that which is made are one, so that it proceeds from the being
of itself, Hence also it: is eternal, never at any time deserting itself, But that
which is alone from another thing, subsists from non-being, because it no
longer is when separated from its cause; and the cause 15 different from the effect.
Thus, therefore, the physical axiom δ may be adapted according to analoy to
this generated nature : and that which is always generated and illuminated by
being, to that which is always in time, But this is evident; forif you take away
the maker, the universe is immediately imperfect ; which is likewise the case with
every thing that is 51}}} generated. At one and the same time, however, the
universe is generated and perfect, and is always venerated. H{ence also its pey-
-petuity and its perfection, are according to the whole of time. For time was
generated together with the heaven (or the universe], not a part of time, but all
time: so that the heaven is generated in an infinite time, and is never-failing
both with respect to beginning and end, in the same manner as time. Thus, there-
fore, it is also said to have a principle of generation, and to originate from a cer-
tain other principle. And in the first place, indeed, it originates as he says from
the most proper principle, the final. For from this, the generating cause com-
mences the generation of the world. In the next place, the generation of the

i.e. That the cause is different from the effect.

BOOK 11.] TIMEUS OF PLATO. 237

world subsists with reference to the final principle, and as the world is always
becoming to be, it is beginning to be generated, and possesses the end of it,
through generation in the whole of time. For with respect to the world, if was
generated, is not one thing, and iis generated another; as neither is the begin-
ning of it one thing, and the end another. That, therefore, which is generated
in a part of time, begins at one time, and is perfected at another; but that which
ts gencrated in the whole of time is always beginning, and is always perfect:
And it has indeed, a certain principle of generation, which is perfected by some-
thing different from itself, but it has not a certain principle, as not having the be-
ginning ofa certain partial time. For since generation is multifarious, the prin-
ciple also of it is multifarious. So that the generation which subsists through the
whole of time ἢ is a certain generation, and this principle is the principle of a
certain, and not of all generation. What therefore is this generation? That
which has both the beginning * and the end contracted together [so as to be si-
multaneous]. Because therefore the world is a body, it is generated, and has a
principle or beginning of generation. But because intellect is the maker of it, it
was generated, and has an end of generation. Through both, however, it is
rising into existence, and is perfect according to generation, was generated, is
always becoming to be, and is gencrated. For these do not” subsist at one and
the same time, in things which are generated in a part of time. Thus for instance
the motion of the heavens, not being generated in a part of time, is always, as
Aristotle says, in the end ; but this is not the case with motions on the earth.

“It was generated. Tor it is visibie and tangible, and has ἃ body.
But all such things are sensible. And sensibles are apprehended by
Opinion in conjunction with sense, and appear to be things which are
becoming to be, and are generated.”

As the Demiurgus of wholes looking to himself, and always abiding in his own
accustomed manner, produces the whole world, totally and at once collectively,
and with eternally invariable sameness ; for he does not make at one time, and

at another not, lest he should depart from eternity ; after the same manner also
4

* xpovoy is omitted in the original.
* apxn also is omitted in this place in the original.
? It is necessary to supply ovy here.

248 PROCLUS ON THE [Βοοκ τι.

Timeus, being converted to himself, delivers the whole theory, recurring to in-
tellect from dianoia, and proceeding into a reasoning process from intellect;
doubting, therefore, and interrogating himself, he energizes according to the self-
motive nature of soul; but in answering he imitates the projecting energy of in-
tellect.. For he first comprehends the dogma in one word γέγονε, it was generated,
and proclaims the conclusion prior to the demonstration, directly after the
manner of those who energize enthusiastically. For these see the whole collec-
tively, and contract in intellect the end prior to the egress, perceiving all things at
once. But syllogizing, he descends from intellect to logical progressions, and
the investigation through demonstration of the nature of the world. Hence,
in a manner perfectly divine, he shows from the hypotheses the whole form of the
universe. For if the world is visible and tangible, and has a body, but that
which is visible and tangible, and has a body, ts sensible, and that which is sen-
sible is apprehended by opinion in conjunction with sense, and is generated, the
world therefore is generated. fence he shows this demonstratively from the de-
finition, according to a conversion’ of the definition ; since geometricians also use
demonstrations of this kind.* And thus much concerning the form of the words.
ΐ Since, however, as we have said, he asks whether the universe is eternal, or
has a certain principle of generation, he answers, if was generated From this,
therefore, itis evident that he gives a certain generation to the world: for this was
the other part of the before-mentioned opposition, — If, however, this be the case,
he establishes the universe remote from temporal generation ; for if the world has
a certain, and not every principle of generation, but that which is generated in
time has the principle of every generation, the world was not generated in
tume. Farther still, let us also consider the wonderful hypotheses of Atticus,
who says that what was moved in ἃ confused and disorderly manner is
unbegotten, but that the world was generated in’ time, and let us speak
concerning this assertion, “7 was generated.” | Since, therefore, Atticus
admits that there is a cause of generation, let us see what the nature of
this cause is according to him; for the world is visible and tangible.
Whether, therefore, was every thing sensible generated in time, or not every
thing? If indeed every thing, then that which was moved in a confused
and disorderly manner will be generated in time: for he says that this alsg

* For exirpoxny here, it is necessary to read exwrpogny.
> See this explained farther on.
1 Γέγονε is omitted here in the original,

ROOK 11. ὙΠ OF PLATO. 239

was visible. But if not every thing, then the reasoning of Atticus is unsyllo-
gistic and conclusive of nothing. Unless he should say, indeed, that the world 15
visible and tangible, but that what was moved in a confused and disorderly man-
ner, is not now visible, but was so prior to the fabrication of the world; since
Plato also speaks in this manner when he says, “ every such thing as was visible,
and was moved in a confused and disorderly manner.” But in the words before us he
says, “ for it is visible and tangible, and has a body.” He shows therefore that every
thing which is visible and tangible, was generated, but not that which was visible and
tangible. Though, therefore, these things should be asserted hy Atticus; for the
man is skilful in defending what he advances ; it must be said in answer to him,
that there is nothing of this kind in the definition of that which is generated, but it
is simply said, that every thing generated is the object of opinion in conjunction
with irrational sense. So thatif there is any thing which is entirely sensible, such
thing will be generated. But every thing visible is sensible; and therefore that
which is moved in a confused and disorderly manner, is generated. In addition
to which we may also say ‘that Plato calls this very disorderly thing itself
generated, For he says that prior to the generation of the world, there were \
three things, being, place and generation, subsisting in the vestiges of forms.
Hence that disorderly nature was generated, as well as that which is visible. It
is not proper therefore to say that it was unbegotten according to time, and that
the universe was generated ; but either both were generated according to Plato,
or both were unbegotten. For both are similarly said by him to be visible and | 4
generated. If however both were generated, the world prior to being gene-
rated such as it now is was changed into the confused: for to a contrary, the
generation is entirely from a contrary. And if he who made the world is
good, how is it possible he should not adapt it in a beautiful manner, or that
having beautifully adapted it, he should corrupt it? But if he is not good,
how not being good, did he make it to be arranged and adorned? For it is
the province of a good being to adorn and arrange other things. If, however, 7
being visible and generated, it is not generated according to time, it is not neces-
sary immediately to make the universe to be generated in time, because it is
visible and generated. And thus much against Atticus.

But let us recur to our principles, and discuss the affair as follows: Whether
is the world perpetual being, in the same maaner as the eternal, or is it not

tf

* For gws here, it is necessary to read payer,

440 PROCLUS ON THE [poox i.

eternal, but consubsistent with time? And whether is it self-subsistent, or
produced ἡ by another? Such then is the inquiry. But the answer is, that it
is produced by another, and is consubsistent with time. A thing of this kind
however, is generated. For if it has a composite form, it has a ceneration
according to the composition. And if it alone subsists from another cause,
it is generated, as not being itself productive of itself. If likewise it is not *
eternal, it has the whole of its hypostasis according to time. For it is fabricated on
account of another, and is generated as a flowing image of being. Hence, as
that which is composite is to that which is simple, and as time is to eternity, so
is generation to essence, Tf, therefore, a simple and uniform essence is eternal,
the essence which is composite, multiform, and conjoined with time, is generation,
For it is divinely said by Plato, that the world originated from a certain principle,
For thet which is generated ina portion of time began from a temporal, from a
producing, from a final, from a material, and from a formal cause. Lor since
principle is multifariously predicated that which was once generated has a begin-
ning of generation according to all these causes. The world however originated
from a certain, and not from every principle, What therefore is this principle ?
You must not say it is a temporal principle. Por that which originates from this
is also allotted the principle of generation from all the rest, But it onyinated
froin that principle, In which he afterwards instructs us, IT mean the most proper,
or the final principle. For it was generated on account of the good ; and this
is the principle from which its generation originated, He says therefore that this
is the most proper principle, so that this may be called the principle of the genera-
tion of the world. lence in the first place he shows that the world is generated
from its composition; forit is visible and tangible. Phese, therefore, are the extremes
of the universe. For heaven is visible, but earth is tangible, And visibility is in
earth so far as it participates of light; and tangibility in heaven, so far as a terres:
trial nature is antecedently comprehended in it according to cause, But the
world is simply {visible and tangible], ! and has a body in order that you may
also assume the middle plenitudes which it contains, And this again is asserted
by Plato conformably to the oracle, which says: /é ts an tnitation of intellect, but
that which is fabricated has somethings of body. So far, therefore, as the universe

* For rayoperoy here, read rapayoperoy.
* For μὲν here, itis requisite to read μη.
> The words oparoy καὶ axroy appear to me to be omitted ia this place,

BOOK 11. ΤΙ EUS OV PLATO. ΒΥ

has something corporeal, it is generated ; for according to this it is visible and
tanzible, But every thing visible and tangible, is sensible 5 for sense is touching and
secing. That however which is sensible is the object of opinion, as being mingled
from sensibles, and not able to preserve the purity of intelligible forms. But every
thing of this kind ts generated, as having a composite essence. ;

Plato, therefore, does not subvert the perpetuity of the universe, as some who
follow the Aristotelian hypotheses faney he does. And that this is true we may
easily learn from hence. | He says that time was generated together with the
heaven oY universe. If therefore time is perpetual, the universe also is perpetual.

πε if the universe had a temporal beginning, then time also had a temporal
beginning, which is of all things the most impossible." They say, however, that
time is twofold, the one disorderly, but the other proceeding according to number,
For motion is twofold, the one kind disorderly and confused, but the other
orderly and elegant. But there is a time * co-ordinate to each of these motions.
That a body, however, may be moved equably or anomalously is possible 5
but it is impossible to conceive an equable and anomalous time. For thus the
essence of time will be a composite. And why do 1 say this? For when the
motion is anomalous, time is equable. There are now, therefore, many motions 3
and some are switter, but others slower, and one is more equable than another ;
but there is one continued time -of all these, and which proceeds according to
number. Ehence itis not τι τ, thus to make a twofold time. If, however, time
is one and continued; ifindeed itis unbegotten, the universe also is unhegotten,
Which is consubsistent with time. But if it was generated, an absurdity will
follow 3 since time, in order that it may be generated, will be in want of time, and
this, though it does not yet exist. For when time was gencrated, time was
not yet.

Farther still, Plato conjoins the soul of the universe immediately on its being
generated, with body, and does not give to it life prior to the corporeal-formed
nature, but as soon as itis constituted incloses it in body. Moreover, he “says ‘
that soul ranks among beings that always exist. If, therefore, he makes body and
soul to be consubsistent, but soul always exists, according to him body also is
perpetual. Vor that which is at once consubsistent with the perpetual, is unbe-

' Instead of σι δε APXNY EXEL χρονικὴν, καὶ ο οὐρανὸς σρχην εξει XPorANY, in this place it seems to be
necessary toread, εἰ δε ovparos ἀρχὴν EXEL χρονικὴν, Καὶ ὁ ypovos ἀρχὴν eee χρονικην.
* For xpory here, it is requisite tu read ypovos.

Tim. Plat. Vou -: ae ἢ

242 PROUCLUS ON TIE {[Buok 11,

gotten. Again, Timwus here says, that the soul was generated ; but Socrates in
the Phadrus says, it is unbegotten, Hence, he after another manner calls that
eenerated, which is clearly unbesotten according to time, Farther still, he saye
that the world is incorruptible, which is also granted by those who oppose him,
But in the Republic he clearly asserts, or rather the Muses, that every thing we-
nerated is necessarily corrupted, assuming in this place generation according to
time. From these things, therefore, you may understand what Tsay: for the
world is thus demonstrated to be unbegotten, Por if the world is incorruptible,
hut nothing which is generated according to time is incerrupuble, the world ts
not generated aceording to time, What occasion 15 there, however, for these
syllogisms ? Por Plato in the Laws clearly says, Ghat tre ds infinite aecording to
the past, and thatin this infinity there have been myriads on ΔῊΝ εἰν of barren
and fertile periods of men. Por investigating the begin of a polity, from
which cites change into virtue and vice, he adds se! But you wall say, frou whence 2
7 indeed think from the length and infinity of time, and the mutations whiel take place
wna thing of this kind” Ov rather that we may argue from what ts tin our hands, a
little prior to this, we may hear him saying, that “where there is neither catreme heat
or cold, there the race of men aleays evivts more or icss numerous.” Bacit the race
of men always enists, the universe also is necessarily perpetual,

Again, therefore, if the Deuiuurgus ranks among eternal betigzs, he does not at
one time fabricate, and at another not. Por if he did, he would not have an in-

variable sameness of subsistence, and immutability. Βα εὐ he always fabricates,

that which is fabricated by him always exists. For why, being willinaly at rest

for an Infinite time, did he at leneth convert: himself to fabrication? Was it
because he apprehended it to be better? But was he, prior to this, tznorant that
itwas betteror not? Por itis absurd, betae intellect, that he should be ignorant;
since there will be about him both tooraice and hoowledge. Bat ithe ον this,
why did he not before begin to generate and produce the world? Numa it it
was better, why did he not persevere in this enerey, iit be lawful so to speak !
For it is not holy to conceive that, being intellect and al God, he would) pursue
that which os fess instead of that whieh is more beautiful Dt is necessary, how-
ever, to admit these things, Wf the world is generated according to ime, and is net
consubsistent with the infinity of time. Those also appear to me to sin against

V Instead of ἀλλὰ ry ἀπειρίᾳ tou κυσμον συνηλεστων ait this place, it is necessary to read «ἀλλὰ μὴ τῇ
απειρίᾷτου KPUdUU GUM OTWS.

nook χε] ΓΜ ΠΝ OF PLATO, 243

the Deminrgus of the world, in another way, who say that the world once was
not. For if it once was not, there was a time in which the Demiurgus did not
make it. For that which is made, and that which makes, subsist together. But
if there was atime in which he did not make, he was then a maker in capacity.
And if he was in eapacity, he was imperfect, and afterwards perfect when he
made. Tf, however, there is prior and posterior about him, itis evident that he
docs not belong to natures which energize eternally ; but that he passes from not
making aceording to tine, to making. Moreover, he produces time. How
therefore having an energy which is in want of tine, does he produce it through
this energy?) For he once produced tine, of which he is indigent, in’ order
that by his eflective energy he may produce time. This, therefore, cannot be
otherwise.

After this opinion, however, let us direct our attention to Severus, who says
that the world stmply considered is indeed perpetual, but that this which now
exists, and is thus moved, was eenerated. For there are twofold circulations,
as the Elean euest has shown; one of whichis that which the universe now cir-
cumvolves, but the other the contrary to it. The world therefore is cenerated,
and originated from ἃ eertain principle, which is) the eause of this cireulation.
Bat supply considered itis net generated. This interpretation, however, we shall
oppose, by observing, that itis net proper to transfer fabulous enigmas to phy-
Siology. For how is it possible that the soul which moves the universe, should
be weary, and change the ancient circulation? [Tow also is the universe pertect,
and suflictent to itsclf fit desires mutation? Pow ean there be an alternate change
of circulations, when both that whichis moved, and that which moves, preserve their
proper hab? And bow does Timiens say, that the circulation of the nature which is
characterized by sameness, is moved to the right hand, according to the demiurgie
will, but that which is characterized by ditlerence, to the left hand ? Por ifit is neces-
sary that the works of the Deminrgns should remain invariably the same, and be
perpetnal, iis likewise necessary that the circulations should be always the same ;
and that the period characterized by sameness should be moved to the right hand,
bat that which is characterized by diderence, to the left.” For they proceeded at
one and the same time from the Demiurgus, and were allotted this circulation.
Barther sull, is id not necessary, that inequability must thus be mtroduced to the

' The words την de θάτερον ex’ apecrepa, are omitted ia the original, but evidently ought to be inserted

in this place,

244 PROCLUsS ON ΤῊΣ

[took 1,

motion of the universe’ For every thing which is about to cease from its former
motion, and to pass on to another, hastens to the contrary, Le. to rest, and causes
the precedaneous motion to waste away. For if it continued tived in the same
energy, What Is the cause of the second circulation?" By no means, therefore, are
these interpretations which are not physical to be admitted. Nor again, must
such explanations be adopted, though they are more rational, as those which
asenibe generation to the world, mm conception only, Por thus we may also infer
according to conception, aud not according to truth, that there isa Demiurgus of
the universe. Por from admitting that the world was generated, it is demonstrated
that there is a producing and demiurgic eause of it. Orit may be said, that the
universe is admitted to be generated * for the sake of perspicuity, and the doctrinal
method, in order that we may Jearn what the numerous goods are, of which it
participates, from the demiurgic providence. Por this is mdeed ina certain respect
true, yet is not sufficient to the theory of Plato. Por the perspreaous, says
Tamblichus, is venerable, when itis adapted to scienee. Por admittines also that
the universe is perpetual, it is possible to point out the goods imparted to it by
the Gods. And thus much tn opposition to these interpretitrons,

Again, however, let us show from the beginning, after what manner the universe
is said to be generated. Por itis neither so according to ὅπ τὸ, through the before
mentioned arguments, nor simply because it proceeds froma eause ; since itis not
sufficient to say this, Por intellect also ts from: the first eause, and all things
after (he one are froma cause, ΜΟῚ 41} things are not generated, Por where does
the eternal subsist, fall: things are generated? Por the one is prior to eternity,
After what manner therefore, ttmay be said, is the universe generated) As that
which now is always becoming to be, and at the same tine always was becoming
to be, or rising into existence. For itis not that whieh ts partial Body there.
fore, (i. e. partial body) is not only generated, but there is also a time when it was
generated. But the whole world alone subsists in becoming to be, and is not at
the same time that which was generated. Ttis also according to Aristotle always
in the end, the always being temporal, according to temporal infinity, Por as
the solar-form light: proceeds from its) proper fountain, thus also the world is
always venerated, and always produced, and is always becoming to be, and at the

Pap is omitted in this ploee; aod the sentence ought to be interrogative, Hence instead of
τι τὴν QUTNS COTWS ε!εέργείιν, TEs HITE Τὴν δέντεμαν avususrrdews, We ust read ἐπὶ γαρ TYS αὐτὴν ἐστων

crepyeas «XN. with ἃ note of interrogation at theeud.,

* After uredero re saz here, the word σεν τον must be supplied.

rook αι] TIMZUS OF PLATO. 245

same time always was so, Asa composite likewise itis generated. For all |
Composition is ceaeration. But if is always composed, it Was always becoming ᾿
to be, with which to be generated conears. And it appears τὸ me that Plate
Knowing this, says ἐδ weas generated instead of it is generated, just as of [real] being,
hesavs it was, instead of itis: for his words are“ whether it aleays was.” Sor as
in the intelligible, the was and is are the same ; for all things are there accord. /
Ing to sameness, since all things are in dhe now, which is more mpartible than
the now which is according to time; thas also iis generated and it was generated
proceed to the same thing inevery sensible nature. For it was generated, as that
Which always was becoming to be,and as generated, itis. But that a thing
generated, when it is assumed aceording to a certain time, does not indicate
that which is simply a composite, is evident: from its opposite. For to. this
Plato opposes perpetual being. Tf therefore, perpetual being manifests that which
is simple, we must say that what is alone a composite is generated. Bat if eternal
heme siguified that which is always according to time, that which is originating
trom ἃ certam thing, would be said to be becoming to be. For that which is
cenerated is not opposed to the eternal, so far as itis cenerated, but) so far as it
participates of time; on which account also it iss generated. That perpetual
being, however, [er that which alw avs is,} manifests the eternal, is evident ; since
the Deminrgus also who produces time, is called perpetual being, and the para-
digm likewise is thus denominated. Hence, it: sicnifies an eternal hypostasis,
and not that which participates of temporal perpetuity.

Some one, however, who acnnowledges this ay nevertheless doubt, why we
have before καὶ that the world is generated, from having a body? For as there
are in ita body, which is alone generated, a divine soul, which always is, and a
divine intellect prior to this, why do we say that it is generated on account of its
body, and not denominate it unbegotten, on account of its soul, or its intellect?
tis said, therefore, that the whole world is every where characterized from form,
and not from the subject nature. For do we not call Socrates mortal, though he
has an immortal soul, because the animal which is in him is mortal? If, however,
you say that we now consider the corporeal-formed nature of the universe, not
yet co-arranged with sont, you will speak richtly. Bat when vou see it animated
and endued with intellect, vou may eall ita God. Por thus Plato in the Repub-
lie calls it a divine generated thing, But inthis dialogue, he thinks fit to denomi-
nate the world, a blessed God. In the very words also before us, he ina
sreater degree celebrates the universe. For as he is about to call that which is

Ϊ
H
Ϊ
Ϊ
5

\

\ 7
\

ri

if

246 PROCLUS ON THE (Book It.

unbegotten [viz. soul] generated, though he attributes an unbegotten subsistence
to eternal natures, thus also he calls the world generated. For it is not when
denominated generated, diminished by a juataposition with the eternal, He
likewise conjoins the becoming to be of it, with if was generated ; in order that
as all or the universe, he may evince that it is perfect and being, but as having
its essence in time, that it is generated. Te likewise assigns to it the principle
ofa certainand not of all generation. And according to its corporeal-formed
nature, he calls it, generation, omitting the divine powers in it, through which it
is happy, and ts called a God.

Moreover, the demonstration is worthy of admiration, viz. how. scientifically
it proceeds from the definition. Llence also, he mverts the order. For inthe
hypotheses indeed, he defined that which is generated to be the objcet of opinion
butte the demonstration of that which is generated, he assures the converse, in
order that he may make the definition to be the middle term, as in demonstra-
tions is perfectly requisite. Por this will cause what ts said to be traly a demon-
stration, For opinion through ' possessing the reasons of generated natures,
introduces the order of eauses with reference to them. Elence itappears to me
that Plato is not satistied with the term sensible ma order to demonstrate that the
world is generated, but adds also that what is sensible is the object of opinion 5
since sense indeed knows the energy of sensibles, in consequence of suffering
by them, but opinion knows also. their essences. Por itantecedently compre-
hends the reasons of them. In order, therefore, that he might evince the esscnce
of sensibles to be generated, he forms lis demonstration from that which ts the
object ofopinton, Farther stu, lis not adding that which ts destructible to that
which is venerated, shows his reverential Conceptions of the world; though it ds
in a certain respect trae that the world is destructible, as we dave before said.
At the sume time, this exhibits tous the caution and reverence of Plato: for
having that which is consequent [τὸ the being generated], vet he does not add
it; which he ought to admire who thinks that the world was generated according
to Plato in time. Por this generated natare which he calls the object of opinion,
isat the same time destructible ; but the world is not cestructible at) the same
time that itis generated. Hence the world is both destructible and ticerraptuble,
yet the philosopher does not call it both these according to the same; for this
would be ridiculous ; but he calls it incorruptible, in the same manner as unbe-

gotten, according to time, For if that which ts gencrated according to time,

"Instead of ἡ yap Sofa ra τοὺς Auzous execw τῶν yeryrwy in this place, itis necessary to read y yap

toga τῷ rovs Noyors KA.

Look wd TIMAUS OF PLATO. 247

is corraptible, as atts said to be in the Republie, that which is incorruptible is
unbezetten, But ie work! is destructiile, as net bein abl to connect its fo For
ws that whieh ts corporeal so faras pertains τὸ itselfis alteramotive, or maved hy
another, thus also so faras pertains to itself itis destructible, in consequence of
hong connected by something else. Por no body is either generative or connec.
live of itself; since every thing which generates, makes; but every thing which
mahes is ineorporeal. For though it should be a body, yet it makes by incorporeal
powers. Every thing, therefore, which generates is incorporeal ; and every. thing
which connects, is efective of a certain thing, viz. it is efleetive of union, and the
undissipated. Bat every thing which is effective is impartible. Every thing there-
fore connective is impartible. Henee itis impossible for that which connects
itself to bea body. Poritis not the province of body to connects; since so. far
as itis body, tis partible, as itis said in the Sophista against those who assert
that all things are bodies, Bat that which connects is inpartible, Tf however,
that whieh is connected is body, but that which couneets is imeerporeal, body
is not itself connective of itself Hence that whieh is connected by itse:f is neces-
sarily impartble. As therefore body has in its own nature a tinite power, so
likewise iis inits own nature destructible, not as being adapted to corruption,
but as not naturally capable of preserving itself, nor as corruptible in’ capacity,
that vou may also investigate the corruptible in energy, but as incapable of im-
partiig Incorruptibility to itself.

Whence, therefore, has it the perpetual, and whenee does it receive intinite
power? We reply, from its producing cause. For as it is moved from thence, so
likewise it is generated from thence, and is always generated, Por every thing
which is generated fren an immoveable cause, is allotted a never-failing nature, as
also the damontacal Aristotle says 5 so that according to this reasoning likewise,
the world will have the perpetual proceeding from the immoveable (i. e. from the
intellectual) fabrication, Since, however, according to its own proper nature it is
senerated, it is always generated from the father, But since the world being all
anda whele, is not imperfect, in addition to being generated, or beconune to be,
it always Was generaied, since, likewise, the motion of itis always in the end, as
Aristotle says. Much more, therefore, is the essential gener. Gon of italways in
the end, imitating the perfection of its maker. So Mat it is always generated, and
always was generated ; not receiving’ at once the whole infinity of the generative

ΛῊ is pecessary here to supply μη δέχομένοι.

248 PROCLUS ON TIE [Book i.

power of its Maker, but always according to the now possessing the ability of existing
from this power, and receiving something from it, according to the instantaneous
participation of infinity. And it receives the same infinity, indeed, on account of
that which is imparted, but on its own account is not able to receive the same at
ence. After this manner, therefore, the perpetuity of the world remains, and the
weneration of it takes place ; and in this respect the before mentioned men {i. ὁ.
Plato and Aristotle} are not at variance. At the same tine, however, they differ,
because Plato says, that the essence of the universe is co-extended with all time,
but Aristotle supposes that it simply always exists, infers this to be necessary
through many arguments, and ascribes to it temporal infinity, asserting at the
same time that eternity is stable infinite power. He likewise demonstrates that
no infinite power whatever can be present with a finite body, Hence it follows,
that the world being corporeal always receives infinite power, but never tras the
whole of it, because it is finite, [tis therefore alone trae to say, that from intimnite
power itis generated, but ay not, infinitely, But if itis eenerated, It receives
infinity on account of infinite time. ΕῸΓ fo be infinite pertains alone to that which
is eternal; but a gene raced infinite belongs to that w hichis temporal; for generation
is conjoined with time. Hence Aristotle himself is compelled to acknowledge that
the world is in a certain respect generated,

Both likewise assert that itis the same in number, but) Plato conformably to
principles, says that it is venerated. Por he established: prior to the universe a
producing cause, from which he gives subsistence to the universe. But Aristotle
does not admit that any eternal nature is an effective cause. And the former,
indeed, generates time together with the essence of the universe, but the latter
together with motion: for time according to him is that which is numbered.
Aristotle, however, is accustomed to do this in his other Preatises. Lor such
things as Plato asserts of the ove, Aristotle ascribes to intellect,’ viz. the non-
possession of multitude, the desirable, the having no intellectual perception of
secondary natures. But such things as Plato attributes to the demiurgic intellect,
Aristotle ascribes to the heavens, and the celestial Gods: for according to hin,
falrication and providence are from these. Such things also as Plato ascribes
to the essence of the heavens, Aristotle attributes to their circular motiun; departing
indeed from theological principles, but dwelling more than is fit on physical

* Aristotle in his metaphysical discussions ascends no higher than intelligible intellect, which is with

him the first cause. And perhaps this was in consequence of knowing that all beyond this intellect is

truly ineffable.

BOOK 11,} TIMAUS OF PLATO. 249

productive powers.’ Since, however, the demoniacal Aristotle is very copious in
discussing the reciprocations of the generated with reference to the corruptible, and
of the unbegotten with reference to the incorruptible, he must be reminded, that
Plato much prior to him assents to these axioms; in the Republic indeed asserting
that corruption follows every thing which is generated; but in the Phadrus, that the
unbegotten is also incorruptible. How is it possible, therefore, since Plato gives
generation to the universe, that he should not also introduce corruption to it;
or that corrupting that which is moved in a confused and disorderly manner, he
should not give generation to it prior to corruption? The generation of the
universe, therefore, was devised by him after a manner different [from its apparent

meaning].

* But we say that whatever is generated, is necessarily generated bv a
eS ᾽ ~ 5 -

certain cause.”

The discussion accords with the hypotheses, or rather with the order of the
things from which the hypotheses are assumed. Tor as every where form is
suspended from the effective cause, so likewise, the first hypotheses are in conti-
nuity with the second, and afford a principle to the demonstrations which are
consequent to them. For since it was demonstrated according to the first hypo-
thesis, that the world was generated, through the object of opinion as a medium,
afterwards that which is consequent to this is demonstrated according to the
second hypothesis, viz. that it was generated by a cause. For it the world is a
thing generated, or becoming to be, but every thing generated is generated by a
certain cause, hence the world was necessarily generated by a certain cause.
What therefore is the producing cause of the universe? That from which the
being generated is present to the world, For it is necessary to investigate this
immediately after the present demonstration. And we shall see as we proceed,
what kind of arguments Plato uses on this subject.

Now, however, let us briefly recall to our memory, [the reasoning by which it
is shown] that every thing which is generated, is necessarily generated by a cer-
(ain cause. Every thing gencrated, therefore, is in its own nature imperfect. But
being imperfect, it is not naturally adapted to perfect itself; since neither is any
other imperfect thing. For every thing which is perfected, is perfected from that

* This is because he discussed metaphysics physically, justas Plato discussed physics metaphysically.
Tim. Plat. Vou. I. 21

250 PROCLUS ON THE [BooK 1).

which is in energy. Bat that which is in energy is perfect; so that every thing
which perfects another ἐμ always when it perfeetein energy! according to that form
to which it gives perfection). ‘Phat however, Which ix generated, so far us it is
venerated, is imperfect. Hence that which is generated, so far as it is generated
is not naturally adapted to perfect another thing, But if it cannot perfect another
thing, much more is it incapable of perfecting itself Phe latter, therefore, is ἃ
vreater undertaking than the former, Por that which perfects itself, is also) per-
fective of another thing.’ Butifitis not perfected by itself, it is evident that itis
perfected by another. For how will it be generated, unless it is perfected ?

Again, therefore, it must be said, the world is generated, But every thing

which is generated being imperfeet, is either perfected: by another thing, or by
itself. Hence every thing which is generated, is either perfected by another, or
hy itself. But it is not perfected by itsell. It is therefore perfected by another,
so that it is generated by a certain cause. Farther still, the world 15. a composite,
and has its hypostasis from dissimilars. But if itis a composite, itis either com-
posed by itself, or by another, For it is, necessary that composition should be
from a eause, unless we intend to make it an accidental thing, and froin chance,
If therefore it is composed by itself, again it will perfect itself, and give subsis-
tence to itself, and we shall ignorantly transfer it to an incorporeal essence. Vor
how will it compose itself? Will it be from the parts arranging themselves? But
thus we shall make bodies to be self-motive. Or will it be from impelling each
other? And what in this case is that which primarily moves them, And how is
itholy to commit the whole world to such like impulsions and contrivances ?
How likewise will there be order from things deprived of order, and ornament
from things unadorned? For every where that which makes is better than its
effect, and that which generates, than the thing generated. And if indeed the
parts are the material causes of the composition of the world, what ' αἰ which
made them? For this is what we investigate. Buatif they are the eflicient causes,
how is it possible that thingsunadorned ean be eflective of things that are adorned,
and disorderly natures, of such as have order and arrangement? Tf however the
world is not composed by itself, it is evident that it has this composition: from
another. Hence if the world is a composite,’ but that which isa COMposile is

. ν
* Tustead of ἀεὶ ον ἐστι ἴῃ this place, we should doubtless read ἀεὶ εὐ ἐργεια ἐστι.
τ Instead of τὸ yap εαυτίν τελειωτίκον cor, which is evidently defective, it seems requisite to read
ro yap ἐαντὸ τελειοῦν, saca\Xov re λειωζίκον ἐστι».

"δ υθετον is omitted inthe original,

noox τι TIMEUS OF PLATO. 251

composed by a certain cause, the world therefore has its generation from a cause.
Hence too, trom these things it is manifest, that what is generated, is generated
by a certain cause.

It is not however wonderful, if Plato calls the cause of every thing generated,
_ acertain cause. For the cause of all things, is stmply cause, and not ἃ certain
cause ; concerning which he also says, that it is the cause of all beautiful things.
For itis simply God. Butevery divinity posterior to it is @ certain God, as for
instance, demiurgic or vivific. The cause therefore of generated natures is a cer-
tain cause, as differing from the cause ofall. Hence, he says, that what is gene-
rated, 15 generated by a certain cause. It is also well that Plato says one’ cause
precedes the whole of generation, For multitude is co-arranged about one prin-
ciple, and the many unities about the one. But with respect to other physiologists,
some rank cause with con-causes; others recur to physical powers; others to
dispersed infinite principles; others to‘ nature ; and others to soul. Plato, how
ever, dismisses indeed these causes, but supposes that there is one cause which
is the first of all causes. For with this cause, the psychical order indeed co-ope-
rates, but nature is ministrant to it, and all con-causes are subservient to it, and
are moved conformably to its will, Because, therefore, the demiurgic monad pre-
cedes multitude, he denominates this monad a cause: for this is significant of
unity. Because, however, it has not the first order among causes, nor is impar-
ticipable,” he adds the word certain. So that the words “ by a certain cause,”
have the same signification as, by one cause indced, yet not the first cause. Hence,
neither is it reasonable immediately to produce that which is generated, but that
which is eternal, from éhe one ; in order that from the one, which is prior to eternity,
every eternal nature may proceed ; but from an eternal nature, that which is gene-
rated and temporal. And that selfsubsistent natures likewise may proceed from
that which is superior to beings that produce themselves; but from these, those
that are generated by others, Vor the series and order of things which proceed
from the one, is continued; and things nearer to the principle, give subsistence
to such as are more remote from it.

“Tt is difficult, therefore, to discover the maker and father of this uni-
verse, and when found, it is impossible to speak of him to all men.”
* For we here, itis requisite to read εἰς

* The demiurgic monad, (i.e. Jupiter or the Demiurgus,) is not imparticipable because it immedi-
ately illuminates, or is con-subsistent with, intellectual intellect. See the 6th Book of my Translation

of Proclus on the theology of Plato.

252 PROCLUS ON THE [pook νυ".

It has been rightly observed by some prior to us, that Plato having shown that
the world was generated by a cause, immediately after ascends to the God who is
the Demiurgus of it, in a manner worthy of his intellectual conceptions, Vor it
seems that the artificial nature of the progeny, introduces a rational and divine
cause, and not accident or chance, which are neither causes, nor have an hypo-
static power, nor in short, sustain the well-ordered progression of beings. [1 is
requisite, however, that we should first examine the words themselves, and after-
wards thus recur to the whole theory.

Father and maker therefore, differ from) each other, so far as the former is the
cause of matter,: but the latter of the world and order, and in short, of the formal
cause; and so far indeed as the former is the supplier of bem and union, but
the latter of powers and a multiforn essence 5 anid so far ax the one stably contains
all things in himself, but the other is the eause of progression and veneration ; and
so far as the former signifies ineffable and divine providence, but the Tatter an
abundant communication of productive principles. Porphyry however says,
that father is he who generates the universe from himself, but maker he who
receives the matter of it from another. Hence Aristo indeed, is said to be the father
of Plato, but the builder of a house is the maker or fabricator of it, as not him-
self generating the matter of which it consists. If however, this is true, there
was no occasion to call the Demiurgus father, because, according to Timwus, he
does not give subsistence to matter. Is not the demiurgus therefore, rather the
maker as producing form? For we call all those makers who produce any thing
from a non-existent state into existence, But so far as the Demiurgus produces
that which he produces, in conjunction with life, he is father. Tor fathers are
the causes of animals, and of certain living beings, and impart seed together with
life. And thus much concerning this particular.

But “ this universe” signifies indeed, the corporeal masses, and the whole
spheres [of which it consists] and the plenitudes of each. It also signifies the
vital and intellectual powers, which ride as it were in the corporeal masses. It
also comprehends all the mundane causes * and the whole divinity of the world,
about which the number of the mundane Gods proceeds ; likewise, the one di-
vinity, the divine soul, and the whole bulk of the world, together with the divine,

' For o\ns here, it is necessary to read vAys, because matter according to Plato proceeds from the
father Phanes, or animal itself, and not from the Demiurgus.

* For avrovs, it is vecessary to read αἰτίας.

ποοκ 11.]} TIMA:US OF PLATO. 253

intellectual, psychical, and corporeal-formed number that is conjoined with the
world, For every monad has a multitude co-ordinate to itself. All these there-
fore must be assumed for the wuiverse ; since it signifies all these. Perhaps like-
wise the addition of the pronoun ¢his, is significant of the universe being ina
certain respect sensible and partial. For the intelligible universe is not ¢his, be-
cause it is comprehensive of all intellectual forms. But the term this is adapted to
the visible universe which is allotted a sensible and material nature. It is ditticult
therefore, as Plato says, to discover the Demiurgus of this universe. For since
with respect to discovery one kind proceeds scientifically from such things as are
first,’ but another journeys on from things of a secondary nature, according to
reminiscence ; the discovery from such things as are first may be said to be
dificult, because the invention of the intermediate powers, pertains to the high-
est theory. But the discovery from such things as are secondary, is nearly more
ditficult than the former. For if we intend from these to survey the essence of
the Demiurgus, and his other powers, it is necessary that we should have beheld
all the nature of the things generated by him, all the visible parts of the world,
and the nnapparent natural powers which it contains, according to which the
sympathy and antipathy of the parts in the world subsist. Prior to these also,
we must have surveyed the stable physical reasons, and natures themselves,
both the more total and the more partial,* and again, the immaterial and material,
the divine and diaemoniacal, and the natures of mortal animals. And farther still,
the genera which are under life, the perpetual and the mortal, the undefiled and
the material, such as are wholes, and sach as are parts, the rational and the irra-
tional, and the prerogatives which are superior to ours, through which every thing
between the Gods and the mortal nature are bound together. We must likewise
have beheld the all-various souls, the diflerent numbers of Gods according to the
diflerent parts of the universe, and the ineffable and effable impressions of the
world through which it is conjoined with the father. For he who without having
seen these is impelled to the survey of the Demiurgus, is more imperfect than is
requisite to the intellectual perception of the father. But it is not lawful for any
thing imperfect to be conjoined with that which is all-perfect.

Moreover, it is necessary,’ that the soul becoming an intellectual world, and
being assimilated as much as possible to the whole intelligible world, should in-

* viz. From axioms and definitions.
* Meptcwrepas is omitted in the original.
Ὁ For δη here, it is requisite to read bec.

254 PROCLUS ON THE (Boon 11.

trofuce herself to the maker of the universe ; and from this introduction, should
in a certain respect become familiar with him through a continued intellectual
energy. For uninterrupted energy about any thing, calls forth and resuscitates
our (dormant) ideas. But through this familiarity, becoming stationed at the
door of the father, it is necessary that we should be united to him. For dis-
covery is this, to meet with him, to be united to him, to associate alone with the
alone, and to see him himself, the soul hastily withdrawing herself from every other
energy to him. For being present with her father, she then considers scientific
discussions to be but words,’ banquets together with him on the truth of real be-
ing, and in pure splendor is purely initiated in entire and stable visions. Such
therefore is the discovery of the father, not that which is doxastic ; for this is du-
bious, and not very remote from the irrational life. Neither ts it scientific ; for
this is syllogistic and composite, and does not come into contact with the intel-
lectual essence of the intellectual Demiurgus. But it is that which subsists
according to intellectual vision itself, acontact with the intelligible, and a union
with the demiurgic intellect. For this may properly be denominated difficult,
either as hard to obtain, presenting itself to souls after every evolution of life; or
as the true labour of souls. For after the wandering about generation, after pu-
rification, and the light of science, intellectual energy and the intellect which is
in us shine forth, placing the sonl in the father as ina port, purely establishing
her in demiurgic intellections, and conjoining hight with light, not such as that of
science, but more beautiful, more intellectual, and partaking more of the nature
of the onethan this. For this is the paternal port," and the discovery of the father,
viz. an undefiled union with him.

* This is in consequence of a union with the Demiurgus beiug so much superior to scientific per-
ception.

* Proclus here alludes to the fabulous wanderings of Ulysses in the Odyssey. Por Homer by these
oecultly indicates the life of a man who passes ina regular manner from a sensible to ao intellectual
life, and who being throughly purified by the excrcise of the cathartic virtues, is at length able to
energize according to the intuitive perception of intellect, and thus after becoming re-united to Penelope
or Philosophy, meets with and embraces his father. This appears also to have been the opinion af tbe
Pythagorean Numenius, as we are informed by Porphyry in his treatise De Antro Nympharuin, “ΤῸ
he thought that the persou of Ulysses in the Odyssey represented to us a man who passes in a regular
maoner over the dark and stormy sea of generation; and thus at Jength arrives at that region (ἡ. ἐν the
intellectual region) where temmpests and seas are unknown, and finds a nation

“Who ne'er knew salt, or heard the billows roar.’”

See more onthis subject in my Restoration of the Platonic Theology, p. 294.

Rook 11.} TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 255

But to say “ thatwhen found it ts impossible to speak of him to all men,”* perhaps
indicates the custom of the Pythagoreans, who had arcane assertions about divine
natures, and did not divulge them to all men. For as the Elean guest says, the
eyes of the multitude are not strong enough to look to truth. Perhaps also this
may be said which is much more venerable, that it is impossible for him who has
discovered the maker and father of the universe to speak of him to certain persons
such ashe has seen him. For the discovery was not made by the soul speaking,
bat closing her eyes, and being converted,” to the divine light. Nor was it made
by her being moved with her own proper motion, but through being silent with
a silence which leads the way (to union}. For since the essence of other things
is not naturally adapted tobe spoken of, either through a name, or through definition,
orthrough science, butis seen through intellection alone, as Plato saysin his Epistles,
inwhat other way can itbe possible to discover the essence of the Demiurgus, than
by intellectual energy? And how when having thus found it, is it possible to tell
whatis seen, and explain it to others, through nouns and verbs? For the evolu-
tion which is conversant with composition, cannot exhibit a uniform and simple
nature, What then, some one may say, do we not assert many things about the
Demiurgus, and about the other Gods, and even of the one ilself? To this we
reply, we speak indeed about them, but we do not speak of cach of them itself.
And we are able indeed to speak scientifically of them, but not intellectually. For
this, as we have before observed, is to discover them. But if the discovery is a
silence of the soul, how can speech flowing through the mouth, be sufficient to
lead that which is discovered into light. ᾿

After these things, therefore, let us, following the light of science, survey who the
Demiurgus is, and to what order of beings he belongs. For different philosophers
among the ancients were led to different opinions on this subject. For Numenius,
indeed, celebrating three Gods, calls the first father, but the second maker, and
the third that which is made, For the world according to him is the third God.
So that with him the Demiurgus is two-fold, viz. the first and the second Goud,
and that which is fabricated is the third God. For itis better to say this, than’
to say as he does speaking tragically, grandfather, ofispring, nephew. He how-

* For μηδε evpovra δυνατα δυνατον εἰναι λέγειν it is necessary to read, μηδε evporra εἰς axarras
δυνατον, κι ἃ. ;

* For axcorpayperns, it is requisite to read extorpapiperns.

Ὁ It is necessary here to supply i.

256 PROCLUS ON THE (Boox 1,

ever, who asserts these things, in the first place does not nghtly con-numerate the
good with these other causes. For it is not naturally adapted to be conjoined
with certain things, nor has it an order secondary to another. But father with
Plato {in the text] is arranged as the second to maker, Farther still, Numenius
co-arranges that which is exempt, ' from all habitude, with the natures that are
under and posterior to it. It is necessary, however, to refer these indeed to the
first, but to take away from it all habitude. Neither therefore, is the paternal
nature of the maker* adapted to the first. For these things’ are apparent in the
orders of Gods posterior to it. In the third place; it is not right to divide father
and maker, since Plato celebrates one and the same God by both these names.
For one divine fabrication, and one maker and father, are every where delivered
by Plato. And by following names, to divulse the one cause fof the world,] is
just as if some one, because Plato calls the universe both heaven and the world,
should say there are two fabrications, the one heaven, and the other the world;
just as here, Numenius says there is a two-fold demiurgic God, the one father, but
the other maker.

With respect to Harpocration, it would be wonderful, if he were consistent
with himself, in determining things of this kind about the Demiurgus, For this
man is inconsistent in what he says according to the doctrine of three Gods and
so far as he makes the Demiurgus to be two-fold. For he calls the first God,
Heaven and Saturn, the second, Dia and Zena, and the third, Heaven and the
World. But again changing the order he calls the first God Dia, and the king
of the intelligible; but he denominates the second God, the ruler, and the same
divinity, is with him Jupiter, Saturn, and Heaven. The first God therefore, 1s
all these; from whom Parmenides takes away all things, every name, all lan-
guage, and all habitude. And we, indeed, cannot endure to call the first God
even father; but he denominates him father, and offspring, and the offspring
of an offspring.

But Atticus, the preceptor of Harpocration, immediately makes the Demiurgus
to be the same with the good, though the Demiurgus is called good by Plato, but
not the good. He is also denominated by him intellect, but he says that the good

* For efnprnyevoy in this place, itis requisite to read εξηρημενον.

* Instead of παντος here, the sense evideotly requires that we should read ποιητὸν.

* Father and maker are first apparent in the intelligible and intellectual, and afterwards iu the other
orders of Gods.

Book 11. TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 257 —

is the cause of all essence, and is beyond being, as we may learn in the Republic.
What then will Atticus say concerning the paradigm? For it is either prior to the
Demiurgus, and in this case, there will be something more ancient and honorable
than the good; or itis in the Demiurgus, and the first God will be many things ;
or it is posterior to the Demiurgus, and thus the good, which it is not lawful to
assert, will be converted to things posterior to itself, and = will intellectually
perceive them.

After these men, Plotinus the philosopher, asserts that there is a twofold
Demiurgus, one in the intelligible world, but the other the leader and ruler of the
universe. And he says rightly. For the mundane intellect is in a certain
respect the Demiurgus of the universe. And Aristotle shows that this is the first
God, denominates it Fate, and calls it by the name of Jupiter. But again, there
is an exempt father and maker, which Plotinus places in the intelligible, calling
every thing between ἐδ one and the world, the intelligible. For there, accord-
ing to him, the true heaven, the king of Saturn, and the Jovian intellect
subsist. Just as if some one should say, that the spheres of Saturn, Jupiter, and
Mars, are in the heavens. For the whole intelligible is one many, and is one
intellect comprehensive of many intelligibles. Plotinus therefore philosophizing
asserts these things,

Amelius, however, makes a threefold Demiurgus, three intellects, and three
kings, one being him that exists, another him that possesses, and the third him
that sees. But these differ, because the first intellect, indeed, is tru/y that which
itis. The second, is the intelligible which is in it, but has the intelligible prior
to itself, participates entirely of it, and on this account is the second intellect.
But the third, is also the intelligible which it contains ; for every intellect is the
same with its conjoined intelligible; but it possesses the intelligible which is in
the second, and sees the first intellect. For by how inuch greater the interval
is, by so much the more obscure is that which is possessed. He supposes, there-
fore, that there are these three intellects and Demiurgi, and says that with Plato
there are three kings, and with Orpheus also three, Phanes, Heaven, and Saturn.
And he who, according to him, is especially the Demiurgus, is Phanes. It is
worth while, therefore, to observe to him, that every where Plato is accustomed
to recur from multitude to the unities, from which the order in the many proceeds,
Or rather, prior to Plato, unity always precedes multitude according to the
arrangement itself of things. And every divine order originates from a monad. .
For it is necessary, indeed, that divine number should proceed from the triad ;

Tim. Plat. Vou... I. 2K

458 PROCLUS ON THE [soon 11,

but the monad is prior to the triad. Where, therefore, is the demiurgic monad, in
order that the triad may procced from it? How likewise is the world one, unless
it was fabricated by one cause? For it is by a much greater priority necessary
that the cause itselfshould be united, and be monadic, in order that the world may
become only begotten. Let there then be three Demiurgi; but who is the one
Demiurgus prior to the three? For no one of the divine orders originates from
multitude. Farther still, if the paradigm is one, and the world is one, how is
it possible that there should not also be one Demiurgus prior to the many, who
looks indeed to the one paradigm, but makes the world to be only begotten ?
Hence, it is not proper that the demiurgic number should originate from a triad,
but from a monad.

After Amelius, Porphyry thinking to accord with Plotinus, calls the super-
mundane soul the Demiurgus, but the intellect of it to which it ix, converted,
animal itself, so as to be according to him the paradigm ofthe Demiurgus; whom
itis worth while to ask, in which of his writings Plotinus makes soul to be the
Demiurgus. How, likewise, is this conformable to Plato, who continually deno-
minates the Demiurgus a God and intellect, but never calls him soul? ILow also
does he call the world a God? How does the Demiurgus proceed through all
mundane natures? For all things do not participate of soul, but all things
partake of the demiurgic providence, And divine production, indeed, Is able to
generate intellect and Gods, but soul is not naturally adapted to produce any thing
above the psychical order. 1 omit to say that this very thing itself requires much
confirmation, whether Plato knew that there is a certain imparticipable® soul.

In the next place, therefore, the divine Jamblichus has written much against
the opinion of Porphyry, and has subverted it as being Plotinian; but delivering
his own theology, he calls the whole intelligible world the Demiurgus; so that
from what has been said, it is evident that he asserts the same thing as Plotinus,—
He says, therefore, in his Commentaries, ** Thus we call that which is truly cause,
and the principle of generated natures, and the intelligible paradigms of the
world, the intelligible world. Such causes, likewise, as we admit to have an
existence prior to all things in nature, these, the demiurgic God, whom we now
investigate, comprehending in one, possesses inhimself.” If, therefore, in what
is here said, he intends to signify that in the Demiurgus all things subsist demiur-

+ i.e. A soul which is not consubsisteut with body.

BOOK 11. TIM.ZUS OF PLATO. 259

gically, and being itself, and the intelligible world, he speaks conformably both
to himself, and to Orpheus who says:

For in Jove’s ample dwelling all things lie,
And in Jove’s belly they together flow.

And all such like assertions. Nor is it at all wonderful, that each of the Gods
should be the universe, but after a different manner, one demiurgically, another
connectively, another immutably, another convertively,' and another in some other
way according to a divine peculiarity. But if he says that the whole extent
between the world and the one, is the Demiurgus, this deserves to become the
subject of doubt; and we may urge against this assertion the arguments which
we derive from him. For where are the kings that are prior to Jupiter, and are
the fathers of Jupiter?) Where are the kings, according to Plato, whom
he thinks fit to arrange above the world next to the onc? How likewise can we
say that perpetual being itself is the first being, if we also say that the Demi-
urgus is the whole intelligible order, who is himself perpetual being, as is likewise
animal itself? For shall we not thus be compelled to say, that the Demiurgus is
notan eternal being? Unless the Demiurgus likewise is comprehended together with
other eternal beings. That Iamblichus himself, however, though he here celebrates
the demiurgic order in a more confused manner, yet speaks of it more accurately
elsewhere, may be from thence assumed, Tor writing concerning the fabrication
of Jupiter in the Timanus, after the intelligible triads, and the three tricds of the
intelligible and at the same time intellectual’ Gods, he attributes the third order
in the intellectual hebdomad to the Demiurgus. Tor he says that these three
Gods are celebrated by the Pythagoreans, who assert that the first of them is an
intellect comprehending in itself whole monads, the simple, the indivisible, the
boniform, that which abides and is united in itself, and who deliver such like
indications of its transcendency. But they say that the second is collective of the
perfection of things of this kind, and that the inost beautiful indications of it are
divine fecundity, that which is collective of the three Gods, that which gives

completion to energy, that which is generative of divine life, that which proceeds

* Instead of των δε rpexrws, it is necessary to read τὸν δε excorperrixws.

* It is here necessary to supply καὶ voepwy. For the three triads of the intelligible and at ‘hes same
time intellectual Gods, immediately follow the intelligible triads, and the intellectual hebdomad follows
as the third in order.

260 PROCLUS ON THE [βοοκ τῷ)

every where, and that which is beneficent. And they teach us that of the third
who fabricates wholes, the most beautiful signatures are, prolific progressions,
the productions and connections of total causes, together with total causes defined
by forms, all proceeding fabrications, and other things similar to these. It is
worth while, therefore, to form a judgment of the Tamblichean theology from these
things, and to determine what the nature of it is respecting the Demiurgus of
wholes. For how can the Demiurgus be the whole’ of perpetual being, if indeed
perpetual being has been already defined by Plato; but he now says that it Is
difficult to find the Demiurgus, and when found, impossible to speak of him to all
men? And how can these things be verified of that which is definitively delivered,
and unfolded into light to all those that were present ?

After Lamblichus, therefore, Theodorus, following Atnelius, says that there are
three Demiurgi. He arranges them, however, not immediately after the one,
but at the extremity > of the intelligible and at the same time intellectual Gods.
He also calls the first an essential intellect, the second, an intellectual essence, and
the third, the fountain of souls. He likewise says, that the first is indivisible, but
the second, divided into wholes, and the third receives a division into particulars.
Again, therefore, the same things must be said to himas were said to the illustrious
Amelius ; viz. that we indeed acknowledge that there are three Gods, or Gods
analogous to these, yet we do not admit that there are three Deminrgi, but that
the first is the intelligible of the Demiurgus, the second, his generative power,
and that the third is truly the demiurgic intellect. It is likewise requisite to con-
sider whether the fountain of souls is to be arranged as the third: for power
pertains to the middle, as he somewhere says; and thus it must be denominated
partially, and not called the universal fountain of life. For the fountain of souls,
is one of the fountains contamed in this middle [or generative power of the De-
miurgus.} For life is not in souls only, norin animated 1tures alone, but there
is also a divine, and an intellectual, prior to the psychical life, which is said to
proceed diversely from thence, from divided rivers. And such, in short, are the
dogmas ? of the ancicnt interpreters concerning the Demiurgus.

Let ux, however, concisely relate the opinion of our preceptor (Syrianus] on this
subject, as we think that it especially accords with the conceptions of Plato.

* For o\ew here, itis necessary to read odor.
1 ΓῚ
Instead οἵ exe τὰ δε των νοητων τέ καὶ νυέρων θεων, I read ex’ ἐσχατον τῶν γοήτων κ. λ.

2. For δυγματων here, it is becessary to read δυγματα.

BOOK 11.} ΤΙΝ 5. OF PLATO. 261

The one Demiurgus, therefore, according to him," subsists at the extremity of the
intellectual divine monads, and the fountains of life. But he emits from himself
the total fabrication, and presides over the more partial fathers of wholes, Being,
however, himself immoveable, he is eternally established on the summit of Olym-
pus,* and rules over the twofold worlds, the supercelestial and the celestial, com-
prebending also the beginning, middles, and ends of wholes. For of the? whole
demiurgic order, one part is a distribution of wholes totally, another of wholes
partially, another of parts totallys, and another of parts partially. Fabrication,
therefore, being fourfold, the demiurgic monad binds to itself the total providence
of wholes; but a demiurgic triad, is suspended from it, which rules over parts
totally, and over the divided power of the monad’ Just again, as in the other,
or the partial fabrication, a monad is the leader of a triad, which orderly distri-
butes wholes partially, and parts partially. But all the multitude of the triad
dances [as it were] round the monad, and being divided about it, distributes its
productions, and is filled from it. Of the many Demiurgi, therefore, there is
one Demiurgus (who is the monad of the rest], in order that all things may be
- consequent to each other, viz. the one, the paradigm in intelligibles, the one intelli-
gible Demiurgus, the one only-begotten world. If, however, these things are rightly
asserted, the Demiurgus of wholes is the boundary of intellectuals, established
indeed in the intelligible, but being full of power, according to which he produces
wholes, and converting all things to himself. On this account also Timaus calls
him intellect, and the best of causes, and says that he looks to the intelligible
paradigm ; in order that by this he may separate him from the first intelligible
Gods. But by calling him intellect, he distinguishes him from the intelligible and
at the same time intellectual Gods. And by denominating him the best of
causes, he establishes him above all the other supermundane Demiurgi. For he
denominates the causes demiurgic, as also he had before said, “ Every thing ge-
nerated is generated by a cause,” and adds, “ /Vhen therefore an artificer, &c.”
Hence the Demiurgus is an intellectual God, exempt from all the Demiurgi. If,

* For avrny in this place, it is obviously requisite to read avroy.
* i.e. He dwells eternally in the highest intellectual splendor.
* Instead of πως yap δημιουργικης κι Δ.» here, it is requisite to read rns yap «. A.

Afier ro δὲ των ὁλων pepixws, it is necessary to supply the words, ro δε των μέρων oducws, in order
to render the division complete.

* For rpcados here, we must read μοναδοε.

4

262 PROCLUS ON THE (Βοοκ 11.

however, he was the first among the intellectual Gods, he would alone abide in his
own accustomed manner: for this is the illustrious property of the first. If he was
the second, he would be particularly the cause of life. But now, when he
generates soul, he energizes with the Crater [i.e. with Juno}, but when he gene-
rates intellect, he energizes by himself. Hence he is no other than the third of
the intellectual fathers. For his illustrious and principal work is to produce in-
tellect, and not to fabricate body. For he produces body not alone, but together
with necessity ; but he produces intellect through himselt. Nor does his prin-
cipal work consist in producing soul: for he generates soul together with the
Crater. But he alune by himself gives subsistence to intellect, and causes it to
preside over the universe.

Existing, therefore, as the producer of intellect, he very properly has an intellec-
tual order. Hence also he is said by Plato to be both maker and father, and
neither father alone, nor maker alone, nor again father and maker. For the
extremes indeed, are father and maker; the former possessing the summit of
intelligibles, and being prior to the royal series [1. ὁ. to Phanes, Night, Heaven,
Saturn, Jupiter, and Bacchus]; but the latter possessing the end of the [intcllec-
tual]order. And the former being the monad of paternal deity; but the latter
being allotted a producing power in the universe. Between both these, however,
are father and at the same time maker, and maker and at the same time father.
For each of these is not the same; but in one order the paternal, and in another
the eflective has dominion. The paternal, however, is more excellent than the
(fective. Hence in the media, though both are in each, yet the former’ is more
father than maker. For it is the boundary of the paternal depth, * and the foun-
tain of intellectuals. But the second is more maker than father. ΠῸΓ it is the
monad, of total fabrication. Hence I think the former is called JZetis, but the
latter Afetietes. And the former indeed is seen, but the latter sees, ‘The former
also is absorbed, but the latter is replete with the power of the former. And
what the former is in intelligibles, that the latter is in intellectuals. For the former
is the boundary of the intelligible, but the latter of the intellectual Gods. Con-
cerning the former likewise, Orpheus says,

In a dark cavern these the father made.
* Viz. father and at the same time maker. This God also is Phanes or animal itself, and subsists

at the extremity of the intelligible order.
* For βοῖτον in this place, we must read βνθου.

BOOK 11.} TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 263

But concerning the latter Plato says, “ Of whom I am the Demiurgus and father
of works.” In the Politicus likewise, he makes mention of the doctrine of the
Demiurgus and father; because with the former [i. e- with Phanes] the paternal
is more predominant, but with the latter [i. 6. with Jupiter] the demiurgic. Each
ot the Gods however is denominated from his peculiarity, though each is compre-
hensive of all things. And he indeed who is alone maker, ' is the cause of mun-
dane natures. Ife who is maker and father, is the cause of supermundane and
mundane natures. Ile who is father and maker, is the cause of intellectual,
supermundane, and mundane natures. But he who is alone father, is the cause
of intelligibles, of intellectuals, of supermundane and mundane natures.

Plato, therefore, admitting a Demiurgus of this kind, suffers him to be ineffable
and without a name, as having an arrangement prior to wholes in the portion of
the good.” Yor in every order of the Gods, there is that which is analogous to
the one. Such therefore is the monad in each world. But Orpheus gives a name
to the Demiurgus, in consequence of being moved [i. e. inspired] from thence ;
whom Plato himself likewise elsewhere follows. For the Jupiter with him, who
is prior to the three sons of Saturn, is the Demiurgus of wholes. After the
absorption therefore of Phanes, the ideas of all things shone forth in him, as the
theologist says :

Hence with the universe great Jove contains,
Extended wther, heav'n’s exalted plains;

The barren restless deep, and earth renown’d,
Ocean immense, and Tartarus profound ;
Fountains and rivers, and the boundless main,
With all that nature’s ample reaims contain ὁ
And Gods and Goddesses of each degree ;
All that is past, and all that e’er shall be,
Occultly, and in fair connection lies,

In Jove’s wide belly,? ruler of the skies.*

‘i.e. Vulcan.

* viz, The Demiurgus has an arrangement analogous to the good. For as the good is the exempt
monad of the intelligible order, so the Demiurgus is the exempt monad of the supermundane order.

? Celestial and sublunary causes and effects, are very properly said by Orpheus to subsist in the
belly of Jupiter, because these have a middle subsistence between supermundane and Tartarean
natures, just as the belly is in the middle of the body. : ᾿

* These verses are very defective in the original; but the learned reader will find them in a correct
state in the Orpheus of Herman.

264 PROCLUS ON THE [Βοοκ 11.

Jupiter however, being full of ideas, through these comprehends in himself
wholes: which the theologist also indicating adds:

Jove is the first, and last, high-thundering king,
Middle and head, from Jove all beings spring.
Jove the foundation of the earth contains,

And the deep splendor of the starry plains.
Jove is a hing by no restraint confin’d,

And all things flow from Jove’s prolific mind.
One mighty principle which never fails,

One power, one damon, over all prevails,

For in Jove’s royal body all things he,

Fire, night and day, earth, water, and the sky.

Jupiter therefore, comprehending in himselt wholes, produces in conjunction with
Night all things monadically and intellectually, according to her oracles, and
likewise all mundane natures, Gods,* and the parts of the universe. | Night
therefore says to him asking, how all things will be a certain one, and yet each
be separate and apart from the rest:

All things receive inclosed on ev'ry side,

In wther’s wide inctlable embrace :

Then in the midst of wther place the heav’n ;
Tn which let earth of infinite extent,

The sea, and stars, the crown of heav’n, be fixt.
But after she has laid down rules respecting all other productions, she adds:
And when your power around the whole has spread

A strong coercive bond, a golden chain

Suspend from wther.
This bond which is derived from nature, soul and intellect, being perfectly strong
and indissoluble. For Plato also says, that animals were generated, bound

with animated bonds. Orpheus, likewise, Homerically calls the divine orders

* For θεὼν here, it is necessary to read θέον.

a

ROOK 41.} TIMAEUS OF PLATO. 205

which are above the world,' a golden chain; which Plato emulating says, “ That
the Demiurgus placing intellect in soul, but soul in body, fabricated the universe 5”
and that he gave subsistence to the junior Geds, through whom also he adorns
the parts of the universe. If therefore, itis Jupiter who possesses the one power,
who absorbs Phanes, in whom the intellizible causes of wholes first subsist, who
produces all things, according to the counsels of Night, and who gives authority
both to the other Gods, and to the three sons of Saturn,—he is the one and whole
Demiureus of all the world, and has the fitth order among'the kings, [1. e. among
the Gods of the royal series,] as it is divinely demonstrated by our preceptor in his
Orphic Conferences. Jupiter likewise,.is co-ordinate with Heaven and Phanes,
and on this account he is both maker and father, and each of these totally.

That Plato, however, had these conceptions respecting the mighty Jupiter, is
manifested by him in the Cratylus from names: for he there shows that he is the
cause and supplier of life to all things. For he says, “ Zhat we denominate him
Dia and Zena, through whom life ts present to all things.” But in the Gorgias he
co-arranges, and at the same time exempts him from the sons of Saturn, in order
that he may be prior to the three, and participated by them. He also makes Law
to be his assessor, in the same manner as Orpheus. For with him also Law is
placed by the side of Jupiter, according to the counsels of Night. Farther still,
Plato in the Laws represents total Justice to be the attendant of Jupiter, in the
same manner as the theologist. But in the Philebus he shows, that a royal soul
and a royal intellect pre-exist in Jupiter according to the reason of cause. And
conformably to this he now represents him as giving subsistence to intellect and
soul, unfolding the laws of Fate, and producing all the orders of the mundane
Gods, and constituting all animals as far as to the last of things; some things
being generated by him alone, but others through the celestial Gods as media.
To which we may also add, thatin the Politicus he calls Jupiter the Demiurgus
and father of the universe, just as in the present dialogue he says concerning him,
“Ofwhom Lam the Demiurgus, and father of works.” He likewise says inthe Poli-
ticus, that the present order of the world is Jovian, aud that the world is moved
wcording to Fate. The world therefore living a Jovian life, has Jupiter for the
Demiurgus and father of its life. If, likewise, he represents the Demiurgus deli-
vering a speech,’ this too is in reality Jovian. For in the Meno, he on this

* Instead of των θείων πραξεων vo των exoopiwy in this place, it is necessary to read των θείων rulrwy
νπερ Tey ἐγκοσμιων.
* For δημιουργουντα here, it is necessary to read énunyopourra.

Tim. Plat. Vou. I. aL

268 PROCLUS ON THE [Βουκ 11.

account calls him a sophist, as filling the Gods posterior to him with all-
various reasons. This also the divine poet [Homer] manifests, who repre-
sents him thus speaking' from the summit of Olympus.

Hear, all ye Gods and Goddesses, my words.

And converting the two-fold co-ordinations to himself. Through the whole of
his poetry, likewise, he praises him as the supreme of rulers, and the father of men
and Gods, and celebrates him with all demiurgic conceptions. As, therefore, we
have shown that all the Grecian theology attributes the total fabrication of things
to Jupiter, what ought we to conceive of these words of Plato? Is it not, that the
same God king Jupiter, is with him maker and father, and is neither father alone,
nor father and maker. For father is the monad, as the Pythagoreans say, but
the decad is the demiurgic® order of divine natures, “to which divine number
arrives from the secret recesses of the monad, which decad is the venerable uni-
versal recipient, surrounding all things with bound, is immutable and unwearied,
and is called the sacred decad.” Hence, after the paternal monad, and the
paternal and at the same time effective tetrad, the demiurgic decad proceeds.
And it is indeed immutable, because an immutable deity subsists together with it.
But it surrounds all things with bound, as supplying with order things that are
disorderly, and with ornament things that are unadorned. It likewtse illuminates
souls with intellect, as being intellect totally, and body with soul, as possessing
and comprehending the cause of soul, and generates things which are truly gene-
rated, both such as are middles, and such as are last, in consequence of compre-
hending in itself demiurgic being. From what is written also in’ the Protagoras,
we may collect what the demiurgic order is. For Jupiter there becomes the cause
of the whole political science, and of the reasons essentially disseminated in souls.
This, however, is to bind the whole fabrication of things, and to connect all things
by his own immutable powers. For as the theolovist establishes about him. the
Curetic order, thus also Plato says, that he is surrounded with terrible guards.
And as the former establishes him on the summit of Olympus, so the latter assigns
to him a tower, in which being eternally seated, he adoins all things through the
middle orders. Who the Demiurgus therefore is, and that he is a divine intellect,
the cause of total fabrication, is evident from what has been said; and likewise
that Jupiter himselfis celebrated as the Demiurgus both by Orpheus and Plato.

* Here also it is requisite to make the same emendation as above,
* Δημιονργικὴ is omitted in the original,

BOOK 11.) TIMAEUS OF PLATO. 267

Whether, however, we must say that he is a fontal or a ruling God, or belongs
to some other order of the demiurgic series, deserves not to be passed over in
silence. It appears, therefore, that such things as the theurgist [Julian] ascribes
to the third divinity of the rulers, these Plato assigns to the Demiurgus ;* such as
to fabricate the heavens, iaclosing them in a convex figure; to establish the nu-
merous multitude of inerratic stars; to give subsistence to the heptad of planetary
animals; and to place earth in the middle, but water in the hosoms of the earth,
and air above these. If, however, we accurately consider the affair, we shall
find that the third of the mundane rulers divides the universe into parts; that the
second divides it into wholes, and is celebrated as the demiurgic cause of motion ;
and that the first by his will alone disposes all things, and constitutes the whole
world according to union. But the God who is said by Timzus to be the De-
miurgus, produces all things by his will, imparts to the universe a division
into wholes, and also into parts, which give completion to all the wholenesses
[rag ολοτητας πασας]. For he not only makes the universe to be a whole of
wholes, but he also produces the multitude of each wholeness. On all these
accounts therefore, we think it proper to assert that the Demiurgus is beyond the
triad of ruling fathers ; that he is one fontal cause, and that the Oracles represent
him eradicating the multitude of ideas in the fontal soul, and constituting the
world from intellect, soul and body, and producing our souls, and sending them
into generation. The Oracles likewise assert the same things of him as Timzus.
For they say, “ The father of Gods and men placed our intellect in soul, but soul
in sluggish body.” But this is the admirable thing celebrated by the Greeks, con-
cerning him who is according to them? the Demiurgus. If however these things
are asserted conformably * both to Timaus and the Oracles, those who are incited
by the divinely delivered theology [of the Chaldeans] will say that this Demiurgus
is fontal; that he fabricates the whole world conformably to ideas, considered as

ἡ Itappears to be necessary here to read ry δημιουργῳ instead of ry κοσμῳ.
* The Greek in this place is very faulty. For it is κατέθετο yap νον μὲν ev ψνχῃ ἐνιματι de ἡμεαι
cysareOnce πατὴρ ανδρων re θεων re. Instead of which it ought to be,

careflero yap
Novy μεν ere ψυχῃ, Yuxny δ᾽ ενε σώματι apyy
Ἡμεων εγκατεθηκε xarnp ανδρων τε θεων τε.

3 For παρ᾽ avrne here, it isnecessary to read παρ᾽ ἀντοιε.
* For ομωφνλως in this place read opoperws.

268 PROCLUS ON THE [Βοοκ "1.

one, and as many, and as divided both into wholes and parts, and that he is cele-
rated as the maker and father of the universe, and as the father of Gods and men

hy Plato, Orpheus, and the Oracles ; generating indeed, the multitude of Gods, but
~ending souls to the generations of men, as Timeus himself also says. For if he
is the best of causes, as he says, by what contrivance can he be arranged in the
second orders of Demiurg:? Por the most excellent among the Demiurgi is
significant of the highest transcendency in the demiurzic series. But the highest
summit of every serivs is fontal, so that this Demiurgus is necessarily fontal, and
not ruling; the rulers being every where secondary to their proper fountam,
Henee also he renders the mundane Gods Demiurgi, or fabricators, as being a
certain demiurgic fountain, Since, however, thereare many fontal Demiurgt, in
what place this Demiurgus is to be arranged, requires greater Consideration.
But from what has been said, it is evident in what order of Gods it’ is necessary
to investigate him; from which hhewise, it is manifest after what manner it 18
dificult to find him, and when found to speak of him to all men. Its also
evident how he is father and maker, and what his eNective power Is 5 and that he
is not as sume say, the maler of inanimate natures, but the father of such as are
animated. For he is both the maker! and father ofall things. Por he ts called
the father of works, as he himself says in his speech (to the junior Gods). But
heis maker and father, as the cause of union, essence, and hypostasis, and the

supplier of providential inspection in all things.

Again, however, this must be considered respecting him, viz. according
to Pry of the paradigms the artificer fabricated the world, whether
according to that which subsists with invariable sameness, or that which

was venerated.”

Timaus having shown what the form is of the mundane system, that it Is ge-
nerated, and the manner in which it is generated, viz. as sensible ; for he makes
no mention whatever of time, because he has not yet constituted time 5 and
having also shown what the demiurgic cause Is, viz. that it is effective and at
the same time paternal, but this is intellectual, imparticipable and total :—he now
passes to the third object of inquiry, what the nature is of the paradigm of the
universe, whether generated, or etern: il?) For he perceived that every artificer

1 Plouprys is omitted here im the origiual,

ROOK 11.] TIM.EUS OF PLATO, 269

either assumes the paradigm of the things which he fabricates, externally, or
himself produces them from the paradigm in himself. Just as of human artificers,
some ave able to imitate other things accurately ; but others possess themselves a
power capable of fashioning admirable and useful works. Thus he who first made
a ship formed in his imagination the paradigm of if. Farther still, this also must
be observed, that every thing which makes in an orderly manner, has the scope
and ineasure of that which is made. For if it has not, it will err in making, and
will not know whether it has arrived at the end when it has. For whence will it
know that this is the end, since something may be deficient or redundant, and it
may be necessary to take something away, orto add something? For on. this
account bodies make irrationally and stupidly, because they have no measure,
hor cause of the thing that is made. For it is necessary that the medicine should
be heated to a certain degree ; but if art and the medical intellect are not present,
defining the’ measure of energy to the fire, it will operate too abundantly and
destroy the whole, though it was intended to contribute to the production of the
remedy. For it has not the form of the thing produced. Every thing, therefore,
which makes ought to have the reason of the thing that is made, if it intends
to make in an orderly manner, Hence Plato perceiving this, at the same time
that he admuts the eflective cause, introduces the paradigm of the universe ; just
as Aristotle also by subverting the paradigm, co-subverts likewise the maker. —
Plato therefore, taking it for granted that there is a paradigm, investigates through
these things what the nature ofitis, and employing the before-mentioned defini-
tions, discovers the object of his inquiry, through the three former hypotheses.
But in what manner he makes the discovery, and through what kind of demon-
“stration, we shall shortly after survey,

In the first place, however, this very thing must be shown by us, that the world
was generated according toa certain paradigm. And in the next place, we must
mvestigate what this paradigm is, and in what order of beings it subsists. — If
indeed the fabrication of wholes is indefinite and without design, there is nota
paradigmatic cause of the universe ; but if itis not lawful to conceive this to be
the case, and the Demiurgus knows what he produces, and knowing thus
produces the fabrication of the world, the causes of the things generated are
contained in him, and it is necessary either that he should primarily possess these
causes, or that they should be imparted to him by more ancient principles. But
whichever of these we admit, there is a paradigmatic cause prior to the world.
Farther still, since the Demiurgus is intellect, if he produces by his very being,

470 PROCLUS ON THE [poox 1}.

he produces that which is most similar to himself. But this is to produce an
image of himself. If, however, he produces from deliberation, this is entirely
and in every respect unworthy of the demiurgic cause. And if some one should
admit this to be the case, yet it will follow that the form of the demiurgic work
pre-exists in him. For every one who deliberates and consults, antecedently
assumes in himself the paradigm of that about which he deliberates. “This there-
fore, may be demonstrated through many other arguments, that it is necessary the
paradigm of the world should have an existence prior to the w orld, and especially
when the demiurgic cause is pre-supposed. For it is necessary that the Demi-
urgus being intellectual, should either be ignorant of the order of what is fabricated,
or that he should know it. But if he isignorant of this, how can he providentially
attend to it?) And how can he give arrangement to the universe? If, therefore,
he knows it, how is it possible he should not comprehend that which is generated
by the intellection of it, according to one cause?

In the next place, it must be considered what this paradigm is, and in what
order of beings itranks. For there is a difference of opinion respecting this among
the more ancient interpreters. Thus according to the divine lamblichus, that which
is being itself, and which is comprehended by intelligence in conjunction with
reason, is the paradigm of the universe. For he admits that ¢he one is beyond the
paradigm, but shows that what is being itself concurs with it, and denominates
each that which is comprehended by intelligence. But the philosopher Porphyry
supposes, as we have before observed, that imparticipable soul is the Demiurgus,
but that intellect is the paradigm, thus beholding in subordinate, natures which
exist in more ancient and venerable orders. For Plato having said that the
Demiurgus is intellect, denominates the paradigm intelligible. But this inter-
preter assuming soul for the Demiurgus, calls the paradigm intellect. In the
third place, the admirable Theodorus dividing the demiurgic triad, and perceiving
that in each monad of it there 1s a first, middle and last, calls the last’ in each
animal itself, and thus says that intellect looks to animal itself; for according to
him, intellect is proximately suspended from essential animal. Hence, either the
essential Demiurgus does not fabricate looking to animal itself, or the paradigmatic
causes are not many, or not every Demuurgus effects his proper production
according to a certain paradigm, lest the maker should make looking to things
posterior to himself, and thus should ignorantly sustain the passion of a partial
soul,

* For ἕκαστον here, it is necessary to read ἐσχατον.

BOOK 11.} TIM/EUS OF PLATO, 271

Our preceptor, however, according to his divine intellectual conceptions, has
thought fit to give this subject an appropriate examination. For of the ancients,
some have made the Demiurgus himsclf to possess the paradigms of wholes, as
Plotinus ; others, not the Demiurgus, but have asserted that the paradigm is prior
to him, as Porphyry ; and others, as Longinus, that it is posterior to him, whom
our preceptor asks, whether the Demiurgus is immediately posterior to the one,
or there are also other intelligible orders, between the Demiurgus and the one.
For if the Demiurgus subsists immediately after the one, it is absurd that all the
multitude of intelligibles should be immediately posterior to that which is without
multitude. For through numbers proximate to the one, the progression is to the
whole of number, and the whole of multitude. But if there are other orders
between the one and the Demiurgus, it must be investigated whether the paradigm
of the universe is in the Demiurgus primarily, or posterior to, or prior to him.
For if itis primarily in him, we must admit that he contains every intelligible
multitude. Lor the paradigm is the most beautiful of intelligibles, so that again
he will be intelligible, and not what we a little before demonstrated him to be,
intellectual, though the paradigm has four ideas alone, but the Demiurgus has
those which are more partial than these, viz. the ideas of the sun and moon, and
each of the natures that have a perpetual subsistence. But if the paradigm is
posterior to him, he will be converted to that which is less excellent, and less
honorable, which it is not lawful to admit of any divine nature. So that the
paradigm is prior to the Demiurgus. If, however, it is prior to the Demiurgus,
whether is it seen by him, or not seen by him? To say, therefore, that it is not seen
by him, does not accord with Plato and the nature of things. For it is absurd
that our soul should see it, and speak about it, but that it should not be seen by
intellect, and by a total intellect. But if the Demiurgus sees the intelligible,
whether being converted tv himself does he see it, or does he alone perceive it
external to himself? If, however, he alone sees it external to himself, he sees the
image of being, and possesses sense instead of intelligence. But if converted to
himself, the object of his intellectual perception will be in himself. So that the
paradigm is prior to, and in the Demiurgus; intelligibly indeed prior to him,
but intellectually in him,

The words of Plato also appear at one time to make the paradigm different
from, and at another the same with the Demiurgus. For when he says, “ Such
and so many ideas therefore, as intellect saw in that which is animal itself, so many
he conceived by a dianoetic energy this universe also should possess,” he asserts that

272 PROCLUS ON THE [poox a.

the Demiurgus, as being different from the paradigm, is extended to animal itself.
And again, when he says, ‘ Let us consider after the similitude of what animal the
composing artificer constituted the world. Indeed, we must by no means think that
he fushtoned it similar to such animals as subsist in the form of a part ; but we must
admit that ut is the most similar of all things to that animal, of which other animals,
both considered individually, and according to their genera, are nothing more than
parts 7°—in these words also he separates him who constituted the universe from
the paradigm. But when again he clearly says, "776 was good ; but in that which
is good, envy can never be inherent about any thing whatever: being therefore void
of this, he was willing that all things should be as much as possible similar to himself ;”
here, the sameness of the Demiargus with the paradigm, appears to be manifest.
So that in some places Plato says that the Demnurgus is the same, and in others,
that he is differentfrom the paradigm, and very properly makes each of these asser-
tions. For the ideas, or four monads of ideas, prior to the fabrication of things subsist
intelligibly ; but the order of forms proceeds into the Demiurgus; aud the whole
number of ideas ts one of the monads which he contains. Orpheus also indicating
these things says, that the intelligible God [Phanes] was absorbed by the Demi-
urgus of wholes. And Plato asserts that the Demiurgus looks to the paradigm,
indicating through sight intellectual perception. According to the theolovist,
however, the Demiurgus leaps as it were to the intelligible God, and as the fable
says, absorbs him. For if it be requisite clearly to unfold the doctrine of our
preceptor, the God who ts called Protogonus by Orpheus, and who is established
at the end of intelligibles, is animal itself,’ with Plato. Hence it is eternal, and
the most beautiful of intelligibles, and is in intelligibles that which Jupiter is in
intellectuals. Each however is the boundary of these orders.*| And the former
indeed, is the first of paradigmatic causes; but the latter is the most monadic
of demiurgic causes. Hence Jupiter is united to the paradigm through Night as
the medium, and being filled from thence, becomes an intelligible world, as in
intellectuals.

Then of Protogonus the mighty strength
Was seen; for in his belly he contain’d

* For τῳ αὐτοθωψ here, read τὸ avrozwoy.

* 1. @, Protogonus is the boundary of the intelligible, and Jupiter of the intellectual order,

BOOK 11. TIM/EUS OF PLATO. 273

The whole ἡ of things, and mingled where ’twas fit,
The force and powerful vigour of the God.
Hence, with the universe great Jove contains, &c.

Very properly, therefore, does Plato now say that the Demiurgus looked to the
paradigm, in order that becoming all things through the intellectual perception
of it, he may give subsistence to the sensible world. For the paradigm was the
universe intelligibly, but the Demiurgus intellectually, and the world sensibly.
Ilence also the theologist says:

For in his sacred heart he these conceal’d,
And into joyful light again reveal'’d.

That the world therefore, was generated according to a paradigm, what this pa-
radigm is, after what manner it is above, and how it is in, the demiurgic intel-
lect, is manifest thronch what has been said.

Some however doubt why Plato inquires whether the world was fabricated
according to that which is generated, or according to that which is intelligible ;
for there is not any other generated nature in order that the universe might be fa-
bricated with relation to it. If therefore the inquiry had been concerning So-
crates, or any other partial nature, the question, say they, would have been rea-
sonable. But as the inquiry is concerning the universe, is it not impossible it
should have been constituted with relation to that which is generated? For what
other generated nature is there besides the universe?) We may dissolve this doubt
however, by recollecting what has been frequently said, that Plato calls soul
generated, so far as it participates of time. But the inquiry here is, what is the
paradizm of the universe, whether itis soul, or intellect, or the intelligible? For
these are the only things that are eternal. And on this account he asks, whether
the world was generated with relation to a generated or to an eternal nature.
After this manner, as it has appeared to some, the doubt may be solved. May
it not, however be possible to solve it, by another more perfect method, through
which it will also be evident that the confused and disorderly nature prior to the

* In the original τῶν xarrwr Se Sepas, the word Seas or body obviously signifying whole. Tn this
sense also, the word σώμα, which ts likewise body, is used by Aristotle in Lib. 2, Cap. 2. of his
Meteors. For he there says, that the sea is the principle and body of all water, ἀρχὴν εἰναι καὶ σωμα
του παντὸς vdaros ηδ᾽ ἐστι. This principle tov, he afterwards calls nOpocoperos oyxos, a collected bulk or
mass. So that ὅεμας with Orpheus, and wa with Aristotle, have in these places the same meaning as
odorms οὐ wholeness with the Platonists.

Tim. Plat. Vou. I. . 2M

474 PROCLUS ON THE fecon τὸ

world, must not be said, as Atticus and Plutarch thought it must, to be unbe-
gotten? For if nothing was generated prior to the universe, it was ridiculous to
inquire whether the world was generated with relation to perpetual being, or to
that which is generated. This however, is now investigated. Prior to the world
therefore, there was a certain generated nature. And since it was neither per-
petual being, nor place ; for three things (as Plato says] were prior to the gene-
ration of the universe, viz. being, place, and generation; it is evident that the
so-much celebrated confused and disorderly nature was a thing of this kind,
Hence not the universe only, but that which was moved ina confused and dis-
orderly manner, Was generated, as we have said, and had a prior subsistence.
The world therefore, possessing this confused nature as matter, but the intelligible
pre-existing as more excellent, whether was the universe assimilated to the ma-
terial nature which it contains, or to that which is essentially more divine? For
being a medium between the two, it 15 necessarily assimilated to one of the
extremes. For it is supposed that the Demiurgus assumed that disorderly nature,
and perceives animal itself; so that Plato very properly inquires to which of
these the Demiurgus assimilates the universe, whether to that which he assumes,
orto that which he sees. To these things therefore, that which follows Is con-
formable ; viz. that the world being beautiful, it was assimilated to the intelligible,
and not to that which was moved ina confused and disorderly manner. For that
which is assimilated to this is deformed.

Some of the interpreters however say, that Plato does not inquire concerning
the Demiurgus, according to which of the paradigms he made the world, but
that he asks as with reference to us who know that there are twofold paradigms,
with relation to which of these the universe was generated. And this assertion 15
after a certain manner reasonable. For we are those who look to both these pa-
radigins, and not the Demiurgus. For it is not lawful for him to look to that
which is less excellent; bat) we perceiving the natures Which are prior, and also
those which are posterior to him, interrogate ourselves, in which of them it is. tit
to place the paradigm. But others say that Plato adduces that which is gene-
rated, forthe sake of a perfect division, in order that he may not appear to
prevent the object of investigation, whether the mundane paradigm js eternal.
For supposing the paradigm to be venerated, he shows that a certain absurdity
will fullow. Others again say, that since of sensibles, some are preternatural,
but others according to nature ; and of these, some have the images of certain
venerated natures, but others are the similitudes of them ;—hence Plato wishing

nook 11. TIMAUS OF PLATO. 275

to demonstrate that the world was generated with relation to an eternal paradigm,
makes a subversion of the others, on account of the universe being most beautiful.
For that which is most beautiful, is neither preternatural, nor is derived from a
generated paradigmatic essence 3 since that which is derived from this is not most
beautiful. But because, in short, the universe is beautiful, it is not preternatural.
Such therefore, is the solution of the doubt.

It is worth while however concisely to survey the accuracy of the words. For
the words “ again,” and “ must be considered,” indicate the order of the problem ;
viz. that it is in continuity with the things which precede it, and that this imme-
diately follows those speculations. But the words, “ respecting him,” collect all
the investizations, and refer them to the one theory about the world. For what
is said about the Demiurgus and the paradigm, is assumed for the sake of the
theory of the universe, The words, “ according to which of the paradigms,” sepa-
rate as extremes, and as different from each other, the intelligible, and that which
is generated ; the former existing among the first, but the latter among the last of
beings. But the word artificer exhibits the production of form by its cause, and
demiurgic art proceeding into the world. For as the theologist says, the first
manual artificers gave to Jupiter the demiurgic powers of all the mundane
production. And,

Who thunder, and the lightning formed for Jove.
Vulcan and Pallas the first artists, taught

Jove all the dadal arts, the world contains.

Plato therefore following what the theologist here asserts, continually uses the
words τέχτὴνάμενος and erexryvara, Which signify fabricative energy, when speak-
ing of the demiurgic production, But the words, “ according to that which sub
sists with invartable sameness,” indicate the eternal paradigm of the universe, which
is the first of eternal natures, and is established at the end of the first intelligibles.
And again, “ that which was generated” signities, that which was moved in a con-
fused and disorderly manner. For this is a composite, is much mingled, and
alter-motive, or moved by another; all which are the clements of a generated
nature. Tle does not therefore say that this disorderly nature is unbegotten and
incorruptible, and that the world is generated and corruptible; but that the
former of these was generated, as being alter-motive and co-mingled. For Plato
clearly says, that prior to the generation of the universe there were these three

276 PROCLUS ON THE ᾿ [BOOK 1.

things, place, generation, and being. And it is evident that by generation he
means the confused and disorderly nature. Generation therefore is this; and
the world is unbegotten according to temporal generation. Hence these things
are more concordant with Plato, and with our unperverted cpinions about the
universe.

Indeed, if this world is beautiful, and the Demiurgus of it 1s good, it is
evident that he looked to an eternal paradigin; but if he is not good,

which it is not lawful for any one to assert, he looked to that which was

generated.”

In the first place, it is requisite that we should understand the logical method
of Plato, in order that we may see how demonstratively it proceeds. For from
the hypotheses he had these twofold axioms, that what is generated according
to an eternal paradigm is beautiful; but that what is generated according to a gene-
rated paradigin ts not beautiful. The converse however to these are, that what is

beautiful was generated according to an eternal paradigm, but what is not beautiful

was not generated according to an eternal paradigm. Por τὸ the opposite of

that which precedes, the opposite of that which is consequent follows, then these
reciprocate with cach other, and that which was proposed from the beginning
is demonstrated, through a deduction to an impossibility. Por if that whieh is
beautiful was generated according to a generated paradigin, but that which is
so generated is not beautiful, through one of the axioms, then it will follow that
what is not beautiful is beautiful, Why therefore, did not Plato immediately in
the hypotheses assume these axioms, viz. that what is beautiful was generated
according to an eternal paradigm, what is not beautiful was not so generated ;
but those to which these are the converse, though he intended to use the former,
and not the latter in his demonstration? In answer to this, it must be said, that
the latter which commence from causes, are more adapted to hypotheses, but
the former which are derived from things caused, are more allied τὸ things
posterior to hypotheses. For when he says, “ That which was generated according
toaneternal paradigm ts beautiful,” he begins froin causes, but ends in that which
is caused. But when vice versa, le says, Zhat is beautiful which was generated
according toan eternal paradigm,” he makes the beautiful to be precedancous, but
the cause consequent. He employs therefore, the former of these, in order that

ΣΝ με. «ὦ δ. κ᾿.

ROOK 41} TIMEUS OF PLATO. 277
he may assume things adapted to principles and causes in the hypotheses, but
he employs the latter, which is the converse of the former, in the demonstrations,
selecting that whieh is appropriate to: the things demonstrated. Hence laying
down these four axioms, he very properly enquires concerning the universe,
Whether itis beautiful, or is not beautiful. Brat if indeed the world is beautiful,
it was generated according to an eternal paradigin; bat if it is not beautiful,
according to a generated paradigm. That the world however is beautiful, is
evident from sense, ΠῚ was therefore generated according to an eternal paradigm.

Since however beanty is imparted to the world from_ the paradigm, through
the demiurgie cause as a medium, in the proposition which precedes, for the
purpose of showing that the world is beautiful, he assumes that the Demiurgus
is good. For every artificer, who is a good artist, has dominion over his proper
matter, and superinduces the form which he wishes, on the subjects of his art.
And this is accomplished in a much greater degree by the whole Demiurgus, who
also gives subsistence to nature, the (universal) subject of things, as other
assertions evince; and who produced i, thatit might co-operate‘ with him, in
receiving the world and fabrication from him. Since however, he had added
this in the second proposition, he passes over the opposite in silence. ΕῸΓ the
defamation of the world is atrocious. since it is most beautiful, and a blessed
God, but the defamation of the Demiurgus is still more so. Hence Plato employs
Themis* as a guard to what he says, who collects the Gods themselves to the
Demiurzus, and does not sufler them to be divulsed from the goodness of the
father. And he does this, in order that through Themis, he may not ascribe any

thing disorderly or defamatory to the Demiurgus. The propositions therefore,
being such, and receiving their beginning from the dividing art, let us see what

Plato afterwards adds.

“It is however, manifest to every one, that he looked to an eternal
paradigm; for the world indeed is the most beautitul of generated
natures, and the Demiurgus is the best of causes. But being thus gene-
‘rated, it is fabricated according to that which may be apprehended by
reason and intelligence, and which subsists invariably the same.”

* Instead of aepyos here, it is requisite to read ovrepyos.
? For Plato uses the word Oeyss, or ἐσμ μέ, in this place.

278 PROCLUS ON THE [noo τι.

Through what is here said, in the first place, he antecedently assumes the con-
clusion, as he is accustomed to do, deriving the principles of his demonstrations
from intellect. Inthe next place, he introduces the recollection of the assump-
tion, and afterwards adds the rest... For the words, “ lt is however manifest to
every one, that he looked to an eternal paradigm,” are the conclusion. But the
words, “ For the world indeed is the most beautiful of generated natures, and the
Demiurgus is the best of causes,” are a narration of the assumption, as the causal
conjunction μὲν indeed manifests. And the rest is the conclusion of all that is
said. Such therefore is the logical arrangement of the words. But again, be-
taking ourselves to the theory of the tings, let us in the first place see
through what cause he transfers the word dcautiful to the word most beautiful, and
good to the best. In the next place, let us survey how these things are true, and
what kind of order they have with reference to each other.

That a beautiful fabrication therefore, was fabricated according to an eternal
paradigm 15 evident, and was before asserted. For whence could it obtain the
beautiful, except from the imitation of this paradigm? If however, this is most
beautiful, the fabrication was not simply made according to an eternal paradigm,
but if it be requisite to say so, it was assimilated to the most eternal of eternal
natures. For every image which more clearly participates of form, is the Image
of a purer paradigm, And as of the statues produced by the telestic art, some par-
taking of the presence of a divine nature more obscurely, enjoy the second and third
powers of the divinity, but others participating of it more clearly, partake also of the
first and highest powers of the God ;—after the same manner likewise, the God who
gives perfection to the world, has rendered it most beautiful, as an image of the
first of eternal natures. For that which is most beautifal is derived to the world
from thence, and is extended to a similitude towards it, through its own beauty.
Again therefore, if the demiursic cause is good, he looked to that which is eternal,
and not to that which is generated ; lest by looking to whatis less excctlent,
which it is not lawful to assert, he should fall off from goodness. [f, however,
this be the case, not only a good cause, but thre best among causes, looked to the
most eternal of paradigms. For by how much the perceiver is more divine, hy so
much the more elevated is the object: of perception. For the same thing will not
be surveyed by the better and the less excellent nature, Plato therefore, indica-
ting these things, and through these latently assisting the position that the para-

* Instead of ro Anyor here, it is necessary to read ro λοιπὸν.

a

Book It] TIMEUS OF PLATO. 279

digm of the universe does not rank among the multitude of eternal natures, but
is the most eternal of all of them, and primarily eternal, calls the world indeed
most beautiful, but the Demiurzus most excellent. For that which is most beau-
tiful was generated according to the most divine paradigm, and that which is
most excellent necessanly looks to that which is supreme. For if that which is most
beautiful was not derived trom the first paradigm, this first paradigm will either be
the paradigm of nothing, or of something less excellent. But it is not lawful for
superior natures to make that which is less excellent in secondary natures, And
unless that which is best looked to that which is first [either it will not make that
which is most beautiful'] or not looking to that which is first it will make it. How
likewise, will that which is the first paradigm, rank as a paradigm, unless* that
which is best intellectually perceives it?) And how can that which 15 intelligible to
a less excellent nature, be incoinprehensible through transcendency by that which
is more excellent? Hence it is necessary that what is most beautiful shculd have
been generated according to that whichis most divine, and that what is most excel-
lent should look to that which is most eternal. Farther still, it isnecessary that what
is most beautiful should be fabricated by that which is best. For of what is that
which is best the cause, unless of that whichis the most beautiful of generated
natures? For if it is not the cause of the most beautiful effect, it is the cause of
something less excellent. If, therefore, that which is best is the cause of that
which is less excellent, that which is not best will be entirely the cause of that
which is most beautiful, and thus the order of things will be radically subverted.
It must be admitted therefore, that these three things are, as it is said, demonstrated
by geometrical necessities ; and through these we are reminded after what manner
names are assumed by Plato. Porphyry however adds, that if the Demiurgus
is most excellent, it follows that he looks to an eternal nature, or? that he will not
fabricate what is beautiful. And in the next place,* it is necessary that he who
fabricates What is [truly] beautiful, should look to that.which is eternal, or’ he will
not make what is beautiful as the best of fabricators, but he will make it casually.
Hence also, Plato asserts that the fabricators of mortal natures are damons.
And ifindeed, they are simply most excellent, nothing will prevent the artificers
and framers of mortal natures from being likewise most excellent, and on this

* The words ἢ ov ποίει ro καλλιστον, are omitted in the original, but evidently ought to be inserted.
Ὁ Instead of ἡ in this place, it is requisite to read εἰ yn.

3 Instead of ec here, read ἡ. 2. For ecre read era,

5" The same emendation is also requisite here as above.

280 PROCLUS ON THE [BOOK tr.

account the fabricators of beautiful images. Such therefore are the observations.
of Porphyry.

We may easily however learn, that it is rightly said the world is most beautiful,
and the Demiurgus the best of causes. In the first place, indeed, the beauty of
the heavens, the order of the periods, the measures of the seasons, the harmony
of the elements, and the analogy which pervades through all things, demonstrate
to those who are not entirely blind, that the universe is most beautiful. [ἢ the
next place, does not the order of the invisible powers it contains, according
to which the parts of the world are connected, and the gift of the intellectual
essence, evince that it is the most beautiful of generated natures? For there are
in it the harmonious choir of souls, the participation of intellect, the supply ofa
divine life, the progression ἡ of ineffable deity, and the number of henads or uni-
ties, from which the whole becomes full of beauty. Since also, the fpartial] soul
which is assimilated to the universe, becoming elegantly adorned, exhibits mn her-
self an admirable beauty, how is it possible that the universe should) not possess
beauty in a still greater degree? hence theolosists conjoining Venus with Vulcan,
say that he thus fabricated the universe, And again, from VWulean and Agata,
they generate Eucleia and Eusthenia, Eupheme and Philophrosune, who render
the corporeal-formed nature decorated with beauty. Neither therefore, do those
who revile the Demiurgus, dare to say that the world Is not most beautiful, but
on the contrary they say that through the beauty of it souls are allured and
ensnared.

But how are we to adnit that the Demiurgus is the best of eternal natures?
For some think that we must understand by this word dest, the best of the causes
of generated natures, in order that he may not be absolutely the best of causes.
For this would be false, but that he may be the best of the causes of things that
are generated ; since the natures that are above him are not the causes of these.
I however, should be ashamed of myself, if L were in want of such an artifice as
this, forgetting what was a little before said, in which the Demiurgus now
delivered to us by Plato, was shown to be the fountain and monad of every
demiurzic order. On account of this therefore, he is the best of causes, because
he is allotted the first order among the demiurgi of the universe ; Plato here,
directly emulating Homer, who calls the Demiurgus the father of wholes, and the
supreme of rulers; and he thus denomiaates him though he mentions the Geds

* Itappears to me that the word xpocéus must be supplied in this place.

BOOK 11. TIMALUS OF PLATO. 281

prior to him, as far as to the Goddess Night. Because therefore Jupiter is the
most ancient and venerable of demiurgi, he is celebrated by Tomer as the
supreme of rulers, but by Plato as the best’ of causes. Others however by no
means dare to aceuse the Demiurgus, but blame this universe, and pervert. thie
assertions of the ancients, who eall ita eavern and aden. And others, as Hera-°
clitus, say, Chat the Demiargus sported in fabricating the world,

To these objections however it is easy to reply. Por though the world is, as
Plato says, most beautiful, and a blessed God, yet when compared with the
intelligible, and the place which is there, it is deservedly called a cavern and a
den. And it is especially so to partial souls who verge to bodies and matter.
But with respect to the Demiurgus, though he is the best of causes, yet the whole
of his providential energies about the recent fabrications, may be called sport,
when compared with the energies which are exempt from sensibles. For these
reasons therefore, the Demiurgus is thus celebrated in the present: words by
Plato. Tt is requisite also to understand how the co-ordination of the most
beautiful with the most excellent, is suspended from the first principles. For as
in them beauty is suspended from (he good, and the beautifying cause, from the
fountain of all cood, thus also here, the world is said to be most beautiful, but the
Demiurgus most execient, and the most beautiful is suspended from that which
is best. Inthe next place i is requisite to understand how what is said about
the fabrication itself (of things] imitates this fabrication. For as the world itself
was led from confusion to order, and a similitade to the intelligible, by fabrica-
tion, thas also the discussion of it first employed abhorrent: appellations, calling
it generated and destructible, but now the most venerable names, denominating
it the best of generated natures, the offspring of the most excellent father, and
the image of the most divine paradigm. And shortly after, he reminds us of it
hy the most sacred of names.

“ But again, these things [thus] subsisting, there is every necessity that
the world should be the image of a certain thing.”

To those who are more simple, what is here said may appear to be the same
with what was before asserted. For some one who does not survey things accu-
rately may ask what difference there is between saying, thatthe world was fabricat-

* For αἴτιος here, itis necessary to read aproros.

Tim. Plat. Vor. i. 2N

289 PROCLUS ON THE [ποὺκ 11.

ed according toa paradigm, and that it is the image of a certain thing. In reality
however, each of these is separated from the other. For since itis possible for an
artificer to make conformably to a paradigin, but the thing fabricated may not
become the image of the paradigm in consequence of not being vanquished by
the fabricating cause; in order that vou may not fancy that this is alse the ease
with the world, Plato has shown that the Demiargus indeed looked to a para-
digm, and that being most excellent he looked to the most divine paradigm, trom
what he said respeeting the universe being fabricated conformably to the itellt-

ἐπ αἷς its

gible, But that the universe also is vanquished by form, and traly
paradigm, he manifests from what is now said. Por if the world is an image,
the universe is assimilated to the intelligible, For that which is not dissimilar
but similar and consentancous, is an image. You have therefore, the sensible
universe, the most beautiful of images, the intellectual universe, the best of causes,
and the intelligible universe, the most divine of paradigms, Each of these also is
every where. Por the sensible universe participates of intellect and being; the
intellectual universe possesses sensibles uniformly, but itelligibles “secondarily 5
and the intelligible universe antecedently comprehends, primordially and umited-
ly, intellectuals and sensibles. Phe universe however, subsists appropriately in
each order. And the sensible universe indeed, is placed before us as a fabrica-
tion; but the eternal is two-fold, the one beme as demiurgic, but the other as
paradigmatic 3 though the paradigmatic is also in the demiurgic. Por the
Demiurgus makes looking to himself; since every Intellect sees itself) and is the
same with the intelligible it contains. And again the demiurgic is in the paradig-
matic; since it makes that which is generated, Por it is not a paradigm like a
form impressed in wax, nor as the Image of Socrates is the image of another
Image; but the paradigmatic cause by its very being makes secondary natures
similar to itself At the same time however, to fabricate paradigmatically, and
τὸ be a paradigm demiurgically (16. fabricatively] differ, For the former is to
energize essentially ; but the latter is to impart essence energetically, And the
former is to perceive intellectually, intelligibly ; bat) the Latter is to be intelli-
wible intellectually. For (he peculiarity of he paradigm ww to make by is very
being ; but of the Demiurgus, to make by cnergismg. Vor itis wot the same thing
tumake by existing, and to hnow and energize through knowledges siice soul
also produces life by evisting, but makes artificially through knowledge. And it

* For ovros here, read ovrws.

* For ra αἰσθητὰ here, it is necessary to read ra sonra,

nook 11} TIMAUS OF PLATO. 283

possesses indeed, the former essentially, but the latter according to energy. And
Why is it requisite to lengthen these observations philosophically ? For the theolo-
gist lone before, celebrates the demiurgic cause in Phanes. 10)" there, ds he SAYS,
the gre.t Bromius, or ali-sceing Jupiter, was, and antecedently existed y in order that
he micht have as it were the fountains of the twofold fabrication of things. He
also celebrates the paradigmatic eause in Jupiter, For again, he likewise is, as
hosayvs, Metis the first ccnerator, and much-pleasing Love. He is also continual-
ly denominaied by him, Dionysius, aud Phanes, and Ericapwus. All the causes
thereiore participate ofeach other, and are in each other; so that he who Says as
the εν το Tamblehus, that the Deminrgus comprehends in himself the paradigm,
and he who evinces, as the dlustrious Amehus, that the paradicm is the Demiur-
gus, a eertain respeet speak rightly, For the latter saw the demiurgic peculiarity
pre-existing Inthe paradigm; for there the first Jupiter exists, and on this account
he makes Phanes to be the Demiurgus ; but the former saw the paradigm in the
Demiturcns, For Metis also was in the Demiurgus, being absorbed by him,
And on this account he considered the paradigmatic to be the same with the
deminraic eause. And thus much concerning these particulars,

We ought not however, to wonder if Plato calls the world an image. For
though itis most beautiful, vet itis the image of intelligible beauty. Through
this similitude also, aoexhibits such things as adorn! and beautify. generation,
and receives as a whole the form of the paradigm. ‘Thus the philosopher calls
the world the image of the intelligible, as being assimilated to its paradigm. The
addition likewise of vecessity, shows that the similitade of the former to the latter
is admirable and metlable. Afterwards also, le testifies this by a demonstration
indubitable and firm. For it proceeds trom the hypotheses themselves,

But in every thing, to begin from a principle according to nature, is

the greatest of undertakings.”

Some read what is here said by stopping at the word ravros, every thing, ac-
cording to whom the words indicate, that it is the greatest of all things, to make
that bezinning. of the discussion which is according to nature. But others, stop-
ping at the word μέγιστον, ereaiest, conjoin the word rayrog with what follows; so
that with them the colon signifies that it is the greatest undertaking, to begin

* For exirpowevorra here, I rcad eximpexovra,

504 PROCLUS ON THE [nook τι.

the discussion of tho universe, from a principle which is according to nature,
Others again say that these words are introduced for the sake of the things pre-
viously assumed, these being rightly concluded through) the hypotheses which
were necessary. But according to others, they are introduced for the sake of
what is directly after asserted, it being requisite, if we intend to make a proper
beginning, to define previously what hind of discourses ought to be adopted
concerning sensibles, And others say, they are introduced for the sake of what
will afterwards be delivered concerning the tinal cause, Por this is the greatest
principle, and according to nature, which it is requisite especially to survey, and
from which commencing it is fit to discuss what follows. But that previous to
the disquisition of this, he informs us what the mode will be gf physical dis-
cussions.

To me however, this axiom appears to be rightly asserted of all things. Vor it
is universal, and is adapted to what has been before said, to what immediately
follows, and to what will be again said. Or rather, it is not adapted to these
alone, but to all fabrication. Por beginning from a principle according to nature
as from a root, Plato delivers afterwards explanations of cause homologous to this
principle. And science itself, from) proper hypotheses, collects appropriate
conclusions. Science therefore follows the order of things ; but doctrinal dis-
quisition follows science. And this is the greatest undertaking. Ino the first
place, because it imitates wholes, and the progression of beings. In the next
place, because if the smallest particular Is overlooked in’ the principle, it becomes
multiplied as we proceed. And in the third place, the principle or beginning, Is
said to be the half of the whole. If however, this be the case, it possesses the
createst power, ΠῚ, too, as some say, the principle is something more than’ the
whole, it is in an admirable manner said to be the greatest thing. The truth ag
this is also. testified by poets who say, ‘that every thine which reecives a good
beginning usually ends well.” And moreover, on this account the Athenian
euest calls the principle a God, if it obtains that which is fit. For he says,
* Principle being established in men as a God, produces all things rightly of it obtains
acongruous portion{or the part which ts adapted to "1

But what is the meaning of the words “ according to nature? Is it the re-
ceiving every thing which ought to be received, or is it that which first proceeds
from things which subsist essentially? Por that which ts last is a principle as
with reference to us, but not with reference to nature. The principle therefore

BOOK "1 TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 285

4d

according to nature, of the universe indeed, is the final cause, but of demonstra-
tions the hypotheses, and of discussions the definition respecting the form of the
doctrine, whether itis to be received as firm, immutable and accurate, or as
that which is merely probable, and is not indeed truth, but credible, and assimi-
Jated to truth.

“After this manner therefore, we must decide about the image, and

the paradigm of it.”

These three particulars are connascently consequent to each other, the things,
the conceptions, and the words, According to the things and the conceptions
therefore, Plato assumes the first hypothesis; but according to the words he
makes this definition, Por when he separates that which is generated from being,
he adheres to the theory of the things. But when he defines our knowledge
according to the objects of it, he adheres to the theory of the conceptions.” And
now distributing the words according to the diversity in the knowledge of them,
he demonstrates to us their definite nature. Tlence, these are consentaneous to
each other; viz. twofold things, being and that which is generated ; twofold
knowledges, intelligence and opinion; and twofold words, the stable and the
probable, For whence are knowledges derived, except from the objects of know-
ledge? And whence ts the difference of words derived, except from knowledges ?
Some therefore say, that it is the logographic art to define previously what. the
mode is of the diction, and what kind of person the auditor of it ought to be;
and that Aristotle emulated this, and also many others more recent.

L however should say that the disenssion imitates the fabrication itself of things,
[ν᾽ αὐ thatunfolds into lightthe invisible lives of the world, but gives subsistence
to that which is apparent, and imparts a boundary to it prior to the whole world,
thus also Timwus adheres indeed to the theory of the things ; bat also makes
the form of the words to be adapted to the things; and antecedently assumes,
and previously defines the mode of the whole theory ofthe discussion, in order
that he may dispose the whole ofthe doctrine conformably to this definition, Why
therefore does he do this now and not before? Because, after the demonstra-

' In the original, ore ες ras nperepas γνώσεις διοριθει, exe ros πραγμασιν τοιε τῶν νοημάτων, Which is evi-
dently defective, but may be restored to its genuine meaning by reading, ore δε ras ἡμετέρας γνωσεις

Sopi2et ene rows πράγμασιν, rns ἀντείχετο Ocwpias των νοηματων.

28. PROCLUS ON THE ἐν ἐς

tion, that it is requisite the world should be generated, he necessarily detines
what the nature of the discussion about: sensible things ought tg be, but not prior
to this, the nature of the universe being unknown, But when he calls the world
an image, an image of sucha kind is not ἡ to be assumed, as we conceive that
of inanimate * natures to) be, as neither is the paradigm unprolitic and ineflicact-
ous, but an assimilation must be given to this world to the intelligible. Inthe
first place indeed, according to the prolific power ot the paradizin 5 for by its
very being it produces the image trom itself. In the second place, according to
the demiurgic cause, Which renders the universe most similar to the intelligible,
by the energies extended to it. And in the third place, according to. the con-
version of the world itself to the forming power and participation of intelligibles.
Por “itassimilates itself, as the Oracle says, hastening to be invested with the im-

pression of the images which the intelligible Gods extend to it.”

“ As words therefore are allied to the things themsclves of whica they

are the interpreters.’

As the progression of beings is from the one which is prior’ to the many, and

mundane natures proceed from a monad to their proper number, thus also. the.

discourse of Timieus, beme assimilated, as he says, to beings, commences
from one axiom, and the universal, and thus afterwards introduces division to his
words. What therefore is the one common axiom, in the words before us?) That
itis necessary language should be allied to the things, of which itis the interpreter.
And it seems that the Platonists Albinus and Gaius, and their followers, took
occasion from hence to define in how many ways Plato dogmatizes ; and that he
does this in a twofold respect, either scientifically, ov from probability, and not
according to one mode, nor as if all discussions had one accuracy, whether they
are concerning beings, or things which subsist through generation ; but such as
is the nature of things, such also is that of the words which are divided) in con-
Janction with things. Hence they subsist in such a way with respect to accuracy
and clearness about the things which are their subjects, that some words assert

the accuracy of the dogmas, but others their probability. For it is necessary that

1 Ou is omitted in the original,
>For ῴνχὼν here, itis necessary to read αψυχων,

2 ΤΙρο is omitted in the original.

DIR Te ee

ΤΙΝ OF PLATO. 237

BOOK 11.}

language should be similar to things ; since it could not otherwise interpret their
nature, than by being allied to them, Por it is requisite that what the thing is
contractedly, that language should be evolvedly ; in order that it may unfold the
thing into Jight, and may be subordinate to the nature of it. Hence, the
divine causes of language unfold after this manner the essences of the natures
prior to them, and are connascent with them. J the Gods therefore, the angel or
messenger of Jupiter (i.e. Hermes), who has the relation of logos to the intellect of his
father, announces the will of Jupiter to secondary natures. But in essences, soul which
is the logos of intelligibles, unfolds the united cause of wholes which ts in them, she
receiving from them her hypostasis."| And in the genera superior to us, the angelic order
has the relation of logos to the Gods. Very properly therefore, is it here said, that
language is allied to the things of which it is the interpreter. This therefore,
must be said to be the one* common axiom, prior to the divided particulars. And
Timwus in what follows, distributes different modes of words in conjunction with

the quality of the things.

- “ TIence, respecting that which is permanent and stable, and intellec-
tually apparent, it is requisite that the words should be as much as
possible permanent, without lapse, irreprehensible and immutable. But

in this [stability] the paradigm is in no respect deficient.”

Prior to this, Timeus called the paradigm perpetual being, subsisting invariably
the same, and apprehended by intelligence ; but now he calls it permanent and
stable; the former indeed, instead of perpetual being, and which is apparent in
conjunction with intellect, but the latter, instead of that which is apprehended by
intelligence. Tle also denominates: the words respecting it permanent, indeed, in
order that through the sameness of the name, he may indicate the similitude of
them to things; but wethout lapse, in order that they might adumbrate the firm-
ness of the thing. And irreprehensible, in order that they may imitate that which
is comprehended by intelligence, and may scientifically accede. For it 15
necessary that words, in order that they may be adapted to intelligibles, should
have accuracy and firmness, as being employed about things of this kind. For
as the knowledge of eternal natures is without lapse, so likewise is the discourse

* For τὴν υποθεσιν here, it is necessary to read τὴν νποστασιν-.
> Ἐν is omitted in the original, but evidently ought to be inserted.

288 PROCLUS ON THE {Book 11.

about them. For it is an evolved knowledge. Since, however, it proceeds into
multitude, and is allotted a composite nature, and on this account falls short of
the union and impartibility of the thing, he densminates the thing itself in’ the
singular number permanent and stable, cad intellectually apparent; but the
discourse about it in the plural number, calling it stable words, which are without a
lapse, and are irreprehensible. And since in language there is a certain: simi-
litude to the paradigm, but there is also a certain dissimilitude, and this abundant,
he assumes one word in common ¢he permanent, but the others different. Since
also a scientific discourse is irreprehensible, as with reference to our knowledge 3
for there is not any thing ἴῃ ἂς better than science; but is confated by the thing.
itself, as not being able to comprehend the nature of it, such as it really is, and.
as falling off! from its impartibility,—on this account he adds, δ as much as
possible” For science itself, as subsisting in souls, is indeed irreprehepsible, but
is reprehended by intellect, for evolving that which is iinpartble, and apprehend-
ing that which is simple ina composite manner, For the phantasy also repre-
hends sense, because its knowledge is in conjunction with passion, according to
a commixture, from which the phantasy is purified. But opinion reprehends
the phantasy because its knowledge is attended with type and morphe, from
Which opinion is. free. Science reprehends opinion, because its Knowledge Is
without the explanation of cause, by which science is especially bound. And
intellect. as we have said, reprehends science, because it transitively divides the
object of knowledge, but intellect’ Knows at once the whole in conjunction with
essence. Hence intellect is alone unconquerable, but science, and scientific

discourse, are vanquished by intellect, according to the knowledge of being.

“It is necessary however, that words respecting that which 1S assiMl-
lated tothe permanent and stable, but which is the image of being
should possess probability [alone).”

That the discussion of generated * natures, is a discussion about an image, and"
that on this account it is to be called probable, is evident. Perhaps however,
some one may inquire what words remain to be assigned to things which are not
assimilated to the intelligible, but yet at the same time exist in the universe, such

* For axopevos here, 1 read axoornoapevos.

> For πρὸ των γενήτων in this place, it is obviously necessary to read πέρι τῶν YORT wr.

BOOK 11} ΤΙΜΊΕῦΘ OF PLATO, 249

as we assert conjectural and artificial things tobe, May we not say, that words
of a conjectural nature are adapted to these, which words are different from
those that are assimilative? For to conjecture is one thing; since this is more
obscure than sense; and to assimilate another. For assimilation pertains to
the interpreters of the images of being. Artificial, therefore, and conjectural
things, are unfolded through conjectural words. Unless other such like words
are adapted to things which are truly conjectural; but with respect to artificial
things, assimilative or probable words, are adapted to those that are the first from
forms, but to those which have a secondary hypostasis, and are the third from
truth, such words are adapted as pertain to things conjectural by nature. For
conjectural things are the images of sensibles, in the same manner as sensibles
are the images of intelligibles. Thus the painted bed is the image of that which
is made by the carpenter.

Farther still, this also must be considered, that Plato is now speaking about
physical images, and that on this account he gives a twofold division to words.
Por things which are assimilated to the intelligible, subsist by nature or naturally ;
but this is not the case with things artificial, For the artist does not make that
Which he makes, according to certain ideas, though Socrates appears to say
this in the Republic. There, however, what is said, is asserted for the sake of the
paradigm, and is not concerning ideas themselves. For he says that God is the
maker and Demiurgus of things artificial,’ but he is not the Demiurgus of ideas.
But in the Protagoras, it is clealy shown by Plato that we do not contain the
reasons or productive principles of the arts,* and much less of things artificial,

' See the 10th book of the Republic, where he speaks of the ideas of a bed and a table. Plato,
however, did not intend to signify in what he there says, that there is an idea of each of these in the
intellect of the Demiurgus of the universe; or, in short, that there are ideas of things artificial; but
he calls by the name of idea, the reason or productive and forming principle which subsists in the
dianoctic power of the artificer, This reason also he says, is the offspring of deity, because he
conceived, that this very artificial principle itsclf, is imparted to souls from divinity, Proclus, in the
Parmenides, well observes, that an argument. of the truth of this may be derived from Β΄ πο, that
Piato calls a poet the third from, or with respect to, the truth, placing him analogous to a painter, who
does not make a bed, but the image of it. The form of bed, therefore, in the dianoctic part of the
artificer, ranks as first with respect to truth; the bed which he makes as second; and that which is
printed asthe third. But if there was an idea of bed in the intellect of divinity, the painter
would be the fourth, and not the third from truth.

* i.e. The soul dues not essentially contain the reasons of those arts which are solely ministrant to
the purposes of the moral life.

Tim. Plat. Vou. I. 20

290 PROCLUS ON THE [βοοκ 11,

and that neither are the paradigms of them established in the Gods. These
therefore were not generated according to the intelligible. Plato, however, now
divides words into those which pertain to the discussion of the intelligible, and
those which are concerning the image of the intelligible. Hence indicating this he
says, that words respecting that which ty assimilated to the permanent and stable, but
which is the image of being, should possess probability [alone]. But the works of
nature are assimilated to the intelligible, and not the works of art; so. that
neither have particulars this assimilation detinitely, but the universals which are
in then. We have, however, spoken concerning these things elsewhere.

“The latter words having the same relation to the former [as that
of an image to its paradigm]. For what essence is to generation, that

truth is to faith.”

Prior to this, Timaus made two things antecedent, the intelligible and the
generated, or the paradigm and the image, and assumed two things as analogous
to these, science and probability, or truth and faith: so that as truth is to the
intelligible paradigm, so is faith to the generated image. But now alternately he
says, as truth is to faith, so is the intelligible to that which Is generated. And
this perfectly well, For he makes the intelligible and truth to be antecedent, but
at the same time begins from that which is generated and faith, that he may
mingle that which bas a reference to us with the order which is according to
nature, and that he may preserve the proper worth of the things, and may argue
from what is μόν ἢ to us. Plato, therefore, clearly divides language and know-
ledge conformably to the objects of knowledge 3 and Parmenides though obscure
on account of his writings being poetical, yet at the same time indicating these
things, he says, “that truth ts full of splendor and immutable, but that the
opinions of mortals have no real credibility.” And again, “ that there are two paths,
one of which has a real existence, so that itis not: possible for it ποῖ to exist.
But this is the path of Persuasion, and 15 attended by Trath, The other, necessarily
has no true caistence. The former of these paths, however, Clough replete with
the most perfect persuasion, is unpleasant.” And again, * Neither can you have
any knowledge of non-being; for it is not attainable; nor can you make it
the subject of discourse." The philosopher therefore says, that there are ἔν ον

* Owing to the obscurity of the original, | have only given the substance of the verses of Parmenides

ROOK tJ TIM:ALUS OF PLATO. 204

fold knowledges, of twofold things 5 truth which he calls [full of splendor, as
shining with intellectual heht; and faith, from which he takes away stable
knowledge. The faith, however, which Plato now mentions appears to be
diflerent from that spoken of him in the Republic, in the section of a line, For
there the faith is an irrational knowledge ; whence also itis divided from eonjec-
ture, but is arranged according to sense, The faith however of which he now
speaks is rational, but is mingled with irrational knowledge, as it employs sense
and conjecture. Hence itis filled with much of the unstable. For receiving from
sense or conjecture the ors, or (hata thing is, it thus explains causes. But these
kinds of knowledge, have much of the confused and unstable. Hence Sucrates
in the Phado reprehends sense in many respects, because we neither hear nor see
any thing accurately.

How, therefore, can the knowledge which originates from sense possess the ac-
curate and the irreprehensible? | For the powers which use science alone, compre-
hend the whole of the thing known with accuracy ; but those that energize with
sense, are deceived, and deviate from accuracy, on account of sense, and because
the object of knowledge is unstable. For with respect to that which is material,
what can any one say of it, since it is always changing and flowing, and is not
naturally adapted to abide fora moment, But that which is celestial, in conse-
quence of being remote from us, is not casily known, nor to be apprehended by
science, but we must be satistied in the theory of it, with an approximation to the
truth, and with probability [instead of certainty}. For every thing which is in
place, requires the being situated there, in order to a perfect knowledge of its
nature. The intelligible, however, is nota thing of this kind; since it is not
apprehended by us in place. For wherever any one establishes his dianoetic
energy, there, truth being every where present, he comes into contact with it.
But if it is possible to assert any thing firm and stable about that which is celestial,
this also is possible so faras it participates of being, and so far as it can be
apprehended by intelligence. For if any thing necessary ean be collected
concerning it, it is alone through geometrical demonstrations which are universal.
But so far as it is sensible, it is difficult to be apprehended, and difficult to. be
surveyed. And thus much concerning there particulars. .

Some one, however, may doubt, how it can be any longer said to be difficult to
discover the Demiurgus, and impossible when found to speak of him to all men,
since we are able to employ stable, immutable, and irreprehensible language about
the paradigm? Or is not that which.is said about the Demiurgus, in a much

292 PROCLUS ON THE [Βοοκ 11.

greater degree adapted to the paradigm itself? For it is much more difficult to
discover the latter than the former, and when found to speak of it to all men.
Neither, however, does Plato deny that scientific language may be employed about
the Demiurgus, nor about any other of the natures that subsist always invariably
the same. For in what does Plato differ from other physiologists, except in ex-
hibiting the science pertaining to divine natures? But if he particularly reminds
us of this in the Demiurgic cause, that itis difficult to find it, we ought not to
wonder. For he knew, as it appears to me, that other physiologists tronsfer the
effective cause to physical powers. Hence that we may not be affected in’ the
same way as they were, he shows that the Demiurgic principle is difficult to be
found, and difficult tobe known. And this much in answer to the doubt.

Plato however in many places admits the truth of beings, conformably to
theologists. For aniform truth (or truth characterized by unity] is of one kind,
and is the light proceeding from the good, which, as he says in the Philebus,
imparts purity, and as he says in che Republic, union to intelligibles. The truth
proceeding from intelligibles, is of another kind, and illuminates the intellectual
orders, which the essence that is without figure, without colour, and without
contact primarily receives, where, also, as itis written in the Phadrus, the plan
of truth is situated. Another kind of truth is that whichis connarcent with souls,
which comes into contact with being through intelligence, and is) conjoined
through science with the objects of science. For the psychical hight, may be
said to be as in the extension of breadth the third from = the intelligible; the
intellectual breadth being filled from the intelligible, but the psychical from the
intellectual. This truth, therefore, which is in souls, is that, which must now
be assumed, since we likewise assume this faith, and not that which is irrational,
and separated from all rational animadversion, The one also must be conjoined
to intelligibles, but the other to sensibles.

“ You must not wonder, therefore, O Socrates, if asserting many
things about many concerning the Gods, and the generation of the
universe, I should not be able to employ language in every respect
accurate and consistent with itself.”

Timeus first exhibits the hypotheses of the whole of physiology, and collects

the lemmas pertaining to the theory of it; the latter being three, but the former
five. In the second place, he defines the mode of the discussion. And in the

ΠΟΟΚ 41.} TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 293 -

third place, he prepares the auditor to receive in a proper manner the discourse

which he is about to make. For it is necessary that he should not expect to

hear perfectly accurate arguments in’ physical discussions, nor sach as are truly
scientific, but such as are assimilated to them. 11 is besides this requisite he
should know, that as the world is mingled from physical powers and an intel-
lectual and divine essence; for “ physical works, as the Oracle says, co-subsist
with the intellectual light of the father = thus also the disenssion of it, makes a
commixture of faith and trath, Por things which are assumed) from sense par-
ticipate largely of conjectural discussion; but things which commence from intel-
ligibles possess that which ds irreprehensible, avd cannot be confuted. For
when we say of the Demiurgus himself, that he consults, that he energizes diano-
etically, and that he makes these things prior to those, we relingtish the trath
ofthings. So thatif when speaking of eternal beings, and showing how they
provide for the universe, we are compelled to divide that which is impartible,
and to inake that which is eternal temporal, much more will the assertions res
specting sensibles themselves be deficient in accuracy [and truth]. What then,
someone may say, do we not speak accurately concerning the heavens when we say,
thatthe circles inthe bisect each other? Butdo we notfall off from accuracy, when
we are satisfied, not with the accurate, but with an approximation to it, in con-
sequence of our tmbecility, and not on account of the nature of the thing? Or,
also, when we receive indeed, principles from sense, yet is it not from universal
reasons? ‘The assertions therefore, respecting the heavens, as in intelligibles, ex-
hibit the irreprehensible; bat as in objects of belief, they also are reprehended
through immaterial forms. Consider then this very thing which is now asserted,
that the greatest circles in the Heavens bisect each other. [sy it not necessary that
the section should be according to points? But a point isimpartible. What,
therefore, is there of this kind ina partible nature? What is there without inter
yal in a nature distended with interval?) For every thing which subsists in a phy-
sical body, is co-divided with its subject. What, then, is there not likewise a
physical point? This however relinquishes that which is truly impartible, and is
a point indeed, in physical substances, but is not simply a point. So that what
is said of a point, is not accurately adapted to a thing of this kind. In short, as
the assertions concerning intelligibles, are not adapted to dianoetic objects, so
neither is what is said of scientific objects adapted to sensibles. For intelligibles
are the paradigms of dianoetic natures, and dianoetic natures of sensibles. For

204 PROCLUS ON THE [βοοκ “τ.

it is soul which adorns the mighty heaven, and adorns it in conjunction with the
father. So that when we speak of circles in the heavens, of contacts, bisections,
and equalities, we speak accurately, as not speaking about sensibles. Since
therefore things of this kind may be asserted of all material natures, the objection
is trifling.

If, however, some one should.ask us, is not that which is truly equal impartible,
and that which is truly a circle, without interval? Por each is a universal; but
universal is an impartible reason and form. But the natures in’ the heavens are
partible, and not indivisible, and are inasubject, Here again, we do not say
that either circles, or equalities, or any thing else of this kind are in sensibles ;
and thus we are consistent with ourselves. We summarily, say, therefore, that
Plato at one time defines science, by an explanation of causes alone ; at another time,
by the subjects of tt, possessing anessence perfectly stable, tovether with an caplanation
of cause ; and at another, by the principles not being hypotheses. And according
to this last form, indeed, he asserts that there is one science (i.e. dialectic] which
ascends as far as to the principle of being. Por this science pre-establishes the
principle which is truly principle, to be unhypothetical, Ttalse has for its subject
truly exisiting being, and produces its reasonings from cause, But according
tothe second form, he also calls dianoetic knowledge science. And according
to the first alone, he allows the appellation of science to be given to phystology.
Now therefore looking to the first’ form he thinks fit to call it conjectural know-
ledye. And thus much in answer to the doubt, the whole of what is here said
being attended with difficulty on account of the construction of the words, which
may thus be corrected with a small addition. “JA O Socrates, asserting many
things about many,” afterwards showing what these many things are, he adds,
“ concerning the Gods, and the gencration of the universe. And these are the
many he alludes τον. Uf therefore, he says, many things being asscrted about
many, concerning the generation of the universe, and the Gods tt contains, cach of these
being many, we should not be able to employ accurate language, you must not ΟΝ
He says this, however, because itis not w onderful, to be oceupicd in things of a
necessary nature, But it is necessary that a discussion should not be accurate in
a twofold respect, viz. on account of the thing known, not being stable and clear,

and on aecount of our nature being human. So great therefore is the caution

' Itis evidently necessary instead of Seurepor ertus iv this plece, to read πρωτὸν etSos. Vor diunve-

tc hnowledge is by nu means conjectural.

ΠΟΟΚ 11. TIMTUs OF PLATO. 295

which Plato employs in what he says. This however is not the case with others.
But Heraclitus, by asserting of himself that he knew all things, makes all other
mento be destitute of science. And Empedocles announces that he imparts
truth herself, and that, in what he writes.

‘To Wisdom’s summit rapidly he leaps.

For these assertions are not conformable to philosophic caution. But the Stoics
say that there is the same virtue of Gods and men, being very far from emulating
the piety of Plato, and the modesty of Socrates.

“ Tf therefore we shall afford arguments no less probable than others,
it is proper to be satisfied, calling to mind that I who speak, and that:
you who are my judges, have the human nature [in common]. 80. that
if you reccive a probable narration concerning these things, it is fit to
seek for nothing farther than this.”

Timeus reminds us ina twofold respect of the privation of stability and aceu-
racy in physical discussions ; first, from the essence of the things. For from im-
material natures becoming material, from impartble partible, from separate
hatures, such as are situated in a foreign seat, and from universal, becoming indi-
vidual and partial natures, they do not receive the definition of things scientific
and irreprehensible, which is adapted to: immaterial and imparuble forms. But
in the second respect, from the imbecility of that by which physical objects are
surveyed. For if it be requisite to know any thing concerning them, it is also
requisite to embrace a knowledge co-ordinate to them. But this is sense. And
if indeed we were in the heavens, we should perhaps be less deceived ; but here
dwelling in the last part of the universe, and being most remote from them, we
employ sense in a gross and erroncous manner. For we are allotted the human
nature. But the human nature brings with ita life which is material and dark-
ened by the body, and which is partible, and in want of irrational knowledge.
The Gods, however, know' that which is generated, in a way perfectly remote
from generation, that which is temporal, eternally, and that which is contingent,
necessarily. For by intellectually perceiving they generate all things, so that they

* The word yeywosover is wanting in the original.

906 PROCLUS ON THE [BOOK It,

intellectually perceive them after the above- mentioned manner. For we must not
fancy that knowledge is characterized by the natures of the things known, or that
what is not stable is also not stable with the Gods, as the pInlosopher Porphyry
says; for this is asserted by lim which it would have been better not to have said ;
but we must admit that the mode of knowledge varies with the diversities of gnos-
tic natures. For the same thing is known by divinity indeed unitedly, by intel-
lect totally, by reason universally, by the phantasy morphotically," and by sense
passively. Nor does it follow, that because the thing known is one, the knowledge
also is one. Farther still, if knowledges are essential in the Gods, and their intel-
lizence is not adventitious, such as they are, such also is their Knowledge. But
they are immaterial, eternal, united, and undefiled; and, therefore, they know
immaterially, eternally, unitedly, and with uncontaminated purity, Hence they
antecedently comprehend that w hich ismaterial, immeatertally 5 dispersed multitude,
uniformly ; that which is changed according to time, stably and eternally 5 and
every thing preternatural, dark and impure, ina manner ftranscendently lumi-
nous and] pure, Would it not therefore be superfluous to add any further contir-
mation of this truth?

Again however this? may be assumed from what has been said, that the want of
accuracy in the theory of the images of being, arises from our imbecility Por to
the knowledge of them we require phantasy, sense, and many other organs. But
the Gods contractedly comprehend these in their unity, and divine intellection,
For in sublunary natures, we are satisfied in apprehending that which for the most
part takes place, on account of the instability of their subject matter, But again,
in celestial natures, we are filled with much of the conjectoral, through employing
sense, and material instruments, On this account, we must he satisticd wath
proximity in the apprehension of them, since we dwell remotely, at the bottom,
as itis said, of the universe. This also is evident from those that are conversant
with them, who collect the same things respecting them from diferent hypotheses 5
some things, indeed, through eccentrics, others through epicyeles, and others
through evolvents, (in all these} preserving the phenomena, What then, some
one may say, are we to be satisfied with Plato im physiologizing, and in affording
us arguments no less probable than others? May we not reply, that it especially
becomes prudent men thus to speak about things of this kind, and to pursue the

' The word morphe, as we have elsewhere observed, pertains to the colour, figure, and magnitude
of superficies. Hence, the phantasy perceives morphotically, because its sight 1s a figured perception.
? Yor roec here, it secins necessary to read rovro.

1

Book 11. TIMAUS OF PLATO. 297

medium between dissimulation and arrogance ; for the latter is to say more, but
the former less, than all others, and the medium is to say What is in no respect
less. In the next place, the words no less, may not only be said of men in former
times, and speculators of nature, but also of the conjectural things themselves.
As if he had said, “ Jf therefore, we shall afford arguments no less probable than the
things thenselces, and shall not desert the nature of the objects of knowledge, we must
be satisfied.” The Gods indeed know these things in a more excellent manner,
but we mist be satistied with an approximating knowledze of them. For we are
men, are placed in body, and exert a partial form of life, and are filled with much!
ofa conjectural nature, Hence, our discourses may be very properly said to
resemble fables. For our language, which the word pugog a fable (used here by
Plato] indicates, is replete with crassitude and irrationality, and it is necessary to
pardon human nature,

* You speak most excellently, O Timawus, and we shall receive what
you say, in every respect as you advise. Your preface indeed we won-
derfully approve. Proceed therefore, and bring to a conclusion the sub-
sequent melody.”

In the Republic, where Socrates disposes the discourse, Timwus was. silently
present, not exhibiting bis own judgment about what was said. But) here
Socrates, after a certain admirable manner, receives what Timanus says.
Por in the things also, of which the persons are images, while secondary
natures energize, those that are first are established in themselves, and do not
depart from themselves, nor ,verge to inferior natures. But when more divine
beings energize, then more subordinate natures are elevated to the participa-
tion of them, through the love of all-various wonder. Hence Socrates, in’ what
is here said, very properly surrounds Timeus with all possible praise. For
through wonder itself, he is in a greater degree united to him. Moreover,
the word most excellent” indicates indeed, the perfect, intellectual, and scientific

“nature of the doctrine of Timaus. And it also indicates his analogy to the Demi-

urgus, For as he is the best of causes in works, thes also Timieus is the best in
discourses. ‘The words likewise, “ we shall receive what you say in every respect

' For πηλὸν here, it is necessary to read πολν.
* In the teat of Proclus, Aoyor is erroneously printed for sepor.
rae > or . o> pp
Zim, Plat. Vou. I. 21

298 PROCLUS ON THE [ϑοοκ 11.

us you advise,” indicate what kind of person he ought to he, who rightly receives
discussions concerning divine natures. That he ought assiduously to adhere to
the teacher; to perform with all his might that which is ordered by him; and to
persuade himself, that it is right to be persuaded by what the teacher says.

Farther still the word “ preface” indicates: the comprehension of total concep-
tions in the hypotheses, All things therefore, are in the preface itself" Por in
this preface, it is shown what the form* is of the object of inquiry, on what
hypotheses,’ and things previously demonstrated from them it depends, and also
what the nature is of the discussion, and what are the requisite qualifications of
the auditor. But the word νόμος melody, is assumed from modulations adapted to
the harp. These therefore, are certain melodies, some of whieh are Minerval,
out others Martial. And some indecd, are entheastic, but others are defamatory
ofmanners, Prior, however, to these melodies, itis usaal to arrange the preludes,
which also on this account are called precontrectations, From thence therefore,
they are assumed, But the word melody contributes to: the thing proposed τὸ be
considered, because all the visible partible* order of things, being harmonious,
eternally remains, on account of the goodness of its producing causes. And
because likewise, It proceeds from, and subsists according to intelleet, and pos-
sesses total powers separated from cach other, and arranged in a manner adapted
toeach. For melodies are called νομοὺς dacs, because they remain iinmutable, and
hecause such things as are fit are distributed from cach,

«“ Tet us narrate then on account of what certain cause, the composing
artificer constituted generation, and this universe.”

All that has been before said delivers to us preparatives for the whole of physio-
logy. And of these, some through images and symbols, exhibit the theory of the
world. A preface also of the whole discussion is prefixed, and of the demonstra-
tion through images or symbols; one part of which unfolds the union, but
another the separation of mundane natures. Of the prefatory parts also, some are
hypotheses, but others are as it were lemmas demonstrated through the hypo-

* For cara re re here, it seems requisite to read κατὰ rovro.
* Instead of re τὸν ecdous in this place, it is necessary to read re ro ecdos.
5 For cat ποιων υποῦεσεων read καὶ ex nowy νπυθεσεων.

* The word pepiorn is omitted in the original,

nook uJ TIMLUS OF PLATO. 299

theses. For the particulars respecting the mode of discussion, may be placed
among the things demonstrated. For to the demonstration that the world is
generated, the assertion that the discussion of it is eikotology [or speaking trom
probability], is consequent. But again, these things having received an appro-
priate end. “Timwus commencing the fabrication of the universe, begins from the
good, conceiving that the discovery of the final cause will be to him the imost
beautiful incitation. For as the good is the cause of all beings, so likewise it is
fit that the generation of the world should proceed from this as the first prin-
ciple. For all things are from ¢he good. And of such things indeed, as the demi-
urgic intellect is not’ the cause, as for instance of matter, of these the good is the
cause. And of such things as the paradigm is not hypostatic, these also derive
their subsistence from the good. For all things are for the sake of it, and it is the
cause of all beautiful things, as it is said in the Epistles. Hence Timieus refers
the other causes to this one cause. For having found the form of the world
through the hypotheses, and also the paradigmatic, and eflective cause, he now
Wishes to assign the most principal, most venerable, and most ancient of causes,
the final, which he particularly desires in the fabrication of things. For since the
man who lives according to intellect performs every thing for the sake of good, will
not intellect itself, and a divine intellect, in a much greater degree fabricate all
things for the sake of the final cause? For though the worthy man frequently
appears to perform something for the sake of the body, yet this is not the end
to him of the thing, nor does he principally regard the good of the subordinate
nature ; but he does this also for the sake of a similitude to divinity, and makes
that to be his most intentional end. How much more therefore, must the Demi-
urgus of the universe fabricate for the sake of good, and the final cause? For he
does not energize without design, nor indetinitely. Hence also, as it appears to
me, Plato does not investigate inthe beginning, if there is a final cause of the
composition of the world, but as if this was acknowledged by all men, he inquires
what the final cause is. For the Demiurgus is supposed to be intellect and a
God, and not chance, as some say, But if intellect is the maker, there is certainly
that for the sake of which in the fabrication of things. For as the soul when it is
in an upright condition, performs all things according to intellect, so intellect in
fabricating, gives subsister ce to all things conformably to divinity. But this is

the same as conformably to the good.

* For oowy μεν ἐστιν aurios here, it is necessary tu read ogwy μη ἐστιν acres,

300 PROCLUS ON THE [noox 1,

Whether therefore, it be requisite to follow the Aristotelian problems, after what
the universe is, and what kind of a thing itis, 1015 necessary to investigate on what
account itis. For it has been said that itis generated indeed, but is the image of
being. And itis also requisite besides this to cousider, for the sake of what it
was generated. Oraf it be necessary to adoptthe Platonic causes, itis fit after the
demiurgic cause and the paradigin, to discover the final cause of the fabrication
of the world. Por again, all other causes are suspended from this, ἀπ likewise
the divinity of the paradigm, the goodness of the maker, and the perfection of
that which is generated. And as far as to this is: the ascent to those who love
to conteniplate truth, Tt is ustal however, to call the final cause δέον ot account of
which ; the paradigmatic cause ποτ ον wth relation to which, the demiurgic cause
vg ov, by which ; Whe instremental cause av ov, (rough which ; form x25 ὁ, accord:
mg lo which ; and matter 22 ov, or evan, from which, ov in which, These causes also
received the same appellations from Plato limsclt, Por now investigating the
final cause he says, on account of what cause. Inquiring conecruing the paradig-
atic Catse, he says, with relation tow hich of the paradigms. Bat concerning
the demiurgic cause, he says, that which is generated, Is from necessity gene-
rated by a certain cause, And as we proceed, we shall point out the rest from
the words themselves of Plato; except: that at present also it must be said, that
these appellations are adapted to the discriminating setenee of the philosopher,

What however is generation, and) what is the universe? Some indeed by
generation understanding the sublunary phice, call the universe the whole world,
Bat these entirely wander from the meaning of Plato. Por the Detturgus ts
hot represented as separately fashioning materkdl natures, aud separately the
whole world. And in the next place, generation itself is a part of the aniverse.
Iv however, it should be said that Plato calls the heaven the universe, because it
Is the greatest part of the world, for the rest is stall ee because itis the most
divine and principal part, and as it were the summit of the universe; for the head
also is called the whole, as,

Peucer, dear Lead ;'
and Plato also says, that the world was surrounded with the remaining bulk of
body for the sake of this;—yet at the same time, the philosopher is accustomed
to call this likewise generation. Others again call matter generation, but that

ν iliad, viii. 281.

BOOK Ih] TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 504

Which is adorned trom matter fas the subject], they denominate the universe, by
Whom many things written by Plato, must necessarily be rejected. For he says.
that every thing generated, and all generation, is sensible, or tancible, and visible,
Farther sal, he gives a division to generation Opposite to that of matter, as when
he says, there were these things subsisting separately, being, place, and generation,
from which the universe was constituted,

Our preceptor however says, that the fabrication of the world is to be under-
stood ina twofold respeet. For one part of it Consists in the formation of bodies,
but the other, in adapting bodies to. the completion of one world, For it is one
‘thing to fashion bodies themselves, through figures, bat another to harmonize them
When fashioned, to the universe. Generation therefore, must be said to be the forma:
tion of bodies, being a motion [or tendency) by the wholeness and perfection of the
τσοὶ, Lor that which is composed from parts has a pre-concetved production of
the parts, Ilence the formation,’ which takes place between matter, the whole orderly
distribution of things, and the one completion of the universe, must be called generation,
τὴ order that it mity bed path to the whole inwhich the parts are comprehended. For
this is the universe, being constituted perfect from perfect: parts, according to the
one harmony of wholes. Since however, this whole is sensible, and not the in-
telligible all, or universe: for this was the paradigm 3 nor the intellectual all; for
this was demiurgie s on this account. Plato adds the particle dhis, inanifesting by
it that which is sensible and partial. For every thing corporeal, though it should
be a whole, is partial. But the most principal whole is that which is immaterial
and withont interval, and that is traly all whether it) be intellectual or intelli-
gible. And thas much concerning this particular,

But what shail we say is meant by composition? Perhaps it indicates that
the world is composed from: many things, and that the generation of it is from
dissimilars, Perhaps also, it signifies thatunion and stability accede to it from
the total fabrication. For the collocation of ow, with, fin the word σωνιττας
IS Significant of union, and of the conspiration of all things to one. But στατις,
permanency, Wanitests the firmness and stability of the fabrication of the world.
Farther stl, with respeet to the words συνιστὰς and συνεστητάτο [1 ον. he who
comjosed and he constituted) employed here by Plato, the former copulates the
present and past times, and the Jatter indicates: the perfection cand the perpe-
tuity of the fabrication. For the former of these words manifests continual pro- "

ἡ For πάσαν here, it is necessary to read πλασι».

302 PROCLUS ON THE [soon ‘i.

duction, and which is always consummately effected with invariable sameness ;
but the latter a wholeness which is allotted an existence in fulness. The signi-
fying likewise, both the past and the present time through the same names, In-
dicates that the divine fabrication proceeds through sameness and similitude.
For such as is the nature of that which is efleetive, such also is the energy which
it possesses. And as it is, so it fabricates ; because it produces by its very being,
and from! its own proper essence.

“fle was good, but in him who is good, no envy is ever ingenerated
about any thing.”

Those who call the Demiurgus the good, are entirely ridiculous. For the good
apd one who is good are not the same. For the former is imparticipable itself
by itself, andis exempt from all things; but the latter is good through participa-
tion ofthe former. And the one rules over all intelligibles ; but the other, if
indeed itis the same with the paradigm, is intelligibles themselves, but is not
the sovereign ruler of intelligibles ; and if itis subordinate to the paradigm is
in amuch greater degree inferior to the king of all intelligibles. And in’ short,
every certain God ts a certain good, one being a demiurgic, another a vivific, and
another a perfective good. But the good is nota certain good, but is sinply good,
And ifyou say that itis demiurgic, you diminish its subsistence as sinply wood,

These distinctions therefore being made, let us neat consider the beginning of
whatis here said. In the first place, therefore, as Plato when Investigating the
mundane form, and inquiring whether the world was generated, or is unbegotten,
adds prior to the whole demonstration, “ if was generated ;” and as when explor-
ing the paradigmatic cause, he previously adds, “if ts manifest to every one, that
“ἀρὰς generated with relation to an eternal paradigm,” adducing the conclusion
prior to the whole of the reasoning ;—thus also proposing to discover the
final cause after all the others, he adds, “ he was good,” imitating intellect
through this enunciation, and the at once collected comprehension of. the
assertion, For in this colon, the whole of what is Investigated Is comprehended,
because goodness is the final cause, whether itis simply so and one, or whether?
it is the demiurgic goodness. For as the paradigm is two-fold, the one being
intelligible, but the other intellectual ; and as the one is prior to the Demiurgus,

" For avro here, read azo,

* Lcre is omitted in the original.

SONS TAT ee RE OF TNT τοῦ

ROOK 11. TIMLEUS OF PLATO. 303

being primarily eternal and united, and comprehensive of all intelligible animals,
but the other which is in the Demiurgus of wholes, unically comprehends the
demiurgic number of forms ;—thus also with respect to goodness, one kind is
simply so, but another ts in the demiurgic intellect. And the former indeed, is the
fountain of all intelligible, intellectual, and supermundane good ; but the latter
being a certain goodness, is the cause and fountain of some things, but is allotted
an order subordinate to others. For if we wish to explore what it is which makes
a God, whether he be intelligible or intellectual, supermundane or mundane, we
shall find that it is nothing else than goodness. For what is it that makes each
of the bodies that are animated to be so, except the resemblance of soul? What
is it which makes intellectual souls to be such, except the intellect that is in them,
and which is an illumination of total intellect?) What therefore can deify intellect,
and an intelligible essence, except the participation of the first God, and the
forerunning illumination that proceeds from him? What therefore is the first? If
indeed, he were intelligible "beauty we should say that intellect was a God
through beauty. But since the first God is the good, intellect also through partici-
pating of goodness is a God. Hence this is the hyparxis of the Gods; and the
very essence of the Gods, if it be lawful so to speak, is goodness. According to
this likewise, every God exists as a God. And on account of this he has a
providential, or a demiurgic, or a vivific, or a connective characteristic. For

‘intellect indeed, so far as intellect, is naturally adapted to have an intellectual

perception and knowledge of beings; but to energize providentially is divine.
So that the demiurgic intellect likewise, possesses its subsistence as demiurgic, on
account of the goodness which it contains. For on account of this, the intellect
which is in the Demiurgus, is the maker, and is not only gnostic of being. The
being also which is in him, is an efficacious paradigm, and produces by its very
existence, and is not alone perfective of intellect. And intellect indeed in
making is corroborated by both these; by the paradigm, because it produces with
relation to it; and by goodness, because it produces on account of it. But the
paradigm is corroborated by unity.

You have therefore, these successive, viz. goodness, the paradigm, intellect.
And these subsist in one way indeed, in the Demiurgus, and in another prior to
the Demiurgus. And if you are willing so to speak, the first goodness is the one,

* For nrrey in this place, it is necessary ¢o read γοητον.

304 -PROCLUS ON THE [wook 11:

which is beyond even intelligibles themselves: for it 1s imparticipable " goodness.
But the paradigm is that intelligible which unitedly comprehends all the number
of forms. And the maker is the intellectual intellect which gives subsistence to
wholes. So that if Amelius said that there are three demiurgi after this manner,
perceiving this triad in the one Demiurgus, he said rightly. For one of them,
says he, makes [as it were] by contrectation, another by mandate, and another by
his will alone. And the first indeed, is arranged analogously to the manual
artiticer; the second pre-exists conformably to the architect; but the third is
established prior to both, analogously to a king, So far therefore, as the Denitur-
gus is intellect, he produces all things by the intellectual perceptions of himself ; but so
Jur asheis intelligible, he makes by his vory being ; and so far as he ix a God, by his
willalone. Whowever Amelias divalses the three Deunurgt from the one Demiur-
ous, we must not admit it, while we follow Plato, Por the same Demiurgus Ip
cood, so far as he is a God, and on account of goodness he produces all things
by his will, and is intellizible ‘intellectually 3 for such is the demiurgic being. Lle
is also intellect, the artificer of the world, The words therefore, “ he was good,” have
an explanation of this hind: in the term was, the super-plenary, the consummately
perfect, and the super-eternal nature of his divine hyparats, being indicated. Lor the
term ts, is significant of eternal things ; the term Was, of the super-eternal unities ;
and the term WILL BE, Of things which subsist in time. For of the term ws pertains to
eternal natures, the term was will be adapted to the natures prior to these, and the term
WILL BE, fo the natures posterior to these. But such are the beings which are indi-
geut of time,

Since however the Demiurgus is good, envy Is never ingenerated in him about
any thing. But some one may say, what is there {remarkable} ino intellect: not
being envious? For this? does not happen even to men that are moderately good.
The term therefore never, is significant of eternal perfection; since souls are at one
time passively effected, but at another, recur to impassivity. Bat the term about
any thing, is significant of self-suflicieney 5 since we indecd, for the sake of other
things, are frequently purified fromenvy, but in those things in which we have less

jthan we think we ought to have in these we are filled with envy. What however, ts

* For aperafexros here, reac ase Oearos.
* Vor vonrws ἐστε γοέρως, tis necessary to read in this place γόητος ἐστι voepws,

2 For rov yap here, it is requisite to read rovro yap.
yo ’ 1 yor

ΒΟΟΚΊΙΙ.] TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 305

the meaning of the term ovjeg, none.” Is it because there are many kinds of envy that
he adds none? Or is it said through transcendency, in consequence of making a
pertect negation of envy?) But what kind of transcendency is it possible to find
in assertions concerning the Gods? For all the appellations and words which are
employed about them, are beneath their dignity. Is not envy therefore, a pain
arising from the goods belonging to others, this passion if us being mingled from
pleasure and pain, as Socrates has shown in the Philebus?) Envy likewise, is for
a man to be able to benefit, and yet not benetiting, but keeping the good contined
tu himself. And envy ts also the want itself of good ; which the philosopher appears
to me especially to assume at present, exterminating it from a divine essence.
For it is naturally adapted to be periectly exempt from this alone, since it is essen-
tialized in goodness itself. For to be pained from the goods pertaining to others,
is inherent in all good which subsists according to participation, and which is not
primarily good. Tor adventitious good is one thing, good according to habit
another, and primary good another. For the first is mingled with its contrary,
in the same manner as adventitious beauty is mingled with deformity. But the
second is wholly boniform, yet is such by participation. And the third, which
is primarily good, ts good itself. For as intellect itself is the first intellect, and as
the beautiful itself is primarily beautiful, so good itself is primarily good. What
therefore is this? It is the deity of each thing, according to which every truly-
existing being is a God. For it differs in no respect from goodness. But if any
one ofsecondary natures should be said to be a God, or good, itis among the num-
her of things deified, and rendered good, and is a God through participation,
and not on account of its own proper essence, nor from itself,

This participation therefore, Plato is accustomed to call indigence ;* just as in
the Banquet, he calls Love the want of things beautiful and good. Hence, a di-
vine nature, so far as it is divine, is primarily good, and not according to parti-
cipation ; so that neither is it indigent of good. Hence too, it is superior to all
envy. Foras to the sun, which is generative of light, it is impossible for dark-
ness to approach, but it is excluded from itat a great distance, about the cavities
of the earth; after the same manner, it is impossible for envy to approach toa
divine nature. For what kind of indigence can there be in such transcendent
abundance? What imbecility is there in almighty deity?) What participation in the

"i.e. Ovders φθόνοι, no envy.
> Evéesay is omitted in the original.

lim. Plat, Tot. ki 2Q

408 PROCLUS ON THE [5οοκ 1).

fountain of good? The Demiurgus therefore, being good by his very being, tran-
scends al! indigence, and all participation which ‘acecdes from another thing,
For he is united to the one itself, and does not proceed out of it. Por intellectual
union is of one kind, but the union prior to intellect of another, according to
which the generative deity of the Demiurgus, and the goodness which connects
allthings, ave united to the one itself. Vor this goodness is not a certain power,
as some say, but the measure of all power, Nor is it will, but will proceeds from
it. Nor is it a habit; for habit pertains to another! thing different from habit ;
but goodness is itself of itself [1 ¢. pertains to itself alone}. Nor, in short, is it an
essential hypostasis ; but itis that which unites essence, and is ineffable, connects
powers, and is prolific of demiurgic energies. As therefore, every intellect 15
essentialized in existing as intellect, but that which is above intellect is partici-
pated by it; and as every soul is essentialized in existing as soul, but intellect 1s
participated by it; thus also every God Is essentialized ino being a God, or rather
is superessentialized, but there is not any ung Which is participated by him 15
because the Gods are the most ancient and venerable of all things. | Phe demiur-
vic intellect therefore, so far as it is a God, in-existing as a God iN primarily se,
and not according to participation, This however ts the same with good. As
therefore, if some one should say that envy is the want of intellect, and a partial
intellect is superior to envy, but soul is not superior to it, for itis indigent of in-
tellect, because it is adapted to become intellectual by the participation of intel-
lect;—thus also in goodness, envy > is the indigence of good ; but every thing
indigent is not primarily good, Soul indeed and intellect are indigent of good,
because they are not primarily good. But a God, so far as a God, being good, is
exempt from all envy, and transcends all indigence of whatever kind it may be,
whether it subsists according to diminution, or according to deviation. Vor
indigence is twofold, one kind as we have said being evil, but the other not.

“ Being therefore entirely void of this, he was willing that all things
should become as much as possible similar to himself.”

This is consequent to the before-mentioned axioms. For the first colon [or

" Por ἀλλο here, itis necessary to read ἀλλον,

Male. Every God, so faras he isa God, is a participant of uothing superior to himself, For the
procession of the Gods frum the principle of all things, ix nota participation, but an ἀρρήτοις exparou,
an ineflable unfolding into light.

> Yor agOosos here, read g6ores,

nook 11. TIMAUs OF PLATO. 307

part of the sentence] manifested the order, and the hyparxis of the Demiurgus,
that he is ἃ αὐ. And since with respect to deity, one God is imparticipable, but
another participable, ' he manifests that the Demiurgus is participable. For he does
not say that he was goodness, but that he was good. But he who is cood participates
of goodness. And goodness itself indeed, is primarily good. But intellect and
being are good by participation. Again, the second colon shows that the Demi-
urgus does not rank among deitied natures. For one thing is entirely imparticipable,
such, for instance, as the good ; but another is good by* the participation of some other
nature, as every thing which is deified.! But that which is primarily good, isgood itself,
And that which is participated, and is the medium of both the before-mentioned
natures is of such akind as all the intelligible and intellectual orders of the Gods are
suid to be. But this third colon comprehends the demiurgie pecuharity. For
not only to be good, but on account of the super-plenary, and the extended, to
proceed to all things, is indicative of the demiurgic and eflective cause, desiring
to fill all things with itself, and to benefit all things; in order that all things may
become as much as possible similar to itself, by participating of a certain divine
nature, and of arcane and ineflable impressions, which accede to them from the
whole fabrication of things. If therefore, the maker of the universe is superior
to all indigence, he is exempt from all imbecility, and this eternally. For being
signifies the eternal; and because he especially benefits all things, he imparts to
all things by illumination, the measure of good, a greater thing than which each
of the participants is by no means adapted to receive. And this indicates the
extension of providence. If likewise, he wished to supply all things with the
participation of good, there is nothing in the universe solely evil, so that neither

ois there any thing disorderly, nor without the inspection of providence, nor

indefinite; but all things participate of beauty and order, so far as they are
naturally adapted to receive them. Tlence he made all things similar to himself,
so far as he is a God, benefiting generated natures ; buthe caused them to become
other things besides this, according to other paradigmatic reasons. For as
Atticus says, as the carpenter makes all that he makes to be artificial, but differ-

' The Demiurgus is a participable deity, because his intellect participates of his goodness, which
constitutes his hyparxis.

> Instead of ro μετασχεῖν in this place, it is necessary to read ry μέτασχειν-

* Thus soul is deified by the participation of intellect as a medium; because deity accedcs to
soul through the intervention of intellect; and body 1» deificd by the participation of soul as
a medium.

408 PROCLUS ON THE [Book 11.

ent things according to a different reason [or productive principle], causing one
thing to be aladder, but another a bed; thus also the Demiurgus, so far as he is
wood, assimilates all things to himself, rendering them good; but according to
forms which distribute their essences, he makes them with relation to paradig-
matic causes. Porphyry however, admitting these things, thinks fit to ask
what itis by the reception of which genera are good, And he says it is by
the reception of harmony, symmetry, and order. For these are beautiful. But
every thing [truly] be autiful is good. Plato therefore manifests that good is
in these, when he says, “ Zhat God led that which was disorderly into order, through
his wish to communicate good.”

From all that has been said, therefore, it is easy to infer, that the Demiurgus
produces eternally; that the world is perpe tual, according to a perpetuity which
is extended through the whole of time; that it is always generated with
arrangement ; and that it rs not always incorruptible, but is always ; generated or
becoming to be so, im Consequence of always receiving good. But it is not imme-
diately good like its eenerating father. For in him all things are contained
unitedly, {but in the world distributedly],! and not with perfect τὸ ‘ality, as in
eternal natures. For if the universe was generated in time, was it from the
Demiurgus that it did not e vist before, or from its subject nature being without
order? For if from the Demiurgus, was it because he also did not subsist
eternally?) Oris it not unlawful to assert this, and in other respects in vain? Por
concerning him, there is the same mode of interrogation, and whether shall we
make all things generated, or will there be something primarily unbegotten,
and the Demiurgus still more so? Let it therefore be admitted, that it was in
consequence of the Demiurgus not energizing. Whether then, did he not fabri-
cate, because he was not willing, or because he was not able? If indeed
we say it) was because he was not willing, we forget that we thus deprive him
of goodness. But if he was not able, itis absurd that he should at one time
have power, and at another imbecility. Por we shall take away the eternal.
But if it was from its subject nature that the universe did ποῖ exist before,
whether was it from this nature being unadapted or adapted? If therefore it
was adapted, it was not this nature which prevented the universe from existing.
But if it was unadapted, how being unadapted for an infinite time, came it to Le
now changed [into an adapted condition]? Whether did it move itself? But it is not

© The words ev δὲ τῳ κοσμῳ Senpnperws, are omitted in the original.
y κοσμῳ διηρὴμ g

BOOK 11. TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 309

self-motive. Was it therefore moved by the Demiurgus? And why was it not
moved by him before, if he also was then good, and was willing that afl things
should become similar to himself?) The extension therefore of providence is
suspended from the goodness of the father; but from this the eternal production
of the Demiurgus ; and from this, the perpetuity of the universe, which subsists
for an infinite time in becoming to be, and is not a stable perpetuity. And the
same assertion subverts the perpetuity of the world, and the goodness of him who
made it. For if the Demiurgus was good, he always wished to impart good to
all things. For as the sun, as long as it exists, illuminates! all things, and fire
heats as long as itis fire; for the one is essentially illuminative, bat the other
calefactive; thus likewise, that which is always good, always wishes to impart
good, lest being willing indeed, but unable, it should sustain the passion of the
vilest natures, For neither does the worthy man wish to effect other things than
such as he is able to effect. But if the Demiurgus was always able to impart good,
he always imparts it in energy, lest he should have an imperfect power. If how-
ever, he always imparts good in energy, he always makes that which is good,
But if he always makes it, the world is always generated. Hence the world is
perpetual ; for the Demiurgus is always good. The world therefore is perpetual,
not being but becoming to be perpetually. lence, as we have said, the perpetuity
of the universe is suspended from the goodness of its maker. For the orderly
distribution of the universe sufficiently manifests the demiurgic power. — For
matter, On account of its privation of form and morphe, has appeared to some to
be without God, and the confused and disorderly nature, to be remote from
divine providence. Since the universe however, is well-ordered and decorated
with beauty, it clearly demonstrates divine production, The visible order of

‘things therefore, being the progeny of the demiurgic cause, is consubsistent: with

the goodness of the father,

* He therefore, who especially receives this most principal or proper
and powerful principle from prudent men, will receive it with the
greatest rectitude.”

Timeus assigns the final cause which extends itself to the goodness of the
Demiurgus, according to which uniting himself to the first, and imitating him,

Ὁ For καταλέμπαγει, it is necessary to read καγαλαμπει.

310 PROCLUS ON THE baka

he generates all things. For the first principle is that which primarily produces
all things, and this ‘Timzus denominates the most proper and powerful principle,
because it is motive of causes themselves. For the demiurgic principle moves
indeed that which is generated, but is moved from thence [i. 6. from the first
principle]. And the paradigmatic principle moves the total fabrication, but
is moved by goodness ; because the good indeed, ts prior to intelligibles, but the
paradigm is intelligible, and the Demiurgus intellectual, About the good also, all
intelligible and intellectual natures subsist: but about the intelligible, the order of
intellectuals © subsists. The effective cause therefore, is a principal cause, but the
paradigmatic is more principal, and the final is most principal. Por it is that for
the sake of which all things subsist, from which other things are suspended, and
which is truly the end of fabrication, Hence the world is perfected indeed, on be-
coming animated and inspired with life; but it is most perfect, so far as 10 partici-
pates of good, and of the union which extends through wholes. Foras the good
is the leader of all things, so the goodness which is in each thing has the first
dignity in each, On these accounts therefore, he calls the tinal cause the most
principal, or the most proper and powerful principle. For the name of principle
comprehends also concauses. But by the addition of mos¢ principal, he indicates
that which is truly * cause. For the most principal principles are the causes of
generated natures τ but concauses are subservient to other things, and are in the
effects themselves. It must be said however, that generation and tne world,
ἐδ τὸς have before observed, are the path between matter and the whole arrangement
of things, and the perfection itself of the universe. Since also in dogmas concerning
the highest causes it is necessary that the speaker should have the intellectual
habit, and the auditor a prudent judgment, this is especially requisite in’ discus-
sions concerning the good. For intellect subsists on account of the good, and the
intellect which is in us, on account of the good which is in-us. Ilence Plato
thinks it is necessary, that those who assert something concerning the most proper
and powerful principle, should be prudent men, and that their auditors
should receive what they say with the greatest) rectitude. What then,
may not any casual person say something concerning God and the — final
cause? And do we not every day hear the multitude assertmmg that God is
good? But God spoken of without true virtue is but a name, as Plotinus says ; and

® Lustead of πέρι δὲ τὸ γοερον, ἢ τῶν γοήτων διακοσμησις in this place, itis necessary to road πέρι δε
ro vonror, ἢ των voepwr διακοσμησις. For the intelligible is superior to the intellectual order.

> Lor τῆν ovros αἰτίαν here, itis requisite to read τῆν οὕτως αἰτίαν.

—— -—-—

TIMAZUS OF PLATO. 31)

BOOK 11.)

he ts spoken of by the multitude, not according to wisdom, but according to chance.
Do not dwmons also know the goodness of the father, who dance [as it were |
round him; and demiurgie angels, who precede as ina solemn procession the
paternal production of things; and Gods who receive demiurgic powers from the
one fabricative cause? Gods however, possess this knowledge uniformly, anzels
intellectualiy, damons with undetiled purity, eternally, and ina way allied to the
natures prior to thei, but we must be satisfied with having this knowledge pru-
dently and wisely, since we are in a certain respect media between more divine
natures and the multitude, between intellectual beings, and those that are deprived
of intellect. Vor such is human prudence, proceeding indeed from intellect and
intelligence, but ruling over a life destitute of intellect. Hence, when we speak con-
cerning the most proper principle, what we assert must be received as uttered by
prudent men, Jor prudence isa medium between intellect and opinion ; sothat aright
judgment will be concordant with it. Hence too, Plato adds, “ he who especially.”
For the assertion concerning this principle must be especially received from prudent

men. But from the natures above man, something better than this assertion must

be sought ; and from the multitude, a casual assertion,

“Por the divinity was willing that all things should be good, and that

as much as possible nothing should be evil.”

The divine fabrication, and intellectual production proceeds from impartibles
to partibles, from things united to such as are multiplied, and from things with-
out interval, to every way extended masses. This also the discourse concerning
it adumbrating, in the first place, celebrates the tinal cause apoplithegmatically ;
inthe next place, discursively ; and in the third place, it delivers in’ an evolved
manner, the whole orderly distribution and progression from it. For the asser-
tion, “he was good,” uniformly comprehends every final and the most divine of
causes, But the words, “ Jn him who is good, no envy is ever ingenerated about any
thing ; and being entirely void of this, he was willing that all things should become as
much as possible similar to himself,” comprehend this cause discursively ;' because,
after the one will of intellect, he adds the divided theory of it. And what he now
says represents to us intelligence procecding into all multitude, and interval, and
evolving all the demiurgic providence, and all the parts of fabrication. The third

* The word διεξοδίκως is omitted in the original,

419 PROCLUS ON THE [BOOK 11.

assertion, likewise, is in continuity with the second, and the second with the
first. For since the first division was, “ he was good,” onthis account the second
begins from good, but proceeds as far as to the will of the father. And the third
beginning from his twil/, delivers the whole of his providential energy. For if he
was good, he wished to make all things good, But if he wished, he made them
to be so, and the universe obtained an elegant arrangement. For providence
indeed, is suspended from will, but will from goodness. And thus much con-
cerning the order and connexion of the assertions.

Let us however survey what will is, in order that we may understand how it
is conjoined with goodness. The super-essential union itse ‘lf, therefore, which 1s
oft itself exempt from beings, is one, ineffable, and uncircumse ribed, from ¢he one

tself possessing its undetined and incomprehensible nature. Hence, if it be requi-
site tu survey in this, from what has been said, the triad which is characterized by
unity, or which has the form of the one,

coodness indeed pre cedes, but the sec “ond
is will, and the third is providence 3 goodness producing the perfect, the sufficient,
and the desirable ; δια τοῦ! exhibiting the super- -plenary, the evtended, and the genera-
uve; and providence imparting the efficacious, the perfective of works, and the unide-
filed. According however, to this ineffable and united hyparais of the triad, the
intelligible also is triply divided, into essence, power, and energy 3 essence indeed,
being firmly established in this triad, and existing selfpe rfect; but power pos-
sessing anever-failing and infinite progression; and enerzy be inzallotted perfection
and essential production, And again, intellect analogously receives a triple dia-
sion, into being, life, and the intellectual. Por the first of these 15. the supplier
ofexistence, the second of vitality, and the third) of knowledee. After these,
soul likewise is divided) into the object of science, into: science, and’ the scien-
tific. For the first of these indeed, is that which is known, the second is know-
ledge, and the third is that which receives its completion from both. These
triads therefore, being four in number, as goodness is to will, so Is essence to
power, being to life, and the object of science to sc ience. And as will is to
providence, so is power to energy, life to intellect, and science to that) which
is scientific. For essence, being, and the object of science, have an order
analogous to goodness. For the eonnective, the stable, the umform,
and the perfective, pertain τὸ. goodness. But power, life, and science, are
analogous to will, Por the selfbegotten, and that which comprehends and
measures all things, belong to will, And energy, intellect, and that which is

scientific, pertain to providence, For the efficacious, and that which proceeds

"οὐκ 41.) TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 313

through and antecedently comprchends all things, are the resemblances of divine
providence, Since therefore, the Demiurgus also is a God, and an imparticipable
intellect, so faras he is a God indeed, he possesses goodness, will, and provi-
Jence ; but as intelligible, he has essence, power, and energy; and as intellect,
ne is, and has life, and a knowledge of wholes. The monad also which he
possesses is suspended from unity. And thus much concerning will.
Consequent to this, it remains to inquire how the Demiurgus wished all things
to be good, and if this is possible, and in what manner. For it may be said, if he
was willing that this should be the case, it would be requisite that the progression
of things should stop at the Gods and undefiled essences. If, however, he not
only fabricated these, but also brutes, and reptiles, and men, and every thing
material, he was not willing that all things should be good. For he was not willing
that better natures should alone exist, but also fabricated such as are worse. If
he had been willing, therefore, that all things should be good, he would have
stopped his fabrication at the Gods. We reply, however, that if the progression
of things was only as far as to the Gods, all things would not be good. For first
natures being allotted the last order, the good would be destroyed; since
being able and willing to generate through their goodness, yet in consequence of
an arrangement as the last of things, they would become unprolific and not good.
Our opponents therefore say, if all tnings are good, the progression is as far as to
the Gods. But we say, if the progression of things extends only as far as to the
Gods, all things are not good. For if a divine nature is unprolific how is it good?
But it will be unprolific, if it is the last of things. For every thing which generates
is better than that which is generated. But the less excellent nature not existing,
that which is more excellent will have no subsistence. Let there be the Gods,
therefore, and let them have the first order. But after the Gods, let there be a
progression’ as far as to matter itself; and let us give a transition to all beings,
from the first to the last of things. And neither let there be any thing wanting
even of the last of beings, nor any vacuum, For what vacuum can there be
when things characterized by itself? have the first subsistence; those that rank as
the second proceed from these ; those of the third order proceed from these and

* TIpoogow is omitted in the original.
“5 viz. Self-subsistent super-essential natures ; for to these the αὐτο, or tlse//, primarily belongs. The
neat to these are intellects, Those in the third rank, are souls, ‘Those in the fourth, the natures that
are divided about bodies, And those in the fifth and last rank are bodies.

Jim. Plat, ἘΠ fe α ᾿ 22k

314 PROCLUS ON THE [Book 11,

others; those in the fourth rank are generated from things characterized by the
term another ; and those in the fifth rank being others only ; and on each side of
these those natures subsisting which are dissimilarly similar!’ Such, therefore,
being the continuity in things, what can be deficient? Immoveable natures being
first established, selfmotive natures having the second, and alter-motive natures,
the third rank, all of which are the last of things. Por all beings derive their com-
pletion from the above-mentioned orders. In short, the production of things may
be shown to be continued in many ways; and if you are willing so to speak,
analogy subsisting from on high as far as to the last of things, according to the
well-ordered progression of all beings from (he one.

Let, therefore, all these things be acknowledged, and let the generation of beings
be extended as faras to nothing ; bat whether is there nothing evil in these, or shall
we admit that there is in a certain respect, and that there is what is called depravity
in bodies, and in souls?) For some have been led by this doubt to take away evil
entirely 3 but others have been induced to deny a providence, im consequence of
believing, that if providence has a subsistence, all things are “σους, Lor if, indeed,
divinity was willing there should be evil, how can he be good? For it is the
province of that which is essentially good to benetit every thing, Just as itis of
that which is essentially hot, to give heat. Butit is not lawful for (he good to
effect any thing else than what is good. And if divinity was not willing there
should be evil, how can it have a subsistence? For something will exist contrary
to the will of the father of all things. Such therefore is the doubt.

We must say, however, conformably to the doctrine of Plato, according to our
preceptor, that the habitude of divinity with respeet to things subsists ina different
manner from that of ours. And again that the habitude of things with reference to
deity is different from their habitude with reference to us. Por wholes have a
relation to parts different from that of parts to cach other. To divinity therefore
nothing is evil, not even of the things which are called evil. Por he uses these
also toa good purpose. But again, to partial natures there is a certain evil, these
being naturally adapted to suffer by it. And the same thing is to a part indeed
evil, but to the universe and to wholes is not evil but good. Forso far as itis a
being, and so far as it participates of a certain order, itis good. Por this thing
which is said to be evil, if you apprehend it to be destitute ofall good, you will

"viz. The one, and matter.

~My 1» wanting iw the original,

HOOK I] TIM.-EUS OF PLATO. 315

make it to be beyond even that which in no respect whatever is. For as the
good itself is prior to being, so evil itself is posterior to the nothingness of non-
entity. Por that which is most distant from the good 15. evil, and not that which
has no kind of subsistence.' If, therefore, that which in’ no respect whatever is,
has more of subsistence than evil itself, but this is impossible, it is much more
impossible that there should be such a thing as evil itself.

If, however, that which is entirely evil has no subsistence, but evil is complicated
with good, you give ita place among beings, and you make it good to other
things, And, indeed, how is it possible it should not, if it ranks among beings ?
For that which participates of being, participates also of unity, and that which
participates of unity, participates likewise of good. Hence evil, if it is, partici-
pates of good ; because evil has not an unmingled subsistence, and is not entirely
deprived of order, and indetinite. Who therefore made it to be such? Who
imparted to it measure, and order, and bound? It is evident that it is the Demiur-
gus who rendered all things similar to himself. For he filled both wholes and
parts with good. But if he benefits all things, and colours evil itself with good,
there is nothing evil according to the power of divinity and of recipients. For
power is twofold, one being that of divinity which benefits the depravity that is
so abundantly seen ;* but the other being that of recipients, which participate of
the goodness of the Demiurgus according to the measure of their order [in the
scale of beings}. In consequence therefore of the Demiurgus being willing that
there should be nothing evil, nothing is evil. But if certain persons accuse him as
the cause of evil, because he gave subsistence to partial natures, they take away
the fabrication of the worid, subvert the prolific power of wholes, and confound
the nature of things first and last,

‘That we assert these things, however, conformably to the opinion of Plato, may
be easily seen from his writings. For in the Politicus, he clearly says, “ that the
world obtained from? its maker all beautiful things, but from its former habit, all
such injustice, and evil, as are produced within the heavens.” For because there
is generation, and also corruption, that which is preternatural has a subsistence.

" The good itself is prior to being. Nothing or non-being is not that which is most distant from
the good; for it is that in which the procession of being ends, but that which is most distant from thr
good is evil itself. Hence eril itself is posterior to nonentity.

τ * For wodvaparoy, it is necessary to read πολυόρατον,

? For rept here, it is requisite to read παρα,

316 PROCLUS ON THE (Book 11.

And because the deformity of matter fills partial souls with inelegance, through
an association with it, on this account that which is not conformable to reason
is allotted a certain resemblance of subsistence. Atthe same time, however, all
these particulars become beautiful through the goodness of the maker of the
universe. But inthe Republic, Plato assigns no other cause of good than God,
and says that certain other causes of evils are to be investigated 5 through which
he manifests that evils do not derive their subsistence from divinity, For it is
not, says he, the province of fire to refrigerate, nor of snow to heat, nor of that
which is all-good to produce evil, And he asserts that certain partial causes of
these are to be admitted, and such as are indefinite, For itis not in evils as im
things that are wood, viz. that the one and what is primarily good, precede multl-
tude; and this on account of the indefinite diffusion of evil The words others,
therefore, and certain, evince that the Causes of evil are partial and indefinite. But
in the Thewtetus he says, thatit is neither possible for evils to be abolished, nor
for them to be in the Gods, but that they revolve from necessity about the mortal
nature, and this place of our abode.” If, therefore, evil revolyes necessarily in
the mortal place, it will not be according to Plato, that which in no respect
whatever has a subsistence, and which is exempt from all beings. So that
according to him evil exists, is from partial causes, and is benefited through the
boniform providence of the Demiurgus, because there Is nothing which is entirely
evil, but every thing is in a certain: respect: accomplished contormably to justice
and divinity.

For we may make the following division; OF all that the world contains, some
things are wholes, but others parts. And of parts, some eternally preserve their
own good, such as a partial intellect, and partial dwmons, but others are not
always able to preserve their proper good. And of these, some are alter-notive,
but others selfmotive. And. of selfmetive natures, some have evil established
in their choice; but in others, it terminates in actions. With respect to wholes,
therefore, they are perfectly good, supplying not only themselves, but also parts
with good. Such things, however, as are parts, and yet preserve their own good,
possess good secondarily and partially. But such as are parts, and alter-motive,
deriving their subsistence from other things, are suspended from the providence
ofthem, and are transmuted in ἃ becoming manner, as is the case with such
bodies as are generated and corrupted, For if it is necessary that there should
he generation, itis also necessary that there should be corruption, — For genera-

ton subsists according to mutation, and is a certain mutation, But if there is

βοοκ 11. TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 317

corruption, itis necessary that the preternatural should be secretly introduced,
Ags, therefore, that which is corrupted, is indeed corrupted with reference to itself,
but is not destroyed with reference to the universe; for it is either air or water,
or something else into which it is changed; thus also that which is preter-
natural, is indeed with respect to itself disordered, but with respect to the
universe has an orderly arrangement. For if though it should be destroyed
and entirely deprived of order, it would not dissolve the order of the universe,
how is it possible that when having a preternatural subsistence which is of
itself nothing when deprived of all order, it can destroy the whole arrange-
ment of things? But again, partial natures which are self-motive indeed,
and whose energy is directed to externals, cause that which is effected by
their energy to be evil to themselves, yet in a certain respect this also is
good, and conformable to divinity. Vor since impulses and actions are
from choice, actions follow elections, according to justice, when he who
chooses not only deserves the retribution consequent to his choice, but that
also which follows from his conduct. And simply, indeed, the action is not good,
but to him who chooses a certain thing, and is impelled in a certain way, it is
introduced according to justice; and is good to this individual and this particular
life. For of goods, some are good to all things, others to such as differ accord-
ing to species, and others to individuals, so far as they are individuals. For
hellebore is not good to all men, nor to all bodies, nor yet to all diseased bodies,
but it is good to one who isdiseased in a particular manner, and is salutary from
acertain principle. Whether, therefore, the action is intemperate or unjust, to
those who perform it indeed it is good, so far as it is conformable to justice, but
simply it is not good, nor to those by whom it ts done, but is to them the greatest
evil. And so far as it proceeds from them and is directed to them, it is evil; but
so far as it proceeds from the universe to them, itis not evil. And so far as their
energy is directed to themselves, they destroy their life, becoming actually de-
praved ; but so far as they suffer from the universe, they undergo the punishment
of their choice (just as it is said, that those who deliberate about betraying a
suppliant, subvert divinity); or they suffer the punishment of their will.

Let us, however, direct our attention to what remains, viz. to such partial na-
tures as energize self-motively, and who stop their depravity as far as to their
choice. For they suffer the punishment of their cogitation alone. For, as it is
said, there is a certain punishment of mere imagination, impulse and will; since
the Gods govern us inwardly, and as they reward beneficent choice, so likewise

418 PROCLUS ON THE [soox 11.

they punish the contrary. But it may be said, how can choice itself have that
which is conformable to justice and divinity? May we not reply, because it is
necessary there should be an essence of this kind and a power of an ambiguous
nature, and which verges to different lives? If therefore that which has dominion
over Choice is from divinity, choice also is from divinity, and if this be the case,
it is good. Por the cleeting soul alone is) transferred to another and another
order. For all choice either elevates the soul, or draws it downward (to an
inferior condition of being}. And if indeed the choice is froma depraved * soul,
itisevils but ifit transfers that which chooses to its proper order, itis according
to justice and good. For the choice itself introduces punishment to the electing
soul. Or rather, the choice becomes punishment in him who chooses, causing the
soul tu apostatize from good. For as a beneticent choice becomes truly the re-
ward of itself, so a depraved choice becomes its own punishment. For this is the
peculiarity of selfmotive powers. Hence there is no evil, which is not also ina
certain respect good ; but all things participate of providence.

If, however, certain persons should ask on what account an evil-producing
cause had at first a subsistence, though it should not rank among wholes, but is of
a partial nature, to these itmust be said, thatthe progression of beings is continued,
and that no vacuum is left among them. Whether, therefore, Is itnecessary that
there should not be every self-motive hfe? But we shall thus take away many
natures that are divine. Or shall we say it: is necessary there should be wholes
that are self-motive, but there is no necessity there should) be selfmotive parts?
But how is it possible they should be wholes, if deprived of their proper parts Ἦ
And how will the continuity of beings be preserved, if wholes ond selfmotive
natures have a prior existence, and also partial and alter-motive natures, but we
entirely destroy the intermediate natures, viz. such as are selfmotive indeed, but
at the same time partial? And which through the partial form become connected
with habitude, but through the selfmotive power, are ata certain time liberated
fron habitude, [tis necessary therefore, that there should be this life also, which is
a medium in beings, and the bond of things which have as it were an arrangement
contrary? to each other. Evil, however, is noton this account natural to the soul ;
since she is essentially the mistress of her choice. For the animated body has an

essential tendency to disease ; for it is essentially corruptible ; and yet disease

* MoyAnpas is omitted in the original,
* For the proper parts of d self-motive whole, are also self-motive,

> For aw’ αἰτίαν here, itis necessary to read amerarriws,

WOOK 11.} ΤΙΝ OF PLATO. 419

is not according to nature. Hence, disease is indeed evil to the partial nature
which is allotted to connect this particular body, but is ood to. the wholeness
of bodies, Por it is necessary that what is generated from other things, should
be changed into another thing. As, therefore, to. the nature which isin us, it is
good for the nutriment to be changed, in order to the preservation of the animal;
thus alse to every nature it is good for a part to be corrupted, in order that the
wholes may be preserved, which are always prior to parts. For if parts were
generated irom wholes, and the things generated should remain, all things would
be rapidly consumed, in consequence of wholes becoming partial natures. For
acontinued ablation taking place from things of a finite nature, the whole must
necessarily fail, But wholes not existing, either generation will be stopped, or
Mutation to partial natures will be derived from other things. Tlence that which
is evil to a partial nature is good to the whole life of the world.

Farther still, therefore, resuming the inquiry after another manner frém the
beginning, if we are asked whether divinity was willing there should be evil, or
was not willing, we reply that he was both. For he was willing, indeed, consi-
dered as imparting being to all things. Forevery thing in the universe which
has any kind of being proceeds from the demiurgic cause, But he was not
"willing, considered as producing all things good. For he concealed evil in the
use of good, And if you are willing to argue physically, evil is produced cssenti-
ally indeed (roma partial soul, but accidentally from divinity, so far as it is evil,
ifit is admitted that divinity gave subsistence to the soul. Evil also, so far as it
is essentially good, originates from a divine cause, but accidentally from the soul.
Por so far as it subsists according to justice, it possesses good. Again, Plato in
the Laws defines what punishment is, viz. that it appears to consume him
Who sullers it, and rescmbles the opening of ulcers. And he who is incapable Ὁ
of being healed without a certain action, is incited to the performance of it, in
order that the soul being liberated from her parturiency and stupid astonishment
about that which is base, and repenting of her own evils, may begin to be puri-
fied. Por base and unjust actions, when they are the objects of hope, are lovely
to those that vehemently admire them, but when accomplished, till those that
perform them with repentance. And when, indecd, they are the subjects of medi-
tation, they cause the soul to be latently diseased ; but when they have proceeded
into energy, they demonstrate their own imbecility, but liberate the soul from the

* For ro μεν vrapevow in this place, itis uecersary to read, ro μὴ Suvapevor.

410 “PROCLUS ON UTIL [wooK 11.

most disgraceful parturition, And some, indeed, exlubit this punisliment accord.
ing to the whole of their life; but others according to purtial energies, For he
who does any thing irrational, does it from choice, is impelled to that which is
the object of his choice, and leads into energy that which pre-existed in his
imagination,

In short, evil is neither in intellectual natures ; for the whole intellectual genus
is free from all evil; nor in whole souls, or whole bodies; for all wholes are
exempt from evil, as being perpetual, and always subsisting according to nature,
It remains, therefore, that it must be in partial souls, or in partial bodies. But
neither js it in the essences of these; for all their essences are derived from divi-
nity ; nor in their powers ; for these subsist according to nature. Hence it re-
mains, thatit must be in their energies. But with respect to souls, itis neither
in such as are rational; for all these aspire after good ; nor in such as are irra-
tional; for these energize according to nature. But it subsists in the privation
of symmetry ' of these with reference to each other. And in bodies, it is neither
in forin; for it wishes to rule over matter; norin matter, for it aspires after the
supervening ornaments of form. Butit consists in the privation of symmetry
between form and matter. From which also it is evident, that every thing evil
exists according to a parypostasis, or resemblance of subsistence, and that at the
same time it is coloured by good ; so that all things are good through the will
of divinity, and as much as possible nothing is destitute of good. For it was not
possible, that generation existing, evil also should not have a shadowy subsis-
tence, since It is necessary to the perfection of the whole of things. And from
what has been said, itis evident, that the will of divinity is not vain. For all
things are good with reference to him, and there is not any being which ts not
vanquished by a portion of good. Nor are the words, “ as much as possible,
written superfluously. For they do not signify an imperfect power, but that
power which rules over all things, and benefits all things through an abundance
of good.

“Thus receiving every thing that was visible, and which was not in a
state of rest, but moved ina confused and disorderly manner, be led it
from disorder into order, conceiving that the latter was in every respect
better than the former.”

‘ For ovpperpig here, it is uccessary to read, ασυμμετρίῳ.
μμετριᾳ 7 ?

———- -—-—

BOOK 11.] TIMAUS OF PLATO, 321

Plutarch of Cherona and his followers, and also Atticus, understand what is

here said literally, as testifying for them the generation of the world froma certain
time. They also say that unadorned matter existed prior to the generation of the
universe, and likewise a malevolent soul, which moved this matter. For, [they
add,] whence was the motion except from soul; and if the motion was disorderly
it was froma disorderly soul? It is said therefore, in the Laws, that a benefi-
cent soul instructs in an upright and prudent manner, but that a malevolent soul
is moved disorderly, and that what is governed by it is conducted confusedly
and inelegantly. They farther add, that when the fabrication of the world by
the Demiurgus commenced, matter was brought into a state adapted to the com-
position of the world, and that the malevolent soul participating of intellect, was
rendered prudent, and produced an orderly motion. For the participation of
form, and the presence of intellect, brought it into order. Porphyry however,
and Tamblichus, and their followers, reprobate this opinion, as admitting in
wholes, that which is without, prior to that which has arrangement, the imperfect
prior to the perfect, and that which is without intelligence, prior to that which is
intellectual. And [they add], that Plutarch and Atticus are not only guilty of >
impiety towards the Demiurgus, but likewise, either entirely subvert his benefi-
cent will, or his prolific power. For both these concurring, it is also necessary
that the world should be perpetually fabricated by him. They likewise say, that
Plato wishing to indicate the providence proceeding from the Demiurgus into the
universe, and also the supply of intellect, and the presence of soul, and the nume-
rous and mighty goods of which they are the causes to the world, previously sur-
veys how the whole corporeal-formed composition is when considered itself by
itself, disorderly and confused. And that he does this, in order that by perceiving
by itself the arrangement derived from soul, and the demiurgic orderly distribu-
tion of things, we may be able to determine what the nature is of the corporeal-
formed essence by itself, and what order it is allotted from fabrication ; the world
indeed, always existing, but language dividing that which is generated from its
maker, and producing according to time things which are con-subsistent at once,
because every thing which is generated is a composite.

We may also observe, in addition to what is here rightly asserted, that since the
demiurgic production is twofold, the one being corporeal,’ but the other decora-

Ϊ
}
Ϊ

tive, Plato beginning from the latter, supposes with the greatest propriety, that //

* For Lwxparcns here, it is necessary to read cwparins.

Tim. Plat. Vou. I. 2s

ὙΠ τ ὐπαντανα.. ἢ

322 PROCLUS ON THE [BooK It.

every thing corporeal is moved in a way perfectly confused and disorderly. For its
motion is such, so far as pertains to itself, when it is surveyed as not yet partici-
pating of intellect, and animated by an intellectual soul. For when the universe
becomes a thing of this kind, then it participates of supernatural powers. But
if itis moved, as he says, neither by intellect, nor by a prudent soul, from which
order is derived, its motion will be disorderly. A little after this however, Plato
delivers to us the demiurgic providence about the fabrication of bodies. For then
the Demiurgus is represented as fashioning the whule of a corporeal nature, which
Plato now says he assumed 5 the Demiurgus being the maker, the adorner, the
artist, and the manual artificer. If therefore, he produces the first bodies, it is
evident that the generation of body is a part of his fabrication, the visible nature
receiving certain vestiges of forms, which are the forerunners of their distinct sub-
sistence ; each thing when this distinction takes place, being perfectly adorned,
and obtaining an appropriate position and order in the universe, And there is no
occasion indeed, to say much about that which is moved in a confused and = dis-
orderly manner. For Plato clearly says, that the Demiurgus fashioned the whole
of the corporeal nature within soul. With respect to soul however, itis evident
that one thing pertaining to it was not a subject funproduced by the Demiurgus),
and that he alone produced its orderly distribution, For he first: constitutes its
essence, and the same and the different; of which as elements it consists. Hence,
if he produced the elements of soul, and the mixture of these, he produced the
whole of it. So that he did not assume one part of it as already existing, and add
another. And of soul indeed, which is incorporeal, this is trae. But with re-
spect to body, we have shown how divinity is the cause of the first forms.
Concerning matter itself, however, some one may enquire whether it is unbe-
gotten, not being generated by a cause, as Plutarch and Atticus say, or whether
it was generated, and if so from what cause. Vor Aristotle indeed, in another
way demonstrates that it ts unbegotten, as not being a composite, nor consisting
of another matter, nor again, being analyzed into another. The present discussion
however, says that it is perpetual, but investigates whether itis unbegotten and
not generated by a cause, and whether according to Plato, two principles of
wholes are to be admitted, matter and God, neither God producing matter, nor
matter God ; in order that the one may be entirely perpetual, and without God,
but the other entirely immaterial and simple. This thing therefore, is among
the number of those which are very much investigated, and has been considered
by us elsewhere. Now, however, it is requisite to exhibit to these men, what the

-- ----

BOOK 11.} TIMAMUS OF PLATO. 323

conception of Plato is on this subject. For that the Demiurgus is mot the first’

who gave subsistence to matter, is evident from what Plato says further on, viz. that
these three things preceded the generation of the world, being, place, and genera-
tion; and that eeneration is an ofispring, but place a mother. He appears there-

\
Ὶ
|
|

fore through these things to divide matter oppositely as it were to the Demiurgus, ἡ

according to the maternal and paternal peculiarity, but to produce generation
from the Demiurgus and matter. Does he not therefore give subsistence to mat-
ter from another order, which has an arrangement prior to the Demiurgus? Iu
the Philebus therefore, he clearly writes, “11 say that God" exhibited the bound,
and also the infinity of beings, from which bodies andall beings derive their composition.”
Hence, if bodies are from bound and infinity, what is the bound in them, and
what the infinity? It is evident indeed, that we Say matter is infinity, but form

bound. If therefore, as we have said, God gives subsistence to all infinity, he \\
likewise gives subsistence to matter, which is the last infinity. And this indeed, /)

is the first and ineffable cause of matter. But since every where sensibles are ana-
logous to intelligible causes, and Plato constitutes the former from the latter ; as
for instance, the equal which is here, from the equal itself, the similar, from simi-
litude itself, and after the same manner all sublunary animals and plants,—it is
evident, that he hkewise produces the infinity which is here, from the first infinity,
Just as he produces the bound which is here from the bound which is there. It has
however, been demonstrated by us elsewhere, that he establishes the first infinity
which is prior to things that are mingled in thesummitof intelligibles, and from thence

extends its illumination as far as tothe last of things ; so that according to him, mat- \
ter proceeds from the one and being, or if you are willing, from the one being also, [or ) |
being characterized by theone|so far as it is being in power. Hence likewise, it is in 1}

a certain respect good and infinite, and the most obscure and formless being. On /
this account also these are prior to forms, and the evolution of them into light.
Orpheus likewise delivers the very same things. For as Plato produces two-
fold causes from the one, viz. bound and infinity, thus too the theologist gives
subsistence to ether and chaos from time ; ether being the cause of bound every
where, but chaos of infinity. And from these two principles he generates both
the divine and the visible orders of things; from the more excellent principle
indeed, producing every thing stable, effective of sameness, and the source of
measure and connexion ; but from the less excellent, every thing motive, effective

‘viz. The highest God, or the one.

/

324 PROCLUS ON THE [BooK 11.

of difference, never failing progression, the nature which is defined, and connected
by other things, and the last infinity by which matter also is comprehended.
Hence also matter is dissimilarly assimilated to the firstinfinity.’ And it is indeed
a separation (ywpiopa), as being the receptacle (ywza) and place of forms ; but there is
neither bound, nor a bottom, nor a seat about it, as being infinite, unstable, and inde-
finite. But again, the last infinity may be denominated a perpetual darkness, as being
cllotted a formless nature. ence conformably to this assertion, Orpheus produces
matter from the first hypostasis of intelligibles, Jur there perpetual darkness* and
the infinite subsist. And these indeed, subsist there in a way more excellent than
the successive orders of being. In matter however, the umluminated, and the infi-
nite are inherent, through indigence, and not according to a transcendency, but a
deficiency of power. Moreover, the tradition of the Egyptians asserts the same
things concerning it. For the divine Tamblichus relates that according to Hermes
materiality (υλοότη τα) is produced from essentiality? (ex τὴς οὐσιοτητος). It is pro-
hable therefore, that Plato derived from Hermes an opinion of this kind concerning
matter. And matter indeed primarily subsists from these principles [bound and
infinity]. But Plato also produces it according to second and third principles,
viz. intelligible and intellectual, super-celestial and mundane causes. And why
do 1 say this of the Gods themselves? For the nature of the universe likewise,
produces matter so far as she is [ἃ Goddess]* and according to the hyparxis of
herself. For according to this she participates of the first cause. The Demiurgus
therefore, according to the unity which he contains, according to which likewise
~ he is a God, is’ also the cause of the last matter; but according to his demi-
urgic being, he is not the cause of matter, but of bodies so far as they are bodies,

* For xpos eavrny here, it is necessary to read pos avrny, [1, €. πρὸς avrny απειριαν.}

* The first hypostasis of intelligibles is being itself, which is mingled from bound and infinity. Per
petual darkness therefore, may be said to reside here, because this hypostasis through proximity to the
ineffable cause of all becomes Carkened. “ον being very pear, as Damarcius admirably observes, to
the immense principle, if it be lawful so to speak, it ἀν εν as it were in the adytum of that truly mystic
silence.” This darkness, however, is not any deficiency, but a transcendency of all that is luminous.
Yor as there is one kind of ignorance which is below knowledge as being the defect of it, and another
which is above knowledge, being that in which our ascent to the ineffable terminates ; thus also, there are
two kinds of darkness, the one being below, and the other above light.

3 See lamblic. De Mysterns, p. 159.

* The word θέον is omitted in the original, but ought evidently to be inserted, because Proclus in the
Introduction to this work observes that Nature is a Goddess through being deified.

" For crc bere, it is requisite to read ἐστι,

BOOK 11.} TIM.ZUS OF PLATO. 225

and of corporeal qualities. Lfence generation is the offspring of being. According
to the life which he contains, he is the cause of the animation which pervades
through all things; but according to his intellect, he is the cause of the intellectual
supply imparted to the universe. And all such things indeed, as he produces
according to his secondary powers, he produces in conjunction with those that
are primary. For every thing which participates of intellect, participates also of
life, of being, and of union, That also which lives is, and is one; and being is
connected through its own proper unity. The converse, however, is not. true.
For such things as he produces according to the one,’ so many he does not produce
according to being. Nor does he give subsistence to as many things according to
the fountain of life, as he does according tobeing. Noras many things according
to a royal intellect, as he does according to life; but he gives the greatest extent
to his providence from his more elevated powers. These things, however, we
have elsewhere more fully discussed.*

Let us therefore return to the words of Plato, and survey the meaning of each.
The word thus then, suspends the whole orderly distribution of things from the
goodness of the Demiurgus, viz. from his divinity. But the words, “ every ¢hing
that was visible,” in the first place, leave’ nothing solitary; and in the next place,
they show that this visible nature is corporeal. For it would not be visible if it
was incorporeal and without quality. So that they neither signify matter, nor the \
second subject (i. e. body void of quality]. But the visible nature is that which, τ εν Ἵ

Oe δ,

ton

now participates of forms, and possesses certain vestiges, and representations, |
being moved in a confused and disorderly manner. For the idolie and indistinct /), :
presence of forms produces different motions in it, as Timeus says farther on. |/ ,
These, however, all the orders of Gods prior to the Demiurgus illuminate; but the
paradigm transcendently illuminates them by his very being, and prior to fabri-
cation. For superior energize prior to secondary causes, and the Demiurgus
makes in conjunction with the paradigm, but the paradigm, prior to the Demi-
urgus, and permeates to those things to which the energy of demiurgic providence

does not extend. Iftherefore, you wish to disjoin primordial causes, and the
things which proceed from them,* you will find that the good which is the cause of 0,
all things, is also the cause of matter. On this account it is likewise the cause of |

!

er

" Instead of cura ro ny here, it is uecessary to read cara ro εν.

* For εξησταται here, it is necessary to read εξετασται.

> Instead of ἀφιστησιν in this place, it is requisite to read ἀφίησιν.
4 For ra aw avrov bere, read ra ax’ avrwy.

“20 PROCLUS ON THE [βοοκ "1.

its being invested with forms; for every form is a measure ; and of its participation
of order. For order is the reason of things that are arranged, ‘Lhe paradigm,
/however, is not the cause of matter, but ofthe production of form, and of the order
vin forms. But the Demiurgus is the cause of order, Hence also Plato says, that
‘the Demiurgus received matter now advancing to the participation of forms.
— Since all causes therefore, subsist always and at once, but of their effects, some
"proceeding as far as to things that are last [1. e. to bodies], but others as far as to
things which are beyond both, through the extension of superior causes ;—this
being the case, the paradigm indeed, receives matter from ¢he good, and invests
it with form; for forms, so far as they are forms, are the progeny of the paradigm ;
but the Demiurgus receiving forms from the paradigm adorns them with numbers,
and inserts in themorder. After this manner therefore, you must conceive, if you
disjoincauses. Ifalso you say, that the Demiurgus 15 the one cause of all things,
[ he produces indeed in one way according to his goodness [or the good which he
| derives from the ineffable], but in another way according to his own paradigmatic,
“andas we may say, artificial peculiarity. Ashe produces likewise collectively, atonce,
and eternally,diflerent things proceed from a different peculiarity contained in him,
| For according to the good, he produces matter, form and order; but according to the
‘paradigm in him, form; and according to his artificial peculiarity, order. Hence this
thing which is invested with form prior to order, has these representations of forms
from the paradigm which is in its own nature intelligible | From this order hke-
wise, the Oracles produce abundantly-various matter. For they say, “ From thence
entirely leaps forth the generation of abundantly-various matter.” For the first
matter does not possess a great variety ; nor ts there a generation of this, but of that
matter which has vestiges the forerunners of forms ; from which it is evident that the
paradigm and the Demiurgus differ from each other, since matter indeed partici-
pates of the former prior to the fabrication of the world, when according to the
hypothesis, the Demiurgus was absent; but it especially receives something
from the latter when it is arranged and adorned, and then the Demiurgus is
present with it. The word therefore recetving, may be said to indicate the para-
digmatic cause which is exempt from the demiurgic providence, from which the
Demiurgus receives the subject of things, now variegated with certain vestiges of
forms. It may also be said, that a different work participates of a diflerent power,
) though we may survey all powers in the Demiurgus. For he will be the same
divinity who receives and who delivers, essentializing, or adorning things by
different powers.

BOOK 11} TIM-EUS OF PLATO. 327

But the words, ‘“cehich was not in a state of rest but moved,” show that the 7
hypothesis alone imparts to the subject a nature from which motion is derived.
For the nature of it being irrational and not governed by divinity, what kind of)
order can it be able to preserve? This however is evident, from the Politicus,!
where, separating the Demiurgus from the world, Plato says, that it was moved by
a certain fate, and an essentially connascent desire. Hence supposing here in
conjunction with fabrication, what he there supposed after it, he introduces the
privation of order to the motion of the visible nature, this motion being produced
without intellect. And thus much for this particular. Again, the words, “ he
led it’ from disorder into order,” signify the participation of intellect, and an intel-
lectual life. But the word conceiving indicates the demiurgic intelligence, which
is analogous to his will and power. Previously assuming therefore, will in the ἡ
expression “ being willing,” and power in the expression “ as much as possible,” in
the third place, he adds intellectual knowledge in the term, “ conceiving.” For in
the Laws, he characterizes divine providence by these three things, vis. by goodness,
power, and knowledge. And goodness indeed is paternal, and pertains to the first
natures; but power is maternal, and ranks in the second place; and intellect,
which is gnostic, is the third. Goodness therefore is the first, but power is with
him, viz. with the first of the triad, and intellect, which is from him, is the third.
Again, the words, “ that was in every respect better than this,” signify that order is
better than disorder. For it was thus said, viz. “ that he led ' it from disorder into
order.” "The word this also has an indication of the disorder then present which
the Demiurgus received ; buat the word that represents to us the order pre-existent
in the Demiurgus, according to which also he is about to arrange disorderly
natures. Aristotle therefore, did not know the order which is in the Demiurgus,
but that which is in effects. Tle places however, the excellent in both; in order
that according to him, intellect may abide in itself, but may in no respect be
effective of secondary natures. But Plato following Orpheus, says, that order
is firstin the Demiurgus, and the whole prior to parts. For the Demiurgus being
ali things intellectually, made all things to exist sensibly. For if he produces by
his very being or existence; and it is necessary that he should, in order that we
may not ascribe to him deliberate choice, which is an ambiguous tendency ; he
either produces by a separation of parts from himself, and by a diminution of his
own powers, in the same manner as fire, or abiding such as he is [without any

" For nxev here, itis requisite to read ηγεν.

328 PROCLUS ON THE [poox 11,

alteration], he produces successive natures by his very being. It is however,
alwurd to say, that he produces by a separation of parts from himself: for neither
js nature diminished in producing the hair or teeth, or any other of the parts of
the body. Much more therefore, is it fit to preserve an exempt essence, and
which gives subsistence to itself, undiminished. But if remaining that which he
is, he produces by his very being, through this indeed, he produces that which is
similar to himself; but through a separation of parts, he does not ' make that
which he produces wholly similar to himself. For that which is diminished, does
not make according to the whole of itself. All things therefore, subsist in him
primanly. But external natures are the images of his allness, (ravroryros) and
order exists in one way in effects, and in another in paradigms. Tor the former
is complicated with disorderly natures, but the latter is order itself, subsisting in,
and being of itself; that it may be able to arrange things disorderly, and may be
exempt from them, and prescrye its Own essence in undefiled purity. And thus
much concerning the meaning of the words.

It deserves however not to be omitted, that Plato here imitates the theologists,
in supposing the existence of a confused and disorderly nature prior to. the
fabrication of the world. For as they introduce the wars and seditions of the
Titans against the Olympian Gods. So likewise Plato presupposes these two
things, the unadorned and that which is effective of ornament, that the former
of these may be adorned, and participate of order, They however speak theologi-
cally. For they arrange in opposition to the Olympian Gods, the patrons of
bodies. But Plato philosophically transfers order from the Gods to the subjects
of their government.

In the next place, therefore, let us concisely narrate the sacred conceptions
which the philosopher Porphyry here delivers. In the first place, then, he opposes
Atticus and his followers, who admit that there are many principles, conjoining
to each other the Demiurgus and ideas. These also say, that matter is moved by
an unbegotten, but irrational and malevolent: soul, and is borne along in a con-
fused and disorderly manner. That according to time likewise, matter exists
prior to that which is sensible, irrationality to reason, and disorder to order,
‘Let there however be, as they say, matter and God, both being without genera-

tion from acause. Hence, the unbegotten is common to them. At the same
time, they differ from each other. They differ therefore, by something eise, and

not by the unbegotten. Hence, that by which they differ from each other, will

| * Instead of καθολον here, it is necessary to read ov καθ᾽ ολον.
{ wt ervgeut 2

a AWA A,

͵ -

t } !
" vberwnct

BOOK 11. TIMAUS OF PLATO. 329

not be unbegotten. It will therefore be generated. It is impossible, however,
that things without generation, should differ by the generated. In the next place,
what is the cause to them of their difference, and which makes the one to be pre-
servative, but the other corruptive? For it is absurd to say, that it is the unbe-
gotten; (for either every thing unbegotten is preservative, or every thing
unbegotten is corruptive;) if the unbegotten nature of God makes God to be
preservative, or the unbegotten nature of matter makes matter to be corruptive.
But ifsomething else is the cause of their difference, whether is that something else
unbegotten or generated? For if it is generated, it is absurd that it snould be the
cause of things unbegotten; or if unbegotten,' that it should be the cause of
unbegotten natures. So that again, we must investigate something else prior to
these, as the cause of their difference, and the ascent will be ad infinitum. For if
there will be no cause of difference to things that differ, so as to render the one
preservative, but the other corruptive, the casual will have dominion over the
principles ; for cause being subverted, the concurrence of such-like principles will
be irrational, and without a cause. :

Farther still, it is absurd to make evil eternal, in the same manner as the good.
Por that which is without God, is not similarly honorable with that which is
divine; nor is it equally unbegotten, nor, in short, is it to be contrarily divided.
Vor why is the one more suflicient to itself, or more immutable, or indestructible,
than the other, if each of them is from eternity, and neither is in want of the other?
Again, if one of them is adapted to be adorned, but the other to adorn, whence
is their aptitude derived? For it is necessary there should be something which
connects both, and makes them commensurate to each other. For these princi-
ples being divulsed from, and subsisting contrary to.each other, cannot render
themselves adapted to coalition. Unless they say, that this also arises from
chance. Nor in thus speaking do they attend to the Athenian guest, who says,
that this is the fountain of stupid opinion, to assert that the irrational is prior to
reason, and that chance has dominion prior to intellectual art. Nor to Socrates
in the Republic, who says, that it is not proper to remain in multitude, but to
recur from the many to their common monads. . Farther still, it is necessary to
characterize the highest principle not by this alone, that it has not another
principle ; for this does not yet demonstrate its dignity * [but that it is the prin-

! It is necessary here to supply ἀγένητον των; and therefore instead of reading, as in the original,
aire αγενητων ὑντων, We Must read, cire ayernroy των ayeyntwY OVTwY.

* For αταξιαν here, it is necessary to read αξιαν.

Tim. Plat. Voi. L ; oy

330 ΤΠ PROCLUS ON THE [noo τι.

ciple of all principles). But if this be the case, there will not be more [indepen-
dent) principles than one. For if there were, God will not be the cause of all
things, but only of certain things. But if he also rules over matter, there is one
principle, and not many principles. Farther still, if the existence of principle
consists in this, that it is the principle of certain things, and that it adorns that
which is disorderly, it will be simultaneous with the things that proceed from it,
and the principle will be no less subverted from things posterior to it not existing,

}

than things posterior tu it when the principle is subverted... But this will be the

Α μ᾽
Ἵ

+ ‘ease, since they frequently say, that the principle has its existence in fabricating.

“If however this be true, itis not possible for the principle to exist, the world not”

‘lexisting, | But again, asserting differently from what they did before, they say, —
that God exists without fabricating. ‘They assert this however, not* knowing

‘that true powers energize by their very being, and that the augmentative and nu-

| tritive powers, by their very being, increase and nourish the body. Thus also the
soul by its very existence animates, vivifies, and moves its instrament [the body],
For the body does not perceive or palpitate in consequence of our pre-deliberation 5
“but the presence of soul alone accomplishes these energies. ) Again, every thing
which is always naturally adapted to a certain thing, essentially possesses the
power of effecting it; but that which is changed differently at different times, Is
adscititious, ΠΟ therefore God always fabricates, he will have a connascent
demiurgic power ; but if he does not, lis power will be adscititious. Hlow there-
fore, from being imperfect, does he become perfect, and from not being artificial,
an artificer?

The second head therefore after this, is that which shows that Plato refers all
things to one principle. And this is evident from the Republic, where he asserts
that the sun is the cause of visible, but the good of intelligible natures. Again
also, he calls the sun the offspring of the good. ‘This is hkewise evident from
his Epistles, in which he says that all things are about the king of all, and that
all things are for his sake. For if all things are converted to him, and subsist
about him, he is the principle of all, and not only of certain things ; since what-
ever you may assume will be derived from thence. “This too is manifest from the
Philebus, in which dialogue he ciearly says, that all things are from bound and

“ Instead of καὶ order μαλλὸν arnpnpern τῆς ἀρχὴν, ἐκ πκοδων ra per αὐτήν, ἐκ τοντων μὴ οντω),
αναιρειται ἡ ἀρχῇ, Ll read, καὶ ονδεν μαλλον ανὴηρημενὴς τὴς ἀρχὴν, €« ποδων τα μετ᾽ αὐτὴν ἡ εκ τύντων, κ. Me

Ὁ Οὐχ is omitted here in the original.

ΟΟΚ it.J ΤΌΘ OF PLATO. 331

infinity, but that of these principles themselves there is one pre-existent cause, which
is God. Hence, there is one principle and many principles ; but these are per-
fected by the one principle. Prom what is said also in the Philebus this is evi-
dent, in which dialogue he confutes those who assert that beings are [alone]
many, and likewise those who admit the principle to be being itself. For he de-
Monstrates, that itis neither proper to begin from the multitude of beings, nor
from the one being, but from the one itself, :

In the third place, therefore, neither do the principles which they assume_per-
tainany thing to Plato. For ideas are not separated from intellect, subsisting |
by themselves apart from it; but intellect being converted to itself, sees all forms. |
Hence the Athenian guest assimilates the energy of intellect to the circulation of
an accurately-fashioned sphere. But they introduce ideas as things ineflicacious,
resembling in themsclves forms impressed in wax, and situated external to intel-
lect. Nor is the Demiurgus the first God. For the first God is: superior to’
every intellectual essence. Nor does ἃ. certain irrational soul move that—
which is borne along in a confused and disorderly manner. Mor every |
soul is the offspring of the Gods. Nor, in short, did the universe, from being |
without order, become arranged. For if God was willing to bring 41} things |
into order, how was he willing?) Was he always willing, or ata certain time? For
if he was willing αἵ acertain time, this was either from himself, or from matter.
Bat if from himself, an absurdity follows. For he is always good. Every
thing good, however, which always exists, is always effective.’ And if this arose
from the resistance of matter, how came it to be now adorned ? Because, say they,
it became adapted to receive the demiurgie productive power, For God observed
this, viz. the aptitude of tt. Tt is necessary therefore, that it should have been
brought into order, not being itself disorderly. For af it had) been disorderly, it
would not have been adapted ; since the disorderly motion of it is inaptitude.
IIence matter is not the cause of the privation of order and ornament. Moreover,
neither is the will of God the cause of this. For he is always good, and therefore
the world is always adorned; and the Demiurgus always arranges the contused/
and disorderly nature. On what account, therefore, did Plato hypothetically in-
troduce this privation of order? It was that we might survey how the generation
of bodies is one thing, and the order of them when generated, another; bodies
indeed existing, but being moved in a disorderly manner. For they are inca-

‘ Instead of ro δε ayaboy war, act ov ποιητικον,, it scems necessary to read ro δε ἀγαθὸν παν ae ον,
ace ποιητικοῦ.

332 . PROCLUS ON 'THTE {[woox ir
pable of arranging themselves. Hence Plato, wishing to indicate the order which
accedes to bodies from something different from themselves, shows that disorder is con-
subsistent with their motions, without a divine cause. Aristotle, however, blames him
who asserts that disorder is assumed prior to order, merely according to hypothe-

sis, and says that those things will not follow for which the hypotheses are
assumed, as is the case in geometry. For the hypotheses of geometry are of

_themselves able to effect geometrical conclusions. To this we reply, that itis

not said after this manner according to hypothesis, that the unadorned ought to
be admitted prior to the adorned, but that Plato saw that which 1s formless prior

- τὸ forms, though it is never separate from them, Thus too, that which is invested

with form, though yet without distinction, is assumed prior to order, though it
never was prior to it, but is consubsistent with order,

The fourth head, in addition to those that have been already considered, is
that in which Plato demonstrates the mode of fabrication ; a divine intellect εἰς
fecting this by its very being, which he infers through many arguments. For
artists are in Want of instruments to their energy, because they have not dominion
over every kind of matter, But this is evident from the instruments which they
use, in order to. render matter pliant, boring, or polishing, or elaborating
it with a wheel; all which operations do nut insert form, but take away
the inaptitude of the recipient of form. Zhe reason itself however, or form,
becomes present with the subject from artinstantancously, all the vapediments being
removed. Wence if there was no impediment, form would immediately accede
to matter, and would not in short be in want of any instruments. Morcover,
the phantasy produces many passions about the body by its very energy alone.
For a man blushes through the imagination of what is base, and becomes red ;
and through the conception of something dreadful is terrified, and his body is
rendered pale. And these, indeed, are the passions about the body. But the cause
of these isa phantasm, which does not employ impulsions and mechanical contr-
vances, but energizes by being present alone. Farther still, theologists axsert that
there are certain powers superior to us, who employ efficacious imaginations, and
which by their very existence are effective of what they wish to accomplish, and
who are also able to produce illuminations, and to exhibit certain divine forms by
their motions, to such ag are able to behold the visions which they externally pre-
sent to the view. If therefore human arts, the imaginations of partial souls, and
the energies of diemons, effect things of this kind, why is it wonderful that the
Demiurgus, by the intellectual intuition of the universe, should give subsistence to
the sensible nature; generating, indeed, that which is material immaterially, that

BOOK 11. ΤΙΝΒΟΒ OF PLATO. 333

which is tangible, without contact ; and extending impartibly that which possesses
interval? And, indeed, it ought not to be considered as an admirable circum.
stance, if something which is incorporeal, and without interval, is the fabricator
of this universe. For human seed produces man, who is so much larger than the
seed, and in each part of it contains all the diflerences of the solids; as for
instance of the bones, those that are compact, and those that are hollow; of the
soft parts, such as the lungs and the liver; of the dry parts, such as the nails
and the hair; of themoist parts, such as the blood and phlegm; of the adipous
parts, as the marrow and fat; of the bitter parts, as the bile; of the parts with.
out quality, as the saliva; of the thick-set parts, as the nerves; and of the ex-
panded parts, as the membranes. For all these, the substances of similar parts,
and those that in a certain respect are composed of them, derive their subsistence
from a small bulk; or rather from that which is without bulk. For reasons [or
productive powers} generate these, and they are every where void of bulk. For
whatever part you may take of the seed, you will find in it all things. Much
more, therefore, is the demiurgic reason able to produce all things, being not at
all in want of matter to their existence. But the fabricator of all things is eter-
nally established in himself, and abiding in himself produces the universe.

* But it neither was, nor is lawful, for that which is best, to effect
any thing else than that which is most beautiful.”

Themis’ is very properly assumed in the beginning of the fabrication of the
universe. For she is the cause of the demiurgic sacred laws, and from her the
order of the universe is indissolubly connected. Hence also she remains a virgin
prior to the progression of the Demiurgus, according to the Oracles of Night.
But she produces, in conjunction with Jupiter, the triad of the Seasons, to whom

Olympus and great Heav'n are giv’n in charge,
And a dense cloud to open, or to close.

She is therefore the monad of all the mundane order; on which account alsa
Socrates in the Repablic calls her Necessity, as is demonstrated in that dialogue.
He likewise convolves the world on her knees, she preserving the order of it
perpetually immutable and unshaken. Conformably therefore to this divine
cause of order, the Demiurgus also, leading that which is disordered into order,
imparts beauty to all things, and renders the world similar .to, and connects it

! This word which is used here by Plato, signifies both the Goddess of justice, and lawful,

334 PROCLUS ON THE (woe τι.

with himself. For being himself most excellent, he very properly causes the
world to be most beautiful ; because the first and intelligible beauty itself is sus-
pended from, and is in goodness. Hence the world likewise, being most beauti-
ful, is suspended from the Demiurgus, who is the best [of fabricative causes].
And because the good is the cause of beauty, on this account also the best of
fathers gives subsistence to the most beautiful offSpring. Farther still, as ‘Themis
is the guardian of the divine laws, but they make the generations of secondary
from first natures to proceed in an orderly series, and preserve the connexion of
divine beings, and the similitudes of things second to such as are first ;—on this
account also, the Demiurgus, energizing with Themis, renders the universe most
beautiful, being himself most excellent. For if Socrates, being a man, says that
itis not lawful for him to concede any thing that is false, or to obliterate the truth,
how is it possible we should say that the demiurgic intellect effects any thing else
than what is beautiful, and that he does not exterminate deformity, being united
to Themis, who is likewise always present with bim? And thus much concerning
this particular.

But the words, “it neither was nor is,” are very appropriately assumed with
that which ts best: for before this, he had called the Demiurgus good, and then
also the term zas, was added. For Timeus says; he was good. For the sim-
plicity which is above intellect, and the peculiarity itself of deity, are more adapted
to the term twas, as being super-eternal, and better than all intellectual perception,
Now! however he calls him the most excellent, as being a deified intellect. For
that which participates [of deity] is most excellent. The terms also was and is,
are adapted to the Demiurgus ; as to a God indeed, the term was ; but as to an
intellect, the term ἐς, in order that at one and the same time his divine union and
eternal hypostasis may be rendered manifest.

“ By a reasoning process, therefore, he found that among the things
which are naturally visible, no whole work destitute of intellect: would
ever be more beautiful than a whole work which possesses intellect.”

Amelius in a wonderful manner endeavours to prove that Plato knew the
different demiurgic causes, and continually passes in a silent way from one of

these causes to another; exhibiting, on account of their connexion, no one of the

* Novy 1s erroneously printed here for νυν.

δοὺκ 11. TIM.E@S OF PLATO. 335

divine causes themselves, but discoursing about them as if they were one and the
same, through the union of the demiurgi with each other. For all of them are
one, and oneis all. Since now also he who wills is one Deimiureus, he who
reasons is another, and he who assumes or receives is another. And the first, indeed,
makes by his wilt alone, the second by intelligence and intellectual perception,
but the third by [as it were] manual operation, For they placed intellect in soul,
but soul in body, and thus together fabricated ' the universe. The divine lambli-
chus however reprobates all such interpretations, as very superfluously devised.
But he defines Ἀογίσμος, OF a reasoning process, to be that which causally precedes
beings, Which is fabricative of essence itself, and which is according to energy
invariably the same; from which all reasonings are connected, and have their
existence.

We indeed have already observed, that Timieus discourses about one and the
same Demiurgus, and shall now remind the reader that this must be admitted.
Por if there isa multitude in the demiurgi, (i.e. if there are many demiurgi,] it is
necessary to arrange aimonad prior to the multitude. Moreorer, we think it fit
that the divine Lambiichus should consider, whether the one and whole Demiur-
gus, being an intellectual world, is not multipotent, and does not by different
powers fabricate diferent things, in addition to his being the father of all things ?
Por let the same Demiurgus, so far as he is good, and so far as he is a God, be
the producing cause of all things; yet since he comprehends in himself the cause
of all fabrications, and produces in one way the whole, but in another the parts ;
the former indeed collectively and totally, but the latter in’ a distributed manner,
ceiving subsistence to each thing, according to its proper cause; hence by one
intellectual perception, he adorns the whole, and generates it, collectively 5 accord-
inz to which also, the world is one animal. But by a reasoning process, he pro-
duces the parts in the world, and these as wholes; because he is the Demiurgus of
total naturcs, fabricating total intellect, and total soul, and all the bulk of body.
Hence, as composing parts, he is said to make them by a reasoning process.
For λογισμὸς isa distributed or divided evolution of parts, and a distinctive cause of
things. For it does not pertain to one who doubts; since neither does art, nor
science doubt; but artists and scientific men then doubt when they are indigent
of the habits by which the former become artists, and the latter men of science.
If however these do not doubt, ng reason can be assigned why intellect should

' For ovvecrecverac in this place, it is necessary to read ovvrecraiveras,

336 PROCLUS ON THE [Boox 11.

doubt. Hence this λογισμὸς is not through the want of that which is fit taking
place. But the Demiurgus produces the whole world by intelligence. For
intelligence is collective of multitude into one; just as λογισμὸς is distributive
of the one into multitude. Such therefore is the meaning of “ by a reasoning
process.”

With respect however to the things which are naturally visible, to say that
they are sensibles is perfectly absurd. For these are not yet arranged in the
discourse of Timeus, and it is among the number of things impossible, that the
Demiurgus should be converted to them. For how can he verge to that which 15
less excellent, or what kind of representation can he receive of material things, to
which it is not fortunate even for a partial soul to incline? Itis better therefore,
as the divine Tamblichus interprets the words, to think that things of this kind are
intelligibles. For that these are visible is evident from the things which ‘Timwus
shortly after says the Demiurgus perceives. For his words are, “ As many
therefore, and such tdeas, as intellect perceived to be inherent in that which ts animal,
&c.” That they are also naturally visible, will be evident if we consider, that
some things are visible with relation to us, but others according to nature.
And the things indeed which are visible with relation to us, are in their own
nature dark and immanifest; but those which are naturally visible are truly
known, and are resplendent with divine light. But intelligibles are things of
this kind. Perhaps too, as he had ealled that which is moved in a confused and
disorderly manner visible, and which subsists preternaturally as with reference
to fabrication, he now calls the intelligible paradigms of the Demiurgus, naturally
visible. Hence, in the introduction he inquires, whether an eternal or a generated
paradigm of the universe must be admitted; these two things existing prior to
the generation of the universe, being and generation. And where else can the
Demiurgus find the causes of generated natures, than in intelligibles? Por in-
vention with him is not a fortuitous thing, nor a syllogistic process 3 since this
pertains to partial souls; but a union with the intelligible causes of the parts of
the universe, and a survey and plenitude from thence derived. For all things
exist paradigmatically in the natures prior to him, both such as are the objects
of intellection, and suchas are deprived of intelligence ;' since truly existing
being comprehends uniformly the cause of intellectual natures, and of those that
do not participate of intellect. And the intellectual beings which are there, are

Yor vonrwy here, it is necessary to read asonruy.

BOOK 11.] TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 337

of a superior’ but the rest, ofan inferior order. For though all things there are
objects of intellectual perception, and intellects, yet in some of them, the cause
posecsses the intellectual nature of the things caused, but in others, the privation
of intellect and the irrational; the causes themselves being intellectual, but the
things which proceed from them, deprived of intellect. Hence the Demiurgus
looking thither, very properly admits that what possesses intellect is more venera-
ble than that which is without it, the genus of the one, than the genus of the
other, and the individuals of the one, than the individuals of the other. For
manis better than horse, and a certain man than all horses, according to the
possession itself of intellect. If however, you assume a certain part of man and
a certain part of horse, it does not entirely follow that the one is better than the
other. Norif youassume man fashioned by nature, and the man made by the
art of the statuary, is the former in every respect more venerable according to
figure than the latter. For art is in many respects more accurate [in this instance
than nature]. One whole therefore, is every where better than another, when
the one possesses intellect, but the other is deprived of it. For through what
other thing can body be able to participate of intelligible beauty [than intellect]!
Let no one therefore fancy that Plato makes the division of forms to be into those
that possess and those that are deprived of intellect. For all things there (i. e.
in the intelligible world] are, as we have said, intellects, where also Plato calls
all things in every respect Gods. But extending himself to the natures which are
there, he likewise perceived the separation which is here between the beings
which possess, and those that are deprived of intellect. Hence he thus says, that
nothing destitute of intellect, will be better than that which possesses it, the
difference of these existing as in works, but there pre-existing according to cause.

Again however, let us survey how Plato says, that secondary energize on
account of more principal causes, the latter being more perfect than the former,
bul the former being suspended from the latter. Because indeed, the Dewmiurgus
is good, on this account, he made the world to be most beautiful. For goodness
is the cause of beauty. But because he made the universe to be most beautifal,
he rendered it endued with intellect. And beauty fills the first intellect with
its own power. Because also he made the universe to be endued with intellect,
he imparted to it soul. For soul proceeds from intellect. Because likewise he
rendered the world animated, he inserted life in that which was before moved in

' For uxeprepoy read νπερτεέρων.

Tim. Plat. | Vou. I. 2U

338 PROCLUS ON THE [ΒΟΟΚ 11-

a confused and disorderly manner. For this being well arranged, is able to
participate of soul, soul of intellect, and intellect of beauty. The whole world
however, becomes most beautiful trom the good, and after this manner may be
said to be a blessed God. The Demiurgus likewise, seems, in what is here said,
to behold all the paradigms, which Plato calls naturally visible, not those only
Which are in animal itself, but also such as are more partial than the four ideas
which are there. Or how does he see some things which are the paradigms of
intellective, but others which are the paradigms of unintellective natures, which
are hot separated in animal itself? But he mentions the forms of this animal
itself, When be causes the universe to be an animal. For so far as it is an animal,
iis the image of anunal itself, and so far also as it consists of four parts [i. e.
of the four elements}. So far however, as it is now divided into intellectual,
and non-intellectual beings, so far it entuely derives its subsistence from other
paradigms more partial than those which exist according to the four ideas in
animal itself, So that animal itself indeed, is a paradigm,\but every " paradigm

isnot *animalitself, Taving discussed these particulars however, let us proceed

to what follows.

* It as impossible however, for intellect to accede without soul.”

The intellectual essence indeed, is impartible, uniform and eternal, but the
essence of bodies is partible and multiplied, and is consubsistent with temporal
representation, These therefore, exist contrarily with reference to each other,
and are in Want of a medium which may be able to collect them together; a
medium, which is at one and the same time partible and impartible, composite
and simple, eternal and generated. But according to Plato, the psychical order
isa thing of this kind, intelligible, and atthe same time the first of generated
natures, eternal and temporal, impartible and partible. If therefore, it is neces-
sary that the universe should be endued with intellect, it is also necessary that
itshould have a soul. For soul is the receptacle of intellect, and through it
mitelicet: exhibits itself to the masses of the universe. Not that intellect is in
wantol soul: for thus it would be less honorable? than soul; but that bodies

* Tustead of τὸ δὲ παράδειγμα in this place, it seems necessary to read ray δὲ παραδειγμα,
> Por os τὸ avrezwow here, it isnecessary to read vv τὸ avrozwor.

* Por cyryswreoos here, it ts necessary to read ariyuwrevos.

pooK 11} TIM-EUS OF PLATO. 339

require soul, in order to their participation of intellect. For the last, and not
the first of things, are in want of secondary ' natures, For the first of things are
every Where present without a medium.’ Hence it is necessary to understand,
thatthe soul which connects intellect witha sensible nature, ought to be intellee-
tual, and not deprived of intellect. For how can that which is destitute οὔ
intellect be suspended from intellect?) But to these another medium will be
requisite. The medium however, being a thing of this kind, will wisely and
orderly govern every corporeal-formed nature. But it will imitate intellect,
dancing as it were round it. If therefore, wholes are better than parts, things
eternal, than such as subsist in time, and efficients than effects, it is necessary
that the whole universe should be more divine than all the parts it contains. If
therefore, certain animals in the world, which are partial, material and mortal,
are naturally adapted to participate of intellect, what ought we to say of the
whole world? Is it not, that the whole of it exhibits through the whole, the
presence of intellect? For its figure, its order, and the measure of its powers, may
be said to afford clear indications of intellectual inspection. If however, intel-
lect presides over wholes, and governs the universe, it is necessary that there
should be an intellectual soul in the middle of it, adorning and ruling over bodies,
and at the same time separate from the subjects of its government, and filling
all things with life, in order that the world may through it, be firmly established
in intellect, and that intellect may illuminate the world. .

If you are willing, we will also recall to your recollection ’ what is written in
the Philebus, where Socrates shows that the world possesses intellect and is ani-
mated, because that which is terrestrial in us is from the universe, and the fire
which is in us is from the mundane fire, and in a similar manner the air and the
water which we contain; and that it would be absurd that things less excellent
in us should pre-exist in the whole, but that things more divine should not analo-
gously pre-subsist in it, and that total intellect and total soul should not be
contained in the universe. For either it must be said that no animal possesses
intellect, or ifthere is a certain animal of this kind, it is absurd that it should

* Instead of σωμάτων in this place, it is requisite to read δεντέρων.
* viz. They are notin want of a medium inorder to be present every where: but the last of things
require secondary natures as media, by which alone they can receive the illuminations of the first

of things.
3 For ἀναμισθωμεν here, it is necessary to read avaprnobwyer.

340 PROCLUS ON THE [Book τι.

participate of intellect prior to the universe." For the universe is always arranged,
and through the sameness of its subsistence, is nearer to an intellectual essence.
But much of the disorderly and confused is inherent in partial animals. Much
more therefore, must it be said, that soul is in the universe.” Hence Plato very di-
vinely admits that there is a twofold intellect, the one being imparticipable and de-
miurgic, but the other participable, and inseparable ? [from its subject]. For from
things which are in themselves, those which are in others, and are co-arranged
with inferior natures, are derived. He also gives to the universe a twofold life,
the one connascent, but the other separate; in order that the world may be an
animal through the life which is in it, animated through an intellectual soul, and
endued with intellect through much-honored intellect jisclf, But Aristotle only
admits the half (of this doctrine of Plato}, since he takes away * imparticipable
intellect from his philosophy.’ For the first: intellect with Jum, 15 the intellect of
the inerratic sphere; but he cuts off the intellectual soul, which is the medium
between intellect and the animated body of the universe 5 and immediately con-
joins intellect with the living body. In addition to these things also he appears
to me toerr in another particular, Por having placed intellect over the spheres,
he does not establish the whole world in any intellect; but this is the most absurd
ofall things; for how is the world one, unless one intellect hasdominion init?) What
co-arrangement likewise is there of intellectual mulutade, unless it 1s suspended
from a proper monad? Aud how are all things co-ordinated to an excellent
condition of being, unless there isa certain common intellect of all mundane
natures? For the intellect) of the inerratic sphere is the intelleet of that sphere

falone}; and this is also the case with the intellect of the solar, and of the lunar
sphere, and in a similar manner of the Other spheres. Against Aristotle however,
we have written a peculiar treatise about these particulars.

With respect to Plato however, Is not his method admirable? For receiving
the world, dividing it into parts, and surveying by itself that which js moved in

" Tu the original ἢ ec ἐστι re wow τοιουτῶν, ατόπον. ἀλλ᾽ ore πρὸ τὸν παντὸς vou μέτεχειν. But it ts
necessary to eapuage ad\, and by altering the punctuation, to read as follows: ἢ ecegrert ἔωον rowvror,
arroy ore πρὸ τὸν παντος, KX.

* The words ev τῷ marre εὐλ αι, are omitted inthe original,

§ Vor aywpnrus here, it 1» necessary to read aywperrer.

4 Forvoede here, read ἀφεῖλε.

§ Por an explanation of the intellect: to which Aristotle asceuded, also why he says nothing about
that which is beyvnd intellect, and why he appears to dissent in many things from Plato, but does not

in reality, see my Diasertation On the Philosophy of Aristotle.

nook 11} TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 311

a confused and disorderly manner, he stops it in his discussion, Just as in the
Laws, wishing to show that the self-motive nature is the cause of all motion, he
stops the whole heaven, and having stopped it, introduces soul into the universe,
in order that by pouring forth an abundance of life, she may animate the world.
He likewise introduces intellect to soul, which governs the world, being con-
verted to itself; through which the universe is moved in a circle, the whole is
arranged, and the whole world is immovable. Since however, all these parti-
culars give completion to one animal, and one nature, it is requisite that a
collective and uniting cause of them should have a prior existence, and that
this should be intellectual. For to comprehend wholes collectively and at once,
and to bring them together, to the completion of one thing, is the work of an
intellectual cause. Hence, Plato establishing imparticipable prior to participable
intellect, and placing the causes of all things in it, he produces from thence,
intellects, souls and bodies, from which he gives completion to the sensible
world. ‘That it is necessary therefore, that the universe should participate of an
intellectual soul, if it participates of intellect, is evident from what has been
said. For this soul is the bond of the extremes which are contrary to each
other.

But it must also be demonstrated that the converse is true; viz. that an
intellectual soul existing in the universe, it is necessary that there should be an
intellect of the universe. For since it is said that this soul is intellectual, it is
likewise necessary that it should participate of intellect. Whether therefore, does
it alone participate of the whole of intellect, or does it participate of it through
a certain thing in itself derived fromit? But if indeed, that which is corporeal
immediately participates of the fountain of souls, and not through that which is
in itself, it will be also requisite to admit, that the same thing takes place in the
whole soul (of the universe]. If however, there is in the Demiurgus the fountain
of souls, and there is also the fountain of the soul of the universe, and the universe
participates through the latter of the former, it is likewise necessary that the soul
itself of the universe, should be entirely suspended from imparticipable intellect
through participable intellects. dor as the body of the universe is to its soul, so
is the soul or it to intellect. And if indeed, so far as it is soul it becomes intel-
lectual,' it would be necessary that every soul should be the same [i. e. should be

* Instead of και et μεν abe voepa, ψνχη ywera, in this place, it is necessary to read, και εἰ μεν cabo
ψνχη, voepa γινεται.

342 PROCLUS ON THE [Boox 1.

intellectual]. But if it becomes intellectual through the participation of intellect,
it is necessary that it should participate of an intellect commensurate to it.
A thing of this kind however, is not intellect itself, but that which is a medium
between intellect itself and soul, which has intellectual perception adscititious.
This intellect also is a certain intellect, and is essentially intellect, and not
becoming to be so, like soul; for it is better than soul. But by being! a certain
intelleet, itis co-ordinate with soul. For intellect itself is intellect by eristing,
and not by becoming to be, and intellect which is simply so by its very being, is
superior to a co-ordination with soul. Ifalso you consider, that every monad
constitutes a multitude similar to itself, a divine monad, a divine multitude,
a psychical monad, a psychical multitude, just as an intellectual monad produces
an intellectual multitude, and that secondary orders always participate of the
natures prior to themsclyves, it is necessary these things being admitted, that there
should be a certain intellect of the whole world. For it is necessary that an
intellectual soul should participate of intellect. But if some one should say,
it’ participates of the intellect which ranks as a whole, it is absurd. For
this intellect will not be the Demiurgus of all things And if it) par-
Ucipates of a certain other intellect, this is the intelleet of the universe, and
that which is properly participated, as giving completion to the universe in
conjunction with soul. But the intellect which ranks as a whole, is so participated
by, as illuminating the soul of the universe. Mf therefore intellect presides over
Wholes, the universe is animated ; but if the universe is animated, it is also

endued with intellect.

“Through this reasoning process therefore, placing intellect in soul,
but soul in body, he fabricated the universe.”

In the first place, it is requisite to sce what this intellect is, and whether it is
essential, established above soul, or a certain intellectual habit of soul. From
analogy however, it may be inferred that it is essential. For as intellect is to
soul, so is soul to body, But soul does not so subsist with reference to body, as
tobe ahabit ofits and therefore neither is intellect a habit of κοι], This like-

' For ro δε ris είναι, read τῳ δε res εἰναι. ,
* viz. The intellect participated by soul, will not be the Demiurgus of all things. For the demiurgic
is an imparticipable intellect, or in other words, is not consubsistent with soul,

BOOK "1. TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 343

wise, may be inferred from the final cause. For Plato says that soul was
constituted on account of intellect.". But the converse is not true. If however.
soul is for the sake of intellect, but intellect is that for the sake of which soul
subsists, intellect is not a habit; for no where*® does essence subsist on account
of habit. And inthe third place, the Demiurgus constitutes this intellect; but
the soul as Plato says, gives subsistence to the intellect which is according to
habit, throneh the motion of the circle of sameness about the intelligible. For
fas he adds] through this motion, imtelleet and scicnce are necessarily produced,
Liow therefore does the Demiurgus constitute prior to soul, that to which soul
herself gives subsistence? To which we may add, that it is right to assume,
that in the Demiurgus there is a royal soul, and a royal intellect, as Socrates
says in the Philebus, subsisting according to the reason of cause [or causally];
and that according to these fountains of these two-fold genera, the Demiurgus
now places intellect in soul, and soul in body, not because better are in less
excellent natures, nor that intellect is in want of a certain seat, or that the soul of
the universe is in a certain thing, For these things are unworthy of wholes and
divine essences; through which the world is called by Plato, a blessed God.
Because however, we conceive of the nature of things in a two-fold respect,
either according to their progression, or according to their conversion; hence,
when we survey their progression, we begin from first natures, and say that
causes are in their effects. But we assert the converse of this, when we survey
their conversion. For then we say that the things caused ’ exist in their causes.
This second mode therefore, Plato delivers to us shortly after, when he places
body in soul, and analogously soul in body. Now, however, treating of tie
mode of progression, he places intellect in soul, because the whole of it has the
form of intellect, and nothing pertaining to it can be assumed, which is not under
the dominion of an intellectual nature. But soul in body, because this according
to the whole of itself participates of soul, and no part of it can be assumed which
is inanimate; but even that which is deprived of its proper life, so faras it isa
part of the universe, is animated, For as we say that providence proceeds every
where, and is every where because itis present with all things, and leaves nothing
destitute of itself; after the same manner likewise, we say that intellect is in

' For δια νὸν here, it is necessary to read δια your,
* After ovsapou in this place, it requisite to supply yap.
7 For ra aria here, it is necessary to read ra acriara.

344 PROCLUS ON THE {Book 11.

soul, as circularly illuminating the whole of it, and soul in body, because it is
present with the whole of it.

Nor docs Plato speak after this manner, and Orpheus after another; but
fit be reyuisite to give my opinion, the conceptions of the theologist become
manifest through what is here said. For Ippa who is the soul of the universe,
and is thus called by the theologist, perhaps because her intellectual conceptions
are essentialized in the most vigorous motions, or perhaps on aceount of the most
rapid lation of the universe, of which she is the cause,—placing a testaceous
vessel on her head, and encircling the fig leaves that bind her temples, with a
drazon, receives Dionysius (or Bacchus}. For with the most divine part of her-
self, she becomes the receptacle of an intellectual essence, and receives the mun-
dane intellect, which proceeds into her from the thigh of Jupiter. For there it
was united with Jupiter, but proceeding from thence and becoming participable
by her, it clevates her to the intelligible, and to the fountain of her nature. For
she hastens to the mother of the Gods, and to mount Ida," from which all the
series of souls is derived, Hence also, Ippa is said to have received Dionysius
when he was brought forth from Jupiter. For as Plato before observed, it is im-
possible fur intellect to accede to any thing without soul, But this is similar
to what is asserted by Orpheus ; by whom also Dionysius is called the sweet
offspring of Jupiter. This however, isthe mundane intellect, which proceeds
into light conformably to the intellect: that abides in Jupiter. hus too, the di-
vinely-delivered theology [of the Chaldeans] says, that the world derives its com-
pletion from these three things (viz. from intellect, soul amd body}. Soul there-
fore says [in the Chaldean Oracles,] concerning Jupiter fabricating the universe :
+} soul reside after the paternal conceptions, hot, and animating all things.’ For
the father of Gods and men placed our intellect in soul, but soul he deposited in
sluggish body.” Plato likewise, bears testimony tu the Oracles, when he calls
the Demiurgus father, and represents him yvenerating souls, and sending them
into the generation of men according to the first life. And thus much concerning
these particulars. Since however, us we have said, both soul and intellect give
completion to one animal, Plato appears tome to use very appropriately the
words to constitute and co-fabricate, through the common preposition σὺν in both,

* For Aawy in this place, 1 read Aueor.
2 je. To the region of ideas, and an intelligible nature,

3 For θερῴηχόνσα here, read θερμὴ ψυχώνσα.

soon kl TIMEUS OF PLATO. 519

exhibiting the union of the universe. For by always making diviner to be more
comprelensive than less excellent natures, he causes the world to become one ;
but through the forms in each he manifests in the one composition, but in the other

demiurgic art.

“Tn order that itmight become most beautiful according to nature, and
the most excellent work.”

In what is here said, Timeus recurs to the principle from which all the before-
mentioned particulars were deduced. For the world has arrangement on aecount
of soul, soul subsists on account of intellect, but intellect: proceeds into the uni-
verse on account of intelligible beauty, and the world participates of this in order
that it may also participate of the one ; and this is the end to it of its composition,
that it may be rendered most beautiful and the best. But it becomes most beau-
tiful indeed, on account of the beautifying cause which subsists in the intelligible,
but the best, or most excellent, on account of the fountain of good. For the good
is the most excellent of all things. And through all these, the world becomes
most similar to the Demiurgus. For he was called by Timaus most excellent.
IIe however, is the best of demiurgic causes, just as the good is simply most excel-
lent, existing beyond all the divine causes. But the world is the most excellent
work, for itis a fabrication. Vor here also the world participates of deity ; since
the goodness which is above intellect is deity ; and on this account the world ts
denominated most excellent. In an admirable manner Plato likewise, does not
-peak of the deity of the world in the same way as concerning intellect and soul,
viz. as acceding after intellect. For the union of intellect with its proper deity is
ineflable, and itellect itself being divine proceeds from the father, which also is
the peculiarity of total production. For as intellect indeed, it derives its subsis-
tence from the total fabrication, but as a divine intellect, from deity.’ Plato
therefore, does not make a division into deity and intellect, in consequence of
constituting the intellect of the world from the father. What however, is the
~ meaning here of according to nature? Perhaps this is significant of order, according
to which the universe is likewise enabled to participate of divine beauty ; and there-
fore will be the same with according to order. Perhaps also it manifests to us, that

* Instead of axo rns odns hicre, I read axorys Ocoryros.

Tim. Plat. Vou. 1, +e ξ ;

the Demiurgus makes by his very being, and produces both intellect and soul
from his essence. And it is not improbable that it is used, because this fabrica-
tion, the universe, is complicated with nature, and the most beautiful here is not
of such a kind as that which 15. better than nature ; but that which is above nature,
is as it were mingled with nature, and intellectual with physical entities.

‘Thus therefore, it is necessary to say, according to assimilative rea-
soning, that this world was gencrated an animal, possessing in trath for
reality) soul and intellect through the providence of God.”

As the world itself is mingled, being composed of images and divine essences,
of physical and supernatural things, thus also Plato calls the discussion of it assi-
milative, and again truth. For according to that which is moved in a confused
and disorderly manner, it requires assimilative reasoning, but according to the
intellectual essence which is init, it requires truth, and also according to the
divine cause from which it proceeds. Hence Plato, when about to speak con-

cerning the world adds the word assiuilative, or probable, but the word truth,

when about to speak concerning the providence of divinity, Farther still, you
may perceive both assimilation and trathin the speaker himself; not only dividing
these conformably to the nature of things. For he frequently apprehends the
fubrication of things in a partible manner, assuming reasonings, divisions and com-

positions, though all things subsist at once in divine production, And frequently, ᾿

he recurs to the whole intelligence of the father, asin the axioms, ‘de was good,”
and “it netther was nor will be lawful for that which is most excellent to effect any
thing else than that which is most beautiful.” Vor in the former of these his appre-
hension is assimilative [but in the latter, comes into contact with truth). For
from the multiform knowledges that are in us, he indicates what pertains to divine
and demiurgic intelligence. But how, say they, dues he detine the universe to be
an animal animated, or possessing soul, and endued with intellect ; for it seems
indeed, that ἀνέρα is a certain part, but anated agenus? In answer to this, it
is necessary to recall to our memory those Platonists who say, that animal extends
as far as to plants themselves, and to sce how, according to. this ductrines
every thing animated is an animal, but not every animal is animated. For
intelligible animal is beyond the causes of soul. For as Plato calls the ra-
tional soul an aninal! but also arranges lite after the rational soul, he very pro-

* Zwov is omitted here in the original,

aaa

ee a Sea ita renner ieee

ROOK 11. ΤΙΜ δ OF PLATO, 347

perly denominates every thing animated an animal, but not vice versa. If however,
this be the case, having said that the world is an animal, since there is an intel-
ligible animal, and also a sensible animal participating of a rational soul, he
properly adds, that itis animated. And since of souls, one kind is endued with
intellect, but another is deprived of it, in addition to the universe being animated,
he likewise asserts that it possesses intellect. For it seems, that animal indeed,
accedes from the first intelligible," and thus also from the intelligible father, who
is prior to the intellectual Gods. But the animated accedes from the middle
cause, both the triadic and the hebdomadic.’ And the possession of intellect ac-
cedes from the intellectual father Jupiter]. For if you survey these as with
“reference to the Demiurgus alone, according to the paradigm which is in’ him,
the universe is rendered an animal; but according to his royal soul, animated ;
and according to his royal intellect, endued with intellect. All these however, Plato
comprehends unitedly in the words, “ through the providence of God.” For from
thence the universe is rendered an animal, anda blessed God,‘ becoming perfect
through the providence of divinity. You may also sce how the discourse proceeds
from goodness through will, and ends in providence. For will indeed, is sus-
pended from goodness, and providence from will. And the universe is gene-
rated, on account of the providence, the will, and the goodness of the father ; the
last of these being essence prior to essence [i. e. being superessential essence], the
second, being as it were power prior to powers, and the first, energy prior to
energies, Tor these pertain to the Gods so far as they are Gods. For goodness
indeed is unific of essence, and is the flower of it ; but willis the measure of power ;
and providence is an energy prior to intellect. For this I think, the very name itself
manifests... We therefore thus distinguish animal and animated.

lamblichus however, arranges animal, with every thing that has life, but anima-
fed, with the peculiar participation of souls. And perhaps he also, through the

‘i.e. Fromro er ov, or from being characterized by the one, and which is the summit of the in-
telligible order.

* ice. From animal itself or Phanes, the extremity of the intelligible order.

dice. The animated accedes from the life, which is in the order called intelligible, and at the same
lime intellectual, and also from the life which is in the intellectual order, which life is the middle
cause ia both these orders.

* For καὶ δαιίμὼν in this place, read ευδαιμων.

S ice. ilporoa providence, is au energy πρὸ νὸν prior to intellect.

448 PROCLUS ON THE {Book 11.

possession of life indeed, comprehends intelligible animals, but through the ani-
mated sensible animals alone. But it may be inferred, that the world is an ani-
mal from its sympathy; that it is animated, from its perpetual motion; and that
itis endued with intellect, from its excellent order. Lor if according to this,
mortal’ are co-passive with celestial natures, and the latter impart an effluxion to
the former, the universe is one animal connected and contained by one life. For
if this life were not common there would not bea sympathy of the parts in it. Jor
sympathy is effected through a participation ef the same nature. And if the world
is perpetually moved, itis governed by soul. For every body which is itself
moved inwardly by itself, is animated; but the body which is moved externally,
is inanimate. If therefore, the universe Is always moved, what is it which moves
it? For this is either immoveable, or self-motive. Butitis not lawful for the im-
moveable cause of motion to approach without a medium to things which are
moved by something different from themselves. Hence, it remains, that the self-
motive nature is that which always moves the world. But this is soul. The
world therefore is animated.

Moreover, in the third place, if? the universe is always arranged, and if all
things are co-ordinated to well-being, and there is nothing adventitious in’ the
polity of the world, intellect governs the world. For the connexion, the order,
and the sacred Jaws of the natures contained in it, bring with them manifest
syinbols of intellectual government. Aristotle also, in another way shows this,
when he says that of animated natures, animals have the left hand and the right,
but plants have the upwards and downwards, and also the meht hand and the
left, so that the world is animated and an animal. But it is likewise endued
with intellect. Por that which moves itis intellect. According to both plilo-
sophers therefore, the world is an animal animated and endued with intellect ;
except indeed, that according to Aristotle, it is animated, as having an insepa-
rable lite; for he does not admit that 1 has an intellectual soul, bat that it has
an intellect above soul, and which is essentially suspended from another intelli
gible animal For what) Plato calls animal itself, he calls eternal animal, as an
his Metaphysics, when he says, “ We say that God ts an eternal animal.” And in
short, since there are in the world things that are moved, and things that are
immoveable, things which are always one or the other of these, and things which

are sometimes in motion, and sometimes are tmmoveable, itis necessary that the

' Ttis necessary here, to supply ra Oynra.

* Fe is omitted here in the orginal.

‘TIMEUS OF PLATO. 349

ROOK 11.}

causes of both these should preside over the world. Soul therefore is the cause
of motion; on which eccount also Plato in the Laws admitting [for the sake ot
arument] the universe to be immoveable, gives motion to it by the introduction
of soul, Andinthe Phaedrus taking away soul, he makes all things to stand
still. But itis evident that intellect belongs to immoveable natures. And beings
that are always moved, are moved about those that are immoveable, and on
accomnt of the permaneney of the latter, the former are perpetually moved.
Hleuce it entirely follows, that there is a mundane intellect above soul. By
no means therefore, must that which Chrysippus devised, be ascribed to the
world. For he confounded imparticipable with participable * causes, by sup-
posing them to be the same with each other, and also the divine, and the intellee-
tual, the immaterial and the material. For the same God, and who according to
him is the tirst God, pervades through the world, and through matter, and is both
soul and nature inseparable from the subjects of his government. Plato how-
ever, establishing prior to the whole world three causes, goodness, intelligible
animal, and the demiurgic intellect, imparts from these to the world in the first
place, a perfect intellect always fixed in energy, exempt from matter, and full of
undefiled intellections. In the second place, a divine intellectual soul, evolving
the essence of this one intellect, dancing round it, and convolving the universe.
In the third place, a union of the total essences in the world, and one deity and
eoodness, connecting all the mundane multitude, and causing itto be one. And
in the fourth place, a providence extending to all things its inspective care, sub-
sisting likewise from itself, and causing itself to be exempt trom all the subjects
of its government.

Since however, as we have before observed, it is necessary to survey the pro-
cressions and the conversions of wholes, both these are accomplished by Plato.
For he delivers the progressions of them when he says that the Demiurgus placed
intellect in soul, and soul in body ; but their conversions, when beginning from
the world, he calls itan animal animated, and endued with intellect, and con-
nects it through soul with intellect, which is the peculiar work of conversion.
And in the last place, he reiers the composition of the world to the demuiurgic
providence, through which conversion is imparted to all things. For goodness
indeed, unites the Demiurzgus to te exe. But will supplies wholes with good.
And providence converts all things to de good. For, as we have said, goodness is

* [tis necessary liere to supply καὶ peGexras.

450 PROCLUs ON THE [Βοοκ lt,

analogous to essence, will to power, and providence to energy ; because the first
indeed, establishes all things; the second moves them to progression; and the
third recalls them according to the retrogression of all things to that which is
prior to intellect. If however, the Demiurgus adorns the universe on account of
coodness, but through adorning it causes it to possess intellect, and to be animated,
and doing these things, eflects them on account of providence, (for these were
generated through the providence of God)—if this be the case, itis necessary that it
should be the same thing to produce onaccount of goodness as on account of provi-
dence. And this very properly, because providence is the energy of goodness. So
that according to Plato, providence is nothing else than an energy conformable to
good, For in our concerns also, we say that to provide for some one, is to be the
cause of good to the object of our pros idential care. Not only, therefore, must provi-
dence be detined to be that which converts all things to the first, but also to be that
the energy of which extends to all things, and which adorns all things according to
one union. And this is in reality providence, the communication of good to all
things, the conversion of all things to and the participation of the wiver (of every
good), who imparts to every thing that which it is able to receive. It is requisite
likewise to remember what the Cheronean (Plutarch) says about the name of
providence, as that which Plato exhorts us to conceive of as something divine.
If also the Demiurgus is intellect, and providence so far as he has something
which is better than intellect, he has deservedly this name, on account of an
energy which is above intellect. For all things aspire after good, but all things
do not aspire after intellect. For such things as are perfectly destitute of intel-
lect do not desire it, lest their desire should be in vain, or they should be deprived
of the end [which is their proper good}. And because he is providence indeed,
he is suspended from the good itself; but because he is intellect be is suspended
from the first intellect, For the first intellect (i.e, Saturn] is not that which intel-
lectually sees and fabricates, but that which alone intellectually perceives; and
on this account, it is a pure intellect, as we learn from the Cratylus. Hence
also, according to Plato, the latter may be said to be orice," as having one energy
directed to himself: bat the former Gece, dogethor with ΠΝ energy ΘΟ ΟΝ ing also
w power fabricative of the universe, and not: only lovinhatively regulating: things,
posterior to himself, but also abiding in his own accustomed manner, as Plato
says shortly after.

* Proclus says this, alluding to the Chaldean oracles, in which Saturn is called ence beyond, and
Jupiter twice beyond.

BOOK 11.} TIMZUS OF PLATO. 351

“This being determined, let us consider what is consequent to these
things; viz. according to the similitude of what animal, the constituting
artificer constituted the world.”

Plato clearly exhibits to us through what is here said the connexion of the
problems, and the suspension of secondary from primary natures. For the words,
“ this being determined,” and ‘ let us consider what is consequent to these things,”
indicate the connexion of what has been with what will be said; and that through
the truth of the former, the latter receive the principle of investigation. For
since it has been shown that the universe was rendered an animal conformably
to the providence of God, it is necessary that it should be assimilated to intelligi-
ble animal. For where did the Demiurgus look when he made the world to be
an animal, except to the intelligible? Por it was one of the things pre-demon-
strated, that the world being most beautiful, was generated according to an
eternal paradigm. If therefore, the Demiurgus making it to be an image of the
intelligible, constituted it an animal, the paradigm itself will be an intelligible
animal, For if that was not an animal, how could that which was generated an
image of itt be rendered an animal? For so far as it is similar to that, it was gene-
rated an animal. For it is sensible indeed, not as similar and separate [but as
visible and tangible}. These however, (i. e. visibility, and tangibility,] it obtains
through a corporeal nature. But it is an animal, as being similar to intelligible
animal. And if itis similar, it is from thence allutted the morphe of animal. For
images also, have not only their forms, but their appellations, so far as they are
formalized, from their paradigms. So that if life 15 imparted to the world through
the paradigm, it is also similarly called an animal and animated from it, because
the cause of its whole animation pre-exists in intelligibles. For the same reason
likewise, itis endued with intellect. It may however, in a greater degree be
called an animal, on account of the most principal cause, because the paradigm is
the cause of animation, of the supply of intellect, and as I may say, of all life. For
every thing enducd with intellect, is also animated, and every thing animated ts also an
anunal ; but the converse is not true. For every animal is not animated. For that

* Instead of πως τον ro exewo yeyovos εἰκων in this place, it is necessary to read πων τὸ κει ον yeyorns
«ιλων.

* The words αλλ᾽ ws eparov καὶ axroy are omitted in the original, but, as it appears to me, ought to
be inserted,

452 PROCLUS ON THE [Βοοκ 11.

which participates of a rational soul is animated. Nor ts every thing which is.
animated endued with intellect. For the genus of men that participate of intellect,

is small ; so that animal 1s more comprehensive than all the rest. And with those

things indeed, with which the rest are present, animal also is present; but it is

not necessary that the rest showld be inherent in those things with which this is

present, That however, which iy more comprehensive, is nearer to the first prin-

ciple. But that which is nearer? to it, is of a more causal nature, since the first

principle 15 the cause of all beings. That Plato also? not only knew intelligible
animal, but also the intelligible animated, ἰδ manifest from what he says in the
Sophista, Por placing tite and soul in being, and wishing likewise to give to it
motion, he adds, * But that which hay intellect and soul, if it ts not animated, must

remain entirely immoveable.” Wence there are, intelligible life, and intelligible
animal; the cause of soul, and the animated ; the cause of intellect, and that

which is endued with intellect. And animal itself is beyond all the intelligible
paradigms. Hence, Plato says, that the discussion of the similitude of the world
to intelligible animal, is consequent to the problem concerning the composition
of it. For because the universe being assimilated according to the form itself of
similitude, was rendered an animal by the Demiurgus, ἐλ may more properly
be called an animal, with reference to which the aniverse was generated an
animal. For it exists as an animal on account of the intelligible, and not on
account of that which is moved in a confused and disorderly manner. [1 ts
necessary however, that animal should be present with the universe, either from
matter or from form; so that if the world is not an animal from its subject
matter, itis so from form. If however from form, that which is primanly animal

is the cause to it of form.

It remains therefore, to survey in the next place after this problem, to what
animal the universe is assimilated. For that it is assimilated, is evident from
what has been already said, but to what it 15 assimilated, must next be con-
sidered. For there is a multitude of intelligible animals, which Plato also indi-
cating, inquires to what animal the Demiurgus constituted the world similar. Por
beginning supernally from intelligibles, animal proceeds through all the middle

orders τ in one of these orders, subsisting intelligibly alone; in another intelligibly

" For avOpwxwe yap yevos, poayyu ἐστιν οὐ μετέχον, it is necessary to read, αὐ flpwawy yap 7Ev0s, ἤραχυ
ἐστιν του vou μετέχον. Vor Plato says this in the latter part of this Dialogue.

* For αλλον here, it is obviously requisite to read ey yurepor.

nook We] TIMEUS OF PLATO, 353

indeed, but as in intelligibles and intellectuals ; and) in another intellectually

alone. And in one of these orders indeed, animal subsists intellizibly alone, but

as in intellectuals; but in another vitally. And thus in each of the intellects

there is intelligible animal, subsisting appropriately in each. For every intellect

has a conjoined intelligible. Very properly therefore, does Plato investigate

what kind of animal is the paradigm of the universe, whether it is super-mundane,

or intellectual only, or intelligible, and at the same time intellectual, or intelligible

only. For the nature of animal’ proceeds according to all the orders of intellect.

But Plato admits that the differences always subsist in the first animal itself:
according to union, and gives a progression to them according to appropriate

numbers. For as the first animalis tetradic, thus a different animal is defined

according to a diflerent number. And in those things in which there is the same

number, in these there is a variety of subsistence according to the peculiarities of
animals, Lor itis necessary that in animal also, there should be the monadic

prior to the multiplied ; because this * is more allied to (he onc. And universally,

every divine multitude begins from a monad. As therefore, the Demiurgus is the

monad of all eflective causes, though the effective peculiarity is in many Gods,

thus also animal itself is the monad of all animals; in which Tihewise the most

total paradigms of mundane natures, and the one cause of the whole world pre-

eNist.

Whi. however, some one may say, does Plato call the intelligible paradigm
animal? Because itis the supplier of life, as T have before observed 5 and because
it generates the causes of the whole vivilie series, and the fountains themselves of
lite. Because likewise, itis replete with the first and intelligible life. For the
one being, or being characterized by the one, is beyond life. But the middle
order of intellizibles is the first life, and is one and infinite. Animal itself) how-
ever, being full of intelligible life, is very properly called animal. For as it is
eternal, on account of being filled from eternity, thus also it is aw animal, on
account of its reception of life. For it ts intelligible, as being arranged [immedi-
ately} after intelligible lite. Tt is therefore called an animal, not as sensitive, nor
as having impulse, but as being vital. For every thing which lives, is according
to Plato, an animal.‘ For because it has life, says Timeus, it may be justly called
ananimal.” Hence also, Plato calls plants and seeds animals, characterizing the

' For ἢ τὸν vow gums here, it is necessary to read ἡ τὸν ὥνου peas.
* For roury here, read τοῦτον

Zim. Plat. Vor. J. Ye ὦ

554 PROCLUS ON THE acne,

animal by vitality. If therefore, the intelligible paradigm lives, as being eternal ;
for eternity, as Plotinus says, is the life of all things, so that the eternal lives κα
and if every thing that lives is an animal, hence the intelligible paradigm is an
animal. And you may from hence assume that this paradigm is in the third trad
of intelligibles. For it ig not in the first triad; for this is prior to life. Nor is it
in the second ; for this is life. Hence it isin the third. For it does not exist
out of intelligibles; since Plato on this' account alone calls the paradigm intelli-
gible, though he knew the super-mundane demiurgic intellect. But neither does
he call the latter intellizible, nor the former intellectual. Before therefore, he
assumed every thing which perpetually exists as the paradigm of all generation ;
among which eternally existing beings, animal itself and the Demiurgus are
included ; for each of these always is. Eternity likewise, which is the first thing
that always is, and the one being itself, which is eternal being according to cause,
are in the number of eternally existing beings. Now, however, he calls animal
itself the paradigin of the world considered as living. Fur perpetual being was the
paradigm of disorderly generation ; since from thence, forms without distinction, were
present with the disorderly nature, prior to the generation of the universe. But though
we should assume animal itself, which has the forms of the elements, this also is
te paradigm of the vestizes of the elements. So far, however, as it 1s animal, it
is the paradigm of this universe now possessing life. So that simply considered,
animal itself, and the intelligible paradigm are not the same. For eternity like-
wise, which always exists, is the paradigm of time, but is not an intelligible animal 5
since not every paradigin is an animal belonging to the intelligible order. But if
animal itself is eternal, eternity is prior to it, whichis not an animal, For prior
to animal itself, there is no other animal ; since neither prior to any other of those
things to which we apply the term itself, is there a certain -form prior to it. As there-
fore, eternity is prior to animal itself, not being yet an animal, so hkewise, being itself
is prior to eternity. Hence also eternity is that which is being, and is a certain
being, Animal itself therefore, is the third intelligible triad, concerning which
the (Chaldean] Oracles say, “ It is the operator, and the giver of life- bearing fire.
It fills the vivific bosom of Hecate,? and pours on the Synoches the fertile strength
(in fireendned with mighty power.” For all these assertions in no respect differ
frorn saying that all-perfect intelligible animal is the fountain of all intellectual

’ For δια re here, it is necessary to read δια rovro.

? For exaorns here, read Exarns.

nook 11. TIMAUS OF PLATO. 335
lite, and the cause of every paradigmatic hyparxis, And thus much concerning
this particular.

With respect to the words of the text, “fo constitute in the similitude,” manitests
that the universe is in the highest degree assimilated to its paradigm. For not
every image is constituted in similitude, but that alone which is perfectly similar ;
since this is not the case, where dissimilitude predominates. Vor then similitude
is not the end. But the words, “the constituting artificer constituted,” clearly de-
monstrate to us, that the Demiurgus of the universe makes by his very being,
and. possesses energy essentially, For Plato does not call him in one way, and
the effective energy proceeding from him in another, but he calls both by one
name. Farther still, the words likewise appear to signify, that the Demiurgus
always produces, and that he always produces perfectly. Tor the word constitu-
ting, Manifests an ever-present making; but the word constituted, an all-perfect
making, and which is suspended from its cause. But by the conjunction of both
these expressions, itis very manifest that the maker of the universe generates
eternally all things, his productive energy neither commencing, nor ending at

a certain time,

“ We must not therefore assert, that he thought it would be adequate
to its dignity, to assimilate it to any one of the animals which naturally
exist in the form of apart. For that which is similar to an impertect
thing, can never at any time become beautiful.”

As there are many intelligible animals, some of which are more total, but others
more partial,’ some of which are united, but others disided, and some are
detined according to bound, but others according to infinity; Plato inquiring
what the all-perfect paradigm of the universe is, and from what intelligible animal
the world is suspended, thinks that no partial animal ought to be placed in this
order. For each of these is imperfect as with reference to the whole. For it is
possible for the imperfect to be so called in a twofold respect, either with refer-
ence to its own nature, or with reference to that which is better and more causal,
And the former indeed, it is not even lawful to conceive of divine natures. For
each has the measure of itself eternally, and its own proper good always exerted.
For, as Socrates says in the Republic, each of them is most excellent in its own

‘It is obviously necessary in this place, to supply the words, των δὲ μερικωτερων.

356 PROCLUS ON THE [BOOK 11.

order. But the latter ranks, as it is said, among the things that are usual. For as
in the Banquet, Plato calls that which is not primarily beautiful, but participates
of beauty, indigent of beauty, thus also he calls that an imperfect animal which is
not the first animal, nor animal itself, but is such by participation, and subsists
according to a progression from that which is first. If therefore, every partial
animal is imperfect, but the paradigm of the world is all-perfect, the paradizm of
the world will not be a partial amimal. Por whether does the Demiurgus intellee-
tually perceive this all-perfect and first animal, or not? It is impossible indeed,
that he should not intellectually perceive those things which we perceive when our
soul energizes intellectually. But if he thus sees it, and all intellectual perception

of the Demiurgus is production or making, it is necessary that he should make:

δ;
by intellectual perception itself. What therefore can he make more divine than
the universe? For he will not make any thing of a less excellent nature, when
looking to that which is more excellent. Very properly therefore, does Plato
when investizating the paradigmatic principle of the world, recur to all-perfect
animal,

What then, some one may say, are not the sun and moon and each of the stars
beautiful? But how is this possible? For each of these is assimilated to a partial
animal. To this we reply, that each of these is beautiful, when surveyed in con-
junction with the whole, and co-arranged with the whole: just as the eye and the
chin are beautiful, in conjunction with the whole face, and while in the whole ;
but surveyed by themselves apart from the face, do not extibit the beauty which
is adapted to them. For in subsisting as a part and not as a whole, cach when
essentially divulsed fromthe whole, sutters a diminution of its own proper beauty.
The pertect therefore, and the beautiful are present with these which are parts, on
account of the whole. ‘The cause, however, of this, says Porphyry 15, that in
intelligible forms the part isa whole.t | For all such things are in each partially,
as are in the whole all-perfectly, on account of the union of intelligible forms.
And the asseruon is indeed true, that each of the parts in them is in a certain
respect a whole, each receiving the form of whole, and becoming essentially
united on account of its Communicating with all, and being all things according
to participation. Nevertheless the wholeness of it subsists partially, and not
like that wholeness which is simply a whole. For itis one thing to be alter a
solar manner a whole, or to be so after a lunar manner, in consequence of cach.

* Instead of ro cNoy μέρὺς ἐστιν, it is necessary to read ro pepos ὑλὺν Core.

-- -τοτοτεςσσ σα καιοαταξυς

BOOK I] TIMMUS OF PLATO. 357

intellect possessing all things ina way adapted to itself, one form having dominion,
which makes the intellect to be such an intellect, and a certain intellect; and ano-
ther thing to be all things, without a partial peculiarity, being all things so far asin-
tellect, and not so far asa particular kind of intellect. What) then, are not these
also generated according to intelligible paradigms, viz. the san and moon and each
of the stars? How therefore, are these beautitul? To this we reply, that these are
beautiful, but not most beautiful. Butthe world is that which is truly most beautifal.
As therefore each of these is perfect, but not all-perfect, so likewise each is beautifal,
but not ke the universe most beautiful. For that each of these is perfect, Plato
manifests farther on, when he says, “ that the world was generated perfect from
things perfect, anda whole framwholes.” Uence the perfection of the whole is one
thing, and ofthe part another. And the wholeness of the all-perfect is different
from the wholeness of that which is only perfect. The beauty likewise which is
in the most beautiful is one thing, but that which receives a more partial partict-
pation of beauty, is another. And thus much in answer to this doubt.

The words however, {in the form of a part,” may be easily understood, if they
are considered as signifying the same as, in the order of a part. And this is the
same with, fecoming a part. But the divine Tamblichas thinks fit to add the
conjunction «sto the words inthe form, and to understand the whole as implying
that every partial animal in intelligibles, naturally exists as in the form of a part.
For since part in them is not such as it is in sensibles 3 since each is there accord-
ing to its own order all such things as the whole is; on this account the philoso-
pher adds, asin the form, in order that surveying the appellation of part ina
manner adapted to forms, we may not understand it as a thing attended with
interval, and susceptible of division, and thus relinquish the union of united and
impartible essences. For these according to the philosopher himself are impart-
ible and united. But with respect to the word “ naturally,” we wust not now under-
stand by it according to nature, but the being cssentalized. For all essences ure
Sroquently called natures, as by Socrates in the Philebus, when he says,“ hence, in
the nature of Jupiter you may say, that there isa royal soul, and a royal intellect,
according to the reason of cause.” But the words, “ he thought it would be adequate
touts divnity,’ are said as if spoken in conjunction with the Demiurgus, and as
truly apprehending the dignity of a divine cause. For he who mystically narrates
the evempt and all-perfect intellectual conceptions of a divine nature, has an arrange-
ment in conjunction with him. And the words, “ for that which is similar to an im-
perfect thing can never be beautiful,” is indeed true, but is attended with a doubt.

358 PROCLUs ON THE [BOOK II,

For if in that whichis a whole one thing 15 more, but another less excellent, must
not the whole become inferior to its more excellent part, by the addition of that
which is less excellent? But the doubt may be solved by observing, that the
co-arrangement of the less with the more excellent makes the whole to be one and
perfect, but when they are not conzlomerated with cach otber, then the mixture
of the less diminishes the power of the more excellent nature, If however, some
one should make a syllogism from opposites, through what is here, and what has
been before said, so as to infer that every thing which is generated according to
an eternal, is not generated according to an eternal paradigm, we may solve the
objection by observing that what 15 employed by the objector as the middle term,
isnot so. For in one place, the words “in order that it might be beautiful,” ma-
nifest that which is beautiful, whether ina certain respect, or simply ; but in
another place, they manifest that which is most beautiful. For a part has
indeed the beauty of a part, but simply considered, is not beautiful. But that
alone is absolutely beautiful which is a whole, to which also the beauty of the
parts contributes 5 this beauty pertaining to certain things, and being itself a cer-
fain (and not atoiversal) thing. For every part is for the sake of another thing, 1. δὶ
the whole, and the beauty which it possesses has the order of matter with reference
to the beauty of the whole. Hence itis not so beautiful as to be most beautiful.
From what has been said, those assertions Likewise may be confuted, which
mnake the good to be a certain intelligible form and not prior to all intelligibles.
For if it is a certain form, itis also a part of the whole intelligible profundity in
which it subsists. But every part, as it is here said, is imperfect; so that the good
likewise is imperfect. How therefore being imperfect is it the most happy of all
things? In reality also that which is sinjjlar to it is not beautiful. Nor are all
beings similarly with reference to it, either more good, more beautiful. “Uf
therefore the good being a part, will suffer things of this 7 it will not be a part
of the intelligible. Moreover, neither 15 it the whole of the intelligible. For
being the whole of the intelligible, over what will it still reign? = Since neither is
the sun which has an arrangement analogous to the good" the whole of that
which is visible. It is necessary therefore, that the good should be beyond the
intelligible, and be neither a part nor the whole of it. Neither therefore, will
either animal itself, or the Demiurgus be the same with ¢he good ; since each of

these is a certain whole comprehensive of all forms.

* For τ᾽ ἀγαθὸν bere, read τ᾽ αγαῦφ.

een] TIMEUS OF PLATO. 359

“ But we should admit it to be the most similar of all things to that
animal of which other animals, both according to one, and according
to genera, are parts.”

Some, as Atticus, assert that this “ according to one, andaccording to genera,” gives
a division to individual opposite to that of more common forms. But they call
individual forms those that are proximate, and the causes of individuals; such
for instance as man itself, horse itself, and each of such-like forms. And they
denominate genera the more total and comprehensive paradigms of these.
Others again, as Amelius, say that Plato by these words, distinguishes that
which is particular from things that are more common. For some things are
paradigms of parts, but others of forms, Theodorus also, following Amelius,
says there are twofold intellects, one of these being divided into wholes, but the
other into parts. And that these are the same with, “ according to genera, and
according to one.” But others, as Nenarchus, assert, that according to genera
inanifests the pre-existent intelligible causes of animals; such for instance as the
celestial, aerial, aquatic and terrestrial, which are shortly after mentioned by
Timeus. And that by “ according to one,” the formalizing principles in each of
these many are indicated. For in celestial natures, the paradigm of the sun is
different from the paradigm of the moon. In terrestrial natures, the paradigm of
men is different from that of ions. And in a similar manner in the natures which
have an intermediate subsistence. The divine Iamblichus however, turns into a
path of interpretation contrary to all these. For they indeed make the “ accord-
ing to one,” subordinate to, and more partial than, “ according to genera ;” but he,
on the contrary, makes it to be more venerable, as it is fit that in intelligibles
unity should precede multitude. He says therefore, that all other animals are
the parts of animal itself, both according to one, and according to genera. For
they are comprehended and perfected by animal itself, both according to the
multitudes they contain, and according to their unities. Nor is there any one of
them which does not proceed from the intelligible. For intelligible animal is com-
prehensive of all the things posterior to it, not as deriving its completion from them.
For itis a whole prior to,’ and does not derive its subsistence from parts. Nor is it
a whole, as being predicated of parts; for it is the cause of the many. But it is

* Intelligible animal, or animal itself, isa whole prior to parts, because it comprehends parts in
itself causally,

360 PROCLUS ON THE [rook 1.

a whole, as a primordial principle, and as filling all things posterior to itself with
itself. Hence it comprehends what are called parts tinpartibly, many species
uniformly, and exists in an all-perfeet manner prior to secondary paradigms.
For this principle indeed, is the universe intelligibly ; but of the natures posterior
to it, one is all things celestially, another atter a solar, another after a terrestrial
manner, and another in some other way, according to the different causes of
mundane natures. So that this principle comprehends all things all-perfeetly,
but all things are comprehended by each of the natures posterior to it partially,
as with reference to the intelligible allness. The world therefore, is also similar
to these partial animals ; since itis likewise similar to the Demiurgus ; but it is
most similar to animal itself, so far as it is an animal. For animal itself was
primary intelligible animal. Henee, that which is most similar is so ina two-
fold respect; either because it is similar to other things, or because other things
are similar to it. But this is especially the case with the universe, and it is espe-
Gially similar to animal itself.

* For this indeed, has all intelligible animals comprehended in itself,
just as this world contains us, and such other animals as are the objects
. μὲ ”
of sight.

Plotinus supposes animal itself to exist ina twofold respect. For atone time
he considers it to be more excellent than intellect, as in his treatise intitled
Different Considerations, but at another, aa inferior to it, as in his treatise Coucern-
ing Numbers, when he says that being ts first, afterwards intellect, and afterwards
animal itself. But Theodorus, who says, that each of the demiurgt has a triples
hyparxis, thinks fit to call the third in each, animal itself. From both, however,
the truth may be assumed. From the admirable Theodorus indeed, that it has
the third order in intelligibles; but from the most divine Plotinus, that it is
inferior to one intellect, but beyond another. And it must be said, that unfold-
ing itselfanto light at the end of intelligibles, it generates from intelligible life all
the number of intellectual, supermundane, and mundane animals, supernally as
αν ἀν τὸ the last of things. Tt is likewise comprehensive of all things, being ex-
empt from, and uniformly and antecedently containing ta itsclf{ the causes of them,
For Orpheus also indicates things of this kind about it, when theologizing

* For τρίτην here, it is necessary to read rpm Nyy.

Βοοκ 1] TIM-EUS OF PLATO. 361

concerning Phanes. The first God therefore, with him, has the heads of many
animals, viz. of aram, a bull, a serpent, and a fierce lion." He also proceeds
from the primogenial egg, in which the animal exists spermatically ; and Plato
knowing this calls this mighty God animal itself. For what difference is there
between calling an occult cause an egg, or that which is unfolded into light from
it, an animal? For what can be generated from the exg of all things, but an
animal? This egg however, was the offspring of ether and chaos, the former of
which is established conformably to the bound, but the latter to the infinity of
intelligibles. For the former is the root of all things, but the latter has not any
boundary. If therefore that which first consists of bound and infinity is that
which is primarily being, the being of Plato will be the same with the Orphtc
egg. And if Phanes is from this, who is arranged according to animal itself, it
is necessary to investigate it as sitnated next to eternity according to Orpheus,
which is a medium between animal itself, and that which is primarily being.’
And thus it will be more clearly evident, that animal itself is no other than the
Phanes of the theologist. For if Phanes first proceeds from the egg, which is
manifestly with Orpheus the first intelligible intellect, but that which first and alone
proceeds from an egg, is necessarily nothing else than an animal, it is evi-
dent that the most mighty Phanes is nothing else than the first animal; and,
as Plato would say, animal ttself. This therefore is demonstrated.

Let us however, in the next place, survey what is consequent to this. Phanes,
therefore, thus unfolding himself into light from the occult Gods, antecedently
comprehends in himself the causes of the secondary orders, viz. of the effective,
connective, perfective, and immutable orders; and also contains in himself
according to one cause, all intelligible animals. For he excites himself to the
most total ideas of all things. Hence also, he is said (by Orpheus] to be the first
of the Gods, and to have a form. But he produces all things, and unfolds the
intelligible and united’ causes of things, to the intellectual Gods. Hence too,
the Demiurgus being filled from these causes, gives subsistence to this visible

* This is an Orphic line, which is not noticed cither by Gesner or Hermann in their collection of
Ormhic fragments. It is however in the printed original in a defective state: for it is, cae cas
Tarptovs opias, χαροπον re λέοντος. But from Eschenbach, who quotes it from ἃ manuscript, it may be
amended as follows: κριὸν καὶ ravpov, opios, yaporow re eovros.

* Itis here necessary to supply the words τὸν xpwrws ovros.

Σ For ηνωμενὼν in this place, it is obviously necessary to read ἤνωμενα, in order to agree with acria.

sim, Fisk , Vo. I. 2Z

362 PROCLUS ON THE {[BooK 1,

world, and causes it to contain all sensible animals, both such as are more divine,
and such as are mortal, which are properly Gzqzuara’ thremmata, or things which
are nourished, as entirely participating of the nutritive soul. All bodies likewise,
may properly be called Sesupara, ts being the progeny of nature, and as ulways
living from, and being connected by it, even though: they should be perpetual
bodies; but not as requiring externally adventitious nutriment. Unless indeed,
it be requisite to call all things in the world Szeumara, us being nourished by the
hing of visible natures through the communication of ight, Por Socrates in the
Republic says, that the sun is the cause of nutroment and generation to all such
things as he illuminates, Por every visible thing is notished bem perfected: by
light, Poras we learn inthe Politious, itis possible to he nourished externally,
and not only internally, Phe Demiurgus therefore, comprehends all that) the
world contains, in order that this sensible world may be ἐδ πα pertect trom the
parts that are in it, conformably to a sitmilitude to him, Hence, this world is a
Various animal, according to a different part of itself emitting a different voice,
and from all its parts one voice. For it is also one, fas well as many}. By a
much greater priority however, the intelligible world is one animal and a multitude
fof animals], contracting multitude in the one, just as this visible world also,
exhibits the one in multitude. And the latter indeed, is a whole from parts 5 bat
the former is a whole prior to parts, cxemptly, uniformly, and according to cause,
comprehending intelligible antinals. Por from it the fountains of divine natures,
and all the most total genera proceed. Flence also, the theologist represents it as a
most tutalanimal, surrounds it with the heads of aram, a buli, a lion, and a dragon ;
and ascribes to it primarily the female aud the mate, as lo the first animal.

Female and father, strong and mighty God,

ry bi ve. 4 2
Enicapxus,

says the theologist. He is likewise the first God that is represented with wings.
And what occasion is there to be prolix? For if he has his progression from the
primogenial egg, this fable manifests that he is the first animal, ifit is fit to pre-
serve the analogy. Vor as the egg’ antecedcntly comprehends the spermatic

* The word used by Plato here for animals.
* In the origival erroneously npuxe xpos.

+ For ro ev ον here, it is necessary to read ro wor.

πον τ TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 303

cause of the animal, thus also the occult order,‘ uniformly comprehends the
whole of the intelligible. And as the animal now possesses in ἃ distributed
manner, such things as were in the egg spermatically, thus likewise this God
produces into a visible subsistence that which is ineffable and incomprehensible
in first causes, Concerning these things however, what has now been said may
suflice for the present.

If however, as this world comprehends in itself all visible natures, so its para-
digm comprehends all intelligibles, and the mode of comprehension, as we have
said, is different in each, yet at the same tine the visible in the former is analogous
to that of the latter. For Phanes supernally illuminating intelligibles with intel-
livible light, causes all of them to be visible, and exhibits all things [in the intel-
ligible] generated from invisible causes ; and the world imparts visibility to bodies
through the light of the stars. Farther still, this also may be considered as
admirable in the doctrine of Plato, that at the same time that he preserves the
union ofintelligibles unshaken, he imparts to them an unmingled purity. For if
all of them were so united to each other as to be confused, and so as not to
permit the peculiarity of each to remain undefiled, there would have been no
occasion to enquire, according to what kind of paradizm the universe was gene-
rated, Por in things confused there is no distinction of quality. And if these
were so divided from each other as to be without any communion, some intel-
ligibles would not comprehend, but others be comprehended. For to comprehend
and be comprehended pertain to order and communion of powers, and to the
-rapld conspiration of all secondary natures to become one. Moreover, for the
union of them to subsist from essence, bat their separation to be rendered appa-
rent from externally proceeding energies, will be the peculiarity of incorporeal
and immaterial eflects. For if they are surveyed, themselves by themselves, all
will be found to be in each other, on account of their being, as it were, of the
same colour, and especially if the unitics of them are seen with the eye of intel-
lect. But from secondary natures, and from their participants, we collect their
unconfused union. Vor whence is the separation of these derived, except from
the unmingled purity of their, efficient causes? For things which are confused
with each other, give subsistence to other such-like natures, [i. e. to natures which
‘are similarly contused.]

* ile. The first triad of the intellicible order, which is called by Plato in the Parmenides το ¢r 11,
the one being, or being characterised by, and absorbed as it were in lhc one.

404 PROCLUS ON THE [Book 1f.

“ For the divinity wishing to assimilate this universe, in the most exqui-
site degree, to that which is the most beautiful, and in every respect per-
fect of intelligible animals, he constituted it one visible animal, contain-
ing all such things within itself, as are allied to its nature.”

Atticus, in what is here said, doubts whether the Demiurgus is comprehended
by intelligible animal. For it would seem, if he were comprehended, that he is
not perfect. For partial animals, he says, are imperfect, and on this account
things which resemble them are not beautiful. But if he is not comprehended,
animal itself will not be more comprehensive than all intelligibles. And having
doubted, he easily solves the doubt, by supposing that the Demiurgus is above
animal itself. On the contrary, Porphyry gives an order to the Demiurgus infe-
ror to the intelligible. Bor establishing a supercelestial soul to be the inaker of
the world, he places in intellect the paradigm of cenerated natures. Phe divine
Iamblichus, as a medium between both these, connects and unites the paradigm to
the Demiurzus, through the union of intellect with the intelligible, But Amelius
makes the intelligible, which is detined according to being, to be the same with the
Demiurgus."| We however say, that ammal itself is prior to, subsists in, and is
posterior to the Demiurgus. For it proceeds to every intellectual order both total
and partial, The Demiurgus himself likewise, sees himself, and the natures prior
to himself: for it is not lawfal fur him to look to natures posterior to himself.
Beholding therefore, Uhese superior natures, he produces all things, and makes the
universe, so faras it is the universe, or the all, to be the image of the whole intelhi-
eihle world. The Demiurzus however, is comprehended by the intelligible, accord-
ine to the cause of the intellectual Gods which there subsist 5 not as beng a part,
vrone species of it; but as a second order inthe order which is prior to it. Fora
divine intellect is in one way said to be comprehensive of forms, and in another
way to comprehend partial intellects. Foreach of the latter indeed, is all things
ina self-perfect manner 5 but each of the former is united to other forms,” but is
not all things. For each is itself preserving its own peculiarity, unmingled and
unconfused. According to the same reasoning also, the intelligibles which are in
intelliible intelleet, are comprehended by it in one way, but in another way the

intellectual orders which proceed from it. For you may say, that each of these

' Por τῷ μὲν τὸν δημιονογον in this place, itis necessary to read ry μέντοι δημιυυργῳ.

2 Por τῶν αλλων ceo here, read τοῖς ἀλλοῖς εἰδέσιν,

Slant

DOOK 11.} TIMUS OF PLATO. 365

“being self-perfect, is comprehended in all-perfect animal. All such things there-
fore, as are in the paradigm, are likewise in the Demiurgus ; and in making the
world with reference to the paradigm, he also makes it with reference to himself.
With respect to al/ness (παντοτης) however, one is intelligible, but another intellec-
tual. For both the tetrad and the decad contain all things in themselves; but the
former unitedly, and the latter distnbutedly. The decad likewise, though it con-
tains all such things as the tetrad contains, yet because it contains them in a more
divided manner, itis more imperfect than the tetrad. For the tetrad being nearer
to the monad is more perfect; and in proportion as quantity is diminished, the
Inagnitude of power is increased. So that the Demiurgus possessing ἈΠῸ such
things as intelligible animal possesses, yet at the same time, he has an allness
inferior to that which is intelligible. In short, as comprehension is twofold, the one
being such as that of parts in their wholeness, but the other, as that of effects in their
causes, Plato now assumes the former of these, and says, that the genera and
species ofanimals, are comprehended as parts in their whole, i. ον in animal itself ;
all which likewise, he denominates imperfect, as with reference to the whole. But
the Demiurgus indeed, proceeds from thence as from a cause, yet he likewise
possesses all things intellectually. The Demiurgus therefore, is comprehended
by intelligible animal according to the reason of cause, and is not so compre-
hended as a part, so as to be also imperfect. Hence likewise, Timzus in a cer-
tain respect thus speaks. For the Demiurgus has all intelligible animals compre-
hended in himself. For in reality, these are contained in him as parts, which
remain in unproceeding union with their proper wholeness, and give completion
to it, as a whole which is not prior to parts, but is from parts. And thus much
in answer to the doubt.

In the next place, this also deserves to be surveyed, viz. in what an admirable
manner Plato, at one time ina way known to us, passes from images to para-
dizms, and at another time, from paradigms to images; at one and the same time
indicating the connexion of things, and their progressions and conversions. For
when he says, that as this world comprehends us, thus also animal itself comprehends
intelligible animals, he recurs from sensible animals to the causes of them. But
when he says, that divinity wishing to assimilate the world to the most beautiful
of intelligibles, rendered it comprehensive of all things, he is willing to pass from
causes to their effects, imitating the progression of secondary natures. He is led
however, to such a transition as this, through analogy. For as effects are to each
other, so are the paradigms of them. And the more total and the more partial,

366 PROCI.US ON THE [Βοοκ 11.

subsist in both according to the same ratio. Why however, does he call animal itself
the most beautiful of intelligibles, though it is the end of intelligibles? May we not
say, that though there are intelligible orders prior to it, yet the most beautiful is
inferior to them?) For they do not participate of beauty ; but the producing cause
of beauty, and the first beauty and elegance subsist in them. Hence also animal
itself is according to Orpheus, intellectually unfolded into lightin this order. And
as beauty had a prior existence in che first intelligibles, unitedly and without inter-
mission, hence Phanes is called by Orpheus, “the very beautiful son of ether,”
and * delicate Love.” Because therefore, this God is the first that is filled with
oceult and ineffable beauty, hence also he is denominated most beautiful, being
the first of participants, though all intelligibles are united to each other. For it is
not proper to divide them from each other, after the same manneras the intellectual
orders, but survey one and an indivisible union of them. These things therefore,
are beautifally asserted (by Orpheus and Plato.

That however, which is most synopucal' in the words of Plato, is this, that
he says animal itselfis the most beautiful, not of all intellgibles simply, but of
mtelhgible animals. Por comparing all-pertect animal with more partial animals,
he says, itis the most beautiful of all intelligible animals ; so that if there is some-
thing more excellent: than the nature of animal, it has nothing to do with the
present assertion. Tt as necessary however, that there should) be a thing of this
Kind, because bemy itself, and beauty itself are more simple than the nature of
animal, on which account also they are participated by things which are not
animals, Moreover, the interpreters say, that the word asysinilation is appropriately
assumed by Plato. For he is frequently dubious ccncerning the mode of par-
teipation, Whether itis from: forms themselves being present with sensibles, or
from their communmeating with them im some other way: but he is not dubious
whether or not it is stmilitude which makes the sensible world to be the image of
the intelligible. Dividing however, they say, that of physical forms indeed, the
sensible world participates as of impressions in wax, but that it receives the
representations of psychical, and the sunilitudes of intelligible forms.* So that
since Plato is speaking concerning intelligible paradigms, he very properly, as
they say, assumes similitude, Parther still, the world is an animal, as the image

1 Por συνεκτικωτατον here, Tread σννοπτιλωτατων.ς
* Concerning the mod > in which forms themselves are participated by sensibles, see the Notes to my
translation of the Parmenides of Plato.

BOOK 11. TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 4207

of this intelligible animal, and of intelligible allness. But it is visible as being
assimilated to the splendour of its paradigm. For what colour is there, that

the visible is here.

‘The Gods adinir'd, mv ether when they saw
A light unlook’d for, bursting on the view,

Prom the immortal Phanes’ glittering skin ;"

fsays Orpheus}. And the world comprebends all kindred natures, because it is
comprehensive of all sensibles. But Plato adds, “as are allied to its nature,”
because intelligibles are paradigms to the world of things which are according
to nature, and not as some Platonists are accustomed to say, of things preterna-
tural, Torin short, mundane things being divided into such as are according to na-
ture, and such as are preternatural, into universals and particulars, and into
essences and accidents, we always admit that there are formal causes of the more,
hut by no means of the less excellent. For that which is produced from ideas,
proceeds through nature. But if this is the case with that which is according to
nature, but not with that which is preternatural, that which is generated from
ideas is a certain whole, and is perpetual, For if this is not admitted, one of two
things must take place, either that things contingent will have no existence, or
that of forms some will necessarily produce, but it will happen that others may
either produce or not produce. And in the third place, every thing whieh pro-
ceeds from ideas is essence... Vor since they produce by their very being, each is
productive of essences. For it would be ridiculous to say that a partial nature is
effective of essence, but that intelligible form gives subsistence to accident?
These things however, we shall elsewhere more copiously discuss. Bat what-
-eyer the world contains is allied to it, because all things in it subsist according to
intelligible causes. Plato likewise appears in this place to have given a definition
uf the world, viz. “one visible animal, comprehending in itself all animals.” For
intelligible animal also is one, but is not visible. And the sun, and each of the
monadic natures, [or those natures of which there. is only one,jis one visible
animal, but does not comprehend all others. So that it is evident that the
above is the detinition of the universe. Let us however proceed to the words
of Plato. |

* For ro ov «πεστιλβε in this place, it is necessary to read ry μὲν αἀπεστιλιβε.
Ὁ For συμιλεβήκοτος evos νποστατικον, read ovp/3e/3qxoros εἰναι νποστατικον.

368 PROCLUS ON THE [oon τι.

“ Whether therefore, shall we assert that there is one world, or is it
more right to say that there are many and infinite worlds ?”

This problem follows indeed logographically what has just now ' been said.
For because he had detined the world to be one visible animal, comprehending
within itself all such animals as are naturally allied to it, it is necessary that he
should think this to be worthy his attention and discussion, whether the world
is one certain thing, or not. For of physiologists, some make the world to be
one; but others assert that there are many worlds; and others contend that
there are not only many, but also infinite worlds. The consideration of this
likewise, has a connection with what has been before said, derived from the things
themselves. For since it has been shown that the world is the image of animal
itself, and is an animated animal, endued with intellect, it was requisite to add
a summit to the discussion of it, by showing that itis also one, For thus he will
demonstrate that it isa God, in consequence of participating a unity which is
above intellect. For it was not only possible for him to say that it is an image
because other things also are images, some being fashioned by nature, but others
by art. Nor an animal alone, because there is a multitude of partial animals,
Nor alone animated; for man likewise is an image, and an animated animal.
Nor alone endued with intellect; for both a demon and an angel are amimnated
animals possessing intellect. But this which especially and primarily pertains
to divine natures, he before suflered to be ineffable, through the cause which we
have already assigned. Now, however, he adds the one, and the alone. For
every thing which ts monadic in the world is divine, as being an image, if it be.
lawful so to speak of ἐμὲ one. But I denominate divine, that which is such as the
anzelic, as the dwemoniacal, and as that which is in partial souls. For each of
these is divine, so far as it 1s suspended from its proper deity, and cach of these ts
monadic. Such monadic natures however, as have generation and corruption,
and are expelled into the mortal abode, are opposed to every thing divine.
Hence this problem 1s suspended from what has been before said. For since the
paradigm of the universe is indeed a God, and 15 intelligible, is the suppher of
lite, and is also intellect ; according to that which is divine in him, he makes the
world to be one; according to the one and the intelligible, he causes it to be
sensible; but according to the one, the intelligible, and life, he makes it to be

* For ra νὸν here, read ra νυν».

nook 11. TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 369

animated and an animal; and according to all these and intellect, he causes it to
be endued with intellect. For union accedes prior to other things, and posterior
to other things. Animal energizes prior to, and in conjunction with other
thaigs, And the gift of life generates and proceeds together with, and prior
to intellect.

From what however is now siown, and from what has been before demon-
strated, you may assume, that at the same time, the paradigm of the universe is
unical, and the whole multitude of intelligibles. And neither is the simplicity of
ewithout multitude, nor the multitude of it divided; but it has the all-various at
once consubsistent with ¢he one, the monadic with the all-perfect, and the uniform
with the multiform. For because it proceeds indeed from the good it is united.
But because it pre-establishes in itself the order of intelligible ideas, it is ἃ}}-
perfect. And as infinite, it unfolds the multitude of intelligibles ; but as contained
by bound, it is only begotten. As proceeding likewise from being characterized
by unity, it has the relation of a monad ; but as being the third from it, it produces
in itself all the intelligible Gods, and on this account is demonstrated to be all-
perfect. These things, however, we shail more fully unfold as we proceed.

But there is a controversy with the interpreters about the text. For to some
of them it appears that two things are now distinguished by Plato, the one, and
all multitude. And the word whether being applied by the ancients to two things,
seems to testify in favor of their opinion, But to others, it appears that there
is a division into three things, the one, finite multitude, and the infinite. And the
patrons of this interpretation are Porphyry and Jamblichus, who speak conforma-
bly both to the things themselves, and to the doctrine of Plato. For shortly
after he takes away two things, but assumes one thing from division. But from
three things, an ablation of two and the position of one is eflected, and not from
two things alone. Nevertheless the word whether’ seems to contradict what
they assert. It may be remedied however by saying that cither whether signifies
the same as shall we therefore ; (zw ap ow τὸ πότερον orci ταυτον) for it is
frequently thus assumed by the ancients; or that the words, or not (ἢ ov) are
wanting to the sentence; and that it will be perfect by reading, whether do we
rightly assert that there is one world, or not? And if not, whether there arc many, or
infinite worlds ? Plato omitting to ‘say this through conciseness. Perhaps too;
you may say, it is not without design that he omitted the words much and finite.

* For πρότερον here, read sorcpor,

Tim. Plat. | Vou. i, ZA

870 | PROCLUS ON THE (wooK 11.

For to say how many, or so many, is to speak in a way that gives completion to
what is said. And as ifthe paradigm is not monadic, s0 as to be the cause of
one thing, the things generated are intinite 5 after this manner itis probable that
there are infinite worlds, if there is not only one. For the vacaum being infinite,
will be the recipient of infinite worlds.

“ One [i. e. there will be but one world,] if it be admitted that it is
fabricated according to the paradigm.”

Again Plato in concord with himself, announces the whole of the conclusion
prior to the demonstrations, previously to beltef, dissolving the doubt. For the
word one is uttered analogously to, if seas generated, and to he was wood,‘ and the
demonstration on account of it, is conformable to the proper method. | For it is
himself who doubts, himself who dissolves the doubts, and himself who demon-
strates. Through the doubt, indeed, converting himself to intelleet; but through
the concise solution of the doubt, energizing according to intellect. For to com-
prehend the whole of a sentence in one word, is animage of intellectual projec-
tion, And through the demonstration descending from intellect to dianoia,
For every one who demonstrates, receives the principles of lis demonstration
from intellect. Butitis intellect, says Aristotle, by which we know terms 3 for
through this we apprehend (true) beimes by simple projections, Such therefore
throughout is the form of the words.

Let us, however, if you think fit, in the first place, svilogistieally survey the trath
of the words themselves. The whole sentence, therefore, is of the following kind,
If the world was generated according to a paradigm, and the paradigm is one,
then the world is one." Bat the antecedent is true, and) therefore the consequent
also is true, That the world, however, was generated according to a paradigm,
was asserted before, and was mentioned both by Plato and ous. But that the
paradigm is one and monadic, Plato asserts as he proceeds, ‘The assumption
therefore being true, it remains to see how that which follows from it is true.
He says then that if the world imitates especially and accurately the para-
dizm, it ought to imitate it ino all thines, and ought to resemble the essence

of it. For if it imitates the paradigin in some things, and not in’ others,

* Instead of ro ἀγαθὸς ἣν in this place, it is requisite to read rw az ules ny.

* The words ὁ κόσμον apa ἐν ἐστιν, are omitted in the original, but evidently ought to be inserted.

BOOK "1.] TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 371

it will not be the imare of ἃ certain whole. For the paradigm making
by its very being, it makes a certain image of the whole of itself. But this
being the case that which is generated with reference or according to. the
whole paradigm itself, is monadic, is perpetual, and is an animal. For as he
who imitates the whole of Socrates expresses the whole of his life, after the same
manner, the world being fashioned in the resemblance of animal itself, imitates
all things mit, so far as itis naturally adapted to such an imitation ; possessing
all things sensibly which animal itself possesses intelligibly,

Some however oppose what is here said, by adducing the multitude of men and
of horses, Por man itself is the cause of many men, horse itself of inany horses,
and this is the ease with every other form or idea of the like hind. But if some
one should say, that these beeause they are parts of other things, are on this
account monadic, the oljector will not cease adducing tous the sun and the
moon, and all the parts of the world which are monadic. Tence more profound
solutions of the objection are requisite. The philosopher Porphyry therefore
striving to solve the didiculty, says, that forms as they proceed, always descend
into mulutude and division, and pass into balk, and an all-various distribution
into parts. Tfenee an intelligible essence, procceding into the world, terminates
ina divided, gross, and material multitade, though on high itis united, impar-
tible, and monadic., To every thing, therefore, which is intelligible, nothing else
imparts the whole, for the intelligible itself gives subsistence to it. Hence it
constitutes it as great as it is able to become. But this universe supplies man
itself with matter. And on this account the matter of one form receives many
Impressions of that form. "The world, therefore, is one from one (paradigm), and
a Whole froma whole. But man is numerous trom one torm, the world supply-
ing the matter of it. Why, therefore, says he, are there not many suns and
moons? For the matter of these is from the universe. To this he replies, that to
incorruptible natures in the world, though they may be parts, the monadic is
appropriate; but to corraptible natures, multitude. For if there were not many
participants of the same reason (or form) but only one corraptible participant, the
form would perish, this being corrupted. It is necessary, however, that all [mate-
rialj forms perishing, the full perfection of the world should still remain. Such
therefore is the solution of Porphyry. |

The divine Tamblichus however reprobates this solution, as dissolving no one
of the doubts, For let, says he, the whole sensible world possess impartible
natures partibly, indivisibles divisibly, and monadic natures multitudinously, yet

372 PROCLUS ON THE [Rook τι,

why do some things in it still remain monadic, but others not? For this is what
was dubious from the beginning. He therefore adduces a certain solution of the
doubt, which is indeed admirable yet is inwant of assistance. For he says that
of forms some rejoice in sameness and permanency, but others in motion and dif-
ference. And that some, indeed, are the causes of monadic and perpetual natures,
but others of such as are mutable and multitudinous. And this indeed is very
admirably asserted, but requires a certain admonition, which it is necessary to
make, by considering that atter the one two principles proceed, bound and infinity,
as Socrates asserts inthe Philebus. And as of numbers, some are more monadic
but others are dyadic, though all numbers derive their subsistence from the monad
and at the same time from the duad, thus likewise, though all forms subsist accor-
ding to these two principles, yet at the same time some are the progeny of bound,
but others of infinity. And what occasion is there to speak of forms; since of
the Gods themselves, some belong to the co-ordination of bound, but others to
that of infinity, both according to their whole orders and according to parts?
According to total orders indeed, because every paternal, connective, and
demiurgic series is defined according to bound; but every vivitic and effect-
ive series, according to infinity. But according to. parts, because of the pater-
nal and of the vivilic series, some belong to the order of bound, but others to that
of infinity. If, therefore, this is the case with the Gods, why is it wonderful that
of forms some are more than others allied to bound, but others to infinity? And
according to this analogy some forms give subsistence to monadic things, but
others to those that proceed into multitude. After this manner, therefore, it is
requisite tu assist this solution.

Our preceptor, however, dissolves this doubt after another manner, multifarious.
ly. Tle says, therefore, that every intelligible nature is uniform and_ eternal, but
that of mundane things, some are able to be more, and others less assimilated
to the essences of intelhgibles. For such things as are more 1mmaterial and pure,
are capable of being assimilated ina greater, but such things as are more material
and gross, in a less degree. As all paradigms therefore subsist in monadic and
eternal essences, the more excellent natures in the universe especially imitating
the causes of themselves, are generated in all things most similar to their para-
digms, viz. according to the monadic, the essenual, and the perpetual; but the
less excellent, being allotted a secondary form of similitude, are in a certain re-
spect assimilated to their causes, and in ἃ certain respect not. Hence, as there
are these three things in intelligible forms, viz. the monadic, the essential, and the
eternal, whether do mundane natures imitate the monadic and perpetual peculi-

BOOK τι. TIMAEUS OF PLATO 373

arity of intelligibles, but not the essential? By no means.’ For it has been de-
monstrated that it is requisite the things which proceed from them should be
essences, since they produce by their very being. Will mundane natures there-
fore be imitations of them according to the monadic and the essential, but not
according tothe eternal?) This however is impossible. For each of them will
perish ; being monadic indeed, but not perpetual. For because not perpetual,
it will vanish into non-entity ; but in consequence of being monadic, there will
not be that from which it may be generated. Besides, every thing which subsiste
from immoveable causes, is immutable in essence. But forms are immoveable, for
they are intelligible. Either therefore itis possible for all things to imitate them
in all things, or in certain things. But it is impossible for all things to imitate
themin all things. For the natures which are more remote from their principles
are in a less degree assimilated to them. Just as with respect to Pythagoras, who
possesses all sciences, he who is nearer to him, receives all his knowledge secon-
darily, but he who is more remote from him, learns some of his sciences, but is
unadapted to the reception of others. Ifitis impossible therefore, for all things
to imitate them in every respect, it remains that this must be effected by them in
certain things. And ifin certain things as there are three peculiarities which are
characteristic of intelligible forms,’ either imitating the extremes, they become
destitute of the middle, or receiving the two first, they will appear to have re-
sinquished the third, or not partaking of the first, they will participate of the two
which are posterior to it. It has however been shown, that neither the first nor
second is true. T/ence it is necessary that they shoulg not express the monacic pecu-
liarily of forms, but only the essential and the eternal. On this account all mundane
Sorms indeed are essences, and are always invariably the same, but all of them are not
monadic. For all mundane forms do not subsist commensurately to ali the
powers of their paradigms. But that every intelligible form, and whole paradig-
Taatic cause having a primary subsistence, is monadic, eternal, and essential, is
evident. For whatever is not essence, will be an accident. Every accident,
however, subsists about matter, and is conversant with things which are in matter,
but not with those which are in separate causes. If likewise an intelligible form
is not eternal, neither will the image of it be perpetual. It is necessary however
that it should, if the world always consists of allforms. But the principle perish-

‘Instead of ro δὲ ovewées ov, ovdayws; in this place, it is necessary to read ro δε ουσιωδε: cv,
ovdapws; :
* Viz. the monadic, the essential, and the eternal.

374 PROCLUS ON THE [noox 11.

ing, that which is derived from it can by no possible contrivance be preserved.
And if an intelligible form is not monadic, it will be no longer primarily a para-
digm. For it is impossible for any thine to be two things primarily, as Socrates
says in the Republic. Vor whence is allness derived to these mundane forms,
except from one certain common form? These three things therefore are present
with all first paradigms. And it seems that the monadie Is present with them
from bound, the perpetual from infinity, and the essential from the first essence.

Farther still, it is also possible for us after another manner to solve the doubt.
Vor of the things contained in the world, some indeed subsist from the first fabri-
cation fice. the fabrication of the Demiurgus}] alone; but others from the tirst
and also from the second Cor the fabrication of the junior Gods]. Those, there-
fore, that subsist) from) the first fabrication, are invariably the same, and are
monadie, imitating the onlyness of their producing ‘cause. Por the sapermun-
dane fabrication is immoveable, one, and eternal. Bat things which proceed
from the second fabrication are mutable, are borne alone In multitude, and sub-
sist differently at diffrent times. — Por the second fabrication is multiform, makes
that which it makes with motion, and has time but not eternity connascent with
itself. Henee the things which proceed from it are very inutable, and inultiplied,
and entirely moved. For things which proceed from causes that are moved, are
naturally of this kind. Whence also ΤΠ think the Demiurgus, having constituted
all the monadice and perpetual natures in the world, excites the junior Gods tu
the fabrication of mortal natures ; ino order that these, so far as they have some-
thing perpetual, may derive their subsistence from hin, but so far as they are mor-
tal, fromthe junior Gods, And that so far as one thing participates of one form
they might be constituted by hin, but so far as this one is multiplied, they might
derive their subsistence fromthem. For the mutation and multiplication of mor-
tal natures are from many canses, and such as are moved.

Aeain, therefore, this also may be said, that the only-begotten is threefold. Por
it either signifies the monad of its proper series τ according to Which signification,
the form of man is monadic, and the form of horse, and every form of things of
this kind. Orit signifies one thing participated by one thing, according to which
signification man and horse are not monadie, but the form of the sun and the
form of the moon. Or it signifies that which has no other thing co-ordinate with
itself, according to which ineaning the above-mentioned natures are no longer

only-begotten, since they are co-ordinate with each “other bat whole auinal [or

Por xpayparos here, it is uccessary ty read nupayorros.

wooK 1] TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 375

animal itself} is only-begotten, in consequence of not being co-ordinate with any
other animal, As the only-begotten, therefore, has a threefold subsistence, if you
assume that which is truly: only-begotten, it is the third, as the cause of all
animals, having the relation of a monad to all of them, being participated by one
thing, and not being co-ordinate with any animal, but being truly monadic.
This, however, being assumed, that which is conjoined with it now necessarily
follows. For if the paradigm is only-begotten, that also which is generated
according to itis only-begotten, imitating the only-begotten nature of the para-
digin, and nothing else besides the world is a thing of this kind. For no other
thing besides animal itself, is according to this signification, only-begotten,
Farther stll, it is requisite to solve the doubt after another manner, by consider-
ing as follows: Every form is gencrative of onc thing, and of a multitude. Of one
thing, indeed, because it constitutes a monad similar to itself, prior to the multitude which
1 produces. But it produces a multitude, because every monad has a number co-ordinate
with itself. Animal itself, therefore, as a monad, constitutes the whole world.
But according to each order, it gencrates a number! analogous to the whole, and
Which is able to preserve the similitude to the universe contorinably to that series,
Hence the solar paradigm, generates Indeed the visible sun itself, but it likewise
zenerates a number of solar animals possessing the same form, according to a
similitude to their proper form, And of animals of this kind, some are
celestial, but others sublunary, so that such a number as this extends as far as to
the earth. Man itself, therefore, does not gmncdiately produce this infinite multi-
tude of men; for progression is no where without a medium; but through numbers
proximate to the monad and appropriate. lence, since an intelligible form is
one, itis necessary thatit should not immediately produce the infinite, but ins the
first place a monad, afterwards an appropriate number, aud so on in suceession.
For between the intellizible form which is one, end the sensible wich is multiplied, the
medium is the form which is sensthle indeed, but monadte 3 through proceeding becom=
ing sensible; but through preserving the similitude of its paradizm, having a monadic
subsistence. For it may be said to be {ταν absurd, that divine, intelligible, and
immoveable causes, should not be primarily the causes of things essentially immu-
table, but of things matenal and mutable. For how is it possible that things
which are in the profundity of the universe, cau be conjoined with those super-

ἡ Ap Opoy is omitted in the original.

* In the original δία τῶν ενυλων, καὶ μεταβλητων; but δία ought evidently to be expunged.

376 PROCLUS ON THE [Βοοκ 11

mundane natures ; things deprived of intelligence, with intellectuals ; perfectly
sautable, with eternal natures; very composite things, with such as are simple; and
things which in their own nature are dissipated, with united essences? It is
necessary, therefore, that man itself, and each of such-like forms, should generate
stable monads prior to a dispersed multitude; from which the progression of
each to its appropriate number is derived. It is likewise necessary that these
monads should exist in the second fabrication. Hence they remain invariably
the same, as being alone produced by an immoveable cause. You must not
wonder, therefore, #f some one should call man immortal, a brute rational, and a
plant intellectual. For each of these is primarily a thing of this kind. But pro-
gression producing a diminution of the all-various imitation of the paradigm,
exhibits some things sensibles, others irrational, and others intellectual im capacity.
For as the water, which primarily proceeds from its wuntain, is most similar to the
fontal water, and preserves its proper purity undefiled; thus also the natures
Which are first unfolded into hight from intellyible forms, genuinely preserve the
similitudes of their paradigms ; batas they proceed, dissolve the perfect sumilitude,
and are filled from their subjects with composition and inelegance.

In another way, likewise, the solution of the things investigated may be
attempted. For of fabrication the first is total, one, and impartible; the second
is partial and multiplied, and proceeds according to a distribution into parts; and
the third is not only partible like that which precedes it, but comes into contact
with generated natures, and with the forms they contain, Vou have also these
three fabrications in Plato, viz. the Jovian, the Dionysiacal, and the Adonaical (or
pertaining to Adonis), conformably to which he divides his three polities, as we have
elsewhere shown. The third fabrication, therefore, ts the cause of wholes’ and parts,
and of things which are not monadtc. The second is the cause of things which are
monaaic indeed, but are not wholes. And the first 1s the cause of the whole and the
monadic. For such is the universe, which is not a part of any thing, as the sun
and moon are, and each of the peculiar parts of the world. If therefore Plato
had now spoken concerning cyery fabrication, it would have been requisite to
annex the extensions of forms into multitude, and their divisions. But since the
present discourse is alone concerning the whole fabrication, or the fabrication
which has a total subsistence, what occasion is there to disturb ourselves, in con-
sequence of not remaining in the first fabrications, which are eflected by an

* For edwy here, it is necessary to read odwy,

BOUK 11.) TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 377

mmoveable and total cause? For the whole Demiurgus is a fabricator totally and
monadically ; since also producing many Gods, he produces them monadically.
Por each of the Gods belonging to the inerratic sphere, is constituted according
to one form; since the form of earth is different from that of water, and the form
vs water from that of fire; the parts of which have a temporal generation and
corruption. Much more, therefore, do such perpetual natures as the stars, and
also partial souls, differ in form from each other, For every individual and at the
same time partial nature, is material. If also partial souls produce different
peculiar lives, from exerting the reasons they contain, it is evident that they pos-
sess the reasons of all things universally, and subsisting in forms alone, so that
the progressions of each of them are according to different forms. This number
too of forms must be placed in the fountain of souls unically (or having a subsis-
tence characterized by unity), but distributedly in the principle* of souls. For how
is it possible it should not be necessary, souls being finite, that the number of them
should pre-exist in the causes from whence they are derived ? Since even nature
comprehends the numbers of the things which she produces according to numbers.
If, however, the Gods are monadic, and souls, the genera between these, are like-
wise monadic ; so that each thing which the Demiurgus constitutes, is entirely
monadic. "This likewise appears to be the cause of the perpetuity of the things
which he produces, that each receives the whole form of the paradigimatic cause,
Ilence every thing which proceeds from the whole Demiurgus has a nature of this
hind,

It, therefore, he gives subsistence to the world, the world is one; both on
account of the demiurgic monad, and the onlyness of the paradigm; which Plato,
as it appears to me, knowing, says, “if it be admitted that itis fabricated according to
the paradigm.” For by not saying if it was generated, but Wit was fabricated, accord-
ing to the paradigm, he indicates the onlyness both of the paradigmatic and the
demiurgic cause. For the Demiurgus is a monad, and the paradigm also is a
monad; and therefore this universe being generated by a monad, with reference
to amonad, is monadic. Why, therefore, you may say, is he satisfied in what
follows, with the demonstration from the paradigm? We reply, because the

“i.e. In Rhea, or the vivitic Goddess, considered according to her first subsistence in the intellec-
tual order of Gods. :

>i. δ. In Proserpine, who subsists in the vivific triad of the super-mundane order of Gods, which
order consists of the Gods who are called apyac or Principles. See the 5th and 6th Books of my Transla-
tion of Proclus on the Theology of Plato, for an account of the deities called fountains and principles.

Tim. Plat, Vou. I. 3B

478 PROCLUS ON TIE [8οοκ τι.

paradigm is more united than the Demiurgus. For the Demiurgus himself is a
monad, through his similitude and analogy to the paradigm. This however is
evident. For among the kings, he is analogous to it ; and both the Demiurgus
and the paradigm are analogous to the intelligible monad.' Hence, since the
monadic nature is from thence derived to the Demiurgus himself, what ought we
to think concerning the universe? Js it not, that it primarily possesses its only-
ness from the paradigm? The paradigm, therefore, is a more principal thing, for
the purpose of demonstrating the onlyness of the world. And again, you may
see, that these are three monads, viz. animal itself, the demiurgic cause, and the
universe. But the first, is an intelligible monad, the second, an intellectual

monad, and the third, a sensible monad.

“ For that which comprehends all such animals as are intelligible, can
never be the second, [or co-arranged] with* any other thing.”

The necessity of these demonstrations is admirable, showing that all-perfect
animal is one and monadic,' similar to those methods through which in the
Sophista, he demonstrates that the multitude of beings is to be referred to one
truly existing being. For if there are two principles of beings, either each of
them is primarily being, or only one of them. But if only one ofthem, the other
will proceed from this. And if each, itis necessary there should be another being,
from which both of these are beings. For cach of these is a certain being, and
not simply being. After the same manner likewise, he now shows, that all- perfect
animal is one. So that according to all the orders of things, that which is said to
exist primarily, will be only-begotten. For being itself is primarily being, Just as
anima! itself is here demonstrated to be primarily animal, or only-begotten.
For how is it possible this should not be only-begotten? For if there is another
animal co-arranged with it, either each has all things, or one of them has all things,
but the other not, or neither of them has all things. For besides these, there are
no other consequences. If, therefore, it should be said that neither of them is all
things, each of them is imperfect. We however are speaking of that which is all-
perfect, and we investigate whence it possesses all things. For it must not be

ice. To the summit of the intelligible order, or being itself.
> In the text of Proclus μεθ᾽ erepoy erroneously instead of μεθ᾽ ἐτέρον.

> Τὰ the original ἐν ov καὶ pevoy. But for μενον Tread μοναδικον.

nook 11.] TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 379

said, that the sensible universe has indeed all things according to its own order,
and that the soul possesses all reasons, as is evident from the things to which it
applies itself, and from assigning to every thing its appropriate reason; but that
there is not a certain intelligible, which is truly comprehensive of all intelligibles,
Just as soul contains all things dianoetically, and the universe sensibly. For
whence is allness derived to these, except from intelligibles? If, therefore, the
intelligible is all- perfect, that will be the paradigm of the universe which is prima-
rily all. But if one of them is all things, and the other not, these will neither be
co-arranged with each other, nor con-numerated 3 but that which has not all things
will be inferior to the other, and that which is all-perfect’ will have a more com-
prehensive power. Hence the one will be a part, but the other a whole; and
both will not be all-pertect animals, but one of them will be more perfect than the
other. For that which has a diminished perfection is not all-perfect. But if
each of them is all things, whence did they obtain all things? — For it is necessary
that they should reccive this allness from something. For as participating of one
form, they subsist from one cause, And thus the natures which similarly participate
of all things, possess this allness from one cause. There will therefore be a cause
prior to them ; since it is necessary that where there are two things there should be
an antecedent cause, which conducts them together. This cause, therefore, which
is prior to them, is either all things indivisibly, or divisibly. But if indivisibly,
another cause will be requisite as amedium. For the medium between that which is
perfectly indreisible, and the duad which possesses all things divisibly, is the monad
whieh has all things indivistbly;' this indeed being itself united by an indivisible cause,
but uniting the allness which is in the duad. Hence that which primarily comprehends
all things ts the monad which is prior to the duad. But in that which subsists indivi-
sihly, the sced and cause are contained of an allness which is characterized by unity.
Deservedly, therefore, is all-perfect animal said to be monadic, and incapable of
being the second with another thing, not only as the words appear to say, because
it is not conjoined with another, but because if it were arranged with another, it
would be secondarily, and no longer primarily all things. For after all-perfect
animal, there are causes which are co-arranged with other kindred natures, but
which have not primarily all things. hat, however, which primarily possesses
all things is monadic. But if it is comprehensive of all things, there will

* The original is, τοῦ yap αδιαιρετως παντὰ ovros, και rns δυαδος τῆς παντὰ ἐχούσης, μεσον ἐστιν ἡ μονας
n Tarra ἐχϑυσα διηρημενως. But it appears to me to be neocssary to read, agreeably to the above transla-

tion, τοῦ yap αδιαιρετως παντῇ ovros, καὶ τὴς ἑναδος τὴν παντα ἐχούσης διηρημενως, μέσον φστιν ἢ μονας ἢ
ταντὰ ἔχουσα αδιαιρετωι.

380 PROCLUS ON THE [BooK 11.

not be an intelligible animal besides it. For if there were, this would no
longer be all-perfect, but a part. And that will be the whole of which this will
he alone a part. For it is necessary that multitude should stop at the monad.

Why, however, does Plato say, the second with another thing? For it would
have been sufficient to have said, with another by itself, or the second, by itself. But
he conjoins both, for the purpose of indicating that the nature which 1s co-ar-
ranged with another, and is not monadic, cannot as we have before observed, be the
first. Perhaps likewise, it signifies the contrary, and that what is said pertains to
thingsand not to words. For the form which is incorruptible natures entirely subsists
with another. For the human form is in this individual, and in that, the partici-
pants being many, and on this account each is with another. That form, however,
which is perpetual, yet not a whole, though it may be monadic, and on this
account not with another, yet it is more imperfect than a certain whole. But
that which is neither in many things, nora part with another thing, 1s not secon-
dary, as being one and a whole, and not a part. Very properly, therefore, does
the theologist produce Phanes, the only divinity bearing the seed of the lustrious
Gods,’ from the God who 15 occultly all things ; and from Phanes gives subsis-
tence to all the second orders of the Gods. For Heaven indeed proceeds toge-
ther with Earth. But she,

Again th’ extended heav’n and earth? brought forth.

Aud Saturn proceeds together with Rhea. For according to a third progeny,
Earth produced [as the theologist says,] “seven pure beautifal virgins with rolling
eyes, and seven sons that were kings, with fine long hair.” But the Demiurgus,
who is the great Jupiter, is conjoined with Juno. Hence also, she is said to be
of equal rank with him, and proceeds from the same fathers. Phanes, however,
proceeds by himself alone, and is celebrated as female and father. 116 also produ-
ces the (three) Nights, and is present with the middle Night. For he

Pluck’d the shorn flower of Night.’

According to this theologist therefore, all-perfect animal is not the second with
another, but fills the orders of Night, and also fills the celestial orders with the

> For θεὸν κλυτὸν here, it is necessary to read θεων κλυτων.

τ, οὶ The intellectual Earth brought forth the sensible Heaven and Earth.

2 In the original avros yap ens παιδὸς ἀφείλετο covpipoy arfos, But for ens waséos, it appears from
Eschenbach to be necessary to read τῆς Nu«res.

Book 11} TIMUs OF PLATO, 381

allness of himself; in imitation of whom, Jupiter likewise, produces twofold
orders, the super-celestial and the mundane. Phanes, however, gives subsistence
to twofold triads, but Jupiter to twofold duodecads. For on this account bis
sceptre is said to consist of four-and-twenty measures. Hence, the demiurgic is
always assimilated to the paradigmatic cause, but proceeds into multitude from
intelligible union. These things, however, are also elsewhere discussed.

But that animal itself rejoices in onlyness, is also manifested through the
Orphic theologies. For as Phanes is the offspring of an egg, it is evident that he
isan animal, At the same time also, he is called by Orpheus the happy aad
venerable Metis, bearing the seed of the illustrious Gods; to whom Jupiter
being analogous, is likewise denominated by Orpheus Metis and a demon.

One power, one demon, the great lord of all.

Thus too, the Oracles call this mighty God (i.e. animal itself] the fountain of
fountains, and say that he alone generated all things. “ For from thence the gene
ration of abundantly-various matter entirely’ leaps forth. Thence a fiery whirl-
wind sweeping along, obscures the flower of fire, leaping at the same time into
the cavities of the worlds. For all things thence begin to extend their admirable

rays downwards.”

“For again, another animal would be required about these two, of
which they would be parts; and it might be more rightly said, that the

universe is assimilated to this comprehending third, rather than to the

other two.”

This which is now asserted by Platu, may be easily demonstrated from the
demiurgic goodness. For ifthe Demiurgus is good, he fabricated the universe with
reference to all-perfect aniinal. Buthe is good and the best of causes, and therefore
he assimilated the world to all-perfectanimal. Forit is necessary that the first Demi-
urgus should be intellective of the first paradigm ; and that being intellective of it,
he should be the maker of that which is in every respect most similar to it. Forif
there is nothing which is intellective of it, it will no longer have the order of a

paradigm, with respect to that which is fabricated by the first Demiurgus. If,

however, you should say, that it is necessary there should be other secondary
causes, which produce with reference to more partial paradigms, you say well

* For Oey aby here, read ενθεν apdny. And for apvépow, αμνδροι.

Γ.

382 τ PROCLUS ON THE [βοοκ τι.

indeed, but at the same time you should preserve the universe one, For the fabri-
cations of these partial paradigms are parts of the universe, in the same manner
as the paradigms, and vice versa. As therefore paradigms are parts of paradigms,
demiurgic’ are parts of demiurgic causes, and fabrications of fabrications, it is
necessary that the wholeness of the universe should be the image of all-perfect
animal; and that a!l-perfect animal should be the paradigm of the universe.
Moreover, it has been demonstrated that animal itself is one, and alone, as being
monadic. The world therefore is one and monadic, in order that it may perfectly
imitate its paradigm. For as it primarily receives a simuar idea of it, how is it
possible it should not adumbrate all the nature of it, im consequence of having
been generated intellectual, perpetual, and monadic?

“Tn order, therefore, that the world from its onlyness or being alone,
might be similar to all-perfect animal, on this account the artificer nei-
ther made infinite, nor two worlds.”

Again, Plato reminds us of the Demiurgic cause, in order that we may un-
derstand also from this, that every thing which is generated by the whole fabri-
cation, 15 monadic, perpetual, and intellectual; and that the Demiurgus is the
cause of all things, in consequence of producing the monnds of them; but that he
delivered the multitndinous and partial fabrication to the yunior Gods. | Farther
still, he also latently teaches us who this all-perfeet intellect is, the name of
which is so celebrated by the more modern philosophers ; viz. that it is intelligible
intellect, in which the universe primarily subsists. Before, therefore, he called it
distributedly “ according to all things perfect,” because he then celebrated its all-
ness; but now speaking of it collectively, he calls it “ a/-perfect,” since his dis-
course is about the only-begotten.

The infinite, however, in a certain respect is, and ina certain respect is not.
Buta thing is said to be infinite ina three-fold manner ; either according to power, or
according to multitude, or according to magnitude. The infinite therefore according
to power isin divine natures, and in the world. For thenever-failing, and the per-
petual, are the peculiarities of the infinite according to power. But the injinite ac-
cording to multitude partly is, and partly ts not, Lor it has not an at-once
collected subsistence, but exists according to a part. And the infinite according ta

Ἰ Instead of δημιονρ npura here, itis neccessary to read δημιονργικα,

BOOK 11 TIM.ZEUS OF PLATO. 383

magnitude, neither erists according to a part,’ nor has any existence whatever
Hence the infinite according to multitude, if it exists in the worlds, in the first
place, will be without arrangement with reference to itself. For what order can
there be in the intinite of things first and second, where there is no first? Jn the
nevl place, it will not hace one producing cause. Lor if ithad, that cause would
produce the one prior to multitude, and the whole prior to parts. For being itself one
it would first assimilate to itself the things posterior to itself. For every cause which
is effective of things according to nature, produces things similar to itself. But
there is no first in those worlds, since they are infinite. And if they suppose
other worlds consisting of others, either the causes of them will be unco-ordinate
or co-ordinate. And if co-ordinate, it is necessary that the worlds should have
one co-arrangement. But in the infinite there is no order. To which we may
add, that the intervention of a vacuum in the middle, will separate the worlds.
Bat if the causes are unco-ordinate, we must admit that there is a divided and
unsympathetic multitude in the principles. This, however, will entirely abolish
both all the causes themselves, and the things posterior to them. For the causes
will be corruptive of each other, not being able to subsist in conjunction with, in
consequence of being perfectly foreign from each other. But the things which
proceed from them, collapsing, will stop, and will not have any thing from
whence again they can be generated, the principles being destroyed.

Perhaps, however, some one may say that there is neither one world, nor infi-
nite worlds, but many and finite. For we have heard of a certain Barbaric
opinion, which the Cheronean Plutarch relates,’ placing in one equilateral. tri-
angle the intelligible world according to the middle of it, in each of the sides
sixty worlds, about the intelligible, and in each angle one world; all of them
(except the intelligible) being such worlds as that in which we are comprehended,

So that there are three leaders, and thrice sixty others, under them. For the
angular are of a more ruling nature than the lateral worlds. "This opinion, there-
fore, introduces a multitude of finite worlds, and makes the intelligible to be one
of them. Unless, indeed, you arrange the intelligible world in the middle, as the

' The words, ovée xara μέρος are omitted in the original; but, as it. appears to me, ought to be
inverted.

* These arguments, which possess an invincible strength, fully show the futility of that very popular
theory of the moderns, that there are infinite worlds. For like most other modern dogmas, it is
unscientific aud rambling.

4 See Plutarch’s Treatise on the Sileuce of the Oracles.

284 PROCLUS ON THE {Boox "1.

root of all things, but the three angular worlds as connective of all things, and
causing all things to be one, according to one mundane intellect, one soul, and
one nature. Or according to the empyrean, etherial, and material world, For
an angle is connective of the sides. But the three sixty worlds may be said to
be the multitude according to each sphere of these. For the spheres are
twelve in number; and the multitude in each is spherical, of which the pentad
is a symbol, being the first spherical number. Hence there are thrice sixty
worlds, because there is an intellectual, a psychical, and a physical series, accord -
ing to each sphere of which the pentad is a symbol; or because there is an
empyrean, etherial, and material multitude of Gods. If, however, some one
shomld not admit that these things are obscurely signified (in this narration of
Plutarch}, but should assert that the worlds are truly divided according to num-
ber, we ask him, whether it is better to make one world comprehensive of all
things, or many worlds separated from each other? Por the former makes
multitude to be connectedly contained by the monad, and parts by the whole ;
but the latter dissipates production into an unco-ordinate multitude; though
nature, and every cause of this kind, makes amonad prior to multitude, and a
whole connective of parts. Jf likewise the worlds being spherical, touch each
other, they will touch according toa point, but in the whole they will be separated
from each other, and will be more unsympathetic than sympathetic. Itis neces-
sary however that things which proceed from one cause, should be co-passive
with each other, and give completion to one lite. Butif they do not at all touch
each other, they will be [entirely] separated. How also, Aristotle would say,
will things which are upward be downward, and things which are duwnward be
upward, interval being external to the worlds?) And how will this thing pertain.
ing to the worlds be arranged here, but another there? For that which is upward
to us, will be to others downward. Will not the earth therefore of the other
worlds, and every thing there which is heavy, be impelled to this world, if the
motion of that which is heavy tends downward? But at one and the same time,
a body which in one of those worlds tends upward, will, as proceeding to this
world, tend downward. And there will not be an order of motions, or powers, or
of things which are co-ordinate in the universe. Unless some one should say in
answer to this, that there is a different middle in each of the worlds : for the middle
isnot the middle of a vacuum, but of a world. Each part therefore of a world
tends cither to the middle, or to the circumference of that world, but not to that
which is foreign to it. All the things, however, that are in other worlds, are

ROOK 11. TIMAUS OF PLATO. 335

foreign to each other. If therefore, some one should think that these assertions
are worthy of belief, let them remain as such.

Plato however, has chosen the most principal and proper cause of their being
but one world, viz. that which is derived from the paradigm of the universe ; but
has omitted as concauses the above, and such-like causes. A demonstration
also of this kind is definite. For it does not separately confute those who say
there is a multitude of worlds, and separately those who introduce an infinite
number, dispersed in different places, and intercepted by a vacuum, but at one
and the same time he shows that the assertions both of the former and the latter
are false, directly proving that the world is one from the onlyness of the paradigm.
And farther still, he avoids the modes of argument which are derived from
matter. Lor he neither demonstrates, as Aristotle docs, from matter being one,
nor from places being definite according to nature, nor from essence, i.e. matter
which is a body, being united, according to the doctrine of the Stoics. For
Plato alone or especially employed, says Theophrastus, the cause which is derived
from prooidential inspection ; beautifully testifying this of Plato. As we have said
therefore, he ascribes the onlyness of the world to the paradigm. For if the pa-
radigm is one, and the Demiurgus is one, it is necessary that the world should
be one. -Or rather, if the paradigm is one, and the world adumbrates the
onlyness of the paradigm, the world is onc. But the antecedent is true, and
therefore the consequent. For the paradigm is one, as he before demonstrated,
and constituted the world conformably to the onlyness of itself, For as the in-
telligible paradigm was generated one from the one which is the good, so likewise
with reference to itself being one, it constituted the world only-begotten. Hence
the world is one. And neither are there many worlds ; for there are not many
first paradigms ; nor infinite worlds ; for the infinite according to multitude, does
not even exist in mortal natures, so far is it from having a subsistence in perpe-
tual beings.

But it is possible, says Porphyry, to use the demonstration of Plato in all
other principles. For through this, not only intelligible animal is demonstrated
to be one, but also the first Demiurgus. And inshort, it may be demonstrated,
that there are not many principles of intelligibles, but one priticiple. For again
another principle of their being many would be requisite, through which the
principles themselves are unbegotten. For every thing which is naturally inherent
mmany things, is necessarily derived from one cause. He therefore who says, that
God and matter are principles, must be compelled to admit that there is a certain

Tim, Plat. Vou. I. - 950

380 PROCLUS ON THE TIMZEUS OF PLATO. [woox τι.

other cause prior to them. For neither is matter sufficient to itself, nor will God
be comprehensive of all things [if there is another principle independent of him).
It is necessary therefore, that there should be a cause prior to these which com-
prehends all things, and which is truly suthcient to itself, and is not in want of
any other thing.

“ But this heaven (or universe} was generated, is, and will be one
and only-begotten.”

The only-begotten indeed, adumbrates the monadic cause, and indicates an
essence which is comprehensive of all secondary natures, and has dominion over
wholes. Fur the theologist is accustomed to call Proserpine only-begotten ; ας pre-
siding ina leading and ruling manner over all mundane natures, and as the cause of
only-begotten animals, For the Goddess who ts posterior to her gives subsistence to
the animals which are not only-begotten, as being irrational, The theologist there-
fore, on this account calls Proserpine only-begotten, though he produces another
divinity from the same causes as he produced Proserpine, Unity however, ts
imparted to the universe from the one unity of unities. For as the being which ts
every where, is derived from being itself, so the one! whichis in all things is from
the one itself. But the words “ was generated, ts, and τοῦδ be,” manifest the tem-
poral perpetuity of the universe, which is extended with the infinity of time. For
the term weas, is indicative of the past, the term is, of the present, and the term
will be, of the future time. Again therefore you have the term ove couformably
to the image of the one being [the summit of intelligibles); but the terms was, és,
and will be, conformably to the image of eternity. Bor the infinity ΟΥ̓ time
imitates the eternal infinity. But all these are according to the image of animal
itself. For this was) primarily monadic, and traly an eternal one. But the
world is monadic and perpetual through the initation of it. Parther still, the term
“was generated,” ts significant of perfection ; the term “4s,” of the participation of
being ; and the term “will be,” of perpetual yencration, through which the world
has a never-failing subsistence. So that of these, the first is from the one; for
from thence perfection in imparted to all things, But the second is from the one
being, And the third is from eternity ; for from thenee the never-failing is” inhe-
rent in wholes.

' For ro ey πᾶσιν ov here, itis obviously necessary to read ro es πᾶσιν ev.
’ y a

BOOK III.

THe present treatise in one way surveys the world according to the wholeness
which it contains, conformably to which also it is similar to all-perfect animal,
and was generated an only-begotten animal, animated and endued with intellect ;
but in another way, according to the division which is in it; as when it divides
the soul from body, and likewise things which have a more formal order, But
how does the psychical breadth proceed from fabrication, and according to what
kind of reasons? For since the world is an animated animal and endued with
intellect, three things are exhibited in it, viz. a certain body, soul, and. intellect. ὦ
Intellect however, is entirely unbegotten : for it is allotted an eternal essence and
energy. But body is entirely generated: for it consists according to the whole
of itself. in the whole of time, And soul is of a middle essence. As therefore,
it is arranged in the middle of impartible and partible natures, after the same man-
ner also, it is the boundary’ of unbegotten and generated essences. Hence it is
generated indeed, as with reference to intellect, but is unbegotten, when consi-
dered with relation to a corporeal-formed nature. It exists also as the end of eter-
nal beings, but ranks as first among things that are generated. On this account
therefore, Plato delivers to us an all-various generation of body, producing it
wholly from causes different from itself; but he produces soul both trom itself,
and from the total fabrication and vivitication. He does not however, in words
devise any generation of intellect. For neither is intellect produced according to
idea, nor does it admit of any name of generation, being entirely unbegotten,
and eternal. It is however unfolded into light from wholes, but abiding in them

* For epwshere, it is necessary to read opos.

388 PROCLUS ON THE [BooK "ι.

inherently, it proceeds unitedly, together with its more total causes. Hence it
abides impartible and undivided, being preserved by undefiled and inflexible
powers, while another life is distributed and divided about the parts of the um-
verse. Plato therefore, delivers the first: hypostasis of the universe from fabrica-
tion, viz. an hypostasis according to wholeness; according to which it becomes
animated, divine, and endued with intelleet, conformably to a similitude to all-
perfect animal. But he adds asecond hypostasis, which divides the world ac-
cording to wholes, and the production of total parts; soul and the corporeal-
formed nature existing according to this hypostasis. For intellect is entirely unbe-
gotten, as we have said, because it is without generation and indivisible; except
that it proceeds in an unbegotten manner, from the providence of the Demiurgus.
But he calls the nature which receives intellect, the evolution ἡ itself into light of
soul. For the Demiurgus himself places the circles of soul in intellect, unfolding
it without division, as being impartible, and without figure, as being pertectly
unfigured. And he delivers after this, the third hypostasis of the universe, divid-
ing it according to parts, and giving perfection to each of the parts. For he
delivers to us, how fire and air, water and earth are generated. But in the Jast
place, he surveys the energy of fabrication which is effective of body ; and neither
in this does he descend to particulars," but abides in the whole elements. — For
the total fabrication is the fabrication of wholes, and of total parts. But he deli-
vers the formation of individuals, and of things which are truly partial, to. the
junior Gods ; in order that imitating the providence of their father about wholes,
they also may receive a similar fabrication about particulars, and may have that
analogy to him which he has to the intelligible paradigm. For being intellectual
as with reference to this paradigm, and having the order of intellect, as with
relation to intelligible intellect, he becomes himself intelligible to the mundane
Gods.

As we have said therefore, fabrication being triple, the first, according to whole-
ness, the second, according to a division into wholes, and the third, according
to a division into parts,’ Plato now intends to deliver to us the middle or second
fabrication ; having indeed a transition of this kind consentaneous from. things
themselves 5 and having also an opportune progression to this from what had been

" For aagaow here, read expavau.

* For ra sadeora, read ra καθέκαστα.

Ὁ In otber words fabrication is either Jovian, or Dienysiacal, or Adontical, as was before observed
by Proclus.

BOOK 111. TIM/EUS OF PLATO. 369

before said. For since he had defined the world to be one visible animal, compre-
hending within it all such things as are naturally allied to it; that the world
indeed is one, he demonstrated from the onlyness of the paradigm ; but that it is
visible, and that it is comprehensive of all kindred natures, is rendered manifest
to us by the division of the universe into wholes. For if we can discover from what
cause the world is visible, and how all the elements are co-arranged in it, and
through what analogies, we shall easily perceive that it comprehends all kindred
natures, and that there is nothing sensible which is not contained in the one ambit
of the world. Perceiving this however, we shall sufficiently obtain the object. of
investigation, For this was, how the world is visible, and how it is comprehep-
sive of all things which are naturally allied to it. For from what has been before
said, we assume that the world is alone; but from these things, that it is all-per-
fect.

“Since, however, it is necessary that what is generated of a corporeal
nature should be visible and tangible ; but without fire nothing can become
visible, neither can any thing be tangible without a certain solid, nor solid
without earth ;—hence divinity beginning to fabricate, constituted the
body of the universe from fire and earth.”

Plato having a little before given the definition of that which is generated, call-
ing it that which is becoming to be, and which is perishable, he defined it to be
that which is the object of opinion in conjunction with sense. But demonstrating
that the world is generated, he converts the definition. For he says that sensibles
are seen to be things which are becoming to be, and are generated. But now
transferring that which is itself generated, to the order of a subject, he predicates
of it the visible and tangible. For these are the extremes of sensibles, just as the
sight and the touch are the extremes of the senses. Hence there, as 1 have ob-
served in what he says respecting the world being generated, he converts the
definition. But here he gives it according to nature. For that which is becoming
to be was in the order of the indefinite. But as he said in the hypotheses, that
which is the object of opinion in conjunction with sense, is to be assumed in the
definition. Ie says therefore, it is necessary that what is generated should be |
sensible, not indeed every generated nature, but that which we before called gene-
rated, viz. the composite nature, and which is always becoming to be through the
whole of time. For soul also is generated, but the discourse is not about this.

200 PROCLUS ON THE [Boox 11.

If however, some one should say that according to Plato material forms and
qualities themselves are apprehended by sense, and yet are incorporeal, and at
the same time have generation, let him know, says the divine Tamblichus, that
these likewise contribute to the hypostasis of bodies, and are surveyed in conjunc-
tion with them. Since therefore the world has a certain corporeal and likewise
an incorporeal portion in it, and this latter is two-fold, one being inseparable, but
the other separate from body; since also the portion of the incorporeal, which is
separate from body is two-fold, viz. psychical and intellectual; and further still,
since the world also has the unbegotten and the generated, but the whole of
every thing which consists of the unbeyotten and the generated, is generated,
Plato very properly calls the whole world something generated and corporeal.
formed. For if a whole consists of the mortal and the immortal, the whole is
mortal ; if from the unbegotten and the generated, the whole is generated 5 and if
from the incorporeal and the corporeal, the whole has the form of a corporeal
nature. For if indeed, the incorporeal itself is co-passive with body, it becomes
itself corporeal-formed, and not the whole only. Ty, however, that which is prin-
cipally and properly incorporeal, is itself exempt and impassive, being raised
above body, this more excellent nature is not indeed body, since it remains tn its
own purity, but the whole may more justly be denominated corporeal-formed.
Hence, since the world participates of many and blessed prerogatives from. its
generator, but partakes also of body, itis deservedly called corporeal-formed,
visible and tangible, according to the whole of itself Tor it is generated. But
that which is generated is visible and tangible and has a body, as was rightly
asserted before.

Plato beginning therefore from body, in the first place gives it to be sensible
according to the extreme senses. In the next place, he imparts to it that which
is more perfect than this, viz. the bond through analogy, which is connective of
the bodies it contains, In the third place, he makes it to be a whole consisting
of the wholes of the elements. Afterwards, in the fourth place, he gives ita sphe-
rical figure, in order that it may be most similar to itself according to form. In
the fifth place, he shows that the world suffers all things in itself, In the sixth
place, he distributes to it an appropriate motion. Afterwards, in the seventh
place, he animates it through a divine soul. In the eighth place, he imparts to
it atemporal period. Afterwards, in the ninth place, he establishes the senes '

For cepa here, itis necessary to read σειρα.

βοοκ 111.] TIM.LUS OF PLATO. 391

of Gods in it, who conjointly produce the perfect year. And _ in the tenth place,
he makes it to be perfect from all animals which are assimilated to the four ideas
{in animal itself]. And thus through the decad he gives completion to the whole
fabrication of things. ‘These particulars Lowever will be unfolded as we proceed.

Now therefore, we shall observe, that since the world possesses interval, and
is apprehended by sense, it is known through the sight and the touch; being
visible indeed, in consequence of being wholly filled through the whole of itself
with light ; but existing tangible in consequence of being a solid. For itis suf-
ficient for it to receive through these senses, all sensible aatures. The visible
also, and the tangible conceived as always existing in the world in the four ele-
ments, are contraries. For these as being most distant from each other and un-
der the same genus, are contraries. For both are sensibles, and this is their com-
mon genus, and they are most distant from each other, since the one is immedi-
ately sensible, but the other is not sensible without a medium. If however,
we lvestigated the contraries in the elements so far as they are mutable, we
should not say that they are fire and earth, but fire and water. For water espe-
cially extinguishes fire. Each also of the assertions is true. For it is common
to both to have their contrariety consist in being extremes. And in this the asser-
tions accord, as in senstbles indeed, carth being contrary to fire, but asin things of a
mutable nature, water to fire. Hence also Plato opposes the visible to the tangible.
Or, [it may be said] that he assumes the sensible clements, as not yet considering
the mutation of them, according to which water is more contrary to fire than
earth. What Plato therefore here says, is not as Theophrastus thought, imperfect :
for he doubts as follows: Why does Plato say that the peculiarity of five is visi-
bility, and of earth tanzibility, but does not at all mention the peculiarities of
the other elements? We reply, it is because we see the world, and also touch it,
but we do not taste, or hear, or smell it. The world itself also is visible and
tangible to itself. And as being luciform indeed, itis visible, perceiving itself
through divine light, which is extended through all heaven, and is similar, as
Socrates says in the Republic, to the rainbow. or this divine light is that which
is primarily visible, and pervades through the whole world. For as the sphere of
the sun is the sight of the soul which is in it, thus also the sight of the sphere" is
that divine light, which pervades through all visive* natures, and operates on,
and imparts life to things that are visible. You may likewise say, that this is

* For ψυχης here, it is necessary to read ogaipas.
* Instead of eparwy in this place, I read σρατικων.

392 PROCLUS ON THE [Βοοκ 111.

the first and most principal sight, but not that which subsists in conjunction with
passion, and which is separated from visible natures. But again, the world as
being solid and full of life, has what is called a co-sensation of itself. For we
also have a co-sensation of the motions or passions which inwardly subsist in us.
And through this consciousness, the world becomes tangible to itself. The most
proper solution however of the doubt, is that which says, that Plato assumes the
extreme elements prior to the others, because the latter subsist for the sake of the
former. And he intends to show that the rest are constituted as the bond of the
extremes. Orit may be said, that through the extremes he also comprehends
the media. For as the universe is defined through fire and earth, and the media
which are comprehended in these, thus also through the visible and the tangible
he comprehends all the variety of sensible natures.

This however, he employs as anaxiom. For it is usual with him prior to each of
the subjects of discussion, to assume an axiom from which he demonstrates the thing
investigated. Thus for instance he assumes axiomatically the sentence, “ Jn him
who is good envy ts never ingenerated about any thing,” in order that he may demon-
strate that the Demiurgus imparts good to all things. And again, in this way he
assumes the words, “ Jt neither was, nor will be lawful for the most excellent nature to
effect any thing else than that which is most beautiful ἢ in order to show that the uni-
yerse is an animal endued with intellect and animated. This too, is the case with
the words, “ That which is assimilated to an imperfect thing can never become beauti-
ful ;” in order that he may survey what the nature of the paradigm is, according to
which the Demiurgus constituted the world. After the same manner therefore here,
previously assuming as an axiom, that what is generated ts visible and tangible, he de-
monstrates from this, how the elements contribute to the composition of the world,
md how they are arranged in the universe. For if itis necessary that the world
should be visible and tangible, fire and earth are necessary to it: for that which
is primarily visible is fire. In the first place, indeed, because visible natures them-
selves are luminous substances: for all colours are the progeny of light. In the
next place, because (he sight itself is light proceeding from an etherial-formed essence.
And in the third place, because sight, and that which is visible, require the con-
gregating power of light, in order to their existence in energy. ΕῸΓ what else Is it
than light that collects both these together? So that the world will be in want
of fire, in order to be visible. To which also may be added, that Pythagoras in
what he says to Abaris, demonstrates that the eye is analogous to fire. For it ts the
most elevated of the instruments of sense, just as fire is of the elements, and em-
ploys as well as fire acute energies. The conical emission also of its rays, has no

ποὺ κ 211.} TIMAUS OF PLATO. 393

small similitude to the pyramidal form of fire. Plato however, does not say that
fire alone is vistble: for this is false in a twofold respect. For fire itself by itself,
unmingled with the other elements, is by no means externally) visible, but is ouly
visible in mental conception, And farther still, none of the other elements will
be visible af tire alone is visible. It is) one thing therefore, to be visible
through fire, and together with fire, and another for fire itself to be the only thing
visible, Henee, he does not assert the latter, which may be confuted in a twofold
respect, but the former, because nothing is visible separated from fire; from
which also you may assume, that all bodies part'cipate of fire. But in different
bodies there is a diflurent fire. For light, flame, and a burnins coal, are not the
same thing. But fromon high there isa diminution as far as to the earth of fire
which proceeds from a more immaterial, pure and incorporcal naturc as far as to the
most matcrial and gross bodies. Vor there are streams of fire under the earth, as
Empedocles somewhere says ;

Beneath the earth buro num‘rous fiery streams.

Nor ought we to wonder how fire, though in water, is not extinguished. For
all things proceed through each other, and that which predominates is different
in diferent things. Light also is fire pervading through all things. Numenius
therefore, being of opinion that all things are mingled, thought that nothing is
simple. But Plato knew the mixture of things, and separately delivered the
nature of each, fashioning the elements from figures,

Perhaps however, the wonderful Aristotle will object to what is said, not
admitting that every thing visible is such through the participation of fire; because
the choir of the stars, and the great sun itself, though they do not consist of fire,
yet at the same time are visible. But if some one should say to him, that with
respect to fire, one kind is material, but another immaterial, as with reference to
sublunary fire which is material; that one kind is corruptible, but another incor-
rupuble; that one is mingled with air, but another is pure; and in short, that
there are many species of fire, perhaps he will assent to the assertion, and also to
the theologists' who cals the suna fire which is the channel of pire, and the dispensator
of fire, and all such-like appellations. For to what else can he ascribe visibility,
than to that which is generative of light? But what except fire is a thing of this

"viz. The Chaldean Theurgists. See my collection of the Chaldean Oracles.

Tim. Plat. | Vou. I. 3D

494 PROCLUS ON THE [Bpoow Itt.

kind? For earth’ is effective of that which is entirely contrary to light: for it is
the cause of darkness. And that which is more terrestrial participates in a less
degree of light; but air and water are diaphanous, and are not of themselves
visible. Hence each of these is a medium between that which is primarily visible,
and that which obumbrates visible natures; cach being the cause of visibility to
other things, but not to itself, so far as each of these is diaphanous, but other
things are transparent through these. It remains therefore, that fire alone illumi-
nates the things with which itis present, and makes them to be visible.

If however, some one should say, that the celestial element which is visible
and iluminative, is not fire, we ask him, whence does the fire which is here,
become such as itis? Por if each of these is generative of sensible light, Why may
not each of them be fire, though the one is immaterial, but the oiher material ?
When, however, I say that the one 15 immaterial, [ mean as was before observed,
that itis so when compared with the grossest* matter, which is not able to sus-
tain forms, so as to prevent them from gliding away, and which is distinguished
from the matter that mvariably remains im its Own proper form, For we learn
that matter pervades through the whole world, as the Gods also say.

Hence
Plato, as he proceeds, calls matter the receptacle of the universe.

Such therefore,
as are the kinds of light, such also are the kinds of fire; and analogy shows that
the hight which is from the celestial element is from fire. Hence, it must be said,
that Plato does not characterize fire by heat, nor by being, moved upward ; for
these things are the peculiarities of the fire which is here, and which is not in its
proper place; but that he characterizes it by visibility. For through this he
comprehends all fire, the divine, the mortal, the caustic, and the vehement.
Farther sull, the same things must likewise be said concerning earth, that
earth is that which is primarily solid. For it must not be said that earth derives
its sohhuity from some other place; but in sensibles, that which is especially solid,
has this pecularity, prior to such things as are less solid; since also that which is
especially hot, is hot prior to things which have less heat, and from this things
which have Jess heat, participate of this quality. If therefore, earth is more solid
than the other elements, but that which is most solid is the cause of things which
are less solid being solid, and things which are less such are not the causes of:
sulidity to those which especially and particularly have this power; —if this be

* Ynstead of πη in this place, it is necessary to read yn.

* Lor Taxyvrarny here, itis necessary to read wayyraryy,

BOOK 111.} TIMZUS OF PTATO. 395

the case, it is necessary that earth should be the cause of solidity to the other
elements, having itself a subsistence contrary to fire. And if indeed, we assume
things which are apparent to our senses, viz. heaven as fiery, and the earth on
which we walk, as especially earth, the contrariety of these will be manifest, the
former being always in motion, but the latter being immoveable; the former being
transcendently visible, but the latter tangible: and the one being most attenuated
through light, but the other most gross through darkness. But if we wish to
survey the first elements of these, viz. fire itself so far as fire, and earth itself, so
far as earth, we shall shortly after unfold all the oppositions of these, when we
discuss the analogy of the four elements. “That visibility therefore, is the pecu-
liarity of fire, and tangibility of earth, we may from these things assume to be
most true, lence Porphyry says, that of demons some, being visible, have in
their composition more of a fiery, in consequence of not having any thing of a
resisting nature. But others, participating also of earth, are capable of being
touched. Ile adds, that such as these appearing near Tialy about the Tuscans,
not only emit seed from which worms are generated, but also strike against other
things, and Jeave behind them ashes ; from which likewise he shows that all things
participate of earth. There is not, however, the same nature of earth every where,
and in all parts of the world, but in some places it is more pure and immaterial,
and without gravity. Lor not gravity, but tangibility, is the peculiarity of earth.
But in other places, itis more material, and heavy, and is moved with difficulty.
In some placcs likewise, it exhibits solidity alone; but in others, it receives other
genesiurgic and material powers, after the same manner as fire.

If however, these things being asserted by us, Aristotle should doubt, how if
fire isin the heavens it is moved circularly, and not in a right le, we must
adduce in answer to him, what Plotinus says, that every simple body, when in tts
proper place, either remains immoveable, or is moved ina circle, in order that it may
hy xo means relinquish its proper place. For if itis moved in a different: manner,
it will cither no fonver be inits own place, or will not yet be init. A celestial body
therefore, being fiery, is necessarily moved in a circle. For earth also, if it were
moved without leaving the place about the middle, would be moved in a circle.
For when fire is moved to the upper region it is so moved in consequence of
being ina foreign place. For the same reason likewise, a clod of earth is moved
downward ; and in short, the local motions of the elements in ἃ right line, ure occa-

* Instead of wa μη Se ws in this place, [ read wa μηδαμωε,

396 PROCLUS ON THE. (moun at,

sioned by their being preternaturally disposed ; so that it is false to say that fire is
naturally moved in a right line. For it then especially subsists according to
nature when it possesses its proper place. — But when it tends to its proper plaice, it
is not yet in a Condition conformable to nature. This however being demon-
strated, itis evident that the celestial fire when it is moved, is moved ina circle ;
and nothing that has been said disturbs the Phatoute assertion. For if fire is
moved in aright line,’ it is not yet in its natural place. Butaf itis in its nataral
place, it will cither be immoveable, or moved in acirele, ΠΝ impossible however,
that it should be immoveable: for all fire is naturally moveable. Tu its natural
place therefore, it is alone moved in a circle. But let us return to the thing pro-
posed to be discussed,

If therefore the universe is generated, itis necessary that it should be sensible.
But if sensible, itis visible and tangible, And itso, it consists of fire and earth,
But if this be admitted, it also consists of the middle clements. | For tire and earth
areas much disjoined from cach other as the sight and the touch, and require the
other clements as connecting media. Tfhowever, the world is visible, itis neces-
sary there should be fire; and if tangible, 1Ὸ is necessary there should be earth,
Bor that which is solid is tangible, and is also able to resist the touch; since that
which is friable, and cannot sustain the touch, is by no means κι]. Tence
Pythagoras calls the earth the sustainer, as being solid, and resisting the touch,
and as moved with dituculty, and participating of stable power. If therefore, as
we have said, fire is requisite in order that the world may be visible, but earth, that
itimay be tangible, divinity beginning from fire and earth, made the universe,
Not that he first made these ; for we have already reyected the generation which
is according to time; but since every physiology commences from contraries, on
this account Plato says that the composition of the universe orianated from fire
and earth, in order that it might become visible through fire, and tangible through
the solidity of earth, which with great accuracy he calls ὦ certain solid. Por ἃ
physical solid is one thing, bata mathematical solid another, And the datter ts
intangible, but the other, which the discussion now requires, is tangible, Por
that solid is tangible, which as physical Pence those are absurd who doubt
why earth alone ix solid: for, say they, water and air are also solids, Por it may
be said, in answerto them, that resistance expecially pertains to earth; since tt is
the support and foundation of the other elements. For earth supports water, and

* The words ex’ evOecas, are omitted in the original

BOOK 111.} ΤΙΝ ῦ5 OF PLATO. 297

both earth and water support air. Earth therefore, is the first tangible, and the first
resisting substance, and on this account is the first solid. We shall omit how-
ever to notice those who say that Plato here calls the three elements after fire,
earth, For if this were admitted, it would not be possible to assign what is the
medium of earth and fire.

“ΤῸ is impossible however, for two things alone to cohere in a beautiful
manner, without the intervention of a certain third ; fora certain collec-
tive bond is necessary in the middle of the two. But that is the most
beautiful of bonds, which causes itself and the natures which are bound,
to be one.”

In what is here said, a bond is assumed as affording an image of divine union,
and the communion of powers, according to which the intellectual causes of
wholes effect their generations. But beauty appears to be assumed, as having an
uniting and binding essence and power. For the words, “ to cohere ina beautiful
manner, and the most beautiful of bonds,” appear to me_ to be significant of this.
Beginning therefore from the duad, as allied to generation, progression and
difference, Plato introduces union to the participants of it, and an harmonious
communion through a bond, imparting to the world this as the second gift from
the Demiurgus. We shall however here avoid the introduction of such doubts as
are adduced by those who do not rightly understand what is said by Plato.
For neither do those who say that semicircles require no bond in order ἴο the
generation of a circle, speak rightly; fora circle does not consist of semicircles,
Lut on the contrary, the circle now existing, and not subsisting from these, the
diameter being drawn makes the semicircles. And this is evident from the name
affording a generation to these from the circle, but not vice versa. Nor do
those speak rightly who assume the monad and the duad, which in a certain
respect are opposites, and have no medium. For Plato does not absolutely say,
that there is something between all things, in whatever manner they may exist,
which gives perfection to the hypostasis of one composite. For he says, that two
things alone cannot beautifully cohere without a third. But the monad and the
duad are not contraries, since the duad consists of monads. Nor again, is there
any rectitude in the assertions of those who introduce things that are corrupted
together, as for instance, wine mingled with honey. For these no longer exist

498 PROCLUS ON THE (BooK τι,

when the mixture takes place. We however, do not investigate how things are
corrupted ; for this is not wonderful ; but how remaining what they are, they are
co-harmonized with each other. For this bond‘ is the cause of safety to the
things that are bound, but not of their common corruption and abolition. Nor
do those speak rightly who adduce as a witness the communion of man and
woman, which requires no third thing to its subsistence. For through ignorance
they do not perceive the greatest bond, that of love, which excites to communion,
in one way indeed, to a communion of the psychical life, and in another to that of
the physical life. For the bond through animation is the medium in these. Nor
are they right who adduce things which are melted together, as gold and silver.
For of these there is the same essence; since both are water. ΑἸ these theretore,
wander trom the conception of Plato.

We however, again say, conformably to what has been before observed, that it is
necessary these two things should be assumed, in the first place, in order to the
g, and in the next place, in order that their coalition may
not be corrupted. For they would no longer be bound, but would cease to exist,
In the third place, also, it is necessary that they should truly be the clements of

composition of one thin

that which consists of them. For having these conditions, they will entirely be
in want of a certain third thing to their colligation, For what, since they are
separate, divided, and most distant from each other, will collect them into one ?
Por if nothing accedes to them, they will remain divided, and will subsist after the
same manner as before. But if something accedes to them besides what they
already are, this thing which accedes will become their bond. For it was this
which collected them mto the composition of one thing. A bond, however, is
said to be so ina threefold respect. For one bond is that which pre-exists in the
cause of the things that coalesce. But another is that which is inherentin the
things themselves that are bound, and which is co-ordinate to, and connascent with
them. Anda third is that which exists in the middle of these, proceeding indeed
from the cause, but presenting itself to the view* in the things that are mutually
bound. Ifyou are willing also, one bond of an animal, and of the parts in it,
is the one reason which is pre-established in the cause itself of the ammal. But
the nerves and the fibres are another bond, connecting the parts of the animal,
And another bond is the physical reason or productive and forming power, which

* For ov yap δέσμος ουτος, It is necessary to read 0 yap de opios ovros.

* For evgau operos in this place, it is obviously necessary to read eppawoperos,

Book 411] TIM ALUS OF PLATO, 399

proceeds from the cause of the animal, and employs the nerves, and all the inate-
rial organic bonds tor the colligation of the animal. For this bond is neither
exempt from the things that are bound, nor yet ranking among things which are
withont eflective power, is it destitute of the true cause. You must not therefore,
understand the bond which is now mentioned by Plato, according to the first
mode; for this is not attended with cause ; but cause is entirely exempt from the
things which proceed from it, so far as itis cause. But Plato says, that the bond
isin the middle of the things that are bound. That, however, which is in the
middle of certain things, is not separated from them. Nor does this bond subsist
according to the organic and Jast kind of bond. For the bond which is confor-
mable to this, is not the lord of itself nor of its own proper union. Plato how-
ever adds, that the bond of which he is sneaking, makes both itself and the
things which are bound to be one. Forit is possible for this to be arranged in the
middle, But it possesses such a power as this through analogy, whichis the most
beantiful bond, and which imparts to it a power that causes all things to have
sameness and union. This bond therefore, is inseparable from the things that are
bound, and is analogy, which is different from all the natures that are bound,
but has a subsistence in them. The demiurgic will likewise, is a bond, but is
exempt from the things that it binds; “ 1/y τοῦ, says the Demiurgus, being a
greater and more principal bond than those with which you were bound at the commence-
ment of your generation.” 11 remains therefore, that we must understand the bond
here mentioned, according to the middle mode, and as having a middle form, so
us to be neither ellective nor organic.

Whence then is the conception of such a bond derived, and of what is it the
symbol? Jt proceeds indeed from the one cause of wholes. For the power of
imparting union is present to all things, from that fountain of all union, through
which also intellect is conjoined to the intelligible, and which produces the light
of truth, or the first of bonds, through which all things are connected with each —
other, and become perfectly one thing through similitade. It is through this like-
wise, that things which have proceeded from their proper principles are converted
to them. But this bond also proceeds from the one being, which is the first of
beings, and which unitedly comprehends the causes of all things, according to the
bond and divine union contained in it. It likewise proceeds from all-perfect
animal. For every intelligible animal is by a much greater priority united to
itself, than a sensible’ animal; and the causes of wholes which it contains, pervade

* For ἡ το νοητὸν here, it is evidently necessary to read ἥ ro αἰσθητον.

400 PROCLUS ON THE [BooK 115.

through each other prior’ to analogy; which analogy imitating, makes all things
to be in all, and imparts the same powers to different things. It also proceeds
from the connectedly-containing cause. For analogy inserts connexion, causing
the natures which are bound by it, as Plato says, to be indissoluble by every thing
except by him who binds them. Hence this bond proceeding from these causes,
is connective, is the cause of the communion, and one union of separated natures,
and is the supplier of harmony, and of the conspiration hastening to unity of dif-
ferent things; in order that it may be similar to the causes from which it was
derived.

These things, however, being thus divided and defined, let us return to the
thing proposed to be considered. For since it is necessary that the world being
generated should be visible and tangible, it will be in want of fire and earth. Of
fire, indeed, because it is visible. For vision? is of an etherial nature, on which
account also it emits rays; and that which collects both sight, and that which is
visible, is light. Batall lightis from fire; for it is not from earth, which produces
darkness. As we have before observed, however, there are many kinds of fire.
Because likewise, the world is tangible, itis in want of earth. For earth is that
which is especially solid: for it is nore stable, and more of a resisting nature than
the other elements. But that which is especially solid is especially tangible.
For it in a greater degree sustains resistance, than that which is not solid. Hence
earth is especially tangible. Let :t therefore be admitted, that there are primarily
these two elements in the universe, and that they are contrary to each other ; fire
indeed, being analogous to form, to the masculine nature, and to things of this
kind ; but earth, being co-ordinate to the female nature, and to matter, Tfence,
of these, which are thus oppositely divided, in’ their essences, powers, and
energies, in the senses by which they are perceived, and in the places of their
abode, there will not be one order, nor one world, unless a bond acecedes to them,
and communion with each other. For it is impossible for two things to cohere in
a beautiful manner without the intervention of a certain third. And Plato indeed
adduces an universal assertion by saying, “a certam or some third thing.” But if
you add the words, “ which are entirely contrary,” (immediately after the words, * or
two things alone”) you will render whatis said mcontrovertble, and more acknowledged.

* For xpos ἀναλογίας in this place, read πρὸ ἀναλογίαν,
*j.e. From the middle triad of the order of Gods called intelligible and at the same time intellectual,

2 For co oper here, itis necessary to read ro ὁρᾷν.

nook 11} TIM.EUS OF PLATO, 401

For it is impossible for two things which are most contrary to concur into one
composition with each other, without the intervention of a third. For either they
collect themselves, or they are congregated by another thing. Being, however,
contrary, and most distant trom each other, and secretly tlying from each other,
through the fear of losing their own essence, they cannot bring themselves toge-
ther. [lence they are congregated by something else. But this is a bond; so
that they are in want of a certain third thing. The universe, therefore, proceeds
from the duad to the triad. Por it began indeed from the duad, because all gene-
ration subsists in a way adapted to this principle. For difference, the infinite,
and the Empedoclean strife [as being allied to the duadj are adapted to generated
things. But the universe proceeds as far as to the triad, through the bond which
is now mentioned. Again, therefore, a certain medium must be assumed between
earth and fire, which is collective of both, And let this for the sake of an example
be moisture, which is common toair andicater. Lor this' is connective indecd of carth,
conglutinates it, and holds it together, so that it may not be dispersed ; but being as a
subject to fire, it imparts to tt nourishment and permanency. From this triad, how-
ever, the tetrad will shortly atter be unfolded, because the natures which are bound
together are solids. Hence it is rightly said, that a bond imparts beauty, and an
harmonious communion and union, But what this bond is, and how it is inhe-
rent in the things that are bound, Plato shows through the following words.

“ This, however, analogy is naturally adapted to effect in the most
beautiful manner.”

Tt must be said, therefore, that this analogy is the bond which is now inves-
tigated 5 but that the middle or media, are after a certain manner bonds. For
analogy is in those things which have the same ratio, and is naturally adapted to
bind itself in conjunction with them; them indeed, through ratios; but. itself,
through preserving the same form in things numerically different, and continuing
to be one in multitude. For it has this from itself, and according to its own
reason, and this consentaneously. For analogy proceeds from equality. But
equality is of the co-ordination of unity. For as the monad is the fountain and
root of quantity considered by itself; so is equality of all relative quantity,
having the order of a monad, to all habitudes. For that we may omit other
middles or media, which more recent philosophers have added, I mean Nicoma-

ἡ For τὸν yap, tead rovro yap.

Tim, Plat. Vou, I. ot ἜΣ

402 PROCLUS ON THE [Book 111.

chus, Moderatus, &c.,’ we shall confine ourselves to the three media from which
Plato constitutes the soul, arithmetically, geometrically, and harmonically.

It may be seen, however, how all these middles are generated: from equality,
by the following method. Phe arithmetic middle, indeed, after this manner:
Make the first number equal to the first; the second to the first and the second 3
and the third to the first, second, and third, Three monads therefore being pro-
posed, there will be produced according to this method three terms, vin. 1. 2.
3. preserving an arithmetic middle. Bor this middle consists in equally surpass-
ing according to number, and being equally surpassed.’ But the geometrical
middle is produced as follows: Make the first equal to the first; the second, to
the first and second ; and the third to the first, to twice the second and
the third. For again, there being three monads, there will thus be
generated the three terms 1. 2. 4. forming the geometric middle. Por the
peculiarity of analogy consists in preserving the same ratio in greater
and lesser terms. And the harmonic middle, which has the third order, is
generated in the following manner : Three monads being proposed make the
first equal to the first, and to twice the second; the second to twiee the first, and
twice the second ; and the third τὸ the first, to twice the second, and thrice the
third. For by this method the three terms 3. 4. and 6. will be produced, form-
ing the harmonic middle. For the harmonic middle, according to the Platonte
definition itself, consists ino surpassing and being surpassed by the same part of
the extremes? All the middles, therefore, have their generation from equality.»
But if this be the ease, they have the uniform, and a power which collects things,
and causes them tobe one. For equality is analogous to sameness, to the monad,
to bound and to similitude, through which communion is produced in’ beings.
Hence Plato appropriately adds the words, ‘naturally adapted,” beewuse the ana-
logies and all the tiddles have the spontaneous, Por they neither introduce an
artificial, nor an adscititious bond, but present themselves to the view in) the

essences and powers themselves of things.
“For when either in three numbers, or masses, or powers, as is the

* For an account of these media, see my Theoretic Arithmetic.
> fu the original, by some negligence of the transertbers, after ww δε urepeyopern, being equally sur-
assed, the words κατὰ ψυσιν αὐτὸν ὁ yidoougys, Lumediately follow, which are obviously totally foreign
to this place.
> Thus 3 is surpassed by 4, by 1 which is a third part of 3, and 6 surpasses + by 2 which is a third
part of 6.

ROOK 411} TIMEUS OF PLATO. 403

middle to the first so is the last to the middle; and again, as is the last
to the middle, so is the middle to the first; then the middle becoming
both first and fast, and the last and. the first becoming both of them
middles, it will thus happen that all of them will necessarily be the same.
But becoming the same with each other, they will be one.”

Tn the first place, it is requisite to explain what is here said mathematically ;
and in the next place, physically, as being that which is especially proposed to be
effected, For it’ is not proper to separate the discussion from. its appropriate
theory. There are therefore some who think that Plato in these words detines
the geometric middle, and among other things which they assert, they say that
the geometrie middle is properly exclusive of all the others analogy ; but that the
others may be justly ealled middles. — Nicomachus also is of this opinion, and he
speaks rightly. 10) geometric proportion is properly analogy ; but it is requi-
site to call the ethers middle, as Plato also says further on inthe gencration of the
soul, But the others are improperly" called analozics. Vo others, however, these
appear not to have apprehended the meaning of Plato properly. For they say
that it is not definitely asserted in these words, that there ought to be the same
ratio; but thus much only is said, that it is necessary there should be such a ha-
bitude of the last to the middle as there is of the middle to the first. But this
is common to all the before-mentioned middles, For as the monad is to the
duad, according to the arithmetical middle, and the equal in quantity, so is the
duad to the triad. | For by as much as the duad is surpassed by the triad, by so
much is the triad less than the tetrad. And as the monad is to the duad, ac-
cording to the geometric middle, so is the duad to the tetrad, For the ratio is
the same. And as the triad is to the tetrad, according to the harmonic middle,
and the part of the triad by whicn the tetrad surpasses it, so is the tetrad to the
hexad. For by that part of the triad by which the triad is exceeded by the
tetrad, by the same part of the hexad is the tetrad sarpassed by the hexad,
Sach, therefore, is their opinion, though Plato clearly assumes the geometric
iniddle. For itis the peculiarity of this proportion, that the first has the same
ratio to the middle that the middle has to the third term. As, however, there
are three middles, the arithmetic, the geometric, and the harmonic, and these
being such as we have shown them to be, Plato very properly assumes these

* For καταχρώμενοι here, 1 read καταχρήστικωε.

404 PROCLUS ON THE (BooK 11,

three subjects, numbers, masses, and powers. For the arithmetical middle is in
numbers; the geametrical is ina greater degree conversant with continued (than
with discrete} quantity ; and the harmonteal middle is in) powers, For it is
conversant with sharp and flat sounds, And after this manner you may speak,
distinguishing the middles according to their predominance,

All of them, however, may be assumed in numbers, in masses, and Jn powers,
And how, indeed, they may be assumed in numbers is evident; for it has been
shown by us. But they may also be assumed in masses. For three equal mag-
nitudes being proposed, you may be able, by using the before-mentioned three
methods, to devise other magnitudes, at one tine producing an arithmetic, at
another a geometric, and at another an harmonic middle. Jn powers likewise
after the same manner. For let there be three equal powers, as for instance,
three highest Aupateé (vraras) sounds, all of them homotonous, or of the same
tone. You will produce therefore from these, the arithmetical middle, if you
place the first sound, that is Aypate, equal to the first; but the second, to the
first and second, as for instance, another sound emitting a sound the double of
the first. And letit be nefe or the last sound, which has a double ratio to Aypate.
But the third sound must be placed equal to the first, second, and third. Por it
will be a sound which wall have a triple ratio to Aypate, surpassing ucte by as
much as γος surpasses Aypate. And these three sounds, Aypate, nete, trite-hyper-
holéon, Will avithinetically differ from cach other. But you will make the geometri-
eal middle, if the Aypate being posited, you make the first equal to the first, but
the second equal to the first and second hypate. And let this sound be mese :
for this is capable of emitting a sound the double of kypate. But if you make the
third sound equal to the first Aypate, and to twice the second, and the third, you
will have a certain chord which will sound wete-huperbolaon, For this will be ca-
pable of producing a sound the double of mese, and the triple of Aypate. These
three sounds Likewise will form the geometric middle. ALL the middles, therefore,
are seen to exist in numbers, im masses, and in powers. Number, however, is
more adapted τὸ the arithmetical, bulk to the geometrical, and power to the har-
monic middle. And hence Plato uses these three, viz. numbers, masses, and
powers.

It is well, likewise, that assigning certain common ratios, he commences from
the middle. For it is this through which all analogy consists, collecting the

———

BOOK 111. TIMASUS OF PLATO. 405

extremes according to ratio, from one power to the other. For analogy is that
Which is principally and) properly a bond. Butitis a bond as that ¢hrough
wehich, and the unddle. Por through the middle analogy binds the extremes.
From this, therefore, he commences as most allied to the nature of analogy, and
because habitude receives its completion through it. Hence, also, they are called
middles, and because sameness is the end of all this analogy. | For since they
proceed from equality, but equality is sameness, it converts all things to sameness.
Sameness, however, may be properly and principally asserted of the geometric
middle, for there is the same ratio; but equality of the arithmetic ; and similitude
of the harmonic middle. And in the third place, the ascent is through sameness
tounion, For analogy indeed is suspended from = equality,” being a πα
ingenerated in the boundaries of equality. But equality is suspended from same-
ness, and sameness from union.

It is necessary, however, after the mathematical resumption of these words, to
direct our attention to the physical theory, For itis not fit that those who apply
themselves to this discussion, should dwell on mathematical speculations ; for
the dialogue is physical; nor that they should neglect such speculations, investi-
gating only what relates to sense 3 but it is requisite to conjoin both, and always
connect physics with mathematics ; just as the things themselves are connected,
are homogeneous, and of a kindred nature, according to the progression from
intellect. For, in short, if the Pythagoreans arranged the mathematical essence
as a medium between intelhgibles and sensibles, as being more evolved than
intelligibles, but more universal than sensibles,* why is it requisite, omitting
mathematics, to pay attention to physiology aloue? For how is the sensible
nature adorned, according to what reasons is it arranged, or from what reasons
does it proceed, exceptitrom those that are mathematical? These reasons there-
fore for productive powers], are primarily in souls, descending into them from
intellect; and afterwards they are in bodies, proceeding into them from souls.
Hence it is necessary not to remain in mathematical speculations as some do;
for this produces false opinions in the auditors, and induces them to think
that physical figures and numbers are mathematical. It is also in another
respect absurd. lor the reaxons of nature do not receive the accuracy and firm-

* Tnstead of εξηρτηται yap ἡ μεν ex rns ἀναλογίαν, it is requisite to read in this place, εξηρτηται yap
ἢ) μὲν ἀναλογία εκ τὴς ἰσότητος,

* For των νοητῶν here, it is obviously necessary to read τῶν αἰσθητῶν. |

406 PROCLUS ON THE [BOOK 111.

ness of the mathematical reasons. To which may be added, that in so doing we
shall not follow the demonstrative canons, in which it is said that) things
pertaining to one genus must not be transferred to another, Neither therefore is
it possible to survey physical objects arithmetically.

Let us, therefore, if you think fit, discuss the theory of the proposed words -
physically. ‘The first analogy then, according to which nature inserts harmony
in her works, and according to which the Demiurgus adorns and arranges the
universe, is one certain life, and one reason, proceeding through all things ; which
first, indeed, connects itself, but afterwards the natures in’ which it exists 5 and
according to whieh sympathy is ingenerated ἴῃ ἈΠ mundane essences, as existing
in one animal, and governed by one nature, This life, theretore, which is the
bond of wholes, total nature for nature which ranks as a whole] and the one
soul of the world constitute, The one intellect ihewise generates it; and always
more excellent beings, insert in mundane matures, a greater and more perfect
union. Lat it be said, therefore, that the habit which predominates in material
subjects, that material form, and the powers of the muddle elements, are bonds.
All these however, have the relation of things without which the primary bond 15
not participated, and are analogous to the middle in mathematical entities,
through which habitude subsists in the extremes. But the lite of which we are
speaking, which collects and unites all things, and is suspended indeed from its
proper causes, but binds the things in whieh at is inherent, Is fru/y analogy, and
preserves both its own union and the union Of its participants, Again, therefore,
a bond is threefold, For the common powers of the elements are one bond 5 the
one cause of bodies is anothers; anda third is that which as the middle of both
the others, which proceeds indeed from the cause of bodies, but employs the
powers that are divided about body. And this is the strong bond, as the theolo-
wist says, which is catended through all things, and is connected by the yolden

chain. For Jupiter after this, constitutes the golden chain,’ according to the

‘
t

admonitions of Night.

But when your pow’r around the whole has spread
A strong cocrcive bond, a golden chain

Suspend from ather,

' This golden chain may be said to be the series of unities proceeding from the one, or the ineffable
principle of things, and extending ay far as to matter itself, And of this chain, the light immediately

proceeding from the sun is au image.

BOOK αι} TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 407

Physical analogy then being a thing of this kind, let us survey in what things,
and through what, it is naturally adapted to be established. As Plato therefore
says, It subsists in nambers, masses, and powers. — Physical mambers, however, are
material forms divided about the subject i.e. about body}. But masses are the
extensions of these forms, and the separations or intervals of them about matter.
And powers are the things which connect, and give form [or specific distinction) to
bodies. For form is one thing, and the power proceeding from it is another. For
form indeed is impartible and essential, but becoming extended, and dilated into
bulk, it emits, as if it were a blast from itself} material powers, which are certain
qualities, "Thus, for instance, in fire, the formand essence of it is impartible,’ and
is truly the image of the cause of fire. For in partible natures there is that which
isimpartible. But from the form in fire which is impartible, a separation and
extension of it take place about matter, from which the powers of fire are exerted,
such as heat, or refrigeration, or moisture, or something else of the like kind.
And these qualities are indeed essential, but are by no means the essence of fire.
For essences are not from qualities, nor are essence and power the same ; but
every Where the essential precedes power; and from that being one, a multitude
of powers proceeds, and that whieh is divided, trom that which is indivisible; just
as from one power many enerzies proceed. For by how much more each thing
proceeds, by so much more is it multiplied ἀπ divided, conformably to {the
characteristic of] its principle and cause, which is impartible and indivisible,
As in every body, therefore, there is this triad,’ T mean number, bulk, and power,
analogy and the physical bond, occupy from on high the numbers, masses, and
powers of bodies, and likewise congregate their partible’ essences, and unite
them for the purpose of producing the one completion of the world. They also
insert communion in forms, symmetry in masses, and harmony in powers. And
thus all things are rendered eflable and consentaneous to each other. But this
analogy proceeds from the middle to the first, and from the third to the middle ;
from the first also to the middle, and from this to the last; and again, from the
last to the middle, and from this to the first. Beeause, likewise, a bond of this
kind imparts progression and conversion to bodies, it begins indeed from the

‘Instead of ro μὲν εἰδὸς αὐτὸν καὶ oumna, ἀμέρους ἐστε καὶ orros ἄγαλμα τῆς αἰτίας τὸν Rupes, It TS
requisite to read, τὸ μὲν εἰδὸς αὐτὸν κας οὐσία «μέρες ἐστι, και οντῶς AYAAPaTHS αἰτίας τὸν RYPOS.

δ For τὸν rpirov rovrov in this place, it is requisite to read τὸν rptagou rovroy.

? Instead of apepers here, itis necessary to read μέρισταν.

408 ᾿ PROCLUS ON THE {Book 111.

middle, in consequence of being connective, and the cause of union, and is
* defined according to this peculiarity. But it proceeds from the first through the
middle, to the last, as extending and unfolding itself, as faras to the last of things.
And it recurs from the last to the first, as converting all things through harmony
to the intelligible cause, from which the division of nature, and the separation and
interval of bodies were produced. For by converting them to this cause,
according to one circle, one order, and one series, secondary being suspended
from primary natures, it causes the world to be one, and most similar to. the
intelligible [paradigm]. For as there all things are truly united to each other, 50
here all things are adapted to each other. And as intelligibles proceeding trom the
good, are again converted to it, through the goodness which is in them," and
through the intelhyible monads ; thus also sensibles: proceeding from the Demi-
urgus, are again converted to him, through this bond, whieh is distributed and
pervades through all of them, and binds all things together, For in this respect
it imitates the intelligible, But it) subsists intellectually in intellect, totally in
wholes, and partially in partial natures,

After the same manner, therefore, as the intelligible, the sensible world has all
things, according to all its parts. Por fire, so far as it is tangible, participates of
earth, and earth, so far as itis visible, participates of fire, and each participates of
moisture. For earth indeed is conglutinated and connected through moisture,
and its dissipated nature is united through it; but tire is nourished and increased
by it. So that the extremes are the middle, in order that what is said may
become physically manifest in things that are Known by us. The extremes, there-
fore, are ina certain respect the middle, as preserving through it their proper idea,
and remaining such as they are. And moisture itself, so far as itis coloured,
participates of fire, and so far as itis re-Invigorated through heat. But again, so
far as it is tangible, 10 participates of earth. So that each of the extremes gives
perfection to moisture. These things, however, will shortly after become more
known to us,

But through this harmony and analogy, in the first place, sameness presents
itself to the view, and in the next place union. For bodies themselves according
to their own nature are partible, aud are subdued by differences and strife. “These,
however, at the same time through harmony, are leagued in tdendship with same-
ness, and through sameness with union. For through analogy the universe 15

' Por ev avry read ey avros.

BOOK 111. TIM.£Us OF PLATO. 409

completely rendered one, this having the power of making things that are divided
to be one, of congregating things that are multiplied, and connecting things that
are dissipated. Hence, theologists surveying the causes of these things in the
Gods, enclose Venus with Mars, and surround them with Vulcanian bonds; the
difference which isin the world being connected through harmony and friendship.
All this complication and connexion likewise has Vulcan for its cause, who
through demiurgic bonds connects sameness with difference, harmony with dis-
cord, and communion with contrariety. And this being eflected, Apollo, Her-
mes, and each of the Gods laugh. But their laughter gives subsistence to mun-
dane natures, and inserts etlicacious power in the bonds. Let these things, how-
ever, as it is said, be preserved in sacred silence. But now, from what has been
discussed, let thus much be manifest to us, that the physical bond being Vulcanian
and demiurgic, (for the one and all-perfect Demiurgus comprehends also the pro-
duction which is through necessity, as being Vulcanian and Dionysiacal, and
causing each of the parts of the universe to be a whole,) is collective of contraries,
and connective of material things; uniting their essences, measuring their masses,
and harmonizing their powers. It likewise makes all things to be in all, and
exhibits the same things in each other, according to all possible modes, empy-
really, aerially, aquatically, and terrestrially.

“ Tf then it were necessary that the body of the universe should have
been generated a superficies, and not have depth, one medium might
have been suticient for the purpose of binding both the natures that sub-
sist with it, and itself. But now it is requisite that it should be a solid,
and solids are never adapted to each other by one, but always by two

media.”

The scope proposed to us (in the Timeus], is, as we have before observed,
to learn how the universe is constituted, and of what it consists. But this being
the design, we may see in what a well-ordered manner the discourse devises. the
composition of the four elements. For it is impossible that there should be one
simple element alone; since there would not be generation. For all generation
is ascertain mutation. But all mutation is naturally adapted to be effected
in two things. All generation likewise is from contraries. But a simple
element itself, is by no means contrary to itself: for it would be itself corruptive
of itself. If, therefore, it is necessary there should be generation, it is

Tim. Plat. Ὁ θῖν ἂν ᾿ 3F

410 PROCLUS ON THE [BOOK 115.

necessary there should not be one element only. For as Hippocrates says,
if there was one element only, it would be impossible for things to be changed.
For mutation and motion are not to the similar, but to the contrary. Hence
there is not one simple element only. If, however, there is not one, but two
at least, it is necessary that these should be contraries: for generation 15
from contraries. It is necessary, therefore, that there should be two elements
having in a becoming manner a nature contrary to each other. Hence, if
they are contraries, they will be in want of a certain bond and medium, For it
is impossible that two contraries can ina becoming manner coalesce, without a
third thing ; since it is necessary that a bond should intervene, which is collective
of both. For being themselves contraries, they will avoid communion with each
other. Hence it is necessary, there should be another third thing which conjoins
them and leads them to the completion ofone thing, But it is likewise necessary
that this medium should be of a biformed' nature. For if the elements which
were to be bound were superticies, one medium would be sufficient, But since
they are solids, they are connected through two media. For the duad being
the primary leader of solids, is also allotted the primordial cause of the bonds
that are in them. Hence, likewise, Timieus calls a binding of this kind harmony,
as inserting in the extremes ἃ symmetry of communion with each other. The
analogy also which is in solids is introduced through two media. For two media
analogously come between two similar solids. If, therefore, these things are
rizhtly asserted, all the elements are four; and there is neither one alone, lest we
should destroy mutation; nor two contraries without a third thing, lest there
should not* be a bond of things which are hostile to each other, Por there will not
be order and ornament from two things most foreign to each other, Butif you con-
ceive a certain thing of this kind, the solution of the doubt will be easy, Moreover,
neither will there be alone two things which are not! contravies. For they will
not be able to operate on each other, Por whiteness suffers nothing from ἃ line,
but from blackness. Nor does heat suffer any thing from whiteness, but from
cold,

Again, therefore, it must be said still more universally, reasoning from things
known, that either there is one clement alone, or not one. If, however, there is only
one element of the world, the variety of the phenomena, the opposition of the cir-

» Por δεειδεν here, read &voedkes.
> Ove is omitted in this place in the original.

2 Ory is also here omitted in the original.

BOOK 111.} TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 411

culations, and the war of generation, will be subverted, and either all things will be
perpetual, or all things will be corruptible. Butif there is not one element only,
there will either be two elements, or more than two. And if two, they will either
be contraries, or not contraries. Tf, however, they are not contraries, there will
neither be action, nor passion, nor opposition in bodies, nor will there be genera.
tion in things which have generation. But if they are contraries, these will require
amedinm. And if this be the case, there will either be one medium, or two
media, Itis impossible, however, that there should be only one medium: for the
elements are not superticies. Hence there are two media. But if there are
two media of two things, all are four, That so many elements therefore in
number are suflicient to the world, is through these things manifest.

Let us, however, if you please, concisely survey the mathematical meaning of
the words before us, and afterwards adduce the physical theory pertaining to
them. For how of two similar superticies or planes there is one medium, and of
two similar solids two media, we will survey in number by themselves. For the
primordial and spontaneous nature of numbers, is to be embraced prior to geome-
trical necessity. Tn the first place, therefore, let there be two square numbers 9
and 16, the less of which has for its side 3, and the greater 4, By multiplying
these and making 12, we shall have an analogy in the three terms 9, 12, and 16."
Let two numbers likewise be assumed, which are not squares indeed, but at the
same time are similar planes, and Jet them be 18 and 3.2," the former being gene-
rated from the triad and hexad, but the latter from the tetrad and ogdoad. [{
therefore, we multiply either the triad by the ogdoad, or the hexad by the tetrad,
we shall have for the product 24, binding in analogy 18 to 32, according to a
sesquitertian ratio. This, however, is caused by their sides having the same ratio,
If, therefore, the sides of the assumed numbers are found to receive no analogous
mean or medium, all the planes generated from them will have but one medium,
according to the before-mentioned mode,’ But if the sides themselves should be

* For as 9 isto 12, sois 12to 10.
Ὁ The two similar plane numbers 18 and 32 here adduced by Proclus, prove that Gaston Pardies
was greatly mistaken in asserting in his Elements of Geometry, “ that if two numbers are similer planes,

the greater may be divided into as many squares as there are units in the less.” See the Translation of
this work by Harris, p. 133. For 32 eannot be divided into as many squares as there are uoits in 18.
And 32 and 18 are evidently similar plane vumbers, because their sides are analogous. For as 3 is to
6 so is 4 to 8. Υ

2 The sides of these numbers are 3, 6, 4, and 8, and they have no analogous mean. For there is no

geometrical mean between 3 and 6, nor between 4 and 8, [lence the planes generated from them, vis.

18 and 32, will have but one medium, which is 24,

412 PROCLUS ON THE [BooR 11}.

found to receive a certain analogous mean, the planes also produced from them,
will necessarily receive more than one mean. For let there be two squares 16 and
81, and let the side of the former be 4, but of the latter 9. Since, therefore, the
analogous medium between 4 and 9 is 6, according to a sesquialter ratio, it is
necessary that more than one mean should fall between them. For the tetrad
multiplied by the hexad will produce 24; but the hexad multiplied by itself will
produce the square of itself 36; and multiplied by 9, will produce 564. And there
will be a continued analogy, in the terms 16, 24, 36, 54, 81." Hence, when
the sides have an analogous mean, the planes produced from them, will have more
than one mean. Hence, too, Plato appears to me to say very cautiously, not that
there is entirely one medium in similar planes, but that it is possible for one to be
suflicient. For more than one plane being produced, one medium would be suf-
ficient to conjoin them, viz. 36 alone, according to the duple sesquiquartan ratio.”
And thus much concerning similar planes.

Let us, however, now pass onto similar solids, and survey the media in these.
In the first place, therefore, let there be two cubes 8 and 27, the former having
for its side 2, and the latter 8. Of these cubes, there will be two media, the one
being produced from twice two multiplied by three, 1. e. 12, and which on this
account 15 (4exis) a Seam, but the other from thrice three multiplied by two, 1. e.
18, and which is therefore (πλίνθος ᾽) a tile. These will make a continued analogy
with the before-mentioned cubes, according to ἃ sesquialter ratio.” And here you
taay see how each of the media has two sides from the cube placed next to it, but
the remaining side from the other cubes This however will be useful to us for
the purposes of physiology. Again, ifthe numbers were not cubes, but similar
solids, they will likewise have two analogous middles or means. For let there
be two similar solids 24 and 192, the sides of the former being 2, 3, 4, but of the
latter 4, 6, 8. And from the duad, the triad, and the ogdoad, 48 will be produced,
but from the tetrad, the hexad, and again the tetrad, the product will be 96.
Ilere too, each of the media will have two sides from that similar solid of the ex-
tremes which is next to it, but one side fromthe other cube, in the same manner

' For as 16 is to 24, sois 24 to 36, sois 36 to 54, so is 54 to 81, the ratio being sesquialter.

* For 36 is a geometrical mean between 16 and 81, according to a duple sesquiquartan ratio, For
36 contains 16 twice, and a fourth part of it, i.e. 4also; aud 81 contains 36 twice, or 72, and 0
besides, which is a fourth part of 36.

3 For riiOus here, read Au os.

* For 12 contains 8 once, and the half of 8. And ina similar manner 4%=1} and 77=11),

δ Fos 12=2x 2X3, 2 being the cube root of 8, and 3 being the cube root of 27; and 18=3X3x 2.

BOOK 111. TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 413

as in the media of the before-inentioned cubes. Hence between similar solids,
two media are sufficient; just as Plato says, that two media adapt solids to each
other, but never one medium. What then, some one may say, is there not one
medium alone of the two solid numbers 64 and 729, which medium is 216? For
G4 is a cube produced from 4, but 729 from 9. And 729 is the triple and su-
perparticular ogdoan part of 216; and after the same manner 216 of 61. For
each contains the other thrice, and three eighths of it besides.". And this will not
only be the case in these, but also in other numbers: for these are the smallest
numbers which admit of this. In answer to this however it must be said, that
the above-mentioned numbers are cubes and at the same time squares; the one,
i. e. 64, being the square of 8, but the other, i. 6. 729, being the square of 27.
Hence they have one mean, not so far as they are cubes, but so far as they have
the tetragonic peculiarity, For the tetragonic side of 64, i. e. 8, being multiplied
by 27, which is the tetragonic side of 729, produces the analogous mean 216,
according to the method delivered [by mathematicians] of finding the mean be-
tween two squares, He who makes the objection, therefore, using solids not as
solids, binds them together by one medium. But if he had surveyed them so far
as they are solid numbers and cubes, he would have found that there are also
two media between these, the one being 144, from four times 4 multiplied by 9,
but the other 324, from nine times 9 multiplied by 4.

But Democritus + doubts, how it is said that one analogous medium falls be-
tween two planes. Vor by assuming four lines in continued proportion, it may
be shown that the squares from them are analogous;’ so that two analogous
media will fall between two extreme planes. He adds, that different persons
have been involved in different difficulties through this doubt, and have been led
by it to the duplication of the cube, and such-like investigations. Plato, however,
does not say that one medium only falls between any casual planes, nor again
two media between casual solids, but between those that are similar, and in an
eflable ratio, and which have their sides arranged according to numbers. For

* Thus 729 contains three times 216, i. ὁ. 648, and three eighths of it besides. For the eighth part of
216 is 27, and thrice 27 is 81, the difference between 729 and 648. And thus also 216 contains
64 thrice, i, e. 192, and 24 besides, which is three cighths of 64. ᾿

* This is most probably the junior Democritus mentioned by Porphyry in his life of Plotinus,

" For let the lines be as the numbers 2. 4. 8. 16, which are in continued proportion; then the
squares of them 4, 16. 64. 256 will also be analogous. Foras 4is to 10, so is 16 to 64, and so is

64 to 256.

414 PROCLUS ON THE (BooK 111.

the things generated by the demiurgic God, are effable with reference to each
other, and are variegated by demiurgic numbers, as Plato says in another part of
this dialogue. And it is requisite to assume similar planes, and solid numbers,
and to survey in these the truth of the Platonic assertion. We shall show there-
fore at the end of these Commentaries, how itis possible, two right lines being
civen, to find two analogous media, selecting for this purpose the demonstration
of Archytas, rather than that of Menwchmus, because he uses conical lines, and
in like manner rather than that of Eratosthenes, because he employs the apposi-
tion of a rule."

With respect however to the things investigated, it must now be said that Plato
appears to have perfect contidence in arithmetical demonstrations, since it is also
possible to find in geometrical figures of two solids an analogous medium. For
if there are three analogous right lines, a, 2, y, in a duple ratio, the squares from
them will be in a quadruple ratio, as £4, ior, and ὃ. But the solids from them
will bein an octuple ratio, as 913, 25, and y. Hence there will be three cubes, the
extremes of which will have one analogous mean, And it is manifest that all
cubes are similar to each other. For the angles are the same in each cube and
are equal 5 and they are also comprehended by similar planes ; and the multitude
of them is equal. Moreover, we may thus demonstrate in the same manner as
Democritus, that two analogous media fall between two similar solids. For that
all squares are similar to each other is evident ; since the angles are the same
in each, and are equal, and the sides are analégous. Hence it seems that
Plato employing numbers, shows that solids are never co-adapted by one mean,
but always by two media. For in these, as you see, the extremes are cubes, and
at the same time similar planes. For 613, is from usr, and az. But the other of
the extremes 7, is from Β, and 4, and there is the same ratio of the sides. There
is therefore one medium of these, so far as they are similar planes, but not so far
as they are solids. So that you will have the solution of what is said, by assum-
ing numbers. Tor it is possible to find the same numbers which are at the same
time similar solids and planes; but it isimpossible to assume geometrical figures
which are at one and the same time similar planes and solids; since this also
may be said, that all of them being cubes, the form of them is one. But Plato

* From the most unfortunate loss of the latter part of these commentaries of Proclus, this method
likewise of his fiuding two analogous media between two given lives, is lost.

poor 11 TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 415

assuming that the means are similar to the extremes, is thus confident in the
theorem. For how would the extremes be in want of other bonds, if they had
entirely the same form? And how would the media communicate with the
extremes, and differ from them according to the sides, if they were all of them
cubes? Hence it is evident that he assumes the media, as being truly media, and
thus says, that solids are never conjoined by one, but always by two media ;
every mediam containing the communion and difference of the things of which it
is the medium. For to say universally, that all solids are connected through
two media, makes the media to be infinite. It is manifest, therefore, that he
assumes things which are most distant, and in every respect contrary to each
other, and which have all the sides opposite to all; these in natural bodies being
corporeal powers. But le does this, in order that of the media, one of them may
have a greater communion with one of the extremes, but a less with the other;
and that this may be vice versa with the other medium. Unless that also is true
which is asserted by our preceptor. For he says that it is necessary to assume
the same ratio in the media or means, as there is in the sides of the extremes.
Thus, for instance, if one of the cubes is 8, but the other 27, we shall find the
media of them, if we take their sides 2 and 3, and multiply the square of 2, i. e.
4 by 3, and the square of 3,1. 6. 9 by 2, For then the media will be 12, and 18,
which will conjoin the extremes through the sesquialter ratio, which is the ratio
of the sides of the cubes. Hence, as there is the same ratio in the sides of the
cubes, and in the media, Plato says that there is necessarily two media, and this
in amanner more consonant to the proposed physiology. For in the powers of
the elements, and in simple forms, the Demiurgus inserted communion prior to

_ things of a composite nature. We however conjoin the extremes through the

octuple ratio, the sides of them not having an octuple ratio. For the mean being
assumed in a duple ratio, the extremes will have a quadruple ratio. Thus, for
instance, in the three proposed terms, if we assume a fourth analogous term, we
shall find that as the side 2 is octuple of the side 16, so the first cube is con-
joined to the fourth through the octuple ratio. For if you add 16, as a fourth
term to 2. 4. 8, the cube from 16, is conjoined to 8, through the octuple ratio
which 64 has to 8, and 512 to 64, and 4096 which is the cube of 16;to 512." So
that the sides of the media receiving an octuple ratio, two media will fall between

" If each of the terms 2. 4. 8. 16, is cubed, the four terms 8. 64. 512. 4096, will be produced, and
C4 is octuple of 8, 512 of 64, and 4096 of 512; and the first cube 8 is conjoined to the fourth 4096,
through the octuple ratio.

416 PROCLUS ON THE [Boox 111.

the extremes. But ifa fifth analogous term is added, the sides will no longer be
conjoined in an octuple ratio but in the ratio of 16 to 15 and on this account there
will be three analogous media between the two cubes. What Plato says, therefore,
is true according to the before-mentioned method. Are not the sides also co-
adapted to his purpose? And it is requisite to say, that there may be one medium
between two cubes, yet not according to harmonic ratios. Hence, when there is
truly a colligation of the extremes through these ratios, then it is perfectly requisite
that there should be two media. Through these things, therefore, it is manifest
mathematically, that similar planes require one medium, and similar solids two
media, and that they can never be bound by one medium alone.

Being impelled, however, by these observations, let us sce how physical concep-
tions accord with them, and let us adapt probable to scientific assertions. And in the
first place, let us survey whata physical plane is, and how in planes of this kind,
there is one medium, but two in physical solids. The divine Tamblichus indeed
(for this man in a remarkable degree comprehended a theory of this kind, others
being as it were asleep, and conversant only with the mathematical meaning of
the words) appears to me to distinguish things simple from such as are composite,
parts from wholes, and in short, material powers, and material forms, from the
essences to which they give completion. And some of these, he calls superficies,
but others solids. For as a superticies is the ultimate boundary of a mathe
matical body, so likewise material form, and material power, are the morphe and
boundary of their subjects. ‘These things, therefore, being thus divided, in
things of a simple nature, one medium is suflicient, because there is [one] difference
of the reasons and forms, and according to the common bonds of the reasons
and the life. Lorin these there is one medium, Hence quality 15. uniformly
connected with quality, and power with power, according to the difference
and sameness of forms. But in things of a composite nature, there are very
properly two media. For the duad is the supplier of all composition and
separation. Every composite nature however consists of many essences and
powers. Hence, there are many media. And these at least are two-fold. For
there is one medium according to form, and another according to subject.

We however, conformably to physical principles, speak as follows, receiving
auxiliaries from what Plato says as he proceeds. Or rather, let us speak from
the beginning. There are some physiologists then, who ascribe one power to
each of the elements ; to fire indeed heat, to air frigidity, to water moisture, and

’
ty earth dryness; in so doing entirely wandering from the truth. In the first

ROOK 111. TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 417

place, because they subvert the world and order, For it is impossible for things
to be co-adapted to each other, when they possess the most contrary powers,
unless they have something incommon. In the next place, they make the most
contrary natures allied to each other, viz. the hot to the cold, and the moist to
the dry.’ It is necessary however, to make things which are hostile more remote
than things which are less foreign. For such is the nature of contraries. In the
third place, therefore, the first two powers will have no sympathy whatever with
the rest; but will be divulsed? from each other. For it is impossible to say
What is common to humidity and frigidity. And in addition to all these things,
aa the elements are solids, they will not be conjoined to each other by any
medium. It has however been shown that it is not possible for solids to be
conjoined through one medium. Nor can they be conjoined without a medium.
For this is alone the province of things that are perfectly without interval.

But some others, as Ocellus, who was the precursor of Timwus, attribute two
powers to each of the elements, to fire indeed heat and dryness, to air, heat and
moisture, to water, moisture and coldness, and to earth, coldness and dryness,
And these things are written by this man in his treatise On Nature. In what.
therefore, do these err who thus speak ? In the first place, indeed, wishing to dis-
cover the common powers in the elements, in order that tiey may preserve the
co-arrangement of them with each other, they no more assign communion than
separation to them, but equally honour their hostility and their harmony. What
kind of world therefore, will subsist from these, what order will there be of things
which are without arrangement and most foreign, and of things which are most
allied and co-arranged? For things which in an equal degree are hostile and
peaceful, will in an equal mode dissolve and constitute communion. But this
communion being similarly dissolved, and similarly implanted, the universe will
no more exist than not exist. In the second place, they do not assign the
greatest contrariety to the extremes, but to things most remote from the extremes ;
though we every where see, that of homogencous natures those which are most
distant have the nature of contraries, and not those which are less distant. How
likewise did nature arrange them, since they are most remote in their situation
from each other? Was it not by perceiving their contrariety, and that the third
was more allied than the last to the first? How also did she arrange the motions

δ For ro evayrwrara here, read ra evayrwwrara, and for ry θερμὸν re ψυχρῳ, το Oeppor, x. XA.
* For arnprnyeva in this place, I read διηρημενα.

Tim. Plat. Vou, I. 3G

418 PROCLUS ON THE Peeve,

of them, since fire is most light and tends upward, but earth is most heavy and
tends downward? But whence were the motions ofthem which are most contrary
derived, if not from nature! If therefore, nature distributed to them most contrary
motions, it is evident that they are themselves most contrary. For 45. the
motions of simple beings are simple, and those things are simple of which
the motions are simple, thus also those things are most contrary of which
the motions are most contrary. And this may occasion some one to wonder at
Aristotle, who in what he says about motion, places earth as most contrary to
fire; butin what he says about powers, he makes the most remote of similar
natures to be more friendly than those that are proximate, when they are moved
with most contrary motions, Por as the clements have contrary places in- their
positions, as they have contrary motions in dations, as they have contrary powers,
eravity and levity, through which motions subsist in their forms, thus also they
have contrary passive qualities. Aristotle Iimself likewise manitests that earth is
contrary to fire. For wishing to show that itus necessary there should) be more
bodies than one, he says: ‘ Moreover, af earth exists, itis also necessary that
fire should exist. For in things, one of the contraries of which naturally is, the
other likewise has a natural subsistence.” So that neither was he able afler any
other manner to show that there are more clements than one, than by asserting
that fire is contrary to earth,

Farther still, as the elements are solids, how can they be bound together through
one medium? For this is impossible im solids, as we have before observed.
Hence those who assert these things, neither speak mathematically nor physically,
but unavoidably errin both these respects. For physical are derived from mathe-
matical entities. Jundus therefore alone, or any other who rightly follows hin,
neither attribules one nor two powers alone, to the elements, but triple powers ; fo fire
indeed, tcnuity of parts, acuteness and facility of motion ; to air, lenuity of parts,
obtuseness, and facility of motion ; to water, grossness of parts, obtuseness, and facility
of motion ; and to earth, grossucss of parts, obtusencss, and difficulty of motion, But
this is in order that each of the elements may have two powers, cach’ of which is
common to the clement placed next to it, and one power which is different, in
the same manner as it was demonstrated in mathematical numbers and figures 5
this different power being assumed from one of the extremes 3; and also in’ order
that earth according to all the powers, may subsist oppositely to fire; and that

For; cay here, it is obviously necessary to read exurepar,

BOOK 1411. TIMA&US OF PLATO. 419

the extremes may have two media, and the continued quantities two; the latter
having solids for the media, but the forme., common powers. For let fire
indeed be attenuated in its parts, acute, and easily moved. For it has an attenu-
ated essence, and is acute, as having a figure of this hind ji. οὐ a pyramidal figure],
and on this account.is incisive and fugitive,’ and permeates through all the other
elements. It is also moved with facility? as being most near to the celestial
hodies, and existing in them. For the celestial fire itself is moved with celerity, as
is likewise sublunary fire, which is perpetually moved in conjunction with it, and
according to one circle, and one impulse. Since therefore, earth is contrary to
fire, it has contrary powers, viz. grossness, obtuseness, and difficulty of motion,
all which we see are present with it. But these being thus hostile, and being
solids, are also similar solids. For their sides and their powers are analogous.
For as the gross is to the attenuated, so is the obtuse to the acute, and that which
is moved with difficulty, to that which is moved with facility. But those are
similar solids of which the sides that constitute the bodies are analogous. Tor
the sides are the powers of which bodies consist. ence, as fire and earth are
similar bodies, and similar solids, two analogous media fall between them; and
each of the media will have two sides of the extreme situated next to it, and the
remaining side from the other extreme. ITence, since fire has for its three
physical sides the triple powers, tenuity, acuteness, and facility of motion, by
taking away the middle power, acuteness, and introducing instead of it obtuse-
ness, we shall produce air, which has two sides of fire, but one of earth, or two
powers of fire, but one of earth; as itis fit that what is near should rather com-
municate with it, than what is separated in the third rank from it.

Again, since earth has three physical powers, contrary to the powers of fire,
viz. grossuess of parts, obtuseness, and difficulty of motion; by taking away
diffeully of motion, and introducing facility of motion, we shall produce water,
which consists of gross parts, is obtuse, and is easily moved; and which has
indeed, two sides or powers common with earth, but receives one from fire.
And thus these media will be spontaneously conjoined with each other; com-
inunicating indeed in twofold powers, but diflering in similitude by one power ;
and the extremes will be bound togetiier by two media. Each element also will
thus be in a greater degree conjoined to, than separated from the element which is

* For vearioy in this place, read νπαικτικον τ"

* Instead of axernros here, it is necessary to read evaeynror.

420 PROCLUS ON THE [ποοκ 111.

near to it; and one world will be perfectly effected through all of them, and one
harmonious order, through the predominance of analogy. Thus also, of the two
cubes 8 and 27, the medium 12 being placed next to 8, will have two sides of
this, but one side of 37. For 12 is produced by 2 Χ 2 Χ 8. But itis vice versa
with 18 For this is produced by 3 X 3 X 2. And the side of 27 is 3, in the
same manner as 2 is the side of 8. The physical dogmas therefore of Plato about
the elements of the universe, accord with mathematical specalations,

Hence these things being thus determined, let us physically adapt them to the
words of Plato. We calla [physical] plane or superticies therefore, that which
has two powers only, but a [physical] solid that which has three powers. And
we say, that if we fashion bodies from two powers, one medium would conjoin
the elements to each other. But since, as we assert, bodies possess triple pow-
ers, they are bound together by two media. For there are two common powers
of the adjacent media, and one power which is different. And the extremes
themselves, if they consisted of two powers, would be conjoined through one
medium. For let tire, if you will, be alone attenuated and easily moved; but
earth on the contrary, have alone grossness of parts aud immobility, One me-
dium therefore, will be sufficient for these. For grossness of parts and facility of
notion, and tenuity of parts, and difliculty of motion, are all that ts requisite to
the colligation of both. Since however, each of the elements is triple, the extremes
require two media, and the things themselves that are adjacent, are bound toges
ther throngh two powers. For solids, and these are things that have triple con-

trary powers, are never co-adapted by one medium,

“Thus therefore, the divinity placing water and air in the middle of
fire and earth, and rendering them as much as possible analogous to
each other, so that what fire is to air, that air might be to water, and
what air is to water, that water might be to earth, he bound together
and constituted the heaven, visible and tangible.”

Some of the Platonists, being impelled. by the assertions of Aristotle, extend
through the whole world one passive matter, not at all different from that of the
heavens, and in consequence of embracing certain barbaric opinions, give to the
world a fifth body, end refer the doctrine concerning it to Plato, For Aristotle,
following these opinions, introduced a filth element. And this ina certain re-
spect he obscurely signifies, adducing the observations of the Barbarians as a

BOOK 111. TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 421

testimony of the perpetuity and sameness of the motion of ether. But others
assert, that the heavens are of a diflerent essence, as having a different form of
life, a more simple motion, and a more perpetual nature ; but that Plato is now
speaking about the sublunary elements, and adorns these by analogies. These
menindeed, speak rightly, both with respect to things, and the opinion of Plato,
in asserting that the nature of the heavens is different from mutable, and in short,
material things; but at the same time ' they neglect the Platonic words, in which
the philosopher says, that “ ¢he Demiurgus bound together and constituted the hea-
ven [or the universe} through the analogy of the four elements ;”? and again, in another
place, “ that he eluborated the idea of the stars, for the most part from fire.”

Let us therefore, if you are willing, preserving the opinions of both these men,
perspicuously show, that the whole world consists of the four elements, and that
the heavens are of a different essence [from the sublunary region]. And in the
first place let us discuss the latter, For it is necessary, either that the heavens,
should be entirely different from the four elements, being, as some sav, a fifth ele-
ment; or that the heavens should consist of the four elements ; or from some one
of the four; or from more than one. And if* the heavens consist of the four, they
either consist of elements specifically the same with the sublunary, or of others.
Tf however, that element is different from the four, how does Plato say that the
whole world consists of the four elements? But if it is constituted from one of the
four, how does he say shortly after, that the stars consist for the most part of fire?
And if the world is constituted from more elements than one, [but not from all
the four] how will it happen that a divine body will not be imperfect, and how wiil
it possess all things, though the earth, and in short the sublunary region, have all
things? Bat, if the world consists of all the elements, how does it happen, that in
the heavens the composition of them is indissoluble, but in these [(sublunary]
realms is dissoluble. For they will not be indissoluble on account of equal domi-
nion. For whence, if there is equal dominion, is the variety in the heavens
produced ? And how does Plato say that fire for the most part predominates there,
if there is an equal domination? But if the heavens consist of four elements spe-
cifically different from the four sublunary elements, how, since they are com-
posites, are the heavens moved with a simple motion? Where also are the whole-
nesses of the things which are there mingled !

' For ἡμῶν in this place, it is necessary to read opws.
* Ecis omitted here in the original,

409 PROCLUs ON THE [BOOK ti.

Such therefore being the doubts, it is better to say that all heaven consists of fire,
which there predominates ; but that it also comprehends according to cause, the powers
of the other elements, such as the solidity and stability of earth, the conglutinating
and uniting power of water, and the tenuity and transparency of air. For as
earth comprehends all things terrestrially, so the heavens comprehend all things
according to a fiery characteristic. So that one thing [1 e. tire} has dominion,
and the other elements are comprehended init) causally. Tt is necessary how-
ever to think, that the fire which is there, is not the same with sublunary tire, but
that itis divine fire, consubsistent with life, and an imitation of intellectual fire.
And that the fire which is here 15 wholly material, venerated, and corraptible.
Genuine fire therefore, is in the heavens, and total fire for the wholeness of tire]
is there. But earth is there according to cause, being another species of earth,
and as itis fit it should, connascent with divine fire, possessing solidity alone, in
the same manner as fire possesses an illuminative power, And as this celestial
fire is not caustic, neither is the earth which is there gross, but the suminit of each
is there. And as genuine and truly existing fire are in’ the heavens, so real earth
is here, and the wholeness of earth 5 but tire is here according to participation,
and materially, in the same manner as earth is primarily. For that which remains
is in each appropriately ; there the summit of earth (or earth according tu cause 5}
but here the dregs of fire. But this is evident from the moon which possesses
something solid and dark, and obstructing the light. For to obstruct is alone the
province of earth, The stars also obstruct the sight, as producing a shadow
above themselves. And it is evident this being the case, that since fire is in the
heavens, and also earth, the diaphanous media between these, are likewise
necessarily there printarily 5 air indeed, such as the most pure and agile air which
is here; but water, such as the most exhaleable with us, and even still purer than

these; in order that all things may be in all, but appropriately in each, Lor on

this account we characterize fire by visibility, which is deservedly the peculiarity of

all fire. For as carth is primarily tangible, so fire is primarily visible ; because it
is not in want of any one of the other clements, in order that it may be visible, as
the others are inowant of the iluminative power of fire to their visibility. But fire
becomes itself visible through itself. And this is common to all fire. Phe
question therefore is solved.

That all the progression of the elements however, may become manifest to us,
and the gradations of them, itis requisite that we should begin the theory of them
from on high, ‘These four elements therefore, fire and air, water and earth,

υουκ I.) TIM AEUS OF PLATO. 423

subsist primarily, and uniformly according to cause, in the Detuinreus of wholes.
For all causes are antecedently contained in him, according to one comprehen-
sion. Elence he comprebends the intellectual, divine, undetiled, and vicorous
power of fire; the connective and vivilic cause of air; the prolitic and regermi-
nating hyparxis of water; and the firm,’ stable, immutable, and unvacillating
idea of earth, The theologist therefore, knowing these things, says of the
Demiurgus,

ilis body's boundless, tim, and tiery-brights
And,

"The wide-extended all-pervading air,
Forms lis broad shoulders, back, and bosom fair,
Hlis middle zone ’s the spreading sea profound,

Ihis feet, the roots deep-fix'd within the solid ground,

But from these demiurgic causes, a progression takes place of these four elements
into the universe, though not immediately into the sublunary world. For how
can the most immaterial natures give subsistence without a medium, to the most
material; and immoveable natures, to those that are in every respect moved? For
the progression of things is nowhere without a medium, but exists according to a
well-ordered gradation, The generations also into these material, dissipated, and
dark realms, are effected through things of a proximate nature. For these are
capable of being fashioned by the junior Gods, and especially so far as they have
a tangible composition, But the Demiurgus is the father of greater and more
beautiful effects. :

Since therevore, the elements in the Demiureus himself are intellects, and impar-
ticipable intellectual powers, what will be the first progression of them? Ts it not
evident, that they will stil continue to be intellectual powers, but participated by
mundane natures? For the progression from imparticipable intellect is proximately
to that intellect which is participated. And in short, the progression from impartici-
pable causes, is to those that are participated, and from supermundane to mundane
forms. These powers however, still remaining intellectual, but participable, what
kind of diminution will they have? Is it not this, that they will no longer be

* For yovincsin this place, it is necessary to read povipos.

424 PROCLUS ON THE foun ti,

intellectual? But I call intellectual natures, the forms of intellect, and of an
essence truly intellectual. Being however, participable, but no longer intellec-
tual, it is evident that they will not be immoveable. And not being immoveable,
they will be self-motive. For these are proximately suspended from immoveable
natures; and the progression is from things essentially intellectual, to those that
are so by participation, and from immoveable beings, to those that move them-
selves. These elements therefore, will subsist in life, and will be intellectual
according to participation, and self-motive. But itis evident what that is which
will proceed from this. For the descent from life is to animal; for this 15
proximate to life. And from that which is self-motive according to essence,
to that which is selfmotive according to the participation of life. And so far
indeed, as the elements proceed from life to animal, they are changed; but so
far as they proceed from that which is immaterial to immaterial natures (1 mean
immaterial as with reference to mutable matter,) and from a divine life, to a
divine essence, they are assimilated to truly immaterial essences. Here there-
fore, taking away the immaterial, and the immutable, you will make the material
and the mutable. And through this they will be inferior to the natures prior to
them; but through the order and symmetry of their motions, and the immutability
in things mutable, they will be assimilated to them, If therefore, you also take
away this order, and survey the great confusion and instability of the elements,
you will have the last of all things, and those which are allotted an ultimate
separation, being the dregs of all the elements prior to these. Hence, of the
elements, some are immoveable, intellectual, demiurgic ; others are intellectual
indeed essentially, and immoveable, but are participated by mundane natures ;
others are self-motive, and have their existence in lives ; others are self-motive,
but live (i. δ. are animals], and are not lives only; others are alter-motive, but
are moved in an orderly manner; and others, are disorderly, tumultuous and
confused,

The difference of the elements therefore, being so great, what occasion is there
to disturb what is here said by Pl: to, as if the elements existed only in one way ?
For it is necessary to survey the clements in as many ways as there are media
between the Demiurgus and sublunary natures; because their progression 15
through media. The elements therefore, are in the heavens, but not! after the

* Ov is omitted here in the original.

BOOK 11|.} TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 425

-V

same manner as tn genesinrzic bodies 3 for neither do they subsist in the heavens,
alter the same manner as in the Demiurzus. But prior to the sublunary elements,
there are, the celestial fire (and this light manifests which is a species of fire) and
celestial earth. Or Why does the moon being illuminated produce a shadow, and
Why does not the solar light pervade through the whole of it? It is also necessary
that the middle elements should. be in the heavenly bodies, but that ditl-rent ele-
ments should abound in different parts of the celestial regions. And in some
places indeci, tt is necessary that tne fiery nature should widely scatter its splendour,
on account of solidity, as in the starry bodies ; but in others, that it should be concealed
from us, as in the spheres that carry the stars. Lence, the peculiarity of all fire is vist-
bility, but neither heat, nor floating, And solidity and tangivility, are the character-

“astics of all earth, but not gravity, sinking, and a downward tendency. It therefore,
We assume these peculiarities, we shall find that fire and earth subsist also analo-
gously in the heavens ; fire indeed, defining the essence of them, but each of the
other elements being consubsistent with it.

Por again, this also may be said, that causes and the efficients of certain things,
every where antecedently comprehend the powers of the natures which are
adorned and produced by them 3 and especially when they produce according to
nature, For thus nature possesses the form of the teeth, the eves and the hands,
through which also she gives morphe to matter, And not every eye possesses
interval, but there is something in which it has an impartible form. Again, soul
is one, and contains in itself that which is divine, and that whieh is irrational.
And in the divine part of itself, it comprehends rationally the irrational powers,
by which it governs, and arranges ina becoming manner irrationality. And
neither is the unity of the soul, nor its multitude destroyed through different
essences. For these things subsist in one way in the superior, and in another in
the inferior part. Ina similar manner, the world also is one and many ; for the
heavens are one thing, and generation another. And ceneration ts adorned from
the heavens ; and these elements are in the heavens, but celestiaily. For they
are in soul, psyehically, in intellect, intellectually, and in the Demiurgus, demi-
urgically. For how could the sublunary elements be governed by the etiluxions
from these natures, unless they also subsisted in them after another manner?
Thus also in the arts, we may see that the physician does not preside over the
carpenter ; for the physician does not anteccdently comprehend in himself the
works of the carpenter. Nor does the mechanic preside over the cook ; for the
former does not antecedently comprehend things pertaining to banquets. But it

Tim. Plat. : Vou. I. 41]

426 PROCLUS ON THE ; [8οοκ lt.

is the province of that which antecedently comprehends the whole power of a
thing, to govern it. Hence it is evident that the mechanist entirely presides over
the carpenter, and the physician over the cook. If therefore, the heavens govern
all generation, the elements will be contained in them primarily.

The Pythagoreans however say, that the clements may be surveyed in the
heavens in a twefuld respect, in one way indeed prior to the sun, and in another
after it: for the moon is ethereal earth. This therefore, the theologist clearly

asserts. Lor he says:

Another boundless earth besides he made,
Which Gods se/ene, mortals meae call,

With num’rous houses, ties, mounts adorn’d.

But they say that the planct Mercury is ethereal water, Venus air, and the sun
fire, And again, that Mars is eclestial fire, Jupiter celestial air, Saturn celestial
water, and the inerratic sphere celestial earth. And thus speaking ina divided
manner they make the extremes to be every where fire and earth, but conjoin the
ethereal natures through media, viz. through Venus and Mercury: for both these
have a collective and unifying power. But they conjoin the celestial natures,
through Saturn and Jupiter: for through these that which is connective of wholes,
and the commensurate, accede to all things. What we now say, however, is con-
formable to the history delivered by many [of the Pythagoric doctrines], For
that this mode of distribution is not Platonic, we may learn from this that Plato
arranges the sun immediately above the moon, afterwards Venus, and then
Mercury.

It is necessary therefore to understand, that all the elements are in each of the
celestial spheres, since in the sublunary elements also, each participates of the
rest. For fire participates of earth; since being moved with facility, it would
most rapidly perish, ifit was entirely without stability. And earth participates of
fire; for being moved with difficulty, it requires heat to resuscitate and restore it.
As this therefore is the case in these sublunary elements, much more must all the
elements be in each of the celestial spheres, though some of the heavenly bodies
participate more’ of fire, others of air, others of water, and others of earth.

Again therefore, from the beginning we must say, that the elements being con-

‘Madey is emitted in this place in the original,

ev aa ae Sen eee oe te ee! ee δὰ τρια»

BOOK 111. TIM.GUS OF PLATO. 427

ceived in one way as unmingled, but in another as mingled, the first’ mixture of
them produces the heavens, which contain all things according to a fiery charac-
teristic. [But the second mixture of them produces the sublunary rezion]," in which
all things subsist according to a middle characteristic. And the last mixture of
them produces the subterranean realins, in which the dregs of all things are con-
tained, Pyriphlegethon, as they say, and Acheron, Ocean and Cocytus. Hence
it may be said, that the four unmingled elements are every where, and that there
are five, all heaven being assumed as one element; but that the last elements are
comprehended in she earth. The five elements however, are said to be the ele-
ments of the world ; and on this account the world derives. its completion from
them. But it must be said that the four elements are the elements both of the
heavens and of generation. Hence the heavens are of a fifth essence, besides the
four elements ; but are mingled from the simple elements. For these sublunary
four are not in the heavens, but the summits of them are there, and all the four
elements unmingled, and separated from each other by their proper forms. And
these assertions are most concordant with Plate, who at one time says that the
heavens consist of the four elements, bound together by analogy, and that the
whole world is constituted from these; but shortly after fashions the five fizures,
and calls them five worlds. For these things give a fifth essence to the heavens,
introduce a tetractys of the elements, and accord with truth. For all things are
inthe heaven according to a fiery mode; and on this account it is a simple body,
different from that which is sublunary, and. truly comprehends all things pertain-
ing to these material masses. We must not therefore admit that all earth is heavy,
nor that all fire is light; but sublunary earth aud fire are perhaps things of this
kind, while those in’ the heavens subsist after another manner. For the solidity
and stability which are there are derived from earth. And hence each of the
spheres is not moved according to the whole of itself [but revolves round an im-
moveable centre]. But the celestial light, and facility of motion, are derived
from fire. The connective and transparent nature of the heavens are from air 5
and their equability and smoothness, from water.

That Plato however, affords us these auxiliaries, he clearly shows shortly after,
whenhe says, “ that hewho constituted the world composed itfromall fire water, airand
earth, leaving nopartnor power ofany oncof them externally.” For he does not sa y from

“ae appears.that the words τῆς ἕε deurepas τον υποσεληνὴῆν τόπον, are wanting in this place, in the
orginal. ;

428 PROCLUS ON THE (BOOK "11,

tire or water simply, but from a// fire and all water, through which he indicates
that there is much fire in the universe, and of a different nature, and also much
water, and which is essentially different. Moreover, the theology of the Assyrians
hich was unfolded into light from divinity, delivers the same Wangs. For in that
theology, the Demiurgus is said to have made the whole world from fire, water,
carth, and all-nourishing ether or air; and the artificer is said to liave fashioned the
world as it were withhis own hands. For it says,“ there was a certain other inass
of fire.” But he fashioned, as it were manually, all things, in order that he might
conglomerate the mundane body, “ that the world might) become manifest, and
might not appear membrancous ;” which is the same thing as to say, that it might
not alone bear the obscure and imbecile vestiges of forms. For the word mem-
brancous signifies the ladistinct subsistence of reasons (or forms). As we have
said therefore, the Oracles also bear witness to what is asserted by Plato, since
they too generate the world from the four elements. And thus much concerning
the concord of philosophers about this particular: for we shall see in what fol-
lows, if there is any difference respecting it in the doctrine of Plato,

It is manifest however, that the elements are every where bound to each other
by analogy." For analogy, as we lave said, imitates divine union, and is a de-
miurgic bond. And the analogy indeed in mathematics, possesses the accurate
and the scientific: for the ratios there are immaterial. Bat in physies this is no
longer similarly the case. For the analogy which is in’ the heavenly bodies
participates of a certain accuracy 3 but in sublunary natures the analogy is less
accurate, because it is Conversant with matter. Again therefore, the order of the
elements becomes apparent, and we see that Plato very properly procures from
the mathematics belief in. physical reasons. For they are causes, and the demi-
urgic progression is effected through soul. The veneration also of physical es-
sences appropriately proceeds through media; and celestial matures are ina
certain respect more allied to accurate reasons, but sublunary natures have an
obscure truth. Plato therefore knowing these things, adds, * as much as possible,”
in order that you may not entirely require in’ physical reasons a mathematical
accuracy. For if you are willing to evamine each of the elements, you will perceive
an abundant mirturein it. Thus, for instance, air is not simply a thing of attenuated
parts. Furit has also sumcthing gross, nebulous, and aqueous. Nor ts water simply
casily moved. And the part of fire itself which is mingled with air, resembles the

1 Instead of ors de avadoyia δεδεικται ἰὼ this place, it is necessary to read, ore δε avaduyeg δεδησεται.

noow it] TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 429

obtuseness of air; and this necessarily. For it is requisite to conjoin the summits
of secondary with the dregs of primary natures.

Farther stall, we ought also to understand the manner in which Plato constitutes
the analogy. Hor he begins from the media, and preserves the order of the terms,
just as the Demiurgus made all things to be in each other,’ together with preserv-
ing the distinction of them; and he denominates all this contexture a bond and
composition, For it is a bond indeed, as imparting union and analogy from the
demiurgic cause 5 but it is a composition, as being thence produced according to
essence itself Por some one may bind things which he did not compose. ‘This
however, is not the case with the Demiurgus, but he is the father, he is the uni-
fying cause, and he is the guardian of all his own works. In addition to these
things also, it must be observed that Plato assumes here, as we have said, the geo-
metric mean, and indicates that this is analogy, For it is the peculiarity of this
middle to have the same ratio, Tlence some persons properly call. it analogy,
The other media therefore, appear to be the suppliers of more partial goods to the
world, and not to be the sources: of the order which proceeds through all things,
and of uninterrupted connexion, For in the generation of the soul the other*
media are assumed for the sake of binding together the geometric ratios, and are
comprehended in the whole geometric middle, as in that which is alone analogy.

“Hence from these and things of this kind, which are four in num-
ber, the body of the world was generated, being concordant through
analogy, and possessing friendship through these, so as to conspire into
union with itself, and to be indissoluble by any other nature than by him
through whom it was bound.”

That the tetrad itself of the elements, primarily proceeded from all-perfeect ani-
mal, (or it was the intelligible tetrad) and that on this account. all things enist
_tetradically, becomes 1 think evident through the words before us + and also that
generation proceeds to the tetrad from the monad through the duad. For the
world is only-begotten and one. Afterwards we find it is nec essary that there
should be the visible and tangible in it; in the next place, we find that these being
much separated from each other, are in want of a certain third thing; and in the

" For ev ἀλλοις here, it is necessary to read ey αλληλοι».
* There is an owission in this place of at adda.

420 PROCLUS ON THE [ποοκ 11,

third place, that the medium is biformed, and thus we arrive at the tetrad. This
therefore, is what the Pythagoric hymn says about number: That it proceeds from
the secret recesses of the monad, until it arrives at the divine tetrad. And this gene-
rates the decad, which is the mother of all things. TVius also the father of the Golden
Verses, celebrates the tetractys itself, as the fountain of perennial nature. For
the world being adorned by the tetrad, which proceeds fromthe monad and triad,
is terminated by the decad, as being comprehensive of all things, That the world
likewise is one through analogy, subsisting from these elements, and from such
like things according to powers, and from so many according to quantity, Plato
clearly manifests by saying, that not the sublunary region, but the body of the
universe, Was venerated from the four elements. But the friendship of the world
is the end of the analogy, through which also the world is) saved by itself Por
every thing which is friendly, wishes to be preservative of that to which it is
friendly : but every thing foreign turns from, and does not even wish that to exist
to which it is abhorrent; 50 that the nature which is friendly to, is preservative of
itself. The world however, is friendly to itself through analogy and) sympathy,
and therefore it preserves itself! Butat is also preserved by the fabrication of
things, receiving from it an ineflable guard. Tfence also, the theologist denomi-
nates the bond derived from the Demiurgus strong, as Night is represented say-
ing to the Demiurgus,

But when your power around the whole has spread

A strong coercive bond.

Analogy however, imparts this friendship to the world, by connecting and com-
prehending the powers of the elements that are init. Total nature likewise im-
parts it, producing the sympathy and harmony of contraries. But prior to nature,
soul imparts it, weaving the one life of the world, and co-adapting all the parts of
it to the whole. And still much prior to these, it is imparted by intellect, which
produces in all things, order, perfection, and one connexion. And even prior to
an intellectual essence, the one divinity of the universe, and all the Gods that are
allotted the world, are the primordial causes of the union that is init. But much
prior to this, the one Demiurgus imparts this friendship to the world. This
greatest however, and most perfect of bonds, which the father on all sides throws
round the world, as being eflective of the friendslip and harmonious communion
init, is denominated by the [Chaldean] Oracles, the bond of love heavily-laden with
fire. For they say, “ The paternal selfbegotten intellect understanding bis works,

BOOK 111.} TIM.LUS OF PLATO. 43h

disseminated in all things, the bond of love heavy with fire.” And they add the
cause why he did this, “ That all things might remain' loving for an infinite time,
woven together intellectaally in all the light of the father.” For on account of this
Jove, all things are adapted to each other, “That the elements of the world might
remain running in love.” Hence, the mundane elements are bound together,
possess friendship, and this indissoluble for an infinite time, through the will of

2

the father. If also together with these,” you are willing to survey the super-
mundane cause of fhendship, you will find this likewise celebrated by theologists.
For the Demiurgus produced Venus, in order that she might beautifully illuminate
all mundane natures, with order, harmony, and communion. And he also pro-
duced Love as her attendant, who is the unifying cause of wholes. The Demiur-
cus however, likewise possesses in himself the cause of Love. For he is “ Metis
the first generator, and much-pleasing Love.” Hence he is very properly the
cause of friendship and concord to his fabrications. And perhaps looking to this
Pherecydes said, that Jupiter when he was about to fabricate, was changed into Love.
Because however, he constituted the world from contraries, he led it to concord
and friendship, and disseminated in all things sameness and union which pervade
through wholes.

Through these things therefore, the world is indissoluble, and it is likewise so
from its maker. For how can that which generates all things by its very
existence, be the cause of corruption to all things? Besides, every thing which i8
corrupted is corrupted either from = matter, or from form, or from its maker; and
from each of these in a two-fold respect. For it is corrupted from the maker,
either being imbecile, as a partial nature; or changing its intention, as ἃ partial
sou]. Itis also corrupted from form, either not being well constituted at first,
or being dissolved in the course of time. And it is corrupted from matter,
either being inwardly deprived of symmetry, or sustaining violence externally.
As corruption therefore, is produced in a sixfold manner, Plato subverts all the
modes of it. For the world is not in either way corrupted from its maker. Not
from his want of power, because the Demiurgus is the best of causes, and imbeci-
lity has no place with him, since he governs the universe by inflexible powers.

* For Mn ée here, read Mnyyy δε.

* In the original πρὸ rovrey, but as Venus is posterior to the Demiurgus, who has previously been
said to be the cause of friendship to the world, it appears to me that we should read wpos rovrwy, oF
rather πρὸς rovrocs, as xpes seldom signifies wilh, when it governs the genitive,

432 PROCLUS ON THE [RooK 11.

Nor from his will, becanse he does not at different times will different things ;

and because, to be willing to dissolve that which 15 beautifully harmonized, and ©

well constituted, is the province of an evil nature. But he is good, and the
universe is beautifully harmonized. It is a similar thing therefore, for the Demiur-
gus to be willing that the universe should not exist, and for him not to be good.
Nor is the world corrupted from form; for itis harmonized according to analogy,
and is perfect and one. And through harmony indeed, form vanquishes; but
through wholeness and onlyness, the world will never be deprived of congruity,
Nor is it corrupted from matter. For its inherent analogy subverts the pnvation
of symmetry. But its onlyness removes it from the reach of external viclence,
By no means therefore, is it possible tor the universe to be corrupted. Why then
does Plato add, that it cannot be corrupted, except by him by whom it was
bound? Itis evident indeed, that it every where belongs to him who binds, to
dissolve. And you may assume from this, that the world is generated in such ἃ
way,' as alone subsisting from another cause. For as it is not dissoluble by any
thing else than its generator; so it is not generated by any other than by him
who bound it, which is, as we have said, through his possessing the cause of the
dissolution of that whichis bound. What is here said also has another indica-
tion. For the universe is indissoluble by every thing, except by him who bound
v. For it is not indissoluble by him; since this is a small thing to assert. But
on the contrary, itis eternally bound by him. As if therefore it should be said,
that he who possesses scientific Knowledge, ts meapable of being deceived by all
things except by intellect; for he is not incapable of being deceived by intellect ;
since it is not sufficient to intellect that the soul is not deceived, but that it
possesses wisdom; thus also the world is not indissoluble by hitn who bound it,
but is rather bound by him. For by other things it is indissoluble ; bat to him it
rather belongs to bind, and not to dissolve. Just as it belongs to the sun to
Huminate, and not to darken. For this is the province of certain other things.

* But the composition of the world received one whole of each of the
fourelements. For it was constituted by him who composed it, from ald
fire, water, airand earth; and he did not leave externally any part or
power of any one of the clements.”

* Instead of euros here, it s requisite to read ovrws.

πθοκ 111] TIM/EUS OF PLATO. 133

Plato knew, as we have before observed, that there are many differences of
fire, of water, and of each ofthe other elements; from all which, he says, the worid
derives its completion; and he confers this as the thira demiurgic gift on the
world. So that we must not wonderif he leaves the summits of the four elements
in the heavens, but the middle progressions of them in the sublunary regions, and
the last dregs of them in the subterranean realms, distributing the elements analo-
gous to the three demiurgi Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto. For each whole of
them is assumed, and the universe consists of all of each; whether you speak of
that which is primarily fire, and is celestial, or of that which has a middle rank,
or of that which is the last, which is disorderly and confused, and is coloured
over with certain fiery qualities. Kor such as we suppose the confused and in-
ordinate to be, such especially appears to be each of the subterranean elements ;
because fabrication in proceeding, ends gradually in that which is unadorned,
and which participates in the smallest degree of order. These things, therefore,
are manifest.

We say, however, that part and power differ; so far as a part of each of the
elements, Is of a similar essence with the whole of which it is a part, but power
gives completion to each of the elements, For a part of fire is fire; Sut power is
one of the many peculiarities in fire, such as motion, acuteness, and tenuity. Itis
evident, therefore, that all tire, and all the powers of fire, and of the other elements,
are comprehended in the world. What then, some one may say who is impelled
by the divine wisdom which is beyond the confines of common philosophy ;'
who divides all things, into the empyrean, the etherial, and the material;* and
who calls the visible alone the material world, what shall we assert of the firma-
ments that are above the world, whether it be requisite to call them Olympus, or
empyrean, or ethers? May we not say, that though those firmaments should not
consist of the four elements, again it is true, that no part of the four, is external to
the universe, or rather, as Plato says, is erternally. For the term ectlernally, is
more emphatical, because it manifests, that the violence which these clements
bring with them, is not within the universe, but externally invades it. For those
lirmaments are fiery, and are comprehended in the whole world. And again it

* Proclus means by this, the wisdom of the Chaldeans, as delivered in their Oracles.

> According to the Chaldeans there are seven corporeal worlds, one empyrean and the first; after
Wis, three ethereal; and then three material worlds, which consist of the inerratic sphere, the seven
planetary spheres, and the sublunary region.

Tim. Plat, Vou. i. 41

434 PROCLUS ON THE [ϑοοκ "17.

is true, that there is no fire out of the universe, but the universe comprehends the
whole of it, such as the universe is, and such as is the amplitude of its bulk. So
that the assertion of Tiinwus 15. perfectly true. But why then, some one may say,
does he give subsistence to the universe, beginning from the inerratic sphere? Is it
net because it belongs to a natural philosopher to discourse about visible, and in
short, sensible natures? Perhaps, too, he very properly alone makes mention of
these, as pertaining to the fabrication of Jupiter. For of those [10 e. the empyrean,
etherial, and material worlds] the etherial is most vivific, but the empyrean is
paternal, and the material is demiurgic. For the fire which is the first beyond, did
not englose its’ power in works, but in intellect : for the artificer of the fiery (i.e. the
empyrean) world ts an intellect * of intellect, says the Oracle. Unless it be requisite
to say this, that Plato produces soul analogous to the etheral worlds, but intellect,
to the empyrean world. Ifence also he says, that soul was mingled from three
parts, but that intellect is impartible. For the etherial is triple, and the Psycho-
crator, or mingler of soul, who ascends into the cetherial worlds, is a Teletarch. "
We Jearn, alsu, that the empyrean world is one, and is essentially intellectual.
These things therefore must hereafter be considered : for itis very dubious how
they accord with the dogmas of Plato. Now, however, let us pass on to the
words that follow.

“ For by a dianoetic or reasoning process he concluded, that it would
thus be a whole animal in the highest degree perfect from perfect parts.
And besides this, that it would be one, as nothing would be left from
which any other such nature might be produced. And further still, that
it would neither be obnoxious to old age, nor disease. For he intel-
lectually perceived, that the heat and cold which meet in body, and all
such things as have strong and vigorous powers, when they surround
bodies externally, and fall on them unseasonably, dissolve their union,
and introducing diseases and old age, cause them to perish through
decay.”

’ For ex buvapuy here, read env δνναμιν.

* Instead of γον yap ws, it is necessary to read νὸν yap vous.

Ὁ The Teletarchs subsist at the extremity of that order of Gods which is called intelligible and at
the same time intellectual. See the 4th Book of wy translation of Proclus on the Theology of Plato.

Book 111} TIMJEUS OF PLATO. 430

Plato assigns three causes, that I may speak summarily, through which no
element is left externally to the universe, viz. perfection, unity, and perpetuity.
But all these reciprocate in the subject of them. For if the universe is perfect,
there is nothing external to it. For another world might be generated from that
which is external; since why should one thing be generated from these elements
(which are within the worldJ, but nothing from those (which are external to it}?
And if there is nothing external to the world, the world is one. Again, if the
world is perpetual, there is no body external to the universe, homogeneous to the
elements which are init. For if any thing should invade it, it would injure, and
dissolve the universe. For being external, it would be foreign to the world, and
being foreign it would molest the universe. And if nothing is external to the
world, the world is perpetual. For it will not have that which is corruptive of it.
If also the admonition respecting the onlyness, perpetuity, and perfection of the
universe, is true, it was before assumed from the paradigm. For that was all-
perfect, uniform {or having the form of one], and eternal ; the second of these, on
account of the one being, from which the only-begotten is derived; but the third,
through eternity, from which perpetuity is derived ; and the first, through com-
prehending all the forms of intelligible animals. For this is the peculiarity of all-
perfect animal. But the all-perfect, indeed, is the cause of pertect natures ; the
uniform, of monadic; and the eternal, of perpetual natures 3 since every producing
cause, produces that which is second similar to itself, and especially when it pro-
duces according to essence, and has an essence inenergy. At the same time, also,
each of these is demonstrated from these as material causes. For if there is
nothing external to the universe, and if it comprehends all appropriate parts, it is
one, perfect, and perpetual, Some one however may doubt, how Plato arguing
from perpetuity, says that nothing is left external to the universe, For there are
other perpetual natures, such as the celestial bodies, and yet something is external
to them. But may you not say of these, that other things are external to them,
and yet not external? For as naturally separated from other things, there is
something external to them ; but as being co-passive with them, and comprehended
together with them as most principal parts of the universe by one nature, there
is notany thing external to them. But if any thing was external to the universe,
it would be external alone, having no sympathy with the world. It would also
be a thing of a foreign nature, would be destitute of the life which is in the world,
and would be cut off from it, by the intervening vacuum.

If, likewise, some one should doubt concerning the psychical vehicles, how they

436 PROCLUS ON THE : [ROOK ae

are not passively affected by these elements, since they do not vanquish them in
the same manner as divine bodies, it must be said that they would suffer from
them, if they consisted of things similar to the elements. But now being com-
posed of other things, they remain according to hypostasis ' indissoluble. Αἱ
the same time, however, they are not entirely impassive ; but material bodies being
agglutinated to them, they are hindered from their natural motion, and are moved
in an inordinate manner; neither being able to be moved circularly, on account
of the connexion with them of the material bodies, nor to proceed ina right line,
on account of their own nature. Hence also Plato calls the periods of our souls,
disorderly and confused ; not only on account of the psychical motions, but hke-
wise on account of the motions of our vehicles, in consequence of such ἃ con-
glutination taking place from these sublunary bodies. Tf therefore the universe is
perpetual, and always subsists according to nature, it will be requisite that there
should be nothing external toit. Por this being perfectly foreign trom it, and fall-
Ing on it externally, would become the cause of its corruption, You may also
say conversely, that the words, “ar order that the universe may be perpetual,” are
the conclusion; but thatthe middle term and the cause of the conclusion Is this,
that there ts nothing external to the universe. For because there is nothing external
to the universe, nothing can introduce corruption to it, as something foreign; so
that itis perpetual. To the universe therefore this is the cause of perpetuity ; but
to the parts init, not this, but other things are the cause of incorruptibility ; such
for instance as, the being constituted by the one Demiurgus. For he is simply
the cause of immortality to all things; so that the universe is ina greater degree
incorruptible. For it is incorruptible on account of the Demiurgus, and because
there is nothing external to it. Thus, likewise, it is possible to convert the other
parts of the text, as, that because there is nothing external to the universe, the
universe ts ouly-begotten ; that the only-begotten may be threefold, viz. on account
of the paradigm, on account of all matter being comprehended im it, and on ac-
count of the Demiurgus being one. And, also, that the universe is a/l-perfect,
hecause It is comprehensive of all things. Each of these assertions therefore is
evident. But with respect to the things which are the converse of these, such as
that, if the universe is only-begotten it has nothing external to it, this is immedi-
ately true of the universe alone; and the demonstrations will be as follow: The
universe Is only-begotten ; but if itis onty-begotten, it will have nothing external

For uxcOcow here, it seems necessary toread vrooraay.

book 111. TIMEUS OF PLATO. 437

to itself, from which another thing of the like kind may be generated. The
universe is indissoluble; but if indissoluble nothing foreign to the natures of
which it consists, will be external to it. The universe is all-perfect. For the all-
perfect is that which is not defective in any thing. Hence Aristotle also says, that
the universe alone is perfect; but all things in it are imperfect, as being parts
of the universe. These therefore, that I may speak summarily, are the particulars
which are discussed by Plato.

If, however, you are willing, we will recur to the words themselves. Through
the words therefore, “by a dianoetic or reasoning process,” he evolves the intellec-
tual perception in the Demiurgus, calling it dianoia; since he apprchends it
dianoetically and not through simple projection. For a various evolution of cause,
ts the work of dianoia ; but a uniform apprehension, and the comprehension of all
things inone intellectual perception, are the employment of intellect. Pjato therefore,
making himself the promulgator of the causes antecedently comprehended in the
Demiurgus, refers his own discursive energy to the uniform intellectual perception
of the fabricator of the world. ‘Thus also the oracles call the partible intellection
of the Demiurgus, dianoia. For they say, “I soul being hot and animating all
things dwell after the paternal dianoias.” But the words, ‘ a whole animal in the
hichest degree perfect from perfect parts,” assimilate the world to the intellectual
wholeness, and the intelligible allness. For parts sabsist with a reference to
whole, and are not perfect from themselves ; but they have indeed the perfection
of parts, yet are simply destitute of perfection. "The universe, however, is properly
awhole. Jor a whole totally ts one thing ; a part totally is another ; a whole parti-
ally is another ; and a part partially ranks in the third place. And the unrerse,
indeed, is a whole totally, as being a whole of wholes. But each of the spheres is a
part totally, according to the second Jorm of wholeness. And partial animals, are
wholes partially. For the third wholeness is in these, but with a partial peculiarity.
And the parts of these are parts partially ; for they are parts alone.

Moreover the words “as nothing would be left from which any other such nature
might be produced,” is an explanation of the cause through which the world is one ;
but it is an explanation ofthe material cause. For if there was any thing of this
kind external to the world, another world greater or less might be generated
from it. For the Demiurgus would not leave it unadorned; because he wishes

’ In the original ro ray apa παντελες, but apa is evitlently superfluous, For that the universe is all-

perfect, is now about to be proved,

4838 PROCLUS ON THE | [ποοκ int.

all things to be good, and nothing to be bad, But if the world is one, nothing
of such a nature as the things from which it is generated, is left external to it.
Perhaps, too, Plato adds this, on account of the celestial bodies, and in short, on
account of monadic natures. For the celestial bodies are monadic, no other things
being left external tothem from which such like bodies could be generated. For each
of them consists of those things, which im magnitude, power, and multitude, are
constitutive of them alone, but of no other thing.’ //ence also they are called
monadic, because they alone consist of these things alone. Nor is any one of the
simple bodies (1. ον of the four elements], such τὰ ἈΠ respects as the clement? of
each of these [eelestial bodies}, From = the elevated conceptions therefore of
Plato, it follows, that then alone a thing is corrupted by the natures that surround
it, When it Consists of the same things as those by which itis surrounded ; so that
there are as many diflerenees of fire, and of each of the elements, as there are
monadie natures from whieh) the universe consists 3 and: the Dc miurgcus coustt-
tuted asimany ideas of simple bodies, as of the composite natures, whieh he in
tended to produce, Hence, all of them give completion to oue certain thing, and
nothing else is generated from: them,

Bat the words, πω" obuovious to old age, nor disease, Wave ἃ manifest Cause.
For disease arises from the want of symmetry inthe things that enter into the body,
some of the parts nus being augmented by others, and dissoleing the analogy with the
remaining parts of which we consist, through which a superabundance and deficiency
of the humours are secretly introduced, and old age accedes, nature becoming
imbecile, as Plato says further on, through contending against many things that
externally attack it, and enduring a numerous succession of labours. For the
concoction and management of the food, purgation, and all such things as are the
works of nature, are not without labour. And trom this you may assume, that
the Deminrgus who renders the world free from old age and disease, possesses
the fountain of the Pwonian series. Por it’ is necessary that the truly existing
cause, and which is alone the cause of health, should subsist prior to the genera-
ted cause, or the cause of health which the world contains. For, in short, if the
cause of symmetry is the health of the cloments, it is necessary that this should
exist in the most beautiful manner in the universe, in which there is mn the most

* Tustead of ἀλλ᾽ οὐδε ovSevos here, it is requisite to read αλλὸν δὲ οἱδενος,

* For owy τὸ ἐκάστου τουτων στοιχείων, | read cior τὸ ἕκαστον τουτων στοιχέιον. The eclestial bodies
consist of, what Aristotle calls, a fifth element, and which is essentially different from cach of the
four elements,

BOOK 110.) TIM-EUS OF PLATO, 439

eminent degree a symmetry of all the elements; so. that the fountain of this is
primarily with the Demiurgus. And it seems that there is one concurrence with
each constitution of composite natures, and which is a certain demiurgic health ;
but another which renovates the existing state of being, or the state of being,
which is still preserved, or is in a perishing condition; which is preserved, indeed,
in the natures that are connected by indissolable bonds, but is in a perishing
condition in those whose connecting bonds are dissoluble. For indissoluble
natures, as being finite, and having a finite power, are in want of renovating
causes: for they are renovated from things which possess infinite power. And
here indeed (1. e. in what Plato now says] the providence of divinity about the
universe, in order that it may be free from disease, concurs with the composition of
the universe. But the providence mentioned in the Politicus, according to which
divinity coming into contact with the helm of the universe, corrects what was
vitiated in a former period, is the paradigm of the second kind of health, which
is of a renovating nature, [ence also theologists refer one kind of health to E:scula-
pius, this being all the medicine of things preternatural, whether it perpetually or
sometimes only represses a preternatural subsistence. But they generate another
prior to Esculapius, which is consubsistent with the fabrication of things, and which
they produce from Persuasion and Love. Uence, as Plato says, the universe is from
intellect: and necessity, intellect’ persuading necessity; but necessity being
converted to intellect, in order that it may lead all things to that which is best. For
it is evident from these things, that the universe subsists according to nature, from
its first composition, through the persuasion proceeding from intellect, and the
conversion of necessity to intellect. lence, it is manifest that. the Demiurgus
comprehends the fountain of health, both that) which is Esculapian, and that
whichis Demiurgic. And thus much for this particular,

But the constituted body, is a composite, and alter-motive. That which is
selfmotive therefore, is preservative of itself; but that which is alter-motive, in
a particular manner requires not to be disturbed by other things, The universe,
however, so far as itis a body is alter-motive. But Plato assumes heat and cold as
things ofan eflicacions nature, and as possessing strong and vigorous powers; the
former producing corruption through section, but the latter through violent con-
gelation, But the word unscasonably manifests the privation of symmetry, and the
‘inaptitude arising from the want of symmetry, and besides these, the incursions

* For τὸν τὸν here, read τὸν you.

440 PROCLUS ON THE [poox 111.

from chance. For it appeared to those who leave something external to the
universe, that it was proper to commit the accidents of bodies to fortune and
chance. Plato, however, in saying that heat and cold by surrounding and falling
on the world, would introduce disease and corruption, may seem to grant that
the world is in short both hot and cold. For if it did not suffer something of
this kind, though the natures which surround it should be hot and cold, it would
suffer nothing from them. For he says that the world would suffer by the things
which would surround it. And if indeed it consisted of things some of which are
hot and others cold, it would suffer by these; but if of others, which have strong
and vigorous powers, it would suffer from them, For whether these surrounding
natures should happen to be contrary to the things of which the world consists,
because contrary, they would cause the composite on which they fall, to decay ;
or whether they were similar, they would dissolve the proportion according to
which the world was constituted, through being mingled with the similar natures
that are in it. As he speaks, therefore, of every composite, he very properly
makes mention of heat and cold, as of things universally known. For there 3a
certain composite, and it consists of these, and is known to all. Tlenece, because
it is known, he mentions these. Since, however, every composite does not con-
sist of these, he adds, in what he afterwards says, universally, ‘ and all such things
as have strong and vigorous powers,” though they should not be heats and colds.
For it is necessary that every physical body should have a physical power, through
which it may be able to act according to nature, If, therefore, any body should
surround the world, whether similar or dissimilar to certain things contained in it;
if dissimilar, indecd, it would disturb the world; but itis necessary that what is
impassive should not be disturbed by that which is foreign, and by something
which is situated ia a certain place; and if similar, In consequence of being
mingled with what is similar to it, it would dissolve the ratio of the elements in
the world, from which it is constituted according to the most beautiful Lond.
Such therefore is the explanation of the particulars of the text.

Let us, however, survey itself by itself, how there is nothing external to the uni-
verse. For why did not the Demiurgus who constituted matter, fabricate many
kinds of matter, and many worlds?) May we not say, that he constituted matter,
and always constitutes it, according to the unity which he contains, so that on
this account, he very properly produces but one matter ; and that the multitude
of sensible forms possess differences, which distinguish them from each other,
but that matter is without difference and without quality? Por though we should

BOOK IIL.) TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 441

orant that there are many kinds of matter in this universe, yet we must say that
there is one matter which proceeds from on high through diminution, as far as to
the last dregs of things, which last sediment also is truly formless, the summit of
matter having a great alliance to forms. For all things according to their
summit are most allied to the natures prior tothem. So that there is one, and
vet not one matter, which proceeds through all things, itself subsiding into itself.
Onaccount of this matter, therefore, the Demiurgus produced one world having
itselfa diminution with reference to itself.’ | Every thing likewise which makes
by its very existence, being one in itself, makes one image of itself, and one whole
form; and especially when it remains immoveable. For being moved, it is pos-
sible for it to make other and other images of itself. Farther still it may be said,
that to divide production into multitude, is no lonzer the effect of power, but of imbecili-
ty. But to comprehend multitude in unity, and to connect thewhole number of things
through the monad, is the province of admirable abundance. Vf, therefore, total pow-
éris in the Demiurgus, if he is an immoveable cause, if he fabricates by his very
being, and if he generates that which is similar to himself, he generates the world
one, Whole, and perfect. What then, it may be said, is not the Demiurgus able to

govern many and infinite worlds? We reply, that multitude and the infinite (in quan-

tty} are not the prerogatives of power, but that it pertains to power to congregate things
that are divided, and to give bound to infinites. For this assimilates things to the good,
0 which also the Demiurgus extends all his productions. "This, therefore, is demon-
strated through many other arguments.

That Plato however, in an admirable manner informs us, that nothing is left
external to the universe, from which any thing else of the like kind could be ge-
nerated, and that each of the things that are monadic alone consists of the simple |
natures of which it is composed, and there are not other? things external to it
of a similar kind, from which any other such nature could be produced, we may
learn by observing that he says, an all-various inequality exists in the seeds of
bodies. And also, that on account of this inequality, the differences of fire, and
ofeach of the elements, are incomprehensible. Hence, all fire is not ’ similar
to all fire, though visibility is common to all. On this account likewise, there is
a certain fire which burns, and this is all-various from the smallness and magni-

{ For aura εἰς eavrny here, it seems necessary to read αὐτὸν εἰς eavroy.
I

* Instead of καὶ μὴ εἰναι exros avrov, adda rovros ὁμοία, it is necessary to al και μὴ εἰναι eKTos

“avrov ἄλλα κ. ds

ἡ Οὐχ is omitted here in the original.

Tim. Plat. Vou. I. aK

442 PROCLUS ON THE [Βοοκ rit;

tude of the elements of which it consists. And the same thing is true of all the
elements. Each of the monadic natures therefore, consists of all such things,
as are contained in it alone, but in no other thing whatever. Hence it is not ex-
ternally mingled with them nor is connascent with them. But you may also as-
sume this from these sublunary bodies. For not every one is nourished by every
one, but different bodies by ditlerent things, because all of them are not similar
to the elements of which they consist. But each body becomes greater through
those things by which itis able to be nourished, the things that enter into it re-
ceiving the places of those that depart from it. On this account, therefore, cor-
ruptible natures perish, because there are external to them things of a kind
similar to those of which they consist, and which are contraries some to one
thing, and others to another. Each of these also, being added to their appro-
priate natures, introduce corruption to composites, by dissolving the symmetry
which is in them. In things that are corruptible therefore, the reason or product-
ive principle, especially effects a difference, since itis very different from that
of simple natures. But in things that are indissoluble, the difference, and tbe
reasons of the composition cf them, pertain to the same things. Hence, they
are indissoluble, and in short monadic, alone existing from elements alone, ac-
cording to one reason, and one symmetry. These things, therefore, should be
examined more fully. Por we shall find that they subsistin a beautiful manner,’
if we look to things, and do not restin words alone, as is the case with many who
meddle with the theory of these particulars. Let us, however, proceed to what

ux next said by Plato.

“ Through this cause, therefore, and this reasoning, he fabricated the
world one whole, perfect from containing in itself all wholes, and free

from old age and disease.”

Cause indeed, uniformly comprehends every thing which proceeds from it, but
reasoning comprehends its productions ina divided manner, as we have before
observed. So that the universe as one whole is comprehended by its cause, and
is generated according to cause ; but as consisting of all wholes, it is generated
by a reasoning process.’ And itis generated one indeed, by the demiurgic deity,

MInstead of evpyooper yap ov καλως ἐχόντα, it js obviously necessary to read ἐυρησομεν yap καλως

€yorvra.
* A reasoning process in the Demiurgus signifies, as has been before observed, a distributed or divid-

ed cause of things.

BOOK 111. TIM.ZUS OF PLATO. 443

and according to divine union; but a whole according to the wholeness which
is connective of intellectuals." For this producing totally renders the universe a
whole. And it isa whole containing in itself all wholes, according to the divided
causes of forms. For the monad possesses with itself the whole number [of which
it is the cause.] The universe also is perfect, as being always converted to its
principles, and imitating the demiurgic conversion. But it is free from old age
and disease, as having a flourishing, vigorous, and ever vigilant life, and as par-
ticipating of admirable powers. For from the causes which renovate the world
a pure and unwearicd life is imparted to it, and from the inflexible * Gods, unde-
filed power. And through the former indeed the world is free from old age,
always becoming new ; but through the latter, it is free from disease, being puritied
from every thing preternatural. The Demiurgus, however, comprehends the
cause of both these.

“Βαϊ he gave to it a figure adapted and ailied to its nature. For to
the animal which was to comprehend all animals in itself, that figure will
be adapted, which contains within its ambit all figures of every kind.
Hence he fashioned it as with a wheel of a spheriform shape, every where
(or fromall the parts} equally distant from the middle to the bounding
extremities; this being the most perfect of all figures, and the most simi-
lar to itself. For he conceived that the similar is infinitely more beauti-
ful than the dissimilar.”

After the total causes of the world, the whole composition of it, and its essence
consisting of total plenitudes, Timaus speaks concerning the figure of the uni-
verse ; the most similar of all figures, being essentially imparted to it by the Demi-
urgus. And this is the fourth demiurgic gift conferred on the universe. There
are therefore, other demonstrations both physical and mathematical, that the
world is spherical, which we shall afterwards discuss. Now, however, let us first
direct our attention to the Platonic demonstration, which is truly a demonstration,
and together with ¢hat itis, showing why it is. The demonstration therefore, is

' The wholeness which is connective of intellectuals, constitutes the middle trad of the order of Gods
which is denominated intelligible and at the same time intellectual. See Book iv. of my translation

of Proclus on the Theology of Plato.
* These are the Amilicti or Curetes of the Grecks, and form the a triad of the intellectual

order of Gods,

444 PROCLUS ON THE [Book 1.

triple, the first being derived from ¢he one, the second from intelligible beauty, and
the third from intellectual production. Or rather each of these is manifold, and
at least triple. We may say then, immediately with respect to the demonstration
from the one, that the Demiurgus is one, and you may also say that the paradigm
is one, and that the good is one, From these things likewise, you may assume,
that in figures that which is especially one is more divine and more perfect: than
that which is not one. For that which ¢he ove is in the Gods, that which the one
intelligible animal itself, is in intelligible animals, and that which the one maker
and father is among the Demiurgi, that the sphere is among solid: figures, For
the one is comprehensive of many unitics, animal itself, of mtelligible animals, the
one Demiurgus, of many causes, and the one spherical figure, of all figures. The
second demonstration therefore, is from the beautiful and the becoming. For
the spherical figure’ is becoming to the receiver, to the giver, and to the paradigm.
To the receiver indeed, because he being perfect, is friendly to the most perfect
of firures, and he who is comprehensive of all things, is friendly to that which
comprebends all things in itself. But it is becoming to the giver, because he being
intellect, and converted to himself, generated a becoming figure, and most simi-
lar to himself. For as Plato says in the Laws, intellect possesses intelligence
similar to the motion of a sphere fashioned by a wheel; being extended according
to the same things, after the same manner, in the same, and about the same.
And itis becoming to the paradigm, because the intelligible universe is a thing
of this kind, converging on all sides to itself,

On all sides like a sphere’s revolving bulk,
Well from the middle pois’d with equal force,

And round its stable centre glad to run :

says Parmenides. The same things also are asserted by Empedocles. For he
makes a two-fold sphere, the one being sensible, in which strife predominates, but
the other intelligible, which is connected by Venus. Ie likewise calls the one
the image of the other; but it is evident which of the two he denominates the
mage.

The third demonstration therefore, is from the allied. For a spherical figure
is allied to the universe; since it is allied to the one, to the Demiurgus, and to all-
perfect animal. To the one indeed, because of the oneness of a spherical figure.

“ Yor ro rperoy here, it is necessary to read ro σφαιρικον.

noox it] TIMEZUS OF PLATO. — 415

For as the world is one, so likewise the figure of it is uniform. Buta spherical
figure is allied to the Demiurgus, because he contains all things intellectually in
himself. And it is allied to the paradigm, because it first proceeds from it.
Hence this figure, is primogeniat to the world. It also presents itself to the view,
in the occult order itself.'’ For (what is said in the Orphic verse ]

Unwearied in a boundless orb it moves,

is asserted of that order, But itis more clearly seen in’ all- -perfect animal, For
itis said of this divinity by the theologist, that he is excited in an ineffable circle.
And it is still more clearly visible in the [intelligible and at the same time] intel-
lectual Gods. For there, intellectual figure, the rectilinear, and the circular sub-
sist, as it is asserted in the Parmenides. Farther still, after these Gods, this
figure is seen in the Demiurgus. For ashe is intellectual intellect, the universe
subsists appropriately in him, and he receives demiurgic powers from the Gods that
are prior to him. Hence also he is the Demiurgus of all mundane figures. But
what shall we say after the Demiurgus of much-honoured Vulean? Does he
not fashion all mundane natures, elaborating all heaven and generation, and
making

Bracelets and chains, and necklaces and rings.*

For how is it possible, since he produces the essence of the mundane body, that
he should not impart a figure adapted to each of the bodies contained in the world?
He however gives figure to the universe as it were with his own hands; but the
Demiurgus by his will alone. For manual operation with him is will, and pro-
duction is intellection. And thus much we have inferred from these particulars.
Because, however, the spherical figure is allied and adapted to the universe, it
is necessary that the universe should have a figure of this kind. Perhaps, indeed,
because’ a sphere, as those who are skilled in mathematics say, is the most capa-
cious of all solids that have equal perimeters, and as we shall shortly after show
by collecting what they have asserted. Perhaps also because every polygonous
figure of εὐθεῖ sides may be inscribed in ἃ sphere ;* but it is not possole to

th At the extremity of the first triad of the intelligible order.
ἢ iad XVIIL. v. 402. -

7 Orcis omitted here in the original

Tustead of εἰς αλλο σχῆμα duvaroy εγγραφεσθαι, it is necessary to read, εἰς σφαιραν δυνατὸν eyypae
φεσθαι.

4

f
{
!
{
|
{

\

“48 PROCLUS ON THE [Rook 111.

inscribe-every polygonous figure of equal sides in another figure. Hence a sphere
is most adapted to that which is to contain all things in itself: for the five regular
figures may be inscribed in it. If therefore, you look to corporeal masses, all
inasses of equal perimeters will be comprehended in the sphere. Not that they
will be so contained in as to have their surfaces equal to the spherical superficies :
for they will be less than it. But if all figures may be inseribed in the spherica!
superficies, which is not true in other figures, this also is more appropriate to the
things proposed. For Plato likewise says that this figure is adapted to that which
is to comprehend in itself all figures. For intending to fabricate the body of the
universe, through the five regular figures, he very properly looks to all the figures
which are about to be comprehended by the universe. So that he evidently
directs his attention, not to corporeal masses, but to the inscription of figures.

Farther still, you may also say in a more perfect manner, that the nature which
is to comprehend all things in itself, ought to have dominion over all that it con-
tains: for it will not otherwise be comprehensive of them. But that which has
dominion over all things, assimilates all things to itself, For nothing has dom-
nion over things foreign and dissimilar. That, however, which assimilates all
things to itself, will be by a much greater priority most similar to itself; in order
that it may impart similitude to other things. But that which being a body is
most similar to itself, is spherical. Hence the body which comprehends all things
in itself, is spherical. This figure, therefore, is adapted to the world: for it is
most perfect, and most similar. It is most perfect, indeed, as being comprehen-
sive of all things, and as having an unceasing motion. Fora right line is imper-
fect, as always capable of being extended ; but a circle and a sphere are most perfect,
as not receiving increase, and as making the end of their motion the beginning. Such
therefore is the meaning of what is here said by Plato.

Let us, however, consider the dogma by itself, conformably to the intellectual
conesptions of lamblichus. Since, therefore, it is necessary that the world should
be assimilated to the whole soul which rides as it were in it, itis also necessary
that it should become similar to the vivilic body of that soul. Hence, as the
Demiurgus constituted the mundane soul, according to two circles, thus also he
fashioned the universe of aspherical figure, assimilating it to the self-motion of
soul. fence too, our vehicle is rendered spherical, and is moved circularly, when the

\ soul isin a remarkable degree assimilated to intellect. For the intellection of soul, and

\ . . . . . . . . “he . . .
the circulation of bodies, imitate intellectual energy, just as rectilinear motion imi-
tates the ascent and descent of souls. Vor these motions pertain to bodics, which

|

BOOK 111.} TIM.EUS OF PLATO. AA?

are not in their proper places. Farther still, the unceasing motion of the universe,
is similar to infinite power; its uniform circulation, to simplicity of essence ; and
the circulation of wholes, after the same manner, and about the same centre, to
eternal permanency. Again, as the one motion of the world comprehends all
motions, one wholeness, all wholes, and corporeal parts; and as one nature,
comprehends all second and third natures, thus also it is necessary that the one
mundane figure, should be comprehensive of all figures. This figure, however, is
spherical, at the same time being one, and capable of containing multitude ; which
is a circumstance truly divine, to have dominion over every thing multitudinous:
without departing from unity.

In addition also to these things, as intelligible animal itself comprehends all
intelligible animals, according to one union, thus also the world being assimilated
to its paradigm, comprehends all mundane figures, according to the spherical
figure. Fora sphere alone is able to comprehend all the elements. As there-
fore the world by its onlyness adumbrates the intelligible universe, thus also by its
spherical figure, it imitates the comprehension of wholes in that universe. Far-
ther still, the world through this fizure is assimilated to intelligible beauty. For
how is it possible that a thing which is perfectly equable, commensurate, and
similar, should not be in a remarkable degree beautiful? If, therefore, it is neces-
sary that the world should be the most beautiful of sensibles, it is requisite that it
should have a figure of this kind, on all sides equal, definite, and accurate.

sides the same, pertains to the cause of bound. Farther still, that which is cole
lective of many things into one, and likewise the generative, and the spermatic,
rejoice in a figure of this kind. But this is manifest in seeds, and in the more ptin-
cipal parts of animals: for nature renders these as much as possible, spherical.
Again, the immutable, the unbroken, and the perpetual, are most adapted! and allied
to a spherical figure; since in consequence of every where verging to itself, it is
most powerful. For the centre is unific and connective of the whole sphere. Very
properly, therefore, did the Demiurgus constitute the universe, which is connective
of itself, of a spherical figure. These things, therefore, may be philosophically said
concerning this particular.

* Yor owecora here, read οἰκειοτατα.

448 PROCLUS ON THE [Βοοκ ut,

After another manner, however, the same thing may be syllogistically inferred,
physically in the way in which Aristotle endeavoured to prove it. For since the
universe is moved in a circle, and it has been demonstrated by him that there is
nothing external to the extreme circumference of the world, neither vacuum, nor
place, it is necessary that the figure of the universe should be spherical, and not
rectilinear. For if it was rectilinear, there would be a vacuum. For as the
universe revolves in acircle, it would never have the same place through the alter-
nate mutation ofthe angles and superticies. For since of every other figure besides
a sphere, the lines from the middle are unequal, there will be a vacuum according
to the less interval, where the bulk of the body is not. Whether therefore it be
according to length, or according to breadth, there will be, during the revolution,
a less interval, For a vacuum is perfectly equidistant; bat where there is no
body nor figure, there will be a deficiency, In Consequence of the magnitude being
less than the vacuum.’ Farther still, from secondary natures also, you: may
assuine physically, that the universe is spherical. For the earth Is spherical, as is
evident from all things every way tending to the middle of it. But water is dil-
fused round the earth, and itis spherical. For there is a contlux of it into the
concavity, till it comes into contact with the central part of the earth, The ar
also surrounds the water and the earth, and the fire surrounds the air. It,
however, this be the case, the heavens likewise will be spherical. For there will
be a vacuum within them, unless they also spherically comprehend tire.

Again, nature distributes to the first of bodies, the first of figures, and a simple
figure, to a simple body. For in each genus of things, ¢#e one is prior to the many,
and the simple, to the composite. As, therefore, we distribute motions in a way
adapted to their works, to simple works indeed, simple notions, but to composite
works, Composite motions; thus also there is an allotinent of appropriate figures,
one kind to simple, but another to composite bodies. Ligure, however, ts, as tt

were, the visible resemblance of form, the morphe of morphe, and as it were anafiation of

the peculiar hyparcis of each particular thing. Hence, that which is essentially
simple, proceeds into a simple figure, but that which is variously mingled, has also
a co-mingled idea of figure. Farther still, the celestial motion is the measure of
notions ; but the measure in each thing is that which is least. The least motion,
however, is the swiftest. But circulation is the swiftest of motions. If, however,

"Tustead of over ro σχημα ἐλλείψει, δια τὸ peyeNus, ἐλαττον ον τὸν KEVoU in this place, it is necessary

to read, ονὲς ro σχημα, ἐλλείψει, δια ro peyeOus ἔλαττον ον τὸν κενὸν.

BOOK 111. TIM EUS OF PLATO, 449

this be the care, the heavens are spherical. For the sphencal is the swiftest of
motions, IN consequence, as the Elean guest says, of proceeding on the smallest
foot. Again, of bodies, some consist of similar, but others of dissimilar parts. "To
bodies, therefore, of dissimilar parts, dissimilar figures are necessarily distributed
by nature. For polygonous and, in short, angular figures, are of this kind, and
wiso those that consist ofmany superticies. But to bodies of similar parts, similar
fizures are adapted contermably to their excellence. For the sphere alone among
solids is a similar figure; since all the rest have dissimilar ficures. For some
have two superficies, ἂς ibe cone, others three, as the cylinder, others four, others
five, and others more than five, as pyramids on polygonous bases arranged in sue-
cession. If, therefore, ether consists of similar parts, but the figure of that which
consists of similar parts is similar, and the similar is spherical, ether is spherical.
After this manner, therefore, we may physically prove that the world is spherical,

If, however, it be requisite to elucidate what is said, by mathematical demons
strations, let us summarily relate what appears to be the truth to those who are
skilled in these particulars, In the first place, therefore, they endeavour to prove
{that the universe is spherical] from the stars being moved in parallel circles, both
the fixed stars, and the planets, the sections always becoming unequal, as we
approach to the north; so that some of the circles touch the horizon; but others
which are less than these, do not touch it. And, at last, there is a certain
immoveable point, about which all the circulation is moved. In the next place,
they infer this from the nights and days becoming unequal, conformably to the
solar motions to the north or south. In the third place, from shadows. For
whence is it that the sun when he begins to rise," and also when he sets, is more
northerr. to us, and appears to pass beyond the crab, but when he is in the
meridian, he sends the shadow to the north; unless from the universe being
moved in acircle, which inclines to our motion? Farther still, they prove that
the universe is spherical, from the stars which are not moved according to depth,
always appearing to have an equal magnitude. For if the heavens were not
spherical but cylindrical, or some other such like figure, it would be requisite that
the sun, when he becoines more southern to us, should appear to be less, oir
account of the inequalily of the interval.*| Nothing of this kind, however, is seen
to take place. From these things, therefore, astronomers, in short, endeavonr te
prove that the universe is splirical.

* For encyec here, it is necessary to read ἀνίσχει».
ἢ For vrocracews in this place, it is necessary (o read arorrasews.

Tim. Plat. γον i. af

450 ; PROCLUS ON THE {Book 411.

Vv

But that a sphere is the most capacious of all bodies that have equal perimeters,
is also demonstrated by them. Likewise that all bodies of equal sides may be
inscribed ina sphere, but not all of them in any one of the polyedra. Nor is there
any occasion that we should transcribe what is demonstrated by them. For we
write to him who has been sufficiently instructed in these particulars. At the
same time, however, thus much must be related, that they demonstrate the super-
ficies of the sphere to be more capacious than that of all other solid bodies of
equal ambits, and they particularly demonstrate that it is more capacious than
the bodies which are called by Plato, equilateral and equiangular polyedra;
partly employing the propositions of Euclid, and partly those of Archimedes.
As I have said, therefore, the demonstrations of this may be obtained from their
writings. Ttais our intention, also, after we have commented on the whole of the
Titmeus, to discuss more fully in a collection of the Mathematical Theorems in
the Timieus, such mathematical particulars as are disseminated in the Comment-
aries; in order that the lovers of truth, by having a collection of these things,
may be assisted in the all-various comprehension of the mathematical parts of
the dialogue, But enough of mathematics.

Tet us therefore return to the words of Plato, and survey after what manner
each of them is delivered. That in intellectuals! then, figure is after whole, and
that Plato having demonstrated the universe to be a whole, very properly in what
follows teaches us concerning the figure of it, we have before observed. Since,
however, this proceeds into-the universe fruin the demiurgic cause, on this account
he says that figure was given to it from thence. But the giver evidently possesses
by a much greater priority that which he gives. The spherical figure, therefore, is
in the Demiurgus, but mitellectually ; so that it is in all-perfect animal intelligibly,
and in that which is still prior to the latter of these,* occultly. For if it be
requisite to speak what appears to me to be the truth, where intellect is, there

>

also the spherical peculiarity exists. For intellectual energy has an essence of
such a kind as that to which the Athenian stranger or guest assimilates it.? But
in one place, this peculiarity subsists unitedly and intelligibly, as those say who
are divinely wise. In another place, it subsists intelligibly, indeed, but with a

* i.e. In first intellectuals, or in other words, in that divine order which is denominated intelligible
and at the same time intellectual.
2

i.e. In being itself, or the summit of the intelligible triad.
ὁ Τὰ the Luth book of the Laws, he assimilates it to the revolution of a spnere fashioned by a wheel.

BOOK 111.]} TIALEUS OF PLATO. $51

more abundant intelligible division. In another intellectually, but accompanied

with an all-various diversity. And in another sens:bly, accompanied with separa-

tion and interval, And _ this last, indeed, is not simply called by Plato spherical

(σφαιρικοην), but spheriform (σφαιροειδές), as being an imitation of the intellectual or

intelligible sphere. For the universe also is moved in a circle, because it imitates

intellect. Bul either the intellectual or the intelligible universe, will be most principally

spherical ; and that which ts truly astronomy, will be conversant with these. For this

ἐξ fo astronomize above the heavens." Moreover, to be from all the parts equally

distant from the middle to the bounding extremities, pertains indeed, to the

sensible sphere, because all the lines from the centre of the earth to the extremities

of the sphere are equal. For from all the parts is significant of distance accord-
ing to the three intervals (of length, breadth, and depth}. It also pertains to the
mathematical sphere. For there there is a middle, and the intervals are from all
the parts equal. After another manner likewise it pertains to intellect. For to
converge to ilsclf, and to be as it were of the same colour acoording to every part of
étsclf, and to have all the powers in it conjoined to the one of itself, ἐδ the spherical pecu-
liarity in intellect. Proceeding also still higher, it will no longer be possible to
separate the centre from the sphere, on account of the ineflable and united nature
of the intelligible* peculiarity. Le says, therefore, that it is the property of the
sphere to have all the right lines every way equal from the middle, in order to
distinguish it from the circle. For the term every way, or from all parts, does
not pertain to this, since it has only two intcrvals.

Plato likewise uses the expression lo fashion as with a wheel, because bodies
with us are rendered more accurately round throngh a wheel which cuts off the
inequalities of the bodies. And that the simi/ar and the perfect especially pertain
to the spherical peculiarity, is evident. The similar, therefore, is analogous to the
one, but the perfect to the good, so that through both he refers the spherical pecu-
liarity to the first principle of things, by saying that itis most similar to itself, and
most perfect ; equallizing that which is most unical and most boniform. For
neither the mixed perfect or similar, nor the right line, which always receives an
addition and may become angular; but the spherical peculiarity alone, is most
similar and most perfect. After this, he adds, which is evident, “ that the similar
ts better than the dissimilar.” For similitude is of an uniting, but dissimilitude of a

* Which the Coryphean philosopher mentioned by Plato in the Thextetus, is said to do.
* Instead of rns voepas cSuorgros in this place, it is neccssary to read ras voqrys ἐδιστητοε.

452 PROCLUS ON THE {[nooK 111.

dividing nature. And the former belongs to the co-ordination of sameness, but the
latter to that of difference. And the former is the cause of simplicity, but the fat-
ter of variety to things. As the artiticer therefore of the universe found, that among
things naturally visible, the intellectual is more beaatifal than that whieh is dest-
tute of intellect, thus also he thought that the similar is better than the dissimilar.
For in intelligibles, similitude is better than dissimilitude, in powers, πὶ intellectual
perceptions, and in productions. Whenee also some one may wonder at those
Platonists, who admit that difference is better than) sameness, though Plato
says that the similar is infinitely more beautiful than the dissimilar, At the same
time, also, dissimilitade is ima certain respect secretly introduced into beings
from matter, but similitade accedes from forms alone, and intellizible causes.
Sinilitude, therefore, is infinitely better than dissimilitude ; 50 that sameness is
also more excellent than difference. ‘This is the judgment of Jupiter. Through
this, also, in the universe the similar is better than the dissimilar, in essences, in
motions, in figures, and in all other things. For the progression of things Is very
properly effected through the similitude of productions to the cause of the produc-
tion; and again, conversion is the primary leader of another similitude. Very
properly therefore is the world, on account of these things, under the dominion
of similitude, being a God according to form itself. Hence Plato also endeavours
to show what the figure of the world is, from similitude, and the Py thagoric
Timeus himself, assigns this as the first cause of its fisure, in conjunction with
making a physical mention of it. “ For a sphere alone, says he, both when it
is quiescent, and when it is moved, is capable of bem co-adapted in the same
place; so as never to fail nor receive another place.” Aristotle likewise after finn,
well knew, that with whatever other figure you may surround the universe, you
will make a vacuum, through the alternate mutation of the angles, and the une-
qual distance of the extremes from the middle.

“He also accurately elaborated the external circumference of the uni-
verse, and rendered it smooth, for the sake of many things.”

Some one may think that the same thing which was before asserted, is again
here repeated. For in what docs this smouthness differ from rotundity, or what
mutation is there of similitude? In acertain respect, therefore, this universe com-
prehends what has been said about similitude; but at the same time, there isa
difference between surveying what the nature is of the whole figure which per-

BOOKIII.] TIM £US OF PLATO. 153

vades as far as to the centre of the earth, and alone considering itself by itself,
the most external superficies of the universe. And what is here said about smooth-
ness, conteads as it appears to one thing, viz. to show that the universe is neither
in want of gnostic, nor of partible motive organs, for the purpose of acting upon,
orsuflering from other things ; introdaciny this as the fifth deminreie cilt to the
world. What is said, therefore, about the sindothness, is a medium between what
is asserted respecting the bulk, and the soul of the universe. For the proximate
boundary of body is smoothness 3 but the exempt boundary is soul, and prior to
soul, intellect. For this is the boundary of soul itself. And prior to intellect,
the one deity which connects the whole mundane multitude, is the boundary of
the body of the world. You may therefore speak after this manner.

But you may also say, according to a more perfect mode, that. the universe
being a luminous whole, it is most Juminous according to its external superticies,
and is full of divine splendour. For on this account also poets place Olympus
on the summit of the world, being wholly luminous, and light itself.

Nor clouds, nor rain, nor winter there are found,"
But dazziing spleodour spreads its radiance round.

Of this luminous subsistence, smoothness is a symbol. Why therefore are the
summits of the universe smooth? Plato says, for the sake of many things. For
they are so, in order that it may be spontaneously conjoined with soul and intel-
lect, and may be adapted to supermundane lights, through a similitude to them,
Smoothness, therefore, is sixnificant * of the highest aptitude, through which the uni-
verse is able to receive the illaminations from iniclicca and soul ; in the same manner
as mirrors receive the representations of things by their smoothness. Formerly
also by theologists, a mirror was assumed as a symbol of aptitude, to the intellec-
tual completion of the universe. Hence they say, Vulean made a mirror for Di-
onysius, or Bacehus, into which the God looking, and beholding the image of
himself, proceeded: into the whole partuble fabrication of things. You may say
therefore, that Plato reminds os of this catoptnc apparatus, ino what he now says
of the sniouthness of the external superiicies of the world, Hence the corporeal

* fom, Odyss. vi, v. 45. Butin Proclus for ava bad \or aibon, read a\\a μαλ᾽ αιθρη.

ἢ For συμμακτικη here, read σημαντικη.

ie, PROCLUS ON THE [βοοκ 111.

universe is a thing of this kind, externally smooth, according to which also, it ix
connascent with its own intellect, and with the Demiurgus, Henee tov, pocts
establish the Demiurgus on the highest summit of the world; it being allotted so
great an aptitude from him, to the participation of intelligible causes,

If you are willing, also, according to another mode, smoothness itselfis a symbol
of the divine and simple life in the world. We, therefore, since we havea partible
life, have also the parts of the body multiform, and variously mixed, because
different things are prepared by nature for a different life, But the universe has
one and asimple Jife. For it is purified from those things of which terrestrial
animals are in want, through a material: and partible life. Menee it is. the reei-
pient of one life, butis exempt from a various life. Itis also prepared for one,
but is unreceptive of a divided life. On this account, it is said τὸ be accurately
elaborated eaternally, and rendered smooth, because it is fitly adapted by the
demiurgic cause, to the reception of one life, being constructed as the orzan of
such a life. What follows, however, is shgmiticant of this,

“Nor was the addition of eyes requisite to the universe: for nothing
visible was left external to it. Nor was hearing necessary : for there was
nothing externally audible, Nor was itinvested with surrounding air,
that it might be in want of respiration,”

Through these things, Plato appears to do nothing clse, than to take away a
partible life from the universe, and the partible organs, which are suspended from
us, when we descend intu generation, For while we abide on high, we are not
at ail in want of these multiform lives, and partible organs. But the luciform
vehicle is sufficient, which possesses all the senses unitedly. If, therefore, we are
purified from every !ife of this hind, when we are liberated from generation, what
ought we to think respecting the universe? Ts it not, thatit has one simple life,
thatitis wholly vigihintly excited to it, and is equally in every part prepared for
the completion of one Lite? Or taust we not in a much greater degree admit) hese
things of the universe! Por wholes are more divine than parts, and comprehending
than comprehended natures, And thas much as to the cotmmon conception
of the things proposed,

Since, however, in whatis now said, and in what follows, Plato takes away

nooK 111. TIM-EUS OF PLATO. 455

all sense from the world, viz. sceing, hearing, smelling, tasting, and touching,
let ug in the first place consider this, whether the universe is sensitive or not. For
of the ancients, some were led to one, and others to another opinion on this sub-
ject. We indced hear theologists speaking of the fountain of sense, and asserting
of the father [i. ον of the Demiurgus] that he possesses intelligibles through intel-
lect, but introduces sense to the worlds."| And again, we hear from the Greeks,

Sun who see’st all things, and dost all things hear,”

Seeing and hearing not existing in him partibly, as in us, but according to one
life, and one subject. Since in us also, Aristotle proclaims, that there is princi-
pally one sense, and one principal sensorium. Nor were the wise men among
the Greeks ignorant that there are divine senses, nor did they refuse to assert of
the Demiurgus himself,

The undecaying royal ether forms
Hlis intellect from falsehood free; by which
He all things indicates and knows; nor voice, !

Nor sound, wor rumor can Jove's cars clude.

And why do I speak of theologists, when Plato himself says that the universe is
an animal, and that animal is characterized by sense? So that asserting likewise
that a plant is an animal, he immediately imparts to it a certain other sense. On
hearing therefore, as [have said, these things, we are unwilling to admit that the
universe is without sensation. For in the Theetetus, sense is said to be the frus-
tration of truth ; and it is universally agreed that its knowledge is passive, and
conversant with the images of things. lence, it is better, in order that we may
be in the middle of both these, to take away from the universe every sense of this
kind, and to give to it another more excellent than this, and more adapied to the
Gods.
What, therefore, is this sense, and after what manner may it be assumed? That
the universe, indeed, is sensitive, we may render manifest from its being an animal,
and from the soul of it being dianoetic and doxastic, and imparting to the mun-
dane body a participation of both these, which participation is an image of dia-

Ὁ This is asserted in the Chaldean Oracles.
* Cayss. XT. v. 108.
* Foravéa here, read avéq; nod for mAvOer im the foliowing line, ἡ ληθει. These verses are Orphic.

456 PROCLUS ON THE [Boox 11}.

ποῖα and opinion ; and this we say is the mundane phantasy itself, adumbrating

intelligence, and possessing invisible sensations * of the sensibles which exist in

every period. It is possible, therefore, from these and many other arguments, to
be persuaded that the universe possesses sensation. Batit requires an appropriate

inspection, to know what sense it possesses. Tsay then, that of sense, the first

and most principal kind, is that which imitates intellect. For every where things |
that rank as first, have an imitation of the natures prior to them. Hence, this
sense is conjoined to things that are first, comprehending in itself the sensible object
of its perception, and neither passing from some things to others; for this is the

province of sense distributed into various parts; nor proceeding outwardly 5 for
this is imperfect ; but it possesses the whole of what is sensible in itself, and 13, as
it were, rather consciousness than sense. The second kind of sense after this, 1s
that which proceeds indeed outwardly, but according to a perfect energy, which
every where always apprehends the whole object of its knowledge with invariable

sameness, and is purified from all passion, and from all the imbecility which 18

adapted to partible and material organs. But the third kind of sense is that,
which suffers from externals, and is mingled from passion and knowledge; be-
ginning indeed from passion, but ending in knowledge. And the last kind of sense
is that with which the most obscure knowledge is present, which ts full of passion,
and proximate to physical sympathy, so as not to have a kuowledge of the forms

of sensibles. Thus, for instance, it does not know that the thing which acts on it
is hot or cold, but alone perceives that what falls on it is pleasant or painful,
Por Timzus farther on informs us that the sense of plants is a thing of this kind,
being an apprehension alone of the pleasing and the painful from sensible ob-
jects.

Sense, therefore, thus procceding supernally, the world, indced, 1s sensitive
according to the first kind of sense. For according to the whole of itself itis the
thing seen, and the eve [by which it is seen]; since we also say that the sun, and
each of the stars, is aneye. Phe whole world therefore is sight and that which 15
visible, and is truly comprehensible by sense and opinion, Hence the knowledge
in itis all-perfect, its sense is tudivisible, and itis itself all things, viz. that which
is sensible, the senusorium, and sense; just as the Demiurgus of it, 15. intellect,
intelligence, and the intelligible. As, likewise, it comprehends in its whole body
partial bodies, so inits fofal sense it contains many senses. And it does not

» αισθησεις is omitted in the original.

BOOK 111.] TIMAUS OF PLATO. 457

know the colorrs and the sounds of sensibles, but the essence of all of them,
so far as it ® material and undivided. Hence also it has a sensible essence, and
essentialty, but not according to accident, sensible. For as that which is always
intelligible, is not in a certain respect intelligible, and ina certain respect not, but
is wholly intelligible, though not to those beings whose intellectual perception
is partible, but to a divine intellect; after the same manner the venerated
sensible nature, is not in a certain respect sensible, and in a certain respect
deprived of sense, but is wholly sensible, not to us whose sensible perception is
partible, but to ¢o¢al animal, in which also there is a total sense. For as the in-
tellectual perception of the Gods is of one kind, but that of men of another, thus
also the sense of Gods is different from that of partible animals; the former
having a knowledge of partial essences, but the latter of things alone pertaining to
essences. The world therefore, has the first sense, Which is immutable, united to
the object of knowledge, and all-perfect according to energy. But total animals,
which are purified from generation, are allotted the second form of sense. For
because indeed, they are parts of the universe, the sense of them proceeds to the
whole ; for there is also something of them which is external, But because they
are exempt from generation, they comprehend that which is sensible impassively
and energetically. And such partial animals as have communication with gene-
ration, and employ as organs, luciform vehicles, possess sense mingled from
passion and knowledge. But there are also certain iast animals, such as plants,
which participate of a vestige only of life and sense; one kind of sense being
total, another partible, another knowing the essences, and another the images of
sensibles.

It is not proper, therefore, to be disturbed, because Plate takes away from the
world, all partible organs. For hearing is not divided in it from sight 3 since
neither, as we say, is the one divided from the other, in our spirit, but there are
init, as Aristotle says, one sense which is truly so called, and one principal sen-
sorium. Hence the world is neither in want of eyes extended to things out of
itself, nor of ears,’ to receive information externally, but it is itself both eye, and
that which is visible, ear, and that which is audible ; and the one sense in it
knows all sensible natures. For whence also is the one sense in us which is prior
to the many senses derived except from the universe? The world therefore, knows
all the beauty that is in itself, through sight; and through the hearing all the har-

* Instead of ovrey here, it is obviously necessary to read wre.

Tim. Plat. Vou. I. 3M

458 PROCLUS ON THE [Boom 111.

mony which pervades through wholes. Hence it neither requires eyes in order
to see, nor ears in order to hear. It possesses also this eyeless peculiarity
according to the image of the intelligible God,’ to which it is assimilated. For
Orpheus says that this God has eyeless Love,

In his breast feeding eycless, rapid Love.

Thus therefore, the universe is conjuined through fove to the natures prior to
itself, and beholds the beauty which is in them through that which is in itself;
and this not by perceiving with paruble senses.

“Nor was it invested with surrounding air, that it might be in want of
respiration. Nor again, was itin want of any organ, through which it
might receive nutriment into itself, and discharge it when concocted. For
there was no possibility that any thing could either accede to, or depart
from its nature, since there was nothing through which such changes could
be produced. For indeed, the universe affords nutriment to itself through
its own consumption; and being artificially fabricated, suffers and acts
all things in itself, and from its own peculiar operations. For its compo-
sing artificer thought that it would be much more excellent, if sufficient
to itself, than if in want of other things.”

Through what is here said, Plato takes away two other senses from the universe,
the smell and the taste. The former indeed because it is without respiration,
For not every thing which respires isin want of smell, though every thing which
has smell respives.” But that which respires is more perfect. Phis therefore, he takes
away from the universe, Hle also takes away the taste, because the universe is not
nourished, Por the animal which is nourished, is in want of the taste. Again
therefore, how shall we say? Must it not be thus, that these partible senses are
notin the universe, but that it contains one simple sense in itself, which has a
knowledge of all colours, sounds, juices, spirits, and qualities, the sensivle
essences themsclyes existing in the universe as in a subject. For if the one

* i. δ. Phanes, or animal itself, the exemplar of the universe.
* Tnstead of ro yap avaxveur δειται rns cogonoews, εἰ καὶ μὴ παν TO EXOY οσῴρησιν, ἀαναπνένστικον ἐστι, in

this place, it seems requisite to read, ov yap παν αϑαπνγεον δειται rns oogpnoems, εἰ και παν TO ἐχον κι Δ.

BOOK 111.] TIM.£US OF PLATO. 459

[common] sense which is in us, uses all the partible senses, and knows all things
according to the same, how much more must the world know at once all the
variety of sensibles, according to one reason, and one sense? As therefore, it is
one in essence, and as it is allotted a uniform figure, thus also it has one sense,
comprehending in itself all sensibles. For it likewise contains one nature, which
connects and vivifies all bodies. And these are the dogmas respecting the
universe.

Let us however, discuss the particulars of what is here said by Plato. In the
first place therefore, he admirably refers the use of the smell to respiration, but
not to the discrimination of fragrances ; giving us the more comprehensive cause,
as existing in respiring natures. For when we have a sensible perception of
fragrant or fetid substances, we respire; but when we respire, we have not entirely
a sensation of them. For respiration is more natural, and more comprehensive
than the proper subjects of the smell; since such animals as have the sense of
smelling, but do not respire, in consequence of not having lungs, are more
imperfect than those that do respire. Very properly therefore, does he frame his
argument from more perfect animals, that if the universe had the sense of smelling,
it would be requisite that it should have it accompanied with respiration, in the
same manner as the more perfect of smelling animals. But in the second place,
he refers the use of the taste, to nutriment. For nature formed this as a criterion
of juices, through which nutriment and increase snbsist. For that which is
without moisture has the power of manifesting this. The world however, is not
in want of nutriment externally, but imparts it to itself, increases itself, and is the
cause of its own consumption. And in the first place, if you are willing, it effects
this, according toa division into two; the heavens augmenting and changing all
things, but the sublunary regions being increased and consumed. For the gene-
ration of one thing is the corruption of another. But of each of these,’ the motion
of the heavens is the cause. In the second place, the world eflects this from the
heavenly bodies themselves, receiving by their motions an analogous increase and
consumption, according to their risings and settings, their visibilities and occulta-
tions, their elevations and depressions, their illuminations, and mutations of light;
through which the celestial bodies receive and lose a certain thing, in the same
manner as sublunary natures. For from these, generation also is changed.

' For exarepas here, it is requisite to read ecarepwes.

460 PROCLUS ΟΝ THE [βοοκ 111.

And again you see that the natures which are above the moon, have increase and
consumption according to analogy only; but that sublunary natures are essentially the
recipients of both these. But the moon is between these, and is truly an isthmus, exr-
hibiting in herself the beginning of mutation according to an increase and diminution
of lisht. For in the bodies prior to it the same form perfectly remains, in their increase
and consumption; and in the bodics posterior to it, their very existence is naturally
adapted to reciprocate. But in the moon the essence remains, but the light is changed
evternally according to daninution and increase, which is not the case with the lumina-
ries that are above it. WWence it is not proper to say, that the heavenly bodies are
nourished from exhalations, as some fancy they are. For things which are in
want of an intlux externally, and receive addition and ablation, have not indisso-
luble bonds. Hence the celestial bodies remain immutable ; as of the ancients
Proclus, Mulotes, and Philonides assert, and of those that are more modern, al!
the Platonists from DPlotinus. For as Plato has not yet delivered to us the
generation of the heavens and stars, how could he speak about the nutriment of
them? And it seems, that now gencrating the elements alone, and perceiving
that these proceed through each other, and that all are in all, he calls this mutual
transition, the nutriment of the universe, of itself by itself; since it both acts upon anid
suffers in itself, by imparting to all things, all the things of whieh it consists. Hence
When he likewise constitutes the other natures (i. 6. the celestial), then he intro-
duces their iluminations, and the communion of all of them with each other,
through these. Alone therefore, directing his attention to the composition of the
four elements of the universe, and perceiving that in these, there are certain com-
munications with each other, he says, that the consumption of some, is the nutri-
iment of other parts of the universe. But it is not yet manifest what each of these
may be. Now however, thus much is evident, that all the parts confer something
on each other, in order that the universe may become one, and are in each other,
so as to nourish each other, and this without any diminution of themselves. For
all things of which the universe consists, are in the earth, and ἃ} of them are
hkewise in the middle elements; and thus the whole world is nourished by itself,
from its own parts, having all things in all.

Farther sull, this also may be said, that if nothing proceeds to the universe,
there is no body external to it, and that if nothing departs from it, there is no
vacuum out of the world. For it would be in vain not being the recipient of any
thing, as that is which receives the world: which things were particularly em-

BOOK 111.] TIM-EUS OF PLATO. 401

braced by Aristotle, who subverts the existence of a vacuum in energy, and
preserves the world only-begotten, But that nothing departs froin, or accedes to
the universe, Plato infers, the latter indeed, becanse there is nothing external to it,
and the former, from the universe making the consumption of itself, its proper
nutriment. As therefore, not having the organs of nutrient in itself, it has nutri-
ment, and is that which itself nourishes itself, and is at the same time nourished ;
thus also, not having senses extended outwardly, it possesses sense in itself, and is
itself sensible to itself. And that Plato intended the latter should be inferred as
well as the tormer, I think he clearly manifests by saying, that “ the universe suffers
and acts all things tn itself, and from its own peculiar operations.” But if all that is
gencrated, is the consequence of the universe acting on and suffering from itself,
it must not be said, that either consumptions or corruptions are simply evils. For
neither does a worthy man, and much less the universe, do any evil to him-
self. And this indeed, is a divine corollary, which is to be assumed from what
Plato says.

Again however, he recurs to the true cause of all mundane effects, viz. the
demiurgie art, and the principle which is perfective of wholes. For from thence
art also proceeds into the demiurgic order. Hence the Oracles call the Demi-
urgus of the universe ove who produces works by art; which expression Plato
divides, at one time calling the things contained in the world, the works of the
Demiurgus, [as when he represents the maker of the world saying] “ ofwhom Iam
the Demiurgus and father of works ;° just as the Oracles also when they say;
for understanding the works of the paternal self-begotten intellect ; but at another
denominating the energy of the Demiurgus art, which in the end becomes the
cause of the sufficiency of the universe to itsclf, For the Demiurgus being good,
raade all things simitar to himself; i. e. he made all things perfect and self-
sufficient. For self-sufficiency is an element of the good. By no means however is
the world, as possessing the power of beng sufficient to itself, diculsed through this self-
sufficiency from its maker, but is ina greater degrec united tohim. For by how niuch
the more self-sufficient it is, by so much the more is it constituted ina similitude to him.
And by how much the more it is assimilated, by so much the more perfictly is it united, to
the deniurgic.gooduess. The universe therefore is self-sufficient, as being the object
of sense to itself," and as not being in want of other sensibles. For to these
the appellation of indigence belongs. But it is in want of the Gods, as being

" Eavry is omitted in the origiual. .

409 PROCLUS ΟΝ ἘΠΕ {800K 111.

always filled by them. Or rather neither is it in want of these, for divinity is every
where present, and the universe is always prepared for the reception of divine
goods.» And as the similar is better than the dissimilar according to the judge-
nent of Jupiter; so likewise, the self-suflicient is more divine than that which is
indigent. For the self-suflicient has dominion in the Gods, and similitude in
beings. And this is another dogma of the mighty Jupiter.

“ But he neither thought that hands were necessary to the world, as
there was nothing for it either to receive or resist ; nor yet feet, nor any
other members which are subservient to progression and rest.”

The touch is the last of the senses, and of this an animal especially participates
according to the whole body, but particularly according to the hands. For these
have the greatest power of touching, as may be seen in the operations of them.
Since however, the hands afford us a twofold use; for through them we receive
things that delight us, and repel such as pain us; but the universe cannot receive
anything, for it has every thing which it wishes; nor repel any thing, because
there is nothing foreign to it ;—this being the case, itis not at all in want of hands.
For as Aristotle says, neither nature, nor God, does any thing in vain. So that
the Demiurgus did not make hands to adhere to the world, because they would
have been added in vain. Since however, that which is motive 1s suspended from
that which is sensitive, but [mean that which is maturally motive, the discussion
of Timwus, appropriately and at the same time reasonably proceeds, froin the
sensitive to the progressive organs. For the feet were formed as instruments for
rectilinear motion, as likewise were the other parts subservient to progression, such
as the leg, the knee, the thigh, and any other such-like part. Its impossible
however, for the universe to be moved ia a right line: for, as we have before
shown, there is no vacuum external to the universe. Through these things there-
fore, he takes away the progressive and sensitive parts. And here again it may
be said, that in taking away the motive organs, he alone takes away feet, but not
wings; because feet are suflicient to more perfect animals for the purposes of
motion ; doing the same thing here as he did respecting smelling and respiration,

Again however, it must be said, that these organs are by no means in the
universe, but that sense and motion after another manner are. For since every

* For opowrnre in this place, itis obviously necessary to read. 9 opovorns.

BOOK I11.] TIM-EUS OF PLATO. 463

thing sensible of whatever kind it may be is comprehended in it, and it is itself
the first sensible, it has also one sense conjoined to a sensible of this kind, just as
the intelligence of the Demiurgus is conjoined to the whole of the intelligible, and
is said to absorb the universe in itself. After the same manner therefore, the
universe absorbs itself by the sense of itself, and comprehends the object of know-
ledze, by a connascent knowledge, Besides, it has indeed powers: which appre-
hend and are the guardians of all things, and these are its hands. It possesses
likewise perfective orders, and these are analogous to nutritive parts. And it
exhibits vivilic causes, which correspond to the parts of respiration. Besides
these also, it has other powers, some of which fill it with invisible causes, and
others conjoin it to intelligible light; of which the latter are analogous to seeing,
but the former to hearing. By those also who survey it physically and theologi-
cally, it will be found, that it has a motion analogous to this sense. For as it has
a sense of itself with itself, so likewise it has a motion in itself, and circulating
about itself, and both these, according to the similitude of its paradigm. For in
this there was intelligence converging to itself, life converted to itself, and know-
᾿ ledge not subsisting according to transition, nor according to a distribution into
parts, but selperfect, and united to intelligibles themselves. For such is the intel-
lect which is there, energizing prior to cnergy, because {according to the Oracle] it has
not proceeded, but abides in the paternal profundity, and in theadytum according to the
God-nourished silence.

* For from among the seven species of local motion, he distributed to
it that which especially subsists about intellect and wisdom, and which is
adapted and allied to its body.”

Of the ancients, some converting the world to intellect, and imparting to it mo-
tion through love about the first appetible, say that nothing proceeds into it from
intellect, thus depriving intellect of fecundity," and giving it an arrangement equi-
valent to that of lovely sensible objects, which have nothing generative in their
own nature, Others on the contrary, acknowledge that intellect, or soul, or
whatever that may be which is above the world, operates on it, yet they do not
give to the world a spontaneous and proper motion, but only say that it is exter-
nally convolved inacircle. These however, Aristotle blames, as subverting the

* For povipow here, it is necessary toread γονιμον,

464 PROCLUS ON THE [Book its.

perpetuity of the universe. For that which is violent ts not perpetual.’ But Plato
guarding against the oversights of both these, assigns to the world a proper and
spontaneous motion, and shows that the Demiurgus is the cause of this motion.
And this is the sixth demiurgic gift imparted to the world; as imitating * the
motion of intellect, which the world possesses both from itself, and from the father,
For the expression he distributed, refers us to the paternal cause. For from that
trom which essence, from that also motion according to nature, is imparted to the
universe. But the words, “ adapted and allied to its body,” refer us to the peculiar
nature of the world, through which it is excited by itself to a motion of this kind.
For it possesses symething adapted and allied to the motion ina circle, both ac-
cording to the self-motive nature, and to its figure, whichis spheneal. Perhaps
also, ifhe had asserted one of these things only, the other might have been in-
ferred. For [πὸ had said, that the motion of the universe was adapted and
allied to it, whence did it possess this except from the father, from whom also its
essence is derived?) But if this motion was imparted to it by the Demiurgus, he
entirely gave to the recipient an appropriate motion, he being intellect, and assign-
ing to all things that which is according to desert. The Philosopher however,
combines both these in order that you may see thessimilitude of the world to the
Demiurgus. For as he himself intellectually perceives himself, 1s converted to
himself, and surveys intelligibles through energizing about them, which be-
come the centres of the demiurgic intelligence ; thus also the world is moved
about itself, verges to itself, and harmoniously revolves about the middle,
which becomes the centre of the mundane motion, And as the Demiurgus is
said to absorb the intelligible, by * proceeding to it, thus also the world is said
to comprehend initself, the centre of itself, Lor the absorptions which are celebra-
ted by theologists, are certain comprehenstons, Bat the absorptions by grandfathers
comprehend intellectuals intellizibly, and those by sons, intelligibles intellectually.

' ifthe principal parts of the universe therefore are perpetual, and that they are so is most fully de-
moustrated in these commentaries, it necessarily follows that the modern system of astronomy, which
fills the heavens with violent motions, is false.

1 Instead of exuir μιμονμεένὴ KU NOLS in this place, f read are vou μιμουμενὴ κινησι».

8 For εἰς ἐαντὸν χωρέειν here, read Tp €ls €QVTOV χωρειν-

4 Instead of αλλ᾽ ae μὲν xpoyoraae τὰ voyra περιλαμβανουσι voepus, ac δε τῶν παιδων, τα νοερὰ
vonrws in this place, it is necessary to read, αλλ᾽ ac per προγονίκαι ra veepa Keprappavovar sonrws, αἱ

ὃς Tw παιδω», Τα μλύητα bOEPWS,

e
κεν γι ἢ TIM-EUS OF PLA‘TO. “ὦ
For thes: ding, the generators of them again convert them to themsclves,
and er min their own allness. Theuniverse therefore linitates bob
thes mdeed, as it revolves about the centre, and comprehends the centre

in tating the progonic ἃ absorption ; but so far as it comprehends its owa
imitself, affording nutriment to itself by its own consumption, and again

Ag initself the natures distributed from itself,—-so far it imitates the com-
sension of children in their fathers. And these τ things indeed, are asserted

“τ the sake of the analogy of the universe to the two fathers.

Again, however, you may see, how the Aristotelie axiom is here pre-assumed,
that the riotion is simple ofa simple body, In the first place, therefore, the body
inthe world whichis more simple than other bodies, is moved with a circular
motion, as being adapted to it; and inthe next place, the whole universe is thug
woved. For the body which is posterior to it, is as much as possible convolved
inacircle. For what else is the meaning ef the word adapted, than that the mo-
tion ina circle is natural to the essence of the universe? For as it was allotted a
spherical figure, so likewise a circular motion according to nature. And farthor
sull another Aristotelian axiom is also here pre-assumed] that a circular motion
has nothing contrary to it. For as there are seven Jocal motions, that which is in
acircle,the upward, the downward, that which is to the right hand, and that
which is to the left, that which is anterior, and that which is to the posterior parts,
you will find that six of these havea contrary. For the motions are coutrary,
which are from contrary to contrary places. But the motion in a circle is exempt
from all contraricty. For since the motions in a right line are generated and
contamed by the motion ina circle, as Mechanics demonstrate, how can it be
said that any one of these is contrary to it? For the contrary is corruptive and
not generative of the contrary. Nor does Plato stop here, but having mentioned
the peculiarity of the circular motion, he shows its admirable transcendency
above the other notions, For he denominates it to be that which subsists about
intellect and wisdom, and this not simply, but he also adds especially. For of
these seven motions, the circular imitates intellect, and the intellectual life, being
established in the same, and about the same, according to one reason and one
order, and possessing a motion which is vanquished by permanency. But all the

"i.e. "Phe absorption of Phanes, the paradigm of the world hy Jupiter.
Ὁ For ra:rys here read ravra. :

Ton. Plat. | Ἷ Vou..1, 3.N

a RN eT

466 PROCLUS ON ‘THE [BOOK 411.

remaining ἡ motion pertains to soul. For in this, Srom whence, and whither, and
fFansition first subsist. In her also the intelligible is the upward, but the sensible
downward. And the circle of sameness, indeed, is the right hand, bot the circle
of ditlerence, the left. Intellect likewise is before her, but nature behind. Por
thus she was constituted at first. And circulation, indeed, is adapted to intelicet,
according to buth numbers, whether you wish to adduce the monad itself, or tie
heptad, enumerating it the first’ or the seventh motion. Jur the monad and the
heptad, are certain intellectual numbers ; the monad tndeed being directly intellect,
but the heptad, the light according to indedlect. dnd on this account also the mundane
intellect $s, as Orpheus says, both monadic, and hebdomadic. Farther suil, the monad
is Apulloniacal, but the heptad Minerval. Again therefore it is intellect and wisdom.
So that circulation through the alliance of numbers, shows that itis suspended
from intellect and wisdom. Bet rectidmear motion, demenstrates through the
Aerad its alliance to the psychical peculiarity. For the number six is allied to the
soul, and this will be manifest as we proceed. Let us however pass on to what

is next said by Plato,

“ Tence by a circumduction according to saineness, in the same, and
in itself, he caused it to be moved convolving in a circle. But he sepa-
rated from it all the six motions, and framed it’ void of their wandernng
progiessions, And as feet were not requisite to this persodical motion,
he generated the universe without legs and fect.”

We have before observed that intellect and wisdom are the paradigms of circu-
‘ation. But what this is, and how it is assimilated to intellect, is delivered in
the words befure us. For circulation is a motion which is led round according
to sameness, and in the same, and in itself, as Timeus here says, and the Athe-
nian guest in the Laws, Of which definition indeed, the words * accerding to
sameness,” signify according to one reason, and one order. For what if the
universe should be moved circularly indeed, but should be differently changed at
different times, by rising or setting, as the fable says in the Politicus. That we
may not therefore apprehend this to be the case, the words * according to same-
yess are placed respecting it, before the rest. The Platonic Severus therefore,
for we shall here speak frecly against: hirn,) is not right in admitting fabulous
eirentations. and thus making the world to be both generated: and unbegotter.

' Yor ἡ &e λοιπή, πασαν τὴν a }read, ἡ δε λειπὴ πασα, τὴν yey.

ne,

mI EN Oe SY emer

ROOK Ε1|,] TIM-LUS OF PLATO. 467

The universe indeed, Plato says, is moved according to sameness, and after a
similar manner; and according to one reason and one order. But such a eireu-
lation as Severus speaks of, subverts the one order of motion, The mode, how-
ever, in Which such ἃ motion is fabulously introduced, is shown by our preceptor
in his Commentaries on that dialogue, ' conformably to the meanine of Plato.
Bat the words ‘in the same,” manifest the immutable in transition, and that the
motion is vanquished by permanency. For because there is not a vacuum external
to the universe, but it is necessary that the universe should be moved, being a
physical body; for nature is a principle of motion; it is moved convolved about
itself, and in the same place. For the bulk of the universe occupies the whol-
of place, and possesses by its parts the parts of interval; and asa whole being
iminutable, it is locally moved in its parts. But the words “ in itself,” inanifest
Mat itis moved on account of this very transition of its parts. For it does not
require the transition of another thing, in order to the motion of ttself, but itsel:
yields to itself, aud itself is transferred into the place of itself’; so that itis moved
mitself, the parts of it being transferred by their motions into the places of each
other. Llence, through the words “ according (0 sameness,” you have tire perpetual ;
but through the words “ in the same,” the immutable; and through the words “ in
itself,” the form of the transition. And from all these you have, that circulation is
a Motion unceasing, remaining in one place, and eflected by the transition of the
parts into the places of each other. But being such it is evident, that it is most
similar to intellect. For intellect eternall energizes intellectually, is established
in the same order, and all things in it are intellectual, most energetic, and Possess
an ever-vigilant lite. And this indeed is evident.

gr about the

It is however worthy of admiration in Plato, that when discoursing

essence of the universe, he assimilates it to itellizible animal; but that now
teaching us concerning the motion of it, he refers the similitude of it to intellect;
delivering to us from these things, the analogy which is in them, viz. that the intel-
ligible has the relation of essence, but intellect of energy. When, likewise, he
says that the universe is spherical, he at the same times cives it to be moved in a
circle, and to be convolved. For it appears to be moved in a circle according to

the greatest circle which is in it. Because however ἃ cylinder is moved in 3

"siz. On the Pobticus, ta which dialogue it is fabulously asserted that the sun and stare pox sefon
the place from whence they formeily rose, See this fable explained in the notes to my transtation of
that dialo ue.

408 PROCLUS ΟΝ 'THE | [βοοκ itt.

circle when it is rolled along, he adds, for the sake of accuracy, the word convol-
ving.’ Itis also admirable in hiro, that he takes away the six motions from the
universe. For this is most peculiar to the world, there being in the stars an
advancing motion, The world, therefore, is truly inerratic, not only because the
summit of itis a thing of this hind, but because itis moved with one and the same
simple motion.

It is necessary however to observe, how the turm of motion which exists in the

most principal part of the universe, is said to have been given, as appropriate’

to the whole world, by the father. For all the other parts, participate of the
circulation of the world; and the inerratic is present with some of them more
manifestly, but with others mure obscurely. Por the streams under the earth
being moved in a disorderly manner, and differently at. different times, are espe-
cially said to wander. But the sublunary elements being naturally moved from
one place to another, participate of less wandering than the subterranean effluxions.
For those things wander which are transferred from one place to another. And
the divine bodies in the heavens, wander still less than these. For so far as they
are moved according to length, and also according to breadth they are
wanderers; but so far as they are moved according to the equable and
orderly, and according to one reason of motion, they are inerratic. But the
world itself may most properly and principally be called inerratic, as not receiving
the representation of any other motion.

If also you are willing to make a division im incorporoal natures, the irrational
life wanders in a remarkable degree, not having the measure of its energies from
itself. The soul that opines rightly wanders, but less than the irrational life.
For this soul also participates in a certain respect of wandering, through being
ignorant of cause. But the soul that possesses scientific knowledge, wanders
still less than this. For in such a soul, the transitive form of life alone produces
the wandering; because it Is not arranged to one intelligible, but becomes a
different intelligible m different forms. And intellect alone is inerratie amoug
beings, always intellectually perceiving the same thing, and energizing towards
and about the same thing. The world, therefore, which imitates intellect in its
mouon, is deservedly truly inerratic, always making the same uniform period
after the same manner. That however which is thus moved, has no need what-
ever of the addition of feet, or in short, of progressive organs. And hence the
universe Was generated without fect and legs. Theoloyists also wishing im @ coral

' Yor rpepopyeroy here, it is obviou.tly necessary to read erpeooperer.

TIM.EZUS OF PLATO. 469

ROOK 111.

respect to indicate this to us, are accustomed to call the God who is the Demiurgus of
the corporcal nature, lame in both feet, as constituting the universe without legs and
feet. They say too that the Gods laugh at him with inertinguishable laughter,
and by their laughing incessantly attend with providential care to mundane natures.

“All this reasoning, therefore, being employed by the eternally exist.
ing God, about the God that would αὐ a certain time or once exist; in
consequence of this reasoning, he made his body smooth and even, every
where from the middle equal and whole, and perfect from perfect bodies.”

What is here said, imitating the one intellect, and the united intellection of
wholes, collects all things into the same, and refers them to one summit, the fabri-
cation of the corporeal system. It is necessary, therefore, that we should recol-
lect What has been before said. It was said then, that the elements rendered all
things in the world concordant through analogy ; that the universe was gencrated
a whole consisting of wholes; and that it is spherical and smooth, and has a
knowledge of itself, and a motion in itself. But this being the case, it is evident
that the whole world itself, is assimilated to all-perfect animal. The orderly dis-
tribution of it, however, according to wholes, proceeds analogous to second and
third causes. And the number of the elements, indeed, and the unifying bond of
them through analogy, proceeds conformably to the e-sence which is uncoloured,
unfigured, and without contact ;' for there number subsists. But the first whole-
ness Which adorns all things, and which consists of the whole elemen:s, is assimi-
Jated to the intellectual wholeness.* The sphericity of the universe is analogous
to the intellectual figure. Its sel@sufficiency, intellectual motion, and convolution*
in sameness, are assimilated to the God who absorbs in himself all bis progeny
[i.e. to Saturn]. Its possession of soul, is analogous to the vivific cause [i. 6. to
Rhea]. And its participation of intellect, is analogous to the Demiurgic intellect ;
though all these proceed from this, and from the natures prior to it, to which
these are respectively analogous. And the more excellent natures, indeed, are the

' This essence forms the summit of that order of Gods which is called intelligible, aud at the same
lime intellectual.

* This forms the middle of the above-mentioned orders

2 And this forms the extremity of that order.

* For τροφὴ here, it is necessary to read στροφη.

470 PROCLUS ON THE {[BooK tit.

causes of all the things of which secondary natures are the causes; but the latter
are the causes of fewer effects than the former. For the Demiurgos himself, so .
far, indeed, 5 he is intellectual, makes all things to be intellectual; butso far as
he is being, he is the father of all bodies, and incorporeal natures; and so far as
he is a God, he constitutes matter itself. In what is here said, therefore, Plato
makes a summary repetition of all such particulars as the universe derives from
the intellectual Gods. And thus much concerning the whole theory,

It is requisite, however, that we should understand the truth pertaining to each
of the words. Directly, therefore, the words “all this,” imply that you should
survey in one the whole cause of the corporeal-formed nature, and know the di-
vision of forms. For wholeness is assimilated to one thing, figure to another, and
motion to another. And the word ¢/és indeed indicates union ; but the word al
the number of causes. Moreover, the words "ἢ reasoning employed by the eternally
eristing God,” make the essence, and at the same me the intelligence of the
Demiurgus to be eternal, through which the world ts perpetual. [tis necessary
likewise to observe, that Plato by arranging the Demiurzus among eternal beings,
gives to him an eternal order, so that he will not faccording to Plato} be soul.
For in the Laws he says, that soul is immortal, indeed, and indestructible, bat is
not eternal. Hence every one who fancies that soul is the Demiurgus, seems to
he ignorant of the diflerence between the eternal and the indestructible. But the
word “reasoning” is significant of a distributed fabrication. And the words
“that would ata certain time erist” are not slguificant of a beginning according to
time, as Atticus fancied they were, but that the world has an essence conjoined
with time. For time was generated together with heaven [or the universe, } and
the world is temporal, and time is mundane, Jor they were co-produced with
each other, and are consubsistent from one fabrication. ‘Phe words therefore a¢
a certain time or once do not signify a part of time, but reason Is time as compared
with eternal being. For that is truly always being ; but the temporal always is
once as With reference to the eternal, justas that which is being, after a venerated
manner, is non-being with reference to that whieh as intelligibly being. Hence
thouch the world exists through the whole of time, yet the existence of it con-
sistyin becoming to be, and is ina part oftime. ᾿ΕΝ. however is once, and is not
simultaneously in alltime, buat Is always once, For the eternal is always in the
whole of eternity; bat) the temporal, In a certain time, is always ata different
time in another time, As with reference therefore, to the eternally existing God,
the world is very properly called, © the God that would once erist.” For as with re-

Hat a τς

ROOK Lh] TIM.EUS OF PLATO. 471

ference to that God who is intellectual, this is sensible. Hence, the consible
world isindecd generated, or becoming to be, always, but is once. For it has its ex-
istence partly, always advancing to being from eternal being. For since, as we
have Letore observed, it las an eternal power of existing derived from a cause
dierent trow itself, and the power which it possesses it possesses terminated, but
by always receiving, it always is, having the power in that which is terminated
numbered to infinity ;—this being the case, it is evident that it is once, from the once
always acquiring existence, and always becoming to be, in consequence of that
which gives it to exist, never ceasing.’ According to its own nature, however, it
is once, and has a renovated immortality, as Plato says in the Politicus, possess-
ing its being in advancing into existence, and on this account participating not
at once wholly of the whole (of time} but once ; and this again and again, existing
in generation, and not being without an extension [of existence]. Unless, there-
fore, the word once signifies with Plato the whole of time. For the transitive
subsistence of time, as compared with eternal energy, is once, and the whole of time
has the same vatio to eternity, as ihe part of time the once to the whole of time.

If yon are willing also to consider what is said after another manner, since
Plato has hitherto fashioned a corporeal nature, bat has not in words constituted
soul and intellect, he denominates the God that would exist, and who subsists in
discourse according to a part, once. For divinity indeed constitutes collectively
parts and the whole, but language divides things which are consubsistent, gene-
rates things which are unbegotten, and distributes according to time, eternal
natures, “The God therefore, that would once exist, is the God that would exist
in the discourse, in which there is a distribation into parts, and composition, For.
ihe Pythagoric Timaus likewise, indicating this in his treatise to those who are
aie to understand him, says ‘ that before heaven (or the universe] was generated

- in words, there were idea and matter, and God the Demiurgus.” For that he

fashions the generation of the universe in words, he clearly manifests in what he
says. Moreover, with respect to (he smooth and the even, they manifest, as we
have before observed, the one comprehension in the world, and the greatest apti-
tude to the participation of a divine soul. But the words, “every where from the
midave equal,” define the peculiarity of the spherical figure, For this is every
Where equidistant, according to all intervals. And the words “ whole, ang

ἡ Instead of και δια το μὴ λεγειν, τὸ διδον aes γινόμενος in this place, it is necessary to read, καὶ δια
τὸ μὴ ληγειν τὸ διδεν, ace ywopercs.

472 PROCLUS ON THE {pook if.

perfect yrom perfect bodies,” establish the world in the highest degree of similitude
to all-perfect animal ; for that was in all respects perfect 5 and, likewise, to the
Deimiurgus himself. For as he is the father of fathers, and the supreme of rulers,
thus also the world is the most perfect of perfect natures, and the most total of
wholes. You may likewise say that the world is smooth, as not being in want
of any motive, or nutritive, or sensitive organs. For this was proximately demon.
strated. But “it is every where equal from the middle,” as having a spherical
figure, and ‘a while and perfect,” as being all-perfect, and leaving nothing exter-
nal to itself: for this is properly a whole and perfect. And it consists of perfect

bodies, as being composed from the four elements. It is also said to be in the
And thus Plato beginning from

singular number a body, as being only-begotten.
rfection, he again converts it

the only-begotten, and proceeding as far as to pe
through the above-mentioned particulars to the same thing [1. ὁ. to the only-
begotten}; imitating the progression of the world from its paradigm, and its

perfect conversion to it.

END OV VOL. 1.

ἐξ
ον"
μενον

ΚΟ] Ὁ 1.2}. ᾿ς

ΠΕΣ 190.

B Proclus Liecochus

“ἐς ΓΤ. ilk a, ral
ΠΡῚΝ The coumente ries of
bee 7 3 rProclus

PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY

τ
rE

a3
++

aes
eas

ΕΣ

ἡ Ὁ Ἢ

Were

i
ty

a

2

he

ἘΞ ik z
ee
hee :

Sper dag pee
ΕΣ πέτα Gog toate
HS ΣΑΣ εις ΟΣ τς

Sor reps οτος

eee

ΜΝ
ae

Hai
3

aed

ou

wy
415

eee

Fes

Fy
=)

Ree
