Other Worlds than Ours: The Plurality of Worlds Studied under the Light of Recent Scientific Researches
Richard A. Proctor, 1870
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Proctor's 1870 survey — the Victorian astronomer's sober assessment of which worlds might be inhabited: the standard popular treatment for a generation (1897 printing). Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/otherworldsthano00proc). This 1870 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

Hichard  A.  Proctor. 


'OX 


& 


INTRODUCTORY  NOTE. 


*l 


This  book  had  from  the  first  a  very  extraordinary  sua 
cess.  It  appeared  in  1870,  and  at  once  attracted  the 
attention  of  the  scientific  world  and  of  all  who  were  inter- 
ested in  knowing  what  the  telescope  and  the  spectroscope 
have  revealed  to  the  tireless  gaze  of  science.  The  volume 
is  written  in  a  most  charming  style.  Like  Huxley  and 
Tyndall,  Mr.  Proctor  sees  the  poetry  of  his  subject  and 
knows  how  to  bring  the  largest  truths  within  the  com- 
prehension of  a  child,  and  make  the  deepest  researches 
as  interesting  to  the  general  reader  as  a  novel.  What  the 
earth  teaches  us,  what  we  learn  from  the  sun,  Mars  a 
miniature  earth,  Jupiter  the  giant  of  our  system,  the 
nature  of  nebulae,  the  constitution  and  shape  of  the  uni- 
verse, the  probability  that  other  worlds  are  inhabited — ■ 
such  are  his  themes,  and  he  brings  to  their  discussion  all 
the  knowledge  of  one  of  the  profoundest  mathematicians 
and  astronomers  of  this  age,  and  all  the  power  of  a  poet 
on  the  perception  and  expression  of  beauty. 

Eichard  A.  Proctor  was  bom  in  England  in  1837.  He 
enjoyed  a  liberal  education  and  distinguished  himself  in 
his  boyhood  as  a  fine  student.  In  1866  he  lost  his  fortune 


6  INTRODUCTORY  NOTE. 

by  the  failure  of  a  bank.  This  hindered  his  scientific 
work  for  a  time,  but  his  many  popular  writings  soon  re- 
lieved him  from  embarrassment.  In  1869  he  made  sug- 
gestions to  Sir  George  Airy,  the  astronomer  royal,  as  to 
the  best  method  of  observing  the  coming  transit  of  Yenus, 
and  at  a  meeting  of  the  principal  astronomers  of  England, 
at  the  Greenwich  Observatory,  in  1873,  his  views  were 
unanimously  approved.  In  the  same  year  Mr.  Proctor 
lectured  in  America.  He  came  to  an  untimely  death  in 
New  York,  from  cholera  caught  in  Florida. 

Frank  Parsons. 


FROM  THE 

PEEFAOE  TO  THE  FOUETH  EDITION. 


This  edition  has  been  carefully  revised  and  in  many 
important  respects  modified. 

Several  passages  relating  to  questions  which  were 
under  controversy  when  the  earlier  editions  appeared 
have  been  removed — those  questions  having  been  decid- 
ed by  new  evidence,  in  the  sense  advocated  in  the  orig- 
inal text. 

I  have  also  omitted  several  passages  from  the  last  chap- 
ter, as  expressing  a  more  confident  opinion  about  mat- 
ters connected  with  the  supervision  and  control  of  the 
universe  than  I  at  present  entertain. 

BlCHAKD  A.  PkOCTOB, 


FROM  THE 

PKEFAOE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION. 


Among  the  additions  which  have  been  made  to  the 
matter  contained  in  a  former  edition  are  two  which 
require  some  notice. 

The  first  consists  of  new  evidence  against  the  theory 
that  the  cloud-belts  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn  are  raised  by 
the  sun's  heat.  I  find  it  difficult  to  conceive  how  this 
evidence  can  be  interpreted  otherwise  than  by  the  theory 
that  the  belts  of  the  giant  planets  are  generated,  main- 
tained, and  modified  by  forces  inherent  in  those  planets, 
and  not  by  any  action  exerted  from  without. 

The  second  is  the  matter  contained  in  pp.  276,  277, 
286-291,  and  illustrated  by  the  large  plate  facing  p.  288. 
Rightly  understood,  the  evidence  there  presented  is  con- 
clusive in  favor  of  the  two  theses,  that — 

1.  Within  the  limits  which  include  the  stars  visible  to 
{he  naked  eye  there  are  laivs  of  aggregation  and  segregation 
'which  the  theories  hitherto  accepted  respecting  the  fixed  stars 
wholly  fail  to  accotmt  for. 

2.  The  Milky  Way  is  not,  as  has  been  so  long  supposed, 


10  PREFACE. 

a  stratum  of  stars  of  all  orders  extending  to  distances  very 
far  exceeding,  relatively  as  well  as  positively,  the  distances 
of  the  lucid  stars — hut  is  a  stream  of  small  stars,  amid 
which  many  of  the  lucid  stars  are  immersed. 

These  points  seem  to  be  as  completely  demonstrated 
by  the  evidence  adduced  as  relations  of  the  sort  can 
ever  be. 

BlCHAKD  A.  PeOCTOE. 

London,  October,  1870. 


EXTRACTS  FROM  THE 

PEEFAOE  TO  THE  FIEST  EDITIOK 


On  many  of  the  subjects  dealt  with  in  this  work,  1 
have  propounded  views  which  differ  from  those  usually 
accepted.  Each  of  the  new  views  here  presented  has 
been  the  result  of  a  careful  study  of  the  subject  dealt  with, 
and  I  have  searched  as  anxiously  for  considerations  op- 
posed to  any  novel  theory  as  for  arguments  in  its  favor. 

My  theory  respecting  the  sidereal  system  has  been  based 
on  the  signs  of  systematic  aggregation  among  the  lucid 
stars,  and  of  a  more  intimate  association  of  those  stars 
with  the  Milky  Way  than  could  be  expected  were  Sir 
William  Herschel's  fundamental  theory  correct. 

The  theory  brought  forward  in  the  chapter  on  Meteors 
and  Comets  is  not  altogether  new.  The  general  idea  on 
which  it  is  grounded  has  been  dealt  with  by  Mayer  and 
Thomson.  The  idea,  however,  presented  itself  independ- 
ently to  my  mind  when  I  was  writing  my  treatise  on 
Saturn.  The  line  of  reasoning  is  wholly  new,  I  believe, 
by  which  I  have  endeavored  to  show  that  those  peculiar- 
ities of  the  solar  system  which  have  hitherto  been  regarded 


12  PREFACE. 

as  affording  the  strongest  objection  to  the  hypothesis  of 
development,  may  be  regarded  as  in  reality  the  direct 
result  of  the  processes  by  which  the  solar  system  has 
reached  its  present  condition.  In  the  preface  to  my  trea- 
tise on  Saturn  I  touched  on  the  possibility  that  some  such 
explanation  of  those  peculiarities  might  be  found,  re- 
marking that  in  the  rings  of  Saturn  astronomers  may 
one  day  recognize  the  action  of  the  processes  by  which 
the  solar  system  has  attained  its  present  state. 

RlCHAED  A.  PeOOTOR. 

London,  May,  1870. 


CONTENTS. 


Introduction, •      •       •       .      it 

CHAPTER  L 
What  Our  Earth  Teaches  Us,       .       «  ,     •       •       •       .21 

CHAPTER  H. 
What  We  Learn  from  the  Sun,  .       •       •       •       ,84 

CHAPTER  ILL 
The  Inferior  Planets,    ....       •       •       •       •     69 

CHAPTER  IV. 
Mars,  the  Miniature  of  Our  Earth,   .       •       •       •       •      95 

CHAPTER  V. 
Jupiter,  the  Giant  of  the  Solar  System,  •       •  120 

CHAPTER  VL 
Saturn,  the  Ringed  World,  ..•••••    159 

CHAPTER  VII. 
Uranus  and  Neptune,  the  Arctic  Planets,        .       .       ,176 

CHAPTER  VIII. 
las  Moon  and  Other  Satellites,        .       ...    187 


14  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  IX. 
Meteors  and  Comets:    Their  Oppice  in  the  Solar  Sts-  pagb 
tem, 203 

CHAPTER   X. 
Other  Suns  than  Ours, •       .    232 

CHAPTER  XI. 

Op  Minor  Stars,  and  op  the  Distribution  op  Stars  in 

Space, 261 

CHAPTER    XII. 
The  Nebula:    Are  They  External  Galaxies?  .        .        .    294 

CHAPTER  XIII. 
Supervision  and  Control,       .......    32? 


INTEODTTCTKXN". 


Astronomy  and  geology  owe  much  of  their  charm  to 
the  fact  that  they  suggest  thoughts  of  other  forms  of  life 
than  those  with  which  we  are  familiar.  Geology  teaches 
us  of  days  when  this  earth  was  peopled  with  strange 
creatures  such  as  now  are  not  found  upon  its  surface.  We 
turn  our  thoughts  to  the  epochs  when  those  monsters 
throve  and  multiplied,  and  picture  to  ourselves  the  ap- 
pearance which  our  earth  then  presented.  Strange  forms 
of  vegetation  clothe  the  scene  which  the  mind's  eye 
dwells  upon.  The  air  is  heavier  laden  with  moisture  to 
nourish  the  abundant  flora ;  hideous  reptiles  crawl  over 
their  slimy  domain,  battling  with  each  other  or  with  the 
denizens  of  the  forest;  huge  bat-like  creatures  sweep 
through  the  dusky  twilight  which  constituted  the  prim- 
eval day;  weird  monsters  pursue  their  prey  amid  the 
ocean  depths :  and  we  forget,  as  we  dwell  upon  the 
strange  forms  which  existed  in  those  long-past  ages,  that 
the  scene  now  presented  by  the  earth  is  no  less  wonder- 
ful, and  that  the  records  of  our  time  may  perhaps  seem 
one  day  as  perplexing  as  we  now  find  those  of  the  geo- 
logical eras. 


18  INTRODUCTION. 

Astronomy  has  a  kindred  charm.  We  cannot  indeed 
examine  the  actual  substance  of  living  creatures  existing 
upon  other  celestial  bodies ;  we  cannot  picture  to  our- 
selves their  appearance  or  qualities;  and  only  in  a  few 
instances  can  we  even  form  any  conception  of  the  condi- 
tions under  which  they  live.  But  we  see  proofs  on  all 
sides  that,  besides  the  world  on  which  we  live,  other 
worlds  exist  as  well  cared  for  and  as  nobly  planned.  Nay, 
we  see  globes  by  the  side  of  which  our  earth  would  seem 
but  as  a  tiny  speck ;  we  trace  these  globes  as  they  sweep 
with  stately  motion  on  their  appointed  courses ;  we  watch 
the  return  of  day  on  the  broad  expanse  of  their  surface ; 
and  we  see  systems  of  satellites  which  are  suspended  as 
lights  for  their  nocturnal  skies.  We  further  find  that  our 
sun  is  matched  by  a  thousand  thousand  suns  amid  the 
immeasurable  depths  of  space;  and  the  mind's  eye  pic- 
tures other  worlds  like  those  which  course  around  the 
sun,  travelling  in  stately  orbits  around  his  fellow-lumi- 
naries. 

Long,  however,  before  the  wonders  of  modern  astron- 
omy had  been  revealed  to  us,  men  of  inquiring  minds 
seem  to  have  been  led,  as  by  an  irresistible  instinct,  to 
examine  into  the  resemblance  which  may  exist  between 
our  world  and  other  worlds  surrounding  it  on  every  side. 
It  has  not  been  the  mere  fanciful  theorizer  who  has  dis- 
cussed such  questions,  but  men  of  the  highest  eminence 
in  science.  In  long-past  ages  Anaximander  and  Pytha- 
goras  studied  the   subject   of   other  worlds  than  ours; 


INTRODUCTION.  19 

later,  such  men  as  Huyghens,  Galileo,  and  Newton  have 
dwelt  upon  the  same  interesting  theme;  while,  in  our 
own  day,  Whewell  and  Brewster  have  employed  their  sci- 
entific and  dialectic  skill  in  defending  rival  theories  upon 
the  subject. 

Undoubtedly,  a  large  share  of  the  interest  with  which 
the  question  of  other  worlds  than  ours  has  been  regarded 
is  due  to  the  fact  that,  as  the  science  of  astronomy  has 
progressed,  the  subject  has  continually  presented  itself 
under  new  aspects.  The  question,  in  fact,  is  one  of  those 
which  are  ever  new  and  ever  old.  It  has  all  the  charm 
belonging  to  subjects  which  men  in  all  ages  have  de- 
lighted to  discuss,  while  it  is  associated  in  the  most  inti- 
mate manner  with  the  progress  of  modern  scientific  re- 
search. The  discoveries  which  are  made  by  astronomers 
acquire  a  new  interest  when  they  are  associated  with  the 
subject  of  life  in  other  worlds.  The  interest  with  which 
the  public  regard  many  of  those  discoveries  may,  indeed, 
be  said  to  depend  wholly  on  their  bearing  upon  the 
subject. 

"We  stand  in  a  position  much  more  favorable  for  the 
formation  of  just  views  on  the  subject  of  life  in  other 
worlds  than  that  from  which  men  surveyed  the  planetary 
and  stellar  systems  thirty  or  forty  years  since.  Never, 
since  men  first  explored  the  celestial  depths,  has  a  series 
of  more  startling  discoveries  rewarded  the  labors  of  as- 
tronomers and  physicists  than  during  the  past  few  years. 
Unhoped-for  revelations  have  been  made  on  every  side. 


20  INTRODUCTION. 

Analogies  the  most  interesting  have  brought  the  distant 
orbs  of  heaven  into  close  relationship  with  our  own  earth, 
or  with  the  central  luminary  of  the  planetary  scheme. 
And  a  lesson  has  been  taught  us  which  bears  even  more 
significantly  on  our  views  respecting  the  existence  of 
other  worlds  :  we  have  learned  to  recognize  within  the 
solar  system,  and  within  the  wondrous  galaxy  of  which 
our  sun  is  a  constituent  orb,  a  variety  of  structure  and  a 
complexity  of  detail,  of  which  but  a  few  years  ago  astron- 
omers had  formed  but  the  most  inadequate  conceptions. 

My  object,  then,  in  the  pages  which  follow,  is  not 
solely  to  establish  the  thesis  that  there  are  other  worlds 
than  ours,  but  to  present,  in  a  new  and,  I  hope,  interest- 
ing light  the  marvellous  discoveries  which  have  rewarded 
recent  scientific  researches.  Judged  merely  according  to 
their  direct  significance,  these  discoveries  are  full  of  in- 
terest. But  it  is  when  we  consider  them  in  their  relation 
to  the  existence  of  other  worlds,  when  we  attempt  to 
form  a  conception  of  the  immense  varieties  of  the  forms 
of  life  corresponding  to  the  innumerable  varieties  of  cos- 
mical  structure  disclosed  by  modern  researches,  that  we 
recognize  their  full  significance.  Although  the  growth  of 
our  knowledge  is  ever  accompanied  by  a  proportional 
growth  of  our  estimate  of  the  unknown,  we  seem  already 
entitled  to  say  that  we  have 

Come  on  that  which  is,  and  caught 
The  deep  pulsations  of  the  world, 
iEonian  music,  measuring  out 
The  steps  of  time. 


OTHER    WORLDS   THAN    OURS, 


CHAPTEK  I. 

WHAT  OUR  EARTH  TEACHES  US. 

Before  proceeding  to  consider  the  various  circumstances 
under  which  the  worlds  or  systems  which  surround  us  ap- 
pear to  subsist,  it  may  be  well  to  inquire  how  far  we  have 
reason  to  conclude,  from  the  consideration  of  our  own 
earth,  that  other  orbs  in  space  support  life. 

It  would  not  be  just  to  argue  directly  from  the  fact 
that  the  earth  is  inhabited  to  the  conclusion  that  the  other 
planets  are  inhabited  also,  nor  thence  to  the  conclusion 
that  other  stars  have,  like  our  sun,  their  attendant  worlds, 
peopled  with  various  forms  of  life.  An  analogy  founded 
on  a  single  instance  has  no  logical  force.  And  it  is 
doubtful  whether  we  have  not,  in  the  moon,  an  instance 
which  would  as  effectually  serve  to  support  a  directly 
opposite  conclusion.  It  seems  all  but  certain,  as  we  shall 
presently  have  occasion  to  show,  that  no  part  of  the 
moon's  globe  is  inhabited  by  living  creatures.  Certainly 
she  is  inhabited  by  none  which  bear  the  least  resemblance 
to  those  existing  on  our  earth.     Thus  it  might  fairly  be 


22         OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

urged  that,  since  one  of  the  two  orbs  respecting  which 
we  know  most  appears  to  be  uninhabited,  there  remains 
no  probable  argument  in  favor  of  the  view  that  other  orbs 
besides  our  earth  are  the  abode  of  living  creatures.  Yet 
the  earth  in  reality  supplies  an  argument  of  great  force, 
when  we  consider  the  evidence  she  presents  in  another 
light.  The  mere  fact  that  this  world  is  inhabited  is,  as 
we  have  seen,  little ;  but  we  shall  find  that  the  way  in 
which  life  is  distributed  over  the  earth's  surface  is  full  of 
significance. 

If  we  range  over  the  earth,  from  the  Arctic  regions  to 
the  torrid  zone,  we  find  that  none  of  the  peculiarities 
which  mark  the  several  regions  of  our  globe  suffice  to 
banish  life  from  its  surface.  In  the  bitter  cold  within  the 
Arctic  Circles,  with  their  strange  alternations  of  long  sum- 
mer days  and  long  winter  nights,  their  frozen  seas,  peren- 
nial ice,  and  scanty  vegetation,  life  flourishes  in  a  hun- 
dred various  forms.  On  the  other  hand,  the  torrid  zone, 
with  its  blazing  heat,  its  long-continued  droughts,  its 
strange  absence  of  true  seasonal  changes,  and  its  trying 
alternations  of  oppressive  calms  and  fiercely  raging  hurri- 
canes, nourishes  even  more  numerous  and  more  various 
forms  of  life  than  either  of  the  great  temperate  zones. 
Around  mountain  summits  as  in  the  depth  of  the  most 
secluded  valleys,  in  mid-ocean  as  in  the  arid  desert,  in  the 
air  as  beneath  the  surface  of  the  earth,  we  find  a  myriad 
forms  of  life. 

But  this  is  far  from  being  all.     Various  as  are  the 


WHAT  OUR  EARTH  TEACHES  US.  23 

physical  habitudes  which  we  encounter  as  we  travel  over 
the  surface  of  our  globe,  we  are  able  to  trace  the  exist- 
ence of  other  varieties  even  more  remarkable.  The  geo- 
logist has  been  able  to  turn  back  a  few  leaves  of  the 
earth's  past  history,  and  though  the  pages  have  been  de- 
faced and  mutilated  by  Time's  unsparing  hand,  he  is  yet 
able  to  read  in  them  of  many  strange  vicissitudes  to  which 
the  continents  and  oceans  of  our  globe  have  been  exposed. 
But,  far  back  as  he  can  trace  the  earth's  history — and 
already  he  counts  her  age  by  millions  of  years — he  finds 
no  evidence  of  an  epoch  when  life  was  absent  from  her 
surface.  Nay,  if  he  reads  aright  the  mysterious  lesson 
which  the  blurred  letters  teach  him,  he  is  led  to  believe 
that,  at  the  most  distant  epoch  to  which  his  researches 
have  extended,  there  was  the  same  wonderful  variety  in 
the  forms  of  life  as  at  the  present  day.  He  can,  indeed, 
find  the  scattered  remains  of  only  a  few  of  those  old-world 
creatures ;  but  he  recognizes  in  those  which  have  been 
preserved  the  clearest  evidence  that  thousands  of  others 
must  have  existed  around  them.  He  knows  that  of  a 
million  creatures  now  existing  scarcely  one  will  leave  to 
future  ages  any  record  of  its  existence ;  he  sees  whole 
races  vanishing  from  the  earth,  leaving  no  trace  behind 
them  ;  and  he  is  thus  able  to  form  an  estimate  of  the 
enormous  extent  by  which  the  creatures  and  races  of 
which  he  can  learn  nothing  must  have  outnumbered  those 
whose  scattered  remains  attest  their  former  existence 
upon  the  earth. 


M  OTHER  WOULD S  THAN  OtJBS. 

Here,  then,  we  have  analogies  which  there  is  no  mistak- 
ing. We  see  that  not  only  is  Nature  careful  to  fill  all 
available  space  with  living  forms,  but  that  no  time  over 
which  our  researches  extend  has  found  her  less  prodigal  of 
life.  We  see  that,  within  very  wide  limits,  she  has  a  sin- 
gular power  of  adapting  living  creatures  to  the  circum- 
stances which  surround  them.  Nor  is  this  lesson  affected 
— like  the  general  lesson  drawn  from  the  mere  fact  of  the 
earth's  being  inhabited — by  anything  we  can  learn  from 
the  aspect  of  our  satellite.  For  the  arguments  against 
the  presence  of  living  creatures  on  the  moon  are  founded 
on  the  evidence  we  have  that  the  physical  habitudes  of 
that  orb  are  outside  the  limits  within  which  Nature  effects 
the  adaptation  spoken  of. 

The  moon  teaches  us,  however,  that  all  the  celestial 
bodies  are  not  at  all  times  habitable.  The  sun  also 
teaches  the  same  lesson.  And  it  is  necessary  that  we 
should  consider  how  far  the  evidence  presented  by  our 
own  earth  may  serve  to  elucidate  this  teaching.  We  shall 
see  that  terrestrial  analogies  afford  a  very  sure  guide  in  the 
midst  of  many  perplexities  presented  by  the  study  of  the 
worlds  around  us. 

Let  us  trace  out  the  various  degrees  of  fitness  or  unfit- 
ness for  the  support  of  particular  forms  of  life,  which  we 
recognize  in  various  regions  of  our  earth. 

Often,  where  there  exists  so  slight  a  difference  between 
two  regions  of  the  earth  that,  to  ordinary  observation,  it 
would  appear  that  the  forms  of  life  existing  in  one  should 


WHAT  OUR  EARTH  TEACHES  US.  25 

be  well  adapted  to  the  other  also,  we  jet  find  that  this  is 
not  the  case.  Some  minute  peculiarity  of  soil,  or  climate, 
or  vegetation,  will  render  one  region  absolutely  uninhab- 
itable by  a  race  which  lives  and  thrives  in  the  other. 
Darwin  mentions  several  instances  in  which  an  apparently 
insignificant  change  in  the  circumstances  under  which  a 
particular  race  has  thriven,  and  sometimes  a  change  which 
does  not,  at  first  sight,  appear  to  be  in  the  least  connected 
with  the  well-being  of  the  race,  has  led  to  its  gradual  dis- 
appearance. And  it  seems  demonstrated  that  even  the 
slow  processes  of  change  to  which  every  part  of  the  earth 
is  subjected  would  suffice  to  destroy  a  number  of  the  races 
now  subsisting  on  its  surface,  were  the  characteristics  of 
those  races  unalterable.  But  as  the  physical  habitudes  of 
their  abode  slowly  change,  the  various  races  of  living  creat- 
ures slowly  change  also,  so  as  to  adapt  themselves  contin- 
ually to  the  varying  circumstances  under  which  they  live. 
The  lesson  taught  us  by  this  peculiarity  is  very  obvious. 
On  the  one  hand,  we  see  that  it  would  be  by  no  means 
sufficient  to  indicate  a  general  resemblance  between  the 
physical  habitudes  of  our  earth  and  those  of  some  far 
distant  planet,  in  order  to  prove  that  that  planet  is  the 
abode  of  living  creatures  resembling  those  on  our  own 
earth.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  we  are  taught  that  the 
existence  of  differences  sufficient  to  render  a  distant  planet 
an  unsuitable  abode  for  such  creatures  as  we  are  familiar 
with  cannot  force  upon  us  the  conclusion  that  the  planet 
is  uninhabited.     On  the  contrary,  the   circumstance   w$ 


26         OTHER   WOBLDS  THAN  OUBS. 

have  been  considering  teaches  us  that  such  differences  as 
would  suffice  to  banish  life  of  certain  kinds  are  insufficient 
to  banish  life  of  all  kinds,  or  even  to  render  less  abundant 
the  forms  of  life  which  exist  under  those  changed  condi- 
tions. 

And  now  we  may  proceed  a  step  further.  On  our  earth 
we  find  differences  of  climate  and  physical  habitudes  gen- 
erally, which  are  much  more  important  than  those  hitherto 
dealt  with.  We  see  that  not  only  would  certain  races 
perish  in  the  long  run,  if  removed  from  their  own  abode  to 
other  parts  of  the  earth,  but  that,  in  some  instances,  the 
process  of  destruction  would  be  very  rapid  indeed.  If  we 
were  to  remove  the  polar  bears  from  their  Arctic  fastnesses 
to  tropical,  or  even  to  the  warmer  parts  of  temperate 
regions,  a  very  few  years  would  see  the  end  of  the  whole 
race.  The  races  inhabiting  steppes  and  prairies  would 
quickly  perish  if  removed  to  mountain  regions.  Those 
accustomed  to  a  moisture-laden  air  and  abundant  vegeta- 
tion would  not  survive  long  if  removed  to  the  desert. 

In  some  races,  indeed,  we  find  a  power  of  enduring 
such  changes  which  very  far  exceeds  that  possessed  by 
other  races.  Those  creatures,  for  example,  which  man 
has  domesticated  seem  capable  of  enduring  a  variety  of 
climate  or  of  circumstances,  which  would  destroy  the 
seemingly  more  vigorous  races  not  yet  subdued  to  the 
yoke  of  man.* 

*  Humboldt  tells  us  that  ' '  the  pliability  of  the  organisation  of  those 
animals  which  man  has  subjected  to  his  sway  enables  horses,  cows,  and 


WHAT  OUR  EARTH  TEACHES  US.  27 

Even  man  himself,  however,  though  he  possesses  in  an 
unrivalled  degree  the  power  of  enduring  in  safety  the 
most  complete  change  of  climate,  scene,  and  circum- 
stances, is  yet  limited,  in  a  certain  sense,  in  his  power  of 
migration.  The  Englishman,  for  example,  can  endure  the 
fiercest  heat  of  the  tropics  or  the  bitterest  cold  of  Arctic 
and  Antarctic  regions.  But  he  cannot  safely  attempt  to 
found  true  colonies  in  every  part  of  the  earth's  surface. 
Our  countrymen  in  India  must  send  their  children  to  be 
reared  in  England,  if  they  wish  them  to  grow  up  strong 
and  vigorous.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  if  a  thou- 
sand men  and  women  from  this  country  were  to  settle  in 
certain  parts  of  India  (not  at  any  time  intermarrying  with 
the  natives),  the  colony  would  disappear  within  a  couple 
of  centuries. 

Here  we  have  a  second  degree  of  unfitness,  according 
to  which  certain  countries  would  quickly  become  depopu- 
lated, if  supplied  with  inhabitants  from  certain  other 
countries.  "We  are  taught  the  same  lesson  as  before,  but 
in  a  more  striking  manner.  "We  see  that  differences  exist 
within  the  confines  of  our  own  earth  which  render  partic- 
ular countries  absolutely  uninhabitable  by  particular  races, 
insomuch  that,  though  the  individual  might  survive,  the 


other  species  of  European  origin  to  lead  for  a  time  an  amphibious  life 
surrounded  by  crocodiles,  water  serpents,  and  manatees.  When  the 
rivers  return  again  to  their  beds,  the  horses  roam  in  the  savannah,  which 
is  then  spread  over  with  a  fine  odoriferous  grass  ;  and  enjoy,  as  in  their 
native  climate,  the  renewed  vegetation  of  spring." 


28         OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

race  itself  would  quickly  perish.  And  we  see,  on  the 
other  hand,  that  these  countries  are  not  uninhabited,  or 
even  less  fully  peopled  with  living  creatures,  than  seem- 
ingly more  fortunate  abodes. 

Now,  if  some  impassable  barrier  prevented  the  in- 
habitants of  one  country  from  visiting  others,  while  yet 
it  was  possible  to  learn  something  of  the  conditions  pre- 
vailing in  other  regions,  how  readily  the  conclusion  might 
be  reached  that  some,  at  least,  of  those  inaccessible  regions 
must  be  wholly  uninhabited,  simply  because  their  physical 
habitudes  appeared  unsuited  to  the  wants  of  the  only 
creatures  with  which  the  observer  was  familiar.  Who 
would  believe,  for  example,  that  men  can  live,  and  not 
only  live,  but  thrive  and  multiply,  in  the  frost-bound  re- 
gions within  the  Arctic  Circle,  if  travellers  had  not  visited 
the  Esquimaux  races,  and  witnessed  the  conditions  under 
which  they  subsist  ?  Again,  if  we  knew  nothing  of  India, 
and  some  one  pictured  to  us  the  intense  heat  of  the  Indian 
sun,  the  strange  alternations  of  weather  which  replace  to 
the  Indian  the  seasonal  changes  we  are  familiar  with,  and 
all  the  other  circumstances  which  render  tropical  regions 
so  different  from  our  English  home,  who  could  believe 
that,  amid  those  seemingly  unendurable  vicissitudes, 
there  are  races  of  men  that  thrive  and  multiply,  even  as 
our  people  in  their  temperate  zone  ?  * 

*  Perhaps  the  most  striking  instance  of  man's  power  of  living  under 
circumstances  seemingly  the  most  unfavorable  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact 
that,  though  the  strongest  traveller  is  affected  seriously  by  the  rarity  of 


WHAT  OUR  EARTH  TEACHES  US.  29 

Therefore,  in  examining  the  circumstances  of  other 
worlds  than  ours,  it  will  not  be  sufficient  to  prove  that 
certain  orbs  would  obviously  not  be  habitable  by  the 
races  subsisting  on  the  earth,  in  order  to  enforce  the 
conclusion  that  no  living  creatures  subsist  at  all  upon 
their  surface. 

Yet  another  step  further,  however.  There  are  regions 
of  the  earth  where  the  members  of  races  belonging  to 
other  regions  quickly  perish.  The  air  of  our  own  Eng- 
land is  death  to  many  creatures.  And  indeed,  there  is 
not  a  spot  in  the  whole  world  which  would  not  be  fatal  in 
a  brief  space  to  many  animals  and  plants  belonging  to 
other  regions.  Yet  each  spot,  though  thus  fatal  to  certain 
races,  is  inhabited  by  numbers  of  others  which  live  and 
thrive  upon  its  surface. 

Here,  then,  is  our  third  lesson.  We  are  taught  by  the 
analogy  of  our  earth  that  it  is  not  even  sufficient  to  show 
that  a  planet  would  be  an  abode  quickly  fatal  to  all  the 
living  creatures  subsisting  on  our  globe  to  prove  that  it 
is  therefore  uninhabited. 

But  we  have  yet  a  stronger  argument  to  touch  on. 
i'here  are  regions  of  our  earth  to  which  creatures  from 
other  regions  cannot  be  removed  without  being  immedi' 


the  air  at  great  elevations,  yet  races  of  men  live  and  thrive  in  Potosi, 
Bogota,  and  Quito,  and— to  use  the  words  of  a  modern  writer — that 
bull-fights  should  be  possible  at  an  elevation  at  which  Saussure  hardly 
had  energy  to  consult  his  instruments,  and  where  even  his  guides  faint 
ed  as  they  tried  to  dig  a  small  hole  in  the  snow. 


30         OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

ately  killed.  The  warm-blooded  animal  perishes  if 
placed  for  a  brief  space  under  water.  The  fish  perishes 
if  placed  for  a  brief  space  on  the  earth.  *  What  could 
be  more  wonderful  to  us,  were  we  not  familiar  with  the 
fact,  than  that  there  are  living  creatures  within  the  depths 
of  that  ocean  beneath  whose  surface  we  ourselves,  and 
the  land  creatures  we  are  familiar  with,  cannot  remain 
alive  many  minutes  ?  If  fishes  could  reason,  how  could 
they  believe  that  creatures  can  live  in  that  element  which 
is  death  to  them  ?  Yet  land  and  river  and  sea  are  alike 
peopled  with  living  creatures,  each  race  as  well  adapted 
as  its  fellows  to  the  circumstances  in  which  it  is  placed. 

We  are  taught,  then,  yet  another  lesson.  We  see  that 
even  though  we  could  prove  that  every  living  creature  on 
this  earth  would  at  once  perish  if  removed  to  another 
orb,  yet  we  cannot  thence  conclude  that  that  orb  is  unin- 
habited. On  the  contrary,  the  lesson  conveyed  by  our 
earth's  analogy  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  many  worlds 
may  exist,  abundantly  supplied  with  living  creatures  of 
many  different  species,  where  yet  every  form  of  life  upon 
our  earth — bird,  beast,  or  fish,  reptile,  insect,  or  animal- 
cule— would  perish  in  a  few  moments,  f 


*  Perhaps  the  fact  that  there  are  certain  kinds  of  fish  which  cannot 
only  live  out  of  water,  but  can  travel  across  the  dry  land,  or  climb 
trees,  affords  an  even  more  striking  instance  of  Nature's  power  of 
adapting  creatures  to  the  circumstances  which  surround  them. 

f  I  might  add  to  the  instances  here  cited  many  others  which  seem 
even  more  striking.  We  know  that  in  strong  acids  which  would  in- 
stantly kill  bird,  beast,  fish,  or  insect  placed  within  them,  there  exist 


WHAT  OUR  EARTH  TEACHES  US.  31 

There  remains  yet  a  last  lesson  to  be  drawn  from  ter- 
restrial analogies.  On  the  earth  there  are  regions  where 
no  form  of  life  exists  or  can  exist.  Within  the  flaming 
crater  of  the  volcano,  or  in  the  frozen  heart  of  the  ice- 
berg, no  living  creature  has  its  being.  Yet  even  here 
Nature  proves  to  us  that  the  great  end  and  aim  of  all  her 
working  is  to  afford  scope  and  room  for  new  forms  of 
life,  or  to  supply  the  wants  of  those  which  already  exist. 
The  volcano  will  die  out,  and  the  scene  of  its  activity  will 
one  day  become  the  abode  of  myriads  of  living  creatures 
who  would  have  perished  in  a  moment  in  its  consuming 
fires.  The  iceberg  will  melt,  and  its  substance  will  once 
again  be  peopled  with  busy  life.  But  this  is  little.  Ii 
is  the  work  of  which  volcano  and  iceberg  are  the  signs, 
which  most  significantly  teaches  us  what  is  Nature's  real 
aim.  The  volcano  is  the  index  of  those  busy  subterra- 
nean forces  which  are  remodelling  the  earth's  frame, 
slowly  changing  the  level  of  the  land,  making  continents 
of  oceans  and  oceans  of  continents,  preserving  and  vivi- 
fying all  things,  while  all  things  seem  to  suffer  a  gradual 
destruction.     The  iceberg,  too,  has  its  work  in  remodel- 


and  thrive  minute  creatures,  adapted  by  Nature  to  the  strange  condi- 
tions in  which  they  are  placed.  Even  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth  and 
in  the  very  neighborhood  of  active  volcanoes,  we  find  the  volcano-fish 
existing  in  such  countless  thousands  that  when  they  are  from  time  to 
time  vomited  forth  by  the  erupting  mountain  their  bodies  are  strewn 
over  enormous  regions,  and,  as  they  putrefy  beneath  the  sun's  rays, 
spread  pestilence  and  disease  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  neighboring 
districts. 


32         OTHER  WORLDS  TEAN  OURS. 

ling  and  fashioning  the  surface  of  new  continents.  It 
also  acts  an  important  part  in  the  formation  and  mainte- 
nance of  the  system  of  oceanic  circulation  on  which  the 
welfare  of  land  creatures  and  water  creatures  so  largely 
depends.  And  so  of  a  multitude  of  other  phenomena, 
which  appear  at  first  sight  significant  rather  of  the  de- 
struction than  of  the  life-preserving  character  of  Nature. 
The  tornado  and  the  thunder-storm,  the  earthquake  and 
the  volcano — nay,  even  the  dreaded  returns  of  plague  and 
pestilence — have  each  a  more  powerful  influence  by  far 
toward  the  preservation  than  they  have  toward  the  de- 
struction of  life. 

"We  see,  then,  that  even  if  we  could  prove  that  an  orb 
in  space  is  so  circumstanced  that  no  life  could  by  any 
possibility  exist  upon  its  surface  ;  if  it  were  the  scene  of 
a  fierce  and  destructive  turmoil,  one  moment  of  which 
would  suffice  to  destroy  every  living  creature  now  exist- 
ing upon  the  earth ;  if  its  whole  mass  were  heated  to  a 
degree  a  thousandfold  more  intense  than  that  of  the 
fiercest  heat  we  know  of ;  if  its  surface  were  bound  in  a 
cold  compared  with  which  our  Arctic  frosts  would  seem 
like  tropical  heat ;  or  even  if  the  most  rapid  alternation 
of  these  extremes  took  place  upon  and  within  it — even 
then  we  could  not  conclude  that  it  has  not  been  in  long- 
past  ages,  or  will  not  be  in  ages  yet  to  come,  the  abode 
of  life. 

Lastly,  even  when  we  can  safely  assert  of  any  celestial 
object  that  neither  now,  nor  at  any  past  or  future  time, 


WHAT  OUR  EARTH  TEACHES  ITS.  33 

could  it  serve  as  the  abode  of  living  creatures,  we  are  led 
by  terrestrial  analogies  to  the  conclusion  that  it  yet  sup- 
ports life  in  other  ways.  So  that  these  very  orbs,  of 
which  it  seems  safest  to  assert  that  they  are,  have  ever 
been,  and  must  ever  remain  uninhabited,  speak  to  us,  no 
less  strongly  than  those  which  appear  best  suited  for 
habitation,  of  the  existence  of  other  worlds  than  ours. 
% 


34  OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 


CHAPTER  H. 

WHAT  WE  LEAEN  FROM  THE  SUN. 

I  do  not  propose  to  dwell  in  this  chapter  on  the  views 
which  have  been  propounded  respecting  the  sun's  habita- 
bility.  It  is  not  merely  that  I  regard  those  views  as  too 
fanciful  to  find  place  in  a  serious  consideration  of  the 
subject  I  am  dealing  with,  nor  that  the  progress  of  recent 
observation  has  rendered  them  utterly  untenable,  but 
that,  in  fact,  they  do  not  belong  to  what  the  sun  teaches 
us.  I  wish  to  consider  only  the  real  evidence  which  the 
sun  affords  respecting  the  scheme  of  creation,  to  dwdl 
upon  the  purposes  which  he  subserves  in  the  econoniy  of 
the  solar  system,  and  thence  to  deduce  a  lesson  respect- 
ing those  other  suns  scattered  through  space  which  we 
«all  the  fixed  stars. 

Let  us  first  endeavor  to  form  adequate  conceptions  re- 
specting the  dimensions  of  the  great  central  luminary  of 
the  solar  system. 

Let  the  reader  consider  a  terrestrial  globe  three  inches 
in  diameter,  and  search  out  on  that  globe  the  tiny  tri- 
angular speck  which  represents  Great  Britain.  Then  let 
him  endeavor  to  picture  the  town  in  which  he  lives  as 
represented  by  the  minutest  pin-mark  that  could  possi- 


WHAT  WE  LEARN  FROM  THE  SUN.  35 

bly  be  made  upon  this  speck.  He  will  then  have  formed 
some  conception,  though  but  an  inadequate  one,  of  the 
enormous  dimensions  of  the  earth's  globe,  compared  with 
the  scene  in  which  his  daily  life  is  cast.  Now,  on  the 
same  scale,  the  sun  would  be  represented  by  a  globe 
about  twice  the  height  of  an  ordinary  sitting-room.  A 
room  about  twenty-six  feet  in  length,  and  height,  and 
breadth,  would  be  required  to  contain  the  representation 
of  the  sun's  globe  on  this  scale,  while  the  globe  repre- 
senting the  earth  could  be  placed  in  a  moderately  large 
goblet. 

Such  is  the  body  which  sways  the  motions  of  the  solar 
system.  The  largest  of  his  family,  the  giant  Jupiter, 
though  of  dimensions  which  dwarf  those  of  the  earth  or 
Yenus  almost  to  nothingness,  would  yet  only  be  repre- 
sented by  a  thirty-two-inch  globe,  on  the  scale  which 
gives  to  the  sun  the  enormous  volume  I  have  spoken  of. 
Saturn  would  have  a  diameter  of  about  twenty-eight 
inches,  his  ring  measuring  about  five  feet  in  its  extreme 
span.  Uranus  and  Neptune  would  be  little  more  than  a 
foot  in  diameter,  and  all  the  minor  planets  would  be  less 
than  the  three-inch  earth.  It  will  thus  be  seen  that  the 
sun  is  a  worthy  centre  of  the  great  scheme  he  sways, 
even  when  we  merely  regard  his  dimensions. 

The  sun  outweighs  fully  seven  hundred  and  thirty  times 
the  combined  mass  of  all  the  planets  which  circle  around 
him,  so  that  when  we  regard  the  energy  of  his  attraction, 
we  still  find  him  a  worthy  ruler  of  the  planetary  scheme. 


36  omm  woblds  tban  oum. 

But,  after  all,  the  enormous  volume  and  mass  of  the 
sun  form  the  least  important  of  his  characteristics  as  the 
ruling  body  of  the  solar  system.  It  is  when  we  contem- 
plate him  as  the  source  whence  the  supplies  of  heat  and 
light  required  by  our  own  world  and  the  other  planets 
are  plentifully  bestowed  that  we  see  what  is  his  chief 
office  in  the  economy  of  the  planetary  scheme. 

Properly  speaking,  the  physical  constitution  of  the  sun 
only  requires  to  be  dealt  with  in  such  a  work  as  the 
present,  in  so  far  as  it  is  directly  associated  with  the 
sun's  action  upon  the  worlds  around  him,  or  as  it  may 
bear  on  the  question  of  the  constitution  of  those  worlds. 
But  the  subject  is  so  interesting,  and  it  would  indeed  be 
so  difficult  to  draw  a  line  of  demarcation  between  the 
facts  which  bear  upon  the  question  of  other  worlds  and 
those  which  do  not,  that  I  may  be  permitted  to  enter  at 
some  length  into  a  consideration  of  the  solar  orb,  as  mod- 
ern physical  discoveries  present  it  to  our  contemplation. 

The  study  of  solar  physics  may  be  said  to  have  com- 
menced with  the  discovery  of  the  sun-spots,  about  two 
hundred  and  sixty-seven  years  ago.  These  spots  were 
presently  found  to  traverse  the  solar  disk  in  such  a  way 
as  to  indicate  that  the  sun  turns  upon  an  axis  once  in 
about  twenty-six  days.  Nor  will  this  rotation  appear 
slow  when  we  remember  that  it  implies  a  motion  of  the 
equatorial  parts  of  the  sun's  surface  at  a  rate  exceeding 
some  seventy  times  the  motion  of  our  swiftest  express 
trains. 


WHAT  WE  LEARN  FROM  THE  SUN.  37 

Next  came  the  discovery  that  the  solar  spots  are  not 
surface  stains,  but  deep  cavities  in  the  solar  substance. 
The  changes  of  appearance  presented  by  the  spots  as 
they  traverse  the  solar  disk,  led  Dr.  Wilson  to  form  this 
theory  so  far  back  as  1779  ;  but,  strangely  enough,  it  is 
only  in  comparatively  recent  times  that  the  hypothesis 
has  been  finally  established.  For  even  within  the  last 
ten  years  a  theory  was  put  forward  which  accounted 
satisfactorily  for  most  of  the  changes  of  appearance  ob- 
served in  the  spots,  by  supposing  them  to  be  due  to 
solar  clouds  hanging  suspended  at  a  considerable  eleva- 
tion above  the  true  photosphere. 

Sir  William  Herschel,  reasoning  from  terrestrial  analo- 
gies, was  led  to  look  on  the  spot  cavities  as  apertures 
through  a  double  layer  of  clouds.  He  argued  that  were 
the  solar  photosphere  of  any  other  nature,  it  would  be 
past  comprehension  that  vast  openings  should  form  in  it, 
to  remain  open  for  months  before  they  close  up  again. 
Whether  we  consider  the  enormous  rapidity  with  which 
the  spots  form  and  with  which  their  figure  changes,  or 
the  length  of  time  that  many  of  them  remain  visible,  we 
find  ourselves  alike  perplexed,  unless  we  assume  that  the 
solar  photosphere  resembles  a  bed  of  clouds.  Through  a 
stratum  of  terrestrial  clouds,  openings  may  be  formed 
by  atmospheric  disturbances,  but  while  undisturbed  the 
clouds  will  retain  any  form  once  impressed  upon  them 
for  a  length  of  time  corresponding  to  the  weeks  and 
months  during  which  the  solar  spots  endure. 


38         OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

And  because  the  solar  spots  present  two  distinct  varie- 
ties oi  light,  the  faint  penumbra  and  the  dark  umbra  or 
nucleus,  Herschel  saw  the  necessity  of  assuming  that 
there  are  two  beds  of  clouds,  the  outer  self-luminous  and 
constituting  the  true  solar  photosphere,  the  inner  reflect- 
ing the  light  received  from  the  outer  layer,  and  so  shield- 
ing the  real  surface  of  the  sun  from  the  intense  light  and 
heat  which  it  would  otherwise  receive. 

But  while  recent  discoveries  have  confirmed  Sir  Will- 
iam Herschel's  theory  about  the  solar  cloud-envelopes, 
they  have  by  no  means  given  countenance  to  his  view 
that  the  body  of  the  sun  may  possibly  be  cool.  The 
darkness  of  the  nucleus  of  a  spot  is  found,  on  the  con- 
trary, to  give  proof  that  in  that  neighborhood  the  sun  is 
hotter,  because  it  parts  less  readily  with  its  heat.  We 
shall  see  presently  how  this  is.  Meantime  let  it  be  no- 
ticed in  passing  that  a  close  scrutiny  of  large  solar  spots 
has  revealed  the  existence  of  an  intensely  dark  spot  in 
the  midst  of  the  umbra.  This  spot  must  be  regarded  as 
the  true  nucleus. 

The  circumstance  that  the  spots  appear  only  on  two 
bands  of  the  sun's  globe,  corresponding  to  the  subtropi- 
cal zones  on  our  own  earth,  led  the  younger  Herschel  to 
conclusions  as  important  as  those  which  his  father  had 
formed.  He  reasoned,  like  his  father,  from  terrestrial 
analogies.  On  our  own  earth  the  subtropical  zones  are 
the  regions  where  the  great  cyclonic  storms  have  then 
birth,  and  rage  with  their  chief  fury.     Here,  therefore, 


WHAT  WE  LEARN  FROM  TBE  SUN  39 

we  have  tlie  analogue  of  the  solar  spots,  if  only  we  can 
show  reason  for  believing  that  any  causes  resembling 
those  which  generate  the  terrestrial  cyclone  operate  upon 
those  regions  of  the  sun  where  the  solar  spots  make  their 
appearance. 

We  know  that  the  cyclone  is  due  to  the  excess  of  heat 
at  the  earth's  equator.  It  is  true  that  this  excess  of  heat 
is  always  in  operation,  whereas  cyclones  are  not  perpetu- 
ally raging  in  subtropical  climates.  Ordinarily,  there- 
fore, the  excess  of  heat  does  not  cause  tornadoes.  Cer- 
tain aerial  currents  are  generated,  whose  uniform  motion 
suffices,  as  a  rule,  to  adjust  the  conditions  which  the  ex- 
cess of  heat  at  the  equator  would  otherwise  tend  to 
disturb.  But  when  through  any  cause  the  uniform  ac- 
tion of  the  aerial  currents  is  either  interfered  with,  01 
is  insufficient  to  maintain  equilibrium,  then  cyclonic  or 
whirling  motions  are  generated  in  the  disturbed  atmos- 
phere, and  propagated  over  a  wide  area  of  the  earth's 
surface. 

Now  we  recognize  the  reason  of  the  excess  of  heat  at 
the  earth's  equator,  in  the  fact  that  the  sun  shines  more 
directly  upon  that  part  of  the  earth  than  on  the  zones 
which  lie  in  higher  latitudes.  Can  we  find  any  reason 
for  suspecting  that  the  sun,  which  is  not  heated  from 
without  as  the  earth  is,,  should  exhibit  a  similar  peculiar- 
ity ?  Sir  John  Herschel  considered  that  we  can.  If  the 
sun  has  an  atmosphere  extending  to  a  considerable  dis- 
tance from  his  surface,  then  there  can  be  little   doubt 


40         OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

that,  owing  to  his  rotation  upon  his  axis,  this  atmosphere 
would  assume  the  figure  of  an  oblate  spheroid,  and  would 
be  deepest  over  the  solar  equator.  Here,  then,  more  of 
the  sun's  heat  would  be  retained  than  at  the  poles,  where 
the  atmosphere  is  shallowest.  Thus  that  excess  of  heat 
at  the  solar  equator  which  is  necessary  to  complete  the 
analogy  between  the  sun-spots  and  terrestrial  cyclones 
seems  satisfactorily  established. 

It  must  be  remarked,  however,  that  this  reasoning,  so 
far  as  the  excess  of  heat  at  the  sun's  equator  is  concerned, 
only  removes  the  difficulty  a  step.  If  there  were  indeed 
an  increased  depth  of  atmosphere  over  the  sun's  equator 
sufficient  to  retain  the  requisite  excess  of  heat,  then  the 
amount  of  heat  we  receive  from  the  sun's  equatorial  re- 
gions ought  to  be  appreciably  less  than  the  amount 
emitted  from  the  remaining  portions  of  the  solar  surface. 
This  is  not  found  to  be  the  case,  so  that,  either  there  is 
no  such  excess  of  absorption,  or  else  the  solar  equator 
gives  out  more  heat,  in  other  words,  is  essentially  hotter, 
than  the  rest  of  the  sun.  But  this  is  just  the  peculiarity 
of  which  we  want  the  interpretation. 

It  may  be  taken  for  granted,  however,  that  there  is  an 
analogy  between  the  sun-spots  and  terrestrial  cyclonic 
storms,  though  as  yet  we  are  not  very  well  able  to  under- 
stand its  nature. 

We  come  next  to  one  of  the  most  interesting  discover- 
ies ever  made  respecting  the  sun — the  discovery  that  the 
spots  increase  and  diminish  in  frequency  in  a  periodic 


WHAT   WE  LEARN  FROM  THE  8UJST.  41 

manner.  We  owe  this  discovery  to  the  laborious  and 
systematic  observations  made  by  Herr  Schwabe,  of 
Dessau.  In  these  pages  any  account  of  his  work  would 
be  out  of  place.  "We  need  only  dwell  upon  the  result, 
and  upon  other  discoveries  which  have  been  made  by 
observers  who  have  taken  up  the  same  work. 

Schwabe  found  that  in  the  course  of  about  eleven  years 
the  solar  spots  pass  through  a  complete  cycle  of  changes. 
They  become  gradually  more  and  more  numerous  up  to 
a  certain  maximum,  and  then  as  gradually  diminish.  At 
length  the  sun's  face  becomes  not  only  clear  of  spots,  but 
a  certain  well-marked  darkening  around  the  border  of 
his  disk  disappears  altogether  for  a  brief  season.  At  this 
time  the  sun  presents  a  perfectly  uniform  disk.  Then 
gradually  the  spots  return,  become  more  and  more 
numerous,  and  so  the  cycle  of  changes  is  run  through 
again. 

The  astronomers  who  have  watched  the  sun  from  the 
Kew  observatory  have  found  that  the  process  of  change 
by  which  the  spots  sweep  in  a  sort  of  "  wave  of  in- 
crease "  over  the  solar  disk  is  marked  by  several  minor 
variations.  As  the  surface  of  a  great  sea-wave  will  be 
traversed  by  small  ripples,  so  the  gradual  increase  and 
diminution  in  the  number  of  the  solar  spots  is  character- 
ized by  minor  gradations  of  change,  which  are  sufficiently 
well  marked  to  be  distinctly  cognizable. 

There  seems  every  reason  for  believing  that  the  peri- 
odic changes  thus  noticed  are  due  to  the  influence  of  the 


4:2         OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

planets  upon  the  solar  photosphere,  though  in  what  way 
that  influence  is  exerted  is  not  at  present  perfectly  clear, 
Some  have  thought  that  the  mere  attraction  of  th^ 
planets  tends  to  produce  tides  of  some  sort  in  the  sola* 
envelopes.  Then,  since  the  height  of  a  tide  so  produced 
varies  as  the  cube  or  third  power  of  the  distance,  it  has 
been  thought  that  a  planet  when  in  perihelion  would 
generate  a  much  larger  solar  tide  than  when  in  aphelion. 
So  that,  as  Jupiter  has  a  period  nearly  equal  to  the  sun- 
spot  period,  it  has  been  supposed  that  the  attractions  of 
this  planet  are  sufficient  to  account  for  the  great  spot- 
period.  Yenus,  Mercury,  the  Earth,  and  Saturn  have,  in 
a  similar  manner,  been  rendered  accountable  for  the 
shorter  and  less  distinctly  marked  periods. 

Without  denying  that  the  planets  may  be,  and  prob- 
ably are,  the  bodies  to  whose  influence  the  solar-spot 
periods  are  to  be  ascribed,  I  yet  venture  to  express  very 
strong  doubts  whether  the  action  of  Jupiter  is  so  much 
greater  in  perihelion  than  in  aphelion  as  to  account  for 
the  fact  that,  whereas  at  one  season  the  face  of  the  sun 
shows  many  spots,  at  another  it  is  wholly  free  from 
them. 

However,  we  are  not  at  present  concerned  so  much 
with  the  explanation  of  facts  as  with  the  facts  themselves. 
We  have  to  consider  rather  what  the  sun  is,  and  what  he 
does  for  the  solar  system,  than  why  these  things  are  so. 

Let  us  note,  before  passing  to  other  circumstances  of 
interest  connected  with  the  sun,  that  the  variable  condi- 


WHAT  WE  LEARN  FROM  TEE  SUN  43 

tion  of  his  photosphere  must  cause  him  to  change  in 
brilliancy  as  seen  from  vast  distances.  If  Herr  Schwabe, 
for  instance,  instead  of  observing  the  sun's  spots  from  his 
watch-tower  at  Dessau,  could  have  removed  himself  to  a 
distance  so  enormous  that  the  sun's  disk  would  have  been 
reduced,  even  in  the  most  powerful  telescope,  to  a  mere 
point  of  light,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  only  effect 
which  he  would  have  been  able  to  perceive  would  have 
been  a  gradual  increase  and  diminution  of  brightness, 
having  a  period  of  about  eleven  years. 

Our  sun,  therefore,  if  viewed  from  the  neighborhood  of 
any  of  the  stars,  whence  undoubtedly  he  would  simply 
appear  as  one  among  many  fixed  stars,  would  be  a  "  vari- 
able," having  a  period  of  about  eleven  years,  and  a  very 
limited  range  of  variation.  Further,  if  an  observer,  view- 
ing the  sun  from  so  enormous  a  distance,  had  the  means 
of  very  accurately  measuring  its  light,  he  would  undoubt- 
edly discover  that  while  the  chief  variation  of  the  sun 
takes  place  in  a  period  of  about  eleven  years,  its  light  is 
subjected  to  minor  variations,  having  shorter  periods. 

The  discovery  that  the  periodic  changes  of  the  sun's 
appearance  are  associated  with  the  periodic  changes  in 
the  character  of  the  earth's  magnetism  is  the  next  that 
we  have  to  consider. 

It  had  long  been  noticed  that  during  the  course  of  a 
single  day  the  magnetic  needle  exhibits  a  minute  change 
of  direction,  taking  place  in  an  oscillatory  manner.  And 
when  the  character  of  this  vibration  came  to  be  carefully 


44         OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

examined,  it  was  found  to  correspond  to  a  sort  of  effort 
on  the  needle's  part  to  turn  toward  the  sun.  For  exam- 
ple, when  the  sun  is  on  the  magnetic  meridian,  the  needle 
has  its  mean  position.  This  happens  twice  in  the  day, 
once  when  the  sun  is  above  the  horizon,  and  once  when 
he  is  below  it.  Again,  when  the  sun  is  midway  between 
these  two  positions — which  also  happens  twice  in  the  day 
— the  needle  has  its  mean  position,  because  the  northern 
and  the  southern  ends  make  equal  efforts,  so  to  speak,  to 
direct  themselves  toward  the  sun.  Four  times  in  the 
day,  then,  the  needle  has  its  mean  position,  or  is  directed 
toward  the  magnetic  meridian.  But  when  the  sun  is  not 
in  one  of  the  four  positions  considered,  that  end  of  the 
needle  which  is  nearest  to  him  is  slightly  turned  away 
from  its  mean  position,  toward  him.  The  change  of 
position  is  very  minute,  and  only  the  exact  methods  of 
observation  made  use  of  in  the  present  age  would  have 
sufficed  to  reveal  it.  There  it  is,  however,  and  this  mi- 
nute and  seemingly  unimportant  peculiarity  has  been 
found  to  be  full  of  meaning. 

Had  science  merely  measured  this  minute  variation, 
the  work  would  have  given  striking  evidence  of  the  exact 
spirit  in  which  men  of  our  day  deal  with  natural  phenom- 
ena. But  science  was  to  do  much  more.  The  variations 
of  this  minute  variation  were  to  be  inquired  into ;  their 
period  was  to  be  searched  for ;  the  laws  by  which  they 
were  regulated,  and  by  which  their  period  might  perhaps 
itself  be  rendered  variable,  were  to  be  examined;  and 


WHAT  WE  LEARN  FROM  THE  SUN.  45 

finally  their  relation  to  other  natural  laws  was  to  be 
sought  after.  That  science  should  set  herself  to  an  in- 
quiry so  delicate  and  so  difficult,  in  a  spirit  so  exacting, 
was  nothing  unusual.  It  is  thus  that  all  the  great  dis- 
coveries of  our  age  have  been  effected.  But  it  is  well  that 
the  reader  should  recognize  the  careful  scrutiny  to  which 
natural  phenomena  have  been  subjected  before  the  great 
laws  we  have  to  consider  were  made  known.  It  is 
thought  by  many,  who  have  not  been  at  the  pains  to 
examine  what  science  is  really  doing  in  our  day,  that  the 
wonders  she  presents  to  men's  contemplation,  the  start- 
ling revelations  which  are  being  made  from  day  to  day, 
are  merely  dreams  and  fancies  which  replace  indeed  the 
dreams  and  fancies  of  old  times,  but  have  no  worthier 
claims  on  our  belief.  Those  who  carefully  examine  the 
history  of  science  will  be  forced  to  adopt  a  very  different 
opinion. 

The  minute  vibrations  of  the  magnetic  needle,  thus 
carefully  watched — day  after  day,  month  after  month, 
year  after  year — were  found  to  exhibit  a  yet  more  minute 
oscillatory  change.  They  waxed  and  waned  within  nar- 
row limits  of  variation,  but  yet  in  a  manner  there  was  no 
mistaking.  The  period  of  this  oscillatory  change  was  not 
to  be  determined,  however,  by  the  observations  of  a  few 
years.*     Between   the  time  when  the  diurnal  vibration 


*  The  reader  must  not  understand  that  the  account  here  given  pre- 
sents in  any  sense  even  a  general  view  of  the  labors  of  those  who  have 
studied  the  earth's  magnetism.     I  touch  only  on  those  points  by  which 


46  OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  0TJR8. 

was  least  until  it  had  reached  its  greatest  extent,  and 
thence  returned  to  its  first  value,  no  less  than  eleven 
years  elapsed,  and  a  much  longer  time  passed  before  the 
periodic  character  of  the  change  was  satisfactorily  deter- 
mined. 

The  reader  will  at  once  see  what  these  observations 
tend  to.  The  sun-spots  vary  in  frequency  within  a  period 
of  eleven  years,  and  the  magnetic  diurnal  observations 
vary  within  a  period  of  the  same  duration.  It  might 
seem  fanciful  to  associate  the  two  periodic  series  of 
changes  together,  and  doubtless  when  the  idea  first  oc- 
curred to  Sabine,  it  was  not  with  any  great  expectation 
of  finding  it  confirmed,  that  he  examined  the  evidence 
bearing  on  the  point.  Judging  from  known  facts,  we 
may  see  reasons  for  such  an  expectation  in  the  corre- 
spondence of  the  needle's  diurnal  vibration,  with  the  sun's 
apparent  motion,  and  also  in  the  law  which  associates  the 
annual  variations  of  the  magnet's  power  with  the  sun's 
distance.  But  undoubtedly  when  the  idea  occurred  to 
Sabine,  it  was  an  exceedingly  bold  one,  and  the  ridicule 
with  which  the  first  announcement  of  the  supposed  law 
was  received,  even  in  scientific  circles,  suffices  to  show 
how  unexpected  that  relation  was  which  is  now  so  thor- 
oughly established.     For  a  careful  comparison  between 


the  association  between  the  earth's  magnetism  and  the  physical  condi- 
tion of  the  sun  are  most  clearly  indicated  ;  because  these  points  alone 
bear  an  the  subject  of  this  chapter.  How  they  do  so  will  appear  fur- 
ther on. 


WHAT  WE  LEARN  FROM  THE  SUN.  4? 

the  two  periods  has  demonstrated  that  they  agree  most 
perfectly,  not  merely  in  length,  but  maximum  for  maxi- 
mum, and  minimum  for  minimum.  When  the  sun-spots 
are  most  numerous,  then  the  daily  vibration  of  the  mag- 
net is  most  extensive ;  while  when  the  sun's  face  is  clear 
of  spots,  the  needle  vibrates  over  its  smallest  diurnal  arc. 
Then  the  intensity  of  the  magnetic  action  has  been 
found  to  depend  upon  solar  influences.  The  vibrations 
by  which  the  needle  indicates  the  progress  of  those  strange 
disturbances  of  the  terrestrial  magnetism  which  are  known 
as  magnetic  storms,  have  been  found  not  merely  to  be 
most  frequent  when  the  sun's  face  is  most  spotted,  but  to 
"occur  simultaneously  with  the  appearance  of  signs  of  dis- 
turbance in  the  solar  photosphere.  For  instance,  during 
the  autumn  of  1859,  the  eminent  solar  observer,  Carring- 
ton,  noticed  the  apparition  of  a  bright  spot  upon  the  sun's 
surface.  The  light  of  this  spot  was  so  intense  that  he 
imagined  the  screen  which  shaded  the  plate  employed  to 
receive  the  solar  image  had  been  broken.  By  a  fortunate 
coincidence  another  observer,  Mr.  Hodgson,  happened  to 
be  watching  the  sun  at  the  same  instant,  and  witnessed 
the  same  remarkable  appearance.  Now  it  was  found  that 
the  self -registering  magnetic  instruments  of  the  Kew  ob« 
servatory  had  been  sharply  disturbed  at  the  instant  when 
the  bright  spot  was  seen.  And  afterward  it  was  learned 
that  the  phenomena  which  indicate  the  progress  of  a 
magnetic  storm  had  been  observed  in  many  places.  Tele- 
graphic communication  was  interrupted,  and  at  a  station 


4:8         OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

in  Norway  the  telegraphic  apparatus  was  set  on  fire ; 
auroras  appeared  both  in  the  northern  and  southern  hem- 
ispheres during  the  night  which  followed ;  and  the  whole 
frame  of  the  earth  seemed  to  thrill  responsively  to  the 
disturbance  which  had  affected  the  great  central  lumi- 
nary of  the  solar  system. 

The  reader  will  now  see  why  I  have  discussed  relations 
which  hitherto  he  may  perhaps  have  thought  very  little 
connected  with  my  subject.  He  sees  that  there  is  a  bond 
of  sympathy  between  our  earth  and  the  sun ;  that  no  dis- 
turbance can  affect  the  solar  photosphere,  without  affecting 
our  earth  to  a  greater  or  less  degree.  But  if  our  earth, 
then  also  the  other  planets.  Mercury  and  Venus,  so 
much  nearer  the  sun  than  we  are,  surely  respond  even 
more  swiftly  and  more  distinctly  to  the  solar  magnetic 
influences.  But  beyond  our  earth,  and  beyond  the  orbit 
of  moonless  Mars,  the  magnetic  impulses  speed  with  the 
velocity  of  light.  The  vast  globe  of  Jupiter  is  thrilled 
from  pole  to  pole  as  the  magnetic  wave  rolls  in  upon  it ; 
then  Saturn  feels  the  shock,  and  then  the  vast  distances 
beyond  which  lie  Uranus  and  Neptune  are  swept  with  the 
ever-lessening  yet  ever- widening  disturbance-wave.  Who 
shall  say  what  outer  planets  it  then  seeks  ?  or  who,  looking 
back  upon  the  course  over  which  it  has  travelled,  shall  say 
that  planets  alone  have  felt  its  effects?  Meteoric  and 
cometic  systems  have  been  visited  by  the  great  magnetic 
wave,  and  upon  the  dispersed  members  of  the  one  and  the 
subtle  structure  of  the  other  effects  even  more  important 


WHAT  WE  LEARN  FROM  THE  SUN  49 

may  have  been  produced  than  those  striking  phenomena 
which  characterize  the  progress  of  terrestrial  or  planetary 
magnetic  storms. 

When  we  remember  that  what  is  true  of  a  relatively 
great  solar  disturbance,  such  as  the  one  witnessed  by 
Messrs.  Carrington  and  Hodgson,  is  true  also  (however 
different  in  degree)  of  the  magnetic  influences  which  the 
sun  is  at  every  instant  exerting,  we  see  that  a  new  and 
most  important  bond  of  union  exists  between  the  mem- 
bers of  the  solar  family.  The  sun  not  only  sways  them 
by  the  vast  attraction  of  his  gravity,  not  only  illumines 
them,  not  only  warms  them,  but  he  pours  forth  on  all  his 
subtle  yet  powerful  magnetic  influences.  A  new  analogy 
between  the  members  of  the  solar  system  is  thus  intro- 
duced. 

And  now  we  pass  on  to  other  discoveries,  bearing  at 
-once  and  with  equal  force  upon  the  relations  between  the 
Various  members  of  the  solar  system  and  upon  the  posi- 
tion which  that  system  occupies  in  the  universe. 

Hitherto  we  have  been  considering  the  teachings  of 
the  telescope ;  we  have  now  to  consider  what  we  have 
learned  by  means  of  an  instrument  of  yet  higher  powers. 
As  I  shall  have  to  refer  very  frequently,  throughout  this 
volume,  to  the  teachings  of  the  spectroscope,  it  will  be 
well  that  I  should  briefly  describe  what  it  is  that  this 
instrument  really  effects.  Were  I  simply  to  state  the 
results  of  its  use,  without  describing  its  real  character, 
many  of  my  readers  would  be  disposed  to  believe  that 


50         OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

astronomers  are  as  credulous  as  in  reality  they  are  ex- 
acting and  scrupulous,  where  new  facts  and  observations 
are  in  question. 

The  real  end  and  aim  of  the  telescope,  as  applied  by 
the  astronomer  to  the  examination  of  the  celestial  ob- 
jects, is  to  gather  together  the  light  which  streams  from 
each  luminous  point  throughout  space.  We  may  regard 
the  space  which  surrounds  us  on  every  side  as  an  ocean 
without  bounds  or  limits,  an  ocean  across  which  there 
are  ever  sweeping  waves  of  light  either  emitted  directly 
from  the  various  bodies  subsisting  throughout  space,  or 
else  reflected  from  their  surfaces.  Other  forms  of  wave 
also  speed  across  those  limitless  depths  in  all  directions ; 
but  the  light-waves  are  those  which  at  present  concern  us. 
Our  earth  is  as  a  minute  island  placed  within  the  ocean 
of  space,  and  to  the  shores  of  this  tiny  isle  the  light- 
waves bear  their  message  from  the  orbs  which  lie  like 
other  isles  amid  the  fathomless  depths  around  us.  With 
the  telescope  the  astronomer  gathers  together  portions  of 
light-waves  which  else  would  have  travelled  in  diverging 
directions.  By  thus  intensifying  their  action,  he  enables 
the  eye  to  become  cognizant  of  their  true  nature.  Pre- 
cisely as  the  narrow  channels  around  our  shores  cause  the 
tidal  wave,  which  sweeps  across  the  open  ocean  in  almost 
insensible  undulations,  to  rise  and  fall  through  a  wide 
range  of  variation,  so  the  telescope  renders  sensible  the 
existence  of  light-waves  which  would  escape  the  notice 
of  the  unaided  eye. 


WHAT  WE  LEARN  FROM  THE  SUN.  51 

The  telescope,  then,  is  essentially  a  light-gatherer. 

The  spectroscope  is  used  for  another  purpose.  It 
might  be  called  the  light-sifter.  It  is  applied  by  the  as- 
tronomer to  analyze  the  light  which  comes  to  him  from 
beyond  the  ocean  of  space,  and  so  to  enable  him  to  learn 
the  character  of  the  orbs  from  which  that  light  proceeds. 

The  principle  of  the  instrument  is  simple,  though  the 
appliances  by  which  its  full  powers  can  alone  be  educed 
are  somewhat  complicated. 

A  ray  of  sunlight  falling  on  a  prism  of  glass  or  crystal 
does  not  emerge  unchanged  in  character.  Different  por- 
tions of  the  ray  are  differently  bent,  so  that  when  they 
emerge  from  the  prism  they  no  longer  travel  side  by  side 
as  before.  The  violet  part  of  the  light  is  bent  most,  the 
red  least;  the  various  colors  from  violet  through  blue, 
green,  and  yellow,  to  red,  being  bent  gradually  less  and 


The  prism  then  sorts,  or  sifts,  the  light-waves. 

But  we  want  the  means  of  sifting  the  light-waves  more 
thoroughly.  The  reader  must  bear  with  me  while  I  de- 
scribe, as  exactly  as  possible  in  the  brief  space  available 
to  me,  the  way  in  which  the  first  rough  work  of  the  prism 
has  been  modified  into  the  delicate  and  significant  work 
of  the  spectroscope.  It  is  well  worth  while  to  form  clear 
views  on  this  point,  because  so  many  of  the  wonders  of 
modern  science  are  associated  with  spectroscopic  analysis. 

If,  through  a  small  round  hole  in  a  shutter,  light  is  ad- 
mitted into  a  darkened  room,  and  a  prism  be  placed  with 


52         OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

its  refracting  angle  downward  and  horizontal,  a  vertical 
spectrum,  having  its  violet  end  uppermost,  will  be  formed 
on  a  screen  suitably  placed  to  receive  it. 

But  now  let  us  consider  what  this  spectrum  really  is. 
If  we  take  the  light-waves  corresponding  to  any  particu- 
lar color,  we  know  from  optical  considerations  that  these 
waves  emerge  from  the  prism  in  a  pencil  exactly  resemb- 
ling in  shape  the  pencil  of  white  light  which  falls  on  the 
prism.  They  therefore  form  a  small  circular  or  oval 
image  on  their  own  proper  part  of  the  spectrum.  Hence 
the  spectrum  is  in  reality  formed  of  a  multitude  of  over- 
lapping images,  varying  in  color  from  violet  to  red.  It 
thus  appears  as  a  rainbow-tinted  streak,  presenting  every 
gradation  of  color  between  the  utmost  limits  of  visibility 
at  the  violet  and  red  extremities. 

If  we  had  a  square  aperture  to  admit  the  light,  we 
should  get  a  similar  result.  If  the  aperture  were  oblong, 
there  would  still  be  overlapping  images ;  but  if  the  length 
of  the  oblong  were  horizontally-placed  oblong,  the  over- 
lapping would  be  less  than  when  the  images  were  square. 
Suppose  we  diminish  the  overlapping  as  much  as  possi- 
ble ;  in  other  words,  suppose  we  make  the  oblong  slit  as 
narrow  as  possible.  Then,  unless  there  were  in  reality  an 
infinite  number  of  images  distributed  all  along  the  spec- 
trum from  top  to  bottom,  the  images  might  be  so  nar- 
rowed as  not  to  overlap ;  in  which  case,  of  course,  there 
would  be  horizontal  dark  spaces  or  gaps  in  our  spectrum. 
Or  again,  if  we  failed  in  finding  gaps  of  this  sort  by 


WHAT  WE  LEARN  FROM  THE  SUN.  53 

simply  narrowing  the  aperture,  we  might  lengthen  the 
spectrum  by  increasing  the  refracting  angle  of  the  prism, 
or  by  using  several  prisms,  and  so  on. 

The  first  great  discovery  in  solar  physics,  by  means  of 
the  analysis  of  the  prism  (though  the  discovery  had  little 
meaning  at  the  time),  consisted  in  the  recognition  of  the 
fact  that  by  means  of  such  devices  as  the  above,  dark 
gaps  or  cross-lines  can  be  seen  in  the  solar  spectrum.  In 
other  words,  light- waves  of  the  various  gradations  corre- 
sponding to  all  the  tints  of  the  spectrum  from  violet  to 
red,  do  not  travel  to  us  from  the  great  central  luminary 
of  our  system.  Kemembering  that  the  effect  we  call 
color  is  due  to  the  length  of  the  light-waves,  the  effect  of 
red  corresponding  to  light-waves  of  the  greatest  length, 
while  the  effect  of  violet  corresponds  to  the  shortest  light- 
wave, we  see  that  in  effect  the  sun  sends  forth  to  the 
worlds  which  circle  around  him  light-waves  of  many  dif- 
ferent lengths,  but  not  of  all  lengths.  Of  so  complex  and 
interesting  a  nature  is  ordinary  daylight. 

But  spectroscopists  sought  to  interpret  these  dark  lines 
in  the  solar  spectrum,  and  it  was  in  carrying  out  this  in- 
quiry— which  even  to  themselves  seemed  almost  hopeless, 
and  to  many  would  appear  an  utter  waste  of  time — that 
they  lighted  upon  the  noblest  method  of  research  yet  re- 
vealed to  man. 

They  examined  the  spectra  of  the  light  from  incandes- 
cent substances  (white-hot  metals  and  the  like),  and 
found  that  in  these  spectra  there  are  no  dark  lines. 


54         OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

They  examined  the  spectra  of  the  light  from  the  stars, 
and  found  that  these  spectra  are  crossed  by  dark  lines  re- 
sembling those  in  the  solar  spectrum,  but  differently  ar- 
ranged. 

They  tried  the  spectra  of  glowing  vapors,  and  they 
obtained  a  perplexing  result.  Instead  of  a  number  of 
dark  lines  across  a  rainbow-tinted  streak,  they  found 
bright  lines  of  various  color.  Some  gases  would  give  a 
few  such  lines,  others  many,  some  only  one  or  two. 

Then  they  tried  the  spectrum  of  the  electric  spark,  and 
they  found  here  also  a  series  of  bright  lines,  but  not 
always  the  same  series.  The  spectrum  varied  according 
to  the  substances  between  which  the  spark  was  taken  and 
the  medium  through  which  it  passed. 

Lastly,  they  found  that  the  light  from  an  incandescent 
solid  or  liquid,  when  shining  through  various  vapors,  no 
longer  gives  a  spectrum  without  dark  lines,  but  that  the 
dark  lines  which  then  appear  vary  in  position,  according 
to  the  nature  of  the  vapor  through  which  the  light  has 
passed. 

Here  were  a  number  of  strange  facts,  seemingly  too 
discordant  and  too  perplexing  to  admit  of  being  inter- 
preted. Yet  one  discovery  only  was  wanting  to  bring 
them  all  into  unison. 

In  1859  Kirchhoff,  while  engaged  in  observing  the  solar 
spectrum,  lighted  on  the  discovery  that  a  certain  double 
dark  line  which  had  already  been  found  to  correspond 
exactly  in  position  with  the  double  bright  line  forming 


WHAT  WE  LEARR  *isvM  THE  STJN.  55 

the  spectrum  of  the  glowing  vapor  of  sodium,  was  inten- 
sified when  the  light  of  the  sun  was  allowed  to  pass 
through  that  vapor.  This  at  once  suggested  the  idea  that 
the  presence  of  this  dark  line  (or,  rather,  pair  of  dark  lines) 
in  the  spectrum  of  the  sun  is  due  to  the  existence  of  the 
vapor  of  sodium  in  the  solar  atmosphere,  and  that  this 
vapor  has  the  power  of  absorbing  the  same  order  of  light- 
waves as  its  emits.  It  would  of  course  follow  from  this 
that  the  other  dark  lines  in  the  solar  spectrum  are  due  to 
the  presence  of  other  absorbent  vapors  in  its  atmosphere, 
and  that  the  identity  of  these  would  admit  of  being  es- 
tablished in  the  same  way,  supposing  this  general  law 
to  hold  that  a  vapor  emits  the  same  light-waves  that  it  is 
capable  of  absorbing. 

Kirchhoff  was  soon  able  to  confirm  his  views  by  a 
variety  of  experiments.  The  general  principles  to 
which  his  researches  led — in  other  words,  the  principles 
which  form  the  basis  of  spectrum  analysis — are  as  fol- 
lows : 

1.  An  incandescent  solid  or  liquid  gives  a  continuous 
spectrum. 

2.  A  glowing  vapor  gives  a  spectrum  of  bright  lines, 
each  vapor  having  its  own  set  of  lines,  so  that  from  the 
appearance  of  a  bright-line  spectrum  one  can  tell  the 
nature  of  the  vapor  or  vapors  whose  light  forms  the 
spectrum. 

3.  An  incandescent  solid  or  liquid  shining  through 
absorbent  vapors  gives  a  rainbow-tinted  spectrum  crossed 


56  OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  0TJR8. 

by  dark  lines,  these  dark  lines  having  the  same  posi* 
tion  as  the  bright  lines  belonging  to  the  spectra  of  the 
vapors ;  so  that,  from  the  arrangement  of  the  dark  lines 
in  such  a  spectrum,  one  can  tell  the  nature  of  the  vapoi 
or  vapors  which  surround  the  source  of  light.* 

The  application  of  the  new  method  of  research  to  the 
study  of  the  solar  spectrum  quickly  led  to  a  number  of 
most  interesting  discoveries.  It  was  found  that  besides 
sodium  the  sun's  atmosphere  contains  the  vapors  of  iron, 
calcium,  magnesium,  chromium,  and  other  metals.  The 
dark  lines  corresponding  to  these  elements  appear  unmis- 


*  To  these  may  be  added  the  following  laws : 

4.  Light  reflected  from  any  opaque  body  gives  the  same  spectrum  as 
It  would  have  given  before  reflection. 

5.  But  if  the  opaque  body  be  surrounded  by  vapors,  the  dark  lines 
corresponding  to  these  vapors  make  their  appearance  in  the  spectrum 
with  a  distinctness  proportioned  to  the  extent  to  which  the  light  has 
penetrated  those  vapors  before  being  reflected  to  us. 

6.  If  the  reflecting  body  be  itself  luminous,  the  spectrum  belonging 
to  it  is  superadded  to  the  spectrum  belonging  to  the  reflected  light. 

7.  Glowing  vapors  surrounding  an  incandescent  source  of  light  may 
cause  bright  lines  or  dark  lines  to  appear  in  the  spectrum,  according  as 
they  are  more  or  less  heated  ;  or  they  may  emit  just  so  much  light  as 
to  make  up  for  what  they  absorb,  in  which  case  there  will  remain  no 
trace  of  their  presence. 

8.  The  electric  spark  presents  a  bright-line  spectrum,  compounded 
of  the  spectra  belonging  to  the  vapors  of  those  substances  between 
which,  and  of  those  through  which,  the  discharge  takes  place.  Ac- 
cording to  the  nature  of  these  vapors  and  of  the  discharge  itself,  the 
relative  intensity  of  the  component  parts  of  the  spectrum  will  be  varia- 
ble. 

Lastly,  the  appearance  of  the  spectrum  belonging  to  any  element 
will  vary  according  to  the  circumstances  of  pressure  and  temperature 
under  which  the  element  may  emit  light. 


WHAT  WE  LEARN  FROM  THE  SUN.  57 

takably  in  the  solar  spectrum.  There  are  other  metals — ■ 
such  as  copper  and  zinc — which  seem  to  exist  in  the  sun, 
though  some  of  the  corresponding  dark  lines  have  not 
yet  been  recognized.  As  yet  it  has  not  been  proved  that 
gold,  silver,  mercury,  tin,  lead,  arsenic,  antimony,  or 
aluminium  exist  in  the  sun — though  we  can  by  no  means 
conclude,  nor  indeed  is  it  at  all  probable,  that  they  are 
absent  from  his  substance.  The  dark  lines  belonging  to 
hydrogen  are  very  well  marked  indeed  in  the  solar  spec- 
trum, and,  as  we  shall  see  presently,  the  study  of  these 
lines  has  afforded  most  interesting  information  respect- 
ing the  physical  constitution  of  the  sun. 

Now,  we  notice  at  once  how  importantly  these  re- 
searches into  the  sun's  structure  bear  upon  the  subject 
of  this  treatise.  It  would  be  indeed  interesting  to  con- 
sider the  actual  condition  of  the  central  orb  of  the  plane- 
tary scheme,  to  picture  in  imagination  the  metallic 
oceans  which  exist  upon  his  surface,  the  continual  evap- 
oration from  those  oceans,  the  formation  of  metallic 
clouds,  and  the  downpour  of  metallic  showers  upon  the 
surface  of  the  sun.  But  apart  from  such  considerations, 
and  viewing  Kirchhoff's  discoveries  simply  in  their  rela- 
tion to  the  subject  of  other  worlds,  we  have  enough  to 
occupy  our  attention. 

If  it  could  have  been  shown  that,  in  all  probability, 
the  substance  of  the  sun  consists  of  materials  wholly 
different  from  those  which  exist  in  this  earth,  the  conclu- 
sion obviously  to  be  drawn  from  such  a  discovery  would 


58         OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

be  that  the  other  planets  also  are  differently  constituted. 
We  could  not  find  any  just  reason  for  believing  that  in 
Jupiter  or  Mars  there  exist  the  elements  with  which  we 
are  acquainted,  when  we  found  that  even  the  central  orb 
of  the  planetary  system  exhibits  no  such  feature  of 
resemblance  to  the  earth.  But  now  that  we  know  quite 
certainly  that  the  familiar  elements  iron,  sodium,  and 
calcium  exist  in  the  sun's  substance,  while  we  are  led  to 
believe,  with  almost  perfect  assurance,  that  all  the  ele- 
ments we  are  acquainted  with  also  exist  there,  we  see 
at  once  that  in  all  probability  the  other  planets  are 
constituted  in  the  same  way.  There  may  of  course  be 
special  differences.  In  one  planet  the  proportionate  dis- 
tribution of  the  elements  may  differ,  and  even  differ  very 
markedly  from  that  which  prevails  in  some  other  planet. 
But  the  general  conclusion  remains,  that  the  planets  are 
formed  of  the  elements  which  have  so  long  been  known 
as  terrestrial ;  for  we  cannot  recognize  any  reason  for 
believing  that  our  earth  alone,  of  all  the  orbs  which 
circle  around  the  sun,  resembles  that  great  central  orb 
in  general  constitution.* 

Now,  we  have  in  this  general  law  a  means  of  passing 
beyond  the  bounds  of  the  solar  system,  and  forming  no 
indistinct  conceptions  as  to  the  existence  and  character 
of  worlds   circling   around  other  suns.     For  it  will  be 


*  It  will  be  seen,  in  the  chapter  on  "  Meteors  and  Comets,"  that  this 
conclusion  has  a  most  important  bearing  on  the  views  we  are  to  form 
respecting  the  original  formation  of  the  planetary  scheme. 


WHAT  WE  LEARN  FROM  THE  SUN.  59 

seen  in  the  chapter  on  the  stars  that  these  orbs,  like  our 
sun,  contain  in  their  substance  many  of  the  so-called 
terrestrial  elements,  while  it  may  not  unsafely  be  as- 
serted that  all  or  nearly  all  those  elements,  and  few  or 
no  elements  unknown  to  us,  exist  in  the  substance  of 
every  single  star  that  shines  upon  us  from  the  celestial 
concave.  Hence  we  conclude  that  around  those  suns 
also  there  circle  orbs  constituted  like  themselves,  and 
therefore  containing  the  elements  with  which  we  are  fa- 
miliar. And  the  mind  is  immediately  led  to  speculate 
on  the  uses  which  those  elements  are  intended  to  sub- 
serve. If  iron,  for  example,  is  present  in  some  noble 
orb  circling  around  Sirius,  we  speculate  not  unreasonably 
respecting  the  existence  on  that  orb — either  now,  or  in 
the  past,  or  at  some  future  time — of  being  capable  of 
applying  that  metal  to  the  useful  purposes  which  man 
makes  it  subserve.  The  imagination  suggests  immedi- 
ately the  existence  of  arts  and  sciences,  trades  and  man- 
ufactures, on  that  distant  world.  We  know  how  inti- 
mately the  use  of  iron  has  been  associated  with  the 
progress  of  human  civilization,  and  though  we  must  ever 
remain  in  ignorance  of  the  actual  condition  of  intelligent 
beings  in  other  worlds,  we  are  yet  led,  by  the  mere  pres- 
ence of  an  element  which  is  so  closely  related  to  the 
wants  of  man,  to  believe,  with  a  new  confidence,  that 
for  such  beings  those  worlds  must  in  truth  have  been 
fashioned. 

I  would  fain  dwell  longer  on  the  thoughts  suggested 


60         OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

by  the  researches  of  Kirchhoff.  Gladly,  too,  would  I 
enter  at  length  on  an  account  of  those  interesting  discov- 
eries which  have  been  made  in  connection  with  recent 
total  eclipses  of  the  sun.  The  requirements  of  space, 
however,  and  some  doubt  as  to  the  direct  bearing  of  the 
last-named  discoveries  on  the  subject  I  have  in  hand, 
warn  me  to  forbear.  One  point,  however,  remains,  which 
is  too  intimately  connected  with  my  subject  to  be  passed 
over. 

I  refer  to  the  sun's  corona. 

It  has  been  proved  that  the  solar  prominences  consist 
of  glowing  vapors,  hydrogen  being  their  chief  constitu- 
ent. It  has  been  found,  also,  by  comparing  observations 
of  the  prominence-spectra  with  elaborate  researches  into 
the  peculiarities  presented  by  the  spectrum  of  hydrogen 
at  different  pressures,  that  even  in  the  very  neighborhood 
of  the  solar  photosphere  these  vapors  probably  exist  at  a 
pressure  so  moderate  as  to  indicate  that  the  limits  of  the 
sun's  vaporous  envelope  cannot  lie  very  far  (relatively) 
from  the  outer  solar  cloud-layer. 

Now  the  solar  corona  has  been  seen,  during  total 
eclipses  of  the  sun,  to  extend  to  a  distance  at  least  equal 
to  the  sun's  diameter  from  the  eclipsed  orb.  So  that, 
assuming  the  corona  to  be  a  solar  atmosphere,  it  would 
have  a  depth  of  about  eight  hundred  and  fifty  thou- 
sand miles,  and  being  also  drawn  toward  the  sun  by  his 
enormous  attractive  energy  (exceeding  more  than  twenty- 
seven  times  that  of  the  earth),  it  could  not  fail  to  exert  a 


WHAT   WE  LEARN  FROM  THE  SUN.  61 

pressure  on  his  surface  exceeding  many  thousand-fold 
that  of  our  air  upon  the  earth.  In  fact,  such  an  atmos- 
phere, let  its  outermost  layers  be  as  rare  as  we  can  con- 
ceive, would  yet  have  its  lower  layers  absolutely  liquefied, 
if  not  solidified,  by  the  enormous  pressure  to  which 
they  would  be  subjected.  "We  cannot,  then,  believe  this 
corona  to  be  a  solar  atmosphere. 

Yet  it  is  quite  impossible  to  dissociate  the  corona  from 
the  sun.  Until  1872  some  attempted  to  do  this,  and  not 
only  so,  but  to  make  of  the  zodiacal  light  a  terrestrial 
phenomenon.  But  they  had  overlooked  considerations 
which  oppose  themselves  irresistibly  to  such  a  conclu- 
sion; and  since  the  observation  of  the  solar  eclipse  of 
December,  1871,  astronomers  are  of  one  accord  in  re- 
garding the  corona  as  appertaining  to  the  sun. 

But  the  spectroscope  has  given  certain  very  perplexing 
evidence  respecting  the  light  of  the  corona,  and  it  remains 
that  we  should  endeavor  to  see  how  that  evidence  bears 
on  the  interesting  problem  which  the  corona  presents  to 
our  consideration. 

During  the  total  eclipse  of  August,  1869,  the  American 
observers  found  that  the  spectrum  of  the  corona  is  con- 
tinuous, but  crossed  by  certain  bright  lines.  If  we  accept 
the  absence  of  dark  lines  as  established  by  the  evidence 
(which  is  doubtful),  this  result  seems  at  first  sight  very 
difficult  to  explain.  Referring  to  the  principles  of  spec- 
troscopic analysis  stated  at  pp.  55,  56,  it  will  be  seen  that 
we  should  be  led  to  infer  that  the  corona  consists  of  in- 


62         OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

candescent  matter  surrounded  by  certain  glowing  gases. 
It  is  difficult  to  suppose  that  this  is  the  real  explanation 
of  the  phenomenon. 

Now,  remembering  that  we  have  two  established  facts 
for  our  guidance — (1)  the  fact  that  the  outer  corona  can- 
not be  a  solar  atmosphere,  and  (2)  the  fact  that  it  must 
be  a  solar  appendage — I  think  a  way  may  be  found  tow- 
ard a  satisfactory  explanation. 

Let  it  be  premised  that  the  bright  lines  of  the  coronal 
spectrum  correspond  in  position,  though  not  in  bright- 
ness, to  those  seen  in  the  spectrum  of  the  aurora,  and 
that  the  same  lines  are  seen  in  the  spectrum  of  the  zodi- 
acal light,  and  in  that  of  the  phosphorescent  light  occa- 
sionally seen  oyer  the  heavens  at  night. 

Since  we  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  light  of 
the  aurora  is  due  to  electrical  discharges  taking  place  in 
the  upper  regions  of  the  air,  we  are  invited  to  the  belief 
that  the  coronal  light  may  be  due  to  similar  discharges 
taking  place  between  the  particles  (of  .whatever  nature) 
constituting  the  corona. 

Now,  though  the  appearance  of  an  aurora  is  due  to 
some  special  terrestrial  action  (however  excited),  yet  the 
material  substances  between  which  the  discharges  take 
place  must  be  assumed  to  be  at  all  times  present  in  the 
upper  regions  of  the  air.  In  all  probability,  they  are  the 
particles  of  those  meteors  which  the  earth  is  continually 
encountering.  And  since  we  know  that  meteor  systems 
must  be  aggregated  in  far  greater  numbers  near  the  sun 


WHAT  WE  LEARN  FROM  THE  SUJST.  63 

than  near  the  earth,  we  may  regard  the  coronal  light  as 
due  to  electrical  discharges  excited  by  the  sun's  action, 
and  taking  place  between  the  members  of  such  systems. 
Besides  this  light,  however,  there  must  necessarily  be  a 
large  proportion  of  light  reflected  from  these  meteoric 
bodies.  In  this  way  the  peculiar  character  of  the  coronal 
spectrum  may  be  readily  accounted  for.  "We  know  from 
the  auroral  spectrum  that  the  principal  bright  lines  due 
to  the  electrical  discharges  would  be  precisely  where  we 
see  bright  lines  in  the  coronal  spectrum.  But,  besides 
these,  there  would  be  fainter  bright  lines,  corresponding 
to  the  various  elements  which  exist  in  the  meteoric 
masses.  These  elements,  we  know,  are  the  same  as  those 
in  the  substance  of  the  sun.  Thus,  the  bright  lines  would 
correspond  in  position  with  the  dark  lines  of  the  solar 
spectrum.  Hence,  as  light  reflected  by  the  meteors 
would  give  the  ordinary  solar  spectrum,  there  would  re- 
sult from  the  combination  a  continuous  spectrum,  on 
which  the  bright  lines  first  mentioned  would  be  seen,  as 
during  the  American  eclipse. 

What  the  polariscope  has  told  us  respecting  the  corona 
is  in  accordance  with  this  view. 

In  the  same  way  the  quality  of  the  zodiacal  light  ad- 
mits of  being  perfectly  accounted  for,  without  resorting 
to  the  hypothesis  that  this  phenomenon  is  a  terrestrial 
one. 

The  explanation  thus  put  forward  has  at  least  the  ad- 
vantage of   being  founded  on  well-established  relations, 


64         OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

We  know  that  the  auroral  light  is  associated  with  the 
earth's  magnetism,  and  that  meteoric  bodies  are  continu- 
ally failing  upon  the  earth's  atmosphere.  We  know  also 
that  the  sun  exerts  magnetic  influences  a  thousand-fold 
more  intense  than  those  of  the  earth,  and  that  in  his 
neighborhood  there  must  be  many  million  tinier  more 
meteoric  systems. 

But  we  have  other  and  independent  reasons,  which 
must  not  be  overlooked,  for  considering  the  corona  to  be 
of  some  such  nature  as  I  have  suggested. 

Leverrier  has  shown  that  there  probably  exists  in  the 
neighborhood  of  the  sun  a  family  of  bodies  whose  united 
mass  suffices  appreciably  to  affect  the  motions  of  the 
planet  Mercury.  It  would  not  be  safe  to  neglect  con- 
siderations thus  vouched  for. 

Now,  whatever  opinion  we  form  as  to  the  exact  charac- 
ter of  the  system  of  bodies  pointed  to  by  Leverrier's  re- 
searches— whether  we  suppose  that  system  to  form  a  zone 
around  the  sun,  or  that  (as  I  believe)  the  system  is 
merely  due  to  the  aggregation  of  meteoric  perihelia  in 
the  sun's  neighborhood — we  may  be  quite  certain  that 
during  a  total  solar  eclipse  the  system  would  become 
visible. 

In  the  eclipse  of  December,  1871,  striking  evidence  was 
obtained  respecting  the  corona.  For  Janssen  was  able  to 
perceive  the  solar  dark  lines  in  the  spectrum  of  the  co- 
rona— proof  unmistakable  that  a  portion  of  the  coronal 
light  is  reflected  sunlight.     It  had  been  a  difliculty  in  the 


WHAT  WE  LEARN  FROM  THE  SUN  65 

meteoric  theory  that  these  solar  lines  had  not  been  de- 
tected in  the  faint  continuous  spectrum  of  the  corona. 
The  meteoric  theory,  that  is,  the  theory  that  a  portion  of 
the  coronal  light  is  due  to  light-reflecting  meteors  round 
the  sun,  accorded  with  all  the  known  phenomena  of  the 
corona  except  this  single  peculiarity,  that  (as  was  sup- 
posed) the  spectrum  showed  no  dark  lines.  Now  that 
the  dark  lines  have  been  seen,  all  doubt  seems  finally  re- 
moved. As  Janssen  said  in  the  letter  containing  the  dis- 
covery, "the  atmospheric  theory  is  disposed  of  (tromchee), 
and  we  must  recognize  in  the  corona  a  circumsolar  phe- 
nomenon containing  effects  of  radiation,  absorption,  and 
reflection  of  light,"  which  it  must  be  the  business  of  fut- 
ure eclipse  observers  to  analyze  in  detail. 

During  the  eclipse  of  July,  1878,  the  corona  was  found 
to  extend  to  at  least  seven  or  eight  millions  of  miles  from 
the  body  of  the  sun. 

It  will  be  seen,  in  the  chapter  on  "Meteors  and 
Comets,"  how  important  a  bearing  the  meteor  theory  of 
ohe  corona  (that  is,  of  a  portion  of  its  light)  has  upon 
the  history  of  the  solar  system.  It  has  been  partly  for 
this  reason  that  I  have  here  briefly  considered  the  mat- 
ter; but  there  is  another  and  a  most  important  relation 
in  which  these  views  must  be  regarded. 

We  know  that  the  sun  is  the  sole  source  whence  light 
and  heat  are  plentifully  supplied  to  the  worlds  which 
circle  around  him.  The  question  immediately  suggests 
itself — Whence  does  the  sun  derive  those  amazing  stores 


66  OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

of  force  from  whence  he  is  continually  supplying  his  de- 
pendent worlds?  We  know  that,  were  the  sun  a  mass  of 
burning  matter,  he  would  be  consumed  in  a  few  thousand 
years.  We  know  that,  were  he  simply  a  heated  body, 
radiating  light  and  heat  continually  into  space,  he  would 
in  like  manner  have  exhausted  all  his  energies  in  a  few 
thousand  years — a  mere  day  in  the  history  of  his  system. 
Whence,  then,  comes  the  enormous  supply  of  force  which 
he  has  afforded  for  millions  on  millions  of  years,  and 
which  he  will  doubtless  continue  to  afford  for  at  least  as 
long  a  time  as  the  worlds  which  circle  around  him  have 
need  of  it — in  other  words,  for  countless  ages  yet  to 
come? 

Now  there  are  two  ways  in  which  the  solar  energies 
might  be  maintained.  The  mere  contraction  of  the  solar 
substance,  Helmholtz  tells  us,  would  suffice  to  supply 
such  enormous  quantities  of  heat,  that  if  the  heat  actually 
given  out  by  the  sun  were  due  to  this  cause  alone,  there 
would  not,  in  many  thousands  of  years,  -be  any  percepti- 
ble diminution  of  the  sun's  diameter.  Secondly,  the  con- 
tinual downfall  of  meteors  upon  the  sun  would  cause  an 
emission  of  heat.  But  though  the  sun's  increase  of  mass 
from  this  cause  would  not  be  rendered  perceptible  in 
thousands  of  years,  either  by  any  change  in  his  apparent 
size  or  by  changes  in  the  motions  of  his  family  of  worlds, 
yet  the  supply  of  heat  obtainable  in  this  way  can  be  but 
small  compared  with  the  sun's  emission  of  heat.  This 
follows  from   the  limits  between  which  Leverrier   has 


WHAT  WE  LEARN  FROM  THE  SUN.  67 

shown  that  the  total  mass  of  the  meteors  of  our  system 
must  certainly  lie.* 

It  seems  far  from  unlikely  that  both  these  processes 
are  in  operation  at  the  same  time.  Certainly  the  latter 
is,  for  we  know,  from  the  motions  of  the  meteoric  bodies 
which  reach  the  earth,  that  myriads  of  these  bodies  must 
continually  fall  upon  the  sun.  If  the  corona  and  zodiacal 
light  are  really  due  to  the  existence  of  nights  of  meteoric 
systems  circling  around  the  sun,  or  to  the  existence  in  his 
neighborhood  of  the  perihelia  of  many  meteoric  systems, 
then  there  must  be  a  supply  of  light  and  heat  from  this 
source,  though  not  nearly  sufficient  to  account  for  the 
solar  emission. 

It  is  worthy  of  notice,  however,  that  the  association 
between  meteors  and  comets  has  some  bearing  on  this 
question.  We  know  that  the  most  remarkable  character- 
istic of  comets  is  the  enormous  diffusion  of  their  sub- 
stance. Now  in  this  diffusion  there  resides  an  enormous 
fund  of  force.  The  contraction  of  a  large  comet  to  dimen- 
sions corresponding  to  a  very  moderate  mean  density 
would  be  accompanied  by  the  emission  of  much  heat. 
The  question  is  worth  inquiring  into,  whether  we  can  in- 

*  Undue  stress  has  been  laid  upon  the  probable  change  in  the  length 
of  the  year,  owing  to  the  downfall  of  meteors  upon  the  sun's  mass.  It 
is  forgotten  that  the  crowded  meteors  forming  the  solar  corona  are 
already  within  the  earth's  orbit,  and  therefore  already  produce  their 
full  effect  on  the  length  of  the  year.  The  subsidence  of  all  these  bodies 
at  once  upon  the  sun  would  not  effect  the  length  of  the  year,  though  it 
would  lead  to  certain  modifications  in  the  secular  perturbations  of  the 
-earth's  orbit  in  figure  and  position. 


63         OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

deed  assume  that  all  meteors  which  reach  our  atmosphere 
are  solid  bodies.  Some  may  be  of  cometic  diffusion. 
But,  be  this  as  it  may,  it  is  certain  that  a  large  portion  of 
the  substance  of  every  comet  is  in  a  singularly  diffused 
state.  Since  the  meteoric  systems  circling  in  countless 
millions  round  the  sun  are,  in  all  probability,  associated 
in  the  most  intimate  manner  with  comets,  we  may  recog- 
nize in  this  diffusion,  as  well  as  in  the  mere  downfall  of 
meteors,  the  source  of  an  enormous  supply  of  light  and 
heat. 

Lastly,  turning  from  our  sun  to  the  other  suns,  which 
shine  in  uncounted  myriads  throughout  space,  we  see  the 
same  processes  at  work  upon  them  all.  Each  star-sun  has 
its  coronal  and  its  zodiacal  disks,  formed  by  meteoric  and 
cometic  systems ;  for  otherwise  each  would  quickly  cease 
to  be  a  sun.  Each  star-sun  emits,  no  doubt,  the  same 
magnetic  influences  which  give  to  the  zodiacal  light  and 
to  the  solar  corona  their  peculiar  characteristics.  Thus 
the  worlds  which  circle  round  those  orbs  may  resemble 
our  own  in  all  those  relations  which  we  refer  to  terrestrial 
magnetism,  as  well  as  in  the  circumstance  that  on  them 
also  there  must  be,  as  on  our  own  earth,  a  continual  down- 
fall of  minute  meteors.  In  those  worlds,  perchance,  the 
magnetic  compass  directs  the  traveller  over  desert  wastes 
or  trackless  oceans ;  in  their  skies,  the  aurora  displays  its 
brilliant  streamers ;  while,  amid  the  constellations  which 
deck  their  heavens,  meteors  sweep  suddenly  into  view,  and 
comets  extend  their  vast  length  athwart  the  celestial  vault. 


THE  INFERIOR  PLANETS.  69 


CHAPTEE  HI. 


THE  INFERIOR  PLANETS. 


In  considering  the  habitabilit y  of  various  portions  of 
the  solar  system,  we  have  to  draw  a  marked  distinction 
between  the  planets  which  travel  within  the  orbit  of  the 
earth  and  those  which  lie  beyond  its  range.  So  far,  in- 
deed, as  our  belief  in  these  orbs  being  inhabited  is  con- 
cerned, we  may  apply  the  same  processes  of  reasoning  to 
one  set  of  planets  as  to  the  other.  Until  it  has  been 
demonstrated  that  no  form  of  life  can  exist  upon  a  planet, 
the  presumption  must  be  that  the  planet  is  inhabited. 
But  it  is  impossible  to  contemplate  the  various  members 
of  our  solar  system  without  being  led  to  consider  their 
physical  habitudes  rather  with  relation  to  the  wants  of 
such  creatures  as  exist  upon  our  own  earth,  than  merely 
with  reference  to  the  existence  of  life  of  some  sort  upon 
their  surface.  Viewing  Venus  and  Mercury  in  this  way, 
we  have  a  different  set  of  relations  to  deal  with  than  we 
find  among  the  outer  planets.  We  are  struck  at  once  with 
the  marked  effects  which  seem  associable  with  their  com- 
parative proximity  to  the  sun's  orb.  This  feature  and  the 
shortness  of  their  period  of  revolution — that  is,  of  their 


70  OTHER   WORLDS  THAIS'  OURS. 

year — are  the  characteristic  peculiarities  we  have  to  deal 
with. 

I  would  willingly  pay  some  attention  here  to  the  story 
of  Vulcan,  the  planet  which  has  been  supposed  to  circle 
yet  more  closely  than  Mercury  around  the  centre  of  our 
system,  were  it  not  that  I  regard  the  existence  of  this 
planet  as  utterly  unlikely. 

Mercury  circles  around  the  sun  in  the  brief  period  of 
eighty-eight  days,  or  rather  less  than  three  of  our  months. 
So  that,  if  the  planet  has  seasons,  these  must  be  sever- 
ally about  three  weeks  long.  His  distance  from  the  sun 
varies  between  somewhat  wide  limits,  owing  to  the  ec- 
centricity of  his  orbit.  When  he  is  nearest  to  the  sun,  he 
receives  ten  and  a  half  times  more  light  and  heat  from 
that  luminary  than  we  do ;  but  when  he  removes  to  his 
greatest  distance,  the  light  and  heat  he  receives  are  re- 
duced by  more  than  one-half.  Even  then,  however,  the 
sun  blazes  in  the  skies  of  Mercury  with  a  disk  four  and  a 
half  times  larger  than  that  which  he  presents  to  the  ob- 
server on  earth. 

Undoubtedly  these  peculiarities,  the  shortness  of  the 
Mercurial  year,  and  the  immense  amount  of  light  and 
heat  poured  by  the  sun  upon  the  planet,  are  circum- 
stances which  do  not  encourage,  at  first  sight,  the  belief 
that  any  creatures  can  subsist  upon  this  planet  resem- 
bling those  with  which  we  are  familiar.  We  see  at  once 
that  all  forms  of  vegetation  in  Mercury  must  differ  in  a 
very  striking  manner  from  those  which  exist  upon  the 


THE  iNFfifilOR  PLANETS.  71 

earth,  because  their  structure  has  to  be  adapted  to  much 
more  rapid  changes  of  temperature.  And  the  existence 
of  a  totally  distinct  flora  suggests  at  once  the  belief  that 
animal  life  on  Mercury  must  be  very  different  from  what 
we  see  around  us. 

Let  us,  however,  proceed  a  few  steps  farther. 

It  has  been  found  that  Mercury  rotates  upon  his  axis, 
and  if  we  may  put  faith  in  the  observations  of  Schroter, 
the  Mercurial  day  is  only  a  few  minutes  longer  than  our 
own.  But  though  the  fact  of  the  planet's  rotation  has 
been  observed,  it  has  not  been  found  possible  to  deter- 
mine in  what  position  the  axis  of  rotation  lies.  It  has 
been  said  that  the  planet's  equator  is  much  more  inclined 
than  the  earth's  to  the  plane  in  which  the  planet  travels  ; 
but  little  reliance  can  be  placed  on  the  evidence  which 
has  been  adduced  in  favor  of  this  view. 

We  are  thus  left  altogether  in  doubt  as  to  the  nature 
of  the  Mercurial  seasons.  That  the  planet  has  seasons  of 
some  sort  we  are  certain,  because  even  if  the  axis  were  so 
placed  that  perpetual  spring  reigned  upon  the  planet — I 
mean,  that  the  days  and  nights  were  at  all  times  and  in 
all  places  equal — yet  his  varying  distance  from  the  sun 
would  give  changes  of  temperature  quite  as  marked  as 
those  which  characterize  our  seasons  in  England,  and 
very  much  more  marked  than  those  known  in  tropical 
regions.  Of  course,  if  this  is  the  actual  arrangement, 
there  are  different  climates  in  different  parts  of  the 
planet.     Near  his  poles  the  sun,  though  visible  for  half 


72         OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

the  Mercurial  day,  attains  yet  but  a  low  elevation  above 
the  horizon  ;  just  as  he  does  on  a  spring  day  within  our 
own  polar  circles.  At  the  equator  the  sun  passes  day 
after  day  to  the  zenith,  and  pours  down  upon  the  planet 
an  amount  of  light  and  heat  far  exceeding  the  light  and 
heat  of  our  tropical  climates.  A  sun  immediately  over- 
head, and  showing  a  diameter  varying  from  more  than 
twice  to  more  than  three  times  that  of  our  sun,  must  be 
a  noble  and  may  be  a  terrible  phenomenon  in  the  skies 
of  Mercury. 

There  is  yet  another  arrangement  by  which,  to  a  por- 
tion of  the  planet,  at  any  rate,  the  Mercurial  seasons 
might  be  tempered.  If  his  axis  is  so  placed  that  what 
would  be  the  winter  season  were  his  orbit  not  eccentric 
takes  place,  for  one  hemisphere,  when  the  planet  is  near- 
est to  the  sun,  then  undoubtedly  it  may  very  well  happen 
(the  inclination  of  his  axis  being  suitably  adjusted)  that 
this  so-called  winter  season  is  the  warmest  part  of  the 
year  for  that  hemisphere.  In  this  case  there  would  be 
the  least  possible  violence  in  the  succession  of  the  Mer- 
curial seasons  for  that  hemisphere.  But  in  the  other 
hemisphere  the  seasonal  changes  would  be  correspond- 
ingly intensified. 

In  either  of  these  cases,  it  is  readily  conceivable  that 
even  forms  of  life  resembling  those  we  are  acquainted 
with  on  earth  might  exist  on  Mercury,  and  this  without 
any  special  provision  for  tempering  the  great  heat  and 
light  of  the  sun.     Those  regions  which  correspond  to  our 


THE  INFERIOR  PLANETS.  73 

* 

temperate  and  tropical  zones  would  indeed  scarcely  be 
habitable ;  but  the  polar  regions  of  the  planet  would  not 
form  a  disagreeable  abode. 

If,  however,  the  equator  of  the  planet  is  very  much  in- 
clined to  the  plane  in  which  Mercury  travels,  it  cannot 
be  doubted  that  no  form  of  life  known  upon  earth  can 
possibly  exist  upon  Mercury,  without  some  special  ar- 
rangements for  tempering  the  seasonal  changes.  This 
will  appear  when  we  come  to  deal  with  the  effect  of  the 
great  inclination  which  some  astronomers  have  ascribed 
to  the  equator  of  Venus ;  and  therefore  we  need  not  con- 
sider the  relation  with  regard  to  Mercury,  respecting 
whose  axial  inclination  no  trustworthy  information  has 
hitherto  been  obtained. 

It  remains  for  us  to  consider  what  sort  of  provision 
may  have  been  made  to  temper  the  great  heat  poured  by 
the  sun  upon  Mercury. 

The  climate  of  a  planet,  considered  generally,  is  largely 
influenced  by  the  nature  of  the  planet's  atmosphere.  We 
have  very  clear  evidence  on  this  point,  in  the  effects 
which  we  notice  on  our  own  earth.  If  we  ascend  to  the 
summit  of  a  lofty  mountain,  we  find  the  air  much  colder 
than  at  its  base.  In  India,  though  the  full  heat  of  a 
tropical  sun  is  poured  day  after  day  upon  the  snowy 
summits  of  the  Himalayas,  yet  the  air  continues  coider 
than  in  the  bitterest  midwinter  weather  experienced  by 
us  in  England.  Not  that  the  solar  rays  have  no  power. 
The  heat  is?  in  reality,  even  greater  than  on  the  plains, 


74         OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

because  it  has  not  been  intercepted  by  vapor-laden  air. 
But  the  air  itself  is  not  heated.  Owing  to  its  extreme 
rarity  and  dryness,  it  neither  impedes  the  passage  of  the 
sun's  heat  to  the  earth,  nor  prevents  the  return  of  that 
heat  from  the  earth  by  radiation  or  reflection ;  and  this 
very  fact,  that  it  does  not  impede  the  passage  of  heat, 
means  nothing  else  than  that  the  air  does  not  become 
heated.* 

We  have,  then,  so  far  as  a  rare  atmosphere  is  con- 
cerned, two  points  to  dwell  upon — the  readiness  with 
which  such  an  atmosphere  permits  the  sun's  heat  to 
reach  the  surface  of  a  planet,  and  the  readiness  with 
which  it  permits  the  planet's  heat  to  pass  away  into 
space.  Now  we  might  feel  doubtful  which  of  these  two 
effects  was  chiefly  to  be  regarded,  were  it  not  that  on  our 
own  earth  we  have  experience  of  the  effects  of  a  very  rare 
atmosphere.  We  know  that  the  climate  of  very  elevated 
regions  is  relatively  much  cooler  than  that  of  places  on 
the  plain.     Thus  we  learn  that  the  direct  heating  powers 

*  The  following  passage,  quoted  by  Professor  Tyndall  from  Hooker's 
*'  Himalayan  Journals,"  illustrates  the  peculiarities  referred  to  above  : 
"  At  10,000  feet,  in  December,  at  9  a.m.,  I  saw  the  mercury  mount  to 
132°,  while  the  temperature  of  shaded  snow  hardly  was  22°.  At  13,100 
feet,  in  January,  at  9  A.M.,  it  has  stood  at  98°,  with  a  difference  of 
68. 2 \  and  at  10  a.m.,  at  114°,  with  a  difference  of  81.4°,  while  the 
radiating  thermometer  on  the  snow  had  fallen  at  sunrise  to  0.7°."  Such 
observations  as  these  are  well  worth  studying.  It  is  interesting  to  con- 
sider that  at  the  summit  of  the  highest  peaks  of  the  Himalayas  the  mid- 
day  heat  due  to  the  sun  must  sometimes  be  near,  if  not  above,  the  boil- 
ing-point corresponding  to  those  places,  since  water  would  boil  on 
Mount  Everest  at  a  temperature  of  little  more  than  160°. 


THE  INFERIOR  PLANETS.  75 

of  the  sun  are  not  so  much  to  be  considered,  in  judging 
of  the  climate  of  any  region,  as  the  quality  of  the  atmos- 
phere. 

Yet  we  must  not  deceive  ourselves  by  inferring  that 
mere  rarity  of  atmosphere  can  compensate  fully  for  an  in- 
creased intensity  of  solar  heat.  It  is  not  true  that  the 
climate  of  a  place  on  the  slopes  of  the  Andes  or  the 
Himalayas  corresponds  to  that  of  a  region  on  the  plain 
which  has  an  atmosphere  equally  warm.  The  circum- 
stances are,  in  fact,  wholly  different.  On  the  plain  there 
is,  it  is  true,  the  same  amount  of  heat  in  the  case  sup- 
posed ;  but  the  air  is  denser  and  more  moisture-laden : 
the  nights  are  warmer  because  the  skies  are  less  clear 
and  the  heat  escaping  from  the  earth  is  intercepted  by 
clouds  or  by  the  transparent  aqueous  vapor  in  the  air; 
and,  lastly,  there  is  not  so  great  a  contrast  between  the 
warmth  of  the  air  and  the  direct  heat  of  the  solar  rays. 

If  the  atmosphere  of  Mercury,  therefore,  be  excessively 
rare,  as  some  have  supposed,  so  as  to  afford  an  Alpine  or 
Himalayan  climate  in  comparison  with  the  tremendous 
heat  we  should  otherwise  ascribe  to  the  climate  of  the 
planet,  there  would  by  no  means  result  a  state  of  things 
resembling  that  with  which  we  are  familiar  on  earth. 
We  must  not,  in  our  anxiety  to  people  Mercury  with 
creatures  such  as  we  know  of,  blind  ourselves  to  the  dif- 
ficulties which  have  to  be  encountered.  We  cannot  thin 
the  Mercurial  air,  without  adding  to  the  direct  effects  of 
the  sun  upon  the  Mercurial  inhabitants.    Whether  in 


76         OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

this  way  we  increase  the  habitability  of  the  planet  may 
be  doubted,  when  we  consider  that  the  direct  action  of 
the  sun's  rays  upon  the  tropical  regions  of  Mercury,  thus 
deprived  of  atmospheric  protection,  would  produce  a 
heat  four  or  five  times  greater  than  that  of  boiling  water. 
It  will  hardly  be  thought  that  the  intense  cold  in  the 
shade,  or  during  the  Mercurial  night,  would  compensate 
for  so  terrible  a  heat.  In  fact,  this  view  of  the  Mercurial 
climate  would  lead  us  to  find  a  close  resemblance  be- 
tween the  inhabitants  of  the  planet  and  the  unfortu- 
nates described  by  Dante  as  doomed 

A  sofferir  tormenti  e  caldi  e  gieli. 

It  would  seem  hard  to  believe  in  the  existence  of  any 
organized  forms  under  such  conditions,  unless  perhaps 
such  "  microscopic  creatures,  with  siliceous  coverings,"  as 
Whewell  proposed  to  people  Venus  with. 

However,  we  have  yet  to  consider  whether  an  atmos- 
phere of  a  different  sort  might  not  be  better  suited  to  the 
requirements  of  Mercury.  We  have  seen  the  effects  of  a 
rare  atmosphere  ;  let  us  inquire  into  those  which  might 
be  ascribed  to  a  dense  one. 

The  ordinary  effect  of  a  dense  atmosphere  we  know  to 
be  an  increase  of  heat,  which  is  certainly  not  what  we  re- 
quire in  the  case  of  Mercury.  Nor  are  we  familiar  with 
any  region  upon  our  earth  in  which  a  dense  atmosphere 
produces  a  contrary  climatic  effect ;  so  that  we  have  no 
analogy  to  support  us  in.  the  belief  that  possibly  a  dense 


THE  INFERIOR  PLANETS.  77 

atmosphere  might,  under  particular  circumstances,  serve 
to  guard  a  planet  from  the  solar  rays.  It  seems  possi- 
ble, however,  that  an  atmosphere  might  be  so  constitut- 
ed as  to  remain  almost  constantly  loaded  with  heavy 
cloud-masses.  In  this  case  it  by  no  means  follows  that 
such  effects  would  follow  as  we  ordinarily  associate  with 
a  moisture-laden  atmosphere.  Up  to  a  certain  point, 
doubtless,  the  increase  of  moisture  in  the  air  tends  to  an 
increase  of  warmth;  because  the  aqueous  vapor  exercises 
a  greater  effect  in  preventing  the  escape  of  heat  from  the 
earth  than  in  guarding  the  earth  from  the  solar  rays. 
And,  as  I  have  said,  the  only  climatic  effect  we  can  asso- 
ciate with  the  frequent  presence  of  large  quantities  of 
aqueous  vapor  in  the  air,  or  therefore  with  an  ordinarily 
clouded  state  of  the  sky,  is  that  of  a  general  increase  of 
heat.  But,  just  as  we  know  that  a  cloudy  day  is  not  nec- 
essarily nor  even  commonly  a  warm  day,  it  may  well  be 
that  an  atmosphere  so  dense  as  to  be  at  all  times  cloud- 
laden  serves  as  a  protection  from  the  sun's  intense  heat. 
So  that,  instead  of  assigning  dense  atmospheres  exclu- 
sively to  the  more  distant  planets,  as  some  astronomers 
have  done,  we  might  be  led  to  see  in  an  envelope  of  great 
density  the  means  of  defending  the  inhabitants  of  Mer- 
cury and  Yenus  from  the  otherwise  unendurable  rays  of 
their  near  neighbor  the  sun. 

Although  Mercury  is  not  a  planet  which  can  be  satis- 
factorily examined  with  the  telescope,  yet,  so  far  as  can  be 
judged  from  his  aspect,  his  atmosphere  is  in  reality  much 


78         OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

denser  than  our  earth's,  and  loaded  with  cloud-masses  oi 
enormous  extent.  Still  the  evidence  on  these  points  is 
far  from  satisfactory  ;  and  there  is  one  peculiarity  of  the 
planet  which  does  not  accord  with  this  view  of  the  consti- 
tution of  his  atmosphere.  Undoubtedly,  if  the  light  we 
receive  from  Mercury  came  from  a  cloudy  envelope,  it 
would  be  more  brilliant  than  the  light  we  should  receive 
from  the  surface  of  continents  and  oceans.  In  fact,  the 
most  brilliant  light  we  could  receive  from  a  globe  of  a 
given  size,  placed  at  a  given  distance  from  the  sun,  would 
be  that  which  would  be  reflected  were  such  a  globe  cov- 
ered with  clouds.  Now  there  can  be  no  doubt  whatever 
that  Mercury  does  not  reflect  the  same  proportion  of 
light  from  his  surface  that  some  of  the  planets  do.  He 
would  be,  when  favorably  situated,  the  brightest  of  all 
the  planets,  were  this  so ;  *  though,  seen  as  he  always  is, 

*  Placing  Mercury  in  perihelion  and  at  his  elongation,  we  get  a  half 
disk,  the  planet  about  90,000,000  miles  from  us,  and  about  30,000,000 
from  the  sun,  his  diameter  about  3,000  miles.  Now,  if  we  wish  to  com- 
pare the  light  he  then  sends  us  with  that  of  Jupiter  at  his  brightest,  on 
the  assumption  of  equal  reflective  powers,  we  must  take  Jupiter  at  a 
distance  of  about  360,000,000  miles  from  us,  and  about  450,000,000 
miles  from  the  sun,  showing  a  full  disk,  his  diameter  about  90,000 
miles  (I  put  all  the  numbers  round  for  convenience  of  calculation). 
We  find,  then,  that  the  ratio  of  Mercury's  light  to  Jupiter's  is 

1     (3,000)* (90,000)2 

"2  (90,000,000)2  x  (30,000,000)2 :  (360,000,000)2  x  (450,000,000)* 

or, 
I  (4)5  (15)2 :  (30)2,  or  exactly  2  to  1. 
The  observation  above  cited  is  sufficient  to  prove  that  a  very  different 
state  of  things  actually  prevails  ;  in  other  words,  that  the  reflective 
powers  of  the  two  planets  are  very  different :  unless*  indeed,  Jupiter 
shines  in  part  by  inherent  light 


THE  INFERIOR  PLANETS.  79 

on  the  bright  background  of  a  full  twilight  sky,  he  would 
not  make  so  striking  an  appearance  as  Jupiter  does, 
when  in  opposition.  This,  however,  is  not  the  case.  I 
remember  being  much  struck  by  the  superior  light  of 
Jupiter,  on  the  afternoon  of  February  23,  1868,  when  the 
two  planets  were  very  close  together,  Mercury  being 
nearly  at  his  brightest,  whereas  Jupiter,  then  near  con- 
junction, was  considerably  less  bright  than  when  in  op- 
position. Yenus  was  close  by,  and  outshone  both  Mer- 
cury and  Jupiter. 

It  seems  difficult,  therefore,  to  believe  that  the  light  of 
Mercury  comes  from  a  cloudy  envelope.  But  there  is 
still  one  supposition  which  may  restore  our  belief  in  the 
habitability  of  the  planet  by  creatures  not  very  different 
from  those  which  inhabit  our  earth.  If  it  has  a  double 
cloud  envelope,  the  upper  like  our  cirrus  clouds,  less  com- 
pact than  the  lower,  and  permitting  a  portion  of  the  sun- 
light to  pass  through,  it  is  possible  that  the  lower  cloud- 
layer  would  be  seen  partly  in  shadow.  I  must  admit  that 
the  explanation  is  not  quite  satisfactory,  because,  just  as 
much  light  as  the  outer  clouds  intercepted  they  would 
reflect ;  still,  it  is  conceivable  that  the  usual  arrangement 
of  these  clouds  may  be  such  that  to  us,  who  do  not  look 
at  the  planet  in  the  direction  in  which  the  sun's  rays  fall, 
but  somewhat  aslant,  the  shadows  of  the  upper  clouds 
upon  the  dense  and  compact  lower  envelope  may  be  ren- 
dered in  large  part  visible. 

After  all,  the  reader  may  prefer  the  view  whicja  r,ecog- 


80         OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

nizes  in  the  polar  regions  of  Mercury  places  suitable  for 
organic  existences,  while  the  equatorial  and  neighboring 
regions  are  zones  of  fire,  whose  dangers  the  bravest  Mer- 
curials, the  very  Livingstones  upon  that  planet,  would  not 
dare  to  face.  We  may  picture  to  ourselves,  on  this  view, 
the  various  contrivances  by  which  the  inhabitants  of  the 
two  polar  (that  is,  in  reality,  temperate)  circles  manage  to 
communicate.  There  may  be  regions  where  favoring  cir- 
cumstances narrow  the  uninhabitable  zone  so  much  that 
the  inhabitants  of  one  polar  circle  may  travel  to  the  other 
(or,  at  least,  cross  the  most  dangerous  portion  of  the  hot 
zone)  in  the  course  of  the  Mercurial  night.  Or  perhaps 
tunnels  may  be  run,  or  sheltered  cuttings  made,  along 
which  the  voyage  may  be  made  in  comparative  safety. 
Ocean  communications  there  can  be  none,  if  the  Mercu- 
rial skies  are  clear,  since  the  sun's  heat  on  the  tropical 
zone  would  suffice  to  boil  away  any  water  which  might 
find  its  way  there. 

Certainly,  the  smallness  of  the  planet  and  the  dimin- 
ished effects  of  gravity  upon  its  surface,  would  tend  to 
make  communication  much  easier,  and  the  construction  of 
protective  tunnels  or  cuttings  a  comparatively  light  task. 
What  the  exact  force  of  gravity  at  the  surface  of  Mercury 
may  be  we  do  not  know,  because  our  means  of  determin- 
ing the  mass  of  the  planet  are  not  so  satisfactory  as  in 
the  case  of  the  other  primary  members  of  the  solar  sys- 
tem. If  Mercury  had  a  satellite,  we  could  tell  his  weight 
at  once.    If  he  were  as  large  as  Yenus,  we  could  tell  his 


THE  INFERIOR  PLANETS.  81 

weight  by  observing  his  effect  in  disturbing  the  motions 
of  that  planet.  As  it  is,  the  only  means  we  have  of 
weighing  Mercury  is  the  observation  of  his  effect  in  dis- 
turbing any  comet  which  may  pass  near  him.  In  this 
way  the  planet  has  been  weighed,  but  the  balance  thus 
employed  is  not  a  satisfactory  one  altogether,  because  we 
are  not  quite  certain  how  much  of  the  disturbance  of  a 
comet  when  near  Mercury  is  due  to  the  planet's  attrac- 
tion. Formerly  it  was  supposed  that  the  mean  density  of 
Mercury  is  equal  to  that  of  lead ;  but  from  the  perturba- 
tions of  Encke's  comet  in  Mercury's  neighborhood,  astron- 
omers have  been  led  to  the  conclusion  that  the  density  of 
the  planet  is  not  more  than  one-sixth  greater  than  our 
earth's.  It  follows  that  as  his  diameter  is  little  more 
than  3,000  miles,  our  earth  is  about  fifteen  times  as  heavy 
as  Mercury.  Gravity  at  his  surface  is  such  that  a  pound 
weight  of  ours  would  weigh  rather  less  than  seven  ounces 
of  Mercury.  Hence  the  creatures  which  seem  to  us  most 
unwieldy — the  elephant,  the  hippopotamus,  and  the 
rhinoceros,  or  even  those  vast  monsters,  the  mammoth, 
the  mastodon,  and  the  megatherium,  which  bore  sway 
over  our  globe  in  far-off  eras — might  emulate  on  Mercury 
the  agility  of  the  antelope  or  the  greyhound. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  where  gravity  acts  so 
feebly,  all  engineering  operations  would  be  rendered  very 
much  simpler — bridges  could  have  a  wider  span,  and  yet 
be  stronger  than  our  terrestrial  ones,  buildings  could  be 
loftier  and  yet  be  raised  more  easily,  and  transit  of  all 


82         OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

sorts  would  be  effected  much  more  readily,  while  at  the 
same  time  the  distances  to  be  traversed  are  very  much 
less  than  on  our  earth,  since  the  surface  of  Mercury  is 
-tittle  more  than  one-seventh  of  the  earth's. 

The  peculiarities  which  characterize  Venus  are  for  the 
most  part  similar  in  kind  to  those  we  have  had  to  con- 
sider in  the  case  of  Mercury.  But  at  the  outset  of  our 
inquiries  into  the  physical  habitudes  of  this  most  beau- 
tiful planet,  we  must  point  to  the  striking  resemblance 
which  it  bears,  in  some  respects,  to  our  own  earth.  So 
far,  indeed,  as  telescopic  and  physical  researches  have  yet 
led  us,  the  planet  Mars,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  appears 
to  exhibit  habitudes  more  closely  corresponding  to  those 
we  are  apt  to  consider  essential  to  the  wants  of  living 
creatures.  But  in  size,  in  situation,  and  in  density,  in 
the  length  of  her  seasons  and  of  her  rotation,  in  the  fig- 
ure of  her  orbit,  and  in  the  amount  of  light  and  heat  she 
receives  from  the  sun,  Yenus  bears  a  more  striking  re- 
semblance to  the  earth  than  any  orb  within  the  solar  sys- 
tem. In  fact  there  is  no  other  pair  of  planets  between 
which  so  many  analogies  can  be  traced  as  between  Yenus 
and  the  earth.  Uranus  and  Neptune  are  similar  in  many 
respects,  but  they  differ  in  at  least  as  many.  Jupiter  and 
Saturn  are,  in  a  sense,  the  brother  giants  of  the  solar 
scheme,  while  the  dwarf  orbs  Mars  and  Mercury  present 
many  striking  points  of  similarity ;  but  between  neither 
of  these  pairs  can  we  trace  so  many  features  of  resem- 
blance as  those  which  characterize  the  twin  planets  Yenus 


THE  INFERIOR  PLANETS.  83 

and  Terra,  while  the  features  of  dissimilarity  in  either 
pair  are  perhaps  even  more  obvious  than  the  points  of  re- 
semblance. Had  Venus  but  a  moon  as  the  earth  has,  we 
might  doubt  whether,  in  the  whole  universe,  two  orbs 
exist  which  are  so  strikingly  similar  to  each  other. 

And  here  we  may  pause  for  a  moment  to  consider  one 
of  the  most  perplexing  enigmas  that  has  ever  been  pre- 
sented to  astronomers.  Are  we  indeed  certain  that 
Yenus  has  no  moon  ?  The  question  seems  a  strange  one, 
when  it  is  remembered  that  year  after  year  Yenus  has 
been  examined  by  the  most  eminent  modern  observers, 
armed  with  telescopes  of  the  most  exquisite  denning 
power,  without  any  trace  of  a  companion  orb  being 
noticed.  Nor  indeed  can  any  reasonable  doubts  be 
entertained  respecting  the  moonless  condition  of  Yenus 
by  those  who  appreciate  the  character  of  modem  tele- 
scopic observations.  And  yet,  if  I  had  begun  this  para- 
graph by  stating  the  evidence  in  favor  of  the  existence  of 
a  satellite,  I  believe  that  nearly  every  reader  would  have 
come  to  the  conclusion  that  most  certainly  the  Planet 
of  Love  has  an  attendant  orb.  They  are  not  amateur 
observers  only  who  have  seen  a  moon  attending  on 
Yenus,  but  such  astronomers  as  Cassini  and  Short,  the 
latter  with  two  different  telescopes  and  four  different 
eye-pieces.  Four  times,  between  May  3  and  11,  1761, 
Montaigne  saw  a  body  near  Yenus  which  presented  a 
phase  similar  to  that  of  the  planet,  precisely  as  a  satel- 
lite would  have  done.     From  these  observations  M.  Bau- 


84        OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

douin  deduced  for  the  new  star  a  diameter  of  about  two 
thousand  miles,  and  a  distance  from  Venus  nearly  equal 
to  that  which  separates  the  moon  from  the  earth.  In 
March,  1764,  again,  Bodkier  saw  the  enigmatical  compan- 
ion ;  Horrebow  saw  it  a  few  days  later ;  and  Montbaron 
saw  it  in  varying .  positions  on  March  15,  28,  and  29. 
Lastly,  Scheuten,  who  witnessed  the  transit  of  Yenus  in 
1761,  declares  that  he  saw  a  satellite  accompany  Yenus 
across  the  face  of  the  sun.  So  that  we  cannot  be  greatly 
surprised  that  some  are  still  disposed  to  believe  in  the 
existence  of  a  satellite  of  Yenus. 

There  is  little  occasion  to  dwell  upon  Yenus's  moon- 
less  condition,  because  the  inferior  planets  are  much  less 
affected  by  the  want  of  a  moon  than  a  superior  planet 
would  be.  The  service  rendered  by  our  own  moon,  as  a 
luminary  of  the  night,  is  the  least  important  work  she 
does  in  our  behalf.  It  is  as  the  chief  regulator  of  the 
tides  that  the  moon  befriends  us  most  usefully.  Now 
Yenus  has  no  need  of  lunar  tides.  Assuming  that  she 
has  oceans  such  as  those  which  exist  upon  the  earth,  her 
solar  tides  must  be  about  two  and  a  half  times  as  high 
as  the  solar  tides  raised  in  our  own  oceans.  Now,  since 
our  lunar  tidal  wave  is  about  two  and  a  half  times  as 
high  as  the  solar  one,  we  have  tides  ranging  between  the 
highest  spring  tides,  which  are  three  and  a  half  times  as 
high  as  the  solar  tide  alone,  and  the  lowest  neap  tides, 
which  are  only  one  and  a  half  times  as  high  as  the  solar 
wave.     Yenus  has  constant  tides,  therefore,  correspond- 


THE  INFERIOR  PLANETS.  85 

ing  very  closely  to  the  mean  tides  on  our  own  earth; 
and  therefore  perfectly  well  adapted  to  subserve  all  the 
purposes  which  our  tides  render  us,  only  with  less  va- 
riety in  their  mode  of  operation.  Mercury  also  has 
sufficiently  high  solar  tides,  supposing  he  has  extensive 
oceans  (which  may  reasonably  be  questioned),  since  the 
smallness  of  his  dimensions  (tending  of  course  to  dimin- 
ish the  difference  of  action,  on  which  the  sun's  tidal 
influence  depends)  is  fully  compensated  by  his  great 
proximity  to  that  orb. 

Yenus  has  a  year  of  224  days  17  hours,  very  nearly, 
and  her  distance  from  the  sun,  which  varies  little  during 
the  course  of  a  year,  is  somewhat  less  than  three-fourths 
of  that  which  separates  the  sun  from  us.  Her  day  is 
about  thirty-five  minutes  shorter  than  ours,  and  her 
globe  somewhat  smaller  than  the  earth's. 

It  is  clear  that,  merely  in  the  greater  proximity  of 
Venus  to  the  sun,  there  is  little  to  render  at  least  a  large 
proportion  of  her  surface  uninhabitable  by  such  beings 
as  exist  upon  our  earth.  The  sun,  as  seen  in  her  skies, 
has  a  diameter  one-third  larger  than  he  presents  to  us ; 
and  his  apparent  surface  dimensions,  on  which  of  course 
his  heating  and  illuminating  powers  depend,  are  greater 
in  the  proportion  of  about  sixteen  to  nine.  This  un- 
doubtedly would  render  his  heat  almost  unbearable  in 
the  equatorial  regions  of  Yenus,  but  in  her  temperate 
and  subarctic  regions  a  climate  which  we  should  find 
well  suited  to  our  requirements  might  very  well  exist ; 


86  OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OUMS. 

while  her  polar  regions  might  correspond  to  our  temper- 
ate zones,  and  be  the  abode  of  the  most  active  and  enter- 
prising races  existing  upon  her  surface. 

Here,  however,  we  have  been  supposing  that  Venus 
has  seasons  resembling  our  own  in  character — in  other 
words,  that  her  axis  of  rotation  is  inclined  at  about  the 
same  angle  to  the  plane  in  which  she  travels.  Observa- 
tions have  been  made,  according  to  which  a  very  different 
state  of  things  would  appear  to  prevail.  It  has  been 
said,  on  the  authority  of  observers  of  some  eminence, 
that  her  axis  in  inclined  only  15°  to  the  plane  of  her 
orbit.  *  If  this  is  really  the  case,  a  number  of  singular 
and  somewhat  complicated  relations  are  presented,  the 
result  of  which  it  may  be  interesting  to  exhibit  to  the 
reader. 

In  the  first  place,  the  arctic  regions  of  Venus  extend 
within  fifteen  degrees  of  her  equator  (if  the  axis  is  really 
bowed  as  supposed),  while  the  tropics  extend  within  fif- 
teen degrees  of  her  poles — so  that  two  zones,  larger  by 
far  than  the  temperate  zones  of  our  earth,  belong  both  to 
her  arctic  and  to  her  tropical  regions.  It  is  difficult  to 
say  whether  her  equatorial,  her  polar,  or  her  arctico-trop- 
ical  regions  would  be,  to  our  ideas,  the  least  pleasing  por- 
tion of  her  globe. 

An  inhabitant  of  the  regions  near  either  pole  has  to 

*  If  the  observations  of  De  Vico  may  be  trusted,  the  inclination  of 
Venus,  though  less  than  75°,  is  still  so  considerable  (about  55°)  as  to 
justify  the  general  conclusions  deduced  in  the  following  paragraphs. 


THE  INFERIOR  PLANETS.  87 

endure  extremes  of  heat  and  cold  such  as  would  suffice 
to  destroy  nearly  every  race  of  living  beings  subsisting 
upon  the  earth.  During  the  summer  the  sun  circles  con- 
tinually close  to  the  point  overhead,  so  that,  day  after 
day,  he  pours  down  his  rays  with  an  intensity  of  heat 
and  of  light  exceeding  nearly  twofold  the  midday  light 
and  heat  of  our  own  tropical  sun.  Only  for  a  short  time, 
in  autumn  and  in  spring,  does  the  sun  rise  and  set  in 
these  regions.  A  spring  or  autumn  day,  like  one  of  our 
days  at  those  seasons,  lasts  about  twelve  hours  ;  but  the 
sun  attains  at  noon,  in  spring  or  autumn,  a  height  of 
only  a  few  degrees  above  the  horizon.  Then  presently 
comes  on  the  terrible  winter,  lasting  about  three  of  our 
months,  but  far  more  striking  in  its  characteristics  even 
than  the  long  winter  night  of  our  polar  regions.  For, 
near  our  poles,  the  sun  approaches  the  horizon  at  the 
hour  corresponding  to  noon ;  and  though  he  does  not 
show  his  face,  he  yet  lights  up  the  southern  skies  with  a 
cheering  twilight  glow.  But  during  the  greater  part  of 
the  long  night  of  Yenus's  polar  regions,  the  sun  does  not 
approach  within  many  degrees  of  the  horizon.  Nay,  he 
is  further  below  the  horizon  than  the  midnight  winter 
sun  of  our  arctic  regions.  Thus,  unless  the  skies  are  lit 
up  with  auroral  splendors,  an  intense  darkness  prevails 
during  the  polar  winter  which  must  add  largely  to  the 
horrors  of  that  terrible  season.  Certainly,  none  of  the 
human  races  upon  our  earth  could  bear  the  alternations 
between  these  more  than  polar  terrors,  and  an  intensity 


88  OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

of  summer  heat  far  exceeding  any  with  which  we  are 
familiar  on  earth. 

Let  us  see  whether  the  equatorial  regions  are  more 
pleasing  abodes. 

In  these  parts  of  Yenus  there  are  two  summers,  corre- 
sponding to  the  spring  and  autumn  of  the  polar  regions. 
At  these  seasons  the  sun  rises  day  after  day  to  the  point 
overhead,  and  the  weather  corresponds  for  awhile  to  that 
which  prevails  in  the  tropical  regions  of  our  own  earth. 
But  between  these  seasons  the  sun  passes  away  alter- 
nately to  the  northern  and  southern  skies.  During  the 
season  corresponding  to  summer  he  is  above  the  horizon 
nearly  throughout  the  twenty-three  hours  of  Venus's 
day ;  *  but  he  attains  no  great  elevation,  travelling  always 
in  a  small  circle  close  around  the  northern  pole.  During 
the  season  corresponding  to  winter  he  is  above  the  hori- 
zon only  a  very  short  time  each  day,  and  is  always  close 
to  the  south,  attaining  only  an  elevation  of  a  few  de- 
grees at  noon.  Thus  we  have  the  following  curious  suc- 
cession of  seasons  :  at  the  vernal  equinox  a  summer  much 
warmer  than  our  tropical  summers;  about  fifty-six  days 
later,  or  at  the  summer  solstice,  weather  resembling 
somewhat  the  spring  of  our  temperate  zones,  only  that 
the  night  is  exceedingly  short;  yet  fifty-six  days  later 
there  is  another  summer,  as  terrible  as  the  former ;  and 


*  On  the  equator  itself,  as  on  our  own,  the  day  is  always  equal  in 
length  to  the  night.  The  above  account  corresponds  to  a  place  near 
the  borders  of  the  equatorial  zone. 


THE  INFERIOR  PLANETS.  89 

lastly,  at  the  winter  solstice,  the  days  are  shorter  and  the 
oold  probably  more  intense  than  in  the  winter  of  places 
near  our  Arctic  Circles.  In  such  regions  the  contrasts, 
rather  than  either  of  the  extremes  of  climate,  would  be 
most  trying  to  terrestrial  races;  and  it  is  scarcely  toe 
much  to  say  that  no  races  subsisting  upon  our  earth 
could  possibly  endure  such  remarkable  changes,  succeed- 
ing each  other  so  rapidly. 

Lastly,  the  beings  who  inhabit  the  wide  zones  which 
are  at  once  tropical  and  arctic  have  climates  ranging 
between  the  two  limits  just  considered.  If  they  are  neat 
the  equatorial  regions  they  suffer  from  all  the  vicissitudes 
of  the  equatorial  climate,  with  this  further  tribulation, 
that  in  midwinter  they  do  not  see  the  sun  even  at  mid- 
day— a  circumstance  by  no  means  compensated  (accord- 
ing to  our  ideas)  by  the  fact  that  near  the  summer  sol- 
stice the  sun  does  not  set.  If  they  are  near  the  polar 
regions,  they  have  a  summer  even  more  terrible  than  the 
polar  summer,  and  a  winter  scarcely  less  dreary  and  bitter. 

Fortunately  for  our  belief  in  the  habitability  of  Yenus, 
astronomers  are  far  from  accepting  with  confidence  the 
assertions  of  those  observers  who  have  assigned  to  Yenus 
an  inclination  so  remarkable.  If  her  inclination  at  all 
resembles  the  earth's,  there  is  every  reason  to  believe 
that  her  physical  habitudes  also  resemble  those  of  the 
earth.  In  this  case,  the  argument  from  analogy  pre- 
sented in  the  opening  chapter  of  this  work,  seems  to 
force  upon  us  the  conclusion  that  she  is  inhabited ;  while 


90         OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

we  may  believe,  though  perhaps  with  less  confidence,  that 
a  close  resemblance  subsists  between  the  creatures  which 
people  her  surface  and  those  with  which  we  are  acquainted. 

We  have  no  direct  evidence,  indeed,  on  which  to  ground 
our  belief  that  the  great  proximity  of  Yenus  to  the  sun 
may  not  be  accompanied  by  any  very  remarkable  pecu- 
liarities in  the  characteristics  of  her  climate.  But  we 
have  an  indirect  argument  of  some  strength.  If  Yenus  is 
much  nearer  than  the  earth  to  the  sun,  the  earth,  in  turn, 
is  much  nearer  to  the  sun  than  Mars  is.  Yet,  as  we  shall 
see  in  the  next  chapter,  we  have  clear  evidence  from  tel- 
escopic observation,  and  still  clearer  evidence  in  the  re- 
sults of  spectroscopic  research,  that  the  climatic  arrange- 
ments on  Mars  do  not  differ  in  any  remarkable  degree 
from  those  of  our  own  earth.  It  would  follow,  therefore, 
as  at  least  probable,  that  a  similar  resemblance  prevails 
between  the  climate  of  the  earth  and  that  of  Yenus.  So 
that,  despite  the  claim  which  Dr.  Whewell  has  put  in 
for  microscopic  animalcules  with  siliceous  coverings  as 
the  sole  inhabitants  of  Yenus,  I  can  find  no  reason  (if  the 
abnormal  axial  inclination  above  considered  is  once  dis- 
proved) for  denying  that  she  may  be  the  abode  of  creat- 
ures as  far  advanced  in  the  scale  of  creation  as  any  which 
exist  upon  the  earth. 

Gravity  at  the  surface  of  Yenus  is  so  nearly  equal  to 
terrestrial  gravity  that  the  difference  is  altogether  insuffi- 
cient to  introduce  any  noteworthy  effects. 

Yenus  is  the  only  planet  the  extent  of  whose  atmos- 


THE  INFERIOR  PLANETS.  91 

phere  has  been  carefully  estimated.  11  Venus  had  no 
atmosphere,  she  would  present,  when  horned,  a  semicir- 
cular convexity;  whereas  the  refractive  effects  of  an 
atmosphere,  by  causing  the  sun  to  illumine  rather  more 
than  a  full  hemisphere,  would  tend  to  lengthen  her  horns. 
It  has  been  found  that  her  convexity  when  she  is  horned 
exceeds  a  semicircle,  and  from  the  observed  extent  of 
this  excess,  it  has  been  calculated  that  her  atmosphere  is 
so  far  more  extensive  than  ours  as  to  make  its  refractive 
effects  on  a  body  near  the  horizon  about  one-third  great- 
er. So  that,  this  being  about  the  proportion  in  which 
the  diameter  of  the  sun  as  seen  from  Yenus  exceeds  that 
which  he  presents  to  us,  the  inhabitant  of  Venus,  like  the 
inhabitant  of  our  earth,  sees  the  sun  fully  raised  above 
the  horizon  at  the  moment  when,  but  for  reflection,  his 
orb  would  be  just  concealed  beneath  it. 

Of  the  constitution  of  the  atmosphere  of  Venus  we 
know  little.  The  spectrum  of  her  light  shows  the  dark 
lines  which  belong  to  the  solar  spectrum,  and  the  Padre 
Becchi  has  noticed  certain  faint  lines,  which  seem  to  indi- 
cate the  presence  of  aqueous  vapor  in  the  atmosphere  of 
the  planet.  But  he  scarcely  gives  satisfactory  evidence 
that  the  lines  he  has  thus  seen  were  not  due  to  the  absorp- 
tion exercised  by  aqueous  vapor  in  our  own  atmosphere. 
The  same  observer  finds,  in  the  strengthening  of  the 
nitrogen  lines  near  the  F  line  of  the  spectrum,  evidence 
that  the  atmosphere  of  Venus  is  constituted  very  simi- 
larly to  the  air  we  breathe. 


92         OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

On  the  whole,  the  evidence  we  have  points  very  strongly 
to  Yenus  as  the  abode  of  living  creatures  not  unlike  the 
inhabitants  of  earth.  With  the  sole  exception  of  the  in- 
clination, which  has  been,  without  sufficient  evidence,  as- 
signed to  the  planet's  equator,  I  can  see  nothing  which 
can  reasonably  be  held  to  point  to  an  opposite  conclusion. 
The  strong  light  which  the  sun  pours  upon  Yenus  need 
least  of  all  be  objected  to,  since,  if  there  is  one  adaptative 
power  which  Nature  exhibits  more  clearly  than  another, 
it  is  that  by  which  the  various  creatures  we  are  acquainted 
with  are  enabled  to  live  in  comfort  under  all  degrees  of 
light,  from  the  obscurity  in  which  the  mole  pursues  his 
subterranean  researches,  to  the  blazing  light  of  the  noon- 
day sun  toward  which  (in  fable,  if  not  in  fact)  the  eagle 
turns  his  unshrinking  eyes. 

There  is  one  peculiarity  which  yet  remains  to  be  no- 
ticed. Many  are  disposed  to  find,  in  the  beauty  of  the 
celestial  objects  which  deck  the  skies  of  different  planets, 
a  certain  proof  that  reasoning  beings  must  exist  who  can 
appreciate  the  display.  Surely  the  argument  has  very 
little  force,  since  we  know  that  myriads  on  myriads  of 
ages  must  have  passed,  during  which  the  glories  of  our 
own  heavens  were  displayed,  night  after  night,  with  none 
to  regard  them.  The  moon  has  passed  through  all  her 
phases,  the  star  of  morning  and  of  eve  has  shed  its  soft 
radiance  upon  the  terrestrial  landscape,  Jupiter  and  Sat- 
urn have  pursued  their  stately  courses  among  the  fixed 
stars,  and  the  glories  of  those  constellations  which  shine 


THE  INFERIOR  PLANETS.  93 

with  equal  splendor  upon  all  the  planets  of  the  solar 
scheme  have  been  displayed  in  all  their  unchanging  mag- 
nificence, while  as  yet  our  earth  was  the  abode  but  of 
hideous  reptiles,  or  of  yet  more  monstrous  creatures  in 
forest  and  in  plain. 

If  this  argument  were  really  of  force,  doubtless  there 
are  no  planets  in  the  whole  range  of  the  solar  system  to 
which  it  might  not  be  applied.  Each  has  some  special 
object  of  beauty  in  its  heavens,  which  is  not  exhibited  to 
the  rest.  Certainly  Mercury  and  Yenus  are  no  exceptions 
to  this  rule.  The  inhabitant  of  Mercury  sees  in  Venus 
an  orb  which,  when  favorably  situated,  far  outshines  in 
splendor  the  brightest  of  the  planetary  orbs  seen  in  our 
skies.  So  far,  indeed,  as  light-giving  power  is  concerned, 
Venus  must  be  no  contemptible  moon  to  the  Mercurials 
when  she  is  nearly  in  opposition.  Our  earth,  too,  with 
its  companion  moon,  must  form  a  noble  object  in  the  sky 
of  Mercury,  though,  without  telescopic  aid,  the  moon  per- 
haps may  not  be  separately  visible.  To  the  inhabitants 
of  Venus,  Mercury  and  the  earth  must  be  splendid  ob- 
jects. The  former  would  not  only  appear  much  larger 
than  to  ourselves,  but  being  seen  almost  as  favorably  as 
we  see  Venus,  would  form  a  much  more  striking  object  in 
the  morning  or  evening  skies  of  that  planet.  The  earth, 
as  seen  by  the  inhabitants  of  Venus,  must  shine  much 
more  splendidly  than  Jupiter  does  in  our  skies.  Our 
moon  must  be  distinctly  visible,  so  that,  without  the  aid 
of  any  telescope,  the  inhabitant  of  Venus  has  such  evi- 


91         OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

dence  of  the  Copernican  theory  as  would  suffice,  if  prop- 
erly handled,  to  rout  the  ranks  of  the  Ptolemaists,  sup- 
posing there  have  ever  been  people  in  Yenus  who  im- 
agined the  tiny  globe  they  live  upon  to  be  the  centre  of 
the  universe. 


MARS,  THE  MINIATURE  OF  OUR  EARTH.         95 


CHAPTEE  IV. 

MABS,   THE  MINIATUBE  OF  OUK  EAETH. 

It  is  singular  that,  among  all  the  orbs  which  circle 
around  the  sun,  one  only,  and  that  almost  the  least  of  the 
primary  planets,  should  exhibit  clearly  and  unmistakably 
the  signs  which  mark  a  planet  as  the  abode  of  life.  "We 
have  examined  Mercury  and  Venus,  the  only  other  orbs 
which  belong  like  the  earth  and  Mars  to  the  scheme  of 
the  minor  planets,  and  we  have  found  little  to  guide  us 
to  any  certain  conclusion  respecting  their  physical  habi- 
tudes. When  we  pass  beyond  the  wide  gap  which  sepa- 
rates the  minor  planets  from  the  giant  members  of  the 
solar  family,  we  shall  find  much  to  attract  our  admiration, 
much  to  force  upon  us  the  belief  that  these  orbs  have 
been  created  to  be  the  abodes  of  even  nobler  races  than 
those  which  subsist  upon  our  earth ;  but  we  shall  find 
little  to  justify  us  in  asserting  that  they  resemble  the 
earth  in  those  habitudes  which  seem  essential  to  the 
wants  of  terrestrial  races.  The  planet  Mars,  on  the  other 
hand,  exhibits  in  the  clearest  manner  the  traces  of  adap- 
tation to  the  wants  of  living  beings  such  as  we  are  ac- 
quainted with.  Processes  are  at  work  out  yonder  in 
space  which  appear  utterly  useless,  a  real  waste  of  Nat 


96  OTHER   WORLDS  TRAJST  OURB. 

lire's  energies,  unless,  like  their  correlatives  on  earth, 
they  subserve  the  wants  of  organized  beings. 

I  would  not  indeed  insist,  as  some  have  done,  too 
strongly  upon  this  argument.  I  know  that  on  every  side 
we  see  tokens  of  an  exuberant  activity  in  Nature,  which, 
according  to  our  ideas,  may  appear  to  savor  of  wasteful- 
ness. The  cloud  which  has  been  raised  by  the  solar 
energies  from  tropical  seas,  and  which  the  winds  have 
wafted  over  continents,  may  shed  its  waters  on  the  sea 
or  in  the  desert,  where  seemingly  they  are  wholly  wasted. 
Winds  may  spend  their  force  apparently  in  vain.  And 
in  a  thousand  ways  Nature's  busy  forces  may  be  at  work 
where  we,  in  our  short-sightedness,  can  see  no  useful  pur- 
pose which  they  subserve. 

But  there  is  a  marked  distinction  between  such  ap- 
parent instances  of  wasteful  action,  and  the  systematic 
processes  which  are  taking  place  over  the  globe  of  Mars. 

Upon  our  earth  we  can  dimly  trace  out  a  necessity 
(depending  upon  the  order  which  actually  exists)  for  that 
which  appears  to  resemble  waste.  "We  see,  for  instance, 
that  if  a  country  or  a  continent  is  to  be  provided  with  a 
due  supply  of  rain,  without  supernatural  intervention  at 
every  step  of  the  process,  that  result  can  only  be  secured 
by  what  may  be  described  as  a  random  distribution,  in- 
volving always  what  to  us  resembles  waste.  If,  out  of  a 
thousand  showers,  ten  only  fall  so  as  to  be  useful  to  the 
land,  the  useful  rainfalls  serve  to  explain  (so  to  speak)  the 
geemingly  wasted  ones. 


MARS,  THE  MINIATURE  OF  OUR  EARTH.         97 

In  the  case  of  Mars  we  have  no  such  explanation  of 
the  processes  we  observe,  if  we  dismiss  our  belief  that  he 
is  the  abode  of  liying  creatures.  For  if  Mars  be,  indeed, 
untenanted  by  any  forms  of  life,  then  these  processes, 
going  on  year  after  year  and  century  after  century,  repre- 
sent an  exertion  of  energy  which  appears  absolutely  with- 
out conceivable  utility.  If  one  cloud  out  of  a  hundred 
of  those  which  shed  their  waters  upon  Mars  supplies  in 
any  degree  the  wants  of  living  creatures,  then  the  purport 
of  those  clouds  is  not  unintelligible ;  but  if  not  a  single 
race  of  beings  peoples  that  distant  world,  then  indeed  we 
seem  compelled  to  say  that  in  Mars  at  least  Nature's 
forces  seem  wholly  wasted. 

L»et  us  consider  what  astronomy  has  taught  us  respect- 
ing the  ruddy  planet. 

The  globe  of  Mars  is  about  five  thousand  miles  in  di- 
ameter, so  that  his  linear  dimensions  bear  to  those  of  the 
earth  the  proportion  of  about  five  to  eight.  His  surface, 
therefore,  is  less  than  that  of  the  earth  in  the  proportion 
of  about  twenty-five  to  sixty-four,  or  more  exactly  (and 
more  conveniently),  the  surface  of  the  earth  is  two  and  a 
half  times  as  extensive  as  that  of  Mars. 

The  substance  of  Mars  has  an  average  density  rather 

less  than  three-fourths  of  our  earth's,  or  very  nearly  four 

times  that  of  water.     Thus  gravity  at  his  surface  is  much 

less  than  terrestrial  gravity.     It  is  even  less,  in  fact,  than 

gravity  at  the  surface  of  Mercury,  insomuch  that  one  of 

our  pound  weights  placed  at  the  surface  of  Mars  would 
7 


98         OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

weigh  but  6  oz.  3  dwts.,  instead  of  nearly  seven  ounces, 
as  on  Mercury.  I  have  already  dwelt  on  the  effects  of 
such  a  relation  as  this,  and  shall  have  occasion,  when  de- 
scribing the  condition  of  Jupiter,  to  discuss  the  converse 
relation.  But  I  may  remark,  in  passing,  how  singular  it 
is  that  we  should  be  compelled  to  people  the  smallest 
planets  with  the  largest  inhabitants,  if  we  wish  to  bring 
the  inhabitants  of  different  orbs  to  about  the  same  scale 
of  activity.  A  Daniel  Lambert  on  Mars  would  be  able 
to  leap  easily  to  a  height  of  five  or  six  feet,  and  he  could 
run  faster  than  the  best  of  our  terrestrial  athletes.  A 
man  of  his  weight,  but  proportioned  more  suitably  for 
athletic  exercises,  could  leap  over  a  twelve-foot  wall.  On 
the  other  hand,  a  light  and  active  stripling  removed  to 
Jupiter  would  be  scarcely  able  to  move  from  place  to 
place.  On  the  sun  his  own  weight  would  simply  crush 
him  to  death. 

Mars  travels  in  an  orbit  of  considerable  eccentricity ; 
in  fact,  the  centre  of  his  orbit  is  no  less  than  thirteen 
million  miles  from  the  sun.  Accordingly,  the  light  and 
heat  he  receives  from  that  luminary  vary  to  an  important 
extent.  In  fact,  he  gets  about  half  as  much  heat  and  light 
again  when  in  perihelion  as  when  in  aphelion.  This  cir- 
cumstance affects  to  an  important  extent  the  climatic  re- 
lations of  his  two  hemispheres,  as  we  shall  presently  see. 

When  Mars  is  at  his  mean  distance  from  the  sun,  the 
light  and  heat  he  receives  are  less  than  ours  in  the  pro- 
portion of  about  4  to  9.     The  length  of  his  year  also 


MARS,  THE  MINIATURE  OF  OJfR  EARTH.         99 

constitutes  a  noteworthy  circumstance  in  which  his  hab- 
itudes differ  from  those  of  our  earth.  His  year  con- 
tains very  nearly  687  of  our  days,  so  that  each  of  the 
Martian  quarters  lasts  about  5§  of  our  months.  But, 
owing  to  the  eccentricity  of  his  orbit,  the  winter  and 
summer  of  the  northern  and  southern  hemispheres  are 
not  equal.  The  Martian  day  is  nearly  forty  minutes 
longer  than  ours.* 

His  equator  is  inclined  at  an  angle  of  about  27J°  to 
the  plane  of  his  orbit,  and  as  the  corresponding  inclina- 
tion in  the  case  of  the  earth  is  about  23^°,  it  will  be 
seen  that  his  seasonal  changes  do  not  differ  much  in 
character,  so  far  at  least  as  they  depend  on  inclination, 
from  our  own. 

The  axis  of  Mars  is  so  situated  that  the  summer  of  his 
northern  hemisphere  occurs  when  he  is  at  his  greatest 
distance  from  the  sun.  The  same  relation  holds  in  the 
case  of  the  earth,  the  sun  being  one  million  five  hun- 
dred thousand  miles  nearer  to  us  in  winter  than  in  sum- 
mer, whereas,  to  those  who  live  in  the  southern  hemi- 
sphere, he  approaches  nearer  in  summer  than  in  winter. 


*  More  exactly,  the  length  of  the  Martian  day  is  24h.  37m.  22.7s. 
This  estimate  I  have  obtained  by  comparing  pictures  taken  by  Hooke 
in  1666,  and  by  Dawes  and  Browning  in  1866-69 — taking  precautions 
to  secure  that  no  complete  rotation  should  anywhere  be  lost  sight  of. 
Kaiser  obtained  a  period  differing  only  one-tenth  of  a  second  from 
mine  ;  but  even  this  small  discrepancy  is  removed  when  certain  cleri- 
cal errors  in  Kaiser's  work  (as  his  counting  1700  and  1800  as  leap-years, 
»nd  wrongly  correcting  for  change  of  style)  are  removed. 

ILofC. 


100        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

But  the  effects  resulting  from  the  relation  in  the  case  of 
Mars  must  be  very  much  more  striking  than  those  we 
recognize.  For  whereas  the  sun  gives  only  one-fifteenth 
more  heat  to  the  whole  earth  in  January  than  he  does  in 
July,  the  sun  of  Mars  gives  half  as  much  light  again  in 
perihelion  as  in  aphelion.  The  summer  of  the  northern 
hemisphere  of  Mars  must  be  rendered  much  cooler  aud 
the  winter  much  warmer  by  this  arrangement.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  contrast  between  the  summer  and  winter 
of  the  southern  hemisphere  is  rendered  more  striking 
than  it  otherwise  would  be. 

It  is,  however,  the  telescopic  aspect  of  Mars  rather  than 
relations  such  as  we  have  been  dealing  with  that  affords 
the  most  interesting  evidence  respecting  the  fitness  of 
the  planet  to  be  the  abode  of  living  creatures.  Although 
the  least  but  one  among  the  primary  planets — a  mere 
speck  compared  with  Jupiter  and  Saturn — Mars  has  been 
examined  more  minutely  and  under  more  favorable  cir- 
cumstances than  any  object  in  the  heavens  except  the 
moon.  He  does  not  approach  us  so  closely  as  Venus,  nor 
does  his  disk  appear  so  large  as  Jupiter's,  yet  he  is  seen 
more  favorably  than  the  former  planet,  and  on  a  larger 
scale,  in  reality,  than  the  latter.  In  fact,  whereas  Yenus 
is  one  of  the  most  unsatisfactory  of  all  telescopic  objects^ 
Mars  is  one  of  the  most  pleasing  ;  and  whereas  Jupiter  is 
always  more  than  380,000,000  of  miles  from  us,  Mars 
sometimes  approaches  us  within  less  than  40,000,000  of 
miles. 


MARS,  THE  MINIATURE  OF  OUR  EARTH.       101 

Tet  even  this  distance  is  enormous,  and  it  affords  high 
evidence  of  the  skill  with  which  modern  telescopes  are 
constructed  and  used  that  astronomers  should  have  been 
able  to  span  that  mighty  gulf,  and  to  bring  from  beyond 
it  reliable  information  respecting  the  structure  of  so  dis- 
tant a  world. 

Such  information  has  been  brought,  however,  and  is 
full  of  interest. 

Viewed  with  the  naked  eye,  the  most  remarkable  feat- 
ure Mars  presents  is  his  ruddy  color.  In  the  telescope 
this  color  is  not  lost,  but  instead  of  characterizing  the 
whole  surface  of  the  planet,  it  is  confined  to  particular 
regions — the  intermediate  parts  being  for  the  most  part 
darker,  and  of  a  somewhat  greenish  hue.  But  a  note- 
worthy feature  adds  largely  to  the  beauty  of  the  picture 
presented  by  the  globe  of  Mars.  Two  bright  spots  of 
white  light  are  seen  on  opposite  sides  of  his  disk,  pre- 
senting precisely  such  an  appearance  as  we  might  ima- 
gine the  snowy  poles  of  our  earth  to  exhibit  to  an  astron- 
omer on  the  planet  Venus. 

Toward  the  edge  of  the  disk  the  ruddy  and  the  greenish 
tracts  are  lost  in  a  misty  whiteness,  which  grows  gradu- 
ally brighter  up  to  the  very  border  of  the  planet.  This 
peculiarity,  as  will  be  seen,  is  one  of  the  most  instructive 
features  of  the  planet's  aspect. 

In  August,  1877,  two  minute  moons  were  discovered 
which  travel  around  Mars  in  about  30J  hours  and  about 
7|  hours  respectively. 


102        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

It  was  discerned,  more  than  two  hundred  years  ago, 
that  the  reddish  spots  on  Mars,  and  the  darker  regions 
which  lie  between  them,  are  not  accidental  or  variable 
phenomena,  but  represent  permanent  peculiarities  of  the 
Martian  surface.  Cassini,  with  one  of  those  outrageously 
long  telescopes  which  were  used  before  the  invention 
of  achromatic  refractors,  was  the  first  to  discover  this. 
But  the  ingenious  Hooke  seems  to  have  obtained  better 
views  of  Mars  in  1666.  At  least,  his  pictures  of  the 
planet  are  the  only  ones  taken  in  the  seventeenth  cen- 
tury in  which  I  can  recognize  the  now  well-known  aspect 
of  the  Martian  continents  and  oceans. 

Later,  Maraldi  and  the  Herschels,  Arago,  Secchi,  Ku- 
nowski,  Beer,  and  Madler,  and  a  host  of  other  eminent 
astronomers,  have  not  thought  the  study  of  this  planet's 
aspect  beneath  their  notice.  "Within  the  last  few  years, 
also,  this  work  has  been  prosecuted  by  Dawes,  Green,  B. 
Trouvelot,  and  others.  Dawes,  whose  acuteness  of  vision 
earned  for  him  the  title  of  the  "  eagk-eyed,"  took  so 
many  and  such  admirable  views  of  the  planet  as  to  render 
it  possible  to  form  a  globe  of  Mars.  Sir  William  Herschel 
had  charted  the  planet,  and  Messrs.  Beer  and  Madler  had 
made  improved  Martian  maps;  while  Phillips  had  con- 
structed two  globes  of  Mars  in  which  many  features  were 
presented.  But  Mr.  Dawes's  pictures  of  the  planet  were 
sufficient,  when  carefully  compared,  for  the  formation  of 
a  globe  in  which  no  large  area  of  the  planet  should  be 
left  bare  of  details.     He  intrusted  to  me  no  less  than 


MAMS,  THE  MINIATURE  OF  OUR  EARTH.       103 

twenty-seven  drawings  of  Mars,  the  choicest  specimens  of 
a  very  large  series,  that  I  might  chart  the  planet  from 
them.  From  the  study  of  his  drawings  the  chart  illus- 
trated in  Fig.  1  has  been  formed.  Of  the  four  illustrative 
views,  the  upper  were  drawn  by  Mr.  Trouvelot  at  Har- 
vard, the  lower  by  Mr.  Nath.  Green.  The  chart  of  Mars, 
in  which  the  darker  parts  of  the  planet  are  assumed  to  be 
seas  and  the  lighter  tracts  continents,  exhibits  the  results 
obtained  from  the  study  of  the  complete  series.  This 
chart  is  on  Mercator's  projection,  and  is  inverted — the 
south  polar  regions,  that  is,  are  at  the  top — because  the 
telescopes  commonly  used  by  observers  exhibit  inverted 
views  of  the  celestial  objects.  At  the  top  of  the  map  wn 
see  the  icy  region  which  lies  at  the  southern  pole  of  Mars 
Around  that  region  is  a  sea  unnamed  in  the  maps.  Then 
along  the  southern  temperate  zone  there  lie  several  tracts 
of  Martian  land,  named  after  observers  of  the  planet. 
These  regions  appear  to  form  a  continuous  land-belt 
round  the  temperate  zone ;  though  there  is  some  uncer- 
tainty on  this  point,  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  coast-line 
is  not  often  very  distinctly  visible.  "We  now  approach, 
however,  a  part  of  the  map  where  all  the  features  are 
thoroughly  recognized  and  permanent.  Next  to  the  circle 
of  land  just  described  there  is  a  nearly  complete  circle  of 
water,  one  strip  only  of  land  connecting  the  equatorial 
continents  of  Mars  with  the  south  temperatate  zone  of 
minor  continents.  Beginning  at  the  eastern  or  left-hand 
extremity  of  the  map,  we  have  a  long  sea  called  Maraldi 


104  OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

Sea,  parallel  to  which  runs  Hooke  Sea,  trending  in  a 
northwest srly  direction,  and  so  running  into  Dawes 
Ocean ;  still  further  west  are  two  vast  islands,  called 
Jacob  Island  and  Phillips  Island,  between  which  runs 
Arago  Strait.  Beyond  these  islands  lies  De  la  Rue 
Ocean,  communicating  by  narrow  straits  with  two  strik- 
ingly similar  seas.  Here  the  zone  of  water  ends,  and  we 
have  only  to  note  further  respecting  it  that  in  De  la  Rue 
Ocean  there  is  a  large  island,  which  presents  so  strikingly 
brilliant  an  aspect  that  it  has  been  supposed  to  be  cov- 
ered (ordinarily)  with  snow.  It  has  been  called  Dawes's 
Ice  Island. 

I  now  come  to  the  most  remarkable  feature  of  the  Mar- 
tian geography — or  perhaps  I  ought  rather  to  say,  areog- 
raphy.  This  is  the  great  equatorial  zone  of  continents. 
There  are  four  of  these.  On  the  left  of  the  map  (Fig.  2) 
is  Herschel  I.  Continent.  Next  is  Dawes  Continent,  the 
largest  of  the  four,  and  separated  from  the  former  by  a 
long  sea  called  Kaiser  Sea.  This  sea  is  one  of  the  most 
striking  marks  on  the  planet,  and  has  been  recognized 
from  the  earliest  days  of  telescopic  observation.  It  is 
connected  toward  the  east  with  a  flask-shaped  sea,  some- 
what resembling  the  two  which  lie  at  the  western  extrem- 
ity of  the  zone  of  water  just  described.  At  its  northern- 
most end  it  turns  sharply  westward,  and  forms  the 
southern  boundary  of  Dawes  Continent.  Further  west 
lies  Madler  Continent,  separated  from  Dawes  Continent 
by  a  long  strait,  which  runs  almost  directly  north  and 


MARS,  THE  MINIATURE  OF  OUR  EARTH.       105 

south.  Lastly,  there  is  Secchi  Continent,  separated 
from  Madler  Continent  by  Bessel  Inlet  and  from  Her- 
schel  Continent  by  Huggins  Inlet.  A  large  lake  on  the 
last-named  continent  is  worthy  of  notice  on  account  of 
its  singular  shape.  It  consists  of  two  bell-shaped  seas 
connected  by  a  narrow  and  sharply  curved  strait. 

The  northern  half  of  Mars  has  not  been  so  thoroughly 
examined  as  the  southern,  for  a  reason  which  will  pres- 
ently be  mentioned.  It  is  known,  however,  that,  in  all 
essential  respects,  it  resembles  the  southern  hemisphere. 
Next  to  the  equatorial  zone  of  continents  there  comes  a 
zone  of  water,  expanding  at  one  point  into  Beer  Sea,  and 
at  another  into  Tycho  Sea.  Then  comes  a  zone  of  land, 
called  Laplace  Land,  in  which  lies  an  enormous  lake 
called  Delambre  Sea.  Next  is  a  narrow  zone  of  water, 
called  the  Schroter  Sea  :  and  so  we  reach  the  north  polar 
ice-cap. 

I  have  been  speaking  of  the  spots  on  Mars  as  though 
they  undoubtedly  represented  land  and  water.  But 
many  may  be  disposed  to  question  the  evidence  we  have 
on  this  point — to  ask  why  the  ruddy  spots  should  be 
held  to  be  continents  or  islands,  and  the  greenish-colored 
markings  to  be  oceans,  seas,  and  lakes.  "We  know  that 
for  a  long  time  after  the  invention  of  the  telescope,  as- 
tronomers called  the  darker  portions  of  the  moon,  seas. 
They  spoke  of  the  Sea  of  Serenity,  the  Sea  of  Crises,  the 
Sea  of  Humors,  and  so  on ;  and  we  know  now  for  certain 
that  these  dusky  regions  are  not  seas.     It  may  be  asked, 


106        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

therefore,  how  we  can  feel  certain  that  the  dark  spots  on 
Mars  are  oceans. 

At  first  sight  this  question  seems  a  difficult  one  to  an- 
swer. The  most  powerful  telescopes  have  been  directed 
toward  the  moon,  without  affording  any  satisfactory  in- 
formation respecting  the  condition  of  its  surface.  Mars, 
therefore,  which  lies — even  under  the  most  favorable  cir- 
cumstances— more  than  one  hundred  and  sixty  times 
further  from  us  than  the  moon,  might  be  thought  to  be 
altogether  beyond  the  reach  of  our  telescopists — so  far, 
at  least,  as  any  knowledge  of  the  Martian  surface  is  con- 
cerned. But  one  important  distinction  between  Mars 
and  the  moon  must  be  carefully  attended  to.  The 
surface  of  the  moon  is  always  the  same — no  natural 
processes  seem  ever  to  take  place  over  that  scene  of  deso- 
lation, though  the  moon  is  exposed  to  contrasts  of  tem- 
perature, compared  with  which  the  distinction  between 
the  intensest  heat  of  our  summers  and  the  bitterest  cold 
of  our  winters  seems  altogether  evanescent.  But  on 
Mars  the  case  is  certainly  different.  Whatever  opinion 
we  may  form  respecting  Martian  habitudes,  whether  we 
assume  or  not  that  Mars  is  the  abode  of  any  forms  of 
animal  life,  there  can  be  no  question  whatever  that  physi- 
cal processes  of  change  are  taking  place  on  a  grand 
scale  in  that  distant  world.  Many  evidences  of  this  can 
be  at  once  adduced.  We  have  spoken  of  the  Martian 
features  as  constant.  They  differ,  for  instance,  from  the 
markings  on  Jupiter,  which  are  as  changeful  as  the  as- 


MAES,  THE  MINIATURE  OF  OUR  EARTH.       107 

pect  of  our  April  skies.  But  though  the  same  marking 
may  have  been  seen  by  Hooke  in  1666,  by  Maraldi  in 
1720,  by  Herschel  in  1780,  by  Beer  and  Madler  in 
1830-37,  and  by  Dawes  in  1852-65,  yet  it  by  no  means 
follows  that  it  is  always  visible  when  the  part  of 
Mars  to  which  it  belongs  is  turned  toward  us.  A  veil  is 
sometimes  drawn  over  it  for  hours  or  even  days  together. 
And  this  veil  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  distinctness  or 
indistinctness  with  which  our  own  atmosphere  permits  us 
to  see  the  planet.  A  spot  will  be  blurred  and  indistinct 
when  a  neighboring  marking  is  exhibited  with  unusual 
clearness. 

Let  us  consider  an  instance  of  this  peculiarity.  On 
October  3,  1862,  late  in  the  evening,  a  part  of  Dawes 
Ocean,  where  it  borders  on  Herschel  Continent,  was  hid- 
den from  view.  In  place  of  the  ordinarily  dark  aspect 
of  this  region,  a  faint,  misty  light,  with  ill-defined  bor- 
ders, was  observable.  As  the  evening  progressed  the 
outlines  gradually  became  clearer,  but  at  about  half-past 
eleven  the  white  light  still  continued  to  veil  the  outline 
of  a  part  of  Dawes  Ocean.  But  Mr.  Dawes,  observing 
Mars  at  a  quarter  past  twelve,  found  that  the  process  of 
clearing  up  noticed  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  night  had 
entirely  lifted  off  the  veil  which  concealed  the  coast-line. 
The  remains  of  the  misty  light  seen  earlier  are  still  to  be 
detected  in  Mr.  Dawes's  drawing,  but  they  have  passed 
further  south,  and  no  longer  hide  the  shores  of  Dawes 
Ocean, 


108  OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

The  Padre  Secchi  of  the  Collegio  Eomano  states  that 
he  has  often  noticed  similar  appearances  while  observing 
Mars  with  the  fine  refractor  in  the  observatory  of  that 
institution. 

But  yet  another  peculiarity  of  the  same  sort  remains 
to  be  mentioned.  Mars,  as  I  have  said,  has  his  winter 
and  summer  seasons.  Since  we  know  the  position  of 
the  Martian  equator  upon  his  surface,  we  can  tell  what 
season  is  in  progress  in  either  hemisphere  at  any  given 
time.  Now,  it  has  been  noticed  that  when  it  is  winter  in 
one  hemisphere,  and  therefore  summer  in  the  other,  the 
former  hemisphere  is  nearly  always  hidden  from  view 
by  just  such  a  veil  as  I  have  spoken  of  above. 

I  may  remark,  in  passing,  that  this  peculiarity  has  led 
many  observers  to  form  very  erroneous  impressions  re- 
specting the  distribution  of  land  and  water  over  the  sur- 
face of  Mars.  Seeing  one  hemisphere  covered  for  weeks 
together  with  whitish  light,  they  have  concluded  that 
there  are  no  oceans  there  ;  and  if  they  have  no  other  op- 
portunity of  observing  the  planet,  the  mistaken  impres- 
sion remains,  and  is  published  to  the  world  with  all  the 
authority  of  the  observer's  name. 

Now,  what  is  this  veil  which  sometimes  for  a  few  hours 
or  days,  at  others  for  months  together,  is  drawn  over  the 
features  of  the  Martian  globe  ?  Have  we  any  terrestrial 
analogies  by  means  of  which  we  may  interpret  this  phe- 
nomenon? 

To  answer  these  questions,  let  us  conceive  the  case  of 


MAES,  THE  MINIATURE  OF  OUR  EARTH.       109 

an  observer  on  Venus  watching  our  earth.  Would  such 
an  observer  always  see  the  features  of  this  globe  with 
equal  distinctness  ?  When  heavy  masses  of  cloud  are 
drawn  over  a  wide  expanse  of  country — spreading  often, 
as  meteorologists  record,  for  hundreds,  and  even  thou- 
sands of  miles — can  we  suppose  that  the  astronomer  on 
Yenus  could  pierce  through  the  veil  ?  Since  we  cannot 
see  the  bright  body  of  the  sun  through  a  dense  cloud- 
veil,  we  may  be  certain  that  the  observer  on  Yenus  can- 
not see  the  oceans  and  continents  of  our  earth  when  thus 
cloud-shadowed.  So  far  as  the  cloud-veil  extends,  the 
lands  and  seas  of  this  globe  would  be  to  him,  at  such  a 
time,  as  though  they  were  not. 

Here,  then,  we  have  an  argument  from  analogy  for 
supposing  that  the  veil,  which  from  time  to  time  con- 
ceals the  Martian  features,  may  resemble  terrestrial 
cloud-banks.  Let  us  next  inquire  whether  there  is  any- 
thing in  the  behavior  of  the  Martian  veil  to  justify  this 
view. 

It  is  clear  that  if  we  held  the  concealing  medium  to  be 
of  a  cloudy  nature,  the  disappearance  of  the  features  of 
the  hemisphere  which  is  passing  through  the  Martian 
winter  would  indicate  that  in  winter  the  Martian  skies 
are  more  clouded  than  in  summer.  We  know  that  this 
is  the  case  on  our  own  earth,  that  fogs  and  mists,  clouds, 
rain,  and  snow,  are  phenomena  far  more  frequently  ob- 
served in  winter  than  in  summer.  We  know  also  why 
it  is  so.      The  cold  winter  air  is  unable  to  .  retain  the 


110        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

aqueous  vapor  continually  passing  into  it,  and  is  thus 
forced  to  precipitate  this  vapor  in  one  or  other  of  the 
forms  just  named.  Nor  can  we  see  any  reason  why  the 
Martian  atmosphere,  supposing  it  to  resemble  our  own, 
should  not  act  in  precisely  the  same  manner.  Thus  we 
recognize,  in  the  remarkable  seasonal  peculiarity  above 
described,  what  seems  to  be  the  exact  counterpart  of 
processes  recognized  upon  the  earth. 

Perhaps  the  reader  may  be  disposed  to  inquire 
whether  the  clearing  up  of  a  portion  of  the  Martian  disk 
observed  by  Dawes  admits  of  interpretation  in  a  similar 
way.  To  this  it  may  be  replied  that,  from  the  observed 
position  of  the  region  in  question,  the  Martian  time  of 
day  there  must  have  been  somewhere  about  noon,  and 
about  one  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  (according  to  our  ter- 
restrial mode  of  reckoning)  when  Mr.  Dawes  observed 
the  planet.  It  is  no  uncommon  thing  to  see  our  terres- 
trial skies  clear  up  soon  after  midday;  and  if  the  veil 
which  conceals  the  Martian  features  is  really  cloudy, 
this  is  precisely  what  happened  out  yonder,  forty  mill- 
ions of  miles  away  from  us,  on  the  day  in  question. 

I  think  the  reader  will  at  least  concede  that  the  expla- 
nation here  given  of  these  peculiarities  is  more  natural 
than  one  which  was  put  forward  some  time  since  by  an 
eminent  French  astronomer.  He  urged  that  Martian 
vegetation,  instead  of  being  green  like  ours,  is  red ; 
hence  in  the  Martian  summer,  the  surface,  as  seen  by 
us,  assumes  a  ruddy  aspect,  while  the  wintry  hemisphere 


MARS,  THE  MINIATURE  OF  OUR  EARTH.       Ill 

loses  its  ruddy  tint.  According  to  this  interpretation, 
such  changes  as  were  noticed  by  Secchi  would  indicate 
the  sudden  blooming  forth  of  Martian  vegetation  over 
hundreds  of  square  miles  of  the  Martian  surface  ! 

To  the  evidence  already  dealt  with  may  be  added  that 
which  is  afforded  by  the  whiteness  of  the  disk  of  Mars 
near  the  edge.  Knowing  that  the  parts  of  Mars  which 
thus  appear  concealed  in  mist  are  those  where  it  is  morn- 
ing or  evening  to  the  Martians,  we  see  a  close  analogy 
\iere  to  terrestrial  relations,  since  our  own  skies  are  com- 
monly more  moisture-laden  in  the  morning  and  evening 
than  near  midday.* 

I  may  here  pause,  in  passing,  to  notice  under  what 
difficulties  the  observation  of  Mars  is  conducted  by  the 
terrestrial  observer.  To  begin  with,  the  sky  must  be 
exceptionally  clear ;  and  none  but  the  practised  observer 
knows  how  seldom  there  occurs  what  is  called  "  a  good 
observing  night."  Then  it  must  be  ajine  day  for  the 
Martians,  for  clouds  over  Mars,  or  even  an  imperfectly 
clear  atmosphere,  must  produce  quite  as  bad  an  effect  in 
spoiling   the   definition   of   Martian   features   as  similar 


*  In  the  Popular  Science  Review  for  January,  1869,  I  have  in- 
dicated a  subsidiary  explanation  of  this  peculiarity,  founded  on  the 
probable  shape  of  the  Martian  clouds.  For  the  same  reason  that,  near 
the  horizon,  our  own  cumulus  clouds  seem  more  closely  packed  than 
overhead,  the  Martians  would  see  a  clearer  sky  overhead  than  near  the 
horizon.  It  follows  at  once  that  we  should  see  best  those  parts  of  the 
surface  of  Mars  which  we  look  down  upon  in  an  early  vertical  direc- 
tion, that  is,  the  central  parts  of  his  disk. 


112        OTHER   W0RLD8  THAN  OURS. 

phenomena  on  earth.  Again,  Mars  only  comes  into  a 
favorable  position  once  in  every  two  and  a  quarter  years, 
continuing  to  be  well  placed  for  only  a  Jew  months. 
Thus  it  happens  that,  although  Mars  has  been  telescopi- 
cally  observed  for  more  .than  two  hundred  years,  the 
actual  time  during  which  he  has  been  favorably  placed  for 
observation  has  been  very  much  less;  and  taking  into 
account  all  the  requirements  for  good  definition,  it  may 
be  said  that  Mars  has  not  been  under  really  effective  ob- 
servation for  more  than  a  very  few  days. 

Of  course  if  we  admit  that  the  vaporous  envelope  which 
occasionally  hides  parts  of  Mars  is  aqueous,  we  must 
believe  in  the  existence  of  oceans  upon  Mars.  And  from 
our  knowledge  of  the  appearance  of  our  own  seas,  we 
should  immediately  recognize  the  greenish  parts  of  Mars 
as  the  Martian  oceans,  and  look  upon  the  ruddy  parts  as 
continents.  "We  have  seen  that  the  behavior  of  the  vari- 
ous envelopes  corresponds  to  that  of  our  own  clouds  and 
fogs.  But  it  might  be  thought  possible  that  the  vapors 
arise  from  fluids  other  than  water ;  that,  in  fact,  a  state  of 
things  exists  upon  Mars  wholly  different  from  that  which 
prevails  upon  our  own  earth. 

A  few  years  ago  it  would  have  been  very  difficult  to 
disprove  such  an  argument  as  this,  however  fanciful  it 
may  seem.  But  the  wonderful  powers  of  the  spectroscope 
have  been  applied  to  this  question,  and  there  is  no  mis- 
taking the  results  which  have  been  obtained.  We  must 
premise  that  this  is  hardly  a  favorable  case  for  the  appli- 


MAR8.  THE  MINIATURE  OF  OUR  EARTH.       113 

cation  of  spectroscopic  analysis,  which  (as  available  to 
the  astronomer)  deals  most  effectively  with  self-luminous 
objects.  Still,  there  was  a  possibility  that  the  light 
which  comes  from  Mars  might  have  been  so  acted  upon 
by  vapors  in  the  Martian  atmosphere  that  its  spectrum 
would  be  affected  in  an  appreciable  manner. 

Mr.  Huggins  examined  Mars  in  1864  without  satisfac- 
tory results,  but  at  the  opposition  of  Mars  in  1867  he 
was  more  successful.  In  the  following  description  of  his 
most  striking  observation  I  epitomize  his  account.  On 
the  14th  of  February  he  examined  Mars  with  a  spectro- 
scope attached  to  his  powerful  8-inch  refractor.  The 
rainbow-colored  streak  was  crossed,  near  the  orange  part, 
by  groups  of  dark  lines  agreeing  in  position  "  with  lines 
which  make  their  appearance  in  the  solar  spectrum  when 
the  sun  is  low  down  so  that  its  light  has  to  traverse  the 
denser  strata  of  out-  atmosphere."  To  determine  whether 
these  lines  belonged  to  the  light  from  Mars  or  were 
caused  by  our  own  atmosphere,  Mr.  Huggins  turned  his 
spectroscope  toward  the  moon,  which  happened  to  be 
nearer  the  horizon  than  Mars,  so  that  the  atmospheric 
lines  would  be  stronger  in  the  moon's  spectrum  than  in 
that  of  the  planet.  But  the  group  of  lines  referred  to  was 
not  visible  in  the  lunar  spectrum.  Hence  it  was  clear  that 
they  belonged  to  the  Martian  atmosphere,  and  not  to  ours. 

I  have  said  that  these  lines  appear  in  the  solar  spec- 
trum when  the  sun  is  shining  through  the  denser  strata 

of  our  atmosphere ;  so  that  the  Martian  atmosphere  must 
8 


114        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

contain  at  least  those  constituent  vapors  whose  existence 
in  our  atmosphere  causes  the  appearance  of  these  lines  in 
the  solar  spectrum.  Hence  there  must  be  some  similarity 
between  the  Martian  atmosphere  and  our  own.  But  we 
know  from  the  researches  of  the  Padre  Secchi  that  it  is 
the  aqueous  vapor  in  our  air  which  causes  the  appearance 
of  the  lines  in  question.  Hence  there  must  be  aqueous 
vapor  in  the  Martian  atmosphere. 

The  discovery  at  once  justifies  the  title  of  the  present 
chapter.  Let  us  consider  what  a  number  of  interesting 
results  follow  from  it. 

The  water  in  the  Martian  air  must  be  raised  from  seas 
and  rivers  upon  the  planet.  These,  therefore,  consist  of 
water,  and  not  of  other  fluids.  The  two  white  spots,  then, 
on  the  Martian  disk  are  no  longer  doubtful  appearances. 
Before  the  discovery  that  water  exists  on  Mars  it  was 
perhaps  somewhat  bold  to  pronounce  that  these  spots 
certainly  indicate  the  presence  of  ice-fields  around  the 
Martian  poles,  resembling  those  which  exist  around  the 
poles  of  the  earth.  Sir  William  Herschel,  indeed,  with 
that  confidence  which  he  always  showed  when  he  had  a 
trustworthy  analogy  to  guide  him,  came  to  this  conclu- 
sion on  the  strength  of  the  correspondence  between  the 
changes  of  the  two  spots  and  the  progress  of  the  Mar- 
tian seasons.  But  many  astronomers  felt  that  there  was 
still  room  to  doubt  whether  he  could  really  speak  of  the 
spots  as 

The  snowy  poles  of  moonless  Mars. 


MARS,  THE  MINIATURE  OF  OUR  EARTH.       115 

Now,  however,  we  know  that  they  can  be  no  other  than 
snow-caps.  Nay,  if  Mars  were  so  far  off  that  we  could 
not  distinguish  these  spots,  we  could  yet,  on  the  strength 
of  what  the  spectroscope  has  taught  us,  pronounce  confi- 
dently that  his  polar  regions  must  be  ice-bound. 

Let  us  proceed  a  step  or  two  further.  We  have  seen 
that  there  are  oceans  on  Mars ;  we  know  that  clouds  and 
vapors  arise  from  those  oceans,  and  are  wafted  over  his 
continents ;  and  finally,  we  have  learned  that  snow  falls 
on  the  Martian  polar  regions.  These  facts  are  very  inter- 
esting in  themselves,  but  they  indicate  the  occurrence  of 
processes  yet  more  interesting.  The  formation  and  the 
dissipation  of  clouds  are  among  the  most  important  of  all 
the  processes  by  which  Nature  arranges  and  modifies  the 
temperature  of  our  earth.  The  heat  of  the  sun's  rays  is 
used  up,  so  to  speak,  in  raising  aqueous  vapor  from  the 
surface  of  the  ocean.  Thus  the  air  is  rendered  cooler 
than  it  otherwise  would  be,  and  this  takes  place  just 
where  coolness  is  most  needed.  But  the  aqueous  vapor, 
once  raised,  is  swept  by  the  winds  to  other  regions.  So 
long  as  the  air  remains  warm  the  aqueous  vapor  remains 
unchanged ;  but  so  soon  as  it  has  been  carried  to  colder 
regions  it  is  condensed  into  the  form  of  a  cloud  or  mist, 
and  while  changing  to  this  form  it  parts  with  the  heat 
which  had  turned  it  into  vapor.  Thus  where  heat  is  in 
excess,  it  is  used  up  in  forming  aqueous  vapor;  and 
where  heat  is  wanted,  there  the  aqueous  vapor  distrib- 
utes it. 


116  OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

"We  see9  then,  that  on  Mars  there  exists  the  same  ad- 
mirabio  contrivance  for  tempering  climates  which  we  find 
on  our  own  earth. 

But  let  us  consider  yet  another  office  fulfilled  by  aque- 
ous vapor.  It  not  only  serves  to  convey  the  heat  from 
the  warmer  parts  of  the  earth  to  those  regions  where  heat 
is  most  needed ;  it  forms  clouds  which  serve  to  shelter  the 
earth  from  the  sun's  heat  by  day,  and  to  prevent  the  es- 
cape of  the  earth's  heat  by  night,  which  also,  in  refresh- 
ing rains,  "  drop  fatness  on  the  earth."  Now  the  clouds 
on  Mars  are  certainly  dissipated  in  some  way,  because,  as 
I  have  said,  astronomers  have  repeatedly  seen  them  dis- 
appear. And  doubtless,  like  our  own  clouds,  they  are 
often  dissipated  by  the  sun's  heat.  But  we  may  take  it 
for  granted  that,  like  our  terrestrial  clouds,  they  are  also 
often  dissipated  by  falling  in  rain.  Thus  the  Martian 
lands  are  nourished  by  refreshing  rainfalls ;  and  who  can 
doubt  that  they  are  thus  nourished  for  the  same  purpose 
as  our  own  fields  and  forests — namely,  that  vegetation  of 
all  sorts  may  grow  abundantly  ? 

But  yet  again,  the  transit  of  clouds  from  place  to  place 
implies  the  existence  of  aerial  currents.  Clouds  cannot 
indeed  even  form  and  be  dissipated  without  occasioning 
wind-currents ;  and  it  need  hardly  be  said  that  the  Mar- 
tian clouds  could  not  be  carried  to  his  polar  regions, 
there  to  fall  in  snow,  unless  the  atmospheric  currents  on 
Mars  were  extensive  and  persistent.  We  see,  then,  that 
Mars  has  winds  as  our  earth  has.     Doubtless  his  trade- 


MARS,  THE  MINIATURE  OF  OUR  EARTH.       11? 

winds  are  less  marked  than  ours,  because  his  surface 
rotates  less  rapidly  than  the  earth's,  his  globe  being  much 
smaller,  while  his  rotation-period  is  slightly  greater.  But 
he  has  less  need  for  trade-winds,  his  oceans  being  so 
much  less  extensive  than  ours.  No  Columbus  on  Mars 
has  ever  needed  the  persistent  breath  of  easterly  winds 
to  encourage  him  on  his  voyage  to  an  undiscovered  con- 
tinent. Rather,  the  intricate  navigation  of  the  narrow 
Martian  seas  would  be  favored  by  variable  breezes.  But 
the  great  purposes  which  the  circulation  of  our  own 
atmosphere  subserves  are  subserved  efficiently  out  yonder 
on  Mars.  The  air  is  cleansed  and  purified,  its  thermal 
and  electrical  conditions  are  regulated,  clouds  are  wafted 
from  place  to  place;  and,  in  fine,  the  atmosphere  is 
rendered  fit  for  all  those  purposes  for  which,  like  our 
own,  it  has  doubtless  been  created. 

We  may  trace  yet  further,  however,  the  results  which 
follow  from  the  existence  of  aqueous  vapor  in  the  atmos- 
phere of  Mars.  We  see  the  polar  snows  aggregating  in  the 
Martian  winter  and  diminishing  in  the  Martian  summer. 
And  we  know  that,  on  our  own  earth,  the  increase  and  the 
diminution  of  the  polar  snows  are  processes  intimately 
associated  with  the  formation  and  maintenance  of  the 
oceanic  circulation.  Doubtless  much  yet  remains  to  be 
done  before  that  system  of  circulation  will  be  fully  under- 
stood. The  rival  views  which  have  been  maintained  by 
Sir  John  Herschel  and  Captain  Maury  have  served  to 
throw  a  certain  air  of  doubt  over  the  theory  of  ocean  cur' 


118        OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

rents. *  But  whether  we  ascribe  the  equatorial  currents 
of  our  oceans  to  the  trade-winds,  with  Herschel,  or  to 
differences  of  specific  gravity,  with  Maury,  we  see  that,  in 
the  first  place,  both  causes  operate  in  the  case  of  Mars  ; 
and,  secondly,  that  the  submarine  return-currents  from 
our  polar  regions  must,  at  any  rate,  be  due  to  the  presence 
of  ice  in  the  polar  seas.  So  that  undoubtedly  the  Mar- 
tian oceans,  so  far  as  their  peculiar  conformation  will 
permit,  are  traversed  by  currents  in  various  directions  and 
at  various  depths. 

Then,  lastly,  there  must  be  rivers  on  Mars.  The  clouds 
which  often  hide  from  our  view  the  larger  part  of  a  Mar- 
tian continent  indicate  a  rainfall  at  least  as  considerable 
(in  proportion)  as  that  which  we  have  on  the  earth.  The 
water  thus  precipitated  on  the  Martian  continents  can  find 
its  way  no  otherwise  to  the  ocean  than  along  river  courses. 

As  to  the  nature  of  these  rivers,  again,  we  may  form 
conjectures  founded  on  trustworthy  analogies.     The  mere 

*If  Herschel  has  completely  overthrown  Maury's  theory,  that  cur- 
rents are  altogether  due  to  differences  of  specific  gravity,  saltness,  and 
so  on,  Maury  has  at  least  been  as  successful  in  overthrowing  Herschel's 
theory,  that  the  currents  are  due  to  the  trade-winds.  A  theory  more 
probable  than  either  is,  I  think,  that  according  to  which  the  whole 
system  of  circulation  is  set  in  motion  by  the  continual  evaporation  going 
on  in  equatorial  seas.  Thus,  by  a  process  resembling  suction,  an  in- 
draught of  cold  water  is  caused,  and  this  water  coming  from  higher 
latitudes,  where  the  earth's  eastwardly  motion  is  less,  to  lower  latitudes, 
where  the  eastwardly  motion  is  greater,  produces  the  relatively  cold  and 
westwardly  equatorial  currents  which  exist  in  the  Atlantic,  Indian,  and 
Pacific  oceans.  Recent  researches  into  the  temperature  of  the  deep  sea 
have  tended  strongly  to  confirm  these  views,  which  I  dealt  with  at  some 
length  in  the  second  volume  of  my  Light  Science  for  Leisure  Hours. 


MAES,  THE  MINIATURE  OF  OUR  EARTH.       119 

existence  of  continents  and  oceans  on  Mars  proves  the 
action  of  forces  of  upheaval  and  of  depression.  There 
must  be  volcanic  eruptions  and  earthquakes  modelling 
and  remodelling  the  crust  of  Mars.  Thus  there  must  be 
mountains  and  hills,  valleys  and  ravines,  water-sheds  and 
water-courses.  All  the  various  kinds  of  scenery  which 
make  our  earth  so  beautiful  have  their  representatives  in 
the  ruddy  planet.  The  river  courses  to  the  ocean,  by  cata- 
ract and  lake,  here  urging  its  way  impetuously  over  rocks 
and  bowlders,  there  gliding  with  stately  flow  along  its  more 
level  reaches.  The  rivulet  speeds  to  the  river,  the  brook  to 
the  rivulet,  and  from  the  mountain  recesses  burst  forth  the 
refreshing  springs  which  are  to  feed  the  Martian  brooklets. 
Who  can  doubt  what  the  lesson  is  that  all  these  things 
are  meant  to  teach  us?  So  far,  let  it  be  remembered,  we 
have  been  guided  onward  by  no  speculative  fancies,  but 
simply  by  sober  reasoning.  But  shall  we  recognize  in 
Mars  all  that  makes  our  own  world  so  well  fitted  to  our 
wants — land  and  water,  mountain  and  valley,  cloud  and 
sunshine,  rain  and  ice  and  snow,  rivers  and  lakes,  ocean- 
currents  and  wind-currents — without  believing  further  in 
the  existence,  either  now,  or  in  the  past,  or  in  the  future, 
of  many  forms  of  life  ?  Surely,  if  it  is  rashly  speculative 
to  form  such  an  opinion  respecting  this  charming  planet, 
it  is  to  speculate  still  more  rashly  to  assert  that  Mars  is 
not,  has  never  been,  and  never  will  be,  tenanted  by  living 
creatures,  or  by  any  beings  belonging  to  other  than  the 
lowest  orders  of  animated  existence. 


120  OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 


CHAPTEE  V. 

JUPITER,   THE  GIANT  OF  THE  SOLAR  SYSTEM. 

Passing  over  the  zone  of  asteroids,  we  come  now  to  the 
noblest  of  all  the  planets — the  giant  Jupiter.  If  bulk  is 
to  be  the  measure  of  a  planet's  fitness  to  be  the  abode  of 
living  creatures,  then  must  Jupiter  be  inhabited  by  the 
most  favored  races  existing  throughout  the  whole  range 
of  the  solar  system.  Exceeding  our  earth  some  one 
thousand  two  hundred  and  thirty  times  in  volume,  and 
more  than  three  hundred  times  in  mass,  this  magnificent 
orb  was  rightly  selected  by  Brewster  as  the  crowning 
proof  of  the  relative  insignificance  of  the  earth  in  the 
scale  of  creation. 

Or  if  we  estimate  Jupiter  rather  by  the  forces  inherent 
in  his  system,  if  we  contemplate  the  enormous  rapidity 
with  which  his  vast  bulk  whirls  round  upon  its  axis,  or 
trace  the  stately  motion  with  which  he  sweeps  onward  on 
his  orbit,  or  measure  the  influences  by  which  he  sways 
his  noble  family  of  satellites,  we  are  equally  impressed 
with  the  feeling  that  here  we  have  the  prince  of  all  the 
planets,  the  orb  which,  of  all  others  in  the  solar  scheme, 
suggests  to  us  conceptions  of  the  noblest  forms  of  life. 

The  very  symmetry  and  perfection  of  the  system  which 


JUPITER,    GIANT  OF  THE  SOLAR  SYSTEM.        121 

circles  round  Jupiter  have  led  many  to  believe  that  he 
must  be  inhabited  by  races  superior  in  intelligence  to  any 
which  people  our  earth.  The  motions  of  these  bodies 
afford,  indeed,  to  our  astronomers  a  noble  subject  of 
study.  Our  most  eminent  mathematicians  have  given 
many  hours  of  study  to  the  phenomena  which  the  four 
moons  present  to  the  terrestrial  observer.  But  we  can 
trace  only  the  general  movements  of  the  satellites  of 
Jupiter.  Their  minor  disturbances,  the  effects  of  the 
varying  influences  which  the  sun  and  Jupiter  exert  upon 
them,  and  which  the  moons  exert  upon  each  other,  must 
tax  the  powers  of  far  abler  mathematicians  even  than 
tie  who  "  surpassed  the  whole  human  race  in  mental 
grasp." 

But,  after  all,  we  must  judge  of  Jupiter  rather  accord- 
ing to  the  evidence  we  have,  and  the  analogies  which  are 
most  directly  applicable  to  the  case,  than  according  to 
fancies  such  as  these.  We  know  that  the  sun,  which  sur- 
passes Jupiter  in  weight  and  volume  even  more  than  Jup- 
iter surpasses  the  earth,  is  yet  not  the  abode  of  life,  so 
that  mere  size  and  mass  must  not  be  held  to  argue  habit- 
ability.  "We  know  that  many  meteors  and  comets  sweep 
through  space  more  swiftly  than  the  vast  bulk  of  Jupiter, 
so  that  the  energies  indicated  by  mere  velocity  of  motion, 
whether  orbital  or  rotational,  must  be  equally  disregarded. 
Nor  must  we  forget  that,  ages  before  men  studied  the 
motions  of  our  own  moon,  she  presented  the  same  noble 
subject  of  study  that  she  forms  in  our  day  for  an  Adams, 


122        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

a  Leverrier,  or  a  Delaunay.  Even  now  a  thousand  grand 
problems  are  presented  to  our  men  of  science  which  es- 
cape their  notice,  and  we  might  as  reasonably  argue  that 
there  must  be  creatures  existing  unperceived  among  us, 
who  deal  with  these  problems,  as  that,  out  yonder  in 
space,  there  must  be  beings  who  study  the  complicated 
motions  of  the  Jovian  satellites. 

Jupiter  presents  the  following  principal  physical  habi- 
tudes : 

He  has  a  diameter  of  about  eighty-five  thousand  miles, 
or  nearly  eleven  times  as  large  as  the  earth's,  a  surface 
one  hundred  and  fifteen  times  larger,  and,  as  I  have  said, 
a  volume  more  than  one  thousand  two  hundred  times 
larger.  Gravity  at  his  surface  is  about  two  and  a  half 
times  as  great  as  on  our  earth's,  so  that  such  creatures  as 
exist  around  us  would  find  their  weight  much  more  than 
doubled  if  they  were  removed  to  Jupiter.  He  lies  more 
than  frve  times  further  from  the  sun  than  our  earth,  and 
the  light  and  heat  which  he  receives  from  that  orb  are 
reduced  to  about  one-twenty-fifth  of  our  supply.  He 
rotates  on  his  axis  in  rather  less  than  ten  hours  (9  hours, 
55  minutes,  26  seconds),  so  that  the  length  of  his  day  is 
considerably  less  than  half  of  ours.  His  axis  is  nearly 
perpendicular  to  his  orbit,  so  that  there  are  no  apprecia- 
ble seasonal  changes  as  he  sweeps  round  the  sun  in  his 
long  year  of  4,332£  days. 

It  will  be  convenient  to  consider,  first,  the  probable 
influence  of  the  great  attractive  power  of  Jupiter  upon  the 


JUPITER,  GIANT  OF  THE  SOLAR  SYSTEM.        123 

dimensions  of  the  various  orders  of  Irving  creatures  exist* 
ing  upon  his  surface. 

The  grandeur  of  his  orb  naturally  suggests,  at  first 
sight,  the  idea  of  beings  far  exceeding,  both  in  might  and 
bulk,  those  which  live  upon  the  earth.  Old  Wolfius  was 
led  to  a  similar  conclusion  in  another  way.  I  quote  his 
quaint  fancies  as  quaintly  presented  by  Admiral  Smyth. 
"Wolfius,"  says  the  genial  sailor,  "not  only  asserts  that 
there  are  inhabitants  in  Jupiter,  but  also  shows  that  they 
must  necessarily  be  much  larger  than  those  of  the  earth ; 
in  fact,  that  they  are  of  the  giant  kind,  and  nearly  four- 
teen feet  high  by  e?/e-measurement.  And  thus  he  proves 
it.  It  is  shown  in  optics  that  the  pupil  of  the  eye  dilates 
and  contracts  according  to  the  degree  of  light  it  encoun- 
ters. Wherefore,  since  in  Jupiter  the  sun's  meridian 
height  is  much  weaker  than  on  the  earth,  the  pupil  will 
need  to  be  much  more  dilatable  in  the  Jovian  creature 
than  in  the  terrestrial  one.  But  the  pupil  is  observed  to 
have  a  constant  proportion  to  the  ball  of  the  eye,  and  the 
ball  of  the  eye  to  the  rest  of  the  body ;  so  that,  in  ani- 
mals, the  larger  the  pupil  the  larger  the  eye,  and  conse- 
quently the  larger  the  body.  Assuming  that  these  con- 
ditions are  unquestionable,  he  shows  that  Jupiter's  dis- 
tance from  the  sun,  compared  with  the  earth's,  is  as  26 
to  5  ;  the  intensity  of  the  sun's  light  in  Jupiter  is  to 
its  intensity  on  the  earth  in  a  duplicate  ratio  of  5  to 
26."  The  eyes  of  the  Jovians  and  their  dimensions  gen- 
erally must  be  correspondingly  enlarged,  and  "  it  there- 


124  OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

fore  follows  that  even  Goliath  of  Gath  would  have  cut 
but  a  sorry  figure  among  the  natives  of  Jupiter.  That  is, 
supposing  the  Philistine's  altitude  to  be  somewhere  be- 
tween eight  feet  and  eleven,  according  as  we  lean  to 
Bishop  Cumberland's  calculation,  or  the  Vatican  copy  of 
the  Septuagint.  Now,  Wolfius  proves  the  size  of  the 
inhabitants  of  Jupiter  to  be  the  same  as  that  of  Og,  king 
of  Bashan,  whose  iron  camp-bed  was  nine  cubits  in  length 
and  four  in  breadth — or  rather  he  shows,  in  the  way 
stated,  the  ordinary  altitude  of  the  Jovicol«3  to  be  13-j^y^ 
Paris  feet,  and  the  height  of  Og  to  have  been  13}  1 1-§  feet. 
See  his  Works,  vol.  iii.,  p.  438." 

This  exact  determination  of  the  dimensions  of  Jovian 
men  would  be  very  pleasing  and  satisfactory  were  it  not 
that  another  line  of  argument  guides  us  at  least  as  con- 
clusively to  a  very  different  view.  If  we  are  to  assume 
that  beings  resembling  men  in  all  attributes  except  size 
actually  exist  on  Jupiter,  we  might  claim  for  these  beings 
the  power  of  moving  from  place  to  place  as  freely  as  we 
do,  with  quite  as  much  reason  as  Wolfius  claimed  for 
them  the  same  powers  of  vision  that  we  possess.  Pro- 
ceeding according  to  this  view,  we  are  led  to  the  conclu- 
sion that  the  Jovicolce  are  pygmies  about  two  and  a  half 
feet,  on  the  average,  in  height.  For  we  know  that  a  man 
removed  to  Jupiter  would  weigh  about  two  and  a  half 
times  as  much  as  he  does  on  our  own  earth.  He  would 
thus  be  oppressed  with  a  burden  equivalent  to  half  as 
much  again  as  his  own  weight.     This  would  render  life 


JUPITER,  GIANT  OF  TUB  SOLAR  SYSTEM.        125 

itself  an  insupportable  burden ;  and  we  have  to  inquire 
what  difference  of  size  would  suffice  to  make  a  Jove-man 
as  active  as  our  terrestrial  men.  Now,  the  weight  of 
bodies  similarly  proportioned  varies  as  the  third  power 
of  the  height ;  for  example,  a  body  twice  as  high  as  an- 
other— in  other  respects  similar — will  be  eight  times  as 
heavy.  But  the  muscular  power  of  animals  varies  as  the 
cross-section  of  corresponding  muscles,  or  obviously  as 
the  square  of  the  linear  dimensions ;  so  that  of  two  ani- 
mals similarly  constituted,  but  one  twice  as  high  as  the 
other,  the  larger  would  be  four  times  the  more  powerful. 
He  would  weigh,  however,  eight  times  as  much  as  the 
other.  He  would  therefore  be  only  half  as  active.  Simi- 
larly, an  animal  three  times  as  high  as  another  of  similar 
build,  would  be  only  one-third  as  active  ;  and  so  on  for 
all  such  relations.  Now,  since  a  terrestrial  man  removed 
to  Jupiter  would  be  two  and  a  half  times  as  heavy  as  on 
the  earth,  it  follows,  obviously,  that  a  man  on  Jupiter 
proportioned  like  our  terrestrial  men  would  be  as  active 
as  they  are,  if  his  height  were  to  theirs  as  one  to  two  and 
a  half.  Hence,  setting  six  feet  as  the  maximum  ordinary 
height  of  men  on  the  earth,  we  see  that  the  tallest  and 
handsomest  of  the  Jovicolse  can  be  but  about  two  and 
a  half  feet  in  height,  if  only  our  premises  are  correct 
Thus  Tom  Thumb  and  other  little  fellows,  if  removed 
to  Jupiter,  might  be  wondered  at  for  their  enormous 
height,  and  eagerly  sought  after  by  any  Carlylian  Fred- 
ericks who  may  be  forming  grenadier  corps  out  yonder. 


126        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

One  line  of  argument  having  thus  led  us  to  regard  the 
Jovicolae  as  Ogs  of  Bashan,  while  another  equally  plau- 
sible has  reduced  their  dimensions  to  those  of  our  two- 
year-old  children,  we  may  fairly  conclude  that  this  method 
of  reasoning  is  fallacious.  We  must  not  measure  the  in- 
habitants of  other  worlds  according  to  the  conceptions 
suggested  by  the  forms  of  life  we  are  acquainted  with 
upon  earth.  We  must  admit  the  possibility  that  arrange- 
ments as  different  from  those  we  are  familiar  with  as  the 
constitution  of  the  insect  is  from  that  of  man  may  be  pre- 
sented amid  the  orbs  which  circle  round  the  sun.  It 
were  unwise,  no  doubt,  to  give  free  scope  to  speculation 
where  we  have,  in  truth,  no  means  of  forming  an  opinion. 
We  need  not  imagine,  as  some  have  done,  that  "  the  in- 
habitants of  Jupiter  are  bat-winged,"  or,  with  others, 
"  that  they  are  inveterate  dancers."  Nor  to  take  the 
views  of  more  respectable  authorities,  need  we  agree  with 
Sir  Humphry  Davy  that  the  bodies  of  the  Jovians  are 
composed  of  "  numerous  convolutions  of  tubes  more  anal- 
ogous to  the  trunk  of  the  elephant  than  anything  else ; " 
with  Whewell,  that  they  are  pulpy,  gelatinous  creatures, 
living  in  a  dismal  world  of  water  and  ice  with  a  cindery 
nucleus  ;  nor  finally,  with  Brewster,  that  the  Jovian  may 
have  his  "  home  in  subterranean  cities  warmed  by  central 
fires,  or  in  crystal  caves  cooled  by  ocean  tides,  or  may 
float  with  the  Nereids  upon  the  deep,  or  mount  upon 
wings  as  eagles,  or  rise  upon  the  pinions  of  the  dove, 
that  he  may  flee  away  and  be  at  rest  "  (sic).     So  soon  as 


JUPITER,    GIANT  OF  THE  SOLAR  SYSTEM.        127 

we  give  a  definite  form  to  the  conceptions  that  the  im- 
agination, free  from  the  control  of  exact  knowledge, 
frames  respecting  the  inhabitants  of  other  worlds,  we 
touch  at  once  on  the  grotesque,  the  hideous,  or  the  ri- 
diculous.* It  is  sufficient  to  recognize  the  probability, 
or  rather  the  certainty,  that  the  beings  of  other  worlds 
are  very  different  from  any  we  are  acquainted  with,  with- 
out endeavoring  to  give  shape  and  form  to  fancies  that 
have  no  foundation  in  fact. 

We  may  regard  it  as  probable,  however,  that  living 
creatures  in  Jupiter,  if  any  exist,  are  built  generally  on 
a  much  smaller  scale  than  those  which  people  our  earth. 
Trees,  plants,  and  the  vegetable  world  generally,  must 
also,  one  would  imagine,  be  very  differently  constituted 
from  those  we  are  familiar  with.  It  is  well  known  that 
the  motion  of  the  vegetable  juices  is  in  part  regulated  by 
the  force  of  gravity,  and  therefore  it  must  be  admitted 
that  the  structure  of  terrestrial  plants  is  in  part  depend- 


*  It  may  be  worth  while  to  gather  a  lesson  from  this  circumstance. 
We  know  that  every  form  of  life  is  replete  with  evidences  of  adaptation 
(no  matter  how  secured)  to  the  conditions  which  surround  it.  Now 
man,  with  all  his  knowledge  of  these  adaptations,  so  soon  as  he  passes 
the  boundary  of  the  known,  pictures  to  himself  all  manner  of  unnatural 
and  impossible  forms  of  existence.  Even  the  unknown  parts  of  our  own 
earth  have  been  peopled  ere  now,  in  imagination,  with  "men  whose 
heads  do  grow  beneath  their  shoulders."  and  other  similarly  incongru- 
ous beings.  It  is  more  excusable,  perhaps,  that  an  anatomically  impos- 
sible structure  should  have  been  assigned  to  angels  (the  cherubim  have 
been  even  more  unfortunate)  ;  while  Satan,  who  "goeth  about  as  a 
roaring  lion,"  has  had  the  principal  attributes  of  a  class  of  Ruminantia 
assigned  to  him. 


128        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

ent  upon  the  value  of  gravitation  at  the  earth's  surface. 
Whewell,  in  his  "  Bridgewater  Treatise "  on  the  astro- 
nomical evidence  of  design  in  creation,  lays  great  stress 
on  this  relation,  pointing  out,  if  I  remember  aright,  that 
all  vegetation  would  be  destroyed  at  once  if  there  could 
suddenly  take  place  any  marked  change  in  the  earth's  at- 
tractive forces.  If  this  view  is  correct,  it  is  certain  that 
none  of  our  plants  could  thrive  on  the  soil  of  Jupiter. 

The  year  of  Jupiter  differs  in  a  much  more  striking 
manner  than  that  of  Mars  from  our  terrestrial  year.  It 
consists  of  nearly  twelve  such  years  as  ours,  so  that  the 
period  corresponding  to  one  of  our  seasons  lasts  nearly 
three  years,  and  a  Jovian  month  is  nearly  equal  to  one 
of  our  terrestrial  years.  He  has,  however,  no  seasons  in 
our  sense  of  the  word,  since  his  equator  is  inclined  but 
little  more  than  three  degrees  to  his  orbit.  Thus  a  per- 
petual spring  reigns  all  over  his  surface. 

But  before  we  proceed  to  form  a  high  opinion  of  the 
planet's  condition  under  the  influence  of  this  perpetual 
spring,  let  us  distinctly  understand  what  the  word  means. 
The  word  "  spring  "  has  a  genial  sound  to  ourselves,  be- 
cause we  associate  it  with  that  which  is  commonly  the 
pleasantest  portion  of  our  year ;  but  it  is  just  possible 
that  the  perpetual  spring  reigning  over  Jupiter,  though 
doubtless  well  adapted  to  the  wants  of  his  inhabitants, 
leads  to  a  state  of  things  such  as  we  might  not  find  alto- 
gether so  agreeable. 

It  has  been  said  that  "  as  the  rays  of  the  sun  fall  per- 


JUPITEft,    GIANT  OF  THE  SOLAR  SYSTEM.       129 

pendicularly  on  the  body  of  the  planet,  and  always  con- 
tinue to  do  so,  the  heat  must  be  as  nearly  as  possible 
equal  at  all  times  of  the  year,  a  perennial  summer  ;  this 
is  a  striking  display  of  beneficent  arrangement."  But  we 
should  be  cautious  in  adopting  this  mode  of  argument. 
If  Jupiter's  great  distance  from  the  sun  is  compensated 
for  by  this  peculiar  disposition  of  his  axis,  and  we  are 
to  admire  the  beneficence  thus  displayed,  are  we  there- 
fore to  find  maleficence  in  the  fact  that  Saturn,  Uranus, 
and  Neptune  have  been  otherwise  dealt  with,  though,  be- 
ing further  from  the  sun,  they  have  greater  need  than 
Jupiter  of  some  special  arrangement  of  the  sort  ?  It 
seems  safer  to  consider  the  consequences  which  flow  from 
the  arrangement  without  any  special  reference  to  its  pur- 
pose, lest,  in  our  over-anxiety  to  recognize  beneficence  in 
foe  treatment  of  one  world,  we  should  adopt  a  mode  of 
reasoning  which  leads  to  the  direct  conclusion  that  other 
worlds  have  been  ill-treated. 

The  great  peculiarity  resulting  from  the  arrangement 
in  question — the  only  peculiarity,  in  fact,  of  which  we 
can  speak  with  any  confidence — consists  in  this,  that 
everywhere  on  Jupiter  day  and  night  are  of  equal  length. 
It  is  in  this  sense  only  that  perpetual  spring — or  perpet- 
ual autumn,  if  we  please — reigns  on  the  giant  planet. 
The  different  latitudes  of  Jupiter  have  climates  differing 
quite  as  much  as  those  found  in  different  latitudes  on  our 
own  earth.  At  the  equator  the  sun  passes  every  day 
nearly  to  the  point  overhead.     At  the  poles  the  sun  seems 


130        OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

to  glide  along  the  horizon,  rising  in  the  east,  passing 
round — always  near  the  horizon — toward  the  south,  and 
thence  to  his  setting-place  in  the  west.  In  intermediate 
latitudes  the  sun  passes  to  a  southerly  elevation,  which 
is  greater  or  less  according  as  the  place  is  nearer  to  or 
further  from  Jupiter's  equator.  It  follows  that  there  is 
a  marked  difference  between  the  subequatorial  and  the 
subpolar  regions  in  Jupiter,  while  between  these  regions 
every  intermediate  climate  is  to  be  found. 

Owing  to  the  rapidity  of  Jupiter's  rotation,  the  motion 
of  the  sun  in  the  Jovian  sky  must  be  much  more  readily 
discernible  and  measurable  than  that  with  which  the  sun 
seems  to  pass  across  our  own  heavens.  He  traverses  the 
whole  semicircle,  from  the  eastern  to  the  western  horizon, 
in  two  minutes  less  than  five  hours,  or  about  six  degrees 
in  ten  minutes.  This  corresponds  to  a  motion  through  a 
space  equal  to  the  sun's  diameter  (as  we  see  him)  in  fifty 
seconds,  and  must  be  readily  discernible,  even  to  the 
unaided  vision  of  the  Jovicolse,  unless  their  eyesight  is 
much  inferior  to  ours.  The  smallness  of  the  sun,  as  seen 
from  Jupiter,  must  help  to  render  the  motion  more  per- 
ceptible. He  presents  to  them  an  apparent  diameter 
only  equal  to  about  one-fifth  of  that  with  which  we  see 
him,  so  that  in  ten  seconds  he  seems  to  pass  over  a  space 
equal  to  his  own  diameter. 

The  other  celestial  bodies  are  affected  with  similar 
motions  as  seen  from  Jupiter.  Of  course,  those  seen 
near  the  poles  of  his  heavens  seem  relatively  at  rest. 


JUPITER,    01  ANT  OF  THE  SOLAR  SYSTEM.        131 

One  of  these  poles  lies  in  the  heart  of  the  constellation 
Draco ;  the  other  lies  close  by  the  Greater  Magellanic 
Cloud,  which  must  present  a  magnificent  cynosure  to  the 
inhabitants  of  the  southern  hemisphere  of  the  planet. 
The  contrast  between  the  steadfastness  of  the  polar  star- 
groups  and  the  swift  motions  of  the  equatorial  constel- 
lations must  be  impressive  indeed.  These  equatorial 
groups  are  no  other  than  our  old  friends  the  zodiacal 
constellations.  As  seen  by  the  inhabitants  of  Jupiter, 
they  rise  with  a  perceptible  but  stately  motion  above  the 
eastern  horizon,  pass  to  their  culmination  on  the  southern 
meridian,  and  so  to  their  setting-place  in  the  west — ex- 
hibiting the  same  splendors  which  the  terrestrial  astrono- 
mer delights  to  gaze  upon,  enhanced  by  the  peculiar 
impressions  of  active  power  suggested  by  visible  and 
obvious  motion. 

It  may  seem,  at  first  sight,  that  the  presence  of  the 
Jovian  satellites  must  tend  to  dim  the  splendor  of  the 
sidereal  heavens.  Our  own  moon,  despite  the  beautiful 
passage  *  in  which  Homer  has  described  the  calm  beauty 
of  a  moonlit  night,  certainly  detracts  largely  from  the 
magnificence  of  the  star-groups ;  and  as  at  times  there 
must  be  four  moons  visible  above  the   horizon  of  the 


*  Homer  must  not  be  held  responsible  for  Pope's  amazing  descrip- 
tion, which,  strangely  enough,  has  found  an  ardent  admirer  in  one  of 
our  best  modern  observers.  Homer  did,  however,  mention  as  a  charac- 
teristic of  the  moonlit  sky,  that  "  all  the  stars  shine,"  a  proof  that 
sometimes,  as  Horace  tells  us,  the  great  master  nodded. 


132        OTHER   WORLDS  THAX  0VR3. 

Jovians,  it  might  seem  that  all  but  the  brighter  stars 
would  be  quite  obliterated.  The  first  moon  must  appear 
somewhat  larger  than  our  own  ;  the  next  has  an  apparent 
diameter  rather  more  than  half  as  large  as  that  of  our 
moon ;  the  third  (really  the  largest)  appeals  about  as 
large  as  the  second ;  and  the  fourth  has  an  apparent 
diameter  equal  to  about  a  quarter  of  our  moon's.  Thus, 
in  all,  they  cover  a  space  on  the  sky  more  than  half  as 
large  again  as  that  which  our  moon  covers.  But.  in  real- 
ity, they  cannot  have  nearly  so  marked  an  effect  in  dim- 
ming the  lustre  of  the  stars.  For  it  must  not  be  forgot- 
ten that  they  shine  only  by  reflecting  the  sun's  light,  and 
that  he  illuminates  them  but  faintly  in  comparison  with 
the  light  he  pours  upon  our  own  moon.  In  effect,  sup- 
posing their  reflective  capacities  equal  to  the  moon's, 
they  must  appeal'  less  brilliant  than  she  does,  in  the  pro- 
portion of  about  one  to  twenty-five  ;  and,,  combining  this 
result  with  the  above  relation,  it  follows  that  even  if  they 
could  all  be  "full"  together,  they  could  send  to  the 
Jovians  but  about  one-sixteenth  part  of  the  light  we  re- 
ceive from  the  full  moon.  But.  as  a  matter  of  fact,  they 
cannot  all  be  full  together.  The  motions  of  the  inner 
three  are  so  related  that,  though  there  is  nothing  to  pre- 
vent them  from  being  all  visible  together,*  yet  when  so 
visible,  one  only  can  be  full.     The  fourth  may  be  full  at 

*  Or   all  invisible    together.     Lardner   asserts   the   contrary.      One 

would  imagine  lie  had  never  seen  all  the  moons  together  on  the  same 
side  of  Jupiter. 


JUPITER,    GIANT  OF  THE  SOLAR  SYSTEM.        133 

the  same  time,  or  in  fact  may  be  associated  with  the 
other  three  in  any  way,  since  its  motions  are  not  bound 
up  with  theirs  as  theirs  are  inter  se. 

Even  now,  however,  we  have  not  reached  a  full  esti- 
mate of  the  extent  of  the  mistake  which  those  astrono- 
mers have  made  who  speak  of  the  splendor  with  which 
the  satellites  of  Jupiter  illuminate  his  skies.  When  at 
that  part  of  their  orbits  where  they  would  otherwise  be 
full,  the  three  inner  moons  are  always  eclipsed;  and 
though  the  fourth,  by  reason  of  its  great  distance,* 
sometimes  escapes  eclipse,  yet  more  frequently  it  is  ob- 
scured like  the  others.  The  two  inner  satellites  are 
eclipsed  for  upward  of  two  hours,  and  as  they  occupy 
but  a  few  hours  in  completing  their  circuit  round  the 
nky,f  it  will  be  seen  how  largely  this  relation  detracts 
from  their  light-supplying  powers. 

"We  see,  then,  that  those  writers  have  been  mistaken 
who  allege  that  the  great  distance  of  Jupiter  from  the 
sun  is  compensated  by  the  number  of  his  moons,  and  the 
quantity  of  light  they  reflect  toward  him.  So  far  is  this 
from  being  the  case  that,  under  the  most  favorable  cir- 
cumstances, they  can  supply  during  the  Jovian  night  but 
about  one-twentieth  part  of  the  light  with  which  the  full 

*  Not  on  account  of  the  inclination  of  its  orbit  being  large,  as  has 
been  asserted.  The  orbit  of  this  satellite  is,  indeed,  less  inclined  than 
the  orbits  of  the  others. 

f  Moving  in  a  direction  contrary  to  that  due  to  the  rotation  of 
Jupiter,  they  of  course  remain  longer  above  the  horizon  than  the  sun, 
or  than  the  equatorial  fixed  stars. 


134        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

moon  illuminates  our  nocturnal  skies.  The  poetical  de- 
scriptions which  imaginative  writers  have  indulged  in, 
respecting  the  splendor  of  the  scene  presented  by  these 
satellites,  will  not  bear  the  dry  light  of  numerical  es- 
timation. That  the  satellite-system  of  Jupiter  sub- 
serves, or  may  hereafter  subserve,  important  functions 
need  not  be  questioned ;  but  that  we  can  recognize 
them  as  created  for  any  special  purpose  may  be  assurj 
edly  denied. 

Perhaps,  if  one  were  able  to  discuss  with  advantage 
the  special  purposes  which  this  or  that  portion  of  the 
universe  is  intended  to  subserve,  it  might  be  argued  that 
the  outer  planets  have  greater  need  of  moons  than  the 
inner,  because,  their  year  being  longer,  there  is  greate! 
occasion  for  objects  whose  motions  shall  serve  as  meas- 
ures of  time.  The  satellites  of  Jupiter  supply,  by  their 
separate  motions,  convenient  measures  of  the  shorter 
time  intervals ;  while,  by  their  successive  conjunctions, 
(1)  in  pairs,  (2)  the  three  inner  together,  and  (3)  the 
outer  with  pairs  of  the  inner,  they  afford  convenient 
measures  of  longer  intervals. 

But  let  us  turn  from  vague  guesses  such  as  these  to 
the  consideration  of  those  facts  which  are  actually  pre- 
sented to  our  notice. 

Recognizing  the  existence  of  varied  climatic  relations 
in  different  parts  of  Jupiter,  we  have  now  to  consider  the 
climate  of  the  planet  generally,  to  contemplate  the  posi- 
tion of  this  great  orb  in  the  solar  system,  and  to  deter- 


JUPITER,    GIANT  OF  THE  SOLAR  SYSTEM.        135 

mine  how  far  its  great  distance  from  the  sun  may  be 
compensated  by  other  relations. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  amount  of  heat 
poured  by  the  sun  on  any  portion  of  Jupiter's  surface 
placed  perpendicularly  with  respect  to  the  heat-rays, 
must  be  very  much  less  than  the  amount  received  by  an 
equal  portion  of  our  earth's  surface  similarly  situated. 
The  direct  heating  effects  of  the  sun  must  in  fact,  as 
already  stated,  be  less  on  Jupiter  than  on  our  own  earth, 
in  the  proportion  of  about  one  to  twenty-five.  And  it 
cannot  be  doubted  that  the  effects  of  this  difference 
must  be  highly  important,  whatever  circumstances  may 
compensate  for  the  deficiency  of  heat.  If  we  can  demon- 
strate in  any  way  that  the  mean  temperature  of  the  Jo- 
vian atmosphere  is  equal  to  that  of  our  own  air,  or  even 
greater,  yet  the  difference  of  the  sun's  direct  heat  in- 
volves a  variety  of  consequences  which  we  cannot  disre- 
gard. 

We  know,  for  instance,  that  it  is  principally  the  direct 
heat  of  the  sun  that  causes  the  evaporation  of  water  from 
the  surface  of  oceans,  seas,  lakes,  and  rivers,  and  there- 
fore all  the  important  consequences  which  flow  from  the 
presence  of  aqueous  vapor  in  large  quantities  in  the 
earth's  atmosphere.  We  can  conceive  the  existence  of 
vapors  in  the  air  which  might  keep  away  from  the  earth's 
surface  the  greater  portion  of  the  sun's  heat,  and  yet, 
preventing  the  escape  of  the  remainder  by  radiation  into 
space,  might  leave  the  general  warmth  of  the  air  around 


136>  OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

us  as  great  as  it  is  at  present.  But  it  cannot  be  doubted 
that  such  an  arrangement  would  injuriously  affect  the 
whole  economy  of  evaporation  and  its  consequences, 
winds,  rains,  clouds,  mist,  with  tlieir  consequences,  so 
important  to  terrestrial  races. 

And  in  like  manner  other  effects  accruing  from  the 
direct  action  of  the  solar  rays  might  be  considered. 

It  follows,  then,  that  it  is  by  no  means  sufficient  to 
show  how  the  heat  which  falls  upon  Jupiter  may  be 
stored  up,  through  the  action  of  some  component  of  his 
atmosphere  in  preventing  its  radiation  into  space.  It  is, 
indeed,  of  the  utmost  importance  to  know  that  even  this 
is  possible,  because  we  are  thus  enabled  to  see  that 
Jupiter  is  not  necessarily  an  abode  so  bleak  and  desolate 
as  some  writers  have  imagined.  In  the  following  pas- 
sage, Professor  Tyndall  has  exhibited  the  means  by 
which  this  result  may  be  brought  about,  and  the  inhabit- 
ants of  the  noblest  planet  in  the  solar  system  placed 
somewhat  higher  in  the  scale  of  creation  than  Whewell 
surmised.  "In  these  calculations,"  he  remarked,  refer- 
ring to  Whewell's  estimate  of  the  sun's  heating  power  on) 
Jupiter  and  the  other  exterior  planets,  "  the  influence  of 
an  atmospheric  envelope  was  overlooked,  and  this  omis- 
sion vitiated  the  entire  argument.  It  is  perfectly  possi- 
ble to  find  an  atmosphere  which  would  act  the  part  of  a 
barb  to  the  solar  rays,  permitting  tlieir  entrance  toward 
the  planet,  but  preventing  their  withdrawal.  For  exam- 
ple, a  layer  of  air,  two  inches  in  thickness,  and  saturated 


JUPITER,    GIANT  OF  THE  SOLAR  SYSTEM.        137 

with  the  vapor  of  sulphuric  ether,  would  offer  very  little 
resistance  to  the  passage  of  the  ether  rays,  but  I  find 
that  it  would  cut  off  fully  thirty-five  per  cent,  of  the 
planetary  radiation.  It  would  require  no  inordinate 
thickening  of  the  layer  of  vapor  to  double  this  absorp- 
tion; and  it  is  perfectly  evident  that  with  a  protecting 
envelope  of  this  kind,  permitting  the  heat  to  enter  but 
preventing  its  escape,  a  comfortable  temperature  might 
be  obtained  on  the  surface  of  our  most  distant  planet." 
The  difference  between  such  an  arrangement  as  this  and 
the  way  in  which  the  earth's  temperature  is  obtained  is 
the  exact  converse  of  that  dealt  with  when  we  were  con- 
sidering the  case  of  Mercury  and  Yenus.  Precisely  as 
the  mean  temperature  of  the  atmosphere  of  either  of  the 
interior  planets  may  be  no  higher  than  that  of  our  own 
air,  while  yet  the  sun's  direct  rays  continue  wholly  un- 
bearable, so  the  outer  planets  may  have  a  perfectly  com- 
fortable temperature,  while  yet  that  direct  solar  heat 
which  exerts  so  many  important  influences  on  the  earth 
must  be  supplied  only  in  quantities  which  we  should  find 
wholly  inadequate  for  our  wants. 

I  am  far  from  desiring  to  infer  that  Jupiter  may  not 
hereafter  be  uninhabited,  or  even  that  creatures  then  ex- 
isting on  his  surface  must  necessarily  differ  wholly  in 
their  nature  from  any  with  which  we  are  familiar.  But  I 
think  that  while,  on  the  one  hand,  we  must  reject  one  of 
the  chief  arguments  by  which  Whewell  was  led  to  people 
Jupiter  with  cartilaginous  and  glutinous  creatures  floating 


138         THER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

in  boundless  oceans,  so,  on  the  other,  we  cannot  accept 
without  question  the  argument  by  which  an  effort  has 
been  made  to  indicate  the  possibility  of  a  close  corre- 
spondence between  Jupiter's  climate  and  our  earth's. 

And  here  we  are  led  to  the  most  interesting  and  sugges- 
tive of  all  the  relations  exhibited  by  Jupiter,  or  rather  to 
three  closely  associated  relations  which  lead  to  views  of  a 
somewhat  startling  character. 

In  common  with  the  other  large  planets  lying  outside 
the  zone  of  the  asteroids,  Jupiter  has  a  mean  density  fall- 
ing very  far  short  of  the  mean  density  of  the  earth  or  the 
other  small  planets  which  travel  within  that  zone.  Ac- 
cording to  the  best  estimates  of  his  mass  and  apparent 
diameter,  his  mean  density  would  seem  to  be  rather  less 
than  one-fourth  of  the  earth's,  or  greater  than  the  density 
of  water  by  about  one-third.  It  is  worthy  of  remark,  in 
fact,  that  his  density  is  almost  exactly  the  same  as  the 
sun's,  and  considerably  greater  than  that  of  the  other 
three  outer  planets  hitherto  discovered. 

If  we  were  quite  certain  that  the  disk  measured  by  us 
exhibits  the  real  outline  of  the  planet,  or  that  his  atmos- 
phere is  not  of  abnormal  extent,  and  that  his  globe  is 
solid  throughout,  it  would  follow  that  the  substances 
composing  Jupiter  are  either  altogether  different  from 
those  forming  our  earth,  or  that  they  are  combined  in 
very  different  proportions.  On  the  last  point  we  can 
form  no  opinion.  On  the  first  we  must  be  guided  by  the 
appearance  of  the  planet, 


JUPITER,    GIANT  OF  THE  SOLAR  SYSTEM.        139 

Thus  we  are  led  to  the  second  of  the  three  relations 
just  mentioned — the  appearance  of  well-marked  but  varia- 
ble belts  on  the  planets,  and  of  other  indications  imply- 
ing the  existence  of  an  atmosphere  of  great  depth. 

The  belts  of  Jupiter  are  commonly  arranged  with  a 
certain  symmetry  on  either  side  of  the  great  equatorial 
bright  belt,  but  sometimes  there  is  a  rather  marked  con- 
trast between  the  northern  and  southern  halves  of  the 
planet.  In  color  the  dark  belts  are  usually — when  seen 
with  suitable  telescopic  power  * — of  a  coppery,  ruddy, 
or  even  purplish  tint,  while  the  intermediate  light  bands 
vary  from  a  pearly  white  in  the  equatorial  belt,  through 
yellowish-white  in  the  middle  latitudes  of  both  hemi- 
spheres, to  a  grayish  or  even  bluish  tint  at  the  poles.  The 
picture  of  Jupiter  which  forms  the  frontispiece,  while  ex- 
hibiting many  of  the  features  usually  seen,  is  intended 
specially  to  illustrate  relations  presently  to  be  dealt  with. 

There  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  these  belts  indi- 
cate the  existence  of  a  very  extensive  vapor-laden  atmos- 
phere. The  dark  belts  must  not  be  considered  as  the  true 
cloud-belts,  because  it  must  be  remembered  that  we  look 


*  What  is  required  is  not  so  much  a  high  light-gathering  as  a  high 
magnifying  power,  though  both  points  are  of  importance.  When  the 
light  is  not  adequately  reduced  by  increase  of  magnifying  power,  the 
color  is  lost  in  the  resulting  "glare."  Reflectors  seem  to  have  an  ad' 
vantage  over  refractors  in  exhibiting  the  colors  of  the  planets ;  at  least, 
nearly  all  the  accounts  in  which  the  appearance  of  color  has  been 
specially  dwelt  upon  have  been  received  from  observers  who  have  used 
reflectors,, 


140        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

upon  the  reverse  side  of  the  skyscape  presented  during 
the  day  to  the  Jovians ;  so  that  where  they  see  densely 
compacted  dark  clouds, we  see  the  light  which  those  clouds 
have  intercepted ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  where  they  see 
clear  spaces,  the  light  which  reaches  them  is  not  reflected 
to  us  without  a  considerable  loss  of  brilliancy.  Thus  the 
dark  belts  of  Jupiter  are  those  regions  where — if  at  all — 
we  see  the  true  surface  of  the  planet. 

Now,  viewing  the  belts  in  this  light,  have  we  any 
means  of  judging  from  their  aspect  what  is  the  extent  of 
the  planet's  atmosphere  ?  So  far  as  I  know,  the  question 
has  never  been  considered,  but  it  is  well  worthy  of  care- 
ful study. 

It  seems  clear,  in  the  first  place,  that  if  the  bright  belts 
really  are  cloud-belts,  and  the  dark  belts  the  surface  of 
the  planet,  then  on  the  edge  of  the  planet's  disk  we  ought 
to  see  some  irregularity  of  level — the  cloud-belts  project- 
ing slightly  beyond  the  real  outline  of  the  planet — if  the 
atmosphere  have  that  enormous  extent  which  some  as- 
tronomers have  supposed.  Whether  such  an  appearance 
has  ever  been  looked  for  I  do  not  know,  but  it  has  cer- 
tainly never  yet  been  detected. 

We  are  led  to  conclude,  then,  that  either  the  atmos- 
phere of  Jupiter  is  not  sufficiently  extensive  to  interfere 
appreciably  with  our  measurement  of  the  planet's  bulk,  or 
else  the  dark  belts  belong  but  to  a  lower  cloud-layer,  not 
to  the  planet's  real  surface. 

yie  have  further  evidence  on  this  point  in  the  appear- 


JUPITER,    GIANT  OF  THE  SOLAR  SYSTEM.        141 

luce  of  dark  spots  on  the  dusky  belts.  These  spots  have 
ever  been  described  as  black,  though  surely  their  ap- 
pearing of  that  hue  must  be  ascribed  to  the  effect  of 
contrast.  Now  these  dark  spots,  which  have  been  seen 
by  Cassini,  Macller,  Schwabe,  and  others,  may  be  re- 
garded as  the  real  surface  of  the  planet  (unless  they  be- 
long to  a  yet  deeper  cloud-layer),  seen  for  a  while  through 
openings  in  the  cloud-bed  to  which  the  dusky  belts  be- 
long. The  reader  will  not  fail  to  notice  here  some  resem- 
blance to  what  has  been  already  mentioned  respecting 
the  sun-spots  ;  and  when  we  come  to  the  third  and  most 
striking  of  the  associated  features  I  am  now  dealing  with, 
it  will  be  seen  that  there  may  be  more  in  the  analogy 
than  one  might  at  first  sight  be  disposed  to  imagine. 

How  far  the  appearance  of  small,  round,  white  spots 
on  the  dark  belts  may  be  considered  as  indicative  of  the 
extent  and  constitution  of  the  Jovian  atmosphere,  it  is 
not  very  easy  to  determine.  That  they  are  dense  clouds, 
hanging  suspended  above  the  dusky  cloud-layer,  must  be 
admitted  as  highly  probable,  but  it  is  open  to  question 
whether  they  have  formed  there  in  the  same  way  that 
cirrus  clouds  are  seen  to  form  at  a  great  elevation  above 
a  layer  of  cumulus  clouds,  or  whether  they  indicate  the 
action  of  volcanoes  beneath  the  dusky  layer,  propelling 
enormous  streams  of  vapor  through  the  superincumbent 
cloud-beds. 

The  third  point  on  which  I  have  to  dwell  is  the  vari- 
ability of  the  belt-system,  under  which  head  I  include 


142        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

not  only  variations  in  shape  and  extent,  but  those  much 
more  significant  changes  of  color  which  have  been  re- 
cently discovered. 

So  far  as  is  yet  known,  there  is  no  recognizable  law  in 
the  changes  of  shape  exhibited  by  the  belts  of  Jupiter — 
no  periodicity  or  intelligible  sequence.  It  may  be  sug- 
gested, in  passing,  that  a  systematic  and  persistent  scru- 
tiny of  the  planet  might  lead  to  the  discovery  of  laws  of 
this  sort,  which  could  not  fail  to  indicate  physical  conclu- 
sions of  the  utmost  importance.  Nay,  further,  since  we 
cannot  doubt  that  the  condition  of  the  real  surface  of  Ju- 
piter is  in  some  sort  reflected,  so  to  speak,  in  the  aspect 
of  his  cloud-envelopes,  it  seems  far  from  unlikely  that  a 
scrutiny  of  this  sort  might  tell  us  where  his  oceans  and 
continents,  where  his  deserts,  lakes,  or  rivers,  are  situ- 
ated, even  though  no  direct  evidence  of  their  existence 
might  ever  reward  the  observer.  In  these  days,  however, 
nine-tenths  of  those  who  are  fortunate  enough  to  possess 
fine  telescopes  prefer  either  to  leave  them  idle,  or  to  em- 
ploy their  powers  in  making  observations,  at  great  pains 
and  labor,  which  are  not  worth  the  paper  on  which  they 
are  recorded.  The  few  original  observers  we  have  are 
overtasked  by  the  multitude  of  questions  of  interest  pre- 
sented to  their  consideration;  so  that  many  subjects  of 
inquiry  must  perforce  wait,  either  till  their  turn  arrives, 
or  till  those  who  have  the  means  of  studying  them  choose 
to  turn  their  thoughts  from  the  sterile  subjects  they  are 
now  engaged  upon. 


JUPITER,    GIANT  OF  THE  SOLAR  SYSTEM.        143 

So  far,  then,  as  inquiries  have  as  yet  been  pushed,  all 
that  can  be  asserted  on  the  subject  we  are  considering  is, 
that  the  planet's  belts  vary  greatly  in  form,  extent,  and 
general  appearance.  At  one  time  the  dusky  belts  cover  a 
large  proportion  of  the  planet's  disk,  at  another  they  are 
singularly  narrow.   Now  they  are  very  regularly  disposed, 


Fig.  3.— The  Planet  Jupiter  (Browning). 

now  they  seem  in  some  way  under  the  action  of  disturb- 
ing forces  of  great  intensity,  causing  them  to  assume  the 
most  irregular  figure.  The  accompanying  picture  of  the 
planet  (Fig.  3),  as  seen  by  Mr.  Browning  with  one  of  his 
own  reflectors,  indicates  an  appearance  not  uncommonly 
seen,  a  dark  streak  extending  obliquely  across  the  planet's 


144        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

equatorial  regions.  The  number  of  belts  is  singularly  va- 
riable. Sometimes  only  one  has  been  seen,  at  others 
there  have  been  as  many  as  five  or  six  on  each  side  of  the 
planet's  equator.  In  the  course  of  a  single  hour  Cassini 
saw  a  complete  new  belt  form  on  the  planet ;  and  on  De- 
cember 13,  1690,  two  well-marked  belts  vanished  com- 
pletely, while  a  third  had  almost  disappeared  in  the  same 
short  interval  of  time. 

The  storm-tossed  aspect  of  the  planet  is  well  shown  in 
the  characteristic  drawing  by  Mr.  De  la  Kue,  which  forms 
the  frontispiece. 

But  if  we  seem  to  recognize  here  the  action  of  forces 
much  more  intense  than  those  which  influence  the  condi- 
tions of  the  earth's  atmosphere,  we  have  still  more  strik- 
ing evidence  to  the  same  purpose  in  the  changes  of  color 
which  have  recently  been  detected  in  the  great  equatorial 
belt.  This  belt  is  usually  of  a  pearly  white  tint,  and  has 
long  been  recognized  as  one  of  the  most  constant  features 
of  the  planet's  aspect.  As  the  mean  surface  of  this  belt  can- 
not be  less  than  a  fifth  of  the  whole  surface  of  the  planet, 
it  is  clear  that  any  changes  which  may  take  place  in  its 
general  aspect  cannot  but  be  of  the  utmost  significance. 
Now,  during  the  autumn  of  1869  and  the  spring  of  1870, 
this  belt  was  more  strongly  colored  than  any  part  of  the 
planet.  Mr.  Browning,  observing  Jupiter  in  the  earlier 
part  of  the  above-named  interval,  found  the  equatorial 
belt  of  a  greenish-yellow  color,  which  deepened  in  Octo- 
ber, 1869,  to  a  full  ochreish-yellow,  and  in  January,  18703 


JUPITEK,    GIANT  OF  THE  SOLAR  SYSTEM.        145 

had  assumed  an  even  darker  tint,  resembling  yellow 
ochre.  On  one  occasion,  and  on  one  only,  he  detected 
this  tint  in  the  first  bright  belt  north  of  the  equator. 
"While  thus  exhibiting  strongly  marked  and  changing 
colors,  the  equatorial  belt  had  lost  its  right  to  be  called, 
par  excellence,  the  bright  belt  of  the  planet,  being  consid- 
erably inferior  in  brilliancy  to  the  narrow  bright  belts 
north  and  south  of  it. 

Other  observers  have  also  seen  these  colors.  Mr. 
Slack,  with  a  6-inch  Browning-With  reflector,  and  Mr. 
Brindley,  with  an  8J-inch  telescope  of  the  same  construc- 
tion, have  witnessed  most  of  the  changes  of  color  above 
described;  and  I  myself,  using  Mr.  Browning's  12J- 
inch  telescope,  found  the  greenish-yellow  tint  of  the 
equatorial  belt  in  the  autumn  of  1869  altogether  unmis- 
takable. 

In  the  phenomena  here  described  we  have  a  problem 
whose  interpretation  is  far  from  easy.  Changes  in  the 
shape,  disposition,  and  extent  of  the  dark  belts  are  suffi- 
ciently intelligible  when  we  associate  them,  as  we  seem 
justified  in  doing,  with  variations  in  the  position  of  the 
currents  which  traverse  the  vaporous  envelope  of  Jupiter 
as  the  trades  and  counter-trades  traverse  the  earth's  at- 
mosphere. But  the  equatorial  zone  is  Jupiter's  belt  of 
calms,  resembling  in  this  respect  the  equatorial  region, 
called  by  sailors  the  "  doldrums ;  "  and  though  occasional 
storms  might  be    expected   to   agitate   this   region,   yet 

processes   of  change   continuing  for   several   months  in 
10 


146  OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

succession  can  evidently  not  be  attributed  to  any  such 
cause.  We  are  taught  by  the  progress  of  recent  research 
to  regard  the  color  of  the  light  derived  from  any  source 
as  a  relation  of  the  most  instructive  character ;  and 
changes  of  color,  especially  changes  affecting  so  enormous 
a  body  as  Jupiter,  and  so  extensive  a  proportion  of  his 
surface,  cannot  but  be  looked  upon  as  highly  significant. 
Supposing  we  regard  the  ordinarily  white  light  of  the 
equatorial  belt  as  indicative  of  the  existence  of  enormous 
masses  of  cloud,  reflecting  ordinary  solar  light  to  us,  then 
we  should  have  to  regard  the  appearance  of  any  other 
color  over  this  region  as  an  indication  that  these  cloud- 
masses  had  been,  through  some  unknown  cause,  either 
wholly  or  in  part  swept  away.  But — passing  over  the 
objection  that  this  view  leaves  our  difficulty  unexplained 
— even  if  we  assumed  that  in  this  way  a  portion  of  the 
surface  of  Jupiter  had  been  brought  into  view,  wholly 
or  partially,  why  should  this  surface  not  exhibit  a  con- 
stant appearance  ?  We  cannot  suppose  changes  affecting 
Jupiter's  real  surface  are  taking  place  with  sufficient  ra- 
pidity to  explain  the  series  of  strange  color-changes  ob- 
served by  Messrs.  Browning,  Slack,  and  other  astrono- 
mers. But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  we  assume  that  a  por- 
tion of  the  light  ordinarily  received  from  the  bright  belt 
is  inherent — that  is,  that  the  planet  is,  to  some  extent, 
self-luminous,  then  there  remains  the  difficulty  of  explain- 
ing by  what  conceivable  processes  the  equatorial  regions 
are  filled  with  a  yellow  light,  so  full  and  bright  as  to 


JUPITER,    GIANT  OF  THE  SOLAR  SYSTEM.       147 

reach  our  earth  from  beyond  four  hundred  millions  of 
miles. 

But  I  have  spoken  of  the  three  relations  last  consid- 
ered— the  small  density  of  Jupiter,  his  extensive  atmos- 
phere, and  the  changes  which  take  place  in  the  shape  and 
color  of  his  belts — as  associated  phenomena.  It  remains 
that  I  should  endeavor  to  justify  this  statement. 

We  know  that  Whewell,  reasoning  from  the  low  specific 
gravity  of  Jupiter,  was  led  to  the  conclusion  that  either 
the  substance  of  the  planet  is  wholly  watery  or  else  a  few 
cinders  in  the  centre  of  Jupiter's  globe  constitute  the 
only  solid  portion  of  his  substance.  It  need  hardly  be 
said  that  the  whole  progress  of  modern  astronomy  is  op- 
posed to  this  view.  We  have  seen  that  in  the  sun  the 
same  elements  exist  as  in  the  earth;  and  in  Mars,  the 
only  planet  whose  nature  we  have  been  able  to  examine 
satisfactorily,  we  find  evidence  of  the  existence  of  the 
same  forms  of  matter  that  we  see  around  us.  It  cannot 
but  be  held  as  highly  improbable  that  the  earth  is  the 
only  member  of  the  planetary  system  whose  substance 
thus  closely  resembles  that  of  the  parent  orb ;  nor  is  it 
likely  that  Mars  is  the  only  planet  whose  general  atmos- 
pheric constitution  resembles  the  earth's.  Far  more 
probably  the  lesson  we  are  really  to  learn  from  these  cir- 
cumstances, is  that  throughout  the  solar  system  a  general 
similarity  of  constitution  exists,  the  sun  being,  so  to 
speak,  the  type  of  the  family  over  which  he  rules. 
Differences  of  condition  we  are  compelled  to  recognize, 


148        OTHER   WORLDS  TBAN  OURS. 

since  the  sun  itself,  though  constituted  of  the  same  ele- 
ments as  the  earth,  is  in  so  different  a  state,  and  has  a 
mean  density  relatively  so  small ;  but  we  have  no  evi- 
dence justifying  us  in  believing  that  any  important  differ- 
ences of  constitution  exist  throughout  the  solar  system. 

Thus  we  are  led  to  regard  the  singularly  small  density 
of  Jupiter,  and  of  the  other  planets  outside  the  orbits  of 
the  asteroids,  as  due  rather  to  some  peculiarity  in  the 
condition  of  these  orbs  than  to  any  such  peculiarity  oi 
structure  as  Whewell  insisted  on.  It  will  be  seen  at 
once  that  Jupiter's  extensive  atmospheric  envelope,  and 
the  strange  changes  in  the  aspect  of  his  belts,  are  circum- 
stances which  tend  strikingly  to  confirm  this  impression. 
Let  it  be  remembered  that,  supposing  Jupiter's  globe 
even  to  be  wholly  covered  with  water,  yet  a  sun  twenty- 
five  times  further  off  than  ours  could  not  by  any  possi- 
bility load  the  planet's  atmosphere  with  the  enormous 
masses  of  vapor  actually  present  in  it.  Let  it  be  remem- 
bered, further,  that  the  relatively  sluggish  action  of  the 
sun  upon  Jupiter  could  not  by  any  possibility  give  rise 
to  atmospheric  disturbances  so  tremendous  as  those 
which  are  indicated  by  the  rapid  changes  of  figure  of  his 
cloud-bands.*     When  to  this  we  add  the  relative  minute- 


*  It  is  worthy  of  consideration,  also,  that  even  though  the  sun  acted 
as  efficiently  upon  the  air  and  oceans  of  Jupiter  (assumed  to  be  similar 
to  our  own),  yet  atmospheric  disturbances  (due  chiefly,  as  we  know, 
to  these  two  fovms  of  action)  could  not  possibly  be  so  violent  even  as 
on  our  own  earth,  since  corresponding  latitudes  on  Jupiter  (that  is, 
regions  where  corresponding  effects  would  be  experienced)  are  separated 


JUPITER,    GIANT  OF  THE  SOLAR  SYSTEM.        149 

ness  of  the  seasonal  changes  on  Jupiter,  we  see  at  once 
that  unless  some  other  cause  than  solar  action  were  at 
work,  Jupiter's  atmosphere  ought  to  be  very  much  calmer 
than  the  earth's. 

There  is  yet  another  circumstance  in  the  condition  of 
Jupiter's  belts  which  opposes  itself  in  a  very  striking  (I 
might  even  say  altogether  convincing)  manner  against 
the  belief  that  the  belts  of  Jupiter  are  raised  by  the  sun's 
action.  The  tropical  cloud-zone  of  the  earth  not  only 
varies  in  position  with  the  seasons — passing  considerably 
to  the  north  of  the  equator  in  summer,  and  considerably 
to  the  south  in  winter — but  it  is  in  truth  a  region  of  mid- 
day cloudiness,  not  of  general  cloudiness.  As  respects 
the  former  relation  we  can  learn  little  from  Jupiter's 
aspect,  because  his  inclination  is  so  small  that  the  annual 
sway  of  his  equatorial  zone  would  be  exceedingly  small 
also,  and  might  well  remain  undetected.  But  as  the  belts 
of  Saturn  must  be  regarded  as  well  as  those  of  Jupiter 
in  forming  an  opinion  on  the  subject  we  are  upon,  and  as 
the  chief  bright  belt  of  Saturn,  despite  the  considerable 
inclination  of  the  planet's  equator,  remains  throughout 
the  year  persistently  equatorial,  we  may  conclude  that 
the  Saturnian  belts — and  presumably,  therefore,  those  of 


by  distances  so  very  much  greater.  It  is  clear  that  if  along  a  certain 
zone  of  a  planet  the  sun  exerts  a  certain  amount  of  influence,  while 
along  another  he  exerts  a  different  influence,  the  result  of  the  differ- 
ence, looked  on  as  a  cause  of  atmospheric  disturbance,  must  be  smaller 
as  the  distance  between  the  zones  is  greater. 


150        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

Jupiter  also — are  not  sun-raised.  To  suppose  that  the 
sun  would  have  power  to  raise  belts  of  clouds,  and  yet 
that  he  would  not  have  power  to  cause  them  to  follow 
him  as  he  passes  far  to  the  north  and  to  the  south  of  the 
Saturnian  equator  in  the  long  Saturnian  year  of  twenty- 
nine  terrestrial  years,  seems  unreasonable  in  the  extreme. 
It  is,  however,  from  the  second  relation  that  the  most 
direct  argument  is  derived  in  the  case  of  Jupiter.  In  the 
latitude  of  the  terrestrial  cloud-zone  the  sun  rises  in  a 
clear  sky ;  shortly  before  noon  the  sky  has  become  over- 
cast, and  storms  of  rain  and  thunder  continue  until  the 
afternoon  is  well  advanced,  after  which  the  clouds  pass 
away  and  the  sun  sets — as  he  had  risen — in  a  clear  sky. 
Now  we  know  quite  certainly  that  nothing  of  this  sort 
happens  in  the  case  of  Jupiter ;  for  we  see  his  equatorial 
bright  belt  stretching  right  athwart  his  disk — that  is,  not 
only  covering  the  centre  of  the  disk,  where  it  is  noon  on 
the  planet,  but  extending  to  the  edge  on  either  side,  or 
to  places  where  the  sun  is  rising  and  setting.  There 
seems  no  escape  from  the  conclusion  that  the  belt  is 
wholly  different  in  character  from  our  terrestrial  cloud- 
belt — that,  in  fact,  it  is  not  sun-raised  at  all. 

It  seems  to  me  that  these  considerations  point  with 
tolerable  clearness  to  the  conclusion  that,  within  the  orb 
which  presents  so  glorious  an  aspect  upon  our  skies, 
processes  of  disturbance  must  be  at  work  wholly  different 
from  any  taking  place  on  our  own  earth.  That  enor- 
mous atmospheric    envelope    is    loaded  with  vaporous 


JUPITER,    GIANT  OF  THE  SOLAR  SYSTEM.        151 

masses  by  some  influence  exerted  from  beneath  its  level. 
Those  disturbances  which  take  place  so  frequently  and 
so  rapidly  are  signs  of  the  action  of  forces  enormously 
exceeding  those  which  the  sun  can  by  any  possibility  ex- 
ert upon  so  distant  a  globe.  And  if  analogy  is  to  be  our 
guide,  and  we  are  to  judge  of  the  condition  of  Jupiter 
according  to  what  we  know  or  guess  of  the  past  condition 
of  the  earth  and  the  present  condition  of  the  sun,  we 
seem  led  to  the  conclusion  that  Jupiter  is  still  a  glow- 
ing mass,  fluid  probably  throughout,  still  bubbling  and 
seething  with  the  intensity  of  the  primeval  fires,  sending 
up  continually  enormous  masses  of  cloud  to  be  gathered 
into  bands  under  the  influence  of  the  swift  rotation  of 
the  giant  planet.  No  otherwise,  as  it  seems  to  me,  can 
one  explain  the  intense  vitality,  if  I  may  use  the  expres- 
sion, of  a  planet  circumstanced  as  Jupiter  is.  No  other- 
wise can  one  understand  whence  his  atmosphere  is  loaded 
with  vapor-masses  whose  contents  must  exceed,  on  a 
moderate  computation,  all  the  oceans  on  the  surface  of 
this  earth.  When  we  see  masses  so  enormous  swayed 
by  influence  of  such  energy  that  intermediate  belts  thou- 
sands of  miles  in  width  are  closed  up  in  a  single  hour,* 
when  we  recognize  the  tremendous  character  of  the  mo- 
tions which  from  beyond  four  hundred  millions  of  miles 


*  Even  if  we  take  the  disappearance  of  a  dark  belt  to  be  due  to  the 
formation  of  clouds,  which  is  perhaps  more  probable  than  that  the 
clouds  of  neighboring  belts  have  closed  in,  the  forces  represented  by 
the  change  are  nevertheless  tremendous. 


152  OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OXTRS. 

are  distinctly  cognizable  by  onr  telescopes,  we  see  that 
we  have  no  ordinary  phenomena  to  deal  with,  and  that 
the  theory  we  adopt  for  their  explanation  cannot  be 
otherwise  than  striking  and  surprising. 

If  the  view  which  I  have  here  put  forward — or  rather, 
lite  view  to  which  I  have  been  led  by  a  careful  consider- 
ation of  the  phenomena  which  Jupiter  presents  to  our 
contemplation — be  indeed  correct,  we  must  of  course  dis- 
miss the  idea  that  the  giant  planet  is  at  present  a  fit 
abode  for  living  creatures.  Yet  need  we  not  turn  from 
his  system  with  the  thought  that  here  at  least  our  hopes 
of  recognizing  other  worlds  have  been  disappointed.  If 
Jupiter  be  still  in  a  sense  a  sun,  not  indeed  resplendent 
like  the  great  centre  of  the  planetary  scheme,  but  still  a 
source  of  heat,  is  there  not  excellent  reason  for  believing 
that  the  system  which  circles  around  him  consists  of  four 
worlds  where  life — even  such  forms  of  life  as  we  are  fa- 
miliar with — may  still  exist?  Those  four  orbs,  which 
our  telescopes  reveal  to  us  as  tiny  points  of  light,  are  in 
reality  globes  which  may  be  compared  with  the  four 
worlds  that  circle  nearest  to  the  sun.  I  have  shown  that 
they  cannot  subserve  the  purpose  which  many  astrono- 
mers have  ascribed  to  them,  of  compensating  Jupiter  for 
the  small  amount  of  light  he  receives,  even  if  they  could 
be  seen  from  any  point  of  his  cloud-encompassed  surface. 
So  that,  even  adopting  the  commonplace  and  superficial 
view  that  the  purpose  of  any  object  may  be  regarded  as 
ascertained  when  we  have  been  able  to  ask  (without  any 


JUPITER,    GIANT  OF  THE  SOLAR  SYSTEM.        153 

obvious  answer)  what  other  purpose  it  can  subserve,  we 
still  are  led  to  the  belief  that  the  satellites  of  Jupiter 
must  be  the  abode  of  life,  since  on  this  view,  and  on  this 
view  only,  we  find  a  raison  d'etre  both  for  the  planet  and 
for  the  system  which  circles  round  him. 

There  are  no  considerations  which  appear  directly  op- 
posed to  the  view  that  Jupiter  is  in  a  sense  a  sun.  It 
need  hardly  be  said  that  I  do  not  regard  him  as  being  in 
the  same  condition  as  the  central  luminary  of  the  plan- 
etary system.  If  he  is  an  incandescent  body,  the  greater 
part  of  his  light  is  veiled  by  the  cloud-envelopes  which 
surround  him.  The  solar  clouds  are,  as  we  know,  them- 
selves luminous  ;  those  of  Jupiter  are  not  so — a  circum- 
stance which  indicates  that  the  heat  of  Jupiter  is  not 
sufficient  to  vaporize  those  substances  which  are  incan- 
descent when  in  the  liquid  state.  The  outer  layer  of 
clouds  must,  therefore,  be  regarded  as  for  the  most  part 
aqueous.  "We  see  there,  in  fact,  the  future  oceans  of 
Jupiter,  if  the  hypothesis  I  am  now  dealing  with  be  cor- 
rect. 

That  Jupiter  may  supply  an  immense  amount  of  heat 
to  his  satellites  (on  this  view  of  his  condition)  is  per- 
fectly clear,  since  the  amount  of  light  he  emits  is  no 
adequate  measure  of  the  amount  of  obscure  heat  which 
radiates  from  him  to  the  four  worlds  around  him.  When 
we  consider  the  enormous  apparent  size  of  Jupiter  as 
seen  from  his  satellites,  we  recognize  at  once  how  large  a 
supply  of  heat  he  is  capable  of  transmitting  to  them. 


154:        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

From  the  outermost  satellite  his  apparent  diameter  ex- 
ceeds that  of  the  sun  (as  seen  by  us)  some  eightfold,  and 
his  apparent  size,  therefore,  exceeds  the  sun's  more  than 
sixtyfold.  From  the  innermost  he  is  seen  with  a  diame- 
ter nearly  forty  times  that  of  the  sun,  and  with  an  ap- 
parent area  more  than  1,400  times  as  large  as  his ! 

We  have  evidence,  however,  which  renders  it  far  from 
improbable  that  Jupiter  may  emit  some  small  proportion 
of  light.  I  have  already  referred  to  the  singular  excess 
of  his  brilliancy  over  that  due  to  his  size  and  his  dis- 
tance from  the  sun  and  from  us.  The  estimates  of 
Zollner,  the  eminent  photometrician,  serve  to  show,  not 
indeed  that  Jupiter  sends  more  light  to  us  than  he  re- 
ceives from  the  sun,  but  that  he  sends  much  more  light 
than  a  planet  of  equal  size,  and,  constituted  like  Mars, 
the  moon,  or  the  earth,  could  possibly  reflect  to  us  if 
placed  where  Jupiter  is.  Whereas  Mars  reflects  but  one- 
fourth  of  the  light  he  receives,  Jupiter  reflects  more 
than  three-fifths.  The  moon  sends  less  than  a  fifth ; 
Saturn,  Jupiter's  brother  giant,  more  than  a  half.  The 
late  Professor  G.  Bond,  of  America,  actually  calculated 
that  Jupiter  sends  forth  more  light  than  he  receives. 
Whether  his  observations  or  the  more  systematic  obser- 
vations of  the  German  astronomer  are  accepted,  we  see 
that  unless  we  adopt  some  such  hypothesis  as  I  have 
dealt  with  above,  we  must  recognize  a  marked  difference 
between  the  relative  light-reflecting  capacities  of  the  two 
largest  planets  of  the  system,  and  those  of  Mars  or  the 


JUPITER,    GIANT  OF  THE  SOLAR  SYSTEM.        155 

moon.  In  fact,  from  other  researches  of  Dr.  Zollner's,  it 
follows  that  if  Jupiter  does  not  shine  in  part  by  native 
light,  his  surface  must  possess  reflective  powers  nearly 
equal  to  those  of  white  paper.  Now  this  would  scarcely 
be  credible,  even  though  under  the  telescope  the  planet's 
surface  were  found  to  be  uniformly  white;  but  as  we 
find  a  large  proportion  of  it  to  be  of  a  dull  coppery  hue, 
we  seem  forced  to  admit  that  it  cannot  really  have  an 
average  reflective  power  nearly  so  great  as  that  calculated 
by  Zollner.  It  follows,  as  at  least  highly  probable,  that 
Jupiter  shines  in  part  by  his  own  light ;  and  this  being 
admitted,  we  cannot  but  regard  it  as  highly  probable 
that  the  real  globe  of  the  planet  must  be  intensely  hot. 

It  may  seem,  at  first  sight,  that  the  apparent  blackness 
of  the  satellites'  shadows,  as  seen  on  the  disk  of  Jupiter, 
is  wholly  opposed  to  the  view  that  any  portion  of  his 
light  is  native.  But  as  a  matter  of  fact  there  is  no  force 
at  all  in  this  consideration,  or  rather,  whatever  weight 
we  may  attach  to  the  observed  appearance  of  the  satel- 
lites' shadows  is  in  favor  of  the  strange  theory  here  put 
forward.  For  it  has  been  a  subject  of  remark  among  the 
most  experienced  observers,  that  a  satellite  in  transit  will 
oceasionally  appear  as  dark  as  its  shadow,  both  seeming 
black.  The  blackness,  then,  is  only  apparent,  and  an 
effect  of  contrast.  In  reality,  if  such  observations  as  I 
have  mentioned  are  to  be  trusted  (and  I  know  no  reason 
for  disregarding  them),  the  shadow  of  a  satellite  is  not 
black,  and  therefore  there  seems  no  escape  from  the  con- 


156        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

elusion  that  the  surface  on  which  they  are  projected  is 
partially  self-luminous. 

A  stronger  argument  against  the  belief  that  Jupiter  is 
self-luminous  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  satellites  disappear 
in  his  shadow.  It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that 
in  any  case  we  can  assign  but  a  small  proportion  of  in- 
herent light  to  Jupiter,  and  that  his  satellites  would 
therefore,  in  any  case,  lose  so  large  a  proportion  of  their 
light  when  passing  into  his  shadow  that  we  might  expect 
them  to  disappear,  even  under  the  closest  telescopic 
scrutiny. 

One  of  the  most  surprising  phenomena  ever  witnessed 
by  the  telescopist  seems  to  me  to  afford  even  stronger 
evidence  than  any  yet  adduced.  I  refer  to  the  observa- 
tion made  by  Admiral  Smyth,  that  on  one  occasion  the 
second  satellite  of  Jupiter,  twelve  minutes  after  entering 
on  the  disk  of  the  planet,  was  seen  outside  the  limb, 
"  where  it  remained  four  minutes,  and  then  suddenly 
vanished."  Two  other  equally  competent  observers, 
Maclear  and  Pearson,  witnessed  the  same  phenomenon. 
"  Here,"  says  "Webb,  "  explanation  is  set  at  defiance." 
But  it  is  precisely  where  explanation  seems  at  defiance 
that  we  have  reason  to  be  most  hopeful  of  gaining  in- 
struction. The  observation  is  very  startling,  it  is  true ; 
and  the  explanation  may  be  expected  to  be  also  surpris- 
ing. But  I  think  it  is  not  far  to  seek.  The  satellite 
cannot  have  retraced  its  course  ;  Jupiter  cannot  have 
shifted  his  place  ;  our  atmosphere  cannot  be  in  question ; 


JTJPITEB,    GIANT  OF  THE  SOLAR  SYSTEM.        157 

all  these  explanations  being  eliminated,  our  task  is  ren- 
dered easier  instead  of  more  difficult.  A  change  in 
Jupiter's  cloud-laden  atmosphere,  corresponding  to  that 
which  I  shall  presently  have  to  exhibit  as  explaining 
Saturn's  occasional  assumption  of  the  square-shouldered 
aspect,  will  obviously  account  for  the  phenomenon.  It  is 
well  known  that  the  acute  observer  Schroter  occasionally 
suspected  an  apparent  flattening  of  portions  of  Jupiter's 
outline,  but  the  suspicion  had  been  regarded  as  erro- 
neous. We  find,  however,  in  the  observation  now  in 
question,  effective  confirmation  of  that  long-doubted 
observation  of  Schroter's.  If  we  consider  the  matter 
rightly,  this  observation,  made  simultaneously  by  Smyth, 
Maclear,  and  Pearson,  renders  that  view  all  but  certain 
which  hitherto  I  have  presented  only  as  a  highly  prob- 
able hypothesis. 

Although  I  have  already  far  exceeded  the  limits  I  had 
proposed  to  myself  for  the  consideration  of  this  noble 
planet,  it  is  with  regret  that  I  take  leave  of  him  to  pass 
onward  to  the  outermost  bounds  of  the  solar  system.  I 
would  fain  dwell  even  longer  than  I  have  on  a  subject 
of  contemplation  at  once  so  interesting  and  so  instructive. 
Jupiter,  the  centre  of  a  noble  system  of  worlds,  or  Jupi- 
ter, himself  a  world  inhabited  by  beings  as  high  perhaps 
in  the  scale  of  creation  as  he  himself  is  in  the  scheme 
of  the  planets,  is  alike  a  worthy  subject  of  study.  The 
more  one  dwells  on  the  features  he  presents,  the  more  one 
is  impressed  with  the  sense  of  the  grandeur  of  his  position 


158        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

in  the  universe.  One  who  has  not  gazed  hour  after  hour 
on  the  glories  of  the  giant  planet,  gathering  fresh  delight 
as  feature  after  feature  is  revealed  beneath  his  scrutiny, 
may  disregard  the  grand  lesson  which  the  heavens  are 
always  teaching.  But  the  astronomer,  imbued  with  the 
sense  of  beauty  and  perfection  which  each  fresh  hour  of 
world-study  instills  more  deeply  into  his  soul,  reads  a 
nobler  lesson  in  the  skies.  The  music  which  reaches  his 
ears  may  be  fitful,  but  it  is  not  "  as  sweet  bells  jangled 
out  of  tune  and  harsh ; "  he  may  not  master  its  full 
meaning,  though  every  note  thrill  through  his  inmost 
soul ;  but  even  when  its  sounds  are  least  distinct,  they 
are  full  of  mystical  solemnity.  In  fine,  the  true  astrono- 
mer may  say  with  the  Pythagorean,  though  in  another 
sense — 

There's  not  one  orb  which  thou  behold'st 
But  in  his  motion  like  an  angel  sings, 
Still  quiring  to  the  young-eyed  cherubim  ; 
But  while  this  muddy  vesture  of  decay 
Doth  grossly  close  us  in,  we  cannot  hear. 


SATURN,  TEE  RINGED   WORLD.  159 


CHAPTER  VI. 

SATURN,   THE   RINGED  WORLD. 

If  Jupiter  by  his  commanding  proportions  affords  a 
forcible  argument  against  the  view  that  our  tiny  earth  is 
the  only  real  world  in  the  solar  system,  Saturn  supplies 
an  argument  of  scarcely  inferior  strength  in  the  singularly 
complex  character  of  the  scheme  of  which  he  is  the  cen- 
tre. No  one  can  contemplate  this  glorious  planet,  as 
shown  by  a  telescope  of  adequate  power,  without  being 
impressed  by  the  conviction  that  he  is  looking  at  a  world 
altogether  more  important  in  the  scheme  of  creation  than 
the  globe  on  which  we  live.  Whether  he  recognizes  in 
the  present  condition  of  the  planet  the  result  of  the  action 
of  laws  which  have  for  vast  periods  reigned  through  the 
universe,  or  whether  he  prefers  the  view  that  Saturn  and 
his  system  are  seen  now  as  they  were  fashioned  at  the  be- 
ginning by  an  Almighty  creative  hand,  he  is  alike  amazed 
at  the  complexity  of  structure  exhibited  in  the  scene  on 
which  he  is  gazing.  He  may  not  be  able,  indeed,  to  ap- 
preciate the  true  character  of  the  life-work  which  the  va- 
rious parts  of  the  Satumian  system  are  doing,  or  he  may, 
in  a  too  hasty  attempt  to  solve  the  mighty  problem,  be 
led  to  erroneous  conceptions ;  but  that  the  great  planet 


160        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

speaks  of  life,  past,  present,  or  to  come,  he  cannot  gravely 
question.* 

In  volume  and  mass  Saturn  is  inferior  to  Jupiter.  Ju- 
piter is  1,230  times,  Saturn  not  quite  700  times,  as  large 
as  the  earth ;  and  while  Jupiter  outweighs  her  300  times, 
Saturn  is  scarcely  90  times  as  heavy  as  she  is.  Still  Sat- 
urn  is  sufficiently  large  and  massive  to  dwarf  our  earth 
to  insignificance ;  and  even  Uranus  and  Neptune,  though 
belonging  to  the  family  of  the  major  planets,  and  giants 
compared  with  the  earth,  fall  below  Saturn  far  more  than 
he  does  below  Jupiter. 

Like  Jupiter,  Saturn  rotates  very  rapidly  on  his  axis, 
the  length  of  his  day  being  about  10J  of  our  hours.  The 
materials  of  which  Saturn  is  composed  have  a  mean 
density  not  much  greater  than  half  that  of  Jupiter,  or 
less  than  three-fourths  of  the  mean  density  of  water.  In 
fact,  Saturn's  mean  density  is  specifically  less  than  that  of 
any  known  planet.  It  seems  not  impossible  that  we  have 
in  this  relation  some  indication  of  the  true  cause  of  that 
complexity  of  detail  which  the  Saturnian  system  exhibits. 

The  equator  of  Saturn  is  inclined  about  28-J-  degrees  to 
the  plane  in  which  the  planet  moves,  so  that  his  seasons 
(so  far  as  they  depend  on  this  circumstance)  closely  re- 
semble in  character  those  of  the  planet  Mars.     He  occu- 

*  I  know  nothing  better  calculated  to  lead  men  to  choose  astronomy 
as  their  favorite  subject  of  study  than  the  contemplation  of  the  Satur- 
nian system.  I  can  well  remember  the  sensations  with  which  I  saw 
the  ringed  planet  for  the  first  time.  I  look  on  that  view  as  my  intro- 
duction to  the  most  fascinating  of  all  the  sciences. 


8ATUHN,  THE  RINGED   WOULD.  161 

pies  about  29£  years  in  circling  once  round  the  sun ;  this, 
therefore,  is  the  length  of  the  Saturnian  year.  His  dis- 
tance from  the  sun  is  nearly  twice  that  of  Jupiter,  and 
nearly  ten  times  that  of  the  earth ;  so  that  the  amount  of 
light  and  heat  which  any  portion  of  his  surface  receives 
from  the  sun  is  about  -^T  part  of  that  received  by  a  similar 
portion  of  the  earth's  surface.  His  orbit  being  somewhat 
eccentric,  however,  there  is  a  considerable  variation  in 
this  respect  during  the  course  of  a  Saturnian  year,  inso- 
much that  when  he  is  nearest  to  the  sun  he  receives  more 
light  that  when  in  aphelion,  in  the  proportion  of  about  5 
to  4. 

Most  of  the  relations  which  have  to  be  considered  in 
discussing  the  habitability  of  Saturn  have  been  already 
dealt  with  (under  very  similiar  conditions)  in  treating  of 
other  planets ;  so  that  I  propose  to  touch  on  them  very 
lightly,  in  order  to  come  more  quickly  to  those  circum- 
stances which  distinguish  Saturn  specially  among  the 
other  members  of  the  solar  system. 

Gravity  at  his  equator  is  almost  exactly  equal  to  gravity 
at  the  earth's  surface.  Near  the  poles  there  is  a  marked 
increase  in  the  action  of  Saturnian  gravity,  insomuch  that 
a  body  weighing  10  pounds  at  his  equator  would  weigh 
about  12  pounds  at  either  pole.  There  is  nothing,  how- 
ever, in  this  peculiarity  which  need  be  specially  dwelt 
upon. 

The  length  of  the  Saturnian  year,  and  the  small  quan- 
tity of  light  and  heat  received  from  the  sun,  are  simply 
11 


102  OTHEK   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

more  marked  instances  of  what  has  already  been  consid- 
ered in  the  case  of  Jupiter.  We  may  conclude  with  some 
confidence  that  these  relations  are  quite  sufficient  to 
render  Saturn  wholly  uninhabitable  by  such  creatures  as 
exist  upon  the  earth ;  but  there  seems  no  reason  for  sup- 
posing that  (so  far  as  these  relations  alone  are  concerned) 
the  planet  may  not  be  the  abode  of  living  beings  as  high 
in  the  scale  of  creation  as  any  which  live  upon  our  globe. 

In  viewing  Saturn,  we  cannot  regard  even  the  excep- 
tional effects  produced  by  his  ring-system  as  of  them- 
selves sufficient  to  banish  life  from  his  surface.  These 
effects  are  not  without  interest,  however,  and  as  they  have 
been  made  the  subject  of  some  discussion,  I  think  it  well 
to  make  a  few  remarks  upon  them. 

I  apprehend  that  when  Sir  John  Herschel  said  that  the 
rings  occasion  an  eclipse  of  nearly  fifteen  years  in  dura- 
tion, first  to  the  northern  and  then  to  the  southern  hemi- 
sphere of  the  planet,  he  meant  simply  that  during  an  in- 
terval of  such  length  a  large  portion  of  either  hemisphere 
was  in  shadow.  He  knew  perfectly  well  that  long  after 
the  edge  of  the  ling  has  been  turned  directly  toward  the 
sun,  a  very  large  proportion  of  the  hemisphere  over  which 
the  ring's  shadow  proceeds  to  sweep  remains  illuminated. 
It  had  always  seemed  to  me,  therefore,  altogether  a  mis- 
take on  the  part  of  Dr.  Lardner  to  interpret  Herschel's 
words  as  though  implying  that  a  whole  hemisphere  of  the 
planet  is  eclipsed  for  fifteen  years  in  succession. 

So  misinterpreting  the  expression  used  by  Sir  John 


SATURN,  THE  RINGED   WORLD.  163 

Herschel,  Dr.  Lardner,  in  his  desire  to  show  that  no  such 
relation  existed,  was  led  into  real  mistakes  such  as  a 
sounder  mathematician  would  not  have  made.  He  ex- 
amined the  relations  presented  by  the  ring  in  a  quasu 
mathematical  but  inexact  manner,  and  came  to  the  follow^ 
ing  conclusion — "that  by  the  apparent  motions  of  the 
heavens  produced  by  the  diurnal  rotation  of  Saturn,  the 
celestial  objects,  including  the  sun  and  the  eight  satellites, 
are  not  carried  parallel  to  the  edges  of  the  rings ;  that 
they  are  moved  so  as  to  pass  alternately  from  side  to  side 
of  these  edges ;  that,  in  general,  such  objects  as  pass 
under  the  rings  are  only  occulted  by  them  for  short  inter- 
vals before  and  after  their  meridional  culmination ;  that 
although,  under  some  rare  and  exceptional  circumstances 
and  conditions,  certain  objects — the  sun  being  among  the 
number — are  occulted  from  rising  to  setting,  the  endur- 
ance of  these  phenomena  is  not  such  as  has  been  sup- 
posed, and  the  places  of  their  occurrence  are  far  more 
limited."  All  these  statements  are  more  or  less  incorrect, 
and  most  of  them  are  the  direct  reverse  of  the  truth. 
The  seven  inner  satellites  of  Saturn  stand  in  an  altogether 
different  relation  with  respect  to  the  rings  from  all  other 
celestial  objects,  since  they  travel  in  the  same  plane  and 
in  circles  concentric  with  the  outlines  of  the  rings :  they 
can  no  more  be  occulted  by  the  rings,  therefore,  than  an 
outer  ring  can  be  occulted  by  an  inner  one.  So  far  is  it, 
again,  from  being  true  that  the  sun  is  in  general  only 
occulted  for  a  short  time  before  and  after  culmination, 


164  OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OtfM. 

that  the  more  common  case  (considering  the  whole  planet) 
is  for  the  sun  to  be  eclipsed  (if  at  all)  throughout  the 
whole  of  the  Saturnian  day ;  and  a  very  common  case,  left 
altogether  unnoticed  by  Dr.  Lardner,  is  that  the  sun  is 
occulted  in  the  forenoon  and  afternoon,  but  free  from 
eclipse  in  the  middle  of  the  day.  Nor  is  it  true  that  the 
places  where  the  sun  can  be  totally  eclipsed  throughout 
the  day  are  limited  to  a  relatively  small  portion  of  the 
planet,  since  every  part  of  the  planet  whence  the  rings  are 
visible  at  all  has  the  sun  eclipsed  by  the  rings  through- 
out the  whole  day  for  a  longer  or  shorter  succession  of 
rotations.  In  the  remaining  or  polar  regions  of  the  planet 
the  sun  is  altogether  absent  for  long  intervals  of  time,  for 
the  same  reason  that  he  is  absent  from  the  skies  of  our 
polar  regions  during  a  comparatively  short  interval.  As 
for  the  endurance  of  the  total  diurnal  eclipses,  it  is  only 
necessary  to  remark  that  in  the  Saturnian  latitude  cor- 
responding to  that  of  London  or  Paris  the  sun  is  totally 
eclipsed  for  more  than  five  years  in  succession,  while  in 
the  latitude  corresponding  to  that  of  Madrid  he  is  totally 
eclipsed  for  nearly  seven  years  in  succession.  This  suf- 
fices to  show  that  an  arrangement  which  the  inhabitants 
of  earth  would  find  wholly  unendurable  prevails  over  a 
very  large  proportion  of  Saturn's  surface.* 


*  The  views  here  expressed  as  to  the  effects  of  the  Saturnian  rings 
are  founded  on  exact  mathematical  calculation,  of  which  the  elements 
are  given  in  my  treatise  on  Saturn;  The  problem  is  not  by  any  means 
A  difficult  one,  and  the  only  way  in  which  the  erroneous  views  formed 


SATURN,  THE  RINGED   WORLD.  165 

But  if  we  consider  the  matter  rightly,  we  shall  see  that 
this,  after  all,  need  not  surprise  us,  since  there  is  already 
in  the  enormous  distance  of  Saturn  from  the  sun  the 
amplest  reason  for  believing  that  he  cannot  be  inhabited 
by  such  creatures  as  exist  upon  the  earth.  It  is  in  vain 
that  by  conceiving  him  to  be  surrounded  by  a  dense 
atmosphere  we  assign  to  him  a  mean  climate  as  warm  as 
that  of  the  earth.  The  want  of  direct  solar  heat  still 
remains,  and  must  be  regarded  as  a  fatal  objection  to  the 
habitability  of  Saturn  by  races  resembling  those  with 
which  we  are  familiar. 

In  the  case  of  Saturn  as  in  the  case  of  Jupiter,  the 
provision  of  satellites  and  of  the  rings  which  form  so 
glorious  an  object  to  the  astronomer  on  earth  is  altogether 
inadequate  to  increase  the  supply  of  light  received  by  the 
Saturnians  to  any  such  extent  as  has  been  imagined. 
Those  well-meaning  persons  who  insist  on  their  own 
interpretation  of  Deity's  designs  are  singularly  success- 
ful in  overlooking  very  obvious  difficulties.  If  the  design 
of  the  rings,  for  instance,  really  were  to  compensate  the 
Saturnians  for  the  small  amount  of  light  which  they  re- 
ceive from  the  sun,  it  would  surely  follow  that  there  was 


by  Dr.  Lardner  can  be  explained  is  by  considering  that  he  dealt  with 
the  problem  in  a  general  instead  of  an  exact  manner.  I  could  not  feel 
any  doubt  as  to  the  accuracy  of  my  results,  but  I  was  not  the  less  pleased 
to  receive  a  letter  from  Mr.  Freeman,  a  fellow  of  St.  John's  College, 
Cambridge,  stating  that  he  had  obtained  similar  results,  and  had  con- 
structed a  table  on  the  plan  of  Table  XI.  in  my  Saturn,  and  so  closely 
according  with  it  as  not  to  need  separate  publication. 


166        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

a  want  of  wisdom  in  the  selection  of  an  arrangement  by 
which  more  light  is  kept  away  from  Saturn  than  the  rings 
can  possibly  reflect  to  him.  And,  further,  during  the 
very  season  when  the  extra  light  derived  from  the  rings 
is  most  required  by  the  planet,  that  is,  during  the  long 
nights  of  the  Saturnian  winter,  they  exhibit  a  dark  band 
upon  the  heavens,  concealing  whole  constellations  from 
the  view  of  the  Saturnian  people.  As  far  as  the  satellites 
are  concerned  there  is  no  corresponding  difficulty.  They 
undoubtedly  reflect  the  sun's  light  to  Saturn,  and  if  there 
really  are  intelligent  beings  on  the  planet,  the  satellites 
must  undoubtedly  present  an  interesting  spectacle,  es- 
pecially when  a  large  number  of  the  moons  are  nearly 
full.  But  a  little  consideration  will  show  that  even  though 
all  the  satellites  were  full  at  the  same  time,  the  quantity 
of  light  they  could  send  back  to  their  primary  would  be 
wholly  inadequate  to  compensate  for  the  planet's  great 
distance  from  the  sun.  According  to  the  best  estimates 
of  their  magnitude,  the  eight  satellites,,  taken  in  their 
order  from  their  planet,  cover  spaces  on  the  Saturnian 
heavens  which  bear  to  the  space  covered  by  our  moon  the 
respective  proportions  of  about  2,  1,  1J,  f ,  f ,  -§-,  T^¥,  -£$. 
In  all,  then,  they  cover  an  area  about  six  times  that  of  our 
moon ;  and  as,  owing  to  their  great  distance  from  the  sun, 
they  are  illumined  by  only  T^th  of  the  light  which  illu- 
minates our  moon,  they  could  only  send  back  to  the 
planet,  if  it  were  possible  for  them  to  be  all  full  together, 
about  yV^h  Pai>t  °f  ^ne  light  we  receive  from  the  full 


SATURN,  THE  RINGED  WORLD.  16? 

moon.  It  will  be  remembered  that  the  light  which 
would  be  reflected  from  the  Jovian  moons,  if  they  could 
be  all  full  together,  bears  about  the  same  proportion  to 
our  moon's.  We  seem  forced  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
satellites  were  not  intended  to  subserve  any  such  design 
as  has  been  imagined.  Here,  as  in  many  other  cases,  the 
scheme  of  creation  is  not  so  obvious  to  human  reasoning 
as  some  have  complacently  supposed. 

But  we  have  now  to  consider  peculiarities  which  suggest 
that  Saturn's  globe  has  not  yet  reached  a  condition  fitting 
it  to  be  the  abode  of  living  creatures.  These  peculiarities 
resemble  in  great  part  those  which  have  been  already 
noticed  in  the  case  of  Jupiter,  but  a  certain  most  remark- 
able phenomenon  belongs  to  the  ringed  planet  alone. 

The  belts  of  Saturn  resemble  those  of  Jupiter  in  their 
general  shape  (see  Fig.  4)  and  also  in  their  color.  The 
dark  belts  near  the  equator  are  of  a  faint  brown  or  ruddy 
tinge,  those  near  the  pole  bluish  or  greenish  gray,  while 
the  bright  belts  are  yellowish — the  equatorial  belt  being 
the  brightest  of  all,  and  almost  white.  The  poles  are 
commonly  dusky,  and  even  sombre  in  hue. 

The  belts  change  in  aspect  much  as  those  of  Jupiter 
have  been  observed  to  do ;  and  whether  we  regard  the 
change  as  due  to  the  bodily  transference  of  the  belts  of 
cloud  or  to  the  precipitation  of  their  material  in  the  form 
of  rain  (while,  elsewhere,  invisible  vapors  are  condensed 
into  clouds),  we  are  compelled  to  recognize  the  action  of 
forces  altogether  exceeding  those  which  the  sun  can  be 


168        OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

supposed  to  exert  upon  this  distant  planet.  The  light 
sent  to  us  from  Saturn  also  bears  a  much  greater  propor- 
tion to  the  amount  of  solar  light  actually  received  by  the 
planet  than  is  observed  in  the  case  of  Mars  or  the  moon, 
and  so  nearly  approaches  the  proportion  noticed  in  the 
case  of  Jupiter  as  to  lead  to  the  same  inference — namely, 
that  a  portion  of  Saturn's  light  is  emitted  from  the  body 
of  the  planet. 

In  these  respects,  and  also  in  the  small  density  of  the 
planet,  we  seem  to  recognize  evidence  which  points  to 
Saturn  as  probably  a  heat-sun  (if  not  to  any  very  note- 
worthy extent  a  light-sun)  to  the  satellites  which  circle 
around  him,  and  not  himself  the  abode  of  living  creatures. 
"Without  dwelling  further  on  evidence  already  fully  con- 
sidered in  the  case  of  Jupiter,  I  turn  to  one  of  the  most 
striking  facts  in  the  whole  range  of  observational  astron- 
omy, as  supplying  at  once  new  evidence  respecting  the 
condition  of  Saturn,  and  strengthening  the  evidence  ad- 
duced respecting  Jupiter. 

If  it  can  be  shown  that  Saturn's  globe  is  subject  to 
changes  of  figure  perceptible  even  across  the  enormous 
gap  which  separates  him  from  the  earth,  it  will  at  once  be 
admitted  that  he  can  hardly  be  regarded  as  a  globe  con- 
veniently habitable.  Now  I  have  very  little  hesitation 
in  saying  that  evidence  of  the  most  conclusive  kind  exists 
in  favor  of  this  strange  mobility  of  figure.  It  will  pres- 
ently be  seen  that  it  is  with  the  observations  of  no  mere 
amateur  astronomers  that  I  have  to  deal  in  endeavoring 


SATURN,  TEE  RINGED   WORLD.  169 

to  establish,  as  a  fact  that  which  has  commonly  been 
spoken  of  as  an'  illusion — the  assumption  by  Saturn  of  his 
so-called  "  square-shouldered  "  figure. 

It  was  in  April,  1805,  that  Sir  William  Herschel  first 
called  attention  to  this  peculiarity.  The  planet,  which 
had  always  presented  to  him  an  elliptical  figure,  exhib- 
ited a  strangely  distorted  aspect.  A  well-marked  flat- 
tening at  the  equator,  accompanied  by  an  equally  well- 
marked  flattening  at  the  poles,  gave  the  planet's  globe  an 
oblong  figure  (with  rounded  angles),  the  longest  diameters 
having  their  extremities  in  Saturnian  latitude  48°  20' — so 
exactly  was  the  great  astronomer  able  to  indicate  the  nat- 
ure of  the  deformity,  owing  to  its  well-marked  character. 

What  view  shall  we  form  respecting  an  observation  of 
so  remarkable  a  nature  ?  Was  the  peculiarity  due  to  tele- 
scopic distortion  ?  Herschel  observed  it  with  several  in- 
struments, some  seven,  some  ten,  one  twenty,  and  one 
forty  feet  in  length.  Was  the  phenomenon  due  to  atmos- 
pheric disturbances?  Such  disturbances  could  not  ac- 
count for  a  persistent  impression,  however  well  they 
might  explain  the  momentary  assumption  of  the  square- 
shouldered  aspect  by  the  ringed  planet.  Besides,  Jupiter 
presented  no  such  appearance.  Was  the  appearance  an 
optical  illusion,  due  to  the  position  of  the  ring — then 
slightly  open?  If  so,  the  planet  should  always  exhibit 
the  square-shouldered  aspect  when  his  rings  are  open  to 
that  particular  extent ;  and  this  is  not  the  case.  Besides, 
we  ought  to  notice  a  similar  illusion  when  looking  at  a 


170        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

picture  representing  that  particular  phase  of  Saturn. 
Must  we  then  accept  the  astounding  conclusion  that  the 
giant  bulk  of  Saturn  is  subject  to  throes  of  so  tremendous 
a  nature  as  to  upheave  whole  zones  of  his  surface  five  or 
six  hundred  miles  above  their  ordinary  level  ?  Truly  the 
conclusion  is  one  to  be  avoided,  if  we  can  by  any  possi- 
bility find  a  less  startling  explanation  of  the  matter. 

Yet  where  are  we  to  look  for  such  an  explanation? 
Was  Sir  William  Herschel  simply  deceived?  I  have 
already  considered  the  general  question  of  illusion,  but 
the  reader  might  entertain  the  explanation  as  conceivable 
that  Herschel  had  for  a  while  lost  the  acumen  which  dis- 
tinguished him — that  illness,  for  example,  might  have 
rendered  his  observations  inexact.  But  we  have  abun- 
dant evidence  that  the  great  astronomer  was  in  the  full 
possession  of  all  his  wonderful  powers  as  an  observer 
during  the  month  of  April,  1805 ;  we  know  further  that, 
by  careful  measurements,  he  rigidly  excluded  all  possi- 
bility of  illusion  affecting  his  judgment. 

It  would  be  more  satisfactory,  doubtless,  to  the  reader, 
however,  to  learn  that  other  observers  had  noticed  simi- 
lar peculiarities,  or  peculiarities  which,  if  not  similar, 
were  at  least  such  as  to  prepare  us  to  consider  the  globe 
of  Saturn  liable  to  remarkable  changes  of  figure.  Fortu- 
nately many  such  observations  have  been  recorded.  I 
take  the  following  from  one  of  a  lengthy  series  of  papers 
on  Saturn  by  Mr.  Webb  in  the  Intellectual  Observer  for 
1866, 


SATURN,  THE  RINGED   WORLD.  171 

On  August  5,  1803,  Schroter  found  Saturn  not  per- 
fectly spheroidal  in  figure.  Kitchener  says  that  for  a 
few  months  in  the  autumn  of  1818  he  saw  Saturn  of  the 
figure  described  by  Sir  William  Herschel,  and  that  with 
two  different  achromatics.  At  this  time  the  ring  must 
have  appeared  too  narrow  to  account  for  the  appearance 
as  due  to  illusion.  On  one  occasion  Sir  George  Airy 
had  a  similar  view  of  Saturn.  He  remarks,  also,  that  a 
person  unacquainted  with  Herschel's  observation  re- 
marked spontaneously  on  the  flattened  equator  of  the 
planet.  On  another  occasion,  Sir  George  Airy  noticed 
the  exact  reverse,  the  planet  seeming  flattened,  instead 
of  upheaved,  in  latitude  45°.  In  January,  1855,  Cool- 
idge,  using  the  splendid  refractor  of  the  Cambridge 
(U.  S.)  Observatory,  noticed  that  the  greatest  diameter 
of  the  globe  seemed  inclined  about  20°  to  the  equatorial 
diameter  ;  but  on  the  9th  the  equatorial  diameter  seemed 
the  greatest ;  while  on  December  6th  he  says  :  "I  cannot 
persuade  myself  that  it  is  an  optical  illusion  which  makes 
the  maximum  diameter  of  the  ball  intersect  the  limb  half- 
way between  the  northern  edge  of  the  equatorial  belt  and 
the  inner  ellipse  of  the  inner  bright  ring."  All  this  time 
the  rings  were  nearly  at  their  greatest  opening,  so  that 
any  illusion  should  have  been  of  an  opposite  character  to 
that  observed  when  the  rings  were  nearly  closed.  In 
the  report  of  the  Greenwich  Observatory  for  1860-61  it 
is  stated  that  "  Saturn  has  sometimes  appeared  to  exhibit 
the  square-shouldered  aspect."    The  eminent  observers 


172        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

Bond,  father  and  son,  have  noticed  similar  peculiarities, 
using  the  great  Merz  refractor  already  referred  to.  Each 
of  them  noticed  a  flattening  of  the  north-polar  regions  of 
the  planet  in  the  summer  of  1848,  when  the  ring  was 
turned  edgewise  toward  us.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
same  observers  noticed  that  in  1855-57,  when  the  ring 
was  most  widely  opened,  the  polar  region  did  not  always 
seem  projected  furthest  on  the  outer  ring  in  a  symmetri- 
cal manner,  but  four  times  on  the  left  of  the  pole,  once 
on  the  right,  and  once  only  exactly  opposite  the  pole. 
"  The  outline  of  this  region,  also,  occasionally  appeared 
irregularly  flattened  and  distorted,"  an  appearance  not 
satisfactorily  explained  by  the  juxtaposition  of  the  dark 
shadow  of  the  planet  on  the  ring. 

Now  there  can  be  no  doubt  whatever  that  the  planet 
Saturn  is  not  ordinarily  distorted.  In  1832,  during  the 
disappearance  of  the  ring,  Bessel  carefully  determined 
the  figure  of  the  planet's  disk,  and  Main  in  1848  (when 
the  ring  was  again  turned  edgewise  toward  us)  made 
similar  measurements.  Each  of  these  trustworthy  au- 
thorities came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  disk  of  Saturn 
did  not,  at  the  seasons  when  they  respectively  measured 
it,  exhibit  any  distortion  of  figure  such  as  Herschel  had 
described. 

We  seem  almost  compelled,  therefore,  to  accept  the 
conclusion  that  the  planet  Saturn  is  subject  to  the  influ- 
ence of  forces  which  either  upheave  portions  of  its  sur- 
face from  time  to  time,  or  cause  vast  masses  of  cloud  to 


SATURN,  THE  RINGED   WORLD.  173 

rise  to  an  enormous  height  above  the  mean  level  of  Sat- 
urn's cloud-envelope.  Whichever  view  we  adopt,  we  can- 
not fail  to  recognize  the  fact  that  an  intense  heat  must  in 
all  probability  prevail  in  the  great  globe  of  Saturn  ;  and 
doubtless  the  real  mass  of  the  planet  must  emit  a  brill- 
iant light,  though  the  cloud-strata  surrounding  him  may 
prevent  us  from  recognizing  more  than  a  minute  propor- 
tion of  his  luminosity.  In  fact,  according  to  this  view, 
Saturn  and  Jupiter,  unlike  the  sun,  whose  real  sub- 
stance emits  a  less  intense  light  than  the  cloud  photo- 
sphere surrounding  him,  must  have  nuclei — solid  or  liq- 
uid —  shining  with  an  altogether  more  brilliant  light 
than  the  cloud-envelopes  of  these  planets  seem  actually 
to  emit. 

Why  Saturn,  rather  than  Jupiter,  should  exhibit  from 
time  to  time  these  mysterious  changes  of  figure  is  readily 
explicable  when  we  remember  that  the  plane  in  which 
the  Jovian  satellites  move  nearly  coincides  with  the  or- 
bital plane  of  their  primary.  There  thus  always  results  a 
close  agreement  between  the  zone  on  which  the  satellites 
exert  their  greatest  disturbing  influences  and  that  most 
influenced  by  the  solar  action.  No  such  coincidence  ex- 
ists in  the  case  of  Saturn,  whose  satellites  travel  in  a 
plane  inclined  nearly  30  degrees  to  that  in  which  their 
primary  travels.  We  have  seen,  however,  that  evidence 
is  not  wanting  to  prove  that  Jupiter  is  really  liable  to 
occasional  changes  of  figure,  though  not  to  such  an  ex- 
tent as  to  change  the  general  aspect  of  the  planet. 


174        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

I  think  the  evidence  in  the  case  of  Saturn  favors,  at 
least  as  strongly  as  that  which  has  been  adduced  in  the 
case  of  Jupiter,  the  belief  that  the  giant  planets  outside 
the  zone  of  asteroids  are  not  themselves  suitable  abodes 
for  living  creatures,  but  are  suns,  supplementing  the  small 
amount  of  light,  and  yet  more  fully  supplementing  the 
small  amount  of  heat  which  the  sun  supplies  to  the  satel- 
lites circling  around  these  orbs.  Undoubtedly,  if  we  are 
to  judge  according  to  the  method  which  has  been  so  often 
applied  to  such  questions,  if  we  are  to  ask  ourselves  ac- 
cording to  what  arrangement  the  central  planets  and  the 
systems  circling  round  them  seem  most  reasonably  inter- 
preted, we  should  at  once  adopt  some  such  conclusion. 
For,  by  taking  Jupiter  and  Saturn  to  be  strictly  analogous 
to  our  own  earth,  and  their  satellites  to  be  subsidiary 
bodies,  resembling  our  moon  in  this,  that  they  subserve 
at  present  no  other  purpose  but  to  illuminate  the  noc- 
turnal skies,  and  to  sway  the  oceans  of  their  primaries, 
we  find  ourselves  perplexed  by  the  consideration  that  a 
much  simpler  arrangement  would  have  subserved  these 
purposes  much  more  completely.  In  the  case  of  Saturn's 
satellites,  indeed,  it  seems  difficult  to  conceive  that  these 
bodies  could  have  been  intended  to  fulfil  any  such  pur- 
poses, since  the  two  outer  ones  could  neither  give  any 
useful  light  to  their  primary,  nor  sway  appreciably  any 
oceans  which  may  exist  upon  the  planet. 

These  considerations  lead  me  to  believe  that  the  two 
most  important  members  of  the  planetary  scheme  must 


SATURN,  THE  RINGED   WORLD.  175 

be  left  without  inhabitants  for  the  present,  while  in  ex- 
change I  submit,  to  the  contemplation  of  the  curious, 
twelve  small  orbs,  constituting  two  miniature  world- 
systems.  The  condition  of  these  worlds  will  be  touched 
on  briefly  in  a  separate  chapter. 


176        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 


CHAPTEE  Vn. 

TJBANUS  AND  NEPTUNE,  THE  AECTIC  PLANETS. 

A  circumstance  which  is  of  great  importance  in  consid- 
ering the  relations  of  the  outer  planets  is  apt  to  be  lost 
sight  of,  owing  to  the  unsatisfactory  manner  in  which  in 
nearly  all  books  on  astronomy  the  planetary  orbits  are 
represented.  To  look  at  the  series  of  equidistant  and 
concentric  circles  representing  the  orbits  of  the  planets, 
who  would  suppose  that  in  passing  from  the  orbit  of  Ju- 
piter to  that  of  Saturn  a  distance  five  times  as  great  as 
that  which  separates  our  earth  from  the  sun  has  to  be 
traversed  ?  But  the  distance  separating  Uranus  from  Sat- 
urn is  twice  as  great  even  as  this  tremendous  gap,  while 
Neptune  travels  as  far  beyond  Uranus  as  Uranus  beyond 
Saturn.  Nine  hundred  millions  of  miles  in  width  is  the 
enormous  gap  by  which  the  path  of  Uranus  is  separated 
from  that  of  the  ringed  planet  on  the  inner  side,  and 
from  that  of  distant  Neptune  on  the  outer  ;  so  that  a  line 
equal  to  the  diameter  of  Jupiter's  orbit  would  barely  suf- 
fice to  reach  from  Saturn  to  Uranus,  or  from  Uranus  to 
Neptune,  even  when  either  pair  of  planets  are  in  con- 
junction. 

We  know  so  little  of  the  physical  aspect  of  Uranus  and 


URANUS  AND  NEPTUNE,  THE  ARCTIC  PLANETS.    177 

Neptune  that  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  form  any  opinion 
as  to  their  condition.  The  two  planets  resemble  each 
other  in  size,  each  being  far  smaller  than  either  of  the 
giant  orbs  we  have  lately  been  considering.  Uranus  has 
a  diameter  of  about  33,250  miles ;  Neptune  is  somewhat 
larger,  his  diameter  having  been  estimated  at  37,250 
miles.  The  volume  of  Uranus  is  74,  the  volume  of  Nep- 
tune 105  times  that  of  the  earth.  Both  planets  exceed 
Saturn  in  density ;  for  whereas  Saturn's  mean  specific 
gravity*  is  but  y^ths,  that  of  Uranus  is  Ty¥ths,  and  that 
of  Neptune  iV6o^ns  °f  ^ne  mean  specific  gravity  of  our 
globe.  Thus  each  planet  has  a  density  nearly  equal  to 
that  of  water.  The  mass  of  Uranus  exceeds  the  earth's 
about  12^  times,  while  that  of  Neptune  is  some  16f  times 
as  great  as  the  earth's.  It  will  be  seen,  therefore,  that 
though  these  two  far-distant  worlds  are  much  less  mas- 
sive than  Jupiter  or  Saturn,  each  of  them  outweighs  many 
times  the  combined  mass  of  the  four  planets  which  travel 
within  the  zone  of  asteroids.  Yet  gravity  on  the  surface 
of  these  two  orbs  is  but  about  three-fourths  of  terrestrial 
gravity. 

The  disk  of  the  sun  as  seen  from  Uranus  is  less  than 
that  which  we  see,  in  the  proportion  of  1  to  nearly  390, 
while  the  Neptunians  have  a  sun  only  about  -g^-g-th  °^  ours 
in  apparent  size ;  and  in  these  proportions  the  solar  light 
and  heat  received  by  these  planets  are  respectively  di- 
minished.    So  small  does  the  sun  appear,  in  fact,  that  to 

eyes  such  as  ours  his  orb  would  not  present  a  disk-like 
12 


178        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

figure,  but  would  appear  like  an  exceedingly  brilliant 
day-star. 

So  far  we  have  found  the  circumstances  of  the  two  plan- 
ets somewhat  similar.  But  we  have  now  to  consider  a 
relation  presented  by  Uranus,  which  is  not  shared  in  by 
Neptune.  It  may  be  remarked  that  we  know  so  little 
about  either  planet  that  any  very  careful  consideration  of 
their  habitability  would  be  simply  a  waste  of  labor.  The 
evidence  I  am  about  to  adduce,  however,  in  the  case  of 
Uranus,  seems  thorougly  to  dispose  of  the  claim  of  this 
planet  to  be  regarded  as  a  world  inhabited  by  creatures 
resembling  those  we  are  acquainted  with  on  earth  ;  and  as 
we  cannot  reasonably  suppose  Neptune  to  be  inhabited 
by  such  creatures  while  Uranus  is  not,  we  may  very  fairly 
regard  the  question  as  disposed  of  for  both  planets,  even 
though  the  relation  dealt  with  is  peculiar  to  Uranus. 

Uranus  has  a  family  of  four  satellites,  Neptune  has 
only  one  satellite  yet  discovered.  Now  we  know  that  in 
the  case  of  Jupiter,  as  in  that  of  Saturn,  the  position  of 
the  plane  near  which  the  satellites  travel  is  nearly  coinci- 
dent with  the  plane  of  the  primary's  equator.  Therefore, 
though  no  telescope  has  yet  exhibited  any  features  on 
the  disks  of  Uranus  or  Neptune  which  can  enable  us  to 
determine  the  position  of  its  equator,  we  can  safely  infer 
from  the  motion  of  the  satellites  how  the  equators  of  the 
planets  are  situated. 

Now  the  satellites  of  Uranus  travel  in  a  plane  very 
nearly  at   right  angles  to  the  plane  in  which  the  planet 


URANUS  AND  NEPTUNE,  THE  ARCTIC  PLANETS.    179 

travels.  It  may  be  mentioned  also,  though  not  important 
for  my  present  purpose,  that  they  travel  in  a  retrograde 
direction.  The  satellite  of  Neptune  travels  in  a  path  not 
inclined  more  than  about  27°  to  the  plane  of  the  planet's 
path  ;  but  the  motion  of  the  satellite  is  retrograde.  We 
conclude  that  the  axis  of  Uranus  lies  very  nearly  in  the 
plane  wherein  the  planet  moves  around  the  sun,  and  that 
the  planet  rotates  in  such  a  way  around  this  axis  that  the 
sun  moves  across  the  Uranian  skies  from  west  to  east,  in- 
stead of  from  east  to  west.  The  latter  relation  is  of  no 
great  importance  ;  the  former,  however,  involves  results 
which  dispose  at  once,  and  thoroughly,  of  any  hopes  we 
might  entertain  of  discovering  creatures  in  Uranus  re- 
sembling those  which  inhabit  the  earth. 

The  inclination  of  the  plane  of  Uranus'  equator  to  the 
path  in  which  he  travels  being  about  76°,  it  follows  that 
the  Uranian  sun  has  a  range  of  about  76°  on  either  side 
of  the  celestial  equator,  during  the  long  Uranian  year. 
Already,  in  considering  the  seasons  of  Yenus,  I  have 
dealt  with  a  peculiarity  of  this  sort ;  but  in  the  case  of 
Uranus  the  effects  are  more  serious.  "We  have  only  to 
consider  what  would  be  the  result  of  so  wide  a  range  of 
solar  excursion  north  and  south  of  the  celestial  equator  in 
a  latitude  corresponding  to  that  of  London,  to  see  how 
importantly  the  climatic  relations  of  a  planet  like  Uranus, 
occupying  eighty-four  years  in  circling  once  round  the 
sun,  must  be  affected  by  such  a  peculiarity.  We  know 
that  in  the  latitude  of  London  the  sun  reaches  at  noon,  in 


ISO        OTBEn  WOBLDS  THAN  OUMS. 

spring  or  autumn,  an  elevation  of  about  38£°  above  the 
southern  horizon,  that  in  summer  he  passes  the  meridian 
23£°  higher,  while  in  winter  he  passes  the  meridian  23^° 
lower,  or  only  15°  above  the  horizon.  But  in  a  similar 
Uranian  latitude,  while  the  sun  would  reach  the  same 
meridian  elevation  in  spring  or  autumn,  he  would  in  sum- 
mer travel  throughout  the  day  in  a  small  circle,  14°  only 
from  the  pole  (raised  of  course  51^°  above  the  horizon), 
so  that  at  noon  he  would  be  65|°,  and  at  nominal  mid- 
night 37^°  above  the  northern  horizon.  And  obviously, 
since  the  year  of  the  Uranians  lasts  eighty-four  of  our 
years,  the  continuance  of  the  sun  above  the  horizon  would 
last  for  many  years.*  So  far  there  is  nothing  to  render 
life  in  Uranus  unpleasant,  always  supposing  the  small 
amount  of  light  and  heat  supplied  by  the  sun  to  be  com- 
pensated by  some  such  atmospheric  arrangements  as  phys- 
icists have  thought  necessary  for  the  convenience  of  the 
more  distant  planets.  But  when  we  consider  the  nature 
of  the  Uranian  winter,  we  find  the  circumstances  such  as 
no  arrangements  of  the  sort  can  be  conceived  to  alleviate. 
The  winter  path  of  the  Uranian  sun,  in  a  latitude  corre- 
sponding to  that  of  London,  is  just  as  fully  depressed 


*  Exact  calculation  applied  to  relations  so  uncertain  as  those  here  in 
question  would  be  out  of  place.  From  a  careful  construction,  however, 
with  76'  as  the  assumed  value  of  the  inclination  of  the  equator  of 
Uranus  to  the  plane  of  his  orbit,  I  find  that  the  sun  would  continue 
above  his  horizon  in  summer  for  about  23  J  years.  Of  course  it  follows 
that  the  sun  would  continue  below  the  horizon  for  an  equally  long 
period  in  winter  I 


VPANVS  AND  NEPTUNE,  THE  ARCTIC  PLANETS.    181 

below  the  horizon  as  the  summer  path  is  raised  above  it. 
At  midnight  the  sun  is  65^°,  at  nominal  noon  he  is  37£c 
below  the  southern  horizon.  And  as  with  the  summer 
day,  so  with  the  winter  night,  years  elapse  before  either 
comes  to  an  end.  For  upward  of  twenty  years,  in  a  lati- 
tude corresponding  to  that  of  London,  the  Uranians — if 
there  are  any — never  see  the  small  Uranian  sun.  During 
all  this  long  time,  too,  a  sight  even  is  denied  them  of  all 
parts  of  the  solar  system  interior  to  the  orbit  of  Uranus  ; 
though  this  deprivation  cannot  be  regarded  as  very  serious 
when  it  is  remembered  that  to  such  eyesight  as  ours  Sat- 
urn would  barely  be  visible  from  Uranus,  even  when  most 
favorably  situated,  while  Jupiter,  always  near  the  sun, 
would  only  be  occasionally  seen,  shining  with  a  light 
somewhat  less  than  a  fiftieth  of  that  which  he  reflects  to 
us  when  in  opposition. 

When  we  consider  other  latitudes,  we  find  Uranus  ill 
provided  for  as  respects  his  winter  season.  In  all  lati- 
tudes nearer  the  pole  than  the  latitude  just  considered, 
the  Uranians  have  winters  lasting  from  twenty  years  to 
upward  of  forty.  In  latitudes  nearer  the  equator  the 
winter  night  is  shorter,  but  we  must  approach  quite  close 
to  the  equator  before  we  reach  a  latitude  where  the  winter 
night  lasts  less  than  a  year  or  so.  Over  a  belt  extending 
about  14°  on  each  side  of  the  equator  there  is  a  perennial 
succession  of  days  and  nights  never  exceeding  the  full 
duration  of  the  Uranian  diurnal  rotation.  But  we  must 
not  suppose  that  we  have  thus  found  an  Elysian  zone  in 


182  OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

Uranus.  The  immense  range  of  the  sun's  excursions  pro* 
duces  here  also  a  variety  of  seasonal  changes  which  we 
should  find  altogether  unendurable.  From  a  sun  barely 
rising  above  the  horizon  in  winter,  to  a  sun  which  rises 
vertically  overhead  twice  in  the  course  of  the  Uranian 
summer,  is  a  change  which  hardly  accords  with  our  views 
of  what  is  desirable  in  the  progress  of  the  seasons.  At 
the  equator  itself  there  are  in  reality  two  summers,  oc- 
curring at  the  period  of  the  sun's  passing  the  celestial 
equator.  Here  for  many  years  together  the  sun  passes 
day  after  day  to  a  point  nearly  overhead.  But  then 
comes  the  long  winter,  in  the  heart  of  which  the  sun  rises 
barely  14°  above  the  northern  or  southern  horizon.  By 
whatever  arrangement  we  render  the  long  Uranian  winters 
in  this  part  of  the  planet  endurable,  we  render  the  heat 
of  his  long  summers  unbearable;  and  vice  versd,  if  we 
conceive  of  atmospheric  relations  which  would  render  his 
summers  pleasing,  we  have  caused  his  winters  to  be  so 
intensely  cold  that  no  creatures  we  are  familiar  with  could 
endure  the  prolonged  and  bitter  frosts,  contrasting  so 
distressingly  with  the  imagined  geniality  of  his  summer 
weather. 

If  Uranus  be  inhabited  at  all,  then,  it  must  be  by 
creatures  constituted  in  a  very  different  manner  from 
any  with  which  we  are  acquainted.  To  such  creatures,. 
if  any  among  them  be  gifted  with  intelligence,  the 
heavens,  though  not  adorned  with  planets,  must  yet 
present  an  interesting  subject  of  study.     The  position 


URANUS  AND  NEPTUNE,  THE  ARCTIC  PLANETS.    183 

of  the  pole,  lying  close  by  the  zodiac,  so  that  among 
the  zodiacal  constellations  there  are  all  the  varieties  of 
motion  which  we  recognize  in  passing  from  the  equato- 
rial to  polar  constellations,  would  lead  to  a  certain  com- 
plexity in  celestial  charts  and  globes,  which  would  invite 
us  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Uranians  must  be  capital 
mathematicians.  Then  there  are  certain  astronomical 
subjects  of  study  to  which  their  mathematical  powers 
may  be  devoted  perhaps  more  successfully  than  those  of 
our  astronomers.  For  example,  the  wide  sweep  of  the 
planet's  orbit  would  enable  the  Uranians  to  recognize  a 
displacement  of  the  stars  in  the  course  of  the  long  "[Iran- 
ian year.  The  star  Alpha  Centauri,  which  only  exhibits 
to  the  terrestrial  observer  an  annual  parallax  of  one 
second,  would  exhibit  to  the  observer  on  Uranus  a  dis- 
placement of  about  the  third  part  of  a  minute.  Other 
stars  would  be  affected  in  like  proportion,  and  perhaps 
the  Uranians  may  thus  be  enabled  to  form  some  concep- 
tion of  that  relation  which  hitherto  has  proved  too 
baffling  a  problem  to  our  astronomers — the  actual  config- 
uration of  the  nearer  parts  of  the  sidereal  system.  The 
Neptunians  would  of  course  be  even  more  favorably  cir- 
cumstanced. 

One  difficulty  presents  itself,  however,  in  thus  consid- 
ering the  prospects  of  the  Uranian  and  Neptunian 
astronomers.  The  enormous  length  of  the  year  of  each 
planet  requires  that  either  the  astronomers  in  Uranus 
and  Neptune  should  be  very  long-lived,  or  that  they 


184:        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

should  be  very  enthusiastic  in  the  cause  of  science,  to 
prosecute  singly  such  observations  as  Henderson,  Olbers, 
or  Peters  have  singly  prosecuted  on  our  earth.  A 
Uranian  who  made  one  set  of  observations  to  determine 
stellar  parallax  when  he  was,  say,  twenty-five  years  old, 
would  have  to  wait  till  he  had  nearly  reached  the 
three-score  years  and  ten  (not  perhaps  allotted  as  the 
span  of  Uranian  life)  before  he  could  make  the  corre- 
sponding set,  by  comparing  which  with  the  former  stellar 
parallax  was  to  be  determined.  In  Neptune  life  must  be 
prolonged  over  the  century  (unless  the  study  of  obser- 
vational astronomy  commence  during  the  babyhood  of 
the  Neptunians),  in  order  that  a  complete  set  of  observa- 
tions for  determining  stellar  parallax  should  be  carried 
out.  One  cannot  but  conceive  that  a  certain  sluggish- 
ness would  mark  the  progress  of  astronomy  in  these  far- 
off  worlds  under  such  circumstances.  In  fact,  the  mere 
consideration  that  after  a  constellation  has  passed  away 
from  the  nocturnal  skies  of  Uranus  or  Neptune,  thirty  or 
forty  years  in  one  case  and  seventy  or  eighty  in  the 
other  must  pass  before  the  constellation  again  becomes 
favorably  visible,  suggests  characteristics  of  astronomical 
observation  altogether  different  from  those  we  are  familiar 
with. 

Admiral  Smyth  suggests  that  these  distant  planets 
must  be  convenient  outposts  for  watching  the  approach 
or  recession  of  comets ;  but  I  venture  to  point  out  that 
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  are  on  the  whole  more  favor- 


URANUS  AND  NEPTUNE,  THE  ARCTIC  PLANETS.    185 

ably  situated  in  this  respect.  Every  large  comet  which 
approaches  tolerably  near  to  the  sun  during  perihelion 
passage  is  as  likely  to  be  seen  as  to  be  missed  by  the  in- 
habitants of  earth ;  but  scarcely  one  out  of  a  thousand 
such  comets  would  be  seen  from  Uranus  or  Neptune, 
since  to  be  visible  a  comet  must  approach  the  sun  01 
recede  from  him  along  a  course  passing  tolerably  near  to 
the  particular  position  of  either  planet  at  the  time ;  and 
the  changes  in  the  case  of  any  individual  comet  would  be 
enormously  against  such  a  contingency. 

With  eyesight  such  as  ours  the  Uranians  would  dis- 
tinctly see  Neptune  when  in  opposition,  but  the  Neptun- 
ians  would  be  wholly  unable  to  see  Uranus,  or  indeed  any 
known  planet  of  the  solar  system. 

Perhaps,  though  we  have  very  little  evidence  on  the 
point,  it  will  be  thought  more  reasonable  to  suppose  that 
Uranus  and  Neptune  are  suns  to  their  respective  systems 
of  satellites,  than  to  imagine  that  these  two  drearily  cir- 
cumstanced planets  are  themselves  inhabited.  Their  satj 
ellites  cannot  possibly  compensate  to  any  noteworthy  ex- 
tent for  the  small  amount  of  solar  light  or  heat  which 
reaches  their  primaries.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not 
difficult  to  conceive  that  the  planets  may  afford  an  im- 
portant supply  of  heat  (at  any  rate)  to  their  depen- 
dent orbs.  Certainly,  so  far  as  the  evidence  we  have  ex- 
tends, Uranus  and  Neptune  resemble  Saturn  and  Jupiter 
too  closely  not  to  warrant  the  application  of  any  argu- 
ments deduced  from  the  appearance  of  the  two  giant 


186  OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

planets  to  the  case  of   their  inferior  but  still  gigantic 
brethren. 

Viewing  the  matter  thus,  we  seem  led  to  the  conclusion 
that  the  planets  which  lie  outside  the  zone  of  asteroids 
are  distinguished  from  those  within  that  belt,  not  merely, 
as  had  so  long  been  recognized,  by  the  attributes  of  size, 
density,  rapidity  of  rotation,  and  the  complexity  of  sys- 
tems circling  round  them,  but  in  this  more  important  and 
more  interesting  circumstance,  that  they  and  their  de- 
pendent orbs  are  real  miniatures  of  the  solar  system. 
Four  suns  they  would  seem  to  be,  not  indeed  suns  re- 
splendent like  the  primary  sun  round  which  they  travel, 
yet  giving  out  perhaps  no  insignificant  supply  of  light ; 
not  heated  to  incandescence  as  he  is,  but  still  supplying 
an  amount  of  heat  proportionately  far  greater  than  the 
quantity  of  light  they  give  forth :  in  fine,  not,  as  he  is  to 
the  inner  planets,  the  sole  source  whence  all  supplies  of 
force  are  derived,  but  adding  their  influence  to  his  in  a 
variety  of  complicated  but  doubtless  well-ordered  combi- 
nations, in  such  sort  that  the  small  worlds  which  circle 
around  them  are  provided  with  all  that  is  necessary  for 
the  well-being  of  their  inhabitants. 


THE  MOON  AND   OTHER  SATELLITES.  187 


CHAPTEE  Vffl. 

THE  MOON  AND  OTHER  SATELLITES. 

Although  the  moon  cannot  be  regarded  as  at  present 
the  abode  of  any  forms  of  life,  such  as  we  are  familiar 
with  on  earth,  there  are  many  reasons  for  studying  in  a 
work  on  other  worlds  the  various  relations  she  presents 
to  us.  In  the  first  place,  she  subserves  various  useful 
purposes  in  the  economy  of  our  own  earth ;  then  there 
are  circumstances  in  her  appearance  which  suggest  that 
at  one  time  there  may  have  been  life  upon  her  surface ; 
and  lastly,  she  affords  us  the  only  information  we  have 
concerning  the  probable  relations  presented  by  the  noble 
systems  of  moons  which  circle  around  Jupiter  and  the 
other  planets  outside  the  zone  of  asteroids. 

With  regard  to  the  present  habitability  of  the  moon, 
it  may  be  remarked  that  we  are  not  justified  in  asserting 
positively  that  no  life  exists  upon  her  surface.  Life  has 
been  found  under  conditions  so  strange — we  have  been 
so  often  mistaken  in  assuming  that  here  certainly,  or 
there,  no  living  creatures  can  possibly  exist — that  it 
would  be  rash  indeed  to  dogmatize  respecting  the  state 
of  the  moon  in  this  respect. 

Still,  in  the  case  of  the  moon  we  have  relations  wholly 


188        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

different  in  character  from  those  we  have  hitherto  had 
to  consider.  We  no  longer  have  to  deal  with  various  de- 
grees of  heat  and  cold,  of  atmospheric  rarity  or  density, 
and  the  like,  but  with  relations  which  do  not  in  the  slight- 
est degree  resemble  those  we  are  familiar  with  on  earth. 

In  the  first  place,  the  moon  has  no  appreciable  atmos- 
phere. We  have  long  known  this  quite  certainly,  be- 
cause we  see  that  when  stars  are  occulted  by  the  moon 
they  disappear  instantly,  whereas  we  know  this  would 
not  be  the  case  had  the  moon  an  atmosphere  of  appre- 
ciable extent.  But  if  any  doubt  could  have  remained, 
the  evidence  of  the  spectroscope  in  Mr.  Huggins'  hands 
would  have  sufficed  to  remove  it.  He  has  never  been 
able  to  detect  a  sign  of  the  existence  of  any  lunar  atmos- 
phere, though  Mars  and  Jupiter,  so  much  farther  from 
us,  have  afforded  distinct  evidence  respecting  the  atmos- 
pheres which  surround  them. 

Then  secondly,  there  are  no  seas  or  oceans  on  the 
moon.  Were  there  any  large  tracts  of  water,  the  tre- 
mendous heat  to  which  the  moon  is  subjected  during  the 
course  of  the  long  lunar  day  (lasting  a  fortnight  of  our 
time)  would  certainly  cause  enormous  quantities  of 
water  to  evaporate  ;  and  not  only  would  the  effects  of 
this  process  be  distinctly  recognizable  in  the  telescope, 
but  the  spectroscope  would  exhibit  in  an  unmistakable 
manner  the  presence  of  the  aqueous  vapor  thus  formed. 

Thirdly,  there  are  no  lunar  seasons.  The  inclination 
of  the  moon's  axis  to  the  orbit  in  which  she  travels 


THE  MOON  AND  OTHER  SATELLITES.  189 

round  the  sun  is  nearly  89°,  and  with  this  inclination 
there  can  be  no  appreciable  seasonal  changes. 

Fourthly,  the  enormous  length  of  the  lunar  day  is 
altogether  opposed  to  our  conceptions  of  what  is  suitable 
for  animal  or  vegetable  life.  The  lunar  day  lasts  about 
a,  fortnight,  and  the  lunar  night  is,  of  course,  equally 
long.  Were  this  all,  the  inconvenience  of  the  arrange- 
ment would  not  be  endurable  by  beings  like  ourselves. 
But  far  more  serious  consequences  must  result  from  the 
combination  of  the  arrangement  with  the  want  of  an  at- 
mosphere ;  for  whereas  during  the  lunar  day  the  surface 
of  the  moon  is  exposed  to  an  inconceivably  intense  direct 
heat,  undoubtedly  sufficient  to  heat  that  surface  far  above 
the  boiling-point,  during  the  lunar  night  the  heat  is 
radiated  rapidly  away  into  space  (no  atmosphere  check- 
ing the  process),  and  an  intensity  of  cold  must  prevail  of 
which  we  can  form  but  imperfect  conceptions.* 

The  mere  fact  that  our  earth  is  always  invisible  from 


*  The  moon's  physical  habitudes  are  in  fact  so  very  different  from 
those  of  the  earth  that  one  cannot  read  without  astonishment  the  fol- 
lowing passage  in  which  Sir  W.  Herschel  pleads  for  the  moon's  habita- 
bility.  "Its  situation,  with  respect  to  the  sun,"  he  says,  "is  much 
like  that-of  the  earth,  and  hy  a  rotation  on  its  axis  it  enjoys  an  agree- 
able variety  of  seasons  (!)  and  of  day  and  night.  To  the  moon,  our 
globe  will  appear  to  be  a  very  capital  satellite,  undergoing  the  same 
regular  changes  of  illumination  as  the  moon  does  to  the  earth.  The 
sun,  the  planets,  and  the  starry  constellations  of  the  heavens  will  rise 
and  set  there  as  they  do  here,  and  heavy  bodies  will  fall  on  the  moon 
as  they  do  on  the  earth.  There  seems  only  to  be  icanting,  in  order  to 
complete  the  analogy,  that  it  slwuld  be  inhabited  like  the  earth!"  The 
evidence  however,  seems  to  me  to  lie  all  the  other  waj. 


190        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

three-sevenths  of  the  moon's  surface  is  one  which  points 
very  strongly  to  the  conclusion  that  the  present  condition 
of  the  moon  is  not  the  one  best  calculated  to  meet  the 
wants  of  living  creatures  on  her  surface.  In  long-past 
ages,  when  her  rotation  had  not  yet  been  forced  into  ac- 
cordance with  her  revolution  *  (as  at  present),  the  earth 
must  have  subserved  a  variety  of  most  important  pur- 
poses. If  water  then  existed  on  the  surface  of  the  moon, 
the  earth  must  have  raised  tidal  waves  in  the  lunar 
oceans.  She  must  further  have  reflected  enormous  sup- 
plies of  light  and  heat  toward  her  dependent  orb,  even  if 
at  that  time  she  were  not  a  secondary  sun  for  the  lunari- 
ans. She  must  have  travelled  across  the  lunar  skies  as 
the  moon  travels  over  ours,  presenting  a  variety  of  inter- 
esting and  beautiful  phases,  affording  useful  time-meas- 
ures, and  so  enabling  the  travellers  on  the  moon  in 
those  long-past  ages  to  guide  their  course  in  safety  over 
her  oceans  or  her  deserts.     But  now  she  is  invisible  from 

*  The  researches  of  Adams  into  the  peculiarity  of  the  moon's  motion 
called  her  acceleration,  suffice  to  show  that  under  the  influence  of  the 
moon's  attraction  on  our  oceans,  the  earth's  rotation  is  gradually  dimin- 
ishing ;  so  that,  though  many  millions  of  ages  must  elapse  first,  she 
will  one  day  so  rotate  as  to  keep  always  the  same  face  turned  toward 
her  satellite.  We  cannot  doubt  that  it  has  been  by  a  process  of  this 
sort  that  the  moon's  rotation  has  been  brought  to  its  present  rate.  In 
fact,  independently  of  the  evidence  afforded  by  the  earth's  gradual 
loss  of  rotation,  we  cannot  account  for  the  moon's  peculiarity  of  rota- 
tion without  regarding  it  as  due  to  the  earth's  controlling  influence.  A 
perfectly  homogeneous  sphere,  started  on  a  direct  line  at  the  moon's 
distance,  and  with  the  same  velocity,  would  travel  without  rotation  on 
an  orbit  like  the  moon's,  and  would  thus  in  completing  a  revolutioa 
exhibit  every  part  of  its  surface  to  us. 


THE  MOON  AND  OTHER  SATELLITES.  191 

a  large  portion  of  the  moon's  surface,  and  almost  a  fix- 
ture in  the  skies  even  of  those  parts  of  the  moon  whence 
she  can  be  seen.  Were  there  lunar  oceans,  she  could 
raise  no  tides  in  them.  Were  there  a  lunar  atmosphere, 
she  could  shed  no  heat,  to  be  garnered  up,  so  to  speak, 
by  that  atmosphere,  and  to  compensate,  in  some  sort, 
for  the  long  absence  of  the  sun. 

But  have  we  evidence  that  at  some  far-distant  epoch 
the  moon  was  inhabited  ?  Taking  for  our  guidance  the 
analogies  which  are  available  to  us,  can  we  really  con- 
clude that  once,  in  all  probability,  those  barren  wastes 
were  clothed  with  vegetation,  those  dreary  solitudes  the 
abode  of  life  ? 

When  we  contemplate  with  attention  the  lunar  surface, 
considering  the  indications  it  presents  of  past  activities, 
we  are  led  to  inquire  how  the  forces  which  have  been 
so  busily  at  work  were  expended.  If  Nature,  studied 
thoughtfully,  teaches  us  the  lesson  that  there  is  no  form 
of  force  which  is  not  the  representative  of  some  other 
pre-acting  form  of  force,  she  also  teaches  us  that  no  form 
of  force  ever  works  without  generating  other  forces  as  its 
own  energies  are  expended.  The  meteor  which  sweeps 
with  planetary  velocity  through  space  may  be  brought  to 
rest  upon  the  sun,  but  the  energy  stored  up  in  its  mo- 
tions is  not  wasted;  the  sun  may  expend  the  stores  of 
force  he  derives  from  meteoric  impact,  but  not  idly;* 

*  The  question  may  be  asked,  What  becomes  of  the  immense  supplies 
of  light  and  heat  continually  poured  by  the  sun  and  other  stars  into 


192        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

all  round  us  we  see  the  fruits  of  solar  energies,  we  feel 
them  within  ourselves,  we  exert  them  upon  others.  And 
therefore  when  we  see  on  the  moon  signs  that  her  sur- 
face was  at  one  time  upheaved  by  tremendous  volcanic 
forces,  we  are  led  to  the  conclusion  that  between  the  era 
when  she  was  thus  disturbed,  and  the  present  time, 
when  she  seems  absolutely  quiescent,  there  must  have 
been  a  period  when  her  energies  were  fit  for  sustaining 
various  forms  of  life;  though  it  does  not  follow,  of 
course,  that  they  were  so  employed.  There  lias,  in  this 
instance,  been  a  process  resembling  exhaustion,  though 
we  know  that  the  forms  of  force  which  have  passed  away 
from  the  moon  have  not  really  ceased  to  exist ;  but  be- 
fore the  lunar  forces  were  dissipated  into  space,  they  may 
have  subserved  the  purpose  of  supporting  life. 

space  ?  We  cannot  tell  ;  yet  we  know  certainly  that  they  cannot  be 
wasted.  The  heat  of  Arcturus,  measured  by  Mr.  Stone,  gives  an  ac- 
count of  one  large  portion  of  the  stellar  heat  supplies,  because  we  know 
that,  small  as  the  amount  may  be,  we  must  multiply  that  amount  mill- 
ions on  millions  of  times  to  get  the  total  received  by  all  the  orbs  in 
space  from  this  particular  sun.  But  we  know  that  a  large  portion  of 
our  sun's  light  and  heat  must  either  fail  to  fall  on  any  other  orbs,  or 
must  be  gradually  exhausted  in  its  progress  through  space  (for  if  lines 
from  the  sun  in  every  direction  encountered  orbs,  the  sky  ought  to  be 
lighted  up  at  all  times  with  star  splendor — which  is  no  other  than  sun- 
splendor).  In  either  case  we  cannot  tell  what  becomes  of  the  portion 
seemingly  wasted ;  though  in  the  latter  case  we  may  affirm  confidently 
that  there  is  simply  a  change  in  the  nature  of  the  energy.  In  both 
cases  we  know  that  the  total  of  energy  in  the  universe  remains  undi- 
minished. There  is,  indeed,  a  seeming  contradiction  here ;  but  it  is 
not  different  in  character  from  the  seeming  contradictions  suggested  by 
the  consideration  of  infinite  space  and  infinite  time,  which  yet  we  are 
compelled  to  recognize  as  absolutely  as  finite  space  or  finite  time. 


TUB  MOON  AND  OTHER  SATELLITES.  193 

Associated,  however,  with,  this  subject,  there  are  ques- 
tions of  a  perplexing  character,  which  invite  our  careful 
consideration.  If  life  ever  existed  on  the  moon,  she 
must  have  possessed  an  atmosphere  and  seas.  Indepen- 
dently, also,  of  our  views  on  the  subject  of  life  upon  the 
moon,  we  are  led  by  the  revelations  of  the  spectroscope 
respecting  the  solar  system,  to  believe  that  all  the  bodies 
within  that  system  are  in  a  general  sense  similarly  con- 
stituted; and  if  this  be  so,  there  must  once  have  been 
oceans  and  air  upon  the  moon.  "What  has  become  of  the 
moon's  atmospheric  envelope,  and  of  the  lunar  oceans  ? 

In  four  several  ways  this  question  has  been  answered. 
Some  have  thought  that  the  oceans  and  air  have  been 
withdrawn  into  cavities  within  the  moon's  substance. 
Others  have  imagined  that  the  air  and  oceans  may  have 
passed  away  to  the  farther  hemisphere  of  the  moon. 
According  to  a  third  theory,  a  comet  has  carried  off  the 
lunar  oceans  and  atmosphere.  And  lastly,  a  fourth  theory 
has  been  maintained,  according  to  which  the  lunar  air, 
and  a  fortiori  the  lunar  seas,  have  been  changed  by  in- 
tensity of  cold  into  the  solid  form. 

Of  these  theories,  the  first  and  last  only  seem  worthy 
of  consideration.  "We  see  so  much  of  the  moon's  farther 
hemisphere  during  her  librations  that  we  must  perforce 
reject  the  second,  even  if  we  had  any  trustworthy  reason 
for  believing  so  strange  an  arrangement  to  be  possible.* 


*  Professor  Newcomb,  of  America,  has  shown  excellent  reasons  for 
doubting  whether  even  that  displacement  of  the  moon's  cenire  of  grav* 
13 


194        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

The  third  theory  is  opposed  by  all  that  modern  astron- 
omy teaches  respecting  the  constitution  of  comets. 

The  theory  that  an  atmosphere  formerly  surrounding 
the  moon  has  passed  with  the  lunar  oceans  into  the  in- 
terior of  our  satellite  has  been  supported  by  physicists  of 
considerable  eminence.  The  relatively  low  specific  gravity 
of  the  moon  (little  more  than  half  the  earth's)  suggests  the 
possibility  that  cavities  large  enough  to  contain  even  all 
the  waters  of  our  own  oceans  may  exist  within  the  moon. 
Nor  does  the  fact  that  we  can  see  no  unmistakable  signs 
of  chasms  extending  deep  into  the  moon's  substance 
suffice  to  render  the  theory  untenable,  or  even  improbable. 
It  is  difficult  to  understand  how  the  retreat  of  the  waters 
took  place.  Certainly  it  cannot  have  happened  while  the 
moon's  volcanic  forces  were  in  vigorous  action;  yet  a 
period  must  undoubtedly  have  arrived  when  by  little  and 
little  the  waters  could  retire  within  the  moon's  substance 
without  being  vaporized.  From  what  we  know  of  volcanic 
action  on  the  earth,  the  lunar  volcanoes  must  have  drawn 
fresh  supplies  of  energy  from  the  gradual  influx  of  water ; 
and  one  can  thus  understand  why  the  aspect  of  the  moon 
indicates  that  up  to  the  last  moment,  so  to  speak,  of  her 


ity,  on  which  the  theory  has  been  based,  can  be  admitted  as  an  estab- 
lished fact.  Independently  of  this,  however,  the  theory  will  not  bear 
close  examination.  Any  one  who  will  draw  a  cross-section  of  the  moon 
(in  a  plane  passing  through  the  earth),  and  endeavor  to  assign  such  a 
position  to  an  atmosphere  of  moderate  extent  that  even  during  the 
moon's  extreme  librations  no  signs  of  the  atmosphere  would  be  per- 
ceptible from  the  earth,  will  at  once  see  that  the  theory  is  untenable. 


THE  MOON  AND  OTHER  SATELLITES.  195 

existence  as  a  world,  the  forces  upheaving  her  crust  were 
busily  at  work.  We  can  thus  see  how  it  has  come  to  pass 
that  the  moon's  surface  shows  so  few  signs  of  the  action 
of  rain  or  running  water. 

The  theory  that  the  lunar  oceans  have  become  frozen, 
and  that  afterward  even  the  gases  forming  the  lunar 
atmosphere  have  become  solidified,  was  maintained  by 
Buffbn  and  Bailly  in  the  last  century,  and  has  been  sup- 
ported by  several  astronomers  in  our  own  day.  In  some 
respects,  the  aspect  of  the  moon  (especially  the  absence 
of  well-marked  colors  from  her  surface)  seems  to  favor 
the  theory.  Nor  need  the  excessive  heat,  to  which  the 
moon's  surface  is  exposed  for  weeks  at  a  time,  be  con- 
sidered a  sufficient  reason  for  rejecting  it,  because  we 
have  no  means  of  judging  how  that  heat  would  act  where 
there  is  no  atmosphere  to  prevent  its  immediate  and  entire 
reflection  into  space.  "We  know  that  despite  the  intense 
heat  which  is  poured  upon  the  summits  of  the  Hima- 
layas, the  snow  there — though  a  portion  may  melt  during 
the  day — remains  year  after  year  and  age  after  age  undi- 
minished ;  and  on  the  summit  of  the  Himalayas  the 
atmosphere  is  dense  and  heavy  compared  with  that  which 
exists  even  in  the  lowest  abysms  of  the  lunar  ravines. 
But  the  results  which  have  been  deduced  from  the  ap- 
plication of  Lord  Rosse's  three-foot  mirror  to  the  measure- 
ment of  the  lunar  heat,  compel  us  to  abandon  the  belief 
in  the  existence  of  frozen  oxygen  or  nitrogen  on  the 
moon's  surface,  since,  according  to  those  results,  a  lasge 


19$  OTBER  WORLDS  THAN  OtTMS. 

proportion  of  the  moon's  heat  is  radiant — in  other  words, 
the  xaoon's  surface  has  been  actually  raised  to  a  high 
degree  of  heat  by  the  solar  rays.  Most  physicists  look 
with  considerable  confidence  on  the  method  by  which,  in 
the  researches  made  at  Parsonstown,  an  attempt  has  been 
made  to  distinguish  between  the  heat  which  the  moon  re- 
flects and  that  which  she  radiates  into  space. 

On  the  whole,  therefore,  the  former  theory  seems  to 
have  the  strongest  evidence  in  its  favor,  or  rather  the 
least  decisive  evidence  against  it. 

In  considering  the  systems  of  bodies  which  circle  around 
the  outer  planets,  we  are  struck  at  once  by  several  marked 
circumstances  of  contrast  between  their  condition  and 
that  of  our  own  moon. 

In  the  first  place,  we  have  no  satisfactory  evidence  that 
the  satellites  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn  turn  always  the  same 
face  toward  their  primary.  It  is  true  that  Sir  William 
Herschel  was  led  by  certain  observations  of  the  satellites 
of  Jupiter  to  conclude  that  this  relation  holds  in  their 
case.  But  we  have  far  stronger  evidence  against  such 
a  view,  in  the  fact  that  modern  observers  armed  with 
telescopes  of  the  most  exquisite  defining  powers  have  not 
only  been  unable  to  confirm  the  relatively  rough  observa- 
tions made  by  Herschel,  but  have  noticed  peculiarities  of 
appearance  only  explicable  by  the  theory  that  the  rota- 
tion of  the  satellites  is  quite  independent  of  their  motion 
of  revolution  around  Jupiter.  Dawes,  for  instance,  has 
observed  that  the  markings  seen  on  the  third   satellite, 


THE  MOON  AJSTD  OTHER  SATELLITES.  197 

when  transiting  Jupiter's  disk,  are  variable.  Bond  has 
seen  this  satellite  as  a  well-defined  black  spot  on  certain 
occasions,  while  on  others  it  has  appeared  quite  bright  on 
the  disk  of  the  planet.  He  once  saw  this  satellite  bright 
as  it  entered  on  the  disk  •  of  Jupiter,  and  about  half  an 
hour  later  as  a  dark  spot ;  while  Mr.  Prince,  with  a 
powerful  reflector,  has  seen  the  satellite  dark  first  and 
afterward  bright.  It  need  hardly  be  said,  that  if  the 
satellite  turned  always  the  same  face  toward  its  primary 
no  such  varieties  of  appearance  would  be  presented  dur- 
ing transit!  The  following  passage  from  Webb's  "Ce- 
lestial Objects "  points  strongly  also  to  the  conclusion 
that  the  rotation  .of  the  Jovian  satellites  must  be  inde- 
pendent of  their  revolution.  After  mentioning  that  the 
variable  light  of  the  satellites  may  be  caused  by  the  ex- 
istence of  spots  upon  their  surface,  he  proceeds :  "A 
stranger  source  of  anomaly  has  been  perceived — the  disks 
themselves  do  not  always  appear  of  the  same  size  or  form. 
Maraldi  noticed  the  former  fact  in  1707,  Herschel  ninety 
years  afterward  inferring  also  the  latter,  and  both  have 
since  been  confirmed.  Beer  and  Madler,  Lassell  and 
Secchi,  have  sometimes  seen  the  disk  of  the  second  satel- 
lite larger  than  that  of  the  first ;  and  Lassell,  and  Secchi 
and  his  assistant  have  distinctly  seen  that  of  the  third 
satellite  irregular  and  elliptical ;  while,  according  to  the 
Boman  observers,  the  ellipse  does  not  always  lie  the  same 
way." 
It  will  easily  be  seen  that  these  peculiarities  indicate  the 


198        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

existence  of  dark  markings  on  these  bodies,  and  that,  as 
the  satellites  rotate,  the  varying  position  of  these  mark- 
ings causes  the  satellites  seemingly  to  change  in  figure, 
since  the  brighter  part  of  the  satellite  would  be  that 
which  would  determine  its  apparent  figure.  And  fur- 
ther, since  the  change  of  figure  shows  no  correspon- 
dence with  the  position  of  the  satellites  in  their  revolu- 
tion, we  infer  that  their  revolution  is  independent  of  their 
rotation. 

It  is  worthy  of  notice,  however,  that  even  if  the  inner 
satellites  turned  always  the  same  face  toward  their  pri- 
mary, the  peculiarity  would  not  (as  in  the  case  of  our 
moon)  result  in  an  inordinate  lengthening  of  their  diurnal 
period,  since  Jupiter's  two  inner  satellites  complete  a 
revolution  in  1  day  18£  hours,  and  3  days  13  hours  re- 
spectively; while  the  revolutions  of  Saturn's  five  innet 
satellites  are  severally  accomplished  in  22  \  hours,  1  day  9 
hours,  1  day  21  hours,  2  days  18  hours,  and  4  days  12^ 
hours. 

So  far  as  we  can  judge  from  Laplace's  estimates,  the 
specific  gravity  of  Jupiter's  moons  must  be  very  small, 
ranging  from  one-third  to  two-thirds  of  the  moon's  specific 
gravity.  But  very  little  reliance  can  be  placed  on  these 
results,  because  the  only  evidence  we  have  respecting  the 
mass  of  the  satellites  is  that  founded  on  the  perturbations 
to  which  their  motions  are  subjected,  and  it  is  very  diffi- 
cult indeed  to  estimate  these  perturbations.  When  to 
this  we  add  the  circumstance  that  little  reliance  can  be 


THE  MOON  AND  OTHER  SATELLITES.  199 

placed  on  measurements  of  the  minute  disk  presented  by 
the  satellites,  it  will  be  seen  that  our  estimate  of  the 
specific  gravities  of  these  bodies  cannot  by  any  means  be 
regarded  as  trustworthy. 

As  seen  from  his  satellites,  Jupiter  must  present  a  mag- 
nificent scene.  To  the  inhabitants,  if  such  there  are,  of 
the  innermost  satellite,  he  exhibits  a  disk  nearly  20°  in 
diameter.  Thus,  whereas  there  might  be  about  seven 
hundred  moons  such  as  ours  placed  all  around  our  horizon, 
fche  disk  of  Jupiter,  as  seen  from  the  inner  satellite,  would 
occupy  a  full  eighteenth  part  of  the  horizon's  circumfer- 
ence. The  disk  of  Jupiter,  as  so  seen,  would  cover  a 
space  on  the  heavens  exceeding  more  than  fourteen  hun- 
dred times  that  which  our  moon  covers.  To  the  second 
satellite,  Jupiter  presents  a  disk  about  12Ja  in  diameter, 
or  about  six  hundred  times  as  large  as  our  moon's.  To 
the  third  satellite  he  shows  a  disk  about  7|°  in  diameter, 
or  more  than  two  hundred  times  the  size  of  the  moon's. 
And  lastly,  the  inhabitants  even  of  the  farthermost  satel- 
lite see  him  with  a  diameter  of  about  4£° — that  is,  with  a 
disk  more  than  sixty-five  times  as  large  as  that  of  our 
moon.  So  that,  if  the  views  I  have  put  forward  respect- 
ing Jupiter  be  correct,  the  enormous  space  he  covers  on 
the  skies  of  his  respective  satellites  must  suffice  to  com- 
pensate in  part  for  the  relatively  small  amount  of  heat 
which  he  can  be  supposed  capable  of  emitting. 

If  the  satellites  rotate  with  a  motion  independent  of 
their  revolution,  Jupiter  passes  across  their  skies  like  a 


200        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

vast  moon,  exhibiting  phases  such  as  those  presented  by 
ours,  but  on  a  far  vaster  scale.  But  besides  his  phases, 
he  must  exhibit  to  the  inhabitants  of  his  satellites  the 
most  marvellous  picture  that  can  be  conceived.  His  belts' 
changes  of  figure  and  color,  only  rendered  visible  to  our 
astronomers  by  powerful  telescopic  aid,  must  be  distinctly 
visible  to  creatures  on  his  satellites,  and  cannot  but  afford 
reasoning  beings  on  those  orbs  a  most  astounding  theme 
for  study  and  admiration. 

To  the  inhabitants  of  the  satellites  which  circle  round 
Saturn,  the  ringed  planet  must  present  an  even  more  in- 
teresting spectacle.  His  disk  as  seen  from  the  nearest  of 
his  satellites  has  a  diameter  of  17°  and  an  apparent  sur- 
face exceeding  more  than  nine  hundred  times  that  of  the 
moon.  From  the  farthest  satellite  his  disk  is  less  than  a 
degree  in  diameter,  and  therefore  not  quite  four  times  as 
large  as  our  moon's.  Between  these  limits  the  apparent 
size  of  Saturn  varies  as  we  pass  from  satellite  to  satellite ; 
but  from  the  sixth  satellite  his  apparent  surface  is  twenty- 
five  times,  while  from  the  seventh  it  is  sixteen  times  as 
large  as  the  moon's;  so  that  the  outer  satellite  is  quite 
exceptionally  circumstanced  in  this  respect. 

It  is  not  so  much  from  the  apparent  size  of  his  disk, 
however  (though  in  the  case  of  all  the  inner  satellites  that 
must  be  a  most  remarkable  relation),  as  from  the  peculiar 
character  of  his  ring-system,  that  Saturn  would  derive 
his  chief  interest.  It  is  true  that  the  inner  satellites 
travel  nearly  in  the  plane  of  the  rings,  so  that  these  are 


THE  MOON  AND  OTHER  SATELLITES.  201 

always  presented  nearly  edgewise.  But  even  so  viewed, 
the  rings  would  present  a  most  striking  appearance. 
From  the  inner  satellite,  indeed,  the  extreme  span  of  the 
ring-system  is  more  than  90° ;  *  so  that  when  one  ex- 
tremity is  seen  on  the  horizon  the  system  would  appear 
as  an  arch  thickest  in  the  middle,  extending  over  an  arc 
of  about  93°,  and  having  the  disk  of  Saturn  at  its  centre. 
When  the  whole  of  this  arch  is  illuminated,  Saturn  is 
"  full ; "  at  other  times  he  presents  all  the  phases  shown 
by  our  moon,  and  the  arch  of  light  is  correspondingly 
shortened.  Saturn  "  full "  and  in  the  zenith,  with  the 
ring-system  dependent  on  either  side  of  his  disk,  must  be 
a  glorious  spectacle  as  seen  from  certain  regions  of  his 
innermost  satellite.  The  display  would  diminish  in 
grandeur,  though  not  perhaps  in  interest,  as  seen  from 
satellites  farther  and  farther  away.  But  the  inhabitants 
of  the  outermost  satellite  of  all  have  the  privilege  of  see- 
ing the  Saturnian  ring-system  opened  out  much  more 
fully  than  as  seen  from  the  other  satellites,  since  the  path 
of  this  moon  is  inclined  some  15°  to  the  plane  of  the 
ring. 

Of  the  satellites  of  Uranus  and  Neptune  little  can  be 
said,  because  so  little  is  known  either  respecting  these 
orbs  themselves  or  their  primaries.  It  seems  clear  that 
Sir  "William  Herschel  was  mistaken  as  respects  four  of 


*  About  93°  according  to  the  best  estimates  of  the  dimensions  of  the 
rings  and  the  distance  of  the  satellite. 


202        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

the  satellites  of  Uranus  he  supposed  he  had  detected. 
Uranus  has  but  four  known  satellites  and  Neptune  only 
one.  Possibly  other  Uranian  satellites  may  one  day  be 
discovered,  and  Neptune  also  may  possibly  have  several 
satellites  circling  around  him.  But  only  the  five  bodies 
above-mentioned  are  at  present  known. 


METEORS  AND  OOMETS.  20o 


CHAPTEK  IX. 

METEORS    AND    COMETS  I    THEIR  OFFICE    IN    THE    SOLAR 
SYSTEM. 

There  are  few  more  interesting  chapters  in  the  history 
of  astronomy  than  that  which  deals  with  the  gradual  in- 
troduction of  meteors  into  an  important  position  in  the 
economy  of  the  solar  system.  Regarded  for  a  long  time 
as  simply  atmospheric  phenomena  (though  many  ancient 
philosophers  held  another  opinion),  it  has  only  been 
after  a  long  and  persistent  series  of  researches  that  they 
have  come  at  length  to  be  regarded  in  their  true  light. 
But  though  the  history  of  those  researches  is  not  only 
full  of  interest,  but  highly  instructive  and  encouraging, 
this  is  not  the  place  for  entering  at  length  into  its  de- 
tails. I  must  present  facts  and  conclusions,  rather  than 
the  narrative  of  observations  or  calculations  by  which 
those  facts  and  conclusions  have  been  established.  Nay, 
it  would  seem  at  first  sight  as  though  even  the  nature  of 
meteors  could  have  very  little  to  do  with  the  subject  of 
this  treatise,  since  we  cannot  suppose  these  small  bodies 
to  be  inhabited  worlds.  It  will  be  found,  however,  that, 
though  this  is  certainly  true,  there  are  reasons  for  believ- 


204        OTHER    WORLDS  THAU  OUBS. 

ing  tliat  meteors  are  associated  in  a  very  intimate  manner 
with  the  general  relations  of  the  family  of  worlds  forming 
the  solar  system 

Under  the  head  "  Meteors  "  I  include  all  those  objects 
which  reach  the  earth's  atmosphere  from  without, 
whether  they  actually  make  their  way  to  her  surface  un- 
broken, like  the  aerolites ;  or  explode  into  small  frag- 
ments, as  bolides  and  fire-balls  have  been  observed  to 
do ;  or  are  apparently  consumed  in  traversing  the  upper 
regions  of  the  air,  as  happens  with  shooting  or  falling 
stars.  All  these  objects,  we  now  know,  represent  in  real- 
ity bodies  of  greater  or  less  size,  which,  before  their  en- 
coanter  with  the  earth,  were  travelling  around  the  sun  in 
orbits  of  greater  or  less  eccentricity.  The  larger  masses, 
though  they  must  be  very  numerous  (or  our  earth  would 
not  once  in  many  ages  encounter  any  of  them),  are  yet 
relatively  few  in  number  as  compared  with  fire-balls,  and 
still  more  so  in  comparison  with  shooting  stars.  It  has 
been  calculated,  indeed,  that  these  last  are  so  numerous 
that  the  earth,  in  passing  through  a  region  of  space  equal 
to  her  own  dimensions,  must  encounter  no  less  than  thir- 
teen thousand  of  them ;  while  of  yet  smaller  bodies, 
whose  passage  through  our  air  would  only  be  recogniza- 
ble by  telescopic  aid,  she  is  supposed  to  encounter  as 
many  as  forty  thousand  within  a  similar  space.  Without 
laying  great  stress  on  these  calculations,  we  may  yet  feel 
quite  sure  that  the  earth  must  encounter  enormous  num- 
bers of  these  bodies,  from  the  mere  fact  that,  though  at 


METEORS  AND   COMETS.  205 

any  fixed  station  but  a  minute  slico  (so  to  speak)  of  the 
earths  atmosphere  is  within  view,  and  ovon  but  a  por- 
tion only  of  that  slice  visible  to  a  single  observer,  six  or 
seven  falling-  stars  on  the  average  may  bo  soon  during 
each  hour  of  the  night. 

It  will  bo  soon,  then,  that  a  problem  of  the  utmost  im- 
portance was  involved  in  the  question  whether  these  bod- 
ies came  from  the  interplanetary  spaces,  or  from  the 
region  oi  space  over  which  tho  earth's  own  attractive 
energies  prevail.  Now  that  wo  know  tho  former  view  to 
be  tho  true  one,  we  recognize  tho  fact  that,  though  each 
meteor  may  be  individually  insignificant,  tho  meteors  of 
tho  solar  system,  looked  on  as  a  single  family,  form  a 
highly  interesting  and  important  portion  of  the  sun's 
domain. 

But  now  a  yet  more  significant  relation  has  to  be  con- 
sidered. Regarding  meteors  as  planetary  bodies,  they 
might  yet  bo  relatively  unimportant,  if  wo  had  any  rea- 
son to  believe  that  they  form  a  sort  of  zone  or  bolt  near 
the  earth's  orbit,  resembling  in  a  sense  the  asteroidal 
zone,  only  composed  of  Ear  smaller  constituent  bodies. 
We  could  not  thai  infer  from  the  number  of  meteors  en- 
countered in  a  given  time  by  tho  earth,  the  largeness  of 
tho  total  number  of  these  bodies ;  for  it  might  well  be 
that  this  zone  had  no  counterpart,  either  in  the  outer 
part  of  the  planetary  system  or  within  tho  orbit  of  the 
earth.  What  has  actually  boon  discovered,  however,  re- 
specting the  paths  along  which  the  meteoric  bodies  have 


206        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

reached  the  earth,  immensely  enhances  the  importance 
of  these  objects. 

It  has  been  proved,  on  evidence  perfectly  incontesta- 
ble, that  two  well-marked  meteoric  systems  travel  in 
orbits  of  enormous  eccentricity.  The  August  meteors 
travel  on  a  path  so  eccentric  that  in  the  neighborhood 
of  the  earth's  orbit  it  may  be  regarded  as  almost  para- 
bolic in  figure.  That  it  is  not  absolutely  parabolic  is 
shown,  of  course,  by  the  fact  that  a  period  has  been  as- 
signed to  the  revolution  of  the  members  of  the  zone.  No 
observations  have  indeed  been  made  by  which  astrono- 
mers could  determine  the  orbit  of  these  meteors,  since 
for  this  purpose  an  exact  determination  of  the  velocity 
with  which  they  enter  the  earth's  atmosphere  would  be 
requisite,  while  the  observations  actually  made  to  de- 
termine their  velocity  are  confessedly  inexact.  But  an 
association,  altogether  too  close  to  be  regarded  as  acci- 
dental, has  been  discovered  between  their  orbit  and  that 
of  a  bright  comet  which  appeared  in  1862,  and  this, 
combined  with  what  has  since  been  established  respect- 
ing the  relations  between  comets  and  meteors,  enables 
astronomers  to  adopt  quite  confidently  the  orbit  of  the 
comet  as  that  of  the  meteoric  system.  Now  a  period  of 
145  years  implies,  according  to  Kepler's  law,  an  orbit 
having  a  mean  distance  nearly  equal  to  that  of  Neptune. 
And  since  the  orbit  is  so  eccentric  as  to  bring  these 
bodies  close  to  the  earth  when  they  are  near  perihelion, 
it  follows  that  their  aphelion  distance  must  exceed  their 


METEORS  AND  COMETS.  207 

mean  distance  in  the  same  degree.  Hence  the  aphelion 
point  of  the  August  meteors  must  lie  nearly  twice  as  far 
away  from  us  as  the  orbit  of  Neptune. 

The  November  meteors  have  been  shown  in  like 
manner  to  travel  in  a  period  of  33J  years  around  the 
sun,  the  aphelion  of  their  orbit  lying  far  beyond  the 
path  of  Uranus. 

So  far,  then,  as  we  can  judge  from  the  only  two 
meteoric  systems  whose  orbits  can  be  said  to  have  been 
satisfactorily  determined  (though  there  are  many  other 
systems  which  have  been  associated  with  known  comets), 
we  are  led  to  the  conclusion  that  the  meteoric  orbits 
are  for  the  most  part  eccentric.  We  know,  further,  that 
they  are  inclined  in  all  directions  to  the  plane  in  which 
the  earth  travels,  because  we  see  that  their  constituent 
bodies  fall  upon  the  earth  in  directions  which  show  no 
tendency  to  near  coincidence  with  the  ecliptic. 

These  two  circumstances  are  full  of  meaning.  If  the 
meteors  travelled  in  nearly  circular  orbits  at  a  mean  dis- 
tance nearly  equal  to  the  earth's  mean  distance  from  the 
sun,  then  the  earth  would  be  certain  to  encounter  mete- 
ors in  the  course  of  her  orbital  motion  round  the  sun. 
Again,  if  the  meteors  travelled  in  eccentric  orbits,  whose 
perihelia  lay  within  the  earth's  orbit,  and  if  these  orbits 
all  lay  in  or  near  the  plane  of  the  earth's  path,  the  earth 
could  not  fail  to  encounter  meteors  as  she  travelled  round 
the  sun.  But  under  the  actual  circumstances — the  mean 
distances  of  the  meteoric  orbits  being  in  no  way  associated 


208        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

with  the  earth's  mean  distance,  and  the  inclination  of 
these  orbits  to  the  ecliptic  not  being  in  any  way  limited 
— the  two  questions  are  at  once  suggested,  (1)  "What 
is  the  a  priori  chance  that  the  earth  would  encounter 
the  members  of  any  meteoric  system  taken  at  random  ? 
and,  (2)  If  this  chance  be  small,  what  is  the  conclusion  to 
be  drawn  from  the  fact  that  the  earth  encounters  meteors 
belonging  to  many  systems  ? — the  number  already  recog- 
nized being  nearly  sixty.  Assigning  elements  at  random 
to  a  meteor  system,  we  see  that,  unless  the  resulting  orbit 
actually  coincides  with  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  (a  relation 
which  would  not  happen  in  a  million  trials),  the  orbit 
will  intersect  that  plane  in  two  points,  lying  on  a  straight 
line  through  the  sun.  And  for  the  earth  to  encounter 
members  of  the  meteoric  system,  it  is  requisite  that  one 
or  other  of  these  two  points  shall  lie  close  to  the  earth's 
orbit.  But  these  points  may  have  any  position  whatever 
in  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic,  and  the  chance  that  one  of 
them  has  the  requisite  position  may  be  regarded  as  in- 
definitely small.  It  follows,  then,  that  the  a  priori  chance 
of  the  earth's  encountering  the  members  of  a  meteoric 
system  is  indefinitely  small ;  and  hence  we  conclude  that 
the  number  of  meteoric  systems  of  which  she  passes 
wholly  clear  is  indefinitely  great,  in  comparison  with  the 
number  whose  members  she  encounters.  But  she  actually 
encounters  meteors  belonging  to  more  than  four  hundred 
systems.  Hence  the  total  number  of  meteoric  systems 
belonging  to  the  planetary  scheme  must  be  an  indefinitely 


METEORS  AND   COMETS.  209 

large  number  of  hundreds — or  in  other  words,  it  must  be 
enormously  beyond  our  powers  of  conception. 

This  being  so,  it  behooves  us  to  inquire,  first  of  all,  what 
extent  we  must  assign  to  indiyidual  meteoric  systems,  and 
how  densely  we  may  suppose  meteoric  masses  to  be 
strewn  along  each  system ;  and  secondly,  what  may  be  the 
nature,  quality  and  substance  of  these  meteoric  masses. 
For  we  begin  to  see  that  we  are  in  the  presence  of  relations 
which  may — or  I  should  rather  say,  which  must — affect 
most  importantly  the  economy  of  the  solar  system. 

Now  we  have  seen  something  already  of  the  longitudinal 
extent  of  meteoric  systems,  since  that  extent  corresponds 
to  the  circumference  of  meteoric  orbits,  and  we  have  seen 
that  these  orbits  have  enormous  dimensions.  We  may 
indeed  suppose  that  in  some  cases  the  whole  extent  of  an 
orbit  is  not  occupied  by  meteoric  masses  at  any  one 
instant :  but  even  when,  as  in  the  case  of  the  November 
meteors,  the  annual  displays  wax  and  wane  in  splendor, 
there  is  no  absolute  cessation  in  the  occurrence  of  star-falls 
on  the  date  corresponding  to  such  a  system.  And  taking 
full  account  even  of  the  marked  diminution  which  actually 
occurs,  we  are  yet  compelled  to  assign  an  enormous  longi- 
tudinal extent  to  that  portion  of  the  system  which  has 
been  poetically  termed  "the  gem  of  the  meteor-ring." 
For  example,  in  the  November  meteor  system,  this  portion 
of  the  ring  cannot  be  less  than  one  thousand  million  miles 
in  length.     As  to  the  width  of  a  meteor  system — that  is, 

its  extent  in  a  direction  measured  in  the  plane  of  its  orbit 
14  ___ 


210        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

— we  have  no  satisfactory  information,  because  a  meteoi 
system  may  extend  enormously  on  either  side  of  the  point 
through  which  the  earth's  orbit  intersects  it,  and  yet  no 
trace  of  that  extension  be  recognized  by  observers  on  the 
earth.  Still  we  may  conclude  that  this  dimension  lies  in 
extent  somewhere  between  the  longitudinal  extension  of 
the  system  and  the  depth  of  the  meteor  zone — that  is, 
the  length  of  a  line  taken  through  it,  square  to  the  plane 
in  which  it  lies.  Now  of  this  last  dimension  we  can  form 
a  tolerably  accurate  estimate  in  many  instances.  "We 
know  that  so  long  as  meteors  belonging  to  any  system  are 
flashing  into  view,  our  earth  is  still  plunging  through  the 
system ;  and  if  we  know  the  position  of  the  system,  we 
can  determine  its  depth  in  this  way,  just  as  we  could  de- 
termine the  breadth  of  a  range  of  hills  if  we  noticed  the 
time  occupied  by  a  train,  travelling  with  known  velocity, 
in  passing  through  a  tunnel  which  traversed  the  range  of 
hills  in  a  known  direction.  Judged  in  this  way,  the  depth 
of  the  November  meteor  zone  would  seem  to  be  one  hun- 
dred thousand  miles  in  the  part  traversed  by  the  earth  hi 

1866,  about  sixty  thousand  miles  in  the  part  traversed  in 

1867,  and  considerably  greater  (though  the  zone  was  more 
sparsely  strewn  with  meteors)  where  the  earth  crossed 
the  system  in  1868,  1869,  and  1870. 

.  Now  as  regards  the  density  with  which  meteors  are 
strewn  in  any  known  system,  I  must  remark  on  a  mistake 
which  has  been  sometimes  made.  It  has  not  been  thought 
necessary  to  consider  the  velocity  with  which  the  meteors 


METEORS  AND  COMETS.  211 

themselves  travel,  as  well  as  tlie  earth's  velocity,  in  order 
to  determine  from  the  average  interval  of  time  separating 
the  appearance  of  successive  meteors  the  average  distance 
separating  neighboring  meteors  from  each  other.  This, 
however,  is  an  erroneous  mode  of  dealing  with  the  prob- 
lem. We  must  consider  the  meteoric  velocity,  since  the 
meteoric  motions  manifestly  tend  to  affect  the  total  num- 
ber of  encounters.*  Let  us  apply  this  consideration  to 
enable  us  to  form  a  rough  estimate  of  the  number  of  bodies 
in  the  richer  part  of  the  November  meteor  system.  We 
may  fairly  assume  that,  taking  the  average  of  the  four 
displays  of  the  years  1866-69,  the  earth  encountered 
more  than  one  meteor  per  minute  as  she  swept  onward 
through  the  system  ;  or,  coveniently  for  our  purpose, 
that  an  average  distance  of  one  thousand  miles  separates 
meteor  from  meteor  throughout  the  "  gem  of  the  ring." 
Now  the  length  of  the  great  cluster  is  at  least  1,000,- 
000,000  miles,  its  thickness  may  be  fairly  assumed  as 
averaging  100,000  miles,  and  its  width  can  hardly  be  less 
than  ten  times  its  thickness,  since  the  forces  acting  on 
the  system  tend  much  more  largely  to  affect  its  width  than 
its  thickness.     Thus,  with  the  assumed  average  of  distance 


*  Obviously  the  total  number  of  meteors  encountered  during  the 
earth's  passage  through  a  meteor  stream  will  be  the  number  contained 
in  a  cylindrical  space  having  a  cross-section  equal  to  the  earth's,  and 
traversing  the  meteor  stream  from  side  to  side.  The  motion  of  tbe  me- 
teors will  affect  the  particular  set  of  meteors  actually  found  within  this 
space  as  the  earth  traverses  it,  and  will  also  afreet  their  number,  assum- 
ing a  general  uniformity  of  meteoric  distribution. 


213        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

(1,000  miles),  we  find  that  the  cluster  cannot  contain  less 
than  (1,000,000  x  100  x  1,000)  or  one  hundred  thousand 
million  meteors ! 

Professor  Alexander  Herschel,  from  observati  ms  of  the 
amount  of  light  given  out  by  these  bodies,  and  a  calcula- 
tion founded  on  the  velocity  with  which  they  penetrate 
our  atmosphere,  has  come  to  the  conclusion,  that  they 
must,  for  the  most  part,  be  very  small,  rarely  perhaps, 
exceeding  a  few  ounces  in  weight.  "We  shall  certainly 
not  exaggerate  their  weight  if  we  assign  the  one  hun- 
dredth part  of  an  ounce  to  each.  We  thus  obtain  for  the 
tveight  of  the  whole  cluster  one  thousand  millions  of 
ounces,  or  about  twenty-eight  thousand  tons.  The  actual 
weight  of  the  November  meteor  system  cannot,  however, 
but  enormously  exceed  this  amount;  and  therefore  we 
recognize  how  erroneous  that  opinion  is  which  an  emi- 
nent astronomer  has  expressed,  who  asserted  that  the 
united  weight  of  all  the  bodies  other  than  planets  in  the 
solar  system  must  be  estimated  rather  by  pounds  than  by 
tons.  We  have  certainly  no  reason  for  thinking  that  the 
November  system,  though  one  of  the  most  important  en- 
countered by  the  earth,  is  exceptionally  important  in  the 
solar  system.  On  the  contrary,  we  have  every  reason 
which  the  laws  of  probability  can  afford  us  for  believing 
that  there  must  be  millions  of  systems  equally  or  more 
extensive.  And  further,  the  fall  of  enormous  masses, 
many  tons  sometimes  in  weight,  upon  the  earth,  would 
point  to  the  conclusion  that  the  members  of  the  Novem- 


METEORS  AND  COMETS.  213 

ber  system  are  exceptionally  insignificant  as  regards  their 
individual  dimensions.  So  that  we  seem  forced  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  aggregate  weight  of  the  various  mete- 
oric systems  circulating  around  the  sun  must  be  esti- 
mated by  billions  of  tons  rather  than  by  any  of  our  ordi- 
nary units. 

I  have  already  referred  to  the  relation  which  has  been 
detected  between  comets  and  meteor  systems.  Perplex- 
ing as  the  relation  appears,  it  has  been  established  on 
evidence  which  cannot  reasonably  be  disputed.  It  car- 
ries with  it  results  of  extreme  interest  and  importance. 

I  do  not  propose  here  to  enter  into  any  consideration 
of  those  enormously  difficult  questions  which  are  sug- 
gested by  the  study  of  cometic  phenomena.  That  they 
will  before  very  long  receive  their  solution  I  confidently 
believe ;  but  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  it 
would  indeed  be  hazardous  to  speculate  as  to  what  that 
solution  may  be.  I  may  remark,  in  passing,  that  while  I 
recognize  in  recently  promulgated  theories  on  the  sub- 
ject the  indication  of  a  highly  suggestive  and  promising 
line  of  research,  I  cannot  but  feel  that  cometic  phenomena 
are  far  too  complicated  to  be  directly  accounted  for  in  any 
of  the  ways  pointed  out  of  late  by  physicists.  Some  of 
the  more  obvious,  and,  I  may  add,  the  more  generally 
known  phenomena,  do  indeed  appear  to  receive  a  solution 
when  examined  under  the  light  of  recent  researches,  but 
numbers  of  others  not  only  remain  unaccounted  for,  but 
stand  apparently  altogether  opposed  to  suggested  theories. 


214        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

For  my  present  purpose,  however,  the  facts  to  be  prin- 
cipally noticed  are  in  a  sense  independent  of  any  views 
which  may  be  formed  respecting  the  nature  of  comets. 
We  know  that  the  dimensions  of  these  objects  are  in  many 
cases  enormous.  We  know,  further,  that  there  must  be 
many  thousands  of  comets  remaining  undiscovered,  for 
each  that  our  astronomers  have  detected.  And,  lastly, 
we  are  led  to  recognize  the  observed  association  between 
certain  meteor  systems  and  certain  comets  as  indicative 
of  a  general  law  by  which,  in  some  way  as  yet  unex- 
plained, comets  and  meteors  are  associated  together. 
Thus,  independently  of  the  considerations  already  ad- 
duced, we  are  led  to  the  conclusion  that  meteor  systems 
must  be  very  numerous;  while  from  the  fact  that  a 
meteor  system  so  important  as  the  November  stream  is 
associated  with  a  comet  so  insignficant  as  Tempel's,  we 
conclude  that  those  magnificent  comets  which  have 
blazed  in  our  skies — a  source  at  once  of  wonder  and  per- 
plexity to  the  astronomer — must  be  associated  with  sys- 
tems of  bodies  incalculably  more  important  than  the 
meteor  system  which  has  so  often  filled  the  heavens  with 
falling  stars. 

Combining  all  these  results,  we  seem  fairly  led  to  the 
conclusion  that  purposes  of  importance  in  the  economy 
of  the  solar  system  are  probably  subserved  by  these  un- 
counted thousands  of  meteoric  streams.  If,  indeed,  we 
could  suppose  that  the  planets  steered  clear  of  them,  and 
that  the  bodies  composing  them  simply  circulated  un- 


METEORS  AND  COMETS.  215 

ceasingly  in  their  orbits,  we  might  form  another  opinion. 
But  we  know  that  meteors  are  continually  falling  upon 
the  atmosphere  of  our  own  earth,  either  there  to  be  dissi- 
pated into  finest  dust,  or  to  pass  onward,  with  or  without 
explosion,  to  the  actual  surface  of  the  earth ;  and  we 
cannot  doubt  that  in  a  similar  way  countless  thousands  of 
meteors  are  falling,  not  only  upon  all  the  primary  mem- 
bers of  the  solar  system,  but  upon  asteroids  and  satellites 
— nay,  are  even  streaming  in  among  the  minute  bodies 
composing  the  rings  of  Saturn.  These  encounters  cannot 
be  wholly  without  result,  and  it  is  quite  conceivable  that 
most  injurious  consequences  might  ensue  to  the  inhabi- 
tants of  all  the  worlds  in  the  solar  system  if  the  contin- 
ual supply  of  meteoric  matter  were  importantly  dimin- 
ished. 

Now,  if  meteoric  masses  fall  continually  upon  the  plan- 
ets, such  masses  must  fall  in  numbers  inconceivably 
greater  upon  the  sun ;  and  it  is  here,  unless  I  mistake, 
that  the  great  purpose  of  the  meteoric  systems  becomes 
apparent. 

Let  us  clearly  recognize,  however,  why  and  how  the 
sun  must  be  assaulted  by  a  continual  inrush  of  meteoric 
bodies.  We  have  seen  how  enormous  must  be  the  num- 
ber of  these  bodies;  we  know  how  swiftly  they  travel, 
and  on  what  eccentric  orbits  ;  but  we  must  go  further  be- 
fore we  can  prove  that  they  fall  upon  the  sun.  For  ex- 
ample, the  November  meteors  are  enormous  in  number, 
and  travel  with  enormous  velocity  in  a  very  eccentric  or- 


216        OTHER  WORLDS  TBAN  0U£$. 

bit,  but  they  do  not  approach  the  sun  within  a  distance 
of  nearly  90,000,000  miles.  Nor,  indeed,  can  any  known 
meteoric  system  pour  a  steady  hail  of  meteors,  so  to 
speak,  upon  the  sun  ;  for  he  is  the  ruling  centre  of  every 
meteoric  system,  and  therefore  under  ordinary  circum- 
stances the  meteoric  orbits  must  pass  around  him,  and 
not  in  such  directions  as  to  intersect  his  substance. 

But  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  meteors  must  be  infi- 
nitely more  crowded  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  sun  than 
at  a  distance  from  him.  An  indefinitely  large  number  of 
meteoric  orbits  must  absolutely  intersect  in  the  immedi- 
ate neighborhood  of  the  sun ;  and  collisions  must  be  con- 
tinually taking  place  as  countless  thousands  of  meteoric 
flights  rush  toward  and  past  and  then  away  from  their 
perihelia.  "Where  these  perihelia  lie  close  to  the  sun  the 
Telocity  with  which  the  meteors  travel  must  exceed  two 
hundred  miles  per  second,  and  therefore  the  collision 
even  of  two  minute  meteors  must  result  in  the  generation 
of  an  enormous  amount  of  light  and  heat.  But  that  is 
not  alL  Among  the  collisions  thus  continually  taking 
place  in  the  sun's  neighborhood  there  must  be  a  consid- 
erable proportion  in  which  the  two  bodies  are  brought 
momentarily  almost  to  rest  by  the  shock.  In  such 
cases  the  combined  mass  of  the  two  meteors  would  fall 
directly  upon  the  sun,  a  fresh  supply  of  light  and  heat 
being  generated  as  they  were  brought  again  to  rest  upon 
his  surface. 

Whether  in  the  continual  collisions  of  meteors  among 


METEORS  AJTD   COMETS.  21? 

themselves,  and  in  their  precipitation  npon  the  sun's  sur- 
..  we  hai  ait  explanation  of  the  seemii 

m  of  light  and  heat  from  the  sun,  I 
lid  not  care  positively  to  assert.     Sir  W.  Thorn] 

who  was  one  of  the  first  to  adopt  this  view,  has  : 
abandoned  it ;  though  it  is  worthy  of  remark  t 
strongest  evidence  in  its  favor  has  been  obtained  since  he 
withdrew  his  support  from  it.  or  at  least  admitted  that 
the  downfall  of  meteors  on  the  sun's  surface  is  not  tzfrni 
sufficient  to  account  for  the  solar  light  and  heat.  But  so 
far  as  I  can  judge,  there  is  no  flaw  in  the  evidence  I  h 
adduced  from  the  laws  of  probability  applied  to  recent 
discoveries  ;  and  that  we  are  bound  to  accept  as  a  legiti- 
mate conclusion  from  that  evidence  the  theory  that  at 
least  a  proportion  of  the  sun's  heat  is  supplied  from  the 
meteoric  streams  which  circulate  in  countless  millions 
around  him.  It  can  no  longer  be  believed,  however, 
without  adopting  unreasonable  assumptions,  that  the 
whole  of  that  enormous  supply  of  light  and  heat  which 
the  sun  emits  on  every  side  is  derived  from  the  meteoric 
vma  belonging  to  the  solar  system  or  drawn  in  from 
surrounding  space,  as  the  sun,  attended  by  his  family  of 
planets,  sweeps  onward  amid  the  stellar  groups. 

If  this  view  were  correct,  then  the  meteor  systems 
would  constitute  indeed  a  most  important  part  of  the  sun's 
domain.  They  might  be  said  almost  to  share  with  the 
sun  a  title  to  be  regarded  as  the  source  of  all  the  forms  of 
force  which  exist  throughout  the  solar  system.     If  in  the 


218        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

energies  of  living  creatures  on  earth,  in  the  forces  derived 
from  the  fuel  that  propels  our  engines,  or  in  the  power  of 
winds  and  storms,  we  trace  the  action  of  the  ruling  centre 
of  the  solar  system,  we  might  trace  back  the  chain  of 
causation  yet  one  link  further,  and  see  in  the  sun's  emis- 
sion of  light  and  heat  the  result  of  forces  inherent  in  the 
meteoric  systems  which  circle  around  him. 

But  we  must  not  forget  one  most  important  considera- 
tion, which  would  make  the  sun  (as  might  be  anticipated) 
again  the  chief  source  of  all  the  forms  of  force  existing 
within  his  system.  The  motions  of  the  meteoric  masses 
are  almost  wholly  due  to  the  sun's  attraction ;  and  there- 
fore, in  so  far  as  those  motions  are  to  be  regarded  as  a 
means  of  renewing  the  solar  heat,  we  must  regard  the 
sun's  attractive  energy  as  the  source  whence  his  heat  and 
all  the  other  forms  of  force  which  he  exerts  are  in  reality 
derived. 

Yet  one  step  further.  The  sun's  attractive  energies 
might  be  increased  a  thousand-fold,  and  yet  not  avail  to 
supply  the  various  forms  of  force  which  are  required  by 
his  dependent  worlds,  were  there  no  external  material  on 
which  those  energies  could  act  in  such  sort  as  to  lead  to 
the  continual  inrush  of  matter  upon  the  solar  surface. 
Nor  would  it  suffice  if  such  materials,  even  in  enormous 
quantities,  existed  close  to  the  sun.  It  is  the  distance 
from  which  that  material  is  dragged  toward  the  sun  which 
gives  that  orb  the  power  of  imparting  those  tremendous 
velocities  to  which  the  collisions  of  the  meteoric  bodies 


METEORS  AND   COMETS,  219 

owe  their  real  effectiveness.  We  thus  find  in  distance,  in 
the  simple  element  of  scale,  the  true  source  of  the  various 
forms  of  force  which  are  continually  exerted  throughout 
the  solar  system.  The  sun  surrounded  by  millions  on 
millions  of  meteoric  masses  close  at  hand  would  be  power- 
less ;  but  placed  as  ruler  over  a  space  far  wider  than  the 
sphere  circled  by  Neptune's  orbit,  amid  which  space 
those  countless  millions  of  meteors  are  distributed,  he 
becomes  forthwith  the  centre  of  a  thousand  forms  of  en- 
ergy, gathered  by  him  continually  from  the  systems  of 
meteors  circling  around  him,  and  distributed  by  him 
abundantly  and  without  ceasing  to  his  dependent  worlds.* 
It  will  not  fail  to  be  noticed  by  the  thoughtful  reader 
that,  adopting  this  view  of  the  relation  in  which  meteoric 
and  cometic  systems  stand  with  respect  to  the  sun,  it  seems 
necessary  that  we  should  regard  those  planets  which  I 
have  endeavored  to  raise  to  the  dignity  of  secondary 
suns,  as  subordinate  centres  of  attraction,  around  which 
countless  thousands  of  meteoric  systems  may  be  supposed 


*  Just  as  this  work  (the  first  edition)  was  about  to  be  placed  in  the 
printer's  hands  I  received  from  Professor  Kirkwood,  of  America,  one 
of  his  valuable  contributions  to  the  history  of  the  solar  system.  In  it 
he  points  to  the  evidence  we  have  that  the  sun,  as  he  speeds  onward 
through  space,  passes  through  regions  in  which  cometic  and  meteoric 
materials  are  now  richly,  now  sparsely  strewn,  and  gathers  in  accord- 
ingly new  stores  of  force  of  greater  or  less  amount.  The  bearing  of  the 
views  of  this  acute  and  soundly  reasoning  astronomer  (the  Kepler  of 
our  day),  not  only  on  the  theories  dealt  with  in  the  above  chapter, 
but  on  those  considered  in  the  chapters  which  follow,  will  be  seen  at 
once. 


220        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

to  circle.     Have  we  any  evidence  pointing  to  such  a  con« 
elusion  ? 

Now  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  if  Jupiter,  the  nearest 
of  these  secondary  suns,  did  so  act  upon  a  passing  comet 
as  to  compel  that  body  to  circle  in  future  around  Mm, 
instead  of  pursuing  its  course  around  the  sun,  we  could 
not  in  any  way  become  cognizant  of  the  event  unless  the 
comet  were  an  exceptionally  large  one.  I  conceive,  how- 
ever, that  such  an  event,  though  undoubtedly  possible,* 
must  be  so  uncommon  that  the  number  of  cometic  sys- 
tems thus  forced  to  own  Jupiter  as  their  centre  of  attrac- 
tion must  be  relatively  few.  But  in  another  way  the 
planet  does  exhibit  his  power  as  a  comet-ruler,  making 
comets  recognize  him  as  a  sort  of  subordinate  master,  the 
sun  being  their  primary  ruler.     When  comets  coming  from 


*  It  is  necessarily  possible  in  the  case  of  any  planet,  but  must  in 
many  cases  be  highly  improbable.  For  example,  astronomers  some- 
times assert  that  meteoric  masses  passing  near  the  earth  might  become 
satellites  of  hers  ;  but  in  reality  this  is  a  very  unlikely  event,  because 
the  maximum  velocity  which  a  body  travelling  under  the  earth's  influ- 
ence can  have  (that  is,  the  velocity  acquired  by  a  body  travelling  from 
infinity  to  a  perigee  close  to  the  earth)  is  less  than  the  velocity  with 
which  a  body  circling  on  any  orbit  round  the  sun  would  move  when  at 
the  earth's  distance  from  him,  unless  its  orbit  were  very  eccentric  and 
the  aphelion  close  by  the  earth's  orbit.  Bodies  travelling  from  outer 
space  toward  the  sun  cannot  by  any  possibility  become  satellites  of  the 
earth,  because  they  would  always  have  a  velocity  greater  than  that 
which  her  attraction  can  master.  Even  in  the  rare  event  of  their 
grazing  her  atmosphere,  and  so  losing  a  large  share  of  their  velocity, 
they  could  not  become  permanent  satellites  of  hers,  because,  returning 
to  the  scene  of  encounter,  they  would  lose  yet  a  larger  share  of  their 
velocity,  and  so  must  be  brought,  and  that  soOn,  to  her  surface. 


METEORS  AND  COMETS.  221 

outer  space  pass  near  enough  to  Jupiter,  he  sways  them 
so  markedly  from  the  orbit  they  are  pursuing  that  the 
scene  of  encounter  becomes  the  aphelion  of  their  orbit, 
or  nearly  so.  Thence  they  pass  on  their  new  orbit  to 
their  perihelion,  returning  again  presently  to  the  scene 
of  their  encounter  with  Jupiter,  and  so  revolving  in  an 
orbit  having  its  aphelion  close  by  the  orbit  of  Jupiter, 
until  haply  the  giant  is  again  near  the  scene  of  encounter 
at  the  moment  when  the  comet  comes  back  to  it.  In  this 
case  a  fresh  struggle  takes  place,  the  overmastering  at- 
traction of  the  planet  necessarily  prevailing,  and  the  com- 
et being  often  dismissed  on  a  new  orbit,  whose  perihelion, 
instead  of  its  aphelion,  lies  close  by  the  orbit  of  Jupiter. 

Now  we  know  that  such  events  as  these  must  be  of  fre- 
quent occurrence  as  Jupiter  sweeps  swiftly  round  on  his 
orbit.  For  we  recognize  several  comets  which  have  evi- 
dently been  compelled  by  Jupiter  to  take  up  such  orbits 
as  I  have  spoken  of — a  family  of  comets,  in  fact,  including 
Encke's,  Faye's,  and  Brorsen's,  Winnecke's  short-period 
comet,  and  several  others.  "We  judge  further,  from  the 
laws  of  probability,  that  for  each  discovered  comet  of  this 
family  there  must  be  thousands  which  have  escaped  detec- 
tion. So  that  around  the  orbit  of  Jupiter  (if  not  around 
Jupiter  himself)  there  cling  the  aphelia  of  myriads  of 
cometic  orbits  whose  perihelia  lie  at  all  conceivable  dis- 
tances from  the  sun  less  than  the  distance  of  Jupiter. 

Saturn  also  has  his  family  of  comets ;  so  also  have 
Uranus  and  Neptune.      The  comat  associated  with  the 


223        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

November  meteors  belongs  indeed  to  the  Uranian  comet- 
family,  and  the  epoch  (126  A.D.)  has  even  been  pointed 
out  when  this  comet  may  have  fallen  under  the  dominion 
(subject  always  to  the  sun's  superior  control)  of  that  dis- 
tant planet. 

And  here  I  may  refer  to  a  view  which  I  have  long 
entertained  respecting  the  purposes  which  meteoric  and 
cometic  systems  have  fulfilled  in  the  past  history  of  the 
solar  system.*  We  know  that  the  materials  composing 
meteors,  and  we  conclude,  therefore,  that  those  composing 
comets  do  not  differ  from  those  which  constitute  the  earth 
and  sun,  and  presumably  the  planets  also.  Therefore 
under  the  continual  rain  of  meteoric  matter  it  may  be  said 
that  the  earth,  sun,  and  planets  are  growing.  Now  the 
idea  obviously  suggests  itself  that  the  whole  growth  of  the 
solar  system  from  its  primal  condition  to  its  present  state 
may  have  been  due  to  processes  resembling  those  which 
we  now  see  taking  place  within  its  bounds.  It  is  of  course 
obvious  that  if  this  be  the  case,  the  number  of  meteoric 
and  cometic  systems  must  have  been  enormously  greater 
originally  than  it  is  at  present.  Countless  millions  of 
meteoric  systems,  travelling  in  orbits  of  every  degree  of 

*  Since  the  present  chapter  was  written,  I  find  that  the  hypothesis 
here  put  forward  has  in  a  general  way  been  touched  on  by  more  than 
one  astronomer  and  physicist.  I  believe,  however,  that  here,  for  the 
first  time,  it  has  been  associated  with  the  chief  features  of  the  solar 
system.  It  was  suggested  in  note  B  (Appendix)  to  my  treatise  on  Saturn. 
But  as  a  matter  of  fact,  when  that  note  was  written,  as  also  when  those 
passages  were  published  in  which  the  same  hypothesis  is  dealt  with  by 
other  authors,  decisive  evidence  in  favor  of  the  theory  was  wanting. 


METEORS  AND  COMETS.  22& 

eccentricity  and  inclination,  travelling  also  in  all  conceiv- 
able directions  around  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  whole, 
would  go  to  the  making  up  of  each  individual  planet.  A 
marked  tendency  to  aggregate  around  one  definite  plane, 
and  to  move  in  directions  which,  referred  to  that  plane, 
corresponded  to  the  present  direction  of  planetary  motion, 
would  suffice  to  account  for  the  present  state  of  things. 
The  effect  of  multiplied  collisions  would  necessarily  be  to 
eliminate  orbits  of  exaggerated  eccentricity,  and  to  form 
systems  travelling  nearly  in  the  mean  plane  of  the  aggre- 
gate motions,  and  with  a  direct  motion.  Further,  where 
collisions  were  most  numerous,  there  would  be  found  not 
only  the  most  circular  resulting  orbits,  not  only  the  great- 
est approach  to  exact  coincidence  of  such  orbits  with  the 
mean  plane  of  the  whole  system,  but  the  bodies  formed 
out  of  the  resulting  systems  would  there  exhibit  rotations 
coinciding  most  nearly  with  the  mean  plane  of  the  entire 
system.* 

It  seems  to  me  that  not  only  has  this  general  view  of 
the  mode  in  which  our  system  has  reached  its  present  state 
a  greater  support  from  what  is  now  actually  going  on  than 
the  nebular  hypothesis  of  Laplace,  but  that  it  serves  to 
account  in  a  far  more  satisfactory  manner  for  the  principal 


*  This  conclusion  depends  on  a  well-known  law  of  probability.  It 
may  be  thus  illustrated:  If  we  have  in  a  bag  a  million  white  and  a 
million  black  balls,  and  takeout  at  random  a  number  of  balls,  then  the 
larger  that  number,  the  more  nearly  (in  all  probability)  will  the  number 
of  black  and  white  balls  included  in  it  approach  to  a  ratio  of  equality. 


224        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

peculiarities  of  the  solar  system.  I  might  indeed  go 
further  and  say  that  where  these  peculiarities  seem  to 
oppose  themselves  to  Laplace's  theory,  they  give  support 
to  that  which  I  have  put  forward.* 

For  example,  what  is  there  in  the  nebular  hypothesis 
which  affords  even  a  general  explanation  of  the  strange 
varieties  of  size  observed  in  the  planetary  system  ?  How 
can  that  hypothesis  be  reconciled  with  the  remarkable 
variations  of  inclination  observed  among  the  planets,  or 
with  the  retrograde  and  almost  perpendicular  motion  of 
the  satellites  of  Uranus  ?  Nor,  again,  is  the  hypothesis 
consistent  with  the  observed  peculiarities  of  motion  of 
those  meteoric  systems  which  we  must  now  regard  a& 
regular  members  of  the  solar  system. 

Now,  according  to  the  hypothesis  I  have  put  forward 
above,  a  general  explanation  of  all  these  matters  is  at 
once  suggested.     Let  us  consider  : 

In  the  neighborhood  of  the  great  central  aggregation 
which  would  undoubtedly  result  from  the  motions  of 
such  meteoric  systems  as  I  have  considered,  all  the  mo- 
tions would  be  very  rapid.  They  would,  in  fact,  resemble 
the  motions  now  actually  observed  in  the  sun's  neighbor- 


*  It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  remark  that  as  regards  at  least  the  larger 
members  of  the  solar  system — including  the  four  primary  planets  with- 
in the  zone  of  asteroids— the  nebulous  condition  inferred  by  Laplace 
would  necessarily  result  from  the  processes  above  suggested ;  so  that,  in 
a  sense,  the  above  account  may  be  supposed  to  describe  a  state  of  things 
antecedent  to  the  nebulous  condition  of  the  planets  and  sun,  as  con- 
ceived by  Laplace.     See  also  note  B  to  my  treatise  on  Saturn. 


METEORS  AND  COMETS.  225 

hood.  Here,  therefore,  subordinate  aggregations  would 
form  with  difficulty,  since  they  would  have  small  power 
of  overruling  meteoric  systems  rushing  with  so  great  a 
velocity  past  them.  In  the  sun's  immediate  neighbor- 
hood, then,  we  should  expect  to  find  relatively  small 
planets;  and  we  do  accordingly  find  that  Mercury,  near- 
est to  him,  is  the  smallest  of  the  planets,  Yenus  larger, 
and  the  earth  (yet  further  away)  not  only  larger  than 
VenuSj  but  adorned  with  an  attendant  satellite. 

Now,  at  a  much  greater  distance  from  the  sun  the 
meteoric  motions  would  be  so  much  less  than  here,  sup- 
posing only  a  suitable  mean  density  of  aggregation,  it 
would  be  possible  for  much  larger  subordinate  centres  of 
aggregation  to  form.  These  centres  would  increase  in 
importance  as  they  swept  round  the  central  aggregation, 
continually  gathering  fresh  recruits.  Indeed,  though,  as 
now,  they  would  not  be  able  to  prevent  the  major  part  of 
the  materials  rushing  from  outer  space  toward  the  sun 
from  aggregating  round  him,  they  would  still  gather  in  no 
inconsiderable  portion  of  those  materials.  Where  the 
largest  portion  would  be  gathered  would  depend  on  the 
way  in  which  (taking  a  general  view  of  the  system)  the 
quantity  of  material  increased  toward  the  neighborhood 
of  the  centre.  For  clearly,  while  distance  from  the  sun' 
would  increase  the  facility  with  which  materials  would  be 
gathered  in — since  the  sun's  influence  would  diminish 
with  distance  it  would  also  affect  the  quantity  of  material 

available — since,  from  a  very  early  period,  the  system 
15 


226  OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

must  have  begun  to  show  an  appearance  resembling  that 
now  presented  by  the  zodiacal  light — that  is,  a  general  in- 
crease of  density  toward  the  centre. 

Assuming  that  the  region  of  maximum  aggregation  was 
that  where  the  influence  of  the  ruling  centre  first  became 
so  far  diminished  with  distance  as  to  render  the  for- 
mation of  a  great  subordinate  aggregation  possible,  we 
should  have  the  innermost  of  the  outer  series  of  planets 
also  the  most  bulky ;  and  next  within  the  orbit  of  that 
giant  planet  we  should  find  a  relatively  barren  space, 
cleared  of  material  not  only  by  the  sun's  still  powerful 
influence,  but  also  by  the  influence  of  this  first  important 
subordinate  aggregation.  The  initial  assumption  is,  in 
itself,  at  least  not  improbable,  and  having  once  admitted 
it,  we  find  an  explanation  of  the  giant  mass  of  Jupiter,  of 
the  comparative  poverty  of  material  just  within  the  orbit 
of  Jupiter,  and  hence  of  the  condition  of  the  asteroidal 
zone,  and  of  the  smallness  of  the  planet  Mars  next  within 
that  zone — though  this  planet  far  outweighs  (according  to 
Leverrier's  estimate)  the  united  mass  of  all  the  asteroids. 
Beyond  the  orbit  of  Jupiter,  we  should  expect  (after  pass- 
ing an  enormously  wide  space,  bare  of  worlds)  to  find 
still  a  great  abundance  of  material,  and  an  even  greater 
facility  in  the  aggregation  of  that  material.  Thus  the  ex- 
istence of  the  planet  Saturn,  next  in  importance  to  Jupi- 
ter, and  surpassing  him  in  the  complexity  of  his  attend- 
ant system,  is  accounted  for ;  yet  further  away,  we  look  for 
and  find  still  an  abundance  of  material,  and  that  materia* 


METEORS  AND   COMETS.  227 

somewhat  more  uniformly  strewn,  while  the  sun's  small 
influence  is  indicated  by  the  existence  of  satellites,  of 
which  doubtless  many  more  will  one  day  be  discovered  by 
astronomers. 

As  to  the  rotations  of  the  various  members  of  the  solar 
system  we  find  some  account,  necessarily  not  exact,  given 
by  this  theory.  I  have  mentioned  above  the  results  to  be 
looked  for;  those  observed  are  closely  accordant  with 
that  view.  Thus  the  sun,  the  largest  member  of  the  sys- 
tem, and  specially  pre-eminent  within  its  inner  division, 
has  its  equator  inclined  but  about  7°  to  the  mean  plane 
of  the  system.  Mars,  the  least  member  of  this  system, 
has  an  inclination  of  no  less  than  28°;  the  larger  earth  an 
inclination  of  but  23°.  The  inclination  of  Venus  and 
Mercury  are  undetermined ;  they  may  be  expected  to  be 
large,  not  merely  on  account  of  the  smallness  of  these 
bodies,  but  on  account  of  their  proximity  to  the  sun.  Of 
the  outer  division  of  the  system,  Jupiter,  the  largest,  has 
an  inclination  of  little  more  than  3°;  Saturn  has  a  very 
considerable  inclination  (more  than  26°) ;  Uranus  has  an 
inclination  which  may  be  described  as  actually  greate* 
than  90°,  since  he  rotates  backward  with  his  equator  in- 
clined 76°  to  the  ecliptic.  And  lastly,  if  the  observations 
hitherto  made  on  Neptune's  satellites  are  to  be  trusted, 
this  planet  probably  rotates  in  a  retrograde  manner,  his 
equator  being  inclined  some  26°  to  the  horizon,  so  that, 
to  render  the  comparison  between  his  rotation  and  that 
of  the  other  members  of  the  solar  system  complete,  he 


228        OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

may  be  said  to  rotate  in  a  direct  manner  with  his  equator 
inclined  some  154°  to  the  ecliptic. 

The  great  inclination  and  eccentricity  of  many  of  the 
asteroidal  orbits  is  also  accounted  for  more  satisfactorily 
by  this  theory  than  by  the  nebular  hypothesis.  There  is 
perhaps  no  absolute  incorrectness  in  the  assertion  that 
the  smallness  of  the  asteroids  explains  (on  the  ordinary 
view  of  their  origin)  the  relatively  irregular  nature  of 
their  motions.  Their  minuteness  doubtless  brings  them 
(when  long  intervals  of  time  are  considered)  more  under 
the  disturbing  influence  of  Jupiter  than  a  single  massive 
planet  at  the  same  distance  from  the  sun  would   be.* 


*  The  most  eminent  astronomer  of  our  day  indicated  in  a  private 
communication  an  objection  to  this  sentence  (originally  written  without 
the  parenthetical  passage),  founded  on  the  fact  that  the  disturbance  by 
Jupiter  of  a  single  planet  as  large  as  the  earth  (or  even  Neptune)  trav- 
elling on  the  orbit  of  one  of  the  asteroids,  would  be  precisely  the  same 
as  the  disturbance  of  the  asteroid,  or  even  of  a  much  minuter  body — as 
a  meteor  or  a  peppercorn.  This  is  just ;  but  the  contrary  was  not 
meant  to  be  implied  by  the  above  sentence  as  it  originally  stood.  It 
was  to  the  influence  of  Jupiter  in  long  cyclic  periods,  during  which  the 
reflex  actions  due  to  the  changes  in  Jupiter's  own  orbit  through  the  ac- 
tion of  the  perturbed  body  came  into  play,  that  I  referred.  In  the  case 
of  two  planets  of  nearly  equal  mass — or  of  masses  comparable  in  magni- 
tude— there  is  an  interchange  of  eccentricities  and  inclinations,  and 
these  can  never  become  very  large  for  either  planet.  It  is  different, 
however,  when  one  of  the  bodies  is  exceedingly  minute,  for  then  the 
orbit  of  the  larger  changes  so  slowly  that  perturbing  effects  are  renewed 
again  and  again,  during  a  very  long  cycle,  so  that  before  the  reverse 
processes  begin  to  act  a  very  considerable  eccentricity  or  a  very  consid- 
erable inclination  may  be  given  to  the  smaller  body.  That  this  is  so  ig 
shown  by  the  much  wider  range  within  which  the  eccentricities  and  in- 
clinations of  the  smaller  planets  of  the  solar  system  are  known  to  oscil- 
late in  long  intervals  of  time. 


METEORS  AND  COMETS.  229 

But  the  attraction  of  Jupiter  can  scarcely  have  been  suf- 
ficient to  cause  the  asteriods  to  depart  so  widely  as  they 
do  from  the  ecliptic,  since  his  path  lies  quite  close 
to  the  ecliptic,  and  even  nearer  to  the  mean  plane  of 
the  solar  system.  Bodies  formed  as  the  asteroids  are 
supposed  to  have  been,  according  to  the  hypothesis  I 
have  suggested,  would  necessarily  exhibit  a  much  greater 
variety  of  motion  than  would  be  recognized  in  the  case  of 
the  larger  planets. 

Another  point  in  which,  as  I  conceive,  my  hypothesis 
is  more  satisfactory  than  the  nebular  one  consists  in  the 
fact  that  it  suggests  an  explanation  of  the  peculiarities 
observed  in  the  planetary  periods.  Professor  Kirkwood's 
researches  into  the  various  relations  of  commensurability 
presented  among  the  periods  of  planets  and  satellites, 
and  the  known  effects  of  commensurability  in  encourag- 
ing the  accumulation  of  planetary  perturbations,  will  at 
once  suggest  to  the  mathematical  reader  the  way  in  which 
a  system  forming  in  such  a  manner  as  I  have  imagined 
might  be  expected  to  exhibit  the  presence  of  law  as 
regards  distances  and  periods.  There  is  nothing  in  the 
nebular  hypothesis  which  encourages  the  belief  that  a 
system  framed  as  Laplace  conceived  the  solar  system 
to  be,  would  exhibit  any  such  laws  as  are  found  vithin 
the  planetary  scheme. 

The  hypothesis  I  have  put  forward  also  gets  rid  of 
what  has  always  seemed  to  me  the  great  difficulty  of 
the  nebular  hypothesis.     According  to  the  views  of  La- 


230        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

place,  Neptune  must  have  been  formed  millions  of  ages 
before  Uranus,  Uranus  as  long  before  Saturn,  Saturn  as 
long  before  Jupiter,  and  so  on.  Now  we  know  that  the 
appearance  of  those  primary  members  of  the  solar  system 
which  we  are  best  able  to  stud}?-  does  not  indicate  any 
such  enormous  disproportion  in  the  ages  of  the  planets, 
even  if  it  does  not  indicate  that  the  planets  were  formed 
nearly  at  the  same  era.  According  to  my  hypothesis,  the 
various  processes  of  aggregation  would  go  on  simultane- 
ously (just  as  the  influences  which  Jupiter  now  exerts 
on  comets  act  simultaneously  with  the  more  powerful  in- 
fluences exerted  by  the  sun) ;  and  though  the  various 
orbs  formed  by  those  processes  would  not  necessarily  be 
completed  simultaneously,  there  would  be  no  such  enor- 
mous disproportion  in  their  age  as  is  necessary  according 
to  the  theory  of  Laplace. 

Yet  another  strong  point  in  favor  of  this  hypothesis 
resides  in  the  circumstance  that  we  now  have  every  reason 
to  believe,  that  all  the  planets  are  constituted  of  the 
same  elements.  "When  it  was  thought  that  Jupiter  might 
be  a  watery  globe,  for  instance,  there  was  some  evi- 
dence in  favor  of  Laplace's  theory.  But  we  now  know 
that  Jupiter  is  not  constituted  differently,  in  all  proba- 
bility, from  the  earth  and  sun,  as  according  to  Laplace's 
theory  he  must  have  been.  Since,  then,  we  know  that 
meteors  contain  the  same  elements  which  exist  in  the 
constitution  of  sun  and  planets,  we  have  here  a  very 
strong   argument   in   favor   of   the  view  that  they  have 


METEORS  AND  COMETS.  231 

played  the  important  part  I  have  assigned  to  them  in  the 
formation  of  the  solar  system. 

But  after  all,  the  strongest  evidence  in  favor  of  the 
hypothesis  I  have  suggested  consists  in  the  fact  that  the 
processes  by  means  of  which  I  conceive  the  solar  system 
to  have  been  formed  are  undoubtedly  going  on  before 
our  eyes.  There  may  be  little,"  indeed,  in  the  downfall  of 
meteoric  showers  to  suggest  the  idea  of  world-formation 
or  sun-formation;  little  in  the  present  aspect  of  the 
zodiacal  light  or  of  the  solar  corona  to  present  to  the 
mind's  eye  a  picture  of  that  vaster  agglomeration  of  me- 
teoric and  cometic  systems,  all  speeding  with  inconceiva- 
ble velocities  on  their  interlacing  orbits,  which  I  imagine 
to  have  been  the  embryon  of  the  solar  scheme.  But  sun 
and  planets  are  growing,  however  slowly,  as  the  meteoric 
hail  falls  continuously  upon  them  ;  the  zodiacal  light  and 
the  solar  corona  are  doubtless  due  to  the  existence  of  me- 
teoric systems,  resembling  (however  relatively  insignifi- 
cant) those  which  I  have  pictured  as  the  materials  of  the 
planetary  scheme.  In  the  Saturnian  rings,  also,  which 
have  been  proved  by  the  researches  of  Maxwell  and  others 
to  consist  of  multitudes  of  discrete  bodies,  we  have  evidence 
of  the  same  sort  in  the  case  of  a  subordinate  centre  of  ag- 
gregation. So  that  we  have  a  form  of  evidence,  which  was 
wanting  in  the  case  of  the  nebular  hypothesis,  in  favor  of 
this  other  hypothesis,  by  which,  as  in  Laplace's,  the  pres- 
ent state  of  the  solar  system  is  regarded  as  the  result  of 
a  process  of  development,  and  not  of  special  creative  fiats. 


£32  OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OVS& 


CHAPTEE  X. 

OTHER  SUNS  THAN  OURS. 

We  are  now  to  venture  into  regions  where  we  shall  no 
longer  have  clear  lights  to  guide  us.  Tremendous  as  are 
the  dimensions  of  the  solar  system,  the  widest  sweep  of 
the  planetary  orbits  sinks  into  insignificance  compared 
with  the  distances  which  separate  from  us  even  the  near- 
est of  the  fixed  stars.  From  beyond  depths  which  the 
human  mind  is  utterly  unable  to  conceive  there  come  to 
us  the  rays  of  light  which  myriads  of  those  orbs  are  pour- 
ing forth,  and  it  is  from  the  lessons  taught  us  by  these 
light-rays  that  we  are  to  form  our  ideas  concerning  the 
nature  of  the  orbs  which  emit  them.  Yery  carefully 
and  cautiously  must  we  proceed,  if  we  would  avoid  being 
led  into  vain  imaginings.  It  will  but  mislead  us  to  pass 
a  single  step  beyond  the  path  which  is  dimly  lighted  for 
us,  and  yet  that  path  is  so  narrow  and  so  obstructed  with 
difficulties  that  we  find  ourselves  continually  tempted 
to  leave  it,  and  to  venture  forward  on  the  alluring  and 
easy  paths  which  speculation  opens  out  on  every  hand 
around  us. 

And  yet  we  may  well  remain  content  to  listen  only  to 
the  teachings  of  known  facts.     Even  so  restraining  our- 


OTHER  8UNS  THAN  OURS.  233 

selves,  we  have  in  reality  a  wide  and  noble  domain  to  ex- 
plore. Facts  which  seem  severally  unimportant,  are  found, 
when  considered  as  parts  of  a  grand  whole,  to  indicate  re- 
lations so  impressive  and  so  interesting  that  the  revela- 
tions of  the  telescope  within  the  solar  system  are  apt  to 
seem  commonplace  beside  them.  "We  have,  in  fact,  no 
longer  to  consider  the  structure  of  a  system — the  archi- 
tecture of  the  universe  is  our  theme. 

Let  us  examine  carefully  the  evidence  which  science 
has  gathered  together  for  us,  endeavoring  at  each  step  to 
gain  the  full  amount  of  knowledge  the  several  facts  in- 
volve, while  at  the  same  time  cautiously  refraining  from 
any  attempt  to  overstep  the  bounds  indicated  by  our  evi- 
dence. 

In  the  first  place  let  us  consider  what  may  be  learned 
from  the  analogy  of  the  solar  system.  The  study  is  an  in- 
viting one,  since  the  discoveries  on  which  we  are  to  found 
our  views  have  been  made  so  recently  that  the  subject 
has  all  the  charm  of  novelty  and  freshness,  while  it  in- 
volves the  consideration  of  the  soundest  and  most  instruc- 
tive mode  of  pursuing  our  researches. 

"We  have  seen  in  the  solar  system  a  variety  and  com- 
plexity of  structure,  such  as,  half  a  century  ago,  few  as- 
tronomers would  have  thought  of  ascribing  to  it.  Wrhen 
Sir  William  Herschel  began  that  noble  series  of  researches 
amid  the  sidereal  depths  by  which  his  name  has  been 
rendered  illustrious,  he  saw  in  the  solar  system  a  scheme 
very  different  indeed  from  that  which  is  presented  to  our 


284        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

contemplation.  He  beheld  a  vast  central  body,  surround- 
ed by  a  limited  number  of  orbs,  some  of  which  are  the 
centres  of  subordinate  schemes  of  greater  or  less  extent. 
When  we  have  added  the  ring  of  Saturn  as  the  only  for- 
mation differing  from  planets  and  satellites  in  character, 
and  the  comets,  few  and  far  between,  which  seemed  rather 
accidental  tributaries  of  the  sun  than  regular  members  of 
his  family,  we  have  considered  all  the  features  which  the 
solar  system,  as  known  in  Sir  William  Herschel's  day, 
presented  to  the  contemplation  of  astronomers. 

With  us  it  is  very  different.  We  see  that  there  exists 
within  the  solar  system  a  variety  of  size  and  structure,  of 
motion,  arrangement,  and  aggregation,  which  is  already 
inconceivable,  and  yet  doubtless  but  faintly  shadows 
forth  the  real  complexity  and  richness  of  the  scheme 
swayed  by  our  sua.  Perhaps  it  is  in  considering  the  so- 
lar system  in  the  particular  light  in  which,  in  this  treatise, 
I  have  had  occasion  to  present  it,  that  this  wonderful  va- 
riety of  conformation  is  made  most  strikingly  apparent. 
But,  apart  from  all  speculative  theories,  there  can  be  no 
doubt  that  the  solar  system  presents  to  us  a  subject  of 
study  amazing  in  itself,  but  most  amazing  when  we  re- 
gard it  as  supplying  the  analogies  which  are  to  guide  us 
in  forming  our  views  respecting  the  sidereal  system.  Be- 
sides the  family  of  planets  circling  round  the  sun,  besides 
the  system  of  dependent  orbs  which  circle  round  the  plan- 
ets, we  see  a  zone  in  which  independent  planets  circle  by 
hundreds,  perhaps  even  by  myriads3  around  the  solar  orb ; 


OTHER  SUNS  THAN  OURS.  235 

we  see  the  ring  of  Saturn  composed  of  thousands  of  tiny 
bodies  ;  we  see  the  meteoric  systems  in  countless  hosts  ; 
we  see  the  comets  of  our  scheme  in  millions  on  millions ; 
and  less  certainly,  but  still  not  indistinctly,  we  recognize 
the  existence  of  a  multitude  of  new  and  hitherto  unsus- 
pected forms  of  matter  within  the  circle  of  our  sun's  at- 
traction. 

What  opinion  then  are  we  to  form — even  here,  at  the 
Very  outset  of  our  inquiry — respecting  the  sidereal  scheme 
of  which  our  sun  forms  but  a  unit  ?  Surely  it  would  be 
to  lose  sight  of  the  significant  lesson  taught  us  by  the  so- 
lar system,  it  would  be  to  forget  how  sure  and  safe  a 
guide  the  greatest  of  modern  astronomers  found  in  the 
teachings  of  analogy,  to  adopt  the  same  view  now  which 
that  great  astronomer  adopted  a  century  ago.  If,  viewing 
the  solar  system  as  consisting  of  discrete  orbs,  compara- 
ble one  with  another  in  size,  and  distributed  with  a  cer- 
tain uniformity  around  their  ruling  centre,  Sir  William 
Herschel  held  that  the  sidereal  scheme  presented  some- 
what similar  relations,  surely  we,  who  know  certainly  that 
the  solar  system  is  constituted  so  differently,  must  adopt 
a  far  different  view  of  the  sidereal  system  also. 

Let  us  remember  that  there  is  here — so  far  as  our  re- 
spect and  admiration  for  Sir  William  Herschel  are  con- 
cerned— a  choice  between  two  courses.  Assuming,  as  in- 
deed is  just,  that  the  views  of  our  great  men  are  not  rash- 
ly to  be  thrown  on  one  side,  we  have  to  choose  whether 
we  would  rather  abandon  the  views  which  Sir  William 


236        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

Herschel  formed  about  facts,  or  the  views  which  he 
formed  about  principles.  If  we  accept  his  opinion  (or 
rather,  after  all,  his  mere  suggestion),  that  the  stars  are 
tolerably  uniform  in  magnitude  and  distribution,  we  must 
abandon  the  analogy  of  the  solar  system.  If,  on  the  con- 
trary, we  accept  Sir  William  Herschel's  often-expressed 
opinion  that,  in  theorizing  about  the  unknown,  there  can 
be  no  safer  guide  than  the  analogy  of  known  facts,  we 
must  abandon  the  view  (which  seemed  to  him  but  prob- 
able) that  the  stars  are  distributed  with  tolerable  uniform- 
ity throughout  our  galaxy,  and  are  comparable  inter  se  in 
magnitude  and  splendor. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  which  course  is  preferable.  We 
know  certainly  that  Sir  William  Herschel  was  often  mis- 
taken, as  all  men  must  be,  in  matters  of  fact ;  while  we 
know  with  equal  certainty  that  he  owed  the  marvellous 
success  with  which  he  theorized  to  his  adoption  of  the 
principle  that  analogy  is  the  chief  and  the  best  guide  for 
the  student  of  astronomy. 

We  are  compelled,  then,  in  our  very  respect  and  ad- 
miration for  the  greatest  astronomer  of  modern  times,  to 
regard  the  constitution  of  the  sidereal  system  as,  in  all 
probability,  very  different  from  what  he  imagined.  We 
must  be  prepared  to  expect  an  infinite  variety  of  figure,  of 
structure,  of  motion,  and  of  aggregation  throughout  the 
galactic  scheme.  If  some  orbs  within  that  scheme  seem 
probably  to  be  suns  like  our  own,  we  must  not  be  surprised 
to  find  others  which  are  probably  far  larger  or  far  smaller. 


OTHER  SUNS  THAN  OURS.  237 

We  may  look  for  objects  differing  as  much  from  the  suns 
of  the  sidereal  system  as  the  asteroidal  zone  differs  from 
Saturn  or  from  Jupiter.  So  that,  if  we  should  recognize 
evidence  of  the  existence  of  clusters  of  minute  stars — a 
whole  cluster,  perhaps,  not  equalling  in  real  importance 
the  least  of  the  suns  of  the  system — we  may  accept  that 
evidence  without  any  scruple  suggested  by  the  improba- 
bility of  the  conclusion  to  which  it  points.  Again,  we 
may  expect  to  find  schemes  within  the  sidereal  system, 
differing  as  much  from  discrete  stars  or  star-clusters  as 
the  rings  of  Saturn  differ  from  the  primary  planets  or 
from  the  asteroidal  zone.  So  that,  if  we  should  recognize 
evidence  of  the  existence  of  relatively  minute  clusters, 
whose  components  are  either  so  small  or  so  closely  aggre- 
gated as  not  to  be  separately  visible  even  in  our  most 
powerful  telescopes,  this  evidence  may  fairly  be  accepted 
as  accordant  with  the  only  analogy  we  have  for  our  guid- 
ance. Yet  once  more  :  we  may  look  for  systems  differing 
as  much  from  all  ordinary  star-clusters  as  the  eccentric 
and  far-reaching  meteor  systems  differ  from  the  symmetri- 
cal rings  of  Saturn.  So  that,  if  we  should  find  evidence 
of  strange  schemes  within  the  sidereal  system,  schemes 
presenting  strange  varieties  of  figure,  with  strange  com- 
plexities of  spiral  whorls  or  outlying  branches,  losing 
themselves,  as  it  were,  in  the  depths  toward  which  they 
seem  to  extend — this  also  need  not  surprise  us  :  we  need 
not  conclude  that  here,  at  any  rate,  we  are  looking  beyond 
the  bounds  of    the  sidereal   system,  and  gazing  upon 


238        OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

external  galaxies ;  for  the  analogy  we  have  chosen  foi 
our  guidance  teaches  us  that  such  structures  were  to  be 
expected  within  the  scheme  of  which  our  sun  is  a  com- 
ponent. And  finally,  if  we  should  find  reason  to  assure 
ourselves  that  there  are  objects  in  the  depths  of  space 
whose  very  substance  and  constitution  are  different  from 
those  of  all  other  objects  within  the  sidereal  system,  we 
need  by  no  means  believe  that  the  objects  thus  singularly 
constituted  belong  to  or  form  external  systems.  For  the 
millions  on  millions  of  comets  which  form  part  and  parcel 
of  the  solar  system  present  a  precisely  analogous  differ- 
ence of  structure,  as  compared  with  the  other  members  of 
that  system. 

Having  thus  replaced  the  erroneous  analogies  to  which 
■ — through  no  fault  of  his  own — Sir  "William  Herschel  was 
led  to  look  for  guidance,  by  the  more  trustworthy  analo- 
gies which  the  recent  progress  of  astronomy  has  afforded 
for  our  instruction,  we  may  proceed  to  consider  the  direct 
evidence  we  have  respecting  the  constitution  of  our  galaxy. 

In  the  first  place,  let  us  examine  the  evidence  pointing 
to  the  dimensions  of  the  sidereal  system. 

That  the  nearest  members  of  the  system  lie  at  enormous 
distances  from  us  is  proved  by  the  fact  that,  as  the  earth 
sweeps  on  her  vast  orbit  round  the  sun,  no  appreciable 
change  is  observed  in  the  configuration  of  the  star-groups. 
That  a  circle  having  a  diameter  of  more  than  185,000,000 
of  miles  should  be  swept  out  year  by  year  as  the  earth 
traverses  her  orbit,  and  yet  that  the  surrounding  stars 


OTHER  SUNS  THAN  OURS.  239 

should  exhibit  no  change  of  place,  is  at  once  the  most 
striking  and  the  simplest  evidence  we  have  of  the  enor- 
mous scale  on  which  the  sidereal  system  is  constructed. 
And  yet  this  first  obvious  fact  sinks  almost  into  insig- 
nificance when  we  regard  thoughtfully  the  teaching  of 
modern  instrumental  astronomy.  There  might  be  a  real 
shifting  of  apparent  position  which  yet  the  unaided  eye 
would  fail  to  detect,  and  such  a  change  would  indicate 
distances  so  enormous  that  the  mind  fails  altogether  to 
conceive  their  real  significance.  But  the  exact  instru- 
ments of  modern  times  would  exhibit  a  change  of  place 
far  more  minute  than  any  which  the  unaided  eye  could 
recognize.  If  a  star  shifted  by  so  much  as  the  ten- 
thousandth  part  of  the  moon's  apparent  diameter,  modern 
astronomers  could  assure  themselves  of  the  change  of 
place.  And  when  we  remember  that  in  precisely  the 
same  proportion  that  we  increase  the  exactitude  of  instru- 
mental observation  we  increase  also  the  significance  of 
the  stars'  apparent  fixity  of  position,  it  will  be  seen  at 
once  how  astounding  is  the  lesson  conveyed  by  the  fact 
that  all  but  a  very  few  indeed  of  the  stars  remain  abso- 
lutely unaffected — even  under  the  most  powerful  instru- 
mental examination — by  the  enormous  range  of  the  earth's 
orbital  motion. 

We  can  roughly  estimate  the  distance  of  the  few  stars 
which  are  thus  affected,  and  thence — on  the  hypothesis 
that  the  intrinsic  brilliancy  of  their  light  is  the  same  as 
the  sun's  —we  may  form  some  idea  of  their  dimensions. 


24:0        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

I  shall,  however,  only  apply  this  process,  in  detail,  to  a 
single  case,  because  my  present  object  is  rather  to  indi- 
cate in  a  general  way  the  scale  on  which  the  sidereal 
system  is  constructed  than  to  enter  at  length  on  the  more 
exact  details  which  find  their  place  in  ordinary  treatises  on 
astronomy. 

The  star  Alpha  Centauri  is  one  of  the  brightest  in  the 
heavens,  Sirius  and  Canopus  alone  surpassing  it  in 
splendor.  But  it  was  not  its  exceptional  brilliancy  alone 
which  led  astronomers  to  regard  it  as  likely  to  afford 
evidence  of  an  apparent  change  of  place  corresponding  to 
the  earth's  real  change  of  place  as  she  sweeps  round  her 
orbit.  Of  course,  the  brightest  stars  are  presumably  the 
nearest ;  but  there  is  another  indication  of  proximity  at 
least  equally  important.  The  so-called  fixed  stars  are  in 
reality  slowly  moving  onward  on  definite  courses — slowly, 
that  is,  in  appearance,  though  in  reality  their  motions  are 
doubtless  inconceivably  rapid.  Now  these  motions,  the 
proper  motions  of  the  stars,  as  they  are  called,  are  as  yet 
very  little  understood.  We  know  only  that  the  whole  of 
the  galactic  system  is  astir  with  life,  but  whither  the  orbs 
are  severally  tending  we  are  not  yet  able  to  say.  Nor  do 
we  know  what  portion  of  the  stellar  motions  may  be  due 
to  the  undoubted  proper  motion  of  our  own  sun  through 
space. 

This,  however,  may  be  regarded  as  certain,  that  until 
we  know  something  respecting  the  laws  which  regulate 
the  stellar  movements  we  must  regard  the  magnitude  of  a 


OTHER  SUNS  TBAN  OURS.  241 

star's  motion  as  probably  an  indication  of  relative  prox- 
imity. Precisely  as  a  man  walking  at  a  great  distance 
from  us  appears  to  move  much  more  slowly  than  one 
who  is  walking  at  the  same  rate  close  by,  so  the  apparent 
rate  of  a  star's  motion  is  diminished  in  proportion  to  the 
star's  distance  from  us.  When,  therefore,  it  was  found 
that  the  star  Alpha  Centauri  is  moving  more  rapidly  than 
other  stars,  this  fact,  combined  with  the  great  lustre  of 
the  star,  led  astronomers  to  suspect  that  it  must  be  com- 
paratively near  to  us. 

Observations  made  to  determine  whether  the  star 
shows  any  sign  of  an  annual  change  of  place  correspond- 
ing to  the  earth's  annual  orbital  motion,  were  rewarded 
by  the  detection  of  a  very  appreciable  displacement.  In 
fact,  owing  to  the  motion  of  the  earth,  each  year,  in  a 
nearly  circular  orbit  185,000,000  miles  in  diameter,  the 
star  Alpha  Centauri  appears  to  trace  out  each  year  a  mi- 
nute oval  path  on  the  celestial  sphere,  the  greater  axis  of 
the  oval  being  equal  in  length  to  about  T^th  part  of  the 
moon's  apparent  diameter.* 

It  follows  from  this  that  in  round  numbers  the  dis- 
tance of  Alpha  Centauri  from  us  is  about  twenty  millions 
of  millions  of  miles.  The  distance  of  the  earth  from  the 
sun  shrinks  into  insignificance  beside  this  enormous  gap. 

*  It  hardly  need  be  mentioned,  perhaps,  that  this  motion  being  su- 
peradded to  the  star's  more  considerable  proper  motion,  the  path  which 
the  star  seems  really  to  follow  is  a  looped  one,  the  size  of  each  loop  be- 
ing small  in  comparison  with  the  distance  between  successive  loops. 
16 


242        OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

Even  Neptune,  though  circling  round  the  sun  at  a  dis- 
tance thirty  times  vaster  than  that  which  separates  us 
from  that  luminary,  is  yet  relatively  so  much  nearer  than 
Alpha  Centauri,  that  a  sun  filling  the  whole  orbit  of  Nep- 
tune would  appear,  as  seen  from  that  star,  but  about 
•g-J-^th  as  large  as  the  sun  appears  to  us. 

Now  let  us  consider  what  dimensions  we  may  assign  to 
Alpha  Centauri,  on  the  assumption  that  the  surface  of 
this  star  emits  a  light  as  brilliant  as  that  which  proceeds 
from  the  photosphere  of  our  own  sun.  We  must  not  neg- 
lect the  consideration  that  the  star  is  double — the  com- 
panion emitting  perhaps  about  one-sixth  as  much  light  as 
the  primary.*  The  distance  of  Alpha  Centauri  is  equal 
to  about  230,000  times  that  which  separates  us  from  the 
sun.  Therefore,  if  removed  to  the  star's  distance,  the  sun 
would  shine  with  only  3-2-g~oTroTro"oo"oth  part  of  his  present 
brilliancy.  Now,  according  to  the  most  careful  estimates 
of  the  brilliancy  of  Alpha  Centauri,  the  light  we  receive 
from  that  star  is  about  TpxoooTnroTrth  of  that  we  receive 
from  the  sun.f     It  follows,  therefore,  that  the  star  emits 

*  In  the  first  edition  of  this  work  the  smaller  star  was  described  as 
emitting  about  one- sixteenth  as  much  light  as  the  primary;  and  in  a 
note  I  remarked  that  Sir  John  Herschel,  observing  the  star  with  his  20- 
foot  reflector,  thought  the  secondary  brighter  than  it  is  usually  consid- 
ered, but  that,  for  a  comparison  of  this  sort,  smaller  telescopes  seemed 
to  me  likely  to  be  on  the  whole  more  trustworthy.  He  convinced  me 
that  my  opinion  as  to  the  brightness  of  the  secondary  was  erroneous. 
Hence  the  change  in  the  estimate. 

•f-  This  estimate  is  founded  on  Sir  John  Herschel's  comparison  between 
the  light  of  the  star  and  that  of  the  full  moon,  and  Zollner's  compari- 
son between  the  light  of  the  full  moon  and  that  of  the  sun. 


OTHER  SUNS  THAN  OURS.  243 

about  three  times  as  much  light  as  the  sun ;  and  there- 
fore, so  far  as  the  emission  of  light  is  a  criterion  of  size, 
the  star  may  be  regarded  as  considerably  larger  than  our 
own  sun.  In  fact,  reducing  the  total  light  of  the  pair  by 
one-seventh,  we  find  that  the  primary  must  still  emit 
nearly  three  times  as  much  light  as  the  sun,  and  there- 
fore the  diameter  of  the  star,  as  thus  estimated,  would 
appear  to  exceed  our  sun's  in  the  proportion  of  about  8 
to  5. 

We  have  here,  then,  clear  and  decisive  evidence  in  favor 
of  the  view  that  among  the  fixed  stars  there  are  orbs 
which  may  be  regarded  as  veritable  suns  worthy  to  be 
the  ruling  centres  of  schemes  as  noble  as  the  solar  sys- 
tem. For  we  know  quite  certainly  that  the  greater  num- 
ber of  the  first-magnitude  stars  are  very  much  further 
from  us  than  Alpha  Centauri,  with  which,  however,  they 
are  fairly  comparable  in  brilliancy  ;  so  that  they  may  be 
regarded  as  for  the  most  part  at  least  equal  to  that  star 
in  size  and  mass.  Sirius  and  Canopus,  indeed,  must  far 
surpass  Alpha  Centauri.  The  latter,  though  more  than 
thrice  as  bright,  exhibits  no  appreciable  change  of  posi- 
tion as  the  earth  circles  round  the  sun.  Sirius,  which  is 
more  than  four  times  as  bright  as  Alpha  Centauri,  shows 
an  annual  change  of  position  which  certainly  does  not 
exceed  one-fourth  of  that  star's.  It  is  therefore  four 
times  further  from  us  than  Alpha  Centauri,  and,  did  it 
emit  no  greater  amount  of  light,  would  appear  to  shine 
with  but  one-sixteenth  of  that  star's  lustre.     As  in  reality 


244       Of  HEM  WOMLDS  THAN  OURS. 

it  is  four  times  as  bright,  the  real  amount  of  light  it 
emits  must  exceed  that  of  Alpha  Centauri  no  less  than 
64  times,  and  that  of  our  own  sun  no  less  than  192  times. 
So  that,  judged  from  this  indication  alone,  the  diameter 
of  Sirius  may  be  held  to  exceed  that  of  our  sun  in  the 
proportion  of  about  14  to  1,  an  estimate  which  assigns 
to  Sirius  a  diameter  of  nearly  12,000,000  miles,  and  a 
volume  2,688  times  as  large  as  the  sun's. 

But  on  the  other  hand,  still  confining  our  attention  to 
this  method  of  estimating  magnitude,  we  find  reason  for 
believing  that  many  of  the  visible  stars  must  fall  far 
short  of  our  sun  in  magnitude.  The  sixth-magnitude 
double  star  61  Cygni  has  been  found  to  be  nearer  to  us 
than  Sirius,  and  about  three  times  as  far  from  us  as 
Alpha  Centauri.  Now,  we  may  assume  that  each  compo- 
nent sends  us  about  one-hundredth  part  of  the  light  we 
receive  from  Alpha  Centauri :  it  follows  that  the  latter 
star,  if  removed  to  the  distance  at  which  61  Cygni  lies 
from  us  (when  its  light  would  of  course  be  dimin- 
ished to  one-ninth  of  its  present  value),  would  out- 
shine either  component  of  that  double  star  more  than  11 
times.  Hence  (on  the  assumption  that  brightness  is  a 
fair  measure  of  real  dimensions),  each  component  has  a 
diameter  less  than  one-third  that  of  Alpha  Centauri.  We 
may  roughly  estimate  the  volume  of  each  at  about  one- 
thirtieth  of  that  of  the  latter  star.  So  that,  remember- 
ing what  has  already  been  shown  respecting  the  relation 
between  Alpha  Centauri  and  our  sun,  the  two  suns  which 


OTHER  SUNS  THAN  OURS.  245 

form  the  double  star  61  Cygni  would  each  have  a  diame- 
ter equal  to  about  seventeen-thirtieths  of  the  sun's,  and  a 
volume  equal  to  about  two-elevenths  of  his.  The  sum  of 
their  volumes  would  be  therefore  about  one-third  of  his  ; 
and  it  will  presently  appear  that  a  perfectly  distinct 
method  of  estimation  tends  to  show  that  the  sum  of  their 
masses  bears  about  the  same  proportion  to  the  sun's 
mass. 

But  here  at  once  we  have  evidence  that  there  is  a  very 
wide  range  of  magnitude  among  the  fixed  stars.  We  have 
seen  reason  to  believe  that  Sirius  is  2,688  times  as  large 
as  the  sun,  while  each  of  the  suns  forming  the  double 
star  61  Cygni  would  appear  to  have  a  volume  less  than 
one-fifth  of  our  sun's,  and  therefore  less  than  yg-J^ths  °^ 
the  volume  of  Sirius.  So  that,  by  considering  only  three 
cases,  we  have  found  tolerably  clear  evidence  of  a  range 
of  variety  in  volume,  reminding  us  forcibly  of  that  which 
we  recognize  in  the  solar  system.  We  cannot  suppose 
that  these  three  cases,  which  have  been  selected  at  ran- 
dom— so  far  as  the  question  of  volume  is  concerned — in- 
dicate anything  like  the  real  limits  within  which  the 
fixed  stars  differ  in  magnitude.  So  that  we  may  confi- 
dently accept,  as  the  most  probable  conclusion  from  the 
evidence  before  us,  that  the  range  of  real  magnitude 
among  the  fixed  stars  is  very  far  greater  than  Sir  W. 
Herschel  was  led  to  anticipate  when,  nearly  a  century 
ago,  he  began  his  researches  into  the  sidereal  system. 

But  it  is  not  sufficient  that  we  should  thus  form  an  es- 


246        OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

timate  of  the  nature  of  the  fixed  stars  from  the  amount  of 
light  they  send  to  us.  It  is  desirable — and  fortunately  it 
is  practicable — to  obtain  information  as  to  the  absolute 
mass  or  weight  of  some  of  the  fixed  stars,  and  further,  to 
ascertain  of  what  substances  they  may  be  composed,  and 
in  what  condition  those  substances  may  exist.  Mere 
lights,  however  glorious,  or  however  wide  the  sphere 
within  which  they  displayed  their  splendors,  would  not 
be  fit  to  sway  the  motions  of  orbs  resembling  those  whish 
circle  around  our  sun.  Nor  would  such  lights  serve  to 
indicate  to  the  astronomer  that,  out  yonder,  myriads  of 
millions  of  miles  beyond  the  extreme  limits  of  the  solar 
system,  there  exist  materials  suited  to  form  the  substance 
of  worlds  resembling  our  own. 

It  seems  a  strange  circumstance  that  astronomers 
should  be  able  to  form  a  more  exact  and  trustworthy  es- 
timate of  the  weight  of  certain  fixed  stars  than  they  can 
hope  to  form  respecting  the  volume  of  any  of  those 
bodies. 

Let  us  consider  the  evidence. 

I  have  spoken  of  the  star  61  Cygni  as  a  double  star. 
The  smaller  star  shows  very  clear  indications  of  orbital 
motion  around  its  primary.  That  the  two  are  associated 
together,  and  not  merely  seen  (as  it  were  by  accident), 
nearly  in  the  same  line  of  view,  is  indeed  certain,  because 
that  peculiarly  large  proper  motion  already  referred  to  is 
shared  in  by  both.  But  many  stars  may  be  physically 
associated,  and  yet  the  distance  really  separating  them 


OTHER  SUNS  THAN  OURS.  247 

may  enormously  exceed  that  by  which  they  seem  to  be 
separated — since  the  line  joining  them  is  not  necessarily 
square  to  the  line  of  sight.  The  components  of  the  stai 
61  Cygni  have  been  carefully  watched,  however,  and 
their  motions  show  that  they  are  circling  round  each 
other  in  a  plane  nearly  square  to  the  line  of  sight.  The 
distance  separating  them  is  probably  about  half  as  large 
again  as  the  distance  of  Neptune  from  the  sun. 

The  period  of  revolution  appears  to  be  about  520  years, 
wlr  sh  is  more  than  three  times  as  great  as  the  period  of 
Neptune.  Now  we  know  that  a  planet,  placed  at  a  dis- 
tance from  the  sun  equal  to  that  which  separates  the 
components  of  61  Cygni,  would  occupy  a  much  less 
period  than  520  years  in  completing  a  revolution ;  in  fact, 
its  perLd  would  be  about  300  years.  Hence  it  follows 
that  the  components  of  61  Cygni  are  attracted  together 
less  forcibly  than  Neptune  is  attracted  toward  the  sun, 
and  therefore  that  the  sum  of  their  masses  must  be  less 
than  the  sun's  mass.  It  is  easy  to  compute  the  actual 
proportion,  and  we  find,  on  doing  this,  that  the  two  com- 
ponents of  61  Cygni,  taken  together,  weigh  about  one- 
third  as  much  as  our  sun.* 

The  star  Alpha  Centauri  is  also  a  binary  system,  and 
though  it  has  not  been  so  systematically  observed  as  61 

*  It  may  be  easily  shown  that  if  a  pair  of  bodies  circling  around  eaoh 
other  at  a  certain  distance  take  a  certain  time  T  in  effecting  a  revolu- 
tion, while  another  pair  at  the  same  distance  take  a  time  t,  the  former 
pair,  taken  together,  have  a  weight  which  bears  to  the  weight  of  the 
latter  pair  the  ratio  of  P  to  T2. 


248  OTHER    WORLDS  TEAtf  OURS. 

Cygni,  some  astronomers  believe  that  its  period  has  beeu 
even  more  satisfactorily  determined.  Indeed  there  are 
peculiarities  in  the  motion  of  61  Cygni  which,  without 
throwing  doubt  on  the  general  conclusions  deduced  above, 
yet  suggest  that  a  third  (probably  opaque)  orb  affects  the 
motions  of  the  other  two.  From  a  careful  comparison  of 
all  the  observations  made  in  recent  times  on  Alpha  Cen- 
tauri,  Mr.  Hind  has  assigned  to  the  components  a  period 
of  revolution  of  about  eighty-one  years,  and  a  mean  dis- 
tance of  13.6  seconds  of  arc,  corresponding  to  a  real  dis- 
tance exceeding  the  earth's  distance  from  the  sun  some  fif- 
teen times.  Since  a  planet  placed  at  this  distance  from  the 
sun  would  occupy  less  than  sixty  years  in  completing  a 
revolution  round  that  body,  it  follows  that  the  mass  of 
the  two  components  of  Alpha  Centauri  must  be  less  than 
that  of  the  sun.  This  result  (if  the  data  be  considered 
trustworthy)  would  indicate  a  considerable  difference  be- 
tween the  condition  of  the  star  and  that  of  our  sun ;  for 
we  have  seen  that  the  star  gives  out  much  more  light 
than  the  sun.  However,  I  believe  that  many  years  must 
elapse  before  we  can  regard  the  period  of  Alpha  Centauri 
as  satisfactorily  determined.* 


*  Mr.  Powell  supplies  the  most  satisfactory  elements  of  the  orbit  yet 
given,  since  he  founds  his  estimate  on  a  more  complete  series  of  obser 
vations.  He  assigns  to  the  system  a  period  of  76£  years,  and  a  mean 
distance  of  20.13  seconds  of  arc,  corresponding  to  a  real  distance  about 
22  times  as  great  as  the  earth's  distance  from  the  sun.  A  planet  at  this 
distance  from  the  sun  would  occupy  about  103  years  in  completing  a  rev- 
olution.    Henee  the  mass  of  the  two  components  of  Alpha  Centauri 


OTHER  SUNS  THAN  OURS.  249 

Still,  we  have  conclusive  evidence  in  this  case,  as  in 
that  of  the  star  61  Cygni,  that  the  component  stars  are 
really  bodies  of  enormous  weight,  and  consequently  well 
fitted  to  sway  the  motions  of  families  of  planets.  We 
conclude,  therefore,  that  the  fixed  stars  generally  are 
suns,  not  mere  lights  ;  and  further,  we  are  led  to  believe 
that  there  must  be  a  general  similarity  in  the  conditions 
under  which  these  bodies  and  our  own  sun  emit  light. 
And  thus  we  are  led  to  recognize  other  stars  also — though 
yet  unweighed — as  massive  orbs,  not  merely  supplying 
light  to  other  worlds  travelling  around  them,  but  regulat- 
ing by  their  attractive  influences  the  orbital  motions  of 
their  dependent  worlds. 

But  we  owe  to  the  revelations  of  the  spectroscope  the 
complete  proof  of  these  matters,  besides  evidence  on 
other  and  equally  interesting  points. 

It  had  long  been  known  that  the  spectra  of  the  fixed 
stars  present  a  general  resemblance  to  the  solar  spectrum, 
though  of  course  very  much  fainter ;  and  that  dark  lines 
can  be  seen  in  these  spectra,  some  of  which  correspond 
with  those  in  the  sun's  spectrum  while  others  seem  to  be 


turns  out  to  be  greater  than  that  of  the  sun — instead  of  less,  as  when 
Mr.  Hind's  elements  were  used.  This  corresponds  with  the  measure- 
ment of  the  star's  light,  though  the  disproportion  of  the  masses  calcu- 
lated in  this  way  is  not  so  considerable  as  it  would  be  if  the  masses 
were  inferred  from  the  light  of  Alpha  Centauri.  By  applying  the  for-. 
mula  of  t\ie  preceding  note,  it  will  easily  be  found  that  with  Mr.  Powell's 
elements  the  mass  of  Alpha  Centauri  (both  components)  equals  about 
twice  that  of  our  sun. 


250        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

new.  So  soon  as  the  great  discovery  effected  by  Kirch- 
hoff  had  been  announced,  it  was  seen  at  once  that  these 
dark  lines  in  the  stellar  spectra  afford  the  means  of  de- 
termining the  constitution  of  the  stars.  It  was  only  nec- 
essary that  these  lines  should  be  identified  by  their  cor- 
respondence with  the  lines  belonging  to  known  elements, 
in  order  to  prove  that  these  elements  exist  in  the  sub- 
stance of  the  star.  But  although  the  principle  on  which 
researches  were  to  be  conducted  was  sufficiently  simple, 
many  difficulties  had  to  be  encountered.  Indeed,  the  at- 
tempts made  by  Airy,  Secchi,  and  Rutherfurd  to  solve 
the  problem  of  determining  the  constitution  of  the  stars 
by  means  of  spectroscopic  analysis  were  unsuccessful ; 
and  it  was  not  until  Mr.  Huggins  and  Professor  Miller 
commenced  their  famous  series  of  researches  that  the 
problem  can  be  said  to  have  been  fairly  mastered. 

Even  in  the  hands  of  these  eminent  physicists  the 
work  was  difficult  and  its  progress  tedious.  The  weather 
necessary  for  the  successful  prosecution  of  so  delicate  a 
method  of  inquiry  does  not  often  prevail  in  our  variable 
climate.  The  comparison  between  the  dark  lines  in  the 
stellar  spectra  and  the  bright  lines  belonging  to  various 
elements  was  not  only  a  delicate  and  laborious  task,  but 
was  singularly  painful  to  the  eyes.  And  other  difficulties 
into  which  I  have  not  space  to  enter  here  had  to  be  en- 
countered and  overcome. 

But  undeterred  by  these  difficulties,  the  two  physicists 
persevered  in  their  researches,  and  were  rewarded  by  re- 


OTHER  SUNS  THAN  OURS.  251 

suits  so  interesting  and  important  that  their  discovery 
may  be  said  to  constitute  the  most  remarkable  era  in  the 
history  of  sidereal  research  since  the  completion  of  the 
star-gangings  of  the  elder  Herschel. 

Two  bright  stars,  Betelgeux,  the  leading  brilliant  of 
Orion,  and  Aldebaran,  the  chief  star  of  Taurus,  were  ex- 
amined with  special  care.  Mr.  Huggins  remarks  that  the 
spectra  of  these  stars  are  as  rich  in  lines  as  the  solar  spec- 
trum itself.  The  places  of  no  less  than  eighty  lines  in 
the  spectrum  of  Betelgeux  were  accurately  measured, 
while  as  many  as  seventy  lines  had  their  places  assigned 
to  them  in  the  spectrum  of  Aldebaran. 

With  respect  to  the  former  spectrum,  Mr.  Huggins  re- 
marks that  it  is  most  complex  and  remarkable.  "  Strong 
groups  of  lines  are  visible,  especially  in  the  red,  the  green, 
and  the  blue  portions ; "  a  peculiarity,  it  may  be  remarked 
in  passing,  which  serves  to  account  for  the  well-marked 
orange  color  of  this  star. 

Now  here  already  we  have  very  decided  evidence  as  to 
the  nature  of  the  star ;  since  the  very  fact  that  its  spec- 
trum presents  the  same  general  appearance  as  the  solar 
spectrum  proves  conclusively  that  the  star  is  an  incan- 
descent body,  whose  light  comes  to  us  through  certain 
vapors  corresponding  to  those  which  surround  the  sun. 
Nor  should  we  be  able  to  regard  the  star  as  other  than  a 
sun,  even'  though  none  of  the  elements  known  to  us  should 
appear  to  be  present  in  its  substance  or  in  the  vapors  sur- 
rounding it.     For  clearly  we  have  no  reason  for  believing 


252        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

that  worlds  can  be  formed  out  of  those  elements  onty 
with  which  we  are  acquainted,  unless  we  find  as  we  pro- 
ceed that  those  elements  actually  do  compose  the  suns 
which  form  the  sidereal  system.  Of  course,  if  this  shall 
appear  to  be  the  case,  our  conclusions  respecting  thd 
nature  of  the  stars  will  be  very  much  strengthened. 

Now,  when  Professor  Miller  and  Mr.  Huggins  compared 
the  lines  in  the  spectrum  of  Betelgeux  with  the  bright 
lines  of  certain  terrestrial  elements,  they  found  that  some 
of  these  elements  do  actually  exist  in  the  vaporous  enve- 
lope of  the  stars.  '  Thus  sodium,  magnesium,  calcium, 
iron,  and  bismuth  are  present  in  Betelgeux.  The  lines  of 
hydrogen,  which  are  so  well  marked  in  the  solar  spectrum, 
are  not  seen  in  the  spectrum  of  Betelgeux.  We  are  not 
to  conclude  from  this  that  hydrogen  does  not  exist  in  the 
composition  of  the  star.  We  know  that  certain  parts  of 
the  solar  disk,  when  examined  with  the  spectroscope,  do 
not  at  all  times  exhibit  the  hydrogen  lines,  or  may  even 
present  them  as  bright  instead  of  dark  lines.  It  may  well 
be  that  in  Betelgeux  hydrogen  exists  under  such  condi- 
tions that  the  amount  of  light  it  sends  forth  is  nearly 
equivalent  to  the  amount  it  absorbs,  in  which  case  its 
characteristic  lines  would  not  be  easily  discernible.  In 
fact,  it  is  important  to  notice  generally  that  while  there 
can  be  no  mistaking  the  positive  evidence  afforded  by  the 
spectroscope  as  to  the  existence  of  any  element  in  iron  or 
star,  the  negative  evidence  supplied  by  the  absence  of 
particular  lines  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  decisive. 


OTHER  SUNS  THAN  OURS.  253 

In  the  case  of  Aldebaran  the  two  physicists  were  able 
to  establish  the  existence  of  sodium,  magnesium,  hydro- 
gen, calcium,  iron,  bismuth,  tellurium,  antimony,  and  mer- 
cury in  the  vapors  surrounding  the  star. 

Besides  these  stars  fifty  others  were  examined.  The 
brilliant  Sirius  exhibits  a  spectrum  of  great  beauty,  though 
the  low  altitude  which  this  star  attains  in  our  latitudes 
renders  the  observation  of  the  finer  lines  exceedingly  dif- 
ficult. But  the  two  physicists  were  able  to  show  that  so- 
dium, magnesium,  hydrogen,  and  probably  iron,  exist  in 
this  gigantic  sun. 

All  the  stars  examined  exhibit  spectra  crossed  by  nu- 
merous lines,  and  in  a  great  number  of  the  spectra  lines 
belonging  to  known  terrestrial  elements  were  detected. 

And  now  let  us  consider  the  general  bearing  of  these 
interesting  discoveries. 

In  the  first  place,  we  are  forced  to  recognize  in  the  stars 
real  suns,  not  mere  lights.  Doubtless  Whewell  did  well 
in  pointing  out  that  astronomers  had  no  right  to  regard 
the  stars  as  suns  until  they  had  some  evidence  that  these 
orbs  resemble  the  sun  in  other  respects  than  in  size,  mass, 
or  luminosity.  And  as  in  his  day  it  appeared  altogether 
unlikely  that  such  evidence  should  be  obtained,  a  real 
limit  seemed  placed  to  the  speculations  which  men  might 
form  as  to  the  existence  of  other  planetary  systems  be- 
sides those  circling  around  the  sun.' 

But  now  we  have  precisely  that  evidence  which  Whew- 
ell required.     We  see  that  the  stars  are  constituted  in 


254        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

the  same  general  way  as  the  sun,  and  that  further  they 
even  contain  elements  identical  with  those  which  exist  in 
his  substance.  There  is  not  indeed  in  every  case,  per- 
haps there  may  not  be  in  any  case,  an  exact  identity  of 
composition  between  the  stars  and  our  sun,  or  between 
star  and  star.  But  this  was  no  more  to  have  been  looked 
for  than  an  exact  identity  of  physical  habitudes  among 
the  members  of  the  solar  system.  That  general  resem- 
blance of  structure  which  indicates  a  general  resemblance 
in  the  purposes  which  the  celestial  bodies  are  intended  to 
subserve,  is  undoubtedly  evident  when  we  compare  the 
stars  either  with  our  sun  or  with  each  other. 

I  have  already  spoken  of  the  conclusions  to  be  drawn 
from  the  existence  of  the  same  materials  in  the  substance 
of  the  sun  that  exist  around  us  on  this  earth.  I  have 
shown  that  we  are  compelled  to  regard  this  general  re- 
semblance of  structure  as  sufficient  to  prove  that  the 
other  planets  resemble  the  earth,  since  we  have  no  reason 
to  believe  that  our  earth  bears  an  exceptionally  close  re- 
semblance to  the  sun  as  respects  the  elements  of  which 
she  is  composed. 

Since,  then,  we  have  reason  to  believe  that  all  the  plan- 
ets which  circle  around  the  sun  are  constituted  of  the 
same  materials  which  exist  in  his  substance,  though  these 
materials  are  not  necessarily  nor  probably  combined  in 
the  same  proportions  throughout  the  solar  system,  we 
have  every  reason  which  analogy  can  give  us  for  believ- 
ing that  the  planets  circling  around  Betelgeux  or  Aide- 


OTHER  SUNS  THAN  OURS.  255 

baran  are  constituted  of  the  same  materials  which  exist 
in  the  substance  of  their  central  luminary. 

Thus  we  are  led  to  a  number  of  interesting  conclusions 
even  respecting  orbs  which  no  telescope  that  man  can 
construct  is  likely  to  reveal  to  his  scrutiny.  The  exist- 
ence of  such  elements  as  sodium  or  calcium  in  those  other 
worlds  suggests  the  probable  existence  of  the  familiar 
compounds  of  these  metals — soda,  salt,  lime,  and  the  rest. 
Again,  the  existence  of  iron  and  other  metals  of  the  same 
class  carries  our  minds  to  the  various  useful  purposes 
which  these  metals  are  made  to  subserve  on  the  earth. 
"We  are  at  once  invited  to  recognize  that  the  orbs  circling 
around  those  distant  suns  are  not  merely  the  abode  of 
life,  but  that  intelligent  creatures,  capable  of  applying 
these  metals  to  useful  purposes,  may  exist  in  those  worlds. 
"We  need  not  conclude,  indeed,  that  at  the  present  mo- 
ment every  one  of  those  worlds  is  peopled  with  intelligent 
beings,  because  we  have  good  reason  for  believing  that 
throughout  an  enormous  proportion  of  the  time  during 
which  our  earth  has  existed  as  a  world  no  intelligent  use 
has  been  made  of  the  supplies  of  metal  existing  in  her 
substance.  But  at  some  time  or  other  those  worlds  have 
been  or  will  be  the  abode  of  intelligent  creatures  seems 
to  be  a  conclusion  very  fairly  deducible  from  what  we 
know  of  their  probable  structure. 

But  secondly,  apart  from  the  information  afforded  by 
the  spectroscope  respecting  the  materials  of  which  the 
stars  are  composed,   the  nature   of   the   stellar   spectra 


256        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

serves  to  prove  most  conclusively  that  the  stars,  besides 
supplying  light  to  the  worlds  which  circle  around  them, 
radiate  heat  also  to  them.  Even  if  we  were  not  certain 
that  elements  which  are  only  vaporized  at  a  very  high 
temperature  exist  in  the  vaporous  envelopes  of  the  stars, 
yet  the  very  nature  of  the  light  sent  out  by  the  stars  in- 
dicates that  these  orbs  are  incandescent  through  intensity 
of  heat.  "When  we  find  that  the  spectrum  of  the  moon's 
light  resembles  the  solar  spectrum,  we  do  not  indeed  con- 
clude that  the  moon  is  as  intensely  heated  as  the  sun,  be- 
cause we  know  that  the  moon  is  not  self-luminous.  But 
in  the  case  of  self-luminous  bodies  like  the  stars,  we  can 
conclude  from  the  very  nature  of  their  spectra  that  these 
orbs  are  intensely  heated.  Of  course  we  are  rendered  ab- 
solutely certain  of  this  when  we  find  that  iron  and  other 
metals  exist  in  the  form  of  vapor  in  the  stellar  atmos- 
pheres. 

The  vast  supplies  of  heat  thus  emitted  by  the  stars  not 
only  suggest  the  conclusion  that  there  must  be  worlds 
around  these  orbs  for  which  those  heat-supplies  are  in- 
tended, but  point  to  the  existence  in  those  worlds  of  the 
various  forms  of  force  into  which  heat  may  be  trans- 
muted. We  know  that  the  sun's  heat  poured  upon  our 
earth  is  stored  up  in  vegetable  and  animal  forms  of  life ; 
is  present  in  all  the  phenomena  of  nature — in  winds,  and 
clouds,  and  rain,  in  thunder  and  lightning,  storm  and 
hail ;  and  that  even  the  works  of  man  are  performed  by 
virtue  of  the  solar  heat-supplies.     Thus  the  fact  that  the 


OTHER  SUNS  TBAN  OURS.  257 

stars  send  forth  heat  to  the  worlds  which  circle  around 
them  suggests  at  once  the  thought  that  on  those  worlds 
there  must  exist  vegetable  and  animal  forms  of  life  ;  that 
natural  phenomena,  such  as  we  are  familiar  with  as  due 
to  the  solar  heat,  must  be  produced  in  those  worlds  by 
the  heat  of  their  central  sun ;  and  that  works  such  as 
those  which  man  undertakes  on  earth — works  in  which 
intelligent  creatures  use  Nature's  powers  to  master  Nat- 
ure to  their  purposes — may  go  on  in  the  worlds  which 
circle  around  Aldebaran  and  Betelgeux,  around  Vega, 
Capella,  and  the  blazing  Sirius. 

Recently  it  has  even  been  found  possible  to  render  the 
stellar  heat  sensible  to  terrestrial  observation — by  methods 
which  need  not  here  be  inquired  into.  Nay,  the  task  of 
measuring  the  amount  of  heat  received  from  certain  stars 
has  not  been  thought  too  difficult.  Mr.  Stone,  making 
use  of  the  powers  of  the  great  equatorial  of  the  Green- 
wich Observatory,  and  ingeniously  overcoming  the  numer- 
ous difficulties  which  exist  in  a  research  of  such  exceeding 
delicacy,  has  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  Arcturus  sends 
us  about  as  much  heat  as  would  be  received  from  a  three- 
inch  cube  full  of  boiling  water,  and  placed  at  a  distance 
of  383  yards.  Yega,  which  shines,  according  to  Sir  J. 
Herschel,  with  about  two-thirds  the  light  of  Arcturus, 
gives  out  about  the  same  proportionate  amount  of  heat.* 

*  Although  these  results  cannot  yet  be  regarded  as  numerically  ex- 
act, it  may  be  interesting  to  consider  the  amount  of  heat  given  out  by 
Arcturus  in  relation  to  the  light  sent  us  by  this  star,  the  more  so  as 
17 


£58        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

But  in  other  instances  the  heat-giving  power  of  a  star  has 
not  been  found  proportional  to  the  amount  of  light  it 
emits. 

The  variation  of  many  fixed  stars  in  lustre  at  once 
forms  a  new  bond  of  association  between  the  stars  and 
the  sun — which  we  have  seen  to  be  in  reality  a  variable 
star—and  suggests  interesting  inquiries  as  to  the  ex- 
istence of  variation  in  the  emission  of  heat.  Some  of 
the  stellar  variations  of  light  are  so  much  more  marked 
than  those  noticed  in  the  case  of  our  own  sun  that  we  can 
scarcely  conceive  how  creatures  resembling  any  with 
which  we  are  acquainted  could  endure  the  effects  of  cor- 
respondingly important  variations  of  heat ;  nay,  in  some 
instances  we  seem  compelled  to  withhold  our  belief  in 
the  existence  of  habitable  systems  around  certain  fixed 
stars.  The  star  Eta  Argus,  for  example,  which  some- 
times blazes  out  with  a  light  surpassing  that  of  any  of 
the  stars  in  the  northern  hemisphere,  while  at  other 
times  it  falls  to  the  sixth  magnitude,  can  hardly  be  re- 

this  star  seems  (from  the  nature  of  its  spectrum)  to  resemble  the  sun 
very  closely  in  constitution.  The  light  sent  to  us  by  Arcturus  is  equal 
to  about  three-fourths  of  that  supplied  by  Alpha  Centauri,  or  about 
rnnrooooo until  part  of  the  light  we  receive  from  the  sun.  Now  Mr. 
Stone  estimates  the  direct  heating  effect  of  Arcturus  at  0.00,000,127° 
Fah.,  making  due  allowing  for  the  effect  of  the  object-glass  in  concen- 
trating and  absorbing  the  heat.  It  will  be  seen  at  once  that,  according 
to  this  estimate,  the  heating  power  of  Arcturus  bears  a  very  much 
greater  proportion  to  that  of  the  sun  than  the  respective  light-giving 
powers  of  the  luminaries  bear  to  each  other.  This  seems  to  throw  some 
doubt  on  the  correctness  of  the  estimate  either  of  the  light-giving  or  of 
iba  beat-giving  power  of  the  star. 


OTHER  SUNS  THAN  OURS.  259 

garded  as  fit  to  be  the  centre  of  a  system  of  worlds.  I 
pass  over  such  variable  stars  as  the  one  which  recently 
blazed  out  in  the  Northern  Crown,  because  in  a  case  of 
this  sort  the  star  may  be  regarded  as  really  a  small  orb, 
and  its  sudden  lustre  is  due  to  some  exceptional  occur- 
rence, leading  (as  the  spectrum  of  the  star  seemed  to 
show)  to  a  temporary  conflagration.  But  Eta  Argus  and 
Mira  Ceti  seem  to  belong  to  a  different  category  alto- 
gether, since  it  is  probable  as  respects  the  former,  and 
certain  as  respects  the  latter,  that  their  appearance  as 
stars  of  the  leading  magnitude  is  not  accidental,  but  part 
of  a  systematic  series  of  changes. 

It  remains  only  to  be  mentioned  that,  besides  light  and 
heat,  the  stars  emit  actinic  rays.  This  is  proved  de- 
cisively by  the  fact  that  the  stars  can  be  made  to  photo- 
graph themselves.  It  has  been  found,  however,  that  the 
actinic  power  of  a  star,  like  its  heat-giving  power,  is  not 
by  any  means  proportional  to  the  star's  light.  So  that 
in  this  respect,  as  in  the  material  constitution  of  the 
stars,  we  find  specific  varieties  even  amid  those  very 
features  which  indicate  most  strikingly  the  general  re- 
semblance which  exists  between  the  suns  constituting 
the  sidereal  system. 

To  sum  up  what  we  have  learned  so  far  from  the  study 
of  the  starry  heavens — we  see  that,  besides  our  sun,  there 
are  myriads  of  other  suns  in  the  immensity  of  space ;  that 
these  suns  are  large  and  massive  bodies,  capable  of  sway- 
ing by  their  attraction  systems  of  worlds  as  important  as 


'260        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

those  which  circle  around  the  sun;  that  these  suns  :Z3 
formed  of  elements  similar  to  those  which  constitute  ou>r 
own  sun,  so  that  the  worlds  which  circle  round  them  may 
be  regarded  as  in  all  probability  similar  in  constitution 
to  this  earth ;  and  that  from  these  suns  all  the  forms  of 
force  which  we  know  to  be  necessary  to  the  existence  of 
organized  beings  on  our  earth  are  abundantly  emitted.  It 
seems  reasonable  to  conclude  that  these  suns  are  girt 
round  by  dependent  systems  of  worlds.  Though  we  can- 
not, as  in  the  case  of  the  solar  system,  actually  see  such 
worlds,  yet  the  mind  presents  them  before  us,  various  in 
size,  various  in  structure,  infinitely  various  in  their 
physical  condition  and  habitudes. 


MINOR  STABS.  261 


CHAPTEE  XL 

OF    MtM)E    riTAftS,  AND    OF    THE    DISTRIBUTION    OF  STARS  IN 

SPACE. 

It  has  been  so  long  a  received  opinion  that  a  general 
uniformity  of  magnitude  and  distribution  characterizes 
the  stellar  system  that  it  is  with  some  diffidence  I  ven- 
ture to  express  a  different  view.  And  here  let  me  not  be 
misunderstood.  I  am  fully  sensible  that  it  is  only  in  cer- 
tain popular  treatises  of  astronomy  that  a  belief  in  any- 
thing like  a  real  uniformity  of  structure  in  the  sidereal 
system  is  attributed  to  astronomers  of  authority.  It  is 
not  any  such  imaginary  theory  that  I  have  now  to  deal 
with,  however;  but  with  opinions  which  have  found  a 
place  in  the  works  of  astronomers  from  whom  I  very  un- 
willingly differ. 

I  propose  to  exhibit  the  reasons  which  have  led  me  to 
believe  that,  so  far  from  knowing  the  real  figure  of  the 
sidereal  system,  astronomers  have  not  been  able  to  pene- 
trate to  its  limits  in  any  direction ;  that  leading  stars, 
such  as  those  discussed  in  the  preceding  chapter,  are  dis- 
tributed throughout  space  to  the  very  furthest  limits  and 
beyond  the  very  furthest  limits  that  our  most  powerful 
telescopes  can  attain  to ;  that  the  stars  are  arranged  in 


262        OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

groups  and  clustering  aggregations,  in  streams  and  whorls 
aud  spirals,  in  a  manner  altogether  too  complex  for  us  to 
hope  to  interpret ;  and  that  in  these  aggregations  stars  of 
all  degrees  of  real  magnitude  are  mixed  up,  from  suns  as 
large  as  Sirius  down  to  orbs  which  may  be  smaller  than 
any  of  the  primary  planets  of  the  solar  system. 

Let  us  consider  step  by  step  the  evidence  we  have  on 
these  points. 

"We  know,  from  the  existence  of  double,  triple,  and 
multiple  stars,  in  which  the  components  are  often  very 
unequal  in  splendor,  that  combinations  of  stars  exist  in 
which  one  or  two  may  be  suns  like  our  own,  while  the 
rest,  or  some  of  the  rest,  are  relatively  minute.  This, 
however,  has  of  course  long  been  known ;  and  it  is  only 
as  a  preliminary  step  in  the  investigation  that  I  here  ad- 
vance so  trite  an  instance. 

Next  let  us  consider  such  star-clusters  as  contain  orbs 
of  the  eighth  or  ninth  magnitude,  besides  a  multitude  of 
minute  stars.  These  clusters  must  of  course  be  regarded 
as  lying  within  the  sidereal  system,  since  no  external  gal- 
axies could  reasonably  be  supposed  to  contain  orbs  so  in- 
finitely transcending  even  Sirius  in  magnitude  as  to  shine 
from  beyond  the  enormous  gap  separating  us  from  such 
galaxies  with  a  light  exceeding  that  derived  from  many 
stars  within  the  sidereal  system.  Now,  regarding  thase 
clusters  as  forming  part  and  parcel  of  the  sidereal  system, 
we  find  in  the  existence  of  multitudes  of  minute  orbs 
within  their  range  a  proof  that  diversity  of  magnitude  in 


MINOR  STABS.  263 

schemes  of  associated  stars  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  feature 
of  certain  parts,  at  any  rate,  of  our  galaxy ;  and  we  shall 
therefore  be  less  surprised  if  we  should  find  reason  for 
believing  that  it  is  a  characteristic  peculiarity  of  the  ga- 
lactic system. 

Now  with  regard  to  the  nebulae  (resolvable  and  irresolv- 
able), and  their  claim  to  be  regarded  as  external  galaxies, 
I  shall  have  much  to  say  further  on ;  but  I  may  remark 
in  passing  that  we  have  precisely  the  same  reason  for 
believing  that  many  of  these  objects  lie  within  the  range 
of  the  solar  system,  as  have  been  already  considered  in 
the  case  of  star-clusters.  Their  component  stars,  to  be 
visible  at  all,  must  fall  within  the  range  of  distance  which 
astronomers  have  assigned  to  the  boundaries  of  the  gal- 
axy, since  some  stars  even  within  this  range  cease  to  be 
separately  visible  in  the  most  powerful  telescopes  man 
has  yet  constructed.  So  that  when  in  these  objects  we 
see  a  few  or  many  distinct  stars,  and  a  mass  of  nebulous 
light  which  we  judge  to  proceed  from  an  indefinitely 
large  number  of  minute  stars,  we  again  have  very  decided 
evidence  of  the  fact  that  in  one  and  the  same  region  of  the 
sidereal  system  there  may  exist  leading  stars  (so  to  speak) 
and  innumerable  stars  relatively  minute. 

With  considerations  such  as  these  (and  I  might  add 
many  others)  to  guide  us,  let  us  proceed  to  examine  the 
teachings  of  the  Milky  Way  itself,  that  we  may  see 
whether  that  wonderful  zone  indeed  represents,  as  has 
been  thought,  the  sidereal  system  itself,  or  only  an  aggre- 


£64        OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

gation  of  minute  orbs  altogether  insignificant  separately, 
in  comparison  with  our  sun  or  Sirius,  Aldebaran  or  Betel- 
geux,  Yega  or  Arcturus. 

The  star-gauging  of  Sir  W.  Herschel,  interpreted  ac- 
cording to  his  hypothesis  of  stellar  distribution,  pointed 
to  an  extension  of  the  Milky  Way  laterally  to  a  distance 
exceeding  some  eighty  times  that  which  separates  us 
from  the  first-magnitude  stars.  So  that,  regarding  sixth- 
magnitude  stars  as  on  the  average  about  ten  times  as  far 
from  us  as  those  of  the  first  magnitude  (the  usual  esti- 
mate), we  see  that  the  outermost  parts  of  the  galaxy  must 
lie  (according  to  Sir  W.  Herschel's  theory)  about  eight 
times  as  far  from  us  as  the  sphere  of  the  sixth-magnitude 
stars.  Now  Sir  John  Herschel  was  led  by  his  observa- 
tions of  the  southern  heavens  to  so  far  modify  his 
father's  theory  as  to  describe  the  Milky  Way  as  probably 
shaped  like  a  flat  ring,  the  stars  down  to  the  tenth  mag- 
nitude being  in  a  sense  dissociated  from  the  ring,  while 
he  regarded  the  probable  distance  of  the  outermost  limits 
of  the  ring  as  750  times  instead  of  but  80  times  the  mean 
distance  of  the  first-magnitude  stars.  This  difference  of 
opinion,  it  may  be  remarked,  though  obviously  not  sur- 
prising when  we  consider  the  enormous  difficulty  of  the 
problem  presented  by  the  sidereal  system,  is  yet  suffi- 
cient to  indicate  the  probability  that  an  important  error 
has  been  made  in  the  hypothesis  which  underlies  the 
accepted  theories  respecting  the  galaxy.  But,  be  this  as 
it  may,  in  regarding  the  Milky  Way  as  shaped  like  a  flat 


MINOR  STABS. 


265 


ring  (cloven  through  one-half  of  its  circumference)  whose 
medial  section  resembles  generally  the  space  between  the 
dark  concentric  circles  in  Fig.  5  (in  which  S  B  equals 


Fig.  5.— The  Galactic  Cloven  Flat  Ring  (Plan). 

eight  times  S  A),  I  have  not  adopted  a  structure  which 
exaggerates  the  difficulties  presented  by  the  disk  or  ring 
theory  of  the  Milky  Way.  The  cross-section  would  be 
somewhat  as  shown  in  Fig.  6. 


LZ 


1 


Fig.  6.— The  Galactic  Cloven  Flat  Ring  (Section). 


Now,  accepting  this  modified  figure,  as  better  according 
with  the  results  of  star-gauging  than  Sir  W.  Herschel's 


266        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

theory  that  the  Milky  Way  forms  a  cloven  disk,  let  us 
consider  whether  any  peculiarities  of  the  Milky  Way 
seem  to  oppose  themselves  to  this  interpretation  of  its 
structure. 

In  the  first  place,  then,  there  is  a  gap  or  rift  extending 
right  across  the  single  part  of  the  Milky  Way  in  the  con- 
stellation Argo ;  so  that  we  must  conceive  that  from  S 
toward  1,  in  Fig.  5,  the  flat  ring  is  broken  through  by 
some  such  rift  as  is  indicated  by  the  broken  lines  in  that 
direction.  Next  there  is,  in  the  constellation  Crux,  a 
pear-shaped  vacuity  of  considerable  size,  and  bounded  by 
well-defined  edges ;  so  that  we  must  conceive  that  from 
S  toward  2  (Fig.  5)  the  flat  ring  is  tunnelled  through  by 
some  such  passage  as  is  indicated  by  the  dotted  lines  in 
that  direction.  A  similar  tunnelling,  but  of  different 
cross-section,  must  exist  in  direction  S  3  (as  shown  by 
the  dotted  lines)  to  account  for  the  dark  gap  in  the  con- 
stellation Cygnus.  Next,  where  the  Milky  Way  is 
double,  a  large  portion  of  one  branch  is  discontinuous, 
so  that  the  upper  part  of  the  double  portion  of  the  ring 
in  Fig.  5  must  be  supposed  removed  between  the  broken 
lines  from  S  to  4  and  5.  Over  the  so-called  double 
stream  there  are  in  places  strange  convolutions,  in  others 
numerous  branching  and  interlacing  streams,  whose  com- 
plexity indeed  defies  description ;  so  that  the  portion  3 
B  2  of  the  ring  must  be  supposed  corrugated  in  the 
strangest  way,  and  further  to  throw  out  plane  and  curved 
sheets  of  stars  presented  tang'entially  toward  S.     Lastly 


MINOR  STABS.  267 

the  single  portion  of  the  Milky  Way  is  very  faint  indeed 
toward  6,  so  that  here  we  must  conceive  its  figure 
trenched  in  upon  in  the  way  indicated  by  the  dot-and- 
peck  line. 

Thus,  even  without  considering  a  multitude  of  minuter 
peculiarities  of  structure,  we  are  led  to  the  conclusion  that 
the  Milky  Way,  judged  according  to  the  fundamental  hy- 
pothesis of  Sir  W.  Herschel,  has  some  such  shape  as  I 
have  endeavored  to  exhibit  in  Fig.  7.     Although  I  have 


Ylq.  7. — The  Galactic  Flat  Ring  Modified  in  Accordance  with  the  Observed 
Peculiarities  op  the  Milky  Wat. 

not  indicated  on  the  figure  the  corrugations  of  the  ring, 
nor  a  tithe  of  the  various  overlapping  layers  which  would 
be  required  to  account  for  the  appearance  of  the  Milky 
W^ay  between  Centaurus  and  Ophiuchus,  yet  the  deduced 
figure  is  by  no  means  inviting  in  its  simplicity.  It  is, 
however,  absolutely  certain  that  the  sidereal  system,  as 
far  as  its  more  densely  aggregated  star-regions  are  con- 
cerned,  has  some  such  figure  as  this,  if  we  are  to  accept 
the  principle  of  Sir  W.  Herschel's  stax-gaugings. 


268         OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

Now,  in  turning  our  thoughts  to  the  recognition  of  a 
more  simple  explanation  of  observed  appearances,  it  will 
be  well  that  we  should  consider  some  peculiarities  of  the 
Milky  Way  which  we  have  not  yet  attended  to.  In  the 
first  place,  I  would  invite  attention  to  a  peculiarity  ob- 
served by  Sir  John  Herschel  in  different  parts  of  the  gal- 
axy— the  fact,  namely,  that  in  places  the  edge  of  the 
Milky  Way  is  quite  sharply  defined.  One-half  of  a  tele- 
scopic field  of  view  may  be  quite  clear  of  stars,  or  show 
only  a  few  straggling  orbs,  while  the  other  half  presents 
what  has  been  called  a  "  Milky  Way  field  " — that  is,  a 
region  profusely  sprinkled  with  stars,  the  boundary  be- 
tween the  two  portions  being  well  defined.  When  we  see 
that  a  cluster  of  objects  presents  a  well-defined  edge, 
what  conclusion  do  we  draw  as  to  the  position  of  the 
object  ?  Is  it  not  in  such  a  case  absolutely  certain  that 
the  distance  of  the  cluster  enormously  exceeds  the  dis- 
tance between  its  component  parts— or  in  other  words, 
that  the  observer  is  far  outside  the  cluster  ?  Many  in- 
stances will  at  once  suggest  themselves  to  the  reader  in 
illustration  of  this  remark. 

We  conclude,  then,  that  these  portions  of  the  Milky 
Way,  at  any  rate,  whether  they  be  regarded  as  projections 
or  nodules,  are  definite  clustering  aggregations  very  far  re- 
moved from  us.  Other  parts  of  the  Milky  Way  may  also  be 
removed  bodily,  so  to  speak,  to  enormous  distances,  be- 
cause a  cluster  which  has  not  a  definite  edge  may  be  as  fat 
removed  as  one  which  has ;  but  certainly  those  portions  are. 


MINOR  STARS.  269 

Next  let  us  consider  what  opinion  we  may  found  on 
the  existence  of  dark  regions  in  the  Milky  Way  ;  and  here 
I  refer  not  merely  to  such  large  and  obvious  vacuities  as 
the  Coal-sack  in  Crux  or  the  oval  opening  in  Cygnus, 
but  also  to  small  openings,  in  which,  though  they  occur 
even  in  rich  regions  of  the  Milky  Way,  there  is  not,  accord- 
ing to  Sir  W.  Herschel's  description,  even  a  telescopic 
star  to  be  seen. 

Judged  apart  from  preconceived  opinions,  such  open- 
ings as  these,  according  to  all  laws  of  probability,  indicate 
that  the  portion  of  the  Milky  Way  in  which  they  occur 
has  not  a  very  great  lateral  extension.  To  return  for  a 
moment  to  Fig.  5,  it  will  be  seen  at  once  that  an  aperture 
extending  laterally  through  a  star  system  so  shaped  must 
have  a  particular  direction  and  be  perfectly  straight  in 
order  to  be  visible  to  observers  placed,  as  we  are  supposed 
to  be,  in  the  central  opening.  It  is  altogether  improbable 
that  one  such  opening  should  exist  by  accident,  and  ab- 
solutely impossible  that  many  should.*  We  are  forced, 
therefore,  to  infer  that,  instead  of  the  enormous  lateral 
extension  assigned  to  the  Milky  Way,  the  galaxy  has  in 
these  places  certainly,  and  elsewhere  probably,  a  lateral 
extension  not  greatly  exceeding  its  depth. 

*  Sir  John  Herschel  distinctly  indicated  this  inference,  as  he  did  many 
other  matters  which  make  strongly  against  the  received  theory  of  the 
sidereal  system.  Nor  was  he  unconscious  of  their  bearing.  Apparently 
unwilling  to  press  them  to  their  full  extent,  he  was  commonly  satisfied 
by  noting  that  they  do  not  seem  to  accord  with  views  he  had  elsewhere 
dwelt  upon. 


270  OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

It  is  further  to  be  noted  that  the  lucid  stars  over  the 
zone  of  the  heavens  which  is  occupied  by  the  galaxy  show 
a  very  decided  preference  for  the  parts  of  that  zone  which 
are  actually  traversed  by  the  Milky  Way.  For  instance, 
we  find  no  stars  above  the  fifth  magnitude,  and  very  few 
of  these  in  the  Coal-sacks,  or  in  the  rift  which  crosses  the 
Milky  Way  in  Argo ;  or,  again,  in  the  space  which  lies  be- 
tween the  two  branches  where  the  Milky  Way  is  double. 
If  this  is  an  accident  it  is  a  very  extraordinary  one,  espe- 
cially when  it  is  remembered  that  the  region  where  it  oc- 
curs is  the  very  part  of  the  heavens  where  stars  of  all 
magnitudes  may  be  expected  to  be  most  profusely  distrib- 
uted ;  that  the  spaces  thus  left  vacant  form  no  inconsid- 
erable aliquot  part  of  that  zone ;  and  that,  according  to 
the  accepted  theory,  there  is  no  reason  for  expecting  any 
peculiarity  of  the  sort. 

Thus,  again,  setting  aside  preconceived  opinions,  and 
judging  only  according  to  the  evidence,  we  seem  led  to 
regard  the  coincidence  as  not  accidental,,  but  as  indicating 
that  there  really  is  a  very  close  association  between  the 
bright  stars  and  those  small  stars  forming  the  milky  light, 
which,  according  to  the  accepted  theory,  lie  so  many  times 
further  from  us. 

But  this  opinion  is  absolutely  forced  upon  us  when  we 
apply  a  rigid  process  of  examination  to  the  evidence  we 
have  respecting  the  distribution  of  the  lucid  stars  over 
the  galactic  zone.  So  far  as  I  am  aware,  this  has  not 
hitherto  been  attempted.     Indeed,  independently  of  the 


MINOR  STARS.  271 

fact  that  I  have  not  met  with  any  reference  to  such  an  in- 
quiiy,  although  I  have  had  occasion  to  study  very  care- 
fully all  the  works  bearing  on  the  subject,  I  feel  confident 
that  the  examination  I  refer  to  has  never  yet  been  at- 
tempted, because  I  am  sure  that  if  it  had,  the  result 
must  have  been  the  adoption  of  views  altogether  different 
from  those  at  present  accepted.  I  shall  have  occasion, 
further  on,  to  exhibit  the  method  by  which  the  following 
results  have  been  obtained,  and  therefore  I  content  myself 
in  this  place  with  simply  stating  them  : 

The  Milky  Way  covers  ^j-ths  of  the  whole  heavens, 
while  the  gaps  and  lacunae  in  the  Milky  Way  cover  about 
3^d  part.  In  the  Milky  Way  there  are  1,115  lucid  stars, 
in  the  gaps  and  lacunae  only  20.  So  that  if  the  whole 
heavens  were  as  richly  covered  with  lucid  stars  as  the 
Milky  Way,  there  would  be  11,681  stars  visible  to  the 
naked  eye,  instead  of  the  5,850  actually  seen.  But  if  the 
whole  heavens  were  no  more  richly  strewn  with  stars  than 
the  gaps  and  lacunae  in  the  Milky  Way,  there  would  be 
but  1,240  lucid  stars.  The  Milky  Way  is,  in  fine,  no  less 
than  nine  times  as  richly  strewn  with  lucid  stars  as  its 
gaps  and  lacuna?,  whereas  according  to  the  accepted  views 
no  such  'peculiarities  are  to  be  looJced  for  in  the  distribution 
of  lucid  stai*s  over  the  galactic  zone. 

We  have  here  a  statistical  fact  which  must  be  accounted 
for  in  forming  a  theory  of  the  sidereal  system.  I  have, 
indeed,  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  it  is  the  most  remark- 
able feature  of  the  stellar  heavens.     No  one  who  appre* 


272        OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

ciates  the  laws  of  probability  will  ascribe  it  to  mere 
chance  distribution.*  Where,  then,  is  the  cause,  unless 
we  accept  the  obvious  and  simple  explanation  that  the 
Milky  "Way  seems  to  be  thus  associated  with  lucid  stars 
because  it  is  associated  with  them — that  in  place  of  being, 
as  has  so  long  been  supposed,  a  congeries  of  suns  many 
times  more  distant  than  the  lucid  stars,  it  is  formed  of 
myriads  of  relatively  minute  orbs  compared  with  which 
those  lucid  stars  are  as  the  giant  planets  of  our  solar  sys- 
tem compared  with  the  asteroids  ? 

It  is  very  clear,  then,  what  views  we  are  to  form  re- 
specting the  Milky  Way.  If  the  galaxy  is,  first,  a  cluster- 
ing aggregation  separated  from  us  by  an  interval  com- 
paratively clear  of  small  stars ;  secondly,  so  shaped  thai 
the  cross-section  of  the  stream  is  everywhere  not  far  from 
a  roughly  circular  figure ;  and  thirdly,  associated  very 
closely  with  the  bright  stars  seen  in  the  same  field  of 
view,  then  must  its  structure  be  somewhat  as  shown  in 
Fig.  8,  in  which  the  disks  represent  lucid  stars  (very 
much  exaggerated  of  course  in  size),  while  the  fine  dotting 
represents  the  spiral  of  relatively  minute  stars,  clustering 
along  the  spiral  group  of  leading  stars.  It  will  be  seen 
*it  once  how,  to  an  observer  placed  at  S,  the  various  feat- 
ires   of   the   Milky  Way  can  be   accounted  for  by  this 

*  If  the  clouds  of  a  summer  sky  arrayed  themselves  in  rank  and  file 
so  as  exactly  to  correspond  to  the  panes  of  the  window  through  which 
I  view  them  as  I  write,  I  should  not  regard  the  coincidence  as  more 
amazing  than  that  involved  by  the  observed  relations  of  the  stars  if 
these  relations  are  due  to  chance  distribution. 


MINOU  STAUS.  273 

figure.  Toward  a  would  lie  the  gap  in  Argo ;  toward  b 
two  branches,  one  faint,  and  in  part  evanescent  through 
vastness  of  distance,  the  other  forming  the  brightest  part 
of  tne  spiral ;  toward  d  the  projection  in  Cepheus ;  toward 
e  the  faint  part  of  the  Milky  Way  in  Gemini  and  Mono- 
ceros.  The  Coal-sacks  would  be  simply  accounted  for  by 
conceiving  that  branches  seen  toward  the  same  general 
direction,  but  at  different  distances,  do  not  lie  in  the 


Fig.  8.— The  Milky  Way  Regarded  as  a  Spibai* 

same  general  plane,  and  so  may  appear  to  interlace  upon 
the  heavens.  We  are  not  only  justified  in  supposing  this, 
but  forced  to  do  so  by  the  way  in  which  the  stream  of 
milky  light  is  observed  to  meander  on  its  course  athwart 
the  heavens.  The  branching  extensions  serve  very  well 
to  account  for  the  appearance  of  the  Milky  Way  between 
Centaurus  and  Ophiuchus,  where  the  interlacing  branches 
and  the  strange  convolutions  and  clustering  aggregations 
described  by  Sir  John  Herschel  are  chiefly  gathered. 
18  t 


274=  OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

I  would  not  have  it  understood,  however,  that  I  at  all 
insist  on  the  general  shape  of  the  spiral  shown  in  Fig.  8. 
On  the  contrary,  that  curve  is  only  one  out  of  several 
Which  might  fairly  account  for  the  observed  appearance 
of  the  Milky  Way ;  and  I  have  often  felt  inclined  to  doubt 
whether  a  single  spiral  of  this  sort  is  in  reality  the  best 
Way  of  accounting  for  the  observed  appearance  of  the 
galactic  zone.  What  I  do  insist  upon  as  most  obviously 
forced  upon  us  by  the  evidence  is  that  (1)  the  apparent 
streams  formed  by  the  Milky  Way  upon  the  heavens  indi- 
cate the  existence  of  real  streams  in  space ;  and  (2)  that 
the  lucid  stars  seen  on  the  stream  are  really  associated 
with  the  telescopic  stars  which  form,  so  to  speak,  the 
body  of  the  stream.  Whether  that  stream  form  a  single 
•spiral  or  several,  or  ivhether,  instead  of  spirals,  there  may 
not  be  a  number  of  streams  of  small  stars,  placed  at  differ- 
ent distances  from  us,  and  lying  in  all  directions  round  the 
medial  plane  of  the  galaxy,  but  more  or  less  tilted  to  that 
plane  (the  sun  not  lying  within  any  one  of  the  streams),  are 
questions  which  can  only  be  resolved  by  the  systematic 
scrutiny  of  this  wonderful  zone. 

The  chief  points  to  be  noticed  among  the  considerations 
flowing  from  these  general  views  are  these : 

In  the  first  place,  the  only  marked  difference  between 
the  stars  of  the  leading  magnitudes  (say  the  first  ten) 
lying  in  the  galactic  zone,  and  those  lying  without  it,  con- 
sists in  the  fact  that  the  former  are  associated  with  count- 
less multitudes  of  smaller  stars,  while  the  latter  appear 


MINOR  STARS.  275 

not  to  have  such  attendants,  or  not  so  many  of  them.  We 
shall  see  presently  that  the  extra-galactic  stars  are  asso- 
ciated, and  in  a  very  intimate  manner,  with  groups  of 
very  minute  stars — of  stars  so  minute  indeed  as  not  to  be 
separately  discernible — so  that  astronomers  have  been  led 
to  regard  such  groups  as  external  galaxies.  But  except  in 
one  region,  we  do  not  find  outside  the  galactic  zone  any 
appearances  reminding  us  of  the  aspect  of  the  Milky  Way 
itself.  In  that  region  lie  the  two  Magellanic  Clouds,  re- 
sembling the  Milky  Way  in  their  general  appearance,  but 
seen,  when  placed  under  telescopic  scrutiny,  to  differ 
from  it  in  this,  that  among  the  minute  stars  which  cause 
the  milky  light  are  numbers  of  nebulae,  of  classes  not 
found  commonly,  if  at  all,  in  the  galactic  zone. 

In  the  second  place,  we  must  conclude  that  uncounted 
millions  of  stars  exist  which  are  very  minute  indeed  in 
comparison  with  those  which  we  have  been  led  to  regard 
as  suns.  That  these  relatively  minute  orbs  may  be  abso- 
lutely large — far  larger,  for  instance,  than .  our  own  earth 
— may  indeed  be  accepted  as  certain.  But  it  is  difficult 
,to  believe  that  they  subserve  purposes  similar  to  those  of 
our  own  sun.  One  cannot  but  see  that  orbs  such  as  these 
would  not  have  that  permanence  of  character,  as  sources 
of  heat-supply,  which  would  seem  to  be  necessary  in  the 
case  of  a  real  sun.  We  know,  indeed,  that  among  the 
small  stars  of  the  Milky  Way  there  is  a  proneness  to  ir- 
regular variation  which  is  not  recognized,  or  is  altogether 
exceptional,  among  the  lucid  stars.     In  the  neighborhood 


2?6  OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OtTMS. 

of  the  Milky  Way,  with  scarcely  an  exception,  those  tem- 
porary stars  have  blazed  out  which  have  formed  a  subject 
of  such  perplexity  to  the  thoughtful  astronomer.  Under 
what  conditions  the  small  orbs  in  the  Milky  "Way  actually 
exist,  whether  clusters  of  them  will  eventually  segregate 
from  their  neighbors  to  form  suns,  or  whether,  after  long 
voyaging  in  spiral  and  contorted  paths  under  the  varying 
influences  of  the  attractions  of  leading  stars,  these  minute 
orbs  will,  for  the  most  part,  be  forced  to  settle  down  as 
attendants  round  the  major  ones,  it  is  as  yet  altogether 
impossible  to  judge.  It  may  be  that  they  bear  the  same 
sort  of  relation  to  the  leading  stars  that  certain  cometic 
and  meteoric  families,  referred  to  in  Chapter  IX.,  bear  to 
the  major  planets  of  the  solar  system,  not  being  in  any 
case  absolutely  dependent  on  any  large  star,  but  yet  re- 
turning in  cycles,  which  must  be  measured  by  millions  of 
aeons,  to  temporary  dependence  on  one  sun  after  another ; 
until  in  the  course  of  time,  under  the  action  of  processes 
somewhat  resembling  those  I  have  conceived  to  take 
place  in  the  formation  of  the  solar  system,  the  conditions 
under  which  they  move  will  have  become  so  far  altered  as 
to  lead  to  the  breaking  up  of  the  Milky  Way  into  distinct 
systems.  Indeed,  as  Sir  William  Herschel  was  led  by 
other  considerations  long  since  to  point  out,  there,  are. 
signs  in  parts  of  the  Milky  Way  which  would  seem  to  in- 
dicate that  several  such  systems  have  already  reached  an 
advanced  stage  of  development. 

But  perhaps  the  most  important  conclusion  deduciHe 


MINOR  STARS.  277 

from  the  circumstances  I  have  dwelt  upon  (assuming  mj 
interpretation  of  them  to  be  in  the  main  correct)  is  this, 
that  we  can  no  longer  suppose  we  have  in  any  direction 
pierced  to  the  limits  of  the  sidereal  system.  So  long  as  a 
general  approach  to  uniformity  of  distribution  was  under- 
stood to  prevail  within  that  system,  there  was  a  ready 
means  of  determining  when  the  telescopist  had  reached  in 
any  given  direction  the  limits  of  the  system.  To  use  the 
words  of  Professor  Nichol,  "  When  an  eye  is  directed  to- 
ward a  prolonged  bed  of  stars,  there  is  no  reason  to  fancy 
that  it  has  reached  the  termination  of  that  stratum  so 
long  as  there  appears  behind  the  luminaries  which  are 
individually  seen  any  milky  or  nebulous  light ;  such  light 
probably  arising  always  from  the  blended  rays  of  remoter 
masses.  But  if,  after  struggling  long  with  a  nebulous 
ground,  we  obtain  a  telescope  that  gives  us  additional 
light  with  a  perfectly  black  shy,  we  then  have  every  rea- 
son the  circumstances  can  furnish  on  behalf  of  the  sup- 
position that  at  length  we  have  pierced  through  the  stra- 
tum ;  a  probability,  indeed,  which  can  be  converted  into 
certainty  in  only  one  way — viz.,  when  no  increase  of  orbs 
follows  on  the  application  of  a  still  larger  instrument." 
Sir  John  Herschel  has  expressed  a  similar  view,  and 
there  can,  indeed,  be  no  doubt  that,  adopting  the  funda- 
mental hypothesis  on  which  accepted  views  are  founded, 
the  test  above  described  is  an  absolutely  certain  one. 

But  if,  instead  of  penetrating  further  and  further  into 
space  when  "struggling  long  with  a  nebulous  ground " 


278        OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

(to  use  Professor  Nichol's  striking  but  somewhat  incorrect 
expression),  we  have  in  reality  only  been  searching  with 
more  and  more  minuteness  into  a  definite  cluster  or 
stream  of  stars,  we  can  no  longer  come  to  the  conclusion 
he  has  insisted  upon.  We  have  reached  the  limits  of 
minuteness  which  the  stars  of  the  cluster  or  stream  attain 
to ;  we  have  learned  perhaps  all  that  we  can  learn  about 
that  cluster  or  stream  ;  but  we  can  no  more  be  said  to  have 
reached  the  limits  of  the  sidereal  system  in  that  direction 
than  we  can  be  said  to  have  reached  the  outermost  bounds 
of  the  universe  in  the  direction  of  the  cluster  in  Hercules, 
when  that  magnificent  object  has  been  thoroughly  re- 
solved with  the  telescope. 

Here,  then,  if  I  have  seemed  to  narrow  the  limits  of 
the  sidereal  system  by  bringing  the  star-myriads  of  the 
Milky  Way,  which  had  been  regarded  as  many  times  fur- 
ther from  us  than  the  lucid  stars,  into  direct  association 
with  these  luminaries,  I  make  amends  by  pointing  out 
that  in  all  probability  the  limits  of  the  sidereal  system 
lie  far  beyond  the  range  of  the  most  powerful  telescopes 
man  has  yet  constructed.  In  fact,  there  is  here  a  some- 
what singular  interchange  of  position  between  the  new 
and  the  accepted  theories.  According  to  the  views  usu- 
ally accepted,  the  small  stars  in  the  Milky  Way  are  really 
as  large,  on  the  average,  as  the  lucid  stars ;  whereas,  ac- 
cording to  my  views,  they  are  relatively  minute.  But 
according  to  the  acccepted  theories,  the  scattered  stars 
of  very  low  magnitude  in  the  extra -galactic  heavens 


MINOR  STARS.  279 

must  be  regarded  as  relatively  minute,  since  it  has 
been  rendered  certain,  according  to  those  theories,  that 
the  limits  of  the  sidereal  system  are  relatively  close  in 
this  direction,  and  we  cannot  suppose  these  stars  to  lie 
beyond  those  limits  (as  they  must  do,  if  really  large). 
Now,  according  to  my  views,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent 
these  minute  stars  from  including  among  their  number 
orbs  as  vast  as  Sirius,  or  many  times  vaster.  Nay,  even 
within  the  galactic  zone  itself  there  are  stars  to  which  my 
theory  gives  as  noble  proportions  as  the  accepted  views. 
For  in  the  southern  Coal-sack  there  are  minute  telescopic 
stars,  as  Sir  John  Herschel  tells  us,  and  these  orbs,  ac- 
cording to  the  accepted  views,  must  be  regarded  as  be- 
longing to  the  galactic  circle,  though  inexplicably  segre- 
gated from  their  fellows.  According  to  the  views  I  have 
been  led  to  form,  many  of  these  telescopic  stars  must  be 
regarded  as  suns  lying  far  beyond  the  galactic  spiral,  or 
perhaps  associated  with  outer  whorls  of  this  spiral  which 
ho  telescope  made  by  man  can  ever  reveal  to  us. 

And  this  leads  me  to  consider  two  phenomena  which 
are  altogether  inexplicable,  I  conceive,  on  any  theory  ex- 
cept mine. 

The  first  is  the  existence  of  excessively  faint  streams  of 
light — star-streams,  doubtless,  though  the  components 
are  not  separately  visible  —  in  certain  regions  of  the 
heavens.  Sir  John  Herschel,  who  detected  this  strange 
phenomena,  speaks  of  the  streams  as  so  very  faint  that 
the  idea  of  illusion  has  continually  arisen  subsequently ; 


280  OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

yet  he  dwells  far  too  clearly  on  the  charactistics  of  the 
phenomenon  for  any  doubt  to  remain  as  to  its  reality. 
The  faintest  possible  stippling  of  the  field  of  view — the 
minute  points  of  light  being  obviously  there,  though  it 
was  impossible  to  see  them  individually  —  a  mottling 
which  moved  with  the  stars  as  he  moved  the  tube  to  and 
fro,  such  are  the  terms  in  which  Sir  John  Herschel  speaks 
of  this  interesting  phenomenon. 

Now  no  doubt  whatever  can  exist  that  if  these  faint 
streams  really  belong  to  the  sidereal  system  they  are  left 
altogether  unaccounted  for  by  the  ordinary  views  respect- 
ing the  structure  of  that  system.  There  is  no  continuity 
between  the  stars  composing  them  and  even  the  minutest 
telescopic  stars  visible  in  the  same  general  direction ;  so 
that  a  vast  void  must  separate  them  from  the  outermost 
of  those  telescopic  stars.  According  to  my  theory,  they 
probably  belong  to  outlying  whorls  of  the  spiral  galaxy, 
and  the  telescopic  stars  seen  upon  them  bear  the  same  re- 
lation to  them  that  the  lucid  stars  bear  to  the  Milky  Way. 

The  second  point  is  perhaps  even  more  striking.  In 
certain  directions  Sir  John  Herschel  recognized  the  exist- 
ence of  two  or  more  distinctly  marked  classes  of  stars,  as 
though,  he  said,  definite  sets  of  stars,  separated  by  com- 
paratively void  intervals,  lay  in  those  directions.  It  is 
clear  that  this  association  of  the  stars  into  sets  is  as  dis- 
tinctly opposed  to  the  views  ordinarily  accepted  as  it  is 
obviously  an  arrangement  to  be  expected  according  to  my 
theory  of  the  constitution  of  the  sidereal  system. 


MINOR  STARS.  281 

But  we  need  not  proceed  beyond  the  sphere  of  the  lucid 
stars  in  order  to  find  evidence  of  such  association.  Amaz- 
ing and  incredible  as  it  may  at  first  sight  appear,  those 
orbs  which  have  been  visible  during  so  many  thousands  of 
years  before  the  telescope  was  invented,  the  stars  which 
Hevelius  and  Ptolemy  could  chart  and  catalogue,  have 
been  teaching  men  with  unmistakable  clearness  a  lesson 
which  hitherto  has  been  persistently  neglected. 

It  had  long  since  occurred  to  me  that  the  lucid  stars 
are  not  spread  over  the  heavens  with  that  general  ap- 
proach to  uniformity  required  by  the  accepted  theories. 
In  constructing  my  gnomonic  charts  of  the  heavens, 
though  these  include  only  the  stars  of  the  first  five  orders 
of  magnitude,  I  recognized  clear  traces  of  the  existence 
of  star-streams  and  star-reticulations,  rich  regions  and 
barren  spaces,  which  the  laws  of  probability  would  not 
permit  me  to  regard  as  due  to  chance-distribution.* 

*  I  tried  the  experiment  of  distributing  2,000  points  at  random  over 
a  square  surface.  It  is  not  quite  so  easy  as  it  might  at  first  be  thought 
to  secure  a  perfectly  random  distribution.  The  plan  I  adopted  was  the 
following  :  Taking  a  book  full  of  numerals  (I  used  a  table  of  loga- 
rithms), and  opening  it  at  random,  I  brought  the  point  of  a  pencil  down 
on  the  open  page.  AVhatever  numeral  the  pencil-point  fell  nearest  to, 
I  entered  in  a  long  list  of  numerals  formed  on  this  plan.  Then  divid- 
ing the  sides  of  my  square  into  100  parts,  and  the  square  itself  into 
10,000  small  squares,  I  took  the  numerals  in  sets  of  four  to  indicate 
the  places  of  a  number  of  dots.  Thus,  supposing  the  first  four  numer- 
als to  be  2371,  I  took  that  small  square  which  was  the  twenty-third 
from  one  side  of  the  large  square  and  the  seventy-first  from  an  adjacent 
side,  and  marked  a  dot  in  that  square.  Doing  this  for  2,000  dots  I  bad 
a  perfectly  random  distribution.  No  well-marked  streams,  reticula- 
tions, vacuities,  or  rich  regions  could  be  recognized  in  the  result.     I 


282        OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

But  while  my  larger  atlas  was  in  progress  this  opinion 
grew  into  conviction.  In  some  of  the  maps  the  bareness 
of  certain  regions  contrasted  so  strangely  with  the  rich- 
ness of  others  as  to  give  an  unfinished  appearance  to  the 
work.  I  determined  that  as  soon  as  I  had  leisure  I 
would  combine  in  two  large  maps  of  hemispheres  the 
twelve  maps  of  my  atlas,  in  order  to  see  what  the  real  re- 
lations might  be  which  were  only  partially  indicated  in 
maps  covering  but  a  tenth  part  of  the  heavens.*  I  se- 
lected for  this  purpose  a  mode  of  projection  described  in 
my  "  Handbook  of  the  Stars,"  but  first  suggested,  I  have 
since  found,  by  Sir  John  Herschel.  It  represents  equal 
areas  on  the  celestial  sphere  by  equal  areas  in  piano  ;  so 
that,  though  there  is  considerable  distortion,  the  real  rel- 
ative richness  of  different  regions  of  the  stellar  heavens 
is  accurately  represented.  The  accompanying  large  plate 
(Fig.  9)  represents  a  reduction  of  the  maps  thus  con- 
structed. 

I  leave  the  exhibition  of  minor  peculiarities  of  stellar 
distribution  —  star-streams,  star-reticulations,  star-clus- 
ters, and  so  on — to  the  maps  themselves,  which  will,  I 
think,  be  found  to  well  repay  careful  study.  But  I  ap- 
plied to  the  original  maps  a  further  process  of  investiga- 

eonsider,  too,  that  where  so  many  dots  were  marked  in,  one  trial  was  as 
good  as  a  large  number. 

*  The  maps  of  my  atlas  overlap  each  of  the  twelve,  including  a  tenth 
part  of  the  celestial  sphere.  The  reader  may  perhaps  be  surprised 
that  the  peculiarities  I  refer  to  should  not  have  been  noticed  while 
other  star  atlases  were  constructed.  But  the  great  distortion  in  all 
former  star  atlases  will  suffice  to  explain  the  circumstance. 


MINOR  STABS.  283 

tion  in  order  to  deduce  the  real  characteristics  of  the 
rich  and  barren  regions  I  had  noticed  while  constructing 
the  large  atlas.  The  plan  I  adopted  was  sufficiently  sim- 
ple. I  cut  out  the  portions  of  the  map  which  seemed 
richly  or  sparsely  dotted  with  stars  and  weighed  the  pa- 
per. The  relative  weights  of  different  portions  gave  me 
the  relative  areas,  and  thus  it  was  only  necessary  to 
count  the  number  of  stars  in  order  to  determine  the  rela- 
tive richness  of  stellar  distribution. 

The  regions  I  selected  for  special  examination  by  this 
method  were  the  following : 

1.  A  nearly  circular  region  in  the  northern  heavens 
surrounding  the  projection  of  the  Milky  Way  toward  the 
North  Pole,  and  having  a  radius  of  about  one-fifth  of  the 
map's  diameter.     I  call  this  the  richest  northern  region. 

2.  A  much  larger  region,  including  the  last,  and  occupy- 
ing the  middle  of  the  northern  map.  I  call  this  the  rich 
central  northern  region. 

3.  A  large  circular  region,  occupying  the  middle  of  the 
southern  map.     I  call  this  the  rich  central  southern  region, 

4.  A  somewhat  triangular  region,  included  within  the 
last,  and  occupying  the  upper  right-hand  part  of  the 
southern  map  (between  Sirius,  Canopus,  and  the  constel- 
lation Crux).     I  call  this  the  richest  southern  region. 

5-6.  The  remaining,  or  outer,  parts  of  the  northern  and 
southern  maps. 

7-8.  Two  very  barren  regions  bordering  on  the  rich 
northern  central  region — one  toward  the  lower  half  of  the 


284 


OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 


northern  map,  the  other  toward  the  upper  half.  I  call 
these  the  poorer  northern  regions  I.  and  II. 

9-10.  Two  corresponding  southern  regions,  one  occupy- 
ing the  upper  right-hand  quadrant  of  the  northern  map, 
the  other  occupying  the  lower  quadrant  of  the  same  side. 
These  I  call  the  poorer  southern  regions  I.  and  II. 

Lastly,  I  take  the  northern  and  southern  portions  of  the 
Milky  Way,  and  the  gaps  and  lacunae  in  the  Milky  Way. 

Having  selected  these  regions  for  comparison,*  and  ap- 
plied to  them  separately  "  the  scissors  and  balance  "  test, 
I  have  deduced  the  following  results  : 


Name  of  Begion. 


Northern — 

Milky  Way 

Richest  region 

Rich  central  region. 

Outer  region 

Poor  region  (I.) 
Poor  region  (II.)  . . . 

Gaps  in  Milky  Way. . . 

Southern — 

Poor  region  (I.) 

Poor  region  (II.). . . . 

Outer  region 

Rich  central  region. 

Richest  region 

Milky  Way 

Milky  Way  as  a  whole 


Area  (Area  of 
Hemisphere,  as  1). 


A 

A 

A 
A 
A 
A 


A 
* 
* 

A 
A 


aVffths  of  sphere 


Number 

of  Lucid 

Stars. 


497 
622 
1,420 
1,070 
201 
175 

20 


181 

216 
893 

2,467 
895 
618 


Richness 

(Average  = 

5,850). 


9,940 
9,050 

6,248 
3,923 
2,948 
2,567 

1,240 


2,361 
3,198 
3,572 
9,868 
13,126 
13,596 


11,681 


*  There  is  some  room  for  choice  in  taking  the  boundaries  of  the 
regions,  and  for  convenience  I  have  so  taken  them  that  the  smaller 
regions  are  made  equal  to  each  other  in  area. 


MINOR  STABS.  285 

But  surprising  as  these  results  may  seem,  the  question 
whether  such  peculiarities  of  stellar  arrangement  may 
not  be  regarded  as  due  to  chance-distribution  remains  to 
be  considered. 

It  has  been  so  often  urged  that  among  a  very  large 
number  of  stars  such  peculiarities  might  be  looked  for 
that  many  will  be  disposed  to  dispute  the  assertion  that 
uniformity,  not  peculiarity  of  distribution,  is  to  be  ex- 
pected among  a  large  number  of  points  spread  over  any 
surface  according  to  true  chance-distribution.  Yet  so  it 
is.  The  laws  of  probability  tell  us  that  whereas  among  a 
few  such  points  peculiarities  need  not  surprise  us,  uni- 
formity of  distribution  will  inevitably  appear  where  there 
are  many  points,  unless  some  special  law  is  in  operation 
to  prevent  such  a  result.* 

To  illustrate  the  amazing  weight  of  probability  in  favor 
of  the  existence  of  laws  of  aggregation  and  segregation 
among  the  lucid  stars,  I  will  state  the  result  of  a  process 
of  calculation  I  have  applied  (in  accordance  with  the 
recognized  laws   for   determining   probabilities)    to   the 


*  As  a  familiar  illustration  of  the  law  of  probabilities  in  question,  we 
may  take  the  case  of  tossing  a  coin.  If  a  coin  be  tossed  six  times,  there 
will  be  nothing  very  surprising  in  the  recurrence  of  "  head  "  (say)  four, 
five,  or  even  six  times— that  is,  if  two  thirds,  five  sixths,  or  the  whole 
of  the  series  of  results  are  of  one  kind.  But  if  we  calculate  the  chance 
that  in  six  thousand  tossings  there  should  be  so  many  as  four  thousand 
results  of  one  kind,  we  find  it  so  minute  that  the  concurrent  testimony 
of  all  mankind  could  never  make  it  credible  that  such  an  event  had 
happened.  The  probability  is  the  same  as  that  referred  to  in  the  text 
a  few  lines  further  on. 


286        OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

statistical  relations  presented  by  the  two  rich  regions  in 
the  northern  and  southern  hemispheres : 

The  vast  scale  of  the  universe  of  the  nebulse  (or,  as  it 
has  been  called,  the  universe  of  universes),  as  conceived 
by  Sir  W.  Herschel,  is  well  known.  Now,  the  probability 
that  tlie  observed  relation  results  from  chance-distribution 
is  many  millions  of  times  less  than  the  chance  of  drawing 
one  particular  grain,  smaller  many  million-fold  than  the 
minutest  object  visible  in  the  'most  powerful  microscope  and 
lying  ivithin  a  space  compactly  filled  with  similar  grains, 
and  large  enough  to  inclose  many  millions  of  the  universes 
of  universes. 

The  probability  that  the  more  remarkable  relations  pre- 
sented by  the  richest  and  poorest  smaller  regions  result 
from  chance-distribution  is  indefinitely  more  minute  even 
than  this  inconceivably  minute  probability. 

But  since  the  above  lines  were  written  I  have  gone 
much  further  with  the  illustration  of  this  matter  by  star- 
charting.  For  I  have  combined  in  a  single  chart  all  the 
forty  large  folio  charts  of  Argelander's  Atlas,  containing 
no  less  than  324,198  stars,  all  presented  on  the  same  iso- 
graphic  projection  as  the  chart  shown  in  Fig.  9.  In  this 
map  of  many  stars,  the  place  of  the  Milky  Way  is  actually 
"  mapped  in  "  by  the  stars  themselves,  not  as  here,  by  a 
separate  indication.  I  would  refer  those  who  desire  fuller 
information  respecting  the  arrangements  of  the  stars  in 
space  to  this  chart  and  its  explanation  (published  by  Mr. 
Brothers,  of  14  St.  Ann  Square,  Manchester). 


MINOR  STABS.  287 

The  evidence  in  favor  of  special  laws  of  stellar  distribu- 
tion is,  however,  far  from  exhausted.* 

Quite  early  in  my  consideration  of  the  subject  I  am 
now  upon,  the  idea  suggested  itself  to  me  that  in  the 
proper  motions  of  the  stars  we  have  a  means  of  forming 
an  estimate  of  the  distances  of  these  orbs ;  and  further,  of 
detecting  any  laws  associating  them  together,  whether 
into  streams  or  clusters;  and  that  the  evidence  thus  ob- 
tained was  likely  to  be  in  many  respects  more  trustworthy 
than  that  afforded  by  the  apparent  magnitudes  of  the 
stars.  Two  processes  of  inquiry  suggested  themselves. 
The  first  consisted  in  a  careful  comparison  of  the  mean 
motions  of  stars  of  different  apparent  size,  in  order  to  de- 
termine whether,  on  the  average,  small  stars  are  so  far  off 
that  we  can  look  upon  them  as  in  reality  no  smaller  on 
the  average  than  those  which  appear  larger.  The  second 
consisted  in  charting  down  the  proper  motions,  so  as  to 
detect  any  signs  of  star-drift  which  might  haply  appear 
in  different  parts  of  the  heavens.  I  confess  that  I  had 
not  by  any  means  expected  results  so  strikingly  confirma- 
tory of  my  views  as  those  I  actually  obtained. 

The  first  method  of  inquiry,  instead  of  giving  an  aver- 
age amount  of  proper  motion  to  the  smaller  stars  some- 
what, or  perhaps  even  considerably,  greater  than  was  to 
be  expected,  according  to  the  theory  which  sets  these 

*  Indeed,  I  am  unable,  within  the  space  here  available  to  me,  even 
to  touch  on  a  tenth  part  of  the  evidence  I  have  gathered  together  in 
my  note-books  and  portfolio  of  charts. 


288        OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

stars  at  an  enormous  distance,  actually  gave  them  a  mean 
motion  equal  to  that  of  stars  of  the  first  three  magni- 
tudes. It  became  evident,  then,  that  not  only  are  small 
stars  (I  am  here  speaking  of  stars  visible  to  the  naked 
eye)  mixed  up  as  I  had  thought  with  bright  stars  visible 
in  the  same  general  direction,  but  that  distance  is  less 
available  to  explain  the  smallness  of  the  stars  even  than  I 
had  supposed.  I  had  thought  that  certainly  a  large  pro- 
portion of  the  small  stars  must  in  reality  be  very  far  from 
us;  but  it  appeared  that  the  proportion  of  stars  whose 
smallness  is  so  to  be  accounted  for  is  in  reality  exceed- 
ingly minute.  There  must  therefore  be  myriads  of  really 
small  stars  for  every  leading  orb. 

The  second  method  of  research  led  to  the  strange  re- 
sult that  in  many  parts  of  the  heavens  a  community  of 
motion  can  be  recognized,  among  star-groups  far  larger 
in  extent  than  any  such  groups  as  I  had  expected  to  find 
thus  drifting  through  space.  Knowing  that  whatever 
view  we  form  of  the  sidereal  universe,  we  must  yet  recog- 
nize the  fact  that  in  every  direction  stars  at  different  dis- 
tances are  visible,  I  had  not  hoped  to  find  over  any  large 
region  of  space  the  traces  of  a  community  of  motion. 
Nor  even  in  small  regions  had  I  hoped  to  recognize  very 
decided  traces  of  star-drift,  because  I  was  conscious  that, 
even  with  three  or  four  stars  really  forming  a  drifting 
group,  there  would  nearly  always  be  found  three  or  four 
others,  either  much  further  off  or  much  nearer,  and  altoj 
gether   dissociated  from   the    drifting    set.      Indeed,   I 


MINOR  8TAUS.  289 

imagined,  when  I  began  the  inquiry,  that  the  most  re- 
markable instance  of  star-drift  in  the  heavens  was  that 
detected  (though  differently  explained)  by  Madler  in  the 
constellation  Taurus. 


-it 


/ 

Fig.  10.— Drift  of  the  Stars  in  the  Constellations  Cancer  and  Gemini. 

I  found,  however,  that  in  other  regions  a  far  more  ob- 
vious tendency  to  drift  can  be  recognized.     Perhaps  the 

most  remarkable  instance  of  all  is  that  illustrated  in  the 
19 


290        OTHER  WOBLDS  TRAN  OUUB. 

plate  (Fig.  10).  This  picture  represents  the  motions  in 
the  constellations  Cancer  and  Gemini.  It  will  be  noticed 
that  though  here  and  there  stars  apparently  not  belonging 
to  the  system  appear  in  the  same  range  of  view,  yet  the 
star-drift  is  unmistakable.  The  general  parallelism  of  mo- 
tion is  very  striking ;  and  the  difference  in  the  amount  of 


=- - —       ai*Zs'  i 


/ 


y 


Fig.  11.— Obseeved  Proper  Motions  of  Stars  in  Ursa  Major  and  Neighbor- 
hood. 

motion  observed  indifferent  stars  is  only  what  was  to 
be  expected  in  a  star-group  whose  range  in  distance,  if 
equivalent  to  its  lateral  extent,  must  be  such  as  fully  to 
account  for  the  range  in  the  amount  of  apparent  motion. 

Fig.  11  exhibits  one  out  of  the  many  parts  of  the  heavens 
in  which  different  sets  of  stars  are  observed  to  be  drifting 
in  different  ways. 


MINOR  STARS.  291 

It  will  be  seen  that  here  there  are  three  sets — those  in- 
cluded in  the  space  a,  those  in  space  b,  and  those  left  un- 
inclosed.  These  groups  are  very  obviously  drifting,  each 
in  its  special  direction.  The  stars  within  the  space  b  are 
ft,  y,  8,  e,  and  £of  the  Greater  Bear  with  three  smaller  stars. 
Their  drift  is,  I  think,  most  significant.  If  in  truth  the 
parallelism  and  equality  of  motion  are  to  be  regarded  as 
accidental,  the  coincidence  is  one  of  a  most  remarkable 
character.  But  such  an  interpretation  can  no  longer  be 
looked  upon  as  admissible.  For 
Mr.  Huggins  has  found  that  these  m 

stars  (3,  7,  8,  e,  and  f  are  all  reced-  j£  ~ 

ing  from  the  earth  at  the  rate  of      "^  ♦' 

about  seventeen  miles  per  second.  ^  1  m  y 

This  was  the  one  piece  of  evidence  f  v 

necessary  to  establish  my  theory,  Fm>  12._0bser^d  Propeb 
that    these   stars   form   a  drifting       motions  of  stars  in  head 

of  Aries. 

system.  But  the  peculiarity  is  only 

one  of  a  series  of  instances,  some  of  which  are  scarcely 
less  striking.  One  of  these  is  presented  in  Fig.  12,  in 
which  the  proper  motions  in  the  stars  a,  /3  and  7  Ari^ 
etis,  and  four  other  stars  in  the  neighborhood,  are  ex- 
hibited.* 

Here  /?  and  7  may  be  regarded  as  drifting  with  a,  but 
having  a  motion  of  their   own  in   addition,  sufficing  to 

*  In  all  three  figures  the  proper  motion  indicated  by  the  length  of  the 
arrow  attached  to  a  star  corresponds  to  the  star's  motion  in  36,00© 
years. 


292        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

account  for  the  want  of  strict  parallelism  between  tkeir 
apparent  motion  and  that  of  a.  The  other  stars  seem 
obviously  to  belong  to  the  same  system. 

I  am  led  by  the  facts  which  have  here  been  briefly  con- 
sidered rather  to  urge  those  who  have  time  and  inclina- 
tion to  inquire  carefully  into  the  minuter  details  of  the 
sidereal  heavens  than  to  insist  on  any  views  of  my  own. 
While  I  recognize  the  wisdom  and  necessity  of  that 
course  which  the  Herschels  adopted  in  taking  a  wide  view 
of  the  sidereal  system,  and  in  dealing  rather  with  general 
results  than  with  special  peculiarities,  I  think  the  time 
has  come  when  another  course  is  possible  and  advisable. 
The  Herschels  having  surveyed  the  field  of  heaven,  it  be- 
hooves us  now  to  go  over  it  with  a  close  and  searching 
scrutiny.  To  consider  averages  now  is  to  level  the 
scarcely  perceptible  undulations  in  our  field  of  research, 
as  well  as  its  better  marked  ridges  or  depressions; 
whereas  we  require,  on  the  contrary,  to  exaggerate  the 
variations  of  level,  so  that  we  may  determine  with  more 
certainty  what  are  the  peculiarities  presented  by  that 
most  interesting  field  to  man's  contemplation.  Or,  to 
change  the  illustration,  and  to  quote  the  words  of  the 
greatest  modern  master  of  that  kind  of  research  which  I 
have  been  advocating,  "  We  must  not  be  deterred  from 
dwelling  consecutively  and  closely  on  these  speculative 
views  by  any  idea  of  their  hopelessness  which  the  ob- 
jectors against  '  paper  astronomy  '  may  entertain,  or  by 
the  real  slenderness  of  the  material  threads  out  of  which 


MINOR  STARS.  293 

any  connected  theory  of  the  universe  has  (at  present)  to  be 
woven.  '  Hypotheses  Jingo '  *  in  this  stage  of  our  knowl- 
edge is  quite  as  good  a  motto  as -Newton's  c  Non  Jingo, 
provided  always  they  be  not  hypotheses  as  to  modes  of 
physical  action  for  which  experience  gives  no  warrant."  f 


*  It  should  be  noticed  that  Newton  defined  wliat  he  meant  by  "  hy^ 
potheses"  when  he  said  "  hypotheses  non  jingo,"  and  that  he  did  not 
object  to  what  have  now  commonly  (through  the  careless  use  of  words) 
come  to  be  regarded  as  hypotheses.  Newton  defined  a  hypothesis  as 
whatever  is  not  deduced  from  the  phenomena. 

f  From  a  letter  addressed  by  Sir  J.  Herschel  to  the  present  writer^ 
August  1,  1869. 


294  OTHER  WORLDS  THAJT  OURS. 

OHAPTEB  XII. 

THE  NEBULA  :  ARE  THEY  EXTERNAL  GALAXIES  ? 

In  the  last  chapter  I  have  indicated  reasons  for  believ* 
ing  that  the  sidereal  system  extends  far  beyond  the  range 
of  the  most  powerful  telescopes  man  has  yet  been  able  to 
construct.  It  need  hardly  be  said  that,  supposing  this 
view  to  be  correct,  we  cannot  possibly  see  any  external 
galaxies  unless  they  surpass  our  own  many  thousands  of 
times  in  richness  and  splendor.  Every  analogy  that  we 
have  for  our  guidance  points  to  the  conclusion  that  if  our 
galaxy  have  limits,  and  there  exist  in  space  other  galax- 
ies, then  those  outer  systems  must  be  separated  from  ours 
by  spaces  exceeding  the  dimensions  of  the  several  galax- 
ies many  thousand  or  many  million-fold  in  extent.  "We 
know  that  the  distances  separating  the  satellites  from 
their  primaries  exceed  in  an  enormous  ratio  the  dimen- 
sions of  the  satellites.  The  distances  separating  the 
planets  from  each  other  exceed  in  an  enormous  ratio  the 
dimensions  of  the  planets.  The  distances  separating  the 
solar  system  from  others  enormously  exceed  the  dimen- 
sions of  the  various  solar  systems.  And  we  may  conclude 
that  in  all  probability  the  distances  separating  our  side- 
real system  from  other  similar  systems  in  space  must 
exceed  in  an  enormous  ratio  the  dimensions  of  our  gal- 
axy, and  of  all  other  such  systems. 


THE  NEBULA.  295 

That  the  sidereal  system  has  limits  I  do  not  doubt. 
Of  course  it  may  be  co-extensive  with  space — that  is,  ab- 
solutely infinite  in  extent.  But  we  have  no  reason  for 
believing  that  in  rising  step  by  step,  from  system  to  sys- 
tem, until  we  have  reached  the  highest  class  of  system 
known  to  us,  we  have  reached  the  real  summit  of  that 
perhaps  altogether  limitless  range  of  steps.  We  know, 
indeed,  that  if  light  do  not  suffer  extinction  in  traversing 
space  (and  we  have  as  yet  no  evidence  that  it  does),  the 
extent  of  the  sidereal  system  must  be  limited,  since  other- 
wise the  whole  of  the  star-lit  sky  should  shine  with  the 
brilliancy  of  sunlight.*      And  we  may  carry  this  argu- 

*  This  is,  perhaps,  obvious ;  but  if  not,  the  following  proof  may  be 
accepted  :  Let  the  whole  of  space  be  conceived  divided  into  spherical 
shells,  having  our  earth  at  the  centre,  the  thickness  of  each  shell  being 
t.  Then  taking  two  shells,  one  at  a  distance  r,  the  other  at  a  distance 
r'  (both  r  and  r  much  greater  than  t),  we  see  that  the  number  of  stars 
in  these  shells  will  be  proportional  to  r*r  and  r'*r  respectively — that  is, 
will  vary  as  the  product  of  the  thickness  of  the  shell  and  the  square  of 
its  radius.  (Herb  I  am  not  concerned  with  those  departures  from  uni- 
formity which  I  have  considered  in  the  last  chapter,  because  I  suppose 
each  shell  large  enough  to  include  within  it  all  varieties  of  distribution 
and  aggregation.  This  applies  also  to  what  follows.)  Now  the  aver- 
age apparent  size  of  the  stars  of  one  shell  will  be  to  the  average  appar- 
ent, size  of  stars  in  the  other  in  the  inverse  proportion  of  the  respec- 
tive radii  of  the  shells,  the  intrinsic  brightness  of  the  light  received 
from  the  stars  of  each  set  being  equal.  Thus  the  total  amount  of  light 
from  the  stars  of  one  shell  is  to  the  total  amount  of  light  from  stars  in 
the  other  as 

1  1 

rV  x  —  :  r'*r  x  —  =  1:1. 

1 

Hence,  supposing  the  amount  of  light  received  from  one  shell  to  be  — th 

k 

part  of   that  which  would  be  received  if  the  whole  celestial  sphere 


296        OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

ment  even  further.  For,  though  the  sidereal  system 
should  be  limited,  but  other  systems  similar  to  it  spread 
throughout  the  infinity  of  space,  there  would  still  result 
this  ineffable  blaze  of  Light,  surpassing  the  light  of  day  as 
greatly  as  the  vault  of  heaven  surpasses  the  disk  of  the 
sun.  And  this  again  would  be  true,  though  this  system 
of  systems  were  limited  in  extent,  but  surrounded  by 
similar  systems  of  systems  in  the  infinity  of  space.  And 
so  on,  let  the  order  of  systems  which  finally  becomes  in- 
finite in  number  be  what  it  may.  There  is  only  one  way 
to  escape  from  this  limitless  series  of  system-orders — 
that  is,  by  accepting  as  true  the  hypothesis  that  light 
suffers  extinction  as  it  voyages  through  space.  But  it  is 
worth  noticing,  when  we  are  actually  dealing  with  the 
infinity  of  space,  and  when,  therefore,  limitless  concep- 
tions are  not  paradoxical,  but  in  reality  as  available  for 
our  purposes  as  finite  conceptions  would  be,  that  if  we  do 
adopt  the  belief  in  an  infinite  succession  of  orders  of  sys- 

were  as  bright  as  the  sun's  (that  is,  as  a  star's)  disk — k  being  enor- 

1 
mcmsly  large,  the  amount  received  from  the  other  is  also  — th  of  this 

k 
amount,  and  the  total  from  all  the  shells  must  therefore  be 

1111 
1 H 1 =  infinity. 

fc  fc  fc  fc 
Now,  by  taking  k  terms  of  this  series  (or  k  shells  out  of  our  infinite 
series  of  shells)  we  should  get  unity,  that  is,  the  whole  heavens  lighted 
up  with  starlight  or  sunlight.  There  would  be  a  proportion  of  stars  in 
the  same  visual  line,  and  so  hiding  each  other  ;  but  since  we  can  take 
2  k,  3  k,  or  infinity  times  k  if  need  be,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the 
whole  heavens  would  be  lighted  up  with  solar  brightness.  Compare 
next  note. 


THE  NEBULA.  297 

terns ;  that  is,  first  satellite-systems,  then  planetary-sys- 
tems, then  star-systems,  then  systems  of  star-systems, 
then  systems  of  systems  of  star-systems,  and  so  on  to  in- 
finity ;  and  if  we  accept  as  true  of  this  infinite  series  what 
we  know  to  be  true  of  the  part  within  our  ken,  viz.,  that 
the  distance  between  the  components  forming  any  system 
is  indefinitely  great  compared  with  the  dimensions  of 
these  components,  we  no  longer  have  as  a  conclusion 
that  the  whole  heavens  would  be  lighted  up  with  stellar 
(that  is,  with  solar)  splendor ;  even  though,  in  this  view 
of  the  subject,  there  are  in  reality  an  infinite  number  of 
stars,  just  as  in  the  view  according  to  which  the  sidereal 
system  extends  without  interruption  to  infinity.* 

*  It  is   clear  that   we   no   longer  get,    as  in  the    previous  note,   a 
series  of  equal  small  terms.     If  we  take  our  infinite  series  of  shells  as 

1 
before  we  get  for  the  sidereal  system  n  times  —  where  n  is  finite, 

k 
n  n 

and  therefore  —  finite.     We  must  indeed  assume  —  to  be  small,  and 

k  k 

so  of  other  similar  ratios  presently  to  be  dealt  with.  With  respect  to 
the  system  of  systems,  we  have  these  considerations  to  guide  us  : 
Any  of  the  spherical  shells  within  this  system  must  supply  to  our 
skies  an  amount  of  light  indefinitely  less  than  one  of  the  shells  within 

1 
the  sidereal    system  itself,  say  — th  part  only,  k'  indefinitely   large. 

k' 

But  the  number  of   shells  falling  within   that   system  is  very  much 

greater,  say  n  times  as  great  where  n    is  finite.      Therefore   we  get 

for  the  total  amount  of  light  coming  from  the  system  of  systems  a 

n  7i 

quantity  proportional  to  .     And  so  for  the    system  of  system  of 

kk' 

n  n'  n" 

systems  we  get  a  quantity  proportional  to ,  where  k"  is  indefi- 

kKk" 


298  OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

But  whether  we  adopt  this  or  any  other  view  of  the  way 
in  which  external  systems  are  arranged,  this  at  any  rate  is 
certain,  that  if  the  stars  at  the  outer  parts  of  our  own 

nitely  large,   n"   very  large.     And  for  each  successive   order  we  get 

N 
a  multiplier  of  the  form  — ,  where  K  is  indefinitely  large,  and  n  very 

K 
V 

large  indeed.     Suppose  —  to  be  the  largest  of  all  these  multipliers, 

7T 

then  the  total  amount  of  light  received  from  the  infinite  system  of  sys- 
tems is  proportional  to  less  than 

v          v1         v3 
1  H 1 1 =  infinity 

k     \  7T  7T2  7T2 

(in  which  v  is  supposed  to  be  less  than  tt),  i.e.  to  less  than 


k    \  TT  —  V 

a  finite  quantity — which,  will  even  be  minute  if  k  and  t  are  severally 
much  greater  than  n  and  v. 

This  particular  mode  of  escaping  from  the  difficulty  suggested  by  the 
illumination  of  the  heavens,  without  adopting  the  theory  that  light 
suffers  extinction  in  its  passage  through  space,  occurred  to  me  while  I 
was  preparing  a  series  of  papers  entitled  "  A  New  Theory  of  the  Uni- 
verse," which  appeared  in  the  Student  in  the  spring  of  1869  ;  and  I 
there  exhibit  the  considerations  just  dealt  with.-  I  was  much  pleased  to 
find  from  a  letter  of  Sir  John  Herschel's  that  the  same  idea  had  (prob- 
ably earlier)  suggested  itself  to  him  ;  and  I  was  thus  encouraged  to  be- 
lieve that  I  had  not  gone  very  far  astray  in  the  whole  series  of  papers, 
whereof  the  matter  in  question  had  seemed  to  me  the  most  speculative 
portion.  The  following  are  the  words  in  which  Sir  John  Herschel  ex- 
presses the  ideas  above  dealt  with  :  "  One  of  the  arguments  advanced 
in  favor  of  the  spatial  extinction  of  light  was  that,  if  there  is  not  such 
extinction,  the  whole  heavens  ought  to  be  one  blaze  of  solar  light — 
admitting  the  universe  to  be  infinite — because  it  was  contended  that 
there  could  then  be  no  direction  in  space  in  which  the  visual  ray 
would  not  encounter  a  star  (i.e.  a  sun).  This  argument  is  fallacious, 
for  it  is  easy  to  imagine  a  constitution  of  a  universe  literally  infinite 
which  would  allow  of  any  amount  of  such  directions  of  penetration  as 
not  to  encounter  a  star.     Granting  that  it  consists  of  systems  subdivided 


TEE  NEBULA.  299 

sidereal  system  be  beyond  the  ken  of  our  most  powerful 
instruments — and  I  have  shown  that  there  are  strong 
reasons  for  this  conclusion — then  the  component  suns  of 
external  galaxies  cannot  by  any  possibility  be  visible.  So 
that,  according  to  this  view,  all  resolvable  nebulae,  at  least, 
must  be  dismissed  from  the  category  of  external  galaxies. 
Nor  will  it  be  thought  probable  that  irresolvable  nebulae 
are  external  galaxies,  if  once  that  view  of  the  extent  of 
the  sidereal  system  is  adopted. 

But  there  are  independent  considerations  on  which  I 
prefer  now  to  dwell,  for  believing  that  all  the  nebulae  be- 
long to  the  sidereal  system. 

It  will  hardly  be  necessary,  let  me  remark  in  passing, 
for  me  to  point  out  how  this  matter  is  associated  with  the 
subject  of  other  worlds.  It  is  true  that  when  once  it  is 
admitted  that  there  are  external  galaxies,  it  may  be  looked 
on  as  a  matter  of  small  importance  (so  far  as  the  subject 
of  this  treatise  is  concerned)  whether  we  can  actually  see 
those  galaxies  or  not.  I  am  not,  for  instance,  in  the  same 
position  as  Dr.  Whewell,  who  assigned  to  the  nebulae  what 

according  to  the  law  that  every  higher  order  of  bodies  in  it  should  be 
immensely  more  distant  from  the  centre  than  those  of  the  next  infe- 
rior order — this  would  happen.  Thus  in  our  own,  the  moon  is  very 
near  the  earth,  the  satellites  to  their  primaries.  These  primaries  are 
immensely  more  distant  from  the  sun,  their  centre ;  the  fixed  stars 
again  still  more  immensely  more  remote  from  the  sun.  Suppose  our 
system  to  terminate  with  the  visible  fixed  stars ;  then  imagine  a  system 
of  such  systems  as  remote  from  each  other,  in  comparison  with  their  01011 
dimensions,  as  the  distance  of  the  fixed  stars  in  comparison  with  the 
planetary  system  ;  such  systems  seen  from  each  other  would  subtend  no 
greater  angle  than  a  star  seen  from  the  sun— and  so  on." 


300        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

I  take  to  be  their  true  place  in  the  universe,  with 
the  express  object  of  overthrowing  the  belief  that  there 
exist  other  galaxies  as  vast  as  the  sidereal,  or  vaster, 
thronged  with  suns  which  are  severally  the  centres  of 
planetary  systems,  within  which  again  are  worlds  as  well 
suited  to  be  the  abode  of  life  as  this  earth  on  which  we 
dwell.  But,  though  my  purpose  is  different  from  his,  it 
is  equally  necessary  that  I  should  insist  on  the  true  posi- 
tion of  the  nebulae.  Because,  if  these  objects  form  in- 
deed parts  of  the  sidereal  system,  the  relations  they  pre- 
sent are  of  extreme  importance.  They  exhibit  to  us  with- 
in the  bounds  of  our  galaxy  systems  altogether  different 
from  the  solar  system,  and  thus  suggest  ideas  of  other 
classes  of  worlds  peopled  with  their  own  peculiar  forms 
of  life,  as  distinct  perchance  even  in  their  general  charac- 
teristics from  any  found  amid  the  systems  circling  round 
stars,  as  the  forms  of  life  in  Yenus  or  in  Mars  must  be 
in  their  special  characteristics  from  those  existing  on 
our  own  earth. 

Freed  from  those  analogies  which  led  the  elder  Her- 
schel  to  regard  the  stellar  nebulae — resolvable  and  irre- 
solvable * — as  external  star  systems,  let  us  consider  the 
relations  presented  by  these  and  other  nebulae  without 
reference  to  preconceived  opinions. 


*  By  irresolvable  stellar  nebulae  I  mean  those  nebulas  which,  though 
not  resolvable  into  stars,  yet  present  the  characteristic  features  which 
lead  astronomers  to  believe  that  only  increase  of  telescopic  power  is 
needed  iu  order  to  effect  resolution. 


THE  NEBULA.  301 

We  must  first  pay  attention  to  one  of  the  most  striking 
of  the  discoveries  which  the  spectroscope  has  yet  enabled 
man  to  make — the  discovery  that  certain  nebulae  are 
gaseous.  It  is  necessary  to  consider  this  significant  dis- 
covery, rather  than  those  which  were  the  first  to  exhibit 
the  real  place  of  the  nebulae  in  our  scheme,  because  we 
shall  thus  be  able  to  divide  the  nebulae  at  once  into  two 
great  classes,  instead  of  being  led  to  this  arrangement  by 
following  out  the  history  of  those  long  processes  of  re- 
search by  which  the  two  great  orders  of  nebulae  were  long 
since  separated  from  each  other  under  the  piercing  scru- 
tiny of  Sir  William  Herschel. 

The  reader  will  see  how  the  spectroscope  could  at  once 
resolve  a  question  which  ordinary  observations  would  be 
all  but  powerless  to  deal  with.  The  nebulae  being  self- 
luminous,  the  nature  of  the  matter  which  is  the  source  of 
their  light  would  be  shown  by  the  character  of  the  spec- 
trum, as  distinctly  as  though  that  matter  were  actually 
present  in  the  laboratory  of  the  spectroscopist. 

Mr.  Huggins  thus  describes  the  observation  which  first 
revealed  the  true  nature  of  certain  orders  of  the  nebulae. 
The  object  under  examination  was  a  nebula  in  Draco,  be- 
longing to  the  class  of  planetary  nebulae  :  "On  August 
19,  1864,  I  directed  the  telescope  armed  with  the  spec- 
trum apparatus  to  this  nebula.  At  first  I  suspected  some 
derangement  of  the  instrument  had  taken  place,  for  no 
spectrum  was  seen,  but  only  a  short  line  of  light  perpen- 
dicular to  the  direction  of  dispersion  (that  is,  to  what 


302        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

would  in  the  case  of  solar  light  be  the  length  of  the  spec- 
trum). I  then  found  that  the  light  of  this  nebula,  unlike 
any  other  extra-terrestrial  light  which  had  yet  been  sub- 
jected by  me  to  prismatic  analysis,  was  not  composed  of 
light  of  different  refrangibilities,  and  therefore  could  not 
form  a  spectrum.  A  great  part  of  the  light  from  this  nebu- 
la is  monochromatic,  and  after  passing  through  the  prisms 
remains  concentrated  in  a  bright  line,  occupying  the  posi- 
tion of  that  part  of  the  spectrum  to  which  its  light  corre- 
sponds in  refrangibility.  A  more  careful  examination, 
however,  showed  that — a  little  more  refrangible  than  the 
bright  line,  and  separated  from  it  by  a  dark  interval — a 
narrower  and  much  fainter  line  occurs.  Beyond  this, 
again,  at  about  three  times  the  distance  of  the  second 
line,  a  third  exceedingly  faint  line  was  seen.  The  posi- 
tions of  these  lines  in  the  spectrum  were  determined  by 
a  simultaneous  comparison  of  them  in  the  instrument, 
with  the  spectrum  of  the  induction  spark  taken  between 
electrodes  of  magnetism.  The  strongest  line  coincides  in 
position  with  the  brightest  of  the  air-lines.  This  line  is 
due  to  nitrogen.  .  .  .  The  faintest  of  the  lines  of 
the  nebula  agrees  in  position  with  a  line  of  hydrogen." 
The  other  bright  line  was  not  found  to  correspond  with  a 
known  line  of  any  terrestrial  element.  Besides  the  bright 
lines,  an  exceedingly  faint  spectrum  was  just  perceived 
for  a  short  distance  on  both  sides  of  the  group  of  bright 
lines.  Mr.  Huggins  suspected  that  this  was  not  uniform, 
but  crossed  by  dark  places.     Subsequent  observations  on 


THE  NEBULA.  303 

other  nebulae  *  induced  him  "to  regard  this  faint  spec- 
trum as  due  to  the  solid  or  liquid  matter  of  the  nucleus, 
and  as  quite  distinct  from  the  bright  lines  into  which 
nearly  the  whole  of  the  bright  light  from  the  nebula  is 
concentrated." 

Thus  was  solved  a  problem  which  had,  for  the  best  part 
of  a  century,  perplexed  astronomers.  There  was  not,  in- 
deed, a  full  answer  to  all  the  questions  of  interest  associ- 
ated with  the  problem.  But  it  had  been  laid  down  by 
Sir  William  Herschel,  as  a  legitimate  conclusion  from  ob- 
servation, that  certain  orders  of  the  nebulae  are  gaseous, 
and  astronomers  had  ranged  themselves  for  and  against 
this  proposition.  Telescopic  improvements  had  seemed 
at  length  to  turn  the  scale  in  favor  of  those  who  held  Sir 
William  Herschel  to  have  been  mistaken.  Already  the 
problem  had  seemed  all  but  definitely  settled.  And  then 
in  a  moment  this  observation  by  Mr,  Huggins  had  re- 

*  One  of  the  most  interesting  of  Mr.  Huggins'  researches  into  the  sub- 
ject of  the  light  of  nebulae  is  his  attempt  to  determine  its  intrinsic 
brilliancy.  By  comparing  the  light  of  certain  gaseous  nebulae  with 
that  of  a  sperm  candle  (of  the  size  called  "  six  to  the  pound  "),  he 
found  that  these  objects,  assumed  to  be  continuous,  shine  with  a  light 
varying  in  intrinsic  brilliancy  from  the  1,500th  to  the  20,000th  of  that 
of  such  a  candle.  By  a  strange  misconception,  Mr.  Lockyer,  in  discuss- 
ing Mr.  Huggins'  result,  speaks  of  the  comparison  as  though  it  related 
to  the  absolute  brightness  of  the  nebulae,  saying  that  "  such  a  candle  a 
quarter  of  a  mile  off  is  20,000  times  more  brilliant  than  the  nebula." 
Mr.  Huggins'  result  is  wholly  distinct  from  this,  and  much  more  im- 
portant. His  comparison  relates  to  the  intrinsic  luminosity  of  the  neb- 
ular substance,  not  to  the  quantity  of  light  received  from  the  nebulae. 
(The  distance  of  the  candle  in  Mr.  Huggins'  observations  is  not  con.« 
sidered  in  the  result ;  it  was  a  mere  matter  of  convenience.) 


304        OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

versed  the  whole  matter.  It  was  now  established  beyond 
all  possibility  of  future  question  that  on  the  main  point 
the  greatest  of  modern  astronomers  had  been  altogether 
in  the  right. 

The  orders  of  nebulae  which  give  a  spectrum  of  bright 
lines  would  seem  from  Mr.  Huggins'  observations  to  be 
(1)  the  planetary  nebulae,  (2)  the  ring  nebulae,  (3)  the 
irregular  nebulae.  The  spiral  nebulae  seem,  for  the  most 
part,  to  give  a  continuous  spectrum,  but  some  of  these 
objects  give  the  bright-line  spectrum  indicative  of  gaseity. 
The  orders  of  nebulae  which  give  a  continuous  spectrum 
appear  to  be  the  following :  (1)  star  groups,  (2)  clusters, 
regular  and  irregular,  and  (3)  easily  resolvable  nebulae. 
Of  the  irresolvable  nebulae  a  large  proportion  seem  to  be 
gaseous.* 

Here,  then,  we  find  the  nebulae  ranged  into  two  im- 
portant divisions,  apparently  separated  by  a  distinct  line 


*  The   following   classification  of  nebulae  in  this  respect,  by  Lord 

Oxmantown,  is   interesting  as   indicating  the  results  of  observations 

made  with  so  powerful  an  instrument  as  the  great  Parsonstown  telescope 

(the  6-foot  reflector) : 

Continuous       Gaseous 
Spectrum.      Spectrum. 

Clusters.... 10  0 

Certainly  or  probably  resolved 5  0 

Certainly  or  probably  resolvable 10  6 

Blue,  or  green,  no  resolvability 0  4 

No  resolvability  detected 6  5 

Total  observed 31  15 

Adding  nebulae  not  observed  at  Parsonstown,  there  are  in  all  41  which 
exhibited  a  continuous  spectrum,  and  19  which  gave  a  spectrum  indica- 
tive of  gaseity. 


THE  NmVLJS.  305 

of  demarcation.  Yet  one  is  tempted  to  inquire  whether 
these  divisions  may  not  in  reality  run  into  each  other  by 
the  fact  that  among  nebulae  of  certain  orders  are  objects 
belonging  to  both  divisions.  And  the  fact  that  beneath 
the  bright-line  spectrum  of  the  gaseous  nebulae  a  faint 
continuous  spectrum  may  be  seen  seems  also  to  point  in 
the  same  direction.  We  know  that,  so  far  as  the  tele- 
scopic appearance  of  the  nebulae  is  concerned,  there  is 
very  striking  evidence  of  a  gradual  progression  from 
clusters  to  irresolvable  nebulae ;  and  therefore  we  are  led 
to  inquire  whether  the  spectroscope  conveys  a  similar 
lesson. 

Now  this  question  could  only  be  answered  satisfactorily 
by  the  observation  of  a  series  of  nebulae  having  spectra 
progressively  varying,  from  bright  lines  on  an  almost  in- 
visible continuous  spectrum  to  a  continuous  spectrum 
with  the  same  bright  lines  superposed  on  it,  but  almost 
imperceptible,  because  their  brightness  so  little  exceeded 
that  of  the  continuous  spectrum.  We  have  no  evidence 
of  such  completeness.  But  Captain  Herschel  has  ob- 
served in  the  southern  heavens  a  clustering  nebula  with  a 
continuous  spectrum,  on  which  he  could  just  detect  the 
three  bright  lines  seen  in  the  spectra  of  the  gaseous  neb- 
ulae. So  far  as  this  evidence  extends,  the  conclusion  is 
obvious  that  the  various  orders  of  nebulae  are  orders  of 
but  a  single  family.  It  will  be  seen  presently  that  this 
conclusion,  which  is  strikingly  corroborated  by  other  evi- 
dence, has  a  very  important  bearing  on  the  views  we  are 
20 


306        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

to  form  respecting  the  relations  between  the  nebulae  and 
the  sidereal  system. 

The  first  process  by  which  we  must  attempt  to  form  a 
correct  estimate  of  the  nebular  system  corresponds  to  Sir 
William  Herschel's  process  of  star-gauging.  We  must  in- 
quire according  to  what  general  laws  the  nebulae  are 
spread  over  the  vault  of  heaven. 

Now,  when  this  is  done,  it  appears  that  there  is  a  well- 
marked  peculiarity  in  the  arrangement  of  the  nebulas,  a 
peculiarity  as  striking  as  the  existence  of  the  galactic 
circle  itself.  Hie  nebulm  seem  to  withdraw  themselves 
from  the  neighborhood  of  the  galaxy.  In  the  northern 
heavens  they  cluster  very  definitely  toward  the  pole  of 
the  galaxy  ;  in  the  southern  they  are  arranged  in  streams 
and  clustering  aggregations,  but  the  galaxy  itself  is,  in 
either  case,  left  almost  clear  of  nebulae. 

If  this  peculiarity  is  accidental,  the  coincidence  in- 
volved  is  most  remarkable.  Had  there  been  a  zone  of 
nebulae,  and  that  zone  had  shown  a  tendency  to  coinci- 
dence with  the  Milky  Way,  the  relation  would  have  been 
thought  strikingly  indicative  of  a  real  association  between 
the  nebular  and  the  sidereal  systems.  But  is  the  direct 
converse  of  this  relation  more  likely  to  be  the  effect  of 
chance?  Have  not  observers  and  experimenters  con- 
cluded (in  every  other  similar  instance)  that  a  law  of  con- 
trast is  as  indicative  of  a  real  connection  as  a  law  of  as- 
sociation? Is  it  not  most  surprising,  therefore,  that 
nearly  all  astronomers  who  have  considered  the  relation 


THE  NEBULJB.  30? 

in  question  have  regarded  it  as  affording  strong  evidence 
that  the  nebular  system  is  wholly  dissociated  from  the 
sidereal  ? 

Next  let  us  turn  to  special  features.  In  the  first  place, 
let  us  inquire  whether  the  different  orders  of  nebulae  ex- 
hibit any  peculiarities  of  arrangement. 

We  find  that  clusters  exhibit  a  very  marked  preference 
for  the  neighborhood  of  the  Milky  "Way ;  resolvable  neb- 
ulae seem  to  prefer  the  galactic  zone,  but  not  in  so  de- 
cided a  manner ;  and  it  is  only  among  the  irresolvable 
nebulae  that  we  recognize  that  withdrawal  from  the  Milky 
Way  which  had  seemed  characteristic  of  the  whole  neb- 
ular system  before  we  considered  its  several  orders.  The 
fact  that  the  irresolvable  nebulae  form  about  four-fifths  of 
the  total  number  will  account  for  the  circumstance  that  a 
peculiarity  really  appertaining  to  that  order  alone  should 
appear  to  belong  to  the  whole  system  of  nebulae. 

Again,  the  planetary  and  irregular  nebulae  are  found  to 
affect  the  neighborhood  of  the  Milky  Way.  I  have  already 
mentioned  that  these  objects  are  gaseous. 

It  is  easy  to  see  what  general  conclusions  may  be  de- 
duced from  the  peculiarities  here  touched  upon.  Obvi- 
ously the  first  shows  us  most  distinctly  that  there  is  a 
relation  between  propinquity  to  the  Milky  Way  and  the 
character  of  nebulae  as  respects  resolvability — a  relation 
which  points  in  the  most  decisive  manner  to  the  existence 
of  a  close  association  between  the  sidereal  system  of  which 
the  Milky  Way  certainly  forms  part,  and  the  nebular  sys- 


308        OTBER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

tern  from  which  clusters  and  resolvable  nebulae  cannot 
reasonably  be  separated.  It  is  equally  obvious  that  the 
second  peculiarity  indicates  the  existence  of  a  close  asso- 
ciation between  the  Milky  Way  and  the  character  of  the 
nebulas  as  respects  gaseity ;  a  relation  which  brings  all 
the  gaseous  nebulae  into  close  association  with  the  sidereal 
system,  since  we  know  that  among  the  extra-galactic  neb- 
ulae there  are  many  which  are  principally  formed  of  the 
very  same  gases  which  appear  in  the  irregular  and  plane- 
tary nebulae.  When  we  consider  that  those  peculiarities 
of  configuration  and  of  constitution  which  have  alike 
seemed  to  indicate  that  the  various  orders  of  nebulae 
merge  into  each  other  by  indefinable  gradations  are  both 
associated  in  a  very  distinct  manner  with  the  most  marked 
peculiarity  of  the  sidereal  system,  and  when  to  this  we 
add  what  has  been  already  suggested  by  the  relation  of 
contrast  between  the  irresolvable  nebulae  and  the  Milky 
Way,  the  conclusion  seems  forcibly  impressed  upon  us 
that  the  nebular  and  the  sidereal  systems  are  but  differ- 
ent parts  of  one  single  scheme. 

But  I  pass  on  to  other  evidence,  independent  of  what 
has  hitherto  been  adduced,  and  pointing  with  equal  force 
to  the  same  conclusion. 

In  the  northern  heavens  it  is  not  very  easy  to  exhibit 
any  general  law  of  arrangement  associating  the  nebulae 
and  the  fixed  stars.  For  reasons  which  yet  remain  to  be 
detected,  there  are  in  fact  many  marked  points  of  differ- 
ence between  the  whole  character  of  the  heavens  on  the 


TEE  NEBULJ&.  30% 

northern  and  on  the  southern  side  of  the  galactic  zone. 
But  even  in  the  northern  heavens  one  peculiarity  has  been 
remarked,  which  is  well  worthy  of  careful  consideration. 
Sir  William  Herschel,  while  prosecuting  his  series  of  re- 
searches among  stars  and  nebulae,  was  struck  by  the  cir- 
cumstance that,  after  sweeping  over  a  part  of  the  heavens 
which  was  unusually  barren,  he  commonly  met  with  nebu- 
las ;  insomuch  that  it  was  his  practice  at  such  times  to  call 
to  his  assistant  (his  sister,  Miss  Caroline  Herschel)  to 
"prepare  for  nebulae."  This  peculiarity  was  noticed  also 
by  Sir  John  Herschel. 

Now  what  are  we  to  understand  by  such  a  relation  as 
this  ?  Can  we  suppose  that,  owing  to  some  strange  acci- 
dent, external  galaxies  have  been  placed  always  opposite 
the  barest  regions  of  the  sidereal  system?  Or,  setting 
aside  such  a  notion  as  obviously  incredible,  are  we  to  im- 
agine that  when  searching  over  those  barren  regions  the 
astronomer  has  a  better  chance  of  detecting  nebulae  than 
where  stars  are  more  richly  strewn,  because  the  sky  is  less 
filled  with  glare  ?  We  are  forced  to  dismiss  this  notion 
that  the  barren  regions  of  the  heavens  are  thus  in  a  man- 
ner the  spy-holes  of  the  sidereal  system,  by  the  fact  (pres- 
ently, and  for  another  purpose,  to  be  dwelt  on  more  at 
length)  that  in  the  Magellanic  Clouds,  where  stars  of  all 
magnitudes  are  richly  strewn,  nebulae,  even  down  to  the 
very  faintest  orders,  are  more  abundant  than  in  any  other 
region  of  the  heavens.  We  have  then  no  other  conclusion 
to  form,  but  that  the  association  thus  observed  between 


310  OTHER   WORLDS  THAtf  OURS. 

starless  regions  and  richness  of  nebular  distribution  indi- 
cates a  very  close  relation  indeed  between  stars  and  nebu- 
lae ;  that,  in  fact,  the  nebulce  in  a  sense  represent  the  missing 
stars  ;  that  the  region  where  those  nebulce  appear  has  been 
drained  of  star  materials,  so  to  speak,  in  order  to  form 
them. 

In  the  southern  heavens  yet  clearer  proofs  exist  of  an 
association  between  the  stellar  and  nebular  systems. 
We  do  not  recognize  in  the  northern  skies  any  well- 
marked  star-streams.  In  the  southern  skies,  however, 
such  streams  have  been  recognized  from  the  earliest 
ages.  The  constellations  Hydra  and  Eridanus,  the  two 
streams  from  the  Water-Can  of  Aquarius,  and  the  band 
between  the  Two  Fishes,*  indicate  how  clearly  the  an- 
cients traced  certain  well-marked  star-streams.  The 
moderns  have  traced  the  extension  of  some  of  these 
streams  in  the  constellations  Grus,  Hydra,  Eeticulum, 
etc.,  into  the  near  neighborhood  of  the  southern  pole. 
Now  the  nebulae  in  the  southern  heavens  exhibit  a  well- 
marked  tendency  to  aggregate  into  streams.  So  that,  in 
this  mere  resemblance  between  the  general  characteris- 
tics of  the  stellar  and  nebular  systems  in  the  southern 
heavens,  we  have  a  somewhat  remarkable  evidence  of 
association.  But  when  we  consider  the  disposition  of 
the  two  sets  of  streams — the  stellar  and  the  nebular — - 

*  Though  Pisces  is  not  a  southern  constellation,  yet  it  is  south  of  the 
galactio  circle,  to  which  I  am  for  the  moment  referring  the  constella- 
tions. 


THE  NEBULA.  311 

this  evidence  is  very  much  strengthened.  There  is  found 
to  be  a  well-marked  correspondence  between  the  nebular 
and  stellar  streams,  not  merely  as  respects  general  posi- 
tion, but  even  in  minute  details — the  nebular  streams  fol- 
lowing the  windings  of  the  stellar  ones.  Such  a  relation 
would  be  very  remarkable,  even  were  it  observed  but  in 
a  single  instance.  Since,  however,  all  the  well-marked 
star-streams  in  the  southern  heavens  are  associated  with 
well-marked  nebular  streams,  no  doubt  can  remain  that 
the  relation  is  not  a  mere  coincidence,  but  indicates  a 
real  association  between  the  nebular  and  stellar  systems. 

But  yet  more  striking  evidence  remains  to  be  consid- 
ered. 

In  the  southern  heavens  there  are  two  strange  clouds 
of  milky  light,  which  have  long  been  known  by  sailors 
as  the  Magellanic  Clouds,  but  are  commonly  called  by 
astronomers  the  Nubecula?.  Each  of  these  objects,  when 
examined  with  the  telescope,  is  found  to  be  constituted, 
like  the  Milky  Way,  of  multitudes  of  small  stars.  But 
unlike  the  Milky  Way,  the  Nubecula  contain  within 
their  bounds  many  nebulae  of  all  orders.  In  fact,  each 
of  the  Nubecula?  is  at  once  a  star-cluster  and  a  cluster  of 
nebula?. 

Now  there  can  be  no  doubt  whatever  that  the  associa- 
tion here  is  not  accidental,  that  we  do  not  by  some 
strange  chance  see  a  great  star-cluster  in  the  same  direc- 
tion of  a  much  more  distant  and  much  vaster  cluster  of 
external  galaxies.    Nor  again  can  there  be  any  doubt 


812  OTHER    WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

that  the  generally  circular  figure  of  each  Nubecula  indU 
cates  a  general  approach  to  the  spherical  form  in  the  case 
of  each  cluster.  The  probability  that  by  some  strange 
accident  a  cluster  of  cylindrical  shape*  might  be  so 
placed  as  to  exhibit  to  us  a  circular  figure  is  exceedingly 
small ;  but  the  chance  that  two  such  clusters  should  be 
presented  in  so  exceptional  a  manner  may  be  regarded  as 
evanescent.  We  are  compelled,  then,  to  believe  that, 
within  the  limits  of  spheres  so  placed  as  to  subtend  a 
small  angle  to  the  eye,  stars  of  all  magnitudes  between 
the  seventh  and  the  twelfth,  inclusive,  are  mixed  up  with 
nebulae  of  all  degrees  of  resolvability.  "  Taking  the  ap- 
parent semi-diameter  of  the  Nubecula  Major  at  three  de- 
grees," says  Sir  John  Herschel,  "and  regarding  its  solid 
form  as,  roughly  speaking,  spherical,  its  nearest  and  most 
remote  parts  differ  in  their  distance  from  us  by  a  little 
more  than  a  tenth  part  of  our  distance  from  its  centre." 
"  It  must  therefore  be  taken  as  a  demonstrated  fact,"  he 
adds  presently,  "  that  stars  of  the  sevenths  and  eighth 
magnitude  and  irresolvable  nebulas  may  co-exist  within 
limits  of  distance  not  differing  in  proportion  more  than 
as  nine  to  ten."  This  demonstrated  fact  of  Sir  John 
Herschel's  is  the  very  fact  to  which  I  had  been  led  by 
other  considerations,  the  fact,  namely,  that  the  nebulae 
are  not  external  galaxies,  but  intimately  associated  with 
the  sidereal  system,  of  which,  in  fact,  they  form  part  and 

*  Or,  more  correctly,  a  cluster  shaped  like  a  long  frustum  of  a  gi- 
gantic cone. 


TEE  NEBULA.  313 

parcel.  Dr.  Whewell,  accepting  Sir  John  Herschers 
reasoning  as  conclusive  on  the  point,  adopted  the  same 
view.  And  although  Sir  John  Herschel  himself,  imme- 
diately after  establishing  this  noteworthy  conclusion, 
speaks  respecting  it  in  a  tone  of  philosophic  caution,  it 
must  not  be  forgotten  that  to  his  clear  vision  the  associ- 
ation between  nebulae  and  fixed  stars  had  presented  itself 
as  a  demonstrated  fact,  and  that  even  in  the  latest  edi- 
tions of  his  noble  work  on  astronomy  he  has  not  altered 
the  words  in  which  he  has  spoken  of  that  association. 

Lastly,  and  perhaps  most  strikingly,  the  association 
between  stars  and  nebulae  is  indicated  by  the  obvious 
connection  between  the  figure  of  the  irregular  nebulae 
and  the  arrangement  of  the  star-groups  seen  in  the  same 
field  of  view.  There  is  not  one  of  the  irregular  nebulae 
which  does  not  exhibit  this  peculiarity  in  the  most  strik- 
ing manner.  This  may  be  asserted  even  of  those  nebulae 
with  respect  to  which  Sir  John  Herschel  has  remarked 
that  the  arrangement  may  be  accidental.  His  own  pict- 
ures seem  to  me  to  prove  in  the  most  convincing  manner 
that  no  such  explanation  can  be  accepted.  The  mere 
aggregation  of  a  large  number  of  stars  in  the  very  heart 
of  a  nebula  might  be  an  accident.  The  fact,  for  in- 
stance, that  the  great  irregular  nebula  surrounding  the 
star  Eta  Argus  agrees  exactly  in  position  with  the  great- 
est condensation  of  the  wonderfully  rich  portion  of  the 
Milky  Way  on  which  that  surprising  variable  lies,  might 
be  a  mere  coincidence,  though  in  any  case  it  would  be  a 


314        OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

strange  one.  But  when  one  examines  the  structure  of 
this  and  similar  nebulae,  and  finds  that  the  stars  are  ar- 
ranged in  a  manner  most  obviously  related  to  the  ar- 
rangement of  the  nebular  condensations  (or  folds  as  one 
may  almost  say),  one  cannot  doubt  that  a  real  and  inti- 
mate bond  of  association  exists  between  the  stars  and 
the  nebulous  masses  around  them.  If  the  extension  of 
the  milky  light  of  the  great  Orion  nebula  to  the  star  i  in 
the  sword,  which  is  centrally  involved  in  strong  nebulos- 
ity ;  to  e  in  the  belt,  which  is  similarly  involved ;  and  to 
several  other  stars  in  the  constellation  (all  alike  in  occu- 
pying regions  of  increased  nebular  condensation),  be  a 
mere  accidental  coincidence,  then  the  laws  of  probability 
had  better  be  forgotten  as  soon  as  possible ;  for,  as  at  pres- 
ent understood,  they  can  only  serve  to  lead  men  astray. 

In  the  accompanying  plate  (Fig.  13)  is  given  a  picture 
of  the  nebula  Messier  17,  as  observed  with  Lassell's  four- 
foot  reflector  at  Malta.  I  have  selected  it  as  affording  a 
very  striking  instance  of  the  particular  form  of  associa- 
tion I  have  just  been  dealing  with.  No  one  can,  I  think, 
refuse  to  recognize  the  fact  that  the  system  of  stars 
shown  in  this  drawing  is  not  accidentally  seen  projected 
on  a  distant  galaxy,  but  forms  part  and  parcel  of  the 
nebula  itself.* 


*  Sir  John  Herschel,  referring  to  the  accompanying  plate,  expressed 
the  opinion  that  the  apparent  association  need  not  necessarily  be  real. 
The  discovery  of  nebular  tracts  in  the  Pleiades  has  now  practically 
demonstrated  the  validity  of  the  opinion  expressed  in  the  text. 


THE  NEBULA.  315 

The  nebula  around  the  strange  variable  star,  Eta  Ar- 
gus, already  referred  to,  is  another  remarkable  instance 
of  this  sort.  More  than  two  years  ago  I  ventured  to 
make  two  predictions  about  this  object.  The  first  was 
a  tolerably  safe  one.  I  expressed  my  belief  that  the 
nebula  would  be  found  to  be  gaseous.  After  Mr.  Hug- 
gins'  discovery  that  the  great  Orion  nebula  is  gaseous,  it 
was  not  difficult  to  see  that  the  Argo  nebula  must  also  be 
so.  At  any  rate,  this  has  been  established  by  Captain 
Herschel's  spectroscopic  researches.  The  other  predic- 
tion was  more  venturesome.  Sir  John  Herschel,  whose 
opinions  on  such  points  one  would  always  prefer  to 
share,  had  expressed  his  belief  that  the  nebula  lies  far 
out  in  space  beyond  the  stars  seen  in  the  same  field  of 
view.  I  ventured  to  express  the  opinion  that  those  stars 
are  involved  in  the  nebula.  Lately  there  came  news 
from  Australia  that  Mr.  Le  Sueur,  with  the  great  re- 
flector erected  at  Melbourne,  has  found  that  the  nebula 
has  changed  largely  in  shape  since  Sir  John  Herschel 
observed  it.  Mr.  Le  Sueur  accordingly  expressed  his 
belief  that  the  nebula  lies  nearer  to  us  than  the  fixed 
stars  seen  in  the  same  field  of  view.  More  lately,  how- 
ever, he  has  found  that  the  star  Eta  Argus  is  shining 
with  the  light  of  glowing  hydrogen,  and  he  expresses 
his  belief  that  the  star  has  consumed  the  nebulous  mat- 
ter near  it.     "Without  agreeing  with  this  view,*  I  recog- 


*  My  belief  is  that  as  the  star  recovers  its  brilliancy  observation  will 
show  that  the  nebula  in  its  immediate  neighborhood  becomes  brighter 


316        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

nize  in  it  a  proof  that  Mr.  Le  Sueur  now  considers  the 
nebula  to  be  really  associated  with  the  stars  around  it. 

Among  other  instances  may  be  cited  the  nebula  round 
the  stars  c1  and  c2  in  Orion.  In  this  object  two  remark- 
able nebulous  nodules  centrally  surround  two  double 
stars.  Admitting  the  association  here  to  be  real  (and  no 
other  explanation  can  reasonably  be  admitted),  we  are 
led  to  interesting  conclusions  respecting  the  whole  of 
that  wonderful  nebulous  region  which  sin-rounds  the 
sword  of  Orion.  We  become  certain  that  the  other 
nebulas  in  that  region  are  really  associated  with  the  fixed 
stars  there ;  that  it  is  not  a  mere  coincidence,  for  in- 
stance, that  the  middle  star  in  the  belt  of  Orion  is  in- 
volved in  nebula,  or  that  the  lowest  star  of  the  sword 
is  similarly  circumstanced.  It  is  a  legitimate  inference 
from  the  evidence  that  all  the  nebulae  in  this  region  be- 
long to  one  great  nebulous  group,  which  extends  its 
branches  to  these  stars.  As  a  mighty  hand  this  nebu- 
lous region  seems  to  gather  the  stars  here  into  close  as- 
sociation, showing  us,  in  a  way  there  is  no  misinterpret- 
ing, that  these  stars  and  the  nebula  form  one  system. 

It  will  be  noticed,  as  respects  the  two  proofs  on  which 
I  have  last  dwelt,  that  they  seem  directly  opposed  to 
those  which  I  first  quoted.  One  cannot  argue,  it  might 
be  urged,  that  the  nebulae  are  associated  with  the  sidereal 

{not  fainter  through  being  consumed  as  fuel).  In  fact,  I  am  disposed 
to  regard  the  variations  of  the  nebula  as  systematic,  and  due  to  orbital 
motions  among  its  various  portions  around  neighboring  stars. 


THE  KEBTJLJS.  317 

system  because  they  are  least  numerous  where  there  are 
most  stars,  and  vice  versa  ;  while  at  the  same  time  one 
draws  the  same  conclusion  from  the  aggregation  of  the 
nebulae  in  streams  or  clusters  where  there  are  streams 
and  clusters  of  stars,  or  from  the  fact  that  stars  are  seen 
actually  mixed  up  with  nebulous  matter.  At  first  sight 
this  objection  seems  just ;  but,  on  consideration,  it  will 
be  found  that,  in  reality,  the  two  seemingly  contrary 
lines  of  argument  bear  in  the  same  direction.  "When  we 
find  the  nebulas  gathered  where  stars  are  wanting,  and 
vice  versa,  we  conclude  that  there  is  some  reason  for 
this  peculiarity,  and  that  that  reason  must  involve  some 
sort  of  association  between  the  nebulae  and  the  stars  ;  we 
see,  further,  that  the  relation  is  accounted  for  if  we  sup- 
pose that,  in  these  cases,  either  the  formation  of  nebulae 
has  drained  a  region  of  material  from  which  single  stars 
would  otherwise  have  been  formed,  or  vice  versa.  Why, 
in  a  particular  region,  the  formation  of  nebulae  should 
be  encouraged,  while  the  formation  of  stars  should  be 
checked,  we  cannot  say ;  nor  can  we  account  for  the 
contrary  peculiarity  in  another  region  :  but  we  feel  cer- 
tain that  some  cause  must  exist  for  both  relations,  be- 
cause the  results  are  too  marked  to  be  due  to  accident. 
Now,  in  the  case  where  we  find  both  stars  and  nebulae 
abundant  in  particular  parts  of  the  heavens,  we  feel 
equally  certain  that  the  result  is  not  accidental.  Even 
though  there  were  not  here,  as  in  the  former  case,  the 
evidence  of  a  clearing  of  star-material  from  certain  re- 


318        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

gions,  we  could  not  doubt  that  the  association  of  stars 
and  nebulae  was  real,  and  not  apparent.  But  in  reality- 
there  is  here,  precisely  as  in  the  former  case,  a  gathering 
together  of  stellar  matter  into  certain  regions.  The 
very  existence  of  such  a  stream  as  Eridanus  or  Hydra, 
and  of  such  a  cluster  as  the  greater  or  lesser  Magellanic 
Cloud,  implies  the  action  of  such  a  process  of  segrega- 
tion. A  stream  would  not  be  recognizable  if  it  were  not 
bounded  by  relatively  bare  regions.  Clusters  like  the 
Nubecula  might  be  visible  even  on  a  rich  sky — and  were 
the  sideral  heavens  richly  strewn  with  stars  round  these 
objects  I  should  be  disposed  to  admit  that  there  was  a 
difficulty  in  my  theory.  But  what  is  the  fact?  Not 
only  is  each  of  the  Nubeculae  placed  in  a  region  obvi- 
ously bare  of  lucid  stars,  but  Sir  John  Herschel,  speak- 
ing of  the  telescopic  aspect  of  the  neighborhood  of  these 
mysterious  clusters,  dwells  again  and  again  on  its  pov- 
erty. "  A  miserably  poor  and  barren  region,"  he  says 
of  one  field  near  the  Nubecula?.  "  The  access  to  the  Nu- 
becube,"  he  says  elsewhere,  "  is  on  all  sides  through  a 
desert."  What  evidence  could  more  clearly  point  to  the 
fact  that  these  great  clusters  are  gathered  out  from  a 
vast  region  of  space  ?  Their  internal  structure  teaches  us 
how  such  a  process  of  segregation  leads  to  the  birth  of 
nebulae  as  well  as  stars.  The  whole  history  of  the  sidereal 
system  is  indeed  taught  us  in  the  Magellanic  Clouds  and 
the  great  streams  of  intermixed  stars  and  nebulae  which 
How  toward  them  as  rivers  toward  some  mighty  lake. 


THE  NEBULA.  319 

It  remains  that  I  should  sum  up  the  results  which  I 
have  discussed  in  the  last  two  chapters.  It  has  seemed 
to  many  that  my  views  tend  largely  to  diminish  our  esti- 
mate of  the  extent  of  the  sidereal  system.  The  exact  re- 
verse is  the  case.  According  to  accepted  views  there  lie 
within  the  range  of  our  most  powerful  telescopes  millions 
of  millions  of  suns.  According  to  mine  the  primary  suns 
within  the  range  of  our  telescopes  must  be  counted  by 
tens  of  thousands,  or  by  hundreds  of  thousands  at  the 
outside.  What  does  this  diminution  of  numbers  imply 
but  that  the  space  separating  sun  from  sun  is  enormously 
greater  than  accepted  theories  would  permit  ?  And  this 
increase  implies  an  enormous  increase  in  the  estimate  we 
are  to  form  of  the  vital  energies  of  individual  suns.  For 
the  vitality  of  a  sun,  if  one  may  be  permitted  the  ex- 
pression, is  measured  not  merely  by  the  amount  of  mat- 
ter over  which  it  exercises  control,  but  by  the  extent  of 
space  within  which  that  matter  is  distributed.  Take  an 
orb  a  thousand  times  vaster  than  our  sun,  and  spread  over 
its  surface  an  amount  of  matter  exceeding  a  thousand-fold 
the  combined  mass  of  all  the  planets  of  the  solar  system : 
so  far  as  living  force  is  concerned,  the  result  is  nil.  But 
distribute  that  matter  throughout  a  vast  space  all  round 
the  orb ;  that  orb  becomes  at  once  fit  to  be  the  centre  of 
a  host  of  dependent  worlds.  Again,  according  to  accept* 
ed  theories,  when  the  astronomer  has  succeeded  in  re- 
solving the  milky  light  of  a  portion  of  the  galaxy  into 
stars,  he  has  in  that  direction,  at  any  rate,  reached  the 


320  OTHER   WORLDS  TB AiV~  OURS. 

limits  of  the  sidereal  system.  According  to  my  views> 
what  he  has  really  done  has  been  but  to  analyze  a  defi* 
nite  aggregation  of  stars,  a  mere  corner  of  that  great  sys- 
tem. Yet  once  more,  according  to  accepted  views,  thou* 
sands  and  thousands  of  galaxies,  external  to  the  sidereal 
system,  can  be  seen  with  powerful  telescopes.  If  I  am 
right,  the  external  star-systems  lie  far  beyond  the  reach  of 
the  most  powerful  telescope  man  has  yet  been  able  to  con- 
struct, insomuch  that  perchance  the  nearest  of  the  out- 
lying galaxies  may  lie  a  million  times  beyond  the  range 
even  of  the  mighty  mirror  of  the  great  Kosse  telescope. 

But  this  is  little.  Wonderful  as  is  the  extent  of  the 
sidereal  system  as  thus  viewed,  even  more  wonderful  is 
its  infinite  variety.  We  know  how  largely  modern  dis- 
coveries have  increased  our  estimate  of  the  complexity  of 
the  planetary  system.  Where  the  ancients  recognized 
but  a  few  planets,  we  now  see,  besides  the  planets,  the 
families  of  satellites  :  we  see  the  rings  of  Saturn,  in 
which  minute  satellites  must  be  as  the  sands  on  the  sea- 
shore for  multitude ;  the  wonderful  zone  of  asteroids ; 
myriads  on  myriads  of  comets ;  millions  on  millions  of 
meteor  systems,  gathering  more  and  more  richly  around 
the  sun,  until  in  its  neighborhood  they  form  the  crown  of 
glory  which  bursts  into  view  when  he  is  totally  eclipsed. 
But  wonderful  as  is  the  variety  seen  within  the  planetary 
system,  the  variety  within  the  sidereal  system  is  infinitely 
more  amazing.  Besides  the  single  suns,  there  are  groups 
and  systems  and  streams  of   primary  suns;    there  are 


THE  NEBULA.  321 

vfhole  galaxies  of  minor  orbs ;  there  are  clustering  stellar 
aggregations,  showing  every  variety  of  richness,  of  figure, 
and  of  distribution ;  there  are  all  the  various  forms  of 
nebulae,  resolvable  and  irresolvable,  circular,  elliptical, 
and  spiral ;  and  lastly,  there  are  irregular  masses  of 
luminous  gas,  clinging  in  fantastic  convolutions  around 
stars  and  star-systems.  Nor  is  it  unsafe  to  assert  that 
other  forms  and  varieties  of  structure  will  yet  be  discov- 
ered, or  that  hundreds  more  exist  which  we  may  never 
hope  to  recognize. 

But  lastly,  even  more  wonderful  than  the  infinite  vari- 
ety of  the  sidereal  system  is  its  amazing  vitality.  In- 
stead of  millions  of  inert  masses,  we  see  the  whole  heav- 
ens instinct  with  energy— astir  with  busy  life.  The  great 
masses  of  luminous  vapor,  though  occupying  countless 
millions  of  cubic  miles  of  space,  are  moved  by  unknown 
forces  like  clouds  before  the  summer  breeze;  star-mist 
is  condensing  into  clusters  ;  star-clusters  are  forming  into 
suns  ;  streams  and  clusters  of  minor  orbs  are  swayed  by 
unknown  attractive  energies ;  and  primary  suns  singly 
or  in  systems  are  pursuing  their  stately  path  through 
space,  rejoicing  as  giants  to  run  their  course,  extending 
on  all  sides  the  mighty  arm  of  their  attraction,  gathering 
from  ever  new  regions  of  space  supplies  of  motive  energy, 
to  be  transformed  into  the  various  forms  of  force — light 
and  heat,  and  electricity — and  distributed  in  lavish  abun- 
dance to  the  worlds  which  circle  round  them. 

Truly  may  I  say,  in  conclusion,  that,  whether  we  re* 
21 


822        OTHER  WORLDS  1BAN  OURS. 

gard  its  vast  extent  or  its  infinite  variety,  or  the  amazing 
vitality  which  pervades  its  every  portion,  the  sidereal 
system  is,  of  all  the  subjects  man  can  study,  the  most 
imposing  and  the  most  stupendous.  It  is  as  a  book  full 
of  mighty  problems — of  problems  which  are  as  yet  al- 
most untouched  by  man,  of  problems  which  it  might 
seem  hopeless  for  him  to  attempt  to  solve.  But  those 
problems  are  given  to  him  for  solution  ;  and  he  will  solve 
them  whenever  he  dares  attempt  to  decipher  aright  the 
records  of  that  wondrous  volume. 


SUPERVISION  AND  CONTROL.  323 


CHAPTEK  Xm. 

SUPERVISION  AND  C0NTK0L. 

It  is  a  peculiarity  of  the  subject  of  other  worlds  than 
ours  that  it  suggests  more  strikingly  than  any  other  cer- 
tain difficulties  in  connection  with  conceptions  as  to 
supervision  and  control  exercised  over  the  universe. 

Let  us  consider  definitely  (even  though  we  must  be  un- 
able to  conceive  clearly  or  at  all)  the  infinities  we  have  to 
deal  with. 

We  know  that  space  must  be  infinite.  If  the  region 
amid  which  stars  and  nebulae  are  scattered  in  inconceiv» 
able  profusion  be  limited,  if  beyond  lies  on  all  sides  a 
vast  void,  or  if,  instead,  there  be  material  bounds  inclos- 
ing the  universe  of  worlds  on  every  hand,  yet  where  are 
the  limits  of  void  or  bound  ?  Infinity  of  space,  occupied 
or  unoccupied,  there  must  undoubtedly  be.  Of  this  in- 
finity it  has  been  finely  said  that  its  centre  is  everywhere, 
its  boundary  nowhere.  Now,  whether  within  this  infinity 
of  space  there  be  an  infinity  of  matter  is  a  question  which 
we  cannot  so  certainly  answer.  Only,  if  we  were  to  ac- 
cept this  as  certain,  that  the  proportion  which  unoccupied 
bears  to  occupied  space  cannot  be  infinitely  great — a 
view  which  at  least  seems  reasonable  and  probable — then 


324        OTHER  WORLD?  THAN  OURS. 

it  would  follow  that  matter  as  well  as  space  must  be  in- 
finite, since  any  finite  proportion  of  infinity  must  itself 
also  be  infinite. 

Time  also  must  undoubtedly  be  infinite.  If  the  por- 
tion of  time  which  has  hitherto  been,  or  which  will  here- 
after be,  occupied  with  the  occurrence  of  events  (of  what- 
ever sort)  were  preceded  and  will  be  followed  by  a  vast 
void  interval,  yet  there  can  be  neither  beginning  nor  end 
to  either  of  those  bounding  voids.  Infinity  of  time,  oc- 
cupied or  unoccupied,  there  must  undoubtedly  be.  And 
though  it  is  not  possible  for  us  to  know  certainly  that 
there  has  been  no  beginning,  or  that  there  will  be  no  end 
to  that  portion  of  time  which  is  occupied  with  the  occur- 
rence of  events  (of  whatever  sort),  yet  it  appears  so  un- 
reasonable to  conceive  that  unoccupied  time  bears  an 
infinitely  great  proportion  to  occupied  time  that  we  seem 
led  to  the  conclusion  that  occcupied  time  is  infinite — or, 
more  definitely,  that  there  has  been  no  beginning  and  will 
be  no  end  to  the  sequence  of  events  throughout  the  in- 
finitely extended  universe. 

Now  to  conceive  of  limits  to  the  wisdom  and  power  of 
One  whose  realm  is  infinite  in  extent  and  in  duration  is 
obviously  to  conclude  that  the  Euler  is  infinitely  incom- 
petent to  rule  over  His  kingdom  :  for  there  can  be  no  re- 
lation between  the  finite  and  the  infinite  save  the  relation 
of  infinite  disproportion. 

Senses  such  as  we  have  we  can  no  more  attribute  to 
such  a  Euler  than  we  can  assign  to  Him  hands  and  feet. 


SUPERVISION  AND  CONTROL.  325 

Nor  can  we  conceive  in  what  way  He  can  be  cognizant  of 
material  processes  which  we  only  recognize  through  their 
material  effects.  Yet  we  can  scarcely  conceive  of  Him  as 
other  than  cognizant  of  all  those  processes  by  which  our 
senses  can  be  affected. 

But  before  considering  the  nature  of  such  a  Being's 
supervision  of  His  universe,  we  may  proceed  a  step 
further.  The  senses  we  possess  are  sufficient  to  indicate 
to  us  the  possible  existence  of  senses  not  merely  far  more 
acute,  but  of  a  wholly  different  kind.  By  the  sense  of 
touch,  for  instance,  we  can  indeed  recognize  the  feeling  of 
heat ;  but  it  is  easy  to  conceive  of  a  sense  (analogous  to 
that  by  which  light  is  made  to  teach  us  of  the  aspect  of 
external  objects)  enabling  men  to  judge  of  the  figure,  sub- 
stance, internal  structure,  and  other  qualities  of  an  object 
by  the  action. of  the  heat-waves  proceeding  from  it.  Or 
again,  electricity,  instead  either  of  light  or  of  heat,  might 
be  the  means  of  communicating  intelligence  as  to  the 
qualities  of  objects.  We  can  conceive  also  of  a  sense 
bearing  the  same  analogy  to  sight  that  the  spectroscope 
bears  to  the  telescope.  And  a  hundred  kinds  of  sense, 
or  in  other  words,  a  hundred  modes  of  receiving  intelli- 
gence about  what  exists  or  is  going  on  around  us,  might 
be  readily  conceived. 

Yet  once  more,  we  know  that  reason  is  able  to  range 
beyond  the  action  of  the  senses.  Man  is  able  to  assure 
himself  that  events  have  happened  which  yet  have  pro- 
duced no  direct  effect  upon  any  of  his  senses.     By  the 


326        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

exercise  of  reason  he  becomes  as  well  assured  of  such 
events  as  though  they  had  actually  passed  before  his 
eyes.  An  analogous  power,  but  infinite  in  degree,  infi- 
nitely rapid  in  its  operation,  and  infinite  in  the  extent  of 
space  and  time  over  which  it  ranges,  we  may  conceive  to 
be  possessed  by  a  true  Ruler  over  the  universe. 

And  now  let  us  notice  some  of  the  conclusions  to  which 
these  considerations  tend. 

Let  us  first  deal  with  the  teachings  of  that  sense  which 
is  the  most  far-reaching  f  of  all  the  faculties  given  to  man 
— the  sense  of  sight. 

In  a  little  treatise  called  "  The  Stars  and  the  Earth," 
published  anonymously  several  years  since,  some  results 
of  modern  discoveries  respecting  light  were  dealt  with  in 
a  very  interesting  manner.  I  propose  to  follow  the  path 
of  thought  indicated  in  that  treatise,  as  a  fitting  introduc- 
tion to  wider  conceptions  of  supervision  and  control  over 
the  universe. 

We  know  from  Romer's  researches,  and  even  more 
surely  from  the  phenomenon  termed  the  aberration  of  the 
fixed  stars,  that  light  does  not  travel  with  infinite  velocity. 
Its  speed  is  indeed  so  enormous  that,  compared  with 


*  Most  persons,  if  asked  which  sense  comes  next  to  sight  in  this  re- 
spect, would  answer  hearing.  Yet  touch — or  rather  feeling — has  a  range 
far  exceeding  that  of  hearing,  since  we  can  feel  the  heat  emitted  by 
the  sun.  Nor  is  it  difficult  to  conceive  of  such  an  increase  in  the  deli- 
cacy of  the  sense  of  touch  that  even  the  minute  amount  of  heat  received 
from  the  fixed  stars  might  be  felt,  and  so  the  range  of  the  sense  ex< 
tended  many  million- fold. 


SUPERVISION  AND  CONTROL.  327 

every  form  of  motion  with  which  we  are  familiar,  the 
velocity  of  light  appears  infinitely  great.  In  a  single 
second  light  traverses  a  space  equal  to  eight  times  the 
circumference  of  the  earth;  and  therefore  in  travelling 
from  any  visible  object  on  the  earth  to  the  eye  of  a  ter- 
restrial observer,  light  occupies  a  space  of  time  indefi- 
nitely short.  Yet  even  as  regards  such  objects  as  these 
light  has  occupied  a  real  interval  of  time,  however  mi- 
nute, in  reaching  the  eye ;  insomuch  that  we  see  ob- 
jects not  as  they  are  at  the  moment  we  perceive  them, 
but  as  they  were  the  minutest  fraction  of  a  second  be- 
fore. 

Raising  our  eyes  from  the  earth  to  regard  the  celestial 
objects,  we  find,  in  place  of  the  indefinitely  minute  inter- 
val before  considered,  a  really  appreciable  space  of  time 
occupied  by  light  in  carrying  to  us  information  as  to  the 
condition  of  those  distant  orbs.  From  the  moon  light 
takes  little  more  than  a  second  and  a  quarter  in  reaching 
us ;  so  that  we  obtain  sufficiently  early  information  of  the 
condition  of  our  satellite.  But  light  occupies  more  than 
eight  minutes  in  reaching  us  from  the  sun ;  a  longer  or 
shorter  interval  in  travelling  to  us  from  Mercury,  Yenus, 
and  Mars,  according  to  the  position  of  these  planets ;  from 
about  thirty-five  to  about  fifty  minutes  in  reaching  ns 
from  Jupiter ;  about  an  hour  and  twenty  minutes  on  th6 
average  in  speeding  across  the  great  gap  which  separates 
us  from  Saturn  ;  while  we  receive  intelligence  from  Uranus 
and  Neptune  only  after  intervals  respectively  twice  and 


328        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

three  times  as  great  as  that  which  light  takes  in  reaching 
us  from  the  ringed  planet. 

Thus,  if  we  could  at  any  instant  view  the  whole  range 
of  the  solar  system  as  distinctly  as  we  see  Jupiter  or  Mars 
when  in  opposition,  the  scene  presented  to  us  would  not 
indicate  the  real  aspect  of  the  solar  system  at  that,  or  in- 
deed at  any  definite  instant.  Precisely  as  a  daily  news- 
paper gives  us  a  later  account  of  what  is  going  on  in 
London  than  of  events  happening  in  the  provinces,  of 
these  than  of  events  on  the  Continent,  and  of  these  again 
than  of  occurrences  taking  place  in  America,  Asia,  Africa, 
or  Australasia,  so  the  intelligence  brought  by  light  re- 
specting the  various  members  of  the  solar  system  belongs 
to  different  epochs.  If  man  had  powers  of  vision  ena- 
bling him  to  watch  what  is  taking  place  on  the  different 
planets  of  the  solar  system,  it  is  clear  that  events  of  the 
utmost  importance  might  have  transpired — under  his  very 
eyes,  so  to  speak — while  yet  he  remained  wholly  un- 
conscious of  their  occurrence.  Or,  to  invert  the  illustra- 
tion, if  an  observer  on  Neptune  could  see  all  that  is  tak- 
ing place  on  the  earth,  he  might  remain  for  hours  quite 
unconscious  of  an  event  important  enough  to  affect  the 
welfare  of  a  whole  continent,  though  that  event  should 
happen  under  his  eyes,  and  his  visual  powers  be  such  as 
I  have  supposed.  We  can  imagine,  for  example,  an  ob- 
server on  Neptune  watching  the  battle  of  Waterloo  from 
the  early  dawn  until  the  hour  when  Napoleon's  heart  was 
yet  full  of  hope,  and  our  great  captain  was  watching  with 


SUPERVISION  AND  CONTROL.  329 

ever-growing  anxiety,  as  charge  after  charge  threatened 
to  destroy  the  squares  on  whose  steadfastness  depended 
the  fate  of  a  continent.  We  can  conceive  how  full  of 
interest  that  scene  would  have  been  to  an  intelligent  Nep- 
tunian, and  how  eagerly  he  would  have  watched  the 
manoeuvres  of  either  army,  and  also,  what  neither  army 
knew  of,  the  approach  of  Blucher  with  his  Prussians. 
Yet  while  our  Neptunian  would  thus  have  traced  the 
progress  of  the  battle  from  his  distant  world,  the  conflict 
would  in  reality  have  been  long  since  decided,  the  final 
charge  of  the  British  army  accomplished,  the  Imperial 
Guard  destroyed,  Napoleon  fugitive,  and  the  Prussians, 
who  to  the  Neptunian  would  be  seen  still  struggling 
through  muddy  roads  toward  the  field  of  battle,  would 
have  been  relentlessly  pursuing  the  scattered  army  of 
France. 

It  is,  however,  when  we  pass  beyond  the  limits  of  the 
solar  system  that  the  non-contemporaneous  nature  of  the 
scene  presented  to  us  becomes  most  striking.  Here  we 
have  to  deal  not  with  seconds,  minutes,  or  hours,  but 
with  years,  decades,  and  centuries.  From  the  nearest  of 
the  fixed  stars  light  takes  fully  three  years  in  travelling  to 
the  earth.  Even  the  star  61  Cygni  is  so  far  from  us  that 
its  light  only  reaches  us  in  seven  years.  And  so  far  as 
observation  has  hitherto  gone,  it  seems  unlikely  that  amid 
the-  whole  host  of  heaven  there  are  so  many  as  a  hundred 
stars — lucid  or  telescopic — whose  light  reaches  us  in  a 
shorter  interval  of  time  than  twelve  or  fifteen  years. 


330  OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

Whatever  views  we  form  as  to  the  arrangement  of  the 
sidereal  scheme,  whether  those  usually  accepted  be  held 
to  be  correct,  or  whether  I  have  been  right  in  adopting 
others,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that,  among  the  stars  re- 
vealed to  us  by  the  telescope,  there  must  be  myriads 
which  lie  many  times  further  from  us  than  the  bright 
star  in  Centaurus  and  the  orb  in  Cygnus  which  have 
been  found  relatively  so  near.  In  fact,  the  views  I  have 
adopted  respecting  the  wide  range  of  magnitude  among 
the  fixed  stars  do  not  interfere  in  the  least  with  the  the- 
ories which  have  been  formed  as  to  the  distances  from 
beyond  which  the  light  of  some  of  the  stars,  only  just 
visible  in  powerful  telescopes,  must  be  supposed  to  reach 
us.  On  the  contrary,  one  may  conceive,  according  to  my 
views,  that  some  of  these  faintly  seen  orbs  may  be  many 
times  larger  even  than  giant  Sirius,  in  which  case  the  dis- 
tance of  such  stars  would  be  many  times  greater  than 
has  been  hitherto  supposed.  We  may  certainly  assume 
with  confidence  that  many  stars  only  visible  in  powerful 
telescopes  shine  from  beyond  depths  which  light  would 
occupy  thousands  of  years  in  traversing.  I  cannot,  in- 
deed, go  further,  as  astronomers  have  hitherto  done,  and 
say  that  the  nebulae  must  be  regarded  as  external  galaxies, 
and  therefore  as  sending  their  light  to  us  over  spaces 
which  light  must  take  many  times  as  long  an  interval  in 
traversing  as  it  does  in  travelling  to  us  from  the  bounds  of 
our  own  galaxy.  But  it  would  be  to  misinterpret  alto- 
gether the  views  which  I  have  formed  respecting  the 


SUPERVISION  AND   CONTROL.  331 

universe  to  suppose  that  I  imagine  those  distant  spaces 
which  astronomers  have  hitherto  filled  with  imaginary 
galaxies  to  be  untenanted.  On  the  contrary,  I  have  no 
doubt  whatever  that  galaxies  resembling  our  own  exist  at 
distances  infinitely  exceeding  those  at  which  astronomers 
have  placed  their  most  distant  nebular  universes,  if  even 
the  bounds  of  our  own  galaxy  do  not  extend  into  space 
as  far  as  the  widest  limits  hitherto  assigned  to  the  system 
of  nebulae.  So  that  I  am  not  precluded  from  speaking  of 
orbs  whose  light,  though  unrecognized  by  us,  is  yet  ever 
pouring  in  upon  the  earth,  conveying,  in  letters  we  can- 
not decipher  or  even  trace,  a  message  which  has  taken 
millions  on  millions  of  years  in  traversing  the  awful  gulf 
beyond  which  lie  those  mysterious  realms. 

If  we  conceive,  then,  that  man's  visual  powers  could 
suddenly  be  so  increased  that,  without  instrumental  aid, 
he  could  look  around  him  into  the  celestial  depths,  pierc- 
ing even  to  those  outer  galaxies  which  astronomers  have 
seen  only  imaged  in  the  nebulae,  how  wide  would  be  the 
range  of  time  presented  to  him  by  the  wonderful  scene  he 
would  behold  !  There  would  blaze  out  Alpha  Centauri 
with  its  record  three  years  old ;  there  the  star  in  Cygnus 
as  it  existed  seven  years  since  ;  the  whole  host  of  stars 
known  to  man  would  exhibit  records  ranging  from  a  few 
years  to  many  centuries  in  age ;  and  lastly,  the  external 
galaxies,  which  are  perhaps  forever  hidden  from  the 
searching  gaze  of  man,  would  reveal  themselves  as  they 
were  ages  on  ages  before  man  appeared  upon  the  earth, 


332        OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

ages  even  before  this  earth  was  framed  into  a  globe  ;  nay, 
ages  perhaps  before  the  planetary  system  had  begun  to 
gather  into  worlds  around  its  central  orb. 

It  is  when  we  are  thus  contemplating  in  imagination 
the  whole  expanse  of  the  universe,  and  as  one  almost  may 
say  the  whole  range  of  past  time,  that  the  author  of  the 
little  treatise  I  have  spoken  of  invites  us  to  consider  two 
processes  of  thought  having  sole  reference  to  this  earth 
on  which  we  live,  and  to  that  history  which,  though  all- 
important  to  ourselves,  seems  to  fade  into  such  utter 
insignificance  in  the  presence  of  the  grand  history  of  the 
orbs  which  lie  in  uncounted  millions  around  us. 

To  a  being  placed  on  some  far-distant  orb,  whence  light 
would  occupy  thousands  of  years  to  wing  its  flight  to  us, 
there  would  be  presented,  if  he  turned  his  gaze  upon  our 
earth,  and  if  his  vision  were  capable  of  telling  him  of  her 
aspect,  the  picture  of  events  which  thousands  of  years 
since  really  occurred  upon  her  surface.  For  the  light 
which  left  the  earth  at  that  time,  winging  its  way  through 
space  with  the  account,  if  we  may  so  speak,  of  those  oc- 
currences, is  now  travelling  as  swiftly  as  when  it  left  our 
earth,  but  amid  regions  of  space  removed  from  us  by  a 
light-journey  thousands  of  years  in  duration.  And  thus, 
to  the  observer  on  this  distant  orb,  the  events  which  hap- 
pened in  the  far-off  years  would  seem  to  be  actually  in 
progress. 

But  now,  conceive  that  powers  of  locomotion  commen- 
surate with  his  wonderful  powers  of  vision  were  given  to 


SUPERVISION  AND  CONTROL.  333 

this  being,  and  that  in  an  instant  of  time  he  could  sweep 
through  the  enormous  interval  separating  him  from  our 
earth,  until  he  were  no  further  from  us  than  the  moon. 
At  the  beginning  of  that  tremendous  journey  he  would  be 
watching  events  which  were  occurring  thousands  of  years 
ago ;  at  its  close  he  would  gaze  upon  the  earth  as  it  was 
one  second  only  before  he  undertook  his  instantaneous 
flight;  so  that,  in  the  course  of  his  journey,  he  would 
gaze  upon  a  succession  of  events  which  had  occurred  dur- 
ing those  thousands  of  years  upon  the  face  of  this  little 
earth. 

The  other  conception  is  less  beautiful  and  striking — I 
may  remark,  also,  that  it  is,  in  a  scientific  sense,  some- 
what more  exact.  Suppose  that  a  being  armed  with  such 
powers  of  vision  as  we  have  imagined  should  watch  from 
the  neighborhood  of  our  earth  the  progress  of  some  inter- 
esting event.  If  he  then  began  to  travel  from  the  earth  at 
a  rate  equal  to  that  at  which  light  travels,  he  would  see 
one  phase  of  the  event  continually  present  before  him, 
because  he  would  always  be  where  the  light-message  re- 
cording that  event  was  actually  travelling.  By  passing 
somewhat  less  swiftly  away,  he  would  see  the  event  tak- 
ing place  with  singular  slowness ;  while  passing  away 
more  swiftly,  he  would  see  the  event  occurring  in  inverted 
order.  Suppose,  for  example,  he  was  watching  the  battle 
of  Waterloo — he  could  gaze  on  the  fine  picture  presented 
by  the  Imperial  Guard  as  they  advanced  upon  the  Eng- 
lish army,  for  hours,  years,  nay,  for  centuries  or  cycles ; 


334        OTHER   WCELDS  THAN  OURS. 

or  he  might  watch  the  whole  progress  of  the  charge  oc- 
curring so  slowly  that  years  might  elapse  between  each 
step  of  the  advancing  column,  and  the  bullets  which 
mowed  down  their  ranks  might  either  seem  unmoving,  or 
else  appear  to  wend  their  way  with  scarcely  perceptible 
motion  through  the  air ;  or  finally,  he  might  so  wing  his 
flight  through  space  that  the  Guard  would  seem  to  re- 
treat, their  dead  men  coming  to  life  as  the  bullets  passed 
from  their  wounds,  until  at  length  the  Old  Guard  would 
seem  as  it  was  when  it  began  its  advance,  in  the  assured 
hope  of  deciding  "Waterloo,  as  it  had  already  decided  s<j 
many  hard-fought  battles  for  its  imperial  chief. 

It  may  seem  hypercritical  to  notice  scientific  inexact* 
Hess  in  ideas  professedly  fanciful.  But  as  the  author  lays 
some  little  stress  upon  the  scientific  truth  of  the  method 
jn  which  his  fancies  are  exhibited,  and  as,  further,  he 
dwells  upon  two  of  the  more  obvious  objections  to  the 
first  conception,  it  may  be  well  to  consider  a  further  ob- 
jection, which  enforces  on  us  a  total  change  in  the  way  of 
presenting  the  idea.  He  remarks  that  the  being  he  has 
conceived  to  be  borne  toward  the  earth  through  a  dis- 
tance so  enormous  would  not  see  in  a  moment  the  whole 
history  of  the  earth  during  the  thousands  of  years  con- 
sidered, but  only  the  history  of  that  hemisphere  which 
was  turned  toward  him;  while,  further,  all  that  took 
place  under  roofs  or  under  cover  of  any  sort  would  re- 
main unperceived  by  him.  But  there  is  a  more  serious 
objection.     Among  the  events  which  have  taken  placs 


SUPERVISION  AND  CONTROL.  335 

during  those  thousands  of  years  have  been  thousands  of 
revolutions  of  the  earth  around  the  sun,  and  more  than 
365  times  as  many  rotations  of  the  earth  upon  her  axis, 
to  say  nothing  of  the  stately  sway  of  the  earth  in  her 
motion  of  precession.  So  that  our  imaginary  observer 
would  in  reality  see  the  earth  whirling  with  inconceivable 
rapidity  upon  its  axis,  and  sweeping  with  even  more 
tremendous  velocity  around  the  sun,  so  as  to  complete 
thousands  of  circuits  in  a  single  second.  He  would  see 
clouds  forming  and  vanishing  in  an  amazing  succession  of 
changes,  all  occurring  in  a  single  instant.  And  even 
though  his  powers  of  vision  enabled  him  to  pierce  the 
cloud-envelope,  he  would  not  have  a  consecutive  present- 
ment of  the  various  events  occurring  in  any  part  of  the 
earth,  but  only  a  hap-hazard  succession  of  half-days  for 
each  portion  of  her  surface. 

However,  we  can  easily  see  that,  by  a  slight  modifica- 
tion, the  beautiful  conception  of  our  author  can  be  made 
to  illustrate  one  mode  at  least  in  which  the  events  occur- 
ring upon  our  earth  may  be  conceived  to  be  at  all  times 
present  to  the  thoughts  of  an  Omnipresent  Being.  Im- 
agine a  sphere  with  a  radius  over  which  light  would 
travel  in  the  time  which  has  elapsed  since  living  creat- 
ures first  began  to  move  upon  this  earth,  and  having  for 
centre  the  place  occupied  by  the  earth  at  that  instant. 
Then,  if  we  imagine  millions  of  eyes  over  the  surface  of 
that  sphere,  all  turned  with  piercing  powers  of  vision 
upon  the  central  earth,  we  see  that  to  these  eyes  the 


336        OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

earth  would  be  presented  by  the  record  of  light,  not  as 
she  is  now,  but  as  she  was  at  that  primeval  day.  Now, 
conceive  those  millions  of  eyes  closing  swiftly  in  upon 
the  earth,  but  with  this  peculiarity  of  movement,  that, 
instead  of  being  always  on  a  sphere  around  a  fixed  point, 
they  were  always  on  a  sphere  around  the  position  which 
was  really  occupied  by  the  earth  when  the  light-messages 
started  which  those  eyes  were  receiving  at  the  moment. 
Then  if  that  wondrous  sphere  contracted  in  an  instant, 
according  to  the  law  assigned  it,  until  its  myriad  mill- 
ions of  eyes  were  gazing  intently  on  our  earth  from  a 
sphere  of  but  a  few  thousand  miles  in  radius,  the  whole 
history  of  the  earth,  so  far  as  light  could  render  it,  would 
have  been  in  a  moment  of  time  presented  before  the 
myriad-eyed  sphere. 

By  extending  these  considerations  to  other  modes  in 
which  the  history  of  an  event  is  recorded,  so  to  speak, 
by  natural  processes,  we  can  see  that  a  much  more  com- 
plete and  definite  picture  of  past  events  than  light  can 
convey  must  be  at  all  times  present  in  the  universe.  A 
sense  which  could  analyze  heat-impressions  as  eyesight 
analyzes  light  would  tell  us  not  only  what  eyesight  tells 
us,  but  much  that  no  light-messages  can  convey  to  us. 
At  least  it  is  conceivable  that  a  sense  of  this  sort  would 
enable  the  being  provided  with  it  to  recognize  not 
merely  the  nature  of  the  surface  of  any  body  whose  heat 
reached  the  organ  of  this  sense,  but  the  quality  of  the 
body's  internal  structure,  processes  going  on  within  the 


SUPERVISION  AND  OONTROL.  337 

body,  or  the  nature  of  bodies  so  placed  that  eyesight 
would  not  render  us  sensible  even  of  their  existence. 
Electricity,  in  like  manner,  would  avail  to  give  informa- 
tion altogether  distinct  from  that  which  light  can  impart. 

But  again,  the  senses  by  which  we  judge  of  what  is 
going  on  around  us  are,  after  all,  merely  certain  means  by 
which  we  judge  of  causes  by  their  effects.  When  we  say, 
for  instance,  that  we  have  seen  such  and  such  an  object, 
or  watched  such  and  such  an  event,  what  we  really  imply 
is  that  we  have  recognized  certain  physical  impressions 
which  we  can  only  explain  by  the  existence  of  that  object, 
or  by  the  occurrence  of  that  event.  We  know,  in  fact, 
that  in  certain  exceptional  cases  impressions  resembling 
those  caused  by  the  actual  presence  of  an  object,  or  by 
the  actual  occurrence  of  some  event,  may  arise  where  no 
such  object  has  been  present,  or  where  no  such  event  has 
taken  place.  Still,  we  commonly  feel  safe  from  error  in 
concluding,  from  certain  impressions  conveyed  to  the 
mind  by  the  agency  of  the  senses  that  certain  objects 
have  been  really  present,  at  rest  or  in  action,  before  us. 

But  then,  even  man,  limited  as  are  his  powers,  can  yet 
follow  a  series  of  effects  and  causes  far  more  numerous 
than  those  concerned  in  the  act  of  vision  ;  and  so  he  can 
become  certain  of  the  occurrence  of  past  events  of  which 
no  sense  he  possesses  gives  him  any  direct  information. 
For  example,  though  I  neither  saw  the  battle  of  Waterloo 
nor  heard  the  thunder  of  the  guns  there,  yet  I  am  as  cer- 
tain that  the  battle  really  took  place  as  though  sight  and 


338        OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS. 

hearing  had  given  me  direct  information  on  the  matter. 
And  when  I  inquire  whence  that  certainty  arises,  I  find  a 
complicated  series  of  events  involved  in  mj  acquisition 
of  the  knowledge  that  the  battle  took  place.  My  inter- 
pretation of  the  letterpress  account  of  the  battle  involved 
in  itself  a  number  of  more  or  less  complex  relations, 
associated  with  the  question  of  my  confidence  in  those 
who  taught  me  that  certain  symbols  represented  certain 
letters,  that  certain  combinations  of  letters  represented 
certain  words,  and  that  certain  words  represented  certain 
ideas.  Not  to  follow  out  the  long  train  of  thoughts  thus 
suggested,  it  will  be  clear  that,  with  regard  to  a  variety  of 
matters,  the  knowledge  which  any  man  has  is  associated 
with  consideration  of  cause  and  effect,  of  general  experi- 
ence, of  confidence  in  the  accounts  of  others  or  in  his 
own  judgment,  which  are  in  reality  of  a  highly  complex 
character. 

Now,  we  are  led  by  these  thoughts  to  remember  that 
independently  of  those  records  of  past  events  which  are 
continually  present  throughout  the  universe  in  processes 
resembling  those  which  directly  affect  our  senses,  such 
events  leave  their  record  (even  to  their  minutest  details) 
in  the  consequences  to  which  they  have  led.  If  a  great 
naturalist  like  Huxley  or  Owen  can  tell  by  examining  the 
tooth  of  a  creature  belonging  to  some  long-extinct  race, 
not  only  what  the  characteristics  of  that  race  were,  but 
the  general  nature  of  the  scenery  amid  which  such  creat- 
ures lived,  we  see  at  once  that  a  single  grain  of  sand  or  a 


SUPERVISION  AN3  CONTROL.  33 

drop  of  water  must  convey  to  an  Omniscient  and  Omni- 
present Being  the  history  of  the  whole  world  of  which  it 
forms  part.  Nay,  why  should  we  pause  here  ?  The  his- 
tory of  that  world  is  in  truth  bound  up  so  intimately  with 
the  history  of  the  universe,  that  the  grain  of  sand  or  drop 
of  water  conveys  not  only  the  history  of  the  world,  but 
with  equal  completeness  the  history  of  the  whole  uni- 
verse. In  fact,  if  we  consider  the  matter  attentively,  we 
see  that  there  cannot  be  a  single  atom  throughout  space 
which  could  have  attained  its  present  exact  position  and 
state,  had  the  history  of  any  part  of  the  universe,  how- 
ever insignificant,  been  otherwise  than  it  has  actually  been, 
in  even  the  minutest  degree. 

Turning  from  the  past  to  the  future,  we  must  not  let 
the  limited  nature  of  our  recognition  of  the  course  of 
future  events  prevent  us  from  forming  a  just  opinion  as 
to  the  way  in  which  the  future  is  in  a  sense  always  pres- 
ent. We  can  judge  of  the  past  by  its  effects,  but  we  are 
almost  utterly  unable  to  judge  of  the  future  by  its  causes. 
Yet  we  cannot  doubt  that  the  future  is  present  in  its 
germs,  precisely  as  the  past  is  present  in  its  fruits.  It 
may  be  regarded  in  fact  as  merely  a  peculiarity  of  man's 
constitution  that  the  past  is  more  clearly  present  to  his 
mental  vision  than  the  future.  It  is  easy  not  only  to 
conceive  that  the  future  and  the  past  should  be  equally 
present  to  intelligent  creatures,  but  to  conceive  of  a  form 
of  intelligence  according  to  which  past  events  would  be 
obliterated  from  the  mind  as  fast  as  they  took  place, 


340  OTHER   WORLDS  THAN  OVKtL 

while  the  future  should  be  as  actually  present  as  to  th$ 
ordinary  human  mind  the  past  is. 

In  considering  the  Omniscient  Omnipresent  Being, 
however,  all  questions  of  degree  must  be  set  on  one  side. 
The  future  must  be  absolutely  and  essentially  present  to 
such  a  Being  in  its  germs  as  the  past  has  been  shown  to 
be  in  its  fruits.  If  a  grain  of  sand  contains  in  its  state, 
figure,  and  position,  the  picture  of  the  universe  as  it  is, 
and  the  whole  history  of  the  universe  throughout  the  in- 
finite past — and  who  can  doubt  that  this  is  so  ? — it  con- 
tains with  equal  completeness  the  history  of  the  universe 
throughout  the  infinite  future.  No  other  view  is  com- 
patible with  the  assumption  of  infinite  wisdom,  and  no 
assumption  which  limits  the  wisdom  of  a  Ruler  of  an  in- 
finite universe  is  compatible  with  our  belief  in  the  fitness 
of  such  a  Buler  to  reign  supreme  over  the  universe. 

Obviously  also  every  event,  however  trifling,  must  be 
held  to  contain  in  itself  the  whole  history  of  the  uni- 
verse throughout  the  infinite  past  and  throughout  the  in- 
finite future.  For  every  event,  let  its  direct  importance 
be  what  it  may,  is  indissolubly  bound  up  with  events 
preceding,  accompanying,  and  following  it,  in  endless 
series  of  causation,  interaction,  and  effect. 

So  far,  then,  as  the  supervision  of  a  Ruler  over  the 
universe  is  concerned,  we  have  two  lines  of  thought,  each 
leading  to  the  recognition  of  perfect  supervision.  In 
virtue  (1)  of  the  omnipresence,  and  (2)  of  the  infinite 
wisdom  of  such  a  Ruler,  He  could  see  at  each  instant  $w* 


SUPERVISION  AND  CONTROL.  341 

whole  universe  as  it  has  been  in  the  infinite  past,  as  it  is 
now,  and  as  it  will  be  in  the  infinite  future;  and  this 
being  as  true  of  any  one  instant  as  it  is  of  any  other,  we 
recognize  the  operation  of  yet  a  new  form  of  infinity — the 
infinite  duration  of  the  Euler's  existence — to  render  yet 
more  inconceivably  perfect  His  supervision  of  the  uni- 
verse. 

With  regard  to  control  it  need  hardly  be  said  that  if  a 
Buler  does  exercise  control,  apart  from  the  laws  assigned 
to  His  universe,  His  knowledge  of  the  progress  of  past 
and  future  events  would  not  therefore  be  called  in  ques- 
laon,  since  His  own  direct  action,  whether  in  the  past  or 
in  the  future,  would  be  quite  as  much  the  subject  of  His 
consciousness  (to  use  this  word  for  want  of  a  better)  as 
the  action  of  His  creatures  or  of  the  laws  He  had  pri- 
marily set  them. 

We  know  that  certain  laws  have  been  assigned  to  the 
universe,  and  we  know,  also,  that,  so  far  as  our  very  lim- 
ited experience  enables  us  to  determine,  these  laws  are 
never  abrogated.  Here  I  set  altogether  aside,  for  the 
moment,  the  possibility  of  miracles  (since  miracles  would 
necessarily  be  non-natural  events),  and  consider  only  the 
results  of  experimental  or  observational  science.  Thus  we 
are  led  to  the  conclusion  that  all  things  happen  according 
to  set  physical  laws;  and  we  see  strong  reason  to  believe 
that  these  laws  are  sufficient  for  the  control  of  all  things. 

Now  it  seems  conceivable  that  in  reality  it  is  only  our 
limited  acquaintance  with  the  operation  of  the  laws  of  the 


342  OTHER  WORLDS  THAN  OURS, 

universe  which  makes  us  regard  them  as  unchanging,  and, 
so  to  speak,  inexorable.  But  I  think  that  this  view — 
though  it  has  been  entertained  by  many  thoughtful  men 
— is  in  reality  inconsistent  with  just  conceptions  of  in- 
finite wisdom.  If  the  wisdom  of  a  Ruler  of  the  universe, 
though  inconceivably  great,  were  yet  finite,  we  could  not 
suppose  that  the  universe  would  have  been  so  planned 
(still  to  use  inexact  words  for  want  of  better),  and  laws  of 
such  a  nature  assigned  to  it,  that  throughout  the  infinity 
of  time  all  things  should  work  welL  There  would  then, 
undoubtedly,  be  continual  need  of  adaptation,  change,  and 
remodelling — of  the  annulment  of  a  law  here,  or  its  sus- 
pension there — in  order  that  the  whole  might  not  fall  to 
rack.  But  with  a  Ruler  infinitely  wise,  there  should  be 
no  such  necessity.  The  whole  scheme  of  the  universe 
would  be  so  perfect  that  direct  intervention  would  not  at 
any  time  be  required. 

To  sum  up,  we  perceive  that,  before  a  Ruler  omnipres- 
ent, omniscient,  and  omnipotent,  the  infinite  past  and  the 
infinite  future  of  the  universe  would  be  at  all  times  sen- 
sibly present ;  that  each  the  minutest  atom  and  every  the 
least  important  event  would  exhibit  before  Him  at  each 
instant  the  perfect  history  of  the  limitless  past  and  future 
of  the  universe ;  and  lastly,  that  His  infinitely  perfect  con- 
sciousness of  the  control  over  all  that  has  been,  is,  or  will 
be,  would  be  infinitely  multiplied  (to  use  the  only  available 
expression)  by  the  infinite  duration  throughout  which  Hia 
existence  would  extend. 


OCT  20  1902 


LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS 


0  003  629  873  A 


