Source note (Tower of Babel staging): Procopius, History of the Wars, Book VIII: The Gothic War (part 3), translated by H. B. Dewing (Loeb Classical Library, Vol. V, London: William Heinemann / New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1928). Text from Internet Archive item procopiuswitheng05procuoft (OCR; Greek facing-page text removed).
Public domain work. This file was produced from a public scan; OCR imperfections may remain.

THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY


FOUNDED BY JAMES LOEB, LL.D.


EDITED BY


7T. E. PAGE, o.H., Lrrt.p.
ΤΕ. CAPPS, pH.p., LL.D. TW. H. ἢ. ROUSE, uirt.p.
L. A. POST, u.a.p. E. H. WARMINGTON, .a., F.R.HIST.SOC.


PROCOPIUS


= wai te BR
swat W αὶ


᾿


PROCOPIUS


WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY
Η. B. DEWING


PRESIDENT, ATHENS COLLEGE, GREECE


IN SEVEN VOLUMES
Vv


HISTORY OF THE WARS,
BOOKS VII (continued) ann VIII


LONDON


WILLIAM HEINEMANN LTD


CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS
HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS
MOMLXII


First printed 1928
Reprinted 1954, 1962


-Ξ PR
ΓᾺΡ RARP)\ 5340
oct 29 1974 | ἣν ᾿
Ce of ow ; &


Printed in Great Britain


CONTENTS


HISTORY OF THE WARS—


VII.—THE GOTHIC WAR (continued) . . .


VIII.—THE GOTHIC WAR (continued)


INDEX. .... ee ee


lle
ee


fea
’


aTerary


j ᾿
way ν
hi.
i
‘qi Φ
“
i
2 r
a a,
= ih
2.8 '
rr
᾿
᾿
-


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


HISTORY OF THE WARS:
BOOK VII


THE GOTHIC WAR (continued)


ΠΡΟΚΟΠΙΟΥ KAIZSAPEOS


THEP TON TOAEMON ΛΟΙῸΣ ΕΒΔΟΜΟΣ


XXXVI


, \ \ / a fol /


2


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA
HISTORY OF THE WARS: BOOK VII


THE GOTHIC WAR (continued)


XXXVI


Totita now led his whole army against Rome, and 549 4.0
establishing himself there entered upon a siege.
But Belisarius had selected three thousand men
noted for their valour and appointed them to
garrison Rome, placing in command of them
Diogenes, one of his own spearmen, a man of un-
usual discretion and an able warrior. Consequently
a long time was consumed in the blockade. For the
besieged, on their part, shewed themselves, thanks
to their extraordinary valour, a match for the entire
Gothic army, while Diogenes was ever keeping a
strict watch that no one should approach the wall
to damage it; furthermore, he sowed grain in all 7)
parts of the city inside the circuit-walland sobrought =,
it about that they had not the least shortage of food.
Many times indeed the barbarians attempted to
storm the fortifications and make trial of the circuit-
wall, but they were always repulsed, being driven
back from the wall by the valour of the Romans,


1 Yo: Dindorf: ἤει V, te L.


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


THOE.

rn nr A > 4 a > \ ,-

4


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIL. xxxvi. 3-9


They did, however, capture Portus,! and thereafter
held Rome under close siege. Such was the course
of these events.

As soon as the emperor saw Belisarius returned
to Byzantium, he began to make plans for sending
another commander with an army against the Goths
and Totila. And if he had actually carried out this
idea, I believe that, with Rome still under his power,
and the soldiers in the city saved for him and enabled
to unite with the relieving force from Byzantium, he
would have overcome his opponents in the war. But


in fact, after first selecting Liberius, one of the patri- _


cians from Rome, and ordering him to make himself
ready, he later, perhaps because some other business
claimed his attention, lost interest in the matter.
After the siege of Rome had continued for a long
time, some of the Isaurians who were keeping guard
at the gate which bears the name of Paul the
Apostle*—men nursing a grievance because for
many years nothing had been paid them by the
emperor, and observing, at the same time, that


those Isaurians who had previously surrendered ©


Rome to the Goths had become the proud possessors


of vast sums of money—very secretly opened .


negotiations with Totila and agreed to hand over
the city, and a definite day was appointed for the
transaction. So when the appointed day was come,
Totila contrived the following plan. He launched
in the Tiber River during the first watch of the
night two long boats, placing on them men who
understood the use of the trumpet. These he com-
manded to row straight across the Tiber, and when


1 At the Tiber’s mouth.
2 The Porta Ostiensis. Cf. Book VI. iv. 3.


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1


»-


» 3 ἴωσιν Haury: om. MSS.


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxxvi. 9-16


they came close to the circuit-wall to sound the
trumpets there with all their might. Meanwhile he
himself was holding the Gothic army in readiness
close to the above-mentioned gate which bears the
name of the Apostle Paul, unobserved by his enemy.
And reasoning that, if any of the Roman army should
succeed in escaping from the city, as they well
might under cover of darkness, they would go to
Centumcellae, for no other fortress was left to them
anywhere among the towns of that region, he
decided to guard the road leading thither by means
of some ambuscades of warlike men, to whom he
gave instructions to destroy the fugitives. So the
men in the boats, upon getting near the city,
immediately made use of their trumpets, as they
had been instructed todo. Thereupon the Romans
were thunderstruck, and falling into great fear and
confusion suddenly abandoned for no sufficient reason
their several posts and hastened on the run to give
᾿ assistance at that point, supposing that the attempt
was directed against that part of the wall. Thus
the Isaurians who were betraying the city remained
alone at their post, and they opened the gates at
their leisure and received the enemy into the city.
And there was great slaughter of those who fell
into the hands of the enemy there, though many
made off in flight through other gates, but those
who went toward Centumcellae ! got into the ambus-
eades and perished. However, a few of them did
escape with difficulty, Diogenes too, they say, being
among them and securing his safety though wounded.

Now there was in the Roman army one named


1 Modern Civita Vecchia.


7


17


19


22


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII, xxxvi. 16-22


Paulus, a Cilician by birth, who at first had been in
charge of the household of Belisarius, but later went
with the army to Italy in command of a cavalry
troop, and had been appointed with Diogenes to
command the garrison of Rome. This Paulus,
during the capture of the city at that time, rushed
with four hundred horsemen into the Tomb of
Hadrian and seized the bridge leading to the church
of the Apostle Peter. And while it was still dawn
and a little daylight was about to appear, the Gothic
army assailed these men, but they withstood their
enemy most vigorously where they were and gained
the upper hand; indeed they slew large numbers
of the barbarians, seeing they were in a great
throng and huddled together. When Totila saw
this, he stopped the fighting immediately, and com-
manded the Goths quietly to blockade their enemy,
thinking that he would capture the men by starva-
τ tion, Consequently Paulus and the four hundred
passed that day without food, and bivouacked during
the night in the same condition. On the following
day, however, they resolved to use some of the
horses for food, but a feeling of reluctance owing to
the unusual nature of this food prevented them
until late afternoon, although exceedingly hard
pressed by hunger. At that time, after long
deliberation among themselves, and after exhorting
one another to boldness, they came to the conclusion
that the better course for them was to end their
lives then and there by a glorious death. In fact
their decision was to make a sudden rush upon their
enemy, to kill as many of them as each man could,


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


TO


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxxvi. 22-28


and thus each and every one of them to meet his
death valiantly. Accordingly they rushed suddenly
into each other's arms, and kissing one another's
cheeks held their friends in a last embrace on the
point of death, intending one and all to perish
forthwith.

But Totila, observing this, began to fear that men
who were setting their faces toward death, having
now no further hope as regards safety, would inflict
irreparable harm upon the Goths. He therefore
sent to them and offered them a choice of two
alternatives, either to leave their horses and arms
there, take an oath not again to fight against the
Goths, and thus to depart for Byzantium without
experiencing any harm, or, on the other hand, to
keep their own possessions and fight thereafter in
the Gothic army, enjoying full and complete equality
with the Goths. These proposals were heard gladly
by the Romans. And at first, to be sure, all were
for choosing to go to Byzantium, but later, being
ashamed to make their withdrawal on foot and
without arms, and dreading also that they would
fall into some ambuscades on the homeward journey
and thus be destroyed, and bearing a grudge,
furthermore, because the Roman State owed them
pay for a long period, they all mingled voluntarily
with the Gothic army, except indeed that Paulus
and one of the Isaurians, Mindes by name, came
before Totila and prayed him to send them to
Byzantium. For they stated that they had children
and wives in their native land, and apart from these
they were unable to live. And Totila received the
request of these men with favour, believing that
they were speaking the truth, and he released them


II


29


or


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XXXVII


12


HISTORY OF WARS, VII. xxxvi. 28-xxxvii. 5


after presenting them with travelling money and
sending an escort with them. There were others
also of the Roman army, those, namely, who had
chanced to take refuge in the sanctuaries of the
city, about three hundred in number, who received
pledges and went over to Totila. As for Rome
itself, Totila was unwilling thereafter either to dis-
mantle or to abandon it; instead he decided to
establish in residence there both Goths and Romans,
not only members of the senate, but also all the
others, for the following reason.


XXXVII


Nor long before this Totila had sent to the ruler
of the Franks and requested him to give his daughter
in marriage. But the Frankish king spurned the
request, declaring that Totila neither was nor ever
would be king of Italy, seeing that after capturing
Rome he had been utterly unable to hold it, but
after tearing down a portion of it had let it fall again
into the hands of his enemy. Consequently he
made haste on the present occasion to convey sup-
plies into the city, and gave orders to rebuild as
quickly as possible everything which he himself had
pulled down and destroyed by fire when he captured
Rome at the previous time ; then he summoned the
members of the Roman senate and all the others
whom he had under guard in Campania. And after
witnessing the horse-races there, he made ready his
whole army, intending to make an expedition against
Sicily. At the same time too he put his four


13


LO


12


13


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


14


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxxvii. 5-13


hundred war-ships in readiness for sea-fighting, as
well as a very considerable fieet of large ships which


had been sent thither from the East by the emperor, Ἢ


and which he, during all this time, had had the
fortune to capture with both crews and cargoes. He |
also sent a Roman named Stephanus as an envoy to
the emperor, requesting him to put an end to this
war and make a treaty with the Goths, with the
understanding that they should fight as his allies
when he should go against his other enemies. But
the Emperor Justinian would not permit the envoy
even to come into his presence, nor did he pay the
least attention to anything he said.

' When Totila heard this, he again set about making
preparations for the war. And it seemed to him
advisable first to make trial of Centumcellae and
then to proceed against Sicily. Now the garrison
there was at that time commanded by Diogenes, the
guardsman of Belisarius, and he had a sufficient force
under him. So the Gothic army, upon reaching
Centumeellae, made camp close to the circuit-wall
and commenced a siege. And Totila sent envoys to
Diogenes and challenged him and his soldiers, if it
was their wish to reach a decision by battle with
the Goths, to fall to with all speed. He also advised
them to entertain no hope whatever that further
reinforcements from the emperor would reach them ;
for Justinian, he said, was unable longer to carry on
this war against the Goths, if anyone could base a
reasonable judgment upon those things which had


«3


14


15


16


17


18


19


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


“ { , .

ε / fal , n
Δ a > , ’ ; > , ee


/ / / fa) ,


\ .


τῆς ῥώμης ξυν L, followed by a lacuna of about one line.


16


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIL. xxxvii. 13-20


taken place at Rome for such a long period. He
accordingly offered them the privilege of choosing
whichever of two alternatives they wished, either to
mingle with the Gothic army on terms of complete
equality, or to depart from the city without suffering
harm and betake themselves to Byzantium. But the
Romans and Diogenes declared that it was not their
wish either to fight a decisive battle or, on the other
hand, to mingle with the Gothic army, because they
would find it impossible to live apart from their
children and their wives. And as for the city over
which they were keeping guard, they were quite
unable for the present to surrender it with any
plausible excuse, since they had, in fact, not even a
pretext for doing so at that time, particularly if they
wished to present themselves before the emperor ;
they did, however, beg him to defer the matter for
a time, in order that they might during that interval
report the situation to the emperor, and in case no
relief should come to them from him in the mean-
time, that then finally they might quit the city;
thus they would surrender the city to the Goths,
while they, for their part, would not be without
justification in leaving it. This was approved by
Totila, and a definite day was agreed upon; then
thirty men were given as hostages by each side to
make this agreement binding, and the Goths broke
up the siege and proceeded on the way to Sicily.
But when they came to Rhegium, they did not
cross the strait there until they had made trial of the
fortress of that city. Now the garrison there was


17


21


22


23


24


26


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


18


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxxvii. 20-26


commanded by Thurimuth and Himerius, whom
Belisarius had appointed to that post. And since
they had under them a large force of excellent men,
they not only repulsed the enemy when he attacked
the wall, but also made a sally and gained the
advantage in combat. Later, however, since they
were far outnumbered by their opponents, they
were shut up inside the circuit-wall and remained
quiet. So Totila left a portion of the Gothic army
there to guard the place, expecting that at a later
time they would capture the Roman garrison through
failure of the food supply ; meanwhile he sent an
army against Tarentum and took over the fortress
there with no difficulty ; likewise the Goths whom
he had left in the land of Picenum also took the
city of Ariminum at that time; for it was betrayed
to them.

When the Emperor Justinian heard this, he formed
the purpose of appointing his nephew Germanus
commander-in-chief to carry on the war against the
Goths and Totila, and he directed him to make
ready. Now when the report of this reached Italy,
the Goths became very deeply concerned ; for the
reputation of Germanus happened to be a favourable
one among all men. The Romans, on the other
hand, straightway became confident one and all, and
the soldiers of the emperor’s army began to meet
danger and hardship much more courageously. But
the emperor for some unknown reason changed his
mind and decided to appoint to the post Liberius, a
Roman whom I have mentioned in the preceding


19


27


28


bo


wn


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA /


XXXVITI


20


HISTORY OF WARS, VII. xxxvii. 26-xxxviii. 5


narrative,' in place of Germanus. And Liberius did
in fact make preparations with all possible speed, and
it was expected that he would sail away immediately
with an army. But again the emperor changed his
mind, and consequently he too remained quiet. It
was at this time that Verus with a band of excellent
warriors whom he had gathered about him came to
an engagement not far from the city of Ravenna
with the Goths who were in Picenum, and he not
only lost many of his followers but was also killed
himself after shewing himself a brave man in the
encounter.


XXXVIII


Ar about this time an army of Sclaveni® amounting
to not more than three thousand crossed the Ister
River without encountering any opposition, advanced
immediately to the Hebrus River,? which they
erossed with no difficulty, and then split into two
parts. Now the one section of them contained
eighteen hundred men, while the other comprised
the remainder. And although the two sections were
thus separated from each other, the commanders of
the Roman army, upon engaging with them, both in
Ijlyricum and in Thrace, were defeated unexpectedly,
and some of them were killed on the field of battle,
while others saved themselves by a disorderly flight.
Now after all the generals had fared thus at the
hands of the two barbarian armies, though they were
far inferior to the Roman forces in number, one
section of the enemy engaged with Asbadus. This
man was a guard of the Emperor Justinian, since he

1 Chap. xxxvi. 6. 2 Cf. VII. xiv. 22 ff,
3 Modern Maritza.
21


10


1


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


22


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxxviii. 5-11


served among the candidati,| as they are called, and
he was also commander of the cavalry cohorts which
from ancient times have been stationed at Tzurullum,?
the fortress in Thrace, a numerous body of the best
troops. These too the Sclaveni routed with no
trouble, and they slew the most of them in a most
disgraceful flight; they also captured Asbadus and
for the moment made him a prisoner, but afterwards
they burned him by casting him into a fire, having
first flayed strips from the man’s back. Having
accomplished these things, they turned to plunder
all the towns, both of Thrace and of Illyricum, in
comparative security; and both armies captured
many fortresses by siege, though they neither had
any previous experience in attacking city walls, non
had they dared to come down to the open plain,
since these barbarians had never, in fact, even
attempted to overrun the land of the Romans.
Indeed it appears that they have never in all time
crossed the Ister River with an army before the
occasion which I have mentioned above.

Then those who had defeated Asbadus plundered
everything in order as far as the sea and captured by
storm a city on the coast named Topirus,’ though it
had a garrison of soldiers; this is the first of the
coast towns of Thrace and is twelve days’ journey dis-
tant from Byzantium. And they captured it in the
following manner. The most of them concealed
themselves in the rough ground which lay before the
fortifications, while some few went near the gate
which is toward the east and began to harass the
Romans at the battlements. Then the soldiers keeping

1 Bodyguards distinguished by a white tunic.


2 Modern Chorlou.
3 Opposite Thasos, in the region of modern Kavalla.


23


12


13


16


18


19


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


24


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxxviii. 11-19


guard there, supposing that they were no more than
those who were seen, immediately seized their arms
and one and all sallied forth against them. Where-
upon the barbarians began to withdraw to the rear,
making it appear to their assailants that they were
moving off in retreat because they were thoroughly
frightened by them; and the Romans, being drawn
into the pursuit, found themselves at a considerable
distance from the fortifications. Then the men in
ambush rose from their hiding-places and, placing
themselves behind the pursuers, made it no longer
ible for them to enter the city. Furthermore,
those who had seemed to be in flight turned about,
and thus the Romans now came to be exposed to
attack on two sides. Then the barbarians, after
destroying these to the last man, assaulted the
fortifications. But the inhabitants of the city,
deprived as they were of the support of the soldiers,
found themselves in a very difficult situation, yet
even so they warded off the assailants as well as the
circumstances permitted. And at first they resisted
successfully by heating oil and pitch till it was very
hot and pouring it down on those who were attack-
ing the wall, and the whole population joined in
hurling stones upon them and thus came not ve
far from repelling the danger. But finally the bar-
barians overwhelmed them by the multitude of their
missiles and forced them to abandon the battlements,
whereupon they placed ladders against the fortifica-
tions and so captured the city by storm. Then they
slew all the men immediately, to the number of
fifteen thousand, took all the valuables as plunder,
and reduced the children and women to slavery.
Before this, however, they had spared no age,


25


20


21


23


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


“


26


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIL. xxxviii. 19-23


but both these and the other group, since the
time when they fell upon the land of the Romans,
had been killing all who fell in their way, young
and old alike, so that the whole land inhabited
by the Illyrians and Thracians came to be every-
where filled with unburied corpses.

Now they killed their victims, not with sword
nor spear, nor in any other accustomed manner, but
by planting very firmly in the earth stakes which
they had made exceedingly sharp, and seating the
poor wretches upon these with great violence, driving
the point of the stake between the buttocks and
forcing it up into the intestines; thus did they see
fit to destroy them. These barbarians also had a
way of planting four thick stakes very deep in the
ground, and after binding the feet and hands of the
captives to these they would then assiduously beat
them over the head with clubs, killing them like
dogs or snakes or any other animal. Others again
they would imprison in their huts together with
their cattle and sheep—those, of course, which they
were utterly unable to take with them to their
native haunts—and then they would set fire to the
huts without mercy. Thus did the Sclaveni con-
sistently destroy those who fell in their way. But
from this time onward both these and those of the
other group, being as it were drunk with the great
quantity of blood they had shed, saw fit to make
prisoners of some who fell into their hands, and
consequently they were taking with them countless
thousands of prisoners when they all departed on
the homeward way.


27


VOL. V. B


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XXXIX


28


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIL. xxxix. 1-6


XXXIX


Arter this the Goths assaulted the fortress of
Rhegium, but the besieged continued to defend
themselves very vigorously and so repulsed them,
and Thurimuth was always conspicuous for the deeds
of heroism which he performed in fighting them.
But Totila discovered that the besieged were in
want of provisions, and so he contented himself with
leaving a portion of his army there to keep guard,
in order, of course, that the enemy might not carry
in anything thereafter, but might be compelled by
lack of necessities to surrender themselves and the
fortress to the Goths; he himself meanwhile crossed
over to Sicily with the rest of the army and delivered
an attack on the wall of Messana. And Domnentiolus,
the nephew of Buzes, who was in command of the
Romans there, encountered him before the fortifica-
tions, and in the engagement which followed he
was not unsuccessful. But he went back into the
city and remained quiet, attending to the guarding
of the place. The Goths, however, since no one
came out against them, plundered practically the
whole of Sicily. And the Romans besieged in
Rhegium, commanded by Thurimuth and Himerius,
as I have said, seeing their provisions had failed
completely, came to terms and surrendered them-
selves and the fortress to the enemy. J

When the emperor heard of these things, he
gathered a fleet and embarked on these ships a
very considerable army formed from infantry de-
tachments, and appointing Liberius commander over
them, ordered him to sail with all speed for Sicily,


29


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


30


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxxix. 6-12


and to put forth all his power to save the island.
But he very speedily repented having appointed
Liberius commander of the fleet; for he was an
extremely old man and without experience in deeds
of war. Then he absolved Artabanes from all the
charges against him, and appointing him General
of the forces in Thrace straightway sent him to
Sicily, providing him with an army of no great size
but instructing him to take over the fleet com-
manded by Liberius, since he was summoning
Liberius to Byzantium. But as commander-in-chief
in the war against Totilaand the Goths he appointed
Germanus, his own nephew. To him he gave an
army of no great size, but he provided him with
a considerable amount of money and directed him
to gather a very formidable army from Thrace and
Illyricum and then to set forth with great speed for
Italy. And he further instructed him to take with
him to Italy both Philemuth the Erulian with his

and his own son-in-law John the nephew
of Vitalian; for John, as General of the forces in
Illyricum, was stationed there.

Then a great ambition took possession of Germanus
to achieve for himself the overthrow of the Goths, in
order that it might be his fortune to recover for the
Roman empire both Libya and Italy. For in the
ease of Libya, at any rate, he had been sent there
by the emperor at the time when Stotzas had es-
tablished his tyranny and was already holding the
power of Libya most securely, and he had exceeded
all expectations by defeating the rebels in battle,
put an end to the tyranny. and once more recovered


1 Jn connection with the palace plot, VII. xxxii.


321


13


14


15


16


17


18


19


PROCOPIUS OF VASES


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIL. xxxix. 12-19


Libya for the Roman empire, as I have recounted
in the preceding narrative1 And now that the
affairs of Italy had come to such a pass as I have
just described, he naturally wished to win for him-
self great glory in that field, by showing himself
able to recover this too for the emperor. Now his
first move, made possible by the fact that his wife,
who was named Passara, had died long before, was
to marry Matasuntha, the daughter of Amalasuntha
and granddaughter of Theoderic, since Vittigis had
already passed from the world. For he cherished
the hope that, if the woman should be with him in
the army, the Goths would probably be ashamed to
take up arms against her, calling to mind the rule
of Theoderic and Atalaric. Then, by expending \
great sums of money, part of which was provided
by the emperor, but most of which he furnished
unstintingly from his own resources, he easily suc- ~
ceeded, contrary to expectation, in raising a great
army of very warlike men in a short space of time.
For among the Romans, on the one hand, the ex-
perienced fighters in many cases ignored the officers
to whom they belonged as spearmen and guards and
followed Germanus; these came not only from
Byzantium, but also from the towns of Thrace and
Illyricum as well, his sons Justinus and Justinian
having displayed great zeal in this matter—for he
had taken them also on his departure. He also
enrolled some from the cavalry detachments which
were stationed in Thrace, with the emperor's per-
mission. The barbarians also, on the other hand,
who had their homes near the Ister River kept
coming in great numbers, attracted by the fame of


1 Book IV. xvi, xvii.
33


21


23


24


PROCOPIUS OF CAESA REA


34


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxxix. 19-24


Germanus, and, upon receiving large sums of money,
these mingled with the Roman army. And other
barbarians too kept flocking to his standard, collected
from the whole world. Furthermore, the ruler of
the Lombards made ready a thousand heavy-armed
soldiers and promised to send them right speedily.
When these things were reported in Italy,
with such additions as rumour customarily makes
as it spreads among men, the Goths were both
frightened and perplexed at the same _ time,
being faced, as they were, with the necessity
of making war upon the race of Theoderic. But
those Roman soldiers who chanced to be fighting
unwillingly in the ranks of the Goths sent a mes-
senger to Germanus with orders to state to him that,
as soon as they should see him arrived in Italy and
his army actually encamped, they too without any
hesitation would certainly array themselves with. his
troops. All these things brought fresh courage to
the detachments of the emperor's army in Ravenna
and whatever other cities chanced to be left in their
hands, and being now filled with the highest hopes
they were determined to guard the towns rigorously
for the emperor. Nay, more, all those who under
Verus or other commanders had previously engaged
with the enemy and had escaped after being defeated
in battle by their opponents, and were now dispersed
and wandering about, each man wherever chance
led him, all these, as soon as they heard that
Germanus was on the way, gathered in a body in
Istria, and there remained quiet, awaiting this army.


35


25


26


28


29


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


36


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIL. xxxix. 25-xI. 2


Just at this time Totila sent to Centumcellae (for
the time agreed upon by him and Diogenes as
touching this town had arrived), and commanded
Diogenes to surrender the city in accordance with
the agreement. Diogenes, however, said that he
personally no longer had authority to do this; for
he had heard that Germanus had been appointed
commander-in-chief to carry on that war, and was
not far away with his army. And he added that,
in regard to the hostages, it was his desire to receive
back, on the one hand, their own, and, on the other,
to return those furnished by the Goths. Then, after
dismissing the messengers, he turned his attention
to the defence of the city, expecting Germanus and
the army with him. Such was the course of these
events; and the winter drew to its close, and the
fifteenth year ended in this war, the history of 5504».
which Procopius has written.


XL


But while Germanus was collecting and organizing
his army in Sardice, the city of Illyricum, and
making all the necessary preparations for war with
the greatest thoroughness, a throng of Sclaveni such
as never before was known arrived on Roman soil,
having crossed the Ister River and come to the
vicinity of Naissus.2_ Now some few of these had
scattered from their army and, wandering about the
country there alone, were captured by certain of
the Romans and made prisoners; and the Romans


1 Modern Sofia. 2 Modern Nish.


37


os


oO


-.-:


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


/ oe \ cod ? A ς ~

/ \ y ee NS / > /
Ὁ“ »Μ) ccd 4, 3 /
> 4 \ \ , f
\ ε rn


38


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xl. 2-7


questioned them as to why this particular army of
the Sclaveni had crossed the Ister and what they
had in mind to accomplish. And they stoutly
declared that they had come with the intention of
capturing by siege both Thessalonice! itself and
the cities around it. When the emperor heard this,
he was greatly agitated and straightway wrote to
Germanus directing him to postpone for the moment
his expedition to Italy and defend Thessalonice and
the other cities, and to repel the invasion of the
Sclaveni with all his power. So Germanus, for his
part, was devoting himself to this problem.

But the Sclaveni, upon learning definitely from
their captives that Germanus was in Sardice, began
to be afraid; for Germanus had a great reputation
among these particular barbarians for the following
reason. During the reign of Justinian, the uncle of
Germanus, the Antae, who dwell close to the Sclaveni,
had crossed the Ister River with a great army and
invaded the Roman domain. Now the emperor had
not long before this, as it happened, appointed
Germanus General of all Thrace. He accordingly
engaged with the hostile army, defeated them
decisively in battle, and killed practically all of
them; and Germanus, as a result of this achievement,
had covered himself with great glory in the estima-
tion of all men, including these same barbarians.
Consequently, on account of their dread of him, as
I have said, and also because they supposed that he
was conducting a very formidable force, seeing that
he was being sent by the emperor against Totila
and the Goths, the Sclaveni immediately turned


1 Modern Salonica.
39


10


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


40


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xl. 7-10


aside from their march on Thessalonice and no
longer dared to descend to the plain, but they
crossed over all the mountain ranges of Illyricum
and so came into Dalmatia. Germanus, accordingly,
paid no further attention to them and issued orders
to the entire army to prepare for marching, intending
to commence the journey thence to Italy two days
later.

But by some chance it so befell that he was taken
sick and abruptly reached the term of life. Thus
did Germanus suddenly pass away, a man endowed
with the finest qualities and remarkable for his
activity; for in war, on the one hand, he was not only
a most able general, but was also resourceful and
independent in action, while in peace and prosperity,
on the other hand, he well understood how to uphold
with all firmness both the laws and the institutions
of the state. As a judge he was conspicuously up-
right, while in private life he made loans of large
sums of money to all who requested it, never so
much as speaking of taking interest from them.
Both in the palace and in the market-place he was
aman of very impressive personality and exceedingly
serious demeanour, while in his daily home life he
was a pleasant, open-hearted, and charming host.
He would not permit, as far as his strength allowed,
any offence in the palace against established laws,
nor did he ever share either in the purpose or in
the conversations of the conspirators in Byzantium,
though many even of those in power went so far
in their unnatural conduct. Such then was the course
of these events.

The emperor was deeply moved by this misfortune,
and commanded John, the nephew of Vitalian and


41


12


13


14


_
>


6


17


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


42


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xl. 10-17


son-in-law of Germanus, in company with Justinian,
one of the two sons of Germanus, to lead this army
into Italy. So they set out on the way to Dalmatia,
intending to pass the winter in Salones, since it
seemed to them impossible at that season to make
the circuit of the gulf, as they would be obliged to
do in travelling into Italy ; ; for it was impossible for
them to ferry across since they had no ships. Mean-
while Liberius, not having as yet learned anything
of the emperor's change of purpose regarding the
fleet he commanded, put in at Syracuse while it was
under siege by the enemy. And he forced his way
through the barbarian lines, sailed into the harbour,
and so got inside the fortifications with the whole
fleet. Now Artabanes not long after this reached
Cephallenia, and finding that Liberius and his army
had already put out to sea and departed thence on
the way to Sicily, he immediately set out from there
and crossed the so-called Adriatic Sea. But when
. he came near Calabria, he was assailed by a terrific
storm and a head wind of extraordinary violence,
and it so fell out that all the ships were scattered so
completely that it appeared that the most of them
had been driven on the shore of Calabria and fallen
into the hands of the enemy. This, however, was
not the case, but they had first been driven apart
by the great violence of the wind, then had turned
about, heavily buffeted meanwhile by the sea, and
had reached the Peloponnesus again. As for the
other ships, some were lost and some were saved,
according to where chance carried them. But one
ship, that in which Artabanes himself was sailing,
had its mast broken off in this heavy sea, and yet,
after coming to such a degree of danger, was carried


43


18


19


21


22


23


24


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


an “ ΄


44


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xl. 17-24


by the surge and followed the swell until it came to
land at the island of Melita? Thus did it come
about contrary to expectation that Artabanes was
saved.

Liberius now found himself unable to make sallies
against the besiegers or to fight a decisive battle
against them, while at the same time their pro-
visions could not possibly suffice for any considerable
time, seeing they were a large force, and so he set
sail from there with his troops, and, eluding the
enemy, withdrew to Panormus.

Totila and the Goths, meanwhile, had plundered
practically the whole land of Sicily; they had
collected as booty a vast number of horses and other
animals, and had stripped the island of grain and all
its other crops ; these, together with all the treasure,
which amounted to a great sum indeed, they loaded
on their ships, and then suddenly abandoned the
island and returned to Italy, being impelled to do so
for the following reason. Not long before this, as it ,
happened, Totila had appointed one of the Romans,
Spinus by name, a native of Spolitium, to be his
personal adviser. This man was staying in Catana,
which was an unwalled town. And, by some chance,
it came about that he fell into the hands of the
enemy there. Now Totila, being eager to rescue
this man, wished to release to the Romans in his
stead a notable’s wife who was his prisoner. But
the Romans would not consent to accept a woman in
exchange for a man holding the position of quaestor,
as it is called. The man consequently became fear-
ful that he would be destroyed while in hostile
hands, and so promised the Romans that he would


1 Modern Meleda.
45


26


29


30


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


46


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIL. xl. 24-30


persuade Totila to depart immediately from Sicily
and cross over to Italy with the whole Gothic army.
So they first bound him over by oaths to carry out
this promise and then gave him up to the Goths,
receiving the woman in return. He then went
before Yotila and asserted that the Goths were not
consulting their own interests, now that they had
plundered practically the whole of Sicily, in remain-
ing there for a few insignificant fortresses. For he
declared that he had recently heard, while he was
among the enemy, that Germanus, the emperor's ~
nephew, had passed from the world, and that John,
his son-in-law, and Justinian, his son, with the
whole army collected by Germanus were already in
Dalmatia and would move on from there, after
completing their preparations in the briefest time,


-straight for Liguria, in order, obviously, to descend


suddenly upon the Goths and make slaves of their
women and children and to plunder all their
valuables; and it would be better for the Goths, he
said, to be there to meet them, passing the winter
meanwhile in safety in company with their families.
“For,” he went on, “if we overcome that army, it
will be possible for us at the opening of spring to
renew our operations against Sicily free from anxiety
and with no thought of an enemy in our minds.”
Totila was convinced by this suggestion, and so,
leaving guards in four strongholds, he himself, taking
with him the entire booty, crossed over with all the
rest of the army to Italy. Such was the course of
these events.

Now John and the emperor's army, upon reaching
Dalmatia, decided to pass the winter in Salones,
purposing to march from there straight for Ravenna


47


31


32


33


34


35


36


37


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 Modern Edirne or Adrianople,


48


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIL xl. 30-37


after the winter season. But the Sclaveni now
reappeared, both those who had previously come
into the emperor’s land, as I have recounted above,
and others who had crossed the Ister not long after-
wards and joined the first, and they began to
overrun the Roman domain with complete freedom.
And some indeed entertained the suspicion that
Totila had bribed these very barbarians with large
gifts of money and so set them upon the Romans
there, with the definite purpose of making it
impossible for the emperor to manage the war
against the Goths well because of his preoccupation
with these barbarians. But as to whether the ©
Sclaveni were conferring a favour upon Totila, or |
whether they came there without invitation, I am
unable to say. These barbarians did, in any case,
divide themselves into three groups and wrought
irreparable damage in all Europe, not merely
plundering that country by sudden raids, but actually
spending the winter as if in their own land and
having no fear of the enemy. Afterwards, however,
the Emperor Justinian sent a very considerable
army against them, which was led by a number of
commanders, including Constantianus, Aratius,
Nazares, Justinus the son of Germanus and
John who bore the epithet of the Glutton.
But he placed in supreme command over them
all Scholasticus, one of the eunuchs of the
palace.

This army came upon a part of the barbarians
near Adrianopolis,! which is situated in the interior
of Thrace, five days’ journey distant from Byzantium.
And the barbarians were unable to proceed further ;
for they were taking with them a booty which


49


PROCOPIUS OF CAESA REA


39


41]


43


\ a
tA : ἐνῶ κα « al > ee 2 n , > aA
, 6
> -“ ” ‘ > \ , Ss: J / ΄
I~ 7 ΄ ε ᾿ o / 4 ‘\
“-“ ’ , / > ,
lel \ XA - Φ 4 rn
lA af > > , LO /


50


Se oe ae «Ὁ Ἃ


at | A τν-


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIL. xl. 37-43
surpassed all reckoning, consisting of men and


animals and valuables of every description. So they
remained there, eager to come to an engagement
with the enemy, but without letting this be known to
them in any way. Now the Sclaveni were encamped
on the hill which rises there, while the Romans
were in the plain not far away. And since a long
time was consumed in thus blocking the enemy, the
soldiers began to be resentful and made a great to-do,
laying against the generals the charge that while
they themselves, as commanders of the Roman
army, had all provisions in abundance, they were
paying no heed to the soldiers, to whom the want ot
absolute necessities was causing hardship and who
were unwilling to engage with the enemy. By these
remonstrances the generals were compelled to join
battle with the enemy. And the battle which
followed was a fierce one, but the Romans were
decisively vanquished. In that battle many of the
best soldiers perished, and the generals came within
a little of falling into the hands of the enemy,
succeeding only with difficulty in making their
escape with the remnant of the army and thus
saving themselves, each as best he could. The
standard of Constantianus was also captured by the
barbarians, who now moved forward heedless of the
Roman army. And they plundered the land of
Astica,! as it is called, without let or hindrance, a
place which had not been ravaged since ancient
times, and for this reason it turned out that they found
there an enormous booty. Thus they devastated a


? Between Adrianople and Constantinople.


44


45


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA |


1 «‘Forty milestones,” as stated by Procopius, On the
Buildings, IV. 9. The modern line of defence, passing


52


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xl. 43-45


wide expanse of country and came as far as the long
walls, which area little more than one day’s journey ἢ
distant from Byzantium. But not long afterwards
the Roman army, in following up these barbarians,
came upon a portion of their force, engaged with
them suddenly, and turned them to flight. And
they not only slew many of the enemy, but also
rescued a vast number of Roman captives, and they
also found and recovered the standard of Con-
stantianus. But the rest of the barbarians departed
on the homeward way with the other booty.


through Chataldja, is about ten miles nearer the city. The
ancient wall, like the modern line, extended from the shore
of the Black Sea to that of the Sea of Marmara, a distance of
twenty-eight miles, cutting off the end of the peninsula on
which Byzantium


53


ahi
oF oe


zuiiiqen.


κ an ees Le ας Vee ht tot
᾿ pita Wale αὐτῷ lent hoe Ad σεξωτῆ


ων" Mi i τς, a cn “hades δ


it
= +
4 we Ὰ
ot Ae
:
3 : u
᾿
ss
᾿ " -
4 ᾽
if
a
, ᾿
5
,
in. Rare
ks,
A -
>
>


HISTORY OF THE WARS
BOOK VIII


THE GOTHIC WAR (continued)


THEP TON TIOAEMON ΛΟΓῸΣ ΟΓΔΟΟΣ


I


1 ἔτι Maltretus: ἐπέ MSS,
56


HISTORY OF THE WARS: BOOK VIII


THE GOTHIC WAR (continued


[


Tue narrative which | have written up to this
point has been composed, as far as possible, on the
principle of separating the material into parts which
relate severally to the countries in which the different
wars took place, and these parts have already been
published and have appeared in every corner of the
Roman empire. But from this point onward I shall
no longer follow this principle of arrangement. For
after my writings had appeared before the public, I
was no longer able to add to each the events which
happened afterwards, but all the later developments
in these wars, and in the war against Persia as well,
now that I have published the previous parts, will
be written down in full in this present narrative,
and thus the record which I shall make of these
events will of necessity be composite.

Now all that took place up to the fourth year of
the five-year truce which was made between the
Romans and the Persians has already been recounted
by me in the previous books.1_ But in the succeeding
year a Persian army in vast numbers invaded the
land of Colchis. In command of this army was a
Persian, Chorianes by name, a man of wide experience


1 Books I and IL
57


or


a


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


la > > , Η


Μ en /


/ > \ 4 2 e fel \


> > > A LA \ \ e \ al > lal
> / 3 a a , cig Ν


a ‘

Vi , > a , \ ov \


58


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. i. 4-9


in many wars, and a large number of barbarians of
the tribe of the Alani followed him as allies. When
this army had come to a part of Lazica, which is
called Mocheresis, they made camp in a suitable
position and remained there. Now there is a river
in that place, the Hippis, not a large or navigable
stream, but actually passable for both horsemen and
foot-soldiers, and it was on the right of this that
they made their entrenchment, not along the bank,
but at a considerable distance from it.

At this point in my narrative it has seemed to me
not inappropriate to pause a moment, in order that
the geography of Lazica may be clear to those who
read this history and that they may know what races
of men inhabit that region, so that they may not be
compelled to discuss matters which are obscure to
them, like men fighting shadows; I shall therefore
give an account of the distribution of the peoples
who live about the Euxine Sea, as it is called, not
that 1 am ignorant that these things have been
written down by some of the men of earlier times
also, but because I believe that not all their state-
ments are accurate. Some of these writers, for
example, have stated! that the territory of the
Trapezuntines is adjoined either by the Sani, who at
the present day are called Tzani, or by the Colchians,
calling another people Lazi, who are actually
addressed by this name at the present day. And
yet neither of these statements is true. For, in the
first place, the Tzani live at a very great distance
from the coast as neighbours of the Armenians in
the interior, and many mountains stand between

? Xenophon, Anabasis IV. viii. 22, and Arrian, Periplus xi,
state that the Colchians were neighbours of the Trapezuntines.


59
VOL. IV. c


}


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


€ , \ la > ‘ \ “ 5
/ e / “ > Ul Ν \


; / > ys >


eee | οὐχ om. MSS.: οὐχ οἷόν τέ ἐστι μὴ ob conjectured by
Comparetti.


60


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIIL. i. 9-ii. 1


which are thoroughly impassable and altogether
precipitous, and there is an extensive area always
devoid of human habitation, cafions from which it
is impossible to climb out, forested heights, and
impassable chasms—all these prevent the -Tzani
from being on the sea. In the second place, it is
impossible that the Lazi should not be the Colchians,
because they inhabit the banks of the Phasis River ;
and the Colchians have merely changed their name
at the present time to Lazi, just as nations of men
and many other things do. But apart from this, a
long period of time has elapsed since these accounts
were written, and has brought about constant
changes along with the march of events, with the
result that many of the conditions which formerly
obtained have been replaced by new conditions,
because of the migration of nations and successive
changes of rulers and of names. These things it
has seemed to me very necessary to investigate, not
relating the mythological tales about them nor other
antiquated material, nor even telling in what part
of the Euxine Sea the poets say Prometheus was
bound (for I consider that history is very widely
separated from mythology), but stating accurately
and in order both the names of each of those places
and the facts that apply to them at the present day.


II


Tuts Pontus, then, begins from Byzantium and
Calchedon and ends at the land of the Colchians.


61


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 Modern Eregli and Amasra.
2 Modern Trabuzun.
3 Modern Sinob and Samsun.


HISTORY OF THE WARS, ΝΗ, ii. 1-6


And as one sails into it, the land on the right is
inhabited by the Bithynians, and next after them
by the Honoriatae and the Paphlagonians, who
have, besides other towns, the coast cities of
Heraclea and Amastris;+ beyond them are the
people called Pontici as far as the city of Trapezus *
and its boundaries. In that region are a number
of towns on the coast, among which are Sinope and
Amisus,? and close to Amisus is the town called
Themiseyra ὁ and the river Thermodon,® where they
say the army of the Amazons originated. But con-
cerning the Amazons I shall write a little later.
From here the territory of the Trapezuntines
extends to the village of Susurmena and the place
called Rhizaeum,® which is two days’ journey distant
from Trapezus as one goes toward Lazica along the
coast. But now that I have mentioned Trapezus,


I must not omit the very strange thing which takes


place there; for the honey which is produced in all
the places around Trapezus is bitter,’ this being the
only place where it is at variance with its established
reputation. On the right of these places rise all
the mountains of Tzanica, and beyond them are the
Armenians, who are subject to the Romans.

Now from these mountains of Tzanica the Boas
River® descends, a stream which, after passing into
innumerable jungles and traversing a mountainous
region, flows along by the land of Lazica and


* Modern Terme.
9. Modern Terme ‘I'schai.
5. Modern Siirmene and Rize.
τ Cf. Xenophon, dauhasis IV. viii. 20.
δ Schol. Hor. A. P. 375 notes that Sardinian honey was
** pessimi saporis.”
Modern Tscharukh Su.
63


10


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA.


Μ 4 , lol os Ν Ἀ ,
ae 4 \ ᾽ , > , “
Ν ᾿ 4 ΄ vA / > fal
n , 1] a >A) / ”
> / > , > / ten an Q7
64


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. ii. 6-10


empties into the Euxine Sea, as it is called, but πὸ.
longer keeping the name of Boas. ~For when it
gets near the sea it loses this name and there-
after bears another, which it acquires from the
character which it now displays. This name which
the natives apply to it for the rest of its course is
Acampsis, and they so name it, obviously, because it
is impossible to force a way through it? after it has
entered the sea, since it discharges its stream with
such force and swiftness, causing a great disturbance
of the water before it, that it goes out for a very
great distance into the sea and makes it impossible
to coast along at that point. And those who are
navigating in that part of the Pontus, whether
sailing toward Lazica or even putting out from
there, are not able to hold a straight course in their
voyage; for they are quite-unable to push through
the river's current, but they must needs put out to
a very great distance into the sea there, going some-
where near the middle of the Pontus, and only in
this way can they escape the force of the river’s
discharge. So much, then, may be said regarding
the Boas River.

Beyond Rhizaeum there is found a territory
occupied by independent peoples, who live between
the Romans and the Lazi. And there is a certain
village there named Athenae,* not, as some suppose,
because colonists from- Athens settled ‘there, but
because a certain woman named Athenaea in earl
times ruled over the land, and the tomb of this


1 Literally ‘‘ bend it.” Procopius takes the name to mean
ἄκαμπτος, ‘““unbent” or ‘‘unbending,” which it certainly
does not mean ; his explanation is doubtless fanciful.

2 Modern Atina.


65


ll


12


13


14


15


16


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


66


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII, ii. 11-16


woman is there even to my day. Beyond Athenae
are Archabis and Apsarus,’ an ancient city which is
about three days’ journey from Rhizaeum. This
was called Apsyrtus in ancient times, having come
to be named after the man on account of his
catastrophe. For in that place the natives say that
Apsyrtus was removed from the world by the plot
of Medea and Jason, and that from this circumstance
the place received its name; for he died on that
spot and the place was named after him. But an
extremely long time has elapsed since these events,
while countless generations of men have flourished,
and the mere passage of time has thus availed to
efface from memory the succession of incidents from
which this name arose and to transform the name
of the place to the form in which it appears at the
present. There is also a tomb of this Apsyrtus to
the east of the city. This was a populous city in
ancient times, and a great expanse of wall sur-
rounded it, while it was adorned with a theatre and
hippodrome and all the rest of those things by
which the size of a city is commonly indicated.
But at the present nothing of these is left except
the foundations of the buildings.

It is now clear that one might with good reason
wonder αὖ. those who assert that the Colchians are
adjacent to the Trapezuntines. For on this hypo-
thesis it would appear that after Jason in company
with Medea had captured the fleece, he actually did
not flee toward Hellas and his own land, but back-
ward to the Phasis River and the barbarians in the
most remote interior. Now they say that in the
time of the Roman Emperor Trajan detachments of


1 Modern Akhava and Makryalos.
67


17


18


20


21


22


23


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


\ \


68


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIIL. ii. 16-23


Roman soldiers were stationed there and as far as the
Lazi and Saginae. But at the present time people
live there who are neither subjects of the Romans
nor of the king of the Lazi, except indeed that the
bishops of the Lazi appoint their priests, seeing they
are Christians. And wishing, as they do, to live in
peace and friendship with both peoples, they have
made a permanent agreement to provide an escort
for those who from time to time travel from the one
country to the other ; and it appears that they have
been doing this even down to my time. For they
escort the messengers despatched from the one king
to the other, sailing in boats of their own. How-
ever, they have become in no way tributary down
to the present time. On the right of these places
very abrupt mountains tower overhead and a barren
land extends to an indefinite distance. And beyond
this the so-called Persarmenians dwell, as well as
the Armenians who are subjects of the Romans,
extending as far as the confines of Iberia.4

From the city of Apsarus to Petra and the boundary
of Lazica, where the Euxine Sea reaches its limit, is
a journey of one day. Now as this sea comes to an
end here, its coast takes the form of a crescent.
And the distance across this crescent amounts to
about five hundred and fifty stades,? while the entire
country behind it is Lazica and is known under this
name. Behind them in the interior are Scymnia
and Suania ; these nations happen to be subjects of
the Lazi. _ Indeed, although these peoples do have


1 Roughly modern Georgia, south of the Caucasus.
2 About 63 miles.


2 rots K: tots te L,
69


ts
Co


30


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA.


f td
, “ ,
;
} > a :
Y \ a 2 «A a ͵ «ὧδ a
\ \ ΄, Ν A n /
fal cin Ἃ ΄ 3 ΄ \ δὲ b ὃ Lol Bo ΄
fol “ , ,
, \ ΜΝ ΄ eee 2 La ¢


7°


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VILI. ii. 23-30


magistrates of their own blood, still, whenever any
of the magistrates reaches the end of his life, it
is always customary for another one to be appointed
in his place by the king of the Lazi.. At the side
of this land and bordering upon Iberia proper for
the most part dwell the Meschi, who have been
from ancient times subjects of the Iberians, having
their dwellings on the mountains. But the moun-
tains of the Meschi are not rough nor unproductive
of crops, but they abound in all good things, since
the Meschi, for their part, are skilful farmers and
there are actually vineyards in their country.
However, this land is hemmed in by mountains
which are very lofty and covered by forests so that
they are exceedingly difficult to pass through. And
these mountains extend as far as the Caucasus, while
behind them toward the east is Iberia, extending as
far as Persarmenia.

Now through the mountains which rise here the
Phasis River emerges, having its source in the
Caucasus and its mouth at the middle of the crescent
of the Pontus. Because of this some consider that
it forms the boundary between the two continents ;
for the land on the left as one goes down this
stream is Asia, but that on the right is named
Europe. Now it so happens that all the habitations
of the Lazi are on the European side, while on
the opposite side there is neither fortress nor
stronghold nor any village of consequence held by
the Lazi, except indeed the city of Petra which
the Romans built there in earlier times. It was
somewhere in this part of Lazica, as the inhabitants ~
say, that the famous fleece was placed for safe
keeping, that fleece on account of which, as the


31


33


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA |


᾽ 4 > , > 4 ‘ lol / Ρ Ν
fal , e “
fal ©? , LA \ lA a


72


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VILL. ii. 30-iii. 2


poets tell the tale, the Argo was fashioned. But in
saying this they are, in my opinion, not telling the
truth at all. For I think that Jason would not
have eluded Aeetes and got away from there with
the fleece in company with Medea, unless both the
palace and the other dwellings of the Colchians
had been separated by the Phasis River from the
place in which that fleece was lying; indeed the
poets who have recorded the story imply that this
was the case. So the Phasis, flowing as I have said,
empties into the Euxine Sea approximately at the
very point where it comes to an end. Now at
the one end of the crescent, that, namely, which
is in Asia, was the city of Petra, while on the
opposite coast which forms a part of Europe the
territory is held by the Apsilii; these Apsilii are
subjects of the Lazi and have been Christians from
ancient times, just as all the other nations which
I have mentioned up to this point in my narrative.


ΑΒουε and beyond this country are the moun-
tains of the Caucasus. This mountain range
which composes the Caucasus rises to such a great
height that its summits are in fact never touched
either by rain or by snow; for they are indeed above
all clouds. But the middle slopes are continually
filled with snow down to the very base. And from
this it may be inferred that the foothills are ex-
tremely high, being in no way inferior to the


73


3


J


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 An obviously absurd statement. Procopius perhaps
thinks of the Haemus Range (modern Balkans) as a con-


74


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. iii. 2-7


principal ridges of other mountains. Now the spurs
of the Caucasus range extend in one direction to
the north and west and continue into Illyricum and
Thrace,t while in the other direction they extend
toward the east and south and reach as far as those
very passes which provide entrance for the Hunnic
nations inhabiting that region into both Persian and
Roman territory. One of these passes is called
Tzur, while the other has been named the Caspian
Gates? from ancient times. But this country which
extends from the Caucasus range as far as the
Caspian Gates is held by the Alani, an autonomous
nation, who are for the most part allied with the
Persians and march against the Romans and their
other enemies. So much then may be said regarding
the Caucasus.

The Huns who are called Sabiri dwell in that
region, as well as certain other Hunnic tribes. And
they say that the Amazons really originated here
and afterwards established their camp near Themis-
cyra on the Thermodon River, as I have stated
above, at the place where the city of Amisus is
at the present time. But to-day nowhere in the
vicinity of the Caucasus range is any memory of
the Amazons preserved or any name connected with
them, although much has been written about them
both by Strabo* and by some others. But it seems
to me that those have spoken the truth about the
Amazons at any rate better than any others, who


tinuation of the Caucasus; but the valleys of the t rivers
Tanais (Don), Borysthenes (Dnieper), and Ister (Danube) lie
between them.

3 Cf. Book I. x. 1 ff.

3 Book XI. 5, ΧΗ. 3, 21.


75


~~)


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


76


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. iii. 7-10


have stated that there never was a race of women
endowed with the qualities of men and that human
nature did not depart from its established norm
in the mountains of the Caucasus alone; but the
fact was that barbarians from these regions together
with their own women made an invasion of Asia
with a great army, established a camp at the river
Thermodon, and left their women there; then,
while they themselves were overrunning the greater
part of the land of Asia, they were encountered by
the inhabitants of the land and utterly destroyed,
and not a man of them returned to the women’s
encampment ; and thereafter these women, through
fear of the people dwelling round about and con-
strained by the failure of their supplies, put on
manly valour, not at all of their own will, and,
taking up the equipment of arms and armour left
by the men in the camp and arming themselves
in excellent fashion with this, they made a display
of manly valour, being driven to do so by sheer
necessity, until they were all destroyed. That
this is about what happened and that the Amazons
did make an expedition with their husbands, I too
believe, basing my judgment on what has actually
taken place in my time. For customs which are
handed down to remote descendants give a picture
of the character of former generations. I mean
this, that on many occasions when Huns have made
raids into the Roman domain and have engaged in
battle with those who encountered them, some, of


77


13


14


15


16


PROCOPIUS OF CAESA REA


78


HISTORY OF THE. WARS, ΝΠ]. iii. 10-16


course, have fallen there, and after the departure
of the barbarians the Romans, in searching the
bodies of the fallen have actually found women
among them. No other army of women, however,
has made its appearance in any locality of Asia or
Europe. On the other hand, we have no tradition
that the mountains of the Caucasus were ever
devoid of men. Concerning the Amazons then let
this suffice.

Beyond the Apsilii and the other end! of the
crescent the Abasgi dwell along the coast, and their
country extends as far as the mountains of the
Caucasus. Now the Abasgi have been from ancient
times subjects of the Lazi, but they have always
had. two rulers of their own blood. One of these
resided in the western part of their country, the
other in the eastern part. And these barbarians
even down to my time have worshipped groves and
forests ; for with a sort of barbarian simplicity they
supposed the trees were gods. But they have
suffered most cruelly at the hands of their rulers
owing to the excessive avarice displayed by them.
For both their kings used to take such boys of this
nation as they noted having comely features and
fine bodies, and dragging them away from their
parents without the least hesitation they would make
them eunuchs and then sell them at high prices to
any persons in Roman territory who wished to buy
them. They also killed the fathers of these boys
immediately, in order to prevent any of them from
attempting at some time to exact vengeance from
the king for the wrong done their boys, and also


1 ¢.e, the northern end.
79


17


18


19


20


21


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


’ a a ’ - , ᾽ 2 ἃ


4 > na Μ - > a nr

a » \ > , > an ,


n r an > δ A Cal
» > \ , aver 9 | om ,


80


᾿


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIIL. iii. 16-21


that there might be in the country no subjects
suspected by the kings. And thus the physical
beauty of their sons was resulting in their destruc-
tion; for the poor wretches were being destroyed
through the misfortune of fatal comeliness in their
children. And it was in consequence of this that
the most of the eunuchs among the Romans, and
particularly at the emperor's court, happened to be
Abasgi by birth.

But during the reign of the present Emperor
Justinian the Abasgi have changed everything and
adopted a more civilised standard of life. For not
only have they espoused the Christian doctrine, but
the Emperor Justinian also sent them one of the
eunuchs from the- palace, an Abasgus by birth
named Euphratas, and through him commanded
their kings in explicit terms to mutilate no male
thereafter in this nation by doing violence to nature
with the knife. This the Abasgi heard gladly,
and taking courage now because of the decree of
the Roman emperor they began to strive with all
their might to put an end to this practice. For
each one of them had to dread that at some time
he would become the father of a comely child. _It
was at that same time that the Emperor Justinian
also built a sanctuary of the Virgin in their land,
and appointed priests for them, and thus brought it
about that they learned thoroughly all the obser-
vances of the Christians ; and the Abasgi immediately
dethroned both their kings and seemed to be living
in a state of freedom. Thus then did these things
take place.


$1


~/


or


fond


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


IV


82


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. iv. 1-6


IV


Beyonp the confines of the Abasgi along the
Caucasus range dwell the Bruchi, who are between
the Abasgi and the Alani, while along the coast
of the Euxine Sea the Zechi have their habitation.
Now in ancient times the Roman emperor used to
appoint a king over the Zechi, but at present these
barbarians are in no way subject to the Romans.
Beyond these dwell the Saginae, and the Romans
had held a portion of their coast from ancient times.
And they had constructed two fortresses on the
coast, Sebastopolis and Pityus, two days’ journey
apart, and maintained in them garrisons of soldiers
from the first. For though in earlier times detach-
ments of Roman soldiers held all the towns on the
coast from the limits of Trapezus as far as the
Saginae, as previously stated, it finally came about
that these two fortresses were the only ones left
them; and here they actually maintained their ,
garrisons up to my day, {but no longer}; for Chosroes,
the Persian king, having been brought in by in-
vitation of the Lazi to Petra, made haste to send an
army of Persians there who were to take possession
of these fortresses and settle down to garrison duty
in them. But the Roman soldiers succeeded in
learning this in advance, and so, anticipating him,
they fired the houses and razed the walls to the
ground, and then with no hesitation embarked in
small boats and made their way immediately to the
city of Trapezus on the opposite mainland. Thus,


1 Cf. chap. ii. 16; above.


83


wo


©


10


11


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


rs Pies ἢ > f cal 4 σ΄ «ὡς ως
we W »" Ν oe ω ,ὔ a Woes


“ ; 5 ee, / J % “A


2 ἥπερ transposed by Haury from immediately before


84


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. iv. 6-11


while they did penalize the Roman empire by the
destruction of the fortresses, they at the same time
gained for it a great advantage in that the enemy
did not become masters of the land. For as a result
of their action the Persians returned baffled to Petra.
Thus then did this take place.

Above the Saginae are settled numerous Hunnic
tribes. And from there onward the country has
received the name of Eulysia, and barbarian peoples
hold both the coast and the interior of this land, as
far as the so-called Maeotic Lake! and the Tanais
River? which empties into the lake. And this lake
has its outlet at the coast of the Euxine Sea. Now
the people who are settled there were named in
ancient times Cimmerians, but now they are called
Utigurs. And above them to the north the countless —
tribes of the Antae are settled. But beside the
exact point where the outlet of the lake commences
dwell the Goths who are called Tetraxitae, a people
who are not very numerous, but they reverence and
observe the rites of the Christians as carefully as any
people do. (The inhabitants indeed give the name
Tanais also to this outlet which starts from the
Maeotic Lake and extends to the Euxine Sea, a
distance, they say, of twenty days’ journey. And
they also call the wind which blows from there the
* Tanaitis.”) Now as to whether these Goths were
once of the Arian belief, as the other Gothic nations
are, or whether the faith as practised by them has
shewn some other peculiarity, I am unable to say, for


1 Modern Sea of Azov. 2 Modern Don.


Christ.
85


12


13


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


Vv


5 δέ Haury: γε K: τε L.
86


a a


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIIL. iv. 11-v. 2


they themselves are entirely ignorant on this subject,
but at the present time they honour the faith in a
spirit of complete simplicity and with no vain
questionings.

This people a short time ago (when, namely, the
Emperor Justinian was in the twenty-first year? of his
reign) sent four envoys to Byzantium, begging him
to give them a bishop; for the one who had been
their priest had died not long before and they had
learned that the emperor had actually sent a priest to
the Abasgi ; and the Emperor Justinian very willingly
complied with their request before dismissing them.
Now these envoys were moved by fear of the
Utigur Huns in making the public declaration of the
object of their coming—for there were many who
heard their speeches—and so they made no state-
ment whatever to the emperor openly except regard-
ing the matter of the priest, but meeting him with
the greatest possible secrecy, they declared every-
thing, shewing how it would benefit the Roman
empire if the barbarians who were their neighbours
should be always on hostile terms with one another. .
Now as to the manner in which the Tetraxitae
settled there and whence they migrated, I shall now
proceed to tell.


In ancient times a vast throng of the Huns who
were then called Cimmerians ranged over this region
which 1 have just mentioned, and one king had
authority over them all. And at one time the


1 548 A.D,
87


oO


«2


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


cal \ > al »” ‘ \ > l4


8


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. v. 2-7


power was secured by a certain man to whom two sons
were born, one of whom was named Utigur and the
other Cutrigur. These two sons, when their father
came to the end of his life, divided the power
between them, and each gave his own name to his
subjects ; for the one group has been called Utigurs
and the other Cutrigurs even to my time. All these
now continued to live in this region, associating
freely in all the business of life, but not mingling
with the people who were settled on the other side
of the lake and its outlet; for they never crossed ἢ
these waters at any time nor did they suspect that /
they could be crossed, being fearful of that which ,
was really easy, simply because they had never even
attempted to cross them, and they remained utterly
ignorant of the possibility. ᾿ 7

Now beyond the Maeotic Lake and the outlet
flowing from it the first people were the Goths called
Tetraxitae, whom I have just mentioned, who in
ancient times lived close along the shore of this
strait ; but the Goths and the Visigoths and Vandals
were located far away from them as were other Gothic
nations. These Tetraxitae were called also Scythians
in ancient times, because all the nations who held
these regions are called in general Scvthians, while
a few of them had an additional designation such as
Sauromatae or Melanchlaenae or something else.

But as time went on, they say (if, indeed, the story
is sound), some youths of the Cimmerians were
engaged in hunting, and a single doe which was
fleeing before them leaped into these waters. And the


89


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


10


11


13


2 μοι MSS. : μοι ὡς editors.
3 μὴ τοῦ Maltretus: μή MSS.


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. v. 8-13


youths, either moved by a thirst for glory or in some
sort of competition, or perhaps it was really some deity
which constrained them, followed after this doe and
refused absolutely to let her go, until they came with
her to the opposite shore. And then the quarry,
whatever it was, immediately disappeared from sight ;
for in my opinion it appeared there for no other
purpose than that evil might befall the barbarians
who lived in that region. Thus, while the youths
did fail in their hunt, they found an incentive to
battle and plunder. For they returned as fast as
they could to their own land, and thus made it clear
to all the Cimmerians that these waters could be
crossed by them. Accordingly they immediately
took up arms as a nation, and making the crossing
with no delay got on the opposite mainland; this
was at a time when the Vandals had already migrated
from there and established themselves in Libya;
while the Visigoths had taken up their abode in
Spain. So they suddenly fell upon the Goths who
inhabited these plains and slew many of them and
turned the rest to flight. And as many as succeeded
in escaping them migrated thence with their children
and wives, leaving their ancestral abodes, and by
ferrying across the Ister River they came into the
land of the Romans.

And at first they committed many outrages against
the inhabitants of that region, but later, with the
emperor’s permission, they settled in Thrace; and
during part of this time they were fighting on the
side of the Romans, receiving pay from the emperor
every year just as the other soldiers did and being


gi
VOL. IV.


14


16


18


19


20


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


92


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIL. v. 13-20


called “ foederati’’; for so the Romans at that time
called them in the Latin tongue, meaning to shew, I
suppose, that the Goths had not been defeated by
them in war, but had come into peaceful relations
with them on the basis of some treaty; for the
Latins call treaties in war “foedera,” as I have
explained in the previous narrative ;1 but during the
rest of the time they were actually waging war
against the Romans for no good reason, until they
went off to Italy under the leadership of Theoderic.
Thus then did the Goths fare.

But the Huns, after killing some of them and
driving out the others, as stated, took possession of
the land. And the Cutrigurs, on the one hand,
summoned their children and wives and settled there
in the very place where they have dwelt even to my
time. And although they receive from the emperor
many gifts every year, they still cross the Ister
River continually and overrun the emperor's land,
being both at peace and at war with the Romans.
The Utigurs, however, departed homeward with their
leader, being destined to live alone in that land
thereafter. Now when these Huns came near the
Maeotic Lake, they chanced upon the Goths there who
are called Tetraxitae. And at first the Goths formed
a barrier with their shields and made a stand against
their assailants in their own defence, trusting both
in their own strength and the advantage of their
position; for they are the most stalwart of all the
barbarians of that region. Now the head of the
outlet of the Maeotic Lake, where the Tetraxitae
Goths were then settled, forms a crescent-shaped


1 Book I. xi. 4. See also note on Book III. xi. 3.
93


21


22


23


24


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


94


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. v. 20-24


bay by which they were almost completely sur-
rounded, so that only one approach, and that not a
very wide one, was open to those who attacked them.
But afterwards, seeing that the Huns were unwilling
to waste any time there and the Goths were quite
hopeless of holding out for a long time against the
throng of their enemy, they came to an understand-
ing with each other, agreeing that they should join
forces and make the crossing in common, and that
the Goths should settle on the opposite mainland,
principally along the bank of the outlet (where they
are actually settled at the present time), and that
they should continue to be thereafter friends and
allies of the Utigurs and live for ever on terms of
complete equality with them. Thus it was that
these Goths settled here, and the Cutrigurs, as I
have said, being left behind in the land on the other
side of the lake, the Utigurs alone possessed the
land, making no trouble at all for the Romans,
because they do not even dwell near them, but,
being separated by many nations which lie between,
they are forced, by no will of their own, not to
meddle with them.
West of the Maeotic Lake, then, and the Tanais
River the Cutrigur Huns established their homes
* over the greater part of the plains of that region, as
I have said; and beyond them Scythians and
Taurians hold the entire country, a certain part of
which is even now called Taurica; and this is the
place where they say the Temple of Artemis was,
over which Agamemnon’s daughter Iphigeneia once
presided. The Armenians, however, claim that this
temple was in the part of their land called Celesene,
and that at that period all the peoples of this region


95


25


26


27


28


29


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


96


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIIL. v. 24-30


were called Scythians, citing as evidence the story of
Orestes and the city of Comana related by me in that
partof my narrative.1 But as regards these matters,
let each one speak according to his wish; for many
things which happened elsewhere, or which, perhaps,
never really happened at all, men are wont to appro-
priate to their own country, being indignant if all do
not follow their opinion.

Beyond these nations there is an inhabited city
on the coast, Bosporus by name, which became
subject to the Romans not long ago. From the
city of Bosporus to the city of Cherson,? which is
situated on the coast and has likewise been subject
to the Romans from of old, all between is held by
barbarians, Hunnic nations. And two other towns
near Cherson, named Cepi and Phanaguris, have
been subject to the Romans from ancient times and
even to my day. But these not long ago were
captured by some of the neighbouring barbarians
and razed to the ground. From the city of Cherson _
to the mouth of the Ister River, which is also called
the Danube, is a journey of ten days, and barbarians
hold that whole region. Now the Ister River rises
in the Celtic mountains,? skirts the boundaries of
Italy, flows into the lands of Dacia, Illyricum, and
Thrace, and finally empties into the Euxine Sea.
From that point all the territory as far as Byzantium
is under the sway of the Roman emperor.


1 Book I. xvii. 13-20.
2 Chersonnesus ; near modern Sevastopol.
3 The Alps.


97


31


32


33


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


VI


1 ἐστίν MSS. : om. editors,


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. v. 31-vi. 2


Such is the circuit of the Euxine Sea from
Calchedon to Byzantium. As to the length of this
circuit, however, | am unable to speak accurately
regarding all portions of it, since such vast numbers
of barbarians, as stated above, dwell along its shores,
and the Romans have no intercourse at all with
any of them except for an occasional interchange


of embassies; indeed those who have attempted |


heretofore to ascertain these measurements have
not been able to make any definite statement.
This, however, is clear, that the right side of the
Euxine Sea, from Calchedon, namely, to the Phasis
River, is a journey of fifty-two days for an un-
encumbered traveller.1 From this fact one could not
unreasonably draw the conclusion that the length
of the other side of the Pontus likewise is not far
from this.


VI


Since we have now reached an appropriate point
in the narrative, it has seemed to me not out of
place to mention the opinions concerning the
boundaries of Asia and Europe which are debated
among those who are experts in these matters.
For, on the one hand, some of them say that these
two continents are separated by the Tanais River,
stoutly maintaining first of all that the division must
be a natural one, and further supporting their claim
by the fact that, while the sea extends from the
west toward the east, the Tanais River flows from
the north toward the south between the two


1 About 1,248 miles. Cf. Book III. i. 17 for Procopius’
standard.


99


᾿
᾿
;


4


5»


.1


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 Modern Cadiz; the Strait of Gibraltar


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. vi. 2-8


continents; similarly, they say, the Egyptian Nile
proceeds in the opposite direction from the south
to the north and flows between Asia and Libya.
On the other hand, others taking issue directly
with them maintain that their reasoning is not
sound. For they say that these two continents are
divided originally by the strait at Gadira,) which
issues from the ocean, and by the sea which extends
from that point, and that the land on the right of
the strait and the sea received the names of Libya
and Asia, while everything on the left was called
Europe approximately as far as the end of the so-
called Euxine Sea.

But on this hypothesis the Tanais River rises
within the limits of Europe and empties into the
Maeotic Lake, which in turn discharges its waters
into the Euxine Sea neither at its end nor even
at its middle, but actually beyond it.2 Yet the
land on the left of this same sea is counted® as
a portion of Asia. But apart from this the river
Tanais rises in the so-called Rhipaean mountains,
which are in the land of Europe, as, in fact, those
who have written of these matters from ancient
times agree. Now the Ocean is very far removed *
from these Rhipaean mountains; consequently all
the land beyond them and the Tanais River in both
directions® must necessarily be European. Just at
what point, then, the Tanais River begins to divide
the two continents it is not easy to say. But if
any river must be said to divide the two continents,
that river would surely be the Phasis. For it flows


3 That is, well within the boundaries of Europe.
8 By the supporters of the former view.
4 To the μα- ἢ 5 East and west.


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


10


11


102


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. vi. 8-11


in a direction opposite to that of the strait of
Gadira, and so passes between the two continents ;
for while the strait, coming out of the ocean and
forming this sea, has these two continents, one on
either side, the Phasis River flows almost at the
end of the Euxine Sea and empties into the middle
of the crescent, obviously continuing the division
of the land heretofore made by the sea. These
then are the arguments which the two sides put
forth as they wrangle over the question,

But not only the former argument, but also that
which | have just stated, can boast, as I shall
shew, of high antiquity and the support of some
men of very ancient times; for I am aware that
as a general thing all men, if they first discover
an ancient argument, are no longer willing to de-
vote themselves to the labour involved in the
search for truth nor to learn instead some later
theory about the matter in hand, but the more
ancient view always seems to them sound and
worthy of honour, while contemporary opinions are
considered negligible and are classed as absurd.
Furthermore, in the present case the investigation
is not concerned with any matter to be grasped
only by the mind or the intellect, or that is
in any other way obscure, but with rivers
and lands: these are things which time has not
been able either to change or to conceal in any
way. For the test is near at hand and vision can
provide most satisfactory evidence, and I think no
obstacle wil! be placed in the way of those eager


103


12


13


14


15


16


17


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


104


HISTORY OF THE WARS, ὙΠ]. vi. 11-17


to discover the truth. To proceed, then, Herodotus
of Halicarnassus in the Fourth Book of his History
says that the entire earth is one, but is considered
to be divided into three parts, having three separate
titles, Libya, Asia, and Europe. And between two
of them, on the one hand, Libya and Asia namely,
flows the Egyptian Nile, while Asia and Europe,
on the other hand, are divided by the Colchian
Phasis. But knowing as he did that some thought
that the Tanais River performed this function, he
mentioned this view also afterwards. And it has
seemed to me not inappropriate to insert in my
narrative the actual language of Herodotus, which
is as follows.t ‘‘Nor am I able to conjecture for
what reason it is that, though the earth is one,
three names are applied to it which are women’s
names. And its lines of division have been estab-
lished as the Egyptian Nile and the Colchian
Phasis. But others name the Tanais River, which
empties into the Maeotic Lake and the Cimmerian
Strait.” Also the tragic poet Aeschylus in the
Prometheus Unhound, at the very beginning of the
tragedy, calls the Phasis River the limit of the land
of both Asia and Europe.®

At this point I shall also mention the fact that
some of those who are versed in such matters think
that the Maeotic Lake forms the Euxine Sea, and
that it spreads out from this lake partly to the right
and partly to the left, this being the reason why the
lake is called the mother of the Pontus. And they

1 Book IV. 45.

3 The Cimmerian Bosporus, Mod. Strait of Yenikale.


a τὰς ὦ 106, preserved by Arrian, Voyage in the Euzxine,


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


« fol -“ ΄ ‘
a+ 4 κ“ lol a "»
\ , > “
\ a
Ψ \ \ > / ς , , ne Ne


΄ ᾽ “ὃ a a 2 Bé , 4

lal e na , ‘
“-“ a , ,
106


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. vi. 17-20


make this statement on the basis of the observation
that from the place called Hieron! the outlet of this
sea flows down toward Byzantium just as if it
were a river, and consequently they consider this to
be the limit of the Pontus, But those who oppose
this view explain that the entire sea is, of course,
one, coming from the ocean, and, without any other
ending, extends to the land of the Lazi, unless, in-
deed, they say, anyone considers the mere change of
name to constitute a real difference, seeing that the
sea is called Pontus beyond a certain point.

But if the current does flow down from the place
called Hieron! to Byzantium, this has nothing to do
with the matter. For the phenomena which are
exhibited in all straits appear to be susceptible of no
explanation, nor has anyone ever shewn himself
able to account for them. Indeed it was this
question which led Aristotle of Stagira, a man
prominent among all others as a philosopher, to go
to Chalcis on Euboea, where he observed the strait
which they call Euripus in an effort to discover by
careful investigation the physical reason why it is
and in what manner it comes about that sometimes
the current of the strait flows from the west, but
at other times from the east, and the sailing of all
boats there is governed by this fact; whenever, for
example, the current is running from the east and
the mariners have begun to sail their boats from
that direction following the inflow of the water, as
they are accustomed to do, if then the current turns
upon itself, a thing which is wont to happen there


1 On the upper part of the Bosporus.


107


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 2 ;


24


26


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. vi. 20-26


many a time, it immediately turns these boats back
in the direction from which they have started, while
the other boats sail from the west to the opposite
end, even though no wind has blown upon them in
the least but deep calm prevails there with all winds
absent; all this the Stagirite observed and pondered
for a long time, until he worried himself to death
with anxious thought and so reached the term of
his life. But this is not an isolated case, for in the
strait also which separates Italy from Sicily nature
plays many strange tricks. For it appears that the
current runs into this strait from the sea called the
Adriatic, and this in spite of the fact that the for-
ward movement of the sea takes place from the
ocean and Gadira. But there are also numerous
whirlpools which appear there suddenly from no
cause apparent to us and destroy the ships. It is
on account of this that the poets say that the boats
are gulped down by Charybdis, when any chance to
be in this strait at such atime. But the advocates
of the second view‘ think that all these exceedingly
strange phenomena which present themselves in all
straits come about in consequence of the two sides
coming very close to each other; for the water, they
say, being constrained by the limited space, is sub-
ject to some strange and unaccountable compulsion.

Consequently, if the current does actually seem
to flow from the place called Hieron to Byzantium,
no one could reasonably maintain that the sea? and
the Euxine end at that point. For this view rests
upon no solid basis of nature, but here again the


1 Mentioned in par. 18 ff., above.
2 The Mediterranean, or, more accurately, the Sea of
Marmara,


109


28


29


30


91


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA —


Dindorf

3 καί K: om. L,


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. vi. 26-31


narrowness of the channel must be considered the
determining factor. Indeed not even this is all that
happens here; for the fishermen of the towns on
the Bosphorus say that the whole stream does not
How in the direction of Byzantium, but while the
upper current which we can see plainly does flow in
this direction, the deep water of the abyss, as it is
called, moves in a direction exactly opposite to that
of the upper current and so flows continually against
the current which is seen. Consequently, whenever
in going after a catch of fish they cast their nets
there anywhere, these are always carried by the
force of the current in the direction of Hieron.

But at Lazica the land checks the advance of the
sea on all sides and puts a stop to its course, and
thus makes its first and only ending at that point,
the Creator obviously having set bounds there for
sea and land. For when the sea encounters that
beach, it neither advances farther nor does it rise to
any higher level, although it is constantly receiving
the inflow of countless rivers of extraordinary size
which empty into it from all sides, but it falls back
and returns again and thus, while making the
beach of normal width, it preserves the boundary
set by the land as if fearing some law, and, through
the necessity prescribed by this, checking itself with
precision and taking care not to be found to have
transgressed the covenant in any way. For all the
other shores of the sea do not face it, but lie along


1. This observation is amply confirmed by experience at the
present time. The counter-current below is caused perhaps
by variation in temperature,


Ill


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


nm > \ \ Ν [4 ; ,


Vil


112


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. vi. 31-vii. 5


its side. But concerning these matters let each
man form his decision and speak as he wishes.


VIL


Now the reason why Chosroes was eager to get
possession of Lazica has already been stated by me
in a previous passage, but that particular con-
sideration which above everything else impelled him
and the Persians to desire this I shall here set forth,
now that 1 have given a description of this whole
country and so made clear my statement of this
matter. Many times these barbarians, under the
leadership of Chosroes, had invaded the Roman
domain with a mighty army, and while they had
inflicted upon their enemy sufferings not easy to
describe, as has been told by me in the books on
this subject,” still they gained from these invasions
no advantage whatsoever and had also to bear the
loss of both treasure and lives: for they always
departed from the Roman domain having lost many
men. Consequently, after they had returned to
their own land, they would very privately rail
against Chosroes and call him the destroyer of the
Persian nation. And on one such occasion when
they had returned from Lazica, seeing that they
had suffered terrible losses there, they were actually
on the point of combining openly against him and
doing away with him by a most cruel death, and
would have done so had he not learned in advance
and guarded against it by winning over the most
notable of them by assiduous wheedling. As a


1 Book IL. xxviii. 18. 2 Books I and ITI.
II3


"
ee


Co


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA —


1 εἶχεν MSS. : ἐλπίδα εἶχεν conjectured by Haury.


114


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. vii. 5-9


result of this incident he wished to remove the sting
from the accusation, and to this end was eager to
gain some great advantage for the Persian Empire.
He accordingly made an attempt! upon the city
of Daras, but met with reverse there, as I have
told,? and came to a state of utter despair regarding
the capture of the place. For neither could he
thereafter capture it by a surprise assault, seeing
that the guards of the city were so alert, nor indeed
did he entertain the hope that he would by any
device get the better of them ina siege. For there
is always an abundant supply of all manner of pro-
visions in the city of Daras stored away against a
siege, so that it may last for a great length of time,
and close by there is a spring placed by nature
among precipices, forming a large river which flows
straight towards the city, and those who seek to
interfere with it are unable to turn it to any other
course or otherwise do violence to it on account of
the rough character of the terrain. But as soon as
this river gets inside the circuit-wall, it flows about
the entire city, filling its cisterns, and then flows out,
and very close to the circuit-wall it falls into a
chasm, where it is lost to sight. And where it
emerges from there has become known to no man
up to this time. Now this chasm was not there in
ancient times, but a long time after the Emperor
Anastasius built this city nature unaided fashioned
and placed it there, and for this reason it comes about
that those desiring to draw a siege about the city of
Daras are very hard pressed by scarcity of water.


1 By strategem, not by storm. 2 Book II. xxviii. 31 ff.


115


10


11


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


VIII


116


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIIL. vii. 1o-viii. 1


So Chosroes, having failed in this attempt, as I
have said, came to the conclusion that, even if he
should be able to gain some other Roman city, he
would still never be able to establish himself in the
midst of the Romans while many strongholds were
left behind in the hands of his enemy. Indeed it was
for this reason that he razed Antioch to the ground
when he captured it and so departed from Koman
soil. Consequently his thoughts soared aloft and
were carried toward more distant hopes as he
sought after impossible things. For having learned
by report how those barbarians on the left of the
Euxine Sea who dwell about the Maeotic Lake
overrun fearlessly the Roman domain, he kept saying
that it would be possible for the Persians, if they
held Lazica, to go, whenever they wished, straight
to Byzantium with no trouble and without crossing
the sea at all, just as the other barbarian nations who
are settled in that region are constantly doing. For
this reason, then, the Persians are trying to gain
Lazica. But I shall return to thé point where I
made this digression from the narrative.


Vill


Cuortanes, then, and the Median army had made
their camp near the Hippis River. And when
Gubazes, the Colchian king, and Dagisthaeus, who
commanded the Roman army, learned this, they


* Chap. i. 7.


117


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


, a > ae eas ‘ , , ;
p pee ς / ¥ s ae > ,
» a B a > A Ν 1 ὃ a
_—aae ἦν ,ὔ ef 7 τῷ ee > \
fal n ‘ e


118


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. viii. 1-6


formed a common plan and led forth the Roman
and Lazic army against the enemy. And when they
had come to the opposite side of the Hippis River
and had made their camp there, they began to con-
sider the situation, debating whether it would be
more to their advantage to wait there and receive
the enemy’s attack or whether they should advance
upon their enemy, in order, of course, that by dis-
playing their daring to the Persians and by making
it obvious to their opponents that they were filled
with contempt as they went against them, they
might, by assuming the offensive in the combat, be
able to humble the spirit of the men arrayed against
them. And since the opinion of those prevailed
who urged an advance upon the enemy, the whole
army straightway hastened toward them. Thereupon
the Lazi would no longer consent to fight beside
the Romans, putting forth the objection that the
Romans, on the one hand, in entering the struggle,
were not risking their lives for their fatherland or
their most precious possessions, while for them the
danger involved their children and their wives and
their ancestral land; so that they would have to
blush before their own women, if it should so fall
out that they were defeated by their opponents.
Indeed they imagined that under this stress they
would improvise the valour which was not in them.
And they were filled with zeal to engage with the
enemy by themselves first, so that the Romans might
not throw them into confusion during the action
through not having the same zeal as they had in
meeting the danger. After the Lazi had begun to
shew this spirit of bravado, Gubazes became well
pleased, and calling them together a little apart from
the Romans he exhorted them as follows.


110


10


1


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA —


«TI la \ , > , «ς a >


120


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. viii. 7-12


* Fellow-men, I know not whether it is necessary
to address any exhortation to you to impel you to
be of good courage. For those men whose enthusi-
asm is upheld by the necessity of circumstances
would, I think, need no further exhortation, and
this is the case with us, in the present crisis at any
rate. For it is your women and children and your
ancestral land, and, to speak plainly, your all, which
is involved in this danger, for it is to secure these
that the Persians are coming upon us. For no one
in the whole world gives way to those who are
seeking by violence to rob him of any of his posses-
sions, for nature compels him to fight for his property.
And you are not ignorant that nothing stops the
avarice of the Persians when they have come to
have power in their grasp, and if at the present
time they prevail over us in the war, they will not
stop with simply ruling us or imposing taxes or
treating us in other matters as subjects,—a state-
ment which we can test by our own memory of
what Chosroes attempted upon us not long ago.
But let me not even so much as mention the ex-
perience we have had with the Persians, and let
not the name of the Lazi come to an end. And the
struggle against the Medes, my fellow-men, is not
a hard one for us who have many times grappled
with them and prevailed over them in the fight.
For a task which has become thoroughly familiar
entails no difficulty whatever, the necessary labour
having been previously expended in practice and
experience. Consequently we shall be obliged be-
cause of this fact actually to despise the enemy as
having been defeated in previous combats and having
no such ground for courage as you have. For when


121


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 Book IT, xxx. 4.
122


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VILI. viii. 12-19


the spirit has been humbled, it is by no means wont
to mount again. Holding these thoughts then before
your minds, advance with high hopes to close with
the enemy.”

After making such a speech Gubazes led out the
army of the Lazi, and they arrayed themselves as
follows. As a vanguard the cavalry of the Lazi
advanced in order against the foe, while the Roman
cavalry followed them, not at a short interval, but
very far in the rear. This particular Roman force
was under the leadership of Philegagus, a Gepaid
by birth and an energetic man, and of John the
Armenian, son of Thomas, an exceptionally able
warrior who was known by the surname Guzes, and
who has been mentioned already in the previous
narrative.t Behind these followed Gubazes, the
king of the Lazi, and Dagisthaeus, the general of
the Romans, with the infantry of both armies, reason-
ing that, should it come about that the cavalry were
routed, they would be saved very easily by falling
back on them. So the Romans and the Lazi arrayed
themselves in this manner; Chorianes meanwhile
selected from his army a thousand men equipped
with the corselet and in all other respects most
thoroughly armed, and sent them forward as a
scouting party, while he himself with all the rest
of the army marched in the rear, leaving behind in
the camp a garrison of only a few men. Now the
cavalry of the Lazi which had gone ahead shewed
in what they did scant regard for their professions,
denouncing by their actions the hopes which they
had previously aroused. For when they came sud-
denly upon the advance party of the enemy, they
did not bear the sight of them, but straightway


123
VOL. Vv. E


20


te


2


23


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA tees


124


—


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. viii. 19-24


wheeled their horses and began to gallop back to
the rear in complete disorder; and pressing onward
they mingled with the Romans, not declining to
take refuge with the very men beside whom they
had previously been unwilling to array themselves.
But when the two forces came close to each other,
neither side at first opened the attack or joined
battle, but each army drew back as their opponents
advanced and in turn followed them as they retired,
and they consumed much time in retreats and
counter-pursuits and swiftly executed changes of
front.

But there was a certain Artabanes in that Roman
army, a Persarmenian! by birth, who had, as it
happened, deserted long before to the Armenians
who are subjects of the Romans, not as a simple
deserter however, but by the slaughter of one
hundred and twenty Persian warriors he had given
the Romans a pledge of his loyalty to them. For
he had come before Valerian, who at that time was
a general in Armenia and requested him to give
him. fifty Romans; and upon getting what he wished
he proceeded to a fortress situated in Persarmenia.
There a garrison of one hundred and twenty Persians
received him with his company into the fortress, it
not being as yet clear that he had changed his
allegiance and gone over to the enemy. He then
slew the hundred and twenty men and plundered
all the money in the fortress—and there was an
enormous quantity of it—and so came to Valerian
and the Roman army, and having thus proved


1 Persarmenia was the portion of Armenia subject to Persia.


125


25


26


28


29


30


31


32


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


126


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII, viii. 24-32


himself faithful to them, he thereafter marched
with the Romans. This Artabanes in the present
battle placed himself in the space between the
armies, taking with him two of the Roman soldiers,
and thither came some of the enemy also. Arta-
banes charged these men, and engaging with one
of the Persians who was a man of high valour and
great bodily prowess, he straightway slew him with
his spear and throwing him from his horse brought
him down to the ground. But one of the barbarians
standing beside the fallen man smote Artabanes on
the head with a sword, but not with a mortal stroke.
Then one of the followers of Artabanes, a Goth by
birth, attacked this man, and while he still held his
hand at Artabanes’ head, smote him with a well-
directed blow in the left flank and laid him low.
Thereupon the thousand, being terrified at what
had taken place, began to withdraw to the rear,
where they awaited Chorianes and the rest of the
army of Persians and Alani, and in a short time
mingled with them.

By this time the infantry under Gubazes and
Dagisthaeus also came up with their cavalry and
both armies closed to a hand-to-hand encounter.
At this point Philegagus and John, thinking they
were too few to bear the onset of the barbarian
horse, particularly because they had no confidence in
the power of the Lazi, leaped from their horses and
compelled all to do the same, both Romans and Lazi.
They then arrayed themselves on foot in a very deep
phalanx, and all stood with a front facing the enemy
and thrusting out their spears against them. But
the barbarians knew not what to make of it, for they


127


33


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 tds Haury: ἐς τάς MSS.
128


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIIL. viii. 32-37


were neither able to charge their opponents, who
were now on foot, nor could they break up. their
phalanx, because the horses, annoyed by the points
of the spears and the clashing of the shields, balked ;
and so they all resorted to their bows, emboldened
by the hope that by a multitude of missiles they
would very easily turn their enemy to flight. The
Romans likewise and all the Lazi began to do exactly
the same thing. So from each side the arrows were
flying in great numbers into both armies, and on
both sides many men were falling. Now the Per-
sians and Alani were discharging their missiles in a
practically continuous stream and much faster than
their opponents. However, the Roman shields
checked the most of them.

In the course of this battle Chorianes, the com-
mander of the Persians, happened to be hit. But by
whom this man was wounded was not clear to any-
one; for some chance guided the shaft as it came
out of a crowded mass of men, fastened itself in the
man’s neck, and killed him outright, and by one
man’s death the battle was inclined and victory fell
to the Romans. For as he fell from his horse to the
ground on his face and lay there, the barbarians went
in a wild rush to their stockade, while the Romans
with the Lazi followed upon their heels and
slew many, hoping to capture with one rush the
camp of their opponents. But one of the Alani, '
who was a man of great courage and bodily strength
and who knew unusually well how to shoot rapidly
to either side, took his stand at the entrance of the


129


38


39


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


\ / a." “-“ , > Z ,


130


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. viii. 37-ix. 4


stockade, which was very narrow, and unexpectedly
blocked the way for the oncoming Romans for a long
time. But John, the son of Thomas, approached
alone very close to him and slew the man with a
spear, and thus the Romans and Lazi captured the
camp. And great numbers indeed of the barbarians
were destroyed there, and the remainder betook
themselves away to their native land, each one as he
found it possible to get there. So this invasion of
the Persians into the land of Colchis ended in this
way. Meanwhile another Persian army, after fortify-
ing the garrison at Petra with an abundance of
provisions and all other supplies, had departed on
their way.


IX


In the meantime the following took place. The
Lazi began to slander Dagisthaeus to the emperor,
going to Byzantium to do so, charging him with
treason and Medizing. For they declared that he
had yielded to the persuasion of the Persians in
refusing to establish himself inside the fallen circuit-
wall of Petra, while the enemy in the interval had
filled bags with sand and laid courses with them in-
stead of stones, and thus had made secure such parts
of the circuit-wall as had fallen down. And they
stated that Dagisthaeus, whether impelled to do so
by a bribe or through negligence, had postponed the
attack to some other time, and had thus let slip for
the moment the precious opportunity which, of
course, he had never again been able to grasp. The
emperor consequently confined him in the prison
and kept him under guard; he then appointed


131


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


132


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. ix. 4-11


Bessas, who had returned not long before from Italy,
General of Armenia and sent him to Lazica with
instructions to command the Roman army there.
Venilus, the brother of Buzes, had also been sent
there already with an army, as well as Odonachus,
Babas from Thrace, and Uligagus of the Eruli.

Now Nabedes had invaded Lazica with an army,
but he accomplished nothing of consequence beyond
spending some time with this army among the
Abasgi, who had revolted from the Romans and
Lazi, and taking from them sixty children of their
notables as hostages. It was at that time that
Nabedes as an incident of his journey captured
Theodora, the consort of Opsites (he was uncle of
Gubazes and king of the Lazi), finding her among
the Apsilii, and he carried her off to the land of
Persia. Now this woman happened to be a Roman
by birth, for the kings of the Lazi from ancient
times had been sending to Byzantium, and, with the
consent of the emperor, arranging marriages with
some of the senators and taking home their wives
from there. In fact Gubazes was sprung from a
Roman family on his mother’s side. But the reason
why these Abasgi turned to revolt I shall now set
forth.

When they had removed from power their own
kings, as has been told by me above, Roman soldiers
sent by the emperor began to be quartered among
them very generally, and they sought to annex the
land to the Roman empire,imposing certain new regu-
lations upon them. But because these were rather
severe the Abasgi became exceedingly wroth.
Fearing, consequently, that they would be mere


2 Chap. iii. 21.
133


12


13


14


16


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


134


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. ix. 11-16


slaves of the Romans thereafter, they again put
their rulers in power, one named Opsites in the
eastern part of their country, and Sceparnas in the
western part. Thus, because they had fallen into
despair of good things, they naturally enough sought
to regain the status which had previously seemed to
them grievous in place of their later estate, seeing
this had been worse, and in consequence of this
change they were in fear of the power of the
Romans and as secretly as possible went over to the
Persians. When the Emperor Justinian heard this,
he commanded Bessas to send a strong army against
them. He accordingly selected a large number
from the Roman army, appointed to command them
Uligagus and John the son of Thomas, and immedi-
ately sent them by sea against the Abasgi. Now it
happened that one of the rulers of the Abasgi, the
one named Sceparnas, was away for some reason
among the Persians; for he had gone under summons
not long before to Chosroes. But the other ruler,
learning of the inroad of the Romans, mustered all
the Abasgi and made haste to encounter them.

Now there is a place beyond the boundary of
Apsilia on the road into Abasgia of the following
description: a lofty ridge runs out from the Caucasus,
and gradually sinks, as it runs along, to a lower level,
resembling in a way a ladder, until it comes to an
end at the Euxine Sea. And the Abasgi in ancient
times built an exceedingly strong fortress of very
considerable size on the lower slope of this mountain.


17


18


19


20


21


22


23


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


136


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. ix. 16-23


Here they always take refuge and repel the inroads
of their enemies, who are in no way able to storm
the difficult position. Indeed there is only one
path leading to this fortress and to the rest of the
land of the Abasgi, and this happens to be impass-
able for men marching by twos. For there is no
possibility of getting along there except in single
file and on foot, and that with difficulty, Above
this path rises the side of an exceedingly rough gorge
which extends from the fortress to the sea. And
the place bears a name worthy of the gorge, for the
inhabitants call it Trachea} using a Greek word.

So the Roman fleet put in between the boundaries
of the Abasgi and Apsilii, and John and Uligagus
disembarked their troops and proceeded on foot,
while the sailors followed the army along the coast
with all the boats. And when they came close to
Trachea, they beheld the entire force of the Abasgi
fully armed and standing in order along the whole
gorge above the path which I have just mentioned,
whereupon they fell into great perplexity because
they were quite unable to handle the situation
before them, until John, after reasoning long with
himself, discovered a remedy for the trouble. For
leaving Uligagus there with the half of the army, he
himself took the others and manned the boats. And
by rowing they rounded the place where Trachea
was and passed it entirely and thus got in the rear
of the enemy. Thereupon the Romans raised
their standards and advanced. The Abasgi, then,


1 “ε Rugged.”


137


25


27


28


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


138


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. ix. 23-28


seeing their enemy pressing upon them from both
sides, no longer offered resistance nor even kept
their ranks, but turning to withdraw in a very dis-
orderly retreat they kept moving forward, but so
impeded were they by their fear and the helplessness
resulting therefrom that they were no longer able to
find their way about the rough terrain of their
native haunts, nor could they easily get away from
the place. The Romans meanwhile were following
them up from either side and caught and killed
many. And they reached the fortress on the run
together with the fugitives and found the small gate
there still open; for the guards could by no means
shut the gates, since they were still taking in the
fugitives. So pursued and pursuers mingled together
were all rushing toward the gate, the former eager
to save themselves, the latter to capture the fortress.
Finding then the gates open, they charged through
them together: for the gate-keepers were neither
able to distinguish the Abasgi from the enemy nor
to shut the gates to with the throng overpowering
them.

And the Abasgi for their part, though feeling
relief at getting inside the fortress, were actually
being captured with the fortress, while the Romans,
thinking they had mastered their opponents, found
themselves involved there in a more difficult struggle.
For the houses were numerous and not very far
apart from each other—indeed they were even
crowded close enough together so that they resembled
a wall all round, and the Abasgi mounted them and
defended themselves with all their strength by
hurling missiles upon the heads of their enemy,
struggling with might and main and filled with


139


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


140


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. ix. 28-x. 3


terror and with pity for their children and women,
and consequently overcome with despair, until it
occurred to the Romans to fire the houses. They
accordingly set fire to them on all sides, and thus
were completely victorious in this struggle. Now
Opsites, the ruler of the Abasgi, succeeded in
making his escape with only a few men, and with-
drew to the neighbouring Huns and the Caucasus
mountains. But the others were either charred and
burned to ashes with their houses or fell into the
hands of their enemy. The Romans also captured
the women of their rulers with all their offspring,
razed the defences of the fortress to the ground, and
rendered the land desolate to a great distance. © For
the Abasgi, then, this was the result of their revolu-
tion. But among the Apsilii the following took
place.


xX


Tue Apsilii have been subjects of the Lazi from
ancient times. Now there is in this country an
exceedingly strong fortress which the natives call
Tzibile. But one among the notables of the Lazi,
Terdetes by name, who held the office of “ magister,” ἢ
as it is called, in this nation, had had a falling out
with Gubazes, the king of the Lazi, and was hostile
to him; accordingly he secretly promised the
Persians to hand over this particular fortress to them,
and he came into Apsilia leading an army of Persians
to accomplish this object. Then, when they came


ΔΑ military title equivalent to ‘‘ General.”
141


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 δέ MSS.: Haury would prefer γάρ.


142


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. x. 3-7


close to the fortress, he himself went ahead with his
Lazie followers and got inside the fortifications,
because those keeping guard there could in no way
disobey the commander of the Lazi, feeling as they
did no suspicion of him. Thus when the Persian
army arrived Terdetes received it into the fortress.
And as a result of this the Medes considered that
not Lazica alone, but also Apsilia was held by them.
Meanwhile neither the Romans nor the Lazi were in
a position to defend the Apsilii, being hard pressed,
as they were, by the task of dealing with Petra and
the Median army.

But there was a certain woman who was the wife
of the commander of the garrison there, one of the
Apsilii, an exceedingly comely person to look upon.
With this woman the commander of the Persian
army suddenly fell violently in love, and at first he
began to make advances, but after that, since he
met with no encouragement from the woman, he
attempted with no hesitation to force her. At this
the husband of the woman became exceedingly
enraged, and at night he slew both the commander
and all those who had entered the fortress with him,
who thus became incidentally victims of their
commander's lust, and he himself took charge of the
fortress. On account of this affair the Apsilii
revolted from the Colchians,) alleging against them
that, whilst the Apsilii were being oppressed by the
Persians, they had been altogether unwilling to
champion their cause. But Gubazes sent a thousand
Romans and John the son of Thomas, whom I[ have


1 2,6. the Lazi; cf. chap. i. 10.


143


10


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


12


18


144


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII, x. 7-13


recently mentioned, against them; this man
succeeded, after long efforts at conciliation, in
winning them over without a fight and made them
once more subjects of the Lazi. Such was the story
of the Apsilii and the fortress of Tzibile.

At about this time it came about that Chosroes
through his inhumanity did not remain unscathed
even as regards his own offspring. For the eldest of
his sons named Anasozadus (this means in the
Persian tongue “Immortal’’) chanced to have a
. falling out with him, having been guilty of many
breaches of conduct, and in particular having
consorted with the wives of his father without the
least hesitation. At first then Chosroes punished
his son by banishment. Now there is a certain land
in Persia called Vazaine, an exceedingly good
country, in which the city named Belapaton is
situated, seven days’ journey distant from Ctesiphon.
There at the command of his father this Anasozadus
was living.

But at that time it so fell out that Chosroes
became very violently ill, so that it was actually said
that he had passed from the world ; for Chosroes was
by nature of a sickly disposition. Certain it is
that he often gathered around him physicians from
all parts, among whom was the physician Tribunus, a
Palestinian by birth. This Tribunus was a man of
great learning and inferior to none in medical skill,
and was furthermore a temperate and God-fearing
man of the highest worth. On one oceasion he had
cured Chosroes of a serious illness, and when he
departed from the land of the Persians, he carried


145


14


15


16


17


18


19


20


21


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


146


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. x. 13-21


with him many and notable gifts from his patient.
When, accordingly, the truce preceding the present
one was made, Chosroes demanded of the Emperor
Justinian that he give him this Tribunus to live with
him for a year. This demand having been granted
him, as stated by me above,! Chosroes bade Tribunus
ask for whatever he wanted. And he asked for
nothing else in the world except that Chosroes should
release for him some of the Roman captives. So he
released three thousand for him, and besides these
all whom he requested by name as being notable
men among the captives, and as a result of this
incident Tribunus won great renown among all men.
Thus did these events take place.

When Anasozadus learned of the disease which
had fallen upon his father, he began to stir up a
revolution by way of usurping the royal power.
And though his father recovered, he nevertheless
set the city in revolt himself, and taking up arms
against him went forth fully prepared for battle.
When Chosroes heard this, he sent against him an
army with Phabrizus as general. So Phabrizus
having been victorious in the battle made Anasozadus
captive and brought him before Chosroes not long
afterward. And he caused the eyes of his son to be
disfigured, not destroying their sight but distorting
both the upper and lower lids in a very ugly fashion.
For he heated a sort of iron needle in the fire and
with this seared the outside of his son’s eyes when


+ Book II. xxviii. 10.


3 twas Maltretus: τινά MSS.


147


22


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XI


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIIL. x. 21-xi. 7


they were shut, thus marring the beauty of the lids.
Now Chosroes did this with only one end in view,
that his son’s hope of achieving the royal power
might be frustrated. For the law does not permit a
man who has a disfigurement to become king over
the Persians, as has been stated by me in the
preceding narrative also.


XI


As for Anasozadus, then, his fortune and_ his
character brought him to this. And when the fifth
year of the truce had now come to an end, the
Emperor Justinian sent Petrus, a patrician and
holding the office of ““ Magister,” to Chosroes, in order
that they might arrange in every detail the treaty
for the settlement of the East. But Chosroes sent
him away, promising that after no long time he
would be followed by the man who would arrange
these matters in a manner advantageous to both
parties. And not long afterwards he sent Isdigousnas
for the second time, a man of pretentious demeanour
and filled with a kind of unspeakable villainy, whose
pompous puffing and blowing no one of the Romans
could bear. And he brought with him his wife and
daughters and his brother, and was followed by a
huge throng of retainers. One would have supposed
that the good men were going out for battle. In his
company also were two of the most notable men
among the Persians, who actually wore golden
diadems on their heads. And it irritated the people


1 Book I. xi. 4.


149


550 A.D.


©


10


11


12


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


150


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xi. 7-12


of Byzantium that the Emperor Justinian did not re-
ceive him simply as an ambassador, but counted him
worthy of much more friendly attention and
magnificence.

But Braducius! did not come again with him to
Byzantium, for they say that Chosroes had removed
him from the world, laying no other charge against
the man than that he had been a table-companion of
the Roman emperor. “For,” said he, “as a mere
interpreter he would not have achieved such high
honour from the emperor, unless he had betrayed the
cause of the Persians.” But some say that Isdigousnas
slandered him, asserting that he had conversed
secretly with the Romans. Now when this ambas-
sador met the emperor for the first time, he spoke
no word either small or great about peace, but he
made the charge that the Romans had violated the
truce, alleging that Arethas? and the Saracens, who
were allies of the Romans, had outraged Alamundarus
in time of peace, and advancing other charges of no
consequence which it has seemed to me not at all
necessary to mention.

While these negotiations were going on in Byzan-
tium, Bessas with the whole Roman army was entering
upon the siege of Petra. First the Romans dug a
trench along the wall just where Dagisthaeus had
made his ditch when he pulled the wall down there.’
Now the reason why they dug in the same place I
shall explain. Those who built this city originally
placed the foundations of the circuit-wall for the


1 Cf. Book IL. xxviii. 41. 2 Cf. Book II. i. 3~7.
3 Book II. xxix. 36.


151


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA
—
152


Ve


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xi. 12-17


most part upon rock, but here and there they were
allowed to rest upon earth. And there was such a
portion of the wall on the west side of the city of no
great extent, on either side of which they had con-
structed the foundations of the circuit-wall upon
hard, unyielding rock. This was the portion which
Dagisthaeus on the previous occasion and now
Bessas likewise undermined, the character of the
ground not permitting them to go further, but quite
naturally determining the length of the trench for
them and controlling it naturally.

Consequently when the Persians, after the with-
drawal of Dagisthaeus, wished to build up this part
of the wall which had fallen down, they did not
follow the previous plan in its construction, but did
as follows. Filling the excavated space with gravel,
they laid upon it heavy timbers which they had
planed very thoroughly, making them entirely
smooth, and then they bound them together so as
to cover a wide space; these then they used as a
base instead of foundation stones, and upon them
they skilfully carried out the construction of the
circuit-wall. This was not understood by the
Romans and they thought they were making their
ditch under the foundations. But by excavating the
entire space under the timbers which I have just
mentioned and carrying their work across most of
the ground they did succeed in damaging the wall
seriously, and a portion of it had actually dropped
down suddenly, but nevertheless this fallen part did
not incline at all to either side nor was one of the
courses of stone deranged, but the whole section


153


18


19


21


22


23


24


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


154


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xi. 17-25


descended intact in a direct line, as if let down by
a machine, into the excavated space and stopped
there, keeping its proper position, though not with
the same height as before, but somewhat less. So
when the whole space under the timbers had been
excavated, it came about that they settled into it
with the entire wall on them.

But even so the wall did not become accessible to
the Romans. For when Mermeroes had come there
with his great throng of Persians, they had added a
great deal to the earlier masonry and so built the
circuit-wall exceedingly high. So the Romans, when
they saw the part of the wall which had been shaken
down still standing, were at a loss and found them-
selves involved in great perplexity. For neither
could they mine any longer, seeing their digging had
brought such a result, nor were they able at all to
employ the ram, for they were fighting against a
wall on a slope, and this engine cannot be broughi
up to a wall except on smooth and very flat ground.

Now by some chance it so fell out that there were
in this Roman army a small number of the barbarians
called Sabiri, for the following reason. The Sabiri
are a Hunnic nation and live in the region of the
Caucasus, being a very numerous people and properly
divided among many different rulers. And some of
the rulers from ancient times have had relations with
the Roman emperor, and others with the king of
Persia. And each of these two sovereigns was
accustomed to pay a fixed amount of gold to those in
alliance with him, not annually, however, but only as
need impelled him to do so, At that time, accord-


1 ἔς τὶ Haury: ἔτι MSS.


155
VOL. Vv. F


fp


26


27


28


29


30


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


156


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xi, 25-30


ingly, the Emperor Justinian, by way of inviting
those of the Sabiri who were friendly to him to a
fighting alliance, had sent a man who was to convey
the money tothem. But this man, seeing that, with
enemies between, he could in no wise travel in
safety into the Caucasus region, particularly when
carrying money, went only as far as Bessas and the
Roman army that was engaged in besieging Petra,
and from there he sent to the Sabiri, bidding some
of them who were to receive the money to come to
him with all speed; whereupon the Sabiri selected
three of their leading men and straightway sent
them with a small escort into Lazica. These, then,
were the men who, upon arriving there, had entered
into the attack on the wall with the Roman army.
Now when these Sabiri saw that the Romans were
in despair and at a loss how to handle the situation,
they devised a contrivance, such as had never been
conceived by anyone else of the Romans or of the
Persians since men have existed, although there have
always been and now are great numbers of engineers
in both countries. And though both nations have
often been in need of this device throughout their
history, in storming the walls of fortresses situated
on any rough and difficult ground, yet not to a single
one of them has come this idea which now occurred
to these barbarians. Thus as time goes on human
ingenuity is ever wont to keep pace with it by dis-
covering new devices. For these Sabiri improvised
a ram, not in the customary form, but using a new
method which was their innovation. They did not


157


91


92


33


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


158


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xi. 30-33


put any beams into this engine, either upright or
transverse, but they bound together some rather
thick wands and fitted them in place everywhere
instead of the beams; then they covered the entire
engine with hides and so kept the shape of a ram,
and hung a single beam by loose chains, as is custom-
ary, in the centre of the engine, and the head of
this, having been made sharp and covered over with
iron like the barb of a missile, was intended to deal
repeated blows to the circuit-wall. And they made
the engine so light that it was no longer necessary
that it be dragged or pushed along by the men
inside, but forty men, who were also destined to
draw back the beam and thrust it forward against
the wall, being inside the engine and concealed by
the hides, could carry the ram upon their shoulders
with no difficulty.

These barbarians made three such engines, taking
the beams with their iron heads from the rams which
the Romans had in readiness but were unable to
draw up to the wall. And Roman soldiers chosen
for their valour in groups of not less than forty went
inside each one of them and set them down very
close to the wall. And others were standing on
either side of each engine, armed with the corselet
and having their heads carefully covered by helmets
and carrying poles, the ends of which were fitted
with hook-shaped irons; now the purpose for which
these had been provided was this, that as soon as the
impact of the ram on the wall should break up the
courses of the stones, they might be able with these


-


159


34


37


38


39


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


160


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xi. 33-40


poles to loosen and pull down such stones as were
dislodged. So the Romans set to work and the wall
was already being shaken by frequent blows, while
those who were on both sides of the engines, using
their hooked poles, were pulling down the stones as
they were dislodged from their setting in the
masonry, and it seemed certain that the city would
be captured instantly.

But the Persians hit on the following plan. They

on the top of the circuit-wall a wooden tower
which had been made ready by them long before,
filling it with their most warlike men, who had their
heads and the rest of their bodies protected by iron
nails and corselets. And they had filled pots with
sulphur and bitumen and the substance which the
Persians call “ naphtha” 1 and the Greeks “ Medea’s
oil,” and they now set fire to these and commenced
to throw them upon the sheds of the rams, and they
came within a little of burning them all. But the
men standing beside them, as | have said, by means
of the poles which I have just mentioned kept
removing these missiles with the greatest determina-
tion and clearing them off, so that they hurled every-
thing down to the ground from the engines as soon
as it fell. But they could not expect to hold out
long in this work; for the fire kindled instantly
whatever it touched, unless it was immediately
thrown off. Such then was the course of events
here.

But Bessas, who had himself donned his corselet
and put his whole army under arms, began to move
forward many ladders to the part of the wall which
had sunk. And after stirring their courage with a


1 Bitumen and naphtha were Persian products.
161


41


42


43


45


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


162


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xi. 40-46


speech of only such length as not to blunt the point
of the opportunity, he devoted the remainder of his
exhortation to action. For though he was a man of
more than seventy years and already well past his
prime, he was the first to mount the ladder. There
a battle took place and a display of valour by both
Romans and Persians such as I at least believe has
never once been seen in these times. For while the
number of the barbarians amounted to two thousand
three hundred, the Romans counted as many as six
thousand. And practically all those on both sides
who were not killed received wounds, and it proved
true that exceedingly few survived with their bodies
intact. So the Romans, for their part, were
struggling with all their strength to force the
ascent, while the Persians on their side were beating
them back with great vigour. Thus many were
being slain on both sides and the Persians were not
far from repelling the danger. For at the tops of the
ladders a violent struggle for position took place, and
many of the Romans, fighting as they were with an
enemy above them, were being slain, and Bessas the
general also fell to the ground and lay there. And
at that point a tremendous shout arose from both
armies as the barbarians rushed together from all
sides and shot at him, and his bodyguard gathered
hastily about him, all of them having helmets on
the heads and wearing corselets; and by holding
their shields close together over their heads and
crowding in so as to touch one another, they made a
sort of roof over him and concealed their general in
complete safety, and kept fending off the missiles _
with all their strength. And a great din arose from


163


48


49


50


51


52


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


ld Lal tet , ς > -


> / \ a ” “ >


164


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xi. 46-53


the missiles which were thrown continually and
blunted on the shields and other armour, and at the
same time each man was shouting and panting and
exerting himself to the utmost. Meanwhile all the
Romans, in their eagerness to defend their general,
were shooting at the wall, stopping not for an
instant, seeking thus to check the enemy.

In this crisis Bessas distinguished himself; though
he could not get on his feet on account of the
impediment of his armour and also because his body
was not nimble (for this man was fleshy and, as
said, very old), still he did not yield to helpless
despair, even when he had come into such great
danger, but formed a plan on the spur of the
moment by which he succeeded in saving both
himself and the Roman cause. For he directed his
bodyguards to drag him by the foot and thus pull
him very far from the wall, and they carried out
this order. And so, while some were dragging him,
others were retreating with him, holding their
shields above him and toward each other, and
walking at the same speed as he was being dragged,
so that he might not, through becoming uncovered,
be hit by the enemy, Then as soon as Bessas had
reached safety, he got on his feet, and urging his
men forward went toward the wall, and setting foot
on the ladder once more made haste to mount it.
And all the Romans following behind him made a
display of real heroism against the enemy. Then
the Persians became terrified and begged their
opponents to give them some time, in order that
they might pack up and get out of the way when
they handed over the city. But Bessas suspected


165


54


55


56


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


» eee \ ae , / 3 an

e , > Lal e , , > A

" « ΄ ΄ ΄ \ »
>
v an eX “ » 7 > 4


166


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xi. 53-57


that they had contrived some trickery, to the end
that in the interval they might increase the strength
of the circuit-wall, and so he said that he was
unable to put a stop to the fighting, but those who
wished to meet him to discuss terms could, while
the armies were fighting, nevertheless proceed with
him to another part of the wall; and he designated
a certain spot to them, 3
This proposal, however, was not accepted by them,
and once more fierce fighting commenced, involving
a violent tussle; but while the conflict was still
indecisive, it so fell out that the wall at another
point, where the Romans had previously undermined
it, suddenly toppled over. Consequently many from
both armies rushed together at that spot. And now
the Romans shewed their great numerical superiority
over the enemy, though they were divided into two
parts, and they kept pressing the battle against
their opponents, shooting faster than ever and
pushing forward with the greatest force. The
Persians, on the other hand, no longer resisted with
the same strength as before, assailed violently as
they were at both points, and the smallness of their
numbers thus divided between two fronts was
conspicuous. Now while both the armies were still
struggling thus, and the Persians, on the one hand,
could not repulse their enemy as they pressed upon
them, and the Romans, on the other hand, were
unable completely to force their entrance, a young
man of the Armenian race named John, son of
Thomas, whom they were wont to call Guzes,
abandoned the downfallen part of the circuit-wall
and the struggles there, and, taking with him some
few of his Armenian followers, ascended by the


167


58


59


61


62


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


168


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xi. 57-63


precipice, where all considered the city to be
impregnable, having overpowered the guards at that
point. Then, after getting on the parapet, he slew
with his spear one of the Persian defenders there,
who appeared to be the most warlike. In this
manner an entry was made possible for the Romans.

Now the Persians who were posted in the
wooden tower had kindled a huge number of fire-
bearing pots, in order that they might be able
by the very number of their missiles to burn up
the engines, men and all, their defenders being
unable to push them all aside with their poles.
But suddenly there sprang up from the south a
wind of extraordinary violence and blew against
them with a great roar, and in some way or other it
set fire to one of the planks of the tower. But the
Persians there did not immediately comprehend this,
for they were every man of them working and
shouting immoderately, being filled with fear and
in the midst of wild confusion, and the urgency
of the moment had robbed them of their senses ; so
the flame rising little by little, fed by the oil which
bears Medea’s name and all the other things with
which the tower was supplied, consumed the whole
tower and the Persians who were in it. These were
all burned to death, and their charred bodies fell,
some inside the wall, others outside where the
engines stood with the Romans about them. Then
the other Romans also who were fighting at the
fallen part of the wall, since the enemy were giving
way before them in utter despair and strove no
longer to resist, got inside the fortifications, and
Petra was captured completely.

So about five hundred of the Persians ran up


169


64


2


-


8


+


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XII


170


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xi. 63-xii. 4


to the acropolis, and seizing the stronghold there
remained quiet, but the Romans made prisoners
of all the others, such as they had not slain in the
fighting, amounting to about seven hundred and
thirty. And among these they found only eighteen
unhurt, all the rest having been wounded. There
fell too many of the best of the Romans, and among
them John the son of Thomas, who, while entering
the city, was hit on the head by a stone thrown
by one of the barbarians, but only after he had made
a display of marvellous deeds against the enemy.


XII


On the following day the Romans, while besieging
those barbarians who had seized the acropolis, made
a proposal, offering them personal safety and promis-
ing to give them pledges to that effect, thinking
that the Persians would submit on this basis. But
they did not receive the suggestion and prepared to
resist, not thinking that they would hold out long in
their desperate situation, but courting a heroic death.
But Bessas, wishing to dissuade them from this
purpose and to turn them instead to a longing for
safety, commanded one of the Roman soldiers to
go up as close as he could to them and make a kind
of exhortation to the men, and he stated what he
wished him to say to them.

This man then came up close to the fortress and
spoke as follows : “ Most noble Persians, what has


171


oa


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


lol >? lol : a


172


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xii. 4~9


come over you that you are stubbornly holding to
this course of destruction, bending your energies
with unreasonable zeal to accomplish a certain death
and conspicuously dishonouring the practice of
valour? For it is not a manly thing to array oneself
against the inevitable, nor a wise thing to refuse
to bow to those who have won the mastery ; nor, on
the other hand, is it inglorious to live by falling
in with the situation chance has brought. For man,
in the grip of necessity which is relieved by no
hope of rescue, is thereby justly acquitted of the
charge of dishonour, even if he is involved in the
most shameful actions ; for evil, when it is unavoid-
able, is naturally followed by forgiveness. Do not,
therefore, emulate madmen in the midst of obvious
danger, and do not barter your safety for wanton
folly, but rather call to mind that it is impossible
for the dead to come to life, while the living can
destroy themselves at a later time, if indeed this
seems best. Make, then, your final deliberation and
consider well your interests, recalling the fact that
those decisions would be the best in which reversal
shall still be within the power of those who have
made the decision. For we on our part do pity you,
though you are fighting against your own friends,
and spare you when you are courting death, and
we expect, as is customary for Christian Romans, to
feel compassion for you though you throw life to
the winds, and look upon it as a trivial matter.
And the result for you will be simply this, that by
shifting your citizenship for the better you will
have Justinian instead of Chosroes as master; in-


173


10


11


12


14


16


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


174


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xii. 1o—-16


deed we agree to give you pledges to make this
promise binding. Do not then destroy yourselves
when it is possible to be saved. For it is not a
glorious thing to linger fondly in danger for no
advantage whatsoever, since this is not playing the
part of brave men, but simply courting death. But .
noble is he who steels himself to endure the most
severe fortune, when he can anticipate from it some
benefit. For men do not applaud voluntary death
in a situation where even the surrounding danger
gives ground for some stronger hope, but a useless
destruction of life is downright folly, and senseless
daring which leads to death, when held out as a
pretence of high seriousness, merits no praise, at
least in the judgment of thinking men. Further-
more, you are bound also to take into consideration
that you may seem to be shewing some ingratitude
toward Heaven. For if God wished to destroy
you, my men, he would not, I think, have put you
into the hands of those who are striving to preserve
you. Seeing then that such is our stand in the
matter, it will clearly be for you to decide what it
is fitting should befall you.”

Such was the exhortation. The Persians, how-
ever, were unwilling even to listen to the discourse,
but wilfully shutting their ears pretended that they
did not understand. Then finally, at the command
of the general, the Romans hurled fire into the
acropolis, thinking that in this way the enemy
would be constrained to surrender themselves.
Then, as the flames spread in great volume, the
barbarians, with disaster before their eyes, and
knowing full well that they would speedily be
burned to ashes, and having no hope, nor yet seeing


175


17


18


19


21


22


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 δι’ “ons τε K: διέσεισέ τε (followed by a lacuna of three
words) L,
176


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xii. 16-22


any possibility of saving themselves by fighting, still
even in that situation would not consent to fall into
the power of their enemy, but they were immediately
burned to death, every man of them, together with
the acropolis, while the Roman army marvelled at
what was taking place. And at that time it became
manifest how much importance Chosroes placed upon
Lazica ; for he had chosen out the most notable of
all his soldiers and assigned them to the garrison
of Petra, and deposited there such an abundance
of weapons that when the Romans took possession of
them as plunder, five men’s equipment fell to each
soldier, and this too in spite of the fact that many
weapons had been burned on the acropolis. There
was also found a vast quantity of grain and of cured
meat as well as all other provisions, which were
indeed sufficient to keep all the besieged adequately
supplied for five years, But the Persians had not,
as it happened, stored wine there other than sour
wine, but they had brought in an ample supply of
beans. But when the Romans actually found water
there flowing from the aqueduct, they were greatly
astonished and perplexed, until they learned the
whole truth about the concealed pipes. And I shall
now explain what these were.

At the time when Chosroes established the
garrison in Petra after capturing it, knowing well
as he did that the Romans would assail it with every
means in their power, and would straightway attempt
without a moment’s hesitation to cut the aqueduct,
he contrived the following plan. The water which
was being carried into the city he divided into three
parts and had a very deep trench dug, in which he
constructed three pipe-lines, one lying on the very


177


23


25


27


28


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA — >


178


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xii. 22-28


bottom of this trench, and this he covered with mud
and stones up to the middle of the trench ; at that
level he concealed the second pipe-line, and above
it built the third, which was above ground. and
visible to all; so the piping was on three levels, but
this fact was concealed. This the Romans at the
beginning of the siege did not understand, and so,
after they had cut this obvious pipe-line, they did
not carry forward their work on the trench, but
gave up the labour before the next pipe-line was
destroyed, and thought that the besieged were in
want of water, their minds being deceived by their
own slipshod methods. But as the siege was pro-
longed, the Romans by capturing some of the enemy
learned that the besieged were drawing water from
the aqueduct. Accordingly they dug down into the
ground and found there the second pipe-line, which
they cut immediately, and they thought that they
had thus crippled the enemy completely, not having
learned even the second time from the lesson before
them the real meaning of their previous experience.
But when they had captured the city and saw, as I
have said, the water flowing in from the pipe, they
began to marvel and were greatly perplexed. And
hearing from their captives what had been done,
they came to realize after the event the care shewn
by the enemy in their work and the futility of their
own feeble efforts.

Bessas now straightway sent all the prisoners to
the emperor and razed the circuit-wall of Petra to


179


29


33


35


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


, ? 3 cal y , n
παρέχωνται Dindorf from a late MS. : παρέχονται MSS.


on, © wm


180


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIIL. xii. 28-35


the ground in order that the enemy might not again
make trouble for them. And the emperor praised
him particularly for the valour he had displayed and
for his wisdom in tearing down the whole wall.
Thus Bessas became once more,’ both because of
the good fortune he had enjoyed and also because
of the valour he had displayed, an object of respect-
ful admiration among all men. For previously, when
he was appointed to command the garrison of Rome,
the Romans had great hopes of him, since before
that time he had consistently shewn himself a man
of the highest courage. But when it came about
that he met with ill fortune there, Rome being
captured as it was by the Goths, as I have recounted
in the previous narrative,? and the race of the
Romans being in large part destroyed, still the |
Emperor Justinian, when he returned after this to
Byzantium, appointed him General against the
Persians. Now practically everyone bitterly criti-
cized this act and scoffed at the emperor's decision,
if he was going to entrust the Medic war to this
Bessas in his closing years, after he had been defeated
decisively by the Goths and had now become a
doddering old man. But although this was the
feeling of practically all men, it actually fell out
that this general met with the good fortune and
displayed the valour which I have described. Thus
it is that human affairs proceed not according to the
judgment of men, but are subject to the power and
authority of God, which men are wont to call fortune,
knowing not why in the world events proceed in the
manner in which they manifest themselves to them.
1 He had previously won distinction in the defence of


Rome under Belisarius. See Book V.
2 Book VII. xx.


181


bo


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XITI


otk eee


182


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xii. 35-xiii. 5


For the name of fortune is wont to attach to that
which appears to be contrary to reason. But as
regards this matter, let each man think as he wishes.


XIII


Now Mermeroes, fearing that in the course of a
long time some mishap should befall Petra and the
Persians left there, had set his whole army in motion
and marched in that direction, being further in-
fluenced to do so by the season, seeing it was now

t winter. But in the course of this journey he
learned all that had befallen and abandoned this
march entirely, knowing well that the Lazi had no
fortress beyond the Phasis River excepting only the
one at Petra. He then returned and seized the
passes from Iberia into the land of Colchis, where
the Phasis can be forded, and he not only crossed
this river on foot but also another river of no less
difficulty, named the Rheon, which is likewise not
navigable there, and thus getting on the right of
the Phasis, he led his army forward against a city
named Archaeopolis, which is the first and greatest
city in Lazica. Now this army, apart from a few
men, was all cavalry, and they had with them eight
elephants, upon which the Persians were to stand
and shoot down upon the heads of their enemy just
as from towers. Indeed one might be led with
good reason to marvel at the assiduity and resource-
fulness of the Persians in the prosecution of their
wars; for it was they who took in hand the road
leading from Iberia into Colchis, which was every-
where impeded by precipitous ravines and difficult


183


10


11


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 ὅσους Hoeschel: ὅσοις MSS.
184


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xiii, s—r1


ground covered with brush, and concealed by forests
of wide-spreading trees, so that even for an unen-
cumbered traveller the way had seemed impassable
previously, and they made it so smooth that not
only did their entire cavalry pass that way with no
difficulty, but they also actually marched over that
road taking with them as many of their elephants
as they wished. And Huns also came to them as
allies from the nation of the Sabiri, as they are
called, to the number of twelve thousand. But
Mermeroes, fearing lest these barbarians, being in
such numbers, would not only be altogether un-
willing to obey his commands, but would actually
do some terrible thing to the Persian army, per-
mitted only four thousand to march with him, while
he sent all the rest away to their homes after making
them a generous present of money.

Now the Roman army numbered twelve thousand;
they were not, however, all concentrated in one
place, for there were only three thousand in the
garrison at Archaeopolis under command of Odo-
nachus and Babas, both able warriors, while all the
rest were waiting in camp on the other side of the
Phasis River, having in mind that, if the enemy’s
army should make an attack at any point, they
themselves would move out from there and go to
the rescue in full force. These were commanded
by Venilus and Uligagus; and Varazes the Persar-
menian was also with them, having recently returned
from Italy and having eight hundred Tzani under
his command. As for Bessas, as soon as he had
captured Petra, he was quite unwilling to continue
the struggle, but withdrew to the Pontici and the
Armenians and was giving the closest possible atten-


185


12


13


14


15


16


17


18


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


186


ty
f

}
? 4
3


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xiii. 11-18


tion to the revenues from his territory, and by this
niggardly policy he again wrecked the cause of the
Romans. For if, straightway after that victory
which I have described and his capture of Petra, he
had gone to the boundaries of Lazica and Iberia and
barricaded the passes there, never again, as it seems
to me, would a Persian army have entered Lazica.
But in fact this general, by slighting this task, all
but surrendered Lazica to the enemy with his own
hand, paying little heed to the emperor's wrath.
For the Emperor Justinian was accustomed to con-
done, for the most part, the mistakes of his com-
manders, and consequently they were found very
generally to be guilty of offences both in private life
and against the state.

Now there were two fortresses of the Lazi almost
exactly on the boundary of Iberia, Scanda and
Sarapanis. These, being situated in extremely
rugged and difficult country, were extraordinarily
hard of access. They used to be garrisoned by the
Lazi in ancient times with great difficulty, for no
food at all grows there, and supplies had to be
brought in by men who carried them on their
shoulders. But the Emperor Justinian at the begin-
ning of this war had removed the Lazi from these
fortresses and substituted a garrison of Roman
soldiers. These soldiers, then, not long afterwards,
being hard pressed by the lack of necessary supplies,
abandoned these fortresses because they were quite
unable to live for any considerable time on millet,
as the Colchians did, since it was not familiar to
them, and the Lazi no longer persevered in travel-


187
VOL. V. G


19


20


22


23


25


26


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


188


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xiii. 18-26


ing the long journey to bring them all their supplies.
Whereupon the Persians occupied and held them, but
in the treaty the Romans got them back in exchange
for the fortress of Bolum and Pharangium, as 1 have
told in detail in the preceding narrative The Lazi
accordingly razed these fortresses to the ground, in
order that the Persians might not hold them as out-
posts against them. But the Persians rebuilt and
held the one of the two which they call Scanda,
and Mermeroes led the Medic army forward.

There had been a city in the plain called Rhodo-
polis, which lay first in the way of those invading
Colchis from Iberia, so situated as to be easily
accessible and altogether open to attack. For this
reason the Lazi had long before, in fear of the
Persian invasion, razed it to the ground. When the
Persians learned this, they proceeded straight for
Archaeopolis. But Mermeroes learned that his
enemy was encamped near the mouth of the Phasis
River, and he advanced upon them. For it seemed
to him better first to capture this force and then to
undertake the siege of Archaeopolis, in order that
they might not come from the rear and do harm to
the Persian army. And he went close by the
fortifications of Archaeopolis and gave a mocking
salutation to the Romans there, and with something
of a swagger said that he would come back to them
at the earliest moment. For, said he, he wished to
address his greetings to the other Romans first who
were encamped near the Phasis River. And the


1 Book I. xxii. 18.


189


27


28


29


30


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XIV


190


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xiii. 27-xiv. 3


Romans, by way of answer, bade him go wherever he
wished, but they declared that if he came upon the
Romans there he would never return to them.
When the commanders of the Roman army learned
this, they became thoroughly frightened and, think.
ing themselves too few to withstand the force of
their assailants, embarked on the boats which they
had ready and ferried across the Phasis River, every
man of them, placing their supplies of provisions on
the boats, as much at least as they were able to
carry, and throwing the rest into the river in order
that the enemy might not be able to revel in them.
So when Mermeroes arrived there with his whole
army not long afterward, and saw the enemy’s camp
entirely abandoned, he was vexed and filled with
resentment at the bafiling situation. He then fired
the Roman stockade, and boiling with fury turned
back immediately and led his army against
Archaeopolis.


XIV


Tue city of Archaeopolis is situated on an exceed-
ingly rugged hill, and a river flows by, coming down
from the mountains which are above the city. And
it has two gates, one of which is below, opening on
the base of the hill, but this one is not inaccessible
except in so far that the ascent to it from the plain
is not smooth; but the upper gate leads out to the
steep slope and is extremely difficult to approach;
for the ground before this gate is covered with brush
which extends to an indefinite distance. And since


[91


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA |


192


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xiv. 3-8


the inhabitants of this city can get no other water,
those who built it constructed two walls which
extend from the city all the way to the river, in
order that it might be possible for them to draw
water from it in safety.

Mermeroes, consequently, being eager and deter-
mined to assault the wall there with his whole
strength, did as follows. He first commanded the
Sabiri to built a great number of rams, of the sort
which men would be able to carry on their shoulders,
because he was quite unable to bring up the custom-
ary engines to the circuit-wall of Archaeopolis, lying
as it did along the lower slopes of the hill; for he
had heard what had been achieved by the Sabiri
who were allies of the Romans at the wall of Petra
not long before, and he sought by following out the
method discovered by them to reap the advantage
of their experience. And they carried out his
orders, constructing immediately a large number of
rams, such as I have said were recently made for
the Romans by the Sabiri. Next he sent the
Dolomites, as they are called, to the precipitous
parts of the city, directing them to harass the enemy
there with all their strength. These Dolomites
are barbarians who live indeed in the middle of Persia,
but have never become subject to the king of
the Persians. For their abode is on sheer mountain-
sides which are altogether inaccessible, and so they
have continued to be autonomous from ancient times
down to the present day; but they always march
with the Persians as mercenaries when they go
against their enemies. And they are all foot-
soldiers, each man carrying a sword and shield and
three javelins in his hand. But they shew extra-


193


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


10


ll


12


13


14


15


16


194


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIIL. xiv. 9-16


ordinary nimbleness in running over cliffs and peaks
of mountains, just as on a level plain. For this
reason Mermeroes assigned them to attack the wall
there, while he with the rest of the army went
against the lower gate, bringing up the rams and
the elephants. So then the Persians and Sabiri
together, by shooting rapidly at the wall so that
they filled the air round about it with their arrows,
came not far from compelling the Romans there to
abandon the parapet. And the Dolomites, hurling
in their javelins from the crags outside the circuit-
wall, were inflicting still more harm upon the
Romans facing them. On every side, indeed, the
situation of the Romans had become bad and full
of danger, for they were in an extremely evil
plight.

At that point Odonachus and Babas, either as
making a display of valour or wishing to test the
soldiers, or it may even be that some divine influence
moved them, left only a few of the soldiers where
they were, directing them to ward off the assailants
of the wall from the parapet, and meanwhile called
together the greater part of them and made a short
exhortation, speaking as follows. “Fellow-soldiers,
you perceive the danger which is upon us and the
necessity in which we are involved. But it is in-
cumbent upon us not to yield in the least to these
evils. For those who come into a situation where
safety is despaired of could be saved only by not
courting safety; for a fondness for life is wont in
most cases to be followed by destruction. And you
will be obliged to consider this fact also in our


18


19


21


22


24


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


196


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIIL. xiv. 16-24


present stress, that by simply warding off the enemy
from this parapet your safety will by no means be
firmly established, even though we carry forward
the struggle with the greatest zeal. For a battle
which is waged between armies standing apart gives
no one opportunity to shew himself a brave man,
but the issue as a general thing is determined by
chance. If, however, the conflict becomes a hand-
to-hand struggle, enthusiasm will in most cases pre-
vail, and victory will appear where valour lies. And
apart from this, even in the case of success in the
conflict, men fighting from the wall would reap no
great benefit from this success, because, while they
have for the moment succeeded in repulsing the
enemy, the danger will again be acute on the
morrow, and, on the other hand, if they fail even
by a little, they are naturally destroyed along with
their defences. But once having conquered their
opponents in hand-to-hand combat they will there-
after have their safety assured. Let us then with
these thoughts in mind advance against the enemy
with all zeal, calling to our aid the assistance from
above, and with our hopes raised high by that
desperate situation which has now fallen to us.
For God is ever wont to save those men above all
others who find no hope of safety in themselves.”

After Odonachus and Babas had thus encouraged
the soldiers, they opened the gates and led the
army forth on the run, leaving a few men behind ©
for the following reason. One of the Lazi, who
was a man of note in this nation, an inhabitant of
Archaeopolis, had on the previous day negotiated
with Mermeroes for the betrayal of his native land.


2 τύχης Maltretus: ψυχῆς MSS.
197


25


26


27


28


30


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


198


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xiv. 24~—30


Now Mermeroes had sent word to him to render
the Persians only this service, that, whenever they
began the assault on the wall, he should secretly
set fire to the buildings where the grain and the
rest of the provisions were stored. And he directed
him to do this, reasoning that one of two things
would happen, either that the Romans being con-
cerned about this fire and devoting their attention
to it would give his men opportunity to scale the
circuit-wall unmolested, or that in their eager-
ness to repulse the Persians storming the wall they
would pay no attention to these buildings; and if
in this way the grain and other provisions were
burned, he would with no difficulty capture
Archaeopolis in a short time. With such purpose
did Mermeroes give these instructions to this Laz;
and he, for his part, agreed to carry out the order
when he saw the storming of the wall at its height,
by setting fire as secretly as possible to these build-
ings. And when the Romans saw the flames rising
suddenly, some few of them went to the rescue
and with great difficulty quenched the fire, which
had done a certain amount of damage, but all the
rest, as stated, went forth against the enemy.
This force, by falling upon them suddenly and
terrifying them by the unexpectedness of their attack,
slew many, for the Persians offered no resistance ;
indeed they did not even dare raise a hand against
them. This was because the Persians, having no
expectation that their enemy, who were few in
number, would make a sally against them, had taken
up positions apart from one another with a view to


199


33


34


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


200


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIIL. xiv. 30-36


storming the wall and so were not in battle array.
And those who were carrying the rams upon their
shoulders were quite naturally both unarmed and
unprepared for battle, while the others, with only
strung bows in their hands, were entirely unable to
ward off an enemy pressing upon them in close
array. Thus the Romans, slashing and turning
from side to side, kept destroying them. At that
moment also it so happened that one of the
elephants, because he was wounded, some say, or
simply because he became excited, wheeled round
out of control and reared up, thus throwing his
riders and breaking up the lines of the others. As
aresult of this the barbarians began to retreat,
while the Romans continued without fear to destroy
those who from time to time fell in their way. And
one might wonder at this point that the Romans,
though knowing well by what means they ought to
repel a hostile attack by elephants, did none of the
necessary things, being obviously confused by the


situation, and yet this result was achieved without ©


effort on their part. And what this is I shall now -


make clear.

When Chosroes and the Medic army were storm-
ing the fortifications of Edessa, one of the elephants,
mounted by a great number of the most warlike
men among the Persians, came close to the circuit-
wall and made it seem that in a short space he
would overpower the men defending the tower at
that point, seeing they were exposed to missiles
falling thickly from above, and would thus take the
city. For it seemed that this was, in fact, an engine
for the capture of cities. The Romans, however, by


201


37


38


39


41


43


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


202


—_


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xiv. 36—43


suspending a pig from the tower escaped this peril.
For as the pig was hanging there, he very naturally
gave vent to sundry squeals, and this angered the
elephant so that he got out of control and, stepping
back little by little, moved off to the rear. Such
was the outcome of that situation. But in the
present case the omission due to the thoughtlessness
of the Romans was made good by chance. But now
that I have mentioned Edessa, I shall not be silent
as to the portent which appeared there before this
present war. When Chosroes was about to break
the so-called endless peace, a certain woman in the
city gave birth to an infant which in other respects
was a normally formed human being, but had two
heads. And the meaning of this was made clear by
the events which followed; for both Edessa and
practically the whole East and the greater part of
the Roman empire to the north came to be fought
for by two sovereigns. Thus did these things happen.
But I shall return to the point from which I strayed.

When confusion thus fell upon the Medic army,
those stationed in the rear, seeing the confusion of
those before them, but having no real knowledge
of what had happened, became panic-stricken and
turned to retreat in great disorder. And the
Dolomites also experienced a like panic (for they
were fighting from the higher positions and could
see everything which transpired), and they too began
to flee in a disgraceful manner, so that the rout
became decisive. Four thousand of the barbarians
fell there, among whom, as it happened, were three


203


46


17


49


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


204


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xiv. 43-49


of the commanders, and the Romans captured four
of the Persian standards, which they immediately
sent to Byzantium for the emperor. They say,
moreover, that not less than twenty thousand of
their horses perished, not from wounds inflicted by
their enemy’s missiles or swords, but because in
travelling a great distance they had become utterly
exhausted and then had found no sufficiency of
fodder since the time they had come into Lazica;
and so, they say, under the stress of both starvation
and weakness they succumbed.

Having thus failed in this attempt, Mermeroes
withdrew with his whole army to Mocheresis ; for,
even though they had failed of getting Archaeopolis,
the Persians still held the mastery of the greater
part of the rest of Lazica. Now Mocheresis is one
day’s journey distant from Archaeopolis, a district
which includes many populous villages. And this is


really the best land in Colchis; for both wine and \,


the other good things are produced there, though


the rest of Lazica, to be sure, is not of guch a sort. J


Along by this disthict flows a river called Rheon, and ~
on it the Colchians in ancient times built a fortress,
but in later times they themselves razed the greater
part of it to the ground, because, lying as it did in a
very flat plain, it seemed to them easy of access. In
those times the fortress was named Cotiaion in the
Greek language, but now the Lazi call it Cotais}
having corrupted the true sound of the name
because of their ignorance of the language. Such is
the account given by Arrian.* But others say that
the place was a city in ancient times and was called


1 Probably Cytaea, modern Cutais.
3 This statement is not found in the extant works of Arrian.


205


=


—


51


52


53


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XV


1 ὡρμῆσθαι Maltretus from an inferior MS.: ὁρμᾶσθαι KL.
206


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xiv. 49- αν. 1


Coetaeon; and that Aeetes was born there, and as a
result of this the poets both called him a Coetaean
and applied the same name to the land of Colchis.

This place Mermeroes was now eager to rebuild,
but, since he had no equipment for the task, and
because at the same time the winter was already
setting in, he replaced with wood as quickly as
possible such parts of the fortress as had fallen down
and remained there. But very close to Cotais is an
exceedingly strong fortress, Uthimereos by name; in
this the Lazi were maintaining strict guard. Anda
small number of Roman soldiers also were sharing
with them the defence of the fortress. So Mer-
meroes settled there with his whole army, holding
the fairest part of the land of Colchis, and preventing
his opponents from carrying any provisions into the -
fortress of Uthimereos, or from going into the
district of Suania and Seymnia, as it is called,
though this was subject to them. For when an
enemy is in Mocheresis, the road into this region is
thereby cut off for both Lazi and Romans. Thus
were the armies engaged in Lazica.


XV


In Byzantium, meanwhile, Chosroes’ envoy Isdi-
gousnas, in conferring with the Emperor Justinian
regarding the peace, wasted a vast amount of time.


207


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


208


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xv. 2-9


And it was only after long-continued debates that
they finally reached an agreement that for five years
the truce should be observed in the realms of both
sovereigns, while envoys passed back and forth from
each country to the other, fearlessly carrying on
negotiations for peace during this period until they
should settle the points of disagreement regarding


both Lazica and the Saracens. It wasfurther agreed ᾿


that the Persians receive from the Romans for this
five-year truce twenty centenaria! of gold, and for
eighteen months which had elapsed between the
expiration of the former truce and the time when
they had commenced negotiations with each other
in the present case, six centenaria more. For the
Persians declared that only on this understanding


had they permitted negotiations for the treaty to _


proceed. Isdigousnas further demanded that he
should receive these twenty centenaria on the spot,
but the emperor wished to give four each year, his
purpose, of course, being that he might have surety
that Chosroes would not violate the agreement.
Later, however, the Romans gave the Persians out-
right the entire amount of gold agreed upon, in
order not to appear to be paying them tribute each
year. For it isthe disgraceful name, and not the fact,
which men are wont as a general thing to be
ashamed of.

Now there was a certain man among the Persians
named Bersabus, a person of especial note and a
very close friend of King Chosroes. Valerian had
once happened upon this man in a battle in Armenia,
and he took him prisoner and immediately sent him


? See Book IIT. vi. 2, note.
209


ry


7)


΄


10


11


12


18


16


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


Σ “aginey W: ΝΕ Bs.


210


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xv. g—-16


to the emperor at Byzantium. And a long-time
passed while he was being kept under guard there.
Now Chosroes was willing to advance a great amount
of money for him, in order that he might see
Bersabus returned to the land of Persia. But on
the present occasion the Emperor Justinian released
the man at the request of Isdigousnas; for this Ὁ
ambassador promised the emperor to persuade σ
Chosroes to remove the Persian army from Lazica. _
Thus this armistice was arranged by the Romans
and Persians in the twenty-fifth year of the reign of 552-553
the Emperor Justinian. Now the majority of the *” )
Romans were thoroughly displeased with this treaty ; )
but whether the reproach they made was in some 4
measure justified or as unreasonable as the complaints
of subjects commonly are, I am unable to say.

These objectors kept saying that this peace had
been made while Lazica was most firmly in the ]
power of the Persians, whose purpose was that for
five years noone might molest them, but that during
this time they might be able without fear or hard-
ship to occupy all the fairest parts of the land of
Colchis; and the Romans thereafter would be
utterly unable to dislodge them from there in all
time, but thenceforth Byzantium itself would be
easily accessible to the Persians from that point.
Such. was the general view, and the people were
consequently vexed and irritated and utterly pessi-
mistic. They were also moved by the fact that the 2
very thing which the Persians had been striving for
from ancient times, but which had seemed impossible
of achievement either by war or by any other


211


17


18


19


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


—ovdeulay editors,


212


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xv. 16-20


means,—that is to say, having the Romans subject
to the payment of tribute to them—this had been
most firmly achieved at the present juncture in the
name of an armistice. For Chosroes, by imposing
upon the Romans an annual tribute of four cente-
naria, the very thing he had clearly been bent upon
having from the first, has up to the present time in
a space of eleven years and six months speciously
gathered in forty-six centenaria on the pretext of
the armistice, giving to the tribute the name of
treaty, although in the meantime he has, as stated,
been carrying on a campaign of violence and war in
Lazica. From this plight the Romans had not the
least hope of rescuing themselves in the future, but
they perceived that they had in no hidden sense
become tributary to the Persians. Thus were these
things done.

But Isdigousnas, in possession of money such as
no envoy ever carried, and having become, I suppose,
the wealthiest of all the Persians, departed on the
homeward way, for the Emperor Justinian had
honoured him in a signal manner and presented
him with huge sums of money before his dismissal.


And this man, unlike all other ambassadors, did not ©


have the experience of being under guard in an
sense, but both he himself and all who followed
him—and they were an exceedingly numerous
company—enjoyed complete freedom for a long ~
period of time in meeting and associating with
whom they wished, walking about in every part
of the city, buying and selling whatever they


213


21


22


25


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


214


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xv. 20-25


pleased, and carrying on all manner of transactions
and devoting themselves with complete unconcern
to the business connected therewith, just as they
would in a city of their own, with not a Roman
following or accompanying them at all or deigning
to watch them, as is customary. τι

At this time an event occurred which has neve
happened before, as far at least as we know. For
though the season of the year was late autumn,
there was a very remarkable period of drought and
hot weather as in the middle of summer, so that
a great quantity of roses actually came out, as if
it were spring, differing in no way at all from
ordinary roses. And practically all the trees brought
forth new fruit again, while the clusters likewise
appeared on the vines, although the vintage had
already been gathered not many days before. From
these things those that are clever in such matters
drew sundry conclusions, saying that some great
and unexpected thing would take place, some that
it would be good and others the opposite. But
I for my part think that this was the result of
a sort of coincidence, the usual south winds having
prevailed for a very long period, and great heat
having consequently come upon the land beyond
what is customary and not in keeping with the
season. But if it really does, as they say, indicate
that some unexpected event will happen, we shall
know most certainly from the future outcome.


215


or


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XVI


᾽ ? \ / > \ -“ Lal ec ,


216


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xvi. 1-6


XVI


Wuite these negotiations were taking place in
Byzantium between the Romans and Persians re-
garding the treaty, meantime the following took
place in Lazica. Gubazes, the king of the Lazi,
was well disposed toward the Romans, for he
perceived that Chosroes, as I have stated in the
previous narrative, was plotting his death. But
the most of the other Lazi, being subjected to |
outrageous treatment at the hands of the Roman |
soldiers, and being particularly angry with the |
commanders of the army, began to favour the Medes
as a general thing, not because they preferred the —
cause of the Persians, but because they wished to be ©
rid of the Roman rule and preferred those diffi- |
culties which were not for the moment present. |
Now there was a man of no mean station among
the Lazi, Theophobius by name, who conferred very
secretly with Mermeroes and promised to put the
fortress of Uthimereos into his hands. And he
filled the man with great hopes and urged him to
accomplish this, declaring that as a result of this
deed he would not only be a very close friend of
King Chosroes, but would also be inscribed by the
Persians as a benefactor for all time, and conse-
quently would become great in renown and in
wealth and power. Theophobius was elated by
these promises and kept working still more eagerly
for the accomplishment of his purpose.

Now there was at that time no free movement
of the Romans and Lazi, but, while the Persians
were going about everywhere in that country with


1 Book II. xxix. 2.
. 217


10


11


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


218


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xvi. 6-11


eomplete liberty, some of the Romans and Lazi were
hiding by the Phasis River, while others had seized
Archaeopolis or some other one of the strongholds
there and were concealing themselves therein.
Meanwhile Gubazes himself, the king of the Lazi,
was remaining quietly at the summit of the
mountains. Consequently Theophobius was able with
no difficulty to make good his promise to Mermeroes.
For he went inside the fortress and stated to the
Lazi and Romans who were keeping guard there
that the whole Roman army had perished, that the
cause of King Gubazes and of all the Lazi about him
had been utterly lost, and that all Colchis was held
by the Persians, and there was not one single hope
for the Romans or Gubazes ever to win back the
rule of the land. For formerly, he pointed out,
Mermeroes had accomplished this alone, bringing
with him more than seventy thousand fighting men
of the Persians and vast numbers of barbarian
Sabiri ; but now, he said, King Chosroes himself had
actually come there with an unnumbered host and
suddenly joined forces with them, and henceforth
not even the whole land of the Colchians would
suffice for this army. With these high-flown words
Theophobius reduced the guards there to a state of
terror and helplessness. And they besought him
with entreaties in the name of their ancestral god
to use all his power to turn the present situation
to their advantage. He then promised them that he
would bring from Chosroes pledges for their safety,
on condition that they surrender the fortress to the
Persians.


210
VOL. V. i


12


14


15


16


17


18


19


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


220


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xvi. 11-19


The men were delighted with these terms and
he immediately departed from the place, and coming
again before Mermeroes explained everything. Then
Mermeroes selected the most notable men of the
Persians and sent them with him to Uthimereos, for
the purpose of arranging pledges both for the money
and for the lives of the guards of the place and
so taking possession of that fortress. Thus did the
Persians gain the fortress of Uthimereos and thereby
secured the mastery of Lazica most firmly. But not
only did the Persians bring this land of Lazica
under their sway, but also Scymnia and Suania, and
in this way the whole territory from Mocheresis as
far as Iberia became inaccessible to the Romans and
the king of the Lazi. And neither the Romans
nor the Lazi were able to ward off the enemy, for
they did not even dare to descend from the mountains
or their strongholds, nor to make any advances against
the enemy.

Mermeroes, as the winter season came on, built
a wooden wall at Cotais and established there a
guard of warlike Persians no less than three thousand
strong, and he also left a sufficient force of men in
Uthimereos. And he also built up the other fortress
of the Lazi which they call Sarapanis, situated at
the very limit of the territory of Lazica, and
remained there. But later, upon learning that the
Romans and Lazi were gathering and making camp
at the mouth of the Phasis River, he moved against
them with his whole army. When Gubazes and the
commanders of the Roman army learned this, re-


221


21


22


23


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


» / ,ὔ \ cel ’ > Χ ΄


222


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xvi. 19-23


fusing to withstand the enemy’s attack they dispersed
and saved themselves as each found it possible. As
for Gubazes, he ran up to the summit of the
mountains and there proceeded to pass the winter
along with his children and his wife and those
particularly intimate with him, putting up with the
rigours of winter because of the hopelessness of his
present evil situation, but confident of the future
because of his hope in Byzantium, and in this way
finding consolation for the fortune then present, as
men are wont to do, and looking for a better day.
And the rest of the Lazi likewise, ashamed to be
outdone by King Gubazes, were passing the winter
as well as he among the crags, fearing indeed no
difficulty from the enemy there, for these mountains
are at all times impracticable and wholly inaccessible
for an attacking force, and particularly during the
winter, but forced to endure mortal suffering through
hunger, cold, and the other hardships.

Meanwhile Mermeroes at his leisure built many
houses in the villages throughout Mocheresis and
established stores of supplies everywhere among
these places; then by sending some of the deserters
to the heights of the mountains and offering pledges
he succeeded in winning over many; these were
naturally in want of provisions, and he supplied
them in generous measure and cared for them as his
own ; indeed he carried on the whole administration
with an air of complete security, as having become
lord of the land. And he wrote the following letter
to Gubazes : “ Two things there are which harmonize
the lives of men, power and wisdom. For some,
who, by reason of their power, are superior to their


223


25


27


29


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


ς Lal n “ » x 4 « La


224


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xvi. 23--29


neighbours, both live themselves according to their
own desires and also never fail to lead where they
wish those less powerful than themselves, while
others, though enslaved to the stronger through
their weakness, can still remedy their impotence
by discretion, and by courting the powerful with
flattery are still able to live with their own pos-
sessions, enjoying by means of their conciliatory
attitude everything of which they are deprived by
their weakness. And this does not hold only for
some of the nations of men, while it is otherwise
in other nations, but one might say that this is
implanted in human experience universally in every
part of the inhabited world like any other natural
characteristic. Do you, accordingly, my dear Gubazes,
if you think you are going to overcome the Persians
in the war, neither hesitate nor let anything stand
in your way. For you will find us in any part of
Lazica you may choose ready to meet your attack
and prepared in battle-array to fight for this land
with all our might; so that in waging a decisive
struggle you will have the opportunity to display
your valour against us. If, however, even you your-
self realize that you are unable to array yourself
against the might of the Persians, then do you,
good Sir, take the second alternative and ‘know
thyself,’ and bow down before your master Chosroes
as king and victor and lord. And beg that he be
merciful to you in spite of your acts, in order that
you may be able henceforth to escape the evils
which harass you. For I personally promise that
King Chosroes will be merciful to you and will give


225


30


31


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XVII


226


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xvi. 29—xvii. 1


pledges, furnishing you as hostages sons of the
notable rulers in Persia, that you will have your
safety and your kingdom and everything else in
security for all time. But if neither of these things
meets your wish, do you at least go off to some other
land and thus grant to the Lazi, who have been
reduced to wretchedness through your folly, recovery
at length and respite from the difficulties which ©
press upon them, and do not wish to inflict upon
them this lingering destruction, being-carried on by
a deceptive hope, by which I mean assistance from
the Romans. For they will never be able to defend
you, just as they have not been able up to the
present day.” Thus wrote Mermeroes. But even
so he did not persuade Gubazes, who remained among
the summits of the mountains, awaiting the assist-
ance to come from the Romans and, by reason of his
hostility to Chosroes, absolutely unwilling to incline
to despair of the Romans. For men as a general
thing adapt their decisions to the dictates of their
desire, and while, on the one hand, they incline
toward the argument which pleases them and
espouse all its consequences, not investigating to
see whether it may be false, they, on the other
hand, are outraged by the one which annoys them
and they distrust it, never searching out to see
whether it may not be true.


XVII


1 Art about this time certain monks, coming from
India and learning that the Emperor Justinian


1 Cf. Gibbon, Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire,
chap. xl.
227


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


228


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xvii. 1-7


entertained the desire that the Romans should no
longer purchase their silk from the Persians, came
before the emperor and promised so to settle the
silk question that the Romans would no longer
purchase this article from their enemies, the Persians,
nor indeed from any other nation; for they had,
they said, spent a long time in the country situated
north of.the numerous nations of India—a country
called Serinda—and there they had learned accurately
by what means it was possible for_silk to be pro-
duced in the land of the Romans. Whereupon the
emperor made very diligent enquiries and asked
them many questions to see whether their state-
ments were true, and the monks explained to him
that certain worms are the manufacturers of silk,
nature being their teacher and compelling them to
work continually. And while it was impossible to
convey the worms thither? alive, it was still practi-
cable and altogether easy to convey their offspring.
Now the offspring of these worms, they said, con-
sisted of innumerable eggs from each one. And
men bury these eggs, long after the time when they
are produced, in dung, and, after thus heating them
for a sufficient time, they bring forth the living
creatures. After they had thus spoken, the emperor
promised to reward them with large gifts and urged
them to confirm their account in action. They then
once more went to Serinda and brought back the
eggs to Byzantium, and in the manner described
caused them to be transformed into worms, which
they fed on the leaves of the mulberry; and thus


1 To Byzantium.


5 ᾧπερ Hoeschel : ὥσπερ MSS.


11


12


18


14


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


a 2 ‘ by \ >. a

> 4, fal , © lA

’ , > 7 a > Ἁ e > /


230


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xvii. 7-14


they made possible from that time forth the pro-
duction of silk in the land of the Romans.+ At that
time then matters stood thus between the Romans
and the Persians, both as touching the war and in
regard to silk.

After the winter season Isdigousnas arrived at the
court of Chosroes with the money and announced
the terms agreed upon by them. And Chosroes,
upon receiving the money, confirmed the armistice |
without any hesitation, but he was utterly unwilling _
to relinquish Lazica. In fact he actually used this ὅ
money to purchase the alliance of a vast horde of the
Sabiri Huns, and he sent them immediately with |
some Persians to Mermeroes, whom he directed to~
pursue his task with all the power at his disposal ;
and he sent him, furthermore, a large number of
elephants.

Mermeroes, accordingly, accompanied by the
whole army of Persians and Huns, departed from
Mocheresis and moved against the strongholds of
the Lazi, taking the elephants with him. The
Romans, however, offered no resistance whatever,
but under the leadership of Martinus they made
themselves as secure as possible in a naturally strong
position near the mouth of the Phasis River and
there remained quiet. And Gubazes, the king of
the Lazi, was also with them. But this Medic army,
because of a certain chance which befell it, did no
harm to anyone either of the Romans or of the Lazi.
For in the first place Mermeroes, learning that the
sister of Gubazes was in a certain fortress, led his
army against this with the intention of capturing it


1 Silk has been manufactured in Asia Minor, notably
at Broussa (Prusa), up to the present day.


231


15


16


17


18


19


20


21


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


32


to


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xvii. 14-21
at all hazards. But because the guards of that


place offered a most valiant resistance and also
because the naturally strong position gave them
material assistance, the barbarians were repulsed
from the town without accomplishing their purpose
and withdrew; whereupon they hastily directed
their course against the Abasgi. But the Romans
keeping guard in Tzibile seized the pass, which was
very narrow and precipitous, as I have stated
previously,' and quite impossible to force, and thus
they blocked their way. Consequently Mermeroes,
having no means of dislodging his opponents by
force, led his army back and straightway moved on
Archaeopolis with the purpose of besieging it. But,
upon making trial of the circuit-wall, he met with no
success and consequently turned back again. But
the Romans followed up the retreating enemy and
in a dangerous pass began to slay many of them,
among those who fell being, as it chanced, the com-
mander of the Sabiri’ And a fierce battle taking
place over the corpse, the Persians finally, at dusk,
forced back their opponents and routed them, after
which they retired to Cotais and Mocheresis. Such
then were the fortunes of the Romans and the
Persians.

—= In Libya, on the other hand, affairs had taken an
altogether favourable turn for the Romans. For it
so fell out that John, whom the Emperor Justinian
had appointed General there, met with a number of
incredible pieces of good fortune, since after secur-
ing the allegiance of one of the Moorish rulers,
Cutzinas by name, he first defeated the others in
battle, and not long afterwards reduced to subjection


1 Chap. x. 1, above.
233


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


334


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xvii. 21-xviii. 6


Antalas and Iaudas, who held the sovereignty over
the Moors of Byzacium and Numidia, and they
joined his train in the position of slaves. And asa
result of this the Romans had for the time no enemy
in Libya at any rate. But by reason of the previous
wars and insurrections the land remained for the
most part destitute of human habitation.


XVIII


Wuie these events were taking place as described,
meanwhile the following transpired in Europe. The
Gepaedes had in the first place, as 1 have stated in
the previous narrative, confirmed a treaty with their
enemies the Lombards. But being utterly unable to
compose their differences with them, they decided
not much later that they must make war. So the
Gepaedes and the Lombards advanced in full force
against each other, both being fully prepared for the
war. And the commanders were, on the side of the
Gepaedes, Thorisin, and on that of the Lombards,
Auduin, each of them being followed by many
myriads of men. Now they had already come close
to one another, but the two armies could not yet see
each other. But that fright which is called panic
suddenly fell upon both armies and carried the men
all backward in a flight which had no real cause, only
the commanders being left where they were with a
small number of men. And though they strove to
draw their men back and check the retreat, they
could accomplish nothing either by the use of abject
entreaty or by fearful threats.


1 Book VII. xxxiv. 45.
235


~


10


‘ll


12


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


236


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xviii. 7-12


So Auduin became thoroughly frightened at seeing
the men taking to their heels in this disorderly
manner (for he did not know that the enemy had
shared the same fate), and straightway sent some ot
his followers on an embassy to his opponents to beg for
peace. But these men, when they came to Thorisin,
the commander of the Gepaedes, and observed what
was taking place and understood from their own
experience what had befallen their enemies, en-
quired of Thorisin, when they came into his presence,
where in the world the host of his subjects was.
And he, for his part, without making any denial of
what had happened, said, “ They are fleeing, though
no man pursues.” Thereupon the envoys said to
him in reply, “This is the very thing which has
happened to the Lombards also. For seeing that
you speak the truth, O king, we shall conceal
nothing on our side. Accordingly, since it is not
at all the will of God that these nations should
utterly perish, and since for this reason He dissolved
the battle lines, smiting both armies with a saving
fear, come now, let us too yield to the will of God
by putting an end to the war.” “Very well, let it
be so,” said Thorisin. Thus they made a two years’
truce, to the end that by maintaining diplomatic
relations and keeping constantly in communication
with one another in the interval, they might make a
thorough settlement of all their differences. So at
that time they each withdrew with this under-
standing.

But finding themselves unable during this truce to
come to such terms with each other as to reach a


; 237


13


14


15


16


17


18


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


Suidas.

4 rotrous—kar’ αὐτούς L; om. K.


238


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xviii. r2—-18


settlement of the disputed points, they were once
more on the point of resorting to warfare. But the
Gepaedes, fearing the Roman power (for it was
expected that the Romans would array themselves
with the Lombards), were purposing to invite some
of the Huns to an offensive and defensive alliance.
They sent, accordingly, to the rulers of the Cutrigurs,
who live on the western side of the Maeotic Lake,
and begged that they assist them in carrying on
the war against the Lombards. And these Huns
straightway sent them twelve thousand men, under
different commanders, among whom was Chinialon,
an especially capable warrior. But the Gepaedes
were for the moment embarrassed by the presence
of these barbarians, since the time had not yet
arrived when a battle could be fought, for the truce
still had a year to run, and so they persuaded them
to overrun the emperor's land in the interval, thus
turning their embarrassment to their profit by
delivering this attack on the Romans, But since the
Romans were guarding carefully the crossing of the
Ister River both in Illyricum and in the land of
Thrace, they themselves ferried these Huns across
the Ister at the point where their own territory
touched the river and turned them loose in the
Roman domain.

And they had indeed plundered practically the
whole country there, when the Emperor Justinian hit
upon the following plan. Sending to the rulers of
the Utigur Huns, who live on the eastern side of the
Maeotic Lake, he reproached them and branded as


239


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


20


21


22


23


24


240


en


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xviii. 18-24


unjust their inactivity with regard to the Cutrigurs,
if indeed one ought to consider the act of watching
without protest the destruction of one’s friends as
the height of injustice. “For the Cutrigurs,” he
said, “paying no heed to their neighbours, the
Utigurs, and that too though they receive great
sums of money every year from Byzantium, are
unwilling in any degree to cease from their injustice
toward the Romans, but they are every day raiding
and plundering them for no good- reason. And
though the Utigurs themselves gain no portion of
this plunder nor share in the booty with the
Cutrigurs, they are not taking the side of the
Romans who are being wronged, though they have
been on terms of close friendship with them from
ancient times.” Thus the Emperor Justinian, by
sending this message to the Utigurs, and not only
making a gift of money to them but also reminding
them of all the gifts they had previously received
from him on many occasions, persuaded them
immediately to make an attack upon those of the
Cutrigurs who had been left behind.

So they first drew into alliance with them two
thousand of the Goths called Tetraxitae, who are
their neighbours, and then crossed the Tanais River
in full force. And they were commanded by Sandil,
a man of the greatest cleverness and experienced in
many wars, and one, moreover, well endowed with
prowess and fortitude. So after they had made the
crossing of the river, they engaged with a large


241


bo


a»
oo


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


242


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xviii. 24—xix. 4


number of the Cutrigurs who disputed their advance.
And since this force offered a most vigorous resistance
to their assailants, the battle continued for a very
long time, but finally the Utigurs routed their
opponents and slew many. And only a small number
of them, by fleeing wherever each man found it
possible, saved themselves. Then their enemy made
slaves of their women and children and so departed
on their homeward way.


XIX


Wuite these barbarians were fighting it out with
each other in the manner described, and when the
struggle was now at the most violent point, it so
fell out that great good fortune came to the Romans,
For al] those Romans who chanced to be among the
Cutrigurs in the status of slaves, amounting, as they
say, to many tens of thousands, during this struggle
departed hastily from there without being detected,
and, since no one followed them up, they reached
their native land, thus profiting by another nation’s
victory at the time of their sorest need. The
Emperor Justinian now sent to Chinialon and the
other Huns the general Aratius,. bidding him an-
nounce to them what had befallen in their own land
and, by offering them. money, persuade them to
depart with all possible speed from the territory of
the Romans. So these Huns, upon learning the
inroad of the Utigurs and receiving at the same time


243


~


We


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


ς Lal


a + eBay / + > > a > /


244


a


x


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xix. 4-8


a large sum of money from Aratius, made an agree-
ment that they would commit no further bloodshed
nor enslave any one of the Romans nor do any other
harm, but would make their withdrawal, treating
the people on the way as friends. And this also
was agreed upon, that if, on the one hand, these
barbarians should be able to return and settle in
their own country, they would both remain there
and hold fast for the future their allegiance to the
Romans; but if, on the other hand, it should be
impossible for them to remain in that land, they
were to return once more to Roman territory, and
the emperor would confer upon them some district
in Thrace, to the end that they should establish
their homes there and be for ever at peace with the
Romans while they assisted in guarding the land
carefully against all barbarians.

By this time two thousand of the Huns who had
been defeated in the battle and escaped the Utigurs
had entered the Roman empire, bringing their wives
and children; and among their several leaders was
Sinnion, who long before! had marched with Beli-
sarius against Gelimer and the Vandals, and they
now made themselves suppliants of the Emperor
Justinian. He received them with all kindness and
bade them settle on Thracian soil. But when Sandil,
the king of the Utigurs, learned this, he was exas-
perated and filled with anger, seeing that, while he
himself, by way of punishing the Cutrigurs who were
his kinsmen for the wrong they had done the Romans,
had driven them from their ancestral abode, they for
their part had been received by the emperor, had
settled in the land of the Romans, and were going to


2 Cf, Book ITI. xi. 12,
245


9


10


1]


12


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


246


gd


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xix. 8-12


live much’ more comfortably; he accordingly sent
envoys to the emperor to remonstrate at what had
been done, not putting any letter into their hands (for
the Huns are absolutely unacquainted with writing
and unskilled in it up to the present time, and they
neither have any writing-master nor do the children
among them toil over their letters at all as they
grow up), but instructing them rather to deliver by
word of mouth in the barbarian fashion everything
which he enjoined upon them.

So when these envoys came into the presence of
the Emperor Justinian, they stated that their king
Sandil spoke through them as by a letter as follows:
“1 know a certain proverb which I have heard from
my boyhood, and if I have not forgotten it, the
proverb runs somewhat as follows. That wild beast,
the wolf, might, they say, possibly not be unable
actually to change in some degree the colour of his
fur, but his character he doth not transform, nature
not permitting him to change this. This proverb,”
says Sandil, “have I heard from my elders, who er
hinted at the ways of men by means of a dark saying.!
And I know something also which I have learned from
experience, one of those things which it would be
natural that a rough barbarian should learn: the
shepherds take dogs when they are still suckling
and rear them with no lack of care in the house,
and the dog is an animal grateful to those who feed
it and most mindful of kindness. Now this is obvi-
ously done by the shepherds with this purpose, that


1 Literally ‘‘a slanting, or indirect, statement.”


247


13


14


16


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


248


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xix. 12-16


when the wolves attack the flock at any time, the
dogs may check their attacks, standing over the
sheep as guardians and saviours. And I think this
takes place throughout the whole world. For no
man in the world has at any time seen dogs attack-
ing a flock nor wolves defending it, but nature as a
law-maker has established this as a kind of ordinance,
as it were, for dogs and sheep and wolves. And I
think that even in your empire, where practically
everything is found in abundance, including doubt-
less even impossible things, there is not the slightest
variation from this rule. Otherwise make a demon-
stration to my envoys in order that on the threshhold
of old age we may actually learn something
new to our experience. But if these things are
by nature everywhere fixed, it is not, I think, a
fair thing for you to receive hospitably the nation
of the Cutrigurs, inviting in a foul set of neighbours,
and making people at home with you now whom
you have not endured beyond your boundaries. For
they will, after no long delay, shew their own true
character toward the Romans, and apart from this,
neither will an enemy be lacking who will prey
upon the Roman domain in the hope that, if
defeated, he will be better off at your hands, nor
will a friend be left the Romans who some day
will stand in the way of those who would overrun
your land, through fear lest, when he gains the
mastery by the gift of fortune, he may see the
vanquished faring more splendidly than himself at
your hands, seeing that while we eke out our ex-
istence in a deserted and thoroughly unproductive


249


)


j
!


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


, Seng - ΄-


18
19


21


22


250


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xix. 16-22


land, the Cutrigurs are at liberty to traffic in corn
and to revel in their wine-cellars and live on the fat
of the land. And doubtless they have access to
baths too and are wearing gold—the vagabonds—
and have no lack of fine clothes embroidered and
overlaid with gold. Yet another point: the Cutri-
gurs had previously enslaved countless thousands of
Romans and carried them off to their own land. And
these cursed rascals have been at no slight pains to
impose all the indignities of slavery upon these
victims, for they were doubtless ever ready even to
apply the lash to those who had done no wrong
or to put them to death, and they practised such
other cruelties as natural inclination and opportunity
suggest to a barbarian master. We, on the other
hand, by our struggles and perils which involved
our lives in danger, delivered them from the fate
which then enchained them and restored them to
their parents, so that they came to represent for us
the object, it proves, of all our labours in the war.
And for these things we and they have each of us
received from you for these different actions rewards
of an opposite nature, if it is true that we, on the
one hand, still partake of our ancestral woes, but
they are allotted an equal share in the land of those
who by our valour escaped from being their slaves.”
Thus spoke the envoys of the Utigurs. But the
emperor, after wheedling them with many words
and comforting them with a quantity of gifts,
sent them away not long afterward. Such was the
course of these events.


251
VOL. V. I


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA
XX


252


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xx. 1-6


XX


Ar about this time war and fighting sprang up
between the nation of the Varni and soldiers who
live on the island called Brittia ;+ and it came about
from the following cause. The Varni dwell beyond
the Ister River, and extend as far as the northern
ocean along the river Rhine, which separates them
from the Franks and the other nations who dwell in
that region. Now among all these nations which
in ancient times dwelt on both sides of the Rhine
river each people had its own particular name, but
the whole group was called in common Germans.
The island of Brittia lies in this part of the ocean
not far from the coast, being about two hundred
stades off and approximately opposite the mouth of
the Rhine, and between the islands of Britain and
Thule. For while Britain lies to the west about in
line with the extreme end of Spain,? separated from
the continent by a distance which at the least is
about four hundred stades, Brittia is towards the
rear of Gaul, that side namely which faces the
ocean, being, that is, to the north of both Spain and
Britain. And Thule, as far as men know at any
rate, is situated towards the extremity of the northern
ocean. But the description of Britain and of Thule
has been set down by me in the preceding narrative.*
The island of Brittia is inhabited by three very


= 5 Erobably modern Denmark.
3 Procopius imagines England roughly five degrees too fat
to the west.
3 See Book VI. xv. 4ff.


2 év Hoeschel: om. MSS.
253


7


8


9


10


ll


12


13


14


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


254


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xx. 6-14


numerous nations, each having one king over it.
And the names of these nations are Angili, Frissones,
and Brittones, the last being named from the island
itself. And so great appears to be the population
of these nations that every year they emigrate thence
in large companies with their women and children
and go to the land of the Franks. And the Franks
allow them to settle in the part of their land which
appears to be more deserted, and by this means they
say they are winning over the island. Thus it
actually happened that not long ago the king of the |

ranks, in sending some of his intimates on an |
embassy to the Emperor Justinian in Byzantium,
sent with them some of the Angili, thus seeking to |
establish his claim that this island was ruled by
him. Such then are the facts relating to the island
that is called Brittia.

The Varni, not long ago, were ruled by a man
named Hermegisclus. He, being eager to strengthen
his kingdom, had made the sister of Theudibert,
ruler of the Franks, his wedded wife. For his
previous wife had died recently, having been the
mother of one child, Radigis by name, whom she left
to his father; and he sought a marriage for this
child with a maiden born in Brittia, whose brother
was then king of the nation of the Angili, and had
given her a large sum of money because of his
wooing. Now this man,! while riding with the
most notable of the Varni in a certain place, saw a
bird sitting in a tree and croaking loudly. And
whether he really comprehended the bird’s voice, or,
possessing some other knowledge, simply made a
mysterious pretence of comprehending the bird’s


δ The king.
255


ce


15


16


17


18


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


256


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIIL. xx. 14-19


prophecy, he at any rate immediately told those
with him that he would die forty days later. For
this, he said, was revealed to him by the prencunee-
ment of the bird. “Now 1,” he said, “making
provision that you should live most securely and at
your ease, have related myself with the Franks by
taking from their country the wife who is now my
consort, and I have bestowed Brittia upon my son
by betrothal. But now, since I expect to die very
shortly, and, as far as this wife is-concerned, I am
without issue male or female, and my son further-
more is still unwed and without his bride, come now,
let me communicate my thought to you, and, if it
should seem to you not without some profit, do you,
as soon as I reach the term of my life, put upon it the
seal of your approval and execute it. I think, then,
that it will be more to the advantage of the Varni to
make the alliance by marriage with the Franks than
with the islanders. For the men of Brittia, on the
one hand, are not even able to join forces with you
except after a long and difficult journey, while the
Varni and Franks, on the other hand, have only
yonder water of the Rhine between them, so
that they, being very close neighbours to you, and
having achieved an enormous power, have the means —
ready at hand both to help you and to harm you
whenever they wish ; and they will undoubtedly harm
you if the said marriage alliance shall not prevent
them. For men naturally find a neighbouring state’s
power, when it surpasses their own, grievous and a
most ready cause of injustice, for a powerful neigh-
bour may with comparative ease secure causes of war
against his neighbours who are doing no wrong.
Since, then, the facts are these, let the island gir!


257


\


7


.


20


om:


We


21


22


23


24


26


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


258


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xx. το-- 26


who has been wooed for this boy? be given up by
you, and all the money which she has received from
us for this purpose,* let her retain as remuneration
for the indignity, as the common law of mankind
has it; but let my son Radigis be married to his
own stepmother thenceforth, just as our ancestral
law permits us.”

So he spoke, and on the fortieth day from the
pronouncement he fell sick and fulfilled his destiny.
Then the son of Hermegisclus, after taking over the
kingdom of the Varni, by the will of the notable men
among these barbarians, carried out the counsel of
the dead king, and straightway renouncing his
marriage with his betrothed, became wedded to his
step-mother. But when the betrothed of Radigis
learned this, she could not bear the indignity of her
position and undertook to secure revenge upon
him for his insult to her. For so highly is virtue
regarded among those barbarians, that when merely
the name of marriage has been mentioned among
them, though the fact has not been accomplished,
the woman is considered to have lost her maiden-


hood. First, then, she sent an embassy to him Ὁ


of some of her kinsmen and inquired for what reason
he had insulted her, though she had neither been
unfaithful nor done him any other wrong. But since
she was unable to accomplish anything by this
means, she took up the duties of a man and
proceeded to deeds of war.

She accordingly collected four hundred ships im-
mediately and put on board them an army of not fewer


2 de. Bortigin.
3. i.¢. as a dowry which she would bring to Radigis.


259


—


27


28


29


30


31


32


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


260


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xx, 26-32


than one hundred thousand fighting men, and she in
person led forth this expedition against the Varni.
And she also took with her one of her brothers who
was to assist her in settling the situation, not that
he was holding the kingship, for he was still living
in the position of a private citizen. Now these
islanders are valiant beyond any of the barbarians
we know, and they enter battle on foot. And
this is not merely because they are unpractised
in horsemanship, but the fact is that they do not
even know what a horse is, since-they never see so
much as a picture of a horse on that island ; for it is
clear that this animal has in no time lived in Brittia.
And whenever it happens that some of them on an
embassy or some other mission make a visit among
the Romans or the Franks or any other nation which
has horses, and they are there constrained to ride on
horseback, they are altogether unable to leap upon _
their backs, but other men lift them in the air and
thus mount them on the horses, and when they wish
to get off, they are again lifted and placed on the
und. Nor, in fact,are the Varni horsemen either, |
but they too all march on foot. Such,then, arethese |
barbarians. And there were no supernumeraries in
this fleet, for all the men rowed with their own
hands. Nor do these islanders have sails, as it
happens, but they always navigate by rowing alone.
‘When they came to land on the continent, the
maiden who commanded them, having established a
strong stockade close by the mouth of the Rhine
River, remained there with a small number, but


261


33


34


35


36


37


38


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


262


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xx. 32-38


commanded her brother to lead forward all the rest
of the army against the enemy. Now the Varni at
that time were encamped not far from the shore of
the ocean and the mouth of the Rhine. So when the
Angili reached that place, marching swiftly, the two
armies engaged in combat with one another, and the
Varni were defeated decisively. And many of them
fell in this struggle, while the entire number of those
remaining, together with the king, turned to retreat,
and the Angili, after keeping up the pursuit for only
a short distance, as is customary for infantry, retired
to their camp. But the maiden rebuked them
when they returned to her and inveighed most
vehemently against her brother, declaring that
nothing worthy of mention had been achieved by
the army, because they had not brought her Radigis
alive.

She then selected the most warlike men among
them and sent them off straightway, instructing
them to bring the man captive without fail. Then,
by way of carrying out her mission, these men went
about searching that whole country thoroughly, until
they found Radigis hiding in a dense wood; then
they bound him and took him back to the girl. So
he stood before her eyes trembling and expecting to
die instantly by the most cruel death; she, however,
contrary to his expectations, neither killed him nor
inflicted any other harm upon him, but by way of
reproaching him for his insult to her, enquired of
the fellow why in the world he had made light of
the agreement and allied himself to another woman,
and that too though his betrothed had not been


263


39


40


41


42


43


At


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


264


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIIL. xx. 38-45


unfaithful. And he, seeking to defend himself
against the charge, brought forward the commands
of his father and the zeal of his subjects, and he
uttered words of supplication and mingled many
prayers with his defence, excusing his action by the
stress of necessity. And if it was her will that they
should be married he promised that what he had
done unjustly in the past would be repaired by his
subsequent conduct. Now when this was approved
by the girl, and Radigis had been released from his
bonds and received kind treatment in all other
matters, he straightway dismissed the sister of
Theudibert and wedded the girl from Brittia. Thus
did these events take place.

Now in this island of Brittia the men of ancient
times built a long wall, cutting off a large part of
it; and the climate and the soil and everything
else is not alike on the two sides of it. For to the
east of the wall there is a salubrious air, changing
with the seasons, being moderately warm in summer
and cool in winter. And many people dwell there,
living in the same fashion as other men, and the
trees abound with fruits which ripen at the fitting
season, and the corn-lands flourish as abundantly
as any; furthermore, the land seems to display a
genuine pride in an abundance of springs of water.
But on the west side everything is the reverse of this,
so that it is actually impossible for a man to survive
there even a half-hour, but countless snakes and
serpents and every other kind of wild creature
occupy this area as their own. And, strangest of


265


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


47


49


<i Aga net
266


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIIL xx. 45-49


all, the inhabitants say that if any man crosses this
wall and goes to the other side, he dies straightway,
being quite unable to support the pestilential air of
that region, and wild animals, likewise, which go
there are instantly met and taken by death.

Since I have reached this point in the history, it
is necessary for me to record a story which bears a
very close resemblance to mythology, a story which
did not indeed seem to me at all trustworthy,
although it was constantly being published by
countless persons who maintained that they had
done the thing with their own hands and had heard
the words with their own ears, and yet it cannot
be altogether passed over, lest, in writing an
account of the island of Brittia, 1 gain a lasting
reputation for ignorance of what takes place there.

They say, then, that the souls of men who die
are always conveyed to this place. And as to the
manner in which this is done, I shall presently
explain, having many a time heard the people there
most earnestly describe it, though I have come to
the conclusion that the tales they tell are to be
attributed to some power of dreams. Along the
coast of the ocean which lies opposite the island of
Brittia there are numerous villages. These are
inhabited by men who fish with nets or till the soil
or carry on a sea-trade with this island, being in
other respects subject to the Franks, but never
making them any payment of tribute, that burden
having been remitted to them from ancient times
on account, as they say, of a certain service, which
will here be described by me.


267


50


51


52


53


54


55


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


/ > / -“ , 3
BLOTS ONEL OR » ἢ ς ἀφ


268 Pe apa


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xx. 50-55


The men of this place say that the conduct of
souls is laid upon them in turn. So the men who
on the following night must go to do this work
relieving others in the service, as soon as darkness
comes on, retire to their own houses and sleep,
awaiting him who is to assemble them for the enter-
prise. And at a late hour of the night they are
conscious of a knocking at their doors and hear an
indistinct voice calling them together for their task.
And they with no hesitation rise from their beds
and walk to the shore, not understanding what
necessity leads them to do this, but compelled
nevertheless. There they see skiffs in readiness
with no man at all in them, not their own skiffs,
however, but a different kind, in which they embark
and lay hold of the oars. And they are aware that
the boats are burdened with a large number of
passengers and are wet by the waves to the edge
of the planks and the oarlocks, having not so much
as one finger’s breadth above the water; they them-
selves, however, see no one, but after rowing a
single hour they put in at Brittia. And yet when
they make the voyage in their own skiffs, not using
sails but rowing, they with difficulty make this
passage in a night and a day. Then when they
have reached the island and have been relieved
of their burden, they depart with all speed, their
boats now becomig suddenly light and rising above
the waves, for they sink no further in the water
than the keel itself.


5 épéccorvres K: om. L. 6 ἔν τε---ὐτήν L: om. K.


269


56


57


58


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XXI


270


HISTORY OF THE WARS, ΝΠ]. xx. 56—xxi. 3


And they, for their part, neither see any man
either sitting in the boat with them or departing
from the boat, but they say that they hear a kind
of voice from the island which seems to make
announcement to those who take the souls in charge
as each name is called of the passengers who have
come over with them, telling over the positions
of honour which they formerly held and calling out
their fathers’ names with their own. And if women
also happen to be among those who have been
ferried over, they utter the names of the men to
whom they were married in life. This, then, is
what the men of this country say takes place. But
I shall return to the previous narrative.


XXI


Sucu was the progress of the wars in each land.
And the Gothic War continued as follows. After
the emperor had summoned Belisarius to Byzantium
as stated in the preceding narrative,! he held him
in honour, and not even at the death of Germanus
did he purpose to send him to Italy, but he actually
appointed him commander of the imperial guards
as being General of the East, and detained him
there. And Belisarius was first of all the Romans
in dignity, although some of them had been
enrolled before him among the patricians and had
actually ascended to the seat of the consuls. But
even so they all yielded first place to him, being


1 Book VII. xxv. 1.


271


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


“1


272


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VILI. xxi. 3-10


ashamed in view of his achievements to take ad-
vantage of the law and to claim the right which

it conferred, a circumstance which pleased the
emperor exceedingly. Meanwhile John, the nephew

of Vitalian, was passing the winter in Salones. And
during all this time the commanders of the Roman
army, expecting him in Italy, remained inactive.

And the winter drew to its close and the sixteenth

year ended in this Gothic War, the history of which 551 4.0.
Procopius has written.

When the following year opened, John was
minded to depart from Salones and lead his army
as quickly as possible against Totila and the Goths.
But the emperor prevented him, bidding him remain
there until Narses the eunuch should arrive. For
he had decided to appoint him commander-in-chief
for this war. But the reason why this was the
wish of the emperor was explicitly evident to no
one in the world; for it is impossible that an
emperor's purpose be discovered except by his own
will; but the surmises which people expressed I
shall here set down. The thought had occurred
to the Emperor Justinian that the other commanders
of the Roman army would be quite unwilling to
take orders from John, not consenting to be in any
way inferior to him in rank. And consequently he
feared lest by being at cross purposes or by playing
the coward through envy they might make havoc
of their operations.

And I also heard the following account of the
matter given by a Roman gentleman when I was


273


11


12


13


14


15


16


17


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


274


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxi. 10-17


sojourning in Rome; and this man was a member
of the senate. This Roman said that once, during
the time when Atalaric the grandson of Theoderic
ruled Italy, a herd of cattle came into Rome in
the late evening from the country through the
forum which the Romans call the Forum of Peace;
for in that place has been situated from ancient
times the temple of Peace, which was struck by
lightning. And there is a certain ancient fountain
before this forum, and a bronze bull stands by it,
the work, I think, of Pheidias the Athenian or of
Lysippus. For there are many statues in this
quarter which are the works of these two men.
Here, for example, is another statue which is
certainly the work of Pheidias; for the inscription
on the statue says this. There too is the calf of
Myron.? For the ancient Romans took great pains
to make all the finest things of Greece adornments
of Rome. And he said that one of the cattle then .
passing by—a steer—left the herd and mounting
this fountain stood over the brazen bull. And by
some chance a certain man of Tuscan birth was

ing by, one who appeared to be a very rustic
fellow, and he understood the scene which was
being enacted and said (for the Tuscans even down
to my day are gifted with prophecy) that one day
a eunuch would undo the ruler of Rome. And then
indeed that Tuscan and the words he uttered earned
only laughter. For before actual experience comes
men are ever wont to mock at prophecies, whilst
proof does not upset them, because the events


1 This famous statue (Greek Anthology IX. 713-742, 793-
798) stood in the market-place of Athens originally (Cic.
Verr. LV. 60).


275


18
19


20


21


22


bo


w


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


> \ , \ , > a /

» / > / > \ > ΄ wv


XXII


΄

’ a Ν lol


,, a > « , , \


38 2” on Chae) / “ Lae ῬἭ ΄
, / a
276


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxi. 17—xxii. 3


have not come about and the tale of them is not
credible, but seems akin to some ridiculous myth.
But now all men, yielding to the arguments of
actual events, marvel at this sign. And it was
perhaps for this reason that Narses marched as
general against Totila, the emperor's judgment
penetrating the future, or chance ordaining the
inevitable thing. So Narses, receiving a notable
army and great sums of money from the emperor,
set forth. But when he came with his command
to the midst of Thrace, he spent some time at
Philippopolis, having been cut off from his road.
For an army of Huns had made a descent upon
the Roman domain and were plundering and pillag-
ing everything with no man to stand in their
way. But after some of them had advanced against
Thessalonice and the rest took the road to Byzantium,
Narses finally departed thence and marched forward.


XXII


Now while John, on the one hand, was at Salones
awaiting Narses, and Narses, on the other hand, was
travelling rather slowly, being hindered by the
inroad of the Huns, meantime Totila, while awaiting
the army of Narses, was engaged as follows. He
placed a part of the Romans and some of the
members of the senate in Rome, leaving the rest
in Campania. And he commanded them to look
after the city as well as they could, shewing plainly
thereby that he felt repentance for what he had
done to Rome previously ; for he had, as it hap-


277


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


278


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxii. 3-10


pened, burned large parts of it, particularly on the
further side of the liber River. But these Romans,
being reduced to the state of slaves and stripped
of all their money, were not only unable to lay
claim to the public funds, but could not even secure
those which belonged to them personally.

Yet the Romans love their city above all the
men we know, and they are eager to protect all ,
their ancestral treasures and to preserve them, so |
that nothing of the ancient glory of Rome may


be obliterated. For even though they were for a


long period under barbarian sway, they preserved
the buildings of the city and the most of its adorn-
ments, such as could through the excellence of their
workmanship withstand so long a lapse of time and
such neglect. Furthermore, all such memorials of “
the race as were still left are preserved even to
this day, and among them the ship of Aeneas,
the founder of the city, an altogether incredible
sight. For they built a ship-house in the middle
of the city on the bank of the Tiber, and depositing
it there, they have preserved it from that time. And
I shall now explain what sort of a ship this is, having
seen it myself.

The ship is one with a single bank of oars and
is very long, being one hundred and twenty feet
in length and twenty-five feet wide, and its height
is all that it can be without becoming impossible to
row. But there is nowhere in the boat any piecing
together of timbers at all nor are the timbers
fastened together by any device of iron, but all the
timbers are of one piece, a thing strange and un-


279


11


12


18


14


15


16


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


280


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxii. 10-16


heard of and true only, as far as we know, of this
one boat. For the keel, which is a single piece,
extends from the extreme stern to the bow, gradu-
ally sinking to the middle of the ship in a remark-
able way and then rising again thence properly and
in due order until it stands upright and rigid. And
all the heavy timbers? which fit into the keel
(these the poets call “ oak-stays,” but others call
them “‘shepherds”) extend each and every one
from one side all the way to the other side of the
ship. These, too, sinking from either end, form a
remarkably shapely bend, in order~that the ship
may be fashioned with a very wide hull, whether
nature under the constraint of their future use origi-
nally carved out the timbers and fashioned this arch or
the sweep of the ribs was properly adjusted by crafts-
men’s skill and other devices. Each plank, further-
more, extends from the very stem to the other end of
the ship, being of one piece and pierced by iron spikes
only for this purpose, that by being fastened to the
timbers + they may form the side of the ship. This
ship thus constructed makes an impression when
seen which transcends all description, for the nature
of things always makes those works which are most
cunningly built not easy for men to describe, but
by means of her innovations so prevails over our
usual habits of mind as to check even our power of
speech. Now none of these timbers has either
rotted or given the least indication of being un-
sound, but the ship, intact throughout, just as if
newly constructed by the hand of the builder,


1 The ribs,


=


281


17


18


19


20


21


22


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


282


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxii, 16-22


whoever he was, has preserved its strength in a
marvellous way even to my time. Such are the
facts relating to the ship of Aeneas,

Totila now manned with Goths as many as three
hundred ships of war and ordered them to go to
Greece, instructing them to make every effort to
capture those who fell in their way. But this fleet,
as far as the land of the Phaeacians, which is now
called Cercyra,! was able to do no damage. ‘For it
so happens that there is no inhabited island in that
part of the sea which extends from the strait of
Charybdis? as far as Cercyra, so that many a time,
in passing that way, I have been at a loss to know
where in the world the island of Calypso was. For
nowhere in that sea have I seen an island with
the exception of three not far from Phaeacia, and
only about three hundred stades distant, huddled
close together and very small and having no habita-
tions either of men or of animals or anything else
at all. These islands are now called Othoni.* And
one might say that Calypso lived there, and that
Odysseus, consequently, being not far from the land
of Phaeacia, ferried himself over from here on a
raft, as Homer says, or by some other means without
any ship. But let this be ventured by us only
as a possible interpretation. For it is not easy to
reconcile the actual facts precisely with the very
ancient records, since the long passage of time is
wont very generally to change the names of places
and the beliefs concerning them.


2 Modern Corfu. 2 Modern Strait of Messina.
3 Modern Othonian Islands.


283
VOL. V. K


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


an , a lal
a e
> / nr \ n / / \ ΄


Ξ » , a “RB a δ}


/ “ ,


284


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxii. 23-29


Such is the case of the ship which stands by
the shore of the island in the land of the Phaeacians,
made of white stone and supposed by some to be
the very one which carried Odysseus to Ithaca at the
time when he had the fortune to be entertained
in Phaeacia, And yet this boat is not a monolith,
but is composed of a very great number of stones.
And an inscription has been cut in it and cries aloud
that some merchant in earlier times set up this
offering to Zeus Casius. For the men of this place
once honoured Zeus Casius, since the very city in
which this boat stands is called up to the present
time Casope. In the same manner that ship is
made of many stones which Agamemnon the son
of Atreus set up to Artemis at Geraestus! in Euboea,
seeking even in this way to blot out the insult to
her, at the time when through the suffering of
Iphigeneia? Artemis permitted the Greeks to set
sail. This is declared by an inscription on this boat
in hexameters which was engraved either then or
later. And though the most of it has disappeared
because of the passage of time, the first verses
are discernible even to the present and run as
follows :—


“Here on this spot Agamemnon did set me, a
ship made of marble,

A sign of the fleet of the Greeks sailing to Troy
e’er to be.”


And at the end it has the words: “Made by


1 Modern Porto Castri.
2 Sacrificed by her father, Agamemnon, in order to
ropitiate Artemis who had detained the Trojan expedition
τὸ contrary winds.


285


31


32


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XXIII


286


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxii. 29—xxiii. 2


Tynnichus, to Artemis Bolosia”’ ; for thus they used
to name Eileithuia in former times, because they
called the pains of travail “bolae.” But I must
return to the point from which I have strayed.

When this Gothic expedition reached Cercyra,
they plundered it thoroughly in a sudden raid, and
also the other islands called Sybotae! which lie near
it; then suddenly crossing over to the mainland
also they plundered the whole country about Dodona,
and particularly Nicopolis and Anchialus, where the
natives say Anchises the father of Aeneas passed
from the world, while he was sailing from captured
Troy with his son, and thus gave the place its name.
And going about the whole coast and meeting many
Roman ships, they captured every one of them,
cargoes and all. Among these happened to be also
some of the ships which were carrying provisions
from Greece for the army of Narses. Thus then did
these things take place.


XXIII


Lone before this Totila had sent an army of Goths
into Picenum, in order to capture Ancon; and he
appointed as commanders over this army the most
notable men among the Goths, Scipuar and Gibal and
Gundulf, the last named having once been a guards-
man of Belisarius. And some called him Induif.2, And


! Modern Sybota Islands. 3 Cf. Book VII. xxxv. 23 ff.


287


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


288


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxiii. 2-7


he gave them also forty-seven ships of war, in order
that, in besieging the fortress by land and sea, they
might make the overmastery of it easier and less
laborious. And after this siege had been continued
a long time it came about that the besieged were
hard pressed by the scarcity of provisions.

When this was learned by Valerian, who was
waiting at Ravenna, being unable single-handed to
succour the Romans in Ancon, he sent a messenger
to John the nephew of Vitalian who was at Salones
with the following letter. ‘‘ Ancon is the only city
left us to the south of the gulf, as: you yourself
know, if indeed it is now still left us. For such is
the situation of the Romans who are being most
closely besieged in this city, that I fear lest we be
late with our assistance, shewing zeal after the
critical time, and displaying our enthusiasm for it a
day too late. But 1 shall cease. For the constraint
imposed upon the besieged does not permit my letter
to be made longer, since it strictly appropriates the ὁ
time to its own uses, while the danger demands
assistance more swift than words.” When John had
read this letter, he dared, though it had been for-
bidden him by the emperor, to go on his own initiative,
considering the straitened condition brought about by
chance more weighty than the imperial commands.
So selecting men whom he considered the most able ~
fighters of all, and manning thirty-eight ships of
war with them—boats of great swiftness and built


3. rois—jwuators L: τοὺς---ὁωμαίους K.
—


289


©


10


12


13


14


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


Maltretus, Αἰώνῃ Comparetti.


290


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxiii. 8-14


with all possible care for warfare on the sea—and
putting a few of his provisions aboard, he set sail
from Salones and put in at Scardon.1_ And Valerian
also came thither not long afterwards with twelve
ships.

After joining forces they conferred with each
other and considered the plans which seemed to
promise them the greatest advantage; then they set
sail from there and upon reaching the opposite main-
land anchored at a place which the Romans call
Senogallia,? not far away from Ancon. When the
Gothic generals learned this, they too immediately
manned with the notable Goths the ships of war
which they had with them, forty-seven in number,
and leaving the rest of the army engaged in the
siege of the fortress they advanced straight against
their enemy. Now Scipuar, on the one hand, com-
manded those who remained to carry on the siege,
and Gibaland Gundulf commanded the men on the
ships. And when the two forces came near each
other, both commanders stopped their ships and
drew them close together and made an exhortation
to the soldiers.

And John and Valerian spoke first as follows.
* Let not one of you, fellow-soldiers, think that on
the present occasion you are to struggle in behalf
of this city of Ancon alone and the Romans besieged
in it, nor that the result of this struggle will affect
that matter only, but you must consider that the


1 Modern Scardona.  * Sena Gallica, modern Sinigaglia.


3 ἄγχιστα Maltretus: om. MSS.


291


15


18


19


21


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


292


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxiii. 14-21


main issue of the whole war, to speak comprehen-
sively, is here involved, and to whichever side the
battle inclines, there will be bestowed also the final
decision of fortune. For you should regard the
present situation thus : War depends for its decision
in large measure upon the commissary, and those in
want of supplies are inevitably bound to be defeated
by their enemy. For valour cannot dwell together
with hunger, since nature will not permit a man to
be starving and to be brave at the same time. This
being the case, we have no other stronghold left us
from Dryus to Ravenna, where we can deposit the
food supplies for ourselves and our horses, and the
enemy are so thoroughly masters of the land that
not a single town remains there friendly to us, from
which we could even in small measure provide our-
selves with supplies. And it is on Ancon alone that
our whole expectation is based that the army sailing
in from the opposite mainland can land here and be
in safety. Consequently, if we fare well in to-day’s
encounter, and secure Ancon, as is probable, for the
emperor, we shall perhaps be in a position hence-
forth to hope that what remains of the Gothic war
will likewise go well for us. If, however, we fail in
this battle,—but of further calamity we would not
speak, only may God grant to the Romans the
lasting mastery of Italy. And this too is worthy
of our consideration, that, if we shew ourselves
cowards in the struggle, even flight will be impossible.
For neither will you have the land, seeing it is held
fast by our opponents, nor will you be able to sail
the sea, since the enemy control it as they do; but


293


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


a , 1 BJ \ / φι ἱ e


23


24


25


26


27


1 τῶν πολεμίων K in margin, L: ῥωμαίων K in context.


294


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxiii. 21-27


it has come to this—that our hope of safety lies in
our own strength alone and will shape itself in
accordance with our performance during the combat.
Be valiant, then, as far as in you lies, laying to heart
this one thought, that if, on the one hand, you are
defeated on the present occasion, you will suffer
your last defeat, but if, on the other hand, you are
victorious, you will not only win glory but will also
be ranked with the very fortunate.”

Thus spoke John and Valerian. And the com-
manders of the Goths made the following exhorta-
tion. “Since these accursed rascals, after being
driven away from all Italy and hiding for a long
time in we know not what corners of the earth or
the sea, have now had the hardihood to engage with
us and have come against us with the purpose of
renewing the fight, it is necessary to check! with full
determination the daring which their folly has
engendered in them, so that it may not happen by
reason of our giving way that the result of their mad-
ness grows tosomething great. For foolishness which
is not checked in the beginning does mount up to
boundless daring, but ends in irreparable calamity to
those concerned. Shew them, therefore, as quickly as
possible that they are Greeklings and unmanly by
nature and are merely putting on a bold front when
defeated, and do not consent that this experiment
of theirs proceed further. For cowardice, when
merely despised, proceeds to flaunt itself still more,
because rashness just by continuing comes to be de-
void of fear. And do not by any means suppose that
they will resist you long if you play the part of
brave men. For when a lofty spirit is not matched

1 Lit, pull back by the hair,”


295


29


30


91


92


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


296


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxiii. 27-32


by a commensurate power on the part of those who
indulge in it, though before the event it may appear
exalted to the highest pitch, yet when the combat
begins, it is wont to ebb away. Seeing then that
this is true, call to mind in what manner the enemy
have fared on many occasions when they have made
trial of your valour, and consider that in coming
against you they have not become better men on
the spur of the moment, but shewing merely a
degree of daring similar to that on previous
occasions, they will now also achieve the same
fortune.”

After the Gothic commanders had made this
exhortation, they confronted the enemy and with-
out delay came to close quarters withthem. And the
fighting was exceedingly fierce and resembled a
battle on land. For both sides set their ships head
on with the bows against those of their opponents
and discharged their arrows against each other, and
all those who laid some claim to valour brought
their ships close enough to touch one another and
then engaged from the decks, fighting with sword
and spear just asif ona plain. Such was the opening
stage of this encounter.

But after this the barbarians, through lack of
experience in sea-fighting, began to carry on the
combat with great disorder; for some of them
became so far separated from one another that they
gave their enemy opportunity to ram them singly,
while others drew together in large groups and
were constantly hindered by one another because


of the crowding of the boats. One would have


thought that the decks of their boats were built
together like a mat. And neither could they shoot


297


~


34


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


/ / - lol > i ,


208


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxiii. 32-35


their bows against those of their opponents who
were at a distance except late and with difficulty.
nor could they use sword or spear whenever they
saw them bearing down upon them; but their atten-
tion was constantly engrossed by the shouting and
crowding among themselves, as they continually
collided with each other and then pushed off again
with their poles in a disorderly manner, sometimes
pushing their prows into the crowded space, and some-
times backing off to a great distance, thus making
trouble for their own side in either case. And each
crew kept shouting orders and howling wildly to those
nearest them, not to urge them against the enemy,
but in order that their own ships might get the
proper intervals from each other. And being thus
preoccupied by their difficulty with each other, they
themselves became the chief cause of victory for
their enemy.

The Romans, on the other hand, handled the
fighting manfully and their ships with skill, putting
their boats head on and neither separating far from
one another nor crowding together closer than was
necessary, but always keeping their movements
toward or from each other properly co-ordinated ;
and whenever they observed an enemy ship separated
from the rest, they rammed and sunk it with no
difficulty, and whenever they saw some of the
enemy in a confused mass, there they directed
showers of arrows, and, as soon as they fell upon
them when in disorder and utterly exhausted by
the labour which their confusion entailed, they
would destroy them out of hand. So the barbarians
giving up the struggle against the adversities of for-
tune and the errors which they had made during the


299


37


38


39


41


42


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


> a
e

a \ - \ \ \ oe; a


n ,
ς a δ. 2 , 5 \ > nA > fol

, -“ ’ > A


300


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxiii. 35-42


battle, knew not how they should continue to fight,
for they neither continued the sea-fight nor yet stood
upon their decks as in a land battle, but abandoning
the struggle they came to a perilous pause, having
now left all to chance. Consequently the Goths in
great disorder turned to a disgraceful retreat, and they
no longer thought of valour or of orderly flight nor ot
anything else which would insure their safety, but
scattered as they were for the most part among
their enemy’s ships, they were completely helpless.
And some of them fled unobserved with eleven ships
and were saved, but all the rest to-a man fell into
the hands of their enemy. Many of these the
Romans slew with their own hands, and many others
they destroyed by sinking them with their ships;
and of the generals Gundulf escaped unobserved
with the eleven ships, but the other was captured
by the Romans.

After this the men on the eleven ships disembarked
on the land and immediately set the ships on fire so
that they might not fall into the hands of their
enemy, while they themselves proceeded on foot to
the army which was besieging the city of Ancon.
And after they had announced to them what had
taken place, they all made a hasty retreat together,
abandoning their camp to the enemy, and ran as
hard as they could and in great confusion up to the
neighbouring city of Auximus. And the Romans,
coming to Ancon not long afterwards, captured the
enemy's camp without a man in it and then, after
carrying in provisions for those in the fortress, sailed


2 és—aaara K: om. L.


301


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XXIV


202


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxiii. 42—xxiv. 4


away from there. And Valerian, tor his part, pro-
ceeded to Ravenna, while John returned to Salones.
This engagement especially broke the spirit and
weakened the power of Totila and the Goths.


XXIV


Ar about this same time Roman affairs stood as
follows in Sicily. Liberius had been summoned
from there by the emperor and had gone to
Byzantium, while Artabanes, for thus the emperor
had decided, commanded the whole Roman army
in Sicily. He had laid siege to those Goths who
had been left in the fortresses of the island, a very
small number indeed, and whenever they made
sallies he had defeated them in battle and had
reduced them to a state of absolute destitution as
regards the necessities of life, and finally he had
taken them all by surrender. At this the Goths
became fearful, being deeply moved by the outcome
of the naval battle, so that they were beginning to
despair of the war, having by now become utterly
hopeless; for they reasoned that even in the
existing circumstances they had been shamefully
defeated by their enemy and completely demoralized,
and if any assistance should come to the Romans,
even in small measure, they would be unable by any
means to hold out against them even for the least
space of time or to keep a foothold in Italy. Nor
indeed had they any hope of accomplishing anything
by negotiation withthe emperor. For Totila had, as
it happened, sent envoys to him often. These envoys
had indeed come before Justinian and explained
that the Franks had occupied the greater part of


393


for)


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


/ « r > a ”
, 34? A 3 \ 4 UA A
\ »Μ / > aw > A
e ‘ an
> 4 b] 4 \ Ul \ a
" \ > , , \
, ΄-“ ΄
\ ͵ > , > 4 7 \
, ‘ «
304


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIIL. xxiv: 4-9


Italy, while the rest of it had become for the most
part deserted on account of the war; yet the Goths
were willing to retire in favour of the Romans from
Sicily and Dalmatia, which alone had remained intact,
and agreed to pay tribute and taxes for the abandoned
land every year and would fight as allies against
whomsoever the emperor should wish and would be
in other respects subject to him. But the emperor
would pay no attention to what they said and
dismissed the envoys one and all, hating as he did
the Gothic name and intending to drive it out
absolutely from the Roman domain. ~Thus then did
these events take place.
But Theudibert, the ruler of the Franks, had not long
before been taken from the world by disease, having
without justification made some parts of Liguria and
the Cottian Alps and the most of Venetia subject to
the payment of tribute. For the Franks had treated
the preoccupation of the warring nations as their
own opportunity, and without danger were enriching
themselves with the lands for which the combatants
were fighting. And the Goths indeed had a few
fortresses left in Venetia, while the Romans held
the coast towns; but the Franks had brought all the
others under their sway. Now while the Romans
and the Goths were waging this war against each "Ὁ
other as I have described it and were unable to take
on new enemies in addition, the Goths and the Franks
had negotiated with each other and come to an agree-
ment that, as long as the Goths were waging war
against the Romans, both of them should remain


305


10


ll


12


13


14


15


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


306


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIIi. xxiv. 9-15


quiet holding what they had secured and there
should be no hostilities between them. But if
indeed Totila should ever have the fortune to over-
come Justinian in the war, the Goths and the
Franks should at such time settle these matters in
such a way as should seem likely to benefit both
of them. So much for thisagreement. But Theudi-
bert was succeeded by his son Theudibald. And the
emperor sent Leontius, the son-in-law of Athanasius,
a member of the senate, as envoy to him, inviting
him to an offensive alliance against Totila and the
Goths and demanding that he withdraw from the
parts of Italy on which Theudibert had set his mind
wrongfully to trespass.

Now Leontius, upon coming before Theudibald,
spoke as follows. “It may perhaps be true that on
other occasions events have gone contrary to the
expectations of men, but such a thing as has been
done to the Romans in the present case by you has,
I think, never happened to anyone else in the
world. For the Emperor Justinian, on his part, did
not enter into this war, nor did he let it appear that
he was about to fight the Goths, until the Franks, in
the name of alliance and friendship, had received


S


from him great sums of money and agreed to assist |
him in the struggle. They, however, have not only ,


seen fit to fulfil none of their promises, but they


have further wronged the Romans in a way which
no one could have easily imagined. For your father
Theudibert undertook to trespass upon territory to
which he had no just claim and which the emperor


3°7


16


17


18


19


20


21


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


3 Swuatovs KH: ῥωμαίοις L.


308


a


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxiv. 15-21


had mastered with great. labour by the perils of war,
and that too while all the Franks were standing out
of the way. Consequently I now come to you, not
to reproach you or lay charges against you, but in
order to make demands and to counsel you as to
what will be of advantage to you yourselves. I say,
then, that you, on the one hand, should preserve
the prosperity which you now enjoy, and allow the
Romans, on the other hand, to have that which is
their own ; for when a nation is possessed of great
power, the unholy acquisition of even some trifling
thing has many a time been of sufficient moment to
rob it of the advantages it has enjoyed from of old,
since prosperity is by no means wont to associate
itself with injustice; and I demand, furthermore,
that you join with us in carrying on the war against
Totila, thus fulfilling your father’s agreement. For
' the conduct which above all others would become
true-born sons is this—to correct whatever mistakes
have been made by their parents, but to continue
and confirm whatever deeds of excellence they
have done. Indeed this would be a thing most
ardently prayed for by the most understanding of
men, that their children might emulate the best of
their activities, and that whatever has not been well
done by them should be corrected by no one else
than their children. In fact you ought to have taken
up this war with the Romans unsummoned. For
our struggle is against the Goths, who have been
from the beginning bitter enemies of the Franks
and altogether untrustworthy toward them, waging


399


22


23


25


26


27


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


ey wr


310


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxiv. 21-27


a truceless and implacable! war upon them through
all the ages. Of course they do not hesitate now,
through fear of us, to adopt a wheedling air toward
you; but if ever they should get rid of us, they will at
no distant time display their real attitude toward the
Franks. For evil men cannot change their character
either in prosperity or in adversity, though it is true
as a general thing that, during periods of ill fortune,
they are wont to conceal it, particularly when they
need something from their neighbours, their need
compelling them to cover up their baseness of heart.
Call to mind then these things and-renew, on the
one hand, your friendship with the emperor, and
defend yourselves, on the other hand, against your
ancient enemies with all your power.”

So spoke Leontius. And Theudibald replied as
follows. “ You summon us, in the first place, to be
allies against the Goths contrary to rectitude and
justice ; for it so happens that the Goths at the
present time are our friends. And if the Franks
should be unfaithful to them, neither will they ever
be faithful to you. For men whose sentiments have
once been seen to be base toward their friends are
always of such a nature as to turn aside from the
path of justice. And, in the second place, as to
the lands you have mentioned, we shall say only this
—that my father Theudibert never set his mind upon
doing violence to any one of his neighbours or
usurping the possessions of others. In proof of this
witness the fact that I am not rich. Consequently
he did not acquire these lands by robbing the Romans
of them, but he took possession of them as a gift
from Totila, who already held them and expressly

1 Lit. “unheralded”; cf. Demosthenes, De Corona 262,


211


28


29


30


32


33


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


312


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxiv. 27-33


handed them over to him, and upon this the Emperor
Justinian should certainly have congratulated the
Franks. For he who sees men who have robbed him
of some of his private possessions roughly handled by
any others would naturally rejoice, believing that
those who wronged him have rightly and justly
paid the penalty, except in case he be privately
envious of those who have done the violence—
for men feel that the appropriation by others of
property which is claimed by an enemy tends, as
a general thing, to envy. We are, however, able to
leave to arbiters the decision of these matters, with
the understanding that, if it becomes evident that
my father robbed the Romans of anything, it shall
be obligatory for us to restore this without delay.
And envoys will be sent to Byzantium by us in
regard to this matter not long hence.” With such
words he dismissed Leontius and despatched
Leudardus, a Frank, with three others to the
Emperor Justinian. And upon their arrival at
Byzantium they treated of the matters for which
they had come.

-~  Totila was now eager to seize the islands which
belong to Libya. He accordingly gathered a fleet
of ships immediately and, putting an adequate army
on board, sent it to Corsica and Sardinia. This fleet
first sailed off to Corsica and, finding no defenders,
took the island, and afterwards took possession of
Sardinia likewise. And Totila made both these


313


34


36


37


38


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 és Hoeschel in margin: ἐν MSS. 3 of K: ἀφ᾽ οὗ L.


314


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxiv. 33-39


islands subject to the payment of tribute. But
when this was learned by John, who was com-
manding the Roman army in Libya, he sent a fleet
of ships and a strong force of soldiers to Sardinia.
And when they came close to the city of Caranalis,
they made camp with the purpose of instituting a
siege; for they did not consider themselves able to
storm the wall, since the Goths had a sufficient
garrison there. But when the barbarians learned
this, they made a sally against them from the city,
and falling suddenly upon their enemy routed them
with no difficulty and slew many.- And the rest
saved themselves for the moment by fleeing to the
ships, but a little later they cast off from there and
went to Carthage with the whole fleet. There they
remained through the winter, in order that at the
opening of spring they might again make an ex-
pedition to Corsica and Sardinia with fuller pre-
paration. Now this island of Sardinia was formerly
called Sardo. In that place there grows a certain
herb such that, if men taste of it, a fatal convulsion
immediately comes over them, and they die not
long afterward, having the appearance of laughing,
as it were, as a result of the convulsion, and this
laughter they call “ Sardonic” from the name of the
place. But Corsica was called by men of ancient
times Cyrnus. On that island are found apes just
like men, and there is also a breed of horses only a
little larger than sheep. So much for this.


Zz 3 πίθηκες Ki νάννοι L in context, yp: mir(dda: L in margin.


315
VOL. V. L


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XXV


316


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxv. 1-6


XXV

A Great throng of Sclaveni now descended upon
Illyricum and inflicted sufferings there not easily
described. And the Emperor Justinian sent an
army against them commanded by the sons of
Germanus with others. But since this army was
far outnumbered by the enemy, it was quite unable
to engage with them, but remained always in
the rear and cut down the stragglers left by the
barbarians. And they slew many of them but took
some few prisoners, whom they sent_to the emperor.
But nevertheless these barbarians continued their
work of devastation. And spending as they did a
long time in this plundering expedition, they filled
all the roads with corpses, and enslaved countless
multitudes and pillaged everything without meeting
any opposition; then finally they departed on the
homeward journey with all their plunder. Nor
could the Romans ambuscade them while crossing
the Ister River or harm them in any other way, |
since the Gepaedes, having engaged their services,
took them under their protection and ferried them
across, receiving large payment for their labour.
For the payment was at the rate of one gold stater
per head. At this the emperor was grievously -
vexed, seeing that for the future he had no possible
means of checking the barbarians when crossing the
Ister River in order to plunder the Roman domain,
or when taking their departure from such expeditions
with the booty they gained, and he wished for these
reasons to enter into some sort of treaty with the
nation of the Gepaedes.


317


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


318


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxv. 7-11


Meanwhile the Gepaedes and the Lombards were
once more moving against each other determined to
make war. But the Gepaedes, fearing the power of
the Romans (for they had by no means failed to hear
that the Emperor Justinian had made a sworn
alliance for offence and defence with the Lombards),
were eager to become friends and allies of the
Romans. They accordingly straightway sent envoys
to Byzantium inviting the emperor to accept an
offensive and defensive alliance with them also. So
he without any hesitation gave them the pledges of
alliance. And at the request of the same envoys
twelve members of the senate also furnished them
with a sworn statement confirming this treaty. But
not long after this, when the Lombards according to
the terms of their alliance requested an army to
fight with them against the Gepaedes, the Emperor
Justinian sent it, laying the charge against the


Gepaedes that after the treaty they had transported ἡ


certain of the Sclaveni across the Ister River to the
detriment of the Romans.

Now the leaders of this army were, first, Justinus
and Justinian, the sons of Germanus; second,
Aratius; third, Suartuas, who had previously been
appointed by Justinian ruler over the Eruli (but
when those who had come from the island of Thule
rose against him, as told by me in the previous
narrative, he had returned in flight to the emperor,
and immediately became general of the Roman
forces in Byzantium); and, lastly, Amalafridas, a
Goth, grandson of Amalafrida the sister of Theoderic


1 Book VI. xv. 32-36. .


319


12


13


14


15


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


320


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxv. 11-15


king of the Goths, and son of Hermenefridus the
former ruler of the Thuringians. This man had
been brought by Belisarius to Byzantium with
Vittigis, and the emperor had appointed him a
Roman commander and betrothed his sister to


Auduin the ruler of the Lombards. But nota man _


of that army reached the Lombards except this
Amalafridas with his command. For the others, by
direction of the emperor, stopped at the city of
Ulpiana? in Illyricum, since a civil war had arisen
among the inhabitants of that place concerning those
matters over which the Christians fight among
themselves, as will be told by me in the treatise on
this subject.”

So the Lombards in full foree and accompanied by
Amalafridas came into the lands of the Gepaedes,
and when the Gepaedes encountered them a fierce
battle ensued in which the Gepaedes were defeated,
and they say that a vast number of them perished
in this engagement. Whereupon Auduin, the king
of the Lombards, sent some of his followers to
Byzantium, first to announce the good news to the
Emperor Justinian, since the enemy had been
vanquished, and, secondly, to reproach him because
the emperor’s army had not been present ip
accordance with the terms of their alliance, although


pie


such a host of Lombards had recently been sent to |


march with Narses against Totila and the Goths. —


Such was the course of these events.


1 Modern Lipljan.
* This promise seems not to have been fulfilled by
Procopius.


ὃ éu€udero—Tér0ovs LW: om. K.
321


16


17


18


19


21


22


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


> 4 ~ , \


a / ,
/


322


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII, xxv. 16-22


It was at this time that extraordinary earthquakes
occurred throughout Greece, both Boeotia and Achaea
and the country on the Crisaean Gulf! being badly
shaken. And countless towns and eight cities were
levelled to the ground, among which were Chaeronea
and Coronea and Patrae and all of Naupactus,? where
there was also great loss of life. And the earth was
rent asunder in many places and formed chasms.
Now some of these openings came together again so
that the earth presented the same form and
appearance as before, but in other places they
remained open, with the consequence that the
people in such places are not able to intermingle |
with each other except by making use of many |
detours. But in the gulf between Thessaly and
Boeotia * there was a sudden influx of the sea at the
city called Echinus and at Scarphea in Boeotia. And
advancing far over the land it deluged the towns
there and levelled them immediately. And for along
time the sea thus visited the mainland, so that
for a very considerable period it was possible for
men on foot to walk to the islands which are inside
this gulf, since the water of the sea, obviously, had
abandoned its proper place, and, strange to say,spread
over the land as far as the mountains which rise
there. But when the sea returned to its proper
place, fish were left on the ground, and since their
appearance was altogether unfamiliar to the people
of the country, they seemed a kind of prodigy.
And thinking them edible they picked them up to


1 A northern arm of the Gulf of Corinth.
2 Modern Lepanto. 3 The Maliac Gulf.


323


23


24


25


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


Ε] ΄ KX > / lal ἐς « / > 4

> n


Ud ΄
; , >
, > La > \ Ν 3 / > lal
e


324


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxv. 22-25


boil them, but when the heat of the fire touched
them the whole body was reduced to a liquid
putrefaction of an unbearable sort. But in that
locality where the so-called Cleft is located there
was a tremendous earthquake which caused more
loss of life than in all the rest of Greece, particularly
on account of a certain festival which they happened
to be celebrating there and for which many had
gathered in that place from all Greece.

In Italy the following took place. The people of
Croton and the soldiers who constituted the garrison
there, commanded by Palladius, wére being very
closely besieged by the Goths; and hard pressed as
they were by scarcity of provisions, they had many
times sent to Sicily without being detected by the
enemy, calling to witness the commanders of the
Roman army there, especially Artabanes, and saying
that, if they did not relieve them at the earliest
possible moment, they would, little as they wished
it, surrender themselves and the city to the enemy
not long thereafter. But no one came from there to
assist them. And the winter drew to a close, and
the seventeenth year ended in this war, the history 552 .n.
of which Procopius has written.


375


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XXVI


226


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxvi. τος


XXVI


But the emperor, learning of the situation at
Croton, sent to Greece and ordered the garrison of
Thermopylae to sail with all speed to Italy and bring
all the assistance in their power to the besieged in
Croton. And they acted accordingly, setting sail
with great haste; and chancing to find a favouring
wind, they put in unexpectedly at the harbour of
Croton. And the barbarians, upon seeing the fleet
all of a sudden, were plunged immediately into great
fear and in wild confusion broke up the siege. Now
some of them made their escape by ship to the
harbour of Tarentum, while others, going by land,
withdrew to Mt. Scylaeum. And this event humbled
the spirit of the Goths still more. In consequence
of this Ragnaris, a Goth of very great note, who
commanded the garrison at Tarentum, and Moras,
who commanded the guards in Acherontia, opened
negotiations, by the wish of their soldiers, with
Pacurius son of Peranius, commander of the Romans
in Dryus, and agreed that, on condition they should
receive pledges for their safety from the Emperor
Justinian, they would surrender themselves with
their commands to the Romans together with the
strongholds they had been set to guard. In order,
then, to confirm this agreement Pacurius journeyed
to Byzantium.

Narses now set out from Salones and moved
against Totila and the Goths with the whole Roman
army, which was an extraordinarily large one; for


327


11


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


328


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxvi. 5—11


he had received from the emperor an exceedingly
large sum of money, with which he was, first,
to gather a very formidable army and meet the
other requirements of the war, and, after that, to
pay the soldiers in Italy all the money which was
due to them from the past; for the emperor had
been delinquent in this matter for a long time, since
the soldiers were not receiving from the public
treasury, as was usual, the pay assigned to them; fur-
thermore, he was to bring pressure to bear also upon
those soldiers who had deserted to Totila, so that
they would be rendered tractable by this money and
reverse their choice of allegiance.

Indeed, though the Emperor Justinian had pre-
viously conducted this war very negligently, he made
the most notable preparation for it at the last. For
when Narses saw that he urgently desired him to
lead an expedition against Italy, he displayed an
ambition becoming to a general, declaring that on no
other condition would he obey the emperor’s com-
mand than that he should take with him forces
sufficient to the purpose. So by taking this position
he obtained from the emperor money and men and
arms in quantities worthy of the Roman empire, and
he himself displayed a most tireless enthusiasm
and so collected an adequate army. For he not
only took with him a great number of Roman
soldiers from Byzantium, but he also collected many
from the lands of Thrace and Illyricum. And John,
too, with his own army and that left by his father-


329


12


13


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


335?


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxvi. 11--13


in-law Germanus, accompanied him. Moreover,
Auduin, ruler of the Lombards, having been won
over by the Emperor Justinian by the use of much
money and in accordance with the treaty of alliance,
selected twenty-five hundred of his followers who
were capable warriors and sent them to fight with
the Romans ; and these were also attended by more
than three thousand fighting men as servants. And
he also had with him more than three thousand
of the Erulian nation, all horsemen, commanded by
Philemuth and others, besides great numbers of
Huns. Dagisthaeus too was there with jis followers,
having been released from prison for this purpose,
also Cabades, with many Persian deserters (this man
was son of Zames and grandson of Cabades the
Persian king, and has been mentioned in the previous
narrative! as having escaped from his uncle Chosroes
by the efforts of the “‘ chanaranges’ * and having come
long before to the land of the Romans). There
was also Asbadus, a young man of the race of the
Gepaedes and an especially active man, having with
him four hundred men of his race who were capable
warriors. Besides these there was Aruth of the
nation of the Eruli, who from boyhood had ad-
mired Roman ways and had made the daughter of
Mauricius son of Mundus his married wife, being
himself a most valiant fighter, and bringing with
him a large number of Eruli who were especially
distinguished in the perils of war. Finally there
was John surnamed the Glutton, whom I have men-
tioned in the preceding narrative,® bringing a large
force of able Roman soldiers.

1 Book I. xxiii. 7 ff.

2 A Persian title meaning ‘‘ general” ; cf. Book 1. ν, 4.

3 Book II. xix. 15, ete.


33!


14


15


16


17


18


19


20


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


*H 2 , « lol \ ‘

= -“" " .


332


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxvi. 14-20


Narses, for his part, was a man of princely generosity
and extraordinarily eager to help those who needed it,
and being clothed with great power by the emperor
he exercised his judgment the more freely regarding
those matters in which he was interested. Conse-
quently many commanders and soldiers as well had
in former times experienced his generosity. Natur-
ally, then, when he was appointed General against
Totila and the Goths, each and every one desired
most eagerly to serve under him, some wishing to
repay him for old favours, and others probably ex-
pecting, as was natural, to receive great gifts from
his hand. But the Eruli and the other barbarians
were particularly well disposed towards him, having
been especially well treated by him.

When they had reached a point very close to
Venetia, he sent a messenger to the rulers of the
Franks who commanded the fortresses there, demand-
ing that they allow his army free passage, as being
friends. But they said that they would by no means
concede this to Narses, not openly revealing the
real reason, but with all possible care concealing the
fact that it was in the interest of the Franks or
because of their good-will toward the Goths that
they were barring his passage, and putting forward
a kind of pretext which did not appear very plausible,
by saying that he came bringing with him Lombards

__ who were their bitterestenemies. Narses was atfirst |
7 _puzzled by this and enquired of the Italians who

were with him what should be done, but some men

brought the news that, even if the Franks permitted

them to pass through this country, they would still


333


21


23


24


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 ἀθρόους Hoeschel in margin: ἀθρόον MSS.
334


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxvi. 20-24


be utterly unable to get on from there to Ravenna,
nor could he march that way any farther than the
city of Verona. For Totila, they reported, had
gathered whatever was notable in the Gothic army,
and appointing as General over them Teias the
Goth, a conspicuously able warrior, had sent him
to the city of Verona, which was subject to the Goths,
for the purpose of preventing, as far as in him lay,
the Roman army from passing by. This was in fact
the case.

_ By the time Teias entered the city of Verona, he
had shut off entirely the road by which his enemy
must pass, having by artificial means made the land
which borders the Po River such that it was alto-
gether out of the question to travel in it or through
it; for he had in some places constructed brush
entanglements and ditches and gullies, in others
sloughs of the greatest depth and certain expanses
of swampy ground, while he himself with the Gothic
army was maintaining close guard so as to engage
with the Romans if they should make any attempt
to pass by that road. Now Totila had devised these
things with the idea that the Romans would never
be able, on the one hand, to make the march along
the coast of the Ionian Gulf, for a great number of
navigable rivers have their mouths there and make
the route entirely impassable; and, on the other
hand, he thought that they certainly did not have
ships in such numbers as to ferry the whole army in
a body across the Ionian Gulf, while if they should
sail in small groups, he himself with the remainder
of the Gothic army would with no trouble stop the
disembarkation on each occasion. Such was the
purpose of Totila in giving these orders, which were
being duly executed by Teias.


335


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


> / 6 ¢ 1 a 2 A ἠδ \ wv > 0 fa) a

1 ἅτε Haury: αὐτός MSS. : αὐτῷ Maltretus.


* οὕσπερ L: obmep V.


336


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxvi. 24—xxvii. 3


Narses thus found himselt completely bewildered,
but John, the nephew of Vitalian, being familiar with
these regions, advised him to proceed with the whole
army along the coast, the inhabitants of this district,
as previously stated; being subject to them, while
some of the ships and a large number of small boats
accompanied them. For whenever they should come
to the mouth of a river, they would throw a bridge
of these boats across the river’s current, and thus
render the crossing comparatively easy. Such was
the advice of John, and Narses was persuaded, and
in this way made the journey to Ravenna with the
whole army.


XXVII


Waite these things were going on as described,
the following took place. Ildigisal the Lombard
has been mentioned in the preceding narrative? as
a personal enemy of Auduin, who was the ruler of |
these barbarians (indeed the kingship belonged to |
this man by birth, but Auduin had taken it from
him by violent means); he now escaped from his
native land and set out for Byzantium. And when
he arrived there the Emperor Justinian treated him
with very particular consideration and appointed him
commander of one of the companies of guards as-
signed to the palace, which they call “scholae.’’?
And he was followed by no fewer than three hundred


1 Chap. xxiv. 8.
* Book VII. xxxy. 19, where he is called Ildiges.
i.e. ‘*schools.”


337


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


338


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxvii. 3-8


able warriors of the Lombard nation, who at first
lived together in Thrace. Auduin accordingly de-
manded Ildigisal from the Emperor Justinian on
the ground that he was a friend and ally of the
Romans, claiming as payment for his friendship the
betrayal of the suppliant to him. But Justinian
refused absolutely to give him up.

Later on, however, Ildigisal began to make the
complaint that both his rank and his maintenance
were not commensurate with his worth and the
good name of the Romans and appeared to be ex-
ceedingly dissatisfied. Now this was observed by
Goar, a Goth, who had long ago come there from
Dalmatia as a captive taken in this war, at the time
when Vittigis, king of the Goths, was carrying on
the war against the Romans; and being an im-
petuous and exceedingly active fellow, he was in
constant rebellion against the fate which was upon
him. But when the Goths, after the overthrow of
Vittigis, planned a revolution and took up arms
against the emperor, he was clearly caught working
against the state. And being condemned to exile,
he proceeded to the city of Antinoiis in Egypt,
where he spent a long time under this punishment.
But later the emperor, moved by pity, brought him
back to Byzantium. This Goar, then, seeing Ildigisal
in a state of discontent, as I have said, kept after
him without interruption and tried to persuade him
to take to flight, promising that he would leave
Byzantium with him. And since this plan pleased
them, they fled suddenly with only a few followers,
and upon reaching the Thracian city of Apri, they


339


10


ll


12


13


14


15


16


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


340


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxvii. 8-16


joined forces with the Lombards who were there.
Next they came by chance upon the imperial horse
pastures and took from them a great number of
horses, which they took with them as they pro-
ceeded.

But when the emperor learned of this, he sent
into all Thrace and Illyricum and instructed all
commanders and soldiers to use every means in
their power to check these runaways. And first
of all a small number of the Huns called Cutrigurs
(men who had migrated from their ancestral abodes,
as I have stated not long since,! “and settled in
Thrace with the emperor’s permission) came to an
engagement with these fugitives. But they were
defeated in battle and some of them fell, while the
rest were routed and did not continue the pursuit,
but remained where they were. Thus Ildigisal and
Goar with their followers passed through the whole
of Thrace, not molested by anyone. But upon
reaching Illyricum they found a Roman army care-
fully gathered to oppose them. Now this army was
commanded by Aratius, Rhecithangus, Leonianus,
Arimuth, and others, all of whom happened to
have been riding the whole day. And upon reaching
a wooded place about nightfall they had stopped,
intending to bivouac and so pass the night there.
So these commanders gave their soldiers the usual
orders, instructing them to care for their horses and
to refresh themselves beside the river which flowed
by, thus repairing the fatigue of the journey. They
themselves meanwhile took with them three or four
bodyguards each and in a concealed place began to


2 Chap. xix. 7.
34!


17


18


19


20


22


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


342


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxvii. 16-22


drink from the river ; for they were naturally suffering
from severe thirst. But the men of Goar and lidigisal
who were near by had sent out scouts and found
this out. So falling unexpectedly upon them as they
drank they slew every man of them, and thereafter
they conducted their march as they pleased without
further fear. For the soldiers, finding themselves
without commanders, fell into a state of perplexity,
and being completely at a loss began to withdraw.
So Goar and I]digisal made their escape in this way
and came to the Gepaedes.

Now it so happened that a certain man named
Ustrigothus had fled from the Gepaedes to the
Lombards in the following circumstances. Ele-
mundus, who had been king of the Gepaedes, had
been taken from the world by disease not long
before, this Ustrigothus being his only surviving
child; but Thorisin had forced him aside (for he
was still a stripling) and had thus secured the


power. Consequently the boy, having no means of ~


defending himself against the aggressor, departed
from his native land and made off to the Lombards,
who were then at war with the Gepaedes. Buta
little later a reconciliation was effected by the
Gepaedes with both the Emperor Justinian and the
Lombard nation, and they bound themselves by the
most solemn oaths that from that time forth they
would preserve an eternal friendship with each
other. And as soon as the details of the agree-
ment had been most firmly fixed, both the Emperor
Justinian and Auduin, ruler of the Lombards, sent
to Thorisin, the ruler of the Gepaedes, demanding
the surrender of Ildigisal as a common enemy, ask-


343


23


25


27


28


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


vba V.


344


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxvii. 22-29


ing that he make the betrayal of his suppliant the
first proof of his friendship to them.

He then conferred on the situation with the
notable men of the Gepaedes and eagerly asked
whether he was bound to fulfil the demand of the
two sovereigns. And they forbade him absolutely
to do so, firmly declaring that it was better for the
nation of the Gepaedes to perish forthwith with
their women and their whole stock rather than to
become polluted by such an impiety. Upon hearing
this Thorisin was plunged into uncertainty. For
neither could he perform the deed against the will
of his subjects, nor did he wish to revive once more
a war against the Romans and Lombards which had
been brought to an end with great labour and ex-
penditure of time. Later, however, he thought of
the following plan. He sent to Auduin and de-
manded the surrender of Ustrigothus, son of Ele-
mundus, urging him to commit a sin equal to the
one urged upon himself, and inviting him to betray
one suppliant in exchange for the other. In this way
he hoped that he would frustrate their demand
through dread of a similar transgression and would
immediately catch Auduin himself by the proposed
illicit compact. So when they had reached these
decisions and understood clearly that neither Lom-
bards nor Gepaedes were willing to have any share
in the pollution, they did nothing at all openly, but
each of them put the enemy of the other to death
by stealth. But as to how they did this, I shall not
undertake to tell; for the accounts of this matter


7 μέν Maltretus: μὲν οὖν MSS.


345


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XXVIII


, > Ῥ ΄ o£. > 8 [Xa

“a > / / v \
“- , Pe, ANG , αὐ

n , nr


γ᾽ A \ fa a > , 3


346


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIIL. xxvii. 29—xxviii. 4


do not agree with each other, but differ widely, as
is natural in matters of a very secret nature. Such
was the end of the story of Ildigisal and Ustrigothus.


XXVIII


Wuen ! the forces of Narses reached the city of
Ravenna, they were joined by the generals Valerian
and Justinus and whatever of the Roman army was
left in that region. Now when they had spent nine
days’ time at Ravenna, Usdrilas,a Goth and an excep-
tionally capable warrior, commander of the garrison at
Ariminum, wrote to Valerian as follows. “Though
you have filled the world with talk of you and have
already captivated the whole of Italy with the
visions of your power, and have assumed an air of
supercilious pride quite above the level of mortal
men, and though you have in this way frightened
the Goths, as you fondly imagine, you nevertheless
now sit in Ravenna without at all shewing your own
forces to your enemy, through your policy of keeping
hidden—no doubt as a way of guarding still this
proud spirit of yours—but using a heterogeneous
horde of barbarians with which to ruin the land
which belongs to you in no sense whatever. But
arise with all speed and henceforth essay the deeds
of war; shew yourselves to the Goths, and do not
tantalize us longer with mere hope, since we have
been awaiting the spectacle a long time.” Such was
the message of the letter.

When this was brought to Narses and seen by
him, he laughed at the effrontery of the Goths and


1 The narrative is resumed from chap. xxvi.


347


VOL. V. M


55


©


10


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 αὐτοῖς Hoeschel in margin: αὐτούς MSS.


348


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxviii. 4-10


immediately prepared his whole army for departure,
leaving a garrison with Justinus at Ravenna. But
when they came close to the city of Ariminum, they
found that the road from that point was not easy,
since the Goths had not long before damaged the
bridge there. For the river which flows by Ariminum
is scarcely passable for a single unarmed man
making his way on foot over the bridge with great
labour and difficulty, and that too when no one is
harassing him or disputing the passage ;! but for a
large number of men, particularly when under arms,
and above all when confronted by an enemy, it is
impossible by any means whatever to make that
crossing. Consequently Narses went to the site of
the bridge accompanied by a few, and being
«ἰβοτους ΕΣ perplexed, he was considering carefully
what solution he could possibly find for the difficulty.
And Usdrilas also came thither, bringing some of
his horsemen, lest anything that was done should
escape him. Then one of the followers of Narses
drew his bow and shot at them, and he hit one of
their horses and killed it outright. And the company
of Usdrilas for the moment departed from there in
haste and got inside the fortifications, but immedi-
ately rushed out against the Romans through another
gate, bringing with them others of their most warlike
men, in order to fall upon them unexpectedly and
destroy Narses forthwith. For in reconnoitring the 17
crossing for the army he had already reached the
other side of the river. But certain of the Eruli ,
by some chance encountered them there and slew


1 The splendid bridge of Augustus over the Marecchia (anc.
Fluvius Ariminus), which still stands, must have been very
much damaged to justify this statement of Procopius.


349


ll


12


13


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


Hoeschel.


959


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxviii. 10-13


Usdrilas, and since he was identified by a Roman
they cut off his head, and coming into the Roman
camp displayed it to Narses and so strengthened
the courage of all; for they inferred from what had
happened that Heaven was hostile to the Goths,
seeing that in seeking to ambush the general of
their enemy they themselves, not through any plot
or preconceived plan, had suddenly lost their own
commander.

But Narses, in spite of the fall of Usdrilas,
commander of the garrison at Ariminum, pushed
forward with the army. For he didnot wish to
trouble Ariminum nor any other place held by the
enemy, in order that no time might be wasted by
him and the accomplishment of the most important
thing be crowded out by that which was incidental
to his task. The enemy, for their part, now that
their commander had fallen, remained quiet and
sought no longer to block his way, so that Narses
without a fear spanned the river with a bridge and
took the entire army across without any trouble.
From there he left the Flaminian Way and went to
the left. For the place called Petra Pertusa, whose
naturally strong fortress has been described by me
in the previous narrative,' had been occupied by his
opponents long before, and consequently the road
was closed to the Romans and it was out of the
question to pass through, as far at least as the


Flaminian Way was concerned. Narses accordingly 2


left the shorter road on this account and went by
the road which could be travelled.


1 Book VI. xi. 10-14,


35!


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XXIX


352


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxix. 1-6


XXIX


Sucu were the events of the march of the Roman
army. Now Totila, having already learned what
had taken place in Venetia, at first remained quiet
in the vicinity of Rome awaiting Teias and his army.
But when they had come and only two thousand
horsemen were still missing, Totila, without awaiting
these, started on the march with all the rest of the
army in order to encounter the enemy in a suitable
place. But he learned on this march both what had
befallen Usdrilas and also that his enemy had passed
by Ariminum, whereupon he crossed the whole of
Tuscany, and upon reaching the mountains called
the Apennines established his camp there and
remained close to a village which the inhabitants
eall Taginae.1_ And the Roman army led by Narses
also made camp on the Apennines not long afterward
and remained in that position, about one hundred
stades distant from the camp of their opponents, in
a place which is level but surrounded by many hills
close by, the very place where once, they say,
Camillus as general of the Romans defeated in battle
and destroyed the host of the Gauls.2 And the
place even to my day bears witness to this deed in
its name and preserves the memory of the disaster
which befell the Gauls, being called Busta Gallorum.*
For the Latins call the remains of the funeral pyre
busta.” And there are great numbers of mounded
tombs of their bodies in this place.


1 More properly Tadinum ; modern Gualdo Tadino.

2 This statement is quite untrue as it stands.

* I.e. *‘ Sepulchres of the Gauls.” Here again Procopius is
far from the truth. The Busta Gallorum of Livy V. xlviii
were in the city of Rome. 353


ae |


©


10


ll


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


354


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxix. 6-11


Now Narses immediately sent from there some of
his associates, bidding them exhort Tetila to lay
aside warfare and at last make plans for peace, for
he must realize that as ruler of only a small number
of men recently banded together by no law, he would
not be able to contend for very long with the whole
Roman empire. But he told them this also, that, if
they saw that Totila was determined to fight, they
should immediately urge him to appoint a definite
day for the battle. These envoys accordingly came |
before Totila and carried out their instructions.
And he in a spirit of bravado -began to boast
that by all means they must fight, but the envoys
rejoined quickly, “ Very well, good Sir, appoint some
definite time for the engagement.” Whereupon he
immediately said, “At the end of eight days let us
match our strength.” So the envoys returned to
Narses and reported their agreement, whereupon
he, suspecting that Totila was planning treachery,
made preparations to fight on the following day.
And in fact he was right in his judgment of the
purpose of his enemy. For on the succeeding day
Totila was at hand self-announced with his whole
army. And immediately the two armies took up
positions opposite one another, not more than two
bowshots apart.

Now there was a small hill there which both were
eager to occupy, thinking that it was favourably
situated for their purposes, both in order to shoot
at their opponents from a high point of vantage,
and also because the ground being hilly thereabout,
as I have previously stated, it was impossible for
anyone to encircle the Roman camp on that side


1 τακτήν A: ravrhy V. 2 +: Maltretas : ro: MSS.
355


12


13


14


15


16


17


18


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


356


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxix. 11-18


and get behind it except by following a single path
which happened to skirt the hill. Consequently
both of them were bound to consider it of particular
importance; the Goths, in order that they might
surround their enemy during the engagement and
so place them between two forces, and the Romans,
in order that they might not have this thing
happen to them. But Narses had anticipated the
Goths by choosing fifty infantrymen from a cohort
and sending them late at night to occupy and hold
the hill. And they, finding none of the enemy in the
way, went there and remained quiet. Now there is
a certain water-course in front of the hill, running
along the path which I have just mentioned and
opposite the spot where the Goths had made their
camp, and it was at this point that the fifty took
up their position, standing shoulder to shoulder and
arrayed in the form of a phalanx as well as the
limited space permitted.

After day came, Totila saw what had happened
and was eager to dislodge them. So he immediately
sent a troop of horsemen against them with orders
to drive them out froin there as quickly as possible.
The horsemen accordingly charged upon them with
great hubbub and shouting, intending to capture
them at the first cry, but the Romans drew up
together into a small space and, making a barrier
with their shields and thrusting forward their spears,
held their ground. Then the Goths came on,
charging in haste and thus getting themselves into
disorder, while the fifty, pushing with their shields
and thrusting very rapidly with their spears, which
were nowhere allowed to interfere one with the
other, defended themselves most vigorously against


357


19


to


23


24


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


358


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxix, 18-24


their assailants; and they purposely made a din
with their shields, terrifying the horses, on the one
hand, by this means, and the men, on the other,
with the points of their spears, And the horses
became excited, because they were greatly troubled
both by the rough ground and by the din of the
shields, and also because they could not get through
anywhere, while the men at the same time were
gradually worn out, fighting as they were with men
packed so closely together and not giving an inch
of ground, and trying to manage horses that did
not in the least obey their urging. So they were
repulsed in the first attack and rode back. And a
second time they made the attempt and retired with
the same experience. Then, after faring thus many
times, they no longer continued the attack, but
Totila substituted another troop for this work. And
when they fared as their predecessors had, still
others undertook the task. So after Totila had in
this way sent in many troops and had accomplished
nothing with «all of them, he finally gave up.

Thus the fifty won great renown for valour, but
two of them distinguished themselves particularly in
this action, Paulus and Ansilas, who had leaped out
from the phalanx and made a display of valour
surpassing all others. For they drew their swords
and laid them on the ground, and then stretched
their bows and kept shooting with a most telling
aim at the enemy. And they destroyed many men
and many horses as well, as long as their quivers
still held arrows. At length, when their missiles had
now entirely failed them, seizing their swords and
holding their shields before them, all by themselves
they warded off the assailants. And whenever any


359


26


26


27


28


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


2 ὅπερ Hoeschel: ὅσπερ MSS.
360


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxix. 25-xxx.1


of their opponents on horseback came at them with
their spears, they immediately broke off the heads of
the spears with a blow of their swords. But after
they had in this manner checked the onrushes of the
enemy many times, it came about that the sword
of one of them (this was Paulus) was bent double by
the frequent cutting of the wooden shafts and so
was utterly useless. This then he immediately
threw on the ground, and seizing the spears with
both hands he would wrench them from his as-
sailants. And by wrenching four spears from the
enemy in this way in the sight of_all he made
himself the chief cause of their abandoning their
attempt. Wherefore, in consequence of the exploit,
Narses made him a personal guard of his own from
that time on.


XXX


Sucu was the progress of these events. Both
armies now prepared for action. And Narses
gathered his army in a small space and exhorted
them as follows. ‘“ When an army is entering the
combat with its strength evenly matched with that
of the enemy, a long speech of exhortation and
encouragement would perhaps be necessary of the
sort which would inspire the men with ardour, in
order that, being superior to the enemy in this
respect they might find the issue of the combat
wholly what they wish. But in your case, my
men, you who have to fight against an army vastly
inferior to you in valour, in numbers, and in
every sort of equipment besides, I think nothing


8 és τήν Haury: τήν MSS.


361


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


ar ᾿ - fa! ,


or


7)


1 ἐστίν Hoeschel: om. MSS.
362


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxx. 1-6


further is necessary than that we enter this engage-
ment with God propitious to us. Do you, then,
invoke His alliance with unceasing prayer, and so
fare forth with great contempt to achieve the over-
throw of these robbers, who, being originally slaves
of the great emperor and then turning fugitives and
setting a tyrant over themselves who was a worthless
fellow from the common rabble, have been able for
a certain season to work havoc in the Roman empire
by their thievish actions. And yet one would have
supposed that these men would not even have
arrayed themselves against us now, if they had
considered the probabilities. Yet they are playing
a desperate game with an irrational sort of boldness
and displaying the rashness of frenzy, and in this
spirit they dare to embrace a death which obviously
awaits them, not shielding themselves by a reason-
able hope, nor even looking forward to see what
will fall to their lot through a strange and un-
expected turn of events, but being indisputably led
on by God to the punishment earned by their
administration of the state. For such men as have
been condemned to suffer by the powers above
move on to their punishment unaided. But aside
from this, while you for your part are entering this
combat in defence of a lawful government, they are
in revolt against the laws and fighting a battle of
desperation, not expecting to transmit anything they
hold to any successors, but well assured that it will
all perish with them and that the hope on which
they live is ephemeral. Consequently they deserve
thoroughly to be despised. For those who are not
organized under law and good government are
bereft of all virtue, and the victory, naturally, is


363


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


10


11


12


364


——  tttst—“<i‘“‘; ; OCC~™S ee


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxx. 6-12


already decided; for victory is not accustomed to
range itself against the virtues.” Such was the
exhortation which Narses made.

And Totila likewise, seeing his men in abject
terror of the Roman army, called them all together
and spoke as follows: “ Fellow-soldiers, I have
brought you together here with the purpose of
making a final exhortation. For no other ad-
monition will, I believe, be necessary after this
battle, but the result will certainly be that the
war will be decided on one day. For so thoroughly
have both we and the Emperor Justinian become
exhausted and stripped of all power through being
subjected to toils and battles and hardships for an
exceedingly long time, and so completely have we
found ourselves unable to meet the demands of the
war, that, if we shall overcome our opponents in this
present engagement, they will be utterly unable to
come back in the future, while if we meet with any
reverse in this battle, no hope will be left the Goths
of renewing the fight, but either side will have in
defeat a thoroughly sufficient excuse for inaction.
For when men once give up the fight against
overwhelming obstacles, they no longer have the
courage to return to them, but even when they are
perhaps strongly impelled to do so by actual need,
their hearts rebel, for the memory of their failure
makes their spirit quail. Having heard this, my
men, play the brave part with all your might,
without holding any fighting power in reserve for
some other occasion, and put your whole strength
into the struggle without trying to save your bodies
for another danger. And let there be on your part


365


13


14


15


16


17


18


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


366


i a


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIIL. xxx. 12-18


no sparing of arms or of horses, for they will never
again be useful to you. For fortune, having de-
molished everything else, has preserved only the
ultimate hope for this day. Tune your hearts, then,
to a high courage, and make ready for deeds of
noble daring. For when hope hangs by a thread,
as it now does with you, the only safe course will
be not to lose courage for the briefest moment
of time. For after the point of the crisis has passed,
zeal becomes for ever worthless, even though it
be of an altogether immoderate sort, since the nature
of things has no place for valour after the event, for
once the need has passed, everything which follows
must necessarily be too late. I believe, then, that
_ you should enter the struggle making the best use
of every opportunity which presents itself in action,
so that you may be enabled also to enjoy the
benefits to come from it. And you understand well
that in the present situation he who flees thoroughly
deserves his own destruction. For men abandon
their post and flee for no other reason than that
they may live ; but if flight can be seen to involve
the death of the fugitive, he who faces the danger
will be in much greater safety than the man who
flees. But the vast number of the enemy is worthy
only to be despised, seeing that they present a
collection of men from the greatest possible number
of nations. For an alliance which is patched to-
gether from many sources gives no firm assurance
of either loyalty or power, but being split up in
nationality it is naturally divided likewise in purpose.
And do not think that Huns and Lombards and
Eruli, hired by them with I know not how much
money, will ever endanger themselves for them to


367


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XXXI


1 ἄτιμος Hoeschel in margin: ἄτιμον MSS.
368


ee


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxx. 18—xxxi. 4


the point of death. For life with them is not so
cheap as to take second place to silver in their
estimation, but I well know that after making
an appearance of fighting they will desert with all
speed, either because they have received their pay, or
as carrying out the orders of their own commanders.
For even things that seem most delightful,—to say
nothing of what happens in war—if they do not turn
out in accordance with men’s wishes, but if they are
forced or hired or subject to any other compulsion,
then such things will come no longer to be accounted
pleasant, but by reason of the compulsion appear
detestable. Remembering these things let us with
all enthusiasm engage with the enemy.”


XXXI


Tuus then spoke Totila. And the armies drew
together for battle and arrayed themselves as
follows. All the forces in each army took their
stand facing the enemy, making the phalanx as
deep as possible and the front very long. And the
Roman left wing was held by Narses and John near -
the hill, and with them was the flower of the Roman
army ; for each of them had, apart from the other
soldiers, a great following of spearmen and guards
and barbarian Huns, all chosen for their valour;
and on the right were arrayed Valerian and John
the Glutton along with Dagisthaeus and all the rest


369


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


379


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxxi. 4-11


of the Romans. Furthermore, they placed on both
wings about eight thousand unmounted bowmen
from the regular troops. But at the centre of the
phalanx Narses had placed the Lombards and the
nation of the Eruli and all the other barbarians,
causing them to dismount from their horses and
making them infantry, in order that, if it should
chance that they turned cowards in the engagement
or deserted, they might not be too eager to fly.
Now Narses had set the extreme left wing of the
Roman front at an angle, placing fifteen hundred
cavalry there. And the instructions previously
given provided that the five hundred, on the one
hand, should rush to the rescue the moment that
any of the Romans chanced to be driven back, while
the thousand, at the moment when the enemy’s
infantry began action, were to get behind them
immediately and thus place them between two
forces. And Totila arrayed his army in the same
way opposite his enemy. Then going along his own
battle-line he kept encouraging his soldiers with
voice and expression and urging them to boldness.
Narses likewise did the same thing, holding in the
air bracelets and necklaces and golden bridles on
poles and displaying certain other incentives to
bravery in the coming struggle. For some time,
however, neither army began battle, but both
remained quiet awaiting the assault of their
opponents.

But later on one man of the Gothic army named


37!


12


14


15


16


17


18


-"
Y


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


>


372


Seine mei


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxxi. 11-18


Coceas, who had a great reputation as an active ᾿


fighter, rode his horse out and came clese to the
Roman army and uttered a challenge, if anyone was
willing to come forth against him in single combat.
Now this Coccas happened to be one of the Roman
soldiers who had previously deserted to Totila.
And immediately one of the spearmen of Narses
stood forth against him, a man of Armenian birth
named Anzalas, who was likewise mounted on a
horse. Coccas then made the first rush and charged
his foe in order to smite him with his spear, aiming
the weapon at his belly. But Anzalas, by suddenly
turning his horse aside, caused the charge of his
enemy to be futile. By this manceuvre he was
placed on his enemy’s flank and he now thrust his
spear into his left side. And Coccas fell from his
horse to the ground and lay there a dead man,
Whereupon a tremendous shout arose from the
Roman army, but even then neither side began any
fighting.

But Totila now went alone into the space between
the armies, not in order to engage in single combat,
but in order to prevent his opponents from using
the present opportunity. For he had learned that
the two thousand Goths who had been missing were
now drawing near, and so he sought to put off the
engagement until their arrival by doing as follows.
First of all, he was not at all reluctant to make an
exhibition to the enemy of what manner of man he
was. For the armour in which he was clad was
abundantly plated with gold and the ample adorn-
ments which hung from his cheek-plates as well as
from his helmet and spear were not only of purple


373


|


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


21


XXXII


374


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxxi. 18—xxxii. 2


but in other respects befitting a king, marvellous in
their abundance. And he himself, sitting upon a
very large horse, began to perform the dance under
arms skilfully between the armies. For he wheeled
his horse round in a circle and then turned him
again to the other side and so made him run round
and round. And as he rode he hurled his javelin
into the air and caught it again as it quivered above
him, then passed it rapidly from hand to hand, shifting
it with consummate skill, and he gloried in his
practice in such matters, falling back on his
shoulders, spreading his legs and leaning from side
to side, like one who has been instructed with
precision in the art of dancing from childhood.
By these tactics he wore away the whole early part
of the day. And wishing to prolong indefinitely
the postponement of the battle, he sent to the
Roman army saying that he wished to confer with
them, But Narses declared that he must be trifling,
seeing that he had been set on fighting at the time
when there was opportunity to make proposals, but
now, upon reaching the battle-field, he came forward
to parley.
XXXII


Meanwuite the two thousand Goths arrived; and
when Totila had learned that they had reached the
stockade, seeing that it was time for the morning meal,
he himself went off to his own tent and the Goths
began to break up their formation and retire. And
when Totila reached his quarters, he found the two
thousand already present. He then commanded


3 xal—éxarepa V: om. A.


375


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA. ___-


376


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII, xxxii. 2-7


all to take their meal, and changing his entire
equipment he armed himself with all care with.
the private soldier’s equipment and led the army
out straightway against his enemy, thinking that
he would fall upon them unexpectedly and thus
overwhelm them. But even so he did not find
the Romans unprepared. For Narses had feared,
as actually happened, that the enemy would fall
upon them when they were not expecting it, and so
he had given orders that not a single man should
either sit down to lunch or go off to sleep or even
remove his cuirass, nor yet take his~bridle off his
horse. However, he did not allow them to be
altogether without food, but commanded them to
eat a small meal in ranks and with their equipment
on, meanwhile maintaining a sharp look-out con-
stantly and expecting the attack of the enemy.
However, they were no longer arrayed in the same
formation as before, for the Roman wings, in each
of which four thousand unmounted horsemen had
taken their stand, were moved forward at Narses’
command so as to form acrescent. But the Gothic
infantry were all placed in a body in the rear of the
cavalry, in order that, if the horsemen should be
routed, the fugitives might fall back upon them and
be saved, and all could then advance immediately
together.

Now orders had been given to the entire Gothic
army that they should use neither bow nor any
other weapon in this battle except their spears.
Consequently it came about that Totila was out-
generalled by his own folly; for in entering this
battle he was led, by what I do not know, to throw


377


10


ll


12


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


378


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxxii. 7-12


against his opponents his own army with inadequate
equipment and outflanked and in no respect a
mateh for their antagonists. For the Romans, on
the one hand, made use of each weapon in the fight-
ing according to the particular need of the moment,
shooting with bows or thrusting with spears or
wielding swords, or using any other weapon which
was convenient and suitable at a given point, some
of them mounted on horses and others entering the
combat on foot, their numbers proportioned to the
needs of the situation, so that at one point they
could carry out an encircling movement around the
enemy, and at another receive a charge and with
their shields stop short the attack. The cavalry of
the Goths, on the other hand, leaving their infantry
behind, and trusting only to their spears, made their
charge with reckless impetuosity ; and once in the
midst of the fray they suffered for their own folly.
For in making their charge against their enemy’s
centre they had, before they realized it, placed them-
selves in between the eight thousand infantry, and
being raked by their bowshots from either side
they gave up immediately, since the bowmen kept
gradually turning both the wings of their front
so as to form the crescent which I have mentioned
above. Consequently the Goths lost many men as
well as many horses in this phase of the encounter
before they had ever engaged with their opponents,
and only after they had experienced very heavy
losses did they with difficulty finally reach the ranks
of their enemy.

At this point I cannot admire any of the Romans
or of their barbarian allies more than the others. For
they all shewed a common enthusiasm and displayed


379
VOL. Vv. N


13


14


16


17


18


19


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


380


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxxii. 12-19


the same valour and energy in action, for each of them
received the enemy’s attack with the utmost vigour
and repulsed the assault. And it was now toward
evening when each of the two armies suddenly began
to move, the Goths in retreat and the Romans in
pursuit. For the Goths could no longer hold out
against the onslaught of their enemy, but began to
give ground before their attacks, and finally turned
precipitately, terrified by their great numbers and
their perfect order. And they gave not a thought to
resistance, being as filled with terror as if some appari-
tions of the air had fallen upon them or as if Heaven
were warring against them. But when shortly they
reached their own infantry, their misfortune was
doubled and trebled. For they did not come to them
in an orderly retreat, as with the purpose of recover-
ing their breath and renewing the fight with their
assistance, as is customary; indeed they had no
intention either of throwing back their pursuers by
a massed attack or of undertaking a counter pursuit
or any other military manceuvre, but they arrived in
such disorder that some of the men were actually
destroyed by the onrushing cavalry. Consequently
the infantry did not open intervals to receive them
nor stand fast to rescue them, but they all began to
flee precipitately with the cavalry, and in the rout
they kept killing each other just as in a battle at
night. Meanwhile the Roman army, profiting by
their panic, continued to kill without mercy all who
fell in their way, while their victims offered no
defence nor dared look them in the face, but gave
themselves up to their enemy to treat as they


3 αὐτούς Hoeschel in margin: αὐτοῖς MSS.


381


21


22


23


24


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


ae
/ lal
\ n , la)

“HS \ 2 e / > Lol ᾽ 4


/ » > lal ae Ν PA
nw , "
rn ,

382


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxxii, 19-24


wished ; so thoroughly had terror settled upon them
and panic possessed them.

Six thousand of the Goths perished in this battle,
while great numbers put themselves into the hands
of their opponents. These the Romans for the
moment made prisoners, but a little later they slew
them. And not Goths alone were destroyed, but
also great numbers of the old Roman soldiers who
had earlier detached themselves from the Roman
army and deserted, as I have told in the previous
narrative, to Totila and the Goths. But all the
soldiers of the Gothic army who liad the fortune
neither to perish nor to come under the hand of
their enemy were able to hide or to flee, according
as each could avail himself of horse or foot or good
luck so as to find opportunity for the one or a place
for the other.

Such was the conclusion of this battle, and com-
plete darkness was already settling down. But
Totila was in flight through the night accompanied
by not more than five men, one of whom chanced
to be Scipuar, pursued by some of the Romans who
did not know that he was Totila; among these was
Asbadus of the Gepaedes. This man had drawn
close to Totila and was charging him with the
purpose of thrusting his spear into his back. But
a Gothic youth of the household of Totila, who was
following his fleeing master, outraged at what was
taking place, cried aloud, ‘What is this, you dog?
Are you rushing to smite your own master?” Then
Asbadus thrust his spear with all his strength at


1 Book VII. xi. 7, etc.


3 ὑπό Haury: om. MSS.
383


~~)


25


27


28


29


30


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


384


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxxii. 24-30


Totila, but he himself was wounded in the foot by
Scipuar and remained there. And Scipuar was
wounded in turn by one of the pursuers and stopped,
whereupon those who had been making the pursuit
with Asbadus, four in number, gave up the chase in
order to save him, and turned back with him. But
the escort of Totila, thinking that the enemy were
still pursuing them, rode forward without pausing,
taking him along with great determination, though
mortally wounded and fainting, for necessity com-
pelled them to that headlong flight. So after
covering eighty-four stades they came to a place
ealled Caprae.t Here they rested from travel and
endeavoured to treat the wound of Totila, who
not long afterwards completed the term of his life.
And there his followers buried him in the earth and
departed.

Such was the conclusion of the reign and the life
of Totila, who had ruled the Goths eleven years.
But the end which came to him was not worthy of
his past achievements, for everything had gone well
with the man before that, and his end was not
commensurate with his deeds. But here again
Fortune was obviously disporting herself and tearing
human affairs to shreds by way of making a display
of her own perverse nature and unaccountable will ;
for she had endowed Totila of her own free will )
with prosperity for no particular reason for a long \
time, and then after this fashion smote the man with
cowardice and destruction at the present time for no ©
fitting cause. But these things, I believe, have never /


1 Modern Caprara?


385


31


32


33


34


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 γοῦν Hoeschel in margin: γάρ MSS.
386


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII, xxxii. 30-34


been comprehensible to man, nor will they ever
become so at any future time. And yet there is
always much talk on this matter and opinions are
being for ever bandied about according to each
man’s taste, as he seeks comfort for his ignorance in
an explanation which seems reasonable. But J shall
return to the previous narrative.

The Romans, indeed, did not know that Totila
had been thus taken from the world, until a
certain woman of the Gothic race told them and
pointed out the grave. But when they heard it
they did not think the story sound, and so they
came to the spot and with no hesitation dug out
the grave and brought up from it the corpse of
Totila; then, they say, after recognizing him and
satisfying their curiosity with this sight, they again
buried him in the earth and immediately reported
the whole matter to Narses.

But some say that Totila’s death and this battle
happened otherwise than I have told it; and it has
seemed to me not improper to record this version.
For these say that the retreat of the Gothic army
did not take place in any strange and unaccountable
manner, but while some of the Romans were shoot-
ing from a distance, a missile from a bow suddenly
struck Totila, but not by the purpose of the man
who had sent it, for Totila was armed in the fashion
of a simple soldier and the place in the phalanx
where he stood had been chosen at random; for he
did not wish to be manifest to his enemy, nor would
he, of course, expose himself to attack; but some
chance prepared this fate for him and directed the


387


an
}


35


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XXXITI


1 μεῖναι A, V pr. m. corr. : εἶναι V pr. m.


388


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxxii. 34—xxxiiiz.


shaft to the man’s body. Then he, having suffered
a mortal wound and being tortured with intense
pain, withdrew from the phalanx with a few men
and moved slowly away. And as far as Caprae he
endured the suffering and continued to ride his
horse, but there he fainted and after that remained
there to care for his wound, and not long afterwards
the final day of his life came upon him. Meanwhile
the Gothic army, not being in any case a match for
their opponents, upon seeing also that their com-
mander had been unexpectedly rendered unfit for
battle, became thunderstruck to think that Totila
alone among them had been mortally wounded with
no design on the part of the enemy, and consequently
they became alarmed and discouraged and were
plunged into terror which had no bounds and began
to retreat in that disgraceful manner. But concern-
ing these matters let each man speak according to
his knowledge.


XXXIII


Narses was overjoyed at the outcome and ceased
not attributing everything to God, an opinion which
was indeed true; and he proceeded to arrange all
urgent matters. And first of all he was eager to be rid
of the outrageous behaviour of the Lombards under his
command, for in addition to the general lawlessness
of their conduct, they kept setting fire to whatever
buildings they chanced upon and violating by force
the women who had taken refuge in the sanctuaries.
He accordingly propitiated them by a large gift of
money and so released them to go to their homes,


389


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


390


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII, xxxiii. 2-9


commanding Valerian and Damianus, his nephew,
with their commands to escort them on the march
as far as the Roman boundary, so that they might
harm no one on the return journey. And after the
Lombards had departed from Roman territory,
Valerian went into camp near the city of Verona,
intending to besiege it and win it for the emperor.
But the garrison of this city became frightened and
opened negotiations with Valerian, with the purpose
of making a conditional surrender of themselves and
the city. When this was learned by the Franks
who were keeping guard in the towns of Venetia,
they tried with all eagerness to prevent it, claiming
the right to take charge of the land as belonging to
themselves. And as a result of this, having accomp-
lished nothing, Valerian retired from there with his
whole army.

As for the Goths who had saved themselves by
fleeing from the battle, they crossed the Po River
and occupied the city of Ticinum and the adjacent


—— ye


country, appointing Teias as ruler over them. And —


he found all the money which Totila had deposited
in Ticinum, and was purposing to draw the Franks
into an alliance ; he also began to organize and put
in order the Goths as well as circumstances per-
mitted, eagerly gathering them all about him.
When Narses heard this, he ordered Valerian with
all his force to maintain a guard near the Po River
so that the Goths might not be at liberty to assemble
freely, while he himself with all the rest of the
army marched against Rome. And when he came
into Tuscany, he took Narnia by surrender and left


3 Tixw@ Maltretus: πιγκηνῶ L, ryxhrer V.
391


10


ll


12


13


14


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


3 πολλάς Hoeschel, in margin, om. ἴω, πολλοῖς V.
392


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxxiii. 9-14


a garrison at Spolitium, which was then without
walls, instructing them to rebuild as quickly as
possible such parts of the fortifications as the Goths
had torn down. And he also sent some men to
make trial of the garrison in Perusia. Now the
garrison of Perusia was commanded by two Romans
who had become deserters, Meligedius and Ulifus;
the latter had formerly been a bodyguard of
Cyprian, but had been won over by the large
promises made to him by Totila and had treacher-
ously killed Cyprian who then commanded the
garrison of that place. Now Meligedius was for
accepting the proposals of Narses and was planning
with the men under his command to hand the city
over to the Romans, but the party of Ulifus per-
ceived what was going on and banded together
openly against them. In the fight that followed
Ulifus was destroyed together with those who
thought as he did, and Meligedius immediately
surrendered Perusia to the Romans. And Ulifus
obviously suffered retribution from Heaven in being
destroyed at the very place where he himself had
murdered Cyprian. Such was the course of these
events.

But the Goths who were keeping guard in Rome,
upon learning that Narses and the Roman army
were coming against them and were now very near,
made preparations to offer the strongest resistance
possible. Now it happened that Totila had burned
many buildings of the city when he captured it for
the first time. . . . But finally, reasoning that the
Goths, reduced as they were to a small number,


* A clause seems lost in which was expressed a first
decision to rebuild.


393


16


17


18


20


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


394


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxxiii. 14-21


were no longer able to guard the whole circuit of the
wall of Rome, he enclosed a small part of the city
with a short wall around the Tomb of Hadrian and,
by connecting this with the earlier wall, he made a
kind of fortress. There the Goths had deposited
their most precious possessions and they were keep-
ing a careful guard over this fortress, disregarding
the rest of the city wall which lay neglected. So
on this occasion they left a few of their number as
guards over this place while all the rest took their
stand all along the battlements of the city wall,
because they were cager to test their opponents’
skill in attacking walls.

Now the whole circuit-wall of Rome was so extra-
ordinarily long that neither could the Romans
encompass it in their attack nor the Goths guard it.
So the Romans scattered here and there at random
and began to make their attacks, while the others
defended themselves as well as circumstances per-
mitted. Thus, Narses brought up a great force of
archers and delivered an attack on a certain portion
of the fortifications, while John the nephew of
Vitalian was making an assault with his command
at another point. Meanwhile Philemuth and the
Eruli were harassing another section, and the rest
followed at a great distance from them. Indeed, all
were fighting at the wall with very considerable
intervals between them. And the barbarians
gathered at the points of attack and were receiving
the assault. But the other parts of the fortifications,
where there was no attack being made by the
Romans, were altogether destitute of men, all the
Goths being gathered, as I have said, wherever
the enemy were attacking. In this situation Narses


395


23


24


26


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


396


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxxiii. 21-26


directed Dagisthaeus to take a large number of
soldiers and the standards of both Narses and John,
and, equipped with a large number of ladders, to
make a sudden assault upon a certain part of the
fortifications which was altogether destitute of
guards. So he immediately placed all the ladders
against the wall without any opposition, and with
no trouble got inside the fortifications with his
followers, and they opened the gates at their
leisure. This was immediately discovered by the
Goths, who no longer thought of resistance but
began to flee, every man of them, wherever each
one could. And some of them rushed into the
fortress, while others went off on the run to Portus.
At this point in the narrative it occurs to me to
comment on the manner in which Fortune makes
sport of human affairs, not always visiting men in
the same manner nor regarding them with uniform
glance, but changing about with the changes of
time and place; and she plays a kind of game with
them, shifting the value of the poor wretches
according to the variations of time, place, or cir-
cumstance, seeing that Bessas, the man who
had previously lost Rome, not long afterward
recovered Petra in Lazica for the Romans, and that
Dagisthaeus, on the contrary, who had let Petra
go to the enemy, won back Rome for the emperor
in a moment of time. But these things have been
happening from the beginning and will always be
as long as the same fortune rules over men. Narses
now advanced against the fortress with his whole
army in warlike array. But the barbarians became


397


to


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XXXIV


398


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxxiii. 26-xxxiv.6


terrified, and, upon receiving pledges for their lives,
surrendered both themselves and the fortress with

all speed, in the twenty-sixth year of the reign of 552 a».
the Emperor Justinian. Thus Rome was captured

for the fifth time during his reign; and Narses
immediately sent the keys of its gates to the
emperor.


XXXIV


Ar that time it was shewn to the world with the
greatest clearness that in the case of all men who
have been doomed to suffer ill, even those things ©
which seem to be blessings turn out for their
destruction, and even when they have fared as they
wish they are, it may be, destroyed together with this .
same prosperity. For this victory turned out to be
for the Roman senate and people a cause of far
greater destruction, in the following manner. The
Goths, on the one hand, as by their flight they
abandoned the dominion of Italy, made it an incident
of their progress to destroy without mercy the
Romans who fell in their way. And the barbarians
of the Roman army, on the other hand, treated as
enemies all whom they chanced upon as they entered
the city. Furthermore, this too befell them. Many
of the members of the senate, by decision of Totila,
had been remaining previously in the towns of
Campania. And some of them, upon learning that
Rome was held by the emperor's army, departed from
Campania and went thither. But when this was
learned by the Goths who happened to be in the


.


399


10


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


400


a


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxxiv. 6-10


fortresses there, they searched that whole country
and killed all the patricians. Among these was
Maximus, whom I have mentioned in the preceding

arrative It happened also that Totila, when he
went from there to encounter Narses, had gathered
the children of the notable Romans from each city
and selected about three hundred of them whom he
considered particularly fine in appearance, telling
their parents that they were to live with him, though
in reality they were to be hostages to him. And at
that time Totila merely commanded that they should
be north of the Po River, but now Teias found and
killed them all.

Now Ragnaris, a Goth, who commanded the
garrison at Tarentum, had received pledges from
Pacurius at the emperor’s wish and agreed that he
would submit to the Romans, as previously stated,”
and had furnished six Goths as hostages to the
Romans to make this agreement binding; but upon
hearing that Teias had become king over the Goths
and had invited the Franks to an alliance and
wished to engage with the enemy with his whole
army, he reversed his purpose completely and
refused absolutely to fulfil his agreement. But he
was eager and determined to get back the hostages,
and so devised the following plan. He sent to
Pacurius with the request that a few Roman soldiers
be sent him in order that it might be possible for
his men with safety to go to Dryus* and from there
to cross the Ionian Gulf and make their way to


1 Book V. xxv. 15 and Book II. xx. 19,
5 Chap. xxvi. 4, 3 Mod. Otranto,


401


ll


12


14


15


16


17


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 αὐτοῦ L: abray V.


402


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxxiv. 10-18


Byzantium. So Pacurius, being utterly ignorant
of the man’s purposes, sent him fifty of his men.
And when Ragnaris had received them in the for-
tress, he immediately put them into confinement
and sent word to Pacurius that, if it was his wish to
recover his own soldiers, he would be obliged to
surrender the Gothic hostages. But when Pacurius
heard this, he left a few men to keep guard over
Dryus, and immediately marched with all the rest
of hisarmy against theenemy. Thereupon Ragnaris
killed the fifty men immediately, and then led forth
the Goths from Tarentum to encounter his enemy.
And when they engaged with each other, the Goths
were defeated. Whereupon Raguaris, having lost
great numbers there, set off in flight with the
remnant. However, he was quite unable to get back
into Tarentum, since the Romans surrounded it on
every side, but he went to Acherontis and remained
there. Thus, then, did these things happen. And
not long afterwards the Romans took Portus by
surrender after besieging the place, and likewise a
fortress in Tuscany which they call Nepa,! as well
as the stronghold of Petra Pertusa, as it is called.
Meanwhile Teias, considering the Goths by them-
selves not a match for the Roman army, sent to
Theudibald, the ruler of the Franks, offering a large
sum of money and inviting him to an alliance. The
Franks, however, out of regard for their own interests,
I suppose, wished to die for the benefit neither


1 Modern Nepi.


3 yéna καλοῦσι V: ἐπικαλοῦσι, followed by a lacuna of one
word, L.


403


19


21


22


23


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


404


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxxiv. 18-23


of Goths nor Romans, but were eager, rather, to
acquire Italy for themselves, and only to attain this
were they willing to undergo the perils of war.
Now it so happened that, while Totila had deposited
some of his money in Ticinum, as previously stated,+
he had placed the most of it in an exceedingly
strong fortress at Cumae, which is in Campania, and
he had set guards over the place, appointing as
their commander his own brother with Herodian.
Narses, then, wishing to capture this garrison, sent
some men to Cumae to besiege the fortress, while
he himself remained at Rome, putting it in order.
And he sent another force with orders to besiege
Centumeellae. Teias then became fearful concern-
ing the guards in Cumae and the money, and
despairing of his hope of the Franks, he put his
forces in array, intending to engage with his enemy.

But when Narses perceived this, he ordered John
the nephew of Vitalian and Philemuth to proceed
with his own army into the province of Tuscany, in
order to take up a position there and check the
march of his opponents to Campania, in order that
the force besieging Cumae might be able without
fear of molestation to capture it either by storm or
by surrender. But Teias, leaving the most direct
roads very far on his right, took many very long
detours, passing along the coast of the Ionian Gulf,
and so reached Campania, having eluded his enemy


1 Chap. xxxiii. 7.


405


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XXXV


406


a ἜΜΑΘΑ ἐν, a aa Ceey ats


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxxiv. 23—-xxxv. 4


entirely. And when Narses learned this, he
summoned the forces of John and Philemuth, who
were guarding the road through Tuscany, called
back Valerian, who was just capturing Petra Pertusa,
as itis called, with his men, collected his forces, and
himself with his whole army marched into Campania
arrayed as for battle.


XXXV


Now there is a mountain called Vesuvius in
Campania, which I have mentioned in the previous
narrative, remarking that it often gives forth a
sound like bellowing. And whenever this occurs,
the mountain also belches forth a great quantity
of hot ashes. So much was said at that point in my
narrative. Now the centre of this mountain, just as
is the case with Aetna in Sicily, is a natural cavity
extending from its base to its peak, and it is at the
bottom of this cavity that the fire burns continually.
And to such a depth does this cavity descend that,
when a man stands on the summit of the mountain
and dares to look over the edge from there, the flames
are not easily visible. And whenever it comes about
that this mountain belches forth the ashes, as stated
above, the flames also tear out rocks from the bottom
of Vesuvius and hurl them into the air above the
summit of this mountain, some of them small, but
some exceedingly large, and thus shooting them
forth from there it scatters them wherever they
chance to fall. And a stream of fire also flows from


1 Book VL. iv. 21-30.


407


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


408


tel


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxxv. 5-10


the peak extending from the summit to the very base
of the mountain and even further, resembling in all
respects the phenomenon which is observed at Mt.
Aetna. And the stream of fire forms high banks on
either side in cutting out its bed. Now as the flame
is carried along in the channel it at first resembles a
flow of burning water; but as soon as the flame is
quenched, the course of the stream is checked
immediately and the flow proceeds no further, and
the sediment of this fire appears as mud resembling
ashes, .

At the very base of this Mt. Vesuvius there are
springs of water fit to drink, and a river named
Dracon proceeds from them which passes very near
the city of Nuceria And it was at this river that
the two armies then made camp, one on one side
and the other on the other. Now while this Dracon
is a small stream, it still cannot be crossed either by
horsemen or infantry, because, as it flows in a narrow
channel and cuts into the earth to a great depth, it
makes the banks on both sides overhanging as it
were. But whether the cause is to be found in the
nature of the soil or of the water, I cannot decide.
Now the Goths had seized the bridge over the river,
since they had encamped very near it, and placing
wooden towers upon it they had mounted various
engines in them, among them those called ballistae,?
in order that they might be able to shoot from the
tower down upon the heads of such of their enemy
as harassed them. It was consequently impossible


1 Modern Nocera. 3 Catapults.


3 ἱππεῦσιν L: ixretovow V.


409


1]


12


13


14


15


16


17


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


410


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII, xxxv. 10-17


for a hand-to-hand engagement to take place, since
the river, as I have said, lay between; but both
armies came as close as possible along the banks of
the stream, and for the most part used only bows
inst each other. Some single encounters also
took place, when some Goth on occasion, in answer
to a challenge, crossed the bridge. And two
months’ time was spent by the armies in this way.
_ Now as long as the Goths controlled that part of
the sea, they maintained themselves by bringing in
provisions by ship, since they were encamped not
farfromtheshore. But later on the Romans captured
the enemy’s boats by an act of treason on the part
of a Goth who was in charge of all their shipping ; and
at the same time innumerable ships came to them
both from Sicily and from the rest of the empire.
At the same time Narses also set up wooden towers
on the bank of the river, and thus succeeded
completely in humbling the spirit of his opponents.
The Goths then, becoming alarmed because of
these things and being at the same time hard pressed
by want of provisions, took refuge on a mountain
which is near by, called by the Romans in the Latin
tongue “ Milk Mountain” ;1 here the Romans were
quite unable to follow them because the rough
terrain made it impossible. But the barbarians
immediately repented having gone up there, because
they began to be still more in need of provisions,
having no means of providing them for them-
selves and their horses. Thinking, consequently,
that death in battle was preferable to that by
starvation, they unexpectedly moved out to engage


1 Mons Lactarius.


411
VOL. V. ο


18


19


21


22


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


3 ayriratéuevor Vi ἀντιταξάμενοι L,


412


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII, xxxv. 17-23


their enemy, falling upon them suddenly and with-
out warning. But the Romans, to ward them off as
well as circumstances permitted, took their stand,
not arranging themselves by commanders or by
companies or by cohorts, nor distinguished in any
other manner from one another, and not so as to hear
the commands given them in battle, but still, de-
termined to put forth all their strength against the
enemy wherever they should chance to stand. Now
the Goths were the first to abandon their horses and
all took their stand on foot, facing their enemy ina
deep phalanx, and then the Romans-too, observing
this, let their horses go, and all arrayed themselves
in the same manner.

Here shall be described a battle of great note and
the heroism of one man inferior, I think, to that of
none of the heroes of legend, that, namely, which
Teias displayed in the present battle. The Goths,
on the one hand, were driven to be courageous by
despair of the situation, while the Romans, on the
other hand, though they could see that the enemy
had become desperate, withstood them with all their
strength, blushing to give way to a weaker force;
thus from both sides they charged their nearest
opponents with great fury, the one army courting
death and the other desiring to make a display of
valour. Now the battle began early in the morning,
and Teias, easily recognized by all, stood with only
a few followers at the head of the phalanx, holding
his shield before him and thrusting forward his spear.
And when the Romans saw him, thinking that, if he
himself should fall, the battle would be instantly
decided in their favour, all those who laid claim to


413


24


26


27


28


29


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


΄ a \ \


414


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxxv. 23-30


valour concentrated on him—and there was a great
number of them—and they all directed their spears
at him, some thrusting and others hurling them.
He himself meanwhile, covered by his shield,
received all their spears in it, and by sudden
charges he slew a large number. And whenever
he saw that his shield was filled with spears fixed
in it, he would hand this over to one of his guards
and take another for himself. And he continued
fighting in this manner for the third part of the day,
and at the end of that time his shield had twelve
spears stuck in it and he was no longer able to move
it where he wished and repel his assailants. So he
eagerly called one of his bodyguards without leaving
his post so much as a finger’s breadth nor giving
ground nor allowing the enemy to advance, nor even
turning round and covering his back with his shield,
nor, in fact, did he even turn sidewise, but as if
fastened to the ground he stood there, shield in
hand, killing with his right hand and parrying with
his left and calling out the name of the bodyguard.
And the guard was now at his side with the shield,
and Teias immediately sought to take this in ex-
change for the one weighed down with spears. But
while he was doing so his chest became exposed for
a brief instant of time, and it chanced that at that
moment he was hit by a javelin and died instantly
from the wound. Then some of the Romans raised
his head aloft on a pole and went about shewing it
to both armies, to the Romans in order that they
might be encouraged, and to the Goths in order that
they might in despair make an end of the war.


415


91


92


39


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


416


a


ae


᾿ς ye, ee ey


re


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxxv. 31-33


But not even then did the Goths abandon the
struggle, but they kept fighting till night, although
well aware that their king was dead. But when it
began to grow dark, the two armies separated and
passed the night on the battle-field in their equip-
ment. And on the following day they arose at
dawn, and arraying themselves again in the same
manner they fought till nightfall, neither army
retreating before the other nor being routed nor
even giving ground, though large numbers were
being slain on both sides, but they kept at it with
the fury of wild beasts by reason of their bitter
hatred of each other, the Goths, on the one hand,
knowing well that they were fighting their last
battle, and the Romans, on the other, refusing to be
worsted by them. But finally the barbarians sent to
Narses some of their notables, saying that they had
learned that the struggle they had taken up was
against God; for they recognized, they said, the
power that was arrayed against them, and, since they
were coming to realize by what had happened the
truth of the matter, they were desirous from now to
acknowledge defeat and give up the struggle, not,
however, to obey the emperor, but to live in indepen-
dence with some of the other barbarians; and they
begged that the Romans concede to them a
peaceful withdrawal, not begrudging them a reason-
able settlement, but presenting them, in fact, with
their own money as travelling funds, that money,
namely, which each of them had previously deposited


417


34


35


37


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


418


—


νυν τ —  —@@Q@Qae@uu LUC hl τὰ


ee


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIII. xxxv. 33-38


in the fortresses of Italy. These proposals Narses
took under consideration. Now John the nephew
of Vitalian advised that they should allow this
request and not carry on battle further with men
who courted death nor expose themselves to those
whose daring was sprung from despair of life, an
attitude which proves dangerous not only for those
possessed by it, but also for their opponents. “ For
victory,’ he said, “is sufficient for the wise, but
extravagant desires might perhaps turn out even to
a man’s disadvantage.”

Narses followed this suggestion, and they came to
terms, agreeing that the remainder of the barbarians,
after receiving their own money, should depart
immediately from all Italy and that they should no
longer wage war in any way against the Romans.
Now a thousand Goths, in the midst of the
negotiations, detached themselves from the main
body, and under command of different men, among
whom was the Indulf whom I have mentioned
before,! proceeded to the city of Ticinum and the
country beyond the Po. But all the rest gave
sworn pledges and confirmed all the details of the
agreement. Thus the Romans captured Cumae and
all that remained, and the eighteenth year, as it
closed, brought the end of this Gothic War, the
history of which Procopius has written.


1 Book VII, xxxv. 23, ete.


419
VOL. V¥. jay


ning


Hate


Aeetes, mythical king of Colchis, vm.
ii. yee legendary birthplace,
Vill. xiv. 49


Aetna, compared with Vesuvius, VIII.
xxxv. 2

Agamemnon, leader of the Trojan
expedition, VII. xxii. 28; father of


the Romans; 7 mountain-

of the Bruchi, vill. iv. 1; as allies
in the Roman army, VII. i. 4;
fighting with the Vill. viii.
one of them alone defends


5


Amazons, their reputed home on the
Vill. ii. 2; traditional

account of their movements, VII.
iii. 5, 6; Procopius’ explanation of
the tradition, VIN. iii. 7-11
Amisus, city on the Euxine, Vill. ii.
2 ae Thermodon River, VII.


asius, Roman emperor; founded
Daras, VILL. vii. 9


421


INDEX


ae eT ravaged by the Goths, VIII.
sschses, father of Aeneas, VII, xxii.


hese attacked by the Goths, VII.
xxiii. 1 ff; saved from them, VII.
ree 39, 40; reinforced, VII. * xxiii.


Angill, one of the nations of Brittia,
Vill. xx. 7, 12; sent as envoys by
the F Vill, xx. 10; attack
and defeat the Varni, VIII. xx. 33, 34

Ansilas, a Roman soldier, distin-
guished for valour, VIII. do,

Antae, a barbarian nation north of
the Maeotic Lake, VII. iv. 9; invade
Roman territory, VIL. xl. 5; neigh-
bours of the Sclaveni, do.

Antalas, Moorish a subjugated by
John, VIM. xvii.

Antinous, the city he in Egypt, VIL.
xxvii. 6


Antioch, "ΙΝ ἘΠῚ destroyed by
Ohosroes, Vint. vii, 1
Anzalas, spearman of Nie answers
the challenge of Coccas, Vill, xxxi.
13; and slays him, VIL. xxxi. 15

Apennines, Vit. xxix. 3,4

Apri, city in Thrace, VIL. xxvii. 8

Apsarus, city near Lazica, VII. ii, 11;
its ancient greatness, VIL, ii. 14;
distance from Rihizaeum, VI. ii.
11; from Petra, VII. ii, 21

Apsilia, its mountains, VIII. ix. 15;
iy catheg to the Persians, VIII x.


Apeilii, 8 Christian people subject to
the Laci, VIL. ii, 82, 38, iii, 12, ix.
Ty Ons, heres their mountainous
country, vill, ix. 20; revolt from
the Colchians, VII. x. 6; won back
to allegiance by John, VII. x. 7;
a woman of, VIII. x. 5

Apsyrtus, brother of Medea; his
tomb, VII. ii. 14; ancient name of
Apsarus, VII. ii. 12

Aratius, Roman commander against
the Sclaveni, vil. xl. 34; sent to
the-Outrigurs with money, VIII. xix.
3, 4; commander of troops sent to
the "Lombards, Vil. xxv. 11; in
Ilyricum, vuI. xxvii. 13

Archabis, town near Lazica, VIU. ii. 11

Archaeopolis, first city in Lazica, VII.
xiii. 3; guarded by three thousand


422


xvii. 17; its
situation, walls’ noe water supply,
vill. xiv. 1-3; from Mo-


Argo. to have been
‘built for the ἀκ χὼ of the Golden
Fleece, Vil. ii. 30

Arians, the Goths, vill. iv. 11


Vill, xxviii. 11, xxix. 3

Arimuth, Roman coat eras in Illy-
ricum, VOI. xxvii. 1

Aristotle, studied the current at
Chalcis, VII. vi. 20

Armenia, VIII. viii. 22, xv. 9; Bessas
appointed General. of, VIII. ix. 4

Armenians, VII. ii. 5, viii. 21; location
of their country, VIL. Ἐΐ 20 i ἀτὲ
bours of the Tzani, VIII.
by Bessas, VII. xiii. ΤῊ Phi the
site of Artemis’ ie Semnpies Vit, v. 24;
the following Armenians are named :
John (Guzes), son of Thomas, VIII.
viii. 15, Meg ὁ Ansalaa, Wetted 13


Arrian, the historian, VII. xiv.
Artabanes, a Persarm: 5 de-
serted to the Ro vill. viii.


21-24; sent by Justinian to relieve
Liberius, Vil. xxxix. 8, xl. 14;
driven back by storm, VII. κι. 15-17;
distinguishes himself as a skir-
misher, VII. viii. 25-27; com-
mander of all troops in Sicily, Vit,
xxiv. 2 Becta 9 appeals from
Croton, vit, XXV.

Artemis, her eis in Tauris, VUL
v. 23; ὃ monument to, VII. xxii.
27; Artemis Bolosia, Vill. xxii. 29

Aruth, of the Eruli; husband of the
daughter of Mauricius, VII, xxvi.
13; in the army of Narses, do,

Asbadus, bodyguard of Justinian;
defeated by the Sclaveni, fil.


INDEX


xxxviii. 4-6, 9; in the army of
Narses, VII. xxvi. 13; pursues and
wounds Totila, VII. xxxii. 22-24;
wounded by Scipuar, VII. xxxii.

24; ret do.
Asia, Vill. ii. 32, iii. 7, 11; one of the
continents, VIIL vi. 12-15; its
toward discussed,


boundary
Vill. vi. 1-15, ii. 28 5
Astica, plundered by the Sclaveni,


vu. xl. 43
Atalaric, ruler of Italy, grandson‘
eric, xxxix. 15, VIL. xxi.


thenae.
10, 11
Athenaea, ancient ruler of a region
which was later called by her name
Vii. ii. 10
Athenian, Phidias, VIII. xxi. 12
Atreus, father of Agamemnon, VIII.
i, 2


xiii. 8; addresses his men, VII. xiv.

14-21; leads a sally, ΥἹΠ. xiv. 22 ff.
Belapaton, city in Persia, VII. x. 9;

distance from Ctesiphon, do.


xxxiii. 24


Bithynians, their location, vil. ii. 2


Boas River, description of, VIII. ii.
6,9


up by the Romans, VIU. xiii. 19
Bosporus, city on the Euxine, vim. v.


ger coca tiny ἃς of

; slain by Chosroes, VOT.

xi. 8, 93 ἢ by
xi. 9


INDEX


Brittones, one of the three nations of
Brittia, vit. xx. 7

Bruchi, a people near the Oaucasus,
vit. iv. 1

Busta Gallorum, VII. xxix. 5

Buzes, Roman commander; brother
of Venilus, VIII. ix. 5; uncle of
Domentiolus, VI. xxxix. 3
gees district in Africa, VII. xvii.


oie, capital of the Roman

Empire; mentioned frequently, ὙΠ,

xxxvii. 14: its long walls, VII.

“ beginning ”’ of ine

Euxine, vul. ii. 1; supplies forces

to Narses, VII. xxvi. 10; distance

from Topirus, VU. xxxviii. 9; from
Adrianople, VI. xl. 36


Cabades A, Persian king; grandfather
of Cabades B, Vu. xxvi.

Cabades B, son of Zames, nephew of
Ohosroes, vil. xxvi. 13; in the
army of Narses, do.

Oalabria, Vil. xl. 15

Calchedon, at the “ Pot
the Euxine, VII. ii. ᾿ ‘es 31, 33

Oalypso, VIII. “xxii. 19,

Camillus, Roman lena: Vill. xxix. 4

ia, district in "Italy, vil.

xxxiv. 22, 23, 24; senators sum-
moned thence by Totila, VI. xxxvii.
3; prisoners sent there by him,
VIL. xxii. 2, xxxiv. 5, 6; its fortress
Oumae, Vill. xxxiy. 19; its moun-
tain Vesuvius, Vill. xxxv. 1

Candidati, Asbadus, VIL. xxxviii. 5

Caprae, scene of Totila’s death, VII.


xxxii. 27, 35
ay moe city in Sardinia, VI. xxiv.
Carthage, VIII. xxiv. 36
Oasius, epithet of Zeus, VIII. xxii. 25


Casope, town in Oercyra, Vul. xxii. 26
Caspian Gates, pass over the Caucasus,


Vill. iii, 4

Oatana, ct tity in Sicily, without walls,
vi. xi.

Oaucasus, ale chain east of the
Euxine, VI. ii. 26, iii. 11, 12, iv. 1;
contains the source of the Phasis,
vill. ii. 27; described, VI. iii. 1-4;
no tradition of Amazons there, vuL
iii. 6, 7; extends to the Euxine,
vol. ix. δ; Opsites takes refuge


424


in, VII. ix. 29; home of the Sabiri,


cemencen by him: Vil. xxxix. oe
attacked by Narses’ order, VIII.
xxxiv. 20

Oephallenia, touched at by Artabanes,


Oepi, town on the Euxine, VIM. v. 28
Cercyra, VII. xxii. eal 19; ra
by the Goths, vm. xxii, 30
Chaeronea, re ae by earthquake,
Vill. xxv. 17
Chalcis, in Euboea; visited by Aris-
totle, VII. vi. 20
Chery aes the strait of, VII. vi. 23,


Cherson, city on the Euxine, VII. v.
27, 28; tance from the mouth


se ee γα


osroes, king of Persia, VIII. xii.
9, xv. 11, xvi. 5, 27, 29; invited into
Lazica by the inhabitants, VII. iv.

Vvul.


τὰ cass xii. 17; repeatedl:
invades Roman ᾿ va,
vii. 2; reviled by the

Vil. oppresses the


Vill. x. banishes him, VII. x.
8-10; “μῆς violently ill,
10; sickly by. bongs τα do. ;


x. 11-14;


Anasozadus, VIM. x. 19-22; power
and dismisses Petrus, VI. xi, 2, 3;


j
i
z
3
ss


im

i
ee :


38: th
vi. xii. 8;
iii. 19, 21; the disputes of the
Vill, xxv. 13


Cimmerians, the ancient name of the
tribes on the Maeotic Lake, VIII.
iv. 8; and of the Huns, VII. v.
1; discover the possibility of cross-
ing the Maeotic Lake, VIII. v. 7-9;
cross it and attack the Goths, VII.
y. 10, 11; Cimmerian Strait, con-
sidered by some the boundary be-
tween Europe and Asia, VIII. vi. 15

Oleft, The, defile in Greece; visited by
a violent earthquake, VIII. xxv. 23

Roman deserter, VILL. xxxi.

slain in single combat, ΥἹΠ.


3


Colchians, VI. i. 8; identified with
be gt pe Vill. i. 10; at the “end”


Apsilii revolt from them, Vil. x.
the Colchian Phasis, VII, vi.


by the Persians
Vil. i. 3 ff.; VU. viii. 39; held
entirely by the Persians, VIL. xvi


7
Comana, city in Armenia, VIII. v. 24
Constan Roman commander


the ;
SEs. fe Goths, VIII. xxiv.
Vu. xxiv. 39


Vil. xvi. 16; Persians retire
9

in Lazica, VII. xiv

Cottian Alps, subject to Thendibert.
Gulf, VII. xxv. 16

Croton, sends appeal for , Vu.

xxv. 24; relief by
Justi Vill. xxvi. 1, 2
Ctesiphon, city in Persia;
Vill. x. 9


INDEX


Outzinas, a Moorish chief; allied with
the Romans, VII. xvii. 21
Oyprian, murdered by Ulifus, vi.
xxxiii. 10, 12
ancient name of Corsica,
Vill. xxiv. 39


oo traversed by the Ister, VIII. v.


Dagisthaeus, Roman commander in
Laziea, vil. viii. 1; undermined


15; leads the Roman army to
battle, vim. viii. 16; fa against
the Persians, VIII. viii. 29; slan-
dered by te the Lazi, VII. ix. 1-3; im-
prisoned, VII. ix. 4; released from
lag and sent with Narses, VIIL.
13; commands on the left

wing, Vit vil. xxxi. 4; in the assault
Rome, Vill. xxxiii, 21; lost
Petra, recovered Rome,’ vu.
xxxiii.
Dalmatia, vol. xxvii. 5; invaded
by the Sclaveni, vm. xl. 7; Roman
army winters in, VIL. xi. “1d, 27, 30;


Goths offer to resign claim to, vor.
xxiv. 4
Damian Roman commander,


Danube, called also Ister, g.v., VII.


v. 29
ace, attacked in vain by Ohosroes,
vi. vii. 5; well provisioned
Ὁ siege, VII. vii. 7; its
remarkable spring, VII. vii. Ἶ, 8;
founded by Anastasius, VII. vii. 9
ae commands e garrison
Rome, vil. xxxvi. 1 ff.; body-
guard of Belisarius, VIL. XXXVii. 9;
os from Rome, VI. xxxvi. 15:
commander of Centumeellae, vi.
xxxvii. 9; receives and answers
proposals from Totila, Vi. xxxvii.
11-17; repudiates his agreement
with Totila, vil. xxxix. 25, 26
Dodona, ravaged by the Goths, VII.
xxii. 31


Dolomites, an independent people in
Persia; in the Persian army, VII.
xiv. 5-7; their fighting equipment,
vill. xiv. 8; accustomed to the
mountains, VII. xiv. 9; assist
in the attack on Archaeopolis,


426


ΥἼΙ. xiv. 12; flee with the Persian
army, VII. ΔΩ͂
Domentiolus, nephew of Buzes; com-


Rokinus) ΝΉΒΗΝ by tidal wave, VII.

XXv.

Edessa, attacked by Ohosroes, VIII.
ais 35; a portent in, VIII. xiv. 39-


Egypt, VOI. xxvii. 6; the Egyptian
rh gg epee "14


Ustrigothus, VI. xxvii. ee 26
Eruli, Suartuas appointed Ν
VIll. xxv. 11: ear of Nara


pe, one of the ts,

vi. 12-15, ii. sae iii. 11, xviii. 1;
ravaged by the Sclaveni, vil. xl.
33; the boundary of, VII. ii. 28,
29. vi. 1-5

Enuxine Sea, description of, VII. i.
7—v. 33; receives the waters of the
Ister, VIL. v. 30; forms part of
the boundary between Europe and
Asia, vil. vi. 3, 5; receives the
outflow from the Maeotic Lake,
vill. vi. 4; Phasis River at itc
extremity, τη. vi. 8; considered
by some to be formed by the Maeotic
Lake, Vil. vi. 16; does not “ end’’
at Byzantium, vil. vi. 25; bar-
barians to the north of it, vill. vii.


-


INDEX


nae ol: εἰ ἘΝ aka
ee , rae ie
weed hf! ‘dei i ie a i Π ahs ae
: ΒΜ ᾿ ᾿ glaabucldl =
meg 8 ἔπ qa ξι
ἜΤ aun ert ὦ id { He
Li ee eve
iain


INDEX


Gibal, Gothic commander; sent


Glutton, epithet of ohn, vu, xl. 34,
VOI. x . 18

Goar, a Gothic captive from Dalmatia ;
exiled to Egypt, VIII. xxvii. 5, 6;
flies from Byzantium with Iidigisal,
Vill. xxvii. 5 ff.; surprises Roman
officers, VII. xxvii. 17; reaches
the Gepaedes, Vill. xxvii, 18

Goths, the Os ic nation settled
in Ttaly; ans, Vil. iv. 11;

i home, VIII. v. δὶ
defeated by the Cimmerians, Vill,
v. 11; their migrations, ΥἹΠ. v.
12-14: besiege Rome, VII. xxxvi.
4 ν capture Portus, VII. xxxvi.
3; besiege Centumeellae, VI.
xxxvii. 10-18; invade Sicily, VIL
xxxvii. 18; capture Ariminum,
ὙΠ. xxxvii. 23; alarmed at the
choice of Germanus as commander
against them, VI. xxxvii. 24;
defeat ἃ Roman force, VII. xxxvii.
28; attack Rhegium, VII. xxxix.
1, ὃς plunder all Sicily, VI. xxxix.
4; terrified at reports of Germanus’
preparations, Vit. Vaxkize)'21;
capture Rome, Vi. xii, 32, 38:
offer to resign all claim to Sicily
and Dalmatia, VI. xxiv. 4; hold
small part of Venetia, VIII. xxiv. 8;
make alliance with the Franks,
vill. xxiv. 9, 10; said to be hostile
to the , VI. xxiv. 21, 22;
on friendly terms with the Franks,
vill. xxvi. 19; despair of ruling
Italy permanently, VII, xxxiv. 3;
in command of the sea, VIII. xxxv.
12, 13; the Gothic War, VIL. xxi.
a; 4, Xxxv. 38

Greece, VIII vill. xxii. 32, xxv. 23, xxvi.
1; its works of art brought to Rome,
vill. xxi. 14; fleet sent thither by
Totila, vir. ” xxii. 17; visited by
earthquakes, VIII. xxv. 16 ff.

Greek language, VII. xiv. 48

Greeklings, contemptuous name for

the opti of the East, VII.


xxiii. 2
a πὰ Agamemnon, VII. xxii.
28


cubises, king of the Oolchians, VII.
viii. 1; addresses the Lazic troops,


428


vill. viii. 6-13; leads the Lazi
to the attack,” vil. viii. 14 ff.;
inst the Persians, VI.


7; flees before the Tati: vill.
xvi. 19; receives a letter from
Mermeroes, vu. xvi, 23; but is
ee Vurl. xvi. 32; hostile
to Chosroes, VIII. xvi. ΕΝ with
the Roman army, VII. xvii. 13;
his wife a Roman woman, VIII. ix.
9; nephew of oe ὙΠΟ;
the sister of, VII. xvii, 1
Gundulf, Gothic
agains


vill, xxiii. 88
Guzes, surname of John the Armenian,
Vill. viii. 15, xi. 57


ei Tomb of, made a fortress
Υ Totila, ba * xxxiii, 14; held

as δ fortress b y Paulus, Vi. *xxxvi,

Halicarnassus, home of Herodotus,

Hebrus sable!) wrap rapghe sedate =
vu.

Hellas, VII. ii. 15

i*, city on the Euxine, VII.


Soemasedall ruler of Pe: Vi
vill. xx. 11; marries the sister
Theudibert, VIII, xx. 11; foretells
his own death, vil. xx. 13 ff.; his
death, VIII. xx. 21

Hermenetridus, ruler of the Thurin-
gians and father of Amalafridas,
vol. xxv. 11

Herodian, Gothic commander of
Cumae, vill. xxxiv, 19

aan aan cited and quoted, VII. vi.

Hieron, place on the B VII,
vi. 17, 19, 25, 28 bape

Himerius, ‘commander of Rhegium,
vu. xxxvii. 20: surrenders to the
Goths, VI. xxxix, 5


din


Homer, Vul. xxii, 21

Hi i neighbours of the Bithyn-

ians, VIL. ii. 2

Hunnic nations, their vill.

iii. 5; their invasions through the
VIL. iii. 3


in vill. iii. 10; give
shelter to Opsites, VMI. ix. 29;
in jan army, Vil, xvii.


xix. 8:
22. See


5
— rule over the Meschi, vil.
ii, 2


Iidigisal, 2 Lombard, goes as a fugiti
to Byzantium, Vm. xxvii. -
kindly received by Ji Vu.


by
xxvii. 22; slain by Thorisin, Vil.
xxvii. 28, 29


gore Mery 9, 12; invaded
and p by the Sclaveni,
Vu, xxxviii. 3, 7, 19; soldiers


Fi
a!


x
eee
5


Toes, VILL. xvii. 9

Ister River, called also Danube;
i from vill. v.
29; its course d VoL. v.
30 b


Italians, in the army of Narses, VII.
Italy, invaded b the Goths,

» inv: Υ̓ Vil. v.
14; skirted by the


30; separated from Sicily by a
narrow strait, VIL vi. 21; said


429


INDEX


to be held largely by the Franks,
VIIL. xxiv. 4; evacuation by Franks
demanded, VII. xxiv. 11; desired
by the Franks, VOI. xxxiv. 18;
relinquished by the Goths, VII.


xxxv. 36
zee. home of Odysseus, VIII. xxii.
2


Jason, shared in slaying Apsyrtus,
vir. ii. 12; his emarig of the
Fleece, VIII. ii. 15; and flight with
Medea, VIII. ii. 31

John, son of Thomas, Roman com-
mander in Lazica, VII. viii. 15, ix.
13; an Armenian, Vl. viii. "15;
called John Guzes, VII. viii. 15;
orders his men to fight on foot,
vill. viii. 30; kills one of the Alani,
vil. viii. 38; attacks and circum-
vents the Abasgi, vin. ix. 20 ff.;
wins over the Apsilii, VII. x. 7;
gains an entrance into Petra,

vill. xi. 57, 58; killed by a stone,


Vul. xi. 64

John the Glutton, Roman commander
against the Sclaveni, vi. xl. 34;
in the army of Narses, VIII. xxvi.
18; commands on the left wing,


Vil. xxxi. 4
John (brother of Pappus), successful
as General of Libya, VII. xvii. 20,
21; sends an expedition to Sardinia,

vu. xxiv. 33
ser nephew of Vitalian, son-in-law
of Germanus, Vil. » 10, Χ];
10, vol. xxvi. 11; accompanies
him as General, vu. xxxix, 10;
appointed to succeed Germanus,
vil. xl. 10, 27; winters in Salones,
Vit. xi. 30, vill. xxi. 4; ordered to
await Narses, ΥΠ|. xxi. 5, 6; not
of sufficient authority to be’ com-
sere μὰ VIll. xxi. 8; awaits
Narses, Vill. xxii. 1; receives @
letter from Valerian, vill, xxiii.
4-6; sails for the relief of Ancon,
vil. xxiii. 7, 8; exhorts his fleet,
ΨΙΠ. xxiii. 14-22; returns to


gi xxvi
24, 25; holds the right , VIL.
xxxi. 3; in the assault on Rome,
vin. xxxiii. 18; his standard, ΨΙΠ.


430


xxxiii. 21; sennitoip Serre vu.
xxxiv. 22; summoned to


Empire; points Germanus
General of vo. xl 6;
uncle xxxvii.
24, xxxix. 9; appoints Snartuas
ruler the ΥΠΙ. xxv, 11;


Totila, VI. xxxvii. 13; dnb
Germanus er ‘in, the


Abasgi, VIIL. 19, 21; receives an
envoy from the Tetraxi
12, 13; sends Bessas instead of


ae ee ee


sali Ve


INDEX


wer ΤῊ Z Loe ΜΙ ΜΠ

ἐ i ἘΝ i Ne eta : ne

ia ee τῇ ΤῊΝ Pa a a

ἘΠ casludersilgitast alltel


on
of the
ey
vii. i.
by
17,
vii. t's
ix. 4;
ix. om
by
pk en tec
ieee be
VIL. xiv.
By Romans
4. Tis
xy. 11,


tee ae LG yea
Wc ete ced ee
ail Gale li te iiecitl aH ἢ cat
ate ἘΠῚ Ae ie eee mbt ‘ae ge

mg Bg
i ΤΡ lila hile atic! ell ie alge ch


a Ee ee oe


Lal
42
a


INDEX


by the Roman soldiers, vill. svi.
1 ff.; securely held by the Persian:
Vit, xvi. 1 13, 14, xvii. 9;
city Archaeopolis, vill. xiii, 3;
its cities: Rhodopolis, vit. xiii.
21; Petra, Vill. xxxiii. 24; its
border fortress Sarapanis, VII. xvi.


17; its fertile section Mocheresis,
Vill. xiv. 46


Leontius, son-in-law of ‘kthacniing
vill, xxiv. 11; sent as envoy to
Theudibald, do.; addresses him,
vol. xxiv. 12-24; dismissed by
him, VII. xxiv. 30

Leuardus, Frankish envoy to Jus-
tinian, VIII. xxiv. 30

Liberius, a patrician of Rome; chosen
to lead an expedition to Italy, VII
xxxvi. 6, xxxvii. 26; but detained
in Byzantium, VU. xxxvii. 27; an
incompetent commander, VI. xxxix.
7; sent with a fleet to Sicily, Vu.

xxxix. 6; reaches Syracuse, VIL.
xl. 12; withdraws to Panormus,
vil. xl. "18; Mg to Byzantium,
VII. xxxix. 8 , VII. xxiv. 1

τ ὡν one of the continents, VIII. vi.
12, 13, xxiv. 31; its geographical
location, vill. vi. 3; settled by the
Vandals, VII. v. 10; saved by
Germanus, VI. xxxix. 11, 12; situa-
tion therefavourable to the Romans,
vil. xvii. 20, 21; desolation in,

John, General of,


Liguria, district in Italy, VI. xl. 27;
on subject to Theudibert, VIII.
xxiv. 6

Lombards, their ruler promises Ger-
manus “support, Vil. xxxix. 20;


pare for war with the τ ὑεῖ τὶ τὸν
vil. xxv. 7; in alliance with Jus-

do.; demand help against
the Gepaedes, vill, xxv. 10; receive
only a small detachment of their
Roman allies, VII xxv. 13; ad-


432


vance on the αἰ ρηδδοαι ΥΠΙ. xxv.
14; sent to assist Narses, vin, xxv.
15, ” xxvi. 19, xxx, 18, xxxi, 5 3 their
unruly conduct, Vil. xxxiii. 2 irae


ae ee VIL. xxxiii, 2 3;
ollow Iidigisal to Byzan VIL.
xxvii. 3; feo wit gal


Goar, vill. ἂ
fugitive, tetris, ‘VI. xxvii.
19, 20; peace with the
Gepaedes, VIL. pean 21, 25; un-
willing to betray Us thus, VII,
xxvii. 28; their king Auduin, vu,
xxv. 12, xxvi. 12, xxvii. 22; Frag
gisal the Lombard, vim.

Lysippus, the sculptor, vat wae is, 13


Maeotic Lake, description of the
“lake”? and the nations surround-
ing it, VII. iv. 7-v. 11, 23, vii. 12;
crossed for the first by the
Cimmerians, VIII. v. 7-9; receives
the waters of the Tanais, VII. vi.
hi called Chee oa oe the

ne,’’ VII. 105
ope ἘΝ one Bo ᾿ it, ‘vn. eV
igur Huns live beyond i
γι. xviii. 18 τς

Martinus, Roman commander in
Lazica, VIII. xvii, 12

Matasuntha, daughter of Ajmalusun-
ved marries Germanus, VII. xxxix,


Mauricins, son of Mundus; father-
in-law of Aruth, VI, xxvi. 13


Medes, encamp on the Hippis River,
Vill. viii. 1, See ersians,


eligedius. com
mander of Perusia, VIII. xxxiii. 10;
peer ae city to Narses, VII.
Melita, island. of Dalmatia, vu. xl, 17
Mermeroes, commander in
Lazica; sends most of the Sabiri
away, VI, xiii, 7; marches toward


INDEX


ii ἮΝ ae
iH ne ΠΕ
ia Ἢ
i ada
ἰ isi


i iy


Eee pet el ἡπ|} 8
i ieee ΠΗ iF
meee τὶ : ‘het Ai une Agi: ΤῊ
ced [at Pec Gee At pcg ag . “ -
: i ΠΝ qq ic
cil he ἡ I: ti i t bs
5 > 2B a ἔς vee BSG 3 καὶ ‘Bus
a ata auealia | HG


INDEX


Vill. xxxv. 36; ἃ generous com-
mander, VIIL xxvi. 14, 15; popular
with officers and soldiers, VIII. erty
16,17; his spearman, Anzalas, VIL
xxxi. 12


Naupactus, cae by earthquake,
Vin. xxv. 17

Nazares, Roman erg σα against
the Sclaveni, Vu. xl. 3

Nepa, captured by the Tneiaatan VIII.
xxxiv. 1

wen a πὲ: by the Goths, vit.


Nile River, VI. vi. 2; separates Asia

from Africa, VIII. vi. 13, 14
Nuceria, city in Campania, Vil, xxxv.7
Numidia, vm. xvii. 21


Odonachus, commander in the Roman
army; sent to Lazica, vil. ix. 5
in command of Archaeopolis, Vu.
xiii. 8; addresses his men, VIII. xiv.
14-21; leads a sally, VIII. "xiv, 22 ff.

Odysseus, Vill. xxii. 21, 23

Opsites, uncle of Gubazes and king
of Lazica, VIII. ix. 7; his consort
oo carried off *by Nabedes,
do.

Opsites, ruler of the Abasgi, VIII. ix.
11; escapes to the Caucasus, VIII.
ix: "29

Orestes, VIII. v. 24

Othoni, islets near Cercyra, VII. xxii.
20


Pacurius, son of Peranius; com-
mander of Dryus; negotiates for
the Goths, VI. xxvi. 4; negotiates
with Ragnaris, VIII. xxxiv. 9; tricked
by him, VII. xxxiv. 10-12; defeats

in battle, Vill. xxxiv. 13-15

Palace, in Byzantium, vil. xl. 9; the
eunuchs in, VII. xl. 35, ws i, 19;
the Palace Guard, vill.

Palestinian, Tribunus the νοὶ τῶν εξ
vill. x. 11

Palladius, commander of Croton, VIII
xxv. 24

Panormus, city in Sicily, vm. xl. 18

Paphlagonians, Se oi of the
Bithynians, VII.

Passara, wife of Gece her death,
Vil. xxxix. 14

Patrae, destroyed by earthquake, VIII.
xxv. 17


434


Patricians, Roman dignitaries; Liber-
ius, VU. xxxvi. oH slain 'by the
Goths, VII. xxxiv.

Paul, Gate of, in the wall of Rome,
Vil. xxxvi. i, 10

Paulus, a Cilician; commander in the
Roman army, VI. xxxvi. 16; seizes
and holds the Tomb of Hadrian,
Vil. xxxvi. 17-25; surrenders and
is sent to Byzantium by Totila,
Vil. xxxvi, 26—

Paulus, a Roman = distinguished
for valour, VIII. xxix. Ἦν —— 27;
made ἐς Ameena τ of Narses, VII.


Peace, “the Forum of, ΥἹΠ. xxi. 11;
Temple of, Vill. xxi. 12

Peloponnesus, refuge of Roman ships.
vu. xl. 16

gre ag father of Pacurius, ΥὙΠ|.


xxvi. 4
ee adjoining Iberia, VII. ii.


26, viii. 2
pe location of their coun-
try, VI. ii. 20; the foll indi-
viduals are menti 5
Vill. viii. 21; Varazes, VII. xiii. 10
7 Dolomites live in, vill. xiv.


6,7
Persians, their five-year truce with
the Romans, VII. i, 3; invade


Lazica, Vill. iv. 5, 6; eager to
acquire Lazica, van. vii. 1, 12,133
invade Lazica, Vill. viii, 39; led
into Apsilia by Terdetes, vil. x.
2, 3; thus extend their power in
Lazica, vill. x. 4; hold Petra, do.;
repair its wall, "yu. xi. 15, 16;
have some of the Huns in alliance,
vm. xi. 24; lose Petra and rush
into the acropolis, VI. xi. 62, 63;
are exhorted by Bessas, VIII. xii.
1ff.; reject his counsel and are
burned with the acropolis, VIII. xii.
14-15; improve the ‘very. difficult
road into Lazica, VOI. xiii. 5; take
Scanda and Sarapanis, VII xiii.
19: rebuild Scanda, VII. xiii. 20;
have the Dolomites as mercenaries,
vill. xiv. 6, 7; attack

vil, xiv. li; control the most.
Lazica, VI. xiv. 45; receive pay-
ments from the Romans, vill. xv.


INDEX


3, 6; make a treaty with the


Vili. xv. 12;


τον apnea eee sagen Ale


Phaeacians, VIII. xxii. 18, 23

Phanaguris, town on the *Buxine, vir.

Pharanginm, fortress in Persarmenia ;


ie ton hg. a sempre ΥἹΗ. xiii,


Phasis River, in Colchis, vim. i. 10,
ii. 15, 31, v. 33, xiii. 3, 9, 23, 26,
is, course


2
a
ra


Piilippepolis, city in Thrace, vm.


Picenum, Vil. xxxvii. 23, 28; invaded
by the Goths, VII. VIM, xxiii. 1

Pityus, fortress built by the Romans
on the Euxine, VIII. iv. 4; distance
from Sebasto;


polis,

Po River, VII. xxvi. 22, xxxiii. 6,
xxxiv. 8, xxxv. 37; guarded by
Valerian, VIII. xxxiii.’ 8

Pontici, a people on the Euxine, vim.
lat widhnl by Ween. Weeki.


to the Romans, VII. xxxiv. 16
Procop’ writer of the history of
the wars, VII. xxxix. 29, VII. xxi. 4,
xxv. 25, xxxv. 38

Prom the alleged scene of his
punishment, VII. 112, vi. 15


Quaestor, VIL. xl. 23


INDEX


Ragnaris, a Goth; commander of
Tarentum; negotiates for its sur-
render, VII. xxvi. 4; refuses to
surrender Tarentum, val. xxxiv. 9;
tricks Pacurius, VIM. xxxiv. 10-12;
Senger in battle, VIII. xxxiv. 14,


Ravenna, centre of Roman strength
in Italy, VI. xxxix. 23, xl. 30, vil.
xxiii. 4, 17, 42, xxvi. 20, 25; xxviii,
1, 2; left in charge of Justinus,
vill, xxviii. 4; Romans defeated
near, VII. i, 28

Rhecithangus, Roman commander, in
Illyricum, ΥἹΠ. xxvii. 13

Rhegium, emt by the ip se vil.
xxxvil. 1 xxxix. 1; surren-
dered ay rine VIL. xxxix. 5

ss River, in’ Lazica, VII. xiii. 3,

iv. 4

Rhine River, VUl. xx. 32, 33; distance
from Brittia, VIII. xx. 4; separates
the Varni from the Franks, VII.


source of the Tanais, vill. vi. 5,

, town on the a Fade
Trapezuntine territory, VII. ii. 3,
ay distance from Apsarus, VII.

Rhodopolis, city in Lazica, VI. xiii.
ae ey destroyed by the Lazi, vu.


arena subjects of the Emperor
both in the East and in the West;
mentioned constantly throughout,
vu. xxxvi. 3, οἷο; in the Gothic
army, VII. xxxix. 22; make pay-
ments to the Persians, VI. xv. 3
6; make a treaty with the Persians,
γίπ. xv. 12; become in effect tribu-
tary to the Persians, VIII. xv. 16--
18; purchase silk from the Per-
sians, Vill. xvii. 1; feared by the
Gepaedes, VII. xviii. 13 ££.; Ynold
little of Venetia, VIL. xxiv. 8;
capture Portus and Petra Pertusa,
vul. xxxiv. 16; capture Cumae,


the inhabitants of pts Vl. xii.
31, 32; especially devoted to their


436


fcc gentleman, VIU. xxi, 10,


defended by the ας
13 ff.; its’ wall
on Bess, by Dagisthaeus,
ost by won

captated tive Glia
tn the πο τὺ Jumeieiaan vance


xxxiv. 6


; serving in
army, VIU. xiv. 1: xvi. 8, xvii. 10;


Sandil, tates of the Clean Tee
xviii. 23; remonstrates with Jus-
, VII. xix. 8 ff.
Sani (see Tzani), VOL. i. 8
Saracens, accused by


INDEX


17
Sardice, city vit. xl. 1, 4
Sardinia, ὃ ὃν
the Goths, VIIL. xxiv. 31-33; un-
recapture,


frontier fortress in Lazica;
held by the Lazi, Romans and
Persians in turn, Vill. xiii. 15-18;
destroyed and rebuilt, Vill. xiii. 20

port on the Adriatic ; touched
by J Vu. 8


VIII. 22; wounds Asbadus,
VIL. xxxii. 24; is wounded himself,
VIII, xxxii. 25

Selaveni, of the Antae,


_ tory, Vil. xl. 1 ff.; fear Germanus,
urn aside to Dal-


over the Ister by the Gepaedes,
Vill. xxv. 10

Scylaeum, mountain in Italy, ΥἹΠ.
xxvi. 3


Seymnia, region near Lazica, VII. ii.
23; shut off by Mermeroes, VII.
xiv. 53; gained by the Persians,
Vili. xvi. 14

Scythians, Vil. v. 24; ancient name
of the Goths, etc., VIII. v. 6; their
location, VIII. v. 23


a, home of Spinus, vi. xl.

20; ered to be rebuilt by Narses,

Vl. xxxiii. 9 -

Stagira, home of Aristotle, VIII. vi .20
Roman


INDEX


——- defeated by Germanus, VII.

xxxix.

Strabo, ie account of the Amazons,
VIL. iii. 6


Suania, region near Lazica, VII. ii.
23; shut off by Mermeroes, VIII.
xiv. 53; by the Persians,
Vill. xvi, 14

Suartuas, Roman commander of
troops sent to the Lombards, VIII.
xxv. 11; had been appointed ruler
of the Eruli, do.; later commander
- troops in Byzantium, VIII. xxv.

Susurmena, village on the boundary of
the Trapezuntine territory, VIII. ii. 3

be islands near Cercyra, VIII.


. 80
—— besieged by the Goths, VII.
. 12


Taginae, town under the Apennines,
Vl. xxix. 3


Tanais River, vil. iv. 7, v. 23;
empties into the Maeotic Lake, vi.
vi. 4; the outlet also of the Maeotic
Lake, VU. iv. 10; rises in the
Rhipaean Mountains, VII. vi. 5;
said by some to divide Europe
from Asia, VII. vi. 2, 6, 7, 13, 15;
grt by the Utigurs, VIII. xviii.

2


Tanaitis, a name given to a wind
near the Maeotic Lake, vt. iv. 10

Tarentum, captured by Totila, vm.
xxxvii. 23; Goths escape thither,
vill. xxvi. 3; commanded by Rag-
naris, VIII. xxvi. 4, xxxiv. 9;
threatened by Pacurius, VIII. xxxiv.
14, 15

Taurians, their location, VIII. v. 23

Taurica, the land of the Taurians,
vil. v. 23

Teias, a Gothic commander; blocks
the roads against Narses, Vill. xxvi.
21, 22, 24; summoned by Totila,
vol. xxix. 4 yin king of the
Goths, VIII. xxxiii . 6, xxxiv. 9,17;
seeks alliance with the Franks, vm.
xxxiii. 7, xxxiv. 9; slays Roman
children, VII. xxxiv. 8; prepares
to fight Narses, VIII. xxxiv. 21;
reaches Campania, VIII. xxxiv. 23;
fights heroically and dies, vi.
xxxv. 20-29


438


Terdetes, a notable of the Lazi; be- —
trays Apeilia to the Persians, vin.


Tetraxitae, a Gothic tribe near the
Maeotic Lake, VII. iv. 9, Vv. 5;
Christians, VUl. iv. 9; their history,
vill. v. 1 ff.; send an embassy to
Justinian, Vill. iv. 12, 13; attacked
and taken across the Maeotic Lake —
by the Utigurs, vul. v. 18-21; in
— with the Utigurs, VIII. xviii,


Peenteteas town on the Thermodon
River, Vul. ii, 2; traditional seat
of the Amazons, ὙΠ. iii. ὅ

Theoderic, king of the a
establishes the Gothic om in
Italy, VU. xxxix. 15, 21, VIII. v.
SR eect ee ‘nate
Sxvi Tks a of A
vul. xxi, 11; father of
suntha, VII. . 14

Theodora, consort of Opsites; carried —
oft by Nabedes, VIIL ix. 7; a Roman
by birth, vii. ix. 8

Theophobius, of the Lazi;
Uthimereos, VIII. xvi. 4-13

Thermodon River, reputed home of
the Amazons, VIII. ii. 2, iii. 5, 7

Thermopylae, in Greece, VIII. xxvi. 1

Thessalonice, its capture planned by
the Sclaveni, vi. xl. 3; avoided
by them, vil. xl. 7; threatened
by Huns, VIM. xxi. 22 ΜῊ

Thessaly, VII. xxv. 19 4

ἘΞ ire | See hee ἘΣ

ert as e ;
xxiv. 11; addressed opi
Vl. xxiv. 12-24; replies to him,
Vill, xxiv. 25-29; invited Ὁ Teles
to an alliance, Vill. xxxiv. 1

Theudibert, king of the Franks; mar-
ries his sister to Hermegisclus, VIII.
xx. 11; his death, Vill. xxiv. 6;
succeeded by Theudibald, Viil. xxiy.
11; had trespassed on Ttaly, VIL.
xxiv. 11, 15; defended by Theudi-
bald, Vit. xxiv. 26; the sister a, ἢ

ae sm dasnee οἱ John Guzes, vit.
omas, er of Jo! ᾿
by 15, 38, ix..13, x. 7, xi. 57,


Th k of the 8668.
a, ng ot avi $, ee
19; negotiates with Auduin, vu.


-
a
&
=
>
-


INDEX


xviii, 8ff.; refuses to surrender


VI. xxvii. 22-25
roraee, invaded by the a vul.
xxxviii. 3; plundered by them,


vil, xxxviii. a ee ig ἑὰς he


vill. ix. 5; mentioned, vil. xviii,
17, xxvii. 9

Thule, Vill. xxv. 11; its position with
reference to Brit itia, Vill, xx. 4;
in the extreme north, VII. xx. 6

parr ae commander of Rhegium,

xxxvii, 20; distinguishes

himself in its vo sae Vil. xxxix. 1;
surrenders Rhegium to the Goths,
Vit. xxxix. 5

Thuringians, their king Hermene-
fridus, Vill. xxv. 11

Tiber River, vil. xxvi. 8, 9, VIII. xxii.


3,8
Ticinum, held by the Goths, VIII.
xxxiii. 6, xxxv. 37; en!


urians,

attacks a Roman force in the Tomb
of Hadrian, vil. xxxvi. 18-20;
receives their surrender, VI. XXxvi.
24-28; receives the surrender of
other Romans, VI. xxxvi. 28;


with the daughter of the Frankish
1; is refused, VU.


Sicily, VU. xxxvii. 4; captures a
fleet of provision-ships, VU. xxxvii.


as ambassador
to Justinian, VII. xxxvii. 6; lays
siege to Centumcellae, VII. xxxvii.
8; sends envoys to > Diogenes and
receives proposals from him, VII.
xxxvii. 11-17; attacks Rhegium,
Vi. xxxvii. 19-22;
Tarentum, VII. xxxvii. 23; crosses
to Sicily and attacks Messana, VII.
xxxix. 2; demands the surrender
Hae, VII. xxxix. 25:
retires from Sicily, with enormous
booty, vil. xl. 19; chooses Spinus
as his counsellor, vl. xl. 20; seeks
to rescue Spinus, VII. x]. 22; leaves
Sicily, oor a by Spinus, vu.


αὶ. 24, 26- suspected of in-
stigating the τ ha vil. xi. 32,
33; Narses marches Ἂ ὙΠ.


against
xxi. 19; prepares for Narses, VII.


against Narses,
xxvi. 21, 23, 24; awaits Telas


INDEX


his flight and death, vil. xxxii.
22-30; his death verified by the
Romans, Vil. xxxii. 31, 32; another
version of his end, Vil. xxxii,
33-36; deposits money in Tici-
num, Vill. xxxiii. 7; instigates the
taurder of Cyprian, VI. xxxiii. 10;
burns many buildings in Rome,
Vil.


14: sends many
senators into Oampania Vill.
xxxiv. 5; sends er μας Ἔν οι
as hostages beyond the Po, ΥΠ|.
xxxiv. 7, 8; deposits money in
een ‘and in Oumae, VII, xxxiy.
9


Trachea, a strongly defended pass in
Abasgia, VIII. ix. 19, 21, 22

Trajan, Roman Emperor, VIL. ii. 16

Trapezuntines, their exact location,
vu. i. 8; extent of their territory,
vill. ii. 3; not neighbours of the
Colchians, VIII. ii. 15

Trapezus, city on the Euxine, val.
ii. 2; distance from Rhizaeum,
Vill. ii. 3; its unusual honey, VIII.
ii, 4; boundaries of, VIII. iv. 5;
refuge of Roman garrisons, VIII. iv. 6

Tribunus, a physician from Palestine;

admired by Ohosroes,
ΥΠΙ. x. 11-14; receives a favour
from Chosroes, VIL. x. 15, 16

Troy, its capture, VIL. xxii. 81


Tuscany, VU. xxxiii.
24; crossed by Totila, VIII. xxix.
33 *its fortress Nepa, VIII. xxxiv. 16

Tynnichus, an artist, VIII. xxii, 29

Tzani, a people on the Euxine, VIII.
i. 8; their exact location, VII. i. 9;
with the Roman army in Lazica,
Vil. xiii. 10

Tzanica, its mountains, VIIL ii. 5, 6

Tzibile, fortress in Apsilia, VII. x, 1, 7;
guarding the road to the country
of the Abasgi, VIII. xvii. 16

Tzur, a pass over the Caucasus, VIL,


Tzurullum, town in Thrace, VIL.
xxxviii. 5


Ulifus, Roman deserter; commander
of Perusia, VII. xxxiii. 10; slayer
of Oyprian, do.; his death, VIL.


xxxiii. 11, 12
Vligagus, of the Eruli;


440


commander


in the Roman army, :
sent to Lazica, VIII. eB, 5, 13, xiii,
9; attacks the Abasgi, VILL. ix. 20 ff.
Ulpiana, city in Illyricum, bie >: XXV,


ina
VUL. xxviii. τ, 11, xxix. 3
Ustrigothus, son of Elemund VIL.
xxvii. 19: sons ple of the
of the Gepaedes i Bige os i ae
xxvii. 19, 20; his
demanded by Thorisin, Vu, Lead
26; slain ne Auduin, VII. xxvii.


Utigur, ‘rogenttor of the Utigur Huns,


Utigut ‘ign tribe near the Maeotic
Lake, Vill. iv. 8;


ae Sal
xix. 4, 6; the VIL.
xix. 8. See also Cimmerians.


Valerian, Roman general in Armenia,
Vill. viii, 22; captured Bersabus,
VI. xv. 93 *writes to John, VILL.
xxiii. 4-6; comes to vill.
xxiii. 8;


encamps
Verona, VII. xxxiii. 3;
proposals of surrender, VIII,
4; retires, VII.


INDEX


οὶ 3B Bol ERG 3


ἡ jee :
ties] Flea ie Ae fe
{8 μβμ 3}: rl Hl


*
ot he
᾿
»


THE LOEB CLASSICAL
LIBRARY


VOLUMES ALREADY PUBLISHED


Latin Authors
AMMIANUS MarcetiiNnus. Translated by J.C. Rolfe. 3 Vols.


: Tue GotpEeNn Ass (METAMORPHOSES). W. Adling-
ton (1566). Revised by S. Gaselee.


Sr. AucustrxneE: Crry or Gop. 7 Vols. Vol. 1. G. H.
McCracken. Vol. VI. W. C. Greene.  -


Sr. AUGUSTINE, CONFESSIONS OF. W. Watts(1631). 2 Vols.
Sr. Aucustrne, Setect Letters. J. H. Baxter.

Avusonius. H.G. Evelyn White. 2 Vols.

ΒΕΡΕ. J. E. King. 2 Vols.


Borruius: Tracts and Dre CoNSOLATIONE PHILOSOPHIAE.
Rev. H. F. Stewart and E. K. Rand.


CarsaR: ALEXANDRIAN, AFRICAN and SPANISH Wars. A. G.
Way.

Cagsar: Crviz Wars. A. G. Peskett.

Cagsar: Gatitic War. H. J. Edwards.


Caro: De Re Rustica; Varro: De Re Rustica. H. B. Ash
and W. D. Hooper.


Catuttus. F.W.Cornish; Trsutius. J. B. Postgate; Prr-
VierLiuM VENERIs. J. W. Mackail.


Cetsus: DE Mepicrya. W.G. Spencer. 3 Vols.


Cicero: Brutus, and Orator. G. L. Hendrickson and H. M.
Hubbell.


[Cicero]: Ap Herennium. H. Caplan.


Cicero: Dr Orarore, ete. 2 Vols. Vol. I. De Onarong,
Books 1. and II. E. W. Sutton and H. Rackham. Vol. I.
De Oratore, Book III. De Fato; Paradoxa Stoicorum;
De Partitione Oratoria. H. Rackham.


Cicero: De Fryisus. H. Rackham.

Cicero: Ds IxvEeNTIONE, etc. H. M. Hubbell.

Cicero: De Natura DeoruM and Acapemica. H. Rackham.
Ciczero: De Orricus. Walter Miller.


Ciczro: De Rerusiica and De Lecrsvus; SomniuM ScrIPIonis.
Clinton W. Keyes.


1


Ciczrro: Ds Senecrure, De ἈΜΙΟΙΊΎΤΑ, Dr DIVINATIONE.
W. A. Falconer.


Cicero: In Catizinay, Pro Fracco, Pro Mtrena, Pro Sunza.
Louis E. Lord.

Cicrro: Lerrrers to Arricus. E. O. Winstedt. 3 Vols.

γι τοῦτ Lerrers ΤῸ His Frienps. W. Glynn Williams. 3

ols.

Cicero: Puinippics. W.C. A. Ker. .

Cicero: Pro Arcuta Post Reprrum, Dz Domo, Dr Harvs-
Picum Responsis, Pro Prancio. N. H. Watts.

CicERO: Pro Carcrna, Pro Lect Mania, Pro CLuEntio,
Pro Rasrrio. H. Grose Hodge.

Cicero: Pro Cartio, De Provrncius ConsunARIBus, Pro
Bartso. R. Gardner.

CicERO: Pro ΜΊΠΟΝΕ, In Pisonem, Pro Scauro, Pro Fonrero,
Pro Rasirio Postumo, Pro MARCELLO, emo LicaRrio, Pro
Reese Deroraro. N. H. Watts.

Cicero: Pro QurncTio, Pro Roscro ῥξ κα ς Pro Roscio
ComorEpbo, Contra Ruttum. J. H. Freese.

Cicero: Pro Sestio, In Vartnium. ΒΕ. Gardner.

Cicero: TuscuLan Dispurations. J. BE. King.

Cicero: VERRINE OraAtTiIons. L. H. G. Greenwood. 2 Vols.

CruaupIaAn. M. Platnauer. 2 Vols.

CotuMELLA: Dr Re Rustica. Dr Arsorrsus. H. B. Ash,
E. 5. Forster and E. Heffner. 3 Vols.

Curtius, Q.: History or ALEXANDER. J.C. Rolfe. 2 Vols.

Frorvus. E.S§. Forster; and Cornetius Nepos. J.C. Rolfe.

Frontimnus: STRATAGEMS and AquEepucts. C. E. Bennett and
M. B. McElwain.

Fronto: CorrESPONDENCE. C. R. Haines. 2 Vols

Getuius, J. C. Rolfe. 3 Vols.

Horace: OpEs AnD Epopss. C. E. Bennett.

Horace: Satrres, Epistites, Ars Porrica. H. R. Fairclough.

JEROME: SELECTED Letrers. Εἰ, A. Wright.

JUVENAL and Prersius. G. G. Ramsay.

Livy. B. O. Foster, F. G. Moore, Evan T. Sage, and A. Ὁ.
Schlesinger and R. M. Geer (General Index). 14 Vols.

Lucan. J.D. Duff.

Lucretius. W.H. Ὁ. Rouse.

Martian. W.C. A. Ker. 2 Vols. f

Mryor Latin Ports: from Pustmius Syrus τὸ Ruritius
NaMATIANUS, including Grarrius, CaLpuRNIUs SiIcuLUs,
NEMESIANUS, Avianus, and others with “ Aetna” and the
“Phoenix.” J. Wight Duff and Arnold M. Duff.

Ovip: THE Arr or Love and OrHER Porms. J. H. Mozley.

2


Ovip: Fastt. Sir James G. Frazer.

Ovip: Heromess and Amores. Grant Showerman.
Ovip: MeramorpHoses. F. J. Miller. 2 Vols.
Ovip: Trista and Ex Ponto. A. L. Wheeler.


Prerronius. M. Heseltine; SENECA; APOCOLOCYNTOsIS.


Puavurus. Paul Nixon. 5 Vols.
Puixy: Lerrers. Melmoth’s Translation revised by W. M. L.
Hutchinson. 2 Vols.


Ῥιανυ: Naturat History. H. Rackham and W. H. 5, Jones.
10 Vols. Vols. 1—V. and IX. H. Rackham. Vols. VI. and
VII. W.H.S. Jones.


Propertius. H. E. Butler.
Prupentius. H.J. Thomson. 2 Vols.
QuintmiAn. H. E. Butler. 4 Vols.


ΒΈΜΑΙΝΒ or Otp Latry. E. H. Warmington. 4 Vols. Vol. I.
(Enntus anp Cazcrtivs.) Vol. Il. (Litvirus, Nagvivs,
Pacuvius, Accirus.) Vol. III. (Lucius and Laws or XII
Tastes.) (ArcHaic INscrRIPTIONs. +)


Satiusr. J.C. Rolfe.

Scriprores Histortazr AucustaE. Ὁ. Magie. 3 Vols.
Seneca: Apocotocyntosis. Cf. PETRONIUs.

Seneca: EpisrunrAE Moraes. R.M. Gummere. 3 Vols.
Seneca: Moran Essays. J. W. Basore. 3 Vols.

Seneca: TrRAGEpies. F.J. Miller. 2 Vols.

Smpontvus: Poems and Lerrers. W.B. ANDERSON. 2 Vols.
Smivs Iraticus. J. D. Duff. 2 Vols.

Srativs. 17. Η. Mozley. 2 Vols.

Sveronius. J.C. Rolfe. 2 Vols.


Tactrus: Dratocues. Sir Wm. Peterson. AGRICOLA and
GERMANIA. Maurice Hutton.


tor Histories AND ANNaAts. C.H.Mooreand J. Jackson.
4 Vols.


TreRENCE. John Sargeaunt. 2 Vols.


TERTULLIAN: ApotoGia and De Specracuuis. T. R. Glover.
Mrxvucius Fetrx. G. H. Rendall

Vaterivus Fraccus. J. H. Mozley.

Varro: De Lineua Latina. R.G. Kent. 2 Vols.

VELLEIVs PaTeRcuLus and Res GestarE Divi Aueusti, F, W.
Shipley.

Vinerz. H.R. Fairclough. 2 Vols.

Virruvius: Dre ArncuirecturA, F. Granger. 2 Vols. -


Greek Authors


AcHiLtLxes Tatrus, S. Gaselee.
ae On tHE Nature or Animats, A, Εἰ, Scholfield. 3
ols,


AENEAS TacTICUS, ASCLEPIODOTUS and ONASANDER. The
Tllinois Greek Club.


AxrscHInes. C. Ὁ. Adams,

AxrscHytus. H. Weir Smyth. 2 Vols.

ALCIPHRON, AELIAN, PHrLOstTRATUS: LETTERS. A. ἢ, Benner
and F. H. Fobes.

AnpocipEs,*AnTipHoN, Cf, Minor Arric ORATORs.

ApotLoporvus. Sir James G. Frazer. 2 Vols.

Apottontus Ruopivus. R. C. Seaton.

THe Apostroxic Faruers. Kirsopp Lake. 2 Vols.

ἌΡΡΙΑΝ; Roman History, Horace White. 4 Vols.

Aratus. Cf, CALLIMACHUS.

ARISTOPHANES. Benjamin Bickley Rogers. 3 Vols. Verse
trans.

ARISTOTLE: ART OF RuEroric. J. H. Freese.

ARISTOTLE: ATHENIAN ConstITuTION, EupEMIAN ΕΤΉΙΟΒ,
VicEs AND VirtuEs. H. Rackham.

ARISTOTLE; GENERATION OF AntIMALS. A. L. Peck.

ARISTOTLE: Mrrapuysics. H. Tredennick. 2 Vols.

ARISTOTLE: MereroLoaica. H. D. P. Lee.

ARISTOTLE: Minor Works. W. 5. Hett. On Colours, On
Things Heard, On Physiognomies, On Plants, On Marvellous
Things Heard, Mechanical Problems, On Indivisible Lines,
On Situations and Names of Winds, On Melissus, Xenophanes,
and Gorgias.

ARISTOTLE: NICOMACHEAN Eruics. H. Rackham.

ARISTOTLE: Oxrconomica and Magna Moraria. G. C. Arm-
strong; (with Metaphysics, Vol. IT.).

ARISTOTLE: ON THE HEAVENS. W. K. C. Guthrie.

ARISTOTLE: ON THE Sout. Parva NatreurauiA. ON BREATH.
W.S. Hett.

ARISTOTLE: CATEGORIES, ON INTERPRETATION, PRIOR
Anatytics. H. P. Cooke and H. Tredennick.

ArIsToTLE: Posterior ANALytics, Topics. H. Tredennick
and E. 8. Forster.

ARISTOTLE: ON SOPHISTICAL REFUTATIONS.

On Coming to be and Passing Away, On the Cosmos. E, 5.
Forster and Ὁ. J. Furley.

ARISTOTLE: Parts or Antmats. A. L. Peck; ΜΌΤΙΟΝ AND

PrRoGRESSION OF AnimAts. E. 5S. Forster.
4


γος : Ῥηυβιοα. Rev. P. Wicksteed and F. Μ. Cornford.

Vols.

ARISTOTLE: Portics and Lonersvus. W. Hamilton Fyfe;
Demerrivs ΟΝ Styte. W. Rhys Roberts.

ARISTOTLE: Pourtics. H. Rackham.

ARISTOTLE: ProsLEeMs. W.S. Hett. 2 Vols.

ARISTOTLE: RHETORICA AD ALEXANDRUM (with PROBLEMs.
Vol. 1.) H. Rackham.

ArRIAN: History or ALEXANDER and inpica. Rev. E, Iliffe
Robson. 2 Vols.

ATHENAEUS: DErPNosopHIsTAE. C. B. Gutickx. 7 Vols.

Sr. Basm: Lerrers. R.J.Deferrari. 4 Vols.

Cattimacuus: Fracments. C. A. Trypanis.

Cattrmacuus, Hymns and Epigrams, and LycopHron. A. W.
Mair; Aratus. G. ΒΕ. Mam.

Crement of ALEXANDRIA. Rev. G. W. Butterworth.

CotitutTHus. Cf. Oppran.

DAPHNIS AND Cxtor. Thornley’s Translation revised by
J.M. Edmonds; and Parruentus. S. Gaselee.

DEMOSTHENES I.: OtyntTHIAcs, Pumiprics and Mryor Ora-
tions. I—XVII. anp XX. J. H. Vince.

DEMOSTHENES IJ.: Dr Corona and De Fatsa LEGATIONE.
C. A. Vince and J. H. Vince.


DEMOSTHENES IIJ.: Merrm1ss, ANDROTION, ARISTOCRATES,
TIMOCRATES and ARISTOGEITON, I. anD II. J. H. Vince.
DEMOSTHENES IV.—VI.: Privare Orations and In NEAERAM.
A. T. Murray.

DEMOSTHENES VII.: FUNERAL SPEECH, Erotic Essay, Exorpia
and Lerrers. N. W. and N. J. DeWitt.

Dio Casstus: Roman History. E. Cary. 9 Vols.

Dio Curysostom. J. W.Cohoon and H. Lamar Crosby. 5 Vols.

Dioporvs Sicutus. 12 Vols. Vols. I-VI. C. H. Oldfather.
Vol. VII. C. L. Sherman. Vols. IX. and X. R. M. Geer.
Vol. XI. F. Walton.

Diocenes LaEririvs. R.D. Hicks. 2 Vols.

Dionysius oF Haticarnassus: Roman Antiquities. Spel-
man’s translation revised by E. Cary. 7 Vols.

Eptcrerus. W.A. Oldfather. 2 Vols.

Evurrmes. A.S. Way. 4 Vols. Verse trans.

Evsrsrus: EccrmstasticAL History. Kirsopp Lake and
J. ΒΕ. L. Oulton. 2 Vols.

Ganen: ON THE Naturat Facutties. A. J. Brock.

Tue Greek AnrHoLocy. W.R. Paton. 5 Vols.

Greek Extecy anp Iamsus with the ANacrEonTEA. J. M.
Edmonds. 2 Vols.

5


THe GREEK Bucoric Porrs (THEocritus, Bion, Moscuus).
J. M. Edmonds.

GREEK MATHEMATICAL Works. Ivor Thomas. 2 Vols.

Heropes. Cf. THEOPHRASTUS: CHARACTERS.

Heropotus. A.D. Godley. 4 Vols.

HEsiop AND THE Homeric Hymns. H. G. Evelyn White.

Hrepocrates and the FRaAGMENts OF HERACLEITUS. W. H.S.
Jones and E. Τὶ Withington. 4 Vols.

Homer: Intap. A. Τὶ Murray. 2 Vols.

Homer: Opyssry. A. T. Murray. 2 Vols.

Isanus. ἘΠ. W. Forster.

Isocrates. George Norlin and LaRue Van Hook. 3 Vols.

Sr. Jonn DAMASCENE: BARLAAM AND JoAsapPH. Rev. G. R.
Woodward and Harold Mattingly.

JosEPpHus. H. St. J. Thackeray and Ralph Marcus. 9 Vols.
Vols. I.-VII. :

JvutiaAn. Wilmer Cave Wright. 3 Vols.

Lucran. 8 Vols. Vols. I.-V. A.M. Harmon, Vol. VI. K.
Kilburn.

LycopHron. Cf. CALLIMACHUs.

Lyra GraEcaA, J. M. Edmonds. 3 Vols.

Lystas. W.R. M. Lamb.

Manetuo. W.G. Waddell: Protremy: Trerrasprstos. F, E.
Robbins.

Marous AureEtius. OC. R. Haines.

MENANDER, F. G. Allinson.

Mryor Artic Orators (ANTIPHON, ANDOCIDEs, LycuRGUS,
DemapeEs, DrnarcHus, Hyprremss). K. J. Maidment and
J. O. Burrt. 2 Vols.

Nonnos: DionystacaA. W.H.D. Rouse. 3 Vols.

Oprran, Co~ttuTHus, TRyPHTODORUS. A. W. Mair.

Papyri. Non-Lirmrary Sretectrions. A. 5. Hunt and C. C.
oe 2 Vols. Lirgerary SELections (Poetry). D. L.

‘age.

ParTHENIvs. Cf. DAPHNIs and CHLOE.

PAUSANIAS: DeEscriIPTION or GREECE. W. H. 5. Jones. 4
Vols. and Companion Vol. arranged by R. E. Wycherley.

Puito. 10 Vols. Vols. I.-V.; Ἐς H. Colson and Rev. G. H.
Whitaker. Vols. VI.-IX.; F. H. Colson.

Puno: two supplementary Vols. (Zranslation only.) Ralph
Marcus.

Puitostratus: THE Lire or Apotntontius or Tyana. F. C.
Conybeare. 2 Vols.

PuILostRATUS: IMAGINES; CALLIsTRATUS: DEscRIPriONS. A,
Fairbanks.

6


PHILOsTRATUS and Eunapius: LivesorTHESopuHists. Wilmer
Cave Wright.

Pinpar. Sir J. E. Sandys.

Prato: CHARMIDEs, ALcIBIADES, Hrpparcuus, THe Lovers,
THEAGEs, Mrxos and Eprnomis. W. R. M. Lamb.

Prato: CraryLus, PARMENIDES, GREATER ΗΊΡΡΙΑΒ, LESSER
Hrepras. H. N. Fowler.

Prato: , Apotocy, Crirro, PHAaEDO, PHAEDRUs.
H. N. Fowler.

Brae, LacueEs, Proracoras, MENO, EutHyDEMus. W.R. M.

Prato: Laws. Rev. R.G. Bury. 2 Vols.

Prato: Lysis, Sympostum, Goreras. W. R. M. Lamb.

Prato: Repusiic. Paul Shorey. 2 Vols.

srs STATESMAN, PHizesus. H.N.Fowler; Ion. W.R.M.


Prato: THEAETETUs and Soruist. H. N. Fowler.


Prato: Timarus, Critras, CrrropHo, MENEXENUS, EpPIsTULAE.
Rev. R. G. Bury.
PrurartuH: Moraria. 15 Vols. Vols. I1-V. F. C. Babbitt.
ὩΣ VI. W.C. Helmbold. Vol. VII. Ρ. Η. De Lacy and
B. Eimarson. Vol. IX. E. L. Minar, Jr., F. H. Sandbach,
Ww. C. Helmbold. Vol. X. H.N. Fowler. Vol. XII. H.
Cherniss and W. C. Helmbold.


PrurarcH: THe Parattet Lives. B. Perrin. 11 Vols.

Potysius. W.R. Paton. 6 Vols. -

Procorius: History or THE Wars. H. B. Dewing. 7 Vols.

ProtemMy: TETRABIBLOS. Cf. MANETHO.

Qurytus SmMyrnaEus. A.S. Way. Verse trans.

Sextus Emrreicus. Rev. R.G. Bury. 4 Vols.

Sopnoctes. F. Storr. 2 Vols. Verse trans.

Srraso: GeocrapHy. Horace L. Jones. 8 Vols.

THEOPHRASTUS: CHARACTERS. J. M. Edmonds. Heropss,
ete. A. D. Knox.

THEOPHRASTUS: ENQurIRyY Into Prants. Sir Arthur Hort,
Bart. 2 Vols.

TxHucypipes. C.F.Smith. 4 Vols.

TrypuHioporus. Cf. ΟΡΡιαν.

XENOPHON: CyROPAEDIA. Walter Miller. 2 Vols.

XENOPHON: HELLENICA, ANABASIS, APOLOGY, and SyMPOsIUM.
C. L. Brownson and O. J. Todd. 3 Vols.

XENOPHON: MEMORABILIA and Orconomicus. E.C. Marchant.

XENOPHON: Scripta Mrvora. E. Ὁ, Marchant.


IN PREPARATION


Greek Authors


ARISTOTLE: History or ANtmMAts. A. ἴω, Peck.
Piotrnus: A. H. Armstrong.


Latin Authors


BaBrRius AND PHAEDRUS. Ben E, Perry.


DESCRIPTIVE PROSPECTUS ON APPLICATION


London WILLIAM HEINEMANN LTD
Cambridge, Mass. HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS
