Source note (Tower of Babel staging): Procopius, History of the Wars, Books VI (continued) and VII: The Gothic War (part 2), translated by H. B. Dewing (Loeb Classical Library, Vol. IV, London: William Heinemann / New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1924). Text from Internet Archive item procopiuswitheng04procuoft (OCR; Greek facing-page text removed).
Public domain work. This file was produced from a public scan; OCR imperfections may remain.

THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY


FOUNDED BY JAMES LOEB, LL.D.


EDITED BY


*T. E: PAGE, στ, 111 1.-Ὁ.
JE. CAPPS, PH.D., LL.D. TW. H. Ὁ: ROUSE, .tirt.p.
L. A. POST, u.u.p. E. H. WARMINGTON, M.4A., F.R.HIST.SOC.


PROCOPIUS
IV


ὯΝ davis io OAL ast


OR, D6E AT b.M YOTOKDETAW SE”


auIIODOHF


PROCOPIUS


WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY
H. B. DEWING


IN SEVEN VOLUMES
IV


HISTORY OF THE WARS,
BOOKS VI (continued) anno VIL


LONDON


WILLIAM HEINEMANN LTD


CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS


HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS
MOMLXII


First printed 1924
Reprinted 1954, 1962


Printed in Great Britain


P i
S340
<a

A 2
19
fy
i


CONTENTS


HISTORY OF THE WARS—


BOOK VI.—THE GOTHIO WAR (continued)


BOOK VII.—THE GOTHIC WAR (continued) .


INDEX .


Map—NoRTHERN ITALY .


PAGE


At end


Of ones 9 ΓΝ


Leising γι


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


HISTORY OF THE WARS:
BOOK VI


THE GOTHIC WAR (continued)


XVI


\ Lal
/ 3 / > / > \ /
f > f δὲ » .“,.7 / ς / CNG,
fal \ Ὁ “ a a
a “ “ /
" Ν \ / 2 eG an / 9 "»
\ 3) / “
+7 na Ν eas / \ / ’
a /
9 a 2 cal
a) / ΄ / ¢


ho


BROCOPIOS: OC 4 C Ads SAE.
HISTORY OF THE.WARS.:; BOOK. VI


THE GOTHIC WAR (continued)


XVI


Beisarius and Narses came together with their
two armies near the city of Firmum,! which lies on
the shore of the Ionian Gulf, and is one day’s
journey distant from the city of Auximus. In that
place they began to hold conterences with all the
commanders of the army, considering at what par-
ticular point it would be most to their advantage to
make the first attack upon the enemy. For if, on
the one hand, they should proceed against the forces
besieging Ariminum, they suspected that the Goths
in Auximus would in all probability, taking them in
the rear, inflict irreparable harm both upon them
and upon the Romans who lived in that region ; but,
on the other hand, they were anxious concerning the
besieged, dreading lest by reason of their lack of
provisions they should suffer some great misfortune.
Now the majority were hostile toward John, and
made their speeches accordingly; and the charge
they brought against him was that he had been


1 Modern Fermo.


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


> , \ / a "» »
, 7, ᾽ , A ’ ᾽ 7 5. @
᾽ / ΄ a

/ \ \ ” b) oF ys τ ,

, / a a
΄ r
lal / -
> / / \ / , nr >
a / \
ὃ ,ὕ v > » , / id \ > ,
f ᾽ \ , Ὗ ᾽ a 3 \
3 \ \ bd \ e ” /


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xvi. 4-


moved by unreasoning daring and a desire to gain
great sums of money to place himself in his present
dangerous position, and that he would not allow the
operations of the war to be carried out in due order
nor in the manner prescribed by Belisarius, But
Narses, who loved John above all other men,
beginning to be fearful lest Belisarius should give
way to the words of the officers and treat the situa-
tion at Ariminum as of secondary importance, spoke
as follows:

“Fellow officers, you are not debating a question
of the customary sort, nor are you holding this
council regarding a situation about which one would
naturally be in doubt, but in circumstances where it
is possible even for those who have had no experience
of war to make their choice offhand and in so doing
to choose the better course. For if it seems to be
true that each of these two alternatives offers to
those who fail an equal degree of danger and
evenly balanced possibilities of mischief, it is alto-
gether worth while to deliberate and to go most
thoroughly into the arguments, and only then to
make our decision regarding the situation before us.
But if we should wish to put off the assault upon
Auximus to some other time, the penalty we shall
suffer will involve in no way any vital interest of
ours; for what ditference could arise during the
interval? But if we fail at Ariminum, we shall in
all probability, if it is not too bitter a thing to say,
shatter the strength of the Romans, Now if John
treated your commands with insolence, most excellent
Belisarius, the atonement you have already exacted
from him is surely ample, since it is now in your
power either to save him in his reverse or to abandon


5


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


18


14


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xvi. 9-15


him to the enemy, But see that you do not exact
from the emperor and from us the penalty for mistakes
committed by John through ignorance. For if the
Goths capture Ariminum at the present juncture, it
will be their good fortune to have made captive a
capable Roman general, as well as a whole army
and a city subject tothe emperor, And the calamity
will not stop with this, but it will also have such
weight as to determine the fortune of the war in
every field. For you should reason thus regarding
the enemy, that they are still, even at the present
time, far superior to us in the number of their
soldiers, and they have lost their courage only
because of the many reverses they have suffered.
And this is natural ; for the adversity of fortune has
taken away all their confidence. If, therefore, they
meet with success at the present time, they will at
no distant date recover their spirit and thereafter
they will carry on this war with a boldness, not
merely equal to ours, but actually much greater.
For it is a way with those who are freeing themselves
from a difficult situation always to have a better
heart than those who have not yet met with disaster,”
Thus spoke Narses.

At this time a soldier who had escaped from
Ariminum by slipping through the guard of the
barbarians came into the camp and shewed Belisarius
a letter which John had written to him, conveying
the following message: “‘ Know that for a long time
all our provisions have been exhausted, that we are
no longer able either to hold out against the populace
or to ward off our assailants, and that within seven
days we shall unwillingly surrender both ourselves


16


17


18


19


21


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 ᾧ Kraseninnikov: ὃ Καὶ, ὃν D.


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI, xvi. 15-22


and this city to the enemy; for beyond this time we
are absolutely unable to overcome the necessity
which is upon us, and this necessity, I think, will
be a suthcient apology in our behalf, if we do any-
thing which is unseemly.” Thus, then, did John
write. But Belisarius, on his part, was sorely per-
plexed and plunged into the greatest uncertainty.
For while he was fearful concerning the besieged,
he suspected, at the same time, that the enemy in
Auximus would overrun the whole country round
about and plunder it with never a fear, and also that
they would ambush his own army from behind at
every opportunity, and especially whenever he joined
battle with his opponents, and would thus in all
probability do the Romans great and irreparable
harm. Finally, however, he did as follows. He
left Aratius with a thousand men there, instructing
them to make a camp by the sea, at a distance of
two hundred stades from Auximus. These troops
he commanded neither to move away from that
position nor to fight a decisive action with the
enemy, except in so far as to drive them off from
the camp, if they should ever make an attack upon
it. For he hoped by this course to make it certain
that the barbarians, seeing Romans encamped close
by, would remain quietly in Auximus and never
follow his own army to do it harm. And he des-
patched by sea a very considerable army commanded
by Herodian, Uliaris and Narses the brother of
Aratius. But Ildiger was appointed commander-in-
chief of the expedition, and he was instructed by
Belisarius to sail straight for Ariminum, taking care
not to attempt putting in to shore near the city


9


20


24


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XVII


2 ἔτυχε Christ: om. MSS.


Io


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xvi. 22-xvii. 3


while the land army was still far behind; for they
would be proceeding by a road not far from the
coast. And he ordered another army under com-
mand of Martinus to march along the coast, keeping
near these ships, and instructing them that, when
they came close to the enemy, they should burn a
greater number of camp-fires than usual and not in
proportion to the actual numbers of the army, and
thus lead their opponents to believe their numbers
to be much greater than they actually were. He
himself, meanwhile, went by another road far
removed from the shore with Narses and the rest of
the army, passing through the city of Urvisalia,!
which in earlier times Alaric destroyed so completely 2
that nothing whatever has been left of its former
grandeur, except a small remnant of a single gate
and of the floor of the adjoining edifice.


XVII


In that place it was my fortune to see the follow-
ing sight. When the army of John came into
Picenum, the people of that region, as was natural,
were thrown into great confusion, And among the
women, some took hurriedly to flight, wherever each
one found it possible, while others were captured and
led away ina disorderly manner by those who chanced
upon them, Now a certain woman of this city had,
as it happened, just given birth to a child, and had
abandoned the infant, leaving it in its swaddling
clothes lying upon the ground; and whether she
sought safety in flight or was captured by someone or
other, she did not succeed in getting back again to

? Urbs Salvia, modern Urbisaglia.
2 In the invasion of 452 4.D.
II


10


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


4 ἐν Maltretus : om. MSS. 3 περιὸν K: περιιὸν L.
12


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xvii. 3-10


that place; for assuredly it fell out that she dis-
appeared from the world or at least from Italy. So
the infant, being thus abandoned, began to cry.
But a lone she- goat, seeing it, felt pity and came
near, and gave the ifant ‘her udder (for she too,
as it happened, had recently brought forth young)
and guarded it carefully, lest a dog or wild beast
should injure it. And since the confusion was long
continued, it came about that the infant partook of
this food tor a very long time. But later, when it
became known to the people of Picenum that the
emperors army had come there to injure the
Goths, but that the Romans would suffer no harm
from it, they all returned immediately to their
homes. And when such of the women as were
Romans by birth came to Urvisalia with the men,
and saw the infant still alive in its swaddling clothes,
they were utterly unable to comprehend what had
happened and considered it very wonderful that
the infant was living. And each of them who
chanced to be at that time able to do so offered her
breast. But neither would the infant now have any-
thing to do with human milk, nor was the goat at all
willing to let it go, but as it kept bleating unceasingly
about the infant, it seemed to those present to be
feeling the greatest resentment that the women came
near it and disturbed it as they did, and, to put all
in a word, she insisted upon claiming the babe as
her own. Consequently the women no longer dis-
turbed the infant, and the goat continued to nourish
it free from fear and to guard it with every care,
Wherefore the inhabitants of the place appropriately
ealled this infant Aegisthus.1 And when I igen


1 From até ‘‘a goat.”


13


1


19


14


10


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


a / / -“
\ > ANE PF ef / \ U4 \
“ b] / n ’ > \ v [4 3
“ la 7 lal
Ν / \ \ 9S 3 \ lal Sits
\ \ a 4 n
A \ \ Ἁ ’ / an
/ a 5) “ A
> \
» / a > a / » »Μ a τ ΄
\ >) id ‘ e A
a e a > nan 8. Ὁ“ NS a
” rid / « Ν > -
/ ,
lal ’ /
2 , Nee


22


14


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xvii. το-- τό


to be sojourning in that place, by way of making a
display of the strange sight they took me near the
infant and purposely hurt it so that it might cry out.
And the infant, annoyed by those hurting it, began
to cry; whereupon the goat, which was standing
about a stone’s throw away from it, hearing the cry,
came running and bleating loudly to its side, and took
her stand over it, so that no one might be able to
hurt itagain. Such then is the story of this Aegisthus.

But Belisarius was advancing through the moun-
tains in this region. For seeing that he was greatly
inferior to his opponents in numbers, he did not
wish to engage in an open battle with them, since
he could see that the barbarians were actually
paralyzed by their previous defeats; and he thought
that, as soon as they learned that a hostile army was
coming upon them from all sides, they would not
once think of resistance, but would without the least
hesitation turn to flight. And indeed he arrived at
a correct opinion regarding the situation, and his
suppositions were not at variance with what the
future was to bring forth. For when they had
reached a point in the mountains where they were
about one day’s journey distant from Ariminum,
they happened upon a small company of Goths who
were travelling on some necessary errand, And
these Goths, falling in unexpectedly with a hostile
army, were quite unable to get away from the road
before they were attacked by the missiles of those
who marched in the van, and some fell on the spot,
while others, after receiving wounds, succeeded in
hiding themselves by scrambling up some of the high
cliffs close by. From that position they watched
the Roman army collecting over all the rough


15


17


18


19


20


bo
bo


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


16


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xvii. 16-23


ground, and they supposed them to be many more
than they really were. And seeing the standards of
Belisarius there also, they realized that he was
leading this army in person. Then night came on
and the Romans bivouacked where they were, while
the wounded Goths went stealthily to the camp of
Vittigis. And reaching it about midday, they dis-
played their wounds and declared that Belisarius
would be upon them almost at once with an army
past numbering. Then the Goths began to prepare
for battle to the north of the city of Ariminum, for
they thought that the enemy would come from that
direction, and they were all constantly looking
toward the heights of the mountain. But when, as
night came upon them, they had laid down their
weapons and were resting, they saw many camp-fires
to the east of the city, about sixty stades away—
these were the fires which the troops of Martinus
were burning—and they fell into a state of helpless
fear; for they suspected that they would be sur-
rounded by the enemy at daybreak. So for that
night they bivouacked in such a state of fear; but
on the succeeding day at sunrise they saw a fleet of
ships in overwhelming numbers bearing down upon
them, and being plunged into speechless terror,
they made a rush to flee. And while they were
packing up their luggage as quickly as they could,
there arose so much confusion and shouting among
them that they neither paid heed to the commands
given nor did they think of anything else than
how each man for himself could get away first from
the camp and place himself inside the fortifications
of Ravenna. And if the besieged had only had
some strength or daring left in them, they could


17


24


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XVIII


18


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xvii. 23-xviii. 4


have killed great numbers of the enemy on the
spot by making a sally from the city, and the
whole war would have ended there. But, as it was,
this was prevented by the great fear which had
taken possession of them because of their past
experiences, and by the weakness which had come
upon many owing to the lack of provisions. So the
barbarians, leaving there some of their possessions
in the excess of their confusion, began to run as fast
as they could go on the road to Ravenna.


XVIII


Amone the Romans, Ildiger and his men were
the first to arrive at the enemy's camp, and they
made slaves of such of the Goths as had remained
there suffering from sickness of one kind or another,
and collected all the valuables which the Goths had
left in their flight. And Belisarius with his whole
army arrived at midday. And when he saw John
and his men pale and dreadfully emaciated, he said
to him, hinting at the rashness of his audacious deed,
that he owed a debt of gratitude to Ildiger. But
John said that he recognized his obligation, not to
Ildiger, but to Narses, the emperor’s steward, im-
plying, I suppose, that Belisarius had not come to
his defence very willingly, but only after being
persuaded by Narses. And from that time both
these men began to regard each other with great
suspicion. It was for this reason that the friends
of Narses even tried to prevent him from marching
with Belisarius, and they sought to shew him how
disgraceful it was for one who shared the secrets of


19


10


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


7
Ν ra / \ \ ¥ > A
» e / 2 - > 2.415 e 4
50, \ / f / > ᾽
4
Ane ”


20


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xviii. 4-11


the emperor not to be commander-in-chief of the
army, but to take orders from a mere general. For
they expressed the view that Belisarius would never
willingly share with him the command of the army
on equal terms, but that, if he wished to take com-
mand of the Roman army for himself, he would be
followed by the greater part of the soldiers, and
much the best ones too, together with their com-
manders. For the Eruli, they said, and Narses’ own
spearmen and guards, and the troops commanded
by Justinus and John himself, together with the
forces of Aratius and the other Narses, amounted
to not less than ten thousand men, brave soldiers
and especially capable warriors, and they did not
wish the subjugation of Italy to be reckoned to the
credit of Belisarius alone, but desired that Narses
too should carry off his share of the honour. For they
supposed that he had left the society of the emperor,
not that by facing danger himself he might establish
the glory of Belisarius, but presumably in order
that by making a display of deeds of wisdom and
bravery he might become famous among all men.
Furthermore, they said, even Belisarius would thence-
forth be unable to accomplish anything without
these troops. For the greater part of the forces
which he commanded had already been left behind
in fortresses and cities which he had himself captured,
and they enumerated them all, starting at Sicily and
naming them in order as far as Picenum.

When Narses heard this, he was exceedingly
pleased with the suggestion and could no longer
restrain his mind or tolerate the existing arrange-
ment. Often, therefore, when Belisarius thought
proper to undertake some new enterprise, he would


21


13


14


17


18


19


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


22


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xviii. 11-19


resort to different pretexts, now one and now
another, and thus block the project he was urging.
And Belisarius, perceiving this, called together all
the commanders and spoke as follows:

“It seems to me, fellow officers, that I do not
have the same opinion regarding this war as you
have. For you, I see, are contemptuous of the
enemy as being completely vanquished. But my
opinion is that by this confidence of yours we shall
fall into a danger which can be foreseen, because I
know that the barbarians have not been vanquished
by us because of any lack of courage on their part
or because of inferiority in numbers, but that it is
by means of careful planning beforehand that they
have been outgeneralled, and consequently have
turned to flight from this place. And I fear that
you may be deceived in regard to these facts because
of your false estimate of the situation, and may thus
do irreparable harm both to yourselves and to the
cause of the Romans. For those who, accounting
themselves victorious, are lifted up by their achieve-
ments are more readily destroyed than those who
have indeed suffered an unexpected reverse, but
thereafter are actuated by fear and abundant
respect of their enemy. For while indifference has
sometimes ruined men who were in good case,
energy coupled with solicitude has often relieved
those who had been unfortunate. For, on the one
hand, when men allow themselves to drift into an
attitude of unconcern, the measure of their strength
is wont, as a rule, to be lessened, but, on the other
hand, careful study of a situation is naturally calculated
to instil vigour. Accordingly, let each one of you
remember that Vittigis is in Ravenna with many


=


20


21


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


a \ / , “


/ ’ / Vv / \ \ >

a / BA \ \ v a /

’ Ul ς a \ a \ > / > ,


24


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xviii. r9—25


tens of thousands of Goths, that Uraias is besieging
Milan and has brought the whole of Liguria under
his power, that Auximus is already filled with an
army both numerous and formidable, and that many
other places, as far as Urviventus,! which is in the
neighbourhood of Rome, are guarded by barbarian
garrisons which are a match for us. Consequently
the situation is more perilous for us at the present
time than it formerly was, seeing that we have come
to be, in a way, surrounded by the enemy. And
this is not all, for I pass over the report that the
Franks also have joined forces with them in Liguria,
a thing which cannot fail to be remembered by all
Romans with great fear. I state, therefore, as my
opinion that a part of the army ought to be sent to
Liguria and Milan, but that the rest should in-
stantly proceed against Auximus and the enemy
there, in order to accomplish whatever God permits ;
and afterwards we should also take in hand the
other tasks of the war in whatever way seems best
and most advantageous.” So spoke Belisarius.

And Narses replied as follows: “ In other respects,
General, no one could deny that everything has been
spoken by you with truth. But that the emperor’s
whole army here should be divided between Milan
and Auximus alone I consider to be utterly inex-
pedient. It would not be at all unreasonable for you,
on your part, to lead against these places such of
the Romans as you yourself might wish, but we, on
our part, shall take possession for the emperor of
the territory of Aemilia, which the Goths are making
the greatest effort to win for themselves, and we
shall harass Ravenna in such a way that you will


1 Urbs Vetus ; modern Orvieto,


20


27


29


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


’ \ \ A A Se 9 DI BS /
lal / \
26


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xviii. 25—-xix. 1


crush the enemy before you as you wish, while they
are excluded from the hope of armies to support
them. For if we should elect to join you in carrying
on a siege at Auximus, the barbarians, I fear, will
come upon us from Ravenna, with the result that
we shall become exposed to the enemy on both
sides and, being at a distance from our base of
supplies, we shall be destroyed on the spot.” Such
were the words of Narses.

But Belisarius feared that, if the Romans should
go against many places at once, it would come about
that the emperor’s cause would be weakened and
finally ruined by the confusion resulting therefrom,
and so he shewed a letter from the Emperor Justinian
which he had written to the commanders of the
army, conveying the following message: “ We have
not sent our steward Narses to Italy in order to
command the army; for we wish Belisarius alone
to command the whole army in whatever manner
seems to him to be best, and it is the duty of all of
you to follow him in the interest of our state.” Such
was the purport of the emperor’s letter. But Narses,
laying hold of the final words of the letter, declared
that Belisarius at the present time was laying plans
contrary to the interest of the state; for this reason,
he said, it was unnecessary for them to follow him.


XIX


Upon hearing this Belisarius sent Peranius with
a numerous army to Urviventus with instructions to
besiege it, while he himself led his army against
Urbinus,! a city of strong defences and guarded by


1 Modern Urbino.


27
VOL. IV. B


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


2 of Haury: om. MSS.


28


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xix. 1-6


a sufficient garrison of Goths (it is at a distance from
the city of Ariminum of one day’s journey for an
unencumbered traveller), and as he led forth the
army he was followed by Narses and John and all
the others. And upon coming near the city, they
encamped in two divisions along the foot of the
hill; for they had not combined their forces at all,
but the troops of Belisarius held the position to the
east of the city, and those of Narses that to the
west. Now the city of Urbinus is situated upon
a hill which is round and exceedingly high. How-
ever, the hill is neither precipitous nor altogether
impossible to climb, and it is difficult only by reason
of being very steep, especially as one comes very
close to the city. But it has one approach by level
ground on the north. So the Romans were stationed
for the siege as has been stated. Now Belisarius
was of the opinion that the barbarians would some-
what readily make terms with the Romans for a
surrender, believing that they had become terrified
by the danger, and so he sent envoys to them,
promising that they would receive many benefits,
and exhorting them to become subjects of the
emperor. These envoys stood near the gates (for
the enemy would not receive them into the city),
and spoke at length, making a great effort to win
them over, but the Goths, confident in the strength
of their position and their abundance of provisions,
would not listen to their proposals, and bade the
Romans depart from the city with all speed. So
when Belisarius heard this, he ordered the army to
collect thick poles and to make of them a long


4. ἰόντι Comparetti: ὄντι MSS.


20


7


we


10


11


12


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 See Book VI. x. 5.
3°


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xix. 6-13


colonnade. This device was destined to cover the
men hidden inside as they moved it forward close
up to the gate at the particular point where the
ground was level and carried on their operations
against the wall. So the soldiers were engaged in
this work.

But some of the intimates of Narses gathered
around him and declared that Belisarius was under-
taking an endless task and devising impracticable
plans. For John, they said, had already made an
attempt upon the place,! and that too at a time
when it was guarded by only a few men, and had
perceived that it was altogether impregnable (and
this was true), and they said that he ought to
recover for the emperor the land of Aemilia. And
since he was won over by this suggestion, Narses
at night abandoned the siege, although Belisarius
begged him earnestly to remain there and assist his
own troops in capturing the city of Urbinus. So
Narses and his followers went in haste to Ariminum
with a portion of the army. And as soon as Moras
and his barbarians saw at daybreak that one-half of
the enemy had withdrawn, they began to shout
taunts and bantering words from the fortifications
at those who had remained. Belisarius, however,
was purposing to storm the wall with his remaining
force. And while he was laying plans for this
attack, an altogether wonderful piece of good
fortune befell him. There was only one spring in
Urbinus, and from it all the inhabitants of the city
were drawing water. This spring of its own accord
little by little dried up and began to give out. And
in three days the water had left it to such an extent
that the barbarians drawing from it were drinking


31


10


17


18
19


20


2]


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 This stva of the Greeks was the vinea of the Romans.
2374
3


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xix. 13-21


the water along with mud. Consequently they
decided to capitulate to the Romans. But Belisarius,
who had not received any information of this, was
still purposing to make an attempt upon the fortifica-
tions. And he armed his entire force and placed it
in a circle about the whole hill, and then commanded
a few men to move forward the colonnade of poles
(for such is the name by which this device is custom-
arily called 1) where the ground was level. So these
men went into it and began to walk and to draw the
colonnade with them, hidden from the eyes of the
enemy. Thereupon, the barbarians, stretching forth
their right hands from the parapet, begged to receive
peace. But the Romans, not knowing anything of
what had taken place regarding the spring, supposed
that it was the combat and the Roman device
which they dreaded. Both sides, at any rate, gladly
refrained from battle. And the Goths surrendered
both themselves and the city to Belisarius with the
condition that they should remain free from harm
and that they should become subjects of the emperor
on terms of complete equality with the Roman army.

But Narses, upon hearing of this success, was
filled with both astonishment and dejection. And
he himself still remained quietly in Ariminum, but
he ordered John to lead his whole army against
Caesena.2_ So they went, taking ladders with them.
And when they came close to the fortress, they
delivered an attack and made trial of the fortifica-
tions. But since the barbarians defended themselves
manfully, many fell in the fight and among them
Phanitheus, the leader of the Eruli. So John,


2 Modern Cesena,


33


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


\ / / a / > \ - >


a ’ / ’ / > / e > / Μ


᾽ a a


2 αὐτὴν Kraseninnikov: αὐτὸν MSS.

34


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xix. 21-xx. 4


failing to capture the fortress of Caesena at that
time, saw fit to make no further attempt upon it,
since it seemed to him impregnable, and he marched
forward with Justinus and the rest of the army.
And by a sudden move he succeeded in taking
possession of an ancient city which is named Foro-
cornelius;! and since the barbarians constantly
retired before him and never came to an engage-
ment, he recovered the whole of Aemilia for the
emperor. Such was the course of these events.


XX


Now Belisarius, since he had captured Urbinus at
about the winter solstice, thought it inexpedient to
march against Auximus immediately ; for he suspected
that a long time would be consumed by his troops
in besieging it. For it was impossible to take the
place by storm because of the strength of its defences,
and the barbarian garrison of the city was both
numerous and composed of the best troops, as I
have previously stated,” and since they had plundered
a large tract of country, they had brought in for
themselves a great store of provisions. But he com-
manded Aratius with a numerous army to pass the
winter in Firmum and to be on his guard that the
barbarians in future should not be at liberty to make
their raids from Auximus and fearlessly to carry on
a campaign of violence in that region; he himself,
however, led his army against Urviventus. For
Peranius kept urging him to do this, since he had


1 Forum Cornelii ; modern Imola.
2 Chap. xi. 2.


35


10


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


2 ποταμός τε MSS: τε bracketed by Dindorf.


1 The nearest eminence is a good half-mile away (Hodgkin).


36


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xx. 4-10


heard from the deserters that the Goths in that city
had a scarcity of provisions, and he hoped that if, in
addition to their lack of supplies, they should see
Belisarius also present with his whole army, as they
would suppose, they would give in the more readily,
as indeed actually happened. For Belisarius, imme-
diately upon reaching Urviventus, commanded the
whole army to encamp in a place suitably situated,
while he himself made a complete circuit of the
city, looking carefully to see whether it was perhaps
not impossible to capture it by storm. And it seemed
to him that there was no possible means of taking
the place by any manner of assault. However, he
decided that it would not be altogether impossible
to capture it by a secret stratagem.

For the city occupies a lone hill which springs
from low-lying ground, being on the top level and
smooth, but precipitous at the base. And round this
hill there stand rocks of equal height which form,
as it were, a circle about it, not immediately at the
base of the hill, but about a stone’s throw away.!
Upon this hill, then, the men of old built the city,
and they neither placed walls around it nor con-
structed defences of any other kind, since the place
seemed to them impregnable by nature. For there
is only one approach to the city through the rocks,
and if the inhabitants of the city only keep this under
guard, they have nothing to fear from hostile attacks
at any other point. For apart from the place where
nature, as has been stated, constructed the approach
to the city, a river? which is always large and impass-
able occupies the space between the hill and the


2 The Paglia now flows on only two sides of the hill
(Hodgkin).


37


12


13


14


16


17


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


38


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xx. 10-17


rocks which I have just mentioned. In view of this
situation the Romans of old built a short piece of
wall across this approach. And there is a gate in
it, which the Goths were guarding at that time.
Such is the situation of Urviventus.

And Belisarius commenced the siege with his
whole army, hoping either to deliver an attack by
way of the river or to bring the enemy to submission
by famine. The barbarians, on their part, were for
a time not utterly destitute of provisions, though
their supply was indeed too scanty for their needs,
but still they held out beyond all expectation in
enduring their suffering, never getting sufficient
nourishment to satisfy them, and using each day
only enough food so as not to die of starvation, But
finally, when all their provisions had been exhausted,
they began to eat skins and hides which they had
previously soaked in water for a long time; for their
commander Albilas, a man of especial note among
the Goths, was sustaining them with empty hopes.

Now as time went on and brought again the
summer season, the grain was already ripening uncared
for in the cornlands, but in no such quantities as
formerly—indeed it was much less. For since it had
not been covered in the furrows, either by ploughs
or by the hand of man, but lay upon the surface,
the earth was able to make only a small portion of
it take root. And since after that no one reaped it,
when it had become fully ripe it fell again to the
ground and nothing grew from it thereafter. And
this same thing had happened also in Aemilia; and

1 ΤΊ isimplied in section 4 above that the city surrendered,


but this is not explicitly stated, and Procopius does not
return to the subject later,


39


18


19


20


2]


22


28


24


25


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


5 οἰκείαν Haury: οὐκ εἴαν K, οὐχὶ ἄν L: xAwpav Herwerden,
ὠχράν Hoeschel in marg.


40


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xx. 17-25


because of this situation the inhabitants of that region
left their homes and went to Picenum, thinking that,
since that country was on the sea, it could not be
suffering from absolute lack of food supplies. And
the Tuscans, no less than the others, were attacked
by famine for the same cause; and as many of them
as lived in the mountains were eating loaves made
of the acorns of the oak trees, which they ground up
just like grain. The natural result of this was that
the most of the people fell victim to all manner of
diseases, and it was only a few who threw these off
and recovered. Indeed it is said that among the
Roman farmers in Picenum not less than fifty thousand
persons perished by famine, and a great many more
north of the Ionian Gulf.4

I shall now tell of the appearance which they came
to have and in what manner they died, for I was an
eye-witness. All of them first became lean and pale ;
for the flesh, being ill supplied with nourishment,
according to the old saying “laid hold upon itself,”
and the bile, having now the mastery of their bodies
by reason of its excess, lent them almost its own
appearance. And as the malady developed, all
moisture left them, and the skin became very dry so
that it resembled leather more than anything else,
giving the appearance of having been fastened upon
the bones. And as they changed from a livid to a
black colour,they came to resemble torches thoroughly
burned. And their faces always wore an expression
of amazement, while they always had a dreadful sort
of insane stare. And they died, some because of
the lack of food, and others too by sating themselves


1 In Procopius the Ionian Gulf is the Adriatic.


41


27


28


90


31


92


99


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


3. πόας τε MSS. : τε bracketed by Dindorf.
42


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xx. 26-33


too much with it. For since all the warmth which
nature kindled within them had died away, whenever
anyone fed them to satiety, and not little by little,
just like infants newly born, the result was that, since
they were as yet unable to digest the food, they died
much more quickly. Some too, overcome by hunger,
fed upon their comrades. And it is said that two
women in a certain place in the country above the
city of Ariminum ate seventeen men; for these
women, as it happened, were the only inhabitants
of the place who survived, and consequently it came
about that strangers travelling that way lodged in
the little house where these women lived; so they
would kill these strangers while they slept and eat
them. Now the story goes that the eighteenth
stranger was roused from sleep, just when these
women were about to lay hands upon him, and leap-
ing up and learning from them the whole story, killed
both of them. Such, then, is the story which they
tell. And the most of the people were so overcome
by their hunger that if they happened upon a bit
of grass anywhere, they would rush to it with great
eagerness, and kneeling down, would try to pull it
from the ground. Then, finding themselves unable
to do so because all strength had left them, they
would fall upon the grass and their outstretched
hand and die. And no one ever laid them in the
earth, for there was in fact not a man to concern
himself about burying them; and yet they remained
untouched by any of those numerous birds which
have the habit of feeding upon dead bodies, for
they offered nothing which the birds craved. For
all the flesh, as I have previously stated, had already


43


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


44


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xx. 33-xxi. 6


been consumed by starvation. Such was the manner
in which famine visited the land.


XXI


Now when Belisarius heard that Uraias and the
barbarians were besieging Milan, he sent Martinus
and Uliaris against them with a numerous army.
But when this force reached the River Po, which is
one day’s journey distant from Milan, they established
a camp and remained there. And a long time was
spent by them at that camp while they were deliber-
ating about the crossing of the river. And when
Mundilas heard this, he sent to them one of the
Romans, Paulus by name. He accordingly passed
through the lines of the enemy without being
detected, and reached the bank of the Po. But he
happened to find no ferry ready at the moment, and
so he removed his clothing and, at great risk, made
the crossing by swimming. So when he had betaken
himself to the Roman camp and had come into the
presence of the commanders, he spoke as follows:

* Martinus and Uliaris, you are not acting justly
nor in a manner worthy of your own fame, seeing
that in appearance you have come for the saving of
the emperor’s cause, but in reality to magnify the
power of the Goths. For this city of Milan, which
far surpasses practically all the other cities of Italy
in point of size and population and in every other
sort of prosperity, and, apart from these advantages,
is an outpost against the Germans and the other
barbarians, and has been thrown out to protect the
whole Roman empire, so to speak,—this city, I say,
has now fallen into great danger together with


45


10


1]


12


13


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


46


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxi. 6-13


Mundilas and the emperor's army, harassed as it is
by the enemy, and neglected meanwhile by you.
And how much the emperor has been wronged by
you in the present case, I refrain from stating. For
the urgency of the moment does not allow me to
use many words, seeking as I do quick assistance for
the city, while some hope is still left. But you, I
say, must come to the defence of the people of Milan
in their peril with all possible speed. For if at the
present crisis you act with any hesitation in coming
to us, the result will be for us, on the one hand, to
perish after suffering the most cruel fate possible, and
for you, on the other, to have betrayed to the enemy
the emperor's power. For those who may perchance
open their gates to the enemy are not the only ones
who are justly called traitors, but with equal, nay
even greater, justice this name belongs to those who,
though they have the power to defend those dearest
to them when they are besieged, still choose the
course of hesitation, which involves no danger, instead
of engaging in the struggle, and thus probably give
to their enemy the victory over them.” Thus spoke
Paulus,and Martinus and Uliaris sent him back with
the promise to follow him right speedily. And he
once more succeeded in getting through the bar-
barians unnoticed, entered Milan by night, and having
roused the hopes of the soldiers and all the Romans,
still more strengthened their purpose to be faithful
to the emperor.

Nevertheless Martinus and his men continued to
be reluctant to move and remained where they were,
and much time was consumed by them in hesitating
in this way. But finally Martinus, wishing to clear
himself of the charge, wrote to Belisarius as follows :


47


14


15


16


17


18


19


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


48


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxi. 13-19


“You sent us hither in order to bring support to
those endangered in Milan, and we have come in
great haste, just as you commanded, as far as the
River Po; but the army fears to cross this river,
since we hear that a strong force of Goths are in
Liguria, and a very great multitude of Burgundians
with them; and against such an army we do not
consider ourselves able to fight a decisive battle
alone. But command John and Justinus, who are
in our neighbourhood in the land of Aemilia, to
come with all possible speed together with their
troops and assist us in meeting this danger. For by
going together from here we shall be enabled both
to be safe ourselves and also to do some harm to the
enemy. Such was the content of Martinus’ letter.
And Belisarius, upon reading it, commanded John
and Justinus to join the forces of Martinus and go
with all speed against Milan. But they said that
they would do nothing except what Narses com-
manded them. Wherefore Belisarius wrote also to
Narses as follows:

“Consider that the whole army of the emperor is
one body, and that, if it does not display one single
purpose, just as do the members of a man, but one
part wishes to act separately from the others, what
will be left to us is to perish utterly without having
performed any of our duties. Therefore have done
with Aemilia, which neither contains any fortress
nor has any decisive importance for the Romans, at
least at the present moment. But do you command
John and Justinus without the least delay to go
with the forces of Martinus straight against the enemy


49


20


27


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


50


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxi. 19-27


at Milan, for they are near at hand and sufficiently
strong to overpower the barbarians. For it so happens
that I myself have here no numerous army which I
could possibly send,and even apart from this, I think
it inexpedient for soldiers to go from here against
Milan. Fora great amount of time wil] be consumed
in the journey so that they will fail to reach the city
at the proper moment, and they will be quite unable
on account of the length of the journey to use their
horses against the enemy when they reach them.
But if these men! go with Martinus and Uliaris
against Milan, they will in all probability both over-
come the barbarians there and also take possession
of Aemilia again without encountering any further
resistance.” When this letter had been delivered
to Narses and read by him, he himself sent orders
to John and Justinus to go with the other army to
Milan. And John a little later set out for the sea-
coast, in order to bring boats from there, which were
to enable the army to cross the river. But an illness
which fell upon him put a stop to the undertaking.
But while the forces of Martinus were hesitating
about the crossing of the river, and those of John
were awaiting the instructions of Narses, a great
amount of time was consumed, and the siege mean-
time continued to be pressed. And the besieged
were already suffering extremely from the famine,
and under the overwhelming necessity of their
wretched situation the most of them had begun
to eat dogs and mice and other animals such as
had never been eaten by man. So the barbarians
sent envoys to Mundilas, bidding him surrender the


1 John and Justinus.


51


28


29


30


31


32


33


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxi. 27-33


city to them, with the condition that he himself
and the soldiers should remain free from harm. But
Mundilas agreed to do this only on condition that
they not only give pledges for the safety of the Roman
garrison, but also that they would do no harm to
any one of the inhabitants. But since the enemy,
though ready to give pledges to Mundilas and the
soldiers, were moved by furious passion against the
Ligurians and were evidently going to destroy them
all, Mundilas called all the soldiers together and
spoke as follows:

“If it has ever happened that any men before us,
though having the opportunity to save their lives
with disgrace, have chosen rather to die with
fair fame, abandoning their immediate safety for a
glorious end of life, such men I should wish you also
to be at the present time, and not through fondness
for life to pursue it even though it be involved in
shame, and that too, contrary to the teaching of
Belisarius, by which you have profited for a long
time past, so that to be otherwise than noble and
exceedingly courageous is for you sacrilege. For
when men have once entered life, a single fate is
advancing upon all of them—to die at the appointed
time ; but as to the manner of death men differ, for
the most part, one from the other. And there is
this difference, that cowards, as one might expect, in
every case first bring upon themselves insult and
ridicule from their enemies and then, at the exact
time previously appointed, fulfil their destiny no whit
the less; but it falls to the lot of noble men to
suffer this with valour and an abundance of goodly
fame. And apart from these considerations, if it
had been possible to become slaves of the barbarians,


53


34


36


39


40


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


Comparettl, κοσμήσαντες Kraseninnikov.


54


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxi. 33-40


and at the same time to save the people of the city,
that at least might have brought us some forgiveness
for saving ourselves so disgracefully. But if, in fact,
we are bound to look on while such a great multi-
tude of Romans is being destroyed by the hand of
the enemy, this will be more bitter than any form
of death of which a man could tell. For we should
appear to be doing nothing more or less than helping
the barbarians to perpetrate this dreadful deed.
While, therefore, we are sufficiently our own masters
to adorn necessity with valour, let us make glorious
the fortune which has fallen upon us. And I say
that we ought all to arm ourselves in the best
possible manner, and advance upon the enemy when
they are not expecting us. For the result for us
will be one of two things: either fortune will have
wrought for us in some way a success which tran-
scends our present hope, or we, in achieving a
happy end, shall have rid ourselves of our present
troubles with the fairest fame.”

So spoke Mundilas; but not one of the soldiers
was willing to undergo the danger, and they sur-
rendered both themselves and the city on the terms
which the enemy offered. And the barbarians did
indeed inflict no harm upon the soldiers, simply
putting them under guard with Mundilas, but the
city they razed to the ground, killing all the
males of every age to the number of not less than
three hundred thousand and reducing the women to
slavery and then presenting them to the Burgun-
dians by way of repaying them for their alliance.
And when they found Reparatus, the pretorian


55


4]


42


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XXII


56


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxi. 40-xxii. 5


prefect, they cut his body into small pieces and
threw his flesh to the dogs. But Vergentinus (for
he had been, as it happened, inside Milan) made
his escape and betook himself with his followers to
Dalmatia, passing through the land of the Veneti
and the other nations of that region. And from
there he went to the emperor bearing the message
of this great calamity which had befallen the
Romans. In consequence of this success the Goths
took by surrender the other cities which happened
to have Roman garrisons and again gained control
over the whole of Liguria. As for Martinus and
Uliaris, they marched back with their army toward
Rome.


XXII


Suc was the course of events in Liguria. And
Belisarius, having not yet learned any thing of what
had happened in that field, was moving with his
whole army into Picenum, since the winter was now
coming to an end. But learning in the course of
this journey what had befallen Milan, he grieved
exceedingly. And never after that time would he
allow Uliaris to come into his presence; but he
wrote to the emperor everything which had taken
place. And the emperor treated no one with
severity on account of these things, but upon hear-
ing of the disagreement between Belisarius and
Narses, he recalled Narses immediately and ap-
pointed Belisarius commander-in-chief for the whole
war. Thus it was that Narses returned to Byzantium,
bringing some few of the soldiers. But the Eruli,
seeing that Narses was departing from Italy, refused
to remain there longer, although Belisarius promised


57


10


11


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 Cf: chap. xix. 20.
58


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxii. 5-11


that they would receive many benefits both from
himself and from the emperor, if they remained ;
but they all packed up their luggage and withdrew,
going first to Liguria. There they happened upon
the army of Uraias, and they sold all the slaves and
the animals they were taking with them to the enemy,
and, having thus acquired a great amount of money,
they took an oath that they would never array them-
selves against Goths or do battle with them. Thus
they made their withdrawal in peace and came into
the land of the Veneti. But upon meeting Vitalius
there, they forthwith began to repent of the wrong
they had done the Emperor Justinian. And seek-
ing to clear themselves of the charge against
them, they left there Visandus, one of their com-
manders, with his forces, but all the rest betook
themselves ‘to Byzantium under the leadership of
Aluith and Philemuth, the latter having taken the
command after Phanitheus was killed at Caesena.}
Now Vittigis and the Goths with him, hearing
that Belisarius at the beginning of spring would
come against them and Ravenna, were plunged into
great fear, and they began to take counsel regarding
the situation which confronted them ; and realizing
as they did that they alone were not a match for
their enemy in battle, they decided, after long
deliberation, to invite the assistance of some other
barbarians. In carrying out this purpose, however,
they avoided the Germans, having already had ex-
perience of their crafty and untrustworthy character,
being well content if they too should not come
against the Goths with Belisarius, but should stand
aside for both. But they sent envoys to Vaces, the
ruler of the Lombards, offering great sums of money


59
VOL. IV. c


12


18


14


15


17


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


60


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxii. 11-17


and inviting him to an offensive and defensive
alliance. But these envoys, upon learning that
Vaces was a friend and ally of the emperor, returned
unsuccessful. It was natural, therefore, that Vit-
tigis should be at a loss in these circumstances, and
he was constantly calling together many of the
elders. And from them he made many inquiries
as to how he should form his plans and act in order
that he might achieve the greatest success. Accord-
ingly many opinions were expressed by those who
gathered for the council, some of them in no way
adapted to the situation, and some too which con-
tained suggestions worthy of some consideration.
And among these suggestions this idea also was
advanced, that the emperor of the Romans had
plainly never been able to make war upon the
barbarians in the West before the time when the
treaty had been made with the Persians. For it
was only then that the Vandals and Moors had
been destroyed, and the Goths had suffered their
present misfortunes. Consequently, if someone
should once more rouse the hostility of the king
of the Medes against the Emperor Justinian, the
Romans thereafter would never be able, when once
that nation had been stirred up to war against
them, to carry on another war against any people
in the world. This suggestion pleased both Vittigis
himself and the other Goths.

It was decided, therefore, that envoys! should
be sent to Chosroes, the king of the Medes, but that
they should not be Goths, in order that the real
character of the embassy might not be at once
obvious and the negotiations be made useless, but


1 Cf. Book II. ii.
61


18


19


21


22


23


24


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 “Ῥωμαίους KraSeninnikov: ῥωμαίοις KL, om. W.


62


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxii. 17-24


Romans,! who were to make him hostile to the
Emperor Justinian. Accordingly they bribed two
priests of Liguria with great sums of money to
undertake this service. One of these men, who
seemed to be the more worthy, undertook the
embassy, assuming the appearance and the title of
bishop, which did not belong to him at all, while the
other followed as his attendant. Vittigis also en-
trusted to them a letter written to Chosroes and
sent them off. And Chosroes, influenced by this
very letter, committed acts of an outrageous
character against the Romans in time of peace, as
has been told by me in the preceding narrative.?
Now when the Emperor Justinian heard that
Chosroes and the Persians were planning to this
end, he decided to bring the war in the West
to an end as quickly as possible, and to recall
Belisarius in order that he might take the field
against the Persians. So he immediately dismissed
the envoys of Vittigis (for they happened to be still
in Byzantium), promising that men would be sent by
him to Ravenna who would draw up the treaty with
the Goths in such form that the interests of both
sides would be furthered. But Belisarius did not
release these envoys to the enemy until they, in
turn, had released the embassy of Athanasius and
Peter. And when these men arrived at Byzantium,
the emperor counted them worthy of the greatest
gifts of honour, appointing Athanasius prefect of
the pretorians in Italy, and giving Peter the office
of “magister’’4 as it is called. And the winter


1 2.6. subjects of the Emperor at Byzantium.
* Book IL. v. ff. 3 Cf. Book V. vii. 25.
4 A military title of the highest rank.


63


25


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XXIII


64


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxii. 25—xxiii. 6


drew to a close, and the fourth year ended in this 539 ap,
war, the history of which Procopius has written.


XXIII


Now Belisarius wished first to capture Auximus
and Fisula,! and after that to march against Vittigis
and Ravenna, with no one of the enemy any longer
able to oppose his advance or to harass his rear.
He accordingly sent Cyprian and Justinus with their
men and some of the Isaurians to Fisula, together
with five hundred foot-soldiers from the detachment
commanded by Demetrius; and they made camp
about the fortress and commenced a siege of the
barbarian garrison. And Martinus and John with
their troops and another army, commanded by John
whom they called the Glutton, he sent to the
country along the Po River. These officers he
commanded to take care that Uraias with his forces
should not advance from Milan against his own
army; and if they were not able to repel the
enemy's attack, they were secretly to follow behind
them and assail their rear. So they took possession
of Dorthon,? an unwalled city which lay on the
river, and having established their camp remained
there, while Belisarius himself went to the city of
Auximus with eleven thousand men. Now this is
the first of the cities in Picenum, being the metro-
polis, as the Romans are accustomed to call it.
And it is about eighty-four stades distant from the
shore of the Ionian Gulf, and from the city of


1 Faesulae ; modern Fiesole.
2 Dertona; modern Tortona.


[eZ]


10


i]


13


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


66


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxiii. 6-13


Ravenna a journey of three days and eighty stades.!
And it is situated upon a very high hill, having no
approach at all upon the level ground, and for this
reason it is entirely inaccessible for an enemy. In
that city Vittigis had assembled all the most notable
troops among the Goths and had established them
there as a garrison, conjecturing that the Romans,
unless they should first capture this city, would
never dare to march against Ravenna.

Now when the Roman army arrived at Auximus,
Belisarius commanded them all to encamp ina circle
about the base of the hill. So they took their places
by companies, and were setting up their huts at
different points in the line; and the Goths,
observing that the enemy were rather far apart
from one another, and were not able easily to bring
assistance to each other, since they were in a great
plain, suddenly advanced upon them in the late
afternoon, on the side to the east of the city, where
Belisarius happened to be still engaged in making
camp with his spearmen and guards. And _ the
Romans took up their arms and began to defend
themselves against their assailants as well as. the
circumstances permitted, and by their valour they
forced them back with the greatest ease and routed
them ; and in following up their flight they reached
the middle of the hill. There the barbarians turned
upon them, and, confident in the strength of their
position, made a stand against their pursuers; and
since they were shooting from above, they slew
many of them, until night coming on put a stop to
the fighting. Thus the two armies separated and
bivouacked that night. Now it happened that on


1 Roughly 81 English miles. Cf. Book III. i. 17.
67


14


15


16


17


18


19


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


68


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxiii. 13-19


the day before this encounter some of the Goths had
been sent out to the country close by at early dawn
in order to gather provisions. These foraging
parties, having learned nothing of the presence of
the enemy, returned at night, and suddenly spying
the fires of the Romans, they became greatly amazed
and frightened. And many of them, who plucked
up courage to take the risk and escaped detection
by their enemy, entered Auximus. But as many as
were overcome by terror and hid themselves for the
time in any convenient clumps of trees with the
intention of proceeding to Ravenna, all these not
long afterward fell into hostile hands and were
destroyed. And Belisarius, seeing that Auximus
was exceedingly strong and securely placed, and
that it was altogether impossible for him to make an
attack upon the fortifications, was of the opinion
that he could never take the place by storm, but he
hoped by a close siege to reduce the enemy to want
by cutting off their food supplies and thus to bring
them into his power by the passage of time.
Now not far from the fortifications there was a
place where the ground was covered with an abund-
ant growth of grass, and this gave rise every day to
an encounter between the Romans and the Goths.
For every time the Romans saw their opponents
cutting this grass for the sake of their horses, they
would ascend the hill with a great rush, and, upon
reaching the enemy, they would engage with them,
and by making a display of valorous deeds, try to
prevent them altogether from carrying off the grass;
and they always slew many of the Goths in this
place. Then the Goths, finding themselves no
match for their enemy in valour, devised the follow-


69


20


21


22


23


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 5 , ~) > ~~ / ’ :


7°


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxiii. 19-23


ing plan. They removed the wheels along with the
axles from their waggons and held them in readi-
ness; then, when they had commenced to cut the
grass, as soon as they saw that the Romans, as they
ascended, were at the middle of the hill, they
released the wheels to rush down upon them from
above. But by some chance it so happened that
these wheels went all the way to the level ground
without touching a single man. And since they had
failed in this attempt, the barbarians on that
occasion took to flight and got inside the fortifica-
tions, but after that they adopted the following
plan. After filling the ravines which are close to
the fortifications with ambuscades of the men of
note among them, a few soldiers would shew them-
selves near the grass to the enemy, and when the
fighting had come to close quarters, those in conceal-
ment would leap out from their ambuscades, and,
being greatly superior to their opponents in number,
and striking terror into them because they had not
previously seen their assailants, they used to kill
great numbers of them and always turned the rest
to flight. And although those of the Romans who
had kept their position in the camps did see the
enemy rising from the ambuscades, and tried, with
much shouting, to call their companions back, still
they failed utterly to do so, since those fighting
could not in the least hear their call, because, in the
first place, they were separated from them by a
great expanse of hillside, and, in the second place,
the barbarians purposely always made a din to drown
the voices by beating their weapons together.

And when Belisarius was in perplexity because of
this situation, Procopius, who wrote this history,


20


29


30


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


\


72


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VL. xxiii. 23—30


came before him and said: ‘‘ The men, General, who
blew the trumpets in the Roman army in ancient
times knew two different strains, one of which
seemed unmistakably to urge the soldiers on and
impel them to battle, while the other used to call the
men who were fighting back to the camp, whenever
this seemed to the general to be for the best. And
by such means the generals could always give the
appropriate commands to the soldiers, and they on
their part were able to execute the commands thus
communicated to them. For during actual combat
the human voice is in no way adapted to give any
clear instructions, since it obviously has to contend
with the clash of arms on every side, and fear
paralyzes the senses of those fighting. But since at
the present time such skill has become obsolete
through ignorance and it is impossible to express
both commands by one trumpet, do you adopt the
following course hereafter. With the cavalry
trumpets urge on the soldiers to continue fighting
with the enemy, but with those of the infantry call
the men back to the retreat. For it is impossible
for them to fail to recognize the sound of either one,
for in the one case the sound comes forth from
leather and very thin wood, and in the other from
rather thick brass.’’ So spoke Procopius.

And Belisarius was pleased by the suggestion, and
calling together the whole army he spoke as follows:
“1 consider that enthusiasm is beneficial and
thoroughly praiseworthy, but only so long as it
continues to be of a moderate sort and consequently
brings no harm upon those under its spell. For
every good thing, when in excess, is wont to change
for the worse. Do you, therefore, from this time


73


9]


94


90


90


37


38


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 τὸν Haury: om. MSS.


1 7. 6. the calves.


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxiii. 30-38


forth, not allow your enthusiasm for battle to cause
you to fail of success; for to flee from one who is
inflicting loss upon you is, as you surely know, no
disgrace. But he who without looking about him
goes into trouble which is before his eyes and, should
it so happen, escapes from it, still stands convicted of
folly; but the man truly noble is he who plays the
part of a brave man in dangers that cannot be
avoided. Now the barbarians, since they are unable
to fight a decisive battle with us in the open, are
trying to destroy us by laying snares. But for us it
is more blameworthy to face the danger than to
escape from their ambush. For nothing is more
shameful than to fall in with the plans of the enemy.
It will rest with me, accordingly, to see to it that
you do not come unawares upon the ambuscades of
the enemy. And it will be your duty, as soon as I
give the signal, to retire with all speed. And this
signal, soldiers, will be given by the trumpet of the
infantry.” So spoke Belisarius. And the soldiers,
seeing the enemy near the grass, made a charge
against them and killed a few of their number in
the first onset. And one of the Moors saw among
these fallen Goths one in particular whose person
was adorned with gold, and laying hold of the hair
of his head, he began to drag the corpse after him
in order to strip it. But some Goth hurled a javelin
at him, and with such a lucky aim that the weapon
passed through both his legs, piercing the muscles
which are behind the shins,} with the result that
his two legs were pinned together by means of the
javelin. But nevertheless the Moor kept holding
the hair of the corpse and dragging it along. At
this point the barbarians roused their men from


79


39


5


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XXIV


, > \ an “ ἃ \ , v

76


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxiii. 38-xxiv. 5


ambush, and Belisarius, seeing from the camp what
was being done, commanded the foot-soldiers to
whom this duty was assigned to sound the trumpets
quickly. And the Romans, hearing it, began im-
mediately to withdraw gradually, taking up and
carrying the Moor, javelin and all. And the Goths
dared follow them no further, but returned un-
successful


XXIV


As time went on and the barbarians saw that their
supply of food was coming to be exceedingly scant,
they purposed to report their situation to Vittigis.
And since no one of them dared set out on this
mission (for they thought that they would never
elude their besiegers), they devised the following
plan. They first put in readiness the men whom
they were intending to send to Vittigis, and then
waited for a moonless night; when this came they
put a letter into their hands, when it was well on in
the night, and thereupon all raised a mighty shout
at many parts of the circuit-wall. One would have
supposed that they had been thrown into confusion
owing to a violent attack of the enemy and an
unexpected capture of the city. And the Romans,
utterly unable to understand what was taking place,
by the will of Belisarius remained quietly in the
camps, suspecting that some stratagem would be
carried out from the city and that an army from
Ravenna bringing assistance to the enemy had come
against them. And moved as they were by these
fears, they thought it better for them to remain


77


9


10


11


12


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


, a > = , ΄ >

΄ \ / ER «ε / \
v 2 / / »/ -“ > /


a / a 46 \ \ > / ς a


a a “-“ ,
ς a \ rn
i » ὃ an A \ / /
Μ 4 / / bd
« , ¢ A \ \ n » / >


78


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxiv. 5-12


quietly in a secure position and thus save themselves
than to go on a moonless night into a danger which
could, in a way, be foreseen. By such means, there-
fore, the barbarians concealed their plan from the
enemy and despatched the men on the way to
Ravenna. And they, without being seen by a
single one of the enemy, came before Vittigis on
the third day and displayed the letter. And the
writing was as follows: ‘When you appointed us,
O King, for the garrison of Auximus, you said that
you had placed in our keeping the keys of Ravenna
itself and of your kingdom. And for this very
reason you enjoined upon us to be on guard with
every fibre of our being, that we should not by any act
of ours betray the power of the Goths to the enemy,
and you declared that, if we craved your assistance,
you would be at hand with the whole army even
before any messenger could announce your coming.
Now as for us, we have, up to the present time,
though fighting both with famine and with Beli-
sarius, proved ourselves faithful guardians of your
kingdom, but you have seen fit to aid us in no way
whatsoever. You must consider, therefore, whether
the Romans may not one day capture Auximus and
take up the keys which you yourself are disregarding
as they lie here, and thereby be excluded in future
from none of your possessions.” Such was the
purport of the letter.

When it was brought to Vittigis and he saw it, he
did at the moment send the men away with the
promise that he would bring assistance to Auximus
with the whole army of the Goths ; but later, after long
consideration, he continued to remain inactive. For,
on the one hand, he suspected that the troops of John


79


19


14


15


16


17


18


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 τι συμβαίη Haury, comparing “πη the Buildings,” 1.


80


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxiv. 12-18


would follow up his rear and thus make him exposed
to attack on two sides, and, on the other, he thought
that Belisarius had with him a numerous force of
able fighting men; consequently he fell into a sort
of helpless fear. But chief among the many causes
of his concern was the famine, which disturbed him
greatly, since he had no source from which to
provide supplies for his army. For the Romans, on
the one hand, being as they were masters of the sea
and holding the fortress in Ancon, brought all their
supplies from Sicily and Calabria and stored them in
that place, and, at the proper time, easily got them
from there. The Goths, on the other hand, if they
marched into the land of Picenum, would have no
means of securing provisions; this he fully realized,
and so he found himself completely at a loss. So
the men who had lately been sent to Vittigis from
Auximus brought back his promise to the city with-
out being detected by their enemy, and thus fortified
the barbarians there with empty hopes. And Beli-
sarius, upon hearing this from the deserters, ordered
that a still stricter guard should be kept in order
that no such thing might happen again. Such was
the course of these events.

Meanwhile the troops of Cyprian and Justinus
who were besieging Fisula were quite unable to
make an assault upon the fortifications or even to
get very close to them; for this fortress was difficult
of access on every side. But the barbarians made
frequent sallies against them, wishing rather to
reach a decision by battle with the Romans than to
be hard pressed by lack of provisions; and the
engagements at first, indeed, proved indecisive, but
after a time the Romans, now having the advantage,


81


19


21


22


23


24


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


82


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxiv. 18-24


shut the enemy up within their wall and continued to
guard them securely, so that no one could leave the
city. So the barbarians, seeing that their provisions
were failing, and finding themselves helpless in their
present situation, sent to Vittigis without the know-
ledge of their enemy, begging him to bring them
assistance with all speed, on the ground that they
would not hold out very much longer. And Vittigis
commanded Uraias to go to Ticinum?! with the army
then in Liguria; for, after that, he declared, he too
would come to the aid of the besieged himself with
the whole Gothic army. And Uraias, acting accord.
ingly, set in motion the whole army he had with
him and went to Ticinum. And crossing the river
Po, they came to the vicinity of the Roman camp.?
There they too made camp and established them.
selves over against their enemy, at a distance of
about sixty stades from them. And neither side
began an attack. For the Romans, on the one
hand, deemed it sufficient if they should block the
way for their enemy, so that they could not advance
upon the besieging army, and the barbarians, on the
other, were reluctant to fight a decisive battle with
their enemy in that place, reasoning that, if they
should fail in this engagement, they would ruin the
whole cause of the Goths, For, in that case, they
would no longer be able to unite with the troops of
Vittigis and with him to give assistance to the
besieged. So both sides, reasoning thus, continued
to remain quiet.


1 Modern Pavia. £ At Dorthon.


83


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XXV


HISTORY OF ΓΗΒ xxv..1-6


XXV


At this time the Franks, hearing that both Goths
and Romans had suffered severely by the war, and
thinking for this reason that they could with the
greatest ease gain the larger part of Italy for them-
selves, began to think it preposterous that others
should carry on a war for such a length of time for
the rule of a land which was so near their own, while
they themselves remained quiet and stood aside for
both. So, forgetting for the moment their oaths
and the treaties they had made a little before with
both the Romans and the Goths (for this nation in
matters of trust is the most treacherous in the
world), they straightway gathered to the number
of one hundred thousand under the leadership of
Theudibert, and marched into Italy; they had a
small body of cavalry about their leader, and these
were the only ones armed with spears, while all the
rest were foot-soldiers having neither bows nor
spears, but each man carried a sword and shield
and one axe. Now the iron head of this weapon
was thick and exceedingly sharp on both sides, while
the wooden handle was very short. And they are
accustomed always to throw these axes at one signal
in the first charge and thus to shatter the shields of
the enemy and kill the men.

Thus the Franks crossed the Alps which separate
the Gauls from the Italians, and entered Liguria.!
Now the Goths had previously been vexed at the


1 Procopius represents Liguria as north of the Po. Cf.
Book V. xv. 28, note.


85


11


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


86


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI xxv. 6-11


thanklessness of the Franks, on the ground that,
although they, the Goths, had often promised to give
up to them a large territory and great sums of money
in return for an alliance, these Franks had been
unwilling to fulfil their own promise in any way;
but when they heard that Theudibert was at hand
with a great army, they were filled with rejoicing,
lifted up, as they were, by the liveliest hopes and
thinking that thereafter they would have the superi-
ority over their enemy without a battle. As for the
Germans,! as long as they were in Liguria, they did
no harm to the Goths, in order that these might
make no attempt to stop them at the crossing of the
Po. Consequently, when they reached the city οὗ.
Ticinum, where the Romans of old had constructed
a bridge over this river, those who were on guard
there gave them every assistance and allowed them
to cross the Po unmolested. But, upon getting
control of the bridge, the Franks began to sacrifice
the women and children of the Goths whom they
found at hand and to throw their bodies into the
river as the first-fruits of the war. For these bar-
barians, though they have become Christians, pre-
serve the greater part of their ancient religion; for
they still make human sacrifices and other sacrifices
of an unholy nature, and it is in connection with these
that they make their prophecies. And the Goths,
upon seeing what was being done, fell into a kind of
irresistible fear, took to flight and got inside the
fortifications.

So the Germans, having crossed the Po, advanced
to the Gothic camp, and the Goths were at first


1 The ‘“‘Germans” in Procopius’ usage and the ““ Franks”
are the same people.


87


19


10


17


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


,


1


> ἄλλο τι Haury: ἀλλ᾽ K, Caro δὲ L, ἄλλο δὴ Hoeschel
in marg.


88


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxv. 11-17


pleased to see them coming in small companies
toward their camp, thinking that these men had
come to fight in alliance with them. But when a
great throng of Germans had come up and opened
an attack, and by hurling their axes were already
slaying many, they turned their backs and rushed
off in flight, and passing through the Roman camp
ran along on the road to Ravenna. And the
Romans, seeing them in flight, thought that Beli-
sarius had come to support their own force and had
both taken the camp of the enemy and dislodged
them from it after defeating them in battle. And
wishing to join forces with him, they took up their
arms and went forth with all speed. But coming
unexpectedly upon a hostile army, they were com-
pelled, much against their will, to engage with them,
and being badly worsted in the battle, they all fled,
not to their camp, to which it was now impossible to
return, but to Tuscany. And when they had at
length reached safety, they reported to Belisarius
all that had befallen them.

The Franks, having defeated both armies, as has
been said, and having captured both camps without
a single man in them, for the time being found
provisions in the camps; but in a short time they
had consumed all these on account of their great
numbers, and, since the land was destitute of human
habitation, they were unable to obtain any provi-
sions except cattle and the water of the Po. But
they were unable to digest this meat because of the
great quantity of water they drank, and consequently
the most of them were attacked by diarrhoea and
dysentery, which they were quite unable to shake


89


18


19


20


2]


22


23


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


\ ’ / > / “ ᾽ , ΄


Ν \ > n » > lal


’ ΄ \ Oe hi ad

/ n > ,
, a a , \

/ / \ \

Ν > \ > o 2, \ BA 2 a

4, \ a s > “- /
n \


e an , /


lal b] / / e / ray / \
an a n > /


go


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxv. 17-23


off because of the lack of proper food. Indeed they
say that at least one-third of the Frankish army
perished in this way. Hence it was that, as they
were unable to go forward, they remained where
they were.

Now when Belisarius heard that an army of
Franks was in Italy and that the forces of Martinus
and John had been defeated in battle and had fled,
he was reduced to a state of perplexity, concerned
as he was, not only for the whole army, but especi-
ally for the detachment conducting the siege of
Fisula, since he learned that these barbarians were
nearer to them than to any others. He therefore
wrote immediately to Theudibert as follows: “I
consider it unseemly in any case, O noble Theu-
dibert, for a man who lays claim to excellence to fail
to be truthful, but especially so when he is a ruler,
as thou art, of nations of such vast numbers. But
to violate oaths which are set down in writing and
to disregard treaties—this would not be proper even
for the most ignoble of men. And yet these very
offences have been committed by thee in the present
ease, as thou knowest thyself, although it was only
recently that thou didst agree to assist us in this
war against the Goths. But, as matters now stand,
far from holding thyself aloof from both nations,
thou hast actually taken up arms in this rash manner
and made an attack upon us. Do not thou, at least,
my excellent friend, follow such a course, and that
too when it involves an insult to the great emperor,
who would surely not be likely to overlook the
insult, or fail to exact atonement in the fullest
measure. Now the best course is for each man to
keep his own possessions in safety, and not, by lay-


gt


VOL. IV. D


24


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


/ a 2 4


XXVI


/
/
la) ΄ /
» / if \ ’ / / b] \
’ ENA ae ry": 5 \ 27
TEENS:
» a / rn
/ \ » e
a ᾽ /
/ la) a ¢
\ a


Q2


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxv. 23-xxvi. 3


ing claim to the possessions of others, to involve
himself in any danger which concerns his most vital
interests.’ When Theudibert had read this letter,
perplexed as he was already by his present situation,
and sharply reproached by the Germans, because, as
they said, they were, for no good reason, dying in a
deserted land, he broke camp with the survivors of
the Franks and retired homeward with great speed.


XXVI


Tuus did Theudibert, after marching into Italy,
take his departure. And the troops of Martinus
and John returned in spite of the changed situation,
in order that the enemy might not make any attack
upon the Romans engaged in the siege.1 Now the
Goths in Auximus, who had learned nothing con-
cerning the coming of the Franks, had begun to
despair of their hope from Ravenna which was so
long deferred, and were purposing once more to
address an appeal to Vittigis; but seeing that they
were unable to elude the guards of the enemy, they
were filled with grief. But later on their attention
was drawn to one of the Romans—he was of the
race of the Besi and named Burcentius, and had
been assigned to the command of Narses, the
Armenian—for they noted that he was keeping
guard alone at midday, that no one should come out
from the city to take the grass; and they went
nearer and hailed him, and giving pledges that they
would do him no harm, they urged him to come to
meet them, promising that he would receive from
them a large sum of money. And when they had


1 At Fisula.
93


on


LO


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


a / re
¢ /


94


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxvi. 4-10


come together, the barbarians besought the man to
carry a certain letter to Ravenna, naming a fixed
sum of gold to be paid to him immediately, and
promising to give more when he should return
bringing them a letter from Vittigis. And the
soldier, won over by the money, agreed to perform
this service, and he carried out his promise. For he
received a sealed letter and carried it with all speed
to Ravenna; and coming before Vittigis he delivered
it to him. Now the message conveyed was as
follows: “The situation in which we now find our-
selves will be clearly revealed to you when you
inquire who the bringer of this letter is. For nota
Goth can find a way to get outside the fortifications.
And as for food, the most available supply we have
is the grass which grows by the wall, and even this
at the present time we cannot so much as touch,
except by losing many men in the struggle for it.
And it becomes both thee and the Goths in Ravenna
to consider what the end of all this will be for us.”
When Vittigis had read this, he replied as follows:
«Let no one think that we have ceased our efforts,
dearest of all men, nor that we have come te be
guilty of such a degree of baseness as to abandon
utterly the cause of the Goths through sheer indif-
ference. For, on my part, it was only recently that
the preparations for departure had been made with
all possible thoroughness, and Uraias with his whole
army had come under summons from Milan. But
the inroad of the Franks, coming upon us unex-
pectedly as it did, has made havoc of all our pre-
parations, a result for which I, at least, could not


95


1


12


13


14


15


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


96


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxvi. 10-15


justly bear the blame. For things which are beyond
human power confer even upon those who fail the boon
of being free from blame, since fortune draws upon
herself whatever charge springs from what has
befallen. Now, however, since we hear that Theu-
dibert has got out of our way, we shall at no distant
time, if God wills, come to you with the whole
Gothic army. And it is needful for you to bear
whatever falls to your lot manfully and as befits the
necessity which is upon you, calling to mind, first,
your own valour, on account of which I chose you
out from the whole army and established you in
Auximus, and respecting also the reputation which
you hold among all the Goths, and which prompted
them to put you forward as a bulwark for Ravenna
and for their own safety.” After writing this letter
and rewarding the man with a large sum of money,
Vittigis sent him away. And when he reached
Auximus, he rejoined his comrades, giving as _ his
excuse that some sickness or other had fallen upon
him, and that for this reason he had been passing
the time in a certain sanctuary not far away ; and so
he was appointed once more to guard-duty, to
the very watch to which he had been accustomed,
and unbeknown to all the Romans he gave the
letter to the enemy; and when this was read to
the people, it gave them all additional encourage-
ment, although they were hard pressed by the
famine. Wherefore they were quite unwilling to
yield to Belisarius, although he oftered many entice-
ments. But when no army had been reported as
having left Ravenna, and they were already in
extreme distress because of the lack of provisions,
they once more sent Burcentius with a message


97


16


17


18


19


20


21


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


98


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxvi. 15-22


stating only this, that after five days they would no
longer be able to fight with the famine. And he
returned to them a second time with a letter from
Vittigis tantalizing them with similar hopes.

Now the Romans were distressed no less than the
Goths, because they had been carrying on such a
long siege in a deserted land, and they were com-
pletely bafed at seeing the barbarians refusing to
give in to them although involved in so much suffer-
ing. In view of this situation Belisarius was eager
to capture alive one of the men of note among the
enemy, in order that he might learn what the
reason might be why the barbarians were holding
out in their desperate situation. And Valerian
promised readily to perform such a service for him.
For there were some men in his command, he said,
from the nation of the Sclaveni, who are accustomed
to conceal themselves behind a small rock or any
bush which may happen to be near and pounce
upon an enemy. In fact, they are constantly prac-
tising this in their native haunts along the river
Ister, both on the Romans and on the barbarians
as well. Belisarius was pleased by this suggestion
and bade him see that the thing was done with all
speed. So Valerian chose out one of the Sclaveni
who was well suited as to size of body and especially
active, and commanded him to bring a man of the
enemy, assuring him that he would receive a
generous reward from Belisarius. And he added
that he could do this easily in the place where the
grass was, because for a long time past the Goths
had been feeding upon this grass, since their provi-
sions were exhausted. So this barbarian at early


99


23


24


25


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XXVII


7 \ / ς a 2 a ee


100


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxvi. 22—xxvii. 1


dawn went close to the fortifications, and hiding
himself in a bush and drawing his body into small
compass, he remained in concealment near the grass.
And at daybreak a Goth came there and began
hastily to gather the blades of grass, suspecting no
harm from the bush, but looking about frequently
toward the enemy's camp, lest anyone should attack
him from there. Then the barbarian, falling unex-
pectedly upon the Goth from behind, made him
captive, holding him tightly about the waist with
both hands, and thus carried him to the camp and
handed him over to Valerian. And when he ques-
tioned the prisoner, asking what basis of confidence
and what assurance the Goths could possibly have
that they were absolutely unwilling to yield to the
Romans, but were voluntarily enduring the most
dreadful suffering, the Goth told Valerian the whole
truth concerning Burcentius, and when he was
brought before him he proved his guilt. As for
Burcentius, when he perceived that he had been
already found out, he concealed nothing of what he
had done. Wherefore Belisarius handed him over
to his comrades to do with him as they wished,
and they not long afterwards burned him alive,
the enemy looking on as they did so. Thus did
Burcentius profit by his love for money.


ox VEL
But when Belisarius saw that the barbarians con-
tinued none the less to hold out in their suffering,


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxvii. 1-6


he was minded to carry out his plot against their
water-supply, thinking that in this way he would
accomplish the capture of his enemy with greater
ease and facility. Now there was a spring on a
steep slope to the north of Auximus, about a stone’s
throw distant from the circuit-wall, which discharged
its water in a very small stream into a cistern which
had been there from of old; and when the cistern
became full from this small inflow, it was a matter of
no difficulty for the inhabitants of Auximus to draw the
water. This situation suggested to Belisarius that,
if the water should not be collected there, the bar-
barians would never be able to fill their jars from the
spring’s flow, because they would be exposed to the
missiles of their enemy for a long time. Wishing,
therefore, to destroy the cistern, he devised the
following plan. He armed his whole force and drew
it up in a circle about the circuit-wall as if for battle,
giving his opponents the impression that he was
about to make an attack upon their defences from
all sides without the least delay. The Goths, con-
sequently, fearing the attack, remained quietly at
the battlements, with the intention of warding off
their enemy from that position. But Belisarius
meanwhile chose out five Isaurians who were skilled
in masonry and conducted them to the cistern with
mattocks and other implements suitable for cutting
stone, concealing them as they went under a great
number of shields; then he commanded them to put
forth all their strength to break up and tear down
the walls of the cistern as quickly as possible. As
for the barbarians, as long as they suspected that
these men were coming against the wall, they re-
mained quiet, in order that they might come as close


103


ll


12


13


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


Δ e b] / / > A / >
\ na “
΄ ᾽
\ ε \ y ς al “
΄, / / ’
. fal n / /
a , , \
/ 9 /
\ la) U /
5 / > / > \ > / \ ΄
/ 3 \ \ > / Ὁ lal fal
id » € val
7 “ a
lal \ / / /
΄, ς τι \ SECT a
A \ e ΄ “ b] / 3 ΄ 1
\ Σ / \ A ’ @ meh
, » bal 5)
a n /
v \ , lal lal


104


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxvii. 6-13


as possible and thus form an easy mark for their
missiles, never once thinking what their real object
was; but when they saw that the Isaurians had got
inside the cistern, they began to hurl stones and dis-
charge all kinds of missiles at them. Then indeed
all the other Romans retired on the run, but the five
Isaurians alone, who had now reached safety, began
their work; for a sort of vault had been built over
the cistern by the men of old in order to shade the
water. So when they had got under this vault, they
paid not the least heed to the enemy, although they
were discharging missiles with great frequency.

In view of this the Goths could no longer endure
to remain inside the fortifications, but opening the
small gate on that side, they all rushed out against
the Isaurians with great fury and tumult. And the
Romans, urged on by Belisarius, made a counter-
charge with great enthusiasm. So a fierce battle
took place in which for a long time they engaged
in a hand-to-hand struggle, and there was great
slaughter on both sides. But the men were falling
more thickly among the Romans. For since the
barbarians were defending themselves from a higher
position, a few men could overpower many, and gain-
ing superiority in the hand-to-hand struggle, they
were killing more men than those who were killed
among themselves. However, the Romans were
determined not to give in, feeling shame before
Belisarius, who was present and urging them on with
shouts. While this battle was in progress, it also
happened that a missile came flying with a shrill
whiz toward the belly of the general, having been
directed there by one of the enemy either by some
chance or with deliberate intent. And this missile


105


15


16


17


18


19


20


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxvii. 13-21


was not seen at all by Belisarius. At any rate, he
failed either to guard against it or to step aside to
avoid it. Buta certain spearman named Unigastus,
who was standing beside him, saw it when it was not
far from the belly of Belisarius, and by putting forth
his right hand saved the general unexpectedly; but
he himself, owing to the wound inflicted by the
arrow, withdrew immediately, suffering severe pain.
And after that, since the sinews had been severed,
he was never able to use his hand again. And the
battle, which had begun early in the morning, con-
tinued up to midday.

And seven men of the Armenians from the com-
mand of Narses and Aratius made a display of
valorous deeds, running about the unfavourable
ground, which was exceedingly steep, just as if on
the level, and killing those of the enemy who from
time to time made a stand against them, until they
forced back the barbarians in that part of the line
and routed them. Then the other Romans, seeing
the enemy now giving way, began to pursue them
and the rout became decisive, and the barbarians
went back inside the fortifications. Now the Romans
thought that the cistern had been destroyed and
that the Isaurians had accomplished their whole
task, but in fact they had been altogether unable to
remove so much as one pebble from the masonry ; for
the artisans of old, who cared most of all for ex-
eellence in their work, had built this masonry in
such a way as to yield neither to time nor to the
attempts of men to destroy it. At any rate the
Isaurians had accomplished nothing when, upon see-
ing that the Romans had won the position, they left
‘he cistern and withdrew to the camp. Consequently


107


22


23


24


25


27


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 7. οι lime.


108


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxvii. 21-27


Belisarius commanded the soldiers to throw into the
water the dead bodies of animals and such herbs as
nature has caused to be especially deadly for man,
and also to put in a kind of stone, very thoroughly
burned, which in olden times they were accustomed
to call “titanos,’ but which at the present time
they call “asbestos,” and thus to quench it in
the water. And the soldiers did accordingly, but
the barbarians made use of a well inside the forti-
fications which had an exceedingly scant supply of
water, and thus they supplied themselves during this
time, but with a smaller quantity than they needed.
Thereafter Belisarius no longer exerted himself
either to capture the place by storm or to carry out
any plot with regard to the water or anything else,
hoping :that by famine alone he would overcome
the enemy. And because of this purpose he exer-
cised the greatest care in guarding the lines. The
Goths, meanwhile, still expecting the army from
Ravenna and being in great want of provisions,
remained quiet.

By this time the Goths who were besieged in
Fisula were beginning to be exceedingly hard
pressed by famine, and, being unable to endure the
suffering, and desparing also of the hope from
Ravenna, they decided to yield to their opponents.
They accordingly opened negotiations with Cyprian
and Justinus, and, upon receiving pledges for their
lives, they surrendered both themselves and the fort-
ress. Then Cyprian and his colleagues, taking them
along with the Roman army, and after establishing
a sufficient garrison at Fisula, came to Auximus.
And Belisarius, from that time, was constantly dis-
playing their leaders to the barbarians in Auximus


109


28


29


90


91


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxvii. 27-32


and bidding them cling no longer to their insane
purpose, but abandon their hope from Ravenna; for
they, like the others, would never receive the least
assistance, but after being utterly worn out by hard-
ship they would none the less come to the same fate
as had the garrison in Fisula. And they, after long
deliberation among themselves, seeing that they
could no longer hold out against the famine, were
ready to receive his proposals and expressed a de-
sire to surrender the city, on condition that they
themselves suffer no harm and proceed with their
belongings to Ravenna. As a result of this, Beli-
sarius was altogether uncertain what to do in the
situation before him, because, on the one hand, he
thought it inexpedient that a body of the enemy of
such marked excellence and so numerous besides
should join forces with their comrades in Ravenna,
and, on the other hand, he was quite unwilling to
let slip the moment of opportunity, but wished to
move against Ravenna and Vittigis while the situ-
ation was still unsettled. For the Franks were
causing him great concern, since he fully expected
that they would come to the assistance of the Goths
almost immediately. And though he was eager to
anticipate their arrival, he was unable to break up
the siege with Auximus still uncaptured. The
soldiers, furthermore, would not allow him to con-
cede their property to the barbarians, displaying
many wounds which they had received at their hands
before the city and recounting all the struggles
which had fallen to their lot during this siege; and
they declared that the rewards for these sufferings
were surely the spoils of the vanquished. But
finally, since the Romans were compelled by the


111


99


94


bo


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XAVIIT


* Πάδου τε MSS.: τε bracketed by KraSeninnikov.


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxvii. 32—-xxviii. 3


pressing need of the moment, and the Goths were
overcome by the famine, they came to an agreement
with each other, stipulating that the Romans should
divide among themselves one half of their wealth,
while the Goths should keep the rest and be subjects
ofthe emperor. Both sides accordingly gave pledges
to secure this agreement, the commanders of the
Romans that the agreement should be binding, and
the Goths that they would conceal nothing whatever
of their wealth. Thus, then, they divided the whole
of it between them, and the Romans, on their part,
took possession of Auximus, while the barbarians
mingled with the emperor’s army.


XXVIII

AFTER the capture of Auximus, Belisarius made
haste to lay siege to Ravenna, and he brought up his
whole army against it. He also sent Magnus with
a large force beyond Ravenna, with orders to move
constantly along the bank of the river Po and keep
guard, with the purpose of preventing the Goths
thereafter from bringing in provisions by way of the
river. Furthermore, Vitalius, who had come from
Dalmatia with an army to join him, was guarding
the other bank of the river. It was here that the
Romans met with a piece of good fortune which
made it perfectly clear that Fortune herself was de-
termining the course of events for both sides. For
the Goths had previously collected a large number
of boats in Liguria and brought them down to the
Po, and after filling them with grain and other pro-
visions were purposing to set sail for Ravenna. But


112


10


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


114


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxviii. 4-10


the water in this river fell so low at that time that
it was altogether impossible to navigate upon it,
until the Romans came up and seized the boats with
all their cargoes. Then the river not long after-
ward returned to its proper volume and became
navigable thereafter. And as far as we know from
tradition, this had never happened to the river before.
By this time the barbarians had already begun to
experience some lack of provisions. For they were
both unable to bring anything in by the lonian
Gulf, since their enemy commanded the sea every-
where, and they were shut off from the river. And
the rulers of the Franks, learning what was going on
and wishing to gain Italy for themselves, sent envoys
to Vittigis, holding out a promise of an offensive and
defensive alliance, on condition that they should
rule the land jointly with him. Now when Beli-
sarius heard this, he also sent envoys, among whom
was Theodosius, who stood at the head of his own
household, in order to speak against the Germans.
So the envoys of the Germans were admitted first
to Vittigis’ presence and spoke to the following
effect : ‘The rulers of the Germans have sent us to
you, in the first place because they are vexed to hear
that you are thus besiged by Belisarius, and, in the
second place, because they are eager to avenge you
with all possible speed in accordance with the terms
of our alliance. Now we suppose that our army,
numbering not less than five hundred thousand
fighting men, has by now crossed the Alps, and we
boast that they will bury the entire Roman army


11g


1]


12


13


14


16


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


, ” λ \ Nit te \
> / 2. \ > ,’ / n /
» ) \ - a
lal ’ / ,
“ ¢ 3 A
\ \ , Crus Sed ef x ἘΝ. κε
΄ ΄, ” / \ a be
/
fal a \ a nan
a \


1
2 ᾧπερ Maltretus: ὅπερ MSS.


116


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxviii. 10-16


with their axes at the first onset. And you, on your
part, ought to conform to the purpose, not of those
who intend to enslave you, but of those who are
entering into the danger of war because of their
loyalty tothe Goths. And apart from this, if, on the
one hand, you unite your forces with ours, the Romans
will have no hope left of facing both our armies
in battle, but from the very outset and without any
effort at all we shall gain the supremacy in the war.
But if, on the other hand, the Goths choose to array
themselves with the Romans, even in that case they
will not withstand the Frankish nation (for the
struggle will not be evenly matched in point of
strength), but the ultimate result for you will be
defeat in the company of the most hostile of all
men. But to plunge into a disaster which can be
foreseen, when the opportunity is offered to be saved
without danger, is utter folly. Besides, the Roman
nation has proved itself altogether untrustworthy
toward all barbarians, since by its very nature it is
hostile to them. We therefore propose, if you are
willing, to share with you the rule of all Italy, and
we shall administer the land in whatever manner
seems best. And for thee and the Goths the natural
course to follow is that one which is destined to re-
dound to your advantage.” Thus spoke the Franks,

And the envoys of Belisarius also came forward
and spoke as follows. ‘That the multitude of the
Germans will inflict no injury on the emperor’s
army—and it is with this that they seek to scare
you—why should one enter into a lengthy proof
before you, seeing that you, certainly, have come to
understand by long experience what wholly governs
the course of war, and know that valour is in no


117


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


l


bo
bo


8


καὶ MSS: Haury suggests καὶ ἐν.


118


L


IA ne Oe bP ΜΚ


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxviii. τ6--22


circumstances wont to be overcome by mere throngs
of men. For we need not add that, in point of fact,
the emperor surpasses all others in the ability to
outstrip his enemies in regard to multitude of
soldiers. But as touching the loyalty of these
Franks, which they proudly claim to shew toward
all barbarians, this has been well displayed by them,
first to the Thuringians and the Burgundian nation,
and then to you also, their allies! And indeed we,
on our part, should take pleasure in asking the
Franks by what god they can possibly intend to
swear when they declare that they will give you
surety for their loyalty. For you understand surely
in what manner they have honoured the one by
whom they have already sworn—they who have
received from you vast sums of money, as you know,
and also the entire territory of Gaul as the price of
their alliance, and yet have decided not merely to
render you no assistance at all in your peril, but
have actually taken up arms thus wantonly against
you, if any account of those things which happened
on the Po is preserved among you.! But why need
we demonstrate the impiety of the Franks by re-
counting past events? Nothing could be more
unholy than this present embassy of theirs. For
just as if they had forgotten the terms they them-
selves have agreed upon and the oaths they have
taken to secure the treaty, they claim the right to
share your all with you. And if they do actually
obtain this from you, it befits you to consider what
will be the end of their insatiable greed for money.”


1 Cf. chap. xxv. 9, above.


110


27


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


r lal \ \ e / /
” >/ \ \ / “ ᾽ /
/- ΄
¢ A
/
ς ¢ e an
/ a
\ bd / > ΄ ΝΜ > Suk /
e / a na
/ 7
/ “
\ ial ΄“ nr
2 ὡς Η, Suidas: τὰ KL.


120


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxviii. 23-28


Thus spoke the envoys of Belisarius in their turn.
As for Vittigis, after long conference with the
noblest of the Goths, he gave his preference to the
proposed treaty with the emperor, and sent away
the envoys of the Germans unsuccessful. And from
that time the Goths and the Romans began directly
to carry on negotiations with each other, but Beli-
sarius was no whit the less on his guard to prevent
the barbarians from bringing in provisions for them-
selves. Furthermore, he commanded Vitalius to go
to Venetia and bring over as many of the towns of
that region as possible, while he himself, with
Ildiger, whom he had sent forward, was maintaining
a guard over both banks of the Po, in order that the
barbarians might yield more readily through lack of
provisions and make the treaty as he himself wished,
And since he learned that a large amount of grain
was still lying in storage in public warehouses inside
Ravenna, he bribed one of the inhabitants of the
city to set fire secretly to these same warehouses
and destroy the grain with them. But they say
that, in reality, it was by the will of Matasuntha,
the wife of Vittigis, that they were destroyed. Now
some few were led by the fact that the grain burned
suddenly to believe that the thing had been carried
out by a plot, but others suspected that the place
had been struck by lightning. Still, whichever of
the two views they took, both the Goths and
Vittigis were, more than ever, plunged into a state
of helplessness, unable as they were even to trust
their own compatriots thereafter, and thinking that
war was being waged against them by God Himself.
Such was the course of these events.

Now there are numerous strongholds in the Alps


29


4]


32


33


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


, Uj rn
ς a / \ / “ Ka

\ , > A / \ ”


\ = “ 2 / « 4

, ἴω a gs >/ \ \ > of.


\ a fal ’ \ Μ΄ r ΄ Φ

cr id a


4 re K: τε καὶ L, om. H.


122


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxviii. 28-33


which separate Gaul from Liguria, and which the
Romans call the Cottian Alps. These strongholds
were garrisoned, as had been the custom for many
years, by many of the noblest of the Goths, who
resided in them together with their wives and
children; and when Belisarius heard that these
garrisons wished to submit themselves to him, he
sent to them one of his officers, Thomas by name,
with some few men, with instructions to give pledges
and accept the surrender of the barbarians there.
And when they reached the Alps, Sisigis, who com-
manded the garrisons of that district, received them
in one of the fortresses, and not only submitted
himself but also urged each of the other commanders
to do likewise. Just at this time Uraias, who had
selected four thousand Ligurians and men from the
fortresses in the Alps, was moving with all speed
toward Ravenna with the intention of relieving the
city. But when these men learned what had been
done by Sisigis, they became feartul for their families
and demanded that they should first go to them.
Consequently Uraias entered the Cottian Alps with his
whole army, and laid siege to Sisigis and the force of
Thomas. Now when John, the nephew of Vitalian,
and Martinus learned of this situation (for they
happened to be very near the Po), they came to the
rescue as quickly as possible with their whole army ;
and by falling suddenly upon some of the fortresses
in the Alps, they captured them and made slaves of
their inhabitants, and a large number οὗ these
captives, as chance would have it, proved to be
children and wives of the men who were serving


123
VOL. 1V. E


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


124


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxviii. 33—xxix. 4


under Uraias. For the most of the men under his
command were natives of these very fortresses,
And when these men learned that their own homes
had been captured, they detached themselves sud-
denly from the army of the Goths, having decided
to go over to the troops under John, and as a result
of this Uraias was able neither to accomplish any-
thing there nor to bring assistance to the Goths
endangered in Ravenna, but he returned unsuccessful
with a few men to Liguria and remained quietly
there. And Belisarius without interference held
Vittigis and the nobles of the Goths confined in
Ravenna.
XXIX

τ᾿ was in these circumstances that envoys arrived
from the emperor, Domnicus and Maximinus, both
members of the senate, in order to make peace on
the following terms. Vittigis was to receive one-
half of the royal treasure, and to rule over the
territory which is north of the river Po; but the
other half of the money was to fall to the emperor,
and he was to make subject and tributary to himself
all that lay south of the Po. So the envoys, having
shewn the emperor's letter to Belisarius, betook
themselves to Ravenna. And when the Goths and
Vittigis had learned the purpose of their coming,
they gladly agreed to make the treaty on these
terms. But Belisarius, upon hearing this, was moved
with vexation, counting it a great calamity that any-
one should prevent him from winning the decisive
victory of the whole war, when it was possible to do
so with no trouble, and from leading Vittigis a
captive to Byzantium. So when the envoys returned


125


10


ll


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


5) , , e ee: ΄ = ,


1 i.e. either good or bad.


126


HISTORY OF THE WABS, VI. xxix. 5-11


to him from Ravenna, he refused absolutely to ratify
the agreement by his own signature. And when
the Goths became aware of this, they began to feel
that the Romans were offering them peace with
treacherous intent, and became very suspicious of
them; and they forthwith declared flatly that with-
out both the signature and the oath of Belisarius
they would never make a compact with the
Romans.

And Belisarius, upon hearing that some of the com-
manders were criticizing him bitterly, on the ground
that he was plainly plotting against the emperor's
cause, and for this reason was quite unwilling to
bring the war to an end, called them all together,
and, in the presence of Domnicus and Maximinus,
spoke as follows. “Iam not alone in knowing that
the fortune of war is by no means fixed and firm, but I
think that each one of you shares this same view with
me regarding it, For many men have been deceived
by the hope of victory when it seemed certain that
it would come to them, while men who, to all
appearances, have met with disaster, have many a
time had the fortune to triumph unexpectedly over
their adversaries. Consequently I say that men
deliberating with regard to peace should not put
before them only the expectation of success, but
reflecting that the result will be either way,! they
should make their choice of policy on this basis.
In view of this, it has seemed best to me, at any
rate, to bring to a conference you, my colleagues,
and these envoys of the emperor, to the end that
the present occasion may afford an opportunity to
choose at our leisure whatever course may seem
destined to be of advantage to the emperor, that


127


12


14


16


17


18


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


128


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxix. 11-18


after the event you may never bring any reproach
against me. For it would be a thing most monstrous,
first to be silent as long as it is possible to choose
the better course, and later, upon surveying the
outcome decreed by fortune, to bring accusations.
Now as to the emperor's decision with a view to the
conclusion of the war, and as to the wishes of
Vittigis, you are of course well informed. And if
you, too, think this course advantageous, let each
man come forward and speak. If, however, you
think that you are able to recover the whole of Italy
for the Romans and to gain the mastery over the
enemy, nothing will prevent you from speaking with
complete frankness.’”’ When Belisarius had thus
spoken, all expressed the opinion with certainty that
the emperor's decision was best, and that they would
be unable to do the enemy any further harm. And
Belisarius was pleased with the expression of the
commanders’ opinion, and asked them to set it down
in writing, in order that they might never deny it.
They accordingly wrote a document stating that
they were unable to achieve superiority over their
opponents in the war.

These deliberations, then, were being carried
forward in the Roman camp. But the Goths, hard
pressed by the famine and no longer able to endure
their suffering, were in a state of suspense ; for while
they were hostile to the rule of Vittigis, seeing that
he had been unfortunate in the extreme, still they
were reluctant to yield to the emperor, fearing only
this, that upon becoming slaves of the emperor they
would be compelled to remove from Italy and go to
Byzantium and settle there. So after deliberating
among themselves, all the best of the Goths decided


129


19


20


21


22


23


24


25


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


/ “ « / / » al

” / \
» f 2/7 ” 4 a \ / 1 id


2 +. Τὼ: τῶ K, Christ would bracket.


130


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxix. 18-25


to declare Belisarius Emperor of the West. And
sending to him secretly, they begged him to assume
the royal power; for upon this condition, they
declared, they would follow him gladly. But Beli-
sarius was quite unwilling to assume the ruling
power against the will of the emperor; for he had
an extraordinary loathing for the name of tyrant, and
furthermore he had, in fact, been bound by the
emperor previously by most solemn oaths never
during his lifetime to organize a revolution; still, in
order to turn the situation before him to the best
advantage, he let it appear that he received the
proposals of the barbarians gladly. And Vittigis,
perceiving this, became fearful, and saying that the
deliberations of the Goths had arrived at the best
possible result, he too secretly urged Belisarius to
enter upon the royal power; for no one, he said,
would stand in his way. Then indeed Belisarius
again called together the envoys of the emperor and
all the commanders and asked them whether it
seemed to them a matter of great importance to
make all the Goths with Vittigis captives, and to
secure as plunder all their wealth, and recover the
whole of Italy for the Romans. And they said that
this would be for the Romans a great and over-
whelming piece of good fortune, and they begged
him to bring it about as quickly as possible, by
whatever means he could. Accordingly Belisarius
at once sent to Vittigis and the notabbes of the
Goths some of his intimates, bidding them carry
out what they had promised. And indeed the
famine would not permit them to put off the matter
to any other time, but, by its increasing pressure,
was driving them to this decision. Consequently


1321


20


27


28


29


30


31


32


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


/ of <A ὃ Ν \ / > \ ᾿ /
/ / S » \ “ \
an lol «. / A ς
oe ¢ » δ wn
/ a b] / , “-“
\ \
/
/
a / / ΄
/ / = e / v ’
\ \ \ /
an “ / e
“ 3 a a
, / v Ay
» Ν fa U \ U -
v a
, \ /
᾽ a “ \ ¢e tal Nut / 7


132


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxix. 25-32


they again sent envoys to the camp of the Romans,
with instructions to make some vague statement
openly, but in secret to receive pledges from Beli-
sarius, both that he would do no harm to anyone of
the Goths, and that thenceforth he himself would be
king of the Goths and Italians ; this accomplished,
they were to come with him and the Roman army
into Ravenna. As for Belisarius, he swore to every-
thing else, just as the envoys required of him, but
concerning the kingship he said that he would swear
to Vittigis himself and the rulers of the Goths.
And the envoys, thinking that he would never reject
the kingship, but that he would strive for it above
all other things, made not the least hesitation in
urging him to come with them into Ravenna. Then
Belisarius ordered Bessas and John and Narses and
Aratius to go with their several commands to different
places (for these were the men whom he suspected
of being exceedingly hostile to him), and to provide
provisions for themselves ; for he alleged that it was
no longer possible for him, in the place where he was,
to bring in provisions for the whole army. So these
officers, as well as Athanasius, the pretorian prefect,
who had recently come from Byzantium, proceeded
to carry out the instructions given them, but he
himself with the remainder of the army marched
into Ravenna with the envoys of the Goths. And
loading a fleet of ships with grain and other pro-
visions, he gave orders that they should sail with all
speed into the harbour of Classes; for thus the
Romans call the suburb of Ravenna where the
harbour is.

And while I watched the entry of the Roman
army into Ravenna at that time, an idea came to


133


33


34


35


36


37


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


3 2 \ so) SS


134


HISTORY: OF ‘THE WARS, VIitxxix. 32-37


me, to the eflect that it is not at all by the wisdom
of men or by any other sort of excellence on their
part that events are brought to fulfilment, but that
there is some divine power which is ever warping
their purposes and shifting them in such a way that
there will be nothing to hinder that which is being
brought to pass. For although the Goths were
greatly superior to their opponents in number and
in power, and had neither fought a decisive battle
since they had entered Ravenna nor been humbled
in spirit by any other disaster, still they were being
made captives by the weaker army and were regard-
ing the name of slavery as no insult. But when the
women, as they sat at the gate, had seen the whole
army (for they had heard from their husbands that
the enemy were men of great size and too numerous
to be counted), they all spat upon the faces of their
husbands, and pointing with their hands to the
victors, reviled them for their cowardice.

As for Belisarius, he held Vittigis under guard,
but not in disgrace, and urged those of the barbarians
who lived south of the river Po to go to their own
lands and care for them unmolested. This he did
because he felt that he would have no hostile force
to deal with in that quarter, and that the Goths of
that region would never unite, because he had, as it
happened, previously established a large number of
Roman troops in the towns there. So these Goths
gladly made haste to return. And thus the Romans
were now making their position secure, for in


om. K.


135


98


99


40


4]


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


2 εἴ τι Maltretus: om. MSS.
8 ἣν K pr. m.: ὃν K corr., om. L.


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxix. 37-41


Ravenna at least they were no longer outnumbered
by the Goths. He next took possession of the
money in the palace, which he intended to convey
to the emperor. But as for the private property ot
the Goths, neither did he take plunder from any
individual, nor would he permit any other Roman to
take such plunder, but each one of them preserved
his property according to the terms of the agree-
ment. Now when those of the barbarians who were
keeping guard in the strongest of the towns heard
that both Ravenna and Vittigis were held by the
Romans, they began to send envoys to Belisarius,
craving permission to submit themselves by surrender
and the places they guarded. And he most willingly
furnished pledges to them all, and thus took over
Tarbesium? and such other strongholds as there
were in Venetia. For Caesena was the only one
remaining in Aemilia, and this he had previously
taken over along with Ravenna. And the Goths
who commanded these towns, as soon as they
received the pledges, came to Belisarius and
remained with him—all except Ildibadus, a man of
note, who commanded the garrison in Verona; for
though he too sent envoys to Belisarius on the same
mission as the others, especially because Belisarius
had found his children in Ravenna and taken
possession of them, still he did not either come to
Ravenna or submit himself to Belisarius. For
fortune brought him to a situation which I shall
now describe.


4 Modern Treviso.


137


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XXX


138


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxx. 1-5


XXX


Certain officers of the Roman army, out of malice
toward Belisarius, began to slander him to the
emperor, advancing against him a charge of usurpa-
tion for which there were no grounds whatever in his
case. And the emperor, not so much because he was
persuaded by these slanders as because the Medic
war was already pressing upon him, summoned
Belisarius to come as quickly as possible, in order
to take the field against the Persians; meanwhile
he commanded Bessas and John with the others to
take charge of Italy, and directed Constantianus
to go to Ravenna from Dalmatia. Now the Goths
who inhabited the country to the north of the Po
and of Ravenna, upon hearing that the emperor was
summoning Belisarius, at first, indeed, paid no heed
to the matter, thinking that Belisarius would never
regard the kingdom of Italy as of less account
than loyalty to Justinian. But when they learned
that he was making preparations for his departure
in real earnest, all the loyal Goths of that region
who were still left formed a common purpose and
went to Uraias, the nephew of Vittigis, at Ticinum ;
and after first lamenting long with him, they spoke
as follows: ‘‘ The man who has proved to be chiefly
responsible for the present misfortunes of the nation
of the Goths is no other than you. For we, on our
part, should have long ago removed that uncle of
yours from the kingship, seeing that he has led us
in such a cowardly manner and with such ill fortune,
just as we removed Theodatus, the nephew of
Theoderic, unless, out of respect for the natural
vigour which you seemed to display, we had decided


139


10


ll


12


13


14


PROCOPIUS OF. CAESAREA


[40


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxx. 5-14


to concede to Vittigis merely the title of king, but
in fact to entrust to you alone the rule of the Goths.
What, however, seemed then consideration, now
stands out clearly as folly and the cause of these mis-
fortunes of ours. For very many of the Goths, as
you know, dear Uraias, and our noblest, have
perished in the war, and such nobles as are left
among the survivors Belisarius will lead away along
with Vittigis and all our wealth. And no one could
deny that we too shall suffer this same fate a little
later, seeing that we are reduced to a small and
pitiable band. Since, therefore, such a dire fate has
encompassed us, it will be preferable for us to die
with glory rather than to see our wives and children
led by the enemy to the extremities of the earth.
And we shall, in all probability, accomplish some-
thing worthy of valorous men, if only we have you
as leader of our struggles.” Thus spoke the Goths.

And Uraias replied as follows: ‘You say that
we ought in our present extremity to choose the peril
of battle rather than slavery, and this opinion I share
with you. But, on the other hand, I think it
altogether inexpedient for me to ascend the throne
of the Goths, in the first place because, being the
nephew of Vittigis, a man who has been so un-
fortunate, I should appear to the enemy as worthy
to be despised, since men believe that among kins-
men the like fortune is ever handed on from one to
another; and, in the second place, I should seem
to act impiously in usurping the rule of my uncle,
and in case I do this 1 shall probably have the
most of you angry with me. But my opinion is that
Ildibadus must become ruler of the Goths for this


141


15


17


19


20


21


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


, / » Lal
ei τ
rn \ \ \
r la f. /
Tocatra καὶ Ovpaias εἰπὼν τὰ ξύμφορα VorGors
“ r
, 7 9S \ \
sf , / Υ
n /
΄ /
/ - /
na lal / 3 /
“ wn /
ΧΙ ” δὲ ) Tava yi 26 4
lo! , / “ \
lal / a
7 a Lol
“ \ \
/ rn
5 lal 7, ς \ 4 An Ν lal > >
142


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxx. 14-21


perilous enterprise, a man who has attained the
highest excellence and is conspicuously energetic.
And it is to be expected with certainty that Theudis
also, the ruler of the Visigoths, seeing that he is
I]dibadus’ uncle, will assist him in the war because
of his kinship. And this indeed will be ground
for more confident hope in carrying on the struggle
against our opponents.’

When Uraias, in his turn, had spoken thus, it
seemed to all the Goths that his words pointed out
the course which would be to their advantage. And
Ildibadus was straightway summoned by them and
eame from Verona. Then, after clothing him in
the purple, they declared him king of the Goths
and entreated him to take the situation in hand and
set matters right for them. Thus did Ildibadus
come into the royal power. But a short time after
this, he called all the Goths together and spoke as
follows: “ All of you, fellow-soldiers, as I am well
aware, have had experience in many wars, so that
we shall probably never proceed to make war on the
spur of the moment. For experience brings a man
sober judgment, so that he is not wont to act rashly
in any case. Now you ought, in fairness to your-
selves, to call to recollection all that has befallen us
heretofore, and make plans to meet the present
situation with this in mind. For when forgetfulness
of past events comes upon men, it often, through
folly, exalts their minds at the wrong moment, and
then, when their all is at stake, utterly overthrows
them. Now when Vittigis placed himself in the
hands of the enemy, it was not against your will
nor did you strive to prevent him, but at that time
you bowed before the adversities of fortune and con-


143


23


24


25


26


27


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


/


144


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxx. 21-27


sidered that we should best consult our own interests
by sitting at home and obeying Belisarius rather
than by risking our lives in endless dangers. But
now, upon hearing that Belisarius is setting out for
Byzantium, you have decided to undertake a revolu-
tion. And yet each one of you ought to have taken
into consideration that things do not always happen
for men as they will them, but many times the out-
come of events has unexpectedly gone contrary to
what has been determined upon. For chance or a
change of heart have a way of setting most things
right when least expected ; and even now it is by no
means improbable that this is what will happen to
Belisarius. It is better, therefore, to make enquiries
of him first and to attempt to bring the man back to
the earlier agreement, and only after this should you
proceed to the next best step.”

When Ildibadus had thus spoken, the Goths
decided that he had counselled well, and he sent
envoys to Ravenna with all speed. So these envoys,
upon coming before Belisarius, reminded him of the
agreement made with them and reproached him as
a breaker of his promises, calling him a slave by his
own choice, and chiding him because, they said, he
did not blush at choosing servitude in place of the
kingship ; and with many other speeches of a similar
sort they kept urging him to accept the rule.
For, should he do so, they declared that Ildibadus
would come of his own accord in order to lay down
the purple at his feet and do obeisance to Belisarius
as king of the Goths and Italians. So the envoys,

145


28


29


30


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VI. xxx. 27-30


on their part, kept making these speeches, thinking
that the man would without any hesitation take
upon himself the kingly title immediately, But he,
contrary to their expectation, refused them outright,
saying that never, while the emperor Justinian
lived, would Belisarius usurp the title of king. So
they, upon hearing this, departed as quickly as
possible and reported the whole matter to Ildibadus.
And Belisarius took his way to Byzantium; and the
winter drew to its close and the fifth year ended in 540a.p.
this war, the history of which Procopius has written.


ae are
Rs « pe pj Mange ΕΖ tases


ea wide
5


oy bagi drt: eimitasanth Οὐ ceave διδεπκει sted io
aT duke. Yo (Oval τ όμαβαα,


΄ ε in .Ψ ras 5 * we, ya
Tie, OW 42gI0K οι τὺ» οβᾶγ ans


“unre


" is


μελ Fide Oni '


—_—


See


peng as


a


“4
ONT


HISTORY OF THE WARS:
BOOK VII


THE GOTHIC WAR (continued)


I


5 / , > / ὃ \ To θ a
7 ,
ς rn Ὁ / \ ae
/ A ,
/ A > / v /
ΕῚ 7 rn \ DI nr >] /
5 Ν an
/
δε 1 LR / / \ B OLX \
rn / i
lal /
/ , /
€ / /


[50


HISTORY OF THE WARS: BOOK Vil


THE GOTHIC WAR (continued)
I


Tuus Belisarius departed, though the situation
was still unsettled, and he arrived at Byzantium in
company with Vittigis and the notables of the Goths
and the children of Ildibadus, bringing with him all
the treasure; and he was escorted by Ildiger,
Valerian, Martinus, and Herodian only. Now the
Emperor Justinian did indeed take pleasure in seeing
Vittigis and his wife, and marvelled at both the beauty
and the great stature of the barbarian throng. But
upon receiving the wealth of Theoderic, a notable
sight in itself, he merely set it forth for the members
of the senate to view privately in the palace, being
jealous because of the magnitude and splendour of
the achievement; and neither did he bring it out
before the people, nor did he accord to Belisarius
the customary triumph, as he had done when he
returned from his victory over Gelimer and the
Vandals. However, the name of Belisarius was on
the lips of all: to him were ascribed two victories,
such as had never before fallen to the lot of any
one man to achieve; he had brought two kings
captive to Byzantium, and unexpectedly had made
both the race and the possessions of Gizeric and of
Theoderic Roman spoil—two kings than whom none,


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


- Seep ES: K: ἐμφερῆ Land Suidas.


KraSeninnikov, παρείχετο Suidas.


152


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. i. 4-8


among barbarians at least, has ever been more illus-
trious; and he had brought back their wealth from
the enemy and restored it once more to the state,
and recovered for the empire in a short space of time
almost one half of its territory on land and sea. And
the Byzantines took delight in watching Belisarius as
he came forth from his house each day and proceeded
toward the market-place or as he returned to his
house, and none of them could get enough of this
sight. For his progress resembled a crowded festival
procession, since he was always escorted by a large
number of Vandals, as well as Goths and Moors.
Furthermore, he had a fine figure and was tall and
remarkably handsome. But his conduct was so
meek and his attitude toward those who met him so
affable that he seemed like a very poor man and
one of no repute.

As a commander the love ever felt for him both
by soldiers and peasants was irresistible, seeing that,
in his treatment of his soldiers on the one hand,
he was surpassed by none in generosity ; (for when
any had met with misfortune in battle, he used to
console them by large presents of money for the
wounds they had received, and to those who had
distinguished themselves he presented bracelets and
necklaces to wear as prizes, and when a soldier had
lost in battle horse or bow or anything else whatso-
ever, another was straightway provided in its place
by Belisarius); and in his treatment of the peasants,
on the other hand, he won their affection because he
shewed so much restraint and such consideration for
them that it never fell to their lot to suffer any


153


10


1


12


19


14


15


16


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


\ \ 60 / n i xv > “eng |
ral , \ \ ’ὔ
\ > if \ fi a FN > \ ΄
e 7 > o / ” Ψ > aA
A ς 3 v b) an 4 » ”
> n Μἷ 9S x \ A A “
yd cr ᾽ ,
/ ᾽ > \ A nr
a / ’ be \
A 7 ’
A A 7 ee Ie Ly tee See
a / cal
7
d \ = / are 7 “-


154


HISTORY OF THE WARS, ΝΠ]. i. 8-16


violence when Belisarius was general—nay, rather,
all those whose land was visited by a large body of
troops under his command unexpectedly found that
they were enriched ; for they always set their own
price upon everything sold to the soldiers. And
whenever the crops were ripe, Belisarius used to
watch closely that the cavalry in passing should
not damage any man’s grain. Also, when the fruit
was ripe on the trees, not a single man was permitted
to touch it. Furthermore, he possessed the virtue
of self-restraint in a marvellous degree; and hence
it was that he never would touch any woman other
than his wedded wife. And so, although he took
captive such great numbers of women from both the
Vandals and the Goths, and such beautiful women as
no man in the world, I suppose, has ever seen, he
refused to allow any of them to come into his
presence or meet him in any other way. In
addition to all his other qualities, he was also re-
markably shrewd, and in difficult situations he was
able with unerring judgment to decide upon the
best course of action. Furthermore, in the dangers
of war he was both courageous without incurring
unnecessary risks and daring to a degree without
losing his cool judgment, either striking quickly or
holding back his attack upon the enemy according
to the requirements of the situation. Nay more, in
desperate situations, on the one hand he shewed
a spirit which was both full of confidence and un-
ruffed by excitement, and in the fulness of success,
on the other hand, he neither gave way to vanity
nor rushed into indulgence ; at any rate no man ever
saw Belisarius intoxicated.

Now as long as he was in command of the Roman


5.5


VOL. IV. Ε


17


19


20


2]


22


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


ι His official retinue.
3 Described in Book V. xix.— VI. x.


156


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. i. 16-23


army both in Libya and in Italy, he was continually
victorious and always acquired whatever lay before
him. But when he had been brought back to
Byzantium by imperial summons, his ability was
recognized still more fully than in previous times
and received most generous appreciation, For since
by his own outstanding merit in every field he was
prominent above all his fellows, and surpassed the
generals of all time in the vastness of his wealth and
the number of his bodyguards and spearmen, he was
naturally looked upon by all officers and soldiers
alike as a formidable person. For no one, I am sure,
had the hardihood to resist his commands, and his
men never refused to carry out whatever orders he
gave, both respecting as they did his ability and
fearing his power. For he used to equip seven
thousand horsemen from his own household,? and
not one of these was an inferior man, but each of
them could claim to stand first in the line of battle
and to challenge the best of the enemy. Indeed,
when Rome was beleaguered by the Goths, and the
Roman elders were watching the progress of the ἢ
struggle through the various engagements,” they
marvelled greatly and cried out that one man’s
household was destroying the power of Theoderic.
So Belisarius, having become, as was noted above,
aman of power, both because of the respect accorded
him and because of his sound judgment, continued to
advise such measures as would prove in the interest
of the emperor’s cause and to carry out with independ-
ent judgment the decisions reached. But the other
eommanders, being, unlike him, on an equality with
one another, and having no single thought in mind
except to make sure of their own personal gain, had


157


24


to
Or


29


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


7 b / we \ \
7 « ’ 7 5 4 /
A 5. δ ΤῸΝ \ / Dies yy
/ «ς "ay WS
fol > > ΄ς \ / \ an ’ὔ
el > A -“
> ΄ Ν , “ / Se «ἢ lal
> / x , J “ “, \ / ,
/ a
, b \ a / \ \
, € / lal ς a *
—


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. i. 23-29


already begun both to plunder the Romans! and
to put the civil population at the mercy of the
soldiers, and neither were they themselves any longer
giving heed to the requirements of the situation, nor
could they secure obedience to their commands on the
part of the soldiers. Consequently, many blunders
were committed by them, and the entire fabric of the
Roman power was utterly destroyed in a short space
of time. And I shall now proceed to recount the
story of these events as best I can,

When lIldibadus learned that Belisarius had
departed from Ravenna and was on his way, he
began to gather about him all the barbarians and as
many of the Roman soldiers as were inclined to
favour a revolution. And he sought by every means
to strengthen his rule, and laboured diligently to
recover for the Gothic nation the sovereignty of
Italy. Now at the first not more than a thousand
men followed him and they held only one city,
Ticinum, but little by little all the inhabitants of
Liguria and Venetia came over to his side.

Now there was a certain Alexander in Byzantium
who held the office of comptroller of the state
treasury ; this official the Romans call “logothete,” 2
using a Greek name. ‘This man was always making
charges against the soldiers for the losses they
caused to the treasury of the state? And by sub-
jecting them to trial for offences of this sort, he on
his part quickly rose from obscurity to fame and


1 In Italy.

2 «(πῃ who audits accounts.”

3 The maintenance of the army seemed to John to involve
unnecessary details of expenditure.


159


30


31


32


33


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


160


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. i. 29-33


from poverty to immense wealth, and not only this,
but he also succeeded in collecting great sums of
money for the emperor, surpassing all predecessors
in this; but it was he, more than any other man,
who was chiefly responsible for the deterioration of
the army, in that the soldiers were both few and
poor and reluctant to face the perils of war. The
Byzantines indeed went so far as to call him by the
name ‘Snips,’ because it was an easy feat for him
to cut off the edge all around a golden coin, and
while thus making it as much smaller as he wished,
still to preserve the circular shape it originally had.
For they call the tool with which such work is done
“snips.” This Alexander, then, it was whom the
emperor sent to Italy after summoning Belisarius
to return. And directly upon his arrival at Ravenna,
he published an altogether unreasonable financial
reckoning. For though the Italians had neither laid
hands upon the emperor's money nor committed any
offence against the state, he summoned then, first
of all, to face an investigation, laying to their charge
the wrongs they had done Theoderic and the other
Gothic rulers, and compelling them to pay whatever
gains they had made, as he alleged, by deceiving
the Goths. In the second place, he disappointed
the soldiers by the niggardliness of the reckoning
with which he repaid them for their wounds and
dangers. Hence not only did the Italians become dis-
affected from the Emperor Justinian, but not one of
the soldiers was willing any longer to undergo the
dangers of war, and by wilfully refusing to fight,
they caused the strength of the enemy to grow
continually greater.


161


34


36


37


38


39


40


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


162


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. i. 34-40


While the other commanders were remaining quiet
on account of this situation, Vitalius alone (for he
happened to have in Venetia a numerous army com-
prising with others a great throng of barbarian
Eruli) had the courage to do battle with Ildibadus,
fearing, as actually happened, that at a later time
when his power had grown greatly they would be no
longer able to check him, But in the fierce battle
which took place near the city of Tarbesium,! Vitalius
was badly defeated and fled, saving some few men,
but losing the most of them there. In this battle
many Eruli fell and among them Visandus, the leader
of the Eruli, was killed. And Theudimund, the son
of Mauricius and grandson of Mundus, a mere lad at
the time, came indeed into danger of death, but
succeeded in making his escape in company with
Vitalius, Asa result of this achievement the name
of Ildibadus reached the emperor and spread over
the whole world.

But after a time it so fell out that enmity sprang
up between Uraias and Ildibadus for the following
reason. Uraias had a wife who in wealth and
personal beauty was adjudged first among all the
women of these barbarians. This woman once went
down to the bath clad in great magnificence of
ornament and taking with her a very notable com-
pany of attendants. And seeing the wife of Ildibadus
there in plain garments, she not only did her no
obeisance as the consort of the king but otherwise
too ignored and did her insult. For Ildibadus was
still in poverty, having by no means come into royal
wealth. And the wife of Ildibadus, being very
much offended by the uncalled-for insult, came to


1 Modern Treviso.


163


41


42


43


44


45


46


47


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


Φ 7 id » a ἈΝ > / \ tel
AA Ν
, € \ ’ \ / > na
> row) \ / Μ 5 / /
fal / / i?
΄“ A 7
᾿ > \
a \
iA \ nw
nr /
/ ral


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. i. 40-47


her husband in tears and demanded that he avenge
her for the outrageous treatment she had received
from the wife of Uraias. Accordingly Ildibadus
first slandered Uraias to the barbarians, imputing to
him that he was intending to desert to the enemy,
but a little later he put him to death by treachery,
and thereby incurred the enmity of the Goths. For
it was by no means in accordance with their wish
that Uraias should be thus unceremoniously removed
from the world. And forthwith a large number of
them formed a party and began to denounce IIdibadus
vehemently as having committed an unholy deed.
However, no one was willing to exact vengeance
from him for this murder.

But there was one among them, Velas by name,
who, though a Gepid by birth, had attained the
dignity of serving among the king’s guards. This
man had wooed a woman fair to lock upon, and he
loved her with an extraordinary love ; but while he
was off on an expedition against the enemy, in order
to make some attack upon them in company with
certain others, I]dibadus, meantime, either through
ignorance or prompted by some other motive, married
his intended bride to someone else among the bar-
barians. And when Velas, returning from the army,
heard this, being passionate by nature, he could not
bear the insult thus done him, but decided im-
mediately to kill Ildibadus, thinking that he would
thereby render a welcome service to all the Goths.
And so, when the king on a certain occasion was
entertaining the noblest of the Goths at a banquet,
he watched for an opportunity and put his plot into
execution. For while the king is dining, it is
customary for many persons to stand about him and


165


48


49


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


II


166


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. i. 47-ii. 5


among them his bodyguards. So when he had
stretched out his hand to the food as he lay reclining
upon the couch, Velas suddenly smote his neck with
his sword. And so, while the food was still grasped
in the man’s fingers, his head was severed and fell
upon the table, and filled all those present with
great consternation and amazement. Such, then,
was the vengeance which overtook IIdibadus for the
murder of Uraias. And the winter drew to a close
and the sixth year ended in this war, the history of
which Procopius has written,


Il


TuHereE was a certain Eraric in the Gothic army,
one of the Rogi by birth, a man possessed of great
power among these barbarians. Now these Rogi are
indeed a Gothic nation, but in ancient times they
used to live as an independent people. But Theoderic
had early persuaded them, along with certain other
nations, to form an alliance with him, and they were
absorbed into the Gothic nation and acted in common
with them in all things against their enemies. But
since they had absolutely no intercourse with women
other than their own, each successive generation of
children was of unmixed blood, and thus they had
preserved the name of their nation among them-
selves. This Eraric, in the midst of the turmoil
consequent upon the murder of Ildibadus, was
suddenly proclaimed king by the Rogi. This act
pleased the Goths not at all; however, the most of
them had in fact fallen into great despondence be-


167


541 A.D.


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


168


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. ii. 5-11


cause the hopes they had formerly placed in I]dibadus
had been frustrated ; for he, they felt, would have
been able to recover the kingdom and the sovereignty
of Italy for the Goths, Eraric, however, did nothing
at all worthy of note; for after living in office five
months he died in the following manner. There
was a certain Totila, a nephew of Ildibadus, a man
gifted with remarkable discretion, energetic in the
extreme, and held in high esteem among the Goths.
This Totila happened at that time to be in command
of the Goths in Tarbesium. But when he learned
that Ildibadus had been removed from among men
in the manner described, he sent to Constantianus
at Ravenna asking that pledges be given him for his
safety, on condition that he hand over to the Romans
both himself and the Goths whom he commanded
along with Tarbesium. This proposal Constantianus
heard gladly and swore to everything just as Totila
requested, and a fixed day for the transaction was
agreed upon by both, on which Totila and the Goths
who were keeping guard in Tarbesium were to
receive into the city some of the associates of Con-
stantianus and put themselves and the city into
their hands.

But already the Goths were becoming dissatisfied
with the rule of Eraric, seeing the man to be incom-
petent to carry on the war against the Romans, and
the most of them were openly abusing him as one
who had stood in their way to great achievements,
alleging that he had done away with Ildibadus.!
And finally they made an agreement among them-


1 This is the first intimation that Eraric had had anything
to do with the murder of Ildibadus, which in the previous
chapter was ascribed to Velas.


169


12


13


14


15


16


17


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


2 nr 3 \ ’ / 4 \ ”


\ / / / 3 )2)28 ?

’ / “ » \ 2. \ /


[70


selves and sent to Totila at Tarbesium, urging him
to assume the royal power. For by now they were
beginning to feel generally a keen sense of regret
for the lost rule of Ildibadus, and so they began to
turn their hope of victory toward his relative Totila,
having come to feel confidence in the man because
his wish was the same as theirs. As for Totila, when
the messengers came before him, he, without any
concealment, disclosed his agreement with the
Romans, but said that, if the Goths should kill
Eraric before the appointed day, he would both
follow them and carry out everything in accordance
with their desires. When the barbarians heard this,
they set about forming a plot to compass the de-
struction of Eraric. Such was the progress of events
in the Gothic camp.

But in the meantime the Roman armies, though
enjoying security as a result of the preoccupation of
the enemy, were neither moving to unite their forces,
nor were they planning any action against the bar-
barians. As for Eraric, he called together all the
Goths and persuaded them to send envoys to the
Emperor Justinian, who should beg him to make
peace with them on the same terms on which he
had been willing previously to conclude a treaty with
Vittigis, on the condition, namely, that the Goths,
holding the territory north of the Po, should with-
draw from the rest of Italy. And since this was
approved by the Goths, he chose out some of those
especially intimate with him, including one -Cabal-
larius by name, and sent them as envoys. Now
these envoys were ostensibly to treat of those matters
which I have mentioned above, but secretly he
instructed them to treat with the emperor of nothing


171


18


9°
7]


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


11


4
8


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIL. ii. 17-iii. 4


else than how he might himself receive a great sum
of money and be enrolled among the patricians in
return for handing over the whole of Italy and laying
aside his official title. So the envoys, upon reaching
Byzantium, proceeded to treat of these matters. It
was at this time that the Goths killed Eraric by
treachery. And after his death, Totila took over the
rule in accordance with the agreement made with
them.


Now when the Emperor Justinian learned of the
fate which had befallen Eraric and that the Goths
had established Totila as ruler over them, he began
to rebuke and censure the commanders of the army
in Italy and gave them no respite. The conse-
quence of this was that John, the nephew of
Vitalian, and Bessas and Vitalius and all the others,
after establishing garrisons in each city, gathered at
Ravenna, where Constantianus and Alexander, whom
I have mentioned previously,! were quartered. And
when they were all gathered together, it was decided
that the best procedure for them was to march first
against Verona, which is in Venetia, and then, after
capturing that city and the Goths there, to move
against Totila and Ticinum. So this Roman army
was assembled with a strength of twelve thousand
men, and its commanders were eleven in number,


1 Chap. i. 28, foll., above.


173


10


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. iii. 4-10


the first of whom were, as it happened, Constanti-
anus and Alexander; and they marched straight
toward the city of Verona. And when they had
come to a place close to the city, about sixty stades
away, they made camp in the plain there. For
plains which are suitable for cavalry stretch out in
every direction from this place and extend as far as
the city of Mantua, which is one day’s journey distant
from the city of Verona.

Now there was a man of note among the Veneti,
Marcian by name, who lived in a fortress not far
distant from the city of Verona, and being as he was
a staunch adherent of the emperor, he eagerly under-
took to hand over the city to the Roman army. And
since one of the guards had been known to him from
childhood, he sent to him some of his intimates and
persuaded the man by means of a bribe to receive
the emperor's army into the city. Then, when the
guard of the gate had agreed, Marcian sent those
who had arranged the matter with the guard to the
commanders of the Roman army, in order both to
report to them the arrangements made and to join
them in forcing an entrance into the city by night.
The commanders then decided that it was advisable
for one of their number to go in advance with some
few men; and if the guard should set the gates
open for them, they were to hold them fast and
receive the army in safety into the city. Now no
one among them all was willing to undertake this
perilous enterprise except Artabazes alone,an Arme-
nian by birth but a man of exceptional ability in
war, who not at all unwillingly offered himself for


ἔαντας Maltretus.


175


11


12


13


14


16


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


176


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. iii. 10-16


the undertaking. This man commanded some
Persians whom Belisarius had, as it happened, sent
to Byzantium from Persian territory along with
Bleschames a little before this, after his capture of
the fortress Sisauranon.1 So he on the present
occasion selected one hundred men from the whole
army and at a late hour of the night went up close
to the fortifications. And when the guard, true to
his agreement, opened the gate for them, some of
them took their stand there and were urging the
army to come, while the others mounted the wall
and killed the men on guard there, assailing them
as they did without warning. Then the whole
Gothic force, upon perceiving their evil plight,
rushed off in flight through another gate.

Now there is a certain rock which rises to a great
height facing the fortifications of Verona, from which
it is possible to observe everything which is taking
place in the city and to count the people in it, and,
besides, to see for a very great distance over the
plain. Thither the Goths retreated and remained
quiet during the whole night. As for the Roman
army, it advanced to a point within forty stades of
the city, but proceeded no further, the generals
being engaged in a dispute among themselves over
the money in the city. And they still continued to
wrangle over this plunder until day had now clearly
dawned; but the Goths, after observing accurately
from the height both the number of the enemy
scattered through the city and the distance at which
the rest of the army had halted from Verona, made
a rush toward the city, and passed through the very


1 Cf. Book II. xix. 24.
177


17


18


20


21


22


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. iii. 16-22


gate through which, as it happened, they had
previously departed ; for those who had entered the
city were unable even to hold this gate. So the
Romans, taking counsel together, hastily sought safety
on the parapet along the circuit-wall ; and when the
barbarians in great numbers assailed them at close
quarters, they all, and Artabazes especially, made a
display of remarkable deeds and warded off their
assailants most vigorously.

At that moment the commanders of the Roman
army had at last reached an agreement with each
other regarding the money in Verona, and decided
to proceed against the city with all the rest of the
army. But finding the gates closed to them and
the enemy warding them off most vigorously, they
quickly marched to the rear, although they saw the
others fighting inside the fortifications and begging
them not to abandon them, but to remain there until
they should save themselves by fleeing to them. So
Artabazes and his men, being overcome by the num-
bers of the enemy and despairing of assistance from
their own army, all leaped down outside the wall.
Now all those who had the fortune to fall on smooth
ground betook themselves unscathed to the Roman
army, among whom was Artabazes also, but as many
as fell on rough ground were all killed instantly.
And when Artabazes had reached the Roman army,
he proceeded with them, having heaped abuse and
contumely upon them all; and after crossing the
Eridanus,! they entered the city of l'aventia,? which


1 Modern Po. 2 Modern Faenza.


179


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


IV


180


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIL. iii. 22-iv. 5


is in the land of Aemilia, one hundred and twenty
stades distant from Ravenna.


IV


TotiLa, upon learning what had taken place at
Verona, summoned many of the Goths from that
city, and upon their arrival moved with his whole
army, amounting to five thousand men, against his
opponents. Now when the commanders of the
Roman army learned this, they began to deliberate
over their situation. And Artabazes came forward
and spoke as follows: “ Fellow-commanders, let no
one of you think fit at the present time to despise
the enemy because they are inferior to us in num-
ber, nor, because he is fighting against men enslaved
by Belisarius, let him advance against them in a
reckless frame of mind. For many a man, deceived
by a false estimate of a situation, has brought about
his own downfall, while others who have been filled
with unjustified contempt of their foes have seen
their whole power ruined thereby; and even apart
from this, the very fact of their previous ill fortune
lures these men on to attain a fairer lot. For when
fortune has reduced a man to despair and robbed
him of his fair hopes, it changes his nature and leads
him to feel an extraordinary degree of daring. And
it is not because I am moved by mere suspicion that
I have made these statements before you, but because
of the thorough acquaintance 1 have recently made
with the daring of these men while engaged in


181


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


/ \ a ’ la) U / is
> a
, /
/ » , “-. 7 con an
al , > \ » cf / ’
a 3 lol , /
, / a
/ nr
/ «ς a “ a
/


1 we Haury: μὴ K, μοι L.
182


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII, iv. 5-11


mortal combat with them. And let no one think
that I now marvel at their power because 1 was
defeated along with a handful of men. For it is to
those who shall come to blows with them that men’s
valour becomes revealed, whether those men are
superior in number or inferior. My opinion then is
that it will be more to our advantage to watch for
the crossing of the river by the barbarians, and,
while the crossing is in progress, and about half their
men are across, to engage with them then, rather
than after they have already assembled, all in one
body. And let no man consider such a victory
inglorious. For the outcome of events alone is wont
to decide whether a deed shall be named glorious or
inglorious, and it is the victors whom men are accus-
tomed to praise without investigating the manner of
the victory.” So spoke Artabazes. But the com-
manders, owing to the divergence of their opinions,
did nothing that they should, but continued to
remain where they were and lose their opportunity
by delay.

And now the army of the Goths had come very
near, and when they were about to cross the river,
Totila called them all together and exhorted them as
follows: ‘My kinsmen, all other battles give promise,
as a general thing, of a contest that will be more
or less even and thereby incite the contending
armies to the struggle, but we are entering this
combat, not on an equality with our enemy as regards
the advantages of fortune, but facing a very different
situation. For they, even in case of a possible defeat,
will be able after no long time to renew the fight


2 τρύτῳ Dindorf, from an inferior MS. : τούτων KI.


183


12


13


14


15


16


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


tretus.


184


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. iv. 11-16


against us. For there is left behind for them a
numerous army quartered in the strongholds through-
out the whole of Italy, and, furthermore, it is not at
all improbable that another army will at a very early
date come to their assistance from Byzantium. But
if we, on the other hand, suffer this same fate, there
will be a final end of the name and hopes of the
Goths. For from an army of two hundred thousand
we have been reduced in the course of events to five
thousand men. Having made such a preface, I think
it not inappropriate to recall to your minds this fact
also, that when you decided to take up arms with
Ildibadus against the emperor, the number of your
band amounted to no more than one thousand men,
while your entire territory consisted of the city of
Ticinum. But since you came off victors in the
engagement, both our army and our territory have
increased. So that if you are willing in this battle
to display the same spirit of manly courage, I am
hopeful that, as the war goes on, following its natural
course, we shall accomplish the complete defeat of
our opponents. For it always proves true that the
victors increase both in numbers and in power. Let
each one of you, therefore, be eager to join battle
with the enemy with all your strength, understand-
ing clearly that if we do not succeed in the present
battle, it will be impossible to renew the struggle
against our opponents. It is reasonable, further-
more, for us te grapple with the enemy with high
hopes, taking courage from the unjust acts com-
mitted by them. For such has been their conduct
towards their subjects that the Italians at the


δ᾽ αὐτοῖς Hoeschel in marg. : αὐτοὺς MSS.


185


17


19


20


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


2 τῷ Krageninnikov: τὸ MSS.


186


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. iv. 16-21


present time need no further punishment for the
flagrant treason which they dared to commit against
the Goths; so true is it that every form of evil, to
put all in a word, has fallen to their lot from the
hands of those whom they cordially received. And
what enemy could be more easy to overcome than
men whose deeds, even those done in God’s name,
are utterly wicked?! Nay more, the very fear we
inspire in them should properly be a further cause
for confidence on our part as we enter the struggle.
For those against whom we proceed are no other
men than those who recently first penetrated into
the middle of Verona, then abandoned it for no good
reason, and, although not a man pursued them,
yet even so rushed off in a disgraceful flight.”

After delivering this exhortation Totila com-
manded three hundred of his troops to cross the
river at a distance of about twenty stades from
where he stood and get behind the enemy's camp,
and when the battle should come to close quarters,
to fall upon their rear, harassing them with their
missiles and assailing them with all their strength,
in order that the Romans might be thrown into
confusion and abandon all thought of resistance. He
himself, meanwhile, with the rest of the army
straightway crossed the river and advanced directly
upon his opponents; and the Romans immediately
came out to meet him. And when, as both armies
advanced, they came nearer to each other, a Goth,
Valaris by name, tall of stature and of most terrify-
ing mien, an active man withal and a good fighter,
rode his horse out before the rest of the army and


1 Referring to their violation of their oaths.


187
VOL. IV. G


22


23


24


20


27


28


29


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


188


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. iv. 21--29


took his stand in the open space between the
armies, clad in a corselet and wearing a helmet on
his head ; and he challenged all the Romans, if any-
one was willing to do battle with him. Whereupon
all remained quiet, being stricken with terror, save
Artabazes alone, who advanced to fight the man.
So they rode their horses toward each other, and
when they came close, both thrust their spears, but
Artabazes, anticipating his opponent, delivered the
first blow and pierced the right side of Valaris. And
the barbarian, mortally wounded, was about to fall
backward to the earth, but his spear, resting on
the ground behind him and being braced against a
rock, did not permit him to fall. As for Artabazes,
he continued to press forward still more vigorously,
driving the spear into the man’s vitals; for as yet he
did not suppose that he had already suffered a
mortal wound. Thus it came about that Valaris’
spear stood practically upright and its iron point
encountered the corselet of Artabazes, and first,
entering little by little, it went clear through the
corselet, and then, slipping further, grazed the skin
of Artabazes’ neck, And by some chance the iron,
as it pushed forward, cut an artery which lies in
that region, and there was immediately a great flow
of blood. However, the man experienced no feel-
ing of pain, and he rode back to the Roman army,
while Valaris fell dead on the spot. But the flow
of blood from Artabazes’ wound did not abate and
on the third day afterwards he departed from
among men; and this mishap shattered all. the
hopes of the Romans, since he was rendered unfit
for fighting in the engagement which followed, and


189


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


31


32


Vd , lel
/ “-“
\ v /
\ a /


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. iv. 29-v. 2


himself injured their cause in no small degree. For
while he went out of range of missiles and was
caring for his wound, the two armies engaged with
each other.

But when the engagement was hottest, the three
hundred barbarians suddenly appeared advancing
behind the Roman army; and when the Romans
saw these men, supposing as they did that their
assailants were a great multitude, they fell into a
panic and straightway rushed off in flight, each man
as best he could. And the barbarians kept up
a slaughter of Romans as they fled in complete
disorder, and many of them they captured and held
under guard, and they captured all the standards
besides, a thing which had never before happened
to the Romans.! As for the commanders, each one
of them as he could fled with only a few men, and
finding safety in whatever cities they happened to
reach they continued to guard them.


V


Nor long after this Totila sent an army against
Justinus and Florentia,? putting in command of the
force the most warlike of the Goths, Vledas,
Roderic, and Uliariss And when they came to
Florentia, they established themselves in camp
about the wall and entered upon a siege. There-
upon Justinus, in great agitation because, as it
happened, he had brought no provisions at all into
the city, sent to Ravenna to the commanders of

1 Incorrect of course ; the loss of the standards by Crassus


in 53 B.c. and by Varus in 9 A.D. should have been known to
Procopius. 2 Modern Florence.


101


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


192


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. ν. 2-


the Roman army, begging them to come to his
assistance with all speed. And the messenger
slipped unobserved through the enemy’s lines by
night, and upon reaching Ravenna reported the
situation which confronted the garrison. As a re-
sult of this intelligence a considerable Roman army
immediately started on the way to Florentia, under
command of Bessas, Cyprian and John the nephew
of Vitalian. When the Goths learned of this army
through their scouts, they broke up the siege and
withdrew to a place called Mucellis,! one day’s
journey distant from Florentia. And when the
Roman army had joined forces with Justinus, the
commanders left there a few of his men to guard
the city, but took the rest along with them and
proceeded against the enemy.

And as they proceeded on their way it was decided
that the most advantageous plan was for one of the
commanders to choose out the most famous fighters
in the whole army and with ;them go in advance
of the others, and make a sudden and unexpected
attack upon the enemy, while the rest of the army
should proceed without quickening its pace and
come upon the scene later. So they cast lots with
this plan in view and awaited the decision of
fortune in the matter. Now the lot fell out for
John, but the commanders were no longer willing
to carry out the agreement. Thus it was that John
was compelled with his own troops alone to go in
advance of the others and make an attack upon
the enemy. But the barbarians, learning that their
opponents were advancing upon them and being
greatly terrified, decided to abandon the plain


1 Modern Mugello (a valley).
193


LO


11


12


14


pond
oy


16


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 ei L: of K.


194


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. v. 9-16


where they had established their camp, and in
confusion ran to the top of a high hill which rises
near by. And when the force of John arrived there,
they too ran up against the enemy and opened the
attack. But since the barbarians defended them-
selves vigorously, a violent struggle took place and
many men on both sides, while making a remarkable
display of heroism, were beginning to fall. Now
though John had led a charge with loud shouting
and tumult against the enemy opposite him, it so
happened that one of his bodyguards was hit by
a javelin thrown by one of the enemy and fell,
as a result of this the Romans, now repulsed, began
to retire to the rear.

By this time the remainder of the Roman army
also had reached the plain, where they formed a
phalanx and stood waiting. And if they had stood
fast to give support to John’s troops, which were
now in full flight, they could have advanced all
together upon the enemy, and not only would they
have defeated them in the battle, but they would
have been able also to capture practically the whole
force. But by some chance it so fell out that an
untrue report was circulated through the Roman
army to the effect that John had perished at the
hand of one of his own bodyguards during the
action then in progress. And when the report
came to the commanders, they were no_ longer
willing to hold their position, but they one and
all began to retire in a disgraceful sort of retreat.
For neither did they keep their troops in order,
nor did they move off in any kind of groups, but
each man for himself, just as he could, rushed off
in headlong flight. And many indeed perished in


195


17


18


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


VI


196


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. v. τό--ν]. 2


this flight, and as for the rest, all such as were
saved continued their flight for many days although
they were not pursued at all. And some time after-
wards they entered such strongholds as each one
happened upon, and the report they carried to those
they chanced to meet was only this, that John was
dead. And consequently they were no longer in
contact with each other, nor had they any purpose
of uniting thereafter against the enemy, but each
remained inside the circuit-wall of his own fort and
began to prepare for a siege, fearing that the
barbarians would come against him. Totila, mean-
while, was shewing great kindness to his prisoners,
and thereby succeeded in winning their allegiance,
and henceforth the most of them voluntarily served
under him against the Romans. And the winter
drew to its close, and the seventh year ended in
this war, the history of which Procopius has written.


VI


Arter this Totila took the fortresses of Caesena 1}
and Petra. And a little later he entered Tuscany
and made trial of the places there; but since no
one was willing to yield to him, he crossed the
Tiber, and, carefully refraining from entering the
territory of Rome at all, he advanced immediately
into Campania and Samnium and with no trouble
won the strong city of Beneventum, the walls of
which he razed to the ground, in order that any
army coming from Byzantium might not be able, by
using this strong base, to cause trouble for the
Goths, After this he decided to besiege Naples,


1 Modern Cesena.


197


542 A.D,


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


\ a / «


7 \ A /
v “ / e / / \ lol

a -


an “ Ν a
΄ I / > lol / » > > lol


/ /
a a / rf
/


/ Weed / \ / ”

κ ἘΠῚ , an [TNS

/ > / \ Bd , vA a
3 / \ 4 Χ \ Ave /

aA / a /

\ /

\ " Ney? ’ > la) ς \ ) la)

ol ,

, 9S > , > - / 5 ,

198


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. vi. 2-7


because the inhabitants, in spite of his many winning
words, were quite unwilling to receive him into the
city. For Conon was keeping guard there with a
force of a thousand Romans and Isaurians. And
Totila himself with the greater part of the army
made camp not far from the fortifications and
remained quiet, but he sent off a part of the army
and captured the fortress of Cumae and certain
other strongholds, from which he succeeded in
gathering in great sums of money. And finding
the wives of the senators there, he not only refrained
from offering them any insult, but actually shewed
such kindness as to let them go free, and by this
act he won a great name for wisdom and humanity
among all Romans.

And since no hostile force was operating against
him, he was constantly sending small detachments
of the army round about and accomplishing results
of great importance. In this way he brought the
Brutii and Lucani under his sway,and gained Apulia
as well as Calabria. And he himself collected the
public taxes and also received the revenues from the
land instead of those who owned the estates, and
in all other matters he conducted himself as having
become master of Italy. In consequence of this the
Roman soldiers naturally did not receive their cus-
tomary payments at the times appointed, and the
emperor owed them great sums of money. Because
of this situation the Italians, on the one hand, having
been evicted from their property and finding them-
selves for the second time in very grave peril, were
beginning to feel greatly dejected, while the soldiers,
on the other hand, were shewing themselves increas-
ingly insubordinate to their commanders, and were


199


10


12


13


14


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


΄, 6 ΄ /
\ t N93 a - \

\
rn \ ΄ \ 5 a
A \
4 /
Ώ an \ ) / a il ᾽ /
A 7]
an / \ > al \ 9 2 /
A ¢€ \
\ / » an
\ 3.9 > an , \ \ > \
/ \
” A \ \ / \ , 3 /
tretus.


200


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIL. vi. 7-14


glad to remain inside the cities. So Constantianus
was holding Ravenna, John Rome, Bessas Spolitium,}
Justinus Florentia, and Cyprian Perusia;? and each
one of the others was holding whatever town had
originally provided him shelter and safety in his
flight.
Upon hearing of these things, the emperor, in sore
distress, made all haste to appoint Maximinus pre-
torian prefect? of Italy, commissioning him to exercise
authority over the commanders for the purpose of
carrying on the war, and to furnish the soldiers
with provisions according to their needs. And he
sent a fleet of ships with him, manning them with
Thracian and Armenian soldiers. The leader of the
Thracians was Herodian, and of the Armenians
Phazas the Iberian, nephew of Peranius;* and a
few Huns also sailed with them. So Maximinus
sailed forth from Byzantium with the whole fleet
and reached Epirus in Greece, where for no good
reason he proceeded to settle down and waste
precious time. For he was utterly inexperienced
in warlike deeds, and was consequently both timid
and exceedingly prone to delay.

Later on the emperor sent Demetrius also as
general, a man who had previously served under
Belisarius as commander of a detachment of infantry.®
So Demetrius sailed to Sicily, and, upon learning
that Conon and the inhabitants of Naples were ex-
ceedingly hard pressed by the siege, being altogether
out of provisions, he wished indeed to go to their


1 Modern Spoleto. 2 Modern Perugia. |

3 Praefectus practorio, though the praetorians in Italy were
no longer an imperial bodyguard.

4 See Book I. xii. 11, ete. 5 See Book V. v. 3.


201


15


18


19


21


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


202


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. vi. 14-21


assistance with all speed, but was unable to do so
because the force which followed him was so small
as to be of little consequence, and so devised the
following plan. Gathering as many ships as possible
from all Sicily and filling them with grain and other
provisions, he set sail, making it appear to his
opponents that some enormous army was aboard the
ships. And he judged the mind of the enemy
correctly; for they thought that a great army was
coming upon them, reaching this conclusion just
because they had learned that a huge fleet was sail-
ing from Sicily. And if Demetrius had been willing
at the very first to steer straight for Naples, I believe
that he would have both struck terror into the enemy
and saved the city, without a man opposing him.
But as it was, he felt that the danger involved was
too great, and so did not put in to Naples at all,
but sailing to the harbour of Rome began hastily to
gather soldiers from there. But the soldiers at
Rome, having been defeated by the barbarians and
still regarding them with great awe, were by no
means willing to follow Demetrius against Totila
and the Goths. Thus it came about that he was
compelled to go to Naples with only the troops who
had come with him from Byzantium.

Now there was another Demetrius, a Cephalenian
by birth, who had previously been a sailor and was
thoroughly skilled in all matters pertaining to the
sea and its dangers, and having sailed with Belisarius
to Libya and to Italy, he had become noted for this
skill of his; and for this reason the emperor had
appointed him governor of Naples. And when the
barbarians began to besiege the town, he was so
carried away by a spirit of utter wantonness that


203


22


23


24


25


26


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


VII


204


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. vi. 21-vii. 1


he commenced to heap insults upon Totila, and
continued often to do so, and the man was observed ᾿
to have an exceedingly reckless tongue during this
time of stress.

As the situation became worse and the loss of
life among the besieged was becoming serious, this
man, acting on the advice of Conon, had the daring
to embark secretly on a skiff and go alone to the
general Demetrius. And having, to every body’s
surprise, made the voyage in safety and coming betore
Demetrius, he endeavoured with all his power to stir
him to boldness, and urged him on to undertake the
task before him. But Totila had heard the whole truth
about this fleet and was holding many ships of the
swiftest sort in readiness; and when the enemy put
in at that part of the coast, not far from Naples, he
came upon them unexpectedly, and filling them with
consternation turned the whoie force to flight. And
although he killed many of them, he captured a
very large number, and there escaped only as many
as succeeded at the first in leaping into the small
boats of the ships, among whom was Demetrius the
general. For the barbarians captured all the ships
with their cargoes, crews and all, among whom they
found Demetrius, the governor of Naples. And
cutting off his tongue and both his hands, they did
not indeed kill him, but released him thus mutilated
to go where he would. This then was the penalty
which Demetrius paid to Totila for an unbridled
tongue.


VII


Later on Maximinus also put in at Sicily with all
his ships, and upon reaching Syracuse he remained


205


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


3 ἐνεδίδου MSS. : efAvev Christ.


206


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. vii. 1-7


quiet, being terrified at the perils of war. Now when
the commanders of the Roman army learned of his
coming, they all sent to him with great eagerness,
begging him to come to the rescue with all speed ;
and Conon sent a particularly urgent message from
Naples, where he was most vigorously besieged by
the barbarians ; for by this time all their provisions
had been exhausted. But Maximinus, after delaying
through the whole critical period in such a state of
terror, was finally moved by his fear of the emperor’s
threats and gave way before the abuse of the other
commanders; so, while he himself still remained
just where he was, he sent the whole army to Naples
with Herodian, Demetrius and Phazas, the winter
season being already very close upon them.

But when the Roman fleet had reached a point
close to Naples, a violent wind came down upon
them, raising an extraordinarily severe tempest.
And the darkness covered! everything, while the
surging waters prevented the sailors from pulling
their oars or handling the ships in any other way.
And because of the roar of foaming waves they were
no longer able to hear one another, but complete
confusion prevailed and they were at the mercy of
the wind’s violence, which carried them, little as
they wished it, to the very shore where the enemy
were encamped. The barbarians, therefore, boarding
the craft of their opponents at their leisure, began
to kill the men and sink the ships without meeting
any opposition. And they also captured along with
many others the general Demetrius. But Herodian
and Phazas with some few men succeeded in making


1 The MSS. do not offer a readable text; the translation
represents Christ’s conjecture.
207


LO


ll


12


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


208


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIL. vii. 7-12


their escape, because their ships did not come very
close to the enemy’s camp. Such was the fate of
the Roman fleet.

And Totila fastened a cord about Demetrius’ neck
and so dragged him up to the wall of Naples, where
he ordered him to advise the besieged no longer to
ruin themselves by trusting in hopes of no avail, but
to hand the city over as quickly as possible to the
Goths and thus rid themselves of bitter hardships ;
for the emperor, he said, was unable thereafter to
send them further aid, but in this fleet both their
strength and their hope had utterly perished. So
Demetrius spoke the words which Totila commanded.
And the besieged, being now exceedingly hard
pressed by famine and utter destitution, upon seeing
the fate of Demetrius and hearing all his words,
began to despair of every hope, and gave way to
sorrowing and helplessness, and the city was filled
with loud tumult and lamentation.

Afterwards Totila himself called them up to the
battlement, and addressed them as follows: ‘“ Men
of Naples, it is not because we have any charge or
reproach to bring against you, that we have under-
taken this present siege, but in order that we may
be able, by freeing you from most hated masters, to
repay you for the service you have rendered us
during this war—a service which has induced the
enemy to treat you with the utmost severity. For
it has come about that you alone among all the
Italians have manifested the greatest loyalty to the


4 rds τε MSS. : Dindorf would delete τε, τάς ye or ταύτῃ
Krageninnikov.
200


18


14


15


16


17


18


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


e® © Dp —


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. vii. 12-18


Gothic nation and have fallen most unwillingly
under the power of our opponents. So that, in the
present circumstances, when we have been com-
pelled to besiege you along with them, we naturally
have a feeling of reluctance on account of your
loyalty to us, although we are not carrying on the
siege in order to harm the Neapolitans. Do not,
therefore, in vexation at the miseries arising from
the siege, think that you ought to regard the Goths
with anger. For those who are striving to benefit
their friends merit from them no blame, even though
they be compelled to use unpleasant means in
accomplishing the service they afford them. And
as for the enemy, let not the least fear of them
enter your hearts, and be not led by past events to
think that they will gain the victory over us. For
the unreasonable events of life,! which are due to
chance and contrary to expectation, are apt as time
goes on to come to naught again. And such is the
good-will which we feel toward you that we make
the concession that both Conon and all his soldiers
may go free from harm wherever they may wish, on
the one condition that they yield the city to us and
depart hence, taking with them all their own posses-
sions; and nothing shall prevent cur taking an oath
to secure these promises and to guarantee the safety
of the Neapolitans.”

Thus spoke Totila; and both the Neapolitans and
all the soldiers under command of Conon expressed
approval ; for the keen necessity of famine was
pressing them hard. However, by way of guarding
their allegiance to the emperor, and still expecting,
as they did, that some assistance would come to


1 He means the Roman successes.
2TF


19


20


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIL. vii. 18-viii. 4


them, they agreed to give up the city after thirty
days. But Totila, wishing to dispel from their minds
every hope of assistance from the emperor, appointed
three months’ time, with the stipulation that after
this time they should do as had been agreed. He
declared, further, that until the time was accom-
plished he would make no assault on the wall, nor
employ any stratagem of any kind. The agreement
was accordingly approved in this sense. But the
besieged, without awaiting the appointed day (for
they were utterly overcome by the lack of necessi-
ties), a little later received Totila and the barbarians
into the city. And the winter drew to its close, and
the eighth year ended in this war, the history of
which Procopius has written.


VIII


Now when Totila captured Naples, he made a
display of kindness to his captives which was to be
expected neither from an enemy nor from a barbarian.
For finding sickness prevalent among the Romans
owing to famine—and indeed their bodily strength
had already been reduced by it—he feared lest, if
they suddenly sated themselves with food, they
would in all probability choke to death, and so he
devised the following plan. Stationing guards both
at the harbour and at the gates, he gave orders that
no one should go away from the city. Then he
himself, with a sort of provident parsimony, pro-
ceeded to issue food more sparingly than they desired
it, adding each day only so much to the quantity


253


543 A.P.


5


6


10


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


214


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. viii. 4--τὸ


that the increase from day to day seemed not to be
noticed at all. And only after having thus built up
their strength did he open the gates and allow each
man to go wherever he wished.

As for Conon and the soldiers under his command,
as many as were by no means satisfied to remain
there he embarked on ships and bade them sail
wherever they chose. And thinking that the
return to Byzantium would bring disgrace upon
them, they were purposing to sail with all speed for
Rome. But since the wind stood against them and
they were consequently quite unable to put out from
the harbour, they were in great perplexity, fearing
lest Totila, seeing he had been victorious, should
decide to disregard his agreement in some measure,
and they should suffer some great harm at his hand.
When Totila perceived this, he called them all
together and reassured them and gave still further
confirmation of the pledges he had given, bidding
them take courage immediately, mingle with the
Gothic army with no fear, and buy from them their
provisions and procure whatever else they lacked as
from friends. But later, since the wind was still
blowing against them and much time had been
wasted, he provided them with both horses and
pack animals, presented them with travelling-money,
and bade them make the journey to Rome by land,
sending with them some of the Gothic notables as
an escort.

And he set about razing the wall of Naples to
the ground, so that the Romans might not take


7 évexelpnoev K: ἀνεχώρησεν 1,.


11


13


14


15


16


17


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


ς Ν la) \ , ¢€ al 3 a


΄ \ f 2 nw a


lal € if “Ὁ id »

΄ \ / Vill, /


216


HISTORY OF THE WARS, ΝΠ]. viii. 10-17


possession of it again and, by using it as a strong
base, make trouble for the Goths. For he preferred
to reach an outright decision by a battle with them
on a plain rather than to carry on a long contest by
means of sundry devices of craft and cunning. But
after tearing down a large part of it he left the
rest.

While Totila was thus engaged, a certain Roman
came before him—a Calabrian by birth—and made
the charge that one of Totila’s bodyguards had
violated his daughter, who was a maiden, utterly
against her will. Whereupon, seeing that the man
did not deny the charge, Totila made haste to punish
him for the offence and confined him in prison. But
the most notable men among the barbarians began
to feel alarm for him (for he was, as it happened, an
active fellow and a good warrior), and so they
straightway gathered together and went before
Totila with the request that he dismiss the charge
against the man.

But he, gently and with no excitement, after
hearing their statement, spoke as follows: “ Fellow-
soldiers, the reason for my speaking as I now do is
not that I am yielding to a harsh inhumanity, or
taking especial delight in the misfortunes of my
kinsmen, but it is that I feel the greatest possible
apprehension lest some mischance befall the Goths.
Now I, for my part, know this, that the great
majority of mankind twist and turn the names of
things until they reverse their meaning. For, on
the one hand, they are accustomed to call kindness
that which is really lawlessness, the outcome of
which is that everything respectable is brought to
utter confusion; and, on the other hand, they call


217


20


21


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


“ Ν fA a \ "4


N
al


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. viii. 17-21


any man perverse and exceedingly difficult who
wishes to preserve the lawful order with exactness—
to the end, plainly, that by using these names as
screens tor their wanton deeds they may be able
more fearlessly to do wrong and display their base-
ness. But I urge you not to sacrifice your own
security for the sinful act of a single man, nor to
assume any share yourselves in this foul sin, seeing
that you have done no wrong. For the act of com-
mitting a sin and that of preventing the punishment
of those who have committed sin are, in my judgment,
on the same plane. I wish, accordingly, that you
make your decision concerning the matter in hand
taking this point of view—that two alternatives are
now presented to your choice, either that this man
should not pay the penalty for the wrong he has
done or that the Gothic nation should be saved and
achieve victory in the war. For I would have you
consider this: we had, at the beginning of this war,
a vast army unsurpassed both in renown and in
actual experience of war; our wealth, to put all ina
word, was too great to be reckoned ; we possessed
an extraordinary abundance of both horses and
weapons; and, lastly, we held all the fortresses that
there are in Italy. And truly these things are re-
garded as not entirely useless equipment when men
are entering into a war. But while we were arrayed
under Theodatus, a man who made less of justice
than of his desire to become wealthy, the lawlessness
of our daily conduct caused God to be in no wise
propitious to us, and to what our fortune has come
as a result of this you are, of course, well aware, as
you know what kind of men and how few of them


219
VOL. IV. H


22


23


24


25


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


220


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. viii. 21-ix. 1


have defeated us. But now that God has inflicted
upon us sufficient punishment for the sins we com-
mitted, he is once more ordering our lives in accord-
ance with our desire, and, to speak comprehensively,
he is guiding our affairs in a better way than we
could have hoped for, inasmuch as we have had the
fortune to be victorious over our enemies beyond
the measure of our actual strength, To preserve,
therefore, the justification of our victory by acting
righteously will be more to our interest than, by re-
versing our course, to let it seem that we have become
envious of our own selves. For it is not possible,
no, not possible, for a man who commits injustice
and does deeds of violence to win glory in battle,
but the fortune of war is decreed according to the
life of the individual man.”’ Thus then spoke Totila.
And the notables of the Goths, approving his words,
no longer begged for the bodyguard’s release, but
consented that he be treated in whatever manner
Totila might deem best. And he executed the man
not long afterwards, and gave to the injured girl all
the money that belonged to him.


Wuite Totila was thus engaged, meantime the
commanders of the Roman army, as well as the
soldiers, were plundering the possessions of their
subjects, and they did not shrink from any act of
insolence and licentiousness whatsoever, but the
commanders, for their part, were revelling with
mistresses inside the fortresses, while the soldiers,


1 The civil population of Italy.


221


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


222


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. ix. 1-8


shewing themselves more and more insubordinate
to their commanders, were falling into every form of
lawlessness. As for the Italians, the result of the
situation for them was that they all suffered most
severely at the hands of both armies. For while, on
the one hand, they were deprived of their lands by
the enemy, the emperor's army, on the other hand,
took all their household goods. And they were
forced besides to suffer cruel torture and death for
no good cause, being hard pressed as they were by
the scarcity of food. For the soldiers, though utterly
unable to defend them when maltreated by the
enemy, not only refused to feel the least blush of
shame at existing conditions, but actually made the
people long for the barbarians by reason of the
wrongs they committed. And Constantianus, being
at a loss because of this situation, sent a letter to
the Emperor Justinian, setting forth plainly that he
was unable to hold out in the war against the Goths.
And the other commanders, as if giving their vote
in support of this view, indicated in this same letter
their reluctance to carry on the struggle. Such then
were the fortunes of the Italians.

Meantime Totila sent a letter to the Roman senate
written in the following terms. “Such men as wrong
their neighbours, being either the victims of ignor-
ance or blinded by some forgetfulness that has come
upon them, may fairly be forgiven by the victims
of their ill-treatment. For their ignorance or for-
getfulness, which led to their wrongdoing, also
excuses it for the most part. If, however, any man
does wrong as a result of deliberate intent solely,
such a man will have nothing left with which even


223


10


11


19


14


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


or πατέρας Christ.


224


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. ix. 8-15


to defend his conduct. For it is not the deed alone,
but also the intention, for which this man himself
must, in justice, bear the responsibility. Therefore,
since this is so, consider forthwith what defence you
will possibly be able to make for your actions toward
the Goths. Has it really come to pass that you
are ignorant of the good deeds of Theoderic and
Amalasuntha, or have they been blotted from your
minds with the lapse of time and forgetfulness?
No, indeed; neither one of these is true. For it
was not in some smal] matter, nor toward your
ancestors in olden times that their kindness was
displayed, but it was in matter of vital importance,
dear Romans, towards your very selves, recently
and in days that are close at hand. But was it
because you had been informed by hearsay or learned
by experience the righteousness of the Greeks toward
their subjects that you decided to abandon to them
as you did the cause of the Goths and Italians? At
any rate, you, for your part, have, I think, entertained
them royally, but you know full well Shak sort of
guests and friends you have found them, if you have
any recollection of the public accounts of Alexander.}
For I need make no mention of the soldiers and the
commanders by whose friendliness and magnanimity
you have profited; and it is precisely this conduct
of these men which has brought their fortunes to
such a pass. Now let no one of you think that I am
moved by youthful ambition to bring these reproaches
against them nor that I am inclined to boastful


1 See chap. i. 32.


225


16


17


18


19


20


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


-


226


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. ix. 15-21


speech merely because I am a ruler of barbarians.
For the overmastery of those men, I say, has not
been a work of our valour, but I confidently maintain
that a sort of vengeance has overtaken them for the
wrongs you have sutfered at their hands. How
then could it fail to appear a most atrocious act on
your part, that you, while God is exacting vengeance
from them in your behalf, should cling fondly to
that atrocity of theirs and be unwilling to be rid of
the ills arising therefrom? Give yourselves, there-
fore, some ground for the defence you must make to
the Goths, and give us, on the other hand, some
ground for forgiveness toward you. And you will
give this if, without proposing to await the con-
clusion of the war, now that there is only scant
hope left you, and that too of no avail, you choose
the better course and set right the wrongs which
you have committed against us.”

Such then was the message which the writing set
forth; and now Totila, placing it in the hands of
some of the captives, commanded them to go to
Rome and give it to the senators. And they did
this. But John prevented those who saw this letter
from making any reply to Totila. For this reason
Totila made a second attempt, writing a large
number of short letters, in which he gave expression
to the most solemn oaths, swearing in explicit terms
that never would the Goths do any harm to anyone
of the Romans. Now as to what persons conveyed
these writings to Rome, 1 cannot speak; for all of
them were posted late at night in the conspicuous
places in the city, and only when it came day were
they discovered ; but the commanders of the Roman


227


22


23


PROCOPIUS OF -CAESAREA


ef


228


HISTORY OF THE WARS, ΧΗ 21-x. 3


army entertained grave suspicions against the priests
of the Arians, and consequently removed these all
from the city immediately.

Totila, upon hearing this, sent a certain portion of
his army into Calabria, bidding them make trial of
the fortress at Dryus.1 But since the troops keeping
guard in this fortress absolutely refused to yield to
him, he commanded the force which had been sent
there to institute a siege, while he, with the greater
part of the army, went to the vicinity of Rome.
When the emperor heard this, he was greatly em-
barrassed, and, in spite of the fact that the Persians
were still pressing him very hard, was compelled to
send Belisarius against Totila. And the winter drew
to a close, and the ninth year ended in this war, the
history of which Procopius has written.


Tuus Belisarius, for the second time, went to Italy.
But since he had an exceedingly small number of
soldiers—for it was quite impossible for him to
detach his own troops from the army in Persia—he
proceeded to travel about the whole of Thrace, and,
by offering money, to gather fresh volunteers. And
by the emperor’s command he was accompanied by
Vitalius, the General of Illyricum, who had recently
returned from Italy, where he had left the Llyrian
soldiers. So together they collected about four
thousand men and went to Salones? with the in-


1 Hydruntum ; modern Otranto.
2 Or Salona, near modern Spalato.


229


544 A.D.


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


230


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. x. 3-2


tention of going to Ravenna first of all and conduct-
ing the war from there in whatever manner might
be possible. For they could in no wise effect a
landing near Rome, either by keeping their move-
ments secret from the enemy (since, as they had
heard, the Goths were encamped both in Calabria
and in Campania), nor by overpowering the enemy
in any manner whatsoever; for they were going
against them without sufficient strength to meet
them on even terms.

In the meantime the Romans besieged in Dryus,
seeing that their provisions had been absolutely
exhausted, made an agreement with the besieging
barbarians, stipulating that they would hand over
the place by surrender, and a definite day was mean-
while agreed upon by both. But Belisarius loaded
ships with provisions for a year’s time and com-
manded Valentinus to sail with them to Dryus, and
to remove the former garrison from the fortress as
quickly as possible—for he learned that they had
been much weakened by disease and famine—and to
establish as a garrison in place of them some of the
men sailing with him; for by this arrangement 1t
would be comparatively easy for them, being fresh
and not in want of any necessaries, to guard the
fortress in security. So Valentinus, chancing to find
a favourable wind, sailed with this fleet to Dryus,
and arrived four days before the time appointed for
the surrender; and finding the harbour unguarded,
he took possession of it, and succeeded without
trouble in entering the fortress. For the Goths,
being confident in the agreement they had made, and
supposing that they would encounter no obstacle in


4 δὲ Hoeschel: te MSS.
2Rn


10


13


14


15


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


8 ἠϊόνι K: nove L. 4 πόλῃ Maltretus: πύλη MSS.


232


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. x. 8-15


the interval, were now giving little heed to their
operations against Dryus and were remaining quiet.
Then, however, upon seeing the fleet suddenly
bearing down upon them, they took fright and
abandoned the siege, and going to a great distance
from the place, they made camp and reported to
Totila all that had befallen them. So close was the
peril from which the fortress of Dryus escaped. But
some of Valentinus’ men, wishing to plunder the
adjoining country, began to make excursions; and
by some chance they encountered the enemy near
the shore of the sea, and engaged with them. And
being badly defeated in the battle, the most of them
fled into the sea-water; in this way they lost one
hundred and seventy men, and the rest withdrew to
the fortress.

Valentinus, upon finding the previous garrison half
dead, removed them from the fortress, and substi-
tuted other fresh men, just as Belisarius had in-
structed him to do, and leaving them supplies for a
year’s time, returned with the rest of the army to
Salones.

Then Belisarius, setting sail from there with the
whole fleet, put in at Pola, where he remained for a
short time, putting the army in order. But Totila,
hearing that Belisarius had reached Pola, and wishing
to discover the strength of the army which he was
bringing, took the following measures. There was
a certain Bonus, nephew of John, commanding the
garrison in Genoa. He accordingly made use of
this man’s name and wrote a letter to Belisarius
purporting to be from this Bonus, and urging him


8 τῷ ὀνόματι Hoeschel: om. MSS.


233


18


L9


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1


3
4


234


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. x. 15-22


t+» come with all possible speed to their assistance,
as they were in some extreme peril. Then he chose
out five men of an especially inquisitive nature, put
the letter into their hands, and instructed them to
observe accurately the force of Belisarius, while
palming themselves off as having been sent from
Bonus. So when the men came before Belisarius,
he received them with great friendliness, as was his
custom. And after reading the letter, he bade them
report back to Bonus that he would come with the
whole army after no long time. Then, after they
had looked over everything exactly as Totila had
directed them to do, they returned to the Gothic
camp and declared that the force of Belisarius was
by no means considerable.

Meanwhile Totila captured the city of Tibur,
which contained a guard of Isaurians, through an
act of treason; this happened in the following
manner. Some of the inhabitants of the place were
guarding the gates together with the Isaurians.
These men, having quarrelled with the Isaurians who
kept guard with them, although the Isaurians had
given no cause for offence, now invited the enemy,
who were encamped close by, to come in by night.
But the Isaurians, on their part, adopted a common
plan while the city was being captured, and practi-
cally all of them succeeded in making their escape.
Among the inhabitants, however, not a man was
spared by the Goths, but they were all killed,
together with the priest of the city, in a manner
which I shall by no means mention, although I know
it well, in order that I may not leave records of
inhuman cruelty to future times. Among these
victims Catellus also perished, a man of note among


235


bo


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


/ \ A / ’ ¢ /
/ /
lo) la a? \ a a
a /

@ K: és L.


236


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. x. 22-xi. 4


the Italians. So the barbarians took possession of
Tibur, and the Romans, in consequence, were no
longer able to bring in their provisions from Tuscany
by way of the Tiber. For the city, situated as it is
fronting the river! about a hundred and twenty
stades above Rome, became thereafter an outpost
against those wishing to sail into Rome by that route.


XI


Sucu was the fate which befell Tibur. As for
Belisarius, he arrived at Ravenna with the whole
fleet; there he gathered those of the Goths who
were in the city and the Roman soldiers, and spoke
as follows: ‘This is not the first occasion on which
it has come to pass that the achievements of virtue
have been brought to naught by wickedness. For
from of old this is wholly natural in human affairs,
and many a time the depravity of persons of the
basest sort has been quite sufficient to frustrate
and destroy the deeds of good men. And now, too,
this very thing has ruined the cause of the emperor.
And he, for his part, is so deeply concerned to
correct the mistakes which have been made that he
has considered the task of defeating the Persians
as of less moment than this situation, and so has
decided at the present time to dispatch me to
you, in order that I may be able to set right and
remedy whatever has been wrongly done by the
commanders in their treatment of his soldiers or of
the Goths. Now it is not human that no mistakes
at all should be committed by anyone, nor is it


1 Hodgkin points out that Procopius here confused the
Anio with the Tiber.


237


"©


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


/


1 Modern Bologna,
238


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xi. 4-12


possible in the natural progress of events; but the
task of setting right the mistakes which have been
made is one eminently befitting an emperor, and
also one which can well afford consolation to his
beloved subjects. For not only will you find rid-
dance from your distress, but you will also
straightway be privileged to understand and enjoy
the emperor's good-will toward you. And ofall things
in the world what could be a greater boon for a man
than this? Seeing then that I am here with you for
this very purpose, it is incumbent upon each one οἱ
you, in your turn, to exert himself to the utmost that
you may profit by the service thus offered. If any one
of you, then, chances to have relatives or friends with
the usurper Totila, let him summon these as quickly
as possible, explaining the emperor’s purpose; for
by such a course you could achieve both the
blessings which flow from peace and those which
fall from the hand of the mighty emperor. For I,
for my part, have neither come here with a lust for
war against anyone, nor should I ever, willingly at
least, be an enemy of the subjects of the emperor.
If, however, they consider it even now too trivial a
thing to choose the course which is better for them-
selves, and if they take their stand against us, it
will be necessary for us likewise, even though it be
sorely against our will, to treat them as enemies.”
So spoke Belisarius. But not one of the enemy
came over to him, either Goth or Roman. Next he
sent his bodyguard Thurimuth and some of his own
troops with Vitalius and the Illyrian soldiers into
Aemilia, commanding them to make trial of the
towns there. So Vitalius with this force took up a
position near the city of Bononia,! and, after taking


2599


13


14


15


16


17


18


19


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


240


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xi. 12-19


some of the neighbouring fortresses by surrender,
remained inactive in Bononia. But not long after
this the whole body of the Illyrians who were serving
under him, suddenly and without having either ex-
perienced any hard treatment or heard any rebuke,
withdrew secretly from the town by night and betook
themselves homeward. And sending envoys to the
emperor, they begged him to grant them pardon,
seeing that they had come to their homes in this
manner for no other reason than that, after their
long service in Italy without receiving the regular
pay at all, the state now owed them a large sum of
money. But it so happened that a Hunnic army
had fallen upon the Illyrians and enslaved the
women and children, and it was because of this
intelligence, and also because they had a scarcity
of provisions in Italy, that they withdrew. And
though the emperor was at first angry with them, he
afterwards forgave them.

Now Totila, upon learning of the withdrawal of
the Illyrians, sent an army against Bononia in order
to capture Vitalius and the troops with him by a
swift attack. But Vitalius and Thurimuth laid
ambuscades in several places and thus destroyed
many of the attacking force and turned the rest to
flight. There Nazares, a man of note and an IIlyrian
by birth, commander of the troops in Illyricum,
surpassed all others by the remarkable exhibition he
made of warlike deeds against the enemy. There-
upon Thurimuth came to Belisarius in Ravenna.

Then at length Belisarius sent three of his own


5 ἀνεχώρησαν Hoeschel: om. MSS., ἤεσαν Maltretus.


241


21


23


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


242


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xi. 19-26


bodyguards, Thurimuth, Ricilas and Sabinianus, with
a thousand soldiers to the city of Auximus, in order
to support Magnus and the Romans besieged there.
This force, slipping past Totila and the enemy’s
camp by night, got inside of Auximus, and then
began planning to make sallies against their op-
ponents. So on the following day about noon, upon
learning that some of the enemy were near at hand,
they sallied forth with the purpose of confronting
them; but, before proceeding, they decided to send
scouts against them to spy out the enemy’s strength
so as not to make an attack on them without
reconnoitring.

But Ricilas, the guardsman of Belisarius, who
chanced to be drunk at the time, would not allow
any others to go scouting, but he himself rode out
alone on horseback and went on at full speed. And
happening upon three Goths on a steep slope, he at
first took his stand with the intention of opposing
them; for he was a man of extraordinary bravery ;
but upon seeing many men rushing toward him from
all sides, he made haste to flee. But his horse
stumbled in a rough place, whereupon a great shout
arose from the enemy and they all hurled their
javelins at him. Then the Romans, hearing this
uproar, came to the rescue on the run. And Ricilas
was killed, being buried under a great number
of spears, but the troops of Thurimuth routed
their opponents, and lifting up the body carried it
inside the city of Auximus; thus did Ricilas meet
his death in a manner unworthy of his valour.

Thereupon Sabinianus and Thurimuth in con-


243


27


29


90


31


32


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


244


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xi. 26-32


ference with Magnus found it inadvisable for them
to spend any more time there, reasoning that while
clearly, owing to his numbers, they would never be
a match for the enemy in battle, they would, on
the other hand, by using up the supplies of the
besieged, doom the city to still earlier capture by
their opponents. And when this had been decided
upon, they themselves and their thousand men
began to prepare for their departure, intending to
make the beginning of their journey at night; but
one of the soldiers forthwith deserted secretly to
the enemy’s camp and made known the plans of the
Romans, Totila accordingly picked out two thou-
sand men distinguished for their valour and, as night
came on, set guards upon the roads at a distance of
thirty stades from Auximus, keeping his movements
entirely secret. So when these guards at about
midnight saw the enemy passing by, they drew
their swords and began their attack. And they
killed two hundred of them, but Sabinianus and
Thurimuth, together with the rest, thanks to the
darkness, succeeded in escaping and fleeing into
Ariminum. However, the Goths captured all the
pack animals which were carrying the servants, the
weapons, and the clothing of the soldiers.

There are two fortresses on the coast of the Ionian
Gulf, Pisaurus! and Fanus,? situated between the
cities of Auximus and Ariminum. They had been
dismantled at the beginning of this war by Vittigis,
who had burned the houses in them and torn down
their walls to about half their height, in order that
the Romans might not, by seizing them, make


1 Modern Pesaro.
2 Fanum Fortunae: Modern Fano.


245


90


37


39


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


246


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xi. 32-39


trouble for the Goths. One of these fortresses,
Pisaurus, Belisarius decided to seize ; for it seemed
to him that the place was by its situation suitable
for the pasturage of horses. So he sent by night
some of his associates and secretly obtained the
accurate measurements, as to breadth and height,
of each one of the gate-ways. He next had gates
made and bound with iron and then loaded them
on boats and sent them off, commanding the men of
Sabinianus and Thurimuth to fit these gates quickly
to the walls and then to remain inside the circuit-
wall, and, after thus insuring their safety, to build
up in whatever manner possible such parts of the
circuit-wall as had fallen down, putting in stones
and mud and any other material whatsoever. So
they carried out these instructions. But Totila,
upon hearing what was going on, marched against
them with a great army. And he made an attempt
on the town and tarried near it for some time, but
since he was unable to capture it, he returned baffled
to his camp at Auximus.

The Romans, however, were no longer making
sallies against the enemy, but at each fortress they
were remaining inside the walls. Furthermore,
even when Belisarius sent two of his guardsmen to
Rome, Artasires, a Persian, and Barbation of Thrace,
in order to assist Bessas in guarding the city, he
instructed them by no means to make sallies against
the enemy. As for Totila and the Gothic army,
seeing that the force of Belisarius was not sufficient
to array itself against them, they decided to harass
the strongest of the towns. They accordingly made
camp in Picenum before Firmum! and Asculum,?


1 Modern Fermo. 2 Modern Ascoli.
247


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


a / an ἃ , /


XII


» > / Nae \Y (ὃ 5


ξυνήγομεν Haury: om. MSS, οἵ. VII. x. 1.


Ioan ὦ


@


248


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xi. 39=xii. 5


and commenced a siege. And the winter drew to a
close, and the tenth year ended in this war, the
history of which Procopius has written.


Now Belisarius, finding himself utterly unable to
give support to the besieged towns, sent John the
nephew of Vitalian to Byzantium, first binding him
by the most solemn oaths that he would make every
effort to return as quickly as possible; and _ his
mission was to beg the emperor to send them a
large army and a generous supply of money, and,
furthermore, both arms and horses. For even the
few soldiers he had were unwilling to fight, asserting
that the state owed them much money and that they
themselves were in want of everything. And this
was true. Belisarius also wrote a letter to the
emperor recording these matters; and the letter?
set forth the following.

“We have arrived in Italy, most mighty emperor,
without men, horses, arms, or money, and no man, [
think, without a plentiful supply of these things,
would ever be able to carry on a war. For though
we did travel about most diligently through Thrace
and Illyricum, the soldiers we gathered are an
exceedingly small and pitiful band, men without
a single weapon in their hands and altogether un-
practised in fighting. And we see, on the other


1 «<The soul of an hero is deeply impressed on the letter,
nor can we confound such genuine and original acts with
the elaborate and often empty speeches of the Byzantine
historian.”—Gibbon, c. 43.


249


545 a.D,


10


1]


12


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 σοὶ Haury: σοῦ MSS.


250


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xii. 5s—12


hand, that the men who were left in Italy are both
insufficient in number and in abject terror of the
enemy, their spirit having been utterly humbled by
the many defeats they have suffered at their hands,—
men who did not simply escape at random from their
opponents, but even abandoned their horses and
flung their weapons to the ground. And as for the
revenue, it is impossible for us to derive any money
from Italy, since it has again been taken by the
enemy into their possession. Consequently, since
we have fallen behind in regard to the payment
of the soldiers, we find ourselves quite unable to
impose our orders upon them; for the debt has
taken away our right to command. And this also
thou must know well, my master, that the majority
of those serving in thy armies have deserted to the
enemy. If, therefore, it was only necessary that
Belisarius be sent to Italy, then thou hast made the
best preparation possible for the war; for I am
already in the very midst of Italy. If, however, it
is thy will to overcome thy foes in the war, provision
must also be made for the other necessary things.
For no man could, I think, be a general without
men to support him. It is therefore needful that,
above all others, my spearmen and guards should
be sent me, and, next to them, a very large force
of Huns and other barbarians is needed, to whom
money must also be given immediately.”

Such was the letter written by Belisarius. But as
for John, though he spent a long time in Byzantium,
he accomplished none of the objects of his mission ;
but he married the daughter of Germanus, the
nephew of the emperor. In the meantime Totila
captured Firmum and Asculum by surrender; and


251
VOL. 1V. I


14


16


17


18


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


, / ¢ / A \ 2
\ / » ¢
¢ na
\ / “ b] rn \


252


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xii. 12-18


advancing into Tuscany, he began the siege of
Spolitium? and Asise.2 Now the garrison in Spo-
litium was commanded by Herodian and that in
Asise by Sisifridus, who, though a Goth by birth,
was exceedingly loyal to the Romans and the
emperor's cause. Herodian, for his part, came to
terms with the enemy, the agreement being that
they should remain quiet for thirty days; and if
no assistance should come to the Romans within
this time, he was to surrender both himself and the
city together with the soldiers and the inhabitants
to the Goths. And he furnished his son asa hostage
for the keeping of this agreement. So when the
appointed day came, and no Roman army had
arrived from any quarter, Herodian and the whole
garrison of Spolitium, in accordance with the agree-
ment, put themselves and the city into the hands
of Totila and the Goths. But they say that the
hostility existing between Herodian and Belisarius
was the real cause of his surrendering himself and
Spolitium to the Goths ; for Belisarius had threatened
to call him to’account for his previous record.

Such was the course of events as regards Spolitium.
Sisifridus, on the other hand, in making a sally with
his troops, lost the most of his men and perished
himself. Thereupon the inhabitants of Asise, de-
spairing of the situation, immediately handed the
city over to the enemy. Totila also sent straight-
way to Cyprian, demanding that he surrender
Perusia to him, attempting to terrify him in case he
should disobey, but promising, on the other hand,
to reward him with a large sum of money if he


1 Modern Spoleto.
2 Modern Assisi.


19


20


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XII


254


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xii, 18-xiii. 4


should carry out this order. But since he met with
no success in dealing with Cyprian, he bribed one
of his bodyguard, Ulifus by name, to kill him by
treachery. Ulifus accordingly, meeting Cyprian by
chance alone, killed him and got away in flight to
Totila. But nevertheless the soldiers of Cyprian
continued to guard the city for the emperor, and the
Goths, consequently, decided to retire from Perusia.


Arter this Totila moved against Rome, and upon
coming near the city, he began a siege. He did no
harm, however, to the farmers in this or any other
part of Italy, but commanded them to continue till-
ing the soil without fear, just as they were accustomed
to do, bringing to him the revenue which they had
formerly brought to the public treasury and to the
owners of the land. And when some Goths had
come close up to the fortifications of Rome, Artasires
and Barbation made a sally against them, though
Bessas did not in the least approve their action,
leading out a large number of their men to the attack.
And they straightway killed many and turned the
rest to flight. But in following up these men and
allowing themselves to be drawn into a pursuit over
a great distance, they fell into an ambush set by
the enemy. Here they lost the most of their men,
and they themselves, accompanied by a handful of
men, succeeded only with difficulty in making their
escape. And thereafter they no longer dared go
out against their opponents, even though they were
pressing their attack.


255


5


10


11


12


18


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


256


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xiii. 5~13


From this time on a severe famine atilicted the
Romans, for they were no longer able to bring in
any necessaries from the country and the traffic by
sea was cut off. For after the Goths captured
Naples, they had stationed a navy of many light
craft both there and at the so-called Aeolian Islands
and at such other islands as lie off this coast, and
with these they were keeping a close watch over
the sea-route. Consequently such ships as put out
from Sicily and started to sail to the harbour of
Rome fell one and all into the hands of these patrols
together with their crews.

Totila now sent an army into Aemilia, with orders
to take the city of Placentia+ either by storm or by
surrender. This is the chief city in the land of
Aemilia and has strong defences, being situated on
the river Eridanus, and it was the only city still left in
that region subject to the Romans. So when this
army came near Placentia, they offered terms to the
garrison there to the end that they might hand over
the city by surrender to Totila and the Goths. But
since they met with no success, they made camp on
the spot and began a siege, perceiving that the
people in the city were in need of provisions.

At that time there arose a suspicion of treason
among the commanders of the emperor's army in
Rome against Cethegus, a patrician and leader of the
Roman senate. For this reason he departed hastily
for Centumcellae.?

But Belisarius became alarmed both for Rome and


1 Modern Piacenza.
2 Modern Civita- Vecchia.


257


14


15


16


17


18


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


& c bo


258


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xiii, 13-18


for the whole Roman cause, since it was impossible
to lend assistance from Ravenna in any case, and
especially with a small army; and so he decided to
remove from there and take possession of the district
about Rome, in order that by being near at hand
he might be able to go to the rescue of those in
difficulty there. Indeed he repented having ever
come to Ravenna at all, a course which he had
taken earlier through the persuasion of Vitalius and
not to the advantage of the emperor's cause, since
by shutting himself up in that place he had given
the enemy a free hand to determine the course of
the war as they wished. And to me it seemed
either that Belisarius had chosen the worse course
because it was fated at that time that the Romans
should fare ill, or that he had indeed determined
upon the better course, but God, having in mind
to assist Totila and the Goths, had stood as an
obstacle in his way, so that the best of the plans of
Belisarius had turned out utterly contrary to his
expectations. For those upon whom the wind of
fortune blows from a fair quarter, even though they
make the worst plans, will meet with no calamity,
since Heaven reverses these plans and brings them
to an entirely favourable issue; but a man, I believe,
who is under the ban of fortune utterly lacks the
ability to plan wisely, being bereft of understanding
and insight into the truth by the fact that he is
fated to suffer ill. And even if he ever does make
some plan adapted to the needs of the situation,
still fortune straightway breathes contrariwise upon
him after he has made such a plan, and perverts
his wise purpose so as to bring about the most dire


259


19


20


22


23


24


25


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


260


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIL. xiii. 19-25


results. However, whether this is so or otherwise,
I am unable to say.

Belisarius then appointed Justinus to command
the garrison of Ravenna, and himself, with only a
few men, journeyed thence through Dalmatia and
the neighbouring lands to Epidamnus,! where he
remained quiet expecting an army from Byzantium.
And writing a letter to the emperor, he reported
the present situation. The emperor, therefore, not
long afterward, sent him John the nephew of Vita-
lian and Isaac the Armenian, brother of Aratius and
Narses, together with an army of barbarian and
Roman soldiers. These troops reached Epidamnus
and joined Belisarius there.

The emperor also sent Narses the eunuch to the
rulers of the Eruli, in order to persuade the most of
them to march to Italy. And many of the Eruli
followed him, commanded by Philemuth and certain
others, and they came with him into the land of
Thrace. For the intention was that, after passing
the winter there, they should be despatched to Beli-
sarius at the opening of spring. And they were
accompanied also by John whom they called the
Glutton. And it so fell out that during this journey
they unexpectedly rendered a great service to the
Romans. For a great throng of the barbarians,
Sclaveni, had, as it happened, recently crossed the
river Ister, plundered the adjoining country and
enslaved a very great number of Romans. Now the
Eruli suddenly came upon these barbarians and


1 Dyrrachium : modern Durazzo.
2 Cf. Book IL. xix.-15, ete.


261


20


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XIV


1 μέτρῳ Maltretus and Scaliger: μετρίως K, ἀμετρία L.
262


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xiii. 25-xiv. 3


joined battle with them, and, although far out-
numbered, they unexpectedly defeated them, and
some they slew, and the captives they released one
and all to go to their homes. At that time also
Narses found a certain man who was pretending
to the name of Chilbudius, a man of note who had
once been a general of the Romans, and he easily
succeeded in unmasking the plot. Here I shall
give the facts of this story.


XIV


Tuere was a certain Chilbudius of the household
of the Emperor Justinian, who was exceedingly
efficient in war, and, at the same time, so far superior
to the lure of money that instead of a great property
in his own right he had no possessions at all. This
Chilbudius was appointed by the emperor, in the
fourth year of his reign, to be General of Thrace,
and was assigned to guard the river Ister, being
ordered to keep watch so that the barbarians of that
region could no longer cross the river, since the Huns
and Antae and Sclaveni had already made the cross-
ing many times and done irreparable harm to the


531 A.D.


Romans. And Chilbudius became such an object οἵ.


terror to the barbarians that for the space of three
years, during which time he remained there holding
this office, not only did no one succeed in crossing
the Ister against the Romans, but the Romans
actually crossed over to the opposite side many


10


11


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


264


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xiv. 3-12


times with Chilbudius and killed and enslaved the
barbarians there. But three years later, when Chil-
budius crossed the river, as was his custom, with a
small force, the Sclaveni came against him with their
entire strength; and a fierce battle taking place,
many of the Romans fell and among them the
general Chilbudius. Thereafter the river became
free for the barbarians to cross at all times just as
they wished, and the possessions of the Romans
were rendered easily accessible; and the entire
Roman empire found itself utterly incapable of
matching the valour of one single man in the per-
formance of this task.

But later on the Antae and Sclaveni became
hostile to one another and engaged in a battle, in
which it so fell out that the Antae were defeated
by their opponents. Now in this battle one of the
Sclaveni took captive a certain young man of the
enemy named Chilbudius, who was just wearing his
first beard, and took him off to his home. This
Chilbudius, as time went on, became devoted to his
master to an extraordinary degree and proved him-
self a vigorous warrior in dealing with the enemy.
Indeed he exposed himself to danger many times
to save his master, distinguishing himself by his
deeds of valour, through which he succeeded in
winning great renown. At about this time the
Antae descended upon the land of Thrace and
plundered and enslaved many of the Roman in-
habitants; and they led these captives with them
as they returned to their native abode.

Now chance brought one of these captives into
the hands of a kind and gentle master. This man
was a great rascal and one capable of circumventing


265


18


14


10


17


18


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


» b 2 δ" >? a \ / >
/ 7 vA
\ s
7
3 , a / xX
/ \ ” \ >] / 3 / > an


/


,


266


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xiv. 12-18


and deceiving those who fell in his way. And since
he was unable by any device to effect his return to
the land of the Romans, much as he wished it, he
conceived the following plan. Coming before his
master, he praised him for his kindness and declared
that God on account of this would bestow upon him
blessings in abundance, and that he for his part
would shew himself by no means ungrateful to a
most kindly master; but, if only he was willing to
give ear to the excellent suggestion which he had
to offer, he would shortly put him in possession of
a great sum of money. For there was, he said,
among the nation of the Sclaveni one Chilbudius,
the former general of the Romans, in the condition
of a slave, while all the barbarians were ignorant as
to who in the world he was. If, therefore, he was
willing to pay out the price set upon Chilbudius
and convey the man to the land of the Romans, it
was not unlikely that he would acquire for himself
from the emperor not only a fair reputation but
also an enormous amount of money. By these words
the Roman speedily persuaded his master, and he
went with him into the midst of the Sclaveni; for
these barbarians were already on peaceful terms
and were mingling with one another without fear.
Consequently they were able, by paying out a large
sum of money to the master of Chilbudius, to
purchase the man, and they departed with him
immediately. And when they had come into their
own country, the purchaser enquired of the man
whether he was Chilbudius himself, the general of
the Romans. And he did not hesitate to state
truly all the facts in order, saying that he too was


267


19


20


2]


22


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


268


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xiv. 18-22


by birth of the Antae, and that while fighting with
his compatriots against the Sclaveni, who were then
at war with them, he had been captured by one
of the enemy, but now, upon arriving in his native
country, he too according to the law would be free
from that time forth.

Thereupon the man who had paid out gold for
him became speechless with vexation, seeing that
he had failed of a hope of no moderate sort. But
the Roman, wishing to reassure the man and to
controvert the truth, so that no difficulty might
arise to prevent his return to his home, still insisted
that this man actually was that Chilbudius, but that
he was afraid, clearly because he was in the midst
of the barbarians, and so was quite unwilling to
reveal the whole truth; if, however, he should get
into the land of the Romans, he would not only not
conceal the truth, but in all probability would actually
take pride in that very name. Now at first these
things were done without the knowledge of the
other barbarians.

But when the report was carried about and reached
the entire nation, practically all the Antae assembled
to discuss the situation, and they demanded that
the matter be made a public one, thinking that
great benefit would come to them from the fact
that they had now become masters of the Roman
general Chilbudius. For these nations, the Sclaveni
and the Antae, are not ruled by one man, but they
have lived from of old under a democracy, and con-
sequently everything which involves their welfare,
whether for good or for ill, is referred to the people.


269


29


24


25


26


27


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


270


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xiv. 22-27


It is also true that in all other matters, practically
speaking, these two barbarian peoples have had from
ancient times the same institutions and customs,
For they believe that one god, the maker of the
lightning, is alone lord of all things, and they sac-
rifice to him cattle and all other victims; but as for
fate, they neither know it nor do they in any wise
admit that it has any power among men, but when-
ever death stands close before them, either stricken
with sickness or beginning a war, they make a
promise that, if they escape, they will straightway
make a sacrifice to the god in return for their life;
and if they escape, they sacrifice just what they have
promised, and consider that their safety has been
bought with this same sacrifice. They reverence,
however, both rivers and nymphs and some other
spirits, and they sacrifice to all these also, and they
make their divinations in connection with these
sacrifices, They live in pitiful hovels which they
set up far apart from one another, but, as a general
thing, every man is constantly changing his place
of abode. When they enter battle, the majority of
them go against their enemy on foot carrying little
shields and javelins in their hands, but they never
wear corselets. Indeed some of them do not wear
even a shirt or a cloak, but gathering their trews
up as far as to their private parts they enter into
battle with their opponents. And both the two
peoples have also the same language, an utterly
barbarous tongue. Nay further, they do not differ
at all from one another in appearance. For they
are all exceptionally tall and stalwart men, while


3 ἐπὶ K; és L.
271


28


29


90


91


32


33


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


272


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xiv. 27—33


their bodies and hair are neither very fair or blonde,
nor indeed do they incline entirely to the dark
type, but they are all slightly ruddy in colour. And
they live a hard life, giving no heed to bodily
comforts, just as the Massagetae do, and, like them,
they are continually and at all times covered with
filth ; however, they are in no respect base or evil-
doers, but they preserve the Hunnic character in
all its simplicity. In fact, the Sclaveni and Antae
actually had a single name in the remote past; for
they were both called Spori in olden times, because,
I suppose, living apart one man from another, they
inhabit their country in a sporadic fashion, And
in consequence of this very fact they hold a great
amount of land; for they alone inhabit the greatest
part of the northern bank of the Ister. So much
then may be said regarding these peoples.

So on the present occasion the Antae gathered
together, as has been said, and tried to compel this
man to agree with them in the assertion that he was
Chilbudius, the Roman general himself. And they
threatened, if he denied it, to punish him. But while
this affair was progressing in the manner described,
meantime the Emperor Justinian had sent some
envoys to these very barbarians, through whom he
expressed the desire that they should all settle in
an ancient city, Turris by name, situated to the
north of the river Ister. This city had been built
by the Roman emperor Trajan in earlier times, but
for a long time now it had remained unoccupied,
after it had been plundered by the barbarians of
that region. It was this city and the lands about
it that the Emperor Justinian agreed to give them,
asserting that it had belonged to the Romans


273


34


35


36


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


/ / / “-“
lol / \
bd > / b] P ὁ ἃς / “
Yr \ «ς , 9S
\ ’ Ν va
/ » / /
> / / / id
΄ / \ oe > 4? τ \ 2h
/ ΄ \ Ld BI \
\ \ a /
an id “ /
an “ ΄
¢ \ e a ,
> \ swe sy 2 / > /


XV


274


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xiv. 33-xv. 1


originally ; and he further agreed to give them all
the assistance within his power while they were
establishing themselves, and to pay them great sums
of money, on condition that they should remain at
peace with him thereafter and constantly block the
way against the Huns, when these wished to overrun
the Roman domain.

When the barbarians heard this, they expressed
approval and promised to carry out all the con-
ditions, provided that he restore Chilbudius to the
office of General of the Romans and assign him to
assist them in the establishment of their city, stoutly
maintaining, what they wished was so, that the
man there among them was Chilbudius. Thereupon
the man himself, being lifted up by these hopes,
began now to claim and to assert, as well as the
others, that he was Chilbudius the Roman general.
Indeed he was setting out for Byzantium on this
mission when Narses, in the course of his journey,
came upon him. And when he met the man and
found him to be playing the part of an imposter,
although he spoke in the Latin tongue and had
already learned many of the personal peculiarities
of Chilbudius and had been very successful in assum-
ing them, he confined him in prison and compelled
him to confess the whole truth, and thereafter
brought him in his own train to Byzantium. But
I shall return to the point from which I have strayed.


XV


Wuite the emperor was taking such measures as
have been described, Belisarius on his part sent an
army to the harbour of Rome under command of


275


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


276


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xv. 1-6


Valentinus and one of his own bodyguards, Phocas
by name, an exceptionally able warrior, with in-
structions to join the garrison in Portus, which
was commanded by Innocentius, and to assist them
in guarding that fortress; and wherever they found
it possible, they were to make excursions and harass
the enemy’s camp. Consequently, Valentinus and
Phocas secretly sent a messenger into Rome bear-
ing the intelligence to Bessas that they were at that
moment about to make a sudden attack upon the
stockade of their opponents; he should, therefore,
on his part, select the most warlike of the soldiers
in Rome, and, whenever he observed their assault,
rush to their assistance, so that each of the two
forces might be able to inflict some great injury
upon the barbarians. Bessas, however, was by no
means taken with this plan, notwithstanding the
fact that he had as many as three thousand soldiers
under him. ‘Thus it was that Valentinus and Phocas
with a force of five hundred descended unexpectedly
upon the enemy’s camp and killed a few men, and
the tumult occasioned thereby soon reached the
ears of the besieged.1 But seeing that no one came
out from the city against the camp, they quickly
retired to the harbour without suffering any loss.

So they sent to Bessas a second time, and first
charging him with having had a regrettable attack
of timidity, they declared that they would soon make
another assault upon the enemy and urged that he
too should fall upon the barbarians with all his
strength at the proper moment. Bessas, however,
still refused to make a sally against his opponents


1 2,6, in Rome.


277


7


8


9


10


ll


12


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


278


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xv. 6-12


and risk a battle. Still Valentinus and Phocas were
purposing to assail the enemy in larger force and
had already made their preparations. But a certain
soldier of Innocentius’ command went as a deserter
to Totila and carried the news that on the following
day there would be an attack upon them from
Portus. So Totila decided to fill with ambuscades
of soldiers all the places which were adapted for
this purpose. On the following day, therefore,
Valentinus and Phocas fell into these τος
and not only lost the most of their men, but were
also killed themselves. And only a small handful
made their escape with difficulty and betook them-
selves to Portus.

It was at this time that Vigilius, the chief priest
of Rome,! who was then sojourning in Sicily, filled
with grain as many ships as he could and sent them
off, thinking that in some way or other those who
were conveying the cargoes would be able to get
into Rome. So these ships were sailing toward the
Roman harbour, but the enemy spied them and got
to the harbour a short time before the ships arrived ;
there they concealed themselves inside the walls,
their purpose being that, as soon as the ships should
come to the land there, they might capture them
with no difficulty. And when all the men keeping
guard in Portus observed this, they went up to the
battlement, every man of them, and by waving their
cloaks strove to signal the men on the ships not to
come ahead, but to turn aside and go elsewhere—
anywhere in fact, where chance might lead them.
But the men on the ships failed to comprehend
what they were doing, supposing that the Romans


1 Vigilius was Pope from 537-555.
279


18


14


15


16


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XVI


2 re K, Suidas: δὲ L.


280


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xv. 12-xvi. 3


in Portus were rejoicing and inviting them to the
harbour, and since they had a favouring wind they
quickly got inside the harbour. Now there were
many Romans on board the ships, and among them
a certain bishop named Valentinus. Then the bar-
barians arose from their hiding place and took
possession of all the boats without encountering
any resistance, And as for the bishop, they took
him prisoner and led him before Totila, but all the
rest they killed, and drawing the boats up on shore
with their cargoes still in them, they departed.
And Totila made such enquiries of this priest as
he wished, and then accused him of not telling the
truth in any respect and so cut off both his hands.
Such was the course of these events. And the
winter drew to a close, and the eleventh year ended
in this war, the history of which Procopius has
written.


XVI


Anp Vigilius, the chief priest of Rome, in obedience
to the emperor’s summons, came to Byzantium from
Sicily ; for he had been waiting a considerable time
in Sicily for this summons.

It was at about this time that the Romans be-
sieged in Placentia, seeing that 411} their provisions
had now been completely exhausted, resorted to
foods of an unnatural sort under constraint of
famine. In fact they had actually tasted each
other’s flesh. And it was because of this situ-
ation that they came to terms with the Goths and


XP ἢ ᾽


281


546 A.D.


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


» / >
“Tla / ε aN - ᾽ a f


282


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xvi. 3-10


surrendered both themselves and Placentia to them.
Such was the course of events here.

At Rome likewise, as it laboured under the siege
of Totila, all the necessaries of life had already
failed. Now there was a certain man among the
priests of Rome, Pelagius by name, holding the
office of deacon; he had passed a considerable time
in Byzantium and had there become especially
intimate with the Emperor Justinian, and it so
happened that he had a short time previously arrived
at Rome possessed of a great fortune. And during
this siege he had bestowed a great part of his
fortune upon those destitute of the necessaries of
life; and thus, though he had been a notable person
even before that time, among all the Italians, now
quite naturally he won still greater renown for
philanthropy. Sothe Romans, finding their situation
desperate by reason of the famine, persuaded this
Pelagius to go before Totila and negotiate for them
an armistice of only a few days, the understanding
to be that, if within the time of that armistice no
help should reach them from Byzantium, they would
surrender both themselves and the city to the
Goths. Pelagius accordingly went on this mission
to Totila. And when he came, Totila greeted him
with great respect and friendliness, and then spoke
first as follows :

« Among all barbarian peoples it is a well-nigh
universal custom to reverence the office of ambassa-
dors, and I for my part have always been eager to
honour particularly those, such as yourself, who can
lay claim to excellence. Now it is my opinion that
the distinction between honour and insult to a man


283


VOL. IV. K


11


12


14


15


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


284


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xvi. 10-15


clothed with the office of ambassador is not made
by a smiling countenance or bombastic utterances
on the part of those who receive him, but either by
simply speaking the truth or, on the other hand,
by addressing him with insincere speeches. For
signal honour, on the one hand, is conferred upon
him who has not been dismissed until the truth has
been disclosed to him with directness, but the
greatest possible insult, on the other hand, has
been heaped upon that ambassador who takes his
departure after hearing only deceitful and insincere
phrases. Now, therefore, O Pelagius, with the
exception of three things you will never fail to
receive from us whatever you may crave. These
things, then, you had best avoid and pass by without
mention, so hak you may not, though having been
yourself most to blame for failing to ‘accomplish any
of the objects of your coming, impute to us the
blame for this failure. For the inevitable con-
sequence of making a request inappropriate to the
actual situation is generally failure to gain one’s
object. I warn you, then, that you are to make
no plea in the interest of either anyone of the
Sicilians, or the fortifications of Rome, or the slaves
who have put themselves under our protection,
For it is impossible either for the Goths to shew any
mercy to anyone of the Sicilians or for this wall to
remain standing or for the slaves who have been
serving in our army to return to the service of their
former masters. And in order to avoid the appear-
ance of advancing these demands in a spirit of
unreason, we shall clear ourselves of that suspicion
by stating our grounds immediately.


285


16


tr


‘18


19


20


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 Sicily.


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xvi. 16-20


“In the first place, then, that island+ from ancient
times enjoyed an unrivalled degree of prosperity,
as evidenced by its revenues and by the abundance
of the crops produced therein, so that it not only
provided enough for its inhabitants, but you
Romans also were abundantly supplied by importing
annually as tribute the produce of Sicilian fields.
It was for this reason that the Romans begged
Theoderic at the beginning of his reign that no
numerous garrison of Goths should be placed there,
so that no check might be put upon the freedom
of the inhabitants or their general prosperity.
In such circumstances the enemy’s army put in at
Sicily with a force which was a match fer us neither
in numbers of men nor in any other respect what-
ever. But the Sicilians, upon seeing the fleet, did
not report this to the Goths, did not even shut
themselves into their strongholds, did not consent
to shew hostility to our adversaries in any other
manner, but opening the gates of their cities with
all zeal received the army of the enemy with open
arms,” just as I suppose the most untrustworthy
slaves would do, who had for a long time been
watching for the favourable moment to escape from
the hand of their owners and find some new and
unknown masters. Then by using that island as a
base, the enemy, as if fighting from an advanced
fortress, without difficulty possessed themselves of
all Italy and seized upon this city of Rome, having
brought with them from Sicily such a great quantity
of grain that, though they were besieged for an
entire year, it continued to suffice for the whole


* Literally ‘* upturned hands.”


287


21]


23


24


25


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


or


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xvi. 20-25


population of the city. Such is the case of the
Sicilians, whose misdeeds have been such that it
will be utterly impossible for the Goths to shew
them forgiveness, seeing that the gravity of the
accusations sweeps away all compassion for the
guilty.

“In the second place, it was within these walls
that our enemy shut himself and from which he was
quite unwilling to come down into the plain and
array himself against us, but by crafty wiles and
baffling tricks, he ever flouted the Goths from day
to day, and thus became, quite undeservedly, master
of our possessions. Consequently it is worth while
for us to make provision that we shall not have this
same experience a second time. For when men
who have once met with a reverse through ignorance
fall into the same evil plight again without pro-
viding against the calamity which has already become
familiar to them by experience, men believe what
has befallen them to be no adversity of fortune, but
in all likelihood a proof of the folly of the victims
of the disaster. And one might add that the
destruction of the walls of Rome will benefit you
above all others. For you will not hereafter be shut
in with others and excluded from all the necessaries
of life while you suffer siege at the hands of the
assailants of the city, but, on the contrary, the two
armies will stake their chances in open battle against
one another, while you, without perils on your part,
will simply become the prize of the victors. In
the third place, regarding the slaves who have put
themselves under our protection, we shall say only
this, that if, after they have taken their places in


289


20


27


29


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


΄ a“ ’ , “ \
΄ 7 a > \
΄ a \ ς nr \
¢ \
an / e ,
5 a / 5 a ” \ \
aA / ee n
iA f / a
΄ \ > / tN / 4
f an an i


290


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xvi. 25~30


our ranks against our adversaries and have received
from us the promise that we will never abandon
them to their former masters, we should at the present
juncture decide to put them into your hands, we
shall have no right to be trusted by you either.
For it is impossible—impossible, I say—for the man
who makes light of his covenant with the most
unfortunate of men to give evidence of a spirit that
can be relied on in dealing with anyone else, but
he always carries along with him his untrustworthi-
ness, just as he does any other characteristic that
reveals his true nature in all his dealings with other
men.”

Thus spoke Totila; and Pelagius replied as follows:
“Though you began, excellent Sir, by saying that
you have the very greatest admiration not only for
me, but also for the ambassadorial title, you have
in fact assigned us to the very lowest grade of
dishonour. Indeed I for my part think that he who
really insults one who is both friend and ambassador
is not the man who may strike him on the head or
otherwise maltreat him, but rather he who decides
to allow his visitor to depart with his mission un-
accomplished. For it is not with the purpose of
achieving any honour at the hands of those who
receive them that men are accustomed to submit to
the labours of an embassy, but in order that they
may return with some good accomplished to those
who have sent them. Consequently, it will be more
favourable to their purpose to have been treated with
wanton contempt and still have accomplished some of
the objects for which they came, than, after hearing
more courteous words, to return disappointed in


201


51


92


bo


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


292


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xvi. 30—xvii. 3


their hope. Turning now to the present situation,
I know not what plea I ought to make concerning
those things which you yourself have mentioned.
For why should one importune him who had refused
an agreement before hearing the plea? This, how-
ever, I could not leave unsaid, that it is clear what
measure of kindness you are purposing to display
toward the Romans who have taken up arms against
you, seeing that, with regard to the Sicilians, you
have determined to vent your enmity upon them
without mercy, though they have in no way opposed
you. But as for me, I shall give over my petition
to you and refer my mission to God, who is
accustomed to send retribution upon those who
scorn the prayers of suppliants.”


XVII


Wiru such words Pelagius departed. And when
the Romans saw him returning unsuccessful, they
fell into a state of helpless despair. For the famine,
becoming still more acute, was working terrible
havoe among them from day to day. The soldiers,
however, had not yet exhausted their supplies, but
they could still hold out. The Romans therefore
gathered in a throng and came before Bessas and
Conon, the commanders of the emperor's army ;
there with weeping and loud lamentation they
spoke to them as follows: “The fate, Generals,
which we see to be upon us at the present time is
such that, if we actually had the power to commit
some unholy deed against you, such a crime would
have brought upon us no reproach. For the over-
whelming constraint of necessity furnishes of itself


293


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


2 τὸν L: τῶν K pr. m., τοῦ K corr.


294


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xvii. 3-7


a sufficient defence. But now, seeing that our
strength cannot suffice for our defence, we have
resorted to words and have come before you to
make our position clear and to lament over our
misfortune ; and do you hear us with forbearance,
not being stirred up by the boldness of our words,
but judging it with due regard to the acuteness
of our suffering. For he who has been compelled
to despair of safety can no longer control his actions
—no, nor his words—so as to preserve decorum.
As for us, Generals, do not consider us to be either
Romans or fellow-countrymen of yours, or even to
have assimilated our ways of government to yours,
and do not suppose that in the beginning we
received the emperor's army into the city willingly,
but regard us as enemies from the first and as men
who have taken up arms against you, and later, when
defeated in battle, have become your captive slaves
simply in accordance with the customs of war. And
do you furnish sustenance to these your captives, if
not in quantities sufficient for our needs, at least in
such measure as to make life possible, that by
your so doing we too may survive and render you
such service in return as it is fitting that slaves
should render their masters. But if you find this
difficult or contrary to your wish, then at least
_consent to release us from your hands! by which
“action you will gain this advantage that you will
not be troubled by the burial of your slaves. And
if even this favour is not left us, deign to put us to
death and do not deprive us of an honourable end
nor begrudge us death, which to us is the sweetest


4 ἡ Haury: 7 K, om, L, ἢ οὐ Scaliger.
295


10


1


12


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


296


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xvii. 7-12


of all things, but by a single act free the Romans
from ten thousand troubles.’”’ When Bessas and his
officers heard this, they asserted, firstly, that to
furnish them with provisions was impossible, secondly,
that to put them to death would be unholy, and,
thirdly, that even to release them was not without
danger. But they insisted that Belisarius with the
army from Byzantium would arrive right speedily,
and after thus consoling them sent them away.

But the famine, becoming more severe as time
went on, was greatly increasing its ravages, driving
men to discover monstrous foods unknown to the
natural desires of man. Now at first, since Bessas
and Conon, who commanded the garrison in Rome,
had, as it happened, stored away a vast supply of
grain for their own use within the walls of Rome,
they as well as the soldiers were constantly taking
from the portion assigned for their own needs and
selling at a great price to such Romans as were rich;
for the price of a bushel had reached seven gold
pieces.1 Those however, whose domestic circum-
stances were such that they were unable to partake
of food which was so much dearer, were able, by
paying in cash one fourth of this price, to get their
bushel measures filled with bran; this was their
food and necessity made it most sweet and dainty
to their taste. As for beef, whenever the bodyguards
of Bessas captured an ox in making a sally, they sold
it for fifty gold pieces.t And if any man had a
horse or any other animal which had died, this
Roman was counted among those exceedingly
fortunate, seeing that he was able to live luxuriously


1 Presumably solidi aurei, at this time worth about 12s. 7d.
or $3.06 each.


297


13


14


15


16


17


18


19


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


ono


208


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIL. xvii. 12-19


upon the flesh of a dead animal. But all the rest of
the numerous inhabitants were eating nettles only,
such as grow in abundance about the walls and
among the ruins in all parts of the city. And in
order to prevent the pungent herb from stinging
their lips and throat they boiled them thoroughly
before eating.

So long, then, as the Romans had their gold
currency, they bought their grain and bran in the
manner described and went their way; but when
their supply of this had at length failed, then they
brought all their household goods to the forum and
exchanged them for their daily sustenance. But
when, finally, the soldiers of the emperor had no
grain which they could possibly sell to the Romans
(except, indeed, that Bessas still had a little left),
nor had the Romans anything with which to buy,
they all turned to the nettles. But this food was
insufficient for them, for it was utterly impossible to
satisfy themselves with it, and consequently their
flesh withered away almost entirely, while their
colour, gradually turning to a livid hue, gave them
a most ghostly appearance. And it happened to
many that, even as they walked along chewing the
nettles with their teeth, death came suddenly upon
them and they fell to the ground. And now they
were even beginning to eat each other’s dung.
There were many too, who, because of the pressure
of the famine, destroyed themselves with their own


> X


299


20


29


25


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


is a ¢
3 / 2 “ id an > / /
an a / »
> / > / Σ a e ”
Fi ο'
» a A A
a , A a
, ς Ai Ν lal A \ A
lal /


XVIII
/ 5 ᾽ / / > / \


300


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xvii. 19—xviii. 1


hands; for they could no longer find either dogs or
mice or any dead animal of any kind on which to feed.

Now there was a Roman in the city, the father
of five children; and they gathered about him and,
laying hold of his garment, kept demanding food.
But he, without a word of lament and without
letting it be seen that he was sorely troubled, but
most steadfastly concealing all his suffering in his
mind, bade the childern follow him as if for the
purpose of getting food. But when he came to
the bridge over the Tiber, he tied his cloak over
his face, thus concealing his eyes, and leaped from
the bridge into the waters of the Tiber, the deed
being witnessed both by his children and by all the
Romans who were there.

From that time on the imperial commanders,
upon receiving further money, released such of the
Romans as desired to depart from the city. And
only a few were left in the city; for all the rest
made their escape by flight in whatever manner
proved possible for each one. But the most of
these, since their strength had been utterly wasted
away by the famine, perished as soon as they had
begun their journey, whether by water or by land.
Many too were caught on the road by the enemy
and destroyed. To such a pass had come the
fortune of the senate and people of Rome.


XVIII


Wuen the army under John and Isaac had reached
Epidamnus and joined Belisarius, John, on the one


301


PROCOPLUS OF CAESAREA


302


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xviii. 1-6


hand, urged that they ferry all the troops across the
gulf and proceed by land with the whole army,
meeting together whatever opposition might develop
against them; but Belisarius, on the other hand,
considered this plan inexpedient, and thought that
more was to be gained by sailing to the neighbour-
hood of Rome; for in going by land they would
consume a longer time, and would perhaps be
confronted by some obstacle; John meanwhile was
to march through the territory of the Calabrians
and the other peoples of that region, drive out the
few barbarians who were there, and, after reducing
to submission the territory south of the Ionian Gulf,
march to the neighbourhood of Rome and rejoin his
friends; it was here, indeed, that Belisarius purposed
to land with the rest of the army. For he thought
that, since the Romans were suffering most cruelly
in the siege, even the smallest delay would, in all
probability, bring disaster to their cause. And if
they went by sea and met with a favouring wind,
it would be possible to land at the harbour of Rome
on the fifth day, while an army marching by land from
Dryus could not reach Rome even within forty days.

So Belisarius gave these directions to John and set
sail from there with his whole fleet; but a violent
wind fell upon them, and they put in at Dryus.
And when the Goths who had been stationed there
to besiege the fortress saw this fleet, they abandoned
the siege and straightway betook themselves to the
neighbourhood of Brundisium, a city two days’
journey distant from Dryus,! situated on the coast


1 To the north.


5 ἐν Ῥώμῃ Haury: om. MSS.


7


8


9


16


Ll


12


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


an /
nr /
“ / /


e an / Μ a > ΄ \ aw X ,
€ 14 . / ia Ν \ \ an? /
/ ” 2 ΄ \ > ,
if t


394


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xviii. 6--ι2


of the guif and without walls; for they supposed
that Belisarius would immediately pass through the
strait at Dryus;1 and they reported their situation
to Totila. He, for his part, put his own army in
readiness to oppose Belisarius and commanded the
Goths in Calabria to keep the passes under guard
as best they could.

But when Belisarius, finding a favourable wind,
sailed away from Dryus, the Goths in Calabria
thought no more of him and began to conduct
themselves carelessly, while Totila was content to
remain quiet and to guard still more closely the
approaches to Rome, so that it might be impossible
to bring any kind of provisions into the city. And
he devised the following structure on the Tiber.
Observing a place where the river flows in a very
narrow channel, about ninety stades distant from
the city, he placed very long timbers, reaching from
one bank to the other, so as to form a bridge at that
point. Then he constructed two wooden towers,
one on either bank, and placed in each one a
garrison of warlike men, so that it might be no
longer possible for boats of any kind whatever to
make their way up from Portus and so enter the
city.

Meanwhile Belisarius, on his part, landed at the
harbour of Rome, while John with his army was
remaining where he was. Then John ferried his
force over to Calabria, quite unobserved by the
Goths, who, as stated above, were waiting in the
neighbourhood of Brundisium. And he captured
two of the enemy who were going out as scouts,


1 The Strait of Otranto; Belisarius would be hastening
southward and so would leave them unmolested.


395


18


14


16


17


18


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 δὲ MSS.: δὴ Herwerden.


306


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xviii. 12-19


one of whom he killed immediately; but the other
laid hold of his knees and begged to be made a
prisoner. “ For,” he said, “I shall not be uselsss to
you and the Roman army.” And when John asked
him what advantage he could possibly confer upon
the Romans and him if he was not destroyed, the
man promised to enable him to fall upon the Goths
while they had not the least expectation of such a
thing. Then John said that his prayer should not
fail to be heard, but first he must shew him the
pastures of their horses. This too the barbarian
agreed to do and so he went with him. And first,
upon finding the enemy’s horses pasturing, all the
men who happened to be on foot leaped upon their
backs; and there was a large number of such men
comprising some of the best troops. Next they
advanced at full speed upon the camp of their
opponents. And the barbarians, being unarmed
and utterly unprepared, and terror-stricken by the
suddenness of the attack, were most of them
destroyed where they stood, utterly forgetful of
their valour, and only a small number succeeded in
escaping and made their way to Totila.

Then John began to console and pacify all the
Calabrians, endeavouring to win them to loyalty to
the emperor and promising that they would receive
many benefits both from the emperor and from the
Romanarmy. Then, departing as quickly as he could
from Brundisium, he captured a city, Canusium? by
name, which is situated approximately at the centre
of Apulia and is distant from Brundisium five days’
journey as one goes westward toward Rome. Twenty-


1 Modern Canosa.


397


20


PROCOPJUS OF CAESAREA


lal > ᾿ ’ὔ


24


\ / ᾽ / \ > “ 1 »! \


, Ὑ ab. A ς

n /
/ / e
\ b] / > \ \ \ A ᾽ /
/ ᾿] / ” > ¢ / 7
lal Ub lal
1 αὐτῶν Maltretus: αὐτὸν MSS.
2 τοῦ Haury: om. MSS.
308


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xviii. 19-25


five stades away from this city of Canusium is Cannae,
where they say the Romans in early times suffered
their great disaster at the hand of Hannibal, the
general of the Libyans.

In that city a certain Tullianus, son of Venantius,
a Roman who possessed great power among the
Brutii and Lucani, came before John and made
charges against the emperor's army for the treatment
they had previously meted out to the Italians, but
he agreed that, if the army thereafter should treat
them with some degree of consideration, he would
hand over Bruttium and Lucania to the Romans, to
be again subject and tributary to the emperor no
less truly than they had been before. For it was
not, he said, by their own will that they had yielded
to men who were both barbarians and Arians, but
because they had been placed under most dire
constraint by their opponents, and had also been
treated with injustice by the emperor's soldiers.
And upon John’s declaration that thereafter the
Italians would receive every blessing from the army,
Tullianus went with him. Consequently the soldiers
no longer entertained any suspicion as regards the
Italians, but the most of the territory south of the
Ionian Gulf had become friendly to them and subject
to the emperor.

But when Totila heard this, he selected three
hundred of the Goths and sent them to Capua.
These men he instructed that, whenever they saw
the army of John marching thence toward Rome,
they should simply follow him without drawing
attention to themselves; for he himself would attend
to the rest. In consequence of this John became
afraid that he would fall into some trap and be


590


216 B.C.


20


27


bo
io 6)


29


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


/ 3 fp n A 3 Wass - 7


310


AISTORY OF THE WARS, VIL. xviii. 25-29


surrounded by the enemy, and so discontinued his
movement to join Belisarius, and instead marched
into the territory of the Bruttii and Lucani.

Now there was a certain Rhecimundus among the
Goths, a man of note whom Totila had appointed to
keep guard over Bruttium; he had under him some
of the Goths as well as Roman soldiers and Moors
who had deserted, and his instructions were to
guard with these troops the Strait of Scylla! and
the adjoining coast, so that no one might be able
fearlessly to set sail from there for Sicily nor to land
there from the island. This army was surprised by
John, whose presence had not been reported to
them; and he fell upon them at a point between
Rhegium and Vevon, threw them into consternation
by a sudden attack, utterly heedless as they were
of their valour, and turned them immediately to
fight. And they sought refuge by fleeing to the
mountain which rises near by, a difficult one to
climb and generally precipitous; but John pursued
them and reached the steep slopes along with the
enemy, and thus, before they had as yet secured
their position on the rough mountain-side, he engaged
with them and killed many of the Moors and Roman
soldiers, though they offered a most vigorous re-
sistance, and captured by surrender Rhecimundus
and the Goths together with all who remained.

After accomplishing this feat, John still continued
to remain where he was, while Belisarius, constantly
expecting John, remained inactive. And Belisarius
kept reproaching him because he would not take
the risk of meeting in battle the force on guard at
Capua, only three hundred in number, and endeavour


1 Messina,


311


oO


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


312


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xviii. 29-xix. 6


to make his way through, in spite of the fact that he
had barbarians under his command who were men
selected for their valour. But John abandoned that
plan, and proceeded to a place in Apulia, called
Cervarium,! where he remained in idleness.


XIX


Beuisarius, therefore, dreading that the besieged
would do something desperate because of the lack
of provisions, began to make plans to convey his
supplies into Rome by some means or other. And
since he plainly had no force sufficient to pit against
the enemy, so that he could fight a decisive battle
with them in the plain, he first arranged the following
plan. He chose two skiffs of very unusual breadth
and, after fastening them together and lashing them
very firmly to one another, constructed a wooden
tower upon them, making it much higher than those
made by the enemy at their bridge. For he had
previously had them accurately measured by sending
some of his men, who, as it was made to appear,
were going over to the barbarians as deserters.
Next he built wooden walls upon two hundred
swift-sailing boats and launched them in the Tiber,
having caused openings to be made in all parts
of the wooden walls, in order that his men might
be able to shoot at the enemy through them.
Finally he loaded grain and many other kinds of
provisions on these boats and manned them with his
most warlike soldiers. He also stationed other
troops, both infantry and cavalry, on either side
of the river in certain strong positions near the


1 Modern Cervaro.


313


id


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


314


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xix. 6-14


mouth of the Tiber, commanding them to remain
at their posts and, if any of the enemy should
threaten Portus, to prevent them with all their
strength. But he stationed Isaac inside Portus, and
it was to him that he entrusted both the city and
his wife and whatever else he happened to possess
there. And he directed himin no circumstances to
go away from the city, not even if he learned that
Belisarius had perished at the hand of the enemy,
but to maintain a close and constant guard, so that,
if any reverse should befall the Romans, they might
have a place where they could take refuge and save
themselves. For they held no other stronghold at
all in that region, but the whole country in every
direction was hostile to them.

Then he himself embarked on one of the swift
boats and led on the fleet, giving orders to tow the
boats on which he had constructed the tower. Now
he had placed on the top of the tower a little boat
which he had caused to be filled with pitch, sulphur,
resin, and all the other substances on which fire
naturally feeds most fiercely. And on the other
bank of the river—that on the right as one goes
from Portus to Rome—a force of infantry was also
drawn up along the stream to support him. But he
had sent word to Bessas the day before commanding
that on the following day he should make a sally
with a strong force and throw the enemy's camp
into confusion; and indeed this was the same
command that he had already sent him many a
time before. But neither on previous occasions nor
during the present battle did Bessas see fit to carry
out his orders. For now he was the only one who


285
VOL. 1V.


15


16


17


18


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


316


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xix. 14-18


still had any grain left, since of all the grain which
the magistrates of Sicily had previously sent to
Rome to suffice both for the soldiers and for the
whole population, he had let an exceedingly small
amount go to the populace, while he had taken for
himself the largest part on the pretext of providing
for the soldiers and had hidden it away; and since
he was selling this reserve to the senators at high
prices, he by no means wished the siege to be
broken.

Meanwhile Belisarius and the Roman fleet were
making their way upstream in spite of the difficulty
caused by the adverse current. The Goths, how-
ever, offered no opposition, but remained quietly
in their fortified camps. But immediately upon
coming close to the bridge, the Romans encountered
a hostile guard; this force had been stationed on
either side of the river to protect an iron chain
which Totila had put in place there not long before,
the which chain reached from one bank of the
Tiber to the other, and its purpose was to make it
dificult for the enemy to get even as far as the
bridge. And they killed some of the guards with
their missiles and turned the rest to flight, then
lifted out the chain and went straight on toward the
bridge. And as soon as they came up to it, they
opened their attack, while the barbarians, shooting
from the towers, were striving most vigorously to
drive them back. By this time, too, the barbarians
had started out from their fortified camps and were
rushing to the bridge.

Just at that moment Belisarius brought the skiffs
on which the tower had been built as close as
possible to one of the towers of the enemy—the


317


19


20


2)


22


23


24


25


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


318


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xix. 18-25


one which stood on the road to Portus at the very
edge of the water—and gave orders to set fire to the
little boat and throw it on top of the enemy's tower.
And the Romans carried out this order. Now when
this little boat fell upon the tower, it very quickly
set fire to it, and not only was the tower itself
consumed, but also all the Goths in it, to the
number of about two hundred. And among those
thus burned was Osdas, their commander, who was
the most warlike of all the Goths. Whereupon the
Romans took courage and began to discharge their
missiles stil] faster than before against the barbarians
who had come to the support of their comrades. As
for the Goths, they were struck with consternation
at the turn of events, and facing about rushed off in
flight, each man as best he could. The Romans
then began to destroy the bridge and were ready,
after wrecking it in a twinkling, to go ahead and
proceed into Rome with no further opposition. But,
since this was not the will of fortune, some envious
spirit interposed and contrived to ruin the cause
of the Romans in the following manner.

While the two armies were engaged in the opera-
tions just described, meantime a report fraught with
ill for the Romans reached Portus and the tidings
spread that Belisarius was victorious and had taken
up the chain after destroying the barbarians at that
point, and all the rest which I have told above.
Now when Isaac heard this, he could no longer
contain himself, but was eager to have a hand in
that glorious victory. So, disregarding the instruc-
tions of Belisarius, he was off as quickly as possible
to the other side of the river. And he took with
him a hundred horsemen from among the troops


o*9


28


29


90


Bil


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


320


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xix. 25-31


which Belisarius had stationed there, and advanced
against the enemy’s stockade, which was commanded
by Ruderic, a capable warrior. Then he made a
sudden assault upon the barbarians in the camp and
smote a certain number of them, including Ruderic
who had come out against him. The Goths, for
their part, immediately abandoned the camp and
withdrew, either because they supposed that Isaac
had a very large hostile force in the rear, or by way
of deceiving their opponents so that they might be
able to capture them, as actually happened.

So Isaac’s men penetrated the hostile camp, and
began to plunder the silver which lay there and
the other valuables. But the Goths immediately
returned and slew many of their opponents, but
took Isaac alive along with some few others. Horse-
men then hastened to Belisarius and reported that
Isaac was in the hands of the enemy. Belisarius
was thunderstruck at what he heard, and, without
investigating in what manner Isaac could have been
captured, but thinking that both Portus and his wife
were lost and that complete disaster had fallen upon
the Romans, in that no other stronghold remained
where they could now take refuge and save them-
selves, he fell into a state of speechlessness, an
experience which he had never had before. It was
for this reason that he hastily withdrew his forces to
the rear, with the intention of attacking the enemy
while they were still in disorder and recovering the
town at all costs.

So the Roman army withdrew from the bridge


221


94


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


wt


322


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xix. τ1-χχ. 3


without accomplishing its object. But when Beli-
sarius reached Portus, he learned of the madness of
Isaac and perceived that his own excitement had been
without reason ; whereupon he was so overcome with
sorrow at this adversity of fortune that he fell sick.
For a fever came on which by its long continuance
harassed him sorely and brought him into danger
of death. Two days later it came about that Ruderic
died, and Totila, being exceedingly grieved at his
loss, put Isaac to death.


XX


Meanwuli_e Bessas continued to grow more wealthy
than ever by retailing his grain, since his prices were
fixed by the necessity of those who wanted it. And
since he was entirely wrapped up in his concern for
this traffic, he neither paid heed to the defence of
the walls nor concerned himself with any other
measures for security whatsoever, but any of the
soldiers who so wished were allowed to neglect
their duties; and meanwhile there was only an
insignificant garrison on the walls, and even this
received very little attention. For those who
chanced from day to day to be assigned to guard
duty were freely permitted to sleep, since no one
was put in command of them who might possibly
take some notice of such an act; nor did any officers
consent to go the rounds of the fortifications, as had
been customary, and inspect the guards to see what
they were doing, and furthermore not one of the
citizens was able to assist them in keeping guard;


323


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


Ans lal [2 > / / \
a lal ἴω ΄
Qn \
A “ ΄
an \ “ /
/ /
᾽ , / a / > Ud ς ῇ
/
al A i /
- c »
/ \
an > / A Me Ud > /
> \ ee AN, 5) \ ἢ a X
“ /
“ / “-“
% , /
/
324


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xx. 3-8


for an exceedingly small number, as | have said,
were left in the city and these were wasted to the
last degree by the famine.

Thus it came about that four Isaurians who were
keeping guard by the Asinarian Gate did as follows:
having waited carefully for that part of the night
during which it always fell to the lot of the soldiers
next them to sleep while the guarding of that
portion of the wall devolved upon them, they
fastened ropes to the battlement long enough to
reach down to the ground, and laying hold of these
with both hands got outside the fortifications; then
they went before Totila and agreed to receive him
and the Gothic army into the city; for, as they
declared, they were able to do this without any
trouble. And Totila promised that he would be
exceedingly grateful to them if they made good
these promises and that he would put them in
possession of great sums of money; he then sent
with them two of his men to look over the place
from which these men claimed that the Goths could
effect an entrance into the city. So this party came
up beside the wall and, laying hold of the ropes,
ascended to the battlement, where not a man
uttered a sound or observed what was going on.
So when they reached the top, the Isaurians shewed
the barbarians everything, namely that those who
wished to ascend would meet with no obstacle, and
that after they had come up they would have
complete freedom of action, meeting as they would
with not the least resistance; then, after bidding
them carry this report to Totila, they sent them
away.

Now when Totila heard this report, he was, in a


2


ww


1]


12


13


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


:


226


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xx. 8--14


way, pleased at the intelligence, but, notwith-
standing this, he felt a suspicion as regards the
Isaurians and was not inclined to place very much
confidence in them. Not many days later these
men came to him again, urging him to undertake
the enterprise. Totila thereupon sent two other
men with them, with instructions that they too
should make a thorough investigation of the whole
situation and bring back a report. And these men,
upon returning to him, made a report in all respects
like that of those previously sent.- But during this
time a large force of Roman soldiers, who were out
on a reconnoitering expedition, charged upon ten
Goths walking along a road not far from the city,
and they took them prisoners and_ straightway
brought them before Bessas. And he_ enquired
of these barbarians what Totila’s purpose really
was; and the Goths said that he was in hopes that
some of the Isaurians would deliver the city to him:
for the story had already become known to many of
the barbarians. But even when Bessas and Conon
heard this, they treated the matter with great
unconcern and took no heed of the report. And
a third time the Isaurians came into the presence
of Totila and tried to induce the man to do the
deed. So he sent with them a number of men and
among them one related to him by blood, and they,
upon returning to him, reported the whole situation
and encouraged him to proceed.

Totila, then, as soon as night came on, put his
whole force under arms in silence and led them up
near the Asinarian Gate. And he commanded four
men who were conspicuous among the Goths for


5 ἡκόντων suggested by Haury: ἥκοντας MSS.
327


15


16


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


2 ὧπερ Land Suidas: ὅπερ K.
3 ξυμβαίνῃ Dindorf from an inferior MS. : ξυμβαίνει KL.


328


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xx. 14-19


their bravery and strength to climb up the ropes
with the Isaurians to the battlements, during that
part of the night, of course, in which the guarding
of that portion of the wall fell to the Isaurians
while the others were taking their turn at sleeping.
And when these men got inside the fortifications,
they descended to the Asinarian Gate without
meeting any opposition ; there they shattered with
axes both the wooden beam with which the Romans
customarily made the gates fast by fitting it into
recesses in the wall on either side, and also all the
ironwork into which the guards always inserted their
keys to shut the gates or open them according to the
need of the moment. Thenthey swung the gates open,
just as they wished to do, and without any trouble
received Totila and the Gothic army into the city.
But Totila collected his men there in one place
and would not allow them to scatter at all, for he
teared that they would fall into some ambush set by
the enemy. And tumult and confusion, as was
natural, fell upon the city, and the most of the
Roman soldiers were fleeing with their commanders
through another gate, each one taking whatever
course he found easy to follow, while only a few
with the rest of the Romans were taking refuge in
the sanctuaries. Among the patricians Decius and
Basilius, in company with a few others (for horses
happened to be at hand for them) succeeded in
escaping with Bessas. But Maximus, Olyvrius,
Orestes, and some others fled to the church of the
Apostle Peter.1 Among the common people, how-
ever, it so fell out that only five hundred men had -


1 The Basilica commenced by Constantine, on the site of
St. Peter’s.


329


20


22


28


24


PROCOPIUS OF. CAESAREA


\ / a \

>
/


9 Ef, \ e / > / / \ >

/ \

΄ na 4 lal
> ” φ \ X “a 9 / > “ “
/


-


339


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIL. xx. 19-25


been left throughout the whole city, and these with
difficulty found refuge in the sanctuaries. For all
the rest of the population were gone, some having
departed to other lands and some having been
carried off by the famine, as I have stated above.
Now many persons during that night kept reporting
to Totila that both Bessas and the enemy were
fleeing. But he, saying the report they had given
was a pleasing one, would not permit a pursuit.
‘“‘For what could be sweeter for a man,” he said,
‘than a fleeing enemy?”

When it was already day and there was now no
suspicion left of any ambush, Totila, for his part,
went to the church of the Apostle Peter to pray,
but the Goths began to slay those who fell in their
way. And in this manner there perished among the
soldiers twenty-six, and among the people sixty.
And when Totila had come to the sanctuary,
Pelagius came before him carrying the Christian
scriptures in his hand, and, making supplication
in every manner possible, said “Spare thine own,
O Master.”” And Totila, mocking him with a
haughty air of indifference, said “Now at last,
Pelagius, you have come to make yourself a sup-


pliant before me.” “Yes” replied Pelagius, ‘at
a time when God has made me your slave. Nay,
spare your slaves, O Master, from now on.” And


Totila received this supplication with favour and
forbade the Goths thereafter to kill any Roman
at all, but he permitted them, while setting aside
for him the most valuable of the property, to have
unrestricted authority to plunder all the rest for
themselves.


9.9:


26


27


29


30


31


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


/ ᾿- a


ore -~


332


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xx. 26-31


Now he found much of value in the houses of
patricians, but most of all in the house where Bessas
had lodged. For that ill-starred wretch had been
only collecting for Totila the outrageous sums
which, as set forth above, he had charged for the
grain. And thus the Romans in general, and
particularly the members of the senate, found
themselves reduced to such straits that they clothed
themselves in the garments of slaves and rustics,
and lived by begging bread or any other food from
their enemies; a very notable example of this
change of fortune being that of Rusticiana, the
daughter of Symmachus, who had been wife of
Boetius, a woman who was always lavishing her
wealth upon the needy. Indeed these wretches
went about to all the houses and kept knocking
at the doors and begging that they give them food,
feeling no shame in doing so.

Now the Goths, on their part, were eager to put
Rusticiana to death, bringing against her the charge
that after bribing the commanders of the Roman
army, she had destroyed the statues of Theoderic,
her motive in so doing having been to avenge the
murder not only of her father Symmachus, but also
of her husband Boethius. But Totila would not
permit her to suffer any harm, but he guarded
both her and all the other women safe from insult,
although the Goths were extremely eager to have
intercourse with them. Consequently not one of
them had the ill fortune to suffer personal insult,
whether married, unwed, or widow, and Totila won
great renown for moderation from this course.


333


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XXI


1 Cf. Book IV. xxvii. 38, note.
334


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxi. 1-6


XXI


On the day following the capture Totila gathered
all the Goths together and spoke as follows:
“Fellow-soldiers, it is not with the purpose of
making to you any new or unknown exhortation
that I have brought you together in this place,
but in order to say those very “things which I have
often said to you, and which you for your part have
heeded with the result that the greatest of blessings
have fallen to your lot. Do not, therefore, on this
account regard this present exhortation as of little
moment. For when words lead to good fortune,
men ought not to feel surfeit of them, even though
the speaker seem to wear out his hearers with much
speaking; for they cannot reasonably reject the
benefit gained from such words. Now what I would
say is this: only yesterday, as it were, we assembled
a host of two hundred thousand most warlike soldiers,
we had at our disposal enormous wealth, and could
display a lavish abundance of both horses and arms,
we had a numerous company of mature men of
the greatest discretion—a circumstance considered
most advantageous for those entering upon a war—
and yet, with all this in our favour, we were van-
quished by five thousand Greeklings,? and for no
good reason were stripped of our power and every-
thing else that was ours. But now it has been
our fortune, though reduced to a small number.
destitute of arms and in pitiable plight and without
any experience at all, to gain the mastery over an
enemy more than twenty thousand strong. Our
experience, then, to put it in a word, has been such


335


10


11


12


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


ev MSS. : εὖ editors; cf. vir. xxxiv. 28, Thucyd. IV. 59.

μόνον K corr., Li: μόνῳ K pr. m,


336


1
2
3
4


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxi. 6-12


as I have described. But the causes of this outcome,
though you know them full well, I must now state
to you. The Goths in earlier times paid less heed
to justice than to any other thing, and treated each
other and their Roman subjects as well in an unholy
manner; wherefore God was then moved to take
the field against them on the side of their enemies.
And so, although we were far superior to our
opponents in number and in valour and in the
general equipment for war, we were defeated by a
power which was invisible and quite uncompre-
hended. It wiil therefore rest with you to guard
your blessings—manifestly by continuing to observe
justice. For if you change your course, God too
will instantly change His favour and become hostile
to you. For itis not His wont to fight with a race
of men or a particular nation, but with such as shew
the greater honour to justice. And for Him it is no
labour to transfer his blessings from one people to the
other. For whereas only to refrain from wrong-doing
inheres in the will of man, God by His very nature
has all things in His power. I say, therefore, that
you must observe justice strictly both in your dealings
with each other and with your subjects; for it
would amount to the same thing to tell you to
preserve your good fortune for ever.”

After Totila had made this speech before the
Goths, he likewise called together the members
of the Roman senate, and reproached and abused
them at length, saying that, although they had


8 og K: as L.
337


13


14


16


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


> lal
/ a
bd fs a a“ / ἐς \
, A , an
“ ’ / ’ , « /
a Ἢ a
¢, a ς , a


1 Cf. Book IV. xxvii. 38, note.
2 Cf. chap. i. 32.


338


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxi. 12-16


received many benefits from both Theoderic and
Atalaric, in that they themselves had always been
appointed to the chief offices throughout the kingdom
and had thus administered the government, and had,
furthermore, amassed vast wealth, still they had
acted with such ingratitude toward the Goths, their
benefactors, that, regardless of their obligations,
they had planned a revolt to their own harm, and
brought in the Greeks! to attack their fatherland,
thus turning traitors to themselves on the impulse of
the moment. Then, after enquiring whether they
had ever suffered any personal harm at the hands
of the Goths, he compelled them to state whether
any good thing came to them from the Emperor
Justinian, reviewing all that had happened in order:
first, they had, he said, been stripped of practically
all the offices; second, they had been maltreated by
the logothetes,? as they were called, in that they
had been compelled to settle accounts for their
treatment of the Goths during their official careers ;
and, third, although they were in dire straits on
account of the war, they were paying the Greeks
not a whit less in public taxes than in times of
peace. And he included many other things too
in his speech, such things as an angry master might
be expected to say in upbraiding men who have
become his slaves. Then he set before them
Herodian and the Isaurians who had handed over
the city to him, and said: “ You, who have been
reared together with the Goths, have not up to
the present day seen fit to surrender to us even
one empty town, but these men have received us
into Rome itself and Spolitium. By this action you
have been reduced to the rank of household slaves,


339


17


18


19


20


21


22


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


σιωῶπαν EYVHKA : καὶ TO παν EYVHKAS


340


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxi. 16-22


while these men, seeing that they have really
proved themselves friends and kinsmen of the
Goths, will hold your offices hereafter.’”. Now when
the patricians heard this, they sat in silence. But
Pelagius began to plead with Totila for them as
men who had suffered reverse and misfortune, and
would not let him go until he made them a promise
of kind treatment and thus sent them away.

After this he sent Pelagius and one of the Roman
orators, Theodorus by name, as envoys to the Em-
peror Justinian, having bound them by most solemn
oaths that they would remain loyal to him and
would make every effort to return to Italy as
quickly as possible. And he instructed them to
exert themselves to the utmost to secure peace for
him from the emperor, in order, as he said, that he,
for his part, might not be compelled to raze Rome
entirely to the ground, to destroy the members of
the senate, and to carry the war into Ilyricum.
And he also wrote a letter to the Emperor Justinian.
Now the emperor had already heard of what had
taken place in Italy. But when later on the envoys
came before him, they delivered the message which
Totila had instructed them to bring and put the
letter into his hands.

Now the contents of the letter were as follows:
«“ As to what has transpired in the city of Rome,
since I suppose thou hast learned everything, I
have decided to remain silent. But as to the
purpose for which I have sent these envoys, thou
shalt straightway be informed. We demand that
thou, for thy part, take to thyself the advantages


341


23


to


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XXII


1

2 / /


H{STORY OF THE WARS, VIL. xxi. 22-xxii. 3


which flow from peace and also grant them to us.
These advantages are recalled and exemplified most
admirably in the lives of Anastasius and Theoderic,
who ruled as kings not long ago, and filled their
whole reigns with peace and prosperity. And if
this same condition should perchance please thee,
thou wouldst properly be called my father, and thou
wilt also have us hereafter as allies against whom-
soever thou mayest wish to use 5. When the
Emperor Justinian saw this letter thus brought to
him, and heard all the words of the envoys, he
dismissed them instantly, giving them only this
reply and writing it to Totila, that he had made
Belisarius supreme commander in the war, and that
he, consequently, had full power to make such
settlement with Totila as he wished.


XXII


But while these envoys were travelling to By-
zantium and returning to Italy, the following events
took place in Lucania. Tullianus gathered the
rustics of that region and set a guard upon the
pass (a very narrow one) which gives access to
the district, with the purpose of preventing the
enemy from entering to devastate the land of
Lucania. And three hundred Antae also were help-
ing them to keep guard, men whom John had left
there previously, as it happened, at the request of
Tullianus; for these barbarians excel all others in


343


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


/ /


re


o


344


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxii. 3-9


their ability to fight on rough ground. When Totila
learned this, though he considered it inexpedient to
_assign. Goths to the task, he gathered a multitude
of rustics, and sent τος with a very few Goths,
with orders to try with all their strength to force
the pass. When these two forces engaged in battle,
a violent struggle ensued, each side striving to force
the other back, but the Otntac by their valour, and
also because the very roughness of the ground was
to their advantage, together with the rustics under
Tullianus turned their opponents to flight; and a
great number of them were slaughtered.

But when Totila learned this, he decided first to
raze Rome to the ground, and then, while leaving
the most of his army in that neighbourhood, to
march with the rest against John and the Lucanians.
Accordingly he tore down the fortifications in many
places so that about one third of the defences were
destroyed. And he was on the point also of burning
the finest and most noteworthy of the buildings and
making Rome a sheep-pasture, but Belisarius learned
of his design and sent envoys with a letter to him.
When these envoys came before Totila, they stated
why they had come and delivered the letter, which
conveyed the following.

«While the creation of beauty in a city which has
not been beautiful before could only proceed from
men of wisdom who understand the meaning of
civilization, the destruction of beauty which already
exists would be naturally expected only of men who
lack understanding, and who are not ashamed to
leave to posterity this token of their character.


345


10


il


12


13


14


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


346


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxii. g-14


Now among all the cities under the sun Rome is
agreed to be the greatest and the most noteworthy.
For it has not been created by the ability of one
man, nor has it attained such greatness and beauty
by a power of short duration, but a multitude of
monarchs, many companies of the best men, a great
lapse of time, and an extraordinary abundance of
wealth have availed to bring together in that city all
other things that are in the whole world, and skilled
workers besides. Thus, little by little, have they
built the city, such as you behold it, thereby leaving
to future generations memorials of the ability of
them all, so that insult to these monuments would
properly be considered a great crime against the
men of all time; for by such action the men of
former generations are robbed of the memorials of
their ability, and future generations of the sight
of their works. Such, then, being the facts of the
case, be well assured of this, that one of two things
must necessarily take place: either you will be
defeated by the emperor in this struggle, or, should
it so fall out, you will triumph over him. Now, in
the first place, supposing you are victorious, if you
should dismantle Rome, you would not have de-
stroyed the possession of some other man, but your
own city, excellent Sir, and, on the other hand, if
you preserve it, you will naturally enrich yourself
by a possession the fairest of all ; but if, in the second
place, it should perchance fall to your lot to ex-
perience the worse fortune, in saving Rome you
would be assured of abundant gratitude on the part
of the victor, but by destroying the city you will
make it certain that no plea for mercy will any
longer be left to you, and in addition to this you

347

VOL. IV. M


15


16


17


18


19


20


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


348


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIL. xxii. 14-20


will have reaped no benefit from the deed. Further-
more, a reputation that corresponds with your conduct
will be your portion among all men, and it stands
waiting for you according as you decide either way.
For the quality of the acts of rulers determines,
of necessity, the quality of the repute which they
win from their acts.” Such was the letter of
Belisarius.

And Totila, after reading it over many times and
coming to realize accurately the significance of the
advice, was convinced and did Rome no further
harm. So he sent a statement of his decision to
Belisarius and immediately dismissed the envoys.
And he commanded the main body of the army to
make camp not far from Rome at the town of
Algedon,! which is about one hundred and twenty
stades distant from the city toward the west, and
to remain quietly there, in order that the troops of
Belisarius might have no freedom to go anywhere
outside Portus; but with the rest of the army he
himself marched against John and the Lucanians.
As for the Romans, however, he kept the members
of the senate with him, while all the others together
with their wives and children he sent into Campania,
refusing to allow a single soul in Rome, but leaving
it entirely deserted.

When John learned that Totila was marching
against him, he refused to remain longer in Apulia,
but went hastily to Dryus. Now those patricians
who were being taken into Campania sent certain
of their domestics into Lucania, by direction of
Totila, and bade their tenants abandon their


1 Perhaps Mt. Algidus (modern Ceraso), though this lies
east, not west, of Rome and is remote from Portus.


349


2]


23


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XXIII


ἴω lal « ’


/ > / an lal , \ \

> \ / U “


1
2
9: 2 , 5 K: > f i
ἐπιπεσόντες IN: EWELOTWETOVTES °


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxii. 20—xxiii. 1


present machinations, and till the fields as they
were accustomed ; for, the message announced, they
would have the property of their masters. So they
detached themselves from the Roman army, and
remained quietly on the land; whereupon Tullianus
made off in flight, and the three hundred Antae
decided to follow John in his retreat. In this way
the whole territory south of the Ionian Gulf, with
the exception of Dryus, became once more subject
to the Goths and Totila. And the barbarians by
this time were filled with confidence and, scattering
in small bands, began to overrun the whole country
round about. When John learned this, he sent a
numerous force of his men against them. And this
force, falling unexpectedly upon the enemy, killed
a large number. And Totila, as a result of this
experience, became cautious and gathered all his
troops together in the neighbourhood of Mt.
Garganon,! which rises near the centre of Apulia,
and encamping in the fortified enclosure of Hannibal
the Libyan, he remained quiet.


XXIII


At this time one of the men who had fled from
Rome with Conon while the city was being captured
—he was named Martinianus, a Byzantine by birth—
came before Belisarius and asked permission to go
to the enemy, pretending to be a deserter, and he
promised to render the Romans a great service; and
since this met with the approval of Belisarius, he


1 Modern Gargano.


351


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


τινας L, cf. sec. 7.


352


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxiii. 1-7


went off. Now when Totila saw him, he was ex-
ceedingly pleased. For he heard that the youth
had won fame in single combats, and he had also
seen him many times. And since the man had two
children and his wife among the captives, Totila
immediately restored to him his wife and one of
the children, but the other he continued to guard
as a hostage, and sent Martinianus to Spolitium
with a few others.

Now it so happened that when the Goths captured
Spolitium by the surrender of Herodian, they had
indeed razed the whole circuit-wall of the city to
the ground, but they had thoroughly walled up the
entrances of the structure in front of the city, which
served for the keeping of wild animals and has come
to be called an amphitheatre, and had established in
it a garrison both of Goths and of Roman deserters,
for the purpose of guarding the country round about.
So when Martinianus had come to Spolitium, he suc-
ceeded in winning the friendship of fifteen soldiers,
whom he persuaded to return to the Roman army
after first accomplishing some great exploit against
the barbarians. And he also sent some men to
the commander of the garrison in Perusia, bidding
him send an army to him at Spolitium with all
possible speed, and explaining to him the whole
situation. Now the garrison in Perusia was at that
time commanded by Odalgan, a Hun, Cyprian having
been treacherously removed from the world, as has
been stated above,! by one of his own bodyguards.
And he came himself with an army to Spolitium.


1 Cf. chap. xii. 20.


3.5.9


10


1]


13


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


354


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxiii. 7-14


Then, when Martinianus ascertained that this army
was close at hand, he in company with the fifteen
soldiers suddenly slew the commander of the garrison
and, opening the gates, received all the Romans
into the fortress. And the most of the enemy they
slew, but they made some prisoners and brought
them before Belisarius.

Shortly after this Belisarius conceived the idea of
going up to Rome and seeing into what condition it
had fallen. So he selected a thousand of his soldiers
and with them went to the city. But a man of
Rome went in haste to the enemy who were in camp
at Algedon, and reported the presence of Belisarius’
army. So the barbarians occupied the district in
front of Rome with several ambuscades, and, when
they saw that the force of Belisarius had come close
upon them, they rose from their places of ambush
and attacked them. Thereupon a fierce battle en-
sued, in which the Romans by their valour routed
their enemy, and, after destroying the most of them,
they withdrew immediately to Portus. Such was
the course of events at Rome.

There is a city on the coast of Calabria called
Tarentum, about two days’ journey distant from
Dryus, on the road from there to Thurii and Rhegium.
Thither John came with a few men, at the invitation
of the Tarentines, having established the rest of his
command as a garrison in Dryus. And when he saw


355


10


17


18


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


AX TV


356


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxiii. 14-xxiv. 1


that this city was exceedingly large and entirely
without defences, he thought that he would be
utterly unable to defend the whole of it; but he
observed that the sea to the north of the city formed
a bay on either side of a very narrow strip of land,
where the port of Tarentum is situated, and thus
the space between the bays naturally forms an isth-
mus for a distance of not less than twenty stades;
so he formed the following plan. He cut off from
the rest of the city that portion which lay on the
isthmus, and enclosed it by means of a wall extending
from one bay to the other and along the wall he dug
a deep trench. There he collected not only the
Tarentines but also all the inhabitants of the sur-
rounding country, and he left them a garrison of
considerable size. In this way all the Calabrians
were now in a secure position and they consequently
purposed to revolt from the Goths. Such was the
course of events in this quarter.

Totila, for his part, occupied a very strong fortress
in Lucania, situated close to the boundaries of
Calabria, called Acherontis by the Romans; and after
establishing there a garrison of not less than four
hundred men, he himself with the rest of his army
marched against Ravenna, leaving in Campania some
of the barbarians, who were charged with the guard-
ing of Roman prisoners, the members of the senate
being in that place.


XXIV


At that time Belisarius conceived a daring and far-
seeing plan, which in the beginning indeed appeared
insane to those who first saw and heard of his actions.


357


~I


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


® ἐσκομίσος followed by a blank space of one word L:


358


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxiv. 1-8


but its outcome proved to be a splendid achievement
of marvellous importance. For he sallied forth,
leaving behind only a few of his soldiers to keep
guard in Portus, and went himself with the rest of
his army to Rome, with the intention of trying with
all his strength to establish himself in possession of
the city. And since he was unable in a short time
to rebuild all the portions of the wall which Totila
had torn down, he did as follows. Gathering stones
which lay close by, he threw them one on top of the
cther, regardless of order, without putting anything
at all between the stones, since he had neither lime
nor anything else of the sort, but caring only that
the face of the masonry should be preserved, and he
set a great quantity of stakes on the outside. Now
he had previously, as it happened, dug deep trenches
around the entire circuit-wall, as stated in the pre-
vious narrative.t_ And since the whole army carried
out this work with unbounded enthusiasm, in twenty-
five days such parts of the fortifications as had been
torn down had been finished in this manner. And
all the Romans who lived in the neighbourhood
gathered in the city, both because of their desire to
make their homes in Rome, and also because they
had for a time been scantily supplied with provisions
and they found abundance there; for Belisarius
had been able to bring this about by loading a great
number of boats with all manner of provisions and
bringing them up to Rome by the river.

When Totila heard this, he immediately set his
whole army in motion and marched against Belisarius


1 Cf. Book V. xiv. 15.


359


11


12


13


14


15


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


360


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxiv. 8-15


and Rome, before Belisarius had as yet been able to
fit the gates to the wall. For it so happened that
Totila had destroyed them all, and Belisarius had
not up to that time succeeded in having gates built
because of the lack of artisans. And when the bar-
barian army came near the city, they made camp
for the moment and bivouacked on the bank of the
Tiber, but on the following day at sunrise they
advanced, filled with great fury and shouting as
they came, to a position before the walls. But
Belisarius had selected the most warlike of his
soldiers and stationed them in the open gateways,
commanding the rest to stand above and ward off
the assailants from the wall with all their force. So
a fierce battle ensued; for the barbarians, on their
part, at first entertained the hope that they would
capture the city at the first shout, but since the
attempt proved difficult, and the Romans offered a
most vigorous resistance, they gave way to rage and
began to press upon the foe, their fury inspiring
them to daring beyond their strength. The Romans,
meanwhile, resisted with unexpected determination,
the danger naturally arousing them to bravery.
Consequently a great slaughter of the barbarians
took place, since they were being shot at from a
high position, and both armies were becoming very
weary and distressed; and the battle, which had
begun in the morning, ended at night. There-
upon the barbarians repaired to their camps
and passed the night there, caring for their wounded ;
as for the Romans, some were keeping guard on the
wall, while others, who were the men most con-


261


19


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


362


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxiv. 15-20


spicuous of all for their bravery, were guarding the
open gateways in relays, having placed ¢riboi in great
numbers in front of them, so that the enemy might
not make a surprise attack upon them.

Now these ¢rzbolz! are of the following sort. Four
spikes of equal length are fastened together at their
butts in such a manner that their points form the
outline of a triangle on every side. These they throw
at random upon the ground, and because of their
form three of the spikes all plant themselves very
firmly upon the ground, while the remaining one
stands up alone and always proves an obstacle for
both men and horses. And as often as anybody
rolls over one of these ¢tribolz, the spike which
hitherto has chanced to stand up straight in the air
becomes planted on the ground, but another one
takes its place above, as an obstacle to those who
wish to advance to the attack. Such are the
triboli. So both sides bivouacked thus after the
battle.

On the following day Totila decided to storm the
wall again with his whole army, and the Romans
proceeded to ward them off in the manner described ;
and gaining the upper hand in the engagement,
they plucked up courage to make a sally against
their enemy. And as the barbarians retreated, some
of the Romans, in pursuing them, went to a con-
siderable distance from the fortifications. These the
barbarians were on the point of surrounding, so that
they might be unable to return to the city. But
Belisarius, noting what was taking place, sent a
large number of his men to that point and thus suc-


1 Caltrops ; used, for example, at Bannockburn.


363


23


24


26


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


Xx,


364


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxiv. 20-27


ceeded in rescuing the force. After being repulsed
in this way the barbarians withdrew, having lost
many of their able fighting men, and bringing with
them a great number of wounded to their camp.
There they remained quiet, caring for their wounds
and attending to their arms, many of which had
now been destroyed, and putting everything else in
readiness.

Many days later they again advanced against the
wall with the purpose of storming it. But the
Romans came out to meet them and joined battle.
And by some chance the man who was bearing the
standard of Totila received a mortal wound and not
only fell from his horse himself, but also threw the
standard to the ground. Whereupon those of the
Romans who were fighting at the front made a rush
with the intention of seizing the standard and the
corpse. But the most courageous of the barbarians
got there first, seized the standard, and also cut off
the left hand of the corpse and took it with them.
For the fallen man was wearing upon this hand a
notable bracelet of gold, over which they were
quite unwilling that their opponents should exult,
and they sought thus to avoid the disgrace which
its loss would involve. Then the barbarian army
was turned to retreat in complete disorder, while
the Romans despoiled what was left of the corpse,
and in pursuing the enemy to a great distance
killed many of them, and then returned to the city
without the slightest loss.

Then all the notable Goths came to Totila and
inveighed against him and reproached him merci-
lessly for his lack of wisdom; after capturing Rome,
they said, he had neither levelled the whole city


365


28


90


9]


99


94


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


260


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxiv. 27-34


to the ground so that it might be no longer possible
for the enemy to take possession of it, nor had him-
self held it, but that which they had accomplished
by a great expenditure of both labour and time, this
he himself had undone in an altogether unreasonable
manner. Thus it is by nature inbred in men to
accommodate their judgment in every case to the
outcome of events and to allow their mind to be
dominated by the current of fortune, and to make
their changes of opinion instantly as a result of
this. It was indeed for this reason that whiie
Totila was succeeding in his undertakings, the
Goths had reverenced him equally with God, calling
him an unvanquished and invincible leader, at the
time when he allowed them to destroy only a portion
of the defences of captured cities, but when he met
with the reverse above mentioned, they did not feel
it improper to inveigh against him, unmindful of
what they had recently said about him, and going
contrary to these declarations without the least
hesitation. But these errors of judgment and others
like them must inevitably be constantly committed
by men, since they are due to human nature.

So Totila and his barbarians broke up the siege
and went to the city of Tibur, having torn down
practically all the bridges over the Tiber, that it
might not be easy for the Romans to make an
attack upon them. One bridge, however, which
bears the name of Mulvius, they were quite unable
to destroy, since it was very close to the city. And
they decided to rebuild the fortress in Tibur with
all their might ; for they had dismantled it previously ;
and they deposited there all their possessions and
remained quiet. As for Belisarius, having now less


367


ue


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


2085 Listeae kK. 8. mote K: ξύμπαντα LL.


368


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxiv. 34—xxv. 5


cause for fear, he fitted gates to the circuit-wall of
Rome on every side, bound them with iron, and
once more sent -the keys to the emperor. And
the winter drew to a close, and the twelfth year
ended in this war, the history of which Procopius
has written.


XXV


Lone before this Totila had, as it happened, sent
an army against Perusia, and they had encamped
about the circuit-wall of the city and were main-
taining a close siege of the Romans there. And
since they perceived that the city was scantily
supplied with provisions, they sent to Totila and
begged him to come there with his whole army,
thinking that they would thus capture Perusia and
the Romans in it with less difficulty and labour.
Now Totila saw that the barbarians were not very
eager to carry out his orders, and so he desired to
deliver an exhortation to them. With this in view,
he called them all together and spoke as follows.

“1 have observed, fellow-soldiers, that you are
cherishing toward me an unjustified anger, and at
the same time that you bitterly resent that adversity
of fortune which has befallen us; for this reason I
have decided to bring you together on the present
occasion, in order that I may be able to remove
from your minds an impression which is absolutely
wrong and bring you back to a better judgment, and
also that you may appear neither to shew me an
ingratitude which ill befits you, nor to be led by
base motives to assume a thankless attitude toward
the Deity. For it is of the very nature of human


360


547 A.D.


9


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 δὲ MSS. : δὲ ἧττον editors.


3 ἂν MSS.: ἄλλοις Maltretus.

4 ὑμῖν Haury: ἢ K, om. L.


370


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxv. 5-11


affairs that failure must come at times, and when any
man, forgetting that he is human, shews himself
rebellious against that which befalls him, he will
himself naturally acquire a reputation for stupidity,
and yet in no wise escape the necessity which
fate has laid upon him. Now I wish to remind you
of previous events, not so much in order to absolve
myself from the blame for what has happened, as
to demonstrate that this may with more justice be
laid upon yourselves. For when Vittigis was enter-
ing upon this war at the very beginning, he did
indeed tear down the walls of the coast towns
Fanum and Pisaurum, but Rome and the other cities
of Italy without exception he exempted, not dam-
aging them in the least. Consequently, while no
trouble has come to the Goths from Fanum and
Pisaurum, it was because of the circuit-walls of
Rome and the other fortified places that trouble
came to the Gauls and Vittigis after the manner
that is well-known to you.

“ Accordingly, when I accepted the royal power
offered by you, I formed the reasonable purpose
of emulating those deeds which had come to be
regarded as better for us rather than to damage
our cause by doing those things which had harmed
us. For while men do not seem to differ greatly
one from the other as far as nature is concerned,
still some have had the advantage of experience,
which, like a teacher, makes him who has learned
her lesson superior in every respect to those who
have not received such instruction. Accordingly,
when we captured Beneventum, we razed its walls


ai


12


13


14


L5


16


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


372


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxv. 11-16


and straightway captured the other towns, whose
circuit-walls we decided to raze in the same way,
in order that the enemy’s army might not be able,
by having any strong base, to carry on the war
by stratagem, but should at once be compelled to
come down to the plain and engage with us there.
So while the enemy, for their part, were in flight,
I was giving orders to raze such of the cities as
were captured. And you, marvelling at my good
judgment, aided and abetted this decision, and so, it
would seem, made my actions your own. For he who
praises the man who has done a deed becomes him-
self the agent of the deed no less than the other.
But now you have reversed your position, my
dearest Goths, simply because it has come about
that Belisarius, by adopting a course of unreason-
able daring, has unexpectedly attained the object
for which he strove, and in consequence of this you
have come to be astounded at the man as a marvel
of courage, For men of daring are called courageous
more readily than men of foresight are called safe.
And the reason is that, while he who displays
daring beyond the established bounds of conduct is
honoured with the name and fame of a strenuous
man, he who refrains from danger with careful
judgment and meets with ill success draws upon
him the responsibility for what happens, and even
if he achieves the success he planned, he still seems,
to foolish men at any rate, to have accomplished
nothing by himself.

«And apart from this, you do not consider that
you are angry with me for the things which, in
reality, cause you resentment just now. Or do
you really believe that Belisarius has won a glorious


373


18


20


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


374


HISTORY OF 'THE WARS, VII. xxv. 16-20


success against you—you who, though reduced to
the condition of prisoners of war and runaway slaves,
took up arms under me as your general and have
proved yourselves able many a time to overcome
him in battle? And yet if it was through my merit
that you succeeded in accomplishing such things,
out of respect for that merit you ought to be silent,
remembering in the hour of men’s reverses that
nothing can remain fixed; and if, on the other
hand, it was some fortune which bestowed that
victory upon you, it will profit you more to shew
reverence toward her rather than vexation, so that
you may not be compelled through failure to learn
the true meaning of her favour. Indeed, how
could it fail to appear inconsistent with a well-
tempered spirit that men who have achieved for
themselves many great successes not long ago and
have now met with a slight reverse should allow
their pride to be thus humbled? For such an
attitude means purely and simply this, that you
obstinately refuse to acknowledge that you are
human. For never to make mistakes could be
predicated only of God. Consequently I say that
you must abandon this attitude and with all
enthusiasm grapple with the enemy in Perusia.
For if you prove able to capture them, Fortune will
again smile upon you. For while that which has
happened could never be undone by all eternity,
still when fresh successes fall to the lot of those
who have met with reverse, it comes about that the
memory of evil days is made lighter.

“And you will achieve the mastery of Perusia


375


21


23


24


9


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XXVI


᾽ e \ A “ὍΛ an » / ’ 4


, , \


1 ¢


376


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxv. 20-xxvi. 2


without any trouble. For Cyprian, who was com-
mander of the Romans there, has been put out of
the way by fortune, coupled with our planning, and
an ungoverned multitude, particularly when scantily
supplied with the necessities of life, is quite in-
capable of offering a brave resistance. Nor indeed
will anyone harm us from the rear; for not only
have I seen fit to destroy the bridges over the river,
with this purpose, that we might suffer no loss from
unexpected assaults, but it is also true that Belisarius
and John are regarding each other with suspicion,
a fact which can be seen from previous events. For
the conflict of men’s judgments, one with the other,
is clearly detected by their actions. This indeed is
the reason why they have not even been able to join
forces with each other up to this time. For their
mutual suspicion disconcerts each of them; and
those who admit this feeling are bound to harbour
envy and hostility besides. And when these passions
assault men, no needful thing can be done.” After
this speech Totila led forth his army against Perusia,
and, upon their arrival at that city, they made
camp hard by the circuit-wall and_ established
themselves for a siege.


XXVI


Wuite these events were taking place in the
manner described, John was meanwhile besieging
the fortress of Acherontis; and since he was not
making any progress, he conceived a daring plan,
which not only effected the rescue of the Roman
senate, but also caused him to win for himself an
extraordinarily great renown among all men. For


377


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


7féAnoe Lz

5 rois—xwpiors K : τὰ---χωρία L.

6 τετρακοσίους οὖν Haury: om. MSS., ef. next sentence.


378


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxvi. 2-6


upon hearing that Totila and the Gothic army were
engaged in assaulting the fortifications of Rome, he
chose out the most illustrious of his horsemen, and,
without announcing his plan to anyone at all, he
rode with them into Campania (for Totila had, as it
happened, left the members of the senate there),
resting neither day nor night, in order that by
making an unexpected attack he might be able to
seize and rescue the senators, seeing that the towns
there were entirely without defences,

Now it so happened that Totila at that very time
began to be alarmed lest some of the enemy should,
as in fact they did, come with the intention of
striking a blow to rescue the prisoners, and he had
accordingly sent an army of cavalry to Campania.
Now when this force reached the city of Minturnae,'
it was decided that the better course for them was
for the main body to remain quietly there and care
for their horses (for they had become greatly fatigued
on this journey), while they sent a few scouts to
investigate the situation at Capua and the adjoining
towns. Now the distance between the two places
is not more than three hundred stades. They
accordingly sent forward as scouts four hundred
men whose horses were unwearied and whose
strength was still unimpaired. And it so fell out
by some chance that on that very day at the same
time both John and his army and these same four
hundred barbarians reached Capua, neither having


1 Near modern Traetto.


379


VOL. IV. N


PROCOPIUS. ΟΕ CAESAREA


10


11


12


13


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxvi. 6-13


heard anything previously of their opponents.
Thereupon a fierce battle ensued on the spur of the
moment; for no sooner did they see each other than
they began fighting ; but the Romans won a decisive
victory and killed most of the enemy immedi-
ately. Only a few of the barbarians were able to
escape, and these reached Minturnae in rapid flight.
But when the others saw these men, some dripping
with blood, some still actually carrying the missiles
in their bodies, and others refusing to speak a word
or give any account of what had happened, but
still persisting in their retreat and openly displaying
the terror which was in them, they leaped upon
their horses immediately and joined in the flight.
And when they came before Totila, they reported
that there was an innumerable host of the enemy,
seeking in this way to remove the shame of their
flight.

Now it so happened that not less than seventy
Roman soldiers of those who had previously deserted
to the Goths were on their way into the towns of
Campania, and these men decided to go over to
John. And John found there only a few of the
members of the senate, but practically all their
wives. For during the capture of Rome many of
the men followed the soldiers in flight and reached
Portus, but the women were all captured. Clemen-
tinus, however, a patrician, took refuge in one of the
sanctuaries there and refused absolutely to follow
the Roman army, for he had previously handed over
to Totila and the Goths a stronghold which is close


8 ἰόντες Maltretus: ὄντες MSS.


281


14


15


17


18


19


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


282


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxvi. 13-19


to Naples, and in all probability dreaded the wrath
of the emperor for this reason. On the other
hand, Orestes, who had been consul of the Romans,
though he chanced to be near at hand, was obliged
to remain, altogether against his will, owing to a
scarcity of horses, John then immediately sent to
Sicily the members of the senate together with the
seventy soldiers who had come over to him.

Totila, upon hearing this, was sorely grieved, and
eagerly sought an opportunity to inflict vengeance
upon John for the deed. With this in view, he
marched against him with the main body of his
army, leaving a small part of his troops behind in
order to keep guard. Now it so happened that
John and his men, a thousand in number, had made
camp in Lucania, having previously sent out scouts
who were watching all the roads closely and keeping
guard that no hostile army should approach to do
them harm. But Totila had in mind that such
would be the case, believing it impossible that
John’s force should settle in their camp without
sending out scouts, and so he abandoned the
customary roads and marched against them through
the mountains, many of which in that region are
precipitous and rise to a very great height—a feat
which no one would have been able to suspect, for
these mountains are considered in fact impassable.
Meanwhile, the men thus sent out as scouts by John
did indeed observe that a hostile army had got into
that region, but they secured no definite information
about it; however they feared what actually did
take place, and so they too marched toward the
Roman camp. And it so turned out that they


383


20


22


24


25


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


384


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxvi. 19-25


arrived there at night together with the barbarians.
But Totila, being now overmastered by violent
passion and not weighing the consequences with
careful judgment, reaped the fruits of his fatuous
fury. For though he had under him an army ten
times as large as that of his opponents, and though it
was plain to be seen that for a stronger army it was
of course advantageous to fight the decisive battle
in broad daylight, and he should rather have engaged
with his enemy at dawn in order that they might
not be able to escape in the darkness, still he did not
observe this precaution at all; for, in fact, he could
have stretched a cordon about his opponents and
immediately captured every man of them as in a
net; but instead he gave way to his anger and fell
upon the hostile army at an advanced hour of the
night. And although not one of them thought of
offering the least resistance, since the most were in
fact still sleeping, none the less the Goths did not
find themselves able to slay many, but they got up,
and the majority, thanks to the darkness, succeeded
in slipping away. And once outside the camp they
ran up into the mountains, many of which rise close
by, and thus were saved. Among these was John
himself and Arufus, the leader of the Eruli. Of the
Romans about a hundred perished.

Now there had been with John a certain Gilacius
of the Armenian race, commander of a small force of
Armenians. This Gilacius did not know how to
speak either Greek or Latin or Gothic or any other
language except Armenian alone. When some of
the Goths happened upon this man, they enquired
who he might be. For they were quite averse
to killing every man who came in their way, lest


385


26


27


23


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


’, \ » / > /
4 ¢ rn
>
\ al /
’ \ \ ¢ / / - /


\ \ } » 5 f , lol


a a /

\ » / \ ” e \ > ᾽ ,


~


386


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII, xxvi. 25-xxvii. 3


they be compelled to destroy each other in fight-
ing at night, as might easily happen. But he was
able to make them no answer except indeed that he
was Gilacius, a general; for his title which he had
received from the emperor he had heard many
times and so had been able to learn it by heart.
The barbarians, accordingly, perceiving by this that
he was an enemy, made him a prisoner for the
moment, but not long afterwards put the man to
death. So John and Arufus fled with their followers
as fast as they could go and made for Dryus, which
they reached on the run, and the Goths plundered
the Roman camp and then retired.


XXVII


Tuus were the armies in Italy engaged. And the
Emperor Justinian decided to send another army
against the Goths and Totila, being led to do so by
the dispatches of Belisarius, who kept urging him to
take this action, having indicated many times tlie
situation in which the Romans found themselves.
Accordingly, he first sent Pacurius, the son of
Peranius, and Sergius, the nephew of Solomon, with
afew men. And they arrived in Italy and immedi-
ately united with the rest of the army. Later on he
sent Verus with three hundred Eruli, and Varazes,
an Armenian by birth, with eight hundred Armenians,
and he recalled from his post Valerian, the General


7 "Apuevlois Haury: om. MSS.: this or Τῴάνοις must be
supplied, cf. sect. 10 below, and vir. xiii. 10; στρατιώταις
Hoeschel.


387


10


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


388


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxvii. 3-10


of Armenia, and-ordered him to go to Italy with his
attendant spearmen and guards, who numbered
more than a thousand. Now Verus was the first to
put in at Dryus, and he left his ships there, being
quite unwilling to remain in that place, where John’s
army was, and went forward on horseback with his
command. For this man was not of a serious temper,
but was utterly addicted to the disease of drunken-
ness, and consequently he was always possessed by a
spirit of reckless daring. And when they had come
close to the city of Brundisium, they made camp and
remained there.

- And when Totila learned this, he said “ Verus has
one of two things, either a powerful army or a
very silly head. Let us then proceed against him
instantly, that either we may make trial of the
man’s army, or that he may realize his own silliness.”
So Totila with these words marched against him
with a numerous army; and the Eruli, spying the
enemy already at hand, took refuge in a wood which
was close by. And the enemy surrounded them and
killed more than two hundred, and were about to
lay hands on Verus himself and the rest of the force
who were hiding among the thorn-bushes, but fortune
came to their aid and saved them unexpectedly. For
the ships in which Varazes and the Armenians
under him were sailing suddenly put in at the shore
there. Now when Totila saw this, supposing the
hostile army to be more numerous than it really
was, he immediately set out and marched away
from there, while Verus and his men were glad to


1
2


389


13


14


10


17


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


399


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxvii. ro-17


reach their ships on the run. And Varazes decided
to sail no farther, but proceeded with them to
Tarentum, whither John the nephew of Vitalian
also not long afterwards came with his whole army.
Such was the course of these events.

Now the emperor wrote to Belisarius that he had
sent him a numerous army with which he should
unite in Calabria and so engage with the enemy.
And in fact Valerian had already come down close
to the Ionian Gulf, but he thought that, for the
present at any rate, it was inexpedient for him to
ferry across, For at that season of the year, he
reasoned, provisions would not be sufficient for men
and horses, since it was near the winter solstice.
But he did send three hundred of his men to John
with the promise that after spending the winter
there he would also come himself at the beginning
of spring,

Belisarius, accordingly, upon reading the emperor's
letter, selected nine hundred men distinguished for
valour, seven hundred horse-men and two hundred
foot-soldiers, and leaving all the rest to guard that
district, and appointing Conon commander over
them, he immediately set sail for Sicily. And from
there he again put out to sea purposing to sail to
the harbour of Tarentum; and as he sailed by he
had on his left the place called Scylaeum, at which
the poets say that Scylla once lived, not because
there really existed there the woman in the form
of a beast, as they say, but rather because a certain
fish, formerly called “ scylax’”’ and now “cyniscus”’
has been found in great abundance in this part of


39!


20


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


/ > \ Noe > / ’ /


XXVIII


1 οὕτως Comparetti: οὗτος MSS.


392


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxvii. 17-xxviii. 2


the strait from ancient times even down to my day.
For names in the beginning are always appropriate
to the things they describe, but rumour, carrying
these names to other peoples, engenders there
certain false opinions through ignorance of the facts.
And as time goes on with this process, it immediately
becomes a powerful builder, as it were, of the story,
and allies itself with the poets, presumably because
of the licence of their art, as witnesses of things
that never happened. Thus, for example, the natives
of the island of Cercyra have from ancient times
called one headland of the island “ Dog’s Head ”—
the one toward the east—but others because of this
name will have it that the people there are a kind
of dog-headed folk. Indeed they even call some
of the Pisidians “ Wolf-Skulls,’ not because they
have the heads of wolves, but because the mountain
which rises there has received the name “ Wolf-
Helmet.” Now as for these matters, let each one
both think and speak as he wishes. But I shall
return to the point from which I have strayed.


XXVITI


So Belisarius was making haste to go straight to
Tarentum. Now the shore there has approximately
the form of a crescent, where the coast recedes and
the sea advances in a gulf, as it were, far up into the
land. But the distance, as one sails along this
whole coast, extends to one thousand stades, and
on either side of the opening of the gulf stand


393


0


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 ὁ T.—évicxovta K: om. ἴ,.


394


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxviii. 2-8


two cities, the one toward the west being Croton,!
and the one to the east Tarentum.2 And at the
middle of this shore is the city of Thurii. But
Belisarius was hindered by a storm and _ forced
from his course by a violent wind and a high sea
which would not permit his ships to make any
progress at all; he therefore put in at the harbour
of Croton.

And since he neither found any fortress there
nor any place from which provisions could be
brought in for the soldiers, Belisarius himself
together with his wife remained there with the
infantry, in order that from there he might be able
to summon and organize John’s army; but he ordered
all the horsemen to go ahead and make camp at the
passes leading into the country, placing in command
of them Phazas the Iberian and the guardsman
Barbation. For in this way he thought that they
could secure all necessary supplies for their horses
and themselves very easily, and would probably, too,
be able in a narrow pass to repulse the enemy. For
the mountains of Lucania extend as far as Bruttium,
and standing as they do close to one another, they
form there only two passes, which are exceedingly
narrow, one of which has received the name “ Rock
of Blood”? in the Latin tongue, while the natives
are accustomed to call the other Lavula. Not far
from these passes on the coast is Rusciane, the naval
harbour of Thurii, while above it at a distance of
about sixty stades is a very strong fortress * built by


1 Modern Cotrone.

2 The description is misleading; Tarentum lies in the
eastern recess of the ‘‘ crescent,” not at the tip.

3 Petra Sanguinis. 4 Perhaps modern Rossano.


395


LO


7 |


13


14


15


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1 γάρ K: om. L.
396


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxviii. 8--ἰ ς΄


the ancient Romans. ‘This fortress had been occu-
pied by John much earlier and he had established a
considerable garrison in it.

Now the soldiers of Belisarius, upon reaching this
district, chanced upon a hostile army, which Totila
had sent for the purpose of making an attempt on
the fortress there. And they engaged with them
immediately and by their valour routed them with-
out any difficulty, although they were far out-
numbered, and they slew more than two hundred.
Those who were left took to flight and when they
came before Totila, reported everything that had
befallen them. As for the Romans, they made
camp and remained there, but since they were
without proper commanders and had won a victory,
they began to conduct themselves in a rather care-
less manner. For they neither stayed quietly gathered
in one place, nor did they take up positions near
the pass and guard the approaches, but, becoming
negligent, they were sleeping at night in encamp-
ments very far removed from one another, and
during the day they would go about searching for
provisions, neither sending any men out as scouts
nor taking any other measures for security.

Totila, consequently, upon learning everything,
selected three thousand horsemen from his whole
army and went against the enemy. And falling
upon them unexpectedly, not drawn up in battle
formation but going about in the manner described,
he threw them all into consternation and complete
disorder. At this moment Phazas, who happened
to be camping near by, encountered the enemy and
made a display of valorous deeds, and he did, indeed,
thus make himself the cause of the escape of a few


397


16


17


18


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


398


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxviii. 15—xxix. 3


men, but he himself perished together with all his
men. This mistortune fell heavily upon the Romans,
because they all pinned their hope on this detach-
ment as an unusually efficient fighting force. Now
as many as succeeded in fleeing saved themselves in
such manner as each found possible. And Barbation,
the guardsman of Belisarius, fled with two others as
hard as he could, and was the first to reach Croton.
There he reported how matters stood at the moment,
and added that he thought the barbarians too would
be at hand right speedily. And Belisarius, upon
hearing this, was sorely grieved, and rushed on
board the ships. So they set sail from there, and
since a wind was blowing, they succeeded that day
in reaching Messana in Sicily, which is seven
hundred stades from Croton, being situated opposite
to Rhegium.


Ar about this time an army of Sclaveni crossed
the river Ister and spread desolation throughout the
whole of Illyricum as far as Epidamnus, killing or
enslaving all who came in their way, young and old
alike, and plundering their property. And they had
already succeeded in capturing numerous strongholds
of that region, which were then quite undefended,
but which previously had been reputed to be strong
places, and they continued to roam about searching
out everything at their own pleasure. And the
commanders of the Illyrians kept following them


399


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1


400


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxix. 3-9


with an army of fifteen thousand men, without,
however, having the courage to get close to the
enemy.

At that time also, earthquakes of extraordinary
severity occurred many times during the winter
season, both in Byzantium and in other places,
always at night. And the inhabitants of these
cities, supposing that they would be overwhelmed,
fell into great fear, yet no harm befell them as a
result of the earthquakes.

Then it was, too, that the river Nile rose above
eighteen cubits and flooded all Egypt with water ,
and yet in the region of Thebes, which is higher
upstream, the waters settled and receded at the
appointed time and gave opportunity to the in-
habitants of that district both to sow the land and
to attend to their other tasks just as they were
accustomed to do. But as for the country below,
after the water had first covered the surface, it did
not recede, but remained in the way throughout
the time of sowing, a thing which had_ never
happened before in all time ; and there were places
where the water, even after receding, owed in
again not long afterwards. Thus it came about that
all the seeds, such as had been put into the ground
in the interval, rotted. And by this strange occur-
rence the people were reduced to dire straits, while
most of the animals died through lack of sustenance.

It was at that time also that the whale, which
the Byzantines called Porphyrius, was caught. This
whale had been annoying Byzantium and the


10


12


13


14


1¢


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


, r b AS an “- ᾽ ᾿] ς \ a +


μ» ΄“ , , b] \ \ Lol > \
v / J /
tal \ \
΄ > a lol U


402


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxix, g-16


_ towns about it for fifty years, not continuously, how.
ever, but disappearing sometimes for a rather long
interval. And it sank many boats and terrified the
passengers of many others, driving them from their
course and carrying them off to great distances, It
had consequently become a matter of concern to the
Emperor Justinian to capture this creature, but be
was unable by any device to accomplish his purpose,
But I shall explain how it came to be captured in
the present instance. It happened that while a deep
calm prevailed over the sea, a very large number of
dolphins gathered close to the mouth of the Euxine
Sea. And suddenly they saw the whale and fled
wherever each one could, but the most of them
came in near the mouth of the Sangarius. Mean-
while the whale succeeded in capturing some of
them, which he swallowed forthwith. And then,
either still impelled by hunger or by a contentious
spirit, it continued the pursuit no less than before,
until, without noticing it, it had itself come very
close to the land. There it ran upon some very deep
mud, and, though it struggled and exerted itself to
the utmost to get out of it as quickly as possible, it
still was utterly unable to escape from this shoal, but
sank still deeper in the mud. Now when this was
reported among all the people who dwelt round
about, they straightway rushed upon the whale, and
though they hacked at it most persistently with
axes on all sides, even so they did not kill it, but
they dragged it up with some heavy ropes. And
they placed it on waggons and found its length to
be about thirty cubits, and its breadth ten.1_ Then,
after forming several groups and dividing it accord-


1 About 45 feet by 15 feet.
493


17


18


19


21


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


404


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxix. 16-21


ingly, some ate the flesh immediately, while others
decided to cure the portion which fell to them.

Now the Byzantines, observing the earthquakes
and learning the circumstances of the Nile’s rise and
the capture of this whale, began straightway to
prophesy that such and such things would take
place, according to the taste of each. For men are
wont, when present events batHe them, to utter awe-
some prophecies of the future, and, distracted by
occurrences which trouble them, to infer, with no
good reason, what the future will bring forth. But
as for me, I shall leave to others prophecies and
explanations of marvels; still, 1 know well that the
lingering of the Nile on the fields did prove a cause
of great calamities at that time at any rate, while
the disappearance of the whale, on the other hand,
unquestionably provided an escape from many
troubles. However, some say that it was not the
same whale that I mentioned, but another one that
was captured. But I shall return to the point where
I made the digression from my narrative.

Totila, after accomplishing what has been re-
counted, learning that the Romans in the fortress
near Rusciane were beginning to feel the want of
provisions, thought that he would capture them very
quickly if they should be unable to bring in any
supplies, and so he made camp close to the town
and settled down for a siege. And the winter drew
to a close and the thirteenth year ended in this war,
the history of which Procopius has written.


405


548 A.D


Ge


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XXX


2 ἐπὶ ‘Povoxiavjs Haury: om. K, ῥουσκιανῶ L: cf. sect. 21,
above.


406


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxx. 1-6


XXX


Tue Emperor Justinian now sent not less than
two thousand infantry by sea to Sicily and ordered
Valerian to join Belisarius without any delay. He
accordingly crossed the sea and put in at Dryus,
where he found Belisarius together with his wife.
At about this time Antonina, the wife of Belisarius,
set off for Byzantium, intending to beg the empress
to make larger provision for carrying on the war.
But the Empress Theodora had fallen sick and
passed from the world, having lived as queen twenty- June 28.
one years and three months.! 9:5. Ἀπ0

Meanwhile the Romans who were being held under
siege in the fortress near Rusciane, hard pressed,
as they were, by the lack of necessary supplies,
opened negotiations with the enemy and agreed
that precisely at the middle of the summer season
they would hand over the fortress, unless some relief
came to them in the interval, on condition, how-
ever, that they should all remain free from harm.
Now there were in this fortress many notables of
the Italians, among whom was Deopheron the
brother of Tullianus, while the Roman army was
represented by three hundred Illyrian horsemen
whom John had stationed in that place, appointing
as commanders over them Chalazar the guardsman,
a Massagete by birth and an especially able warrior,
and Gudilas the Thracian; and there were also a


1 Since April 1, 527 a.p.


4°7


ll


12


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


408


HISTORY OF THE WARS, ΝΠ xxx. 6-12


hundred infantry sent by Belisarius to guard the
fortress.

At that time also the soldiers who had been
detailed by Belisarius for the garrison of Rome
killed their commander Conon, bringing against him
the charge of trafficking in grain and the other pro
visions to their detriment. And they sent some of
the priests as envoys, firmly declaring that if the
emperor did not exonerate them from guilt for this
deed and remit to them within a specified time the
back payment which the state owed them, they
would without the slightest hesitation go over to
Totila and the Goths. And the emperor fulfilled
their request.

Belisarius now summoned John to Dryus and,
together with him and Valerian and other com-
manders, he gathered a great fleet and sailed straight
for Rusciane with all speed, being intent upon
bringing relief to the besieged. And those in the
fortress, seeing this fleet from their elevated
position, revived their hopes and now decided not
to yield to the enemy, although the day upon which
they had agreed was already close at hand. First
then a terrific storm came on, and for this reason and
also because the coast there is altogether without
harbours, the ships came to be scattered far apart
from one another; thus it came about that con-
siderable time was wasted. And when they had
been collected in the harbour of Croton, they put
out a second time for Rusciane. But when the
barbarians saw them, they leaped upon their horses


i /


409


13


14


15


16


17


18


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


΄ (ol 7 ‘ 4 ΄


410


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII xxx 12-18


and came down to the beach, intending to prevent
the disembarkation of their enemy. And Totila
placed them for a great distance along the shore
face to face with the prows of the ship, some with
spears and some with bows ready strung. This
array struck terror to the hearts of the Romans
when they saw it and they had not the courage to
come close, but they first stopped their ships at a
great distance and remained quiet for some time,
and then, giving up the landing in despair, they
all backed off and put to sea and sailed once more
into the harbour of Croton.

There, after taking council together, they decided
that it was better that Belisarius should proceed to
Rome and there set matters in order as well as
possible and bring in provisions, while John and
Valerian should first disembark the men and horses
on the shore and then march overland into Picenum,
in order to throw into confusion those of the bar-
barians who were besieging the strongholds in that
region. For they entertained the hope that Totila
would be led by such moves to abandon the siege
and follow them. Accordingly, John, for his part,
accompanied by his troops, a thousand in number,
carried out this plan; but Valerian, fearing the
danger, went around through the Ionian Gulf with
the ships and sailed straight for Ancon. For he
thought that he could in this way reach Picenum with
safety and unite with John. But even so Totila was
unwilling to abandon the siege, but, while he him-
self remained settled there, he selected two thousand
horcemen from the army and sent them _ into


VOL. IV, 0


20


2]


22


29


24


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


\ / Neots , \ ,


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxx. 18-24


Picenum, in order to unite with the barbarians
there and throw back the forces of John and
Valerian.

The Romans who were besieged in the fortress at
Rusciane, seeing that their provisions had now com-
pletely failed them and that they had no further
hope of assistance from the Romans, sent Gudilas the
guardsman and Deopheron the Italian to Totila and
opened negotiations concerning their safety, begging
him to pardon them for their deeds. And YTotila
promised that he would inflict punishment upon no
one except Chalazar, seeing that he had disregarded
the previous agreement, but he would remit the
charge against all the others. On such terms he
in person took over the fortress. And he cut off
both the hands of Chalazar and his private parts and
then killed him immediately ; as for the soldiers, he
ordered those who wished to do so to remain, keeping
their own possessions, on condition that they array
themselves thereafter with the Goths on terms of
complete equality ; indeed this was the same pro-
cedure which he had regularly followed when the
other strongholds were captured; those, on the
other hand, who were not at all satisfied to remain,
he commanded to depart from there and go without
equipment wherever they pleased, in order that no
man in the world might march unwillingly under his
standard. Thus, while eighty of the Roman army
abandoned their possessions and came to Croton, the
rest remained where they were with their possessions.
The Italians, however, he deprived of all their
property, though he left their persons entirely
unharmed.


* εἴασεν Scaliger: ἦσαν MSS.
413


9


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


414


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxx. 25-xxxi, 5


When Antonina, the wife of Belisarius, reached
Byzantium after the decease of the empress, she
begged the emperor to summon her husband thither.
This she accomplished very readily. For the Persian
war was now pressing the Emperor Justinian to the
utmost, and influenced him to this decision.


XXXII


At this time certain men formed a plot to assail
the Emperor Justinian. And I shall now set forth
how these men came to undertake this plot and the
manner in which they were frustrated and never
came to the accomplishment of their purpose. Arta-
banes, after slaying the tyrant Gontharis, as told in
the preceding narrative,! conceived an immoderate
desire to take to wife the emperor's niece Preiecta,
who was betrothed to him. Now she, too, desired
this very ardently, not that she was led to this by love
for the man, but because she acknowledged a heavy
debt of gratitude to him, seeing that he had not
only avenged the murder of her husband Areobindus,
but had also rescued and snatched her from peril
when she was a captive and destined after no long
time to become the unwilling consort of the tyrant
Gontharis. Since, then, both wanted this, Artabanes
sent Preiecta to the emperor, while he himself, though
appointed to the post of General of all Libya,
invented sundry untruthful pretexts to induce the
emperor to summon him to Byzantium. For he was


1 Cf. Book IV. xxviii. 29.


415


LL


2


13


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


\ > a ZEN ΄ “ / > , /

es | / 5 AC / \ a
/
fa \ “ : :


\ U / 5 > / Ai? BI ee ᾿ς

a 3 /


1 ἑστάναι MSS. : ἱστάναι Maltretus from an inferior MS.


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIL. xxxi. 5-13


led on to do this by the hope of this marriage,
which suggested to him many blessings that would
flow from the union and, in particular, that he would
thereafter not be far from the throne. For when
men lay hold upon prosperity unexpectedly, their
minds cannot remain stable, but in their hopes they
ever keep going forward, until they are deprived
even of the felicity that has been undeservedly
theirs.

However, the emperor fulfilled his request and
summoned Artabanes to Byzantium, while he ap-
pointed in his place another General of Libya, as has
been related above. Now when Artabanes reached
Byzantium, the common people admired him for his
achievements and loved him tor his other qualities
For he was both tall of stature and handsome, of a
noble character and little given to speech. And
the emperor had honoured ‘him in ἃ very unusual
manner. For he had appointed him general of the
troops in Byzantium and commander of the foederati,”
as well as clothing him with the dignity of consul.
But as for Preiecta, Artabanes was quite unable to
marry her. For he had already a wife who was a
relative of his and had been married to him from
childhood. This wife he had, for his part, re-
pudiated long before, doubtless because one of those
causes had developed such as lead to the estrange-
ment of man and wife. She, for her part, as long as
the affairs of Artabanes were not prosperous, had
remained at home without causing any trouble,


1 Cf. Book IV. xxviii. 45.
2 Private bands of troops under the leadership of con-
dottiere. See Book III. xi. 2, note.


41|


14


17


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


418


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxxi. 13-18


bearing her lot in silence. But when Artabanes had
now become illustrious by his deeds and great by his
good fortune, the woman could no longer bear her
dishonour and came to Byzantium. There, making
herself a suppliant of the empress, she demanded
the right to take back her husband. Whereupon
the empress, whose nature always led her to assist
unfortunate women, decided to force Artabanes to
accept her as his wife, although he rebelled violently,
while John the son of Pompeius and nephew of
Hypatius made Preiecta his wedded wife. This
calamity Artabanes did not bear lightly, but he
became furious and said that one who had served
the Romans so well... was now refused per-
mission to lead in marriage the woman to whom he
was betrothed and who shared with him a common
desire to consummate the marriage, but he was, on
the contrary, compelled for ever to share the couch
of the one woman in the world most hateful to him
—a situation which is bound inevitably to harass a
man’s soul. Consequently, a little later, as soon as
the empress had passed from the world, he, without
further ado, promptly and joyfully sent this wife
away.

Now it happened that Germanus, who was nephew
to the emperor, had a brother named Boraides. This
Boraides, then, brother of Germanus, had recently
died, leaving the most of his property to his brother
and nephews. And though he had a wife and one
daughter, he directed that the daughter should have
only as much as the law required. Because of this,


® παισὶ Maltretus: πᾶσι MSS.


419


PROCOPIUS. OF CAESAREA


XXXII


420


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxxi. 18-xxxii. 6


the emperor chose to champion the daughter's cause,
an act which irritated Germanus exceedingly.


XXXII


Sucu then were the relations of the emperor to
Artabanes and to Germanus. ‘There was alsoa
certain Arsaces in Byzantium, an Armenian by birth
and one of the Arsacidae, related to Artabanes by
blood. This man had been detected not long before
this in an attempt to harm the state, and he had
been clearly convicted of treason, since he was
negotiating with Chosroes, the Persian king, to stir
up trouble for the Romans. But the emperor did
him no further harm than to beat his back with not
many blows and parade him through the city mounted
on a camel; however, he did him no injury in either
his person or his property, nor did he even penalize him
by exile. But Arsaces was nevertheless incensed at
what had taken place, and began to devise treacher-
ous plans against both Justinian and the state. And
when he saw that Artabanes, as his kinsman, was
sharing his vexation, he began to stir him up still
more, and, gaining the man’s attention by crafty
speeches, he ceased not day nor night to upbraid
him, rebuking him for having been both courageous
and faint-hearted out of season. For he had, on the
one hand, given proof of his nobility of spirit in his
attitude toward the misfortunes of others, in that he
had put an end to the tyranny; indeed, though
Gontharis was his friend and his host, he had laid
hold of him with his own hand and slain him
under no compulsion whatever. But at the present


421


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


8 ἐσχατογέρουσιν Hoeschel in marg.: ἔσχατον yéoovow K,


422


juncture, he said, he was utterly cowed, and he con-
tinued to sit there without a spark of manhood,
though his fatherland was kept under strictest guard
and exhausted by unwonted taxes, his father had
been slain on the pretext of a treaty and covenant,
and his whole family had been enslaved and was
kept scattered to every corner of the Roman empire.
But in spite of these facts Artabanes thought it
sufficient for him to be a general of the Romans and
merely bear the name of consul. ‘And you,” he said,
“do not share my sorrow in the least, though I am
your kinsman and have suffered outrageous treat-
ment, while I, for my part, pity you, my dear fellow,
for the fortune you have suffered in the case of both
those women, not only the one you have been
cheated of wrongfully but also the other with whom
you have been ‘compelled to live. And yet it ill
becomes anyone who has even a little spirit in him
to refuse to undertake the murder of Justinian, nor
should he hesitate nor entertain any fear,—a man
who always sits unguarded in some lobby to a late
hour of the night, eagerly unrolling the Christian
scriptures in company with priests who are at the
extremity of old age. Furthermore,’ he continued,
“not one of the kinsmen of Justinian will oppose
you. Indeed the most powerful of them all, Ger-
manus, will, I believe, assist you with all his heart
and his sons as well, seeing that they are young
men and consequently boiling with fury against
him; and I am in hopes that these men will actually
carry through the enterprise of their own accord.
For they have already suffered injustice at his hand
such as neither we nor anyone else among the
Armenians has suffered.”” By such speeches Arsaces


423


13


14


16


17


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


aor Ὁ NS .»


424


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxxii, 11-17


ever sought to cast a spell over Artabanes, and as
soon as ever he saw him beginning to yield, he
carried the matter to another Persarmenian, Chan-
aranges by name. Now this Chanaranges was a
young man who, though comely of person, was not
a man of serious character, but childish to an extra-
ordinary degree.

So when Arsaces had brought him and Artabanes
into mutual agreement, both in their thinking and
in their speaking, he departed, promising to make
Germanus and his sons of the same mind with them
in regard to the undertaking. Now Justinus, the
elder of the sons of Germanus, was a youth wear-
ing his first beard, but an energetic fellow and un-
usually keen in action; indeed, as a result of these
qualities, he had actually risen to the dignity of
the consular chair not long before. Accordingly,
Arsaces approached him and said that he wished
to speak with him secretly in some sanctuary. When
they had both entered the church, Arsaces_ first
required Justinus to affirm on oath that he would
never report their conversation to any man in the
whole world, except his father alone. And after
the man had sworn to this effect, he took him to
task, because, on the one hand, he, a very close
relative of the emperor, saw other men holding the
offices of the state, common plebeian fellows with
no claim to such distinction, while he himself, on
the other hand, though he was now of such age that
he was entitled to manage his own affairs, paid no
heed to the fact that not only he himself, but also
his father, and that, too, in spite of his high achieve-


425


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


mty


20


2]


22


23


> ΄ b , e ἃ) 9 - 3 \
AptaBavn ἀπήγγειλεν, ὁ δὲ “lovativos és τὸν
” » > / / / > \ /


426


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxxii, 17-23


ments, and his brother Justinian had to sit for ever
in the place of private citizens. Nay more, he had
not even been allowed to enter into the property
of his unele, to which he and no other had been heir
as far as concerned the purpose of Boraides, but
the greater part of it had been unjustly wrested
from him. Still it was probable that they would
be still further humiliated forthwith, as soon as
Belisarius should arrive from Italy; for he was
reported to be already somewhere in the heart of
Illyricum. After such an introduction Arsaces
sought to impel the youth to take part in the plot
against the emperor, disclosing to him the agree-
ment reached between himself, Artabanes and
Chanaranges in regard to this business. Upon
hearing this Justinus was greatly agitated and his
head swam, but he told Arsaces flatly that neither
he himself nor his father Germanus could ever do
these things.

Then, while Arsaces reported to Artabanes what
had happened, Justinus referred the whole matter
to his father. He thereupon conferred with Mar-
cellus, the commander of the palace guards, and
they took the question under consideration whether
it was advisable for them to report this matter to
the emperor. Now this Marcellus was a man of
very great dignity who observed silence in most
matters, neither doing anything for the sake of
money nor tolerating buffoonery in word or deed
ner taking any pleasure in other iurms of relaxation,
but always living a kind of austere life to which
pleasure was strange; but at the same time he was


427


25


27


29


30


91


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


᾽
a i \ 7 ’ “

- f 53

9 a


1 sé wey Li: ἐμὲ" K.


428


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxxii. 23-31


scrupulous in his observance of justice and a most
ardent lover of truth. So he naturally would not
on that occasion allow the report to be carried to
the emperor. “For as for you,” he said, ‘it is in-
expedient that you should carry information of this
thing. For if you should wish to say anything to
the emperor in secret, Artabanes and his friends
will straightway become suspicious that the matter
has been denounced, and, if perchance Arsaces is
able to escape unnoticed, the charge will remain
unproved. And I, on the other hand, am not at all
accustomed either to believe myself or to report to
the emperor anything which I have not thoroughly
verified. It is my desire, consequently, either that
I hear the words with my own ears or that one of my
intimates, by your contriving, hear the man saying
something unmistakably clear about these matters.”’

When Germanus heard this, he bade his son
Justinus arrange that the requirement of Marcellus
should be carried out. He, however, was no longer
able to say anything about this matter to Arsaces,
since he had, as stated above, given him a flat
refusal. Still he did enquire of Chanaranges
whether Arsaces had recently approached him at
the suggestion of Artabanes. “For I,” he said,
“should never have had the courage to entrust any
of my secrets to him, seeing he is such a man as he
is. But if you should be willing yourself to tell
me something to the point, we could, by deliberating
in common, perhaps accomplish something really
worth while.” Chanaranges then conferred with
Artabanes about this and reported to Justinus each
and every thing which Arsaces had previously told
him,


420


92


35


36


37


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


/ A » a fal
Σ / cal ς /
\ a 3 f , lal 3 / ΕῚ ΄“ 9 \
/ / /
᾿ fal γὼ" x
A /
, “- ‘ \ /
/ ” / \ a 6
" a \ 7 ef
“ \ a nw
A e lal \
\ / / > / \ La)
430


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIL. xxxii. 32-39


Then, since Justinus agreed both to carry out
everything himself and to bring his father to agree-
ment with them, it was decided that Chanaranges
should meet Germanus in conference, and a definite
day was appointed for the interview. Germanus re-
ported this to Marcellus and requested him to provide
them one of his intimates who should hear with his
own ears the words of Chanaranges. And he pro-
vided Leontius, the son-in-law of Athanasius, a man
who had strict regard for justice and thoroughly
capable of speaking the truth. This man Germanus
introduced into his house and placed in a room
where a thick curtain had been hung to conceal the
couch on which he was accustomed to dine. And
he hid Leontius inside this curtain, while he himself
with his son Justinus remained outside. When
Chanaranges came there, Leontius clearly heard
him say everything which he, Artabanes, and
Arsaces had planned. Among these things this too
was mentioned, that, if they killed the emperor
while Belisarius was still on the way to Byzantium,
their purpose would not be advanced at all; for,
though they might wish to establish Germanus on
the throne, it was probable that Belisarius would
gather a vast army from the towns of Thrace, and
they would be unable by any device to repulse the
man when he came against them in this way. It
would consequently be necessary to postpone the
execution of the plan until Belisarius should be
present, but as soon as the man should reach


/ a


40


4]


43


44


PROCOPIUS. OF CAESAREA


7 2 “ e ’, /


HISTORY ΟΕ ΤῊΝ WARS, VIL. xxxii. 39-44


Byzantium and should be closeted with the emperor
in the palace, then, at some time late in the evening,
they should go there unexpectedly, armed with
daggers, and kill Marcellus and Belisarius as well as
the emperor. For such a course of action would
enable them thereafter to make such dispositions
as they wished without fear.

Even when Marcellus learned this from Leontius,
he could not as yet make up his mind to report
the matter to the emperor, being, as he was, still
very reluctant to act, lest by excessive haste he
should doom Artabanes on imperfect evidence.
Germanus, however, revealed everything to Bouzes
and Constantianus, fearing, as actually happened,
that some suspicion would attach to him as a result
of the delay.

Many days later, when word came that Belisarius
was now close at hand, Marcellus reported the whole
matter to the emperor, who immediately commanded
Artabanes and his associates to be taken off to prison,
entrusting to some of his officers the duty of tortur-
ing them. And when the whole conspiracy had now
come to light and was clearly set down in writing,
the emperor called a session of all the members of
the senate in the palace, where they are accustomed
to make their decisions regarding matters in dispute.
When they had read over everything which had
been stated by the men under examination, they
nevertheless sought to involve Germanus and his
son Justinus in the accusation, until Germanus, by
presenting the testimony of Marcellus and Leontius,
succeeded in clearing himself of the suspicion. For


1 7, e. in order to obtain their testimony.


433


45


46


47


48


49


50


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


434


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxxii. 44-51


these men, as well as Constantianus and Bouzes,
declared under oath that Germanus had concealed
from them nothing whatever as far as concerned
these matters, but that everything had happened as
I have just related. The senators, consequently,
straightway acquitted both him and his son unani-
mously as having committed no offence against the
state.

But when all had gone within to the emperor’s
apartment, the emperor himself, who had become
violently angry, began to complain and to speak with
the greatest: bitterness against Germanus, blaming
him for the tardiness of his disclosure, and two of
the officials, courting his favour, agreed with his
opinion and seemed to share his displeasure. In this
way they greatly increased the emperor's anger, eager
as they were to be complacent to him in matters
involving other men’s misfortunes. But the others,
cowed by fear, remained silent, yielding to him by
not opposing his wish; Marcellus alone, however, by
speaking with plain directness succeeded in saving
the man. For taking the blame upon himself and
speaking with all the emphasis in his power, he
said that Germanus, for his part, had told him most
seasonably what was going on, but that he himself,
making a very careful and detailed investigation,
had reported the matter more deliberately. And in
this way he allayed the emperor's anger. So Mar-
cellus won for himself great renown from this inci-
dent among all men, as one who in a moment of the
gravest peril shewed his sterling quality. And the


435


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XXXITI


1 αὐτὸν Maltretus: αὐτῶ MSS.


436


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxxii. 51—xxxiii. 4


Emperor Justinian removed Artabanes from the office
he held, but he did him no harm, nor in fact any
one of the others, beyond keeping them all under
guard without dishonour—in the palace, however,
not in the public prison.


XXXITII


AT about this point in the war, the barbarians
became unquestionably masters of the whole West.
Thus, though the Romans had been at first decisively
victorious in the Gothic war, as | have previously
said, the final result for them was that not only had
they consumed money and lives in prodigal fashion
to no advantage, but they had also lost Italy besides,
and had to look on while practically all the Illyrians
and Thracians were being ravaged and destroyed in
a pitiable manner by the barbarians, seeing they had
now become their neighbours. And it came about
as follows.

The Goths had at the beginning of this war given
to the Germans all of Gaul which was subject to
them, believing that they could never be able to
array themselves against both nations, as has been
said by me in the previous narrative.!_ This act the
Romans were not only unable to prevent, but the
‘mperor Justinian even encouraged it, in order
that no obstacle might confront him through having
these particular barbarians roused to war (for the


1 Book V. xiii. 15 ff.


437


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


438


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIL. xxxiii. 4-8


Franks! never considered that their possession of
Gaul was secure except when the emperor had put
the seal of his approval upon their title). And
consequently the rulers of the Germans occupied
Massilia,* the colony of Phocaea, and ali the sea-
coast towns and gained control of that part of the
sea. Soas gentlemen of leisure they view the horse
races at Arelatum,®? and also make a golden coin
from the product of the mines in Gaul, not stamping
the likeness of the Roman emperor on this stater,
as is customary, but their own likeness. And yet,
while the Persian king is accustomed to make silver
coinage as he likes, still it is not considered right
either for him or for any other sovereign in the whole
barbarian world to imprint his own likeness on a
gold stater, and that, too, though he has gold in his
own kingdom; for they are unable to tender such
a coin to those with whom they transact business,
even though the parties concerned in the transaction
happen to be barbarians. Thus, then, had matters
proceeded as regards the Franks.

When the arms of the Goths and Totila had gained
the upper hand in the war, the Franks assumed
control of the largest part of Venetia with no right
at all, the Romans, for their part, being unable to
ward them off any longer, and the Goths being
unable to carry on the war against the two peoples.
Meanwhile the Gepaedes held the city of Sirmium ὅ
and practically all the cities of Dacia, having taken
possession of them at the moment the Emperor
Justinian took them away from the Goths ; and they


1 7. e. the Germans. 2 Modern Marseille.
ὃ Modern Arles. * Modern Mitrovitza


τ λόγω K: rove L.


439


©


10


11


19


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


΄ € /


/
> > a
aA / /
/ r
/ / / v » > \
, , 2 \ o a ’ ,
/ “ ,ὔ ’ lal


1 Probably Noreia in the province of Noricum; modern
Neumarkt.


440


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxxiii. 8-13


not. only enslaved the Romans of that region, but
they were also constantly moving forward, plunder-
ing and doing violence to the Roman territory.
Consequently the emperor was no longer giving them
the contributions which it had long been customary
for them to receive from the Romans. Now the
Emperor Justinian had bestowed upon the Lombards
the city of Noricum? and the strongholds of Pan-
nonia, as well as many other towns and a very great
amount of money. It was because of this that the
Lombards departed from their ancestral homes and
settled on the south side of the Ister River, not
far from the Gepaedes. They then, in their turn,
plundered the population of Dalmatia and Illyricum
as far as the boundaries of Epidamnus, taking
captives; and since some of the captives escaped
and succeeded in getting back to their homes,
these barbarians, on the ground that they were at
peace with the Romans, went about through the
Roman domain, and whenever they recognized any
of the escaped captives there, they laid hold of them
as if they were their own slaves who had run
away, and, dragging them from their parents, carried
them off τς them to their own homes, no one
opposing them. Other towns of Dacia also, about
the city of Singidunum,? had been taken over by
the Eruli as a gift from the emperor, and here they
are settled at the present time, overrunning and
plundering Illyricum and the Thracian towns very
generally. Some of them have even become Roman
soldiers serving among the foederati,? as they are


2 Modern Belgrade.
* Cf. chap. xxxi. 10, note; Book Π|. xi, 2, note.


441


14


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


> 4 » / / nw /
, \
,


XXXIV


1 re L: om. V, οὖν W.


442


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxxiii. 13-xxxiv. 5


called. So whenever envoys of the Eruli are sent
to Byzantium, representing the very men who are
plundering Roman subjects, they collect all their
contributions from the emperor without the least
difficulty and carry them off home.


XXXIV


Tuus had the barbarians apportioned the Roman
empire among themselves. But later on the Gepaedes
and the Lombards, having come to be neighbours,
became exceedingly hostile toward one another.
And they were extremely enthusiastic in their desire
to fight each other, so that each nation was eager to
do battle with the enemy, and a fixed time had
been determined upon for the encounter. But the
Lombards, thinking that they alone by their own
strength would never be a match for the Gepaedes
in battle (for they were, in fact, outnumbered by
their enemy), decided to invite the Romans to an
alliance. Accordingly they sent envoys to the
Emperor Justinian begging him to send them an
army. And when the Gepaedes learned this, they
too sent envoys to Byzantium to present the same
request. Now the Gepaedes were ruled at that
time by Thorisin, and the others by Adouin. So
the Emperor Justinian decided indeed to hear the
statement of each of them, but he did not wish them


΄ ΄ 4 -


443
VOL. IV. P


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


A / A ““

a Ν , e > 4 > / 3


al ‘

» , cal / x e a \


1 αὐτὸν Maltretus: αὐτῶν MSS.

' ὑμᾶς Maltretus: ἡμᾶς MSS.


444


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxxiv. 5-10


to come at the same time, but to appear before
him separately. First the Lombards came into the
emperor's presence and spoke as follows.

“‘ We, for our part, O Emperor, have been astounded
at the outrageous conduct of the Gepaedes, seeing
that, although they have already perpetrated crimes
both many and great against your realm, as we all
know, they have now come before you to offer you,
in fact, the greatest possible insult. For they, and
they only, can be said to put the utmost insult upon
their neighbours, who imagine that these are so very
easily deceived that they come to them with the
intention of profiting by the simplicity of those very
men whom they have already wronged. Now we ask
you to give careful consideration to one matter only,
the question namely as to what attitude the Gepaedes
assume toward their friends. For thus you could
with the greatest certainty assure the welfare of the
Roman empire, since men are always able to infer
safely from previous events what the future will bring
forth. If, now, it were true that the nation of the
Gepaedes had displayed their ingratitude only to
some other people, it would have been necessary for
us to occupy much time with a long speech and to
bring in testimony from outside, in striving to
demonstrate the base character of the men; but as
it is, we are enabled to choose an example near at
hand from your own experience.

“This is what we would have you consider: the
Goths formerly held the land of Dacia as a tributary
province, while all the Gepaedes dwelt originally on
the other side of the Ister, being in such mortal
terror of the Gothic power, on the one hand, that


445


"


12


18


14


15


16


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


446


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxxiv. ro-16


they never succeeded in crossing the stream, or
even attempting it, while they were, on the other
hand, on terms of close alliance and friendship with
the Romans, and every year they received from the
former emperors many gifts in the name of friend-
ship, and indeed they have received them from thee
in no less generous measure. We should be glad
then to ask these gentlemen what good thing they
have done for the Romans in return for these benefits.
But they would not be able to mention one such
thing, great or small. Now as long as they had no
means of doing you wrong, they remained quiet, not
because of any conviction on their part, but because
they were compelled by lack of opportunity to do
so. For you, on your part, did not seek to lay any
claim to the country beyond the Ister, while the fear
inspired by the Goths always frightened them from
the land on this side. But who indeed would call
impotence gratitude? And what assurance of friend-
ship could be based on inability to commit an offence?
None, O Emperor, none; these things cannot be. For
opportunity alone reveals the nature of a man, bring-
ing out his character to the common gaze of all
because of his freedom to act. For behold, at the
very moment the Gepaedes saw that the Goths had
been driven from all Dacia, while you, on your part,
were busily engaged in fighting your enemies, the
cursed wretches have dared to trespass upon your
land in every part.

“How could anyone adequately depict in words
the outrageous nature of their action? Did they
not heap contempt upon the Roman empire? Did
they not break the bonds of both treaty and


447


18


19


9]


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


/


eB ὦ 1. »»


448


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxxiv. 16--22


alliance? Did they not insult those whom they
should never have treated thus? Did they not do
violence to an empire whose slaves they would crave
the privilege of being should you find any leisure to
deal with them? The Gepaedes, O Emperor, are
holding Sirmium and enslaving Romans, and they
make the boast that they are in possession of all
Dacia. Yet what war have they ever won fighting
in your behalf, or with you, or against you? Or
what struggle do they consider has brought them
this land as a prize? And in spite of all this, they
have often been in your pay and have been receiving
their payments, as previously stated, for we know
not how long a time. And yet there has never
been in all time an act more despicable than this
present embassy of theirs. For as soon as they saw
that we were eager to make war on them, they had
the hardihood to come to Byzantium and appear
before the emperor who has been so grievously
insulted by them. In sooth they will, perhaps, in
their excess of shamelessness, invite you to form an
alliance of arms against us who have been so favoured
by you. And verily if they have come with the
purpose of giving back what they have usurped
without any right, the Lombards should be counted
by the Romans most responsible for that benefit, if
they are really constrained through fear of them
unwillingly to change their course and manifest
gratitude late in the day. For naturally he who
creates the constraint will be thanked by him who
receives the benefit. But if indeed they have
decided even now to retreat from none of their
usurped holdings, what could surpass such_ base-
ness?


449


23


24


25


29


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


lal e a , -“ Ud


΄ “- = Peron an “4

» ΄ ‘ ’ 9S ΄“ sf oe
« ΄ ΄ - -


GC ta) \

/ ’ an » / \ a x‘

/ / 0. n ἢ e
a \
ψὶ of > ’ / / \ \ \ n
, 7 >


450


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII, xxxiv. 23-29


“This then shall be our plea, expressed with
barbarian simplicity, with scant words, and in no
way worthily of the situation. But we beg that
thou, O Emperor, after carefully weighing what we
have said less adequately than the facts deserve,
take that course of action which will redound to
the benefit both of the Romans and of the Lombards,
thy people, calling to mind this, in addition to all
other considerations, that while the Romans will
justly take sides with us, seeing that we have been
in agreement from the first as regards religion, they
will stand in opposition to our opponents for the
simple reason that they are Arians.”

Thus spoke the Lombards. On the following day
the envoys of the Gepaedes in turn came before the
emperor and spoke as follows: “It may fairly be
expected, O Emperor, that those who approach a
neighbouring state with a request to form an alliance
of arms, should first demonstrate that they have
come with a just request and with proposals of
advantage to those who are to form the alliance,
and then speak on the matters of which they
have come to treat. In the first place, then, that
we have been wronged by the Lombards is evident
from the facts themselves; for we are eager to
settle our difficulties by arbitration, and those who
are bent on arbitration can have nothing to do with
violence. In the second place, why should one, in
order to prove that the Gepaedes are far superior
to the Lombards both in multitude and in valour,
address long speeches to those who know? Now
the policy of entering a conflict on the side of
the weaker contestant and thus getting into an
evil plight which has been foreseen, though the


451


90


31


32


33


34


35


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


SF \ ” 2 \ ΄ ” / e ,


452


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxxiv. 29-35


opportunity is offered of having the victory without
danger by arraying oneself with the more powerful
contestant, is not one, we think, which any men
gifted with even a little discretion would choose.
Consequently you also will find, when you go forth
against another enemy, that the Gepaedes hereafter
will array themselves with you, thus paying a debt
of gratitude for what you have done, and by their
overwhelming power helping you in all probability
to achieve the overmastery of your foes. Further-
more, it would be in point for you to consider this
fact also, that while the Lombards have become
friends of the Romans on the spur of the moment,
the Gepaedes have been in alliance with you and
well known to you from ancient times. And friend-
ship cemented by long continuance is not easily
dissolved. Consequently you will acquire not only
powerful, but also steadfast, allies. These, then,
are the just grounds on the basis of which we invite
you to form this alliance.

““ Now observe what manner of men the Lombards
are. At first they absolutely refused to settle our
differences by arbitration, though we invited them
repeatedly to do so, overcome, as they were, by
unreasoning boldness. But now that the war has
come almost to an actual engagement, they, making
a tardy retreat from their position because they
realize ‘fully their own weakness, have come to you,
asking the Romans to take up the unjust struggle in
their behalf, Doubtless these thieves bring up the
case of Sirmium and a few other towns in Dacia, and
put this forward as a pretext on which you may


453


90


37


38


40


41


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


454


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxxiv. 35-41


enter this war. And yet thy empire comprises
such an overabundance both of cities and of lands
that thou art actually searching for men upon whom
thou couldst confer some part of it for their habita-
tion. Indeed thou hast bestowed upon the Franks
and the nation of the Eruli and these Lombards
such generous gifts of both cities and lands, O
Emperor, that no one could enumerate them all.
But we, emboldened by thy friendship, have ac-
complished that which thou didst wish, and truly,
when a man has formed the purpose of parting with
some one of his possessions, he thinks far less highly
of one who waits to receive his gift than of one who
anticipates his purpose and takes the gift by his own
decision, provided such an one does not appear to
have claimed the right to take this course in a spint
of insolence toward the possessor, but in a spirit of
confidence in the strong friendship he feels toward
him; and this is exactly the attitude of the Gepaedes
toward the Romans. We ask you, then, to recall
these things and, preferably, to observe the terms
of our alliance by throwing al] your strength into
the conflict on our side against the Lombards, other-
wise, to stand aside for both. For in reaching such
a decision you are acting with justice and greatly to
the advantage of the Roman empire.”

Such was the speech of the Gepaedes, whom the
Emperor Justinian, after long deliberation, decided
to send away with their mission unaccomplished ;
but he made a sworn alliance of arms with the
Lombards, and then sent them more than ten
thousand horsemen commanded by Constantianus,
Bouzes, and Aratius. Associated with them also
was John the nephew of Vitalian, who had received


455


(


48


44


45


46


4]


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


1

2 ¢@


456


HISTORY OF THE WARS, ΝΠ xxxiv. 41-47


previous instructions from the emperor that, as soon
as they should fight a decisive battle with the nation
of the Gepaedes, he should hasten thence to Italy
with his troops. For he, too, as it happened, had
returned from Italy. They also took with them as
allies fifteen hundred Eruli, commanded by Phile-
muth and others. For, except for these, the whole
nation of the Eruli,to the number of three thousand,
were arrayed with the Gepaedes, since they had
revolted from the Romans not long before for a
cause which I have set forth above.}

Now a detachment of the Romans who were
marching to join the Lombards as allies unex-
pectedly chanced upon some of the Eruli with
Aordus, the brother of their ruler. And a fierce
battle ensued in which the Romans were victorious,
and they slew both Aordus and many of the Erulli.
Then the Gepaedes, upon learning that the Roman
army was close at hand, straightway settled their
disagreement with the Lombards, and 50 these
barbarians made a treaty of peace with each other,
contrary to the will of the Romans. When the
Roman army learned this, they found themselves ἡ
involved in a very perplexing situation. For neither
were they able to continue their advance nor could
they retrace their steps, because the generals feared
lest both Gepaedes and Eruli would overrun and
plunder the land of Illyricum. At any rate, they
remained there and reported their situation to the
emperor. Such was the course of these events.
But I shall return to the point in my narrative from
which I strayed.


1 Cf. Book VI. xiv. 37.
2 The digression begins with chap. xxxi.


457


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


XXXV


4


458


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxxv. 1-5


XXXV


Tue journey of Belisarius to Byzantium was an
inglorious one ; for five years he had not disembarked
anywhere on the soil of Italy, nor had he succeeded
in making a single march there by land, but he had
been obliged to conceal himself by fight during this
whole time, always sailing without interruption. from
one fortified coast-town to some other stronghold
along the shore. As a result of this the enemy,
having now little to fear, had enslaved Rome and
everything else, practically speaking. It was on this
occasion also that he abandoned Perusia, the leading
city of Tuscany, though it was very closely besieged ;
indeed it was captured by storm while he was “still
on his way. After reaching Byzantium he took up
a permanent residence there, having now amassed a
great fortune and being greatly admired because of
his earlier successes, just. as the Deity had foretold
to him by an unmistakable sign before he made the
expedition to Libya.

Now the sign was as follows. Belisarius had an
inherited property in the suburb of Byzantium which
is called Panteichion,! and 1s situated on the opposite
mainland. On this property, shortly before the
time when Belisarius was about to lead the Roman
army against Gelimer and Libya, it so happened
that his vines bore a great abundance of grapes.


1 Modern Pendik, on the Asiatic shore.


459


10


11


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


οἰκίᾳ Dindorf from an inferior MS.


460


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxxv. 5-11


And with the wine thus produced his servants had
filled a great quantity of jars, which they placed in
the wine-cellar, burying the lower part of them in
the earth and smearing the upper part carefully with
clay. But eight months later the wine in some jars,
as it began to ferment, burst the clay with which
each of them had been sealed; then it ran over the
tops of the jars and, flowing copiously, covered the
ground around with such a flood that it actually
formed a great pool on the floor there. When the
servants saw this, they were filled with amazement ;
and they were able to fill many amphoras from it,
after which they again stopped up those same jars
with clay and remained silent about the matter.
But when they had seen this happen many times at
about the same date, they did report the matter to
their master, and he, for his part, gathered many of
his friends there and displayed the phenomenon ;
whereupon they foretold that many blessings would
fall upon that house, basing their conclusion upon
this sign.

Such was the fortune of Belisarius. But Vigilius,
the chief priest of Rome, together with the Italians
who were in the city at that time (and there were
many very notable men there), was giving the
emperor no respite from his entreaty to stand forth
with all his power as champion of Italy. But
Justinian was influenced most of all by Gothigus, a
man of patrician rank who had long before this time
risen to the dignity of the consular office ; for he, too,
had recently come to Byzantium for this very purpose.
Now although the emperor did promise to concern


Σ »é0:yos V: Haury believes this an error for Κέθηγος, cf.


461


12


13


15


16


18


19


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


a lacuna of about six words. 5


462


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII. xxxv. 11-19


himself personally with Italy, still he was devoting
his time for the most part to the doctrines of the
Christians, seeking eagerly and with great deter-
mination to make a satisfactory settlement of the
questions disputed among them.

Such was the situation in Byzantium. Meanwhile
one of the Lombards had fled to the Gepaedes for
the following reason. When Vaces was ruler of the
Lombards, he had a nephew named Risiulfus, who,
according to the law, would be called to the royal
power whenever Vaces should die. So Vaces, seek-
ing to make provision that the kingdom should be
conferred upon his own son, brought an unjustified
accusation against Risiulfus and penalized the man
with banishment. He then departed from his home
with a few friends and Hed immediately to the
Varni, leaving behind him two children. But Vaces
bribed these barbarians to kil] Risiulfus. As for the
children of Ruisiulfus, one of them died of disease,
while the other, Ildiges by name, fled to the
Sclaveni.

Now not long after this Vaces fell sick and passed
from the world, and the rule of the Lombards fel! to
Valdarus, the son of Vaces. But since he was very
young, Audouin was appointed regent over him
and administered the government. And since he
possessed great power as a result of this, he himself
seized the rule after no long time, the child having
immediately passed from the world by a natural
death. Now when the war arose between the
Gepaedes and the Lombards, as already told, Ildiges
went straight to the Gepaedes taking with him not
only those of the Lombards who had followed him,


463


20


2)


22


23


24


25


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


464


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VIL. xxxv. 19-26


but also many of the Sclaveni, and the Gepaedes were
in hopes of restoring him to the kingdom. But on
account of the treaty which had now been made
with the Lombards, Audouin straightway requested
the Gepaedes, as friends, to surrender Ildiges ; they,
however, refused absolutely to give up the man, but
they did order him to depart from their country and
save himself wherever he wished. He, then, with-
out delay, took with him his followers and some
volunteers of the Gepaedes and came back to the
Sclaveni. And departing from there, he went to
join Totila and the Goths, having with him an army
of not less than six thousand men. Upon his arrival
in Venetia, he encountered some Romans commanded
by Lazarus, and engaging with them he routed the
force and killed many. He did not, however, unite
with the Goths, but recrossed the Ister River and
withdrew once more to the Sclaveni.

While these events were taking place in the
manner described, one of the guardsmen of Beli-
sarius, Indulf by name and of barbarian birth, a
passionate and energetic fellow, who had been left
in Italy, went over to Totila and the Goths for no
good reason, And Totila straightway sent him with
a large army and a fleet to Dalmatia. So he came
to the place called Mouicurum, which is a coast town
situated very near Salones, and at first, being a
Roman and a member of Belisarius’ suite, he
mingled with the people of the town; then however
he raised his own sword, urged his followers to do
the same, and suddenly killed them all. Then,
taking all the valuables as plunder, he departed from


7 N


465


27


28


29


30


PROCOPIUS OF CAESAREA


>


466


HISTORY OF THE WARS, VII, xxxv. 26-30


there and descended upon another fortress situated
on the coast, which the Romans call Laureate.
Here he entered the town and slew those who fell
in his way.

When Claudian, who was commander of Salones
at that time, learned this, he sent an army against
him on dromones,! as they are called. And when
this force reached Laureate, they engaged with the
enemy. But they were overwhelmingly defeated in
the battle and took to flight, wherever each man
could, abandoning their ships in the harbour. And
it so happened that the other boats were there laden
with grain and other provisions. All these Indulf
and the Goths captured, and, after killing all whom
they met and making plunder of the valuables, they
returned to Totila. And the winter drew to a close
and the fourteenth year ended in this war, the history
of which Procopius has written.


1 Swift ships.


467
VOL. IV. Q


649 ALL:


᾿ rou Pa.


Tom πῇ
7 o
| =

>t


οἐὺς SRI ΒΕΔ OES 5 nes sOTE


Abokund, Saba oenpnisl Shaun ten08,
oy gt enh saat wale, bys, akotpelas bette
μία μα po solinoneyen δ᾽ pes (Oh ΤᾺ Ὑ
BE ae {πα MS 3195. 961,5 ae .
bot Lbotiaa S18 Ye}
2 aus iste Dayana, Sane βολὴν ὡς bs ἘΝ
εἴ figsesi5b vidhilhladeris vo οτος 56hg' jul, pA
d&in “Ase Qihahir ouigiht od? ΠΟῪΣ ‘fikd)¢
Bad! ἡ 98} ai’ aq tile ὙΠ ΠῚ hia Kk
Hobalo1s4 tow Band 90 90} Jaf) BSE
Vobak: sail die ὑτενοι νονὰ HOH" ace
29 choder [by rrifiteh rotten bis) σϑνσν 6ν} OF ἦν bis
 -ybdtgeoldauler arti Ao: asbeala patil nero dane: κ᾽ ould
s40le. x ot worh tothiaysdti bad wires. let hoommen
9 οι tt 1s #idd αἵ bobsaireouctigeess


TOC, Gi ré noel
4


| pocorn i ate


sae


rf;
4
»01


; > j i 7
> gaxPb0 D>, Advts Vo


oes


INDEX


Acherontis, fortress in Lucania; cap-
tured by Totila, VII. xxiii. 18
Aegisthus, name given to an infant
reared by a goat, VI. xvii. 9, 11
Aegypt, suffers greatly from persistent
flooding of the Nile, vil. xxix. 6-8
Aemilia, district in northern Italy,
VI. xviii. 25, xix. 8; recovered for
the Romans by John, VI. xix. 22,
xxi..14; famine in, VI. xx. 17 ff;
not of great military importance,
VI. xxi. 18, 22; invaded by a
Roman army, VII. xi. 11; by the
Goths, VII. xiii. 8; its cities,
Caesena, VI. xxix. 40; Faventia,
VII. iii. 22; and Placentia, Vil.
xiii. 8, 9
Aeolian Islands, used as a naval
station by the Goths, VII. xiii. 6
Alaric, destroyed Urvisalia, VI. xvi. 24
Albilas, commander of the Gothic
garrison in Urviventus, VI. xx. 14
Alexander, logothete in Byzantium,
VII. i. 28; his unscrupulous
practices, VII. i. 29, 30; sent to
Italy, VII.i. 31; offends both Goths
and Italians by his administration,
Vil. i. 32, 33, ix. 13; in Ravenna,
VII. iii. 2; shares chief command
with Constantianus, VII. iii. 4
Algedon, place 120 stades west of
Rome, VII. xxii. 18; Goths camp
near, VII. xxiii. 9
Alps, crossed by the Franks, VI. xxv.
5, xxviii. 10. See also ‘* Cottian
Alps.”
Aluith, Erulian commander, VI. xxii. 8
Amalasuntha, Gothic queen; the
benefits of her reign, Vil. ix. 10
Anastasius, Roman Emperor; _bless-
ings of his reign, VII. xxi. 23

Ancon, city in Picenum, VII. xxx. 17;
used as 8 provision port by the
Romans, VI. xxiv. 14


Antae, a barbarian nation; formerly
called Spori, Vil. xiv. 29; bold
extensive territory, VII. xiv. 30;
their democratic government, VII.
Xiv. 22; religious beliefs, customs,
language, etc., VII. xiv. 23-28;
force Chilbudius to declare himself
the Roman general of the same
name, VI{. xiv. 21, 31; treat with
envoys from Justinian, VII. xiv.
32-34; frequent invasions of, VII.
xiv. 2; defeated by the Sclaveni,
VII. xiv. 7; invade Thrace, VII. xiv.
11; in the Roman army, VII. xxii.
3, 5, 21; good fighters on rough
ground, VII. xxii. 3, 5

Antonina, wife of Belisarius; left by
him in Portus, VII. xix. 7; be fears
for ber safety, VII. xix. 30; with
him at Croton, VII. xxviii. 9; at
Dryus, VII. xxx. 2; goes to Byzaa-
tium, VII. xxx. 3, 25

Aordus, brother of the ruler of the
Eruli, VII. xxxiv. 44; killed io
battle, VII. xxxiv. 43

Apulia, gained by Totila, vII. vi. 5;
its town Canusium, VII. xviii. 18;
Mt. Garganon in, VII. xxii. 24;
mentioned, VII. xviii. 29

Aratius, brother of Isaac and Narses,
Vis, Xvi, 21 - Vilas: ΘΕ, com-
mander of Armenians, VJ. xxvii. 16;
holds Auximus in check, VI. xvi. 18;
sides with Narses against Belisarius,
VI. xviii. 6; stationed at Firmum,
VI. xx. 3; sent away from Ravenna.
VI. xxix. 29; sent to help the
Lombards, VII. xxxiv. 40

Arelatum, city in Gaul, VII. xxxiii. 5

Areobindus, husband of Preiecta;
slain by Gontharis, VII. xxxi. 3

Arians, holders of the Arian doctrine,
including the Goths, VII. xviii. 21;
and the Gepaedes, VII. xxxiv. 24;


469


INDEX


Ariao priests expelled from Rome,
VU. ix. 21

Ariminum, city of oorthern Italy,
Vil. xi. 32: besieged by Vittigis,
VI. xvi. 3; its relief advocated by
Narses, VI. xvi. ὃ ff.; messenger
sent thence to Belisarius, VI. xvi.
14; saved for the Romans, VI. xvi.
2l-xvii. 22; entered by Narses,
VI. xix. 10; Sabinianus and
Thurimuth flee to, VII. xi. 30;
distance from Urbinus, VI. xix. 1;
three women cannibals in its
vicinity, VI. xx. 27 ff.

Armenia, Valerian General of, VII.
Xxvii.3

Armenians, serving inthe Romanarmy,
Vie Vie tO. χχν 24. £xVi. ὦ, 105
render signal service at Auximus,
VI. xxvii. 16; the following
Armenians are mentioned: Arsaces,
VIL. xxxii. 1; Artabanes, VII. xxxii.
11; Artabazes, VII. iii. 10; Chana-
ranges, VII. xxxii. 11; Gilacius,
VII. xxvi. 24; Isaac, VI. xiii. 20;
Narses, VI. xxvi. 3; Varazes, VII.
xxvii.3; the Armenian language,
VII. xxvi. 24

Arsaces, an Armenian, of the Arsa-
cidae, VII. xxxiil. 1, 3 ; had made
overtures to Chosroes, VII. xxxii. 2;
mildly punished by Justinian, VII.
xxxii. 3; plots against Justinian,
VII. xxxii. 4-51; instigates Arta-
banes, VII. xxxii. 5-11; enlists
Chanaranges, VII. xxxiji. 1], 31,
seeks in vain to enlist Germanus
through his son Justinus, VII. xxxii.
13-21, 28; confers with Artabanes,
V1ll. xxxii. 22; his escape feared
by Marcellus, VII. xxxii. 24

Arsacidae, descendants of Arsaces,
King of Armenia, among whom
was Arsaces, VII. xxxli. 1

Artabanes, an Armenian; General of
Libya, VII. xxxi. 4;° slayer of
Gontharis, VII. xxxi. 2; desires to
marry Preiecta, do.; secures his
recall, VII. xxxi. 4, 7: admired by
the Byzantines, VII. xxxi. 8, 9;
honoured by the emperor, VII. xxxi.
9, 10; not permitted to marry
Preijecta, VII. xxxi. 11; had left a
former wife, VII. xxxi. 11-13;
whom he is forced to take back.


470


VI. xxxi. 14; outraged thereby,
Vil. xxxi. 15; eends his wife away
again, VII. xxxi. 16; incited by
Arsaces to plot against Justinian,
Vil. xxxii. 5-51; consulted by
Chanaranges, VII. xxxii. 31; Mar-
cellus shows concern for him, VII.
xxxii. 40; imprisoned by Justinian
and examined, VII. xxxii. 42, 44;
mildly punished, VII. xxxii. 51;
a relative of Arsaces, VII. xxxii. 1

Artabazes, an Armenian; leads an
advance party into Verona, VII.
iii. 10 ff.; escapes with difficulty,
VII. iii. 21; reproaches the com-
manders, VII. iii. 22; delivers a
speech, VII. iv. 2-8; fights in single
combat with Valaris, VII. iv. 22 ff.;
sustains 8 severe wound, VII. iv.
25 ff.; his death, VII. iv. 29

Artasires, a Persian, guard of Beli-
sarius; sent to Rome, VII. xi. 37;
makes a sally, VII. xiii. 2-4

Arufus, commander of Eruli; escapes
with John, VII. xxvi. 23; flees to
Dryus, VII. xxvi. 28

Asculum, city in Picenum; besieged
by Totila, vil. xi. 39; surrenders
to him, VII. xii. 12

Asinarian Gate, in the wall of Rome;
betrayed by four Isaurians, VII.
xx. 4-15; opened to the Gothic
army, VII. xx. 14, 15

Asise, town in Tuscany; besieged by
Totila, vil. xii. 12; surrendered to
him, VII. xii. 18

Atalaric, King of the Goths; his
benefactions to the Romans, VII.
xxi. 12

Athanasius, Roman envoy; returned
by the Goths, vi. xxii. 23; made
pretorian prefect by the emperor,
Vl. xxii. 24; returns to Italy, VI.
xxix. 30; father-in-law of Leontius,
VII. xxxii. 34

Audouin, ruler of the Lombards,
VII. xxxiv. 4; regent for Valdarus,
Vil. xxxv. 17; assumes the royal
power, VII. xxxv. 18; demands
surrender of Ildiges, VII. xxxv. 20

Auximus, first city of Picenum; its
strong position, VI. xxiii. 6, 7;
strongly garrisoned by the Goths,
VI. xviii. 19 ff., xx. 2, xxiii. 8, xxvi.
13; well provisioned, VI. xx. 2;


Belisarius,


INDEX


its garrison feared by the Romans,
VI. xvi. 3, 8, 17; held in check by
Aratius, VI. xvi. 18-20; besieged by
Belisarius, VI. xxiii. 1, 5-xxiv. 17,
xxvi. 2-xxvii. 24, 27; surrenders
to him, VI. xxvii. 28-34; besieged
by the Goths, VII. xi. 19; fighting
around it, VII. xi. 19-31; its spring
and cistern, VI. xxvii. 2; con-
sidered the key to Ravenna by
Vittigis, VI. xxiv. 7, 10, xxvi. 13;
distance from Firmum, VI. xvi. 1;
from Ravenna and the [Ionian Gulf,
VI. xxiii.6 ;


Barbation, a Thracian; guard of


Belisarius, VII. xi. 37; makes a
sally from Rome, VII. xiii. 2-4;
sent forward with troops, VII.
xxviii. 5; returns with news of
defeat, VII. xxviii. 17

Basilius, a patrician; escapes from
Rome, VII. xx. 18
commander-in-chief of
Roman armies in Italy; joins
forces with Narses, VI. xvi. 1, they
hold a council, VI. xvi. 2 ff.;
receives a message from Ariminum
and arranges for its relief, VI. xvi.
14, 17 ff; advances through the
mountains, VI. xvii. 12 ff.; arrives
at Ariminum, VI. xviii. 2: becomes
suspicious of John, VI. xviii. 3;
his plans blocked by Narses, VI.
xviii. 4-11; protests in a speech,
VI. xviii. 12-22; displays a letter
from Justinian, VI. xviii. 27, 28;
accused by Narses, VI. xviii. 29:
marches against Urbinus and
besieges it, VI. xix. 1 ff.; abandoned
by Narses with part of the army,
VI. xix. 8, 9; takes Urbinus by
surrender, VI. xix. 17; stations
Aratius at Firmum, VI. xx. 3;
marches against Urviventus by the
advice of Peranius, VI. xx. 3, 4;
lays siege to the place, VI. xx. 5 ff.;
sends troops against Uraias, VI.
xxi. 1, 16; receives a letter from
Martinus, VI. xxi. 13; orders John
and Justinus to Milan, VI. xxi. 16;
writes a letter to Narses, VI. xxi.
17-22; moves into Picenum, VI.
xxii. 1; hears of the fall of Milan
and reports to the emperor, VI.


xxii. 2, 3; made sole commander,
VI. xxii. 4; tries in vain to keep the
Eruliin Italy, vl. xxii.5; Justinian
wishes to send him against the
Persians, vi. xxii. 21; holds the
Gothic envoys, VI. xxii. 23; plans
to capture Auximus and Fisula,
VI. xxiii. 1 ff.; lays siege to the
former, VI. xxiii. 5-xxiv. 17, xxvi.
2-xxvii. 24, 27; takes it by sur-
render, VI. xxvii. 28-34; hears of
the arrival of the Franks, VI. xxv.
15 ; writes to Theudibert, Vi. xxv.
19-23; narrowly escapes a serious
wound, VI. xxvii. 13, 14; lays siege
to Ravenna, VI. xxviii. 1 ff,; sends
envoys to Vittigis, VI. xxviii. 8 ff. ;
sends Vitalius into Venetia, VI.
xxviii. 24; sends Thomas to take
over the strongholds of the Cottian
Alps, Vl. xxviii. 29 tf.; refuses to
sanction the terms of peace made
by the emperor’s envoys, VI. xxix.
4, 5; addresses the officers, VI.
xxix. 7-14; secures a_ written
statement from them, VI. xxix.
16, offered the kingship of the
West by the Goths, VI. xxix. 18,
unwilling to accept, VI. xxix. 19,
20, but uses the opportunity to
take Ravenna, VI. xxix. 20 ff.
calls a second council, VI. xxix. 22;
writes to Vittigis to make good his
promise, VI. xxix. 24; receives
envoys from the Goths, VI. xxix.
26-28: sends unfriendly com-
manders away from Ravenna,
VI. xxix. 29; enters Ravenna with
his army, VI. xxix. 30 ff.; guards
Vittigis not in disgrace, VI. xxix.
35; preserves the Goths from
barm, VI. xxix. 38; receives the
surrender of several strongholds,
VI. xxix. 39-41; receives envoys
from Ildibadus, VI. xxix. 41;
slandered to the emperor, VI. xxx.
1; summoned to Byzantium, V1.
xxx. 2, 3; again invited by the
Goths to remain as king in Italy,
VI. xxx. 24-27; his refusal, VI. xxx.
28; proceeds to Byzantium, VI.
xxx. 30; VII. i. 1, 25, 31; denied
a triumph by the emperor, τη]. i. 3;
his popularity with the people,
vil. i. 4, 5; his prominent position


411


INDEX


in Byzantium, VU... ἢ. 17=22;
Justinian forced to send him
against Totila, VII. ix. 23, x. 1;
relieves Dryus, VII. x. 6, 7, 12;
moves to Pola, VII. x. 13; feigned
letter of Bonus to, VII. x. 15;
receives the spies to Totila, VIT. x.
17; sends an answer to their forged
letter, VII. x. 18; reaches Ravenna,
VII. xi. 1; delivers a speech, VII. xi.
1-9; sends a force into Aemilia,
Vil. xi. 11; to Auximus, VII. xi. 19;
seizes Pisaurus, VII. xi. 33, 34;
sends a force to Rome, VII. xi. 37;
his forces not a match for the Goths,
VII. xi. 38; sends John to Byzan-
tium with a letter, VII. xii. 1-10;
hostile to Herodian, VII. xii. 16;
regrets his decision to operate from
Ravenna, VII. xiii. 18, 14; proceeds
to Epidamnus, VII. xiii. 19; writes
to Justinian, do.; receives rein-
forcements. VII. xiii. 21; sends a
force to Portus, VII. xv. 1; rein-


forced by John and Isaac, VII. xviii.


1; disapproves John’s plan, VII.
xviii. 1, 2; his concern for Rome,
VII. xviii.3; sends John to Calabria,
and sails for Rome, VII. xviii. 5;
leaves Dryus, VII. xviii. 8; arrives
at Portus, VII. xviii. 11; awaits
John in vain, VII. xviii. 25, 29;
attempts to get provisions into
Rome, VII. xix. 1ff.; leaves
Antonina with Jsaac in Portus,
VlI. xix. 7; which he protects by a
special force, VII. xix. 25; instructs
Bessas to divert the barbarians,
VII. xix. 12; sets fire to a tower,
1. xix. 18, 19; and captures the
bridge, VII. xix. 21; report of his
success reaches Portus, VI. xix.
23: hears of Isaac’s rashness, VII.
xix. 29: abandons the attack, VII.
xix. 30; falls sick, VII. xix. 32, 33;
Justinian refers Totila to him,
VII. xxi. 25; dissuades Totila by
letter from destroying Rome, VII.
xxii. 7-17; held in Portus by a
Gothic garrison at Algedon, VII.
xxii. 18; permits Martinianus to
feign desertion, VII. xxiii. 1;
receives captives from. Spolitium,
Vil. xxiii. 7; makes a visit of
inspection to Rome, VII. xxiii.


472


8-11; ambushed by the Goths,
but defeats them, VII. xxiii. 10, 11;
reoccupies Rome, VII. xxiv. 1, 2;
repairs its defences, VII. xxiv. 3-6;
provisions the city, VII. xxiv. 7;
successfully defends it against
Totila’s attacks, VII. xxiv. 8-26;
fits gates to the walls of Rome and
sends the keys of the city to
Justinian, VII. xxiv. 34; ‘“‘sus-
Ppicious ”’ of John, VII. xxv. 22-24;
urges the emperor to send rein-
forcements, VIJ. xxvii. 1; receives
a letter from the emperor, VII. xxvii.
12; sails to Sicily, VII. xxvii. 16;
thence for Tarentum, VII. xxviii. 1;
puts in at Croton, VII. xxviii. 3;
makes a camp and sends the larger
part of his force forward, VII.
xxviii. 4, 5; hastily sails back to
Messana, VII. xxviii. 18; joined
by Valerian, VII. xxx. 2; summons
John and sails for Rusciane, VII.
xxx. 9; decides to go to Rome,
VJ. xxx. 15; respected and feared
by the Goths, VII. xxv. 14; sum-
moned to Byzantium, VII. xxx. 25;
his inglorious return, VII. xxxv. 1;
abandons Perusia to its fate, VII.
xxxv. 2; his return to Byzantium
expected, VII. xxxif. 19, 38, 42;
feared by conspirators, VII. xxxii.
38; who desire to kill him, vii.
xxxii. 39; takes up residence in
Byzantium, VII. xxxv. 3; his
wealth and fame, VII. xxxv. 3;
owned property in a suburb of
Byzantium, VII. xxxv. 4; his good
fortune foretold by a Sign, VII.
xxxv. 3-8; his qualities as a man
and as a commander, VII. i. 6-16;
his wife Antonina, VII. xix. 7, 30,
XXViii. 4, xxx. 2, 3, 25; served: by
Demetrius, navigation officer, VII.
vi. 20; had captured Sisauranon,
VII. iii. 11; the--‘“‘ teaching of
Belisarius,’”’ VI. xxi. 30; his guards,
Artasires, VII. xi. 37; Barbation,
Vil. xi. 37, xxviii. 5, 17; Indulf,
VII. xxxv. 23; Phocas, VII. xv. 1;
Ricilas, VII. xi. 19; Sabinianus, do.;
Thorimuth, do.; Unigastus, VI.
xxvii. 14; his ‘‘ household,” VI.
XxViii. 8; VII. i. 20, 21


Beneventum, town in Samnium; its


INDEX


. defences destroyed by the Goths,

Besi, a barbarian tribe, VI. xxvi. 3

Bessas, Roman general; sent away
from Ravenna, VI. xxix. 29; with
others left in charge of Italy, VI.
xxx. 2; confers with other com-
manders, VII. iii. 2, 3; with others
leads an army to the relief of
Florentia, VII. v. 4; holds Spolitium,
VIL. vi. 8; then Rome, VII. xi. 37;
disapproves a sally, VII. xiii. 2;
refuses to support a Roman sally
from Portus, VII. xv. 2-6; appealed
to by the citizens, VII. xvii. 2-8;
replies thereto, VII. xvii. 8; hoards
and sells grain, VII. xvii. 10, 16,
xix. 13,° xx.:1; instructed. by
Belisarius to attack the barbarian
camps, VII. xix. 12; his failure to
obey on this and other occasions,
VIJ. xix. 13; neglects discipline,
Vil. xx. 1, 2; questions Gothic
captives, VII. xx. 10,11; disregards
their warning, VII. xx. 12; escapes
from Rome by flight, VII. xx. 18,
20; his accumulated wealth falls
to Totila, VII. xx. 26; his guards,
VII. xvii. 12

Bleschames, a Persian; sent to
Byzantium by Belisarius, VII. iii. 11

Boetius, husband of Rusticiana, VU.
xx. 27, 29

SBononia, city in Aemilia;
by Vitalius, VII. xi. 12

Bonus, nephew of John; commander
of the garrison in Genua, VII. x.
14, 16, 18

Boraides, brother of Germanus and
nephew of Justinian, VII. xxxi. 17,
xxxii. 18

Bouzes, Roman commander; sent
to help the Lombards, VIJ. xxiv.
40; confided in by Germanus,
VII. xxxii. 41; testifies in his
favour, VII, xxxil. 45

Brundisium, city in Calabria, VII.
xviii. 11; Goths retire to, VII.
xviii. 6; Verus encamps near,
VII. xxvii. 6; distance from Cannae,
VII. xviii. 18; from Dryus, VII.
xviii. 6

Bruttium, gained by Totila, VII. vi. 5;
influence of Tullianus in, Vil. xviii.
20; John in, VII. xviii.25; guarded


captured


by Rhecimundus, VII. xviii. 26;
Lucanian mountains extend to,
VITSEXViligey

Burcentius, Roman soldier; sent as
a messenger by the Goths, VI. xxvi.
3 ff., 14, 15; denounced to Valerian,
VI. xxXvi. 25; confesses and is
killed, VI. xxvi. 26

Burgundians, a barbarian people of
Gaul; subjugated by the Franks,
VI. xxviii. 17; reported to be in
Liguria, VI. xxi. 13; rewarded for
their alliance with the Goths,
VI. xxi. 39

Byzantines, inhabitants of Byzan-
tium; their admiration of Beli-
sarius, VII. i. 5; mock Alexander,
Vil. i. 30; make direful forecasts,
VII. xxix. 17; Martinianus a
Byzantine, VII. xxiii.1

Byzantium, capital of the empire,
mentioned frequently throughout;
its suburb Panteichion, VII. xxxv.
4; its palace, VII. i. 3, xxxii. 22,
39, 43, 51; visited by earthquakes,
VII. xxix. 4, 5, 17; harassed by a
whale, VII. xxix. 9


Caesena, fortress in northern Italy;
John sent thither by Narses, VI.
xix. 19; attacked unsuccessfully
by him, VI. xix. 20, 21; taken over
by Belisarius, VI. xxix. 40; cap-
tured by Totila, vi. vi. 1

Calabria, provisions brought thence
by the Romans, VI. xxiv. 14;
gained by Totila, VII. vi. 5; held
by the Goths, VII. x. 4; mentioned,
VII. XViii.2, 7, 8, 11, xxiii.18, xxvii.
12; its city Tarentum, VII. xxiii.
12


Calabrians, won over by John, VII.
xviii. 17; plan revolt from the
Goths, VII. xxiii. 17; a Calabrian
accuses a Gothic soldier, VII. viii.12

Campania, entered by Totila, VII. vi.
1; held by the Goths, VII. x. 4;
John rescues senators from, VII.
xxvi. 2-13; mentioned, VII. xxii.
20, xxiii.18

Cannae, town in Apulia; scene of the
great battle, VII. xviii.19; distance
from Canusium, do.

Canusium, town in Apulia; taken by
John, VII. xviii. 18; distance from


473


INDEX


Brundisium, do.; from
VII. xviii. 19

Capua, town in Campania; garrisoned
by Totila, VII. xviii. 24, 29; Roman
senators rescued from, VII. xxvi.
4ff.; distance from Minturnae,
VII. xxvi. 4

Oatellus, an Italian notable; slain by
the Goths, VII. x. 22

Cavallarius, envoy of Eraric to
Justinian, VII. ii. 16

Centumcellae, town in Etruria, VII.
xiii. 12

Cephallenian, Demetrius a Cephallen-
ian, VII. vi. 20

Cercyra, legend as to its inhabitants,
VII. XXVii..19

Cervarium, town
Xvili. 29

Cethegus, a patrician of Rome;
suspected by the commanders, he
goes to Centumeellae, VII. xiii. 12

Chalazar, a Massagete; guardsman,
in command of Lllyrians, VII. xxx.
6; mutilated and killed by Totila,
VII. xxx. 20, 21

Chanaranges, ἃ Persarmenian, VII.
xxxii. 11; his unstable character,
VII. xxxii. 12; involved in a plot
against Justinian, VII. xxxii. 11-51;
entrapped by Justinus, VII. xxxii.
29-40; consults Artabanes, VII.
xxxii. 31

Chilbudius (a), Roman general, VII.
xiii. 26; his services to the empire,
VII. xiv. 1-6; impersonated by a
barbarian of the same name, VII.
xiv. 7 ff.

Chilbudius (b), one of the Antae:
captured in battle, VII. xiv. 8;
serves his master well, VII. xiv. 9,
10; ransomed and taken home to
the Antae, VII. xiv. 16 ff.; forced
to pretend to be the Roman general,
VII. xiv. 31; unmasked by Narses,
VII. xiv. 35, 36

Chosroes, Persian King; envoys sent
to him by Vittigis, VI. xxii. 17;
he violates the treaty with the
Romans, VI. xxii. 20, 21; receives
overtures from Arsaces, VII. xxxii. 2

Christians, the Franks mentioned
as such, VI. xxv. 10; Christian
Scriptures, VII. xxxii. 9; Christian
dogmas, VII. xxxy. 1]


474


Cannae,


in Apulia, VII.


Classes, harbour of Ravenna, VI.
9.66.4 pill
Claudian, commander of Salones;


sends a force against Indulf, vit.
KXXV. 27

Clementinus, a patrician; refuses to
follow John, VII. xxvi. 13

Conon, commander of Naples;
besieged by Totila, VI. vi. 2 ff.;
sends Demetrius to the Roman
fleet, VII. vi. 22; urges Maximinus
to relieve Naples, VII. vii. 2;
allowed his liberty by Totila, VII.
vii. 16; treated kindly by him,
VII. viii. 6-9: commander of
Rome; appealed to by the citizens,
VII. xvii. 2-8; hoards and sells
grain, VII. xvii. 10; disregards
warning of captives, VII. xx. 12;
flees from Rome, VII. xxiii. 1; left
in command of Rome by Belisarius,
VII. xxvii. 16; killed by his soldiers,
Np Rig.o.0.<har/

Constantianus, Roman commander;
sent from Dalmatia to Ravenna,
VI. xxx. 2; receives offer of sur-
render from Totila, VII. ii. 8;
which he agrees to accept, VII. ii. 9;
confers with other commanders,
ΥΙΙ. 111. 2, 3; shares chief commaud
with Alexander, VII. iii. 4; holds
Ravenna, VII. vi. 8; appeals to
Justinian, VII. ix. 5; receives
confidence of Germanus, VII. xxxii.
41; testifies in his favour, VII.
xxxii. 45; sent to help the Lom-
bards, VII. xxxiv. 40

Consul, VII. xxxii. 15, xxxv. 10

Cottian Alps, between Gaul and
Liguria, VI. xxviii. 28; strongholds
in, partly taken over by Belisarius,
VI. xxviii. 29 ff.

Croton, city in Bruttium, VII. xxviii.
2, 3, xxx. 12, 14, 23; distance from
Messana, VII. xxviii. 18

Cumae, town in Campania; captured
by Totila, VII. vi. 3

Cyprian, Roman commander; sent
against Fisula, VI. xxiii. 2; with
Justinus presses its siege, VI. xxiv.
18; receives its surrender, VI.
xxvii. 26; with others leads an
army to the relief of Florentia,
Vil. v. 4; holds Perusia, VII. vi. 8;
ordered by Totila to surrender


INDEX


Perusia, VII. xii. 18; slain by
Ulifus, VII. xii. 19, 20, xxiii: 6,
xxv. 21


Dacia, taken by the Gepaedes, VII.
Xxxiii. 8, xxxiv. 17, 35; parts of,
taken by the Eruli, VII. xxxiii. 13;
formerly under Gothic power, VII.
xxxiv. 10; Goths driven from,
VII. xxxiv. 15

Dalmatia, plundered by the Lom-
bards, VI. xxxiii.12; visited by a
Gothic fleet, VII. xxxv. 24-29;
mentioned, VI. xxi. 41, xxviii. 2,
SEK 2S VET sil. 19

Decius, a patrician;
Rome, VII. xx. 18

Demetrius (a), Roman commander
of infantry, VI. xxiii. 2; sent to
Italy, VII. vi. 13, 14; endeavours
in vain to relieve Naples, VII. vi.
15-24; escapes capture, VII. vi.
25; sent by Maximinus to Naples,
VII. vii. 3; captured by the Goths,
VII. vii. 6; forced by Totila to
advise Neapolitans to surrender,
VII. vii. 8-10

Demetrius (Ὁ). a  Cephallenian;
Governor of Naples, VII. vi. 20;
his wanton abuse of Totila, VII. vi.
21; goes secretly to the Roman
fleet, VII. vi. 22, 23; captured and
mutilated by the Goths, VII. vi.
26

Deopheron, a notable Italian, VII.
xxx. 6; brother of Tullianus, do.;
sent as envoy to Totila, VII. xxx. 19

Dog’s Head, eastern point of Cercyra,
VII. xxvii. 19

Domnicus, comes as an envoy from
Justinian to Vittigis, VI. xxix. 1, 7

Dorthon, town on the Po, VI. xxiii. 5

Dryus, town in Calabria; besieged by
the Goths, VII. ix. 22, x. 8; its
garrison parley with the Goths,
VII. x. 5; relieved by Valentinus,
VII. x. 6, 7,9; itssiege raised by the
Goths, VII. xviii. 6; only city of
southern Italy held by the Romans,
VII. xxii. 22, xxiii. 13; distance
from Brundisium, VII. xviii. 6;
from Rome, VII. xviii. 4; from
Tarentum, VII. xxiii. 12: men-
tioned, VII. xviii. 5, 8, xxii. 20,
XXVi. 28, xxvii. 4, xxx. 2, 9


escapes from


Epidamnus, city in Ulyricum ; reached
by Lombard invasions, VII. xxxiii.
12; by an invasion of the Sclaveni,
VII. xxix. 1; mentioned, VII. xiii.
19, 21, xviii.1

Epirus, in northern Greece, VII. vi.
11


Eraric, one of the Rogi; serving in
the Gothic army, VII.ii. 1; declared
king of the Goths by the Rogi,
Vil. ii. 4; hated by the Goths, VII.
ii. 10; who plot his destruction,
VII. ii. 12, 13; sends envoys to
Justinian, VII. ii. 15-17; slain by
the Goths, VII.ii. 6, 18, iii. 1

Eridanus, river in northern Italy,
VII. iii. 22; Placentia situated on,
VII. xiii. 9. See also ‘‘ Po.”

Eruli, a barbarian nation; some-
times serving in the Roman army,
counted as followers of Narses,
VI. xviii. 6; refuse to remain with
Belisarius, VI. xxii. 5; meet the
army of Uraias, VI. xxii. 6; reach
Venetia, and go thence to Byzan-
tium, VI. xxii. 7, 8; follow Narses
into Thrace, VII. xiii. 21, 22; defeat
the Sclaveni, VII. xiii. 25; receive
parts of Dacia from the emperor,
VII. xxxiii. 13, xxxiv. 37; overrun
Illyricum and Thrace, VII. xxxiii.
13, 14; receive payments from
the Roman emperor, VII. xXxxili.
14; arrayed with Roman forces
against Gepaedes, VII. xxxiv. 42;
side with Gepaedes, VII. xxxiv.
43; with their leader Aordus,
defeated by the Romans, VII.
xxxiv. 44, 45; feared by Roman
commanders, VII. xxxiv. 46; com-
manded by Arufus, VII. xxvi. 23;
by Verus, VII. xxvii.8; by Vitalins,
VII. i. 34, 35

Euxine, Sea, VII. xxix. 11


Fanus, fortress on the Adriatic, VII.
xi. 32; dismantled by Vittigis,

Faventia, city in Aemilia; distance
from Ravenna, VII. iii. 22

Firmum, city on the Adriatic, VI.
xvi. 1: Aratius stationed there
to hold Auximus in check, VI. xx. 3;
besieged by Totila, VII. xi. 39;


475


INDEX


surrenders to him, VII. xii. 12;
distance from Auximus, VI. xvi. 1
Fisula, town in Etruria; Belisarius
plans its capture, VI. xxiii. 1;
besieged by Cyprian and Justinus,
surrenders to the Romans, VI.

XXVii. 25-27

Florentia, city in Etruria; besieged
by the Goths, VII. v. 1; relieved
by a Roman army, VII. v. 4, 5;
held by Justinus, VII. vi. 8; distance
from Mucellis, VII. v. 5

Foederati, foreign bands in the Roman
army, VII. xxxi. 10, xxxiii. 13

Forocornelius, ancient town in
northern Italy, VI. xix. 22

Franks, ‘‘modern’’? name for the
Germans (Υ. xi. 29); their reported


alliance with the Goths, VI. xviii.


21; distrusted by the Goths, VI.
xxii. 10; regardless of treaties,
VI. xxv. 2; decide to enter the war,
VI. xxv. 1; their fighting equip-
ment, VI. xxv. 3, 4, 12; —their
atrocities at Ticinum, VI. xxv. 9;
attack and rout a Gothic and a
Roman force, VI. xxv. 11-14;
suffer from lack of food, VI. xxv.
16-18; their previous alliance
with the Romans, VI. xxv. 21;
retire from Italy, VI. xxv. 24, xxvi.
12; feared by Belisarius, VI. xxvii.
30; send envoys to Vittigis without
success, VI. xxviii. 7-23; seek the
emperor’s approval of their occu-
pation of Gaul, VII. xxxiii. 4;
conduct themselves as equals of
the Romans, VII. xxxiii. 5; issue
gold coinage, VII. xxxiii. 5, 6;
acquire most of Venetia, VII. xxxiii.
7; received lands from Justinian,
Vil. xxxiv. 37; Milan a bulwark
against them, VI. xxi. 6; adherents
of Christianity, but retaining much
of their pagan religion, VI. xxv. 10


Garganon, mountain in Apulia, VII.
xxii. 24

Gaul, separated from Italy by the
Alps,;) Vi. xxv. lb Sccvilis2 Sijeathe
Gothic portion of, offered to the
Franks as the price of alliance with
Theodatus, VI. xxviii. 19; VII.
Xxxlii. 2; occupied by them, VII.


476


xxxiii. 4; gold mined in, VI.
XxXxiil. 5


Gelimer, King of the Vandals, VII.


i. 3, xxxv. 4


Genua, city in Liguria; commanded


by Bonus, VII. x. 14


Gepaedes, a barbarian nation; take


possession of Dacia, VII. xxxiii.
8, xxxiv. 17, 35; oppress the
population, VII. xxxiii. 8; long
received pay from the Roman
emperor, VII. Xxxiii. 9; in alliance
with the Romans, VII. xxxiv. 10,
51; received gifts from the emperor,
VII. xxxiv. 10; Lombards settle
near them, VII. xxxiii. 11; become
hostile to the Lombards, VII. xxxiv.
1, 2, xxxv. 19; whom they out-
number, VII. xxxiv. 3, 28; seek
an alliance with Justinian, VII.
xxxiv. 4-39; who rejects their
proposal, VII. xxxiv. 40; a Roman
army sent against them, VII. xxxiv.
41; have most of the Eruli as
allies, VII. xxxiv. 43; make hasty
settlement with Lombards, VII.
xxxiv. 45; feared by Roman
commanders, VII. xxxiv. 46; some
of them follow Ildiges, VII. xxxv.
21; a Lombard flees to them, VII.
xxxv. 12 ff.; ruled by Thorisin,
VII. xxxiv. 4


Germans, called also Franks, q.v.;


receive from the Goths a portion
of Gaul, VII. xxxiii. 2


Germanus, nephew of Justinian,


VII. xii. 11; his daughter marries
John, do.; brother of Boraides,
VII. xxxi. 17; father of Justinus,
VII. xxxii. 14; and of Justinian,
VII. xxxii.17; vexed by interference
of Justinian in settling the estate
of his brother, VII. xxxi. 18;
attempt to involve him in plot
against Justinian, VII. xxxii. 10,
13-21; confers with Marcellus,
VII. xxxii. 22, 24-27; through his
son entraps Chanaranges, VII. xxxii.
27-38; plot to name him emperor,
VII. xxxii. 38; reveals plot to
Bouzes and Constantianus, VII.
xxxii.41; involved in an accusation
of conspiracy, .VII. xxxii. 44;
successfully defended by Marcellus
before the senate, do.; and by


INDEX


Constantianus and lBouzes, VII.
xxxii.45; experiences the emperor’s
anger, VII. xxxii. 47; saved by
Marcellus, VII. xxxii. 48

Gilacius, an Armenian; General in
the Roman army, VII. xxvi. 24,
26; captured and put to death by
the Goths, VII. xxvi. 25-27

Gizeric, King of the Vandals, VII. i. 4

Gontharis, tyrant of the Vandals;
slain by Artabanes, VII. xxxi. 2,
xxxii. 6; slayer of Areobincus,
VII. xxxi. 3

Gothigus, a patrician and ex-consul;
urges Justinian to defend Italy,
VII. xxxv. 10

Goths, used throughout to indicate
the Ostrogoths, often coupled with
“Ttalians’’ (VI. xxix. 26, etc.);
raise the pace? of Ariminum, VI.
xvii. 21, 22; control Aemilia, VI.
XVill. 25; surrender Urbinus to
Belisarius, VI. xix. 17; take Milan
by surrender, VI. xxi. 38 ff.; become
masters of Liguria, VI. xxi. 42;
seek the alliance of the Lombards,
VI. xxii. 9-12; decide to stir up
Chosroes against the Romans,
VI. xxii. 17; besieged in Auximus,
VI. xxiii. 9—xxiv. 17, xxvi.
24, 27; surrender to Belisarius,
VI. xxvii. 28-34; surrender Fisula,
VI. xxvii. 25, 26; disappointed in
their hopes of the Franks, VI. xxv.
6 ff.; many Goths in the Cottian
Alps submit to Belisarius, VI.
Xxviii. 28-35; accept the terms
offered by Justinian, VI. xxix. 3;
distrust the Romans, VI. xxix. 6;
dissatisfied with Vittigis, wish to
make Belisarius King, VI. xxix.
17 ff.; arrange to receive Beli-
sarius into Ravenna, VI. xxix. 24 ff.;
attempt a new national movement,
VI. xxx. 3ff.; their power re-
organized by Ildibadus, VI1.i. 25 ff. ;
take Placentia by surrender, VII.
xvi. 3; capture Rome, VII. xx.
14 ff.; capture the fortress of
Rusciane, VII. xxx. 21; give the
Franks a portion of Gaul, VII.
xxxiii. 2; unable to hold back the
Franks, VII. xxxiii. 7; dreaded by
the Gepaedes, VII. xxxiv. 10;
capture Perusia, VII. xxxy. 2;


2-xxvii.


formerly held Dacia, VII. xxxiv.
10; which was taken from them by
Justinian, VII. xxxiii. 8, xxxiv. 15;
Gothic captives of Belisarius, VII.
i. 12; in the retinue of Belisarius,
Vil. i. 6; the Gothic language, VII.
xxvi. 24; the Gothic War, VII.
xxxiii. 1

Greece, VII. vi. 11

Greeks, contemptuous name for the
armies of the Eastern Empire,
VII. ix. 12, xxi. 4, 12, 13

Gudilas, a Thracian; Roman com-
mander, VII. xxx. 6; ἃ guardsman;
sent as envoy to Totila, VII. xxx. 19


Hannibal, Carthaginian General; his
memorable defeat of the Romans,
VII. xviii. 19; his camp used by
Totila, VII. xxii. 24

Herodian, Roman commander of
infantry, VI. xvi. 21; accompanies
Belisarius to Byzantium, VII. i. 1;
commander of Thracians, VII. vi.
10; sent to Naples, VII. vii. 3;
escapes capture, VII. vii. 7; com-
mander of Spolitium, VII. xii. 2:
parleys with the Goths, VII. xii. 13;
surrenders the town, VII. xii. 15,
xxiii. 3; his fear of Belisarius,
Vil. xii. 16; praised by Totila,
VII. xxi. 15, 16

Huns, invade Illyricum, VII. xi. 15;
frequent invasions of, VII. xiv. 2;
Justinian tries to block them by
means of the Antae, VII. xiv. 33;
in the Roman army, VII. vi. 10;
Hunnic soldiers asked for by
Belisarius, VII. xii. 10; the Hunnic
character, VII. xiv. 28; Odolgan a
Hun, VII. xxiii. 6

Hypatius, brother of Pompeius and
uncle of John, VII. xxxi. 14


Iberians, Phazas an Iberian, VII. vi.
10, xxviii. 5

Ildibadus, Gothic commander of
Verona; sends envoys to Belisarius,
VI. xxix. 41; suggested for the
kingship of the Goths, VI. xxx. 14;
summoned from Verona, ΕΞ ΕΣ
16; declared king, VI. xxx. 17;
addresses the Goths, VI. xxx. 18 ff.;
sends envoys to Belisarius, promis-
ing to obey him as King, VI. xxx. 25,


477


INDEX


26; receives the report of his
envoys, VI. xxx. 29; his children
taken to Byzantium by Belisarius,
VII. i. 1: reorganizes the Gothic
power, VII. i. 25-27, iv. 12; defeats
Vitalius, ὙΠ. i. 34, 35; increasing
his fame thereby, VII. i. 36;
becomes hostile to Uraias, VII. i.
37 ff.; slays him, VII. i. 41; re-
proached by the Goths, vil. i. 42;
offends Velas, VII. i. 43 ff.; slain
by him, VII. i. 47-49, ii. 4, 8, 10;
hopes of the Goths in him, ΥΤΙ. ii. 5;
they sorrow for his loss, VII. ii. 11;
nephew of Theudis, VI. xxx. 15;
uncle of Totila, VII. ii. 7

Iidiger, Roman commander; sent in
command of a fleet to Ariminum,
VI. xvi. 22; takes possession of the
Gothic camp, VI. xviii. 1; slighted
by John, VI. xviii. 2, 3; sent to
guard the Po, VI. xxviii. 24;
accompanies Belisarius to Byzan-
tium, VII. i. 1

Iidiges, a Lombard prince; son of
Risiulfus; flees to the Sclaveni,
VII. xxxv. 16; and thence to the
Gepaedes, VII. xxxv. 19; _ his
surrender demanded by Audouin,
VII. xxxv. 20; returns to the
Sclaveni, VII. xxxv. 21; starts to
join Totila, VII. xxxv. 22; defeats
a Roman force and recrosses the
Danube, do.

Iilyrians, their land at the mercy of


the barbarians, VII. xxix. 3, xxxili.


1; in the Roman army, VII. x. 2,
xi. 11, xxx. 6; abandon Vitalius,
VII. xi. 13, 14, 16; commanded by
Nazares, VII. xi. 18

Illyricum, invaded by the Huns,
VII. xi. 15; canvassed for recruits
by Belisarius, VII. xii. 4; Totila
threatens to carry the war into
Iilyricum, VII. xxi. 19; devastated
by the Sclaveni, VII. xxix. 1-3;
Belisarius reported in Illyricum,
VII. xxxii, 19; plundered by the
Lombards, VII. xxxiii. 12; overrun
by the Hruli, VII. xxxiii. 13; at the

mercy of the barbarians, VII. xxxiv.

46

Indulf, guard of Belisarius; deserts
to Totila, VII. xxxv. 23; sent to
Dalmatia with an army and fleet,


478


VII. xxxv. 24; raids Mouicurum,
VII. xxxv. 25, 26; and Laureate,
VII. xxxv. 26-29

Innocentius, commander of Portus,
VII. xv. 1, 7; receives reinforce-
ments, VII. xv. 1

Ionian Gulf, the modern Adriatic;
controlled by the Romans, VI.
xxviii. 6; mentioned, VI. xvi. 1,
xx. 21,/) xxiii. 65 VII x1. 32jixvinis
2,.23, xxii. 22, xxvil. 13, xxx./17

Isaac, the Armenian, brother of
Aratius and WNarses; sent to
Belisarius, VII. xiii. 20; joins forces
with him, VII. xviii. 1; placed in
command of Portus, VII. xix. 7;
disobeys Belisarius’ instructions,
VII. xix. 24, 32: crosses the river
and attacks a Gothic camp, VII.
xix. 24-28; captured by the Goths,
VII. xix. 29, 30; executed by
Totila, VII. xix. 34

Tsaurians, in the army of Belisarius;
sent against Fisula, VI. xxiii. 2;
sent to destroy the cistern at
Auwximus, υ 10. χαν Off. Join
Conon’s garrison of Naples, VII. vi.
2; form the garrison of Tibur, VII,
x. 19-21; four Isaurians negotiate
with Totila, VII. xx. 4-10, 12, 13;
open the Asinarian Gate to the
Gothic army, VII. xx. 14, 15, xxi.
15, 16

Ister River, the modern Danube;
the Sclaveni settled near its banks,
VI. xxvi. 19; crossed by the
Sclaveni, VII. xiii. 24; guarded by
Chilbudius, VII. xiv. 2, 3; crossed
by the Sclaveni, VII. xxix. 1; by
the Lombards, VII. xxxiii. 11;
recrossed by Ildiges, VII. xxxv. 22;
mentioved, VII. xiv. 30, 32, xxxiv.
10, 13

Italians, separated from Gaul by the
Alps, VI. xxv. 5; oppressed by
Alexander, VII. i. 32, 33; said to
repent ‘‘ betraying”? the Goths,
VII. iv. 16; suffer grievous hard-
ships during the war, VII. vi. 7,
ix. 2-4, xviii. 20; their condition
improved, VII. xviii. 22, 23; at
Rusciane, spared by Totila, VI.
xxx. 24; in Byzantium, urge
Justinian to defend Italy, VII. xxxv.
9; Deopheron an Italian, VII. xxx,


INDEX


19; often coupled with ‘‘ Goths,”
VI. xxix. 26, etc.

Italy, scene of the Gothic War;
desired by the Franks, VI. xxv. 1,
Xxviii. 7, 15; invaded by Theudi-
bert, VI. xxv. 2-23; Theudibert
retires thence, VI. xxvi. 1; Beli-
sarius commander in Italy, VII.
i. 16 ete.; its revenues taken by
Totila, VII. xii. 6, xiii. 1; lost to
the Romans, VII. xxxiii. 1


John the Glutton, Roman com-
mander; sent to the Po, VI. xxiii.
3-5; accompanies Narses, VII.
xiii. 23

John, son of Pompeius, nephew of
Hypatius; marries Prefecta, VII.
xxxi. 14

John, nephew of Vitalian, Roman
commander; leads his command
into Picenum (VI. vii. 25); his
action discussed by a council of
war, VI. xvi. 4ff.; his friendship
with Narses, VI. xvi. 5; writes to
Belisarius, VI. xvi. 14-16; _ his
sufferings in the siege of Ariminum,
Vl. xviii. 2; his reply to Belisarius,
VI. xviii. 3; becomes suspicious
towards him, do., sides with
Narses against Belisarius, VI. xviii.
6; accompanies. Belisarius to
Urbinus, VI. xix. 1; had previously
failed to capture Urbinus, V1. xix.
8; sent by Narses against Caesena,
VI. xix. 19; makes an unsuccessful
attack upon it, VI. xix. 20, 21;
occupies Forum  Cornelii and
recovers all Aemilia, VI. xix. 22,
xxi. 14; refuses to obey Belisarius,
VI. xxi. 16, 25; sent by Narses to
Milan, VI. xxi. 19, 23; later sent
to bring boats, VI. xxi. 24; sent to
the Po, VI. xxiii. 3-5; feared by
Vittigis, VI. xxiv. 12; his force
routed by the Franks, VI. xxv. 14,
19; returns with Martinus, VI.
xxvi. 1; comes to the relief of
Thomas, VI. xxviii. 33-35; Gothic
soldiers desert to him, VI. xxvili.
35; sent away from Ravenna,
VI. xxix. 29; with others lett in
charge of Italy, Vl. xxx. 2; confers
with other commanders, vii. 11].
2,3, leads an army tu the reliet of


Florentia, vil. v. 4; chosen by Jot
to lead an advance party, VIT. v. 8,
9; engages with the enemy and
is repulsed, VII. v. 10-12; false
report of his death, VII. v. 14, 17;
holds Rome, VII. vi. 8; prevents
Romans from answering Totila’s
letter, VII. ix. 20; sent to Byzan-
tium for reinforcements, VII. xii.
1; marries the daughter of Ger-
Manus, VII. xii. 11; sent to Beli-
sarius from Byzantium, Vil. xiii.
20, joins forces with him, VII.
xviii. 1; urges a tand march on
Rome, VIl. xviii. 1, 2; ‘sent to
Rome, VII. xviii. 5; awaited in
vain by Belisarius, VII. xviii. 11,
29: surprises the Goths at Brundis-
ium, VH.voxvitis —11=16 5 ‘wins
Calabria, VII. xviii. 17; takes
Canusium, VII. xviii. 18; admon-
ished and assisted by Tullianus,
VII. xviii. 20-22; his route to Rome
blocked at Capua, VIL. xviii. 24, 25;
disperses a Gothic force in Rhegium,
VII. xviii. 27, 28; sends Antae to
Tullianus, Vil. xxii. 3; Totila
marches against him, VII. xxii. 6,18;
retreats to Dryus, VII. xxii. 20;
Antae return to him, VII. xxii. 21;
intercepts foraging parties, VII.
xxii. 23; fortifies Tarentum, VII.
xxiii. 12-17; ‘‘suspicious”’ of
Belisarius, VII. xxv. 22-24; fails
te capture Acherontis, VII. xxvi. 1;
rescues Roman senators, VII. xxvi.
1-13; sends them to Sicily, VII.
xxvi. 14; Totila marches against
him, VII. xxvi. 15; encamps in
Lucania, VII. xxvi. 16; surprised
and routed by Totila, VII. xxvi.
17-23; flees to Dryus, VII. xxvi.
28; at Dryus, VIf. xxvii. 4;
marches to Tarentum, VII. xxvii.
11; receives a small detachment
sent by Valerian, VII. xxvii. 15;
had garrisoned fortress near
Rusciane, VII. xxviii. 8; summoned
by Belisarius to Dryus, VII. xxx. 9;
disembarks and marches to Pice-
num, VIl. xxx. 15, 17, 18, sent
witb av army to help the Lombards,
Vill. xxxiv. 41, bad returned from
Italy, do.; uncle of Bonus, VII. x.
14


479


INDEX


Justinian, Roman Emperor; sends
a letter to the army in Italy regard-
ing Narses, VI. xviii. 27, 28; recalls
Narses and makes Belisarius sole
commander, VI. xxii. 4; decides
to summon Belisarius and attack
Chosroes, VI. xxii. 21; Belisarius’
loyalty to him, VI. xxix. 20, xxx. 28;
returns the envoys of Vittigis, VI.
xxii. 22; sends envoys to conclude
peace with him, VI. xxix. 1; sum-
mons Belisarius from Italy, VI.
xxx. 2; treats him coldly, VII.i. 2,
3; not loved by the Italians, VII.
i. 33; receives envoys from Eraric,
VII. ii. 15-18; provoked at the
commanders, VII. iii. 1; appoints
Maximinus pretorian prefect, VII.
vi. 9; sends an army to Italy, VII.
vi. 10; sends Demetrius to Italy,
VII. vi. 13; forgives Illyrian soldiers,
VII. xi. 16; appealed to by Beli-
sarius, VII. xii. 1-10; sends troops
to him, VII. xiii. 20; sends Narses
to the Eruli, VII. xiii. 21; offers
Turris to the Antae, VII. xiv. 32-34;
summons Vigilius, VII. xvi. 1;
intimate with Pelagius, VII. xvi. 5;
receives envoys and a letter from
Totila, VII. xxi. 18-25; sends
reinforcements requested by Beli-
sarius, VII. xxvii. 1-3; writes a
letter to him, VII. xxvii. 12; his
unsuccessful attempts to capture
the whale, VII. xxix. 10; sends
further reinforcements to Sicily,
VII. xxx. 1; forgives the garrison
of Rome for killing Conon, VII. xxx.
8; summons Belisarius from Italy,
VII. xxx. 25; plot against his life,
VII. xxxi. 1-xxxii. 51; recalls
Artabanes and appoints a new
general of Libya, VII. xxxi. 7;
honours Artabanes, VII. xxxi. 9, 10;
incurs the hostility of Artabanes,
VII. xxxi. 15; and of Germanus,
VII. xxxi. 18; alters the will of
Boraides, do.; had punished
Arsaces mildly, VII. xxxii. 3;
imprisons conspirators, VII. xxxii.
42; assembles the senate, VII.
xxxii. 43; angry with Germanus,
VIl. xxxii. 47; persuaded by
Marcellus, Il. xxxii. 48-850;
punishes the conspirators mildly,


480


VII. xxxii. 51; approves the cession
of Gaul to the Franks, VII. xxxiii. 3,
4; had taken Dacia from the Goths,
VII. xxxiii. 8; withholds payments
from the Gepaedes, VII. xxxiii. 9;
gives certain towns to the Lom-
bards, VII. xxxiii. 10; makes
payments to the Eruli, VII. xxxiii.
14; his alliance solicited by both
Lombards and ἘΓΏ], VII. xxxiv.
3-39; favours the former, VII.
xxxiv. 40; had given lands to
Franks, Eruli, and Lombards, VII.
xxxiv. 37; sends a force to support
the Lombards, VII. xxxiv. 40;
urged to defend Italy, VII. xxxv. 9,
10; but devotes himself to Christian
dogmas, VII. xxxv. 11; a student
of the Scriptures, VII. xxxii. 9;
his “‘ household,” VII. xiv. 1; uncle
of Germanus and Boraides, VII.
xii. 11, xxxi. 17; and of Preiecta,
VII. Xxxi. 2


Justinian, son of Germanus, brother


of Justinus, VII. xxxii. 17


Justinus, General of Ilyricum; sides


with Narses against Belisarius,
VI. xviii. 6; accompanies John’s
troops, VI. xix. 21; in Aemilia,
VI. xxi. 14; refuses to obey Beli-
sarius, VI. xxi. 16; sent by Narses
to Milan, VI. xxi. 19, 23; sent
against Fisula, VI. xxiii. 2; with
Cyprian presses its siege, VI. xxiv.
18; receives the surrender of
Fisula, VI. xxvii. 26; besieged in
Florentia, VII. v. 1; sends for relief,
VII. v. 2; relieved by a Roman
army, VII. v. 5, 6; holds Florentia,
VII. vi. 8; left in command of
Ravenna, VII. xiii. 19


Justinus, elder son of Germanus, an


ex-consul, VII. xxxii. 14, 15;
brother of Justinian, VII. xxxii. 17;
Arsaces endeavours in vain to
involve him in a plot against
Justinian, VII. xxxii. 14-21, 28;
reports to his father, VII. xxxii. 22;
entraps Chanaranges, VII. xxxii.
27-38; involved in au accusation of
conspiracy, VII. xxxii. 44; success-
fully defended by Marcellus, do.


Latin tongue, VII. xxvi. 24, xxviii. 7;


spoken by Chilbudius, VII. xiv. 36


INDEX


Laureate, a stronghold in Dalmatia;
raided by a Gothic force, VII. xxxv.
26-29

Lavula, pass between Lucania and
Bruttium, VII. xxviii. 7

Lazarus, Roman commander;
defeated by Ildiges, VII. xxxv. 22

Leontius, son-in-law of Athanasius;
assists in detecting a plot, VII.
Xxxii. 34-37; reports to Marcellus,
VII. xxxii. 40; exonerates Germanus,
VIl. xxxii. 44

Libya, northern Africa, VII. i. 16,
vi. 20, xxxv. 3, 4;- Artabanes
General of, VII. xxxi. 4: a new
general appointed, VII. xxxi. 7

Libyans,
RVG, 19. xxii 24

Liguria, separated from Gaul by the
Cottian Alps, VI. xxviii. 28; occu-
pied by Uralas, VI. xviii. 19, 22,
xxiye 20, xxvili. 35; Franks
reported present in, VI. xviii. 21;
also Burgundians, VI. xxi. 13; falls
under the power of the Goths, VI.
xxi. 42, xxviii. 3; Eruli proceed
tiither, VI. xxii.5; entered by the
Franks, VI. xxv. 5, 7; gained by
Ildibadus, VII. i. 27

Ligurians, in Milan, slain by the
Goths, VI. xxi. 29, 39; in the army
of Uraias, VI. xxvili. 31; sent as
envoys to Chosroes by Vittigis,
VI. xxii. 18, 19

Lombards, their alliance sought by
the Goths, VI. xxii. 11, 12; receive
certain towns from Justinian, VII.
xxxiii. 10; migrate to the south
side of the Danube, VII. xxxiii. 11;
plunder Dalmatia and Illyricum,
VII. xxxiii. 12; become hostile to
the Gepaedes, VII. xxxiv. 1, 2,
xxxv. 19; seek an alliance with
Justinian, VII. xxxiv. 3-39; who
favours their cause, VII. xxxiv. 40;
outnumbered by the Gepaedes,
VII. xxxiv. 3, 28; receive lands from
Justinian, VII. xxxiv. 37; Justinian
sends them Roman troops, VII.
xxxiv. 40, 44; make hasty settle-
ment with the Gepaedes, VII. xxxiv.
45, xxxv. 20; their kings, Audouin,
Vil, xxxiv. 4; Vaces, :VIl..xxxv. 13;
and Valdarus, VII. xxxv. 17; a
Lombard fugitive, VO. xxxv. 12 ff.


Hannibal a Libyan, VII.


Lucania, gained by Totila, vil. vi. 4;
Tullianus influential in, VII. xviii.
20; mountains of, VII. xxviii. 7;
mentioned, VII. xviii. 25; xxii,
1 ff., xxiii. 18, xxvi. 16

Lucanians, Totila marches against
them, VII. xxii. 6, 18


Magnus, Roman commander: sent
to guard the Po, Vi, xxviii. 1;
besieged in Auximus, VII. xi. 19,
26

Mantua, city in northern Italy;
distance from Verona, VII. iii.5

Marcellus, commander of palace
guards; consulted by Germanus,
VII. xxxii.22; his austere character,
VII. xxxii. 23; advises cautious
action, VII. xxxii. 24-27; wishes
to secure direct evidence, VII. xxxii.
26, 27; gives the services of
Leontius, VII. xxxii. 33, 34; his
death plotted, VII. xxxii. 39;
hearing Leontius’ report, still defers
action, VII. xxxii. 40; reports to
Justinian, VII. xxxii. 42; exoner-
ates Germanus, VII. xxxii. 44;
saves Germanus from the emperor’s
wrath, VII. xxxii. 48-50; gains a
high reputation, VII. xxxii. 50

Marcian, a man of note in Venetia;
helps the Romans to capture
Verona, VII. iii. 6 ff.

Martinianus, a Byzantine; flees from
Rome, VII. xxiii.1; goes over asa
pretended deserter to Totila, vIt.
xxiii. 1, 2; captures the amphi-
theatre at Spolitium from the
Goths, VII. xxiii. 4-7

Martinus, Roman commander; sent
to Ariminum with a land army,
VI. xvi. 23, xvii. 20; sent to
succour Milan, VI. xxi. 1; delays,
VI. xxi. 2 ff.; writes to Belisarius,
VI. xxi. 13-15; John and Justinus
sent to assist him, VI. xxi. 16, 19,
22, 23; marches toward Rome,
VI. xxi. 42; sent to the Po, VI.
xxili.3-5; defeated by the Franks,
VI. xxv. 14, 19; returns with John,
VI. xxvi. 1; comes to the relief
of Thomas, VI. xxviii. 33; accom-
panies Belisarius to Byzantium,
Vite ee

Massagetae,


@ barbarian nation;


481


INDEX


their austere life, VII. xiv. 28;
Chalazar a Massagete, VII. xxx. 6
Massilia, city in Gaul; comes under


the power of the Franks, VII. xxxiii.


4; colony of Phocaea, do.

Matasuntha, daughter of Amalasuntha
and wife of Vittigis; suspected of
burning the grainstoresin Ravenna,
VI. xxviii. 26

Mauricius, son of Mundus, and father
of Theudimundus, VII. i. 36

Maximinus, comes as envoy from
Justinian to Vittigis, VI. xxix. 1, 7;
appointed pretorian prefect, VII.
vi. 9; sails to Epirus, VII. vi. 11;
a timid warrior, VII. vi. 12, vii. 1;
puts in at Sicily, VII. vii.1; urged
by Roman commanders to come
to their relief, VII. vii.2; sends his
force to Naples, VII. vii. 3

Maximus, a Roman; takes sanctuary,
VII. xx. 19

Medes, see ‘‘ Persians ”

Messana, city in Sicily, VII. xxviii.18;
distance from Croton, do.; opposite
Rhegium, do.

Milan, city in northern Italy ; besieged
by Uralas, VI. xvili.19, 22, 24, xxi.
1 ff.; Paulus seeks relief for the
city, VI. xxi. 3-11; John and
Justinus sent to relieve it, VI. xxi.
16, 19, 22, 23; surrenders to the
Goths, VI. xxi. 38, xxii. 2; razed
to the ground, VI. xxi. 39; held by
Uraias, VI. xxiii. 4, xxvi. 9; dis-
tance from the Po, VI. xxi. 2;
second only to Rome among the
cities of the West, VI. xxi. 6;
bulwark against the Franks, do.

Minturnae, town in Latium, VII. xxvi.
4, 8; distance from Capua, VII.
xxvi. 4

Moors, their power destroyed by
Belisarius, VI. xxii. 16; in the
retinue of Belisarius, VII. i. 6;
deserters in the Gothic army,
VII. xviii. 26, 28; a Moor dis-
tinguishes himself at the siege of
Auximus, VI. xxiii. 36-39

Moras, commander of the Gothic
garrison in Urbinus, VI. xix. 10

Mouicurum, town near Salones; raided
by a Gothic force, VII. xxxv. 25

Mucellis, town in upper Italy;
distance from Florentia, VII. v. 5


482


Mulvian Bridge, over the ‘Tiber.
Mile Xxivi52

Mundilas, guard of Belisarius; sends
from Milan for relief, Vi. xxi. 3-9;
agrees to surrender the city on
certain conditions, VI. xxi. 27-29;
addresses the soldiers, VI. xxi.
29-37; kept under guard by the
Goths, VI. xxxi. 39

Mundus, father of Mauricius, VII.i. 36


Naples, city in Campania; besieged
by Totila, VII. vi. 2 ff.; its relief
attempted by Demetrius, VII. vi.
15 ff.; governed by another
Demetrius, VII. vi. 20; second
attempt to relieve it, VII. vii. 3 ff.;
inhabitants addressed by Totila,
VII. vii. 11-16; surrendered to
Totila, VII. vii. 20, xiii. 6; its
defences partially dismantled by
him, VII. viii. 10; a fortress near
Naples, VII. xxvi. 13

Narses the Eunuch, imperial steward;
joins forces with Belisarius, VI.
xvi. 1; they hold a council, VI.
xvi. 2ff.; friendship with John,
VI. xvi.5; defends him in a speech,
VI. xvi. 6-13; accompanies Beli-
sarius to Ariminum, VI. xvi. 24;
considered by John responsible for
the relief of Ariminum, VI. xviii.3;
persuaded to separate from Beli-
sarius, VI. xviii. 4-9; blocks the
plans of Belisarius, VI. xviii.10, 11:
replies to Belisarius’ speech of
protest, VI. xviii. 23-26; letter
written by Justinian regarding his
authority, VI. xviii. 28; his per-
verse interpretation thereof, VI.
xviii. 29; accompanies Belisarius
to Urbinus, VI. xix. 1; encamps
apart from him, VI. xix. 2; aban-
dons him with part of the army,
VI. xix. 8,9; proceeds to Ariminum,
VI. xix. 10; vexed at Belisarius’
success at Urbinus, VI. xix. 18;
sends John against Caesena, VI.
xix. 19; receives a letter from
Belisarius, VI. xxi. 17-22; John
awaits his command, VI. xxi. 25;
sends John and Justinus to Milan,
VI. xxi. 23; recalled by Justinian,
VI. xxii. 4, 5; sent by him to the
Eruli, VII. xiii. 21; unmasks the


INDEX


pretended Chilbudius, VII. xiii.


26-xiv. 36

Narses, an Armenian, brother of
Aratius; commander in the Roman
army, VI. xvi. 21, xxvi. 3, xxvii.16;
sides with Narses the Eunuch
against. Belisarius, VI. xviii. 6:
sent away from Ravenna, VI. xxix.
29; brother of Isaac and Aratius,
ὙΊΙ. xiii. 20

Nazares, an Illyrian commander;
distinguished for bravery, VII. xi.18

Neapolitans, approve Totila’s pro-
posal, VII. vii. 18

Nile River, its unusual flooding, ΥἹΙἝΙ.
xxix. 6-8, 17, 19


Odalgan, a Hun; commander of
Perusia; sends aid to Martinianus,
VII. xxiii. 6

Olyvrius, a Roman; takes sanctuary,
Vile xe 19

Orestes, a Roman; takes sanctuary,
VII. xx. 19; unable to flee with
John, VII. xxvi.13; an ex-consul, do.


Osdas, Gothic commander; burned
to death, VII. xix. 20
Pacurius, son of Peranius; sent to


Italy, VII. xxvii. 2

Panteichion, suburb of Byzantium,
VII. xxxv. 4

Patrician rank, VII. xiii. 12, xx. 18,
xxvi. 13, xxxv. 10

Paulus, messenger of Mundilas, VI.
xxi.3; swims the Po and delivers
his message, VI. xxi. 4-9; returns
to Milan, VI. xxi. 11

Pelagius, a priest of Rome; intimate
with Justinian, VII. xvi. 5; uses
his wealth to relieve suffering in
Rome, VII. xvi.6; goes as an envoy
to ‘Totila, VII. xvi. 7—xvii. 1:
appeals to him to spare the Romans,
VII. xx. 23-25; entreats him for
the senators, VII. xxi. 17; sent as
envoy to Justinian, VII. xxi. 18

Peranius, Roman _ general; sent
against Urviventus, VI. xix. 1;


persuades Belisarius to march
against it, VI. xx. 4; uncle of
Phazas, VII. vi. 10; father of


Pacurius, VII. xxvii. 2
Persarmenians, Chanaranges a Persar-
menian, VII. xxxii.11


Persia, VII. x. 1

Persians, called also Medes, VI. xxii.
15, 16, 17,21, Vi. ix. 23; xiv35 Jin
the Roman army, VII. iii. 11;
Artasires a Persian, VII. xi. 37;
Chosroes King of the. Persians,
VII. xxxii. 2; the Persian War,
Wit? χχχ 12. γε ice χοῦ 125: 5,8i the
Persian King issues silver, but not
gold, coinage, VII. xxxiii. 6

Perusia, first city in Tuscany, VII.
xxxv. 2; held by Cyprian, τι. vi.
8; its surrender demanded by
Totila, VII. xii. 18; support
obtained thence by Martinianus,
VII. xxiii. 5-7; besieged by the
Goths, VII. xxv. 1,.2; Totila
summoned thither, VII. xxv. 19,
20; he moves against it, VII. xxv.
24; abandoned by Belisarius and
captured by the Goths, VII. xxxy. 2

Peter the Apostle, his churchin Rome,
VII. xx. 22

Peter, Roman ambassador; returned
by the Goths, VI. xxii. 23; -made
Magister Militum by the emperor,
VI. xxii. 24

Petra, fortress on the Flaminian Way;
captured by Totila, VII. vi. 1

Phanitheus, an Erulian commander;
slain at Caesena, VI. xix. 20, xxii. 8

Phazas, an Iberian, nephew οὗ
Peranius; commander of Armen-
ians, VII. vi. 10; sent to Naples,
VII. vii. 3; escapes capture, VII.
vii. 7; sent forward by Belisarius,
VII. xxvili.5; dies fighting bravely,
VII. xxviii. 15

Philemuth, sueceeds Phanitheus as
commander of the Eruli, VI. xxii. 8;
VII. xiii. 22, xxxiv./42

Phocaea, its colony Massilia, VII.
xxxiii. 4

Phocas, guard of Belisarius; sent to
Portus, VII. xv. 1; with Valentinus
plans a sally, VII. xv. 2; not
supported by Bessas, VII. xv. 3, 4;
meets his death in a second sally,
VII. xv. 5-8

Picenum, raided by John, VI. xvii. 1;
story of an infant abandoned there,
VI. xvii. 2ff.; inhabitants of
Aemilia seek refuge there from
famine, VI. xx. 18; ravages of the
famine therein, VI. xx. 21; scarcity


483


INDEX


of food, VI. xxiv. 15; invaded by
Totila, VII. xi. 39; ‘Totila sends a
force: into it, ΨΙΙ.. Χχχ. 18; its
metropolis Auximus, VI. xxiii. 6;
mentioned, VI. xviii. 9, xxii. 1,
VII. xxx. 15, 17

Pisaurus, fortress on the Adriatic,
VII. xi. 32; dismantled by Vittigis,
VII. Xi. 32, xxv. 7, 8; seized by
Belisarius, VII. xi. 33, 34

Pisidians, some of them called “ Wolf-
Skulls,”’ VII. xxvii. 20

Placentia, first city of Aemilia, on
the Po River, VII. xiii.9; besieged
by the Goths, VII. xiii, 8-11;
inhabitants hard pressed by the
siege, VII. xvi. 2, 3; surrender to
the Goths, VII. xvi. 3

Po River, distance from Milan, VI.
xxi. 2; spanned by a bridge at
Ticinum, VI. xxv. 8; proposed as
a boundary between Gothic and
Roman territory, VI. xxix. 2;
Vil. ii. 15; remarkable falling of
its water, VI. xxviii. 3-5; Paulus
swims acrossit, VI. xxi.4; Martinus
and Uliaris delay on its banks, VI.
xxi. 2, 13; guarded by Roman
trocps, VI. xxiii. 3-5, xxviii. 33;
crossed by Uliaris, VI. xxiv. 21;
by the Franks, VI. xxv. 7-11,
xxviii. 19; at Ravenna, guarded


by Magnus and Vitalius, VI. xxvili.


1,2; and by Belisarius and Ildiger,
VI. xxviii. 24; mentioned, VI. xxix.
35, xxx. 3. See also ‘* Hridanus ”’
Pola, city in Illyricum, VII. x. 13
Pompeius, father of John and brother
of Hypatius, VII. xxxi. 14
Porphyrius, the whale which harassed
Byzantium, VII. xxix. 9 ff.
Portus, town at the mouth of the
Tiber; receives reinforcements,
VII. xv. 1; sally from, VII. xv. 7, 8;
Roman ships intercepted at, VII.
xv. 11-13; shut off from communi-
cation with Rome by Totila, VII.


xviii. 10; protected by a special
force, VII. xix. 6; held by Isaac,
VII. xix. 7; report of Belisarius’


success reaches it, VII. xix. 23; its
loss feared by Belisarius, VII. xix.
30; Belisarius returns thither, VII.
xix. 832; checkmated by a garrison
at Algedon, VII. xxii. 18; guarde!


484


by the Romans, VII. xxiv. 2;
refuge of Roman’ fugitives, VII.
xxvi. 12; the road between Portus
and Rome, VII. xix. 11, 18
Prelecta, niece of Justinian; be-
trothed to Artabanes, VII. xxxi. 2;
to whom she owes a debt of grati-
tude, VII. xxxi. 3; wife of Areo-
bindus, do.; sent to the emperor
by Artabanes, VII. xxxi. 4; Arta-
banes unable to marry her, VII.
xxxi. 11; married to John, son
of Pompeius, VII. xxxi. 14
Procopius, writer of the history of
the Gothic War, VI. xxii. 25, xxx.
30; VII.1. 49, v. 19, vii. 20, ix,.23,
xi. 39, xv. 16, xxiv. 94. xxx 21:
xxxv. 29; witnesses the infant
reared by a goat, VI. xvii. 10;
makes a useful suggestion to
Belisarius, VI. xxiii. 23-28


Ravenna, city in northern Italy;
held by the Goths and Vittigis,
VI. xvi.-xxix.; besieged by Beli-
sarius, VI. xxviii. 1 ff.; its stores
of grain burned, VI. xxviii. 25, 26;
entered by Belisarius and his army,
VI. xxix. 30 ff.; left by Belisarius,
VII. i. 25; administration of
Alexander in, VII. i. 32; held by
Constantianus, VII. vi. 8; head-
quarters of Belisarius, VII. xi. 1 ff.;
found by him unsuitable for this
purpose, VII. xiii. 13, 14; left in
charge of Justinus, VII. xiii. 19;
its harbour Classes, VI. xxix. 31;
its palace, VI. xxix. 37; Auximus
considered its key by  Vittigis,
VI. xxiv. 7, xxvi. 13; distance from
Auximus, VI. xxiii. 6; from
Faventia, VII. iii. 22

Reparatus, pretorian prefect; his
death, VI. xxi. 40

Rhecimundus, a Gothic notable; in
command of Bruttium, VII. xviii.
26; his force attacked and dis-
persed by John, VII. xviii. 27, 28

Rhegium, city in Bruttium, VII.
xviii. 27, xxiii. 12; opposite
Messana, VII. xxviii. 18

Ricilas, guard of Belisarius; sent to
Auximus, VII. xi. 19; his rash
encounter with the Goths, VI. xi.
22-24; his death, VII. xi. 25


INDEX


Risiulfus, a Lombard; nephew of
Vaces and heir to the throne, VII.


xxxv. 13; banished by him, VI.
xxxvy. 14; flees to the Varni, VII.
xxxy. 15; his two children, VII.


xxxv. 15, 16

Rock of Blood, pass between Lucania
and Bruttium, VIJ. xxviii. 7

Rogi, a Gothic nation, VII. il. 1-3;
elevate Eraric to the Gothic throne,
VII.ii. 4

Romans, (a) subjects of the Roman
empire both in the East and in
the West; mentioned constantly
throughout; their alliance with
the Franks, VI. xxv. 2; in control
of the sea, VI. xxiv. 14, xxviii. 6;
unable to keep out the Franks
from Venetia, VII. xxxiii. 7;
Roman deserters in the Gothic
army, VII... Xxili. 13, xxvi. 10;
Roman senators left in Campania
by Totila, VII. xxiii. 18, xxvi. 2;
the Roman emperor alone privileged


to issue gold coinage, VII. xxxiii.


5, 6; (b) the inhabitants of Rome,
VII. i. 21; send Pelagius as envoy to
Totila, VII. xvi. 7; suffer famine


during the siege by Totila, VII. xiii.


AAT τοαυλονν Valse h9—LOs xs 8:
appeal to Bessas and Conon, VII.
xvii. 2-8; their attempts to get
away from Rome, VII. xvii. 23-25;
a Roman drowns himself before
his children, VII. xvii. 20-22; only
five hundred left when Totila
captured the city, VII. xx. 19;
reduced to beggary, VII. xx. 27, 28
Rome, avoided by Totila, VII. vi. 1;
held by John, VII. vi. 8; garrison


of Naples repairs thither, VII. viii.


6-9; placarded by Totila, VII. ix.
21; Belisarius sends a small force
thither, VII. xi. 37; besieged by
Totila, vil. xiii. 1ff.; Vigilius
seeks to send in provisions, VII.
xy. 9ff.; sufferings of the popu-


lation during the siege, VII. xiii.


4 ff., xvi. 4, 7, xvii. 1, 9-25, xx. 3;
concern of Belisarius for it, VII.
xviii. 3; its approaches guarded
by Totila, VII. xviii. 8; captured
by him, VII. xx. 16 ff.; its walls
partly razed by Totila, VII. xxii. 7,
xxiv. 8 saved from destruction


by a letter from Belisarius, VII.
xxii. 8-17; left utterly without
inhabitants by Totila, VII. xxii. 19;
visited by Belisarius, VII. xxiii. 8;
reoccupied and held by him, VII.
xxiv. 2-26; its walls hastily
rebuilt by him, VII. xxiv. 3, 4: its
keys sent to Justinian by Belisarius,
VIl. xxiv. 34; its garrison kills
Conon, VII. xxx. 7; at the mercy of
the Goths, VII. xxxv. 2; its chief
priest Vigilius, VII. xv. 9, xxxv. 9;
its priest Pelagius, VII. xvi. 5; the
road between Rome and Portus,
VII. xix. 11, 18; its harbour, VII.
vi. 18; distance from Algedon, VII.
xxii. 18; from Dryus, VII. xviii. 4

Ruderic, Gothic commander, VII.
v. 1; defeated by Isaac, VI. xix.
25, 26; dies of wounds, VII. xix. 34

Rusciane, harbour of Thurii, VII.
xxviii. 8; strong fortress near it,
do.; which is besieged by Totila,
VII. xxix. 21; makes terms with
the Goths, VII. xxx. 5; Belisarius
attempts to relieve it, VII. xxx.
9-14; surrenders to Totila, VII.
xxx. 19-21

Rusticiane, daughter of Symmachus
and wife of Boethius; reduced
to beggary, VII. xx. 27, 28; hated
by the Goths, VII. xx. 29; protected
by Totila, VII. xx. 30


Sabinianus, guard of Belisarius; sent
to Auximus, VII. xi. 19; decides
to leave Auximus, VII. xi. 26, 27;
attacked by Totila, but escapes,
VII. xi. 29-31; sent to Pisaurus,
VII. xi. 34

Salones, city in Dalmatia, VII. x.
3, 12; near Mouicurum, VII. xxxv.
25; commanded by Claudian,
VII. xxxv. 27

Samnium, entered by Totila, VII. vi.1

Sangarius River, in Bithynia, VII.
xxix. 12

Sclaveni, a barbarian nation, VI.
xxvi. 18; settled near the Ister,
VI. xxvi. 19; formerly called Spori,
VII. xiv. 29; hold extensive terri-
tory, VII. xiv. 30; their frequent
invasions, VII. xiv. 2; defeat
Chilbudius, VII. xiv. 4, 5; make
war on the Antae, VII. xiv. 7; cross


485


INDEX


the Danube, VII. xiii. 24; defeated
by the Eruli, VII. xiii. 25; invade
Illyricum, VII. xxix. 1-3; Ildiges
flees to them, VII. xxxv. 16; many
of them follow him, VII. xxxv. 19;
Iidiges returns to them, VII. xxxv.
21, 22; their democratic govern-
ment, VII. xiv. 22; religious beliefs,
customs, language, etc., VII. Xiv.
23-28; one of them renders a
service to Belisarius, VI. xxvi.
20 ff.

Scylaeum, placein Sicily, VII. xxvii. 17

Scylla, fabled monster in Sicily,
VII. xvii. 17; the Strait of Scylla,
VII. XViii. 26

Senate, VII. xxi. 19, xxii. 19, xxiii. 18,
xxvi. 1, 2, 14, xxxii. 43, 46

Sergius, nephew of Solomon;
to Italy, VII. xxvii. 2

Sicilians, marked for vengeance by
Totila, VII. xvi. 14-21, 31

Sicily, had been captured by an
insignificant Roman force, VII. xvi.
18, 19; important source of sup-
plies for Rome and all Italy, VI.
xxiv. 14° vil. vicl5; xiii. 7; αν. 20,
xix. 13; mentioned, VI. xviii. 9;
VII. vi. 14, 16, vii. 1, xv. 9, xvi. 1,
αν 1S3xxx, 1

Singidunum, city in Moesia; towns
near it given to the Eruli, VII.
xxxili.13

Sirmium, city in Pannonia, taken by
the Gepaedes, VII. xxxili. 8; held
by them, VII. xxxiv. 17, 35

Sisauranon, city in Mesopotamia;
captured by Belisarius, VII. iii. 11

Sisifridus, a Goth; commander of
the Roman garrison of Asise, VII.
xii.12; killed in a sally, VII. xii. 17

Sisigis, commander of a Gothic
stronghold in the Alps; submits
to Belisarius, VI. xxviii. 30, 32;
besieged by Uraias, VI. xxviii. 33

Solomon, uncle of Sergius, VII. xxvii. 2

Spolitium, city in Tuscany; held by
Bessas, VII. vi. 8; besieged by
Totila, VII. xii. 12; surrendered to
him, VII. xii. 15, 16, xxi. 15; its
walls razed by the Goths, VII.
xxiii. 3; Roman prisoners sent
there, VII. xxiii.2; its amphitheatre
used as a garrison by the Goths,


486


sent


VII. xxiii. 3; captured by Mar-
tinianus, VII. xxiii. 4-7

Spori, ancient name of the Antae and
Sclaveni, VII. xiv. 29

Symmachus, father of Rusticiane,
Vile xx. 27, 29

Syracuse, city in Sicily, VII. vii. 1


Tarbesium, stronghold in Venetia;
surrenders to Belisarius, VI. xxix.
40; Vitalius defeated near it, VII.
i. 35; commanded by Totila, VII.
ii. 7; who proposes to surrender it,
VII.ii. 8, 9

Tarentum, city in Calabria; fortified
by John, VII. xxiii. 12-17; its
harbour, VII. xxiii.14; its location,
VII. xxiii. 14, xxviii. 2; distance
from Dryus, VII. xxiii. 12; men-
tioned, VII. xxvii. 11, 17, xxviii.1

Thebes, city in Aegypt, VII. xxix. 6

Theodatus, King of the Goths,
nephew of Theoderic, VI. xxx. 5;
VII. viii. 21

Theoderic, King of the Goths, uncle
of Theodatus, VI. xxx. 5; VII.
i. 4, 21, 32; conciliates the Rogi,
VII. ii. 2; begged to send only a
small garrison to Sicily, VII. xvi.
17; benefits of his reign, VII.ix. 10,
xxi. 12, 23; his wealth carried to
Byzantium, VII. i. 3; statues of
Theoderic destroyed, VII. xx. 29

Theodora, wife of Justinian, Roman
Empress; compels Artabanes to
take back his wife, VII. xxxi. 14;
her death, VII. xxx. 4

Theodorus, an orator in Rome; sent
as envoy to Justinian, VII. xxi. 18

Theodosius, head of the household
of Belisarius, VI. xxviii.8

Theudibert, Frankish King; leads
an army into Italy, VI. xxv. 2-24;
receives a letter from Belisarius,
VI. xxv. 19-23; retires from Italy,
VI. xxv. 24, xxvi.1, 12

Theudimund, son of Mauricius;
escapes from peril, VII. i. 36

Theudis, King of the Visigoths; uncle
of Ildibadus, VI. xxx. 15

Thomas, Roman commander; sent
by Belisarius to take over the
strongholds of the Cottian Alps,
VI. xxviii. 29ff.; besieged by
Uralas, VI. xxviii. 33


INDEX


Thorisin, ruler of the Gepaedes, VII.
xxxiv. 4

Thrace, soidiers recruited thence by
Belisarius, ΟῚ  xh52,)-2, ἘΠῚ. "4:
Narses leads the Eruli_ thither,
VII. xiii. 22: invaded by the Antae,
VII. xiv. 11; overrun by the Eruli,
VII. xxxiii. 13; Chilbudius General
of Thrace, VII. xiv. 2; mentioned,

Thracians, at the mercy of the
barbarians, VII. xxxiii. 1; in the
Roman army, VII. vi. 10; the
following Thracians are mentioned :
Barbation, VII. xi. 37; QGudilas,
VII. xxx. 6

Thurii, city in Bruttium, VII. xxiii.
12; between Croton and Tarentum,
Vil. xxviii.3; its harbour Rusciane,
VII. xxviii. 8

Thurimuth, guard of Belisarius:
sent into Aemilia, VII. xi. 11; with
Vitalius defeats the Goths, VII. xi.
17; returns to Ravenna, VII. xi.
18; sent to Auximus, VII. xi. 19:
defeats the Goths, VII. xi. 25;
decides to leave Auximus, VII. xi.
20. 27; attacked by Totila, but
escapes, VI. xi. 29-31; sent to
Pisaurus, VII. xi. 34

Thuringians, subjugated by the
Franks, VI. xxviii. 17

Tiber River, its bridge, VII. xvii. 22;
guarded by a bridge built by
Totila; Vite: xviii. 9, 10. xix. ΤῸ:
the most of its bridges destroyed
by the Goths, VII. xxiv. 31, xxv.
22; mentioned, VII. vi. 1, x. 23,
xix. 5, 6, xxiv. 10

Tibur, town in Latium; taken by
Potila, Vil xl 9.2 πὶ, es its
inhabitants slain, VII. x. 22; held
by the Goths as a check on Rome,
VII. x. 23; its defences destroyed,
VII. xxiv. 33; occupied by Totila,
VII. xxiv. 31; strengthened by
him, VII. xxiv. 32

Ticinum, city in northern Italy;
Uraias proceeds thither, VI. xxiv.
20, 21, xxx. 4; a bridge there over
the Po, VI. xxv. 8; held by the
Goths, VII. i. 27, iii. 3, iv. 12

Totila, nephew of Ildibadus, VII.ii. 7;
offers to surrender Tarbesiur\ to
Constantianus, VII. ii. 8, 9; invited


to the Gothic throne, VII. ii. 11;
his conditions, VII. ii. 12; assumes
the power, VII. ii. 18, iii. 1; in
Ticinum, VII. iii. 3; moves against
the Romans, VII. iv. 1; addresses
his army, VII. iv. 10-18; crosses
the Po and defeats the Romans,
VII. iv. 19 ff.; sends a force against
Florentia, VII. v. 1; treats Roman
captives kindly, VII. v. 19: cap-
tures Caesena, Petra and Bene-
ventum, VII. vi. 1; lays siege to
Naples, VII. vi. 2ff.; takes by
surrender a fortress near Naples,
VII. xxvi. 13; captures Cumae,
VII. vi. 3; his chivalrous treatment
of the senators’ wives, VII. vi. 4;
gains Bruttium, Lucania, Apulia,
and Calabria, VII. vi. 5; feared
by Roman soldiers, VII. vi. 19:
insulted by Demetrius, VII. vi 21;
intercepts a relieving fleet, VII. vi.
24; humiliates Demetrius, VII.
vii. 8,9; addresses the Neapolitans,
VII. vii. 11-16; receives the sur-
render of Naples, VII. vii. 18-20;
his humane treatment of the
Neapolitans, VII. viii. 1-5; and
kindness to the Roman garrison,
VII. viii. 8, 9; partially dismantles
the defences of Naples, VII. viii.10;
imprisons one of his guards, VII.
viii. 13; appeases the Gothic
notables, VII. viii. 14-24; executes
the guard, VII. viii. 25; writes a
letter to the Roman senate, VII.
ix. 19; has Rome placarded, VII. ix.
20, 21; sends a force against Dryus,
and moves to Rome, VII. ix. 22;
receives a report from Dryus,
VII. x. 9; sends spies to Belisarius’
army, VI?. x. 14-18; takes Tibur,
Vil. x. 19-21; sends : army to
Bononia, VII. xi. 16; eluded by
the Romans, VII. xi. 20; ambushes
the Romans, VII. xi. 28-30;
threatens Pisaurus, VII. xi. 35, 36;
attacks several towns, VII. xi. 38,
39; besieges Tuscan towns, VII.
xii.12; takes Firmum and Asculum
by surrender, VII. xii. 13; receives
the surrender of Spolitium, VII.
xii. 15; and of Asise, VII. xii. 18;
demands the surrender of Perusia,
do.; has Cyprian murdered, VII.


487


INDEX


xii. 19, 20; besieges Rome, VII.
xiii. 1ff.; urges the farmers to
cultivate the land, VII. xiii. 1;
takes the revenue, do.; sends a
force into Aemilia, VII. xiii. 8-11;
ambushes a Roman force, VII. xv.
7, 8; puts to death a Roman
bishop, VII. xv. 14, 15; treats with
Pelagius, VII. xvi. 7—xvii. 1;
receives news of Belisarius’ arrival
at Dryus, VII. xviii.6; guards the
approaches to Rome, VII. xviii. 8;
constructs a bridge over the Tiber,
VII. xviii. 9, 10, xix. 16; receives
remnants of a force from Brundis-
ium? Vile xviii.” 163) sends’ a
force to Capua, VII. xviii. 24; ap-
points Rhecimundus commander of
Bruttium, VII. xviii. 26; executes
Isaac, VII. xix. 34; negotiates with
four JIsaurians, VII. xx. 4-13;
captures Rome, VII. xx. 14 ff.;
satisfied to have the Romans flee,
VII. xx. 20, 21; prays in the church
of Peter the Apostle, VII. xx. 22;
appealed to by Pelagius, VII. xx.
23-25; orders the slaughter of
Romans to cease, VII. xx. 25;
secures the accumulated wealth
of Bessas, VII. xx. 26; protects
Rusticiane and other Roman women,
Vil. xx. 30, 31; addresses the Goths,
vil. xxi. 1-11; and the Roman
senate, VII. xxi. 12-16; persuaded
by Pelagius to spare the senators,
VII. xxi. 17; sends envoys with a
letter to Justinian, VII. xxi. 18-24;
referred by Justinian to Belisarius,
VII. xxi. 25; sends Roman senators
to Campania, VII. xxvi. 2; sends a


force against Tullianus, VII. xxii.


4; decides to dismantle Rome,
VII. xxii. 6; does so in part, VI.
xxii. 7, xxiv. 3, 9; dissuaded by a
letter from Belisarius, VII. xxii.
8-17; garrisons Algedon and
marches against John, VII. xxii. 18;
disposes of his prisoners, VII. xxii.
19; persuades the Roman farmers
to return to their work, VII. xxii. 20,
21; becomes master of southern
Italy except Dryus, VII. xxii. 22;
encamps at Mt. Garganon, VII.
xxii. 24; receives Martinianus
kindly, VII, xxiij. 1, 2; captures


488


Tullianus, son of


Acherontis and goes to Ravenna,
VII. xxiii. 18; attacks Belisarius in
Rome unsuccessfully, VII. xxiv.
8-26; reproached by the Gothic
notables, VII. xxiv. 27; worshipped
by them while successful, VIT. xxiv.
29; retires to Tibur, VII. xxiv. 31;
had sent an army against Perusia,
VII. xxv. 1; requested to assist in
its siege, VII. xxv. 2; addresses
the Goths, VII. xxv. 3-24; moves
against Perusia, VII. xxv. 24;
sends a force into Campania, VII.
xxvi. 3; receives report of its
defeat, VII. xxvi.9; vows vengeance
on John, and marches against him,
vil. xxvi. 15; surprises and routs
him, VII. xvi. 17-23; surprises a
force under Verus, VII. xxvii. 6-9;
frightened away by a Roman fleet,
VII. xxvii. 10; sends troops to
Rusciane, VII. xxviii. 9; who
return defeated to him, VII. xxviii.
11; surprises and overwhelms the
Roman force, VII. xxviii. 13-15;
besieges a fortress near Rusciane,
VII. xxix. 21; prevents a Roman
fleet from landing, VII. xxx 13, 14;
the Romans unsuccessfully attempt
to draw him away from Rusciane,
VII. xxx. 16, 18; sends a force into
Picenum, VII. xxx. 18; takes the
fortress of Rusicane by surrender,
VII. xxx. 19-21; his moderation
in treating the captives, VII. xxx.
21, 22; Ildiges plans to join him,
VII. xxxv. 22; receives Indulf as a
deserter, VII. xxxv. 23; sends him
to Dalmatia, VII. xxxv. 24; Indulf
returns to him, VII. xxxv. 29


‘rajan, Roman Emperor; founded


Turris, VII. xiv. 32

Venantius;
admonishes and assists John, VII.
xviii. 20-22; exercised great
influence in Bruttium and Lucania,
VII. xviii.20; brother of Deopheron,
VII. xxx. 6; rouses the rustics,
VII. xxii.2; defeats a Gothic force,
VIl. xxii. 4-6; makes off in flight,
VII. xxii. 21


Turris, ancient city founded by


Trajan, VII. xiv. 32


Tuscany, famine in, VI. xx. 19;


Romans flee thither, VI. xxv 14;


INDEX


entered by Totila VI. vi. 1;
off from Rome, VII. x. 23;
by Totila, VII. xii. 12;
city Perusia, VII. xxxv. 2


shut
invaded
its chief


Uliaris Roman commander, VI.
21; sent with Martinus against
Uraias, VI. xxi. 1ff.; urged by
Mundilas to hasten, VI. xxi. 5-9;
continues to delay, VI. xxi. 10, 12;
John and Justinus sent to assist
them, VI. xxi. 22, 23; marches
toward Rome, VI. xxi 42; for-
bidden to come before Be’isarius,
VERE. 9

Uliaris Gothic commander, VII. vy. 1

Ulifus guard of Cyprian; kills him
at the instigation of Totila, VII.
xii. 19, 20

Unigastus, guard of Belisarius: saves
him from a serious wound, VI.
xxvii. 14

Uraias, nephew of Vittigis, VI. xxx.
4, 12; besieges Milan, VI. xviii.
19, xxi. 1; makes terms with the
Eruli VI. xxii.6; held in check by
John and others, VI. xxiii. 4; sent
to Ticinum, VI. xxiv. 20-22;
summoned hy Vittigis, VI. xxvi. 9;
leads a relief expedition to Ravenna,
VI. xxviii. 31; turns aside to the
Alps, VI. xxviii. 33; -unable to
continue, VI. xxviii. 35; invited
to assume the kingship of the
Goths, VI. xxx. 4ff.; declines the
offer, VI. xxx. 118: becomes
hostile to Iidibadus, VI. i. 37 ff.;
slain by him VII.i. 41 49

Urbinus, city in Picenum; its
situation, VI. xix. 3, 4: distance
from Ariminum, VI. xix. 1; be-
sieged by Belisarius, VI. xix. 1 ff.;
failure of its water supply, VI. xix.


xvi.


12, 13; captured in mid-winter,

Urvisalia, town in  Picenum;:
destroyed by Alaric; an infant


reared there by a goat, VI. xvii. 1 ff.
Urviventus, town near Rome;
guarded by the Goths, VI. xviii.19;
its situation, VI. xx. 7-10; Peranius
sent against it, pviagxix. I: Bels-
sarius marches. against it by the
advice of Peranins. vt. xx. 3,4:
besieged by him, VI. xx. 5 ff,


Vaces, ruler of the Lombards, VI.
xxii. 11; Vi. xxxv. 18: friend of
the emperor, VI. xxii. 12; uncle of
Risiulfus, VII. xxxv. 13; father
of Valdarus, VII. xxxv. 17; banishes
Risiulfus, VII. xxxv. 14; bribes
the Varnito kill him, Vil. xxxv. 16;
dies of disease, VII. xxxv. 17

Valaris, a Goth; challenges the
Roman army, VII. iv. 21; fights
with Artabazes, VII. iv. 23; slain
by him, VII. iv. 24, 28

Valdarus, son of Vaces; becomes
king of the Lombards, VII. xxxv.
17


Valentinus, Roman commander; sent
to relieve Dryus, VII. x. 6, 7; his
men defeated, Vir. x. 10, 113
returns to Salones, VII. x. 12; sent
to Portus, VII. xv. 1; with Phocas
plans a sally, VII. xv. 2: not
supported by Bessas, VII. xv. 3, 4;
meets his death in a second sally,
VII. xv. 5-8

Valerian, Roman commander; assists
Belisarius at Auximus, VI. xxvi.
17 ff.;. accompanies Belisarius to
Byzantium, VII. i. 1; General of
Armenia; sent to Italy, VII. xxvii.
3; hesitates to cross the Adriatic,
VII. xxvii. 13, 14; sends a small
detachment, VII. xxvii. 15: ordered
by Justinian to proceed, VII. xxx.
1; crosses to Dryus, ὙΠ. xxx. 2;
accompanies Belisarius to Rusciane,
VII. xxx. 9; arrangements made
for him to disembark and march
to Picenum, VII. -xxx. 15, 18;
instead sails to Ancon, VII. xxx. 17

Vandals, in Africa; their overthrow,
Vi. xxii, 16) Vi a2-32 in ‘the
retinue of Belisarius, VII. i. 6; as
captives of Belisarius, VII. i. 12

Varazes, an Armenian, commander
in the Roman army; sent to Italy,
VII. xxvii. 3; unexpectedly rescues
Verus, VII. xxvii. 10;- lands and
marches to Tarentum, VII. xxvii. 11

Varni, a barbarian tribe; Risiulfus
flees to them, VII. xxxv. 15

Velas, a Goth; offended by Ildibadus,
Vil.i. 43 ff.; slays him, VII.i. 47, 48

Venantius, father of Tullianus, vir.
xviii. 20

Venetia, Vitalius sent thither. vt.


489


INDEX


xxviii. 24; gained by Ildibadus,
Vil. i. 27; partly acquired by the
Franks, VII. xxxiii. 7; its towns,
Tarbesium, VI. xxix. 40; Verona,
VII. iii. 3; mentioned, VI. xxi. 41,
xxii.7; VII.i. 34, xxxv. 22


Vergentinus, Roman senator; pro-
ceeds to Dalmatia, VI. xxi. 41
Verona, city in upper Italy; com-


manded by Ildibadus, VI. xxix. 41,
xxx. 16; VII.iii.3; attacked by a
Roman army, VII.iii. 4 ff.; entered
by Artabazes, VII.iii.14; recovered
by the Goths, VII. iii. 16, iv. 18;
many of its garrison summoned by
Totila, VII. iv. 1; distance from
Mantua, VII.iii. 5

Verus, commander of the Eruli; sent
to Italy, VII. xxvii. 3; arrives at
Dryus, VII. xxvii. 4; his uncon-
trolled nature, VII. xxvii. 5, 6;
almost captured by Totila, VII.
xXvVii. 9; rescued by Varazes,
VII. xxvii. 10

Vevon, placein Bruttium, VII. xviii.27

Vigilius, chief priest of Rome; sends
supplies to Rome, VII. xv. 9 ff.;
goes to Byzantium, VII. xvi. 1;
urges Justinian to defend Italy,
VII. xxxv. 9

Visandus, Erulian commander; left
in Venetia, VI. xxii. 8; killed in
battle, VII. i. 35

Visigoths, in Spain;
Theudis, VI. xxx. 15

Vitalian, the tyrant; uncle of John,
ἘΠῚ 1 90. xxvii. 11. xxxiv. 41

Vitalius, General of Ulyricum, VII.x. 2;
meets the Eruliin Venetia, VI. xxii.
7; guards the Po near Ravenna, VI.
xxviii. 2; sent into Venetia, VI.
xxviii. 24; defeated by Ildibadus,
VII. i. 34, 35; escapes, VI. i. 36;
confers with other commanders,
Vil. iii. 2, 3; returns from Italy
and accompanies Belisarius through


their king


Thrace, VII. x. 2ff.; persuades
him to proceed to Ravenna, VII.
xiii. 14; repulses an attack of the
Goths, VII. xi. 16, 17; sent into
Aemilia. VII. xi. 11; captures
Bononiua, VII. xi. 12

Vittigis, King of the Goths; places
a very strong garrison in Auximus,
VI. xxiii. 8; learns from Gothic
fugitives of the approach of Beli-
sarius to Ariminum, VI. xvii. 17,
18; holds Ravenna, VI. xviii. 19,
xxiii.l, xxiv. 24; seeks the alliance
of the Lombards, VI. xxii. 9-12;
persuaded to stir up Chosroes,
VI. xxii. 13 ff.; his envoys returned
by Justinian, VI. xxii.22; appealed
to in vain by the Goths in Auximus,
VI. xxiv. 1-16, xxvi. 2, 5-15; also
by those in Fisula, VI. xxiv. 19;
sends Uraias to Ticinum, VI. xxiv.
20; besieged in Ravenna, VI.
xxviii. 1 ff.; receives envoys from
the Franks and from Belisarius,
VI. xxviii. 7-22; favours the latter,
VI. xxviii. 23; despairs of success;
VI. Xxviii.27; agrees tomake peace,
VI. xxix. 2,3; VII.ii.15; the Goths
dissatisfied with his rule, VI. xxix,
17; encourages Belisarius to accept
the kingship, VI. xxix. 21; invited
by Belisarius to make good his
promise, VI. xxix. 24: places
himself in the hands of the Romans,
VI. xxx. 21; guarded by Belisarius,
VI. xxix. 35; taken to Byzantium
by Belisarius, VII. i. 1, 2; had
dismantled Pisaurus and Fanus,
VII. xi. 32, xxv. 7; uncle of Uraias,
VI. xxx. 4, 12; husband of Mata-
suntha, VI. Xxviii.26; VII.i. 2

Viledas, Gothic commander, VII. v. 1


Wolf-Helmet, mountain in Pisidia,
VII. xxvii. 20

Wolf-Skulls, name applied to certain
of the Pisidians, VII. xxvii. 20


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY RICHARD CLAY AND COMPANY, LTD.,
BUNGAY, SUFFOLK.


HAN ie


|


|


NORTHERN
ITALY +—


Scale of English Miles


o bb δ 31 40 50


| ad Wiese


—
; " 7
.] ᾿ _ _ .


THE LOEB CLASSICAL
LIBRARY


VOLUMES ALREADY PUBLISHED


Latin Authors


AMMIANUS MARCELLINUs. Translated by J. C. Rolfe. 3 Vols.


APULEIUS: THE GOLDEN Ass (METAMORPHOSES). W. Adling-
ton (1566). Revised by S. Gaselee.


St. AUGUSTINE: Crry oF Gop. 7 Vols. Vol. I.  G. H.
McCracken. Vol. VI. W. Ὁ. Greene.


St. AUGUSTINE, CONFESSIONS OF. W. Watts (1631). 2 Vols.
St. AUGUSTINE, SELECT Letters. J. H. Baxter.

Ausontius. H.G. Evelyn White. 2 Vols.

Bepe. J. E. King. 2 Vols.


BoetHivus: Tracts and DE CONSOLATIONE PHILOSOPHIAE.
Rev. H. F. Stewart and E. K. Rand.


CAESAR: ALEXANDRIAN, AFRICAN and SPANISH Wars. A. G.
Way.

CaEsAaR: Civit Wars. A. G. Peskett.

CaESAR: GALLIC War. H. J. Edwards.


Cato: DE RE Rustica; VARRO: DE RE Rustica. H. B. Ash
and W. D. Hooper.


Catutitus. F.W. Cornish; Trsutitus. J. B. Postgate; PrEr-
VIGILIUM VENERIS. J. W. Mackail.


Cretsus: DE Mepricrya. W.G. Spencer. 3 Vols.

CicERO: Brutus, and Oratror. G. L. Hendrickson and H. M.
Hubbell.

[ΟἸΘΕΒΟ]: AD HERENNIUM. H. Caplan.


CicERO: DE ORATORE, etc. 2 Vols. Vol. I. DE ORATORE,
Books I. and II. E. W. Sutton and H. Rackham. Vol. Ii.
De OrRaATORE, Book III. De Fato; Paradoxa Stoicorum;
De Partitione Oratoria. H. Rackham.


CicERO: Dr Fryisus. H. Rackham.

CicERO: DE INVENTIONE, etc. H. M. Hubbell.

CicERO: DE Natura DEORUM and AcADEMIcCA. H. Rackham.
CicERO: Dr OrFficius. Walter Miller.


CicERO: DE REPUBLICA and DE LEGIBUS; SOMNIUM SCIPIONIs.
Clinton W. Keyes.
1


CicERO: Dr SENEcTUTE, DE ΑΜΊΟΙΤΙΑ, DE ΤΡΙΨΙΝΑΤΙΟΝΈ.
W. A. Falconer.

Cicero: Is CaTILINAM, Pro Fracco, Pro ΜΌΒΕΝΑ, Pro SULLA.
Louis E. Lord. , ' ᾿

CicERO: LEerrers to Arricus. Εἰ. Ο. Winstedt. 3 Vols.

igmEo- Letters ΤῸ His Frienps. W. Glynn Williams. 3

ols.

CicERO: Puiurerics. W.C. A. Ker.

Cicero: Pro ArcutiA Post REpiItTuM, DE Domo, DE HaArus-
PicumM RrEsponsis, Pro Prancio. N.H. Watts.

CicERO: Pro Carctna, Pro LEGE Manimia, Pro CLUENTIO,
Pro Rasirio. H. Grose Hodge.

Cicero: Pro Carxtio, DE Provinctis CONSULARIBUS, PRO
Barpo. R. Gardner.

Cicero: Pro ΜΊΠΟΝΕ, IN PisoneM, Pro Scauro, Pro Fon Tero,
Pro Rasrrio PostumMo, Pro MarcetyLo, Pro Licario, Pro
ReEecE Deriotaro. N. H. Watts.

CicrRo: Pro Quincrio, Pro Roscto AMERINO, PRO Roscio
ComoEDoO, Contra Ruttum. J. H. Freese.

Cicero: Pro Sestio, In Vatintium. R. Gardner.

Cicero: TuscuLaN Disputations. J. Εἰ. King.

CiceRO: VERRINE OratTions. L. H. G. Greenwood. 2 Vols.

CLAuDIAN. M. Platnauer. 2 Vols.

CoLUMELLA: DE ΒΕ Rustica. DE Arsorisus. H. B. Ash,
E. S. Forster and E. Heffner. 3 Vols.

Curttius, Q.: History oF ALEXANDER. J.C. Rolfe. 2 Vols.

Fiorus. E.S. Forster; and Cornetius NEpos. J.C. Rolfe.

FRONTINUS: STRATAGEMS and AquEDucts. C. E. Bennett and
M. B. McElwain.

FRontTO: CORRESPONDENCE. C. R. Haines. 2 Vols.

Ge.utus, J. C. Rolfe. 3 Vols.

Horace: OprEs AND Epopss. C. E. Bennett.

Horace: Satires, Epistites, Ars Porrica. H. R. Fairclough.

JEROME: SELECTED Letters. Εἰ. A. Wright.

JUVENAL and Perstus. G. G. Ramsay.

Livy. B. O. Foster, F. G. Moore, Evan T. Sage, and A. C.
Schlesinger and R. M. Geer (General Index). 14 Vols.

Lucan. J.D. Duff.

Lucretius. W.H. Ὁ. Rouse.

Mariiat. W.C.A. Ker. 2 Vols.

Mrnor Latin Ports: from Pusiinius Syrus To RvTILIUs
NAMATIANUS, including GRarrius, CALPURNIUS SICULUs,


NEMESIANUS, AvIANUS, and others with “ Aetna” and the
* Phoenix.” J. Wight Duff and Arnold M. Duff.


Ovip: THE Art oF LovE and OTHER Poems. J. H. Mozley.
2


Ovip: Fastr. Sir James G. Frazer.

Ovip: HerrorpEs and AMorEs. Grant Showerman.
Ovip: MetTAaMorRPHOSES. F. J. Miller. 2 Vols.
Ovip: ΤΈΙΒΤΙΑ and Ex Ponto. A. L. Wheeler.
Persius. Cf. JUVENAL.


Prerronius. M. Heseltine; SENECA; APOCOLOCYNTOSIS.
W. H. Ὁ. Rouse.


Prautus. Paul Nixon. 5 Vols.


Puryy: Letrers. Melmoth’s Translation revised by W. M. L.
Hutchinson. 2 Vols.


Priny: Naturat History. H. Rackham and W. H.S. Jones.
10 Vols. Vols. 1... and IX. H. Rackham. Vols. VI. and
Vil. W.H. S. Jones.


Prorertivus. H. E. Butler.

PrupEntivus. H.J. Thomson. 2 Vols.

QuINTILIAN. H. E. Butler. 4 Vols.

REMAINS OF ΟἿ Latin. E. H. Warmington. 4 Vols. Vol. I.
(ENNIUS AND Caecitius.) Vol. II. (Livirus, NArvius,
Pacuvius, Acctus.) Vol. III. (Lucitius and Laws or XII
TABLES.) (ARCHAIC INSCRIPTIONS.)

Sattust. J.C. Rolfe.

ScripToReEs Histor1aE AuGusTAE. Ὁ. Magie. 3 Vols.

SENECA: APOCOLOCYNTOSIS. Cf. PETRONIUs.

SENECA: EpistuLAE Moraes. R. M. Gummere. 3 Vols.

SENECA: Morat Essays. J. W. Basore. 3 Vols.

SENECA: TRAGEDIES. F.J. Miller. 2 Vols.

Smpontus: Porms and Letters. W.B. ANDERSON. 2 Vols.

S1x1us Iraticus. J.D. Duff. 2 Vols.

Statius. J. H. Mozley. 2 Vols.

SuvEtonius. J.C. Rolfe. 2 Vols.

Tacitus: Dratocurs. Sir Wm. Peterson. AGRICOLA and
GERMANIA. Maurice Hutton.

Tacitus: Histories AND ANNALS. C.H. Moore and J. Jackson.
4 Vols.

TERENCE. John Sargeaunt. 2 Vols.

TERTULLIAN: Apotocia and De SprEctracttis. T. R. Glover.
Minucius Fetrx. G. H. Rendall.

VALERIUs Fruaccus. J. H. Mozley.

Varro: De Lincua Latrna. R.G. Kent. 2 Vols.

VELLEIUs PatTERcULUS and RrEs GEsTAE Divi Auausti. Εἰ, W.
Shipley.

Vireizx. H.R. Fairclough. 2 Vols.

Virruvius: De ArcHITEcTURA. F. Granger. 2 Vols.


3


Greek Authors


ACHILLES Tatius. S. Gaselee.


AELIAN: ON THE NATURE OF ANIMALS. A. F. Scholfield. 3
Vols.


AENEAS Tactricus, ASCLEPIODOTUS and ONASANDER. ‘The
Tilinois Greek Club.

AESCHINES. C. Ὁ. Adams.

Arscuytus. H. Weir Smyth. 2 Vols.


ALCIPHRON, AELIAN, PHILOSTRATUS: LETTERS. A. R. Benner
and F. H. Fobes.


ANDOCIDES, ANTIPHON, Cf. Minor Arric ORATORS.
APOLLODORUs. Sir James G. Frazer. 2 Vols.
APOLLONIUS RuHoptus. R. C. Seaton.

THE AposTOLiC FATHERS. Kirsopp Lake. 2 Vols.
APPIAN: Roman History. Horace White. 4 Vols.
Aratus. Cf. CALLIMACHUS.


ARISTOPHANES. Benjamin Bickley Rogers. 3 Vols. Verse
trans.


ARISTOTLE: ART OF RHETORIC. J. H. Freese.


ARISTOTLE: ATHENIAN CONSTITUTION, EUDEMIAN ETHICS,
VICES AND VirTuEs. H. Rackham.


ARISTOTLE: GENERATION OF ANIMALS. A. L. Peck.
ARISTOTLE: Mrtapuysics. H. Tredennick. 2 Vols.
ARISTOTLE: METEROLOGICA. H. D. P. Lee.

ARISTOTLE: Mtnor Works. W. S. Hett. On Colours, On
Things Heard, On Physiognomies, On Plants, On Marvellous
Things Heard, Mechanical Problems, On Indivisible Lines,
On Situations and Names of Winds, On Melissus, Xenophanes,
and Gorgias.

ARISTOTLE: NICOMACHEAN Eruics. H. Rackham.

ARISTOTLE: Orconomica and Macna Moraria. G. Ὁ. Arm-
strong; (with Metaphysics, Vol. 11.).

ARISTOTLE: ON THE HEAVENS. W. K. C. Guthrie.

ARISTOTLE: ON THE Sout. Parva NATURALIA. ON BREATH.
ἵν. 5. Hett.

ARISTOTLE: CATEGORIES, ON INTERPRETATION, PRIOR
ANALYTICS. H. P. Cooke and H. Tredennick.

ARISTOTLE: PostEeRIOoR ANALYTICS, Topics. H. Tredennick
and ἘΣ. ὃ. Forster.

ARISTOTLE: ON SOPHISTICAL REFUTATIONS.

On Coming to be and Passing Away, On the Cosmos. E.S.
Forster and D. J. Furley.

ARISTOTLE: Parts or Animas. A. L. Peck; Morron anp

PROGRESSION OF ANIMALS. E.'S. Forster.


4


pa Puysics. Rev. P. Wicksteed and F. M. Cornford.

2 Vols.

ARISTOTLE: Portics and Lonerxus. W. Hamilton Fyfe;
DEMETRIUS ON STYLE. W. Rhys Roberts.

ARISTOTLE: Ponitics. H. Rackham.

ARISTOTLE: PROBLEMS. W.S. Heit. 2 Vols.

ARISTOTLE: RHETORICA AD ALEXANDRUM (with PROBLEMS.
Vol. 11.) H. Rackham.

ARRIAN: HistoRY OF ALEXANDER and InpIcA. Rey. E. Llitfe
Robson. 2 Vols.

ATHENAEUS: DEIPNOSOPHISTAE. C. B. GunicK. 7 Vols.

St. Bastz: Letrers. R. J. Deferrari. 4 Vols.

CaLLimacHus: FrRacMENTs. C. A. Trypanis.

CaLLIMACHUs, Hymns and Epigrams, and LycopHron., A. W.
Mair; Aratus. G. R. Marr.

CLEMENT of ALEXANDRIA. Rev. G. W. Butterworth.

CotLtuTHus. Cf. OPPILAN.


DaPHNis AND CHLOE. Thornley’s Translation revised by
J.M. Edmonds; and PArTHENIus. S. Gaselee.

DEMOSTHENES I[,: OtLyNntTHtacs, Puinippics and Minor Ora-
TIons. I.—XVII. anp XX. J.H. Vince.

DEMOSTHENES II.: DE Corona and DE Fatsa LEGATIONE.
C. A. Vince and J. H. Vince.
DEMOSTHENES III.: ΜΕΙΡΙΑΒ, ANDROTION, ARISTOCRATES,
TIMOCRATES and ARISTOGEITON, I. AND II. J.H. Vince.
DEMOSTHENES IV.-VI.: PRIVATE ORATIONS and IN NEAERAM.
A. T. Murray.

DEMOSTHENES VII.: FUNERAL SPEECH, Erotic Essay, ExorpIa
and Letters. N. W. and Ν. 7. DeWitt.

Dio Casstus: Roman History. Εἰ. Cary. 9 Vols.

Dio Curysostom. J. W.Cohoon and H. Lamar Crosby. 5 Vols,

Dioporwus Sicutus. 12 Vols. Vols. I-VI. Ὁ. H. Oldfather.
Vol. VII. C. L. Sherman. Vols. IX. and X. R. M. Geer.
Vol. XI. F. Walton.

DiocGENEs LAERITIUS. R.D. Hicks. 2 Vols.

Dionysus oF HALICARNASSUS: ROMAN ANTIQUITIES. Spel-
man’s translation revised by E. Cary. 7 Vols.

Epictetus. W.A. Oldfather. 2 Vols.

Euripipes. Α. 5. Way. 4 Vols. Verse trans.

Evsesius: EcciestasitcAL History. Kirsopp Lake and
J, .-E. Oulton. 2 Vols:

GALEN: ON THE NATURAL Facuttiss. A. J. Brock.

THE GREEK ANTHOLOGY. W.R. Paton. 5 Vols.

GREEK ELEGY AND JAmMBUS with the ANACREONTEA. J. M.
Edmonds. 2 Vols.


Ture GREEK Bucotic Ports (THEOcRITUs, Bion, Moscuvs).
J. M. Edmonds.

YREEK MATHEMATICAL Works. Ivor Thomas. 2 Vols.

Heropes. Cf. THEOPHRASTUS: CHARACTERS.

Heropotus. A. D.Godley. 4 Vols.

HeEs1op AND THE Homeric Hymns. H. G. Evelyn White.

Hippocrates and the FRAGMENTS OF HERACLEITUS. W.H.S.
Jones and E. T. Withington. 4 Vols.

Homer: Intap. A. T. Murray. 2 Vols.

Homer: Opyssrty. A. T. Murray. 2 Vols.

Isarus. E. W. Forster.

TsocratEs. George Norlin and LaRue Van Hook. 3 Vols.

Sr. JoHN DAMASCENE: BARLAAM AND ITOASAPH. Rev. G. R.
Woodward and Harold Mattingly.

Joseruus. H. St. J. Thackeray and Ralph Marcus. 9 Vols.
Vols. I—VII.

JuLiaAnN. Wilmer Cave Wright. 3 Vols.

Lucran. 8 Vols. Vols. I.-V. A.M. Harmon. Vol. VI. K.
Kilburn.

LycopHron. Cf. CALLIMACHUS.

Lyra Grarca. J. M. Edmonds. 3 Vols.

Lystas. W. R. M. Lamb.

ManetrHo. W.G. Waddell: Protemy: TEerraprstos. F. E.
Robbins.

Marcus AURELIus. C. R. Haines.

MENANDER. F. G. Allinson.

Minor Artric Orators (ANTIPHON, ANDOCIDES, LycuRGUS,
DEMADES, DinarcHUs, HyPEREIDEsS). Κα. J. Maidment and
J. O. Burrt. 2 Vols.

Nonnos: Dionystaca. W.H.D. Rouse. 3 Vols.

ΟΡριαν, CotLtuTHus, TRyPHIODORUS. A. W. Mair.

Papyri. Non-LirerRArRY SELEcTIONS. A. S. Hunt and C. 6.
ΤΠΕΙΣ 2 Vols. Lirrrary SELECTIONS (Poetry). D. L.

age.

PaRTHENIUs. Cf. DAPHNIS and CHLOE.

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE. W. Η. S. Jones. 4
Vols. and Companion Vol. arranged by R. E. Wycherley.

Puro. 10 Vols. Vols. I.-V.; F. H. Colson and Rev. 6. H.
Whitaker. Vols. VI.-IX.;. F. H. Colson.

PxILo: two supplementary Vols. (Zranslation only.) Ralph
Marcus.

PuHILOSTRATUS: THE LIFE OF APOLLONIUS OF TyANA. F. (Ὁ.
Conybeare. 2 Vols.

PHILOSTRATUS: IMAGINES; CALLISTRATUS: DESCRIPTIONS. A.
Fairbanks.

6


PHILOSTRATUS and EuNAPIvus: LIVES ΟΥ̓ THESOPHISTS. Wilmer
Cave Wright.
Prnpar. Sir J. E. Sandys.


PLATO: CHARMIDES, ALCIBIADES, HippaArcHus, THE LOVERs,
THEAGES, ΜΙΝΟΒ and Eprrnomis. W. R. M. Lamb.


Prato: CraAtTyYLUS, PARMENIDES, GREATER Hrppias, LESSER
Hippras. H. N. Fowler.


Prato: EurHypHrRo, Apotoay, Crito, PHAEDO, PHAEDRUs.
H. N. Fowler.


Prato: LAcHEs, Proracoras, MENO, EurHyDEMus. W.R. M.
Lamb.


Puiato: Laws. Rev. R.G. Bury. 2 Vols.
Prato: Lysis, Sympostum, Goretas. W.R. M. Lamb.
PxLatTo: ReEpusLic. Paul Shorey. 2 Vols.


ῬΙΑΤΟ: STATESMAN, PHILEBUS. H.N.Fowler; Ion. W.R.M.
Lamb.


Puato: THEAETETUS and SopHist. H. N. Fowler.


Prato: Trmaerus, Critias, CLiropHO, MENEXENUS, EPISTULAE.
Rev. R. G. Bury.


PrurarcH: Moraria. 15 Vols. Vols. 1.-ν. F. C. Babbitt.
Vol. VI. W.C. Helmbold. Vol. VII. P. H. De Lacy and
B. Einarson. Vol. LX. E. L. Minar, Jr., F. H. Sandbach,
ἵν, ©) Helmbold: Voli xX. HH. Ne Howler)” Vole ἘΠ
Cherniss and W. C. Helmbold.


PrLuTarcH: THE PARALLEL Lives. B. Perrin. 11 Vols.
Potypius. W.R. Paton. 6 Vols.

Procoptus: History OF THE Wars. Η. Β. Dewing. 7 Vols.
PTOLEMY: TETRABIBLOS. Cf. MANETHO.

Quintus SMyRNAEUs. A.S. Way. Verse trans.

Sextus Emprricus. Rev. R.G. Bury. 4 Vols.

SopHoctes. Εἰ, Storr. 2 Vols. Verse trans.

SrraBo: GEOGRAPHY. Horace L. Jones. 8 Vols.


THEOPHRASTUS: CHARACTERS. J. M. Edmonds. HeEropss,
ete. A. D. Knox.


THEOPHRASTUS: ENQUIRY INTO PLaANTs. Sir Arthur Hort,
Bart. 2 Vols.


TuHucypipEs. C.F.Smith. 4 Vols.

TrypHiopoORus. Cf. OPPIAN.

XENOPHON: CYROPAEDIA. Walter Miller. 2 Vols.

XENOPHON: HELLENICA, ANABASIS, APOLOGY, and SYMPOSIUM.
C. L. Brownson and O. J. Todd. 3 Vols.

XENOPHON: MEMORABILIA and OEcoNomicus. E.C. Marchant.

XENOPHON: Scripta Minora. E. C. Marchant.


IN PREPARATION


Greek Authors


ARISTOTLE: History oF ANIMALS. A. L. Peck.
Piotinus: A. H. Armstrong.


Latin Authors


BaBRIUS AND PHAEDRUsS. Ben Εἰ. Perry.


DESCRIPTIVE PROSPECTUS ON APPLICATION


London WILLIAM HEINEMANN LTD
Cambridge, Mass. HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS
