================================================================================
Psychomachia; or, The War of the Soul
Aurelius Prudentius Clemens | Translated from the Latin (London, 1743)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Internet Archive: Psychomachia, the war of the soul (1743)
Source URL: https://archive.org/details/bim_eighteenth-century_psychomachia-the-war-of_prudentius_1743
Rights: Public Domain (U.S.)
Staged: 2026-10-09 | Tower of Babel Library, Batch 09a (classical-literature lane)

PREFACE,


N AzRaM's Life we ſee a Plan
Ot Faith, accommodate to Man;
Who proy'd, in Ares low Delius,
The parent of the Bleſſed Line; .
And took an anpler Name of Grace
To ty pify his num rous Race. N
His 45. you'll find, When well apply 4.
In Paith's Concerns your ſureſt Guide.
When to the Mount you ſee him lead |
The Earneft of the promis'd Seed,


Of ſinking Age the darling Son,


Think, in like Cafe, what muſt be done; |
To God you only muſt impatt,
What's choiceſt, beſt, and next your Heart,
Ev'n us, the faithful PATRIARCH ſtrove,
By nen * to move, |
Wich


{821
With many-headed 77 Vice to wage
Eternal War with pious Rage; ;
For till the Spirit does fubdue
The wild, ungovernable Crew
of monſtrous Vices, that infeſt
With Ravage dire the human Breaft,
Oblations, tho? of pureſt Kind,
Shall ne'er with God Acceptance find.
But Words, he knew, had often fail'd,
Where n Precedents prevail'd ;
And therefore what his Precepts taught,
His thund'ring Arm in Battle wrought.
£ By Chance wbilſt Lor, whofe growing Name
Was brighten'd by his Uncle's Fame;
"In Sopow's Diſtrict did reſide,” © ©
That early Source of Ly and Pride,
Confed'rate Kings the State invade,
And Lor and Natives captive made.
The direful Tale ſtrikes ABRaM's Ears,
And fills his Soul with anxious Fears,
4 | That


$27
That barb'rous Conquerors conſtrain
His Nephew in a ſervile Chain.
Breathing Revenge he ſtrait reviews
His menial Servants, and purſues.
The flying Victors, whom a Load

Of Spoil encumber'd on the Road. 2
Old Age itſelf, with Sword in Hand,
Leads on the firm domeffick Band;

And full of Energy divine,

In pious Arms delights to thine. ;

Th' o'erloaded, ſtraggling Rout of Foes
He beats, diſperſes, overthrows; _ _.
Redeems the Captives from their Chains,
And plunder'd SoDOM's Spoil regains;
Soft Virgins, whom in Bonds they bore;;
And rural Meglib, a countleſs Store;
| Much Gold, and coſtly Suits of Dreſs,
And houſhold Treaſures numberleſs, b |
Then Lor himſelf, who groaning bond ws 7


Beneath the galling Fetter's Load,


n 21
B 2 | U 24008 tle


[04]

Unloos'd, recover'd once again
The upright Attitude of Man.
ABRAM, who with vindiftive Pow'r
O'ertook the flying Conqueror,
Returns, the glorious Work atchiev'd,
His pious Nephew Lor reliey'd,
Proud, no Barbarian ſhould oppreſs
The Lineage Heay'n ordain'd to bleſs. =
As recent from the Field of Fame,
And wide-extended Death he came,
MELcHISEDECK the Hero meets, |
And with cœleſtial Viands greets; 5
A royal Prigſ, but of what Line
No human Searches can divine;


From what Progenitors he roſe,

No Being, but Janovan knows.
Angels, itinerant below,

To ſee the far-fam'd Patriarch go,

Vouchſafe his humble Board to grace,

And take the Banquet of the Places;
2 e Whilſt


[5]

Whilſt wond'ring Sarah feels her Womb
To beat with promis'd Life to come,
And, joyful in this Jate Relief,
Regrets the Laugh of Unbelief.

This Map of Life ſo fair, ſo true,
For us to imitate he drevw
Like him, we militant muſt live,


To rebel Thoughts no Reſpite give;


But always under Armour ſtand,


And bear the Sword of Faith in Hand;
And when a Member would obey
Of Las the dire, tyrannick Sway,
The Heart's Militia we muſt ſend
Its moral Freedom to defend.
Nor any Want that Soul will find
Of Forces of the Bouſbold Kind,
Who ſpiritually can explain |
What AnRAM's myfick * Niimbers means -
„ There are various Expoſitions of this Paſſage, but that. of


Ciimans ALEXANDRINUS is the moſt probable ; he hereby
ſtands the Myſtery of Feſus Chrif Cracifed ; the Letter x, 33


re of the Croſs, denoteg 300, and the firſt two Letters in the
ame [ngo?g denote 18, in all, 318, the Number of Ana-


naAu's Houſhold.


*


12
CHRIST, of whoſe generative Source
No Morra comprehends the Courſe,
Our true High-Prief, will then prepare
'To feaſt our. Souls with Reav*nly Fare ;
And in our Boſoms will reſide,
From Luft and Paſſion purify'd.
IIluſtrious Spirits! Trebly bleſt!
The holy TziniTyY your Gueſt!
From that Aliance ye will fink © ,, |
| Freſh Vigour working in the Mind.
The Seeds of Goodneſs richly ſown
In Souls, by Axe unfruigful grown,
And, cultur d by indulgent Skies,
Behold large Crops of Virtue rife. — & +
Then ſhall your Hearts, like Sarah, bear
A late, but not unworthy Heir,


PST.


21


PSTCHOMACHI 4: b
OR, THE
WAR of the SOUL.


DN Tov. whoſe mercies  fibver _ to
| 45 Jon helpleſs mortals, when diſtreſt 2
RS Thou, who art mighty in thy father's
And in thine own indubitable right; *
Stil d his deſcendant, and yet ü create,

In godbead one, in per ſon ſeparate,

Fro me, O CHRIST, thy guardian fuccour bring,
And grace the fubje& I preſume to ſing.

Say, with what arms the human ſoul expels
Fach vice, that harbours in her inmoſt cells;
| What troops ſhe ſends the rebel to defeat,

And keep the peace of our internal fate,
When fleſh with ſpirit, thought with thought


And chri iftian minds are made the ſeat of a 1


For,


| C8]
For, beav' ny leader, thou wouldſt neꝰ er —
Thy flock unarm'd to ſuch outragious foe;


No various virtues on their fide engage
The ſoul to ſuccour, and her wars to wage;
With wond*rous arts the infant mind you form,
And fence the fortreſs for the future Storm,
Art always ready, when diſtreſs is nigh,
Strength to impart, and prudence to ſupply,
The hear?”s obſcure devices to unfold,
shew whence they riſe, and how they 3
That bence thy name with added beams —
And all the #riumph of the war be thine.
To conqueſt ſhort and eaſy were the way,
Could we their numbers, and their CHIEFS ſurvey,
That uſeful work the gracious muſe deſigns,
And ranks both armies in oppoſing lines ;
"IR Preſents each dreadful combatant to fight,
+” Paints all the turns, and fortune of che fight.


"Py
1


Th


[9]


The COMBAT of FAITH and IDOLATRY.
IRS T, heav'n-born FaiTH —_—_— Res
The dubious fortune of the war to try;
"Rude was her dreſs, and un-adorn'd her hair,
Her arms protended, and her ſhoulders bare;
So ſudden was the impulſe of her mind,
She left all ;n/fruments of war behind;
And wholly truſting to a dauntleſs heart,
Neo ſhield ſhe carried, nor envenom'd dart,
But, ſteel'd with native proweſs, on ſhe goes
To brave che fierceſt fury of her foes. 275
When, lo! IporArRT. aſham'd to yield.
Accepts the challenge to conteſt the field
Drunk with the blood of many victims lain,
The bloated monſter ſtalkd along the plain;
Fir d at the fight Faith riſes to the blow.
And falls with fury on her frantic foe,
© Whoſe hoary head, with ſacred fillets bound, b
Stunn'd with the ſhock, comes tumbling to the
| c ow


[ 10 E

Then, treading on her neck, arreſts her breath,
And leaves her ling' ring in the pangs of death;
For the pent Air her ſobbing lungs contain
Feeds life awhile, and animates her pain.

Loud ſhout the martyrs who advent*rous came,
By Faith-embold'ned, to the field of fame;
Whence, crown'd with garlands, they e
Array'd in veſtments of the tyrian dye.


The COMBAT of CHa8TITY and LUST.


TEXT to the field, rous'd by the war's a-
Fair CHASTITY advanc'd in ſplendid —

From th? adverſe lines a fury ſhoots in haſte,
With flaming torches whizzing round her waſte;
From ſinful SODOM ſhe deriv'd her birth,
That neſt of luſt to ſtock th? infected carthz =
And on the maid the fiend, like lightning flies,
Darting her ſmoaking torches in her eyes,
Tries ev'ry art the bluſhing Fair to choak
With ſcreaming ſulphur, and encircling ſmoak.
| | | 1


1 1

In thought ſerene, the virgin ſtooping low *
Lift a huge ſtone, and hurls it at her ſoe;
The rocky fragment, with a tempeſt Ls,”
Lights on the arm, and ſnaps the tingling bone; |
The deaden'd nerves no griping pow'r retain, 5
But drop the gying firebrand on the plain. | |

The barlot thus diſarm'd, the conqu'ring maid
Forth from her fide unſheaths the ſhining blade;
Thro? the tough neck the ſword a paſſage found,
And thick corruption iſſued from the wound,
Which in its courſe a nauſeous ſtench exhales,
Spreads thro” the air, and taints the ambient gales.

This be thy fate, the Queen proclaims with jo
Thus inoffenſi ve on the earth to lie;
No longer ſhalt thou wave thy flaming brand,
| Hot plagues to ſcatter o'er a waſted land;
Chrif's lamp alone the hallow'd heart ſhall fire, ©
And vital light, and vital warmth inſpire :
Thou baneful mifchief to the ſons of men,
Who could have choughr you'd viſit earth


again #


Wher


[ 22 ]

When JopiT#'s arm th* ASSYRIAN's luſt ſup-
Did you not. feel the dagger in your breaſt ? 1 |
Did you not both at once reſign your breath,
Bleed from one wound, and jointly ſink to death?

Illuſtrious JuDITH ! thy unequall'd name
Succeeding times ſhall conſecrate to fame;
Twas heav'n inſpir'd you with ſo 13
_ ?Twas heay'n aſſiſted, and for me you fought.
But then perhaps beneath the barren ſhade
Of Jewiſh rites, which better times portray'd,
When god's own ſpirit ſhou'd on earth be born,
And fairer virtues human breaſts adorn,

The valiant matron might eſſay in vain

To fix the period of thy deadly reign:

But now thy empire has fulfill'd its date,

The weak are made the miniſters of fate;
Nature amaz'd forſakes her uſual road.


Led thro' new paths to generate a god, 3 be


Forth from a virgin's pure, and maiden w 4
| Behold! behold the mighty congueror come!
The


- 7
3
"YA


[ 23 ]
The #:/ of man, thy old imperial ſeat, |
Releas'd from thee, aſſumes a nobler State;


A new alliance is commenc'd with heav'n,


A God to fleſh, and fleſh to God is giv'n:


vnd'rous conception where extremes unite,
And bring full man, full deity to licht.
Yet to the form divine no weakneſs cleaves,
But man new graces, and new ſtrength receives;


For after all the heav'nly gifts beſtow'd,


The ſpring of bounty undiminiſh'd flow'd;


Still in the God unfaded glories ſhine,

Our nature brighten, and exalt our line,
He ſtill the ſame, but we become divine.
Here lies my ſafety, here I put my truſt,
And hence my triumph, O infernal Lüst;


Hence 'tis my empire, ſince the virgin's age,


Mocks thy devices, and defies thy rage;
Thou art the way to hell; thy flatt'ring path
Leads to the chambers of eternal Death *


By


[14]

By thee ſeduc d. unwary ſouls begin |

To walk unthougheful in the ways of fin ;
Blindly they enter, by thy ſoothings led,

Soon grow defibd, and fink among the dead.

| Hence chen to bell. thou fury, ſpeed thy flight,
And howl in dungeons of eternal night ;


Or ſtretch'd at length on ſome ſulphureous


stream,


Or roll'd in whirling vortices of flame :
On earth no more uplift thy baleful face,
To teui pt the heroes of the chriftian race ;
Oer them in quiet let Mzss14n reign,
And keep his flock unconſcious of a ſtain.
I Thus ſpake the maid; and joyful to foreſee
The growing bleſſings of her victory, ,
She ſeeks the ſil ver ſtream of jon DAN's flood,
To waſh the ſteel, and wipe away the blood,
That of the clotted gore no foul remain
In time the ſplendor of the ſword ſhou'd ſtain;
Then walks triumphant to the fair abode,
And bloodleſs altar of the chriſtian God ;

Faſt


3


E M4


(2)
| Faſt by whoſe fide the naked ſteel the lay d,
Leſt ruſt . tarniſh, f in ĩts * the dn,


TheConaTofPaTiBNGE 5 wa Arn.


Wu death thus rag'd in various forms 1
Undaunted PATIENCE ſtill ne 17 0 her

| Still in the ſame inaftive poſture ſtaid, 1
And unconcern'd the work of fate fi urvey'd ; ;
Heard, round her head; the darts, unnumber'd,
Without a groan, a trouble, or a Ab. n
Not far remote infernal Ax RR ſtood,

Her mouth with Joan, her eyes ſuffus'd with bed;
== 5So ſwell'd with rage, that each diſtended vein

3 Could ſcarce the driving flood of life contain;
And fird with madneſs at the odious fight

4 Of one ſo peaceful midit the noiſe of fight, ©
4 | Thither, impatient of the conflict, flies,
Alfailing her with /pear, voice, Tooks and cer;
5 Words from her mouth in guſbing torrents broke,
Andor her head che briſtling horſe hair ſhook.


Here


OT OR A to
* ov *


" — ENE COT TOE


E
Here, fair ſpectator, let this mortal dart
Obtain admittance to thy dauntleſs heart;
But not a groan muſt thence emiſſion find,


For groans ill-ſuit a ſpirit ſo.re/ign'd.


Thus when the ſpake, a javelin launch'd _
Whizzes the air, and keeps i its deſtin'd courſe, ;
Where the ſtrong cuiraſs o'er the breaſt was bound,

But thence repell'd drop'd bloodleſs to the ground
The prudent Virtue, at the firſt alarms,

Came well provided with defenfro arms;

A coat of Adamant its rigour | ſpread


Her ſhoulders o'er, impenetrably made;


; Hence no aſſailant can her ſoul affright,


Nor ſhow'rs of arrows drive her from the fight; :
Wounded the ſeeks not to annoy the fo,

Aſſur'd, herſelf will ſtrike the deadly blow.
When now the ſavage's efforts were croſt,


Her quiver empty'd, and her vigour loſt,


| Herſelk, with furious Paſſion, tir'd in vain,
* 1 arrow enter d o'er the plain,


She


1 1

She puts all 3 of conqueſt on her ſword,
The only refuge now that arms afford.

Pois d from her ear the broad effulgent blade
Sweeps down impetuous on che meek one's head,
Loud rings the helmet to the ruſhing ſtroke,
Back flies the weapon into pieces broke 3

The truſty metal's well concocted frame 3
From heaven's own ſtores inyulnerable came :
No human force the jointed plates could rend.
But darts recoil, and blows in yain deſcend.
No limits now the mon/er”'s rage reſtrain,


1 To ſec her hand a Hadeleſs hilt retain;


Stung with remorſe, the toſſes it aſi de,


f A ſhameful monument of Fallen pride 3


Nor longer meditates the martial ſtrife,

© Bur'ſceks for means to end her wretched life 3 3
Selects a javelin, on the ſandy plain,

From heaps of others lately caſtin vain


D 1 Then


1
Then ſtrikes the inverted ſhaft of poliſh'd wood
Deep in the earth; the point erected ſtood, - ö
Enters her breaſt, and drinks her vital blood.
Streight tow'rds the baugbry vangquiſh'd PATI-


Juve came,


And mildly thus her triumph did proclaim;


At length victorious; thus our warg we wage,
Without th* inhuman marks of bloody rage
From diſcipline, like this, we never part,
For hardy ſuf *rance is our martial art :
Unmoy'd we ſtand, and let the 5% go by,
For Paſſion always, like a hd, will die;
Her fretting ſpirits into vapours fume, |
Or end, like flames, that will themſelves conſume.
©  Shecewd; chen ſhot, umwounded, thro? the =
Nobly attended as ſhe paſ&d along;
For Jos, ſtill faithful, from his ſoverejgn's ſide
No force could ſeperate, nor threats divide ;
But cloſe he follow'd where ſhe march'd before,
His face diſplaying all the wounds he bore


.
7
5


And


Cthrong,


{ 29}
And whilſt he ſhew'd, by + peculizs ſcar,
Each ſundry peril he ſultain'd in war,
With pleaſure told the ruins of his frame,
His glorious ſpoils, his adverſary 8 ſhame, Eg
The goddeſs orders all his toils to ceaſe,


* 1


2 And kindly lays him in the arms of peace;


With wealth accumulated ſwells his ſtore, FOR


And yows his ſubſtance ſhall decreaſe no more.


Safe, and unhurt ſhe then purſues her way,
Thro' hoſtile lines, where arrows thickeſt play 3
With ev'ry virtue does by turns appear,


Now aiding in the front, now heart' ning 8. the


Crear;


Does ſtrength to all without diſtinction yield.
For without her no virtue keeps the field; 3
Without ber preſence ev ry virtue's faint,


And where ſhe's not, you'll never ſinda SAINT, _


2 „ — — K 2 8 8


[ 20 ]
The COMBAT of PrIDE and HUMILITY.


—_ routed troops, diſpers'd on ev'ry


dae
A beadlong coarſer flew, at will, wi ith


Ps; |


Rais'd on a Lion's ſpoil ſublime ſhe rode,

The ſhaggy trappings were the Horſe's led "=
But that capariſon ſhe ficly choſe,

To look from high with ſcorn upon her foes.
Built on her head, compos'd of plaited hair,

A tow'ry fructure nodded in the air;

| Down from her ſhoulders, knotted o'er her breaſt,
A ſwelling canvaſs bellied for a veſt ; |


Round neck and breaſt a thin embroid'ry flows,


And opening gathers ev'ry wind that blows.
Juſt like the rider was the bouncing feed,
Scorning reſtraint, impatient to be free'd ;


Champing his foamy bit, he ſought the plain,


Spread broad, and ſwell'd upon the curbing rein:


The puft VIR ACO, in this monſtrous plight,
Between both hoſts rode eminent to fight ;
| Wheels


” ay - fra


„ „ ,..Y


L 27

wheels round ber ſteed, av both with hooks and
The adverſe lines inſultingly defies, wy
Which in A wedge, a ſmall but choſen train,
| HUMILITY had marſhall'd on the plain,
In rank a Queen, but wanting foreign aid
To j Join thelevies ſhe herſelf had made; ;
Hoes was her firm ally, whoſe kingdom lies,
Far from our Region, i in ſuperior i es. |

Here PRIDE, obſerving not an arm to wield,
A brandiſh'd ſword, nor claſp 4 ſplendid ſhield,
Did thus with fooliſh ſcofs, and taunts deride
The mean appearance of the adverſe ſide.
| Baſe, vagrant tribe ! what 3 ? not deterr'd by
To cope with leaders of ſuch mighty fame FP "0


Wich ſuch a fereil, and ing lorious band


Againſt an old illuſtrious race to ſtand? ?


Who to ſuch mines of wealth have fought their
To cich poſſeſſions , and imperial ſway 3 ; 1255


rom which the rabble, that Pretender brings,


1 Would dri Ve, if poſſible, its ancient tings.
| Heaven!


—U


|
|


| Heavens ! ſeewhathands would fain a ſcepter wield,
By force ejeft the old, laborious ſwains,
5 While yet the limbs retain a plaſtick heat,
| And rule the /uture: man without controul.


For pxp ſubdued him in his firſt eſtate,


(44)
And reap the'wealth of many a fertile field ;


And ſeize the land, where flowing bounty reigns.
A I-vain attempt! for, at the natal hour,
O'er all the nan we get unbounded power;


We ftrike th* impreſſion, and we ſeal his fate;
Shoot all our influence thro* his inmoſt ſoul,


Then, with what hope can you this empire claim
From us, who grow and -ſtrengthen 2 — i.
And Mas and Miftreſs had an equal date:
In nature's infancy, when ADAM fell.
Expell'd from EpRx on this earth to dwell,
Ne yet had naked liv'd; but friendly Pride
"Taught him with leaves that nokedueſs to hide.
. From what long exile, from what land un-
Come theſe Praun to diſpute my throne;
of Why 1 Bs


*


This diſtant hope alleviates preſent pain,


a There Jus rick, doom doom'd to indigence by fates
And Hoxzsrr, who never will be great;
Soker, juſt wither'd to a-ſhade;z. 2


be =
Why did they not exert an earlier claim,
Loſt to all worth, to honour, and to fame?


But vain tradition {till allures them on


With hope of crowns, that mily ſome time be


[won ;


And is the trick by which their leaders reign;


Fit bait for minds, whom glory never charms,


Nor ſprightly trumpets. animate to arms;


Cold, frozen ſouls, whom valour never fires;


Whoſe luke-warm temper nothing great deſires;
What feats will CHASTITY's cold nerves per-


orm ?
In war will PT ſupport a ſtorm? 92
Twixt ſhame and grief how e —
To ſee myſelf opposd by ſuch an hoſt ;. .


5 To ſee a band of mill: fac d maids advance,


Not bred to combat, nor to poiſe the lance?


Aud pale-fac'd A8STIEXCE, a pining mad
1 Wich


x
— 2- oro rent


[ 24 ]
| With SHAME, thro? whoſe wan cheeks wi emp-
| Life? q ſprightly tide tranſmits no crimſon RE :
* narm'd SIMPLICITY, who may be ſlain
By ev'ry arrow Hot acroſs the plain Y
HuMiLitr, afraid to look around, =
With eyes ſtill fix d upon the ſordid ond;
Such fearfulneſs an abject ſoul betrays, 5
That ſeeks no honour, nor pretends to praiſe.
With the ignoble blood of ſuch a crew
My ſword I'll ſtain not, nor my hand embrue;
A ſoe ſo deſpicable cannot claim ”
Diginetion, due to military fame :
With ſuch my courſer fights; *tis he ſhall beat
Their heads to earth, and cruſh them with his
Thus loud ſhe cry'd: then urg'd ber expe
| Loogd ev'ry rein, and drove with headlong
Affur'd the Virtue to the ſhock would yield; hs
And ſhe remain ſole miſtreſs of the field.
But while he flew upon his utmoſt ſtretch,
Plumb down he drops i into a latent ditch,


Which


0, Yr, Ho Ve TS T . . N O . AE 8 T 5 2 8
2 N r ß DS ors fo e :
- a


*


5


* E FEI rs rg £ 7 F NN IONS 7 1 n 1
35 R . 8 Fo ENG War ft, ot Eo » fo
)%%%%/%%%%%% ͤ es:
3 k N :


„

Which FRAUD, a ſiſter of th' infernal train,
Miſchieyous open'd on th* embattled plail ainz
That, i in the conflicts formidable hour, |
The ruſhing ranks it might at once devour;
And, leaſt ſome eye the cavern ſhou'd explore,
With rods, and branches ſhe had bridg'd it ober.
Then cover'd all with cufts of verdabe graſs,
That none ſhou'd heſitate the gulph to paſs:

Safe from the liſts the queen of meekneſs 2
Nor once approach'd the ambuſh that was laid,


From no ſurmifings i in a fearful mind,


= Of dark contrivances by FR Aup defign'd : go.

| | But PRIDE, high-thron'd upon her fiery horſe,
W Drives forward blindly, with impetuous force, ;
W Brooks no delay, nor at the danger ſtops,


And down the pit a pondrous ruin drops:


| Pirch'd on her head, with ſudden loſs of breath,
he ſteed incumbent preſſes her to death.


Soon as che gentle- minded queen beheld |


The monſtrous vanity entirely quell'd,


R Forward


[46]


Forward ſhe came, with ſlow and ſolemn pace,


With looks more elevate; but modeſt grace
Temp'ring the fluſh of triumph in her face.
And whilſt in doubt ſhe ſtood, her GuARDIAN
Preſents a ſword, and points the way to *
Seiz 'd by the hair the vanquiſh'd fiend to light
She drew, and ſtretch'd her with her face up-
And, while ſhe fervently for mercy dee
Her head diſſever'd with the ſhining blade,
Which, by a lock upheld, on high ſhe bore,


A gaſtly trophy, all defild with gore.


Ober proſtrate PRIDE now Horz declaims ſe-
Shun all preſumption with peculiar care ; 4
God {till will humble the ambitious ſoul,

And the weak bubble's empty ſwell controul ; |
The ſculptur'd obelisk, the tow'ring wall


The higher rais'd, the proner are to fall.


All ſupercilious lofty looks deſpiſe,
Nor fall to earth, by gazing on the skies:


i


This


[29-1

IT bis far-fam'd' Apothegm remember well,

Which from the mouth of heav'nly wiſdom fell,

« He from their ſeat ſhall pull the mighty

« And raiſe the meek. and lowly to a crown.

Amaz'd we ſaw, upon tho embattled plain,

The huge GoLIAH by a ftripling ſlain,

A common pebble, from the limpid ſtream,
Beat down that bulwark of PHILISTIN fame;

Between both armies whilſt this ſon of Pride

Stood like a tow'r, and-/raePs God defy'd,

Brandiſh'd his beamy ſpear, and . 5

And ſtrode at large the terror of the field,

To ev'ry eye he, by his fall, did ſhew

What the mock- armour of a boy can do.

= When yet a child, the pious youth engag'd

nu vin rug's cauſe, and all her battles wag'd;

: | On me he always caſt a longing eyes. :

| | Where, at God's Jeet, I keep my ſeat on high; |

; | Whither 1 VIRTUE call, and where beſtow

f The juſt rewards for Vick ſubdued below.

I 'E 2 Sde


: 5 1 1 8


[1287] _
She ceas'd; then ſhot on golden wings upright,
To regions ſmiling with unclouded light;
The virtues militant, with wond'ring eyes,

| Purſue her flaming progreſs to the skies;

' Fain wou'd they follow where ſhe leads the way,
But earthly conflicts till require their ſtay :
Vice muſt be vanquiſh'd ; many trophies won;


Sure then to follow, when their work is done.


The Combat of LUXURY. and SOBRIETY.
a N time's laſt period, to the combat came |
1 A fell lect” Luxury by name;

Th abandon'd wanton, from her early days,

: Deſpis'd all cenſure, nor regarded praiſe ;

Averſe from ev'ry good; her only care

With coſtly odours to perfume her hair;

A ſoft, ſweet voice to melt the captive ſoul,
And ſleepy eyes with languid airs to roll, |

Furniſt'd with all habiliments to pleaſe, - |

And lead the ſoul aſtray from Virtue's ways ;

8 t With


(29)
With ſoftning arts th? enervate mind to ply,.
And ope each avenue of ſenſe to joy
Studious her hours in banquetting to ſpend,: -
Nor valuing life, where pleaſure's not the end.
When morning light o'er earth began to flow,
Alarm'd the heard the martial trumpet blow;
Leaving the brimming bowl, with all her pow'rs,
| Ofer floods of wine, and trodden heaps of flow'rs,
Now lips, now ſtaggers; head and feet betray,
That wine perverts, and theſe a ſlippꝰry way.
But when ſhe came within the verge of fight,


She mounts a chariot eminent to ſight,

In heavy, pompous ſtate ſlow-moving on;

All eyes were raviſh'd, and all hearts were won :
Strange ſort of war ! no miſjfve engines throw

.” The pond rows lance; nor ſounds the twanging bow :
She caſts, from baskets, flagrant heaps of flow'rs,

At hoſtile heads, in aromatich ſhow'rs ? |
Th' exhaling odours ſoon unman the ſaint,
On beds of eſſences reclin'd, and faint : L |


(30)
Quick ſhoots the venom thro? each nerve, and
And Virtue periſhes, by roſes ſlain. | _
A death-like ſtupor the whole hoſt o 'erſpreads,


They drop their weapons, and chey hang 2
As on the chariot's radiant frame they gaze,
And their eyes dazzle in the diamond blaze;
Or while the golden traces they behold,
And whirling axletree of ſolid gold,
Or filver ſpokes, that emulate the ſun,
And in an orb of lucid amber run. |

From rank to rank ſeditious murmurs fly,
For quick deſertion is the gen'ral cry 5

All long to ſerve the oftentations fool,
And live with Luxuzy, -unbound by rule.

The Ween of Temperance ſeverely mourn'd,
To ſee her ſons to baſe deſerters turn'd,
Her firm allies, who mighty ſhocks had ſtood,
Strike to mere ſhew, and periſh without blood.
The croſſes s banner, which the princely maid
Noor? in the van, aloft i in air dif] play'd,


Der


.
Deep in the earth ſhe ſtruck, then ſtaid the lines,
And thus beſpoke them for their baſe deſigns;
With ſoft entreaties ſharp rebukes allays,

With /hame deters them, and tranſports with
Whence, whence this rage, which wings oh

Whonks this Wehe of incellefiual hs.

What do you want? whoſe nod would ye obey ?

What fetters ſeek ye on your necks to lay?

What ? ſhall a Aly, or a vi et chain,

Arms ſo robuſt, with infamy, conſtrain ?

For ſhame, that ſetters of the flowry kind

Such arms ſhou'd ſhackle, and ſuch necks ſhowd q

How will the turban, with a ſaffron lace, i wad

Become a rough, and military face ?

Or coſtly ointments'of ARABIA ow

Their odors round a conſecrated bead,

Which CHRIS ordain'd with ſpotleſs rayate ſhine


[


By royal unction, and his ſeal divine?


Shame! at your heels that wavy trains ſhou'd IT


And filken veſtments wrap each looſen'd limb z .
Thoſe


| 132
Thoſe limbs, which Farrz, in earlier times ar-
Wich ſnowy garbs of curious texture made, *

Endued with mighty prevalence to ſave N
The ſoul from in, the body from the grave. |
Hence to the nightly feaſts, where goblets ſhine,
Where ſtream inebriating draughts of wine ;
Where fill d with trembling hands the cups _
The beds around, and murbled floors below: ”
Is all forgotten? how JeHovan bleſt
Your fainting fathers in the dreary waſte ;
When rocks, obedient to the myſtick wand,
Diſſol wd to water, and refreſh'd the band;
The food of heay'n, on this laſt age beſtow'd,
Firſt round your tents, in morning __ = :
But mightier bleſſings on this age enſue ;
>Tis CHRIST to them, which was a Tee to you.
Vet you, the gueſts of heav'n, can LusT entice
From feaſts ambroſial to the ſtyes of vice:
Whom neither WRATH, the thunder ofthe field,
Nor old IDoLATRY compell'd to vield, A


EA


A drunken vagrant, by her fraudful arts,


Has ſapp'd your virtue, and ſeduc'd your hearts:
Remember, oh! my fons, your rank, your ſtate 3


Think on your Saviour, and your future fate;
Think on the anceſtry, from which-youſpring,


Think who's your God, your Saviour, and — 5
* 3


Your line from JuDan does to MART run,
Whom God ordain- d to bear his only Son:
Let Davip's battles, and victorious name - |
| Rekindle in your hearts a martial flame;
Let SAMUEL gen'rous ſentiments. conveys.
And.caſt the ſpoils of.yvanquiſh'd foes away 5
To him the guidance of your actions give, |
Nor ſuffer kings, not circumcis'd, to live;


Such lives, if ſpar'd, the way to peace will bar, |

And ill-tim'd mercy ſow the feeds of war.

| With him twas ſin a conquer'd king to fave,

With you not congueſt, but ſubmiſfow's brave.

If yet to Gd your hearts. obſequious move
With the leaſt force of duty, and of love,

F 5 Repent:


—— &


( 34 ]

Repent : Repentance always will prevail,
Your guilt annihilate, and pardon ſeal.
Safe ſor a time the ſinner walks aſtray,
If this o'ertakes, and brings him to his way.
A royal youth, by high preſumption led,

Trangreſs'd an order by his father made;
| Rob'd of a golden drop the waxen cell,
The knawing rage of hunger to repel ;
Incurr'd the doom attendant on the deed,
But by repentance ſay'd his forfeit head:
 Repentance, always prevalent when true,
The ſtubborn father from his purpoſe drew;
Firm in the way of rigid juſtice ſtood,
Nor let the royal axes drink his blood.

Lo! I SoBRIETY, of you ſecure,

To ev'ry virtue will a palm enſure ;
Will ſoon the miſcreant, and her ſlaves reſtrain,
And lead them. captive in a brazen chain;
At CHRIS T's tribunal ſhall the rebels ſtand,
And feel the weight of his avenging hand.

| No


tw}
No more; but quick the flaming croſs ſhe threw
Full in the horſe's eyes ; away they flew
Confounded and amarz'd ; ſcour o'er the plain,
Nor hear the driver, nor obey the rein.

Still in their eyes the flaming croſs does glare,
They ſtart, they neigh, they toſs their er |
Blindly o'er rock, and precipice they bound;
The giddy rider tumbles to the ground :

Lock'd in the wheel, the makes the chariot lag,
A dead, unwieldy, cumbrous, heavy drag:
Thick clouds of duſt her ſhining treſſes foil,
The golden mitre, and the ſcented oil. |
There, as ſhe roll'd, entangl'd, on the ground,
The 2yeen of Temperance gave the deadly wound:
A rugged ſtone, which fortune did provide,
The place of better inſtruments ſupply'd;
(Unarm'd ſhe took the field ; her only care
The croſs's ſtandard in the van to bear)
Full on the mouth with craſhing noife it ſmote,


Beat teeth, and tongue promiſcuous down her


2


hroat,


+ Y | 15 Cie


1361
Clos -d up che conduit of her vital breaths
And made an hideous ſpeQacle of death;
: | Cramm'd with a maſs, it never felt before, |
Of pounded teeth, and fetid clots of gore,
Th? 'o'erburden'd ſtomach heav'd againſt the
And caſt it, direfully conyuls'd, abroad.

Then thus SOBRIETY in ſcoffing mood,
Let thy laſt draught, O Drunktard, 4 —
of thy voluptuous life the clo/ing ſcene
Be form'd of bitterneſs, diſguſt, and pain;
Tortur'd with nauſeous reachings may you die,
And real pains, conclude fantaſtic Foy. |

The hoft of trifles, when their hope was dead,
Diſpers'd, and broke, in vaſt confuſion fled;
Then Mirth, and Petulancy caſt away
| The noiſy rattles of their childiſh play;
With ſuch mock arms they jocund tripp'd around,
And wag'd fierce battle with the cymbals ſound.
80 Them Love ſoon follow'd, rapid as the wind,

And left ingloriouſly his arms behind;

= With


ad,


24


C37 J


With fear as pale as lovers, when their hearts


Are deeply wounded by his poiſon'd darts...


Slow-marching PoMe was forc'd to mend her
Spoil'd of her robe, and ribbands in the ON


Of all the ſhining wreaths, and drops of gold,


Which grace the head, or do the neck enfold;


And all the gems, the dreſſer's arts unite
To draw freſh luſtre from a mingled light,
Now from their ſtations in diſorder toſt,


+ Bemoan their beauty, and effulgence loſt.
Nor tender-footed PLEASURE dar'd to ſtay,


O'er flinty paths „ and thorns ſhe ſcour'd away >
A greater terror follow'd in the rear,

Hard'ning her feet the rugged ways to bear.
Where'er the routed Squadrons fly, the road |
With claſps, crowns, fillets, and with 7 = |
Here arms to ſhed, there arms the hair to preſs,


And all the fine artillery of dreſs. 6
But neither victor, nor victorious bands,


Would with the glitt'ring ſpoil profane their


„
With look auſtere the meaneft paſs'd it by,
Nor once look'd backward with a wiſhful eye.


The Conpar 7 AVARICE and Li-


"HEN Ric came, if. ancient fame ſays

To glean the ſpoil of the luxurious A
Tuck'd up 2 corner of her robe ſhe bare,
Which deeply bellied, like a ſheet, before;
But not content with that, on either ſide
Deep bags, and pouches in long rows were ty'd;
In them the Harpy ſtow'd with griping hand
The golden booty ſcrap'd from heaps of ſand;
Still with her 475 concealing cloſe from fight
Whate'er ſhe ſeiz d, and gather'd with her
CORRUPTION, FAMINE, PERJURY, and Pain,
With the three ers of th' infernal train,
Carr, FRAUD, and Lrins, WATCHFULNESS,


Land Fzar,
And galtly PALENESS at her heels appear;


Where'er


1 5

Where'er the fiend her baleful influence ſheds, -
Crimes ſpring apace, and murd'rous _—
Like rav'ning Wolves, the terror of the wood, g
They roar for plunder, and they feaſt on blood. -
A ſtarry helmet o! yon Soldier wears,
That ſtarry helmet ſoon his life enſnares;
Obſerve his Comrade ſeeks a cauſe of ſtrife,
And takes the jewels with the owner's life.

A belt, with gems adorn'd, has there ſuppreſt
The voice of nature in the filial breaſt;
Has drawn the /on, for ſordid hopes of gain,
To ſpoil the parent, by another ſlan:
The luſt of lucre ſhoots the flaming brand
Of civil diſcord thro? a peaceful land,
To dire extremes th* inſatiate rage has run;
1 rav'ning parent robs his only ſon. "3 0

Such ſcenes of cruelty the Monſter W |

And mighty numbers to deſtruction brought; Hf
Ten thouſand ways ten thouſand ills conttiyes, ©
To rob deluded * of their ves; N


Od
*


[ 40 1


One ſhe deprives of intellectual light,
And leaves him wand' ring in the ſhades of nights


No ray of reaſon to the wretch ſupplies,”


5 Nor patting ſtaff, that ſubſtitute of eyes.


For fronger minds a guilgful bait ſhe lays,


And with imaginary good betrays ;


With fair appearances the ſenſe is won,


And, while they ſtoop to take, they are undone,
Nor ſee their danger, till the wounded heart


Sobs ſudden. at the ent' rance of the dart.

Let flames enwrap the dome; yet man's deſire
Will dive for riches in that flood of fire ;
From pointed flames too covetous to turn;
And love, and lover will together burn. N
Widely ſpe lords it o' er this earthly ball,
And all, that's mortal, by her hands ſhall fall; 7


A greater plague was never ſent by fate, |
I To baniſh peace, and multiply debate;
No fiend fo fruitful of deſtructive ſchemes


To catch the worldling i in infernal flames.
Ev'n


En God's own priefts, the holy LRvrrx train


( f ſuch traditions ought of truth retain)
While in the Front ſucceſsful war they wage,
And wake with trumpet's ſounds the warrior's
With furious combat AvaRice aſſail'd, 4 *
And, but for REASON, had too ſure prevail d; *
Almighty REASON, wont in arms to ſhine,
A firm adherent to the prieftly line,
Catch'd on her beamy ſhield the falling blow,
Her ſons protected, and repell'd the foe;
Behind that fence now well-ſecur'd they ſtand,
Far from the reach of any hoſtile hand.
Some feu indeed, who off their guard had been,
Her darts did hit, and gently raz'd the skin.

- Unhurt the reſt eſcap'd the ſhocks of fight, |

of heart unbroken, and in thought upright. |

The rueful Pes in wild amazement ſtood,
To ſee her ſhafts reverting without blood,

| Andthusorecharg'd with ſpiteful wrath,expreſt

The flood of paſſion boiling in her breaſt.
= 8. © .


[42]


SLOTH thro* our hoſt his drouſy pow' r has


[ſpread ;
Our former vigour, and ſuccels is fled ;


Languid the arm, that ſlew without 5
And widely ravag d evry buman foul,;
For never nature, by her plaſtick art,
Gave ſuch hard temper to a carnal heart.
As long contention with our arms to hold,
Unpierc'd, unbroken by almighty gold.

O'er ev'ry temper abſolute we reign,

The mild, moroſe ; the ſimple, and the vain;
Not only minds devoid of reaſon's ray


By goldenlights are often drawn aſtray, _


But ev'n the wiſe conſent to miſs their way.


Harlots for gold will practice wanton arts,


And Prudes themſelves be found with Tiglding
arts ;


To us the monarch of the infernal reign .


Owes ev'ry ſubject, which his floods . 3


From us he got them; by our arms they fell ;


| Wedrove them headlong to the gates of hel},
A


*


„


e A A ft wt


[ 43 )


We the ſole cauſe of all the woe and ſtrife,
Which caſt ſuch ſhadows o'er a mortal life ;
We point the paths, thro? which loſt mankind run,
Undoing otkers, and themſelves undone.


MWhence is't, our bold reſolves now end in


ſhame?


Why ebbs our fortune? why declines our .
The CHRISTIAN now can un-entic*d behold
The charming luſtre of refulgent gold ;
Can the bright filver's beauteous form deſpife,
And look on wealth with undeſiring eyes:
Whence this affected ſcorn ? this proud diſdain?
Did not the great ICaR1OT wear my chain?
The princely JuDas, honour'd by his Lord,
Rank'd with his Peers, and feaſting at his board,
Yet from his table, on the feſtal day, =
Io us deſerted, and receiy'd our pay;
For thirty pieces a vile contract made, 5
A God, a Saviour, and a Friend betray'd;
And laſt to ſtrike, and make the compact good,
Himſelf he hang'd, and blood atton'd for blood
G 2 Le


[44] .

Let J1co « our great atchievements tell,
| When Acnan battled, and her bulwarks fell;
Wich er ry laurel of the war his own,

For ſquadrons routed, and a wall oerthrown,
| The conquer*d ſpoil his congu'ring arm afſail'd,
And gold ſucceeded, where the ſword had fail'd.
Not all the merit his fam'd lineage pleads,
Their faith implicit, and heroick deeds,
Not ev'n che far, chat ſhone in JuDan's line,
Nor ABRAM truſting in the word divine,
Could wretched Acaan's puniſhment abate,
Or fave his houſhold from their fery fate.
Bure then a race, which takes ſuch pious care
Each word, each action by their fire's to ſquare,
Won't, at the laſt, be backward to comply,
And keep the ſame reſemblance when they die;
With Juſtice | now, fince over-match'd in war,
For Juan” s ſons I'll bait the /raud/u/ ſnare ; ;
| For God' 8 Highpriefts will frame the dark deſign,


1 call they ron, and the facred line)


Tt


5 (45)
It matters little how we ſhape our courſe
To glorious conqueſt; be it fraud, or force.
So ſpake the fiend, and inſtant on the place


puts off the fury's arms, the fury's face ;


And, in their room, amazing change! 1e


A decent habit, and engaging mien;


A virtue now ſhe outwardly appears,
The very dreſs, the very viſage wears
Of plain F RUGALITY ; her ſole delight
To live on little, and preſerve her right :
No longer ray*nous on another preys,
But ſteals, by induſtry, a virtue's praiſe.
Thus chang'd, ſhe enters on the field of fame,


Not i in a Vice's, but a Virtues name ;


For ſnakes aſſumes old age's ſnowy hairs,


A well-known emblem of parental cares;


And, in a matron's modeſt raiment dreſt,


Seems of a numerous progeny poſſeſt. 1
Hence what by rapine, and by then ſhe gaing


Comes from good conduct, and dome/tick pains ;


Hence


(46)

Hence all her hoardings with penurious care,

| Are Nous ſavings for a worthy heir.

Whilſt thus th* Inpoſtor play'd her wily arts,

And won the multitude's believing hearts,

In crowds they follow the deſtructive fiend,

And think; they Yirtue, and her ſteps attend,

Wilfully ſwallow ev*ry bait ſhe leaves,

Flock to her call, and glory to be ſlaves;

The ſons of Firtue at th' ambiguous ſhew

Stood in amaze, and at a loſs to know

What part to take, the error how decide,

| Repel the be, or in the Friend confide ;

Wond'rous the mixture, intricate and nice,

Where ends the virtue, and begins the vice!
With grief diſtracted, from the diſtant rear,

Came CHARITY, an honeſt volunteer z

Who, tho*ſhe hindmoſt rank d, remote from light,

Alone muſt turn the dubious ſcale of fight;

Not how with gold de' reharg d, but wholly bare,

: Aud eas d of all [pecuniary care 3


i


RR...” | Tho?


U 47 ]

Tho? once on fortune's golden tide the faild,
The ſpring at length, by frequent running, fail'd; |
But till ſhe views with ſecret, heart · felt joy.
Her urn exhaulted, and che channel dry
Wiſely ſhe parted with her copious ſtore,
To cloath the naked, and relieve the Poor;

Bankrupt on earth, ſhe all in alms had. giy'n,
But rich in FAITH's expectancies from heav'n.

When Av'xIcR ſaw this thund'ring foe apr |
Her heart beat quick with fate-foreboding lang
A ſudden Stupor o'er her ſenſes flies,
And certain death ſtood obvious to her eyes;
Corruption's arts, and god's enchanting pow'r,
She ſaw, would fail her in the fatal hour;
| Too well the knew the genius of her foe, 3
How great her ſcorn for all that's priz'd. belowz |
How, once unloos'd from lucre's galling chains
She vow'd, ſhe never would be caught again.

Here She, whoſe preſence powerfully inclines
The human heart to generous defigns,


Her


[48]

Her folding arms around the Miſer threw,
And in cloſe durance to her breaſt ſhe drew ; |
Claſpꝰd round the neck one hand's conſtrin ent
Of Reſpiration intercepts the courſe, |
The duct of vital air compreſſing broke,
And ſpread pale horror o'er her meagre look;
The-etherial ſpirit now no more maintains

An open commerce with the lungs and veins,
But life ſhut up, like lamps without repair
Of waſted vigour by nutritious air, |
In dark corporeal cells now ſobs now ſighs,
And ſtruggling, panting in its priſon dies.
Loos'd from the graſp the body beats the ground,
Unſtain'd, unbloody, and without a wound.
The joyful victor, with inſulting tread,

- Struts Ger the ruins of the meagre dead,
- Unloads the vanquiſo'd of the motley ſpoil,
The due reward of military toil; .
From tatter'd bags, where moths prolific bred,
And plenteouſly in mouldy paſtures fed,
| Vnnum-


| [49]

Unnumber'd beaps of rufy coin ſhe dreir,
Rever'd by AV*RICE for their virid huez
With countleſs maſſes of unripen'd gold,
Unpurg'd by fire, unſhapen in the mould;
All theſe, obtain'd by Fraud, preſery'd with
The tedious work of many a painful year, 15
The great of heart, whom no ſelf intereſt guides,
Among her poor confederates divides, |
And, as they clos'd her round, with look ſerene,
And diction mild, beſpoke th' attentive train.

Retire, ye Juſt, from off th* embattled field,


Fearleſs of danger, when the foe is kill'd: |
. Henceforth let war, and madding diſcord ceaſe,
And turn; with ſafety, to the arms of peace,


Peace is conſummate ; if the heart deſires 4
No more, than what neceſſity requires;
 Plainneſe of dreſs; a fmple, wholſome fare, |
Repelling hunger, and inclement air ; #
Nature's demands nor here, nor there exceed;
Nor gayly dreſs, nor delicately feed 3


— —


.
*
* * 2 8 Ss N * —
r rd . FO: A I. —


i

q
F
.F
* b
|


—.


[ 59 ]
If lus urges, and you needs muſt run
Ev'n from the riſing, to the ſetting ſun,
Think not a moment, nor a moment ſtay
For food, or raiment ; but purſue your way.
No'thought beyond the current hour extend,
Nor this day's bus neſs with to morrow*s blend;
Each morning ſun does /e//-ſufficient riſe,
And all th* expences of his day ſupplies.
Behold the wing'd inhabitants of air,
Sumptuous they ea, yet nothing they prepare;
But hourly find, when forth by hunger led,
The cup repleniſh'd, and the table ſpread;
Content they caſt all farther cares aſide,
And in God's bounteous providence confide.
Bluſh Reaſon, bluſh! when ev'n the bird that
So lowly rated that a farthing buys, wy
Eſteems itſelf more worthy of the care
Of God, than Man, who doth his i image bear:
7 zak, inconſſſtent Man, who now. canſt call
Frogs heay . rite, and the Lord of Att;


Shes


6

Anon canſt fear this /av"rite will be left
Of raiment deftitute, of food bereft : ©
But learn, tho? late, the ways of truth to ſcan,
That God, who breath'd the breath of life on
In point of juſtice, is concern'd to ſave wo
The breath imparted, and the life he gave.
Terreſtrial dainties, chat corrupt and cloy,
Are but poor ſources of convivial joy;
To rich repaſts does God his Saints invite,
To rich repaſts of intellectual light;

Divine, ambroſial nurture, that conveys
| To ſouls elect a boundleſs length of days:
To this af pire; on this deyoutly feed;
And truſt to God for what your Bodies need.
Her balmy words each anxious heart appeas'd;
Calm'd ev'ry thought, and every grievance
The fluſh of triumph reafſum'd its place,
And ſhone unclouded in each virtue's face;


But th* adver ſe party, ſmote with ſo re affright,
Flew off, and plac'd their ſafety in their flight;
9  FRavD


eas d;


[ 52 }
FRAUD falſe of tongue, and heart-corroding CARRk,
And murd'rous RAPIiNE never known to ſpare.
Then Peace advanc'd, and Plenty l
And drove grim war, and terror from the field;
Loos'd was each ie and ev'ry belt unbound,
No more was heard the martial e
War's threatning front receiv'd a ſeſter grace,
And ffrutting ſoldiers learn'd the /tep of peace;
Long robes, pacific garb, flow'd o'er the plain,
And to their ſheaths the ſwords return'd again;
Clear was the air; the clouds of duſt were laid,
Which earth had buried in their pitchy ſhade;
Freſh to the ſigbt emerg'd a beauteous ſcene,
Not bath'd in blood, but deck'd with lively
O'er heav? n the ſun diffus'd a brighter 1
Nature reviv'd ; and all the world was gay.
With ev'ry hour new funds of pleaſure riſe;
Firſt, earth in peace; and next, unfolding skies;
The Son of God, preſented to the view,


Holds forth the n and ſhews their hopes


[were true ;


Points


L 53 ]

Points out the diſtant port, where endleſs eaſe ©

Awaits them landed from tempeſtuous ſeas.
5 With ſil ver trump now CONCORD gave the
Quick parts the hoſt, and line divides from ling,
In ſep'rate ſquadrons there the Horſemen ride;
Here march the Fot in military pride;
O glorious pomp of war! how gay they ſhin'd,

In ſpotleſs veſtures of the lucid kind,
Not ſtain'd by art, but native ſnowy-white,
Pure as their hearts, to feaſt the raptur'd fight!
Back to their tents they flock, the war now
And place the Eagles, where they ſat before. =o
In joyful ſtrains victorious hymns they ſung,
The mountains eccho'd, and the vallies rung.
Such thankful lays the Hebrew race expreſt,
Such holy raptures fir'd each tuneful breaſt, /
| When on che farther:ſhore ſecure they ſtood} | -
And yiew'd the fury of the warring flood; |
Saw the high walls of pendent cryſtal flow

In ruſhing mountains on th* embattled:foe 5 --
12 * Saw


[ 54]
Saw Aevypt's pride in foaming oceans drown'd,
Where late they march'd, up-born on ſolid
Saw refluent waves o'erwhelm the ſandy 2
And to the fiſt reſtore their watry reign.
Enraptur'd thoughts] EHOVAH's deeds inſpi re,
JzHovan's deeds were ſung on ev'ry lyre;
| Still in the ſong we ſee the waves divide,

And form a liquid mound on ey'*ry fide ;

Still, loſt in wonder, praiſe the pow'r hat
The rowling main, and petrify'd the wave.
Thus Virtue's conqu'ring bands eſſay'd to fing,
Loud notes of triumph to the vocal ſtring 3
And nobly painted, in the myſßtick lay,

The great deliv*rance of a future day.

Scarce to the camp the marching ſquadrons
Where double valves a narrow entrance 6 |
When; ſent by FRAUD, a ſudden ſtorm aroſe, |
And rueful Faftion broke their hop'd repoſe, 75
Their ſongs of conqueſt into ſorrow turn,

And leave no cauſe to triumph, but to mourn.
| The *


355 1


The Combat of CONCORD: and Dis coRD.


N the hoft's center, with ſucceſs elate,

L. CoNCoRD enter d thro? the narrow gates

A wily foe did there inſidious hide, =
And ſtruck a deadly weapon at her fide ;:

In vain the mail its rigid plates oppos'd,

Bound faſt with ſteel, and to the body clogd's

The fiend eſpying, where the deepeſt row |

Olf ſcales indented ſeem'd to ſtart below.

Thither conveys th' infinuating dart,

Ruffled the skin, but hit no vital part.

Such ſudden ſtrokes awak'ning FaTEs provide

For fond ſecurity, and ſlumb*ring pride;

And this revenge the profligated foe

To baneful DiscorD's black contrivance owe.

For lately baniſh'd from the rebel hoſt,

With prudent caution,” for they fear'd best |

To our battallions, quick cransform'd, ſhe came

In friendly ſemblance, anda ſocial name;

| The


: 1

The tatter d veſture, which her works diſplay'd,
And deadly wand of twining ſerpents made,
She left behind her, where the battle bled, i
And with a wreath of olive crown'd her head; =
Then join'd in feſtal hymus the vocal quire, |
Where none ſung lweetgr, and none ſhouted
| Beneath her robe the dagger ſhe e ee
With which, fair COxcoRp, ſhe thy life alaild;
_ *Gainſt thee alone of all the hoſt intent,

And ſtudioufly on thy deſtruQion bent;

But fortune lichten d t the malicious blow,

And turn'd remorſe and ſorrow on the foe.

Some drops of oozing blood, at laſt, were ſeen


 CoNCORD alarm'd,criesout ; what hoſtile hand
Lurks in diſguiſe amid our friendly band? :
Who ſhe, that ſecks my being to deſtroy, |
And with the ſword diſturbs our preſent joy?
To what-effeft have we by combat broke
FE n Au


1 2
All pice controuÞ'd, and ey'ry Firtue free'd,
I Pirtue's ruin ſhall with peace ſucceed ?
| With fear and tremb' ling, ev'ry eye eſpy'd >
The blood diſtilling from the punctur'd fide: * |
- Whey in the countenance an anxious cloud
Singled the Band of murder from the crowd 3 .
In various characters was read her guilt, -
And deep convittion of the blood ſhe ſpilt ; |
Her hand, when ſeiz d, with languid tremors ſhook,
And palencſ pleaded guilty in her lk.
Quick in a globe the virtuous h appears
Dran round the ofa Mn with pointed ſpears,
Whilſt allinterrogate. her name, her place,
Her country, office, e enterprize, and race,
What God ſhe warſhips, and at whoſe command
She nag d mingled with their holy bad, |
The fend, tho ſenfible of danger nigh,
Makes no exaſion, but this blunt reply + |
Discoxp, and HeREsr's the name I bear, bs
able; N Jam, now „
1 Now


1
f 349 oY *


And Private reſt, 125 publick * regain'd,


[58]


Now Jeſs, now greater; juſt as fancy wills;
An innate ſeu that all exten on fills


Now ene, now wo; BELIAL's my maſter's name,


And the wide earth the country which I claim.


FAITH, Queen of Virtues, could not long endure


Language ſo blaſphemous, and ſo impure;


- But to the head the ſteely ſhafc ſhe drew,


; Swift to the tongue the whizzing arrow few,


Th' alternate flux of vital air OW
And bound that i»/rument of bell to reſt. oY


Then, quick as thought, the mon/fer”s coarſe they


Ltear,


And ev'ry virtue does a portion bear;


Dogs ſome to feaſt, for vultures ſome a prey,


While ſome to fiſhes, or to ſinks convey ; _
The brutal tribes the mangled carcaſs rend;


And ſuch was HeresY's deſerved end:
3 death, like l, 75 the miſcreant did betide,
She liv'd d. ſmemb'ring, and diſnember d dy'd. -


When now the common weal was aſcertain'd,


ks


f
;


1


[ 39 ]

En the low vulgar were allow'&to pleaſe, |
Themſelves in all the liberties of eaſe;
Safe in the camp each moment to employ
| To heal paſt ſorrows with f ucceeding joy.

Next, on a central eminence they place
A double pile, but on one common baſe ;
The lower part, a fair tribunal, ſhews
Auguſt and ſpacious; but above it grows,
A narrower edifice; whoſe top commands
A boundleſs proſpect over ſeas and lands.
Thither the Queens aſcending take their ſeat,


With equal dignity, and equal tate,
CONCORD and FAITH ; precedence neither take,


But ſcorn all difference for agreement's ſake.
| Then thro” the camp their meſſengers they ſend, |
And ſummon all their people to attend.


Chearful each mental Jaculty obeys * +


The ſov'reign mandate, nor abſconding ſtays 3
Tho? numerous labyrinths the mind ſupply'd,,
The ling'ring truants in its folds to hide:


12 Each


[6]

. | Fach tent was ſtruck; each cirivis open 127d.

That none tight flumber in the datkfome tide,

The pott /f affentibled with itnpitierite wait;

| Anxiows to know the bus heft of the fate; ==
Why, when no tnbre the marks of war were ſcen,

| Concord decreed a cbüntif ſhou'd convene, =

What for the pubtick good Farrn meant to do,

Amend old edicts, or promulgate ew,

Then CONCORD firkt the ger ral filence broke,
Drew deep attention, and ſerenely ſpoke. + .

| Thrice hippy Pireaes ! now complearly bleſt ! !

| Henceforth confign'd to everlaſting reſt!

| Kiill true to God, and tothe chriſtian name

Full is ti anötted rheafure of your fime:
Extinet the foe; that would your peace confound,

And beat yotf ſatred city to the ground ;

| With hoſtife flames the zoh) place would burn,
And all its elorigs into aſhes tür. |

Now privite Jendfoip labour to prove,

Fo r pubJith peact 18 built on kr rute lobe;

. Domeſtick


(6 )
= Domeftick ruptures thro? a nation run, ; |
And priviite quarrels have whole fates unddonk; ;
Watch ev'fy motion then with jealous cate,
And of gone My bewate 3 ;
And _— 055 n but neꝰ'er EY
For trifling notions friend with friend will pan.
And diff rent renets alienate the heart ;
However oppofite you 75k or write,
| Let chriſtian charity your - ſouls 1 unite 3 5
Of ev'y life be that the ruling line ; .
For what's dd haſtens to dec me.
Twixt God and Man as Jssvs interpostd.
And the wide breach by mediation EY ;
Sharing both natures, both he did combine,
Earth rais'd to heavy n, and mortal to divine;
Thus let, in acts of body and of a,
One ſpirit govern, and connect our whole.
Love is th? gen'ral law ; the Plants run,
By 1 _ attrafted, round their central ſun ;


1


*


And, ſo unbigotted, ſhe all belieues;


60


Love is the cement of this earthly ball ;


Diſſolve that cement, and the whole muſt fall.
Of no oblation will your God appr oye,

Unleſs. prefer'd with ſanctity and love;

Evo'n on the altar when the victim lies,

Heay*n will rejeC the blazing ſacrifice,


If livid flames of wrath within you hide,
And from your brother turn your heart aſide:


Nay, ſhould you ſtand the perſecutor's flame,


And bravely ſuffer for the chriſtian name,
8 Yet in your breaſt if malice ſhould remain,
The groaning martyr burns, and dies in vain :


That little drop of cordial gall will four =
The cup preſented to the heav'nly pow'r.
Love, love alone compleats the chriftian plan,
And ſtamps perfection on the works of man;
Content i in ev*ry ſtation can abide, |
Untoueh'd with envy, and unſwell'd with pride;
when injur'd grieves not; readily forgives 3


Win


4
| With general pardon ſure each day to crown, -
"Mer wrath muſt always with the Sun go down: 3 |
Who ſceks the favour of his God to win? £4
With Jos at heart he muſt his W A
From that obJation fragrant odours riſe, 2
Peaceful on earth, and grateful to the Scies. .
CHRIST will ſuch votaries with joy receive,
And due regard to their petitions give: We
But ſhou'd the Temprer, enemy to Love, £428
Aſſume the plumage of the harmleſs Dove, TS
Mix with the flock, and ape their manners too,


As fondly: Bill; and as uxorious woe;
By certain marks we learn from God to FR ;
The genuine turtle from the ſpurious for: ©
In woolly ſoftneſs oft the Wolfi will hide
His ſavage aſpect, and his tawny pride,
And ſafely, cover'd with the fair diſguiſe,” 1
Y Paſs unſuſpected by the Shepherd's eyes,
4 Fell rage, and flaughter thro” the er” will
And beap the fold with numbers of the a


From


#


1

| From them the Heretiets derive their arts,

Thus Aru, and Photinus play'd their Parts;

And thus my ſuffrances, tho” trivial, ſhew

What hoſtile fraud will, undeteQed, do.

No more ſhe utter'd: When her plaintive

Drew groans of ſympathy from all the IE ny :

Next FaiTH, to heal their bleeding 1 217

No longer grieve, triumphant o'er your woes: |

Tho? death was ſlily aim'd at CONCORD's breaſt,

I timely ſuccour'd, and its force repreſt :

She too to me will mutual aid afford;

And, join'd with ber, I fear no hoſtile ſword.
But fill one labour there remains to grace

Our paſt atchieyements; anda work of peace;

Reſembling chat, which was in JuDan do done

By warlike Pa vip 's wiſe, pacifick Son;

The prudent father from the work abſtain d.

: For royal Blood his ſlaught'ring hand diſtain d:

Aud only hands, of blood unconſcious, dare

EreR, and conſecrate an Hauſe of Fray:


EE Z1ON.


L 65 ] |
Zion with joy beheld the fabrick riſe,

And God, deſcendant from ſuperior cies,
Thither his glory vifible tranſſate.
And make JERUSALEM his royal ſeat :
Then did the Al, itinerant beſore.

© Obtain a reſidence, and roam no more.


Here too let us with JuDan's monarch vie. |


And rear a ſtately ſtructure to the sky
Where God may deign conſpicuous to abide,
And o'er the Temples of our Hearts preſide z
Say. what avails it, tho? our arms o'erthrew


The rebel race, and quell'd the earth · born crew,


If yet the Son of God, ordain'd to come
Sin to aboliſh, and reverſe our doom,


| Shall, heav'n deſcended, find no human breaſt


Adorn'd, and furnifh'd for its heav'oly gueſt? .
Quick then, ye Sons of God, ye virtuous race,
Proceed to cultivate the works of Peace z
No longer in the tented field appear.


: Poiſing the ſhicld, and brandiſhing the ſpear *


K


A Ls TED


SS


2 4
r


r


x
14
t4
1
4
60
[+
2
9
1 4
TY
© I
* =

7

2

f

Y

43

7.

A
|

*

*

3
bY:
8
1
2

x %
45

4
B
1 1
bo
R
>
*

%
DR
*

1
5
i
*
if
75
8
6


PER
Of ſome rich * Fane project the grand deſign,
Of Peace a monument, for God a ſhrine. =


Here FAITH her pious exhortation ends,
And, with her Sifer, from the tow'r deſcends,
Studious by Line to meaſure ey'ry part,
Confin'd, and govern'd by the rules of art,
Four Fronts with curious ſymmetry to frame,
That no odd angle ſhou'd the ftrufture maim:
Three gates are ſet to catch the morning ray,
Three to the breezes from the weſtern ſea;
Three: more are beaten by the northern cold,
And three a ſouthern ſituation hold:
Not of rude ſtone, which foſſile earth ſupplies,
The ſpecious portals of each quarter riſe;
But folid gems, tranſpierc'd with artful skill,
The ſtately arch of ey'ry portal fill;


* The Plan of this Temple is taken from the Deſcription of the \
| New Jeruſalem in the 21ſt Chapter of St. Jobs Revelations. |


In


(67 ]

In ductile gold, from twelve compartments,

Three to a front, each apo/folick name:

By which the Spirit teaches us to find

A trinal paſſage to the human mind;

Shews by what channels, by what ſecret art,

It gains the inmoſt altar of the heart,

And prompts to pious vows, in ev'ry ſtage,

Throꝰ the Four ſeaſons of revolving age:

Whether the heat of life, as morning mild,

Warms, with its gentle influence, the child;

Or elſe, in Tourh's hot veins, it burne and fires

| The ſoul to fierce, inordinate defires;

Or when, in Man, it temp'rate and ſedate,

Mellows the fruits of life with autumn-heat ;
Or when, in Ape, it ſhoots a feeble ray,

Cold as the North, and ſcarce affords us day:

At ev'ry front a trinal Pow'r we find, |

Guarding the poſts their ſoy*reign Lord aſlign'd,
Three beauteous ſ pecies of tranſparent ſtone

; Each front compos'd, and, in their orders, ſhone;


K 2


j From


From lucid ſurfaces dart copious rays
| ot vivid colours, i in 2 mingled blaze:
In one che Chryſolite, with clouded veins |
Of ſparkling gold, the midgle ſtation gains;
And, in fit union with its languid beams,
Conjoins the BeryPs, and the Sophire s flames.
In this Chalcedons, with their native gloom,
Full light from neighbouring Hyatinths aſſume;
| Or, hid with art in ſplendor not their own,
Refled che azure of che Tur quois ſtone.
In that the ſanguine Amethyſt is laid,
| To tinge the Sardonys a watry red;
ö And e Faſpers, to that quarter born,
: Diffuſe their ſplendor, and the whole adorn.
E Fair, i in the fourth, the Emerald is ,


_ Vying with nature in a vernal green;


; From ev'ry. point a fylyan ſplendor fireams,
A lucid verdure, and cærulean beams.

| There too, O Chryſopraſs, you hold a place,

: Another 3 the ſhining work to grace; Os.

4 And


_ mm cog


£ Lo OR A um *
W
Ls ic n


: W Bo, n *
* — el * on apa 4 >
9 oy png FI 8 7


Stands on ſev'n columns of the cryſtal kind;
a O'er which is laid, of one pellueid ſtone,

A curious capital, i in form a cone 5

Along the baſe are ſinuous Autings wrought,


But rough, and branchy ; of a ruſtick hue;


[69]
And faſt by thee, the Topazes unite
A golden luſtre, and refreſhing light.


PP


The cordage ks as the lab'ring wheels *
The pond'rous' maſſes of the gems they bats, |
The inmoſt ſhrine, for #5, dew'sthronedefigrds


With ſofteſt touch, and elegance of thoughts ' *


The ſame the pearl, which. Fart ſo high did


And cheaply purchas'd with her whole eſtate, _
There heav*n-born WisDOM conſtantly *


And there all national concerns decides,


EnaQts new laws, and publiſhes a plan


To form, and regulate the life of man:


A ſylvan ſcepter in her hand ſhe bears,


And,


L 70 J.
And. tho no ſap the ſever'd root ſupplies,
Its verdure fades not, nor the bloſſom dies :
The ſhow-white lilly, and the ruſſet roſe
A twining foliage round the trunk diſpoſe ; 3


All freſh and gay, as in their earthy: beds


They never droop, they never hang their heads.
Such once, of old, in A*RON's hand was ſeen

For ever blooming in a vernal green B

Still round the arid, unprolifick wood

 Unfading leaves; and rural beautics ſtood. =

 Tndulgent Lord ! who didſt, in mercy, deign

To aid the poet, and ſupply the ſtrain,

To thee our thanks we pay in vocal lays,

For vice untunes the heart for #lent praiſe.

By thee aſſiſted bravely we repreſt

Th' infidious thoughts, that harbour'd in the breaſt;

By thee enlight'ned clearly we beheld ® _

The dreadful combats of the carnal field ; 3


9


da doubtful Fortune hov'ring oer che beart,


| Now take the _ and then che better part, |


.


*


_


TART


= Now ſway to Nice, anon to Virtue bend,
Now ſave, now damn, and to perdition ſend, ©
Ofc have Ifelt the influence of the God,


When in my foul he fix'd his fair aboe
Did ſtrength to ev*ry faculty impart,


And drive the crowd of rebels from my heart,


But ſoon theſe glitt'ring ſcenes of joy wereo'er,


And vice, and darkneſs triumph as before;
Wars, horrid wars within my boſom rage, |


And man's ?wo natures furiouſly engage;


The carnal /rame endeavours to retain


The etherial ſpirit in e miry chain;
The ſpirit, active as the ſolar ray,
Repels th oppreſſor, and aſpires to day:
£ Thus darbneſs jars inceſſantly 1 with 260


And Beil natures animatę the ſight;


| in Ves great Lord appears on Virtue's


— 1g ot


| And ev'ry Virtue is enthron'd i in peace:


fide, |


| Then quick thoſe tumults of the ſoul ſubſide; \ 4
No noiſe igtheard ; all earthly quarr 17 eaſe, *


*


＋


1 12


HS dE


Rt peo


* 9 -
7
.


r ee
