Psalms of the Brethren (Theragatha)
===================================
Psalms of the Brethren (Theragatha), translated by C. A. F. Rhys Davids (London: Pali Text Society, 1913), public domain. The first English rendering of the verses of the early Buddhist monks, Part 2 of Psalms of the Early Buddhists. Scan via Internet Archive.

L'wisioa 


Sei  tioa 


BL1405 

,P\U 

\/ »  A 


•v 


\ 


) 


PSALMS  OF  THE  EARLY  BUDDHISTS 


no  -  ^ 


PSALMS  OF  THE 
EARLY  BUDDHISTS 


II— PSALMS  OF  THE  BRETHREN 


BY 


i/"  V 

MRS.  RHYS  DAVIDS,  M.A. 


FELLOW  OF  UNIVERSITY  COLLEGE,  LONDON 
LECTURER  IN  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY,  MANCHESTER  UNIVERSITY 
AUTHOR  OF  ‘  A  MANUAL  OF  BUDDHIST  PSYCHOLOGICAL  ETHICS,’  ‘  BUDDHISM,  A 
STUDY  IN  THE  BUDDHIST  NORM,’  ETC. 


‘  The  truth  ( however  true  it  is)  that  robs  you  of  sympathy  toith  any  form 
of  thought  or  trait  of  man ,  is  false  for  you.' — R.  L.  Stevenson 


ILontion 

PUBLISHED  FOR  THE  PALI  TEXT  SOCIETY 


BY 


HENRY  FROWDE 


OXFORD  UNIVERSITY  PRESS  WAREHOUSE,  AMEN  CORNER,  E.C. 

1913 


;; 


\  *! 


-* 


> 


\ 


.* 


:  •:  ‘ 


HERMANN  OLUENBERG, 

WHO  FIRST  MADE  ACCESSIBLE  TO  THE  WEST  THE 

THERAGATHA, 

THIS  THE  FIRST  ENGLISH  TRANSLATION 
IS  IN  GRATEFUL  ADMIRATION 


DEDICATED 


f 


I 


'Tis  self  whereby  ice  suffer.  'Tis  the  greed 
To  grasp,  the  hunger  to  assimilate 
All  that  earth  holds  of  fair  and  delicate , 

The  lust  to  blend  with  beauteous  lives ,  to  feed 
And  take  our  fill  of  loveliness,  which  breed 
This  anguish  of  the  soul  intemperate. 

’ Tis  self  that  turns  to  harm  and  poisonous  hate 
The  calm,  clear  life  of  love  that  [ Arahants ]  lead. 

Oh  !  that  ’  twere  possible  this  self  to  burn 
In  the  pure  flame  of  joy  contemplative  ! 

Then  might  ice  love  all  loveliness,  nor  yearn 
With  tyrannous  longings  ;  undisturbed  might  live 
Greeting  the  summer  s  and  the  spring's  return, 

Nor  wailing  that  their  joy  is  fugitive. 

J.  A.  Symonds. 

.  .  .  Was  erloschen  sollte,  is  erloschen,  das  Feuer  der  Begier, 
des  Hasses,  der  Verblendung.  In  wesenloser  Feme  liegt  Filrchten 
wie  Hoffen ;  das  Wollen,  das  Sichanklammern  an  den  Wahn 
der  Ichheit  ist  uberwunden,  wie  der  Mann  die  torichten  Wilnsche 
der  Kindheit  von  sich  abwirft. 


H.  Oldenberg. 


CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION 

PAGE 

The  text  of  the  verses  ;  its  difficulty.  Sources  of  aid.  First  ap¬ 
pearance  in  translation  or  in  print  of  Dhammapala’s 
Commentary.  Its  historical  weakness.  The  early  doc¬ 
trines  in  the  poems.  Gradual  insertion  of  the  poems  into 
an  anthology.  Problem  of  the  names.  Type-names.  The 
prose  legends  and  the  Old  Commentaries  of  the  Great 
Minster,  Ceylon.  Poetry  in  prose  framework  the  Bud¬ 
dhist  mode  of  presentation.  Varying  utility  of  the  Com¬ 
mentary  ;  cases  where  it  is  indispensable.  Its  information 
concerning  the  families  whence  the  authors  “  went  forth.” 
Authors  of  more  than  one  poem.  The  proportion  of  poor 
families  represented.  The  large  number  of  young  and 
even  of  child  arahant-poets.  The  Buddha  seeking  the  poor 
and  the  children.  External  and  internal  experiences  in  the 
poems.  Sermon-poems  and  the  Sisters.  “Anna”  testi¬ 
fied  to.  Pictures  in  the  Commentary.  Beauties  of  diction. 

Great  and  ordinary  savakcfs.  Monachism  and  nature-love 
intensified  by  poetic  gift.  The  forest  as  a  home  of  the  pure. 
Permanent  poetic  production  and  transient  wave  of  poetry. 

The  poetry  of  the  saint  as  expressing  another  scale  of  values 
from  that  of  the  layman  and  the  aspirant.  The  vision 
of  the  Arahant  and  the  “forward  view.”  Comparative 
study  for  future  writers.  Metres  ....  xix 

Introductory  verses  by  the  Compilers  of  the  Anthology  .  6 

Canto  I.  Single  Verses  ascribed  to1 — 

I.  Subhuti  (burgess),  Savatthi,  nephew  to  Anathapindika  .  4 

II.  *Kotthita  the  Great,2  brahmin,  Savatthi .  .  .6 

III.  *Kanhha  Revata  (burgess),  Savatthi  .  .  .7 

1  Pronounce  the  vowels  as  in  German  or  Italian,  but  the  unaccented  a  as  u  in 
nut.  Every  a  is  thus  pronounced,  if  it  have  no  long  mark  ;  e.g .,  Revata=,  not 
Ray-vah-ta,  but  Ray-v&-t& ;  the  emphasis  not  as  in  tomato,  but  as  in  com¬ 
forter.  Pronounce  single  consonants  as  in  English,  except  c,  which  always  =  ch, 
as  in  church  ;  and  g,  which  is  always  hard,  as  in  get.  Pronounce  dotted  dentals 
as  English  dentals ;  in  undotted  dentals  let  the  tongue  strike  the  teeth.  In 
doubled  consonants  detach  as  in  Italian,  thus :  kam-ma,  Pun-na.  In  aspirated 
consonants  let  the  aspirate  be  heard,  e.g.,  in  Thera,  t-h  as  in  fat-head  (t-hay-rS.); 
Channa,  ch  as  ch-h  in  beech-hill  ;  visuddhi  as  d-h  in  dead-head ,  with  a  second  d 
interposed  ;  y  =  ng  ;  the  sound  is  more  usually  printed  as  m. 

*  *  signifies  an  agga-sdvaka,  or  disciple,  chief  in  some  attainment,  according 
to  Anguttara-Nikdya  i,  ‘  Etad-agga-vagga  \  Names  in  capitals  are  those  of 
Dhammapala’s  maha-savakd.  Names  in  italicized  capitals  are  those  classed  as 
leading  Theras  in  Vinaya  and  Nikayas  (c/.  R.  O.  Franke,  J.P.T.S.,  1908,  p.  23). 


IX 


X 


PSALMS  OF  THE  BRETHREN 


PAGE 

IV.  *Punna  of  the  Mantanis,  brahmin,  Donavatthu  .  8 

•  • 

V.  *Dabba  of  the  Mallas,  khattiya,  Anupiya  .  .  10 

VI.  “  Slta-Vaniya  ”  Sambhuta,  br.,  Rajagaha  .  .  11 

VII.  Bhalliya  (caravan-driver),  Pokkharavatl  .  .  12 

VIII.  VIra,  kh.  (s.  of  minister  to  Pasenadi),  Savatthi  .  13 

IX.  *Pilinda-Vaccha,  br.,  Savatthi .  .  .  .14 

X.  Punnamasa,  br.,  Savatthi  .  .  .  .15 

XI.  Gavaccha  the  Less,  br.,  KosambI  .  .  .16 

XII.  Gavaccha  the  Great,  br.,  Nalaka  .  .  .17 

XIII.  “  Vana  ’’-Vaccha,  br.,  Kapilavatthu,  playmate  of 

the  Bodhisat  .  .  .  .  .17 

XIV.  SIvaka,  br.,  nephew  to  XIII.  .  .  .  .18 

XV.  *“  Kunda  ’’-Dhana,  br.,  Savatthi  .  .  .19 

XVI.  Belatthaslsa,  br.,  Savatthi  .  .  .  .21 

XVII.  Dasaka,  slave,  Savatthi,  Anathapindika’s  household  21 
XVIII.  Singala-Pitar,  burgess,  Savatthi  .  .  .22 

XIX.  Kula,  br.,  Savatthi  .  .  .  .  .24 

XX.  Ajita,  br.,  Savatthi  (s.  of  Pasenadi' s  valuer)  .  25 

XXI.  Nigrodha,  br.,  Savatthi,  very  rich  .  .  .26 

XXII.  Cittaka,  br.,  Rajagaha,  very  rich  .  .  .26 

XXIII.  Gosala,  Magadha,  rich  .  .  .  .27 

XXIV.  Sugandha,  burgess,  Savatthi,  rich  .  .  .28 

XXV.  Nandiya,  kh.,  Sakiyan,  Kapilavatthu  .  .  29 

XXVI.  Abhaj^a,  kh.,  Rajagaha,  bastard  son  of  Bimbisara  .  30 

XXVII.  LomasakangijTi,  kh.,  Sakiyan,  Kapilavatthu  .  31 

XXVIII.  Jambugamika’s  Son,  Campa,  lay-adherent’s  son  .  32 

XXIX.  Harita,  br.,  Savatthi  (rich)  .  .  .  .33 

XXX.  Uttiya,  br.,  Savatthi  .  .  .  .34 

XXXI.  “  Gahvaratlriya  ”  Aggidatta,  br.,  Savatthi  .  .  35 

XXXII.  Suppiya,  s.  of  cemetery  watchman,  Savatthi  .  36 

XXXIII.  “  Sopaka,”  adopted  brother  to  Suppiya,  Savatthi  .  37 

XXXIV.  Posiya,  burgess,  Savatthi  (rich)  .  .  .39 

XXXV.  Samannakani,  a  Paribbaj aka’s  son  .  .  .40 

XXXVI.  Kuma’s  Son,  burgess,  Velukanda  in  Avanti  .  .  41 

XXXVII.  “  Comrade  of  Kuma’s  Son,”  Sudanta,  burgess,  ibid .  42 

XXXVIII.  Gavampati,  burgess,  friend  of  Yasa  (CXVII.)  .  42 

XXXIX.  Tissa,  kh.,  Kapilavatthu,  the  Bodhisat’s  step-brother  43 

XL.  Vaddhamana,  kh.,  Vesall  .  .  .  .  .  44 

XLI.  Sirivaddha,  br.,  Rajagaha  .  .  .  .45 

XLII.  *“  Khadira-Vaniya,”  i,e.  Revata,  br.,  younger 

brother  of  Sariputta  ;  so  also  CCXLIV.  .  .  45 

XLIII.  Sumangala,  peasant,  near  Savatthi  .  .  .47 

XLIV.  Sanu,  Savatthi,  s.  of  a  lay-adherent  .  .  .48 

XLV.  “  Ramanlya-viharin,”  burgess,  Raja£aha  .  .  49 

XL VI.  Samiddhi,  kh.,  Rajagaha  .  .  .  .51 

XL VII.  Ujjaya,  br.,  Rajagaha  .  .  .  .52 


CONTENTS  xi 

PAGE 

XLVIII.  Sanjaya,  br.,  Rajagaha,  rich  .  .  .52 

XLIX.  “  Ramaneyyaka,”  burgess,  Savatthi,  rich  .  .  53 

L.  Vtmat.a,  burgess,  Rajagaha,  rich  .  .  .54 

LI.  Godhika,  kh.,  Pava.  .  .  .  .54 

LII.  Stjbahxj,  kh.,  Pava  .  .  .  .  .54 

LIII.  Valliya,  kh.,  Pava  .  .  .  .  .54 

LIY.  Uttiya,  kh.,  Pava  .  .  .  .  .54 

LV.  “  Anjana-Vaniya,”  kh.,  Vajjian,  Vesali  .  .  56 

LVI.  “  Kutiviharin,”  (?  kh.,  Vajjian,  Vesali)  .  .  57 

LVII.  “  Kutiviharin  ”  (2)  (?  kh.,  Vajjian,  Vesali)  .  .  58 

LVIII.  “  Ramaniya-kutika  ”  (?  kh.,  Vajjian,  Vesali)  .  59 

LIX.  Kosala-viharin  (?  kh.,  Kosala)  .  .  .59 

LX.  *Sivali,  kh.,  s.  of  Suppavasa-kumara  .  .  60 

LXI.  Vappa,  br.,  s.  of  Vasettha  of  Kapilavatthu,  one  of 

the  “  Five  ”  ascetics  .  .  .  .62 

LXII.  Vajji-putta,  burgess,  Vesali  .  .  .63 

LXIII.  “  Pakkha  ”  Sapmoda,  kh.,  Sakiyan,  Devadaha  .  64 

LXIV.  Vimala-“Kondanha,”  Vesali,  bastard  son  of  Bim- 

bisara  .  .  .  .  .  .65 

LXV.  “  Ukkhepata,”-Vaccha,  br.,  Savatthi  .  .  66 

LXVI.  Meghiya,  kh.,  Sakiyan,  Kapilavatthu  .  .  67 

LXVII.  “  Ekadhamma-Savaniya,”  burgess,  Setavya  .  67 

LXVIII.  “  Ekudaniya,”  burgess,  Savatthi  .  .  .68 

LXIX.  .Channa,  slave,  Suddhodana’s  household,  Kapila¬ 
vatthu  .  .  .  .  .  .70 

LXX.  Punna  (Sunaparantaka),  burgess,  Supparaka  .  70 

LXXI.  Vacchapala,  br.,  Rajagaha  .  .  .72 

LXXII.  Atuma,  burgess,  Savatthi  .  .  .  .72 

LXXIII.  “  Manava,”  br.,  Savatthi  .  .  .  .73 

LXXIV.  Suyamana,  br.,  Sali  .  .  .  .74 

LXXV.  “  Susarada”  br.,  Nalaka  .  .  .  .74 

LXXVI.  “  Piyanjaha,”  kh.,  Vesali  .  .  .  .75 

LXXVII.  “  Hattharoha-putta,”  elephant-trainer,  Savatthi  .  76 

LXXVIII.  “  Mendasira,”  burgess,  Saketa  .  .  .76 

LXXIX.  Rakkhita,  kh.,  Sakiyan,  Devadaha  .  .  77 

LXXX.  Ugga,  burgess,  Ugga  .  .  .  .78 

LXXXI.  Samitigutta,  br.,  Savatthi  .  .  .  .78 

LXXXII.  Kassapa,  br.  (Udicca),  Savatthi  .  .  .79 

LXXXIII.  Siha,  kh.,  of  the  Mallas  .  .  .  .80 

LXXXIV.  Nita,  br.,  Savatthi  .  .  .  .81 

LXXXV.  Sunaga,  br.,  Nalaka  .  .  .  .81 

LXXXVI.  Nagita,  kh.,  Sakiyan,  Kapilavatthu  .  .  82 

LXXXVII.  Pavittha,  br.,  a  Paribbajaka  in  Magadha  .  .  82 

LXXXVIII.  Ajjuna,  burgess,  Savatthi  .  .  .  .83 

LXXXIX.  Devasabha,  kh.,  mandalika-raja  .  .  .83 

XC.  Samidatta,  br.,  Rajagaha  .  .  .  .84 

\ 


Xll  PSALMS  OF  THE  BRETHREN 

PAGE 

XCI.  Paripunnaka,  kh.,  Sakiyan,  Kapilavatthu  .  .  85 

XCII.  Vijaya,  br.,  Savatthi  .  .  .  .  .85 

XCIII.  Eraka,  (?)  burgess,  Savatthi  .  .  .86 

XCIV.  Mettaji,  br.,  Magadha  .  .  .  .87 

XCV.  “  Cakkhu  ”-Pala,  s.  of  landowner  (kutumbiya), 

Savatthi  .  .  .  .  .  .88 

XCVI.  Khandasumana,  kh.,  Malla,  Pava  .  .  .90 

XCVII.  Tissa,  kh.,  Roguva  .  .  .  .  .90 

XCVin.  Abhaya  (2),  br.,  Savatthi  .  .  .  .92 

XCIX.  Uttiya,  kh.,  Sakiyan,  Kapilavatthu  .  .  .92 

C.  Devasabha  (2),  kh.,  Sakiyan,  Kapilavatthu  .  .  93 

Cl.  Belatthakani,  br.,  Savatthi  .  .  .  .94 

CII.  Setuccha,  kh.,  mandalikaraja  .  .  .94 

CIII.  Bandhura,  burgess,  Sllavatl  .  .  .  .95 

CIV.  Kbit  aka,  br.,  Savatthi  .  .  .  .96 

CV.  Malitavambha,  br.,  Kurukaccha  .  .  .96 

CVL  Suhemanta,  br.,  “  Border  country  ”,  (Sankassa)  .  97 

CVII.  Dhammasava,  br.,  Magadha .  .  .  .98 

CVHI.  Dhammasava’s  father,  br.,  Magadha  .  .  98 

CIX.  Sangharakkhita,  rich,  Savatthi  .  .  .98 

CX.  Usabha,  Kosala,  rich  .  .  .  .  .99 

CXI.  Jenta,  kh.,  mandalika-raja,  Magadha  .  .  .  100 

CXII.  Vacchagotta,  br.,  Rajagaha  ....  101 

CXIII.  “  Vana  ’’-Vaccha,  br.,  Rajagaha  .  .  .  101 

CXIV.  Adhimutta,  br.,  Savatthi  (cf.  CCXLVIII.)  .  .  102 

CXV.  Mahanama,  br.,  Savatthi  ....  103 

CXVI.  Parapariya,  br.,  Rajagaha  ....  103 

CXVII.  Yasa,  burgess,  Benares  ....  104 

CXVIII.  Kimbila,  kh.,  Sakiyan,  Kapilavatthu  .  .  105 

CXIX.  Vajji-putta  (2),  kh.,  Vesall  ....  106 

CXX.  Isidatta,  caravan-guide,  Velugama,  Avanti  .  .  107 

Canto  H.  Psalms  of  Two  Verses  ascribed  to — 

CXXI.  Uttara,  br.,  Rajagaha  ....  109 

CXXII.  *“  Pin p ola  ’’-Bharadvaja,  br.,  s.  to  King  Udena’s 

chaplain  KosambI  .  .  .  .  .110 

CXXIII.  Valliya  (2),  br.,  Savatthi  .  .  .  .112 

CXXIV.  “  Gangatlriya  ”  Datta,  burgess,  Savatthi  .  .112 

CXXV.  Ajina,  br.,  Savatthi  (poor)  ....  114 

CXXVI.  Melajina,  kh.,  Benares  .  .  .  .114 

CXXVH.  *Radha,  br.,  Rajagaha  .  .  .  .115 

CXXVIII.  Suradha,  br.,  younger  brother  of  above,  Rajagaha  .  116 

CXXIX.  Gotama,  br.,  Rajagaha  .  .  .  .117 

CXXX.  Vasabha,  kh.,  Vesall  .'  .  .  .  .118 

CXXXI.  Cunda  the  Great,  br.,  younger  brother  of 

Sariputta,  Nalaka  .  .  .  .118 


CONTENTS  xiii 

PAGE 

CXXXII.  Jotidasa,  br.,  Padiyattha  country  .  .  .119 

CXXXIII.  Herannakani,  (?)  bhojalca  in  Kosala  .  .  121 

CXXXIV.  Somamitta,  br.,  Benares  ....  121 
CXXXV.  Sabbamitta,  br.,  SavatthI  ....  122 
CXXXVI.  Mahakala,  merchant,  Setavya  .  .  .  123 

CXXXVn.  Tissa  (2),  br.,  Rajagaha  ....  125 

CXXXVIII.  Kimbila,  kh.,  same  as  CXVIII.  .  .  .  125 

CXXXIX.  *Nanda,  kh.,  step-brother  to  the  Bodhisat,  Kapi- 

•  lavatthu  .....  126 

CXL.  Sirimat,  burgess,  SavatthI  ,  127 

CXLI.  Uttara,  br.,  Saketa  ....  128 

CXLII.  Bhaddaji,  burgess,  Bhaddiya  of  the  Angas  .  129 

CXLIII.  *Sobhita,  br.,  SavatthI  .  .  .  .131 

CXLIV.  “  Valliya  ”  Kanhamitta  br.,  Vesall  .  .131 

CXLV.  Vltasoka,  kh.,  younger  brother  of  King  Asoka  .  133 

CXL VI.  Punnamasa,  landowner,  SavatthI  .  .  .134 

CXL VII.  Nandaka,  burgess,  Campa  .  .  .  .134 

CXL VIII.  Bharata,  burgess,  Campa,  elder  brother  of  above  .  135 

CXLIX.  Bharadvaja,  br.,  Rajagaha  .  .  .136 

CL.  Kanhadinna,  br.,  Rajagaha,  s.  of  above  .  .137 

CLI.  Migasira,  br.,  Kosala  ....  138 

CLII.  Sivaka,  br.,  Rajagaha  ....  139 

CLIII.  Upavana,  br.,  SavatthI  ....  140 

CLIV.  Isidinna,  burgess,  Sunaparantas’  country  .  .  141 

CLV.  Sambula-Kaccana,  burgess,  Magadha  .  .  142 

CLVI.  Khitaka  (2),  br.,  Kosala  .  .  .  143 

CL VII.  Sona-Potiriyaputta,  bhojaka,  Kapilavatthu  .  143 

CL VIII.  Nisabha,  kh.,  Koliyans  ....  144 

CLIX.  Usabha  (2),  kh.,  Sakiyan,  Kapilavatthu  .  .  145 

CLX.  “  Kappa ta-Kura,”  pariah,  SavatthI  .  .  146 

CLXI.  *“  Kumara  ’’-Kassapa,  burgess,  Rajagaha  .  .  147 

CLXII.  Dhammapala,  br.,  in  Avanti  (later) .  .  .  149 

CLXIII.  Brahmah,  br.,  Kosala  .  .  .  .150 

CLXIV.  *Mogharajan,  br.,  pupil  of  Bavariya  .  .  151 

CLXV.  Visakha,  Pancall’s  Son,  kh.,  Magadha  .  .  152 

CLXVI.  Culaka,  br.,  Rajagaha  ....  153 

CLX VII.  “  Anupama,”  Kosala,  rich  .  .  .  .154 

CLXVIII.  Vajjita,  Kosala,  rich  ....  155 

CLXIX.  Sandhita,  Kosala,  rich  .  .  .156 

Canto  III.  Psaxms  of  Three  Verses  ascribed  to — 

CLXX.  Anganika-Bharadvaja,  br.,  Ukkattha,  rich  .  .157 

CLXXI.  Paccaya,  kh.,  Rohi  .  .  .  .  .158 

CLXXII.  *“  Bakula,"  burgess,  KosambI  .  .  .159 

CLXXIII.  Dhaniya,  potter,  Rajagaha  .  .  .161 

CLXXIV.  Matanga’s  Son,  landowner,  Kosala  .  .162 

\ 


XIV 


PSALMS  OF  THE  BRETHREN 


PAGE 

CLXXV.  “  Khujja  ’’-Sobhita,  br.,  Pataliputta  .  .  163 

CLXXVI.  Varana,  br.,  Kosala  .  .  •  .164 

CLXXVII.  Passika,  br.,  Kosala  •  165 

CLXXVIII.  Yasoja,  fisherman,  gate  of  SavatthI  .  .166 

CLXXIX.  Satimattiya,  br.,  Magadha  .  •  •  167 

CLXXX.  *  TJ pali,  barber,  Kapilavatthu  .  •  .168 

CLXXXI.  Uttarapala,  br.,  SavatthI  .  •  •  170 

CLXXXII.  Abhibhuta,  kli.,  Vetthapura  .  •  .170 

CLXXXIII  Gotama  (2),  kh ,  Sakiyan  .  .  171 

CLXXXIV.  Harita  (2),  br.,  SavatthI  (?  identical  with  Ha- 

rita  XXIX) . !72 

CLXXXV.  Vimala  (2),  br.,  Benares  .  •  •  .173 


Canto  IV.  Psalms  of  Four  Verses  ascribed  to— 

CLXXXVI.  Nagasamala,  kh.,  Sakiyan  .  .  .175 

CLXXXVII.  Bhagu,  kh.,  Sakiyan,  Kapilavatthu  .  .176 

CLXXXVIII.  Sabhiya,  kh.,  born  of  Paribbajaka  parents  .  177 

CLXXXIX.  *Nandaka,  kh.,  SavatthI  .  .  •  .178 

CXC.  Jambuka,  very  poor,  an  ascetic  .  -  •  179 

CXCI.  Senaka,  br.,  Gaya,  nephew  of  the  Kassapas  of 

Uruvela  .  •  •  •  .180 

CXCII.  Sambhuta  (?  “  Sanavasin  ”),  kh.,  a  “Western” 

Thera  .  . 

CXCIII.  *  Rahul  a,  kh.,  Sakiyan,  s.  of  the  Bodhisat  .  .  183 

CXCIV.  Candana,  rich,  SavatthI  .  .  •  .183 

CXCV.  Dhammika,  br.,  Kosala  .  .  •  .185 

CXCVI.  Sabbaka,  br.,  SavatthI  .  .  .  .186 

CXCVII.  Mudita,  c.,  Kosala  •  •  •  .187 


Canto  V.  Psalms  of  Five  Verses  ascribed  to— 

CXC VIII.  Rajadatta,  caravan  leader,  SavatthI  .  .189 

CXCIX.  Subhuta,  c.,  Magadha  .  .  •  ?  •  190 

CC.  Girimananda,  br.,  Rajagaha,  s.  of  King’s 

chaplain  .  •  •  •  •  .192 

CCI.  Sumana,  c.,  Kosala  .  •  •  .193 

CCII.  Vaddha,  c.,  Bharukaccha  (Therl’s  son)  .  .  194 

CCIII.  Kassapa  of  the  River,  br.,  Magadha  .  .195 

CCIV.  Kassapa  of  Gaya,  br.,  Magadha,  brother  of 

above,  .  ^9^ 

CCV.  *Vakkali,  br.,  SavatthI  .  .  •  .197 

CCVI.  Vijitasena,  elephant  trainer,  Kosala  .  .  200 

CCVII.  Yasadatta,  kh.,  of  the  Mallas  .  .  .201 

CCVIII.  Sona-“  Kutikanna,”  setthi,  Avanti  .  .  202 

CCIX.  Kosiya,  br.,  Magadha  .  .  •  .204 


CONTENTS 


XV 


Canto  VI.  Psalms  of  Six  Verses  ascribed  to — 

CCX.  *Kassapa  of  Uruvela,  br.,  Magadha 
CCXI.  Tekicchakari,  br.,  s.  of  Subuddha  (later) 

CCXII.  Mahanaga,  br.,  Saketa  . 

CCXIII.  Kulla,  landowner,  Savatthi  . 

CCXIV.  Malunkya’s  Son,  s.  of  Kang’s  valuer,  Savatthi 
CCXV.  Sappadasa,  br.,  Kapilavatthu,  s.  of  Suddhodhana’s 
chaplain  ...... 

CCX VI.  Katiyana,  Kosiya,  br.,  Savatthi 
CCXVII.  Migajala,  s.  of  Visakha,  Savatthi  (setthi) 

CCXVIII.  Jenta  (2),  br.,  s.  of  King’s  chaplain,  Savatthi 
CCXIX.  Sumana  (2),  upasaka’s  son,  pupil  of  Anuruddha 
CCXX.  “  Nhataka-muni,”  br.,  Rajagaha 
CCXXI.  Brahmadatta,  kh.,  son  of  Pasenadi  . 

CCXXII.  Sirimanda,  br.,  Supsumaragiri 
CCXXIII.  Sabbakama,  kh.,  Vesali  (later),  pupil  of  Ananda 


PAGE 

206 

208 

210 

211 

212 

214 

215 

216 
218 
220 
222 

223 

224 
226 


Canto  VII.  Psalms  of  Seven  Verses  ascribed  to — 


CCXXIV.  “  Sundara  ’’-Samudda,  setthi,  Rajagaha  .  .  228 

CCXXV.  *“  Lakunt aka  ’’-Bhaddiya,  Savatthi,  rich  .  .  230 

CCXXVI.  Bhadda,  setthi,  Savatthi  .  .  .  .231 

CCXXVII.  Sopaka  (2),  either  a  pariah,  or  a  trader’s  child  .  233 
CCXXVIII.  “  Sarabhanga,”  br.,  Rajagaha  .  .  .236 


Canto  VIII.  Psalms  of  Eight  Verses  ascribed  to — 

CCXXIX.  *Kacca\ya]na  the  Great ,  br.,  son  of  the  chaplain 

to  King  Candapajjota,  Ujjeni  .  .  .  238 

CCXXX.  Sirimitta,  landowner,  Rajagaha  .  .  .  241 

CCXXXI.  *“Panthaka”  Major,  setthi’s  daughter’s  s., 

Rajagaha  ......  242 


Canto  IX.  Psalm  of  Nine  Verses  ascribed  to — 
CCXXXII.  Bhuta,  setthi,  Saketa  ....  245 


Canto  X.  Psalms  of  Ten  Verses  ascribed  to — 

CCXXXIII.  *Kaludayin,  s.  of  a  statesman,  Kapilavatthu 

(?  kh.)  .  .  .  .  .  .248 

CCXXXIV.  “  Ekavihariya  ”  Tissa-kumara,  kh.,  brother  to 

King  Asoka  ( cf .  CXLV.)  .  .  .  .251 

CCXXXV.  *KarPina  the  Great,  kh.,  Kukkuta  (Border 

country)  ......  254 


\ 


XVI 


PSALMS  OF  THE  BRETHREN 


PAGE 

CCXXXVI.  *“  Cula-Panthaka  ”  (Minor),  setthi’s  daughter’s 

s„  Rajagaha  .....  258 

CCXXXVII.  Kappa,  kh.,  Magadhan  raja  .  .  .  259 

CCXXXVIII.  *Upasena,  Vanganta’s  Son,  and  of  Sari,  or 

“  Rupa-Sarl,”  br.,  Nalaka  .  .  .  261 

CCXXXIX.  Gotama  (3),  br.,  of  Udicca,  Savatthi  .  .  264 

tCANTo  XI.  Psalm  of  Eleven  Verses  ascribed  to — 

CCXL.  Sankicca,  br.,  Savatthi,  high  rank  .  .  266 


Canto  XII.  Psalms  of  Twelve  Verses  ascribed  to — 

CCXLI.  Sllavat,  kh.,  s.  of  Bimbisara,  Rajagaha  .  .  269 

CCXLII.  Sunita,  flower-scavenger  ....  271 

Canto  XIII.  Psalm  of  Thirteen  Verses  ascribed  to — 
CCXLIII.  *Sona-Kolivisa  (councillor’s  s.),  Campa  .  .  275 

Canto  XIV.  Psalms  of  Fourteen  Verses  ascribed  to — 

CCXLIV.  *Revata  (“  Khadiravaniya  ”),  br.,  younger 

brother  of  Sariputta,  Nalaka  ( see  XLII.)  .  279 

CCXLV.  Godatta,  caravan-leader,  Savatthi  .  .  281 

(Psalms  of  fifteen  verses  desunt.) 

Canto  XV.  Psalms  of  Sixteen  Verses  ascribed  to— 

CCXLVI.  *Anna-Kondanna,  br.,  Donavatthu,  the  first 

disciple  .....  284 

CCXL VII.  Udayin,  br.,  Kapilavatthu  .  .  .  287 

(Psalms  of  seventeen,  eighteen,  and  nineteen  verses  desunt.) 

Canto  XVI.  Psalms  of  Twenty  Verses  ascribed  to — 

CCXL VIII.  Adhimutta,  br.,  nephew  of  Sankicca  (CCXL.)  .  291 
CCXLIX.  Parapariya,  br.,  Savatthi  (see  CCLVII.)  .  .  294 

CCL.  Telakani,  br.,  Savatthi  ....  298 
CCLI  *Ratthapala,  councillor’s  s.,  Thullakotthika  .  302 

CCLII.  Malunkya’s  Son  (same  as  author  of  CCXIV.)  .  307 

CCLIII.  Sela,  br.,  Apana  .....  310 
CCLIV.  *Bhaddi ya-Kaligodha’ s  Son,  kh.,  Kapilavatthu  315 
CCLV.  “  Angulimala  ”  Ahirjsaka,  br.,  s.  of  Bhaggava, 

Pasenadi’s  chaplain  (?  Savatthi)  .  .318 

CCL VI.  *Anurui)Diia,  kh.,  Kapilavatthu  .  .  .  325 

CCLVII.  Parapariya  (later)  ;  identical  with  CCXLIX  .  331 


CONTENTS 


XVII 


Canto  XVII.  Psalms  of  Thirty  Verses  ascribed  to — 

PAGE 

CCLVIII.  Phussa,  kh.  (a  later  poem)  ....  335 

CCLIX.  *Sariputta,  br.,  Nalaka,  ‘  chief-disciple  ’  .  .  340 

CCLX.  *Ananda,  kh.,  Sakiyan,  cousin  to  the  Bodhisat  .  349' 

Canto  XVIII.  Psalm  of  Forty  Verses  ascribed  to — 

CCLXI.  *Kassapa  the  Great,  s.  of  the  brahmin  Kapila, 

Mahatittha  ......  359' 

Canto  XIX.  Psalm  of  Fifty  Verses  ascribed  to — 
CCLXII.  Talaputa,  mime,  Rajagaha  ....  369 

Canto  XX.  Psalm  of  Sixty  Verses  ascribed  to — 
CCLXIII.  *Moggallana  the  Great ,  s.  of  Moggali,  br.,  near 


Rajagaha,  *  chief-  disciple  ’  .  .  .  382'. 

Canto  XXI.  Psalm  of  Seventy- One  Verses  ascribed  to — 
CCLXIV.  *VangIsa .  395- 

Appendices 

t 

I.  Additions  and  Corrections  .  .  .  .414 

II.  Aspects  of  the  Goal  or  Good  ....  420 

III.  Thera-Verses  not  included  in  this  Anthology  .  423 

IV.  Works  quoted  by  the  Commentary  .  .  .  425 

Index  ........  428 


\ 


h 


INTRODUCTION 


With  this  second  volume  of  the  so-called  Psalms  of  the 
Early  Buddhists,  my  task  is  finished  of  laying  before  Eng¬ 
lish  readers  a  translation,  at  its  best  but  rough  and  pro¬ 
visional,  of  the  remarkable  anthology  of  the  Thera-therv - 
gdthci  contained  in  the  Pali  Canon  of  the  Three  Pitakas. 
Of  the  stanzas  in  this  volume  of  the  poems,  numbering,  if 
we  discount  duplicates,  approximately  1,220,  only  a  small 
proportion,  under  100,  have  hitherto  appeared  in  English 
dress.  These  are  the  verses,  specified  throughout  the 
work,  which  appear  in  English  translations  of  the  Dham- 
mapada,  Sutta-Nipata  and  Udana,  the  Dialogues  of  the 
Buddha ,  the  Jataka ,  and  the  Milinda.  Only  in  German, 
in  Dr.  K.  E.  Neumanns  translation,  published  fourteen 
years  ago,  has  the  work  up  till  now  appeared  in  its  entirety 
in  any  European  tongue. 

Concerning  the  Pali  text  itself,  I  have  already  written  in 
the  sister  volume.  Thanks  to  the  institution  of  the  Pali  Text 
Society  and  to  the  editio  princeps  of  the  text,  prepared  by 
the  fine  scholarship  of  Dr.  Hermann  Oldenberg,  and  forming 
one  of  that  Society’s  early  volumes,  there  has  been  no  need 
for  the  translator  to  wear  eyes  and  patience  in  deciphering 
undivided  lines  of  alien  scripts  on  palm-leaves  of  mellow 
ochre,  unsuited  to  readers  in  this  light-starved  climate. 

The  residual  difficulties  encountered  in  coping  with  the 
poetic  diction  in  general,  and  with  many  an  obscure  allu¬ 
sion  in  particular,  have  at  times  been  very  formidable.  As 
with  the  sister  volume,  however,  three  powerful  aids  have 
been  at  hand  throughout— my  husband’s  Pali  collectanea 
and  knowledge  of  Pali,  the  Neumann  translation,  and 

XIX 


XX 


PSALMS  OF  THE  BRETHREN 


Dhammapala’s  commentary  :  —  the  Paramattha  -  Dlpam 
That  neither  my  husband,  nor  any  other  competent  critic 
of  Pali  or  English  has  gone  systematically  through  the  work 
in  proof-stage  is  a  serious  drawback ;  but  there  are  limits 
to  what  one  can  ask  of  the  patience,  kindness,  and  leisure 
of  others,  as  well  as  to  the  time  during  which  a  book  can 
be  suffered  to  block  the  way.  Anyway,  I  have  had  the 
benefit  of  his  ready  help  in  most  of  the  cruces  of  the  work, 
and  in  much  besides.  But  there  are  a  host  of  minor  flaws, 
let  alone  greater  ones.  Dr.  Neumann’s  presentation  of 
each  poem  as  a  whole  was  of  great  preliminary  assistance, 
and  to  differ  from  him  in  many  a  detail  of  interpretation 
was  a  healthy  stimulus  to  closer  inquiry,  such  as  he  will  be 
content  to  reckon  among  the  fruits  of  his  pioneer  venture. 

Then  as  to  the  Commentary  to  which  I  have  referred  in 
the  introduction  to  the  Sisters  : — the  whole  of  this  long 
work  was  transcribed,  during  1911  and  half  1912,  in  con¬ 
siderably  over  a  thousand  foolscap  pages,  by  the  talent  and 
indomitably  sustained  industry  of  my  colleague,  Miss  Mabel 
Hunt.  Of  her  transcript  the  former  half  is  in  process  of 
collation  by  Mrs.  M.  H.  Bode,  with  the  Singhalese  palm- 
leaf  copy,  lent  by  the  Royal  Library  of  Copenhagen,  which 
unfortunately  comes  to  an  untimely  end  at  the  Solasa- 
Nipata — in  this  volume,  Canto  XY.  The  present  transla¬ 
tion  could  not  await  the  help  of  that  collation  ;  hence  to 
what  extent  the  Burmese  MS.  will  prove  faulty,  my  read¬ 
ings  from  it  will  have  suffered. 

Even  had  it  been  consulted  in  a  critically  edited  edition, 
such  as  the  Pali  Text  Society  hopes  in  the  near  future  to 
publish,  the  Commentary  is  doubtless  no  infallible  guide, 
historically  or  grammatically.  Its  narrative  contains  much 
hagiographical  myth  ;  its  exegesis  is  coloured  by  later 
developments  of  doctrine,  and  is  twisted  by  professional 
exigencies  of  edification.  Such  historico-scientific  defects 
were  unfelt  in  Dharmapala’s  age.  He  had  no  conception 
of  historical  criticism.  If  he  quotes  two  versions  of  a 
Thera’s  story,  he  does  not  attempt  to  weigh  the  evidence, 
and  make  inferences  as  to  historical  truth.  But  to  gird  at 


INTRODUCTION 


XXI 


him  for  lacking  anything  so  new-born  in  ourselves  were  to 
show  an  equal  deficiency  in  historical  sense. 

Now  the  Commentator  alleges  that  there  were  Thera 
verses  recited  ‘  at  the  time  of  the  first  great  Council.’  But 
he  also  relates  that  many  Theras  lived  later  than  that, 
notably  Tekicchakari,  in  the  reign  of  Asoka’s  father,  and 
Vitasoka  and  Eka-vihariya,  who  are  alleged  to  have  been 
brothers  of  Asoka  himself.  Their  verses  may  have  been 
incorporated  in  the  Anthology  at  the  ‘  Third  Great  Council,’ 
held  at  Patna  during  Asoka’s  reign.  Dhammapala  asserts 
that  this  was  so  in  the  case  of  the  first-named  poet. 

There  is  nothing  incredible  in  the  view  that  the  Antho¬ 
logy  is  thus  a  collection  containing  an  early  nucleus  with 
later  accretions.  There  may  well  have  been,  among  the 
constituents  of  the  earliest  body  of  the  Dhamma,  many 
such  verses  containing  doctrines  generally  expressed,  or 
personal  confessions  of  faith  associated  with  the  names  of 
particular  teachers.  Dr.  Winternitz  concedes  as  much  for 
one  or  two  of  the  stanzas  which  I  have  tabulated  in  the 
index  as  Refrain-verses.1  It  is  probably  true  of  many  more. 
The  Sangha  is  said  to  have  been  an  organization  of  over 
forty  years’  standing  when  its  founder  passed  away.  It  is 
inconceivable  that  its  unwritten  ‘  literature  ’ — rules,  trans¬ 
actions,  tenets,  homilies,  hymns,  etc. — should  not,  during 
those  many  years  of  young  energy  and  endeavour,  have 
also  become  to  some  extent  organized. 

As  the  Sangha,  during  the  next  two  or  three  centuries, 
continued  to  develop,  so  doubtless  did  the  stock  of  gathas 
grow,  till  conceivably  the  collection  of  poems  committed  to 
memory  by  experts  became  a  fluctuating  quantity,  so  that 
revision  and  a  definite  selection  became  desirable.  And 
this,  it  appears,  was  effected  at  the  Council  of  Patna. 

There  may  possibly  have  been  further  accretions  before 
the  time  when  the  Pitakas  were  committed  to  writing. 
Dr.  Winternitz  suggests  signs  of  later  thought  in  Khanda- 
sumana’s  stanza.  That  of  Sandhita2  is  along  similar  lines. 

1  Gescldchte  dcr  Indischcn  Litteratur  (1913),  ii.  88. 

2  XCYI. ;  CLXIX. 


XXII 


PSALMS  OF  THE  BRETHREN 


But  that  the  great  bulk  of  the  poems  are  relatively  early 
seems  probable  by  both  the  doctrine  and  diction  of  them. 
The  former  and  the  latter  are  true  counterparts  of  the  Four 
Nikayas  : — the  true  Suttanta  teaching,  and  its  idiom,  so  far 
as  that  is  metrical.  ‘  Anicca,’  ‘  dukkha,’  £  anatta,’  the  Four 
truths,  the  Ariyan  Path,  the  seven  Buddhas,  Arahants  as 
no  less  buddha  and  tathagata  than  their  great  Master,1 
and  so  forth  : — such  is  the  range  of  the  ancient  Theravadism 
of  these  poems,  no  less  than  it  is  that  of  the  Suttantas  and 
the  Satta-Nipdia,  and  the  Dliammapada. 

If  European  Indologists  eventually  agree  to  refer  the 
final  inclusion  of  all  but  negligible  increments  to  the 
Council  of  Patna  (in  the  eighteenth  year  of  Asoka’s  reign), 
there  seems  to  be  no  valid  reason  why  orthodox  Buddhists 
should  not  concur  with  this.  Admitting,  then,  this  range 
of  nearly  two  and  a  half  centuries  for  the  growth  of  the 
Anthology  as  such,  and  discounting  the  pious  tradition 
that  most  of  the  putative  authors  were  contemporaries  of 
the  first  Theras,  I  am  not  so  sceptically  disposed  as  to  see 
in  most  of  the  names  of  those  authors  a  large  number 
of  literary  fictions,  nor,  in  many  of  the  poems,  literary 
concoctions  to  explain  so  many  names.  A  goodly  propor¬ 
tion  of  the  names  are  admitted  by  the  Commentary,  one 
or  two  by  the  text  itself,  to  have  been  nicknames,  such  as 
are  so  frequent  in  Indian  literature.2  The  adoption  of  a 
new  name  on  leaving  the  world  for  a  religious  order  is  of 
much  later  date.  It  is,  however,  not  inconceivable  that, 
among  the  nicknames,  one  here  and  there  may  have  been 
adopted  by  a  poet  to  screen  his  identity,  such  a  name,  e.g., 
as  Lone-dweller  for  Prince  Tissa-Kumara,  brother,  according 
to  Dhammapala,  of  the  Emperor  Asoka.  But  that  name 
or  legend  is  largely  literary  fiction  is  a  supposition  for 
which  there  seems  no  sufficient  historical  necessity.  If 
the  Thera -therl-gdthd  took  two  or  three  centuries  to 
reach  its  present  canonical  proportions,  this  permits  on  the 
average  an  output  of  between  one  and  two  completed 

1  Cf.  Vinaya  Texts ,  i.,  p.  112,  §  11  (1). 

2  Rhys  Davids  in  Dialogues  of  the  Buddha ,  i.  193. 


INTRODUCTION 


XX1U 


poems  every  year.  And  the  Sangha  was  growing  every 
year.  Hence  it  must  have  contained  a  much  greater  pro¬ 
portion  of  men  and  women  capable  of  poetical  self-expres¬ 
sion  than  the  relatively  small  number  whose  verses  were 
deemed  worthy  of  canonical  honours.  All  is,  of  course, 
conjecture,  but  I  incline  to  think  that  a  wholesale  and 
undiscriminating  scepticism  as  to  the  historical  reality  of 
the  men  and  women  whose  names  are  attached  to  these 
poems  is  too  easy.  It  is  more  likely  than  not  that  at  some 
time  within  those  centuries  they  lived,  were  members  of 
the  Order,  and  either  composed,  or  in  another  way  came  to 
have  associated  with  their  self-expression — in  sermons  or 
converse — the  poems  bearing  their  name. 

I  see  no  good  reason  to  disallow  this  for  the  majority  of 
the  names.  Some  there  are,  it  is  true,  where  the  real 
individual  does  not  stand  out  at  all.  Here  it  is  not  impos¬ 
sible  there  may  have  been  one  or  more  bhikkhus  with 
whom  the  poem  was  associated,  but  the  name  may  be 
either  a  soubriquet,  or  a  name  to  the  poem  itself.  Take 
the  gatha  entitled  Manava  (LXXIIL,  p.  78).  The  name 
means  simply  ‘  brahmin  youth,’  just  as  Kumara  means 
noble  youth,  Junker.  The  experience  related  is  a  phase  in 
the  legend  of  the  Buddha  himself,  just  as  the  story  of  Yasa 
(CXVII.)  also  became  a  phase.  But  for  the  Buddhists— 
and  for  how  many  more  than  Buddhists! — it  is  typical  of 
what  might  amongst  us  be  called  ‘The  Soul’s  Awakening.’ 
And  there  may  well  have  been  a  verse  (compiled  by  some 
early  long-forgotten  member  of  the  Order) — perhaps  a 
fraction  of  a  longer  poem  about  the  Great  Renunciation — 
expressing  this  typical  phase,  and  bearing  a  typical  name, 
analogous  to  our  ‘Everyman.’ 

Other  numbers  may  be  selected  as  bearing  names  equally 
shadowy.  Thus  discriminating,  we  come  to  see  our  cluster 
of  Theras  in  a  perspective  like  that  of  a  Renaissance 
painter’s  aerial  gallery— a  row  of  saintly  personages  clearly 
portrayed  in  front,  and  behind  them,  not  bodies  but  just 
faces,  leaning  out  from  cloudy  bars  in  all  degrees  of 
diminishing  clearness. 


XXIV 


PSALMS  OF  THE  BRETHREN 


The  length  of  the  biographical  legend  prefixed,  together 
with  citation  of  the  corresponding  legend  from  the  Apaddna 
to  each  poem,  varies  greatly  with  each  Thera.  I  have 
excised  the  whole  of  each  story  with  the  exception  of  the, 
for  ns,  less  mythical  account  of  the  saint’s  last  and 
culminating  span  of  life  on  this  limited  if  indisputable 
earth  of  ours.  The  work,  as  we  know,  is  early-medieval, 
and  the  purist — I  use  the  term  in  all  respect — may  ill  brook 
the  juxtaposition  of  any  of  it  beside  the  purer  and  more 
venerable  Theravada  of  the  Gathas.  Let  it,  however,  not 
be  forgotten,  firstly,  that  Dhammapala  claims  to  have  based 
his  Commentary  on  ‘  the  method  of  the  Old  Commentary 
or  Commentaries’: 

‘  saliassay  vannanay  yasmd  dhdrate  Satthu  Sasanarj 
pubbdcariyasihdnay  titthateva  vinicchayo , 
tasmd  tam-avalambitvd  ogdhitvdna  panca  pi 
Nikdye  upanissdya  Pordnatthakathd-nayay 
suvisuddhay  asankinnay  nipunattliavinicchayay 
Mahd-Vihdra-vdsinay  samayay  avilomayay.  .  .  1 

‘  In  order  that  the  Master’s  doctrine  should  bear  its  mani¬ 
fold  explication,  and  the  interpretation  of  those  lions,  the 
teachers  of  old,  should  be  established,  therefore  [will  I> 
hard  though  it  be,  to  the  best  of  my  powers  make  a  Com¬ 
mentary]  resting  upon  that  [interpretation],  diving  also 
into  the  Five  Nikayas,  and  in  dependence  on  the  method 
of  the  Old  Commentary  (or  Commentaries) — so  pure  and 
unadulterated  in  its  interpretation  of  subtle  meaning — the 
concordant  views  of  them  that  dwell  at  the  Great  Minster  ’ 

1  From  the  opening  stanzas  of  the  Commentary.  They  are  void  of 
interest  except  the  lines  here  quoted.  Very  similar  lines  preface  the 
other  parts  of  the  Paramattha-Dipani.  The  Br.  transcript  reveals  at 
once  the  error,  so  easy  to  make  in  reading  Singhalese,  standing  in 
Professor  E.  Muller’s  edition  of  the  Therigathd  Commentary ,  undis¬ 
cerned  by  me  in  the  ‘  envoi  ’  of  the  Sisters.  There  it  is  Pordnattha- 
kathd-tayay  (triplet  of  Old  Commentaries)  instead  of  Lnayay' — 
‘method.’  As,  however,  there  seem  to  have  been  three  Commentaries 
in  Ceylon  in  Dhammapala’s  time,  the  tayay  may  be  virtually,  if 
not  formally,  correct. 


INTRODUCTION 


XXV 


[of  Anuradhapura,  Ceylon].  And  this  Old  Commentary 
was  probably  the  Slhdldtthdkdthil  (Singhalese  Commentary), 
which,  in  the  relatively  modern  work  Sdddhd-innid-  Sdnydhdf 
is  said  to  have  comprised  the  4  Great  [Minster]  Atthakatha,’ 
the  4  Great  Raft  ’  (pdccdri) ,  and  the  4  Great  Kurunda  Attha- 
kathas.’1  Hence,  the  juxtaposition  of  the  Theras’  pre- 
Asokan  and  Asokan  poems  with  the  prose  of  six  to  nine 
centuries  later  is  not  so  forced  as  at  first  sight  it  might 
seem.  The  matter  and  the  method  of  the  more  modern 
work  is  not  really  a  mushroom  invention  of  story  and 
edifying  exigesis.  That  work  is  but  a  recast,  a  re-compiled 
edition  in  scholastic  Pali,  of  the  older  Singhalese  or 
Tamil  prose  framework.  Set  down  in  writing  a  few  cen¬ 
turies  before  Dhammapala’s  time,  the  legends  were  oral 
tradition  long  before  that.  Seen  in  this  perspective  the 
Commentary  has  a  venerableness  of  its  own,  bridging  over 
the  seas  of  time  between  Asoka  and  the  days  of  the  great 
scholastics  to  a  greater  extent  than  at  first  appears. 
Evolving  inevitably  as  secular  prose  framing  the  sacredly 
intact  verses,  it  forms  with  these  a  picture,  as  it  were,  of 
wooded  slopes  of  verdant  growth  clothing  the  hills  that 
tower  relatively  unchanging  above  them  a  picture  that 
would  lose  if  both  features  were  not  presented. 

In  the  second  place,  the  presentation  of  verses,  solemn 
or  otherwise,  in  a  framework  of  prose  narrative  is  essentially 
the  historical  Buddhist  way  of  imparting  canonical  poetry. 
Dhammapala’s  chronicles  are,  for  the  most  part,  undupli¬ 
cated  in  any  other  extant  work ;  but  not  seldom  they  run 
on  all  fours,  not  only  with  parallel  chronicles  in  Buddha- 
ghosa’s  Commentaries,  but  also  with  the  prose  framework 
of  poems  in  Suttd  Nipdtd  or  Sdyyuttd  Nikdyd ,  not  to  mention 
the  Jatdkd.  Centuries  divide  the  compilation  of  these  three 
last-named  prose  frameworks  from  the  Paramattha-Dlpani, 
and  yet  we  read  on  with  no  sense  of  rupture.  And  why  ? 
Because  Dhammapala  is  following,  as  he  said,  the  ndyd  of 
the  Old  Atthakatha,  or  ‘  talk  about  the  meaning,’  and  that 
old  talk  came  down  to  him  unbroken,  if  varied  in  diction, 

1  J.P.T.S. ,  1890,  p.  55  ;  cf.  my  Bud.  Psy.,  xxi.  /. 


XXVI 


PSALMS  OF  THE  BRETHREN 


from  the  earlier  ages  of  his  faith.  With  some  excision,  there¬ 
fore,  and  a  little  condensing  of  the  prose,  I  have  presented 
the  gathas  in  the  way  in  which  they  have  lived  for  so  many 
centuries  in  the  living  tradition  of  Pali  Buddhism. 

In  defending  thus  the  presentation  of  the  ‘  psalms  ’  in 
their  native  and  historical  setting,  I  admit  that,  as  eluci¬ 
dating  the  circumstances  under  which  the  poems  were 
composed,  the  Commentary  varies  greatly  in  utility.  At 
times  its  utility  is  at  zero-point — e.g.,  in  those  poems  which 
are  sermons  (e.g.,  CCXXXY.),  or  collections  of  folk  philosophy, 
or  gnomic  runes  (e.g.,  CLXXII.),  or  hymns  of  general  import 
(XCIY.,  CXVIL).  Sometimes  the  Thera’s  verses  bear  their 
own  sufficient  explanation,  as  in  those  of  Cula-Panthaka, 
Sunita,  Nagasamala,  Telakani,  etc.  The  Commentary 
here  does  but  etch  in  the  individual  a  little  more  sharply. 
But  there  are  a  certain  number  which,  like  so  many 
Jatakas,  are  hardly  intelligible  without  the  accompanying 
prose.  With  its  help  they  become  not  only  intelligible,  but 
intelligible  after  a  simple,  ingenuous  fashion.  Thus  read, 
how  clearly  and  naturally  stands  out  the  suicidal  wail  of 
Mahanama  (CXY.),  the  awe  and  swiftly  growing  insight  of 
Kimbila  at  the  cinematographic  vision  before  him  (CXYIII.), 
the  humour  and  earnestness  of  Mahakala  (CXXXYI.),  the 
dream  of  Usabha  begging  in  state  (CLIX.),  the  lure  of 
Kappata-Kura’s  rags  (CLX.),  the  rebuke  of  Satimattiya 
(CLXXIX.),  or  the  revolt  against  the  ever-present  satellites 
in  Eka-vihariya’s  opening  line  (CCXXXIY.)!  How  do  we 
not  now  understand  Pakkha’s  comment  as  he  watches  the 
scrambling  kites  (LXIII.),  or  Atuma’s  bamboo  canes  mutu¬ 
ally  stifling  each  other  (LXXII.),  or  Cakkhupala’s  virtuous 
wrath  (XCY.) !  In  Dr.  Oldenberg’s  words  on  the  bulk  of 
the  Jataka  verses,  we  may  say  of  most  of  these  few 
poems :  ‘  Nobody  can  imagine  that  the  Buddhists  would 
have  found  pleasure  in  reciting  such  unintelligible  fragments 
to  each  other.’  And  can  we  not,  indeed,  feel  justified  in 
going  equally  far  for  these  Theragathas  (at  least  in  the 
poems  cited  above)  as  for  the  Jataka,  Sutta-Nipdta ,  Sayyutta 
Nikaya,  and  say  :  ‘  The  verses  taken  alone  are  to  a  large 


INTRODUCTION 


XXV11 


extent  meaningless.  Then  comes  in  the  prose,  and  by  it 
all  becomes  clear.  That  the  verses  were  intended  to 
complete  just  that  context  indicated  by  the  prose  is  self- 
evident.’  1 

Let  us  anyway,  with  what  credulity  we  can  muster, 
briefly  glance  at  such  information  as  the  Commentary 
yields  concerning  the  Theras  in  general :  their  numbers, 
age,  and  social  status  while  yet  in  the  life  of  4  the  house,’ 
with  a  comparative  glance  at  their  Sisters’  verses. 

And  first  we  find  that,  among  several  duplicated  and 
triplicated  names,  there  are  but  five  of  whom  it  is  alleged 
that  they  stand  for  Theras  who  composed  a  second  poem 
in  the  collection.  These  are, 

Adhimutta  (CXIY.,  CCXLVIII.). 

Kimbila  (CXVIII.,  CXXXVIII.). 

Malunkya’s  Son  (CCXIY.,  CCLII.). 

Parapariya  (CCXLIX.,  CCLYII.). 

Revata  (XLIL,  CCXLIV.). 

This  reduces  the  possible  264  authors  to  259.  The 
Commentator  is  careful  to  point  out  these  few  traditional 
identities,  among  other  apparently  possible  and  even 
probable  duplicates.  This  makes  his  silence  concerning 
the  latter — e.g.,  concerning  the  two  Woodland  Yacchas,  the 
two  Punnamasas,  and  again  concerning  identical  poems 
ascribed  to  two  authors,  e.g.,  CLXXII.,  CLXXXIV. — all  the 
stranger.  Yet  it  is  perhaps  not  so  strange,  when  we 
remember  that  neither  Anthology  nor  Commentary  was  the 
independent  work  of  one  or  two  persons  of  literary  genius, 
but  that  both  were  accretions  of  slow  growth.  The  added 
poems  would  fall  into  their  respective  Nipatas  (or  Cantos), 
an  easy  matter  when  the  whole  Anthology  was  completed 
before  it  was  set  down,  at  a  later  age,  in  writing.  The 
*  talk  1  about  each  gatha  added  would  also  be,  so  to  speak, 

1  J.P.T.S. ,  1912.  ‘  The  Akhyana  type  and  the  Jatakas,’  pp.  20,  21. 

One,  indeed,  of  the  legends  presents  its  poem  in  the  very  words  in 
which  the  Jdtaka  Commentary  presents  the  Akhyana.  This  is 
Dhammika’s  poem  CXCV.  On  both  legend  and  poem,  see  Additions 
and  Corrections  in  Appendix,  opposite  p.  185. 


xxviii  PSALMS  OF  THE  BRETHREN 

instituted  in  its  proper  order,  and  also  eventually  and  at  a 
still  later  age,  committed  to  writing.  And  Dhammapala, 
recasting  the  ‘  Old  Atthakatha,’  judged  himself  bound,  not 
to  revise  the  matter,  or  to  make  historical  and  literary 
criticisms  about  it,  like  us  irreverent  outsiders  (ito  bahiddha ), 
but  to  follow  the  traditional  ‘  method,’  as  he  says,  and  set 
down  pretty  much  what  he  found.  Hence  he  does  not 
speculate  in  footnotes  on  possibly  bifurcated  legends  such 
as  those  of  the  two  brahmins  of  Kosala,  Migasira  (CL.), 
and  Yangisa  (CCLXIY.) ;  nor  on  a  possible  confusion 
between  the  legends  of  Somamitta,  pupil  of  Yimala,  and 
Yimala,  pupil  of  Amit(t)a  (CXXXIY.,  CLXXXY.),  or 
between  those  of  uncle  Sankicca  and  nephew  Adhimutta 
(CCXL.,  CCXYIII.),  etc.  The  ‘revised  version’  upon 
which  he  is  engaged  is  not  of  the  Canon  itself,  yet  is  it  a 
very  venerable  adjunct  to  the  sacred  books,  and  he  writes 
as  one  from  whom  an  orthodox  conservatism  is  expected, 
an  Achariya  of  the  Kancipura  school. 

Secondly,  the  Commentary  enables  us  to  take  a  census 
of  the  various  classes  and  districts  from  which  these  259 
poets  were  traditionally  believed  to  have  sprung.  Thus  we 
find  of — 


Brahmins  ...  ...  ...  •••  ••  HO1 

Khattiyas  (rajas,  etc.,  ‘  clansmen,’  ‘minister’s  ’  son)  ...  602 

Owners,  or  at  least  tenants,  of  land,  cultivators  ...  73 

Burgesses,  such  as  setthis,  or  councillors,  commoners, 

merchants,  or  simply  ‘  rich’  men’s  sons  (14)  ...  534 

Craftsmen,  elephant-trainers,  caravan  guides  ...  9 

Actor  ...  ...  ...  ...  •••  •••  1 

Pariahs,  labourers,  ‘  slaves,’  fisherman  (1)  ...  ...  10 

Illegitimate  sons  of  kings,  sons  of  religieux  4  ...  3 

Sons  of  simply  ‘  lay- adherents  ’  ...  ...  ...  3 

259 


1  Malunkya’s  son  is  reckoned  as  of  this  class  (CCXIV.  ;  cf.  XX.). 

2  The  four  ‘  hut  ’-theras  (LVI.-LIX.) ,  likened  in  circumstances  to  the 
Vajjian  raja’s  son  (LV.),  are  reckoned  as  also  of  this  class. 

3  Bhojakd,  kutumbikd ;  I  cannot  class  these  according  to  vanna. 

4  Gavampati  was  a  wealthy  commoner’s,  or  setthi’s,  son,  see  Vinaya 
Texts ,  i.  110.  I  have  used  ‘councillor’  for  setthi,  as  implying  that 


INTRODUCTION 


XXIX 


That  a  large  proportion  of  these  men  of  ‘  letters  ’ 
should  belong  to  the  class  which  were  the  custodians  of 
religious  lore  and  sacred  hymns  wTas  inevitable.  The  really 
interesting  feature  is  that  the  residuum,  consisting  of 
noblemen  trained  in  war,  governance,  and  sports,  of 
merchants,  craftsmen,  and  the  like,  occupied  with  business, 
commerce,  and  constructive  work,  and  of  the  illiterate  pool, 
should  be  as  numerous  as  it  is.  Or,  indeed,  that  there 
should  have  been  any  of  the  last-named  group  at  all  as 
composers  of  verses  deserving  inclusion  in  the  Canon.  In 
fact,  it  would  not  be  entirely  unreasonable  to  conclude  that 
if  four  per  cent,  of  the  canonical  poets  were  drawn  from  the 
poor  and  despised  of  the  earth,  from  whom  no  such  pro¬ 
ducts  as  verses  could  be  expected,  then  the  proportion  of 
bhikkhus,  in  general,  coming  from  that  class  may  have 
been  considerable.  This  suggestion  is  worth  bringing  up 
as  showing  that  the  Commentary  does  not  altogether 
confirm  the  view  that  Buddhism,  at  its  inception,  had  but 
little  power  to  draw  to  itself  the  lowly,  the  wretched,  and 
the  suffering.* 1 

Another  conclusion  which  the  Commentary,  in  so  far  as 
it  faithfully  handed  on  more  ancient  traditions,  goes  far  to 
modify,  is  that  Buddhism  was  not  for  children  nor  for  the 
childlike.2  The  testimony  borne  by  some  of  the  psalms  to 
the  youthfulness  of  the  compilers  and  to  the  Sasana  as 
attracting  the  young,  is  largely  complemented  by  the 
Commentary.  In  contrast  to  the  Brahmin  ordinance 
which  prescribed  a  retreat  to  a  recluse’s  career  for  the 
declining  year’s  of  life,  the  Sangha  welcomed  the  young, 
and  was  sceptical  as  to  the  average  worth  of  old  age 
renunciation.3  We  find  accordingly  a  goodly  number  of 


the  burgess  so  termed  held  some  municipal  post,  head  of  a  guild,  or  the 
like.  The  word  means  simply  chief,  or  best. 

1  Cf  Oldenberg,  Buddha ,  5th  edition,  p.  180  and  n. 

2  Ibid. 

3  As  Dr.  Neumann  points  out  in  Upali’s  poem  (CLXXX.),  where, 
however,  navapabbajito  navo,  ‘  novice  new,’  does  not  necessarily  mean 
‘young,’  Cf.  also  Any.,  iii. '  78,  and  above  (462).  ‘Thera’  means 


XXX 


PSALMS  OF  THE  BRETHREN 


our  poets  leaving  the  world  as  youths  and  becoming 
arahants  at  the  threshold  of  manhood :  Manava,  Adhi- 
mutta,  Rahula,  Sanu,  Kumara-Kassapa,  and  many  others. 
But  a  more  striking  feature  yet  is  the  group  of  child- 
arahants,  a  few  of  whom  betray  their  childhood  in  their 
verses : — Bhadda,  Sankicca,  Sivali,  the  Sopakas,  and 
Sumana.  In  true  Buddhist  fashion,  the  age  of  seven  is 
assigned  to  all  at  their  ordination,  as  the  typical  childhood 
figure.  And  the  childlike  diction  and  ideas  of  the  words 
put  into  their  mouths  are  worthy  of  note.1  We  have  only 
to  compare  the  lines  : 

(1)  ‘  So  too  ye  should  be  very  good 

Towards  all  creatures  everywhere  and  everyone .’ 

and 

(2)  ‘  Then  lie  ashed  me  questions ,  He  so  shilled  in  questions 

and  so  wise , 

And  unwavering ,  unaffrighted  answered  there  the  Master 
I ,’  etc. 

and 

(3)  ‘  An  only  child  was  I ,  to  mother  dear 

And  to  my  father  dear,’  etc. 

with  any  of  the  verses  ascribed  to  adult  and  cultured 
arahants,  however  unknown  elsewhere  in  the  Canon’s  roll 
of  honour  : — 

(4)  ‘  Errant  in  wilderness  of  heresies , 

By  their  contagion  dazed  and  led  astray.'  .  .  . 

(5)  ‘  Curbed'  in  the  harness  of  right  energy , 

Thou  shalt  not ,  0  my  heart ,  go  far  from  me’ 

(6)  ‘  Showing  a  vision  by  the  light  of  truth 

Of  things  as  come  to  be  by  way  of  cause.'  .  .  .2 


‘  elder  ’  literally,  but  technically  is  simply  ‘  senior.’  Cf  Pdiys  Da\ids, 
s.v.  Elder,  Encycloycedia  Religion  and  Ethics. 

1  This  does  not  apply  to  the  abnormally  precocious  Sivali,  nor  to 
the  words  spoken  of  Sumana  (2)  by  the  Buddha  : 

‘  See,  Sariputta,  how  the  little  lad.  .  . 
and  annexed  to  his  gatha. 

2  CCXXVI.,  CCXL.,  LX.,  XXXIII.,  CCXXVII.,  and  CCXIX. 


INTRODUCTION 


XXXI 


to  discern  at  once  the  difference  between  the  child’s  and  the 
(cultured)  adult’s  language  and  sentiments.* 1  Even  if  we 
see,  in  the  little  narratives  of  three  of  the  poorest,  most 
illiterate  brethren : — the  peasant  Sumangala,  the  vagrant 
Kappata-Kura,  the  scavenger  Sunita2 — an  approach  to  the 
style  of  these  child-verses,  yet  does  the  standpoint,  yet  do 
the  experiences,  betray  the  adult  mind.  Hence  the  verses 
support  the  legend  of  the  Commentary,  and  strengthen  our 
belief  in  the  faithfulness  of  the  prose  tradition  which  saw, 
in  its  great  founder,  not  only  a  mind  of  consummate 
wisdom,  but  a  heart  filled  with  tender  compassion,  strong 
and  willing  to  save  even  these  little  ones,  these  parvulos 
trahendos .3  The  stories  of  that  net  of  insight  spread  in  the 
early  morning  by  the  Master  ‘great  in  pity,  as  the 
‘  Buddha-eye  ’  surveys  the  suffering  world  ;  of  the  maturing 
light  of  emancipation  ‘  shining  as  a  lamp  within  a  jar  ’  even 
in  the  heart  of  a  child ;  of  the  journeys  to  charnel  field  or 
to  palace  to  save ;  as  well  as  of  the  welcoming  the  parents’ 
advent : — these  may  possibly  give  us  a  truer  picture  of  a 
movement  sometimes  held  to  be  reserved  for  the  middle- 
aged  well-to-do,  and  may  even  dispose  us  to  adapt  to  it  a 
later  Divine  saying  :  ‘  Suffer  me  to  come  to  the  little  children, 
for  of  such  too  is  my  kingdom  that  is  within  you.’ 

Thirdly,  the  Commentary,  without  calling  for  over-much 
credulity,  suggests  a  modification  of  the  contrast  lately 
drawn  by  Dr.  Winternitz,4 5 6  that  a  far  greater  proportion  of 

1  Cf.  the  Pali  itself  : 

(1)  evay  sabbesu  panesu  sabbattha  kusalo  siya. 

(2)  tato panhe  apucchi  may  panhdnay  kovido  vidii, 
accliambl  ca  abhlto  ca  vydkdsiy  satthuno  aliay. 

(3)  ekaputto  ahay  asiy  piyo  matu  piyo  pitu.  .  .  . 

(4)  dittliigahanapakkhanno  paramdsena  mohito.  .  .  . 

(5)  viriyadhuraniggahlto  na  yito  duray  gamissase ,  citta  ! 

(6)  paticcuppannadliammdnay  yathdvdlokadassano.  .  .  . 

2  XLIII.,  CLX.,  CCXLII. 

3  A  phrase  of  Gerson’s,  the  mystic  scholastic. 

4  Op.  cit.,  ii.  1,  p.  83. 


XXX11 


PSALMS  OF  THE  BRETHREN 


the  Sisters’  poems  are  occupied  with  external  experience 
than  those  of  the  Brethren,  which  deal  more  with  intro¬ 
spective  self-expression.  This  at  first  sight  is  obviously 
true ;  a  census  yields  us  these  results,  roughly  estimated : 

External  Internal  Mixed 

Experience.  Experience. 

Sisters’  psalms  73  ...  ...  42  26  5 

Brothers’  psalms  264  ...  ...  [414  141  91 

When,  however,  with  the  aid  of  the  Commentary,  we  look 
more  closely  into  these  141  introspective  poems  of  the 
Theras,  we  find  that  upwards  of  forty  of  them 2  are  not 
confessions  of  personal  religious  experience,  but  hortatory 
verses,  purporting  to  have  been  delivered  as  so  many 
sermons  to  bhikkhus  or  to  laymen,  either  in  response  to 
invitations,  or  as  part  of  the  duties  of  a  Thera.  Now  the 
Sisters  had,  as  we  may  infer  from  the  Yinaya,  but  a  limited 
scope  as  preachers.  They  occupied,  according  to  the  letter 
of  the  Sasana,  the  position  of  novices  with  respect  to  the 
Brethren,  however  ‘  senior  ’  (then)  a  woman  might  be 
among  the  Sisters  in  age  or  in  standing.  When  a  Therl, 
in  spite  of  this,  was  so  gifted  a  teacher  as  to  become,  as 
such,  a  valued  servant  to  the  Order,  her  merits  are  duly 
recorded.3  But  there  is  practically  none  of  the  Sisters’ 
psalms  that  is  professedly  a  public  homily,  even  though 
such  homilies  are  themselves  the  subject  of  at  least  one 
poem.4  The  chant  of  consolation  to  the  bereaved  mothers 
comes  nearest  to  being  one.5  The  poems  are  largely  occupied 
with  the  getting  out  of  their  cage,  and  so  they  sing  4  the 
strange  things  women  carry  under  their  silence,  that  silence 
of  the  centuries  which  is  so  profound,  that  when  it  is  broken 
their  voice  sounds  like  a  cry.’6  But  to  teach  in  due  season 
was  the  duty  of  a  Thera ;  and  strangely  is  this  at  times 
overlooked  by  a  want  of  sympathy,  which  sees  in  books 
like  this  a  proof  that  the  object  of  becoming  a  Thera  was 

1  E.g.,  Vangisa,  CCLXIY. 

2  From  the  first  Canto  I  have  selected  only  XII.,  XV.,  XXXIII., 
XXXV.,  XXXVI.,  LXXXV.,  CVI.,  CXIV. 

3  Cf.  Sisters,  p.  xxxvi.  4  Sukka’s,  xxxiv. 

5  By  Patacara,  1.  6  M.  P.  Willcocks,  Wings  of  Desire. 


INTRODUCTION 


XXX111 


solely  to  live  in  solitude,  absorbed,  when  not  coming  round 
with  a  bowl,  in  idle  musings  and  ineffective  sentiment ! 
‘  Go  ye  now  for  the  welfare  of  the  many  .  .  .  preach  ye 
the  doctrine  .  .  .  and  I  will  go  also,  to  preach 1  .  .  was 
the  general  marching  order  given  from  the  first.  And 
that  order  the  verses,  as  supplemented  by  the  Commentary, 
show  as  being  dutifully  kept.  To  the  c  close  time  ’  of  respite 
we  shall  come  presently. 

If  then  we  deduct  from  the  141  introspective  poems  at 
least  46,  containing  nothing  but  so  many  miniature  versified 
sermons  of  relatively  general,  non-subjective  import — or,  it 
may  be,  metrical  portions,  alone  surviving,  of  longer  prose 
discourses — we  get  the  following  corrected  table  : — 


Poems. 

Brethren  :  264 


Homilies. 

46 


External  Internal 
Experience.  Experience. 

114  95 


Mixed. 

9 


proportions  which,  while  they  still  uphold  the  general 
truth  of  Dr.  Winternitz’s  statement,  modify  the  significance 
of  it  to  a  considerable  extent. 

Fourthly,  the  so-often  reiterated  record  that  the  poems 
were  first  publicly  uttered. as  ‘  confessions  of  anna ,’  deserves 
a  passing  word.  The  history  of  this  term,  of  its  use  and  of 
its  non- use,  in  Buddhism  has  yet  to  be  written.  Signify¬ 
ing  literally  acl-sciens,  *  ac-knowledging,’  anna  is  used  in 
the  Suttanta  books  to  signify  that  mental  flash,  or  suffu¬ 
sion  of  intuitive  knowledge  and  assurance  of  ‘  salvation  ’ 
constituting  emancipation,  or  arahantship.  The  Buddha 
testifies  to  having  realized  it  under  the  Bodhi-Tree,  but 
uses  the  kindred,  less  specialized  word  nana.  In  the  mouth 
of  bhikkhus  such  testifying  was  no  guarantee  of  right 
[samma)  gnosis  ;  it  might  be  made  through  mental  illusion, 
conceit,  frenzy,  or  even  evil  design  (Anguttara  iii.,  119). 
Genuine,  or  samma-d-anna  is,  of  course,  intended  by  the  Com¬ 
mentary.  This,  in  Dhammapada,  verse  96,  is  rendered  by 
Fausboll  absoluta  cognitio  ;  by  Max  Muller,  ‘  true  knowledge.' 
That  the  testifying  to  it  is  as  old  as  the  Four  Nikayas, 
appears  from  the  little  episQde  in  the  Anguttara  Nikdya , 

1  Vinaya  Texts ,  i.,  p.  112. 


XXXIV 


PSALMS  OF  THE  BRETHREN 


iii.  359  : — Two  disciples  who  have  newly  realized  this  intui¬ 
tive  knowledge  or  gnosis,  wait  upon  the  Buddha  and  testify 
to  the  same  before  him.  As  they  again  depart,  the  Buddha 
remarks :  ‘  Even  so  do  men  of  true  breed  declare  gnosis 
{anna) they  tell  of  the  good  they  have  won  (attha),  but 
they  do  not  bring  in  their  ego  {atta).’1  That  the  public 
individual  testimony  to  the  assurance  of  salvation  won, 
invited  yesterday  and  to-day  in  Christian  revivalist  meet¬ 
ings,  should  have  been  thus  anticipated  2000  years  ago  in 
Buddhist  usage,  is  an  interesting  link.  And  anna  is  rarely 
met  with  except  in  connexion  with  the  confession  of  the 
attainment  of  such  consciousness :  —  the  ‘  fruition  of 
arahantship  ’  (arahattaphala) . 

Fifthly,  whereas  the  Commentary  lacks  the  inspired  flame 
that  touches  now  and  again  the  varying  quality  of  the  more 
venerable  Pali  verses,  and  reads  often  no  better  than  mere 
fable,  it  does  invest  the  poems  very  often  with  a  heightened 
personal  colour,  revealing  behind  many  of  them  a  touch  of 
background,  like  the  quiet  river-threaded  campaign,  or  the 
hill-perched  Vihara  of  a  Tuscan  Holy  Family  or  single 
saintly  figure.  And  this  is  the  more  welcome  in  a  book 
where  the  majority  of  the  poems  are  ascribed  to  authors 
who  are  mere  names,  not  met  with  elsewhere  in  the  Canon. 
Of  authors  known  to  us,  we  hail  the  better  acquain¬ 
tance  with,  e.g.y  (1)  the  gifted  children  of  Sari  the  brahmin 
lady,2  when  we  now  see  the  saintly  Sari-putta,  her  eldest 
born,  advancing  to  visit  the  sick,  collectively  in  the  infirmary, 
and  again  in  the  person  of  his  own  younger  brother,  the 
three  boy-nephews  standing  at  attention,  coached  by 
anxious  Uncle  Revata  ;  or  (2)  with  the  faithful  Ananda  doing 
sentry-go  with  lantern  and  staff  around  the  chamber  of  the 

1  The  context  shows  that  no  derogatory  judgment  on  confessions, 
such  as  these  poems  contain,  is  implied,  but  that  only  self-conceit  and 
self-advertisement  are  condemned.  Cf.  Dliammasangani ,  §  1116 
(Bud.  Psy.  Ethics ,  298/.),  and  below,  verse  1076. 

2  A  touching  picture  of  Sari,  trying  to  keep  Revata  by  her,  the 
rest  of  her  children  and  grandchildren  having  left  the  world,  is  given 
in  Dhammapada  Commentary ,  ii.  188/.  Dr.  Burlingame  is  bringing 
out  a  complete  translation  of  this  lengthy  but  interesting  work. 


INTRODUCTION 


XXXV 


Man  Beloved  ;  or  (3)  with  Vakkali,  tearing  himself  from  that 
Beloved’s  presence ;  or  (4)  with  Kassapa  the  Great,  vainly 
trying  to  escape  his  last  marriage  with  her  who  had  been  fit 
mate  to  him  in  previous  lives.  But  it  is  no  less  pleasant  to 
learn  a  little  more  than  the  mere  name  of  others  :  to  see, 
as  we  read  Suman gala’s  rough -hewn  words,  the  toil-  and 
soil-stained  peasants  at  work  in  the  fields,  or  4  Bags-and- 
Bice  ’  casting  wistful  glances  at  his  old  discarded  gear  ;  to 
feel  behind  Lomasa-Kangiya’s  doughty  words  the  mother’s 
fears,  or  the  father’s  in  Jambugamika’s  letter,  or  the  mid¬ 
night  horrors  from  which  little  Sopaka  is  rescued  ;  or  to 
bear  in  mind,  as  we  read  their  delightful  verses,  Eka- 
vihariya’s  court-bred  youth,  and  the  dramatic  and  rhe¬ 
torical  proficiency  of  Talaputa.  For  the  majority  of  these 
Theras,  apart  from  their  name  in  the  Anthology,  and  their 
legend  in  the  Commentary,  are  strangers  to  the  Canon. 
And  it  is  noteworthy  that  the  finer  poems  belong,  on  the 
whole,  to  these,  rather  than  to  the  Theras  who  rank  high 
in  Yinaya  and  Suttanta. 

In  the  limited  if  earnest  lines  collected  under  the  great 
names  of  Sariputta,  Moggallana,  Kotthita,  Iyappina, 
Punna-Mantani-putta,  we  see  no  such  poetic  gift  letting 
itself  go  as  is  heard  in  the  musical,  sparkling  cadences 
of  Kaludayin’s  opening : 

Angdrino  ’ ddni  duma ,  bhadante, 
phalesino  chadanay  vijppalidya.  .  .  .  (527), 

in  the  deep  and  solemn  rapture  of  Bhuta  : 

yadd  nabhe  gajjati  meghadundubhi 
dhdirdikuld  vihangapatlie  samantato.  .  .  .  (522), 

in  the  culminating  roll  of  splendid  compounds  describing 
the  Ariyan  Path  by  Migajala,  beginning 

Sudesito  Cakhhumatd  Buddhen’  ddiccabandhuna.  .  .  .  (417), 

in  the  swift  stride,  full  of  verve  and  grace,  of  Ekavi- 
hariya’s  forest  song : 

vane  kusumasanchcnne  x>'ib\>liare  nuna  sitcile.  .  .  .  (545), 


XXXVI 


PSALMS  or  THE  BRETHREN 


or  in  the  long-drawn  sighs  of  Talaputa’s  aspirations : 


kada  nu  'liay  p abb atakandarcisu  ekakiyo  addutiyo  vihassay.  .  .  . 

.  .  .  tay  me  iday  tay  nu  hadd  bliavissati  ?  (1091) 

Such  lines  as  these,  and  many  more,  simply  as  word- 
music,  we  may  place  without  hesitation  beside  any  passage 
of  Keats  and  Shelley.  The  authors  were  doubtless  capable 
of  composing  at  least  as  much  as  did  these  two  splendid 
minstrels,  and  it  is  possible  that  they  concentrated  their 
efforts,  not  on  missionary  or  pastoral  labours,  but  on  versi¬ 
fication.  The  worse  luck  for  the  world  that  such  scanty 
portions  should  have  been  preserved ! 

Such  matters  Dhammapala  does  not  discuss.  The  only 
distinction  he  draws  between  the  Theras  is  to  classify  them, 
in  his  concluding  remarks,  not  into  (A)  the  eleven  or  twelve 
leading  Theras  usually  grouped  in  the  Yinaya,  and  (B)  the 
rest,  viz.  : 


(A)  Sariputta 

Moggallana  the  Great 

Kassapa  ,,  ,, 

Kaccana  ,,  ,, 

Kotthita  „  ,, 

Kappina  ,,  ,, 


Cunda  the  Great 

Anuruddha 

Kevata 

Upali 

Ananda 

Bahula, 


and  (B)  the  other  247  ;  nor  into  the  41  Agga-savakd  of  the 
Anguttara,1  and  the  rest ;  but  into  Great  (malm)  and 
Ordinary  ( pakati )  sdvaka,  making  together  the  company 
of  Agga-savakd.  Of  these  the  former  (Great)  were  80  in 
number,  and  he  proceeds  to  enumerate  64  only  of  the  80, 
made  up  of  48  of  the  poet  Theras,  and  16  others  most  of 
whom  do  not  occur  in  the  Canon.  ‘  Why  are  these  called 
Great  Disciples  ?  Because  of  the  greatness  of  their  Besolve 
(i abhinihdra ),’  resulting  in,  it  would  seem,  a  more  perfect 
evolution  of  knowledge  in  their  last  birth.  Into  his  discourse 
on  this  point  space  will  not  allow  further  inquiry.  But  all 

1  Anguttara  Nihdya ,  i.  ‘23-5.  With  the  exception  of  two,  Bahiya 
Daruclriya  (cf.  Dhammagtada  Commentary ,  ii.  209  /.)  and  Sagata,  all 
of  these  distinguished  followers  are  represented  in  the  TheragdtJid. 


INTRODUCTION 


XXXV11 


whom  his  list  terms  Mahd-savaka  are  printed  in  the  list 
above  in  capitals  (p.  ix  /.). 

We  may,  finally,  note  what  the  Commentary  has  to  say 
concerning  the  monaehistic  proclivities  of  the  poet-Theras, 
and,  in  particular,  concerning  an  openly  confessed  love  of, 
and  admiration  for,  nature,  strong  enough  in  the  hearts  of 
some  of  these  votaries  of  renunciation  to  invest  their 
psalms  with  a  glowing  if  gentle  paganism,  such  as  we 
have  often  complacently  claimed  as  a  monopoly  of  our 
modern  poetry.1  That  the  members  of  the  Order  were 
advised  to  cultivate  the  art  of  solitude,  not  only  in  the  cell, 
but  also  and  much  more  in  the  ‘  empty  places  ’  (sunndgdrd) 
of  nature,  is  not  only  confessed  to  in  these  poems  but  is 
borne  out  by  Yinaya  and  Suttanta.  We  read  of  the  founder 
betraying  a  predilection  for  solitude,  and  that  not  within 
walls,  but  away  in  the  forest.2  Herein  he  confesses  sympathy 
with  the  elephant  (c/.  Udayin’s  poem  CCXLVII.)  which 
has  broken  away  from  the  herd,  with  the  ‘  rhinoceros 
wandering  alone.'3 *  Was  it  not  a  wrench  to  leave  that 
‘happy  ease  here  alone,  uncompanied,’  to  go  forth  and 
spiead  the  daily  ‘net  of  insight’  to  catch  men?  And 
solitude  is  commended  to  the  disciple  both  for  the  better 
compassing  of  his  own  consummation  : — 

‘  If  a  bhikkhu  should  desire  ...  to  know  and  realize  and  win 
Arahantship,  emancipation  of  heart  and  mind ,  let  him  fulfil  all 
righteousness,  let  him  be  devoted  to  that  quietude  of  heart  which 
springs  from  within ,  let  him  not  drive  back  the  ecstasy  of  contempla¬ 
tion,  let  him  look  through  things,  let  him  be  much  alone 


1  This  opinion  finds  expression  again  in  Mr.  Havelock  Ellis’s 
‘The  Love  of  Wild  Nature’  ( Contemp .  Rev.,  February,  1909)  :  ‘It 
is  highly  improbable  that  any  earlier  or  non-Christian  writer  had  ever 
broken  out  into  such  a  eulogy  of  the  desert  as  we  find  ...  in  Jerome’s 
delightful  epistles.’  Dr.  Winternitz’s  book  bears  testimony  to  this 
feeling  for  nature  in  other  branches  of  Indian  literature  beside  the 
Buddhist  (i.  7,404).  But  the  latter  strikes  a  more  intimate  note. 

2  Vinaya  Texts,  ii.  312/. 

3  Sutta-Nipdta,  ‘  Khaggavisana-Sutta.5 

Akankheyya-Sutta,’  Majjhima  Nikdya ,  translated  in  Rhys  Davids’ 

Buddhist  Suttas,  S.B.E.,  xi.  Cf.  Sutta-Nipdta ,  verses  34/ 


XXXVlll 


PSALMS  OF  THE  BRETHREN 


and  also,  in  the  intervals  of  his  duties  towards  others,  to 
restore  vigour  and  maintain  spiritual  tone.  There  were 
woods  and  groves  adjacent  to  most  of  the  cities  that 
witnessed  the  growth  of  Buddhism,  although,  for  some  of 
our  recluses,  nothing  short  of  the  deeper  recesses  of  wild 
jungle  sufficed.1 2  But  most  consonant  with  the  stronger 
temperaments  were  ever  the  heights  : — the  fells  dominating 
the  meads  of  Magadha  above  Bajgir,  or  the  foothills  of 
Northern  Kosala  (Nepal  and  Sikkim),  beyond  which 
towered  the  snowy  ramparts  of  mysterious  Himava  : — 

‘  te  sold  ramayanti  may.’* 

Such  retreats  were  ‘  clean  and  pure,’  ‘  a  hiding-place  from 
the  many-folk,’  and  the  haunt  of  saintly  climbers3  like 
great  Kassapa,  presences  to  fortify,  not  disturb  : — 

‘  Lone  heights  where  saintly  Bishis  oft  resort.' 

‘  Is’t  here,  is’t  there,’  in  such  scenes  some  of  the  best 
poets  of  these  Theras,  ‘  become  at  heart  like  creatures 
of  the  wild  ’  (migabliutena  cetasd),  sought  and  found  fit 
accompaniment  to  the  story  of  their  struggles  and  their 
victory. 

On  all  this  Dhammapala’s  narrative  touches  but  lightly, 
finding  nothing  morbid  or  exceptional  about  it.  They 
‘  loved  the  woods,’  he  simply  remarks  ;  ‘  it  was  to  show 
the  charm  of  the  forest  that  he  replied  ’  .  .  .  and  so  on. 
It  is  only  with  regard  to  the  one  purely  pagan  poem — that 
of  Sabbaka  (CXCYI.) — that  his  language  has  a  touch  of 
apology  in  it  that  is  delightful : — ‘  And  because  he  showed 
herein  his  delight  in  empty  places ,  this  became  the  Thera’s 
confession  of  anna.4  Of  pathetic  interest,  too,  is  the  little 

1  Cf.  CCXL.  and  others. 

2  ‘  They,  the  crags,  are  my  delight.’  See  Kassapa’s  refrain,  CCLXI. 

3  Milinda,  ii.  353. 

4  Majjhima,  i.  450;  ii.  121.  It  is  a  not  infrequent  conclusion  to  a 

Sutta  for  the  Buddha  to  say  :  ‘  Now  have  I  made  this  clear  to  you.  Here, 
bhikkhus,  are  the  roots  of  trees  ;  here  are  empty  places.  Meditate  ;  be 
earnest  lest  hereafter  ye  regret.’  .  .  .  E.g.,  Majjhima ,  i.  118;  iii.  302. 


I 


INTRODUCTION 


XXXIX 


background  of  legend  behind  Woodland- Vaccha  (XIII.), 
lover  of  the  woods  and  born  there,  because  his  mother, 
yearning  to  see  them,  had  ventured  thither  on  an  ill- 
timed  excursion.  So  fleeting  as  is  this  mother’s  form  in 
the  picture,  it  yet  shows  that  the  love  of  nature,  if  it  finds 
no  expression  in  the  Sisters’  verses,  was  not  unknown  to  the 
heait  of  the  Indian  woman,  but  was  part  of  that  which  lay 
under  her  silence  of  the  centuries,  only  finding  an  outlet 
through  her  sons. 

Or  the  absence  of  this  nature-love  in  the  Sisters’  poems 
I  ha^e  dealt  with  elsewhere.  Man  could  afford  so  much 
better  to  range  ‘alone  like  the  rhinoceros’1  in  the  wild 
than  woman,  whom  for  so  many  centuries  he  had  driven 
within  doors,  and  looked  upon  as  a  prisoner  of  state,  or  as 
a  serf.  And  we  can  only  guess  that  the  sense  of  the  great 
Motter’s  touch  was  on  them,  too,  sometimes  by  a  brief 
line  here  and  there,  reminding  us,  with  an  almost  poignant 
patios,  as  I  have  said,  of  the  halting  notes  of  a  bird  first 
let  oat  into  the  woods  from  its  cage.2 

The  leaning  of  so  many  of  our  Theras,  however,  to 
prolonged  spells  of  monachistic  life  in  wild,  or,  at  least, 
retired  places,  is  perhaps  not  a  safe  guide  by  which  to  judge 
the  early  Buddhist  Order  generally.  That  Order  gathered 
into  itself  every  variety  of  temperament,  every  grade  of 
religious  capacity.  Many  of  them  were  quite  unfit  for 
various  reasons  to  make  religious  progress  in  solitude.3 
And  in  one  of  Thera  Subhoti’s  verses,  not  included  in  this 
collection,  he  summons  the  unfit  to  leave  it : — 

‘  Infected  as  thou  art  by  lust , 

By  ill-will  and  illusion's  taint , 

Come  thou  away  and  leave  the  wood  / 

This  is  the  home  of  souls  made  pure, 

Of  stainless  anchorites  austere. 

Defile  not  thou  the  purified ; 

Come  thou  away  and  leave  the  wood  !'  4 

1  The  Quest ,  ‘tLove  of  Nature  in  Buddhist  Poems,5  April,  1910  ; 

e.g.,  Sisters,  i.  28,  150.  2  75^ 

3  Cf.  Ang.,  iii.  145,  as  explained  by  the  Commentary  quoted  by 

Edmund  Hardy  in  vol.  v.  892.  4  Milinda,  ii.  315. 


xl 


PSALMS  OF  THE  BRETHREN 


In  fact,  only  the  Arahant  is  pronounced  to  be  really  fit  to 
dwell  in  such  solitudes.1  And  even  among  the  Theras  them¬ 
selves  we  find  instances  of  unfitness  for  the  monachistic 
life,  both  through  immaturity  of  training  and  through 
individual  temperament — Meghiya,  for  instance  (LXYI.), 
Upali  (CLXXX.),  and  Ananda  (CXIX.,  CCLX.).  In 
Cunda’s  stanzas,  and  in  Upali’s  legend,  the  respective 
advantages  of  monachistic  and  of  cenobitic  life  are  defined  ; 
and  that  Upali’s  choice  of  the  latter  suited  his  tempera¬ 
ment  is  confirmed  by  his  record  in  the  Yinaya.  To  judge 
by  his  gatha,  he  had  no  distinctively  poetic  gift.  The 
majority  of  bhikkhus,  whether  Theras  or  not,  seem  to  have 
dwelt  as  cenobites  in  ‘  Yiharas,’  and  in  close  touch  with 
the  laity,  bound  with  these  in  a  mutual  dependence  of  give 
and  take,  spiritual  and  material.  The  Buddha  was  iften 
largely  attended,  for  there  came  to  be  a  constant  st;eam 
of  bhikkhus,  waiting  temporarily  upon  him,  from  all  cirec- 
tions.  When  not  thus  engaged,  they  probably,  if  we  may 
judge  by  the  Ceylon  of  to-day,  lived  in  very  small  groups 
in  groves  or  on  hills.  The  Yiharas  were  not  the  abbeys 
and  monasteries  of  medieval  Europe,  but,  for  the  most 
part,  little  groups  of  huts,  fulfilling  the  work  of  rectory, 
presbytdre ,  or  house  of  call,  where  a  Thera  lived  with  a 
novice  or  two,  preached  to  the  laity,  counselled  them  in 
difficulties,  and  taught  their  children. 

Some  temperaments,  on  the  other  hand,  as  we  le&rn 
from  gatha  and  commentary,  were  less  well  fitted  to  the 
quiet  routine  of  a  pastor’s  or  a  social  life.2  And  among 
the  motives  urging  them  to  seek  solitude,  a  poetic  gift  may 
very  well  have  counted.  And  further,  as  is  revealed  by  the 
Buddha’s  encouragement  of  Yangisa’s  talent  of  versifying 
(CCLIY.),  it  is  probable  that  a  disciple  thus  gifted  would 
be  suffered  to  cultivate  his  talent,  in  the  wild  or  elsewhere, 
so  only  he  used  it  to  compose  poems  of  sound  doctrine, 
whereof,  as  I  have  suggested,  this  anthology  is  only  a  selec¬ 
tion  that  has  survived.  Justly  has  Dr.  Oldenberg  remarked 

1  Anguttara  iii.  135. 

2  Cf.  Sabbamitta  (149);  and  Kondanna  :  What  need  have  I  as 
cenobite  to  dwell  ? 


INTRODUCTION 


xli 


of  Talaputa’s  poem  (CCLXII.)  :  ‘Feeling,  such  as  lives  in 
these  verses,  is  conceivable  only  as  the  growth  of  a  culture 
that  has  won  its  way  through  much  suffering.  And  to 
give  expression  to  it  as  Talaputa  has  done,  could  only  be 
done  by  a  poet.’1  That  is  to  say,  by  one  who  has  not  only 
an  imperative  need  of  articulate  self-expression,  but  who 
has  also  been  able  to  devote  himself,  not  as  an  amateur 
otherwise  busy,  but  outright,  to  the  cultivation  of  the  art 
of  verbal  self-expression.  Briefly  stated,  our  monachistic 
Theras  sought  out  Nature  as  much  because  they  were  poets 
and  children  of  Nature  as  because  they  were  arahants.  They 
present  a  unique  blend  of  religious  maturity,  primeval  shy¬ 
ness,  and  aesthetic  sensitiveness.  And  very  probably,  given 
an  efficient  state  of  organization  in  the  Order,  to  such  excep¬ 
tionally  gifted  men,  exceptional  leisure  was  accorded  as  a 
necessity  for  their  proper  development,  and  not  in  any  way 
a  concession  to  ethical  slackness,  or  pagan  and  atavistic 
instincts.  ♦ 

These  considerations  apply,  I  need  hardly  say,  only  to 
those  of  the  monachistically  disposed  Theras  whose  poetic 
talent  was  fruitful.  It  may  be  said  that  much  leisure  and 
lonely  self-communing  was  not  required  to  turn  out  many  of 
the  short  poems  composing  the  majority  of  this  collection. 
This  is  true.  Not  only  is  the  literary  gift  in  them  very 
unequal,  but  unequal,  too,  is  the  florescence  of  any  poetic 
capacity  in  the  lives  of  most.  Some  writers  of  prose  will 
confess,  that  at  one  period  only  of  their  lives  ‘  everything 
seemed  to  run  to  metre  ’  and  even  rhyme.  Some  con¬ 
juncture  of  notable  external  experience  and  responsive 
internal  development,  recipient  and  synergic,  has  super¬ 
vened,  and  for  a  brief  space  the  rhythm  of  being  becomes 
rhythmically  articulate.  Such  a  period  must  have  been 
the  spiritual  crisis  and  the  consciousness  of  spiritual  victory 
in  these  authors,  impelling  them  to  a  rhythmic  uddna,  ‘  a 
breathing  forth  ’  of  the  tale,  however  brief,  of  their  deep 
emotion.  Possibly  thereafter  they  relapsed  into  the  prose 
of  the  religious  life,  teaching  only  by  catechism,  by  pro¬ 
tests,  by  the  force  of  a  blameless  life. 

1  Literatur  des  alten  Indien,  1910,  102. 

\  7  1 


xlii  PSALMS  OF  THE  BRETHREN 

But  with  respect  to  such  brief  utterances  I  repeat, 
that  the  Anthology  before  us  probably  no  more  re¬ 
presents  the  total  poetic  output  of  pre-Asokan  Theras 
than  such  a  collection  as,  say,  our  Golden  Treasury,  ex¬ 
hausts  the  verses  of  our  own  poets.  This  is  borne  out  by  the 
quite  remarkable  minor  anthology  that  may  be  formed  out 
of  the  Thera  verses — all  by  authors  represented  in  this 
book— which  are  quoted  in  Chapter  VII.  of  the  Questions  of 
King  Milinda ,  not  to  mention  those  in  the  Divydvadana ,  and 
which  are  briefly  discussed  in  my  Appendix.  There  is 
nothing  in  our  Commentary  to  suggest,  even  in  the  assort¬ 
ment  given  under  the  last  few  Psalms,  that  the  collection 
was  considered  as  exhaustive. 

*  *  *  * 

A  volume  might  be  written  on  the  ideas  and  ideals 
revealed  in  the  Theragatha,  but  the  poems  must  speak  for 
themselves,  so  far  as  they  may,  in  their  present  ill-made 
English  garb.  I  have  ventured  to  call  them  ‘  psalms,’ 
because  they  indisputably  satisfy  the  dictionary  definition 
of  psalms  : — they  are  ‘  spiritual  songs.’  Varied,  too,  as  in 
the  Hebrew  Anthology,  is  their  burden.  Here  and  there 
is  a  number  that  lends  itself  to  a  ritual  hymn,  such  as 
Mettaji’s  : 1 

‘  All  glory  to  th ’  Exalted  One , 

Our  splendid  Lord,  the  Sahiyas ’  son  P  .  .  . 

and  others  of  the  first  Canto,  or  such  as  Kumara-Kas- 
sapa’s  of  the  second  Canto  : — 

‘  All  hail  the  Buddhas,  and  all  hail  the  Norms  P  .  .  .2 

and  one  or  two  others  with  refrains.  And  who  shall  say 
that  when  I-Tsing  heard  the  choric  chanting  of  bhikkhus 
round  stupas  in  the  cool  of  the  day,  it  was  not  these  Theras’ 
psalms  to  which  he  listened,  and  not  always  those  of 
Matriceta’s  more  prolific  muse?3 

1  XCIV. ;  cf.  XLVII.  2  CLXI. 

3  I-Tsing’s  Becord  of  the  Buddhist  Beligion ,  a.d.  671-95.  Trans¬ 
lated  by  J.  Takakusu. 


INTRODUCTION 


xliii 


Now  and  again  our  gathas  show  another  link  with  the 
Hebiew  Psalms  namely,  when  they  tell  of  prc- Avahunt 
aspirations,  like  Suppiya’s  : 1 

0  would  that  I  who  hourly  waste ,  might  change 
For  tha.t  which  ne'er  decays —  ’  .  .  . 

or  like  the  ampler  yearnings  of  Talaputa;2  or  when,  as  in 
the  second  part  of  the  latter’s  poem,  in  Anupama’s,  or  in 
Vijitasena  s  verses,  they  record  pre-Arahant  wrestlings 
with  the  chitta :  the  rational  consciousness  taming  the 
impulsive  consciousness,  ‘  heart,’  or  4  soul  ’—or  tell  of  back¬ 
sliding  in  the  upward  way,  and  self-recovery,  such  as  fills 
much  of  the  Hebrew  Anthology,  a  work  professedly  not 
written  by  Arahants. 

But  for  the  most  part — and  discounting  all  but  the  poems 
which  are,  in  brief  or  more  fully,  so  many  stories  of  the 
heart  these  Psalms  of  the  Brethren,  no  less  than  those 
of  the  Sisters,  confirm  both  their  prose  legends  and  the 
introductory  stanzas  in  bearing  testimony  less  to  present 
struggle  and  upward  aspiration,  than  to  a  consciousness  of 
absolute  victory  and  final  attainment,  cessation  of  toil, 
completed  introspective  sanctification.  Outward  work  on 
the  ‘many  folk,’  and  on  brethren  and  pupils  remained ;  but 
the  work  on  self  is  done  : — 

.  .  .  c  now  am  I  adept  !'3 

They  may  describe  divers  spiritual  conflicts  of  days  gone 
by,  like  those  of  Telakani  or  Uttarapala,  but  when  the  day 
of  days,  the  meridian  of  present  Arahantship  is  the  theme, 
then  is  their  melody  so  far  unisonal  as  to  resemble  in 

part  that  which  Christians  sing  only  after  the  believer’s 
death : — 

‘  Now  the  labourer's  task  is  o'er  /’ 

So  the  great  Kassapa  of  himself  during  his  lifetime 

‘  His  task  is  done ,  and  he  is  sane ,  immune.' 


1  XXXII. 


2  CCLXII. 


3  (334). 


xliv  PSALMS  OF  THE  BRETHREN 

So  Ananda  : — 

‘  Gone  are  the  chains ,  the  barriers  all  behind.’ 

And  Anna-Kondanna  : — 

‘  Sloughed  off  have  I  the  dyings  and  the  births , 

Wholly  accomplishing  the  life  sublime.’ 

And  very  many  other  lines  might  be  quoted. 

The  ‘  refrains  ’  harp  on  a  system  ( scisana )  which  is  ‘  done/ 
a  quest  of  highest  good  which  is  won,  a  load  laid  down 
once  for  all,  a  cessation  of  further  life-force  as  imminent, 
and  patiently  awaited.  That  the  Arahant  is  immune  and 
cannot  ‘  fall  from  grace  ’  is  a  conviction  that  much  of  the 
Katha-Vatthu  was  compiled  to  emphasize.  He  had  con¬ 
summated  ;  he  had  his  reward.  And  the  Thera  poets 
and  their  Sister  poets  were  ranked  as  saints  of  this  kind. 

Yet  the  early  Buddhist  standard  of  saintship  was  ap¬ 
parently  not  one  that  could  accurately  be  called  lax,  or 
vaguely  conceived.  It  was  held  to  be  realizable  under  tem¬ 
poral  conditions,  but  they  alone  could  realize  that  supreme 
attainment  whose  evolution  was  matured.  And  as  for 
saints  in  all  ages,  so  especially  for  these  arahants,  with 
their  outlook  on  life  as  a  thing  completed,  an  abnormal, 
exceptional  standard  of  values  and  of  satisfactions  is  needed. 
They  were  the  religious  aristocracy  of  their  age.  The 
Christian  saint,  like  the  Hebrew  psalmist,  never  forgets 
the  residual  human  frailty  in  himself,  and  leans  perpetually 
on  Divine  sources  to  renew  his  strength  : — 

‘  Wein  und  Brod  des  letzten  Mahles 
Wandelt ’  einst  der  Herr  des  Grates 
Burch  des  Mitleids  Liebesmacht 
In  das  Blut  das  Er  vergoss , 

In  den  Leib  den  dar  Er  braclit'.  .  . 

The  Arahant  has  evolved  into  that  fifth  and  ultimate 
order  of  his  universe :  dhammata ,  or  the  order  ( niyama )  of 
the  Norm  (cf.  verse  712),  wherein  holiness  is  the  natural 
expression  of  his  mental  and  moral  being  : — 

‘  0  see  the  seemly  order  of  the  Norm  !’ 


INTRODUCTION 


xlv 


It  is  a  curious  fact  that,  whereas  there  is  perhaps  nothing 
in  which  human  beings  vary  so  much  as  in  the  nature  and 
extent  of  their  religious  needs  and  ideals,  religion  is  the 
sphere  in  which  we  are  the  most  determined  to  be  demo¬ 
cratic.  Before  the  Most  High  of  the  creeds,  all  men  are 
equal.  ‘All  have  sinned  and  come  short,’  ‘all  we  like 
sheep  have  gone  astray.’  .  .  .  But  while  this  is  true,  the 
range  of  divergence  in  errancy  and  home-returning  is  lost 
sight  of,  and  saintly  possibilities  get  reduced  to  a  relatively 
low  level.  We  speak  vaguely  of  saints,  but  all  we  judge  a 
creed  need  cater  for  ‘  here  below  ’  is  sinners. 

India  has  judged  otherwise.  In  its  doctrine  of  the  indi¬ 
vidual  life  as  an  immensely  prolonged  self-transmitting  and 
evolving  force,  Buddhism  saw  in  every  individual  at  any 
given  moment  a  phase  of  that  evolution.  During  such 
phases  the  religious  ideals  of  the  individual  were  those  of 
the  layman,  or  of  the  average  religieux : — moral  health, 
the  gentle  teaching  of  the  Blessed  Masters,  the  well-kept 
Sabbaths,  the  pious  vows  in  illness,  the  docile  solemnity  at 
funerals,  the  aspiration  to  dwell  hereafter  with  the  gods, 
and  so  forth.  But  finally,  one  individual  among  a  million 
or  so  reaches  that  final  stage  of  life  in  which  his  evolution 
is  consummated.  The  consciousness  that  this  is  so  comes 
to  him  perhaps  as  the  quiet  but  wonderful  awakening  from 
a  sleep  in  which  long  and  fevered  dreams  had  harassed  him ; 
or  again  by  the  impressive  word  of  a  teacher ;  or  again  by 
a  terrible  rupture  of  his  happiness,  as  with  Harita  : — ‘  and 
he  enjoying  his  lot  with  her  .  .  .  his  wife  was  bitten  by  a 
black  snake  and  died.’  And  lo  !  the  long-maturing  plant 
bursts  into  flower.  The  humanity,  which  had  been  latently 
perfecting  itself,  void  of  all  greed,  enmity,  or  illusion, 
reaches  heights  of  insight  and  power  of  will  undreamt  of 
before.  A  vision  of  the  ideal  order  in  the  cosmos  is  re¬ 
vealed.  Awake  like  unto  the  great  Awakened  of  all  time, 
he  tastes  a  wonderful  joy  in  contemplating,  as  with  the  eye 
of  a  god,  the  things  that  are  and  the  way  in  which  they 
have  come  to  be,  or  he  reaches  out  hands  to  guide  and  bless 
his  less  fortunate  fellowmen.  They  listen  as  they  worship 


xlvi 


PSALMS  OF  THE  BRETHREN 


and  piously  aspire,  then  go  forth  to  work  and  play,  much 
as  they  who  have  just  arisen  from  a  dream.  But  for 
him,  it  is  they  who  have  gone  back  to  dreamland ;  for  him, 
with  all  the  light  of  a  new  spiritual  day  about  him,  with  a 
vision  ineffable  of  what  the  vistas  of  the  past  have  led  up 
to  for  him,  now  only  is  he  truly,  once  for  all,  and  always, 
buddho — awake. 

And  so  great  was  the  zest  and  joy  of  these  altered  ideals 
and  widened  retrospects,  so  deep  the  peace  and  calm  follow¬ 
ing  on  the  complete  emptying  himself  of  the  world’s 
standard  of  values  as  the  greater  presences  arose  and  filled 
the  scene,  that  all  questions  concerning  any  fate  awaiting 
him  beyond  this  most  wonderful  present  were  blotted  out. 
The  moment  of  all  the  ages  had  come  ;  beyond  that  time 
for  him  was  not.  In  casting  out  that  which  insured  life’s 
renewal,  he  had  laid  low  the  ancient  burden  of  that  life’s 
tale.  And  how  could  he  conceive  a  future  existence  of 
travel  elsewhither,  whose  boat  had  already  grounded  on 
the  shore  of  the  beyond  ?  No  forward  view  remained  for 
him  who  was  there  already,  who  was  jmragu.1 

We  may  call  these  men  and  women  sick  in  a  sick  age. 
If  so,  it  was  of  a  fairly  divine  distemper,  and  one  that  does 
not  wholly  show  symptoms  of  decadence  or  senility.  For 
it  attacked  chiefly  the  young.  ‘  Why  have  you  who  have 
suffered  in  nothing,  left  the  world2?’  these  men  and  women 
in  the  prime  of  life  were  asked.  And  the  temper  of  these 
is  not  at  all  languid,  weary,  or  disgusted  with  the  fact  that, 
as  victorious,  they  yet  live.  Again,  in  depreciating  the 
human  body  (as  deserving  to  be  anything  more  than  a 
healthy  instrument  for  spiritual  life),  they  do  not  speak 
of  it  as  a  weary  machine,  running  down  day  by  day,  nearly 
so  much  as  of  a  clumsy  and  offensive  and  most  unfortun¬ 
ately  constructed  complex. 

Not  theirs,  again,  because  £  we  walk  ever  near  to  death,’3 
to  eat,  drink  and  be  merry.  Were  they  to  do  so,  that 
‘  death  who  puts  an  end  to  ills,’  when  it  is  final,  would 

1  Verses  766  ;  748,  771.  2  Cf.  Ratthapdla,  p.  804. 

3  Verses  278,  v.  2. 


INTRODUCTION 


xlvii 


be  multiplied  into  a  myriad  more  successive  dyings.  Not 
theirs  too,  the  foolishness  of  seeking  to  hold,  and  to  quarrel 
that  they  might  hold  ;  it  is  only  they  who  *  never  really 
understand  that  we  are  here  but  for  a  little  spell  ’  who 
quarrel.1  Again,  the  distemper  made  the  Arahant  as 
fearless  as  the  Christian  martyr.  Humans  are,  perhaps,  on 
the  whole  braver  than  they  were — anyway,  the  felt  conquest 
of  fear  is  a  distinct  feature  in  the  Psalms,  notably  in  the 
Brethren’s.  The  Sisters  barely  echo  this  sentiment.  4  No 
fear  cometh  ’  [in  Nibbana],  says  one,  and  another  calls  her 
Saviour  ‘  Akuto-bhayaij,’  4  Him  who  hath  the  No-whence 
[cometh]  fear.’2  But  both  sexes  exult  in  a  calm  serenity 
and  fortitude  that  can  face  hardship,  suffering,  and,  like 
young  Adhimutta,3  death,  in  spite  of — they  would  say, 
because  of — their  conviction  : 

‘  Now  is  there  no  more  coming  bach  to  be  /’4 

Diseased  then  they  may  have  been,  yet  did  their  ailment 
thrive  with  an  ethics  that  kept  their  lives  pure,  and  sweet, 
and  steadfast  and  very  largely  occupied  with  pastoral  and 
missionary  effort. 

‘  With  all  am  I  a  friend,  comrade  to  all , 

And  to  all  creatures  hind  and  merciful .’  5 

‘  One  should  exhort ,  one  should  instruct ,  forbid , 

Hinder  that  which  is  mischievous  and  wrong .’6 

They  stood  for  the  social  reforms  of  their  day,  teaching 
goodness,  amity,  the  simple  life,  the  abolition  of  sacri¬ 
ficial  and  other  slaughter,  and  of  the  barriers  of  rank  and 

1  Sabhiya’s  poem,  read  superficially,  may  seem  trite.  To  me  it  was 
a  striking  echo  of  M.  Bergson’s  voice  at  his  second  London  lecture, 
1911  :  ‘ .  that  death  of  each  of  us,  in  which  we  do  not  really 
believe.  Why  do  I  say  that  ?  Because,  if  we  really  believed  that  we 
should  each  of  us  die,  we  should  act  so  differently  from  what  we  do.’ 
And  it  is  no  less  haunting. 

2  Sisters,  verses  135,  512.  3  CCXLVIII. 

4  Silavat  is  teaching  the  quite  immature  when  he  adverts  to  the 
'  joys  of  heaven  ’  (CCXLI.). 

6  Verse  648. 


6  Verse  994, 


xlviii 


PSALMS  OF  THE  BRETHREN 


caste.  Immunity  from  the  microbe  of  arahantship  is  no 
matter  for  much  complacency. 

But  to  return  to  that  most  distinctive  feature  of  all : — 
the  absence  of  all  joy  in  the  forward  view.  I  am  not 
dogmatizing  here  on  the  unrevealed  mystery  of  a  spaceless, 
timeless  tr ans -mortality ,  possibly  comprised  in  the  concept 
of  the  Arahant’s  destiny.  Freed  from  the  fetters  of  ‘life,’ 
everything  not  of  life  was  possible.  But  nothing  was 
thinkable,  much  less  describable.1  All  that  need  here  be 
said  is  that  these  poets  are  entirely  and  orthodoxly  un- 
speculative.  Emerson  described  them  unawares  :  ‘  Of 
immortality  the  soul,  when  well  employed,  is  incurious. 
It  is  so  well  that  it  is  sure  it  will  be  well.’  There  are 
many  readers  of  to-day  ready  to  acquiesce  in  the  Thera’s 
refrain  of  quiet  patience  in  awaiting  the  end  of  life’s  ebb¬ 
tide,2  if  not  in  Sariputta’s  exultation  : 

‘  Lo  !  noiv  my  going-oat  complete  will  be. 

From  all  am  I  released  and  utterly 3 4 

or  Anuruddha’s  : — 

‘  And  I  ’ neath  bamboo -thicket's  shade  that  day 
Sane  and  immune ,  shall  wholly  pass  away.,4: 

Their  only  stricture  hereupon  may  be,  that  a  yet  more 
saintly  Sariputta  would  have  aspired  to  yet  further,  even  to 
an  infinite  series  of  rebirths,  wherein  he  might,  with  ever¬ 
growing  power  and  self-devotion,  work  for  the  furtherance 
of  the  religious  evolution  of  his  fellows. 

But  social  and  religious  ideals  evolve  out  of,  yea,  and 
even  beyond  the  finished  work  and  time-straitened  vision  of 
the  Arahants  of  old.  It  is  unreasonable  to  seek,  in  ancient 
ideals,  the  illimitable  faith  and  hope  of  the  democracy  of 

1  The  reader  is  referred  to  Dr.  Oldenberg’s  judicious  discussion  of 
passages  bearing  on  this  point.  Buddha ,  5th  ed.,  313-36. 

2  E.g.,  verses  606,  607. 

3  Verses  1002/.,  1017.  See  also  Revata,  658. 

4  Verse  919. 


INTRODUCTION 


xlix 


the  spirit  now  abroad.  If  now  there  dawns  for  many 
the  hope 

‘  That  in  a  world  of  larger  scope 
What  here  is  faithfully  begun, 

Shall  be  continued,  not  undone, ’ 

which  is  a  neo-Christian  approximation  to  the  Indian  faith 
in  rebirth — it  is  not  because  our  tradition  has  nursed  us 
in  the  belief  of  an  immortality  of  noble  work.  And  Buddhist 
ideals  may  have  been  growing  too.  Else  let  them  say 
with  the  Christian,  in  the  sublime  words  of  Elijah  :  ‘  Lord, 
now  let  me  die,  for  I  am  no  better  than  my  fathers !’  Let 
us  look  to  it,  in  discerning  ‘  motes  ’  in  the  Arahant  vision, 
that  there  is  no  4  beam  ’  in  our  historical  consideration  of 
that  past  by  which  we  have  learnt,  thus  far,  to  see. 

It  remains  that  a  note  of  the  joy  of  victory  in  reviewing 
a  past  out  of  which  a  man  or  woman  has  fought  his  or  her 
way  to  what  is  felt  as  ‘  salvation,’  can  claim  the  sympathy 
of  the  religious  reader,  irrespective  of  beliefs  concerning 
the  future.  To  read  with  sympathy  is  better  than  to 
depreciate  the  Theras’  view  of  saintship  for  being  the 
conquering  of  a  peak,  rather  than  a  further  achievement  of 
indefinitely  prolonged  arrete-climbing. 

It  should  also  be  noted  that  not  all  the  poems,  nor  every 
theme  in  them  is  equally  of  the  nature  of  a  swan’s  song. 
The  release  from  Ill,  in  the  release  from  the  rebirths  that 
lead  to  more  Ill,  is,  no  doubt,  the  ground-wave  of  the  tide 
of  blissful  emotion.  But  there  are  other  themes.  Now 
it  is  the  sublime  Teacher  : — physician,  deliverer,  tamer, 
and  guide,  comforter  in  trouble,  presence  supremely  in¬ 
spiring  : 

‘  The  Master  hath  my  fealty  and  love,'  — 

who  could  discern  the  maturing  conditions  shining  in  the 
heart  of  the  poor  scavenger,  terrified  orphan,  or  squalid 
fakir,  no  less  than  in  that  of  noble  or  cultured  Brahmin. 
Nobly  and  worthily  is  his  spiritual  descent  and  glorious 
mission  appraised  : — 

‘  The  self-same  Path  by  which  Vipassi  went.  .  .  . 

Lo  !  now  to  us  there  cometh  Gotama. 


1 


PSALMS  OF  THE  BRETHREN 


‘  For  if  i'  faith  some  Man  the  world’s  corruptions 
Sweep  not  away ,  as  wind  the  lowering  clouds , 

The  world  were  shrouded  wholly  in  thick  darkness , 

And  e'en  the  brighter  minds  would  lose  their  light.' 1 

Now  it  is  the  saving,  missionary  spirit,  exhorting  con¬ 
temporaries,  or  bewailing  the  religious  decay  of  posterity, 
that  should  follow  the  golden  morning  of  a  renascent 
Norm.  Again,  it  is  the  happy  ease  attending  life  purified 
and  simplified,  the  cool  and  steadfast  pulse  in  place  of  the 
old  fevered  fret  and  longing ;  and  greatly,  as  we  have  seen, 
is  that  joy  intensified  when  felt  through  ‘the  calm  great 
nights  and  days  ’2  of  life  in  the  wild,  and  in  freedom  from 
the  wearing  irk  and  jar  of  the  world’s  nightmare  dream. 

I  have  added  (in  the  Appendix)  a  roughly  approximate 
table  of  those  matters  concerning  which  the  psalms  consti¬ 
tute,  in  Thera-phrase,  a  ‘  lion’s  roar,’  or  song  of  victory,  or 
of  religious  testimony.  This  may  serve  not  only  for  com¬ 
parison  with  a  similar  table  in  the  companion  volume  of 
the  Sisters,  but  also  to  show  how  far  are  these  verses  from 
sameness  and  monotony,  even  when  viewed  apart  from  the 
particular  circumstances  of  each  singer.3  Not  all  of  these 
themes  will  appeal  to  all  of  us,  but  it  is  not  given  to  man 
to  prescribe  unity  for  man  either  in  Path  or  Goal.  I  can 
remember  as  a  child  hearing  in  my  home  divines  discussing 
hymns.  And  one,  a  muscular  parish  priest,  derided  the 
hymn — 

‘  0  Paradise  !  O  Paradise  ! 

'  Tis  weary  waiting  here . 

I  leant  to  be  where  Jesus  is  ; 

To  see ,  to  feel  Him  near  /’ 

as  unworthy  of  Christians  who  were  zealous  to  work  for 
him  here  and  not  weary  in  well-doing.  ‘But,’  remarked 
a  gentle,  wistful-eyed  man  from  Oxford,  ‘  was  there  not 
once  a  tired  saint  who  wrote  of  himself  :  “  having 
a  desire  to  depart  and  be  with  Christ,  which  is  far 
better”?’4 


1  Verses  490,  1268. 

3  Winternitz,  op.  cit.,  p.  84. 


2  W.  Watson. 

4  Philippians  i.  23. 


INTRODUCTION 


li 


In  the  Thera-hymns  is  a  like  manifold  of  harmonies  for 
those  who  are  not  sunk  over  the  ears  in  one  tradition  only. 
If  the  psalms  of  Arahants  suit  moderns  no  more  than  they 
will  have  suited  the  immature  layman  and  cleric  of  Asoka’s 
days  and  earlier,  let  us  not  say,  So  much  the  worse  for 
the  moderns !  Let  the  latter  be  willing  to  admit  a  certain 
aristocracy  in  the  evolution  of  the  religious  spirit.  Let 
it  be  frankly  understood  as  not  implying  any  morbid 
symptoms  in  the  saint,  or  incapacity  for  either  vision  or 
growth  in  us  who,  from  the  Theras’  point  of  view,  may  all 
be,  as  Edwin  Arnold’s  line  has  it,  ‘  on  the  upward  way,’  but 
are  yet  at  all  degrees  of  distance  from  the  top.  The  ‘  many- 
folk  ’  ( puthujjana )  could  play  with  religion,  put  it  on  and 
doff  it  again.  The  savaka  could  not  so  compromise.  When 
the  former  are  now  and  again  confronted  by  the  dread 
shapes — 

‘  Like  forest  fires  behold  them  drawing  nigh  : — 

Disease ,  decay ,  and  death ,  dread  trinity,1 

they  stay  awhile  to  listen  to  Thera-strains.  For  the  Thera 
this  was  no  transient  mood,  but  one  that  had  diverted  the 
whole  current  of  his  life,  setting  him  apart  and  ‘  free  ’ : 

Tato  cittay  vimucci  me  ! 

0  then  my  heart  was  set  at  liberty  !2 

Out  of  joint  thenceforth  with  the  ways  of  those  who  tem¬ 
porized,  he  felt  only  safe  and  at  ease  precisely  when  con¬ 
scious,  or  at  least  sub-conscious  of  this  misfit.  His  is  a  bliss 
which  rings  for  him  the  more  truly  precisely  in  proportion 
as  it  is  not  consonant  with  the  joys  of  the  immature. 

Jfc  Ak-  ifc.  Jk. 

n»  VfS  Vj\  vt* 

To  other  more  competent  hands  I  leave  the  fascinating 
task  of  bringing  these  ‘  Varieties  of  Eeligious  Experience  ’ 
— unknown,  alas !  to  W.  James,  as  to  his  successors 
thus  far  in  that  field — into  comparison  with  the  religious 
self-expression  of  other  lands  and  other  times,  as  well 
as  with  other  Indian  literature.  Just  as  both  Dr. 
Winternitz  recently,  and  Professor  Ed.  Muller,  thirteen 


1  Verse  450. 


2  Cf.  verse  640/.,  and  passim. 


lii  PSALMS  OF  THE  BRETHREN 

years  ago,  have  already  compared  Sister  Subha  with 
SS.  Lucy  and  Bridget  (op.  cit.,  86,  1,  quoting  the  latter 
authority) ;  just  as,  in  the  photographs  before  me  of 
S.  Caterina’s  home,  a  fresco  shows  her  repeating  Sumedha’s 
cutting  off  her  own  hair  to  force  the  hand  of  those  who 
would  keep  her  from  ‘going  forth  and  just  as  Kisagotami 
may  be  said  to  have  quite  a  little  comparative  literature 
of  her  own,1  so  among  the  Brethren  might  a  number  of 
interesting  parallels  be  discovered.  The  present  volume  is 
but  a  pioneer  attempt  to  present  the  poems  and  some  of 
their  prose  in  English  dress,  in  the  hope  that  this  may 
facilitate  worthier  treatment  by  the  more  competent. 

The  metres  which  alternate  nearly  always  between  the 
sloka,  and  variants  in  trishtubh  and  jagciti ,2  are  another 
subject  awaiting  competent  discussion  in  a  field  where  the 
rules  of  prosody  have  been  decided  only  by  later  forms  of 
poetry.  In  the  Brethren’s  poems,  whatever  be  the  cause, 
the  metre  is  changed  during  the  poem  oftener  than  is  the 
case  with  the  Sisters.  Such  changes  have  been  indicated 
by  some  corresponding  change  in  the  English  metre. 

The  crude  forms  (Ananda  for  Anando,  etc.)  used  for  the 
names  involve  more  difficulties  than  is  the  case  with  the 
more  uniform  terminations  of  female  names ;  and  the 
choice,  where  the  crude  form  is,  in  vocative  case  or  com¬ 
pound,  not  a  hard  and  fast  rule,  will  find  critics,  and  to 
what  extent  it  really  matters,  deservedly  so. 

For  photographs  kindly  sent,  and  for  permission  to 
reproduce  illustrations,  my  sincere  thanks  are  due  to 
J.  H.  Marshall,  Esq.,  Director-General  of  Archaeology, 
Simla;  Mrs.  Jayasundare,  Galle  ;  Rev.  Ananda  Metteyya, 
Rangoon;  A.  D.  Imms,  Esq.,  D.Sc,;  the  Clarendon  Press, 
and  Mr.  Fischer,  Jena,  publishers  of  Schimper’s  Plant 
Geography. 

C.  A.  F.  RHYS  DAVIDS. 


1  (7/  J.  H.  Thiessen’s  essay,  Die  Legendc  von  Kisagotami ,  1880, 
already  quite  a  venerable  work  in  the  growing  literature  of  Indological 
research. 

2  See  verses  (417),  (527),  (522)  respectively. 


PSALMS  OF  THE  BRETHREN 


WITH  SELECTIONS  FROM  THE 

CHRONICLE  IN  DHAMMAP ALA’S  COMMENTARY, 

ENTITLED 

‘  PARAMATTHA-DIPANl  ’  (Part  V.) 


PSALMS  OF  THE  BRETHREN 

(THEEA-GATHA) 

Honour  to  the  Exalted  One,  Arahant,  Buddha  Supreme. 


As  to  the  call  of  distant  lions'  roar 
Resounding  from  the  hollow  of  the  hills , 

List  to  the  psalms  of  them  whose  selves  were  trained , 
Telling  us  messages  anent  themselves : 

Hoiv  they  were  named ,  and  what  their  kin ,  and  how 
They  kept  the  Faith,  and  how  they  found  Release. 

Wise  and  unfaltering  they  lived  their  lives; 

Now  here,  now  there  they  saw  the  Vision  gleam  ; 

They  reached ,  they  touched  the  ageless,  deathless  Way; 
And  retrospective  of  th ’  accomplished  End, 

They  set  to  speech  these  matters  of  their  quest.1 

1  These  verses,  writes  Dhammapala,  ‘  were  composed  by  the  venerable 

Ananda,  at  the  time  of  the  First  Council,  in  praise  of  these  Theras’ : _ 

a  pious  but  unsupported  tradition.  ‘  Distant  lions  ’  is  in  the  Pali 
‘toothed  lions.’  ‘Faith’  is  Dhamma.  ‘Way’  is  paday,  a  word  of 
wide  import,  defined  in  the  Commentary  thus  :  ‘  Nibbana,  so  called 
from  its  being  unmixed  with  conditioned  things,  and  from  the  necessity 
of  practising  (or  walking  in)  it  by  those  who  seek  it.’  Cf  XCIL,  n. 

The  opening  simile  has  older  precedents,  notably  in  a  stanza  ascribed 
to  the  Master  himself  : 

But  they  who  in  the  bosom  of  the  hills 

Sit  with  heart  throughly  purged  and  well-composed , 

Like  to  so  many  lions  crouching  still, 

Are  vanquishers  over  the  creeping  dread , 

White-minded,  pure,  serene  and  undefiled. 

Dialogues  of  the  Buddha ,  ii.  285. 


CANTO  I 

PSALMS  OF  SINGLE  VERSES 

PART  I 
I 

Subhuti. 

Reborn  in  the  time  of  our  Buddha  at  SavatthI,  in  the 
family  of  councillor  Sumana,  younger  brother  of  Anatha- 
pinaika,  he  was  named  Subhuti.1  Now  on  the  day  when 
the  Jeta  Grove,  purchased  by  his  uncle,  was  presented  to 
the  Exalted  One,  Subhuti  was  present,  and  when  he  heard 
the  Norm,  he  found  faith  and  left  the  world.  Receiving 
ordination,  he  mastered  the  two  categories  (of  Vinaya 
rules).2  Thereafter  a  subject  for  exercise  in  meditation 
was  given  him  to  learn,  and  he  went  into  the  forest  and 
practised  it.  Developing  insight  on  the  basis  of  love- 
jhana,3  he  wen  arahantship.  And  he,  teaching  the  Norm 
without  distinctions  or  limitations,  became  chief  among  the 
brethren  who  cultivated  universal  amity.  And  because, 
while  going  round  for  alms,  he  fell,  at  house  after  house, 

1  In  the  days  of  Padumuttara  Buddha,  aeons  earlier,  when  this  Thera 
was  said  to  have  made  the  resolve  that  determined  the  rest  of  his 
existence,  he  was  named  Nanda.  The  Chronicle  here  gives  a  brief 
account  of  the  building  of  the  Vihara,  the  great  college,  in  Jeta’s  Grove, 
by  his  uncle,  as  told  more  fully  in  the  introduction  to  the  Jatakas.  See 
Rhys  Davids,  Buddhist  Birth  Stories ,  p.  130. 

2  See  Vinaya  Texts,  i.  273  ;  iii.  2,  n.  ‘  Norm’  is  ‘  Dhamma.’ 

3  Rapt  but  ordered  mentality,  induced  by  some  .specified  mode  of 
self-hypnosis,  and  here  concentrated  on  suffusing  its  objects  with 
universal  goodwill  (Bud.  Psy.,  65  ff.;  Vibhanga,  277). 

4 


I.  SUBHUTI 


into  love-j liana,  taking  his  alms  when  he  emerged  from 
reverie,  this  was  judged  to  bring  great  reward  to  his 
almoners,  and  he  became  chief  among  them  that  were 
held  worthy  of  gifts.  Wherefore  the  Exalted  One  said  : 
‘  Subhuti,  bhikkhus,  is  the  chief  of  my  bhikkhu-disciples  in 
universal1  amity,  and  chief  among  such  as  are  held  worthy 
of  gifts.2  .  .  . 

So  this  great  Brother,  travelling  about  the  land  for  the 
good  of  the  many,  came  in  due  course  to  Rajagaha.  King 
Bimbisara  heard  of  his  coming,  and  went  to  salute  him, 
bidding  him,  ‘  Here,  your  reverence,  be  pleased  to  dwell,  and 
I  will  make  you  a  dwelling-place.’  But,  going  thence,  he 
forgot.  The  Brother,  receiving  no  shelter,  meditated  in  the 
open  air.  And  because  of  the  Brother’s  dignity,  the  god 
rained  not,  so  that  the  people  were  oppressed  with  the 
drought  and  raised  a  tumult  at  the  door  of  the  king’s  house. 
The  king  asked  himself  for  what  reason  the  god  rained  not, 
and  judged  it  must  be  because  the  Brother  wras  in  the  open. 
So  he  had  a  leaf-hut  made  for  him,  and  saluted  him,  say¬ 
ing,  ‘Be  pleased,  lord,  to  dwell  in  this  leaf-hut,’  and  so 
departed.  The  Brother  entered,  and  seated  himself  cross- 
legged  on  the  couch  of  hay.  Then  the  rain  began  to  drip 
drop  by  drop,  not  in  a  torrent.  But  the  Brother,  wishing 
to  allay  the  people’s  fear  of  drought,  declared  the  absence 
of  any  danger  to  himself  from  without,  or  from  within,  by 
uttering  the  verse : 

Well-roofed  and  pleasant  is  my  little  hut, 

And  screened  from  winds — Rain  at  thy  will, 
thou  god ! 

My  heart  is  well  composed,  my  heart  is  free, 

And  ardent  is  my  mood.  Now  rain,  god  !  rain.3  (1) 

1  AnodissaJca.  See  my  review  of  Dr.  A.  C.  Taylor’s  edition  of  the 
Patisambhiddmagga ,  JPAS,  January,  1905. 

2  See  Anguttara  Nikdya ,  i.  24,  where  a  number  of  brethren,  sisters 
and  the  laity  are  formally  recognized  as  excelling  each  in  a  specific 
attainment. 

3  Dhammapala  states  that  deva  here  refers  to  the  spirit  or  deity  of 
the  thunder-cloud,  Pajjunna,  or  Parjunya — idhdjoi  meglie  Pajjunve  vd 


6 


II.  KOTTHITA  THE  GREAT 


Thus  verily  did  the  venerable  Brother  Subhuti  utter  his 
Psalm } 

And  the  verse  was  his  confession  of  Anna. 


II 

Kotthita  the  Great. 

•  • 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age* 1 2  at  SavatthI,  in  a  very  wealthy 
clan  of  brahmins,  he  was  named  Kotthita.3  When  he  was 
coma  of  age  he  had  learned  the  three  Vedas,  and  perfected 
himself  in  the  accomplishments  of  a  brahmin.  He  heard 
the  Master  preach  the  Norm,  found  faith,  and  entered  the 
Order.  Practising  insight  from  the  day  of  his  ordination 
he  attained  arahantship,  together  with  thorough  mastery 
of  the  form  and  meaning  of  the  Norm.4  As  proficient 

daffhabbo.  Sutta-Nipdta,  verse  18  ;  Rliys  Davids,  American  Lectures , 
167  ff. ;  Buddhist  India ,  336.  Cf.  LI.-LIV.,  CLY. 

The  Commentary  leaves  the  option  of  seeing  in  ‘  hut  ’  a  metaphor  for 
the  body.  This  being  in  good  training  through  discipline,  the  ‘  heart  ’ 
no  less  so  through  jhana,  and  insight,  through  knowledge,  the  verse 
gives  in  miniature  the  end  of  the  threefold  sikkhd  (training).  See  my 
Buddhism ,  chap.  viii.  ;  cf.  below,  LVII.,  etc. 

1  This  affirmation  is  canonical  matter,  doubtless  by  the  editors.  The 
following  sentence  is  the  Commentator’s.  ‘Anna’  means  gnosis  or 
intuitive  enlightenment,  constituting  the  guarantee  of  Arahantship. 
Majjhima,  i.  479  ;  Sanyutta ,  ii.  221. 

We  meet  with  Thera  Subhuti  elsewhere  only  in  TJddna,  vi.  7,  where 
the  Buddha  commends  his  proficiency  in  meditation,  and  in  Questions 
of  King  Milinda ,  ii.  315,  323,  where  his  verses  (not  found  elsewhere) 
are  quoted.  See  Appendix  (below). 

2  Imasmiy  Buddhuppade.  Lit.,  not  £  age,’  but  arising,  advent.  The 
period,  however,  includes  the  whole,  i.e.,  the  last  life,  of  the  great 
teacher  ;  hence  only  ‘  age 5  seemed  to  fit.  The  phrase  alternates  with 
kd.lo,  samayo,  ‘time.’ 

3  Pronounced  Kott’hita.  The  name  is  also  recorded  as  Kotthika  and 
Kotika.  The  Thera  is  evidently  the  one  included  among  the  ‘  Great 
Elders ;  in  Vinaya  and  Suttanta,  the  interlocutor  in  several  Suttas — 
e.g.,  Majjhima  Nikdiya ,  i.  292  ;  Sanyutta  Nik.,  ii.  112  ;  Any.  Nik.,  i.  24, 
etc.  See  Vinaya  Texts ,  ii.  112,  317  ;  iii.  359. 

4  On  this  technical  phrase,  see  Sisters,  p.  17,  n.  1. 


II.  KOTTHITA  THE  GREAT 


7 


herein  he  used  to  question  the  great  Theras  and  Him- 
of-the-Ten-Powers1  about  them.  Hence  it  came  that  he 
was  held  chief  of  those  who  were  thus  proficient.  Then 
the  Master,  having  shown  his  attainments  in  the  Vedalla^ 
Sutta,  ranked  him  chief  of  those  who  were  proficient  in 
insight.2 

He,  on  a  later  occasion,  conscious  of  the  bliss  of  emanci¬ 
pation,  broke  forth  in  this  verse : 

Whoso,  serene  and  calm,  dead  to  the  world, 

Can  utter  wisdom’s  runes,3  with  wit  unswelled, 
Unruffled — he  doth  shake  off  naughty  things 
As  they  were  forest  leaves  by  wind-god4  blown.  (2) 

Thus  verily  did  the  venerable  Brother  Maha-Kotthita  utter 
his  psalm. 


Ill 

Kankha-Revata. 

(Revata  the  Doubter.) 

He  was  reborn  in  the  days  of  our  Exalted  One  in  a  wealthy 
family  of  Savatthl.  And  as  he  stood  in  the  outermost  ring 
of  those  who  went  after  dinner  to  hear  Him-of-the-Ten- 
Powers  preach,  he  believed,  and  thereupon  entered  the 
Order.  And  he  attained  arahantship  by  way  of  practising 
jhana ;  and  so  proficient  in  jhana  did  he  become,  that  the 
Master  pronounced  him  chief  of  the  bhikkhus  who  prac¬ 
tised  it.5 

1  A  title  of  the  Buddha,  frequent  in  scholastic  works.  It  was  at 
first  applied  equally  to  Arahants.  Cf.  Ang.,  ii.  63  ;  Sayy  ,  ii.  28. 
The  powers  are  enumerated  in  Majjh .,  i.  69-71. 

2  Ang.,  i.  23  ;  Majjh.,  i.  292. 

3  Manta  or  mantras,  an  allusion  to  his  brahmin  or  Vedic  training. 
The  next  two  phrases  are  a  rendering  of  the  one  word  anuddhato, 
which  the  Commentary  connects  with  uddliacca ,  excitement. 

4  Mdluto,  wind,  may  possibly  have  ceased  to  suggest  the  Vedic 
Maruts,  or  wind-gods,  at  this  date.  Cf.  Sisters,  p.  150. 

5  Ang.  Nik.,  i.  24. 


8 


III.  KANK HA-RE VATA 


His  task  accomplished  thus,  this  great  Brother  reflected 
on  the  inveterate  tendency  of  his  mind  to  doubt,1  now 
wholly  overcome,  and  praised  the  might  and  wisdom  of 
the  Exalted  One,  whereby  his  mind  was  now  calm  and 
steadfast,  saying : 

Behold  how  great  the  wisdom  is  of  Them 
Who  Thus-have-come  ! 2  As  fire  at  midnight  hour, 
Givers  of  light,  givers  of  sight  are  they 
To  those  that  pass,  subduing  all  their  doubt.  (3) 

Thus  verily  did  the  venerable  Brother  Kankhd-Revata  utter 
his  psalm. 


IV 

Punna  of  the  Mantanis. 

He  was  reborn  in  the  days  of  our  Exalted  One,  in  an 
eminent  brahmin  clan,  at  the  brahmin  village  of  Dona- 
vatthu,  not  far  from  Kapilavatthu.  He  was  sister’s  son 
of  the  Elder  Kondanha,3  and  was  named  Punna.  And 
after  performing  all  the  duties  of  his  novitiate,  he  put 
forth  every  effort  till  he  had  accomplished  the  highest 
duties  of  a  recluse.  He  thereupon  went  with  his  uncle 
to  dwell  near  the  Master,  leaving  the  neighbourhood  of 
Kapilavatthu.  And  thoroughly  intent  in  practice,  he  not 
long  after  became  an  arahant. 

^ow  f^ui^ria  came  to  have  a  following  of  500  clansmen 
who  had  also  left  the  world.  And  because  he  himself  had 

1  This  tendency  is  mentioned  in  the  Apadana.  The  soubriquet  it 
earned  may  have  been  maintained  undeservedly  to  distinguish  Revata 
from  the  more  distinguished  Maha-Thera  Revata,  co-Director  of  the 
Council  of  Vesall  ( Vinaya  Texts ,  ii.  317  ;  cf.  67). 

2  Tathagatd.  For  a  full  exposition  of  this  famous  term,  the  Corny, 
refers  to  the  TJddna  and  Iti -  Vuttaka  Commentaries.  Cf.  J.  H.  Moore, 
Sayings  of  Buddha,  p.  131  ;  Sir  R.  Chalmers,  JR  AS,  1898,  103. 

3  See  Ps.  CCXLYI.  His  full  name  distinguishes  him  from  the  Punna 
of  LXX. 


IV.  PUNNA  OF  THE  MANTANIS 


9 


acquired  the  ten  bases  of  discourse,1  he  taught  his  followers 
therein  till  they,  too,  became  experts  and  arahants.  They 
thereupon  desired  him  to  take  them  to  the  Master.  But 
he,  judging  it  unfitting  to  go  surrounded  by  them,  bade 
them  go  on,  and  promised  to  follow  them.  They,  being 
all  fellow-countrymen  of  Him-of-the-Ten-Powers,  walked 
the  sixty  yojanas  to  Rajagaha,  and,  in  the  great  Vihara 
of  the  Bamboo  Grove,2  found  him  and  did  obeisance  to 
him.  Now,  when  bhikkhus  come  to  Buddhas,  the  Exalted 
Ones,  it  is  customary  for  friendly  greetings  to  be  exchanged. 
Wherefore  the  Exalted  One  asked  them  :  ‘I  hope,  brethren, 
that  you  are  well  and  have  pleasantly  rested.  Whence 
come  ye?’  ‘From  your  own  country,  lord,’  they  replied. 
Then  he  asked  if  there  were  a  bhikkhu  who  knew  the  Ten 
Subjects,  saying:  ‘Who,  brethren,  of  such  fellow-country¬ 
men  of  mine  is  capable,  himself  a  simple  liver,  to  discourse 
on  the  simple  life  ?’  ‘  Punna,  lord,  the  venerable  son  of  the 
Mantanis.’ 

And  when  the  Master  went  from  Rajagaha  to  Savatthi, 
Punna  went  thither  and,  in  the  Fragrant  Chamber,3  was 
taught  the  Norm.  And  Sariputta,  desiring  to  meet  him, 
went  after  him  to  Dark  Wood,  whither  he  had  gone  to 
meditate  on  the  Master’s  words,  and  found  him  resting 
beneath  a  tree.  And  they  discoursed  of  those  words,  and 
had  joy  of  each  other,  Punna  winning  his  heart  by  the 
parable  of  the  posting  by  chariot. 

Now  the  Master  proclaimed  Punna  chief  among  the 
bhikkhus  in  preaching  the  Norm.4  And  he  one  day,  re¬ 
flecting  near  the  Master  on  the  emancipation  he  had  won, 

1  The  ten  Kathavatthus,  according  to  the  AbhiddnappadipiTcd,  are 
Simple  Living,  Content,  Detachment,  Segregation,  Endeavour,  Morality, 
Concentration,  Understanding,  Emancipation,  Knowledge  with  Insight. 

2  See  Sisters,  p.  81. 

3  The  Buddha’s  own  cell  at  the  Jetavana.  See  Sisters,  p.  11 ; 
JR  AS,  19. 

4  Any.,  i.  23.  The  interview  with  Sariputta,  after  the  bhikkhus’ 

testimonial,  is  told  in  Majjliima  (‘  Rathavinita  Sutta  ’),  i.  146^.  Further 
testifying  to  his  teaching  and  influence  occurs  in  Sayy.,  ii.  156 ; 
iii.  105  /.  v 


10  IV.  PUNNA  OF  THE  MANTANIS 

•  • 

bethought  him :  ‘  Verily  to  me  and  many  others,  delivered 
from  the  round  of  sorrow,  how  great  a  help  is  communion 
with  good  men  !’  And  with  joy  and  enthusiasm  he  uttered 
this  verse: 

Aye  with  the  good  consort,  with  them 

Who  know,  who  understand,  who  see  the  Good.1 

Great  is  the  Good  and  deep  and  hard  to  see, 

Subtle  and  delicately  fine,  to  which 

The  wise  and  brave  do  penetrate,  e’en  they 

Who  strenuous  live  and  lofty  vision  gain.  (4) 

Thus  verily  did  the  venerable  Punna  of  the  Mantdnis  utter 
his  psalm. 

And  the  Brother  explained  that  the  psalm  contained  his 
affirmation  of  aim  a  . 


V 

Dabba.2 

(Of  the  Mallas.) 

He  came  to  birth  in  the  family  of  a  clansman  of  the 
Mallas,3  at  Anupiya.  As  a  child  of  seven,  he  saw  the 
Master  when  the  latter  visited  his  country  and  home,  and 
was  so  attracted  that  he  asked  his  grandmother,  his  mother 
having  died  at  his  birth,4  if  he  might  leave  the  world  under 
the  Master.  She  brought  him  to  the  Master,  who  bade  a 
bhikkhu  ordain  him.  And  the  boy,  being  one  in  whom 
past  causes  and  an  aspiration  were  taking  effect,  realized 
the  Four  Paths  in  succession,  in  the  very  act  of  having  his 
curls  cut  off. 

1  Attha ,  the  subject  discussed  with  Sariputta. 

2  Cf.  below,  verse  1218.  On  this  eminent  Brother,  see  also  Vinaya 
Texts ,  iii.  4-18;  Jdtaka ,  1.  21  ;  TJddna ,  viii.  9;  Ang.  Nik.,  28. 

3  Lit.,  of  a  raja  of  the  Mallas,  a  confederation  of  independent  clans, 
located  by  the  two  great  Chinese  pilgrim  chroniclers  on  the  mountain 
slopes  eastward  of  the  Buddha’s  own  clan. 

4  Before  his  birth,  according  to  the  Commentarial  tradition. 


V.  DABBA 


11 


And  when  the  Master  left  the  Mallas’  country  for 
Rajagaha,  Dabba,  meditating  alone,  and  desirous  of  de¬ 
voting  his  body  to  the  service  of  the  Order,  considered  that 
he  might  both  apportion  night’s  lodging  and  direct  to 
meals.  The  Master  sanctioned  his  doing  so,  and  his  success 
herein,  and  his  supernormal  power  herein,  lighting  the 
brethren  to  their  lodgings  with  his  shining  finger,  is  told 
in  the  Pali  narrative.1 

But  it  was  after  the  baseless  calumny,2  wherewith  the 
bhikkhus  who  followed  Mettiya  and  Bhummajaka  sought  to 
ruin  him,  had  been  condemned  by  the  Order,  that  the 
Brother,  conscious  of  his  virtuous  compassion  for  others, 
uttered  this  verse  : 

Once  hard  to  tame,  by  taming  tamed  is  now 

Dabba,  from  doubts  released,  content,  serene. 

Victor  is  Dabba  now,  and  void  of  fears  ; 

Perfected 3  he  and  staunch  in  steadfastness.  (5) 

Thus  verily  did  the  venerable  Brother  Dabba  utter  his  psalm. 


VI 

SIta-Vaniya. 

This  is  the  psalm  of  the  venerable  Brother  Sambhuta. 
He  was  reborn  at  Rajagaha  as  the  son  of  an  eminent 

1  Vatthu  -pdliyay —  viz.,  in  Khandaka  IV.  See  Vinaya  Texts , 

iii-  4#- 

2  Ibid.,  pp.  10-18. 

3  Parinibbuto.  On  this  Dhammapala  comments :  ‘  There  are  two 
parinibbdnas — the  parinibbdna  of  evils  ( kilesd ,  the  “ten  torments,” 

or  “bases  of  corruption”;  see  my  Buddhist  Psychological  Ethics, 
p.  327  ff.)t  which  is  the  element  of  Nibbana,  wherewith  is  yet  remaining 
stuff  of  life  ;  and  parinibbdna  of  hhandhas  (factors  of  personality), 
which  is  the  element  of  Nibbana  without  that  remainder.  Here  the 
former  species  is  meant,  inasmuch  as  there  had  been  an  entire  putting 
away  by  the  Path  of  everything  that  should  be  put  away.’  Cf.  Com¬ 
pendium  of  Philosophy,  p.  168  ;v  my  Buddhism,  p.  191. 


12 


VI.  SITA-VANIYA 


brahmin,  and  named  Sambhuta.1  With  his  three  friends, 
Bhumija,  Jeyyasena  and  Abhiradana,  he  heard  the  Exalted 
One  preach  the  Norm,  and  left  the  world  to  enter  the  Order. 
While  practising  the  systematic  meditation  of  ‘  mindfulness 
respecting  the  body,’  he  stayed  continually  in  Slta-Vana 
(Cool  Wood),  and  thus  became  known  as  Slta-Yaniya  (Cool 
Woodlander). 

And  seeing  bhikkhus  passing  by  on  their  way  to  see 
the  Exalted  One,  he  said :  ‘  Friends,  worship  the  Exalted 
One  for  me  with  speech  of  mine,  and  say  to  him  thus  ’ 
(showing  the  Master  his  uninterrupted  concern  with  the 
Norm)  : 

There  is  a  brother  who  to  Cool  Wood  gone  doth  dwell 
Alone,  content,  in  meditative  ecstasy, 

Victorious,  no  more  by  creeping  dread  dismayed, 

He  mindful  watcheth  over  sense  with  courage  high.  (6) 

Thus  verily  did  the  venerable  Brother  Sltavaniya  utter  his 
psalm. 


YII 

Bhalliya. 

He,  with  his  elder  brother  Tapussa,2  was  born  in  the 
time  of  our  Exalted  One,  in  the  city  of  Pokkharavatl,  as 
the  son  of  a  caravan-driver.  As  they  were  conducting  a 
caravan  of  carts  in  a  pleasant  glade,  a  muddy  place  checked 
their  progress.  Then  a  tree-fairy,  one  of  their  own  kin, 
showed  himself,  and  said  :  ‘  Sirs,  the  Exalted  One  hath  just 
attained  enlightenment,  and  for  seven  weeks  abideth  fasting 
in  the  bliss  of  emancipation,  seated  at  the  root  of  the  King's 

1  This  cannot  be  the  Sambhuta  of  CXCII.,  verse  9.  Of  the  friends, 
we  meet  (probably)  only  with  Bhumija  in  Sayy.,  ii.  39. 

2  In  the  Commentarial  tradition,  they  were  brothers  in  like  circum¬ 
stances,  when  Ivassapa  Buddha  lived,  and  rendered  like  service  then  to 
Kassapa,  entreating  that  they  might  repeat  it  in  a  future  life. 


VII.  BHALLIYA 


13 


Stead  tree.1  Serve  him  with  food ;  this  will  long  make  for 
your  good  and  happiness.’  They,  with  joyful  eagerness, 
waited  not  to  prepare  food,  but  took  rice-cakes  and  honey, 
and,  leaving  the  high  road,  ministered  to  the  Exalted  One. 

Now  when  the  Exalted  One  had  set  rolling  the  wheel  of 
the  Norm  at  Benares,2  he  stayed  in  due  course  at  Rajagaha. 
There  Tapussa  and  Bhalliya  waited  on  him  and  heard 
him  teach.  The  former  became  a  lay-follower,  the  latter 
left  the  world  and  mastered  the  six  forms  of  abhinna.3 

One  day  when  Mara4  appeared  to  the  Brother  in  fearsome 
terrifying  shape,  Bhalliya,  manifesting  how  he  had  passed 
beyond  all  fear,  uttered  a  psalm  to  Mara’s  discomfiture : 

Wlioso  hath  chased  away  the  Death-king  and  his  host, 
E’en  as  a  mighty  flood  the  causeway  of  frail  reeds, 
Victor  is  he,  self-tamed.  Fear  cometh  never  more. 

His  is  the  Goal  supreme,  and  utter  steadfastness.  (7) 

Thus  verily  did  the  venerable  Bhalliya  utter  his  psalm .5 


VIII 

VIr  a. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthi,  in  the  family  of 
a  minister  to  King  Pasenadi,  he  was  named  Vlra.6  And 
when,  as  befitted  his  name,  he  had  acquired  athletic  accom¬ 
plishments,  he  became  a  warrior.  Marrying  with  his 
parents’  consent,  a  son  was  born  to  him.  Thereupon, 

1  Cf.  Sisters,  p.  5.  This  story  occurs  in  Vinaya  Texts,  iii.  81,  and 
in  the  ‘Nidana-Katha,’  Bud.  Birth  Stories,  p.  110,  Bhalliya  being  there 
Bhallika  and  Bhalluka.  Ika  and  iya  are  interchangeable  adjectival 
terminations. 

2  His  first  sermon,  etc. 

3  Supernormal  thought.  Cf.  p.  82,  n.  1. 

4  Professor  Windisch  holds  there  may  have  been  a  collection  of  such 
Mara  or  Devil  legends  ( Mara  und  Buddha ,  184). 

5  Henceforth  this  obiter  dictum  ceases. 

6  Heroic,  strong.  Pase'nadi  was  King  of  Kosala,  of  the  same  age 
as  the  Buddha  ( Majjh .  Nik.,  ii.  124). 


14 


VIII.  VIRA 


seeing  the  trouble  in  the  perpetuation  of  life,1  he  left  the 
world  in  anguish,  and  putting  forth  every  effort  soon 
acquired  sixfold  abhinna.  Now  when,  as  arahant,  the  was 
living  in  the  bliss  of  fruition,  his  former  wife  tried  to  lure 
him  back  in  various  ways.  But  the  venerable  Yira  said  : 
‘  This  woman,  desiring  to  seduce  me,  is  like  one  wishing  to 
shake  Mount  Sineru2  with  the  wing  of  a  gnat.’  And  he 
showed  her  how  futile  it  was  by  his  psalm  : 

Once  hard  to  tame,  by  taming  now  is  tamed 

Yira,  from  doubts  released,  content,  serene  ; 

Victor  is  Vlra,  free  from  creeping  dread ; 

His  is  the  goal  supreme,  and  steadfast  strength.  (8) 

The  woman,  hearing  him,  was  deeply  moved,  and  thought : 

‘  My  husband  has  won  to  this — what  good  is  domestic  life 
to  me  ?’  And  she  went  forth  among  the  Sisters,  and  soon 
acquired  the  Three-fold  Lore.3 


IX 

Pilinda-Vaccha. 

Beborn  at  SavatthI  as  a  brahmin’s  son,  before  the 
Exalted  One  became  a  Buddha,  they  named  him  Pilinda, 
Vaccha  being  the  name  of  his  clan.  He  became  a  recluse, 
and  acquired  the  charm  called  the  Lesser  Gandhara,4 
deriving  therefrom  great  renown.  But  when  our  Exalted 
One  became  Buddha  the  charm  ceased  to  work.  He  having 
learnt  that  the  Greater  Gandhara  spell  stopped  the  Less, 

1  Lit.,  in  Saijsara,  ‘  continual  going  on.’  Cf.  XCIX. 

2  See  Sisters,  verse  384.  Pronounced  SIne'ru. 

3  Gf.  p.  29,  n.  1.  This  triple  acquisition  forms  three  of  the  six 
forms  of  abhinna,  or  supernormal  thought,  p.  32,  n.  1. 

4  On  the  Gandhara  Vijja,  or  charm — not,  as  here,  distinguished  as 
twofold— see  Dialogues ,  i.  278.  Cf.  Jat.,  iv.  498  /.  The  charm  is 
here  said  to  confer  the  power  both  of  going  through  the  air  and  of 
thought-reading.  The  identity  of  this  Thera  with  the  Pilinda-Vaccha 
of  Rajagaha  {Viv.  Texts ,  r.  61).  is  doubtful ;  yet  cf.  next  p.,  v.  2. 


IX.  PILINDA-VACCHA 


15 


concluded  that  Gotama  the  recluse  knew  the  former,  and 
he  waited  on  him  in  the  hope  of  acquiring  it,  asking  if  the 
chance  might  be  granted  him.  The  Exalted  One  answered  : 
‘  You  must  leave  the  world.’  He,  fancying  that  this  was  a 
preparation  for  the  charm,1  did  so.  To  him  the  Exalted 
One  taught  the  Norm,  and  gave  him  exercise  in  medita¬ 
tion,  so  that  he,  the  conditions  being  ripe,  attained 
arahantship. 

Now  one  who,  in  consequence  of  Pilinda’s  guidance  in  a 
former  birth,  had  gone  to  heaven  as  a  deva,  waited  on  him 
morning  and  evening  out  of  gratitude.  Hence  the  Brother 
was  distinguished  as  one  dear  to  the  gods,  and  was  ranked 
chief  among  the  brethren  who  were  such  by  the  Exalted  One.2 

And  Pilinda  one  day,  sitting  among  the  brethren,  and 
reflecting  on  his  success,  declared  to  them  how  the  charm 
had  brought  him  to  the  Exalted  One  uttering  this  psalm  : 

O  welcome  this  that  came,  nor  came  amiss  ! 

O  goodly  was  the  counsel  given  to  me  ! 

’Mong  divers  doctrines  mooted  among  men 

Of  all  ’twas  sure  the  Best  I  sought  and  found.  (9) 


X 

Pu^namasa. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  as  the  son  of  Samiddhi,  a 
brahmin  of  SavatthI,  he  left  the  world  when  a  son  was 
born  to  him,  and  entering  the  Order  under  the  Exalted 
One,  took  the  Four  Truths  as  his  exercise  in  meditation, 
and  became  an  arahant.  His  former  wife  sought  to  seduce 
him  from  his  faith,  visiting  him  adorned,  and  with  her 

1  This  fresh  renunciation  ( pabbajja )  must  have  meant  entering  the 
Order,  although  this  is  not  stated.  Contrast  with  Pilinda’s  mistaken 
view,  Dialogues ,  i.  278,  and  iii.,  XXIV.,  §  4.  Cf.  Vanglsa,  CCLXIV. 

2  Ang.,  i.  24,  the  Cv.  on  which  quotes  TJddnar) ,  iii.  6. 


16 


X.  PUNNAMASA 


child.  But  the  Brother,  showing  his  utter  detachment, 
uttered  this  psalm  : 

All  longings  as  to  this  or  other  life 
Have  I  put  far  from  me,  as  one  who  hath 
Beta’en  himself  to  truth,  whose  heart’s  at  peace, 
Who,  self -subdued,  in  all  things  undefiled, 

Discerns  the  world’s  incessant  ebb  and  flow.  (10) 

Then  the  woman  thinking,  ‘  This  holy  man  cares  not  for 
me  nor  for  the  child ;  I  am  not  able  to  persuade  him,’ 
went  away.1 


PART  II 
XI 

Gavaceha  the  Less. 

Reborn  as  a  brahmin  at  Kosambi,  and  hearing  the  Exalted 
One  preach,  he  entered  the  Order.  At  that  time  the 
bhikkhus  of  Kosambi  had  become  contentious.2  Then 
Gavaceha  the  Less,  not  taking  part  with  either  side,  re¬ 
mained  steadfast  in  the  Exalted  One’s  admonition,  and 
developing  insight,  attained  to  arahantship.  And  seeing 
in  the  bhikkhus’  quarrelsome  tastes  what  might  have  been 
the  downfall  of  his  own  good,  he  reflected  with  joy  and 
enthusiasm  on  his  own  contrasted  state,  saying : 

Abundantly  this  brother  doth  rejoice, 

For  the  blest  truths  the  Buddha  hath  revealed 
Are  his,  and  he  hath  won  the  Path  of  Peace, 

And  his  the  bliss  where  worldly  cares  are  stilled.  (11) 

1  A  curious  feature  about  this  story  is  the  repetition  of  it,  again 
as  Punnamasa’s,  in  Canto  II.,  the  Commentator  taking  no  notice  of  the 
substantial  identity  in  legend  and  authorship.  See  Ps.  CXLYI. 

2  They  seem  to  have  been  incorrigibly  so,  in  spite  of  the  Buddha’s 
earnest  and  repeated  exhortations  ( Majjh .,  i.  320  ff.,  513). 


XII.  GAYACCHA  THE  GREAT 


17 


XII 

Gavaeeha  the  Great. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha’s  days  as  the  son  of 
Samiddhi,  a  brahmin  of  the  village  of  Nalaka  in  Magadha. 
And  he  entered  the  Order  because  Sariputta 1  had  done  so, 
and  he  knew  that  Sariputta  was  very  wise.  After  he  had 
attained  arahantship,  and  was  enjoying  the  bliss  of  emanci¬ 
pation,  he  uttered  his  psalm  to  encourage  his  fellow*  disciples 
to  make  efforts  : 

In  wisdom  strong,  guided  by  virtue’s  rule,  intent, 

To  concentration’s  rapture  given,  yet  vigilant ; 

Partaking  of  such  fare  as  brings  thee  only  good  : 

So  in  the  faith,2  with  passions  quenched,  await  the 
hour.  (12) 


XIII 

Vanavaceha. 

In  this  Buddha-age  he  took  rebirth  at  Kapilavatthu,  in 
the  brahmin  clan  of  the  Vaccha’s.  He  was  born  in  the 
forest,  his  mother  being  taken  with  travail  while  walking 
in  the  forest  which  she  had  yearned  to  see.  He  became 
one  of  the  future  Buddha’s  playmates  in  the  sand.  And 
because  he  loved  the  woods,  he  was  known  as  Woodland- 
Vaccha.3  Later  on,  when  he  had  entered  the  Order,  it 

1  His  fellow-townsman.  See  CCLIX.  ;  Sisters ,  p.  96. 

2  Idha;  lit.,  ‘here,5  ‘here  below,’  is  technically  used  as  above, 
and  is  so  interpreted. 

3  As  if  the  legend  strove  to  link  him  closer  to  nature,  the  only  two 
of  his  former  lives  mentioned  in  detail  represent  him  as  a  tortoise  or 
turtle,  and  as  a  dove.  The  stanza  recurs,  with  others  in  a  similar 
vein,  in  Kassapa’s  poem  (CCXLIV.).  Again,  as  with  the  two  Punna- 
masa  psalms,  the  Commentator  takes  no  heed  of  the  identity  of  name, 
nor  of  the  substantial  identity  in  story  and  verse.  The  verse  is 
incorporated  in  the  long  poem  (CQLXI.). 


2 


18 


XIII.  VANAVACCHA 


was  in  the  forest  that  he  strove  for  and  won  arahantship. 
And  it  was  in  praise  of  the  forest  life  that  he  utteied  his 
psalm,  replying  to  the  brethren  who  asked  him :  What 
comfort  can  you  get  in  the  forest  ?  ‘  Delightful,  my 

friends,  are  forest  and  mountain  !’ — 

Crags  with  the  hue  of  heaven’s  blue  clouds, 

Where  lies  enbosomed  many  a  shining  tarn 
Of  crystal-clear,  cool  waters,  and  whose  slopes 
The  ‘  herds  of  Indra  91  cover  and  bedeck  : 

Those  are  the  braes  wherein  my  soul  delights.  (13) 


XIV 

SIvaka. 

(A  Novice  attending  Brother  Vanavacclia.) 

In  this  Buddha  -  era  he  was  horn  as  the  son  of 
Vanavaccha’s  sister.  When  his  mother  heard  that  her 
eldest  brother  Yanavaccha  had  left  the  world,  had 
graduated  in  the  Order,  and  was  dwelling  in  the  forest,  she 
said  to  her  son  :  ‘  Dear  SIvaka,  you  should  leave  the 
world  under  the  Elder,  and  wait  on  him  ;  the  Elder  is 
getting  old  now.’  He,  at  this  sole  bidding  of  his  mother, 
and  because  of  his  previous  aspirations,  did  so  and, 
ministering  to  his  uncle,  dwelt  in  the  forest.  One  day, 
when  he  had  gone  to  the  outskirts  of  the  village  on  some 

1  Indag opaka-sanchannd,  1  covered  by  Indra’s  cowherds.’  According 
to  the  Commentary  (cf.  Childers,  ‘  a  crimson  beetle  noticeable  after 
rain  ’),  these  are  coral -red  insects  (kimi),  alluded  to  in  connexion  with 
recent  rain,  but  said  by  some  to  be  a  red  grass,  or  by  others  the 
kanikara  trees  (. Pterosjpermum  acerifolium).  To  come  into  a  highland 
or  upland  picture,  these  crimson  insects  must  swarm  in  vast  numbers. 
The  coivs  of  Indra — i.e.,  the  clouds — would  have  filled  the  background 
far  more  easily.  The  Russians,  however,  Sir  Charles  Eliot  informs 
me,  call  lady-birds  ‘  God’s  little  cows  ’  ( bozhya  korovka )  ;  and  on 
upper  Alpine  pastures  in  late  summer  I  have  seen  crimson  (?  Burnet) 
moths  crowded  on  the  heath.  On  the  colour  ;  cf.  Vin .,  iii.  42. 


XIV.  SIVAKA 


19 


errand,  he  fell  very  ill.  And  when  medicine  did  not  cure 
him  and  he  came  not,  the  Elder,  wondering  at  the  reason, 
went  and  found  him  ill.  Administering  remedies  and 
tending  him  the  Elder,  when  dawn  was  nigh,  said  : 
‘  Sivaka,  since  the  time  when  I  left  the  world,  I  have  not 
sojourned  in  the  village.  Let  us  go  hence  into  the  forest.’ 
Sivaka  answered :  ‘  Sir,  even  if  my  body  stay  now  by  the 
village,  my  heart  is  in  the  forest,  wherefore  though  I  lie  here 
yet  shall  I  go  thither.’  Then  the  Elder  took  hold  of  his 
arm,  and  led  him  to  the  forest  exhorting  him.  He,  made 
steadfast  by  that  admonition,  won  arahantship. 

1  hereafter  he  uttered  his  psalm,  combining  his  master  s 
words  and  his  own,  expressing  both  his  love  of  seclusion 
and  his  achievement,  his  obedience  to  his  master  and  the 
winning  of  anna : 

The  teacher  spake  me  thus  :  4  Sivaka,  hence 
Let’s  go  I’1  Here  in  the  town  my  body  dwells  ; 

My  thoughts  are  to  the  forest  gone.  So  thus, 
Prostrated  though  I  be,  yet  do  I  go. 

No  bond  is  there  for  those  who  understand.  (14) 


XV 

Kunda-Dhana.2 

In  the  age  of  our  Exalted  One,  he  was  reborn  at  SavatthI 
as  a  brahmin’s  child,  and  called  Dhana.3  Knowing  the 

1  The  text  gacchdmi,  ‘I  go,’  is  in  the  Commentary  gacclidma,  ‘let 
us  go.’  The  latter  accords  with  the  story,  and  with  Vanavaccha’s 
active  care  for  his  pupil,  and  the  latter’s  devotion.  The  Commentary 
compares  the  youth’s  swift  response  to  that  of  a  spirited  horse  touched 
by  the  whip.  A  spirited  horse  is  called  bhadvo,  which  =  also  auspicious, 
or  lucky  ( Sivaka .  Cf.  Siva). 

2  In  the  Corny.  Konda-  Kontha-  Kudda-  Kunda-dhana.  He  is  men¬ 
tioned  in  Majjh .,  i.  462  ;  XJddna,  ii.  8  ;  Dhammapada  Corny.,  iii.  52-58 

3  The  Corny,  deals  at  some  length  with  the  legend  of  this  Brother’s 
antecedents,  the  immediate  object  of  which  is  to  explain  how  Dhana 


20 


XV.  KUNDA-DHANA 


three  Vedas  by  heart,  he  when  advanced  in  years  heard  the 
Master  preach,  and  left  the  world.  Now  King  Pasenadi  of 
Kosala  became  interested  in  him  and  provided  him  with 
necessaries,  so  that  he  had  not  to  go  round  for  alms.  But 
it  was  when  the  great  Subhadda  invited  the  Master  and 
his  company  to  dine  with  her,  that  Kunda-Dhana  revealed 
his  powers  and  attainments,  as  it  is  written  in  the  Com¬ 
mentary  on  the  Anguttara-Nikaya.* 1  And  it  was  to  the 
brethren  that  he  recited  this  verse : 

Five  cut  thou  off ;  Five  leave  behind,  and  Five  beyond 
all  cultivate ! 

He  who  the  Fivefold  Bond2  transcends — a  Brother 
Flood-crossed  is  he  called.  (15) 


won  the  nickname  of  Kunda  or  Konda,  a  word  which  by  the  context 
would  seem  to  mean  ‘gallant.’  In  a  previous  birth  he  appears  as  the 
victim  of  a  fairy’s  practical  joke,  and  the  blame  he  attaches  to  an 
innocent  fellow-monk  in  consequence  is  a  karma,  which  pursues  him 
in  this  life,  causing  him  mortification.  As  the  legend  throws  no  light 
on  the  verse,  it  is  not  given  here,  nor  is  the  account  of  his  prior  rank 
in  receiving  food-tickets  (see  Ang.,  i.  24),  and  for  the  same  reason. 
The  verse  might,  in  fact,  have  been  spoken  by  any  learned  Thera 
(cf.  CCXLII.,  verse  633).  Subhadda  is  presumably  the  daughter  of 
Anathapindika,  living  at  Saketa  ( Milinda ,  ii.  308).  The  way  to  her 
(from  SavatthI)  is  described  as  being  far  ;  in  Majjh.,  i.  149,  as  seven 
express  coaching  stages. 

1  I.e.,  on  the  Etad-agga- V agga  {Ang.,  i.  23/.),  wherein  the  Thera’s 
success  is  recorded.  It  is  noticeable  that,  in  citing  this  Commentary, 
Dhammapala  does  not  quote  it  as  Buddhagliosa’s  Manorathapuranl. 

2  According  to  the  Commentary,  the  first  of  these  four  pentads  is 
the  group  of  the  five  lower  Fetters  {Bud.  Psy .,  §§  1113-1134;  Rhys 
Davids,  American  Lectures ,  p.  141  jf.).  The  second  pentad  is  the 
remaining  five  Fetters,  the  liberation  from  the  ten  involving  deliverance 
from  rebirth.  The  third  refers  to  the  five  moral  powers  or  faculties 
{Bud.  Psy.,  §§  305-311),  and  the  fourth  to  the  bonds  of  passion,  hate, 
stupidity,  pride,  and  opinion  ( Vibhanga ,  p.  377).  The  verse  occurs  in 
Dhammapada,  v.  370,  and  Sayyutta  Nik.,  i.  3,  and  below,  633,  where 
this  comment  is  repeated.  The  verse  is  a  good  example  of  the  kind  of 
holy  riddle  in  which  these  Elders  (like  others  nearer  home)  took 
special  delight.  {Cf.  LXIV.) 


XVI.  BELATTHASISA 


21 


XVI 

Belatthasisa.  ' 

In  this  Buddha -age  he  was  reborn  at  Savatthi  in  a 
brahmin’s  family,  and  before  the  Exalted  One  became  a 
Buddha  he  left  the  world  to  join  the  ascetic  Order  of 
Kassapa  of  Uruvela,  and  tend  the  sacred  fire.  And  when 
Kassapa  was  tamed  by  the  Buddha,1  he  was  one  of  the 
thousand  ascetics  who  obtained  arahantship  on  hearing  the 
sermon  on  Burning.2 

He  thereafter  became  the  tutor  of  the  ‘  Treasurer  of 
the  Norm.3  And  one  day,  reflecting  on  the  pure  bliss  of 
fruition  and  his  own  earlier  discipline,  in  rapture  he  uttered 
a  psalm  : 

E’en  as  the  high-bred  steer4  with  crested  back5 
Lightly  the  plough  adown  the  furrow  turns, 

So  lightly  glide  for  me  the  nights  and  days 
Now  that  this  pure  untainted  bliss  is  won.  (16) 


XVII 

Dasaka. 

He,  by  his  karma,  was  reborn  in  the  age  of  our  Exalted 
One  at  Savatthi,  as  the  child  of  a  slave  of  Anathapindika, 

1  See  Vinaya  Texts ,  i.  118-134. 

2  Ibid.,  p.  134/. 

A  soubriquet  of  the  Elder  Ananda.  Belatthasisa  is  also  mentioned 
as  a  sufferer  from  eczema  ( Vin .  Texts,  ii.  48,' 226),  and  as  committing 
a  minor  offence  in  storing  food  (Vin.,  iv.  86).  The  Commentarial 
tradition  is  that  Dhammcipada  verse  92  refers  to  the  last-named 
incident  (Dlip.  Com.,  ii.  170). 

4  The  text  bhaddo  djanho,1  noble,  or  spirited  thoroughbred,’  is  declared 
by  the  Commentary  to  imply,  out  of  the  three  creatures  to  which  this 
epithet  is  applied— bull,  horse,  elephant— the  first  named,  as  the  only 
one  used  for  ploughing. 

SiKlti,  crested,’  is  applicable  to  either  the  horns  or  the  hump  of  the 
zebu  (Commentary). 


22 


XVII.  DASAKA 


and  was  by  him  appointed  as  gate-porter  of  the  Vihara.1 
Hearing  of  his  virtuous  conduct  and  his  wishes,  his  master 
made  him  a  freed  man,  and  said,  how  happy  it  was  to  leave 
the  life  of  the  world.  He  was  ordained  accordingly  ;  but 
from  that  time  he  grew  slothful  and  slack  of  effort,  taking 
no  steps  to  roll  back  the  round  of  rebirth,  and  sleeping 
much  after  meals.  At  sermon -time  he  would  get  into  a 
corner  on  the  outskirts  of  the  congregation,  and  sit 
snoring.  Now  the  Exalted  One,  contemplating  his  ante¬ 
cedents,  spoke  the  following  verse  to  him  in  order  to  stir 
up  agitation  : 

Who  waxes  slothful  and  in  diet  gross, 

Given  to  sleep  and  rolling  as  he  lies, 

Like  a  great  hog  with  provender  replete— 

The  dolt  comes  hack  again,  again  to  birth.  (17) 

Hearing  this,  Dasaka  grew  agitated  and,  developing  in¬ 
sight,  not  long  after  realized  arahantship.  Thereafter  he 
thought  ‘  the  verse  of  the  Exalted  One  became  as  a  goad 
to  me/  and  he  repeated  the  verse.  Thus,  though  uttered 
as  a  protest  concerning  food,  it  became  the  declaration  of 
his  anna. 


XVIII 

Singala-Pitar.2 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha -age  of  wealthy  parents  at 
SavatthI,  he  married  and  named  his  son  Singala(ka),  him¬ 
self  becoming  known  as  Singala’s  father.  At  a  later  time 
he  threw  off  domestic  ties,  and  left  the  world  for  the  Order. 
The  Exalted  One,  contemplating  his  inclinations,  gave  him 
the  meditative  exercise  of  the  idea  of  a  skeleton.  Taking 
it  he  dwelt  among  the  Sakiyans  at  Suijsumaragira,  in  the 

1  Of  the  Jetavana.  See  Sisters  for  an  illustration  of  the  ruins  of 
this  famous  institution,  built  by  Anathapindika.  Dasaka  =  Decimus. 

2  In  the  Commentary  Singalaka-pita.  The  name  means  ‘  jackal.’ 


XVIII.  SINGALA-PITAR 


23 


Bhesakala  Wood.1  Now  in  that  wood  a  woodland  sprite, 
judging  that  the  Thera  would  soon  grasp  the  fruition  he 
laboured  after,  uttered  this  verse  : 

Lo  !  in  the  forest  of  Bhesakala 
A  brother  dwells,  heir  of  the  Buddha’s  grace, 
Suffusing  through  and  through  this  earthy  frame 
With  thought  intent,  austere,  of  skeleton.2 
Beshrew  me,  if  he  do  not  swiftly  drive 
All  passion  of  the  senses  clean  away !  (18) 

Hearing  that  verse  the  brother  thought  ‘  this  fairy  said 
this  to  me  to  call  forth  effort,’  and  willing  unfaltering 
endeavour,  he  developed  insight  and  attained  arahantship. 
Thereafter  he  recalled  the  fairy’s  words,  and  breathed  forth 
that  very  verse  as  the  confession  of  his  anna. 

1  This  town  (see  Windisch,  Mara  u.  Buddha ,  p.  150)  and  wood  have 
hitherto  been  found  in  association,  not  with  the  Sakiyans,  but  with 
the  Bhaggas  ( JPTS ,  1888,  pp.  63,  98).  Either,  therefore,  there  was 
more  than  one  wood  of  this  name,  or  the  Bhaggas,  whose  locality 
seems  doubtful,  were  a  section  of  the  Sakiyas.  Cf.  ver.  1208. 

^  Kevalay  atthisahhdya  aphari  pathaviy  iruay,  Dr.  Neumann 
sees  in  this  line  an  allusion  to  the  passage  in  Sayy.  Nik ,  ii.  178^.,  and 
referred  to  by  Sumedha  ( Sisters ,  p.  173) : 

‘  And  bear  in  mind  that  tumulus  of  bones 
By  creatures  piled  who  wander  through  the  world. 
Remember  the  great  cairn  of  one  man’s  bones 
From  one  aeon  alone,  equal  to  Vipula.’ 

Dhammapala,  on  the  other  hand,  ignores  any  such  allusion,  and 
interprets  the  line  as  referring  to  the  mode  of  asubha~sahhd ,  or  the 
hasina  called  ‘meditative  exercise  of  bones’  (atthiha  -  bhdvand). 
Pathavi ,  usually  applied  to  the  extended  world,  he  explains  as  atta - 
bhdva-pathavi,  that  extended  or  earthy  attribute  of  the  individual 
called,  in  the  Nikayas,  ajjhattiha-pathavidhdtu  (personal  extended 
element).  That  it  is  never  called  simply  pathavi  (the  extended,  or 
earth)  may  incline  the  critic  to  dissent  from  the  Commentarial  tradition. 
And  yet  why  should  the  latter  have  let  slip  this  good  exegetical  oppor¬ 
tunity,  had  the  mountain  of  bones  been  indeed  implied  ?  ‘  Having  by 

the  bones-notion  ”  wholly  suffused  his  own  or  all  beings’  organism 
with  the  thought  “  ’Tis  bone  1”  and  making  that  the  basis  of  jhana,  he 
will  put  away  all  sensuous  passion  by  the  Non-Returner’s  Path  .  .  .’ 
so  runs  the  Commentary. 


24 


XIX.  KULA 


Kula. 

Eeborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  SavatthI  of  a  brahmin 
family,  he  entered  the  Order,  but  from  want  of  mental 
balance  could  not  concentrate  on  a  given  idea.1  Now  one 
day  going  to  the  town  for  alms,  he  saw  men  conducting 
running  water  wherever  they  wished  by  digging  channels. 
Within  the  town  he  marked  out  of  the  corner  of  his  eye2 
how  the  fletcher  fixed  the  arrow-shaft  in  his  lathe,  and 
leaving  with  full  bowl  he  saw  the  chariot-makers  planing 
axle  and  tire  and  hub.  So  entering  the  Vihara  he  dined  ; 
then  during  siesta  he  pondered  on  these  three  modes  of 
taming  things,  making  them  his  goad,  and  applying  them 
to  his  own  need  of  self-mastery.  So  striving  he  not  long 
after  won  arahantship.  And  connecting  those  object-lessons 
with  his  own  heart’s  taming,  he  confessed  anna  in  this 
verse  : 

The  conduit-makers  lead  the  stream, 

Fletchers  coerce  the  arrow-shaft, 

The  joiners  mould  the  wooden  plank ; 

The  self — *tis  that  the  pious  tame.3  (19) 

1  Visesciy  nibbattetuy .  Cf.  Childers,  s.v.  Viseso. 

2  See  Vin.  Texts ,  i.  59 :  ‘  With  downcast  eye.’  Practically  directed 
on  to  the  ground  about  a  plough’s  length  in  front  of  him  (Commentary). 

3  This  verse  recurs  in  CCLIY.,  and  occurs  twice  in  the  Dhammapada , 
being  assigned,  in  the  Commentary  on  that  work,  to  one  Pandita- 
samanera  at  verse  80,  and  to  Sukha-samanera  at  verse  145.  Both  are 
of  SavatthI  also,  and  both  are  described  as  making  object-lessons  of 
human  skill  over  matter  in  the  crafts  alluded  to.  But  in  the  former 
instance  the  story  i3  much  expanded. 


XX.  AJITA 


2  5 


XX 

Ajita. 

He  was  reborn,  when  our  Master  was  living,  at  Savatthi, 
as  the  son  of  the  brahmin  who  was  price-assessor1  to  the 
king  of  Kosala.  He  became  an  ascetic  as  follower  of 
Bavarl,  the  learned  brahmin,  who  dwelt  in  the  Kapittha 
park  on  the  banks  of  the  Godhavarl.  Now  Bavarl2  sent 
him,  together  with  Tissa  and  Metteyya,  to  the  Master. 
And  Ajita  was  so  satisfied  with  the  Master’s  answers  to  his 
questions,  that  he  entered  the  Order.  Choosing  a  form  of 
mental  exercise  he  developed  insight,  and  attained  arahant- 
ship.  Thereupon  he  uttered  his  song  of  victory3  in  this 
verse : 

All  unafraid  of  death,  nor  fain  to  live, 

I  shall  lay  down  this  compound  frame  anon,4 
With  mind  alert,  with  consciousness  controlled.  (20) 

In  the  JCitaka  it  appears  that  the  purchase  of  goods  by  or  for  a 
king  was  effected  by  an  officially  regulated  price.  This  was  fixed 
without  appeal  by  the  court  assessor  or  valuer,  who  stood  between  the 
two  fires  of  offending  the  king  if  he  valued  the  goods  submitted  too 
high,  and  of  driving  away  tradesmen  if  he  refused  bribes  and  cheapened 
wares.  See  my  ‘Early  Economic  Conditions  in  Northern  India,’ 
JBAS,  October,  1901. 

-  This  episode  forms  part  of  the  Sutta-Nipata ,  verses  976-1039 
(SBE,  x.  184/.). 

3  His  ‘  lion’s  roar  ’  ( slhanada ). 

4  Cf.  Savyutta ,  iii.  25. 


26 


XXI.  XIGRODHA 


PART  III 


Nigrodha. 

He  in  this  Buddha  -  age  was  reborn  in  an  eminent 
brahmin’s  family  at  Savatthi.  And  on  the  day  when  Jeta 
Grove  was  presented,  he  saw  the  majesty  of  the  Buddha 
and  was  satisfied,  so  that  he  entered  the  Order.  When 
he  had  stirred  up  insight,  he  soon  became  able  to  exercise 
the  six  forms  of  supernormal  thought.  And  pondering, 
in  the  bliss  of  fruition,  on  the  advantages  of  the  doctrine 
which  leads  us  away  from  rebirth,  he  uttered  this  verse  as 
the  expression  of  anna  : 

No  fear  have  I  of  fearsome  things,  for  He, 

Our  Master,  knoweth  well  th’  ambrosial  lore.1 
The  Path  where  fear  nowise  a  footing  finds, 

Along  that  Path  the  brethren  hold  their  way.  (21) 


XXII 

Cittaka. 

He  was  born  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Rajagaha,  as  the  son 
of  a  brahmin  of  great  possessions.  And  when  the  Master 
was  staying  in  the  Bamboo  Grove,  Cittaka2  went  to  hear 
him,  and  found  faith  and  so  entered  the  Order.  Choosing 
ethical  conduct  as  his  exercise,  he  entered  a  wooded  spot, 
and  there  in  devotional  practice  induced  jhana.  Thereby 
developing  insight  he  soon  attained  arahantship.  There¬ 
upon  he  went  to  salute  the  Master.  Asked  by  the  brethren, 

1  Lit.,  ‘  skilled,  learned  in  ambrosia,’  amdtd ,  the  most  frequent 
synonym  for  Nibbana.  The  Path  is  the  Ariyan  Eightfold  Path 
(Commentary). 

2  Pronounced  Chittaka.  Sister  Citta  was  also  of  Rajagaha  ( Sisters , 
p.  27). 


XXII.  CITTAIvA 


27 


‘  Have  you  been  strenuous,  friend,  in  your  forest  sojourn  ?’ 
he  uttered  his  psalm,  to  show  he  had  been  so,  and  to 
declare  anna : 

Peacocks  of  sapphire  neck  and  comely  crest 
Calling,  calling  in  Karaijviya  woods 
By  cool  and  humid  winds  made  musical  :1 2 
They  wake  the  thinker  from  his  noonday  sleep.  (22) 


XXIII 

Gosala. 

He  was  born  in  this  Buddha-age  in  a  wealthy  Magadhese 
family.  He  came  to  know  Sona-Kutikanna  ;3  and  when  he 
heard  that  the  latter  had  left  the  world,  he  grew  agitated, 
and  thought :  ‘  If  he  who  has  so  great  an  estate  shall  leave 
the  world,  why  not  rather  I  ?’  And  entering  the  Order,  he 
took  for  exercise  the  subject  of  ethical  conduct,4  and  seeking 
a  suitable  haunt,  dwelt  on  the  uplands  not  far  from  his 
native  village.  Now  one  day  his  mother,  who  daily  dis¬ 
pensed  alms,  gave  him,  on  his  round,  rice-porridge  prepared 
with  honey  and  sugar.  This  he  took  and  ate  in  the  shade 
of  that  hill  under  a  bamboo  thicket.  With  bowl  and  hands 
washed,  and  refreshed  by  the  appropriate  fare  offered  him, 
he  put  forth  insight  without  toil  and,  with  mind  intent  on 

1  The  Commentary,  reading  Karambhiya,  states  this  word  is  the 
name  of  a  species  of  tree,  and  possibly  also  the  name  of  the  wood. 

2  In  the  compound  sitavdta-Tcalitd  the  Br.  MS.  of  the  Commentary 
reads  Jcilitd,  the  S.  MS.  kadditd.  In  both  the  word  denotes  the  musical 
call  (madliuravassitarj)  of  the  peacock  ( mora—'mayura ).  According 
to  the  Abliidhdnci'p'padi'piUd  (137),  the  term  kalasaddo  is  used  to 
designate  any  inarticulate  pleasant  sound.  The  birds  are  described  as 
crying  their  lie-lid  call  when  they  hear  the  thunder  of  the  approaching 
clouds  heralding  the  rains.  Mora ,  a  redundant  foot,  has  crept  in — 
from  the  Commentary  perhaps.  ‘Humid,’  the  translator’s  gloss, 
from  megliavdtena ,  f  rain-cloud-breeze,’  in  the  Commentary. 

3  See  Ps.  CCVIII.  Sona  was  of  Avanti  far  to  the  E. 

4  Cariyanukulay  kammatthdnarj . 


28 


XXIII.  GOSALA 


the  ebb  and  flow  of  all  things,  attained  the  topmost  medita¬ 
tion  of  the  Paths,  winning  arahantship,  with  mastery  of 
the  form  and  meaning  of  the  doctrine.  Desirous  to  go  up 
to  the  hilly  region  that  he  might  dwell  in  bliss  while  he 
lived,  he  made  known  his  own  experience  in  this  verse  : 

Lo  !  I  who  in  the  bamboo  thicket  dined 
Off  rice  and  honey,  who  now  comprehend, 

Him  worshipping,1  the  ebb  and  flux  of  all 
These  factors  of  my  life,  will  hie  me  back 
Up  on  my  hill,  to  foster  there  the  growth 
Of  heart’s  detachment,  lone  and  separate.2  (23) 


XXIY 

Sugandha. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  of  wealthy  parents  at 
Savatthi.  And  because  of  his  aspiration  in  the  past,  when 
he  presented  Kassapa  Buddha  with  a  Fragrant  Chamber  of 
sandal- wood,  that  he  might  in  one  life  be  reborn  with  a 
fragrant  body,  he,  on  the  day  of  his  birth — and  his  mother 
before  that  day — filled  the  house  with  fragrance.  Then 
said  his  parents :  ‘  Our  son  is  come  bringing  his  own 
name  !’  and  they  called  him  Sugandha  (Aroma).  When 
grown  up,  he  was  induced  to  leave  the  world  by  the 
preaching  of  the  Thera  Maha-Sela.3  And  within  seven 

1  Padakkliinay  sammasanto.  The  Commentary  explains  the  former 
word  as  ‘  perfectly  accepting  the  Master’s  admonition.’  The  Chronicle 
lays  stress  on  the  tonic  effect  of  the  food  on  his  spiritual  attainment,  a 
characteristically  anti-ascetic  comment. 

2  Vivekam  anubruhayan  ti.  Cf.  Childers  under  the  latter  word. 
In  the  Commentary  p atipassaddhi-vivekay  plialasamdpattiy  kdya- 
vivekan  ca  paribrulianto.  Cf  ver.  1246,  n. 

3  This  Thera  (‘  Great-rock  ’)  is  probably  the  brahmin  teacher  of  the 
Sela-Sutta  in  the  Sutta-Nipdta ,  who  was  converted  by  the  Buddha, 
became  an  arahant,  and  would  naturally  continue  to  exercise  his 
oratorical  gifts.  Cf.  Milinda,  i.  253  ;  Sum.  V.,  i.  276. 


XXIV.  SUGANDHA 


29 


days  he  attained  arahantship.  Confessing  anna  he  uttered 
this  verse  : 

Scarce  have  the  rains  gone  by  since  I  went  forth, 
Yet  see  the  seemly  order  of  the  Norm  ! 

The  Threefold  Wisdom1  have  I  gotten  now 
And  done  all  that  the  Buddha  bids  us  do.2  (24) 


XXV 

Nandiya. 

Born  in  this  Buddha-age  at  KapiJavatthu,  in  the  house 
of  a  Sakiyan  raja,  his  parents  said  :  He  is  born  bringing  us 
bliss  ;  and  they  called  him  Nandiya  (Beatus).  Grown  up, 
he  went  forth,  when  Anuruddha  and  the  rest  left  the  world 
under  the  Master.  And  because  of  his  studies  and  his 
resolve  made  in  the  past,  he  soon  attained  arahantship. 
Thereafter  he  dwelt  with  Anuruddha  the  Thera3  and  his 

1  Tevijjo,  lit.,  ‘  thrice-wise.’  This  brahminist  phrase,  referring  to  one 
who  had  learnt  the  three  Vedas,  was  adopted  by  the  Buddha,  and 
transferred  to  one  who  had  the  three  kinds  of  pahhd,  vijja,  or  abhinna 
(intuition,  insight),  entitled  reminiscence  of  former  lives,  the  heavenly 
eye,  and  the  destruction  of  the  asava’s,  or  intoxicants — sensuality,  lust 
of  life,  opinions,  ignorance  ( Any .  Nik.,  i.  163-165).  Cf  p.  14,  n.  3. 

2  The  phrase  anuvassika-jmbbajito  is,  according  to  the  Commentary, 
capable  of  more  than  one  interpretation.  If  it  means  i  renounced  the 
world  a  year  ago  ’  ( vide  Neumann),  it  is  curious  that  Dhammap&la 
does  not  paraphrase  by  the  term  sarjvacchara.  Is  it  not  perhaps 
permissible,  in  view  of  the  strong  emphasis  on  the  order  (lit.,  ‘Normity  ’) 
of  the  Norm,  to  see  a  parallel  between  two  strands  of  the  fivefold 
order  (niyama)  of  the  universe the  seasons  and  the  Norm  (utu- 
niyama ,  dhamma-niyama )  ?  (Cf  Dialogues  of  the  Buddha ,  ii.  8,  n.  3, 
and  mj  Buddhism ,  118  fi)  The  fruition — namely,  of  his  moral  and 
spiritual  evolution — was  as  certain  and  inevitable  as  that  ‘  seedtime 
and  har\  est,  .  .  .  summer  and  winter  shall  not  cease  *  (Gen.  viii.  22) 
The  phrase,  however,  recurs  frequently  with  no  such  point. 

3  On  Anuruddha  and  his  friends,  see  Ps.  CXXX VIII.-CXXXIX., 
CCLVI.  (cf.  Ps.  CXXXVIII.).  The  only  passage  where  Nandiya  is 
mentioned  independently  is  Sauy.,  v.  403.  Dhavimapada  Com.,  on 
verses  219,  220,  refers  to  a  quite  different  Nandiya  (verse  11,  Nandika, 
Nanda)  of  Benares,  a  lay-adherent. 


30 


XXV.  NANDIYA 


friends,  in  the  Eastern  Bamboo  Wood.  Theye  Mara,  the 
Evil  One,  wishing  to  frighten  him,  appeared  in  a  terrifying 
shape.  But  the  Thera  drove  him  away  with  the  words, 
‘  0  Evil  One  !  what  canst  thou  do  with  those  that  have 
transcended  thy  realm  ?  ’Tis  thou  that  thereby  wilt  meet 
with  defeat  and  ruin 

To  him  whose  thought  is  ever  newly  born 
From  splendour  of  the  Path,  and  eke  hath  touched 
The  Fruit — if  such  a  Brother  thou  assail  st, 
Black-hearted  sprite,  to  misery  thou  must  go.1  (25) 


Abhaya. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  as  the  son  of  King 
Bimbisara.  The  circumstances  of  his  rebirth  will  be  set 
forth  later.2  Nataputta  the  Jain  leader  taught  him  a 
dilemma  to  set  the  ‘  Samana  Gotama,’  but  in  the  Master’s 
reply  he  recognized  the  defeat  of  the  Jain  and  the  supreme 
enlightenment  of  the  Exalted  One.  Thereafter,  when  the 
king  died,  Abhaya  grew  anxious  and  left  the  world  for  the 
Order.  Through  the  preaching  of  the  Sutta  on  the  parable 
of  the  hole  in  the  yoke,  he  reached  the  First  Path ; 
again,  stirring  up  insight,  he  realized  arahantship.0  There¬ 
upon,  glorying  in  that  which  he  had  won,  he  confessed 
anna  saying : 

Of  him,  the  Buddha,  kin  o’  th’  sun,  I  heard 
The  word  most  eloquent,  and  hearing  pierced 
The  subtle  truth  of  things,  as  ’twere  the  tip 
Of  hair  by  cunning  bowman’s  art  transfixed.4  (26) 

1  Cf.  verse  1189. 

2  See  Sisters ,  p.  30  (where  the  printer  altered  the  name  to  Abhaya). 
The  dilemma  episode  occupies  the  Abhayarajakumara- Sutta  (58)  of  the 
Majjh.  Nik. 

3  I.e .,  the  fruition  of  the  Fourth,  or  Topmost,  Path.  This  Sutta  is 
probably  that  of  the  turtle  and  the  floating  trap  {Sayy.,  v.  455  ;  Majjli. 
iii.  169). 

4  The  typical  test  of  skill  with  the  bow  [Dhp.  Com.,  i.,  p.  288). 


XXVII.  LOMASAKANGIYA 


31 


XXYII 

Lomasakangiya. 

When  Kassapa  was  Buddha,  this  brother  left  the  world  and 
followed  him.  Now  after  the  Master  had  preached  the  Sutta 
on  Happy-Lonely,  a  certain  bhikkhu  talked  with  Lomasa- 
kangiya  about  it.  And  our  Thera,  being  unable  to  explain 
it,  uttered  the  wish  :  ‘  May  I  in  the  future  become  able  to 
teach  thee  the  Happy-Lonely !’  The  other  answered : 
‘May  I  ask  thee!’  Of  these  two  the  former,  when  our 
Buddha  lived,  was  reborn  at  Kapilavatthu,  in  the  house 
of  a  Sakiyan  raja.  And  he  was  very  delicate,  and  covered 
with  fine  hair,  and  therefore  he  was  called  Lomasakangiya.* 1 
The  other  was  reborn  at  that  time  among  the  gods,  and 
named  Candana.2 

Now  when  Anuruddha  and  the  other  Sakiyan  youths  left 
the  world,  Lomasakangiya  would  not.  Then  Candana,  to 
stir  him  up,  came  to  him  and  asked  concerning  the  Happy- 
Lonely.  The  other  knew  not  what  he  meant.  Then 
Candana  reminded  him.  So  Lomasakangiya  went  to  the 
Exalted  One  and  asked  him  if  it  was  true  that  he  had 
made  that  resolve  in  the  past.  ‘  Ay,  youth,’  replied  the 
Exalted  One  ;  ‘  and  the  meaning  of  it  is  to  be  understood 
in  more  than  fifty  points  of  detail.’  Then  Lomasakangiya 
said:  ‘Wherefore,  lord,  let  me  be  ordained.’  And  the 
Exalted  One  sent  him  to  get  his  parents’  permission.  He 
asked  his  mother,  but  she  feared  for  his  health,  saying  : 

‘  My  dear,  thou  art  delicate.  How  canst  thou  leave  the 
world  ?’  Then  Lomasakangiya  uttered  this  verse  : 


Nipunan ,  the  subtle,  is  explained  by  Dhammapala  as  implying  the 
third  of  the  ‘  Four  Truths,’  the  understanding  of  the  Nirodha  Sacca, 
or  the  cessation  of  ill.  It  is  interesting  to  note  how  the  prince  draws 
his  similes  from  race  and  from  warlike  sports.  Cf.  Ps.  CXXXIX.,  by 
the  Buddha’s  stepbrother  Nanda;  also  verse  1160. 

1  I.e.y  downy  limbs.  Pronounced  Lo’masa  Kang’iya, 

2  Pronounced  Chand’ana. 


32 


XXVII.  LOMASAKANGIYA 


Dabba  and  Ivusa  grass  and  pricking  stems 
And  all  that  hurts  in  brush  and  underwood 
Forth  from  my  breast  I’ll  push  and  thrust  away, 
And  go  where  I  the  growth  may  cultivate 
Of  heart’s  detachment,  lone  and  separate.1  (27) 

Thereupon  his  mother  said,  ‘Well  then,  my  dear,  go 
forth.’  And  he  gained  the  Master’s  consent  to  be  ordained. 
After  doing  the  preliminary  exercises  he  went  to  enter  the 
forest.  And  the  bhikkhus  said  to  him :  ‘  Friend,  you  are 
delicate.  What  can  you  do  here?  ’Tis  cold  in  the  forest. 
But  he  repeated  his  verse,  and  entering  the  forest,  devoted 
himself  to  meditation,  and  soon  acquired  the  six  forms  of 
supernormal  thought.2  When  he  won  arahantsliip  he  con¬ 
fessed  anna  in  the  same  verse. 

XXVIII 

Jambugamika’s  Son. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Campa  as  the  son 
of  a  lay-adherent  named  Jambugamika,3  and  became  called 

1  Cf.  XXIII.,  and  see  Ps.  CLXXIV.  The  Commentary  gives  us  the 
previous  half  of  the  legend,  the  latter  half  of  which  is  told  in  the  Lomasa- 
kangiya-Sutta  of  Majjh.  (iii.  199).  Here  Candana  is  represented  as 
teaching  the  Sutta  in  question  to  the  Thera.  No  less  than  four  Suttas 
of  this  Nikaya  deal  with  the  little  poem  called  ‘  Bhaddekaratta,’  or 
‘  the  happy-lonely  one,’  giving  expositions  by  the  Buddha,  by  Ananda, 
by  Kaccana  the  Great,  and  by  Candana  in  succession. 

2  ‘  The  powers  named  Iddhi,  the  Celestial  Ear , 

Discerning  others ’  thoughts  ;  reminiscence 
Of  former  births ,  and  fifth,  the  Heavenly  Eye.' 

Compendium  of  Philo  sop] iy,  p.  209. 

The  sixth,  extirpation  of  the  Asavas,  is  tantamount  to  arahantsliip. 
The  six  are  comprised  in  the  term  ‘  Abhihha,’  and  are  left  untranslated 
as  ‘  Abhihha  ’  in  the  following  psalms. 

3  In  the  Commentary  Jambugamiya.  The  name  refers  to  an  office, 
and  means  syndic  of  the  village  of  Kose-apple-trees,  a  place  included 
by  the  Buddha  on  his  last  preaching  tour  ( Dialogues ,  ii.  133),  and 
which  probably  was  a  suburb  of  Campa  (pronounced  Champa),  on  the 
Ganges,  the  easternmost  point  of  the  Buddha’s  ministrations. 


xxviii.  jambugax\iika’s  son  33 

after  his  father.  While  studying  as  a  novice  in  the  Order, 
he  dwelt  at  Saketa,  in  the  Ahjana  Grove.1  Then  his  father, 
thinking,  ‘  I  wonder  if  my  son  remains  devoted  to  his  life 
in  the  Order  or  not  ?’  wrote  the  following  verse  to  examine 
him,  and  sent  it  to  him : 

And  art  thou  then  not  gratified  by  gear  ? 

And  art  thou  then  not  charmed  thyself  t’  adorn  ? 

And  is  this  fragrant  odour,  virtue-fraught, 

Wafted  by  thee,  and  not  by  other  folk  ?  (28) 

When  he  had  read2  this  he  thought :  ‘  My  father  is  sus¬ 
picious  that  I  want  worldly  vanities.  Even  to-day  I  have 
not  got  beyond  the  level  of  the  common  man !’  Filled  with 
anxiety,  he  strove  and  wrestled,  so  that  he  soon  acquired 
the  six  abhinnas.  And  taking  the  verse  his  father  sent 
him  as  a  goad,  he  finally  realized  arahantship.  And  both 
to  confess  anna  and  honour  his  father,  he  recited  the  verse. 


Harita. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  SavatthI,  as  the  son  of  a 
wealthy  brahmin,3  his  parents  wedded  him  to  a  brahmin’s 
daughter  suitable  in  birth,  beauty  and  every  other  respect. 
And  he,  enjoying  his  lot  with  her,  was  one  day,  while  he 
contemplated  the  perfection  of  her  beauty,  admonished  by 

1  Cf.  Sisters,  pp.  84,  158;  Bud.  India,  pp.  39,  40;  Neumann, 
Majjh.  translation,  iii.  361,  n. 

2  Tay  vdcetvd.  The  legend,  for  us,  dates  from  the  Chronicler’s  day 
only,  when  the  Pitakas  had  long  been  committed  to  writing.  But  as 
recording  even  a  legend  of  the  committal,  at  its  very  birth,  of  what 
became  a  fraction  of  ‘  holy  writ 5  to  writing,  it  is  of  considerable  interest. 
In  the  verse  I  read  with  the  Commentary  Kacci  na  .  .  .  hacci  na. 
The  odour  of  saintliness  is  a  common  Indian  metaphor. 

Cf.  CLXXXIV.  Harita,  one  of  the  gods  of  the  Brahma-heaven 
( Dialogues ,  ii.  292),  was  the  name  in  the  Jdtala  of  an  erring  bhikkhu, 
on  whose  account  the  Buddha  related  a  birth-story  of  his  own  fallibility 
when  Bodhisat  (Jdt.,  iii.  295).  ' 


o 

O 


34 


XXIX.  HARITA 


the  order  of  things,1  that  such  beauty  must  needs  ere  long 
be  crushed  out  by  decay  and  death.  Nay,  when  but  a 
few  days  had  passed  by,  his  wife  was  bitten  by  a  black 
snake  and  died.  Overwhelmed  by  anguish  he  sought  the 
Master  and,  hearing  the  Norm,  severed  his  domestic  ties 
and  left  the  world.  Now  while  he  was  training  himself 
ethically,  he  could  not  make  straight  his  heart.2  And 
going  for  alms  into  the  village,3  he  saw  a  fletcher  applying 
his  tools  and  making  straight  the  shaft  of  an  arrow.  Then, 
he  thought :  ‘  These  men  make  even  a  senseless  thing 
straight ;  why  do  I  not  make  straight  my  heart  ?’  So 
he  turned  back  and,  seated  for  siesta,  stirred  up  insight. 
And  lo !  the  Exalted  One,  seated  in  the  air  above  him, 
admonished  him  by  this  verse  : 

Now  bend  aloft  thyself ;  e’en  as  his  holt 
The  fletcher,  so  do  thou,  O  Harita, 

Make  straight  thy  heart  and  ignorance  cut 
away.  (29) 

Hearing  him,  the  Thera  developed  insight,  and  soon 
became  an  arahant.  He  thereupon  confessed  anna  with 
this  same  verse. 

XXX 

Uttiya. 

He  was  born  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthi,  as  the  son 
of  a  brahmin,  and  leaving  the  world  on  the  quest  of  the 
Ambrosial,4  he  became  a  Wanderer.5  One  day  on  his 

1  Lit dhammatd,  cf  p.  39,  and  my  Buddhism,  pp.  119,  241. 

2  Cittau  may  be  rendered  by  heart  or  mind,  understood  as  synony¬ 
mous,  as  in  our  New  Testament. 

3  Gdmo ,  whether  Savatthi,  called  elsewhere  nagaro,  ‘  town,’  or  a 
suburb,  or  other  place,  is  not  stated.  Cf.  Ps.  XIX. 

4  Amata ,  the  not-dead,  a  term  applied  to  Nibbana,  or  the  Paths 
thereto  ;  more  generally,  to  the  Summum  Bonum. 

5  Paribbdjaha — i.e .,  an  unattached  religieux.  It  is  very  possible 
that  the  Uttiya  paribbajaka  of  Ang .,  v.  193,  and  the  Uttiya  bhikkhu  of 
Sar\y .,  v.  166,  who  asks  for  a  lesson  in  brief,  are  identical  with  this 
Uttiya. 


XXX.  UTTIYA 


35 


travels  he  came  where  the  Exalted  One  was  preaching, 
and  entered  the  Order.  From  the  impurity  of  his  moral 
principles  he  could  not  win  the  goal.  And  seeing  other 
bhikklius  who  had  won  confessing  to  anna,  he  asked  the 
Master  for  a  lesson  in  brief.  The  Master  answered,  ‘It 
follows  that  you,  Uttiya,  must  purify  the  rudiments,’1  and 
he  taught  him  them  in  brief.  Uttiya,  accepting  the  lesson, 
called  up  insight,  but  in  the  process  he  fell  ill.  In  his 
anxiety  he  put  forth  every  effort,  and  attained  arahantship. 
Inasmuch  as  he  won  to  perfect  attainment  in  the  face  of 
such  a  condition,  he  confessed  anna  with  reference  to  his 
illness  : 

Since  sickness  hath  befallen  me,  O  now 
Let  there  arise  in  me  true  mindfulness. 
Sickness  hath  now  befallen  me — ’tis  time 
For  me  no  more  to  dally  or  delay.2  (30) 


PART  IV 


Gahvaratiriya. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthi,  in  a 
brahmin  s  family,  and  named  Aggidatta.3  When  grown 

1  Tvarj  adirn  eva  visodhelilti. 

2  The  unique  reiteration  of  the  me,  twice  in  the  locative,  twice  in 
the  dative,  in  the  Pali  (the  word  is  identical  in  both  languages),  scarcely 
makes  for  elegant  poetry ;  but,  to  be  faithful,  the  translation  was  bound 
to  reproduce  it.  It  is  very  possible  that  there  is  here  a  suggestion  of 
the  harassed  travail  of  the  feverish  and  ailing,  but  unfaltering,  in¬ 
domitable  brain.  Under  this  aspect  the  verse  becomes  a  very  living 
document. 

3  I.e.,  Fire-given.  Even  if  Ratlriya  mean  Ratira  woodlander  (see 
next  page),  it  is  not  evident  how  to  interpret  Gahva.  The  name  and  the 
Thera  are  not  met  with  elsewhere.  The  Brother’s  disposition  and  his 
simile  occur  in  a  Sutta  comparing  five  qualities  common  to  excellei  ce 
in  elephants  and  in  bhikkhus  {Any.,  hi.  161#.). 


3G 


XXXI.  GAHVARATIRIYA 


up  he  saw  the  Exalted  One  work  the  twin-miracle,1  and, 
being  convinced,  he  entered  the  Order.  Taking  a  subject 
for  meditation,  he  went  to  the  Ratira  forest,  and  became 
known  as  Gahva-Ratlriya.  Growing  in  insight,  he  in  a 
short  time  attained  arahantship.  Thereupon  he  went  to 
worship  the  Exalted  One  at  Savatthi.  His  kinsfolk,  hearing 
of  his  coming,  bestowed  liberal  gifts  upon  him.  And  when 
he  wished  to  go  back  to  the  forest,  they  said :  ‘  Sir,  the 
forest  is  full  of  peril  through  the  gadflies  and  mosquitoes. 
Stay  here  !’  But  the  Thera,  devoted  to  detachment,  replied, 
‘  Life  in  the  forest  suits  me,’  and  confessing  anna  he  uttered 
this  verse : 

In  the  great  forest,  in  the  mighty  woods, 
Touched  though  I  be  by  gadfly  and  by  gnat, 

I  yet  would  roam,  like  warrior-elephant, 

In  van  of  battle,  mindful,  vigilant.2  (31) 


XXXII 

Suppiya. 

He  in  this  Buddha-age  was  reborn,  in  consequence  of  his 
actions,3  in  a  despised  class,  as  one  of  a  clan  of  watchmen 
in  a  cemetery  at  Savatthi.  Converted  by  the  preaching 
of  the  Thera  Sopaka  4  his  friend,  he  entered  the  Order  and 
attained  to  the  highest,  declaring  this  in  his  psalm  while  he 
yet  was  striving  for  arahantship : 

1  The  power  of  emitting  fire  and  water  from  any  two  opposed  parts 
of  the  body  respectively  and  simultaneously,  also  of  conjuring  up  a 
figure  moving  differently  from  himself  (Patisambhida,  i.  125).  This  the 
Buddha  (in  post-canonical  works)  is  recorded  to  have  done  at  Savatthi 
( Milinda ,  ii.  247  ;  Sumangala-Vil.,  i.  57  ;  Pham.  Corny.,  iii.  213  ff.). 

2  Recurs  CLXXVIII.,  verse  244. 

3  Through  pride  and  conceit  when  a  bhikkhu  in  the  Order  of  Kassapa 
Buddha.  Apparently  not  the  detractor  of  Dialogues,  i.  1. 

*  Cf.  XXXIII.,  CCXXVII. 


XXXII.  SUPPIYA 


37 


O  would  that  I  who  hourly  waste,  might  change  1 
For  that  which  ne’er  decays — who  ever  burn, 

Might  change  for  that  cool  bliss— e’en  for  the 
Peace 

That  passeth  all,  Safety  beyond  compare  !2  (32) 


XXXIII 


S  o  p  a  k  a. 

(A  Boy-Bhikkhu.) 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savattlh,  of  a  very 
poor  woman.  In  her  travail  his  mother  fell  into  a  long 
deep  swoon,  so  that  her  kinsfolk  said  ‘  She  is  dead !’  And 
they  bore  her  to  the  cemetery,  and  prepared  to  cremate 
the  body.  But  a  spirit  prevented  the  fire  burning  by  a 
storm  of  wind  and  rain,  so  they  went  away.  Then  was 
the  child  born  hale  while  the  mother  died.  And  the  spirit, 
in  human  shape,  took  the  infant  and  placed  it  in  the  watch¬ 
man’s  house,  nourishing  it  for  a  time  with  suitable  food. 
After  that  the  watchman  adopted  it,  and  the  child  grew 
up  with  his  own  son  Suppiya  (Ps.  XXXII.).  And  be¬ 
cause  of  his  birth  in  the  cemetery,  he  became  known  as 
Sopaka,  ‘the  Waif.’3  When  he  was  seven  years  old  it 
came  to  pass  that  the  Exalted  One  early  in  the  morning 
spread  out  his  Net  of  Insight  to  contemplate  what  folk 
might  be  brought  in.  And  seeing  what  the  net  enclosed, 

1  The  Commentary  reads  nimiyay,  and  paraphrases  by parivatteyyay 
cetdpeyyay  ( cf .  Vin.,  iii.  219),  and  concludes  :  ‘Just  as  men,  exchanging 
any  goods  for  which  they  care  not,  are  greatly  taken  by  what  they  get, 
even  so  this  Brother,  caring  not  for  body  or  life  ( jlvitay ),  strove  after 
Nibbana  till  he  won.’  ‘  Cool  bliss  ’  is  nibbuta,  on  which,  and  on 
the  last  clause,  see  Sisters,  p.  19,  n.  4,  and  p.  13,  n.  2,  and  p.  14,  n.  2, 
respectively.  This  is  one  of  the  very  few  psalms  which  resemble  our 
own  anthologies  in  having  a  burden  of  the  quest  not  yet  won. 

2  Ultimate,  perfect  ( anuttaro ). 

3  Cf.  Sutta-Nipata,  verse  137. 


38 


XXXIII.  SOPAKA 


he  went  to  the  cemetery.  The  boy,  impelled  by  his  ante¬ 
cedents,  approached  the  Master  with  a  gladdened  mind  and 
saluted  him.  The  Master  taught  him,  so  that  he  asked 
to  leave  the  world,  and  when  bidden  to  gain  his  father’s 
consent,  fetched  the  latter  to  the  Master.  The  father 
saluted,  and  asked  the  Master  to  admit  the  boy.  And 
the  Master  had  him  admitted,  and  assigned  to  him  the 
study  of  fraternal  love.1  He,  taking  this  exercise  and 
dwelling  in  the  cemetery,  soon  acquired  the  corre¬ 
sponding  jhana.  And  making  that  his  base,2  he  fostered 
insight  and  realized  arahantship.  As  arahant  he  showed 
in  his  verse  to  the  other  bhikkhus  dwelling  there  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  the  love  exercises,  bidding  them  make  no  difference 
between  those  who  were  to  them  friendly,  indifferent,  or 
hostile.  For  all  alike  their  love  should  be  one  and  the 
same  in  its  nature,  and  should  include  all  realms,  all  beings, 
at  all  ages  : 

E’en  as  she  would  be  very  good 

Towards  her  only  child,  her  well-beloved  son, 

So  too  ye  should  be  very  good 

Towards  all  creatures  everywhere  and  every¬ 
one.3  (33) 

1  Cf.  Dialogues ,  ii.  219.  It  is  a  pretty  touch  tl\at  the  boy,  who  as  a 
waif  owed  everything  to  fraternal  love  and  pity,  should  have  been  set 
this  study.  Cf.  Ps.  I. 

2  Compendium ,  p.  62. 

3  This  simile  is  better  known  in  the  form  given  it  in  the  Sutta- 
Nipdta  (verse  149)  and  the  Khuddaka-pdtlia ,  bringing  in  the  loving 
mother  more  explicitly.  Here  the  language  is  so  simple  that  it  really 
lends  probability  to  the  Commentator’s  story  of  the  boy-bhikkhu,  who 
as  a  ‘  waif  ’  had  never  known  a  mother.  I  have  therefore  rendered  it 
as  a  child's  attempt.  ‘  Ye  ’  is  lit.  ‘  one.’ 


XXXIV.  POSIYA 


39 


XXXIY 

Posiya. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthi,  as  the 
son  of  a  very  wealthy  councillor,1  and  the  younger  brother 
of  the  Thera  Sangamaji.2  When  he  was  grown  up  he 
married ;  but  when  a  son  was  born  to  him,  he,  being 
impelled  by  the  order  of  things  belonging  to  the  last  span 
of  life,  grew  anxious  concerning  birth  and  the  like.  So 
he  left  the  world  and  dwelt  alone  in  the  forest,  exercising 
himself  in  the  Four  Truths.  And  soon  after  he  won 
arahantship. 

Then  he  went  to  Savatthi  to  worship  the  Exalted  One, 
and  came  to  his  home.  There  his  former  wife  entertained 
him  and,  unaware  of  his  disposition,  was  desirous  of 
drawing  him  back  by  her  attractions.  The  Thera  think¬ 
ing  ‘  Alas !  the  fool  of  desire  has  designs  even  on  such 
as  me,’  said  no  word,  but  rose  up  and  went  away  into  the 
forest.  And  the  bhikkhus  there  said  to  him :  ‘  Why, 
friend,  you  are  come  back  too  quickty  ;  have  you  not  seen 
your  people  ?’  The  Thera  told  them  what  had  taken  place, 
and  recited  a  verse : 

Best  when  not  near,  both  now  and  evermore, 

Are  such  as  these  for  him  who  understands. 

Forth  from  the  township  to  the  woods  I  went, 
Thence  to  my  home  once  more  I  came ;  but  thence 
Rising  I  gat  me  forth  again,  nor  e’er 
Did  this  same  Posiya  let  fall  a  word.  (34) 

1  On  the  term  setthi,  see  Sisters ,  p.  192,  n.  1.  I  have  in  this  work 
decided  to  use  ‘  councillor  ’  as  expressing,  for  us,  a  burgess  of  some 
official  importance,  head  (sett hi) — e.g.,  of  a  guild,  etc. 

2  See  Uddna ,  i.  8 ;  Netti ,  p.  15C. 


40 


XXXV.  SAMANNAKANI 


XXXY 

Samannakani. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  as  the  son  of  a 
Wanderer,1  and  was  converted  to  the  religious  life  when  he 
saw  the  Exalted  One  perform  the  twin -miracle.2  And 
through  jhana  he  attained  arahantship. 

Now  a  Wanderer  named  Katiyana,  whom  he  had  known 
as  a  layman,  had  lost  all  support  from  the  laity  since  the 
Buddha  had  arisen,  and  was  destitute.  He  came  to  the 
Thera  and  said  :  ‘  You  of  the  Sakiyans,  who  have  won 
much  fame  and  support,  live  happily,  but  we  are  distressed 
and  destitute.  What  should  one  do  to  compass  happi¬ 
ness  both  in  this  life  and  the  next  ?’  The  Thera  said  : 
‘  Happiness  not  of  the  world  : — this,  for  one  who  undergoes 
the  suitable  procedure  to  get  it,  and  who  gets  it,  is  alone  to 
be  called  unqualified  happiness.’  And  to  illustrate  this  by 
his  own  attainment,  he  uttered  this  verse  : 

Happiness  he  who  seeks  may  win  an  he  practise  the 
seeking — 

Honour  he  gaineth  beside,  and  growth  of  renown 
shall  befall  him — 

So  he  but  practise  the  road  called  Straight,3  even  the 
Ariyan, 

The  Noble  Eightfold  Path  whereby  we  may  reach 
salvation.4  (35) 

Paribbajaka  i.e, ,  an  unattached  religicux.  Whether  he  was 
born  before  the  father  left  the  world,  or  after  he  had  lapsed  into  it 
again  (c/.  Sisters ,  Ps.  lxviii.),  is  not  stated. 

2  Cf  p.  36,  n.  1. 

Because  one  has  put  away  all  bodily  and  other  crookedness,’ 
explains  the  Commentary.  I  seem  to  discern  an  echo  of  the  Nikaya 
verse:  TJjulto  ncima  so  mag  go  ( Sayy .,  i.  14;  Sisters,  verse  361) — 
Straight  is  the  name  that  Way  is  called.’  The  Pali  is  in  Grayatrl  metre 
(Vedic). 

4  Amata.  Cf.  XXI. 


xxxvi.  kuma’s  son 


41 


XXXYI 

Kuma’s  Son. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  the  Avanti  country,1  at 
the  town  of  Velukanda  in  the  family  of  a  housefather,  he 
was  called  Nanda.  But  his  mother’s  name  was  Kuma, 
whence  he  was  known  as  Kuma’s  son.  He  entered  the 
Order  after  hearing  the  venerable  Sariputta  preach,  and 
studied  on  the  slope  of  the  frontier  hills  ;  but  it  was  only 
after  he  had  gone  to  hear  the  Exalted  One  that  he  was 
able  so  to  correct  his  exercises,  as  to  realize  arahantship. 
As  arahant  he  saw  that  the  other  bhikkhus  showed  excess 
in  bodily  needs,  and  he  admonished  them  in  the  doctrine, 
saying : 

O  goodly  are  the  things  our  ears  now  hear ! 

O  goodly  is  the  life  we  here  may  lead ! 

O  good  it  is  always  to  lack  a  house ! 2 * * 

Now  questioning  on  things  of  high  import, 

Now  showing  all  due  thanks  and  reverence  : 

Such  is  the  calling  of  the  true  recluse, 

Of  him  who  owneth  naught  of  anything.  (36) 

1  See  Buddhist  India ,  by  Rhys  Davids,  p.  3  /.  It  is  noteworthy 
that  one  of  the  principal  lay-followers  of  the  Buddha  was  a  lady  called 
the  Yelukandiyan  or  -kantikan,  mother  of  Nanda.  This,  however,  was 
probably  Uttara ;  she  can  scarcely  be  our  Kuma,  since  she  is  represented 
as  telling  the  chief  Theras  that  her  only  son  Nanda  had  been  put  to 
death  as  a  boy  by  the  rajas  ( rdjdno ),  or  oligarchs.  Nanda  was  a 
common  name,  and  it  is  possible,  if  we  do  not  impatiently  class  all 
such  references  as  purely  legendary,  that  to  call  one  Nanda  Kumaputta 
was  a  convenient  distinction  among  neighbours.  It  may,  of  course, 
have  reference  to  bina-marriage  descent  (Sayy.,  ii.  236 ;  Ang.,  i.  26,  88, 
164 ;  iii.  336  ;  iv.  63  ;  and  cf.  Dialogues ,  i.  193,  §  5). 

2  An  allusion  to  Sutta-Nipdta,  verse  844.  This  is  discussed  in 

Sayij.y  iii.  9  ff.  ;  ‘lacking  a  house5  is  symbolical  of  ‘not  being 

engrossed  by  objects  and  pleasures  of  sense.5 


XXXVII.  THE  COMRADE  OE  KUMa’s  SON 


XXXVII 

The  Comrade  of  Kuma’s  Son. 

Eeborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  the  town  of  Velukanda, 
of  a  wealthy  family,  and  named  Sudanta — some  say  Vasu- 
loki — he  became  the  dear  friend  of  Kuma’s  son.  When 
the  latter  left  the  world,  he  thought :  ‘  That  can  be  no 
mean  religion  which  Kuma’s  son  has  entered.’  So  he  went 
and  heard  the  Master  preach.  Thereupon  he  wras  filled 
with  a  much  more  fervent  desire  and  entered  the  Order, 
dwelling  with  Kuma’s  son  on  the  frontier  hills  devoted  to 
religious  exercises. 

Now  at  that  time  many  bhikkhus  touring  in  various 
districts,  going  and  coming,  halted  at  that  station,  so  that 
there  was  much  noise.  And  Sudanta,  disturbed  in  his 
concentration  of  mind,  made  his  trouble  the  goad  for  the 
taming  of  his  thoughts,  and  uttered  this  verse  : 

To  divers  regions  back  and  forth  they  fare 
Heedless  of  heart  upon  their  rounds,  and  balk 
The  mind’s  due  concentration.  What,  forsooth, 
Shall  all  this  vagabondage 1  bring  to  pass  ? 

Hence  is  it  meet  that  clamour  be  subdued, 

Nor  harass  him  who  fain  would  meditate.  (37) 


XXXVIII 

Gavampati. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  as  one  of  the  four 
lay-companions  of  the  Thera  Yasa,  who,  when  they  heard 
of  Yasa  s  renunciation,  imitated  him,  and  also  won  ara- 
hantship.2  Thereafter  he  dwelt  in  the  Anjana  Grove  at 

1  Ratthaii cariya,  lit.,  kingdom-touring;  not  a  bad  predecessor  of  our 
‘  globe-trotting.’  It  was  part  of  a  bhikkhu’s  duties,  though  liable  to 
be  abused  or — at  least,  as  here — mismanaged.  Raftliav  is  metrically 
redundant,  but  the  disturbance  in  rhythm  maj'  be  intentional. 

2  See  I  inaya  Texts,  i.  110,  and  below,  CXXXII.  On  Gavampati, 
see  also  Dialogues ,  ii.  373  ;  Sayy.,  v.  436. 


XXXVIII.  GAVAMPATI 


43 


Saketa,  experiencing  the  bliss  of  emancipation.  Now  at 
that  time  the  Exalted  One  came  also  with  a  great  company 
of  bhikkhus  to  the  Anjana  Grove,  and  the  accommodation 
was  insufficient,  many  of  the  bhikkhus  sleeping  around 
the  vihara  on  the  sandbanks  of  the  River  Sarabhu.1  Then 
in  the  middle  of  the  night  the  stream  rose  in  flood,  and  a 
great  cry  arose  from  the  younger  brethren.  The  Exalted 
One  hearing  it,  sent  for  the  venerable  Gavampati,  and 
said  :  ‘  Go,  Gavampati,  arrest  the  rising  stream,  and  put 
the  bhikkhus  at  ease.’  And  the  Thera  by  his  mystic 
power  did  so,  and  stopped  the  stream  afar  so  that  it  stood 
up  like  a  mountain-peak.  Thenceforth  the  might  of  the 
Thera  became  known.  One  day  as  the  Master  sat  teach¬ 
ing  in  the  midst  of  a  great  assembly  he  saw  Gavampati, 
and  in  compassion  for  the  world  praised  his  virtues  in  this 
verse  : 

Who  by  his  might2  reared  up  the  Sarabhu, 

Who  standeth  self-reliant  and  unmoved, 

Who  hath  transcended  every  tie,  Gavampati, 
Him  mighty  seer  the  very  gods  acclaim, 
Surpasser  of  the  coming  back  to  be.3  (38) 


XXXIX 

Tissa. 

He  was  born  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Kapilavatthu,  as 
the  son  of  the  Exalted  One’s  aunt,  and  named  Tissa.4  He 
left  the  world  to  follow  the  Exalted  One,  and  dwelling  in 
a  woodland  settlement,  was  proud  because  of  his  rank,  being 

1  The  present  city  of  Ayodhya  stands  on  a  corner  of  the  site  of  what 
was  once  the  great  city,  24  miles  in  circumference,  of  Saketa,  about 
100  miles  north-north-east  of  Benares.  The  Sarabhu  or  Sarayu  flows 
through  it  into  the  Gharghara,  a  tributary  of  the  Ganges.  Cf.  XXVIII. 

2  The  Commentary  reads  vadanti  (they  say),  instead  of  iddhiyd. 

3  Bhavassapdragurj.  The  former  half  of  the  gatha  is  of  the  Tristubh, 
the  latter  of  the  Jagati  metre. 

4  I.e.,  son  of  Amata  (Amrita),  sister  of  Suddhodana, 


44 


X.  TISSA 


irritable  and  captious  in  his  conduct,  so  that  he  did  not 
do  his  duties  with  zeal.  Then  the  Master,  surveying  him 
one  day  with  celestial  vision  from  afar,  while  he  was  sleep¬ 
ing  with  open  mouth  at  siesta,  came  over  him  above, 
shedding  glory  down  upon  him,  and  wakening  him  with 
these  words : 

As  one  downsmitten  by  impending  sword, 

As  one  whose  hair  and  turban  are  aflame,1 
So  let  the  Brother,  mindful  and  alert, 

Go  forth,  all  worldly  passions  left  behind.  (39) 

When  the  Thera  heard  this,  his  heart  w7as  filled  with 
anguish,  and  he  abode  intent  on  insight.  Noting  this,  the 
Master  taught  him  the  ‘  Sutta  of  Thera  Tissa,’  which  is 
in  the  Sapyutta  collection.2  At  the  close  of  it  Tissa  was 
established  in  arahantship.  And  to  confess  aniia  and 
honour  the  Master,  he  uttered  that  same  verse. 


XL 

Vaddhamana. 

•  • 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Vesali,  in  the  family  of  a 
Licchavi  raja,  he  became  as  a  pious  lad  a  servitor  to  the 
Order.  Later,  after  he  had  been  ordained,  he  also  was 
subject  to  sloth  and  torpor,  and  was  also  aroused  by  the 
Master  with  this  verse  : 

As  one  downsmitten  by  impending  sword, 

As  one  whose  hair  and  turban  are  aflame, 

So  let  the  Brother,  mindful  and  alert, 

Go  forth,  all  lust  of  living3  left  behind.  (40) 

1  On  this  metaphor,  see  Sisters ,  p.  172,  verse  7.  The  Commentary 
has  a  note  on  various  sword-wounds,  but  the  moral  is  simply  the  need 
of  instant  action,  whether  to  heal  or  to  extinguish.  See  verse  1,162/. 

2  Sayy.,  iii.  106.  Tissa  confesses  to  the  brethren  his  mental  sluggish¬ 
ness  and  distaste  for  religion.  They  bring  him  to  the  Master.  The  Homily, 
with  catechism,  is  in  keeping  with  the  above.  In  the  Dhamviajpada 
Corny,  (i.  37)  he  is  called  Thulla -Tissa  (Fat  Tissa).  Cf.  Sayy.,  i.  13. 

3  Lit.,  of  becoming.  For  satto  read  sato. 


XLI.  SIRIVADDHA 

•  • 


45 


PART  V 
XLI 

Sirivaddha. 

•  • 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Rajagaha,  in  the 
house  of  a  prosperous  brahmin.  Previous  causes  induced 
him,  when  King  Bimbisara  met  the  Master,  to  take  orders, 
and  he  went  to  a  certain  forest  near  the  hills  Vebhara  and 
Pandava,  and  there  dwelt  devoted  to  religious  exercises. 
And  there  arose  once  a  great  storm,  and  the  lightnings 
entered  the  cave.  But  the  wind  from  the  pregnant  clouds 
assuaged  the  heat  and  fever  oppressing  the  Thera,  so  that 
by  the  more  suitable  temperature  his  heart  grew  concen¬ 
trated,  and  he  was  able  to  exercise  such  insight  that  he 
won  arahantship.  So  he,  with  anna  as  a  pretext,  broke 
forth  into  this  utterance  touching  himself : 

The  lightnings  flash  e’en  in  the  rocky  cave, 
Smiting  Vebhara’s  crest  and  Pandava,1 
And,  in  the  mountain-bosom  hid,  a  child 
Of  that  incomparable  Master  sits 
Ardent  in  contemplative  ecstasy.  (41) 


XLII 

Khadira- V  aniy  a. 

(Revata.) 

He  was  reborn,  in  this  Buddha-age,  in  the  kingdom  of 
Magadha,  at  the  village  of  Nalaka,  as  the  son  of  Rupasarl, 
the  brahminee.  When  he  was  grown  up  his  mother  desired 

1  Two  of  the  five  crests  in  the  group  of  hill-ranges  rising  above 
Rajagaha  (Rajgir).  The  former  name  persists  as  Baibhara  or  Vaibhara 
(see  illustration),  which  rises  to  the  East.  The  last  line  expands  the 
one  word jhayati,  a  wrord  meaning,  in  Pali,  both  ‘burns’  and  ‘meditates 
in  jhana.’  Cf.  verse  1,167. 


46 


XLII.  KHADIRA-VAN1YA 


he  should  marry,  but  he  heard  of  Sariputta’s1  renunciation, 
and  said :  ‘  If  my  elder  brother  Upatissa  has  laid  aside  this 
wealth,  I  too  will  vomit  back  his  vomit,’  and  he  went  to 
the  bhikkhus  and,  announcing  himself  as  the  younger 
brother  of  the  ‘  General  of  the  Norm,’ 2  he  asked  for  ordina¬ 
tion.  When  he  had  won  arahantship  in  the  Acacia  Wood,3 
he  went  to  Savatthi  to  salute  the  Exalted  One  and  his 
brother,  staying  a  few  days  at  the  Jeta  Grove.  Then  the 
Master,  seated  in  the  conclave  of  the  Ariyans,  assigned 
‘  Eevata  the  Acacia-woodlander  the  first  place  among  forest 
bhikkhus.’4 

At  another  time  he  went  to  his  native  village  and  fetched 
away  his  three  nephews,  the  sons  of  his  three  sisters,  Cala, 
Upacala,  and  Sisupacala,5  named  respectively,  Cala,  Upacala, 
and  Sisupacala,  and  ordained  them.  One  day  the  Thera 
was  ill,  and  Sariputta  heard  of  it,  and  said  :  ‘  I  will  make 
inquiry  after  Revata’s  state  and  treatment.’  And  seeing 
him  coming  far  off,  Revata  admonished  the  three  novices 
to  be  heedful,  saying  : 

Come,  Csla,  and  you,  Upacala  too, 

Sisupacala  also,  take  good  heed, 

Be  on  your  guard,  for  he  who  comes  to  you 
Is  as  a  wondrous  archer  splitting  hairs.  (43) 

And  when  they  heard  him  the  novices  went  forth  to 
meet  the  General  of  the  Norm,  and  while  he  conversed 
with  their  uncle,  sat  near  composed  and  intent.  When  he 
approached  them,  they  rose  up,  bowed,  and  remained  stand¬ 
ing.  The  Thera  asked  them  at  which  vihara  they  were 

1  Rupasarl’s  relation  to  Upatissa  Sariputta  ( i.e .,  son  of  Sari),  the 
chief  Thera,  is  given  in  Dhp.  Com.,  i.  88,  and  below  CCLIX. 

2  The  usual  title  of  Sariputta. 

3  Ivhadira  ;  Acacia  Catechu,  according  to  Childers. 

4  Ang.,  i.  24.  For  Revata’s  longer  poem  see  CCXLIY. 

5  See  Sisters ,  Ps.  lix.,  lx.,  lxi.  In  the  absence  of  the  Commentary, 
Dr.  Neumann  has  assumed  that  the  three  masculine  vocatives  in  the 
text  are  feminine,  and  that  Revata  is  addressing  his  sisters.  Pronounce 
Cal-  as  Chal-  in  all  these  names. 


XLIII.  SUMANGALA 


47 


each  dwelling,  and  they  replied  :  ‘  At  such  an  one.’  Then, 
instructing  the  boys,  he  said  :  ‘  My  little  brother  has  indeed 
taught  the  lesser  duties  belonging  to  the  Norm,’  and  thus 
praising  Eevata,  he  departed. 


XLIII 

Sumangala. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  a  hamlet  near 
Savatthi,  in  a  poor  family.  Grown  up,  he  earned  his 
living  in  the  fields,  furnished  with  a  little  sickle,  plough, 
and  spade.  Now  one  day  when  King  Pasenadi  of  Kosala 
was  bestowing  a  great  offering  on  the  Exalted  One  and 
the  Order,  he  went,  taking  milk  and  butter,  along  with 
men  who  were  taking  woodwork.  Seeing  the  attentions 
and  honours  paid  to  the  Brethren  and  Sisters,  he  thought : 

4  These  Sakiyan  recluses  live  in  sheltered  lodgings  and  in 
delicate  robes — what  if  I  too  were  now  to  leave  the  world  ?’ 
And  he  approached  a  certain  great  Thera  and  made  known 
his  intention.  The  Thera  out  of  compassion  admitted 
him,  and  sent  him  into  the  forest  with  an  exercise.  But  in 
solitude  he  pined  and  wavered,  and  departed  to  his  native 
village.  Then  as  he  went  along  he  saw  the  peasants 
ploughing  the  fields  in  soiled  garments,  covered  with  dust 
blown  by  hot  winds.  And  he  thought :  ‘  Truly  these  fellows 
earn  their  living  in  great  misery  !’  And  feeling  anxious, 
his  insight  approaching  maturity,  he  set  himself  to  do  the 
exercises  that  had  been  given  him,  going  to  the  roots  of  a 
tree,  and  biding  in  seclusion.  Thus  he  finally  won  arahant- 
ship.  Thereafter,  to  celebrate  his  own  emancipation  from 
the  ills  of  life,  he  broke  forth  into  this  psalm : 

Well  rid,  well  rid,  O  excellently  rid 
Am  I  from  these  three  crooked  tasks  and  tools, 
Rid  o’  my  reaping  with  your  sickles,  rid 
Of  trudging  after  ploughs,  and  rids  my  back 
Of  bending  o’er  these  wretched  little  spades. 


48 


XLIV.  SANU 


Though  they  he  ever  here,  ay,  ever  here, 
Enough  of  them,  I  say,  for  me,  enough ! 
Go  meditate,  Sumangala,  ay,  go 
And  meditate,  Sumangala,  and  bide 
Earnest  and  diligent,  Sumangala  ! 1  (43) 


XL  IV 

Sanu. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  SavatthI,  in  the 
family  of  a  lay-follower,  after  the  father  had  left  his  home. 
The  mother,  naming  him  Sanu,  brought  him  when  he  was 
seven  years  old  to  the  bhikkhus  for  ordination,  deeming 
she  would  thus  ensure  for  him  supreme  happiness.  Now 
Sanu  the  Novice  became  very  learned,  a  teacher  of  doctrine, 
and  practised  in  the  jhana  of  love,  being  beloved  by 
gods  and  men.  And  as  we  know  from  the  Sanu-Sutta 
( Sayyutta  Nikaya,  i.  108)  his  mother,  in  his  previous  birth, 
was  a  Yakkha.2 3  Now  as  time  went  on  Sanu  lost  his  intel¬ 
lectual  discernment  and  grew  distraught,  and  longed  to  go 
a -roaming.  Then  his  previous  mother  perceived  this,  and 
warned  his  human  mother  saying  :  ‘  Your  son  has  a  fancy 
to  roam,  wherefore  bid  him  rouse  himself.  Tell  him  what 
the  Yakkhas  say : 

Do  nought  of  evil ,  open  or  concealed , 

If  evil  thou  now  doest  or  wilt  do, 

Thou  It  not  escape  from  ill,  e'en  though  thou  flee.2, 

1  This  curious  and  racy  verse  runs  into  four  lines  of  text,  is  of  no 
assignable  metre  or  symmetry,  and  would  seem  to  represent  a  Wait- 
Whitman  esque  effort  of  a  peasant -bhikkhu  to  turn  out  rough-hewn 
the  utterance  of  his  emotions.  As  such,  it  is  of  striking  interest,  and 
is  paralleled  in  homeliness  and  verve  by  the  verse  of  Mutta  ( Sisters , 
Ps.  xi.),  herself  of  humble  circumstances,  rejoicing  to  be  rid  of  her 
special  trio  of  crooked  things — husband,  quern,  and  churn. 

2  The  Yakkhas,  denizens  of  the  jungle,  and  man-eaters  ;  conceivably 
the  legendary  survivors  of  aboriginals,  but,  as  here,  invested  with  more 
than  human  intuition. 

3  Sayy.,  ii.  271  ;  TJdana,  v.  4  ;  Sisters,  verses  246,  247. 


XLIV.  SANU 


49 


Thus  saying,  the  Yakkha-mother  disappeared.  But  when 
the  human  mother  heard,  she  was  overwhelmed  with  grief. 
Then  Sanu  the  novice,  taking  his  robe  and  bowl,  set  out 
early  and  came  to  his  mother.  At  sight  of  her  sorrow  he 
said  :  ‘  Mother,  why  do  you  weep  ?’  When  she  told  him 
why,  he  said  this  verse  : 

Mother,  they  weep  for  the  dead,  or  the  living  they  may 
not  see. 

But  for  him,  O  mother,  who  lives,  who  is  here,  why 
mournest  thou  me  ?  (44) 

His  mother  answered  him  from  the  Suttas,  “  This  is 
death,  0  bhikkhus,  that  one  should  reject  the  training  and 
turn  again  to  lower  things,’1  and  with  this  verse : 

They  mourn  for  son  who  lieth  dead ,  or  him 
B  ho  is  alive  but  whom  they  no  more  see , 

And  him  they  mourn ,  who  though  he  did  renounce 
The  world ,  my  son,  doth  hither  come  again, 

For  though  he  live  again,  yet  is  he  dead. 

Drawn  forth  from  burning  embers,  O  my  dear, 

Dost  thou  on  embers  wish  to  fall  again  ? 

When  he  heard  her,  anguish  seized  on  Sanu  the  Novice, 
and  making  firm  his  insight,  he  soon  won  arahantship.  And 
thereupon  thinking,  ‘  My  victory  is  due  to  that  verse,’  he 
repeated  it  as  his  psalm.2 


XLY 

Ramanlyaviharin . 

Beborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Rajagaha,  as  the  son  of  a 
leading  citizen,  he  lived  in  youthful  wantonness.  One  day 
he  saw  the  king’s  officers  arresting  an  adulterer,  and  grow- 

1  SaVV->  h.  271 ;  Sisters ,  verses  246,  247  ;  the  verse  is  from  Sany. 
i.  209. 

2  The  Dliammapada  Commentary ,  discussing  verse  326,  has,  as  its 
subject,  Sanu  and  his  mother.  His  own  question  was  the  penultimate, 
though  not  the  proximate,  cause  of  his  victory. 


4 


50 


XLV.  RAMANIYAVIHARIN 


ing  agitated,  he  listened  to  the  Master  teaching,  and  left 
the  world.  As  a  bhikkhu,  but  still  susceptible  to  fleshly 
lusts,  he  made  himself  a  well-garnished  chamber,1  well 
furnished  as  to  food  and  drink,  seat  and  couch  ;  and  so  he 
ever  dwelt.  For  this  reason  he  was  known  as  Eamaniya- 
viharin  (Pleasant-lodge  Brother).  But  his  previous  in¬ 
dulgence  making  the  recluse’s  life  too  hard  for  him,  he  felt 
unworthy  to  accept  the  offerings  of  the  faithful  and  said  : 
‘I  will  roam.’  On  his  way  he  sat  down  beneath  a  tree. 
And  as  carts  were  passing  by  on  the  road,  one  ox  being 
weary  stumbled  at  a  rough  place  and  fell.  The  carter 
loosened  its  yoke,  gave  it  hay  and  water  and  so  allayed  its 
fatigue ;  then  he  harnessed  it  again  and  they  went  on. 
And  the  Thera  thought :  ‘  Even  as  this  ox  having  stumbled 
has  arisen  and  draws  his  own  load,  so  doth  it  behove  me, 
who  once  have  stumbled  in  the  forest  of  vice,  to  arise  and 
carry  out  the  duty  of  a  recluse.’  And  thoughtfully  turning 
back,  he  told  what  he  had  done  and  seen  to  Thera  Upali,2 
was  by  him  absolved  from  his  fault,  and  helped  back  into 
right  ways.  And  not  long  after  he  attained  arahantship. 
Thereafter  enjoying  the  bliss  of  freedom,  he  set  forth  his 
lapse  and  return  in  this  verse  : 

E’en  though  he  trip  and  fall,  the  mettled  brute 
Of  noble  breed  will  steadfast  stand  once  more. 

So  look  on  me  as  one  who  having  learned 
Of  Him,  the  All-Enlightened  One,  have  gained 
True  insight,  am  become  of  noble  breed, 

And  of  the  Very  Buddha  very  child.3  (45) 

1  Or  well  polished,  susamatthav . 

2  See  Ps.  CLXXX.  As  the  greatest  expert  in  Vinaya,  or  the  dis¬ 
cipline  of  the  Order,  Upali  (if  it  be  this  Upali  who  is  meant)  was 
eminently  qualified  to  judge  respecting  his  lapse,  and  to  counsel  him. 

3  As  this  verse  stands  in  the  PTS  version,  it  is  incomplete.  The 
Commentary  leads  us  to  suppose  that  it  should  be  completed,  as  is  the 
.case,  in  verse  174,  q.v. 


XL VI.  SAMI DD HI 


51 


XL  VI 
Samiddhi. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Bajagaha,  in  a 
clansman’s  family.1  From  the  time  he  was  born  the 
wealth  of  his  family  increased,  and  he  himself,  handsome 
and  virtuous,  became  known  as  Samiddhi  (Prospero).  He 
saw  the  power  of  the  Buddha  when  the  latter  was  met 
by  Bimbisara,2  won  faith  in  him,  and  left  the  world, 
abiding  devoted  to  meditation.  When  the  Exalted  One 
was  staying  at  the  Tapoda  Park,3  Samiddhi  one  day  was 
musing  in  exquisite  joy  on  his  good  fortune  as  a  bhikkhu. 
Then  Mara  the  Evil  One,  unable  to  bear  it,  made  a  fearful 
noise  near  him,  as  if  the  very  earth  were  splitting.  The 
Thera  told  this  to  the  Exalted  One.  The  latter  bade  him 
persist  where  he  was  and  think  no  more  about  it.  He 
obeyed,  and  soon  after  won  arahantship.  Mara,  unaware 
of  it,  once  more  created  a  fearful  noise.  But  the  Thera 
felt  no  fear  :  Lndaunted  by  all  such  Maras,  not  once  have 

I  turned  a  hair!’  And  confessing  anna,  he  uttered  this 
verse : 

In  ti  list  ancl  hope  forth  from  my  home  I  came 
Into  the  homeless  life.  And  there  in  me 
Have  mindfulness  and  insight  grown,  and  tense 
And  well  composed  my  heart  and  mind.  Make  thou 
Whatever  shams  thou  list,  thou’lt  harm  me  not.  (46) 

And  Mara,  thus  rebuked,  said,  ‘  The  recluse  knows  me,’  and 
vanished  from  that  place. 

1  Kulagehe.  Cf.  Rhys  Davids,  Buddhist  India ,  pp.  17-22. 

2  Vinaya  Texts ,  i.  136. 

This  episode  is  related  in  nearly  the  same  words,  and  with  the 
same  gatha,  in  the  Mara-Sapyutta  ( Sayy .,  i.  119  /.,  p.  91),  but  the 
geography  is  a  little  halting.  In  the  Nikaya  the  locality  is  Silavati  of 
the  Sakiyans  ;  the  Tapoda  Park  was  on  the  river  of  that  name  at 
Bajagaha.  Samiddhi,  in  the  double  role  of  Adonis  and  Galahad,  is 
the  subject  of  the  f  Samiddhi- jataka  ’  ( Jataka ,  ii.,  No.  167). 


52 


XL VII.  UJ.TAYA 


XL  VII 

Uj  jaya. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Bajagaha,  as  the 
son  of  a  brahmin  graduate.1  Growrn  up  and  proficient  in 
the  Three  Vedas,  he  saw  no  kernel  in  them,  and  being 
urged  by  maturity  of  conditions,  he  went  to  the  Bamboo 
Grove,  and  when  he  had  heard  the  Master  preach,  he  left 
the  world.  Meditating  in  the  forest  on  ethical  conduct,  he 
was  not  long  in  winning  arahantship.  Thereupon  he 
approached  the  Master,  saluted  him,  seated  himself  on 
one  side  and,  by  praising  the  Exalted  One,  confessed 
anna  in  this  verse  : 

Buddha  the  Wake,  the  Hero  hail !  all  hail  !2 

Thou  who  from  every  bond  art  wholly  free ! 

Strong  in  the  lore  I  learnt  of  thee,  I  live  3 

From  fourfold  venom  cleansed,  sane,  immune.4  (47) 


XL  VIII 

Sanjaya. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age,  at  Bajagaha,  as  the 
son  of  a  wealthy  brahmin.  Grown  up,  he  followed  the 
example  of  Brahmayu,  Pokkharasati  and  othei  well-known 
brahmins,  who  found  faith  in  the  Master  and  reached  the 
First  Path.  Later  he  entered  the  Order  and  acquired  the 

1  Sotthiya  brahmana  (Sansk.  srotriya ),  ‘one  who  had  graduated  in 
the  sacred  tradition.’ 

2  See  Sisters,  verse  157. 

3  More  literally,  1  In  thy  lore  a  liver  I  live.’ 

4  I.e.,  from  the  four  Asavas,  or  poisons  or  intoxicants— sensuality, 
(love  of)  rebirth,  opinion  or  speculation,  ignorance  ( Compendium 
p.  227). 


XLIX.  RAMANEYYAKA  53 

six  abhinnas.  Then,  confessing  anna,  he  uttered  this 
verse : 

Since  I  went  forth  from  home  to  homeless  life, 
Ne’er  have  I  harboured  conscious  wish  or  plan 
Un-Ariyan,  or  linked  with  enmity.1  (48) 


XLIX 

Ramaneyyaka. 

Eeborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  SavatthI  in  a  wealthy 
family,  his  heart  was  moved  when  the  Jeta  Grove  was 
presented,2  and  he  left  the  world.  Dwelling  in  the  forest 
he  meditated  on  ethical  conduct,  and,  because  of  his  attain¬ 
ments  and  charm,  he  became  called  Ramaneyyaka  (Gratus, 
Gratulus). 

Now  one  day  Mara  the  Evil  One,  wishing  to  disturb  him, 
made  a  fearful  noise.  The  Thera,  hearing  it,  was  with  his 
habitual  courage  unafraid,  and  knew  it  was  Mara.  And 
to  show  his  contempt  he  uttered  this  verse : 

Not  all  the  clitter-clatter  of  your  noise, 

No  more  than  chirp  and  squeal  of  forest  sounds,3 
Avail  to  make  pulse  throb  or  mind  distraught, 

For  one  the  aim  to  which  my  heart  is  given.  (49) 

This  verse  became  the  Thera’s  confession  of  anna. 

1  Gf.  verses  603,  645.  Pokkharasati  and  other  brahmins  are  named 
as  adherents  in  the  Vasettha  Sutta  ( Satta-Nipata ,  iii.  9),  but  Sanjaya 
is  not  mentioned.  This  is  not  the  teacher  of  Sariputta  (CCLIX.). 

2  Cf.  p.  4 ;  Sisters ,  p.  60. 

3  The  limited  range,  as  yet,  of  Pali  lexicography  makes  it  difficult 
to  follow  the  Commentary’s  elucidation  of  sippika.  But  that  the 
Thera  contemptuously  likens  Mara’s  ‘  fearful  noise  ’  to  minor  forest 
sounds,  such  as  those  emitted  by  monkeys  and  squirrels,  is  obvious. 
The  gatha,  barely  stated,  is  thus :  As  to  the  x  y  noise  and  the  0  sounds, 
that  does  not  make  ‘  throb  my  heart,  for  devotion  to  unity  is  mine.’ 


54 


L.  VIM  A  LA 


L 

Vimala. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Rajagaha,  of  a 
wealthy  family,  and  (because  of  a  wish  he  had  uttered  over 
a  pious  act  when  Kassapa  was  Buddha)  his  body  was  as 
pure  as  a  dewdrop  on  a  lotus-leaf,  or  as  that  of  the  Bodhisat 
in  his  last  birth.  Wherefore  he  was  named  Yimala  (Im- 
maculatus).  When  grown  up  he  was  filled  with  faith  on 
seeing  the  Buddha  at  Rajagaha,1  and  leaving  the  world, 
took  a  form  of  study  and  went  to  dwell  in  a  mountain  cave 
in  Kosala. 

Now  one  day  a  vast  storm-cloud  spread  over  the  firma¬ 
ment  and  the  rain  fell,  allaying  heat  and  feverishness,  so 
that  the  Thera  was  able  to  concentrate  till  he  had  won 
arahantship.  Thereupon  rejoicing  over  his  accomplished 
task,  he  broke  forth  in  this  psalm : 

The  burdened  earth  is  sprinkled  by  the  rain, 

The  winds  blow  cool,  the  lightnings  roam  on  high. 
Eased  and  allayed  tlT  obsessions  of  the  mind, 

And  in  my  heart  the  spirit’s  mastery.2  (50) 

This  verse  was  the  Thera’s  confession  of  anna. 


PART  VI 
LI-LIV 

Godhika,  Subahu,  Valliya,  Uttiya. 

In  the  time  of  our  Buddha,  these  four,  companions  in 
a  former  birth  when  Kassapa  Buddha  was  on  earth,  were 
reborn  at  Pava3  as  the  sons  of  four  Malla  rajas,4  and  there 

1  Cf.  Pss.  XLI.,  XL VI. 

2  Lit.,  ‘  the  heart  (consciousness)  of  me  is  well  composed.’ 

3  See  Dialogues ,  ii.  136 

4  Among  Mallas,  Koliyans,  Liccliavis,  Sakiyans,  every  clansman 
was  called  a  raja. 


LI.-LIV.  GODHIKA,  SUBAHU,  VALLIYA,  UTTIYA  55 

was  whole-hearted  friendship  between  them.  They  went 
on  some  embassy  to  the  King  at  Kapilavatthu.  At  that 
time  the  Master  too  had  gone  thither,  and  was  staying 
in  the  Banyan  Park,  where  he  convinced  the  Sakiyan  rajas 
by  his  twin-miracle.1  Then  the  four  saw  the  same  and 
believed.  They  entered  the  Order,  and  not  long  after 
attained  arahantship  with  thorough  mastery  of  the  letter 
and  spirit  of  the  Norm.  Now  after  they  had  received  much 
honour  and  support  from  the  King  and  his  ministers,  they 
dwelt  in  the  forest.  Then  King  Bimbisara,  when  they  went 
to  Bajagaha,  called  on  them  and  invited  them  to  spend  the 
rains,  building  for  each  of  them  a  chalet ,  but  carelessly 
omitting  to  have  the  huts  roofed.  So  the  Theras  dwelt 
in  those  huts  unsheltered.  But  at  the  time  of  the 
rains,  the  god  rained  not.2  And  the  king,  wondering 
thereat,  remembered  his  neglect,  and  had  the  chalets 
thatched  with  plaster  and  painted,  and  held  an  opening 
festival,  besides  giving  gifts  to  the  Order.  The  Theras  did 
the  King  the  favour  of  entering,  and  forthwith  attained 
to  the  suffusion  of  universal  love.  Then  from  the  north  and 
the  east  arose  a  great  storm-cloud,  and  just  as  the  Theras 
emerged  from  their  ecstasy,  the  rain  fell.  Then  Godhika, 
aroused  by  the  thunder  of  the  storm,  uttered  this  verse  : 

God  rains  as  ’twere  a  melody  most  sweet. 

Snug  is  my  little  hut,  sheltered,  well-roofed. 

The  heart  of  me  is  steadfast  and  at  peace. 

Now  an  it  pleaseth  thee  to  rain,  god,  rain !  (51) 

And  Subahu : 

God  rains  as  ’twere  a  melody  most  sweet. 

Snug  is  my  little  hut,  sheltered,  well-roofed, 

Well  hath  my  mind  the  body’s  nature  grasped.3 

Now  an  it  pleaseth  thee  to  rain,  god,  rain  !  (52) 

1  See  p.  36,  n.  1. 

2  The  usual  idiom  for  ‘it  rained’  (of.  I.).  The  Commentary  again 
paraphrases  ‘  deva  ’  by  rain-cloud  ( megha ),  without  Pajjunna.  The 
metre  of  these  rain-verses  is  of  a  peculiar  rippling  rhythm.  I  cannot 
allocate  it. 

3  Lit.  :  ‘  Well  composed  is  the  mind  with  respect  to  the  senses.’ 


56 


LV.  ANJANA-VANIYA 


And  Yalliya : 

God  rains  as  ’twere  a  melody  most  sweet. 

Snug  is  my  little  hut,  sheltered,  well-roofed. 
Herein  earnest  and  strenuous  I  dwell. 

Now  an  it  pleaseth  thee  to  rain,  god,  rain  !  (53) 

And  Uttiya : 

God  rains  as  ’twere  a  melody  most  sweet. 

Snug  is  my  little  hut,  sheltered,  well-roofed. 

Herein  I  dwell  unmated  and  alone.1 

Now  an  it  pleaseth  thee  to  rain,  god,  rain  !  (54) 


LY 

Anjana-vaniya.2 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Yesali,  of  the  family 
of  a  raja3  of  the  Yajjians.  When  he  was  grown  up,  a 
threefold  panic  had  arisen  in  the  Yajjian  territory — to  wit, 
the  fear  of  drought,  of  sickness,  and  of  non-human  foes. 
This  is  all  told  in  the  Commentary  on  the  Ratana-Sutta.4 
When  the  Exalted  One  quieted  the  panic  at  Yesali,  and  a 
great  concourse  heard  him  preach,  this  raja’s  son  heard 
him  also,  and  winning  faith,  left  the  world. 

When  he  had  fulfilled  the  preliminary  training,  he  dwelt 
in  the  Anjana  Wood  at  Saketa.  And  when  the  rains  drew 
near,  he  procured  a  worn  castaway  couch,  and  placing  it 
on  four  stones  and  enclosing  it  above  and  around  with 
grasses,  he  set  up  a  door  to  it,  and  so  got  a  sheltered 

1  Adutiyo  can  mean  this,  or  else  ‘  free  from  craving.’  Cf.  verse 
896,  n. 

2  The  Commentary  has  Ahjanavanira. 

3  On  rajas,  see  above,  LI. 

4  Or  Jewel  Discourse,  Sutta- Nijpdta  and  Kkuddaka-Pathaj  an 
interesting  remark,  if  the  Commentary  he  refers  to  is  the  Paramattha- 
jotikd.  I  have  found  no  canonical  account  of  this  panic. 


LVI.  KUTIVIHARIN 


57 


retreat  for  the  rainy  season.  After  only  one  month  his 
strenuous  study  won  for  him  arahantship.  Thereafter, 
feeling  the  bliss  of  emancipation,  he  roused  himself, 
and  contemplating  his  victory  with  rapture  uttered 
this  verse : 

Deep  in  the  leafy  glades  of  An j ana 
My  couch  into  a  little  hut  I  made. 

The  threefold  wisdom  have  I  made  my  own, 

And  all  the  Buddha’s  ordinance  is  done.1  (55) 


LYI 

Kutiviharin  2 

His  story  (in  this  life)  is  like  that  of  Anjana-vaniya,  with 
this  difference :  while  striving  for  insight  he  was  walking 
by  the  fields,  and  took  shelter  from  the  rain  in  the  little 
empty  hut  of  the  field- watchman,  and  there  won  arahant¬ 
ship.  Thereupon  the  watchman  came  and  said  :  ‘  Who  is 
in  the  hut?’  The  answer  was :  ‘A  bhikkhu  is  in  the  hut,’ 
and  the  rest  of  the  verse : 

Who’s  in  my  little  hut  ?  A  brother  ’tis, 

Who  in  thy  little  hut,  all  passions  tamed, 

Hath  throughly  set  his  mind.  Know  this,  O 
friend, 

’Twas  not  for  naught  thou  mad’st  thy  little 
hut !  (56) 

Then  the  watchman  said :  ‘  Luck  indeed  for  me,  good 
luck  indeed  is  mine,  that  your  honour  should  have  come 
into  my  little  hut  and  be  sitting  there  !’ 

And  the  Exalted  One  heard  their  converse  by  his  celestial 

1  Verse  24,  n.  3. 

2  I.e.,  hut-dweller ;  in  the  Commentary  Kutivihariya. 


58 


LVII.  KUTIVIHARIN 


hearing,  and  discerned  the  watchman’s  pleasure.  And  he 
addressed  these  verses  to  him  : 

Within  the  hut  a  brother  dzvells,  peace  in  his  heart, 
purged  of  all  taint. 

Fruit  of  this  deed  shall  be  to  thee  :  lord  of  the  gods 
thou  It  come  to  be 

Six  tunes,  ay,  seven,  lord  of  the  gods,  ruler  over  celestial 
realms, 

Thereafter  all  thy  passions  tamed,  a  Silent  Buddha  1 
thou  shalt  be. 

From  that  time  the  Thera  began  to  be  called  Kutiviharin. 

LVII 

Kutiviharin  (2). 

His  story  resembles  that  of  the  Anjana  Wood  Thera,  with 
this  difference :  When  he  had  left  the  world  under  similar 
circumstances,  he  pursued  his  religious  studies  in  a  very 
old  hut.  And  he  thought :  ‘  This  old  hut  is  now  rotten ; 
I  ought  to  make  another.’  So  he  turned  his  mind  to  new 
action.2  Then  a  spirit,  seeking  salvation,  sought  to  agitate 
him  by  uttering  this  verse,  simple  in  words  but  profound  in 
meaning : 

This  was  an  ancient  hut,  say’st  thou  ?  To  build 
Another  hut,  a  new  one,  is  thy  wish  ? 

O  cast  away  the  longing  for  a  hut ! 

New  hut  will  bring  new  pain,  brother,  to  thee.3  (57) 

When  he  heard  these  words,  the  Thera  grew  anxious, 
and  with  effort  and  endeavour  establishing  insight,  soon 
won  arahantship.  Thereupon  he  repeated  the  verse  as 
that  which  had  spurred  him  on  to  victory,  and  as  the  con¬ 
fession  of  his  anna.  Because  he  had  attained  while  in  the 
hut,  he,  too,  became  known  as  Kutiviharin. 

1  Pacceka-buddha.  See  Sisters,  p.  11,  n.  4. 

2  Karima,  karma. 

3  Cf.  Sarabhanga,  CCXXVIII.  ‘  New  hut  ’  symbolizes  rebirth. 


LVIII.  RAMANIYAKUTIKA 

•  • 


59 


LVIII 

Ramanlyakutika. 

His  story  resembles  that  of  the  Anjana-Woodlander,  with 
this  difference :  he  dwelt  in  a  hut  beside  a  hamlet  in  the 
Vajjian  territory.  It  was  a  pretty  pleasing  little  chalet, 
with  floor  and  walls  well  prepared,  surrounded  by  park 
and  tank,  and  with  its  enclosure  of  smooth  pearly  sand. 
And  the  Thera  s  excellent  virtues  enhanced  its  attractive¬ 
ness.  He  there  won  arahantship,  and  there  continued  to 
dwell.  Now  when  people  came  to  see  the  vihara  (settle¬ 
ment),  they  could  see  the  hut.  One  day  a  few  fast  women 
came  by,  and  seeing  the  attractiveness  of  the  hut  said  : 

*  The  recjluse  living  there  might  be  a  youth  we  could 
fascinate.’  So  they  accosted  him,  saying:  ‘Delightful, 
sir,  is  your  dwelling-place.  We  too  are  delightful  to  see, 
just  in  the  prime  of  our  youth,’  and  they  began  to  show 
off  their  raiment  and  so  forth.  But  the  Thera  set  forth 
his  passionless  state  in  this  verse : 

Delightful  is  my  little  hut,  the  gift 

Most  fair  of  faithful,  pious  folk. 

What  need  of  maidens  then  have  I  ?  Nay,  go 

Thither  to  them,  ye  women,  who  have  need  of 
you.  (58) 

By  this  ‘not  needing’  saying,  the  declaration  of  the 
Thera’s  arahantship  is  implied. 


LIX 

Kosalaviharin. 

His  story  resembles  that  of  the  Anjana-Woodlander,  with 
this  difference :  after  his  novitiate,  he  dwelt  in  the  forest 
by  a  village  in  the  kingdom  of  Kosala,  near  the  dwelling  of 
a  lay  adherent.  The  latter,  seeing  him  camped  under  a 


60 


RIX.  KOSALAVIHARIN 


tree,  made  a  little  hut  and  gave  it  him.  There  the  Thera 
attained  arahantship.  Then  filled  with  rapture  at  his 
emancipation,  he  uttered  this  psalm : 

Strong  in  my  faith  1  I  left  the  world.  Now  here 
Within  the  woods  a  hut  is  made  for  me ; 

And  I  with  zeal  and  ardour  meditate, 

With  watchful  wit  and  clarity  of  mind.  (59) 

This  was  his  confession  of  anna,  and  because  he  dwelt 
so  long  in  Kosala,  he  became  known  as  the  Kosala  settler. 


LN 


Sivali. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  as  the  son  of  Sup¬ 
pavasa,  the  king’s  daughter.2 * *  When  his  mother  was  not 
able  to  bring  forth  and  lay  seven  days  in  great  suffering, 
she  said  to  her  husband  :  ‘  Before  I  die  I  will  give  a  gift.’ 
And  she  sent  him  to  the  Master,  saying  :  ‘  Go  tell  of  my 
state  to  the  Master,  and  invite  him  ;  and  what  he  says, 
mark  well  and  come  and  tell  it  me.’  He  did  her  bidding, 
and  the  Master  said :  ‘  May  Suppavasa,  daughter  of  the 
Koliyas,  be  happy.  May  she,  happy  and  healthy,  give 
birth  to  a  healthy  child.’  The  raja  heard,  saluted  the 
Exalted  One  and  set  out  for  the  village.  Even  before  he 
came,  Suppavasa  was  delivered  of  a  son.  The  persons 

1  ‘When  I  saw  the  might  of  the  Exalted  One  at  Vesall,  I  thought  : 
“Absolutely  able  to  guide  is  this  doctrine  and  ordinance;  therefore 
shall  I  verily  through  this  attainment  be  set  free  from  old  age  and 
death.”  And  because  of  the  faith  thus  arisen,  I  went  forth5  (Com¬ 
mentary).  The  last  two  lines  in  the  stanza  are  an  expansion  of  four 
adjectives,  the  sentence  lacking  expressed  subject  and  predicate. 

2  Bing  of  Koliya.  The  story  is  told  in  the  introduction  to  the 

100th  Jataka  (i.  242),  in  TJdciuct  (II.  8),  and  in  Dhp.  Com.  on  verse  414 

(of  Ang.,  ii.  62'.  The  mother,  in  the  legend,  was  unable  for  seven  years 

and  seven  days  to  bring  forth  her  child. 


LX.  SIVALI 


61 


who  had  surrounded  her  with  tearful  faces  went  forth  de¬ 
lighted  to  tell  the  raja.  He  saw  them  coming  and  thought : 
‘  That  which  He  of  the  Ten  Powers  told  me  has  been 
fulfilled.’  And  he  went  to  the  princess  and  told  her 
what  the  Master  had  pronounced.  Then  she  bade  him 
show  hospitality  to  the  Buddha  and  the  Order  for  seven 
days.  And  saying,  ‘  The  child  is  born,  bringing  glad¬ 
ness  of  heart  to  all  our  kin,’  they  named  him  Sivali 
(Auspicious). 

By  the  seventh  day  from  his  birth  he  was  able  to  do 
anything.  Sariputta,  General  of  the  Norm,  conversed  with 
him  on  that  day,1  and  said :  4  Does  it  not  behove  one  who 
has  overcome  such  suffering  as  you  have  done  to  leave  the 
world?’  'Sir,’  babbled  the  infant,  'I  would  leave  the 
world.’  Suppavasa  saw  them  talking,  and  asked  the  Thera 
what  he  had  said.  ‘  We  spoke  of  the  long  suffering  he 
has  overcome.  With  your  leave  I  will  ordain  him.’  She 
replied  :  ‘  It  is  well,  sir ;  ordain  him.’  And  Sariputta, 
ordaining  him,  said  :  ‘  Sivali,  you  want  no  other  exhorta¬ 
tion  than  the  cause  of  the  long  suffering  you  have  over¬ 
come.  Think  on  that.’  ‘  Sir,’  replied  the  child,  ‘  yours 
was  the  burden  of  ordaining  me  ;  but  I  will  find  out  what 
I  am  capable  of  doing.’  At  the  moment  when  the  first 
lock  of  his  hair  was  cut  off,  he  was  established  in  the 
fruition  of  the  First  Path,  when  the  second  was  cut,  in 
that  of  the  Second  Path,  and  so  for  the  third  and 
fourth.  .  .  .2 

I 

Other  teachers  say  that  after  Sariputta  had  ordained 
him,  he  went  the  same  day,  and  taking  up  his  abode  in  a 
secluded  hut,  meditated  on  his  woefully  delayed  birth,  and 
so,  his  knowledge  attaining  maturity,  descended  into  the 
avenue  of  insight,  casting  out  all  the  intoxicants  (of  the 
mind)3  and  thus  attaining  arahantship.  Thereupon  ex- 

1  The  verse  in  the  Dhammapada  (414)  is  here  quoted,  and  the 
episode  narrated  in  the  Commentary  (PTS  edition,  vol.  iii.). 

2  Here  follows  the  episode  dealt  with  by  the  Commentary  on  Ang., 
i.  24,  where  Sivali’s  eminence  as  recipient  of  offerings  is  stated. 

3  See  p.  52,  n.  4. 


62 


LXI.  VAPPA 


periencing  the  bliss  of  emancipation,  he  in  emotional 
rapture  uttered  this  psalm  : 

Now  have  they  prospered,  all  my  highest  aims, 

To  compass  which  I  sought  this  still  retreat. 

The  holy  lore  and  liberty,  my  quest, 

All  lurking  vain  conceits  I  cast  away.  (60) 


PART  VII 

LXI 

Vappa. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Kapilavatthu,  as  the 
son  of  a  brahmin  Vasettha.  Now  when  Asita  the  seer1  had 
declared  that  the  young  noble  Siddhattha  would  become 
omniscient,  Vappa  with  four  other  sons  of  brahmins, 
Kondanna  at  their  head,2  became  recluses.  When  Asita’s 
prophecy  had  been  fulfilled,  Vappa  heard  the  Buddha 
preach  and  thought :  ‘  I  will  win  salvation.’  He  was 
present  during  the  six  years  when  the  Great  Being  made 
his  ascetic  struggles ;  thereupon  disgusted  when  the  latter 
again  took  solid  food,  he  went  to  Isipatana,  and  there  met 
the  Master  then  starting  the  Wheel  of  the  Norm  a-rolling 
and  was  converted.  On  the  fifth  day  he  and  his  four 
mates  won  arahantship.  Thereupon  reflecting  on  the 
might  of  the  Master  and  the  blindness  of  the  world,  and 
how  the  Ariyan  state  bestowed  vision,  he  said  this  verse  : 

He  who  doth  see  can  see  another  seer, 

Him  too  who  hath  no  eyes  wherewith  to  see, 

He  who  himself  sees  not,  can  ne’er  discern 
Either  the  eye  that  sees  not,  or  the  seer.3  (61) 

1  Sutta-Nipdta,  verse  128  f. ;  Vinaya  Texts ,  i.  90,  n.  1  ;  Bud. 
Birth  Stories ,  p.  113. 

2  See  CCXLVI. 

3  There  is  here  an  allusion  to  the  undiscerning  attitude  of  the  five 
recluses  over  against  the  spiritual  evolution  of  the  Buddha,  recorded 
by  the  books  referred  to. 


LXII.  VAJJI-PUTTA 


63 


LXII 

Vajji-putta.1 

He  was  born  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Yesali,  in  the  family 
of  a  councillor,2  and  was  named  Vajji-son.  He  saw  the 
majesty  of  the  Exalted  One  when  the  latter  came  to  Yesali, 
believed,  entered  the  Order,  and  after  his  novitiate  dwelt 
in  a  wood  near  Yesali.  Now  a  festival  took  place  at  Yesali, 
and  there  was  dancing,  singing  and  reciting,  all  the  people 
happily  enjoying  the  festival.  And  the  sound  thereof 
distracted  the  bhikkhu,  so  that  he  quitted  his  solitude, 

gave  up  his  exercise,  and  showed  forth  his  disgust  in  this 
verse  : 

Each  by  himself  we  in  the  forest  dwell, 

Like  logs  rejected  by  the  woodman's  craft. 

So  flit  the  days  one  like  another  by, 

Who  more  unlucky  in  their  lot  than  we  ? 

Now  a  woodland  sprite  heard  him,  and  had  compassion 
on  the  bhikkhu,  and  thus  upbraided  him,  ‘  Even  though 
you,  bhikkhu,  speak  scornfully  of  forest  life,  the  wise 
desiring  solitude  think  much  of  it,’  and  to  show  him  the 
advantage  of  it  spoke  this  verse : 

Each  by  himself  we  in  the  forest  dwell, 

Like  logs  rejected  by  the  woodman’s  craft. 

And  many  a  one  doth  envy  me  my  lot, 

E  en  as  the  hell-bound  him  who  fares  to 
heaven.  (62) 

Then  the  bhikkhu,  stirred  like  a  thoroughbred  horse  by 
the  spur,  went  down  into  the  avenue  of  insight,  and  striv¬ 
ing  soon  won  arahantship.  Thereupon  he  thought,  4  The 
fairy's  verse  has  been  my  goad  !’  and  he  recited  it  himself. 

1  The  son  of  the  Yajjians,  or  simply,  the  Vajjian.  See  CXIX. 

2  The  Yajjians  were  a  republic. 


64 


LXIII.  PAKKHA 


LXIII 

Pakkha. 

(The  Cripple.) 

Eeborn  in  this  Buddha-age  among  the  Sakiyans,  in  the 
township  of  Devadaha,  in  the  family  of  a  Sakiyan  raja,  he 
was  named  Young1  Saijmoda.  But  inasmuch  as,  when  a 
boy,  he  suffered  from  rheumatism,2  and  at  times  walked 
like  a  cripple,  he  grew  to  be  called  Pakkha  (  =  cripple),  and 
retained  the  name  after  his  recovery.  He  was  present 
when  the  Exalted  One  visited  his  kinsfolk,3  won  faith  in 
him,  entered  the  Order,  and  dwelt  in  the  forest.  Going 
one  day  to  the  village  for  alms,  he  sat  down  beneath  a 
tree.  Then  a  kite,  seizing  some  flesh,  flew  up  into  the  sky. 
Him  many  kites  attacked,  making  him  drop  the  meat. 
Another  kite  grabbed  the  fallen  flesh,  and  was  plundered 
by  another.  And  the  bhikkhu  thought :  ‘  Just  like  that 
meat  are  worldly  desires,  common  to  all,  full  of  pain  and 
woe.’  And  reflecting  hereon,  and  how  they  were  im¬ 
permanent  and  so  on,  he  carried  out  his  mission,  sat 
down  for  his  afternoon  rest,  and  expanding  insight  won 
arahantship.  Thereupon  making  the  base  of  his  emotion 
his  goad,  he  confessed  anna  in  this  verse  : 

They  fly  at  what  is  fall’ll,  and  as  it  lies, 

Swooping  in  greed  they  come  again,  again.  .  .  . 
But  what  ’twas  meet  to  do,  that  have  I  done, 

And  what  is  verily  delectable, 

Therein  was  my  delight :  thus  happily 

Has  hapxiiness  been  sought  after  and  won.4  (63) 

1  Kumdra,  which  means  simply  ‘youth,’  is  a  distinctive  title  of  a 
young  noble,  as  mdnava  is  of  a  young  brahmin.  We  have  no 
suitable  word.  Cf.  the  Greek  hour  os. 

2  Vdtarogo ,  lit.,  f  wind-illness.’  On  the  synonym  vdtabddho,  see 
Milinda ,  i.  191,  and  below,  CLIII. 

3  See  Bud.  Birth  Stories,  p.  121  ff. 

4  I.e.,  says  the  Commentary  :  ‘  By  the  happiness  of  the  attainment 
of  fruition  has  Nibbana,  which  is  beyond  happiness  (or  is  exceeding 


LXIV.  yimala- kond  anna 


65 


LXIY 

Vimala-Kondanna. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  as  the  son  of 
Ambapall,  his  father  being  King  Bimbisara.* 1  She  named 
the  child  Yimala,  but  afterwards  he  was  known  as  Yimala- 
Kondanna.2  He  was  convinced  by  the  Buddha-majesty  of 
the  Exalted  One  at  Yesali,  left  the  world  for  the  Order, 
and  attained  arahantship.  He  declared  his  anna  in  this 
verse  : 

By  the  bright  Banner  came  I  here  to  birth 
In  her  called  of  the  Tree.  And  by  the  flag 
That  smites  the  flag,  is  the  great  Flag  o’er- 
thrown.3  (64) 


great  happiness,  accanta-sukliay ),  been  won,  and  by  that  happiness 
of  insight,  which  has  become  a  happy  mode  of  procedure,  has  the  bliss 
of  Fruition,  of  Nibbana,  been  reached.’  The  latter  interpretation,  as 
Dr.  Neumann  has  pointed  out— winning  happiness  by  happiness— is, 
in  the  Majjhima-Nikaya  (i.  93/.),  contrasted  with  the  Jain  point  of 
view  :  ‘Nay,  friend  Gotama,  happiness  is  not  to  be  got  at  by  happiness, 
but  by  suffering  ’—the  ascetic  standpoint.  Cf.  CLXXI. 

1  Cf  Sisters,  Ps.  lxvi.,  where  he  is  said  to  have  converted  his 
mother. 

2  Yimala  =  spotless.  There  is  no  apparent  clue  to  his  acquiring  the 
brahmin  clan-name  of  Kondanna.  Cf.  CCXLYI. 

3  This  verse  is  one  of  the  allusion-riddles  dear  to  ancient  poets. 
The  one  word  ketu  (banner,  flag)  is  symbolical  (1)  of  Bimbisara’s 
kingship ,  (2)  of  the  Dhamma  :  ‘  For  the  Norm  is  the  banner  of  the 
seers,’  quotes  the  Commentary  {Ang.,  ii.  51 ;  iii.  150) ;  (3)  of  the  vice 
of  conceit  (mdna  ;  ‘  flaunting  a  flag  .  .  .  desire  of  the  heart  for  self- 
advertisement  ’)  (Dhs.,  1116;  Bud.  Psy.,  p.  298,  n.  3 ;  (4)  of  the  hosts 
of  evil.  Hence  the  fourfold  iteration  of  ketu  may  be  thus  paraphrased  : 

‘  By  me’  son  of  a  liing  (!)>  through  the  aid  of  the  Dhamma  (2),  smiting 
down  evil  (4),  is  conceit  (3),  with  all  soul-illusion  involved  therein, 
overthrown.’  The  Tree  is  the  Mango  {ambd),  beneath  which,  in  her 
legend,  Ambapall  was  found  as  an  infant. 


5 


66 


LXV.  UKKHEPAKATA-VACCHA 


LXY 


Ukkhepakata-Vaccha. 

He  was  born  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthi,  as  the  son 
of  a  brahmin  of  the  Yaccha  family.  He  heard  the  Master 
preach,  entered  the  Order,  and  went  to  dwell  at  a  village 
settlement  in  Kosala.  Through  the  bhikkhus  who  came 
there  from  time  to  time  he  mastered  the  doctrine,  although 
he  did  not  know  how  to  distinguish  what  was  Yinaya,  what 
Suttanta,  and  what  Abhidhamma.  .  This  too,  however,  he 
learnt  from  questioning  Sariputta,  so  that,  whereas  other 
bhikkhus  were  versed  in  Yinaya,  or  in  some  other  part  of 
doctrine,  he  had  learnt  the  Pitakas  by  heart,  even  before 
the  Council,  when  they  were  recited.1 2  And  soon  after 
attaining  this  proficiency,  he  won  araliantship.  Thereafter 
he  became  a  teacher,  and  one  day,  addressing  himself  as 
another  person,  he  uttered  this  verse  : 

That  heaped  wealth  by  Yaccha’s  toil  thrown  up3 
By  steady  increment  these  many  years, 

That  doth  he  to  the  laity  declare, 

Seated  in  honour,  filled  with  splendid  joy.  (65) 

1  See  Vinaya  Texts ,  iii.  373  jf.  It  is  a  fixed  tenet  with  Dhammapala 
( Vace  other  commentators)  that  the  doctrines  and  discipline  of  his 
faith  had  existed  in  the  infinite  past  in  the  form  of  three  Pitakas, 
revived  under  each  Buddha.  Councils  had  but  to  decide  on  the  sub¬ 
ject-matter  to  be  included  in  that  form,  and  to  ‘  recite  ’  the  wording  of 
the  same.  Cf.  Mahdvamsa ,  Geiger’s  translation  ;  P.T.S,  1912,  chapters 
iii.-v. 

2  The  soubriquet  by  which  he  is  called  means  Throwing-up  made- 
\accha,  Vaccha  the  Pile-maker,  to  emphasize  his  eminent  repertory 

of  orally -learnt  doctrine.  The  Vaccha  family  contributed  many  Theras  ; 
hence,  no  doubt,  the  need  of  distinguishing.  Cf.  IX.,  XIII.,  LXXI., 
CXII.,  CXIII. 


LX  VI.  MEG  HIV  A 


67 


LXYI 

Meghiya. 

Eeborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Kapilavatthu,  in  the 
family  of  a  Sakiyan  raja,  he  was  named  Megliiya.1  When 
grown  up,  he  entered  the  Order  and  ministered  to  the 
Exalted  One  while  he  was  residing  at  Calika  on  the  River 
Kimikala.  And  seeing  a  pleasant  mango-wood  he  desired 
to  dwell  there.  Twice  the  Exalted  One  refused,  but  at  his 
third  request,  let  him  go.  There,  however,  being  consumed 
by  evil  thoughts  as  by  flies,  he  got  no  concentration  of 
mind,  so  he  returned  and  told  the  Master.  The  latter  said, 
‘When  the  heart,  Meghiya,  is  not  ripe  for  emancipation, 
five  things  conduce  thereto,’  and  admonished  him.  Where¬ 
upon  Meghiya  attained  arahantship,  and  announced  his 
anna  in  this  verse  : 

He,  the  great  Hero,  counselled  me,  whose  mind 
Hath  all  transcended  that  our  minds  may  know. 
And  I,  hearing  the  Norm,  held  close  to  Him 
In  loving  pupillage  and  piety.2 
The  threefold  wisdom  have  I  made  my  own, 

And  all  the  Buddha’s  ordinance  is  done.  (66) 


LXYII 

Ekadhamma  Savaniy a. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Setavya,3  in  the 
family  of  a  councillor.  When  the  Exalted  One  visited 
Setavya,  and  stayed  in  the  Singsapa  Wood,  he  went  to  listen 

Meaning  ‘  cloudy,’  ‘  cloud-like,’  a  name  of  happier  augury  in  India 
than  in  more  humid  climates.  Told  more  fully  in  TJddna,  IV.,  i. 

More  literally,  ‘  dwelt  near  him  having  loved,  or  being  devoted  to.’ 
But  the  idiom,  to  leave  the  world  dwelling  ‘near’  a  Teacher  implies 
the  relation  of  pupillage. 

In  Kosala.  Cf.  Dialogues,  ii.  849;  Sutta  Nipcita ,  verse  1012; 
Ang.,  ii.  87. 


68 


LX VI I.  EKADHAMMA-SAYANIYi 


to  him,  saluting,  and  sitting  down  at  one  side.  The  Master 
contemplated  his  inclinations,  and  taught  him  the  Norm  in 
the  verse : 

Impermanent  indeed  are  all  component  things.1 

And  he,  influenced  by  his  past  resolve  (to  leave  the 
world  when  the  Norm  was  revived),  discerned  the  truth 
more  plainly,  left  the  world,  and  studying  the  notions  of 
ill  and  of  the  absence  of  soul,  acquired  insight  and  won 
araliantship.  And  because,  by  one  hearing  of  the  Norm 
alone,  his  destiny  was  fulfilled,  he  acquired  the  name  of 
Once-Norm-hearer  (Ekadhammasavanlya).  His  anna  he 
confessed  in  this  verse  : 

Burnt  up  in  me  is  all  that  doth  defile, 

And  rooted  out  all  life’s  continuance ; 

Slain  utterly  the  cycle  of  re-birth  : 

Now  is  there  no  more  coming  back  to  be.2  (67) 


LXVIII 

Ekudaniya.3 

He  w7as  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  SavatthI,  as  the 
son  of  a  wealthy  councillor.  Come  to  years  of  discretion, 
he  was  convinced  by  the  majesty  of  the  Buddha,  at  the 
presentation  of  the  Jeta  Grove,  and  left  the  world.  Ful¬ 
filling  his  novitiate,  and  dwelling  in  the  forest,  he  came  to 
the  Master  to  learn.  And  at  that  time  the  Master,  seeing 

1  See  Dialogues ,  ii.  175  :  ‘They’re  transient  all,’  etc. 

2  This  phrase  and  that  of  ‘  life’s  continuance  ’  are  in  the  Pali  both 
bliava ,  first  plural,  then  singular  with  prefix  of  puna,  ‘again’;  lit., 
‘  becomings  ’  and  ‘  becoming-again.’  By  the  plural  form  the  three 
chief  modes  of  rebirth  are  understood — Tcdma-,  rupa-,  and  avupa-bhava 
— as  well  as  both  kammabhava ,  or  that  continuity  of  action  or  character 
which  determines  future  bhava ,  and  the  uppatti-bhava,  or  resultant 
rebirth  itself  (so  the  Commentary).  This  doctrine  is  explained  in  the 
Compendium  of  Philo sopluj,  especially  pp.  262-264. 

3  So  the  Commentary ;  in  the  text  Ekuddaniya. 


LX VI II.  EKUDAN1YA 


69 


Sariputta  rapt  in  contemplation  near  him,  broke  forth  into 
this  psalm  : 

He  who  doth  dtcell  on  highest  plane  of  thought ,  etc.1 

And  the  brother  hearing  him,  even  when  once  more  far 
away ,  and  for  a  long  time  in  the  forest,  kept  repeating  the 
psalm  ever  and  anon,  so  that  it  became  customary  to  call 
him  ‘  Ekudaniya,’  4  One-Psalm-er.’ 

Now  one  day  he  got  unity  and  concentration  of  mind, 
and  so,  insight  expanding,  he  won  arahantship.  And 
dwelling  in  the  bliss  of  emancipation,  he  was  once  invited 
by  the  Treasurer  of  the  Norm2  to  be  tested  in  exposition, 
with  the  words:  ‘Friend,  expound  the  doctrine  to  me.’ 

And  from  long  dwelling  in  mind  over  that  verse,  he  uttered 
it  then  again  : 

He  who  doth  dwell  on  highest  plane  of  thought, 
With  zeal  unfaltering,  Sage,  Arahant, 

In  wisdom’s  branches3  trained such  as  he  is, 

No  sorrows  may  beset  him,  who  with  mind 
Calm  and  serene  and  clear  abideth  aye.  (68) 

This  became  the  confession  of  his  anna. 

1  Narrated  in  Udana,  iv.  7.  Dliammapada ,  verse  259,  is,  by  the 
Commentator,  ascribed  to  the  Buddha,  who  was  commending  ‘  Ekud- 
dana’s  ’  fruitful  use  of  his  one  stanza. 

2  A  title  given  to  Ananda.  See  Ps.  CCLX. 

3  The  Commentary  emphasizes  the  mutual  equivalence  of  muni 
(sage)  and  arahu.  It  also  specifies  the  thirty-seven  ‘wings  of  wisdom’ 
(see  Compendium,  p.  179),  and  the  three  siJcJchds,  or  trainings— viz., 
in  morals,  in  jhana  or  mental  control,  and  in  insight  or  doctrine  (Any. 
i.  255).  In  the  Sutta-V ibhanga  of  the  Vinaya-Pitaka  this  psalm  is  put 
into  the  mouth  of  Panthaka  the  Less,  to  whom  in  the  present  work 
Ps.  CCXXXVI.  is  ascribed.  The  Sisters  at  the  SavatthI  College  are 
represented  as  expecting  no  effective  lesson  when  it  is  Panthaka’s  turn 
to  teach  them,  since  he  always  repeated  one  and  the  same  stanza— 
namely ,  that  here  attributed  to  Ekudaniya.  The  Thera  hears  of  their 
remarks,  and  forthwith  gives  an  exhibition  both  of  his  magical  power 
and  of  his  knowledge  of  much  else  of  the  ‘  Buddha- word.’  Whereupon 
he  reaps  the  Sisters’  tribute  of  admiration. 


70 


LXIX.  CHANNA 


LXIX 

Channa. 

Reborn  when  our  Exalted  One  was  alive  in  the  house  of 
King  Suddhodana,  of  a  slave,  he  was  called  Channa.  A 
contemporary  of  the  future  Buddha,  he  found  faith  in  the 
Master  when  the  latter  returned  to  meet  his  kinsfolk.  He 
thereupon  entered  the  Order.  Out  of  his  affection  for 
Him,  egoistic  pride  in  4  our  Buddha,  our  Doctrine  ’  arose, 
and  he  could  not  conquer  this  fondness,  nor  perform  his 
duty  as  novice.  When  the  Master  had  passed  away,  and 
his  injunction  that  the  higher  penalty  be  imposed  on 
Channa  was  carried  out,1  the  latter  suffered  anguish,  extir¬ 
pated  his  fondness,  and  soon  after  attained  arahantship. 
Thereafter,  blissful  in  his  emancipation,  he  expressed  his 
rapture  in  this  psalm  : 

I  heard  the  Truth  which  that  Great  One  had  taught, 
And  felt  its  mighty  virtues,  known  by  Him 
Who  all  things  with  supernal  insight  knew.2 
The  Path  for  winning  things  ambrosial 
I  found.  Past-master  He  in  sooth  to  guide 
Into  the  way  of  blest  security.  (69) 


Punna. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha  age  in  the  Sunap>aranta  country, 
at  the  port  of  Supparaka,3  in  the  family  of  a  burgess,  he 
was  named  Punna.  Arrived  at  years  of  discretion,  he  went 
with  a  great  caravan  of  merchandise  to  Savatthi,  when  the 

1  Dialogues ,  ii.  171 ;  Vinaya  Texts ,  iii.  381-384. 

2  Lit.,  ‘  by  supreme  knowledge  which  has  understood  everything. 

5  Of.  Mahdvamsa  (Geiger’s  translation),  54,  n  3. 


LXX.  PUNNA 


71 


Exalted  One  happened  to  be  there.  And  he  went  to  hear 
the  Mastei  at  the  \ihara  with  the  local  lay-followers. 
There  he  believed,  and  left  the  world.  And  for  a  time  he 
won  favour  among  the  teachers  and  preceptors  by  his  skill 
in  dialectic.  Then  one  day  he  went  to  the  Master,  and 
asked  for  a  lesson,  so  that  he,  hearing  propositions  pair¬ 
wise,  might  therewith  go  to  dwell  in  Sunaparanta.  To  him 
the  Exalted  One  uttered  a  ‘  Lion’s  Roar  ’  of  a  lesson,  to 
wit :  ‘  Now  there  are  objects,  Punna,  cognizable  by  the 
eye,  etc.  1  So  Punna  departed,  and  studying  concentration 
and  insight,  acquired  the  three  forms  of  higher  cognition. 

W  hen  he  won  arahantship  he  won  over  many  people  to 
the  faith,  even  500  lay-brethren  and  as  many  lay-sisters. 

And  as  he  lay  near  final  death  he  confessed  anna  in  this 
verse : 


Only  virtue  here  is  highest ;  but  the  wise 
man  is  supreme. 

He  who  wisdom  hath  and  virtue, 

He  inong  men  and  gods  is  victor.2  (70) 

1  This  is  told  in  the  Sntta  on  Punna’s  lesson  ( Majjh .,  iii.  267  f. ; 

Sany.,  iv.  60  ;  also  Divyavadana ,  37-39).  ‘  Pair-wise  ’  in  the  text  is 

yamaka,  Judging  by  the  context  in  the  ‘  lesson,’  compared  with  the 
method  used  throughout  the  book  of  the  Yamakas  ( Abhidhamma - 
Pitaka),  this  means  that  the  thesis  is  stated,  and  is  then  followed  by 
either  its  converse  or  other  logically  contrasted  form. 

2  This  forms  a  verse  in  Silava’s  poem  (CCXLI.,  verse  619).  There 
is  a  greater  simplicity  in  this  stanza,  about  the  diction  and  the  ideas, 
as  of  a  man  who  had  spent  his  life  giving  simple  teaching  in  ethics  to 
rough  rustic  audiences,  such,  as  one  gathers,  he  would  meet  in  Suna¬ 
paranta.  The  Master  led  him  to  expect  rough  treatment  at  their 
hands  {Majjh.,  loc.  cit.).  The  rhythm  above  almost  parallels  the  Pali : 
Silam  eva  idha  aggan ,  pahhavd  pana  uttamo,  etc. 


72 


LXXl.  VACCHAPAL A 


PART  VIII 

LXXI 

Vacchapala. 

He  was  born  in  this  Bnddha-age  at  Rajagaha,  as  the 
son  of  a  rich  brahmin,  and  was  named  Vacchapala  (calf- 
herd).  He  saw  when  the  Master  met  Bimbisara,  the  self¬ 
submission  of  Uruvela-Kassapa  to  the  Exalted  One,1  and 
believing,  entered  the  Order.  In  a  week  he  had  so  developed 
insight  as  to  have  acquired  sixfold  abhinha. 

As  arahant  he  extolled  in  sheer  happiness  his  attainment 
of  Nibbana  in  this  verse : 

Is  there  a  man  who  can  the  truth  discern 
Tho’  it  be  very  subtle  and  refined, 

Who,  skilled  to  measure  spiritual  growth, 

Is  yet  of  lowly  and  of  gentle  mind, 

Who  shapes  his  life  by  rule  of  Them  that  Wake  :2 
For  him  Nibbana  is  not  hard  to  find.  (71) 

And  this  was  the  Brother’s  confession  of  anna. 


LXXII 

A  t  u  m  a  . 

Now  he  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthi,  as 
the  son  of  a  councillor,  and  was  named  Atuma.  When  he 
was  adolescent  his  mother  proposed  to  find  him  a  wife,  and 
consulted  with  kinsfolk.  But  he,  being  impelled  by  the 
fulness  of  conditions,  said  :  ‘  What  have  I  to  do  with  house- 
ways  ?  Now  will  I  leave  the  world.’  But  though  he  went 

1  See  CCX. ;  also  Vinaya  Texts ,  i.  136  ff. ;  Bud.  Birth  Sto?‘ies , 
p.  114  f. 

2  Saysevita-buddha-silind.  ‘  Spiritual  growth  ’  is  from  the  Com¬ 
mentary.  ‘  Truth  ’  or  true  meaning  = attha . 


LXXII1.  MANAVA 


73 


to  the  Brethren  and  was  ordained,  yet  did  his  mother  seek 
to  corrupt  his  pious  wish.  Then  he  declared  his  inclination 
in  this  verse  : 

As  the  new  bamboo-stem,  even  when  grown 
To  its  full  knotted  height,  can  scarce  emerge, 

So  I  by  all  this  bringing  home  of  brides - 

Give  me  your  leave !  Gone  forth  e’en  now  am  I.  (72) 

And  even  as  he  stood  speaking  to  his  mother,  insight 
grew  in  him,  and  casting  off  the  defilements,1  he  became 
an  arahant. 


LXXIII 

Manava. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthi,  in  the 
house  of  a  brahmin  grandee.  For  seven  years  he  was 
reared  within  the  precincts  of  home,  and  when  at  seven 
years  old  he  was  taken  out  on  the  estate,  he  saw  an  aged 
person,  a  diseased  person,  and  a  corpse  for  the  first  time. 
When  he  was  told  about  these  things,  he  was  filled  with 
dread,  went  to  the  Vihara,  heard  the  doctrine,  and  gained 
his  parents’  consent  to  enter  the  Order.  Thereupon  he 
won  insight  and  arahantship. 

Him  thus  having  arrived  thereat  the  Brethren  asked  : 
‘  How  is  it  you  were  stirred  to  come  forth  at  so  tender  an 
age  ?’  He  thereupon,  confessing  anna,  signalized  his  going 
forth  in  this  verse  : 

I  saw  an  aged  one,  and  one  afflicted  with  disease, 

And  then  I  saw  one  dead,  with  all  his  span  of  life 
consumed. 

Thence  I  forth  going  left  the  world  to  live  the  other 
life, 

And  from  me  put  away  the  enticing  sweets  of  sense- 
desire.  (73) 

1  Kilesd.  This  is  as  general  a  term,  especially  in  the  Commentaries, 
as  is,  in  Christian  writings,  the  word  ‘  sin.’  See  Bud.  Psy.,  p.  327,  n. 


74 


LXXIV.  SUYAMANA 


Now,  because  he  left  the  world  while  so  young,  the  Thera 
was  always  called  Boy  (Manava).1 


LXXIY 

Suyamana. 

Beborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Sail,  as  the  son  of  a 
certain  brahmin,  he  grew  up  expert  in  the  Three  Vedas.2 
Feeling  repelled  by  domestic  life,  and  inclined  to  jhana,  he 
met  the  Exalted  One  at  Sail,  believed,  wTas  ordained,  and 
attained  arahantship  as  soon  as  his  head  was  shaved. 

Thereupon  he  signalized  his  putting  away  the  hindrances, 
and  confessed  anna  in  this  verse  : 

With  sensuous  desires,  with  enmity, 

With  sloth  of  mind  and  torpor  of  the  flesh 
A  brother  hath  no  truck,  and  in  his  heart 
Turmoil  of  any  kind  and  doubt  are  dead.  (74) 


LXXV 

Susarada. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Sariputta’s  native 
place,3  in  a  brahmin’s  family,  and  was  called  Susarada 

1  One  is  tempted  to  see  here  no  individual  sharing  the  experiences 
of  the  Buddha,  but  a  type  of  the  earnest  youthful  religious  mind 
gripped  by  life’s  realities. 

2  It  is  noteworthy  that  whereas  there  were  in  Dhammapala’s  day 
Four  Vedas  (including  the  later  Atharva-veda),  the  Buddhist  schools 
of  Eastern  India — e.g.,  Conjevaram — either  did  not  know  of  this 
increment  in  brahmin  literature,  or  observed  sufficient  historical 
accuracy  to  associate  these  original  Theras  with  three  Vedas  only 
(see  Dialogues ,  i.  109,  n.  2).  Sala,  or  Salar),  a  brahmin  village  in 
Kosala,  is  twice  mentioned  as  visited  by  the  Buddha  in  the  Majjhima 
(Suttas  41,  62  ;  cf.  Sayy.,  v.  144) ;  but  Sail  has,  so  far,  not  been  met 
with  elsewhere. 

3  Nalaka- village  in  Magadha. 


LXXV.  SUSARADA  75 

(Dullard),  because  he  was  slow  in  growing.1  He  was  con¬ 
verted  by  the  teaching  of  that  Thera  and  in  due  time,  as  a 
bhikkhu,  became  an  arahant,  and  confessed  his  anna  in 
this  verse : 

O  goodly  is  the  sight  of  cultured  minds  !2 
Doubt  is  cut  off,  and  wisdom  grows  apace. 

E'en  of  a  fool  they  make  an  able  man  ; 

Hence  goodly  is  the  intercourse  with  saints.  (75) 


LXXYI 

Piyanjaha. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Yesall,  in  the  family 
of  a  Liechavi  noble  (raja).  When  grown  up  he  was  ever 
mad  for  war  and  an  unconquered  fighter,  ever  sacrificing 
what  was  near  and  dear,  so  that  he  became  known  as 
Piyanjaha— Love-renouncing.  But  when  the  Master  came 
to  Yesall,  Piyanjaha  found  faith  in  him,  entered  the  Order, 
dwelt  in  the  forest,  developed  insight  and  won  arahantship. 
As  arahant  he  thought,  1  How  different  is  worldly  success 
from  Ariyan  success !’  and  by  this  insight  confessing  anna, 
he  uttered  this  verse  : 

Where  men  are  arrogant,  see  thou  lie  low.3 

Where  they  are  low  in  mind,  lift  up  the  heart. 

Dwell  thou  where  other  folk  care  not  to  dwell, 

Wherein  men  find  delight,  take  thou  no  joy.  (76) 

1  Susarada  means  ‘very  autumnal’ — i.e.,  as  it  were,  ‘having  un¬ 
developed  seed  or  growth,’  and  corresponding  therefore  to  early  spring¬ 
time  in  our  climate.  Cf.  JPTS ,  1909,  p.  150  ;  and  the  contrary, 
visdrada ,  below,  CCII.,  verse  838. 

It  is  a  detail  of  interest  that  on  the  word  suvihitdna,  rendered  by 
cultured’  (lit.,  well-disposed,  ordered,  or  practised),  the  Commentary 
remarks  anusvaralopo  kato ;  the  terminal  rj  has  been  cut  off,  gdthCi- 
sukhatthay ,  for  prosodical  reasons.  With  line  3,  cf.  Sisters,  verse  213. 

3  In  the  text  the  inflexion  used  is  the  third  person  singular  of  the 
older  optative  in  e  :  he,  one,  should  lie  low. 


76 


LXXVII.  HATTHAROHA-PUTTA 


LXXVII 

Hattharoha-Putta. 

(Elephant  -  rider’s  Son.) 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthl,  in  the  family  of 
an  elephant-driver,  as  he  grew  up,  he  became  proficient 
in  managing  elephants.  One  day,  as  he  was  training  an 
elephant  by  the  river,  he  was  impelled  by  maturing  con¬ 
ditions  to  think  :  ‘  What  is  all  this  elephant-taming  to  me  ? 
Better  is  it  to  tame  one’s  self.’  So  he  went  to  the  Exalted 
One,  heard  the  Norm,  believed,  entered  the  Order,  and 
exercised  himself  in  insight  on  a  basis  of  ethical  meditation. 
And  as  a  skilful  elephant-trainer  restrains  savage  ways  by 
his  hook,  so  he  by  meditation  suffered  not  his  thoughts  to 
wander  away  from  his  exercise,  saying  this  verse : 

Once  roamed  this  heart  a-field,  a  wanderer 
Wherever  will,  or  whim,  or  pleasure  led. 

To-day  that  heart  I’ll  hold  in  thorough  check, 

As  trainer’s  hook  the  savage  elephant.1  (77) 

And  so  acting,  his  insight  expanded,  and  he  realized 
arahantship. 


LXXVIII 

Mendaslra. 

•  • 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Saketa,  in  the 
family  of  a  burgess.  Because  his  head  resembled  that 
of  a  ram,  he  acquired  the  nickname  of  Mendaslra  (  =  ram’s 
head).  While  the  Exalted  One  was  staying  at  Saketa  in 
the  Anjana  Wood,  Mendaslra  came  to  believe  in  him, 
entered  the  Order,  and  practising  calm  and  insight, 

1  This  goes  to  form  one  verse  in  the  interesting  poem  ascribed  to 
Talaputa  (CCLXII.,  1130).  ‘Trainer’s  hook,’  more  accurately  ‘grasper 
of  the  hook.’ 


I ..XXVIII.  MENDASIIIA  77 

acquired  sixfold  abhinna.  He  could  thus  recall  former 
births,  and  concerning  these  he  uttered  this  verse : 


Full  many  a  round  of  rebirth  have  I  run 
Nor  found  a  clue.1  Lo  !  now  from  me  who  sore 
Have  suffered  is  the  load  of  ill  withdrawn.  (78) 

And  this  was  his  confession  of  anna. 


LXXIX 

Rakkhita. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  the  township  of  Devadaha, 
in  the  family  of  a  Sakiyan  noble  (raja),  he  was  named 
Rakkhita  (Guarded).  He  was  one  of  those  five  hundred 
young  nobles  who,  as  having  renounced  the  world,  were 
given  by  the  Sakiyan  and  Koliyan  rajas  as  escort  to  the 
Exalted  One.  The  latter  had  converted  these  youths  by 
the  lesson  of  the  Kunala-jataka2 — a  lesson  against  the 
danger  of  sensuality.  And  connecting  this  lesson  with  his 
exercises,  he  developed  insight  and  attained  arahantship. 
Thereafter,  reflecting  on  his  own  renunciation  of  the  cor¬ 
ruptions,3  he  uttered  his  verse  confessing  anna : 

All  passion  have  I  put  away,  and  all 

Ill  will  for  ever  have  I  rooted  out ; 

Illusion  utterly  has  passed  from  me ; 

Cool  am  I  now.  Gone  out  all  fire  within.  (79) 

1  In  the  text,  ‘  I  found  not  Commentary,  ‘Not  getting  the  know¬ 
ledge  how  to  turn  or  roll  back  ’  (nivattakananar)') — i.e.,  the  unending 
course  of  rebirth. 

2  Jdtalca,  vol.  v.,  No.  536.  The  introduction  relates  the  giving  of 
the  escort. 

3  Kilesd.  See  above,  LXXII.,  n.  1. 


78 


LXXX.  UGGA 


LXXX 

Ugga. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  Kosala,  at  the  town  of  Lgga, 
as  the  son  of  a  councillor,  he  was  named  Ugga.  When  he 
had  attained  to  years  of  discretion,  he  went  to  hear  the 
Master,  who  had  come  to  that  town,  found  faith  in  him, 
entered  the  Order  and  finally  won  arahantship.  He 
thereupon  set  forth  his  severance  of  the  round  of  rebirth, 
confessing  anna  in  this  verse : 

All  action  wrought  by  me  and  bringing  birth, 
Whether  ’twas  of  great  potency  or  small, 
Shattered  and  ended  is  it  utterly. 

Now  is  there  no  more  coming  back  to  be.  (80) 


PART  IX 


LXXXI 


Samitigutta. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthl,  as  the  son  of  a 
brahmin,  he  was  named  Samitigutta.1  Hearing  the 
Master  preach,  he  entered  the  Order  and  attained  entire 
purity  of  conduct.  As  the  consequence  of  his  action  in  a 
former  life,  he  was  attacked  by  leprosy  and  his  limbs 
crumbled  off  piece  by  piece.  He  dwelt  in  the  infirmary.2 
And  one  day  the  General  of  the  Norm  went  on  his  round 
of  inquiry,  asking  after  this  and  that  sick  bhikkhu.  Seeing 
Samitigutta,  he  gave  him  an  exercise  on  the  contemplation 

1  ‘  Guarded-by-concord,  or  by-union.’ 

2  He  is  represented  as  having  said  of  a  Silent  Buddha,  ‘  This  leprous 
shaveling  is  concealing  something,  methinks,’  and  spitting ;  again,  as 
a  Wanderer,  he  loses  his  temper  with  a  lay-adherent,  saying,  ‘  May 
you  become  a  leper !’  That  Savatthl  College  should  include  an  infirmary 
(gilanasala)  is  interesting,’ if  to  be  expected.  The  visitor  is  Sariputta. 
Cf.  verses  1054-1056. 


LXXXII.  KASSAPA 


79 


of  feeling,  saying  :  ‘  My  friend,  in  so  far  as  there  is  what  we 
call  process  of  the  five  constituents,  the  whole  of  suffering 
is  a  matter  of  feeling.  But  if  just  the  constituents  be 
absent,  suffering  is  absent.’  So  saying,  he  went  on ;  but 
the  patient,  set  up  by  the  lesson,  developed  insight  and 
realized  sixfold  abhinna.  Thereupon  he  remembered  the 
evil  action  in  former  births  for  which  he  was  now  overcome 
by  disease.  And  extolling  the  fact  that  all  was  now  done 
with,  he  uttered  this  verse : 

Whatso  of  evil  wrought  in  bygone  days, 

In  former  births  by  me,  just  here  and  now, 

Tis  that  whereby  I  lie  and  suffer  sore — 

But  other  ground  for  ill  exists  no  more !  (81) 


LXXXII 

Kassapa.; 

Beborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  SavatthI,  as  the  son  of  a 
brahmin  of  north-western  origin,1  he  was  named  Kassapa. 
His  father  died  while  he  was  a  child,  and  his  mother 
brought  him  up.  When  one  day  he  heard  the  Exalted 
One  preach  at  the  Jeta  Grove,  he  was  then  and  there 
impelled  by  maturing  conditions  to  enter  the  First  Path. 
And  going  to  his  mother,  he  asked  her  permission  for  his 
ordination. 

Now  when  the  Master  had  ended  the  rainy  season  with 
the  Parivara  festival  and  was  starting  on  his  country  tour, 
Kassapa  was  anxious  to  go  with  him.  And  first  he  went  to 
take  leave  of  his  mother.  She  let  him  go  with  this  admoni¬ 
tion  : 

To  any  place  where  alms  are  easy  got, 

Where’er  ’tis  safe  and  free  from  peril,  there 
Go  thou,  my  boy  ;  vex  not  thy  life  with  care.  (82) 

1  Udicca-brdhmanassa.  Cf.  Jdt i.  324;  ’ Milinda ,  ii.  45,  n.  1. 


80 


LXXXIII.  SIHA 


Then  the  Thera  thought:  ‘My  mother  wants  me  to  go 
where  I  shall  be  free  from  care.  Come  then,  for  me  ’tis 
right  to  win  a  place  entirely  and  absolutely  free  from  care.’ 
And,  striving,  he  set  up  insight  and  soon  won  arahantship. 
Thereupon,  inasmuch  as  his  mother’s  words  had  been  his 
spur  in  winning  it,  he  repeated  that  very  verse. 


LXXXIII 

SIha. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  the  country  of  the  Mallas, 
in  the  family  of  a  raja,  he  was  named  Siha  (Leo).  Seeing 
the  Exalted  One,  he  was  attracted  by  him,  saluted  him  and 
sat  down  at  one  side.  The  Master  discerned  the  trend  of 
his  mind  and  taught  him  the  Norm,  so  that  he  believed, 
entered  the  Order,  and,  taking  his  exercise,  dwelt  in  the 
forest.  His  thoughts  were  distracted  by  many  objects  and 
he  could  not  concentrate.1  The  Master  saw  this  and, 
standing  over  him,  uttered  this  verse  : 

O  Siha  !  persevere  in  earnestness  ; 

By  night  and  day  abide  unfaltering. 

Engender  the  good  Norm  within  thy  heart. 

Swiftly  renounce  that  piled  up  base  of  birth.2  (83) 

Hereby  the  Thera  was  able  to  expand  insight  and  win 
arahantship.  And,  confessing  anna,  he  repeated  the  verse. 

1  Lit.,  ‘to  him  one-point-ness  comes  not’;  the  usual  psychological 
term,  to  which  we  can  only  approximate  in  our  ‘  concentration.’ 
Cf.  Compendium,  pp.  237,  240/. 

2  Samussayo,  lit.,  ‘accumulation.’  Commentary  =  ‘  the  passions 
binding  to  personal  existence.’  Used  for  the  body,  or  whole  living 
aggregate.  Cf.  Sisters ,  verse  22. 


LXXX1V.  NITA 


81 


LXXXIV 

NIta. 

Reborn  in  this  Bnddha-age  at  SavatthI  as  the  son  of  a 
brahmin,  he  was  called  NIta.  When  grown  np  he  thought: 
‘  These  Sakiyan  recluses  are  very  lucky  in  that  they  are 
well  provided  with  all  necessaries.  It  is  a  happy  life,  that 
of  a  member  of  the  Order.’  So  he  entered  it  to  get  pleasure 
from  it,  paid  scant  attention  to  his  exercise,  ate  his  fill,  spent 
the  day  in  idle  talk,  and  slept  all  night  long.  But  the 
Master  discerned  the  ripeness  of  his  antecedents,  and  gave 
him  this  verse  in  admonition : 

Thou  all  the  night  to  slumber  given  o’er, 

Who  lov’st  the  day  ’mid  chattering  crowds  to 
spend : — 

Dost  deem  that  thou  this  way  at  any  time, 

Poor  silly  fool,  of  Ill  shalt  make  an  end?  1  (84) 

Agitated  by  the  Master’s  words,  he  settled  to  develop 
insight,  and  not  long  after  attained  arahantship.  He  then 
confessed  anna  in  repeating  this  verse. 

L  X  X  X  Y 

Sunaga. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  the  village  of 
Nalaka  as  the  son  of  a  brahmin,  and  was  a  friend  of 
Sariputta  before  the  latter  left  the  world.  Hearing  the 
General  of  the  Norm  preach,  he  too  left  the  world,  being 
established  on  the  plane  of  insight.2  Anon  he  won  ara¬ 
hantship.  Thereupon,  in  course  of  teaching  the  bhikkhus, 
he  confessed  anna  in  this  verse : 

Expert  to  grasp  the  image  conjured  up,3 
Versed  in  the  secret  of  the  life  detached, 
Practised  in  contemplation,  clear  in  mind  : — 

Well  may  he  win  to  rapture  unalloyed.  (85) 

1  Dummedha  dukJchass ’  antay  harisassiti  pi  Pali.  Cy. 

2  Dassanabliumiyan  patitthito ,  a  divergence  from  the  usual  phrases. 

3  In  the  self-hypnosis  of  jhana.  See  Compendium. ,  p.  54. 


6 


82 


LXXXVI.  NAGITA 


LXXXYI 

Nagita. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Kapilavatthu,  in 
the  family  of  a  Sakiyan  raja,  and  named  Nagita.  When 
the  Exalted  One  was  staying  in  that  place,  he  preached  the 
Lump  of  Sweetness  discourse.1  Thereby  Nagita  was  in¬ 
duced  to  enter  the  Order,  whereupon  he  attained  arahant- 
ship.  Then,  thrilled  with  rapture  over  the  truth  of  the 
Master’s  teaching  and  the  effective  guidance  of  the  Norm, 
he  burst  out  in  this  psalm : 

Outside  our  Order  many  others  be,  who  teach 

A  path  never,  like  this  one,  to  Nibbana  leading. 

But  us  the  Exalted  One,  the  blessed  Master’s  self 

Instructs  as  ’twere  by  just  the  palm  o’  th’  hand  out¬ 
spreading.2  (86) 


LXXXYII 

Pavittha. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  the  kingdom  of  Magadha, 
in  a  brahmin’s  family,  and  being  naturally  inclined  to  the 
life  of  a  recluse,  he  became  a  Wanderer.  His  training 
ended,  he  wandered  forth,  and  heard  of  Upatissa  and 
Kolita  (=  Sariputta  and  Moggallana)  joining  the  Buddha’s 
Order.  And  he  thought :  ‘  That  methinks  must  be  a 

1  Majjliima  Nikdya,  18th  Sutta,  outlined  (at  Kapilavatthu)  by  the 
Master,  and  expounded  by  Maha-Kaccana  (see  Ps.  CCXXIX.),  on  the 
self-mastery  of  the  arahant.  This  is  apparently  not  the  bhikkhu  of 
the  Kassapa  clan  {Dialogues,  i.  193  ff.  ;  Ang.  iii.  31,  341 ;  iv.  341). 
Perhaps  the  latter  was  known  as  N.  Kassapa,  to  distinguish. 

2  The  Commentary  has  :  ‘  Our  Master  sayay  ’—that  is,  sayaybhu 
iidnena ndtay,  ‘ self-taught ’  knower  by  knowledge,  or,  ‘himself ’—urged 
by  great  compassion,  teaches  his  own  doctrine,  like  one  who,  to  make 
sport  (?  vildsapattiydi),  shows  dmalaka- seed  in  the  palm  of  his  hand. 
Is  an  ancient  game  like  morrd  alluded  to  ? 


LX XX VI II.  A.TJUNA 


83 


better  Order  since  such  great  sages  enter  it.’  And  he  went 
and  heard  the  Master,  believed,  and  was  ordained.  Soon 
after  he  lealized  arahantship,  and  thus  confessed  anna  : 

The  factors  of  the  self  are  throughly  seen ; 

All  bases  of  new  being  broken  down. 

Slain  utterly  the  cycle  of  rebirth. 

Now  is  there  no  more  coming  back  to  be.1  (87) 


LXXXYIII 

Ajjuna. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthi,  in  the 
family  of  a  councillor,  and  named  Ajjuna.  When  grown 
up  he  came  into  contact  with  the  Jains,  and  entered  their 
Order  very  young,  thinking  among  them  to  win  salvation.2 
But  finding  there  nothing  to  satisfy  him,3  he  met  the 
Master,  believed,  entered  his  Order,  and  anon  won  arahant¬ 
ship.  Mien  in  rapture  at  his  attainment,  he  burst  forth 
in  this  verse  : 

O  wonder  that  I  found  the  power  to  draw 

Myself  forth  from  the  waters  on  dry  land. 

Borne  drifting  on  the  awful  flood  I  learnt 

To  know  the  Truths,  their  truth  to  understand.  (88) 

LXXXIX 

Devasabha.4 

Beborn  in  this  Buddha-age  as  the  son  of  the  raja  of  a 
district,5  he  succeeded  to  his  title  when  quite  young.  But 

1  Cf.  LX VII.  2  Lit.,  Ambrosia,  Aviata,  or  Nibbana. 

3  Bit.,  no  pith  or  kernel,  the  usual  metaphor  for  no  truth  or 
genuineness. 

4  Ps.  C.  is  by  another  Devasabha, 

5  Mandalika-rtija.  This  term  occurs  in  Vinaya  Texts ,  iii.  47.  I  have 
no  evidence  of  the  comparative  rank  attaching  to  the  title. 


84 


XC.  SAM1DATTA 


when  being  awakened  (buddlio)  he  went  to  hear  the  Master 
teach,  he  resigned  his  title,  entered  the  Order,  and  anon  won 
arahantship.  Then  joy  arose  in  him  when  he  reflected  on 
the  corrupting  things  he  had  put  away,  and  he  burst  forth 
in  this  psalm  : 

Transcended  is  the  miry  bog  of  lusts. 

Past  doom  infernal  am  I  safely  come 
From  flood  and  fetter  dire  to  liberty, 

And  shed  is  every  form  of  self  conceit.1  (89) 


XC 

Samidatta. 

Eeborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Rajagaha  as  the  son  of  a 
brahmin,  he  was  called  Samidatta.  When  arrived  at  years 
of  discretion,  he  heard  of  the  Buddha’s  puissance,  and 
went  with  laymen  to  the  Vihara  to  hear  him.  He  believed 
and  entered  the  Order,  but  from  the  immaturity  of  his. 
knowledge  he  continued  for  a  little  while  without  applica¬ 
tion.  Finally,  on  again  hearing  the  Master  teach,  he 
became  devoted  and  intent,  and  won  arahantship. 

Later  on  the  bhikkhus  asked  him  :  ‘  How  now,  friend,, 
have  you  reached  the  state  of  the  elect?’2  And  he,  show¬ 
ing  the  guiding  efficacy  of  the  doctrine,  and  his  own 
attainment  in  the  Norm  and  minor  doctrines  (dhamma- 
nudhamma),  confessed  anna  in  this  verse : 

The  factors  of  my  life  well  understood 

Stand  yet  a  little  while  with  severed  root. 

Slain  is  the  round  of  living  aye  renewed. 

Now  is  there  no  more  coming  back  to  be.3  (90) 

1  Mdna.  Nine  forms  are  distinguished  ( Vibh .,  p.  889).  Cf.  Bud.. 
Psy.y  p.  299,  which  gives  the  first  three  only. 

2  TJttari-manussadhammo,  or,  of  the  ‘  supermen.’ 

3  Cf.  LXXX.  and  LXXXYII. 


XCI.  PARIPUNNAKA 


85 


PART  X 

XCI 

Paripunnaka.  ' 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Kapilavatthu,  in  the 
family  of  a  Sakiyan  raja.  And  because  of  the  completeness 
of  his  gifts  and  fortune  he  became  known  as  Paripunnaka.1 
His  means  allowed  him  to  enjoy  at  all  times  food  of  a 
hundred  essences.  But  he,  hearing  that  the  Master  par¬ 
took  of  mixed  scraps,  said  :  ‘  Though  he  be  delicately  bred, 
the  Exalted  One  lives  thus,  contemplating  the  bliss  of 
Nibbana.  Why  should  we  in  our  greed  become  epicures  ? 
Let  us,  too,  seek  for  that  bliss  of  Nibbana !’  Thus 
agitated  he  renounced  his  home,  entered  the  Order,  and, 
taking  his  exercise  of  meditation  on  the  body  from  the  Exalted 
One,  he  in  due  course  attained  arahantship.  Thereupon 
he  burst  forth  into  this  psalm  : 2 

Never  as  ’t  were  some  dish  of  hundred  essences, 
Could  I  o’errate  what  I  partook  to-day, 

When  He,  the  all-seeing  Gotama,3  the  Buddha  blest, 
Himself  revealed  to  me  the  holy  Norm.  (91) 


XCII 

Vijaya. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthi,  in  a 
brahmin’s  family,  and  named  Vijaya.  When  he  had 
learnt  the  brahmin  wisdom,  he  left  the  world  as  an  ascetic, 

1  Meaning  ‘  fulfilled’  or  ‘  perfected,’  with  ka ,  agent-noun  affix. 

2  The  metre  is  here  not  that  of  the  usual  sloka. 

3  Note  the  frank  but  infrequent  mention  of  the  Master’s  name,  a 
usage  not  countenanced  by  later  Buddhists.  In  this  work  it  occurs 
eight  times,  in  the  Sisters  twice  (c/.  Vinaya  Texts,  i.  228).  Cf.  the 
corresponding  reticence  among  many  Episcopalian  Christians. 


86 


XCII.  VIJAYA 


and  dwelt  in  the  forest  practising  jhana.  Then  he  heard 
of  the  Buddha’s  mission  and  was  glad,  and  went  to  salute 
and  hear  him.  Thereupon  he  entered  the  Order  and  soon 
won  arahantship,  confessing  anna  in  this  verse : 

In  whom  the  intoxicants  are  dried  up ; 

Whose  happiness  dep)endeth  not  on  food ; 

Whose  range  is  in  the  Void  and  the  Unmarked 
And  Liberty : — as  flight  of  birds  in  air 
So  hard  is  it  to  track  the  trail  of  him.1  (92) 


XCIII 
E  raka. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthi,  as  the 
son  of  an  eminent  person,  and  was  named  Eraka.2  He 
had  beauty  and  charm,  so  that  in  all  that  he  had  to  do  he 
was  in  the  most  highly  favoured  position  for  doing  it.  His 
parents  wedded  him  to  a  maiden  suitable  for  beauty,  virtue, 
years,  and  accomplishments.  But  anon,  because  it  was  his 
final  life,  he  grew  agitated  at  continued  being,  and  sought 

1  Intoxicants  =  dsava  (see  Ps.  XLVII.).  Food  ( cihdro ),  repre¬ 
sents  all  the  four  necessaries  provided  by  the  laity  (food,  clothing, 
lodging,  medicine).  Commentary.  ‘Liberty  ’  represents  the  Third  Sign 
of  ‘  Freedom  from  Hankerings,’  or  Content.  As  an  arahant,  his  mind 
dwells  only  on  ideas  and  desires  void  of,  and  unmarked  by,  the  three 
features — Ill,  Impermanence,  Soul-delusion.  By  ‘  trail  ’  (paddy)  is 
meant  destiny — namely,  rebirth.  Part  of  this  gatha,  and  approximately 
the  same  Commentary,  occur  in  Dhammapada,  verse  92  (Commen 
tary,  ii.  171-173),  ascribed  to  the  Master  when  addressing  Belatthasisa 
(cf.  Ps.  XVI.).  The  Commentary  cited  enumerates  all  forms  of  rebirth ; 
Dhammapala  gives  only  ‘  destiny  ’  in  purgatory,  and  the  rest.  Both 
say  only,  it  is  as  impossible  to  declare  what  is  his  destiny,  as  to  say 
where,  or  how,  birds  will  alight. 

2  Eraka  seems  to  have  been  a  kind  of  plant,  perhaps  a  grass,  woven 
into  blankets  or  mats  ( Vinaya  Texts ,  ii.  35,  n.  3  ;  Jdtaka ,  iii.  91 ; 
Sisters,  lxii.  435).  A  town  is  called  Eraka-grass  in  Majjh.,  i.  87  = 
Milinda,  i.  276.  Cf.  also  Dhp.  Com.,  iii.  231. 


XCIII.  E  It  AlvA 


87 


the  Master.  After  hearing  him  teach  the  Norm,  Eraka  left 
the  world.  And  the  Master  gave  him  an  exercise,  but  for 
some  days  he  remained  mastered  by  evil  thoughts.  Then 
the  Master,  knowing  the  course  of  his  thoughts,  admonished 
him  in  a  verse.  And  he,  on  hearing  it,  thought :  ‘  Unfitly 
have  I  acted ;  I,  fool,  that  I  should  have  continued  full  of 
bad  thoughts  when  learning  from  such  a  Master.’  And  in 
distress  he  devoted  himself  to  gaining  insight,  and  soon 
won  arahantship.  Thereupon  he  confessed  anna  by  re¬ 
peating  that  verse : 

Woeful  are  worldly  wishes,  Eraka! 

No  weal  in  worldly  wishes,  Eraka ! 

Whoso  desireth  joys  of  sense  desireth  ill. 

Whoso  desires  not  joys  of  sense  desires  no  ill.1  (93) 


XCIY 

Mettaj  i. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  the  kingdom  of  Magadha 
as  the  son  of  a  brahmin,  he  was  named  Mettaji.2  Grown 
up,  he  saw  the  evil  of  worldly  desire,  and  became  an  ascetic 
dwelling  in  the  forest.  Hearing  of  the  Buddha’s  advent, 
and  impelled  by  antecedent  causes,  he  sought  the  Master 
and  asked  him  concerning  his  progress  and  regress.  The 
answer  given  convinced  him  that  he  should  enter  the  Order, 

1  The  austere  jejune  simplicity  of  this  gatha  is  not  poetic,  and  is 
closely  followed  in  the  translation.  Kama  (worldly  wishes ;  joys  of 
sense)  is  not  easy  to  equate.  Buddhism  defines  this  plane  of  life,  and 
animal  life,  and  the  lower  heavens,  too,  as  all  ‘  sphere  of  Kama.’ 
‘  Unregenerate  desire  ’  is  perhaps  the  nearest  rendering.  ‘  Desire  ’ 
alone  is  not  correct,  for  there  is  the  dhamma-chanda ,  or  desire  for 
higher  things,  also  characterizing  life  on  the  Mmtivacara  plane. 
Dr.  Neumann  has  ‘Lust’;  our  word  ‘lust’  is  degraded  by  specializa¬ 
tion.  ‘  Pleasure  ’  should  not  be  so  degraded,  for  there  is  pleasure 
(sukha)  not  entailing  woe. 

2  Conqueror  by  affection. 


88 


XCIV.  METTAJI 


whereupon  he  won  arahantship.  And  in  this  verse  he 
extolled  the  Master  : 

All  glory  to  the  Exalted  One, 

Our  splendid  Lord,  the  Sakiyas’  son ! 

For  lie  the  topmost  height  hath  won, 

And  well  the  Norm  supreme  hath  shown.  (9T) 


XCV 

Cakkhupala. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthi,  as  the 
son  of  a  landed  proprietor  named  Maha-suvanna,  and  re¬ 
ceived  the  name  of  Pala.1  He  was  also  called  Pala  major, 
because  his  younger  brother  was  called  Pala  minor.  And 
the  parents  bound  the  sons  in  domestic  bonds.  But  the 
Master  came  to  the  Jeta  Grove,  and  there  Pala  major 
heard  him,  and  leaving  his  brother  to  manage  the  property 
entered  the  Order.  After  five  years  of  novitiate,  he  went 
with  sixty  bhikkhus  to  perfect  his  studies.  And  they 
chose  a  woodland  spot  near  a  border  village,  where  the 
villagers  were  lay-followers,  and  he,  dwelling  in  a  leaf-hut, 
practised  the  duties  of  a  recluse. 

He  was  attacked  by  ophthalmia,  and  a  doctor  prescribed 
for  him.  But  he  did  not  follow  the  advice,  and  the  disease 
grew  worse.  ‘  Better,’  he  thought,  ‘  is  the  allaying  of  the 
moral  torments  ( ltilesd )  than  that  of  eye-disease.’  Thus  he 
neglected  the  latter  and  worked  at  his  insight,  so  that  eyes 
and  torments  perished  at  the  same  time.  And  he  became 
a  ‘  dry-visioned  ’  arahant.2 

Now  the  village  patrons  asked  the  bhikkhus  what  had 
become  of  the  Thera,  and,  hearing  of  his  blindness,  they 

1  The  full  name  means  Eye-guardian,  the  father’s  Great-golden. 
The  story  is  given  in  somewhat  ampler  detail  and  slightly  varied 
diction  in  the  Dhammapada  Commentary  on  the  opening  verses  of 
that  anthology.  Pronounced  Chakkhu-. 

2  See  Compendium,  p.  75. 


XCV.  CAKKHUPALA 


89 


ministered,  to  his  wants  full  of  compunction.  Then  those 
bhikkhus  having  also  won  arahantship,  they  proposed  that 
they  should  return  to  SavatthI  to  salute  the  Master ;  but 
the  Thera  said :  ‘  I  am  weak  and  blind,  and  the  journey  is 
not  without  risk.  I  should  hinder  you.  Do  ye  go  first  and 
salute  for  me  the  Master  and  the  great  Theras,  and  tell 
Pala  minor  of  my  state  that  he  may  send  a  servant  to  me.’ 
At  length  they  consented  to  go,  after  taking  leave  of  their 
patrons  and  providing  him  with  a  lodging.  And  they  carried 
out  his  bidding,  and  Pala  minor  sent  his  nephew  Palika. 
And  the  bhikkhus  ordained  Palika,  because  the  road  was 
not  safe  for  a  solitary  layman.  He  went  and  announced 
himself  to  the  Thera,  and  set  out  with  him.  Midway,  near 
a  village  in  the  forest,  a  woodcutter’s  wife  was  singing. 
And  the  novice  was  smitten  by  the  sound,  and,  bidding  his 
uncle  wait,  went  and  dallied  with  her.  The  Thera  thought : 

4  Now  I  heard  a  woman  singing,  and  my  novice  stays  long. 
Is  he  not  evilly  employed  ?’  The  youth  returned,  saying  : 
‘Let  us  go,  sir.’  And  the  Thera  said:  ‘What!  hast  thou 
been  vile?’  The  novice  at  length  confessed,  and  the  Thera 
said  :  ‘  One  so  evil  shall  hold  no  staff  for  me.  Get  thee 
hence  !’  ‘  But  the  way  is  perilous,  and  you  are  blind.  How 
will  you  go?’  ‘Fool!  even  if  I  lie  down  and  die,  yet  will 

I  get  on,  but  not  with  such  as  thee.’  Then  he  uttered  this 
verse : 

All  blind  am  I  and  perished  are  mine  eyes 

And  through  the  jungle’s  wilderness  I  fare. 

E’en  then  I’ll  go,  and  were  it  lying  down, 

But  not  with  child  of  evil  as  my  mate.  (95) 

Then  the  other,  conscious  of  his  evil  action,  weeping  with 
outstretched  arms,  plunged  into  the  forest.  But  the  efficacy 
of  the  Thera’s  virtue  made  Sakka’s  throne  hot,  and  the  god, 
in  the  shape  of  a  man  journeying  to  SavatthI,  took  his  staff 
and  brought  him  that  evening  to  SavatthI  to  the  Jeta  Grove. 
And  Pala  minor  ministered  to  him  all  his  days. 


90 


XCVI.  KHANDASUMANA 

•  • 


XCVI 

Khandasumana. 

•  • 

Eeborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Pava  in  the  family  of  a 
Maharaja,1  he  was  named  Khandasumana  (Jasmine),  because 
on  his  birthday  the  jasmine  was  in  bloom.2  He  heard  the 
Exalted  One  while  the  latter  was  staying  in  Cunda’s  mango 
grove  at  Pava,3  entered  the  Order,  and  acquired  sixfold 
abhinna.  Thereupon  he  remembered  his  own  former 
births  :  how  he  had  offered  a  plant  of  jasmine  at  the  tope 
of  Kassapa  Buddha  when  all  the  plucked  flowers  went  to 
form  the  king’s  own  offering ;  and,  discerning  how  this  act 
had  guided  him  to  Nibbana  now,  he  said  this  verse : 

One  flower  in  pious  offering  brought 
Did  win  me  years  on  years  of  pleasant  life 
In  heavenly  worlds  ;  the  balance  hath  availed 
To  bring  me  perfect  peace  and  purity.4  (96) 


XCVII 

Tissa. 

Beborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  the  town  of  Boguva  in  a 
raja’s  family,  at  his  father’s  death  he  succeeded  to  the 
title.  As  an  absent  ally  of  King  Bimbisara,  he  sent  him 
presents  of  jewels,  pearls,  and  robes.  The  king  sent  him 
in  return  the  life  of  the  Buddha  on  a  painted  panel,  and 
the  Conditioned  Genesis  on  a  gold  plate  specially  inscribed.5 6 

1  See  p.  10,  n.  3. 

2  Sumana  is  jasmine  ;  Khanda  is  broken,  fragmentary.  The  jasmine 
is  called  khanda-saJchara ,  broken-sugar. 

3  See  Dialogues ,  ii.  137.  Pronounced  Chunda. 

4  Lit.,  ‘  by  the  remainder  am  I  nibbuto  ’  —  i.e .,  ‘  I  have  parinibbdna 
of  the  kilesa’s,’  entire  going  out  or  quieting  away  of  the  ten  kinds  of 

moral  corruption  or  torment.  See  above,  LXXII.,  n. 

6  Early  historians  were  not  over-careful  in  the  matter  of  attributing 
civilization  of  their  own  day 'to  an  earlier  age;  nevertheless,  writing 


XCVII.  TISSA 


91 


When  he  saw  these,  because  he  had  resolved  under  former 
Buddhas  and  because  it  was  his  last  birth,  he  pondered  on 
going  forward  and  turning  back,  setting  the  order  of  the 
doctrine  in  his  heart  and  growing  uneasy  till  he  came 
to  this  conclusion  :  ‘  Now  have  I  seen  the  likeness  of  the 
Exalted  One,  and  have  learnt  the  order  of  his  doctrine  at 
the  same  time.  Full  of  ill  are  worldly  desires.  What  have 
I  to  do  with  the  life  in  houses  ?’  And  he  abdicated,  entered 
the  Order,  and,  taking  his  earthen  bowl  and  followed,  as 
was  Prince  Pukkusati,* 1  by  a  lamenting  populace,  he  left 
the  town  and  went  to  Rajagaha.  There  he  dwelt  in  the 
Sabbasondika  Cave,  and  visited  the  Exalted  One.  And 
learning  of  him,  he  won  arahantship.  Thereupon  alluding 
to  his  experiences,  he  uttered  this  psalm : 

Renouncing  costly  vessels  wrought  in  bronze, 

In  gold  and  lac,  I  grasped  this  earthen  bowl. 

The  second  time  was  I  anointed  then.  (97) 


was  certainly  known  in  India  in  early  Buddhist  days,  even  though  the 
use  of  it  might  (through  lack  of  suitable  book-material)  be  limited  to 
the  brief  contents  of  tablets.  As  to  the  contents  written,  the  historical 
critic  should  bear  in  mind  that  a  ministry,  growing  in  public  esteem 
and  success  for  forty  years,  may  well  have  seen  its  founder’s  life  and 

leading  doctrines  written  and  circulated,  even  without  the  printing 
press. 

1  Tissa’s  story  is,  indeed,  so  like  a  brief  resume  of  the  full  and 
pleasant  chronicle  of  the  friendship  between  Pukkusati,  king  of  Tak- 
kasila  and  Bimbisara,  recorded  by  Buddhaghosa  in  the  Commentary  on 
Majjh.,  iii.  237  ff .,  that  it  seems  not  unlikely  the  two  accounts  bifurcated 
out  of  one.  Pukkusati  was  gored  by  a  fierce  cow  on  the  eve  of  his 
entering  the  Order,  and  so  is  not  inscribed  among  the  Tlieras.  Bimbi- 
sara’s  gifts  differ  a  little  in  either  story.  To  Pukkusati  he  sent  a 
description  of  the  e  Three  Gems  ’ — Buddha,  Dhamma,  Sangha— and 
on  the  gold  plate  he  had  inscribed  various  tenets,  Satipatthanas, 
Eightfold  Path,  thirty-seven  Wisdom  Factors,  but.wotf  the  Paticca- 
samuppd  a.  There  is  no  commoner  name  in  Indian  literature  than 
Tissa,  but  this  ex-king  of  Boguva  is  not  identifiable  with  any  other 
of  the  known  Tissas.  The  verse  recurs  in  Ps.  CCLIY. 


92 


XCVIII.  ABHAYA 


XCYIII 

Abhaya  (2). 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  SavatthI  in  a  brahmin 
family,  he  was  called  Abhaya.  After  he  had  heard  the 
Master  teach  and  had  entered  the  Order,  he  went  one  day 
for  alms  into  the  village,1  and  saw  a  woman  attractively 
dressed.  This  disturbed  his  mental  composure,  so  that  he 
returned  to  the  Vihara  thinking :  ‘  Looking  on  a  visible 
object  has  corrupted  me.  I  have  done  amiss.’  Thus  re¬ 
pudiating  that  consciousness,  he  so  developed  insight  as 
to  win  arahantship. 

Thereupon  he  reviewed  his  moral  slip  and  his  recovery 
in  this  verse : 

Sight  of  fair  shape  bewildering  self-control,2 
If  one  but  heed  the  image  sweet  and  dear, 

The  heart  inflamed  in  feeling  doth  o’erflow 

And  clinging  stayeth.  Thus  in  him  do  grow 

The  deadly  taints  3  that  bring  new  living  near.  (98) 


XCIX 

Uttiya. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Kapilavatthu  in  the  family 
of  a  Sakiyan  raja,  he  was  named  Uttiya.4  Come  to  years 
of  discretion,  he  witnessed  the  power  of  the  Buddha 
when  the  latter  came  to  visit  his  kin,5  believed  in  him,  and 
entered  the  Order.  As  a  student  he  visited  the  village  one 
day  for  alms,  and  on  the  way  he  heard  a  woman  singing, 
and  his  concentration  gave  way,  desire  and  passion  arising 
in  him.  Checking  himself  by  the  power  of  reflection,  he 

1  So  in  XIX.  and  XXIX.  This  is  clearly  not  the  Abhaya  of  XXYI. 

2  Sati  =  mindfulness,  heedfulness,  control  of  thought. 

3  Asavd.  Cf.  verses  794  ff.  ;  Sarjy.,  iv.  73. 

4  The  Commentary  (Br.)  has  both  Uttiya  and  Uttariya. 

6  See  above,  LXIII. 


C.  DEVASABHA 


93 


entered  the  Vihara  much  agitated,  and  seating  himself  for 
siesta-meditation,  he  so  developed  insight  that  he  won 
arahantship.  Thereupon  he  mentioned  his  release  from 
the  ills  of  rebirth,  through  disgust  at  the  corruptions,  in  this 
verse : 

Sound  of  sweet  voice  bewildering  self-control, 

If  one  but  think  upon  the  image  dear, 

The  heart  inflamed  in  feeling  doth  o’erflow 
And  clinging  stayeth.  Thus  in  him  do  grow 
The  deadly  taints  that  bring  Sapsara 1  near.  (99) 

C 

Devasabha  (2).2 

Eeborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Kapilavatthu  in  the  family 
of  a  Sakiyan  raja,  he  was  named  Devasabha.  When  grown 
up  he  believed  when  he  saw  the  Master  appeasing  the  quarrel 
between  Sakiyans  and  Koliyans,3  and  was  established  in 
the  Refuges.  Again,  he  went  when  the  Master  was  staying 
at  the  Banyan  Park,  this  time  entering  the  Order.  He 
won  arahantship,  and  dwelling  on  the  bliss  of  his  emanci¬ 
pation,  he  burst  forth  in  rapture  with  this  psalm : 

Whoso  supreme  endeavour  doth  put  forth, 

Whose  range  is  in  the  fourfold  heedfulness,4 

He  with  fair  flowers  of  Liberty  enwreathed, 

Sane  and  immune,  will  reach  the  perfect  peace.5  (100) 

Thus  the  Thera  confessed  anna. 

1  Pronounced  Sangsara,  ‘  continual  going  ’ ;  the  stream  or  cycle  o 
rebirth,  new  life  and  death. 

2  See  LXXXIX. 

3  See  Kunala-Jataka,  Introduction,  Jdtaka,  v.  450,  and  above, 
LXXIX. 

4  See  Compendium,  p.  179  ;  Dialogues,  ii.  327  ff. 

rv^5  Lit.,  will  parinibbdn- ate  void  of  dsava's.  The  Commentary  says, 
perfected  by  both  sa-upddisesa  and  anupddisesa  Nibbana  ( cf .  Com - 
pendium,  p.  153,  n.  5).  ‘  Sane  and  immune  ’  is  used  throughout  these 

verses  to  express  the  awkward  term  an-asavo. 


94 


Cl.  BELATTHAKANI 


PART  XI 

Cl 

Belatthakani. 

•  • 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  SavatthI  in  a  brahmin’s 
family,  he  was  named  Belatthakani.  When  after  hearing 
the  Master  teach  he  had  entered  the  Order,  and  was  prac¬ 
tising  calm  and  insight  in  a  forest  of  Kosala,  he  grew  very 
slothful  and  was  also  rough  of  speech.  Hence  he  did  not 
evoke  the  right  state  of  mind  for  his  exercises.  Now  the 
Exalted  One  considered  his  maturing  insight,  and  stirred 
his  heart  by  this  admonitory  verse  : 

Though  layman’s  life  be  left,  yet  if  the  task 
Remain  undone,  the  mouth  harsh  furrows  plough, 
The  paunch  be  full,  the  mind  all  slack  with  sloth  : — 
Like  a  great  hog  with  provender  replete, 

He  cometh  back,  again,  again  to  birth.1  (101) 

Then  he,  seeing  the  Master  as  if  seated  before  him,  was 
thrilled  with  agitation  at  his  discourse,  and  establishing 
insight,  was  not  long  in  winning  arahantship.  And 
through  the  divers  expressions  of  the  psalm,  he  declared 
his  anna. 


CII 

Setuccha. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  as  the  son  of  the  raja  of  a 
district,2  he  was  unable  to  maintain  his  country’s  indepen¬ 
dence,  and  lost  his  throne.  Wandering  about  the  land 
unhappy,  he  saw  and  heard  the  Exalted  One,  entered  the 

1  See  XVII.  2  Mandala-rdjd.  See  p.  83,  n.  5. 


CIII.  BANDHURA 


95 


Order,  and  won  arahantship.  And  inveighing  in  his  psalm 
against  worldliness,  he  thus  in  divers  ways  confessed  anna  : 

By  vain  conceits  deluded,  and  their  minds 
Corrupted  by  the  varied  things  of  sense ; 
Flushed  by  their  gains,  by  dearth  thereof  upset, 
They  fail  to  win  the  concentrated  mind.  (102) 


CIII 

Bandhura. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  the  town  of  Silavatl1  as 
the  son  of  a  councillor,  he  was  named  Bandhura.2 *  And 
going  one  day  on  some  business  to  Savatthi,  he  went  with 
the  laity  to  the  Vihara,  heard  the  Master,  believed  and 
entered  the  Order,  and  in  due  time  won  arahantship.  Now 
to  render  service  to  his  raja  and  so  show  his  gratitude  for 
his  success,  he  went  to  Silavatl  and  preached  the  Norm  to 
the  raja,  declaring  to  him  the  Four  Truths.  The  raja 
became  a  convert,  built  a  great  Vihara  in  the  township, 
calling  it  Sudassana,  and  bestowed  it  on  the  Thera  with 
many  honours  and  offerings.  The  latter  handed  over 
everything  to  the  Order,  and  going  on  his  rounds  as  before, 
conceived  the  wish  to  go  to  Savatthi.  The  bhikkhus  said  : 
‘  Sir,  stay  with  us.  If  you  lack  in  what  you  require,  we 
will  make' it  good.’  He  replied  :  4 1  have  no  need,  friends, 
of  anything  out  of  the  way  ;  I  keep  going  on  anything  I 
get.  I  am  content  with  the  savour  of  the  Norm,’  and 
uttered  this  psalm  : 

Nay,  ’tis  not  this  I  need,  who  live  in  bliss, 

Regaled  by  sweetest  nectar  of  the  Norm. 

Drinking  those  drops  peerless,  supreme,  shall  I 

F orsooth  my  tongue  with  poison  now  acquaint  ?  (103) 

1  A  town  of  the  Sakiyas  ( Sayy i.  117  ff.). 

2  The  Burmese  Commentary  calls  him  Bandhana  and  Sandhaya. 

One  Singhalese  MS.  calls  him  Sandhava. 


96 


CIV.  KHITAKA 


CIV 

Khitaka. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthi  in  a  brahmin’s 
family,  he  heard,  when  grown  up,  of  the  great  supernormal 
powers  of  Moggallana  the  Great.1  And  he  thought :  ‘  I, 
too,  will  become  so  gifted.’  And  impelled  by  prior  causes 
he  entered  the  Order  under  the  Exalted  One,  and  by 
exercising  himself  in  the  training  for  calm  and  insight, 
acquired  in  due  course  sixfold  abhinna.  Then  he,  enjoy¬ 
ing  the  various  forms  of  supernormal  movement,  continued 
to  bestow  favour  on  beings  by  the  wonder  of  those  acts  and 
by  the  wonder  of  training.2  When  the  bhikkhus  asked  him  : 

‘  Khitaka,  friend,  do  you  employ  supernormal  power  ?’  he 
uttered  this  verse : 

Buoyant  in  sooth  my  body,  every  pulse 
Throbbing  in  wondrous  bliss  and  ecstasy. 

Even  as  cotton-down  blown  on  the  breeze, 

So  floats  and  hovers  this  my  body  light.  (104) 

CV 

Malitavambha. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  the  town  of  Kurukaccha 
as  a  brahmin’s  son,  he  was  converted  by  the  preaching 
of  Pacchabhu,  the  great  Thera,3  and  entered  the  Order. 
Working  at  exercises  for  insight,  he  abode  in  any  place 
where,  of  the  four  necessaries  of  life,4  only  suitable  food 
was  hard  to  get ;  but  where  such  food  was  easily  got  and 

1  Gf.  Moggallana’s  poem,  CCLXIII. 

2  These  are  the  first  and  third  of  the  three  sorts  of  wonders  which 
the  Buddha  claimed  to  know  ( Dialogues ,  i.  277,  cf.  88).  The  second  was 
the  ‘  wonder  of  manifestation  ’ — i.e .,  thought-reading. 

3  A  name  not  met  with  elsewhere.  The  episode  may  be  of  later 
date.  The  name  itself— lit.,  Epigonus— is  possibly  significant. 

4  The  four  necessaries  (paccaya)  for  a  bhikkhu  were  food,  raiment, 
lodging,  and  medicine.  Not  too  little  ease  nor  too  much  comfort  for 
the  holy  life  is  the  maxim.  The  subject,  as  Dr.  Neumann  reminds  us, 
is  expanded  in  Mcijjh .,  18th  Sutta. 


CV.  MALITAVAMBHA 


97 


the  lest  difficult  to  find,  he  went  away.  So  continuing, 
because  he  had  the  antecedents,  and  was  of  the  nature  of 
the  Great  Men,1  he  expanded  insight,  and  in  due  course 
became  an  arahant.  Thereupon,  reflecting  on  his  attain¬ 
ment,  he  broke  forth  in  this  verse : 

Where  I  am  straitened  let  me  never  dwell,2 

Let  me  go  thence,  if  life  too  pleasant  prove. 

Ne’er  will  the  man  with  eyes  to  see  abide 

Where  aught  may  hinder  in  the  quest  supreme.  (105) 

CVI 

Suhemanta. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  the  Border  country  as  the 
son  of  a  wealthy  brahmin,  he  went  to  hear  the  Exalted 
One  teach  the  Norm  in  the  deer  park  at  the  town  of 
Sankassa.3  Leaving  the  world  he  joined  the  Order,  and 
became  a  reciter  of  the  Three  Pitakas,4  becoming  in 
due  course  possessor  of  sixfold  abhinna.  Thereupon  he 
thought :  ‘  I  have  won  all  that  a  disciple  may  win.  What 
if  I  were  now  to  do  a  service  to  the  brethren  ?’  So  he 
lectured  to  them  and  solved  their  difficulties.  And  one 
day  he  addressed  them  and  other  intelligent  persons  con¬ 
cerning  himself  in  this  verse  : 

A  hundred  tokens  show,  a  hundred  marks 
Betray  wherein  the  hidden  meaning6  lies. 

Whoso  hath  eyes  to  see  but  one,  a  dullard  is, 

Who  can  discern  the  hundred,  he  is  wise.  (106) 

Thus  the  Thera  magnified  before  the  Brethren  his  attain¬ 
ment  of  analytic  knowledge  that  was  so  excellent. 

Mahdpurisajdtikatciya.  This  is  the  only  instance  where  this  ex¬ 
pression  occurs.  I  do  not  see  the  special  bearing  of  it  in  Malitavambha’s 
case.  A  Great  Man  was  either  a  Buddha  or  a  great  emperor. 

2  The  tense  throughout  is  the  optative.  ‘  Quest,’  or  ‘  welfare  ’  ( attha ). 

3  Mentioned  by  Fa-Hien  as  a  thriving  Buddhist  centre.  The  name 

exists  to  this  day,  the  village  being  45  miles  north-east  of  Kaniij 
(Legge’s  Travels  of  Fa-Hien,  1886).  4  Cf.  LXV.,  n.  2. 

0  Attha=ueyya,  Cy. 

Note.— On  previous  page,  n.  4,  read  17 th  Sutta. 


rr 

I 


98 


evil.  DHAMMASAVA 


CYII 

Dhammasava. 

Reborn  in  the  kingdom  of  Magadha  in  a  brahmin  s 
family,  and  impelled  by  maturity  of  conditions,  he  pre¬ 
ferred  the  religious  to  the  household  life.  Seeking  the 
Exalted  One  on  the  South  Hill,1  he  heard  him  teach  the 
Norm,  whereupon  he  entered  the  Order,  and  in  due  course 
became  an  arahant.  And  reflecting  with  joy  upon  his 
career,  he  broke  forth  in  this  psalm,  confessing  anna  : 

I  pondered  well,  then  sought  the  life  that  lay 
Beyond  the  walls  and  bonds  of  household  life. 

The  Threefold  Wisdom  have  I  made  my  own, 

And  all  the  Buddha’s  ordinance  is  done.2  (107) 

CVIII 

Dhammasava’s  Father. 

He  followed  his  son’s  example,  saying :  ‘  My  son  left  the 
world  when  he  was  young ;  why  should  not  I  leave  it  ?’  So 
he,  too,  sought  the  Master,  and  in  due  course  realized 
arahantship  and  uttered  his  psalm  : 

A  hundred  years  was  I  and  eke  a  score, 

When  forth  I  went  and  knew  my  home  no  more. 
The  Threefold  Wisdom  have  I  made  my  own, 

And  all  the  Buddha’s  ordinance  is  done.  (108) 


CIN 

Sangha-Rakkhita.3 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  a  wealthy  family  at  SavatthI, 
he  found  faith,  and  entering  the  Order  took  an  exercise, 
and  joined  another  bhikkhu,  both  dwelling  in  the  forest. 
Not  far  from  where  they  abode,  a  doe  in  the  thicket  had 

1  Dakkhinagiri  ( Vinaya  Texts ,  ii.  207,  n.  2). 

2  Ps.  XXIV.  3  =  Guarded  by  the  Order. 


CIX.  SAN GHA-R AKKHIT A 


99 


given  birth  to  a  fawn.  Tending  it,  her  love  kept  her  from 
going  far  from  it,  and  lacking  grass  and  water  close  by 
she  was  famished.  Seeing  her  the  Thera  said:  4  Ah, 
surely  this  world  bound  in  the  bonds  of  craving  suffers 
sore,  unable  to  cut  them  !’  And  taking  this  feeling  as  a 
goad,  he  developed  insight  and  won  arahantship.  There¬ 
upon,  discerning  that  his  companion  was  cherishing  many 
wrong  thoughts,  he  admonished  him  through  the  parable 
of  the  doe,  and  uttered  this  verse  : 

Not  yet  doth  he,  though  in  retreat  he  dwell, 

Con  o’er  the  system  by  that  Blest  One  (planned) 
Wdio  showed  compassion  for  our  highest  good. 

Still  are  his  powers  relaxed  and  uncontrolled, 

Like  woodland  doe  all  tender  grown  and  weak.1  (109) 

Now  hearing  these  words  that  bhikkhu  grew  agitated, 
and  expanding  insight,  in  due  course  won  arahantship. 


CX 

Usabha. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  a  wealthy  family,  in  the 
kingdom  of  Kosala,  he  found  faith  in  the  Master  when  the 
latter  accepted  the  gift  of  the  Jeta  Grove.  Finishing  his 
novitiate,  he  dwelt  in  the  forest  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain. 
Now  at  the  time  of  the  rains,  the  clouds  had  emptied 
themselves  in  the  crests  of  the  hills  and  trees ;  bushes  and 
creepers  became  filled  with  dense  foliage.  Then  the  Thera, 
going  forth  one  day  from  his  cave,  saw  the  loveliness  of 
the  woods  and  the  mountains,  and  considered  seriously : 

*  These  trees  and  creepers  are  unconscious,  yet  by  the 
season’s  fulfilment  they  have  won  growth.  Why  should  not 

1  This  stanza  is  a  notable  example,  among  others,  of  the  extra¬ 
ordinary  difficulty  attending  translation  in  the  absence  of  the  Com¬ 
mentary.  Lack  of  the  simple  little  narrative  has  landed  Dr.  Neumann 
in  a  very  different  interpretation,  with  a  strained  use  of  the  word 
pakatindriyo.  Pdkata  —  asayvuta  (Commentary).  Cf.  Milinda ,  ii.  72. 


100 


CX.  USAJ3HA 


I  who  have  attained  a  suitable  season  win  growth  by  good 
qualities?’1  And  he  uttered  this  verse,  which  became  his 
confession  of  anna,  for  he  fortnwith  strove  and  won 
arahantship  : 

The  trees  on  high  by  towering  cloud  refreshed 
With  the  new  rain  break  forth  in  verdant  growth. 
To  Usabha  who  for  detachment  longs, 

And  hath  the  forest  sense  of  things,2  doth  come 
[From  this  responsive  spring]  abundant  good.  (110) 


PART  XII 

CXI 

Jenta. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  the  kingdom  of 
Magadha  at  the  village  of  Jenta,  as  the  son  of  the  raja  of  a 
district.3  While  still  young,  his  mind,  impelled  by  maturity  of 
conditions,  inclined  to  leaving  the  world,  and  he  turned  the 
matter  over  and  wTondered  what  he  should  do.  So  doubting 
he  heard  the  Master  preach.  From  that  day  he  became  de¬ 
voted  to  the  religious  life,  and  entered  the  Order.  Happily 
working  and  with  swift  insight,  he  realized  arahantship ; 
then  reflecting  on  his  attainment  and  how  he  had  been 
perplexed,  he  joyously  uttered  this  verse: 

Hard  is  the  life  without  the  world,  and  hard 

In  sooth  to  bear  house  life.  Deep  is  the  Norm  ; 

Hard  too  is  wealth  to  win.  Thus  difficult 

The  choice  of  one  or  other  how  to  live. 

Behoves  me  bear  unceasingly  in  mind 

[And  see  in  everything]  Impermanence.  (Ill) 

1  Cf.  Keble’s  autumnal  pendant  to  this  mood : 

‘  Yet  stay  awhile  and  see  the  calm  leaves  float 
Each  to  its  rest  beneath  their  parent  shade,'  etc. 

2  =  arahhasahhino. 

3  Mandalikarcijassa.  Cf.  p.  88,  n.  5. 


CXII.  VACCHAGOTTA 


101 


CXII 

Vaeehag’otta. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Rajagaha  as  the  son  of 
a  wealthy  brahmin,  and  because  there  were  four  Theras 
named  Yaccha,  he  was  called  Yacchagotta.1  Come  to  years 
of  discretion,  and  expert  in  brahmin  learning,  he,  as  a 
seeker  after  emancipation,  found  no  pith  in  those  studies, 
and  became  a  wandering  recluse.  As  such  he  met  and 
questioned  the  Master.  Satisfied  with  the  answers,  he 
entered  the  Order,  and  in  due  course  acquired  sixfold 
abhinna.2  Reflecting  with  joy  upon  his  career,  he  uttered 
this  psalm  : 

The  Threefold  Lore  is  mine,  and  I  excel 
In  Jhana-ecstasy,  adept  in  calm 
Of  balanced  mind.  Salvation  have  I  won, 

And  all  the  Bnddha-ordinance  is  done.  (112) 


CXIII 

Vanavaccha  (2). 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  as  the  son  of  a  wealthy 
brahmin  at  Rajagaha  and  named  Yaccha,  he  found  faith 
when  King  Bimbisara  conferred  with  the  Master.  And 
entering  the  Order  he  attained  arahantship.  As  arahant 
he  dwelt  in  the  woods  devoted  to  detachment ;  hence  he 
came  to  be  called  Woodland  Yaccha  (Yanavaccha).  Now 
it  happened  that  the  Thera,  in  order  to  do  a  kindness  to 
his  kinsfolk,  went  to  Rajagaha,  and  dwelt  there  a  little 

1  The  others  were  called,  one,  Pilinda- Yaccha  (IX.)  and  two,  Yana- 
Vaccha  (XIV.  and  CXIII.). 

2  The  two  conversations  occur  in  Majjh.,  i.,  72nd  and  73rd  Suttas. 
Yacchagotta’s  ordination  is  also  mentioned,  and  how  the  Buddha  tells 
him  to  proceed  to  the  study  of  Calm  and  Insight,  whereby  sixfold 
abhihha  might  be  acquired.  Cf.  Compendium ,  part  ix. 


102 


CXIII.  VANAVACCHA 


space,  telling  them  of  his  mode  of  life.  They  begged  him, 
saying :  ‘  Sir,  do  us  the  kindness  of  dwelling  in  the  near 
Vihara,  and  we  will  wait  upon  you.’  The  Thera  showed 
them  in  this  verse  both  his  love  of  the  mountains  and 
the  life  of  detachment : 

Crags  where  clear  waters  lie,  a  rocky  world, 

Haunted  by  black-faced  apes  and  timid  deer, 

Where  ’neath  bright  blossoms  run  the  silver  streams  : 

Those  are  the  highlands  of  my  heart’s  delight.1  (113) 

This  verse  became  the  Thera’s  confession  of  anna. 


CXIY 

Adhimutta.2 

Eeborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  a  brahmin  family  at  SavatthI 
and  named  Adhimutta,  he  became  discontented  at  finding 
no  pith  in  the  brahmin  wisdom,  and  while  he  was  seeking 
to  escape  during  his  last  span  of  life,  he  saw  the  majesty 
of  the  Buddha  at  the  presentation  of  the  Jeta  Grove. 
Entering  the  Order,  he  in  due  course  won  arahantship. 
Thereupon  he  admonished  those  bhikkhus  dwelling  with  him 
who  were  very  corpulent,  in  this  verse : 

If  ye  to  this  gross  body  give  such  heed, 

Greedy  its  pleasures  to  enjoy,  the  while 
Life’s  energies  do  ebb  away,  O  whence 
Shall  come  perfection  in  the  holy  life  ?  (114) 

1  The  only  bond  between  the  two  Yacchas  seems  to  be  their  common 
brahmin  stock  and  their  love  of  nature.  The  poem  goes  to  make  up 
those  ascribed  to  Sankicca  and  Kassapa  the  Great  (CCXI.,  CCLXI.). 
Cf.  also  that  by  the  Kapilavatthu  Yaccha  of  the  Woods  (XIII.).  It  is 
doubtful  whether  the  two  legends  do  not  derive  from  an  identical 
source.  But  cf.  CXII. 

2  Cf.  CCXLVIII.,  also  ascribed  to  an  Adhimutta  of  SavatthI. 


CXV.  MAHAN  AM  A 


103 


CXV 

Mahanama. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha -age  at  SavatthJ  in  a  brahmin 
family,  and  named  Mahanama,1  he  heard  the  Exalted  One 
teaching  the  Norm,  and  gaining  faith,  entered  the  Order. 
Taking  an  exercise,  he  dwelt  on  the  hill  called  Nesadaka. 
Unable  to  prevent  the  rising  up  of  evil  thoughts  and  desires, 
he  exclaimed :  ‘  Of  what  worth  is  life  to  me  with  this  cor¬ 
rupted  mind?’  And  disgusted  with  himself  he  climbed  a 
steep  crag  of  the  mountain,  and  made  as  if  he  would  throw 
himself  down,  saying,  ‘I  will  kill  him,’  speaking  to  himself 
as  to  another  and  uttering  this  verse : 

Lo  thou !  how  to  a  wretched  end  art  come 
By  this  steep  crag,  this  famous  Hunter  s  Hill, 

Its  many  crests  begirt  by  sal-tree  woods, 

[And  all  its  glens  with  tangled  verdure]  clothed  !  (115) 

In  the  act  of  upbraiding  himself  thus,  the  Thera  evoked 
insight  and  won  arahantship.  And  this  verse  became  his 
confession  of  anna. 


CXVI 

Parapariya. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  a  brahmin  family  at  Raja- 
gaha,  he  became  proficient  in  the  three  Vedas.  And  being 
of  the  Parapara  clan,  he  was  called  the  Parapariyan, 

1  Another  instance  where  the  Chronicle  makes  clear  lines  otherwise 
inexplicable.  There  is  no  hint  given  that  this  Thera  (whose  name 
means  ‘Great-Name’)  is  identical  with  Maha-Nama  the  Sakiyan,  one 
of  the  Buddha’s  first  (lay)  converts,  or  with  the  Licchavi  of  Ang., 
iii.  76.  The  hill  in  question  has  not  been  met  with  in  other  books  as 
yet,  but,  judging  from  the  Commentary,  it  seems  to  have  been  a  most 
charming  resort,  well  supplied  with  shade,  water,  and  medicinal  herbs. 
With  his  desperate  mood,  cf.  Yakkali  (CCV.),  Sappadasa  (CCXV.), 
and  Slha  ( Sisters ,  Ps.  xi.). 


104 


CXVl.  PARAPARIYA 


and  taught  mantras.1  He  saw  the  wisdom  and  majesty  of 
the  Master  at  the  Rajagaha  Conference,  and  entered  the 
Order,  in  due  course  winning  arahantship.  Reflecting  on  his 
career,  he  broke  forth  in  joy  with  this  psalm  : 

Avoiding  truck  with  contact’s  sixfold  field, 
Guarding  the  gates  of  sense,  master  of  self, 

The  general  root  of  misery  vomiting, 

From  every  poison- taint  am  I  immune.  (116) 

This  verse  became  his  confession  of  anna. 


CXYII 

Yasa. 

Reborn  in  this  time  of  our  Exalted  One  as  the  son  of  a  very 
wealthy  councillor  at  Benares,  he  was  exceedingly  delicately 
nurtured,  and  had  three  mansions  for  the  different  seasons, 
all  of  which  is  told  in  the  Khandaka.2  Impelled  by  antece¬ 
dent  conditions,  he  saw  one  night  the  indecorum  in  his 
sleeping  attendants  and,  greatly  distressed,  put  on  his  gold 
slippers  and  left  both  house  and  town,  gods  opening  the 
doors  for  him.  So  he  went  towards  Isipatana,  exclaiming : 
‘  Alas  !  what  distress  !  Alas  !  what  danger  !’  Now  at  that 
hour  the  Exalted  One,  who  was  staying  at  Isipatana  in 
order  to  do  him  kindness,  was  walking  to  and  fro  out  of 
doors,  and  said  :  ‘  Come,  Yasa,  here  is  there  neither  distress 
nor  danger.’  Yasa  filled  with  joy  put  off  his  slippers,  and 
sat  down  beside  the  Exalted  One.  The  Master  talked  to 
him  by  a  graduated  discourse,  and  when  he  had  finished 
teaching  the  Truths,  Yrasa  became  a  convert.  And  while 
the  Exalted  One  taught  the  Truths  to  his  father  who  had 
come  to  seek  him,  Yasa  realized  arahantship. 

Then  the  Exalted  One  held  out  his  right  arm  to  Yasa, 
saying,  ‘  CoxVE,  bhikkhu!’  And  at  his  merely  saying  the 
words,  Yasa’s  hair  was  shorn  two  fingers’  length,  and  he 

Vinaya  Texts ,  i.  102  ff. 


1  Cf.  CCXLIX.,  CCLYII. 


2 


CXVII.  YASA 


105 


was  equipped  with  the  eight  necessaries.1  Reflecting  on 
his  career,  he  rejoiced  over  those  words  calling  him  to  his 
present  state,  *  Come,  bhikkhu  !’2  and  uttered  this  psalm  : 

With  perfumed  skin  and  delicately  clad 
And  head  ablaze  with  gems,  natheless  my  way 
I  found  and  made  the  Threefold  Lore  my  own;3 
And  now  the  Buddha-ordinance  is  done.  (117) 


CXVIII 

Kimbila. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha- age  at  Kapilavatthu  in  the  family 
of  a  Sakiyan  raja,  and  named  Kimbila,4  he  inherited  im¬ 
mense  wrealth.  The  Master  saw  the  maturity  of  his  insight 
while  staying  at  Anupiya,  and  in  order  to  arouse  him, 
conjured  up  a  beautiful  woman  in  her  prime,  and  showed 
her  to  him  passing  to  old  age.  Then  Kimbila  greatly 
shaken  uttered  this  verse  : 

As  bidden  by  some  power  age  o’er  her  falls. 

Her  shape  is  as  another,  yet  the  same. 

Now  this  my  self,  who  ne’er  have  left  myself, 

Seems  other  than  the  self  I  recollect.  (118) 

1  This  is  a  mythical  elaboration  of  the  older  tale  in  the  Vinaya.  In 
the  Order  the  learner  or  pupil  had  to  remove  his  shoes  when  waiting 
on  his  teacher  { ibid .,  i.  66  (62),  154). 

2  Cf.  Bliadda’s  joy  at  these  words,  a  special  honour  to  a  candidate 
( Sisters ,  Ps.  xlvi.,  also  CCXXVI.  below  and  others). 

3  The  point  lies  in  his  swift  attainment,  as  a  layman. 

4  Also  spelt  (Br.)  Kimila  and  Kimmila.  He  was  converted,  with 
five  other  young  Sakiyan  nobles,  in  the  first  week  of  the  Buddha’s 
mission,  according  to  the  Vinaya  narrative.  There  the  method  adopted 
for  his  conversion  is  not  given.  Kimbila  is  represented  in  the  Majjhima 
as  maintaining  his  early  friendship  with  the  senior  Thera  Anuruddha, 
dwelling  with  him,  and  a  third,  Nandiya  (Ps.  XXV.),  now  in  this  wood 
or  park,  now  in  that  ( Vinaya  Texts ,  ii.  609,  iii.  228;  Majjh.,  i.  205, 
iii.  155  ;  see  also  CXXXVIII.).  Anupiya  was  a  town  in  the  Malla 
republic  ( Vinaya  Texts ,  iii.  224). 


106 


CXIX.  VAJJI-PUTTA 


He  thus,  considering  the  fact  of  impermanence,  was  yet 
more  strongly  agitated,  and  going  to  the  Master  heard  the 
Norm,  believed,  entered  the  Order,  and  in  due  course  won 
arahantship.  Thereupon  he  emphasized  how  he  had 
formerly  looked  on  things  as  permanent  by  repeating  the 
verse,  thereby  confessing  anna. 


CXIX 

Vajji-putta  (2). 

(The  Vajjian.) 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  as  the  son  of  a  Licchavi  raja 
at  Vesall,  he  became  known  as  the  Vajjian’s  son,  because 
his  father  was  one  of  the  Yajjians.1  While  yet  a  youth 
and  engaged  in  training  elephants,  he,  inclined  by  fulness 
of  cause  to  seek  Release,  went  to  the  Yihara  at  the  hour 
when  the  Master  was  to  preach,  and  having  heard,  entered 
the  Order,  and  in  due  course  acquired  sixfold  abhihna. 

At  a  later  time,  shortly  after  the  Master  had  passed  awTay, 
Yajjiputta  formed  an  agreement  with  the  chief  Theras  to 
preserve  the  Dhamma  intact,  and  travelled  with  them  from 
place  to  place.  One  day  he  saw  the  Yenerable  Ananda, 
who  was  still  a  student  only,  surrounded  by  a  large  con¬ 
gregation,  teaching  them  the  Norm.  And  to  call  forth 
endeavour  in  him  to  reach  the  higher  Paths,  he  uttered 
this  verse : 

Come  thou  ancl  plunge  in  leafy  lair  of  trees, 

Suffer  Nibbana  in  thy  heart  to  sink ! 

Study  and  dally  not,  thou  Gotamid ! 

What  doth  this  fingle-f angle  mean  to  thee  ?2  (119) 

1  This  is  apparently  not  the  Vajji-putta  of  LXII.,  who  was  not  of 
noble  rank. 

2  For  this  late  attainment  of  the  goal  by  Ananda,  the  Buddha’s  chief 
attendant,  see  Vinaya  Texts,  iii.  373.  The  verse  occurs  also  in  Sayy, 
i.  199,  where  woodland  sprites  note  Ananda’ s  preoccupation  with 
worldly  interests — a  tendency  that  was  entirely  amiable  in  itself,  and 


CXX.  I  SI  DA  TT  A 


107 


Hearing  this  and  speech  of  others,  dispelling  poisonous 
odours,  Ananda  grew  agitated,  and  most  of  the  night 
walked  to  and  fro  meditating.  Then,  with  insight  worked 
up,  he  entered  his  dwelling,  and  in  the  act  of  lying  down 
on  his  couch,  he  won  arahantship. 


CXX 

Isidatta. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  the  kingdom  of  Avanti  at 
Velugama,* 1  as  the  son  of  a  caravan  guide,  he  became  (by 
correspondence)  the  unseen  friend  of  Citta,  a  house-father 
at  Macchikasanda.  The  latter  wrote  to  him  on  the  excel¬ 
lence  of  the  Buddha,  and  sent  him  a  copy  of  the  system. 
This  so  moved  him  that  he  sought  ordination  under  the 
Thera  Kaccana  the  Great.  In  due  course  he  acquired  six¬ 
fold  abhinna.  Thereupon  he  had  a  mind  to  visit  the 
Buddha,  and  taking  leave  of  the  Thera,  came  in  course  of 
time  to  the  Middle  Country,2  and  had  an  interview  with 
the  Master.  The  latter  asked  him  the  question,  ‘  How  goes 


which  is  noticeable  in  the  many  episodes  related  of  him.  To  these  other 
admonishers  the  Chronicle  refers.  Ananda  was  of  the  Gotama  clan, 
cousin  to  the  Buddha.  The  quaint  term  bilibilika  is  thus  paraphrased 
vilivilikriyd  (lit.,  sticky-sticky- action  ?),  the  reiteration  being  intended 
as  a  deprecation  of  his  preoccupation  with  the  interests  of  the  many 
to  his  own  spiritual  hindrance.  For  Ananda’ s  psalm,  see  CCLX.  ; 
cf.  also  CLXXV. 

1  Avanti  lay  north  of  the  Vindhya  Mountains,  north-east  of  Bombay. 
It  was  one  of  the  four  chief  monarchies  in  India  when  Buddhism 
arose,  and  was  later  absorbed  into  the  Moriyan  Empire.  Its  capital 
was  Ujjeni.  Velugama  (Bamboo-village)  is  not,  so  far,  met  with  in 
other  works  (see  Buddhist  India ,  p.  1  ff.).  Citta,  whose  home  lay  near 
Savatthl,  was  one  of  the  most  eminent  lay-supporters  of  the  Buddha. 
On  this  further  instance,  in  the  later  tradition,  of  the  doctrine  being 
propagated  by  writing,  cf.  XCVII.  On  Kaccana,  see  CCIX.  Pro¬ 
nounced  Chitta,  Kacchana. 

2  The  Ganges  Valley  (Rhys  Davids,  ‘The  Middle  Country,’  JliAS, 
1904,  p.  83#.). 


108 


CXX.  ISIDATTA 


it  with  you,  bhikkhu  ?  Are  you  prospering  ?’  And  he  re¬ 
plied  :  ‘  Exalted  One,  from  the  time  when  I  was  admitted 
into  your  Rule,  all  sorrow  and  pain  left  me,  all  sense  of 
peril  was  calmed.’  And  he  declared  anna  in  making  that 
confession,  uttering  this  verse  : 

The  factors  of  my  life  well  understood 
Stand  yet  a  little  while  with  severed  root.1 
Sorrow  is  slain !  that  quest  I’ve  won,  and  won 
Is  purity  from  fourfold  Venom's  stain.2  (120) 


1  =  verse  90,  first  half. 

2  Asavas. 


CANTO  II 

PSALMS  OF  TWO  VERSES 

PART  I 

CXXI 

Uttar  a. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Rajagaha  as  the  son  of 
an  eminent  brahmin  and  named  Uttara,  he  graduated  in 
brahmin  lore,  and  became  renowned  for  his  breeding, 
beauty,  wisdom  and  virtue.  Vassakara,  a  leading  minister 
of  Magadha,  seeing  his  attainments,  was  desirous  of  marry¬ 
ing  him  to  his  daughter.  But  he  with  heart  set  on  release 
declined,  and  he  attended  the  teaching  of  the  General  of  the 
Norm.1  Winning  faith,  he  entered  the  Order  and  fulfilled 
his  novitiate,  waiting  upon  Sariputta. 

Now  the  Thera  fell  ill,  and  Uttara  set  out  in  the  morning 
to  seek  a  physician.  On  his  round  he  set  down  his  bowl 
on  the  banks  of  a  lake  and  went  to  the  water  to  wash  out 
his  mouth.  Then  a  certain  thief,  pursued  by  the  police, 
escaped  from  the  town  by  the  chief  gate,  and  running  by, 
dropped  his  stolen  jewels  into  the  novice’s  bowl,  and  fled. 
Then,  as  the  latter  came  back  to  his  bowl,  the  king’s  men 
passed  in  pursuit,  and  seeing  the  bowl,  said :  4  This  is  the 
thief !  He  has  done  the  burglary !’  And  binding  his  arms 
behind,  they  brought  him  before  Vassakara,  the  brahmin, 
and  punished  him. 

Then  the  Exalted  One,  contemplating  the  ripeness  of  his 
insight,  went  thither,  and  placing  a  gentle  hand,  like  drop¬ 
ping  of  crimson  gold,  on  Uttara’s  head,  spake  thus  :  ‘  Uttara, 
this  is  the  fruit  of  previous  action.  Come  here  to  pass,  it 

1  Sariputta,  chief  of  the  disciples  till  his  death. 

109 


110 


CXX1.  UTTARA 


is  to  be  accepted  by  thee  through  the  power  of  reflection,' 
and  so  taught  him  the  Norm  according  to  his  need.  Uttara, 
thus  ambrosially  anointed  by  the  touch  of  the  Master’s 
hand,  was  transported  with  joy  and  rapture,  and  through 
the  ripeness  of  his  insight  and  the  charm  of  his  Master’s 
teaching,  so  cast  off  all  impurity  that  he  attained  sixfold 
abhinna.  Rising  clear  of  the  stake,1  he  stood  in  the  air, 
performing  a  miracle  out  of  compassion  for  others.  To  the 
amazement  of  all,  his  wound  was  healed.  When  asked  by 
the  bhikkhus,  ‘  Brother,  how  were  you  able,  suffering  such 
pain,  to  apply  insight?’  he  said,  ‘Since  I  clearly  saw, 
Brothers,  the  evil  of  rebirths  and  the  nature  of  the  con¬ 
ditioned,  it  was  not  the  lesser  evil  of  present  pain  that 
could  hinder  me  from  increasing  insight,  and  achieving 
attainment  ’  :2 

There  is  no  life  that  lasteth  evermore, 

Nor  permanence  in  things  from  causes  come. 

They  are  reborn,  the  factors  of  our  life, 
Thereafter  they  dissolve  and  die  away.  (121) 
Since  this  the  evil  claiming  all  my  thought, 

Sooth  am  I  one  who  doth  not  seek  to  be. 

Detached  from  all  that  worldly  aims  commend, 

Of  th’  intoxicants  have  I  now  made  an  end.3  (122) 


CXXII 

Pindola-Bharadvaj  a. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  as  the  son  of  the  chaplain 
to  king  Udena  of  Kosambi,  he  was  named  Bharadvaja.4 

1  Sulato  utthahitva.  He  was  presumably  bound  or  impaled,  or 
otherwise  suffering  punishment. 

2  Viseso. 

3  I.e.,  ‘  I  have  won  nibbana  and  arahantship.’  Commentary, 
averse  458. 

4  Bharadvaja  seems  to  have  been  the  name  of  a  brahmin  clan, 
though  here  given  as  a  personal  name  ( S .  Vibh.,  p.  6;  Sayy.,  i.  160). 
Hence  either  Pindola  is  the  personal  name,  or  it  is  a  soubriquet, 
analogous  to  our  ‘  chunks,’  associated  with  his  earlier  greedy  habits. 


Ill 


CXXII.  PINDOLA-BHARADVAJA 
•  • 

Having  learnt  the  three  Vedas,  and  teaching  the  hymns 
with  great  success  to  a  school  of  brahmin  youths,  the  work 
became  distasteful.  And  leaving  them,  he  went  to  Rajagaha. 
Seeing  there  the  gifts  and  favours  bestowed  on  the  Order 
of  the  Exalted  One,  he  entered  the  same.  He  overcame 
intemperance  in  diet  by  the  Teacher’s  methods,  and  ac¬ 
quired  sixfold  abhinna. 

He  thereupon  announced  before  the  Exalted  One  that  he 
would  answer  the  questions  of  any  Brethren  in  doubt  con¬ 
cerning  path  or  fruit,  thus  uttering  his  ‘lion’s  roar.’* 1 
Wherefore  the  Exalted  One  said  of  him  :  4  The  chief  among 
my  disciples  who  are  lion-roarers  is  Pindola-Bharadvaja.’ 

Now  there  came  to  him  a  former  friend,  a  brahmin  of  a 
miserly  nature.  And  the  Thera  persuaded  him  to  make  an 
offering,  handing  it  over  to  the  Order.  And  because  the 
brahmin  believed  the  Thera  was  greedy  and  self-seeking, 
the  latter  set  himself  to  instruct  him  in  the  privileges  of 
religious  gifts,  saying : 

Not  without  rule  and  method  must  we  live. 

But  food  as  such  is  never  near  my  heart. 

4  By  nutriment  the  body  is  sustained  ’  :2 

This  do  I  know,  and  hence  my  quest  for  alms.  (123) 

4  A  [treacherous]  bog’  it  is  : — the  wise  know  well : 

These  bows  and  gifts  and  treats  from  wealthy  folk. 

’Tis  like  steel  splinter  bedded  in  the  flesh, 

For  foolish  brethren  hard  to  extricate.3  (124) 


His  perfected  self-mastery  is  the  theme  in  TJddna,  iv.  6.  He  is 
persecuted  for  preaching  by  King  Udena  (Jut.,  iv.  375),  but  is  sub¬ 
sequently  consulted  by  the  latter,  who  reforms  his  ways  ( Saijy ., 
iv.  110).  He  is  rebuked  for  cheaply  performing  a  miracle  ( Vinaya 
Texts ,  iii.  78).  Two  untraced  stanzas  of  his  are  quoted  ( Milinda , 
ii.  335,  345). 

1  The  usual  idiom  for  an  affirmation  of  competence  or  readiness 
to  act  (Ang.  Nik.,  i.  23). 

2  Included  in  the  orthodox  dictum  :  1  All  beings  are  sustained  by 
nutriment  ’  ( Digha  Nik.,  iii.  211  ;  Khuddaka  Pdtha). 

3  See  verses  495,  1053.  Gf.  J  at  aka,  iv.  222  (text). 


112 


CXXIII.  VALLIYA 


CXXIII 

Valliya.1 

Eeborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthi  as  the  son  of 
an  eminent  brahmin,  he  was  named  Valliya.  While  adoles¬ 
cent  and  in  the  power  of  the  senses,  he  formed  virtuous 
friendships,  whereby  he  came  to  the  Exalted  One,  found 
faith  and  entered  the  Order,  soon  thereafter  establishing 
insight  and  winning  arahantship.  Reflecting  on  the  past 
with  its  worldly  objects  and  desires,  and  on  how,  by  the 
Ariyan  Path,  he  now  had  turned  from  all  that,  he  thus 
declared  anna  : 

Within  the  little  five-doored  hut  an  ape2 

Doth  prowl,  and  round  and  round  from  door  to  door 

He  hies,  rattling  with  blows  again,  again.  (125) 

Halt,  ape  !  run  thou  not  forth  !  for  thee 

Tis  not  herein  as  it  was  wont  to  be. 

Reason  doth  hold  thee  captive.  Never  more 

Shalt  roam  far  hence  [in  freedom  as  of  yore].  (120) 

CXX1V 

Gangatlriya. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthi  as  a  citizen’s 
son,  he  was  named  Datfca.3  And  when,  in  his  domestic 

1  Cf.,  LIII.,  and  CXLIY. 

2  Chitta  (consciousness),  is,  in  the  Sayyutta  Nihdya  (ii.9),  pictured 
as  the  restless,  varying  leaps  of  a  tree-monkey.  The  Commentary 
applies  this  simile  to  the  present  one  of  the  ape  under  control.  The 
ape  is  found  in  Tibetan  drawings  of  the  stages  of  (past,  present,  and 
future)  life  as  the  symbol  of  vihhdna,  the  synonym  for  consciousness, 
or  sense-cognition  (see  JRAS,  1894,  p.  367  Apparently  the  Tibetan 
lamas  had  forgotten  the  tradition,  or  gave  an  explanation  which  they 
hnew  would  interest  their  medical  interlocutor,  Major  Waddell,  or  the 
latter  evolved  a  Western  interpretation  out  of  their  imperfectly  under¬ 
stood  descriptions).  Cf.  verse  1111  in  Ps.  CCLXII. 

3  =  Donatus.  His  story — how  he  came  to  take  his  mother  and  his 
sister  as  his  wives,  not  knowing  his  relation  to  either — is  told  in  the 


CXXIV.  GANGATIRIYA 


113 


life,  he  transgressed  through  ignorance,  then  discovered 
his  offence,  anguish  seized  him  so  that  he  left  the  world. 
Distressed  at  his  deeds,  he  adopted  a  course  of  austerity, 
and  dwelt  on  the  bank  of  the  Ganges,  making  himself  a 
tent  of  palm-leaves.  Hence  he  became  known  as  Ganga- 
tlriya  (Ganges-sider).  And  he  resolved  to  speak  to  no  one. 
So  he  kept  silence  for  a  whole  year.  In  the  second  year,  a 
woman  of  the  village  where  he  sought  alms,  wishing  to  find 
out  whether  he  was  dumb,  spilt  milk  as  she  filled  his  bowl. 
And  he  let  fall  the  words  :  ‘  Enough,  sister.’  But  in  the 
third  year,  after  strenuous  effort,  he  won  arahantship. 
Thereupon  he  declared  anna  by  word  of  mouth,  extolling 
his  past  procedure  in  these  verses  : 

On  Ganga’s  shore  three  palm-tree  leaves  I  took 
And  made  my  hut ;  my  bowl  like  funeral  pot 
Wherewith  men  sprinkle  milk  upon  a  corpse ; 

My  cloak  from  refuse  of  the  dust-heap  culled.1  (127) 
Two  years,  from  one  rain-season  till  the  next, 

I  [there  abode],  nor  spake  a  word  save  once. 

So  till  the  third  year  passed— then  the  long  night 
Of  gloom  asunder  burst  [and  broke  in  light].  (128) 


Chronicle  to  the  Sisters’  Psalms,  pp.  112,  115.  The  allusion  here  to 
his  incest  is  so  delicately  or  vaguely  worded  that  it  needs  the  explana¬ 
tion  afforded  by  the  Sister-chronicle.  The  Pali  is  as  follows  :  Ghard- 
vasarj  vasanto  agamaniyatfh dinab hdvay  ajdnitvd  vitikkamay  katvd 
puna  dgamaniyatthdnabhdvay  iiatvd. 

1  On  such  austerities,  see  Vinaya  Texts ,  iii.  89.  The  bowl  here  is 
not  a  skull  ( chavaslsay ),  but  is  described  in  the  Commentary  as 
.  matdnay  khirasecanakuycla-sadiso ,  ‘  like  a  milk- sprinkling  pot  for  the 
dead  ’—a  sort  of  memento  mori  (cf.  Neumann).  It  is  just  possible  that 
the  text  was  originally  chavasisena  me  patto,  as  the  idiom  runs  in 
the  Vinaya,  but  such  skull-bowls  were  forbidden.  There  is  greater 
sobriety  and  dignity  in  the  austerities  of  this  Indian  (Edipus  than  in 
the  brutal  self-mutilation  of  the  Greek  kino- 

O 


8 


114 


CXXV.  A  JIN  A 


CXXY 

Ajina. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthi,  in  the  family 
of  a  certain  poor  brahmin,  he  was  wrapt  at  birth  in  an 
antelope’s  skin,  and  was  hence  named  Antelope  (Ajina). 
Growing  up  in  poverty,  he  saw  the  Jeta  Grove  presented, 
and  the  power  and  majesty  of  the  Buddha.  And  gaining 
faith  he  left  the  world,  and  not  long  after  acquired  super¬ 
normal  thought.  When  he  had  moreover  won  arahantship, 
he,  in  consequence  of  past  deeds,  remained  unhonoured 
and  unknowm.  And  some  worldly  novices  among  the 
bhikkhus  despised  him  for  this.  Then  the  Thera  agitated 
them  with  these  verses  : 

E'en  though  a  man  have  gained  the  Triple  Lore, 
Have  vanquished  death  and  purged  th  intoxicants, 
Yet,  let  him  be  to  fame  unknown,  poor  fools 
May  in  their  ignorance  look  down  on  him.  (129) 
But  let  him  get  the  good  things  of  this  world, 

Then  though  he  be  of  evil  breed,  natheless 
Service  and  honour  will  they  render  him.  (130) 


CXXYI 

Melajina. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Benares,  in  a  nobleman’s 
family,  and  named  Melajina,  he  became  distinguished  for 
learning  and  accomplishments,  and  renowned  in  all  the 
country.  When  the  Exalted  One  stayed  at  Benares,  in 
Isipatana,  Melajina  went  to  hear  him  preach  the  Norm ; 
and  gaining  faith,  he  entered  the  Order  and  won  arahant¬ 
ship. 


CXXVI.  MELAJINA 


115 


A.nd  when  the  bhikkhus  asked  how  far  he  had  acquired 
supernormal  qualities,  he  uttered  a  'lion’s  roar’: 

When  I  had  heard  the  Master  preach  the  Norm, 
No  doubts  my  mind  could  thenceforth  entertain 
In  him  all-knowing  and  invincible.  (131) 

Nor  in  a  mighty  hero  like  to  him, 

Lord  of  the  caravan,1  driver  of  men, 

Peerless  and  grand,  nor  in  the  Path,  the  Rule,2 
Can  ever  want  of  faith  disturb  my  soul.  (132) 


CXXYII 

Radha. 

Reborn  in  the  time  of  our  Exalted  One  at  Rajagaha,  as 
a  brahmin,  he  was  in  his  old  age  unable  to  perform  his 
various  duties.  Being  passed  over,3  he  went  to  the  Master 
and  levealed  his  needs.  The  Master,  contemplating  his 
graduation  in  essential  conditions,  ordered  Sariputta  to 
admit  him.  Soon  after  that  he  won  arahantship.  And 
thereafter,  keeping  near  the  Master,  he  became  pre-eminent 
among  those  who,  deriving  from  the  Master’s  teaching,4 
could  speak  impromptu. 

1  Cf.  Dialogues ,  ii.  82.  Satthavdhe ,  there  rendered  ‘  lord  of  the 
pilgrim  band,’  is  here  more  literally  reproduced. 

2  Magge ,  patipaddyay  vd—i.e.,  ‘the  Ariyan  [Eightfold]  Path,  and 
the  Precepts,  and  so  on  5  (Commentary).  The  verses  may  not  seem 
an  apposite  reply;  but  if  the  Compendium  of  Philosophy  (pp.  65,  210, 
213)  be  consulted,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  expulsion  of  all  forms  of 
doubt  was  held  to  be  a  very  essential  preliminary  to  transcending 
normal  experience. 

3  Patihliitto. 

4  The  passage  assigning  him  pre-eminence  is  then  quoted  from 
Ang.,  i.  25.  Cf.  with  "V  angisa’s  similar  but  not  identical  pre-eminence, 
Ps.  CCLXIY.  This  Thera  is  possibly  identical  with  the  ‘venerable 
Radha  ’  addressed  in  many  short  discourses  of  the  Sayyutta  (iii.  79 

188  ^ ;  iv.  48  /.). 


116 


CXXVII.  RADHA 


Now  one  day  seeing  how  want  of  self-training  occasioned 

« 

governance  by  the  passions,  he  exhorted  thus : 

E’en  as  into  an  ill-roofed  house  the  rain 
Doth  pierce  and  penetrate  continually, 

So  into  mind  by  exercise  untrained 
Doth  passion  ever  pierce  and  penetrate.  (138) 
And  as  into  a  well-roofed  house  no  rain 
Doth  pierce  and  penetrate  continually, 

So  into  mind  by  calm  and  insight  trained 
Doth  passion  never  pierce  and  penetrate.1  (134) 


CXNVIIX 


Suradha. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  as  the  younger  brother  of  the 
aforesaid  Radha,  he  followed  his  elder  brother’s  example, 
and  became  an  arahant  also.  To  show  the  saving  guidance 
of  the  Rule,  he  declared  anna  thus : 

All  coming  back  to  birth  is  now  destroyed. 

The  Conqueror’s  Rule  hath  guided  all  my  ways.2 

That  which  we  call  the  Net  have  I  put  off  ;3 

The  lust  that  leads  to  life  is  rooted  out.  (135) 

And  the  great  quest,  for  which  I  left  the  world, 

Forsaking  home  a  homeless  life  to  lead, 

Even  that  quest  and  high  reward  I’ve  won, 

For  I  am  he  whose  bonds  are  riven  in  twain.4  (136) 

\ 

1  ‘  Exercise,’  ‘  calm  and  insight  ’ — in  the  text  blidvana — the  collective 
name  for  the  systematized  effort  in  self -training  of  the  disciple  who 
seeks  perfection  (Bud.  Psy p.  261,  n.  2).  Specified  as  'calm  and 
insight  ’  in  the  Commentary.  Cf.  Compendium ,  p.  202  ff. 

2  ‘  The  holy  life  of  the  Path  has  been  lived  by  me  ’  (Commentary). 

3  Cf.  Dliaynmapada ,  verse  251  ;  Sayjy .,  iii.  83.  Commentary, 

4  net  =  error,  ignorance.’  More  usually  it  =  craving,  or  sense.  Suradha 
is  possibly  the  listener  in  one  discourse  of  the  Sayyutta  (iii.  79). 

4  CCX.,  380. 


CXXIX.  GOTAMA 


1  17 


CXXIX 


Go  tama. 

Eeborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Rajagaha,  in  a  brahmin 
family,1  and  named  Gotama,  he  fell,  when  still  a  youth, 
into  bad  company,  and  gave  all  that  he  had  to  a  courtesan. 
Repenting  thereafter  of  his  vicious  ways,  he  beheld  a  vision 
of  the  Master  seated — of  Him  who  had  discerned  the  pro¬ 
gress  of  his  mind  and  his  attainment  of  the  conditions. 
He  with  heart  assured  went  to  the  Master,  was  taught,  and 
believed.  Entering  the  Order,  he  won  arahantship,  even 
as  the  razor  touched  his  hair.  And  while  he  was  pondering 
the  bliss  of  jhana  and  of  fruition,  a  lay-companion  asked 
him  concerning  his  property.  He  confessed  how  he  had 
lived  unchastely,  and  declaring  anna  by  his  present  purity 
from  passion,  said  : 

At  ease  they  sleep,  the  wise  and  pure,  who  ne’er 
Are  bound  to  womankind,  for  these  must  aye 
Be  kept  ’neath  watch  and  ward,  and  among  them 
’Tis  ever  hard  to  learn  the  truth  of  things.2  (137) 

W ar  to  the  knife  with  thee,  O  lust,  we’ve  waged. 
Now  are  we  quit  and  free  of  debt  to  thee. 

Now  fare  we  onward  to  that  Going-out,3 

Where  at  our  journey’s  end  we  weep  no  more.  (138) 

1  Not  identical  with  the  other  Gotama  Theras  of  CLNXXIII., 
CCXXXIX. 

There  is  a  nice,  discriminating  touch  about  the  Commentary’s 
remark:  ‘Now  to  him  [the  friend]  who  is  still  bound  to  such  women , 
the  Thera,  to  show  his  own  complete  extirpation  of  that  lust,  says  the 
second  verse.  The  use  of  the  first  person  plural  is  a  rare  feature  in 
Buddhist  hymns.  It  must  refer  to  a  sodality  of  freed  minds,  and  not 
to  the  speaker  and  his  quondam  friend,  since  the  latter  had  still  his 
worldly  ties. 

3  Nibbana  in  the  original.  Since  the  Thera  is  an  arahant,  this  can 
only  refer  to  his  Parinibbana,  the  complete  extinction  of  his  life 
spatially  figured — his  anupddisesa-nibbana,  says  the  Commentary, 
however  that  was  conceived. 


118 


CXXX.  VASABHA 


CXXX 

Vasabha. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Vesall,  as  the  son  of  a 
Licchavi  raja,1  he  was  won  over  by  the  majesty  of  the 
Buddha  when  the  latter  went  to  Vesall,  and  left  the  world. 
In  due  course  he  won  arahantship,  and  thereafter,  gracious 
to  his  patrons,  he  did  not  reject  the  necessaries  they  pro¬ 
vided,  but  enjoyed  what  he  received.  The  common-minded 
deemed  him  self-indulgent,  but  he  continued  taking  no 
account  of  them. 

But  near  him  dwelt  a  fraudulent  bhikkhu,  who  deceived 
the  people  by  pretending  to  lead  the  simple  life,  content  with 
little,  and  was  honoured  by  them.  Then  Sakka,  ruler  of 
the  devas,  discerned  this,  and  came  to  Vasabha  Thera  and 
asked  :  ‘  Your  reverence,  what  is  it  that  an  impostor  does  ?’ 
The  Thera,  in  rebuke  to  that  evil-doer,  replied  : 

He  erst  doth  work  destruction  to  himself  ; 
Thereafter  doth  he  ruin  other  men. 

Most  throughly  works  he  mischief  to  himself, 

E’en  as  decoy-bird  2  by  its  own  deceit.  (139) 

No  brahmin  he,  by  outward  colour  judged. 

By  inner  hue  shall  ye  the  brahmin  know. 

He  in  whom  deeds  show  evil,  even  he 
Is  swarth  of  face,  O  consort  of  Suja.3  (140) 


PART  II 

CXXXI 

Cunda  the  Great. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  the  kingdom  of  Magadha, 
at  Nalaka  village,  as  the  son  of  the  brahminee  Rupasarl, 

1  See  above,  p.  54,  n.  4. 

2  Cf.  vitaysa-kakkaro ,  the  decoy  jungle-cock  in  Jdt.,  ii.  161. 

3  Sujampati,  a  title  given  to  Sakka,  whose  consort-goddess  was 
Suja.  On  the  spiritual  complexion,  cf.  Digha-NiJcdya ,  Suttantas  iii., 
iv.,  and  xxvii  ;  Sutta  Nipdta ,  Vasettha-Sutta. 


CXXXI.  CUNDA  THE  GREAT 


119 


and  younger  brother  of  Sariputta,1  he  followed  the  latter 
into  the  Order,  and  after  arduous,  strenuous  effort  won 
arahantship.  And  glorying  in  his  attainment  and  in 
solitude  of  life,  he  uttered  this  psalm  : 

The  will  to  learn  maketli  of  learning  growth ; 

Learning  2  makes  insight  grow,  and  by  insight 

We  know  the  Good  ;  known  Good  brings  bliss 
along.  (141) 

Seek  ye  the  lonely  haunts  remote  from  men.3 

Practise  the  life  of  liberty  from  Bonds. 

If  there  ye  come  not  by  your  heart’s  desire, 

Dwell  with  the  Brethren,  mindful  and  con¬ 
trolled.  (142) 


C  XXXII 

Jotidasa. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  as  the  son  of  a  wealthy 
brahmin,  in  the  Padiyattha  country,  he  was  named  Jotidasa.4 
When  come  of  age  he  saw  Kassapa  the  Great  one  day  going 
his  round  for  alms,  and  entertained  him  in  his  house,  and 
heard  him  discourse.  On  the  hill  near  the  village  he  him¬ 
self  had  a  great  vihara  built  for  the  Thera,  and  supplied 
him  with  the  four  requisites.  Moved  thereafter  by  the 
Thera’s  teaching  he  left  the  world,  and  not  long  after  won 
the  sixfold  abhiniia.  After  ten  years,  during  which  he  learnt 

1  Cf.  Sayy.,  iv.  251 ;  v.  161 ;  Psalms,  I.,  p.  96.  With  his  brother 
he  visits  Channa  ( Majjli .,  iii.  263;  Sayy.,  iv.  55).  He  was  one  of  the 
nine  or  ten  chief  Theras.  Three  discourses  are  ascribed  to  him  in 
the  Anguttara  Nihdya,  addressed  to  the  bhikkhus,  and  preaching 
modesty  and  mutual  tolerance,  especially  between  the  erudite  and  the 
more  mystically  inclined  (iii.  355). 

2  Lit.,  hearing,  significant  of  an  era  of  oral  instruction  and 
mnemonic  recording. 

3  The  Master’s  own  advice  to  him  {Majjli.,  i.  46). 

4  Maha-Kassapa  lived  near  Rajagaha  (CCLXL),  but  neither  Jotidasa 
nor  Padiyattha-janapada  have  been  met  with  in  other  works. 


120 


CXXXII.  .TOTIDASA 


the  three  Pitakas,  with  special  proficiency  in  the  Vinaya- 
Pitaka,1  and  waited  on  the  fraternity,  he  set  out  with  many 
bhikkhus  to  salute  the  Exalted  One  at  Savatthi.  On  the 
way  he  entered  a  theologian’s  park,  and  seeing  a  brahmin 
practising  the  fivefold  austerity,2  he  asked  :  ‘  Why,  brahmin, 
do  you  not  burn  otherwise  in  a  different  heat  ?’  The  brah¬ 
min  annoyed,  answered  :  ‘  Master  shaveling,  what  other 
heat  is  there  ?’  The  Thera  replied  : 

Anger ,  and  envy,  and  all  cruel  deeds, 

And  pride,  and  arrogance,  and  wanton  strife, 
Craving,  and  ignorance,  and  lust  of  life  : 

These  burn  away  and  let  thy  body  be  !  3 

and  therewith  taught  him  the  Norm.  And  all  those 
theologians  besought  him  for  ordination. 

On  leaving  Savatthi  he  went  to  his  former  home,  and 
admonished  his  relatives  in  these  verses  : 

They  who  in  divers  ways  by  deeds  of  force 
And  violence,4  rude  and  rough-mannered  folk, 

Do  work  their  fellow-creatures  injury, 

Thereby  they  too  themselves  are  overthrown,5 
For  never  is  th’  effect  of  action  lost.  (143) 

The  deed  a  man  doth,  be  it  good  or  ill, 

To  all  liis  doing  is  lie  verily  the  heir.  (144) 


1  Cf.  Punna,  who  learnt  them  in  a  former  birth  ( Sisters ,  p.  116; 
again  above,  LXV.).  We  may  concede  thus  much  to  the  plausibility 
of  the  Commentator’s  statement — that  a  threefold  body  of  doctrine 

would  be  taking  shape  during  the  founder’s  long  ministry. 

3  /.<?.,  surrounded  by  four  fires,  with  the  sun  beating  on  him 
above. 

3  I  have  not  traced  these  lines. 

4  On  the  word  veghamissena ,  etc.  (cf.  Dialogues,  ii.  107,  n.  3),  the 
Commentary  has  :  ‘  Tugging  the  head,  etc.,  by  rein,  strap,  etc.  ;  blows 
given  by  hand,  foot,  etc.’ 

5  Kir  anti.  Dr.  Neumann  has  scien,  sow,  as  if  scattering  seed.  The 
Commentary  ignores  any  such  metaphor,  and  has  :  as  they  have  made 
suffering  for  others,  so  by  others  are  they  made  to  suffer — tatlf  eva 
annehi  kiriyanti  dnkkhay  imply  anti.  Cf.  abhikiranti  in  verse  598. 


CXXXIII.  HEUANNAKANI 


121 


CXXXIII 

Heranfiakani. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  as  the  son  of  one  who  was  a 
tenant-in-chief  of  the  King  of  Kosala,  and  in  command  of 
bandits,1  he  succeeded  to  his  father’s  position  at  the  latter’s 
death.  Converted  on  seeing  the  Buddha  accept  the  Jeta 
Grove,  he  put  his  younger  brother  in  his  place,  left  the 
world,  and  soon  after  won  arahantship.  He  thereupon 
sought  to  turn  his  brother  to  a  better  life,  and  on  seeing 
him  attached  to  it,  urged  him  in  these  verses  : 

The  days,  the  nights  flit  by  and  pass  away. 

Life  is  arrested,  and  the  span 
To  mortals  given  is  consumed  and  fails, 

Like  water  in  the  shallow  mountain  streams.  (145) 
But  evil  actions  still  the  fool  commits, 

Nor  understands  how  dire  the  aftermath, 

Till  comes  the  bitter  hour  of  action’s  fruit.  (146) 

Hearing  the  Thera’s  homily,  the  brother  besought  the 
king’s  leave,  and  left  the  world,  and  not  long  after  found 
salvation. 

CXXXIY 

Somamitta. 

* 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Benares,  in  a  brahmin’s 
family  and  named  Somamitta,  he  became  an  expert  in  the 
three  Yedas,  but  was  converted  by  the  Thera  Yimala2 
and  took  orders.  He  dwelt  near  the  Thera,  fulfilling  his 
duties.  But  the  latter  was  given  to  sloth  and  torpor.  And 
Somamitta,  thinking  ‘Who  can  be  virtuous  near  a  sluggard?’ 

1  Cora-vomsako ,  one  having  highwaymen  or  dacoits  at  his  bidding, 
whether  to  employ,  or  to  suppress,  is  doubtful. 

2  Cf.  the  Yimala  of  CLXXXV.,  who  was  also  of  Benares. 


122 


CXXXIV.  SOMAMITTA 


went  to  Kassapa  the  Great,1  and  attending  his  lectures, 
established  insight,  aud  soon  after  attained  arahantship. 
Thereupon  he  rebuked  Yimala  in  these  verses : 

As  one  who,  mounted  on  a  puny  plank, 

Is  in  mid-ocean  whelm’d  beneath  the  waves, 

So  even  he  of  blameless  life  doth  sink, 

When  thrown  together  with  the  man  of  sloth  ; 
Wherefore  from  such  an  one  keep  well  apart 
The  sluggard  and  the  poor  in  energ  y-  (147) 

Dwell  thou  with  them  who  live  aloof, 

With  wise,  with  noble  souls  who  have  renounced, 
Who  in  rapt  contemplation  ever  strive.2  (118) 

Hearing  him,  Thera  Yimala  was  deeply  moved,  and 
establishing  insight,  bestirred  himself  to  win  salvation,  the 
which  he  will  be  seen  hereafter  to  attain. 


CXXXY 


Sabbamitta. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  the  family  of  a  brahmin 
of  SavatthI,  and  named  Sabbamitta,  he  saw,  at  the 
presentation  of  the  Jeta  Grove,  the  wondrous  power  of  the 
Buddha,  and  entering  the  Order  he  obtained  a  subject 
for  exercise  and  dwelt  in  the  forest.  After  the  rains  he 
went  into  SavatthI  to  salute  the  Buddha,  and  on  his 
way  there  lay  a  fawn  caught  in  a  trapper’s  net.  The 
doe,  though  not  in  the  net,  kept  near  from  love  for 
her  young,  yet  dared  not  come  close  to  the  snare.  The 
fawn,  turning  hither  and  thither,  bleated  for  pity.  Then 
the  Thera :  ‘  Alas  !  the  suffering  that  love  brings 
to  creatures  !’  Going  further  he  saw  many  bandits 
wrapping  a  man  they  had  captured  alive  in  straw,  and 

1  I.e.,  to  Rajagaha  (CCLXI.). 

2  Repeated  in  CLXXXV. 


CXXXV.  SABBAMITTA 


123 


about  to  set  fire  to  it.  Hearing  his  cries,  the  Thera,  out  of 
his  distress  at  both  these  things,  uttered  a  verse  within 
hearing  of  the  bandits. 

Folk  are  bound  up  with  folk  and  cling  to  folk. 

Folk  suffer  scathe  from  folk  and  wreak  the  same.  (149) 
^  hat  boots  thee  then  this  folk,  and  brood  of  folk  ? 
Let  the  folk  go  and  get  thee  gone  from  them, 

Who  as  they  go  injure  so  many  folk.1  (150) 

So  saying,  he  forced  his  way  to  insight,  and  won  arahant- 
ship.  But  the  brigands,  listening  to  his  teaching,  were 
moved  in  heart  and  renounced  the  world,  practising  the 
Norm  in  principle  and  in  detail. 


CXXXYI 

Mahakala. 

Beborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  the  town  of  Setavya,  in  the 
family  of  a  merchant,  he  was  named  Mahakala.2  When 
come  of  age  and  dwelling  at  home,  he  took  five  hundred  carts 
of  merchandise  to  trade  with  to  Savatthl.  While  resting 
there  with  his  men  in  the  evening,  he  saw  the  laity  going 
with  perfumes  and  garlands  to  the  Jeta  Grove,  and  went 
with  them.  There  he  heard  the  Master  preach  the  Norm, 
believed,  and  entered  the  Order.  Deciding  on  cemetery- 
contemplation,  he  dwelt  in  the  charnel-field.  And  one  day 
a  woman  named  Kali,  employed  as  crematrix,3  in  order  to 
give  the  Thera  an  object-study,  cut  off  from  a  recently 
cremated  body  both  thighs  and  both  arms,  and  breaking 
the  head  into  the  semblance  of  a  milk-bowl,  arranged  all 

1  I  read  gacchantay. 

2  So  the  Commentary  ;  not  °kala.  The  name  thus  means  ‘  big  dark 
one,’  or,  in  the  convenient  Italian  nomenclature,  Neraccio.  Kali,  too, 
is  ‘  brunette.’ 

3  In  Jat .,  v.  449,  we  meet  with  a  man  pursuing  this  trade. 


124 


CXXXVI.  MAHAKALA 


the  members  together,  placed  them  where  the  Thera  studied 
for  him  to  look  at,  and  sat  down  at  the  side.  The  Thera 
seeing  this  exhorted  himself  in  these  verses : 

Kali,  woman  broad  and  swart  of  hue  as  blackbird, 
Now  hath  broken  off  a  thighbone,  now  another ; 

Now  hath  broken  off  an  arm,  and  now  another ; 

Now  the  skull  hath  broken  off  as  ’twere  a  milk  bowl, 
Made  them  ready  and  is  seated.  (151) 

He  who  witless  doth  not  understand,  but  maketh 
Cause  for  life  renewed,  comes  back  again  to  sorrow. 
Wherefore  he  who  knows  creates  no  more  new 
causes. 

May  I  ne’er  so  lie  again  with  scattered  mem¬ 
bers!1  (152) 

Thus  wholly  self-mastered,  the  Thera  brought  forth  insight 
and  won  arahantship. 

1  The  account  of  Kali’s  activity  closes  with  an  odd  half  line,  as  if  to 
mark,  by  a  pause,  the  abrupt  transition  from  the  Thera’s  half- amused 
notice  of  her  grisly  service,  to  the  solemn  quest  of  the  End  of  Sorrow  on 
which  he  is  bent.  This  is  a  good  instance  of  a  poem  which  is  scarcely 
intelligible  without  the  Commentary’s  help.  With  that  help,  the  more 
literal  the  translation,  the  more  intelligible  is  the  verse.  Without  it  we 
have  but  to  look  at  Dr.  Neumann’s  guessing  and  forced  rendering, 
making  Kali  a  wanton,  and  the  good  bhikkhu  a  prurient  -  minded 
fellow,  to  realize  how  relatively  sane  and  simple  even  a  scholastic 
exegesis  may  be.  The  practice  of  Asubha-jhana,  or  meditation  on  a 
base  of  some  unlovely  object,  was  recommended  from  the  early  days 
of  the  Sanglia,  and,  to  judge  by  the  accompanying  illustration  of  a 
Ceylonese  bhikkhu  of  to-day,  is  still  practised.  Cf.  Bud.  Psy ., 
p.  69,  n.  2. 


ASUBHA-JHANA  IN  CEYLON. 

‘  May  I  ne'er  so  lie  again  with  scattered  members  P 


To  face  p.  124, 


CXXXVII.  TISSA 


125 


CXXXVII 

Tissa.1 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Rajagaha,  in  a  brahmin’s 
family,  and  named  Tissa,  he  became  an  expert  in  the  Vedas, 
teaching  the  mantras  to  five  hundred  brahmin  boys,  and 
winning  the  highest  praise  and  renown.  When  the  Master 
came  to  Rajagaha,  Tissa  saw  the  Buddha-majesty,  and 
believed  and  entered  the  Order,  thereafter  winning  arahant- 
ship  through  established  insight.  So  also  he  won  praise 
and  renown. 

Now  certain  worldly-minded  bhikkhus  noting  the  atten¬ 
tion  paid  to  the  Thera  were  unable  to  endure  it.  The 
Thera  knew  this,  and  declared  the  evil  in  such  attentions 
and  his  own  detachment  therefrom  in  these  verses : 

Many  the  foes  he  gets,  the  bhikkhu  shorn, 

Wrapt  in  his  robe,  to  whom  the  world  gives  gifts 
Of  food  and  drink,  raiment  and  where  to  lodge.  (153) 
Let  him  then,  knowing  all  the  bane  herefrom, 

The  fearsome  peril  in  the  world’s  regard, 

Taking  but  little,  free  from  lusting’s  taint, 

Wary  and  mindful,  hold  his  onward  way.  (154) 

Then  those  bhikkhus  straightway  sought  the  Thera’s 
forgiveness. 


CXXXVIII 

Kimbila. 

His  meeting  with  the  Buddha,  his  emotion  and  his  leaving 
the  world  are  told  in  Canto  I.,  the  verse  beginning,  ‘As 
bidden  by  some  power.’ 2  Here  the  Thera  tells  how  he  dwelt 

1  Clearly  quite  a  different  Tissa  from  either  of  the  foregoing  Theras 
so  named.  Cf.  Ps.  XXXIX.,  XCVII. 

2  His  story  having  been  given  in  Ps.  CXVIII.,  the  Chronicle  begins 
at  once  with  the  circumstances  resulting  in  the  gatha. 


12  6 


CXXXVIII.  KIMBILA 


fraternally  with  his  comrades,  the  venerable  Anuruddha  and 
the  venerable  Bhaddiya,  Sakiyan  rajas: 

W  here  lies  the  Eastern  Bamboo  Grove  we  dwell, 
Sons  of  the  Sakiyans,  comrades  [all  and  true]. 

No  little  wealth  have  we  renounced  for  this, 
Contented  with  whatever  fills  our  bowl.  (155) 
Quickened  and  ardent  is  our  energy, 

Earnest  and  resolute  [our  heart’s  intent] , 

Ever  we  boldly  press  toward  [our  goal]. 

Love  of  the  Norm  our  [sure  and  sole]  delight, 

All  worldly  loves  by  us  forsworn  outright.  (156 » 


CXXXIX 

Nanda. 

Beborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Kapilavatthu,  as  the  son  of 
Baja  Suddhodana  and  of  Great  PajapatT,1  and  a  joy  to  his  kin, 
on  his  naming  day  he  was  named  Nanda.  When  Nanda  was 
of  age,  the  Master,  rolling  the  Wheel  of  the  Norm,  came  out 
of  compassion  to  Kapilavatthu.  Making  a  shower  of  rain 
the  occasion,  he  told  the  Yessantara  Jataka.2  On  the  second 
day,  by  the  verse  ‘  Rise  up,’  he  established  his  father  as 
a  Stream-winner;  Pajapati  also  by  the  verse,  ‘Follow 
after  a  holy  life,  and  the  raja  further,  as  a  Once-returner. 
On  the  third  day,  when  seeking  alms  at  the  coronation-hall 
where  congratulations  were  being  offered  to  Prince  Nanda 
on  his  wedding,  the  Master  handed  the  prince  his  bowl  and 
wished  him  luck.  And  he,  taking  the  bowl,  followed  the 
Master  to  the  Vihara,  who  there  ordained  him,  though 
Nanda  wished  it  not. 

1  See  Ps.  I.,  p.  6  /.  Nanda  is  called  Nandiya  above  (Ps.  XXV.). 
This  single  verse  may  have  been  incorporated  from  some  such  collec¬ 
tion  of  Mara  anecdotes  as  those  in  the  Bhikkhunl-Saijyutta  (see 
Windisch,  MChcl  und  Buddhct ,  p.  134),  and  the  form  for  his  name 
used  there  left  unaltered.  The  difference  is  only  that  between,  e.g., 
Joy,  Joyous. 

Jdt.,  vi.,  No.  547  ;  Buddhist  Birth  Stories ,  p.  124. 


CXXXIX.  NANDA 


127 


From  that  time,  knowing  that  Nanda  was  oppressed  by 
his  distaste,  the  Master  trained  it  away,  so  that  Nanda,  by 
thoroughgoing  meditation,  established  insight  and  attained 
arahantship.  Thereafter,  enjoying  the  bliss  of  liberty,  he 
said :  4  0  excellent  method  of  the  Master,  whereby  I  was 
drawn  out  of  the  bog  of  rebirth  and  set  on  Nibbana’s 
strand !’  And  joying  in  his  reflections  he  uttered  these 
verses : 

Heedless  and  shallow  once  my  thoughts  were  set 
On  all  the  bravery  of  outward  show  ; 

Fickle  was  I  and  frivolous  ;  all  my  days 
Were  worn  with  wanton  sensuality.  (157) 

But  by  the  Buddha’s  skilful  art  benign, 

Who  of  sun’s  lineage  cometh,  was  I  brought 
To  live  by  deeper  thought,  whereby  my  heart 
From  the  great  swamp  of  endless  life1  I  drew.  (158) 

And  the  Exalted  One,  discerning  how  eminently  he  was 
trained  in  self-control,  declared  him  before  the  Order  to  be 
chief  therein  among  his  disciples,2  even  therein  conferring 
that  distinction  to  which  the  Thera,  in  past  ages,  had  once 
aspired. 


CXL 

Sirimat. 

Beborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthi,  in  a  burgess’s 
family,  he  was  named  Sirimat  (Faustus)  because  of  his 
family’s  good  fortune  and  constant  success.  His  younger 
brother,  as  increaser  of  that  good  fortune,  was  named 
Sirivaddha  (growth  of  luck).3  They  both  saw  the  majesty 
of  the  Buddha  when  the  Jeta  Grove  was  presented,  believed, 
and  entered  the  Order.  Sirivaddha,  though-  at  first  he  won 
no  abnormal  powers,  was  honoured  and  feted  by  laity  and 

1  Bhava ,  becoming.  Saysarajianke  nimuggay.  Cy. 

2  He  is  so  distinguished  in  Ang.  Nik.,  i.  25. 

3  Evidently  not  the  Thera  of  Ps.  XLI. 


128 


CXL.  SIMM  AT 


recluses.  But  Sirimat,  through  defective  karma,  was  little 
honoured ;  nevertheless,  exercising  himself  in  calm  and 
insight,  he  soon  won  the  sixfold  abhinna. 

Now  the  ordinary  bhikkhus  and  novices,  not  knowing 
Sirimat  was  an  Ariyan,  continued  to  disparage  him  and  to 
honour  his  brother.  Then  the  Thera,  blaming  their  faulty 
judgment,  said: 

Others  may  laud  and  honour  him 
Whose  self  is  uncontrolled. 

Surely  amiss  their  praise  is  given, 

Since  self  is  uncontrolled.  (159) 

Others  may  chide  and  censure  him 
Whose  self  is  well  controlled. 

Surely  amiss  their  blame  is  given, 

Since  self  is  well  controlled.  (100) 

Then  Sirivaddha,  hearing  him,  was  agitated,  and  establish¬ 
ing  insight,  not  long  after  he  also  completed  his  salvation. 
And  they  who  had  blamed  the  Thera  sought  his  forgive¬ 
ness. 


PART  III 

CXLI 

Uttara. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Saketa,1  in  a  brahmin’s 
family,  he  wTas  named  Uttara.  Convinced  by  the  twin- 
miracle  at  the  Gandamba  tree  at  Savatthi,2  whither  some 
business  had  taken  him,  he  was  induced  to  leave  the  world 
when  the  Master,  at  Saketa,  preached  the  Kalaka  Park  dis¬ 
course.3  Going  with  the  Master  to  Rajagaha,  he  there 
developed  insight  and  acquired  sixfold  abhinna.  Returning 
again  to  Savatthi  to  wTait  on  the  Buddha,  the  bhikkhus  asked 
him :  ‘  What,  Brother,  have  you  already  accomplished  your 

1  See  XXVIII.  2  Wrought  by  the  Buddha  (Sum.  V.,  57). 

A-fic/.,  ii.  24,  on  a  Tathagata  s  clarity  of  knowledge  and  integrity. 


CXL1.  UTTARA 


129 


religious  duties  ?’  He,  declaring  anna,  replied  in  these 
verses : 

W  ell  do  I  understand  the  factors  five, 

And  well  is  craving  rooted  out  in  me, 

Developed  are  the  seven  wisdom-chords, 

And  all  the  poison-fumes  are  shrunk  to  nought.  (161) 
And  since  the  factors  now  are  understood, 

I— look  you!1 — casting  out  the  Huntress  fell 
[Who  sets  her  netted  snare  for  every  thought],2 
And  cultivating  wisdom’s  harmony,3 
Sane  and  immune,  in  peace  shall  pass  away.4  (102) 


CXLII 

Bhaddaji. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Bhaddiya,5  as  the  only 
child  of  a  councillor  whose  fortune  was  worth  eighty  crores,6 
he  was  named  Bhaddaji,  and  was  brought  up  in  luxury, 
like  that  attending  the  Bodhisat  in  his  last  rebirth.  . 
(The  Commentary  then  relates  the  story  of  his  sudden 

1  So  ’ liay ,  Jit.  ‘  this  [self-same]  I.’ 

2  Expansion  of  the  one  word  jalirii ,  ‘she  who  lays  a  net’ — i.e., 
craving  ‘by  the  suffusion  of  which  the  manifold  web  of  the  senses 
becomes  as  a  net’  ( Attliasdlini ,  p.  363;  Bud.  Psy.,  p.i  278,  n.  2). 
Cittacittasantdnato  uddhavitvci  (Commentary). 

3  Bojjhangd,  as  in  verse  161.  Cf.  Compendium ,  pp.  66,  180  f. 
The  Commentary  calls  the  seven  ‘  the  concord  of  the  Norm.’ 

4  Nibbdyissay  andsavo,  ‘  by  the  expiry  of  the  last  (moment  of) 
consciousness,  like  a  fire  without  fuel,  I  shall  imrinibbdn-'&Xo  without 
danger  (of  rebirth)  ’  (Commentary). 

5  In  the  Angas’  country,  east  of  Magadha.  Kotigama  was  near 
Patna.  The  Bodhisat  is,  of  course,  Gotama,  before  he  became  a 
Buddha.  The  Commentary  differs  from  the  Jataka  version  (see  next 
page)  only  in  a  few  small  details,  and  uses  independent  phraseology. 

I.e.,  800,000,000.  The  unit  seems  to  have  been  a  copper  coin, 
termed  kahdpana.  See  Bud.  India ,  p.  100^. 


9 


130 


CXLII.  BHADDAJ1 


realization  of  arahantship  while  listening  for  the  first  time 
to  the  Buddha,  the  latter  having  come  from  Savatthi 
purposely  to  seek  him  out ;  together  with  his  following 
the  Master  and  his  company,  the  week  after,  to  Kotigama, 
and  retiring  to  the  bank  of  the  Ganges  to  become  absorbed 
in  jhana.  Thence  he  emerges  only  when  the  Master  came 
by,  not  heeding  the  preceding  chief  Theras.  To  vindicate 
his  new  supreme  attainments,  the  Buddha  invites  him  on  to 
his  own  ferry-boat,  and  bids  him  work  a  wonder.  Bhaddaji 
thereupon  raises  the  submerged  palace  he  dwelt  in  when 
he  was  King  Panada,  all  being  told  in  the  ‘  Maha-panada- 
Jafcaka,’  ii.,  No.  264.)  Then  the  Thera  described  the  golden 
mansion  in  which  he  had  once  lived,  speaking  of  himself, 
that  self  having  passed  away,1  as  of  another  : 

Panada  was  that  king  by  name 
Whose  palace  was  of  gold  ; 

Sixteen  apartments  deep  it  stood, 

Aloft  a  thousandfold.  (163) 

A  thousand  flights  it  rose  on  high, 

Its  walls  with  scroll-work  dight, 

With  many  a  flaunting  banner  hung, 

With  emeralds  glittering  bright. 

’Twas  there  they  danced,  Gandharvas  dunced, 
Six  thousand  in  seven  bands.  (164) 

1  On  this  mythical  king  see  also  Diglia ,  iii.  76;  Jat.,  iv.,  No.  489. 
Dipavaysa,  iii.  7 ;  Mahavaysa  (translation),  xxxi.  7  ff.  Jat.  No.  264 
gives  a  fuller  account  of  Bhaddaji’s  performance.  The  text  versions 
are  uncertain  in  some  of  the  descriptive  terms,  and  the  Commentary’s 
authorities  are  equally  divided.  Hence  the  attempt  at  ballad  form 
above  does  not  claim  to  have  selected  an  absolutely  correct  rendering. 
The  last  two  lines  refer  to  the  vain  efforts  of  mimes  or  musicians, 
collected  by  Panada’s  father  to  make  the  prince  smile.  He,  reminiscent 
of  celestial  art,  was  only  moved  to  a  slight  smile  when  Sakka,  the  god, 
sent  a  celestial  harlequin  (Jat.,  op.  cit.). 


CXLIII.  SOBHITA 


131 


CXLIII 

Sobhita. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthi,  in  a  brahmin’s 
family,  he  was  named  Sobhita.  And  after  he  had  heard 
the  Master  teach,  had  left  the  world  and  acquired  sixfold 
abhinna,  he  practised  recollecting  his  former  lives  with 
such  success  that  the  Master  ranked  him  foremost  among 
those  who  could  so  remember.1  And  he,  reflecting  on 
his  pre-eminence  in  attainment,  was  filled  with  joy ,* and 
breathed  forth  this  psalm  : 

A  bhikkhu  mindful,  gifted  with  insight, 

With  strenuous  effort  strongly  set  to  work, 
Have  I  [the  infinite  past]  recalled  to  mind : 

Five  hundred  ages  in  a  single  night.  (165) 

O  let  the  Onsets  Four  of  mindfulness2 
My  study  be,  the  Seven,3  the  noble  Eight  !4 
For  I  [the  infinite  past]  have  called  to  mind  : 

Five  hundred  ages  in  a  single  night.  (166) 


CXLIY 

‘  Valliya.’ 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Vesall,  in  a  brahmin’s 
family,  he  was  named  Kanhamitta.  Come  of  age,  he  saw 
the  majesty  of  the  Buddha  when  the  latter  came  to  Vesall, 

1  Ang. ,  i.  25.  Sister  Bhadda  Kapilani  was  also  thus  distinguished 
( Sisters ,  p.  47).  Sobhita  Thera  (possibly  this  man)  was  the  third 
in  the  apostolic  succession  of  thirteen  Abhidhammikas,  who  handed 
down  this  teaching  till  Mahinda  conveyed  it  to  Ceylon.  Bhaddaii 
Thera  was  second.  ( Atthasdlini ,  p.  32). 

2  See  Dialogues,  ii.  327  ff.  ;  Compendium,  p.  179.  Bhdvayay  = 
bhdvand  hotu  (Commentary). 

3  Factors  of  Enlightenment,  Wings  of  Wisdom  (Compendium 

p.  180). 

4  The  Eightfold  Path  (ibid.). 


132 


cxliv.  ‘yalliya’ 


and  believing,  he  took  orders  under  Maha-Kaccana.  Dull 
of  insight,  and  beginning  to  make  effort,  he  was  so  long 
dependent  upon  the  wisdom  of  his  co-religionists  that  they 
called  him  Yalliya  (Creeperling),  saying,  ‘  Like  ivy  and 
such  plants,  that  cannot  grow  leaning  on  nothing,  so  he 
cannot  get  on  without  leaning  on  someone  who  is  wise.’1 

And  it  came  to  pass  that  he  went  to  hear  Thera 
Yenudatta  preach,  and  becoming  thereby  heedful  and  in¬ 
telligent  and  ripe  in  knowledge,  he  asked  that  proficient 
teacher,  saying  : 

All  that  by  earnest  work  has  to  be  done, 

All  that  one  fain  to  wake  to  truth  must  do, 

All  that  shall  be  my  work  nor  shall  I  fail. 

O  see  my  forward  strides  in  energy  !  (167) 

And  do  thou  show  me  how  and  where  to  go — 
The  Path  that’s  founded  on  Ambrosia— 2 
So  I  in  silent  study  pondering 
Shall  to  the  silence  of  the  seers  attain, 

As  glides  great  Ganga  s  river  to  the  main.3  (168) 

Then  Yenudatta  gave  him  an  exercise  for  study,  and  he, 
working  at  it,  not  long  after  won  arahantship.  Declaring 
anna,  he  uttered  those  same  verses. 

1  Apparently  a  different  Thera  from  the  Yalliyas  of  LIII.  and 
CXXIII.,  in  whose  case  Yalliya  would  seem  to  be  no  nickname.  I 
have  called  valli  (creeper)  ‘  ivy,’  because  of  its  typically  representing 
for  us  such  a  character.  On  Maha-Ivaccana,  see  CCXXIX.  Y  enudatta 
is  not  met  with  elsewhere. 

2  Nibbdne patitthitattd  (Commentary). 

3  The  quarter  verse  ahay  monena  monissay  has  been  perhaps 
unduly  expanded,  but  it  was  to  do  justice  to  the  association,  for  classic 
Indian  literature,  between  the  seer  or  sage  (muni)  and  silence  (cf. 
Chdndogya  Upanishad,  viii.  5,  2).  The  simile  of  the  Ganges  illustrates 
both  silent  progress  and  attainment.  Nevertheless,  the  Commentary 
will  have  nothing  to  do  with  silence ;  for  it,  monena  is  1  by  wisdom  or 
insight,’  and  monissay  is  ‘  I  shall  know  or  discern  (Nibbana).’ 


CXLY.  VlTASOKA 


133 


CXLY 

Vltasoka. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age,  in  the  two  hundred  and 
eighteenth  year  thereof,  as  the  younger  brother  of  King 
Dhammasoka,  he  was  named  Vltasoka.1  Come  of  age,  he 
acquired  the  accomplishments  befitting  noble  youths,  and 
then  as  a  lay-pupil  of  Thera  Giridatta  became  highly  pro¬ 
ficient  in  the  Sutta-  and  Abhidhamma-Pitakas. 

Now  one  day  when  his  hair  was  being  dressed,  he  took 
the  mirror  from  the  barber’s  hand,  and  contemplating  his 
body,  saw  some  grey  hairs.  In  agitation  he  sent  down 
insight  into  his  mind,  and  exerting  himself  to  meditate,  he 
became,  as  he  there  sat,  a  Stream-winner.  Taking  Orders 
under  Giridatta,  he  not  long  after  won  arahantship.  There¬ 
upon  he  thus  declared  anna  : 

‘Now  let  him  shave  me  !’ — so  the  barber  came. 
From  him  I  took  the  mirror  and,  therein 
Reflected,  on  myself  I  gazed  and  thought :  (169) 

‘  Futile  for  lasting  is  this  body  shown.’ 

[Thus  thinking  on  the  source  that  blinds  our  sight 
My  spirit’s]  darkness  melted  into  light. 

Stripped  are  the  swathing  vestments  utterly  !2 
Now  is  there  no  more  coming  back  to  be  ?  (170) 

1  According  to  the  Commentary,  Vltasoka  (one  who  has  ended  grief) 
is  none  other  than  the  younger  brother  of  Emperor  Asoka,  whose  career 
forms  an  episode  in  the  Divyavadana  (translated  by  Burnouf  in 
Buddhisme  Indien,  1844),  in  which  Vltasoka  is  impelled  to  leave  the 
world  through  the  arahant  Yasa.  Neither  Giridatta  nor  the  barber 
episode  is  alluded  to,  which  shows  how  different  was  the  tradition 
handed  on  by  Dhammapala.  The  grey  hair  episode  is  a  very  old  tale, 
told  in  Majjh .,  ii.  83 ;  Jdt. ,  i.,  No.  9. 

2  The  barber  was  also  bathman  and  head-dresser;  hence  cola, 
(vestments),  which  means  any  napery,  may  be  an  allusion  to  the 
muslin  folds  of  the  turban,  or  to  bath  robes  and  towels,  or  to  dress. 
The  Commentary  only  expands  the  altered  scale  of  values  in  the 
prince’s  life.  PacchaveJcJchisay  has  the  double  sense  of  our  ‘  reflected.’ 


134 


CXLVI.  PUNNAMASA 


CXLYI 

Punnamasa.1 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthi  in  the  family  of 
a  landed  proprietor,  he  left  the  work  after  the  birth  of  his 
firstborn.  And  dwelling  near  a  village,  he  strove  and 
worked  till  he  acquired  sixfold  abhinna.  Going  thereupon 
to  Savatthi  and  saluting  the  Master,  he  dwelt  in  a  charnel- 
field.  Now  his  son  died,  and  his  wife,  desirous  that  their 
property,  having  no  heirs,  should  not  be  taken  over  by  the 
rajas,  went  with  a  large  following  to  greet  her  husband, 
and  induce  him  to  leave  the  religious  life.  But  the  Thera, 
to  show  his  passionless  state  and  to  vindicate  his  attain¬ 
ment,  stood  in  the  air  and  said : 

All  the  five  Hindrances  that  bar  the  way  2 
Against  the  safe,  sure  peace  3  I  put  aside. 

The  mirror  of  the  holy  Norm  I  grasped  : — 4 
The  knowing  and  the  seeing  what  we  are —  (1T1) 

So  I  reflected  on  this  grouped  frame  5 
Within  and  eke  without,  and  I  beheld 
How,  whether  it  was  mine  or  not  of  me, 

The  body  empty  [is  and  vanity].  (172) 

CXLYII 

Nandaka. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha -age  at  Campa,6  in  a  burgess’s 
family,  he  was  named  Nandaka.  He  was  the  younger 

1  See  the  other  version  in  X.  The  Commentary  recognizes  no 
identity. 

2  Desires  of  sense,  malevolence,  sluggishness,  distraction,  perplexity 
— to  ‘  put  aside ?  these  was  the  essential  preliminary  to  attaining  the 
serenity  and  detachment  for  fruitful  intellectual  effort  ( Dialogues , 
i.  82-84). 

3  Yoyakkhemay .  See  XXXII. 

4  Sisters ,  verse  222. 

5  Kayo  is  both  body  ( sarira )  and,  generally,  a  group,  or  organism. 

6  Capital  of  the  Angas,  now  Bagulpur.  Pronounced  Champa. 


CXLVII.  NANDAKA 


135 


brother  of  Bharata,  whose  story  will  next  be  told.  When 
both  were  come  of  age,  they  heard  that  Sona-Kolivisa 1 
had  left  the  world.  And  saying :  4  Even  Sona  who  is  so 
delicate  has  gone  forth ;  now  what  of  us  ?’  they,  too, 
left  the  world.  Bharata  soon  acquired  sixfold  abhinna,  but 
Nandaka,  through  the  strength  of  the  corruptions,  was  not 
able  to  command  insight,  and  could  only  practise  for  it. 
Then  Bharata,  wishing  to  help  him,  made  him  his  atten¬ 
dant,  and  went  forth  from  the  vihara.  Sitting  down  near 
the  road  he  discoursed  to  him  of  insight. 

Now  a  caravan  passing  by,  an  ox,  unable  to  pull  his 
cart  through  a  boggy  place,  fell  down.  The  leader  had 
him  released  from  the  cart,  and  fed  with  grass  and  water. 
His  fatigue  allayed,  the  ox,  reharnessed  and  strengthened, 
pulled  the  cart  out  of  the  bog.  Then  Bharata  said  :  *  Did 
you  see  that  business,  brother  Nandaka?’  ‘I  did.’  4  Con¬ 
sider  its  meaning.’  And  Nandaka  said  :  4  Like  the  refreshed 
ox,  I,  too,  must  draw  forth  myself  out  of  the  swamp  of 
sapsara.’  And  taking  this  as  his  subject  in  practising,  he 
won  arahantship.  Then  to  his  brother  he  declared  anna 
in  these  verses  : 

E’en  though  he  trip  and  fall,  the  mettled  brute 
Of  noble  breed  will  steadfast  stand  once  more. 
Incited  yet  again  to  effort  new, 

Foredone  no  longer,  draws  his  load  along.  (173) 

So  look  on  me  as  one  who  having  learned 
Of  Him,  the  all-enlightened  One,  and  gained 
True  insight,  am  become  of  noble  breed, 

And  of  the  Very  Buddha  son  indeed.  (174) 


CXLVIII 

Bharata. 

Now  when  his  younger  brother  Nandaka  had  confessed 
that  he  had  gotten  anna,  Bharata  conceived  the  idea  : 

1  See  CCXLIII.  The  following  object-lesson  occurs  in  the  case  of 
Ramanlya-viharin,  as  the  Commentary  reminds  us  (XLV.h 


136 


CXLVIII.  BHARATA 


‘  Let  us  both  go  forthwith  to  the  Master,  and  tell  him  how 
we  have  carried  out  holiness  of  life.’  And  he  said  these 
verses  to  Nandaka  : 

Come,  Nandaka,  now  go  we  unto  Him 
Whose  blessed  teaching  taught  us  all  we  know  ; 
And  in  the  presence  of  the  Wake,  the  Chief, 

Let’s  roar  the  lion’s  paean  of  our  hearts.  (175) 

That  quest  for  which  the  holy  Sage  in  [love 
And  great]  compassion  bade  us 1  both  go  forth — 
That  Good  supreme  both  you  and  I  have  won, 

And  every  bond  that  hindered  us  is  gone.  (176) 


CXLIX 

Bharadvaja. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Rajagaha  in  a  brahmin’s 
family,  he  came  to  be  designated  by  his  gens-name  of 
Bharadvaja.2  Living  the  domestic  life,  a  son  was  born  to 
him,  and  he  named  him  Kanhadinna.  When  the  boy  was 
of  proper  age,  his  father  said,  4  Come,  dear  boy,  and  study 
under  such  and  such  a  teacher,’  and  sent  him  to  Takka- 
sila.3  On  his  way  thither  he  made  friends  with  a  great 
Thera,  a  disciple  of  the  Master,  heard  him  teach  the 
Norm,  took  orders,  and  after  due  training  won  arahantship. 

Now  his  father  Bharadvaja  heard  the  Exalted  One  teach 
the  Norm  at  the  Bamboo  Grove  Vihara,  and  he,  too,  left 
the  world  and  realized  arahantship.  But  Kanhadinna 
came  to  salute  the  Master  at  Rajagaha,  and  with  joy  he 
saw  his  father  seated  near  the  latter.  And  he  asked 
himself :  ‘  My  father,  too,  has  gone  forth.  Has  he,  I 

1  Pabbiljayi  pabbajesi.  Cy. 

2  A  numerous  gens,  but  not  reckoned  of  high  rank  ( Vinaya  Texts, 
iv.  6).  At  least  twenty  individuals  of  this  surname  are  met  with  in 
the  Pitakas. 

3  The  Taxila  of  Greek  chroniclers,  a  famous  ancient  seat  of  learning 

in  Kashmir.  See  the  numerous  references  in  the  Jdtaha. 


CXLIX.  BHARADVAJA 


137 


wonder,  attained  the  end  of  the  religious  life  ?’  Then  he  dis¬ 
cerned  that  his  father  was  an  arahant,  and  wishing  to  make 
him  utter  a  lion-roar,  asked  him :  ‘  Hast  thou  succeeded 
in  attaining  the  end  of  that  for  which  we  leave  the  world  ?' 
Then  Bharadvaja  showed  his  attainment  in  these  verses  : 

Tis  thus  th’  enlightened  lift  their  triumph-song, 
Like  lions  roaring  in  the  hill-ravine,1 
Heroes  who  in  the  holy  war  have  won, 

And  conquered  evil,  Mara  and  his  host.  (177) 

The  servant  of  the  blessed  Master  I, 

A  votary  of  the  Norm  and  Brotherhood  ; 

And  glad  and  gratified  my  heart  to  see 

My  son  purged  of  the  poisons,  sane,  immune.  (178) 


CL 

Kanhadinna. 

Beborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Rajagaha,  in  a  brahmin’s 
family,  he  was  named  Kanhadinna.  Come  of  age,  and 
impelled  by  the  efficient  cause  culminating,  he  came  to  the 
General  of  the  Norm,2  heard  the  Norm,  believed,  left  the 
world,  and  developing  insight,  won  arahantship.  There¬ 
upon  he  thus  declared  aniia  : 

Waited  have  I  on  saintly  men  and  heard 

Full  many  times  the  saving  truths  [they  taught]. 

Hearing  I  knew  I  should  attain  the  road 

That  leads  away  from  things  that  age  and  die.3  (179) 

1  Cf.  the  introductory  verses. 

2  Sariputta.  We  are  left  in  doubt  as  to  whether  Kanhadinna  is  the 
son  in  the  preceding  story  or  not.  If  he  is,  then  the  ‘great  Thera  ’  he 
met  was  Sariputta ;  but  in  that  case  it  is  curious  that  the  stories  are 
not  explicitly  connected. 

3  Lit.,  the  ambrosial  road;  according  to  the  Commentary  —  the 
Eightfold  Path.  ‘  I  knew  I  should  ’  is,  literally,  1 1  shall  [attain]/ 
He  had  already  attained. 


138 


CL.  KANHADINNA 


And  so  in  me  all  lust  to  live  again 

Tims  being  utterly  cast  out,  since  then 

In  me  tis  no  more  found,  nor  was’t,  nor  will  it  e’er 

Come  back  in  me,  nor  at  this  hour  doth  rise  in  me.1 

(180) 


PART  IV 
CLI 

Migasira. 

Pieboen  in  this  Buddha-age  in  the  family  of  a  brahmin  of 
Kosala,  he  was  named  Migasira2  after  the  constellation 
under  which  he  obtained  birth.  And  having  acquired 
brahmin  culture,  he  practised  the  skull-spell,3  so  that,  when 
he  had  muttered  the  spell  and  tapped  with  his  nail  on  the 
skull,  he  would  declare,  *  This  person  is  reborn  in  such  a 
sphere,’  even  with  respect  to  those  who  had  been  dead 
three  years.  Disliking  domestic  life,  he  became  a  Wanderer,4 
and  through  his  art  won  favour  and  respect.  Coming  to 
Savatthl  and  going  before  the  Master,  he  declared  his 
power,  saying :  ‘  I,  master  Gotama,  can  tell  the  destiny  of 
dead  persons.’  ‘How  do  you  tell  it?’  He  let  a  skull  be 
brought,  and,  muttering  his  rune  and  tapping  with  his  nail, 
he  asserted  purgatory  or  some  other  sphere  to  be  the  place 
of  rebirth. 

Then  the  Exalted  One  had  the  skull  of  a  bhikkhu 
brought,  who  had  attained  complete  outgoing  ( parinibbdna ), 
and  said  :  ‘  Tell  now  his  destiny  to  whom  this  skull 
belonged  !’  Migasira  muttered  and  tapped,  but  saw  neither 
the  beginning  nor  the  end.  Then  the  Master  said :  ‘  Art 
not  able,  Wanderer?’  He  replied,  ‘I  must  first  make 
sure,’  and  turning  the  skull  round  never  so  much — for  how 
should  he  know  the  goings  of  an  arahant?5 — stood  ashamed, 

1  Either  glosses  have  crept  in,  or  the  additional  feet  in  the  latter 
gatha  are  intentional,  to  pile  on  emphasis. 

2  Deer's  head  =  Capricorn.  3  Cf.  Vanglsa’s  legend,  CCLXIV. 

4  See  Rhys  Davids,  Buddhist  India,  pp.  141-143.  5  Cf.  verse  92. 


C LI.  MIGASIRA 


139 


perspiring,  dumb.  ‘  Art  tired,  Wanderer  ?’  ‘  Ay,  I  am 

tired ;  I  cannot  discern  the  destiny  of  this  one.  Do  you 
make  it  known  ?’  ‘  I  know  it,  and  more  besides.  He  is 

gone  to  Nibbana.’1  Then  said  the  Wanderer:  ‘Give  me 
this  hidden  lore  !’  ‘  Then  do  you  take  orders.’  So  Miga- 

sira  was  ordained,  and  was  given  exercises  in  calm.  Well 
grounded  in  jhana  and  abhinna,  he  practised  insight,  and 
not  long  after  won  arahantship.  He  then  confessed  anna 
thus  : 

Since  I  went  forth  and  entered  on  the  Rule 
Ordained  by  the  Enlightened  One  Supreme, 
Emancipated  as  I  went,  I  rose 

Transcending  all  these  things  of  sense-desire.  (181) 
While  He,  that  Very  Brahmin,2  looked  on  me, 

O  then  my  heart  was  set  at  liberty ! 3 
Yea,  since  all  bonds  are  broke  for  evermore, 

For  me  Emancipation’s  fixed  and  sure  !  (182) 


CLII 

Sivaka. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Rajagaha  in  a  brahmin’s 
family,  he  was  named  Sivaka.  And  when  he  had  acquired 
a  complete  education,  he  followed  his  inclination  to  leave 
the  world.  Coming  as  a  Wanderer  to  hear  the  Master 
teach  the  Norm,  he  received  faith,  entered  the  Order,  and 
eventually  won  arahantship.  He  then  thus  confessed 
anna  : 

Transient  the  little  houses  [of  our  life], 

Built  here,  built  there,  again,  ever  again. 

Hunting  the  house-builder  [thus  far  I  come] ; 

Birth  is  but  woe  again,  ever  again.  (183) 

1  Nibbanay  gato  so,  the  only  Pali  approximation  to  the  frequent 
rendering,  ‘  entered  into  Nirvana,’  I  have  yet  met  with. 

2  In  the  sense  of  chief,  best  (Commentary)  ;  a  genitior  absolute. 

3  See  Sisters,  verses  17,  81,  116. 


140 


CL1II.  UPAVANA 


Thou’rt  found,  house-maker  thou,  thou’rt  seen  at 
last ! 

Never  again  shalt  fashion  house  [for  me] ! 

Broken  are  all  thy  walls,  shattered  thy  roofs. 
Stayed  is  the  further  rise  of  consciousness ; 

Blown  ’twill  be  even  here  to  nothingness.1  (184) 

CLIII 

Upavana. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthi,  in  a  brahmin’s 
family,  he  was  named  Upavana.  He  saw  at  the  Jeta  Grove 
presentation  the  majesty  of  the  Buddha,  and  entering  the 
Order,  practised  for  insight,  and  won  sixfold  abhinna. 

Now  Upavana  became  attendant  on  the  Exalted  One.2 
And  at  that  time  the  Exalted  One  was  attacked  by  cramp. 
And  Devahita,  a  brahmin  lay-friend  of  the  Thera,  living  at 
Savatthi,  was  supplying  him  with  the  four  necessaries.  See¬ 
ing  him  come  with  bowl  and  robe,  Devahita  discerned  that  he 
needed  something  different  and  said :  ‘  Let  your  reverence 
be  supplied.  What  do  you  need  ?’  And  Upavana  answered  : 

The  Arahant,  the  Well-Come  of  all  men, 

The  Holy  Sage,  he  suffereth  sore  with  wind. 

If  there  be  any  water  heated  here, 

O  give  it  to  me,  brahmin,  for  the  Sage.  (185) 
Revered  by  them  to  whom  we  reverence  owe, 
Cherished  by  them  who  claim  our  pious  care, 
Honoured  by  them  to  whom  honour  is  due, 

For  Him  I  do  beseech  it  may  be  brought.  (186) 

1  Legend  has  assigned  these  famous  verses  as  the  Buddha’s  first 
logion,  after  his  attainment  of  Buddhahood  {Bud.  Birth  Stories , 
p.  103/. ;  Sum.  V.,  i.  16) ;  but  they  do  not  occur  in  the  canonical 
descriptions  of  that  event  (c/.  the  slightly  different  Gathas,  Dhp., 
158,  154;  SBE,  x.  42,  to.).  Dhammapala  is  briefer  than  usual, 
apparently  ignorant  of  the  tradition  given  in  Buddhaghosa.  He 
makes  no  allusion  to  it.  The  house-builder,  he  points  out,  is  craving, 
tanha  vaddhaki. 

2  See  CCLX.  On  the  ailment  of  Milinda  i.,  194,  to.  4. 


CLIV.  ISIDINNA 


141 


Thereat  the  brahmin  offered  both  hot  water  and  suitable 
medicine.  Thereby  the  Master’s  sickness  was  healed,  and 
to  him  the  Exalted  One  rendered  thanks. 


CLIV 

Isidinna. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  the  country  of  the  Suna- 
parantas,1  in  the  family  of  a  councillor,  he  was  named 
Isidinna.  Grown  up,  he  saw  the  double  miracle  at  the 
presentation  of  the  Sandalwood  Pavilion,2  and  coming  with 
a  satisfied  mind  to  the  Master,  he  heard  the  Norm,  and 
became  a  Stream-winner.  While  still  living  a  domestic 
life,  a  compassionate  spirit  urged  him,  saying  : 

I  mark  the  pious  laity  who  treasure  on  their  lips  the 
Norm  ; 

How  you  may  often  hear  them  say :  ‘  Transient  are 
all  this  world’s  desires  !’ 

But  in  their  hearts  lies  love  of  pelf,  of  precious  stones 
and  jewelled  rings, 

And  that  which  fills  their  thought  is  care  of  sons  and 
daughters  and  of  wives.  (187) 

Nay,  verily,  they  do  not  know  the  inward  meaning  of 
the  Norm  ; 

E’en  though  you  often  hear  them  say  :  ‘  Transient  are 
all  this  world’s  desires  !’ 

To  cut  themselves  from  passions  free,  they  lack  the 
spiritual  health, 

And  therefore  cleaveth  aye  their  heart  to  wife  and 
children,  and  to  wealth.  (188) 

When  the  layman  heard  this,  he  was  thrilled  with 
emotion,  and  leaving  the  world,  he  not  long  after  won 
arahantship.  In  confessing  anna,  he  repeated  these 
verses. 


1  Cf.  LXX. 


2  I  cannot  trace  this  legendary  event  elsewhere. 


142 


CI.V.  SAMBULA-KACCANA 

CLY 

Sambula-Kaccana. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  the  kingdom  of  Magadha, 
as  the  son  of  a  burgess  of  the  Kaccana’s,  he  was  named 
Sambula,  but  was  known  as  Sambula-Kaccana.1  After 
he  had  heard  the  Master  teach  the  Norm,  and  had  entered 
the  Order,  he  went  to  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Himalaya, 
and  practised  his  insight  exercises  in  a  cave  called  Bhera- 
vayana  (‘  dreadful-passage  ’). 

Now  one  day  there  arose  a  great  storm-cloud  out  of 
season,  towering  high  in  the  heavens,  emitting  roars  of 
thunders,  forked  lightning,  and  rushing  noise.  And  it 
began  to  rain,  and  thunderbolts  burst.  All  creatures — 
bears,  hyenas,  buffaloes,  elephants — cried  out  in  fear  and 
trembling.  But  the  Thera  had  stirred  up  insight,  and, 
careless  as  to  body  and  life,  heeded  not  the  noise,  but 
cooled  by  the  storm  so  composed  his  mind,  that  he  quickened 
insight,  and  won  arahantship  together  with  abhinna. 

Thereupon  reflecting  on  his  achievement  he  was  filled 
with  joy,  and  in  a  psalm  confessed  anna  : 

God’s  rain  pours  down,  ay,  and  god’s  rain  roars 
down, 

And  I  alone  in  fearsome  hollow  dwell. 

Yet  dwelling  so  in  fearsome  rocky  dell 
To  me  no  fear  comes  nigh,  no  creeping  dread, 

No  quailing  [of  my  soul].  (189) 

For  such  the  law 
Within  the  blessed  Norm,  that  dwelling  so 
To  me  no  fear  comes  nigh,  no  creeping  dread, 

No  quailing  [of  my  soul]  to  me,  alone.2  (190) 

1  There  was  need  to  distinguish  him  from  other  Kaccanas — e.g., 
CCXXIX.  In  Phayre  MS.  and  Br.  Cy.,  Sampahula-. 

2  The  metre  in  these  graceful  gathas  I  cannot  allocate  under  any 
of  the  textbook  varieties.  The  words,  *  For  such  .  .  .  Norm,’  are  an 
expansion  of  the  Suttanta  term,  Dhammatd  (mam:)"esd — ‘  This  for'me 
is  Normness’  (c/.  Dialogues ,  ii.  8,  n.  3;  my  Buddhism ,  p.  119).  Deva 
(god),  the  Commentary,  as  before,  paraphrases  with  megha  (cloud). 


CLYI.  KHITAKA 


143 


CL  VI 

Khitaka. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  the  kingdom  of  Kosala  as 
the  son  of  a  brahmin,  and  named  Khitaka,1  he  heard  the 
Norm  from  the  Master,  and  entering  the  Order,  dwelt  in  a 
forest  till  he  won  arahantship.  Thereupon  continuing  in 
the  bliss  of  fruition,  of  Nibbana,  a  Thera  enthusiastic  for 
endeavour,  he  went  to  the  bhikkhus  dwelling  in  that  forest 
to  stir  enthusiasm  in  them.  First  asking  concerning  their 
good,  he  spoke  these  verses,  therein  confessing  anna : 

Whose  heart  stands  like  a  rock,  and  swayeth  not, 

Void  of  all  lust  for  things  that  lust  beget, 

And  all  unshaken  in  a  shifting  world  ?  2 

To  heart  thus  crained,  whence  shall  come  aught  of 
ill?  (191) 

My  heart  stands  like  a  rock,  and  swayeth  not, 

Void  of  all  lust  for  things  that  lust  beget, 

And  all  unshaken  in  a  shifting  world. 

My  heart  thus  trained— whence  shall  come  ill  to 
me  ?  (192) 

CL  VII 

Sopa-  Potiriyaputta. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Kapilavatthu,  as  the  son 
of  the  zemindar3  Potiriya,  he  was  named  Sona.  Come  of 
age,  he  became  chief  captain  of  the  forces  of  Bhaddiya, 
a  Sakiyan  raja.  Now  Bhaddiya  having  left  the  world,  as 
will  be  described  below,  Sona  thought :  4  If  even  the  raja 
has  left  the  world,  what  have  I  to  do  with  domestic  life  ?’ 

1  Identical  with  the  author  of  CIV.  ? 

2  Lit.,  shakes  not  in  that  which  tendeth  to  shake. 

3  On  the  position  of  a  bliojcika  holding  land  in  fief,  see  Dialogues , 
i.  108,  n.  1;  on  Bhaddiya,  see  CCLIY.  Anupiyii,  in  the  Mallas’ 
territory,  lay  east  of  Kapilavatthu.  On  the  vision,  cf.  several  of  the 
first  Sisters’  psalms. 


144 


CLVII.  SONA-POTIRIYAPUTTA 


So  he  took  orders,  but  remained  sluggish,  not  given  to 
meditative  exercise.  On  him  the  Exalted  One,  dwelling  in 
the  Mango  Grove  at  Anupiya,  sent  forth  his  glory,  and 
arousing  him  to  mindfulness  uttered  admonitory  verses  : 

Nay,  not  for  this  that  thou  mayest  slumber  long, 

Cometh  the  night  in  starry  garlands  wreathed. 

For  vigil  by  the  wise  this  night  is  here.  (193) 

Hearing  him,  Sona  was  exceedingly  agitated,  and  keep¬ 
ing  his  shortcomings  before  the  mind,  adopted  the  open-air 
practice,  exercising  himself  for  insight.  And  he  uttered 
this  verse : 

If  in  the  light  my  warrior-elephant 
Advanced,  ’twere  better,  fallen  from  his  back,1 
Dead  on  the  field  [and  trampled  I  should  lie], 

Than  beaten  live  a  captive  to  the  foe.  (194) 

So  saying,  he  stirred  up  insight  and  won  arahantship, 
and  thereupon  repeated  the  Master’s  words  and  his  own  as 
his  confession  of  anna. 


CL  VIII 

Nisabha. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  the  country  of  the  Koliyans,2 
in  a  clansman’s  family,  he  was  named  Nisabha.  Come  of 
age,  he  saw  the  Buddha’s  wisdom  and  power  at  the  fight 
between  the  Sakiyans  and  Koliyans,  and  believing,  entered 
the  Order,  anon  winning  arahantship. 

Thereupon  seeing  a  fellow-bhikkhu  spending  his  time 

1  The  Commentary  confirms  the  reading  avapatitarj  ( vide  Neumann) . 
The  figure  is  a  very  natural  one  for  an  Indian  soldier,  and  its  applica¬ 
tion  is  easy.  Metaphors  from  warfare  are  less  frequent  in  Buddhist 
than  in  Christian  literature,  and  the  few  contained  in  this  work  almost 
exhaust  them.  ‘  Trampled  ’  (by  the  elephant)  is  a  Commentarial  gloss. 

2  A  clan  separated  from  the  Sakiyans  by  the  River  Rohinl.  Cf.  C., 
CCXXXIII. 


CLVIII.  NISABHA 


145 


carelessly,  he  admonished  him,  adding  another  verse  to 
show  he  acted  that  which  he  preached : 

Put  them  away,  those  fivefold  things  of  sense, 
Objects  that  charm  and  captivate  the  mind. 

Thou  who  through  faith  didst  give  up  home  and 
world, 

Become  end-maker  of  its  grief  and  pain.  (195) 

With  thought  of  death  I  dally  not,  nor  yet 

Delight  in  living.  I  await  the  hour 

With  mind  discerning  and  with  heedfulness.1  (196) 


CLIX 

Usabha. 

Keborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Kapilavatthu  in  the  family 
of  a  Sakiyan  raja,  he  was  named  Usabha.  And  when  the 
Master  visited  his  own  folk,2  Usabha  saw  his  power  and 
wisdom,  believed  in  him,  and  entered  the  Order.  From  that 
time  he  fulfilled  no  religious  duties,  but  passed  all  day  in 
society  and  all  night  in  sleep. 

Now  one  day,  muddled  in  mind  and  unheedingly  dropping 
off  to  sleep,  he  dreamt  that  he  shaved,  put  on  a  crimson 
cloak,  and,  sitting  on  an  elephant,  entered  the  town  for 
alms.  There,  seeing  the  people  gathered  together,  he  dis¬ 
mounted  full  of  shame.  Thereupon  he  awoke  thinking : 

‘  Why,  this  was  a  dream  !  Muddled  in  head  and  thought¬ 
less  I  saw  myself  in  sleep.’  And  with  anguish  he  established 
insight,  and  in  due  course  won  arahantship. 

Thus  having  made  the  dream  his  goad,  he  celebrated  it 
to  confess  aima,  saying : 

A  cloak  the  hue  of  purple  mango-buds 
Draping  about  my  shoulder,  I  bestrode 
The  back  of  elephant,  and  so  to  seek 

Mine  alms  into  the  village  street  I  rode.  (197) 

»  *  ... 

1  Cf.  XX.,  and  ver.  607.  3  Cf.  CCXXXIII. 

10 


146 


CRIX.  USABHA 


Down  from  his  back  [in  very  shame]  I  slid — 

[When  lo  !  I  woke  and]  anguish  seized  me  then. 

This  arrogant  self  was  then  made  meek  and  mild, 
Purged  were  the  poisons  [that  my  mind  defiled].1  (198) 


CLX 

Kappata-kura. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthi  in  poor  circum¬ 
stances,  the  only  way  he  knew  of  to  support  himself  was  to 
go  about,  clad  in  rags,  pan  in  hand,  seeking  for  rice-grains.2 
Hence  he  became  known  as  Kappata-kura — ‘Rags-and-rice.’ 
When  grown  up,  he  maintained  himself  by  selling  grass. 
Reaping  this  one  day  in  the  forest,  he  saw  a  Thera.  Doing 
obeisance  he  sat  down  near  him,  and  heard  him  teach  the 
Norm.  Then  he  believed,  and  saying  *  What  to  me  is  this 
wretched  mode  of  life?’  he  entered  the  Order,  bestowing 
his  ragged  cloth  in  a  certain  place.  And  when  repugnance 
[to  his  new  life]  arose  in  him,  he  would  go  and  look  at  the 
rags  and  feel  unsettled.  So  doing,  he  seceded  seven  times 
from  the  Order.  Then  the  bhikkhus  told  the  Exalted  One 
of  this.  And  he  one  day,  when  Kappata-kura,  as  bhikkhu, 
sat  in  the  preaching-hall  at  the  edge  of  the  congregation- 
dozing,  admonished  him  in  these  verses : 

‘  These,’  saith  he,  ‘  are  the  rags  of  Rags-and-Rice  I 
Too  heavy  is  the  gear  I’m  wearing  now.’ 

Full  measure  of  the  Norm  hath  he  in  shower 
Ambrosial ;  and  yet  no  step  he  takes 
To  practise  contemplative  discipline.  (199) 

1  Another  instance  where  the  legend  straightens  out  the  tangle  of 
the  gatha  taken  in  isolation.  What,  e.g.,  had  the  elephant  rider  to  do 
with  ‘  to  seek  mine  alms  ’  ?  Dr.  Neumann  has  been  compelled  to  excise 
the  phrase.  As  the  anomaly  of  a  dream,  the  little  poem  is  quite  clear. 

‘  Then  .  .  .  then  ’  is  a  repetition  copied  from  the  text. 

2  Kura ,  occurring  once  as  kiira  in  the  Commentary  (  =  in  Childers 
and  in  Bohtlingk  and  Roth,  ‘  boiled  rice  ’),  is  probably  wild  rice  in  some 
form  or  other.  Cf.  sukkha-kura  in  the  Sutta-Vibhanga  of  the  Yinaya, . 
edition  Oldenberg,  iv.,  Pac.  38,  1. 


CLX.  KAPPATA-KURA 


147 


O  Kappata,  thou  shouldst  not  sway  and  nod, 

Nor  make  me  cuff  the  word  into  thine  ear. 

Never  a  whit  thou,  Kappata,  hast  learned, 

Sleepily  swaying  ’midst  the  listeners  here.1  (200) 

Thus  the  Exalted  One  upbraided  him  strongly,  as  if  He 
had  pierced  his  very  bones,  as  if  a  fierce  elephant  had  gone 
down  into  his  path.  And  he,  greatly  disturbed,  established 
insight,  and  soon  won  arahantship.  Thereupon  he  repeated 
the  verses  which  had  been  the  goad  that  sent  him  to  the 
goal,  so  that  they  became  his  confession  of  anna. 


PART  V 
CLXI 

Kumara-Kassapa. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Rajagaha,  his  mother  was 
the  daughter  of  a  councillor.  She  having  failed  to  gain 
her  parents’  consent  to  leave  the  world  while  yet  a  maiden, 
was  married,  and  obtained  her  husband’s  consent  to  take 
Orders,  not  knowing  at  the  time  that  she  had  conceived. 
When  later  the  bhikkhums  saw  her  condition,  they  con¬ 
sulted  Devadatta,  who  replied  :  ‘  She  is  no  true  nun !’  They 
then  consulted  Him-of-the-Ten-Powers.  He  entrusted  the 
matter  to  Thera  Upali,  who  convened  certain  residents  at 
SavatthI,  including  the  lay-patroness  Visakha,  and  in  full 

1  These  verses  remain  not  exactly  the  reverse  of  ‘  obscure  sayings,’ 
as  Dr.  Neumann  calls  them,  even  after  the  help  of  the  legend.  The 
Commentary,  in  both  versions,  is  scarcely  as  lucid  as  usual ;  yet  such 
explanation  as  it  gives  is,  as  ever,  to  show  a  situation  of  a  simple  and 
probable  kind — the  ragged  loincloth,  with  its  vagabond  associations, 
supplying  a  Bohemian  and  pagan  lure,  making  the  more  decorous 
yellow  robes  seem  cumbrous,  and  the  discipline  irksome.  The  legend 
is  a  distinct  addition  to  the  ‘  human  documents  ’  of  the  Order’s 
traditions. 


148 


CLXI.  KUMARA-KASSAPA 


assembly,  the  king  being  present,  pronounced  the  Sister  to 
have  been  with  child  when  she  took  orders.  The  Master 
approved  his  decision.  So  she  brought  forth  her  child  at 
the  Vihara,  a  boy  like  a  golden  statue,  and  the  king  reared 
him,  and  brought  him  later  on  to  the  Master  to  join  the 
Order.  Because  he  joined  as  a  youth,1  and  they  would  ask, 
when  the  Exalted  One  said,  *  Send  for  Kassapa,’  or  ‘  Give 
this  fruit  or  biscuit  to  Kassapa,’  ‘  Which  Kassapa  ?’  and 
because  of  his  royal  rearing,  he  became  known  as  Kumara- 
Kassapa,  even  after  he  was  grown  to  manhood. 

Now  while  he  exercised  himself  for  insight  and  learnt 
the  Buddha-word,  he  dwelt  in  Dark  Wood.2  Then  a  deva, 
one  who  had  with  him  done  only  the  mountain-recluse’s 
course,  and  having  become  a  Non-Returner,  had  been  reborn 
as  a  Great-Brahma  in  the  Pure  Abodes,  determined  to  show 
Kumar  a- Kassapa  a  method  for  attaining  the  Paths  and 
Fruits.  And  he  came  into  the  Dark  Wood,  and  showed 
him  fifteen  questions  which  only  the  Master  could  answer. 
So  he  asked  them  before  the  Exalted  One  and  learnt  them ; 
whereupon  having  conceived  insight,3  he  attained  arahant- 
ship. 

Thereupon,  having  been  ranked  by  the  Master  foremost 
among  those  who  had  the  gift  of  varied  and  versatile  dis¬ 
course,  he  reviewed  his  career,  and  under  the  aspect  of 

,  .  »  '*  i 

1  In  his  twentieth  year  ( Vinaya  Texts ,  i.  229). 

2  At  Savatthl.  Three  of  the  Sisters’  psalms  are  associated  with  it. 
On  the  technical  expressions  used  in  the  next  sentence,  see  Com¬ 
pendium,  p.  91. 

,  3  An  exceptional  and  curious  phrase,  borrowed  from  the  terms  of 
maternity  :  Vipassanay  gabbhay  ganhdpetvd — an  echo,  perhaps,  of 
the  description  of  his  mother’s  ordeal  described  above.  The  story 
of  the  Thera  is  told  also  in  the  Commentary  on  the  Anguttara  Nihdya, 
i.  24  ;  in  Jataka,  i.  148  ff. ;  and  in  the  Commentary  on  the  Dhamma- 
pada ,  iii.  144  ff.  The  questions  arising  from  the  deva’s  visit  are  in 
Majjh.,  i.  143,  ‘  Yammika  -  Sutta.’  An  interesting  feature  in  the 
Commentary  is  a  reference  made  by  its  author,  Dhammapala,  to  the 
Commentary  on  the  Anguttara  Nihdya.  Where  Dhammapala  writes 
gehe ,  he  adds  :  ‘  The  Anguttaratthakatha  says  hulagehe  ' — as,  indeed, 
it  does.  Hence  it  would  seem  that  Buddhaghosa  wrote  before  Dham¬ 
mapala. 


CLXI.  KUMARA-KASSAPA 


149 


extolling  the  virtues  of  the  Jewel-Trinity,  confessed  his 
anna  : 

All  hail  the  Buddhas,  and  all  hail  the  Norms.1 
Hail  the  blest  System  by  our  Master  wrought, 
Wherein  he  that  doth  hear  may  [be  enrolled 
And]  come  to  realize  a  Norm  like  ours.  (201) 
Down  countless  ages  have  its  members  come, 
Reborn  now  as  this  compound,  now  as  that. 

But  this  for  them  is  now  the  very  last, 

The  final  confluence  of  the  factors  five,2 
In  flux  of  rebirth  and  mortality. 

Now  come  they  never  more  again  to  be.  (202) 


CLXII 

Dhammapala. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age,  when  the  Master  had  passed 
away,  in  the  kingdom  of  Avanti,3  as  a  brahmin’s  son,  he 
was  named  Dhammapala.  As  he  was  returning  from 
Takkasila,  his  schooldays  finished,  he  saw  on  his  way  a 
certain  Thera  in  a  single  cell,4  and  hearing  from  him  the 
Norm,  he  believed,  left  the  world,  and  acquired  sixfold 
abhinna. 

Now,  as  he  was  ruminating  in  the  bliss  of  his  achieve¬ 
ment,  two  novices  climbed  a  tree  at  the  Vihara  to  pick 
blossoms,  and  a  branch  breaking,  they  were  falling.  Seeing 
them,  the  Thera  caught  them  with  his  hand,  and  by  his 

1  Cf.  Majjh .,  ii.  96,  where  the  apostrophe  is  in  the  singular  number. 
The  plural  dhammd ,  as  applied  to  Norm,  is  perhaps  unique.  The 
Commentary  has — ‘  the  Doctrine,  together  with  the  nine  lokuttard 
dhammd'  These  are  enumerated  in  the  Patisambhidd  (ii.  166)  as 
the  seven  groups  given  in  Compendium,  pp.  179-181  ( a — g),  plus  the 
Paths  and  Fruits,  and  Nibbana  making  ten. 

2  Samussayo,  compound  of  the  five  khandhas,  bodily  and  mental. 
Cf.  p.  80,  n.  2. 

The  country  just  east  or  north-east  of  Bombay.  See  Bud.  India , 

p.  28. 

4  Ekasmiy  vihare.  Cf.  Dialogues ,  ii.  4,  n.  1. 


150 


CLXII.  DHAMMAPALA 


iddhi-power1  placed  them  unhurt  upon  the  ground.  And 
he  taught  them,  saying : 

The  brother  who  while  young  hath  given  himself 
Wholly  to  carry  out  the  Buddha’s  plan, 

Who  keepeth  vigil  in  a  sleeping  world, 

Not  vainly,  not  for  naught  he  spends  his  days.  (203) 
So  let  the  wise  man,  so  let  him  who  aye 
Remembereth  that  which  Buddhas  have  enjoined, 
Devote  himself  to  faith  and  righteousness, 

To  know  the  blessedness  They  brought  to  us, 

And  the  true  vision  of  the  holy  Norm.2  (204) 


CLXIII 

Brahmali. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  the  kingdom  of  Kosala, 
as  a  brahmin’s  son,  he  was  named  Brahmali.  When 
grown  up,  being  impelled  by  the  fulness  of  conditions, 
distress  arose  in  him  because  of  the  continual  round,  and, 
through  associating  with  spiritually  minded  friends,  he  left 
the  world,  and  took  his  exercise  to  a  forest.  From  the 
maturity  of  his  knowledge  he  soon  developed  insight,  and 
acquired  sixfold  abhinna. 

Dwelling  thereafter  in  the  bliss  of  the  Paths,  the  Thera, 
so  versed  in  compassing  endeavour,  uttered  one  day  these 
verses,  on  behalf  of  the  bhikkhus  in  that  forest,  concerning 
devotion  to  endeavour  : 

In  whom  the  senses  have  been  hushed  to  calm, 
Like  horses  well  tamed  by  the  charioteer, 

In  whom  no  vain  conceits  are  found,  nor  aught 
Of  poison-fumes  survives,  a  man  like  this 
May  stir  up  envy  e’en  among  the  gods.  (205) 

1  Compendium,  pp.  60  jf.,  209. 

2  The  literal  Pali  of  these  two  lines  is  the  two  very  pregnant  terms 
pasdday  (expressing  relief,  satisfaction,  trust)  and  dhammadassanay 
(insight  into  or  through  the  Dhamma). 


A  BURMESE  NOVICE. 

From  Buddhism,  Rangoon,  December,  1903 

‘  The  Brother  who  ivhile  young  hath  given  himself 
Wholly  to  carry  out  the  Buddha's  plan.  .  . 


To  face  p.  150. 


CLXIII.  BRAHMAIil 


151 


In  me  the  senses  have  been  hushed  to  calm, 
Like  horses  well  tamed  by  the  charioteer, 

In  me  no  vain  conceits  are  found,  nor  aught 
Of  poison-fumes  survives  ; — one  such  as  I 
May  stir  up  envy  e’en  among  the  gods.1  (206) 


CLXIY 

Mogharajan. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  a  brahmin’s  family,  and 
named  Mogharajan,2  he  studied  under  the  brahmin  Bavariya. 
Growing  distressed,  he  became  an  ascetic.  He  was  one  of 
the  sixteen,  Ajita  and  others,  who  was  sent  by  Bavariya 
to  the  Master  to  interview  him.3  When  Mogharajan 
had  asked  his  question  and  been  answered,  he  attained 
arahantship. 

Thereafter  he  acquired  distinction  by  wearing  rough  cloth 
which  caravaners,  tailors  and  dyers  had  thrown  away. 
Wherefore  the  Master  assigned  him  the  first  place  among 
those  who  wore  such  rough  clothing  [he  thereby  realizing 
his  aspiration  made  many  ages  ago].4 

At  another  time,  from  want  of  care  and  through  former 
karma,  pimples  and  the  like  broke  out  and  increased  on 
his  body.  Judging  that  his  lodging  was  infected,  he  spread 
out  a  couch  of  straw  in  the  Magadha  fields,  and  there, 
though  it  was  winter,  he  lodged.  Of  him,  waiting  one  day 

1  The  first  gatha  is  found  in  the  Dhammapada ,  verse  94,  spoken, 
according  to  the  Commentary  (ii.  176  /.),  by  the  Buddha  concerning 
Maha  Kacca[ya]na.  Cf.  below,  CCXXIX. 

2  This  curious  name  (=  futile  king)  seems  to  be  nowhere  explained. 
The  one  so  named  in  Sayy.  Nik.,  i.  23,  seems  to  be  a  deva,  but  a 
verse  by  a  Mogharaja-Thera  in  Milinda,  ii.  359,  is  one  of  those  not 
incorporated  in  this  Canon. 

3  See  Sutta-Nipdta ,  verses  976-1031,  1116-1119.  Cf.  also  XX 
(Ajita),  and  the  varied  ‘  BavarT,’  ‘  Bavariya-brahmano.’ 

4  Ang.  Nik.,  i.  25. 


152 


CLXIV.  MOGHA11AJ AN 


upon  the  Master,  and  paying  his  respects,  the  latter  of  his 
courtesy  inquired  in  the  following  verse  : 

Well,  Mogharajan,  thou  skin-sufferer, 

Thou  blest  of  heart  and  constantly  serene, 

Cometh  the  time  when  winter  nights  are  cold, 

And  thou  a  brother  poor — how  wilt  thou  fare  ?  (207) 

Thus  asked,  the  Thera  explained  the  matter  to  the 
Master : 

Rich  are  the  cornfields  of  the  Magadhese,1 
And  thriving,  every  one,  I’ve  heard  it  said. 

My  little  straw-built  canopy  doth  please 
Better  than  others’  way  of  finding  ease.  (208) 


CLXY 

Visakha  the  Paneali’s  Son. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  the  kingdom  of  Magadha, 
as  the  son  of  a  district  raja,  he  was  named  Visakha.  But 
because  he  was  the  son  of  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  the 
Pancalas,2  he  became  known  afterwards  as  the  Pancall’s 
son. 

At  his  father’s  death  he  succeeded  to  his  title,  but  when 
the  Master  came  to  his  neighbourhood  he  went  to  hear  him, 
and  believed,  and  left  the  world.  Following  him  to  Savatthi, 
he  established  insight,  and  acquired  sixfold  abhihna. 

Thereupon,  in  kindness  to  his  own  folk,  he  visited  his 
native  place.  And  as  people  kept  coming  to  hear  him,  he 
was  one  day  asked  :  ‘  How  many  qualities,  your  reverence, 
should  a  man  acquire  to  be  a  preacher  of  the  Norm  ?’  The 

1  On  the  large  fields  of  Magadha  see  my  ‘Early  Economic 
Conditions  in  Northern  India,’  JBAS ,  1901,  p.  860.  Klietta ,  the 
collective  singular,  has  here  become  khettani,  but  cf.  p.  153. 

2  An  ancient  kingdom,  lying  to  the  east  of  the  Kurus,  whose  capital 
was  where  Delhi  stands  {Bud.  India).  Pronounced  Panchala. 


CLXV.  VISAKHA  THE  PANCALl’s  SON  153 

Thera  taught  them  the  essential  feature  of  such  an  one  as 
follows : 1 

Let  him  not  be  puffed  up,  nor  other  folk 
Belittle,  nor  despise  nor  yet  molest 
The  victor  who  hath  overcome  the  world.2 
Nor  let  him  drag  the  praises  of  himself 
Before  the  public  ;  let  him  be3  sober,  meek, 

And  moderate  in  speech  and  virtuous.  (209) 

Is  there  a  man  who  can  the  truth  discern, 

Tho’  it  be  very  subtle  and  refined  ? 

Who  skilled  to  measure  spiritual  growth, 

Is  yet  of  lowly,  and  of  gentle  mind. 

Who  shapes  his  life  by  rule  of  Them  that  W ake  : 
For  him,  Nibbana  is  not  hard  to  find.4  (210) 


CLXVI 

Culaka. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Rajagaha,  as  a  brahmin’s 
son,  he  was  named  Culaka.  When  he  saw  the  Master  tame 
the  elephant  Dhanapala,5  he  believed,  and  left  the  world. 
Working  at  his  training,  he  dwelt  in  the  Indra-sal-tree 
Cave.6  One  day  as  he  sat  in  the  entrance  of  the  cave, 
looking  down  over  the  Magadha  ‘  field,’  a  great  storm- 
cloud  filled  the  sky  with  piled-up  masses,  and  amid  deep, 
lovely  roars,  the  rain  came  down.  The  flock  of  peacocks, 
hearing  the  thunder,  joyously  uttered  their  k6-ka  cry,7  and 

1  The  Buddha  is  recorded  as  having  assigned  the  first  place  among 
the  dhammakathika' s  to  Punna  among  the  Brethren  (IV.),  Dhamma- 
dinna  among  the  Sisters  ( Sisters ,  p.  17),  and  Citta  among  laymen j 
nevertheless,  he  specially  praised  this  Thera’s  teaching  ( Sayy .  Nik., 
ii.  280;  Any.  Nik.,  ii.  51). 

2  Lit.,  him  who  hath  gone  beyond. 

3  Siydti  should  here,  writes  the  Commentary,  be  added  as  a 
kriya-pada. 

4  This  is  Vacchapala’s  psalm  (LXXI.)  ;  also,  be  it  noted,  a 
Magadhese. 

5  See  Milinda,  i.  298/.,  nn.  on  Vinaya  Texts,  iii.  247/. 

6  See  Dialogues,  ii.  299.  7  See  XXII.,  n.  2. 


154 


CLXVI.  CUIiAKA 


danced  around.  The  touch  of  the  storm-breeze  brought 
coolness  and  comfort  to  the  Thera  in  his  cavern-lodge,  so 
that  with  a  suitable  temperature  his  mind  became  con¬ 
centrated.  He  entered  the  avenue  of  his  exercise,  and, 
discerning  that  the  favourable  moment  was  come,  he 
praised  his  practice,  breaking  out  in  these  verses  : 

Hark !  how  the  peacocks  make  the  welkin  ring, 
Fair-crested,  fine  their  plumes  and  azure  throat, 
Graceful  in  shape  and  pleasant  in  their  cry. 

And  see  how  this  broad  landscape  watered  well 
Lies  verdure-clad  beneath  the  dappled  sky !  (211) 

Healthy  thy  frame  and  fit  and  vigorous 
To  make  good  progress  in  the  Buddha’s  rule. 

Come  then  and  grasp  the  rapt  thought  of  the 
saint,1 

And  touch  the  crystal  bright,  the  subtly  deep, 

The  elusive  mystery — even  the  Way 
Where  dying  cometh  not,  ineffable.  (212) 

And  so  the  Thera,  admonishing  himself,  attained  under 
seasonable  conditions  to  mental  concentration,  and  evoking 
insight,  won  arahantship.  Thereupon  reviewing  what  he 
had  wrought,  with  zest  and  joy  he  repeated  those  lines  as 
the  confession  of  anna. 


CLXYII 

Anupama. 

Eeborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  a  wealthy  family  at 
Kosala,  his  beauty  obtained  him  the  name  of  Anupama — 
‘  Peerless.’  Come  of  age,  he  felt  the  working  of  the 
efficient  cause,  forsook  the  world,  and  dwelt  in  the  forest, 

1  Sumanassa,  paraphrased  by  sundaramanassa  yogdvacarassa. 
‘  Come,’  ‘  grasp,’  ‘  touch,’  are  expansions  of  the  Pali  phusdhi,  the  last 
of  the  three  verbs.  The  long-drawn-out  Jagati  metre  of  the  two 
gathas  relies  on  reiteration  of  the  adaptable  prefix  su  (Greek  ev) — 
good,  fair,  well — to  convey  intense  gladsomeness. 


CLXVII.  ANUPAMA 


155 


practising  for  insight.  But  his  mind  hovered  about  external 
objects,  revolving  about  his  theme  for  meditation,  so  that 
he  thus  rebuked  himself : 

O  heart !  gone  gadding  after  things  that  please, 

O  thou  that  shapest  many  a  shaft  of  doom, 

There  and  there  only  dost  thou  ever  tend 
Where  block  and  stake  rise  at  the  bitter  end.  (213) 
I  call  thee,  heart,  the  breaker  of  my  luck ! 

I  call  thee,  heart,  despoiler  of  my  lot ! 

Lo  !  He  whom  many  an  age  thou  couldst  not  find, 

The  Master  now  is  come — suffer  it  not 

That  I  to  wreck  and  ruin  be  consigned.1  (214) 

Thus  admonishing  his  own  consciousness,  the  Thera 
developed  insight,  and  won  arahantship. 


CLXVIII 

Vajjita. 

Keborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  a  wealthy  Kosalan  family, 
after  deceasing  from  the  Brahma  world,  he  ever  wept  in  his 
mother’s  arms.  And  because  he  could  not  endure  the 
touch  of  a  woman,  he  came  to  be  called  Vajjita — 
‘  abstaining.’  Come  of  age,  he  saw  the  Master  work  the 
twin-miracle,2  and  believing,  he  entered  the  Order,  and 
acquired  sixfold  abhinna.  Thereupon  remembering  his 
former  existence,  he  was  stirred  with  holy  emotion,  and 
said  : 

A  traveller  I  these  long,  long  ages  past, 

And  round  about  the  realms  of  life  I’ve  whirled  ; 
One  of  the  many-folk  and  blind  as  they, 

No  Ariyan  truths  had  I  the  power  to  see.  (215) 

1  This  eloquent  poem  is  a  miniature  version  of  Talaputa’s  long- 
drawn-out  apostrophe  to  his  cliitta  (CCLXII.).  The  Commentary 
identifies  Jcaliy  with  Kdlakanni ,  goddess  of  ill  luck.  The  last  words 
of  the  text  should,  of  course,  be  understood  as  nid  anatthe,  etc. 

2  Cf.  p.  36,  to.  1. 


156 


CLXVIII.  VAJJ1TA 


But  earnestly  I  strove  for  light  and  calm ; 

And  now  all  shattered  lies  the  endless  way. 

All  future  bournes  abolished  utterly, 

Now  cometh  never  more  rebirth  for  me.  (216) 

And  this  became  the  Thera’s  confession  of  anna. 


CLXIX 

Sandhita. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha -age  in  a  wealthy  family  of 
Kosala  and  named  Sandhita,  he  heard,  when  come  of  age, 
a  sermon  on  impermanence,  and  this  alarmed  him  so 
that  he  entered  the  Order.  Through  the  maturity  of  his 
knowledge  he  established  insight,  and  acquired  sixfold 
abhinna.  Recalling  his  own  former  life,  how  after  the 
passing  away  of  Sikhi  Buddha  he  had  worshipped  at  the 
Bo-tree  and  acquired  discernment  of  impermanence,1  he 
declared  his  winning  of  the  goal,  by  that  efficient  cause, 
in  these  verses : 

Beneath  the  tree— the  holy  Bodhi-tree— 

Clad  in  the  glory  of  its  vernal  green, 

To  me  musing  and  mindful  came  a  thought 
A  Buddha-burdened  thought.  •  (217) 

’Tis  one  and  thirty  aeons  since  it  came. 

Natheless  so  fruitful  proved  that  thought  in  me, 
By  dint  thereof  o’er  the  intoxicants 

The  victory  is  wrought !  (218) 

1  In  lamenting  that  he  only  heard  of  that  Buddha  just  as  he  had 
passed  away.  On  Sikhi,  see  Dialogues ,  ii.  6.  ‘  Bodhi-tree  is  assatthe, 
or  the  species  of  fig-tree  which  was  Gotama  Buddha’s  Bo-tree.  Sikhi’s 
was  a  kind  of  mango  (see  Childers’s  ‘  Pundarika  ’),  and  the  Com¬ 
mentary  is  at  some  pains  to  explain  that  assattha  had  come  to  stand 
for  Bo-tree  associations  in  general.  ‘  Thought  '—sauna,  aperfu—  is 
repeated  thrice  in  the  text. 


CANTO  III 


PSALMS  OF  THREE  VERSES 

CLXX 

Ang’anika-Bharadvaj  a. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  near  the  Himalaya,  at  the 
city  of  Ukkattha,1  in  the  family  of  a  very  rich  brahmin,  he 
was  named  Anganika-Bharadvaja.2  And  when  he  had 
learned  all  Yedic  lore  and  art,  his  inclination  for  renuncia¬ 
tion  induced  him  to  leave  the  world  and  carry  on  penance 
for  salvation.3  Wandering  here  and  there,  he  met  the 
Buddha  Supreme  on  a  country  tour,  and  with  satisfied 
mind  heard  him  teach.  Leaving  his  false  ascetics,  he  took 
orders,  and  practising  for  insight,  in  due  course  acquired 
sixfold  abhinna. 

Abiding  thereafter  in  the  bliss  of  liberty,  he  took  com¬ 
passion  on  his  kinsfolk,  and  visited  and  taught  them  in  the 
Refuges  and  the  Precepts ;  then  leaving  them,  he  went  to 
dwell  in  a  forest  near  the  village  of  Kundiya  of  the  Kurus.4 

1  On  this  upland  town  (  =  ‘ lofty’),  see  Dialogues,  i.  108.  A  road 
connected  it  with  Setavya  (sup.,  p.  67 ;  Ang.,  ii.  37)  and  with  Vesall 
(Jdt.,  ii.  259,  text). 

2  There  are  about  nineteen  Bharadvajas  (a  gens  name)  mentioned 
in  the  Pitakas.  This  one  is  not  met  with  elsewhere. 

3  That  which,  in  the  text,  is  amaray  tapay  (‘  penances  .  .  .  for 
heaven  ’)  is,  in  the  Commentary,  rendered  amatatapay ,  amatay 
tapay.  The  difference,  etymologically,  is  that  between  ‘  undying  ’ 
and  ‘not  dead.’  Both  refer,  probably,  to  reunion  with  the  gods,  as 
attainable  by  the  penance  of  the  five  fires,  etc.  See  sup.,  p.  120, 
and  Dialogues,  i.  211. 

4  This  will  not  be  the  Kundiya  of  the  Koliyas  (ZJcldna,  ii.  8; 
Jdt.,  i.  No.  100).  XJggayama  is  possibly  the  place  Ugga  of  LXXX. 

157 


158  CI,XX.  ANGAN1KA-BHARADVAJA 

Going  for  some  purpose  to  Uggayama,  he  was  accosted  by 
some  brahmin  acquaintances,  who  said :  ‘  Master  Bharad- 
vaja,  what  have  you  seen  that  you  have  left  the  brahmin 
communion  for  this  community  ?’  And  he,  showing  that 
outside  the  Buddha’s  church  there  was  no  pure  rule,  said : 

Purity  without  principle  my  quest, 

When  in  the  grove  I  fostered  sacred  fire. 

Painful  the  penances  I  wrought  for  heaven, 

All  ignorant  of  purity’s  true  path.  (219) 

This  happiness  by  happy  ways  is  won1 — 

O  see  the  seemly  order  of  the  Norm  ! 2 
The  threefold  wisdom  have  I  gotten  now, 

And  all  the  Buddha’s  ordinance  is  done.  (220) 
Once  but  a  son  of  brahmins  born  was  I  ;3 
To-day  1  stand  brahmin  in  very  deed, 

Versed  in  the  triple  lore  and  graduate,4 
By  sacramental  bathing  consecrate.  (221) 

Then  those  brahmins  hearing  him,  expressed  enthusiastic 
appreciation  of  the  Sasana. 


CLXXI 

Paccaya. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  the  city  of  Rohi,  in  a 
nobleman’s  family,  he  was  named  Paccaya.5  Inheriting 
the  estate  at  his  father’s  death,  he  decreed  to  hold  a  great 
ceremonial  oblation,  and  a  great  assembly  foregathered. 

1  Cf.  LXIII. 

2  Cf.  XXIV.  He  is  addressing  either  the  Norm  or  himself,  says 
the  Commentary,  omitting  the  more  probable  ‘  or  the  brahmins.’ 

3  Cf.  p.  222  ;  also  the  very  similar  lines,  Sisters ,  verse  251  and  note. 

4  The  Commentary  finds  Sasana- equivalents  for  all  these  terms  of 
Vedic  tradition. 

5  Neither  raja  nor  city  is  found  elsewhere.  Pacchaya  (pronounce 
thus)  was  the  name  of  the  elephant  of  Vessantara,  a  Sakiyan  ancestor 
(Jat.j  vi.  485,  text). 


CLXXI.  PACCAYA 


159 


At  that  congress,  the  Master,  seated  on  a  throne  in  a 
jewelled  pavilion  made  by  (his  ancestor)  Vessavana,1  taught 
the  Norm,  while  all  the  people  gazed  at  him.  Even  the 
great  multitude  understood  the  doctrine,  but  raja  Paccaya 
went  further.  For  impelled  by  earlier  causes,  he  renounced 
his  estate  and  left  the  world.  And  even  as  he  had  vowed 
in  Kassapa  Buddha’s  time,  so  now,  entering  his  cell,  he 
vowed  to  attain  before  he  left  it  again.  And  now  at  last, 
insight  growing,  and  knowledge  attaining  full  maturity,  he 
attained  arahantship. 

Thereupon,  celebrating  his  achievement,  he  thus  con¬ 
fessed  anna : 

Five  days  have  now  gone  by  since  I  went  forth, 

A  learner,  and  my  mind  not  perfected.2 
Then  in  the  heart  of  me  within  my  cell 
Retired  uprose  unfaltering  resolve  :  (222) 

I  wdll  not  eat  nor  will  I  drink  again, 

Nor  from  this  lodging  let  me  issue  forth, 

Nor  will  I  even  lie  upon  my  side, 

While  yet  the  dart  of  Craving  lies  undrawn.3  (223) 
Thus  steadfast  I  abiding — O  behold 
And  mark  the  forward  stride  of  energy : 

In  Threefold  Wisdom  have  I  made  my  own, 

And  all  the  Buddha  bids  us  do  is  done !  (224) 


CLXXII 

Bakula. 

Born  at  Kosambi  in  a  councillor’s  family  before  our 
Exalted  One  appeared,  he  was  being  bathed  for  his  health 
in  the  Great-Yamuna  River,4  when  a  fish  swallowed  him 

1  Cf.  p.  189,  n.  1.  Jilt.,  vi.  265/.  (text). 

2  A  phrase  of  the  Nikayas  ( Majjli .,  i.  4;  Saijy.,  i.  121,  v.  145). 

3  A  resolve  enjoined  on  learners  [Majjh.,  i.  480;  Ang.,  i.  50; 
Sayy ii.  28). 

4  The  Jumna.  Kosambi  was  near  the  confluence  of  the  Jumna  and 
Ganges  (at  Allahabad).  Bakula’s  or  Bakkula’s  story  is  given  in  the 


160 


CLXXII.  BAKULA 


out  of  the  nurse’s  hands.  The  fish  was  caught  by  an 
angler  and  sold  to  the  wife  of  a  Benares  councillor.  When 
it  was  split  open,  the  child  through  the  might  of  his  merit 
appeared  unhurt.  The  wife  cherished  him  as  her  son, 
and  when  she  heard  his  story,  asked  him  of  his  parents. 
The  king  decided  they  should  have  him  in  common,  hence 
he  was  named  Ba-kula  (‘  two-families,’  bi-kin ). 

After  a  prosperous  life  he  heard  the  Master  preach,  and 
left  the  world  at  eighty  years  of  age.  For  seven  days  he 
remained  unenlightened,  but  as  the  eighth  dawned  he 
attained  arahantship,  together  with  thorough  mastery  of 
the  letter  and  spirit  of  the  doctrine.* 1 

One  day  the  Master,  when  assigning  manifold  eminence 
to  his  disciples,  ranked  Bakula  foremost  for  good  health.2 
Thereafter  he,  when  about  to  pass  away,  confessed  anna  in 
the  midst  of  the  Brethren  thus : 

He  who  is  fain  to-morrow  to  perform 

The  things  that  he  should  yesterday  have  done, 

Forfeit  of  happy  opportunity, 

He  shall  anon  repent  him  fierily.3  (225) 

Let  him  but  talk  of  that  which  should  be  done  ; 
Let  him  not  talk  of  what  should  not  be  done ! 

Of  him  who  talketh  much,  but  doeth  not, 

Wise  men  take  stock,  and  rate  him  at  his 
worth.4  (226) 


Anguttara-Nikaya  Commentary  and  in  the  Singhalese  Corny,  of 
Milinda  (ii.  10,  n.  2).  His  legend  tells  of  his  having  healed  two 
Buddhas  in  former  births.  Morris’s  discussion  of  bakkula  in  another 
connection  ( JPTS ,  1886,  p.  95  ff.)  explains  the  word  as  a  proper  name 
no  better  than  does  the  mythical  story. 

1  See  Sisters,  p.  17  n.  The  poem  is  repeated  (CLXXX1Y.). 

2  Any.  Nik.,  i.  25 ;  there  called  Bakkula.  Presumably  his  great 
age  lent  point  to  the  distinction. 

3  Anutappati ,  lit.,  proceed  to  be  hot  about.  Our  metaphor  is  bite 
( remorse )  or  pricking  (of  conscience). 

4  Expanded  from  the  two  words  parijdnanti  panditd,  the  wise 
understand.  The  Commentary’s  expansion  is  ‘  they  fixing  [him] 
accurately  know,  do  not  esteem  highly.’ 


CLXXII.  BAKULA 


161 


O  great,  O  wondrous  is  Nibbana’s  bliss, 
Revealed  by  Him,  the  Utterly  Awake ! 

There  comes  no  grief,  no  passion,  haven  sure, 
Where  ill  and  ailing  perish  evermore !  (227) 


CLXXIII 

Dhaniya. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Rajagaha  in  a  potter’s, 
family  and  named  Dhaniya,  he  practised  the  potter’s  craft. 
It  was  at  his  house  that  the  Master  taught  Pukkusati  the 
noble  the  Sutta  of  the  System  of  Elements.1  Dhaniya, 
hearing  of  Pukkusati  dying  as  an  arahant  [that  very  night], 
thought :  ‘  Mighty  to  guide  verily  is  the  Buddha-sasana, 
wherein  a  single  night  suffices  to  release  a  man  from  the 
sorrows  of  rebirth !’  So  he  entered  the  Order.  But  he 
continued  to  occupy  himself  with  making  tiles  for  roofs.2 
Reproved  for  making  a  clay  hut  by  the  Exalted  One,  he 
took  up  his  abode  in  a  bhikkhu’s  lodging,  and  there  won 
arahantship. 

Thereafter,  on  the  occasion  of  admonishing  bhikkhus 
who,  as  self-mortifying,  held  themselves  superior  to  others, 
he  confessed  anna  thus  : 

If  one  in  the  recluse’s  discipline 

Take  thought  how  he  may  live  in  happy  ease, 

Let  him  not  scorn  the  Order’s  uniform, 

Nor  hold  in  disrespect  its  food  and  drink.  (228) 

If  one  in  the  recluse’s  discipline 

Take  thought  how  he  may  live  in  happy  ease, 

Let  him  frequent  a  shelter  like  the  lair 
Of  watersnake  or  mouse  [primitive,  bare].3  (229) 

1  ‘  Dhatuvibhanga-sutta,’  Majjli.  Nik.,  iii.  237  ff.,  where  the  potter’s 
name  is  not  mentioned.  Gf.  above  XCVII.,  and  my  Buddhism,  1912 

2  Dhaniya’s  skill  in  brick-making :  clay-work  red  as  the  indago- 
paka  ( cf .  verse  13),  and  giving  a  bell-like  sound  when  tapped,  is 
described,  in  this  connection,  in  Vinaya,  iii.  41  /. 

3  Commentary :  ‘  the  hole  of  the  moment,  where  he  can  go  in  and 
out  at  will.’ 


11 


162 


CLXXIII.  UHANIYA 


If  one  in  the  recluse’s  discipline 
Take  thought  how  he  may  live  in  happy  ease, 
Let  him  be  glad  whate’er  the  day  may  bring,1 
And  let  him  be  intent  on  one  main  thing.2  (230) 


CLXXIY 

Matanga’s  Son. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  Kosala  as  the  son  of 
Matanga  a  landowner,  he  came  to  be  called  after  his  father. 
He  grew  up  idle  in  habits,  and  when  his  people  rebuked 
him,  he  made  acquaintance  with  the  bhikkhus,  noting  how 
happily  the  Sakiya-son  recluses  lived.  But  when  he  heard 
the  Master  teach  the  Norm,  he  believed  and  took  orders. 
Seeing  the  power  of  iddhi  wielded  by  bhikkhus,  he  aspired 
to  the  same.  And  practising  exercises,  he  won  sixfold 
abhinha. 

Thereupon  he  scourged  slothfulness,  extolling  his  own 
rush  of  energy  in  these  verses : 

Too  cold  !  too  hot !  too  late  !  such  is  the  cry. 

And  so,  past  men  who  shake  off  work  [that  waits 
Their  hand],  the  fateful  moments  fly.3  (231) 

But  he  who  reckons  cold  and  heat  as  less 
Than  straws,  doing  his  duties  as  a  man, 

He  no  defaulter  proves  to  happiness.  (232) 

1  Lit.,  glad  at  one  thing  or  another. 

2  I.e.,  let  him  be  in  earnest  (Commentary)  whatever  be  the  eka- 
dhammay  of  his  study. 

3  ‘  Fateful  ’  is  interpolated  to  give  weight  to  the  urgency  with  which, 
in  the  earnest  bhikkhu’s  life,  conjuncture  of  opportunity  is  associated 
with  this  present  life,  especially  in  a  ‘Buddha-age.’  So  the  Com¬ 
mentary  here,  and  cf.  Sisters ,  p.  12,  n.  4.  These  two  verses  occur  in 
Digha  iii.,  ‘  Sigalovada  Suttanta,’  but  ‘moments’  is  superseded  by 
atthd ,  ‘  advantages  ’  or  ‘  good  ’—a  rare  use  of  the  plural  form. 


CLXXV.  KHUJJA-SOBHITA 


163 


Dabba-  and  kusa-grass  and  pricking  stems, 

And  all  that  hurts  in  brush  and  underwood. 

Forth  from  my  breast  I’ll  push  and  thrust 
away, 

And  go  where  I  the  growth  may  cultivate 
Of  heart’s  detachment,  lone  and  separate.1  (233) 


CLXXV 

Khuija-Sobhita. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Pataliputta,2  in  a  brah¬ 
min’s  family,  he  was  named  Sobhita.  But  being  a  little 
hunchbacked,  he  was  called  Crooked  Sobhita.  Come  of 
age  at  the  time  of  the  Master’s  passing  away,  he  was 
ordained  by  Ananda,  and  acquired  sixfold  abhinna. 

Now,  at  the  first  Great  Council  in  the  Sattapanni  Cave, 
he  was  bidden  fetch  Ananda  Thera  to  the  Assembly.3  Now 
at  that  time  the  company  of  devas  sent  an  angel  to  stand 
at  the  entrance  to  the  Cave  to  counteract  the  work  of  Mara. 
And  Khujj a- Sobhita  announced  his  own  coming  to  the  angel 
in  this  verse  : 

One  of  the  Brethren  who  in  Patna  dwell, 

Learned  and  erudite,  lo  !  at  the  door, 

Advanced  in  years,  stands  Crooked  Sobhita.  (234) 

1  =  XXVII. ;  cf.  XXIII.  The  energy  defies  in  the  one  case  physical 
delicacy,  in  the  other  effeminacy. 

2  Patna ;  cf.  Sisters,  p.  157  n. 

3  For  Ananda’s  late  appearance  see  Vinaya  Texts,  iii.  373  ;  Vinaya, 
iii.  259.  There,  Ananda’s  access  to  the  Cave  through  earth  or  air,  in 
the  commentarial  legend,  is  ascribed  to  our  Thera.  Curiously  enough, 
the  Vinaya  itself  knows  of  no  Khujja- Sobhita  till  the  Council  of 
Vesall,  a  century  later  ( Vinaya  Texts,  iii.  407).  That  the  Council  was 
held  in  this  Cave  is  not  stated  in  the  Vinaya,  which  names  only 
the  Ivalandaka-nivapa  (squirrels  feeding-ground)  in  the  Veluvana 
(Bamboo  Grove).  ‘Angel’  is  devata ;  lit.,  deity. 


164 


CLXXV.  KHUJJA-SOBHITA 


Then  the  angel  informed  the  Sangha  of  the  Thera  s  advent : 

One  of  the  Brethren  who  in  Patna  dwell, 
Learned  and  eloquent,  lo !  at  the  door, 
Advanced  in  years,  he  stands  borne  by  the 
winds.1  (235) 

Then  the  Sangha  giving  him  opportunity,  the  Thera 
approached  them  and  confessed  anna : 

Good  fight  he  made,  and  made  good  sacrifice,2 
And  in  the  battle  won now  by  such  war, 

The  fervent  following  of  the  holy  life, 

In  happiness  he  resteth  [evermore].  (236) 


CLXXVI 

Varana. 

• 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  Rosala  as  a  brahmin  s 
son,  he  was  named  Varana.  Come  of  age,  he  heard  a  Thera 
preach  the  Norm  in  a  forest,  and  believing,  entered  the 
Order.  One  day  going  to  wait  upon  the  Buddha  he  saw, 
on  the  way,  a  family  quarrel,  through  which  some  were 
slain.  Distressed,  he  hastened  to  the  Exalted  One,  and 
told  him.  And  the  latter,  discerning  the  progress  of  his 
mind,  exhorted  him,  saying  : 

Whoso  here  causeth  fellow-creatures  pain, 

From  this  and  from  the  other-world,  from  both 
This  man  may  forfeit  all  they  yield  of  good.3  (237) 
Whoso  with  loving  heart  compassion  takes 
On  every  fellow-creature,  such  a  man 
Doth  generate  of  merit  ample  store.  (238) 

1  His  aerial  return  from  Ananda  to  the  Sangha. 

2  Suyitthena  (which  comes  more  naturally  from  a  lapsed  brahmin 
than  the  "martial  epithets)  the  Commentary  explains  as  ‘religious 
gifts  from  virtuous  friends.’  The  metre  of  the  poem  is  disturbed 
by  two  glosses  samand  and  clvdre. 

3  The  last  phrase  from  the  Commentary,  ‘  the  good  and  happiness 
comprised  in  both  worlds. 


CLXXVI.  VARANA 


165 


Train  ye  yourselves  in  pious  utterance, 

In  waiting  ever  on  the  wise  and  good, 

In  haunting  secret  solitary  seat, 

And  in  the  calm  and  concentrated  mind.  (239) 

When  these  verses  were  ended,  Varana,  developing  insight, 
won  arahantship. 


CLXXVII 

Passika. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  the  family  of  a  Kosalan 
brahmin,  he  saw  the  Master  work  the  twin  miracle,1  and 
believed.  Entering  the  Order  he  fell  ill  while  performing 
the  studies  of  a  recluse.  His  own  people  attended  him 
and  healed  him.  But  he,  greatly  stirred  by  his  recovery, 
pressed  forward  his  study,  and  acquired  sixfold  abhinna. 
Thereupon  he  went  through  the  air  to  his  own  people,  and 
established  them  in  the  Refuges  and  the  Precepts.  And 
some  of  his  kin,  so  established,  died  and  were  reborn  in 
heaven.  When  Passika  waited  on  the  Master,  the  latter 
asked  after  the  health  of  his  kin.  And  Passika  thus  made 
answer : 

Though  I  alone,  ’mong  unbelieving  kin, 

Had  faith  and  wit  enough,  discerned  the  Norm 
And  clove  to  virtue,  this  was  for  their  good.  (240) 

For  see !  mine  own  folk,  whom  for  pity’s  sake 
I  took  to  task,  roused  and  rebuked  by  me, 
Through  their  affection  and  their  piety 
Constrained,  towards  the  Brethren  wrought  good 
work.  (241) 

They  who  are  now  gone  hence,  ending  this  span, 
They  reap  much  happiness  among  the  gods. 
Brothers  of  mine  are  there,  my  mother  too, 

Fain  for  the  pleasures  that  they  now  enjoy.  (242) 


1  See  p.  36,  n.  1. 


166 


CLXXVIII.  YASOJA 


CLXXVIII 

Yasoja. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  the  gate  of  the  city  of 
SavatthI  in  a  fisher’s  village,  as  the  son  of  the  headman  of 
the  500  fishermen’s  families,  he  was  called  Yasoja.  Come 
of  age,  he  was  one  day  fishing  with  the  fishermen’s  sons  in 
the  River  Aciravatl.  And  casting  his  net,  he  caught  a  great 
gold-coloured  fish.  They  showed  it  to  King  Pasenadi,  who 
said  :  ‘  The  Exalted  One  will  know  the  cause  of  the  fish’s 
colour.’  And  the  Exalted  One  told  them  that  the  fish  had, 
in  Kassapa  Buddha’s  time,  been  a  wicked  bhikkhu,  who  had 
since  then  suffered  in  purgatory ;  that  his  sisters  were  still 
there,  but  that  his  brother  as  Thera  had  perfected  life  ;  and 
then  for  their  good  he  taught  the  Kappila  Sutta.1 

Thereupon  Yasoja  in  deep  emotion  renounced  the  world, 
and  his  companions  with  him.  Of  his  going  with  them  to 
wait  on  the  Exalted  One  at  the  Jeta-Vana,  and  of  their 
dismissal  because  of  the  noise  they  made  on  arriving,  the 
record  stands  in  the  Udana.2  Dismissed,  and  dwelling  on 
the  banks  of  the  River  Vaggumuda,  Yasoja,  like  a  highbred 
horse,  his  mettle  stirred,  strove  and  toiled  till  he  acquired 
sixfold  abhinna.  Thereafter  the  Exalted  One  sent  for  him. 
And  he,  from  practising  all  the  special  austerities,3  was 
emaciated  and  uncomely.  Then  the  Exalted  One  com¬ 
mended  his  self-denial  in  this  verse : 

Lo !  here  a  man  with  frame  so  pale  and  worn ; 
Like  knotted  stems  of  cane  his  joints,  and  sharp 
Th’  emaciated  network  of  his  veins. 

In  food  and  drink  austerely  temperate, 

His  spirit  neither  crushed  nor  desolate.  (243) 

1  I  cannot  identify  this  Sutta. 

2  Udana ,  iii.,  §  3.  In  that  work  it  is  interesting,  in  view  of  the 
Thera’s  legend,  that  the  Master,  when  rebuking  Yasoja’s  followers,  com¬ 
pares  them  to  noisy  fishermen. 

3  These  were  not  the  self-inflicted  tortures  of  Indian  ascetics,  but 
the  Dhutangas,  all  of  which  are  given  in  the  Milinda,  ii. ,  bk.  vi. 


CLXXVIII.  YASOJA 


167 


And  Yasoja  so  commended,  extolled  the  love  of  solitude, 
and  taught  doctrine  thus  : 

In  the  great  forest,  in  the  mighty  woods, 

Touched  though  I  be  by  gadfly  and  by  gnat, 

I  yet  would  roam,  like  warrior-elephant 
In  van  of  battle,  mindful,  vigilant.1  (244) 

Alone  a  man  is  even  as  Brahma. 

And  as  the  angels  if  he  have  one  mate. 

Like  to  a  village  is  a  group  of  three. 

Like  to  a  noisy  crowd  if  more  there  be.  (245) 


CLXXIX 

Satimattiya. 

Beborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  the  kingdom  of  Magadha 
as  a  brahmin’s  son,  he  having  the  essential  conditions2 
entered  the  Order  among  the  forest  bhikkhus,  and  through 
study  and  practice  acquired  sixfold  abhinna.  Thereupon 
he  instructed  bhikkhus,  and  preached  to  many  folk  on  the 
Befuges  and  the  Precepts.  One  family  in  particular  he 
converted  to  faith  and  trust ;  and  in  that  house  he  was 
greatly  welcomed,  the  only  daughter,  a  pretty,  lovely  girl, 
respectfully  providing  him  with  food. 

One  day  Mara,  plotting  to  disturb  and  disgrace  him,  took 
his  shape,  and  going  to  the  maiden,  grasped  her  hand. 
But  she,  feeling  that  this  was  no  human  touch,  loosed  her 
hand.  But  the  others  in  the  house  saw  it  and  lost  faith  in 
the  Thera.  He,  knowing  nothing,  perceived  next  day  their 
changed  manner.  And  discerning  that  Mara  had  been  at 
work,  he  vowed  to  loose  the  dead  dog  from  their  neck,  and 
made  them  tell  him  what  had  happened.  And  the  house¬ 
master,  hearing  his  explanation,  begged  his  forgiveness, 

1  =  XXXI. 

2  I.e.,  maturity  of  evolution  in  character. 


168 


CLXXIX.  SATIMATTIYA 


and  declared  he  himself  would  wait  upon  him.  The  Thera 
told  the  matter  in  these  verses : 

The  trust  thou  once  didst  place  in  me, 

To-day  it  lives  no  more.  What’s  thine  is  thine  ; 
But  in  this  house  no  evil  have  I  done.  (246) 
Transient  and  wavering  is  the  layman’s  faith  : — 
So  have  I  marked.  Folk  love  and  then  grow  cold. 
Why  for  that  should  a  holy  brother  die  ?  (247) 

Cooked  stands  the  sage’s  food  a  little  here, 

A  little  there,  in  one  clan  or  the  next. 

I  will  go  round  to  seek  my  little  alms ; 

My  legs  are  strong  enough  forsooth  for  that.1  (248) 


CLXXX 

Upali. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  a  barber’s  family,  he  was 
named  Upali.  Come  of  age  he  left  the  world,  following 
Anuruddha  and  the  other  five  nobles,  when  the  Exalted 
One  was  staying  at  Anupiya  Grove,  as  is  recorded  in  the 
Pali.2  Now  when  he  was  taking  a  subject  for  exercise  from 
the  Master,  he  said  :  *  Send  me  not  away,  Lord,  to  dwell  in 
the  forest.’  ‘Bhikkhu,  you  dwelling  in  the  forest,  will 
develop  one  subject3  only ;  if  you  dwell  with  us,  you  will 
become  proficient  in  both  book-knowledge4  and  insight.’ 
The  Thera,  consenting  to  the  Master’s  word,  practised  for 
insight,  and  in  due  time  won  arahantship. 

1  This  little  poem,  so  simply  explained  by  the  Commentary,  has  for 
lack  of  it  been  twisted  into  a  limping  dialogue  on  Karma,  etc.,  between 
two  bhikkhus.  See  Neumann,  in  loc. 

2  See  the  charming  episode,  Vinaya  Texts ,  iii.  224-230. 

3  Dliuray. 

4  Gantha-,  Br.  gandha-dhuray.  With  this  cf.  Digha-Nikdya ,  iii.  94  : 
ganthe  karontd.  Dhammapala,  of  course,  had  palm-leaf  manuscripts 
in  mind  and  a  written  Yinaya,  whereas,  in  Upali’s  case,  the  Master 
would  probably  teach  him  orally  (uggahapesi) ,  though  heads  or 
subject-words  may  then  have  been  committed  to  writing. 


CLXXX.  UPAIil 


169 


Moreover,  the  Master  himself  taught  him  the  whole  Vinaya- 
Pitaka.  And  later,  after  Upali  had  won  the  Master’s  com¬ 
mendation  of  his  decision  in  the  three  cases  of  Ajjuka,  the 
Kurukacchaka  bhikkhu  and  Kumara-Kassapa,  he  was 
ranked  first  among  those  who  knew  the  Vinaya.1 

One  feast-day,  when  he  was  reciting  the  Patimokkha,2  he 
thus  admonished  the  brethren  : 

He  who  for  faith’s  sake3  hath  renounced  the 
world, 

And  stands  a  novice  in  the  Order  new, 

Friends  let  him  choose  of  noble  character, 

Pure  in  their  lives,  of  zeal  unfaltering.  (249) 

He  who  for  faith’s  sake  hath  renounced  the  world, 
And  stands  a  novice  in  the  Order  new, 

Among  the  Order  let  that  bhikkhu  dwell, 

And  wisely4  learn  its  code  of  discipline.  (250) 

He  who  for  faith’s  sake  hath  renounced  the  world, 
And  stands  a  novice  in  the  Order  new, 

Skilled  in  what  should  be  done,  or  left  undone, 

Let  him  uncompanied  hold  on  his  way.  (251) 

) 

1  See  Vinaya ,  iii.  66 ;  39,  and  above  CLXI.  respectively.  These  are 
but  a  tithe  of  the  cases  recorded  as  settled  by  this  notable  Dean. 
Cf.  XLV.,  p.  50,  n.  2. 

2  This — the  ‘  Rules  of  Disburdenment  ’ — constituted,  and  still  con¬ 
stitutes,  a  fortnightly  ritual  ( Vinaya  Texts ,  i.  1-69). 

3  Commentary  :  i.e.,  either  not  in  order  to  gain  a  living,  or  believing 
in  the  fruit  of  action  and  in  the  excellence  of  the  Gem-Trinity  (Buddha, 
Norm,  Order).  Upali’s  own  beginning  was  not  so  single-minded,  he 
having  joined  precisely  in  order  to  protect  his  life.  The  young  nobles 
gave  him  their  effects  to  take  home,  and  he,  fearing  that  the  Sakiyans 
might  suspect  him  of  murder,  hung  up  the  bundle  on  a  tree  and 
followed  them. 

4  BudJio.  The  Commentary  interprets:  buddhcl  ti  ca  pathan  ti ; 
so  ev'  attlio.  The  iteration  ‘  novice  .  .  .  new  ’  is  in  the  text. 


170 


CLXXXl.  UTTARAPALA 


CLXXXI 

Uttarapala. 

Reborn  in  this  Budclha-age  at  Savatthi  in  a  brahmin 
family,  he  was  named  Uttarapala.1  He  saw  the  Twin 
Miracle,2  and  believing,  entered  the  Order,  and  pursued  his 
studies.  One  day,  amid  desultory  recollections,  sensual 
desires  beset  him,  but  after  a  violent  mental  struggle,  he 
arrested  the  corrupting  moods  (. kilesas ),  and  in  earnest 
meditation  won  arahantship. 

Thereupon  reflecting  on  his  victory,  he  uttered  a  ‘  lion- 

roar  ’ : 

Me  seeming  wise,  forsooth,  and  spent  enough 
In  pondering  on  the  things  that  make  for  good, 
Me  overthrew  fivefold  desires  of  sense, 
Bewilderers  [of  the  reason]  of  the  world.  (252) 
Though  lodged  in  Mara’s  reach,  by  mighty  dart 
Assailed,  yet  did  my  strength  suffice  to  win 
From  snare  set  by  the  King  of  Death  release.  (253) 
Now  are  all  sense-desires  put  far  away ! 

Now  are  all  rebirths  shattered  once  for  aye ! 
Destroyed  is  birth-and-death’s  eternity  ! 

Now  cometh  nevermore  rebirth  for  me  !  (254) 


CLXXXII 

Abhibhuta. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  a  raja’s  family  at  the  city 
of  Yetthapura,3  he  was  named  Abhibhuta,  and  succeeded 
to  the  estate  at  his  father’s  death.  Now  when  the  Exalted 

i  ==  Guardian  of  the  North.  2  See  p.  86,  n.  1. 

3  No  other  mention  of  place  or  raja  is  yet  traced,  but  the  four 
middle  lines  are,  in  Sayy.  Nik.,  i.  156,  put  in  the  mouth  of  one 
Abhibhu,  who  was  a  bhikkhu  in  the  age  of  Sikhi  Buddha,  according 
to  a  story  told  by  Gotama  Buddha. 


CLXXXII.  ABHIBHUTA 


171 


One  arrived  at  his  city  on  tour,  Abhibhuta  he  went  to  hear 
him,  and  on  the  morrow  offered  him  hospitality.  The 
Exalted  One  expressed  the  thanks  he  felt,  and  thereupon 
taught  him  the  Norm  more  in  detail.  Then  the  raja  found 
faith,  left  his  estate  for  the  Order,  and  realized  arahantship. 

While  he  was  dwelling  in  the  bliss  of  emancipation,  his 
kindred,  councillors  and  retainers  came  to  him  lamenting 
that  he  had  left  them  without  a  chief.  And  he,  teaching 
them  the  Norm  by  way  of  extolling  the  reason  of  his 
renunciation,  said : 

Hear,  O  ye  kinsmen,  and  give  ear  to  me, 

All  and  as  many  as  are  gathered  here ! 

The  Norm  it  is  that  ye  shall  learn  from  me  : — 
Painful  is  hirth  again  and  yet  again !  (255) 

Bestir  yourselves,  rise  up,  renounce  and  come, 

And  yield  your  hearts  unto  the  Buddha’s  Rule. 
Shake  off  the  armies  of  the  King  of  Death 
As  doth  the  elephant  a  hut  of  straw.1  (256) 
Whoso  within  this  righteous  discipline 
Shall  come  with  diligence  to  understand. 

Rebirth’s  eternal  round  put  far  away, 

All  pain  and  suffering  he  shall  end  for  aye.2  (257) 


CLXXXIII 

Gotama. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  the  Sakiyan  clan,  he  came 
to  be  known  only  by  his  gens  name.  He  found  faith  when 
the  Master  visited  his  kinsfolk,  and  entering  the  Order  and 
studying  for  insight,  acquired  sixfold  abhinna.  Now,  while 

1  Cf.  verse  1147. 

2  These  last  eight  lines  are  elsewhere  assigned  to  the  Buddha, 
four  by  Nagasena  ( Milinda ,  ii.  60),  and  four  in  the  Book  of  the 
Great  Decease  ( Dialogues ,  ii.  128).  The  former  is  also  so  assigned  in 
Kathd  Vattlm ,  ii.  3,  and  in  Divyavaddna ,  p.  300,  but  to  the  gods 
(ibid.,  p.  569)  and  to  the  bhikkhu  Abhibhu  in  Sayy .  Nik.,  i.  156 /. 


172 


CLXXXIII.  GOTAMA 


he  was  dwelling  in  the  bliss  of  emancipation,  his  kinsfolk 
asked  him  one  day  why  he  had  put  them  aside  and  gone 
forth.  And  he,  to  show  both  the  ill  he  had  suffered  in 
Sapsara  and  the  happiness  of  Nibbana  which  he  then  had 
gotten,  said  : 

Lo  !  as  I  fared  through  being,  I  came  to  the  kingdom 
infernal, 

So  to  the  dolorous  realm  of  the  Petas,  times  without 
number. 

Evil1  befell  me  again  in  manifold  shapes  of  the 
beast-world.  (258) 

Glad  enough  reborn  as  human,  rarely  I  won  to  the 
heavens. 

Yea,  in  the  realms  of  vision,  in  realms  where  all 
sense  was  abolished 

Have  I  been  placed,  and  in  realms  ’twixt  conscious¬ 
ness  and  the  unconscious.2  (259) 

All  this  becoming  lies  clearly  before  me  as  void  of 
real  value, 

Born  of  preceding  conditions,  unstable  and  con¬ 
stantly  drifting. 

So  comprehending  the  coming  to  be  of  this  self  of 
me,  heedful, 

Came  I  at  length  to  find  Peace,  yea,  the  Peace 
[wherein  I  am  resting].  (260) 

CLXXXIY 

Harita. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  SavatthI  in  a  brahmin 
family,  he  fell  into  the  habit,  from  pride  of  birth,  of  calling 
other  men  low-born.  Even  after  he  had  heard  the  Norm, 
and  believed  and  entered  the  Order,  he  persisted  from  the 

1  The  oddly  redundant  dukkhamamhi  the  Commentary  gives  in  the 
verse,  but  restates  in  paraphrasing  as  dukkhamhi. 

2  On  these  planes  of  existence  see  Compendium,  p.  137  ff. 


CLXXXIV.  HAlilTA 


173 


cumulative  force  of  the  habit.  But  one  day,  after  hearing 
the  Master  preach,  he  reviewed  his  own  mental  procedure, 
and  was  distressed  to  mark  the  surrender  to  conceit  and 
arrogance.  Expelling  it  all,  he  conjured  up  insight  and 
won  arahantship.  Thereafter,  dwelling  in  the  bliss  of 
emancipation,  he  testified  to  anna  in  thus  admonishing  the 
bhikkhus  : 1 

He  who  is  fain  to-morrow  to  perform 

The  things  that  he  should  yesterday  have  done, 

Forfeit  of  happy  opportunity, 

He  shall  anon  repent  him  fierily.  (261) 

Let  him  but  talk  of  that  which  should  be  done ; 
Let  him  not  talk  of  what  should  not  be  done ! 

Of  him  who  talketh  much  but  doeth  not, 

Wise  men  take  stock,  and  rate  him  at  his 
worth.  (262) 

O  great,  O  wondrous  is  Nibbana's  bliss, 

Revealed  by  Him,  the  Utterly  Awake ! 

There  comes  no  grief,  no  passion,  haven  sure, 
Where  ill  and  ailing  perish  evermore  !  (263) 


CLXXXY 

Vimala. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Benares  in  a  brahmin 
family,  he  entered  the  Order  under  Thera  Amitta,2  and 
through  his  instigation  acquired  insight  and  won  arahant¬ 
ship.  Thereupon  he  admonished  a  bhikkhu  who  was  his 
comrade  as  follows  : 

From  evil-minded  friends  keep  far  away, 

And  make  thy  choice  among  the  best  of  men. 

1  Harita’s  psalm  is  identical  with  Bakula’s  (CLXXII.).  Cf.  also  the 
Harita  of  XXIX.,  also  a  brahmin  of  Savatthl. 

2  On  this  curious  name  (?  Amita)  cf.  Jdt vi.  271. 


174 


CliXXXY.  YIMALA 


To  his  advice  hold  fast,  and  let  thy  heart 
Aspire  to  happiness  immutable.  (264) 

As1  one  who,  mounted  on  a  puny  plank, 

Is  in  mid-ocean  whelmed  beneath  the  waves, 

So  even  he  of  blameless  life  doth  sink, 

When  thrown  together  with  the  man  of Jsloth.  (265) 
Wherefore  from  such  an  one  keep  well  apart, 

The  sluggard  and  the  poor  in  energy. 

Dwell  thou  with  them  who  live  aloof, 

With  wise,  with  noble  souls  who  have  renounced, 
Who  in  rapt  contemplation  ever  strive.  (266) 

1  See  above,  CXXXIV.  This  Thera  is  not  met  with  elsewhere,  nor 
is  Vimala  identical  with  the  author  of  Psalm  L. 


CANTO  IV 

PSALMS  OF  FOUR  VERSES 


CLXXXVI 

Nagasamala. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  a  clan  of  Sakiyan  rajas, 
he  made  the  perishableness  of  life  his  principle,  and, 
conjuring  up  insight,  attained  arahantship.  He  there¬ 
upon  testified  to  anna,  as  occurring  in  his  own  experience, 
thus : 

Bedecked  with  trinkets  and  with  pretty  frock, 
Wreathed  with  flowers,  raddled  with  sandal 
wood, 

In  the  main  street,  before  the  multitude 
A  nautch  girl  danced  to  music’s  fivefold  sound.1  (267) 
Into  the  city  I  had  gone  for  alms, 

And  passing  I  beheld  the  dancer  decked 
In  brave  array,  like  snare  of  Mara  laid.  (268) 
Thereat  arose  in  me  the  deeper  thought  :2 
Attention  to  the  fact  and  to  the  cause. 

The  misery  of  it  all  was  manifest ; 

Distaste,  indifference  the  mind  possessed.  (269) 

1  The  five  instruments  usually  grouped  as  turiya  are  three  sorts  of 
tom-toms,  cymbals  (?),  and  pipe  or  flute  ‘  Nautch  girl  ’  is  nari— lit., 
woman — and  nattaki,  dancer. 

2  Yoniso  manasikaro.  The  Commentary  paraphrases  by  analyzing 
the  sight  of  that  which  was  intended  to  appeal  to  sense  and  emotion. 

Distaste,  etc.  Oy.  has  scLTn/patitthathuti  .  .  .  had.  ay  ay  sayhusi . 

175 


176 


CLXXXVI.  NAGASAMALA 


And  so  my  heart  was  set  at  liberty. 

0  see  the  seemly  order  of  the  Norm ! 

The  Threefold  Wisdom  have  I  made  my  own, 
And  all  the  Buddha  bids  me  do  is  done.1  (270) 


CLXXXYII 

Bhagu. 

Beborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  a  clan  of  Sakiyan  rajas, 
he  left  the  world,  together  with  his  clansmen,  Anuruddha 
and  Kimbila,  and  dwelt  by  the  village  of  Balakalona.2  And 
one  day,  when  he  had  left  his  cell  to  discipline  his  tendency 
to  sloth  and  torpor,  he  fell  as  he  was  stepping  up  on  to  the 
terrace.  Using  this  as  his  goad,3  he  accomplished  self- 
mastery,  and  developing  insight,  he  won  arahantship. 
Thereupon,  as  he  was  living  in  the  bliss  of  fruition,  the 
bliss  of  Nibbana,  the  Master,  coming  to  congratulate  him 
on  his  solitude,  asked  him :  ‘  How  now,  bhikkhu,  do  you 
continue  in  earnest  T  And  he  assenting,  replied  : 

Foredone  by  drowth  I  gat  me  from  my  cell 
For  exercise,  and  climbed  the  terrace-steps, 

And  fell  thereby  all  drowsy  to  the  earth.  (271) 
Chafing  my  limbs,  once  more  I  mounted  up  ; 

And  while  on  terrace  to  and  fro  I  went, 

Within  ’twas  all  alert,  composed,  intent.  (272) 
Thereat  arose  in  me  the  deeper  thought : 
Attention  to  the  fact  and  to  the  cause.  .  .  . 

1  It  is  not  possible  to  be  sure  that  this  Nagasamala  is  the  Thera  so 
named  who  was  occasionally  the  Buddha's  attendant  on  his  walks. 
Cf.  CCLX.  ;  Majjh.  Nik.,  i.  43 ;  TJddna ,  viii.  7  ;  Jdt,  iv.  95. 

2  On  these  see  above  (CXVIII.,  n.  4)  and  below  (CCLVI.).  The  visit 
by  the  Buddha,  without  the  incident  of  the  tumble,  is  recorded,  Majjh. 
Nik.,  iii.  154;  Vinaya  Texts,  ii.  308,  where  the  village  has  ‘-kara’ 
added  to  its  name.  Cf.  Jdt.,  i..  No.  10;  Milinda,  i.  163.  The 
village  was  a  suburb  of  Kosambl  on  the  Jumna. 

3  Cf.  Sisters ,  xvii. 


CLXXXVII.  BHAGU 


177 


The  misery  of  it  all  was  manifest ; 

Distaste,  indifference  the  mind  possessed ;  (273) 

And  so  my  heart  was  set  at  liberty. 

0  see  the  seemly  order  of  the  Norm ! 

The  Threefold  Wisdom  have  I  made  my  own, 
And  all  the  Buddha  bids  me  do  is  done.  (274) 

This  was  the  Thera’s  confession  of  anna. 


CLXXXVIII 

Sabhiya. 

In  the  time  of  our  Exalted  One  he  took  rebirth  as  the 
son  of  a  nobleman’s  daughter,  whose  parents  had  committed 
her  to  the  charge  of  a  Wanderer,  that  she  might  learn  other 
doctrines  and  usages.  Sabhiya,  when  grown  up,  also 
became  a  Wanderer,  and  learning  various  recitations, 
became  a  great  dialectician,  and  found  none  to  equal  him. 
Making  his  hermitage  by  the  city  gate,  he  gave  lessons  to 
the  children  of  noblemen  and  others,  and  devised  twenty 
questions,  which  he  asked  recluses  and  brahmins.  In  the 
narrative  to  the  Sabhiya-Sutta  it  is  handed  down,  that  a 
Brahma  god  from  the  Pure  Abodes  devised  the  questions.1 
There,  too,  it  is  told  how  the  Exalted  One,  when  he  came 
to  Bajagaha,  to  the  Bamboo  Grove,  so  answered  the 
questions,  that  Sabhiya  believed  on  him,  and  entering  the 
Order,  established  insight  and  won  arahantship. 

But  after  this  it  was  in  admonishing  the  bhikkhus  who  sided 
with  the  seceding  Devadatta  that  he  spoke  these  verses : 

People  can  never  really  understand 
That  we  are  here  but  for  a  little  spell.2 

1  See  Sutta-Nipdta ,  verses  510-547.  Of  the  verses  here  ascribed 
to  Sabhiya,  275,  277  =  Dhammapada,  verses  6,  312,  verse  6  being 
there,  as  in  Vin.  Texts ,  ii.  306  /.,  put  into  the  mouth  of  the  Buddha 
addressing  the  quarrelsome  Kosambi  bhikkhus. 

2  ‘People’:  ‘All  except  the  wise.’  Cy.  Line  2  :  ‘We  walk  con¬ 
stantly  near  to  Death.’  (Cy.)  This  reading  is  vindicated  by  the 
opposed  :  ‘  as  they  immortals  were,’  next  verse. 


12 


178 


CLXXXVIII.  SABHIYA 


But  they  who  grasp  this  truth  indeed, 

Suffer  all  strife  and  quarrels  to  abate.  (275) 
And  whereas  they  who  cannot  understand, 
Deport  themselves  as  they  immortals  were, 
They  who  can  really  understand  the  Norm 
Are  as  the  hale  amid  a  world  diseased.1  (276) 
All  flaccid  action,  all  corrupted  rites, 

All  mischief-making  in  religious  life  : 

On  all  such  work  follows  no  high  reward.  (277) 
He  who  among  his  fellow-brethren  wins 
No  reverence  is  far  from  the  good  Norm, 

As  is  the  firmament  far  from  the  earth.  (278) 


CLXXXIX 

Nandaka. 

Reborn  in  the  time  of  our  Exalted  One  at  Savatthl  in  a 
clansman’s  family,  he  was  called  Nandaka.  He  entered 
the  Order  after  hearing  the  Master  teach  the  Norm,  and 
developing  insight  won  arahantship.  Thereafter,  while 
dwelling  in  the  bliss  of  emancipation,  he  gave  a  lesson  by 
the  Master’s  order  one  feast-day  to  the  bhikkhums,  and 
caused  500  of  them  to  attain  arahantship.  Wherefore  the 
Exalted  One  ranked  him  foremost  among  the  exhorters  of 
the  brethren  and  sisters.2 

Now,  one  day,  while  seeking  alms  in  Savatthl,  a  woman, 
to  whom  he  had  been  married,  saw  him  and  laughed  with 

1  This  line  =  Dhammajpada,  verse  198  (half  the  sloka).  It  is 
interesting  to  note  that  the  Commentary  on  verse  6  of  the  Dhamma - 
pada  is  verbatim  the  same  as  that  by  Dhammapala,  while  that  on 
verse  312  is  nearly  so. 

2  Ang.y  i.  25.  The  successful  lesson  is  told  in  the  Nandakovada- 
Sutta  ( Majjh .,  iii.  270).  The  Anguttara  Commentary  leads  up  to 
that  Sutta,  but  the  occasion  of  these  verses  finds  a  fuller  preface  in 
the  story  it  tells  of  Nanda,  the  Buddha’s  stepbrother  (CXXXIX.). 
He,  infatuated  with  a  beautiful  woman,  is  by  the  Master  shown  the 
nymphs  in  Sakka’s  heaven,  and  finds  her  plain  as  an  ape  in  comparison. 


CLXXXIX.  NANDAKA 


179 


sinful  heart.  The  Thera,  seeing  her  action,  taught  her  the 
Norm  under  the  aspect  of  emphasizing  repugnance  at  the 
body,  thus  : 

Fie  on  the  fulsome  thing  malodorous  ! 

A  very  tool  of  Mara,  even  this, 

Thy  body,  whence  exude  those  many  streams, 

In  number  nine,  that  never  cease  their  flow.  (279) 
Build  no  conceits  from  former  passages. 

Try  not  to  allure  the  Elect-who-Thus-have-Come  ! 1 
The  very  heavens  delight  them  not,  how  then 
Should  aught  that’s  merely  earthly  ever  please?2  (280) 
The  fools  who  lack  discretion,  they  whose  mind 
Is  sullied,  and  their  heart  by  dulness  cloaked, 

Such  men  in  charms  of  body  take  delight, 

For  they  are  fast  in  bonds  by  Mara  thrown.  (281) 
To  them  who  are  untouched  by  lust,  or  hate, 

Or  ignorance,  these  things  no  pleasures  be. 

Cut  are  the  cords ;  they  from  all  bonds  are  free.  (282) 


CXC 

Jambuka. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  a  very  poor  family,  he 
,  inclined,  as  in  a  previous  birth,  to  feeding  on  excrement, 
and  left  the  world  to  be  a  naked  ascetic.  Practising  many 
austerities,  and  eating  beans  one  by  one  on  the  point  of  a 
straw,  he  was  fifty-five  years  old  when  the  Exalted  One, 
seeing  the  conditions  of  arahantship  shining  within  his 
heart  like  a  lamp  in  a  jar,  himself  went  to  him,  and  teach- 

1  T athdgate,  made  here  by  the  Commentary  to  include  all  Buddha- 
savakas,  or  Ariya-savakas,  who  have  ‘  come  ’  with  the  conditions  for 
saintship,  or  have  attained  the  highest,  are  avabuddhd. 

I  do  not  here  follow  Dr.  Neumann’s  syntax.  The  woman’s  power 
to  please  humans  was  a  source  of  danger.  She  was  only  incapable  of 
moving  tatliCigatcis ,  or  saints,  who  have  won  ineffable  pleasures. 


180 


CXC.  JAMBUKA 


ing  him  the  Norm,  converted  him.  Then  said  he  :  ‘  Comb, 
bhikkhu  !’  thereby  ordaining  him.1  And  Jambuka  thereupon 
conjuring  up  insight,  the  Master  established  him  in  arahant- 
ship.  This  is  in  outline,  but  a  full  account  is  given  in  the 
Commentary  on  the  Dhammapada  verse  : 

Bean  after  bean  by  point  of  straiv.  .  .  .2 

At  the  hour  of  his  passing  away  he  showed  that,  though 
once  wrongly  living,  he,  by  leaning  on  the  Buddha  Supreme, 
had  gotten  where  a  disciple  ought  to  get,  thus : 

For  five  and  fifty  years  covered  with  dust 
And  dirt,  eating  a  dinner  once  a  month,3 
And  pulling  out  my  hair  from  head  and  face,  (283) 
On  one  leg  would  I  stand,  I  used  no  couch, 

Dry  dung  I  ate,  nor  would  accept  when  bid.  (284) 
So  wrought  I  actions  leading  to  much  woe 
And  ruin,  swept  along  by  mighty  flood, 

Till  I  a  refuge  in  the  Buddha  found : —  (285) 

O  see  how  to  that  Refuge  I  am  come  ! 

O  see  the  seemly  order  of  the  Norm  ! 

The  Threefold  Wisdom  have  I  made  my  own, 

And  all  the  Buddha  bids  me  do  is  done.  (286) 


CXCI 

Senaka. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  a  brahmin  family,  as  the 
son  of  the  sister  of  the  Thera  Kassapa  of  Uruvela,  he  was 
named  Senaka.4  When  he  had  learnt  the  brahmins’  Yedic 

1  See  p.  105,  n.  2. 

2  Verse  70  ( Commentary ,  ii.  52-68).  The  literary  reference  is  of 
interest,  but  it  does  not  enable  us  to  say  that  the  Dhammapada  Com¬ 
mentary  referred  to  is  positively  that  which  we  now  have  in  Pali. 
Jambuka  is  referred  to  in  Milinda ,  ii.  249. 

3  The  extreme  interval  given  in  the  list  of  austerities  occurring  more 
than  once  in  Digha-Nikdya  is  twice  a  month — e.y.,  Dialogues ,  i.  229. 

4  Brahmins  of  this  name  are  in  Jdt.,  iii.,  No.  401 ;  vi.,  No.  546. 
For  the  uncle’s  psalm,  see  CCX. 


CXCI.  SENAKA 


181 


culture,  he  dwelt  with  his  family.  And  at  that  time  the 
people  held  a  festival  every  year  in  the  former  half  of 
March  (Phagguna),1  and  a  baptizing  at  the  landing-stage,2 
the  festival  being  called  the  Gaya-Lent. 

Then  the  Exalted  One,  out  of  compassion  for  those  who 
could  be  led,  stayed  near  that  riverside.  And  when  the 
people  assembled,  Senaka  came  too,  and  hearing  the  Master 
teaching  the  Norm,  was  converted,  entered  the  Order,  and 
in  due  course  won  arahantship.  Thereafter,  reflecting  on 
his  victory,  he  was  filled  with  joy,  and  breathed  forth  this 
psalm  : 

O  welcome  was  to  me  that  day  of  spring, 

When  at  Gaya,  at  Gaya’s  river-feast, 

I  saw  the  Buddha  teach  the  Norm  supreme,  (287) 
Saw  the  great  Light,  Teacher  of  multitudes, 

Him  who  hath  won  the  highest,  Guide  of  all, 

The  Conqueror  of  men  and  gods,  unrivalled 
Seer.  (288) 

Mighty  magician,  hero  glorious, 

Far-shining  splendour,  pure,  immune  of  mind,3 
The  Master  who  hath  slain  all  asavas, 

And  hath  attained  that  where  no  fear  can 
come.4  (289) 

Long  lay  I  bound  and  harassed  by  the  ties 
Of  sect  and  dogma — ah !  but  now  ’tis  He, 

The  Blessed  Lord  hath  rescued  Senaka 
From  every  bond  and  set  at  liberty.  (290) 

1  Phagguna,  or  Phalguna,  fell  half  in  February,  half  in  March. 

2  Titthdbhiseka.  What  sort  of  ‘baptizing’ — lit.,  sprinkling — went 
on,  whether  of  infants,  scholars,  or  of  religious  confession,  it  is  not 
easy  to  divine.  According  to  Bohtlingk  and  Roth’s  Dictionary,  the 
river  (Neranjara)  itself  was  known  as  the  Phalgu.  Dr.  Neumann 
says  the  town  of  Gaya  is  itself  so  called  ( Majjh.-Nik .,  translation, 
i.  271.  Cf.  the  very  suggestive  photograph  in  the  Sisters ,  p.  134,  of 
a  modern  riverside  gathering  at  Gaya. 

3  Andsava.  The  Thera  here  repeats  himself  a  little. 

4  A  frequent  epithet  of  Nibbana. 


182 


CXCII.  SAMBHUTA 


CXCII 

Sambhuta. 

Reborn  in  this  Bnddha-age  in  a  clansman’s  family,  he  was 
converted,  after  the  Exalted  One  had  passed  away,  by  the 
Treasurer  of  the  Norm.1  And  entering  the  Order,  he 
developed  insight  and  attained  arahantship.  So  he  lived  in 
the  bliss  of  emancipation  till,  a  century  after  the  Parinib- 
bana  of  the  Exalted  One,  the  Vajjian  brethren  of  Vesall  put 
forward  the  ten  theses,  and  were  resisted  by  the  Thera 
Niyasa2  and  the  Kakandakan  brethren,  and  a  recension  of 
Norm  and  Yinaya  was  made  by  700  arahants.  Then  the 
Thera,  moved  by  righteous  emotion  at  the  proposed  per¬ 
version  of  Dhamma  and  Yinaya,  uttered  these  verses, 
testifying  thereby  to  anna : 

He  who  decides  in  season  meet  for  pause, 

And  he  who  dallies  when  he  should  decide,3 
This  fool  by  want  of  plan  and  principle 
Doth  journey  hence  to  suffer  many  ills.  (291) 
Rewards  that  should  be  his  do  melt  away, 

As  in  the  dark  weeks  melts  the  waning  moon. 
Dishonour  he  incurs,  at  variance  with  his  friends.  (292) 

He  who  is  slow  in  season  meet  for  pause, 

Who  crosses  when  ’twere  wrong  to  hesitate, 

This  wise  man  by  his  plan  and  principle 
Doth  surely  win  his  way  to  happiness.  (293) 

The  gains  that  shall  be  his  wax  ripe  and  full, 

As  in  bright  weeks  doth  wax  the  crescent  moon. 
Honour,  renown  he  wins,  at  one  with  friends.  (294) 

1  A  title  bestowed  on  the  Thera  Ananda. 

2  On  the  Council  of  Vesall  ( Vinaya  Texts ,  vol.  iii.,  chap.  xii.).  The 
Thera  Sambhuta  ‘  Hemp-robed 5  (Sanavasin) — was  one  of  the  organizers 
of  this  difficult  and  delicate  campaign  of  reform. 

3  Lit.,  crosses.  See  below\ 


CXCIII.  RAHULA 


183 


CXCIII 

Rahula. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  through  our  Bodhisat,  as  the 
son  of  Princess  Yasodhara,  he  was  reared  with  a  great 
retinue  of  nobles.  The  circumstances  of  his  entering  the 
Order  are  recorded  in  the  Khandhaka.1  And  he,  his  know¬ 
ledge  ripened  by  gracious  words  in  many  Sutta  passages,2 
conjured  up  insight,  and  so  won  arahantship.  Thereupon, 
reflecting  on  his  victory,  he  confessed  anna : 

Twice  blest  of  fortune  am  I  whom  my  friends 
Call  ‘  Lucky  Rahula.’  For  I  am  both 
Child  of  the  Buddha  and  a  Seer  of  truths ;  (295) 

Yea,  and  intoxicants  are  purged  from  me ; 

Yea,  and  there’s  no  more  coming  back  to  be. 
Ar’hant  am  I,  worthy  men’s  offerings  ; 

‘Thrice  skilled’  my  ken  is  of  ambrosial  things.  (296) 

Blinded  are  beings  by  their  sense-desires, 

Spread  o’er  them  like  a  net ;  covered  are  they 
By  cloak  of  craving  ;  by  their  heedless  ways 
Caught  as  a  fish  in  mouth  of  funnel-net,3  (297) 
But  I,  that  call  of  sense  abandoning, 

Have  cut  and  snapt  the  bonds  of  devil’s  lure. 
Craving  with  craving’s  root  abolishing  ; 

Cool  am  I  now ;  extinct  is  fever’s  fire.4  (298) 

CXCIY 

Candana. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  SavatthI  in  a  wealthy 
clan,  and  named  Candana,  he  lived  a  domestic  life  till  he 

1  Vinaya  Texts ,  i.  208  /. 

2  E.g .,  Majjliima.  Nos.  62;  147;  Sayyutta ,  iii.  135/.,  etc. 

3  Kumindmukhe.  The  kumind,  paraphrased  by  pasibbaka,  a 
funnel-shaped  net,  probably  resembling  our  weir-traps. 

4  Nibbuto.  This  is  nearer  to  the  Buddhist  idea  than  the  rendering 
given  to  this  line  in  the  Sisters,  p.  19  ;  see  n.  4. 


184 


CXCIV.  CANDANA 


heard  the  Master  preach  the  Norm  ;  and  became  thereupon 
a  Stream-winner.1  When  a  child  was  born  to  him,  he  left 
his  home  for  the  Order,  and  taking  an  insight  exercise,  dwelt 
in  the  forest.  Coming  into  Savatthi  to  salute  the  Master, 
he  stayed  in  a  charnel-field.  And  his  wife,  hearing  of  his 
coming,  adorned  herself,  and,  taking  her  child  and  many 
attendants,  approached  him,  judging  that  by  her  attractions 
she  could  induce  him  to  secede  from  the  Order.  He,  seeing 
her  coming  from  afar,  thought :  *  Now  will  I  get  outside 
her  reach  !’  And  he  so  conjured  up  insight  that  he  acquired 
sixfold  abhinna.  Thereupon  he  rose  aloft,  and  so  taught 
her  the  Norm,  establishing  her  in  the  Refuges  and  the 
Precepts.  Then  he  went  back  to  his  former  haunts.  And 
when  his  bhikkhu  comrades  asked  him,  saying,  ‘  Serene 
are  you  looking,  brother  ;  what  truths  have  you  discerned?’2 
he  told  of  his  achievement,  and  testified  to  anna  in  these 
verses  : 

In  golden  gear  bedecked,  a  troop  of  maids 
Attending  in  her  train,  bearing  the  babe 
Upon  her  hip,  my  wife  drew  near  to  me.  (299) 

I  marked  her  coming,  mother  of  my  child, 

In  brave  array  like  snare  of  Mara  laid.  (300) 
Thereat  arose  in  me  the  deeper  thought :  3 
Attention  to  the  fact  and  to  the  cause. 

The  misery  of  it  all  was  manifest ; 

Distaste,  indifference  the  mind  possessed  ;  (301) 
And  so  my  heart  was  set  at  liberty. 

O  see  the  seemly  order  of  the  Norm  ! 

The  Threefold  Wisdom  have  I  made  my  own, 

And  all  the  Buddha  bids  me  do  is  done.  (302) 

1  Or  convert. 

2  Kacci  taya  saccani  patividdhariibi  ?  I  commend  this  noble  ques¬ 
tion  to  the  attention  of  students  in  comparative  hagiology. 

3  Eepeating  verses  269,  270. 


CXCV.  DHAMMIKA 


185 


CXCY 

Dhammika. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  a  family  of  Kosalan  brah¬ 
mins,  and  named  Dhammika,  he  won  faith  at  the  presentation 
of  the  Jeta  Grove,  and  entered  the  Order.  Becoming  a 
resident  at  a  village  Vihara,  he  grew  impatient  and  irritable 
over  the  duties  of  incoming  bhikkhus,1  so  that  the  latter 
abandoned  the  Vihara.  Thus  he  became  sole  master  of  the 
Vihara.  And  a  layman  reported  this  to  the  Exalted  One. 
The  Master  sent  for  Dhammika,  and  asked  him  to  explain. 
Thereupon  he  said  :  *  Not  only  now  are  you  impatient ;  you 
were  so  formerly  also  ’ ;  and  at  the  bhikkhus’  request  he 
gave  a  *  tree-talk’  on  the  Norm,  with  admonition  over  and 
above,  as  follows : 

Well  doth  the  Norm  protect  him  in  sooth  who  follows 
the  Norm. 

Happiness  bringeth  along  in  its  train  the  Norm  well 
practised. 

This  shall  be  his  reward  by  whom  the  Norm  is  well 
practised : 

Never  goeth  to  misery  he  who  doth  follow  the 
Norm.  (303) 

F or  not  of  like  result  are  right  and  wrong : 

Wrong  leads  to  baleful,  right,  to  happy  doom.  (304) 

Wherefore  let  will  be  applied  to  [master]  the  things 
that  we  know. 

So  let  him  hail  with  delight  so  welcome  a  blessing  as 
this.2 

1  For  an  account  of  the  many  sources  of  petty  annoyance  arising 
herefrom,  see  Vinaya  Texts ,  iii.  272  ff. 

2  I.e.,  according  to  the  Commentary,  the  privilege  of  a  Buddha’s 
admonition.  The  double  reversion  to  the  sloka  (ll.  5,  6 ;  11,  12)  in 
this  gatha,  which  is  in  irregular  Tristubh  metre,  is  indicated  above  by 
corresponding  changes.  The  four  gathas,  indeed,  bear  so  little  on 
Dhammika’s  offence,  and  vary  so  in  metre,  that  [they  suggest  a 
patched  compilation. 


186 


CXCV.  DHAMMIKA 


Firm  in  the  Welcome  One’s  Norm  the  disciples  fare 
onward, 

Valiantly  following  Him,  their  sovereign  Refuge.  (305) 

Plucked  out  the  root  of  all  this  cancerous  lump,1 
The  net  of  craving  wholly  torn  away, 

The  round  of  life  renewed  hath  ceased, 

And  naught  of  clinging  doth  remain, 

E’en  as  the  moon  on  fifteenth  day 

Sails  in  clear  sky  without  a  stain.  (306) 

When  the  Master  had  taught  three  of  the  verses,  Dham- 
mika,  bearing  them  in  mind,  developed  insight  even  as  he 
sat,  and  won  arahantship.  And  to  show  the  transforma¬ 
tion  in  himself  to  the  Master,  he  declared  anna  by  the  last 
verse. 

CXCYI 

Sabbaka. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  SavatthI  in  a  brahmin 
family  and  named  Sabbaka,  he  heard  the  Exalted  One  teach¬ 
ing  the  Norm,  and  believing,  entered  the  Order.  Taking  an 
exercise,  he  went  to  the  Lonagiri  Vihara  on  the  banks  of 
the  river  Ajakarani,  and  there  in  due  time  won  arahant¬ 
ship.  Going  thereupon  to  salute  the  Master  at  SavatthI, 
he  stayed  a  little  while,  entertained  by  his  kinsfolk.  And 
having  confirmed  them  in  the  Refuges  and  the  Precepts, 
he  was  anxious  to  return  to  his  dwelling.  They  begged 
him  to  stay  and  be  supported  by  them.  But  he,  showing 
them  why  he  had  come,  and  declaring  his  love  of  retirement 
by  praise  of  his  dwelling-place,  said : 

Whene’er  I  see  the  crane,  her  clear  bright  wings 
Outstretched  in  fear  to  flee  the  black  stormcloud, 
A  shelter  seeking,  to  safe  shelter  borne, 

Then  doth  the  river  Ajakarani 
Give  joy  to  me.  (307) 

1  The  ‘lump5  is  the  five  khandhas  (body  and  mind),  the  ‘root’  is 
ignorance  (Commentary). 


CXCVI.  SABBAKA 


187 


Whene’er  I  see  the  crane,  her  plumage  pale 
And  silver  white  outstretched  in  fear  to  flee 
The  black  stormcloud,  seeing  no  refuge  nigh, 

The  refuge  seeking  of  the  rocky  cave, 

Then  doth  the  river  Ajakaranl 
Give  joy  to  me.  (308) 

Who  doth  not  love  to  see  on  either  bank 
Clustered  rose-apple  trees  in  fair  array 
Behind  the  great  cave  [of  my  hermitage] 1  (309) 
Or  hear  the  soft  croak  of  the  frogs,  well  rid 
Of  their  undying  mortal  foes  proclaim  : 

4  Not  from  the  mountain-streams  is’t  time  to-day 
To  flit.  Safe  is  the  Ajakaranl. 

She  brings  us  luck.  Here  is  it  good  to  be.  2  (310) 

Then  the  relatives  suffered  him  to  depart.  And  because 
he  showed  herein  his  delight  in  empty  places,  this  became 
the  Thera’s  confession  of  anna. 


CXCYII 

Mudita. 

Beborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  the  family  of  a  Kosalan 
commoner,  he  was  named  Mudita.  When  he  was  come 
of  age,  his  clan  for  some  reason  became  objectionable  to 
the  king.  Mudita,  terrified  of  the  king,  ran  away,3  and 

1  The  jambu-tree  is  evergreen;  its  boughs  bent  with  fruit;  its  glossy 

foliage  affords  shade  (Commentary). 

2  I  do  not  find  allusion  elsewhere  to  this  little  river.  It  may  well 
have  been  the  name  of  a  tributary  of  the  Aciravatl  flowing  past 
Savatthl  (see  CLXXII.).  In  the  line  preceding  the  burden  of  the 
frogs’  croak,  text  and  both  versions  of  the  Commentary  are  at 
variance,  and  I  do  not  pretend  to  have  solved  that  which  will  be  dis¬ 
cussed  more  appropriately  in  an  edition  of  the  Commentary.  The 
exact  meaning  is  not  vitally  important  to  a  poem  in  which  the  essential 
charm  lies  in  its  gentle  paganism.  That  sangha  can  be  used  for  a 
flock,  say,  of  cranes,  see  Milindapanha,  p.  403. 

3  Cf.  CCXI.  Mudita  signifies  complacent,  glad.  Cf.  Bud .  Psy., 
p.  65,  n.  1. 


188 


CXCVII.  MUD  IT  A 


entering  the  forest,  approached  the  dwelling  of  an  arahant 
Thera.  The  latter,  seeing  his  terror,  bade  him  fear  not, 
and  reassured  him.  ‘  How  long,  your  reverence,  will  it  take 
before  I  am  free  from  danger  ?’  ‘  When  seven  or  eight 

months  have  passed.’  ‘  I  cannot  wait  so  long  ;  I  will  leave 
the  world,  your  reverence  ;  ordain  me  V  So  he  begged,  to 
protect  his  life.  The  Thera  ordained  him.  And  he, 
coming  to  believe  in  the  doctrine,  lost  his  fears  and 
exercised  himself  for  insight.  Failing  to  win  arahantship, 
he  vowed  not  to  leave  his  retreat  till  he  had,  and  thereupon 
succeeded.  Thereafter  experiencing  the  bliss  of  emancipa¬ 
tion,  he  was  asked  as  to  his  success  by  his  fellow-bhikkhus. 
And  he  told  them  how  he  had  succeeded,  thus : 

I  left  the  world  that  I  might  save  my  life, 

And,  once  ordained,  I  won  back  faith  and  hope  ; 
Valiant  in  energy  I  onward  pressed.  (311) 

Now  an  it  must  be,  let  this  body  break 

And  waste  and  let  its  flesh  consume, 

My  limbs  let  falter  at  the  knee  and  fail ;  (312) 

I I  will  not  eat  nor  will  I  drink  again, 

Nor  from  this  lodging  let  me  issue  forth, 

Nor  will  I  even  lie  upon  my  side, 

While  yet  the  dart  of  Craving  lies  undrawn !  (313) 
Thus  steadfast  I  abiding — O  behold 
And  mark  the  forward  stride  of  energy : 

The  Threefold  Wisdom  have  I  made  my  own, 

And  all  the  Buddha  bids  us  do  is  done  !  (314) 

1  =  verses  223,  224  (Paccaya,  CLXXI.). 


CANTO  V 

PSALMS  OF  FIVE  VEESES 

CXCVIII 

\ 

Rajadatta. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthi  in  a  caravan-leaders’ 
family,  his  parents  called  him  Rajadatta  (‘  given  by  the 
king  ’),  because  they  had  obtained  him  through  praying  to 
Vessavana,  the  great  firmament  deity.1  Come  of  age,  he 
once  took  500  carts  of  merchandise  to  Rajagaha.  Now  there 
he  squandered  all  his  money,  spending  a  thousand  a  day  on 
a  beautiful  courtesan,  so  that  he  was  penniless  and  had  not 
enough  to  eat,  and  wandered  about  in  wretchedness.  So  he 
came  with  other  laymen  to  the  Bamboo  Grove,  where  the 
Master  sat  teaching  the  Norm  to  a  great  congregation.  And 
Rajadatta,  seated  at  the  fringe  of  the  assembly,  heard  and 
believed,  and  entered  the  Order.  Undertaking  the  Dhu- 
tangas,2  he  dwelt  in  a  charnel-field. 

Now  another  caravan-leader  also  spent  his  thousand  on 
the  courtesan,  and  wore  on  his  hand  a  ring  of  great  value, 
which  she  coveted.  She  got  men  to  steal  it,  but  the  owner’s 
servants  told  the  police,3  and  they  raided  her  house,  slew 
her,  and  cast  her  body  into  the  charnel-field. 

The  Thera  Rajadatta,  walking  therein  to  find  a  foul 
object  for  meditation,  noticed  this  corpse.  For  a  while 

1  One  of  four  so-called  Great  Kings,  each  presiding  over  a  quarter 
of  the  visible  world ;  called  also  Kuvera,  he  presided  over  the  northern 
quarter  ( Dialogues ,  ii.  287  /.). 

2  Supererogatory  austerities  ( Milinda ,  ii.,  book  vi.). 

3  Avacarakamanussa  (?).  I  have  not  found  the  word  elsewhere, 
and  only  guess  at  the  meaning. 


189 


190 


CXCVIII.  KAJADATTA 


he  concentrated  his  attention,  but  the  portions  of  her  yet 
unmangled  by  dogs  and  jackals  distracted  him  and  all  but 
overmastered  him.  Much  distraught,  he  exhorted  his  heart, 
and  went  away  for  a  brief  space  ;  then  recommencing,  he 
induced  jhana,  confirmed  his  insight,  and  so  won  arahant- 
ship. 

Thereupon,  reflecting  on  his  success  and  filled  with  zest 
and  joy,  he  said  : 

A  bhikkhu  to  the  charnel-field  had  gone, 

And  there  he  saw  a  woman’s  body  cast 
Untended  ’mid  the  dead,  the  food  of  worms.  (315) 
Most  men  had  felt  repugnance  at  the  sight, 

Seeing  the  corpse,  the  poor  dead  evil  thing. 

In  me  was  sensual  passion  manifest, 

And  I  became  as  blind  and  lost  control.  (316) 

But  swifter  from  that  place  than  seething  rice 
Could  boiling  overflow,  I  turned  and  fled  ; 1 
Aside  elsewhere  I  took  my  seat  cross-legged, 

In  heedful  and  discriminating  mood.  (317) 
Thereon  arose  in  me  the  deeper  thought : 2 
Attention  to  the  fact  and  to  the  cause. 

The  misery  of  it  all  was  manifest. 

Distaste,  indifference  the  mind  possessed  ;  (318) 
And  so  my  heart  was  set  at  liberty. 

O  see  the  seemly  order  of  the  Norm  ! 

The  Threefold  Wisdom  have  I  made  my  own, 

And  all  the  Buddha  bids  us  do  is  done.  (319) 


CXCIX 

Subhuta. 

Beborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  the  family  of  a  commoner 
of  Magadha,  and  named  Subhuta,  his  disposition  to  seek 

1  The  Commentary  explains  as  follows :  ydvatd  ktilena  su'pari- 
dhotatintatandulandUyd  odanarj  j^accati,  tato,  oram  eva  kalarj , 
tato  lahuJcdlena  ragay  vinodento. 

2  =  verses  269,  270. 


CXC1X.  SUBHUTA 


191 


escape  caused  him  to  quit  domestic  life  and  to  join  sectarian 
ascetics.  Finding  among  them  nothing  genuine,  and  seeing 
the  happiness  enjoyed  by  Upatissa,  Kolita,  Sela1  and  others, 
after  they  had  entered  the  Order,  he  believed  in  our  doctrine 
and  entered  also.  After  winning  the  favour  of  his  teachers 
and  preceptors,  he  went  into  retreat  with  an  exercise.  And 
developing  insight  he  won  arahantship. 

Thereupon  he  declared  anna  by  reviewing  the  suffering 
he  had  endured  by  self-mortification,  and  his  subsequent 
happiness  in  jhana,  etc.  : 

A  man  who  yokes  himself  to  things  unfit, 

Desiring  2  to  accomplish  work  therein, 

If  seeking  he  doth  not  attain,  his  quest 
Doth  bear  the  intrinsic  markings  of  mis  - 
chance.  (320) 

If  he  surrender  but  one  [vantage-point] 

Of  miseryfs  source]  drawn  out  and  overcome, 

Like  luckless  throw  of  dice  his  state  may  be. 

But  if  he  throw  all  [he  hath  gained]  away, 

No  better  is  he  than  a  blinded  man, 

Who  sees  not  if  the  road  be  smooth  or  rough.3  (321) 

Of  him  who  talketh  much,  but  doeth  not, 

Wise  men  take  stock,  and  rate  him  at  his 
worth.  (322) 

1  Upatissa  is  Sariputta,  Kolita  is  Moggallana.  See  CCLIX., 
CCLXIII.,  CCLIII.  The  two  former  were  of  his  own  country ;  Sela 
was  from  the  country  lying  north  of  Magadha. 

2  According  to  the  Commentary  we  are  to  read  icchato  as  =icchanto. 
Dr.  Oldenberg  supports  this  by  parallels  from  Sisters,  verse  240 : 

‘Who,  ignorant  ( ajdnato )  to  the  ignorant,  hath  told  thee  this  ?’ 

for  ajdnanto  ( Sayy .,  i.  11 ;  Dipavarjsa,  xxi.,  verse  2). 

3  The  metre  of  this  one  gatha  is  very  curious  and  irregular,  nor 
can  the  Commentary  throw  much  light  on  its  original  phraseology. 
It  decides  that  aghatarj  stands  for  three  aghani's  (miseries) — viz., 
greed,  hate,  and  illusion.  The  Br.  MS.  makes  no  attempt  to  correct 
this  term  by  references  to  value  ( aggTia ),  as  does  the  S.  MS.  Yet  this 
gatha  fits  in  better  with  the  legend  than  do  the  platitudes  that  follow 
(=verse  226).  It  is  the  language  of  one  who  has  sacrificed  his  all  to  win. 


192 


CC.  GIRIMANANDA 


Just  as  a  beauteous  flower  of  lovely  hue 

But  lacking  odour,  so  is  uttered  word 

That  barren  proves,  by  action  not  made  good.  (323) 

Just  as  a  beauteous  flower  of  lovely  hue 

And  fragrant  odour,  so  is  uttered  word 

That  fruitful  proves,  in  action  holding  good.1  (324) 


CC 

Girimananda. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Rajagaha  as  the  son  of 
King  Bimbisara’s  chaplain,  he  was  named  Girimananda. 
He  saw  the  power  and  majesty  of  a  Buddha  when  the 
Master  attended  the  meeting  at  Rajagaha,  and  he  entered 
the  Order.  During  his  studies  he  stayed  awhile  at  a  village, 
then  came  back  to  the  town  to  salute  the  Master.  And 
Bimbisara  the  maharaja  heard  of  his  coming,  and  going  to 
him,  said  :  ‘  Do  you  dwell  here,  your  reverence  ;  I  will  supply 
your  needs.’  But  from  his  much  business  he  forgot,  so 
that  the  Thera  dwelt  in  the  open.  And  the  weather-gods 
held  off  the  rain  for  fear  of  wetting  the  Thera.  Then  the 
king,  noting  the  drought,  built  him  a  hermitage.  And  the 
Thera,  sheltered  in  his  hut,  put  forth  all  his  efforts,  and 
combining  energy  and  calm,  conjured  up  insight  and  won 
arahantship.  Then,  delighted  at  its  advent,  he  confessed 
anna  while  the  rain  fell  from  above : 

God  rains  as  ’twere  a  melody  most  sweet. 

Snug  is  my  little  hut,  sheltered,  well-roofed. 

Therein  I  dwell,  my  heart  serene  and  calm. 

Now  an  it  pleaseth  thee  to  rain,  god,  rain !  (325) 

God  rains  as  ’twere  a  melody  most  sweet. 

Snug  is  my  little  hut,  sheltered,  well-roofed. 

Therein  I  dwell,  and  peace  within  my  heart. 

Now,  etc.  (326) 


=  Dhammapacla,  verses  51,  52. 


CCI.  SUMANA 


# 


193 


Therein  I  dwell,  all  passion  purged  away. 

.  (327) 


Therein  I  dwell,  all  hatred  purged  away. 

.  (328) 


Therein  I  dwell,  all  error  purged  away. 

Now  an  it  pleaseth  thee  to  rain,  god,  rain ! 1  (329) 


CCI 

Sumana. 

Beborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  the  family  of  a  commoner 
of  Kosala,  and  named  Sumana,  he  grew  up  in  happy  circum¬ 
stances.  His  mother’s  brother  became  an  arahant,  dwelling 
in  the  forest,  and  when  Sumana  came  of  age,  this  uncle 
ordained  him,  giving  him  exercises  on  ethical  conduct. 
Finally,  when  the  four  jhanas  and  fivefold2  abhinna  were 
acquired,  the  Thera  showed  him  the  way  of  insight,  so  that 
he  soon  acquired  arahantship.  And  when  he  went  to  his 
uncle  and  was  asked  concerning  his  success,  he  thus  made 
confession  : 

That  which  my  teacher  wished  that  I  should 
know 

In  doctrines  good,  and  of  his  kindness  taught 
To  me  who  longed  for  the  Ambrosial : 

That  now,  even  the  task  prescribed,  is  done.  (330) 

Yea,  won  and  realized  is  the  Norm 

E’en  for  my  own,  not  learnt  ‘  as  such  and  such.’ 3 

1  Cf.  I.  and  LI.-LIV.  There  is  such  a  uniformity  in  these 
references  to  a  carelessly  benevolent  patron  that  the  six  poems  and 
their  legends  lose  individual  validity. 

2  See  p.  32,  n.  1.  He  only  lacked  AsavakTihaya. 

3  Dhammo  ariitiho ,  a  favourite  expression  in  the  Satta  Nipdta. 
See  Fausboll’s  translation  and  notes,  verses  934,  1052,  1065,  1080, 
1083,  1134  ;  cf.  Majjh .,  i.  520. 


13 


194 


CCI.  SUMANA 


Pure  lore  is  mine,  dispelled  is  every  doubt. 

Let  me  stand  near  to  thee  and  testify  :  (331) 

I  know  tlie  where  and  when  of  former  lives, 

And  clearly  shines  the  Eye  Celestial ; 

The  Good  Supreme,  Ar’hantship,  have  I  won,1 
And  what  the  Buddha  bids  us  do  is  done.  (332) 
Well  have  1  learnt,  who  used  all  diligence, 

The  method  and  the  training  in  thy  rule  ; 

For  all  th’  Intoxicants  are  purged  away ; 

Now  cometh  never  more  the  life  renewed.  (333) 
Noble  thy  cult  and  thou  hast  guided  me. 
Compassionate,  ’tis  thou  hast  favoured  me. 
Thine  admonitions  have  not  proved  inept. 

Once  an  apprentice,  now  am  I  adept.  (334) 


CCII 

Vaddha. 

•  • 

Beborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  the  city  of  Bharukaceha 
in  a  commoner’s  clan,  and  named  Vaddha,  he  grew  up  in 
due  course.2  Now  his  mother,  distressed  at  the  continuity 
of  rebirth  and  death,  entrusted  her  son  to  her  kinsfolk,  and 
entered  the  Order  among  the  bhikkhunls.  She  thereafter 
won  arahantship.  Her  son,  too,  entered  the  Order  under 
Thera  Veludanta,  and  learning  the  Buddha-Word,  became 
learned  and  eloquent  in  preaching.  And  one  day,  feeling 
the  responsibility  of  office,  he  thought :  ‘  I  will  go  alone  and 
see  my  mother,  nor  put  on  my  cloak.’  So  he  went  to  the 

1  Sadattho  ti  arahattay  (Commentary). 

2  Anupubbena  vaddliati.  This  (here)  unusual  turn  of  phrase 
refers  doubtless  to  his  name,  which  means  ‘growth,’  ‘increase.’  The 
mother’s  story  is  given  in  the  Sisters,  lxii.  ff.  She  speaks  also  for 
him,  but  except  for  the  ‘  spur ’—literally,  ‘  goad ’—motive  and  the 
‘  jungle,’  she  places  a  different  psalm  in  his  mouth,  a  by-proof  of  the 
difference  in  authorship  (see  Introduction).  The  wearing  under¬ 
garments  as  outer— i.e.,  leaving  the  civara  behind — is  commented  on 
in  Yinaya  discipline  ( Vinaya ,  iv.  281).  Presumably  the  Thera  herein 
put  his  sonship  before  his  office. 


CCI1.  VADDHA 

•  • 


195 


bhikkhunis’  quarters.  His  mother,  seeing  him,  rebuked 
him  :  ‘  Why  are  you  come  here  alone  and  without  your  cloak  ?’ 
And  he,  convicted  in  doing  that  which  was  unfit,  returned 
'  to  his  Vihara,  and  seated  in  the  day-room,  there  attained 
arahantship,  testifying  to  anna  under  the  aspect  of  ascribing 
his  achievement  to  his  mother’s  admonition  : 

O  well  in  sooth  my  mother  used  the  goad  ! 

I  marked  her  word,  and  by  my  parent  taught, 

I  stirred  up  effort,  put  forth  all  my  strength, 

And  won  the  goal,  th’  enlightenment  supreme.  (335) 

Ar’hant  am  I,  meet  for  men’s  offerings.1 

Thrice  wise,  th’  ambrosial  vision  I  behold  ; 

Conquered  is  Namuci  and  all  his  host,2 

And  now  I  dwell  henceforth  sane  and  immune.  (336) 

Yea,  the  intoxicants  that  once  were  there, 

Within,  without  me,3  are  extracted  clean  ; 

Nought  doth  remain  nor  may  they  re-appear.  (337) 
Lo  !  wise  and  ripe  in  grace  the  Sister  4  was, 

Who  spake  this  word  of  pregnant  good  to  me  : 

For  thee  now  even  as  for  me,  [my  son,] 

No  jungle  of  the  mind  doth  bar  the  way.  (338) 

A  final  barrier  is  made  to  Ill. 

Last  mortal  frame  is  this,  to  which  belongs 
The  way  world  without  end  of  birth  and  death, 

Nor  ever  cometh  more  rebirth  [for  thee].  (339) 


CCIII 

Kassapa  of  the  River. 

Eeborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  a  clan  ofaMagadha  brah¬ 
mins,  as  the  brother  of  Uruvela-Kassapa,  his  religious 
inclination  made  him  dislike  domestic  life,  and  he  became  an 

1  =  verses  296,  516. 

2  Namuci,  a  name  for  Mara. 

3  I.e.,  bahiddhavatthu'kd,  ‘having  external  bases  or  causes’ _ e.g., 

objects  of  sense,  misguided  teachers,  heavens,  etc. 

4  Bhaginl ,  lit.,  sister. 


196 


CCIII.  KASSAPA  OF  THE  RIVER 


ascetic.  With  300  ascetics  he  carried  on  a  hermit’s  life  on 
the  banks  of  the  Eiver  Neranjara,  and  thus  he  became 
known,  by  his  habit  and  the  name  of  his  gens,  as  Kassapa  of 
the  Eiver.  Now  how  the  Exalted  One  ordained  him  and  his 
company  by  the  summons,  ‘  Come,  bhikkhu,’  is  recorded  in 
the  Ivhandaka.1  He  was  confirmed  in  arahantship  by  the 
Exalted  One’s  sermon  on  Burning.  Thereafter  reflecting 
on  his  achievement,  he  confessed  anna  by  way  of  extolling 
his  rooting  out  of  error  : 

O  truly  for  my  good  it  was  that  He, 

The  Buddha  came  to  the  Neraftjara, 

Whose  doctrine  hearing,  I  renounced  wrong 
views.  (340) 

The  celebrant  in  many  a  sacrifice, 

I  fostered  sacred  fire,  oblations  made  ; 

4  These  be  the  pure  and  holy  rites  !’  methought — 

O  blind  and  average  worldling  that  I  was  !  (341) 
Errant  in  wilderness  of  heresies, 

By  their  contagion  dazed  and  led  astray, 

I  deemed  that  pure  religion  which  was  false. 

And  blinded  was  I,  shiftless,  ignorant.  (342) 

Now  is  all  error  put  away  for  me  ; 

Broken  the  line  of  comings  back  to  be. 

Worth  every  gift,  the  Fire  I  celebrate  : 2 
I  worship  4  Him  who  on  This  Wise  hath 
Come.’  (343) 

Illusions  all  have  I  put  far  away. 

Crushed  is  the  thirst  for  going  on  to  be, 

And  shattered  is  the  endless  round  of  life. 

Now  cometh  nevermore  rebirth  for  me  !  (344) 


1  Vinaya  Texts ,  i.  118-135. 

2  The  Sammasambiiddlia  (Commentary). 


CCIV.  KASSAPA  OF  GAYA 


197 


CCIY 

Kassapa  of  Gaya. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  a  brahmin  clan  [his  story 
resembles  that  of  Kassapa  of  the  River,  save  that  his  com¬ 
pany  numbered  200,  and  that  he  dwelt  at  Gaya].1  He  con¬ 
fessed  anna  by  exalting  the  washing  away  of  evil,  thus  : 

At  morn,  at  noonday,  at  the  eventide 
Thrice  in  the  day  I  gat  me  at  Gaya 
Down  in  the  water  at  Gaya’s  spring  feast,2 
For  ‘  sins  that  I  have  done  in  other  births,  (345) 
In  days  gone  by,  those  here  and  now  hereby 
I  wash  away  ’ : — thus  did  I  once  believe.  (346) 

I  heard  a  voice  that  uttered  winning  words, 
Whereof  the  burden  wedded  Norm  and  Good. 

And  on  their  meaning,  true  and  genuine, 

I  pondered  much  and  reasoned  earnestly.  (347) 
Now  from  all  evil  am  I  truly  bathed, 

Cleansed  from  error,  pure,  immaculate. 

In  purity  heir  of  the  Purified, 

His  child,  even  the  Buddha’s  very  son.  (348) 

For  I  have  plunged  into  the  Eightfold  Stream, 
And  every  evil  thing  I’ve  washed  away. 

The  Threefold  Wisdom  have  I  found  and  won, 
And  all  the  Buddha  bids  us  do  is  done.  (349) 

CCY 

Vakkali. 

Reborn  in  the  time  of  our  Master  at  SavatthI  in  a 
brahmin  clan,  they  named  him  Yakkali.  When  he  had 
grown  wise  and  had  learnt  the  three  Yedas,  and  was 

1  Oddly  enough,  the  Commentary  does  not  mention  his  relationship 
to  Uruvela-Kassapa,  nor  to  Kassapa  of  the  River.  See  Vinaya  Texts , 
loc.  cit. 

2  The  Commentary  repeats  (cf.  above,  p.  181)  that  the  annual 
sacramental  festival  in  the  month  of  Phagguna  is  here  alluded  to,  and 
not  the  name  of  the  town  only,  as  Dr.  Neumann  holds. 


198 


CCV.  VAKKALI 


proficient  in  brahmin  accomplishments,  he  saw  the  Master. 
Never  sated  by  looking  at  the  perfection  of  the  Master’s 
visible  body,  he  went  about  with  him.  And  when  in  his 
house  he  thought :  ‘  I  shall  not  [here]  get  a  chance  of 
seeing  Him  constantly  ’ ;  so  he  entered  the  Order,  and  spent 
all  his  time,  save  at  his  meals  and  toilet,  doing  nothing  else 
but  contemplating  the  Exalted  One.  The  Master,  waiting1 
for  the  maturity  of  his  insight,  for  a  long  while  made  no 
comment ;  then  one  day  he  said :  4  What  is  to  thee, 
Yakkali,  this  foul  body  that  thou  seest  ?  He  who  seeth  the 
Norm,  he  it  is  that  seeth  me.  For  seeing  the  Norm  he 
seeth  me,  and  seeing  me  he  seeth  the  Norm.’  At  the 
Master’s  words,  Yakkali  ceased  to  look,  but  he  was  unable 
to  go  away.  Hence  the  Master  thinking  :  4  This  bhikkhu,  if 
he  get  not  deeply  moved,  will  not  awake,’  said  on  the  last 
day  of  the  rains :  4  Depart,  Yakkali !’  Thus  bidden,  he 
could  not  stay ;  but  thinking  :  4  What  is  life  to  me  if  I 
cannot  see  him  ?’  climbed  the  Vulture’s  Peak  to  a  place  of 
precipices.  The  Master,  knowing  what  Yakkali  was  about, 
thought :  4  This  bhikkhu,  finding  no  comfort  away  from  me, 
will  destroy  the  conditions  for  winning  the  topmost  fruits  ’ ; 
and  revealing  himself  in  a  glory,  spake  thus : 

Now  let  the  bhikkhu  with  exceeding  joy 
Delighting  in  the  Buddhas  Way  and  Lore , 

Go  up  on  to  the  holy ,  happy  Path , 

Where  things  component  ne'er  excite  him  more? 

And  stretching  forth  his  hand,  he  said  :  4  Come,  bhikkhu  !’ 

The  Thera,  filled  with  mighty  joy  and  rapture  at  the 
thought :  4 1  see  Him-of-the-Ten-Powers,  and  mine  is  it  to 
hear  Him  say :  Come  !’  came  to  himself  and  realized  what 
he  was  doing.  Eising  in  the  air,  he  stood  on  the  nearest 
point  of  the  hill  while  he  pondered  on  the  Master’s  verse  ; 

1  Or  ‘  causing  to  come  ’  ( dgcimento ).  The  Anguttara  Commentary 
has  the  same  expression,  but  then  says  [after  no  comment]  :  ‘  Dis¬ 
cerning  that  it  was  now  ripe,  and  he  able  to  enlighten  him,  said  .  . 

2  Dhammapada ,  verse  381.  The  adhigacclie  is  not  present  tense  as 
jn  Fausboll’s  ‘  adit,'  nor  future  as  in  Max  Muller’s  translation.  The 
Master’s  body  was  eminently  a  type  of  ‘  things  component  ’  ( sanJchdrd ) 


CCV.  VAKKAL1 


199 


then  arresting  his  rapture,  he  realized  arahantship,  together 
with  grasp  of  the  form  and  meaning  of  the  Norm.  This  is 
what  is  recorded  both  in  the  Anguttara  Commentary  and  in 
that  on  the  Dhammapada. 

But  here  they1  say  as  follows  :  Admonished  by  the 
Master’s  ‘  What  is  to  thee  . . .  Vakkali  dwelt  on  the  "V ulture  s 
Peak,  establishing  himself  in  insight,  and  descending  into 
the  avenue  thereof  by  the  might  of  his  faith.  The  Exalted 
One,  knowing  this,  gave  him  a  special  exercise  which  he 
could  not  achieve,  and  from  insufficient  food  he  suffered 
from  cramps.  Knowing  him  thus  suffering,  the  Exalted 
One  went  and  asked  him  : 

Thou  who  foredone  with  cramping  pains, 
Dwell’st  in  the  jungle,  in  the  woods, 

Thy  range  confined,  in  hardship  dire— 

Tell  me,  bhikkhu,  how  wilt  thou  live  ?  (350) 

And  the  Thera  declaring  his  constant  happiness  through 
unworldly  joys,  replied : 

With  bliss  and  rapture’s  flooding  wave 
This  mortal  frame  will  I  suffuse. 

Though  hard  and  rough  what  I  endure, 

Yet  will  I  in  the  jungle  dwell.  (351) 

Herein  myself  I’ll  exercise  : — 

The  Starting-x)oints  of  Mindfulness, 

The  Powers  five,  the  Forces  too, 

The  Factors  of  Enlightenment — 

So  will  I  in  the  jungle  dwell.  (352) 

For  I  have  seen  [what  friends  have  wrought] : 2 
Their  striving  roused,  their  straining  mind, 
Their  staunch  and  ever  onward  stride, 

In  concord  bound, — and  having  seen, 

E’en  in  the  jungle  will  I  dwell,  (353) 

1  Presumably  the  two  sources  of  his  own  work.  The  Commentaries 
referred  to  are  quoted  accurately  by  him — to  wit,  the  Manor atha-pur and 
on  Ang.,  i.  24,  §  2,  and  the  Dhammapada  Commentary  on  verse  381. 

2  ‘  “  Having  seen  ”  his  co-religionists.  By  this  he  shows  his  good 
fortune  in  virtuous  friends  ’  (Commentary). 


200 


CCVI.  VIJITASENA 


Remembering  Him,  the  Very  Wake, 
Supremely  tamed,  intent,  serene, — 

With  mind  unwearied  night  and  day, 

Thus  will  I  in  the  jungle  dwell.  (354) 

Thus  saying,  the  Thera  conjured  up  insight,  and  then  it 
was  that  he  won  arahantship. 

CCYI 

Vijitasena. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  a  Kosalan  elephant- 
trainers'  family,  he  was  named  Vijitasena.  His  maternal 
uncles,  Sena  and  Upasena,1  had  both  entered  the  Order  and 
become  araliants,  when  Vijitasena,  after  learning  the  craft 
of  his  folk,  saw  the  twin-miracle2  of  the  Master,  believed, 
and  being  naturally  of  a  religious  disposition,  entered  the 
Order  under  his  uncles.  Training  by  their  instructions  he 
rose  into  the  avenue  of  insight,  but  his  mind  remaining  dis¬ 
cursive  through  various  external  objects,  he  admonished  it : 

I  will  restrain  thee,  heart,  as  elephants 
Are  by  the  towngate’s  sallyport  3  kept  back. 

1 11  not  abet  thee  in  thy  naughty  ways, 

Thou  net  of  wishes,  thou  of  body  born.  (355) 

Not  thine  ’twill  be,  thus  checked,  to  go  at  large. 

As  elephant  that  wins  not  through  the  gate, 
Struggle  thy  best,  thou  witch,4  again,  again  ; 

Thou  shalt  not  roam,  who  art  to  sin  so  fain.  (356) 
Even  as  one  who  firmly  wields  the  hook 
Doth  turn  th’  unbroken,  untamed  elephant 
Against  its  will,  so  will  I  turn  thee  back.  (357) 

Not  the  brother  of  Sariputta  (CCXXXVIII.).  Neither  uncle  is  met 
with  elsewhere. 

2  See  XXXI. 

3  =  Khiiddaka-dvaraw,  or  low,  little  door  (Commentary). 

Citta-Kalal anni.  I  take  pcLsajliaT]  as  pasciJicinto,  i  using  force. 
The  Br.  Cy.  reads  p&sanga,  paraphrasing  by  saJrana-sayp>asscistiva- 
sena.  Cf.  the  S.  MS.  in  Dr.  Oldenberg’s  note,  p.  40. 


CCVII.  YASADATTA 


201 


As  the  good  driver,  in  horsebreaking  skilled, 

Doth  tame  the  mettle  of  the  thoroughbred, 

So  will  I  bring  thee  too  beneath  control. 

By  virtue  of  the  fivefold  spiritual  force.  (358) 

Yea,  by  right  heedfulness  I’ll  bind  thee  fast, 
Myself  restrained,  so  will  I  master  thee. 

Curbed  in  the  harness  of  right  energy, 

Thou  shalt  not,  O  my  heart,  go  far  from  me.1  (359) 

Thus  restraining  his  thoughts  did  the  Thera  expand 
insight  and  win  arahantship. 

CCVII 

Yasadatta. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  a  clan  of  Malla  rajas,  and 
named  Yasadatta,  he  was  educated  at  Takkasila.2  There¬ 
after  making  a  tour  with  the  Wanderer  Sabhiya,3  they 
came  to  SavatthI,  where  Sabhiya  put  questions  to  the 
Exalted  One.  Yasadatta  listened  to  the  answers,  thinking 
as  he  took  his  seat,  eager  to  criticize :  ‘  I  will  show  the 

defects  in  the  Samana  Gotama’s  discourse.’  Now  the 
Exalted  One  knew  what  was  in  his  mind,  and  at  the  end  of 
the  ‘  Sabhiya  Sutta  ’  admonished  him  in  these  verses  : 

Who  witless  and  with  captious  mind 
Doth  hear  the  Conqueror’s  doctrine  told, 

Far,  far  from  the  true  Norm  is  he, 

As  from  the  heaven  is  the  earth.4  (360) 

Who  witless  and  with  captious  mind 
Doth  hear  the  Conqueror’s  doctrine  told, 

From  the  true  Norm  he  wanes  away, 

As  in  the  month’s  dark  half  the  moon.  (361) 

1  This  is  the  second  of  the  three  poems  conceived  in  this  vein _ 

namely,  of  a  better  self  attempting  to  control  the  mutinies  of  older 
unregenerate  impulses.  Cf.  LXXVII.  and  CCLXII. 

2  See  Bud.  Ind pp.  8,  28,  203. 

3  See  Sabhiya’s  psalm  CLXXXVIII. ;  Sutta-Nipdta ,  iii.  6. 

4  =  verse  218,  a  line  in  Sabhiya’s  own  psalm. 


202 


CCVII.  YASADATTA 


Who  witless,  etc.  .  .  . 

In  the  true  Norm  he  withers  up, 

As  fish  where  water  runneth  low.  (362) 

Who  witless,  etc.  .  .  . 

In  the  true  Norm  he  cloth  not  thrive, 

As  rotten  seed  in  furrow  sown.  (363) 

He  who  with  glad  contented  mind 
Doth  hear  the  Conqueror’s  doctrine  told, 

He,  casting  out  th’  Intoxicants, 

Doth  realize  the  Influctuate,1 
Doth  win  the  Peace  ineffable, 

And  is  perfected,  sane,  immune.  (364) 

Thus  admonished  by  the  Master,  Yasadatta  was  filled 
with  emotion,  entered  the  Order,  and,  establishing  insight, 
in  due  course  won  arahantship.  And  in  confessing  anna 
he  uttered  these  very  verses. 


CCVIII 

Sona-Kutikanna. 

Eeborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  the  country  of  Avanti 
in  the  family  of  a  very  wealthy  councillor,  he  was  given 
the  name  of  Sona.  Wearing  ear- jewelry  worth  a  crore,  he 
became  known  as  Koti-,  or  Kuti-kanna  (Crore-ears).2 
Grown  up,  he  became  a  landowner,  and  when  the  venerable 
Kaccana  the  Great3  stayed  near  his  house,  he  ministered 
to  his  wants,  learned  the  Norm,  and  finally  growing 
disturbed,  entered  the  Order  through  him.  Collecting  with 

1  Akuppatd,  a  very  rare  abstract  noun  from  akuppa,  undisturbed, 
unshaken.  ‘  Is  perfected  ’  ( parinibbdti ,  more  usually  the  deponent 
form  parinibbdyati)  in  the  sense  of  rounded  off,  complete — i.e ., 
attained  life’s  climax  and  end.  ‘  Sane,’  etc.  =  andsavo. 

2  Or  is  it  possible  he  had  the  little  point  or  faunlike  peak  ( kuti )  in 
the  ears,  like  Julian  Hawthorne’s  hero  in  ‘Transformation’?  See 
Vinaya  Texts ,  ii.  32,  n.  3. 

3  See  CCXXIX. 


CCVIII.  SONA-KUTIKANNA 


203 


great  difficulty  a  company  of  ten,  he  soon  took  leave  of  the 
Thera  to  go  to  SavatthT  and  salute  the  Master.  Being 
admitted  to  pass  the  night  in  the  Master’s  portion,  and  in 
the  morning  invited  to  recite,  he  was  commended  for  the 
sixteen  Atthakas.  And  when  the  verse — 

‘  Seeing  the  evils  of  a  zoorldly  life 

was  finished,  he  developed  insight  and  won  arahantship. 

And  when  he  had  obtained  the  Master’s  consent  to  the 
three  matters  which  Kaccana  the  Great  had  commissioned 
him  to  ask,  he  returned  to  his  own  dwelling-place,  and  told 
the  Thera  his  instructor.  This  is  recorded  more  fully  in 
the  Udana  and  Anguttara  Commentaries,1  but  there  it  is 
said  that  he  attained  arahantship  while  studying  under  his 
teacher. 

Anon,  while  dwelling  in  the  bliss  of  emancipation,  he 
reviewed  his  achievement,  and  full  of  joy  he  breathed  out 
these  verses : 

Not  only  did  I  ordination  win, 

Emancipated  am  I,  sane,  immune  ; 

Yea,  him  have  I  now  seen,  th’  Exalted  One, 

And  where  he  dwelt,  there  with  him  did  I 
lodge.  (365) 

Far  through  the  night  he  stayed  beneath  the  sky, 
Then,  versed  in  everything’s  abiding-place, 

The  Master  in  his  chamber  went  to  rest.  (366) 

His  robe  spread  Gotama  2  and  laid  him  down, 

Like  unto  lion  in  a  rocky  cave, 

For  whom  all  fear  and  dread  have  passed 
away.3  (367) 

Thereafter  in  the  presence  of  the  Chief, 

The  Wake,  did  Sona,  framing  goodly  speech, 
Disciple  of  the  Buddha,  speak  the  Norm.  (368) 

1  Udana ,  v.  6;  Manor atha-piir am  on  Ang.,  i.  24,  §  2;  Vinaya 
Texts ,  ii.  32j(f. 

2  See  XCI.,  n,  3,  in  which  for  ten,  read  nine,  times. 

3  Cf.  introductory  stanzas. 


204 


CCIX.  KOSIYA 


Well  doth  he  know  the  factors  of  this  life, 

Well  doth  he  cultivate  the  Ariyan  Way, 

So,  having  won  to  that  most  perfect  Peace, 

Shall  he  complete  becoming,1  sane,  immune.  (369) 


CCIX 

Kosiya. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  a  Magadhan  brahmin’s 
family,  he  was  called  by  his  family  name  :  Kosiya.  Come  of 
age,  he  often  went  to  hear  the  General  of  the  Norm  teach¬ 
ing,2  and  thereby,  believing  in  the  doctrine,  entered  the 
Order,  and  in  due  course  won  arahantship.  Thereupon 
reviewing  his  achievement,  he  extolled  the  venerableness 
and  determining  power  for  good  of  the  wise  in  these 
verses  : 

He  that  is  valiant  and  learn’d  in  the  word  of  the 
masters, 

Therein  can  rest 3  and  therefor  can  cherish  affection, 
Him  ye  may  call  devoted 4  and  wise  :  thus  he 
may  he 

One  that  winneth  distinction  in  knowledge  of 
doctrines.5  (370) 

1  Identical  with  the  last  line  in  verse  364,  except  that  the  verb  is  in 
the  future,  paviTiibbissati,  making,  by  the  way,  a  superfluous  foot  in 
the  Pali  metre. 

2  Sariputta,  a  native  of  a  village  in  Magadha. 

3  Vase'  =  vaseyya  (Commentary). 

4  Bhattima,  meaning  either  this,  or  one  who  can  distinguish 
(vide  Childers).  The  former  meaning  seems  required  by  ‘  can  cherish 
affection,’  but  I  doubt  if  this  (later  very  prevalent)  meaning  occurs 
elsewhere  in  the  Pitakas.  The  Commentary’s  remark  is:  So  ti  so 
garunay  vacahhu  dhiro ,  so  yathdnusittharj  patipattiyd,  tattlia, 
bhattima  ca  nama  hoti. 

5  Cf.  Sutta-Nipdta,  iv.  13,  11,  where  the  line  occurs.  It  does  not 
seem  to  me  to  require  the  alteration  suggested  by  Dr.  Neumann. 
Visesi  assa  :  visesavci  siyd.  Cy. 


CCIX.  KOSIYA 


20.5 


Him,  whose  steadfast  philosophy  hardship  unparalleled 
Testing  has  no  power  to  disturb  or  bewilder, 

Him  ye  may  call  strong-willed  and  wise :  thus  he 
may  be 

One  that  winneth  distinction  in  knowledge  of 
doctrines.  (371) 

He  who  abideth  as  ocean  unyielding,  unfathomed 
As  to  his  insight  in  problems  subtle  and  delicate, 

Him  ye  may  call  inexpugnable,1  wise  :  thus  he  may  be 
One  that  winneth,  etc.  .  .  .  (372) 

Erudite,  one  who  beareth  the  Word  in  his  memory, 
Practiser  he  of  all  doctrine,  greater  and  lesser, 

Him  ye  may  call  all  this  and  wise :  thus  he  may  be 
One  that  winneth,  etc.  .  .  .  (373) 

He  who  knoweth  the  meaning  of  that  which  is  spoken, 
Knowing  the  meaning,  shapeth  his  actions  accord- 
ingly, 

4  Meaning- within-side  ’  2  call  him  and  wise  :  thus  he 
may  be 

One  that  winneth  distinction  in  knowledge  of 
doctrines.  (374) 

1  Lit.,  ‘  who  may  not  be  removed.’ 

2  Atth-antaro.  We  are  reminded  of  M.  Bergson’s  phrase,  that  ‘by 
intuition  we  may  see  the  becoming  of  things  from  within ,  transported 
by  an  effort  of  sympathy  ’  ( Creative  Evolution ,  pp.  361  /.,  334).  The 
Cy.,  however,  reads  atthandharo.  Cf.  dhammadharo  just  above. 


CANTO  VI 

PSALMS  OF  SIX  VERSES 


ccx 

Kassapa  of  Uruvela. 

Reborn  in  the  day  of  our  Exalted  One  as  the  firstborn  of 
three  brothers  in  a  brahmin  family,  they  were  all  called 
by  their  family  name  Kassapa,1  and  they  all  learned  the 
three  Vedas.  They  had  a  following  of  five,  three,  and  two 
hundred  brahmin  youths  respectively.  And  finding  no 
vital  truth  in  their  scriptures,2  but  only  subjects  of  worldly 
interest,3  they  left  the  world  and  became  ascetics;  And 
they  became  named  after  the  places  where  they  dwelt  as 
rishis,  the  eldest  with  his  company  going  to  dwell  at 
Uruvela.  Many  days  after  this  came  the  great  renuncia¬ 
tion  of  our  Bodhisat,  the  starting  of  the  Norm-Wheel,  the 
arahantship  of  the  five  Theras,  the  conversion  of  the 
fifty-three  associates  headed  by  Yasa,  the  sending  forth  of 
the  sixty  arahants,  4  Go  ye,  bhikkhus,  and  wander  .  . 
the  conversion  of  the  thirty  wealthy  friends,  and  the 
coming  of  the  Master  to  Uruvela.  When  he  had  there 
wrought  many  wonders,  beginning  with  the  taming  of 
the  Naga,  Kassapa  was  convinced  and  entered  the  Order, 
his  brothers  following  his  example.  To  them  and  their 

1  See  CCIII.,  CCIV.  The  incidents  here  outlined  are  told  in  Vinaya 
Texts,  i.  119-139.  This  Kassapa  is  assigned  chief  rank  among  those 
bhikkhus  who  had  great  following  ( Ang i.  25). 

2  Lit.,  in  their  own  book,  attano  ganthe. 

3  Ditthadhammikam  eva  atthay. 

206 


CCX.  KASSAPA  OF  URUVELA 


207 


1,000  followers,  the  Master,  seated  on  the  crest  of  a  rock 
on  Gaya  Head,  uttered  the  discourse  on  Burning,  establish¬ 
ing  them  all  as  arahants. 

But  Uruvela-Kassapa  reviewing  his  achievement,  uttered 
lion-roar  verses,  attesting  anna  : 

Beholding  all  the  wondrous  works  achieved 
By  the  high  powers  of  glorious  Gotama, 

At  first,  natheless,  myself  I  humbled  not, 

Being  deceived  by  envy  and  by  pride.  (375) 

But  He,  Driver  of  men,  who  knew  my  thought 
And  my  intent,  took  me  at  length  to  task. 
Thereby  anguish  befell  me,  I  was  seized 
By  thrill  mysterious,  hair-raising  dread.  (376) 

And  then  the  gifts  that  erst  accrued  to  me 1 
As  famed  ascetic  poor  and  worthless  seemed. 

All  these  I  thereupon  esteemed  as  nought, 

And  in  the  Conqueror’s  Order  was  enrolled.  (377) 
Once  well  content  with  sacrifice,  ’bove  all 
Concerned  within  these  worlds  once  more  to  live 
Now  have  I  set  myself  to  extirpate 
All  passion,  all  ill  will,  illusion  too.  (378) 

How  erst  I  lived  I  know  ;  the  heavenly  eye, 
Purview  celestial,  have  I  clarified  ; 

Power  supernormal,  reading  others’  thought, 
Hearing  ineffable,  have  I  achieved.  (379) 

And  the  great  Quest  for  which  I  left  the  world, 
Forsaking  home,  a  homeless  life  to  lead, 

Even  that  quest,  that  high  reward  I’ve  won, 

For  every  fetter  now  is  broken  down.2  (380) 

1  Sablia-sakTidra-sammiddlii.  Cy. 

2  He  enumerates  sixfold  abhinna,  or  modes  of  higher  knowledge, 
only  calling  the  last  ‘  destroying  the  (ten)  fetters,’  instead  of  the  four 
intoxicants,  the  more  usual  formula  (cf.  p.  82,  v.  1).  The  last  two  lines 
are  identical  with  (CXXVIII.)  verse  186 ;  the  four  in  verse  379  occur, 
slightly  different,  in  Uppalavanna’s  gathas  ( Sisters ,  verse  227).  Verse 
380  =  136. 


208 


CCXI.  TEKICCHAKARI 


l 


CCXI 

Tekicchakari 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  as  the  son  of  a  brahmin 
named  Subuddha,  he  was  safely  brought  into  the  world  by 
the  aid  of  physicians.  Hence  he  was  named  Tekicchakari, 
‘  doctor-made.’ 1  He  grew  up,  learning  the  arts  and  learn¬ 
ing  of  his  clan.  Now  his  father,  by  his  wisdom  and  policy 
having  incurred  the  jealousy  and  suspicion  of  the  King  of 
Benares  (sic),  was  by  King  Candagutta  thrown  into  prison. 
Then  Tekicchakari,  hearing  of  this,  took  fright  and  fled, 
taking  sanctuary  with  the  Thera  dwelling  at  the  Vihara 
Hall,  and  telling  him  the  cause  of  his  trouble.  The  Thera 
ordained  him  and  gave  him  an  exercise,  whereupon  he 
became  an  open-air  sedent  bhikkhu,2  heedless  of  heat  or 
cold,  and  devoted  especially  to  the  cultivation  of  the 
Sublime  Moods.  Him  Mara  the  Evil  One  saw,  as  one 
slipping  out  of  his  reach ;  and  in  the  desire  of  unbalancing 
the  Thera,  he  drew  nigh  in  the  guise  of  a  field-herd,  when 
the  harvest  was  over,  tempting  him  thus : 

All  harvested  is  iioav  the  rice,  and  threshed 

The  barley.  Not  a  bite  or  sup  I’ll  get ! 

What  shall  I  do  ?  (381) 

Then  the  Thera,  thinking,  ‘  This  fellow  tells  me  of  his 
state.  But  it  is  myself  that  I  ought  to  admonish.  I  have 
no  business  to  be  discoursing,’  thus  exhorted  himself  to 
meditate  on  the  Three  Bases  : 

Think  on  the  Buddha  !  infinite  the  thought ! 

Thou  thus  in  gladsome  piety,  thy  frame 

With  rapture  all  suffused,  shalt  ever  dwell 
Upon  the  heights.  (382) 

1  So  in  Oldenberg’s  MSS.  and  the  Br.  Cy.  Only  the  S.  Cy.  has  -kani. 

2  Two  forms  of  the  dhutangas.  See  Milinda ,  ii.,  book  vi. 


CCXI.  TEKICCHAKARI 


209 


Think  on  the  Dhamma  ! 1  .  .  .  (383) 

Think  on  the  Order  !  infinite  the  thought ! 1 
Thou  thus  in  gladsome  piety,  thy  frame 
With  rapture  all  suffused,  shalt  ever  dwell 
Upon  the  heights.  (384) 

Then  Mara  again,  wishing  to  dissuade  him  from  solitude, 
pretended  to  be  his  well-wisher,  saying : 

> 

Dost  dwell  beneath  bare  skies  ?  Cold  are  these 
nights 

And  wintry  now.  See  that  thou  perish  not 
With  cold  foredone.  Get  thee  Avithin  thy  lodge, 

Thy  door  well  barred  !  (385) 

Then  the  Thera,  showing  that  in  house-dwelling  was  a 
fetter,  but  that  there  he  was  at  ease,  said  : 

My  heart  transported  shall  reach  out  and  touch 
The  Four  Immeasurable  Moods  ;2  thereby 
Ever  shall  I  in  blissful  ease  abide. 

Not  mine  foredone  by  cold  to  fail,  who  dwell 
Unmoved  and  calm.  (386) 

Thus  saying,  the  Thera  developed  insight  and  realized 
arahantship. 

And  because  this  Thera  lived  in  the  time  of  King 
Bindusara,  these  verses  must  be  understood  as  having  been 
rehearsed  as  canonical  at  the  Third  Council.3 

1  Repeat  as  in  verse  382. 

2  See  his  story  and  that  of  Subhuti.  The  Four  Moods  were  Love, 
Pity,  Sympathy  for  Happiness,  and  Equanimity.  Line  1  is  expanded 
from  ‘  I  shall  touch,’  an  expression  scarcely  so  significant  to  us  as  to 
a  Buddhist  or  a  Neo-Platonist.  See  my  Buddhism ,  p.  218. 

3  This  interesting  historical  sidelight  was  noticed  in  Oldenberg’s 
edition,  p.  42  n.,  and  in  Dialogues  of  the  Buddha ,  i.  xvi.  Bindusara, 
father  of  Asoka,  was  son  of  the  usurper  Chandragupta  (Candagutta), 
who  imprisoned  the  Thera’s  father. 


14 


210 


CCXII.  MAHA-NAGA 


CCXII 

Maha-nag’a. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Saketa  as  the  son  of  a 
brahmin  named  Madhu-Vasettha,  he  was  given  the  name 
of  Maha-naga.1  He  saw  the  wonder  wrought  by  Thera 
Gavampati,2  while  the  Exalted  One  was  staying  in  the 
Anjana  Wood,  and  receiving  faith,  he  entered  the  Order 
under  the  Thera,  winning  arahantship  through  his  counsels. 

Now  while  he  abode  in  the  bliss  of  emancipation,  the 
Thera  Maha-naga  saw  how  the  six  bhikkhus3  habitually 
failed  to  show  respect  to  their  co-religionists,  and  he 
admonished  them  in  verses  which  became  his  confession 

of  anna  : 

Who  towards  his  fellows  in  the  Rule 
Showeth  no  reverence  nor  respect, 

From  the  true  Norm  he  wilts  away, 

Like  fish  where  water  runneth  low.  (387) 

Who  towards  his  fellows  in  the  Rule 
Showeth  no  reverence  nor  respect, 

In  the  true  Norm  he  doth  not  thrive, 

Like  rotten  seed  in  furrow  sown.  (388) 

Who  towards,  etc. 

'  Far  from  Nibbana  standeth  he 

Within  the  Norm-Lord’s  cult  and  school.  (389) 

Who  towards  his  fellows  in  the  Rule 
Showeth  due  reverence  and  respect, 

From  the  true  Norm  falls  not  away, 

Like  fish  where  many  waters  be.  (390) 

1  Nothing  else  is  known  of  this  Brother.  His  namesake  ‘  of  the 
Black  Creeper  Pavilion  ’  is  a  much  later  personage  ( Jdt .,  iv.  490  ; 
vi.  30  [text]  ;  JR  AS,  1901,  p.  893).  The  name  =  great  wondrous- 
being  or  spirit,  applied  equally  to  a  serpent,  an  elephant,  a  thera,  and 

to  a  class  of  fairies. 

2  See  XXXVIII. 

3  A  notorious  group  of  intriguers,  whose  doings  severely  tested  the 
organization  of  the  Sangha.  See  Ps.  V. ;  Vinaya  Texts,  i.  213  n. 


CCXIII.  KULLA 


211 


Who  towards  his  fellows  in  the  Rule 
Showeth  due  reverence  and  respect, 

In  the  true  Norm  he  thriveth  well 
As  seed  benign  in  furrow  sown.  (391) 

Who  towards  his  fellows  in  the  Rule 
Showeth  due  reverence  and  respect, 

He  to  Nibbana ’s  very  near, 

Within  the  Norm-Lord’s  cult  and  school.1  (392) 

CCXIII 

Kulla. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  SavatthI  in  the  family  of  a 
landowner,  and  named  Kulla,  he  was  converted  by  faith,  and 
was  ordained  by  the  Master.  But  he  was  often  seized  by  fits 
of  lustful  passion.  The  Master,  knowing  his  tendencies, 
gave  him  the  exercise  on  foul  things,  and  bade  him  often 
meditate  in  the  charnel-field.  And  when  even  this  sufficed 
not,  he  himself  went  with  him  and  bade  him  mark  the 
process  of  putrefaction  and  dissolution.  Then,  as  Kulla 
stood  with  heart  disinfatuated,  the  Exalted  One  sent  out  a 
glory,  producing  in  him  such  mindfulness  that  he  discerned 
the  lesson,  attained  first  jhana,  and  on  that  basis  develop¬ 
ing  insight,  won  arahantship. 

Reviewing  his  experience,  he  breathed  forth  these  verses, 
fiist  speaking  of  himself  (then  repeating  the  Master’s  words 
and  finally  adding  his  own  )  : 

Kulla  had  gone  to  where  the  dead  lie  still 
And  there  he  saw  a  woman’s  body  cast, 

Untended  in  the  field,  the  food  of  worms.2  (393) 

1  Who  towards  .  .  .  showeth  (not)  is,  literally  rendered :  For  whom 
with  respect  to  his  co-religionists  reverence  does  (not)  exist,  or  is  not 
found,  or  seen  (cf  Kathavatthu  Commentary  on  n'upalabbhati , 
p.  8;  Dialogues ,  ii.  166,  ‘is  [not]  found’).  The  occasion  of  these 
verses  as  described  by  Dhammapala  above,  let  alone  the  religious 
consequences  invoked,  justify  my  differing  here  from  Dr.  Neumann’s 
rendering.  For  the  similes,  cf.  CCVII.  Cult  and  school  =  sasana, 

2  Cf  CXCVIII. 


212 


CCXIII.  KULLA 


‘  Behold  the  foul  compound,  Kulla,  diseased, 
Impure,1  dripping,  exuding,  pride  of  fools.’2  (394) 
Grasping  the  mirror  of  the  holy  Norm, 

To  win  the  vision  by  its  lore  revealed, 

I  saw  reflected  there,  without,  within, 

The  nature  of  this  empty  fleeting  frame.  (395) 

As  is  this  body,  so  that  one  was  once, 

And  as  that  body,  so  will  this  one  be.3 
And  as  it  is  beneath,  so  is’t  above, 

And  as  it  is  above,  so  is’t  beneath.  (396) 

As  in  the  daytime,  so  is  it  at  night, 

And  as’t  was  once,  so  will’t  hereafter  be, 

And  as’t  will  be,  so  was  it  in  the  past.  (397) 

Not  music’s  fivefold  wedded  sounds  4  can  yield 
Such  charm  as  comes  o’er  him  who  with  a 
heart 

Intent  and  calm  rightly  beholds  the  Norm !  (398) 

These  verses  were  the  Thera’s  confession  of  anna. 


CCXIV 

Malunkya’s  Son.6 

Beborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthl  as  the  son  of  the 
King  of  Kosala’s  valuer,6  his  mother  was  named  Malunkya, 
and  he  became  known  by  her  name.  When  he  was  come 
of  age  his  naturally  religious  disposition  prevailed,  and  he 
left  the  world  as  a  Wandering  ascetic.  Then,  on  hearing 
the  Master  teach,  he  entered  the  Order,  and  in  due  course 
won  sixfold  abhinna.  Visiting  his  home  out  of  compassion 

1  Cf.  Sisters, x ix. ;  DJiammajpada  Commy.,  iii.,  p.  113/.,  on  verse  150. 

2  Complacent  in  calling  it  ‘  I,’  ‘  mine  ’  (Commentary). 

3  Cf.  Sutta-Nijpdta,  verse  202. 

4  Cf.  p.  175,  n.  1 ;  and  verse  1071. 

5  A  second  poem  of  this  Thera  is  given  as  CCLII.  The  Thera  is 
met  with  in  Sayy.,  iv.  72  (a  Sutta  identical  with  the  latter  poem),  and 
presumably  in  Ang.,  ii.  248,  and  Majjh.,  i.,  Suttas  63,  64. 

6  Agghdipanika.  Cf.  XX.  :  agghdpani ;  Jdt.,  i.,  No.  5. 


ccxiv.  malunkya’s  son 


213 


for  his  kinsfolk,  these  entertained  him  with  great  display 
of  hospitality,  seeking  to  allure  him  back,  and  saying : 
‘  With  this  wealth  that  belongs  to  you,  you  could  support 
a  family  and  do  good  works.’ 

But  the  Thera,  unfolding  his  disposition,  said  : 

Is  1  there  a  man  who  careless,  heedless  dwells, 
Craving  in  him  will  like  a  creeper  grow. 

He  hurries  hankering  from  birth  to  birth,2 
In  quest  of  fruit  like  ape  in  forest  tree.  (399) 
Whom  she  doth  overcome,  —  the  shameful 
jade, 

Craving,  the  poisoner  of  all  mankind, — 3 
Grow  for  him  griefs  as  rank  as  jungle-grass.  (400) 
But  he  who  doth  her  down,  —  the  shameful 
jade, 

Hard  to  outwit, — from  him  griefs  fall  away 
As  from  the  lotus  glides  the  drop  of  dew.  (401) 
This  word  to  you,  as  many  as  are  here4 
Together  come  :  May  all  success  be  yours  ! 

Dig  up  the  root  of  craving,  as  ye  were 
Bent  on  the  quest  of  sweet  usira  root. 

Let  it  not  be  with  you  that,  ye  the  reed, 

Mara  the  stream,  he  break  you  o’er  and  o’er  !  (402) 
Bring  ye  the  Buddha- Word  to  pass  ;  let  not 
This  moment  of  the  ages  pass  you  by  ! 

That  moment  lost,  men  mourn  in  misery.5  (403) 

1  Dhammapada ,  pp.  334-337. 

2  Hurahuranj ,  in  the  Commentary,  seems  to  mean  both  ‘hanker- 
ingly’  and  ‘from  birth  to  birth,’  the  latter  with  the  former  implied. 
See  JPTS,  1909,  p.  168. 

3  To  connect  visatti-ha  with  visarj  may  not  be  correct  etymo¬ 
logically.  Visatti  may  mean  very  powerful,  or  withdrawing  power, 
but  as  an  agency  we  should  almost  expect  vesattihd.  But  both 
Buddhaghosa  ( Atthasdlinl ,  p.  264)  and  Dhammapala  connect  the  word 
with  poison.  The  latter,  however,  adds  asattatd.  Cf.  Dhammapada 
Commentary  (Fausboll),  p.  409. 

*  Cf.  CLXXXII. 

5  Cf.  p.  162,  n.  3 ;  S.-Nipdta ,  verse  333  =  Dhammapada ,  verse  315. 


214 


CCXV.  SAPPADASA 


As  dust  [mixed  and  defiled],  is  carelessness ; 

And  dust-defilement  comes  through  carelessness. 
By  earnestness  and  by  the  Lore  ye  hear, 

Let  each  man  from  his  heart  draw  out  the 
spear.1  (404) 


CCXY  . 

Sappadasa. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Kapilavatthu  as  the  son 
of  the  King2  Suddhodana’s  chaplain,  he  was  named  Sap¬ 
padasa.  He  received  faith  on  the  occasion  of  the  Master’s 
visit  to  his  own  people,3  and  entered  the  Order.  Over¬ 
mastered  by  corrupt  habits  of  mind  and  character  (the 
kilesa’s),  he  never  got  concentration  and  singleness  of 
mind.  This  finally  distressed  him  so  much  that  he  was 
about  to  commit  suicide,  when,  the  inward  vision  suddenly 
expanding,  he  attained  arahantship.  Confessing  anna  he 
said : 

Full  five  and  twenty  years  have  passed  since  I 
Had  left  the  world  and  in  the  Order  lived, 

And  yet  not  for  one  fingersnap  of  time 

Had  1  found  peace  [and  sanity4]  of  mind.  (405) 

Intent  and  single  vision  ne’er  I  won, 

Distraught  and  harassed  by  desires  of  sense  ; 

In  tears,  wringing  my  hands,  I  left  the  lodge.5  (406) 
Nay  now  I’ll  take  a  knife  or  else — For  what 
Is  life  to  me  ?  And  how  can  such  as  I, 

Who  by  my  life  the  training  have  denied, 

Do  better  than  set  term  to  it  and  die  ?  (407) 

So  then  I  came  and  with  a  razor  sat  me  down 
Upon  my  couch.  And  now  the  blade  was  drawn 
Across  my  throat  to  cut  the  artery.  .  .  .  (408) 

1  Sisters ,  verse  131.  Commentary,  hadayanissitay . 

2  Distinguished  by  the  Commentary  as  maharaja. 

3  See  CXXXIX.  4  Cetaso  samdddnay.  Corny. 

6  Corny. :  anupanikhhamiy.  bahi  nikkhanto. 


CCXVI.  KATIYANA 


215 


When  lo  !  in  me  arose  the  deeper  thought : 
Attention  to  the  fact  and  to  the  cause. 

The  misery  of  it  all  was  manifest ; 

Distaste,  indifference  the  mind  possessed,  (409) 
And  so  my  heart  was  set  at  liberty ! 

O  see  the  seemly  order  of  the  Norm  ! 

The  Threefold  Wisdom  have  I  made  my  own, 

And  all  the  Buddha  bids  us  do  is  done.1  (410) 

CCXVI 

Katiyana. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthi  as  the 
son  of  a  brahmin  of  the  Kosiya  family,2  but  was  named 
Katiyana  after  the  family  of  his  mother.  Seeing  his  friend 
Samannakani3  become  a  Thera,  he,  too,  entered  the  Order. 
While  at  his  studies  he  determined  to  discipline  himself  at 
night  as  to  sleep.  While  pacing  on  the  terrace  he  dozed, 
overcome  by  sleepiness,  and  fell  right  there  to  the  ground. 
The  Master,  seeing  what  had  happened,  went  himself,  and 
standing  above  him,  called  him  ‘Katiyana!’  He  thereat 
rose  up,  saluted,  and  stood  much  agitated.  Then  the 
Master  taught  him  the  Norm  thus : 

Rise  up,  rouse  thee,  Katiyana,  seat  thee  crosslegged.4 
Be  not  filled  with  drowsiness.  Watch  and  keep  vigil. 
Child  of  heedless  race,  let  not  the  King  of  Mortals 
By  a  simple  trick  o’ercome  thee  self-indulgent.  (411) 
E’en  as  billow  sweeping  o’er  the  mighty  ocean 
So  may  round  of  birth  and  age  o’erwhelm  and  drown 
thee. 

See  that  thou  dost  make  thyself  an  isle  of  safety,5 
For  nought  else  is  there  may  serve  thee  as  a 
refuge.  (412) 

1  =  verses  269/.  Cf.  CXV.,  CCV. 

2  Cf  CCIX. 

3  See  XXXV. 

4  So  the  Commentary  as  the  prescribed  posture  for  meditation. 

5  Cf.  Sutta-Nipata,  501. 


216 


CCXVI.  K  ATI  YANA 


Lo !  for  thee  the  Master  hath  prepared  this  Right 
Way, 

Past  all  bonds  and  past  all  fear  of  birth  and  dying. 

Be  thou  diligent  when  night  is  young,  and  after ; 
Strive  with  all  thy  might,  and  strenuous  make  thy 
study.  (413) 

Loose  all  earlier  ties  ;  live  as  befits  a  brother, 

Robed  in  yellow  cloak,  by  razor  shaved,  and  almsfed. 
Be  not  fain  for  pastimes,  nor  to  lengthened  slumbers 1 
Be  addicted.  Contemplate,  0  Katiyana  !  (414) 

Concentrate,  conquer,  O  Katiyana  !  Make  thee 
Adept  in  the  path  to  sure  salvation  leading. 

Hast  thou  won  the  ultimate  purification, 

Thou  shalt  reach  the  Going-out,  as  flame  in  water.  (415) 
Light  of  feeble  ray  is  as  a  wind-torn  creeper. 

So  do  thou,  clansman  of  Indra,2  clutching  nothing, 
Shake  off  Mara.  Cleans’d  of  passion  for  sensations, 
Wait  thine  hour,  e’en  here  in  holy  coolness  dwel¬ 
ling.  (416) 

Thus  aided  by  the  Master’s  homily  to  win  the  Nibbana 
wherein  is  no  residual  base  of  rebirth,  the  Thera  developed 
insight  and  attained  arahantship.  Thereafter  he  uttered 
the  verses  as  taught  by  the  Master  in  confessing  anna. 


CCXYII 

Migaj  ala. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthi  as  a  son  of  the 
great  lay-lady  Yisakha,3  he  would  often  go  to  the  Yihara 

1  The  Cy.  (Br.)  supplies  the  other  ca  after  nidday. 

2  Kosiyagotta.  Kosiya  is  one  of  the  god  Indra’s  names.  The 
application  of  the  simile  of  the  light  (lamp)  is  not,  I  venture  to  think,  that 
Mara’s  death-torch  was  to  be  extinguished  by  Kosiya  ( cf .  Neumann), 
but  that  his  own  rebirth- ‘fire,’  grown  ‘cool  ’  and  low,  was  in  dying  out 
to  checkmate  Mara’s  designs  for  his  rebirth. 

3  See  Sisters,  p.  16  n. 


CCXVII.  MIGAJALA 


217 


to  hear  the  Norm.  Finally  he  entered  the  Order,  and 
in  due  course  won  arahantship.  Confessing  anna  he 
said  : 

Well  taught  it  is  by  Him  who  seeth  all— 

The  Buddha,  offspring  of  the  sun’s  high  race  1 — 
Through  it  all  bonds  are  bygone  things,  through  it 
All  constant  rolling  on  2  is  razed  away  ;  (417) 

It  leadeth  on  and  out,3  it  beareth  o’er, 

Through  it  the  root  of  craving  withers  up  ; 
Cutting  the  poison-root,  our  tragic  doom, 

It  bringeth  us  to  evil’s  utter  end  ;4  (418) 

By  severing  the  root  of  ignorance, 

It  breaks  in  pieces  Kamma’s  living  car  ;5 
It  hurls  the  bolt  of  insight  on  the  goods 
That  dower  consciousnesses  at  rebirth  ;6  (419) 

The  truth  ’neath  all  our  sentience  laying 
bare, 

And  from  all  fevered  grasping  setting  free, 
Bevealer  ’tis  to  us,  by  knowledge  given, 

Of  rebirth  as  a  fiery  pit  of  coals  ; 7  (420) 

Of  mighty  properties,  far-reaching,  deep, 

Averter  of  decay  and  death  to  come 
Such  is  the  Ariyan,  the  Eightfold  Path, 
Assuager  of  all  ill,  auspicious,  blest.8  (421) 

Action  it  knoweth, — what  the  act  doth  mean, — 
And  fruit  of  action  as  the  fruit  indeed. 

1  See  XXVI.,  CXXXIX. 

2  Sabbavattavindsano,  ‘  because  it  destroys  the  rolling  on  of  the 
results  of  corrupt  karma.’  Cy. 

3  Niyydniko.  Cf.  Bud.  Psy .,  p.  82,  n.  2. 

4  Nibbuti  =  nibbana — i.e.,  of  all  kamnma  and  kilesa.  Cy. 

5  Kammayanta  :  attabhdvayanta.  Cy. 

6  Vinndndnarj  pariggalie :  kdmabhavddisu  yathdsakakammund 
vinndtiagahane  upatthite.  Cy.  Cf.  Dialogues ,  i.  813,  n.  1. 

7  Cf.  Majjhima ,  i.  74.  Here  rebirth  in  purgatory  is  specified;  the 
simile  is  elsewhere  ( ibid .,  p.  365)  applied  to  sensuous  desires,  by  which 
rebirth  is  incurred. 

8  Two  words  for  sivo  (cf.  Siva,  the  later  popular  Hindu  deity). 


218 


CCXVIII.  JENTA 


Showing  a  vision  by  the  light  of  truth 
Of  things  as  come  to  be  by  way  of  cause. 

Yea,  to  the  mighty  Haven  1  doth  it  wend  ; 

High  peace  it  brings  and  bliss  lies  at  the  end.2  (422) 

Thus  the  Thera,  showing  in  manifold  ways  the  Ariyan 
Norm,  declared  how  he  himself  had  followed  it  as  confes¬ 
sion  of  anna. 


CCXVIII 

Jenta. 

(The  Chaplain's  Son.)3 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthi  as  the  son  of  the 
King  of  Kosala’s  chaplain,  he  was  named  Jenta.  When 
grown  up  he  became  intoxicated  with  his  advantages  of 
birth,  wealth,  and  position,  despising  where  he  should 
have  honoured,  and  stiff  with  pride.  One  day  he  approached 
the  Master,  who  was  teaching  in  the  midst  of  a  great  company, 
and  he  thought :  *  If  the  Samana  Gotama  will  first  address 
me,  I  will  also  speak  ;  I  will  not  voluntarily  address  him.’ 
Thus  the  Exalted  One  not  addressing  him,  and  he  through 
pride  not  speaking  either,  he  showTed  the  motive  for  his 
coming  as  he  stood  there.  Him  the  Exalted  One  then 
addressed  in  a  verse : 

To  dicell  on  proud ,  vain  fancies  is  not  well . 

Cultivate ,  brahmin ,  that  which  profiteth. 

The  good  ichich  thou  dost  seek  in  coming  here — 

That ,  and  that  only  shouldst  thou  dwell  upon. 

1  Khema  (ver.  32, 227, 310).  ‘  Haven  ’  implies  here  its  primary  mean¬ 
ing  of  ‘  safe  place,’  or  ‘hold,’  and  not  anything  marine  (cf.  verse  415). 

2  The  whole  of  this  most  eloquent  gatha  is  a  rosary  of  adjectival 
terms  and  phrases  in  praise  of  the  Dhamma,  a  connexion  confirmed 
by  the  Commentary.  This  is  rightly  indicated  in  the  Oldenberg  text 
by  the  absence  of  stops.  By  Dr.  Neumann  the  epithets  are  twisted  to 
apply  to  the  Buddha — twisted  from  the  instrumental,  in  which  case 
they  would  have  stood,  to  the  nominative.  The  English  rendering 
mocks  the  glowing  poetry  of  the  original. 

3  To  distinguish  him  from  the  Jenta  of  CXI. 


CCXVIII.  JENTA 


219 


Jenta  thinking,  ‘He  knows  my  thoughts!’  was  greatly 
drawn  to  him,  and  fell  at  his  feet,  paying  the  highest 
degree  of  homage.  And  he  asked  the  Master,  saying  : 

For  whom  is  one  to  cultivate  no  pride  ? 

Whom  should  one  honour  ?  Whom  should  one 
revere  ? 

To  tohom  if  one  show  reverence  is  it  well  ? 

To  him  the  Exalted  One  : 

For  mother  and  for  father  too ,  likewise 
For  eldest  brother ,  for  the  teacher ,  for 
The  brahmin  and  for  them  of  yellow  robe  : 

For  these  is  one  to  cultivate  no  pride , 

These  should  one  honour ,  these  should  one 
revere , 

To  these  if  one  show  reverence  it  is  well. 

The  arahants  cool ,  adept ,  sane ,  immune , 

For  whom  pride  perished  as  they  crossed  the 
goal j1 

To  them  beyond  all  others  homage  pay. 

Jenta  by  that  teaching  became  a  Stream-winner,  entered 
the  Order,  and  in  due  course  won  arahantship.  Thereupon 
in  celebrating  his  achievement  he  thus  declared  anna : 

Infatuated  with  my  birth,  my  wealth 
And  influence,  with  the  beauty  of  my  form 
Intoxicated,  thus  I  led  my  life.  (423) 

O’ermuch  I  fancied  none  was  like  to  me. 

A  poor  young  fool  by  overweening  spoilt, 
Stubborn  with  pride,  posing  and  insolent.  (424) 
Mother  and  father,  ay,  and  others  too 
Claiming  respect  and  honour,  never  one 
Did  I  salute,  discourteous,  stiff  with  pride.  (425) 

1  Mdna  is  one  of  the  last  ‘  fetters  ’  to  be  broken  in  the  fourth  or 
highest  path  leading  to  arahantship.  As  Stream-winner  he  enters  the 
first  path.  Cf.  also  Bud.  Psy .,  p.  298,  n.  3. 


220 


CCXIX.  SUMANA 


Then  saw  I  Him  the  Guide,  Leader  Supreme, 

The  peerless  Chief  mong  drivers  of  mankind, 

In  glory  shining  like  the  sun,  with  all 
The  company  of  brethren  in  his  train.  (426) 
Casting  away  conceit  and  wanton  pride, 

A  pious  gladness  filling  all  my  heart, 

Lowly  I  rendered  homage  with  the  head 
To  Him  among  all  creatures  Best  and  Chief.  (427) 
Well  extirpated  now  and  put  away 
Is  both  o’erweening  and  hypocrisy ; 

The  what  and  that  4 1  am  ’  is  snapt  in  twain, 

Yea,  every  form  of  self-conceit  is  slain.1  (428) 


CCXIX 

Sumana. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  he  took  birth  in  the  family 
of  a  certain  lay-disciple  who  had  become  the  lay-attendant 
of  the  venerable  Thera  Anuruddha.2  Now  that  layman’s 
children  till  then  had  died  young.  And  the  father  said  :  ‘  If 
yet  one  more  son  is  born  to  me,  I  will  have  him  ordained 
by  the  Thera.  After  ten  months  a  healthy  boy  was  born 
to  him,  and  accordingly,  when  the  child  was  seven  years 
old,  he  was  ordained.  And  from  the  ripeness  of  his  in¬ 
sight,  it  was  not  long  before  he  acquired  sixfold  abhinna, 
waiting  the  while  upon  the  Thera.  Taking  a  jar  to  fetch  him 
water,  Sumana  through  iddhi-power  came  to  the  Anotatta 
Lake.3  And  a  wicked  serpent-king,  coiled  about  the  lake, 
reared  its  great  hood  aloft  and  would  not  suffer  him  to  get 
water.  Then  Sumana  took  the  shape  of  a  garucla-bird4  and 

1  Nine  forms,  says  the  Commentary.  These  are  enumerated  in  the 
Vibhanga ,  p.  389  /.  In  Buddhism  mana  comprises  all  intrusions  of 
the  ego.  This  as  entity  was  a  myth,  and  was  not  to  be  set  in  rivalry 
over  against  the  myth  in  one’s  neighbour. 

2  See  CCLYI. 

3  One  of  seven  mythical  lakes  in  the  Himalaya  regions  ( Vinaya 
Texts ,  i.  124;  Milinda,  ii.  137). 

4  The  ‘  roc  ’-bird  of  India. 


CCXIX.  SUMANA 


221 


overcame  the  serpent,  and  flew  back  with  the  water  to  the 
Thera.  And  the  Master,  seated  in  Jeta  Grove,  saw  him  as 
he  went,  and  called  Sariputta  to  see,  praising  him  in  the 
four  verses  below. 

Now  Sumana,  in  testifying  to  anna,  added  those  verses 
to  his  own  as  follows  : 

AVhen  newly  made  a  brother  seven  years  old, 

By  supernormal  power  I  overcame 
The  wondrous  potence  of  the  serpent  king,  (429) 
Whenas  1  water  for  my  teacher’s  use 
From  the  great  lake  of  Anotatta  fetched. 

Me  coming  thus  the  Master  saw  and  spake  :  (430) 

See,  Sariputta,  how  the  little  lad 
Holding  his  jar  of  water  comes  along, 

Rapt  all  his  being,  utterly  intent.  (431) 

Noble  his  carriage  on  his  gracious  quest, 

And  well-matured  in  supernormal  power, 

This  novice  of  our  Anuruddha’s  band.  (432) 

By  trainer  of  high  breeding  highly  bred, 

By  the  proficient  made  throughly  expert, 

By  perfect  competence  made  competent, 

By  Anuruddha  taught  and  disciplined  :  (433) 

He  having  won  the  highest  peace  and  good 
And  realized  the  influctuate,  even  he — 

This  novice  Sumana — [would  hide  his  power] 

And  thus  :  Let  no  man  know  me  !  doth 
desire.1  (434) 

1  Sumana  might  well  be  the  Sumana  of  CCI.  if  Anuruddha  were 
the  uncle,  and  it  may  be  another  case  of  a  bifurcate  legend.  The 
name,  however,  is  not  unusual.  This  Sumana  is  possibly  the  venerable 
Thera  ‘  from  the  West,’  who,  with  three  others  and  four  from  the  East, 
presided  at  the  Council  of  Yesall  a  century  after  the  Buddha’s  death 
(Vinaya  Texts ,  iii.  407).  There  was  anyway  a  tradition  that,  of 
these  eight  Theras  two— Sumana  and  Yasabhagami— were  pupils  of 
Anuruddha,  and  ‘had  seen  the  Tathagata  ( Dtjpavaysci ,  iv.  48  ;  v.  24). 


222 


CCXX.  NHATAKA-MUNI 


CCXX 

Nhataka-muni.1 

Eeborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Rajagaha  in  a  brahmin 
clan,  and  well  educated  in  Yedic  lore,  he  became  known  by 
the  mark  and  order  of  a  graduate  as  Nhataka,  the  bath- 
graduate.  Becoming  an  ascetic,  he  dwelt  in  a  forest  glade 
three  leagues  from  Rajagaha,  living  on  wild  rice  and 
worshipping  fire. 

Now  the  Master,  seeing  the  conditions  of  arahantship 
shining  within  his  heart  like  a  lamp  in  a  jar,  came  to  his 
hermitage.  He,  filled  with  pleasure  thereat,  placed  before 
him  food  prepared  in  his  own  way.  The  Exalted  One  ate 
it;  and  so  three  days  went  by.  On  the  fourth  day  the 
Exalted  One  said  :  ‘  You  who  are  of  such  extreme  delicacy, 
how  can  you  support  life  on  this  food  ?’  And  thus  com¬ 
menting  on  saintly  content,  he  taught  him  the  Norm. 
And  the  ascetic  thereupon  from  Stream-winner  became 
arahant.  The  Exalted  One  confirmed  him  therein  and 
went.  But  he,  continuing  to  dwell  there,  fell  ill  of  cramp. 
The  Master  went,  and  with  kindness  asked  after  his  health  : 

Thou  who  foredone  with  cramping  pains 
Dwell’ st  in  the  jungle,  in  the  woods, 

Thy  range  confined,  in  hardship  dire, 

Tell  me,  bhikkhu,  how  wilt  thou  live  ?  (435) 

Then  the  Thera  : 

With  bliss  and  rapture ’s  flooding  wave 
This  mortal  frame  is  all  suffused. 

Though  hard  and  rough  what  I  endure, 

Yet  will  I  in  the  jungle  dwell.2  (436) 

1  There  is  a  close  connexion  between  the  brahmin  graduate’s  and 
our  knight’s  sacramental  bath.  A  Nhataka  might  not  unfairly  be 
called  a  ‘C.B.,’  Companion  of  the  Bath. 

2  Cf.  Yakkali,  CCV. 


CCXX.  NHATAKA-MUN1 


223 


Wisdom’s  seven  branches  practising, 
The  Powers  five,  the  Forces  too,1 
Rapt  to  ethereal  heights  of  thought, 
So  will  I  in  the  jungle  dwell.  (437) 
From  all  corrupting  thoughts  set  free, 
With  heart  all  pure  and  undefiled, 
Often  to  contemplation  given, 

So  will  I  in  the  jungle  dwell.  (438) 
And  all  the  intoxicants  that  once, 
Within,  without,  beset  my  life, 

Hewn  and  cast  out  are  one  and  all, 
Never  to  rise  for  me  again.  (439) 

The  factors  five  are  understood,2 
Persisting  yet  with  severed  root. 

The  end  of  sorrow  now  is  won, 

And  all  rebirth  for  me  is  done.  (440) 


CCXXI 

Brahmadatta. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthi  as  a  son  of  the 
King  of  Kosala,  and  named  Brahmadatta,  he  witnessed  the 
majesty  of  the  Buddha  at  the  Jeta  Grove  inauguration, 
entered  the  Order  because  he  believed,  and  in  due  course 
acquired  sixfold  abhinna,  together  with  thorough  grasp  of 
the  letter  and  meaning  of  the  Norm. 

One  day  as  he  went  round  for  alms,  a  brahmin  abused 
him.  The  Thera  heard  in  silence  and  went  on  with  his 
business.  The  brahmin  again  reviled  him,  and  people 
commented  on  the  Thera’s  silence.  Whereupon  Brahma¬ 
datta  taught  them,  saying : 

Whence  rises  wrath  for  him  who  void  of  wrath 
Holds  on  ‘  the  even  tenor  of  his  way,’ 

Self-tamed,  serene,  by  highest  insight  free  ?  (441) 
Worse  of  the  two  is  he  who,  when  reviled, 


1  Cf.  Compendium,  pp.  180,  /,  d,  e. 


2  =  CXX. 


224 


CCXXI.  BRAHMADATTA 


Reviles  again.  Who  doth  not,  when  reviled, 
Revile  again,  a  twofold  victory  wins.1  (442) 

Both  of  the  other  and  himself  he  seeks 
The  good  ;  for  he  the  others  angry  mood 
Doth  understand  and  soothe  [checking  him¬ 
self].  (443) 

Him  who  of  both  is  the  physician,  since 
Himself  he  healeth  and  the  other  too, 

Folk  deem  a  fool,  they  knowing  not  the  Norm.  (444) 

Then  the  reviling  brahmin,  hearing  these  words,  was 
both  distressed  and  glad  of  heart,  and  besought  the  Thera’s 
forgiveness.  Yea,  he  took  Orders  under  him,  and  was 
taught  the  exercise  of  meditating  on  love  towards  others, 
the  Thera  thus  arming  him  against  obsession  by  anger : 

If  anger  rise  in  thee,  then  think  upon 
The  Figure  of  the  Saw ;  and  if  arise 
Craving  t’  indulge  thyself,  remember  thou 
The  Parable  of  how  they  ate  the  Child.  (445) 

If,  lusting  for  new  lives  in  heaven  and  earth, 

Thy  heart  run  wild,  O  check  and  curb  it  swift 
By  mindfulness,  as  ’twere  the  beast  men  find 
In  young  corn  grazing  trespasser,  and  bind.2  (446) 


CCXXII 

Sirimanda. 

•  • 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Suijsumaragira  in  a 
brahmin  family,  he  entered  the  Order  through  faith  got  on 
hearing  the  Master  teaching  in  the  Bhesakala  Wood.3  One 
feast-day,  while  he  was  seated  where  the  Patimokkha  was 

1  Lit.,  reviles  back  the  reviler.  Cf.  I.  Pet.  ii.  23  ;  Dhammapada , 
verse  133. 

2  These  three  parables  occur  in  three  discourses  ascribed  to  the 
Buddha  :  Majjh.,  i.  129  ;  Sayyutta,  ii.  98;  iv.  196.  A  similar  reference 
to  similes  from  the  Suttas  is  made  by  Sumedha  ( Sisters ,  p.  173). 

3  Cf.  XVIII. 


CCXXII.  SIR1MANDA 

•  • 


225 


to  be  recited  at  the  end  of  the  recitation  of  the  introduc¬ 
tion1  ...  ‘for  [a  fault]  when  declared  shall  be  light  to 
him,’  he  pondered  on  the  advantage  gained  by  the  con¬ 
fession  of  faults  concealed,  and  thereupon  exclaimed  with 
eager  interest  and  gladness  :  ‘  Oh,  how  utterly  pure  is  the 

rule  of  the  Master  !’  And  so  expanding  insight  he  attained 
arahantship.  Reviewing  the  course  thereto  with  a  glad 
heart,  he  admonished  the  brethren : 

Heavily  falls  the  rain  of  guilt  on  fault 
Concealed ;  less  heavy  where  the  fault  lies  bare.2  (447) 
By  death  the  world  is  held  enslaved  ;  by  age 
And  by  decay  ’tis  shrouded  and  beset, 

Pierced  by  the  dart  of  craving  evermore, 

By  itch  of  pestering  desires  assailed.  (448) 

By  death  the  world  is  held  enslaved  ;  by  age 
And  by  decay  escorted,  guarded  sure,3 
Without  a  refuge,  everlastingly 

Struck  as  by  thief  with  bludgeon  and  with 
sword.4  (449; 

Like  forest  fires  behold  them  drawing  nigh  : — 

Death  and  disease,  decay,  dread  trinity, 

Whom  to  confront  no  strength  sufficeth,  yea, 

No  swiftness  aught  avails  to  flee  away.  (450) 

Make  thou  the  day  not  futile,  not  in  vain, 

Whether  it  be  by  little  or  by  much. 

For  every  day  and  night 5  that  thou  dost  waste, 

By  so  much  less  thy  life  remains  to  live.  (451) 
Whether  thou  walk  or  stand  or  sit  or  lie, 

For  thee  the  final  day  of  life  draws  nigh ; 

No  time  hast  thou  to  dally  heedlessly.6  (452) 

1  The  Nidana.  See  Vinaya  Texts ,  i.  1  /. 

2  This  verse  is,  in  Vinaya  Texts ,  iii.  305,  ascribed  to  the  Buddha. 

'  Guilt,’  ‘  fault  ’  are  glosses,  the  context  there  and  the  Commentary 
here  justifying  the  application  of  the  simile. 

3  Occurs  in  Sayy .,  i.  40.  4  Reading  satthadando. 

5  Lit.,  ‘  night  ’  only.  The  Indian  reckoned  as  much  by  ‘  nights  ’  as 
by  ‘  days.’ 

6  Cf.  Sisters ,  verse  95. 


15 


226 


CCXXIII.  SABBAKAMA 


CCXXIII 

Sabbakama. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age,  after  the  Exalted  One  had 
passed  away,  at  Yesali  in  a  noble  clan,  and  named  Sabba¬ 
kama,  he,  when  he  was  come  of  age,  gave  gifts  and  posses¬ 
sions  to  his  kinsfolk,  and  following  his  religious  inclination 
left  the  world,  taking  orders  under  the  Treasurer  of  the 
Norm.1  In  course  of  his  studies  he  came  back  to  Yesali 
with  his  instructor  and  visited  his  family.  And  his  former 
wife,  afflicted,  lean,  in  sorry  array  and  tears,  greeted  him 
and  stood  by.  Seeing  her  thus,  affection  led  by  pity  arose 
in  him,  and  losing  the  deeper  view7  in  the  present  object, 
carnal  feeling  came  over  him.  Then  like  a  high-bred  horse 
at  the  touch  of  the  whip,  anguish  arose,  and  he  departed 
to  the  charnel  field  to  learn  the  lesson  of  Foul  Things. 
Thereby  jhana  supervening,  he  expanded  insight  and  won 
arahantship.  Now  his  father-in-law  brought  his  daughter 
decked  out  once  more  in  finery  to  the  Yihara,  with  a  great 
retinue,  seeking  to  make  him  secede,  but  the  Thera  declared 
to  them  how  he  had  ejected  all  such  desires  as  follows : 

This  twaybased  thing,  impure,  malodorous, 

Full  of  foul  matter,  ebbing  thus  and  thus, 

Is  cherished  as  the  chief  of  all  our  care.2  (453) 

As  hidden  deer  by  craft,  as  fish  by  hook, 

As  ape  by  pitch,  so  is  the  world  ensnared.  (454) 

Sights,  sounds  and  tastes,  odours  and  things  to 
touch, 

That  please  and  charm,  the  fivefold  way  of 
sense : 

All  these  are  shown  combined  in  woman’s 
shape.  (455) 

1  Ananda.  Sabbakama  is  probably  the  SabbakamI  of  Vin.  Texts, 
iii.  404. 

2  =  Sutta-Nipdta,  i.  11,  13.  My  third  line  expands  the  word 
patihlrati  (for  °hiriyati). 


CCXXIII.  SABBAKAMA 


227 


The  worldlings,  who  with  heart  inflamed  pursue 
And  woo  her,  swell  the  dreadful  field  of  death 1 
And  make  accumulation  of  rebirth.  (456) 

But  he  who  shuns  it  all,  as  with  the  foot 
The  serpent’s  head  is  shunned,  he,  vigilant, 

Doth  circumvent  this  poisoner  of  the  world.2  (457) 
And  I  who  evil  saw  in  sense-desires 
And  in  renunciation  safety,  lo  ! 

Detached  from  all  that  worldly  aims  commend, 

Of  all  th’  intoxicants  have  made  an  end.3  (458) 

1  Cf.  Sisters ,  verse  502  ;  Udana,  vi.  8 ;  Vin.  Texts ,  iii.  890. 

2  Craving  (Cy.).  Cf.  verses  400,  401. 

3  Cf.  verse  122. 


CANTO  VII 

PSALMS  OF  SEVEN  VERSES 


CCXXIV 

Sundara-Samudda. 

Bebokn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Bajagaha,  as  the  son  of  a 
very  wealthy  councillor,  he  was  named  Samudda.  And 
because  of  his  beauty  he  became  known  as  Sundara- 
Samudda.1  In  the  prime  of  his  youth  he  saw  the  majesty 
of  the  Buddha  at  the  festival  of  his  coming  to  Rajagaha, 
and  through  faith  and  his  native  inclination  he  left  the 
world  for  the  Order.  Entrusted  with  a  message  he  went 
from  Bajagaha  to  SavatthI  and  there  stayed  with  a  virtuous 
friend,  learning  how  to  practise  himself  in  insight.  Now 
his  mother  at  Bajagaha,  seeing  other  councillors  sons  and 
their  wives  dressed  in  their  best  enjoying  themselves  at  a 
festival,  thought  of  her  son  and  wept.  And  a  certain 
courtesan  to  comfort  her  offered  to  go  and  entice  him  back. 
The  mother  promised,  if  she  would  do  so,  and  he  were  to 
marry  her,  to  make  her  mistress  of  the  family,  and  gave 
her  many  gifts.  Well  attended,  she  went  to  SavatthI,  and 
stopping  at  a  house  where  the  Thera  came  day  after  day 
on  his  alms  round,  she  caused  him  to  be  carefully  attended 
to,  showing  herself  decked  and  adorned  and  wearing  golden 
slippers.  And  one  day,  slipping  these  off  at  the  house  door, 

1  Sundara-Samud’da  =  beautiful  sea.  Samudda  does  not  play  a 
part  elsewhere  in  the  Canon,  but  his  soubriquet  only  appears  as  the 
name  of  a  bhikkhu  of  Rajagaha  cited  in  the  Vinaya ,  or  type  of 
bhikkhu  who  underwent  similar  St.  Anthony’s  ordeals  ( Vinaya , 
iii.  36). 


228 


CCXX1V.  SUNDARA-SAMUDDA 


229 


she  saluted  him  with  clasped  hands  as  he  passed  and 
invited  him  in  with  seductive  air.  Then  the  Thera,  a 
worldly  thought  fluttering,  resolved  then  and  there  to  make 
a  supreme  effort,  and  so  standing,  conjured  up  meditation 
and  acquired  sixfold  abhinna.  Concerning  this  it  is  said  : 

Adorned  and  clad  to  make  a  gallant  show, 
Crowned  with  a  wreath  and  decked  with  many 
gems, 

Her  feet  made  red  with  lac,  with  slippers  dight, 

A  woman  of  the  town  accosted  me,  (459) 

Doffing  her  slippers,  greeting  hands-to-head, 

With  soft,  sweet  tones  and  opening  compli¬ 
ment  :  (460) 

‘  So  young,  so  fair,  and  hast  thou  left  the 
world — 

Stay  here  within  my  Rule  and  Ordinance. 

Take  thou  thy  fill  of  human  pleasures.  See, 

’Tis  I  will  give  thee  all  the  means  thereto. 

Nay,  ’tis  the  truth  that  I  am  telling  thee. 

Or  if  thou  doubt,  I’ll  bring  thee  fire  and 
swear.1  (461) 

When  thou  and  I  are  old,  we  both  of  us 
Will  take  our  staff  to  lean  upon,  and  so 
We  both  will  leave  the  world  and  win  both 
ways.’ 2  (462) 

Seeing  that  public  woman  making  plea, 

And  proffering  obeisance  gaily  decked 
In  brave  array  like  snare  of  Mara  laid,  (463) 

1  So  the  Commentary  :  ‘  If  you  do  not  believe  me,  I,  having  fetched 
fire,  will  make  the  fire-motived  oath.’  Cf.  Laws  of  Manu ,  viii.  114, 
115  ( SBE ,  xxv.),  referring  to  an  ordeal  by  fire  for  testing  veracity. 
Or  only  an  invocation  of  fire  as  witness  to  the  oath  may  be  implied. 
Such  a  reading  is  less  forced  than  Dr.  Neumann’s,  who  would  see  in 
‘  truth  ’  and  ‘  fire  ’  the  woman’s  travesty  of  religious  terms  to  suit  her 
own  ‘  Rule  ’  ( sdsana ). 

2  See  Laws  of  Manu ,  vi.,  §§  2,  3,  on  husband  and  wife  becoming 
hermits  together  when  both  were  old. 


230 


CCXXV.  LAKUNTAKA-BHADDIYA 


Thereat  arose  in  me  the  deeper  view : 

Attention  to  the  fact  and  to  the  cause. 

The  misery  of  it  all  was  manifest ; 

Distaste,  indifference  the  mind  possessed  ;  (464) 
And  so  my  heart  was  set  at  liberty. 

0  see  the  seemly  Order  of  the  Norm ! 

The  Threefold  Wisdom  have  I  made  my  own, 
And  all  the  Buddha  bids  us  do  is  done.  (465) 


CCXXV 

Lakuntaka-Bhaddiya. 

Reborn  in  the  time  of  our  Master  at  Savatthi  in  a 
wealthy  family,  he  was  named  Bhaddiya,  but  from  his 
extreme  shortness,  he  was  known  as  Lakuntaka  (Dwarf)- 
Bhaddiya.  Hearing  the  Master  preach,  he  entered  the 
Order,  and  becoming  learned  and  eloquent,  he  taught  others 
their  work  with  a  sweet  voice.  Now  on  a  festival -day,  a 
certain  woman  of  the  town,  driving  with  a  brahmin  in  a 
chariot,  saw  the  Thera  and  laughed,  showing  her  teeth.1 
The  Thera,  taking  that  row  of  teeth  as  an  object-sign, 
evoked  jhana,  and  on  that  basis  established  insight  and 
became  a  Non-Returner.2  And  after  practising  mindful¬ 
ness  regarding  the  body,3  admonished  by  the  Captain  of  the 
Norm,4  he  was  established  in  arahantship.  Later  he  thus 
confessed  anna : 

Beyond  the  gardens  of  Ambataka,5 
In  woodland  wild,  craving  and  craving’s  root 
Withdrawn,  and  rapt  in  deepest  reverie, 

There  happy  sits  fortunate  Bhaddiya.  (466) 

1  Someone’s  teeth  proved  equally  efficacious  for  Thera  Maha  Tissa 
of  Ceylon.  See  Atthasdlini,  p.  200;  Bud.  Psy .,  p.  70  n. 

The  grade  of  salvation  next  below  the  arahant,  in  which  final 
death  is  to  come  after  one  more  life  in  one  of  the  remoter  heavens. 

3  Cf.  Dialogues ,  ii.  328/.  4  Sariputta. 

This  park  is  probably  that  at  Macchikasanrla,  given  by  Citta  to 
the  Order  ( Dhammapada  Commentary ,  ii.  74). 


CCXXV.  LAKUNTAKA-BHADDIYA 


231 


And  some  are  charmed  by  cymbals,1  lutes  and 
drums, 

And  I  in  leafy  shadow  of  my  trees 

Do  dwell  entranced  by  the  Buddha’s  Rule.  (467) 

Let  hut  the  Buddha  grant  one  boon  to  me, 

And  if  that  boon  were  mine,  I’d  choose  for  all 
Perpetual  study  in  control  of  self.  (468) 

They  who  decry  me  for  my  shape,  and  they 
Who  listen  spell-bound  to  my  voice,  such  folk 
In  toils  of  lust  and  impulse  know  me  not.  (469) 
The  fool  hemmed  in  on  every  side  knows  not 
The  inner  life,  nor  sees  the  things  without, 

And  by  a  voice  forsooth  is  led  away.  (470) 

And  if  the  inner  life  he  knoweth  not, 

Yet  can  discern  the  things  that  are  without, 
Watching  alone  the  outer  fruits  that  come, 

He  also  by  a  voice  is  led  away.  (471) 

He,  who  both  understands  the  inner  life, 

And  doth  discern  the  things  that  are  without, 
Clear- visioned,  by  no  voice  is  led  away.2  (472) 


CCXXYI 

Bhadda. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthi  in  a  Coun¬ 
cillor’s  family,  as  the  child  of  hitherto  childless  parents,  to 

1  Mutingehi  means  a  variety  of  drum.  Our  drum  nomenclature  is 
insufficient  for  the  number  of  Indian  species  of  this  instrument.  The 
sweet  voice  probably  went  with  a  musical  ear,  and  this  is  why  he 
ranks  music  as  second  only  to  his  own  supreme  source  of  delight. 

2  Bhaddiya  (the  name  means  Felix,  Fortunatus ;  his  soubriquet 
distinguishes  him  from  the  other  Bhaddiya,  cf.  CCLIY.)  is  in  Ang., 
i.  25,  ranked  as  the  sweetest  voiced  among  all  the  brethren.  This 
distinction  is  said  to  have  been  the  result  of  an  aspiration  made  in 
past  ages,  before  Padumuttara  Buddha.  The  evolutionary  momentum 
of  this  caused  him  rebirth,  under  Yipassi  Buddha,  as  a  ‘variegated- 
feathered  cuckoo’  ( citta-pattakoMla ),  a  sweet  warbler  in  India.  The 
Cy.  does  not  allude  to  the  realization  of  his  wish,  but  the  poem  betrays 
it.  ‘  Study  in  control  of  self  ’ :  Myagatdsatiy. 


232 


CCXXVI.  BHADDA 


whom,  after  prayers  to  gods  and  the  like,  none  had  been 
born.  They  had  gone  to  the  Master  saying,  ‘  If,  your  rever¬ 
ence,  we  shall  get  a  child  we  will  offer  him  to  you  as  your 
servant.’  They  named  him  Bhadda  (Faustus),  and  when  he 
was  seven  years  old,  they  dressed  him  in  his  best,  and  led 
him  to  the  Master,  saying,  ‘  This,  your  reverence,  is  the 
child  we  got  after  asking  you  ;  we  deliver  him  to  you.’  The 
Master  bade  Ananda  ordain  him,  and  withdrew  to  the 
Fragrant  Chamber.  And  Ananda  instructed  him,  and  so 
ripe  was  in  him  the  efficient  cause  that,  while  studying,  even 
as  the  sun  rose,  he  conjured  up  contemplation,  and  acquired 
sixfold  abhinna. 

Now  the  Exalted  One  knew  what  had  happened,  and 
called,  *  Come,  Bhadda  !’  So  he  went,  saluting  the  Master 
with  clasped  hands.  This  was  his  ordination.  And  this 
Buddha-ordination,1  the  Thera,  beginning  with  his  birth, 
magnified  when  thus  confessing  anna : 

An  only  child  was  I,  to  mother  dear 
And  to  my  father  dear.  By  many  a  rite 
And  much  observance  was  I  gotten,  ay, 

And  many  prayers.  To  do  me  kindness 
they,  (473) 

My  good  desiring,  and  my  happiness, 

Conducted  me — father  and  mother  too — 

Into  the  presence  of  the  Buddha  blest.  (474) 

4  Hardly  hath  he  been  gotten,  this  our  child, 

And  he  is  delicate  and  softly  reared. 

Him  do  we  give,  O  Lord,  to  thee,  that  he 
May  wait  as  servant  on  the  Conqueror.’  (475) 
The  Master  took  me  unto  Him  and  thus 
To  Ananda  did  say  :  ‘  Quickly  admit 
This  child,  for  he  a  thoroughbred  shall  be.’  (476) 
And  then,  thus  sanctioning  my  coming  forth, 
The  Conqueror  withdrew  to  spend  the  night. 
And  as  the  sun  rose  up  out  of  the  dawn 
Lo  !  then  my  heart  was  set  at  liberty.  (477) 

1  Cf.  CXVII. ;  Sisters ,  verse  109,  n.  4. 


CCXXVII.  SOPAKA 


283 


Then  to  complete  his  work  the  Master,  roused 
From  quietude  :  4  Come,  Bhadda  !’  called  to  me  ; 
Thereby  to  me  was  ordination  given.  (478) 
Seven  were  my  years  when  I  was  thus  ordained. 
The  Threefold  Wisdom  have  I  made  my  own. 
Hail  to  the  seemly  order  of  the  Norm !  (479) 


CCXXYII 

Sopaka. 

Beborn  in  this  Buddha-age  to  a  pariah’s  wife,  he  was 
called,  according  to  his  birth,  Sopaka  (pariah).  Some  say 
he  was  born  in  a  trader’s  family.  This  is  contradicted  by 
the  Apadana  text  (paliya)  : 

When  to  my  last  birth  I  had  icon, 

Into  Sopaka-iromb  I  came. 

Four  months  after  birth  he  lost  his  father,  and  was 
maintained  by  his  uncle.  The  latter,  when  Sopaka  was 
seven  years  old,  was  bidden  by  his  own  ill-tempered  son  to 
kill  the  child.  So  he  took  him  to  the  charnel-field,  bound  his 
hands,  and  tied  him  by  the  neck  to  a  corpse,  thinking,  ‘  Let 
the  jackals  and  others  devour  him,’  for  he  was  not  able 
himself  to  kill  the  child,  who  had  come  to  his  last  rebirth. 
The  jackals  and  other  creatures  came,  and  the  child  at 
midnight  cried : 

O  what  the  fate  in  store  for  me , 

Or  who  to  the  orphan  lone  is  kin  ? 

In  midst  of  dreadful  deathfield  bound , 

Whom  shall  I  find  to  be  my  friend  $ 1 

The  Master,  at  that  hour  surveying  what  fellow-men  were 
redeemable,2  saw  the  conditions  of  arahantship  shining 

1  Ddyako ,  benefactor. 

2  Veneyya — lit.,  capable  of  being  led. 


234 


CCXXVII.  SOPAKA 


within  the  child’s  heart,  and  drew  his  attention  by  emitting 
a  glory,  saying : 

Come  then ,  Sopaka,  fear  thou  not ; 

Behold  the  Man-who-thus-hath-come  ! 

I,  even  I,  will  bea?'  thee  o'er , 

As  moon  comes  safe  from  Rahus  jaws.1 

The  boy  by  the  Buddha’s  power  broke  his  bonds,  and  at 
the  end  of  the  verse  stood,  a  Stream-winner,  before  the 
Fragrant  Chamber.2  Now  his  mother  sought  him,  and  the 
uncle  telling  her  nothing,  she  went  to  the  Exalted  One, 
thinking  ‘  the  Buddhas  know  all,  past,  future,  and  present.’ 
The  Master,  as  she  came,  hid  the  boy  by  iddhi,  and  to  her 
saying,  ‘  Lord,  I  cannot  find  my  son,  nevertheless  the 
Exalted  One  knows  what  he  is  doing  ?’  he  replied  : 

Sons  are  no  shelter  nor  father ,  nor  any  kinsfolk. 
For  one  oertaen  by  death ,  bloodbond  is  no 
refuge,  .  .  .3 

so  teaching  her  the  Norm.  She,  hearing,  became  a 
Stream-winner,  but  the  boy  an  arahant.  Then  the  Exalted 
One  withdrew  iddhi ,  and  she,  overjoyed,  beheld  her  son. 
Hearing  he  was  arahant,  she  suffered  him  to  leave  the  world, 
and  went  her  way.4 

Now  he  came  and  saluted  the  Master,  as  he  was  walking 
in  the  shade  of  the  Fragrant  Chamber,  and  followed  him. 
And  the  Exalted  One,  desiring  to  grant  him  ordination, 
asked  him  the  ten  questions  beginning:  ‘  What  is  the  one  ?’ 5 
He,  grasping  the  Master’s  intention,  supplied  the  answers, 
‘All  beings  are  sustained  by  food,’  etc.,  by  his  omniscience. 
Whence  the  name  of  the  *  Boy-Questions  ’  arose.  And  the 
Master,  satisfied  in  mind  by  his  replies,  ordained  him. 
All  this  the  Thera  set  forth  in  confessing  anna  thus : 

1  Cf.  Sisters,  Ps.  ii. 

2  The  Buddha’s  apartments  at  the  Jeta-Vihara. 

3  Dhammapada,  verses  288,  289;  to  Patacara,  cf.  Sisters,  p.  71. 

4  Cf.  the  similar  episode  in  Yasa’s  legend  (CXVII.'. 

5  Khuddaha  pdtlia.  Cf.  Sisters,  p.  66. 


CCXXVII.  SOPAKA 


235 


In  the  shade  upon  the  terrace  walking,  lo  !  the  Chief 
of  men. 

Thither  went  I,  in  His  presence  worshipping  the  Man 
of  men.  (480) 

Draped  my  robe  was  on  one  shoulder,  forth  my 
clasped  hands  were  stretched, 

In  the  footsteps  of  the  highest  of  all  beings  so  I 
walked.  (481) 

Then  He  asked  me  questions,  He  so  skilled  in  questions 
and  so  wise. 

And  unwavering,  unaffrighted  answered  there  the 
Master  I.  (482) 

He  The-thus-Come  then  commended  how  the  questions 
answered  were. 

And  the  brethren-host  surveying,  to  them  made  this 
matter  known  : —  (483) 

‘  Fortunate  are  they  of  Anga,  and  of  Magadha,  from 
whom 

Such  as  he  procureth  raiment,  food  and  lodging, 
medicine 

And  the  reverence  that  is  seemly,  yea,  they’re  happy!’ 
so  He  said.  (484) 

‘From  to-day  henceforth,  Sopaka,  come  to  see  Me 
when  thou  wilt. 

Our  discourse  alone,  Sopaka,  shall  thine  ordination 
be.’  (485) 

Seven  were  my  years  when  to  me  ordination  thus  was 
given. 

Now  I  bear  the  final  body.  Hail !  fair  Order  of  the 
Norm.1  (486) 

I  have  rendered  these  relatively  crude  and  artless  verses  almost 
literally,  not  trying  to  recast  them  in  English  more  aesthetically 
satisfying.  If  there  be  any  truth  in  the  tradition,  they  were  composed 
by  a  boy  of  the  people,  of  natural  genius  (for  deep  questions),  but  of  no 
education.  And  the  youth  and  lack  of  literary  ability  seem  to  be 
betrayed  in  the  simply  told  Pali.  There  is  a  world  of  difference 
between  it  and  the  form  and  contents  of  such  poems  as,  say,  Migaj ala’s, 
Ivosiya’s,  or  those  of  the  Kassapa  brothers. 


236 


CCXXVIII.  SA11ABHANGA 


CCXXYIII 

Sarabhanga. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Rajagaha,  as  the  son  of  a 
certain  brahmin,  he  was  given  a  name  according  to  or  in¬ 
dependent  of  family  traditions,  he  having  no  distinctive 
marks 1  [and  that  name  is  forgotten].  But  he  became, 
when  of  age,  an  ascetic,  making  a  hut  for  himself  out  of 
reed-stalks,  which  he  had  broken  off,  and  from  that  time 
he  was  known  as  Sara-bhanga — reed-plucker.  Now  the 
Exalted  One,  looking  over  the  world  with  the  Awakened 
Eye,  discerned  in  him  the  conditions  of  arahantship,  and 
going  to  him  taught  him  the  Norm.  And  he,  convicted 
and  becoming  a  member,  in  due  course  won  arahantship, 
continuing  to  live  in  his  hut.  This  became  decayed  and 
crumbling,  and  people  noticing  it,  said  :  ‘Why,  your  rever¬ 
ence,  do  you  not  repair  it  ?’  The  Thera,  saying :  ‘  The  hut 
was  made  when  I  was  doing  ascetic  practices  ;  now  I  cannot 
do  the  like,’  set  forth  the  whole  matter  thus  : 

Ay,  reeds  in  handfuls  once  I  plucked,  and  built 
A  hut  wherein  I  sojourned  ;  hence  the  name 
‘  Reedpicker  ’  given  me  by  the  common  voice.  (487) 
But  not  to  me  doth  it  belong  to-day 
To  pluck  the  reeds  in  handfuls  as  of  yore, 

Because  of  what  the  training  doth  prescribe, 
Revealed  to  us  by  glorious  Gotama.  (488) 

How  wholly  and  entirely  he  did  ail : — 

That  had  Reedpicker  never  seen  before. 

This  sorely  ailing  state  he  came  to  see 
Through  word  of  Him  who  is  beyond  the 
gods.  (489) 

The  self-same  Path  by  which  Vipassi  went, 

The  Path  of  Sikhi  and  of  Vessabhu, 

Of  Kakusandha,  Konagamana, 

And  Kassapa,  e’en  by  that  very  Road 
Lo !  now  to  us  there  cometh  Gotama.  (490) 

1  See  legend  in  CCXXXII.,  CCXXXIII. 


‘  Lo  !  now  to  us  there  cometh  Gotama.’> 

A  mutilated  statuette  found  among  ruined  sites  on  the  Peshawur  side  of  the  Indus,  just  outside 
the  Hazara  district ;  now  in  the  Fitzwilliam  Museum,  Cambridge. 


To  face  p.  236, 


CCXXVIII.  SARABHANGA 


237 


And  all  these  seven  Buddhas,1 — they  for  whom 
Craving  wras  dead,  and  nought  was  grasped,  and 
who 

Stood  planted  on  Abolishing  of  Ill 2 — 

They  taught  this  Norm,  ay,  even  such  as  they, 
Who  were  themselves  the  body  of  the  Norm,3  (491) 
In  great  compassion  for  us  all,  e’en  these 
Four  Ariyan  Truths  :  the  Truth  of  Ill ;  the  Cause  ; 
The  Path  ;  the  End,  th’  abolishing,  of  Ill,  (492) 
Whereby  the  endless  tale  of  grief  and  pain 
In  life’s  great  cycle  cannot  take  its  course  ;4 
For  when  this  body  dies  and  life  is  spent, 

No  other  rebirth  cometh  more — yea,  free 
Am  I  from  birth,  from  evil  utterly ! 5  (493) 

1  On  the  seven  see  Dialogues,  i.  1  ff. 

2  Khayogadhd.  Khaya  =  Nibbana  (Commentary). 

3  Dhammabhutd  =  Norm,  become  dhammakdya ,  paraphrases 
Dhammapala,  using  the  term  so  largely  coming  into  favour  in 
Mahay  anism. 

4  Nibbattate,  paraphrased  as  ( nirvattate )  na  pavattati,  ( na )  uppaj- 
jati,  i.e.,  through  nirodha,  Nibbana. 

5  So  the  Commentary :  sabbehi  hilesehi ,  sabbehi  bhavehi.  The 
reader  might  well  miss  the  point  of  this  fine  poem  without  the  simple 
but  illuminating  legend,  and  imagine  it  was  not  becoming  for  a  Thera 
to  work  with  his  hands,  as  Dr.  Neumann’s  rendering  seems  to  imply. 
The  bhikkhus  built  ‘  huts  ’  galore,  made  and  mended  their  garments, 
etc.  But  Sarabhanga’s  point  is  that  of  those  other  two  Hut-theras 
in  LVI.,  LVII. :  their  ‘one  thing  needful’  is  the  non-renewal  of  the 
at  tab  hciv  a  -  hu  tiled,  as  the  Commentary  calls  it,  the  ‘  personal  organism- 
hut,5  and  hence  it  is,  that  he  so  harps  on  the  ending  of  ill— i.e.,  of 
rebirth.  The  state  of  his  reed-hut  is  a  trifling  detail,  useful  only  as 
a  symbol.  Poem  and  legend  may  have  grown  up  out  of  the  inter¬ 
pretation  of  the  name.  This  occurs  as  that  of  a  seer,  not  only  in  the 
Jatakas  (iii.  464;  v.  127  ff.),  but  also  in  the  Mahabharata  and 
Ramayana. 


CANTO  VIII 

PSALMS  OF  EIGHT  VERSES 


CCXXIX 

Kaeea[ya]na  the  Great. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  UjjenI,  in  the  family  of 
the  chaplain  of  King  Candapajjota,  he  learned  the  three 
Vedas  as  he  grew,  and  succeeded,  at  his  father’s  death,  to 
the  post  of  chaplain.  And  he  was  known  by  his  gens  name 
of  Kaccana.1  Now  the  king  heard  of  the  Buddha’s  advent, 
and  said  :  ‘Teacher,  do  you  go  and  bring  the  Master  hither.’ 
He,  with  a  party  of  seven,  went  to  the  Master,  who  taught  him 
the  Norm  with  such  effect  that  at  the  end  of  the  lesson,  he, 
with  his  seven  attendants,  were  established  in  arahantship 
with  thorough  grasp  of  letter  and  meaning.  Then  the  Master, 
saying,  ‘  Come,  bhikkhus  !’  stretched  forth  his  hand,  and 
they  forthwith  were  as  Theras  of  a  century  of  rain-seasons, 
hair  of  two  fingers’  length  cut  off,  and  equipped  with  bowl 
and  robes. 

Then  the  Thera,  having  successfully  accomplished  his 
own  salvation,  invited  the  Master  on  the  king’s  behalf: 

‘  Lord,  the  King  Pajjota  desires  to  worship  at  your  feet  and 
hear  the  Norm.’  The  Master  said :  ‘  Do  you,  bhikkhu,  go 

1  He  was  one  of  the  eleven  or  twelve  ‘Great  ’  Theras  (Vin.  Texts, 
ii.  317,  359),  and  the  teacher  of  Sona-Kutikanna  (CCVIIJ.) .  In  the 
Vinaya  and  Nikayas,  the  name  usually  appears  as  Kaccana.  So,  too, 
the  Cy.  The  king  is  met  with  in  Jut.,  v.  133;  Dhammapada 
Commentary ,  i.  192  ff. ;  and  as  Pajjota  in  Vinaya  Texts ,  ii.  186. 
See  also  Kathdsaritsdgara ,  i.  102. 

238 


239 


ccxxix.  kacca[ya]na  the  great 

yourself ;  by  your  mission,  too,  will  the  king  be  satisfied.’ 
He,  thus  bidden,  went  with  the  seven,  satisfied  the  king’s 
desire,  established  him  in  the  faith,1  and  returned  to  the 
Master. 

One  day  many  bhikkhus,  having  put  aside  their  duties, 
and  finding  pleasure  in  worldly  activities  and  in  society,  were 
leading  desultory  lives.  The  Thera  thereupon  admonished 

them  in  two  verses,  and  in  the  next  six  admonished  the 
king  : 

Let  not  a  brother  occupy  himself 

With  busy  works,  let  him  keep  clear  of  folk, 

Nor  strive  [to  copy  nor  to  emulate]. 

Who  greedy  seeks  to  taste  life’s  feast  entire, 
Neglects  the  good  that  brings  true  happiness.  (494) 
A  treacherous  bog  it  is,  this  patronage 

Of  bows  and  gifts  and  treats  from  wealthy 
folk. 

’Tis  like  a  fine  dart  bedded  in  the  flesh, 

For  erring  human  hard  to  extricate.2  (495) 

{To  the  King.) 

Not  evil  are  the  actions  of  a  man 
Because  of  what  another  [saith  or  doth] ; 

’Tis  of  himself  he  must  from  wrong  abstain, 

Of  their  own  acts  the  offspring  mortals  be.3  (496) 
No  speech  of  others  makes  a  man  a  thief, 

No  speech  of  others  makes  a  man  a  sage ; 

And  what  we  know  at  heart  we  really  are, 

That  do  the  gods  who  know  our  hearts  know 
too.4  (497) 

1  Sasane.  2  —verses  124,  and  1052/. 

3  Majjh.,  iii.  203  ;  Ang iii.  72. 

4  The  ^  Commentary  reads  atta  ca  nag  yathdvediti  naij  sattan 
tassa  atta  cittag  yatha  ayarj  parisuddho  aparisuddho  cdti  yathdvato 
avedd  jdnati.  The  devas  are  then  credited — i.e the  purer  gods — with 
knowing  the  thoughts  of  others. 


240 


ccxxix.  kacca[ya]na  the  great 

People  can  never  really  understand 
That  we  are  here  but  for  a  little  spell. 

But  they  who  grasp  this  truth  indeed, 

Suffer  all  strife  and  quarrels  to  abate.1  (498) 

The  wise  man  is  alive,  and  he  alone, 

Although  his  wealth  be  utterly  destroyed  ; 

And  if  the  man  of  wealth  do  wisdom  lack, 

For  all  his  wealth  he  doth  not  truly  live.  (499) 

(To  the  King  consulting  him  about  a  dream.)2 

Things  of  all  sorts  by  way  of  ear  we  hear ; 

Things  of  all  sorts  by  way  of  eye  we  see  ; 

And  for  the  wise  and  strong  it  is  not  fit 
All  to  neglect  as  things  unseen,  unheard.  (500) 

Let  him  as  seeing  be  as  he  were  blind, 

Let  him  as  hearing  be  as  he  were  deaf, 

Let  him,  in  wisdom  versed,  be  as  one  dumb, 

And  let  the  man  of  strength  be  as  the  weak ; 

But  let  the  thing  of  genuine  good  arise  : — 

Be  that  for  him  the  nesting-place  of  thought.3  (501) 

1  =  verse  275. 

2  The  king’s  dream  is  not  told.  He  is  only  said  to  have  gone  next 
day  to  the  Thera  and  told  it  ‘in  the  order  in  which  he  had  seen  it.’ 
The  oracular  reply  may  not  have  proved  satisfying,  but  it  is  quite  in 
keeping  with  the  ‘Great  Slla’  of  Dialogues ,  i.  17(4).  The  chaplain 
was  largely  an  astrologer  and  dream  interpreter ;  the  Sakiya-samana 
was  concerned  with  the  bed-rock  realities  of  waking  life  and  moral  law. 

3  The  last  six  lines  are  quoted  in  Milinda ,  ii.  282  /.  My  own 
rendering  is  guided  by  the  high  import  attaching  to  attha  (good) 
through  the  ‘  Psalms,’  and  by  Dhammapala.  The  latter,  it  is  true,  is 
no  adequate  guide.  He  omits  any  reference  to  ‘  in  wisdom  versed  ’ 
(see  Milinda ,  ii.  283,  n.  1),  and  makes  no  attempt  to  paraphrase  the 
curious  mata-sayikay  except  by  mataka-sdyikar).  Preceding  this 
word  he  has  jpassetha=  passitvd.  The  whole  poem  seems  to  be  a 
patchwork  of  annexed  gnomic  proverbs  from  the  current  popular  . 
philosophy,  annexed  like  much  of  Sayyutta  I.  and  the  Jdtakas  by  the 
Canon,  and  only  essentially  in  sympathy  with  the  Buddhist  teaching. 


CCXXX.  SIRIMITTA 


241 


CCXXX 

Sirimitta. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Rajagaha  as  the  son  of  a 
very  wealthy  landowner,  he  was  named  Sirimitta,  his 
mother  being  sister  to  Sirigutta,  whose  story  is  included  in 
the  Dhammapada  Commentary.1  Now  he,  Sirimitta, 
Sirigutta  s  nephew,  found  faith  when  the  Master  subdued 
the  elephant  Dhanapala.2  And  he  entered  the  Order,  and 
in  due  course  became  arahant. 

One  day  rising  from  his  seat  to  recite  the  Patimokkha, 
he  took  a  painted  fan,3  and  reseating  himself,  taught  the 
Norm  to  the  bhikkhus,  and  in  so  doing,  distinguished  the 
more  eminent  virtues  thus  : 

From  anger  and  from  hatred  free, 

Clean  of  deceit,  of  slander  bare, 

Look  you  !  a  brother  such  as  he, 

When  he  goes  hence,4  will  weep  no  more.  (502) 

From  anger  and  from  hatred  free, 

Clean  of  deceit,  of  slander  bare, 

Ever  4  door-guarded  ’ 5  brother,  he, 

When  he  goes  hence,  will  weep  no  more.  (503) 

From  anger,  etc. 

...  of  slander  bare, 

Brother  of  noble  virtue,  he, 

When  he  goes  hence,  will  weep  no  more.  (504) 

1  Presumably  in  i.  434  ff.  He  was  a  lay-adherent  of  Savatthi. 

2  Called  Nalagiri  in  Vinaya  Texts ,  iii.  247-250.  Cf.  Milinda ,  i. 
297  ff. 

3  So  did  the  learned  Sister  Khujjutara  in  preaching  ( Dhammapada 
Commentary ,  i.  209). 

4  ‘To  another  world’  (Commentary).  He  is  not  discoursing  neces¬ 
sarily  of  or  to  arahants.  Cf.  for  a  different  import  in  the  phrase, 
verse  138. 

6  Gutta-dvdro ,  the  technical  phrase  in  Buddhist  ethics  for  control 
over  the  ‘  gates  ’  of  sense. 


16 


242 


CCXXX.  SI  RIM  ITT  A 


From  anger,  etc. 

Brother  of  virtuous  comrades,  he, 

When  he  goes  hence,  will  weep  no  more.  (505) 

From  anger,  etc. 

Brother  of  noble  insight,  he, 

When  he  goes  hence,  will  weep  no  more.  (506) 

Having  discoursed  against  anger  and  so  on,  he  then 
set  forth  the  supreme  career  by  verses  describing  the 
right  attitude  for  individuals,  testifying  thereby  to  anna 
in  himself  : 

Of  him  whose  faith  in  the  Tathagata 
Is  firmly  planted  and  unwavering, 

Whose  virtues  are  commended  by  the  good 
And  pleasing  in  the  eyes  of  Ariyans,1  (507) 

Who  dwells  contented  with  the  Brotherhood, 

Who  in  his  views  is  candid  and  sincere : 

4  No  pauper  he,’  they  say,  with  so  much  wealth, 
Nor  sterile  and  in  vain  the  life  of  him.  (508) 

So  let  the  wise  man,  so  let  him  who  aye 
Remembereth  that  which  Buddhas  have  enjoined,, 
Devote  himself  to  faith  and  righteousness, 

To  know  the  blessedness  they  brought  to  us 
And  the  true  vision  of  the  holy  Norm.2  (509) 

CCXXXI 

Panthaka  Major. 

When  our  Master  had  gone  to  Rajagaha,  rolling  the 
excellent  wheel  of  righteousness,  Panthaka,  the  elder  son3 

1  Buddhas,  Silent  (Pacceka)  Buddhas,  and  earnest  disciples  (Buddha - 
sdvakd). 

2  =  verse  204. 

3  The  untimely  birth  of  the  boys  when  their  mother  had  set  out  to 
return  to  her  kinsfolk,  their  being  named  ‘  Roadling  ’  the  Greater  and 
the  Less,  and  their  going  to  live  with  her  kinsfolk,  is  briefly  sketched 
here,  but  is  told  Imore  fully  in  Jut.,  i.  14  ff.,  and  Anguttara 
Commentary  on  i.  26. 


CCXXXI.  PANTHAKA  MAJOR 


243 


of  a  rich  councillor’s  daughter  and  one  of  her  father’s 
servants,  used  to  go  with  his  grandfather  to  hear  the 
Master,  and  so  won  faith  with  insight.  Entering  the 
Order,  he  became  highly  versed  in  the  Buddha-Word,  and 
in  the  four  abstract  jhanas,  in  due  time  becoming  arahant. 
Dwelling  in  the  bliss  of  jhana  and  of  fruition,  he  was 
reviewing  one  day  his  achievement,  and  in  great  joy  thereat 
burst  into  a  ‘  lion’s  roar  ’  thus  : 

When  first  I  saw  the  blessed  Master,  Him 
For  whom  no  fear  can  anywhence  arise, 

A  wave  of  deep  emotion  filled  my  soul 
At  sight  of  Him,  the  peerless  man  of  men.  (510) 
Had  a  man  erst  on  hands  and  knees  besought 
Favour  of  Fortune’s  goddess  hither  come, 

And  won  the  grace  of  Master  such  as  this, 

Still  might  he  fail  to  win  [the  thing  he 
sought].1  (511) 

I  for  my  part  [all  hindrance]  cast  away — 

[The  hope  of]  wife  and  children,  coin  and  corn,2 
And  let  my  hair  and  beard  be  shorn,  and  forth 
Into  the  homeless  life  I  went  from  home.  (512) 
The  life  and  training  practising,  all  faculties 
Well  held  in  hand,  in  loyalty  to  Him, 

Buddha  supreme,  master  of  self  I  lived.  (513) 

Then  longing  rose  within  my  heart,  I  yearned 
[To  consummate] :  ‘  Now  will  I  no  more  sit, 

Not  even  for  a  moment,  while  the  dart 
Of  craving  sticketh  and  is  not  outdrawn.  (514) 

Of  me  thus  aye  abiding,  O  !  behold  3 
And  mark  the  onward  stride  of  energy  : 


1  ‘  Unlucky  .  .  .  fail  at  the  ninth  moment  ’  (?  eleventh  hour),  says 
the  Commentary,  which  sees,  moreover,  in  siriy  an  allusion  not  to 
the  goddess  of  luck  ( Buddhist  India^  p.  217),  but  to  the  sivisaycmci, 
or  cathedra  of  a  teacher. 

2  Living  as  a  minor  with  his  grandparents,  he  had  as  yet  none  of 
these,  remarks  the  Commentary. 

3  For  this  and  following  lines,  cf.  verses  167,  224,  296,  332,  477. 


244 


CCXXXI.  PANTHAKA  MAJOR 


The  Threefold  Wisdom  have  I  made  my  own, 

And  all  the  Buddha  bids  us  do  is  done.  (515) 

I  know  the  where  and  when  of  former  lives, 

And  clearly  shines  the  eye  celestial. 

Ar’hant  am  I,  worthy  men’s  offerings. 

Released  and  without  basis  for  rebirth.  (516) 

For  as  the  darkness  melted  into  light, 

And  the  day  broke  with  rising  of  the  sun, 

From  craving,  stanched  and  dry,  had  come  release, 
And  on  my  couch  crosslegged  I  sat  in  peace.  (517) 


CANTO  IX 

PSALM  OF  NINE  VERSES 


CCXXXII 

Bhuta. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  a  suburb  of  the  city  of 
Saketa  as  the  son  of  a  wealthy  councillor,  he  was  the  last 
and  only  surviving  child,  the  others  having  been  devoured 
by  a  hostile  Yakkha.  He  was  therefore  well  guarded,  but 
the  demon  (i bhuta )  had  meanwhile  gone  to  wait  on 
Vessavana1  and  came  back  no  more.  On  the  child’s 
naming  day  he  was  called  Bhuta,  for  they  said :  ‘  May 
compassionate  non-humans  protect  him  !’2  He  by  virtue 
of  his  merit  having  grown  up  without  accident,  reared  with 
three  residences  as  was  Yasa,3  went,  when  the  Master 
came  to  Saketa,  with  other  laymen  to  the  Vihara  and 
heard  the  Norm.  Entering  the  Order,  he  went  to  dwell  in 
a  cave  on  the  banks  of  the  River  Ajakaranl.4  There  he  won 
arahantship.  Thereafter,  he  visited  his  relatives  out  of 
kindness  to  them,  staying  himself  in  the  Anjana  Wood. 
When  they  besought  him  to  stay,  urging  that  this  would 
result  in  mutual  benefit,  the  Thera,  declaring  his  love  for 
and  happiness  in  the  monachistic  life,  spoke  these  lines 
before  he  left  them  : 

1  Ruler  of  the  northern  quarter  of  the  skies  and  of  the  Yakkhas 
(. Dialogues ,  ii.  259,  805). 

2  Thus  compelling  the  propitiation  of  such  creatures  by  making 
them  sponsors  !  Bhuta  =  spirit,  sprite,  creature. 

3  CXVII. 

4  Cf.  Sappaka,  CXCVI. 


245 


246 


CCXXXII.  BHUTA 


When  the  wise  man  hath  grasped,  that  age  and  death, 
yea,  all 

Whereto  the  undiscerning  world-folk  cling  is  Pain, 
And  Pain  thus  understanding,  dwells  with  mind 
intent 

And  rapt  in  ecstasy  of  thought : — no  higher  bliss 
Is  given  to  men  than  this.  (518) 

When  the  fell  poisoner  1  he  hath  banned  who  bringeth 
pain, — 

Ay,  even  Craving,  who  doth  sweep  him  towards  the 
pain 

Of  being  prisoned  in  the  web  of  many  things, 
Obsessed,2 — and  he  delivered  dwells  with  mind  intent 
And  rapt  in  ecstasy  of  thought : — no  higher  bliss 
Is  given  to  men  than  this.  (519) 

When  by  insight  he  sees  the  happy-omened  Path, 
Twice  fourfold,  ultimate,  that  purifies  from  all 
That  doth  defile,  and  seeing,  dwells  with  mind  intent, 
Rapt  in  an  ecstasy  of  thought : — no  higher  bliss 
Is  given  to  men  than  this.  (520) 

When  work  of  thought  makes  real  and  true  the  way 
of  peace, 

From  sorrow  free,  untarnished  and  uncorrelate,3 
Cleansing  from  all  that  doth  defile,  and  severing 
From  every  bond  and  fetter,  and  the  brother  sits 
Rapt  in  an  ecstasy  of  thought : — no  higher  bliss 
Is  given  to  men  than  this.  (521) 

When  in  the  lowering  sky  thunders  the  storm-cloud’s 
drum, 

And  all  the  pathways  of  the  birds  are  thick  with  rain, 

1  On  visattikd  see  p.  213,  n.  3. 

2  With  this  phrase  papancasanghdUa(-dukkhddhivdhaniy),  cf. 
Majjh .,  i.  271,  l.  1 ;  383,  l.  29 ;  Milinda,  390,  l.  7.  The  Com¬ 
mentary’s  explanation  is  very  lame,  but  it  paraphrases  papancanti 
vitthdrentiti. 

3  Asankhatay.  Na  kenaci  paccayena  sankhatan  ti  (Commentary). 


CCXXXIL  BHUTA 


247 


The  brother  sits  within  the  hollow  of  the  hills, 

Rapt  in  an  ecstasy  of  thought : — no  higher  bliss 
Is  given  to  men  than  this.  (522) 

Or  when  by  rivers  on  whose  banks  together  crowd 
Garlands  of  woodland  blossoms  bright  with  many  a 
hue, 

With  heart  serene  the  brother  sits  upon  the  strand, 
Rapt  in  an  ecstasy  of  thought : — no  higher  bliss 
Is  given  to  men  than  this.  (523) 

Or  when  at  dead  of  night  in  lonely  wood  god  rains, 
And  beasts  of  fang  and  tusk 1  ravin  and  cry  aloud, 

The  brother  sits  within  the  hollow  of  the  hills, 

Rapt  in  an  ecstasy  of  thought : — no  greater  bliss 
Is  given  to  men  than  this.  (524) 

When  he  hath  checked  the  mind’s  discursive  restless¬ 
ness,2 

And  to  the  mountain’s  bosom  hies  and  in  some  cave 
Sits  sheltered,  free  from  fear  and  from  impediment, 
Rapt  in  an  ecstasy  of  thought: — no  greater  bliss 
Is  given  to  men  than  this.  (525) 

When  he  in  healthful  ease  abides,  abolisher 
Of  stain  and  stumbling-stone  and  woe,  open  to  peace  3 
The  portals  of  the  mind,  lust-free,  immune  from  dart,4 
Yea,  all  intoxicants  become  as  nought,  and  thus 
Rapt  in  an  ecstasy  of  thought no  greater  bliss 
Is  given  to  men  than  this.  (526) 

1  The  Commentary  instances  lions  and  tigers — true  of  course  only 
of  remoter  haunts.  Cf.  at  least  Sisters,  p.  151  n. 

2  VitakJca,  a  word  to  indicate  the  application  of  attention  to  this 
and  that,  hindering  concentrated  thought. 

3  Lit.,  one  who  is  unbolted.  The  bolt  is  ignorance  hindering  the 
entrance  of  Nibbana,  says  the  Commentary. 

4  By  ‘  dart,’  craving  is  always  implied. 


CANTO  X 

PSALMS  OF  TEN  VERSES 


CCXXXIII 

Kaludayin. 

He  going  on  in  rebirth  among  gods  and  men,  was  born  on 
the  same  day  as  our  Bodhisat,  in  the  family  of  one  of  the 
king’s  ministers  at  Kapiiavatthu.  Yea,  on  that  one  day 
were  born  these  seven  :  the  Bodhisat,  the  Bodhi-tree,  the 
mother  of  Bahula,  and  the  four  treasures  the  riding- 
elephant,  the  horse  Kanthaka,  Channa,  and  Kaludayin.1 
Now  on  his  naming  day,  the  child  was  called  Udayin, 
and  because  he  was  dark  of  feature  he  became  known 
as  Kal’  -  Udayin.  He  grew  up  as  the  play -fellow 
of  the  Bodhisat.  But  later,  when  the  Lord  of  the 
World  had  gone  forth  in  the  Great  Renunciation,  had 
become  omniscient,  and  was  staying  in  the  Bamboo  Grove 
near  Rajagaha,  rolling  on  the  excellent  wheel  of  the  Norm, 
King  Suddhodana  heard  thereof,  and  sent  a  minister  with 
a  suite  of  a  thousand,  saying:  *  Bring  my  son  hither.’ 
And  that  minister  and  suite,  arriving  when  the  Norm  was 
being  preached,  heard,  and  all  becoming  arahants,  the 
Master  stretched  forth  his  hand,  saying :  ‘  Come  ye, 
bhikkhus  !’  .  .  .  And  they  abiding  among  the  Ariyas,  did 
not  deliver  the  king’s  message.  And  the  like  happened 
with  other  messengers.  So  the  king  sent  Kaludayin, 
saying  :  ‘  This  Udayin  is  of  the  same  age  as  the  Ten- 

On  these  seven  ‘  Connatal  Ones  ’  see  Bud.  Birthstories,  68  n. ; 
cf .  Dialogues ,  ii.  202-208. 


248 


CCXXXIII.  KALUDAYIN 


249 


powered,  and  is  akin  to  me  and  affectionate  ;  I  will  send 
him  ;  go  you,  my  dear,  with  a  thousand  men,  and  bring  the 
Ten-powered  One.’  So  he  went,  saying :  *  If  I,  sire,  may 
leave  the  world,  then  will  I  bring  hither  the  Exalted  One.’ 
‘  Whatever  you  do,  show  me  my  son,’  was  the  reply.  He, 
too,  fared  like  the  first  minister  and  became  arahant. 
Now  he  thought :  ‘  Not  yet  is  it  time  for  Him  to  go 
to  the  city.  When  the  rains  have  come,  and  the  woods 
are  in  flower  and  the  earth  is  covered  with  verdure,  then 
’twill  be  time.’  And  when  the  time  was  come,  he  spoke 
these  verses  ro  the  Master,  praising  the  beauty  of  the 
journey  : 

Now  crimson  glow  the  trees,  dear  Lord,  and 
cast 

Their  ancient  foliage  in  quest  of  fruit.1 
Like  crests  of  flame  they  shine  irradiant, 

And  rich  in  hope,  great  Hero,  is  the  hour.  (527) 
Verdure  and  blossom-time  in  every  tree, 

Where’er  we  look  delightful  to  the  eye, 

And  every  quarter  breathing  fragrant  airs,2 
While  petals  falling,  yearning  comes  for  fruit : — 
’Tis  time,  O  Hero,  that  we  set  out  hence.  (528) 

Not  over  hot,  nor  over  cold,  but  sweet, 

O  Master,  now  the  season  of  the  year. 

O  let  the  Sakiyans  and  the  Koliyans 
Behold  thee  with  thy  face  set  toward  the 
West, 

Crossing  the  [border-river]  Rohinl.3  (529) 

1  ‘  Though  without  will,  they  express  the  setting  about  a  voluntary 
act,’  is  the  comment. 

2  Pavanti :  gandhag  visajjenti  (Commentary). 

3  ‘  From  this  river,  flowing  through  the  land  of  those  two  clans, 
from  north  to  south,’  writes  Dhammapala,  ‘  Rajagaha  lies  S.E.,  there¬ 
fore  to  go  from  thence  to  Kapilavatthu,  one  crosses  it  facing  W.,’  or 
north-west,  a  journey  of  60  yojanas  (p.  9  ;  about  435  miles).  On  this 
river,  now  the  Rowai,  or  Rohwaini,  see  the  detailed  account  in  Cunning¬ 
ham’s  Archceological  Survey  of  India ,  xii.,  p.  190  ff.  Kaludayin 
‘  then  makes  known  his  own  aspirations  by  similes  ’  (Commentary). 


250 


CCXXXIII.  KALUDAYIN 

In  hope  the  field  is  ploughed,  in  hope  the  seed  is 
sown, 

In  hope  of  winning  wealth  merchants  fare  over  sea. 
The  hope  I  cherish,  may  that  hope  be  realized  !  (530) 

Again  and  yet  again  is  seed  in  furrow  sown. 

Again  and  yet  again  the  cloud-king  sends  down 
rain, 

Again  and  yet  again  the  ploughmen  plough  the 
field, 

Again  and  yet  again  comes  corn  into  the  realm.  (531) 
Again  and  yet  again  do  beggars  go  their  round  ; 

Again  and  yet  again  the  generous  donors  give ; 

Again  and  yet  again  when  many  gifts  are  given, 
Again  and  yet  again  the  donors  find  their  heaven.  (532) 

Surely  a  hero  lifts  to  lustrous  purity 
Seven  generations  past  wherever  he  be  born. 

And  so  methinks  can  He,  the  vastly  wise,  the  god 
Of  gods.  In  Thee  is  born  in  very  truth  a  Seer.  (533) 
Suddhodana  is  named  the  mighty  prophet’s  sire, 

And  mother  of  the  Buddha  was  [our  queen]  Maya. 

She,  having  borne  the  Wisdom-being  in  her  womb, 
Found,  when  the  body  died,  delight  in  Tusita.1  (534) 
She,  Gotamid,  dying  on  earth,  deceasing  hence, 

Now  lives  in  heavenly  joys  attended  by  those 
gods.  (535) 

Now  when  the  Exalted  One,  thus  besought,  discerned 
salvation  coming  for  many  by  his  going,  he  set  out  attended 
by  20,000  arahants,  walking  a  yojana  each  day.  And  the 
Thera  went  by  power  of  iddhi  to  Kapilavatthu,  into  the 
king’s  presence.  ‘  Who  are  you  ?’  he  was  asked  ;  and  he  : 

‘  If  you  know  not  the  minister’s  son  whom  you  sent  to  the 
Exalted  One,  know  that  I  am  he’ : 

Son  of  the  Buddha  I,  yea,  e’en  of  such  as  He, 

Th’  Anglrasa,  to  whom  there  lives  not  any  peer, 

1  The  Heaven  of  Delight,  fourth  above  this  world.  Cf.  Sisters ,  p.  3. 


CCXXXIV.  EKAVIHAR1YA 


251 


Who  that  which  is  insuperable  hath  o’ercome. 
And  father  of  my  Father  art  thou,  Sakiyan, 

To  me  thou,  Gotamid,  art  grandsire  in  the 
Norm.1  (536) 


CCXXXIV 

Ekavihariya. 

(Tissa-Kumara.) 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age,  after  the  Exalted 
One  had  passed  away,  as  the  youngest  brother  of  the 
King  Dhammasoka.  And  King  Asoka,  in  the  218th  year 
after  that  Passing  Away,  having  united  all  India  in  one 
empire,  and  made  his  own  younger  brother  Tissa  vice¬ 
regent,  enlisted  Tissa’s  friendship  for  the  Sasana  by  a  single 
stratagem.2 

Now  the  prince,  while  hunting,  was  so  impressed  at  the 
sight  of  the  Greek  Thera,  Maha  Dhammarakkhita,3  seated 
under  a  tree,  that  he  also  longed  to  live  so  in  the  forest. 
When  he  had  seen  the  Thera’s  supernormal  powers,  he 

1  The  Commentary  gives  two  explanations  of  Anglrasa,  a  name 
applied  to  the  Buddha  elsewhere — e.g.,  Digha ,  iii.  196  ;  Sany.,  i.  196 ; 
Ang.,  iii.  239  ;  Jdt.,  i.  116.  One  is  Commentator’s  etymology  ;  the 
other  calls  it  a  second  personal  name,  like  Siddhattha.  The  first  three 
graceful  gathas  are  given  more  briefly  in  the  Jataka  Commentary 
{Buddhist  Birth  Stories ,  p.  121).  The  next  gatha  is  in  slokas  ;  all  the 
rest  is  tristubh  (upavajira)  ;  but  it  is  a  little  difficult  to  believe  that 
the  musical  opening  and  the  clumsy  sequel  are  by  the  same  hand. 

The  specific  distinction  awarded  to  Kaludayin,  in  Ang.  Nik.,  i.  25, 
is  recorded  to  have  been  won  by  this  embassy — that  of  ‘  him  who  best 
satisfied  the  clans.’ 

2  This  is  told  in  th oMahdvaysa,  ver.  154-160.  Ibid.,  161-172,  is  a 
metrical  parallel  to  Dhammapala’s  prose  account  in  the  following 
paragraph,  which  is  slightly  condensed. 

3  Yonaka-Mahd-Dhammarakkhitathera.  This  Thera,  not  elsewhere 
called  Greek,  is  mentioned,  Mahdvaysa,  loc.  cit.  ;  Dipavaysa,  viii.  8 ; 
Sdmaniapasdidika,  pp.  314,  317. 


252 


CCXXXIV.  EKAVIHARIYA 


returned  to  the  palace  and  told  the  king  he  wished  to  leave 
the  world.  Asoka  could  not  in  any  way  dissuade  him. 
Longing  for  the  happiness  of  the  recluse,  he  uttered  these 
verses : 

If  there  be  none  in  front,  nor  none  behind 
Be  found,  is  one  alone  and  in  the  woods 
Exceeding  pleasant  doth  his  life  become.1  (537) 
Come  then !  alone  Ill  get  me  hence  and  go 
To  lead  the  forest-life  the  Buddha  praised,2 
And  taste  the  welfare  which  the  brother 
knows, 

Who  dwells  alone  with  concentrated  mind.  (538) 
Yea,  swiftly  and  alone,  bound  to  my  quest,3 
I’ll  to  the  jungle  that  I  love,  the  haunt 
Of  wanton  elephants,  the  source  and  means 
Of  thrilling  zest  to  each  ascetic  soul.4  (539) 

In  Cool  Wood’s  flowery  glades  cool  waters  lie,5 
Within  the  hollows  of  the  hills  ;  and  there 
I’ll  bathe  my  limbs  when  hot  and  tired,  -and 
there 

At  large  in  ample  solitude  I’ll  roam.  (540) 

1  I  was  inclined,  before  gaining  access  to  the  Commentary,  to  see 
in  these  lines  the  sentiment  of  Sutta-Nipdta ,  verses  9,  52  : 

To  him  for  whom  there's  nothing  in  the  world 
Either  before  or  after  or  betiueen — 

Nothing  at  all  to  take  or  to  possess.  .  .  . 

But  the  Commentary’s  brief  comment  reveals,  not  the  detachment  of 
the  arahant,  but  the  longing  of  the  court  dignitary  to  be  rid  of  the 
perpetual  attendance  of  courtiers,  retainers,  soldiers,  etc.,  ever  before 
and  behind  and  around,  sycophantic,  or  slaves  of  etiquette,  and  perhaps 
traitorous,  or  at  least  backbiting.  The  name  adopted  by,  or  fastened 
on  Prince  Tissa,  Ekavihariya,  means  Lone-dweller. 

2  Vinaya  Texts ,  ii.  312,  313  Cf,  Bud.  Suttas,  p.  210  ff. ;  Sutta- 
Nipdta,  verses  34-74,  etc. 

3  Atthavasi,  ‘  in  submission  to  the  business  of  a  recluse  ’  (Cy.). 

4  Yogi-piti-karaij. 

5  The  wood  contains  six  pools,  writes  Dhammapala. 


CCXXXIV.  EKAVIHARIYA 


253 


Lone  and  unmated  in  the  lovely  woods, 

When  shall  I  come  to  rest,  work  wrought,  heart 
cleansed  ?  (541) 

0  that  I  might  win  through,  who  am  so  fain ! 

I  only  may  achieve  the  task  ;  herein 

None  for  his  fellow-man  can  aught  avail.1  (542) 

*  *  *  *  * 

I’ll  bind  my  spirit’s  armour  on,  and  so 

The  jungle  will  I  enter,  that  from  thence 

I’ll  not  come  forth  until  Nibbana’s  won.2  (543) 

I’ll  seat  me  on  the  mountain-top,  the  while 
The  wind  blows  cool  and  fragrant  on  my  brow, 
And  burst  the  baffling  mists  of  ignorance.  (544) 
Then  on  the  flower-carpet  of  the  wood, 

Anon  in  the  cool  cavern  of  the  cliff, 

Blest  in  the  bliss  of  Liberty  I’ll  take 

Mine  ease  on  thee,  old  Fastness  o’  the  Crag.3  (545) 

*  *  *  *  * 

Lo !  I  am  he  whose  purpose  is  fulfilled, 

And  rounded  as  the  moon  on  fifteenth  day. 
Destroyed  all  deadly  canker,  sane,  immune, 

I  know  rebirth  comes  ne’er  again  for  me.  (546) 

1  The  beautiful  poem  reads  better  uninterrupted  by  prose;  but 
Dhammapala  gives  it  in  three  sections.  Section  2  describes  Tissa’s 
burst  of  delighted  energy  after  his  ordination,  Asoka  having  conducted 
both  him  and  his  son-in-law  (and  nephew),  Aggibrahma,  to  the  Vihara 
with  great  pomp  and  ceremony  (a  last  ordeal  for  Tissa’s  tastes !). 

2  Lit. ,  until  the  asavas  are  destroyed. 

3  Giribbaja,  the  ‘  mountain  stronghold  ’  near  Rajagaha.  The  ruined 
fortifications,  4|  miles  in  circumference,  are  still  extant,  and  are  the 
most  ancient  stone  buildings  yet  found  in  India.  The  ‘newer’  Raja¬ 
gaha  is  said  to  have  been  chiefly  the  work  of  King  Bimbisara,  the 
Buddha’s  contemporary  ( Buddhist  India,  p.  37). 

The  last  section  is  the  dying  utterance  of  Tissa  (‘  Lone-dweller  ’).  He 
is  related  to  have  gone  with  his  instructor  (Dhammarakkhita)  to  the 
Kalinga  country,  a  great  and  noted  forest  tract  (cf.  Majjh.,  i.  3^8)  on 
the  east  coast,  south  of  Rajagaha.  There  Asoka  built  for  him  the 
Vihara  of  Bhojaka-Giri.  In  Kalinga  are  the  Asoka  inscriptions  of 
Dhauli  and  Jaugada  (Cunningham,  Corp.  Inscr.  Ind.,  i.  15^.). 


254 


CCXXXV.  KAPPINA  THE  GREAT 


CCXXXY 

Kappina  the  Great. 

Reborn  before  our  Master’s  birth  in  the  border  country 
at  a  town  named  Kukkuta  (Cock),  in  a  raja’s  family,  he  was 
named  Kappina.  At  his  father’s  death  he  succeeded,  as 
raja,  Kappina  the  Great.  He,  to  extend  his  knowledge, 
would  send  men  of  a  morning  out  of  the  four  gates  to  the 
cross-roads,  bidding  them  arrest  passing  scholars  and  tell 
him.  Now  by  that  time  our  Master  had  come  into  the 
world,  and  was  dwelling  at  Savatthi.  And  traders  of  that 
town  brought  goods  to  Kukkuta  and  disposed  of  them. 
Then  saying,  ‘Let  us  see  the  king,’  they  took  gifts  and 
announced  themselves.  The  king  accepted  their  gifts, 
saluting  them,  and  asked  whence  they  came,  and  what 
their  country  and  king  were  like,  and  what  sort  of  religion 
(dhamma)  was  theirs?  ‘Sire,’  they  replied  to  the  last 
question,  ‘  we  are  not  able  to  tell  you  with  unwashen 
mouths.’  The  king  sent  for  a  gold  ewer  of  water,  and 
they,  with  cleansed  mouths  and  hands  at  salute,  said: 
‘  Sire,  in  our  country  the  Treasure  of  a  Buddha  has  arisen.’ 
At  the  one  word  ‘Buddha,’  rapture  suffused  the  king’s 
whole  body.  ‘  “  Buddha,”  ’  say  you,  friends  ?’  And  he  made 
them  tell  him  thrice  that  infinite  word,  giving  them 
100,000  pieces.  They  told  him  also  of  the  Treasure  of  the 
Norm  and  of  the  Order,  and  he  trebled  his  gift,  and  forth¬ 
with  renounced  the  world,  his  ministers  doing  likewise. 
Now  they  set  forth  [to  find  the  Exalted  One]  and  came  to 
the  Ganges.  There  they  made  a  determination  by  the 
power  of  truth,1  saying:  ‘If  [there  be]  a  Master,  a 
Buddha  Supreme,  let  not  even  a  hoof  of  these  horses  be 
wetted  !’  Then  they  crossed  on  the  surface  of  the  full 
river,  and  so  crossed  yet  another  river,  coming  thirdly  to 

1  Saccadhitthana ,  for  the  more  usual  saccakiriyd.  Cf.  Jdt .,  i., 
Nos.  20,  35.  Cf.  2  Kings ,  i.  10. 


CCXXXV.  KAPPINA  THE  GREAT 


2  55 


the  great  river,  Candabhaga,1  which  they  crossed  in  like 
manner. 

The  Master,  too,  who  on  that  day  had  risen  at  dawn,  and, 
filled  with  great  compassion,  surveyed  the  world,  discerning 
that  ‘  to-day  Kappina  the  Great  has  renounced  his  kingdom, 
and  comes  with  a  great  following  to  enter  the  Order ;  ’tis 
fit  I  go  far  to  meet  him,’  first  went  with  a  company  of 
bhikkhus  to  Savatthi  for  alms,  then  went  himself  through 
the  air  to  the  banks  of  the  Candabhaga,  and  sat  down 
cross-legged  under  a  great  banyan  facing  the  landing-stage 
of  the  ford,2  sending  forth  the  Buddha-rays.  Kappina  and 
his  men  saw  the  rays  darting  to  and  fro,  and  said :  ‘  We 
are  come  on  account  of  the  Master,  and  lo !  here  He  is!’ 
And  they  drew  near,  prostrating  themselves.  Then  the 
Master  taught  them  the  Norm,  so  that  they  were  all  estab¬ 
lished  in  arahantship,  and  asked  to  become  recluses.  The 
Master  said,  ‘  Come,  bhikkhus  !’  and  this  was  their  sanction 
and  their  ordination.  Then  he  took  them  back  with  him 
through  the  air  to  the  Jetavana. 

One  day  the  Exalted  One  asked  whether  Kappina  taught 
the  Norm  to  the  bhikkhus  ?  They  said  that  he  lived  in¬ 
actively,  enjoying  his  happiness.  Kappina,  when  sent  for, 
admitted  this  was  true,  and  was  told :  ‘  Brahmin  ! 3  do  not 
so  ;  from  to-day  teach  the  Norm  to  them  that  have  arrived.' 
Kappina  assented,  worshipping,  and  by  his  very  first  dis¬ 
course  established  a  thousand  recluses  in  arahantship. 

1  If  this  be  the  Chenab  (the  Akesines  of  the  Greeks),  the  geography 
of  Dhammapala  is  impossible ;  but  if  for  Ganges  we  substitute  Sindhu 
(the  Indus),  then  Kappina,  coming  from  the  extreme  north-west 
(Kukkuta  is  an  unknown  locality),  would  have  the  Indus  and  the 
Vitasta  (Jelum)  for  his  first  and  second  rivers.  In  Jdt.,  iv.  180,  the 
Buddha  is  said  to  have  gone  2,000  yojanas  to  meet  him.  This  is 
commentarial  legend.  From  Savatthi  to  the  Chenab,  before  it  flows  into 
the  Indus,  is,  as  the  crow  (or  a  Buddha)  flies,  roughly  600  miles  (?). 

2  Uttar anatitthassdbhimukhattJidne,  which  seems  to  render  the 
mystic  feat  rather  superfluous. 

3  The  Buddha  occasionally  addresses  his  arahants  thus— e.g., 
Angulimala  ( Majjh .,  ii.  104;  cf.  Ps.  CCLV.).  Brahmana  ==  holy,  or 
excellent  man.  By  social  class,  Kappina  was  a  Khattiya. 


256 


CCXXXV.  KAPPINA  THE  GREAT 


Wherefore  the  Master  assigned  him  the  foremost  rank 
among  those  who  taught  the  Sisters.1 
*  Now  one  day  the  Thera  taught  the  Sisters  as  follows : 

Can  ye  but  see  that  which  is  coming  ere  it 
come,2 

And  mark  such  business  as  will  benefit  or  harm, 
Nor  foes  nor  friends,  howe’er  they  seek,  will  find  a 
rift.  (547) 

The  man  by  whom  the  breathing  exercise 
With  self-control  is  to  perfection  brought, 
Practised  with  method  as  the  Buddha  taught, 

He  casts  a  radiant  sheen  about  the  world, 

As  doth  the  moon  emerging  free  from  cloud.  (548) 
Lo !  now  the  mind  of  me  is  white  indeed,3 
Expanded  beyond  measure,  practised  well, 

Its  nature  understood,  and  strenuous  ; 

Shedding  a  radiance  on  every  side.  (549) 

The  wise  man  is  alive  and  he  alone, 

Although  his  wealth  be  utterly  destroyed  ; 

And  if  the  man  of  wealth  do  wisdom  lack, 

For  all  his  wealth  he  doth  not  truly  live.4  (550) 
Wisdom  is  arbiter  of  what  is  heard. 

Wisdom  doth  nourish  honourable  fame. 

With  wisdom  in  his  company  a  man 
Even  in  pain  and  sorrow  findeth  joys.  (551) 

Here  is  a  fact  that’s  not  of  yesterday ; 

’Tis  not  abnormal  nor  anomalous  : 

‘  Where  ye  are  being  born,  ye  also  die.’ 

What  have  we  there  save  what  is  natural  ?  (552) 

1  Ang.,  i.  27. 

2  Patigacca :  xmretaray  yeva  (Cy.). 

3  Oddtay.  When  the  Buddha  (Sayy.,  ii.  284)  points  out  Kappina 
to  the  bhikkhus  to  praise  him,  he  says  :  ‘  Do  you  see  that  slight  little 
white  ( odatakay )  man  with  the  prominent  nose  coming  along  ?’  referring 
probably  only  to  his  complexion.  Cf.  p.  3,  n.  1  ;  and  verse  972. 

4  =  ver.  499. 


CCXXXV.  KAPPINA  THE  GREAT 


257 


For  after  being  born  we  do  but  lead 

A  life  that  is  a  dying  hour  by  hour. 

Whoe’er  are  born  in  that  same  life  they  die — 

Such  is  the  nature  of  all  living  things.  (553) 

That  brings  no  good  to  the  dead  which  is  good  for 
the  living. 

Mourning  the  dead  is  no  honour  nor  purification,1 

Nor  is  it  praised  by  the  wise,  by  recluses  and 
brahmins.  (554) 

Mourning  vexes  the  eye  and  the  body,  wasteth 

Comeliness,  strength  [of  body  and  mind]  and  in- 
telligence. 

If  he  be  blithesome,  all  the  four  quarters  become 

Cordial  well-wishers,  e’en  if  his  lot  be  not 
happy.  (555) 

Wherefore  let  laymen  desire  to  receive  in  their 
family 

None  but  them  that  are  wise  and  discreet  and 
much  learned. 

They  by  the  power  of  their  wisdom  accomplish 
their  business, 

E’en  as  a  boat  doth  effect  a  crossing  o’er  the  full 
river.2  (556) 

1  I  do  not  pretend  to  have  solved  the  difficulties  here.  Even 
Dhammapala  seems  to  evade  them.  He  reads,  for  na  lokyay,  na 
sokyay ,  and  paraphrases  this  bty  na  visuddhi.  I  follow  him,  as  the 
only  way  to  make  the  passage  intelligible. 

2  Kappina  was  one  of  the  twelve  ‘  Great  ’  Theras  ;  his  verses,  however, 
are,  for  the  most  part,  more  gnomic  saws  of  popular  philosophy  than 
genuine  Dhamma,  such  as  was  fitted  for  members  of  the  Order,  whom 
he  is  said  to  have  been  addressing.  They  would  have  fitted  an  early 
Greek,  or  any  pagan.  And  it  was  not  possible  to  get  poetry  out  of 
them.  Dr.  Neumann  succeeds  here  and  there,  but  only  by  departing 
from  the  original.  The  change  of  metre  is  merely  to  indicate  a 
corresponding  change  in  the  Pali. 


17 


258 


CCXXXVI.  CULA-PANTHAKA 


CCXXXVI 

Cula-Panthaka. 

(Roadling  Minor.) 

His  previous  story  is  told  in  the  Eighth  Canto,  in  the 
chronicle  of  Roadling  major.  The  remainder  is  [told  in  the 
Commentary  on  the  Culasetthi-Jataka.1] 

He,  on  another  occasion,  uttered  these  verses  : 

Sluggish  and  halt  the  progress  that  I  made, 

And  therefore  was  I  held  in  small  esteem. 

My  brother  judged  I  should  be  turned  away, 

And  bade  me,  saying:  ‘Now  do  thou  go  home.’  (557) 
So  I,  dismissed  and  miserable,  stood 
Within  the  gateway  of  the  Brethren’s  Park, 
Longing  at  heart  within  the  Rule  to  stay.  (558) 
And  there  he  came  to  me,  the  Exalted  One, 

And  laid  his  hand  upon  my  head ;  and  took 
My  arm,  and  to  the  garden  led  me  back.  (559) 

To  me  the  Master  in  his  kindness  gave 
A  napkin  for  the  feet  and  bade  me  thus : 

‘  Fix  thou  thy  mind  on  this  clean  thing,  the  while 
Well  concentrated2  thou  dost  sit  apart.’  (560) 

And  I  who  heard  his  blessed  Word  abode 
Fain  only  and  alway  to  keep  his  Rule.3 
Achieving  concentrated  thought  and  will, 

That  I  might  win  the  crown  of  all  my  quest.  (561) 

1  Jdt.,  i.,  4.  Dhammapala  also  gives  the  story,  agreeing  in  all  but 
a  few  details,  in  which  his  version  is  the  simpler.  The  gist  of  the 
‘  remainder  ’  is  contained  in  the  verses  above.  He  also  mentions  the 
double  eminence  (in  mind-created  forms  and  in  mental  evolution), 
defined  by  Buddhaghosa  as  skill  in  the  fourfold  Riipa  and  Arujpa  jhana, 
assigned  to  Cula-Panthaka  and  his  brother  respectively  (Ang.,  i.  24). 

2  Svadhitthitay  is  paraphrased  only  by  manasikarena.  Panthaka 
handles  the  cloth  while  he  muses,  till  it  is  no  longer  clean  and 
smooth. 

3  Sisters,  verses  187,  194,  202. 


CCXXXVI.  CULA-PANTHAKA 


259 


And  now  I  know  the  where  and  how  I  lived, 

And  clearly  shines  the  Eye  Celestial ; 1 
The  Threefold  Wisdom  have  I  made  my  own, 

And  what  the  Buddha  bids  us  do  is  done.  (562) 

In  thousand  different  shapes  did  Panthaka 
Himself  by  power  abnormal  multiply ; 

And  seated  in  the  pleasant  Mango-Grove,2 
Waited  until  the  hour  should  be  revealed.  (563) 
Then  did  the  Master  send  a  messenger, 

Who  came  revealer  of  the  hour  to  me, 

And  at  th’  appointed  time  I  flew  to  Him.  (564) 
Low  at  his  feet  I  worshipped  ;  then  aside 
I  sat  me  down  ;  and  me  so  seated  near 
Whenas  he  had  discerned,  the  Master  then 
Suffered  that  men  should  do  him  ministry.3  (565) 
High  altar  4  He  where  all  the  world  may  give, 
Receiver  of  th’  oblations  of  mankind, 

Meadow  of  merit  for  the  sons  of  men, 

He  did  accept  the  gifts  of  piety.  (566) 

CCXXXYII 

Kappa. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  the  kingdom  of  Magadha, 
as  the  son  of  a  provincial  hereditary  raja,  he  succeeded  his 
father,  but  was  addicted  to  self-indulgence  and  sensuality. 
Him  the  Master  saw,  as  he  roused  himself  from  a  reverie 

1  Above,  verse  516. 

2  The  property  of  the  court  physician  and  lay- adherent,  Jivaka. 
See  Sisters,  p.  139  n. 

3  The  story  relates  that,  whereas  Panthaka’s  elder  brother,  who  was 
steward,  had  omitted  his  junior  from  the  brethren  entertained  at  lunch 
by  Jivaka,  the  Buddha  (who  had  left  Cula-Panthaka  studying  impurity 
by  the  towel  as  object-lesson)  closed  his  bowl  with  his  hand  when  food 
was  offered  till  Cilia  had  been  sent  for.  How  Cula’s  new  powers  of 
magic  mystify  the  messenger  is  told  in  the  Jdtakci  Commentary . 

4  This  rendering  of  ay  ago,  following  Dr.  Neumann,  is  supported  by 
the  Commentary’s  yajitabba-thanabhuto,  1  who  is  become  the  place 
where  oblations  should  be  made.’ 


260 


CCXXXVII.  KAPPA 


of  great  compassion  and  surveyed  the  world  for  treasure 
for  his  net  of  insight.  And  pondering,  ‘What  now  will 
he  become  ?’  he  discerned  that  ‘  This  one,  hearing  from  me 
a  discourse  on  foul  things,  will  have  his  heart  diverted  from 
lusts,  and  will  renounce  the  world  and  win  arahantship.’ 
Going  to  Kappa  through  the  air,  he  addressed  to  him  these 
verses  : 

Filled  full  with  divers  things  impure, 

Great  congeries  of  excrement, 

Like  stale  and  stagnant  pool  of  slime, 

Like  a  great  cancer,  like  a  sore,  (567) 

Filled  full  of  serum  and  of  blood, 

As ’t  were  from  dung-heap  issuing, 

Dropping  with  fluid — ever  thus 
The  body  leaks,  a  carrion  thing.  (568) 

By  sixty  tendons  kept  in  place, 

And  smeared  with  plaster  of  the  flesh, 

By  dermis  armed  and  cuticle — 

In  carrion  carcase  lies  small  gain.  (569) 

By  bony  framework  rendered  firm, 

By  sinew-threads  together  knit, 

The  which,  as  they  in  concert  work, 

Effect  our  postures  manifold  ;  (570) 

Faring  world  without  end  to  death, 

E’en  to  the  King  of  Mortals’  realm : — 

If  it  be  even  here  cast  off, 

A  man  may  go  where’er  he  will.1  (571) 

The  body  cloaked  in  ignorance, 

Entrammelled  bv  the  fourfold  tie,2 

1  On  this  verse  that  may  have  been  annexed,  proverb-wise,  from 
Animistic  literature,  the  Commentary  has  :  ‘  In  just  this  world  having 
cast  away  (chaddetvd)  ....  By  these  words  he  shows  that,  since  the 
body  is  a  transitory  thing,  no  tie  is  to  be  formed.’  Dr.  Neumann 
considers  that  what  may  be  cast  off  is  the  power  of  death. 

2  Viz.,  covetousness,  ill-will,  faith  in  ritual,  clinging  to  dogma  (Bud. 
Psy .,  p.  304/. ;  Compendium,  p.  171).  On  the  four  Floods  and  seven¬ 
fold  Bias  ( anus  ay  a )  see  ( Compendium ,  ibid.,f.). 


CC XXXVII.  KAPPA 


261 


Tlie  body  flood-engulfed  and  drowned, 

In  net  of  latent  bias  caught,  (572) 

To  the  five  Hindrances  a  slave, 

By  restless  play  of  mind  obsessed, 

By  pregnant  craving  ever  dogged, 

In  trammels  of  illusion  swathed  : —  (573) 

Lo !  such  a  thing  this  body  is, 

Carried  about  on  Karma’s  car, 

To  manifold  becoming  doomed, 

Now  to  success,  to  failure  then.  (574) 

And  they  who  say  of  it 4  ’Tis  mine  !’ — 

Poor  foolish  blinded  many-folk — 

They  swell  the  dreadful  field  of  death,1 
Grasping  rebirth  again,  again.  (575) 

They  who  this  body  seek  to  shun, 

As  they  would  serpent  smeared  with  slime, 
They,  vomiting  becoming’s  root, 

Shall  make  an  end,  sane  and  immune.  (576) 

Kappa,  hearing  the  Master  discourse  in  so  many  figures 
on  the  nature  and  destiny  of  the  body-complex,  in  fear, 
and  aversion  at  his  own  body,  besought  him  in  distress 
for  ordination.  The  Master  consigned  him  to  a  bhikkhu 
to  be  ordained.  Kappa  received  five  exercises,  and  forth¬ 
with  attained  arahantship  as  his  hair  was  being  shaved. 
He  thereupon  went  to  render  homage  to  the  Master,  and 
seated  at  one  side,  confessed  anua  in  those  very  verses. 
Hence  they  became  Thera-verses. 


CCXXXVIII 

Upasena,  Vanganta’s  son. 

Keborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  the  village  of  Nalaka  as 
the  son  of  Rupasarl,  the  brahminee,  he  was  named  Upasena.2 

1  Cf.  verse  456. 

2  Brother  therefore  to  Sariputta  (CCLIX.)  and  the  three  sisters 
Cala,  etc.  Cf.  Dhavimapada  Cy .,  ii.  84. 


262  ccxxxviii.  upasena,  vanganta’s  son 

Having  come  of  age  and  learnt  the  three  Vedas,  he  renounced 
the  world  after  hearing  the  Master  teach  the  Norm.  Or¬ 
dained  but  one  year,  he  thought,  ‘  I  will  multiply  the  breed 
of  the  Ariyas,’  and  himself  ordained  another  bhikkhu,  and 
with  him  went  to  wait  upon  the  Master.  The  latter,  having 
heard  of  this,  rebuked  his  hasty  procedure.  Then  Upasena 
thought :  4  If  now,  on  account  of  having  a  following,  I  am 
blamed  by  the  Master,  on  that  same  account  will  I  earn 
his  praise.’ 1  And  studying  for  insight,  he  won  in  due 
course  arahantship.  Thereafter,  himself  adopting  the 
austerer  practices,2  he  persuaded  others  to  do  likewise,  and 
with  such  success  that  the  Exalted  One  ranked  him  fore¬ 
most  among  those  who  were  generally  popular.3 4 5 

At  another  time  he  was  asked  by  that  other  bhikkhu, 
when  at  KosambT,  what  was  to  be  done  during  the 
dissensions  and  the  schism  there?4  Upasena  taught 
him  thus  : 

Lonely  the  spot  and  far  away  where  noise 
Scarce  comes,  the  haunt  of  creatures  of  the 
wild  : 

’T  is  there  the  Brother  should  his  couch  prepare 
For  purposes  of  studious  retreat.  (577) 

From  rubbish-pile,  or  from  the  charnel-field, 

Or  from  the  highways  let  him  take  and  bring, 
Worn  cloths  and  thence  a  cloak  of  patchwork 
make, 

And  in  such  rough  apparel  clothe  himself.  (578) 
In  lowliness  of  mind  from  house  to  house, 

In  turn  unbroken 5  let  the  Brother  fare 

1  Told  in  Vin.  Texts ,  i.  175/.  ;  Jdt.  ii.,  No.  800. 

2  The  Dhutangas.  See  Milinda ,  vol.  ii.,  book  vi. 

3  Ang .,  i.  24.  Cf.  Milinda ,  ii.  270  ;  also  289,  326,  328. 

4  See  p.  16,  n.  2;  Vinaya  Texts ,  ii.  312. 

5  Sapaddnay.  On  this  term  see  JPTS ,  1909,  p.  72;  JBAS ,  1912, 
p.  736  ff.  Dhammapala  defines  it  as  gharesu  avakhanda-rahitay, 
anugharay . 


CCXXXVIII.  UPASENA,  VANGANTAS  SON  263 

Seeking  his  alms,  sense  guarded,  well  con¬ 
trolled  ;  (579) 

With  any  fare  content  rough  though  it  be, 

Nor  fain  for  other  than  he  gets,  or  more, 

For  if  he  once  indulge  in  greed  for  tastes, 

Ne’er  can  his  mind  in  jhana  take  delight.  (580) 

In  great  content,  with  very  sparse  desires, 

Remote,  secluded  :  so  the  sage  should  live, 
Detached  from  housefolk  and  the  homeless, 
both.  (581) 

Let  him  so  show  himself  as  he  were  dull 
And  dumb,  nor  let  the  wise  man  speech  prolong 
Unduly,  when  in  midst  of  gathered  folk.  (582) 

Let  him  not  any  man  upbraid  ;  let  him 
Refrain  from  hurting  ;  let  him  be  in  rule 
And  precept  trained,  and  temperate  in  food.  (583) 
Let  him  be  one  who  concentrates  upon 
The  symbol,  skilled  in  genesis  of  thought. 

To  practise  Calm  let  him  devote  himself, 

And  Intuition  also  in  due  time.  (584) 

With  energy  and  perseverance  armed, 

Let  him  he  ever  to  his  studies  yoked  ; 

Nor  till  he  have  attained  the  end  of  Ill, 

Let  the  wise  man  go  forth  in  confidence.  (585) 

Thus  if  the  Brother,  fain  for  purity 

[Of  knowledge  and  of  vision] 1  shall  abide, 

The  working  of  th’  Intoxicants  shall  cease, 

And  he  shall  reach  and  find  Nibbana’s  peace.2  (586) 

Now  the  Thera,  in  so  admonishing  that  bhikkhu,  showed 
his  own  attainment,  and  confessed  anna. 


1  So  Cy. 

2  Nibbuti ,  explained  as  Nibbana  in  life  and  at  death. 


264 


CCXXXIX.  GOTAMA 


CCXXXIX 

Gotama. 

Reborn  before  the  manifestation  of  our  Exalted  One  at 
SavatthT,  in  a  brahmin  family  from  Udicca,1  he  grew  up  an 
expert  in  the  Vedas  and  an  unrivalled  orator. 

Now  our  Exalted  One,  having  arisen  and  started  the 
rolling  of  the  wheel  of  the  Norm,  after  converting  Yasa  and 
his  friends,2  came  on  to  SavatthT  at  the  urgent  request  of 
Anathapindika.  Gotama  the  brahmin  saw  and  heard  him, 
and  asked  for  ordination.  Ordained  by  a  bhikkhu  at  the 
Master’s  bidding,  he  attained  arahantship  even  as  his  hair 
was  being  shaved.  After  a  long  residence  in  the  Kosala 
country,  he  returned  to  SavatthT.  And  many  of  his  relations, 
eminent  brahmins,  waited  upon  him  and  asked  him  which, 
of  the  many  gospels3  as  guides  to  life  that  were  current,  he 
judged  should  be  followed.  He  addressed  them  thus : 

Let  the  recluse  discern  his  own  real  good, 

And  let  him  well  consider  all  the  Word 

He  heareth  preached,  and  what  therein  beseems 

The  holy  life  whereunto  he  hath  come.  (587) 

Religious  friendships  in  the  Rule,  a  course 

Of  ample  training,  and  the  wish  to  hear 

Men  fit  to  teach  this  the  recluse  beseems.  (588) 

For  Buddhas  reverence  ;  towards  the  Norm 

Honour  sincere  ;  for  the  Fraternity 

Care  and  esteem this  the  recluse  beseems.  (589) 

Of  decorous  habit  and  in  living  pure, 

In  conduct  blameless,  and  the  intelligence 

1  A  north-western  district.  Cf.  p.  79,  n. 

2  See  above,  CXVII. ;  Bud.  Birth  Stories ,  p.  130. 

...3  Purity-doctrines  ( suddhivadd ).  It  would  appear  from  Ang., 
iii.  277  {cf.  Dialogues ,  i.  220),  that  among  such  doctrinaires  were 
those  called  Gotamakas,  or  Gotamists.  Apparently  none  of  the  three 
Theras  called  Gotama  (CXXIX.,  CLXXXIII.,  and  above)  was  this 
doctrinaire.  In  the  Cy.  he  is  termed  ‘  Another  ’  (Apara-)  Gotama. 


CCXXXIX.  GOTAMA 


265 


Adjusted  well : — this  the  recluse  beseems.  (590) 

In  what  he  does  and  what  he  leaves  undone 
Using  deportment  that  doth  favour  find  ; 

To  higher  training  of  the  heart  and  mind 
Fervently  given  : — this  the  recluse  beseems.  (591) 
Haunts  of  the  forest,  lone,  remote,  where  sounds 
May  hardly  come,  ’mong  these  the  earnest 
sage 

Should  make  his  choice : — this  the  recluse  be¬ 
seems.  (592) 

And  virtue,  and  much  learning,  and  research 
To  know  how  in  themselves  things  really  are, 
Grasp  of  the  Truths  :  —  this  the  recluse  be¬ 
seems.  (593) 

To  meditate  upon  the  Impermanent, 

And  on  the  absence  of  all  soul,  and  on 
The  foul,  and  in  the  world  to  find  no  charm 
To  bind  the  heart : — this  the  recluse  beseems.  (594) 
To  meditate  on  Wisdom’s  seven  arms, 

On  paths  to  mystic  potency,  on  powers 
And  forces  five,  and  on  the  eightfold  Path, 

The  Ariyan 1 : — this  the  recluse  beseems.  (595) 

Let  the  true  sage  put  Craving  far  away  ; 

Let  him  uproot  and  crush  the  Intoxicants  ; 

Let  him  live  Free  : — this  the  recluse  beseems.  (596) 

Thus  the  Thera,  in  praising  the  course  suitable  to  a 
recluse,  magnified  the  efficiency  of  his  Order,  and  contrari¬ 
wise  the  ineffectualness  of  a  recluse  not  of  it.  Then  those 
brahmins,  mightily  approving  of  the  Rule,  were  established 
in  the  precepts  and  so  forth. 

1  Cf.  ‘  Ariyan  ’  conveyed  to  Buddhists  much  what  our  ‘  Christian  5 
does  to  us.  Originally  a  racial  term,  it  had  come  to  mean  ‘noble, 
gentle,5  and  specifically,  a  saintly  ‘  confessor 5  of  the  Dhamma.  These 
subjects  are  the  thirty-seven  ‘  bodhipakkhiya  dhamma,’  or  Factors  of 
Enlightenment,  less  the  four  Onsets  of  Mindfulness  (verses  166,  352) 
and  the  four  Supreme  Efforts.  See  Compendium,  p.  179/. 


CANTO  XI 

PSALM  OP  ELEVEN  VERSES 


CCXL 

Sankicca. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  SavatthI  in  a  family  of  very 
eminent  brahmins,  his  mother  died  just  prior  to  his  birth, 
so  that  he  was  discovered  unburnt  upon  the  funeral  pyre. 
For  the  life  of  a  being  in  his  last  birth  cannot  perish  ere 
he  attain  arahantship,  even  if  he  fell  down  Mount  Sineru. 
At  seven  years  of  age,  when  he  heard  of  his  mother  dying 
at  his  birth,  he  was  thrilled,  and  said,  *  I  will  leave  the 
world.’  So  they  brought  him  to  Sariputta.  And  he  won 
arahantship  even  as  his  hair  was  being  cut  off.  How  he 
offered  his  life  to  brigands  to  save  8,000  bhikkhus  is  told 
in  the  Dhammapada  Commentary.1 

Now  a  certain  layman,  desiring  to  wait  upon  him,  asked 
him  to  dwell  in  the  neighbourhood,  saying : 

What  is  the  gain  for  thee,  dear  lad,2  to  dwell 
During  the  rains  within  the  distant  woods, 

Like  Ujjuhana,  marshy,  jungle-crowned  ? 

Sweeter  for  thee  Verambha,  Cave  of  Winds, 

Since  they  who  meditate  must  dwell  apart.3  (597) 

1  Vol.  ii.,  pp.  240-252  :  the  story  of  Sankicca  the  novice,  and  how 
he  converted  the  highwaymen,  explaining  the  circumstances  of 
Dhammapada ,  verse  110.  With  his  birth,  cf.  Dabba,  V.,  p.  10,  n.  4. 

3  Tata ,  speaking  to  the  boy  as  if  he  were  his  father,  says  Dhamma- 
pala.  Kim,  he  adds,  is  for  ho  ( attho ). 

3  Ujjuhana  is  said  to  have  been  either  a  hill  covered  with  jungle 
and  abounding  in  waters,  or  a  bird  that  dwelt  in  thickets  during  the 

266 


CCXL.  SANKICCA 


267 


Then  the  Thera,  to  show  the  charm  of  the  forest  and 
other  things,  replied : 

E’en  as  the  wind  of  the  monsoon  blows  up 
And  all  around  the  cloud- wrack,  in  the  rains, 

[So  in  the  forest  lone,  remote,  arise] 

The  thoughts  that  with  detachment  harmonize, 
And  all  my  spirit  whelm  and  overspread.* 1  (598) 
’Twas  the  dun-feathered  one,2  in  charnel-field 
Going  his  rounds,  that  made  to  rise  in  me 
Clear  thought  about  this  body,  passion- 
purged.  (599) 

Moreover,  he  whom  others  need  not  guard, 

He  too  who  hath  no  others  whom  to  guard : — 
Even  the  bhikkhu,  dwells  in  happy  ease, 
Regardless  of  what  men  desire  and  love.3  (600) 
Crags  where  clear  waters  lie,  a  rocky  world, 
Haunted  by  black-faced  apes  and  timid  deer, 
Where  ’neath  bright  blossoms  run  the  silver 
streams  : — 

Those  are  the  highlands  of  my  heart’s  de¬ 
light.4  (601) 

I’ve  dwelt  in  forests  and  in  mountain  caves, 

In  rocky  gorges  and  in  haunts  remote, 

And  where  the  creatures  of  the  wild  do  roam  ;  (602) 
But  never  mine  the  quest,  with  ill-will  fraught, 
Ungentle  and  ignoble  :5 — 4  Let  us  hunt, 

Let’s  slay  these  creatures,  let  us  work  them 
ill!’  (603) 


rains.  Similarly,  veramb(Ji)a  is  the  monsoon  wind,  or  a  certain  cave 
nearer  the  layman’s  home  than  the  woods.  I  am  of  an  open  mind  as 
to  which  was  really  meant. 

1  The  Pali  is  here  very  terse.  For  abhiMranti  (see  Jdt .,  iii.  57) 
=  ajjhottharanti.  Cf.  Ps.  CXXXII.,  Mr  anti. 

2  I.e. ,  the  carrion  crow,  at  home  in  the  charnel-field,  feeding  on  the 
dead.  Ayandaro ,  not-clear,  not-bright,  is  paraphrased  as  k dlavanno. 

3  See  Jdt.,  i.,  No.  10. 

4  See  CXIII.,  CCLXI. 


-  Cf.  XLVIII.,  CCXLIY. 


268 


CCXL,  SANKJCCA 


The  Master  hath  my  fealty  and  love, 

And  all  the  Buddha’s  bidding  hath  been  done. 
Low  have  I  laid  the  heavy  load  I  bore 
Cause  for  rebirth  is  found  in  me  no  more.  (604) 
The  Good  for  which  I  bade  the  world  farewell, 
And  left  the  home  a  homeless  life  to  lead, 

That  highest  Good  have  I  accomplished, 

And  every  bond  and  fetter  is  destroyed.2  (605) 
With  thought  of  death  I  dally  not,  nor  yet 
Delight  in  living.  I  await  the  hour, 

Like  any  hireling  who  hath  done  his  task.  (606) 
With  thought  of  death  I  dally  not,  nor  yet 
Delight  in  living.  I  await  the  hour 
With  mind  discerning  and  with  heedfulness.3  (607) 

The  load  of  the  Khandhas  (Commentary) — i.e.,  he  had  removed 
the  cause  ( tanhd ,  see  next  line)  of  their  future  renewal.  He  now 
concludes  his  reply  in  terms  of  the  question  put  to  him,  viz.,  of  ‘  good,’ 
or  ‘  gain  ’  ( attlia ). 

2  =  ver.  136;  380. 

3  See  CLXVIII.,  CCLIX.  (1002  /.) ;  cf  Milinda,  i.  70.  The 
hireling,  woiking  for  another,  takes  no  great  joy  in  the  completion  of 
his  work  (Commentary).  Cf.  Laws  of  Manu  (S.B.E.  xxv.),  p.  207. 


CANTO  XII 

POEMS  OF  TWELVE  VERSES 


CCXLI 

Silavat. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Rajagaha,  as  a  son  of 
King  Bimbisara,  he  was  named  Silavat.  When  he  was 
come  of  age,  his  brother  Ajatasattu  was  king,  and  wished 
to  put  him  to  death,  but  was  unable,  because  Silavat  was 
in  his  last  span  of  life,  and  had  not  won  arahantship.1 
Then  the  Exalted  One,  discerning  what  was  going  on,  sent 
Moggallana  the  Great  to  fetch  him.  And  Prince  Silavat 
alighted  from  his  elephant,  and  did  obeisance  to  the 
Exalted  One.  Then  the  latter  taught  him,  adapting  the 
doctrine  to  his  temperament,  so  that  the  youth  won  faith, 
entered  the  Order,  and  in  due  time  became  an  arahant. 
He  dwelt  in  Kosala,  and  when  Ajatasattu  sent  men  to 
murder  him,  he  taught  them  and  converted  them,  so  that 
they,  too,  joined  the  Order.  And  he  preached  to  them 
thus  : 

In  morals2 *  ’tis  that  ye  should  train  yourselves 

Here  on  this  earth,  in  morals  practised  well. 

1  Cf.  CCXXVII.,  CCXL. ;  also  Vinaya  Texts ,  iii.  241  /. 

2  I  was  tempted  to  retain  the  pretty  word  sila  for  our  more  cumbrous 
4  morality,’  etc.  4  Virtue  ’  is  more  elegant,  but  a  little  vague.  Sila  is 
moral  habit ,  habitual  good,  or  moral  conduct — the  conduct  of  one  who 

does  not  hurt  or  rob  living  things,  is  sexually  straight,  truthful,  and 

gentle  of  speech,  and  sober  as  to  drink.  That  is  all.  Such  conduct  is 
only  the  essential  basis  of  the  higher  life.  The  sermon  is  addressed  to 
hired  assassins,  not  to  bhikkhus. 


269 


270 


CCXLI.  SILAVAT 


For  moral  culture  well  applied  doth  bring 
Near  to  our  reach  success  of  every  kind.1  (608) 

Let  the  wise  man  protect  his  morals  well, 

Who  doth  to  threefold  happiness  aspire : 

A  good  name  and  the  gain  of  this  world’s  goods 
And,  when  this  life  is  o’er,  the  joys  of  heaven.  (609) 
The  moral  man,  restrained,  wins  many  friends  ; 

Th’  immoral,  working  mischief,  loseth  friends.  (610) 
Dispraise  and  ill-fame  wins  th’  immoral  man  ; 

Aye  wins  the  good  man  fame,  approval,  praise.  (611) 
Nothing  there  is  of  spiritual  worth 
But  hath  the  moral  habit  as  its  base, 

Its  matrix  and  its  vanguard  and  its  source  ; 

Make  ye  therefore  your  morals  wholly  pure.  (612) 
Morals  do  give  the  tether  and  the  term, 

Light  and  delight  affording  to  the  heart  ;2 
The  strand  whence  all  th’  enlightened  put  to  sea  ;3 
Make  ye  therefore  your  morals  wholly  pure.  (613) 
No  force  is  there  like  unto  moral  force ; 

Weapon  supreme  the  moral  habit  is  ; 

Chief  decoration  is  the  moral  life ; 

Wondrous  invulnerable  coat  of  mail.1  (614) 

A  mighty  causeway  is  morality ; 

A  peerless  fragrance,  sov’reign  frankincense, 
Wherewith  we  safely  travel  far  and  wide.5  (615) 
Good  morals  are  the  best  viaticum,6 
Sov’reign  munitions  [for  life’s  pilgrimage], 

Good  morals  are  a  peerless  talisman, 

Wherewith  we  safely  travel  far  and  wide.7  (616) 

1  Success  as  man,  as  god,  or  in  Nibbana  (Commentary). 

2  Abhibhasanay  means  either;  the  Commentary  reads  the  latter 
meaning. 

3  ‘In  fording  the  great  river  (or  sea)  of  Nibbana’  (Commentary). 

4  The  Commentary  maintains  that  abbhutay,  wondrous,  means 
abhejjay,  unbreakable. 

5  Lit.,  from  one  quarter  (of  the  compass)  to  another,  so  acceptable 
to  all  men  are  virtuous  qualities. 

Sambalay  is  illustrated  by  the  yufablicittcLy ,  or  leaf  -  wrapped 
pudding  taken  by  a  traveller.  7  gee  ncqe  5. 


CCXL1.  SILAYAT 


271 


The  evil-minded  man1  wins  blame  on  earth, 

And  in  the  after-life  a  woeful  doom ; 

A  fool  no  matter  where  hath  sorry  cheer, 

Not  firmly  planted  on  morality.  (617) 

The  man  of  virtuous  mind  wins  fame  on  earth, 
And  in  the  after-life  the  radiant  realms. 

No  matter  where,  the  brave  are  of  good  cheer, 
Their  hearts  well  stablished  in  morality.  (618) 
Chief  here  below  is  morals,  but  the  man 
Of  wisdom  is  supreme  ;  ’mong  gods  and  men 
He  doth  prevail  who  is  both  good  and  wise.2  (619) 


CCXLII 

Sunlta. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  as  one  of  a  family  of  flower- 
scavengers,3  he  earned  his  living  as  a  road-sweeper,  not 
making  enough  to  still  his  hunger.  Now  in  the  first  watch 
of  the  night  the  Exalted  One,  attaining  that  mood  of 
great  pity  so  largely  practised  by  Buddhas,  surveyed  the 
world.  And  he  marked  the  conditions  of  arahantship  in 
the  heart  of  Sunita,  shining  like  a  lamp  within  a  jar.  And 
when  the  night  paled  into  dawn  he  rose  and  dressed,  and 
with  bowl  and  robe,  followed  by  his  bhikkhu  train,  walked 
to  Rajagaha  for  alms,  and  sought  the  street  where  Sunlta 
was  cleaning.  Now  Sunlta  was  collecting  scraps,  rubbish, 
and  so  on  into  heaps,  and  filling  therewith  the  baskets  he 
carried  on  a  yoke.  And  when  he  saw  the  Master  and  his 
train  approaching,  his  heart  was  filled  with  joy  and  awe. 
Finding  no  place  to  hide  in  on  the  road,  he  placed  his  yoke 

1  Dummano  and  its  opposite  are  usually  rendered  ‘  gloomy  ’  and 
‘cheerful,’  but  the  context  demands  an  ethical  rendering.  The  Com¬ 
mentary  paraphrases  by  papadhammo,  etc.,  and  kalyanadhammo. 

2  =verse  70. 

3  I.e.,  removers  of  cut  flowers,  wreaths,  etc.,  thrown  aside.  This 
was  a  ‘  low  ’  hereditary  trade. 


272 


CCXLII.  SUNITA 


in  a  bend  of  the  wall,  and  stood  as  if  stuck  to  the  wall 
saluting  with  clasped  hands.  Then  the  Master,  when  he 
had  come  near,  spoke  to  him  in  voice  divinely  sweet, 
saying :  ‘  Sunlta !  what  to  you  is  that  wretched  mode  of 
living  ?  Can  you  endure  to  leave  the  world  ?’  And 
Sunlta,  experiencing  the  rapture  of  one  who  has  been 
sprinkled  by  ambrosia,  said  :  4  If  even  such  as  I,  Exalted 
One,  may  in  this  life  take  orders,  why  should  I  not  ?  May 
the  Exalted  One  suffer  me  to  come  forth.’  Then  the  Master 
said:  4  Come,  bhikkhu  !’  And  he,  by  that  word  receiving 
sanction  and  ordination,  was  by  magic  power  invested  with 
bowl  and  robes.  The  Master,  leading  him  to  the  Vihara, 
taught  him  an  exercise,  and  he  won  first  the  eight  attain¬ 
ments1  and  fivefold  abhinna;  then  developing  insight,  the 
sixth.  And  Sakka  and  the  Brahma  gods  came  and  did 
homage  to  him,  as  it  is  written  : 

Those,  deities  seven  hundred ,  glorious , 

Brahma s  and  Irulr as  following  drew  nigh 
And  gladly  paid  S  unit  a  homage  due , 

As  high-bred  victor  over  age  and  death.2 


The  Exalted  One  saw  him  surrounded  by  gods,  and 
smiled  and  commended  him,  teaching  the  Norm  by  the 
verse : 

‘  By  discipline  of  holy  life!  .  .  .3 

Now  many  bhikkhus,  desirous  of  raising  their  ‘lion’s 
roar,’  asked  Sunlta:  ‘From  what  family  did  you  come 
forth  ?  Or  why  did  you  leave  the  world  ?  And  how  did 

‘  Of  Bud.  Psy.,  p.  346,  n.  3 ;  Compendium, ,  p.  133,  n.  3  (read  part  IX., 
$  11)  for  XI.,  §  12.  The  five  Jhanas  are  often  taken  as  four).  The  sixth 
abhinna  is  abolition  of  the  Asavas  =  arahantship. 

2  Of  Sisters,  p.  146,  verse  365.  These  lines  are  not  quoted  as  from 
the  Apaddna.  The  spiritual  breeding,  transmitted  from  the  past,  is 
doubtless  emphasized  in  aesthetic  and  ethical  contrast  with  the  sordid 
circumstances  of  his  last  span  of  life. 

3  Verse  631. 


CCXLI1.  SUNITA  273 

you  penetrate  the  truths?’  Then  Sunlta  told  them  the 
whole  matter  thus  : 

Humble  the  clan  wherein  I  took  my  birth, 

And  poor  was  I  and  scanty  was  my  lot ; 

Mean  task  was  mine,  a  scavenger  of  flowers.  (620) 
One  for  whom  no  man  cared,  despised,  abused, 

My  mind  I  humbled  and  I  bent  the  head 
In  deference  to  a  goodly  tale  of  folk.  (621) 

And  then  I  saw  the  All-Enlightened  come, 

Begirt  and  followed  by  his  bhikkhu-train, 

Great  Champion  ent’ring  Magadha’s  chief 
town.  (622) 

I  laid  aside  my  baskets  and  my  yoke, 

And  came  where  I  might  due  obeisance  make, 

And  of  his  lovingkindness  just  for  me, 

The  Chief  of  men  halted  upon  his  way.  (623) 

Low  at  his  feet  I  bent,  then  standing  by, 

I  begged  the  Master’s  leave  to  join  the  Buie 
And  follow  him,  of  every  creature  Chief.  (624) 
Then  he  whose  tender  mercy  watcheth  all 
The  world,  the  Master  pitiful  and  kind, 

Gave  me  my  answer :  Come,  bhikkhu  !  he  said. 
Thereby  to  me  was  ordination  given.1  (625) 

Lo  !  I  alone  in  forest  depths  abode, 

Wdth  zeal  unfaltering  wrought  the  Master’s  word, 
Even  the  counsels  of  the  Conqueror.  (626) 

While  passed  the  first  watch  of  the  night  there 
rose 

Long  memories  of  the  bygone  line  of  lives. 

While  passed  the  middle  watch,  the  heav’nly  eye, 
Purview  celestial,  was  clarified. 

While  passed  the  last  watch  of  the  night,  I  burst 
Asunder  all  the  gloom  of  ignorance.2  (627) 

Cf.  above,  Bhadda,  CCXXVI.  ;  Sisters ,  verse  109 
13  Nearly  identical  with  Sisters,  verses  172,  173. 


18 


274 


CCXLII.  SUNITA 


Then  as  the  night  wore  down  at  dawn 
And  rose  the  sun,  came  Indra  and  Brahma, 
Yielding  me  homage  with  their  clasped  hands :  (628) 
Hail  unto  thee,  thou  nobly  horn  of  men ! 

Hail  unto  thee,  thou  highest  among  men  ! 
Perished  for  thee  are  all  th’  intoxicants ; 

And  thou  art  worthy,  noble  sir,  of  gifts.  (629) 

The  Master,  seeing  me  by  troop  of  gods 
Begirt  and  followed,  thereupon  a  smile 
Revealing,  by  this  utterance  made  response  :  (630) 
‘  By  discipline  of  holy  life,  restraint 
And  mastery  of  self  :  hereby  a  man 
Is  holy  ;  this  is  holiness  supreme  I’1  (631) 

1  I.e .,  says  the  Commentary,  supreme  brahminhood  {brahman fi-arj) , 
not  caste  and  the  like,  and  quotes  Dhammapada ,  verses  58,  59 : 

‘  As  on  a  rubbish-heap  on  highway  cast 
A  lily  there  may  grow ,  fragrant  and  sweet , 

So  among  rubbish-creatures ,  worldlings  blind 
By  insight  shines  the  Very  Buddha's  child.' 

‘  Holy  life,’  ‘  holy,’  -  holiness,’  are  in  the  Pali  brahmacariyay ,  brdh- 
mano ,  brdhmanay. 

Celestial  tribute  evokes  a  smile  from  a  great  Thera  in  Ps.  CCLXI., 
verse  1086.  One  is  tempted  to  think  it  was  because  of  the  humorous 
element  in  the  situation — the  man  become  as  god — and  not  from 
complacency  alone. 


CANTO  XIII 

POEMS  OF  THIRTEEN  VERSES 

CCXLIII 

Sona-Kolivisa. 

He  got  rebirth,  in  the  lifetime  of  our  Exalted  One,  at  the 
city  of  Campa,  in  the  family  of  a  distinguished  councillor. 
From  the  time  when  his  birth  was  expected,  his  father’s 
great  wealth  increased  even  more,  and  on  his  birthday  the 
whole  town  kept  festival.  Now  because  of  his  generosity 
in  a  previous  birth  to  a  Silent  Buddha,  his  body  was  as 
fine  gold  and  most  delicately  soft,  wherefore  he  was  named 
Sona  (golden) .  On  the  soles  of  his  feet  and  the  palms  of  his 
hand  grew  fine  down  of  golden  colour,  and  he  was  reared  in 
luxury,  in  three  mansions  suited  to  each  of  the  three 
seasons.1 

Now  when  our  Master  had  attained  omniscience  and 
begun  rolling  the  wheel  of  the  Norm,  and  was  staying  at 
Bajagaha,  King  Bimbisara  sent  for  Sona.  He,  having 
arrived  with  a  great  company  of  fellow-townsmen,  heard 
the  Master  teach  the  Norm,  and,  winning  faith,  obtained 
his  parents’  consent  to  enter  the  Order.  He  received  a 
subject  of  study  from  the  Master,  but  was  unable  to  con¬ 
centrate,  owing  to  his  maintaining  intercourse  with  people 
while  he  stayed  in  Cool  Wood.  And  he  thought :  ‘  My  body 
is  too  delicately  reared  to  arrive  happily  at  happiness.2  A 

1  This  episode  and  the  following  occur  in  Vmaya  Texts ,  ii.  1  ff. 
Kolivisa,  his  family  name,  distinguishes  him  from  the  other  Sonas 
(CLVII.,  CCVIII.). 

2  Cf.  CLXX. ,  verse  220. 


275 


276 


CCXLIII.  SONA-KOLIVISA 
•  • 


recluse’s  duties  involve  bodily  fatigues.’  So  he  disregarded 
the  painful  sores  on  his  feet  got  from  pacing  up  and  down, 
and  strove  his  utmost,  but  was  unable  to  win.  And  he 
thought:  ‘I  am  not  able  to  create1  either  path  or  fruit. 
Of  what  use  is  the  religious  life  to  me  ?  I  will  go  back 
to  lowTer  things  and  wTork  merit.’  Then  the  Master 
discerned,  and  saved  him  by  the  lesson  on  the  Parable  of 
the  Lute,2  showing  him  how  to  temper  energy  with  calm. 
Thus  corrected,  he  went  to  Vulture's  Peak,  and  in  due 
course  won  arahantship.  Reflecting  on  his  achievement, 
he  thus  declared  his  anna  : 

Who  once  in  Anga’s  realm  was  passing  rich, 

A  squire  to  Anga’s  king,3  lo  !  he  to-day 
Is  of  fair  wealth  in  spiritual  things. 

Yea,  past  all  ill  hath  Sona  won  his  way.  (632) 

Five  cut  thou  off ;  Five  leave  behind,  and  Five 
beyond  these  cultivate ! 

He  who  the  Fivefold  Bond  transcends — a  Brother 
Flood-crossed  is  he  called.4  (633) 

Seest  thou  a  Brother  with  a  rush-like  mind, 
[Stuck-up  and  empty],5  trifler,  keen  to  taste 
External  things  ?  Never  will  he  attain 
Fulness  of  growth  within  the  moral  code, 

In  mental  training,  or  in  insight’s  grasp.6  (634) 

1  Nibbattetuy. 

2  Op.  cit .,  p.  8,  Ang.  iii.,  874  j/f.  He  was  to  cultivate  a  just  mean 
in  effort,  like  a  well-strung  lute. 

3  Bimbisara  was  therefore  King  of  both  Anga  and  Magadha.  Cf. 
op.  cit.,  1,  n.  2.  On  ‘  squire,5  paddliagu ,  patagu,  cf.  Sutta  Nipdta, 
verse  1094,  ‘comrade.5 

4  =  XY.  See  note  there. 

5  JJnnalo  is  thus  derived  by  Buddhists.  Cf.  s.v.  Childers’  Dictionary. 
The  Commentary  has  the  phrase  there  quoted  :  f  bearing  aloft  the 
reed  of  pride.’  The  etymology  is  probably  exegetical  only  ;  but  it 
expresses  what  the  word  means  for  a  Buddhist — and  that  is  all  that 
matters  here. 

6  The  three  trainings.  Cf.  my  Buddhism ,  chap.  viii. 


CCXLIII.  SONA-KOLIVISA 


277 


For  such  neglect  that  which  they  have  to  do, 

But  what  should  not  be  done  they  bring  to  pass. 

In  these  conceited,  desultory  minds 

Grow  [the  rank  weeds  of]  the  intoxicants.  (635) 

In  whom  the  constant  governance  of  sense 

Is  well  and  earnestly  begun,  the  things 

That  should  be  left  undone  they  practise  not ; 

Ever  what  should  be  done  they  bring  to  pass. 

For  them  who  live  mindful  and  self-possessed, 

The  intoxicants  wane  utterly  away.  (636) 

In  the  straight  Path,  the  Path  that  is  declared, 
See  that  ye  walk,  nor  turn  to  right  or  left. 

Let  each  himself  admonish  and  incite  ; 

Let  each  himself  unto  Nibbana  bring !  (637) 

When  overtaxed  and  strained  my  energies, 

The  Master — can  the  world  reveal  his  peer  ?— 
Made  me  the  parable  about  the  lute, 

And  thus  the  Man  who  Sees  taught  me  the 
Norm.  (638) 

And  I  who  heard  his  blessed  word  abide 
Fain  only  and  alway  to  do  his  will.1 
Calm  I  evolved  and  practised,  equipoise,2 
That  so  to  highest  Good  I  might  attain. 

And  now  the  Threefold  Wisdom  have  I  won, 

And  all  the  Buddha’s  ordinance  is  done.  (639) 

He  who  hath  compassed  yielding  up  the  world, 
And  hath  attained  detachment  of  the  mind,3 
Who  hath  achieved  conquest  of  enmity, 

And  grasping  rooted  out  that  bringeth  birth,  (640) 
And  death  of  craving  hath  attained  and  all 
That  doth  bewilder  and  obscure  the  mind, 

1  Cf.  verse  561 ;  Sisters ,  LIX.  ff. 

2  The  MSS.  read  here  some  samathay ,  some  samatay.  The  Cy. 
exploits  both,  and  so  does  the  translation. 

3  These  lines,  to  the  end,  occur  verbatim  in  Vinaya  Texts ,  loc.  cit. 
and  in  Anguttara  iii. ,  378. 


278  CCXLIII.  SONA-KOLIVISA 

And  of  sensations  marked  the  genesis  : — 

His  heart  is  set  at  perfect  liberty.  (641) 

For  such  a  Brother  rightly  freed,  whose  heart 
Hath  peace,  there  is  no  mounting  up  of  deeds, 

Nor  yet  remaineth  aught  for  him  to  do.  (642) 

Like  to  a  rock  that  is  a  monolith,1 
And  trembleth  never  in  the  windy  blast, 

So  all  the  world  of  sights  and  tastes  and  sounds, 
Odours  and  tangibles,  yea,  things  desired,  (643) 
And  undesirable  can  ne’er  excite 
A  man  like  him.  His  mind  stands  firm,  detached, 
And  of  all  thatg  he  notes  the  passing  hence.  (644) 

1  Dhammapada,  verse  81. 

2  Assrt  for  Tassa.  The  Cy.  paraphrases  by  arammanadhammassa 
.  .  .  khane  b hijjan as abJidvay. 


CANTO  XIV 

POEMS  OF  FOURTEEN  VERSES 


CCXLIY 

Re  v  at  a. 

This  Thera’s  verse  has  already  been  recorded  in  the  first 
Canto,1  where  is  incorporated  the  admonition  to  his  sisters’ 
sons  to  be  mindful.  Here  are  incorporated  the  verses  he 
published  during  his  life  in  the  Order.  This  is  the  point 
of  them :  When  he  had  won  arahantship,  he  went  from 
time  to  time  with  the  great  Theras,  Sariputta  and  the  rest, 
to  visit  the  Master,  and  after  staying  for  a  while,  returned 
to  the  Acacia  Wood,  dwelling  in  the  bliss  of  fruition  won 
and  in  the  Sublime  Moods.2  And  thus  he  continued  till 
he  was  an  aged  man.  Going  thus  one  day  to  visit  the 
Buddha,  he  stayed  not  far  from  SavatthI  in  a  forest.  Now 
the  police  came  round  on  the  track  of  thieves.  The  thieves 
running  by  the  Thera  dropped  their  booty  near  him  and  ran. 
And  the  police,  running  up,  arrested  the  Thera,  dragged 
him  before  the  king,  and  said  :  ‘  This,  sire,  is  the  thief !’ 
The  king3  had  him  released,  and  asked  him  :  ‘Has  your 
reverence  committed  this  robbery  or  not  ?’  Then  the 
Thera,  who  had  never  from  his  birth  done  anything  of  the 
sort,  taught  the  Norm,  by  way  of  showing  his  incapacity 
for  such  an  act,  in  these  verses  : 

1  XLII.  Revata  is  a  brother  of  Sariputta,  and  hence  a  brother 

of  Upasena  (CCXXXVIII.)  and  of  Cunda  (CXXXI.).  The  summary 
reference  is  in  Dhammapala’s  own  words.  2  See  verse  286,  n. 

3  Pasenadi,  King  of  Kosala,  was  a  warm  lay-adherent,  and  was  alive 
in  the  Buddha’s  last  years  ( Mctjjh .,  ii.  124).  Cf.  the  similar  episode, 
with  a  very  different  judge,  on  p.  109. 

279 


280 


CCXLIV.  RE  VAT  A 


Since  I  went  forth  from  home  to  homeless  life, 
Ne’er  have  I  harboured  conscious  wish  or  plan 
Un-Ariyan  or  linked  with  enmity.  (645) 

Ne’er  mine  the  quest,  all  this  long  interval; — 

‘  Let’s  smite  our  fellow-creatures,  let  us  slay, 

Let  them  be  brought  to  pain  and  misery.’ 1  (646) 

Nay,  love  I  do  avow,  made  infinite, 

Well  trained,  by  orderly  progression  grown, 

Even  as  by  the  Buddha  it  is  taught.  (647) 

With  all  am  I  a  friend,  comrade  to  all, 

And  to  all  creatures  kind  and  merciful ; 

A  heart  of  amity  I  cultivate, 

And  ever  in  good  will  is  my  delight.  (648) 

A  heart  that  cannot  drift  or  fluctuate 
I  make  my  joy  ;  the  sentiments  sublime 
That  evil  men  do  shun  I  cultivate.  (649) 

Whoso  hath  won  to  stage  of  ecstasy  2 
Beyond  attention’s  range  of  flitting  sense, 

He,  folloAver  of  the  Enlightened  One  Supreme, 

To  Ariyan  silence  straightway  doth  attain.3  (650) 
E’en  as  a  mountain  crag  unshaken  stands 
Sure-based,  a  Brother  with  illusions  gone 
Like  very  mountain  stands  unwavering.4  (651) 

The  man  of  blameless  life,  who  ever  seeks 
For  what  is  pure,  doth  deem  some  trifling  fault, 
That  is  no  heavier  than  the  tip  of  hair, 

Weighty  as  [burden  of  the  gravid]  cloud.  (652) 

E’en  as  a  border  city  guarded  well 

Within,  without,  so  guard  ye  well  yourselves. 

See  that  the  Moment  pass  not  vainly  by.5  (653) 

1  Cf.  XLVIII. ;  CCXL.,  verse  603. 

2  =  verses  999  jf.  in  his  brother’s  poem. 

3  Namely,  in  the  second  stage  of  Jhana  (Commentary).  The  Com¬ 
mentary  cites  Majjh.  Nik.,  i.  161.  Cf.  Sayy.  Nik.,  ii.  273. 

4  See  CXLVI.  and  preceding  Ps.,  verse  643. 

6  Cf.  verses  231,  403,  and  Sisters,  verse  5,  and  note.  Here  the  Com- 


CCXLIV.  HEVATA 


281 


With  thought1  of  death  I  dally  not,  nor  yet 

Delight  in  living.  I  await  the  hour 

Like  any  hireling  who  hath  done  his  task.  (654) 

With  thought  of  death  I  dally  not,  nor  yet 

Delight  in  living.  I  await  the  hour 

With  mind  discerning  and  with  heedfulness,  (655) 

The  Master  hath  my  fealty  and  love, 

And  all  the  Buddha’s  bidding  hath  been  done. 

Low  have  I  laid  the  heavy  load  I  bore, 

Cause  for  rebirth  is  found  in  me  no  more.  (656) 
The  Good  for  which  I  bade  the  world  farewell, 
And  left  the  home  to  lead  the  homeless  life, 

That  highest  Good  have  I  accomplished, 

And  every  bond  and  fetter  is  destroyed.  (657) 

Work  out  your  good  with  zeal  and  earnestness ! 
This  is  my  [last]  commandment  unto  you.2 
For  lo  !  now  shall  I  wholly  pass  away, 

To  me  comes  absolute  enfranchisement.3  (658) 


CCXLY 

Godatta. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthi,  in  a  family  of 
caravan-leaders,  he  was  named  Godatta.  After  his  father’s 
death  he  arranged  his  estate,  and  taking  500  carts  full  of 
wares  travelled  about,  maintaining  himself  by  trading. 
One  day  an  ox  fell  on  the  road  while  drawing  its  cart,  and 
his  men  could  not  raise  it,  so  he  himself  went  and  smote 


mentary  pertinently  adds  being  born  in  the  ‘  Middle  Country  ’  (p.  107) 
to  the  great  'conjuncture.’ 

1  =  verses  606,  607,  604,  605. 

2  Cf.  the  Buddha’s  last  words  (. Dialogues ,  ii.  173),  and  Sariputta’s, 
below,  verse  1017. 

3  The  Chronicle  relates  that  he  then  and  there  passed  away— lit., 
‘  became  extinct  ’ — like  a  flame  going  out.  There  is  no  ‘  passing  hence  ’ 
in  the  Pali  term  yarinibbissay ,  as  originally  conceived. 


282 


CCXLV.  GODATTA 


it  severely.  Then  the  ox,  incensed  at  his  ruthlessness, 
assumed  a  human  voice  and  said  :  ‘  Godatta,  this  long  time 
have  I  unreservedly  given  my  strength  to  draw  your  burdens, 
but  to-day  when  I  was  unable  and  fell,  you  hurt  me  badly. 
Well  then  !  wherever  henceforth  you  are  reborn,  may  I  be 
there  as  your  enemy  able  to  hurt  you  P  Godatta  was  thrilled 
at  hearing  this,  and  thought :  ‘  What  do  I  in  this  way 
of  life  who  have  thus  hurt  living  things  ?’  And  he 
divested  himself  of  all  his  property,  and  took  orders  under 
a  certain  great  Thera,  in  due  course  attaining  arahantship. 

Now  one  day  as  he  was  abiding  in  the  bliss  of  fruition, 
he  discoursed  to  Ariyan  groups,  both  lay  and  religious,  on 
worldly  wisdom : 1 

E’en  as  the  mettled  brute  of  noble  breed, 

Yoked  to  his  load,  drawing  his  load  along, 

Though  worn  by  burden  past  his  powers,  [unfair], 
Breaks  not  away,  revolting  from  bis  bonds,  (659) 
So  they  in  whom,  as  water  in  the  sea, 

Wisdom  abounds,  despise  not  other  men  ; 

This  among  creatures  is  the  Ariyan  rule.2  (660) 

Living  in  time,  come  ’neath  the  power  of  time ; 
Subject  to  dread  concerning  future  life,3 
Men  go  their  ways  to  pain  and  misery, 

Yea,  here  below  the  sons  of  men  do  mourn.  (661) 
Elated  by  some  pleasant  hap,  by  ill 
Depressed,  the  fools  are  smitten  to  and  fro,4 
Who  nothing  as  it  really  is  can  see.  (662) 

But  they  who  can  escape  the  seamstress  fell,5 
Twixt  pain  and  pleasure  holding  Middle  Way, 

1  LoJcadhamma. 

2  It  is  interesting  to  contrast  the  protest  of  the  Indian  ox  with  that 
of  the  Hebrew  ass  of  Balak.  According  to  the  Commentary,  the  gist 
of  the  ‘  Ariyan  rule  ’  is  the  sporting  maxim  that,  whether  we  do  or 
do  not  congratulate  ourselves  on  our  successes,  we  are  not  to  belittle 
( avambhanay )  others  when  we  fail.  Herein,  in  either  case,  rich 
wisdom  makes  a  man  happy. 

3  More  literally,  subject  to  becoming  and  not  becoming. 

4  Cf.  CII. 

5  I.e.,  craving  (tanka),  who  sews  life  on  to  life  (Bad.  Psy p.  278). 


CCXLV.  GODATTA 


283 


They  stand  as  any  pillar  at  the  gate, 

Neither  elated  they,  nor  yet  depressed.  (663) 

For  not  to  gain  or  loss,  to  honour,  fame, 

To  praise  or  blame,  to  pleasure  or  to  pain — (664) 
Where’er  it  be — do  they  take  hold  and  cling, 

No  more  than  drop  of  dew  to  lotus-leaf. 

Hale  and  serene  are  heroes  everywhere, 

And  everywhere  unconquered  [bound  to  win].1  (665) 

Of  him  who  rightly  seeks  and  nought  doth  gain, 
And  him  who  gains  but  seeketh  wrongfully, 

Better  is  he  who  rightly  sought  and  lost 
Than  he  who  gained  by  methods  that  were 
wrong.  (666) 

Of  them  who  have  repute,  but  scanty  dower 
Of  wit,  and  them  who  know,  but  lack  repute, 
Better  the  wise  men  who  do  lack  repute 
Than  great  repute  and  men  of  little  wit.  (667) 

Of  praises  by  the  unintelligent, 

And  blame  and  criticism  by  the  wise, 

Better  the  censure  of  th’  intelligent 

Than  are  the  commendations  of  a  fool.  (668) 

The  pleasure  born  of  sensuous  desire, 

The  pain  that  comes  from  life  detached,  austere, 
Better  the  pain  that  comes  from  life  austere 
Than  pleasure  born  of  sensuous  desire.  (669) 

To  live  by  wrong  ;  for  doing  right  to  die, 

Better  ’twere  thus  to  die  than  so  to  live.  (670) 
They  who  have  put  off  sense-desire  and  wrath, 
Peace  in  their  heart  regarding  life  to  come,2 
They  walk  the  world  from  lust  and  craving  free  ; 
Likes  and  dislikes  are  not  for  such  as  these.  (671) 
The  factors  of  enlightenment,  the  powers, 

These  have  they  studied  and  the  forces  too. 

So  winning  perfect  peace,  as  fires  extinct, 

They  wholly  pass  away,  sane  and  immune.  (672) 

1  This  last  ( metri  causa)  from  the  Commentary  :  anabhibhava- 
niyato.  2  See  ver.  661,  n.  3. 


[POEMS  OF  FIFTEEN  VEBSES  DESUNT) 


CANTO  XV 

POEMS  OF  SIXTEEN  VERSES 

CCXLVI 

Anna-Kondanna. 

Rebokn  before  our  Exalted  One,  in  the  village  of  Dona- 
vatthu,  not  far  from  Kapilavatthu,  in  a  very  wealthy  brah¬ 
min  family,  he  came  to  be  called  by  his  family  name, 
Kondanna.  When  grown  up  he  knew  the  three  Vedas,  and 
excelled  in  runes  concerning  marks.1  Now  when  our  Bodhi- 
sat  was  born,  he  was  among  the  eight  brahmins  sent  for 
to  prognosticate.  And  though  he  was  quite  a  novice,  he 
saw  the  marks  of  the  Great  Man  on  the  infant,  and  said  : 

‘  Verily  this  one  will  be  a  Buddha !’  So  he  lived,  awaiting 
the  Great  Being’s  renunciation.  When  this  happened  in 
the  Bodhisat’s  twenty-ninth  year,  Kondanna  heard  of  it, 
and  left  the  world  with  four  other  sons  of  mark-interpreting 
brahmins,  Vappa2  and  others,  and  for  six  years  dwelt  at 
Uruvela,  near  the  Bodhisat,  during  the  latter’s  great 
struggle.  Then  when  the  Bodhisat  ceased  to  fast,  they 
were  disgusted,  and  went  to  Isipatana.  There  the  Buddha 
followed  them,  and  preached  his  Wheel  sermon,  whereby 

Dialogues,  i.  17,  n.  2.  On  the  prophecy,  see  a  fuller  version  in 
Buddhist  Birth  Stories,  p.  72  f. 

2  See  above,  LXI. 


284 


ccxlvi.  anna-kondaMa 


285 


Kondanna  and  myriads  of  Brahma  angels  won  the  fruition 
of  the  first  path.  And  on  the  fifth  day,  through  the  sermon 
on  4  No  Sign  of  any  Soul/  Kondanna  realized  arahantship. 
Him  the  Master,  later  on,  in  conclave  at  the  great  Jeta 
Grove  Vihara,  ranked  chief  among  those  bhikkhus  who 
were  of  long  standing  in  the  Order.1  And  on  one  occasion 
Kondanna’s  sermon  on  the  Four  Truths — a  discourse 
bearing  the  impress  of  the  three  signs,  dealing  with  non¬ 
substantiality,  varied  by  divers  methods,  based  on  Nibbana, 
and  delivered  with  the  Buddha’s  own  fluency — so  impressed 
Sakka  the  god  that  he  uttered  this  verse : 

Hearing  thy  doctrine’s  mighty  properties, 

Lo  !  I  thereby  am  more  than  satisfied. 

Most  passionless  and  pure  the  Norm  thus  taught, 
From  every  form  of  grasping  wholly  free.2  (673) 

On  another  occasion  the  Thera,  seeing  how  the  minds  of 
certain  worldlings  were  mastered  by  wrong  ideas,  delivered 
himself  on  this  wise  : 

Many  the  motley  pictures  in  the  world, 

Enjoyed  within  this  earth’s  circumference, 
Inciting,  I  do  note,  man’s  purposes, 

Fair-seeming  hopes,  and  linked  with  fierce  de¬ 
sire.  (674) 

As  dust  by  wind  upchurned  the  rain-cloud  lays, 

So  are  those  purposes  composed  and  quenched, 
When  he  by  wisdom  doth  discern  and  see.  (675) 

When  he  by  wisdom  doth  discern  and  see  : 

‘  Impermanent  is  everything  in  life,’ 

Then  he  at  all  this  suffering  feels  disgust. 

Lo  !  herein  lies  the  way  to  purity.  (676) 

1  Any.,  i.  26.  For  the  Buddha’s  sermon,  see  Vinaya  Texts,  i.  100  f. 

2  Anupadaya ,  paraphrased  by  agahetvd  vimiUtisddhanavasena 
pavattattd. 


286 


CCXLVI.  ANNA-IvONDANNA 


When  he  by  wisdom  doth  discern  and  see, 

That  ‘Everything  in  life  is  bound  to  III’  . .  d  (677) 
That  ‘Everything  in  life  is  Void  of  Soul,’ 

Then  he  at  all  this  suffering  feels  disgust. 

Lo !  herein  lies  the  way  to  purity.  (678) 

Thereupon  he  showed  that  he  bad  himself  attained  this 
insight,  confessing  ariha,  and  saying  : 

Brother  Kondanna,  wakened  by  the  Wake  : — 

Lo  !  he  hath  passed  with  vigour  out  and  on ; 
Sloughed  off  hath  he  the  dyings  and  the  births, 
Wholly  accomplishing  the  life  sublime.  (679) 

And  be  it  ‘  flood  ’  or  ‘  snare  ’  or  ‘  stumbling- 
stone,’ 

Or  be  it  ‘  mountain  ’  hard  to  rive  in  twain,1 2 
The  net,  the  stumbling-stone  I’ve  hacked  away, 
And  cloven  is  the  rock  so  hard  to  break, 

And  crossed  the  flood.  Rapt  in  ecstatic  thought 
I  dwell,  from  bondage  unto  evil  freed.  (68(3) 

Now  one  day  the  Thera  rebuked  a  bhikkhu,  who  had 
fallen  into  bad  habits  through  unworthy  friendships,  and 
admonished  him,  saying : 

A  bhikkhu  of  distraught,  unsteady  mind, 

Who  doth  associate  with  vicious  friends, 

In  the  great  flood  [of  constant  living]  falls 
Headlong  and  drowning  sinks  beneath  its 
waves.  (681) 

But  who,  with  concentrated,  steady  mind, 

Discreet  and  self-restrained  in  heart  and  sense, 
Doth  wisely  join  himself  to  virtuous  friends, 

His  it  may  be  to  put  an  end  to  Ill.  (682) 

1  Here  repeat  the  two  preceding  lines.  Cf.  Dhammapada ,  verses 
277-279. 

2  All  metaphors  from  the  Suttas — e.g.,  Diglia  Nik.,  iii.  230;  Sayy. 
Nik.,  i.  105/.;  i.  27 ;  Majjli.  Nik.,  iii.  130. 


287 


CCXLVI.  ANM-KONDANNA 

Lo  !  here1  a  man  with  worn  and  pallid  frame ; 
Like  knotted  stems  of  cane  his  joints,  and  sharp 
Th’  emaciated  network  of  his  veins ; 

In  food  and  drink  austerely  temperate, 

His  spirit  neither  crushed  nor  desolate.  (683) 

In  the  great  forest,  in  the  mighty  woods, 

Touched  though  I  be  by  gadfly  and  by  gnat, 

I  yet  would  roam,  like  warrior-elephant, 

In  van  of  battle,  mindful,  vigilant.  (684) 

With  thought2  of  death  I  dally  not,  nor  yet 

Delight  in  living.  I  await  the  hour 

Like  any  hireling  who  hath  done  his  task.  (685) 

With  thought  of  death  1  dally  not,  nor  yet 

Delight  in  living.  I  await  the  hour 

With  mind  discerning  and  with  heedfulness.  (686) 

The  Master  hath  my  fealty  and  love, 

And  all  the  Buddha’s  bidding  hath  been  done. 
Low  have  I  laid  the  heavy  load  I  bore, 

Cause  for  rebirth  is  found  in  me  no  more.  (687) 
The  Good3  for  which  I  bade  the  world  farewell, 
And  left  the  home  to  lead  the  homeless  life, 

That  highest  Good  have  I  accomplished. 

What  need  have  I  as  cenobite  to  dwell  ?  (688) 


CCXLYII 

Udayin. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Kapilavatthu  in  a  brahmin 
family,  he  saw  the  power  and  majesty  of  the  Buddha  when 

1  =  CLXXVIII.  This  to  enjoin  the  hermit-life  on  the  erring  one 
(Commentary). 

2  =  verses  606/.,  654/  ;  604  and  655. 

3  Cf.  verse  605.  The  Commentary  adds  that  he  went  and  dwelt 
twenty-two  years  at  the  Chaddanta  Lake  before  he  passed  away,  only 
visiting  the  Buddha  shortly  before  that  event  to  announce  his  assurance 
of  it. 


288 


CCXLVII.  UDAYIN 


he  visited  his  family,  believed  in  him,  entered  the  Order, 
and  in  due  course  became  an  arahant.  Now  there  are 
these  three  Theras  named  Udayin  :  the  minister’s  son, 
Kaludayin,  recorded  above,1  this  brahmin,  and  Udayin  the 
Great.2  This  one,  when  the  Sutta  of  the  Elephant  Parable 
had  been  taught  on  the  occasion  when  Seta,  King  Pasenadi’s 
elephant,  was  publicly  admired,3  was  stirred  to  enthusiasm 
at  thought  of  the  Buddha,  and  thinking :  ‘  These  people 
admire  a  mere  animal.  Come  now,  I  will  proclaim  the 
virtues  of  that  great  and  wondrous  Elephant,  the  Buddha  !’ 
he  uttered  these  verses  : 

Buddha  the  Wake,  the  son  of  man, 

Self-tamed,  by  inward  vision  rapt, 

Bearing  himself  by  ways  sublime, 

Glad  in  tranquillity  of  heart ;  (689) 

To  whom  men  honour  pay  as  one 
Who  hath  transcended  all  we  know;4 
To  whom  gods  also  honour  yield  : — 

So  I,  an  arahant,  have  heard —  (690) 

From  jungle  to  Nibbana  come,5 
With  every  fetter  left  behind, 

Glad  in  renouncing  worldly  joys, 

Extracted  like  fine  gold  from  ore,  (691) 

Like  elephant  superb  is  he, 

On  wooded  heights  in  Himalay  : — 

Lo,  him  behold  !  Naga  superb — 

1  See  CCXXXIII. 

2  It  is  not  easy  to  elicit  from  the  canonical  episodes  mentioning 
ayasma  Udayi,’  which  is  the  last  named.  Such  a  personage  frequently 

appears,  getting  into  trouble  in  the  Vinaya,  conversing  with  the  Buddha 
and  apostles  in  the  Suttas,  but  never  called  ‘  Great,’  or  doing  anything 
to  merit  the  title.  Conceivably  he  lived  nearer  the  Commentator’s  time. 

3  See  Ang.  Nik.,  iii.  345/.,  where  the  psalm  is  also  given.  Translated 
by  E.  Hardy,  Buddha,  1903,  p.  51. 

4  Dhammd — i.e.,  things  as  cognizable. 

5  Vand  nib-bdnam  dgatay ;  the  word-play  [cannot  be  reproduced. 
See  Compendium,  p.  168. 


‘  On  wooded  heights  in  Himalayd 

From  Schimper’s  Plant  Geography,  Oxford,  Clarendon  Press,  1SP3. 


CCXLVII.  UDAYIN 


289 


For,  sure,  of  all  we  4  Naga  ’  name, 

(Serpent  or  elephant  or  man) 

Supremely  true  that  name  for  him —  (692) 

This  Naga  will  I  praise  to  you, 

For  he  4  no  sin  ’ — na  agun — doth.1 
Mercifulness,  sobriety  :2 
These  be  two  of  the  Naga’s  feet ;  (693) 
Intelligence  and  mindfulness  : 

Other  two  feet  of  this  Elephant. 

The  Naga’s  trunk  is  confidence  ; 

His  white  tusks,  equanimity ;  (694) 

His  throat  awareness,3  and  his  head 
Is  insight ;  testing  touch  of  trunk 
Is  weighing  wisely  good  and  bad  ; 

Shrine  of  the  Norm  his  viscera  ; 

Detachment  is  the  tail  of  him.  (695) 

So  musing  rapt,  and  breathing  bliss,4 
Composed  in  body  and  in  mind, 

Composed,  this  Naga,  when  he  walks, 
Composed,  this  Naga,  when  he  stands,  (696) 
Composed,  this  Naga,  lying  down, 

And  eke  composed  while  he  sits  ; 

Self -governed  whatsoe’er  he  doth  : 

This  is  the  Naga’s  perfect  way.  (697) 
Blameless  in  all  that  he  enjoys, 

Enjoying  naught  that  calls  for  blame, 

Hath  he  but  gotten  food  and  gear, 

From  store  laid  up  he  doth  refrain.  (698) 

1  Naga,  whatever  its  real,  not  (as  here)  exegetical,  derivation,  meant 
a  fairy,  daimon,  or  mysterious  being.  The  serpent  was  as  mysterious 
for  the  Indian  as  for  Cretan  and  Greek.  So  was  the  elephant.  So 
was  the  saint.  The  bracketed  line  is  from  the  Commentary.  Cf. 
Sutta-Nipata ,  verse  522. 

2  On  sobriety  ( soraccay ;  Commentary  =  silay),  see  Bud.  Psy.,  p.  349. 
The  other  two  feet  are,  in  Ang.  NiJc.,  called  ‘austerity’  (tapo)  and 
4  holy  life.’ 

3  Sati,  4  mindfulness,’  above,  is  also  sati. 

4  Lit.,  4  delighting  in  inhaling,’  a  word  meaning  also  comfort — 
namely,  of  Nibbana  (Commentary). 


19 


290 


CC-XLVII.  UDAYIN 


Whether  the  tie  be  coarse  or  fine, 

Bonds  of  all  kinds  he  knaps  in  twain ; 

He  goeth  wheresoe’er  he  will, 

Nor  careth  wheresoe’er  he  goes.  (699) 

As  lotus  born  within  a  lake, 

By  water  nowise  is  defiled, 

But  groweth  fragrant,  beautiful,  (700) 

So  is  the  Buddha  in  this  world, 

Born  in  the  world  and  dwelling  there, 

But  by  the  world  nowise  defiled, 

E’en  as  the  lily  by  the  lake.  (701) 

A  mighty  fire  that’s  spent  itself, 

And  hath  no  fuel  dieth  down, 

And  of  the  smouldering  ashes  men 
Do  say  ‘  That  fire  is  now  extinct.’1  (702) 

Lo  !  here’s  a  parable  the  wise 

Have  taught  to  make  their  meaning  known. 

Great  Nagas,  they  will  understand 

The  Naga,  by  that  Naga  taught :  (703) 

With  passion  gone,  and  hatred  gone, 

And  dulness  gone,  sane  and  immune, 

This  Naga  yielding  up  his  life, 

Will  clean  ‘  go  out,’  sane  and  immune.  (704) 


1  Nibbuto. 


(POEMS  OF  SIXTEEN,  SEVENTEEN,  EIGHTEEN , 
NINETEEN  VERSES  DESUNT) 


CANTO  XVI 

POEMS  OF  TWENTY  VERSES 

CCXLVIII 

Adhimutta. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  as  the  sister’s  son  of  the  Thera 
Sankicca,1  he  left  the  world  under  his  uncle’s  tuition,  and 
while  only  a  novice,  won  arahantship.  And  dwelling  in 
the  bliss  of  fruition,  he  wished  for  full  ordination,  and 
went  home  to  ask  his  mother’s  leave.  Now  as  he  went,  he 
fell  in  with  highwaymen  on  the  look-out  for  an  offering  to 
their  deity,  and  they  seized  on  him  as  a  suitable  sacrifice. 
He,  thus  assailed,  stood  undaunted  and  without  blenching. 
Then  the  robber-chief  was  amazed,  and  commended  him, 
saying  : 

Of  all  the  lot  whom  we,  for  god2  or  pelf, 

Have  smitten  in  our  time,  there’s  not  been  one 
But  hath  shown  fear,  trembled  and  clamoured 
sore.  (705) 

But  thou,  who’rt  not  affrighted,  nay,  whose  face 
Shows  brighter  bloom,3  why  dost  thou  not  lament, 
When  such  a  fearsome  peril  threatens  thee?  (706) 

1  See  CCXL.  2  Lit.,  ‘for  sacrifice.’ 

3  Adhimutta  was  a  young  novice. 

291 


292 


CCXLVIII.  ADHIMUTTA 


Adhimutta  : 

No  misery  of  mind,  0  chief,  is  there 
For  him  who  hath  no  wants.  All  fear  have  I 
Transcended,  since  the  Fetters  were  destroyed.  (707) 
By  death  of  that  which  leadeth  to  rebirth,1 
The  truths  are  seen  e’en  as  they  really  are, 

And  hence  in  death  there  lies  no  fear  for  me, 

Tis  as  a  laying  down  the  load  I  bore.  (708) 

Well  have  I  lived  the  holy  life,  and  well 
Made  progress  in  the  Ariyan  Path  ;  no  fear 
There  lies  in  death,  who  puts  an  end  to  ills.2  (709) 
Void  of  delight  the  forms  of  birth  appear,3 
Like  drinking  poison  one  has  thrown  away.  (710) 
He  who  hath  passed  beyond,  from  grasping  free, 
Whose  task  is  done,  sane  and  immune,  is  glad, 

Not  sorry,  when  the  term  of  lives  is  reached, 

As  one  who  from  the  slaughter-house  escapes.  (711) 
He  who  the  ideal  order4  hath  attained, 

All  the  world  over  seeking  nought  to  own, 

As  one  who  from  a  burning  house  escapes, 

When  death  is  drawing  nigh  he  grieveth  not.  (712) 
All  things  soever  which  have  come  to  be, 

And  all  rebirth  wherever  it  is  got, 

Nowhere  therein  is  personal  design  : — 5 
So  hath  the  mighty  Sage  declared  to  us.  (713) 

1  Bhavanetti — i.e .,  tanlid . 

2  Lit.,  diseases.  Cf.  Tennyson’s  Elaine: 

‘  And  sweet  is  death  who  puts  an  end  to  pain.’ 

3  That  ‘life  is  not  worth  living,’  which  is  Dr.  Neumann’s  rendering, 
seems  to  me  scarcely  sound  Buddhism.  Life  can  yield  arahantship — 
the  thing  supremely  worth  having,  the  crown  of  all  previous  upward 
effort.  ‘  Rebecomings  are  unsatisfying’;  ‘  nirassddd  bhavii  ’  is  the  literal 
rendering  of  the  text.  We  need  to  leave  our  own  ‘saws  ’  behind  in 
getting  at  the  Buddhist  standpoint. 

4  Dhammatay  uttamay — i.e.,  ‘  the  nature  of  the  Norm;  in,  and  because 
of,  completed  arahantship  ’  (Commentary). 

5  Na-issaray—  lit.,  that  which  has  no  lord  or  ruler;  issdra  is  used 
for  a  personal  creator. 


CCXLV1II.  ADHIMUTTA 


293 


And  he  Avho  knows  that  things  are  even  so, 

As  by  the  Buddha  it  is  taught,  no  more 
W ould  he  take  hold  of  any  form  of  birth 
Than  he  would  grasp  a  red-hot  iron  ball.  (714) 
Comes  not  to  me  the  thought :  ‘  Tis  I  have  been,’ 
Nor  comes  the  thought :  ‘  What  shall  I  next  become  ?’ 
Thoughts,  deeds  and  words  are  no  persisting  [soul], 
Therefore  what  ground  for  lamentations  here?1  (715) 
To  him  who  seeth,  as  it  really  is, 

The  pure  and  simple2  causal  rise  of  things, 

The  pure  and  simple  sequence  of  our  acts  : — 

To  such  an  one  can  come  no  fear,  0  chief.  (716) 

That  all  this  world  is  like  the  forest  grass 

And  brushwood  [no  man’s  property] : — when  one 

By  wisdom  seeth  this,  finds  naught  that’s  ‘  Mine,’ 

Thinking  :  ‘  ’tis  not  for  me,’  he  grieveth  not.3  (717) 

This  body  irketh  me ;  no  seeker  I 

To  live.  This  mortal  frame  will  broken  be, 

And  ne’er  another  from  it  be  reborn.  (718) 

Your  business  with  my  body,  come,  that  do 
E’en  as  ye  will;  and  not  on  that  account 
Will  hatred  or  affection  rise  in  me.  (719) 

The  young  men  marvelled  at  his  words,  and  thrilled 
With  awe,  casting  away  their  knives  they  said:  (720) 
What  are  your  honour’s  practices,4  or  who 
Is  teacher  to  you  ?  Of  whose  Ordinance 
A  member,  have  you  gained  this  grieflessness?  (721) 

Adhimutta  : 

My  teacher  is  the  Conqueror  knowing  all 

And  seeing  all,  the  Master  infinite 

In  pity,  all  the  world’s  Physician,  He.  (722) 

1  Lit.,  will  pass  away.’  ‘  Soul  ’  is  supplied  from  the  Commentary. 

2  Suddhay ,  pure,  unmixed — i.e.,  with  attd ;  phenomenal  process 
only  :  dhammamattappavatti  (Commentary). 

3  =  Sutta-Nipdta,  verse  951. 

4  Tapas  :  religious  austerities  or  magic  (Commentary). 


294 


CCXLVIII.  ADHIMUTTA 


And  He  it  is  by  whom  these  truths  are  taught, 
Norm  to  Nibbana  leading,  unsurpassed. 

Within  His  Rule  I’ve  won  this  grieflessness.  (723) 

Now  when  the  robbers  heard  the  well-spoke  utterance 
of  the  sage, 

They  laid  aside  their  knives,  their  arms,  and  some 
forsook  that  trade, 

And  some  besought  that  they  might  leave  the  world 
for  holy  life.  (724) 

They  leaving  thus,  within  the  Buddha’s  welcome  Rule 1 
grew  wise, 

The  seven  Factors  practising  and  eke  the  Forces 
live, 

Trained  in  the  Powers,  with  hearts  elate,  happy  they 
reached  the  Goal.  (725) 


CCXLIX 

Parapariya. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Savatthi  as  the  son  of  a 
certain  very  eminent  brahmin,  he  was  called,  when  adult, 
after  his  family  name  Parapara,  ‘  the  Parapariya  ’  (Para- 
parite).2  Well  educated  in  brahmin  lore  and  accomplish¬ 
ments,  he  went  one  day  into  the  Jeta  Grove  Vihara,  at  the 
Master’s  preaching  hour,  and  took  his  seat  at  the  fringe  of 
the  assembly.  The  Master,  contemplating  his  character, 

1  Lit.,  the  rule  of  the  Welcome  ( su-gata ),  a  title  often  used  for  the 
Buddha.  For  Factors,  Forces,  and  Powers,  see  Compendium,  p.  180, 
called  factors,  powers,  faculties,  respectively.  ‘  Reached  the  Goal  ’ — 
lit.,  ‘  touched  (attained)  the  state  of  Nibbana,  the  unconditioned.’  The 
Commentary  adds  that  the  youthful  saint  went  imperturbably  on  his 
way,  obtained  his  mother’s  consent  to  enter  the  Order,  and  was  ordained 
by  his  uncle.  On  verse  722  Dhammapala  refers  to  his  own  Commentary 
on  the  Iti-vuttakci. 

2  Connected  with,  perhaps,  but  not  identical  with,  the  Parapariya  of 
CXVI.  of  the  Rajagaha  Paraparas.  This  one  is  the  Parapariya  of 
CCLVII. 


CCXL1X.  PARAPARIYA 


295 


taught  the  Sutta,  called  ‘Practice  of  Faculties,’1  where¬ 
upon  Parapariya  found  faith  and  entered  the  Order.  After 
learning  the  Sutta  by  heart,  he  pondered  over  the  meaning, 
thinking :  *  In  verses  the  meaning  would  appear  so  and  so.’ 
Thus  pondering  on  the  subject  of  sense -perception  he 
established  insight,  and  in  due  time  won  arahant- 
ship.  Later  he  expressed  his  meditations  in  verse  as 
follows : 


To  a  Brother  came  these  musings 
To  the  bhikkhu  Parapariya, 

As  he  sat  alone,  secluded, 
World-detached  and  meditating  :  (726) 

What  is  there  of  course  or  order, 

What  is  there  in  rite,  or  conduct, 

Which  may  make  a  man  accomplish 
That  which  to  himself  is  owing, 

Nor  work  harm  on  any  other?  (727) 

Lo  !  the  parts  and  powers  of  humans 
Make  for  welfare  and  for  evil : 

Powers  unguarded  make  for  evil, 
Guarded  powers  make  for  welfare.  (728) 
One  who  guardeth  parts  and  powers, 

One  who  tendeth  parts  and  powers, 

He  may  do  to  self  his  duty, 

Nor  work  harm  on  any  other.  (729) 

If  he  go  with  unrestrained 
Power  of  sight  among  sense-objects, 


1  The  only  Sutta  I  can  discover  with  this  title  ( Indriya-bhdvand )  is 
the  last  Sutta  in  the  Majjhima  Nihlya.  This  refers  to  the  methods 
used  by  the  brahmin  teacher  Parasariya,  and  then  gives  the  method  of 
‘  faculty-training  ’  taught  in  the  ‘  Ariyan  Vinaya,’  the  Buddha  speaking 
(at  Kajangala,  not  SavatthI),  and  the  interlocutors  being  Uttara,  the 
brahmin’s  pupil,  and  Ananda.  Identity  of  subject  is  the  one  thing 
connecting  Sutta  and  poem.  There  is  no  identity  of  treatment,  and 
the  two  problems  are  set  up  :  (1)  Was  Parapariya  paraphrasing  another 
version?  (2)  Was  Parapariya  Parasariya  himself? 


296 


CCXLIX.  PARAPARIYA 


All  the  evil  ne’er  discerning. 

He  doth  not  escape  from  sorrow.1  (730) 

If  he  go  with  unrestrained 
Power  of  hearing  sounds  about  him, 

All  the  evil  ne’er  discerning, 

He  doth  not  escape  from  sorrow.  (731) 

If  in  divers  kinds  of  odours 
He  indulge,  voluptuously, 

Way  of  refuge  ne’er  discerning,2 
He  doth  not  escape  from  sorrow.  (732) 
Taste  of  sour  and  sweet  and  bitter 
Relishing  and  pondering  over, 

Cleaving  to  desires  of  palate  : 

Ne’er  his  heart  will  be  awakened.  (733) 
Lovely,  luring  things  of  contact, 

Touching,  feeling,  pondering  over, 
Lust-exciting,  he  impassioned 
Findeth  divers  forms  of  sorrow.  (734) 

Yea,  who  in  these  sense-impressions 
Cannot  guard  the  mind  [recipient], 

Sorrow  thereby  will  pursue  him, 

E’en  by  way  of  all  five  senses.  (735) 

Body  full  of  blood  and  matter 
And  of  plenteous  other  carrion, 

So  by  human  skill  and  wit  is 
Rendered  fair  like  painted  casket,  (736) 
That  the  bitter  suffering  from  it 
Shows  as  sweetly  satisfying, 

Bound  to  what  we  hold  beloved, 

As  a  razor- blade,  that’s  hidden 
Neath  thick  crust  of  honey-syrup, 

The  Commentary  supports  the  reading  na  lii  muccati ,  altered  by 
Neumann. 

2  Dr.  Neumann’s  fUnd  nicht  die  freie  Hohe  sieht’  is  perhaps 
unnecessarily  free,  and  is  scarcely  a  good  antithesis  to  fragrant  odours, 
as  anyone  knows  who  has  left  a  malodorous  Alpine  village  for  the 
odours  of  the  flower-covered  uplands  in  June. 


CCXLIX.  PARA  PARI  YA 


297 


Undiscerned  [by  the  greedy].1  (737) 

He  who  dotes  on  form  of  woman, 

Taste  and  touch  and  scent  of  woman, 
Findeth  divers  shapes  of  sorrow.  (738) 

All  that  emanates  from  woman,2 
Permeating  [all  men’s  senses,] — 

This  and  that  man’s  five  gates  [open,] — 
’Gainst  all  these  to  make  a  barrier 
If  a  man  have  grit  and  valiance,  (739) 

He  is  wise  and  he  is  righteous, 

He  is  clever  and  far-seeing  ; 

For  he  may,  at  ease  and  cheerful, 

Set  himself  to  righteous  duties.  (740) 

When  immersed  in  temporal  profit,3 
If  he  shun  vain  undertakings, 

If  he  judge  it  right  to  shun  them, 

He  is  earnest  and  far-seeing.  (741) 

Is  a  work  with  good  connected, 

Is  his  love  set  on  th’  Ideal,4 
Let  him  take  the  work  and  do  it ; 

Other  loves  that  Love  surpasseth.  (742) 
Many,  manifold  the  methods 
Whereby  man  his  fellows  cheateth  ; 
Smiting,  slaying,  sore  afflicting 
He  with  violence  oppresses.5  (743) 

As  a  strong  man  plying  woodcraft, 

Useth  nail  to  smite  a  nail  out, 

1  ‘  As  one  greedy  of  sweet  things  licking  the  edge  of  a  razor  ’ 
( Commentary). 

2  Lit.,  streams — i.e .,  her  visible  shape,  etc.,  objects  of  sense  (Com¬ 
mentary).  The  Pali  is  more  refined  than  the  Neumann  German 
version,  and  the  dragging  in  again  of  the  maligned  concrete  1  Weib  ’ — 
‘  Wo  nieder  man  zum  Weibe  sinkt  ’ — is  entirely  unwarranted  by 
the  Pali. 

3  The  Commentary  upholds  the  atho  (in  exegesis  tato)  sidati  san- 
nutav ,  adding  ‘  if  he  lays  hold  of  good  of  a  temporal  kind.’ 

4  Dhammagata  rati — lit.,  set  on  the  Norm. 

5  Redundant  padas,  omitted  in  translating,  have  got  into  the  Pali. 


298 


CCXLIX.  PARAPARIYA 

So  the  wise  and  virtuous  brethren 
Use  one  power  to  smite  out  others  : —  (744) 
Faith  and  effort,  concentration, 

Mindfulness  and  wisdom  plying, 

Five  by  other  Five  outsmiting, 

Goes  the  saint  from  flaws  released.1  (745) 
He  is  wise  and  he  is  righteous ; 

He  hath  kept  the  Rule  proclaimed 
Wholly,  fully  by  the  Buddha. 

He  is  happy,  he  doth  prosper.  (746) 

CCL 

Telakani. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age,  before  the  Master’s 
birth,  at  SavatthI,  in  a  brahmin  family,  and  named 
Telakani.  Matured  as  to  antecedents,  he  wearied  of 
worldly  desires,  and  left  the  world  as  a  wandering  recluse. 
Seeking  for  emancipation  of  spirit,  he  toured  about,  think¬ 
ing  :  ‘  W  ho  is  he  in  the  world  who  has  got  beyond  ?’  and 
asking  questions  of  recluses  and  brahmins  without  re¬ 
ceiving  satisfaction.  Meanwhile  our  Exalted  One  had 
arisen,  and  was  rolling  the  Norm-Wheel,  working  the  good 
of  the  world.  Him  one  day  Telakani  heard,  and  found 
faith,  was  ordained,  and  not  long  after  won  arahantship. 
Sitting  one  day  with  bhikkhus,  and  remembering  his  own 
toiling  and  winning,  he  declared  it  all  to  them  thus  : 

Oh  the  long  days  I  cast  about  in  thought, 

Ardent  to  find  truth  [that  could  set  me  free] ! 2 
N o  peace  of  mind  I  won,  [but  up  and  down 
I  fared,]  asking  of  brahmin  and  recluse  :  (747) 

1  Here  again  the  German  translation  misses  the  point.  Satisfaction 
with  the  five  modes  of  sensuous  pleasure  is  to  be  ejected  by  the  five 
modes  of  spiritual  sense,  sense-powers  or  faculties  by  spiritual  powers. 
See  XV.,  n.  2,  and  Compendium ,  p.  180.  Cf.  above,  verse  725,  n. 
There  is  a  play  on  words  in  dni,  nail,  anigho,  flawless,  untranslatable 
in  English. 

2  So  the  Commentary,  vimuttidhammav ,  vimoTcJchadhammo. 


CCL.  TELAKANI 


299 


‘  What  man  in  all  the  world  hath  got  beyond  ? 
Who  in  the  Ambrosia  hath  a  foothold  won  ?1  2 
Whose  doctrine  can  I  to  my  bosom  take, 

Whereby  the  Highest2  I  may  come  to  know  ?’  (748) 
Caught  on  a  hook  within,  my  spirit  hung 
E’en  as  a  fish  that  swallows  baited  food. 

Captured  I  lay,  as  Yepachitti  once, 

The  Asura,  in  mighty  Indra’s  toils.3  (749) 

I  dragged  my  chains  along,  nor  found  release 
From  this  [unending  source  of]  grief  and  dole. 

Is  there  no  man  on  earth  who  can  unloose 
My  bonds,  and  make  me  know  Enlighten¬ 
ment  ?  (750) 

What  brahmin,  what  recluse  can  tell  me  how 
To  break  them  off  ?  Whose  Norm  can  I  accept, 
Able  to  bear  away  old  age  and  death?  (751) 

Behold  this  load !  coil  of  perplexity 
And  doubt,  the  mortal  force  of  it 
Wearing  the  temper,  stiffening  the  mind, 

And  lacerating  with  a  vast  desire,  (752) 

Fell  offshoot  from  the  bow  of  craving,  due 
To  [forms  of  false  opinion,]  twice  fifteen4 — 
Behold,  I  say,  how  mightily  about 
My  breast  this  pressure  crushes  where  it  lies  !5  (753) 
The  ruck  of  vain  opinions6  not  put  off 

1  ‘In  this  world  among  those  who  are  acknowledged  as  religious 
teachers,  who  now  has  gone  up  to  Nibbana  beyond  Sarjsara  (i.e.,  con¬ 
secutive  livings  and  dyings)  ?  Who  is  established  in  Nibbana,  in  the 
path  of  emancipation  ?’  (Commentary). 

2  Paramattlia ,  the  supreme  good,  or  meaning. 

3  See  Sayy.  Nik.,  i.  220,  §  4. 

4  According  to  the  Commentary,  the  ‘  twice  fifteen  ’  refers  to  the 
twenty  forms  (5  x  4)  of  sahhdy  ad/it  thi,  or  soul-speculation  ( Dh .  S., 

§  1003  =  Bud.  Psy.,  p.  259),  and  the  ten  forms  of  micchdditthi 
( Vibhanga ,  p.  392). 

5  I  read  with  the  Commentary  bdlhay  and  titthati. 

6  The  word  anuditthinay  is  paraphrased  by  sesadittliinay  .  .  . 
sassataditthi  ddinay. 


300 


CCL.  TELAKANI 


But  quickened  by  fond  hopes  and  memories : 1 
By  this  transfixed  I  stagger  to  and  fro, 

And  quiver  as  a  leaf  blown  by  the  wind.  (754) 

Tis  from  within  me  that  hath  sprung  the 
dart,2 

Whence  swiftly  is  consumed  this  self  of  me,3 
Even  this  body  with  its  sixfold  field 
Of  contact,  where  it  doth  proceed  alway.  (755) 

I  see  him  not,  that  surgeon  skilled,  who  can 
Extract  the  dart  and  purge  me  of  my  doubts 
By  subtle  probe,  and  not  by  other  knife.4  (756) 
Can  any  one,  without  or  knife  or  wound, 

Leaving  the  members  of  me  all  unscathed, 

Draw  out  this  shaft  that’s  stuck  within  my 
heart  ?  (757) 

He  who  is  master  of  the  truth  and  best, 

Who  can  the  venoms  fever-scathe  disperse, 

Who,  were  I  fallen  in  the  deep,  could  show 

A  hand  and5  point  where  shallows  sloped  to 
land.  (758) 

Yea,  in  a  pool  it  is  that  I  am  plunged, 

A  pit  of  dust  and  mire  undrainable, 

Extended  wide  with  treacherous  counterfeit, 

Envy  and  overstrain,6  torpor  and  sloth.  (759) 

The  Commentary  reads  sankappa-paratejitay  .  .  .  micchdvitak- 
kena  parajane  .  .  .  nssdliitay.  The  other  reading,  sankappasara- 
tejitay,  seems  more  intelligible  and  less  forced  in  construction.  There 
is  an  approximate  precedent  in  sarasankappd  (. Majjh .  Nik.,  i.  453  ; 
Sdyy.  Nik.,  iv.  76).  Lit.,  the  ‘  not  putting  off’  is  ‘  quickened.’ 

2  Stress  is  laid  in  the  Commentary  on  the  wound  being  self-inflicted, 
much  in  the  style  of  Christ’s  words  :  ‘ .  .  .  those  things  which  .  .  . 
come  forth  from  the  heart ;  .  .  .  they  defile  the  man  ’  (Matt.  xv.  18). 

3  Mdmakay  =  ?nama  santakay  attablidvay. 

Doubts,  as  ‘  the  dart,’  are  here  said  to  typify  the  entire  group 
of  kilesas  (lit.,  torments,  cankers  ;  cf.  Bud.  Psy .,  327,  n.).  The  probe, 
ndndrajja,  is  paraphrased  by  esani-saldka .  Ahiysay=abddhento. 

5  The  Commentary  reads  pdnifi  ca. 

6  Sdrambha  (cf.  verse  752)  is  explained  by  karakuttariya-lakkhano. 


CCL.  TELAKANI 


301 


Thunder  of  thought  distracted  overhead, 

And  fettering  wraiths  of  cloud  about  my  path 
The  rush  of  lust-borne  impulse  and  intent 
Doth  thither  sweep  me— to  a  sceptic’s  doom.1  (760) 
And  everywhere  the  streams  are  flowing  by, 

And  ever  burgeoning  the  creeper  stands— 

Those  streams  whose  strength  avails  to  stop  ? 
That  creeper  who  can  sever  from  its  root  ? 2 3  (761) 

Make  thee  a  dyke,  good  sir,  to  dam  the  streams ; 
See  that  the  mind’s  strong  current  ruthlessly 
Dash  thee  not  hence  like  any  log  away  !  (762) 

’Twas  even  so  for  me  who  sought  in  fear, 

On  this  side  for  the  distant  shore,  when  He, 

The  Master,  followed  by  his  saintly  throng,  (763) 
He  the  true  Refuge,  and  with  insight  armed, 

Held  out  to  me  a  stairway,  strongly  wrought, 

And  firm,  made  of  the  Norm’s  pure  heart  of 
oak,4 

And  to  me  toiling  spake  :  ‘  Be  not  afraid  !  ’  (764) 

I  climbed  up  to  the  terrace  where  the  mind 
Alert  and  vigilant  applies  itself,5 
Thence  I  could  contemplate  the  sons  of  men 
Delighting  in  that  sense  of  ‘  I  ’  and  ‘  mine,’ 6 
Wherein  I  once  was  wont  to  nurse  conceits.  (765) 
And  when  I  saw  the  Way,  even  the  ship 
On  which  to  embark,  and  dwelt  no  more  on  Self, 
’Twas  then  that  I  beheld  Nibbana’s  shore.7  (766) 

1  The  Commentary  interprets  valid  vahanti  as  ‘a  rush  of  great  waters 
bearing  me  to  the  doom-ocean.’  Cf.  Jdt .,  v.  388/.;  Dlip.,  ver.  339/ 

2  These  are  standard  similes  for  ‘craving’  ( tanhd ).  Cf.  verse  1094. 

3  Karotlia  is  ‘  make  ye,’  but  one  meets  with  this  inflexion  in  the 
singular  sense,  such  as  the  context  demands. 

4  Lit.,  ‘  made  of  the  pith  of  the  Norm.’ 

5  S  a  tip  att  hdna-pdsdday . 

6  Saklidya ,  paraphrased  as  aliay  mamati. 

7  Titthay  uttamay — lit.,  best  or  supreme  shore — paraphrased  by 
‘  the  landing-place  of  the  ambrosial  great-beyond,  called  Nibbana.’ 


302 


CCLI.  RATTHAPALA 


The  dart  that  sprang  from  self,  offshoot  of  her 
Who  to  becoming  leads 1 — to  stop  all  that 
The  perfect  Path  [the  Ariyan]  he  taught.  (767) 
The  knotted  bonds  long  buried  in  my  life, 
Fixed  up  about  me  for  so  many  years, 

The  Buddha  loosed  and  cast  them  off  from  me, 
And  every  poison  canker  purged  away.  (768) 


CCLI 

Ratthapala. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  in  the  country  of  the 
Kurus,  in  the  township  of  Thullakotthika,  as  the  son  of 
a  councillor  named  Ratthapala,2  and  was  called  by  his 
family  name.  Brought  up  in  a  large  establishment  of 
retainers,  he  was  united,  when  adolescent,  to  a  suitable 
wife,  and  enjoyed  a  prosperity  resembling  that  of  the 
devas.  Now  the  Exalted  One,  touring  in  the  Kuru  country, 
came  to  Thullakotthika,  and  Ratthapala  went  to  hear  him 
teach.  Receiving  faith,  he  with  great  difficulty  obtained 
his  parents’  leave  to  renounce  the  world.  Going  to  the 
Master,  he  received  ordination  from  a  bhikkhu  at  the 
Master’s  command,  and  studying  diligently  developed  in* 
sight  and  won  arahantship.  Thereupon  he  obtained 
permission  to  visit  his  parents,  and  went  to  Thullakotthika, 
going  from  house  to  house  for  alms.  At  his  father’s  house 
he  obtained  rancid  gruel,  but  ate  it  as  if  it  were  ambrosia. 
Invited  by  his  father,  he  went  next  day  to  his  home.  And 

1  Tanka.  See  p.  292,  n.  1.  Pabhdvitay=samutthita7j  (Commentsacy). 

2  Because  he  was  wealthy  enough  to  prop  up  a  bankrupt  kingdom 
(Commentary);  This  legend  is  more  fully  told  in  Majjhima ,  vol.  ii., 
No.  82.  It  reappears  also  in  the  Vinaya  Texts  and  the  Jdtaka 
(vol.  i.,  No.  14).  See  hereon  Mr.  W.  Lupton’s  discussion,  prefacing 
his  edition  and  translation  of  the  ‘Ratthapala  Sutta,’  JBAS ,  1894, 
p.  769  ff.  I  have  largely  profited  by  Mr.  Lupton’s  translation  of 
the  verses.  Dhammapala’s  brief  resume  is  given  in  full. 


303 


CCLI.  RATTHAPALA 
•  • 

when  the  ladies  in  fine  array  asked  him  :  ‘  What  are  the 
celestial  nymphs  like,  my  lord,  for  whose  sake  you  live  the 
holy  life  ?  he  taught  them  the  Norm  in  connection  with 
impermanence,  etc.,  repulsing  their  insinuating  conduct: 

Behold  the  tricked-out  puppet-shape,  a  mass 
Of  sores,  a  congeries  diseased,  and  full 
Of  many  purposes  and  plans,  and  yet 
In  whom  there  is  no  power  to  persist  I1  (769) 

Behold  the  tricked-out  form,  bejewelled,  ringed, 
Sheathed  in  bones  and  skinny  envelope, 

By  help  of  gear  made  fine  and  fair  to  see !  (770) 

Feet  dyed  with  lac,  with  rouge  the  lips  besmeared  : 
All  good  enough  for  dull  wit  of  a  fool, 

But  not  for  him  who  seeketh  the  Beyond !  (771) 

The  locks  in  eightfold  plait,  eyes  fringed  with  black: 
All  good  enough  for  dull  wit  of  a  fool, 

But  not  for  him  who  seeketh  the  Beyond  !  (772) 
Like  a  collyrium-pot,2  brand  new,  embossed, 

The  body  foul  within  is  bravely  decked  : 

All  good  enough  for  dull  wit  of  a  fool, 

But  not  for  him  who  seeketh  the  Beyond.  (773) 

The  trapper  set  his  snare.  The  deer  came  not 
Against  the  net.3  We’ve  eaten  of  the  bait— 

Let’s  go  !4  the  while  deer  trappers  make  lament.  (774) 
Snapt  is  the  hunter’s  snare  !  The  deer  came  not 
Against  the  net.  We’ve  eaten  of  the  bait— 

Let’s  go  ;  the  while  deer  catchers  weep  and  wail.  (775) 

Ratthapala  thereupon  went  through  the  air5  to  the 
Antelope  Park  of  King  Koravya,  and  seated  himself  on  a 
stone  slab.  Now  the  Thera’s  father  had  had  bolts  put  on 

1  Cf.  verse  1020  /. 

2  Here  Mr.  Lupton  has  somewhat  missed  the  point. 

3  Ndsadd  =  na  sanghattesi  (Commentary). 

4  Or,  ‘  we  go.’ 

The  older  chronicle  in  the  Majjhima  Nihuya  does  not  mention 
this  feat  of  the  Thera’s,  nor  the  father’s  measures. 


304 


CCLl.  RATTHAPALA 


his  seven  doors,  and  had  sent  men  to  prevent  him  from 
getting  out,  and  to  take  off  his  yellow  robes  and  clothe 
him  in  white.1  Hence  the  Thera’s  going  through  the  air. 
Then  the  king,  hearing  where  he  was  seated,  went  to  him, 
and  with  courteous  greeting  asked  him  thus :  ‘  Master 
Ratthapala,  in  this  world  men  renounce  it  for  some  kind  of 
misfortune — illness,  loss  of  king,  wealth  or  family.  But 
you  who  have  suffered  no  such  thing,  why  have  you  left 
the  world  ?’  Then  the  Thera  replied :  ‘  The  world  passes 
away,  is  transient ;  the  world  is  without  refuge  or  provi¬ 
dence  ;  the  world  has  no  stronghold  ;  the  world  is  wanting 
and  destitute,  dissatisfied,  the  slave  of  craving.’  Thus 
showing  his  separate  condition,  he  recited  a  parallel  in 
verse : 

Men2  of  much  wealth  I  see  in  the  world  : — 

Riches  acquiring  they  err  in  not  giving. 

Make  out  of  greed  a  great  hoard  of  their  wealth, 
Yea,  hankering  yet  after  ever  more  pleasures.  (776) 
The  king  having  forcibly  conquered  the  earth, 

To  the  shore  of  the  ocean,  holding  the  land 
This  side  of  the  sea,  may  yet  all  unsatisfied 
Hanker  after  the  further  side  also.  (777) 

See  where  both  king  and  full  many  another  man 
Nursing  their  cravings  come  to  their  dying. 
Paupers  becoming,3  they  put  off  this  body, 

For  never  content  lies  in  pleasures  of  this 
world.  (778) 

Kinsfolk  bewail  him  with  tresses  dishevelled, 
Crying  :  4  Alas  !  would  our  kin  were  immortal !’ 4 
Him  in  his  shroud  envelop t  they  bear  away  ; 
Raising  a  pyre  they  forthwith  cremate  him.  (779) 

1  The  layman’s  colour. 

2  The  metre,  till  verse  789,  is  in  the  Tristubh  (Vedic)  metre,  of  the 
5  +  5  feet  variety. 

3  I.e.,  in  their  wishes  (Commentary). 

4  Paraphrased  by  alio  vata  (lengthened  metri  causa ,  1  gaiha- 
sukhattay  ’)  amhakarj  nati  amara  siyan  {?  siyuri)  ti. 


CCLI.  RATTHAPALA 
•  • 


305 


He  lies  a-burning,  by  forks  being  prodded, 

Clad  in  one  garment,  stripped  of  all  riches. 

Never  to  one  who  is  dying  are  kinsfolk 
Refuge,  nor  friends,  nay,  nor  even  neighbours.  (780) 
His  wealth  is  annexed  by  his  heirs,  but  the  being1 
Goeth  according  to  all  his  past  actions. 

Never  doth  wealth  follow  after  the  dying, 

Nor  children,  nor  wife,  nor  wealth,  nor  a  king 
dom.  (781) 

Never  is  long  life  gotten  through  riches, 

N or  is  old  age  ever  banished  by  property. 

Brief  is  this  life,  all  the  sages  have  told  us ; 
Transient  it  is,  and  essentially  changing.  (782) 

All  feel  the  Touch,2  both  the  poor  and  the  wealthy; 
Touched  is  the  wise  man  no  less  than  the  fool. 

But  the  fool,  smitten  down  by  his  folly,  lies  pros¬ 
trate  ; 

The  wise  man,  when  feeling  the  Touch,  never 
trembles.  (783) 

Wherefore  far  better  than  riches  is  wisdom, 
Whereby  we  arrive  even  here  at  the  terminus. 

For  from  not  reaching  the  goal3  the  dull-minded 
Work  wicked  deeds  in  delusion,  reborn 
In  spheres  whether  high  or  whether  of  no  ac¬ 
count.4  (784) 

Cometh  a  man  to  the  womb  and  in  other  worlds 
Findeth  rebirth,  being  caught  in  Saijsara, 

Round  sempiternal  of  livings  consecutive ; 

Him  one  of  little  wit  follows  believing, 

Cometh  to  birth  both  here  and  in  other  worlds.  (785) 
E’en  as  a  thief  who  is  taken  in  burglary, 

By  his  own  act  is  condemned  as  a  criminal,5 

1  Satto.  2  Paraphrased  by  anitthaphassay  pdjpunanti. 

3  Anadhigatanitthattd  (Commentary) . 

4  Bhavdbhavesu.  This  curious  term  is  so  paraphrased  :  mahantd- 

mahantesu  bhavesu. 

5  Quite  literally  :  is  ruined  ( haniiati ),  as  being  of  evil  nature. 

20 


306 


CCLI.  RATTHAPALA 
•  • 


So  is  the  race,  after  death,  in  another  world, 

By  its  own  doing  condemned  as  a  criminal.  (786) 

For  by  the  charm,  sweet  and  diverse,  of  sense- 
desire, 

One  way  or  other  the  mind  is  unbalanced ; 

And  seeing  the  evil  in  sensuous  pleasures, 
Therefore,  O  King,  have  I  gone  all  forsaking.  (787) 
Fall  as  fruit  from  the  tree  all  the  sons  of 
men, 

Youthful  and  aged,  when  breaks  down  the  body, 
This  too  seeing,  O  King,  have  I  gone  forth. 

Better  the  safe,  sure  life  of  religion.  (788) 

Full  of  high  confidence1  I  left  the  world 
And  joined  the  Order  of  the  Conqueror. 

Blameless  my  going  forth  has  been,  and  free 
From  debt  I  live  on  my  allotted  share.2  (789) 
Looking  on  sense-desires  as  fire  alight, 

On  gold  and  silver  as  a  [noxious]  knife, 

[On  life]  from  entry  in  the  womb  as  ill, 

And  on  the  fearsome  peril  of  the  hells  : —  (790) 
Seeing,  I  say,  great  evils  everywhere, 

Thereat  was  I  with  anguish  sore  beset. 

Then  to  me,  pierced  and  wounded  as  I  was, 

Came  fourfold  victory :  o’er  sense-desires, 

O’er  rebirth,  error,  ignorance,  victory  !3  (791) 

The  Master  hath  my  fealty  and  love,4 

And  all  the  Buddha’s  bidding  hath  been  done. 

Low  have  I  laid  the  heavy  load  I  bore, 

Cause  for  rebirth  is  found  in  me  no  more.  (792) 

1  This  is  the  dominant  note  in  the  Pali  term  saddha ,  ‘  faith.’  Cf. 
Dr.  Neumann’s  Zuversicht,  rather  than  Glaube.  The  61oka  metre 
re-enters  here.  In  the  Majjln.  the  poem  ends  with  (788). 

2  Cf.  Sisters,  verse  110. 

3  Expansion  of  sampatto  dsavakTiliciyay. 

4  =  verses  604,  605,  687. 


CCLI.  RATTHAPALA 

•  • 


307 


The  Good  for  which  I  bade  the  world  farewell, 
And  left  the  home  to  dwell  where  home  was  not, 
That  highest  Good  have  I  accomplished, 

And  every  bond  and  fetter  is  destroyed.1  (793) 

Then  the  Thera,  having  thus  taught  the  Norm  to  King 
Koravya,  went  back  to  the  Master.  And  He  thereafter,  in 
the  assembly  of  the  Ariyans,  declared  Batthapala  foremost 
of  those  who  had  left  the  world  through  faith.2 


CCLII 

Malunkya’s  Son. 

The  story  of  this  venerable  one  is  given  in  Canto  YI. 
(CCXIV.),  wherein  the  Thera,  established  in  arahantship, 
uttered  a  psalm  by  way  of  teaching  his  kinsfolk  about  the 
Path.  But  in  this  poem  the  Thera,  not  yet  an  arahant, 
had  asked  the  Master  for  doctrine  in  brief,  and  he  received 
this  response:  AVhat  think  you,  Malunkya’s  son,  things 
which  you  have  never  seen,  heard,  smelt,  tasted,  touched, 
or  perceived,  of  which  you  have  no  present  impression, 
nor  of  which  you  wish  you  might  have  sensations  and 
perception  : — do  you  feel  desire,  or  longing,  or  fondness  for 
them?’  ‘No,  lord.’  ‘Here,  then,  Malunkya’s  son,  when 
you  do  get  any  sensation  or  perception  of  things,  you  will 
have  just  the  sensations  or  perceptions  only.  And  inas¬ 
much  as  this  is  so,  and  you  will  get  no  [greed,  ill-will,  or 
illusion]  thereby,  or  therein,  either  here  or  elsewhere,  or 
hereafter,  this,  even  this,  is  the  end  of  pain.8 

1  =  verse  136.  2  j  24. 

3  That  is,  you  can  use  sense  and  intellect  without  craving  being 
engendered.  I  have  inserted  the  bracketed  words  from  Buddhaghosa’s 
Commentary  on  this  passage  in  his  Sdratthapakdsini.  Cf.  the  Thera’s 
emphasis  on  tanka  in  his  former  poem.  The  Commentary  follows 
almost  verbatim  the  Sutta  Sangaylm  in  the  ‘  Salayatana-Sapyutta  ’ 
(Sayy.  Nik.,  iv.  72),  where  the  poem  also  occurs. 


308 


cclii.  malunkya’s  son 


And  Malunkya’s  son,  showing  how  well  he  had 
learnt  that  doctrine  so  summarized,  expressed  it  in  these 
verses  : 

Sight  of  fair  shape  bewildering  lucid  thought,1 
If  one  but  heed  the  image  sweet  and  dear, 

The  heart  inflamed  in  feeling  doth  o’erflow,  (794) 
And  clinging  stayeth.  Thus  in  him  do  grow 
Divers  emotions  rooted  in  the  sight, 

Greed  and  aversion,2  and  the  heart  of  him 
Doth  suffer  grievously.  Of  him  we  say, 

Thus  heaping  store  of  pain  and  suffering : 

Far  from  Nibbana  !  (795) 

Sound,3  smell,  taste,  touch,  bewildering  lucid 
thought, 

If  one  but  heed  the  image  sweet  and  dear, 

The  heart  inflamed  in  feeling  doth  o’erflow,  (796) 
And  clinging  stayeth.  Thus  in  him  do  grow 
Divers  emotions  rooted  in  the  sense, 

Greed  and  aversion ;  and  the  heart  of  him 
Doth  suffer  grievously.  Of  him  we  say, 

Thus  heaping  store  of  pain  and  suffering  : 

Far  from  Nibbana  !  (797-803) 

Object,  idea,4  bewildering  lucid  thought, 

If  one  but  heed  the  image  sweet  and  dear, 

The  heart  inflamed  in  feeling  doth  o’erflow, 

And  clinging  stayeth.  Thus  in  him  do  grow  (804) 

1  See  verse  98  and  n.  ‘  Lucid  thought  ’  is  better  for  sati  than  ‘  self- 
control,’  to  which  sati  conduces. 

2  Vihesd ,  aroused,  says  the  Commentary,  when  the  object  is  the 
reverse  of  agreeable.  More  probably  the  enmity  born  of  greed.  Cf. 
Dialogues,  ii.  55. 

3  Each  sense  is  given  a  separate  stanza. 

4  Dhammay  natvd — i.e.,  the  aspect  of  cognition  as  an  act  of  mind, 
supplementing,  or,  it  may  be,  independent  of,  sense-impressions. 


cclii.  malunkya’s  son 


309 


Divers  emotions  rooted  in  idea, 

Greed  and  aversion ;  and  the  heart  of  him 
Doth  suffer  grievously.  Of  him  we  say, — 

Thus  heaping  store  of  pain  and  suffering  : — 

Far  from  Nibbana  !  (805) 

He  who  for  things  he  sees  no  passion  breeds, 

But  mindful,  clear  of  head,  can  suffer  sense, 

With  uninflamed  heart,  nor  staying  clings  ;  (806) 

And  as  he  sees,  so  normally  he  feels  j1 
For  him  no  heaping  up,  but  minishing : 

Thus  doth  he  heedfully  pursue  his  way. 

Of  him,  building  no  store  of  ill,  we  say  : — 

Near  is  Nibbana  !  (807) 

He  who  for  things  he  hears,  or  smells,  or  tastes, 
Or  for  things  touched  and  felt  no  passion  breeds, 
But  mindful,  clear  of  head,  can  suffer  sense 
With  uninflamed  heart,  nor  staying  clings  ;  (808) 

And  as  he  hears,  or  smells,  or  tastes,  is  touched, 
Or  doth  perceive,  so  normally  he  feels  ; 

F or  him  no  heaping  up,  but  minishing  : 

Thus  doth  he  heedfully  pursue  his  way. 

Of  him,  building  no  store  of  ill,  we  say : — 

Near  to  Nibbana  !  (809-817.)2 

Then  the  Thera  rose,  saluted  the  Master  and  departed, 
not  long  after  so  developing  insight  that  he  won  arahant- 
ship. 

1  The  rest  of  consciousness  follows  its  gocara,  or  normal  procedure 
(Commentary). 

2  As  before,  each  sense  is  assigned  a  complete  stanza.  The  Buddha, 
according  to  the  Sayyutta  Nikdya,  accords  warm  praise  to  Malunkya’s 
son’s  rendering. 


310 


CCLIII.  SELA 


CCLIII 

Sela.1 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age,  in  Anguttarapa,2 *in  a  brahmin 
family,  at  the  brahmin  village  of  Apana,  he  was  named 
Sela.  And  he  dwelt  there  when  adult,  proficient  in  the 
three  Yedas  and  in  brahmin  arts,  teaching  mantras  to 
300  brahmin  youths.  Now  at  that  time  the  Master,  leaving 
Savatthi,  toured  in  Anguttarapa  with  1,250  bhikkhus.  And 
divining  the  maturity  of  insight  in  Sela  and  his  pupils,  he 
halted  at  a  certain  wood.  Then  Keniya,  the  ascetic,  having 
invited  the  Master  and  his  band  for  the  following  day,  made 
preparation  of  much  food.  And  Sela  with  his  300  visited 
the  hermitage  and  asked  :  4  What  now,  Keniya,  is  a  minister 
of  the  King  expected?’  and  so  on.  Keniya  replied:  4 1 
have  invited  the  Buddha,  the  Exalted  One  for  to-morrow.’ 
Now  Sela,  thrilled  with  joyful  enthusiasm  at  the  word 
4  Buddha,’  sought  out  the  Master  straightway  with  his 
youths,  and  after  exchange  of  courtesies  seated  himself  at 
one  side.  Contemplating  the  Exalted  One,  he  thought : 
4  He  has  all  the  marks  of  one  who  is  either  a  world-emperor, 
or  a  Buddha  rolling  back  the  veil  of  the  world ;  yet  I  know 
not  whether  this  religious  Brother  be  a  Buddha  or  not. 
But  I  have  heard  that  they  who  are  Exalted  Ones,  Arahants, 
Buddhas  supreme,  reveal  themselves  when  their  praises 
are  uttered  ;  for  one  who  is  not  such  a  Buddha,  when  some 
one  in  his  presence  praises  the  virtues  of  a  Buddha,  is 
irritated  and  dissatisfied,  because  he  has  not  won  the 

1  Both  story  and  poem  form  the  greater  part  of  the  *  Sela-Sutta  ’  in 
the  Sntta-Nipdta  and  in  the  Majjhima  Nik ay  a  (ii.  146).  Dhammapala 
is  strangely  silent  over  these  older  versions.  His  own  version  is  briefer 
and,  except  for  the  more  evolved  myth  alluded  to  below  (p.  314,  n.  2), 
more  simple.  His  use  of  ddi,  1  and  so  on,’  seems,  however,  to  hint 
at  a  more  standard  account  as  known  to  him. 

2  In  the  Sutta-Nipdta  Commentary  this  is  the  country  about  the 

Biver  Mahl,  north  of  the  Ganges.  Apana  means  ‘  bazaar,’  ‘  market.’ 


CCLIII.  SELA 


311 


serene  confidence  of  Buddhas,1  and  cannot  endure  the 
allusions.2  What  if  I  were  now  to  praise  the  Samana 
Gotama  to  his  face  with  suitable  verses  ?  So  he  began  : 

O  thou  of  perfect  form  and  beauty  rare, 

Of  fairest  parts3  and  lovely  to  behold, 

Exalted  One!  thy  colour  like  fine  gold, 

Thou  valiant  spirit,  with  the  dazzling  teeth,  (818) 
Whose  body  shows  the  features  that  betray 
The  man  of  perfectly  adjusted  parts, 

Yea,  all  the  traits  that  mark  the  Super-Man;  (819) 
Thou  with  the  eyes  so  clear,  thy  countenance 
So  fair,  broad,4  straight,  majestic,  thou  dost  shine 
As  doth  the  sun,  the  centre  thou  of  all 
The  chosen  band  of  brethren  gathered  round :  (820) 
Thou  bhikkhu  noble  of  aspect,  whose  skin 
Resembleth  gold,  say,  what  is  friar’s  life 
To  thee  with  presence  so  supremely  fair?  (821) 

A  Prince  thou  dost  deserve  to  be,  a  Bull 
Drawing  the  chariot  of  the  world’s  empire  ; 

Lord  of  the  earth  from  end  to  end  foursquare, 

A  conqueror,  of  Jambudipa  chief.  (822) 

Nobles  and  wealthy  lords  thy  vassals  be, 

Thou  sovran  lord  of  lords,  thou  king  of  men, 

Take  thou  thy  power,  O  Gotama,  and  reign !  (823) 

Then  the  Exalted  One,  fulfilling  Sela’s  wish,  replied  : 

4  A  king,  O  Sela,  verily  am  I ; 

King  of  the  Norm,  above  me  there  is  none. 

1  This  is  based  on  the  conviction  that  they  have  the  genuine  intel¬ 
lectual  and  moral  qualities  required  in  a  Buddha,  and  that  what  they 
teach  is  true  and  its  results  certain  (Ang.  Nik.,  ii  8). 

2  These  negative  clauses  are  not  in  the  Sutta-Nipdta  narrative. 

3  In  the  Commentary  sujdto  is  ‘  perfect  in  presence,’  as  to  height 
and  breadth.  On  these  proportions,  see  Dialogues,  ii.  14-16. 

4  Brahd ;  the  Commentary  reads  brahma,  excellent- -i.e.,  in  pro¬ 
portions. 


312 


CCUII.  SELA 


And  by  my  doctrine1  do  I  turn  the  wheel 
.  Of  sovereignty,  wheel  irreversible.’  (824) 

Then  Sela  to  win  confirmation  spoke  again  : 2 

Wholly  enlightened  thou  dost  own  thyself  : 

‘  King  of  the  Norm,  above  me  there  is  none 
And  by  my  doctrine  do  I  turn  the  wheel 
Of  sovereignty  ’ — so  sayst  thou,  Gotama.  (825) 
Who  is  the  general  of  my  lord  the  King, 

Disciple  following  in  the  Master’s  steps  ? 

Who  after  his  example  turns  the  wheel  ?  (826) 

Now  the  venerable  Sariputta  was  seated  at  the  right  of 
the  Exalted  One,  his  head  shining  in  beauty  like  a  pile  of 
gold.  And  showing  him  the  Exalted  One  said : 

‘  The  wheel  I  set  a-going  of  the  Norm, 

Above  which,  Sela,  there  is  none,  that  wheel 
Doth  Sariputta  after  my  example3  turn, 

Who  hath  become  like  Him -who -Thus- hath  - 
Come.  (827) 

All  that  which  should  be  known  is  known  by 
me, 

All  culture  of  the  mind,  that  have  I  wrought, 
Whate’er  should  be  renounced  I  have  renounced, 
Hence,  brahmin !  am  I  Buddha— one  Awake.  (828) 


1  Pariyatti-dhammo ,  the  Norm  in  its  literary  form,  or  formulated 
doctrines  (Commentary). 

I  omit  from  the  text  the  glosses  ‘  thus  Sela  said,’  etc.,  which 
hamper  the  Pali  metre. 

3  Ang.  Nile.,  i.  23.  Ann ,  in  anuvatteti ,  anujdto,  is  intended  to 
express  conformity,  likeness,  and  not  so  much  succession  in  time. 
Cf.  the  latter  term  in  Iti-vuttaJca  (trans.  Sayings  of  Buddha ),  §  74, 
where  it  is  applied  to  children  whose  lives  resemble  those  of  their 
parents.  In  becoming  an  Ariya,  says  the  Commentary,  Sariputta 
became  of  like  birth  or  caste  (jdti)  with  the  Tathagata.  Sariputta  did 
not  live  to  succeed  the  Master  as  leader. 


CCLIII.  SELA 


313 


Subdue  thy  doubts  regarding  me,  brahmin  ! 

Have  faith  in  me.  Hard,  hard  it  is  to  win 
Repeated  seeing — [as  thou  mayest  now] — 

Of  them  who  rise  on  earth  Buddhas  Supreme.  (829) 
And  ’tis  of  such  whose  advent  in  the  world 
Is  difficult  and  rare,  that  I  in  sooth 
Am  one,  0  brahmin !  yea,  a  Buddha  I, 

Surgeon  and  Healer,1  over  whom  there’s  none.  (830) 
Supreme  my  place  and  past  compare  my  work, 

In  crushing  the  assaults  of  Mara’s  hosts. 

All  that  is  hostile  lieth  ’neath  my  sway, 

And  I  rejoice  for  no  whence  cometh  fear.’  (831) 

Then  Sela  the  brahmin,  so  convinced  by  the  Exalted 
One  as  to  wish  to  take  orders,  said  : 

‘Now  pay  good  heed,  sirs,  to  the  words  that  He 
Who  sees,  Healer  and  Hero,  speaks  to  us, 
Impressive  as  a  forest  lion’s  roar.  (832) 

Supreme  in  place  and  past  compare  in  work, 

Who  crusheth  the  assaults  of  Mara’s  hosts : —  (833) 
Who  that  hath  seen  him  would  not  feel  con¬ 
vinced, 

And  were  he  never  so  obscure  of  birth?2 
He  who  is  fain  for  me  may  follow  me ; 

And  whoso  is  not  fain  may  go  his  way ; 

But  I  will  in  this  Rule  renounce  the  world, 

’Neath  him  who  is  so  noble  and  so  wise.’  (834) 

Then  the  brahmin  youths  also,  because  they  had  attained 
to  the  requisite  conditions,  replied : 

‘  If  to  thy  judgment,  sir,  this  Rule  of  him, 

The  Supreme  Buddha,  doth  commend  itself, 

We  too  will  in  that  Rule  renounce  the  world, 
’Neath  him  who  is  so  noble  and  so  wise.’  (835) 

1  I.e.,  of  greed,  hate  and  illusion  (Commentary). 

2  Lit.,  ‘  one  of  dark  descent,’  paraphrased  as  riicajdto. 


314 


CCLIII.  SELA 


Then  Sela,  delighted  because  those  youths  shared  in  his 
resolve,  showed  them  to  the  Master  and  asked  for  ordina¬ 
tion  : 

These  thrice  one  hundred  brahmins  with  clasped 
hands 

Beseech  thee,  O  Exalted  One,  that  we 

May  lead  the  holy  life  beneath  thine  eye.  (836) 

Then  the  Exalted  One,  inasmuch  as  in  past  ages  Sela, 
as  teacher  of  just  those  800,  had  sown  the  root  of  merit, 
and  now  in  the  last  life  had  produced  both  his  own  insight 
and  their  maturity,  discerned  that  they  were  ripe  for  ordina¬ 
tion  and  said : 

4  W ell,  Sela,  is  the  holy  life  set  forth, 

Clear  to  be  seen  and  heard  ;  swift  is  the  fruit,1 

TV  herein  not  futile  is  the  coming  forth 

For  one  who  earnestly  doth  train  himself.’  (837) 

Thereupon  the  Exalted  One  said  :  ‘  Come  ye,  bhikkhus  ! 
And  they,  by  his  mystic  power  endued  with  the  robes  and 
bowl  of  bhikkhus  of  long-standing,2  did  obeisance  and  began 
their  studies  for  insight,  attaining  arahantship  on  the 
seventh  day.  Thereat  they  came  to  the  Master  and  con¬ 
fessed  anna  thus,  Sela  speaking  : 

Lo !  thou  who  seest  all,  ’tis  eight  days  since 
We  came  and  refuge  found.  In  one  sennight, 
Exalted  One  !  we’re  trained  in  thy  Rule.  (838) 
Thou  art  Buddha  !  our  Master  thou  !  and  thou 
The  mighty  Seer  who  Mara  didst  o’erthrow. 

Thou  who  all  evil  tendencies  hast  purged, 

And  crossed  [the  flood  of  life’s  eternal  sea], 

’Tis  thou  dost  aid  the  sons  of  men  to  cross.  (839) 

1  PaccaJckho  is  the  paraphrase  of  sanditthiko ;  akdliko — lit.,  ‘  not- 
time-ish  is  explained  as  where  fruition  is  to  be  won  immediately 
after  [each]  path,  without  interval  of  time.  The  Sutta-Nipdta  Com- 
meritary  explains  in  practically  identical  terms. 

2  This  legendary  feature  is  not  in  the  Sutta-Nipdta  story. 


CCLIII.  SELA 


315 


Thou  hast  transcended  every  cause  of  birth, 

And  shattered  every  poison-growth  within, 

Thou  even  as  a  lion,  grasping  nought, 

Hast  banished  every  source  of  fear  and  dread.  (840) 
Three  hundred  bhikkhus  lo !  before  thee  stand, 
With  clasped  hands  outstretched  to  honour  thee, 
Stretch  forth  thy  feet,  O  hero  !  suffer  them, 

Thine  arahants,1  their  Master  to  salute.  (841) 


CCLIY 

Bhaddiya,  son  of  Kali  of  the  Godhas. 

Beborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Kapilavatthu  in  a  clan  of 
Sakiyan  rajas,2  he  was  named  Bhaddiya.  And  when  adult, 
he  left  the  world  together  with  Anuruddha  and  the  other 
four  nobles,  while  the  Master  was  staying  at  the  Mango 
Grove  of  Anupiya.  And  entering  the  Order,  he  won  ara- 
hantship.  Him  (as  the  result  of  a  primeval  vow  and 
efforts  on  his  part),  the  Master  in  conclave  at  Jeta  Grove, 
ranked  as  the  best  among  those  bhikkhus  who  were  of  aristo¬ 
cratic  birth.3  And  he,  dwelling  in  the  bliss  of  fruition,  in 
the  bliss  of  Nibbana,  while  in  the  forest,  beneath  a  tree,  in 
any  lonely  spot,  was  ever  breathing  forth  the  exclamation  : 
‘Ah,  what  happiness!  ah,  what  happiness  !’  Now  bhikkhus 
hearing  him  told  the  Master  ;  to  whom  Bhaddiya,  when 
summoned,  admitted  the  habit,  adding:  ‘Formerly,  lord, 

1  Nagas.  On  this  term,  see  Udavi’s  psalm  (CCXLVII.). 

2  I  have  not  met  elsewhere  with  the  Godhas,  but  Kali  is  recorded 
in  Sayy.,  v.  396,  as  having  been  honoured  by  a  visit  from  the  Master 
at  Kapilavatthu,  and  commended  for  her  confession  of  faith  as  a 
believer  in  the  First  Path  {sotdpatti) .  She  is  spoken  of  as  Kaligodha 
the  Sakiyaij,  and  addressed  as  ‘Godhe.  It  is  not  clear  as  to  what  was 
the  political  relation  between  raja  Bhaddiya  and  Suddhodana,  who, 
n  the  Digha-Nikdya,  is  also  termed  simply  raja;  not  ‘maharaja,’  as 
once  in  this  Commentary.  Cf.  Rhys  Davids  Buddhist  India,  p.  19  ff. 
Bhaddiya’s  story  occurs  in  Uddna,  ii.  10. 

3  Any.  Nik.,  i.  23.  Such  had  greater  difficulties  to  overcome.  Cf. 
Sisters,  verse  517  ;  Majjh.  Nik.,  iii.  129/. 


316 


CCLIV.  BHADDIYA 


when  I  was  ruling  my  principality,  I  was  well  provided 
with  protection,  yet  even  so  I  was  ever  fearful,  nervous, 
distrustful.  But  now  that  I  have  renounced  all,  I  am  no 
longer  in  that  state.’  And  before  the  Master  he  uttered  his 
‘  lion’s  roar,’  thus  : 

What  delicate  gear  was  mine  to  wear, 

When  riding  on  my  elephants, 

What  dainty  fare  was  mine  to  eat, 

Prepared  by  art  from  rice  and  flesh  I1  (842) 
To-day  a  happy  winner,2  stanch, 

Pleased  with  what  scraps  his  bowl  is  filled, 

In  contemplation,  grasping  nought, 

Lives  Bhaddiya,  the  Godha’s  son.  (843) 

In  cast-off  rags  attired,  and  stanch, 

Pleased  with  what  scraps  his  bowl  is  filled, 

In  contemplation,  grasping  nought, 

Lives  Bhaddiya,  the  Godha’s  son.  (844) 

Seeking  his  daily  alms  and  stanch, 

Pleased  with  what  scraps,  etc.3  (845) 

In  triple  robe,  no  more,  and  stanch, 

Pleased,  etc.  (846) 

Taking  each  house  in  turn,  and  stanch, 

Pleased,  etc.  (847) 

With  one  good  meal  a  day,4  and  stanch, 

Pleased,  etc.  (848) 

Eating  from  bowl  alone  and  stanch, 

Pleased,  etc.  (849) 

Refusing  aftermeals  and  stanch, 

Pleased,  etc.  (850) 

Haunting  the  lonely  woods  and  stanch, 

Pleased,  etc.  (851) 

The  things  specified  are  types  .  of  a  life  in  all  these  respects 
luxurious  (Commentary). 

2  There  is  here  a  word-play  on  bhadda-BJiaddiya. 

In  every  gatha  the  three  lines  of  refrain  are  to  be  understood. 

4  Ekdsani  :  one  ‘  sit-down  meal’  only  in  the  day. 


CCLIV.  BHADDIYA 


317 


Sheltered  by  shade  of  tree1  and  stanch, 

Pleased,  etc.  (852) 

’Neath  open  sky,  unsheltered,  stanch, 

Pleased,  etc.  (853) 

Haunting  the  charnel-fields  and  stanch, 

Pleased,  etc.  (854) 

Seated  no  matter  where  and  stanch, 

Pleased,  etc.  (855) 

Resting  in  sitting  posture,2  stanch, 

Pleased,  etc.  (856) 

Simple  and  few  his  wants  and  stanch, 

Pleased,  etc.  (857) 

With  mind  content,  serene,  and  stanch, 

Pleased,  etc.  (858) 

Secluded,  much  alone  and  stanch, 

Pleased,  etc.  (859) 

Detached,  aloof  [from  men]  and  stanch, 

Pleased,  etc.  (860) 

With  surging  energy3  and  stanch, 

Pleased  with  what  scraps  his  bowl  is  filled, 

In  contemplation,  grasping  nought, 

Lives  Bhaddiya,  the  Godha’s  son.  (861) 

Renouncing  costly  vessels  wrought 
In  gold  and  lac,  this  earthen  bowl 
I  grasped,  and  thus  the  second  time 
Anointment’s  consecration  won.4  (862) 

Guarded  by  lofty  circling  walls, 

And  mighty  gates  with  watchtowers  high 
And  men-at-arms  with  sword  in  hand, 

So  was  I  wont  in  dread  to  dwell.  (863) 

1  I.e.,  instead  of  by  a  roof. 

2  Verses  844-856  enumerate  twelve  of  the  thirteen  Dhutangas,!  or 
extra  austerities,  optional  to  bhikkhus.  Enumerated  in  Milinda, 
ii.  268.  Cf.  Majjh.  Nik.,  77th  Sutta. 

3  Verses  857-861  refer  to  practices  incumbent  on  all  bhikkhus 
without  option. 

4  Verse  97,  spoken  also  by  an  ex-prince. 


318 


CCL1V.  BHADDIYA 


To-day  a  happy  winner,  see, 

At  ease,  all  fear  and  fright  removed, 

In  forest  meditation  plunged 

Dwells  Bhaddiya  the  Godha  s  son.  (864) 

Firm  planted  on  the  moral  code, 

In  clarity1  and  insight  trained, 

In  due  succession  have  I  won2 
Release  with  every  fetter  gone  !  (865) 


CCLY 

Angulimala. 

He  was  reborn  in  this  Buddha-Age  as  the  son  of  the 
brahmin,  Bhaggava,3  who  was  chaplain  to  the  King  of 
Ivosala.  On  the  night  of  his  birth  all  the  armour  in  the 
town  shone.4 5  The  King’s  state  armour  too,  so  that  he, 
seeing  it  as  he  lay  in  bed,  could  get  no  sleep,  but  was 
nervous  and  alarmed.  The  chaplain  that  night  consulted 
the  stars  and  concluded  that  his  son  was  born  in  the 
conjunction  of  the  thieves’  constellation.6  At  dawn  he 
waited  on  the  king  and  asked  if  he  had  slept  well.  ‘  How 
could  I  have  slept  well,  teacher?’  replied  the  King,  4  my 
armour  was  lit  up  all  night.  Now  what  can  that  presage  ?’ 

1  Sati ,  which  is  intelligent  awareness.  Cf.  verse  794,  n. 

2  On  this  ‘  succession,’  see  Rhys  Davids,  American  Lectures , 
pp.  141-150. 

3  Not  identifiable  with  the  Bhaggava,  at  whose  hermitage  the  Prince 
Siddhattha  first  studied  after  his  renunciation.  See  Sisters,  p.  2. 

4  I  have  given  this  quaint  legend— invented  to  explain  a  nickname- 
in  full,  as  affoiding  a  means  of  comparing  the  scholastic  journalism  of 
Buddhaghosa  (Commentary  on  Majjhima  Dikaya,  1  Sutta  86  ’)  and  of 
Dhammapala.  The  two  narratives  differ  in  details,  and  are  probably 
mutually  independent  and  approximately  contemporaneous.  The  story 
was  a  popular  one ;  it  occurs  in  the  Avaddna-Sataka  (No.  27),  and  is 
referred  to  ( Milinda ,  ii.  855).  Dliammapada ,  verses  178,  422,  refer 
to  it,  but  the  Commentary  and  that  on  Jdtaka  V.,  No.  537,  both  refer  to 
Buddhaghosa’s  account.  Was  the  babe  brother  to  Jenta,  CCXVIII.  ? 

5  On  this  ‘  brahmin  art,’  cf.  Dialogues,  i.  16/.,  20/  I  do  not  know 

which  star  or  stars  are  meant. 


CCLV.  ANGULIMALA 


319 


‘Fear  not,  your  majesty,  in  my  house  a  child  is  born. 
Through  his  influence  the  armour  in  the  whole  town  was  lit 
up.’  ‘  What  then  will  he  become,  teacher  ?’  ‘  The  child  will 
become  a  thief?’  *  Single-handed,  or  leader  of  a  gang?’ 
‘  Single-handed,  sire.’  ‘  Had  we  not  better  kill  him  ?’  ‘  If 

single-handed,  he  can  be  held  in  check.’ 

Now  because  he  was  born  vexing  the  King’s  mind  he  was 
named  Hiijsaka.  But  afterwards  when  what  was  seen  was 
seen  no  more,  he  became  known  as  Ahiijsaka.1  Through 
former  Karma  he  had  the  strength  of  seven  elephants.  And 
while  he  studied  under  the  first  teacher  at  Takkasila,  he  res¬ 
pectfully  waited  on  the  latter  and  his  wife,  so  that  he  was 
frequently  with  them  at  meals  and  so  forth.  But  the  other 
brahmin  youths  could  not  endure  him,2  and  at  length 
brought  about  discord  between  him  and  the  brahmin 
teacher,  persuading  the  latter  against  him.  Because  of 
his  pupil’s  great  strength,  the  brahmin  devised  a  stratagem 
for  his  ruin,  and  said  :  ‘  Ahiijsaka,  you  have  now  finished 
as  my  pupil:  give  me  my  honorarium.’  ‘Very  good, 
teacher,  how  will  you  have  it?’  ‘Bring  me  a  thousand 
human  right-hand  fingers.’  For  he  expected  that  Ahiijg- 
saka  would  for  shame  bring  one  only,  and  could  then  be 
punished.  Thereat  Ahigsaka’s  long  heaped-up  ruthless¬ 
ness  came  to  the  front,  and  girding  on  armour,  he  went  to 
the  Jalini  forest,3  in  Kosala,  and  from  a  cliff  near  the  high 
road  watched  the  passers-by,  and  rushing  down  smote  off 
their  fingers  and  hung  them  on  a  tree,  till  the  vultures  and 
crows  had  stripped  the  bones  of  flesh.  Then  making  a 
garland  of  the  fingerbones,  he  hung  it  round  his  shoulders 
as  if  decked  for  sacrifice.  From  that  time  he  was  called 
Fingerwreathed  (Angulimala).  And  when  through  his 
deeds  the  road  became  tabu,  he  entered  the  villages,  and 
these  became  deserted.  Then  the  King  proclaimed  :  ‘  Let 

1  Our  nearest  equivalents  are  Nocens  and  Innocens,  the  latter  once 
a  favourite  Christian  name.  Dr.  Neumann’s  Wagnerian  *  Friedreich,’ 
etc.,  is  wider  of  the  mark.  According  to  Pap.  Slid .,  he  was  named 
Ahirjsaka,  or  Abhirjsaka,  from  the  first. 

2  In  the  Majjhima  Nikaya  Commentary  they  we-e  ‘ aliens’  ( bahiraka ). 

3  ‘  Snare  Wood.’ 


320 


CCLV.  ANGULIMALA 


a  strong  force  come  that  we  may  quickly  take  the  bandit.’ 
And  Angulimala’s  mother,  of  the  Mantani  brahmins,1  said 
to  her  husband  :  4  Our  son  is  a  thief  and  committing  this 
and  that.  Send  for  him,  bid  him  to  stop  doing  these 
things.’  But  he  replied :  ‘  I  have  nought  to  do  with  sons 
of  that  sort ;  let  the  King  do  as  he  will.’  Then  she  in  love, 
took  provisions  and  set  out,  saying  :  ‘  I  will  bring  my  son 
and  stop  him.’ 

The  Exalted  One  thought :  ‘  If  she  comes  to  him, 
Angulimala  will  kill  her  to  make  up  his  thousand  fingers. 
This  is  his  last  birth.  If  I  do  not  go  there  might  be  great 
loss.  I  will  speak  to  him.’  So  after  his  meal  he  travelled 
the  thirty  leagues  along  the  road,  and  warning  off  cow¬ 
herds  and  the  like,  approached  the  Jalini  Wood.  Now 
Angulimala  had  just  seen  his  mother,  and  was  reckoning 
on  her  finger  to  make  up  his  number,  when  the  Exalted 
One  showed  himself  between  them.  Then  said  the  son : 
*  Why  should  I  kill  my  mother  for  a  finger?  Let  my  mother 
live  !  Let  me  rather  go  for  that  recluse’s  finger.’  And 
drawing  his  sword  he  stalked  the  Exalted  One.  Then  the 
Exalted  One  exerted  such  magic  power  that,  even  though 
he  was  walking  at  his  usual  pace,  Angulimala  could  not, 
even  running,  overtake  him,  but  panting,  pouring  sweat, 
unable  to  lift  his  feet,  stood  like  a  stake  and  cried  :  ‘  Stop, 
friar  !’  The  Exalted  One  said  :  ‘  Tho’  I  walk,  yet  have  I 
stopped,  and  do  you,  Angulimala,  stop  !’  Then  the  thief 
thought :  ‘  They  speak  the  truth,  these  Sakiyan  friars,  yet 
he  says  he  has  stopped,  whereas  it  is  I  who  have  stopped. 
What  can  he  mean  ?’  So  he  asked  : 

Thou  who  art  walking,  friar,  dost  say  :  ‘  Lo  !  I  have 
stopped !’ 

And  me  thou  tellest,  who  have  stopped,  I  have  not 
stopped  ! 

I  ask  thee,  friar,  what  is  the  meaning  of  thy  words  ? 

How  sayest  thou  that  thou  hast  stopped,  but  I  have 
not  ?  (866) 

1  Cf.  IV. 


CCLV.  ANGULIMALA 


321 


Then  the  Exalted  One  replied  : 

Yea,  I  have  stopped,  Angulimala,  evermore, 
Towards  all  living  things  renouncing  violence ; 

Thou  holdest  not  thy  hand  against  thy  fellow-men, 
Therefore  ’tis  I  have  stopped,  but  thou  still  goest 
on.  (867) 

Thereat  Angulimala,  as  the  Exalted  One  stood  there 
revealing  his  true  virtue,  remembered  what  he  had  heard 
rumouied  about  him  and,  his  insight  reaching  maturity, 
lapture  pervaded  his  being,  like  a  sheet  of  water  spreading 
over  the  whole  earth.  And  saying  to  himself,  ‘  Great  is 
this  lion  s  roar.  This  can  be  none  other,  methinks,  than 
the  Samana  Gotama  ;  to  help  me  the  Exalted  One  is  come 
hither  !’  lie  said  : — 

O  long  is  it  since  mighty  sage  by  me  revered, 

A  friar,  to  this  forest  great,  hath  found  his  way ! 

Lo  !  I  will  readily  forego  a  thousand  crimes, 

Hearing  the  righteous  doctrine  in  this  verse  of 
thine.  (868) 

And  so  *  the  bandit  doffed^  his  armour  and  his  sword 
And  threw  them  down  a  cliff,  into  a  pit,  a  chasm. 
Before  the  W elcome  One,  low  worshipping,  the  thief 
Straightway  besought  the  Buddha’s  leave  to  be 
enrolled.  (869) 

Thereat  the  Buddha,  mighty  Sage  most  pitiful, 
Master  of  all  the  world  and  eke  of  all  the  gods, 
Spake  then  these  words  to  him,  saying  i  i 2  Yea,  Come 
bhikkhu  !’ 

And  e  en  thereby  to  him  was  bhikkhu  -  status 
given.  (870) 

1  According  to  the  Commentaries,  the  bandit  speaks  these  words 
then  and  there.  At  verse  871  begins  Angulimala’s  song  of  triumph 
as  arahant. 

2  Anvdkdsi  (Pap.  Sud.,  anvdlcdri)  paraphrased  as  Jchipi,  chaddesi. 

21 


322 


CCLV.  ANGULIMALA 


He  who  in  former  days  a  wastrel  living, 

In  later  day  no  more  so  spends  his  time, 

He  goeth  o’er  the  world  a  radiance  shedding, 

As  when  the  moon  comes  free  in  clouded  sky.  (871) 
To  whomsoe’er  the  ill  deeds  he  hath  wrought, 

By  a  good  life  are  closed  up  and  sealed,1 
He  goeth  o’er  the  world  a  radiance  shedding 
As  when  the  moon  comes  free  in  clouded  sky.  (872) 
Surely  a  brother  who  in  youth  doth  give 
Himself  to  live  within  the  Buddha’s  Rule, 

He  goeth  o’er  the  world  a  radiance  shedding 
As  when  the  moon  comes  free  in  cloudy  sky.  (873) 

Thus  abiding  in  the  joy  and  ease  of  emancipation,  he 
went  into  the  town  for  alms.  And  men  threw,  here  a 
clod,  and  there  a  stick  at  him,  hitting  him  on  the  head,  so 
that  he  came  back  to  the  Vihara  with  broken  bowl2  and 
sought  the  Master.  The  latter  admonished  him  saying  : 
‘  Suffer  it,  brahmin,  you  have  to  suffer  it.  The  result  of 
your  actions,  for  which  you  might  have  been  roasted  for 
centuries  in  purgatory,  you  are  feeling  now  in  this  life.’ 
Then  the  Thera,  summoning  up  a  heart  of  love  for  all 
beings  without  distinction,3  said  : 

O  let  my  foes  but  hear  the  Norm  as  told  to  me, 

And  hearing  join  with  me  to  keep  the  Buddha’s  Rule  ! 
O  let  my  foes  but  minister  to  men  of  peace, 

Who  e’en  have  taken  to  their  hearts  that  holy 
Norm !  (874) 

O  let  my  foes  from  time  to  time  but  hear  that  Norm 
From  them  who  tell  of  gentleness,  and  who  commend 
Affection,  and  to  what  they  hear,  their  actions 
suit !  (875) 

4 

1  Pitliiyati  the  Commentary  connects  with  the  closing  of  a  door. 

2  The  Majjhivia  Nikaya  gives  a  more  coloured  picture:  ‘With 
broken'  head  and  flowing  blood,  cut  and  crushed.’  In  the  Dhamma- 
jjada  Commentary ,  iii.,  169,  he  is  represented  as  dying  after  uttering 
these  verses. 

3  Cf.  I.,  pp.  4,  5;  n.  1. 


CCLV.  ANGULIMALA 


323 


For  such  a  foe  would  verily  not  work  me  harm, 

Nor  any  other  creature  wheresoever  found. 

He  would  himself  attain  the  peace  inffable, 

And  thus  attaining  cherish  all  both  bad  and 
good.1  (876) 

The2  conduit-makers  lead  the  stream, 
Fletchers  coerce  the  arrow  shaft, 

The  joiners  mould  the  wooden  plank, 

The  self  ’tis  that  the  pious  tame.  (877) 

Some  creatures  are  subdued  by  force, 

Some  by  the  hook,  and  some  by  whips ; 

But  I  by  such  an  One  was  tamed 

Who  needed  neither  staff  nor  sword.  (878) 

Innocens  !  such  the  name  I  bear,3 
While  Noxious  in  the  past  was  I ; 

To-day  most  truly  am  I  named, 

For  now  I  hurt  not  any  man.  (879) 

1  Tasa-thdvare  :  in  Childers  ‘feeble -strong,’  but  admittedly  a  term 
of  doubtful  meaning.  Dhammapala  has  ‘  all  beings/  Buddhaghosa 
says  :  Tasd  are  called  satanhd,  thdvard,  nittanhd  (having  craving  and 
the  opposite). 

Dr.  Neumann,  who  in  these  three  gathas  takes  disci  to  mean,  not 
‘  foes,’  as  do  both  Commentaries,  but  the  quarters  of  the  firmament 
( disd ,  disciyo),  lets  himself  go  in  an  invocation  to  die  Liifte,  entirely 
in  the  style  and  words  of  the  German  Romantic  poets  of  the  last 
century.  The  result  is  lovelier  as  poetry,  if  not  after  Thera-precedent, 
as  observed  by  the  Commentators  he  derides.  The  Thera’s  regret  is 
that  the  men,  ‘relatives  of  his  many  victims,’  do  not  know  how 
changed  he  is,  nor  the  virtues  of  that  which  has  changed  him. 

2  See  XIX.  The  metre  in  (878)  reverts  to  the  sloka.  The  Thera, 
having  uttered  the  foregoing  for  his  own  protection  (Buddhaghosa), 
and  to  deliver  others  from  evil  (Dhammapala),  now  declares  his  own 
accomplished  work. 

3  ‘  I  bear  ’  accords  better  with  our  Commentary,  which  gives 
Hiijsaka  as  the  Thera’s  original  name,  and  Ahipsaka  as  that  given  him 
on  his  conversion.  Buddhaghosa’s  version  is  perhaps  more  plausible. 
Cf.  p.  319,  n.  1.  It  must,  too,  be  remembered  that  his  record  was 
spotless  till  he  tried  to  pay  his  college  iu«.*. 


CCIiV.  ANGULIM ALA 


Once  an  obnoxious  bandit  I, 

Known  by  my  name  of  Finger- wreathed, 

Till  toiling  mid  the  awful  flood, 

I  refuge  in  the  Buddha  found.  (880) 

Once  were  my  hands  imbrued  with  blood  ; 

Known  was  my  name  as  Finger-wreathed. 

O  see  the  Refuge  I  have  found, 

With  every  craving1  rooted  out !  (881) 

Me  who  had  wrought  such  direful  deeds, 

Fast  going  to  my  place  of  doom, 

Me  all  that  doing’s  aftermath 

Hath  touched  e’en  here — and  freed  from  debt 

Now  take  I  my  allotted  share.2  (882) 

’Tis  a  fool’s  part  heedless  to  waste  his  life : — 

Such  are  the  folk  who  will  not  understand. 

He  who  is  wise  doth  foster  earnestness 

As  he  were  watching  o’er  his  chief est  wealth.  (883) 

Give  not  yourselves  to  wastage  in  your  lives, 

Nor  be  familiar  with  delights  of  sense. 

He  who  doth  strenuously  meditate, 

His  shall  it  be  to  win  the  bliss  supreme.  (884) 

O  welcome3  this  that  came  nor  came  amiss  ! 

O  goodly  was  the  counsel  given  to  me ! 

’Mong  divers  doctrines  mooted  among  men, 

Of  all  ’twas  sure  the  Best  I  sought  and  found.  (885) 
O  welcome  this  that  came  nor  came  amiss ! 

O  goodly  was  the  counsel  given  to  me ! 

The  threefold  wisdom  have  I  made  mine  own, 

And  all  the  Buddha’s  ordinance  is  done.  (886) 

Deep  in  the  wild  beneath  some  forest  tree, 

Or  in  the  mountain  cave,  is’t  here,  is’t  there, 

So  have  I  stood  and  let  my  throbbing  heart  (887) 

1  Bhavanetti,  ‘  guide  to  rebirth  ’  =  tanha.  See  verse  604,  n.  1. 

2  See  verse  789. 

3  Pilinda-Vaccha’s  verse  (IX.). 


CCLV.  ANGULIMALA 


325 


Transported  beat.  Happy  I  seek  my  rest, 

Happy  I  rise,  happy  I  pass  the  day, 

Escaped  from  snare  of  evil — ah  !  behold 

The  Master’s  sweet  compassion  shown  to  me  !  (888) 

A  child  born  of  good  brahmin  stock  was  I ; 

Of  pure  and  high  descent  this  side  and  that. 

This  day  the  Welcome  One  doth  call  me  son,1 
The  Master,  yea,  the  Sovereign  of  the  Norm.  (889) 
Gone  is  all  craving,  nowhere  have  I  hold. 

Guarded  the  gates,  and  well  controlled  the  sense. 
Of  this  world’s  misery  spewing  forth  the  root, 
From  every  poison-taint  am  I  immune.2  (890) 

The  Master  hath  my  fealty  and  love, 

And  all  the  Buddha’s  ordinance  is  done. 

Low  have  I  laid  the  heavy  load  I  bore : 

Cause  for  rebirth  is  found  in  me  no  more.3  (891) 


CCLYI 

Anuruddha. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Kapilavatthu,  in  the  house 
of  Amitodana  the  Sakiyan,  he  was  named  Anuruddha.4  Thus 
his  elder  brother  was  Mahanama  the  Sakiyan,  the  son  of  the 
Master’s  paternal  uncle.  And  he  was  reared  most  delicately 
and  luxuriously,  in  a  different  house  for  each  of  the  seasons, 

1  The  Dkammapada  Commentary  relates  (iii.  170)  that  when  Anguli- 

mala  passed  away,  and  the  Master  heard  of  it,  he  said:  ‘My  son, 
bhikkhus,  has  reached  Parinibbana.’  ‘  Lord,  has  he  so  reached  who 
did  kill  so  many  people  ?’  ‘  Yea,  he  did  evil  when  he  had  not  one 

virtuous  friend,  but  when  he  found  one,  he  strove  earnestly,  wherefore 
his  evildoing  is  closed  up  by  good.’ 

2  Cf.  CXYI.  3  =  verses  604,  792. 

4  Both  text  and  legend  give  one  of  his  names  in  a  previous  birth, 

in  Kassapa  Buddha’s  time  (verse  910).  The  Br.  manuscript  misspells 
the  father’s  name  (correctly  given  in  the  Anguttara  Nihdya  Com¬ 
mentary)  as  Amittodhana.  See  further,  Vinaya  Texts,  iii.  224^.  On 
the  dancers,  etc.  ( ndtakd ),  see  ibid.,  iii.  225,  n.  1. 


326 


CCLVl.  ANURUDDHA 


and  was  surrounded  with  dancers  and  mimes,  enjoying  a 
divinely  good  fortune.  And  when  he  was  summoned  with 
the  Sakiyan  rajas  to  form  a  guard  for  the  Master,  he  went 
to  him  in  the  Mango  Wood  at  Anupiya,  took  orders,  and 
within  the  period  of  the  rains,  acquired  celestial  vision. 
Again,  receiving  an  exercise  under  the  tuition  of  the 
General  of  the  Norm,  he  went  into  the  East  Bamboo 
Wood,  and  studying,  mastered  seven  of  the  thoughts  of  a 
great  man,  but  could  not  learn  the  eighth.  The  Master, 
discerning  this,  taught  it  to  him,  teaching  him  the  great 
course  of  the  lineage  of  the  Ariyans.1  Remembering  this 
lesson,  Anuruddha  developed  insight  and  realized  arahant- 
ship,  accompanied  by  supernormal  and  analytic  powers.2 
Him  the  Master  ranked  foremost  among  those  who  had 
attained  the  celestial  eye.3  And  he,  dwelling  in  the  bliss 
of  emancipation,  reviewed  one  day  his  achievement.  And 
thrilled  with  joy,  he  breathed  forth  this  psalm  : 

Forsaking  mother,  father,  all  his  kin, 

Sister  and  brother,  quitting  joys  of  sense, 

Sits  Anuruddha  rapt  in  reverie.  (892) 

By  dance  and  song  attended,  by  the  sound 
Of  cymbals  in  the  morn  awaked  : — not  so 
Were  pure  religion  to  be  reached,  too  fain 
Was  I  in  Mara’s  precincts  to  abide.  (893) 

And  now  that  all  those  things  are  left  behind, 
Fain  with  full  heart  to  keep  the  Buddha’s  Rule, 
Yea,  passing  over  all  the  mighty  Flood, 

Sits  Anuruddha  rapt  in  reverie.  (894) 

1  The  eight  thoughts  ( Ang .  Nik.,  iii.  228  ff.  where  the  dialogue  is 
given)  are  that  the  Dhamma  is  for  one  who — (1)  has  few  wants ;  (2)  is 
contented,  serene,  (3)  much  alone,  (4)  strenuous,  (5)  introspectively 
mindful,  (6)  concentrated,  and  (7)  wise ;  (8)  delights  in  freedom  from 
obstruction. 

The  course  of  the  lineage  of  the  Ariyans  ( ariyavarjsapatipada )  in 
Ang.  Nik.,  ii.  26,  is  simply  contentment  with  three  of  the  bhikkliu’s 
‘  four  conditions,’  or  necessaries — raiment,  food,  and  shelter — and  with 
exercise  or  study,  and  selective  or  pruning  culture  [bhdvand, pahdna). 

2  A  unique  variation  :  abhiiindpatisambhiddp arivaray  arahattay. 

3  Ang.  Nik.,  i.  23.  Cf.  above,  p.  32,  n.  2;  Dialogues,  i.  91. 


CCLVI.  ANURUDDHA 


327 


Sights,  sounds  and  tastes,  odours  and  things  to 
touch, 

That  please  and  charm,1  leaving  all  these  behind, 
Sits  Anuruddha  rapt  in  reverie.  (895) 

From  quest  of  alms  he  cometh  back  alone, 

An  unencumbered2  silent  sage  ;  from  heap 
Of  rubbish  to  renew  what  garb  he  hath 
Doth  Anuruddha  seek,  sane  and  immune.  (896) 

He  seeketh,  taketh,  washeth,  dyeth,  wears 
The  shabby  gear,3  this  sage  deliberate  : — 

For  such  is  Anuruddha,  sane,  immune.  (897) 

He  who  is  big  with  wants  and  discontent, 

Is  puffed  up4  and  cleaveth  to  his  kind, 

Displayeth  qualities  corrupt  and  vile.  (898) 

And  is  he  mindful,  having  few  desires, 

Contentedly  serene  and  ne’er  upset, 

Delighting  in  seclusion,  blithe  of  heart,  (899) 

Aye  strenuous  : — his  qualities  are  good 
And  such  as  to  enlightenment  belong, 

And  he,  sane  and  immune, — saith  the  Great 
Seer.  (900) 

He  knew  my  heart’s  intent,  the  Master,  he 
Whose  peer  the  world  hath  not,  and  came  to  me 
By  mystic  power  with  body  wrought  of  mind.5  (901) 

1  Cf.  verse  455. 

2  Lit.,  unseconded,  unmated  (cf.  v.  54,  541).  The  Commentary- 
paraphrases  this  by  nittanho ,  without  craving.  Cf.  Bud.  Psy.,  p.  278 ; 
Sutta  Nipdta,  v.  740 ;  and  Sayy.  Nik.,  i.  25,  where  faith  is  the  ‘  mate.’ 
As  Anuruddha,  in  the  Majjhima  Nikdya,  is  the  type  of  an  affectionate, 
loyal  comrade-bhikkhu  (Suttas  82,  128),  he  could  not  well  be  typical 
of  the  monachist ,  like  Ekavihariya  (CCXXXIV.).  See  also  verse  155. 

3  The  first  Dhutanga.  Cf.  CCLIY. ,  verse  844. 

4  Uddhato,  often,  as  here,  made  synonymous  with  want  of  balance, 
as  in  our  ‘  swelled  head.’ 

5  Verses  901-908  are  in  Ang.  Nik.,  iii.  235,  ending  the  lesson  referred 
to.  ‘  As  if  made  of  mind  .  .  .  let  this  body  be  as  this  mind  :  thus  by 
process  of  will-fixing  iddhi  ’  (Commentary).  Cf.{  Compendium ,  p.  61, 
adhitthaniddhi.  The  Anguttara  Cy.  (i.  23),  quotes  verses  901-903. 


328 


CCLVI.  ANURUDDHA 


To  me,  when  further  truths  I  wished  to  learn, 

The  Wake,  the  Buddha  [that  last  truth]  revealed; 
He  who  in  freedom  from  obsessions  1  joyed 
That  freedom  from  obsessions  taught  to  me.  (902) 
And  I  who  heard  the  blessed  Norm  abode 
Fain  only  and  alway  to  keep  his  Buie  ; 

The  Threefold  Wisdom  have  I  made  my  own, 

And  all  the  Buddha’s  ordinance  is  done.2  (903) 

h  e’er  have  I  rested  supine  five  and  fifty  years,3 
Tis  five  and  twenty  years  since  sloth  was  over¬ 
come.  (904) 

No  heaving  breath  left  as  He  lay; 

The  mind  in  Jhana’s  steadfast  stay, 

With  thought  from  every  craving  free, 

Fixed  on  the  Peace  incessantly  : 

So  passed  the  Man  Who  Saw  away.  (905) 

With  mind  unshaken,  as  they  came, 

He  suffered  pangs  of  death  in  peace  ; 

Stole  o’er  His  heart  the  last  release  : 

Nibbana  of  the  unfed  flame.4  (906) 

The  last  things  these  that  now  we  see  of  Him, — 
Touch  and  the  other  senses  of  the  Sage — 

No  other  conscious  states5  shall  come  to  be, 

When  one  that’s  wholly  Wake  doth  pass  away.  (907) 

Now,  a  spirit,0  who  in  a  former  birth  had  been  his 
attendant,  seeing  the  Thera  old  and  feeble,  came,  out  of 

1  Papanca ,  a  word  here  interpreted  as  simply  ‘the  (ten)  kilesas, 
lust,’  etc.  Cf.  p.  343,  n.  4,  and  Bud.Psy.,  p.  327/. 

2  Cf.  verse  561  and  Sisters ,  verses  187,  194,  202. 

3  Cf.  verse  856. 

4  Verses  elsewhere  ascribed  to  Anuruddha  at  the  Buddha’s  passing 
away  (. Dialogues ,  ii.  176;  Avadana,  100).  On  the  two  versions 
(in  Dialogues ,  line  4,  is  :  .  .  .  yay  kdlam  akari  muni ,  ‘  the  seer  died’), 
cf.  Oldenberg’s  discussion,  ‘  Studien  zur  Geschichte  des  buddhistischen 
Kanon,’  Nachrichten  der  Wissenscliaften  zu  Gottingen ,  1912.  p.  168  /. 

6  Dhamrnd.  6  J)evata . 


CCLiVI.  ANURUDDHA 


329 


her  former  love  for  him,  and  bade  him  aspire  to  rebirth 
among  the  gods.  But  he  made  answer  : 

Sojourn  amid  the  company  of  gods 
Never  again,  seducer,1  comes  for  me. 

Destroyed  is  all  renewal  of  rebirth. 

Now  is  there  no  more  coming  back  to  be.  (908) 

Then  the  other  bhikkhus,  not  seeing  the  goddess,  were 
wondering  to  whom  the  Thera  was  speaking.  To  show  his 
mystic  power  to  them  he  said  this  verse  : 

He  who  e’en  in  a  moment  by  a  thousand  ways  can  take 
Purview  of  all  the  world,  he  is  for  Brahma’s  heaven 
fit.2 

But  here’s  a  brother  versed  in  power  of  magic  who 
doth  see 

What  time  [both  men  and  gods],  thou  goddess,  die  and 
come  to  be.  (909) 

He  now  unfolds  his  former  Karma : — 

Lo!  I  was  Annabhara  long  ago,3 
A  poor  man  working  for  my  daily  bread, 

Then  1  to  Uparittha,  the  recluse 

Of  holy  fame,  made  humble  offering.  (910) 

1  Addressed,  according  to  the  Commentary,  to  the  goddess.  In 
Sarjy.  Nik.,  i.  200,  where  the  goddess’s  verses  are  given,  Jalinl  (seducer, 
ensnarer)  is  said  to  be  her  name.  Cf.,  however,  below,  ver.  (1181). 

2  The  Commentary  reads  sa-Brahmakajijpo  as  saha-Br°,  as  in  the 
frequent  term  sa-Brahmako ,  etc.  But  this  seems  more  strained  than 
the  interpretation  above,  in  which,  with  a  more  literal  rendering,  I 
follow  Dr.  Neumann.  The  Commentary  does  not  explain  devatd  in 
the  vocative,  but  elsewise  the  verse  does  not  parse  correctly.  Sa  bhikkhu 
I  take  as  eso  bhikkhu.  See  verse  1181,  n.  1. 

3  This  episode  is  the  latest  recorded  in  the  prose  legend  of  his  lives 
before  ‘  our  Buddha’s  ’  time.  The  name  Annabhara,  ‘  food-bearer,’  {cf. 
Ang.  iii.  122)  is  doubtless  framed  to  suit  the  legend  or  vice  versa.  Anna¬ 
bhara  works  for  a  Councillor  Sumana  of  Benares,  who,  on  hearing  of 
how  the  former  abstained  from  a  meal  to  feed  a  Silent  Buddha, 
rewarded  him  and  set  him  up  in  trade. 


380 


CCLVI.  ANURUDDHA 


Then  was  I  born  within  the  Sakiyan  clan, 

As  Anuruddha  known  ;  by  dance  and  song 
Attended,  and  by  clang  of  cymbals  waked.1  (911) 
But  I  beheld  the  Buddha,  the  Awake, 

The  Master,  for  whom  no  whence  cometh  fear. 

In  him  my  heart  believed  and  was  at  rest, 

And  from  the  home  I  sought  the  homeless  life.  (912) 

I  know  my  former  lives,  and  where  and  how 
I  lived  in  years  gone  by  ;  among  the  gods 
Thirty  and  Three  I  stood  of  Sakka’s  rank.  (913) 
Seven  times  a  king  of  men  I  held  my  sway, 

Lord  of  the  earth  from  end  to  end  foursquare, 

A  conqueror,  of  Jambudipa  chief,8 

Using  no  force  or  arms  I  ruled  by  right.3  (914) 

Thence  seven,  and  other  seven  spans  of  life, 

E’en  fourteen  former  births  I  recognize, 

E’en  then  when  in  the  world  of  gods  reborn.  (915) 

In  fivefold  concentrated  ecstasy,4 
My  heart  goes  up  in  peace  and  unity. 

Serene  composure  have  I  made  my  own ; 

My  vision  as  a  god’s  is  clarified.  (916) 

I  know  the  destinies  of  other  lives  : — 

Whence  beings  come  and  whither  they  do  go  ; 

Life  here  below,  or  other-where  of  life — 

Steadfast  and  rapt,  in  fivefold  Jhana  sunk.  (917) 

The  Master  hath  my  fealty  and  love,5 
And  all  the  Buddha’s  ordinance  is  done. 

1  Pabodhano.  2  See  verse  822. 

3  Seven  among  gods,  seven  among  men  (Commentary).  The  so-called 
‘  celestial  eye,’  or  sight  is  dealt  with  in  verses  916,  917. 

4  Saviadhi — i.e.,  of  Fourth  Jhana — based  on  his  power  of  abhinhd 
(Commentary) .  The  1  fivefold  ’  quality,  according  to  the  Commentary, 
is  not  the  Four  Stages,  with  the  First  divided  (see  Bud.  Psy.,  p.  52), 
but  a  somewhat  similar  list  of  suffusion  of — (1)  zest ;  (2)  pleasure  ; 
(3)  ceto ,  ?  will  or  intellect ;  (4)  light ;  (5)  a  representative  image.  The 
fivefold  Jhana  (917)  is  not  so  characterized.  I  have  not  as  yet  me1! 
with  this  classification  elsewhere. 

= verse  891,  etc. 


5 


‘  These  be  the  thoughts  that  came  to  a  Brother 
Seated  beneath  the  sal-forest’s  fair  blossoms, 

Lone  and  aloof  in  deep  contemplation 

The  Siul,  or  Shorea  robusta,  is  eminent  amongst  Indian  trees  for  its  timber,  its  majestic  size,  and 
the  abundance  of  its  clustered  yellow  flowers.  Wright’s  Illustrations  of  Indian  Botany,  p.  S7. 


To  face  p.  830. 


IN  A  SIWALIK  SAL-FOREST. 


CCLVII.  PARAPARIYA 


331 


Low  have  I  laid  the  heavy  load  I  bore,  * 

Cause  for  rebirth  is  found  in  me  no  more.  (918) 

In  Vejuva,1  in  Vajjian  land  ’twill  be 
That  life  shall  reach  its  final  term  for  me ; 

And  I  ’neath  bamboo-thicket’s  shade  that  day, 
Sane  and  immune,  shall  wholly  pass  away.  (919) 


CCLYII 

Parapariya. 

His  story  has  been  recorded  above.2  Now  those  verses 
he  spoke  in  the  Master’s  lifetime,  himself  not  yet  arahant, 
touching  the  governance  of  the  six  powers  (five  senses  and 
mind).  But  these  verses  he  uttered  after  the  Master  had 
passed  away,  and  when  his  own  passing  away  was  at  hand. 
And  in  them  he  declared  the  future  of  bhikkhus  under  a 
perverted  Norm. 

Now  the  first  stanza  was  placed  by  the  Compilers. 

These  be  the  thoughts  that  came  to  a  Brother , 

Seated  beneath  the  great  for'est’s3  fair  blossoms, 
Lone  and  aloof,  in  deep  contemplation : —  (920) 

How  is  the  conduct  of  the  Brethren  changed 
Since  when  the  Sovereign  of  the  world,  the  Man 
Supreme,  was  yet  abiding  on  the  earth  !  (921) 

Raiment  to  shield  from  chilly  winds,  to  hide 
What  should  be  hid,  enough,  no  more,  they  sought, 
Enjoyed  contentedly  whatever  came.  (922) 

Whether  the  food  was  excellent  or  poor, 

Whether  ’twas  much  or  little,  they  partook 
To  keep  life  going,  free  from  greedy  whims.  (923) 

1  According  to  the  Commentary  this  was  Hatthigama,  near  \  esali. 

2  CCXLIX. 

3  In  the  great  wood  of  sal  trees  (Commentary,  948).  There  was  a 
‘Mahavana’  at  Kapilavatthu,  at  Vesali,  and  on  the  Neranjara  in 
Magadha.  Parapariya  was  a  Savatthi  Thera ;  hence  one  cannot 
identify  the  wood. 


332 


CCLVII.  PARA  PA  III  Y  A 


The  requisites  for  men  as  living  things, 

And  medicine  too  as  means  to  live : — for  these 
Not  fervently  they  cared,  as  care  they  did 
How  to  destroy  the  poisons  of  the  mind.  (924) 

In  the  deep  forests  ’neatli  the  shade  of  trees, 

In  caverns,  in  the  bosom  of  the  rocks, 

Detachment  studying  and  developing  : — 

So  lived  they  making  that  their  instant  quest.  (925) 
Of  lowly,  humble  soul  and  frugal  ways, 

Gentle  of  heart,  pliant  and  apt  in  mind, 

Of  gracious  manner,  speech  not  scurrilous, 

Intent  on  good  [for  others  and  for  self].1  (926) 
Pleasant  and  lovely  therefore  in  their  lives  : — 

Their  goings,  their  enjoyments,  their  pursuits, — 
Like  the  smooth  tenour  of  a  stream  of  oil.  (927) 

For  them  every  intoxicant  was  dead, 

Mighty  in  Jhana  they,  mighty  for  good  : 

Now  are  those  Elders  wholly  passed  away. 

Few  now-a-days  there  be  like  unto  them.  (928) 

From  dearth  of  good  conditions  and  insight, 

The  Conqueror’s  Rule,  compact  of  all  that’s  best 
In  plan  and  mode,  crumbles  and  wears  away.  (929) 
Bad  the  conditions  and  corrupt  the  age, 

Wherein  e’en  they,  who  for  the  life  detached 
Had  made  good  start,  and  to  the  higher  things 
That  yet  remain  [might  follow  on], — e’en  they  (930) 
From  the  swift  growth  of  all  that  doth  corrupt, 

Do  influence  for  evil  many  folk. 

Methinks  they  juggle  with  [the  consciences 
Of]  fools  as  devils  sport  with  the  insane.  (931) 

By  the  corruptions  overcome,  such  men, — 

Pursuing  here  and  there  what  doth  corrupt, 

As  one  who  calleth  loud  what  he  hath  got,— 2  (932) 

1  So  the  Commentary.  Yer.  926-8  show  the  Ariyavaysapatipadd. 

2  The  three  foregoing  gathas  are  full  of  difficulties,  which,  for  me, 
are  nor  always  made  intelligible  by  the  Commentary.  Upatthitci- 
vivekdya  is  suvisuddhasllacdrd  pi  samand.  Sesadhammakd  is,  lit. 


333 


CCLVII.  PARA  PARI  YA 

They  quarrel  ’mongst  themselves,  forsaking  quite 
The  blessed  Norm,  and,  after  errors  gone, 

Do  ween  : — Lo  !  this  is  better,  this  is  best.  (933) 
They  who  have  turned  their  back  on  wealth  and  wife 
And  child,  and  left  their  home,  if  they  but  get 
Spoon  -  alms,  will  do  things  that  beseem  them 
not.  (934) 

They  eat  until  they  are  replete,  then  down 
They  lie  supine,  and  when  awake,  discourse 
Concerning  matters  which  the  Master  blamed.* 1  (935) 
All  arts  and  handicrafts  they  highly  rate 
And  practise  : — such  are  bhikkhus’  duties  deemed, 
The  while  from  inner  conquest  they  abstain.  (936) 
And  clay  and  oil  and  powder  for  the  bath, 

Water  and  food  and  lodging  they  present 
To  laymen,  in  the  hope  of  richer  alms  ;  (937) 

Yea,  toothsticks  also  and  kapittha  fruit,2 
Petals  of  flowers  to  chew,  and  curries  choice, 
Mangoes3  and  cocoanut,  myrobalan.  (938) 

In  drug-purveying  they  as  doctors  be,4 
In  business  matters  like  the  laity, 

Like  courtezans  do  they  parade  their  gear, 

And  play  the  lord  like  any  noble  squire.  (939) 


‘  remainder-of-Norm-ish.’  ‘  Consciences  ’  is  interpolated.  For  sayarj- 
galie ,  etc.,  sasangdme  is  suggested ,  as  the  battle-cry  of  Mara,  captain 
of  the  kilesas.  These,  standing  for  evil  or  sin  in  general  are  greed, 
hate,  dulness,  conceit,  error,  perplexity,  sloth,  distraction,  impudence, 
imprudence.  Dr.  Neumann  cites  only  the  first,  over-simplifying  the 
evil  conditions. 

1  Abstemiousness,  lying  on  the  side  only,  and  avoidance  of  certain 
topics  belonged  to  a  bhikkhu’s  duties.  Cf.  Bud.  Psy.,  p.  353 ; 
Dialogues ,  i.  245  (for  ‘heroes,’  understand  ‘champions,  athletes’); 
Ang.  Nik.,  i.  114 ;  Bud.  Suttas,  227. 

2  Apparently  a  kind  of  apple.  Cf.  Milinda,  i.  262.  Identified  in 
Childers’s  Dictionary  as  Feronia  elephantum. 

3  Mangoes,  the  Commentary  says,  typify  many  fruits,  such  as 
citrons,  cocoanuts,  etc. 

4  The  practice  of  medicine  and  surgery  for  gain  is  disallowed  for 
bhikkhus  ( Dialogues ,  i.  25  /.). 


334 


CCLVII.  PARAPARIYA 


Adulterators  they,  tricksters  and  cheats, 
Unscrupulous,  by  many  stratagems, 

In  things  of  this  world  freely  they  indulge,  (940) 
Pursuing  ways  and  methods  fit  for  fraud, 

Seeking  a  livelihood1  by  cunning  craft, 

They  draw  together  plenteous  store  of  wealth.  (941) 
To  settle  business  is  the  Chapter  called, 

Not  in  the  interests  of  the  holy  Norm. 

And  when  they  preach  to  others,  ’tis  but  gain 
That  is  their  motive  not  the  good  of  men.  (942) 
Many  there  be  without  the  Order’s  fold 
Who  brawl  and  quarrel  o’er  the  Order’s  gains : 
Insolent  spirits  they,  all  unashamed 
To  live  on  offerings  to  others  given.  (943) 

Thus  some  there  are  who  lacking  piety, 

Though  with  head  shaved,  and  with  the  yellow  robe, 
Yearn  all  the  while  to  be  revered, 

And  hanker  after  favours,  treats,  and  gifts.  (944) 

Thus  when  so  much  as  now  is  fallen  away, 

No  easy  thing  it  is,  as  it  was  then, 

Either  to  touch  and  win  the  unattained, 

Or  to  hold  fast  what  hath  been  touched  and  won.  (945) 
As  one  who  shoeless  walks  in  thorny  brake, 

Calling  up  heedfulness  at  every  step, 

So  should  the  sage  in  township  make  his  tour.  (946) 
Remembering  the  saints  of  other  days, 

And  recollecting  how  it  was  they  lived, 

E’en  though  to-day  be  but  the  after-time, 

He  may  yet  win  the  Ambrosial  Way  of  Peace.  (947) 

Thus  in  the  sal-wood  spake  the  good  Friar, 
Well-trained  and  practised  as  to  his  faculties. 

Then  to  the  Saint  came  the  Peace  of  the  Passing — 
Came  to  the  Seer  for  whom  was  no  rebirth.  (948) 

1  Jivikattha  (where  Dr.  Neumann’s  rendering  is  ingenious,  if  strained) 
is  paraphrased  by  jxvikapp ay oj and ;  djivahetukd. 


CANTO  XVII 

POEMS  OF  THIRTY  VERSES 


CCLVIII 

Phussa, 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  as  the  son  of  the  ruler  of  a 
province,1  he  was  named  Phussa,  and  was  trained  in  all 
the  accomplishments  of  noble  youths.  But  because  of  the 
conditions  to  which  he  had  attained,  his  heart  hung  not 
upon  worldly  desires,  so  that  when  he  heard  a  certain  great 
Thera  preach  the  Norm,  he  believed,  and  entered  the  Order. 
Practising  himself  in  Jhana,  he  thereby  established  insight, 
and  in  due  course  acquired  sixfold  abhinna. 

Now  one  day  an  ascetic  named  Pandara-gotta2  heard  him 
teach  the  Norm.  And  seeing  around  the  Thera  a  company 
of  bhikkhus  all  of  virtuous  conduct,  trained  and  controlled 
in  body  and  mind,  that  ascetic  thought :  ‘  Excellent  i’  faith 
is  this  system  !  Long  may  it  prevail  on  earth  !’  And  he 
asked  the  Thera  :  ‘  How  will  it  be,  your  reverence,  with 
the  progress  of  bhikkhus  in  the  future  ?’ 

To  explain  this  situation  the  Compilers  first  placed  this 
verse : 

Pandarasa-gotta ,  hermit , 

Seeing  such  a  goodly  audience , 

Modest ,  quiet ,  contemplative , 

Questions  asked ,  addressing  Phussa : —  (949) 

1  Mandalikaraniio.  See  p.  83,  n.  5. 

J  The  Commentary  gives  Panda,  Pandara,  Pandarasa,  as  equally 
va  id.  Nothing  more  is  known  of  him  ;  but  it  may  be  he  is  connected 
with  the  Pandarangas,  a  set  of  ‘Wanderers’  in  the  days  of  Bindusara 
and  his  son  Emperor  Asoka.  Samantapdsddiha  ( Vinaya  Texts ,  iii.  300). 

335 


336 


CCLVIII.  PHUSSA 


What  in  the  days  to  come  will  be  your  aims, 

And  what  will  be  your  tendencies1  and  what 
Will  be  your  customs  and  observances  ?2 
To  me  who  ask  thee  do  thou  this  declare.  (950) 

Phussa. 

List  to  my  words,  Seer,  Pandarasa  named, 

And  store  them  in  thy  mind  attentively ; 

I  will  pronounce  concerning  things  to  come.3  (951) 

Hasty  of  temper  and  malign, 

Arrogant,  hypocritical, 

Deceitful,  envious,  bickerers : 

Thus  many  in  those  days  shall  be ;  (952) 

Deeming  they  know  the  depths  of  truth, 

While  standing  at  the  water’s  edge. 

Flighty,  irreverent  towards  the  Norm ; 

And  mutually  irreverent.  (953) 

Yea,  many  evils  on  this  earth 
Shall  in  the  future  come  to  pass. 

This  Norm  of  ours  so  well  set  forth 
The  stupid-minded  will  corrupt.  (954) 

When  in  the  Conclave  voice  and  vote 
Are  giv’n,  men,  tho’  in  virtue  poor, 

Will  forward  he,  in  backers  strong,4 
Scurrilous  and  unscholarly.  (955) 

When  in  the  Conclave  voice  and  vote 
Are  given,  they  of  virtuous  mind 
And  honesty  will  weaklings  be, 

Of  shamefaced  mood  and  little  zeal.  (956) 

1  =kiy-disajjhcisayd  (Commentary). 

2  = vdrittacdrittcLvanto  (Commentary). 

3  Analogous  predictions  of  dangers  besetting  the  Order  in  the  future 
( andgata-bhaydni ,  etc.)  are  ascribed,  in  several  discourses,  to  the 
Buddha  (. Ang .  Nik.,  iii.  105-110  ;  cf.  pp.  176  /.,  247/.,  329/.,  340). 

4  =  pakkhabalena  balavanto  (Commentary). 


CCLVIII.  PHUSSA 


337 


Silver  and  gold,  fields,  sites  and  herds,1 
Slaves,  maids  and  men,  in  days  to  come 
The  undiscerning  will  accept.  (957) 

And  foolish  ones  in  testy  mood, 

Lacking  in  ethical  restraint, 

Will  truculently  go  about 

Like  wild  things  spoiling  for  a  fight.  (958) 

Sobriety  they  will  not  know : — 

They  will  be  draped  in  robe  of  blue,2 
Hypocrites,  stiff-necked,  obstinate, 
Chatterers,  skilled  diplomatists,3 
Counterfeiting  the  saints  of  old.  (959) 

Hair  sleek  with  oil,  and  frivolous  mien, 

And  eyelids  with  colly rium  dyed, 

And  swathed  in  robe  of  ivory  hue  : 

Thus  will  they  go  about  the  streets.  (960) 
The  yellow  robe,  that  goodly  dye, 

That  freed  souls  wear  without  disgust, 

The  Banner  of  the  Arahant, 

Creates  in  them  but  queasiness, 

Who  hanker  after  robes  of  white.  (961) 
Greedy  of  gain  they  will  become, 

Sluggish  and  poor  in  energy  ; 

Finding  fatigue  in  woodland  haunts, 

Around  the  township  will  they  bide.  (962) 
And  ever  bent  on  wrongful  ways, 

Without  restraint,  as  pupils  apt, 

They’ll  follow  those  who  get  most  gifts.  (963) 
But  they  to  whom  no  gifts  are  given, 

Will  find  nor  honour  nor  regard ; 

Though  they  be  men  of  worth  and  charm, 

No  following  will  be  theirs  that  day.  (964) 


1  I.e.j  for  building,  or  fallow  ground—4  aJcatabhumibhdgo  vatthu/ 
‘  herds>’  lit,  goats,  representing  all  cattle  (Cy.).  Cf.  Vin.  Texts ,  iii.  389  /. 
Dyed  of  inappropriate  colour  generally’  (Commentary). 

Cf.  JPTS ,  1885,  p.  53  ;  Milinda,  ii.  253  ;  Iti-vuttaka,  p.  112. 
The  Commentary  in  places  defines  in  the  same  words  as  Buddhaghosa 
{Ang.  Nik ii.  26). 


22 


338 


CCLVI1I.  PHUSSA 


Scorning  their  own,  the  yellow  gear, 

Some  will  wear  red  of  foreign  dye,1 
And  others  will  be  found  to  wear 
White  robes  of  some  sectarian  flag.  (965) 
Dishonour  toward  the  yellow  robe 
They  in  those  days  will  show ;  bhikkhus 
Will  not  consider  what  it  means.  (966) 

Want  of  discernment  such  as  this 
Was  tragedy  unthinkable 
To  that  wise  beast  who  lay  o’ercome 
By  pain,  wounded,  in  dire  distress.2 3  (967) 

For  the  Six-tusker  then  beheld 
The  well-dyed  flag  of  arahants, 

And  thereanent  the  elephant, 

Pointing  the  moral,  verses  spake  :  (968) 

‘  Who  suffers  vice ,  yet  dons  the  saffron  robe, 

Keeping  apart  from  self-control  and  truth, 
Unworthy  he  to  wear  the  saffron  hue.  (969) 

Who  vice  rejects,  steadfast  in  virtuous  ivays, 

And  yokes  himself  to  self-control  and  truth, 

Worthy  is  he  to  wear  the  saffron  hue  A  (970) 
Immoral,  stupid  and  perverse, 

A  wanton  doer,  one  whose  heart 
Wavers,  whose  mind  is  overcast : 

Unworthy  he  of  saffron  robe.  (971) 

1  On  milakkhuraj anay  r attar)  the  Commentary  has  kdlakarajanena 
rattay ,  ‘the  nasal  y  being  inserted  metri  causa ’  in  milakkhuraj  ana- 
rattay. 

2  Muppato,  dat.  of  ruppay ;  sariravikdray  dpajjato  (Commentary). 
Cf  *  utta  Nipdta ,  v.  331. 

3  From  the  Cliaddanta  (Six -tusker)  Jdtaka ,  v.,  No.  514.  The 
elephant,  who,  it  was  claimed,  was  the  Bodhisat  (destined  to  become  a 
Buddha),  is  trapped  in  a  pit  by  the  craft  of  a  hunter,  who,  to  avoid 
creating  suspicion  of  harm  in  the  beast’s  mind,  disguises  himself  as  a 
bhikkhu!  The  Jataka  verses  are  also  incorporated  in  the  Dhammapada , 
verses  9,  10.  Cf.  Kdsdva- Jdtaka,  ii.,  No.  221.  On  the  word-play, 
kasdva,  ‘vice,’  kdsdva ,  ‘yellow  dye,’  see  M.  Muller’s  Bliammapada , 
SBE,  x.  5,  n.  9.  The  citation  of  this  ancient  gatha,  and  its  story,  by 
another  book  of  the  Khuddaka-Nikaya  is  of  historical  interest. 


CCLVIII.  PHUSSA 


339 


He  who  with  virtue  blest,  is  freed 
From  passion,  is  intent  in  heart, 

Whose  hopes  and  purposes  are  white  i1 
Worthy  is  he  of  saffron  robe.  (972) 

A  fool  with  mind  puffed  up,  distraught, 

For  whom  no  moral  code  exists  : 

Gear  white  of  hue  doth  he  deserve. 

For  saffron  robe  what  use  hath  he  ?  (973) 
Brethren  and  Sisters,  in  that  day, 

With  hearts  corrupt,  and  impious, 

Will  bully  and  humiliate 

Such  as  have  trained  their  hearts  in  love.  (974) 
And  fools  e’en  by  their  Elders  taught 
Rightly  to  wear  and  use  the  robe, 

For  want  of  wit  will  listen  not, 

Perverse  and  wanton  doers  all.  (975) 

And  so  the  fools,  instructed  thus, 

Lacking  in  mutual  respect, 

Will  not  their  tutors’  word  obey, 

No  more  than  vicious  hack  its  groom.  (976) 

Thus  in  the  age  that  is  to  come 
Will  be  the  course  and  tendencies 
Of  bhikkhus  and  of  bhikkhunls, 

When  the  last  time  shall  be  at  hand.2  (977) 

Until  this  time  of  mighty  dread 
That  now  is  not  shall  come  to  pass, 

Be  ye  of  gentle,  docile  hearts, 

Filled  with  a  mutual  regard.  (978) 

Be  loving  and  be  pitiful 

And  well  controlled  in  virtue’s  ways, 

1  Cf.  verse  549.  Suvisuddhamano  vitakko  andoilasankappo  vd  (Cy.). 

2  ‘What,’  asks  the  Commentary,  ‘is  the  last  time  ( pacchimo  kdlo )? 
From  the  Third  Council  ”  (at  Patna,  in  Asoka’s  reign)  is  a  reply 

disputed  by  some.  For  there  are  five  stages  ( yugdni )  in  the  [life  of 
the]  Sasana  :  Vimutti,  samddhi ,  slla,  suta ,  ddina.  They  follow  in 
ihis  order,  till  only  the  outward  signs  (linj amattay)  survive.’ 


340 


CCLVIII.  PHUSSA 


Strenuous,  bent  upon  the  goal, 

And  onward  ever  bravely  press.  (979) 

That  danger  doth  in  dalliance  lie  : — 

That  earnestness  is  sure  and  safe  : — 

This  when  ye  see,  then  cultivate 
The  Eightfold  Path,  so  shall  ye  touch, 

So  make  your  own,1  the  Deathless  Way.  (980) 

Thus  spake  the  Thera  to  his  congregation.  Now  just 
these  verses  were  his  confession  of  anna. 


CCLIX 

Sariputta. 

His  story  and  that  of  Moggallana  the  Great 2  are  taken 
together.  iEons  ago,  in  the  days  of  the  Buddha  Anomadassi, 
they  were  playmates,  named  Sarada  and  Sirivaddha,  sons,  the 
one  of  an  eminent  brahmin,  the  other  of  a  great  landowner. 
Sarada  succeeded  to  his  father’s  estate,  but  oppressed  with 
the  general  doom  of  all  creatures,  he  left  the  world  to  seek 
a  path  of  release,  inviting  Sirivaddha  to  do  likewise.  ‘  I 
cannot,’  answered  Sirivaddha,  but  he  yielded  when  Sarada, 
as  a  Kishi,  had  been  visited  by  the  Buddha.  Now  all 
Sarada’s  followers  became  arahants  after  hearing  Anoma, 
the  chief  disciple,  preach  the  Norm.  But  Sarada  himself, 
being  pre-occupied  in  mind,  was  unable  to  penetrate  to  the 
Paths  and  the  Fruits.  Thereupon  both  Sarada  and  Siri¬ 
vaddha  aspired,  in  presence  of  the  Buddha,  to  occupy, 
like  Anoma,  the  post  of  chief  disciples  to  a  Buddha  in  the 
future.  This  the  Buddha  promised  should  come  to  pass  in 
the  days  of  Gotama  Buddha.  There  is  no  record  of  their 
subsequent  kamma,  but  before  our  Exalted  One  arose, 
Sarada  was  reborn  not  far  from  Rajagaha,  at  the  township 

1  ‘  Touch’ — i.e ‘realize/  Commentary  readin  g  phusantd. 

2  See  CCLXIII.  Dhammapala’s  account  of  the  legend  is  here 
somewhat  condensed. 


CCLIX.  SAIIIPUTTA 


341 


of  the  Upatissas,1  of  Rupasari  the  brahminee,  and  on  the 
same  day  Sirivaddha  was  born,  not  far  from  Rajagaha,  at 
the  township  of  the  Kolitas,  of  MoggalJ  the  brahminee.  And 
because  each  was  the  son  of  the  head  of  his  family,  the 
one  was  named  Upatissa,  the  other  Kolita.  Both  boys2 
were  reared  in  luxury,  and  excelled  in  all  accomplishments. 
But  seeing  the  crowds  one  day  assembled  for  the  hill-top 
fair3  at  Rajagaha,  they  both,  because  their  insight  had 
attained  maturity,  beheld  how,  within  a  century,  all  that 
folk  would  fall  into  the  jaws  of  death,  and  with  agitation 
they  decided  to  seek  a  doctrine  of  release.  And  they  left 
the  world  in  the  school  of  the  Wanderer  Sanjaya,  agreeing 
each  to  tell  the  other  if  he  first  arrived  at  Amata. 

In  Sanjaya’s  teaching  they  found  nothing  genuine,  and 
pursued  their  quest,  asking  recluses  and  brahmins,  till 
through  Assaji  the  bhikkhu,  they  found  the  Exalted  One,4 
and  were  by  him  ordained  with  the  laying  on  of  the  hand 
and  the  words :  Come,  bhikkhus.  Made  Stream-winners  by 
Assaji’s  summary  of  the  Norm,6  they  had  no  need  to  study, 
for  each  of  the  other  three  Paths.  Why  ?  Because  of  their 
consummate  knowledge  even  as  disciples.  Thereby  the 
Venerable  Moggallana,  on  the  seventh  day,  at  the  village  of 
Ivallavala  in  Magadha,  overcame  sloth  and  torpor  by  the 
Master’s  injunction,  and  listening  to  an  exercise  on  elements,6 
won  the  topmost  point,  while  the  Venerable  Sariputta,  half 
a  month  after  his  ordination,  won  it  while  dwelling  with 
the  Master  in  the  Sukarakhata  Cave7  at  Rajagaha;  while 

1  Nalaka.  Upatissa  was  his  family  name,  Vanganta  his  father’s 
name  ( Dhammapada  Commentary ,  ii.  84 ;  see  above,  CCXXXVIII.). 

2  Their  close  friendship  is  described  in  detail  in  the  Dhammajpada 
Commentary ,  i.  90  ff.  (‘  Aggasavaka-vatthu,5  on  verses  11,  12). 

3  Giraggasamajja.  On  samajja,  see  Dialogues ,  i.  7,  n.  4. 

4  Fully  described  in  Vinaya  Texts ,  i.  144  ff. ;  hence  I  have  greatly 
condensed  the  narrative  here. 

5  Viz.,  that  the  Buddha  explained  all  things  causally, 

6  I  cannot  trace  this  particular  exercise  in  the  Nikayas,  but  there 
are  several  that  may  have  served  such  a  purpose — e.g  ,  in  the  Dhdtu- 
Sagyutta ,  ii.  143^.  ;  also  248;  iii.  227  ff.  ;  Ang.  Nik.,  iii.  245,  290. 

7  Or  Sukara.  The  name  is  not  met  with  elsewhere.  Cf.  Dhamma- 
pada  Commentary ,  i.  96. 


342 


CCLIX.  SARIPUTTA 


Dighanakha,  the  Wanderer,  his  sister’s  son,  was  being 
taught  the  ‘  Yedanapariggaha  ’  Suttanta.1  Thereafter  the 
Master,  in  conclave  at  Jetavana,  ranked  Sariputta  chief 
among  his  disciples  in  wisdom  and  insight. 

And  he,  established  in  the  position  of  General  of  the 
Norm,  working  for  the  good  of  beings,  one  day  thus  declared 
his  anna  before  his  fellow-disciples  : 

Whoso  according  to  his  powers 
Is  virtuous,2  saintly,  clear  in  mind, 

Earnest  his  purpose  to  perform, 

Who  loveth  introspective  work,3 
Well  concentrated  and  intent, 

Lone  and  detached,  blissful,  serene  : 

This  man  is  rightly  Bhikkhu  named.  (981) 

When  he  of  food  or  moist  or  dry  partakes,4 
Let  him  not  fully  satiated  be. 

Lean  in  the  stomach,  temperate  at  meals, 

And  watchful  let  the  bhikkhu  wend  his  way.5  (982) 
Hath  he  but  eaten  mouthfuls  four  or  five, 

Let  him  drink  water  : — here  is  sure  enough 
Refreshment  for  a  bhikkhu  filled  with  zeal.  (983) 
Things  that  are  seemly  let  him  get  and  take  : — 
Raiment  that’s  worn  for  this  specific  end  : — 
Comfort  enough  for  bhikkhu  filled  with  zeal.  (984) 

1  I.e.,  the  ‘  Dighanakha -Suttanta  ’  ( Majjh .  Nil c.,  i.,  No.  74).  It  is 
called  as  above  in  the  Dhamnmapada  Commentary ,  loc.  cit.,  and  in 
Sumangala-Vildsini  on  Digha ,  ii.,  XIV.,  §  10. 

2  The  Commentary  paraphrases  yathdcdri  as  yato  kdyadihi  sayyato , 
sarjvuto  Tiutvd  carati,  which  is  merely  exegetical ;  -sato  is  for  -santo. 

3  Ajjhattarato.  This  apparently  curious  term — lit.,  delighting  in 
what  is  of  one’s  self,  or  personal — occurs  in  a  verse  repeated  four 
times  in  the  Sutta-Pitaka :  Digha  Nik.,  ii.  107 ;  Sayy.  Nik.,  v.  263 ; 
Dhammapada,  verse  362 ;  Uddna,  vi.  1.  In  Dialogues,  ii.  113,  it  is 
rendered  ‘  with  inward  joy,’  the  Commentary  only  paraphrasing  by 
niyaka ,  ‘one’s  own5  ( Therigdthd ,  ver.  469).  Here  our  Commentary 
paraphrases  by  ‘  delighting  in  the  practice  of  meditative  exercise.’ 

4  The  metre  here  changes  from  a  long  irregular  one  to  sloka. 

5  Paribbaje  =  vihareyya  (Cy.).  Quoted  in  Mil.  ii.  350  ;  Jak.  Cy ., 
ii.,  293. 


CCL1X.  SARI  PUTT  A 


343 


And  when  he  sitteth  cross-legged  on  his  couch, 

If  but  his  knees  be  screened  from  falling  rain,1 
’Tis  ease  enough  for  bhikkhu  filled  with  zeal.  (985) 

Whoso  hath  looked  on  pleasure  as  but  pain  ; 

Who  hath  discerned  in  pain  the  piercing  dart ; 

Saw  no  abiding  self  betwixt  the  two  : — 2 
What  world  will  hold,  what  fate  detain  that 
man  ?  (986) 

Ne’er  give  me  one  with  evil  in  his  heart, 

Inert,  inactive,  and  intractable, 

Knowing  but  little  of  the  holy  Norm. 

What  world  will  hold,  what  fate  detain  that 
man?3  (987) 

He  who  is  learned  in  the  holy  Norm, 

Can  understand,  is  thoroughly  intent 
On  moral  base,  and  knit  to  inward  calm  : — 

Let  him  for  me  the  head  and  foremost  stand.  (988) 

Whose  heart  is  to  obsessions4  given  o’er — 

A  deer  seduced  by  fascination’s  snare — 

He  from  Nibbana  goeth  far  astray, 

To  utmost  haven  fails  to  find  the  course.  (989) 

1  This  is  the  first  of  the  gathas  quoted  in  the  Milinda  as  Sariputta’s 
(ii.  280).  Some  of  them  are  not  traceable  in  the  Canon.  The  Com¬ 
mentary  explains :  ‘  Of  whom,  so  seated  in  his  hut,  the  rain  does  not 
wet  the  knees.’ 

2  Referring  to  the  doctrine  in  Sayy.  Nik.,  iv.  207  ;  Iti-vuttaka,  §  53. 
The  ethical  point  is  self-mastery  with  regard  to  the  three  modes  of 
feeling  on  occasion  of  sense.  The  usual  reference  to  the  third  mode, 
neutral  feeling,  is  ‘hath  looked  on  it  as  impermanent’  ( aniccatto ). 
Here  it  is  anattato.  The  Commentary  has  ndhositi :  yathdbhutdva- 
bodlie  net  attaniydbhinivesanay  ahosi. 

3  Lit.  :  By  what  in  the  world  what  may  be?  Quoted,  but  not  ver 
batim,  in  Milinda,  ii.  332.  Dr.  Oldenberg  inclines  to  think  andcdro  may 
be  more  correct  than  anddaro,  intractable  ( Theragathd ,  p.  89,  n.). 

4  The  difficult  word  papanca.  See  Dr.  Neumann’s  note  at  this 
passage  and  ours  ( Dialogues ,  ii.  312).  The  former  renders  it  by 
Sonderheit,  Vielheit,  diversity,  plurality.  But  when  the  danger  in 


344 


CCLIX.  SARIPUTTA 


But  he  who  from  obsessions  clears  the  heart, 
Delighting  in  that  path  where  these  are  not, 

He  to  Nibbana  surely  finds  the  way, 

To  utmost  haven  safely  steers  his  course.  (990) 

Now  one  day  the  Thera,  seeing  where  his  younger 
brother  Revata* 1  was  dwelling — a  waterless  jungle  of  thorn 
and  acacia  trees — commended  him,  saying  : 

In  village  or  the  wild,  in  vale,  on  hill, 

Where’er  the  men  of  worth,  the  arahants, 

Their  dwelling  make,  delightful  is  that  spot.  (991) 
Delightful  are  the  forests,  where  no  crowd 
Doth  come  to  take  its  pleasure  ;  there  will  they 
Who  are  released  from  passions  find  their  joy. 

Not  seekers  they  for  sense-satiety.  (992) 

Again,  the  Thera  showing  kindness  to  an  unfortunate 
brahmin  named  Radha,  caused  him  to  leave  the  world  and 
enter  the  Order.2  Afterwards,  while  on  tour,  he  admonished 
Radha,  pleased  with  his  gentle  behaviour : 

As  one  who  shows  where  treasures  hidden  lie, 

So  is  the  man  of  wisdom  who  discerns 
What  to  avoid,  and  utters  sage  rebuke  : — 

If  such  an  able  guide  ye  see  and  heed, 

For  you  who  follow,  better  ’tis,  not  worse.  (993) 

Now  one  day,  the  Master  not  going  himself  to  suppress 
the  corrupt  settlement  of  the  Assaji-Punabbasu  bhikkhus 


these  is  opposed  to  £  concentration,’  ‘  selection,’  ‘  simplicity,’  etc.,  the 
word  opposed  to  ekatta  is,  so  I  find,  ndnatta ,  not  papanca.  Papanca 
is  defined  as  threefold:  ‘  craving,’  ‘  conceit,’  and  '  error  ’  ( ditthi ).  In  the 
Vibhanga,  p.  390,  papancitdni  are  nine  forms  of  speculation  (ditthi) 
about  future  individual  existence,  a  content  shared  by  the  terms  mail - 
nitani  (conceits),  phanditdni  (‘ vapourings,’  imaginings),  sankhatdni 
(mental  concoctions).  Cf.  my  note  JBAS,  1906,  246/. 

1  Cf.  XLII.,  CCXLIY. 

2  This  is  more  fully  related  in  Dhavimapada  Commentary  (‘  Radha- 
thera-vatthu’),  ii.  104/”.,  on  verse  76.  Radha  is  probably  the  aged 
Thera  of  CXXVII.,  ordained  by  Sariputta. 


CCIJX.  SARIPUTTA 


345 


on  Kita  Hill,1  Sariputta  went  instead  with  Moggallana  and 
their  followers.  And  when  Sariputta’s  admonition  was 
disregarded,  he  spake  thus  : 

One  should  exhort,  one  should  instruct,  forbid, 
Hinder  that  which  is  mischievous  and  wrong. 

So  acting,  by  the  good  is  one  beloved  ; 

’Tis  only  evil-doers  who  take  dislike.  (994) 

When  the  brethren  were  saying  that  he  whom  the 
Master  was  teaching — namely,  Dlghanakha  the  Wanderer2 
— was  fully  prepared  by  his  antecedents,  Sariputta  inter¬ 
posed,  saying  :  That  was  not  so  : 

Another  was’t  to  whom  He  taught  the  Norm — 
The  Exalted  One,  the  Buddha,  He  who  Sees — 

For  while  the  Norm  was  being  taught  I  heard, 
Seeking  for  good  with  hearing  all  attent.  (995) 
And  not  in  vain,  I  trow,  my  listening, 

For  I  have  won  release,  am  sane,  immune. 

Nor  to  attain  the  vision  of  my  past, 

Nor  for  the  means  to  see — the  eye  divine —  (996) 
The  mystic  power  to  read  the  thoughts  of  men, 
Discern  decease,  rebirth  in  earth  and  heaven, 

Nor  for  the  ear  celestially  attuned : — 

Had  I  to  pitch  and  to  adjust  the  mind.3  (997) 

The  next  three  stanzas  were  spoken  of  him,  when, 
dwelling  at  the  Dove’s  Cave  Yihara,  he  took  no  injury 
from  the  Yakkha’s  blow  : 4 

1  On  this  section  of  the  first  schismatics,  see  Vinaya  Texts ,  ii.  847  ff. 
Cf.  iii.  211 ;  Dliammapada  Commentary ,  ii.  109.  The  hill  was  near 
Savatthl. 

2  See  above,  p.  34,  n.  5. 

3  Panidhi  me  na  vijjati.  See  Sariputta’s  story — his  needing  no 
intermediate  studies. 

4  This  quaintly  told  episode  is  in  XJddna ,  iv.  4.  The  Yihara  is  not 
as  yet  met  with  elsewhere.  In  that  work  the  concluding  three  lines 
are  said  to  have  been  spoken  of  him  by  the  Buddha.  Verses  998-1000 
are  ascribed  also  to  Revata  (CCXLIV.). 


346 


CCLIX.  SARIPUTTA 


Seated  at  foot  of  tree,  with  shaven  head, 

Wrapped  in  his  cloak,  in  wisdom  ranked  supreme, 
The  Thera  Upatissa  musing  deep,  (998) 

His  thought  transcending  acts  percipient,1 
Disciple  of  the  supreme  Buddha,  he 
Thus  far  in  Ariyan  silence  was  immersed.  (999) 
E’en  as  a  mountain-crag  unshaken  stands, 
Sure-based,  a  Brother  with  illusions  gone, 

Like  to  that  mountain  stands  unwavering.  (1000) 

Now  one  day,  through  the  Thera’s  absence  of  mind,  the 
lap  of  his  robe  hung  down.  And  a  novice  said :  £  Your 
reverence,  it  should  be  draped  around  you.’  Then  Sari- 
putta,  nodding,  said  :  ‘  Good,  you  have  done  well  to  say 
so  !’  And  going  a  little  way,  he  draped  his  robe  round  him. 
And  showing  that  for  such  as  he  that  was  a  fault,  he  said : 

The  man  of  blameless  life,  who  ever  seeks 
For  what  is  pure,  doth  deem  some  trifling  fault, 
That  is  no  heavier  than  the  tip  of  any  hair, 

W eighty  as  [burden  of  the  gravid]  cloud.2  (1001) 

Again  he  showed  the  equanimity  of  his  mind  in  respect 
to  living  or  dying  with  the  verse : 

Not  fain  am  I  to  die  nor  yet  to  live. 

I  shall  lay  down  this  mortal  frame  anon 
With  mind  alert,  with  consciousness  con¬ 
trolled.  (1002) 

With  thought  of  death  I  dally  not,  nor  yet 

Delight  in  living.  I  await  the  hour 

Like  any  hireling  who  hath  done  his  task.3  (1003) 

Again,  in  teaching  the  Norm,  he  uttered  these  verses : 

On  both  sides  [of  the  scene  we  look,]  and  lo ! 

’Tis  dying,  not  the  dearth  of  death  [we  see], 

1  He  was  in  Fourth  Jhana  (Commentary).  But  avitaJcka  is  reached 
as  early  as  the  second  stage. 

2  Also  in  his  brother’s  poem,  =  verse  652. 

3  =  verse  606.  These,  again,  come  into  Revata’s  verses. 


CCLIX.  SARIPUTTA 


347 


'  Be  it  the  backward  or  the  forward  view.1 
Fulfil  ye  then  your  course,  lest  ye  be  lost ! 

See  that  this  moment  pass  not  by  for  nought  !2  (1004) 

E’en  as  a  border  city  guarded  well 

Within,  without,  so  guard  ye  well  yourselves  ! 

See  that  the  moment  pass  not  and  be  lost, 

For  many  mourn  in  woe  that  moment  past.  (1005) 

Now  one  day,  seeing  the  venerable  Kotthita  the  Great, 
he  spoke  three  stanzas  proclaiming  his  excellence  :3 

Whoso  serene  and  calm,  dead  to  the  world, 

Can  utter  wisdom’s  runes  with  wit  unswelled, 
Unruffled,  he  doth  shake  off  naughty  things, 

As  they  were  forest-leaves  by  wind-god  blown.  (1006) 
Whoso  serene  and  calm,  dead  to  the  world, 

Can  utter  wisdom’s  runes  with  wit  unswelled, 
Unruffled,  he  doth  strip  off  naughty  things, 

As  they  were  forest-leaves  by  wind-god  blown.  (1007) 
Calm  and  serene,  by  vice  unharassed,  free 
From  all  that  hinders  clarity  of  mind, 

Lovely  in  virtue,  of  discerning  wit, 

He  should  End-maker  be  of  suffering.  (1008) 

The  following  was  said  concerning  the  Yajjians  who 
believed  in  Devadatta,4  and  approved  of  his  doctrine  : 

Some5  souls  there  be  on  whom  none  should  rely, 

Be  they  housefolk,  or  e’en  among  recluses. 

1  Standing  in  middle-life  and  looking  at  old  age  or  youth  (Com¬ 
mentary).  In  these  four  lines  the  sloka  is  exchanged  for  an  irregular 
species  of  verse.  Read  ubhayena-m-iday . 

2  Cf.  verses  403,  653 ;  Sisters,  verse  5. 

3  Curiously  enough  the  first  is  ascribed  to  Kotthita  himself.  See  II. 

4  On  the  career  of  Devadatta,  first  cousin  to  the  Buddha,  see  Vinaya 
Texts,  i.  228  /.,  233  ff.,  especially  239  ff.  Cf.  Milinda,  i.  162  ff. 
Sariputta,  who  had  previously  sung  his  praises,  was  appointed  to 
proclaim  him  a  renegade,  whose  very  virtues  were  untrustworthy. 

5  On  ekatiyesu  (Cy.  ekaccesu),  see  Trenckner,  Pali  Miscellany ,  p.  56 


348 


CCL.1X.  SARI  PUTT  A 


Such  as  have  once  been  good  and  turned  to  bad, 

And  then  from  bad  have  veered  to  good  again.  (1009) 
Desires  of  sense,  ill-will,  torpor  and  sloth 
In  the  bhikkhu,  distraction  of  the  mind, 

And  doubt  : — five  cankers  of  the  heart1  are 
these.  (1010) 

Whoso  can  sulfer  both  extremes  of  fate  : 

The  favour  and  disfavour  of  the  world, 

The  while  he  bides  in  sober  earnestness, 

Unwavering  his  concentrated  mind  : — (1011) 

Him,  musing  ardent  and  unweariedly, 

With  intuition  fine  and  delicate, 

Zealous  to  slay  the  tendency  to  grasp  : — 

Him  ‘  a  good  man  ’  indeed  should  others  call.  (1012) 

To  draw  yet  other  distinctions,  instancing  the  Master 
and  himself,  he  uttered  these  verses : 

The  mighty  ocean,  the  extended  earth, 

The  mountains,  yea,  the  firmament2  afford 

No  picture  meet  to  show  how  excellent 

Th’  emancipation  of  our  Master’s  mind.  (1013) 

The  Elder  Brother,  very  wise,  intent, 

Who  after  His  example  turns  the  Wheel, 

Is  like  to  earth,  to  water,  and  to  fire, 

In  that  he  feels  no  fondness  nor  disgust.3  (1014) 

He  hath  the  topmost  place  for  wisdom  now, 

Mighty  in  intellect,  a  mighty  sage ; 

Not  dull  is  he  though  he  seem  dull  of  wit  ;4 
Ever  in  blissful  cool  he  wends  his  way.  (1015) 

1  These  five  ‘Hindrances’  are  here  classed  as  Kilesas,  or  kelisd 
{Bud.  Psy.,  310  ff.) — so  also  the  (Br)  Cy .=‘  cittupakkilesa.' 

2  ‘  That  which  is  divided  into  East,  and  so  on  ’  (Commentary). 

3  The  Master  was,  deliberately  and  magnanimously,  as  equable  with 
regard  to  things  desirable  and  undesirable  as  were  the  elements,  un¬ 
consciously,  says  the  Commentary.  The  bhikkhu  had  to  cultivate  the 
earth-mind,  water-mind,  to  the  same  end  {Majjh.  Nik.,  i.  423;  Ang. 
Nik.,  iv.  374;  cf.  Jut.,  iii.  247  ;  Milinda,  i.  258  ;  ii.  308,  311). 

4  Cf.  verse  501.  ‘  Owing  [to  the  simplicity  of  his  wants.’  Com- 


CCLIX.  SARI  PUTT  A 


349 


To  show  the  completion  of  his  life’s  task,  he  said : 

The  Master  hath  my  fealty  and  love, 

And  all  the  Buddha’s  ordinance  is  done. 

Low  have  I  laid  the  heavy  load  I  bore ; 

Cause  for  rebirth  is  found  in  me  no  more.* 1  (1016) 

And  when  he  came  to  his  utter  passing  away,  he  thus 
admonished  the  brethren  assembled  around  him  : 

Press  on  with  earnestness  and  win  the  goal ! 

This  the  commandment  that  I  give  to  you. 

Lo  !  now  my  going-out  complete  will  be. 

From  all  am  I  released  and  utterly.2 *  (1017) 


CCLX 

Ananda. 

Deceased  from  the  Tusita  heaven,  together  with  our 
Bodhisat,  he  took  birth  in  the  family  of  Amitodana  the 
Sakiyan.  And  because  the  kinsfolk  said,  * He  is  born 
bringing  you  happiness’  (Ananda),  so  they  named  him. 
When  he  was  grown  up,  and  the  Denunciation,  Supreme 
Enlightenment  and  Wheel-rolling  had  taken  place,  and 
the  Exalted  One  had  finished  his  visit  to  Kapilavatthu, 
Ananda  renounced  the  world  with  Bhaddiya4  and  the 
others,  and  was  ordained  by  the  Exalted  One.  Not  long 
after  he  heard  a  discourse  by  Punna  of  the  Mantanis,6  and 
completed  the  First  Path. 


mentary,  reading,  for  mahdmuni ,  mahamatl ,  and  quoting  the  Buddha’s 
eulogy  of  Sariputta,  Majjh .,  iii.  25. 

1  —  verses  604,  792,  891,  918. 

Ascribed  to  his  brother,  Revata,  when  the  latter  also  was  dying 
(verse  658).  Cf.  the  Buddha’s  last  words,  Dialogues ,  ii.  173. 

Cf.  the  genealogical  table  in  Rhys  Davids,  Buddhism ,  p.  52,  where, 
according  to  authorities  later  than  Dhammapala,  he  is  made  son  of 
Suklodana,  another  brother  of  Suddhodana.  Here  he  is  made  brother 
(possibly  half-brother)  to  Mahanama  and  Anuruddha  (see  CCLYI ) 

4  Cf.  CCLIY.  ■ .  .  c  s  cy  Iy> 


350 


CCLX.  ANANDA 


Now  during  the  first  twenty  years  of  the  Exalted  One’s 
Buddhahood,  his  personal  attendants  were  not  permanently 
such.  One  day  it  was  Nagasamala,1  who,  taking  bowl  and 
cloak,  walked  [after  him] ;  another  day  Nagita,2  another 
day,  Upavana,3  Sunakkhatta,4 *  Cunda  the  novice,6  Sagata,6 
Meghiya.7  Usually  the  Master  did  not  favour  one  more 
than  the  others.  But  one  day  the  Master,  seated  in  the 
Buddha’s  seat  of  supremacy,  in  the  cell  of  the  Fragrant 
Chamber,  surrounded  by  the  brethren,  addressed  them 
thus  :  ‘  I,  bhikkhus,  am  now  advanced  in  years  ;8  and  some 
bhikkhus,  when  they  have  been  told,  “  Let  us  go  this  way,” 
take  another  way,  and  some  drop  my  bowl  and  cloak  on 
the  ground.  Do  ye  know  of  a  bhikkhu  to  be  my  perma¬ 
nent  body-servant  ?’  Then  a  righteous  thrill  went  through 
the  brethren,  and  the  venerable  Sariputta  arose,  and, 
bowing  to  the  Exalted  One,  said :  £  I,  lord,  will  wait  upon 
you.’  Him  the  Exalted  One  rejected,  and  Moggallana  the 
Great  also.  And  all  the  great  disciples  said,  £  We  will  wait 
upon  you,’  save  only  Ananda.  But  he  just  sat  in  silence. 
Then  they  said  to  him  :  ‘  Brother,  do  you,  too,  ask  the 
Master  for  the  post  of  attendant  ?’  £  If  I  did  ask,  what 

sort  of  post-gaining  would  that  be?  He  himself  will  say 
of  whom  he  approves.’  Then  the  Exalted  One  said : 
‘  Ananda,  bhikkhus,  is  not  to  be  urged  by  others  ;  if  he 
knows  it  of  himself,  he  will  wait  upon  me Then  the 
brethren  said  again  :  £  Get  up,  brother  Ananda,  ask  the 
Master  for  the  post.’ 

1  Cf  CLXXXVI.  2  Cf  LXXXVI. 

3  Cf.  Dialogues ,  ii.  151. 

4  Cf.  Dialogues,  iii. ,  XXIV.,  §§  3,  4. 

5  Apparently  not  Cunda  the  Great  (CXXXI.).  He  was  attendant 

on  Sariputta  till  the  latter  died.  He  then  announced  the  death  to 
Ananda  and  the  Buddha  ( Sayy .  Nik.,  v.  161/.). 

6  Cf.  Vinaya  Texts ,  ii.  2  ff. ;  Jdtaka,  i.,  No.  81. 

7  Cf.  LXVI. 

8  Judging  by  Ananda’s  account  of  his  term  as  constant  attendant, 
in  verses  1039-1043,  the  Buddha  will  have  been  at  this  time  fifty-six 
years  old.  The  twenty  years  of  temporary  attendance  added  to  these 
twenty-five  just  make  up  the  period  of  the  Buddha's  ministry. 


CCLX.  ANANDA 


351 


Then  Ananda  stood  up  and  said  :  ‘  If,  lord,  the  Exalted 
One  will  refuse  me  four  things  and  grant  me  four  things, 
then  will  I  wait  upon  the  Exalted  One.  Will  he  never 
give  me  any  choice  garment  or  food  gotten  by  him,  nor  a 
separate  “  fragrant  cell,”  nor  go  if  he  has  received  an  in¬ 
vitation  ?  For  if  he  do  not  deny  me  these  things,  some 
will  say :  “Where  is  the  burden  [of  such  service]  ?  Ananda 
serves  that  he  may  get  clothes,  good  fare  and  lodging, 
and  be  included  in  the  invitations.”  And  further,  will  the 
Exalted  One  go  when  I  have  received  invitations  ?  Will 
he  suffer  me  to  bring  those  to  him  who  have  come  from 
afar  and  around  to  see  him  ?  Will  he,  when  I  am  per¬ 
plexed,  suffer  me  to  come  to  him  ?  Will  he  repeat  to  me 
doctrines  he  has  taught  while  I  was  present  ?  For  if  he 
do  not  grant  me  these  things,  some  will  say:  “Where  is 
the  advantage  [in  such  service]  ?”  If  when  I  am  asked  to 
bring  the  Exalted  One  to  a  meal  next  day  he  will  not 
come,  or  if  he  will  not  consent  to  see  whom  I  would  bring, 
people  will  put  no  trust  in  me,  and  will  say  he  shows  me 
no  attention.  And  if  he  do  not  explain  the  doctrine  and 
its  divisions,  they  will  say  :  “  Friend,  do  you  not  know, 
however  much  you  follow  him  like  his  shadow?”  If,  then, 
the  Exalted  One  will  grant  me  these  eight  boons,  I  will 
wait  upon  him.’  And  the  Exalted  One  granted  them.1 

So  from  that  day  thenceforth  Ananda  waited  upon  him 
of  the  Ten  Powers,  bringing  him  water  and  toothpick, 
washing  his  feet,  accompanying  him,  sweeping  his  cell,  and 
so  forth.  During  the  day  he  kept  at  hand  to  mark  the 
Master’s :  ‘  This  should  be  procured,’  ‘  That  should  be 
done.’  And  at  night,  taking  a  stout  staff  and  lantern,  he 
would  go  nine  times  round  the  ‘  fragrant  cell,’  making 
response  if  the  Master  called  that  he  might  not  succumb 
to  drowsiness. 

Then  the  Master,  in  Ariyan  conclave  at  the  Jeta  Grove, 

1  Buddhaghosa’s  account  of  Ananda’s  judicious  contract  (Com¬ 
mentary  on  Anguttara ,  i.  24  /.)  is  more  coherent  than  that  in  our 
Burmese  manuscript  of  Dhammapala’s  Commentary.  I  have  used  its 
help  in  the  above,  somewhat  condensing  both  accounts. 


352 


CCLX.  ANANDA 


ranked  him  the  foremost  bhikkhu  in  five  respects  :  erudi¬ 
tion,  mental  vigilance,  power  of  walking,  steadfastness, 
ministering  care,1  .  .  .  And  so  this  great  Brother,  re¬ 
maining  yet  a  student  after  the  Master  had  passed  away, 
when  admonished  by  the  bhikkhus2  and  alarmed  by  a 
fairy3 — as  has  been  related  above — thought,  ‘  To-morrow4 
the  Council  will  take  place,  but  it  is  not  suitable  that  I, 
who  am  doing  a  student’s  work,  should  go  to  the  assembly 
to  recite  the  Doctrine  with  the  Masters,  the  Elders.’  Then 
zeal  awoke  in  him,  and  far  through  the  night  he  practised 
insight  on  the  Terrace.  His  efforts  yet  unrewarded,  he 
entered  the  Vihara,  and  seated  on  his  couch,  and  desirous 
to  lie  down,  he  inclined  his  body.  His  head  had  not 
touched  the  pillow,  nor  his  feet  left  the  ground,  when  in 
that  interval  his  heart  was  freed  from  the  intoxicants 
without  any  grasping  whatever,  and  he  won  sixfold 
abhiiina.  Therefore  he  entered  the  Council  Hall. 

Now  the  verses  he  had  uttered  from  time  to  time  were 
collected,  and  included  in  the  Brethren’s  Psalms  at  the 
recital  of  the  Khuddaka-Nikaya.6 

The  first  stanzas  were  delivered  in  admonition  to  those 
bhikkhus  whom  he  saw  consorting  with  Devadatta’s  par¬ 
tisans  : 

With  slanderer  and  man  of  wrath, 

With  the  mean-hearted  and  malign6 
No  commerce  should  the  wise  man  hold. 

Evil  is  concourse  with  the  bad.  (1018) 

With  the  believer  and  the  wise, 

The  gentle  and  the  learned  man7 
Communion  should  the  wise  man  hold, 

For  blest  is  concourse  with  the  good.  (1019) 

1  Ang.  Nik.,  i.  24  /.  2  Vinaya ,  ii.  288. 

3  Scvyy.  Nik.,i.  199.  Cf.  above,  CXIX.  4  Vinaya  Texts,  iii.  373  /. 

5  The  fifth  and  concluding  section  of  the  Sutta-Pifaka ,  containing, 
inter  alia,  the  present  work. 

6  Lit.,  delighting  in  ruin  (of  others).  On  Devadatta,  see  preceding  poem. 

7  Pesalo,  amiable,  is,  in  the  Commentary,  having  charming  virtue 
( piyasilo ). 


CCLX.  ANANDA 


353 


The  following  verse  was  uttered,  when  the  lay-follower 
Uttara  was  suffering  her  own  beauty  to  dispose  her  to 
sensuality,  and  in  order  to  make  her  understand  the 
frailty  of  the  body.  Some  say  it  was  spoken  in  admonition 
of  those  who  lost  their  heads  at  sight  of  Ambapall  r1 

Behold  the  tricked-out  puppet  shape,  a  mass 
Of  sores,  a  congeries  diseased,  teeming 
With  many  purposes  and  plans,  and  yet 
In  whom  there  is  no  power  to  persist.  (1020) 
Behold  the  tiicked-out  form,  bejewelled,  ringed, 
All  sheathed  in  bones  and  skinny  envelope, 

By  help  of  gear  made  fine  and  fair  to  see.2  (1020a) 

The  next  two  verses  were  a  psalm  uttered  by  the  Thera 
when  he  had  won  arahantship  that  night  on  his  couch  : 

Much  learn  d  in  holy  lore  and  eloquent, 

The  leal  henchman  of  the  Buddha  he  ; 

N o w  hath  the  burden  fallen  from  his  back.3 
Released,  the  Gotamid  lies  down  to  rest.  (1021) 

Foi  him  the  deadly  cankers  live  no  more  \ 

Gone  are  the  chains,  the  barriers  all  behind  ; 

In  blissful  cool  lie  bears  his  final  frame, 

For  ever  past  the  power  of  birth  and  death.  (1022) 

Wherein  are  founded  and  set  up  the  truths 
Taught  by  the  Buddha  of  the  Sun’s  great  line  : — 

The  Path  that  to  Nibbana  straight  doth  lead _ 

There,  too,  stands  Ananda  the  Gotamid.4  (1023) 

1  I  can  trage  neither  episode.  See  verses  769,  770.  Uttara,  a  lay- 
follower,  has  a  story  in  the  Dhammapacla  Commentary ,  iii.  302  ff' 
but  it  is  not  that  alluded  to  above. 

2  Dr.  Oldenberg  allows  fofthe  pe,  ‘  etc.,'  in  the  manuscripts,  only  one 
verse  (769),  but  the  Commentary  gives  verses  769;  770,  in  full. 

3  Pannabhdro,  ‘  a  fallen-burden-er  ’  ( Majjh .  Nik.,  i.  139,  etc.).  This, 
a .  qualification  in  Bunyan  of  the  new  cbnvert,  is  in  Buddhism  a 
dulniinaling  event  for  the  ajrahant. 

4  The  Commentary  makes  a  Great  Brahma  god  vindicate  Ananda’s 
rank  as  arahant  on  his  entry  at  the  Council  by  these  words.  Cf.  above 

Khujja-sobhita,'  CLXXV.  On  the  Sun  lineage  of  the  Gotarna  clan’ 
cf.  XXYI.  and  CXXXIX. 


23 


354 


CCLX.  ANANDA 


Now  one  day  Moggallana  the  brahmin  cattle  -  herd  1 
asked  the  Thera  :  ‘  You  are  very  learned  in  the  Buddha’s 
Rule.  How  many  of  the  doctrines  your  Master  taught  do 
you  keep  in  your  mind  ?’  The  Thera  replied  : 

Eighty-two  thousand  from  the  Buddha’s  self 
I’ve  learned,  from  brethren  yet  two  thousand 
more : 

Hence  four  and  eighty  thousand  texts  in  all 
The  number  that  for  me  have  currency.2  (1024) 

One  day  the  Thera  showed  a  man  of  desultory  life  the 
danger  of  no  culture  thus  : 

Whoso  but  little  knowledge  hath, 

That  man  grows  old  as  doth  an  ox.3 
His  fleshly  bulk  is  multiplied, 

But  understanding  groweth  not.  (1025) 

The  following  verses  he  said  concerning  a  bhikkhu  who 
despised  another  as  less  learned  than  himself : 

The  learned  man  who  doth  despise, 

For  knowledge,  him  who  little  knows, 

Is  as  a  blind  man  who  doth  bear 
A  lamp  : — so  ’tis  borne  in  on  me.4  (1026) 

Wait  on  the  men  of  learning ;  look 
That  learning  nowise  injured  be  ; 

For  ’tis  the  root  of  holy  life  ;5 

Hence  bear  the  Doctrine  in  your  hearts.  (1027) 

Knowing  the  sequence  of  the  text,6 

And  versed  in  what  the  text  doth  mean, 

1  Ananda’s  interlocutor  in  the  ‘  Gopaka-Moggallana-Sutta  ’  ( Majjh . 
Nik.,  iii.  7jf.),  where,  however,  this  question  does  not  find  a  place. 

2  Pavattino ,  ‘  that  proceed  ’ ;  the  better  way,  in  Buddhist  psychology, 
of  expressing  the  popular  ‘  keep  in  mind  ’  ( dlidreti ). 

3  I.e.,  not  seeking  the  good  of  parents,  kin,  or  anyone  (Commentary). 

4  I.e .,  while  his  knowledge  benefits  others,  his  pride  darkens  his  own 
progress  (Commentary). 

5  The  fulcrum  for  saintly  effort  (Commentary). 

6  I.e.  if  half  a  stanza  is  given,  he  can  supply  the  other  half 
(Commentary). 


CCLX.  ANANDA 


355 


Apt  to  interpret  and  explain  : 1 
This  scholar  grasps  the  Norm  aright, 

And  well  its  sense  doth  ascertain.  (1028) 
By  patience  eager  purpose  grows,2 
Up  surges  effort;  then  he  weighs  ; 

Thus  timely  exercising  will,3 

Within  he  grows  composed,  intent.  (1029) 

Who  in  the  Norm  is  widely  versed 
And  bears  its  doctrines  in  his  heart, 
Disciple  of  the  Buddha,  wise, 

Eager  to  understand  the  Norm  :4 
Such  as  he  is,  him  follow  ye.  (1030) 

Who  in  the  Norm  is  widely  versed 
And  bears  its  doctrines  in  his  heart, 

Of  the  great  Master's  treasure  Ward,5 
An  eye  is  he  for  all  the  world, 

Whom  all  should  honour  and  revere, 

Who  in  the  Norm  is  widely  versed.  (1031 ) 
Who  in  the  Norm  takes  his  delight,6 
Doth  love  and  con  it  over  well, 

And  lets  it  live  in  memory, 

That  brother  from  the  holy  Norm 
Will  ne’er  secede  nor  fall  away.  (1032) 


1  Nirutti  here  represents  the  other  three  patisambhidds  as  well 
(Commentary).  Cf.  Sisters,  p.  17,  n.  1. 

2  Chandikato  hoti.  In  Vibhanga,  p.  208,  cliandlkatd ,  the  correspond¬ 
ing  abstract  noun,  is  synonymous  with  kattukamyatd,  desire  to  do. 
The  Commentary  paraphrases  by  chandajdto.  Hence  apparently  -kato 
signifies  ‘  formed*  or  *  set  up,’  and  not  ‘  done  ’  or  ‘  fulfilled.’ 

3  Padahati. 

*  Dhammavinndnay  dkankhay  :  dha  m  mavi  n  hd  nasan  kit  at  ay  dham- 
manndnay.  Viiindnay  is  knowing  on  occasion  of,  or  in  connection 
with,  sense-objects.  It  is  probably  used  here  metri  causa  for  iidnay, 
for  I  cannot  match  such  usage  of  the  term. 

5  Kosdrakkho :  an  allusion  to  his  usual  (Commentarial)  title  of 
Dliammablianddgdrika ,  Treasurer  of  the  Norm. 

6  Lit.,  having  the  Doctrine  as  his  pleasaunce  ( Dhammayada  Com¬ 
mentary,  364). 


356 


CCLX.  ANANDA 


One  day  he  stirred  up  a  listless,  slothful  bhikkhu  thus  : 

Art  thou  so  heavy,  loth  to  act  ? 

Life  hourly  ebbing,  canst  not  rise  ? 

To  give  thy  body  pleasures  gross 
So  greedy  ?  Whence  should  come  to  thee  • 

The  happy  ease  of  holy  friar  ?  (1033) 

The  following  verse  the  Thera  uttered  on  hearing  of  the 
passing  away  of  the  General  of  the  Norm  : 1 

The  firmament  on  every  hand 
Grows  dim,  yea,  all  confused  stand 
The  truths  I  seemed  to  understand.2 
Gone  is  the  noble  friend  we  love, 

And  dark  is  earth  and  heaven  above.  (1034) 

*  *  *  *  * 

And  is  the  comrade  passed  away, 

t 

And  is  the  Master  gone  from  hence  ? 

No  better  friend  is  left,  methinks, 

Than  to  mount  guard  o’er  deed  and  sense.0  (1035) 
They  of  the  older  time  are  gone ; 

The  new  men  suit  me  not  at  all. 

Alone  to-day  this  child  doth  brood, 

Like  nesting-bird 4  when  rain  doth  fall.  (1036) 

The  next  stanza  was  spoken  by  the  Master,  and  the  next 
by  the  Thera,  delighting  to  do  his  will : 

Full  many  folk  from  divers  regions  come 

To  see.  Forbid  them  not  as  hearers  of  the  Norm  ; 

Suffer  them  to  behold  me,  ’tis  the  hour.  (1037) 

.  f  V..1  •  •  ',"V  •  ~  -  •  V  ‘  *  •  _  -  . * 

1  Sariputta.  The  first  part  of  the  yerse  is.putun  Ananda’s,  mouth  when 

passing  on  the  news  brought  by  Cunda,  Sariputta  s  attendant,  to  the 
Master  (Sayy.  Nik.,  v.  16b).  Verses  4035  /  were  presumablyjittered 
later,  after  the  Great  Decease.  Possibly  the  Br.  MS.  has  omitted  the 

introductory  sentence  from  the  Commentary.  ; 

2  « The  doctrines  ( pariyattidhavifnd )  I  had  well  learnt,  ^ven  about 

death*  (Commentary),  i  v  >  .  i 

3  Cf.  Dialogues ,  ii.<  177  jf.,  on  the  need,  in  bereavement,  of 

kdyagatd  sati,  •.  A;  :■  -  -  ••  * 

4  *  Gone  to  its  nest  in  the  rainy  season  ’  (Commentary).  , 


CCLX.  ANANDA 


357 


Full  many  folk  from  divers  regions  come  - 
To  see.  The  Master  opportunity 
Doth  give.  The  Man  who  Sees  forbiddeth 
none.1  (1038) 

'  •  *  *  i. 

The  next  five  stanzas  were  spoken  to  show  his  position 
as  chief  attendant : 

For  five-and-twenty  years  a  learner  I ; 

No  sensual  consciousness  arose  in  me. 

O  see  the  seemly  order  of  the  Norm  !2  (1039) 

For  five-and-twenty  years  a  learner  I ; 

No  hostile  consciousness  arose  in  me. 

O  see  the  seemly  order  of  the  Norm  !  (1040) 

For  five-and-twenty  years  on  the  Exalted  One 
I  waited,  serving  him  by  loving  deeds, 

And  like  his  shadow  followed  after  him.  (1041) 
For  five-and-twenty  years  on  the  Exalted  One 
I  waited,  serving  him  with  loving  speech, 

And  like  his  shadow  followed  after  him.  (1042) 
For  five-and-twenty  years  on  the  Exalted  One 
I  waited,  serving  him  with  loving  thoughts, 

And  like  his  shadow  followed  after  him.  (1043) 
When  pacing  up  and  down,  the  Buddha  walked, 
Behind  his  back  I  kept  the  pace  alway ; 

And  when  the  Norm  was  being  taught,  in  me 
Knowledge  and  understanding  of  it  grew.  (1044) 

But  I  am  one  who  yet  has  work  to  do, 

A  learner  with  a  mind  not  yet  matured  ; 

And  now  the  Master  hence  hath  passed  away, 

Who  e’er  to  me  such  sweet  compassion 
showed  !3  (1045) 

O  !  then  was  terror,  then  was  mighty  dread, 

Then  stiffened  hair  and  quivered  creeping  nerve, 

1  Cf.  Ananda’s  sixth  request,  p.  351. 

2  Cf  XXIV.,  n. 

3  Cf.  Dialogues ,  ii.  158  /.,  where  Ananda  laments  and  the  Master 
comforts  him  ;  again  ibid p.  177,  for  the  next  verse. 


358 


CCLX.  ANANDA 


When  he,  endowed  with  every  crowning  grace 
The  All-Enlightened  Buddha  passed  away.  (1046) 

The  three  following  stanzas  were  added  by  the  members 
of  the  Council  in  praise  of  the  Thera  : 

Who  in  the  Norm  is  icidely  versed , 

And  bears  its  doctrines  in  his  heart — 

Of  the  great  Masters  treasure  Ward — 

An  eye  was  he  for  all  the  world, 

Ananda,  who  is  passed  away .  (1047) 

Who  in  the  Norm  is  tvidely  versed, 

And  bears  its  doctrines  in  his  heart  — 

Of  the  great  Master  s  treasure  Ward— 

An  eye  was  he  for  all  the  world, 

Dispelling  gloom  in  darkest  place.  (1048) 

Sage  of  the  tireless  ministry, 

Foremost  in  mindful  vigilance, 

Foremost  in  steadfast  fortitude} 

Upholder  of  the  holy  Norm, 

Of  all  its  jewels  living  mine  : — 

Our  Elder  Brother,  Ananda.  (1049) 

And  this  verse  he  said  as  he  lay  a-dying  his  last  death  : 

The  Master  hath  my  fealty  and  love, 

And  all  the  Buddha’s  ordinance  is  done. 

Low  have  I  laid  the  heavy  load  I  bore, 

Cause  for  rebirth  is  found  in  me  no  more.1 2  (1050) 

1  Gatimanto ,  satimanto,  dhitimanto ,  strictly  nominative  plurals,  are 
explained  in  the  Commentary  as  adjectives  to  isi,  and  are  presumably 
a  poetic  liberty.  The  first  is  explained  as  jpcu'lncincigcit'i.  Buddhaghosa, 
however  (Commentary  on  Avg.  Nik.,  i.  24),  dwells  on  Ananda’s  untiring 
activity  and  readiness  to  act  in  his  Master’s  service. 

2  See  verse  1016  and  notes  there  given. 


CANTO  XVIII 

PSALM  OF  FORTY  VERSES 


CCLXI 

Kassapa  the  Great.1 

Our  Master  had  already  arisen,  and  was  turning  the 
Wheel  of  the  Norm,  and  staying  at  Rajagaha,  when  at  the 
brahmin  village  of  Maha-tittha  in  Magadha,  this  Thera  was 
reborn  as  Pippali-manava,  the  son  of  the  chief  wife  of 
Kapila  the  brahmin.  Four  years  later  Bhadda  Kapilani 
was  reborn  of  the  chief  wife  of  the  Kosiya-gotta  brahmin 
at  Sagala  in  the  kingdom  of  Madda.2  Now  Pippali-manava 
refused  to  marry.  ‘  While  you  live,’  he  told  his  parents, 
‘  I  will  take  care  of  you  :  afterwards  I  shall  leave  the 
world.’  But  to  appease  his  mother  he  had  a  statue  made 
of  a  beautiful  maiden,  dressed  in  crimson  and  ornaments, 
and  showed  it  her  saying  :  ‘  Mother,  if  I  find  anyone  like 
this,  I  will  lead  the  domestic  life.’  His  mother  was  a 
clever  lady,  and  sent  brahmins  forth,  with  the  statue,  on 
that  quest.  They  came  to  Sagala,  and  setting  the  statue 
by  the  river’s  edge,  sat  down  apart.  Now  Bhadda’s  nurse, 
who  had  bathed  her  charge,  and  gone  down  again  for  her 
own  bath,  saw  the  statue,  and  thinking  :  ‘  What !  is  my 

1  The  legend,  in  their  former  and  their  last  lives,  of  Maha-Kassapa 
and  his  wife  (see  Sister, s,  p.  47  ff.),  itself  fit  subject  for  a  poem,  is  too 
long  to  reproduce  in  full,  and  is  here  greatly  condensed.  It  follows 
very  closely  the  version  given  in  the  Commentary  on  the  Ang.  Nik., 
i.  23.  Under  Vipassi-Buddha  they  were  a  brahmin  couple,  with  but 
one  cloak  between  them  for  outdoor  wear.  This  Kassapa  presented  to 
the  Buddha.  They  were  husband  and  wife  in  many  rebirths. 

2  Gf.  Jdt.  v.  (No.  581),  283,  289  ;  vi.  (No.  545),  280. 

359 


360 


CCLXI.  KASSAPA  THE  GREAT 


young  lady  so  ill  bred  ?’  slapped  it  on  the  cheek,  and 
discovered  it  was  not  Bhadda,  but  a  gold  statue.  The 
brahmins  accosted  her,  inquiring  about  her  mistress,  and 
she  brought  them  to  the  house  of  Kosiyagotta,  where  they 
were  made  welcome.  And  they  sent  word  to  Kapila : 
‘  We  have  got  the  maiden ;  do  you  act  accordingly.’  But 
Pippali-manava  and  Bhadda,  being  both  unwilling  to 
marry,  wrote  secretly  each  to  the  other,  thus  —  He: 
‘Bhadda!’  and  she:  ‘Sir!’  ‘May  you  obtain  a  menage 
suitable  to  your  birth  and  fortune.  I  shall  leave  the 
world.  Bo  not  act  so  as  to  regret  hereafter.’  Now  the 
two  letter-bearers  met,  questioned  each  other,  read  the 
letters,  and  said:  ‘Look  at  the  work  of  these  children!’ 
Throwing  away  the  letters  in  the  forest,  they  wrote  others 
and  took  them.  So  the  marriage  was  celebrated.  But 
the  wedded  pair  spent  the  night  separated  by  a  chain  of 
flowers.  And  when  Pippali-manava’s  parents  died,  he  and 
Bhadda  decided  one  day,  after  they  had  dined  and  talked 
together,  to  renounce  the  world. 

And  they  got  out  yellow  raiment  from  their  wardrobes, 
and  cut  off  each  other’s  hair,  slung  bowls  from  their 
shoulder,  passed  out  through  their  weeping  servants,  to  all 
of  whom  they  gave  their  freedom,  and  departed  together, 
Pippali-manava  walking  in  front. 

And  looking  back,  he  thought :  ‘  Here  is  Bhadda  Kapi- 
lani,  a  woman  worth  the  whole  of  India,  walking  at  my 
heels.  Someone  seeing  us  will  think :  “  These  have  re¬ 
nounced  the  world,  but  cannot  do  without  each  other.” 
So,  falsely  accusing  us,  they  may  incur  danger  of  pur¬ 
gatory.’  And  he  told  Bhadda  this,  and  she  agreed  that  a 
woman  must  needs  be  a  hindrance  to  the  male  recluse. 
So  they  settled,  at  the  cross  roads,  that  he  should  go  right 
and  she  left.  Then  the  earth,  though  it  could  bear  all 
Sineru,  trembled  at  the  weight  of  such  virtue.1  And  the 
supreme  Buddha,  seated  in  the  fragrant  chamber  of  the 
great  vihara  in  the  Bamboo  Wood,  knew  what  the  earth¬ 
quake  signified,  and  gathering  eighty  chief  Theras 

1  The  second  of  the  eight  causes  of  earthquakes  in  Dialogues ,  ii.  144. 


CCLXI.  KASSAPA  THE  GREAT 


361 


together,  he  walked  three  leagues  on  the  road,  and  seated 
himself  at  the  foot  of  the  Bahuputtaka  Banyan, \  between 
Rajagaha  and  Nalanda.  And  though  he  was  clad  in  a 
ragged  robe,  the  Buddha-rays  shone  forth  from  him  and 
darted  to  and  fro,  and  the  tree  took  on  different  colours. 
Then  Kassapa  the  Great1 2  perceived  :  ‘  This  will  be  our 
Master,  through  whom  I  have  left  the  world.’  And  bend¬ 
ing  low,  he  said :  *  The  lord,  the  Exalted  One,  is  my 
Master !  I  am  his  disciple.’  And  the  Exalted  One  said : 

‘  Sit,  Kassapa,  and  I  will  show  thee  thine  inheritance.’ 
And  in  three  homilies  he  gave  him  ordination.  So  they 
returned  to  Rajagaha,  Kassapa  exchanging  his  new7  robe 
for  the  Master’s  old  one,3  and  with  humility  and  zeal 
determining  to  practise  the  thirteen  dhutangas.4  And  on 
the  eighth  day  thereafter  he  won  arahantship  with  thorough 
grasp  of  the  spirit  and  letter  of  the  Norm.  Him  the 
Master  pronounced  chief  among  those  who  undertook  the 
extra  austerities.  And  he,  by  way  of  showing  the  charm 
of  detachment,  told  his  experiences,  in  admonishing  the 
brethren,  thus : 


i. 

On  seeing  bhikkhus  mingling  with  crowds,  and  frequent¬ 
ing  laymen’s  houses : 

Walk  not  where  many  folk  would  make  thee 
chief. 

Dizzy  the  mind  becomes,5  and  hard  to  win 

Is  concentrated  thought.  And  he  who  knows  : 

‘  Ill  bodes  the  company  of  many  folk,’ 

Will  keep  himself  aloof  from  haunt  of  crowds.  (1051) 

1  I.e.,  of  the  Many  Sons ;  presumably  (with  its  Cetiya)  a  votive  tree 
for  parents  praying  for  offspring. 

2  Here  the  name  he  is  known  by  suddenly  appears.  It  was  pre¬ 
sumably  that  of  his  gens. 

3  One  gathers  that  the  Buddha  wore  the  ragged  robe  intentionally. 
The  episode  is  described  in  charming  detail,  but  is  omitted  for  brevity. 

4  See  .166,  n.  3.  5  Vimano ,  vikdribhutacitto  (Cy.). 


362 


CCLXI.  KASSAPA  THE  GREAT 


Go  not,  0  sage,  to  hearths  of  citizens. 

Who1  greedy  seeks  to  taste  life’s  feast  entire, 
Neglects  the  good  that  brings  true  happiness.  (1052) 
A  treacherous  bog  it  is,  this  patronage 
Of  bows  and  gifts  and  treats  from  wealthy  folk. 

’Tis  like  a  fine  dart,  bedded  in  the  flesh, 

For  erring  human  hard  to  extricate.  (1053) 


II. 

An  exhortation  to  bhikkhus  to  practice  content  respect¬ 
ing  the  four  necessaries  of  life  : 

Down  from  my  mountain-lodge2  I  came  one  day 
And  made  my  round  for  alms  about  the  streets. 

A  leper  there  I  saw  eating  his  meal, 

[And  as  was  meet,  that  he  might  have  a  chance,3] 

In  [silent]  courtesy  I  halted  at  his  side.  (1054) 

He  with  his  hand  all  leprous  and  diseased 
Put  in  my  bowl  a  morsel ;  as  he  threw, 

A  finger,  mortifying,  broke  and  fell.  (1055) 

Leaning  against  a  wall  I  ate  my  share, 

Nor  at  the  time  nor  after  felt  disgust.  (1056) 

For  only  he  who  taketh  as  they  come 
The  scraps  of  food,  medicine  from  excrement,4 
The  couch  beneath  the  tree,  the  patchwork  robe, 
Stands  as  a  man  in  north,  south,  east,  or  west.  (1057) 

ill. 

When  he  was  asked,  in  his  latter  years  :  ‘  How  is  your 
reverence  able  at  your  time  of  life  day  after  day  to  climb 
the  hills  ? 

Where  some  do  perish  as  they  climb  the  rocks, 

Heir  of  the  Buddha,6  mindful,  self-possessed, 

1  Cf.  verse  124,  and  CCXXIX.,  verses  494,  495. 

2  Pabbatasenasanattd  (Commentary).  Quoted  in  the  Milinda,  ii.  330. 

3  A  chance  of  winning  the  distinction  of  ministering  to  an  arahant 
(so  the  Commentary). 

4  Gomuttaparibhcivitaharitakddi  (Cy.).  5  Cf.  XVIII. 


CCLXI.  KASSAPA  THE  GREAT 


363 


By  forces  of  the  spirit  fortified, 

Doth  Kassapa  ascend  the  mountain  bro.w.  (1058) 
Returning  from  the  daily  round  for  alms, 

Kassapa  mounts  some  craggy  coign  and  sits 
In  meditation  rapt,  nor  clutching  aught, 

For  far  from  him  hath  he  put  fear  and  dread.  (1059) 
So 1  mounting  to  some  craggy  coign  he  sits, 

In  meditation  rapt,  nor  clutches  aught, 

For  he  mong  those  that  burn  is  cool  and  still.  (1060) 
So1  mounting  to  some  craggy  coign  he  sits, 

In  meditation  rapt,  nor  clutches  aught ; 

His  task  is  done,  and  he  is  sane,  immune.  (1061) 


IV. 

On  being  asked  further :  ‘  But  why  does  your  reverence 
at  your  time  of  life  dwell  in  the  mountain -jungle  ?  Is  not 
the  Bamboo  Grove,  or  others  like  it  pleasant  to  you?  he 
replied  : 

Those  upland  glades  delightful  to  the  soul, 

Where  the  kareri  spreads  its  wildering  wreaths,2 

Where  sound  the  trumpet-calls  of  elephants  : 

Those  are  the  braes  wherein  my  soul  delights.  (1062) 

1  The  text  repeats  also  the  line,  ‘  Returning,’  etc. 

2  The  kareri  is  called  in  Childers’  Dictionary — I  do  not  know  on 
what  authority;  it  is  apparently  not  in  Sanskrit  literature  —  the 
Capparis  trifotiata  tree.  It  gave  the  name  to  a  pavilion,  or  mandala- 
mala ,  in  the  Jeta  Grove  at  SavatthI  ( Dialogues ,  ii.  4;  XJddna ,  iii.  8). 
From  the  expression  above,  karerimala-vitata ,  I  am  much  tempted  to 
see  in  the  plant  the  musk  rose-tree  ( Bosa  moschata )  of  Nepal  and  the 
North-Western  Himalayas,  which  is  still  known  in  some  dialects  as 
karer ,  and  is  thus  described  in  Dietrich  Brandis’sDieZwm  Trees  (London, 
1906) :  ‘  A  thorny  shrub  climbing  to  the  tops  of  lofty  trees,  flowering 
branches  hanging  down  in  rich  festoons.  Flowers,  white,  ...  in  large 
compound  terminal  corymbs.  Found  at  a  height  of  from  two  to  eleven 
thousand  feet.  Nearly  allied  to  the  Rosa  sempervirens  of  the  Mediter¬ 
ranean  region.’  Could  the  *  caper  ’  tree  be  described  as  making  a 
glade  malavitata ,  c  enwebbed  ’  or  ‘  festooned  with  wreaths,’  as  well  as 
a  climbing  rose  ? 


364 


CCLXL  KASSAPA  THE  GREAT 


Those  rocky  heights  with  hue  of  dark  blue 
clouds, 

Where  lies  embosomed  many  a  shining  tarn 
Of  crystal-clear,  cool  waters,  and  whose  slopes 
The  ‘  herds  of  Indra  ’  cover  and  bedeck  : 

Those  are  the  braes  wherein  my  soul  delights.1  (1063) 
Like  serried  battlements  of  blue-black  cloud, 

Like  pinnacles  on  stately  castle  built, 

Re-echoing  to  the  cries  of  jungle  folk  : 

Those  are  the  braes  wherein  my  soul  delights.  (1064) 
Fair  uplands  rain-refreshed,  and  resonant 
With  crested  creatures’  cries  antiphonal, 

Lone  heights  where  silent  Risliis  oft  resort : 

Those  are  the  braes  wherein  my  soul  delights.  (1065) 

Here  is  enough  for  me  who  fain  would  dwell 
In  meditation  rapt,  mindful  and  tense. 

Here  is  enough  for  me,  who  fain  would  seek 
The  highest  good,  a  brother  filled  with  zeal.  (1066) 
Here  is  enough  for  me,  who  fain  would  dwell 
In  happy  ease,  a  brother  filled  with  zeal. 

Here  is  enough  for  me  who  give  myself 
To  studious  toil,  so  am  I  filled  with  zeal.  (1067) 

Clad  with  the  azure  bloom  of  flax,  blue-flecked 
As  sky  in  autumn  ;  quick  with  crowds  i 

Of  all  their  varied  winged  populace  : 

Such  are  the  braes  wherein  my  soul  delights.  (1068) 
Free  from  the  crowds  of  citizens  below, 

But  thronged  with  flocks  of  many  winged  things, 
The  home  of  herding  creatures  of  the  wild : 

Such  are  the  braes  wherein  my  soul  delights.  (1060) 
Crags2  where  clear  waters  lie,  a  rocky  world, 
Haunted  by  black-faced  apes  and  timid  deer, 

Where  ’neath  bright  blossoms  run  the  silver  streams : 
Such  are  the  braes  wherein  my  soul  delights.  (1070) 

1  =  XIII.,  Yaccha  of  the  Woods. 

2  =  CXIII.,  Yaccha  of  the  Woods  and  CCXL.,  verse  601,  Sankicca. 


VAIBHARA  HILL,  [OLD]  RAJGIR. 

Showing  probable  site  of  the  SattapannI  Cave  (p.  163). 

‘  Lone  heights  where  silent  JRishis  oft  resort.' 


CAVE  IN  VAIBHARA  HILT,,  RAJGIR. 

‘  The  lightnings  flash  e'en  in  the  rocky  cave , 
Smiting  Vebhdra’s  crest  and  Paiidava , 

And  in  the  mountain-bosom  hid ,  a  child 
Of  the  incomparable  Master  sits, 

Ardent  in  contemplative  ecstasy.' 


To  face  p.  364' 


365 


CCLXI.  KASSAPA  THE  GREAT 

For  that  which  brings  me  exquisite  delight 
Is  not  the  strains  of  string  and  pipe  and  drum,1 
But  when,  with  intellect  well  poised,  intent, 

I  gain  the  perfect  vision  of  the  Norm.  (1071) 

v. 

When  admonishing  bhikkhus  delighting  in  secular 
activities  and  greedy  as  to  gifts  of  things  needful  for  life,  he 
said  : 

Let  not  a  brother  occupy  himself 

With  busy  works  ;  let  him  keep  clear  of  folk, 

Nor  strive  [to  copy  nor  to  emulate]. 

Who  greedy  seeks  to  taste  life’s  feast  entire, 

Neglects  the  good  that  brings  true  happiness.2  (1072) 

•  > 

Let  not  a  brother  occupy  himself 

With  busy  works  ;  let  him  keep  clear  of  this 

That  nowise  tendeth  to  his  real  good  ; 

The  body  toils  and  suffers  weariness, 

Ail'd*  thus  afflicted  he  attains  no  calm.  (1073) 


VI. 

The  following  verses  were  spoken  to  admonish  on  certain 
occasions  : 

By  mere  repeating  with  a  muttering  lip,3 
We  see  not  e’en  ourselves  for  what  we  are  ; 

Arid  so,  stiff-necked,  we  go  about  and  deem : 

"  A  better  man  am  I  than  he,  than  they !’  (1074) 

No  better,  truly*  is  the  fool,  and  yet 
He  deems  himself  to  be;  the  better  man. 

•  But  him,  poor  creature  of  a;  stiff-necked  mind, 
Command  not  They  who  truly  understand,  (1075) 

i  i'1  V'  .  -  j  '  \  *  .  .".S'- 

1  Lit.,  the  five  kinds  of  musical  instruments  ;  =  verse  398. 

2  Cf.  verses  494,  1052.  ,  , 

3  Qtthffty h a tama ttena,  sajjhdyakaranavasena  (Commentary).  Cf. 
Majjh.  Nik.,  i.  164. 


366 


CCLXI.  KASSAPA  THE  GREAT 


Who  is  not  exercised  about  himself, 

In  this  way  or  in  that : 1 — ‘  the  better  man 
Am  I  ’ ;  ‘  no  better,  I  ’ ;  or  ‘  I  am  worse,’ 

Or  yet  again  ‘  I  am  as  good  as  he  ’ —  (1076) 

He  who  doth  really  know,  and  speaketh  truth,2 
Whose  heart  in  righteousness  is  well  composed, 

And  holdeth  fast  the  saint’s  serenity,3 

Him  do  they  praise,  who  truly  understand.  (1077) 

He  who  among  his  fellow-brethren  wins 

No  reverence,  is  far  from  the  good  Norm 

As  is  the  firmament  far  from  the  earth.4  (1078) 

But  they  who  well  have  planted  modesty 
And  eke  discretion  alway  in  their  heart, 

They  in  the  holy  life  do  richly  thrive ; 

For  them  rebirths  are  ever  at  an  end.  (1079) 

A  brother  who,  though  clad  in  patchwork  robe, 

Is  of  a  puffed-up  and  unsteady  mind, 

As  ’twere  a  monkey  in  a  lion’s  hide, 

No  glory  from  his  gear  august  doth  gain.  (1080) 

But  who,  with  uninflated,  steadfast  mind, 

Is  prudent,  with  his  senses  well  controlled, 

He  shineth  glorious  in  a  patchwork  robe, 

As  lion  in  the  sombre  mountain  cave.  (1081) 

VII. 

On  witnessing  the  gods  of  the  Brahma  world  doing 
obeisance  to  the  Venerable  Sariputta,  and  marking  how  the 
Venerable  Kappina  smiled  : 

See  how  they  stand,  those  thronging  deities 
Of  mystic  potency  and  glorious, 

Ten  times  a  thousand,  all  of  Brahma’s  heaven,  (1082) 

1  Vidhdsu.  Nine  such  modes  of  self-conceit  are  documented  in 
Vibhanga,  p.  389.  Cf.  Bud.  Psy .,  §  1116;  Ang.  Nik.,  iii.  359. 

2  The  Commentary  reads,  not  tathdvddirj ,  but  tathd  tadiy  :  itthadisu 
tddi-bhdvappattiyd.  The  former  reading  is  less  forced. 

3  Arahattaphalasamdjpattisamdjjajjanena  .  .  .  (Commentary). 

4  =  verse  278. 


CCLXI.  KASSAPA  THE  GltEAT 


367 


Around  our  valiant  Captain  of  the  Norm, 

Great  son  of  Sari,  calm  and  rapt  in  thought, 
Acclaiming  him  with  clasped  hands  upraised: —  (1083) 
‘  Hail  thou,  humanity’s  aristocrat ! 

Glory  to  thee,  O  thou  supremest  man ! 

Lo !  past  our  thinking  are  thy  ranging  thoughts ;  (1084) 
O  wondrous  are  th’  Enlightened  of  the  world  I1 
Their  intuition,  how  profoundly  deep, 

Beyond  the  powers  to  which  we  testify, 

Though  we  be  skilled  as  archer  splitting  hairs  !’2  (1085) 

Then,  seeing  Sariputta  thus  adored 
By  hosts  divine,  saint  most  adorable, 

A  smile  stole  o’er  the  face  of  Kappina.3  (1086) 


VIII. 

The  Thera’s  ‘lion’s  roar  ’  concerning  himself : 

In  the  whole  field  of  Buddha’s  following, 

Saving  alone  the  mighty  Master’s  self, 

I  stand  the  foremost  in  ascetic  ways  ; 

No  man  doth  practise  them  so  far  as  I.  (1087) 

The  Master  hath  my  fealty  and  love,4 
And  all  the  Buddha’s  ordinance  is  done. 

Low  have  I  laid  the  heavy  load  I  bore, 

Cause  for  rebirth  is  found  in  me  no  more.  (1088) 

For  never  thought  for  raiment,  nor  for  food, 

Nor  where  to  rest  doth  the  great  mind  affect, 
Immeasurable,  of  our  Gotama, 

1  Buddhdnay :  Cf.  Dialogues ,  ii.  2  ;  ltivuttaka,  §  68. 

2  A  phrase  elsewhere  associated  with  Sariputta’s  intellectual  powers. 
See  his  brother’s  verse,  XL. 

3  Kappina  the  Great.  Cf.  CCXXXV.  We  have  seen  this  tribute 
of  the  (gods  produce  the  same  effect  on  the  Master.  Cf.  CCXLII., 
verses  629,  630. 

4  =  verse  1050  and  passim. 


368 


CCLXI,  KASSAPA  THE  GREAT 


No  more  than  spotless  lotus-blossom  takes 
A  mark  from  water;1  to  self-sacrifice2 
Continually  prone,  he  from  the  sphere 
Threefold3  of  new  becoming  is  detached.  (1089) 

The  neck  of  him  is  like  the  fourfold  tower  , 

Of  mindfulness  set  up  ;  yea,  the  great  Seer 
Hath  faith  and  confidence  for  hands  ;  above, 

The  brow  of  him  is  insight ;  nobly  wise,  j 

He  ever  walketh  in  cool  blessedness.  (1090) 

1  Cf.  verse  701  ;  also  the  preceding  verses  in  that  poem  with  the 
concluding  similes  above. 

2  Nikkhamma. 

3  The  three  planes  of  existence  :  kdma-bhava,  or  -loka,  rupabhava, 
arupabhava.  See  Compendium ,  p.  135. 


CANTO  XIX 

PSALMS  OF  FIFTY  VERSES 


CCLXII 

Talaputa. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-age  at  Rajagaha  in  an  actor’s  family, 
he  acquired  proficiency  at  theatres  suited  to  clansmen,1  and 
became  well  known  all  over  India  as  leader  of  a  company  of 
actors.  With  a  company  of  five  hundred  women  and  with  great 
dramatic  splendour  he  attended  festivals  in  village,  township 
and  royal  residence,  and  won  much  fame  and  favour.  Now 
when  he  had  been  giving  performances  at  Rajagaha  2  with 
his  usual  success,  his  ripening  insight  prompted  him  to 
visit  the  Master.  And  seated  at  one  side,  he  said :  ‘  I 
have  heard  it  said,  your  reverence,  by  teachers  and  their 
teachers,  when  speaking  of  actors,  that  the  actor  who,  on 
the  stage,  counterfeiting  truth,  amuses  and  delights  his 
audience,  will  be  reborn  after  death  among  the  gods  of 
laughter.  What  does  the  Exalted  One  say  on  this  point  ?’ 
Thrice  the  Exalted  One  rejected  the  question,  saying : 

‘  Ask  me  not  of  this,  director.’  But  when  asked  the  fourth 
time,  he  said  :  ‘  Director,  those  persons  who  induce  sensual, 
misanthropic,  or  mentally  confused  states  in  others  and 
cause  them  to  lose  earnestness,  will  after  death  be  reborn 
in  purgatory.  But  if  he  thinks  as  you  have  heard,  then 
his  opinion  is  wrong.  And  the  fate  of  one  who  thus  holds 
wrong  opinions  is  to  be  reborn  either  in  purgatory,  or  as 
an  animal.’  Thereupon  Talaputa  wept.  4  Said  I  not  to 

>  1  Kulanuru'pesu  naccatthdnesu. 

2  Nagaravasinay  samajjay  dassetvd. 

369 


24 


370 


CCLXII.  TALAPUTA 


you,  director,  “  Ask  me  not  concerning  this  ?”  ’  ‘  Not  for 

this  reason,  your  reverence,  do  I  weep,  that  the  Exalted 
One  has  thus  spoken  concerning  the  future  state,  but 
because  older  actors  have  deceived  me,  saying  that  an  actor 
holding  a  public  performance  is  reborn  in  a  happy  life.’ 

Then  Talaputa  listened  to  the  Master’s  teaching,  and 
receiving  faith,  was  ordained,  and  after  due  study  won 
arahantship.  Thereafter,  showing  in  varied  detail  how 
he  had  restrained  and  chastened  his  heart  to  deeper  under¬ 
standing,  he  uttered  these  verses : 


i. 

When  shall  I  come  to  dwell  in  mountain  caves, 
Now  here,  now  there,  unmated  with  desire, 

And  with  the  vision  gained 

Into  impermanence 

Of  all  that  into  being  doth  become — 

Yea,  this  for  me,  e’en  this,  when  shall  it  come  to 
be?1  (1091) 

O  when  shall  I,  who  wear  the  patchwork  cloak, 

Be  a  true  saint  of  yellow  robe, 

Without  a  thought  of  what  is  ‘mine 
And  from  all  cravings  purified, 

With  lust  and  hate,  yea,  and  illusions  slain, 

So  to  the  wild  woods  gone,  in  bliss  abide  ?  (1092) 

O  when  shall  I,  who  see  and  know  that  this 
My  person,2  nest  of  dying  and  disease, 

Oppressed  by  age  and  death, 

Is  all  impermanent, 

Dwell  free  from  fear  lonely  within  the  woods — 
Yea,  when  shall  these  things  be?  (1093) 

1  The  metre  of  the  text  is  Tristubh  throughout.  In  trying  to 
reproduce  the  wistful  yearning  of  the  opening,  I  have  had  the  ‘  Choric 
Song’  of  Tennyson’s  ‘  Lotus-Eaters’  in  mind.  Ekdkiyo=ekeko. 

2  Kayo,  literally,  group,  including  not  body  only,  but  the  mental 
groups  (Commentary).  ‘Nest’:  cf.  Iti-vuttaka ,  §  43. 


CCLXII.  TALAPUTA 


371 


O  when  shall  I  with  insight’s  whetted  sword 
Have  cut  it  down,  this  creeper  of  Desire,1 
With  all  its  tendrils  twining  far  and  strong, 
Breeder  of  many  fears, 

Bearer  of  pain  and  woe — 

Yea,  even  this  !  when  shall  it  come  to  be  ?  (1094) 

O  when  shall  I  have  power  to  draw  the  blade 
Of  insight,  fiery  splendour  of  the  Saints, 

And  swiftly  shatter  Mara  and  his  host, 

While  in  the  victor’s  posture  seated  still — 2 
Yea,  when  shall  these  things  come  to  be  ?  (1095) 

O  when  may  I  in  pious  companies 
Be  seen  among  all  such  as  hold  the  Nor m 
In  reverence,  given  to  noble  toil 
With  them  who  see  the  heart  of  things, 

With  masters  over  sense — 

Yea,  when  shall  these  things  come  to  be  ?  (1096) 


O  when  will  slackness,  hunger,  thirst, 

No  more  distress  me,  nor  the  wind,  the  heat, 
Insects  and  creeping  things  wreak  scathe  on  him. 
Who  on  the  Fastness  of  the  Crag;3 
Doth  mind  his  own  high  needs — 

Yea,  when  shall  this  thing  come  to  be  ?  (1097) 

O  when  shall  1  Avith  thought  composed,  intent, 
And  clarity  of  insight  come  to  touch 
That  which  the  mighty  Seer  understood — 

The  Four,  the  Ariyan  Truths, 

So  passing  difficult  to  see — 

Yea,  even  this,  when  shall  this  come  to  be?  (1098) 

Tanha-latd.  A  favourite  simile  in  the  Canon.  Cf.  verse  761. 

The  whole  line  is  implicit  in  the  word  sihdsane,  c  in  the  lion’s 
seat,’  or  ‘  on  a  throne.’  Commentary  :  thirdsane  apardjitapallanke. 

3  Giribbaja.  See  CCXXXIV.,  545,  n.  ' 


372 


CCLXII.  TALAPUTA 


O  wh^n  shall  I,  yoked  to  the  avenues  of  calm, 
With  deeper  vision  see  the  things  of  sense 
Innumerable— sights  and  sounds, 

Odours  and  tastes  and  tangibles, 

And  all  the  inner  objects  of  the  mind 
As  things  ablaze  and  burning— 1 
Yea,  when  cometh  this  for  me  V  (1099) 

O  when  shall  I  abide  [unmoved]— 

Because  of  speech  abusive  not  downcast, 

Nor  when,  again,  my  praise  is  sung, 

Be  filled  with  complacency— 2 
When  cometh  this  for  me  ?  (1100) 


O  when  as  so  much  firewood,  bindweed,  straw, 
Shall  I  esteem  the  factors  of  my  life,3 
With  all  the  countless  objects  known  by  sense,4 
Internal  or  without, 

Judging  them  all  alike — 

[Hollow,  impermanent]5  — yea,  this  for  me,  O 
when?  (1101) 

O  when  will  [break  above  my  head] 

The  purple  storm-cloud  of  the  rains, 

And  with  fresh  torrents  drench  my  raiment  in 
the  woods, 

Wherein  I  wend  my  way 

Along  the  Path  the  Seers  have  trod  before — 

Yea,  when  shall  this  thing  come  to  be?  (1102) 

1  Cf.  Sisters,  verses  200,  351.  The  Commentary,  in  sampling  the 
‘things  of  sense,’  specifies,  among  ‘inner  objects,’  things  as  pleasant 
and  as  painful  ;  but  they  include  also  concrete  perceptions  (as  distinct 
from  each  mode  of  sensation),  images,  ideas,  etc. 

2  This  was  a  great  step  for  one  of  Talaputa’s  art  to  surmount. 

3  Khandhe. 

i  Dliamme.  Commentary  :  rupadliamme. 

'»  Aniccadivasena  c'eva  a sdrddi - upamdnavasena  (Commentary). 


CCLXII.  TALAPUTA 


373 


O  when  shall  I,  hearing  the  call  adown  the  woods 
Of  crested,  twice-born 1  peacock  [as  I  lie 
At  rest]  within  the  bosom  of  the  hill, 

Arise  and  summon  thought  and  will 
To  win  th’  Ambrosial — 

Yea,  when  shall  this  come  to  be?  (1103) 

O  when  shall  I,  by  spiritual  powers  upborne, 

Cross  over  Ganga,  Yamuna,2  Saraswatl 
Unsinking,  yea,  float  o’er  the  awful  mouth 
Of  hell-flung  ocean  waters — 

Yea,  when  shall  this  come  to  be  ?  (1104) 

O  when,  like  elephant  in  battle  charging, 

Shall  I  break  through  desire  for  joys  of  sense. 

And  to  rapt  contemplation  given, 

Shun  all  the  marks  of  outward  loveliness — 

Yea,  when  shall  these  things  come  to  be?  (1105) 

O  when,  like  some  insolvent  pauper  pressed 
By  many  a  dun  discovering  hidden  store, 

Shall  I  be  filled  with  joy, 

In  that  I  have  attained 

The  [refuge  of]  the  mighty  Master’s  Rule  ? 

Yea,  when  shall  this  thing  come  to  be  ?  (1106) 


ii.3 * 

Tis  many  years  since  thou,  my  heart,  didst  urge  : 

‘  Come  now,  enough  of  this  house-life  for  thee  !’ 

See  then  !  I’ve  left  the  world.  Wherefore,  O  heart, 

Dost  lack  devotion  to  thy  task  ?  (1107) 

1  Dvija ,  a  generic  name  for  oviparous  creatures,  ‘  born  of  the  mother 
and  of  an  egg’  (Commentary). 

2  6/.  p.  159.  See  also  Additions,  etc. 

3  4  Now,  having  shown  the  course  of  his  thoughts  before  he  renounced 

the  world,  he,  being  in  the  Order,  shows  in  what  ways  he  admonished 

his  heart  so  as  to  attain  5  (Commentary). 


874 


CCLX1I.  TALAPUTA 


Have  I  not,  0  my  heart,  been  urged  by  thee : 

4  On  Fastness  of  the  Crag 
Bright-plumaged  passengers  of  air, 

Greeting  great  Indra’s  thunder  with  their  cries, 
Do  give  him  joy  who  ponders  in  the  wood.’  (1108) 


In  social  circle  friends  beloved  and  kin, 

The  joys  of  games,  of  art,  delights  of  sense  : 

All  have  I  put  away  to  come  to  this. 

Well  then,  O  heart,  art  thou  not  pleased 
with  me?  (1109) 

’Twas  only  for  myself  I  acted  thus, 

For  no  one  else  [made  I  this  sacrifice] . 

Why  then  lament  when  conies  the  time  to  arm  ? 

This  life  is  all  a-quake  ! — so  I  beheld.1 2 
And  I  renounced  the  world  and  chose  the  Ambrosial 
Way.  (1110) 

Hath  he  not  said — who  sayeth  all  things  well, 

The  best  of  beings,3  great  Physician, 

Tamer  and  driver  of  the  sons  of  men — 

Unsteady  is  the  heart  like  [jigging]  ape,4 
So  hardly  may  that  heart, 

With  passions  not  o’ercome,  be  held  in  check.  (1111) 

For  varied,  sweet,  entrancing  are  desires  of  sense, 
Wherein  the  ignorant  majority 
Entangled  lie.  They  do  hut  wish  for  ill 
Who  seek  to  live  again, 

Led  by  their  heart  to  perish  in  the  Pit.  (1112) 

1  I.e to  study  (Commentary). 

2  Cf.  Sisters,  p.  188,  verses  200,  201. 

3  Lit.,  of  bipeds.  Cf.  Sisters,  verse  432.  Dr.  Neumann  cites  one 
other  instance  :  Epigraphia  indica ,  iii.,  p.  3131,  6. 

*  See  Ps.  CXXIII. 


CCLXII.  TALAPUTA 


875 


‘  There  in  the  jungle  ringing  with  the  cries 
Of  peacock  and  of  heron  wilt  thou  dwell, 

By  panthers  and  by  tigers  owned  as  chief.1 
And  for  thy  body  cast  off  care  ; 

Miss  not  thine  hour,  thine  aim  !’2 

So  wast  thou  wont,  my  heart,  to  urge  on  me.  (1113) 

*  Create,  develop3  thou  the  Ecstasies, 

The  fivefold  moral  Forces  and  the  Powers, 

The  seven  Wings  of  Wisdom 

And  the  four  Grades  of  concentrated  will  ;4 

Touch  thou  the  Triple  Lore 

Within  the  Buddha’s  Rule’ : — 

So  wast  thou  wont,  my  heart,  to  urge  on  me.  (1114) 

4  Create,  develop  in  thy  life  the  Path 
Whereby  thou  mayest  win  x4mbrosia — 

The  way  of  progress  and  egress, 

Founded  upon  the  ending  of  all  Ill, 

Eightfold,  purging  from  all  that  doth  defile  ’ : — 

So  wast  thou  wont,  my  heart,  to  urge  on  me.  (1115) 

4  This  mind  and  body  shouldst  thou  scrutinize 
And  hold  as  44  ill  ”  ;  and  all  the  source  of  ill 
Do  thou  put  far  from  thee  ; 

Yea,  here  and  now  make  thou  an  end  of  ill !’ — 

So  wast  thou  wont,  my  heart,  to  urge  on  me.  (1116) 

4  And  understand  that  transiency  is  ill, 

Is  empty,  without  soul,  is  bane  and  bale ; 

Restrain  thy  mind’s  discursive  vagrancies  ’ : — 

So  wast  thou  wont,  my  heart,  to  urge  on  me.  (1117) 

1  ‘  Because  of  the  exercise  of  universal  love  ’  [ mettd{brahma ) 
vihdrataya ]  (Commentary). 

2  Md  virddhaya  is  the  text  in  the  Commentary,  and  the  comment 
md  virddkehi,  ‘  miss  not  this  moment  so  hard  to  win.’  Cf.  verse  403. 

3  For  bJidvehi  the  Commentary  gives  ‘  cause  to  arise,  make  to  grow.’ 

4  The  numbers  are  given  in  the  Commentary.  The  last  refer  to  the 
four  Iddhipadas.  Cf  Compendium,  p.  180,  d ,  e,  f,  c,  and  above, 
verse  437. 


376 


CCLX1I.  TALAPUTA 


‘  Shaven,  unsightly,  and  apostrophized 1 

When  come  for  alms,  with  skull-like  bowl  in  hand  2 

Among  the  citizens, 

Do  thou  now  give  thyself 

Wholly  to  carry  out  the  Master’s  Word,  the  Seer’s  ’: — 
So  wast  thou  wont,  my  heart,  to  urge  on  me.  (1118) 

‘  Walk  thou  well-disciplined  within  the  streets, 

With  mind  unfettered  by  the  sense-desires 
Of  them  that  live  therein. 

Be  like  the  moon  a  fortnight  old  in  cloudless 
sky  :’3 — 

So  wast  thou  wont,  my  heart,  to  urge  on  me.  (1119) 

•  i  j  (9  ;  t 

‘  He  who  in  forest  dwells  and  lives  by  alms, 

Who  haunts  the  field  of  death,  wears  patch work  robe, 
Refrains  from  lying  down,4 
He  ever  finds  the  true  ascetic  joy  ’ 

So  wast  thou  wont,  my  heart  to  urge  on  me.  (1120) 

‘  As  one  who,  having  planted  trees,  seeks  fruit, 

Dost  thou  now,  finding  none,  desire  to  cut 
Thy  tree  down  at  the  root  ?’ — 

Such  was  the  parable  thou  mad’st,  my  heart, 

When  thou  the  unstable  and  th’  impermanent 
Didst  urge  on  me.  (1121) 

Thou  unseen  thing  that  knowest  from  afar,6 

Rising  in  single  file,  no  more  thy  word 

Will  I  obey.  For  thy  sense-born  desires 

Lead  but  to  woe,  to  bitter  fruit,  to  brooding  fear. 

Henceforth  toward  Nibbana’s  peace  alone 

I’ll  set  my  face  and  walk.  (1122) 

1  Dhammapala,  reading  also  abhisdpam-dgato,  refers  to  Itivuttaka , 

§  91.  His  Commentary  on  that  work  has  abhildpo  ti  akkoso. 

■  2  Of.  p.  113,  n.  1.  3  Cf.  verse  306.  4  Cf.  verse  856. 

6  Cf.  Dh’pada,  ver.  37;  Corny.,  i.  304.  The  latter  work  is  largely 
in  literal  agreement  with  onr  Commentary  on  this  and  the  next 


CCLXII.  TALAPUTA 


377 


I  did  not  leave  the  world  when  out  of  luck, 

Nor  as  a  shameless  joke,  nor  from  a  whim, 

Nor  was  I  banished  in  disgrace, 

Nor  seeking  daily  bread, 

When  I  did  give  consent,  my  heart,  to  thee.  (1123) 


‘  Good  men  do  praise  small  needs  and  much 
content, 

Yea,  and  renouncing  of  hypocrisy, 

And  the  assuaging  of  all  pain  ’ : — 

Thus  didst  thou,  0  my  heart,  exhort  me  then. 

Now  go’st  thou  back  to  all  thy  former  loves.  (1124) 

Craving  and  ignorance  and  loves  and  hates, 
x4nd  things  of  beauty,  all  the  pleasant  thrills 
And  charm  of  sensuous  joys: — these  have  I 
vomited, 

Nor  may  I  strive  to  come  once  more  to  things 
thus  spurned.  (1125) 


Where’er  my  life  has  fallen,  0  my  heart, 

Thy  word  have  I  obeyed. 

In  many  births  thou’st  not  been  vexed  with  me. 
And  this  is  all  thy  gratitude  : — 

This  individual  compound  self, 

With  all  the  suffering  wrought  by  thee 
A-down  the  long,  long  aeons  of  my  life.  (1126) 


phrase.  Consciousness  has  no  visible  properties,  and  cannot  move 
in  space  the  width  of  a  spider’s  thread,  but  knows  its  object 
without  such  contact.  Again,  it  is  a  series  of  units  of  mental  life 
arising  singly.  ‘  Two,  three  consciousnesses  do  not  arise  together. 
One  ceases,  another  rises.’  It  is  just  possible  that  what  the  Pali 
suggests  to  us  —  ‘  Thou  formless,  lonely  traveller  afar  ! — may  be 
nearer  what  Talaputa  meant  than  the  psychological  interpretation 
of  the  scholastics.  Nevertheless,  when  the  lines  elsewhere  suggest 
romance  to  the  latter,  they  do  not  stifle  it.  Anyway,  the  character¬ 
istic  Buddhist  difference  is  interesting. 


378 


CCLXII.  TALAPUTA 


Tis  thou,  0  heart,  dost  make  us  what  we  are. 

Thou  makest,  we  become.  A  brahmin  now, 

Then  are  we  nobles,  yea,  a  king,  a  seer,1 
Burgess  one  day,  and  serf  the  next  are  we, 

Or  e’en  a  deity — and  all 

In  virtue  of  thine  agency  alone  ;  (1127) 

Through  thee  alone  have  we  been  Asuras, 

Thou  working,  have  we  been  through  hellish 
doom  ; 

Again,  one  day,  in  realm  of  beasts  reborn, 

Or  Petas,  by  thine  agency  alone.  (1128) 

Nay  now,  thou  shalt  not  dupe  me  as  of  old 
Time  after  time,  again,  ever  again, 

Like  mountebank  showing  his  little  masque  ;2 
Thou  playest  guileful  tricks  with  me, 

As  with  a  lunatic.3 

Tell  me,  my  heart,  wherein  am  I  at  fault?  (1129) 

Once  roamed  this  heart  a-field,  a  wanderer, 
Wherever  will  or  whim  or  pleasure  led. 

To-day  that  heart  I’ll  hold  in  thorough  check, 

As  trainer’s  hook  the  savage  elephant.4  (1130) 

To  me  the  Master  did  insist5 : — this  world 
Was  transient,  temporal,  without  a  soul. 

Now,  heart,  leap  forward  in  the  Conquerors  Rule, 
And  bear  me  o’er  the  great  forbidding  floods.6  (1131) 

For  thee,  O  heart,  things  are  not  as  of  yore.7 
’Twill  not  suffice  that  I  within  thy  power 
Fall  back  to  live  once  more. 

1  In  rdja-d-isi  the  d  is  inserted  to  link  the  two  words  (Cy.). 

2  Reading  cdranikay.  See  Additions,  etc. 

3  Cf.  verse  931 ;  JPTS ,  1889,  p.  203. 

^  See  LXXVII.,  p.  76. 

5  Adhitthahi,  an  uncommon  use  of  this  word. 

6  Of  Saysara  (Commentary).  7  Cf.  verses  126,  280. 


CCIjXII.  talaputa 


879 


Gone  forth  am  I  ’neath  the  Great  Masters  Rule. 
Men  such  as  I  now  am  no  forfeit  will  endure.  (1132) 

Mountains  and  seas,  the  rivers,  earth  itself, 

The  quarters  four,  the  intervening  points, 

The  nadir,  yea,  and  all  the  heavens  above1 
Three  planes  of  being 2  each  impermanent 
And  all  of  them  forlorn — 

M'here  canst  thou  then,  my  heart,  find  ease  and 
rest?  (1133) 

Since  I’ve  the  goal  so  firm,  so  sure,  0  heart,3 
AAhat  wilt  thou  do  [to  make  me  turn]  ? 

No  more  be’t  mine,  my  heart,  to  follow  thee. 

None,  in  good  sooth,  would  touch  a  bag 
That  opened  at  both  ends.  Fie  !  then, 

On  that  full  thing  flowing  with  issues  nine.4  (1134) 

0  [thou  wilt  love  the  life],  be’t  on  the  crest 
Of  caverned  cliffs,  where  herd  boar  and  gazelle* 

Or  in  fair  open  glade,  or  in  the  depths 
Of  forest  freshened  by  new  rain — ’tis  there 
Lies  joy  for  thee  to  cavern-cottage  gone.5  (1135) 
Fair-plumed,  fair-crested  passengers  of  air 
With  deep  blue  throats  and  many-hued  of  wing, 
Give  greeting  to  the  muttering  thundercloud 
With  cries  melodious,  manifold  ;  ’tis  they 
Will  give  thee  joy  whiles  thou  art  musing 
there.  (1136) 

1  Disa  ti  devalokd  (Commentary).  2  Cf.  verse  1089. 

3  The  Commentary  reads  :  Dhitipparan  ti  dhiti-pardyanay  par  ay 

may  thirabhave  thitay  .  .  .  may  cdletuy  na  sakkliissasi  ti  attho. 
This  seems  preferable  to  reading  6  fie  I’  (dhi  /)  here,  and  ‘  fie  !’  again  in 
the  same  gatha. 

4  tReading  with  the  Commentary  ubhato.  This  otherwise  unintel¬ 
ligible  line  then  falls  into  its  place  in  quaint  but  pointed  contrast  to 
the  figure  of  the  body.  Cf.  verses  279,  1151. 

5  An  attempt  to  reproduce  the  Pali  alliteration — guhdgehagato. 


380 


CCLXII.  TALAPUTA 


And  when  the  god  rains  on  the  four-inch  grass,1 
And  on  the  cloud-like  crests  of  budding  woods, 
Within  the  mountain’s  heart  I’ll  seated  be 
Immobile  as  a  lopped-off  hough,2  and  soft 
As  cotton  down  my  rocky  couch  shall  seem.  (1137) 

Thus  will  I  do  e’en  as  a  master  should. 

Whate’er  is  got,  be  it  enough  for  me. 

And  like  a  tireless  tanner  dressing  hides,3 

I’ll  make  thee  soft  as  catskin  finely  dressed.  (1138) 

Thus  will  I  do  e’en  as  a  master  should. 

Whate’er  is  got,  be  it  enough  for  me. 

I’ll  lead  thee  in  my  power  by  force  of  will,4 
Like  a  fierce  elephant  by  skilled  mahout.  (1139) 

With  thee  at  length  well  tamed  and  steadfast  grown, 
Like  trainer  with  a  steed  well  purged  of  vice, 

Then  can  I  tread  the  Path  of  happy  fate, 

Haunted  by  them  whose  hearts  are  guarded 
well.  (1140) 

And  to  the  object  thou  shouldst  think  upon 
I’ll  bind  thee  by  the  power  that  training  gives, 

As  elephant  by  strong  cord  bound  to  post. 

So  when  I  have  thee  guarded  well,  and  trained 
By  clarity  of  thought,  thou  shalt  become 
Unleaning  on  all  forms  of  future  life.  (1141) 

When  by  the  aid  of  insight  thou  hast  dammed 
Thine  errant  course,  by  study  hast  restrained, 

1  ‘  Resembling  a  crimson  blanket  ’  (Commentary)  reminds  us  of  our 
clover-fields. 

2  Lit.,  ‘  like  a  log  without  appurtenances  ’  (Commentary).  Cf.  LXII. 

3  Cf.  this  simile  in  Majjh.  Nik.,  i.  128.  The  Commentary  reads,  for 
tay  tay  karissdmi ,  nalianta-kassami. 

4  Viriyena.  * 


CCLXI1.  TALAPUTA 


381 


Turned  it  along  the  avenue  [of  truth],1 
So  thou  canst  see  how  all  things  do  become : — 

Rise  into  being  and  are  then  dispersed — 

Then  shalt  thou  be  the  [child  and]  heir  of  Him  : 
Knower  and  Teacher  of  the  Things  Supreme.  (1142) 

On  the  fourfold  hallucination  set,2 
As  village  lout  didst  drive  me,  0  my  heart.3 
Come  now  and  follow  him,  the  Merciful, 

Great  Seer  for  whom  all  bonds  and  chains  are 
broke,  (1143) 

Like  creature  of  the  wild  roaming  at  large 
In  the  fair  flowering  jungle,  so  thou  too 
Hast  gone  up  on  the  lovely  cloud-wreathed  crest. 
There  on  the  mountain,  where  no  crowd  can  come, 
Shalt  find  thy  joy,  0  heart,  for  never  doubt 
But  thou  shaft  surely  win  to  the  Beyond.4  (1144) 

They  who  remain  subservient  to  thy  will, 

Male  or  female,  enjoy  what  thou  dost  give, 

Delight  in  ever  coming  back  to  be  : — 

Unknowing,  in  the  wake  of  Mara’s  power, 

These  all,  0  heart,  retainers  are  of  thee.5  (1145) 

1  Pathe  is  paraphrased  by  vipassandvitliiyay . 

2  I.e. ,  holding  the  impermanent  as  permanent,  and  the  ugly 
( asubhav ),  the  painful,  the  soulless,  as  beautiful,  pleasant,  and  having 
a  soul  respectively.  The  last  illusion,  in  the  Br.  MS.  Corny,  is  either 
worded  unusually — attani  attd  ti  (‘in  one’s  ‘self’  a  ‘soul’),  or  the 
scribe  has  omitted  the  an  from  anattani  (‘  in  the  soul-less  a  soul  ’). 

3  Gamandalar).  The  Commentary  first  reads  gdmandalay  ;  then, 
in  commenting,  gdmantalarj ,  but  explains  this  to  mean  gdmanddrakay 
— ‘  my  good  heart,  thou  draggest  ( yarihaddhasi )  me  around,  hither 
and  thither,  as  if  I  were  a  (stupid)  village-lad.’  Dr.  Neumann  reads 
for  gd ,  go. 

4  Lit. :  ‘  Thou  shalt  beyond-become,  look  down  upon  or  become 
superior  to.’  Commentary:  ‘Thou  shalt  stand  firm  by  the  ruin  of 
(thy)  sapsara.’ 

5  The  last  verse,  as  well  as  1143,  would  fit  better  if  placed  a  little 
further  back  in  the  poem. 


\ 


CANTO  XX 

POEM  OF  SIXTY  VERSES 


CCLXIII 

Moggallana  the  Great. 

His  story  is  told  in  that  of  the  venerable  Sariputta.1  After 
he  had  been  ordained  a  week,  and  while  he  was  occupied 
with  his  duties  near  the  hamlet  of  Kallavala  2  in  Magadha, 
torpor  and  sleepiness  assailed  him,  so  that  the  Master 
aroused  him  with  the  words  :  ‘  Moggallana,  idleness  is  not 
the  same  as  Ariyan  silence.’  Conquering  his  weakness  by 
merely  hearing  an  exercise  on  Elements  given  him  by  the 
Master,  he  attained  the  highest  insight  that  a  Buddha’s 
disciple  can  reach.  At  another  time  the  Master,  in  conclave 
at  the  Jeta  Grove,  pronounced  him  foremost  in  super¬ 
normal  power  of  will  ( idclhi ).  And  the  verses  which  he 
spoke  while  thus  gifted  were  collected  in  a  series  by  the 
compilers  of  the  Doctrine  at  the  time  of  the  Council : 


i. 

When  exhorting  the  bhikkhus  : 

We  forest-dwellers,  beggars  all, 

Pleased  with  the  scraps  placed  in  our  bowl, 
The  hosts  of  Mara  we  can  smash 3 

If  we  have  well  learned  self-control.  (1146) 

1  See  CCLIX. 

2  See  Ang.  Nik.,  i,  28.  On  iddhi,  see  Compendium ,  60/. 

3  On  the  Optative  in  emu,  cf.  E.  Muller’s  Pali  Grammar,  p.  109. 

382 


CCLXIII.  MOGGALLANA  THE  GREAT 


383 


We  forest-dwellers,  beggars  all, 

Pleased  with  the  scraps  by  which  we’re  fed, 
Mara  and  hosts  let’s  sweep  away, 

As  elephant  a  rush-built  shed.1  (1147) 

We  who  at  root  of  shady  tree 
Work  at  our  task  persistently, 

Pleased  with  the  scraps  placed  in  our  bowl, 
The  hosts  of  Mara  we  can  smash 
If  we  have  well  learned  self  control.  (1148) 
We  who  at  root  of  shady  tree 
Work  at  our  task  persistently, 

Pleased  with  the  scraps  by  which  we’re  fed, 
Mara  and  hosts  let’s  sweep  away, 

As  elephant  a  rush-built  shed.  (1149) 


ii. 

To  a  courtesan  who  sought  to  allure  him  :2 

Thou  with  that  little  hut  of  framework  bony 
And  flesh  encased  by  sinewy  stitchery : — 

Fie  on  thee,  fie  !  thou  full  of  smells  unseemly, 
Finding  thyself  in  limbs  that  are  not  ‘thou.’3  (1150) 
O  bag  of  muck  enwrapped  in  skin !  O  witch 
With  ulcered  breast !  nine  are  the  streams 
That  on  thy  body  trickle  night  and  day ;  (1151) 

Thy  body  nine-streamed  and  malodorous, 

Maker  of  bonds  :4 — that  let  a  bhikkhu  shun 
As  one  would  ordure,  would  he  fain  be  clean.  (1152) 

1  Cf.  verse  256 ;  Sayy.  Nik.,  i.  156. 

2  According  to  Sisters,  p.  52,  this  was  Vimala,  of  Yesall  notoriety. 
She  became  a  lay-adherent,  then  a  bhikkhunl,  eventually  an  arahant. 

3  Paragatte.  On  para-,  ‘other,’  see  Sisters,  verse  101,  n.  3:  parato 
disvd.  Cf.  Majjh,  i.  485;  Ang.  iv.  422.  The  Cy,  adds :  gattabhute 
katevare  mamattay  karosi  :  ‘  thou  makest  mineness  with  regard  to  the 
be-limbed  carcase.’  Apparently  there  is  no  reference  to  another’s  limbs. 

4  The  Commentary  reads  kariparibandhay ,  but  omits  the  kari- 
from  its  analysis  :  sammdpatipatti  paribandhabhntay. 


884 


eCLXIII.  MOGGALLANA  THE  GREAT 


Did  but  folk  know  thee  as  tliou  art,  as  I 
Do  know  thee,  they  would  shun  thee  from  afar 
As  they  would  shun  a  cesspool  in  the  rains.  (1153) 

Then  that  woman  felt  ashamed  and  bowed  before  the 
Thera  saying  : 

Yea,  O  great  hero,  even  so  it  is 
As  thou,  O  holy  friar,  hast  pronounced. 

And  herein  many  miserably  fail 

And  faint,  as  in  a  swamp  an  aged  ox.  (1154) 

The  Thera  : 

He  who  would  fancy  he  can  paint  the  sky 
With  yellow,  or  maybe  some  other  hue, 

Is  to  defeat  foredoomed,  and  only  that.  (1155) 

My  heart  is  like  that  sky,  beyond  thy  reach, 

For  it  is  well  controlled  within  and  calm.1 
Wherefore  bring  not  thine  evil  thoughts  to  me, 
As  bird  that  flies  bewildered  into  flame.  (1156) 

Behold  the  tricked-out  puppet-shape,  a  mass 
Of  sores,  a  congeries  diseased,  teeming 
With  many  purposes  and  plans,  and  yet 
In  whom  there  is  no  power  to  persist.2  (1157) 


ill. 

Concerning  the  passing  away  of  Sariputta  Thera  :3 

O  !  then  was  terror,  then  was  mighty  dread, 
Then  stiffened  hair  and  quivered  creeping  nerve, 
When  he,  endowed  with  every  crowning  grace,4 
The  venerable  Sariputta  passed  away.  (1158) 

1  =  verbatim,  the  last  line  of  verse  1146.  Cf.  Majjh,  i.  127. 

2  Cf.  verses  769,  1020.  3  Cf.  verse  1046. 

4  The  Commentary  instances  ‘  virtuous  conduct,  self-control,’  etc. 


CCLXIII.  MOGGALLANA  THE  GREAT 


385 


O  transient  are  our  life’s  experiences  ! 

Their  nature  ’tis  to  rise  and  pass  away. 

They  happen  in  our  ken,  they  cease  to  be. 

O  well  for  us  when  they  are  sunk  to  rest  I1  (1159) 

They  who  our  fivefold  organism  see 
As  something  4  other,’  not  the  self,  not  soul,2 
They  penetrate  the  delicate  things  [of  truth] 

As  arrow-point  doth  pierce  a  tip  of  hair.  (1160) 
They  who  behold  our  life’s  experience 
As  something  4  other,’  not  the  self,  not  soul, 
They’ve  pierced  the  subtle  [mysteries  of  truth] 

As  arrow-point  doth  pierce  a  tip  of  hair.  (1161) 

IV. 

Spoken  concerning  Tissa  Thera  : 3 

As  one  down-smitten  by  impending  sword, 

As  one  whose  hair  and  turban  are  aflame, 

So  let  the  brother,  mindful  and  alert, 

Go  forth,  all  worldly  passions  left  behind.  (1162) 

Spoken  concerning  Vadclhamana  Thera  : 

As  one  down-smitten  by  impending  sword, 

As  one  whose  hair  and  turban  are  aflame, 

So  let  the  brother,  mindful  and  alert, 

Go  forth,  all  lust  of  living  left  behind.  (1163) 

1  The  Commentary  gives  these  lines  in  full.  They  amount  to  a 
proverb  for  Buddhists,  and  familiarity  with  them  is  probably  the  reason 
why,  though  they  occur  but  this  once  in  these  poems,  the  manuscripts 
used  by  the  editor  of  this  text  give  only  the  first  line,  with  ‘  etc.’  added. 
See  Dialogues ,  ii:  175  ;  176,  n.  1 ;  194.  Dhammapala  makes  no  com¬ 
ment.  I  prefer  to  treat  sankhdrd  as  phenomena  subjectively  considered 
(experiences);  things  as  known  and  felt;  in  Buddhist  phrase,  sankhdrd 
of  deed,  word,  and  thought.  Cf.  verses  1175,  1180,  n.  3. 

Tattha  parato  ti  anattato ;  tassa  attagdha-patikkhejpa-dassanay 
rj  j  te  aha  no  ca  attato  ti  (Commentary).  (No  license  is  given 
for  anything  so  revolutionary  as  to  call  the  five  classes  of  sensations 
five  khandhas.  Cf.  Neumann.) 

3  Verse  ascribed  to  the  Buddha,  addressing  Tissa,  XXXIX.,  and 
Vaddhamana,  XL. 


25 


386 


CCEXIII.  MOGGALLANA  THE  GREAT 


V. 

Spoken  in  connection  with  the  ‘  Act  of  the  Terrace 
Dialogue : 1 

By  Him  advised,  who,  perfectly  evolved,2 
For  the  last  time  a  mortal  body  bore, 

My  foot  uplifting  with  my  toe  I  shook 
The  Terrace  by  Migara’s  Mother  built.  (1164) 

VI. 

Spoken  concerning  a  certain  bhikkhu  : 3 

Nothing  hath  this  to  do  with  tepid  slackness, 

Not  by  a  little  toil  canst  gain  Nibbana, 

Deliverance  from  every  tie  and  chain.  (1165) 

See  this  young  brother,  this  among  you  peerless  ! 
Mara  and  all  his  host  hath  he  defeated, 

And  [therefore]  weareth  he  his  final  frame.  (1166) 

VII. 

Concerning  his  own  detached  life  : 

The  lightnings  flash  e’en  in  the  rocky  cave, 

Smiting  Vebhara’s  crest  and  Pandava, 

And  in  the  mountain-bosom  hid,  a  child 
Of  the  incomparable  Master  sits, 

Ardent  in  contemplative  ecstasy.4  (1167) 

1  ‘  Pasadakamnla-Suttanta.,  See  Majjh.  Nik.,  i.  337.  The  Dialogue 
is,  in  the  Majjhima,  named  the  ‘  Mara-tajjaniya-Sutta[nta]  ’  (spurning  of 
Mara) — another  difference  of  title  that  is  not  without  interest.  The  toe- 
feat  is  only  alluded  to  in  the  verses  appended  to  the  Suttanta.  Migara’s 
mother  =  Visakha,  mother  also  of  Thera  Migajala,  CCXVII.  Dh’pada 
Cy.  i.,  p.  384/. 

2  Bhavitattena ,  lit.,  by  him  who  had  the  state  of  being  developed 
or  practised — i.e.,  who  had  finished  the  entire  course  of  developing 
body  and  mind— namely,  the  Buddha. 

3  Two  bhikkhus  are  apparently  contrasted;  but  the  Commentary 

mentions  only  the  one  first  referred  to,  as  being  ‘  slack  and  sensuous,’ 
and  not  the  second  one.  4  =  verse  41,  Sirivaddha’s  psalm. 


CCLXIII.  MOGGALLANA  THE  GREAT 


VIII. 

Entering  Rajagaha  for  alms,  he  admonishes  a  nephew 
of  Sariputta  Thera,  a  brahmin  of  wrong  opinions,  who  on 
seeing  Kassapa  the  Great  felt  repugnance,  as  if  he  had  seen 
the  goddess  of  ill-luck  herself : 

The  seer  calm  and  serene,  dead  to  the  world, 
Whose  dwelling  is  remote,  aloof  from  men,1 
The  heir  of  Buddha,  Wake  and  Chief  of  all, 
Greeted  with  honour  by  great  Brahma’s  self ;  ( 1 168) 
Behold  him,  calm,  serene,  dead  to  the  world, 

The  sage  who  dwells  remote,  aloof  from  men, 

The  heir  of  Buddha,  Wake  and  Chief  of  all : — 
Brahmin,  give  greeting  low  to  Kassapa  !  (1169) 
He  who  a  hundred  generations  back 
Can  trace  descent,  all  brahmin  ancestors, 

Himself  as  graduate  and  Yeda-wise, 

Again,  again  among  mankind  reborn,  (1170) 
Though  he  as  teacher  in  the  Yedas  three 
Past -master  rank,  wouldst  honour  him  for 
that , 

To  him  thy  homage  were  not  worth  a  straw.  (1171) 

He  who  before  he  breaks  his  fast  can  touch 
Mental  emancipation’s  eight  degrees, 

In  grade  ascending  and  so  back  again : — 2 
Then,  only,  cometh  forth  to  seek  for  alms  : —  (1172) 
Assault3  thou  not  a  bhikkhu  such  as  this. 

Refrain  from  digging  up  thyself,  [thy  good]  !4 
Appease,  brahmin,  and  gratify  thy  mind 
In  [contemplating]  such  an  arahant. 

1  Cf.  Kassapa  Thera’s  characteristics,  CCLXI.,  1057^'. 

2  Dialogues,  ii.  119.  ‘  Touch,’  ap(Ji)assayi  =  samdpajji. 

3  Ahari ,  paraphrased  by  dsddeti.  Vinaya  Texts ,  ii.  378  ;  Milinda 
text),  100. 

4  So  the  Commentary. 


388 


CCLXIII.  MOGGALLANA  THE  GREAT 


Swiftly  lift  up  thy  hands  and  greeting  give. 
Set  not  that  head  of  thine  in  jeopardy.1  (1173) 


IX. 

When  admonishing  a  bhikkliu  named  Potthila: 

He  doth  not  yet  behold  the  blessed  Norm 
Who  hath  eternal  living  in  his  train ; 

From  course  precinct  he  wandereth  afar, 

Straying  in  error’s  devious  dangerous  ways.  (1171) 
Like  to  a  worm  obscene  besmeared  with  dung, 

He  walloweth  in  the  tainted  things  of  life,2 3 
Plunged  in  pursuit  of  favours  and  of  gain, 

Bare  [of  true  profit]  goeth  Potthila.  (1175) 


x. 

In  praise  of  the  venerable  Sariputta  : :: 

Yonder  behold  where  Sariputta  goes 

So  nobly  fair !  Emancipated  he 

By  contemplation  rapt,  and  purity,4 

And  all  his  inner  self  is  well  composed.  (1176) 

Exempt  from  moral  scathe,  all  fetters  broke, 

In  higher  Vedas  versed,  slayer  of  Death, 

Worthy  that  men  should  bring  him  offerings ; 
Incomparable  held  for  great  reward.5  (1177) 

1  Lit.,  let  not  your  coiffure  be  undone!  (ironically  spoken).  On  the 
risk,  see  Dialogues ,  i.  116.  The  brahmin  is  stated  to  have  begged 
forgiveness  for  his  want  of  courtesy. 

2  Sankhdrd.  Potthila  is  the  subject  of  Dhammapada  Commentary , 
iii.  417  ff.,  on  verse  282. 

3  Mogallana  speaks  to  himself  (Commentary). 

4  See  Dialogues,  ii.  70.  Lit.,  ‘  freed-on-both-sides.’ 

5  A  favourite  metaphor  for  the  Order  generally.  Merit  accrues  to 
pious  supporters,  as  a  harvest  from  seed.  Cf.  (1087). 


CCLXIII.  MOGGALLANA  THE  GREAT 


389 


XI. 

Spoken  by  the  venerable  Sariputta  in  praise  of  Moggallana 
the  Great  Thera : 

See  how  they  stand,  those  thronging  deities1 
Of  mystic  potency  and  glorious, 

Ten  times  a  thousand,  Brahma’s  ministers, 
Acclaiming  Moggallana  reverently: —  (1178) 

4  Hail  thou,  humanity’s  aristocrat ! 

Glory  to  thee,  thou  highest  among  men ! 

Perished  for  thee  are  the  intoxicants, 

And  thou,  O  lord,  most  worthy  art  of  gifts  !  (1179) 

In  honour  held  by  men  and  gods  alike,2 
Uprisen  as  the  conqueror  of  death, 

As  lotus  from  the  water  takes  no  smear, 

So  thou  in  changing  world  dost  not  adhere.’3  (1180) 

He  who  e’en  in  a  moment  by  a  thousand  ways  can  take 
Purview  of  all  the  world,4  as  were  he  Brahma’s  very 
self.5 

Yea,  here’s  a  brother  versed  in  power  of  magic6  who 
doth  see 

What  time  doth  suit  [for  gods  and  men]  to  die  and 
come  to  be.7  (1181) 

1  Cf.  1082  ;  also  629. 

2  The  Commentary  suggests,  as  an  alternative  reading,  ‘by  the 
man-god,  the  Exalted  One,  who  is  uprisen,’  etc. 

3  Cf.  Sutta-Nipdta,  verse  547.  Sankhdr agate,  born  amid  pheno¬ 
mena,  he  adheres  not  to  the  slime  of  craving  and  error  ;  na  upalimpati 
(sic)  katthici  pi,  anissito  ti  attho  (Commentary).  Cf.  the  slight 
metrical  irregularity  in  Sutta-Nipdta,  verse  812,  where  sankhdrd's 

are  detailed  as  ditthasutan-mutesu. 

•  •  « > 

4  The  world  of  space  (Commentary). 

5  Here  (cf.  n.  to  verse  629)  sa-Brahmakappo  is  explained  as  Mahd- 
Brahma-sadiso . 

6  On  iddhi,  cf.  Compendium,  p.  71,  with  Dialogues,  i.  87  f 

7  Here  the  Commentary  makes  no  effort  to  associate  dev  aid,  deity 
spirit,  angel,  with  a  particular  being,  as  in  Anuruddha’s  poem,  verse  911. 
This  leaves  the  use  of  devatd  a  little  unusual.  Moggallana’s  vision  is 
as  that  of  a  deva — ‘a  devata  is  that  bhikkhu !’ 


CCLXIII.  MOGGALLANA  THE  GREAT 


890 


XII. 

Moggallana  the  Great  speaks,  affirming  his  own  gifts  : 

Now  Sari's  son  by  wisdom,  virtue,  self-control 
Excelleth  all  ;  here  let  this  brother  stand 
supreme.  (1182) 

But  I  can  instantly  innumerable  times 
Create  a  living  shape  ;  skilled  to  transform 
myself 

As  other,  yea,  all  magic  power  have  I  at  will.1  (1183) 
He  of  the  Moggallanas,  in  the  Rule  of  Him 
Who  stands  alone,2 *  hath  perfected  his  powers  ;  ‘6 
In  contemplative  ecstasy  and  higher  lore 
Expert,  valiant  and  self-controlled  hath  burst  his 
bonds, 

As  doth  the  elephant  a  rotten  fibre  rope.4  (1184) 

The  Master  hath  my  fealty  and  love,5 
And  all  the  Buddha’s  ordinance  is  done. 

Low  have  I  laid  the  heavy  load  I  bore ; 

Cause  for  rebirth  is  found  in  me  no  more.  (1185) 
The  Good  for  which  I  bade  the  world  farewell,6 
And  left  the  home  to  dwell  where  is  no  home, 
That  highest  good  have  I  attained  and  won, 

And  all  that  bound  and  fettered  me  is  gone.  ( 1 186) 

1  See  n.  6,  p.  889.  2  Asitassa ,  tanhanissayddi  raliitassa.  (Cy.) 

3  Jdtaka  i.  (text)  1789. 

4  Cf.  Sutta-Nipata ,  verse  29.  In  Suttanta  141  of  the  Majjh.  Nil’. 
these  great  ‘  twin  brethren  ’  are  thus  characterized  by  their  Master  : 
‘  Sariputta  is  as  she  who  brings  forth,  Moggallana  is  as  the  nurse  of 
what  is  brought  forth.  The  former  trains  for  the  fruit  of  the  first 

Path,  the  latter  for  that  of  the  highest.  The  former  is  able  to  teach 
and  make  plain  the  four  Ariyan  truths.’ 

5  =  604,  656,  687,  792,  891,  918,  1016,  1088,  1050. 

6  =  136,  380,  605. 


CCLXIII.  MOGGALLANA  THE  GREAT 


391 


XIII. 

In  reproof  of  Mara  who,  had  entered  and  then  left  the 
Thera's  bowels  : 1 

What  sort  of  hell  was  it  where  Dussi  cooked 
In  anguish,  when  he  injured  Vidhura, 

Disciple,  holy  Kakusandha  too?  (1187) 

’Twas  the  infernal  realm  of  iron  spikes, 

A  hundred  points,  each  dealing  bitter  pain. 

This  sort  of  hell  it  was  where  Dussi  cooked 
In  anguish,  when  he  injured  Vidhura, 

Disciple,  holy  Kakusandha  too.  (1188) 

If  thou  a  brother  who  can  tell  thus  much— 
Disciple  of  the  Buddha — dost  assail, 

Black  -  hearted  sprite !  to  misery  thou  must 

go.2  (1189) 

Far  in  the  midst  of  ocean,  palaces 
Have  stood  an  geon,  exquisite,  with  hue 
Of  beryl-stones,  flashing  like  crests  of  flame. 

There  dance  full  many  nymphs  in  divers 
hues : —  (1190) 

If  thou  a  brother  who  can  tell  thus  much — 
Disciple  of  the  Buddha — dost  assail, 

Black  -  hearted  sprite !  to  misery  thou  must 

go.  (1191) 

Incited  by  the  Buddha’s  self  I  wrought, 

With  all  the  Bhikkhu-Order  looking  on, 

1  Told  in  Majjh.  Nik.,  i.,  50th  Sutta.  Cf.  verse  1164.  Dussi,  a 
name  for  Mara  in  a  previous  life.  Kakusandha,  Buddha  next  but  two 
before  Gotama.  Vidhura  (or  Vidhura,  cf.  Oldenberg’s  ed.  in  loco  ; 
Br.  Cy.  Vidura),  one  of  his  two  chief  disciples.  The  hell  of  the 
spikes  was  one  of  the  many  purgatories.  The  Commentary,  for  a 
description  of  it,  refers  to  the  Devaduta-Sutta  (Ang.  Nik.,  i.  138  ff.). 
On  the  fiend’s  singular  retreat,  cf.  Uppalavanna’s  poem,  Sisters, 
p.  114 

2  =  verse  25. 


392 


CCLXIII.  MOGGALLANA  THE  GREAT 


My  foot  uplifting,  with  my  toe  I  shook 
The  Terrace  by  Migara’s  Mother  built.1  (1192) 

If  thou  a  brother  who  can  tell  thus  much,  etc., 

.  .  .  (verse  1191)  thou  must  go.  (1193) 

I  who  my  foot  uplifting,  with  my  toe 
Caused  Vejayanta’s  terraced  fane  to  shake, 

Rigid  as  iron  by  my  magic  power, 

And  thro’ the  deities  sent  thrill  of  dread: — 2  (1194) 
If  thou  a  brother  who  can  tell  thus  much,  etc., 

.  .  .  thou  must  go.  (1195) 

He  who  in  Vejayanta’s  terraced  fane 

Did  take  Sakka  the  deity  to  task  : — 2 

*> 

‘  Come,  friend,  and  didst  thou  really  understand 
Release  through  end  of  craving  [taught  to  thee]  ?’ 
To  whom  Sakka  made  answer  truthfully —  (1196) 

If  thou  a  brother  who  can  tell  thus  much — 
Disciple  of  the  Buddha — dost  assail, 

Black  -  hearted  sprite !  to  misery  thou  must 
go.  (1197) 

Who  catechized  great  Brahma’s  very  self, 

Seated  in  conclave  in  Sudhamma  s  hall : — 3 
‘  Come  tell  me,  friend,  hast  thou  to-day  the 
views 

Which  in  the  days  gone  by  were  views  of  thine  ? 
Or  seest  thou  now  the  glory  of  thy  heaven, 

How  age  by  age  it  all  is  passing  by?’  (1198) 

1  Cf.  verse  1164,  and  n. 

2  Related  in  Majjh.  Nil'.,  i.,  No.  37,  ‘  Culatanhakkhaya-Sutta ' ; 
referred  to  as  such  by  the  Commentary.  Cf.  Sarjy  i.  234/.  Dhp.  Cy.  i.  273. 

3  Lit.,  ‘Brahma,  having  a  conclave  present.’  This  is  related  in 
Majjh.  Nik.,  i.,  No.  49,  ‘  Brahmanimantika-Sutta  ’ ;  referred  to  by  the 
Commentary  as  ‘Baka-Brahma  Sutta.’  The  Commentary  reads  thito 
sabhaij ,  but  adds  only:  ‘This  is  the  Sudhamma  hall  in  the  Brahma- 
world,  not  that  in  the  Tava-tiijsa  realm.  There  is  no  celestial  world 
without  its  Sudhamma  hall.’ 


CCLXIII.  MOGGALLANA  THE  GREAT  393 

To  whom  Brahma  made  answer  truthfully: — 

‘  My  lord,  no  longer  do  I  hold  the  views, 

Which  in  the  days  gone  by  were  views  of 
mine.  (1199) 

I  do  behold  the  glory  of  my  heaven, 

How  age  by  age  it  all  is  passing  by. 

To-day  I  hold  it  false  what  once  I  said : — 

,k  I  am  eternal ;  permanent  am  I !”  ’  (1200) 

If  thou  a  brother  who  can  tell  thus  much,  etc., 

.  .  .  thou  must  go.  (1201) 

Who  in  emancipation [’s  ecstasy]1 

Hath  touched  great  Neru’s  topmost  pinnacle,2 

Pubbavideha’s  forest  world  hath  seen,3 

And  men  that  live  on  that  remotest  plain  : —  (1202) 

If  thou  a  brother  who  can  tell  thus  much,  etc., 

.  .  .  thou  must  go.  (1203) 

Fire  doth  not  think :  4  Lo  !  I  will  burn  the  fool !’ 
But  if  the  fool  lay  hands  on  blazing  fire, 

The  fire  must  burn  and  he  must  needs  be 
burned.  (1204) 

Thus,  Mara,  thou  on  One  who  Thus  hath  Come4 
Hast  made  attack,  but  ’tis  to  thine  own  hurt, 

As  when  a  foolish  child  doth  touch  the  fire.  (1205) 
Demerit  hath  the  Evil  One  begot, 

Who  made  attack  on  One  who  Thus  hath  Come. 
What  ?  dost  imagine,  O  thou  Evil  One, 

That  evil  brings  thee  not  its  sure  reward?  (120(3) 
For  this  that  thou  hast  done,  long  will  it  be, 
Before  that  evil  dieth  out,  O  Death.5 

1  Jlidna-vimokhena  (Commentary). 

2  Mount  Sineru,  or  Meru,  the  hypothetical  centre  of  the  world. 

f  The  eastern  of  the  four  great  continents  grouped  round  Meru. 

4  Tathdgata  is  here  clearly,  in  the  Commentary  explicitly,  applied 
to  a  Thera  Arahant. 

Antaka ,  or  ‘  Ender  ’  (of  a  span  of  life)  ;  used  of  Mara,  in  these 
poems,  only  here  and  in  Sisters ,  verses  59,  62. 


894 


CCLXIII.  MOGGALLANA  THE  GREAT 


Aroint  thee,  Mara,  from  the  awakened  mind  I1 
Against  the  brethren  cease  thy  wicked  plots.  (1 207) 

Thus  in  the  forest  of  Bhesakala2 
Did  Mara  by  a  Brother  censured  stand. 

Thereat  the  rated  imp,  dejected  sore, 

E’en  where  he  stood,  did  vanish  quite  away.  (1208) 

Thus  verily  did  the  venerable  Moggalldna  the  Great  utter 
his  verses. 


1  Buddhamha  ( abl .),  applied  to  a  disciple. 


2  Cf.  verse  18. 


CANTO  XXI 


POEM  OF  SEVENTY-ONE  VERSES:  CALLED  ALSO  ‘THE 

GREAT  NIPATA  ’ 

CCLXIY 

Vangisa. 

Reborn  in  this  Buddha-ag3  at  Savatthi,  in  a  brahmin 
family,  he  was  named  Vangisa;  and  was  taught  the  three 
Vedas.  And  he  won  favour  as  a  teacher  by  tapping  on 
skulls  with  his  finger-nail,  and  discovering  thereby  where 
their  former  occupants  were  reborn.1  The  brahmins  saw 
in  this  a  means  of  gain,  and  taking  Vangisa  toured  about 
in  villages,  townships  and  royal  residences.  And  for 
three  years  Vangisa  had  skulls  brought  to  him  and  divined. 
Persuading  the  people  to  believe  in  him,  he  won  fees  of  100 
and  even  1000  (?  kahapanas).  And  the  brahmins  took  him 
about  wherever  they  chose  to  go.  Now  he  heard  of  the 
Master’s  virtues,  and  wished  to  visit  him,  but  the  brahmins 
objected,  saying  :  ‘  Gotama  the  recluse  will  pervert  you  by 
his  craftiness.’2  But  Vangisa  heeded  them  not  and  went, 
seating  himself  at  one  side.  The  Master  seeing  him 
asked  :  ‘  Vangisa,  do  you  know  any  art  or  craft  ?’  ‘  Yes, 

Master  Gotama,  I  know  the  skull-spell.  By  that,  tapping 

1  The  same  story  is  told  of  Migasira,  also  a  brahmin  of  Kosala 
(CLI.),  and  is  probably  another  bifurcated  legend.  In  the  Sayyutta- 
Nikdya,  the  8th  Book  is  entirely  devoted  to  such  of  Vangisa’s 
improvisations  as  are  contained  in  the  following  xii  sections, 
together  with  prose  episodes  followed,  in  outline  only,  by  our  Com¬ 
mentary.  The  remaining  verses  (1268-78)  are  contained  in  the  Sutta- 
Nipata  (verses  848-58),  as  are  also  verses  (1227)-(1280). 

2  An  allegation  frequently  made  by  rival  teachers.  Cf.  Majjh.  Nik., 
i.  375  ;  Sayy.  Nik.,  iv.  341. 


395 


396 


CCLXIV.  VANGISA 


on  a  skull  with  my  finger-nail,  have  I,  for  three  years  past 
ascertained  where  rebirth  has  taken  place.’  The  Master 
let  him  be  shown  the  skulls  of  individuals  reborn  in 
purgatory,  as  man,  as  god,  and  of  one  who  had  passed 
utterly  away.  Divining  concerning  all  but  the  last,  of 
that  he  could  make  nothing.  Then  the  Master:  ‘Art 
not  able,  Vanglsa  ?’  ‘Let  me  make  quite  sure,’  said 
Yanglsa,  and  he  turned  it  round  again  and  again  till  the 
sweat  stood  on  his  brow — for  how  will  he  know  the  going 
of  the  arahant  ?  And  he  stood  there  silent  and  shamed. 

‘  Art  tired,  Yanglsa  ?’  ‘  Ay,  Master  Gotama,  I  cannot  find 

out  where  this  one  has  been  reborn.  If  you  know,  tell  it.’ 

‘  Yanglsa,  both  this  I  know,  and  I  know  more  than  this  : 

He  who  of  every  creature  knoweth  well 
Whence  they  decease  and  where  they  come  to  be, 
Enlightened,  well  come,  freed  from  every  tie 
Him  ccdl  I  brahmin . 

Whose  destiny  nor  angel,  god,  nor  man 
Doth  know,  the  arahant,  sane  and  immune  :  — 

Him  call  I  brahmin .’ 1 

Then  said  Yangisa  :  ‘  Well  then,  Master  Gotama,  give 
me  this  hidden  lore.’  And  doing  obeisance,  he  seated 
himself  as  the  Master’s  pupil.  But  the  Master  said : 
‘  Let  us  give  you  the  marks  of  a  recluse.’  Then  Yanglsa 
thought:  ‘I  must  at  all  costs  learn  this  spell.’  And  he 
said  to  his  fellow-brahmins  :  ‘  Do  not  think  it  amiss  if  I 
take  orders.  When  I  have  learned  this  spell,  I  shall  be 
first  in  all  India,  and  that  will  bring  you  good  fortune.’ 
So  he  asked  for  ordination,  and  the  Exalted  One  commanded 
Nigrodhakappa  Thera,  who  stood  near,  to  ordain  Yanglsa. 
The  Thera  did  so,  and  then  saying  :  ‘  You  must  first  learn 
the  accessories  of  the  spell,’  gave  him  the  exercise  of  the 
thirty-two  constituents  of  the  body,2  and  one  on  insight. 
Rehearsing  the  former,  he  established  the  latter  faculty. 
And  when  brahmins  came  to  ask  whether  he  had  acquired 


1  Sutta-Nipata,  verses  643,  644. 


2  See  Khuddaka-patha. 


CCLXIV.  VANGISA 


397 


the  art,  lie  replied:  ‘What  art-acquiring?  Go  ye  hence; 

I  have  no  more  to  do  with  you.’  The  brahmins  said : 

‘  There  !  he  too  has  got  into  the  power  of  Gotama  the 
recluse,  perverted  by  craftiness.  What  have  we  to  do  with 
you  as  teacher  ?’  And  they  went  away.  But  Yangisa 
realized  arahantship. 

As  arahant,  he  went  to  the  Master’s  presence  and  mag¬ 
nified  him  in  scores  of  verses,  comparing  him  to  the  moon, 
the  sun,  space,  ocean,  mountains,  the  lion,  the  elephant. 
Him  the  Master,  seated  in  conclave,  pronounced  foremost  in 
facility  of  speech.1  But  what  he  said  in  verse,  both  before 
and  after  he  became  arahant,  was  collected  and  recorded  by 
Ananda  and  the  other  Theras  at  the  Council  as  follows  : 

i. 

Spoken  when  a  novice,  after  having  been  afiected  by 
the  sight  of  many  gaily  dressed  women,  who  had  approached 
the  Vihara,  a  feeling  which  he  suppressed  : 2 

Alas  !  that  now  when  I  am  gone  from  home 
Into  the  homeless  life,  these  graceless  thoughts 
Sprung  from  the  Dark  should  flit  about  my 
mind.3  (1209) 

Were  highborn  warriors,  mighty  archers,  trained 

In  champion  bow-craft,  such  as  never  flee, 

To  scatter  thousand  arrows  round  about  .  .  .  (1210) 

But  women !  W ell,  far  more  than  those  may  come, 

Yet  shall  they  never  wreck  my  peace  of  mind, 

Firmly  established  in  the  truths  I  stand.4  (1211) 

«/ 

1  Any.  Nik.,  i.  24. 

2  ‘  Swtjy.  Nik.,  i.  185/.  Vangisa  is  there  called  the  custodian  or 
porter  of  the  Vihara,  and  the  women  were  come  to  see  it. 

3  Kdfato  Idmakabhdvato  (Cy.).  Mdrapakkhato.  Sayy.  Cy. 

4  This  difficult  passage  is  thus  interpreted  by  the  Commentary,  with 
this  explanation  :  ‘  A  man  taking  a  stall  ’  (why  not  a  shield  ?) £  can  beat 
down  a  series  of  arrows,  but  every  woman  shoots  five  at  once  (assailing 
each  sense),  and  is  therefore  more  dangerous.’  ‘  Truths  ’  ( dhammesu ) 
mean  doctrine  generally,  but  especially  the  thirty-seven  bod  hip  akkJ i/iyd 
dhammd.  Cf.  Compendium,  p.  179/. 


398 


CCLXIV.  VANGISA 


For  even  in  his  presence 1  have  I  heard 
The  Buddha  of  the  Suns  high  lineage  tell2 
About  the  Path  that  to  Nibbana  goes ; 

And  there  the  love  of  all  my  heart  is  given.  (1212) 
Now  that  I  alway  in  such  mood  abide, 

Dost  think,  vile  one,  thou  canst  draw  nigh  to  me  ? 
Then  will  I  do  the  like,  0  Death,  and  thou 
Wilt  ne’er  discover  which  the  way  I  take.3  (1213) 


ii. 

Spoken  when  suppressing  his  own  feelings,  aversion, 
and  so  forth  : 

I  who  have  given  up  dislikes  and  do  tings 
In  all  that  stirs  the  lay  imagination, 

May  not  make  anywhere  a  haunt  for  lusting. 

He  who  from  jungly  vice4  hath  gained  the  open, 
From  lusting  free,  ’tis  he  is  truly  Bhikkhu.  (1214) 
All  things  of  visible  shape  here  on  earth  dwelling, 
Or  in  the  upper  air  that’s  based  on  earth,5 
Transient  is  all,  and  all  away  is  wearing 
Thus  understanding  they  who  think  do  walk.6  (1215) 
In  all  that  makes  for  life7  the  folk  cleave  ever8 
To  what  is  seen  and  heard  and  touched9  and 

thought. 

1  Samukhd  (Commentary).  2  ^XVI. 

3  Cf.  Sisters,  Uppalavanna  and  Mara,  verse  231/. 

4  On  the  jungle  or  forest  as  symbolical  of  lust  or  craving,  cf.  Sisters , 

Vaddha’s  Mother,  verse  208. 

5  According  to  the  Commentary,  vehdsay  =  devalokanissitay ;  jagato- 
gadhay  —  lokikay. 

6  Reading  mutantd  —  parinnd  (Commentary). 

7  TJpadhisu,  or  substrates.  The  Commentary  names  only  the  five 
khandhas,  but  elsewhere  three  other  categories  are  named  {Dharnma- 
pada,  verse  418;  SBE,  x.,  p.  94)  kdmd  (sensuous  desires),  kilesd 

(vices,  sins  ;  cf.  p.  73,  n.  i.),  and  karnma. 

8  Gadhitdse.  Commentary  :  patibandhacittd. 

9  Patiglie.  Commentary  :  ghattaniye,  photthabbe  (things  to  be 
struck,’ touched).  It  is  of  interest  that  Dhammapala  quotes  the 
‘  Sdratthapakdsini  ’  ( Sayyutta  Commentary  by  Buddhaghosa)  :  Sqrat- 
thapahlsiniyay  patighasaddena  gandharasd  gahita ,  etc. 


CCLXIV.  VANGISA 


399 


Who  here,  desires  suppressing,  unaffected, 
Adhereth  nowhere,  him  [the  wise]  call  Saint.  (1216) 
Who  cleave  to  views  mistaken  eight  and  sixty,1 
Their  nature  of  the  common  average  sort, 

They’re  fixed  in  courses  evil  and  unrighteous.2 
But  whoso  to  no  sect  whate’er  doth  go, 

Nor  clutcheth  at  blown  straws  [of  vain  opinion],3 
A  genuine  bhikkhu  he  all  men  may  know.  (1217) 
Fully  endowed,4  long  since  of  self  the  master, 
Candid  yet  wise,  and  free  from  craving’s  power, 

A  Saint,  the  way  of  peace  he  hath  attained ; 
Serene  and  cool,  awaits  his  final  hour.  (1218) 

hi. 

Spoken  when  suppressing  his  own  behaviour  in  connection 
with  his  facility  of  speech  : 

Renounce  conceit,  thou,  Gotama’s  disciple  ! 5 
Wholly  from  path  of  pride  remove  thy  foot. 

Since  with  that  path  some  time  infatuated, 

Long  ere  to-day  thou  truly  didst  repent.  (1219) 

By  self-deceit  deceived  this  generation, 

Destroyed  by  vanity,  is  doomed  to  woe. 

For  many  an  age  reborn  in  purgatory 
Will  folk  destroyed  by  pride  lament  their 
doom.  (1220) 

1  Usually  the  speculative  opinions  described  in  Dialogues ,  i., 
‘  Brahmajala-Suttanta,’  are  referred  to  as  sixty-two.  Here,  says  the 
Commentary,  the  Pali  ( i.e .,  text)  is  not  exact  as  to  a  little  more  or  less. 
The  Sayy.  Gy.  has  atha  satthinissitd  :  atha  cha  drammandnissitd. 

2  Cf.  Jdt.  i.  259  :  adhammasmiy  nivittho. 

3  Padulla-  occurs,  I  believe,  in  no  other  work.  Cf.  Bothlingk  and 
Roth  :  s.v.  dul.  The  Commentary  has  dutthullagdlii ;  Sayy. :  -bhdni, 

4  Dabbo.  Commentary,  dabbajdtiko  (see  Ang.  Nik.,  i.  354), 
piiidito.  The  latter  word  is  used,  in  the  Jdtaka  Commentary  (vol.  ii., 
p.  439  of  text),  to  interpret  bindussaro,  the  rich  or  full  voice  of  the 
bird.  The  Anguttara  Cy.  interprets  by  pindita  -jatiko  ;  Sayy.  Cy. 
by  dabbajdtiko  pandito  (sic).  Anyway,  I  do  not  see  justification  for 
dragging  in  the  Thera  Dabba  (V.),  as  does  Dr.  Neumann. 

6  Gotamagottassa  Bhagavato  sdvakattd  attdnay  Goiamagottay 
katvd  dlapati  (Commentary). 


400 


CCLXIV.  VANG  18 A 


He  weepetli  not  at  any  time,  the  Brother : 
Path-victor  who  the  Highest  hath  achieved. 

Both  fame  and  happy  conscience1  he  enjoyeth. 
‘Norm-seer  2 3  say,  and  rightly  say  the  wise.  (1221) 
Hence  in  this  life,  sober  and  unimpeded, 

Dispelled  all  hindering  clouds,  and  clear  in  mind, 
Renouncing  pride  and  vain  conceits  entirely, 

Bet  me  be  found  End-maker  and  serene."  (1222) 


IV. 

One  day  as  a  novice  he  attended  the  venerable  Ananda, 
whom  one  of  the  King’s  ministers  had  bidden  to  visit  him. 
There  they  were  surrounded  by  women  highly  adorned, 
who,  saluting  the  Thera  and  asking  questions,  heard  him 
preach  the  Norm.  But  Vangisa  was  excited  and  moved  with 
desire.  Then  he,  being  a  well-bred  man  of  faith  and 
integrity,  thought:  ‘This  my  emotion  growing  is  unsuitable 
for  my  present  and  future  good.  And  seated  as  he  was, 
he  confessed  his  state  to  the  Thera,  saying  : 

My  sense  with  passion  burns,  my  mind  s  aflame. 

Take  thou  compassion  on  me,  Gotamid ! 

O  tell  me  truly  of  a  putting  out  !4  (1223) 

And  the  venerable  Ananda  replied : 

Because  thy  judgment  is  upset,  perverse, 

Therefore  thy  mind's  aflame.  Thou  shouldst 
avoid  5 &' 

The  seeing  lovely  objects  passion-linked.  (1224) 

1  In  its  original  sense  of  consciousness.  ‘  Highest  :  sammd. 

2  Dhammadaso.  In  the  Sayy.  Nik.  ‘Norm-lover,’  Dhammarato. 

3  Cf.  Sutta  Nipata,  verse  520,  and  its  context. 

4  Nibbapanay ,  a  causing-to-go-out  (of  this  fire  or  fever  of  passion): 
Later  exegesis  dwelt  perhaps  less  on  this  sense  of  Nibbana  than  on  a 
going-out  in  the  sense  of  departure  or  escape  ( Compendium ,  p.  168)  ; 

yet  see  above,  verse  691. 

&  ==  Sutta-Nipdta ,  verse  840  /. 


CCLX1V.  VANGISA 


401 


Compel  thy  steeled  and  well-composed  mind 
To  contemplate  what  is  not  fair  to  view, 

Let  there  be  heedfulness  concerning  sense. 

And  be  thou  filled  with  a  sane  distaste.  (1225) 
Study  the  absence  of  the  Threefold  Sign  ;x 
Cast  out  the  baneful  bias  of  conceit. 

Hath  the  mind  mastered  vain  imaginings, 

Then  mayst  thou  go  thy  ways,  calm  and 
serene.  (1226) 

v. 

Spoken  after  the  Exalted  One  had  taught  the  Sutta  on 
‘  Things  Well-spoken/2  in  praise  of  the  Master  : 

Whoso  can  speak  a  word  whereby 
He  works  no  torment  to  himself, 

Nor  causeth  harm  to  fellow  men — 

That  word  is  spoken  well.  (1227) 
Pleasant  the  word  that  one  should  speak. 

Speech  that  is  grateful  to  the  ear, 

That  lays  not  hold  of  others’  faults  : 

Sweet  is  that  word  to  hear.  (1228) 
Truth  is  the  word  that  dieth  not. 

This  is  the  old  primeval  Norm.3 
On  Truth  and  Good  and  Norm,  ’tis  said, 

The  saints  do  firmly  stand.  (1229) 

That  which  th’  Awakened  speaks,  the  sure 
Safe  guide  to  make  Nibbana  ours, 

To  put  a  lasting  end  to  Ill — 

That  is  the  Word  Supreme.  (1230) 

1  Ascribed  also  to  Sister  Abhirupa-Nanda,  but,  in  her  Psalm, 

inspired  by  the  Buddha  ( Sisters ,  p.  23).  ‘  Steeled/  ekaggay;  lit.,  one- 

pointed  ;  ‘  study,’  etc.  :  see  things  as  transient,  involving  ill,  soulless. 

2  Sayy.  Nik.,  i.  188;  Sutta  Nip.,ve r.  450  f. :  ‘  To  be  well  spoken,  speech 
must  not  only  be  such,  but  also  righteous,  lovely,  and  true.5  Vangisa 
thereupon  announces  a  wish  to  express  himself.  The  Master  consents, 
and  Vangisa,  standing  before  him,  embellishes  the  prose  Sutta  as  verse. 

3  Here  both  Buddhaghosa  and  Dhammapala  agree  verbatim :  esa 
pordno  dhammo  cariydpaveni;  idham  eva  hi  pordndnay  dcinnay  na- 
tc  (Dh  pala  :  yan  te  na)  alikay  bhdsiysu.  See  also  Additions,  etc. 

26 


402 


CCLXIV.  VANGISA 


VI. 

Spoken  in  praise  of  Sariputta  : 

With  insight  into  mysteries  deep, 

And  richly  dowered  with  learned  lore, 

Expert  in  paths  both  true  and  false, 

The  son  of  Sari,  greatly  wise, 

Teacheth  the  bhikkhus  in  the  Norm.  (1231) 

He  teaches  first  in  outline  brief, 

And  then  expounds  in  full  detail. 

And  like  the  myna-bird’s  sweet  song,1 
His  exposition  poureth  forth.  (1232) 

And  while  he  teaches,  they  who  hear 
His  honeyed  speech,  in  tones  they  love 
Of  voice  enchanting,  musical, 

With  ravished  ears,  transported  hearts, 
Delighted  list  his  every  word.  (1233) 

VII. 

i  4 

Spoken  after  the  Exalted  One  had  discoursed  in  the 
Pavarana  (Valediction  or  Dismissal)  Suttanta  : 2 

To-day,  at  full  moon,  for  full  purity 
Five  hundred  brethren  are  together  come. 

They  all  have  cut  their  fetters  and  their  bonds  ; 
Seers  who  are  free  from  rebirth  and  from  ill.  (1234) 
And  as  a  king  who  ruleth  all  the  world, 
Surrounded  by  his  councillors  of  state, 

Toureth  around  his  empire  everywhere, 

Driving  throughout  the  lands  that  end  in 
sea,  (1235) 

1  Sdlikd ,  lit.,  ‘  rice-kin,’  just  as  we  say  ‘  siskin.’ 

2  A  meeting  terminating  the  rainy  season,  when  confession  was 
invited.  See  VinaycL  Texts ,  i.  325  ff-  The  Master  (in  the  Suttanta, 
Sayy.  Nile.,  i.  189)  invites  complaints  against  himself,  and  Sariputta, 
on  behalf  of  the  others,  gives  him  a  clean  bill,  then  receives  the  same 
himself. 


CCLX1V.  VANGISA 


403 


So  him,  who  is  our  victor  in  the  fight, 

The  peerless  Master  of  our  caravan, 

We  followers  attend  and  wait  upon, 

Who  hold  the  triple  lore,  slayers  of  Death.  (1236) 
All  we  are  sons  of  the  Exalted  One. 

No  sterile  babbler1  is  among  us  found. 

I  worship  him  who  strikes  down  craving’s 
darts. 

I  greet  the  offspring  of  the  Sun's  great  line.  (1237) 


VIII. 

Spoken  in  praise  of  the  Exalted  One,  who  had  been 
delivering  a  religious  discourse  to  the  brethren  bearing  upon 
Nibbana : 2 

A  thousand  brethren,  yea,  and  more  than  these 
Attend  around  the  Well-Come  One,  who  here 
Doth  teach  the  Norm,  the  Pure,  the  Passionless,3 
Even  Nibbana,  where  can  come  no  fear.  (1238) 
They  hearken  to  the  Norm’s  abundant  flow, 
Imparted  by  the  Very  Buddha  blest, 

O  wondrous  fair  the  All-Enlightened  shines, 

With  all  the  Band  of  Brethren  seated  round.  (1239) 
Mysterious  spirit4  thou,  Exalted  One ! 

The  seventh  in  the  lineage  of  the  Seers,5 
Like  a  great  storm-cloud  in  the  summer  sky, 

Thou  on  thy  followers  pourest  precious  rain.  (1240) 

1  In  our  text  palapo,  or  babbler ;  in  Burmese  manuscripts  of  text 
and  Commentary  paldso ,  phalciso.  Pdlaso ,  having  leaves,  not  fruit, 
means  presumably  ‘  sterile.’  Both  Commentaries,  ours  and  the 
Sdrattha-pakdtsirii,  explain  by  tucclio  anto ,  sdrarahito ,  dussllo  (empty, 
deprived  of  pith,  morally  bad). 

2  Vangisa  again  suggests  that  he  should  be  allowed  to  speak  ( Sayy . 
Nik.,  i.  192). 

3  Gf.  Sisters,  verse  97. 

4  Ndga.  Cf.  above  CCXLVII. 

5  The  seventh  of  the  Buddhas.  The  Nikayas  take  only  these 
into  account  in  the  past. 


404 


CCLXIV.  VAX  GISA 


And  one  of  these,  from  meditation  come, 

Full  fain  liis  gracious  Master  to  behold — 

Thy  true  disciple,  mighty  Hero,  see  ! 

Low  at  thy  feet  Yanglsa  worships  thee.  (1241) 

Then1  the  Exalted  One  asked:  ‘How  now,  Yanglsa, 
have  you  composed  these  verses  beforehand,  or  did  they 
occur  to  you  just  on  the  present  occasion  ?’  ‘  They 

occurred  to  me  just  now,’  replied  Yanglsa.  [‘  Well  then, 
let  some  more  such  verses  occur  to  you.’  ‘  Even  so,  lord 
— and  Yanglsa  spoke  further  his  praises  :] 

O’er  Mara’s  devious  ways  he  fares  triumphant, 

And  every  obstacle  he  breaketh  down. 

Behold  him  from  all  bondage  our  Deliverer ; 
Himself  full  fraught,  he  p)ortions  out  the 
Norm.2  (1242) 

For  he  hath  shown  a  Way  by  many  methods 
For  crossing  o’er  the  [fearsome  fourfold]  Flood  ;3 
And  we  to  whom  he  hath  declared  Ambrosia,4 
Stand  as  Norm-seers  inexpugnable.  (1243) 
Light-bringer,  he  hath  pierced  beyond,  beholding 
Past  all  those  stations  where  the  mind  doth  halt.  ’ 
The  topmost  heights  knowing  and  realizing, 

To  us  he  maketh  known  the  path  of  sight.6  (1244) 

1  The  Commentary  quotes  only  the  question  and  answer.  The  rest 
I  take  from  the  Sarjy.  Nik.  Dhammapala  only  adds  that  the  Master 
wished  to  show  Vanglsa’s  gift  to  the  brethren. 

2  One  might  render  this  clause — asitay  va  blidgaso  %>avibliajja[m ] — 
as  Dr.  Neumann  does,  by  ‘  as  a  sickle  having  divided  off  by  sections  ’ 
(or  sheaves),  but  (1)  I  hesitate  to  liken  the  Saviour  of  the  Buddhists, 
for  them ,  to  a  sickle ;  (2)  both  Commentaries  agree  that  asitay  is,  as 
in  other  gathas,  e.g .  (1184),  anissitay  (independent,  himself  needing 
nothing).  I  have  taken  asita  as  meaning  dhdta  ( cf .  Jcltaka  Com¬ 
mentary ■,  vol.  ii.,  p.  247,  text,  opposed  to  clidta,  lacking).  The  main 
emphasis  is  on  the  Teacher’s  passing  on  to  others  what  he  has  gained. 

3  Cf.  XV.,  n.  2.  4  Lit.,  that  ambrosia  being  declared. 

B  Both  Com.  have  ditthitthdndnay  vihndnatthdnanay  vd. 

0  Both  Commentaries  reject  dasatthdnay ,  reading  dasaddhdnay,  and 
refer  to  the  First  Sermon  delivered  to  the  five  recluses  as  the  recipients 
of  the  aggay  dhammay,  neither  explaining  the  term. 


CCLXIV.  VANGISA 


405 


Lo !  now  in  truths  so  well  revealed,  for  trifling 
What  place  is  there  mong  them  who  learn  his 
Lore  ? 

Hence  zealously  within  that  Master’s  System 
Let  each  man  train,  and  while  he  trains 
adore.  (1245) 


IX. 

Spoken  in  praise  of  the  venerable  Thera  Anna-Kon- 
danna  : 1 

Who  next  to  our  Great  Waked  One  was  awoke, 
Brother  Kondanna,  strong  in  energy, 

Who  oft  enjoyetli  hours  of  blissful  ease — 

[The  harvest]  of  complete  detachment  won— 2  (1246) 
All  that  the  Master’s  follower  can  win, 

If  he  fulfil  the  training  of  the  Rule — 

All  this  Kondanna  step  by  step  hath  won 
By  study  strenuous  and  diligent.  (1247) 

Sublime  in  power  and  versed  in  triple  lore, 

Expert  the  thoughts  of  others  to  descry,3 
Kondanna  of  the  Buddha  rightful  heir, 

Low  at  the  Master’s  feet  behold  him  lie.  (1248) 


x. 

Spoken  in  praise  of  the  venerable  Moggallana  the  Great, 
before  the  Exalted  One,  when  the  former  discerned  that 
the  hearts  of  the  500  arahants,  gathered  together  at  Black 
Rock  on  Rishis’  Hill  at  Rajagaha,  were  emancipated  and 
free  from  the  conditions  for  rebirth  :4 

High  on  the  hilly  slopes  disciples  wait, 

Holding  the  triple  lore,  slayers  of  Death, 

1  Sayij.  Nik.,  i.  193.  Cf.  CCXLYI. 

2  Vivekdnay ,  of  the  detachments — namely,  three :  of  body,  of  mind, 
and  that  involved  in  Nibbana. 

3  Sayy.  Nik.,  i.  194. 


406 


CCLXIV.  VANGISA 


Upon  the  pleasure  of  the  seated  Saint, 

Who  hath  transcended  all  the  power  of  ill.  (1249) 
And  Moggallana  great  in  mystic  power 
Doth  scrutinize  in  thought  the  hearts  of  all, 

And  thus  examining  he  finds  them  freed, 

And  having  nought  wherefrom  to  be  reborn.1  (12.>0) 
So  do  they  wait  upon  that  perfect  Saint, 

Who  hath  transcended  all  the  power  of  ill, 

And  perfected  on  every  hand  his  work — 

So  wait  upon  and  honour  Got  am  A.  (1251) 


XI. 

Spoken  in  praise  of  the  Exalted  One,  luminous  by  his 
own  beauty  and  glory,  when  surrounded  by  the  Order  and 
the  laity  at  the  Gaggara  Lotus-lake,  at  Campa  : 2 

As  when  th’  obscuring  clouds  have  drifted  from 
the  sky, 

The  moon  shines  splendid  even  as  a  sun, 

So  thou,  Angirasa,3  most  mighty  Seer, 

Dost  with  thy  glory  all  the  world  illume.  (1252) 


XII. 

Spoken  when  reflecting,  as  a  new-made  arahant,  on  his 
experiences  and  on  the  Master : 

Drunk  with  divining  art,4  of  old  we  roamed 
From  town  and  village  on  to  town  again. 

Then  we  beheld  the  All-Enlightened,  Him 
Who  hath  transcended  all  that  we  can  know.  (1253) 

1  Nir-upadhiy.  See  verse  1216,  n. 

2  cf.  p.  82,  n.  2 ;  134  ;  275.  See  also  Dialogues ,  i.  144. 

3  Cf.  verse  536,  n. 

4  Kdveyyamattd.  Wrongly  translated  by  me  elsewhere.  Without 
the  Commentary  I  had  imagined  Yanglsa  as  having  been  a  troubadour, 
a  nata  or  mime,  like  Talaputa  (CCLXII.).  Imagination  and  a  rhetorical 
facility  he  had,  but  one  need  not  substitute  a  new  legend  for  the  old 
tradition.  The  term  occurs  again  in  Sayy.  Nik.,  i.  110,  where  the 


CCLXIV.  VANGISA 


407 


He  in  the  Norm  instructed  me — the  Seer, 

Who  hath  transcended  all  the  power  of  ill, 

And  when  we  heard  that  Norm  our  heart  was  glad, 
And  faith  and  trust  therein  rose  up  in  us.  (1254) 
Hearing  his  Word  concerning  body,  mind, 
Sensations,  objects  of  the  same,  and  all 
The  data  of  our  knowledge* 1— grasping  these, 

I  left  the  world  to  lead  the  homeless  life.  (1255) 

O  surely  for  the  weal  of  many  folk 

The  advent  is  of  Them-who-Thus-are-Come  ! — 

Of  women  and  of  men  who  keep  their  Rule.  (1256) 
Yea,  surely,  and  for  highest  good  of  those — 

The  Brethren  and  the  Sisters,  they  who  see 
The  order  of  what  is,  what  may  become  2 — 

For  them  the  Seer  did  win  Enlightenment.  (1257) 
By  Him-who-Sees,  the  Buddha,  Kin  o’  th’  Sun,3 
Well  taught  in  kindness  to  all  things  that  breathe 
Are  the  Four  Ariyan,  Four  Noble  Truths  ;  (1258) 
Even  the  What  and  Why  of  Ill,  and  how 
Ill  comes,  and  how  Ill  may  be  overpassed, 

E’en  by  the  Ariyan,  the  Eightfold  Path, 

That  leads  to  the  abating  of  all  Ill.4  (1259) 

Such  were  the  doctrines  uttered  thus,  and  I, 

I  saw  them  e’en  as  they  were  shown  to  me ; 

And  now  salvation  have  I  surely  won, 

And  all  the  Buddha’s  ordinance  is  done.  (1260) 


Buddha,  sitting,  suppressing  the  pain  arising  from  a  splinter  in  his 
foot,  Mara  inquires  why  he  sits  apart  with  drooping  head  :  Is  he 
feeling  ‘  blithered  ’  or  worried,  kaveyyamatto,  or  only  sleepy  ?  The 
Commentary  has  ‘  as  he  were  thinking  of  what  he  had  to  say,  crazy 
by  reason  of  what  he  had  to  do.’  Both  Commentaries  here  have 
k(weyyana-kabba-(omcs  \-kavyd- )  kdrakena  mattd ,  manitd,  sambhdvitd , 
garukodayay  dpannd.  Yangisa’s  story  explains  the  choice  of  the  term. 

1  Khandhe  dyatandni  ca  dhdtuyo  ca.  Cf.  Sisters,  Ps.  XXX., 
XXXVIII. ;  also  my  Buddhism ,  p.  70;  and  for  n.  2,  p.  119/.;  241. 

2  Lit.,  seers  of  what  is  included  in  the  order — i.e.,  of  the  world, 
physical  and  moral.  The  Commentary  emphasizes  only  the  latter — 
sampattiniydmay,  the  order  by  which  to  achieve  (saintly)  success. 

3  See  XXVI.,  n.  4  Cf.  Sisters,  verse  186. 


408 


CCLXIV.  VANG  ISA 


O  welcome  tidings  !  welcome  time  to  me 
To  live  and  study  near  the  Master’s  feet ; 

’Mong  divers  doctrines  mooted  among  men 
Of  all  ’twas  sure  the  best  I  sought  and  found.1  (1261) 
To  heights  of  intuition  have  I  won,2 
From  sense  of  hearing  is  the  dulness  swept ; 

The  triple  lore  have  I  and  magic  power ; 

In  knowing  others’  thought  am  I  adept.  (1262) 

XIII. 

When  inquiring  as  to  whether  his  tutor3  had  passed 
wholly  away  at  death  : 

1  ask  the  Master — boundless  is  his  wisdom — 

Who  as  to  this  life  severs  every  doubt  :4 — 

Here  at  Aggalava 5  hath  died  a  Brother, 
Well-known  and  famous,  cool  and  calm  [his 
heart] ;  (1263) 

Nigrodha-Kappa,  so  thyself  didst  call  him, 

Such  was  this  good  man’s  name,  Exalted  One.6 
Revering  thee  he  lived,  his  gaze  on  Freedom, 

And,  Seer  of  what  is  stable,7  well  he  strove.  (1264) 

Of  this  disciple,  Sakyan,  all  desirous 

Are  we  to  know  the  fate,  thou  Seer  of  all ; 

Attent  the  ear  of  everyone  to  hear  it : — 

Thou  art  our  Master  and  thou  art  supreme.  (1265) 

1  Cf.  IX. 

2  To  mastery  of  the  six  forms  of  abliinna.  Cf.  p.  14,  n.  3,  with 
p.  32,  n.  2. 

3  Nigrodha-Kappa  Thera.  This  episode  is  also  given  in  the  Sutta- 
Nipdta,  verse  342  j/f.  ( SBE ,  x.,  p.  57  ff.). 

4  For  chetvd  read  clietta ,  as  Oldenberg  suggests.  The  Commentary 
paraphrases  by  chedaJco  :  ‘  cutter- off  of  doubts.’ 

5  A  Vihara  at  the  chetiya  (pre-Buddhistic  shrine),  so  called,  at  Alavl, 
a  town  on  the  Ganges,  12  yojanas  from  Benares,  30  from  Savatthl. 

G  Because  he  habitually  sat  in  the  shade  of  a  banyan  ( nigrodha ),  and 
there,  too,  became  arahant  (Commentary). 

7  I.e.,  Nibbana,  as  that  which  does  not  crumble  He  is  addressing 
the  Buddha  by  this  title  (Commentary). 


CCLXIV.  VANG  ISA 


409 


Do  thou  but  sever  from  us  all  our  doubting, 

Tell  thou  me,  amplest  Wisdom,  make  it  known  : 
Hath  he  indeed  his  life’s  long  round  completed  ? 
Speak  to  us  in  our  midst,  O  Seer  of  all, 

As  Sakka  thousand-eyed  in  heavenly  hall.1  (1266) 
Bonds  that  here  bind  us,  pathways  of  illusion, 
Factors  of  ignorance,  stations  of  doubt 
Whate’er  they  be,  confronted  by  the  Master, 

By  Him-who-Thus-hath-Come,  they  cease  to  be, 
For  among  men  the  Eye  Supreme  is  he.  (1267) 
For  if,  i  faith,  some  Man  the  world’s  corruptions 
Sweep  not  away,  as  wind  the  lowering  clouds, 

The  world  were  shrouded2  wholly  in  thick  dark¬ 
ness, 

And  e’en  the  brighter  minds  would  lose  their 
light.  (1268) 

Light-bringers  [to  us  all]  are  men  of  wisdom ; 

And  thou,  O  Sage,  methinks  art  even  such. 

We  have  drawn  nigh  to  one  who  seetli, 
kno weth  ; 3 

Reveal  to  us  assembled  Kappaf’s  fate] !  (1269) 

Swiftly  send  forth  thy  voice  in  all  its  beauty, 

O  thou  most  beauteous  ;  even  as  the  swan, 

With  rich  and  mellow  tones  well  modulated, 

Lifts  up  its  neck  in  measured  trumpeting, 

And  we  will  hearken  all,  our  hearts  sincere.  (1270) 
Gone  from  his  ways  all  future  birth  and  dying  ;4 
And  him  who  shook  them  off  without  remainder, 
Him  now  constraining  will  I  cause  to  speak. 

For5  average  folk  fail  to  fulfil  their  wishes, 

But  saints  perform  whatever  they  devise.  (1271) 

1  Lit.,  to  the  devas. 

2  For  nibbuto  understand  nivuto  (Commentary). 

3  Jdnay  for  jdnantay.  Buddhist  and  Jain  suttas  constantly  link 
these  two  verbs. 

4  Dhonay ,  agent-noun  of  dhundti ,  which  occurs  in  II.  Cf.  Sutta- 
Nipdta,  ver.  813. 

5  Our  Corny,  reads  also  hi  and  va. 


410 


CCLXIV.  VANGISA 


Well  have  we  learnt  how  thou  canst  answer, 
Whose  insight  straight  to  heart  of  things  dost  go, 
Not  vainly  do  we  stand,  once  more  saluting, 

O  baffle  not,  thou  infinite  in  wisdom, 

Who  [Kappa’s  destiny]  dost  surely  know.  (1272) 
The  Ariyan  Norm  thou  know’st  in  all  its  bearings,1 
Knowing  and  strong  to  work,  O  baffle  not ! 

As  for  cool  waters  when  by  heat  we  suffer, 

Thy  word  we  wait  for :  —  rain  that  we  may 
hear  !2  (1273) 

That  holy  life  which,  for  the  goal  desirous, 

He  of  the  Kappas  led,  was’t  not  in  vain  ? 

Passed  he  away  fraught  with  the  seed  of  rebirth,3 
Or  as  one  wholly  free  ? — that  would  we  hear.  (1274) 


The  Exai.ted  One. 

All  craving  as  to  life  of  mind  and  body 
He  severed  here  below ,  and  crossed  the  stream 
Of  craving  flowing  long  deep-bedded  in  him , 

Passed  utterly  beyond  both  birth  and  death.  (1275) 

( Thus  spake  the  Exalted  One,  best  in  the  Fire.)4 

1  Paroparay.  Cf.  Sutta-Nipdta,  p.  59,  n.  2,  with  p.  193,  n.  Our 
Commentary  condenses  the  paraphrase  of  that  Commentary  :  \lokut- 
tara- J  lokiyavasena  sundaray  [ asundaraij]  dure  santikay  vd  ariya- 
dhamman  ti. 

2  Lit.,  ‘rain  the  heard  thing’ — i.e.,  speech. 

3  Our  Commentary,  unlike  the  text,  has  nibbdyi  so  anupddiseso. 

4  The  interpolated  references  to  the  Buddha  loquitur  are  by  the 
Compilers,  says  the  Commentary.  I  do  not  understand  panccisettlio 
here  any  more  than  did  the  Commentators.  The  allusion  in  the 
Sutta-Nipdta  Commentary  is  obviously  inaccurate.  The  Buddha  was 
not  one  of  the  five,  nor  a  brahmin  in  the  social  sense.  Our  Com¬ 
mentary  suggests  the  Five  Indriyas  or  the  Five  Precepts,  both  inap¬ 
posite  here.  Dr.  Neumann’s  five  divisions  of  Middle  Country  and  four 
quarters  of  barbarians  has  a  more  plausible  sweep  of  world-laudation 
but  is,  I  think,  without  precedent.  Conceivably,  the  original  reading 
was  simply  some  such  compound  as  pumasettho ,  chief  of  men.  The 
metre  now  turns  to  slokas. 


CCLXIV.  YANGISA 


411 


Vangisa. 

Pleased  is  my  heart  to  hear  thy  word, 

0  seventh  of  mighty  Rishis  thou  I1 
Not  vain,  in  sooth,  was  my  request, 

Thou’st  not  deceived  me,  Holy  One  !2  (1276) 

As  Kappa  spoke,  so  Kappa  wrought, 

Disciple  of  the  Buddha  he,3 

For  he  hath  cut  the  netted  snare 

By  crafty  Death  outstretched  and  strong.  (1277) 

He  of  the  Kappas  saw  the  source 

Of  grasping,  0  Exalted  One  ! 

Ah  !  truly  he  hath  passed  beyond 

The  realm  of  Death  so  hard  to  cross.  (1278) 

Thee  greater  than  the  gods  I  greet, 

With  thee  thy  son,  0  best  of  men,4 
A  mighty  hero  like  thee  grown, 

Of  wondrous  Being,5  very  son.  (1279) 

Thus  verily  did  the  venerable  Brother  Vangisa  utter  his 
psalm. 

1  I.e.,  seventh  Buddha.  Cf.  p.  403,  n.  5.. 

Lit.,  Brahmin,  but  used  in  its  original  sense  :  holy,  excellent. 

3  Consistency  between  word  and  deed  is  expressly  named  as  a 
quality  of  a  Tathagata.  Iti-vuttaka ,  §  112. 

4  Nigrodha-Kappa  is,  of  course,  the  ‘son.’  ‘Men’  is  lit.  bipeds. 
The  last  verse  is  not  in  the  Sutta-Nipdta.  The  term  devadevay 
suggests  a  later  source. 

5  Ndga. 


Envoi. 


Singing  the  pcean  of  their  4  lions  roar , 

These  children  of  the  Buddha ,  sane ,  immune , 
I V inning  the  safe  sure  haven  of  their  quest , 
Dwelt  in  blest  cool  like  flame  of  fire  extinct. 


APPENDIX 


1 

ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS 

Page  8  :  On  Kankha-Kevata  subduing  doubt,  see  Udana ,  v.  7. 

Page  9,  l.  9  :  This  is  virtually  a  quotation  from  the  Vinaya 
5  (Vinaya  Texts ,  ii.,  351) :  “  Now  it  is  the  custom  for  the 
Blessed  Buddhas  to  exchange  words  of  greeting  with 
incoming  Bhikkhus.”  The  same  courteous  inquiries 
follow.  On  Punna  see  Appendix  III. 

Page  16,  n.  2  :  Add  Vin.  Texts,  ii.,  312. 

Page  17  :  For  “  the  Great,”  read  Major. 

Page  21  :  Read  Dasaka.  The  verse  =  Dhp.,  325,  and  is  there 
said  to  have  been  addressed  to  King  Pasenadi. 

Page  33  :  Read  Harita. 

Page  42,  n.  2  :  Add  Kathavatthu,  p.  220. 

Page  46  :  Read  (thrice)  for  Sisupacala(la),  Slsupacala(la). 

Page  48  :  After  Sayyutta-N  ikdya,  for  i.,  108,  read  i.,  208. 

Page  48,  n.  3  :  After  Sayy.,for  ii.,  271,  read  i.,  209. 

Page  54  :  Read  Pava.  n.  4  :  This  is  too  sweeping  a  state¬ 
ment.  See  the  discussion  in  Bhys  Davids’s  Buddhist 
India,  p.  22. 

Page  63  (lxii.)  :  Cf.  Dhammapada  Commentary,  iii.,  460,  giving 
a  slightly  different  version  of  the  legend. 

Page  67  :  “  Five  things  conduce  .  .  .”  cf  Anguttara,  iii.,  84,  or 
85,  or  173.  I  am  not  sure  whether  the  Commentary  is 
referring  to  any  of  these. 

Page  69,  n.  3  :  Read  araha. 

Page  72  :  Read  Atuma. 

Page  76  (77) :  =  Dhammapada,  ver.  326. 

Page  77  (78)  :  First  half  =  Dhammapada,  ver.  153. 

Page  82  :  For  line  4  (86),  read  Instructs  as  one  what  is  in  palm 
o’  th’  hand  revealing.  In  w.  2  delete  last  sentence  and 
read :  Cf.  “  the  closed  fist  ”  of  a  teacher,  Dialogues,  ii.,  107. 

Page  91,  n.  1  :  Read  Paticca-samuppada. 

Page  92,  n.  2  :  “  lucid  thought  ”  is  preferable,  for  sati. 

Page  93,  n.  3 :  For  450  read  412  ff. 

414 


APPENDIX 


415 


Page  95  (102)  :  For  minds  read  wits. 

Page  110,  n.  4  :  It  should  have  here  been  stated  that  pindola 
is  Pali  for  beggar,  almsman.  Childers’s  Dictionary’ does 
not  know  the  word.  Not  recognizing  it  as  a  purely  * 
common  name,  the  translator  and  even  the  editor  of 
the  Iti-vuttaka  (§  91),  have  yielded  to  the  obstructive 
association  created  by  the  well-known  soubriquet.  Yet 
both  Dhammapala’s  Commentary  (on  Iti-vuttaka)  and  that 
on  the  parallel  Sayyutta,  iii.  93,  are  clear  : — pindaya 
ulatlti  pindolo  ;  pindolassa  kammaij  pindolyay.  ’  The 
soubriquet  of  Beggar-Bharadvaja  may  have  been  given 
by  contemptuous  kinsfolk.  On  the  abuse  bestowed  on 
the  beggar  (specimens  are  given  in  the  latter  Commen¬ 
tary)  see  Talaputa’s  verse  (1118).  It  appears  that 
Pindola  is  the  name  of  a  “  Wandering  Jew  ”  bhikkhu 
in  Chinese  Buddhist  legends.  But  it  is  clear  from  both 
the  translated  and  the  excised  legends  m  Dhamma¬ 
pala’s  Commentary,  that  he  knew  nothing  about  that. 

Cf.  A.  J.  Edmunds,  Buddhist  and  Christian  Gospels , 
ii.  264. 

Page  116  (133-4)  :  =  Dhp.,  ver.  13,  14. 

Page  117  (137)  :  Cf.  Jdtaka,  i.,  No.  62,  p.  155  (text,  295). 

Page  118  :  Read  Nalaka. 

Page  119  (14:1)  =  Sayyutta,  i.  154. 

Page  122  (147)  :  Add: — after  apart.  =  Sayy.,  ii.  158. 

Page  124  (152)  :  =  Sutta-Nipdta,  ver.  728,  1051. 

Page  134,  l.  4  :  For  work  read  world. 

Page  138,  n.  1  :  Add :  Cf.  the  correcter  form,  Udana,  vi.  3. 

Page  139,  n.  2  :  Read  genitive  absolute. 

Page  140,  n.  1,  l.  3 :  To  references  add  Dhammapada  Com¬ 
mentary,  iii.,  127.  n.  2  :  for  of  read  cf 

Page  143  (191)  :  =  Uddna,  iv.  4. 

Page  144  (194)  :  Last  two  lines  =  Sutta-Nip.,  ver.  440. 

Page  159  (224)  :  For  In  read  The. 

Page  170  :  Read  Vetthapura. 

Page  171,  l.  1  :  Delete  he.  In  n.  2,  for  The  former  is  read 
They  are  ;  and  for  ii.  3,  read  ii.  5. 

Page  172  :  Read  Harita. 

Page  174,  n.  1  :  Conceivably  a  confusion  has  arisen  in  this 
legend  and  in  that  of  Somamitta,  cxxxiv.  Amitta  Thera 
is  very  possibly  Somamitta,  and  the  roles  of  teacher  and 
learner  may  have  got  inverted.  It  is  curious  that  Dham- 
mapala,  after  his  concluding  comment  on  p.  122,  makes 
no  subsequent  allusion  to  it. 

Page  176,  last  line  :  Delete  dotted  line . 


416 


APPENDIX 


Page  182  :  Niyasa  ;  in  the  Yinaya  account,  Yasa.  I  do  not 
yet  know  whether  the  Singhalese  (Copenhagen)  MS. 
supports  this  alteration  in  the  Thera’s  name. 

Page  185  :  I  can  give  no  explanation  of  the  curious  term 
“  tree -talk.”  It  is  unmistakably  rukkha-kathd  in  the 
Br.  MS.  The  first  verse  occurs  Jdt.,  i.  31  ;  iv.  496  (text), 
and  is  quoted  in  Dhammapada  Commentary ,  i.  99. 

Page  192  :  “  The  weather-gods  .  .  .”  So  Commentary  :  devatd 
vassay  varesuy,  the  plural  number  being  most  unusual.  (The 
noun  is  singular,  or  plural  ;  the  verb  is  certainly  plural.) 

Page  196  (344)  :  “  Quenched  ”  were  more  congruous  than 
“  crushed,”  but  the  latter  is  nearer  the  meaning  of  padalitd , 
shattered,  burst. 

Page  198,  n.  1  :  Add :  It  is  noteworthy  that  neither  of  these 
versions  of  Vakkali’s  legend  coincides  entirely  with  that 
of  the  Sayyutta-Nikaya  (iii.,  119  /.),  in  which  Yakkali 
is  admonished  when  mortally  ill,  and  ultimately  commits 
suicide  without  forfeiting  arahantship.  Cf.  Iti-vuttaka, 
§  92  ;  Divydvadana,  p.  49  ;  Bud.  Psy.,  258,  n.  4. 

Page  199,  n.  1  :  Omit  two. 

Page  203  :  Omitted  footnote  :  The  “  sixteen  Atthakas  ”  make 
up  the  Atthaka-vagga,  or  Book  IV.  of  the  Sutta-Nipata 
(ver.  766  ffi.)  But  the  verse  quoted — 

“  Seeing  the  evil  of  a  worldly  life 
And  knowing  what  is  taught  by  holy  Norm, 

Exempt  from  all  the  substrate  for  re-birth, 

The  Ariyan  findeth  no  delight  in  sin  ; 

Sin  doth  afford  no  pleasure  to  the  pure,’’'’ 

is  the  “  Udana,”  or  solemn  utterance  of  the  Buddha, 
pronounced  upon  Sona’s  sincerity  and  finished  recital, 
in  Udana ,  v.,  6. 

Page  203,  n.  2  :  For  ten  read  eight.  It  is  perhaps  a  little 
premature  to  call  Sela  a  “  believer  ”  in  verses  823,  825. 
(Non-believers  usually  spoke  to  or  of  the  Master  as  bho , 
or  samana  Gotama.)  If  Sela’s  case  be  omitted,  only  six 
instances  remain. 

Page  231  :  Verses  469-72  occur  Anguttara ,  ii.  71. 

Page  237,  n.  3  :  Read  Dhammabhutd  =  Norm-become  ;  dhamma- 
Jcdyd,  paraphrases,  etc. 

Page  237,  n.  5  :  Add  :  See  also  Mahdvastu  (Senart),  iii.,  365/. 

Page  240  (498)  :  =  Dhammapada,  ver.  6. 

Page  243,  l.  5  :  “  Abstract  ” — i.e.,  arupa-jhanas  :  see  p.  258, 
n.  1,  and  Compendium,  64,  90. 

Page  251,  n.  1 ,  l.  6  :  Add :  And  also,  fully,  but  in  slightly 
different  phraseology,  in  Mahdvastu,  iii.,  p.  93. 


APPENDIX 


417 


Page  251,  n.  2  :  After  Mahdvaysa  read  ch.  v. 

Page  251,  n.  3  :  For  not  elsewhere  called  Greek,  read  called 
the  Yona  in  Mahdvamsa  (Geiger’s  translation,  P.T.S., 
1912),  pp.  82,  85,  where  see  n.  5. 

Page  252,  n.  1  :  For  verses  9,  52  read  verse  645  (iii.,  9,  52). 

Page  254,  l.  4  :  Delete  comma  after  raja. 

Page  255,  n.  3  :  Read  Brahmana. 

Page  256,  l.  2  :  Read  for  Sisters,  Brethren. 

Page  258  (561)  :  After  Rule  supply  comma. 

Page  262  (578)  :  Delete  comma  after  bring. 

Page  266  :  The  story  of  Sankicca  may  be  a  doubly  bifurcated 
legend  :  cf.  his  birth  and  ordination  with  that  of  Sopaka 
(XXXIII.)  and  Sivali  (LX.)  ;  and  his  self-sacrificing 
courage  with  that  of  his  nephew  Adhimutta  (CCXLVIII.). 

Page  267,  n.  1  :  Delete  brackets. 

Page  277  (635,  636)  :  =  Dhammapada,  ver.  292,  293. 

Page  280  (653)  :  = Dhammapada ,  ver.  315. 

Page  283  (672)  :  Parinibbanti  need  not  necessarily  refer  to 
the  death  of  the  righteous  ;  cf.  p.  202  n.  1  ;  Majjhima,  i., 
45,  446.  The  Commentary  takes  it  apparently  to  mean 
the  rounding  off  of  perfected  life :  iddni  .  .  .  anupadisesa- 
nibbana-dhatuyd  desandya  kutay  ganhanto  bhavdyitvandti 
osanagdtham  aha. 

Page  284  :  Read  Anna-Kondanna.  It  is  interesting  to  note 
that  the  Burmese  MS.  of  the  Commentary,  when  com¬ 
mencing  his  legend,  retains  the  original  form  Annasi- 
Kondanna.  The  Buddha,  namely,  when  he  had  con¬ 
vinced  this,  his  first  disciple,  is  said  to  have  exclaimed, 
Ahhdsi  vata  bho  Kondahno  !  (Truly  Kondanna  has  per¬ 
ceived  !),  and  the  latter  became  known  as  Annata- Kon¬ 
danna  (“  Kondanna  who  has  that  which  is  perceived  ”) 
( Vinaya  Texts ,  i.  98).  In  subsequent  allusions  the  Com¬ 
mentary  calls  him  simply  Kondanna,  or  Kondanna- 
manava.  In  Milinda,  ii.,  44,  where  the  eight  brahmins’ 
names  are  given,  he  is  called  Yanna.  Cf.  Buddhist  Birth 
Stories  ( Nidana-Katha ),  p.  72/.,  113,  where  he  is  called 
Yanna,  and  Anna-Kondanna  respectively. 

Page  286,  n.  1  :  Add :  These  three  verses  are  quoted  in  the 
Katlidvatthu ,  p.  531,  as  spoken  by  the  Exalted  One. 

Page  293  :  Verses  720,  72],  724,  725  are  ascribed  to  the  official 
editors  or  “  chanters.”  Commentary  (the  first  two, 
sangitikdrena,  the  second  two,  sangitikdrehi ,  vuttagathd , 
In  elucidating  verse  722,  the  Iti-vuttaka  Commentary  is 
referred  to. 

Page  295  (726)  :  After  musings  insert  comma. 


27 


418 


APPENDIX 


Page  295,  n.  1  :  In  the  Iti-vuttaka,  Suttas  1  and  2  of  the  Duka- 
Nipata  give  in  briefest  outline  the  substance  of  Para- 
pariya’s  Gatha,  and  would  be  well  known  to  Dhammapala, 
but  his  Commentary  on  them  does  not  refer  to  the 
Thera. 

Page  299,  l.  2  :  Read  the  Ambrosial. 

Page  311,  l.  2  :  Read  Samana.  (820)  :  For  colon  read  full- 
point. 

Page  318,  n.  4  :  Insert  ?  after  nickname. 

Page  319,  l.  21  :  Read  Ahiqsaka. 

Page  326,  n.  1  :  For  Ang.  Nik.,  iii.,  read  iv.,  and  for  obstruction, 
obsessions. 

Page  334  (944)  :  Better  :  Some  too  there  are  .  .  . 

Page  335,  n.  2  :  Read  (Samantapasadika,  Vinaya,  iii.,  300). 

Page  342,  n.  1  :  It  is  clear  that,  in  Dhammapala’s  authorities. 
Dighanakha  and  Maha-Kotthita  were  different  persons. 
Cf.  Avaddna,  ii.,  187,  188;  Oldenberg,  op.  cit.  on  p.  328, 
n.  4. 

Page  342,  n.  5  :  Read  Jdt. 

Page  343,  n.  2  :  Read  ( aniccato ). 

Page  345  (997)  :  Delete  colon  and  rule. 

Page  345,  n.  3  :  Add  :  These  six  lines  are  quoted  as  Sariputta's 
in  the  Kathdvatthu,  p.  257. 

Page  354  (1026)  :  The  metaphor  anticipates  by  centuries  that 
kindred  one  of  Dante,  who  ( Purg .,  xxii.)  makes  Statius 
say  to  Virgil : 

“  ...  As  one 

Who,  journeying  through  the  darkness,  bears  a  light 
Behind,  that  profits  not  himself,  but  makes 
His  followers  wise.  ...” 

Page  361,  n.  4  :  Insert  page. 

Page  369  :  Talaputa  is  a  name  that  suggests  a  soubriquet, 
tala  meaning  palm  or  palm-leaf,  and  puta  a  bundle  or 
leaf -basket.  Cf.  putabhattay ,  p.  270,  n.  6. 

Page  373  (1104)  :  ‘  Hell-flung  ’  is  perhaps  more  rhetorical 
than  closely  accurate  ;  pdtdlakhittay  balavdmukhan  ca 
.  .  .  vibhiysanay  is  literally  :  [when shall  I,  etc.]  “and  o’er 
the  awful  mighty  abyss-discharged  mouth.  .  .  .”  Patala, 
meaning  (vaguely)  abyss,  is  conceived  in  the  Epics  and 
Puranas  as  a  bottomless  pit  on  land  ;  in  Buddhist  litera¬ 
ture  it  is  conceived  as  a  whirlpool  in  the  ocean  concealing 
submarine  regions.  Thus  in  Sayyutta  Nikdya,  iv.,  206  : 
“  .  .  .  who  says,  there  is  a  patala  in  the  ocean  ...” 
where,  as  in  i.,  32  :  “  Patalam  atari  isi ,”  patala  is  taken 
metaphorically  as  any  circumstance  in  which  one  is  carried 


APPENDIX 


419 


off  one’s  feet,  loses  balance  ( Commentary ).  Cf.  Milinda, 
ii.,  138  for  a  different  application. 

Page  378,  n.  2  :  V  and  c  are  often  confused  not  only  in  Singha¬ 
lese, ^  but  also  in  Burmese,  on  palm-leaf.  In  Sutta- 
Nipata,  verse  162/.,  between  -carano  and  -varano  Fausboll 
chose  the  former.  What,  then, 'is  a  caranikay  ?  The 
Commentary  itself  is  obscure  :  abhinhako  ’carakarahaij 
viya  mano-dassento  carakarahaij  purisap  vancetva  cara 
gopakanap  nibbadento  viya  punappunap  tantap-bhavap 
dassento.  I  should  be  glad  to  have  light  thrown  on 
carakarahap  and  tantap-bhavap.  In  Sanskrit  carano 
is  a  strolling  player,  hence  my  rendering.  If  correct, 
it  is  a  very  likely  simile  for  one  with  Talaputa’s  tradi¬ 
tional  antecedents  to  have  used. 

Page%384  (1156):  With  “ma  papacitte  ahari”  cf.  (1173), 
p.  387,  n.  3.  Ahari,  as  there,  means,  more  probably, 
accost,  assail.  And  a  juster  rendering  would  be  : 

Wherefore  have  thou  no  truck  with  thoughts  of  vice, 

As  bird  that  flies  bewildered  into  flame. 

The  Commentary  has:  Kamesu  niggatdya  lamakacitte 
nihinacittamddise  dsddesi. 

Page  389,  n.  3  :  Read  kattliaci. 

Page  394  :  Read  Bhesakala  ;  also  on  p.  23. 

Page  412  :  Read  ‘  lion’s.’ 


ASPECTS  OF  THE  GOAL  OR  GOOD  {ATT HA)  IN  THE 
BRETHREN’S  VERSES,  VIEWED  UNDER— 


(а)  Nibbana  (or  going-out — viz., 

of  the  fire  or  fever,  of  greed, 
ill-will,  illusion) 

(б)  Freedom  : 

(i.)  Release  from  social  or 
economic  bonds 
(ii.)  Release  from  spiritual 
bonds 


(c)  Release  from  Ill,  sorrow 


{d)  Release  from  Living  and 
Dying  (rebirth,  or  Sapsara) 


.,  lxxix.,  cxix.,  cxxix.,  cxli., 
clxv.,  clxxii.,  clxxxiv.,  cc.  cciii.,. 
ccxii.,  ccxxxviii.,  ccxlv.,  cciii., 
cclix.,  cclx.,  cclxii.,  cclxiv. 

xliii.,  lxxii.,  lxxxii.,  lxxxix.,  cxxxh 

lx.,  lxxxix.,  xciii.,  c.,  cxxxi., 
cxlviii.,  cli.,  clxxxvi.-clxxxvii., 
clxxxix.,  cxci.,  cxciv.,  cxcviii., 
ccx.,  ccxv.,  ccxxiv.,  ccxxvi., 
ccxxxix.,  ccliv. 

lxviii.,  lxxviii.,  lxxxi.,  lxxxiv., 
cxx.,  clviii.,  clxxxii.,  clxxxiv., 
ccii.,  ccxx.,  ccxxviii.,  ccxxxviii., 
ccxlviii.,  cclix. 

xvii.,  xliv.,  lvii.,  lxvii.,  lxxx., 
Ixxxiii.,  lxxxvii.,  xc.,  xcviii.- 
xcix.,  ci.,  cxxi.,  cxxv.,  cxxviii., 
cxxxvi.,  cxxxix.,  cxxv.,  cxlv., 
cxlix.,  clii.,  clxviii.,  clxxxi.- 
clxxxii.,  ccii.,  cciv.,  ccxx., 
ccxxviii.,  ccxxxvii.,  ccxl., 
ccxliv.-ccxlv.,  ccii. 


A.  A  Negative  Aspect. 

{As  a  release,  a  getting  rid  of.) 
lxxi 


1  This  table,  a  companion  picture  to  that  drawn  up  for  the  Sisters, 
may  be  of  some  positive  and  comparative  utility.  I  have  endeavoured 
to  select  only  the  dominant  note  of  attainment  or  aspiration  in  each 
psalm.  At  times  this  is  difficult ;  the  Commentary,  e.g.,  in  introducing 
the  brief  poem  of  Slvaka  (xiv.)  states  a  fourfold  burden  to  the  one  sloka. 
There  I  have  selected  the  joy  in  that  retreat  from  the  world  into  the 
peace  and  charm  of  nature,  which  is  so  characteristic  a  note  of  those 
poet-anchorites.  Besides  this  new  group,  I  have  had  to  add  others, 
for  this  volume  contains  nearly  thrice  as  many  poems,  and  among 
the  men,  as  is  natural,  there  is  a  greater  range  of  outlook.  Where,  in  a 
complex  goal,  no  one  aspect  predominates,  I  have  enrolled  the  poem 
under  more  than  one  head,  as,  e.g.,  in  cxxv.  Poems  not  hymning  any 
aspect  {e.g.,  cxxx.)  have  not  been  included. 

420 


APPENDIX 


421 


(e)  Release  from  Craving  and 
Sensuality  (one  aspect  of 
Nibbana) 

(/)  Release  from  Fear 

(<7)  Release  from  Illusions  of  Self 
(soul),  mdna 

( h )  Release  from  the  (four)  Asavas 

(intoxicants,  which  include 

r  (e)) 

( i )  Release  from  scepticism 


xviii.,  xxviii.,  lvi.,  lxxiii.,  lxxiv., 
xciii.,  cxxvii.,  cxxxiv.,  cxli., 
clxxi.,  clxxxi.,  cxciii.,  cciii., 
ccxiv.,  ccxxxi.,  ccxxxix., 
ccxlviii.,  ccli.,  cclxii.,  cclxiv.  (iv. ). 
vi.-viii.,  xxi.,  civ.,  ccxvi.,  ccxxxii., 
ccxlviii.,  ccliii.,  ccliv.,  cclxii. 
lxiv.,  lxxxix.,  clxiii.,  ccxviii.-ccxx., 
ccl.,  cclxi. 

v.,  xlvii.,  xcii.,  cxvi.,  cxxv.,  cxli., 
cxlix.,  cxcviii.,  clxiii.,  clxix., 
ccxxxviii.-ccxxxix.,  cch.,  ccxlvii., 
cclvi.,  cclxi. 
ccl. 


B.  A  Positive  Aspect. 


1.  Subjectively  Considered. 

{a)  Mental  Enlightenment  conceived  as — 

(i.)  Light  . .  . .  .  .  iii.,  xxv.,  cxxiv.,  cxlv.,  ccxlii., 


(ii.)  Knowledge,  under¬ 
standing,  insight,  wis¬ 
dom,  vision 

(iii.)  Intuition,  insight,  “  triple 
lore  ” 


(iv.)  Clarity,  lucidity  (sati)  . . 
(v.)  Concentration 

(b)  State  of  Feeling  : 

(i.)  Happiness 

(ii.)  “  Cool,”  calm,  content, 
serenity,  resignation 


(iii.)  Peace,  safety 


(c)  State  of  Will :] 

(i.)  Self-mastery 


(ii.)  Power 

(iii.)  Steadfastness,  balance  . . 

(d)  Complexes  of  ( a ),  (&),  (c)  : 

(i.)  Confidence 
(ii.)  Victory 


cclxiv. 

x.,  xlv.,  lxi.,  cxlii.,  cxlvi.,  cxlvii., 
clxii.,  clxxxviii.,  ccxiii.,  ccxxvi., 
ccxxx.,  cclxii. 

Iv.,  cxxv.,  c.,  cxliii.,  clxx.,  clxxi., 
cxc.,  cxcvii.,  cxcviii.,  ccxxxi., 
ccxxxvi.,  ccxlii.,  ccxliii.,  cclvi., 
cclxiv. 

xxx.,  xli.,  fix.,  ccxxv.,  cclxii. 

xxxvii.,  xlvi.,  cxii.,  clxxiii. 

xvi.,  xxxv.,  lxiii.,  lxxxv.,  clxii., 
clxxv.,  cxcii.,  cxcv.,  ccv.,  ccxi., 
ccxxx.,  ccliv. 

i.,  ii.,  xii.,  xx.,  li.-liv.,  lviii.,  cvi., 
cxi.,  cxviii.,  clxiv.,  clxxiii., 
cxciii.,  ccv.,  ccxvi.,  ccxi., 
ccxliv.,  ccxlvi.,  ccxlviii.,  ccliv., 
ccvi.,  cchx.,  cclxi. 

xv.,  xxxii.,  xhx.,  lxix,  xcvi., 
clxxxiii.,  cc.,  ccvii.-ccviii., 
ccxvii.,  ccxxix.,  ccxxiii.,  ccxiv., 
cclvii. 

vi.,  xix.,  xxix.,  1.,  lxxvii.,  cix., 
cxxiii.,  cxl.,  clxiii.,  clxvii.,  ccvi., 
ccxxv.,  ccxlii.,  cclv.,  cclxii. 

xxxviii.,  lxx.,  civ.,  cclxiii. 

clvi.,  ccxi. 

cxxvi.,  ccli.,  cchii. 

vi.-viii.,  xi.,  clvii.,  clxxv.,  ccli. 


422 


APPENDIX 


(iii.)  Alertness,  awakeness, 

health  . .  . .  . .  xxii.,  xxxix.,  xl.,  clxvi. 

(iv.)  Detachment  (with  or  xiii.,  xiv.,  xxiii.,  xxvii.,  xxxi., 

without  nature-love)  xxxiv.,  xli.,  lxiii.,  cv.,  cxiii., 

cxxxi.,  clxxiv.,  clxxv.,  clxxviii., 
cxcvi.,  ccxxxii.,  ccxxxiv., 
ccxxxix.-ccxl.,  cclxi.-cclxii. 


2.  Objectively  considered  as — 


(а)  Truth . 

(б)  Good  news,  doctrine,  guidance 

(c)  A  supreme  conjuncture 

(d)  Order  ( dhammata ,  niyamata)  . . 


(e)  Regulated  life  .. 

(/)  Communion  with  the  Best  . . 

(g)  Service,  fraternal  goodwill  . . 

( h )  Perfection  ( sadhuta ) 

(i)  Otherness  of  life  (from  worldly 

life  and  standards) 

(;)  Refuge,  haven 

(k)  The  “  Ambrosial  ” 

(l)  The  Good  Supreme,  salvation 

(attha,  sadattha) 


xxvi.,  lxxxviii. 

ix.,  lxxxvi.,  xci.,  xciv.,  ciii.,  cxvii., 
cxxxviii.,  cclv.,  cclx. 
clxxii.,  clxxiv.,  clxxxiv.,  ccxiv., 
ccxxii.,  ccxliv.,  cclix. 
xxiv.,  clxi.,  clxx.,  clxxxvi.- 
clxxxvii.,  cxc.,  cxciv.,  cxcviii., 
cciv.,  ccxv.,  ccxxiv.,  ccxxvi.- 
ccxxvii.,  ccxlix. 
xxxvi. 

iv.,  lxvi.,  lxxv.,  clxxxv.,  ccix., 
ccxxxiii.,  cclx.,  cclxii. 
xxxiii.,  xlviii.,  lxv.,  lxxvi.-lxxvii., 
ccxl.,  ccxhv. 
cxiv. 

lxxvi.,  xcvii.,  cii.,  cvii.-cviii.,  cx., 
cxxii.,  cxxxvii.,  cliv.,  ccxxiii., 
ccli. 

clxxii.,  clxxxiv.,  cxc.,  ccxvii.,  ccl., 
cclix. 

cxliv.,  cci.,  cclvii.-cclviii.,  cclxii., 
cclxiv. 

cci.,  cciv.,  ccxix.,  ccxxix.,  ccxhii., 
cclxiv. 


Ill 


THERA- VERSES  NOT  INCLUDED  IN  THIS  ANTHOLOGY  NOR 

IN  THE  PITAKAS 

We  know  that  the  Theragatha  does  not  exhaust  the  verses 
ascribed  to  Theras  which  survive  in  Buddhist  literature. 
There  are  several  which  have  not  even  found  a  place  in  the 
Pali  Canon.  Among  these  are  twenty  slokas  attributed  to 
Punna,  son  of  the  Maitreyas  (Purna  Maitrayaniputra)  in  the 
Mahavastu  (Senart  ed.,  iii.,  382).  He  is  said  to  have  been  a 
brahmin  s  son  of  Donavatthu  in  Kosala,  and  may  possibly 
be  identifiable  with  Punna  Mantaniputta,  No.  IV.  in  our 
Anthology,  the  birthplace  being  identical  and  the  legends  very 
similar.  The  contents  of  the  verses  would  scarcely  repay  the 
difficulties  of  a  metrical  English  rendering.  They  are  a  hymn 
of  praise  to  the  Buddha,  who  for  thirteen  gathas  is  addressed 
by  a  sun-title,  different  from  that  in  our  collection,  in  a 
refrain,  as  e.g.  : 

That  thou,  being  in  the  Realm  of  Bliss,  didst  become  an  elephant 
like  to  a  snowy  crest,  and  enter  on  thy  last  birth  .-—this,  0  thou,  kin  to  the 
thousand-rayed  !  is  sweet  to  me  /” 

— a  verse  which  suggests  that  the  hymn  is  of  a  relatively  late 
date,  the  white  elephant  legend  appearing  first,  I  believe,  in 
the  Nidanakatha  Jataka  Commentary. 

After  hymning  thus  the  Birth,  Renunciation,  and  En¬ 
lightenment,  the  author  continues  by  exulting  in  the  “great 
Hero’s  ”  Dhamma,  this  time  prefixing  a  refrain  of  the  one 
word  dishtyd  :  “by  good  luck  !”  e.g.  : 

0  happy  fate,  the  Norm-Wheel  by  the  Norm  !  0  happy  fate,  that 
this  of  twelve  parts  composed  should  be  rolled  on  /” 

Here  again  is  the  identification  of  the  twelve  links  of  the 
“  Wheel  of  Causation  ”  with  the  “  Wheel  of  the  Norm,”  which 
Buddhaghosa  evidently  found  in  vogue,  but  which  I  have 
not  met  with  in  the  Pitakas.  The  Divyavaddna ,  using  the 
same  phrase  :  dvddas* diigah  ( pratityasam utyd do )  relates  how 

423 


424 


APPENDIX 


this  doctrine  was  explained  by  the  graphic  aid  of  a  wheel- 

picture  (p.  300/.).  Cf.  the  modern  version  of  the  tradition  in 
Compendium,  p.  262 /d 

In  the  Divyavaddna,  again,  are  other  verses — 6. <7.,  by  Punna 
(Purna)  of  Sunaparanta  (Sronaparanta),  whither  he  went,  or 
returned,  as  a  missionary.  This  is  the  author  of  No.  LXX. 
in  this  collection  (p.  40/.  in  Divyavaddna).  More  available  to 
English  readers  are  the  extra-canonical  Thera-verses  in  the 
Milinda, ^comprising  fourteen  by  Sariputta,  two  by  Pindola- 
Bharadvaja,  two  by  Subhuti,  one  by  Moggallana  the  Great, 
three  by  Anuruddha,  one  by  Upali,  three  by  Rahula,  one  by 
Vanglsa,  one  by  Cula-Panthaka,  one  by  Mogharajan,  and 
five  by  Upasena-Vanganta-putta.  All  of  these  occur  in  the 
last  book  (VII.)  of  the  Milinda,  and  may  be  consulted  in  the 
translated  edition.  They  are  all  quoted  by  the  author,  as 
bearing  precisely  as  much,  or  as  little,  authority  as  those 
other  verses,  which  he  quotes,  on  five  occasions,  from  the 
Theragatlia.  Reference  to  such  citations  is  given  in  my  foot¬ 
notes.  But  the  source  or  sources  from  which  they  are  drawn 
remains  one  of  the  many  problems  obscuring  the  historv  of 
Pali  literature. 

Cf.  Dr.  Oldenberg  s  comparative  analysis  of  the  diction  in  the 
Purna  episode  with  that  of  Majjh.  Nile.,  “  Rathavinlta-Sutta.”  “  Stu- 
dien  zur  Geschichte  des  buddhistischen  Kanon.”  Nachrichten  G.  W. 
Gottingen ,  1912, 


IV 


WORKS  QUOTED  OR  REFERRED  TO  BY  DHAMMAPiLA’S 

COMMENTARY 

Page  21  :  Vinaya  (Yin.  Texts,  i.,  134),  sermon  on  Burning  (sic). 

Page  207  :  Vinaya  (Yin.  Texts,  i.,  134),  sermon  on  Burning 
(sic) . 

Page  225  :  Vinaya  (Vin.  Texts,  i.,  If.). 

Page  285  :  Vinaya  (Yin.  Texts,  i.,  100/.),  sermon  on  No-sign - 
[of-any-soul]  (sic). 

Page  9  :  Majjhima  Nihaya,  “  Rathavinita-Sutta  ”  (sic). 

Page  30  :  Majjhima  Nihaya,  “  Balapandita-Sutta,”  parable  of 
the  bole  in  the  yoke.  (Also  cited 'in  CLXXXIII.) 

Page  31  :  Majjhima  NiJcdya,  “  Bhaddekaratta-Sutta,”  in 
“  Lomasakangiya-Sutta  5 5  (sic). 

Page  71  :  Majjhima  Nihaya,  “  Punnovada-Sutta.” 

Page  82  :  Majjhima  Nihaya,  “  Madhupindika-Sutta  ”  (sic). 

Page  161 :  Majjhima  Nihaya,  “  [Dhatu]vibhanga-Sutta  ”  (sic). 

Page  224  :  Majjhima  Nihaya,  “  Kakacfipama-Sutta,”  the  para¬ 
ble  quoted  by  name. 

Page  280  :  Majjhima  Nihaya,  (“  Ariyapariyesana-Sutta  ”)  on 
ariyatunJabhava .  ’  ’ 

Page  295  :  Majjhima  Nihaya,  “  Indriyabhavana-Sutta  ”  (sic) ; 
see  below  p.  418,  on  p.  295,  n.  1. 

Page  342  :  Majjhima  Nihaya,  Dighanakha-Sutta,”  called 
“  Yedana-pariggaha-Suttanta.” 

Page  386  :  Majjhima  Nihaya,  “  Maratajjaniya-Sutta,”  called 
“  Pasadakamma-Suttanta.” 

Page  30  :  Sayyutta-Nihdya ,  v.,  455,  “  Chiggala-Sutta  ”  (see 
above,  Majjhima  wt  Bala-pandita-sutta  ”). 

Page  44  :  Sayyutta-Nihdya,  iii.,  106,  “  Thera-Tissa-Sutta  ” 
(sic). 

Page  48  :  Sayyutta-Nihdya,  i.,  208,  “  Sanu-Sutta  ”  (sic). 

Page  49  :  Sayyutta-Nihdya,  ii.,  271,  “  Maranan  h’etap  ”... 
hinayavattati.” 

Page  224  :  Sayyutta-Nihdya,  ii.,  98,  parable  referred  to. 

425 


426 


APPENDIX 


Page  224  :  Sayyutta-Nikdya ,  iv.,  196,  §  5,  parable  referred  to. 
Page  397/.  :  Sayyutta-Nikdya,  i.,  1 85/.,  Vangisa-Saijyutta. 
Page  5  :  Anguttara  Nikdya,  i.,  24,  Etad-agga-vagga.  (The 
other  forty  1  agga  ’  or  top  (a/cpos)  assignments  are  men¬ 
tioned  (see  footnotes),  but  not  with  quotation. 

Page  288 :  Anguttara  Nikdya ,  iii.,  345/.,  “  Nagopama-suttanta  ” 
(sic). 

Page  234  :  Khuddaka-pdtha ,  “  Kumarapanha  ”  (sic). 

Page  166  :  Udana,  iii.,  3.  The  rebuke  to  Yasoja  referred  to. 
Page  345  :  Udana ,  iv.,  4.  Incident  there  is  referred  to,  but 
work  not  mentioned. 

Page  177  :  Sutta-Nipata,  “  Sabhiya-Sutta  ”  (sic). 

Page  201  :  Sutta-Nipata,  “  Sabhiya-Sutta  ”  (sic). 

Page  203  :  Sutta-Nipata,  the  “  Sixteen  Atthakas  ”  (sic). 

Page  126  :  Jataka,  vi.,  No.  547,  “  Vessantara-jataka  ”  (sic). 
Page  77  :  Jataka,  v.,  No.  536,  “  Kunala- jataka  ”  (sic). 

Page  258:  Jataka,  i.,  No.  4,  “  Ciilasetthi- jataka  ”  (sic,  not 
Cullaka-).  Dhammapala  quotes  it  not  as  Vannana,  but 
as  stated  ;  so  thatin  his  day  a  u  Jataka  ”  meant  Commen¬ 
tary  as  well  as  Akhyana,  all  taken  together.  Another 
interesting  feature  is  his  free  citation  of  that  Commentary. 
I  give  both  version  as  an  instance  of  how  fluid  was  the 
form  of  prose  narratives,  even  of  canonical  matter  : 

Jataka.  Dha  mmayala . 

Bhikkhave,  Cullapanthako  may  Bhikkhave,  Culapanthakena 
nissdya  iddni  tava  dhammesu  idani  mayhay  ovade  tliatva  lokutta- 
dhammamahantatay  patto ;  pubbe  radayajjay  laddhay ;  pubbe  pana 
pana  may  nissdya  bhogesu  pi  lokiyadayajjan  ti. 
bhogamahantatay  papuniti. 

Apaddna  :  quoted  regularly,  as  for  the  Sisters’  legends,  for  most? 
but  not  for  ‘all  the  Theras — e.g.,  not  for  Talaputa.  Hence 
one  of  Dhammapala’s  dichotomies  of  them  is  that  thy 
were  either  s' apaddna  or  an-apadand.  Only  they  who 
under  former  Buddhas  had  had  punnakriyavasena  savaka- 
pdramita-sankhatay  pavattitay  are  in  the  Apaddna. 


Other  Commentaries. 

Page  398,  n.  9  :  Saratthapakdsini  (sic). 

Page  20 :  Anguttara  Commentary.  Never  referred  to  as 
Manoratlia-purani,  but  the  phrase  quoted  (p.  199)' 
agrees  textually  with  it. 

Page  198  :  Anguttara  Commentary. 

Page  199  :  Anguttara  Commentary . 


APPENDIX 


427 


Page  203  :  Anguttara  Commentary. 

Page  56  :  Khuddaka-patha  or  Sayyutta  Commentary ,  “  Ratana- 
Sutta  ”  (sic). 

Page  180  :  Dhammapada  Commentary  on  verse  70. 

Page  199  :  Dhammapada  Commentary  on  verse  381. 

Page  266  :  Dhammapada  Commentary  on  verse  110. 

Page  8  :  Udana  Commentary  on  “  Tathagata.” 

Page  203  :  Udana  Commentary  on  v.,  6. 

Page  8  :  Iti-vuttaka  Commentary  on  “  Tatha¬ 
gata.” 

Page  293  :  Iti-vuttaka  Commentary  on  “  know¬ 
ing  all  ”  and  “  seeing  all  ”  (?). 

Page  30  :  Therigathd  Commentary  on  Abhaya’s 
Mother,  Sisters ,  page  30,  referred  to  as  to 
follow.  j 

Page  237  (492)  :  Visuddhi-Magga,  probably  the  “  Indriya- 
Sacca-Niddesa,”  as  dealing  in  detail  with  the  Truths. 
Page  317  :  Visuddhi-Magga ,  the  “  Dhutanga-Niddesa.” 

In  his  opening  remarks  Dhammapala  enumerates  the  five 
Nikayas,  and  affirms  the  inclusion  of  the  Thera-therigdthd  in 
the  poetical  books  of  the  Fifth  (Khuddaka-)  Nikaya.  The 
gathas  “  were  all  brought  into  unity  (ekajjay  katvd)  at  the 
Recitation-time  (council),  and  were  as  such  chanted  by  those 
who  made  the  recension  of  the  Dhamma  ”  (dhammasangd- 
hakehi). 

It  is  noteworthy  that  Dhammapala  only  once  refers  to  any 
of  the  three  last  named  Commentaries  as  parts  of  the  Para- 
matthadipani,  nor  does  he  call  it  his  own  work.  Nor  does 
he  even  name  Buddhaghosa  as  author  or  editor  of  any  of 
the  other  Commentaries  mentioned,  or  of  the  Visuddhi 
Magga.  Nor  does  he  refer  to  the  Commentary  on  the  Sutta- 
Nipata  as  such,  nor  to  that  on  the  Majjhima,  nor  to  that  on 
the  Digha,  nor  indeed  does  he  ever  quote  any  portion  of 
the  Digha  itself,  although  the  Theragatlia  includes  gathas. 
taken  from  that  work.  See  CCLVI.,  CCLX. 


Dhammap  ala’s 
*  own  commen¬ 
taries. 


INDEX 


References  in  brackets  are  to  verses :  without  brackets,  to  pages. 
An  *  is  prefixed  to  names  of  ‘ Psal?n’ -authors. 


*Abhaya,  30 
*Abhaya,  (2),  92 
Abhibhu,  170  n.  3 
Abhibhuta,  170 
Abhidhamma,  66,  133 
Abhidhammikas,  131  n.  1 
Abhiradana,  12 
Action,  (422).  See  Kamma 
Actors,  369,  (1129) 

Adept,  (334),  (415) 

*Adhimutta,  xxvii,  xlvii,  102,  291 
Affection,  (241),  (370),  (875) 

Age,  decay,  (73),  (118)  (133), 
(450) 

Aged  Theras,  xxix,  (108),  115 
Aggalava,  (1263) 

Aggidatta,  35 

Aims  ( sankappa ),  (60)  ;  (quest, 
attha),  (105),  (380),  (539) 
Ajatasattu,  269 
*Ajina,  114 
*Ajita,  25 
*Ajjuna,  83 

Alertness  of  mind.  See  Mind¬ 
fulness 

Alms,  (82),  92,  (123),  (248), 
(268),  (531),  (579),  (934), 
(1054/.),  (1146/.),  (1172) 
Altar  {simile),  (566) 

Amata,  kumara,  43 
Ambapali,  353  ;  her  son,  65 
Ambrosial, the  (c/.a/x/Sporoi/, 272; 
simile  for  Nibbana,  26  n.  1, 
(21),  34,  (69),  83  n.  2,  (168), 
(179),  (199),  (296),  (330),  (336), 
(749),  (947),  (980),  (1103), 

(1110),  (1115),  (1229),  (1243) 
Amitodana,  325,  349 
Amitta  (?  Amita),  173 
Amity,  love,  mettd,  xlvii  n.  4, 
[38,  48,  (48),  55,  (640)] 


!  Analytic  attention,  (269),  (273) 
_  (301),  (318),  (409),  (464) 
Ananda,  CCL.,  introduction 
ascribed  to  him,  3,  n. ;  soubri¬ 
quet,  21,  182  ;  his  tutor,  21  ; 
becomes  arahant,  163,  352  ; 
ordains,  163,  232  ;  is  admon¬ 
ished,  106  ;  converts,  182/ 
permanent  attendant,  350 
Anathapindika,  his  Grove,  4  n.  1  ; 
his  daughter,  20  ;  his  nephew, 
4  ;  his  slaves,  21  ;  invites  the 
Buddha,  264 
S  Anga,  (484),  (632) 
*Anganika-Bharadvaja,  157 
Angirasa,  (536),  (1252) 
*Angulimala,  318 
*Anjana-vaniya,  Anjanavaniya,56 
Anguttarapa,  310 
Anna,  xxxiii,  6w.  1,  passim 
*  Anointing,  (97),  110,  (862) 
Anna-Kondanna,  8,  284,  405 
Anomadassi  Buddha,  340 
Anotatta  Lake,  220  /. 

*Anupama,  154 

Anupiya,  10,  105,  143  n.  3,  168, 
315  326 

*Anuruddha,  29,  31,  126,  220, 
325 

Apadana,  xxiv,  426 
Apana,  310 

Ape,  (113),  (601),  (1070)  ; 

(simile)  (125),  (399),  (454), 
(1080),  (1111) 

Application  (will,  chanda),  (305) 
Apprentice,  (334) 

Arahant,  of  ‘  ten  powers,’  7  n.  1, 
138  ;  (Buddha),  185  ;  banner 
of,  (961),  and  passim 
Arahantship,  passim 
i  Arahants,  991 


428 


INDEX 


429 


Archery,  (1160),  (1210).  See 

Hair-splitting 

Ari-ya,  -yan,  (48),  62,  75,  128, 
(507),  248,  262,  265  n.  1,  (595), 
(645  /.),  (282),  312  n.  3; 
lineage  of,  326  ;  cf.  312  n.  3 
Armour  {simile),  (543),  (614), 
318,  (1110) 

Arnold,  E.,  1 

Asceticism,  179,  191,  196,  (683), 
(1120) 

Asita,  62 

Asoka,  Dhammasoka,  King, 
xxi /.,  133,  251 
Asuras,  (1128) 

Assaji,  341 

Assaji-Punabbasu  bhikkhus,  344 
Atthaka’s  (of  the  Sutta-  Nipdta), 
203,  415 
Astray,  (1174) 

*Atuma,  72 

Austerities,  113  n.  1,  120,  157, 
166,  180,  189,  208,  262,  (721), 
844/.),  (1087) 

Avadana,  328  n.  4 
Avanti,  107, 149,  202 
Avenue  of  insight,  199,  200 
Awe,  (376),  (1046),  (1158) 

Bag  {simile),  (1134),  (1151) 
*Bakula,  159 
Balakalona,  176 

Balance,  mental,  24,  (102),  (662) 
Bamboo  {simile),  (72) 
*Bandhura,  95 
Bane  and  bale,  (1117) 

Banner  {four  similes),  (64),  (961) 
Baptizing,  181 
Barber,  133,  168 
Bases,  the  Three,  208 
Bathing,  (540) 

Bath-rite,  222  n.  1,  (345/.) 
Bavari,  -riya,  25,  151 
Beasts,  (524)  ;  bears,  buffaloes, 
hyenas,  142;  boar,  (1135); 
dog,  190  ;  frogs,  (310)  ;  jackals, 
190,  233  ;  panthers,  (1113)  ; 
tigers,  (1113)  ;  mouse,  (229)  ; 
gazelle,  (1135).  See  also  Deer, 
Elephant,  Lion,  Horse,  Ox, 
etc. 

Beauty,  (1105),  (1125);  of  the 
Buddha,  (818/.) 

Becoming,  369,  (574/.), 


(661),  (767),  (1089),  (1091), 
(1142).  And  see  Life,  birth 
of 

*Belatthakani,  94 
*Belatthasisa,  21 
Benares,  13,  104,  114,  121,  160, 
173,  208 

Bergson,  xlvi  n.  4,  205  n.  2 
Best,  (9),  (1261) 

Beyond,  xlvi,1  (748),  (763L 

(771  /.),  (1144) 

*Bhadda,  231 
*Bhaddaji,  129 
Bhadda  KapilanI,  359  /. 
Bhaddiya,  129 

*Bhaddiya-Kaligodhaya,  315 
*Bhaddiya,  Lakuntaka-,  230 
Bhaggava,  318 
*Bhagu,  176 
*Bhalliya,  12 
*Bharata,  135 
*Bharadvaja,  136 
*Bharadvaja,  Pindola,  110,  415 
Bharadvajas,  the  gotta,  157 
Bharukaccha,  194 
Bhikkhus,  seditious,  16,  344  /. ;. 
touring,  42  ;  intemperate,  41; 
degenerate,  331/.  ;  336/. 
Bhumija,  12 

Bhikkliunls.  See  Sisters 
*Bhuta,  245 

Bimbisara,  Kang  of  Magadha, 
forgetfulness,  5,  55,  192  ;  sons 
of,  30,  65,  269 ;  receives 

Buddha,  45,  51,  72,  101  ;  his 
friend,  90 ;  sends  for  Sona- 
Kolivisa,  275 
Bindusara,  King,  209 
Birds,  (522),  "(1065),  (1108), 

(1135)  ;  kite,  64 ;  heron, 
(1113)  ;  cuckoo,  231  n.  2  ; 
crow,  (599) ;  crane,  (307  /.)  ;: 
peacock,  (22),  27  n.  2,  153, 
(211),  (1065),  (1113),  (1136); 
similes,  (1156)  ;  path  of,  (92), 
(522)  ;  decoy,  (139)  ;  myna, 
(1232) ;  nesting,  (1036) ;  swan, 
(1270) 

Blind,  88,  (342),  (1026) 

Boat  {simile),  (556),  (766).  Sen 
Ship  (also  nava) 

Bode,  Mrs.  M.  H.,  xx 
Bodhisat,  62,  129,  248,  (534), 
284,  338  n.  3,  349 


430 


INDEX 


Bodyservant  to  the  Buddha, 
350/.  (1021),  (1041  /.) 

Body  (kdya),  (52),  (104),  (114), 
(169),  (172),  (279  /.),  (312), 
(736  /.),  (395  /.),  (1020  /.), 
(1150  /.),  passim;  ( samus - 
saya),  80  n.  2,  (124), 

(351),  (394),  (436)  ;  ( sarira ), 
(381  /.)  ;  ( sandeha ),  (599)  ; 
(dipadaka),  (453)  (samussitay), 
(769/.) 

Bog  (similes),  (89),  (124),  127, 
(495),  (1053) 

Bonds,  (142),  (176),  (182),  (282), 
(413),  (417),  (521),  (699),  (750), 
(768),  (793),  (1022),  (1143), 
(1152),  (1234).  See  Fetter 
Bones,  meditation  on,  22,  123/. 
Books  (gantha),  168,  206 ; 

(sdtiha),  177 
Boon,  (468),  351 

Border  city  (simile),  (653),  (1005) 
Border  country,  97 
Bourne  (gati),  (216) 

Bow  (simile),  (753) 

Boy  Theras,  37  /.,  60,  73,  220, 
231,233 

'•'Brahmadatta,  223 
Brahma-gods,  148,  177,  (1082), 
(1168),  (1178/.) 

*Brahmali,  150 
Brahmayu,  52 

Brahmins,  xxviii,  and  passim  ; 
lore,  180,  198 ;  communion, 
158  ;  descent,  (889)  ;  £  gradu¬ 
ates,’  52,  (221),  222 ;  (holy, 
excellent),  (182)  ;  saint,  322, 
(948),  (1264),  (1276)  ;  enmity 
of,  387 

Brandis,  D.,  on  trees,  363  n.  2 
Breathing  exercise,  (548),  (696) 
Breed,  noble,  thorough,  (173), 
(476),  (659) 

Buddha,  xxxi,  xlix,  (203),  (340), 
(417),  (467/.) ;  earlier  Buddhas 
(a)  the  seven,  28,  31,  54, 
90,  (201),  156,  159,  166, 

170  n.  3,  (490),  (533/.),  254, 
284,  (768),  310,  (728),  (1087  /.), 
(1240) ;  (b)  others,  4  n.  1,  340 ; 
silent,  58,  242  n.  1,  275, 
329  n.  3  ;  Buddha-rays,  255, 
361.  See  also  Angirasa,  Go- 
tama,  Master,  Sun 


Bunyan,  353  n.  3. 

Burden, sm»7e,  (708),  (1021).  And 
see  Life 

Burning,  21,  (39/.),  207,  (1162 /.) 

*Cakkhupala,  88 
Calika,  67 

Calm  ;  subs.  ( samatha ),  (94),  96, 
(112),  101  n.  2,  (584),  (639), 
(988),  (1099),  (vupasama),( 239), 
419;  adj.  (upasanta),  (2),  (68), 
(1006/.),  (1226) 

Campa,  32  n.  2,  134,  275,  406 
Candagutta,  208 
*Candana,  183 
Candana,  a  deva,  31 
Canda-pajjota,  King,  238 
Caravan,  12,  70,  (132),  135 ; 

drivers,  12,  107,  151,  189,  281 
Casket  (simile),  (736) 

Catskin  (simile),  (1138) 
Causation,  (422),  (716) 

Cause,  efficient,  154 
Causeway  (simile),  (615) 

Caves,  (524/.),  (1091),  (1135/.)  : 
Bheravayana,  142 
KapotakandarS, ,  345 
Lonagiri,  186,  (309),  245 
Sabbasondika,  91 
Sattapanni,  163 
Sukara-Khata,  341 
Verambha,  (597) 

Cemetery,  charnelfield,  36,  37, 
123/.,  134,  184,  189,  211,  226, 
233,  (578),  (599) 

Cenobite,  xl,  (688) 

Cesspool  (simile),  (1153) 
Chaddanta  Lake,  287  n.  3 
Champion.  See  Hero 
*Channa,  70 

Chaplains  (purohita),  110,  214, 
218,  238,  318 

Chapter  of  the  Order,  (942) 
Charm,  spell,  14 

Child,  son,  of  the  Buddha,  (45), 
(174),  (295),  (348),  (536),  (889), 
(1237).  See  also  Boy 
Children,  in  Buddhism, 

Chinese  pilgrim  chroniclers,  97 
n.  3. 

Citta,  gahapati,  107 
*Cittaka,  26 

Clansmen  (kulaputta),  8,  51,  178, 
182.  For  clan  read  gens,  family 


INDEX 


431 


Clarity  of  thought,  (1008).  See 
also  Mindfulness 
Clear-visioned,  (472) 

Clothes,  146,  151,  (578),  304, 

(S96  /),  (959  /),  346,  361, 

(1092) ;  (simile),  (170) 

Clouds,  (1063/.),  (1102),  (1135/), 
(1144),  (1240),  (1252),  (1268)  ; 
(simile),  (625),  (760),  (1001) 
Coals,  charcoal  (simile),  (420) 
Cold,  (385/)  )  K  ’ 

Collyrium-pot  (simile),  (773) 
Compassion,  110,  (176),  141, 
(238),  (241),  181,  (334  ,  260, 
(888),  (1045) 

Commentary,  the  ‘  Old,’  xxi v/. 
Commoners  (gahapatikula),  190 
Composure,  (696/),  (916) 
Communion  with  the  Good, 
Concentration  ( jhana ,  samddhi), 
(12),  (37),  69,  80,  (102),  (560/), 
(1011),  (1051),  421  J 

Conclave,  (965/) 

Concord,  (353) 

Conditioned  Genesis,  90,  (260), 
Conditions,  maturity  of,  xlv, 
52,  87,  98,  105,  109,  150,  167, 
179,  198,  222,233,  236;  271, 
321  ;  favourable,  (82),  (105), 
(110),  154  ;  good  (929) 
Confession,  (447) 

‘  Connatal  Ones,’  seven,  248 
Conqueror,  (135),  (288),  (360), 
(377),  (475),  (626),  (722),  (789), 
(929),  (1131) 

Consciousness,  conscience  (citta), 
112  n.  2,  (184),  (420),  (1221) ; 
(sauna),  (1039  /) ;  self-con¬ 
scious  (sampajano),  (20) 
Contemplation,  (41),  (85),  (148), 
(199),  (266),  (415),  (438), 

(1105),  (1176) 

Content,  (230),  (364),  (580  /.), 
421  (b) 

Cool,  (=Nibbana),  xlix;  (siti- 
bhuti,  nibbuti),  (32),  (79),  (298), 
(416),  (1015),  (1022),  (1060), 
(1090),  412  ;  (abhinibbutatto), 
(1263) 

Corruptions,  defilements  (Me¬ 
sa's),  73,  77,  88,  135,  (932) 
Cotton  -  down  (simile),  (104), 
(1137) 

Councils,  xxi/.,  352,  353  n.  4 


Councillor  (setthi),  39,  passim 
Courtesan,  117,  189,  228  /.,  230, 
(939),  383 

Craving  (tanhd),  109,  (161),  140 
n.  1,  passim;  (dsa),  (1092); 
unmated  with,  (1091),  (1275), 
421  (e) 

Creeper  (simile),  (399),  (416), 
(761),  (1094) 

‘  Crossed  over,’  (839),  cf.  (15) 
Crowd,  (992),  (1051),  (1069), 
(1144) 

*Culaka,  153 
*Cula-Panthaka,  258 
*Cunda  the  Great,  118,  350 

*Dabba  of  the  Mallas,  10 
Dancer,  (267),  326 
Darkness,  spiritual,  (128),  (170), 
(1268) 

Dark  Wood.  See  Woods 
Dart,  spear  (simile),  (313), 
(404),  (448),  (495),  (514),  (526), 
(755/),  (986),  (1053) 

*Dasaka,  21 
Data  ( dhatuyo ),  (1255) 

Datta,  112 
Dead,  (44),  (73) 

Death,  (129),  (133), (196),  (448/.), 
(575),  (778/),  (1004),  (1277/); 

(final),  xlviii,  138 
Death  king.  See  Mara 
Debt,  (1106)  ;  free  from,  (788), 
(882) 

Deer,  98/.,  (113),  114,  122,  (601), 
(1070)  ;  (simile),  (109),  (454), 
(774/),  (989),  (1144) 

Deliverer,  (1242) 

Design,  no  personal,  (713) 

Desire  (sense),  (73),  (74),  (93), 
(181),  (252  /),  (297),  (406), 
(448),  (458),  (581),  (669  /), 
(787/),  (992),  (1112),  (1119/); 
(heart’s)  rati,  (142)  ;  (craving), 
(1091),  (1094) 

Detachment,  xlvi ;  ([pa-]  viveka), 
16,  (23),  (27),  (110),  101,(233), 
(598),  (640),  (726),  361,  (1246), 
(925),  (930)  ;  (nissata),  (122)  ; 
(pavivitto),  (581) ;  '  as  goal, 
422  (iv) 

Deva  (spirit,  angel,  god),  15, 
23,  37,  58,  63,  141,  148, 
163 


432 


INDEX 


Devadaka,  64,  77 
Devadatta,  147, 177,  347,  352 
Devahita,  140 
*Devasabha,  83 
*Devasabha,  (2),  93 
Dkamnia,  faith,  3  ;  Norm,  4, 
'passim;  truth,  (69),  (179); 
Suttanta,  182 
*Dhammapala,  149 
Dkammapala,  xx,  xxi v/.,  xxxvi 
*Dhammasava,  98 
*Dliammasava’s  Father,  98 
*Dhammika,  185 
Dhana.  See  Kunda 
Dhanapala,  241 
*Dhaniya,  161 

Dhfttangas.  See  Austerities 
Dialectic,  71 
Dice  {simile),  (321) 

DIghanakha,  342,  345,  417 
Diligence.  See  Earnestness 
Disciples,  (305),  (368),  (631), 
(826),  (999),  (1240),  (1249), 
(1265),  (1277) 

Discipline,  (228),  (257) 

Discretion  (281),  (500/.),  (556), 
(582),  (682),  (1079) 

Disease,  (73)  ;  illness  of  Theras, 
etc.,  35,  46  ;  vataroga  :  cramp, 
(?)  rheumatism,  or  ‘  wind  ’-ill¬ 
ness,  64,  140,  199,  222 ; 

leprosy,  78  ;  ophthalmia,  88  ; 
pimples,  151 

Divining  art,  (1253).  Cf.  Skull- 
spell 

Distinction  (vises-i,-a),  (370/). 
Distrait,  (1080/.) 

Doctrine,  (1024),  (1027) 
Donavatthu,  Brahmin  village 
near  Kapilavatthu,  8,  284 
Doubt,  7  /.,  (74),  (75),  (131), 
(752/.),  (829),  (1266/.) 

Dream,  145,  (500/.) 

Driver,  (205),  (358)  ;  of  men, 
(132),  (376),  (426) 

Dulness,  (281),  (704),  (784).  And 
see  Illusion 

Dust  {simile),  (404),  (675) 

Duties,  (740/.);  ( anudhamma ),  47 
Dyke  {simile),  (762) 

Earnestness,  diligence,  (53),  (59), 
(68),  (83),  (156),  (230),  (249), 
(257),  (333),  (347),  (404),  (413), 


(626),  (658),  (741),  (883),  (980), 
(981),  (1011),  (1017),  (1245) 
Earth  {simile),  (1013  /.) 

I  Earthquakes,  360 

Ease  ( sulcha ,  etc  ),  (137),  (208), 
(526),  (600),  (864),  (1246); 
{phdsutd),  (1033) 

Ecstasy  {samdhitatta),  12  ;  {jha- 
yati),  (41),  (112),  (518/),  (680), 
(1167)  ;  ( samadhi ),  (916), 

(1184) 

Edmunds,  A.  J.,  415 
Egoism,  (765) 
*Ekadhamma-savaniya,  67 
*Ekavihariya,  251 
*Eku[d]daniya,  68 
Elders,  xxix  n.  3 
Elements,  382 

Elephant,  106, 145, 147, 153,200, 
241,  248,  269,  288,  (1062); 
simile,  (31),  (77),  (194),  (244), 
(256),  (355  /.),  (539),  (684), 
(842),  (968),  (1105),  (1130), 
(1139/.),  (1147/.) 

Eliot,  Sir  C.,  18  n.  1 
Ellis,  Havelock,  xxxvii  n.  1 
Emancipation,  xlix,  12,  17, 

(60),  67,  101,  (181  /.),  157, 
(365),  (441),  (658),  298,  (1172), 
(1176),  420  (6) 

Emotion,  155,  166,  182,  (510), 
(795/.) 

Empty.  See  Void ;  places, 
xxxviii,  187 
End.  See  Goal,  Ill 
Endeavour,  150,  (353) 
Endurance,  (371) 

Energy,  etc.,  (148),  (156),  (167), 
(224),  (311),  (353),  (515),  (585), 
(739),  (861),  (900),  (1246), 
(1253) 

Enlightened  One  (Sambuddha), 
(622),  (650),  (1046),  (1239) 
Enlightenment,  12,  (335),  (352), 
(672),  (750),  (900),  (1257); 
(factors  of),  (725) 

Enthusiasm,  {pitipamojja,  lit. 
zest  and  joy),  16,  143, 

passim 
Epicures,  85 

Equanimity,  (694),  (719),  346, 

(1002),  (1100) 

*Eraka,  86 

Error,  (329),  (343),  (348) 


INDEX 


433 


Ethics,  27,  52,  53,  (727/.) 
Exercises,  116  w,  1,  and  passim 
Experiences,  compared  with 
Sisters’,  xxxii  /.,  xxxix 
Eye  Celestial.  See  Supernormal 
Eye  of  the  world,  (1031),  (1047) ; 
supreme,  (1267) 

Factors  (of  the  self,  Jchandhas ), 
(87),  (90),  (120),  (121),  (161), 
(202),  (369),  (440),  (1101) 
Faculties.  See  Powers 
Faith,  confidence,  trust,  (59), 
(195),  (203),  (246  /.),  (249  /.), 
(311),  (1090),  (1254),  421  (d) 
Father,  encouraging,  33,  136  /.  ; 
follows  son,  98,  136  ;  sons 
named  after,  143,  162,  261  ; 
named  after  sons,  22,  108 
Fastness  of  the  Crag.  See  Giri- 
bbaja 

Fear,  cast  out  by  Nibbana,  xlvii 
3  n (5)— (8),  (21),  (189  /), 
(289),  (387),  (413),  (510),  (525), 
(705  /.),  (764),  (831),  (840), 
(864),  (912),  (1193),  (1238),  421 
Feeling,  79,  (794/.),  (986),  421 
Festivals,  63,  181,  341 
Field  (simile),  (1087),  (1177) 
Fetters  (simile),  (89),  (380),  (521), 
(605),  (657),  (707),  (865),  (1165) 
Fire,  sacred,  (219),  (341),  222, 
229  ;  simile,  8,  (39),  (40),  49, 
(79),  (343),  (450),  (702), 

(1Q14),  412  ;  £  on  fire,’  (1099). 
See  Burning 

Firmament,  (278),  189,  (1013), 
(1034),  (1078) 

Fish,  159,  166  (simile),  (297), 
(362),  (387/.),  (454),  (749) 
Fishermen,  xxviii,  166 
Five,  s'ets  of,  (15),  (633),  (745) 
Flag.  See  Banner 
Flame  (simile),  (415) 

Flood  (simile),  (7),  (15),  (88), 
(89),  (285),  (572),  (633), 

(680  /.),  (880),  (894),  (1243) ; 
sap sara,  (1131) 

Flowers,  (100),  (523),  (545)  ; 
flax,  (1068)  ;  jasmine,  90 ; 
lotus,  54,  (401),  (700),  (1089), 
(1180);  lily,  (701);  (simile), 
(323/.) 

Flower-scavenger,  271 


Folk,  (149  /.) ;  average,  many-, 
(215),  (1271).  See  Worldling 
Flux  (of  life),  (202) ;  of  things, 
(10) 

Forces,  (1114) 

Foresight,  (547) 

Forest,  life  in,  xxxvii  /.,  4,  168y 
and  passim ;  hardships  of, 
(27),  (31),  63,  (233),  (684), 
(244)  ;  love  of,  17,  19,  (537 
/.),  267,  (601),  (992),  (1092), 
(1102),  (1120),  (1135)  ;  simile, 
50  ;  (logs  in),  63  ;  sounds  of, 
(49),  63  ;  underwood,  (717) 
Forest  dwellers,  (155),  (1146/.) 
Foul  objects,  189,  211,  226,  260, 
(594) 

Fortitude,  xlvii,  (1049) 

Franke,  R.  O.,  ix  n.  2 
‘  Fragrant  Chamber,’  cell,  lodge, 
9,28,232,  234,  350/.,  360 
Free,  freed,  (596),  (642),  (680) 
Freedom,  (1264),  as  goal,  418. 
See  also  Emancipation, 
Liberty 

Friends,  friendship,  112,  (264/.), 
292/.),  (588),  (681/.) 

Fruit,  fruition,  xxxiv,  21,  (25), 
(471),  291,  315  ;  (result),  (422), 
(1121/.)  ;  (simile),  (788) 

Games,  (1109) 

Gaggara,  406 
*Gahvaratiriya,  35 
*GangatIriya,  112 
Ganges.  See  Rivers 
*Gavaccha  the  Less,  16 
*Gavaccha  Major,  17 
*Gavampati,  42 
Gaya,  (287),  (345) 

Gaya  Head,  207.  See  also 
Kassapa 

Geiger,  W.,  on  Yona-ka,  417 
Gentleness,  (48),  (583),  (602  /.), 
(645  /.),  (645  /.),  (875),  (926), 
(978),  (1019) 

Giribbaja,  253  n.  3,  (1097),  (1108) 
Giridatta  Thera,  133 
*Girimananda,  192 
Goad  (simile),  33,  63,  145,  147, 
176,  (335), 

Goal,  (335),  (725),  (784),  (1134) 
*Godatta,  279 
*Godhika,  54 


28 


434 


INDEX 


Gods,  fairies,  spirits,  angels,  53/.,  i 
57,  (205),  (242),  (497),  272, 
(908),  352,  364  ;  (god  of  gods), 
(533) ;  rain-god,  5,  55,  (1137) 

‘  Going  out  ’  ( nibbanay ),  (138), 
(1017) 

Good  ( attha ),  xxxiv,  (176),  (338), 
(340),  (347),  (443),  (494),  (501), 
(605),  (742),  (926),  (942),  (995), 
(1066),  (1073);  Norm  and 

Good,  (347);  ( sadattha ),  (332), 
{paramattha) ,  (748)  ;  ( utta - 

mattha),  (639);  ( kalyatH ),  110. 
See  also  Aim 

Good  (persons),  (264),  (994), 
(1012),  (1019),  passim 
^OosS/lci  27 

Gotamas,  Gotamids,  106,(1021 /.) 
Gotama  (Buddha),  so-called  by 
believers,  (91),  (367),  (375), 
(488),  (1089),  (1251) ;  so-called 
by  non-believers,  15,  30,  138, 
201,218,311,321 

*  Gotama  of  Rajagaha,  117 

*  Gotama  of  Kapilavatthu,  171 

*  Gotama  of  Savatthi,  264 
Grandfather,  243,  (536) 
Grandmother,  10 

Grasping,  (420),  (640),  (673), 
(1012),  (1278) 

Guide,  (288),  (426) 

Hack  {simile),  (976) 

Hair,  oiled,  (960)  ;  ( simile )  tip  of, 
(26),  (43),  (652),  (1001) ;  hair¬ 
splitting,  (40),  (1085),  (1160) 
Hallucinations,  (1143) 

Happiness,  bliss  ( sulclia ),  xlv/., 
(11),  (16),  (35),  (63),  72,  (85), 
100,  (141),  (228  /.),  (232), 
(236),  (242),  (264),  (293), 

(303  /.),  (351),  (386),  (494), 
(518  /.),  252,  (551),  (590), 
(613),  275,  (746),  315,  (1052), 
(1072),  (1^92) ;  threefold, 

(609) ;  supreme,  (884  /.)  ;  as 
goal,  419 

Hardship  ( luJcha ),  350/.,  435/. ; 

( apdda ),  (371) 

*IIarita  of  Savatthi,  33 
*Harita  of  Savatthi,  172 
Hate,  enmity  {dosa,  etc.),  (79), 
(281).  (328),  (378),  (704), 

(795/.) 


*IIattharohaputta,  76 
Haven,  (227),  (263),  (422),  (990), 
412 

Health,  160,  (212),  (276) 

Heart  ( hadaya ),  (119)  ;  heart  or 
mind  ( citta ),  (46)  passim  ;  as 
the  impulsive  self,  (214), 
(355/.),  (1107/.) 

Heat  {simile),  (1273) 

Heavens,  (62),  (96),  (280),  (360), 
(532),  (609),  (618) ;  (the  Pure 
Abodes),  148  ;  (Tusita),  (534), 
(349) 

Heir,  361,,  spiritual,  (18),  (1058), 
(1142),  (1168),  (1248) 

Hell.  See  Purgatory 
*Herannakani,  121 
Hero,  13  n.  6,  (47),  (66),  (131), 
(177),  (289),  (527  /.),  (622), 
(665),  (841),  (1154),  (1241), 
(1279) 

Hills,  xxxviii.  See  Mountains 
Hill-top  fair,  341 
Hindrances,  (74),  (171),  (573), 
(902),  (1010) 

Hireling,  (606),  (654),  (685) 

Hog  {simile),  (17),  (101) 

Holiness,  (631) 

Home,  xxxix.  See  also  House 
Hope,  (530) 

Horses,  (205),  (1140) 

Hot  iron  {simile),  (714) 

House,  (1107) ;  {simile),  (36), 
(183  /.),  (712) ;  houseless,  (36), 
(46),  (107),  passim 
Humility,  (71),  (209),  (579) 

Hunt,  Miss  M.,  xx 
Huts,  associated  with  brethren, 
(51-58) ;  associated  with  the 
body,  5  k.  3,  236/. 

Hypocrisy,  (1124) 

I,  mine,  (717),  (1072/.),  (1092) 
I-Tsing,  xlii 

Iddhi,  32  n.  2,  15Q,  162,  220  /., 
234,  250,  (595),  314,  (909), 
(1104),  382,  (1181/.),  (1262) 
Ideal,  (742) ;  ideal  order,  xlv. 
See  Order 

Ignorance  {avijjd),  (29),  (282), 
(419),  (544),  (572),  (627), 

(1125),  (1267) 

Ill,  pain,  sorrow,  (57),  (78),  (81), 
(84),  (120),  (152),  (183),  (195),. 


INDEX 


435 


(227),  (255  /.),  (258),  (263), 
(291),  (339),  (421),  (440),  (491), 
(518/.),  (585),  (661/.),  (676/.), 
(682),  (707),  (730  /.),  (790), 
307,  (795/.),  (1008),  (1115/.), 
(1124),  (1230),  (1249  /.), 

(1254/.) 

Ill-will.  See  Hate 
Illusion  ( molia ,  sammoha),  (79), 
(344),  (378),  (573),  (641),  (651), 
(1000),  (1267) 

Immune.  See  Sane 
Immunity,  xliv,  421  ( h ) 
Impermanence,  (23),  68,  (111), 
106,  (118),  (121),  (187  /.), 
156,  175,  (592),  (676), 

(715),  (1091/.),  (1117),  (1121), 
(1133),  (1159);  (and  ill-will), 
(275) 

Incessant  change,  (118).  See 
Flux,  Impermanence 
Indagopaka,  18  n.  1,  161  n.  2, 
(1063) 

India,  251,  360 

Indra,  (416),  272,  (628),  (749), 
(1108) 

Inertia,  (987).  See  also  Sloth 
Infirmary,  78 

Influctuate,  (191/.),  (364),  (434) 
Insane,  (931),  (1129) 

Insight  (■ vipassana ),  xlv,  16, 
105,  'passim ;  {anna),  (441)  ; 
{pannd),  (46),  (141),  (520), 

(865),  (929),  (1090),  (1094), 
(1098),  (1142),  (1231),  (1272)  ; 
( dassana ),  (45),  81,  (174), 

(372)  ;  ( passati ),  (61)  ;  {nana), 
(69),  (419)  ;  {nanadassana), 

(172)  ;  (as  goal),  419 
Intellect  ( buddhi ),  (1015) 
Intentness  of  mind,  (12),  (46), 
(272),  (354),  (406),  (518  /.), 
(1098) 

Intercourse,  (75),  (84),  (119),  (149) 
Intoxicants  (Four  Asavas), 
poisons,  venom,  (47),  (791), 
passim.  See  also  Sane 
Introspection,  (981) 

Intuition  ( vipassana ),  xxxiii, 
(584),  (1012) ;  ( abhinna ),  (1262) 
♦Isidatta,  107 
♦Isidinna,  141 
Isipatana,  62,  104,  114,  284 
Isle  {simile),  (412) 


Jains,  30,  83 
♦Jambugamika’s  son,  32 
♦Jambuka,  179 
Jambudipa,  (822),  (914) 

*Jenta,  100 

♦Jenta  Purohita-putta,  218 
Jeta-Vana  Vihara,  4  n.  1,  22 
Jhana,  4,  38,  (41),  48,  (112) 
Jungle,  (95),  (350  /.),  (435  /.), 
passim  ;  {simile),  (338) 

Jewels,  (187),  202 
♦Jotidasa,  119 

Joy,  (337/.),  (1135/.),  (1144) 

♦Kaccana,  or  Kaccayana,  the 
Great,  107,  137,  202,  238 
Kaccana.  See  Sambula-Kac- 
cana 
Kali,  123 
Kali  Godha,  315 
Kalinga  country,  253  n.  3 
Kallavala,  341,  382 
*Kaludayin,  248 
Kanhamitta.  See  Valliya,  (3) 
*Kanhadinna,  137 
*Kankha-Revata,  7 
Kapila,  brahmin,  359 
*Kappa,  259 
*Kappata-Kura,  146 
*Kappina  the  Great,  254,  266 
Karma,  Kamma,  21,  (80),  109, 
(144),  128),  (419,  (496),  (574), 
329,  340  ;  effect  of  {vipdlca), 
(146),  322,  (422) 

*Kassapa,  79 
Kassapa.  See  Kumara- 
*Kassapa  of  the  River,  195 
*Kassapa  of  Gaya,  197 
*Kassapa  of  Uruvela,  21,  72,  180, 
195,206 

♦Kassapa  the  Great,  Pipphali- 
manava,  119,  122,  359,  387 
♦Katiyana,  40,  215 
♦Khanda-sumana,  90 
♦Khadiravaniya-Revata,  45 
♦Khitaka,  SavatthI,  96 
♦Khitaka,  Kosala,  143 
♦Khujja-Sobhita,  163 
♦Kimbila,  105, 125 
Kindness  (to  animals  as  well), 
(237  /.),  (602  /.),  (645  /.), 
(1258).  See  also  Service 
King,  (777/.) ;  {simile),  (1235) 
Knowledge,  419 


436 


INDEX 


Kolita,  341.  See  Moggahana 
Koliyans,  77,  93,  144,  (529) 
Kondanna.  See  Anna- 
*Kosalaviharin  59 
KosambI,  16,  110  159,  177  n.  1, 
262 

*Kosiya,  204 
Kosiya’s,  204,  215,  359 
Kotigama,  129  n.  5  130 
*Kotthita  (Kotthika)  the  Great,  6 
Kukkuta,  254 
*Kula,  24 
*Kuila,  211 
Kuma,  41 

*Kumara-Kassapa,  147 
*Kuma’s  son,  41 

*Kuma’s  son’s  friend,  Sudanta, 
42 

*Kunda-Dhana,  19 
Kundiya,  157 
Kurukaccha,  96,  169 
Kurus,  157,  302 
**Kutiviharin,  1  and  2,  57,  58 

Laity,  59,  71,  84,  95,  111,  123, 
(187/.),  (556) 

Lakuntaka.  See  Bhaddiya 
Lamp  (simile),  179,  (1026), 

Land,  owner  of,  xxviii,  134, 
143,  202,  241 

Leaf  (simile),  (2),  (754),  (1006/.) 
Learning,  (141),  (373),  (593), 
(1026/.) 

Leper  (1054) 

Liberty,  (89),  (92),  (100),  (142), 
(270),  (274),  (290),  (302),  (319), 
(410),  (465),  (477),  (545),  (641). 
See  Emancipation,  Release 
Licchavi  rajas,  44,  75,  106,  118 
Life,  xlv  /.,  li,  (10),  (98), 

(121)  ;  attitude  towards  this, 
(12),  (20),  (23),  (152),  (196), 
(416),  (606),  /.  (654  /.), 

(685  /.),  (1002  /.),  (1141);  as 
pain,  (255  /.),  (791)  ;  (as  a 
burden),  (604),  (708) ;  rebirth 
of,  (258  /.),  (399),  (446),  (575), 
(1126/.),  (1079);  ebb  of,  (114), 
(145),  (275),  (451),  (498),  (553); 
lust  of,  (378);  term  of,  attained, 
(67),  (78),  (80),  (83),  (87),  (90), 
(170),  passim ;  holy,  (236), 
(587),  (679),  (709),  (836), 

(1027),  (1274) ;  ‘  going  out  ’ 


of,  (416),  (704)  ;  former  life. 
See  Supernormal  (memory) 
Light  (simile)  (pabha),  (288)  ; 
(dlolca),  (422)  ;  (pajjotakara), 
(416),  (1244)  ;  (as  goal),  419 
Lions  (simile),  (3),  (367),  (840), 
(1081)  ;  lion’s  roar,  or  con¬ 
fession,  25,  71,  111,  115,  (175), 
(177),  170,  207,  243,  (832), 
316,  367,412 
Lip-knowledge,  (1074) 
*Lomasa-kangiya,  31 
Longing,  (752)  ;  (cultivated), 
(32),  (514),  (1091/.);  (ejected), 
(10),  (57) 

Lore  (vijja),  (404),  (1184),  (1231), 
(1236),  (1248).  See  Threefold 
Wisdom 

Love,  224,  322,  (1228) ;  higher 
love,  (742) 

Luck,  (214),  (295),  (310),  (320/.), 
(356  n.  4),  (511),  387 
Lucky,  (421),  (466),  (520) 
Lupton,  Mr.  W.,  302  n.  2 
Lust  (kama),  (138),  260  ;  (raja), 
(191  /.),  (734)  ;  (rdga),  (282), 
(469)  ;  (kamaraga),  (1162) 
Lute,  276,  (638) 

Macchikasanda,  107 
Madda,  359 
Madhuvasettha,  210 
Magadha  fields,  xxxviii,  151  /., 
153  ;  (country),  passim 
Magic.  See  Iddhi 
Magician,  289 
*Mahakala,  123 
*Mahanaga,  210 
MahSnama,  325 
Maha  Pajapati,  126 
Maha-Panthaka.  See  Panthaka 
Maha-Sela.  See  Sela 
Mahasuvanna,  88 
Mahatittha,  359 
*Malitavambha,  96 
Mallas,  the  republic  of,  10,  80,  90 
Malunkya,  212 
*Malunkya’s  son,  212,  307 
Mantani  brahmins,  8,  320 
*Manava,  xxiii,  73 
Mantras,  Vedic  hymns,  runes, 
spells,  7  n.  2,  1255 
Mara,  (1095)  ;  as  fear,  13,  30,  51, 
53  ;  as  death,  (7),  (253),  (2561, 


INDEX 


437 


(402),  (411  /.),  (571),  (1166); 
as  evil,  (177),  163,  167,  (268), 
(279/.),  (300),  (381  /.),  (463), 
(831/.),  (893),  (1145),  (1146/.), 
(1242) 

Marks,  284,  310 

Master,  the  ( sattha ),  510  /.  ; 
passing  wise,  (67),  (901)  ; 

passing  kind,  559  /.,  (623), 
(722),  (870),  (1037  /.),  (1045)  ; 
teacher,  (86) ;  devotion  to, 
(604),  (656),  (687),  (792),  (891), 
(918),  (1016),  (1050),  (1088), 
(1185),  (1241) ;  of  the  caravan 
{simile),  (1236) 

*Matanga’s  son,  162 
Maya,  (534) 

Meaning  ( attha ),  (36),  (106)  ; 

grasp  of,  (373)  ;  inward,  (188) 
Meditation  (jhana  etc.),  (37), 
45  n.  (43)  (864),  (1059  /.), 
(1066).  See  also  Contempla¬ 
tion,  Jhana 
*Meghiya,  67 
*Melajina,  114 

Memory,  374,  (1024),  (1032). 

See  also  Supernormal 
*Mendasira,  76 
Merchants.  See  Traders 
Merciful  (1143) 

Merit,  (238),  245,  (566) 

*Mettaji,  87 
Metteyya,  25 

Middle  Country,  107,  281  n.  1 
Middle  Way,  (663) 

*Migajala,  216 
*Migara’s  Mother,  (1164) 
Migasira,  138,  395  n.  1 
Mind  ( citta ).  See  Consciousness, 
Heart;  ( manasa ),  (102),  (1119); 
(mano),  (752),  (762),  (1117) 
Mindfulness,  12,  (30),  (46),  (59), 
(68),  (85),  (98),  (99),  (100), 
(165),  (317),  (352),  (446),  230, 
(607),  (694),  (765),  (806),  (865), 
(899),  (946),  (1035),  (1090), 
(1098),  (1141),  (1225),  419 
Mine  (simile),  (1049) 

‘  Mine.’  See  ‘  I,’  Self-conceit, 
Illusion 

Miracle,  the  Twin,  36,  40,  55, 
128,  141,  155,  165,  170,  200 
Mirror,  133;  (simile),  (171),  (395) 
Modesty,  (1079) 


Moggali,  341 

*Moggallana  the  Great,  96,  191, 
269,  340,  382,  389,  405 
Moggallana,  stockherd,  354 
*Mogharajan,  151  ;  other  verse, 
421 

Moment,  the,  xlvi,  (231),  (403), 
(653),  (1004/.), 

Monachism,  xxxvii.  See  also 
Detachment,  Solitude 
Moon  (simile),  (182),  (306),  (361), 
234,  (546),  (548),  (871  /.), 
(1119),  (1252) 

Moral  code,  (973)  ;  base,  (988) 
Morals,  (608  /.),  (865).  See 
Ethics,  Virtue 

Mother,  dying  at  birth,  10,  37, 
266  ;  forest-lover,  xxxix,  17  ; 
encouraging  son,  18,  27,  79; 
hindering,  72,  228  ;  fragrant, 
28;  solicitous,  31,  (33),  48/., 
234  ;  rebuking,  195  ;  brethren 
named  after  : 

Bhaddiya  Kali-Godhaya. 

Katiyana. 

Kuma’s  son. 

Malunkva’s  son. 

Moggallana. 

Punna  Mantaniputta,  423 

Visakha-Pancalf  s  son. 

Sarlputta. 

Vimala-Kondahna  (?  illeg.). 
Mountains,  hills,  (524/.)  ;  simile, 
(652),  (680),  (1000),  (1013); 
love  of,  xxxviii,  (13),  (544), 
(601),  (1058),  (1144) 

Frontier  hills,  41,  42 
Himalaya,  142,  157,  (692), 

363  n.  2 
Isigili,  (405) 

Kita,  345 
Nesadaka,  (115) 

Sineru,  360 

Vebhara,  Panda va,  (41) 
Vulture’s  Peak,  198,  276 
Mourning,  (44),  (544  /.) 

*Mudita,  187 
Muller,  Ed.,  xxivn.  1,  li 
Music,  (267),  (398),  (467),  (1071) 

Naga,  206,  210  n.  1,  (692  /.), 
(1240),  (1279) 

*Nagasamala,  175 
*Nagita,  82 


438 


INDEX 


Naked  ascetic,  179 
Nail  (simile),  (743/.) 

Nalaka,  Magadha,  home  of  Ga- 
vaccha  Major,  17  ;  of  4  Susa- 
rada,’  74  ;  of  Sunaga,  81  ;  of 
Vanganta  and  Rupasari,  45, 
118,  261  ;  and  their  sons  Sari- 
putta,  Cunda,  Upasena,  Revata 
Nalanda,  361 
Namuci,  (336) 

*Nanda,  126 
*Nandaka  of  Campa,  134 
*Nandaka  of  Savatthi,  178 
*Nandiya,  29 
Nataputta,  30 
Natural  law,  (552) 

Nature,  feeling  for,  xxxvii, 
(113),  (887) 

Net,  of  insight,  xxxi,  37 ;  of 
bias,  572 ;  of  craving,  (297), 
(355),  (1277) ;  of  error,  (135) 
Neumann,  K.  E.,xix/.,xxixw.3, 
96  n.  4,  99  n.,  120  n.  5, 124  n., 
147  n.,  179  n.  2,  204  n.  5, 
211  n.  1,  216  n.  2,  218  n.  2, 

229  n.  1,  237  n.  5,  257  n.  2, 

259  n.  4,  292  n.  3,  296  n.  2, 

297  n.  2,  319  n.  1,  323  n.  1, 

329  n.  2,  332  n.  2,  343  n.  4 
*Nhatakamuni,  222 
Nibbana,  xlvi  /.,  (71),  (86),  85, 
93  n.  5,  (119),  (138),  127, 
(210),  (227),  172,  (263), 

(389  /.),  216,  247  n.  3,  (543), 
(691),  (795/.),  (989/.),  (1023), 
(1122),  (1165),  (1230),  (1238), 
420 ;  for  parinibbdna,  139, 
(906) ;  for  hhaya,  (723) 
*Nigrodha,  26 

Nigrodha-Kappa,  396,  (1264  /.) 
*Nisabha,  144 
*Nita,  81 

Niyasa  (Yasa)  Thera,  182 
Not-needing,  59 
Novice,  (249/.),  291 
Norm,  the,  xliv,  4,  passim ; 
Norms,  (201) ;  Wheel  of  the, 
64,  passim  ;  Norm  and  Bud¬ 
dha,  198,  (389)  ;  King  of, 
(824/.),  (889)  ;  body  of,  (491) ; 
preacher  of,  152  ;  General  of, 
46,  61,  137,  204,  230,  326, 
342,  356 ;  Treasurer  of,  69, 
226 ;  vision  of,  (204),  (395), 


(509),  (1243) ;  understanding 
of,  (276)  (1027  /.)  ;  practised, 
(303  /.) ;  perverted,  331, 
(954/.) ;  order  of,  29  n.  2, 189  /., 
(220),  (270),  (274),  (286),  (319), 
(410),  (465),  (479),  (486) 

Oath,  (461) 

Obsessions  ( vitakka ),  (50),  (573)  ; 

(; papaiica ),  (519),  (989) 

Ocean,  (147) ;  (simile),  (372), 
(412),  (660),  (1013) 

CEdipus,  Indian,  113  n.  1 
Oil  (simile),  (927) 

Oldenberg,  x;x,  xxvi  /.,  xli, 
191  n.  2,  209  n.  3,  218  n.  2, 
328  n.  4,  343  n.  3,  424  n.  1 
Oneness  of  aim,  (49) 
Opportunity,  xlvi,  162  n.  3, 
422  (c).  See  also  Moment 
Order  of  Brethren  (Sangha), 
82  /.,  (249  /.),  (789),  passim  ; 
of  the  Norm.  See  Norm ; 
ideal,  xlv,  (712),  (1257) 
Ordinance.  See  Rule 
Ordination,  4,  passim  ;  full,  291  ; 
by  the  Master,  104,  (478), 
(485),  238,  248,  255,  272, 
(625),  314,  (870) 

Orphan,  233 
Over-strain,  (638),  (759) 

Ox,  bull,  steer  (simile),  (16),  50, 
(173),  (822),  (1025),  (1154) 

*Paccaya,  158 
Pacchabhu  Thera,  96 
Padiyattha  country,  119 
Paganism,  xxxvii  /.,  187  n.  2 
Pain.  See  Ill 
Pajjunna,  Parjunya,  5  n.  3 
*Pakkha,  64 
Panada,  130 
Pancalas,  152 
Pandarasagotta,  335 
Panda va,  (41),  (1167) 

*Panthaka  Major,  242,  258 
*Panthaka  Minor,  Cula,  69  n.  3, 
258 

Paraparas,  the,  103 
*Parapariya  of  Rajagaha,  103 
Parapariya  of  Savatthi,  294,  331 
Pariah,  xxviii,  233 
Parinibbana,  182 
*Paripunnaka,  85 


INDEX 


439 


Pari  vara,  79 
Parks,  gardens  : 

Ambataka,  230 
Antelope,  303 
Banyan, 55, 93 
Deer,  97 
Kalaka,  128 
Kapittha,  25 
Tapoda,  51 

Pasenadi,  King  of  Kosala,  13, 
20,  47,  166,  279 

Passion  (rdga),  (18),  (39/.),  (79), 
(133  /.),  (188),  (316),  (327), 
(378),  211,  (416),  (674),  (734), 
(806  /.),  (992),  (1162  /.) ; 
quenched,  (12),  (56),  (704) 
Pataliputta,  Patna,  163,  339  n.  2 
Path  (addhdna),  (1244) ;  (pada). 
See  Way 

Path  (Ariyan  Eightfold),  26  n.  1, 
(35),  (69),  (132),  (166),  (179), 
(349),  (369),  (421),  (520),  (595), 
(637),  (709),  (767),  (980),  (1115) 
Paths,  Four  (Stream -winning, 
Once-return,  No-return,  Ara- 
hantship),  10,  (25),  52,  61, 
106,  126,  133,  141,  150,  184, 
222,  230,  234 

Patisambhidamagga,  5n.  1 
Patience,  (1029) 

Patimokkha,  169,  224,  241 
Patna,  Council  of,  xxi,  339  n.  2 
Pavarana,  402 
Pava,  90 
*Pavittha,  82 

Peace  ( paddy  santay,  santi),  (11), 
(33),  (260),  (364),  (369),  (405), 
(422),  (434),  (521),  (642) 

(671  /.),  (876),  (905) ;  at  peace 
( samito )  (10)  ;  ( vupasanto ), 

(326) ;  ( yogakkhema ),  171  ; 

( sama ),  (748) ;  as  goal,  419 
Peacemaker,  (441  /.) 

Peasants,  47 
Perfection,  (114),  420 
Perseverance,  (83),  (585) 

Peta’s,  (258),  (1128) 

*Phussa,  335 

Physician,  surgeon,  healer,  109, 
208,  (444),  (722),  (756),  (830/.), 
(939),  (1111) 

Pippali-manava ;  Kassapa  the 
Great,  q.v. 


*Pilinda-Vaccha,  14 
Pit  (simile),  (759),  417 
Pitakas,  66,  97,  120,  133 
*Pindola-Bharadvaja,  110,  415 
Pith,  i.e.  truth,  101,  102,  (764) 
*Piyanjaha,  75 

Pleasure,  bodily  ( sarira-suJcha ), 
(1033) 

Plough  (simile),  (16),  (101) ;  a 
measure,  24  n.  2 
Poets  among  the  Brethren,  xxxv 
Poetic  qualities  in  the  Psalms, 
xxxv  /. 

Poison  (visa),  (103),  (710), 

(758/.).  See  Intoxicants 
Pokkharavati,  122 
Pokkharasati,  521 
Pool  (simile),  (759) 

Poor,  in  Buddhism,  xxix 
*Posiya,  39 
Potter,  161 
Potthila,  388 
Potiriya,  143 

Powers,  He  of  the  Ten,  7  n.  1, 
9,  61,  147,  198,  249,  351  ; 
(faculties,  forces),  (109),  (352), 
(358),  (437),  (595),  (672),  (725), 
(728/.),  (948),  (1114) 

Prayers,  (473) 

Preachers,  xxxii,  (234/.),  194 
Precepts,  the,  157,  167,  184,  186 
Principle,  (219),  (291) 
Procrastination,  (225/.),  (231/.), 
(261/.) 

Prophecy,  (951/.) 

Pukkusati,  91,  161 
*Punna  of  Sunaparanta,  70 
*Punna  of  the  Mantanis,  8,  349, 
423 

*Punnamasa,  15 
*Punnamasa,  (2),  134 
Puppet-shape,  (769/.),  (1020/.) 
Purgatory,  (62),  (89),  322,  364, 
369,  (790),  (1128) 

Purification  (visuddhi),  (415), 
(676/.) 

‘  Purity  ’  (religion,  suddhi), 
(219  /.),  (331),  (341  /.),  (348), 
(893)  ;  (holiness),  (586) 
Purposes,  (546),  (674  /.),  (769), 
(1020) 

Quarters,  four,  (555),  (1057) 
Quest.  See  Aim 


440 


TNDEX 


*Radha,  115,  344 
*Rahula,  183 

Rain,  and  rain-god,  5  n.  3,  (24), 
(50),  55,  56/.,  99,  (128),  (189), 
(325  /),  (524),  (531),  (597  /), 
(985) ;  {simile),  (133  /),  (447), 
(675),  (1135),  (1273) 
*Rajadatta,  189 
Rajagaha,  5,  passim 
*Rakkhita,  77 
*Ramaneyyaka,  53 
*Ramaniyakutika,  59 
*Ramaniyaviharin,  49 
Rapture,  198,  (351),  (382  /.), 
(518/) 

*Ratthapala,  302 
Razor  {simile),  (737) 

Realization,  (331),  (434) 

Reason  {panna),  (126) 

Rebirth.  See  Life 
Recluse,  (228  /.),  165,  (587), 
276 

Reed,  rush,  (402),  (487  /.),  (634) 
Refrain  verses,  xxi : 

1 .  The  Threefold  wisdom  .  .  . 
(24),  etc. 

2.  And  the  great  Quest  .  .  . 
(136),  etc. 

3.  With  thought  of  death 
.  .  .  (196),  etc. 

4.  I  will  not  eat  .  .  .  (223), 
etc. 

5.  Thereat  arose  in  me  .  .  . 
(269),  etc. 

6.  The  Master  hath  .  .  . 
(604),  etc. 

7.  O  see  the  seemly  .  .  . 
(220),  etc. 

Refuges,  the  (3),  157,  167,  (286), 
184,  (305),  186 

Refuge  {simile),  (412),  (449), 
(764),  (780),  (838),  (881), 
Release,  from  drudgery,  (43) ; 
from  rebirth,  (516  /.).  See 
also  Life ;  of  spirit,  106, 
(750),  (865),  (906),  (1021); 
as  goal,  418/ 

Religion  {dhamma),  254 ;  {sa- 
manna),  (788) 

Remorse,  (225),  360 
Renunciation,  171,  (458),  (512), 
248,  (640),  (691),  304 
Reputation,  (291-294) 

Resolve,  {222  f.),  (312/.),  (514) 


*Revata,  45,  279 
Reverence,  (387/),  219,  (423/), 
(589),  (1078),  (1096) 

Rice,  146,  (317),  (381),  222 
Righteousness  {sila),  (203),  (740), 
(1077) 

Rishis,  206,  (1065) ;  (Buddhas), 
(1276) 

Rivers,  (523)  : 

Aciravati,  166 
Ajakarani,  (307/.),  245 
Candabhaga,  255 
Ganges,  113,  130,  (168),  254, 
(1904) 

Kimikala,  67 

Neranjara  (Phaggu),  181,  (340) 
Rohini,  144  n.  2,  (529) 
Sarabhu, 43 
Saras vatl,  (1104) 

Vaggumuda,  166 
Yamuna,  159,  (1904) 

Rock,  crag  {simile),  (191  /.), 
(643),  (651),  (680),  (1000) 
Roguva,  90 
Rohi,  158 

Rudiments  {adi),  35 
Rule  {Sasana),  system,  church, 
108,  (132),  passim ;  decay  of, 
(952/) 

Runes,  (2),  (1006 /). 

Rupasari,  xxxiv,  261,  341 

Sapmoda.  See  Pakkha 
Sapsara,  14  n.  1,  (87),  (99), 
135,  150,  172,  (493),  (785), 

420  {d) ;  (traveller  in),  (215), 
(258) 

*Sabbaka,  Sappaka,  186 
*Sabbakama,  226 
*Sabbamitta,  122 
*Sabhiya,  177 

Sacrifice,  (341),  (378)  ;  human, 
(705) ;  self,  (1089) 
Saddhammasangaha,  xxv 
Safety,  (32),  (69),  (171),  (415), 

421  (6) 

Sagala,  359 
Sagata,  350 

Sage  {muni),  (68),  (176),  (185), 
(592),  (896),  (907),  (946), 

(1169)  ;  {isi — i.e.,  rishi),  (713), 
(724),  (868),  (900),  (1015) 

Saint  {santo),  (57)  ;  {sumano 
[; yogavacaro ]),  (212);  yogi,  (946) 


INDEX 


441 


Saketa,  33,  43  n.  1,  56,  76,  128, 
210,  245 

Sakiyan,  Sakyan,  a  clan  of 
rajas,  at  Kapilavatthu,  22, 
(94),  (529/.),  passim;  follow¬ 
ers  of  the  Buddha,  40,  47,  81, 
162,  320  ;  ancestors  of.  See 
Sun  ;  the  Buddha,  (1265) 
Sakka,  deva,  89,  118,  272,  285, 
(1266) 

Sal!,  74 

Sallyport,  (355) 

*Samannakani,  40 
*Sambhuta,  182 
*Sambula-Kaccana,  142 
Salvation  ( sadattha ),  (112), 
(1260) ;  ( amata ),  83 
*Samidatta,  84 

Samiddhi,  a  brahmin  of  Savat- 
thl,  father  of  Punnamasa,  15 
Samiddhi,  a  brahmin  of  Nalaka, 
father  of  Gavaccha  Major,  17 
*Samiddhi,  51 
*Samitigutta,  78 
Sandalwood  pavilion,  141 
*Sandhita,  156 

Sane,  immune  ( andsava ),  (100), 
(162),  (178),  (289),  (336),  (364), 
(365),  (369),  (576),  (672),  (704), 
(711),  (896),  (919),  (996), 

(1061),  412 
Sangamaji -Thera,  39 
*Sangharakkhita,  98 
*Sanjaya,  52 

Sanjaya,  paribbajaka,  341 
Sankassa,  97 
*Sankicca,  266,  291 
*Sanu,48 

Sappaka.  See  Sabbaka 
*Sappadasa,  214 
*Sarabhanga,  236 
Saratthapakasini,  398  n.  9,  424 
*Sariputta,  340 ;  his  influence, 
17,  41,  46,  61,  81,  109,  191  ; 
teacher,  66,  75,  204,  266,  279  ; 
visits  sick,  46,  78  ;  falls  sick, 
109 ;  commended,  69,  312, 
366  /.,  388,  390,  402,  431  ; 
other  verses,  422  ;  dea+h,  356 
Sasana.  See  Order,  (1),  Rule 
*Satimattiya,  167 
Savaka,  1  ;  agga0,  xxxvi 
Savatthi,  capital  of  Kosala,  7, 
passim 


Sceptic,  (760) 

Scruples,  (652) 

Sea.  See  Ocean 
Season,  spring,  181,  (345)  ; 

autumn,  249 ;  winter,  151  ; 
residences,  104 

Seed  {simile),  (363),  (388  /.), 
(530/.) 

Seer  ( passo ,  cf.  Chand.  Up.,  vii, 
26,  2),  (61)  ;  {muni),  (168), 
(533),  (839),  (1143),  (1168); 
{-dassano),  (288) ;  {caJcJchuma), 
(295),  (905),  (995),  (1038); 
{isi),  (948),  (1098),  (1118), 
(1234),  (1240) ;  {-dassi),  (1264); 
{-calcJchu),  (1266/.) 

*Sela,  28,  191,  310 
Self-conceits,  pride,  (60),  65  n.  3, 
(89),  (102),  (205),  (280),  219 
n.  1,  (765),  (1074/.),  (1226) 
Self-denial,  166,  (1089).  See 
also  Austerities 
Self-dependence,  (412),  (542) 
Self-mastery,  (50),  176,  (468), 
(631),  (636),  (697),  (1146  /.), 
421  (c) 

Self-subdued  {yatatto),  (10) 

Sena,  200 
*Senaka,  180 

Sense,  (195),  passim  ;  gates  of, 
(116),  (125),  241  n.  5,  (579) ; 
desires  of.  See  Desire 
Serene  {santusito),  (8),  (899), 
{samahito),  (207),  (1077) ;  {upa- 
santo),  (68),  (441),  (689),  (1226) 
Sermon-poems,  xxxii 
Serpent,  snake,  (229)  ;  {simile), 
(457),  (576) 

Service,  97,  101,  (178),  (185  /.), 
(240/.),  420  ;  mutual,  101  /. 
Seta,  288 
Setavya,  67,  123 
*Setuccha,  94 
Shadow  {simile),  (1041  /.) 

Ship  {simile),  (766) 

Shipwrecked  {simile),  (147),  (265) 
Sign,  threefold,  (1226) 

*Slha,  80 
*Sllavat,  269 
Sllavatl,  95 

Silence,  (650),  (999),  382 ;  of 
women,  xxxii,  xxxix 
Simple  life,  9 
Sineru,  Mt.,  14,  360 


442 


INDEX 


*Singalapitar,  22 
Sirigutta,  241 
*Sirimanda,  224 
*Sirimat,  127 
*Sirimitta,  241 
*Sirivaddha,  45 
Sirivaddha,  127 

Sisters  (Bhikkhunis,  Theris), 
xxxii,  xxxix,  14,  69  n.  3, 
147,  194,  (1257) 

Slsupacala,  46 
Sita-Vana.  See  Woods 
*Slta-Vaniya,  11 
Sivaka,  139 
*Sivaka,  18 
*Slvali,  60 

Skull,  (bowls  like),  113  n.  1, 
(1118) ;  (spell),  138,  395. 

Sky,  (1155/.) 

Slackness  ( sithila ),  (1165) 
Slaughterhouse  (simile),  (712) 
Slaves,  servants,  xxviii  /.,  21,  70 
Sleep,  (17),  (22),  (84),  (193),  145, 
(200) 

Sloth,  (17),  44,  (74),  (101),  121, 
162,  (265),  176,  (987),  (1010), 
(1033) 

Smile,  by  the  Master,  (630) ;  by 
Kappina,  (1086) 

*Sobhita,  131 

Sobhita.  See  Khujja-Sobhita 
Solitude,  xxxvii,  (54),  (142), 
(189  /.),  (239),  (245),  245  /., 
(537/.),  (577/.),  (592),  (597/.), 
(626) 

*Somamitta,  121 
Son,  136/.;  (spiritual) .  See  Child 
*Sona-Kolivisa,  135,  275 
*Sona-Ku'tikanna,  27,  202 
*Sona-Potiriyaputta,  143 
*Sopaka,  *37 
*Sopaka,  (2),  233 
Soul,  self,  non-existence  of  per¬ 
manent,  68,  (594),  285,  (678), 
(715),  (766),  (1160) 

South  Hill,  98 

Speculation  on  life,  (715),  (753) 
Speech,  (101),  (1227/.),  (1233) 
Stairway  (simile),  (764) 

Stars,  138,  (193),  318 
Status,  social,  of  Brethren, 
Steadfastness,  (1049),  (1081) 
Study  (yoga),  (1142) ;  (sikkhd), 
(1247).  See  also  Training 


Storm,  45,  54,  55,  142,  153, 
(307/.),  (522) 

Streams  (simile),  (761) 

Strand  (simile),  (613) 

Stumbling  stone  (simile),  (680) 
Supsumaragira,  22,  224 
*Subahu,  54 

Subhadda,  lay-sister,  20 
*Subhuta,  190 

*Subhuti,  4  ;  other  verses,  422, 
Subjects,  the  Ten,  9 
Sublime  moods,  or  sentiments, 
208,  (386),  279,  (649) 
Sudassana,  vihara  at  Silavatl,  95 
Sudhamma,  (1198) 

Suddhodana,  70,  126,  214,  248/. 
*Sugandha,  28 
*Suhemanta,  97 

Suicides,  intending,  103, 198, 214 
Suja,  (140) 

Sumana,  4 
*Sumana,  193 

*Sumana,  pupil  of  Anuruddha,220 
Sumangala,  47 

Sun,  ancestor  of  Sakiyans,  30, 
(158),  (417),  (1023),  (1237), 
(1258) 

*Sunaga,  81 
Sunaparanta,  70,  141 
*Sundara-samudda,  228 
*SunIta,  271 

Supernormal  powers,  96,  326 ; 
emitting  light,  11,  211  ;  ar¬ 
resting  flood  43 ;  vision,  32 
n.  2,  (332),  (379),  (516),  (562), 
(627),  326,  (916),  (996) ;  hear¬ 
ing,  32  n.  2,  (379),  (997), 
(1262) ;  thought  (abhinnd),  26, 
(1262) ;  memory,  32  n.  2,  131, 
(627),  (913) ;  movement,  96, 
(104),  (901) ;  thought-reading, 
(379),  (1248  /.) ;  power,  or  id- 
dhi,  (379),  (563).  See  also  Iddhi 
Suppavasa,  Kumara,  60 
Supparaka,  70 
*Suppiya,  36 
*Suradha,  116 
*Susarada,  74 
*Suyamana,  74 

Sword  (simile),  (39),  (40),  (449), 
(1094/.),  (1163) 

Takkasila,  136,  149,  201,  319 
*Talaputa,  xxxv/.,  xli,  369,  418 


INDEX 


448 


Talisman,  (616) 

Taming  (spiritual),  (5),  (8),  24, 
(354),  (359),  (441),  (689),  (877), 

(1111) 

Tapussa,  12 

Tathagata,  8,  (507).  See  Thus- 
hath-Come 

Teacher  and  pupil,  18  /,  (66), 
(330/.),  203,  319,  (408/),  (433) 
*Tekicchakari  (-kani),  208 
*Telakani,  298 

Temperance,  (12),  111,  (583), 
(982/) 

Theatre,  369 

Theras  of  the  Cave,  1,  cx.  civ, 
clxvi,  cxcvi,  ccxxxii ;  of  the 
Field,  clxiv,  ccxi ;  of  the 
Hiils,  xxiii,  xxxvi,  cxv,  clvi, 
ccxliii,  cclxiii ;  of  the !  Hut, 
xlv,  lv-lix,  xcv,  ccxxviii ;  of 
the  Rain,  i,  li-liv,  cc  ;  of  the 
River,  cxxiv,  cxlii,  cxci,  cxcvi, 
cciii,  ccxxxii,  ccxliv ;  of  the 
Woods,  vi,  xiii,  xiv,  xviii,  xxii, 
xxvii,  xxxi,  xlii,  xlix,  lxii, 
lxiii,  lxviii,  xcii,  cix,  cx,  cxiii, 
cxxxv,  civ,  clxiii,  clxvii,  ccv, 
ccxx,  ccxxv,  ccxxxiv,  ccxl, 
ccxlii,  cclvii,  cclxii ;  and  Mara, 
vii,  xxv,  xlvi,  xlix 
Thieves,  109,  123,  279,  291  /  ; 

{simile),  (449),  (786),  318 / 
Thought  ( citta ),  (25)  ;  ( mata ), 
(501)  ( sauna ),  (217  /)  ;  sati, 

(794  /)  ;  thoughts  of  a  great 
man,  eight,  326 
Thullakotthita,  302 
Thunder  {simile),  (760) 
Thunderbolt  {simile),  (419) 
Threefold  lore,  or  wisdom 
{tevijjd),  14,  29  n.  1,  (55), 
passim 

Thus  has-  or  have-  Come,  He, 
They,  xxii,  8,  (280),  (343), 
(483),  (827),  (1256),  (1267) 
Tibet,  112  n.  2 

Tie  ( bandhana ),  (414)  ;  {gantha) 
572  ;  {sanga)  (38) ;  {sanddna), 
290 

Time,  as  precious,  (30),  (661). 

See  also  Moment 
*Tissa  the  Sakiyan,  43,  385 
*Tissa  of  Roguva,  90 
*Tissa  of  Rajagaha,  125 


*Tissa-Kumara,  251 
Touch  (of  death),  (783) 

Traders,  123,  (530),  254 
Training  {sikkha),  5  n.  3,  (68), 
116  n.  1,  (239),  (333),  (407), 
(433),  (513),  (588),  (608  /), 
(634),  (1245),  (1247) ;  as 

moulding  nature,  24,  34,  (433) 
Trapper,  (774) 

Trees  :  banyan,  408,  12  ;  kareri, 
363  n.  2 ;  mango,  (64);  jasmine, 
90;  sal,  (114), (948);  rose-apple, 
32  n.  3,  (309) ;  acacia,  46,  344  ; 
‘Bodhi,’  (217),  248;  ‘  Bahu- 
puttaka,’  361 ;  ‘  Kingstead,  T2 
{  Tree-talk,’  185,  415  ;  -spirits,  12 
Truths,  the  Four  Ariyan,  15, 
39,  (88),  195,  (215),  (492), 
(592),  285,  (1098),  (1258) 

Truth  {sacca),  184,  (1229) ; 

(< attha ),  (71),  (210);  dhamma. 
See  Norm  ;  dhamma,  (708) ; 
{yathava),  (422),  (1096) ;  {tath- 
avada),  (1077) ;  master  of  the, 
(758) ;  asseveration  of,  254  ; 
as  goal,  420 

*Udayin,  287 
Udena,  110,  110  n.  4 
Udicca,  263 
*Ugga,  78 
Ugga,  78 
Uggayama,  158 
*Uijaya,  52 
Ujjenl,  238 
Ujjuhana,  (597) 

Ukkattha,  157 
*Ukkhepa[-kata]-Vaccha,  66 
Upacala,  46 

*Upali,  50,  147,  168  ;  other  verse, 
422 

*Upasena,  200 

*Upasena  Vanganta’s  son,  261  ; 

other  verses,  422 
*Upavana,  140 
Uruvela,  21,  72,  180,  206,  284 
Upatissa,  341,  (998) 

*Usabha  of  Kosala,  99 
♦Usabha  of  Kapilavatthu,  145 
Usira-root,  (402) 

*Uttara  of  Rajagaha,  109 
*Uttara  of  Saketa,  128 
*Uttarapala,  170 
i  Uttara,  353 

I 


444 


INDEX 


*Uttiya  of  Savatthi,  34 
*Uttiya  of  Pava,  54 
*Utt<iya  of  Kapilavatthu,  92 

Vaccha.  See  Pilinda0 
*Vaccha,  Vana-,  17 
*Vaccha,  Vana-,  101 
*Vacchagotta,  101 
Vacchagottas,  the,  101 
*Vaccliapala,  72 
Vagrant  bhikkhus,  50,  146 
*Vaddha,  194 
*Vaddhamana,  44,  385 
Vajjians,  56,  59,  63,  106,  182, 
(919),  347 
*Vajji-putta,  63 
*Vajji-putta,  (2),  106 
*Vajjita,  155 
*Vakkali,  xxxiv,  197 
*Valliya  of  Pava,  54 
*Valliya  of  Savatthi,  112 
Valliya  ’  Kanhamitta  of  Vesall, 
131' 

Valuer,  assessor,  court,  25,  212 
*VangIsa,  395 
*Vappa,  62 
*Varana,  164 
*Vasabha,  118 
Vasulokl,  42 
Vebhara,  (41) 

Vedas,  the  Three,  6,  52,  74  n.  2, 
157,  197 
Velugama,  107 
Velukanda,  41,  42 
Veluva,  (919) 

Venudatta  Thera,  132 
Vepacitti,  (749) 

Vesall,  44,  56,  63,  65,  75,  106, 
118,  131,  182,  226 
Vessavana,  159,  189,  245 
Vetthapura,  170 
Viaticum  (simile),  (616) 

Views,  (340/.) 

Vigil,  (203),  (411) 

Vigilance,  (59),  (193)  ;  ( sati ), 

(12),  (1049) 

Vihara’s,  xl,  59,  95, 102, 119,  136, 
185,  208  ;  the  Lonagiri,  186  ; 
the  Bhojakagiri,  253  n.  3  ;  the 
Jeta  Grove,  4  n.  1,  22,  285, 
294 ;  the  Doves’  Cave,  345 
*Vijaya,  85 
*Vijitasena,  200 
*Vimala  of  Rajagaha,  54 


*Vimala  of  Benares,  173 
*Vimala-Kondanna,  65 
Vimala,  382,  n.  2 
Vinaya,  66,  169,  182  ;  rules,  4 

13 

Virtue  (sila),  (12),  (70),  502  /.), 
590  /.),  (608  /.),  (1008) ;  odour 
of,  (28),  (615) 

Visakha  PancalTs  son,  152 
Visakha,  147,  216 
Vision,  3,  (422).  And  see  Norm 
*Vltasoka,  133 
Voice,  230/.,  (1233),  (1270) 
‘Void,’  the,  (92),  (1117) 

Waif,  37 

Wake,  Awake,  (47),  (71),  84, 
(167),  (175),  (227),  (263),  (354), 
(368),  (679),  (689),  (828),  (902), 
(907),  (914),  (1168),  (1246) 
Wanderers  ( paribbajakd ),  34,  40, 
82,  138,  139,  177,  201,  212,  289 
War-similes,  (31),  (177),  144  n.  1, 
(236) 

Ward,  (1031),  (1047) 

Way  ( i/pada'> ),  3,  (212),  198; 

(migga),  (1243);  (saysara),( 216) 
Wealth,  worldly,  (550),  (776  /.)  ; 

spiritual,  (508),  (632) 

Welfare,  (538) 

Well-Come,  the,  185,  (305),  (725), 
(869),  (889),  (1238) 

Wheel.  See  Norm 
White,  (549),  (972) ;  robes,  (965), 
(973) 

Wife,  trying  to  recall  husband, 
14,  15,  39,  134,  184,  (299), 
226 ;  loss  of,  34 ;  (refused),  (72) ; 
accompanies  husband,  360 
Will,  (1029),  (1114) 

Wind,  (22),  (50),  (235),  (544); 
wind-god,  (2),  7  n.  4,  (1006 /.)  ; 
simile,  (416),  (754)  (1268); 

wind-illness.  See  Disease 
Winternitz,  M.,  xxi,  xxxi  /., 
xxx vii  n.  1 

Wisdom  (panna),  (3),(12 ),  passim ; 
(vijja),  (60) ;  ( buddhi ),  (75)  ;  cf. 
(1015),  intellect;  ‘  wisdom  - 
being.’  See  Bodhisat ;  arms, 
branches,  chords,  etc.,  of,  (68), 
(161),  (166),  (595),  passim 
Woman,  spurned,  (58),  109,  137, 
155  ;  (vision  of),  105  ;  rebuked, 


INDEX 


445 


(279  /.)  ;  dead,  (393)  ;  power 
after  death,  (315  /.)  ;  charm 
of,  (738/.) 

Woods  or  forests  : 

Acacia,  46,  279 

Anjana  (Saketa),  33,  43,  56/., 
76,  210,  245 

Bamboo,  Bajagaha,  9,  26,  52, 
136,  189,  248,  360,  363 
Bhesakala,  23,  224 
Cool  Wood,  (6),  (540),  275 
Dark  Wood,  9,  148 
Eastern  Bamboo,  30,  177,  326 
Jalini,  319 

Jeta  Wood,  26,  46,  53,  68,  79 
Karapviya,  (22) 

Mango,  67,  90,  (563),  315  ;  at 
Anupiya,  326 
Sala,  331 
Sirjsapa,  67 

World,  ‘  lower  things,’  49,  (154), 


(494),  276,  (1072  /.)  ;  worldly 
views,  (129/.),  (187/.),  (458), 
282,  (1175) ;  not  of  the,  (76), 
(209),  (600) 

Worldling,  philistine,  many-folk, 
(215),  (341),  (456),  (518),  (575), 
285 

Worm  {simile),  (1175) 

Writing,  letters,  33,  90  n.  5,  107 
Written  doctrine,  tradition  of, 
90,  107 

Yakkha,  48,  245,  345 
*Yasa,  xxiii,  42, 104 
*Yasadatta,  201 
Yasodhara,  183 
*Yasoja,  166 

Zeal,  (983  /.),  (1030),  (1066  /.). 

See  also  Earnestness 
Zest,  (539) 


ii 


PALI  WORDS  DISCUSSED  IN  FOOTNOTES 


Akuppata,  202  n.  1 
Akalika,  314  n.  1 
Ajjhattarato,  342  n.  3 
Atthantara,  205  n.  2 

Adhitthahi,  378  n.  5 

•  • 

Anudhamma,  46,  84 
Anupadaya,  285  n.  2 
Anujata,  312  n.  3 
Anuvatteti,  312  n.  3 
Anodissaka,  5  n.  1 
Abyositattha,  305  n.  3 
Abhinnd,  13,  14  n.  3,  33  n.  2 
Abhisapa,  376  n.  1 
Ariyavatd,  (334) 

Ariya,  242  n.  1,  265  n.  1 
Avacdrakamcinussd,  189  n.  3 
Asita,  404  n.  2 

Ayitandni  (sense-organ  and  ob- 
_  ject),  407  n.  1 
Ahari,  387  n.  3,  419 

Inddgopaka,\Sn.  1, 161 7i.  2,  (1063) 


Udicca-brdhmana,  79 
Upadhi,  398  n  '.  7,  406  n.  1 

Ekagga,  397  n.  1 
Ekatiya,  347  n.  5 

Kathavatthus,  Ten,  9n.  1 
Kapittha,  333,  n.  2  ;  cf.  25 
Kdveyyamatto,  406,  n.  4 
Kilesd,  73  n.  1 
Kumina,  183  n.  3 
Kura,  146  n.  2 
Khandhd,  11  n.  3,  407  n.  1 

Gadhita,  398  n.  8 
Gamandala,  381  n.  3 

Cdranika,  378  n.  3,  419 
Coravosasaka,  121  n.  1 
Chandikato,  355  n.  2 

Tathdgata,  179  n.  1 
Tasa-thavara,  323  n.  1 


446 


INDEX 


Dabba,  399  n.  4 
Dubhato,  ubhato,  379  n.  4 
Dhammibhuta,  237  n.  3 
Dhammd,  doctrines,  truths,  (9), 
(11),  (201),  (340),  (370/.),  264 
Dhona,  409  n.  4 

Nandrajja,  300  n.  4 
Nibbut-a-i,  90  n.  4,  183  n.  4,  217 
n.  4,  (586) 

Niyama,  407  n.  2 
Nivuta,  409  n.  2 

Paduttagahi,  399  n.  3 
Papanca,  246  n.  2,  343  n.  4,  328 
n.  2 

Pabhdvita,  302  n.  1 
Para-to,  383  n.  3,  385  n.  2 
Pardbhavissasi,  381  n.  4 
Paray,  379  n.  3,  383  n.  3 
Pariggaha,  217  n.  6 
Parinibbdna,  11  n.  3 
Parinibbuto,  ‘perfected,’  11  n.  3, 
202  n.  1 ;  reaching  the  goal,  (7), 
(8),  417 
Patala,  418 

Bhattimd,  (370)  n.  4 

Bhadda,  bhadra,  bhaddiya,  19  n.  1, 

21  n.  4 

Bhavdbhavd,  305  n.  4 
Bhavehi,  375  n.  3 
Bhojalca,  143  n.  3 

Mandal[ih\a-rdjd,  83  n.  5,  94,  100, 
152 


Mdmaka,  300  n.  3 
Milaklchurajana,  338  n.  1 
Muni,  132  n.  3 

Yathacdri,  342  n.  2 
Yojana,  250,  255  n.  1 
Yugdni,  339  n.  2 

Ruppato,  338  n.  2 

Vatta,  217  n.  2 
Vatihu,  337  n.  1 
Vinnana,  355  n.  4 
Vitapi,  380  n.  2 
Vitakka,  346  n.  1 
Viraye,  375  n.  2 
Visattikd,  213  n.  3 
Visesa,  24  n.  1,  110 
Vedagu,  ‘  hath  beta’en  himself  to 
truth,’  (10) 

Sankhard,  ‘  varied  things  of  sense  ’ 
life’s  ‘  experience,’  385  n.  1 

(1175) 

world,  (1180) 

Sanditthika,  314  n.  1 
Sati,  308  n.  1,  318  n.  1,  (1141) 
Samussaya,  149  n.  2 
Sarasankappa,  300  n.  1 
Sdrambha,  300  n.  6 
Sirisayana,  243  n.  1 
Sila,  269  n.  1 
Sujata,  311  n.  3 
Setthi,  xxviii,  n.  4 

Hurdlnura,  213  n.  2 


BILLING  AND  SONS,  LTD.,  PRINTERS,  GUILDFORD 


DATE  DUE 


-t 

j  ikui  ...aJ 

IP** 

w  w 

GAYLORD 

PRINT  EO  IN  U  S.  A.
