Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


■ 

^H 

■b^ 

^^H 

1 

|~ 

L 

\ 

i 

1 

] 

LEL«rD5TANfORDj? 

^j  p.  UNIVERSITV 

retit-'fu  B.  IH9MA5    WCLTefl    STANFORD 

1 

1 

1 

1 

^^^ 

B^ 

r" 

IH^K^SI 

1 

1 

1 

' 

Lel*d5tanfordJ? 

_JL  UNIVERSITV 

PsesEMtD  6r  TH?«ft5    WELTOrt    STANFORD 

L 

i 

I 

I 


-* 


it 

1i 

■■I 


*.  * 


%c. 


Ill 


a: 


UNIVERSITV 


DPtiE»rEu  B'  THO«A5    WELTON    STANFORQ 


A 


PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS, 

— —  OR 

QUADRIPARTITE: 

BF.IXa 

FOUR  BOOKS  \.    . 

-  •■  ' 

OF  THB  Q-d/ 

INFLUENCE  OF  THE  STARs/'^  ' 


NEWLY  TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  GREEK  PARAPHRASE  OF  IMIOCLUS. 

WITH 

A   PRKFACE,   EXPLANATORY  NOTES, 

AKD 
t»XTAIKISO 

EXTRACTS   FROM  THE  ALMAGEST  OF  PTOLEMY, 

And  the  wholo^of  his 

C  E  N  T  I L  O  Q  U  Y. 

By   J.   M.   ASHMAN D. 


"  Ye  stars,  which  are  the  poetry  of  Heaven  I 

**  H,  in  your  bright  leaves,  we  would  read  the  fate 

*'  Of  men  and  empires, — 'tis  to  be  forgiven." 

__^ ^  LORD  BVRON. 

•. '  /'  ii'i  nJ:  e  t\  .-» A  i>  r.  c^B  I.  i  an  r  (>  B'i   n  .t  v  /.v  ii-a  d  i*  i  l^h  i^ e  x- 
«...  '  '..  ~^  '      -^--,     •«.,.* 

*••*    '    "'  "0cn!rr3:iTi --i^ciciitific  iippjtd/-    .'.'-  -*.    V 

No.  17,  St.  Martin's-le-Grand,  Newgate  Street. 

1822. 

J\'o*r  Ki printed  a$  a  Stu.^iUnvnt  to        ^ ' iftM ^fiU$%%d,  fi^^'  '•» 

••COMINQ     EVENTS,"^'  UyTTuJfv^M^^^^, 

"Tj  ifiii£ 

Hy  Hay  Nis»:kt  &  Co.,  1«»  St.  Eik*c)i  Square,  lil!l•»t;«':^■. 

1893.        4^*  •-•^n.  <^  Hu^sm/fH^ ^'jur  t 


19l9y3 


i 


THIS    ITEM  HAS   BEEN  MICROFIUIED   BY 

STA2JF0RD  UlIIVERSITY    LIBRARIES 
REFORKATTIKG    SECTION    1991.    CONSULT 
SUL  CATALOG   FOR  LOCATION 


TO  THE 


AUTHOR  OF  "WAVERLEY," 


THIS  TRANSLATION 


OF  A 


WORK  CONTAINING  THE  BEST  ACCREDITED  PRINCIPLES 


or 


^Btrologg 


IM   DEDICATEL); 


With  the  most  profound  admiration  of  his  unrivalled  Talents^ 


WHICH  COULD  ALONE    HAVE  KESTORED 


INTEREST  TO  THE  SPECULATIONS 


OF  AN 


AyTIQVATED  SCJESCE. 


^ibcrttBtment. 


I  m  I 


THE  U8C  recently  made  of  Astrology  in  the  poetical  machinery  of 
certain  works  of  genius  (which  are  of  the  highest  popularity,  and 
above  all  praise),  seems  to  have  excited  in  the  world  at  large  a  desire 
to  learn^something  of  the  mysteries  of  that  science  which  has,  in  all 
former  ages,  if  not  in  these  days,  more  or  less  engaged  reverence  and 
usnrped  belief.  The  apparent  existence  of  such  a  general  desire 
has  caused  the  completion  of  the  following  Translation,  and  its 
presentation  to  the  public;  although  it  was  originally  undertaken 
only  in  part,  and  merely  to  satisfy  two  or  three  individuals  of  the 
grounds  on  which  the  now  neglected  doctrines  of  Astrology  had  so 
long  and  so  fully  maintained  credit 


F^RfiFA-Cfi. 


OF  all  sciences,  whether  true  or  false,  which  have  at 
any  time  engaged  the  attention  of  the  world,  there  is 
not  one  of  which  the  real  or  assumed  principles  are  less 
generally  known,  in  the  present  age,  than  those  of  As- 
trology, The  whole  doctrine  of  this  science  is  com- 
monly understood  to  have  been  completely  overturned ; 
and,  of  late,  people  seem  to  have  satisfied  themselves 
with  merely  knowing  the  import  of  its  name.  Such  con- 
tented ignorance,  in  persons,  too,  sufficiently  informed 
in  other  respects,  is  the  more  extraordinary,  since  Astro- 
logy has  sustained  a  most  conspicuous  part  throughout 
the  history  of  the  world,  even  until  days  comparatively 
rec^t.  In  the  East,  where  it  first  arose,  at  a  period  of 
very  remote  antiquity*,  and  whence  it  came  to  subjugate 
the  intellect  of  Europe,  it  still  even  now  holds  sway.     In 


*  Sir  Isaac  Newton  has  the  following  remarks  in  regard  to  the 
origin  of  Astrology : — "  After  the  study  of  Astronomy  was  set  on 
"  foot  for  the  nse  of  navigation,  and  the  ^Egyptians,  by  the  heliacal 
"  risings  and  settings  of  the  stars,  had  determined  the  length  of  the 
"solar  year  of  365  days,  and  by  other  observations  had  fixed  the 
"  solstices,  and  formed  the  fixed  stars  into  asterisms,  all  which  was 
"  done  in  the  reigns  of  Ammon,  Sesac,  Oros,  and  Memnon,"  (about 
1000  years  before  Christ,)  "it  may  be  presumed  that  they  continued 
"  to  observe  the  motions  of  the  planets,  for  they  called  them  after  the 
"  names  of  their  gods ;  and  Nechepsos,  or  Nicepsos,  King  of  Sais,'* 
[772  B.C.]  "by  the  assistance  of  Petosiris,  a  priest  of  Mgypt,  in- 

a 


Europe,  and  in  every  part  of  the  world  wliere  learning 
had  "impress'd  tlie  human  soul,"  Astrology  reigned  su- 
preme until  the  middlo  of  the  17th  century.     It  entered 


•'  TODted  aatrology,  gronniliog  it  upon  the  aspects  of  the  planets,  and 
"the  qnalitieH  of  the  men  and  women  to  whom  they  were  dedl- 
"  cnteil* ;  and  in  the  begianing  of  the  reigo  of  Nabonas.'uir,  Kinj;  of 
"  Biibylon,  about  which  tirue  the  .^^thiopians,  tinder  Sabacmn,  invailed 
"  -V-KSf*-"  [^f  1  ^-^^  "  tliose  -Egyptians  who  fled  from  him  to  Ba- 
"  bylon,  carried  thither  the  ^Egyptian  year  of  365  days,  nnd  the  study 
"  of  astronomy  and  astrolo^cy,  and  founded  the  irra  of  Nabonassar, 
"  dating  it  from  the  first  year  of  that  king's  raign  "  [747  B.C.],  "and 
"  beginning  the  year  on  the  same  day  with  the  .K^-yptians  for  the 
"  sake  of  their  calculations.  So  Diodoms ;  '  Chey  lay  lliat  the  Chat' 
"  '  damnt  in  Babylon,  being  coloniaof  the  .-Kgyptiana.  bteame  famoiu 
"  '  for  ailrologi/,  having  learned  it  from  tkt  priala  of  .-Kgypl.' " — Xew- 
ton's  Chronology,  pp.  251,  S52. 

Again,  in  p.  327  :  "Tbe  practice  of  observing  the  stars  began  in 
"  -Egypt  in  the  days  of  Aramon,  as  above,  and  was  propagated  from 
"  thence,  in  tbe  reign  of  bia  aoo  Sesac,  into  Afric,  Europe,  and  Asia, 
"  by  conquest ;  and  then  Atlas  formed  the  sphere  of  tlie  Libyans  " 
(«5a  RC],  "and  Cbiron  that  of  the  Greelta  [g.t'J  B.C.];  and  the 
"  Chaldicans  also  made  a  epiiere  of  tbeir  own.  But  astrology  was 
"  invented  in  .-Egypt  by  Nichepsos,  or  Necepsos,  one  of  the  Kings  of 
"  the  Lower  .I'^gypt,  and  Petoairis  his  priest,  a  little  before  the  day* 
"  of  Sabacon,  and  propagated  thence  into  Chaldira,  where  Zoroaster, 
"  tbe  legislator  of  the  Magi,  met  with  it :  so  Paiilinus ; 


' '  Quiqut  magoi  doeuU  myiter 


a  Neeepiot.' " 


The  arcana  of  Aatrology  constituted  a  main  feature  in  tlie  doctrines 
of  the  Pernan  Magi ;  and  it  further  appears,  by  Newton's  Chronology, 
p.  347,  that  Zoroast«r  (altbouiiih  the  n"ra  of  his  life  has  been  erro- 


*  It  is  luaintaiDeal  by  astrologers,  timt  the  planeta,  haping  been  oi 
tervtd  to  produce  certain  eflects,  were  conaequently  dedicated  to  th 
several  parsonages  whose  names  they  respectively  bear. 


into  the  councib  of  princes,  it  guided  the  policy  of  na- 
tions, and  ruled  the  daily  actions  of  individuals.  All 
this  is  attested  by  the  records  of  every  nation  which  has 


neously  asnigneil  to  vEuious  remoter  periods)  lived  in  the  reign  of 
Dariiis  Hystaspis,  about  520  B  C,  and  assiHled  HyHtAHpes,  the  fnther 
of  Darius,  in  reforming  the  Magi,  of  whom  the  said  Kyittiupes  wu 
Muter.  Newton  adda,  p.  352,  that "  about  the  utme  time  with  Hya- 
"taapeeand  Zoroaster,  lived  aiao  Ostanen,  another  eminent  Magns: 
"Pliny  places  him  nnder  Dariua  Hjstaapis,  and  Suidas  makes  him 
"the  foUower  of  Zoroaster :  he  rame  into  Greece  with  Xerxes  about 
"48»  B.C.,  and  Heenw  to  be  the  Otanes  of  Herodotos.  In  hi.i  book, 
"  called  the  Octateuchus,  he  taught  the  same  doctrine  of  the  Deity 
"  as  Zoroaster." 

Having  ijnoted  thus  far  from  Newton,  it  neenw  proper  to  subjoin 
the  following  extract  from  the  "  Ancient  Uniiersal  History : "— "  In 
"the  reign  of  Gnshtaap  "  [the  oriental  name  of  Darius  HystRi^pLi], 
"  King  of  Persia,  floorished  a  celebrated  astrologer,  whose  name  was 
"  Gjamasp,  snmanied  A1  Hakira,  or  the  wise.  The  most  credible 
"writers  say  that  he  was  the  brother  of  King  Gushtaap,  and  liia  con< 
"  lidant  and  chief  minister.  He  is  Raid  to  have  predicted  the  coining 
"  of  the  Messiah ;  and  aorao  treatises  nnder  hb  name  are  yet  rnrrent 
"  in  the  East.  Dr.  Thomas  Hyde,  in  speaking  of  this  pliilosapher, 
"  cites  a  passage  from  a  very  ancient  author,  having  before  told  ua 
"  that  this  author  asserted  tliere  had  been  among  the  Persians  ten 
"doctors  of  such  conanmmate  wisdom  as  the  whole  world  coald  not 
"  boast  the  like.  He  then  gives  the  author's  words  :  ■  Of  these,  the 
''  'sixth  wosGjaiuasp,  an  astiologer,  who  was  connsellor  to  Hyslas- 
"  '  pia.  He  ia  the  author  of  a  book  intitled  JudUia  Gjatna*/iU,  in 
"' which  is  contained  Ms  judgement  on  the  planetary  conjunctions. 
" '  And  therein  he  gave  notice  that  Jesus  should  appear  ;  that  Mo. 
"'bammed  ahonld  be  borni  that  the  Magian  religion  should  be 
"'abolished,  &c,  j  nor  did  any  astrologer  ever  come  up  to  him.' 
■■[B  lib.  Mticj.  ajnid  Eyde].  Of  tliis  hook  there  is  an  Arabic  ver. 
"sion,  the  title  of  which  runs  thus;  The  Book  of  the  Pliltosopher 
"UJAmaap,  containing  Judgements  on  tlie  Grand  Conjunctions  of  the 
"  Planets,  and  on  the  Events  produced  by  them.  This  version  was 
"  made  by  Lali  %  the  title  be  gave  it  in  Arabic  was  Al  Keronat,  and 


A  history,  and  by  none  more  fully  than  by  those  of  Eng- 
land. Yet,  with  these  striking  facta  K-fore  their  eyes, 
the  present  generation  seem  never,  until  now,  to  have 


"he  pnbliahedit  A.D,  128i).  In  the  prcfuceof  bb  retsion  it  ia said 
"  that,  after  ttie  times  of  Zoroaxter,  or  ZerduElit,  reigned  IJuahtMp, 
"  the  Bon  of  Loliraap*,  tt  very  poncrful  prince ;  and  that  in  liia  reign 
"  Honrisfaed  in  the  tily  of  Balcli,  on  the  borders  of  Choraasiin,  a  most 
"cKcellent  pliilosophcr,  whose  name  was  Ujamasp,  anthor  of  this 
"book;  Tfherein  in  contained  an  account  of  all  the  great  conjunctiona 
"of  the  planets  which  had  happened  1>efore  his  time,  and  wliich  were 
"to  happen  in  sncceeiliae  ages;  and  wherein  the  nppearancefl  of 
"  new  rel'gions  aqiI  the  rixe  of  new  monarchies  were  exactly  set 
"down.  This  anthor,  throughout  his  whole  piece,  styles  Zerdnsht,  cr 
"Zoroaster,  our  Prophet.  [D'Herbelot,  Bibl.  Orient.  Art.  Gjumasb.] 
"  The  notion  of  predicting  the  rise  and  progress  of  religions  from  the 
"grand  conjunctions  of  the  planets,  has  been  likewise  propagated  in 
"onr  western  parts;  Cardan  was  a  bold  assertor  of  tliis  doctrine. 
"The  morlern  Pcraiana  are  still  great  votaries  of  astrolo^,  and  al- 
"  though  they  distinguish  between  it  and  astronomy,  they  have  but 
"one  word  to  express  aslronoiner  and  astrologer;  viz.  manrgjim, 
"  which  is  exactly  equivalent  to  Ihe  Greek  word  <ii;.]iiyii.  Of  all  the 
"provinces  uf  Persia,  Charassan  is  the  moat  famoUH  for  prodnring 
"  great  men  in  that  art ;  and  in  Chorassan  there  is  a  little  town  called 
"  Genabed,  and  in  that  town  a  certain  family  which,  for  0  or  700 
"years  pH£t,  has  produced  the  most  famous  astrologers  in  PersiB  ; 
"and  the  king's  aslruloger  is  always  either  a  native  of  Genabeil,  or 
"one  brought  up  there.  Sir  John  Chardin  affirms  that  the  appoint- 
"ments  in  his  time  for  these  sagesamoanted  to  six  millions  of  French 
"  livres  per  annum.— Albums zar  of  Balch  (scholar  of  Alkeudi,  a  Jew, 
"who  was  professor  uf  judicial  astrology  at  Bagdad,  in  the  Calipbale 


*  This  seems  to  be  a  mistake  of  the  Arabian  author,  for  Gushta^p 
was  identical  with  Darius  Ilyataspis,  and  Lohrasp  [otherwise  Cy 
axarea]  was  father  of  Darius  the  Mede,  who  was  overcome  by  Cyrus, 
G3G  B.C.-S«e  Newioo. 


PREFACE.  IX 

inquired  on  what  basis  this  belief  of  their  forefathers 
was  established,  nor  by  what  authority  the  delusion  (if 
it  was  one)  could  have  been  for  so  many  ages  supported. 
Among  a  thousand  persons  who  now  treat  the  mention 
of  Astrology  with  supercilious  ridicule,  there  is  scarcely 
one  who  knows  distinctly  what  it  is  he  laughs  at,  or  on 
what  plea  his  ancestors  should  stand  excused  for  having, 
in  their  day,  contemplated  with  respect  the  unfortunate 
object  of  modern  derision. 

The  general  want  of  information  on  these  points,  and 
the  indifference  with  which  such  want  has  been  hitherto 
regarded,  cannot  surely  be  attributed  solely  to  the  mo- 


**  of  Almamoam*)  became  wonderfally  famous.  He  wrote  expressly 
"  from  the  Persian  astrologers,  and  it  may  be  from  the  works  of 
"  Gjamasp,  since  he  also  reports  a  prediction  of  the  coming  of  Christ 
*'  in  the  following  words :  viz.  '  In  the  sphere  of  Persia,  saith  Aben 
" '  Ezra,  there  ariseth  upon  the  face  of  the  sign  Virgo  a  beautiful 
*' '  maiden,  she  holding  two  ears  of  corn  in  her  hand,  and  a  child  in 
** '  her  arm :  she  feedeth  him,  and  giveth  him  suck,  &c.  This  maiden,' 
"saith  Albumazar,  'we  call  Adrenedefa,  the  pure  Virgin.  She 
"  '  bringeth  up  a  child  in  a  place  which  is  called  Abrie  [the  Hebrew 
"  '  land],  and  the  child's  name  is  called  Eisi  [Jesus].'  This  made 
"  Albertus  Magnus  believe  that  our  Saviour,  Christ,  was  bom  in 
*'  Virgo ;  and  therefore  Cardinal  Alliac,  erecting  our  Lord's  nativity 
"  by  his  description,  casteth  this  sign  into  the  horoscope.  But  the 
'*  meaning  of  Albumazar  was,  saith  Friar  Bacon,  that  the  said  virgin 
"  was  bom,  the  San  being  in  that  sign,  and  so  it  is  noted  in  the  ca- 
"  lendar ;  and  that  she  was  to  bring  up  her  son  in  the  Hebrew  land. 
**  [Mr.  John  Gregory's  Notes  on  various  Passages  of  Scripture]." — 
Ancient  Universal  History,  vol.  5,  pp  415  to  419. 


*  This  caliph  reigned  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  9th  century,  and 
caused  Ptolemy's  Great  Constraction  to  be  translated  into  Arabic,  as 
hereafter  mentioned. 


dern  disrepute  of  the  science  ;  for  mankind  have  uwally, 
in  every  successive  age,  exercised  yreat  industry  in 
tracing  all  previous  customs,  however  trifling  or  obso- 
lete, and  in  examining  all  sorts  of  creeds,  however  un- 
important or  erroneous,  whenever  there  has  appeared 
.  any  striking  connection  between  such  matters  and  his- 
torical facta;  and,  since  astrology  is  most  unquestion- 
ably blended  intimately  with  history,  it  therefore  be- 
comes necessary  to  seek  for  some  further  hypothesis,  by 
which  this  ignorance  and  indifference  may  be  accounted 
for. 

Perhaps  a,itrology  has  been  conceived  to  have  borne 
the  same  relation  to  astronomy  as  alchymy  did  to  chy- 
mistry.  If  such  has  been  the  notion,  it  has  certainly  been 
adopted  in  error,  for  a  modern  chymist  is  still  almost 
an  alchymist:  it  is  true  that  he  no  longer  delays  hh 
work  in  deference  to  the  planets,  nor  does  he  now  try 
to  make  gold,  nor  to  distil  the  elixir  of  earthly  immor- 
tality ;  hut  nevertheless  he  still  avails  himself,  to  a  cer- 
tain degree,  of  the  same  rules  and  the  same  means  as 
those  of  the  old  alchymist:  he  is  still  intent  upon  the 
subtle  processes  of  Nature,  and  still  imitates  her  as  far 
as  he  can.  He  reduces  the  diamond  to  charcoal  by  an 
operation  analogous  to  that  by  which  the  alchymist 
sought  to  transmute  lead  into  gold;  and  he  mainly  dif- 
fers from  the  alchymist  only  in  having  assured  himself 
that  there  is  a  point  beyond  which  Nature  forbids  fac- 
similes. Not  so  slightly,  however,  does  the  astronomer 
differ  from  the  astrologer,  but  toto  ccelo :  the  astrologer 
considered  the  heavenly  bodies  and  their  motions  merely 
as  the  mechanism  wherewith  he  was  to  weave  the  tissue 
of  his  predictions;  and  astronomy  is  no  more  an  inte- 
gml  part  of  astrology,  than  the  loom  i'*  of  the  web  which 


has  been  woven  by  it.  To  have  an  idea  of  what  alchy- 
my  was,  it  ia  sufficient  to  have  an  idea  of  chymistry ;  but 
astronomy,  in  itself,  will  never  give  a  notion  of  astro- 
logy, wliich  requires  additional  and  distinct  considera- 
tion. 

It  may  be  urged,  that  in  the  present  day  a  general  idea 
of  this  by-gone  and  disused  science  is  quite  sufficient 
for  every  body  not  profe.saedly  antiquarian.  Such  an 
assertion  would  doubtless  never  be  controverted,  pro- 
vided the  proposed  general  idea  might  comprehend  the 
truth.  But  the  present  actual  general  idea  of  astrology 
is  by  no  means  so  comprehensive;  indeed,  nothing  can 
well  be  more  inaccurate,  or  even  more  false:  it  seems  to 
have  been  adopted  not  from  the  elements  of  the  science 
itself,  but  from  trite  observations  made  by  writers  against 
the  science ;  and  consequently  the  world  now  wonders 
at  the  lamentable  defect  of  understanding  that  could 
ever  have  permitted  belief  in  it — ^forgctting  that  astrology 
has  been  consigned  to  neglect,  not  in  consequence  of 
Any  primd  facie  palpability  in  ils  imputed  fallacies,  nor 
indeed  of  any  special  skill  or  acuteness  on  the  part  of 
its  professed  adversanes,  but  rather  in  consequence  of 
the  sudden  and  astonishing  growth  of  other  undoubted 
sciences,  with  which  it  has  been  presumed  to  be  incom- 
patible, and  which  during  the  thousands  of  years  of  the 
reign  of  astrology  were  either  unborn,  or  still  slumbering 
in  continued  infancy." 


*  To  this  view  of  tfae  case,  tbe  folbniog  rem&rkB  Bceni  not  inap- 
plicaliie :  tliej  are  token  from  a,  periodical  work  of  deserved  repn- 

"  The  Rtiidy  of  aatrology  itself,  lu  profesiin);  to  discover,  by  celcH- 
"  lial  plienomeDa,  future  iDntatioDB  in  tlie  elements  and  termtrial 


The  worda  "professed  adTer3avie3,"  which  have  just 
now  been  used,  are  of  course  not  intended  to  be  applied 
to  those  mighty  explorers  of  Nature's  laws  and  nian'a 
powers,  who,  in  their  lofty  career,  mtiy  have  made  an 
incidental  swoop  at  the  pretensions  of  astrology.  Di- 
rectly engaged  in  more  exact  pursuits,  they  stopped  not 
to  dissect  this  their  casual  prey,  which,  after  having  been 
thua  struck  by  eagles,  was  left  to  regale  crows  and  daws, 
and  these,  in  their  convivial  loquacity,  accusud  their 
unfortunate  victim  of  crimes  incapable  of  being  com- 
mitted, and  of  offences  which  had  never  been  iraagined- 
Of  the  real  faults  of  their  victim  these  garrulous  bipeds 
seem  not  to  have  been  aware,  or,  if  aware,  they  seem  to 
have  considered  them  as  not  sufficiently  prominent.  Nor 
was  this  want  of  candour  or  information  absolutely  con- 
fined to  the  mere  vulgar  herd  of  vituperative  scribblers, 
tor  even  the  sparkling  essay  against  astrology,  writtan  by 


"bcKlien,  ODgbt,  perhapa,  not  to  be  despised*.  Tbe  theory  of  the  tides, 
"  for  exHmpic,  U  nltogetlier  an  iutro1ot{ica1  doctiine,  and,  long  before 
"  the  days  of  Sir  I^noc  Nowton.  was  as  well  understood  as  it  U  at  this 
"moment.  The  correspondenre  alleged  by  the  ancient  physicians 
"  to  exLat  between  the  poaitionB  of  the  Moon  and  the  stages  of  various 
"diseases,  is  ho  far  from  being  rejected  by  the  modern  faculty,  that 
"  it  has  been  openly  niaintainedt."  The  writer  then  recounts  sundry 
incideattt,  asserted  by  the  Afltrulogers  to  be  dependent  on  tbe  Moon, 
and  he  adds  these  words :  "  The  fact  of  thene  allegation))  might  be  so 
"easily  ascertained,  that  it  is  surprising  they  still  should  be  pro- 
"  naunced  incredible,  and  drnied  rather  than  contrafiiiUiil." 


"•  Sir  Christopher  Heydon's  Defence  of  Astrology,  p  2,ei)it  1803." 

"t  Dr.  Mend  on  tlie  inllaenoe  of  the  Sun  and  Moon  upon  Human 

■'  Bodies.     See  also  Kdinb.  Kcv.  vol.  12,  p.  36— Balfnnr  on  Sol-Lunat 

"  Inllaence."    Biaektoood'i  Mtujacine  for  Dec.,  IS3I,  Part  2,  Ne.  59. 


PREFACE.  Xlll 

Voltaire  (in  his  iiTepressible  desire  to  convince  the  world 
that  he  was  an  fait  in  every  thing),  proves  only  that  the 
writer,  though  the  most  generally  informed  man  of  his 
time,  had  mistaken  the  really  assailable  points  of  the 
object  of  his  attack. 

The  author  of  the  present  Translation  has  no  intention 
now  of  either  advocating  or  impugning  the  doctrines  of 
the  science  of  which  his  Translation  discourses:  his 
purpose  is  a  different  one.  He  has  that  sort  of  respect 
for  "the  dead,  which  are  already  dead,"  which,  although 
it  does  not  incline  him  to  "  praise  "  them  "  raore  than 
*'  the  living,  which  are  yet  alive,"  is  still  sufficient  to 
incite  him  to  endeavour  to  avert  the  imputation  of  idiot 
credulity,  to  which  their  faith  in  astrology  seems- now 
to  subject  them  in  the  general  opinion  of  the  enlightened 
"  living."  And,  while  he  disclaims  all  idea  of  presum- 
ing to  offer  any  argument  on  either  side  of  the  question, 
as  to  the  validity  of  the  science,  he  must  still,  at  the 
same  time,  confess  his  admiration  of  the  ingenuity  and 
contrivance  manifest  in  its  construction,  and  avow  his 
readiness  to  believe  that  all  its  harmonized  complica- 
tions might  have  easily  held  dominion  over  some  of  the 
strongest  niinds  in  that  darker  period  when  it  flourished. 

In  executing  here  the  desire  of  attempting  to  vindi- 
cate the  ancient  credence  in  astrology,  an  elaborate 
disquisition  would  surely  be  not  only  unnecessary,  but 
misplaced :  it  seems  sufficient  to  refer  the  reader  to  the 
work  of  which  the  following  is  a  translation,  and  to 
these  undisputed  facts, — that  the  science  was  formerly 
inculcated  by  the  highest  and  most  erudite  authorities 
of  the  period, — that  it  was  insisted  on  by  votaries  in  all 
parts  of  the  world,  attesting  and  producing  instances  of 
its  truth  ; — and  moreover,  that  it  was  so  finely  and  beau- 

b 


tifully  put  together,  as  to  cause  the  only  deficiency  of 
one  Hmal),  though  mo:st  important,  link  in  its  whole 
chain  of  argument,  to  be  undetected  by  dull  minds,  and 
readily  supplied  by  enthusiastic  genius.  For  centuries 
after  centuries  all  branches  of  learning  were  either  made 
subservient  to  astrology,  or  carried  on  in  close  alliance 
with  it;  and  many  of  the  illustrious  names  which  it  re- 
calls to  our  recollection  are  greatly  reverenced  even 
by  modern  science.  The  genius  of  Roger  Bacon,  al- 
though he  was  the  6rst  of  that  school  of  natural  phi- 
losophy which  acknowledges  none  but  experimented 
truths,  was  nevertheless  bowed  to  the  doctrines  of  ju- 
dicial astrology  ;  and  hia  greater  Namesake,  who  after 
an  interval  of  several  centuries  succeeded  to  him  in  giv- 
ing proper  direction  to  the  mental  energy,  was  still  an 
arguer  in  favour  of  celestial  influences :  it  may  he,  there- 
fore, fairly  inferred,  that  the  subtle  apell  which  had 
strength  to  enthrall  "stuff"  so  "stern,"  could  have  been 
of  no  weak  or  vulgar  order  ;  but  that  it  was  suiEciently 
potent  and  refined  to  interest  and  amuse  even  tlie  pre- 
sent age*. 


•  In  the  olst  No.  of  the  Quarterly  Review,  Art.  "  Astrology  and 
Alyckmy,"  the  followlDg  obacrvntioni  are  made: — 

■*  CertMDly,  if  man  niay  ever  found  hU  glory  on  the  acldevemenls 
"  of  hU  wudom,  he  may  reasonably  exalt  in  the  discoveries  of  astro- 
"  nomy  ;  bat  the  knowledge  ivliich  avails  as  lias  been  created  solely 
"by  the  sbanrditiaB  whioli  it  lias  extirpated.  DehinJoa  became  the 
"  boala  of  tmth.  Horoacopes  and  nativities  have  taught  as  to  trace 
"the  planet  iu  its  sure  and  silent  path  ;  and  the  acqiiiremeuU  which, 
"  of  all  others,  now  testily  the  might  of  the  liuraan  intelleit,  derived 
"  their  origin  from  weakaasa  and  crudnUty"(p.  IBl),  A);ain;"A8- 
"  tiology,  like  alohyniy,  derives  no  protection  from  sober  reason  j  yet, 
"  with  all  its  vanity  and  idleness,  it  was  not  a  corrupting  weakness. 


In  this  little  volume  will  be  found  the  whole  of  the 
elements  of  astrology,  and  the  entire  ground-work  of 
those  stupendous  tomes  in  folio  and  quarto  on  the  same 
subject,  which  were  produced  in  ntyriaiU  during  the 
16th  and  17th  centuries,  for  the  due  mystification  of  the 
then  world.  The  present  volume  is  addressed  equally 
to  the  general  rL^aJer,  a-i  well  as  to  the  votary  of  pure 
astrology,  if  any  such  there  be:  to  the  one  it  offers 
amusement;  for  the  other,  it  should  contain  the  most 
glowing  interest.  Even  to  the  speculative  metaphysi- 
cian it  will  furnish  food  for  contemplation ;  for,  in  ad- 
dition to  its  peculiar  hypothesis  of  cause  and  effect, 
it  developes  many  of  tho'se  apparent  incongruities  of 
character  so  often  united  in  the  same  inilividual:  and 
thin  developement,  even  although  adapted  to  the  doc- 
trine of  the  stars,  still  merits  attention ;  inasmuch  ns 
the  phenomena  of  which  it  treats  (in  whatever  way 
they  may  be  produced  or  regulated)  will  ever  remain 
in  actual  existence. 

The  only  English  translation  of  Ptolemy's  Tetrabiblos 
hitherto  published,  appears  to  have  been  first  set  forth 


"Tokens,  predictions,  prognmliin,  poaaewi  a  psycliologica]  reality. 
"  All  events  are  but  the  consuiumsitioa  of  precoding  causes,  cleariy 
"felt,  but  not  distinctly  apiiTcliended.  When  tlie  ctroin  is  soQadcd, 
"  the  most  unLutored  listener  can  t«11  that  it  will  end  witli  the  key- 
-note, thoDKh  lie  cannot  explain  whyeadi  sooeessivo  bar  must  at 
"  last  Uad  to  the  concluding  chord.  The  omen  embodies  this  pre- 
I  receives  its  consistency  from  our  hopes  or  feitrs." 


(.208. 


It  may,  perhaps,  be  dillicult  t 
volved  in  these  extracts ;  hut  th 
clearly  unqnealienabk. 


Rssent  to  all  of  the  propo!iitioas  i 
a  are  among  theui  aunie  which  a 


in  1701,  under  Ihe  name  of  "  The  Quadripartite."  That 
pnlilieation  has  been  long  removed  from  general  sale; 
and  its  gross  misinterpretation  of  the  author,  caused  by 
the  carele5sne33  or  ignorance  of  Whalley  an<I  Iiis  assist- 
ants, by  whom  it  was  produced,  has  reodered  most  of 
its  pages  unintelligible  :  its  absence  is,  therefore,  scarce- 
ly to  be  regretted.  The  second  edition  of  tbe  same 
translation,  professing  to  be  "  revised,  corrected,  and 
"improved,"  and  published  by  Browne  and  Sibley,  in 
17S6,  was  not,  in  any  one  instance,  purified  from  the 
blunders  and  obscurities  which  disgmcetl  its  predecessor : 
it  seems,  in  fact,  less  excusable  than  the  former  edition, 
of  which  it  was  merely  a  reprint,  without  being  at  all 
corrected,  not  even  in  certain  typographica!  errata 
whicli  the  former  printer  had  been  zealous  enough  to 
point  out  in  his  final  page.  Even  this  second  publica- 
tion, wortiiless  as  it  intrinsically  is,  can  rarely  now  be 
met  with,  and,  like  the  former,  only  at  a  very  heavy 
price. 

Tne  present  Translation  has  been  made  from  Proclus's 
Greek  Paraphrase  of  Ptolemy's  original  text :  the  edi- 
tion followed  _is  that  of  the  Elzevirs,  dated  in  1635*. 


*Thu  edition  was  priotiid  in  double  cotamos,  one  containing  Pra- 
clos'a  Greek  Parapbnse,  tlie  olher  tbe  Latin  translatioa  of  Leo 
AUatiua ;  and  William  Lilly  (no  ligUt  anthortty  in  Iheje  matter?)  Ihua 
wrote  of  it  in  the  yeai  1047  -.  "  Indeed  I'tolemy  bath  been  printed  in 
"  folio,  in  qaarto,  in  octavo,  in  eiiteeas :  that  Utety  printed  at  Ley- 
"ilen"  [where  tbe  Klzevin  were  established]  "I  cuncelvo  t«  be 
••  raoHt  eiact ;  it  was  perfonawl  by  Allatius."  To  the  said  elition  ia 
prefived  an  anonyniona  addresi  to  tlie  reidfr,  in  Lalio,  and  to  the 
lolloving  effect . — 

"  I  have  reckoned  it  part  of  my  duty  t)  ;,-ive  yoo,  benevoleot 
*'  retujer.  Home  abort  iufomiatioD  as  to  the  pablii:jvliua  of  this  tilt'u 


PREFACE. 


Bat.  in  the  courae  of  traat^lation,  continual  references 
have  been  atao  had  to  various  editions  of  the  oiigina] 
text,  in    order   to  ascertain    the  proper  acceptation   of 


"work,  which,  Laving  hilberto  existed  only  in  Ureek*,  is  now,  in  its 
''  Latin  dresa,  accessible  to  the  iriirioBity  of  nil  pursona.  This  Pan- 
"phraseof  ProaIu9  on  ibe  Tetrabiblon  of  PColcin;  wb^  tT«n«lat«iI  a. 
"  f«w  years  a^o  l>y  Leo  AllatiuR,  a  Greek  by  birth,  eniiaently  skilled 
"  ill  the  iearuiiig  of  hie  own  Datiua,  as  well  a«  in  Latin  literature, 
"aod  already  celehratvd  for  other  writiegn  in  both  InnKoageB.  Hr 
"liree,  I  kave  nnilentood,  in  Rome,  in  the  family  of  Canlinal  RisciH, 
"anil  holila  soms  office  in  the  Vatican  Library.  He  andertouk  thir< 
"  present  work,  however,  (or  his  own  private  gralifi cation,  and  thai 
"of  certain  friend*;  bi)t  when  writings  compiled  with  this  view 
*'hav«  fiTife  quiltod  their  atthur'B  liands,  it  will  often  happen  that 
"  they  bavB  also,  at  lbs  same  time,  esoaped  his  controut.  Ho  Ibis 
"offspiinj'  of  Allalins,  hsviag  enii^rged  from  Kotu<!,  arrived  at  Ve- 
"  nioe,  from  whence  it  was  forwarded  to  me  by  a  certuiu  great  por- 
"sonage  of  illastrioua  rank,  in  order  that  I  might  caiue  it  to  b« 
"  printed.  The  names  of  Ptoleinj  «uJ  Pronlua,  so  celebrated  amon;; 
"  BtathematiciaDH  and  philosophers,  besides  the  su^jeol  of  the  work 
"itself,  seemed  to  mt'  a  suHicient  warrant  for  ooinmitting  it  to  the 
"press.  Wberaupon  I  delayed  not  to  nvail  myt<elf  of  tb*  advants^n 
"I  posBettsed  in  having  access  to  onr  excellent  and  most  aoeurktv 
"typographers,  the  Khevirs,  and  I  earnestly  «olieit«d  tbem  to  pnb. 
"lishit:  tliey,  in  their  love  for  the  PoinmonweallJi  of  lettcnt,  took 
"  upon  themselves  the  charge  of  printing  it  in  the  form  yon  see. 
"Yon  will  learn  from  it,  tnquLiitive  Header,  how  mach  power  the 
"■Mrs  have  over  the  atmonphere  and  all  snhlnnary  things:  fur  the 


"  This  assertion  is  applicable  only  to  Proclns'a  Paraphrase.  There 
were  several  prior  translatioDs  of  the  orif^nal  TetrabihIoH  in  l.iatiii 
and  Arabic:  and  it  appuars  by  an  extract  from  the  Biblioiheca 
Oneca  of  Fabrieos  [which  vrill  he  found  in  a  Bnbset)nent  paije],  that  ^*''- 
a  Latin  version,  done  from  the  Arabic,  was  printed  at  Venice  ai 
early  ■■  the  year  1403. 


doubtful   passagea.      The  editions  thus   inspected 

that  by  Caraerarius,  printed  at   Nuremberg    in    1535 ; 

that  by  Melancthon,  printed  at  Basle  in  1553  :  and  that 


"  titan,  and  those  brighter  bodieR  of  heaven,  must  not  be  iiaagineil 
"  U>  be  idle.  The  whole  doctrine  of  the  st&ts  if  not.  however,  here 
"  treiit«d  of,  but  only  that  iliHtiiiet  pnrt  of  it  whirh  the  Greeks  call 
"jadioial  (tad  prognosUc,  and  which,  while  confined  within  certain 
"  iiniita,  is  u  entertnining  as  it  \a  useful,  and  is  pnrtly  considered  to 
"  be  agreeable  to  nature.  But  should  it  pretend  to  subject  to  the  skies 
"  Hucb  tliingfl  as  do  not  depend  tiiereupon,  and  siiould  it  invite  ns  to 
"  foreiec  by  the  starn  nucb  things  oh  are  above  the  weakness  of  our 
"apprehension,  it  will  assnredly  deserve  to  be  reprehendeil  as  a  vain 
"and  empty  art,  which  hai  been  demonstrated  in  many  learned 
"  books  by  the  great  Picus  of  Mirandols.  The  ChaldaianH,  (^netli- 
"liacs,  and  PlaheUirianB,lia*e  been  always  held  in  diBrepat«,  because 
"  they  professed  to  know  not  only  more  than  they  actually  did  know, 
"  hat  also  more  than  is  allowed  to  man  to  know,  Ev«ii  Ptolemy, 
"  while  he  employe  hiniKelf  \a  Ms  present  wnrk  upon  the  Doctrine  of 
"  NatiTities,  is  scarcely  free  from  the  charge  of  anperstition  and  va- 
"  nity :  perhaps,  in  a  Pagan,  this  may  ha  forgiven ;  but  it  is  hardly 
*'  [0  be  tolerated,  that  persons  professing  Christianity  should  be  led 
"  away  by  such  an  empty  study,  in  which  Ihere  is  no  solid  utility, 
*■  and  the  whole  plenaure  of  which  is  puerile.  Finally,  I  warn  jrou 
"that  some  person*  doobt  whether  this  was  really  produced  by 
"  Ptolemy*  :  neveriheless,  it  has  certainly  appeared  to  Porphyry  and 
"  Proclns  (who  were  donbtleas  great  philosophers,  although  hostile 
"  to  the  Christian  faith)  to  be  worthy  of  receiving  elucidation  by 
'■  their  Commentaries  upon  it+,  Pemse  it,  however,  friendly  reader, 
"  with  caution,  having  Rrst  shaken  ofl  the  weakness  of  credulity,  for 
"  the  sinew  of  wisdom  in  not  to  believe  rashly.     Farewell." 

In  addition  to  the  remarks  made  in  the  foregoing  address  regard- 


•  The  reader  i*  again  referred  to  the  extract  from  Fabricua  (insert- 
ed in  a  subupuHcnt  panel,  containing  that  learned  person's  account  of 
this  liook  among  the  othet  works  of  Ptolemy. 

+  Their  Commentaries  were  printed  at  Ilasle,  in  I5G9. 


by  Junctinus,  printed,  with  hi:^  own  enormous  < 
taries,  at  Lyons,  in  1581.  Independently  of  these  re- 
ferences, the  present  iranslatJoii  haa  been  collated  with 
the  Latin  of  Leo  Allatius,  and  with  two  other  L»ttn 
ttanslationa  :  mie  printed  at  BosIb,  together  with  a  tran- 
slation of  the  Aiiim^e.st  in  1541  ;  the  other  by  itself  at 
Perugia  in  IGtC.  The  Trunslator  has  devoted  all  this 
extreme  care  and  attention  to  hU  labours,  in  the  wiah  to 
render  Ploleinj's  aatro-judicial  doctrine  into  English  as 
purely  and  perfectly  as  possible  ;  and,  with  the  same 
view,  he  has  likewise  added,  in  an  Appendix,  certain 
extracts  from  such  parts  of  the  Almagest  as  were  found 
to  be  refetrefl  to  in  the  present  work.  Further  tltustra- 
tioQ  ia  also  given  by  notes  gathered  from  the  "  Piimum 
"  Uobile "  of  Pladduaf ,  and  from  a  variety  of  other 


ing  Lea  Allatikis,  it  may  be  obxerveil  that  be  was  appointed  Keeper 
of  ilia  Vatican  Library  hy  Pope  Alcx&uder  VII,  wiUi  whum  he  was 
in  high  favour.  It  is  (aid  of  him,  Ihnt  hs  had  a  pen  with  whidi  he 
had  written  Greek  for  forty  years,  and  that  he  shed  tears  on  losing  it. 
Another  story  of  him  8tat«s,  that  the  Fop«  hod  often  arKcU  him  Ui 
lake  holy  oiden,  Iliat  ha  niiKht  be  advanced  in  the  chart'h,  «ud  one 
day  hiVed  bim  why  he  tiad  not  done  bo  :  "  Bccaase,"  taid  Allatinn, 
"I  wootd  be  free  to  marry."—"  Wliy,  then,  do  yon  not  marry!"— 
"  Becauw  I  would  lie  free  to  take  orders."— CAa/mirra'«  Biogrephieal 
Dietionarj/, 

*Thii  tranalatjon  from  the  Perugia  piesa  has  been  serviceable  in 
preseottng  t-crtaio  viuioue  readings ;  but  it  doen  not  tseem  ta  possess 
any  other  peculiar  merit.  It  professea  to  be  a  translation  from  the 
original  l«xtof  Ptolemy  ;  and  so  likowiae  does  the  translation  printed 
at  Basle,  ha  above  igiiuted. 

+  It  appears  by  the  printed  works  of  this  author,  that  he  was  named 
DidavDs  Plaeidu?  de  Titis.  He  was  n  native  of  Bologna,  by  pro- 
fearioD  a  iiiuak,  and  was  styled  Mathematician  to  tlic  Arohduke  I.eo- 


sources,  whence  any  elucidation  of  the  text  might  lie 
derived  Even  Whalley'a  "Annotations"  (to  use  his 
own  grandiloquent  desij^nation)  have  occasionally  yield- 
ed information,  not  altogether  unimportant,  although 
geoeratly  incomplete. 

It  seenis  improper  to  close  this  Preface  (notwitlistand- 
ing  the  bulk  it  has  already  attained),  without  annexing 
the  following  short  notice  of  the  life  and  works  of  the 
great  man  from  whom  the  Tetrabiblos  has  emanated. 

Claiidiufi  Ptolemy  was  born  at  Pelusiuin,  in  ^gypt, 
and  Lucamo  an  illustrious  disciple  of  the  school  of 
Alexandria,  in  which  city  he  flourished  during  the  reign 
of  Adrian  and  that  of  Antoninus  Pius.  Tht-date  of  hi.i 
birth  has  been  commonly  assigned  to  the  70th  year  of 
the  Christian  icra ;  but  the  accuracy  of  this  date  seems 
questionable  ;  for  lie  has  himself  noted  in  one  part  of  his 
works,  that  Antoninus  reigned. twenty-three  yeara.  He 
must  have,  therefore,  survived  that  prineo  ;  and,  as  it  b 
not  probable  that  he  continued  his  scientific  labours 
until  after  ninety  years  of  age,  which  he  must  have  done 
had  he  been  Iwrn  about  the  year  70,  because  Antoninus 
died  in  the  year  161,  it  seems  thai,  his  birth  would  oe 
more  properly  ascribed  to  some  later  period,  Moreover, 
it  is  asserted  by  the  Arabians,  that  he  died  in  the  78th 
year  of  his  age;  and  a  simitar  statement  is  aUo  made 
by  Luca  Gauricus,  in  the  dedication  of  his  version  of 
the   Almagest*   to   Dominico   Palavicini :   Gauricus  has 


pold  William  of  Austria.  He  wrote  in  lliu  earlier  part  of  the  ITtb 
century,  sqiI  liis  work,  now  cited,  is  cousidoreil  to  cnntain  the  meet 
aucceattful  upplicatioo  of  Ptoleni; '■  BHtroiugical  rulr»  to  practice.  Tbe 
original  is  extremel;  ioarce ;  bat  a  new  English  edition,  by  Cooper, 
ml,y  be  had  of  the  VnblifhpTB  of  this  work. 
*  Printed  at  B>uil«,  1G41. 


PREFACE.  ^  XXI 

however,  placed  his  death  in  the  year  147,  which  does 
not  accord  with  the  fact  of  his  having  survived  Anto- 
ninus. 

Ptolemy  has  recorded  that  he  observed,  at  Alexan- 
dria, an  eclipse  of  the  Moon,  in  the  9th  year  of  Adrian  ; 
and  that  he  made  many  observations  upon  the  fixed 
stars  in  the  2d  year  of  Antoninus  Pius :  whence  it  may 
be  concluded,  that  his  observations  upon  the  heavens 
were  principally  made  during  the  period  from  A.D.  125 
to  A.D.  140,  or  thereabouts;  and  it  also  follows,  of 
course,  that  the  supposition,  entertained  by  some  au- 
thors, of  his  identity  with  the  Ptolemy  who  was  always 
in  attendance  upon  Galba,  as  his  personal  astrologer, 
and  who  promised  Otho  that  he  should  survive  Nero 
and  obtain  the  empire,  is  entirely  without  foundation*. 
To  Gauricus's  version  of  the  Almagest  there  is  also 
another  dedication,  addressed  to  Pope  Sixtus,  and  com- 
posed by  George  Trapezuntius,  describing  Ptolemy  as 
''regid  atirpe  oHundumJ'  and  explaining  that  he  had, 
"  with  a  truly  regal  mind,"  applied  himself  to  the 
sciences,  because  the  ancient  sceptre  of  the  Ptolemies 
had  previously  passed  into  the  hands  of  Cleopatra,  and 
because  the  kingdom  of  iEgypt  had  been  since  reduced 
to  the  state  of  a  Roman  province.  The  authentic  de- 
tails of  the  circumstances  of  Ptolemy's  life  are,  however, 
extremely  few.  It  is  said  that  he  was  distinguished 
among  the  Greeks  by  the  epithets  "  most  wise,"  and 
"most  divine,"  on  account  of  his  great  learning;  and, 
according  to  the  Preface  to  Whal  ley's  translation  of  the 
Tetrabiblos,  the  Arabians  report  that  "he  was  extreme- 


*  Chalmers's  Biographical  Dictionary. 

c 


"  ly  abstemious,  and  rode  much  on  horseback;"  adding, 
that  alth(mp[h  he  was  "spruce  in  apparel,"  yet  his 
breath  was  not  remarkable  for  an  agreeable  odour. 

The  errors  of  the  Ptolemaic  theory  of  the  universe 
have  now  been  long  discarded;  but  there  are  many 
poinls  in  which  modern  sciences,  and  modem  astrono- 
my in  particular,  have  reaped  incalculable  benefits  from 
the  labours  and  researches  of  its  great  founder.  He 
has  preserved  and  transmitted  to  us  the  observations 
and  principal  discoveries  of  remoter  periods,  and  has 
enriched  and  augmented  them  with  hia  own.  He  cor- 
rected Hipparchus's  catalogue  of  the  fixed  stars,  and 
formed  tables  for  the  calculation  and  regulation  of  th» 
motions  of  the  Sun,  Moon,  and  planets.  He  was,  in 
fact,  the  fir.-^t  who  collected  the  scattered  and  detached 
obaervation.s  of  Aristotle,  Hipparchus,  Posidonius,  and 
others  on  the  CEconomy  o(  the  world,  and  digested  them 
into  a  system,  which  he  set  forth  in  hia  MtyaAij  Sutrofi!, 
or  Great  Construction,  divided  into  thirteen  books,  and 
called,  after  him,  the  Ptolemaic  System.  This  and  all 
his  other  astronomical  works  are  founded  upon  the  hy- 
pothesis, that  the  earth  is  at  rest  in  the  centre  of  the 
universe,  and  that  the  heavenly  bodies,  stars,  and  pla- 
nets, all  move  round  it  in  solid  orbs,  whose  motions  are 
all  directed  by  one  primwm  mobile,  or  tirst  mover,  of 
which  he  discourses  at  large  in  the  "  Great  Construc- 
"tiou."  In  that  work  he  also  treats  of  the  figure  and 
divisions  of  the  earth,  of  the  tiyht  and  oblique  ascensions 
of  the  heavenly  bodies,  and  of  the  motions  of  the  Sun, 
Moon,  and  planets;  and  he  gives  tables  for  finding  their 
situations,  latitudes,  longitudes,  and  motions:  he  treats 
also  of  ficlipses,  ami  the  methods  of  computing  them; 
and  he  discourses  of  the  fixed  stars,  of  which  he  for- 


niahes  a  numerou»  c&iaiogae,  with  their  magnitudes,  la- 
titudes, ami  longitudes*. 

It  has  been  truly  said,  that  "Ptolemy's  order,  false 
*■  as  it  was,  enabled  observers  to  give  a  plausible  ac- 
'  count  of  the  motions  of  the  Sun  and  Moon,  to  foretell 
"  eelipsea  and  to  improve  geography +  ;"  or,  in  other 
words,  that  it  represented  the  actual  phenomena  of  the 
heavens  as  they  really  appear  to  a  spectator  on  the 
earth.  It  ia,  therefore,  clear  that  Ptolemy's  astrology  ia 
just  as  applicable  to  modern  and  improved  astronomy 
as  it  was  to  his  own  \ . 


*  In  France,  Kbout  tha  beginning  of  Uio  I6th  century,  Oronce  Pia6, 
the  Koyitl  Reiwler,  atteniptcd,  under  cbe  patronage  of  Francis  I.,  to 
prudaue  an  iislroDoniical  cWk,  in  wliich  everything  moved  tiecon]- 
iag  to-the  prineiplos  of  Ptolemy.  It  waa  kept,  aboat  fifty  yeare  ago, 
in  the  nionaatery  of  St.  Genevieve,  at  Paris.  In  Lilly's  Catalogae  of 
A»trological  Anthors,  Orontins  Finti'u«  is  mentioaed  at  tbe  writer  o/ 
a  work  on  the  twelve  houses  of  heaven,  printed  in  Paris,  1553. 

i  Sptctaelt  de  la  Xaluri, 

%  The  objection  which  has  been  urged  against  astrology,  that  the 
ugnt  Me  continually  moving  from  their  positions,  cannot  invalidate 
this eonclasioQ.  That  ohjeclion  hnx,  in  fact,  no  real  existence:  for 
Ptolemy  seems  ta  have  been  awara  of  this  motion  of  the  signs,  and 
hu  folly  provided  for  it  in  the  2T<\\i  Chapter  of  tlic  Ist  Book  of  the 
TetrabibloB.  From  that  chapter  it  is  clear  that  the  respective  in- 
lleaces  he  aacribes  to  the  twelve  signs  (or  divisions  of  the  zodiac) 
wers  connidered  by  liim  as  apparteuant  to  the  placa  they  occnpled, 
and  not  to  the  start  of  which  they  ware  composed.  He  baa  expressly 
and  repeatedly  declared  that  the  point  of  the  vernal  e<iuinax  is  ever 
tha  beginning  of  the  lodiac.  and  that  the  30  degrMH  following  it  ever 
retain  the  aame  virtue  aa  that  which  he  has  in  thi»  work  attributed 
to  Aries,  althongh  the  stars  forming  Aries  may  have  quitted  those 
degrees:  tbe  next  IX'  degrees  are  still  lo  he  acconntwl  as  Taams, 
and  BO  of  the  rent.  There  is  abundant  proof  tliroughont  the  Tetrabi. 
bloe,  tliat  Ptolemy  considered  the  virtues  of  the  contlMalions  ef  the 
Midiac  distinctly  from  those  of  the  spaces  they  occupied. 


In  the  year  827*  the  "Great  Construction"  was  tran- 
slated by  the  Arabians  into  their  own  language,  and  by 
tbem  cotnniunicated  to  Europe.  It  is  through  them  that 
it  has  been  usually  known  by  the  name  of  the  Almagesi 
In  the  13th  cenliiry,  tlie  Emyieror  Frederic  II.  caused  it 
lo  be  translated  from  the  Arabic  into  Latin,  and  Sacro- 
bo8co+  waa  eonsequently  enabled  to  write  his  famous 
work  upon  the  sphere.  It  was  not,  however,  until  about 
the  eiul  of  the  Inlh  century  that  the  "  Great  Construe- 
"  tion  "  was  translated  into  Latin  from  the  original  text ; 
and  this  Important  service  was  rendered  to  science  by 
Purbach,  a  professor  of  philosophy  at  Vienna,  who 
learned  the  Greek  tongue  at  the  instigation  of  Cardinal 
Bessarion,  By  means  of  this  translation,  the  Epheme- 
ridea  of  George  Miillur,  surnamed  Regi  onion  tan  us,  a 
disciple  of  Purbach'a,  were  first  composed.  The  Greek 
text  of  the  Almagest,  or  Great  Construction,  was  first 
publishi-d  at  Basle,  by  Simon  Grynajus,  in  1.538  ;  and  \i 
waa  again  printed  at  the  same  place  in  lo3I,  with  cer- 
tain other  works  of  Ptolemy*.  Tlie  rt-t  of  Ptolemy's 
works  connected  with  astronomy,  and  now  extant,  are 
the  Tetrnbihlos,  or  Four  Books  of  llie  Influence  of  the 
Stars  §  (now  translated) ;  the  Centiloqiiy,  or  Fruit  of  his 


*  The  French  say  813,  but  827  ia  the  date  ^ven  by  English  chro- 

i  Thii  BcienliRu  man  was  a  Mathnrine  Friar,  and  a  profea»ar  in  thl^ 
Univereity  of  Paris:  he  died  iii  1*256.  U  U  pointed  nur.  in  llie  Edin- 
bur^h  Keviaw,  No.  68,  that  h«  waa  a  native  of  Yurksliire,  and  hU 
real  name  John  Uulywuod,  euphonized,  in  Paris,  into  !ju;roboacu. 

%  Cbalmera. — The  TetrabililoB  was  among  tliese  works. 

%  To  such  readers  as  may  lie  curioQH  to  know  iu  whut  maonei'  lUi« 
book  was  promulgated  in  Europe,  ^ftet  the  rerivul  of  letters,  the  fol- 


PBEFACE.  XXV 


Four  Books,  being  a  kind  of  supplement  to  the  former  ; 
and  the  Significations  of  the  Fixed  Stars.  The  last  is 
merely  a  daily  calendar,  showing  the  risings  and  settings 


lowing  extract  from  the  fiibliotheca  Gneca  of  Fabrieus  vill  furnish 
information : — 

*'  Lib.  IV.  Cap.  XIV.  §  4.       Vtl^afitiXtt,    ^Vflailit    yiechuartxr..      QuodH- 

* '  partitum,  swe  qwUuor  lihri  de  apotclesinatibus  efjudiciis  astroru  in.ad 
"  Syrum  (h).  Graeca  primnm  editi  a  Joachimo  Catnerario,  cnui  ver- 
sione  buSl  duorom  priorum  librorum,  et  prjpcipuorum  e  reliquis  lo- 
comm.  Norimb.  1635, 4tx). — Hinc  cum  versione  Phil.  Melancthonis, 
qui  in  pnefat.  ad  Erasmum  Ebnerum  Senatoreni  Noriinbergenseni 
"  testator  ae  editionem  Camerarii  multis  mendis  purgu^se,  turn  nu- 
'*mero8  in  locis  apheticis  tarn  Grteci  qaam  Latini  textus  emendasse. 
''Basil,  1653,  8vo. — Latine  pridcm  verterat  .-Egidius  Teb(ddintu,9ivti 
"  latino-barbard  ex  Hispanica  verbione,  AlfonBi  Ca&tella'  Regis  jassu, 
**ex  Arabico  (i)  confectd.  yertit  et  Antonius  Gogava,  Lovan.  1548, 
**4to;  Patavii,  1668,  12mo;  Pragse,  1610,  12ino.  Coraraentario  il- 
**  lustravit  Hieron,  Cardanus  prioribus  daobus  libris  Camerarii,  poste- 
**rioribu8  Gogava?  versione  servantfl,  Basil,  1554,  fol. ;  1579,  fol. ; 
''Lugd.  1555,  8vo,  et  in  Cardani  opp. — Georgii  Valitr  commentarius, 
"anno  1602  editus,  nihil  aliud  est,  quam  Latina  versio  scholiornm 
"Gnecorum,  sive  exegeseos  jejuna*  Deinophili  in  tetrabiblon,  qua' 
'*cum  Porphyrii  sive  Antiochi  isagoge,  Gru^ce  et  Latine,  addita 
'Hieron,  Wolfii  versione,  lucem  vidit  Basil.  1559,  fol.  In  his?  scho- 
'*liis  Dorotheua  allegatur,  p.  48,  110,  et  139;  Cleopatra,  p.  88 ;  Por- 
**phyriufl  Philosophus,  p.  169.  Meminit  et  auctor  Petosiridis  ac  Ne- 
**  cepso,  p.  112 : — Xiyu  %i  TMXMitv  T09  Nt;^f^*  (ita  leg.  pro  ATi-v^*;  ut  p  112) 

**  »at  Htfict^tv,  VTM  Xmf  T^ttrtt  rt  il  ttf^ekeytaf  t^rtTXtt^av  v^tyvttftxd** .      Pa- 

"  raphrasin  tetrabibli  a  Proclo  concinnatam  Gra*ce  edidit  Melancthon, 
"Basil.  1554,  8vo.  Grapce  et  Latine  cum  versione  suA  Leo  AllatitiSf 
"Lugd.  Batav.  1654t,  8vo.     Locum  Ptoleraaji  e  codice  Gra»co  MS. 


*  — **  Nechepsos  and  Petosiris  are  anciently  spoken  of,  for  they 
"first  explained  prognostication  by  Astrology." 

tXhis  was  perhaps  a  reprint  of  the  edition  of  1635,  from  which 
the  present  translation  has  been  made ;  unless  there  may  have  been 
an  error  of  the  press  in  stating  1654  instead  of  1635,  which  ^eems 
probable,  as  the  edition  of  1636  is  unnoticed  by  Fabrieus. 


of  the  atars,  and  the  nature  of  the  weather  thereby  pro- 
iluced.  There  are  likewise  extant  his  geographical 
work  (which  baa  rendered  important  service  to  moiiern 
geographers),  and  alao  his  celebrated  book  on  Har- 
monics, or  the  Theory  of  Sound. 

ProcluH,  to  whom  the  world  is  indebted  for  the  im- 
proved text  of  the  Tetrabiblos*,  was  born  at  Constanti- 


"  in  aoUegio  Corporis  Cliristi  Oxou.  feliuitar  restitait  HeldeniiK,  p. 
'•35  ail  Marmora  AriimieliaaB.     Haly  Hoben  Rculoan  Arabia  com- 
"  nientarinni  laudat  CardaDiis,  cam  Demopliilo  Lnline  adilatn." 
■'  (b)  Sinio!.  Gneo.   njirf^.u  t*.  iujm  •  iwii.i/tiins  ».  Sii^in  «■(»«  ■■  "• 

•'  u-illii  ma.i,*  rnrtn  1^,  ^thu'""" ■" 

''{ilSelden  Uxor  HhW.  p.  'M-2.  Cictenira  de  Alphoiiai  Kegis 
' '  cni&  ID  pronaveoda  Arabica  Qiiadri parti [i  veroione,  ride,  si  placet, 
'   Nic:  Autoninm  in  Bibl.  veteri  Hispana,  t.  2,  p.  .Vi,  vel  Acta  Ernd. 

A  1607,  p.  303.  LatiDB  ventio  ex  Arabico  facta  lacem  vidit  Venet. 
"  1493,  (ol.  Viderit  porro  Gasiendus,  qui  in  Pbiloaopiiia  Epitnri, 
"  abi  contra  Astrologos  di«putat.  t.  S,  p.  SOI,  coDlendit  letrabiblon 
"indignum  esse  Ptoleoiiyi  genio  et  BulMlilitium.  Enuideiu  Jo.  Pico, 
"judice,  1,  1,  contra  Astrologos,  p.  283,  Ptoleniii-UB  tnaloriim  aive 
"  Apotelesnialicomm  est  optimut." 

'  It  will  be  seen  by  the  preceding  note,  that  ProcloB's  Paraphrase 
iif  the  Tetrabibloa  should  properly  he  oonsiderad  as  HDperior  to  the 
.liber  readings  of  that  liook  ;  since  it  appears,  on  the  authority  of 
l''al)riciut,  that  Melauctbon,  after  having  lieen  at  the  pains  of  cor- 
raoting  and  rapablishing,  in  ISoS  (with  liis  own  utnendationa),  the 
vdiUon  of  CamerariiiB,  containing  tlic  reputed  original  text,  Htill 
deemed  it  advlnable,  in  the  following  year,  to  edil«  Proclna'a  Para- 
phraae.  This  Paraphrase  must,  therefore,  neceRsarily  have  had  cliums 
it  found  in  the  text  he  had  previoasly  e<1)ted 


••  '■  Piolt-iuy  addresses  the  book  to  Synw,  to  whom  he  has  alao 
'  addressed  all  bia  other  treattaea.  Some  day  that  this  name  of  8yrus 
"  WM  feigned  ;  otbsrs,  that  it  wan  not  fi>lgDGd.  but  that  \ip  wan  a 
"  phyHician.  and  educated  in  theae  aciencei'." 


PREFACE.  XXVllf 

nople,  in  the  year  410.  He  studied  at  Alexandria  and 
at  Athens,  and  became  very  eminent  among  the  later 
Platonists.  He  succeeded  Syrianus,  a  celebrated  phi- 
losopher, in  the  rectorship  of  the  Platonic  school  at 
Athens,  and  died  there  in  485*.  He  was  a  most  volu- 
minous author,  in  poetry  as  well  as  in  prose.  Among 
his  works  there  are  Hymns  to  the  Sun,  to  Venus,  and 
to  the  Muses ;  Commentaries  upon  several  pieces  of 
Plato,  and  upon  Ptolemy's  Tetrabiblosf ;  an  Epitome 
or  Compendium  of  all  the  Astronomical  Precepts  de- 
monstrated in  the  Almagest ;  and  Elements  of  Theology 
and  Natural  Philosophy. — He  was  in  dispute  witlAhe 
Christians  on  the  question  of  the  eternity  of  the  world, 
which  he  undertook  to  prove  in  eighteen  elaborate  ar- 
guments.— A  late  writer  in  a  certain  periodical  work 
has  erroneously  identified  him  with  another  Proclus, 
who  was  in  favour  with  the  Emperor  Anastasius,  and 
who  destroyed  the  ships  of  Vitalianus,  when  besieging 
Constantinople  in  614,  by  burning  them  with  great  bra- 
zen mirrors,  or  specula. 


*  Chalmers's  Biographical  Dictionary. 

t  Tt  will,  of  course,  be  understood  that  this  Commentary  is  distinct 
from  his  Paraphrase,  now  translated. 


V 


Signs  of  the  Zodiac, 
Aries  :^  Libra 


a  Taurus  n^  Scorpio 

n  Qemini  f    Sagittarius 

OS  Cancer  '/^   Capricorn 

^  Leo  ssc  Aquarius 

TTf  Virgo  K    Pisces. 


^able  of  Contents. 


BOOK  I. 

CHAP. 

I.  Proem  ........ 

•II.  Knowlodffe  may  b«  acquired  by  Astronomy  to  a  certain  Extent 
III.  That  Pnsflcienct'  u»  useful    .... 

;IV.  Tlie  Influences  of  the  Planetary. OrK- 
V.  bcTietiefl  and  Malefic« 
VI.  Ma»culinc  and  Feminine    - 
VII.  Dium;d  and  Nfictumal       .... 

VIII.  The  IntUieucc  of  Position  with  regard  to  tho  Sun 
IX.  The  Influence  of  tlic  fixed  Stars 
X.  Cont'tellatiou.s  North  of  the  Zrxliac 
XI.  ConstellationH  South  of  the  Zodi>io 
XII.  The  Annual  Sc*i«on«  .... 

.XIII.  The  Influence  of  the  Four  Angles 
X\y.  lYopicd,  Equinoctial,  Fixed,  and  Bicorporeal  Signs 
X\".  Masculine  and  Feminine  Higua    • 
XVI.  Mutual  Confii^mitlone  of  the  Sigi.- 
XVII.  Signs  commimding  and  obeying  • 
XVni.  Signs  beholding  each  other,  and  of  oqual  Power 
XIX.  Signs  inconjunct      .  -  .  -  - 

>*-XX.  Houses  of  the  Planets        ...  - 

XXI.  The  Triplicities         ... 
XX H.  Exaltations  .  ■ 

XXII  I.  The  Disposition  of  the  TennH 
XXIV.  The  Terms  (according  to  Ptolemy) 
XXV.  The  Places  and  Degrees  of  every  Planet 
XXVI.  Faces,  Chariot-*,  and  other  similar  Attributes  of  the  Planet- 
XXVIl.  Api»lication,  .Seiwmtlon,  and  other  Faculties* 


PAOB 

1 
2 
11 
VJ 
21 
ibid. 
2-2 
23 
24 
2f> 

ao 

81 
82 
84 
35 
»('. 
89 
ibid. 
40 
41 
48 
4.S 
47 
51 
5S 
54 
55 


BOOK  II. 


I.  General  Division  of  the  Svibjcct   -  .  -  -  - 

11.  Peculiarities  observable  throughout  every  entire  Climate 
III.  The  Familiarity  of  the  Regions  of  the  Earth  with  the  Tdplicities 
and  the  Planets  ...... 

IV.  The  Familiarity  of  the  Regions  of  the  Earth  with  the  fixed  Stiirs 
V.  Mftde  of  particTilar  Prediction  in  Ecliiwes 

\l.  The  Regions  or  Countries  to  be  considered  a.s  liable  t<»  be  compre 
hended  in  the  Event     .----. 

VII.  The  Time  and  Periwl  of  the  Event  .... 

\'III.  The  Genus,  Class,  «>r  Kind,  liable  to  Ijc  affected 
IX.  The  Qtudity  and  Nature  of  the  Effect    .  .  - 

X.  Colours  in  Eclipnes,  Comets,  and  similar  Phenomena  - 
XI.  The  New  Moon  of  the  Year         ..... 


.>s 

02 

76 

ibid. 

77 
78 

.S4 

yi 

02 


fONTENTH. 

XU.  Ttxj  tKirtimiLir  Nutiires  d[  tha  Sl^us  lij*  which  Ilie  dIOgrDiit  Oaqatl- 

tutlnnii  of  the  AtnuHphen  urn  iiTfluanl      .           -           ■           ■  ""*  O'i 

XIII.  Mc>iii)o(CDntWomliunfor|)8Micul»rOmu>Ht»aimRaIthBAtin»pl»m  l»       ' 

XIV.  Tile  Sli^ifliatinu  of  HotioTK dSt- 

/Of 
nooK  III. 

I.  p™,., *H't^ 

V.  Tbfl  ConcunMun,  w.ii  tlw  IVrtiirition,  or  Birth  i  b^  wlilch  Ullw 

III.  The  DoMTw  MceniUng        .....--  Jtf  jit, 

IV.  IHsUilnitlau  uf  ttui  Dnttrlns of  NHMvfltei  111 
V.  The  Pnninti             ....--.-  In 

VI.  BruUmnimil  SlBtaiK          ...                                 -           -  Ihl 
VIT.  UhId  or  FanuiJa         -            -                                                  -            .            ■  1^1 

VIII,  TwillJl              ....                          ,             -             .             -  IKS 

tHonfltnmi  or  dsfiwUvs  BIrthx I^VH 

Chlliireii  not  rMm)            -           • n» 

XI.  Thclhiistlonof  Life HH 

\II.  The  Pnffogatory  I'lwiDa     .......  .UK^-t\^ 

Kill.  ThB  ICumlior  of  Pporogitom,  tii-i  uWp  IV  Part  i>'  I'l-ri"".     -           -  lai 

SIV   KumbR of  Uia  UdiIob at  PcunigaMoa      .           .           -           -           -  IS4 

XV.  Exmujilltlmtinu 41 

SVI.  Thn  Ponn  and  Tompomnoiit  of  Ihe  Body  "■ 

XVII.  Tbe  Uiirta.  Inlnh»,  tinil  Ulseuunftlie  Body  l''I 

XVIIl.  Thn  Qiulltyatthe  Hind    ...-..-  MM 

SIX.  Tlu.  DlmMorihe  Mliid              ....                      .  iilB 

in.  Ths  FortuDBof  lliink         .......  lT4 

IV.  TliB  ginlltr<>r  ICni|>li>)'inetit ttt 

V.  Murrlnfn -           -           -  IM 

VI.  rhlltojii IB»  . 

Vlt.  Frtentevid  Bnaml» 1« 

VIII,  TiBrBning ...,»( 

IX.  Tbr  Kind  of  pMtli tffT 

APPKSllJX, 

.\o.  I.  AluuwHt.  Binlc  vllt,  Clinp.  4 SM  1.1  [ 

II.  Rxtnct  from  Uu  Almagnt,  Book  II.  Chip,  1'    ■                                 -  HI  li,] 

TmblB  ol  Latltudn  (rum  Ihs  Jklmnectt Ui  kl  (. 

Eilmct  fromthBTiblecil  AwnnalouH,  In  the  Alnugvtl  '^'11 

HI.  PtoIetiij''B CantUuqur >>M  It 


PTOLEMY'S    TETRABIBLOS 


cvffe,' 


I^FIUK.VCE    OF   TIIE    .ST.Jfl.V. 


BOOK   THE   FIRST. 


tJlhaptEir   I. 


Proem. 

J.  HE  studies  prelimiaary  to  astronomical  prognostication, 
O  Syrus!  w^two:  tlieoiie.first  alike  in  order  and  in  power, 
leads  to  the  knowledge  of  the  figurations  of  the  Sun,  the 
Moon, and  the  stars  ;  andof  their  relative  aspects  to  each 
other,  and  to  the  Earth :  the  other  takes  into  consideration 
the  changes  which  their  aspects  create,  by  means  of  their 
natural  properties,  in  ohjectN  under  their  influence. 

The  first  mentioned  study  has  been  already  explained  in 
the  Syotaatis*  to  the  utmost  practicable  extent;  for  it  is 
complete  in  itself,  and  of  essential  utility  even  without 
being  blended  with  the  second ;  to  which  this  treatise  will 
be  devoted,  and  which  is  not  equally  self -complete. 
The  present  work  shall,  however,  be  regulated  by  that 
due  regard  for  truth  which  pliilosophy  demands :  and 
since  the  material  quality  of  the  objects  acted  upon 
renders  them  weak  and  variable,  and  difficult  to  be 
accurately  apprehended,  no  positive  or  infallible  rulea 
(as  were  given  in  detailing  the  first  doctrine,  which  is 


2  lTOI.EM'v.'s.TETUAIilBl.n,S.  [Bouk  I. 

always  governed -.Uy .tlie  same  immutable  laws)  celd  be 
here  set  forth  :  hfjnle,  on  the  other  hand,  a  due  observa- 
tion of  most.-ef ^liose  <reneral  events,  whicli  evidently 
trace  their  eMjs^s  to  the  Aiiihient,  shall  not  be  omitted. 

It  ia.  ht/wertr,  a  common  practice  with  the  vulgar  to 
slander -'evc'i-y thing  which  is  difficult  of  attainment,  and 
surely  thej'  who  condemn  the  first  of  these  two  studies 
must'lje  considered  totally  blind,  whatever  nrj;uments 
iij«y'-b'e  produced  in  support  of  those  who  impugn  the 
sw^hd.  There  are  also  persons  who  imagine  that  what- 
_..pver  they  themselves  have  not  been  able  to  acquire,  must 
'•.Tae  utterly  beyond  the  reach  of  all  understanding ;  while 
.  others  again  will  consider  as  useless  any  science  of  which 
(although  they  may  have  been  often  instructed  in  it) 
they  have  failed  to  preserve  the  recollcclinn,  owing  to 
its  difficulty  of  retention.  In  reference  to  these  opinions, 
therefore,  an  endeavour  shall  be  made  to  investigate  the 
extent  to  which  prognostication  by  astronomy  is  prac- 
ticable, as  well  as  serviceable,  previously  to  detailing  the 
particulars  of  the  doctrine. 


tHIiiiiJtci-  II. 

Kaoiplflif  iii'ii/  l.f  'in/U'rei!  hy  Arlronomy  In  a  certain  Exlmi, 
That  a  certain  power,  derived  from  the  asthereal  nature, 
is  difu^ed  over  and  pervades  the  whole  atmosphere  of 
the  earth,  is  clearly  evident  to  all  men.  Fire  and  air,  the 
first  of  the  sublunary  eiemcnts,  arc  encompassed  and 
altered  by  the  motions  of  the  lether.  These  element.s  in 
their  turn  encompass  all  inferior  matter,  and  vary  it  as 
tbey  themselves  are  varied  ;  acting  on  earth  and  water, 
on  plants  and  animals*. 

*  Tlio  foliuwing  extract  from  an  old  ^ograpliical  work,  frtinieil 
on  tlic  tul(;.'<  ol  I'toleiuy,  eupkiiis  tlie  aj^lem  on  which  tliia  actian  of 
the  H'tlier  is  made  to  depend  :  — 


Ckup.  II.]  imolkmy's  tethabiblos.  3 

The  Sun,  always  acting  in  connection  with  the 
Ambient,  contributes  to  the  regulation  of  all  earthly 
things:  not  only  by  the  revolution  of  the  Reasons  doea 
he  bring  to  perfection  the  embryo  of  animals,  the  buds 
of  plants,  the  spring  of  waters,  and  the  alteration  of 
bodies,  but  by  his  daily  progress  also  he  operates  other 


"  Chap,  2.  Tbe  world  a  divideil  into  two  parts,  the  elementAl 
"  ngioD,  and  llie  n'lbereal.  The  elemental  region  Is  conatAntlj' 
"auhjeot  to  nlteration,  &nd  cDmprise8  the  four  elemonta;  e&rlh, 
"  water,  air,  aod  fire.  The  n'theTeal  region,  which  pli:lo*npher8  call 
"  the  fifth  essence,  cnconipaasen,  liy  its  concavily,  the  elemental : 
"its  enbstatioe  renal db  alwa.ra  Dmaricd, and  consiata  of  ten  ■pberen ; 
"  of  which  the  greater  one  alwajB  spherically  environs  the  next 
"  imalhr,  and  sg  on  in  tonHOOutivu  onler.  —Firnt,  therefore,  around 
"  tbe  sphere  of  Rre,  OOD,  the  creator  of  the  world,  placed  the  sphere 
"of  the  Moon,  then  that  of  Merpnry,  then  that  of  Venos,  then  that 
"  of  the  San,  and  afWrwardN  those  of  MarH,  of  Jupiter,  and  of  Sa- 
"  torn.  Each  of  these  Hphere.s,  however,  containH  hnt  ono  star :  and 
"  these  stam,  in  parsing  through  the  zodiac,  always  struggle  a^in»t 
"  the  primum  mobile,  or  the  motion  of  the  tenth  aplipre ;  they  are  aUo 
"  entirely  Inminoiu.  In  the  next  place  follows  tbe  firmament,  which 
"ia  tbe  eiebth  or  atarry  sphere,  and  whi«b  trembles  or  vibratet((r«- 
"pidat)  in  two  small  circles  at  the  beginning  of  Ariea  and  Libra 
"  (an  placed  in  the  ninth  sphere) :  this  motion  is  called  by  astrono- 
"  met*  the  motion  of  the  access  and  recess  of  the  fixed  stars."  (Pro- 
bably in  order  ta  account  for  the  precession  of  the  eqninoxe*.) 
"  This  is  surrounded  by  the  ninth  sphere,  called  the  chryHUlline  or 
"watery  heaven,  because  no  star  is  discovered  ia  It.  Lastly,  the 
" primum  mobiCt,  styled  nl^o  the  tenLh  uphere,  encompasses  all  the 
"  before  men  tinned  iclhereal  sphere*",  and  is  cotilinually  tnrned  upon 
"  the  poles  of  the  world,  by  onu  revolution  in  24  hours,  from  tba  eavt 
"  through  tbe  meridian  to  the  west,  again  coining  round  U>  the  eaat. 
"  At  the  same  time,  it  rolls  all  the  inferior  spheres  round  with  it,  by 
"ita  own  force;  and  there  it*  no  star  in  it.  Against  Ihisjjrimunimo. 
"  bih,  the  motion  of  tbe  other  spheres,  running  Erom  the  wast 
"  through  the  meridian  to  the  eaet,  contends.  Whatever  is  beyond 
"  this,  is  fined  and  immoveable,  anci  the  professor.'!  of  our  orthodox 
"  faith  afiimi  It  to  be  the  empyrean  heaven  which  Goo  inhabits  with 
"  ibe  elect" — Cosmographia  of  Pcl«r  Apianus  (named  Benewilit), 
dedicated  lo  the  Archbishop  of  Salliburg,  edited  by  Gemma  Priaiiu, 
and  printed  at  Antwerp,  1574. 


4  PTOI-EMy's   TETRABIBt.OS.  [Book  J. 

changes  in  light,  heat,  moi»tiire,  dryness  and  cold; 
dependent  upon  his  situation  with  regard  to  the  zenith. 

The  Moon,  being  of  all  the  heavenly  bodies  the  neatest 
to  the  Earth,  also  dispenses  much  influence;  and  things 
animate  and  inanimate  sympathi^te  and  vary  with  her. 
By  the  changes  of  her  illumination,  rivers  swell  and  are 
reduced ;  the  tides  of  the  sea  are  ruled  by  her  riainss 
and  settings;  and  plants  and  animals  are  expanded  or 
collapsed,  if  not  entirely  at  least  partially,  as  she  waxes 
or  wanes. 

The  stars  likewise  (as  well  the  6xed  stars  as  the  planets), 
in  performing  their  revolutions*,  produce  many  impres- 
sions on  the  Ambient.  They  cause  heats,  winds,  and 
storms,  to  the  influence  of  which  earthly  things  are  con- 
formably subjected. 

And  further,  the  mutual  configurations  of  all  these 
heavenly  bodies,  by  commingling  the  influence  with 
which  each  is  separately  invested,  produce  a  multiplicity 
of  changes.  The  power  of  the  Sun,  however,  predomin- 
ates, because  it  ia  more  generally  distributed  ;  the  others 
either  co-operate  with  his  power  or  diminish  its  effect: 
the  Moon  more  frequently  and  more  plainly  performs 
this  at  her  conjunction,  at  her  first  and  last  quarter,  and 
at  her  opposition :  the  stars  act  also  to  a  similar  purpose, 
but  at  longer  intervals  and  more  obscurely  than  the 
Moon  ;  and  their  operation  principally  depends  upon  the 
mode  of  their  visibility,  their  occultation  and  their 
declination. 

From  these  premises  it  fuliows  not  only  that  all  bodies, 
which  may  he  already  compounded,  are  subjected  to  the 
motion  of  the  stars,  but  also  that  the  impregnation  and 
growth  of  the  seeds  from  which  all  bodies  proceed,  iiro 

*  It  will  be  recollected  tbnt  the  I'tulemaic  HBtronoiiiy  altribu[«8 
notioD  and  a  regalsr  ooune  tu  those  dt-ara  which  wo  now  call  fixed, 
but  irliicli  (lie  Greeks  nienly  termed  utIki/i,  undeBi^tinff. 


Chap.  II.]  PTOl.E-MV's   TETRABIULOS.  5 

framed  and  moulded  by  the  quality  existing  in  the  Am- 
bient at  the  time  of  such  impregnation  and  growth. 
And  it  13  upon  this  principle  that  the  more  observant 
huabandmcii  and  shepherds  are  accustomed,  by  drawing 
their  inferences  from  the  particular  breezes  which  may 
happen  at  seed-time  and  at  the  impregnation  of  their 
cattle,  to  form  predictions  as  to  the  quality  of  the  ex- 
pected produce.  In  short,  however  unlearned  in  the 
philosophy  of  nature,  these  men  can  foretel,  solely  by 
their  previous  observation,  alt  the  more  general  and  usual 
effects  which  result  from  the  plainer  and  more  visible 
configurations  of  the  Sun.  Moon,  and  stars.  It  is  daily 
aeen  that  even  most  illiterate  persons,  with  no  other  aid 
than  their  own  experienced  observation,  are  capable  of 
predicting  events  which  may  be  consequent  on  the  more 
extended  intiuence  of  the  Sun,  and  the  more  simple  order 
of  the  Ambient,  and  which  may  not  be  open  to  variation 
by  any  complex  configurations  of  the  Moon  and  stars 
towards  the  Sun.  There  are,  moreover,  among  the  bruto 
creation,  animals  who  evidently  form  prognostication, 
and  use  this  wonilorrul  instinct  at  the  changes  oF  the 
several  eea.'tons  of  the  year,  spring,  summer,  autumn  and 
winter ;  and,  also,  at  the  changes  of  the  wind. 

In  producing  the  changes  of  the  seasons,  the  Sun  itself 
is  chiefly  the  operating  and  visible  canise.  There  are, 
however,  other  events  which,  although  they  are  not  in- 
dicated in  .so  simple  a  manner,  hut  dependent  on  a  slight 
fiomplication  of  causes  in  the  Ambient,  art;  also  fore- 
known by  persons  who  have  applied  their  observation  to 
that  end.  Of  this  kind,  are  tempests  and  gales  of  wind, 
produced  by  certain  aspects  of  the  Moon,  or  the  fixed 
stars,  towards  the  Sun,  according  to  their  several  courses, 
and  the  approach  of  which  is  usually  foreseen  by  mari- 
nere.  At  the  same  time,  prognostication  made  by  per- 
sons of  this  class  must  be  frequently  fallacious,  owing  to 


tf  ITOLEMY'S    TETRABlBLua.  [Book  I. 

their  deficiency  in  science  and  their  consequent  inability 
to  give  necessary  consideration  to  the  time  and  place,  or 
to  the  revolutions  of  the  planets;  all  which  circum- 
MtanceB,  when  exactly  delinetl  atiJ  understood,  certainly 
ti-ntl  towards  accurate  foreknowledge. 

When,  therefore;,  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  motions 
of  the  -stard,  and  of  the  Sun  and  Moon,  shall  have  lieen 
acquired,  and  when  the  situation  of  the  place,  the  time, 
and  all  the  contigurfttions  actually  existing  at  that  place 
and  time,  shall  also  he  duly  known ;  and  .such  knowledge 
be  yet  further  improved  by  an  ac(]UEiintance  with  the 
natures  of  the  heavenly,  bodies^not  of  what  Ihey  are 
composed,  but  of  the  elective  inHuences  they  possess ;  as, 
for  instance,  that  heat  is  the  property  of  the  Sun,  and 
moisture  of  the  Moon,  and  that  other  peculiar  properties 
respectively  appertain  to  the  rest  of  them; — when  all 
these  qualiticatiotis  for  prescience  may  be  possessed  by 
any  individual,  there  seems  no  obstacle  to  deprive  hiro 
of  the  insight,  oHered  at  once  by  nature  and  his  own 
judgment,  into  the  effects  arising  out  of  the  quality  of 
all  the  various  influences  compounded  together.  So  that 
he  will  thus  be  competent  to  predict  the  peculiar  consti- 
tution of  the  atmosphere  in  every  sea.son,  as,  fnr  instance, 
with  regard  to  its  greater  heat  or  moi.sture,  or  other 
similar  qualities  :  all  of  which  may  be  foreseen  by  the 
visible  position  or  configuration  of  the  stars  and  the 
Moon  towards  the  Sun. 

Since  it  is  thus  clearly  practicable,  hj'  an  accurate 
knowledge  of  the  points  above  enumerated,  to  make  pre- 
dictions concerning  the  proper  quality  of  the  seasons, 
there  also  seems  no  impediment  to  the  formation  of 
similar  prognostication  concerning  the  destiny  ami  dis- 
poailion  of  every  human  being,  For  by  the  constitution 
of  the  Ambient,  even  at  the  time  of  any  individual's 
rimary  conformation,  the  general  quality  of  that  indi- 


Chap.  II.]  PTOLEMY'S  T^BABIBLOS.  7 

vidual's  teniperament  may  be  perceived ;  and  the  cor- 
poreal shape  and  mental  capacity  with  which  the  person 
will  be  endowed  at  birth  may  be  pronounced  ;  as  well  as 
the  favourable  and  unfavourable  events  indicated  by  the 
state  of  the  Ambient,  and  liable  to  attend  the  individual 
at  certain  future  periods ;  since,  for  instance,  an  event 
dependent  on  one  disposition  of  the  Ambient  will  be  ad- 
vantageous to  a  particular  temperament,  and  that  result- 
ing from  another  unfavourable  and  injurious.  From 
these  circumstances,  and  others  of  similar  import,  the 
possibility  of  prescience  is  certainly  evident. 

There  are,  howpver,  some  plausible  assailants  of  this 
doctrine,  whose  attacks  though  greatly  misapplied  seem 
yet  worthy  of. the  following  observations. 

In  the  first  place,  the  science  demands  the  greatest 
study  and  a  constant  attention  to  a  multitude  of  different 
points ;  and  as  all  persons  who  are  but  imperfectly  prac- 
tised in  it  must  necessarily  commit  frequent  mistakes,  it 
lias  been  supposed  that  even  such  mistakes  as  have  been 
truly  predicted  have  taken  place  by  chance  only,  and  not 
from  any  operative  cause  in  nature.  But  it  should  be 
remembered  that  these  mistakes  arise,  not  from  any  defi- 
ciency or  want  of  power  in  the  science  itself,  but  from 
the  incompetency  of  unqualified  persons  who  pretend  to 
exercise  it.  And  besides  this,  the  majority  of  the  per- 
sons who  set  themselves  up  as  professors  of  this  science, 
avail  themselves  of  its  name  and  credit  for  the  sake  of 
passing  off  some  other  mode  of  divination  ;  by  that  means 
defrauding  the  ignorant,  and  pretending  to  foretellmany 
things  which  from  their  nature  cannot  be  possibly  fore- 
known ;  and  consequently  affording  opportunities  to  more 
intelligent  people  to  impugn  the  value  even  of  such  pre- 
dictions as  can  rationally  be  made.  The  reproach,  how- 
ever,*thus  brought  upon  the  science  is  wholly  unmerited ; 
for  it  would  be  equally  just  to  condemn  all  other  branches 


d  I'Tnr.EMV'S   TETRABIRLOS,  [liook  I. 

of  philosophy,  because  each  numbers  among  its  professors 
some  mischievous  pre  tenders. 

Secondly,  it  is  not  attempted  to  be  denied  that  any 
individual,  although  he  may  have  attained  to  the  greatest 
possible  accuracy  in  the  science,  must  still  be  liable  to  fre- 
quent error,  arising  out  of  the  very  nature  of  his  under- 
taking, and  from  the  weakness  of  his  limited  capacity  in 
comparison  with  tbo  magnitude  of  his  object.  For  the 
whole  theory  of  the  quality  of  matter  is  supported  hy 
inference  rather  than  by  positive  and  scientific  proof; 
and  this  is  caused  principally  by  the  concretion  of  its 
temperament  out  of  a  multitude  of  dissimilar  ingredients. 
And,  although  the  former  configurations  of  the  planets 
have  been  observed  to  produce  certain  consequences 
(which  have  been  adapted  to  configurations  now  taking 
place),  and  are,  after  long  periods,  and  in  a  greater  or 
les.9  degree,  resembled  by  subsequent  configurations,  yet 
these  subsequent  configurations  never  become  exactly 
similar  to  those  which  have  preceded  them.  For  an 
entire  return  of  all  the  heavenly  bodies  to  the  exact  situ- 
ntion  in  which  they  have  once  stood  with  regard  to  the 
eartli  will  never  take  place,  or  at  least  not  in  any  period 
determinable  by  human  calculation,  whatever  vain  at- 
tempts may  be  made  to  acquire  such  unattainable  know- 
ledge*.    The  examples  referretl   to  for  guidance  being 

*  There  spenis  reason  to  siippof^e  that  tbjn  nas  a  fnvorite  specula. 
tioQ  among  tliu  antientB.  la  Scipio's  Dream,  as  related  hj  Cieero, 
the  phantoni  of  his  illastrioos  grandfather  is  nade  to  speak  uf  thin 
«ntire  return  of  all  the  celestial  boiiiea  lo  some  original  position 
which  they  ha<l  once  held,  aa  bein^;  tlie  completion  of  tlie  revolution 
of  one  great  UQiveiBftl  year ;  and  tlie  phaniom  adds,  "  but  I  uiuat  ac. 
"  quaint  yOQ  that  not  one-twentieth  part  of  that  great  year  has  been 
"  yet  accomplished." 

This  quotAtion  is  from  memory,  and  perhaps  ropy  not  be  verbally 
Dorrect 

Cicero,  in  cap.  2i),  lib.  2,  De  Nut.  Deor.  also  alludes  to  anothiT 
grtat  year,  an  heiuff  completed  on  the  return  of  the  Sun,  Moon,  aLd 


Chaj).  II.J  ITOLEMV'3   TETKABIBI-OS,  9 

therefore  not  exactly  similar  to  the  fxisUng  cftses  to 
which  they  are  now  appHerl,  it  must  naturally  follow 
that  predictions  are  sometiinea  not  borne  out  by  the 
events.  Hence  arises  the  «oIg  difficulty  in  the  considera- 
tion of  events  produced  by  the  Ambient.  For  no  other 
concurrent  cause  has  been  hitherto  combined  with  the 
motion  of  the  heavenly  bodies;  although  the  doctrine  of 
nativities,  particularly  that  part  of  it  relating  to  peculiar 
individual  temperament,  demands  also  the  consideration 
of  other  concomitant  causes,  which  are  neither  trifling 
nor  unimportant,  but  essentially  potent  in  att'ectinij 
the  individual  properties  of  the  creatures  born.  Thus 
the  variety  in  seed  has  the  chief  influence  in  supplying 
the  peculiar  quality  of  each  species;  for,  under  the  same 
disposition  of  the  Ambient  and  of  the  horizon,  each  various 
kind  of  seed  prevails  in  determining  the  distinct  formation 
of  its  own  proper  species;  thus  man  is  born,  or  the  hor.*c 
is  foaled;  and  by  the  same  law  arc  brought  forth  all  the 
other  various  creatures  and  productions  of  the  earth.  It 
is  also  to  be  remembered,  ibat  considerable  variations  are 
caused  in  all  creatures  by  the  respective  places  where  they 
may  be  brought  forth :  for  although,  under  the  same  dispo- 
sition of  the  Ambient,  the  germs  of  the  future  creatures 
may  be  of  one  species,  whether  human  or  of  the  hor.se,  tho 

tliQ  Ave  planets,  to  some  original  conliFiuiftlioii,  "  inter  te,  em\fcctit 
"omnium  tpatiit ;"  and  of  tliat  revolution  he  Baya,  "qnn?  qaa.ni 
"longa  sit,  magna  quiL'stio  eat;  esite  vero  certain  et  defiDitant, 
"  necesse  cut."  Again,  in  nriting  of  HorteiuiuB,  he  aa.ja,  "Is  c«t 
"  niagnua  et  verus  annua,  quo  tadtm poailio cieli  siderumque qiiii  eiiitt 
"  ma^inif  ttt,  rurium  exUUC ;  ifuyae  aunns  horara,  quos  vocanius, 
"annonun  XII.  MDcccliv.  complecitur."  But  in  the  "Somnium 
"  Saipionis"  his  words  are,  "  turn  tignii  omnibiu  ad  idem  princifiium 
"tUllUgue  reeoeatii,  expletum  annum  babeto."  It  thus  appears, 
that  of  three  different  cycles  or  periods,  each  was  conaidered  by 
Cicero  aa  forming  a  i/Tt:at  year,  although  that  wliich  he  has  contem- 
plated in  Scipio'fl  Dream  ia  the  only  one  equivalent  to  the  "  cntirt 
return"  of  "  all  the  heavenly  bodies,"  adverted  lo  by  Pto!(ln>. 


10  ITuLEMY's  TLTKAMIULOS.  [Boi'k  1. 

(litference  in  sitaation,  of  the  places  in  which  they  are 
generated,  produces  a  dissiiiiilai-ity  in  the  body  and  spirit 
of  one  from  the  body  and  spirit  of  another:  and  in  addition 
to  this  ifc  must  be  considpred  that  different  modes  of  nur- 
ture, and  the  variety  of  ranks,  manners,  and  customs,  con- 
tribute to  render  thecourse  of  lif  e  of  one  individual  greatly 
ditfurontfrom  that  of  another*;  consequently, unless  every 
one  of  these  varieties  bo  liuly  blended  with  the  causes 
arising  in  the  Ambient,  the  pre-jndgment  of  any  event  will 
doubtless  be  very  incomplete.  For,  although  the  greatest 
iiiuttiplicity  of  power  exists  in  the  Ambient,  and  although 
all  other  things  act  as  concurrent  causes  in  unison  with 
it,  and  can  never  claim  it  as  a  concurrent  cause  in  sub- 
servience to  thorn,  there  will  still,  nevertheless,  be  a  great 
deficiency  in  predictions  attempted  to  be  made  by  means 
of  the  heavenly  motions  alone,  without  regard  to  the 
other  concurrent  causes  just  now  adverted  to. 

Under  these  circumstances,  it  would  seem  judicious 
neither  to  deny  altogether  the  practicability  of  prescience, 
because   prognostications  thus  imperfectiv  derived  are 

*  In  tbia  passaKe  tlie  author  seems  to  Iiotq  anticipated,  and  ex- 
tiuied  the  ab8UTdit3-  of  an  argument  niiw  wiDsidereJ  very  forcible 
ngainat  astrology  :  vi/.  lliat  "if  tlie  art  were  true,  then  any  two  in- 
"  •tiviiluaU  bom  under  the  eame  meridinn,  in  tho  itanie  latitude,  and 
"  at  tliesame  momenL  i>f  time,  iiiiut  have  one  and  the  some  destiny; 
"although  ono  were  bom  a  prince,  and  the  other  a  mendieant." 
Such  a  monstrous  eonclofion  is  nowhere  authorized  by  any  a.'itrologi- 
cal  writer ;  it  i-i,  on  the  contrary,  always  inaintnined  by  all  of  them, 
that  the  worldly  ililTurcntes  and  ilistinetions,  altudcil  to  in  the  te.it, 
ineritahly  prevent  this  e.vact  resemblance  of  destiny  ;  and  all  that 
tliey  presume  to  (ts."ert  if,  that,  in  tlieir  respective  degrees,  any  two 
individuals,  xo  born,  will  have  a  partial  similarity  in  the  hading 
fealnres  of  their  fate.  Whether  their  assertion  is  ani/crmiy  borne 
ODt,  T  will  not  t&ku  iipou  ina  to  determine,  but  it  would  be  unfair  not 
to  subjoin  the  followin;;  fact ;— 

Id  the  newspapers  of  the  month  of  Fcbraary,  1820,  tho  death  of  a 
Mr.  Saiiiuel  tienimingii  ia  notieed  :  it  was  statei)  that  lie  had  been 
an  irtmimm^r,  and  proaperou«  in  trade;  that  be  \rnn  born  on  the 


Chap.  11.]  PTOLEarr's  tetrabiblos.  11 

sometimes  liable  to  be  fallacious;  nor,  on  the  other  hand, 
to  admit  that  all  events,  whatever,  are  open  to  previous 
enquiry ;  &s  if  such  enquiry  could  in  all  cases  be  securely 
conducted  without  having  recourse  to  mere  inference, 
and  as  if  it  were  not  limited  by  the  narrow  extent  of 
mere  human  abilities.  The  art  of  navigation,  for 
instance,  is  not  rejected,  although  it  is  in  many  points 
incomplete;  therefore  the  bare  fact  that  predictions 
are  frequently  imperfect  cannot  authorise  the  rejection 
of  the  art  of  prescience :  the  magnitude  of  its  scope, 
and  the  faint  resemblance  that  it  bears  to  a  divine 
attribute,  should  rather  demand  grateful  commendation.s, 
and  receive  the  utmost  regard  and  attention.  And, 
since  no  weakness  is  imputed  to  a  physician,  because 
he  enquires  into  the  individual  habit  of  his  patient,  as 
well  as  into  the  nature  of  the  disease,  no  imputation  can 
justly  attach  to  the  professor  of  prognostication,  because 
he  combines  the  consideration  of  species,  nurture,  educa- 
tion and  country,  with  that  of  the  motion  of  the  heavens: 
for  &s  the  physican  acts  but  reasonably,  in  thus  consider- 
ing the  proper  constitution  of  the  sick  person  as  well  as 
his  disease;  so,  in  forming  predictiims,  it  must  surely  be 
justifiably  allowable  to  comprehend  in  that  consideration 
every  other  thing  connected  with  the  subject,  in  addition 
to  the  motion  of  the  heavens,  and  to  collect  and  compare 
with  that  motion  all  other  co-operating  circumstances 
arising  elsewhere. 


4th  of  Jane,  1738,  at  nearly  the  same  moment  as  his  late  Majesty, 
aod  in  the  same  parish  of  St.  Martin's  in  the  Fields ;  that  he  went 
into  business  for  himself  in  October,  1760 ;  that  he  married  on  the 
8th  September,  1761 ;  and  finally,  after  other  events  of  hia  life  had 
resembled  those  which  liappened  to  the  late  King,  that  he  died  on 
Saturday,  the  29th  January,  1820. 
These  coincidences  are,  at  least,  highly  remarkable. 


i   TETRAIUBLOS, 


(llhiiiJtEi-    III. 

That  Prescience  is  useful. 

It  appears,  then,  that  prescience  by  astronomy  is  possible 
under  certain  adaptation ;  and  that  alone  it  will  afford 
premonition,  as  far  a.'^  Hyinpboins  in  the  Ambitint  enable 
it  to  do  so,  of  all  such  events  as  happen  to  men  by  the 
inHuencQ  uf  the  Ambient.  These  events  are,  from  their 
commencement,  always  fn  conformity  with  the  spiritual 
and  corporeal  faculties,  and  their  occaj^ional  affections ;  as 
well  as  with  the  shorter  or  longer  duration  of  those  affec- 
tions. Tliey  are  also  conformable  with  other  things  which, 
although  not  actually  seated  in  man's  immediate  person, 
are  still  absolutely  and  naturally  connected  with  him : — 
in  connection  with  his  body  they  are  applicable  to  his 
estate,  and  his  conjugal  cohabitations ;  in  connection  with 
his  spirit,  they  relate  to  his  oftspring*  and  his  rank  ;  and 
they  are  also  connected  with  all  fortuitous  circumstances 
which  may  occasionally  befall  him. 

That  the  foreknowledge  of  these  can  be  attained  has 
already  been  demonstrated ;  and  it  remains  to  speak  of 
the  utility  of  the  attainment.  First,  however,  let  it  be 
said  in  what  respect  and  with  what  view  it  is  proposed 
to  draw  advantage  from  this  science ; — if  it  be  considered 
in  its  tendency  to  promote  the  good  of  the  mind,  no  object 
more  advantageous  can  surely  be  wanting  to  induce  the 
the  world  to  rejoice  and  delight  in  it,  since  it  offers  an 
acquaintance  with  things  divine  and  human :  if  it  be  COQ- 
eidei-ed  in  respect  to  the  benefits  it  is  capable  of  conferring 


*  Tlie  Greek  word  for  tliia,  >»u.  though  found  in  the  Elxevir 
edition  from  which  this  tranaUtion  i.^  mwle,  does  not  ftppear  in  other 
copies ;  the  Bule  edition  of  1553  eay4  merely,  r  t>  rifin  ■*•  <>  *i'ift*. 
"  honour  and  rank,"  irhich  ia  the  icnse  aIbo  given  in  the  L&tin  truia- 
Ution  of  Penigio,  IW!,  without  any  mention  of  " ofaprinj." 


Cliap.  III.J  PTOLEMY'S  TETItABIIlDiW.  13 

on  the  body,  its  utility,  in  this  view  also,  will  be  found 
on  oomparison  to  excel  that  of  all  other  arts  conducive  to 
the  comforts  of  life,  for  it  is  of  more  general  application 
and  Hervics  than  all  the  othiTii  together.  And,  although 
it  may  be  objected  to  the  art  of  prescience,  that  it  doen 
not  co-operate  towards  the  acquirement  of  riches  or  glory, 
let  it  also  be  remembered  that  the  same  objection  attaches 
to  every  other  art  and  science ;  since  there  is  not  one 
which  can  of  itself  produce  either  richesorglory,  nor  yet 
is  there  one  which  Is  on  that  plea  deemed  useless:  it 
seems,  therefore,  that  the  science  of  prognostication,  with 
its  high  qualifications  and  its  aptitude  to  the  most  im- 
portant objects,  does  not,  in  any  greater  degree,  deserve 
to  be  condemned. 

In  t;eneral,  however,  the  persons  who  attack  and  repro- 
bate it  as  being  useless,  do  not  pay  due  regard  to  the 
manner  in  which  it  becomes  necessary;  but  deny  its 
utility  on  the  specious  argument  that  it  i.s  supertluous 
and  puerile  to  attempt  to  foreknow  things  which  must 
inevitably  come  to  pass :  thus  considering  it  in  a  mode 
at  once  abstracted,  unlearned,  and  unfair.  For,  in  the 
first  place,  this  fact  ought  to  be  kept  in  view,  that  event* 
which  necessarily  and  fully  happen,  whether  exciting 
fear  or  creating  joy.  if  arriving  unforeseen,  will  either 
overwhelm  the  mind  with  terror  or  destroy  its  composure 
by  sudden  delight ;  if,  however,  such  events  should  have 
'  been  foreknown,  the  mind  will  have  been  previously 
prepared  for  their  reception,  and  will  preserve  an  equable 
calmness,  by  having  been  accustomed  to  contemplate 
■  the  approaching  event  as  though  it  were  present,  so 
I  that,  on  its  actual  arrival,  it  will  be  sustained  with 
tranquillity  and  constancy. 

In  the  next  place,  it  must  not  be  imagined  that  all 
thinga  happen  to  mankind,  as  though  every  individual 
circumstance  were  ordained  by  divine  decree  and  some 


1+  I'Tul.EMVS   TETlUlilBLris.  [Dook  I. 

indissoluble  supernal  cauae;  nur  is  it  to  be  tboiight  tliat 
all  events  are  shewn  to  proceed  from  oneainfjle  inevitablu 
fate,  without  being  inflneiiceii  by  tlie  interposition  of  any 
other  agency.  Huch  an  opinion  ia  entirely  inadmissible  ; 
for  it  is  on  the  contrary  most  essential  to  observe,  not 
only  the  heavenly  motion  which,  perfect  in  its  divine  in- 
stitution and  order,  is  eternally  regular  and  undeviating, 
but  aho  the  variety  which  exists  in  earthly  things,  sub- 
jected to  and  diversiticd  by  the  institutions  and  courses 
of  nature,  and  in  connection  with  which  the  superior 
cause  operates  in  re^>pect  to  the  accidents  produced. 

It  is  further  to  be  remarked  that  man  is  subject,  not 
only  to  events  applicable  to  his  own  private  and  indi- 
vidual nature,  hut  also  to  others  arising  from  general 
causes.  He  siiH'ers,  for  instance,  by  pestilences,  inunda- 
tions, or  conHagrations,  produced  by  certain  extensive 
changes  in  llie  Ambient,  and  destroying  niultiludes  at 
once;  since  a  greater  and  more  powerful  agency  must  of 
course  always  absorb  and  overcome  one  that  is  more 
uiinuto  and  weaker.  In  great  changes,  therefore,  where 
a  stronger  cause  predominates,  more  general  aifections, 
like  tbo.se  just  mentioned,  are  put  in  operation,  but  atfec- 
lions  which  attach  to  one  individual  solely  are  excited 
when  his  own  natural  constitution,  peculiar  to  himself, 
may  be  overcome  by  some  opposing  impulse  of  the 
Ambient,  however  small  or  faint.  And  in  this  point  of 
view  it  is  manifest  tliat  all  events  whatsoever,  whetlier 
general  or  particular,  of  which  the  ptiuiaiy  cause  is  strong 
and  irresistible,  and  against  which  no  other  contrary 
agency  has  sufficient  power  to  interpose,  must  of  neces- 
sity be  wholly  fulfilled  ;  and  that  events  indicated  by  a 
minor  cause  miipt  of  course  be  prevented  and  annihilated, 
when  some  olher  agency  may  be  found  contending  for  an 
opposite  effect ;  if,  however,  no  such  opposing  agency  can 
be  found,  they  also  oiUst  be  fulfilled,  in  due  succession  to 


C%ap.  III.]  FTOLEMY'S   TETRABIHLOS.  15 

the  primary  cause.  Nevertheless,  the  fultilinent  of  events 
thus  indicated  may  not  be  ascribed  solely  to  the  vigour  of 
the  cause  producing  them,  nor  to  any  inevitable  fate,  but 
rather  to  the  absence  of  any  opposing  influence  capable 
of  prevention.  And  thus,  with  all  things  whatsoever 
which  trace  their  cause  and  origin  to  nature,  the  case  is 
exactly  similar;  for  stones*,  plants,  animals,  wounds, 
passions  and  diseases,  ail  will  of  necessity  operate  on  man 
to  a  certain  degree ;  and  they  fail  to  do  so  if  antidotes  be 
found  and  applied  against  their  influence. 

In  exercising  prognostication,  therefore,  strict  care  must 
be  taken  to  foretel  future  events  by  that  natural  process 
only  which  is  admitted  in  the  doctrine  here  delivered  ; 
and,  setting  aside  all  vain  and  unfounded  opinions,  to 
predict  that,  when  the  existing  agency  is  manifold  and 
great,  and  of  a  power  impossible  to  be  resisted,  the  cor- 
responding event  which  it  indicates  shall  absolutely  take 
place;  and  also,  in  other  cases,  that  another  event  shall 
not  happen  when  its  exciting  causes  are  counteracted  by 
some  interposing  influence.  It  is  in  this  manner  that 
experienced  physicians,  accustomed  to  the  observation  of 
diseases,  foresee  that  some  will  be  inevitably  mortal,  and 
that  others  are  susceptible  of  cure. 

Thus,  when  any  opinion  is  given  by  the  astrologer 
wuth  respect  to  the  various  accidents  liable  to  happen,  it 
.should  be  understood  that  he  advances  nothinor  more  than 
this  proposition;  viz.  that,  by  the  property  inherent  in  the 
Ambient,  any  conformation  of  it,  suitable  to  a  particular 
temperament,  being  varied  more  or  less,  will  produce 
in  that  temperament  some  particvdar  affectiov.  And 
it  is  also  to  be  understood  that  he  ventures  this  opinion 
with  the  same  degree  of  confidence,  as  that  with  which  a 


*  In  alliuion  to  tbe  sympathetic  powers  antiently  attributed  to 
certain  AtoBCB. 


IG  ptolkmy's  tetrabiblos.  [BouIc  I. 

pliyaician  may  declare  that  a  certain  wound  will  iacrease 
or  grow  putrid ;  or  a  man  acquainted  with  nietala  say 
timt  the  magnet*  wiil  attract  iron.  For  neither  the  in- 
crtjaae  nor  putrefaction  of  the  wound,  nor  the  magnet's 
nttraction  of  iron,  is  ordained  by  any  inevitable  law, 
althouf;h  thene  con'iequencea  must  necessarily  follow,  in 
due  obedience  to  the  lirst  principles  of  the  existing  order 
of  nature,  when  no  means  of  prevention  can  be  found 
and  applied.  But,  however,  neither  of  these  consequences 
will  take  place,  when  such  antidotes  shall  be  presented  as 
will  naturally  prevent  ihem  r— and  a  similar  consideration 
should  be  givtn  to  the  predictions  of  the  astrologer: — 
because,  if  garlick  be  rubbed  on  the  magnet,  iron  will 
experience  no  attraction -f;  and  if   proper  medicines  be 

*  Wlialley,  in  trBDalaliDg  tliis  chapter,  makes  the  foUotviag  remark 
on  this  mention  of  the  magnet:  "  However  much  later  it  was  tint 
"  llio  loathtone  became  known  in  Europe,  what  U  mentioned  uf  it  in 
'■  lliis  chapter  luakei  it  evident  that  it  was  known  in  .Egypt,  where 
"  Ptoleiiif  lived,  in  his  time."— That  worthy  translator  forgot  (if  in- 
deed he  ever  knew)  that  the  loadstono's  property  of  attracting  iron 
was  known  to  Tlmlea,  anil  coniwcnted  on  by  I'lalo  and  Aristotle,  nil 
of  whom  lived  some  centarie«,  more  or  1es»,  before  Ptolemy.  It  u  itii 
polarity  that  was  not  known  nntil  the  lllh  or  i'2th  century;  and  llie 
French  say  that  the  earliest  notice  of  that  polarity  in  found  in  n 
poem  of  Guyot  of  Provence,  who  was  at  the  Enipernr  Frederick's 
Coart  at  MenU  in  1181.— See  the  French  Eneyclopicdia,  &c. 

+  Respecting  the  etTect  here  asserWd  to  be  produced  on  the  magnet 
by  f^rlick,  1  have  found  the  following  nienlion  in  a  book  called 
"The  Gardener's  Labyrinth,"  printed  at  London  in  I5S6  "Hero 
"  also  1  thonght  not  to  ouerpasse  the  maruelloua  discord  of  tlio  ada- 
"  m  ant -atone  and  garlike,  which  tlie  Greekea  name  to  be  an  Anti- 
"patheia  or  natarall  contiarietie  betwecne  them;  for  such  is  the 
"  hatred  or  contrarietie  between  these  two  bodies,  (lauking  botU 
"  hearing  and  feeliag)  that  the  adamant  rather  pnttetli  away,  than 
"  draweth  t*  it,  iron,  if  the  same  afore  be  rubbed  with  garlike  j  as 
"  PlntSTohos  hath  noted,  nnd,  after  him,  Clandinn  Ptolemims. 
"  Which  matter,  examined  by  diuers  learned,  and  founde  the  con- 
"  trarie,  cansed  them  to  jii'lge,  that  those  skilful  men  (especially 
"  Ptolemie)  mcnt  the  hoiiic  to  be  done  with  the  Egyptian  Gartike  : 


Chuii.  III.j  rrc 'LEMV'.S   TET1UH1BI.0S. 

itpplied  to  the  wound,  it  will  cease  to  increase  or  to  putrefy. 
And  therefore  all  events  wliich  happen  to  mankind  take 
placi!  also  in  the  regular  course  of  natine,  when  no  iin- 
pedimentsf  thereto  are  found  or  known:  but  a!:;ain,  on 
iho  otlier  hand,  if  any  impediments  or  obstructions  be 
fouml  in  tlio  way  of  events  which  may  be  predicted  by 
tlie  re*;ular  coursti  of  nature  to  happen,  such  events  will 
eilhiT  nut  take  place,  at  all.  or,  if  they  should  tnko  plac. 
will  l>e  much  diminished  in  their  force  and  extent. 

Thu  same  order  and  consequence  exist  in  all  cases. 
whether  the  ev^-nts  have  a  general  or  only  a  particular 
operation;  and  it  may  therefore  well  be  demanded,  why 
prescience  is  believed  to  be  possible  ai  far  as  it  regards 
general  events,  and  why  it  is  allowed  to  be  serviceable 
in  preparing  for  their  approach  :  while  in  particular  in- 
stances its  power  and  use  arr  altogelher  denietl.  That 
the  weather  and  the  seasons,  and  the  indications  of  the 
fixed  Htars,  as  well  as  the  configurations  of  the  Moon, 
afford  means  of  prognostication,  many  persons  admit; 
and  they  exercise  this  foreknowledge  for  their  own  pre- 
Mervatinn.  and  comfort,  adapting  thi-ir  constitutions  to 

"  w  lucli  Diotoiiridea  nnite  to  be  *tna,U  garlitv.  anil  the  same  iweete 
"  ill  tMte,  pi»Ho»»ing  a.  licwtifuU  head,  tending  unto  n  purple  colour. 
"Tliere  be  wliHi  nttrihnl^  the  tame  to  OphJoncoridon,  which 
'"AntoaiMMiiTophoniitH  Ritarix,  a  eingnint  l<!nrne<I  mftn,  and  wel 
"jmMtiwd  in  tumlry  skillcs,  uttered  this  itppn>on»l  secrete  to  a, 
"  friend  wlrom  ho  loncil  " 

In  the  Bnine  hook,  the  "Ophia»coriJoii"  it*  thus  ipoken  of: 
"Tb«n  U  nnotiier  Mild  tinrlike  which  the  Greekea  name  Ophioscori- 
"don;  in  En^lixii,  ItunmieK;  growing  of  tlie  owns  accord  in  the 
"f»ll<*wlid.liM" 

Comeliii*  Agrippit  (ut^oording  to  the  Knglish  translation)  has  uttited 
ithat  the  presenri'  of  the  diamond  also  nEUtrali;ief<  the  attractive 
powet  of  tlie  niagiiel.  fiat  aa  tliat  preat  magician  was  somewbiit 
IWtliDed  to  qiiilililiiijf,  it  ia  not  imposBilile  tiiat  l>y  ihc  word  he  urv<i 
'diamuiid"  (vix.  a'/amu)  he  may  me&n  the  adamant  or  load> 
alone;  whii'li  wouhl  reduce  his  assertion  merely  to  this,  that  one 
fliagnct  win  poLinternpt  another. 


18  FroLKMY's    TKTHAiilHLUS.  [Book  I, 

the  ex])ecto,J  temperature,  by  cooling  and  refreshing 
things  for  the  summer,  ami  by  warm  thint;pt  for  the 
-winter.  They  also  watch  the  a igniti cations  of  the  tixed 
stars,'to  aviiid  dangerous  weather,  in  making  voyitgea  liy 
i^ea;  and  they  notice  the  aspects  of  the  Moon,  when  at 
the  full,  in  order  to  diroet  the  copulation  of  their  herds 
and  floclts,  and  the  setting  of  plants  or  sowing  of  seeds : 
and  there  is  not  an  individual  who  considers  tliese  general 
precautionn  aa  impassible  or  unprofitable.  Still,  how- 
ever, these  same  persons  withhold  their  assent  to  the 
possibility  of  applying  preiscience  to  particular  caae.s; 
such,  for  instance,  as  any  particular  excess  or  diminution 
of  cold  or  heat,  whether  arising  out  of  the  peculiar  tein- 
peraiiient  producing  the  original  cold  or  heat,  or  from 
ihe  eonjbination  of  other  properties  ;  nor  do  they  admit 
that  tliere  are  any  means  of  guarding  against  many  of 
these  particular  circii instances.  And  yet.  if  it  be  clear 
that  persons,  who  prepare  themselves  by  cooling  things, 
ure  less  affected  by  any  general  heat  of  the  weather. 
there  seems  no  rea.son  for  supposing  that  a  similar 
preparation  would  not  be  equally  effectual  against  any 
particular  conjuncture  oppressed  by  immodirato  heat. 
It  appears,  however,  that  this  idea,  of  the  impractica- 
bility of  attaining  foreknowledge  of  particular  circuiu- 
stances,  must  originate  solely  in  the  mere  difficulty  of 
the  acquirement;  which  difficulty  is  certainly  rendered 
peculiarly  arduous  by  the  necessity  of  conducting  the 
enquiry  with  the  greatest  accuracy  and  precisi<m :  and 
to  this  it  must  be  added,  that,  as  there  is  rarely  found  u 
person  capable  of  arranging  the  whole  subject  so  peifectly 
that  no  part  of  the  opposing  infl.uence  can  escape  his 
attention,  it  freipiently  happens  that  predictions  are  not 
properly  regulated  by  due  consideration  of  that  opposing 
inffuence,.and  that  the  effects  ate  at  once  considered  fully 
tftble  lo  be  brought  to  pass,  agreeably  to  the  primary 


\ 


Chap.  III.]  PTOLEMY'S   TFrRAUIBLOS,  1'' 

agency  and  without  any  intervention.  Tliia  ilL-fuct,  of 
not  sufficiently  consiilering  tlie  opposing  influence,  has 
n&tnraHy  induced  an  opinion  that  all  future  events  are 
entirely  unalterable  and  inevitable.  But  since  the  fore- 
knowledge of  particular  clrcumstanci.'s,  although  it  may 
not  wholly  claim  infallibility,  seemi  yet  so  far  practicable 
as  to  merit  consideration,  so  the  precaution  it  nfford.s,  in 
particular  circumstances,  deserves  in  like  manner  to  be 
attended  to;  and,  if  it  be  not  of  universal  advantage-, 
but  useful  in  few  instances  only,  it  is  still  most  worthy 
of  estimation,  and  to  be  consi<Iered  of  no  moderate  v&lue. 
Of  thie,  the  jEgyptiana  seem  to  have  been  well  awere ; 
their  discoveries  of  the  great  faculties  of  this  science 
have  exceeded  those  of  other  nation.s,  and  they  have  in 
all  ca.seH  combined  the  medical  art  with  astronomical 
pro^notstication.  And,  if  they  had  been  of  opinion  that 
all  expected  events  are  unalterable  and  not  to  be  averted, 
they  never  would  have  instituted  any  propitiations,  re- 
medies, and  preservatives  against  the  influence  of  the 
Ambient,  whether  present  or  approaching,  general  or 
particular.  But,  by  means  of  the  science  called  by  them 
Medical  Mathematics,  tliey  combined  with  the  power 
oF  prognostication  the  concurrent  .secondary  influence 
arising  oiil  of  the  institutions  and  courses  of  nature,  as 
well  as  the  contrary  influence  which  might  be  procured 
out  of  nature's  variety ;  and  by  lueatis  of  these  they 
rendered  the  indicated  agency  useful  and  advantageou.i; 
since  their  astronomy  pointed  out  to  them  the  kind  of 
temperament  liable  to  be  acted  upon,  as  well  as  the  events 
abuut  lo  proceed  from  the  Ambient,  and  the  peculiar 
influence  of  those  events,  while  their  medical  skill  made 
them  acc|uainted  with  every  thing  suitable  or  unsuitable 
lo  each  of  the  effects  to  be  produced.  And  it  is  by 
this  process  tliat  remedies  for  present  and  preservatives 
against  future  disorders  are  to  be  acquired;  for,  without 


20  I'TULKMY'S   TETRABlllLOS.  {liouk  I. 

astronomical  knowledge,  uie'lical  aid  woulJ  be  most 
l'rec|uently  unavailing;  aince  the  same  identical  remedies 
are  not  bettei'  calculated  for  all  persons  whatsoever,  than 
they  are  for  all  diseaaes  whatsoever*. 

The  practicability  and  utility  of  prescieDce  having 
been  thus  far  briefly  explained,  the  ensuing  discnurse 
nnist  be  proceeded  with.  It  commences,  introductoHly, 
with  an  account  of  the  efficient  properties  of  each  of  the 
heavenly  bodies,  taken  from  the  rules  of  the  antients, 
whose  obseivations  were  founded  in  nature. — And,  first, 
of  the  influences  of  the  planets  and  of  the  Sun  and  Moon. 

Orhaptcr  IV. 

7'Ae  Tnriwnces  of  iki  I'laneiary  Orhs. 
The  Siinf  is  found  to  produce  heat  and  moderate  dry- 
ness. His  magnitude,  and  the  changes  which  he  so 
evidently  makes  in  the  seasons,  render  his  power  more 
plainly  perceptible  than  that  of  the  other  heavenly 
bodica;  siucc  his  approach  to  the  zenith  of  any. part  of 
the  earth  creates  a  greater  deyree  of  heat  in  that  part, 
and  proportionately  disposes  its  inhabitants  after  his 
own  nature. 

The  Moon  principally  generates  moisture;  her  prox- 
imity to  the  earth  renders  her  highly  capable  of  exciting 
damp  vapours,  and  of  thus  operating  sensibly  upon 
animal  bodies  by  relaxation  and  putrefaction.  She  has. 
however,  also  a  moderate  share  in  the  production  vf 
beat,  ill  consequence  of  the  illumination  she  receives 
from  the  Sun. 

•  This  seemn  to  cKplittii  tlie  urigiD  of  the  old  alli&nce  between 
medicine  and  oatrology,  so  univcrMlljr  preserved  until  almmt  within 
ibe  last  ceutury. 

■t  U  will  be  recollecceil  that  llie  Ptolemaic  bypotbeaic  cuDiiders 
llie  Sua  OB  a  plaoelarj  gtb,  in  consequence  of  Iiir  apparent  progrwa 
i<!ti  the  zodiac. 


O/i'iyi.  IV,]  PTOJ,EMV'S  TETBAHIHI-OS.  21 

Saturn  produces  cold  and  dryness,  for  he  is  most 
remote  both  from  the  Sun's  heat  and  from  the  earth's 
vapours.  But  he  is  more  effective  in  the  production  of 
colli  than  of  dryness.  And  he  and  the  rest  of  the  planets 
derive  their  energy  from  the  positions  which  they  liold 
with  regard  to  the  Sun  and  Moon ;  and  they  are  all  seen 
to  alter  the  constitution  of  the  Ambient  in  various  ways. 
Mars  chiefly  causes  dryness,  and  is  also  strongly  heat- 
ing, by  means  of  his  own  tiery  nature,  which  is  indicated 
by  his  colour,  and  in  consequence  of  his  vicinity  to  the 
Sun  ;  the  -sphere  of  which  is  immediately  below  him. 

Jupiter  revolves  in  an  intermediate  sphere  between 
tlie  extreme  cold  of  Saturn  and  the  burning  heat  of 
Mars,  and  has  consequently  a  temperate  inHuence:  he 
therefore  at  once  promotes  warmth  and  moisture.  But, 
owing  to  the  spheres  of  Muts  and  the  Sun,  which  He 
beneath  him,  his  warmth  is  predominant:  and  hence  he 
produces  fertilizing  breezes. 

To  Venus  also  the  same  temparate  quality  belongs, 
although  it  exists  conversely;  since  the  heat  she  pro- 
duces by  her  vicinity  to  the  Sun  is  not  so  great  as  the 
moisture  which  she  generates  by  the  magnitude  of  her 
light,  and  by  appropriating  to  herself  the  moist  vapours 
of  the  earth,  in  the  same  manner  that  the  Moon  does. 

Mercury  sometimes  produces  dryness,  and  at  other 
times  moisture,  and  each  with  equal  vigour.  Kis  faculty 
of  absorbing  moisture  and  creating  dryness  proceeds 
from  his  situation  with  regard  to  the  Sun,  from  which 
he  is  at  no  time  far  distant  in  longitude;  and,  on  the 
other  hand,  he  produces  moi.sture,  because  he  borders 
upon  the  Moon's  sphere,  which  is  nearest  to  the  earth ; 
and,  being  thus  excited  by  the  velocity  of  his  motion 
with  the  Sun,  he  consequently  operates  rapid  chauges 
tending  to  produce  alternately  either  quality. 


i'TOl,EMV.S    TETBAIIIIILOS. 


[Booh- 1. 


(£\v.\\i\tx  V. 

liniejics  awl  Malefic^. 

Of  the  four  tetnijeraments  or  ijualities  above  meutioned, 
twii  are  nutritive  and  prolific,  vin.  heat  and  moisture;  by 
these  all  matter  coalesces  and  is  nourished  :  the  other 
two  are  noxious  and  destructive,  viz.  dryness  and  cold  ; 
by  these  all  matter  is  decayed  and  dissipated. 

Therefore,  two  of  the  planets,  on  account  of  their 
temperate  quality,  and  because  heat  and  moisture  are 
predominant  in  them,  are  considered  by  the  antieuts  as 
benefic,  or  causers  of  good  :  these  are  Jupiter  and  Venus. 
And  the  Moon  also  is  si  considered  for  the  same  reasonw. 

But  Saturn  and  Mars  are  esteemed  of  u  contrary 
nature,  and  malefic,  or  causers  of  evil  :— -the  first  from 
his  excess  of  cold,  the  other  from  his  excess  of  dryness. 

The  Sun  and  Mercury  are  deemed  of  common  influ- 
unce,  and  productive  either  of  good  or  evil  in  unison  with 
whatever  planets  tliey  may  be  connected  with. 


tfluiiJtcr  VI. 

Miiwuiim  ami  Feminine. 

TuERE  are  two  primary  .sexes,  male  and  female ;  and  the 
female  sex  partakes  chiefly  of  moisture.  The  Moon  and 
Venus  are  there-fore  said  to  be  feminine,  since  their 
qualities  are  principally  moist. 

The  Sun,  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars  are  called  mascu- 
line. Mercury  is  common  to  hoth  gendtTs,  because  at 
certain  times  he  produces  dryness,  and  at  olher.s  moisture, 
and  performs  each  in  an  equal  ratio. 

The  stars,  however,  are  also  .-^aid  to  be  masculine  and 
fi^minine,  by  their  positions  with  regard  to  the  Sun. 
While  they  are  matutine  ami  preceding  the  Sun,  they 


IJIiilp.  VII.]  PTi>r,KMV's    TRTllArintLDS 

are  luaaciiliiie ;  when  vespertinp  ami  following  the  Sun. 
they  become  feminine*. 

And  they  nre  further  regulated  in  this  respect  by  their 
positions  with  regard  to  the  horizon.  From  the  ascend- 
nnt  to  the  mid-heaven,  or  from  the  angle  of  the  went  to 
the  lower  heaven,  they  are  considereil  to  be  niai^cnline, 
lieing  then  oriental :  and  in  the  other  two  quadrantai 
feminine,  being  then  occidental. 


Chapter  VII 

J)mrn"l  anrf  Xor.tunial. 
Thk  tiny  at«l  the  iiiglit  are  the  visible  divisions  of  timetl 
The  day,  in  its  heat  and  it»  aptitude  for  action,  is  mAMCD*^ 
line; — the  ni^ht,  in  iU  moisture  and  itis  appropriation  to 
rest,  fendnine. 

Hence,  a^ain,  the  Moon  and  Venus  arc  esteemed  to  Ije 
nocturnal ;  the  Sun  and  Jupiter,  diornal ;  and  Mercury, 
common  ;  nnce  in  his  nialutine  position  hi'-  h  diurnal, 
but  nocturnal  when  vespertine. 

Of  the  ntber  two  planets,  Saturn  and  Mars,  which  are 
noxious,  one  i.s  considered  to  be  diurnal,  and  the  other 
noeturnul.  Neither  of  them,  however,  is  allotted  to  that 
division  of  time  with  which  its  nature  occorfls,  (as  heat 
accords  with  heat,)  but  each  is  disposed  of  on  a  contrary 
prindple:  and  for  this  reason,  that,  although  the  benefit 
ia  increased  when  a  favourable  temperament  receives  an 
addition  of  its  own  nature,  yet,  the  evil  arising  from  a 
[>ernicious  inBuence  is  much  mitigated  when  dissimilar 
(juaiities  are  mingled  with  that  influence.  Hence  the 
coldnes.s  of  Saturn  is  allotted  to  the  day,  to  counter- 
balance its  beat;  and  the  dryness  of  Mars  to  the  night, 

*  "  Astro nuiuera  i.tM  the  ptaneU  malatine,  wlien,  being  orienul 
"  from  tbe  Sun,  ttiey  are  above  the  earth  when  he  rines ;  anci  vesper* 
'   line,  when  they  set  after  him  "— Moicoii'a  MftlhenmticalDictioniirj'. 


24 


•roT.EMY  S    TETRABIllLOS. 


[liooi.  r. 


to  counterbalance  its  moisture.  Thus  each  of  thtse 
pkneta.  being  moderated  by  this  combiaatiuu,  is  placed 
in  a.  condiliou  calculated  to  produce  a  favourabU  teni- 
perfttnerit*. 

i£lui;)ta-  VIII. 

The  Injlaeiwe  vf  Position  ivith  regard  tu  the  Su-n. 
The   respective  powers  of  the  Moon  and    uf  the   three 
MUperiur  planets  arc  either  augmented  or  diininisheil  by 
iheir  several  positions  with  rt-gard  to  the  Sun. 

The  Moon,  during  her  increase,  from  her  first  emerg- 
ing to  her  tir.st  quarter,  produces  chiefly  inoiiiture :  on 
contimiing  her  increase  from  her  first  quarter  to  her  full 
fatate  of  illumination,  she  causes  heat ;  from  her  full  state 
to  her  third  quarter  she  causes  dryness;  and  from  her 
third  quarter  to  her  occultation  she  causes  coid. 

The  planets,  when  matutine,  and  from  their  first 
emerging  until  they  arrive  at  thtlr  first  station,  are 
chietly  productive  of  moisture;  from  their  tir»t  station 
until  they  rise  at  night,  of  heat;  from  their  rising  at 
night  until  their  second  station,  of  dryness;  and  from 
their  second  station  until  their  occultation,  thoy  produce 
coldf. 


*  Wbolley  hern  appends   the  following  uo 
"  ma;  be  properly  added,  that  a  p1aii«t  ia  aai 
"  in  ft  diurani  nativity,  Above  the  earth ;  and,  < 
"  under  the  earlh  :   but  nortarnal,  when,  in  n  nuotiirnal   na 
"  aboTe  the  earlh ;  or.  in  a  diamal  uativity,  under  the  earth." 

t  Although  all  the  positiuna  meationed  ii 
applicable  lo  Veuus  and  Mercury,  which  can  n< 
is  to  say,  at  Bunsut,  and  althoutth  the  author  it 

chapter  speaks  only  of  the  Moon  aucl  the  three  superior  pkneta,  there 
yet  fteems  no  reason  why  the  orbira  of  Venus  and  Mercury  ahoald  not 
lie  »iiuilarly  divided  by  ilieir  in/orior  and  auperior  ('onjunFtions,  and 
their  greatent  elongatious. 

The  fotluwinK  it  from  Whalley  :  "  The  first  statitiu.  in  thid  chapter 
"  luentiaued,  i»  whenapliuiet  liegina  toberetrograile:  aud  the  second 


"  To  this  chapter 
o  be  diurnal,  whtan, 
uutturnal  nativity. 


1  thin  pamgriLph  arc  nol 
e  beginning  of  the 


(V.<(yi.  IX.]  ITOLtMV's   TETKAUIHLOS.  25 

But  it  is  akosutticiently  plain  that  they  must  likewise 
cause,  by  their  iiiti;rmixlure  with  each  other,  many 
varieties  of  quality  in  tlie  Ambient:  because,  although 
their  individual  and  peculiar  iiiHuence  may  for  the  most 
part  prevail,  it  will  still  be  more  or  less  varied  by  the 
power  of  the  other  heavenly  bodies  configurated  with  them. 

(tllillJtcr  IX. 
The  Injiunwe  of  the  FUvd  Stars. 
"Sext  in  successioD,  it  is  nt-ccsssry  to  detail  the  natures 
and  )iroperties  of  the  tixe<l  stars ;  all  of  which  have  their 
respective  intlucQces,  aDalu(;uus  to  the  iufluenceo  of  the 
planets :  and  those  stars  which  furm  the  constellations  of 
tht>  zofliac  require  to  be  first  ilescribed. 


Thii  stars  in  the  head  of  Aries  possess  an  influence 
similar  in  its  effects  to  that  of  Mars  and  .Saturn :  those  in 
the  mouth  act  similarly  to  Mercury,  and  in  some  degree 
to  Saturn  ;  th.jse  in  the  hinder  foot,  to  Mars ;  those  in  the 
tail,  to  Venus. 

Those  stars  in  Taurus,  wliich  are  in  the  abscission  of 
the  sign,  resemble  in  their  leuiperamcnt  the  influence  of 
Venus,  and  in  some  diHj;ree  that  of  Saturn  :  those  in  the 
Pleiaden  are  like  the  Moon  and  Mars.  Of  the  stars  in 
the  head,  that  one  of  the  Hyades  which  is  bright  and 
ruddy,  and  called  Facula*  has  the  same  temperament  as 
Mars:  the  others  r&semble  Saturn,  and, partly.  Mercury; 
and  those  at  the  top  of  the  horns  are  like  Mars. 

"  italioQ  wlieu,  from  retrograUatiou,  a  planet  becomes  direct.    They" 
(the  pliiii«ta)  "begin  to  riw  at  night  when  in  uppoBJtioD  to  ilm 
■'  Sun." 
'  Tlie  little  Torch ;  non  knoivn  by  the  name  of  Aldebaiaa. 


26  rroLEMv's  tkikahihi-os.  [Baal.-  I. 

Oemini. 
The  stars  in  the  feet  of  Oemini  Imve  an  iiiHiience 
similar  to  that  of  Mercury,  and  moderately  to  that  of 
Venns.  The  bright  stars  in  the  thighs  are  like  Saturn  ; 
of  the  two  bright  stars  on  the  heads,  the  one,  which 
precedes  and  is  called  Apollo",  is  like  Mercury ;  the  other 
which  follows,  called  HL'rciilea-(-,  is  like  Mars. 

Cuii<:cy. 
The  two  stars  in  the  eyes  of  Cancer  are  of  the  same 
inflnoDce  as  Mercury,  and  are  also  moderately  like  Mars. 
Those  in  the  claws  are  like  Saturn  and  Mercury,  The 
nebulous  mass  in  the  breast,  called  the  Pnosepe,  has  the 
same  efficacy  as  Mars  and  the  Moon.  The  two  placed  on 
either  side  of  the  nebulous  mass,  and  called  the  Asini, 
have  an  influence  similar  to  that  of  Mars  and  the  Sun. 

ieo. 
Of  the  stars  in  Leo,  two  in  the  head  are  like  Saturn 
and  partly  like  Mars.  The  three  in  the  neck  are  like 
Saturn,  and  in  some  degree  like  Mercury.  The  briyht 
one  in  the  heart,  called  ReRulusJ.  agrees  with  Mars  and 
Jupiter.  Those  in  the  loins,  and  the  bright  one  in  the 
tail,  are  Saturn  and  Venus :  those  in  the  thighs  resemble 
Venus,  and,  in  some  degree,  Mercury. 

The  stars  In  the  head  of  Virgo,  and  that  at  the  top  of 
the  southern  wing,  operate  like  Morcury  and  somewhat 
like  Mars;  the  other  bright  stars  in  the  same  wing,  and 
Ihose  about  ihc  girdle,  resemble  Mercury  in  their  in- 
fluence, and  also  Venus,  moderately.  The  bright  one  in 
the  northern  wing,  called   Vindemiator,  is  of  the  .same 

'olluxi  f  Cor  Leonia. 


inHuence  as  Saturn  and  Meroiry  :  that  calleH  8pica 
Virginia  is  like  Venus  and  jjactly  Mars :  those  at  the 
points  of  the  feet  and  at  the  bottom  of  the  garments  are 
like  Mercury,  and  also  Mars,  moderately. 

Lilmi'. 
Those   stars  at  the  points  of   the  claws  of   Seorpio 
operate  like  Jupiter  and  Mercury:  those  in  the  middle 
of  the  daws,  like  Saturn,  and  in  some  degree  like  Mars. 


The  bright  stars  in  the  front  of  the  body  of  Scorpio 
have  an  effect  similar  to  that  produced  by  the  influence 
of  Mar.%  and  partly  to  that  produced  by  Saturn  :  the 
three  in  the  body  itself,  the  middle  one  of  which,  called 
Aritarest,  is  ruddy  and  more  luminous,  are  similar  to 
Mars  and  moderately  fo  Jupiter:  those  in  the  joints  of 


Clieln-,  or  Iho  elawt  of  Scorpio : 
itegrew,  omittioK  Libra,     Tims 


*  Cftlled  by  tbe  antieuts  x"'-' 
wbicb  sign  Ihey  mnde  to  oonsial  of  Bf 
Virgil  in  the  first  Georgic,  line  33,  &< 

Qao  locos  Erigonen  inter,  Clielawjue  seqnentes 
Pandiliu  :  ip«e  tilii  jam  bruciiia  coatrahit  anleoK 
Scorpiui,  et  c<i'li  justft  ptuH  parity  reliquit. 
Ovjd,  likewise,  takes  the  follnwin);  nolira  of  Scorpio : — 
I'orrigit  in  apatinm  signonini  membrfi  duomiii. 

Mtl.  2,  I  198. 
t  Adama's  Treatise  on  the  Globes  calls  thiti  star  "  Kalb  a1  Akrab, 
or  (he  Scnrpion'a  heart,"  and  adds,  that  "  the  woni  Antares  (if  it  is 
not  ft  corruption)  ba«  no  Bigniflcatiim."  Bnl  il  should  be  nlwerved 
thai  Ptoleniy  Htates  that  this  star  partakea  of  tlie  nature  of  Mam ;  it 
8e«ina  tben^fore  not  improbable  that  Antarea  may  be  a  regular  (Ireek 
word,  (wniponnded  of  «tTi  pro  and  *fvi  Hars,  and  »igni(yins  Mara\ 
dtputy,  or  lieutenant,  or  ont  actg/iff  for  Mars. 

In  corroboration  of  the  conjecture  hazarded  iu  the  note,  as  W  the 
etymology  of  Antares,  it  may  be  o)iH«n-ed  that  an  authentic  wonl, 
AnteroB,  the  nikine  uF  a  deity  in  alliance  witli  Cnpid,  has  been 
similarly  compounded,  vi/,,  from  ■•n^nv,  and  Ef«t  Cupido. 


ITOLEMY's   TETltAiillJI-DS.  [IJook  L 

the  tail  are  like  Saturn  and  partly  like  Venus :  those  in 
tlie  stinj;,  like  Mercury  and  Mara.  The  nebula  is  like 
Mar^j  and  the  Moon. 

Sai/ittci-ius. 
The  stars  at  the  point  of  Lhe  arrow  in  Sagittarius  have 
influence  similar  to  that  of  Marti  and  the  Moon  :  those  on 
the  bow,  and  at  the  <;ra3p  of  the  hand,  act  like  Jupiler 
and  Mars:  the  nebula  in  the  face  is  like  the  Sun  and 
Mars :  those  in  the  waist  and  in  the  back  resemble 
Jupiter,  and  also  Mercury  moderately;  those  in  the  feet, 
Jupiter  and  Saturn:  the  four-aided  figure  in  the  tail  is 
similar  to  Veiiua,  and  in  some  degree  to  Saturn. 

VapHconi. 

The  stars  in  the  lioms  of  Capricorn  have  efficacy 
similar  to  that  of  Venus,  and  partly  to  that  of  Mars. 
The  stars  in  the  mouth  are  like  Saturn,  and  partly  like 
Venus :  those  in  the  feet  and  in  the  belly  act  in  the  same 
manner  an  Mara  and  Mercury  :  those  in  the  tail  are  like 
Saturn  and  Jupiter. 

A'jiuii-'ti'i. 

The  stars  in  the  shoulders  of  Aquarius  operate  like 
Saturn  and  Mercury ;  those  in  the  left  hand  and  in  the 
face  do  the  same :  those  in  the  thighs  have  an  inBuence 
more  consonant  with  that  of  Mercury,  and  in  a  lees 
degree  with  that  of  Saturn :  those  in  the  stream  of  water 
have  power  similar  to  that  of  Saturn,  and,  moderately,  to 
that  of  Jupiter. 

Those  stars  in  Pisces,  which  are  in  the  head  of  the 
southern  fish,  have  the  same  inHuence  as  Mercury,  and, 
in  some  degree,  as  Saturn:  thoNe  in  the  body  aie  like 
Jupiter  and    Mercury:    those   in   the   tail  and   in   the 


ifiMi 


Chap.  X.] 


southern  line  are  like  Satiini,  am),  moderately,  like 
Mercury.  In  tlie  northern  fish,  thoie  on  its  borly  and 
bftck-bone  resemble  Jupiter,  iind  also  Venut^  in  some 
di'gree:  those  in  the  northern  line  are  like  Saturn  and 
Jupiter;  and  the  bripht  star  in  the  kno'  acts  like  Mars, 
nnd  niuderately  like  Mi.-rc'irv*. 

tClmplct  X. 

Conatdlallona  North  o/ tlie  ZwUac. 
The  constellations  north  of  the  zodiac  have  iheir  respec- 
tive influences,  analogous  to  those  of  the  planets,  existing 
in  the  mode  described  in  the  following  list, 
Ureii  Minor.     The  bright  stars  in  this  con^tidlation  are 

like  8atui-n,and  in  sntue  degree  like  Venus. 
UvBii  Mfijor.     is  like  Mars,  but  the  nebula  under  the 

tail  resembles  the  Moon  and  Venus  in  its 

influence, 
Dr(u:o  .     .     .     The  brijjbt  ,stur.s  operate  like  Saturn  and 

Mars. 
Cephetij'   .     .     ia  like  Saturn  and  Jupiter. 
Bootrs      .     .     is   like    Mercury  and   >Saturn ;    but    thi- 

bright  and  ruddy  star,  called  Arcturus,  i- 

like  Mars  and  Jupiter. 
Cofona  Jiorealifi  is  like  Venus  and  Mercury. 


•Salmon,  in  his  "  Honi'  MathetnftLicii',  or  8o\il  of  Astrology" 
(printtvl  by  Dawks,  I6~!>).  divider  ench  sign  of  the  zodiac  ioto  six 
hcus  of  live  degrees  e«i'li,  "IjeciMiBa  that  in  every  sigT  there  are 
"variouBslruB  of  differing  nalares;"  and  hegivcsapartit^alardeicrip- 
tion  to  each  face,  depending  on  its  oscenBton  or  oalniination.  This 
se«ni»  an  attempt  to  adapt  Ptaleniy's  si gniR cation  of  the  several 
atan,  CDmpu»ilig  Ihe  different  figaa,  to  some  general  rale  or  mode  of 
jiutgment  i  but  it  due*  not  merit  llie  inipiidt  afeent  of  astrologerH. 
It  U  underatood  that  Salmon  was  not  the  invenlor  of  this  divisioti  of 
the  aigUHintn  faces,  bat  that  it  mine  originally  from  the  Arabian 
■cbools. 


30                                    ITOI.K 

n's  TETUAiiiHr.iis,              [liool  t 

tfej-c«.?.s  (or  the  Knee 

er)  ia  like  Mercury. 

J'l/ra 

is  like  VenuM  and  Mercury. 

Gygnwt   *, 

Venus  and  Mercury. 

Saturn  and  Venus. 

Pfrseua     .          ... 

Jupiter    and    Saturn  :     hut    the 

nebula,  in  the  hilt  of  the  sword, 

is  like  Mars  and  Mercury. 

Aari.ja      ... 

The  bright  Stars  are   like  Mars 

Hnd  Mercury. 

4iei'2>entiiri'U» 

i-s  liki]^   Saturn,  and  inoderatt^ly 

like  Vunus. 

.Serpens     .     . 

i.s  like  Saturn  and  Mars. 

Sa<j!tt.(      - 

Saturn,    and     moderately     like 

Venus. 

Aqiiila 

is  like  Mars  and  Jupiter. 

Delphinua      .... 

Saturn  and  Mars. 

Eqaug  (or  Pe^^asiw)     . 

The  hright  stars  are  like  Mara 

and  Mercury. 

Andi-omeda  .... 

is  like  Venus. 

IMta  (or  tlie  Triangle) 

Mercury. 

(Sluptci-   XI.                                      ^ 

(.•'.■,i:^ldUdioi 

(t  South  of  Uie  Zodiac.                            V 

TUK  influences  of  the  constellations  south  of  the  zodiac.           1 

exiiitiiig  in  a  Himilar  mode,  are  as  follow  :~                                 | 

PUcis  AuHmlis     .     . 

The  bright  star  in  the  mouth  is 

of  the  same  influence  af  Vcnus 

and  Mercury. 

C«/iw 

is  like  Saturn. 

Orion 

The     «tars     on     the    shouldei-s 

uperate    similarly   to    Mars  and 

Mercury  ;  and   the  other  bright 

^^A 

.stare  to  Jiipiti-r  and  Saturn. 

^^^^^^I^H  ^^H 

Clnip.  XI.] 

TOLEMV'S   TLIH,vmill.OK.                                 31 

nurlux.  or  /Jrul 

iniwt.     The  last  bright  one   is  of   the 

SHiue  inHumce  a.^  Jupiter :   the 

-    rest  are  like  Saturn,     • 

Lepu. 

CaniH        ... 

.     .     is  like  Saturn  and  Alernury. 

.     .     The  bright  star  in  the  mouth  la 

like  Jupiter,   and    partly    tike 
Mara:  the  others  are  like  Venus. 

Procffoii  *       .     . 

,     .     The  bright  star  is  like  Mercury, 
and  in  some  degree  like  Mars. 

////./.•(tx 

.     .     The  bright  stars  are  like  Saturn 

and  Venua. 

C'jof-'c  , 

\h    like    Venus,   and     in     some 

Coi'viut .     .     , 

degree  like  Mercury, 
ifl  like  Mar^  and  Saturn. 

Argu     . 

The  bright  stam  are  like  Saturn 

Ctmlaui-ua 

and  Jupiter, 

The  .stars  in  the  human  part  of 

the  figure  are  of   the  same  in- 

tbience  as  Venuf*  and  Mercury: 
the  bright  stars  in   the  horse's 

LuptlAi    . 

Ara. 

part  are  like  Venus  and  Jupiter. 
The  briglitsUr.s  are  like  Saturn, 
and  partly  like  Mar^^. 
is  like  Venus,  and  also  Mereurj- 

Cortmn  Aunt>-ali 

in  some  degree. 
^  .     ,     The  bright  stars  are  like  Saturn 

and  Jupiter. 

The  respective 

iuKuences  of  the  -several  stars  have  been 

observed  by  the  antients  lo  operate  in  confnnnity  with              | 

the  mode  pointe( 

out  in  the  foreuoinj  di.slributionsf.                   H 

■  CkdU  Minor. 
t  "  Of  llie  lineil 
"greftteitt  inatnilud 
'•  the  L-cIiptic,  more 

tar."  ill  genernl,"  Whdlley  naya,  "  those  of  tlie                 ^1 

PTOLEMVS   TETRMIIBI.OS. 


Otiuptci-  XII. 


[Book  1. 


The  An 


ual  H.-H 


The  year  comprises  four  seasons;  spring,  siiinmor,  aii- 
tiiiiin,  and  winter ;  rjf  these,  the  spring  partakes  chiefly 
of  nioist.Tire,  for  on  the  dissipation  of  cold  and  reconi- 
mencenient  of  warmth,  an  cspansion  of  the  fluids  takes 
place :  the  oniiimer  is  principally  hot,  owing  to  the  Sun's 
nearest  approach  to  the  zenith  :  the  autumn  is  principally 
dry,  because  the  recent  heat  has  absorbed  the  moisture  : 
and  the  winter  is  chietjy  cold,  the  Sun  being  then  at  his 
farthest  distance  from  the  zenith. 

The  beginning  of  the  whole  zodiacal  circle,  (which  in 
its  nature  as  a  circle  can  have  no  other  beginning,  nor 
end,  capable  of  being  determined,)  ia  therefore  assinned 
to  be  the  sit-n  of  Aries,  which  cominences  at  the  vernal 
equinox*:  since  the  moistnro  of  spring  forms  a  primary 
beginning  in  the  zodiac,  analogous  to  the  beginning  of 
alt  animal  life;  which,  in  its  first  age  of  existence,  abounds 
principally  in  moisture:  the  spring  too,  like  the  first  age 
of  animal  life,  is  soft  and  tender;  it  is  therefore  suitably 
placed  as  the  opening  of  the  year,  and  is  followed  by  the 
otiu-r  seasons  in  appropriate  succession.  The  summer 
comes  second,  and,  in  its  vigour  and  heat,  agrees  with 


"  planet,  ■ 


ortU  latituJeund  deciinfttion  alTeet  m  niont,      TLey  in  lUe 

ifliienea  mure  tbon  othera,  more  remote,     Likewixe  sufli 

I  pnrtile  conjiinction  with,  or  in  the  antiwioni  of  iiny 

r  whirli  ri-e  nnd  net,   or  culminate  with  itny  planet,  or 

"are  belii-ld   by  Huy   pknet,  havo  an   increase  of  power:   Iml  of 

"  themselvca  the  lixed  etar*  eniit  no  rays." 

*  This  sentence  shews  tbt'  futility  of  the  objection  raiHtd  againiit 
astrology  (nn-t  menlionmi  in  the  Prefiioo  to  this  translation)  that  the 
Bi]^B  have  chan)^  and  are  chinKini:  places.  It  in  olear  froni  this 
sentence  that  I'tolcniy  atcrihes  to  the  30  ilegrecB  after  the  vernal 
ei|Uioox,  that  inRapnr«  which  he  han  herein  mentioned  to  heVin^  Id 
ArieB ;  to  the  next  30  Ae^rKt».  the  inllnence  herein  said  lo  belong  <n 
I)  of  the  re«t  "f  the  lodinp.     We  should  rather  say 


« 


I 


f'hnp.  XIII.)  ITIH.KMVS    TKTItABIIil.OS.  3.1 

the  Hccoml  age  of  aiiiujals;  Lhu  priuii^  of  life,  and  the 
period  most  abounJing  in  heat.  Afjain,  the  ape  when 
the  priiue  of  life  has  passed  away,  ami  in  which  decay 
prepares  to  advance,  is  chiefly  abundant  in  dryness,  and 
correnpond«  to  the  autumn.  And  the  final  period  of  old 
age,  ha.stenin^  to  dissolution,  is  principally  cold,  like  the 
winter. 

ffllmpttr  XIII. 

The  Injlaence  of  the  Four  Anylet. 
Thb  angles  are  the  four  cardinal  points  of  the  horizon, 
whencearederivi'd  the  general  names  of  the  winds.  With 
respect  to  their  qualities,  it  is  to  Ije  observed  that  the 
eastern  point,  or  anffle  of  the  ascendant,  is  chiefly  dry 
in  its  nature  ;  hecau.se,  on  the  Sun's  arrival  therein,  the 
damps  occasioned  by  the  ni^ht  be<pQ  to  be  dried  up :  and 
all  wimla  blowini^  from  that  quarter,  under  the  common 
name  of  east  winds,  are  arid  and  free  from  moisture. 

The  southern  point,  or  angle  of  the  mid-heaven,  is  the 
most  hot;  because  the  Sun's  meridian  position,  which 
produces  greater  warmth  and  heat,  declines  (in  this  part 
of  the  earth,)  towards  the  south.  The  winds,  therefore, 
which  blow  from  that  quarter,  and  are  commonly  called 
south  winds,  are  hot  and  rarefying. 

The  western  point,  or  occidental  angle,  is  moist; 
hecau.se,  when  the  Sun  is  there, the  moisture,  which  had 
been  overpowered  during  the  day,  recommences  its 
operation:  and  the  winds  proceeding  from  thence,  and 
commonly  called  west  winds,  are  light  and  damp. 

Uut  the  Btam  hnvn  L-h&ngeil  places,  than  thai  the  parts  of  lieaven,  in 
whioli  they  were  unM  Bimiil^,  have  tlonn  so.  I'toleniy  hinieelf  mciiib 
to  have  furen^ou  this  frroutiJleHs  objevtiun  of  tliu  luiHlerni'.  and  han 
written,  in  the  2.Hh  chapter  of  thix  book,  wlint  ■tught  I'onipletely  to 
have  |ireveDte<l  it.  It  liaH  uerUluly  been  one  of  tlie  niisfoitunes  of 
■atrology  to  be  actai!ke<<  by  people  entiraly  igniniiDt  of  its  prineiplu 


Hi  ITOI.l^MY'S  TKTBABrill.O.S.  ( /( IW)^  I. 

Tbn  northern  point,  or  angle  of  the  lower  heaven,  i-^ 
the  most  cold ;  for  the  .Sun's  meriJian  position  in  this 
part  of  thp  earth  is  far  removeil  from  it  in  declination : 
and  al!  wincJa  thence  proceetling,  umlcr  the  cointnoD 
name  of  nortli  winds,  are  cold  and  frosty. 

It  will,  of  course,  be  seen  that  a  thorough  acquaint- 
ance with  the  foregoing  matters  is  es-sential  in  order  to 
acquire  the  faculty  of  distinguishing  temperaments  in 
every  shape  anil  variation :  since  it  is  sufficiently  ob- 
vious that  the  effective  infiuence  of  the  ntars  must  he 
greatly  diversified  by  the  consitutions  of  the  seasons,  as 
well  as  those  of  the  ages  of  life,  and  of  the  angles ;  and 
also  that  the  stars  have  a  much  stronger  influence  on 
any  constitution,  when  there  may  not  be  in  it  any 
tendency  contrary  to  their  own,  as  the  whole  influence 
is  then  entire  and  unalloyed.  For  example,  stars  effect- 
ing heat  operate  more  vigorously  in  con.stitutions  of 
heat;  and  those  eflecting  moisture  in  constitutions  of 
muisture.  On  the  other  hand,  should  a  tendency,  con- 
trary to  their  own,  exist  in  any  constitution,  the  starn 
accordingly  become  less  eflicacious;  in  consequence  of 
being  attempered  and  mixed  with  that  contrary  ten- 
dency; and  this  happens,  for  instance,  when  stars 
eflecting  heat  are  attempered  by  constitutions  of  cold, 
or  stars  producing  moisture  by  constitutions  ol  dryness. 
The  influence  of  every  star  is  thus  njoditied  by  the 
proportionate  admixture  presented' by  constitutions  of  a 
nature  diHerent  from  its  own. 

In  succession  to  the  previous  instructions,  the  following 
description  of  the  natural  and  peculiar  prDpcrties  of  the 
signs  of  the  zodiac  is  annexed  :  the  general  temperaments 
of  the  signs  are  analogou.s  to  those  of  the  seasons,  which 
are  respectively  e.stabliahed  under  each  si^n,  but  they 
have,  also,  certain  peculiar  energies,  arising  from  their 
familiarity  with  the  Sun,  the  Moon,  and  the  stars,  which 


Chap.  XIV.]         PTOLEMY'S   TETRABIBLOS.  35 

shall  be  hereafter  specified ; — and  the  simple  and  un- 
.mixed  influences  existing  in  the  ^igns,  as  considered 
only  in  themselves  and  with  regard  to  each  other,  will 
be  first  stated. 

Orkaptcr  XIV. 

Tropical,  Equinoctial,  Fioced,  and  Bicmporeal  Signs. 

Among  the  twelve  signs,  some  are  termed  tropical,  other8 
equinoctial,  others  fixed,  and  others  bicorporeal. 

The  tropical  signs  are  two :  viz.  the  first  thirty  degrees 
after  the  summer  solstice,  which  compose  the  sign  of 
Cancer;  and  the  first  thirty  degrees  after  the  winter 
solstice,  composing  the  sign  of  Capricorn.  These  are 
called  tropical,  because  the  Sun,  after  he  has  arrived  at 
their  first  points,  seems  to  tuim,  and  to  change  his  course 
towards  a  contrary  latitude*;  causing  summer  by  the 
turn  he  makes  in  Cancer,  and  winter  by  that  which  he 
makes  in  Capricorn. 

There  are  also  two  equinoctial  signs:  Aries,  the  first 
after  the  vernal  equinox ;  and  Libra,  the  first  after  the 
autumnal  equinox ;  they  are  so  called,  because  the  Sun, 
when  in  the  first  point  of  either,  makes  the  day  and 
night  equal. 

Of  the  remaining  eight  signs,  four  are  fixed,  and  four 
bicorporeal.  Those  signs,  which  severally  follow  im- 
mediately after  the  two  tropical  and  the  two  equinoctial 
signs,  are  termed  fixed,  because,  during  the  Sun's  pres- 
ence in  them,  the  cold,  heat,  moisture  or  dryness,  of  the 
season,  which  commenced  on  his  arrival  in  the  preceding 
tropical  or  equinoctial  sign,  is  then  more  firmly  estab- 
lished : — not,  however,  that  the  temperament  of  the  sea- 
son has  in  itself  actually  increased  in  vigour,  but,  having 


*  In  other  words,  the  Sun  then  begins  to  diminish  his  declination, 
which,  at  the  first  points  of  the  said  signs,  is  at  its  greatest  amount. 


36 


pt<ji.p:mv's  TKrHAiiiiiLoa. 


[Iio,.k  I. 


continued  for  some  time  in  operation,  it  then  renders  &11 
things  more  strongly  affected  by  its  influence. 

The  bicorporeal  signs  s.everaliy  follow  the  tised  signs; 
and,  being  thus  intermediately  placed  between  the  fixed 
and  the  tropical  signs,  they  participate  in  the  constitu- 
tional properties  of  both,  from  their  first  to  their  last 


OtKflptcr  XV. 

Masculine  iind  Feminine  Signs. 
Again,  among  the  twelve  signs,  six  are  called  masculine 
and  iliurnal,  and  six  feminine  and  nocturnal.  They  are 
arranged  in  alternate  order,  one  after  the  other,  as  the 
day  is  followed  by  the  night,  and  us  the  male  is  coupled 
with  the  female. 

The  commencement,  it  has  been  already  said,  belongs 
to  Aries ;  since  the  moisture  of  the  spring  forms  an  intro- 
duction for  the  other  seasims.  And,  ns  the  male  sex 
governs,  and  the  active  principle  takes  precedence  of  the 
passive,  the  sign-^  of  Aries  and  Libra  are  consequently 
considered  to  be  masculine  and  diurnal  These  signs 
describe  the  equinoctial  circle,  and  from  them  proceed 
the  principal  variation,  and  most  powerful  agitation  of 
all  things.  The  signs  immediately  following  them  are 
feminine  and  nocturnal ;  and  the  rest  are  consecutively 
arranged  as  masculine  and  feminine,  by  alternate  order. 

Masculine  or  feminine  qualities  are,  however,  by  some 
persons,  attributed  to  the  .signs  by  means  of  a  different 
arrangement,  and  by  making  the  .sign  ascending  (which 
is  also  called  the  horoscope)  the  first  of  the  mascidine 
signs.  They  also  consider  the  first  tropical  sign  to  be 
that  in  which  the  Moon  is  posited,  because  she  under- 
goes more  frequent  and  rapid  changes  and  variations 
than  any  other  heavenly  body;  and  it  is  by  a  similar 
mode  of  reasoning  that  they  establish  the  horoscope  aa 


Chap.  XVI.]  PTOLEMY'S   TETRAIilBLOS.  37 

the  first  masculine  sign,  on  account  of  its  being  inore 
immediately  under  the  Sun.  Again,  certain  of  these 
persons  likewise  allow  the  alternate  arrangeniunb  of  the 
signs;  while  there  are,  again,  others  who  du  not  admit 
it;  but,  instead  thereof,  divide  the  whole  zodiac  into 
quadrants,  and  denominate  those  between  the  ascendant 
and  the  mid-heaven,  and  between  the  we-stern  angle  and 
the  lower  heaven,  oriental  and  masculine;  and  the  other 
quadrants,  occidental  and  feminine. 

There  have  also  been  other  additional  appellations 
bestowed  on  the  signs,  in  consequence  of  their  apparent 
formations  and  figures: — ^they  have  been  called  quadru- 
pedal, terrestrial,  imperial,  fruitful,  and  have  received 
various  other  distinguishing  epithets  of  the  same  sort; — 
but  these  distinctions  seem  too  unimportant  to  be  even 
enumerated  here,  since  their  origin  is  obvious,  and  since, 
should  they  ever  be  thought  serviceable  towards  the 
inference  of  future  effects,  they  may  be  easily  applied 
without  the  aid  of  further  instruction. 


Cthapter  XVI. 

Mutual  Canjiguriitions  of  the  Signa. 
There  are  certain  familarities  or  connections  between 
different  parts  of  the  zodiac;  and  the  chief  of  these  is 
that  which  exists  between  such  parts  as  are  configurated 
with  each  other. 

The  mutual  configuration  attaches  to  all  parts  dia- 
metrically distant  from  each  other,  containing  between 
them  two  right  angles,  or  six  signs,  or  a  hundred  and 
eighty  degrees :  it  also  exists  in  all  parts  at  the  triangular 
distance  from  each  other,  containing  between  them  one 
tight  angle  and  a  third,  or  four  signs,  or  a  hundred  and 
twenty  degrees;  also,  in  all  parts  at  the  quadrate  dis- 
tance from  each  other,  containing  between  them  eK.actlY 


38  PTOI.EMV'a  TETiunim.ns.  [Book  I, 

one  right  angle,  or  three  signa,  or  ninety  degrees ;  and, 
also,  in  all  parts  at  the  hexagonal  distance  from  each 
other,  containing  between  them  two-thirds  of  a  right 
angle,  or  two  signs,  or  sixty  degrees".      These  several 


distances  are  taken  for  the  following  reasons : — the 
distance  by  diameter,  however,  is  in  itself  sufficiently 
clear,  and  requires  no  further  explanation: — but,  as  to  the 
rest,  after  the  diametrical  points  have  l>een  connected 
by  a  straight  line,  AB;  the  apace  of  the  two  right  angles, 
contained  on  the  diameter,  is  then  to  be  divided  into 
aliquot  partis  of  the  two  greatest  denominations ;  that  is 


'  WhaUey,  in  lii«  note  upon  tlii«  chajiter,  seems  to  have  been  sur- 
prised tbat  no  nientioo  in  Diade  here  by  Ptolemy  of  the  rimjunction  ; 
bnt  be  overlooketl  the  lact  that  the  chapter  trcAts  only  uf  parts  of  the 
lodiao  coiiligiirat«il  irilk  taek  other :  and  that  it  was  not  possible  for 
Ptolemy  to  conceive  bow  aoy  part  eoiild  be  conligurat«<l  uritA  itid/. 
It  in,  therefore,  by  nu  iiieanH  nonderfnl  that  the  conjunction  is  not 
inserted  here  along  with  the  rest  of  the  nsptwta ;  although  it  is  fre- 
qoently  adverted  to  in  snbsaqaent  ahaplert,  and  ila  efhcacy  particu- 
larly deM-rilieil. 


Ghap,  XVI.]        ptolkmy's  tetuakiulos.  3& 

to  aay,  into  halves,  AFC,  CFB.  and  into  \}\\tA»,  AFD, 
DFE,  EFB:  there  will  then  lie  provided  for  the  third, 
part  (AD)  a  super-proportion  (DC),  equal  to  its  own  half ; 
and  for  the  half  (AC)  a  super- pro  portion  (CE),  equal  to 
itt  own  third  part;  so  that  the  division  into  two  aliquot 
parta.  AC,  CB,  will  make  the  quartile  distance  AC;  and 
the  diviiiion  into  three  aliquot  parU.  AD.  DE,  EB, 
will  make  the  sextile  distance  AD,  and  the  tnnal  dis- 
tance AE.  The  respective  super- proportions  (on  either 
side  of  the  intermediate  quartile  AC,  formed  by  the  one 
right  angle  AFC),  will  hNo  again  make  the  quartile  AC, 
(if  there  be  added  to  the  sextiie  AD.  the  aiiper-proportion 
DC,  equal  to  the  halt'  of  the  sextiie),  and  the  trine  AE 
(if  there  he  added  to  the  quartile  AC  the  super-propor- 
tion C£,  equal  to  the  third  part  of  the  quartile). 

Of  these  contigurati'ini.  thi"  trine  and  the  sextile  ai-e 
each  called  harmonious,  liecauMi.'  they  are  constituted  be- 
tween signs  of  the  .sauie^  kind ;  being  formed  between 
either  all  feminine  or  all  masculine  ttigns.  The  opposi- 
tion and  quartile  are  con.tidered  to  be  discordant,  because 
they  are  configurations  made  between  signs  not  of  the 
same  kind,  but  of  ditferent  natures  and  sexes' 


■  From  the  tenor  of  tbis  uhapter  it  wa»  funiierlj  ilonbtcil  whether 
ihe  aiithor  intended  to  admit  in  his  theory  only  i<idiacAl  A«pect«,  and 
to  rejeut  thoM-  which  are  i^alled  mundane  ;  l>nt  PlaaiduB  iiaa  referreii 
Ut  the_4lh  Hinpler  of  the  mth  Rook  of  tht^AltiiBgest  (which  will  lie 
found  in  tliu  Appendix  to  thin  tranNlntion)  to  prove  that  Ptolemy 
distinctly  taught  two  kinds  of  lupeet ;  one  in  the  xodiac  and  one  in 
the  world,  Wli&lley  <|aotc»  the  opinion  u/  I'lauidns,  which  he  xaye  ^, 
is  farther  conhrmed  by  the  Igtii  Chapter  of  the  3rd  Book  of  this  Tery  / 
Itefttise,  where  it  is  atiit^d  that  the  asucndaut  and  the  eleventh 
bonHC  are  in  MXtile  to  uai'h  oilier;  the  asi^endant  and  the  mid-heaven 
in  qnartilei  the  nscendant  and  the  ninth  houHe  in  trine:  and  the 
Mcendant  and  the  oceidental  angle  in  opposition;  all  which  certainly 
aeem  to  be  applicable  to  mundane  Mpect:!  in  paiticular. 


40  rrOLEMY's    TETHABUILUS.  [Bi)Ok  I. 

Slmptcr  XVII. 

Signs  covtviandlng  and  obeying. 
Ant  two  nigTis  confi<;iirateH  with  each  other  at  an  eqaal 
^  distance  from  the  ^^iiih.  or  from  either  equinoctial  point, 
are  termei]  commantlinc;  nnd  obeying,  because  the  ascen- 
sional and  ilesci-nsional  times  of  the  one  are  equal  to 
those  of  the  other,  and  both  describe  equal  [mrallels. 

The  aigna  in  the  summer  semicircle  are  coniuianding; 
those  in  the  winter  semicircle,  obeying:  for,  when  the 
Sun  in  present  in  the  former,  he  luakes  the  day  longer 
than  the  ni^ht;  and,  when  in  the  latter,  he  produces  the 
contrary  eEFect. 

Clwfttv  XVIII. 

Signs  heJwldin;/  each  other,  a-itd  of  equal  Power. 

Any  twtj  signs,  equally  distant  from  either  tropical  sign, 
are  equal  to  euch  other  in  power;  because  the  Sun,  when 
present  in  one,  mukes  day  and  night,  and  the  divisions 
of  lime,  respectively  equal  in  duration  to  those  which  he 
produces  when  present  in  the  other.  Such  signs  are  also 
said  to  behold  each  other,  as  well  for  the  foregoing 
reasons,  as  becAUae  each  of  them  rises  from  one  and  the 
same  part  of  the  horizon,  and  sets  in  ono  and  the  same 
part.* 

*  Wlmlle;  has  n  very  loni^tliy  note  upoD  thU  nnH  lUv  prcveiling 
obapler,  to  bIibw  that  Ptolemy  here  xpeAks  of  zodiac&l  parallels,  or 
parallel»  of  ilecUnntiun,  anil  lo  point  out  tlie  necesciLy  of  o1ii>erving  a 
planet's  laUtade,  in  order  M  aiwertnin  iu  true  parallels,  [t  is,  liow. 
ever,  to  be  rauollect«J,  tlial  the  pirailels  now  allmlad  to  are  dialinel- 
from  the  mundant  pa<nllelH,  whit'b  are  equal  iliatAiioL'B  from  the 
horizon  or  nieritlian,  and  are  Hjiisidered  by  Ptoletny  in  the  14th  and  ^■/■^^ 
f  llfii  I3tll  Chapters  of  Ihe  IM  Bank  of  tliin  work; — althoii|{b  nor,  ilnil«r  the 
£ipie»»  name  of  mundaau  parallels. 


Chap.  XIX.]       Ptolemy's  tetbabi blos, 
(Hhaptcr  XIX. 

Sii/ns  inconjuncl. 
All  tiigns,  between  which  tliere  does  not  exist  any  fami- 
liarity in  any  of  the  modes  above  specified,  are  incoiijunct 
and  separated. 

For  instance,  all  signn  are  inconjiinct  which  are  neither 
commanding  nor  obeying,  and  not  beholdino  each  other 
nor  oE  equal  power,  as  well  as  all  signs  which  contain 
between  them  the  space  of  one  sign  only,  or  the  apace  of 
five  signs,  and  which  do  not  at  all  share  in  any  of  the 
four  prescribed  configurations:  viz.  the  opposition,  the 
trine,  the  qiiaitile,  ami  the  sextile.  All  parts  which  are 
distant  from  each  other  in  the  space  of  one  sign  only  are 
considered  inconjunct,  because  they  are  averted,  as  it 
were,  from  each  other;  ami  becau.se,  although  the  said 
apace  between  them  may  extend  into  two  signs,  the 
whole  only  contains  an  angle  equal  to  that  of  one  sign  : 
all  parta  distant  from  each  other  in  the  space  of  five 
signa  are  also  considered  inconjunct,  heeause  they  divide 
the  whole  circle  into  unequal  parts;  whereas  the  spaces 
contained  in  the  configurations  abuve- men  tinned,  vix. 
the  opposition,  trinf ,  quartile,  and  sextjle,  produce  aliquot 
divisions,* 

*  It  has  never  been  very  dearly  shewn  how  the  followers  of  I'Loleiuy 
have  reeoncileil  the  new  aapei^ta  [called  the  Beiniqatulrtite.  quintile, 
KsqniquaHmte,  biquintile,  &c.]  witli  the  vrto  pronouneeil  in  this 
chapter.  Keplar  i»  said  to  have  Inventeil  them,  and  they  have  been 
nnivereally  ailopted;  evi>n  PlovidnH,  who  has  applied  Ptolemy's 
doctrine  to  prai'tice  better  than  any  other  writer,  liai  nvdled  hiii^lf 
of  them*,  and,  if  the  nativities  published  by  him  ure  lu  be  rredited, 
he  lias  fnlly  cstahliehed  their  imp<ir(ance. 

Salmon,  in  hin  "  Honi'  Mat  hem  alien ',"  before -mentioned,  )jives  a 
toDK  disnertation  (from  p.  V>S  to  p.  414)  on  the  old  Ptolemaic  acpects, 
■Dantrative  of  their  foundation  in  nature  and  in  mathematics  ;  apd, 

*  F^xcept  the  xetiLiijuadrate,  which  he  has  not  at  all  noliceil. 


ITIH.EMVS   TETRAIilKLns, 


[Hool,:  I. 


flthaptei-  XX. 

Houses  of  tlie  Planela. 
Those  stars  wiiicli  are  dKnotninated  plurielarj  urbs  have 
particular  familiarity  with  certain  places  ia  the  zodiac, 
by  mean!'  of  parts  designated  as  their  houHea,  and  also 
by  their  triplicities,  exaltations,  termn,  and  so  forth, 
The  nature  of  their  familiarity  by  houses  is  as  follows: 

ullhougli  hif  roncluMons  are  not  iiiiite  Halisfactorily  dmwu.  etiiue  of 
his  arKiimeniR  woulil  Keem  approprialc,  if  he  had  but  liandlcil  them 
more  fully  unil  expertly  ;  pnrticiilnrly  where  ho  Bays  that  (he  nupecta 
are  derived  "  from  the  aliquot  parts  of  a  circle,  whnrein  olxieTve  that, 
"  alUiouKh  the  zodiai-  may  Imve  many  more  aliqQOt  parbH  than  these 
"  four  (the  eextile,  quarCiie,  trine,  and  oppoaitioD),  yet  thme  other 
"  aliquot  parin  of  the  circle,  ur  360  dej,'reeK.  will  Dot  make  an  aliqnot 
"division  of  the  ttij^nn  also,  wliii;h  in  thin  dengn  waa  noaght  to 
"  answer,  ^  well  in  the  aumlier  V2,  as  in  the  numlnir  'Mi."  The 
pasga^e  in  whicii  he  eniIeavour»  to  shew  that  they  are  anthori/*d  hy 
their  projection,  also  deserveB  attention. 

All  Salmoti'n  argumentx,  however,  in  Knpporl  of  the  old  I'lnlemaic 
aipeclK,  militate  against  the  new  Keplerian  ones ;  and  hu  iloea  the 
following  extracf  from  the  astrological  discourse  of  ijir  Christopher 
Heydon  !— ■' For  thus,  aniongsl  all  ordjnaUj  plancH  (hfti  may  he 
"inscribed,  there  are  two  whose  sides,  joined  together,  have  pre- 
"  eminent^  lo  taks  up  a  seniieirclc,  but  only  the  hexagon.  <|uadrate, 
"  and  equilateral  trianjile.  annwering  Ui  the  nextile,  quartile,  and 
"  trine  irradiated.  The  subtense,  therefore,  of  a  sexlile  aspect  con- 
"  siflteth  of  two  Htgns,  wliicb,  joined  to  the  siibten»G  of  a  trine, 
"  composed  of  four,  being  re^fular  and  equilateral,  take  up  six  signs, 
"which  is  a  complete  eemicirole  in  like  maoner,  the  sides  of  a 
"  i|Dadrate  inscribed,  subtending  three  ingjw,  twice  rerkoued,  do 
"  occupy  likewine  the  mediely  of  a  circle.  And  what  those  fignrea 
"  nre  before  «nid  to  perform"  (that  is,  U>  take  up  a  semicin''H)  "either 
"  donbled  or  joioeil  together,  may  also  be  truly  a!>cribed  unto  the 
"  opposite  aspect  byitseK  i  for  that  the  diametral  line,  which  passeth 
"  from  the  place  of  conjunction  lo  the  opposite  point,  divideth  a 
"circle  into  two  equal  parts;  the  like  whereof  cannot  lie  found  in 
"  any  other  inscripte ;  for  example,  tkt  *'fU  cf  a  regular  pinlagon" 
[tba  noiatih)  " tubleiideth  12  degrtet,  of  an  Mcro^on"  (Ihesemiquad- 
ral^)  "  but  45 :  Ihr  rtmaiitders  of  w/iieh  arai,  viz.  108  and  IXJ  drgnt*. 
r  not  fhtmifrd  bu  thr  si-lta  nf  anv  ordiuil-'  fitiurt." 


Chnp  XX.]  Ptolemy's  TETHAiniti.os.  43 

Cancer  and  Leo  are  the  most  northerly  of  all  the 
twelve  signs ;  they  approach  nearer  than  the  other  signs 
to  the  zenith  of  this  part  of  the  earth,  and  thereby  cause 
warmth  and  heat:  they  are  consequently  appropriated 
as  houses  for  the  two  principal  and  greater  luminaries  ; 
Leo  for  the  Sun,  as  being  masculine ;  and  Cancer  for  the 
Moon,  as  being  feminine.  It  has  hence  resulted,  that  the 
semicircle  from  Leo  to  Capricorn  has  been  ordained  solar, 
and  the  semicircle  from  Aquarius  to  Cancer,  lunar;  in 
order  that  each  planet  might  occupy  one  sign  in  each 
semicircle,  and  thus  have  one  of  its  houses  cnntigurated 
with  the  Sun  and  the  other  with  the  Moon,  conformably 
to  the  motions  of  its  own  sphere,  and  the  peculiar  pro- 
perties of  its  nature. 

Saturn,  therefore,  since  he  is  cold  and  inimical  to  heat, 
moving  also  in  a  superior  orbit  most  remote  from  the 
luminaries,  occupies  the  signs  oppasite  Ui  Cancer  and 
:  these  are  Aquarius  and  Capricorn;  and  they  are 
jfjned  to  him  in  consideration  of  their  cold  and  wintry 

aire ;  and  because  the  configuration  by  opposition  does 
not  co-operate  towards  the  production  of  good". 

Jupiter  has  a  favourable  temperament,  and  is  situated 
beneath  the  sphere  of  Saturn;  he  therefore  occupie.s  the 
next  two  signs,  Sagittariu:^  and  Pisces.  These  signs  are 
airy  and  fruitful,  in  consequence  of  their  trinal  di^^tance 
from  the  houses  of  the  luminaries,  which  distance  har- 
monizes with  the  operation  of  good. 

Mars  is  dry  in  nature,  and  beneath  the  sphere  of 
Jupiter:  he  takes  the  next  two  signs, of  a  nature  similar 
to  his  own,  -viz.  Aries  and  Scorpio,  whose  relative  dis- 
tances from  the  houses  of  the  luminaries  are  injurious 
and  discordant. 

Tenus,   possessing    a    favourable    temperament,  and 


*  Saturn  boiag  also  maletiu  i 


,  hi*  HI 


■**  PTOLKMT'S   TETaABIBLOS.  [Book  I. 

placed  beneath  the  sphere  of  Mars,  takes  the  next  two 
signs,  Taurus  and  Libra.  Tliese  are  of  a  fruitful  nature, 
and  preserve  harmony  by  the  sexUle  distance;  and  this 
planet  is  never  mora  than  two  itignH  distant  from  the 
Sun, 

Mercury  never  has  greater  distance  from  the  Sun  than 
the  space  of  one  sign,  and  is  beneath  all  the  other 
planets:  hence  he  is  placed  nearest  to  both  luminaries, 
and  the  remaining  two  signs,  Gemini  and  Virgo,  are 
allotted  to  him*. 

fflliafttr  XXI. 

The  TriplicUies. 
The  familiarity  existing  by  triplicity  arises  in  the  foU 
lowing  mode: 

The  triplicity  preserves  accordance  with  an  equilateral 
triangle,  and  the  whole  zodiacal  orbit  is  defined  by  three 
circles,  viz.  that  of  the  equinox,  and  those  of  the  two 
tropics;  the  twelve  signs  are,  therefore,  distributed 
among  four  equilateral  triangles. 

The  first  triangle,  or  triplicity,  ia  formed  by  three 
ma.%uline  signs,  Aries,  Leo,  and  Sagittarius,  having  the 
Sun,  Jupiter,  and  Mars,  as  lords  by  house.  Mar.'i,  how- 
ever, being  contrary  in  condition  to  the  solar  influence, 
thin  triplicity  receives,  as  its  lords,  only  Jupiter  and  the 
Sun.     By  day,  therefore,  the  Sun  claims  the  principal 

*  The  planets,  bnving  two  lion»eB,  are  said  to  be  mora  powerful  in 

one  by  ilny  uod  in  the  other  by  night:  thuR, 

Satnrn'a  day  Iioa^te  in  AiiuariuH,  liU  oighl  bgusa  Capricom 

Jupiter'it         Sagittarina  PUcw 

Mara'ii  Ariea  Scorpio 

VeuDs's  Taurus  Libra 

Mercury's       (Jemini  Virgo. 

The  above  in  from  Whatley ;  hut  the  »aiue  diapMitioii  in  Ui  be  f«und 

in  all  modern  astrological  writem. 


Chaji  XXI. 1        i-roLKMV's  tetuaiii hlos.  +R- 

co-regency  of  it.  and  Jupiter  by  niglit.  Arie:*  is  on  the 
equinoctial  circle,  Leo  on  the  Miiinnier,  ami  Sagittarius  on 
the  winter  circle.  This  tripHcity  is  principally  northern, 
owing  to  the  concurrent  dominion  of  Jupiter,  who  in 
fruitful  and  airy,  and  expreaaly  connected  with  winds 
proceeding  froui  the  north  ;  it  is,  however,  al.w  north- 
west, in  consetiiience  of  heing,  in  some  degree,  combined 
with  the  weHb  hy  means  of  the  bouse  of  Mars,  who  intro- 
duces western  breezes  and  the  feminine  qualities  of  that 
quarter,  in  consequence  of  lii.s  lunar  condition*. 

The  second  tripltcity,  formed  by  Taurus,  Virgo,  and 
Capricorn,  is  allotted  to  the  dominion  of  the  Moon  and 
Venus,  since  it  consists  of  feminine  signs.  Tlie  Moon 
rules  it  by  night,  and  Venus  by  day.  Taurus  is  on  the 
snuimer  circle,  Virgo  on  the  equinoctial,  and  Capricorn 
on  the  winter.  This  tripHcity  is  southern,  in  consequence 
of  the  dominion  of  Venus,  whose  warm  and  moist  influ- 
ence produces  south  winds:  it,  however,  additionally 
receives  a  mixture  of  the  east,  by  means  of  Saturn ;  for, 
as  Capricorn  is  the  house  of  that  planet,  and  an  eastern 
sign,  Saturn  becomet  effective  of  winds  from  that  quarter, 
and  furniyhes  this  triplicity  with  a  mixture  of  the  east, 
with  which  quarter  he  is  further  connected  by  means  of 
his  solar  condition-f. 

The  third  triplicity  is  composed  of  Gemini,  Libra,  and 
Aquarius,  masculine  signs.  It  holds  connection  with 
Saturn  and  Mercury  by  containing  their  houses,  and  is 
therefore  attributed  to  them,  and  not  to  Mars,  to  which 
planet  it  bears  no  relation.  Saturn  rules  it  by  day, 
owing  to  his  condition!,  *"''  Mercury  hy  night.    Gemini 


*  Tbe  "  lunar  conditiuD"  here  Bpoken  of  refers  to  the  posiliun  of 
Aries  (Miint'H  bouite)  in  itiu  lunar  semicirde. 

t  Capi  iconi  being  in  the  m\m  semicircle. 

X  The  reBHin  for  niakiuf;  Saturn  diiunal  lord  of  this  triplicity  uiny 
be  fonnd  in  Chap,  vii,     /.'  i-  i 


46  Ptolemy's  tetkabiiilos.  [Book  I. 

is  on  the  summer  circle,  Libra  un  the  equinoctial,  and 
Afguarius  on  the  winter.  Thin  triplicity  ia  principally 
eastern,  by  the  influence  of  Saturn;  but  it  becomes 
noith-eiLst  hy  receiving  alijo  a  mixture  of  the  north  from 
thu  condition  of  Jupiter,  witli  which  planet  Saturn  baa, 
ill  this  respect,  a  diurnal  familiarity  *. 

The  fourth  triplicity,  formed  hy  Cancer.  Scorpio,  and 
Pisces,  ia  left  to  the  remaining  planet,  Mars,  who  has 
right  in  it  by  means  of  hia  houae,  Scorpio.  But,  as  the 
signs  which  compose  this  triplicity  are  feminine,  the 
Moon  by  night  and  Venus  by  day,  through  their  feminine 
condition,  govern  it.  together  with  Mara.  Cancer  ia  on 
the  summer  circle,  Scorpio  on  the  winter,  and  Pisces  on 
the  equinoctiai.  This  triplicity  ia  western,,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  government  of  the  Moon  and  Mara;  but 
it  is  also  blended  with  the  iiouth  by  the  joint  dominion 
of  Venua,  and  therefore  hecomoa  south-weat. 


(Chapter  XXII. 

Exaltations. 
That  which  is  termed  the  exaltation  of  the  planets  is 
considered  by  the  following  rulea : 

The  Sun  on  his  entrance  into  Aries  ia  then  pa-saing 
into  the  higher  and  more  northern  semicirle;  but  on  his 
entrance  into  Libra,  into  the  more  southern  and  lower 
one:  his  exaltation,  therefore,  is  determined  to  be  in 
Ariea,  as,  when  pre.sent  in  that  wign,  he  begins  to 
lengthen  the  days,  and  the  influence  of  hia  heating 
nature  increaaes  at  the  aame  time.  Hia  full  is  placed  in 
Libra,  for  the  converae  r 


*  This  faiiiitiariLy  seemx  to  urine  from  iho  sexlile  Ewpeot  belweeo 
Aquarius,  llie  djurnkl  lioiite  of  Saturn,  and  Sagittarias,  the  dioTDal 


CAap.  XXII.]        PTOLEMY'S  TETWABIBLOS.  47 

Saturn  on  the  contrary,  in  order  to  preserve  his  station 
opposite  to  the  Sun,  in  this  respect,  as  well  as  in  regard 
to  their  respective  houses,  obtains  his  exaltation  in  Libra, 
and  his  fall  in  Aries :  since,  in  all  cases,  the  increase  of 
heat  must  be  attended  by  a  diminution  of  cold,  and  the 
increase  of  cold  by  a  diminution  of  heat. 

The  Moon,  again,  after  conjunction  with  the  Sun  in 
Aries,  the  seat  of  his  exaltation,  makes  her  first  appear- 
ance, and  begins  to  augment  her  light  in  Taurus,  the 
first  sign  of  her  own  triplicity,  which  is  consequently 
ascribed  to  be  her  exaltation;  while  Scorpio,  the  oppo- 
site sign,  is  her  fall. 

Jupiter,  since  he  is  efficacious  in  exciting  fruitful 
breezes  from  the  north,  and  since  he  becomes  most 
northerly,  and  augments  his  peculiar  influence  when  in 
Cancer,  accordingly  obtains  his  exaltation  in  that  sign, 
and  his  fall  in  Capricorn. 

Mars  posses.ses  a  fiery  nature,  which  receives  its 
greatest  intensity  in  Capricorn,  in  which  sign  this  planet 
becomes  most  southerly ;  his  exaltation  is  therefore 
placed  in  Capricorn,  in  opposition  to  that  of  Jupiter, 
and  his  fall  in  Cancer. 

Venus  is  of  a  moist  nature,  and  becomes  chiefly  moist 
when  in  Pisces.  Under  that  sign  a  dampness  begins  to 
be  perceptible  in  the  atmosphere,  and  Venus,  from  being 
in  that  sign,  derives  an  augmentation  of  her  own  proper 
influence :  her  exaltation  is  consequently  placed  therein, 
and  her  fall  in  Virgo. 

Mercury  is  of  a  nature  opposite  to  that  of  Venus,  and 
is  more  dry:  in  opposition  to  her,  therefore,  he  takes 
his  exaltation  in  Virgo,  in  which  sign  the  autumnal 
dryness  makes  its  first  appearance ;  and  he  receives  his 
fall  in  Pisces. 


PTOLEMY  S  TETRABIBLOS, 


[Boo*  T. 


ffiliapttt  XXIII. 

Hie  Disposition  of  the  Terms ". 
Theue  are  two  methods  of  disposing  the  terms  o£  the 
planets,  in  reference  to  the  dominion  of  the  triplicities ; 
one  is  Egyptian,  ihe  other  Chaldaic 

But  the  jEgyptian  method  preserves  no  regular  dis- 
tribution, neither  in  point  of  suecensive  order  nor  in 
point  of  quantity. 

In  point  of  order  it  is  defective,  since  it,  in  some  in- 
stances, allots  the  tir&t  degrees  of  a  sign  to  the  lord  of 
the  house,  in  others  to  the  lord  of  the  triplicity,  and  in 
others  a<iitm  to  the  lord  of  the  exaltation.  By  selecting 
examples  this  failure  in  order  will  easily  be  seen;  for 
instance,  if  the  order  were  regulated  by  the  government 
of  houses,  for  what  reason  should  Saturn  take  the  first 
degrees  in  Libra,  ."lince  that  nign  is  the  house  of  Venus  ? 
or  why  bhould  Jupiter  take  them  in  Aries,  which  is  the 
house  of  Mars?  It  the  government  of  trip'icities  were 
followed,  for  what  reason  should  Mercury  take  the  first 
degrees  in  Capricorn,  which  is  in  the  triplicity  ruled  by 
Venus?  If  the  government  by  exaltations,  why  should 
Mars  take  the  first  degrees  in  Cancer?  that  sign  being  the 
exaltation  of  Jupiter.  And  if  the  order  were  regulated 
even  by  considering  the  planet  which  posaeNses  most  of 
these   dignities   in   the   sign,   for   what    reason  should 

*  Id  refereDce  to  the  terms  of  the  plaoelA,  Placid  na  hu  lliene  trordit 
(acoonliiii;  lu  t.^Hiper's  tmnBtHltun) ;  "Tlie  di^jly  uf  tbe  plnnetn  in 
"  (be  vigiiB  ami  llieir  pitrta,  wIjIcIj  nre  oalleil  tlje  boundH  auit  t«r> 
"  minntiims,"  {tfunjii,  lenim)  "  linvi^  h.  renl  and  iiaturul  fuuodatinn  ; 
"  to  wil,  the  po*er(nl  napecl  or  pniporlionnl  (nlliixen  W  the  move- 
"  ftble  points  in  whirh  tlie  stan>  bcKiD  u>  prolines  the  priiuftTj' 
"  qiMlities,  So  ttiut,  aeeonliog  to  tlione  thio^^  we  have  explained 
"  in  lht<  pliilusophy  of  the  lieavens,  these  are  funnd  to  upree  *to  well 
"with  the  .1C}{yptian  boundaries,"  lt«rniK)  "  Ibat  tbey  are  higbljr 
"  rieMrvini;  of  admiralian. " 


Chap.  XXUL]     fiolemy's  tkti!Abiiii.os.  49 

Mercury  take  the  first  degrees  in  Aquarius,  in  which 
sign  he  rules  only  by  triplicity,  and  why  not  Saturn 
who  has  government  in  it  by  house,  as  well  as  by  tri- 
plicity ?  or  why  in  short  should  Mercury,  who  does  not 
possess  any  kind  of  dominion  in  Capricorn,  receive  the 
first  degrets  in  that  sign  also  >.  The  same  want  of  order 
is  abundantly  evident  in  the  rest  of  the  distribution. 

An  equal  irregularity  exists  in  the  respective  quanti- 
ties of  degrees  allotted  by  the  ^Egyptians  to  the  several 
terms  of  the  planets.  For  it  is  by  no  means  a  proper 
nor  sufficient  demonstration  of  accuracy  that  the  aggre- 
gate snm  of  all  the  numbers  of  every  single  planet 
amounts  to  the  precise  total  requiring  to  be  divided  into 
portions  of  time*;  since,  even  if  it  be  admitted  that  this 
total,  collected  from  every  single  star,  is  correctly  as- 
serted by  the  j^gyptians,  it  may  still  be  objected  that 
the  same  total,  so  collected  by  them,  may  bo  found  in 
many  other  ways  by  interchanging  the  numbers  in  a 
sign.  There  are  persons  also  who  contend  that  in  every 
latitude  the  same  space  of  time  is  occupied  in  ascension 
by  every  star  ;  this,  however,  is  manifestly  wrong  :  for, 
in  the  first  place,  these  persons  are  guided  by  the  vulgar 
opinion  of  the  plane  heights  of  ascension,  which  is  totally 
foreign  to  truth,  and  according  to  which,  in  the  parallel 
of  Lower  jEgypt,  the  signs  of  Virgo  and  Libra  would 
ascend  each  in  thirty-eight  degrees  and  a  thir<l-f,  and 
Leo  and  Scorpio  each  in  thirty-five  degrees;  when  it  is, 
on  the  contrary,  shewn  by  the  Tables  J,  that  the  latter 
two  signs  occupy  in  their  several  ascensions  more  than 


*  Thi*  total  is  tbe  iltiU  degrees  of  the  zodiac,  reqniriDg  to  be  divided 
aoeordint"  to  cotreapondent  portions  of  the  equator ;  by  wliirh  all 
time  is  reekoned. 

t  The  degrees  here  meationed  are  degrees  of  the  eqaator. 

Z  See,  in  tbe  Appendix,  an  extract  from  theiie  tables :  tJie  whole  ut 
whieb  are  to  be  found  in  the  Almage^it.      /i  tli. 


50  I'TOLKMY'S   TETilABIBLOS.  [Book   I. 

thirty-five  degrees  cacli.  hut  Virgo  and  Libra  less.  It 
should  further  he  observed,  that  those  wlio  support  this 
opinion  seem  (by  so  doing)  not  only  to  Jifipute  the 
quantity  of  the  terms  most  generally  received,  but  to  he 
driven  also  to  the  necessity  of  falsifying  many  points; 
since  (as  it  is  indispensable  to  keep  to  the  same  total 
amount  of  all  the  terms  together)  they  make  uae  of  parts 
of  degrees;  but  even  that  contrivance  does  not  enable 
them  to  reach  the  true  point. 

The  old   terms,  admitted   by  many  persons   on    the 
authority  of  former  tradition,  are  as  follow: 


The  Terms 

according  to  the  ^Egyptio/ 

Ari». 

T.,™. 

a«aliii. 

c™.     1       u.. 

vt^ 

Jupiter 

G 

6 

Ven. 

H 

ij 

Mer. 

a!e 

Ma» 

'Iv 

Jup.    U 

IS 

Mer. 
Ven. 

7j7 

Vonns 

(1 

12 

Mer 

6 

I4|Jup. 

8|l^V... 

»i" 

lo!l7 

Mercury 

8 
R 
5 

20 

Jnp. 

S 

«v™. 

5|l7 

Jup. 

Sat. 

6  l» 

430 

1 

Jnp. 

4 

I 

Mm 

Hal 

6 

37  Mam 

'1- 

M„.    |6 

24 

Mate 

7 

SBtnm 

30 

Mnrs 

3 

'^r 

6  30 

Man  '6 

an 

tiat. 

230 

- 

Boorpic 

.iqnmriun. 

PlMS*. 

SAtora 

« 

B 

M»ra 

T 
i 
6 
S 

7 

Jnp. 

12,12 

Mer. 

ill 

7jM 

B  32 

Mer. 

7 

Veo. 

12 

12 

Morcnrj 

8 

14 

Ven. 

" 

Ven. 

BIT 

J«p, 

Ven. 

6 

13 

Jup. 

4 

le 

Jt^iUir 

' 

21 

Her. 

„M„. 

4  21 

Yen. 

Jap. 

7  aolMer. 

S 

19 

Veniu 

7 
2 

88 

Jnp. 

o. 

Sat 

S.^jSat 

Mars 

5 

2d!  Man 

D 
2 

28 

Han 

3U 

Sat. 

11 

Man. 

4  SolMani 

,     1 

4  J3o!s«t. 

3(^Sat. 

«) 

Thus,  by  the  .^Egyptian  distribntion,  it  appear.^  ihat 
the  total  numbeiH  of  the  degrees  for  each  planet,  added 
together,  make  300: — viz.  for  Saturn  67,  Jupiter  79, 
66.  Venus.  82.  and  Mercury  76. 


U' 


Cfldp.  XXIII.]        PTOLEMT's  TKTKAIUBLOS.  51 

The  method  of  the  ChaHseans  contains  a  certain  siiii- 
pHcity  of  arrangement  as  to  quantity,  and  preservea  an 
order  of  succession  ratlier  more  confonnaljle  to  the 
dominion  of  the  Iriplicities.  It  is,  nevertheless,  highly 
imperfect,  as  may  be  easily  discovered  even  without 
being  pointed  out;  for  in  the  6rst  tripUcity,  (which  the 
Chaldieans  also  attribute  to  the  same  signs;  viz.  Aries, 
Leo,  and  Sagittarius,)  Jupiter,  the  lord  of  the  triplicity, 
takes  till?  lirst  degrees;  Vetius.  who  rules  the  next 
triplicity,  follows  him ;  after  her,  in  succession,  are 
Saturn  ami  Mercury,  the  lords  of  the  triplicity  of  Gemini; 
and  lastly  Mars,  lord  of  the  remaining  triplicity.  In  the 
second  triplicity,  (also  alIotti;d  to  the  same  signs,  viz. 
Taurus,  Virgo  and  Capricorn,)  Venus  stands  first;  next  to 
her,  Saturn  and  Mercury;  after  them  Mars,  and  Jupiter 
lest.  In  the  other  two  triplicities  a  similar  order  of 
succession  is  closely  followed;  and  with  respect  to  the 
third  triplicity,  which  is  ascribed  to  two  lords,  viz.  to 
Saturn  and  Mercury.  Katurn  i*  placed  first  in  order  by 
day  and  Mercury  by  night. 

The  quantity  of  degrees  allotted  to  each  planet  is  also 
simply  re;^ulated  in  the  Clialdaic  method;  it  diminisheH 
in  gradation  from  the  quantity  given  to  the  planet  first 
an  order,  so  that  each  successive  planet  takes  one  degree 
less  than  that  which  preceded  it.  Thus  the  first  planet 
takes  eight  degrees,  the  second  seven,  the  third  six,  the 
fourth  five,  and  the  fifth  four.  By  this  arrangement 
the  degrees  of  Saturn  amount  by  day  to  78,  and  by 
night  to  66 ;  the  degrees  of  Jupiter  to  72,  of  Mars  to  6y, 
of  Venus  to  75,  and  of  Mercury  by  day  to  66,  and  by 
night  to  78^the  whole  amounting  to  360. 

Of  these  two  distributions  of  the  terms,  that  of  the 
^Egyptians  seems  more  to  be  relied  on  than  the  other; 
since  it  has  been  handed  down  and  recommended  in  the 
writings  of  the  ^^'yptian  authors,  and  aUo  V)ftcfl.w^«  ^io.ft 


S2  PTOLEMY'S   TETRABIBL08.  [Bock    I. 

degrees  of  the  terms,  in  nativities  rectified  by  them  a^* 
examples,  are  universally  in  accordance  with  this  distri- 
bution :  while,  on  the  other  hand,  neither  the  order  nor 
the  number  of  the  Chaldaic  method  has  ever  been  re- 
corded or  explained  by  any  writer — ^not  even  by  the 
writers  of  that  very  nation;  tlie  accuracy  of  that 
metliod  is  consequently  doubtful,  and  it-)  irregularity 
aa  to  the  order  of  placing  the  planets  is  widely  open 


There  is,  however,  an  antient  writing  which  has  fallen 
into  the  author's  possesFion,  and  which  gives  a  rational 
and  consistent  account  of  the  nature  of  the  terms;  of 
the  order  in  which  they  arc  tn  be  taken,  and  of  the 
quantity  belonging  to  each.  It  will  be  found  in  the 
.subsequent  chapter.   /■  ''j  n, 


Chapter  XXIV. 

The  Tern\x  according  to  Ptolemy. 
In  arranging  the  order  in  which  the  planeU  take  their 
terms  in  each  sign,  their  exaltations,  triplicities,  and 
houses  are  taken  into  consideration ;  and  whatever 
planet,  whether  benefic  or  malefic,  may  po.ssess  two 
rights  of  dominion  in  one  and  the  same  sign,  such  planet 
is  universally  placed  first  in  order  in  that  sign.  In  other 
cases,  bowever,  where  it  does  not  happen  that  a  malefic 
possesses  two  rights  of  dominion  in  the  sign,  it  is  always 
placed  last. 

The  lord  of  the  exaltation  is  placed  jjrsl ;  then  the  lord 
of  the  triplicity;  and  then  the  lord  of  the  house;  in 
regular  succes-sion,  according  to  the  series  of  the  signs : 
but  it  must  be  again  remembered  that  any  planet,  having 
two  rights  of  dominion  in  the  same  sign,  takes  pre- 
cedence, as  before  mentioned,  of  those  having  only  one. 
In  Cancer  and   Leo,  however,  the   malefic-s  occupy  the 


Chap.  XXIV.]     itolemy's  tetkabiblob.  53 

first  degrees ;  as  thase  signs  are  the  houses  of  the  Moon 
and  the  Sun,  which  take  no  terms ;  and  the  malefics 
being  found  to  have  greater  potency  in  those  sign:^ 
therefore  take  precedence  in  them.  Mars,  consequently, 
receives  the  first  degrees  in  Cancer,  and  Saturn  in  Leo, 
by  which  arrangement  a  proper  order  is  preserved  ". 

The  respective  quantities  of  degrees  for  the  several 
terms  is  thus  determined :  viz.  when  there  is  no  planet 
found  to  he  lord  by  two  rights  in  the  same  sign,  or  in 
the  two  signs  next  following,  each  of  the  benefics,  Jupiter 
and  Venus,  takes  seven  degrees;  llie  nialefics,  Saturn 
and  Mar.B,  take  five  degrees  eacli ;  and  Mercury,  being 
of  common  influence,  takes  six  degrees ;  thus  completing 
the  whole  thirty.  Since,  however,  there  are  some  cases 
in  which  a  planet  has  always  a  double  right — (for  Venus 
obtains  the  sole  government  of  Taurus  and  Pisces,  as 
the  Moon  dries  not  share  in  the  terms) — it  i«  to  be 
observed  that  when  such  double  right,  (whether  it  exist 
Id  the  same  sign  or  in  the  signs  next  following  as  far  as 
may  complete  a  quadrant,)  may  be  possessed  by  any 
planet,  that  planet  receives  in  addition  one  degree.  The 
planets  thus  entitled  were  distinguished  by  points  in 
the  antient  writing  above  mentioned.  And  the  degree, 
added  to  the  quantity  of  the  planet  which  exercises 
a  double  right,  is  subtracted  from  those  of  single  right; 
most  generally  from  Saturn  and  Jupiter,  in  consequence 
of  their  slower  motion, 


*  The  c&uee  of  thU  diepohition  i»  that  Cancer,  the  house  of  the 
Moci],  parl&keB  of  tnoUture,  and  counteracts  Msm'tt  dryneKn ;  while 
t«o,  the  Sun's  liousc,  in  hot,  and  oouDteracta  Saturn's  cold.—A'ide 
CHap.  iv-,  and  c^mcluBion  of  Chap,  vii.  of  this  book.  j>.ij. 

U  may  further  be  observed,  that  Jufiler'a  right,  by  triplidty,  to 
thettrst  degree*  in  Leu,  U  of'conrne  aiirrendcred  to  Satnm,  on  the 
principle  that  tlie  malelicfl  have  greaier  potency  in  the  tousee  of  the 


i4  PTOLEm''S  TKTHAl)IHt,OS.  [Book   I. 

These  terms  are  detailed  in  the  toUowinp;  table : — 


4H«.                Turn 

- 

<^. 

c.™,.     1      w 

Vlrjo. 

Jnpitor 

B 

1 

a  [Von, 

8 

8 

Mer. 

' 

7 

Mm 

6 

7 
7 

! 

13 

Her.     7 113 

Mer. 

7 

7 

13 
18 

Tmu 

8 

14:Her. 

7 

" 

Jnp. 

6 

13 

Mer. 
J.p. 

Von. 

0 

Mtffcnr; 

7  21  Jnp. 

7 

J 

Van. 

7 

20 
26 

fe 

I 

Sat.        „  ,~n 
Ven.        1 

Jnp.     I0I2S 

Jup. 
Sat. 

S 

HUR 

5;a!S«t 

2J24 

Uara 

6 

Ven. 

7 

e|H- 

Sktam 

4 

KIMUB 

S»t 

' 

30 

Sab 

3 

Lo 

Hart  Is  30 

Man 

S.9» 

Ubnu        j     Bwrpio. 

a.giu. 

iriiu. 

Aq«Bl.«. 

PiW«. 

fiktnn 

e' 6  Mara 

a 

Jup. 

s 

8 

Ven. 

616 

Sat.   -6 

fl 

Ven. 

6 

8 

VenDH 

5 

II 

Ven. 
lup. 

15V.. 

! 

s 
e 

U 
IS 

Mer. 
Jup. 

a 

7 

12 

Her.    |q 

IS 

Jnp. 

« 

14 

Hercnry 

8 
5 

IS 

Jup. 

21 

Mer. 

19 

Ven. 

8 

X 

Mer. 

6 

9) 

Jupiter 
Mercury 

8,** 

M„. 

»!27 

9at. 

-^i. 

6 

2G 

Jnp. 

J) 

2: 

Mtra 

6 

a 

26 
26 

Mm 

.!» 

Sat 

.|» 

Uua 

5 

»«r 

SO 

Man 

D 

so 

Sat. 

3 

» 

fflliiifltr  XXV. 

r/ic  Places  artil  Degrees  of  every  Plaviet. 
The  signs  have  been  subdivided  by  some  persons  into 
parts  still  more  minute,  whicli  have  been  nutned  places 
and  degrees  of  dominion.  Thus  the  twelfth  part  of  a 
sign,  or  two  degrees  and  a  half,  has  been  called  a  place, 
and  the  dominion  of  it  given  to  the  signs  next  succeed- 
/n/^.     Other  persons  again,  pursuing   various  modes  of 


Vhaji.  XXVI.]      iTULEMY's  TliTKABIHLOS.  55 

iirrangement,  attribute  to  each  planet  certain  degrees, 
aa  being  aboriginally  connected  with  it,  in  a  manner 
nomcwhat  siiniiar  to  the  Chaldaic  arrangement  of  the 
terms.  But  all  these  iiuaginary  attiibutes  cannot  be 
herein  detailed,  for  they  receive  no  confirmation  from 
nature,  are  not  capable  of  being  rationally  demonstrated, 
and  are.  in  fact,  merely  the  ottspring  of  scientific 
vanity. 

The  following  observation,  however,  deserves  atten- 
tion, and  must  not  be  omitted. 

The  beginning.t  of  the  signs,  and  likewise  those  of  the 
terms,  are  to  be  taken  from  the  equinoctial  and  tropical 
pointtj.  This  rule  is  nnt  only  clearly  stated  by  writers 
on  the  subject,  but  is  also  specially  evident  by  the 
demonstration  constantly  aifoided.  that  their  natureu, 
influences,  and  familiarities,  have  no  other  origin  than 
from  the  tropics  and  equinoxe.'i,  as  has  been  already 
plainly  shown  *.  And,  if  other  beginnings  were  allowed, 
it  would  either  be  necessary  to  exclude  the  natures  of  thi' 
digns  from  the  theory  of  prognostication,  or  impossible 
to  avoid  error  in  then  retaining  and  making  use  of  them ; 
fts  the  regularity  of  their  spaces  and  distances,  upon 
which  their  influence  depends,  would  then  be  invaded 
and  broken  in  upon. 


Chaplev  XXVI. 

Facm,  Omriots.  aiul  othet-  vimilar  Attributee  of  t/ie 
Pianeta. 
The  familiarities  exi.sting  between  the  planets  and  the 
signs  are  <juch  as  have  been  already  particularized. 

There  are  also,  however,  further  peculiarities  ascribed 
to  the  planets.     Each  is  said  to  be  in  its  proper  face, 


*  Vi<le  CliapUra 


H^ 


xiv.  of  tbia  Bouk. 


56 


PTOLEMY  S  TETRABlBLOa 


[Book  I. 


when  the  aspect  it  holds  to  the  Sun,  or  Moon,  is  similar 
to  that  which  it-)  own  house  bears  to  their  houset:  tor 
example,  Venus  is  in  her  proper  face  when  makinp;  a 
aextile  aspect  to  either  luminary,  provided  she  be  occi- 
dental to  the  Sun,  but  oriental  to  the  Moon,  a^rreeably 
to  the  primary  arrangement  of  her  houses  *. 

Each  planet  \»  also  said  to  be  in  its  proper  chariot,  or 
throne,  or  otherwise  triumphantly  situated,  when  it  holds 
familiarity  with  the  place  which  it  actually  occupies  by 
two.  or  more,  of  the  prescribed  modes  of  connection :  for 
when  it  in  so  circumstanced,  its  influence  and  energy 
are  specially  augmented  by  the  familiarity  it  thus  holds 
with  the  sign  which  encompasses  it,  and  which  is  similar 
in  influence  and  co-operates  with  it. 

Lastly  each  planet  (although  it  may  possess  no 
familiarity  with  the  sign  encompassing  it)  is  said  to 
rejoice,  when  any  connection  subsists  between  itself  and 
other  stars  of  the  same  condition :  as,  notwithstanding 
the  distance  between  them,  a  certain  sympathy  and  com- 
munication of  inriuenoe  is  derived  from  their  mnlual 
resemlilance.  In  the  same  nianner,  a^ain,  when  a 
planet  occupies  a  place  adverse  and  dissimilar  in  con- 
dition to  itself,  much  of  its  influence  is  dissipated  and 
lost;  in  consequence  o£  the  interposition  and  admix- 
ture of  the  other  different  intiuence,  arising  out  of 
the  di^imilar  temperament  of  the  sign  by  which  it  in 
encompassed. 


.  Ajt 


I  hi« 


*  Vide  Clia[iter  \\.  Il  of  counse  follow.''  tliLit  Saturn  i 
proper  lAce  wlieti  he  i»  live  signH.  or  in  ijuiutile,  after  the  Suu 
ur  before  the  Mui>o  ;  that  Jupiter  is  ao  when  iu  trine ;  Mare  wben 
in  iiQArtilei  Venus  when  in  sextile;  &nd  Mercnry  nlien  only  one 
(ii|{n,  or  in  modem  ptir&w,  in  Mtni-wxtile,)  after  the  Sun  or  before 
Uie  Moon. 


Chnp.  XXVII.]   itolemy's  tetrabiblos. 


> 


miwptct  xxvii. 

Application,  Separation,  and  other  Faculties. 
In  all  canes  wbeti  the  distances  between  planets  or 
luiainaTies  are  but  trifling*,  tbe  planet  which  precedes 
b  said  to  apply  to  that  which  follows;  and  that  which 
follows  to  be  separatinr;  from  that  which  precedes -f. 
The  same  rule  obtains  both  in  reapect  to  hodily  con- 
junction and  to  any  otber  of  the  aspects  before  described ; 
except  that,  in  the  application  and  i^eparation  of  the 
bodily  conjunclinn,  it  is  also  essential  to  (ibserve  tlie 
actual  latitudes  of  the  bodies,  in  order  to  receive  and 
consider  only  »ucb  a  transit  as  may  bo  mad»  in  the  same 
parti  of  the  zodiac  |.  But  in  the  application  and 
separation  of  aspects  merely,  the  same  attention  is  not 
requisite,  since  all  the  rays  are  uniformly  converj^ed 
into  one  focu.s,  that  is  to  say,  into  the  angle  of  the 
earth  S,  and  meet  there  alike  from  every  tjuarter, 

*  TliiH  lias  been  unilerstooil  to  iiicfLn,  wben  ilie  iikiietn  or  luniinsrieH 
are  witliin  each  other's  orVra  ;  Sawm's  nrh  being  l(i  ilef!ree«,  Jopiter'^ 
IS,  Mar»'B  7  degrees  :ili  mioutea,  lliu  San'»  IT  des^Teex.  Venu>'B  8, 
Meruiiry'sTdegreet' 30  minutes,  ftinl  the  Moon's  12 ile),'ree)- 30 minuter. 

t  Aslrolitgcrs  genorally  agree,  that  the  inferior  jilnnetB  ahvays 
apply  to  the  superior,  but  tbe  fuperior  nevur  to  the  inferior,  except 
wben  the  inferior  Iw  retrograde.  In  llie  present  inalAnco  it  seeing 
moet  probnble  tliat  tbe  aotbnr  meana  the  plinct  whk-li  in  more  occi- 
dental, l>y  "  the  planet  whicli  preeeiles."  He  often  use*  "  jiriMedent" 
as  e<|Divalent  to  "  oreiriental "  in  rt^ird  to  the  dnily  revolution  of  the 
heavens  :  and  tbiis  a.  planet  in  the  hrst  det^iee  of  Aries  would  prerede 
and  bo  more  occidental  than  one  in  the  Hixtli  degree  nf  Ariei',  to 
which  latter  it  would,  by  tbe  regular  planetary  uintioa,  be  applying. 

tUn  tbiB,  Wballejsajs  tbat  "the  less  the  dilfercnce  uf  latitude  of 
"  the  planets  in  conjunction,  the  more  pow<>Tfnl  ^vill  be  the  iuHnence: 
"  for  if  two  planets  in  conjunction  have  ench  oonmdemble  latiludo  of 
"different  ile nomination,  the  inHuence  of  *acb  conjunction  uill  be 
"  much  Iwsened.  ' 

f  fauT  Id  IT.  Ti  nitTft  m  jB(.  The  precise  meaning  of  the  wonl 
•■t^»  is   "centre,''   rather    than   "angle;"    but   Ptolemy   uses    it 


i!S  PTOLEMr'3  TETHABIBI.OS.  [Book   I. 

It  appears,  therefore,  by  the  whole  of  what  has  been 
already  (ielivereil,  that  the  effective  influence  of  the  stars 
must  be  considered  as  arising  not  only  from  their  own 
peculiar  natures  and  properties,  but  also  from  the  quality 
of  the  surrounding  signs,  and  from  configuration  with 
the  Sun  and  the  angles ;  alt  which  has  been  pointed  out. 
The  influence  of  each  planet,  however,  is  strengthened 
chiefly  when  it  may  be  oriental,  swift  ami  direct  in  its 
proper  coui'se  and  motion — for  it  has  then  its  greatest 
power:  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  loses  strength  when 
ficcidental  and  slow  in  motion  or  retrograde;  as  it  then 
acts  with  smaller  effect*.  Its  influence  also  receives 
accession  or  diminution,  from  its  position  with  regard  to 
the  horizon  ;  as,  if  it  be  situated  in  the  mid-heaven,  or 
snccedent  to  the  mid-heaven,  it  is  especially  strong; 
likewise,  if  it  be  on  the  actual  horizon,  or  succedent  to 
the  horizon,  it  is  also  powerful ; — particularly  if  in  the 
ea.stcrn  quarter.    Should  it,  however,  be  below  the  earth, 

Uironglinul  thU  worli,  in  epeakiDg  of  the  fouranglenof  licnven,  and  1 
concpiVH  be  uses  i[  liere  to  signify  an  angle  at,  or  on,  the  eurtlt  The 
following  definition  of  an  aspect,  by  Kepler,  strengthens  my  opinion : 
"  An  aipect  is  an  angle  fariueil  on  the  earth,  by  the  luniinouH  rayH  of 
"  two  planels ;  cHirndouii  in  stimulating  sublunary  nature  '' 

*  Placi'lne  (Cooper's  translation)  says  Chat  "the  three  Huperior> 
"  are  snpposd  to  be  stronger,  if  they  are  found  Ui  bo  niatuline,  or 
"  eastern,  from  tbe  Sun ;  the  three  inferiors,  vespertine,  or  weHtern ; 
"  for  then  they  have  a  greater  dejn^ee  of  light,  in  whieli  oonsista  their 
"  virtual  influence,  and  then  they  are  calleil  oriental ;  but  occidental 
"if  otherwise.  Every  one  knows  how  largely,  yet  to  no  purpose, 
"  antliors  have  iroated  of  the  orieotality  of  the  pline-s  " 

Moxon'x  Mathematical  Dictionary  has  tbe  following  words  on  the 
same  subject :  "  Now  tbe  three  »uporior  planets  are  strongest,  being 
"oriental  and  niatutine;  but  tbe  three  inferior  when  they  are  occi- 
"  dental  and  vespertine.  Tbe  reason  is,  because  tbe  fint  in  the  first 
"  case,  hut  the  last  in  the  second,  do  then  descend  to  tbe  lowest  part 
"  of  their  orbit,  are  increased  in  light,  and  approaching  nearer  the 
"  earth;  and  so  on  tbe  contrary,  tbe  inferiors  niatutine,  the  snperioiH 
"  vespertine  are  weakened," 


Chap.  XXVII.]  Ptolemy's  tetrabiblos.  b9 

and  configurated  with  the  ascendant,  either  from  the 
lower  heaven,  or  from  any  other  part  below  the  earth, 
its  influence  then  becomes  more  languid ;  but  if,  when 
below  the  earth,  it  hold  no  such  configuration,  it  ia 
entirely  deprived  of  efficacy  *. 

*  In  a  note  on  the  6th  Chapter  of  this  Book,  Whalley  says  that, 
"  according  to  Ptolemy,  such  as  are  between  the  ascendant  and  mid- 
"  heaven  obtain  the  first  place  of  strength,  and  are  Haid  to  be  in  their 
"  oriental  orientality :  but,  between  the  western  horizon  and  the  lower 
"  heaven,  in  their  occidental  orientality,  which  is  the  second  place  of 
'*  strength :  between  the  lower  heaven  and  the  ascendant,  in  their 
'*  oriental  occidentality,  the  first  degree  of  weakness ;  and  between 
"  the  mid-heaven  and  western  horizon,  in  their  occidental  occiden- 
*'tAlity,  the  weakest  place  of  all."  This  is  all  ^ery  pretty  jargon, 
but  certainly  not  ''according  to  Ptolemy,"  who  distinctly  says,  on 
the  contrary,  that  if  a  planet  "  is  on  the  actual  horizon,  or  succedent 
*'  to  the  horizon,  it  is  bX^o  powerful ,  and  pariictUarly  if  in  the  eastern 
"  quarter."  The  last  member  of  this  sentence,  as  well  as  the  con- 
clusion of  this  27th  Chapter,  shows  that  Ptolemy  did  not  consider 
a  situation  between  the  mid-heaven  and  western  horizon  to  be  '*th& 
*'  weakest  place  of  all." 


BOOK   THE  SECOND. 


(Ehapter  I. 


General  Division  of  the  Subject 

The  great  and  leading  points,  requiring  to  be  attended 
to  as  a  necessary  means  of  introduction  to  the  consider- 
ation of  particular  predictions,  having  been  succinctly 
defined,  the  further  parts  of  the  subject,  comprehending 
every  thing  which  may  tend  to  facilitate  prediction,  and 
render  it  complete,  shall  now  be  duly  proceeded  in ;  and, 
at  the  same  time,  care  shall  be  taken  to  confine  the 
whole  doctrine  within  the  limits  of  natural  reason. 

The  foreknowledge  to  be  acquired  by  means  of  Astro- 
nomy is  to  be  regarded  in  two  great  and  principal 
divisions.  The  first,  which  may  be  properly  called 
General,  or  Universal,  concerns  entire  nations,  countries, 
or  cities;  and  the  second,  denominated  Particular,  or 
Genethliacal,  relates  to  men  individually. 

In  considering  these  respective  divisions,  it  seems 
proper  to  give  priority  to  that  which  has  the  more 
general  application  and  influence  :  because,  in  the  first 
place,  general  events  are  produced  by  causes  greater  and 
more  compulsatory  than  the  causes  of  particular  events ; 
secondly,  because  natures  of  more  extended  potency 
must  invariably  controul  those  which  are  more  limited 
in  action;  and,  thirdly,  because  particular  events,  or 
individual  affections,  are  comprehended  in  those  of 
general  influence  *.     It  is  therefore  especially  necessary, 

*  Vide  Chap,  ill,  Book  I,  pp.  1314. 


•62  itolemy's  tetbabirlos.  [Boofc  II. 

in  desiring  to  investigate  particular  events,  to  treat  firr^t 
of  those  which  are  general. 

Again,  general  events  are  anbdivided  according  to  their 
operation  upon  entire  countries,  and  upon  certain  cities 
or  districts  :  one  subdivision  being  regarded  as  affecting 
entire  countrie.i,  and  the  other  certain  cities  or  districts 
only.  They  are  also  separately  considered  according  to 
the  causes  by  which  they  are  produced  ;  war,  pestilence, 
famine,  earthquakes,  inundations,  and  other  'similar  visi- 
tations being  dependent  on  such  greater  and  more  im- 
portant causes,  as  arise  only  after  considerable  periods; 
while  slighter  causes,  arising  more  frequently,  have 
reference  only  to  the  revolution  of  the  seasons;  their 
greater  or  less  variation  in  cold  and  heat ;  the  severity 
or  mildness  of  the  weather;  the  occasional  abundance  or 
scarcity  of  provisions;  and  other  like  occurrences. 

Hence  the  consideration  of  those  events  which  concern 
whole  countries,  and  are  dependent  on  the  greater  causes, 
(since  it  has  a  more  extended  scope  than  the  other,  which 
attaches  onlj'  to  certain  cities,  or  districts,  and  is  subject 
to  slighter  causes)  takes  precedence,  And,  for  its  due 
investi>i;ation,  two  essential  points  are  to  be  attended  to  : 
the  first  is,  the  appropriate  familiarity  of  the  zodiacal 
signs  and  the  fixed  slars  with  the  several  regions  which 
may  be  concerned  :  and  the  second  comprises  the  indica- 
tions occasionally  arising  in  those  parts  of  the  heavens 
where  such  familiarity  is  found  :  for  instance,  the  eclipses 
of  the  Sun  and  Moon,  and  such  transits  as  may  be  made 
by  tlie  planets,  when  matutine,  and  in  their  respective 
stations. 

The  nature  of  the  sympathy  between  these  thinfjs 
must  however  be  explained  first ;  and  a  brief  description 
will  therefore  be  given  of  the  chief  peculiarities  observ- 
able in  whole  nations;  in  regard  to  their  manners  and 
customs,  as  well  as  to  their  bodily  formation  and  tempera- 


Chap.  IL]      PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  03 

fnent;  considered  agreeably  to  their  familiarity  with 
those  stars  and  signs  whence  the  natural  cause  of  their 
peculiarities  duly  proceeds. 

(Elwptcr  II. 

Peculiarities  observable  throxighoxit  every  entire 

Climate. 

The  peculiarities  of  all  nations  are  distinguished  accord- 
ing to  entire  parallels  and  entire  angles,  and  by  their 
situation  with  regard  to  the  Sun  and  the  Ecliptic. 

The  climate  which  we  inhabit  is  situated  in  one  of  the 
Northern  Qua<lrants :  but  other  nations,  which  lie  under 
more  southern  parallels,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  space 
between  the  equinoctial  line  and  the  summer  tropic, 
have  the  Sun  in  their  zenith,  and  are  continually 
scorched  by  it.  They  are  consequently'  black  in  com- 
plexion, and  have  thick  and  curled  hair.  They  arc, 
moreover,  ugly  in  person,  of  contracted  stature,  hot  in 
disposition,  and  fierce  in  manners,  in  consequence  of  the 
incessant  heats  to  which  they  are  exposed ;  and  they  are 
'Called  by  the  common  name  of  Ethiopians.  But  the 
human  race  does  not  alone  aftbrd  evidence  of  the  violent 
heat  in  these  regions;  it  is  shown  also  by  all  other 
animals  and  by  the  state  of  the  surrounding  atmosphere. 

The  natives  of  those  countries  which  lie  under  the 
more  remote  northern  parallels,  (that  is  to  say,  under  the 
Arctic  circle  and  beyond  it*)  have  their  zenith  far  dis- 
tant from  the  zodiac  and  the  Sun's  heat.  Their  consti- 
tutions, therefore,  abound  in  cold,  and  are  also  highly 
imbued  with  moisture,  which  is  in  itself  a  most  nutritive 
quality,  and,  in  these  latitudes,  is  not  exhausted  by  heat : 
hence  they  are  fair  in  complexion,  with  straisrht  hair,  of 


•  ( 


'  Under  the  Bears,"  in  the  Greek. 


PTOLKHT'S  TETRABIBr-OM.  [Booh  II. 

large  bodies  and  full  stature.  They  are  cold  in  disposi- 
tion, and  will!  in  manners,  owing  to  the  constant  cold. 
The  state  of  the  surrounding  atmosphere  and  of  animalK 
and  plaats,  corresponds  with  that  of  men,  who  (as  natives 
of  tho^e  countries^  are  here  designated  hy  the  general 
name  of  Scytiiians. 

The  nations  situated  hotween  the  summer  tropic  and 
the  ai-ctic  circif,  having  the  meridian  Sun  neither  in 
their  zenith  nor  yet  far  remote  from  it.  enjoy  a  well- 
tempered  atmosphere.  This  favourable  temperature, 
however,  still  undergoes  variation,  and  changes  alter- 
nately from  heat  to  cold  ;  but  the  variation  is  never  vast 
nor  violent.  The  people  who  enjoy  this  kindly  atmo- 
sphere are  consequently  of  proportionate  stature  and 
Ctiniplexion,  and  of  good  natural  disposition:  they  live 
not  in  a  state  of  dispersion,  hut  dwell  together  in 
societies,  and  are  civilized  in  their  habits.  Amung  the 
nations  comprehended  in  this  division,  those  verging 
towards  the  south  are  more  industrious  and  ingenious 
than  the  others,  and  more  adapted  to  the  sciences;  and 
these  qualifications  are  engendered  in  tlicrn  by  the 
vicinity  of  the  zodiac  to  their  zenith,  and  by  the  fami- 
liarity thus  subsisting  between  them  and  the  planets 
moving  in  the  zodiac,  which  familiarity  give.f  activity 
and  on  intellectual  impulse  to  their  minds.  Again,  the 
natives  of  those  countries  which  lie  towards  the  east 
excel  in  courage,  acting  boldly  and  openly  under  all 
circumstances;  for  in  all  their  characteristics  they  are  . 
principally  conformed  to  the  Sun's  nature,  which  is 
oriental,  diurnal,  masculine  and  dexter: — (and  it  is 
plainly  apparent  that  the  dexter  parts  of  all  animals  are 
much  .stronger  than  olhefs) : — hence  results  the  greater 
courage  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  East.  And  as  the 
Moon,  on  her  first  appearance  after  conjunction  is 
always  seen  in  the  West,  the  western  parts  are  therefore 


Chap.  III.]  PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  65 

lunar,  and  consequently  feminine  and  sinister ;  whence 
it  follows  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  west  are  milder, 
more  e£feminate  and  reserved. 

Thus,  in  all  countries,  certain  respective  peculiarities 
exist  in  regard  to  manners,  customs  and  laws:  and  in 
each  it  is  found  that  some  portion  of  the  inhabitants 
differs  partially  and  individually  from  the  usual  habits 
and  condition  of  their  race.  These  variations  arise 
similarly  to  the  variations  perceptible  in  the  condition  of 
the  atmosphere ;  as,  in  all  countries,  the  general  state  of 
whose  atmosphere  may  be  either  heat,  or  cold,  or  tem- 
perate, certain  districts  are  found  to  possess  a  particular 
temperature  of  their  own,  and  to  be  more  or  less  hot,  or 
cold,  by  being  more  or  less  elevated  than  the  general 
face  of  the  country.  So,  likewise,  certain  people  become 
navigators  owing  to  their  proximity  to  the  sea,  while 
others  are  equestrian,  because  their  country  is  a  plain ; 
and  others,  again,  become  domiciliated  by  the  fertility  of 
their  soil. 

And  thus,  in  each  particular  climate,  certain  peculiar 
qualities  are  to  be  found,  arising  from  the  natural  famili- 
arity which  it  holds  with  the  stars  and  the  twelve  signs. 
And  although  these  qualities  do  not  pervade  it,  in  such 
a  manner  as  to  be  necessarily  exhibited  by  every  indi- 
vidual native,  yet  they  are  so  far  generally  distributed 
as  to  be  of  much  utility  in  investigating  particular 
events;  and  it  is  highly  important  to  take  at  least  a 
brief  notice  of  them. 

(Ehaptcr  III. 

Tlie  Familiarity  of  the  Regions  of  the  Earth  v/dk  the 

Triplicities  and  the  Planets. 

It  has  been  already  stated  that  there  are  four  triplicities 
distinguishable  in  the  zodiac.  The  first,  composed  of 
Aries,  Leo,  and  Sagittarius,  is  the  north-west  triplicity ; 


HQ  PTOLEMY'S   TETKAlilBLOS.  [Book  II. 

and  Jupiter  has  chief  dominion  over  it  on  behalf  of  its 
northern  proportion;  but  Mars  also  rules  with  liim  in 
reference  to  the  weat.  The  second,  consisting  of  Taurus, 
Virgo,  and  Capricorn,  is  the  south-east;  and  in  this  tri- 
plicity  Venus  bears  chief  rule,  in  consequence  of  the 
southern  proportion;  but  Saturn  also  governs  with  her 
in  consideration  of  the  east.  The  third,  compased  of 
Gemini,  Libra,  and  Aquarius,  is  north-east;  and  Saturn 
is  here  the  principal  lord,  in  consequence  of  the  eastern 
proportion ;  Jupiter,  however,  governs  with  hitii  in  refer- 
ence to  the  north.  The  fourth  triplicity  is  constituted 
of  Cancer,  Scorpio,  and  Pisces,  and  is  south-west;  it 
owns  Mars  as  its  principal  ruler,  in  consideration  of  its 
we.stern  proportion ;  and,  on  behalf  of  the  south,  it  13  also 
governed  by  Venua. 

The  four  triplicitiea  being  thus  established,  the  whole 
inhalited  earth  is  accordingly  divided  into  four  parts, 
agreeing  with  the  number  of  the  triplicities.  It  is 
divided  latitudinally  by  the  line  of  the  Mediterranean 
Sea,  from  the  Straits  of  Hercules  to  the  Issican  Gulph, 
continued  onwards  through  the  mountainous  ridge  ex- 
tending towards  the  east;  and  by  this  latitudinal  division 
its  southern  and  northern  parts  are  defined.  Its  longi- 
tudinal division  is  made  by  the  line  of  the  Arabian 
Gulph,  the  Mgea.n  Sea,  Pontus,  and  the  lake  M^otis ;  and 
by  this  line  are  separated  its  eastern  and  western  parts. 

Of  the  four  quadrants  of  the  earth,  thus  agreeing  in 
number  with  the  four  triplicitias.  one  is  situated  in  the 
north-west  of  the  entire  earth,  and  contains  Celto-galatia; 
or,  us  it  is  commonly  called,  Europe.  Opposed  to  this 
q'ladrant  lies  that  of  the  south-east,  towards  Eastern 
.^tliiopia;  it  is  called  the  southern  part  of  Asia  Magna, 
Another  quadrant  of  the  entire  earth  is  in  the  north-east, 
about  Scythta,  and  is  called  the  northern  part  of  Asia 
Magna.     To  this  is  opposed  the  quadrant  of  the  south- 


<lhap.  III.]         Ptolemy's  tetrabiblos.  67 

west,  which  lies  about  Western  iEbhiopia,  and  is  known 
by  the  general  name  of  Libya. 

Each  of  these  quadrants  contains  certain  parts,  which, 
in  comparison  with  its  other  parts,  lie  more  contiguous 
to  the  middle  of  the  earth ;  and  these  parts,  in  respect 
of  the  quadrant  to  which  they  belong,  have  a  situation 
opposite  to  the  rest  of  that  quadrant,  in  the  same  manner 
as  that  quadrant  itself  is  situated  in  res;ard  to  the  rest 
of  the  earth.  For  instance,  in  the  quadrant  of  Europe, 
which  is  situated  on  the  north-west  of  the  whole  earth, 
those  parts  of  it  which  lie  towards  the  middle  of  the 
earth,  and  near  the  angles  of  the  other  quadrants,  are 
manifestly  situated  in  the  south-east  of  that  quadrant. 
The  like  rule  obtains  in  regard  to  the  other  quadrants. 
And  hence  it  is  evident  that  each  quadrant  is  in  famili- 
arity with  two  oppositely-placed  triplicities,  its  whole 
extent  being  adapted  to  the  one  triplicity  which  governs 
it  as  an  entire  quadrant ;  but  its  particular  parts,  situated 
about  the  middle  of  the  earth,  and  lying,  as  regards  the 
rest  of  the  quadrant,  in  a  direction  contrary  to  that 
assigned  to  the  whole  quadrant  altogether,  being  adapted 
to  the  other  triplicity  which  rules  the  particular  quad- 
rant lying  opposite  to  it.  The  planets  exercising  do- 
minion in  both  these  triplicities  also  hold  familiarity 
with  these  particular  parts;  but,  with  the  other  more 
remote  parts  of  any  quadrant,  only  those  planets  hold 
familiarity  which  rule  in  the  single  triplicity  to  which 
the  whole  qtiadrant  is  allotted.  With  the  said  particular 
parts  about  the  middle  of  the  earth,  Mercury  also,  as 
well  as  the  other  planets  in  dominion,  bears  familiarity, 
in  consideration  of  his  mediative  condition  and  common 
nature. 

Under  this  arrangement,  it  follows  that  the  north- 
western parts  of  the  first  quadrant,  or  that  of  Europe, 
are  in  familiarity  with  the  north-west  triplicity,  com- 


m 


PTOLEMY  S   TETBAISIMLO 


[Book  U. 

posed  of  Aries,  Leo,  and  Sagittarius;  and  they  are 
accordingly  governed  by  the  lords  of  that  triplicity, 
Jupiter  and  Mars,  vespertine.  These  parts,  as  dis- 
tinguished by  their  appropriation  to  entire  nationw,  are 
Britain,  Oalatia,  Germany,  Baraania*,  Italy,  Apulia. 
Sioiiy,  Oaul,  Tuscany.  Celtica,  and  Spain.  And,  since 
the  triplicity  iteelf  and  the  planets  connected  with  it  in 
dominion  are  adapted  to  command,  the  natives  of  these 
countries  are  consequently  impatient  of  restraint,  lovers 
of  freedom,  warlike,  industrious,  imperious,  cleanly,  and 
high-minded.  But,  owing  to  the  vespertine  configuration 
of  Jupiter  and  Mars,  ns  well  as  the  masculine  condition 
of  the  anterior  parts  of  the  triplicity,  and  the  feminine 
condition  of  its  latter  parts+,  the  said  nations  regard 
women  with  Hcorn  and  indifference  J.  They  are,  how- 
ever, still  careful  of  the  community,  brave  and  faithful, 
affectionate  in  their  families,  and  perform  good  and  kind 
actions. 

Among  the  countries  before  named,  Britain,  Galatia. 
OeriTiany,  and  Barsania  have  a  greater  share  of  famili- 
arity with  Atie.i  and  tA&rn ;  and  their  inhabitants  are 
accordingly  wilder,  bolder,  and  more  ferocious.  Italy, 
Apulia,  Sicily,  and  Gaul  are  in  familiarity  with  Leo  and 
the  Sun ;  and  the  natives  oF  these  countries  are  more 

'Or,  perhaps,  BBHtamia,  a  pari  of  the  anticiit  Kuropvui  Sannatia. 

t  This  should  probably  be  onderiitDOil  lo  roeBn  in  a  niiindaDe  point 
of  view,  aKTeetibly  to  Chap.  6  anil  15,  Book  i.  For  when  Aiies  is  on 
ihe  aavendant,  it  is.  of  course,  oriental  and  maHcnline :  anil  Sigit- 
tuins  uinst  (^nsequently  then  be  in  tiie  eighth  lioiine,  occiitental, 
and  therefore  feminine. 

;The  ciMtonis  of  nations  have,  in  some  dcRree,  altered  wnce 
Ptolemy  made  IIiih  oevere  charge  agtunst  ns  and  our  brolhren  iu  the 
north  and  west  of  Europe.  The  following  passa^  alsQiiccurs  in  tbia 
part  of  the  original  text ;— «^i<  ii  mi  ri.,mmi  tv>  nfunKut  uMiin^itK 


Chap,  III.]  PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  69 

imperious,  yet  kind  and  benevolent,  and  careful  of  the 
commonwealth.  Tuscany,  Celtica,  and  Spain,  are  con- 
nected with  Sagittarius  and  Jupiter ;  and  their  inhabi- 
tants are  lovers  of  freedom,  simplicity,  and  elegance. 

The  south-eastern  parts  of  this  quadrant,  which  are 
situated  towards  the  middle  of  the  earth,  viz.  Thrace, 
Macedonia,  lUyria,  Hellas,  Achaia,  and  Crete,  as  well  as 
the  Cyclad  Isles  and  the  shores  of  Asia  Minor  and  of 
Cyprus,  assume,  in  addition,  a  connection  with  the  south- 
east triplicity,  which  is  composed  of  Taurus,  Virgo,  and 
Capricorn,  and  ruled  by  Venus  and  Saturn ;  and,  in  con- 
sequence of  the  vicinity  of  these  regions  to  the  middle  of 
the  earth.  Mercury  likewise  has  a  proportionate  dominion 
over  them.  Hence  their  inhabitants,  being  subjected  to 
the  rules  of  both  triplicities,  enjoy  a  favourable  tempera- 
ment of  mind  and  of  body.  From  Mars  they  imbibe 
their  fitness  for  command,  their  courage,  and  impatience 
of  restraint ;  from  Jupiter  their  love  of  freedom,  their 
self-rule,  their  skill  in  guiding  public  affairs,  and  in 
legislation :  through  the  influence  of  Venus  they  are  also 
lovers  of  the  arts  and  sciences,  as  well  as  of  music  and 
poetry,  of  public  shows,  and  all  the  refinements  of  life : 
and  from  Mercury  they  deduce  their  hospitality,  their 
fondness  for  society  and  communion,  their  love  of  equity 
and  of  literature,  and  their  power  of  eloquence.  They 
are  also  in  the  highest  degree  conversant  with  sacred 
mysteries,  owing  to  the  vespertine  figuration  of  Venus. 

It  is  further  to  be  observed  of  these  last-named 
countries,  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  Cyclad  Isles,  and 
of  the  shores  of  Asia  Minor  and  of  Cyprus,  are  more  par- 
ticularly under  the  influence  of  Taurus  and  Venus,  and 
are  therefore  voluptuous,  fond  of  elegance,  and  over- 
studious  in  their  attention  to  the  body.  The  people 
of  Hellas,  Achaia,  and  Crete,  have  a  stronger  familiarity 
with  Virgo  and  Mercury,  and  are  therefore  learned  and 


McieQtific,  preferring  the  cultivation  of  the  mind  to  the 
care  of  the  body.  The  people  of  Macedonia,  Thrace,  and 
Illyria,  are  chiefly  influenced  by  Capricorn  and  Satnm  ; 
whence  they  are  greedy  of  wealth,  inferior  in  civilization, 
and  have  no  ordinances  of  civil  polity. 

The  second  quadrant  consists  of  the  southern  division 
of  Asia  Matjna.  Such  of  its  parts  as  are  contained  in 
India,  Arriano-j  Oedrgsia,  Parthia.  Media,  Persia,  Baby- 
lonia, Mesopotamia,  and  Assyria,  are  situated  in  the 
south-east  of  the  whole  earth,  and  have  due  familiarity 
with  the  south-east  triplicity  (composed  of  Taurus,  Virgo, 
and  CapricornX  and  consequently  with  Venus.  Mercury, 
and  Saturn,  in  matutine  flguration.  The  nature  of  the 
inhabitants  of  these  countries  is  obedient  to  the  dominion 
of  these  ruling  influences;  they  worship  Venus  under 
the  name  of  Isis:  and  they  also  pay  devotion  to  Saturn, 
invoking  him  by  the  name  of  Mithranhelios,  Many  of 
them  likewise  foretell  future  events:  and  they  conse- 
crate to  the  gods  some  of  their  bodily  members,  to  which 
superstition  they  are  induced  by  the  nature  of  the  fiyur^- 
tion  of  the  planets  before  mentioned*.  They  are,  more- 
over, hot  in  constitution,  amorous  and  lustful,  fond  of 
acting,  singing,  and  dancing,  gaudy  in  their  dresses  and 
ornaments:  owing  to  the  influence  of  Venus.  Saturn, 
however,  inclines  them  to  simplicity  of  conduct;  and,  in 
consequence  of  the  matutine  figuration,  they  address 
their  women  publiclyf-.  There  are  also  many  among 
them  who  beget  children  by  their  own  mothers'.     The 

*  The  Greek  ie  fLt  fnllows  ;   ...  »  ^.,..  .ur..  t.  y,.„ri...  >.>l./»« 

FoIlieH,  similar  ia  their  kind  to  these,  are  still  prootised  by  tbe 
F*quirs  of  Hindostui,  and  by  other  religioitii  sects  in  Asia. 

Z  The  author  gives  >  siat^lar  reason  for  this  incest! :   wrvr.  )•  rai 


yCvidx.M'AK.A^^f-.l'  Jf' 


Chap.  Ill]         Ptolemy's  tetrabiblos.  71 

matutine  figurations  also  influence  their  mode  of  worship, 
which  is  performed  by  prostration  of  the  breast ;  because 
the  heart  is  the  nobler  part  of  the  body,  and,  in  its 
vivifying  faculties,  acts  like  the  Sun.  And,  although 
the  influence  of  Venus  makes  the  people,  generally 
speaking,  flnical  and  efl*eminate  in  their  personal  adorn- 
ment and  apparel,  yet  the  connection  which  Saturn 
holds  with  them,  by  means  of  the  east,  still  rendera 
them  great  in  mind,  eminent  in  council,  courageous  and 
warlike. 

It  is  to  be  remarked,  that  Parthia,  Media,  and  Persia, 
have  a  more  particular  familiarity  with  Taurus  and 
Venus;  whence  it  follows  that  the  dwellers  in  those 
countries  wear  splendid  garments,  and  clothe  the  whole 
person  entirely,  except  the  breast ;  they  are  also  fond  of 
elegance  and  refinement.  The  countries  about  Babylon, 
Mesopotamia,  and  Assyria,  are  connected  with  Virgo  and 
Mercury ;  their  inhabitants  are  consequently  studious  of 
the  sciences,  and,  among  other  attainments,  excel  in 
making  observations  on  the  five  planets.  India,  Arriana, 
and  Gedrosia,  are  connected  with  Capricorn  and  Saturn ; 
the  natives  of  these  regions  are,  therefore,  ill-formed  in 
person,  of  dirty  habits,  and  barbarous  manners. 

The  remaining  parts  of  this  second  quadrant,  viz.  Idu- 
msea,  Coelesyria,  Judaea,  Phoenicia,  Chaldsea,  Orchynia, 
and  Arabia  Felix,  occupy  a  situation  in  the  vicinity  of 
the  middle  of  the  earth,  and  in  the  north-west  of  the 
quadrant  to  which  they  actually  belong :  hence  they  are 
in  familiarity  with  the  north-west  triplicity  (which  con- 
sists of  Aries,  Leo,  and  Sagittarius),  and  they  have  for 
their  rulers,  Jupiter  and  Mars,  together  with  Mercury. 
By  means  of  the  figuration  of  these  planets,  the  natives 
of  the  said  countries  are  skilful  in  trade  and  all  mercan- 
tile affairs,  heedless  of  danger,  yet  treacherous,  servile, 
and  thoroughly  fickle. 


72 


PT0LKMY8    TETRABIBLOS. 


[Book  11. 


The  inhabitants  of  Ccelesyria,  Iduriisea,  and  JudiBa,  are 
principally  intlueneed  by  Ariea  and  Mars,  and  are  gener- 
ally audacious,  atheistical",  and  treacherous.  The 
Phoenicians,  Ch&ldseans,  and  Orchynians,  have  fumiliarity 
with  Leo  and  the  Sun,  and  are  therefore  more  simple  and 
huniuDe  in  disposition  ;  they  are  also  studious  of  a-strology, 
and  pay  greater  reverence  than  all  other  nations  to  the 
SuD.  The  people  of  Arabia  Felix  are  connected  with 
Sagittarius  and  Jupiter:  the  country  is  fertile,  and 
abundantly  productive  of  spices;  and  its  inhabitants 
are  well-proportioned  ia  person,  free  in  all  their  habits 
of  life,  and  liberal  in  all  their  contracts  and  dealings. 

The  third  ijuadrant  occupies  the  northern  division  of 
Ania  Magna.  Those  several  parts  of  it  which  lie  to  the 
north-east  of  the  whole  earth,  and  comprise  Uyicania, 
Armeoia,  Mantiana,  Bactriana,  Cunperia.  Serica,  Sauro- 
matica,  Oxiana,  and  Sogdiana.  are  in  familiarity  with 
the  north-east  triplicity,  composed  of  Gemini,  Libra,  and 
Aquarius,  and  have  for  their  rulers  Saturn  and  Jupiter, 
in  uiatutine  positions;  hence  the  inhabitants  worship 
Jupiter  and  the  Sun-|-.  They  are  abundantly  rich  in  all 
things:  they  possess  much  gold,  and  are  dainty  and 
luxurious  in  their  diet.  They  are  also  learned  in  the- 
ology, skilled  in  magic,  just  in  all  their  dealings,  free 
and  noble-minded,  holding  dishonesty  and  wickedness 
in  abhorrence,  strongly  imbued  with  the  softer  affections 

*  TLie  epitliet  h  remarkable,  out  only  as  being,  in  the  opiuion  of  a 
tientile,  merited  by  the  Jews,  among  other  natioos,  but  also  at  a 
period  Boaruely  exc«eiling  t,  century  after  their  nio^t  lieinous  orime 
had  been  cominitted,  exprenly  under  the  tloak  of  religion.  It  seenu, 
however,  tbnt  the  Jews  were  chiu-ged  with  Atheism  by  other  writers 
«Jro,  and  od  account  of  their  neglect  of  the  false  godauf  the  heatliens; 
vie.  "/aliomm  deoram  neglectiu.  qoain  eandem  causam  etiam 
"Jada'is  RuJedicendi  Tacitns  liabnit,  «t  Flinius  Major,  cui  JndHd 
"  dicontur  gent  contumtlia  nnminum  inaignis."  See  Clark's  Nut«s 
to  Grotina  de  Verit.  Helig.  Christ.  Lib.  2,^± 

t  Other  copies  eay  "  Saturn." 


-Chap.  III.]  PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  713 

of  nature;  and,  in  a  worthy  cause,  they  will  even  readily 
embrace  death  to  preserve  their  friends.  They  are, 
furthermore,  chaste  in  marriage,  elegant  and  splendid  in 
their  dress,  charitable  and  beneficent,  and  of  enlightened 
intellect.  All  these  qualities  are  principally  produced 
by  the  matutine  positions  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter,  who 
influence  the  region. 

Among  these  nations,  however,  Hyrcania,  Armenia, 
-and  Mantiana,  have  a  greater  familiarity  with  Gemini 
and  Mercury;  and  the  inhabitants  are  consequently 
more  acute  in  apprehension,  but  less  tenacious  of  their 
probity.  The  countries  about  Bactriana,  Casperia,  and 
Serica,  are  connected  with  Libra  and  Venus ;  and  the 
natives  are  endowed  with  much  wealth  and  many  luxu- 
ries, and  take  delight  in  poetry  and  songs.  The  nations 
•about  Sauromatica,  Oxiana,  and  Sogdiana,  are  influenced 
by  Aquarius  and  Saturn ;  and  are  therefore  less  polished 
in  manners,  and  more  austere  and  uncouth. 

The  other  parts  of  this  quadrant,  lying  near  the  middle 
of  the  entire  earth,  consist  of  Bithynia,  Phrygia,  Colchis, 
Laxica,  Syria,  Commagene,  Cappadocia,  LyJia,  Lycia, 
•Cilicia,  and  Pamphylia.  These,  being  situated  in  the 
south-west  of  their  quadrant,  have  familiarity  accord- 
ingly with  the  south-west  triplicity,  composed  of  Cancer, 
Scorpio,  and  Pisces,  and  are  ruled  by  Mars  and  Venus, 
together  with  Mercury.  In  these  countries  Venus  is 
principally  worshipped ;  she  is  invoked  as  the  Mother  of 
the  Gods,  and  by  various  local  and  indigenous  appel- 
lations; Mars  likewise  receives  adoration  here,  under 
the  name  of  Adonis,  as  well  as  by  other  titles*;  and 


*  It  is  Uiiually  understood  that  the  male  deity,  coupled  by  the 
Phrygians  with  Cybeie,  "the  mother  of  the  Gods,"  was  called  by 
them  Atys ;  and  that  Adonis  was  the  name  used  by  the  PhtxjnicianH 
in  addressing  the  associate  of  Venus.  It  has  been  said  that  these 
-divinities  were  identical  with  the  Isis  and  Osiris  of  tV\«  iV.^'^Xha.ii^. 


74 


Ptolemy's  tetbabiui.os. 


[Boole  U. 


some  of  the  religious  services  to  these  deities  are  per- 
formed by  loud  lamentations.  The  people  are  servile  in 
roind,  diligent  in  labour,  yet  fraudulent,  knavish,  and 
thievish  :  they  enter  into  foreign  armies  for  the  sake  of 
hire,  and  make  prisoners  and  slaves  of  their  own  coun- 
trymen :  besides  which,  they  are  continually  subject  try 
intestine  broils.  These  traits  arise  from  the  matutine 
figurations  of  Mars  and  Venns.— It  is  further  to  be 
observed,  that,  from  the  circumstance  of  Mar^*  receiving 
his  exaltation  in  Capricorn  (one  of  the  signs  of  the  tri- 
pHcity  ruled  by  Venus),  and  Venus  hers  in  Pisces  (a  sign 
belonging  to  the  triplicity  of  Mars),  it  thence  follows 
that  the  women  have  strong  attachments  and  kindly 
affections  to  their  husbands,  are  vigilant  and  careful  in 
domestic  afFairs,  and  highly  industrious:  they  also  act 
as  servants,  and  labour  for  the  men,  with  all  due  obedi- 
ence, in  every  thing. 

Bithynin,  Phrygia,  and  Colchis,  must  however  be  ex- 
cepted from  sharing  in  this  general  propriety  of  the 
female  character;  for,  as  these  nations  are  chiefly  con- 
nected with  Cancer  and  the  Moon,  their  male  population 
is,  generally  speaking,  slavish  in  itn  habits,  timid  and 
superstitious,  while  the  greater  part  of  the  women,  owing 
to  the  niatutine  and  masculine  position  of  the  Moon,  are 
of  masculine  manners,  ambitious  of  command,  and  war- 
like. Tlie.se  females  shun  the  addresses  of  men,  as  the 
Amazons  did  of  old,  and  delight  in  the  use  of  arms,  and 
in  manly  occupations:  they  also  amputate  the  right 
breasts  of  their  female  children  for  the  sake  of  adapting 
them  to  military  service,  and  in  order  that,  when  in 
combat  and  exposing  that  part  of  their  body,  they  may 
appear  to  be  of  the  male  sex. — Again,  Syria,  Com- 
magene,  and  Cappadocia,  are  principally  influenced  by 
(.1  Scorpio  and  Mam ;  and  their  inhabitants  are  accordingly 
'  lM)ld,  wicked,  treacherous,  and  laborious.     Lydia,  Cilicia. 


'<•  Ou^fuL  4  2AJk*iC.I.(^.  Af^v**-^  j  *rzl;^2^i^a*-^  c^fr^  rffi^G 


I    I 


Chap.  Ill]  PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  75 

and  Pamphylia,  have  a  great  familiarity  with  Pisces  and 
Jupiter ;  whence  their  inhabitants  are  wealthy,  of  mer- 
cantile habits,  living  in  freedom  and  community,  faithful 
to  their  engagements,  and  honest  in  their  dealings. 

The  remaining  quadrant  is  the  vast  tract  known  by 
the  general  name  of  Libya.  Its  several  parts,  dis- 
tinguished by  the  particular  names  of  Numidia,  Carthage, 
Africa*,  Fhazania,  Nasamonitis,  Garamantica,  Mauritania,. 
Getulia,  and  Metagonitis,  are  situated  in  the  south-west 
of  the  entire  earth,  and  have  due  familiarity  with  the 
south-west  triplicity,  composed  of  Cancer,  Scorpio,  and 
Pisces;  their  rulers  therefore  are  Mars  and  Venus,  in 
vespertine  position.  From  this  figuration  of  the  planets 
it  results  that  the  dwellers  in  these  regions  are  doubly 
governed  by  a  man  and  woman,  who  are  both  children  of 
the  same  mother ;  the  man  rules  the  males,  and  the 
woman  the  females.  They  are  extremely  hot  in  constitu- 
tion, and  desirous  of  women ;  their  marriages  are  Uvsually 
made  by  violence,  and  in  many  districts  the  local  princes 
first  enjoy  the  brides  of  their  subjects :  in  some  places,, 
however,  the  women  are  common  to  all.  The  influence 
of  Venus  causes  the  whole  people  to  delight  in  personal 
ornaments,  and  in  being  arrayed  in  female  attire  ;  never- 
theless, that  of  Mars  renders  them  courageous,  crafty ,^ 
addicted  to  magic,  and  fearleas  of  dangers. 

Again,  however,  of  the  above-named  countries,  Nu- 
midia, Carthage,  and  Africa,  are  more  particularly  in 
familiarity  with  Cancer  and  the  Moon  :  their  inhabitants,. 

*  The  name  of  Africa  was,  in  Ptolemy's  time,  limited  to  those 
parte  of  the  coast  on  the  Mediterranean  which  contained  the  anticnt 
Utica,  and  in  which  Tunis  now  stands.  Josephus  says  the  name  is 
derived  from  Afer,  (one  of  the  posterity  of  Abraham  by  Cethurah> 
who  is  stated  to  have  led  an  army  into  Libya,  and  to  have  established 
himself  in  the  country.  This  Afer  is,  of  course,  the  same  with  Epher, 
mentioned  in  the  fourth  verse  of  the  25th  chapter  of  Genesis,  as  a  son 
of  Midian,  one  of  the  sons  of  Abraham  by  his  concubine  Keturah. 


76  Ptolemy's  tetkabiblos.  [Book  11, 

consequently,  live  in  community,  attend  to  mercantile 
pursuits,  and  enjoy  abundantly  all  the  blessings  of  nature. 
The  natives  of  Metagonitis,  Mauritania,  and  Getulia,  are 
influenced  liy  Scorpio  and  Mars,  and  are  consecjuently 
ferocious  and  pugnacious  in  the  highest  degree  ;  eaters  ol' 
human  flesh,  utterly  indifferent  to  danger,  and  so  regard- 
less and  prodigal  of  blood,  as  to  alay  each  other  without 
hesitation  on  the  slightest  cause.  The  people  in  Phazania, 
Nasamonitis,  ahd  Garamantica,  are  connected  with  Pisces 
and  Jupiter,  and  are  accordingly  frank  and  simple  in 
manners,  fond  of  employment,  well  disposed,  fond  of  the 
decencies  of  life,  and,  for  the  most  part,  free  and  un- 
restrained in  their  actions :  they  worship  Jupiter  by  the 
name  of  Ammon. 

The  other  parts  of  this  quadrant,  which  lie  near  the 
middle  of  the  entire  earth,  are  Cyrenaiea,  Manimrica, 
jtlgypt,  Thebais,  Oasis,  Troglodytica,  Arabia,  Azania,  and 
Middle  j^thiopia.  These  countries,  being  situated  in  the 
north-east  of  their  quadrant,  have  due  familiarity  with 
the  north-east  triplicity  (consisting  of  Gemini,  Libra,  and 
Aquarius),  and  are  governed  by  Saturn  and  Jupiter,  and 
alio  by  Mercury.  Their  inhabitants,  therefore,  partici- 
pate in  the  influence  of  all  the  five  planets  in  vespertine 
figuration,  and  consequently  cherish  due  love  and  rever- 
ence for  the  gods,  and  dedicate  themselves  to  their 
service.  They  are  addicted  to  sepulchral  ceremonies; 
and,  owing  to  the  said  vespertine  position,  they  bury 
their  dead  in  the  earth  *,  aud  remove  them  from  the 


*  It  does  not  appear  why  this  practice  should  have  beea  remarkeJ 
oa  a  DKliooal  pecatiarity,  unless  in  dutinctiou  froiu  the  oostoiu  of 
burning  the  dead  among  the  Gre«k4  and  Honiana.  iDteriuent  ix 
recorded  as  liaviog  been  iisuat  aiuuog  the  .Jewa,  and  it  u  known  to 
have  been  cummon  among  many  antienC  barbarous  nations. 

A  conjecture  may  perhaps  be  allowed,  tliat  the  author,  when  he 
wrote  this  possotK,  lioil  ia  Lin  miud  the  iua)^Dit)cent  suburraoeaD 


Chap,  III.]  Ptolemy's  tetrabiblos.  77 

pablic  eye.  They  ase  various  laws  and  customs,  and 
worship  divers  gods.  In  a  state  of  subjection,  they  are 
submissive,  cowardly,  abject,  and  most  patient;  but 
when  they  command,  they  are  brave,  generous,  and 
high-minded.  Polygamy  is  frequent  among  them,  and 
practised  by  the  women  as  well  as  the  men :  they  are 
most  licentious  in  sexual  intercourse,  and  allow  in- 
cestuous commerce  between  brothers  and  sisters.  Both 
men  and  women  are  extraordinarily  prolific,  and  corre- 
spond in  this  respect  with  the  fecundity  of  their  soil. 
Many  of  the  men  are,  however,  effeminate  and  debased 
in  mind,  in  consequence  of  the  figuration  of  the  malefics, 
together  with  the  vespertine  position  of  Venus ;  and  some 
of  them  mutilate  their  persons*. 

Among  these  last  named  countries,  Cyrenaica,  Mar- 
marica,  and  particularly  Lower  iEgypt,  are  chiefly 
influenced  by  Gemini  and  Mercury :  the  natives  are 
therefore  highly  intellectual  and  sensible,  and  gifted 
with  capacity  for  every  undertaking;  above  all,  for  the 
attainment  of  wisdom,  and  an  insight  into  divine  mys- 
teries. They  are  also  magicians,  performing  secret  rites 
and  ceremonies,  and  are  in  every  respect  calculated  for  the 
prosecution  of  all  scientific  inquiry  f.     The  inhabitants 

palaces,  constructed  for  the  dead,  in  parts  of  the  region  in  question  ; 
some  of  which  have  been  recently  made  known  to  the  modern  world 
by  the  sagacity  and  enterprize  of  the  celebrated  Belzoni. 

•  Ttnt  ^«  ««i  ««'«^^*»r<  Tif  yi99itltxtt9  juiXw*. — The  "contempt"  here 
expressed  by  *m\m^^§ftiei  has  been  taken  by  all  translators  (except 
Whalley)  to  signify  "mutilation." 

t  History  warrants  the  high  encomium  here  given  to  the  natives 
of  these  countries,  -^gypt  was  the  acknowleded  mother  of  the  arts 
and  sciences,  and  at  one  time  the  great  dep6t  of  all  the  learning  of 
the  worhl :  her  school  of  astronomy  (a  science  which  our  author  may 
be  suf  posed  to  have  placed  in  the  first  rank),  founded  at  Alexandria 
by  Ptolemy  Philadelphus,  maintained  its  superior  reputation  for  a 
thousand  years.  Cyrenaica  gave  birth  to  many  illustrious  philoso- 
phers, and,  among  them,   to   Eratosthenes,  who  is  said  to  have 


78  itolemy's  TETRAfliBLos.  [Book  IT. 

of  Thebaia,  Oaais,  and  Troglodytica,  are  connected  with 
Libra  and  Venus ;  they  are  of  warmer  constitution,  and 
more  hasty  disposition,  and  enjoy  life  in  all  its  plenitude 
and  abundance.  The  natives  of  Arabia,  Azania,  and 
Middle  ^Ethiopia,  have  familiarity  with  Aquarius  and 
Saturn  ;  they  consequently  feed  on  flesh  and  fish  indis- 
criminately, and  live  in  a  state  of  dispersion  like  wild 
beasts;  they  never  unite  in  society,  hut  lead  a  wandering 
and  savage  life. 

The  familiarities  exercised  by  the  Planets,  and  by  the 
Signs  of  the  Zodiac,  together  with  the  manners,  customs, 
and  qualities,  particular  as  well  as  general,  which  they 
produce,  have  now  been  concisely  described;  but  in 
order  to  facilitate  the  knowledge  and  use  of  them,  the 
subjoined  table  is  inserted,  to  show,  at  one  view,  what 
countries  are  in  connection  with  each  sign,  respectively, 
according  to  the  mode  above  detailed. 


invented  the  arniillary  sphere.  TIiih  great  man  meuured  the  obli- 
quity of  tlie  cclii>tic,  and  tliuugli  he  erroneooil;  reckoned  it  at  only 
20}  degrees,  it  shoutii  be  recoUecIed  that  lie  lived  tiOO  years  before 
the  Clirislian  icra.  He  tim  iiiea.-areil  a  degree  of  the  meridian,  and 
itetermined  the  extent  uf  the  earth  by  means  niniilar  to  those  adopteil 
by  the  DioderDS. 


r«t 


^t*^  «itt«,>»^  f*A«c:U  ( *i^t-^.  ya.:,'.h.tr.  tjrw-*j.  *-si-* 


Okap.  III.]  Ptolemy's  tetrabiblos. 


1 

1 

1 

j 

1 

1 

i\i\4i 

1 

Hi 

JOB, 

^ 

s 

f 

1 

S 

an 

1 

■5 

1 

fill 

111 

"!^  III 

1 

i 

■i 

.s 

■s 

Hi 

1 

1 

■3 
1 

IB:  J 

|l|  %M 

1 

HI 

i 

1 

1 

i 

z 

1 

m 

J  if 

f  1  m 

^    1 

i 

5 

1 

i 

.» 

1 

III. 

Hit 

1 
1 

^l| 

1 

1 

1 

!lii^ 

1 

1 

-III 

u 

I'm 

1 

1 

PillP 

^5  : 

! 

1 

|6 

^^  ■ 
111 

IF 

hi 

ITOLEMV'S  TET1(AHII1I.0 


[SmA-   II. 


eEhaptcr  IV, 

The  Familiarity  of  tiu:  Regimis  uf  the  Earth  vUh  thf 

Jix^-d  Stars. 
Is  addition  to  the  rules  which  have  been  alreaily  given, 
respecting  the  familiarity  of  the  regions  of  the  earth 
with  the  sif;n3  and  planets,  it  must  he  observed,  that  all 
fixed  stars  which  may  he  posited  on  any  line,  drawn  from 
one  zodiacal  pole  to  the  other,  through  such  parts  of  the- 
;^odifle  as  may  be  connected  with  any  particular  country, 
are  aiso  in  familiarity  with  that  particular  country. 

And,  with  regard  to  metropolitan  cities,  it  ia  necessary 
to  state,  that  those  points  or  degrees  of  the  zodiac,  over 
which  the  Sun  and  Moon  were  in  transit,  at  the  time 
when  the  construction  of  any  auch  city  was  first  under- 
taken and  commenced,  are  to  be  considered  as  sym- 
pathizing with  that  city  in  an  especial  manner;  and  that. 
among  the  angles,  the  ascendant  is  principally  in  accor- 
dance with  it.  In  certain  cases,  however,  where  the  date 
of  foundation  of  a  metropolis  cannot  be  ascertained,  the 
mid-heaven  in  the  nativity  of  the  reigning  king,  or 
other  actual  chief  magistrate,  is  to  be  substituted,  and 
considered  as  that  part  of  the  zodiac  with  which  it 
chiefly  sympathizes  •. 


Qthaytcr  V. 

Mode  of  particular  Prediction  in  Eclipses. 
After  having  gone  through  the  necessary  preliminary 
topics,  it  is  now  proper  to  speak  of  the  manner  in  which 
predictions  are  to  be  formed  and  considered  ;  beginning 

*  \Vhiill(>y  reiiiArlcB  on  IIiik  paI^»aKe,  that  the  gradual  prui^ress  of 
ihe  lixed  hIbth  "  from  oae  sign  lo  anotlier,  i»  in  aa  especial  maDiier 
"  to  I>e  regnrded  in  cooidderlii);  th?  mutation?, 
'  laws,  government,  and  fortune  of  a  kioKiioni." 


Gimp.  VI.]  PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  81 

with  those  which  relate  to  general  events,  affecting  either 
certain  cities,  or  districts,  or  entire  countries. 

The  strongest  and  principal  cause  of  all  these  events 
exists  in  the  ecliptical  conjunctions  of  the  Sun  and  Moon, 
and  in  the  several  transits  made  by  the  planets  during 
those  conjunctions. 
/,  One  part  of  the  observations,  required  in  forming  pre- 
diction in  cases  of  this  nature,  relates  to  the  locality  of 
the  event,  and  points  out  the  cities  or  countries  liable  to 
be  influenced  by  particular  eclipses,  or  by  occasional 
continued  stations  of  certain  planets,  which  at  times 
remain  for  a  certain  period  in  one  situation.  These 
planets  are  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars ;  and  they  furnish 
portentous  indications,  when  they  are  stationary. 

2.  Another  branch  relates  to  time,  and  gives  pre-infor- 
mation  of  the  period  at  which  the  event  will  occur,  and 
how  long  it  will  continue  to  operate. 

3.     The  third  branch  is  generic ;  and  points  out  the  classes, 
or  kinds,  which  the  event  will  affect. 

/^.  The  last  part  is  specific;  and  foreshows  the  actual 
quality  and  character  of  the  coining  event. 

arhnptcr  VI. 

Tlte  Regions  or  Gowntries  to  he  considered  as  liable  to  he 

comprehended  in  the  Event. 

The  first  of  the  several  branches  of  consideration  just 
enumerated  relates  to  locality,  and  is  to  be  exercised  in 
the  following  manner : — 

In  all  eclipses  of  the  Sun  and  Moon,  and  especially  in 
such  as  are  fully  visible,  the  place  in  the  zodiac,  where 
the  eclipse  happens,  is  to  be  noted ;  and  it  must  be  seen 
what  countries  are  in  familiarity  with  that  place,  accord- 
ing to  the  rules  laid  down  regarding  the  quadrants  and 
the  triplicities ;  and  in  like  manner  it  must  be  observed 

o 


82  PTOLEMY'S  TETRAHIBLOS.  [Bock   II. 

what  cities  are  under  tlie  influence  of  the  sign  in  whicli 
tlie  eclipse  tiappens;  either  by  means  of  the  ascendant, 
and  the  situations  of  the  luniinarieN  at  the  time  nf  their 
foundation,  or  by  inean.s  of  the  mid-heaven  of  their 
kings  or  governors,  actually  ruling  at  the  time  of  the 
eclipse;  although  such  time  may  be  subsequent  to  the 
building  of  the  said  cities.  Whatever  countries  or  cities 
shall  be  thus  found  in  familiarity  with  the  ecliptical 
place,  will  all  be  comprehended  in  the  event;  which  will, 
however,  principally  attach  to  all  those  parts  which  may 
be  connected  with  the  identical  sign  of  the  eclipse*,  and 
in  which  it  was  visible  while  above  the  earth  t- 

eiiapter  VII 

The  Tivie  and  Period  of  the  Event. 
The  second  point  requiring  attention  relates  to  time,  and 
indicates  the  date  when  the  event  will   take  place,  and 
the  period  during  which  its  effect  will  continue:  these 
are  to  be  ascertained  in  the  following  manner. 

It  must,  however,  be  premised,  that  as  an  eclipse, 
occurring  at  any  particular  season,  cannot  happen  in  all 
climates  at  the  same  temporal  or  solar  hour^,  so  neither 
will  the  magnitude  of  the  obscuration,  nor  the  time  of 
its  continuance,  be  equal  in  all  parts  of  the  world.     First, 

*  As  ehou'n  in  the  Tabli:  al  pafje  70. 

f  It  does  not  ftppcAr  that  the  text  here  warrants  tiio  coDclaBieii 
-which  Whailey  has  drawn  from  it,  viz.  "thai  wherever  eelipaea  »r« 
"  not  visible,  they  hava  no  iulluence.  tin<l  therefore  xuhturriuieAii 
■'  eolipseB  fannot  have  ntiy."  Pioleiny  deulares,  that  all  oouiitriu- 
in  familiarity  with  the  ecliptical  plftH  will  be  iximpreliendeil  in  the 
event :  and,  with  regard  to  the  visihilily  or  iDvisibility  of  the  eclipse, 
be  says  merely  that  its  efleetH  nit]  be  prinfipallii  folt  in  bucIi  of  Ihii 
naid  countries  a£  might  have  obtainwl  a  view  nf  the  eoiipne. 

I  Trmpornl  or  solar  lionrii  ivre  duodecimal  parte  of  the  Sun's  diurnal 
or  nocturnal  arc,  anil  are  nnmbered  by  day  from  Bun-riiie  to  sun-set; 
Ijy  night,  from  Run-set  to  snn-iise. 


Chap,  VII.]  PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  83 

therefore,  (as  is  done  in  a  nativity)  the  angles  are  to  be 
arranged,  in  every  country  connected  with  the  eclipse, 
according  to  the  hour  at  which  the  eclipse  takes  place 
and  the  elevation  of  the  pole  in  that  country.  The  time, 
during  which  the  obscuration  of  the  eclipse  may  continue 
in  each  country,  is  then  to  be  noted  in  equatorial  hours*. 
And,  after  these  particulars  have  been  carefully  observed, 
it  is  to  be  understood  that  the  effect  will  endure  as  many 
years  as  the  obscuration  lasted  hours,  provided  the  eclipse 
was  solar,  but  if  lunar,  a  like  number  of  months  is  to  be 
reckoned  instead  of  years. 

The  commencement  of  the  effect,  and  the  period  of  its 
general  intensity,  or  strength,  are  to  be  inferred  from  the 
situation  of  the  place  of  the  eclipse  with  respect  to  the 
angles.  For,  if  the  ecliptical  place  be  near  the  eastern 
horizon,  the  effect  will  begin  to  be  manifested  in  the 
<50urse  of  the  first  four  months  after  the  date  of  the 
eclipse;  and  its  general  height,  or  intensity,  will  take 
place  in,  or  about,  the  first  third  part  of  the  whole  ex- 
tent of  its  duration.  If  the  ecliptical  place  happen  to 
be  in  or  near  the  mid-heaven,  the  effect  will  begin  to 
appear  in  the  second  four  months,  and  its  general  in- 
tensity will  occur  about  the  second  third  part ;  and,  if 
the  place  should  fall  near  the  western  horizon,  the  effect 
will  begin  in  the  third  four  months,  and  take  its  general 
intensity  in  the  last  third  part  of  its  whole  duration  -f-. 


*  Equatorial  hours  are  the  twenty-four  hours  of  the  earth's  revolu- 
tion on  its  axis.  Each  of  thetn  is  equal  in  duration  to  the  passage 
of  15  <legrees  of  the  Equator ;  and  they  are  numbered  from  noon  to 
noon.  A  particular  explanation  of  the  astronomical  use,  both  of 
temporal  and  equatorial  hours,  is  to  be  found  in  the  9th  Chapter  of 
the  second  Book  of  the  Almagest ;  an  extract  from  which  is  given  in 
the  Appendix. 

t  The  three  periods  of  four  months  each,  stated  in  this  paragraph, 
are  applicable  to  solar  eclipses  only  ;  for  lunar  eclipses,  these  periods 
may  be  reckoned  at  ten  days  each ;  that  number  of  days  bearing  the 


j^'lt-jJt^ 


Partial  iDtensities,  or  relaxations  of  the  effect,  are, 
however,  to  be  inferred  from  any  combinations  which 
may  happen  during  the  intermediate  period  •.  either  in 
the  actual  places  where  the  primary  cause  v/aa  presented, 
ot  in  other  places  configured  therewith.  Thoy  are  also 
to  be  conjectured  by  the  various  courses,  or  transits,  of 
such  planets  as  co-operate  in  producing  the  effect,  by 
being  configured  with  the  sign  in  which  the  primary 
cause  was  situated ;  and,  with  this  view,  the  matutine. 
vespertine,  or  stationary  position,  or  midnight  culmin- 
ation of  those  planets  must  be  observed;  for  the  effect 
will  be  strengthened  and  augmented  by  their  matutine 
or  stationary  position ;  but  weakened  and  diminished  by 
their  being  veapertine,  or  situated  under  the  sunbeams. 
or  by  their  midnight  culmination. 

(KhajJtEr  VIII. 

The  GenuK,  GUies,  or  Kind,  liable  to  be  affected. 
The  third  division  of  these  observations  relates  to  the 
mode  of  distinguishing  the  genus,  or  species,  of  animals 
or  things  about  to  sustain  the  expected  effect.  This 
distinction  is  made  by  means  of  the  conformation  and 
peculiar  properties  of  those  signs  in  which  the  place  of 
the  eclipse,  and  the  places  of  such  fixed  stars  and  planet.^, 
as  are  in  dominion  according  to  the  actual  sign  uf  the 

aarne  proportbii  to  b,  month,  u  four  tnontliB  to  b,  year.  On  thi» 
point,  Whalley,  with  his  uauat  inacciirocj,  has  asnerled,  Chat  "in 
"  eclipF«i<  of  the  Moon,  two  Any*,  or  thereabouts,  are  equal  to  the 
four  months"  here  reukoned  in  eclipses  of  the  Sun.  He  adde,  how- 
ever, what  perhaps  lua J  be  true,  that  "  lunar  etiipnes  are  by  no  means 
"  BO  powerful  ai  tlioxe  of  the  Sun,  althonirh  more  «o  than  any  ottier 
"  liuiation." 

*  Tbftt  U  to  nay,  from  any  combinationH  of  the  Una  ami  Moon 
which  maj'  take  place  after  the  date  of  the  et'lipae,  but  before  the 
oloM  of  iU  elTtcl, 


Chap,  VIII.]         PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  85 

eclipse,  and  that  of  the  an^le  before  it,  may  be  found. 
And  a  planet,  or  fixed  star,  is  to  be  considered  as  holding 
dominion  when  circumstanced  as  follows. 

If  there  be  found  one  planet  having  more  numerous 
claims  than  any  other  to  the  place  of  the  eclipse,  as  well 
as  to  that  of  the  angle,  being  also  in  the  immediate 
vicinity  of  those  places,  and  visibly  applying  to,  or 
receding  from  them,  and  having  likewise  more  rights 
over  other  places  connected  with  them  by  configuration  ; 
the  said  planet  being,  at  the  same  time,  lord  by  house, 
triplicity,  exaltation,  and  terms ;  in  such  a  case,  only  that 
single  planet  is  entitled  to  dominion.  But,  if  the  lord 
of  the  eclipse  and  the  lord  of  the  angle  be  not  identical, 
then  those  two  planets  which  have  most  connections 
with  each  place  are  to  be  noted ;  and,  of  these  two,  the 
lord  of  the  eclipse  is  to  be  preferred  to  the  chief  dominion, 
"  although  the  other  is  to  be  considered,  as  bearing  rule 
"  conjointly  "  *  And  if  more  than  two  should  be  found, 
having  equal  -  pretensions  to  each  place,  that  particular 
one  among  them  which  may  be  nearest  to  an  angle,  or 
most  concerned  with  the  places  in  question,  by  the  nature 
of  its  condition,  is  to  be  selected  for  dominion  +. 

But,  among  the  fixed  stars,  the  chief  bright  one 
(which,  during  the  time  of  the  eclipse,  may  hold  connec- 
tion, in  any  of  the  nine  modes  of  apparent  configuration 
detailed  in  the  First  SyntaxisJ  with  the  angles  then 
actually  in  passage)  is  to  be  admitted  to  dominion ;  as 

*  The  edition  of  Allatus  does  not  contain  the  words  here  marked 
by  inverte<l  commas ;  Imt  they  are  found  in  other  editions  of  the  text, 
and  »eein  necessary  to  complete  the  sense  of  the  passage. 

+  **  When  planets,  in  election  for  Lords  of  the  eclipse,  are  found 
"  of  equal  strength  and  dignity,  those  which  are  direct  are  to  be 
**  preferred  before  those  which  are  retrograde ;  and  the  oriental  before 
**  the  occidental"— Jf'Aa//ey'*  *' Annotations:' 

t  That  b  to  say,  in  the  Almagest,  Book  8,  Chap  4 ;  which  chapter 
is  given,  entire,  in  the  Appendix. 


86  Ptolemy's  tetrabiblos.  [Book  II, 

also  that  one  which,  at  the  ecliptical  hour,  uiay  be  in 
an  eminent  Rituation,  either  having  risen,  or  having 
culminated  with  the  angle  following  the  place  of  the 
eclipse  •. 

Having  considered,  according  to  the  foregoing  rules, 
what  stars  co-operate  in  regulating  the  coming  event, 
the  conformation  and  figure  of  the  signs,  in  which  the 
eclipse  takes  [>iace  and  the  said  ruling  stars  may  be 
posited,  are  alao  to  be  observed  ;  and,  from  the  properties 
and  characteristics  of  those  signs,  the  genus,  or  species,  to 
be  comprehended  in  the  event,  is  chiefly  to  be  inferred. 

For  instance,  should  the  zodiacal  constellations,  and 
those  of  the  ruling  fixed  stars  out  of  the  zodiac,  be  of 
human  shape,  the  effect  will  fail  upon  the  human  race. 
If  the  signs  be  not  of  human  shape,  but  yet  terrestrial,  or 
quadrupedal,  the  event  would  be  indicated  to  happen  t<' 
animals  of  similar  form :  the  signs  shaped  like  reptiles 
signify  that  .serpents  and  creatures  of  that  description 
will  be  aff'ected ;  those  bearing  the  figure  of  ferocious 
beasts  denote  that  the  event  will  affect  savage  and  de- 
structive animals;  and  those  figured  like  tame  beasts 
show  that  it  will  operate  on  animals  serviceable  to  man- 
kind, anil  of  domestic  character;  as  intimated  by  the 
shape  and  figure  of  the  signs,  whether  resembling  horses, 
oxen,  sheep,  or  any  other  useful  animals. — In  addition 
to  this,  the  terrestrial  signs  situated  in  the  north,  about 
the  Arctic  circle,  indicate  sudden  earthquakes  ;  and  those 
in  the  south,  .sudden  deluges  of  rain.     And  .should  the 

*  "  In  electing  lixeH  sUtre,  CitrclBn  ilirevU  to  obmrve  tbe  ingle 
"  which  the  eclipM  folIowB,  and  that  which  it  precedes  :  as,  if  the 
"  eclipM  l>e  between  the  seventh  house"  (or  uctidental  angle)  "and 
"  the  mid-heaven,  tbe  Btais  which  are  in  the  seventh  shall  be  pre- 
"  ferred  :  and  next,  those  in  tbe  luid-heaven  ;  but,  if  between  tbe 
"  niid-beaven  and  the  ascendant,  those  in  the  mid-beaven  shall  have 
"  tbe  preference;  and  next,  those  in  the  maceudaDt."^Whalle!/'t 
"Annolaliim*." 


iLEMYS   TETBABIBLU 


sr 


Chap.  VIII] 

ruling  places  be  .situated  in  nin;ns  nlmped  like  winged 
unimuls,  as  in  that  of  Acjuila.  or  in  others  of  similar 
form,  the  event  will  tike  efl'ect  on  birds ;  and  will  chiefly 
attach  to  those  which  affoni  food  to  man.  IE  the  said 
places  should  be  in  sign.s  formed  like  creature.s  which 
swim,  and  in  marine  signx,  such  as  Delphinus,  the  effect 
will  be  felt  by  marine  animals,  and  in  the  navigation  of 
fleets;  if  in  river  signs,  Mich  as  Aquarius  and  Pisces,  it 
will  attach  to  animals  living  in  rivers  and  in  fresh  water ; 
and,  if  in  Argo,  both  sea  and  fresh-water  aniniab  will  be 
aflected  by  it*. 

Again,  shuiild  the  ruling  places  be  situated  in  tropical 
or  in  equinoctial  signs,  in  either  case  alike  they  presignify 
changes  in  the  stale  of  the  atinoHphere,  at  the  respective 
season  to  which  each  sign  is  appropriated.  For  example 
with  rcf-ard  tn  the  season  of  spring  nnd  the  productions 
of  the  earth,  if  the  said  places  .should  be  in  the  sign  of 
the  vernal  equinox,  they  will  produce  an  effect  on  the 
buds  of  the  vine  and  fig,  and  of  such  other  trees  as  sprout 
forth  at  that  sea-son.  Should  they  be  in  the  sign  of  the 
summer  tropic,  the  event  will  afl'ect  the  gathering  and 
■lepo.-iiling  of  fruits ;  and,  with  respect  to  j?igypt  in  par- 
ticular, it  will  impede  the  rising  of  the  Nile.  If  they 
should  be  in  the  sign  of  the  autumnal  equinox,  they 
foreshow  that  it  will  operate  on  grain  and  on  various 
sorts  of  herbs;  if  in  the  sign  of  the  winter  tropic,  on 
potherb»,  esculent  vegetables,  and  such  birds  and  fishes 
an  arrive  in  that  season. 

The  equinoctial  signs  further  indicate  the  circum- 
stances liable  to  happen  in  ecclesiastical  concerns,  and 

*  It  i«  perhnpi-  tinnecemarj-  to  remark,  th&t,  in  speaking  of  ruling 
plwwH.  ft^  liaMe  Ui  be  sitiUiUd  in  AiguiU,  DelpliinDB  or  Ar^,  Ptolemy 
MUndw  only  to  the  pl&cea  of  the  flxed  iCars  in  dorainion  :  since  tlie 
eoliptical  plat.'e  and  the  pluiets  moat  be  confined  to  tbe  zoditcnl 


88  PTOLEMV's  TETRABIBLOS.  \Book   II. 

in  religiouB  matters ;  tlie  tropical  signs  give  warning  of 
changes  in  the  atmosphere  and  in  political  affairs;  the 
lixed  signs,  of  changes  in  institutions  and  in  buililings; 
tind  the  hicorporeal  signs  show  that  the  future  event 
will  fall  alike  on  princes  and  their  subjects. 

Again,  the  ruling  places  situated  in  the  east,  during 
the  time  of  the  eclipse,  signify  that  fruits  and  seeds,  in- 
cipient institutions,  and  the  age  of  youth,  will  be  atTected . 
those  which  may  be  in  the  mid-heaven  above  the  earth 
announce  that  the  coming  event  will  relate  to  ecclesi- 
astical affairs,  to  kings  and  princes,  and  to  the  middle 
age;  those  in  the  weat,  that  it  will  induence  the  laws, 
old  age,  and  persons  about  to  die. 

The  proportion  liable  to  be  affected,  of  that  genus  or 
kind  on  which  the  event  will  fall,  is  to  be  a^icertained  by 
the  magnitude  of  the  obscuration  caused  by  the  eclipse, 
and  by  the  positions  held  by  the  operative  stars  in  regard 
to  the  ecliptical  place;  as,  in  vespertine  position  to  a 
solar  eclipse,  or  in  inatutine  position  to  a  lunar  eclipse, 
the  said  stars  will  ujost  usually  much  diminish  the 
effect; — in  opposition  they  render  tt  moderate; — hut  in 
matutine  position  to  a  solar  eclipse,  or  in  vespertine  tn  a 
lunar,  they  greaily  augment  and  extend  it*. 


Chapter  IX. 

The  (jwdili/  ami  Nature  of  tbt  Effect. 
TU£  discrimination  of  the  peculiar  properties  and  char- 
acter of  the  offi'ct  about  to  he  produced,  and  of  it<4  good 
or  evil  nature,  occupies  the  fourth  and  last  division  of 
this  part  of  the  subject, 

"  According  (o  Wlmllvy,  Cardiiii.  in  referente  to  thn  nine  nii»le»  of 
i-'oiitiguraliun,  a|>plkable  to  the  lixei)  atom,  oays,  "  When  a  lixeil  itAT 
•'  ifl  with  any  pinnet,  or  in  any  angle,  eousiiler  whether  it  ba  liy  any 
"  of  lliene  wayii ;  if  uol,  it  in  iiiOHt  weak  ;  if  it  be.  uunxiiler  wlietlier  il 


Chxup.  IX.]  PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  89 

These  properties  must  be  gathered  from  the  power  of 
the  stars  which  control  the  ruling  places,  and  from  the 
contemperament  created  by  their  relative  admixture  with 
each  other  and  with  the  places  which  they  controul. 
For,  although  the  Sun  and  the  Moon  are  the  acknow- 
ledged sources  of  all  the  efficacy  and  dominion  of  the 
stars,  and  of  their  strength  or  weakness,  and  in  a  certain 
manner  regulate  and  command  them,  still,  it  is  by  the 
theory  of  the  contemperament,  produced  by  the  stars  in 
dominion,  that  the  effect  is  indicated. 

In  order  to  understand  the  indications  thus  made,  it  is 
necessary  to  begin  by  attending  to  the  following  detail  of 
the  effective  property  of  each  planet — previously  observ- 
ing, however,  that,  when  any  circumstance  is  said,  for 
the  sake  of  brevity,  to  come  to  pass  by  the  general 
influence  of  the  five  planets,  their  temperament,  and  the 
power  and  assistance  they  may  derive  from  natures 
similar  to  their  own,  the  actual  continuance  of  their  own 
proper  constitution,  or  the  casual  combination  of  any 
analogous  influence,  arising  from  fixed  stars  or  places  in 
the  zodiac,  are  all,  at  the  same  time,  to  be  kept  in  view. 
Consequently,  whenever  any  general  remark  is  herein 
made  relative  to  the  five  planets,  it  will  likewise  be 
necessary  to  bear  in  mind  both  their  temperament  and 
quality ;  as  fully,  indeed,  as  if  the  stars  themselves  had 
not  been  named,  but  only  their  effective  quality  and 
nature.  And,  it  is  further  to  be  remembered,  that,  in 
every  case  of  compound  temperament,  not  only  the 
combination  of  the  planets  with  each  other  requires  to 
be  considered,  but  also  that  of  such  fixed  stars  and 
zodiacal  places  as  share  in  the  natures  of  the  planets,  by 


<i 


be  with  the  Sun,  and  not  to  be  seen  ;  then  it  is  very  weak.     Or  if 
*'  it  is  to  be  seen,  and  iH  with  the  Sun  occidental,  it  is  indifferent. 
Or  if  it  be  seen,  and  is  not  with  the  Sun,  it  is  stronger  ;  or  if  it  be 
seen,  and  is  oriental,  then  it  is  strongest." 


90 


[Book  II. 


being  respectively  connecteil  with  tliem  according  to  the 
f&miliaritieK  already  describeil. 

Hence,  when  Saturn  may  be  sole  governor,  he  will 
produce  disasters  concomitant  with  cold.  Anil,  in  as  far 
as  the  event  may  apply  to  the  human  race  in  particular, 
it  will  induce  among  men  lingering  diseaaes.  consump- 
tions, declines,  rheumatisms,  disorders  from  watery 
humours.  an<l  attacks  of  the  quartan  ague ;  as  well  an 
exile,  poverty,  and  a  general  ma.ss  of  evils,  griefs,  and 
alarms  :  deaths  also  will  be  frequent,  but  chieHy  among 
persons  advanced  in  ago.  That  part  of  the  brute  crea- 
tion which  is  most  serviceable  to  man  will  likewise 
suffer,  and  he  destroyed  by  disease;  and  men  who  make 
use  of  the  animals  thus  diseased  will  be  infected  by 
them,  'and  perish  with  them.  The  atrao.sphere  will 
become  dreadfully  chill  and  frosty,  unwholesome,  turbid 
and  gloomy,  presenting  only  clouds  and  pestilence. 
Copious  ami  destructive  storms  of  snow  and  hail 
wilt  descend,  generating  and  fostering  insects  and 
reptiles  noxious  to  mankind.  In  rivers,  and  at  sea, 
tempests  will  be  frequent  and  general,  causing  disastrous 
voyages  and  many  shipwrecks;  and  even  fish  will  be 
destroyed.  The  waters  of  the  sea  will  retire  for  a  time, 
and  again  return  and  produce  inundations ;  rivers  will 
overHow  their  banks,  and  cause  stagnant  pools  ;  aud  the 
fruits  of  the  earth,  especially  such  ai  are  necessary  to 
sustain  life,  will  be  lost  and  cut  off  bj  blight,  locusts, 
Hoods,  rains,  hail,  or  some  similar  agency  ;  and  the  loss 
will  be  so  extensive  as  to  threaten  even  famine. 

Jupiter,  if  he  should  be  lord  alone,  will  thoroughly 
improve  and  benefit  all  things.  Among  mankind,  in 
particular,  this  planet  promotes  honour,  happiness,  con- 
tent and  peace,  by  augmenting  all  the  neces.sarie8  and 
comforts  of  life,  and  all  mental  and  bodily  advantages. 
It    induces   also   favours,  beneiits,  and  gifts   emanating 


Chap.   IX.]      PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  91 

from  royalty,  and  adds  greater  lustre  to  kings  them- 
selves, increasing  their  dignity  and  magnanimity:  all 
men,  in  short,  will  share  in  the  prosperity  created  by  its 
influence.  With  regard  to  the  operation  of  the  event  on 
brutes,  those  which  are  domestic  and  adapted  to  man's 
service  will  be  multiplied  and  will  thrive ;  while  others, 
which  are  useless  and  hostile  to  man,  will  be  destroyed. 
The  constitution  of  the  atmosphere  will  be  healthy  and 
temperate,  filled  with  gentle  breezes  and  moisture,  andi 
favourable  to  fruits.  Navigation  will  be  safe  and  suc- 
cessful ;  rivers  will  rise  to  their  just  proportion ;  fruits 
and  grain,  and  all  other  productions  of  the  earth  con- 
ducive to  the  welfare  and  happiness  of  mankind,  will  be 
presented  in  abundance. 

Mars,  when  governing  alone,  generally  causes  such 
mischief  and  .destruction  as  are  concomitant  with  dry- 
ness. And,  among  mankind,  foreign  wars  will  be 
excited,  accompanied  with  intestine  divisions,  captivity, 
slaughter,  insurrections  of  the  people,  and  wrath  of 
princes  against  their  subjects  ;  together  with  sudden  and 
untimely  death,  the  consequence  of  these  disturbances. 
Feverish  disorders,  tertian  agues,  and  haemorrhages  will 
take  place,  and  will  be  rapidly  followed  by  painful 
death,  carrying  eff  chiefly  youthful  persons:  an<l  con- 
flagration, murder,  impiety,  every  infraction  of  the  law, 
adultery,  rape,  robbery,  and  all  kinds  of  violence  will  be 
practised.  The  atmosphere  will  be  parched  by  hot, 
pestilential,  and  blasting  winds,  accompanied  by  drought, 
lightnings,  and  flres  emitted  from  the  sky.  At  sea, 
ships  will  be  suddenly  wrecked  by  the  turbulence  of  the 
wiud  and  strokes  of  lightning.  Rivers  will  fail,  springs 
will  be  dried  up,  and  there  will  be  a  scarcity  of  water 
proper  for  food  and  sustenance.  All  the  creatures  and 
productions  of  the  earth  adapted   to  the  use  of  man,. 


S2  itolbmy's  tetrabiblos.  [Book  II. 

whether  beasts,  grain,  or  fruits,  will  be  damaged  or 
destroyed  by  excessive  heat,  by  storms  of  thunder  and 
lightning,  or  by  violent  winds;  and  whatever  has  been 
deposited  in  store  will  be  destroyed  or  injured  by  fire, 
or  by  heat 

Venus,  alone  in  dominion,  generally  produces  the  same 
effects  aa  Jupiter,  yet  with  greater  suavity  and  more 
agreeably.  Glory,  honour,  and  joy  will  attend  mankind ; 
happy  marriages  will  be  contracted,  and  the  fortunate 
pairs  will  be  blessed  with  numerous  children.  Every 
undertaking  will  proceed  prosperoiisly,  wealth  will  in- 
crease, and  the  conduct  of  human  life  will  be  altogether 
pure,  simple,  and  pious ;  due  reverence  being  paid  to  all 
holy  and  sacred  inrititutiuns.  and  harmony  subsisting 
between  princes  and  their  subjects.  The  weather  also 
will  be  of  a  favourable  temperature,  cooled  by  moistening 
breezes;  the  air  altogether  pure  and  .salubrious,  frequently 
refreshed  by  fertilizing  showers.  Voyages  will  be  per- 
formed in  safety,  and  be  attended  by  success  and  profit. 
Rivers  will  be  improved,  and  receive  their  adequate 
supply  of  waters;  and  all  things  valuable  and  useful  lo 
mankind,  whether  animal  or  vegetable,  will  abundantly 
thrive  and  multiply. 

Mercury,  if  possessing  dominion,  is  usually  conjoined 
with  one  or  other  of  the  planets  beforementioned.  and  is 
conformed  and  assimilated  to  their  natures;  yet  as,  in 
itself,  it  presents  a  certain  addition  to  thetr  power,  this 
planet  increases  the  respective  impulses  of  them  all. 
And,  in  regard  to  the  operation  of  the  event  on  man- 
kind, it  will  [ironiote  industry  and  skill  in  buniness; 
but,  at  the  same  time,  thievish  propensities,  robberies, 
and  plots  of  treachery:  it  configurated  with  the  malefics, 
it  will  produce  calamities  in  navigation,  and  will  also 
n>\  parching  disenses,  quolidiitn  fever,  cough, 


CAap.  IX.]  PTOLEBiY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  9* 

consumption,  and  haemorrhage. — All  parts  of  the  cere- 
monies and  services  of  religion,  the  afiFairs  of  the 
executive  government,  as  well  as  manners,  customs,  and 
laws,  are  disposed  and  regulated  by  this  planet,  con- 
formably to  its  admixture  and  familiarity  with  each  of 
the  others.  And  in  consequence  of  the  dryness  of  its 
nature,  arising  from  its  proximity  to  the  Sun,  and  the 
rapidity  of  its  motion,  it  will  generate  in  the  atmosphere 
turbulent,  sharp,  and  variable  winds,  together  with 
thunders,  meteors,  and  lightnings,  accompanied  by 
sudden  chasms  in  the  earth,  and  earthquakes :  by  these 
means  it  not  unfrequently  occasions  the  destruction  of 
animals  and  plants  assigned  to  the  service  of  mankind. 
Besides  the  foregoing  effects,  it  produces,  when  in 
vespertine  position,  a  diminution  of  waters,  and,  when 
matutine,  an  augmentation. 

Each  of  the  planets,  when  fully  exercising  its  own 
separate  and  distinct  influence,  will  properly  produce  the  ' 
peculiar  effects  above  ascribed  to  it;  but  should  it  be 
combined  with  others,  whether  by  configuration,  by 
familiarity  arising  from  the  sign  in  which  it  may  be 
posited*,  or  by  its  position  towards  the  Sun,  the  coming 
event  will  then  happen  agreeably  to  the  admixture  and 
compound  temperament  which  arise  from  the  whole 
communion  actually  subsisting  among  the  influencing 
powers.  It  would,  however,  be  a  business  of  infinite 
labour  and  innumerable  combinations,  quite  beyond  the 
limits  of  this  treatise,  to  set  forth  fully  every  contem- 
perament  and  all  configurations,  in  every  mode  in  which 
they  can  possibly  exist ;  and  the  knowledge  of  them 
must,  therefore,  be  acquired  by  particular  discrimination 


*  That  is  to  say,  (technically  speaking,)  by  reception,  or  by  being 
posited  in  a  sign  in  which  another  planet  has  a  certain  dignity  or 
prerogative. 


'94  croi-EUY's  TETiumBLos,  [Bookli. 

in  every  instance,  under  the  guidance  of  the  precepts  of 
science. — Yet  the  following  additional  remark  must  not 
be  here  omitted. 

The  nature  of  the  familiarities  dubnisting  between  the 
stars,  lorda  of  the  coming  event,  and  the  countries  or 
cities  over  which  the  event  will  extend,  requires  to  be 
observed ;  for,  should  the  stars  be  benetic,  and  their 
familiarity  with  the  countries  liable  to  sustain  the  effect 
be  unimpeded  by  any  opposing  influence,  they  will  then 
exercise  the  favourable  energies  of  their  own  nature  in 
a  greater  degree.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  when  any 
obstacle  may  intervene  to  obstruct  their  familiarity,  or 
when  they  ihemselve--^  may  be  overpowered  by  some 
opposing  influence,  the  advantages  of  their  operation 
will  be  diminished.  Again,  should  the  stars,  lords  of 
the  coming  event,  not  be  benefic.  but  injurious,  their 
effect  will  be  leas  severe,  provided  they  may  either 
have  familiarity  with  the  countries  on  which  the  event 
will  fall,  or  be  restrained  by  some  opposing  influence. 
IE,  however,  they  .thould  have  no  such  familiarity,  and 
not  be  subjected  to  restraint  by  any  others,  endowed 
with  a  nature  contrary  to  their  own.  and  pas.sessing  a 
familiarity  with  the  countries  in  question,  the  evils 
which  they  produce  will  be  more  violent  and  intense. 
And  all  these  general  aflections,  of  whatever  kind. 
whether  good  or  evil,  will  bo  principally  felt  by  those 
persons  in  whose  individual  nativities  there  may  be 
found  the  same  disposition  of  the  luminaries,  (which  arc 
the  most  essential  significators,)  or  the  same  angW,  an 
those  existing  during  the  eclipse  which  operates  the 
general  artection.  The  same  remark  equally  applies  to 
other  persons,  in  whose  nativities  the  disposition  of  the 
luminaries  and  of  the  angles  may  be  in  opposition  to 
that  existing  during  the  eclipse.  With  respect  to  these 
■coincidences,  the  partite  agreement,  or  opposition,  of  the 


Chap,  X.]  PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  95 

^cliptical  place  of  the  luminaries  to  the  place  of  either 
luminary  in  a  nativity,  produces  an  effect  least  capable 
of  being  guarded  against*. 

Chapter  X. 

Colours  in  Eclipses ;  Comets,  and  similar  Phenomena. 

In  investigating  general  events,  it  is  necessary  further 
to  observe  the  colours  or  hues  displayed  during  an 
Hclipse,  either  in  the  luminaries,  or  around  them  ;  in  the 
shape  of  rods  or  rays,  or  in  other  similar  forms.  For,  if 
these  colours  or  hues  should  be  black,  or  greenish,  they 
portend  effects  similar  to  those  produced  by  Saturn's 
nature ;  if  white,  to  those  operated  by  Jupiter ;  if 
reddish,  to  those  by  Mars ;  if  yellow,  to  those  by  Venus : 
and  if  of  various  colours,  to  those  by  Mercury. 

And,  if  the  entire  bodies  of  the  luminaries  be  thus 
coloured,  or  should  the  hues  extend  over  all  the  parts 

*  In  conformity  to  the  rale  laid  down  in  Chap  6  of  this  Book, 
tliose  individuals  whose  nativities  may  thus  resemble  the  position  of 
the  heavens  at  the  time  of  an  eclips  ,  and  who  are  here  stated  to  be 
chiefly  liable  to  the  effects  of  the  eclipse,  will  be  more  affected  by  it, 
if  it  should  be  visible  to  them. 

To  the  precepts  contained  in  this  chapter,  Placiduw  makes  the  fol 
lowing  allusion,  in  his  remarks  on  the  nativity  of  Cardinal  Pancirolo. 
— "  Any  significator  whatever,  together  with  the  other  stars,  whils 
they  are  moved  by  a  converse  universal  motion,  change  tie  aspect 
alternately,  and  consequently  the  mundane  rays,  as  it  like«i^o 
happens  when  they  acquire  parallels  : — the  rays  thus  acquired  aie 
of  a  long  continuance,  and  denote  a  certain  universal  disposition 
of  the  things  signified,  either  good  or  bad,  accurding  to  the  nature 
of  the  aspecting  stars  ;  as  it  happened  to  this  Cardinal,  who  some 
years  before  his  death  was  always  sickly  :  and  this  observation  is 
wonderful  in  the  changes  of  the  times  and  weather  ;  for  this  prin- 
ciple Ptolemy  adhered  to  in  the  Almagest,  lib.  viii,  cap.  4  ;  and 
this  doctrine  he  also  mentions  in  the  2nd  Book  of  Judgments,  io 
the  chapter  on  the  Nature  of  Events." — (Cooper's  Translation, 
272.) 


K 
(i 
C< 
(( 
<( 
<< 

cc 

4C 


96  PTOLEMT'H  TETRAlllBLOS.  [BimIc  II. 

immediately  cirumjacent  to  the  luminaries,  it  is  an 
indication  that  the  effects  will  attach  to  most  part?  of 
t!ie  region,  or  countries,  with  which  the  eclipse  and  its 
ruling  places  may  be  in  familiarity.  If,  however,  the 
colourinir  should  not  spread  over  the  whole  surface  of 
the  luminarie.',  nor  over  all  the  parts  around  tliem,  but 
be  limited  to  some  particular  quarter,  then  only  such  a 
portion  of  the  said  countries,  as  may  be  indicated  by  the 
situation  of  the  visible  hues,  will  be  comprehended  in 
the  event. 

It  is  also  requisite  to  notice,  with  respect  to  general 
events,  the  risings  or  first  appearances  of  those  celestial 
phenomena  called  comet.s,  whether  presenting  themselves 
at  eclipticftl  times  or  at  any  other  periods.  They  are 
ilisplayed  in  the  shape  of  beams,  trumpets,  pipes,  and  in 
other  similar  figures,  and  operate  efl'ects  like  those  of 
Mara  and  Mercury ;  exciting  wars,  heated  and  turbulent 
dispositions  in  the  atmosphere,  and  in  the  constitutions 
of  men,  with  all  their  evil  con.seqiiences.  The  parts  of 
the  zodiac*  in  which  they  may  be  posited  when  they 
Hrst  appear,  and  the  direction  and  inclination  of  thi^ir 
trains,  point  out  the  regions  or  places  liable  to  be 
affected  by  the  events  which  they  threaten;  and  the 
form  of  the  signs  indicates  the  quality  and  nature  of 
those  events,  as  well  as  the  genus,  class,  or  kind,  on 
which  the  effect  will  fall.  The  time  of  their  continuance 
shews  the  duration  of  their  effect;  and  their  position, 
with  regard  to  the  Sun,  the  period  when  it  will  com- 
mence ;  as,  if  they  first  appear  mafcutine,  they  denote  an 

*  When  a  roiuet  appears  out  of  the  xmlioc,  it  line  abciiild  be  drawn 
from  one  zudiai^al  pole  to  the  other,  through  the  »pot  where  it 
ftppeam :  and  that  Bpot  in  to  be  comtidered  as  being  in  faniilianty 
with  tbe  same  eountries  as  tlioae  parCa  of  the  zodiac  which  may  b«  on. 
th?  uuae  line.— Vide  Chap.  4  of  this  Book,  relatire  to  the  manner  in 
whifh  liied  slars  oal  of  the  zoiliae  hold  familiarity  with  certfun 
regions  and  eoontriea. 


Chap.  XI.]  Ptolemy's  tetrabiblos.  97 

early  commencement;  but,  if  vespertine,  that  it  will  be 
late  and  tardy. 

The  general  and  more  comprehensive  parts  of  the 
consideration  regarding  regions,  countries,  and  cities, 
having  now  been  explained,  it  becomes  necessary  to  dis- 
cuss certain  particular  points  of  the  same  consideration ; 
that  is  to  say,  the  annual  occurrences  which  take  place 
at  certain  fixed  seasons,  and  the  chief  of  which  is  that 
called  the  New  Moon  of  the  Year. 

(Ehaptcr  XI. 

The  New  Moon  of  the  Year, 

In  every  annual  revolution  made  by  the  Sun,  the  first 
new  Moon  of  the  year  is  to  be  considered  as  the  point 
of  the  commencement  of  his  circuit ;  this  is  evident  not 
only  from  its  denomination,  but  from  its  virtue  also  *. 

The  case  stands  thus : — In  the  ecliptic,  which,  as  a 
circle,  has  in  fact  no  actual  or  definite  beginning,  the 
two  equinoctial  and  the  two  tropical  points,  marked 
by  the  equator  and  the  tropical  circles,  are  reasonably 
assumed  as  beginnings.  And  to  obviate  any  doubt  as 
to  which  of  these  four  points  should  preferably  be  con- 
sidered as  the  primary  beginning,  (since  in  the  regular 
simple  motion  of  a  circle  no  part  of  it  has  any  apparent 
precedence?,)  the  appropriate  quality  naturally  belonging 
to  each  of  these  four  points  has  been  taken  into  con- 
sideration by  the  writers  on  this  subject.     And  the  point 

•  The  Neomenia,  or  new  Moon,  was  observed  as  a  festival  with 
much  solemnity  in  earlier  ages  and  by  the  most  ancient  nations.  It 
was  celebrated  by  the  Israelites,  as  well  as  by  Pagans,  and  it  may 
perhaps  Ims  gathereil  from  the  5th  and  6th  verses  of  the  20th  Chapter 
of  the  1st  Book  of  Samuel,  that  it  was  kept  once  in  a  year  with 
greater  ceremony  than  at  other  times:  this  was  done,  probably,  at 
the  **  New  Moon  of  the  Year,"  as  Ptolemy  calls  it ;  or,  in  other 
words,  at  the  new  Moon  nearest  to  the  vernal  equinox. 

H 


38  PTOLEMY'3  TETHABIBLOS.  [Buotc  11. 

of  the  vernai  equinox  has  been  consequently  tiesignated 
by  them  as  the  beginning  of  the  year;  because,  from 
that  time,  the  duration  of  the  day  begins  to  excued  that 
of  the  nitfht,  and  btcaiise  the  season  then  produced  par- 
takes highly  of  inoisture,  which  is  alwaytt  a  prt-dominant 
quality  in  all  incipient  generation  and  growth.  After 
the  vernal  equinox  comes  the  summer  solstice  ;  when  the 
day  attains  its  greatest  length,  and  in  JEgy^it,  at  the  name 
period,  the  rise  of  the  Nile  takes  place  and  the  Dog  Star 
appears.  Then  follows  the  autumnal  equinox,  when  all 
fruits  arc  gathered  in,  and  the  sowing  of  seeds  recom- 
mences anew ;  lastly,  comes  the  winter  solstice,  when 
the  day  proceeds  from  its  shortest  duration  towards  its 
increase. 

Although  the  foregoing  arrangement  has  been  adopted 
by  men  of  science  to  denote  the  commencement  of  the 
several  seasons  of  the  year,  it  yet  seems  to  be  more  con- 
sonant to  nature,  and  more  consistent  with  the  facts,  that 
the  combined  positions  of  the  Sun,  and  the  new,  or  full. 
Moon,  which  happen  when  the  Sun  is  nearest  to  the 
points  above  mentioned,  should  mark  the  four  begin- 
nings; and  more  especially  if  such  combined  positions 
should  produce  eclipses:  thus,  from  the  new  or  full 
Moon,  taking  place  when  the  Sun  is  nearest  to  the  tirst 
point  of  Aries,  the  spring  should  be  dated  ;  from  that 
when  the  Sun  is  nearest  to  the  tirst  point  of  Cancer,  the 
summer ;  from  that  when  he  is  nearest  to  the  Krst  point 
of  Libra,  the  autumn ;  and  from  that  when  he  is  nearest 
to  the  first  point  of  Capricorn,  the  winter,  The  Sun  not 
only  produces  the  general  qualities  and  cou'ititutiona  of 
the  seasons,  by  means  of  which  very  illiterate  persons 
are  enabled,  in  a  certain  degree,  to  form  predictions,  but 
he  also  regulates  the  proper  significations  of  the  signs 
with  regard  to  the  excitation  of  the  winds,  as  well  as 
other   general   occurrences,   more   or   less   subjected    to 


Chap,  XII.]  PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  99 

occasional  variation.  All  these  general  efiects  are  usually 
brought  about  by  the  new  or  full  Moon  which  takes  place 
at  the  aforesaid  points,  and  by  the  configurations  then 
existing  between  the  luminaries  and  the  planets;  but 
there  are  certain  particular  consequences  which  result 
from  the  new  and  full  Moon  in  every  sign  *,  and  from 
the  transits  of  the  planets ;  "  and  which  require  monthly 
investigation  -f-/' 

It  therefore  becomes  necessary  to  explain,  in  the  first 
instance,  the  particular  natures  and  attributes  exercised 
by  each  sign  in  influencing  the  several  constitutions  of 
the  weather,  as  it  exists  at  various  times  of  the  year  ; — 
these  natures  and  attributes  shall  now  be  immediately 
detailed.  It  will  be  recollected,  that  the  peculiar  pro- 
perties of  the  planets  and  the  fixed  stars,  as  affecting  the 
wind  and  the  atmosphere,  as  well  as  the  manner  in  which 
the  entire  signs  hold  familiarity  with  the  winds  and  the 
seasons,  have  been  already  set  forth. 

Chapter  XII. 

The particidar  Natures  of  the  Signs  by  which  the  different 
Constitutions  of  the  Atmosphere  are  pi^oducedl. 

The  sign  of  Aries  has  a  general  tendency,  arising  from 
the  presence  of  the  Equinox,  to  promote  thunder  and  hail. 
Certain  of  its  parts,  however,  operate  in  a  greater  or  less 
degree,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  stars  which  com- 
pose the  sign :  for  instance,  the  front  parts  excite  rain  and 
wind;  the  middle  are  temperate ;  and  those  behind  are 


*  That  is  to  ray,  at  the  new  and  fnll  Moon  taking  place  during  the 
Snn's  progress  through  each  sign. 

t  The  passage  marked  thus  ** ''  is  not  in  the  Greek,  but  is  found 
in  two  Latin  translations. 

X  According  to  Wing,  in  his  **  Introduction  to  the  Ephemerides," 
printed  in  1652,  the  signs,  as  mentioned  in  this  chapter  by  Ptolemy, 
are  to  be  considered  in  their  quality  as  constellations,  and  not  as 


100  rTni,EMY'.S  TETBABIBLOS.  [ISook  II, 

healing  an<I  pestilential.  The  northern  parts.alao.are  heat- 
ing and  pernicious,  but  the  aouthern  cooliny;  and  frosty. 

The  sign  of  Taurus,  in  its  general  character,  partakes 
of  both  temperaments*,  but  is  nevertheless  chiefly  warm. 
Its  front  parts,  and  especially  those  near  the  Pleiades, 
produce  earthquakes,  clouds  and  winds;  the  middle  parts 
are  moistening  and  cooling;  those  behind  and  near  the 
Hyades,  are  tiery,  and  cause  meteors  and  lightnings. 
The  northern  parts  are  temperate ;  the  aouthern  tur- 
bulent and  variable. 

Gemini,  in  its  general  tendency,  is  temperate;  but  ita 
leading  parta  produce  mi.scbief  by  moisture;  its  middle 
parts  are  entirely  temperate  ;  its  latter  parts  mixed  and 
turbulent.  The  northern  parts  promote  earthquakes 
and  wind ;  and  tlie  southern  are  dry  and  heating. 

Cancer  is,  in  the  whole,  serene  and  warm,  but  its 
anterior  parts  near  the  Prtesepe  are  oppre.ssively  hot  and 
suffocating;  the  middle  parts  are  temperate,  and  the 
latter  parts  excite  wind.  And  both  its  northern  and 
southern  parts  are  eqnally  fiery  and  scorching. 

Leo  baa  a  general  tendency  operative  of  «tiHing  heat. 
The  anterior  pait.s  are  oppressively  and  ppstiii-ntiiilly  hot ; 
yet  the  middle  parts  are  temperatu ;  and  tliose  behind 
are  injurious  by  means  of  moisture.  The  northern  parts, 
produce  variation  and  heat,  and  the  southern  moisture. 

Virgo,  in  its  general  tendency,  excites  moLsture  and 
thunder.  The  front  parts,  however,  are  chittiy  warm  and 
noxious;   the  middle  temperate;   and  the  latter  parts 

■pftow  of  tlie  heavena.  This  opinion,  however,  qeenin  to  me  to  ba 
eiToneoQ^;  for  Ptolemy  hns  ftlreaily  devoted  a  cli»iitfr  in  ilie  Isl  Book 
to  the  detail  of  the  in  d  iienves  of  the  several  nIsth  In  tixt  rexpeotive 
uoQstetlalionH  of  the  zodiac ;  and  he  moreovor  c|ienhH,  in  Ihu  present 
chapter,  of  the  operation  of  Arieu  a»  owing  to  the  presence  of  th« 
Eqiiinoic  ThJB  be  could  not  hnt-e  dune,  had  hu  i^poken  of  the  ntgna 
M  ooniitel1ation»  instead  of  Hpace*. 

*  Tliu  leiupernnientA  here  allnrle<l  to  are,  probably,  lieiLt,  and  cold. 


Chap.XIlL]       Ptolemy's  Ti-rrRABiBLOs.  101 

watery.  The  northern  parts  promote  wind ;  the  southern 
are  temperate. 

Libra  has  a  general  tendency  to  produce  change  and 
variation.  Its  front  and  middle  parts  are  temperate ;  its 
hinder  parts  watery.  The  northern  parts  cause  variable 
winds,  and  the  southern  are  moistening  and  pestilential 

Scorpio,  in  its  general  character,  is  fiery  and  produc- 
tive of  thunder.  The  front  parts  cause  snow ;  the  middle 
are  temperate ;  the  latter  parts  excite  earthquakes.  Its 
northern  parts  are  heating ;  its  southern  moistening. 

Sagittarius,  generally,  is  effective  of  wind.  The  front 
parts  are  moistening ;  the  middle  temperate ;  and  the 
hinder  parts  fiery.  The  northern  parts  promote  wind, 
and  the  southern  variation  and  moisture. 

Capricorn's  general  tendency  is  to  operate  moisture; 
but  its  anterior  parts  are  pernicious  by  means  of  heat ; 
its  middle  parts  are  temperate,  and  its  latter  parts  pro- 
mote rain.  Both  its  northern  and  southern  parts  are 
injurious  by  means  of  moisture. 

Aquarius,  in  its  general  character,  is  cohl  and  watery. 
The  front  parts  are  moistening ;  the  middle  temperate ; 
and  the  latter  parts  productive  of  wind.  The  northern 
parts  are  heating ;  the  southern  cause  snow. 

Pisces,  in  its  general  character,  is  cold  and  effective 
of  wind.  The  front  parts  are  temperate ;  the  middle 
moistening;  the  hinder  parts  highly  heating.  The 
northern  parts  excite  wind,  and  the  southern  are  watery. 

Chapter  XIII. 

Mode  of  Consideration  for  jxirtieular  Constitutions  of 

the  Atmosphere, 

The  tirst  part  of  the  consideration,  requisite  to  form  an 
estimate  of  the  various  constitutions  liable  to  take  effect 
in  the  atmosphere,  applies  to  the  general  qualities  per- 
vading the  several  quarters  of  the  year,  and  has  therefore 


102  ..".■. ■p-.roi. KM V*S   TETHATUBLOS.  [lioitk  II. 

the  most  ejt&ntled  scope.  In  ordet  to  learn  thesf  qualities, 
it  is  nec'ei^'Ary,  in  every  quarter,  to  observe,  aa  above 
directejl'-t/fe  new  or  full  Moon  wliich  may  happen  before* 


*  "  Bffwe."   Although  t  have  thuti  Englished  the  -word  wf,  1  think 

jC^fQ(i«rl}'  reqairen  to  be  here  rendered,  by  "at"  or  "  near  ia,"  rather 

,'^UHm  "be/ore."    Fimtty,  because  my  aathor,  (ia BpeakioK of  the  com- 

'•Uencement  in  etcli  quarter  of  the  year,  in  the  llth  Chapter,  p  98,) 

'/Aim  expreesly  stated  that  "  the  BprioR  i»  to  be  dal«d  from  the  new  or 

•   "  full  Moon  taking  place  when  the  Sun  ie  nearal  (i/Vti)  to  the  first 

"  [loint  of  Aries  :  the  Bunimer  from  that,  when  he  is  nairett  the  Urst 

*'  point  of  Cancer,"  etc.  elc.  ;  and  (in  p   90)  he  ttateB  that  certain 

"  general  elTectx  aru  brouj^ht  iibotit  by  the  new  or  fall  Mooii  occarr  og 

"  at  (»«in)  the  aforesaid  points,"     Secondly,  because,  iu  a  few  Udob 

fuitber  on.  In  HpcakiD>!  of  the  monthly  oonaideratinn,  p.  |i)3,  he  again 

uses  Duly  i/V'ra,  in  reference  to  Ihe  present  passage,  in  which,  how. 

ever,  he  lias  need  only  r/i.     Thirdly,  it  is  a  proper  inference  tiiat  he 

meant  to  point  out  here  the  now  or  full  Moon  which  nmy  hnppen 

ttrai-r^l  to  the  tropical  or  equinoctial  pointe,  becaase  he  has  previously 

and   rxplicitly   taught   th«t   the  principal   variation   of    all   things 

depcnda  upon  those  points.     Lastly,  Allatua  has  here  rendered  the 

woril  by  no  other  than  proximi.,  which  is  also  the  word  given  in  the 

I'erugio  Latin  of  164(1. 

Un  the  other  bund,  Whaliey,  in  hie  note  on  the  present  chapter, 
B«ys,  that  "accoriling  to  this  I'nnne  of  Astrologers."  (nie*ning  Pto- 
lemy) "  we  are  to  observe  l\\'.  new  or  full  Moon  |ireceding  the  iugreag, 
"only,  for  our  jiidgnieut  on  the  succeeding  quarter,  and  not  the 
"  lunation  succeeding :  and  the  reason  I  conceive  to  be,  becanse  the 
"  Innation,  which  ininiediate'y  precedes  the  ingress,  carrieH  its  InHu- 
"  ence  to  the  very  position  of  the  ingress  itself,  but  not  so  Ihat  which 
"  follows  the  ingresH."  Wing,  in  his  Introduction  to  the  Epheme- 
rides  (London  16^2}  also  says,  that  "for  ihe  knowledge  of  the 
"  weather,  it  is  requisite  lo  observe  the  oonjnnction  or  oppoucjoo  of 
"  the  luminaries  next  precfding  the  Sun's  ingresfi  into  the  Grst  point 

Now,  if  a  new  or  full  Moon  happen  immrdialelj/  after  the  Son's 
transit  or  ingress,  the  previous  full  or  aatr  Moon  must  have  happened 
a  fortnight  btfort  t\ie  said  transit  or  ingress;  and,  aft«r  considering 
the  other  paria  of  Ptolemy's  doctrine,  (  do  not  conceive  that  bo 
intendeil  to  leach,  in  this  rhapler.  that  a  prtPioiu  lunntion,  when  at 
so  ureal  a  distance  before  the  important  ingress,  would  have  a  greater 
influence  over  the  ensuing  quarter  of  the  year  than  a  tubnquent 
lunatjim  taking  pUce  no  closely  after  the  said  ingress. 


Ghaj).  XI II.]       Ptolemy's  tetrabiblos.  103 

the  period  of  the  Sun's  transit  through  either  tropical  or 
equinoctial  point,  whichever  it  may  be ;  and  to  arrange 
the  angles  (as  in  the  case  of  a  nativity)  according  to  the 
degree  and  hour  at  which  the  new  or  full  Moon  may  be 
found  to  happen,  in  every  latitude  for  which  the  con- 
consideration  may  be  desired.  Such  planets  and  stars  as 
may  have  dominion  over  the  places  where  the  said  new 
or  full  Moort  happens,  and  over  the  following  angle,  are 
then  to  be  noted  ;  in  the  same  manner  as  that  stated  with 
regard  to  eclipses.  And  after  these  preliminary  steps 
have  been  attended  to,  a  general  inference  may  be  drawn 
as  to  tho  proper  qualities  of  the  whole  quarter ;  and  the 
intensity  or  relaxation  of  their -operation  is  to  be  con- 
templated from  the  natures  of  the  ruling  planets  or  stars, 
distinguished  by  the  faculties  they  possess,  and  by  the 
mode  in  which  they  affect  the  atmosphere. 

The  second  part  of  the  con.sideration  relates  to  each 
month,  and  requires  a  similar  observation  of  the  new  or 
full  Moon  first  taking  place  on  the  Sun';*  progress  through 
each  sign  :  and  it  must  be  remembered,  that,  if  a  new 
Moon  should  have  happened  at  a  period  nearest  to  the 
Sun's  transit  over  the  past  tropical  or  equinoctial  point, 
the  new  Moon  also  in  each  succeeding  sign,  until  the 
commencement  of  the  next  quarter,  is  to  be  observed ; 
but,  if  a  full  Moon  should  have  so  happened,  then  similar 
observation  is  to  be  made  of  each  subsequent  full  Moon. 
The  angles,  also,  must  be  duly  attended  to,  as  well  as  the 
planets  and  stars  ruling  in  both  the  places*;  and  especi- 
ally the  nearest  phases,  applications,  and  separations  of 
the  planets,  and  their  properties.  The  peculiar  qualities 
of  the  two  places,  and  the  winds,  liable  to  be  excited  by 
the  planets  themselves  and  by  those  parts  of  the  signs 

*  •*  Both  the  j'laees.'*  These  are  the  places  of  the  new  or  full  M«'ori, 
ami  of  tho  following  angle  ;  as  hefore  mentioned  with  regard  to  the 
quarterly  conKideration. 


104  Ptolemy's  tetuahiblos.  [Bcmk  71, 

in  which  they  may  1m  aitiiated,  are  likewise  to  be  con- 
sidered ;  and  ftlso  that  particular  wind,  which  is  indicateil 
by  the  direction  of  the  Moon's  ecliptica!  latitude.  By 
the  aid  of  these  observations,  and  by  wei(;hing  and  com- 
paring the  existing  vijjour  of  each  of  the  several  pro- 
perties and  qualities,  tlie  general  constitution  of  the 
atmosphere  duriTig  each  month  may  be  predicted. 

The  third  part  of  this  considi-ration  appertains  to 
significations  applying  more  minutely,  and  points  out 
their  force  or  weakness.  In  this  case,  the  partile 
configurations  of  the  Sun  and  Moon,  at  the  intermediate 
quarters,  as  well  as  at  the  new  or  full  Mo^n.  are  to  be 
attentively  regarded;  since  tliere  is  a  cenain  varia- 
tion in  the  cunstitution  of  the  atmosphere,  which 
usually  commences  about  three  days  before,  and  some- 
tiroes,  also,  about  three  days  after  the  Moon  has  equated 
her  course  to  the  Sun.  The  configurations  efl^ected 
between  the  Moon,  at  each  quarterly  equation,  and  the 
planets,  whether  by  the  trine,  sextilu.  or  -other 
authorized  distances,  are  also  to  be  observed;  because 
the  peculiar  property  of  the  change  in  the  constitutions  of 
the  atmosphere  drpends  much  upon  sucli  configurations, 
and  may  be  accordingly  perceived  by  conwidering  iho 
nature  of  the  influence  which  the  said  confii;urated  planeti 
and  the  signs  exercise  over  the  atmosphere  and  the  winds. 

The  particular  quality  of  tin-  weather,  thus  produced, 
will  be  mure  fully  established  on  certain  days ;  especially 
when  the  brighter  and  more  efficacious  fixed  stars  may 
be  near  the  Sun, either  luatutine  or  vespertine;  as,  when 
BO  posited,  they  most  frequently  convert  the  constitution 
of  the  atmosphere  to  an  agreement  with  their  own 
natures :  and,  when  the  Luminaries  may  tran.sit  any  one 
of  the  angles,  a  similar  ett'ect  is  also  produced.  At 
all  such  po.sitions  the  particular  coasiitutions  of  the 
atmosphere  are  suliject  to  variation,  and  thus   becooie 


CKtop.  XIV.]  PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  106 

alternately  more  intense  or  more  relaxed  in  their 
respective  qualities.  In  this  manner,  by  certain  positions 
of  the  Moon,  the  flux  and  reflux  of  the  sea  are  caused ; 
and,  when  the  Luminaries  may  be  in  angles,  a  change 
of  the  wind  is  produced,  according  to  the  direction  of 
the  Moon's  ecliptical  latitude. 

Finally,  in  all  these  considerations,  it  must  be  remem- 
bered that  the  more  general  and  first  constituted  cause 
takes  precedence,  and  that  tlie  particular  cause  comes 
subsequently  and  secondarily ;  and  that  the  operation 
is  in  the  highest  degree  confirmed  and  strengthened, 
when  the  stars,  which  regulate  the  general  effects, 
may  be  also  contigprated  towards  the  production  of 
the  particular  effects. 

Orhapter  XIV. 

The  Signification  of  Meteors. 

In  order  to  facilitate  prognostication  in  minor  and  more 
limited  instances,  it  is  important  to  nnke  further 
observation  of  all  remarkable  appearances  occasionally 
visible  around  or  near  the  Sun,  Moon,  and  stars.  And, 
for  the  diurnal  state  of  the  atmosphere,  the  Sun's  rising 
should  be  remarked  ;  for  the  nocturnal  state,  his  setting; 
but  the  probable  duration  of  any  such  state  must  be 
considered  by  reference  to  the  Sun's  configuration  with 
the  Moon  ;  for,  in  most  cases,  each  aspect,  made  between 
them,  indicates  the  continuance  of  a  certain  state  until 
another  aspect  shall  take  place. 

Hence,  the  Sun,  when  rising  or  setting,  if  he  shine 
clear  and  open,  free  from  mists,  gloom,  and  clouds, 
promises  serene  weather.  But,  if  he  have  a  wavering 
or  fiery  orb,  or  seem  to  emit  or  attract  red  rays,  or  if  he 
be  accompanied  in  any  one  part  by  the  clouds  called 
parhelia,  or  by  other  reddish  clouds  of  extended  figure, 


106 


rruLKMVS  TETRAItlBLOS. 


[Book  II. 


in  the  form  of  long  rayx.  he  then  portends  violent 
windp,  chiefly  liable  to  arise  from  those  parts  in  wliich 
the  said  phenomena  may  have  shewn  theiiiselven.  If  he 
should  he  pale  or  lurid,  and  rise  or  set  encumbered  with 
clouds,  or  surrounded  by  halo.s,  he  indicates  storms  and 
winds  coming  from  the  quarter  of  hia  apparent  situation  : 
and,  if  he  bo  also  accompanied  by  parhelia,  or  by  lurid 
or  dark  rays,  similar  effects  are  also  threatened  from  the 
parts  where  those  appearances  may  he  situated*. 

The  Moon'M  course  is  to  be  carefully  i>bscrved,  at  the 
third  day  before  or  after  her  conjunction  with  the  Sun, 
her  opposition,  and  her  intermediate  quarters ;  for  if  she 
then  shine  thin  and  clear,  with  no  other  phenomena 
about  her,  she  indicates  serenity;  but  if  she  appear  thin 
and  red,  and  her  whole  unilluminated  part  visible,  and 
in  a  stale  of  vibration,  she  portends  winds  from  the 
quarter  of  her  latitude  and  declination-|-:  and  if  she 
appear  dark,  or  pale  and  thick,  she  threatens  storms 
and  showers.  All  haios  formed  around  the  Moon 
should  also  be  observed ;  for,  if  there  appear  one  only, 
bright  and  clear,  and  decaying  by  deirrees,  it  promises 
serene  weather;  but,  it  iwo  or  three  appear,  tempests 
are  indicated :  and,  if  they  seem  reddish  and  broken, 
they  threaten  tempests,  with  violent  and  boisterous 
winds;    if  dark  and  thick,  they  foreshew  storms  and 


'Similar  preccpto  niay  be  found  linely  illustrated  i'l  Vir, 
GeoTgic,  vide  1.  438  at  iofra : 

"  Sol  qiiiM|ue  et  exoriens  et  onm  se  condit  in  auda.- 

"Signa  daliit :" 

+  Virgii  liaH  Hftid  alinosl  llie  Name  tiling  in  tliese  bKftiitifnl  li 
"  At  ni  virgiuenm  BotTuderit  ore  ruburem 
"  Ventns  urit  i  vento  semper  rubet  anraa  Phii-'bi!." 

See  also  tbv  whole  pasHage.  be^noning  at  1.  434 : 

"  Si  vero  Suieni  lul  rnpidiim  Lnnaaquu  Bcqtienteit 
"  Ordine  reHpieies,"  etc 


Chap,  XIV.]  PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIULOS.  107 

snow  ;  if  pale,  or  black  and  broken,  tempests  with  winds 
and  snow,  both :  and,  whenever  a  greater  number  may 
appear,  storms  of  greater  fury  are  portended. 

The  planets,  also,  and  the  brighter  fixed  stars,  occa- 
sionally have  halos,  which  indicate  certain  effects 
appropriate  to  their  tinctures,  and  to  the  nature  of  the 
stars  around  which  they  may  be  situated. 

The  apparent  magnitudes  of  the  fixed  stars,  and  the 
colours  of  the  luminous  masses  among  them,  are  likewise 
to  be  remarked  :  for,  when  the  stars  appear  brighter  and 
larger  than  usual,  they  indicate  an  excitation  of  the 
wind  from  that  quarter  in  which  they  may  be  situated. 
The  nebulous  mass  of  the  Praesepe  in  Cancer,  and  others 
similar  to  it,  also  require  observation  ;  as,  if  in  fine 
weather  they  appear  gloomy  and  indistinct,  or  thick, 
they  thereby  threaten  a  fall  of  rain ;  but.  if  clear  and  in 
continual  vibration,  they  announce  rough  gales  of  wind*. 

Appearances  occasionally  visible  in  the  sky,  resemb- 
ling the  trains  of  conietsf,  usually  indicate  wind  and 
drought;  in  a  degree  proportionate  to  their  multitude 
and  continuance. 

-'^'^Appearances,  resembling  shooting  or  falling  stars, 
when  presented  in  one  part  only,  threaten  a  movement 
of  wind  from  that  part| ;  when  in  various  and  opposite 

*  At  this  place,  the  following  sentence,  not  found  in  the  Greek,  is 
inserted  in  a  Latin  translation  : 

"  If  the  northern  of  the  two  stan,  situated  one  on  each  side  of  the 
"  Pra'sepe,  and  called  the  Asini,  should  not  appear,  the  north  wind 
"will  blow  :  but,  if  the  southern  one  be  invisible,  the  south  wind  " 

t  These  coruscations  are,  perhaps,  similar  to  those  now  known  by 
the  name  of  the  Aun^ra  Borealis. 

X  Virgil  again : 

"Sn'pe  etiam  stellas  vento  impendente  videbis 
•*  PniKsipites  copIo  labi."— etc.  Georg.  I,  1.  365. 

A  great  part  of  the  1st  Georgio  consists  of  astrological  rules  for  pre- 
dicting the  weather,  closely  resembling  the  precepts  here  given  by 
Ptolemy.     Virgil  is  said  to  have  adopted  his  doctrine  from  Aratus. 


108  FTOLEMV'S   TETRAHIBLOS.  [Book  II. 

jMtta,  they  portend  the  approach  of  all  kinds  of  tem- 
peijtiious  weather,  together  with  thunder  and  Uzhtning^. 
Olouds  resembling  fleeces  of  wool  will  also  sometimes 
preuage  tempests ;  and  the  occasional  appearance  of  the 
rainbow  denotes,  in  stormy  weather,  the  approach  of 
serenity  i  in  fine  weather,  storms.  And,  in  a,  word,  all 
remarkable  phenomena,  visible  in  the  sky,  universally 
portend  that  certain  appropriate  events  will  be  produced, 
each  harmonising  with  its  proper  cause,  in  the  manner 
herein  described. 


After  the  foregoing  brief  investigation  of  the  more 
limited,  as  well  as  more  extensive  significations,  regard- 
ing general  events  it  becomes  proper  to  proceed  to  the 
doctrine  of  genethliacal  prognostication,  or  judgment  of 
individual  nativities. 


BOOK  THE  THIRD. 


(Ehapter  I. 


Proem. 

In  the  precedinjQr  pages,  such  events  as  affect  the  world 
generally  have  been  discussed  in  priority ;  because  they 
are  operated  by  certain  principal  and  paramount  causes, 
which  are,  at  the  same  time,  predominant  over  par- 
ticular and  minor  events  applicable  only  to  the  separate 
properties  and  natural  peculiarities  of  individuals.  The 
foreknowledge  of  these  particular  events  is  called  Gen- 
ethlialogy,  or  the  science  of  Nativities. 

It  must  be  remembered  that  the  causation,  bv  which 
all  efiects,  whether  general  or  particular,  are  produced 
and  foreknown,  is  essentially  one  and  the  same;  for  the 
motions  of  the  planets,  and  of  the  Sun  and  Moon,  pre- 
sent the  operative  causation  of  events  which  happen 
to  any  individual,  as  well  as  of  those  which  happen 
generally ;  and  the  foreknowledge  of  both  may  be 
obtained  by  the  same  accurate  observation  of  the  dis- 
tinct natures  of  the  several  creatures  and  substances 
subjected  to  the  influence  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  and 
by  due  attention  to  the  changes  prorluced  in  those 
natures,  by  the  configurations  displayed  in  the  Ambient 
by  the  planetary  motion. 

Still,  however,  the  causes  of  general  events  are  greater 
and  more  complete  than  those  of  particular  events ; 
and,  although  it  has  been  now  stated  that  one  aiu^V^ 


no 


ptolkmy's  tetrabiblos. 


[Book  III. 

identical  power  supplies  both  the  causation  and  the 
foreknowledge  of  general  as  well  as  particular  events. 
yet  there  does  not  belong  to  the  two  sorts  of  events  a 
aimiiar  origin  or  beginning,  at  which  observation  of  the 
ccelestial  configurations  must  be  made  for  prognostica- 
tion. In  regard  to  general  events,  the  dates  of  origin  and 
commencement  are  many  and  various;  for  all  general 
events  cannot  be  traced  to  one  origin,  neither  is  their 
origin  always  considered  by  means  of  the  matter  sub- 
jected to  their  operation,  for  it  may  also  be  established  by 
circumstances  occurring  in  the  Ambient  and  presenting 
the  causation.  It  may,  in  fact,  almost  be  Maid  that  they 
b1!  originate  in  eminent  eclipses  of  the  Luminaries,  and 
in  remarkable  transits  made  by  the  stars,  at  various 
times. 

Particular  events,  however,  which  concern  men  indi- 
vidually, may  be  traced  to  one  origin,  single  as  well  as 
manifold.  Their  origin  is  single,  in  respect  to  the 
primary  composition  of  the  nascent  man;  but  it  is  also 
manifold,  in  respect  lo  other  circumstances  subsequently 
indicated  by  dispositions  in  the  Ambient,  correlative  to 
the  primary  origin.  In  all  particular  events,  the  origin, 
or  birth,  of  the  subjected  matter  itself,  must  of  course  be 
the  primary  origin;  and,  in  succession  thereto,  the  various 
Ijeginnings  of  other  subsequent  circumstances  are  to  be 
assumed.  Hence,  therefore,  at  the  origin  of  the  subjected 
matter,  all  the  properties  and  peculiarities  of  iU  contem- 
perament  must  be  observed;  and  then  the  subsequent 
events,  which  will  happen  at  certain  periods,  sooner  or 
later,  are  to  be  considered  by  means  of  the  division  of 
time,  or  the  scale  of  the  ensuing  years". 


*  The  DivUiuD  of  Time  is  Bulwequently  IkUI  ilown  by  llie  author  ir 
the  IttMt  Chapter  of  the  foortli  Itoolc, 


Chap.  II.]  Ptolemy's  tetrabiblos.  Ill 


IfX-i 


Otkapter  IL  * ^'^'^^s^^l^^-^ 

The  Conception,  and  the  Parturition,  or  Birth ;  by  which  /  .^T^ 
latter  Event  the  Animal  quits  tite  Womb,  and  assumes       "^ 
another  State  of  Existence. 

The  actual  moment,  in  which  human  generation  com- 
mences, is  in  fact,  by  nature,  the  moment  of  the  concep- 
tion itself;  but,  in  efficacy  with  regard  to  subsequent 
events,  it  is  the  parturition,  or  birth. 

In  every  case,  however,  where  the  actual  time  of  con- 
ception may  be  ascertained,  either  casually  or  by  observa- 
tion, it  is  useful  to  remark  the  effective  influence  of  the 
configuration  of  the  stars  as  it  existed  at  that  time ;  and, 
from  that  influence,  to  infer  the  future  personal  peculi- 
arities of  mind  and  body.  For  the  seed  will,  at  the  very 
first,  and  at  once,  receive  its  due  quality,  as  then  dis- 
pensed by  the  Ambient;  and,  although  in  subsequent 
periods  its  substance  is  varied  by  growth  and  conforma- 
tion, it  will  still,  by  the  laws  of  nature,  congregate,  during 
its  growth,  only  such  matter  as  may  be  proper  to  itself, 
and  will  become  more  and  more  imbued  with  the  peculiar 
property  of  the  first  quality  impressed  on  it  at  the  time 
of  conception.  These  precepts  must  always  be  attended 
to,  when  that  time  can  be  ascertained. 

But,  if  the  time  of  conception  cannot  be  precisely  made 
out,  that  of  the  birth  must  be  received  as  the  original 
date  of  generation ;  for  it  is  virtually  the  most  import- 
ant, and  is  in  no  respect  deficient,  on  comparison  with 
the  primary  origin  by  conception,  except  in  one  view 
only;  viz.  that  the  origin  by  conception  affords  the 
inference  of  occurrences  which  take  effect  previously  to 
the  birth,  whereas  the  origin  by  birth  can,  of  course,  be 
available  only  for  such  as  arise  subsequently.  And, 
although  the  birth  should  in  strictness  be  called  tlie 
secondary   beginning,   while   the   conception   might    be 


112 


PTOLEMY  S   TETIlABIBr.OS. 


[Book  111. 

insisted  on  as  the  primary  beginning,  it  is  still  found  to 
be  equal  to  the  conception  in  ita  efficacy,  and  much 
more  complele,  although  later  in  time.  For  the  concep- 
tion may,  in  Fact,  be  .said  to  be  the  generation  of  mere 
human  seed,  but  the  birth  that  of  man  hiiaself;  since 
the  infaTit  at  iti  birth  acqtiireM  numerous  qualitips  which 
it  could  nut  pOHsess  while  in  the  womb,  and  which  are 
proper  to  human  nature  alone;  "such  for  instance,  as 
"the  panicular  action  of  the  senses  and  the  movement 
"of  the  body  and  limbs*"  Besides,  even  if  the  position 
of  the  Ambient,  actually  existing  at  the  birth,  cannot 
be  considereil  to  Assial  in  forming  and  engendering  the 
particular  shape  and  qualitieN  of  the  infant,  it  is  never- 
theless still  auxiliary  to  the  infant's  entiance  into  the 
world  :  because  nuluro,  after  couipleting  the  formation 
in  the  womb,  always  effects  the  birth  in  immediate 
obedience  to  some  ciTtuin  position  of  the  Ambient,  cor- 
responding  and  sympathizing  with  the  primary  position 
which  operated  the  incipient  foruiation.  It  is  therefore 
perfectly  admissible,  and  consistent  with  reason,  that 
the  confif^uration  of  the  stars,  as  it  exists  at  the  time 
of  birth,  although  it  cannot  be  said  to  possess  any  share 
of  the  creative  cause,  should  still  be  considered  to  act  in 
signification  as  fully  as  the  contigoration  at  the  time  of 
conc'.'pliim ;  because  it  has,  of  necessity,  a  power  corres- 
ponding to  that  configuration  which  actually  possessed 
the  creative  cause. 

In  speaking  of  the  practicability  of  prognostication, 
in  the  conmienceuient  of  this  treatise,  the  intention  of 
setting  forth  this  part  of  the  subject,  now  under  con- 
sideration, in  a  scientitic  manner,  has  been  alri'sdy  noti- 
fied.    The  antient  mo<le  of  production,  tounderl  on  the 


inl!>  thuH  marked  '' 


e  not  in  tbo  Greek,  bin  i 


Chap.  II.]  PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  113 

commixture  of  all  the  stars,  and  abounding  in  infinite 
complication  and  diversity,  will  therefore  be  passed 
over;  and,  in  fact,  any  attempt  to  detail  it,  however 
accurately  and  minutely  made,  in  conformity  to  the 
several  precepts  given  in  the  traditions  relating  to  it, 
would  prove  unserviceable  and  unintelligible :  it  is 
therefore  entirely  abandoned.  And  the  doctrine,  now 
presented,  comprehending  every  species  of  event  liable 
to  happen,  and  explaining  all  the  effective  influences 
generally  exercised  by  the  stars,  in  their  separate  quali- 
ties, over  every  other  species  of  event,  shall  be  delivered 
succinctly,  and  in  agreement  with  the  theory  of  nature. 

With  this  view,  certain  places  in  the  Ambient,  regu- 
lating the  formation  of  ail  inferences  of  the  events  liable 
to  affect  mankind,  are  appointed  as  a  kind  of  mark  to 
which  the  whole  theory  of  those  inferences  is  applied, 
and  to  which  the  operative  powers  of  the  stars,  when 
holding  familiarity  with  the  said  places,  are  in  a  general 
manner  directed :  in  the  same  way  as,  in  archery,  the 
arrow  is  directed  to  the  target. — And  any  event,  which 
depends  on  the  compound  temperament  of  many  various 
natures  and  influences  together,  must  be  left  to  the 
discretion  of  the  artist,  who,  like  the  skilful  archer,  must 
himself  judge  of  the  best  mode  of  hitting  the  mark. 

To  proceed  methodically  and  in  due  order,  it  is  proper 
to  commence  by  investigating  such  general  events  as  are 
open  to  consideration,  and  liable  to  have  happened,  or  to 
happen,  at  the  actual  origin  by  birth ;  since,  from  that 
origin,  all  things  necessary  to  be  investigated  may  be 
gathered,  as  before  stated.  Yet,  if  a  previous  inquiry, 
by  means  of  the  primary  origin  by  conception,  should 
nevertheless  be  desired  and  undertaken,  such  an  inquiry 
may  still  in  some  degree  assist  prognostication ;  although 
only  in  regard  to  properties  and  qualities  dispensed  and 
imbibed  at  the  time  of  conception. 


114 


PTOLKMY'S   TETKABIBLOS.  [Book  III. 


(tthapter  III. 

The  Detjree  (tHce titling. 
There  freqtientiy  arises  some  uncertainty  as  to  the  pre- 
cise time  of  birth,  and  some  apprehension  lest  it  should 
not  be  accnratelj-  noted.  In  most  cases,  the  actual  minute 
of  the  hour,  at  which  the  birth  happens,  can  only  be 
ascertained  by  making  a  scientific  observation,  at  the 
time,  with  a  horoscopieal  astrolabe*;  for  all  other  instru- 
ments, employed  in  ascertaining  the  hour,  are  almost 
always  fallacious,  although  used  by  many  persons  with 
much  care  and  attention  The  clepsydraf,  for  instance, 
is  subject  to  error,  because  the  flow  of  the  water  will, 
from  various  causes,  proceed  irregularly:  and  the  sun-dial 
is  often  incorrectly  placed,  and  it-s  gnomon  often  distorted 
from  the  true  meridian  line.  To  obviate  the  difficulty 
arising  from  the  inaccuracy  of  these  instruments,  it  seems 
highly  necessary  to  present  some  method  by  which  the 
actually  ascending  degree  of  the  zodiac  may  be  easily 
ascertained,  in  a  natural  and  consistent  manner, 

And  in  order  to  attain  this  essential  point,  it  is 
necessary  first  to  set  down  the  ordinary  degree  which, 
by  the  Doctrine  of  Ascensions^,  is  found  near  the 
a-scendant  at  the  presumed  hour.  After  this  has  been 
done,  the  new  or  full  Moon,  whichever  it  may  be,  thai 
may  take  place  next  before  the  time  of  parturition, 
must  be  observed :  and  if  a  new  Moon,  it  will  be  neoea- 


*  It  is,  perbsps,  D«edleas  to  remark  tliat  iiiiHlem  iniprovetuents  in 
Kcieni'e  have  Baperseded  the  use  of  this,  aDil  other  antient  instm- 
ineDti>  liere  iiieDtioueil. 

tAlthoagh  tlie  "clepsydra,"  or  wa,terclock,  was  conimonly  nxed 
ainoD^  the  autientii  for  varion»  piirpoBeH,  it  appears,  from  Martiait 
(a  Latio  nrit^r,  who  lived  about  a.d.  i9U,|  Iliat  there  was  alao  t^ 
olepsydra  in  special  lue  as  an  astroloKi<.'Al  oagine. 

Z"Th-  I'xlrine  of  yliCFnrioiu,"— in  alluMon  to  the  method  of 
'    caU'nlatiiig  the  actual  iMisition  uf  the  ecliptic. 


/^U   <W,lovwir*Ou,* 


Chap.  III.]  PTOLEBfY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  116 

sary  to  mark  exactly  the  degree  of  the  conjunction  of  the 
two  luminaries ;  but,  if  a  full  Moon,  the  degree  of  that 
luminary  only  which  may  be  above  the  earth  during  the 
parturition.  After  this  it  must  be  observed  what  planets 
have  dominion  over  the  said  degree :  and  their  dominion 
depends  always  on  the  five  following  prerogatives,  viz. 
on  triplicity,  house,  exaltation,  terms,  and  phase  or 
configuration*;  that  is  to  say,  a  planet,  eligible  to 
dominion,  must  be  connected  with  the  degree  in  question 
either  by  one,  or  more,  or  all  of  these  prerogatives. 

If,  therefore,  there  may  be  found  any  one  planet 
properly  qualified  in  all  or  most  of  these  prerogatives,  the 
exact  degree,  which  it  occupies  in  that  sign  in  which  it 
may  be  posited  during  the  parturition,  is  to  be  remarked; 
and  it  is  then  to  be  inferred  that  a  degree  of  the  same 
numerical  denomination  was  actually  ascending,  at  the 
precise  time  of  birth,  in  that  sign  which  appears,  by  the 
Doctrine  of  Ascensions,  to  be  nearest  to  the  ascendant^f-. 

But  when  two  planets,  or  more,  may  be  equally 
qualified  in  the  manner  prescribed,  it  must  be  seen 
which  of  them  may  transit,  during  the  parturition,  a 
degree  nearest  in  number  to  the  ordinary  degree  shewn 
by  the  Doctrine  of  Ascensions  to  be  then  ascending ;  and 
that  said  degree,^  nearest  in  number,^  is  to  be  considered 
as  pointing  out  the  numerical  denomination  of  the  degree 
actually  ascending.  And  when  the  degrees  of  two  planets, 
or  more,  may  closely  and  equally  approximate  in  numeri- 
cal denomination  to  the  ordinary  degree  found  by  the 
Doctrine  of  Ascensions,  the  degree  of  that  planet  which 
possesses  further  claims,  by  connection  with  the  angles 
and  by  its  own  condition,  is  to  regulate  the  number  of 
the  actually  ascending  degree. 

*  '*  Phase  or  configuration"    Or,  holding  some  authorized  aspect 
to  the  degree  in  question. 
t  Or,  on  the  ascendant. 


IIG  ptolemt'b  tetrabiblos.  [BookJU. 

It  must  however  be  observed,  that  if  the  actua,!  distance 
of  the  degree,  in  which  the  rulincj  planet  may  be  posited, 
from  the  ordinary  degree  ascending,  be  found  to  exceed 
its  distance  from  the  ordinary  degree  of  the  mid-heaven, 
the  numerical  denomination,  found  in  the  way  above 
mentioned,  is  then  to  be  considered  as  applicable  to  the 
actual  degree  in  culruination;  and  the  other  angles  are 
to  be  arranged  in  conformity  therewith*. 

aih^fUv  IV. 

Distribution  of  tlie  Doctrine  oj  Natlmtiea. 
After  due  attention  to  the  preceding  instructions,  the 
doctrine  of  genethliacal  prognostication  should  be  sepa- 
rately and  distinctly  considered,  for  the  sake  of  order 
and  perspicuity,  in  its  first,  second,  and  successive  divi- 
sions or  heads  of  inquiry.  It  will  thii^j  be  found  to 
present  a  mode  of  investigation,  at  once  practicable,  com-  ' 
petent,  and  agreeable  to  nature. 

One  division  is  applicable  only  to  certain  circumstances 
established  previous  to  the  birth,  as,  for  instance,  to 
thase  which  concern  the  parents;  another  to  circum- 
stances, which  may  be  established  both  before  and  after 
the  birth,  as  tho.se  respecting  brothera  and  sisters ; 
another  to  circum,stances  actually  occurring  at  the  very 
time  of  birth,  and  immediately  consequent  thereupon : 
and  this  head  of  inquiry  embraces  various  points,  and  is 
by  no  means  simple :  and  the  East  division  relates  to 
events  liable  to  take  place  after  the  birth,  at  various 
periods,  earlier  or  later ;  and  it  involves  a  still  more 
diversified  theory. 

*  The  precepts  delivered  io  thi»  Cliapter  hfive  obtftined  ihe  name  of 
Ptolemy's  Ammoilar :  the  term  is  probsbiy  Araliic,  ii  it  lie  nob  r 
corruption  of  the  Latin  words  animum,  or  aniinam,  dare,  "  giving 
"  aDimalioQ  or  lite ; "  yet  this  meauing  seenia  scarcely  close  enough. 


\    . 


Chap.  IV]  PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  117 

Thus,  the  questions  to  be  solved,  in  regard  to  the  actual 
circumstances  of  the  birth  itself,  are,  whether  the  pro- 
duction will  be  male  or  female;  twinvS,  or  even  more; 
whether  it  will  be  monstrous;  and  whether  it  will  be 
reared. 

The  questions  of  the  periods  subsequent  to  the  birth 
relate  first  to  the  duration  of  life  (which  is  distinct  from 
the  question  of  rearing),  then  to  the  shape  and  figure  of 
the  body,  to  the  bodily  affections,  and  to  injuries  or  defects 
in  the  members.  After  these,  further  inquiry  is  instituted 
as  to  the  quality  of  the  mind,  and  the  mental  affections ; 
then,  as  to  fortune,  in  regard  to  rank  and  honours 
as  well  as  wealth.  In  succession  to  these,  the  character 
of  the  employment  or  profession  is  sought  out ;  then, 
the  questions  relative  to  marriage  and  offspring,  and  to 
consentaneous  friendship,  are  to  be  considered;  then,  that 
concerning  travel;  and,  lastly,  that  concerning  the  kind 
of  death  which  awaits  the  native.  The  question  of  death, 
although  depending,  in  fact,  upon  the  same  influence  as 
the  question  of  the  duration  of  life,  seems  yet  to  find  its 
proper  situation  in  being  placed  last  in  the  series. 

On  each  of  the  foregoing  points  of  inquiry,  the  doctrine 
and  precepts  to  be  followed  shall  be  thoroughly  and  suc- 
cinctly detailed;  but  all  idle  conceits, promulgated  by  many 
persons  without  any  foundation  capable  of  sustaining  the 
test  of  reason,  shall  be  utterly  avoided,  in  deference  to 
the  only  true  agency,  which  is  derived  from  primal 
Nature  herself.  It  is  only  upon  clearly  effective  influ- 
ences that  this  treaty  i^  established :  and  all  matters, 
which  are  open  to  an  authorized  mode  of  inquiry  by 
means  of  the  theory  of  the  stars,  and  their  positions  and 
aspects  with  regard  to  appropriate  places,  shall  be  fully 
discussed  here ;  but  the  divination  by  lots  and  numbers, 
unregulated  by  any  systematic  causation,  must  remain 
unnoticed. 


118  PTOLEMY'S  TETKABIBLOS.  [Book  III. 

The  brief  remarks,  immediately  following,  are  applic- 
able to  all  cases,  g;enerally,  and  are  now  at  once  stated,  to 
avoid  the  repetition  of  them  under  each  particular  divi- 
sion or  head  of  inquiry. 

Firstly,  notice  must  be  taken  of  that  place  in  the 
zodiac  which  corresponds,  according  to  the  scheme  of  the 
nativity,  with  the  particular  division  of  inquiry :  for 
example,  the  place  of  mid-heavea  is  adapted  to  questions 
comprisiid  under  the  head  of  employment  or  profession ; 
and  the  Sun's  place  to  those  relative  to  the  concerns  of 
the  father. 

Secondly,  after  the  proper  place  has  thus  been  duly 
ascertained,  the  planets  holding  right  of  dominion  there, 
by  any  of  the  five  prerogatives  hereinbefore  mentioned, 
are  to  be  observed ;  and,  if  any  one  planet  be  found  to 
be  lord  by  all  these  prerogatives,  that  planet  muat  be 
admitted  as  the  ruler  of  the  event  liable  to  happen  under 
that  particular  head  of  inquiry.  If,  however,  two  or 
three  planets  hold  dominion,  that  one  among  them, 
which  may  have  most  claims  to  the  place  in  question. 
must  be  selected  as  the  ruler. 

Thirdly,  the  natures  of  the  ruling  planet  and  of  the 
signs,  in  which  itself  and  the  place  which  it  thus  con- 
trouls  may  severally  be  situated,  are  to  be  considered  aa 
indicating  the  quality  of  the  event. 

Fourthly,  the  proportionate  vigour  and  strength,  or 
weakness,  with  which  the  dominion  is  exercised,  as  ex- 
hibited either  by  the  actual  cosmical  position  of  the  ruling 
planet,  or  by  its  pasition  in  the  scheme  of  the  nativity, 
will  point  out  to  what  extent  and  with  what  force  the 
event  will  operate.  And  a  planet  is  found  to  be  cos- 
mically  powerful  when  in  one  of  its  own  places*  or 
when  oriental,  or  swift  in  course ;  and  it  is  strong  in  the 

•  Id  Hooae,  Triplicity,  Exaltation,  Term  or  l-'aoe. 


Chap,   v.]       PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  119. 

scheme  of  the  nativity,  when  transiting  an  angle  or 
succedent  house ;  especially  those  of  the  ascendant,  or  of 
the  mid-heaven.  But  it  is  cosmically  weaker,  when  not 
in  one  of  its  own  places ;  or  when  occidental,  or  retarded 
in  its  course;  and  in  respect  to  the  scheme  of  the 
nativity,  it  is  weak  when  cadent  from  the  angles. 

Lastly,  the  general  time,  about  which  the  event  will 
take  place,  is  to  be  inferred  from  the  ruling  planet's 
matutine  or  vespertine  position,  in  regard  to  the  Sun 
and  the  ascendant,  and  from  the  circumstance  of  its 
being  situated  in  an  angle,  or  a  succedent  house.  As,  if 
it  be  matutine,  or  in  an  angle,  its  influence  operates 
earlier  and  more  promptly;  but,  if  vespertine,  or  in  a 
succedent  house,  later  and  more  tardily.  And,  in 
reference  to  this  point,  the  quadrant  which  precedes  the 
Sun,  and  that  which  precedes  the  ascendant,  together 
with  the  quadrants  opposite  to  these,  are  oriental  and 
matutine ;  and  the  other  quadrants,  following  the 
former,  are  occidental  and  vespertine. 

arhaptcr    V. 

The  Parents, 

Under  each  head  of  enquiry  the  proposed  investigation 
must  be  entered  upon  in  the  manner  mentioned  in  the 
preceding  chapter:  and,  to  proceed  in  due  order,  the 
circumstances  relating  to  the  parents  require  to  be  first 
disposed  of. 

In  conformity  with  nature,  the  Sun  and  Saturn  are 
allotted  to  the  person  of  the  father ;  and  the  Moon  and 
Venus  to  that  of  the  mother:  and  the  mode  in  which 
these  luminaries  and  planets  may  be  found  posited,  with 
reference  to  each  other,  as  well  as  to  other  planets  and 
stars,  will  intimate  the  situation  of  affairs  affecting  the 
parents. 


120 


PTOLEMV'S   TETRAKIBLOS. 


[Booh  III. 

Thus,  for  example,  the  degree  of  their  fortune  and 
wealth  will  be  indicated  by  the  doryphory*,  or  atten- 
dants of  the  luminaries.  If  the  luminaries  be  accom- 
panied, (either  in  the  same  signs  in  which  themselves 
are  placed,  or  in  the  signs  next  following,)  by  the 
benetics,  <md  by  such  stars  or  planets  as  are  of  the  same 
tendency  as  themselves,  a  conspicuous  and  brilliant 
fortune  is  presaged :  especially  should  the  Sun  be 
attended  by  malutine  stars,  and  the  Moon  by  vesper- 
tinei",  and  these  stars  be  also  well  established  in  the 
prerogatives  before  mentioned.  Likewise,  if  Saturn  or 
Venus  be  matutine,  and  in  proper  face|,  or  in  an  angle, 
it  foreshows  the  prosperity  of  either  parent  respectively, 
according  to  the  scheme.Jj  If,  however,  the  luoiinariea 
hold  no  connection  with  the  planets,  and  be  unattended 
by  any  doryphory,  the  adverse  fortunes  of  their  parents, 
their  humble  state  aid  obscurity,  are  then  denoted; 
especially,  if  Saturn  and  Venus  may  not  bo  favourably 
constituted.  The  parents  are  also  subjected  to  a  state 
of  vicissitude,  never  rising  above  mediocrity,  when  the 
luminaries  may  have  a  doyrphory  of  a  condition  or 
tendency  foreign  to  their  own :  as,  for  instance,  when 
Mars  may  ascend  near  in  succession  to  the  Sun,  or 
Saturn  to  the  Moon  ;  or  if  the  benefics  be  found  con- 
stituted unfavourably,  and  not  in  conformity  with  their 
own  natural  condition  and   tendency.     But  should  the 

I   ■    •  ^•tuf.fiu.     TbJB  word  has  been  hereto/ore  rendfreil  "  ^afciii/iuni" 

^aiid  "satellites",  but,  &s  these  terms  do  not  bbbiii  HuKicieDlIf  precise 

r  in  their  ineaning,  and  are  alreiidy  in  Dse  to  signify  tlie  minor  orbs 

which  revolve  round  k  principail  planet,  I  have  ventured  to  AnglioJM 

the  Greek  word  ;  the  ubueiI  signifioation  of  wbich  is  a  "  Imdy-giurd."' 

+  Or,  in  other  word«,  "  eliould  the  atars,  which  attend  the  Sod,  be 

'*  snch  as  rise  btfore  hiiu  ;  and  those,  which  attend  the  Moon,  snch  oa 

"  rise  afttr  her." 

J  As  described  in  CImp.  26,  Book  I. 

j!  .Sntnrn  bein);  applicable  to  the  father,  and  Venus  to  the  niolher. 


Chap,  v.]       PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  121 

part  of  fortune,  as  shewn  by  the  scheme  of  the  nativity, 
be  found  in  a  favourable  position,  and  in  consonance 
with  the  doryphory  of  the  Sun  and  Moon,  the  estate  of 
the  parents  will  then  remain  steady  and  secure.  If. 
however,  the  position  be  discordant  and  adverse,  or  if 
the  malefics  compose  the  doryphory,  the  parents*  estate 
will  be  unproductive  and  even  burthensome. 

The  probable  duration  of  the  lives  of  the  parents  is  to 
be  inferred  by  means  of  other  configurations.  And,  in 
the  case  of  the  father,  a  long  life  is  presaged,  if  Jupiter, 
or  Venus,  be  in  any  mode  whatever  configurated  with 
either  the  Sun  or  Saturn ;  or,  also,  if  Saturn  himself 
makes  an  harmonious  configuration  with  the  Sun  (that 
is  to  say,  either  by  the  conjunction,  the  sextile,  or  the 
trine) ;  provided  such  configuration  be  fully  and  strongly 
established  and  confirmed*: — and,  when  not  so  estab- 
lished and  confirmed,  although  it  does  not  actually 
denote  a  short  life,  yet  it  will  not  then  equally  presage 
a  long  life. 

If,  however,  the  planets  be  not  posited  in  the  manner 
just  described  ;  and  if  Mars  be  elevated  abovef,  or  ascend 


*  The  Perugio  Latin  translation,  of  1646,  inserts  here,  *'and  pro- 
'*  vided  Saturn  and  the  San  are  not  impeded  by  being  posited  in 
"  unfortunate  or  unsuitable  places." 

t  *'  Elerated,'^  Moxon's  Mathematical  Dictionary  gives  the  follow- 
ing detinition  of  this  astrological  term.  "Elevated.  A  certain  pre- 
**  eminence  of  one  planet  above  another ;  or,  a  concurrence  of  two 
**  to  a  certain  act,  wherein  one,  being  stronger,  is  carried  above  the 
"  weaker,  and  does  alter  and  depress  its  nature  and  influence :  But 
'*  whereio  this  being  elevated  consists,  there  are  several  opinions ; 
'*  some  say  when  a  planet  is  nearest  the  zenith,  or  meridian  ;  others 
"  will  have  it  only  that  planet  that  is  highest,  or  nearest  to  the 
'*  Apoga'on  of  his  eccentric  or  epicycle.  And  Argol  admits  of  all 
"  these,  and  several  other  advantages,  and  thence  advises  to  collect 
"  the  several  testimonies,  and  that  that  planet,  who  has  most,  shall 
"  be  said  to  be  elevated  above  the  other."  According  to  Whalley, 
Cardan's  opinion  was  that  **  that  planet  is  mo%\)  ^\«^^\ft.\  ^\£vOcv 


122  KrOLEMY's  TETRABIULOS.  [Book  III. 

in  succesiiion  to  the  Sun,  or  to  Saturn  ;  or,  even,  should 
Saturn  himself  not  be  in  consonance  with  the  Bun,  but 
configurated  with  it  by  the  quartile  or  opposition,  and 
if,  when  thus  cireuuistanced.  both  he  and  the  Sun  ahould 
be  posited  in  cadent  houses,  it  is  then  indicated  that  the 
father  is  liable  to  infirmities;  but,  if  in  angles  or  succedent 
houses,  the  father  will  live  only  a  short  life,  and  suffer 
from  various  bodily  injuries  and  diseases.     The  short- 
ness of  bis  life  is  particularly  intimated  fay  the  position 
of  the  Sun  and  Saturn  in  the  first  two  angles,  viz.  the  4 
ascendant  and    the  mid-heaven,  or  in   their  succedent'l 
houses;  and  his  aHliction  by  diseases  and  injuries,  whea.1 
they  may  be  posited  in  the  two  other  angles,  the  westernJ 
and  the  lower  heaven,  or  in  the  houses  succedent  thereto,  I 
And,  if  Mars  be  aspected  to  the  Sun  in  the  way  before- T 
mentioned,  the  father  will  die  suddenly,  or  receive  injury  I 
in  his  face  or  eyes ;  h\it,  should  Mara  be  so  aspected  to 
Saturn,  he  will   be   afilicted   with   contractions  of   the 
muscles  or   limbs,  and   with  fevers  and   disorders  pro- 
ceeding from  infiammation  and  wounds  ;^ — or  even  death 
may  be  the  consequence.     And  even  Saturn  himself,  if 
badly  configurated  with  the  Sun.  will  also  intlict  disease 
and  death  on  the  father,  by  inducing  such  particular 
disorders  as  are  incidental  from  wateiy  humour. 

The  foregoing  observations  are  applicable  to  the  father, 
and  those  which  follow  must  be  attended  to  in  the  case  | 
of  the  mother. 

Should  the  Sun  be  configurated,  in  any  mode  whafri9 
ever,  with  the  Moon  or  Venus,  or,  should  Venus  hersei{ 


"  u  more  ocoitlentaJ  uid  ponderous."    For  myaelf,  1  i 

Dpinion   to  be  inaccurate,   becautie,   if   Ptolemy   nieaDt   U 

only  the  greater  oceidentality  of  the  planet,  he  would  (as 

instances)   liare   used   the  word  "precrding"  instead   of  ' 

'•  above ; "  aud  t  incline  to  think,  that  greater  proiimily  to  I 

is  the  tmer,  as  well  as  more  simple,  lueaniog  of  tlie  t«rm  "  elevated." 


Chap,  v.]  PTOLEMY'S   TETRABIBLOS.  123 

be  harmoniously  configurated  with  the  Moon,  either  by 
the  sextile,  the  trine,  or  the  conjunction,  the  mother  will 
live  long. 

If,  however,  Mars  be  succedent  to  the  Moon  and  Venus, 
or  in  quartile  or  opposition  to  them,  or,  if  Saturn  be 
similarly  aspected  to  the  Moon  only,  and  both  of  them  be 
void  of  course  or  retrograde,  or  cadent,  adverse  accidents 
and  disease  will  attend  the  mother ;  should  they,  on  the 
other  hand,  be  swift  in  motion  and  placed  in  angles,  they 
portend  that  her  life  will  be  short,  or  grievously  afflicted. 
Their  position  in  the  oriental  angles,  or  succedent  houses, 
particularly  denotes  the  shortness  of  her  life ;  and,  in 
those  which  are  occidental,  her  affliction.  In  the  same 
manner,  should  Mars  be  thus  aspected  to  the  Moon,  (and 
should  that  luminary  at  the  same  time  be  oriental)  the 
mothers  sudden  death,  or  some  injury  in  her  face  or  eyes, 
will  be  produced :  and,  if  the  Moon  be  then  occidental* 
death  will  be  occasioned  by  miscarriage  in  parturition, 
by  inflammation,  or  by  wounds.  Such  are  the  efiects 
which  ensue  from  these  aspects  made  by  Mars  to  the 
Moon ;  but,  should  he  make  them  to  Venus,  death  will 
then  take  place  from  fever,  some  latent  disease,  or  sudden 
sickness.  Saturn's  aspect*  to  the  Moon,  when  she  is 
oriental,  inflicts  on  the  mother  disease  and  death  from 
extreme  colds,  or  fevers ;  but,  should  the  Moon  be  occi- 
dental, the  danger  arises  from  aflections  of  the  womb,  or 
from  consumption. 

In  the  investigation  of  all  these  circumstances,  it  is 
highly  essential  that  the  properties  of  the  signs,  in  which 
are  situated  the  stars  actuating  the  influence,  should  be 
also  taken  into  consideration ;  and  that,  by  day,  the  Sun 
and  Venus  should  be  principally  observed  ;  and,  by  night, 
Saturn  and  the  Moon. 


*  By  the  qnartile  or  oppoaition, ««  \)«1ot^  xEv^TtXlvycv^. 


lU 


PTOLEMY  S  TETRABIBLOS. 


[Book  III. 


If,  however,  after  due  attention  baa  been  paid  to  the 
foregoing  points,  a  more  specific  inquiry  should  still  be 
demanded,  it  will  then  become  necessary  to  assume  the 
place  allotted  to  the  paternal  or  maternal  condition,  as  the 
case  may  be,  for  an  horoscope  or  ascendant,  in  order  to 
pui'sue  the  invesligalion".  And  by  this  means,  which 
in  this  respect  will  answer  the  purpose  of  a  nativity,  al 
other  particulars  concerning  the  parents  may  be  viewed 
succinctly,  according  to  the  general  forms  hereinafter  ■ 
given,  as  adapted  for  practice  and  applicable  to  all  events.  I 

In  these  and  in  all  other  cases,  the  mode,  in  which  tba'l 
influences  are  commixed,  must  be  carefully  kept  in  viewp, 
and  it  must  be  observed   whether  any  particular  i 
possess,    in    themselves    alone,    the    operative    cause 
whether  others  share  dominion  with  them;   and  it  ia.l 
then  to  be  »een  which  among  them  all  are  more  powe)^-■ 
ful,  and  which  of  them  take  the  lead  in  establishing  the  ' 
event:  so  that  due  inference  may  be  drawn  agreeably 
to  their  several  natures.     And  should  the  several  stars, 
which  may  happen  to  be  combined  in  dominion,  be  also 
equal  in  power,  the  diversity  of  their  several   natures, 
and  the  admixture  of  qualities  thence  arising,  must  then 
be  taken  into  consideration ;   and,  by  fairly  weighing 
this  various  admixture,  the  nature  and  quality  of  the 
future  event  may  be  apprehended. 


*  III!  tliu  posui&p^e,  WLiilluy  Teniarku  tli&t "  Ptolemy  tcavbetli,  from 
"  tile  child'ij  QftlivUy,  lu  entuC  svliemes  for  tbe  father  and  mother, 
"  auil  theacc  to  give  juiigmeut,  as  if  it  were  thrir  proper  nativitieii ; 
"  the  rule  U  tliU  :  If  the  nativity  be  diuro*!,  far  ilic  father.  oUi^rve 
"  the  UeijreK  ihe  Sua  is  in,  ia  thechilil'a  nnUvily  ;  nnd  nmkt  thiit  the 
"  degree  aaoetxting  for  tbe  father:  nod  cuufarmable  to  tbut,  iirder  the 
"  cusps  of  all  till'  utber  housei  If  for  the  miillier,  ii»e  Venus.  Bat 
"  if  tlic  nntiviiy  be  nm-turnKl.  for  tlie  father,  Iilkh  the  place  of 
"  Saturn  :  and  for  the  mother,  that  of  the  Moon  "  WJialley  odJs, 
that  "  wliat  ill  this  chapter  liath  relation  to  llis  parents,  ia  vrliat  shall 
"  /mpiKB  thmii  itJttT  the  nativiiy,  uud  nut  be/urt." 


Chap,  VI.]  Ptolemy's  tetrabiblos.  125 

Stars,  posited  separately  or  at  a  distance  from  each 
other,  distribute,  at  their  appropriate  times  and  periods, 
the  events  operated  by  each ;  thus  the  earlier  events 
are  brought  about  by  stars  which  are  more  oriental 
than  others,  and  the  latter  events  by  those  which  are 
more  occidental.  For  it  is  indispensably  requisite  that 
the  star,  under  the  influence  of  which  some  particular 
event  is  expected  to  happen,  should  be  originally*  con- 
nected with  the  place  to  which  the  inquiry,  concerning 
that  event,  is  allotted ;  and,  if  such  connection  should 
not  have  existed,  no  effect  of  any  importance  can 
possibly  be  produced;  because  a  star  does  not  exercise 
a  vigorous  influence,  unless  it  was  fully  in  communica- 
tion at  the  beginning.  But,  however,  the  time,  at  which 
the  effect  will  take  place,  is  further  regulated  by  the 
relative  distance  of  the  star,  governing  the  efl^ect,  from 
the  Sun  and  the  angles  of  the  world,  as  well  as  by  its 
primary  position  of  dominion. 

OthaptEr  VI. 

Brothers  and  Sisters, 

Under  this  head  of  inquiry,  a  general  and  cursory 
investigation,  only,  can  be  performed ;  and  an  attempt 
to  dive  into  minute  particulars  would  be  fruitless,  and 
would  prove  to  be  merely  a  vain  search  after  things  not 
open  to  discovery .-f- 


*  Or,  at  the  actual  time  of  nativity. 

t  In  spite  of  this  declaration  of  the  author,  it  seems,  by  Whal ley's 
note  on  this  chapter,  that  Cardan  maintained  that  the  particular 
•circumstances,  liable  to  aifect  the  brothers  and  sisters,  might  be 
inferred  by  adopting;:,  as  an  ascendant,  the  degree  of  the  planet 
holding  chief  dominion  over  the  place  of  brethren,  and  erecting  a 
ficheme  thereby,  in  a  mode  similar  to  that  allowed  by  Ptolemy  in 
the  case  of  parents. 


126 


Ptolemy's  tetbabibloh.  [Book  III. 


Tlie  place,  whence  inferences  are  drawn  respecting 
brothers  and  sisters,  is  to  be  considered  aa  being  applic- 
able only  to  children  of  the  same  mother,  and  it  is 
consequently,  agreeably  to  nature,  presumed  to  be  the 
same  a^  the  maternal  place;  viz.  the  sign  nceupying  the 
mid-heaven ;  or,  by  day,  that  which  contains  Venus, 
and,  by  night,  the  Moon.  This  sign  and  its  succedent 
are  considered  as  indicative  of  the  mother  and  her 
children,  and  the  same  place  is  therefore  properly 
allotted  to  brothers  and  sisters. 

Hence,  provided  this  place  be  configurated  with  the 
benefics,  there  will  be  several  brothers  and  sisters: 
the  number  of  them  depending  upon  the  number  and 
positions  of  such  benefic  stars,  whether  in  bicorporeal 
signs,  or  in  signs  of  single  form. 

If,  however,  the  malefics  should  be  in  elevation  over 
this  place,  or  be  hostilely  situated  in  apposition  thereto, 
the  brothers  and  sisters  will  then  be  few  in  number; 
and  this  fewness  especially  follows  when  the  malefics 
may  surround  the  Sun.  Should  the  hostile  configuration 
be  presented  from  the  other  angles*,  and,  particularly, 
if  from  the  ascendant,  Saturn  will  then  represent  the 
elder  born;  and  Mars,  by  inflicting  death,  will  diminish 
the  total  number  of  brothers  and  sistera-f-. 

Again,  should  the  stars,  which  promise  brethren,  be 
favourably  circumstanced  as  to  their  cosmical  position, 
the  brethren  will  be  eminent  and  illustrious  ;  but  humble 
and  obscure,  if  the  cosmical  position  be  of  an  adverse 


*  That  is  to  xay,  from  the  angleB  Id  qnartile  (and  therefore  hostile 
also)  to  the  111 irl- heaven . 

4  The  text  does  not  shew  whether  it  be  necessary  th&t  Saturn  ajid 
Mftr»  -thouli]  both  be  in  the  asceDilant,  in  order  to  produce  the  etfeet 
describsil ;  nor  whether  the  Ksme  elTecl  would  not  follow,  if  one  of 
them  ihould  be  in  the  osceadiuit,  and  the  other  in  the  occidental 
angle,  or  even  in  some  other  position. 


Cha'p.  VII.]  PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  127 

nature.  If,  also,  the  malefic  stars  should  be  in  elevation 
over  those  which  give  brethren,  the  life  of  the  brethren 
will  then  be  only  of  short  duration. 

Stars,  constituted  masculinely,  represent  brothers; 
those  femininely,  sisters.  The  more  oriental  stars  like- 
wise represent  the  elder  born;  and  those  which  are  more 
occidental,  the  younger. 

Moreover,  should  the  stars,  which  give  brethren,  be 
harmoniously  configurated  with  that  one  which  has 
dominion  of  the  sign  allotted  to  brethren,  the  brethren 
will  be  mutually  friendly  and  affectionate:  and,  if  an 
harmonious  configuration  be  also  extended,  by  the  same 
planets,  to  the  part  of  fortune,  the  brethren  will  live 
together  in  communion.  But,  if  the  stars,  which  give 
brethren,  should,  on  the  contrary,  be  in  situations  uncon- 
nected with  each  other,  or  be  in  opposition,  the  brethren 
wili  then  live  at  variance,  mutually  practising  enmity 
and  fraud. 

(EhaptEr  VII. 

Male  or  Female, 

After  the  indications  which  regard  brothers  and  sisters 
have  been  investigated  by  the  foregoing  rules,  consonant 
with  nature  and  reason,  the  actual  native,  or  the  person 
to  whom  the  scheme  of  nativity  is  specially  appropriated, 
demands  attention :  and  the  first  and  most  obvious  in- 
quiry is  whether  the  said  native  will  be  male  or  female. 

The  consideration  of  this  question  rests  not  on  a  single 
basis,  nor  can  it  be  pursued  in  one  sole  direction  only ; 
it  depends,  on  the  contrary,  upon  the  several  situations 
of  the  two  luminaries  and  the  ascendant,  and  upon  such 
planets  as  possess  any  prerogatives  in  the  places  of  those 
situations;  and  all  these  circumstances  should  be  specially 
observed  at  the  time  of  conception,  and,  in  a  general 
manner  also,  at  that  of  birth. 


128  Ptolemy's  TETiiABiiiLos.  [Bci-klU. 

Observation  of  the  said  three  places,  and  of  the  mode 
in  which  the  planets  ruling  them  may  be  con-^tituted,  is 
wholly  indispensable:  it  luuat  be  seen  whether  all,  or 
most' of  them,  may  be  constituted  masculincly  or  femin- 
inely; and  prediction  must,  of  course,  be  regulated  m 
conformity  with  their  disposition,  so  observed  :  as  tend- 
ing  to  produce  a  male  or  female  birth. 

The  masculine  or  feminine  nature  of  the  starn  is  to  be 
dietinguisbed  in  the  manner  already  pointed  out  in  the 
commencement  of  this  treatise*.     For  instance,  by  the 
nature  of  the  signs  in  which  they  are  situated,  by  their 
relative  position  to  each  other,  and  also  by  their  positioa 
towards  the  earth ;  as,  when  in  the  east,  ihc-y  are  ma»>  ] 
culinely  disposed,  and,  when  in   the  west,  femininely.  J 
Their  relative  position  to  the  Sun  also  affords  guidanoaj 
in  distinguishing  them ;  since,  if  they  should  l^e  matu-'. 
tine,  they  are  considered  to  signify  tlie  male  gender ;  andil 
if  vespertine,  the  female.     Thus,  from  the  aex  ( 
prevalent,  as  observed  by  these  rules,  that  of  the  nati^ 
may  be  rationally  inferred. 


ChiilJtcr  VIII. 

Tu'ins. 

With  respect  to  the  probability  of  the  birth  of  twins,  o 
a  greater  number  at  once,  the  same  place.«  must  be  ol> 
served  as  those  mentioned  in  the  preceding  cl 
that  is  to  say,  the  places  of  both  luminaries,  and  I 
ascendant. 

"When  two,  or  all  three,  of  the  said  places  may  be 
situated  in  bicorporeai  signs,  births  of  this  kind  will 
occur,  in  consequence  of  the  combination  which  then 
arises;  especially, provided  all  the  planets,  which  confcroul 


Clotp.  VIII.]  PTOLEMV'S   TETRABIliLOS.  129 

those  places,  should  also  be  similarly  circumstanced :  or 
although  only  some  of  them  be  posited  in  bieorpoteai 
signs,  while  the  rest  may  be  placed  by  two  or  more 
together.  Because  even  more  than  twinij  will  be  born, 
in  a  case  where  all  the  ruling  places  may  be  in  bicor- 
poreal  signs,  mcst  of  the  planets  being  at  the  same  time 
posited  in  the  same  way,  and  configurated  with  them. 
The  number  of  children,  however,  to  be  produced  at  the 
birth,  is  to  be  inferred  from  that  planet  which  exercises 
the  right  of  determining  the  number*  :  and  the  sex  ot 
sexes  are  to  be  predicted  by  means  of  the  planets  in 
configuration  with  the  Sun,  Moon,  and  ascendant. 

And,  should  the  position  of  the  heavens  be  arranged 
so  that  the  angle  of  the  mid-heaven,  and  not  that  of  the 
ascendant,  may  be  connected  with  the  luminaries,  there 
will,  in  that  case,  be  produced,  almost  always,  twins-, 
and  sometime.^  even  more. 

To  .speak,  however,  more  particularly,  three  males  will 
be  born,  as  in  the  nativity  of  the  Anactores  f,  when 
Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars  may  be  configurated  with  the 
places  before  appointed,  in  hicorporeal  signs;  and  three 
females,  as  in  the  nativity  of  the  Graces,  when  Venue 
and  the  Moon,  with  Mercury  femininely  constituted,  may 

'  The  planet  here  alluded  to,  seetu*  to  b«  tliat  which  may  be 
vonDected  with  moHt  ol  tlio  ruling  placw. 

f  I  have  looked  in  many  other  books  for  this  word  "  Anaetoret" 
(ploral  of  mtM*Tt,f),  as  desigQating  three  particular  iniHriduals  bom 
at  the  same  birth,  for  which  ci^ilication  it  is  here  utied  hy  Ptolemj'; 
but  iny  ■eari^li  lias  been  in  vain.  Cicero  has,  however,  written  a 
pwsage,  in  whieli  a  word,  very  nearly  resembling  it,  oecurs,  and 
which  would  seem  to  relate  to  the  very  perions  alluded  to  by 
Ptolemy:  viz.,  "The  godRbip  of  the  Dioispuri  wm  eHtablinhed  in 
"  various  rnoden  among  the  Greeks,  and  applied  to  varions  persons. 
"  One  set  consisted  of  three  peraons,  who  were  styled  at  Athenn  the 
'  Anacta,  and  were  the  sons  of  Jupiter,  the  most  antient  king,  and 
"  Proserpine ;  their  several  names  were  Tritopatrens,  Eubuleoi',  and 

Dioaysiufl."     De  Xat.  Dior.  lib.  3,  cap.  21. 


130  I'TOLEMY'S   TETIIABIBLOS.  [Bnnl:  HI, 

be  configurated  in  like  manner.  When  Saturn.  Jupiter, 
and  Venus  may  be  so  configurated,  two  males  and  one 
female  will  be  horn,  as  in  the  nativity  of  the  Dioscuri*; 
and,  when  Venus  the  Moon  and  Mare  inay  be  »o  con- 
figurated, two  females  and  one  male,  as  in  the  nativity 
of  Cerea,  Core  and  Liber -f". 

In  cases  of  this  kind,  however,  it  most  usually  happens 
that  the  conception  has  not  been  complete,  and  that  the 
children  are  born  with  some  remarkable  imperfections  or 
deformities.  And,  in  some  instances,  owing  to  a  certain 
concurrence  of  events,  these  numerous  productions  are 
<^uite  extraordinary  and  amazing. 

Chapter  IX. 

Monstrous  or  defective  Births. 
The  same  places,  as  those  pointed  out  in  the  two  chapters 
last  preceding,  are  again  to  be  considered,  in  inciuiring 
into  the  probability  of  a  monatroua  or  defective  birth, 

•  ThL*  is  ilii?  second  set  of  the  Dioocuri,  as  stalwi  by  Cicero  :  they 
were  tlie  children  of  the  lliird,  nr  Cretan  •tu)iit«r  (tlie  eon  of  Katnin) 
and  Lcdai  their  natiies  were  Caetor,  Pollux,  and  Uelcna..  Helena, 
however,  in  Dot  raenlioiied  by  Cicero. 

I  Core  is  a  uarue  of  Proserpine:  Liber,  of  IIaccIiub.  And,  altbon^ 
the  mention  here  made  of  Ceres,  Pronerpiue,  and  Bacchus,  aa  being 
the  oRsiring  of  one  and  the  same  birth,  does  not  accord  with  tlw 
usnal  notion  of  the  genealogy  of  these  divinities,  it  seems  (hat 
Ptolemy  did  not  no  represieDt  tbem  without  same  reason.  For,  in 
cap.  'i4.  lib.  2,  De  Nal  Dear.,  Cicero  speaks  of  Lilier  u»  liaviag 
been  deified  conjointly  with  Ceres  and  Libera  (another  name  of 
rroscTpine) :  and  adds,  that  "it  may  be  understood,  from  the  rit«B 
"  and  ii)y>terie8  of  the  wiirahip,  hon  ihe  deification  look  place."  It 
appears  also,  by  Daviea'^  notes  on  Cicero,  that  Livj  and  Tacitus  botii 
speak  of  the  co-partnerfcbip  in  divinity  exercised  by  Liber,  Libera, 
and  Ceres.  There  is  not,  however,  any  occasion  at  present  te  dive 
deeper  into  the  question  of  the  generation  of  thei«  deities :  for  onr 
author  bas  ailvertcd  to  them  only  to  point  out  that  so  many  males  or 
females  will  be  produceil  at  one  birth,  under  cevtjuu  condguratjone 
of  the  stars. 


Chap.  IX.]  PTOLEMY'S   TETRABIBLOS.  131 

For  it  will  be  found  that,  at  a  birth  of  this  description, 
the  luminarias  are  either  cadent  from  the  ascendant,  or 
else  not  in  any  manner  configurated  with  it ;  while,  at 
the  same  time,  the  angles*  are  occupied  by  the  malefics. 

It  therefore  becomes  necessary,  when  such  a  position 
of  the  heavens  may  occur  at  the  time  of  birth,  to  observe 
forthwith  the  preceding  new  or  full  Moon-f"  and  its  ruler, 
as  well  as  the  rulers  of  the  luminaries  at  the  said  time  of 
birth.  For,  if  all  the  places,  in  which  the  rulers  of  the 
luminaries,  and  in  which  the  Moon  herself  and  Mercury 
may  be  situated,  at  the  birth,  or,  if  most  of  those  places 
should  be  totally  inconjunct  and  unconnected  with  the 
places  of  the  said  preceding  new  or  full  Moon  and  its 
ruler,  the  birth  will  then  be  monstrous.  And  if  it  should 
be  further  found,  in  addition  to  this  absence  of  connection, 
that  the  luminaries  may  be  also  posited  in  quadrupedal  or 
bestial  signs,  and  the  two  malefics  in  angles,  the  birth  will 
in  that  case  not  be  human.  And  should  the  luminaries, 
when  so  circumstanced,  be  not  at  all  supported  by  any 
benefic  planet,  but  only  by  malefics,  the  creature  born 
will  be  wholly  indocile,  wild,  and  of  evil  nature  :  if,  how- 
ever, they  should  receive  support  from  Jupiter  or  Venus, 
the  offspring  will,  then  be  like  that  of  dogs  or  cats,  or 
other  creatures  held  in  religious  veneration  and  used  in 
worship  J:  but,  if  Mercury  support  the  luminaries,  it  will 
resemble  that  of  fowls,  oxen,  or  swine,  or  of  other 
animals  adapted  to  the  service  of  mankind. 

When  the  luminaries  may  be  in  signs  of  human  shape, 
while  other  circumstances  in  the  scheme  of  the  nativity 
may  exist  as  before  described,  the  creature  born  will  then 


•  Whalley  says  here,  "  chiefly  the  ascendant  and  niid-h^avcn.'* 

t  Whichever  n)i«;ht  have  been  nearer  in  time 

X  It  is  perhaps  superfluous  to  mention  that  the  two  kinds  of 
animals  here  named,  (as  well  as  many  others)  were  venerated  by  the 
iKji^yptians. 


132  ptolkmy's  tetrabiblds.  [Boo!.:  III. 

lie  human,  or  wil)  partake  of  liuman  nature,  although  it 
will  stilt  be  defective  in  some  peculiar  quality.  And, 
in  order  to  ascerlain  the  nature  of  that  defect,  the  shape 
and  form  of  the  signs  found  on  the  angles  occupied  by 
the  malefic-'i,  as  well  as  of  those  wherein  the  luminaries 
are  situated,  must  be  taken  into  consideration  :  and,  if  in 
this  instance  also,  no  benetic  planet  should  lend  support 
to  any  one  of  the  prescribed  places,  the  offspring  pro- 
duced will  he  utterly  void  of  reason,  and  indeed  indefin- 
able*. If,  however,  it  should  happen,  that  Jupiter  or 
Venus  gives  support,  the  defect  will  be  veiled  by  a  specious 
outward  appearance,  similar  to  that  of  hermaphrodites, 
and  of  those  persons  called  Harporratiaci-f-.  or  others  of 
like  i  III  perfections.  And  should  Mercury  also  give  sup- 
port, in  addition  to  that  of  Jupitsr  or  Venus,  the  offspring 
will  then  become  ao  interpreter  of  oracles  and  divina- 
tions; but,  if  Mercury  .support  alone,  it  will  be  deaf  and 
dumb^,  although  clever  and  ingenious  in  its  intellect. 

CluijJtev  X. 

Children  not  reared. 
The  question  which  now  remains  to  be  considered,  in 
order  to  complete  the  investigation  of  circumstances 
taking  place  simultBDeously  with  the  nativity,  or  im- 
mediately consequent  thereon,  is,  whether  the  child,  then 
born,  M'iil  or  will  not  be  reared. 

This  inquiry  is  to  be  handled  distinctly  from  that 
regarding   the   duration   of   life,  although    there   is  an 

•  The  Groek  aays  "ii-nigmatifdl.'' 

f  One  LaLin  translation  Las  rendered  this  wurd  "  Btammerers;" 
anil,  lis  Httt|Hii'r».tes  was  the  god  of  Bileuce,  Ptolemy  has  probably 
ueeil  the  epithet  to  signify  ilefet^t  of  speech. 

X  "  Dumb.''  The  (ireek  ia  ilaiTui  tri^^ixk,  "  depriitd  of  tteth,"  and 
AllntinB  has  bo  traoslatad  it :  bnt  other  translationii  render  Clieae 
wonl^  by  dumb,  whii-h,  ooofcidiarinK  the  nature  of  Mercary,  seema 
their  preferable  signilicatinn. 


Chap,  X.]  PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  133 

apparent  connection  between  them.  The  questions 
themselves  are,  indeed,  similar ;  for  it  is  much  the  same 
thing  to  inquire  whether  the  child  will  be  nurtured,  or 
how  long  it  will  live;  and  the  only  distinction,  between 
these  two  question?,  arises  from  the  different  modes  in 
which  they  are  treated.  For  instance,  the  inquiry  into 
the  duration  of  life  is  to  be  pursued  only  in  cases  wherein 
there  is  allotted  to  the  native  some  space  of  time,  not  less 
in  duration  than  a  solar  period ;  that  is  to  say,  a  year. 
Therefore,  since  time  is  also  measured  by  smaller  portions, 
such  as  months,  days,  and  hours,  and  since  the  question, 
whether  the  native  will  or  will  not  be  reared,  belongs  to 
cases  wherein  some  exuberance  of  evil  influence  threatens 
speedy  destruction,  and  where  life  is  not  likely  to  endure 
throughout  a  whole  year,  the  inquiry  into  the  duration 
of  life  must  consequently  involve  a  more  multifarious 
consideration  than  that  which  relates  to  rearing ;  which 
may  be  at  once  disposed  of,  in  a  more  general  and 
summary  manner. 

Thus,  if  either  of  the  two  luminaries  be  in  an  angle, 
and  one  of  the  maleflcs  be  either  in  conjunction  with 
that  luminary,  or  else  distant  in  longtitude  from  each 
luminary,  in  an  exactly  equal  space,  so  as  to  form  the 
point  of  junction  of  two  equal  sides  of  a  trianirle,  of 
which  sides  the  two  luminaries  form  the  extremities, 
while,  at  the  same  time,  no  beneflc  star  may  partake  in 
the  configuration,  and  while  the  rulers  of  the  luminaries 
may  be  also  posited  in  places  belonging  to,  or  controuled 
by,  the  malefics — the  child,  then  born,  will  not  be 
susceptible  of  nurture,  but  will  immediately  perish. 

Should  the  configuration,  made  between  the  malefic 
planet  and  the  luminaries,  not  exist  precisely  in  the 
mode  jusu  mentioned  ;  that  is  to  say,  should  the  said 
planet  not  be  equally  distant  from  both  luminaries^  ao  «& 
to  form  the  point  of  junction  oi  two  ec\w«\  ^\^^'9»  ^^'i  ^ 


134  i'Tolemy's  tetuakiblus.  [Booklll. 

triangle :  yet  should  it  then  hippen  that  tlie  rays  of  two 
maletics  may  nearly  approach  the  places  of  the  two 
luminaries,  easting  an  injurjoua  influence  either  on  both, 
nr  only  one  of  them,  and  if  both  the  said  roalefics  be 
together  succedent,  or  in  opposition,  to  the  luminaries, 
or  if  one  of  them  be  suecedent,  and  the  other  in  opposi- 
tion, or  even  if  only  one  may  particularly  afflict  one  of 
the  luminaries,  then,  in  any  such  case,  no  duration  of  life 
will  be  allotted  to  the  child;  for  the  Mupreiuacy  of  the 
power  of  the  maiefics  extinguishes  the  influence  favour- 
iible  to  human  nature,  and  tending  to  prolong  existence. 
Mai's  is  exceedingly  pernicious  when  sncoedent  to  the 
Sun,  and  Saturn  when  suecedent  to  the  Moon.  But  a 
converse  effect  takes  place  when  either  of  these  planets 
may  he  in  opposition  to  the  Sun  or  Moon,  or  in  elevation 
above  them  ;  for  the  Sun  will  then  be  afllicted  by  Saturn, 
and  the  Moon  by  Mars:  and  especially  so,  provided  the 
said  planets  !<houId  have  local  prerogatives,  in  the  signa 
containing  the  luminaries,  or  in  the  sign  on  the  ascend- 
ant. And,  should  a  double  opposition  exist,  by  the 
circumstance  of  the  luminaries  being  placed  in  two 
opposite  angles,  and  by  the  two  malefics  being  each  so 
pasited  as  to  be  equally  distant  from  each  luminary,  the 
child  will  be  born  almost,  if  not  quite,  dead.  Neverthe- 
le.ss.  if  the  luminaries  should  be  .separating  from,  or  be 
otherwise  configurated  with  benefic  planets,  whose  rays 
may  be  projected  to  parts  preceding  the  said  luminaries, 
the  child  will  then  live  as  many  days,  or  hours,  as  there 
lire  degree.s,  numbered  between  the  prorogator"  and  the 
nearest  malefic. 

*  A  prorogator  ix  eillier  b  lumiimry,  pinnet,  or  a  uerlftin  ilcKDie  of 
tlie  luHini^,  wliicli  detcrmiueB  tlie  ilurntiou  of  Ufa,  or  tliu  liiiie  of  lUn 
aocomplialiDient  of  any  event :  it  ia  liereafter  tally  treattKl  of  in  Dm 
13tli  Chapter  of  tliis  Book ;  wliich  stiows  that,  in  the  insiKnoe  now 
roeutioneil,  it  would  be  a  lutninary,  either  iu  the  aspendant,  i>r  in  the 
mid-beaveu 


Chap,  XL]  PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  135 

If  malefics  should  cast  their  rays  to  parts  preceding 
the  luminaries,  and  benefics  to  parts  following  them,  the 
child  will  be  abandoned  at  its  birth  ;  but  will  afterwards 
meet  with  adoption,  and  will  live.  Yet,  if  the  •  malefics 
should  be  in  elevation  above  those  benefics  which  are 
thus  configurated,  the  child,  so  adopted,  will  lead  a  life 
of  misery  and  servitude  :  if,  on  the  contrary,  the  benefics 
should  be  in  elevation,  then  whoever  may  adopt  the 
deserted  child  will  supply  the  place  of  its  parents.  And, 
provided  a  benefic  planet  should  either  ascend  with,  or 
near  in  succession  to  the  Moon,  or  be  applying  to  her, 
and  one  of  the  malefics  be  occidental,  the  child's  own 
parents  will,  in  that  case,  take  it  again  under  their 
protection. 

Rules  similar  to  the  foregoing  are  to  be  observed  when 
more  than  one  child  is  bom;  for,  if  any  one  of  those 
planets,  which  may  be  configurated  towards  the  produc- 
tion of  two,  or  even  more,  children,  should  be  under  the 
west,  the  children  will  be  born  half  dead,  or  deformed, 
and  imperfect  in  body.  And,  if  the  planet  so  situated 
should  also  be  beneath  the  malefics,  the  children  will  not 
be  susceptible  of  nurture,  or  their  life  will  be  of  the 
shortest  span. 

Orhaptcr  XI. 

The  Duration  of  Life. 

Of  all  events  whatsoever,  which  take  place  after  birth, 
the  most  essential  is  the  continuance  of  life :  and,  as  it 
is,  of  course,  useless  to  consider,  in  cases  wherein  the  life 
of  a  child  does  not  extend  to  the  period  of  one  year, 
what  other  events  contingent  on  its  birth  might  other- 
wise have  subsequently  happened,  the  inquiry  into  the 
duration  of  life  consequently  takes  precedence  of  all  other 
questions,  as  to  the  events  subsequent  to  tVv^  VA?c\iVv. 


18B  ptolemy'-s  tetrabibuis.  [lioi'k  III. 

The  discua.^ion  ot  this  inquiry  is  by  no  aietuis  simple, 
nor  easy  of  execution ;  it  is  conducted  in  a  diversified 
process,  by  means  of  the  governance  of  the  ruling  places. 
And  the  method  now  about  to  be  laid  down  seems,  of  all 
others,  the  most  consonant  with  reason,  and  with  nature  : 
because  the  influence  of  the  prorogatory  places,  as  well 
as  the  rulers  of  those  places,  and  the  disposal  of  the 
anreretic*  places  or  stars,  perform  the  whole  operation 
of  regulating  the  duration  of  life.  Each  of  the.se  influ- 
ences is  to  be  distinguished  in  the  mode  pointed  out  in 
the  chapters  immediately  ensuing. 

Chapter  XII. 

The  Prorogatory  Places. 
Firstly,  those  places  only  are  to  be  deemed  prorogatory, 
to  which  the  future  assumption  of  the  dominion  of  pro- 
rogation exclusively  belongs.  These  several  places  are 
the  aign  on  the  angle  of  the  ascendant,  from  the  fifth 
degree  above  the  horiaon,  to  the  twenty-fifth  degree 
below  it; — the  thirty  degrees  in  dexter  textile  thereto, 
constituting  the  eleventh  hou.se,  called  the  Good  Daemon ; 
— also  the  thirty  degrees  in  dexter  quartile,  forming  the 
mid-heaven  above  the  earth  ; — those  in  dexter  trine 
making  the  ninth  house,  called  God  ; — and  lastly,  those 
in  opposition,  belonging  to  the  angle  of  the  west. 

Secondly,  among  these  places,  the  degrees  which  consti- 
tute the  mid-heaven  are  entitled  to  preference,  as  being 
of  a  more  potent  and  paramount  influence  ; — the  degrees 
in  the  ascendant  are  next  in  virtue; — then  the  degrees  in 
the  eleventh  hou.se  succeJent  to  the  mid-heaven ; — then 
those  in  the  angle  of  the  west ; — and,  lastly,  those  in  the 
ninth  house,  which  precedes  the  mid-heaven. 

'  The  epithet  arntTitie  U  a.  term  of  art,  adopted  from  tbe  Greek, 
signifying  fatal,  i 


Ckap.  XIII.]  PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  137 

No  degrees  under  the  earth  are,  in  any  manner, 
eligible  to  the  dominion  now  in  question ;  except  such 
only  as  enter  into  light  actually  above  the  succedent,  or, 
in  other  words,  with  the  ascendant.  And  any  sign, 
although  it  may  be  above  the  earth,  is  still  incompetent 
to  partake  in  this  dominion,  if  it  be  inconjunct  with  the 
ascendant:  hence  the  sign  which  precedes  the  ascendant, 
and  constitutes  the  twelfth  house  (called  that  of  the 
Evil  Dsemon),  is  incompetent;  and  not  only  for  the 
above  reason,  but  also  because  it  is  cadent,  and  because 
the  beams  cast  by  the  stars  posited  therein,  towards  the 
earth,  are  impaired  by  the  thick  and  dark  exhalations 
arising  from  the  earths  vapours,  which  produce  an 
unnatural  colour  and  magnitude  in  the  appearance  of 
stars  so  posited,  confusing,  and  in  some  measure  annihi- 
lating, their  beams. 

Thus  far  with  regard  to  the  places  of  prorogation. 

Chapter  XIII. 

The  Nuniher  of  Prorogatora,  and  also  the 

Part  of  Fortune.        *»>^  /•  '^f 

After  due  attention  has  been  given  to  the  instructions 
in  the  preceding  chapter,  the  Sun,  the  Moon,  the 
ascendant,  and  the  part  of  Fortune,  are  to  be  considered 
as  the  four  principally  liable  to  be  elected  to  the  oflSce 
of  prorogator ;  and  their  positions,  together  with  those 
of  such  planets  as  rule  in  the  places  of  their  positions, 
are  to  be  observed. 

The  part  of  Fortune  is  ascertained  by  computing  the 
number  of  degrees  between  the  Sun  and  the  Moon ;  and 
it  is  placed  at  an  equal  number  of  degrees  distant  from 
the  ascendant,  iA  the  order  of  the  signs.  It  is  in  all 
cases,  both  by  night  and  day,  to  be  so  computed  and  set 
down,  that  the  Moon  may  hold  with  \\.  l\\fe  ^'OAXi^  xA^Naqtcv 


138  PTOLEMV's  TETRABIBLOS.  [Book  IIL 

as  thai  M'hich  llie  Sun  may  hold  with  the  ascendant  i 
iind  it  thus  becomes,  an  it  were,  a  hinar  horoscope  or 
Hscendaiit*. 

*  Tlie  Lntin  tmiiKlnlion  (irinteil  at  Prrufiio  in  164fi.  has  here  tbe 
fnliiiwtn);  iiRKsaiie  in  uldition  :  "  Hut  it  iiiust  be  *eea  whicli  lurnJD&rjr 
"  iiiny  fullow  tlioothvr  in  llie  *QCce»iion  oF  tbe  signs;  for  if  tbe  Mooa 
"  rtlimild  »o  follow  tlitf  Sum,  tbe  pnrt  of  FortQuu  is  also  to  be  dddi- 
"  IwiL'il  froio  the  bor'ntope  or  a-wandant,  acordUig  w  the  BDeceMlon 
"of  tliH  HjjrK,  But  if  the  Moon  precede  the  Sun,  the  part  of  Fortune 
"  niu-it  be  nunibereJ  froui  Llie  rtdcendiint,  iMntrarg  to  tbe  succesgioD 

Tlii^re  iH  K  louy  diivertBtioii  un  the  pnrt  of  Fortune,  in  Cooper's 
Plii['i(lui>.  from  pp.  SUM  t«  31H  :  ami,  among  the  directioon  there  given 
for  eom|iutiii|j>  ita  niluntion,  the  following  eeeni  tbe  iuobI  accurate 
and  Biinplu:  vix.  "In  tbe  diurnal  geriiture,  tbe  Sun's  true  disiance 
"  from  the  eaat  is  ti>  be  addeil  to  the  Moon's  rif:ht  (ucension,  and  in 
"  llie  nvolurnal,  Biibiracted  ;  for  tlie  number  Ibeoce  arising  will  be 
"  tile  plaee  tind  riglit  ascension  of  the  part  of  Fortune  :  and  it  always 
"has  tlie  BAiiie  declination  with  the  Moon,  both  iu  number  and 
"tiaiiiv,  wherever  it  >*  found  Again,  let  the  Siin'a  ob1ii|ue  ascen- 
"  'ion  tAken  in  tlie  OBuendant,  be  subtracted  always  frotu  the  oblique 
''AHConMon  of  ibe  asHnJant,  an  welt  in  the  day  as  in  the  night,  and 
"  the  remaining  difference  be  addeil  to  the  Moon's  right  ascenvioo  i 
"  the  snni  will  bu  the  right  aacenfion  of  the  pnrt  of  Fortune,  »bich 
"  will  have  the  Moon's  declinatiou."  It  is  nhewn  also  by  this  disaer* 
tation,  that  the  situation  of  the  part  df  Fortune  must  be  neceiaarily 
confined  lo  the  lunar  parallels;  that  it  can  but  rarely  be  in  the 
ecliplie :  and  that  ils  latitude  iu  ever  varying.  Cooper  alsu  adds, 
from  (ardun'M  Coiiimeotariea  on  the  Telrahiblos,  that  "if  the  Moon 
*'  ii  going  from  the  conjunction  to  the  oppoaittun  of  the  Sun,  then 
"  the  Moon  follows  the  Sun,  and  the  part  of  Fortune  b  always  under 
"the  Earth,  from  the  ascendant;  Init  if  the  Moon  has  passed  the 
"opposition,  she  goes  before  the  Sun,  and  tlie  part  of  Forlnne  is 
"  before  the  ascendant,  and  always  above  the  earth.*'  Thia  remark 
of  Cardan's  is,  in  effect,  exactly  equivalent  to  what  is  stated  in  the 
additional  posange  inserted  in  ihe  Perugiu  Latin  translation,  and 
given  above. 

In  the  Prinium  Mobile  of  Placidaa  (Cooper's  translation,  p.  45), 
the  following  remark  and  example  are  given: — "The  part  of  Fonune 
"is  placed  according  to  the  Moon's  distance  from  ilie  Sun  ;  and  you 
■'  iiiUHt  oliserve  what  rays  tlie  Moon  has  to  the  Sun,  for  the  Utter 
"  uu^h^  to  have  the  satne,  and  with  tbe  same  excess  or  deliciency.  aa 


Chap,  XIII.]         PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  13i) 

Among  the  candidates  for  prorogation  as  before- 
mentioned,  by  day  the  Sun  is  preferred,  provided  he  be 
situated  in  a  prorogatory  place;  and,  if  not,  the  Moon; 
but  if  the  Moon,  also,  should  not  be  so  situated,  then 
that  planet  is  to  be  elected  which  may  have  most  claims 
to  dominion,  in  reference  to  the  Sun,  the  antecedent  new 
Moon,  and  the  ascendant;  that  is  to  say,  when  such 
planet  may  be  found  to  have  dominion  over  any  one  of 
the  places  where  these  are  situated,  by  at  least  three 
prerogatives,  if  not  more ;  the  whole  number  being  five. 
If,  however,  no  planet  should  be  found  so  circumstanced, 
the  ascendant  is  then  to  be  taken. 

By  night,  the  Moon  is  to  be  elected  as  prorogator,  pro- 
vided, in  like  manner,  she  should  be  in  some  prorogatory 
place  ;  and  if  she  be  not,  the  Sun :  if  he  also  be  not  in 
any  prorogatory  place,  then  that  planet  which  may  have 
most  rights  of  dominion  in  reference  to  the  Moon*,  and 
the  antecedent  full  Moon  and  the  part  of  Fortune.  But, 
if  there  be  no  planet  claiming  dominion  in  the  mode  pre- 
scribed, the  ascendant  must  be  taken,  in  case  a  new 
Moon  had  last  preceded  the  birth;  but,  if  a  full  Moon, 
the  part  of  Fortune. 

If  the  two  luminaries,  and  also  some  ruling  planet  of 
appropriate  condition,  should  be  each  posited  in  a  proro- 
gatory place,  then,  provided  one  luminary  may  be  found 

*'  the  part  of  Fortune  to  the  horoscope.  As  tlie  Moon  ia  to  the  8ud, 
**  80  is  the  part  of  Fortune  to  the  horoscope ;  and  as  the  Sun  i>«  lo  the 
"  horoscope,  so  is  the  Moon  to  the  part  of  Fortune.  So,  in  the 
'*  nativity  of  Charles  V,  the  Moon  applies  to  the  ultimate  sextile  of 
**  the  Sun,  but  with  a  deficiency  of  7*  45' :  I  sulitract  the  T  45'  from 
"S"*  34'  of  Scorpio,  the  ultinnte  sextile  to  the  horoscope,  and  the 
"  part  of  Fortune  is  placed  in  28^  9'  of  Libra. — N.B.  In  this  nativity, 
according  to  Placidus,  the  Sun  is  in  the  second  house,  in  14"  30'  of 
Pisces ;  the  Moon  in  the  ascendant,  in  6"  45'  of  Capricorn  ;  the 
ascendant  is  5'  34'  of  Capricorn  ;  and  the  part  of  Fortune  is  in  the 
ninth  bouse,  in  28°  Q'  of  Libra. 
*  According  to  her  position  in  tbo  schema  oi  1\\^  Ti-aXYNWrs . 


HO 


Ptolemy's  tethabiblos. 


[Bo'A-  III. 


to  occupy  some  place  more  important  and  influential  than 
the  others,  that  luminary  must  be  chosen;  but  sliould  the 
ruling  planet  occupy  the  stronger  place,  and  have  pre- 
rogatives of  dominion  suitaMe  to  the  conditions  of  both 
luminaries,  the  planet  must  then  be  preferred  to  either 
of  them". 

flIhaptEC  XIV. 

Number  of  the  Modes  of  Prorogation. 
When  the  prorogator  has  been  determined  as  above 
directed,  it  is  also  necessary  to  take  into  consideration 
the  two  modes  of  prorogation;  one  into  succeeding  signs, 
under  the  projection  of  rays,  as  it  is  called  ;  and,  when 
the  prorogator  may  be  in  an  oriental  place,  that  is  to  say, 
in  any  placn  between  the  mid-heaven  and  the  ascendant, 
this  mode  only  is  to  be  used.  The  other  mode  extends 
into  signs  preceding  the  prorogator,  according  to  what  is 
called  horary  proportion^;  and,  in  cases  when  the  pro- 
rogator may  be  situated  in  any  place  receding  finm  the 
mid-heaven,  or,  in  other  words,  between  the  mid-heaven 
and  the  angle  of  the  west,  both  modes  of  prorogation  are 
to  be  adopted. 

It  is  next  to  be  observed,  that  certain  degrees  are 
anteretic;   though,  in  the  prorogation    made   into  signs 

*  Ptacidus,  in  ri?iiiarkiDe  on  the  nativity  af  Juhn  <li  Culunna,  aitai 
staling  bin  upinion  llmt  it  is  aa  error  to  Huppose  that  a  maligu  in0a- 
eiKW  to  tlib  horoscnpe  (wlien  the  liororaupe  has  "ot  the  priiii&ry  Big- 
nitication  u(  Ii(e)  in  anu-retic,  wiys  tliat  "the  onlerand  metliod  which 
"  Ptolemy  lays  iluwii  for  the  election  of  a  prorogator  are  qnite  ali- 
"snrd,  unleB*  life  lie  at  ih>]<ti«po!Mil  of  asole  prime i-i^aitic&tor  only." 
He  proves  by  otiier  u'^iituenl!)  hIho,  anil  l>y  instances  of  the  fart,  that 
"ont  onlji  ri(;Dtliea  life,  elected  ac'urding  to  Ptolemy'*  method." 
(Cooper's  irauRlaiion,  |i.  184.) 

t  ■■  Horary  yroportion."  So  the  Perupu  Latin  of  1648 ;  the  Greek 
word,  however,  is  w(<^iat.  which  seenis  tn  be  conipoiimled  of  turn 
And  !/.■>:  and,  if  so,  the  literal  nigiiilicatiun  would  be  "  exlraotiun 
"  of  hoiiK." 


Chap.  XIV.]  PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  141 

preceding,  the  only  degree  which  is  strictly  anaeretic  is 
that  of  the  western  horizon ; — and  it  becomes  so  because 
it  obscures  the  lord  of  life ; — while  other  degrees,  of  stars 
meeting  with  or  testifying  to  the  prorogator,  both  take 
away  from  and  add  to  the  aggregate  amount  of  the  pro- 
rogation, which  would  otherwise  continue  until  the 
descension  or  setting  of  the  prorogator.  Of  these  last- 
mentioned  degrees,  however,  there  are  none  properly 
anaeretic ;  since  they  are  not  borne  to  the  prorogatory 
place,  but,  on  the  contrary,  that  place  is  carried  to  their 
positions*.  In  this  manner  the  benefics  increase  the 
the  prorogation,  but  the  malefics  diminish  it;  and 
Mercury  assists  the  influence  of  either  party  with  which 
he  may  be  configurated.  The  amount  of  the  increase  or 
diminution  is  indicated  by  the  degree  in  which  each 
star,  so  operating,  i3  exactly  situated ;  for  the  number  of 
years  will  depend  upon,  and  correspond  with,  the  horary 


*  By  the  apparent  motion  of  the  planetary  system.  On  this  pas- 
sage, Placid  us  has  the  following  observations  :  '*  In  directing  the  sig- 
''nificator  to  the  west,  you  must  consider  what  stars  or  mundane 
*  *■  rays  are  intercepted  between  the  significator  and  the  west ;  if  for- 
"tunate,  add  their  arc  to  the  significator's  arc  of  direction  to  the 
''west;  if  unfortunate*,  subtract  it  from  the  same,  and  it  will  give 
''the  arc  of  direction,  augmented  or  diminished  according  to  Pto- 
"lemy. — How  largely  and  differently  authors  have  spoken  of  this 
"direction  of  the  significator  to  the  west,  putting  various  construe- 
"  tions  on  the  words  of  Ptolemy,  is  known  to  every  one.  See  Car- 
*'  dan  in  his  Commentaries,  Maginus  in  Prim.  Mob.  and  the  Use  of 
"  Legal  Astrology  in  Physic,  c.  viii,  where  he  delivers  the  sentiments 
"of  Naibod.  Argol  censures  wholly  this  doctrine  of  Ptolemy's,  of 
"  directing  the  moderator  of  life  to  the  west,  as  vain  and  uselef^s ; 
"  but  I  say  it  is  worthy  of  remark,  and  altogether  conformable  to 
"  truth  ;  because  then  the  rays  and  intermediate  stars  of  the  malign 
"only  lessen  the  arc  of  direction  to  the  west,  and  do  not  destro}^ 
"  life,  when  by  a  right  direction,  the  moderator  of  life  does  not  re- 
"  main  at  the  same  time  with  the  malignant  planet :  for,  should  this 
"  happen,  they  kill,  without  any  manner  of  doubt."  (Cooper's  trans- 
lation, pp  106  and  108.) 


142  itolemy's  tetrabiblos.  [Buuk  III. 

times*  proper  to  each  degree ;  and  if  the  birth  be  by  day, 
care  must  be  taken  to  calculute  the  diurnal  horary  times : 
it"  by  night,  the  nocturnal.  Theae  directions  are  to  be 
understood  as  applicable  to  instances  wherein  the  degrees 
in  question  may  be  in  ihe  ascendant ;  if  farther  advanced, 
a  deduction  proportionate  to  the  distance  is  to  be  made, 
unless  they  should  be  on  the  occidental  horizon,  in  which 
case  there  can  be  no  remainder, 

But,  in  the  prorogation  made  into  succeeding  signs, 
the  places  of  the  maleflcs,  Saturn  and  Mars,  are  an^retic. 
whether  meeting  the  prorogator  bodily,  or  by  emission  of 
lajs  in  quartile,  from  either  side,  or  in  opposition  ;  they 
are  also  sometimes  anieretic,  by  a  sextile  ray,  if  in  a  sign 
of  equal  power,  obeying  or  beholding  the  sign  of  the 
prorogator.  And  even  the  mere  dejjree.  in  signs  follow- 
ing, in  quartile  with  the  prorotjatory  place,  as  also  the 
degree  in  sextile,  if  badly  afflicted,  which  is  sometimes 
the  ca.se  in  signs  of  long  ascension,  and,  still  further,  the 
degree  in  trine,  if  in  signs  of  short  ascension,  are  all 
anteretic:  so  ako  is  the  Sun's  place,  should  the  Moon  be 
prorogatory.  But,  although  the  meetings,  which  occur 
in  the  course  of  prorogation  thus  made,  have,  respectively, 
some  of  them  an  anreretic,  and  other.s  a  preservative, 
power,  in  consequence  of  their  occurring  by  means  of  an 
actual  transmission  to  the  prorogatory  place+  ;  yet  theii- 
anroretic  tendency  is  nat  always  effectual,  but  only  in 
cases  where  the  places,  ao  brought  to  the  prorogatory 
place,  may  be  badly  afflicted.  For  should  those  places 
be  situated  within  the  terms  of  a  benelic,  the  operation 
of  their  anreretic  degree  becomes  impeded;  and  it  wiil 
likewise  be  impeded,  if  either  of  the  bene6cs  should  cast 

•  "  tlofnry  Utatt."    Theae  are  the  number  0/  equatorial  deKreca 
wliich  tiny  deKr^c  of  the  ludiau  may  appear,  in  a  certain  Inlitude  on 
the  earth,  to  trannit  in  an  equatorial  hour- 
ly the  apparuat  motion  of  tlie  planetary  sytKia. 


Chap.  XIV.]  PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  143 

a  ray  in  quartile,  trine,  or  opposition*,  to  the  said 
anaeretic  degree  itself,  or  to  some  other  degree  near  in 
succession,  and  not  farther  distant  from  it  than  twelve 
degrees,  if  the  benefic  be  Jupiter;  nor  than  eight,  if 
Venus  :  the  like  impediment  will  also  subsist,  if  both  the 
prorogator  and  its  opponent^  should  be  bodies^,  and  not 
have  the  same  latitude. 

Therefore,  whenever  there  may  be  found  two  or  more 
conflicting  configurations,  auxiliary  on  the  one  hand,  and 
hostile  on  the  other,  due  observation  must  be  made  to 
ascertain  which  party  surpasses  the  other,  in  power  as 
well  as  in  number.  The  pre-eminence  in  number  will 
be,  of  course,  obvious,  from  the  greater  number  §  on  one 
side  than  on  the  other ;  but,  for  pre-eminence  in  power, 
it  must  be  seen  whether  the  stars,  auxiliary  or  hostile  as 
the  case  may  be,  are,  on  the  one  side,  in  places  appro- 
priate to  themselves,  while  they  are  not  so  on  the  other ; 
and  especially  whether  those  on  the  one  side  may  be 
oriental,  and  those  on  the  other  occidental.  It  is  also  to 
be  observed,  in  all  cases,  that  not  any  one  of  such  stars, 
whether  hostile  or  auxiliary,  is  to  be  left  out  of  the 


*  In  reference  to  this  pa^sa^e,  IMacidiiB,  in  speaking  of  the  death 
of  Octavian  Vestrius  of  Kome,  has  the?e  words:  *'The  Moon  is  found 
"  in  a  parallel  declination  of  Mars,  and  Saturn  with  tlie  opposition,  of 
*'Mar8;  the  sextile  of  Jupiter  to  the  Sun  could  give  no  assistance, 
"  because  Jupiter  is  cadent,  and  the  ray  sextile  is  very  weak,  espc- 
**  cially  when  it  is  the  principal  ray  :  for  which  reason,  Ptolemy,  in 
*'  the  chapter  of  Life,  when  he  mentions  the  planets  that  are  able  to 
**8ave  in  the  occourses  of  the  infortunes,  does  not  name  the  sextile. 
''but  the  quartile,  trine,  and  opposition;  because  the  sextile  ray  is 
"feeble,  particularly  when  it  is  less  than  60'  ;  neither  could  Venus 
*'  assist,  as  she  was  cadent  from  the  house,  and  in  a  sign  inimical  to 
**  the  Sun,"  etc.    (Cooper's  Translation,  p.  286.) 

t  Literally,  and  perhaps  more  properly,  "its  meeter." 

t  That  is  to  say,  orbs,  in  contradistinction  to  prorogations  made  by 
inspects  or  degrees  merely. 

§  Of  the  stars  and  places  brought  into  configuration. 


l*i  .  PTULKMYS   TETRABIBLOW.  [Book  III, 

present  calculation,  on  account  of  its  caaual  position 
under  the  sunbeams".  This  rule  muat  be  particularly 
attendeil  to,  because,  even  thougli  tlie  Moon  be  not  pro- 
rogatory,  the  solar  place  itself  becomes  anaT^tic,  if 
shackled  by  the  simultaneous  presence  of  a  malefic, 
and  not  restored  to  freedom  of  operation  by  any 
bene  fie. 

The  number  of  years,  depending  on  the  distances 
between  the  prorogator  and  Bnasretic  places,  cannot  be 
always  gathered  simply  and  at  once  from  the  a.seensional 
time8+  of  each  respective  degree;  but  only  in  cases  when 
the  ascendant  itself,  or  some  other  specific  degree  or 
body  actually  ascending  in  the  oriental  horizon,  may 
possess  the  prorogation.  For,  if  it  be  desired  to  calculate 
agreeably  to  n&titre,  every  process  of  calculation  that 
can  be  adopted  must  be  directed  to  the  attainment  of 
one  object;  that  i»  to  say,  to  ascertain  after  how  many 
equatorial  timesj  the  place  of  the  succeeding  body,  or 
degree,  will  arrive  at  the  position  preoccupied  at  the 
birth  by  the  preceding  body,  or  degree :  and,  as  equa- 
torial time  transits  equally  both  the  horizon  and  the 
meridian,  the  places  in  qiie.-^tiou  §  must  be  considered,  in 
respect  of  their  proportionate  distances  from  both  these ; 
each  equatorial  degreeji  being  taken  to  signify  one  solar 
year. 

*  WlialWy'K  Iran^ltition  of  thin  passage  is  iti  ditect  cod  trod  iation  to 
llie  aeaee :  and  even  Chat  of  AllatiuH,  hh  well  a»  other  Latin  ones,  are 
(if  ilrictly  correct)  confuHed  in  tlieir  ineaninK. 

+  "  Atcenaional  timet."  Tliete  are,  in  other  words,  the  number  of 
itpgrees  of  the  equator,  equivalent  to  a  certain  number  of  zodiaeal 
ilogteeg.  UFendini;  in  any  particular  latitude.  They  are  also  other- 
wise called  the  oblique  atctnrion  of  such  zodiacal  de(;rees. 

t  " E'jualorial  timta"  here  sigaify  degrees  of  the  eiga&tor,  by 
which  all  time  is  DtMsareil. 

i  That  is  to  Mf,  of  the  preceding  and  of  the  tucceeding  body  or 

,  Which  may  be  intercepted  in  the  arc  tictween  Cham. 


Chap.   XIV.]  PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  145 

In  conformity  with  the  foregoin<y  remarks,  when  it 
may  happen  that  the  prorogatory  and  preceding  place 
may  be  actually  on  the  oriental  horizon,  it  will  be 
proper  to  reckon,  at  once,  the  ascensional  times  which 
may  intervene  until  the  meeting  of  the  degrees;  be- 
cause, after  the  same  number  of  ec^uatorial  times,  the 
anaereta  will  arrive  at  the  prorogatory  place;  that  is 
to  say,  at  the  oriental  horizon.  Should  the  proroga- 
tory place  be  found  on  the  meridian,  the  whole  number 
of  degrees  by  right  ascension,  in  which  the  whole  in- 
tercepted arc  will  transit  the  meridian,  must  then  be 
taken.  And  if  the  prorogatory  place  be  on  the  occi- 
dental horizon,  the  number  of  descensions.  in  which 
every  degree  of  the  distance  will  be  carried  down  (or, 
in  other  words,  the  number  of  ascensions,  in  which 
their  opposite  degrees  will  ascend),  is  in  that  case  to  be 
reckoned*. 

When,  however,  a  prorogatory  and  preceding  place 
may  not  be  situated  on  any  one  of  the  aforesaid  three 
points,  but  in  some  intermediate  station,  it  must  be 
observed  that  other  timesi*  will  then  bring  the  succeed- 
ing place  to  the  preceding  one;  and  not  the  times  of 
ascension  or  descension,  or  transit  of  the  mid-heaven,  as 
above  spoken  of.  For  any  places  whatever,  which  have 
one  particular  position,  on  the  same  degree,  in  regard 
to  the  horizon  and  meridian,  are  alike  and  identical. 
This  is  the  case,  for  instance,  with  all  places  lying  on 
any  one  of  those  semicircles  which  are  drawn  through 
the  arcs  of  the  meridian  and  horizon ;  and  each  of 
these   semicircles   (all   of   which    have   position    at   the 


*  ThiH  number  Ib  that  of  the  oblique  descensional  times  of  the 
intercepted  arc,  or  of  the  oblique  ascensional  times  of  the  arc  opposite 
to  it. — The  whole  of  the  instructions  in  this  paragraph  are  fully 
exemplified  in  the  following  chapter. 

t  Or,  times  to  be  reckoned  in  another  manner. 

L 


146  PIOLEJIV'S    TETBADIilLOS.  [Book  III. 

Hftine  eqiiHl  •iistaiice  from  each  olber  i  marks  one  tem- 
poral hour*;  and,  as  the  time  oecupitd  in  proceedin}i 
through  the  placesf  above  descrilied,  and  arriving  at  the 
aame  poailion  of  the  horizon  and  meridian,  ia  rendered 
unequal  to  and  different  from  the  time  of  transits  iti  the 
zudiac;  so,  alifo,  the  tran.'^ita  of  other  spaces  are  made, 
agreeably  to  their  position,  in  time  again  distinct  fro'n  this. 
Tliere  is,  however,  a  method  by  which  the  proportion 
of  time,  occupied  in  the  progress  of  a  succeeding  place  to 
a  prorogatory  and  preceding  place,  in  whatever  po^itioa, 
whether  oriental,  mcridianal,  or  occidental,  or  any  other, 
may  be  easily  calculated.     It  is  as  follows. 

*  On  ttiis  passAge,  there  bun  been  fouoded.  (to  use  Wb&Uey's  words) 
"  what  we  call  Mundane  Parallels,  or  parallels  in  the  world.  And, 
"ftaaodiaoftl  pamllelH  are  e<[iial  diHtanoes  from  the  tropical  orequi- 
"  noctial  circles,  hd  mundHne  parallels  are  a,  like  equal  distance  from 
"the  hurimntal  or  nicriitianal  points  or  ciroles.  And  ba  uodiaeal 
"parallels  are  measa red  by  the  zodiacal  circle,  ea  those  mundane  par- 
"allela  are  measored  bj  the  diurnal  or  nocturnal  an»  :  and  jnat  to 
"  long  aa  the  Sun  or  any  other  planet  U  Ju  proceeding  from  the  cnsp 
"  of  the  twelfth  House  to  the  caup  of  the  tenth,  the  same  3un  or  other 
"planetwill  he  in  proceeding  from  the  cunp  of  the  tenth  to  the  cusp 
"of  the  eiKhtb  Honne.  And  the  distance  between  Sun-rifing  and 
"aettini;,  h  the  dinrnal  arc  which  the  meridian  cuts  in  two  equal 
"parts.  In  directions,  these  mundane  pamtleU  liave  a  twofold  con- 
"  sideration  ;  first,  simple ;  secondly,  according  to  the  rapt  motioa 
"of  the  earth,  or  the  yrinufni  mobUe  :  all  which  have  been  largely 
"explained  by  the  learned  Monk,  Placidus,"  etc  That  aathor  has 
certainly  !t«l«d,  in  one  of  hiH  Thtwes,  that  "  those  seals,  or  parta  of 
"  the  circle,  are  to  be  received,  in  which  the  stars,  having  a  different 
"  declination,eirect  equal  temporal  hour3"(p,  2^2,  Cooper's Tranalatioit), 
and  he  baa  fnlly  e\cmpliHed  this  principle  in  other  ports  of  bis  "  Pri- 
"mnm  Mobile;"  bnt  Ptolemy  here  sppaks  only  of  une  of  Cbecnnicirolea 
between  the  horizon  and  meridian,  without  reference  to  any  other 
semicircle,  corresponding  in  distance  from  the  horizon  and  inid- 
heaven ;  and  all  that  he  has  said  on  Ibe  subject  amounts  only  to  this, 
that  the  prorogation  is  completed  when  the  socceeding  place  arrii'es 
at  tlie  some  semicircle  on  which  the  preceding  place  had  been  poeit«d. 

t  The  ascendant,  mid-faeaven,  and  western  horizon,  as  mentioned 
in  the  preceding  paragraph. 


Chap.  XIV.]       Ptolemy's  tetrabiblos.  147 

When  it  has  been  ascertained  what  decrree  of  the  zodiac 
is  on  the  mid-heaven,  as  also  which  are  the  preceding  and 
succeeding  degrees,  the  period  of  whose  meeting  is  to  be 
calculated,  the  position  of  the  preceding  degree,  and  its 
distance  in  temporal  hours  from  the  meridian,  are  next 
to  be  noted ;  because  any  part  of  the  zodiac,  on  becoming 
distant  from  the  meridian  in  the  same  temporal  hours, 
must  fall  on  the  same  individual  semicircle*.  For  ascer- 
taining this  distance,  the  number  of  ascensions,  in  a  right 
sphere,  found  in  the  intermediate  space  between  the  said 
preceding  degree  and  the  mid-heaven,  either  above  or 
under  the  earth,  is  to  be  divided  by  the  number  of  the 
diurnal  or  nocturnal  horary  times  of  the  said  preceding 
degree :  for  instance,  if  that  degree  be  above  the  earth, 
by  its  diurnal  horary  times  ;  and,  by  its  nocturnal,  if  it 
be  under  the  earth.  It  is  then  to  be  discovered  in  what 
number  of  equatorial  times  the  succeeding  degree  will  be 
distant  from  the  same  meridian,  by  as  many  similar 
temporal  hours  as  those  by  which  the  preceding  degree 
is  distant  from  it.  And,  to  effect  this,  the  hours  in 
question  must  be  noted,  and  it  must  first  be  observed, 
by  the  right  ascensions  again,  how  many  equatorial 
times  the  succeeding  degree,  at  its  original  position,  is 
distant  from  the  degree  on  the  mid-heaven ;  and  then  it 
must  be  seen  how  many  equatorial  times  it  will  be  dis- 
tant, on  coming  to  the  preceding  degrees  distance  in 
temporal  hours  from  the  said  mid-heaven  :  this  will  be 
found,  by  multiplying  those  hours  by  the  succeeding 
degree  s  horary  times ;  diurnal,  if  the  future  position  be 
above  the  earth,  and  nocturnal  if  under ;  and  the  difler- 
ence  in  amount,  of  these  two  distances,  in  equatorial 
times,  will  present  the  number  of  years  inquired  for. 


•  Vide  Note  *  p.  146. 


PTOLEMr  3  TETRA,mBL( 


[Book  III. 


(jlthapter  XV. 

Exeviplificat  ion. 
In  order  to  exemplify  the  foregoing  instructions,  let  the 
first  point  of  Ariea  be  supposed  as  the  preceding  place, 
and  the  first  point  of  Gemini  the  succeeding;  and  let 
the  latitude  of  the  country,  to  which  the  operation 
relates,  be  such  as  will  cause  the  longest  day  to  consist 
of  fourteen  hours*;  and  where  the  horary  magnitude  of 
the  beginning  of  Gemini  will  be  about  seventeen  equa- 
torial timeaf. 

Let  the  first  point  of  Aries  be  first  placed  on  the 
ascendant,  so  that  the  beginning  of  Capricorn  may  he  on 
the  mid-heaven  above  the  earth,  and  the  first  point  of 
Gemini  be  distant  from  the  said  mid-heaven  14S  equa- 
torial times*.  Now,  since  the  first  point  of  Aries  is 
distant  sis  temporal  hours  from  the  mid-heaven  above 
the  earth,  the  times  of  that  distance  will  be  found,  by 
multiplying  the  said  six  hours  by  the  seventeen  equa- 
torial times  of  the  horary  magnitude  of  the  first  point  of 
Gemini,  to  be  I02§.  The  whole  sum  of  the  distance  to 
the  mid-heaven  above  the  earth,  is  148  times ;  and  as  148 
times  exceed  102  by  46,  the  succeeding  place  will  con- 
sequently devolve  into  the  preceding  place  after  46  times; 
(being  the  amount  of  the  said  excess,  and  also,  as  near 


'  This,  in  Ihe  Northern  Hemispliere,  would  be  the  Ulitiide  of 
Alexamiria,  (where  PUilemj  Hourishcd)  or.  in  his  own  words,  that  of 
the  3d  Climnte,  passing  through  Lower  E^pC,  numbered  30°  22*. — 
Vide  extTBcta  from  the  Tables  of  the  Almagest,  inserted  in  the 
Appendix. 

+  This  is  liie  maf^nUude  of  the  diurnal  temporal  hour  of  the  litBt 
point  o(  Gemini  in  the  Ulitude  preRcrilieil. 

t  By  riglit  ascension,  as  shown  by  tlie  Kxtract,  inwrled  in  the 
Appendix,  from  the  Table  of  Asceoxions  in  the  Almagest.  The  exact 
distAUEte,  however,  according  to  that  Table,  is  HT  44'. 

%  Or  rather,  according  to  that  Table,  ICKT  3<l'. 


« 

Chap.  XV.]         Ptolemy's  tetrabiblos.  149 

as  possible,  the  amount  of  the  times  of  ascension  of 
Aries  apd  Taurus*),  since,  in  this  instance,  the  pro- 
rogatory  place  is  established  in  the  ascendant. 

In  like  manner,  let  the  first  point  of  Aries  be  next 
placed  on  the  mid-heaven,  culminating ;  so  that  the  first 
point  of  Gemini,  in  its  position,  may  be  distant  from  the 
said  mid-heaven  58  equatorial  times-(-.  Now,  as  it  is 
required  to  bring  the  first  point  of  Gemini,  in  its  second 
position,  to  the  mid-heaven,  the  whole  distance  is  to  be 
reckoned,  viz.  58  times,  in  which  Aries  and  Taurus  pass 
the  mid-heaven;  because,  again,  the  prorogatory  place 
was  culminating^. 

In  the  same  way,  let  the  first  point  of  Aries  be  de- 
8cending§ ;  so  that  the  beginning  of  Cancer  may  occupy 
the  mid-heaven,  and  the  first  point  of  Gemini  precede 
the  mid-heaven  at  the  distance  of  32  equatorial  times ||. 
Therefore,  as  the  first  point  of  Aries  is  on  the  west,  and 
again  distant  six  temporal  hours  from  the  meridian,  let 
these  six  hours  be  multiplied  by  the  seventeen  times; 
which  will  produce  102,  making  the  sum  of  the  distancelT 

*  That  is  to  say,  of  their  oblique  ascensioD,  which  is  here  required 
to  be  reckoDed ;  because  the  prorogatory  and  preceding;  place  is  in 
the  ascendant.  Vide  p.  145,  and  Note  t  in  page  144. — And  the  first 
point  of  Gemini,  on  arriving  at  the  ascendant,  will  be  distant  from 
the  mid  heaven  102''  39'  by  right  ascension ;  the  13th  degree  of 
Aquarius  being  then  in  the  culmination  in  the  prescribed  latitude. 
The  oblique  ascensions  in  the  atitude  30"  22'  N.  are  also  shewn  in 
the  extract  referred  to  in  the  preceding  note:  and  it  thereby 
appears,  that  Aries  and  Taurus  ascend  in  45^  5',  instead  of  46''. 

t  Or  rather,  57"  44' — by  right  ascension. — Vide  extract  above 
referred  to. 

:;:  Vide  p.  145. 

§  Or  on  the  cusp  of  the  7th  House. 

II  Or  rather,  32°  16' — by  right  ascension  again. — Vide  extract  as 
before. 

%  By  right  ascension. — The  amount  according  to  the  Table  is» 
however,  102**  39',  as  before  stated. 


150  ITOLEMY's   TETRABIBLOS.  [Bo(jIc  III. 

of  the  first  point  of  Gemini,  at  its  future  d<;.scension, 
from  the  meridian*.  But,  as  die  lirst  point  of  Gemini, 
at  its  larst  position,  was  already  distant  from  the 
meridian  32  times;  wliich  number  102  exceed  by  70;  it 
will  consequently  arrive  at  its  descension  after  70  times, 
the  amount  of  the  excess;  in  which  space  Aries  and 
Taurus  will  have  descended,  and  their  opposite  signs 
Libra  and  Scorpio  ariaen+. 

Again,  let  the  first  point  of  Aries  have  another  position 
not  in  an  aiigiej,  but,  for  instance,  at  the  distance  of 
three  temporal  hours  past  the  meridian  ;  so  that  the  18th 
degree  of  Taurus  may  be  on  the  mid-beaven,  and  the 
first  point  of  Gemini  be  approaching  the  mid-heaven,  at 
Lie  distance  of  thirteen  equatorial  times.  The  seventeen 
limes  must,  therefore,  be  again  Tuultiplied  by  the  three 
hours,  and  the  first  point  of  Gemini,  at  its  second 
rasition,  will  be  found  to  be  pa.st  the  meridian,  at  the 
distance  of  51  timesg.  The  distance  of  13  times  of  the 
first  position  and  51  times  of  the  second  position  are  then 
both  to  be  taken  ;  and  they  will  produce  64  times.  In 
the  former  instances  the  prorogatory  place  performed  in 
the  same  succession  ;  viz.  occupying  46  times  in  coining 
to  the  ascendant,  HH  in  coming  to  the  mid-lieaven,  and 
70  in  coming  to  the  west ;  so  that  the  present  number  of 
times,  depending  on  the  intermediate  position  between 
the  mid-heaven  and  the  west,  and  being  64,  also  differs 
from  each  of  tlie  other  numbers,  in  proportion  to  the 
three  hours  difference  of  position.  For,  in  the  other 
cases  which  proceeded  by  quadrants  ||,  according  to  the 

*  On  whicli  tiiB  lOth  degree  of  VirRO  will  tben  be  poeiMd. 
+  By  oblique  dencension  and  acueaBion :  vide  p.  l45.~The  Tkble 
■hcWB  tho  Amount  to  1m  Tu°  23'. 
X  III  reference  to  p.  145,  and  note  t  in  the  aanie  page, 
g  Tilt)  ISth  degree  of  Canoer  being  then  in  uulminatioD. 
jl  Or  aemi-diaitial  aru,  each  equal  to  bIx  temporal  hoon. 


Chap,   XV.]     PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  151 

angles,  the  times  pro<^ressively  differed  by  tw6lve,  but,  in 
the  present  case  of  a  minor  distance  of  three  hours,  they 
differ  by  six*. 

There  is,  however,  another  method  which  may  be  used, 
and  which  is  still  more  simple ;  for  instance,  should  the 
preceding  degree  be  on  the  ascendant,  the  following 
intermediate  times  of  ascension-(-,  between  it  and  the 
succeeding  degree,  n»ay  be  reckoned ;  should  it  be  on  the 
mid-heaven,  the  times  of  ascension  must  be  reckoned  on 
a  right  sphere ;  and,  if  it  be  on  the  west,  descending,  the 
intermediate  times  of  descensionj  are  to  be  reckoned. 
But,  should  the  preceding  degree  be  between  any  two  of 
these  angles,  as,  for  instance,  at  the  distance  of  Aries, 
just  spoken  of,  the .  i)roper  times  for  each  angle  must 
first  be  considered.  And,  since  the  first  point  of  Aries 
was  assigned  a  position  between  the  two  angles  of  the 
mid-heaven  and  the  west,  the  proper  times  of  the  dis- 
tances from  these  angles  to  the  first  point  of  Gemini jj 
would  be  found  to  be  58  from  the  mid-heaven,  and  70 
from  the  west.  The  distances,  in  temporal  hours,  of  the 
precading  degree  from  each  of  these  angles,  are  then  to 
be  ascertained ;  and  whatever  proportion  these  same 
temporal  hours,  contained  in  such  distances  between  the 
said  preceding  degree  and  each  angle,  may  bear  to  the 
temporal  hours  of  the  whole  quadrant,  the  same  propor- 


•  The  amount  of  tlie  progre»8ive  difference  of  the  times  of  proro- 
gation, as  here  mentioned,  is  of  course  only  applicable  to  the  parallel 
ol  declination  of  the  fir^t  p'>int  of  Gemini,  in  the  latitude  before 
quoted.  It  must  necessarily  vary  in  all  other  parallels  of  declination, 
and  also  in  other  latitudes. 

t  Oblique  ascension. 

X  The  times  of  oblique  descension  of  any  arc  of  the  zodiac  are  equal 
to  the  times  of  oblique  ascension  of  its  opposite  arc;  as  before 
explained. 

§  That  is  to  say,  at  the  time  of  the  1st  point  of  Aries  transiting 
the  cusp  of  each  angle  respectively. 


152  PTuLEMY'-S  TETKABIBLOS,  [Book  III. 

tiou.  out  of  the  excL'Ss  of  the  times  of  liistance  of  one 
anyle  over  thoae  of  the  other,  is  either  to  be  aiKled  to,  or 
deducted  from,  the  aclnnl  rairiiber  of  times  of  the  respec- 
tive aiigiea.  For  iiisiuiice,  in  the  example  before  set 
forth,  70  times  liscewi  5K  times  by  12 ;  and  the  prewriing 
place  was  distant  frnm  the  anf^lea  three  equal  temporal 
hour.s,  which  are  thu  lialf  of  sis,  the  number  beionuing 
to  the  whole  qiiadraiil.  Now,  three  Lein<>;  the  half  of  six, 
and  t2  being  the  atiiuiint  uf  the  exce.-is,  the  half  of  12  is 
therefore  to  be  taken,  ^iviny  6  to  be  either  added  to  tlie 
58  time.s,  or  subtracted  from  the  70:  thus,  in  either 
way,  producing  64,  tin-  required  number  of  times. 

If,  however,  the  preceding  place  should  be  distant 
from  either  angle  two  temporal  hours,  which  are  the 
third  part  of  six,  thiii,  in  that  case,  (he  third  part  of  12, 
the  amount  of  the  excess,  must  be  taken,  viz.  i;  and.  if 
the  said  two  hours  be  tlie  di-^tance,  as  calculated  from 
the  uiid-heaven,  the  said  4  times  are  to  be  added  to  the 
■58  times;  but,  if  it  be  the  distance  from  the  occidental 
angle,  the  4  times  are  to  be  subtracted  from  the  70. 

In  conformity  with  these  rule*  now  laid  down,  the 
amount  of  the  times  must  necessarily  be  ohtRiiied*. 

*  The  calcalaliou  of  time  may  be  greatly  fatiliCated  by  tbe  use  of 
K  Kuiliaoal  planispbere,  BHid  to  Lave  beuu  invented  about  lliirly  yeAn 
ago  by  Mr.  Kanger,  nbo  died  without  lunkinf;  hi»  invention  pnblio. 
The  iuventian  eonsista  of  ti  sei  of  inBtruments  perfectly  mlnpted,  as 
far  as  relates  to  the  zodiac,  for  aAtrononiical,  as  well  as  aatrologioal, 
pnrpo^es ;  and  tbe  complelenese  ivitb  wbicb  it  Holve»,  in  tlie  most 
intelligible  and  expeditious  munner,  all  the  aHtronoiniciil  problem* 
of  the  lodiac,  deserves  attention.  Whether  a  eimilar  planivpbere  was 
known  in  tbe  dajH  of  Plavidue,  I  am  not  aware ;  but  it  is  worthy  of 
tflmiirk  that  tbe  followiui;  words  occur  in  his  "  Primnm  Mobile,"  and 
•eeni  alnioat  to  have  been  predicated  of  Mr.  Kan^jer's  planisphere : — 
"  If  any  one  would  provide  himself  with  a  PEolemaic  planisphere, 
"  with  tbe  iiorary  circles,  crepaHcales,  tbe  zodiac's  latitude,  and  all 
"  otlier  things  requisite,  it  would  be  of  very  great  tervioe  towards 
"foreseeing  the  aspecl»i.''      (Cooper's  Triinalation,  p.  87.)     In  the 


Chap,  XV.]        Ptolemy's  tetrabiblos.  153 

The  ansBretic  and  critical  influences  of  all  meetings  or 
descensions  of  prorogators*  remain  to  be  determined; 
beginning,  in  due  order,  with  such  as  are  accomplished 
in  the  shortest  time.  And  whatever  else  may  happen, 
by  means  of  any  affliction  or  assistance  offered  (in  the 
manner  heretofore  prescribed)  during  the  actual  transit 
of  the  meeting,  is  also  to  be  decided  on,  as  well  as  what- 
ever may  occur  through  other  circumstances,  arising  out 
of  the  ingresses  taking  place  at  the  time :  because,  should 
the  places  of  both  the  significators  be  afflicted,  and  should 
the  transit  of  the  stars,  at  the  then  existing  ingress, 
operate  injuriously  on  the  chief  ruling  places,  it  is  then 
altogether  probable  that  death  will  ensue -(•;  and,  even 
though  one  of  the  places  J  may  be  disposed  favourably 
to  human  nature,  the  crisis  will  still  be  important  and 
perilous;  but,  if  both  the  places  be  so  disposed  favour- 
ably, some  debility  only,  or  transient  malady,  or  hurt, 
will   then   happen.     It  is,  however,  necessary   in  these 

Appendix  will  be  found  a  plate,  containing  diagrams  drawn  by  the 
instruments  in  question,  which,  though  not  completely  filled  up, 
will  shew  how  easily,  and,  at  the  same  time,  how  accurately,  the 
measure  of  time  in  directions  may  be  ascertained.  The  said  diagrams 
have  been  adapted  to  the  "exemplification"  here  given  by  Ptolemy; 
one  of  them  being  laid  down  for  the  latitude  of  Alexandria,  and  the 
other  for  the  latitude  of  southern  Britain  (5r  30'  N.),  with  similar 
positions  of  the  preceding  and  succeeding  places  adverted  to  in  the  text. 

*  These  meetings  and  descensions  are  technically  termed  *'direc- 
"  tions." 

t  On  these  words  Placidus  has  the  following  remark  :  **  The  revo- 
'*  lu tions  may  possess  some  virtue,  but  only  according  to  the  con- 
"  stitotion  of  the  stars  to  the  places  of  the  prorogators  of  the  nativity, 
"  and  their  places  of  direction,  but  no  further ;  as  Ptolemy  was  of 
"  opinion,  and  briefly  expresses  himself  in  his  Chapter  of  Life. 
"  *  Those  who  are  afflicted,  both  in  the  places  and  conclusions  of  the 
"  '  years,  by  the  revolution  of  the  stars  infecting  the  principal  places, 
**  'have  reason  to  expect  certain  death.*"    (P.  127  Cooper's  Transl.) 

t  Of  the  signiGcators  before-mentioned. 


154  PTOLKMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  [fioofc  I IL 

cases,  to  consider  also  what  familiarity,  or  analogy,  the 
peculiar  properties  of  the  places,  thus  meeting,  may  bear 
to  the  circu Distances  of  the  nativity, 

III  order  to  obviate  the  doubts  which  frequently  arise, 
as  to  the  particular  star  or  place  to  which  the  anferetic 
dominion  ought  to  be  assigned,  all  the  meetings  should 
lie  duly  contemplated  and  considered,  each  by  each ;  and 
thus,  after  considering  those  chiefly  corresponding  with 
the  events  already  past,  and  with  the  future  events  about 
to  follow,  or  with  the  whole  together,  it  will  be  practic- 
able to  found  an  observation  on  the  equality  or  inequality 
of  their  influence. 

Cliiipttr  XVI. 

The  Form  and  Tempemment  of  the  Body. 
The  matters  afTeCting  and  regulating  the  duration  of  life 
have  now  been  disposed  of;  and  it  becomes  proper  to 
enter  into  further  particulais,  commencing,  in  due  order, 
with  the  figure  and  conformation  of  the  body;  because 
Nature  forms  and  moulds  the  body  before  she  inspires  it 
with  a  soul.  In  fact,  the  body,  in  its  materiality,  is  en- 
dowed with  Muitahle  constitutional  properties  begotten 
with  it.  and  almost  apparent  from  its  very  birth ;  but  the 
soul  afterwards,  and  by  degrees,  develops  the  appropriate 
qualities  which  it  derives  from  the  primary  cause,  and 
which  become  known  much  later  than  external  attributes, 
and  in  process  of  time  only. 

In  regard  to  the  body,  therefore,  it  is  in  all  cases  re- 
quisite to  observe  the  oriental  horizon,  and  to  ascertain 
what  planets  may  preside  or  have  dominion  over  it.  and 
al.so  to  pay  particular  attention  to  the  Moon.  For,  from 
tmth  these  places*,  and  from  their  rulers,  as  well  as  from 

*  That  of  tbe  ascendant,  and  that  of  the  Uood. 


CJvap.  XVI.]  PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  155 

the  natural  formation  and  con  temperament  appertaining 
to  every  species  of  the  human  race,  and  also  from  the 
figure  ascribed  to  those  fixed  stars  which  may  be  co- 
ascending,  the  conformation  of  the  body  is  to  be  inferred. 
The  planets  possessing  dominion  have  the  chief  influence, 
and  the  proper  qualities  of  their  places  co-operate  with 
them.  And,  in  order  to  simplify  these  instructions,  and 
as  the  planets  are  first  to  be  treated  of,  each  planet  is 
individually  to  be  considered  as  follows  :  viz. 

Saturn,  when  oriental,  acts  on  the  personal  figure  by 
producing  a  yellowish  complexion  and  a  good  constitu- 
tion; with  black  and  curled  hair,  a  broad  and  stout 
chest,  eyes  of  ordinary  quality,  and  a  proportionate  size 
of  body,  the  temperament  of  which  is  compounded 
principally  of  moisture  and  cold.  Should  he  be  occi- 
dental, he  makes  the  personal  figure  black  or  dark, 
thin  and  small,  with  scanty  hair  on  the  head ;  the  body 
without  hair,  but  well  shaped ;  the  eyes  black  or  dark ; 
and  the  bodily  temperament  consisting  chiefly  of  dryness 
and  cold. 

Jupiter  ruling,  when  oriental,  makes  the  person  white 
or  fair,  with  a  clear  complexion,  moderate  growth  of 
hair,  and  large  eyes,  and  of  good  and  dignified  stature ; 
the  temperament  being  chiefly  of  heat  and  moisture. 
When  occidental,  he  still  causes  a  fair  complexion,  but 
not  of  equal  clearness ;  and  he  produces  long  straight 
hair,  with  baldness  on  the  forehead  or  on  the  crown  of 
the  head ;  and  he  then  also  gives  a  middle  stature  to 
the  body,  with  a  temperament  of  more  moisture. 

Mars,  ascending,  gives  a  fair  ruddiness  to  the  person, 
with  large  size,  a  healthy  constitution,  blue  or  grey  eyes, 
a  sturdy  figure,  and  a  moderate  growth  of  hair,  with  a 
temperament  principally  of  heat  and  dryness.  When 
occidental,  he  makes  the  complexion  simply  ruddy,  and 
the  personal  figure  of  moderate  stature,  with  small  eyes ; 


156 


PTOLEMY  S   TETRAfllBLOS. 


[Book  III. 


tlie  body  without  hair,  and  the  hair  of  the  head  Hght  or 
red,  ami  Mtrai^ht;  the  bidily  temperament  being  chiefly 
dry. 

Venus  operates  in  a  manner  similar  to  that  of 
Jupiter,  but,  at  the  same  time,  more  becominffly  and  more 
gracefully;  producing  qualities  of  a  nature  more  ap- 
plicable to  women  and  female  beauty,  such  as  softness, 
juiciiieas,  and  greater  delicacy.  She  also  peculiarly  makes 
the  eyes  beautiful,  and  renders  them  of  an  azure  tint. 

Mercury,  when  oriental,  makes  the  personal  figure  of 
a  yellowish  complexion,  and  of  stature  proportionate 
and  well-shaped,  with  small  eyes  and  a  moderate  growth 
of  hair;  and  the  bodily  temperament  ia  chiefly  hot.  If 
occidental,  he  gives  u  complexion  white  or  fair,  but 
not  altogether  clear;  straight,  dark  hair,  a  thin  and 
slight  figure,  some  squint  or  defect  in  the  eyes,  and 
a  long:  visage*  faintly  red;  the  temperament  being 
chiefly  dry. 

The  Sun  and  Moon,  when  configurated  with  any  one 
of  ihe  planeLs.  also  co-operate  :  the  Sun  adds  a  greater 
nobleness  to  the  figure,  and  increases  the  healthinesa  of 
the  constitution;  and  the  Moon,  especially  when  holding 
or  delaying  her  separation -f-,  generally  contributes  better 
proportion  and  greater  delicacy  of  figure,  and  greater 
moisture  of  temperament;  but,  at  the  same  time,  her 
influence  in  this  latter  particular  is  adapted  to  the 
proper  ratio  of  her  illumination;  as  referred  to  in  the 
modes  of  temperament  meniioned  in  the  beginning  of 
this  treatise^ 


*  Tlie  original  won!  is  (in  the  accusative  plural)  aiymvc,  which 
AHatius  haa  readered,  by  "pedibut  caprinU,"  gaat-foottd,  as  if 
it  were  compounded  of  mf  eapra  and  tivi  pet ;  but  tlie  preferable 
derivation  neeniH  to  li«  from  «.Eand  -J.  vultiit;  ineaninj;  "foat-faeed." 

t  From  any  one  of  the  said  planets.. 

;  Vide  Chap.  8,  Book  I. 


Chap.  XVI.]  PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  157 

Again,  should  the  planets  be  tnatutine,  and  fully  con- 
spicuous*, they  will  cause  the  body  to  be  large;  if  in 
their  first  station,  they  will  make  it  strong  and  vigorous; 
if  they  should  precede  or  be  in  advance,  it  will  be 
<lisproportionate ;  if  in  their  second  station,  it  will  be 
weaker,  and,  if  vespertine,  altogether  mean  and  sub- 
servient to  evil  treatment  and  oppression.     At  the  same 

time,  the  places  of  the  planetsf,  as  has  been  already 
said,  cj-operate  especially   in    producing  the   shape   of 

the  personal   figure,   and  contribute   also    towards   the 

temperament. 

And  further,  it  is  the  general  tendency  of  the 
<}uadrant  comprised  between  the  vernal  equinox  and  the 
summer  tropic  to  produce  good  complexions,  advan- 
tageous stature,  fine  constitutions,  and  fine  eyes ;  with  a 
temperament  abounding  in  heat  and  moisture.  The 
quadrant  from  the  summer  tropic  to  the  autumnal 
equinox  tends  to  produce  an  ordinary  complexion, 
proportionate  stature,  a  healthy  constitution,  large  eyes, 
a  stout  person,  with  curled  hair,  and  a  temperament 
abounding  in  heat  and  dryness.  The  quadrant  from  the 
autumnal  equinox  to  the  winter  tropic  causes  yellowish 
complexions,  slender,  thin,  and  sickly  persons,  with  a 
moderate  growth  of  hair,  fine  eyes,  and  a  temperament 
abundantly  dry  and  cold.  The  other  quadrant,  from 
the  winter  tropic  to  the  vernal  equinox,  gives  a  dark 
complexion,  proper  stature,  straight  hair  on  the  head 
and  none  on  the  body,  a  goodly  figure,  and  a  tempera- 
ment abounding  in  cold  and  moisture. 

To  speak,  however,  more  particularly,  all  constellations 
of  human  form,  both  those  within  and  those  without  the 


•  The  Greek  is  ^$iv/Atfoi  ^avut ; ;  literally  **  making  apparition ; 
but  the  f^ubseqaent  context  seems  to  require  the  meaning  I  have 
Adopted. 

t  The  parts  of  the  signs  in  which  the  planets  are  posited. 


158 


ITOLEMVS  TETRABIBLOS. 


[Book  HI. 

zodiac,  act  in  favour  of  giving  a  handsome  shape  to  the 
body,  and  dne  proportion  to  the  figure :  while  those  not 
of  human  form  vary  its  due  proportions,  and  incline  it 
towards  their  own  sha[>e :  as.'^imilating  it,  in  some 
measure,  to  their  own  peculiarities,  either  by  enlarging 
or  diminishing  h»  size,  by  giving  it  additional  strength 
or  weakness,  or  by  otherwise  improving  or  disfiguring  it. 
Thiifi.  for  example,  Leo,  Virgo,  and  Sagittarius,  enlarge 
the  person ;  and  Pisces,  Cancer,  and  Capricorn,  tend  to 
make  it  diminutive ;  and  thus,  again,  the  upper  and 
anterior  parts  of  Aries,  Taurus,  and  Leo,  increase  its 
strenjfth,  and  their  lower  and  posterior  parts  render  it 
weaker  :  while,  on  the  other  hand,  Sagittarius,  Scorpio, 
and  Gemini,  act  conversely ;  for  their  anterior  parts 
produce  greater  debility,  and  their  posterior  parts  greater 
vigour.  In  like  manner.  Virgo,  Libra,  and  Sagittarius, 
contribute  to  render  the  person  handsome  and  well- 
proportioned  :  and  Scorpio.  Pisces,  and  Taurus,  incline  it 
to  be  mis-shapen  and  disfigured. 

The  other  constellations*  also  operate  on  similar 
principles  ;  and  all  these  inliuences  it  is  necessary  to  bear 
in  mind,  in  order  that  the  peculiar  properties,  observed 
in  their  joint  temperament,  may  be  so  compounded  a,s  to 
authorise  an  inference  therefrom,  concerning  the  form 
and  temperament  of  the  body. 

Ehapttr  XVII. 

The  Hitrts.  Injuries,  and  Diseases  qfiiie  Body. 
Next  in  succession  to  the  foregoing  chapter,  the  circum- 
stances relating  to  bodily  hurts,  injuries,  and  diseases, 
claim  to  be  discussed  ;  and  they  require  to  be  considered 
in  the  following  mode, 

*  Fur  llie  operative  qaalitiee  of  the  other  conKtelUtioaH,  vi<l'~ 
Chapters  10  and  11,  Bi>ok  1. 


160  PTOI-EMY'S   TETRABIBLOH.  [Book  III. 

side;  Venus,  the  nostriU,  the  liver,  and  the  flesh;  Mercury, 
the  speech,  the  understanding,  the  bile,  the  tongue,  and 
the  fundament;  and  the  Moon  governs  the  palate,  the 
throat,  the  stomach,  the  belly,  the  womb,  and  all  the 
left  parts. 

It  generally  happens  that  some  casual  hurt,  or  injuri- 
ous afiection  of  the  body,  is  the  utmost  that  takes  effect 
when  the  maletics  may  be  oriental,  and  that  considerable 
diseases  occur  only  when  the  tnalefics  may  be  occidental. 
And  a  hurt  is  distinct  from  a  disease,  inasmuch  as  the 
pain,  which  it  induces  at  the  time,  is  not  afterwards 
continued  ;  while  a  disease  is,  on  the  other  hand,  imposed 
on  the  sufferer  either  constantly  or  at  repeated  intervals. 
These  remarks  are  applicable  to  all  cases;  but,  in  order 
to  inquire  particularly  into  the  nature  of  the  hurt  or 
disease,  a  further  attention  must  be  paid  to  the  figures, 
or  schemes,  with  which  the  effects,  about  to  bo  produced, 
will  for  the  most  part  correspond  in  character. 

For  instance,  blindness  of  one  eye  will  ensue,  when  the 
Moon  may  be  in  the  before-mentioned  angles,  either 
operating  her  conjunction,  or  being  at  the  full :  it  will 
also  happen  should  she  be  configurated  with  the  Sun  in 
any  other  proportional  aspect,  and  be  at  the  same  time 
connected  with  any  one  of  the  nebulous  collections  in 
the  zodiac;  such  as  the  cloudy  spot  of  Cancer,  the 
Pleiades  of  Taurus,  the  arrow-head  of  Sagittarua,  the 
sting  of  Scorpio,  the  parts  about  the  mane  of  Leo,  or  the 
urn  of  Aquarius.  Moreover,  both  eyes  will  be  injured 
should  the  Moon  be  in  an  angle,  and  in  her  decrease,  and 
Mars  or  Saturn,  being  matutine,  ascend  in  succession  to 
her;  or.  again,  if  the  Sun  be  in  an  angle,  and  theae 
planets  pre-ascend  before  him,  and  be  configurated  with 
both  the  luminaries,  whether  the  luminaries  be  in  one 
and  the  same  sign,  or  in  opposition:  provided  also  the 
said  planets,  although  oriental  of  the  Sun,  be  occidental 


Chap.  XVII.]        PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  161 

of  the  Moon. — Under  these  circumstances,  therefore, 
Mars  will  cause  blindness  by  a  stroke  or  blow,  or  by  the 
sword  or  by  burninpr ;  and,  if  he  be  con6gurated  with 
Mercury,  it  will  be  effected  either  in  a  place  of  exercise 
or  sport,  or  by  the  assault  of  robbers.  Saturn,  however, 
under  the  same  circumstances,  produces  blindness  by 
cataract,  or  cold,  by  a  white  film,  or  by  other  similar 
disorders. 

Venus,  if  in  one  of  the  angles  before-mentioned,  and 
especially  if  she  be  in  that  of  the  west,  and  Saturn  be  in 
conjunction  or  in  configuration  with  her,  or  be  changing 
place  with  her*,  while  Mars,  at  the  same  time,  is  in 
elevation  above  her,  or  in  opposition  to  her,  will  produce 
impotence  in  the  native,  if  a  male ;  and,  if  a  female,  will 
render  her  liable  to  abortion,  or  to  produce  children  still- 
born, or  not  capable  of  being  extracted  except  in  mangled 
parts.  Such  misfortunes  especially  happen  under  Cancer, 
Virgo,  and  Capricorn ;  even  though  the  Moon  may  be  in 
the  ascendant,  in  conjunction  with  Mars.  And  if,  under 
the  same  circumstances,  Venus  be  also  configurated  with 
Mercury,  as  well  as  Saturn,  Mars  again  being  in  elevation 
above  her,  or  in  opposition  to  her,  the  native  will  be 
either  an  eunuch  or  hermaphrodite,  or  devoid  of  the 
natural  channels  and  vents.  And,  when  these  positions 
occur,  should  the  Sun  also  partake  in  the  configuration, 
the  luminaries  and  Venus  being  all  masculinely  consti- 
tuted, the  Moon  in  her  decrease,  and  the  malefics  brought 
up  in  the  degrees  next  successively  ascending,  the  males 
will  be  born  maimed  or  crippled,  or  injured  in  their 
private  members ;  (particularly  under  Aries,  Leo,  Scorpio, 
Capricorn,  and  Aquarius ;)  and  the  females  will  remain 
childless  and  unprolific.    And  it  also  occasionally  happens 

*  This  seems  to  imply,  if  Saturn  be  in  one  of  Venus's  places  of- 
dignity,  and  Venus  in  one  of  Saturn's.  Such  a  counterposition  is 
technically  termed  "  mutual  reception." 

M 


102  Ptolemy's  tetrakiblos,  [Donfc  HI. 

that  the  natives,  tinder  such  a  coiittguration ,  are  like- 
wise injured  in  tlie  faee  or  eyes. 

If  Saturn  and  Mercury,  in  conjunction  with  the  Sua, 
be  in  the  lief  ore- mentioned  angles,  the  native  will  have 
some  defect  in  the  tongue,  and  stammer  or  spt;a)c  with 
difficulty  I  especially  if  Mercury  be  occidental,  and  both 
he  and  Saturn  be  configurated  with  the  Moon.  Should 
Mars,  however,  be  found  together  with  theuj,  he  will  for 
the  uioat  part  remove  the  defect  in  the  tongue,  after  the 
Moon  shall  have  completed  her  approach  to  him. 

Further,  should  the.inalefics  be  in  angles,  and  the  lumi- 
naries, either  together  or  in  opposition,  be  brought  up  to 
them  ;  or,  if  the  inaletics  be  brought  up  to  the  luminaries, 
especially  when  the  Moon  may  be  in  her  nodes,  or  in  her 
bend",  or  in  obnoxious  signs,  such  as  Aries,  Taurus.  Can- 
cer, Scorpio,  and  Capricorn,  the  body  will  then  be  afflicted 
with  excrescences,  distortions,  lameness,  or  paralysis. 

If  the  malefic^i  be  in  conjunction  with  the  luminaries, 
the  calamity  will  take  effect  from  the  very  moment  of 
birth  ;  but  should  they  be  in  the  mid-heaven,  in  elevation 
above  the  luminaries,  or  in  opposition  to  each  other,  It 
will  then  arise  out  of  some  great  and  dangerous  accident, 
such  as  a  fall  from  some  height  or  precipice,  an  attack 
of  robbers,  or  of  quadrupeds.  And  thus,  if  Mars  hold 
dominion,  he  will  produce  the  ujisfoitune  by  means  of 
fire  or  wounds,  through  quarrel.s.  or  by  robbers  ;  and  if 
Saturn,  it  will  be  eau.sed  by  a  fall,  by  shipwreck,  or  by 
convulsive  fits  or  spasms. 

The  minor  bodily  disorders  rao.stly  occur  on  the  Moon's 
being  posited  in  a  tropical  or  equinoctial  sign ;  and,  if  in 
that  of  the  vernal  equinox,  these  disorders  usually  arise 
from  the  white  leprosy;  in  that  of  the  summer  tropic, 
from   tetters;  in  that  of  the  autumnal   equinox,  from 

*  Tn  lier  extreme  latilude,  wbether  north  or  soutli. 


Ckap,  XVII.]        PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  163 

leprosy;  and  in  that  of  the  winter  tropic,  from  the  erup- 
tion of  pimples,  and  similar  inconveniences. 

Considerable  diseases,  however,  take  effect  when  the 
malefics  may  be  configurated  in  the  same  situations  as 
those  before  prescribed,  yet  differing  in  one  respect;  that 
is  to  say,  being  occidental  of  the  Sun  and  oriental  of  the 
Moon.  In  such  cases,  Saturn  will  generally  produce 
cold  in  the  bowels,  excessive  phlegm,  rheumatism, 
emaciation,  sickliness,  jaundice,  dysentery,  cough,  ob- 
struction, cholic,  or  scurvy ;  and,  in  women,  besides 
these  diseases,  he  produces  complaints  of  the  womb. 
Mars  will  cause  expectoration  of  blood,  atrabilarions 
attacks,  pulmonary  complaints,  sores,  and  diseases  in 
the  private  parts,  (which  will  be  rendered  still  more 
painful  by  surgical  burning  or  incision,)  such  as  fistula, 
haemorrhoids,  or  knots  in  the  fundament,  and  also 
inflamed  and  putrifying  ulcers.  In  women,  to  these 
calamities  he  adds  abortion,  excision  of  the  foetus  or 
its  mortification. 

And,  even  though  these  planets  should  not  be  properly 
configurated  towards  the  particular  parts  of  the  body, 
their  qualities  will  still  operate.  Mercury  also  will  act 
with  them,  and  contribute  to  the  increase  of  the  evil ; 
thus,  if  he  be  in  familiarity  with  Saturn,  he  will  mucl» 
augment  the  coldness,  and  promote  the  continuance  of 
rheumatism, and  the  disturbance  of  the  fluids;  especially 
in  the  chest,  throat,  and  stomach.  If  in  familiarity  with 
Mars,  he  will  tend  to  produce  greater  dryness,  and  will 
increase  ulcers,  abscesses,  loss  of  hair,  scarified  sores, 
erysipelas,  tetters,  blackness  of  bile,  insanity,  epilepsy*, 
and  similar  disorders. 


*  Tns  tgpms  MOV ;  literally  "  the  holy  diseaAe,"  which  aathors  have 
explained  to  mean  epilepsy.  Perhaps  the  disease  was  antiently 
called  holy,  because  the  patient,  when  possessed  by  the  fit,  seemed 
to  be  ander  the  influence  of  some  supernatural  agency. 


164 


PTOLEMV'S  TETItAHIBLOS.  [Booh   lit. 


Some  o£  the  properties,  peculiar  to  di^iease,  arise  oat 
of  the  various  character  of  the  signs  which  may  contain 
the  above-mentioned  coiitigu  rat  ions  in  the  two  angles. 
Thud  Cancer,  Capricorn,  and  Places,  and,  in  short,  all 
signs  ascribed  to  terrestrial  animals  and  fishes,  appro- 
priately cause  diseases  of  putridity,  tetters,  excociatton, 
Mcrophula,  fistula,  leprosy,  and  the  like;  while  Sagittarius 
and  Gemini  produce  disease  by  failing  iits  and  epilepsy. 
And  if  the  planets  happen  to  be  posited  in  the  latter 
degrees  of  the  signs  containing  them,  the  extremities  of 
the  body  will  then  be  chiefly  atiected  by  the  disease  or 
hurt;  which  will  arise  from  humours  or  accidents, 
producing  leprosy,  gout,  or  other  infirmities,  in  tbt 
hands  and  feet. 

Under  the  circumstances  above  detailed,  the  disease  or 
hurt  will  be  incurable,  provided  there  shall  be  not  o 
the  benefics  in  configuration  with  the  maletics  which 
effect  the  evil,  nor  with  the  luminaries  posited  in  angles 
and  even  though  the  benefics  may  be  so  configurate 
the  misfortune  will  still  be  incapable  of  remedy,  if  ths 
maleficij  bo  well  fortified,  and  in  elevation  above  them. 

Should  the  henetics,  however,  hold  principal  situadoom 
and  be  in  elevation  above  the  obnoxious  malelics,  ths 
disease  or  hurt  will  then  be  moderate,  and  have  neither 
deformity  nor  disgrace  attached  to  it;  and  it  will  some* 
times  be  altogether  prevented  and  set  aside,  if  tha  b«a»' 
fics  be  oriental.  Jupiter,  for  instance,  by  means  of  hum 
aid,  such  as  wealth  and  rank  can  command,  will  c 
and  soothe  hurU  and  diseases ;  and.  if  Mercury  be  join) 
with  him,  the  assistance  will  be  further  improved  by  |] 
addition  of  skilful  physicians  and  good  medicine.  Venu 
likewise,  through  the  mediation  of  deities  and  ( 
will  cause  hurts  to  appear  in  a  manner  neither  murno^ 
Ful  nor  unbecoming,  and  will  ameliorate  diseases  I 
medicines  granted  by  the  gods. 


Chxip,  XVIIL]    Ptolemy's  tetrabiblos.  165 

Lastly,  should  Saturn  be  present  in  the  configuration, 
the  afflicted  persons  will  move  abroad  to  shew  their 
maladies,  and  to  complain ;  and  if  Mercury  also  be  pre- 
sent, they  will  do  so  for  the  sake  of  deriving  support  and 
profit  from  the  exhibition. 

Othaptcr  XVIII. 

The  Quality  of  the  Mind. 

The  consideration  of  circumstances  applicable  to  the 
body  is  practised  under  the  foregoing  rules. 

Of  the  spiritual  qualities,  however,  all  those  which 
are  rational  and  intellectual  are  contemplated  by  the 
situation  of  Mercury  ;  while  all  others,  which  regard  the 
mere  sensitive  faculties,  and  are  independent  of  reason, 
are  considered  rather  by  other  luminaries  of  a  less 
subtle  constitution  and  more  ponderous  body ;  for 
instance,  by  the  Moon  and  such  stars  as  she  may  be  con- 
figurated with,  as  well  by  separation*,  as  by  application. 

Now  the  mind  is  liable  to  impulse  in  a  multiplicity 
of  directions,  and  the  investigation  of  them  cannot  be 
summarily  or  hastily  performed,  but  must  be  conducted 
by  means  of  many  various  observations:  for  the  different 
qualities  of  the  signs,  containing  Mercury  and  the  Moon, 
or  such  stars  as  hold  any  infiuence  over  those  two,  are 
well  competent  to  contribute  towards  the  properties  of  the 
mind ;  so  likewise  are  the  configurations  made  with  the 
Sun  and  the  angles,  by  stars  bearing  any  relation  to  the 
point  in  question  ;  besides,  also,  the  peculiar  nature  exer- 
cised by  each  star  in  operating  upon  the  mental  movements. 

Thus,  the  tropical  signs  generally  dispose  the  mind  to 
enter  much  into  political  matters,  rendering  it  eager  to 
engage  in  public  and  turbulent  affairs,  fond  of  distinc- 

*  That  is  to  Bay,  in  the  commencement  of  her  separation  from  tlie 
afipect  or  conjunction  of  Bach  Htari^. 


\m 


PTOLEMY  S  TETHABIBLOS. 


[B:.>!.-    III. 

tiiiii,  anrl  busy  in  theology  ;  at  the  »ame  tiirie,  ingenioas, 
acute,  itn|uiflitive.  inventive,  speouliitive,  and  studious 
of  astrology  and  divination. 

Bieorporeal  «i^^  render  the  mind  variablf,  versntile, 
not  easy  to  bw  understoad.  volatile,  and  unsteady;  in- 
clined to  duplicity,  amorous,  wily,  fond  of  music,  careless, 
full  of  expedients,  and  regretful* 

Fixed  signs  make  the  mind  just,  uncompromising,  con- 
stant, firm  of  purpose,  prudent,  patient,  industrious,  strict, 
chaste,  tnindfitl  of  injuries,  steady  in  pursuing  its  object, 
contentious,  desirous  of  honour,  sudiliouM,  avaricious,  and 
ptrtinacious. 

Oriental  positions,  and  those  in  the  ascendant,  especi- 
ally if  innilu  by  planets  in  their  proper  faces-f-,  make  men 
liberal,  frank,  self-con tident.  brave,  ingenious,  unreserved, 
yet  acute.  Oriental  stations,  and  pasitions  on  the  mid- 
lieaven,  or  culminations,  make  men  reflective,  constant, 
of  good  memory,  firm,  prudent,  magnanimous,  successfol 
in  pursuing  their  desires,  inflexible,  powerful  in  intellect, 
strict,  not  easily  imposed  upon,  judicious,  active,  hostile 
to  crime,  and  skilful  in  science. 

Precedent  and  occidental  positions  make  men  unsteady, 
irreverent,  imbecili',  impatient  uf  labour,  easily  impressed, 
humbie.  doubting,  wavering,  boastful,  and  cowardly, 
slothful,  lazy,  and  hard  to  rouse.  Occidental  stations, 
Hnd  positions  on  the  lower  heaven,  (as  well  as  Mercury 
and  Venus,  when  making  vespertine  descension  by  day, 
and  rising  in  the  night.)  will  render  the  mind  ingenioas 
and  sagacious,  but  not  capable  of  great  recollection,  nor 
very  industrious;  yet  inquisitive  into  occult  matters, 
such  at  magic  and  sacred  mysteries;   also  studious  of 

*  Tlie  Ureek  U  iiira/iKioT'iivi,  wliiuli  mean-  "  peiiileni,"  or  "  prom 
"lo  repenwnce,"  or  "ro  BnUse.|uent  regrtt."  It  iHiiifficiill  toponvey 
'M  piecjiw  meaning  in  tliu  t«xC 

+  Vide  Clinliter  28,  B.iok  1, 


^m^ 


Chap.  XVIII.]      PTOLKMY*S  TETRABIBLOS.  167 

mechanics,  and  mechanical  instruments ;  addicted  to  the 
observation  of  meteors,  to  philosophy,  to  augury  by 
means  of  birds,  and  to  the  judgment  of  dreams. 

Further,  should  the  planets  having  dominion  be  in 
places  of  their  own,  and  in  conditions  suitable  to  their 
own  qualities,  the  mental  properties  will  be  rendered 
exquisite,  unimpeded,  and  successful :  and  especially  if 
these  planets  rule  at  the  same  time  over  both  places;  that 
is  to  say,  be  by  some  mode  configurated  with  Mercury, 
and  hold  separation  from,  or  application  to  the  Moon. 
Should  the  said  planets,  however,  not  be  thus  constituted, 
but  be  posited  in  places  not  particularly  appropriate 
to  themselves,  they  will  yet,  even  then,  infuse  into  the 
composition  of  the  mental  energy  the  properties  of  their 
own  nature;  but  obscurely  and  imperfectly,  and  not 
with  such  force  and  strong  evidence  as  in  the  other  case. 

The  peculiar  qualities  of  planets  in  dominion,  or  in 
elevation,  are  powerfully  impressed  upon  the  mental 
energy ;  for  instance,  persons,  who,  in  consequence  of 
the  familiarity  of  the  malefics,  become  wicked  and 
dishonest,  have  their  impulse  to  commit  evil,  free  and 
unrestrained,  when  the  said  familiarity  is  not  governed 
by  any  contrary  influence.  But,  should  a  contrary 
condition  impede  and  govern  that  familiarity,  the  im- 
pulse will  be  frustrated,  and  the  culprits  will  be  easily 
overtaken,  and  undergo  punishment.  In  like  manner, 
persons  endowed  with  goodness  and  virtue,  by  the 
familiarity  between  the  benefics  and  the  before-men- 
tioned places*,  and  when  no  contrary  influence  in 
elevation  may  interpose,  will  exert  themselves  with 
cheerfulness  and  alacrity  in  performing  good  actions, 
will  be  subject  to  no  injustice,  but  enjoy  the  advan- 
tages of  their  honesty  and   virtue.     If,  however,  this 


*  That  of  Mercury,  and  that  of  the  Mooyl. 


168  PTOLEMY'S   TETRAltlKLOS.  [Book  III. 

familiarity  should  be  superseded  by  some  contrary 
condition,  the  very  mildness  and  humanity  of  these 
persons  will  operate  to  their  diaadvantage,  exposing 
them  to  contempt  and  accusation,  and  rendering  theia 
liable  to  be  wronged  by  the  multitude. 

The  foregoing  observations,  relative  to  the  moral  habit, 
apply  generally;  and  the  particular  properties,  created  in 
the  mental  energies  by  the  actual  nature  of  the  planets, 
according  to  the  respective  dominion  of  each,  remain  to 
be  treated  of. 

The  planet  Saturn,  therefore,  when  alone  possessing; 
dominion  of  the  mind,  and  governing  Mercury  and  the 
Moon,  and  if  posited  in  glory,  both  co^jmically  and  with 
respect  to  the  angles',  will  make  men  careful  of  their 
bodies'!',  strong  and  profound  in  opinion,  austere,  singular 
in  their  modes  of  thinking,  laborious,  imperious,  hostile 
to  crime,  avaricious,  par.simonious,  accumulators  of 
wealth,  violent,  and  envious ;  but,  if  he  be  not  in  glory, 
coaraieally,  and  as  regards  the  angles,  he  will  debase  the 
mind,  making  it  penurious,  pu.sillanimous,  ill-disposed, 
indiscriminating,  malignant,  Liiuorous,  .slanderous,  fond 
of  solitude,  repining,  incapable  of  .shame,  bigoted,  fond  of 
labour,  void  of  natural  atl'ection,  treacherous  in  friendship 
and  in  family  connections,  incapable  of  enjoyment,  and 
regardless  of  the  bodyj. — Connected  with  Jupiter  in  the 
mode  before -mentioned,  being  also  situated  in  glory, 
Saturn  will  render  the  mind  virtuous,  respectful,  well- 
intentioned,  ready  to  assist.  Judicious,  frugal,  magnani- 
mous, obliging,  solicitous  of  good,  atfectionate  in  all 
domestic  ties,  mild,  prudent,  patient,  and  philosophical : 
but,  if  thus  connected  and  posited  ingloriously,  he  makes 


>  imply,  if  wall  placed  i 
u  a.  conBpiunniu 
u[  dignities. 

t  Or,  penoDH  :— the  Greek  is  famfu^mi 


n  tlie  mid- 


! 


i 


'I 


I 


tt 


Cliap.  XVIII.]    Ptolemy's  tetrabiblos.  161) 

men  outrageous,  incapable  of  learning,  timorous,  highly 
superstitious,  yet  regardless  of  religion,  suspicious,  averse 
to  children,  incapable  of  friendship,  cunning,  misjudging, 
faithless,  foolishly  wicked,  irascible,  hypocritical,  idle 
and  useless,  without  ambition,  yet  regretful,  morose, 
highly  reserved,  over-cautious,  and  dull. — Conciliated 
with  Mars,  and  posited  in  glor}',  Saturn  renders  men 
reckless  over-diligent,  free  in  speech,  turbulent,  boastful, 
austere  in  their  dealings,  pitiless,  content ptuous,  fierce, 
warlike,  bold,  fond  of  tumults,  insidious,  deceitful,  and 
implacable;  promoters  of  faction,  tyrannical,  rapacious, 
hostile  to  the  commonwealth,  delighting  in  strife,  vin- 
dictive, profound  in  guilt,  strenuous,  impatient,  insolent, 
mischievous,  overbearing,  evil,  unjust,  obstinate,  inhuman, 
inflexible,  immutable  in  opinion,  busy,  able  in  oftice, 
active,  submitting  to  no  opposition,  and  on  the  whole 
successful  in  their  undertakings  ;  but,  if  thus  connected, 
and  not  placed  in  glory,  he  will  make  men  plunderers, 
robbers,  adulterers,  submissive  to  evil,  seeking  gain  by 
their  turpitude,  infidels  in  religion,  void  of  common 
affections,  mischievous,  treacherous,  thievish,  perjurers, 
and  sanguinary ;  eaters  of  unlawful  food,  familiar  with 
guilt,  assassins,  sorcerers,  sacrilegious,  impious,  violators 
of  the  tomb,  and,  in  short,  thoroughly  depraved. — Con- 
ciliated with  Venus,  and  being  again  in  glory, '  Saturn 
makes  men  averse  to  women,  and  renders  them  fond 
of  governing,  prone  to  solitude,  highly  reserved,  regard- 
less of  rank,  indiflerent  to  beauty,  envious,  austere, 
unsociable,  singular  in  opinion,  addicted  to  divination 
and  to  religious  services  and  mysteries;  solicitous  to 
the  priesthood,  fanatical,  and  subservient  to  religion; 
solemn,  reverential,  sedate,  studious  of  wisdom,  faithful 
in  friendship,  continent,  reflective,  circumspect,  and 
scrupulous  in  regard  to  female  virtue:  but,  if  he  be  thus 
conciliated,  and   not  posited  in  glory,  he  rnake^  vss&v^ 


170 


PTOLEMY'S  TETltABIBLOS. 


[BMk  III. 


licentious  and  libidinous,  practisers  of  lewdness,  careless, 
and  inipure  in  sexual  intercourse;  obscene,  treacherous 
to  women,  especially  to  those  of  their  own  families; 
wanton,  quarrel.'ionie,  sordid,  hating  elegance;  slander- 
ouk.  drunken,  superstitious,  adulterous,  and  impious; 
blsisphenieia  of  the  gods,  and  scoffers  at  holy  rites; 
calumniators,  sorcerers,  hesitating  at  nothing. — If  con- 
ciliated with  Mercury,  and  if  in  a  glorious  position, 
Suturn  makes  men  inquisitive,  loquacious,  studious  of 
law  and  of  medicine,  mystical,  confederate  in  secrecy, 
fttliricators  of  miracles,  impostors,  improvident,  cunning, 
familiar  with  business,  cjuick  in  perception,  petulant, 
uccurate,  vigilant,  meditative,  fond  of  employment,  and 
tractable  ;  but,  if  efmnected  with  Mercury,  and  not 
posited  gloriously,  he  causes  men  to  be  frivolous,  vindic- 
tive, laborious,  alienated  from  their  families,  fond  of 
tormenting,  and  void  of  enjoyment;  night- wanderers, 
insidious,  treacherous,  pitiless,  and  thievish ;  magicians, 
sorcerers,  forj^ers  of  writings,  cheat.H,  unsuccessful  in 
iheir  undertakings,  and  quickly  reduced  to  adversity. — 
Such  are  the  effecLs  of  Saturn. 

When  Jupiter  alone  has  dominion  of  the  mind,  and  ia 
gloriously  situated,  he  renders  it  generous,  gracious, 
pious,  reverent,  joyous,  courteous,  lofty,  liberal,  just, 
magnanimous,  noble,  self-acting,  compassionate,  fond  of 
learning,  beneficent,  benevolent,  and  calculated  for 
government:  and,  if  posited  ingloriously,  he  will  endow 
the  ndnd  with  qualities  apparently  similar  to  these,  but 
not  of  such  virtue  and  lustre:  as,  instead  of  generosity, 
he  will  then  cause  profusion;  instead  of  piety,  bigotry; 
for  modesty,  timidity ;  for  nobleness,  arrogance ;  for 
courteousness,  folly;  for  elegance,  voluptuousness;  tor 
magnanimity,  carelessness ;  and  fur  liberality,  indiffer- 
ence,— Conciliated  with  Mara,  and  being  in  glory, 
Jupiter    will    make    men    rough,   warlike,    skilful    in 


Cliup.  XVIII.]       PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  171 

military  affairs,  dictatorial,  refractory,  impetuous, 
daring,  free  in  speech,  able  in  action,  fond  of  dis- 
putation, contentious,  imperious,  generous,  ambitious 
irascible,  judicious,  and  fortunate  :  but,  if  thus  con- 
nected, and  not  placed  in  glory,  he  makes  men  mis- 
chievous, reckless,  cruel,  pitiless,  seditious,  quarrelsome, 
perverse,  calumnious,  arrogant,  avaricious,  rapacious, 
inconstant,  vain  and  empty,  unsteady,  precipitate, 
faithless,  injudicious,  inconsiderate,  senseless,  and  oflS- 
cious  ;  inculpators,  prodigals,  triflers,  altogether  without 
conduct,  and  giving  way  to  every  impulse. — When 
conciliated  with  Venus,  and  in  a  glorious  position, 
Jupiter  will  render  the  mind  pure,  joyous,  delighting 
in  elegance,  in  the  arts  and  sciences,  and  in  poetry  and 
music;  valuable  in  friendship,  sincere,  beneficent,  com- 
pas.sionate,  inoffensive,  religious,  fond  of  sports  and 
exercises,  prudent,  amiable  and  affectionate,  gracious, 
noble,  brilliant,  candid,  liberal,  discreet,  temperate, 
modest,  pious,  just,  fond  of  glory,  and  in  all  respects 
honourable  and  worthy ;  but,  if  posited  ingloriously, 
when  so  connected,  he  makes  men  luxurious,  soft, 
effeminate,  fond  of  dancing,  indulgent  in  expenses, 
incapable  of  managing  women,  yet  amorous  and  las- 
civious ;  mean,  slanderous,  adulterous,  fond  of  dress, 
dissolute,  dull,  wasteful,  without  energy,  enervated,  fond 
of  personal  adornment,  womanish  in  mind,  yet  observ- 
ant of  holy  rites  and  ceremonies,  faithful,  harmless, 
pleasant,  afi'able,  cheerful,  and  liberal  to  misfortune. — 
If  connected  with"  Mercury,  and  posited  in  glory, 
Jupiter  will  render  men  fit  for  much  business,  fond  of 
learning,  and  of  geometry  and  the  mathematics; 
poetical,  public  orators,  acute,  temperate,  well-disposed, 
skilful  in  counsel,  politic,  beneficent,  able  in  govern- 
ment, pious,  religious,  valuable  in  all  useful  professions, 
benevolent,    affectionate    in    their    families,    ready    lev 


172 


PTOLRMY's   TETItABlBLUS.  [Book  111. 


acquiring  knowledge,  philosophical,  and  dignified:  but 
when  so  connected,  and  placed  ingloriously,  lie  will 
produce  contrary  effects,  rendering  men  frivolous,  empty. 
contemptible,  credulous  of  faUehood,  senseless,  fanatical, 
trifling,  petulant  nfiV-ctera  of  wisdom,  Mtupid,  arrogant, 
pretenderM  in  art,  magicians,  and  vacillating:— yet  he 
will  also  produce  men  skilled  in  various  learning,  and  of 
strong  memory,  capable  of  imparting  instruction,  and 
pure  in  their  enjoyment. 

Mar»  alone  having  dominion  of  the  mind,  and  placed 
with  glory,  makes  men  noble,  imperial,  irascible,  warlike, 
versatile,  powerful  in  intellect,  daring,  bold,  refractory, 
careless,  obstinate,  acute,  self-confident,  conteroptuoua, 
tyrannical,  strenuous,  stern  and  able  in  government :  but, 
posited  ingloriously.  he  makes  men  cruel,  mischievous, 
sanguinary,  tumultuous,  extravagant  in  expense,  boister- 
ous, ruffian-like,  precipitate,  drunken,  rapacious,  pitiless, 
familiar  with  crime,  restless,  outrageous,  hostile  to  their 
families,  and  intidels  in  religion. — Should  he  be  con- 
ciliated with  Venus,  and  posited  in  glory,  he  renders 
the  mind  cheerful,  docile,  friendly,  complacent,  joyous, 
playful,  frank,  delighting  in  songs  end  dancing,  ainoroua, 
fond  of  the  art  and  of  dramatic  personation,  voluptuous, 
brave,  libidinous  in  desire,  sensible,  cautious,  and  discreet; 
disposed  to  free  sexual  intercourse*,  (juick  in  anger, 
extravagant  in  expense,  and  jealous;  but  if  he  have  an 
inglvrious  position  when  thus  conciliated,  he  makes  men 
overbearing,  lascivious,  sordid,  opprobrious,  adulteronn, 
mischievous.  Iiar,s,  fabricators  of  deceit,  cheats  of  their 
own  families  as  well  as  others,  eager  in  desire,  and  at 
the  same  time  soon  satiated,  debauchers  of  wives  and 
virgins,  daring,  impetuous,  ungovernable,  t^eacheroH^', 
faithless,  dangerous,  fickle,  and  weak  in  mind ;  and 
occasionally  also  wasteful,  fond  of  dress,  audacious,  am) 


Chap,  XVIII.]      PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  173 

shameless. — Connected  with  Mercury,  and  placed  with 
glory,  Mars  renders  men  skilful  in  command,  cautious, 
strenuous,  active,  obstinate,  yet  versatile,  inventive, 
sophistical,  laborious,  busy  in  all  things,  eloquent,  im- 
posing, deceitful,  inconstant,  overknowing,  maliciously 
artful,  quick-witted,  seductive,  hypocritical,  treacherous, 
habituated  to  evil,  inquisitive,  fond  of  strife,  and  success- 
ful ;  fair  dealers  with  persons  of  habits  similar  to  their 
own,  and,  in  short,  altogether  mischievous  to  their 
enemies,  though  beneficial  to  their  friends ;  but,  if  Mars 
be  posited  ingloriously,  and  thus  connected,  he  makes 
men  prodigal,  yet  avaricious,  cruel,  daring,  bold,  regret- 
ful, and  vacillating;  liars,  thieves,  infidels  in  religion, 
perjurers,  and  impostors;  seditious,  incendiaries,  fre- 
quenters of  theatres,  covered  with  infamy,  robbers, 
housebreakers,  sanguinary,  forgser  of  writings,  familiar 
with  crime,  jugglers,  magicians,  sorcerers,  and  assassins. 

When  Venus  rules  alone  in  a  position  of  glory,  she 
renders  the  mind  benignant,  good,  voluptuous,  copious 
in  wit,  pure,  gay,  fond  of  dancing,  jealous,  abhorring 
wickedness,  delighting  in  the  arts,  pious,  modest,  well- 
disposed,  happy  in  dreams,  affectionate,  beneficent,  com- 
passionate, refined  in  taste,  easily  reconciled,  tractable, 
and  entirely  amiable :  but,  if  contrarily  posited,  she 
renders  the  mind  dull,  amorous,  effeminate,  timorous, 
indiscriminating,  sordid,  faulty,  obscure,  and  ignominious. 
— Conciliated  with  Mercury,  and  posited  with  glory, 
Venus  makes  men  lovers  of  the  arts,  philosophical,  of 
scientific  mind  and  good  genius,  poetical,  delighting  in 
learning  and  elegance,  polite,  voluptuous,  luxurious  in 
their  habits  of  life,  joyous,  friendly,  pious,  prudent, 
fitted  for  various  arts,  intelligent,  not  misled  by  error, 
quick  in  learning,  self-teaching,  emulous  of  worth, 
followers  of  virtue,  copious  and  agreeable  in  speech, 
serene  and  sincere   in  manner,  delighting  in  exercise, 


174 


PTOLEHVS   TETUA11IBLO.S. 


[a.",/,-  III. 


hotie»t,  judiciouH,  high-minded,  and  continent  in  desiru 
as  regards  women";  but,  when  so  conciliated,  ami 
_positeil  adversely,  she  will  make  men  oppressive,  tit  for 
various  arts,  evil-tongued,  unsteady,  malevolent,  fraud- 
ulent, turhulunl,  Itarfl,  caluminatortt,  faithless,  crafty, 
iniiidious,  practised  in  evil,  uncourteous,  debaucheVs  cf 
women,  corrupters  of  youth-f-,  fond  of  personal  adorn- 
ment, dissolute,  infamous,  notoriously  ofl'ensive  and 
publicly  complained  of,  yet  striving  after  all  things. 

Mercury,  alone,  having  dominion  of  the  mind,  and 
being  in  a  glorious  position,  rcndern  it  prudent,  clever, 
sensible,  capable  of  great  learning,  inventive,  expert, 
logical,  studious  of  nature,  speculative,  of  good  genius, 
emulous,  benevolent,  skilful  in  argument,  accurate  in  con- 
jecture, adapted  to  sciences  and  mysteries,  and  tractable ; 
but,  when  placed  contrarily,  he  makes  men  busy  in  all 
things,  precipitate,  forgetful,  impetuous,  frivolous,  vari- 
able,regretful,  foolish,  inconsiderate,  void  of  truth,  careless, 
inconstant,  insatiable,  avaricious,  unjust;  and  altogether 
of  slippery  intellect,  and  predisposed  to  error. 

To  these  influences  and  their  etfects,  as  above  detailed, 
the  Moon  also  contributes :  for,  should  she  be  in  the 
bends  of  her  southern  or  northern  boundary^,  she  will 
render  the  properties  of  the  mind  more  various,  more 
versatile  in  art,  and  more  susceptible  of  change  :  if  she 
be  in  her  nodes,  she  will  make  them  more  acute,  more 
practical,  and  more  active.  Also,  when  in  the  a.-icendant, 
and  during  the  increase  of  her  illumination,  she  augments 
their  ingenuity,  perspicuity,  tirmness,  and  expansion;  but, 
when  found  in  her  decrea-se,  or  in  occultation,  she  renders 
them  more  heavy,  more  obtuse,  more  variable  of  purpose, 
more  timid,  and  more  obscure. 


..I.;^ 


latitude,  whether  south  or  nortbi  j 


chap.  XIX.]  PTOLEMY'S  TETRAKTBLOS.  175 

The  Sun  likewise  co-operates,  when  conciliated  with 
the  lord  of  the  mental  temperament ;  contributinix,  if  he 
be  in  a  glorious  position,  to  increase  probity,  industry, 
honour,  and  all  laudable  qualities;  but,  if  adversely 
situated,  he  increases  debasement,  depravity,  obscurity, 
cruelty,  obstinacy,  moroseness,  and  all  other  evil  qualities. 

Chnpter  XIX. 

The  Diseases  of  the  Mind. 

In  connection  with  the  foregoing  discussion  on  the  pro- 
perties of  the  mind,  the  circumstances  relating  to  eminent 
mental  disorders,  such  as  madness,  epilepsy*,  and  others 
of  the  like  formidable  nature,  duly  claim  attention. 

Now,  with  reference  to  these,  it  is  always  essential  to 
consider  the  planet  Mercury  and  the  Moon,  and  to  observe 
in  what  mode  they  may  be  disposed  towar<ls  each  other, 
and  towards  the  angles,  and  also  towards  the  maletics ; 
for,  if  the  Moon  and  Mercury  be  unconnected  with  each 
other,  or  with  the  oriental  horizon,  and  provided  such 
planets  as  may  be  adversely  and  noxiously  configurated 
should  be  in  elevation  above  them,  or  over-rule  them,  or 
be  in  opposition  to  them,  the  mental  properties  will  then 
consequently  become  impregnated  with  various  disorders; 
the  characters  of  which  may  be  clearly  known  by  the 
qualities  of  the  stars  thus  contrpuling  the  places"f-. 

It  is  true  that  there  are  many  disorders  of  a  moderate 
nature,  capable  of  being  distinguished  by  what  has  been 
already  stated,  in  the  preceding  chapter,  regarding  the 
mental  qualities:  for  it  is  by  the  increase  and  growth 
of  certain  of  those  qualities,  that  an  injurious  excess 

*  Epilepsy  is  defined  to  be  "  a  convulsive  motion  of  the  wliole  Ix)dy, 
"  or  some  of  its  paxts,  accompanied  with  a  loss  of  sense."  The  know- 
ledge uf  this  latter  effect  probably  induced  the  author  to  rank  it 
among  diseases  of  the  mind. 

t  Of  Mcrcnfyi  the  Moon,  and  the  ascendant. 


17(i  ITOI.EMV'.S  TETRABIbl.US.  [Uoolc  III. 

is  produced  ;  and  every  irregularity  of  the  moral  habit. 
whuthcr  by  de6cieney  or  superabundance,  may  be  fitly 
termed  a  moral  disorder.  But,  at  the  same  lime,  there 
are  other  disorders  of  so  vast  and  raanifokl  a  dis- 
proportion, that  they  quite,  as  it  were,  overpower  the 
natural  course  of  the  intellect  and  passions  of  the  mind- 
And  of  these  greater  disorders  it  is  now  proposed  to  treat. 

For  example,  epilepsy  generally  attaches  to  all  persons  ' 
born  when  Mercury  and  the  Moon  may  be  unconnected 
either  with  each  other,  or  with  the  oriental  horizon, 
while  Saturn  and  Mars  may  be  in  angles  and  superintend 
the  scheme;  that  is  to  say.  provided  Saturn  be  so  posited 
by  day.  and  Mars  by  night;  otherwise,  when  the  con- 
verse may  happen  in  these  schemes,  viz.  when  Saturn 
may  have  dominion  by  night,  but  Mara  by  day,  (especially 
if  in  Cancer,  Virgo  or  Pisces,)  the  persons  born  will 
become  insane.  And  they  will  become  diemoniac.  and 
afflicted  with  moisture  of  the  brain,  if  the  Moon,  being 
in  face  to  the  Sun,  should  be  governed  by  the  maletics; 
that  is  to  say,  if  she  be  governed  by  Saturn  when 
operating  her  conjunction,  but  by  Mars  when  etlbcting 
her  opposition :  and  particularly  when  it  may  happen  in 
Sagittarius  and  in  Pisces. 

If  the  malefics,  only,  should  have  ruled  the  scheme, 
in  the  manner  described,  the  said  disorders  of  the  mind 
will  become  irremediable,  although  at  the  same  time 
not  eminent,  but  doubtful,  and  not  openly  displayed; 
but,  should  the  benetia-s,  Jupiter  and  Venu.s,  be  conciliated, 
and  be  posited  in  eastern  parts  and  in  angles,  while  the 
matefics  may  be  in  western  parts,  the  disorders,  although 
highly  conspicuous,  will  then  be  susceptible  of  cure. 
For  instance,  under  Jupiter's  influence,  they  will  be 
healed  by  means  of  medical  or  surgical  aid,  and  by  diet 
and  medicine;  under  Venus,  by  the  guidance  of  oraclea 
and  by  divine  interposition. 


I  . 


Chap.  XIX.]       Ptolemy's  tetrabiblos.  177 

Should  the  benefics,  however,  be  occidental,  and  the 
malefics  be  found  in  eastern  parts  and  in  angles,  the 
disorders  will  then  become  not  only  incurable,  but  most 
conspicuous :  the  epileptic  persons  will  then  be  subjected 
to  constant  fits,  and  to  danger  of  death ;  the  insane  will 
become  outrageous  and  unmanageable,  breaking  away 
from  their  families,  raving  and  wandering  in  nakedness ; 
the  dsemoniacs  and  those  afflicted  with  moisture  of  the 
brain  will  become  furious,  uttering  mysterious  sayings, 
and  wounding  themselves. 

The  several  places  of  position  in  the  scheme  also  afford 
co-operation :  for  instance,  those  of  the  Sun  and  Mars 
contribute  to  insanity ;  those  of  Jupiter  and  Mercury,  to 
epilepsy ;  those  of  Venus,  to  the  fury  of  enthusiasm ; 
and  those  of  Saturn  and  the  Moon,  to  daemoniac  affections 
and  moisture  of  the  brain. 

It  is  by  such  configurations,  as  those  just  described, 
that  any  morbid  deviation,  occurring  in  the  active  or 
reasoning  faculties  of  the  mind,  is  produced;  but  a 
deviation  of  the  passive,  or  merely  sensitive  faculties 
is  discernible  chiefly  in  the  excess  and  deficiency  (as  the 
case  may  be)  of  the  masculine  and  feminine  genders ; 
that  is  to  say,  in  the  superabundance,  or  deficiency,  of 
the  power  of  either  gender  to  produce  a  conformation 
agreeable  to  its  own  proper  nature :  and  a  knowledge  of 
this  latter  deviation  is  to  be  acquired  by  means  of  the 
following  rules. 

When  the  Sun,  instead  of  Mercury,  may  be  with  the 
Moon,  and  if  Mars,  together  with  Venus,  be  then  in 
familiarity  with  them,  in  that  case,  provided  the  lumin- 
aries only  be  found  in  masculine  signs,  men  will  excel 
in  their  nature,  or,  in  other  words,  will  possess  in  full 
plenitude  the  properties  becoming  their  sex ;  while  the 
properties  of  women,  who  are  thus  constituted  more 
masculinely  and  more  actively,  will  deviate   from   the 

N 


178 


PTOI.EMV's  TETItABIRl.n 


[lionk  111. 


usual  limits  of  nature.  But,  if  both  Mars  and  Venus,  or 
if  only  one  of  them,  be  likewise  maKCulinely  situated, 
men  will  be  freely  and  promptly  inclined  to  natural 
intercourse  and  connection;  and  women  will  be,  in  like 
manner,  licentious  and  intemperate  in  intercourse  beyond 
nature.  Their  desires  will  bo  practised  in  privacy,  and 
not  openly,  should  only  Venus  be  situated  mtt.«culinely ; 
but  shamelessly  and  publicly,  if  Mars  also  be  masculinely 
placed,  together  with  Venus. 

But,  if  the  luminaries  only  be  in  feminine  signs, 
women  will  then  possess  their  natural  functions  in 
greater  plenitude,  and  men  will  deviate  from  the  limits 
of  nature  towards  efTeminacy  and  wantonness.  And,  if 
Venus  be  femininely  posited,  women  will  be  In.stful  and 
licentious,  and  men  wanton  and  soft ;  seeking;  connection 
contrary  to  nature ;  yet  in  privacy  and  not  openly :  but, 
if  Mars  be  posited  femininely,  they  will  then  put  their 
desires  in  practice  shamelessly  and  publicly. 

The  oriental  and  diurnal  positions  of  Mars  and  Veoos 
also  contribute  to  more  masculine  and  more  reputable 
qualities;  and  their  occidental  and  vespertine*  podtions 
to  qualities  more  feminine,  and  more  sordid. 

Lastly,  if  Saturn  be  in  famitiai-ity  tvith  them,  he  will 
likewise  co-operate,  by  tending  to  produce  greater  im- 
purity and  obscenity,  and  greater  evil  altogether;  but 
Jupiter,  if  in  familiarity,  tends  to  greater  decency  and 
modesty,  and  altogether  to  better  conduct;  and  Mercury 
to  greater  mobility,  diversity,  activity,  and  notoriety  of 
the  passions, 


'   Erri^o 


.   perbaps, 


rnal.    the  word   I 


usod  in  coacmst  to  if 


END     OF     THE    THIKD     HOOK. 


BOOK  THE  FOURTH. 

O-haptcr  I. 

Proem, 

ALL  those  circumstances  have  now  been  set  forth, 
which  occur  previously  to  the  birth,  as  well  as  at  the 
actual  birth,  and  after  it,  and  which  it  seemed  necessary 
to  mention,  as  conducing  to  a  knowledge  of  the  general 
quality  of  the  conteniperament  produced.  And  of  the 
other  points,  now  remaining,  by  which  extrinsic  events* 
are  contemplated,  those  regarding  the  several  fortunes 
of  wealth  and  of  rank  claim  to  be  taken  first  into 
consideration.  Each  of  these  fortunes  has  a  distinct 
relationship ;  for  instance,  that  of  wealth  relates  to  the 
body,  and  that  of  rank  to  the  mind. 

Chapter  II. 

The    Fortune   of    Wealth, 

The  circumstances  regulating  the  fortune  of  wealth 
are  to  be  judged  of  from  that  part  alone,  which  is 
expressly  denominated  the  Part  of  Fortune;  the  position 
of  which  is,  in  all  oases,  whether  arising  in  the  day  or 
in  the  night,  always  as  far  removed  from  the  ascendant 
as  the  Sun  is  distant  from  the  Moon  "f. 

When  the  Part  of  Fortune  has  been  determined,  it 
must  be  ascertained  to  what  planets  the  dominion  of  it 


*  That  is  to  say,  such  events  as  are  independent  of  the  will,  and 
not  necessarily  consequent  on  any  peculiar  conformation  of  the  mind 
or  body. 

t  Vide  Chapter  13  of  the  3d  Book,  ^u^ 


180 


I'TOLEMYH   TETRABI  liLOS. 


[BoU-  IV. 

belongs;  ami  their  power  anil  connexion,  as  also  the 
power  anrl  connexion  of  others  configurated  with  them, 
or  in  elevation  above  them,  whether  of  the  same  or  an 
adverse  condition,  are  then  to  be  observed:  for,  if  the 
planets  which  assume  dominion  of  the  Fart  of  Fortune 
be  in  full  force,  tliey  will  create  much  wealth,  and  especi- 
alty  should  the  luminaries  also  give  them  suitable  testi- 
mony in  addition. 

In  this  manner.  Saturn  will  effect  the  acc]uirement 
of  wealth  by  means  of  buildings,  agriculture,  or  navi- 
gation :  Jupiter,  bj'  holding  some  government,  or  office 
of  trust,  or  by  the  priesthood ;  Mars,  by  the  army  and 
military  command ;  Venus  by  means  of  friends,  by  the 
dowry  of  wives,  or  by  other  gifts  proceeding  from 
women  "i  and  Mercury  by  the  sciences  and  by  trade. 

Should  Saturn,  however,  when  thas  in  influence  over 
the  fortune  of  wealth,  be  also  configurated  with  Jupiter, 
he  particularly  provides  wealth  through  inheritance: 
especially  if  the  configuration  should  exi.st  in  the 
superior  angles,  Jupiter  being  also  in  a  bicorporeal 
sign  and  receiving  the  application  of  the  Moon ;  for, 
in  such  a  case,  the  native  will  also  be  adopted  by 
persons  unallied  to  him,  and  will  become  heir  to  their 
property. 

And,  further,  if  other  stars,  of  the  same  condition  as 
those  which  rule  the  Part  of  Fortune,  should  likewise 
exhibit  testimonies  of  dominion,  the  wealth  will  he  per- 
manent; but,  on  the  other  hand,  if  stars  of  an  adverse 
condition  should  either  he  in  elevation  above  the  ruling 
places,  or  ascend  in  succession  to  them,  the  wealth  will 
not  continue. — The  general  period  of  its  duration  is, 
however,  to  be  calculated  by  means  of  the  decliuntion  of 


*  1  have  considered  the  wordn,  yvxnni.vi  3>;i4i>,  aa  eotnpririiig  ■ 
" ilotory  of  mvei,"  ae  well  aanlher  " gift*  fnm  women." 


cW 


Chap.  Ill]  PTOLEMY'S   TETRABIBLOS.  181 

the  stars,  which  operate  the  loss,  in  respect  of  the  angles 
and  succedent  houses  *. 


(Chapter  III. 

The  Fortune  of  Rank, 

The  disposition  of  the  luminaries  and  the  respective 
familiarities  exercised  by  the  stars  attending  them,  are 
to  be  considered  as  indicative  of  the  degree  of  rank  or 
dignity  f. 

For  example,  should  the  two  luminaries  be  found  in 
masculine  signs  and  in  angles,  or  even  if  only  one  of 
them  be  in  an  angle  J,  they  being  at  the  same  time 
specially  attended  by  a  doryphory§  composed  of  all  the 

*  That  is  to  say,  its  duration  will  depend  on  the  time  requisite  to 
complete  the  arc  of  direction  or  prorogation  between  the  stars, 
operating  the  loss,  and  the  places  which  give  the  wealth.  And 
the  calculation  is  to  be  made  as  pointed  out  in  the  14th  and  15th 
Chapters  of  the  3d  Book. 

t  It  seems  that  there  have  been  different  opinions  on  this  point. 
Placidus  makes  the  following  remark  on  the  subject:  **  I  do  not  take 
"  the  dignities  from  the  horoscope,  but  from  the  Sun  and  Medium 
"  Oeli,  according  to  Ptolemy  and  others."  (Cooper's  Translation, 
p.  121.) 

X  The  Perugio  Latin,  of  1646,  says,  "  If  either  both  luminaries,  or 
**  only  that  one  of  the  chief  quality"  (which  Whalley  defines  to  be 
the  Sun  by  day,  and  the  Moon  by  night)  **be  in  an  angle,"  etc. 

§  Doryphory.  Vide  Chapter  5  of  the  3(1  Book.  On  the  present 
passage,  Placidus  has  the  following  words  :  **  You  are  not  to  observe 
"  what  ia  generally  alleged  by  professors,  respecting  the  satellites" 
{quasi  doryphory)  "  of  the  luminaries,  for  dignities ;  viz  that  the 
*' satellites  are  those  planets  which  are  found  within  30^,  on  either 
^*  side  of  the  luminaries ;  but  that  a  satellite  is  [also]  any  kind  of 
**  aspect  of  the  stars  to  the  luminaries  of  what  kind  soever:  which,  if 
"it  be  made  by  application,  its  power  extends  inwardly  over  the 
**  whole  orb  of  light  of  the  aspecting  planet,  and  the  more  so,  as  the 
**  proximity  is  greater ;  but,  by  separation,  it  is  not  so  This  doctrine 
"  may  be  seen  in  several  chapters  of  Ptolemy  ;  for,  an  aspeoting  ntar 

influences  the  significator,  and  disposes  him  to  produce  effects  co- 


(I 


182  niiLEMVS   TKTflAlilBL'lS  [liootr  LV. 

five  planets ;  the  Smi  by  such  as  are  oriental,  but  th>- 
lloon  by  occidental,  the  persons  then  about  to  be  born 
will  consequently  become  kings  or  princes.  And,  if  thf 
attendant  stars  themselves  should  also  bo  in  angles,  or 
configurated  with  the  anijle  above  the  earth",  the  said 
persons  will  become  great,  powerful,  and  mighty  in  thf 
world:  and  even  yet  muie  abundantly  so,  provided  tbr 
configurations,  made  by  the  attemlant  stars  with  the 
angles  above  the  earth,  be  dexter.  But,  when  bcitli 
luminaries  may  not  be  found  in  iii&.sculine  Mgnn  as  afore- 
said, but  the  Sun  only  in  a  uiascuHne  and  the  Moon  in  u 
feminine  sij^n,  and  only  one  of  them  posiwd  in  an  angle, 
the  other  concomitant  circumstances  still  existing  in 
tbe  mode  above  described,  tlic  persons  about  to  be  born 
will  ibon  become  merely  chiuftaius,  invested  with  the 
sovereignly  of  life  and  death. 

And  if  tbe  attendant  stars,  while  tbe  luminaries  may 
be  situated  in  ibe  manner  last -mentioned,  nbould  be 
neither  actually  in  angles,  nur  bear  any  testimony  to  the 
angles,  tbe  persons  then  horn.  althi>ugb  they  will  still 
enjoy  eminence,  will  attain  only  some  limited  dignity  or 
distinction;  such  as  that  of  a  delegated  governor,  or  coin- 
luauder  of  an  army,  or  ilignitary  of  the  priesthood;  and 
they  will  nut  be  invested  with  sovereignty. 

If,  however,  neither  of  tbe  luminaries  be  in  an  ftngle, 
and  it  happen  that  must  of  tbe  attendant  stars  Vje  eilfaer 
themselves  in  angles,  or  configurated  with  the  angles,  the 
persons  then  born  will  not  attain  to  any  very  eminent 
rank;  yet  they  will  take  a  leading  part  in  ordinary  civil 
and   municipal  affairs:  but,  should  the  attendant  stars 

"  natuml  lu  him,  by  u  xubsequeiil  ilin:i:tiun.     Bat  a  »t&r  of  no  a^eet 
■'  doee  not  predispuw  lliu  Biffutlicnior,  and  prutlucvH  v«ry  Itltlrt  «r  BO 
"elTect  of  ita  natnre,   by  r,  oubAeijuent  ilirection;   thi*  is  Iba  (nM 
"  doctrine  of  the  atftn."     ((.'ooper's  Trftiuliitioii,  pp.  It!4,  12S.) 
*  Tlic  an^le  of  lie  luid-liuaveii  :  we  lliu  linil  not*  to  lliis  Ch&pter. 


Chap:  III  ]  Ptolemy's  tetrabiblos.  183 

have  no  configuration  with  the  angles,  they  will  then 
remain  altogether  undistinguished  and  without  advance- 
ment; and  provided,  further,  that  neither  of  the  lumin- 
aries be  found  situated  in  a  masculine  sign,  nor  in  an 
angle,  nor  be  attended  by  any  benefics,  they  will  be  born 
to  complete  obscurity  and  adversity. 

The  general  appearance  of  exaltation  or  debasement  of 
rank  is  to  be  contemplated  as  before  stated,  but  there  are 
many  gradations  intermediate  to  those  already  specitied, 
and  requiring  observation  of  the  particular  interchanges 
and  variations  incidental  to  the  luminaries  themselves 
and  their  doryphory,  and  also  to  the  dominion  of  the 
planets  which  compose  their  doryphory.  For  instance, 
should  the  benefics,  or  stars  of  the  same  condition,  exer- 
cise the  chief  dominion,  the  dignities  to  be  acquired  will 
be  not  only  more  important,  but  also  more  securely 
established:  and,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  chief  dominion 
be  claimed  by  the  malefics,  or  by  stars  of  an  adverse 
condition,  the  dignities  will  be  more  subordinate,  and 
more  dangerous  and  evanescent. 

The  species  of  dignity  may  be  inferred  by  observing 
the  peculiar  qualities  of  the  attendant  stars.  And,  if 
Saturn  have  chief  dominion  of  the  doryphory,  the  power 
and  authority  derived  therefrom  will  lead  to  wealth  and 
profit :  authority  proceeding  from  Jupiter  and  Venus  will 
be  pleasurable,  and  attended  by  presents  and  honours: 
that  proceeding  from  Mars  will  consist  in  commanding 
armies,  in  obtaining  victories,  and  in  over-awing  the 
vanquished :  and  that  proceeding  from  Mercury  will  be 
intellectual,  superintending  education  and  study,  and 
directing  the  management  of  business. 


1S4  PTULEMV'S  TKTUABIBLOS. 

QThavter  IV. 

The  Qiuility  of  Employment. 

The  dominion  of  the  employment,  or  profession,  is 
claimed  in  two  quarters ;  viz.  by  the  Sun,  and  by  the 
sign  on  the  mid-heaven. 

It  is,  therefore,  necessary  to  observe  whether  any 
planet  may  be  making  its  oriental  appearance  nearest  to 
the  Sun",  and  whether  any  he  posited  in  the  mid- 
heaven;  especially,  when  also  receiving  the  application 
of  the  Moon.  And,  if  one  and  the  same  planet  possesa 
both  thene  qualiiications,  that  is  to  say.  make  its  nearest 
appearance  to  the  Sun,  and  be  also  in  the  mid-heaven, 
that  one  alone  must  be  elected  to  determine  the  present 
inquiry  ;  and,  likewise,  though  the  planet  should  not  be 
thus  doubly  qualified,  but  only  singly,  in  whichever 
respect,  even  then  that  planet  alone  must  still  be 
elected,  provided  itself  alone  should  possess  such  single 
qualification.  If,  however,  there  should  be  one  planet 
presenting  its  nearest  appearance,  and  another  in  the 
mid-beaven  conciliated  with  the  Moon,  both  must  then 
be  noticed ;  and  whichever  of  these  two  may  have 
greater  sway,  and  possess  greater  rights  of  dominioQ, 
that  one  must  be  preferred.  But  where  not  any  planet 
may  be  found  so  situated,  neither  making  its  appear- 
ance as  above  described,  nor  being  in  the  mid-heaven, 
then  that  one,  possessing  the  dominion  of  the  mid- 
heaveni".  is  to  be  considered  as  lord  of  the  employment : 

*  See  llie  4tli  CLttpter  of  th«  Sill  Book  of  the  Almagest,  inserted 
in  the  AppendU. 

+  The  Greek  says  merely  "  tbal  one  having  the  domiDloii,"  with- 
ont  Bpeuifying  the  place  of  dominion  :  the  L#atia  printed  iit  Perugia, 
is,  however,  "  diuiiinum  accipe  m»<lii  ciHi,"  whli^h  is  ccrl-iunly  tha 
seuae  reqaired  by  the  t«Dor  of  the  previons  instructions.  Wh&Ui^y 
bIso  has  similarly  rendered  it. 


/ 


r 


I 


(l 


Chap.  IV.]  PTOLEMY'S  TmtABIBLl»S.  185 

it  is,  however,  only  some  occasional  occiipatJoo  which 
can  be  thus  denoted ;  because  persons,  born  under  such 
a  configuration,  most  commonly  remain  at  leisure  am) 
unemployed. 

What  has  now  been  said,  relates  to  the  elwtion  nf  the 
lord  of  the  employment  or  profession ;  but  the  species  of 
the  employment  will  be  distinguished  by  means  of  the 
respective  properties  of  the  three  planets.  Mars,  Venus 
and  ISIercury,  and  of  the  signs  in  which  they  may  l>e 
posit«d. 

Mercury,  for  imitance,  produces  writers,  superintend- 
ents of  business,  accomptants,  teachers  in  the  sciences, 
merchants  and  bankers :  also,  soothiiayens,  asttolt^ers, 
and  attendants  on  sacritices,  and,  in  short,  all  who  liv« 
by  the  exercise  of  literature,  and  by  furnishing  explana- 
tion or  interpretation  ;  as  well  as  by  stipend  and  salary, 
or  allowance.  If  Saturn  bear  testimony  jointly  with 
Mercury,  persons  then  born  will  become  maitagera  of 
the  affairs  of  others,  or  interpreters  of  dreams,  or  will 
be  enij^ed  in  temples  for  the  purposes  of  divination, 
and  for  the  sake  of  their  fanaticism.  But.  if  Jupiter 
join  testimony,  they  will  be  painters,  orators,  or  pleaders 
in  argument,  and  occupied  with  eminent  personages. 

Should  Venus  have  dominion  of  the  employment,  she 
will  cause  persons  to  be  engaged  in  the  various  per- 
fumes of  flowers,  in  unguents  and  wines,  and  aUo  in 
colours,  dyei,  and  in  spices:  thus  she  will  produce 
vendors  of  unguents,  garland -makers',  wine- merchants, 
dealers  in  medical  drugs,  weavers,  dealers  in  spices, 
painters,  dyers,  and  vendors  of  apparel.  If  Saturn  add 
his   testimony   to   hers,   he    will    cause    persons   tu   be 

*  Amonji  the  antieolJ*,  H  ^rUuH  wiu  t,a  indupennablB  liprorKtion 
at  dl  public  c«rt>iuoaie«,  wlietlier  rivil  or  rcligiaas,  uid  private  M 
buiqueU.  The  making  of  garUniU  km,  th«rolon>,  n  cooB)<lpnitil« 
em  ploy  men  L 


1K() 


VS   TETKABIBLOS. 


[Rook  IV. 


employed  in  matters  belonging  to  amusement  and 
decoration;  and  will  also  produce  jug3;lers.  sorcerers, 
and  charlatans,  and  all  such  &.t  practise  Himilarly.  But, 
if  Jupiter  join  testimony  with  Venus,  persona  will 
become  prize-wrestlurs,  and  garland-wearers",  and  will 
be  advaucL'd  in  honour  through  female  interest. 

Mars,  rnling  the  employmi-nt,  and  being  configurated 
with  the  Sun,  will  produce  persons  who  operate  by 
means  uf  tire  ;  for  instance,  cooks,  as'  well  as  those  who 
work  in  copper,  brass,  and  other  metals,  by  melting, 
burning,  and  casting  :  if  Mars  be  separated  from  the 
Sun.  he  will  make  shipwrights,  smiths,  agriculturists, 
stonemasons,  carpenters,  and  subordinate  labourers.  If 
Saturn  bear  testimony,  in  addition  to  Mars,  persons 
will  become  mariners,  workers  in  wells,  vaults  or 
mines,  painters,  keepera  of  beasts  or  cattle,  cooks  or 
butchers,  and  attendants  on  baihs  or  on  exhibitions. 
And  if  Jupiter  join  testimony,  they  will  be  soldiers, 
or  mechanics,  collectors  of  revenue,  innkeepers,  toll- 
gatherers,  or  attendants  on  sacrifices. 

Further,  should  it  happen  that  two  arbiters  of  employ- 
ment may  be  found  together,  and  provided  they  should 
he  Mercury  and  Venus,  they  will  then  produce  musicians, 
melodists,  and  persons  engaged  in  music,  poetry,  and 
songs:  they  will  also  produce  (especially  if  changed  in 


sein,  from  " QurlaDrl-wearere"  bein|{  plaeml  liure  in 
n  with  "priie  wre-stlem"  (■^>nrsi),  tbnt  the  aatlior  inlended 
to  point  out  personfl  competent  to  obtain  the  victor's  wreath  io  public 
exhthitiODs. — Bub  it  uppearH  that  the  woiil  ufamfi^ii,  gartaad- 
vearer.  nlso  BiguiKes  a  pereuo  wlio  was  annually  uliuaen  hy  the 
ptieHts  tu  Hupurinteurl  religious  ite  re  monies,  an  olGue  similar  to  thai 
of  high  print.  AcoonlinK  to  Athenivus,  tbe  Stephanephorus  of 
TAraos  WKs  invested  with  a.  purple  tunic,  edged  or  ntripetl  with 
white,  anil  wore  the  laurel  chaptet,  which  Plato,  in  the  treatise 
etc  Leiibun,  describes  hh  being  eonetantly  iroru  by  these  otfic«i«, 
iilthoiit{;h  the  other  priest«  wore  it  only  during  the  {lerfur 
the  cerenionie* 


-J 


Chnp.  IV. ]  noLEMV'-.  TKTIIAHIIH.'W.  157 

their  places*)  mimics,  actors,  dealers  in  slaves,  in/ikers 
of  musical  instruinents.  clionsters  and  musical  per- 
formers, dancers,  weavers,  niodellers  in  wax,  and 
painters.  And  if  Saturn  join  testimony  with  Mercury 
and  Venus,  the  preparation  and  sale  of  female  ornaments 
will  be  added  to  the  aforesaid  occupations.  But,  if 
Jupiter  give  testimony,  the  persons  will  become  adminis- 
trators of  justice,  Kunrdians  of  public  aflfairs,  instructors 
of  youth,  and  ma^diitrates  of  the  people. 

Should  Mercury  and  Mars  together  bu  lords  of  the 
employment,  persona  will  become  statuaries,  armour- 
inakers,  sc^lptoTS'^,  modellers  of  animals,  wrestlers, 
surgeons,  spies  or  informers,  adulterers,  busy  in  crime, 
and  forgers.  And.  if  Saturn  also  liear  testinxjny  in 
addition  to  Mei-cury  and  Mars,  he  will  produce  a.^sas')- 
ins,  hi^jhwayraen  thieves,  robliers  lurking  in  amhush, 
marauders  on  cattle,  and  swindlers.  But,  if  Jupiter 
afford  testimony,  he  will  engage  persons  in  honourable 
warfare,  and  in  industry  ;  making  them  cautious  and 
diligent  in  business,  curious  in  foreign  matters,  and 
derivin;^  protit  from  their  pursuits. 

When  Venus  and  Mars  exercise  the  dominion  together, 
persons  will  become  dyers  dealers  in  unguents  and 
perfumes,  workers  in  tin,  lead,  gold  and  silver,  mock 
combatants  or  dancers  in  armour,  dealers  in  medical 
drugs,  agriculturists,  and  physicians,  healing  by  means 
of  medicine.  And,  if  Saturn  add  testimony  to  Venus 
and  Mars,  he  will  produce  persons  attendant  on  animals 
consecrated  to  religion ;  also  grave-diggers  and  under- 
takers, mourners  and  musicians  at  funerals,  and  fanatics 
occupied  in  religious  ceremonies,  lamentations  and  blood. 
But,  if  Jupiter  add  testimony,  the  persons  will  become 

*  Meaning  iirobubly  •'  if  in  mattui  nweptinn,"  wliicli  portion  \au. 
lieen  Icfore  c^tplnined. 

t  iir  iiiiikeri  of  liierogl3'iiliio*~i<^yi  vf«. 


PTOLEMY'S   TKTUABiai.OS.  [Bvnh  IV. 

regulatora  of  sacrilices,  aiigura,  holders  of  sacred  officea, 
governors  placed  over  women,  and  interpreters ;  and  they 
will  derive  support  from  such  occupations. 

The  properties  of  the  signs,  in  which  the  lords  of  the 
employment  may  he  posited,  are  also  influential  in  vary- 
ing the  employment.  For  uxample,  the  signs  of  human 
shape  promote  all  scienti&c  pursuits,  and  such  as  are  of 
utility  to  mankind;  the  quadrupedal  signs  contribute  to 
produce  employment  among  metals,  in  business  and 
trade,  in  house-building,  and  in  the  work  of  smiths  and 
mechanics:  the  tropical  and  equinoctial  signs  tend  to 
give  employment  in  translation  or  interpretation,  in 
matters  of  exchange,  in  mensuration  and  agriculture,  and 
in  religious  dutien;  the  terrestrial  and  watery  signs  tend 
to  employment  in  water,  and  in  connection  with  water, 
as  well  in  regard  to  the  nurture  of  plants,  as  to  ship- 
building; they  likewise  contribute  to  employment  in 
funerals,  in  embalming  and  preserving,  and  also  in  ^t 

Moreover,  should  the  Moon  herself  actually  occupy  the 
place  regulating  the  employment*,  and,  after  her  con- 
junction, continue  in  course  with  Mercury,  being  at  the 
same  time  in  Taurus,  Capricorn,  or  Cancer,  she  will  then 
produce  soothsayers,  attendants  on  sacrifices,  and  diviners 
by  the  basin  f,     If  she  be  in  Sagittarius  or  Pisces,  she 

*  That  is  to  Bay,  the  mid-iieaTen ;  an  stated  in  the  4th  Chapt«r  of 
the  3d  Book,  and  in  the  i^oiumenaemeDt  of  the  present  Chapter 

t  This  mode  of  diviuntion.as  practised  by  the  Greeks,  is  mentioneil 
by  Potter.  It  is  likewiae  deserilied  by  a  le&med  Doctor  of  Mediciov, 
t.>eo.  PictoriaB  Vieillanus,  (ia  bis  Truatine  "de  Speeiebiis  Magiir 
Cereiiioniali«,"  printed  at  Stra^bargh,  l.'iSI,)  us  lieing  used  "'when 
"  the  fraudulent  vanity  of  a  dii'mon  renders  things  moTc  like  each 
'■  other  than  eggs  are  to  eggs."  And,  according  to  this  writer,  it  is 
pmctixed  by  oxorcisinc  water,  and  pouring  it  into  a  basin,  wherein 
I  be  vain  and  refractory  divniou  is  immersed  :—tbe  eaid  do'iiiuu  will 
Homelimen  remain  at  the  botloni,  and  sometimeH  raixe  hiniuelf  to  llie 
Kurface,  Bending  forth  a  Blender  iitstiing ;  out  of  which  the  desimi 
reaponses  are  to  he  formed. 


Chap.  IV.]  Ptolemy's  tetrabiblos.  189 

will  make  necromancers,  and  evokers  of  daemons:  if  in 
Virgo  or  Scorpio,  magicians,  astrologers,  and  oracular 
persons,  possessing  prescience:  and,  if  in  Libra,  Aries,  or 
Leo,  she  will  produce  fanatics,  interpreters  of  dreams, 
and  makers  of  false  vows  and  adjurations. 

From  the  foregoing  rules,  the  various  forms  of  em- 
ployment are  to  be  inferred ;  and  its  magnitude  or 
importance  will  be  manifested  by  the  existing  power  of 
the  ruling  planets.  For  instance,  if  the  said  planets  be 
oriental,  or  in  angles,  they  will  give  the  person  eminence 
and  authority  in  his  employment :  but,  if  occidental  or 
cadent,  they  will  render  him  subordinate.  And  should 
the  benefics  be  in  elevation,  the  employment  will  be 
important,  lucrative,  secure,  honourable,  and  agreeable ; 
but,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  malefics  be  in  elevation 
above  the  lords  of  the  employment,  it  will  then  be 
mean,  disreputable,  unprofitable,  and  insecure :  thus, 
Saturn  brings  an  adverse  influence  in  coldness  or  tardi- 
ness, and  in  the  composition  or  mixture  of  colours  * ; 
and  Mars  produces  opposition  by  audacity  and  publicity 
in  enterprise:  and  both  planets  are  alike  hostile  to 
proficiency  and  prosperity. 

The  general  period,  at  which  any  increase  or  diminu- 
tion of  the  employment  may  take  place,  must,  again  in 
this  case  also,  be  determined  by  the  disposition  of  the 
stars,  which  operate  the  eff'ect,  towards  the  oriental  and 
occidental  angles. 

•  K^tiffi^t  Tft»»  ^^ufAmru^. — These  words  have  been  rendered  literally, 
hat  they  seem  to  contain  some  figurative  meaning,  rather  than  a 
literal  one.  Perhaps  the  preferable  sense  of  them  is,  "bya  mixture 
"  of  views,**  or  **from  various  pursuits  being  blended  together.** 


I'TULEMV'S    rKTRABIKLOS. 


l/.'..oi-|V. 


C  li  fl  ?  t  e  r    V. 

Marriage. 
Tee  coiisKieration  of  circumstances  relatinj^  to  marriage. 
or  the  cohabitation  of   husband   and  wife,  aa  sanctioned 
by  law,  Rucceeda   to   the    foregoing  details,  and   must  be 
pursued  in  the  following  method. 

With  regard  to  men,  it  is  to  ire  observed  in  what 
manner  the  Moon  may  hn  disposed  ;  for,  in  th«  tir^t  place, 
if  ahe  be  found  in  the  oriental  quadrants,  she  will  cause 
men  either  to  many  early  in  life,  or,  after  liavin^'  over- 
passed their  prime,  to  marry  young  women  ;  "  but,  should 
"  she  be  situated  in  either  uf  the  occidental  quadrants, 
"  men  will  then  marry  either  late  in  life,  or  to  women 
"  advanced  in  age" :"  and  if  she  be  found  under  the 
Sun's  beams,  and  conBgurated  with  Saturn,  she  then 
entirely  denies  marriage.  Secondly,  should  she  be  in  a 
sign  of  single  form,  and  in  application  to  only  one  of 
the  planets,  she  will  cau.'^e  men  to  marry  only  once;  but. 
if  she  be  in  a  bicorporeal  or  multiform  sign,  or  in  appli- 
cation to  several  planets,  she  will  then  cause  them  to  be 
married  several  times;  ami,  provided  also  that  the  planets, 
which  thus,  either  by  adjacency  or  by  testimonyf-,  receive 
her  application,  be  benetic,  men  will  then  obtain  good 
wives;  but  if.  on  the  contrary,  the  said  planets  be  malefic, 
bad.  For  example,  if  Saturn  receive  the  Moon's  applica- 
tion, the  wives  whom  he  will  provide  will  be  troublesome 
and  morose;  but,  if  Jupiter  receive  it,  they  will  be  de- 
corous and  coeonomical ;  if  Mars,  bold  and  refractory  ;  if 
Venus,  cheerful,  handsome,  and  agreeable;  and  if  Mercury, 

*  The  words  marked  with  inverted  cnmiDK»,  are  not  in  tlie  Urnek  ; 
til ey  are  found,  liowever,  in  (no  Latin  IraiielalionH ;  iblit  of  liable, 
1541.  and  tbjil  of  Perujtio,  lfi4H. 

t  In  other  editioDB,  "  whether  by  uoiij  unci  ion  or  a>'pecl." 


ifn 


Chap,   v.]  |-T1)I.EMV'S   TETI{AI!llir.llS.  IfJl 

senoibiL',  piudent,  aud  clever.  Moreover,  should  Venus 
be  found  connected  with  Jupiter,  Saturn*,  or  Mercury, 
she  will  render  wives  provident,  and  attached  lo  their 
husbands  and  children;  but,  if  she  be  found  connected 
with  Mars,  they  will  be  irascible,  unsteady,  and  indis- 
creet,— Thus  far  in  reference  to  the  marriage  of  men. 

But,  in  the  case  of  women,  the  Sun  must  be  observed, 
instead  of  the  Moon  ;  and,  should  he  be  posited  in  the 
oriental  quadrants,  women  will  be  married  either  in  their 
own  youth,  or  to  men  younger  than  themselves;  but,  if 
he  be  in  the  occidental  quadrants,  they  will  itither  be 
married  late  in  life,  or  to  men  who  have  passed  their 
prime,  and  are  advanced  in  years.  And  should  the  Sun 
be  in  a  sign  of  single  form,  or  configurated  with  only  one 
oriental  planet,  he  will  cause  them  to  enter  into  matri- 
mony only  once ;  but,  if  in  a  bicorporeal  or  multiform 
sign,  or  configurated  wjth  several  oriental  planets,  he 
will  then  cause  them  to  be  often  married.  And  Saturn, 
being  configurated  with  the  Sun,  will  provide  husbands 
-stedfast,  advantajreous,  and  industrious ;  Jupiter,  such 
OS  are  honourable  and  noble-minded ;  Mars,  severe 
liusband.4,  void  of  affection  and  intractable;  Venus, 
amiable  and  handsome  husbands  ;  and  Mercury,  nuch  as 
are  provident  and  expert  in  business.  But,  if  Venus  be 
found  connected  with  Saturn,  ahe  will  indicate  dull  and 
timid  husbands  ;  "  if  with  Jupiter,  the  husbands  will  be 
"good, just,  and  modest t;"  if  with  Mars,  hasty,  lustful, 
and  adulterous;  and  if  with  Mercury,  they  will  be  ex- 
travagantly desirous  of  young  persons  ^. 

In  regard  to  tho  Sun,  thone  quadrants  which  precede 
the  ascending  and  descending  points  of  the  zodiac,  and, 

*  "  Saturn."     Not  foun<l  iu  tti«  Elzevir  eililion,  Iml  in  other*, 
f  Tlie  wufiIh  tliUN  uiMkeil  "  "  are  out  founil  )d  the  Elzevir  tNlitiun, 
but  appe&r  in  tlie  lAlin  oae  uf  Basle.  1341. 


\0-2 


PTOLEMYS    TETRABTBLOS. 


[Book  IV. 


ill  respect  of  the  Moon,  those  which  are  measured  from 
her  conjunction  and  oppoaition*  to  her  intermediate 
quarters,  are  called  oriental  quadrants :  the  occidental 
quadranta  are,  of  course,  those  lying  opposite  to  the 
oriental 

Whenever  both  nativities,  viz.  that  of  the  huaband  and 
that  of  the  wife,  may  exhibit  the  luminaries  configurated 
together  in  concord,  that  is  to  say,  either  in  trine  or  in 
textile  to  each  other,  the  cohabitation  will  most  usually 
be  lasting;  especially  if  the  said  concord  exist  by  means 
of  interchange  + ;  but  its  duration  will  be  also  much 
move  securely  established,  provided  the  Moon  in  the 
husband's  nativity  should  correspond  or  agree  with  the 
Sun  in  the  wife's  nativity  J.  If,  however,  the  relative 
positions  of  the  luminaries  be  in  signs  inconjunct,  or  in 
opposition,  or  in  quartile,  the  cohabitation  will  be  speedily 
dissolved  upon  slight  causes,  and  the  total  separation  of 
the  parties  will  ensue. 

And  should  the  configuration  of  the  luminaries,  when 
made  in  concord,  be  aspeeted  by  the  benefics,  the  coha- 
bitation will  continue  in  respectability,  comfort,  and 
advantage;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  will  abound  in 
strife,  contention,  ami  misfortune,  if  the  nialefics  be  in 
aspect  to  the  said  configuration. 

In  like  manner,  even  thongh  the  luminaries  may  not 
be  favourably  configurated  in  concord,  should  the  benefics 
.still  offer  testimony  to  them,  the  cohabitation  will  then 
not  be  entirely  broken  off,  nor  totally  destroyed  for  ever, 
but  will  be  again  renewed,  and  re-established  as  before. 


•  Tliat  is  to  sfty,  from  the  now  and  the  fall  Moon. 

t  By  mutual  reception  ;  at-porilin;,'  to  Whalley,  and  alau  aruonJin); 
to  tlie  Lntiii  copy  of  Peruf^o.  1044). 

;  Meaning,  probably,  if  ihe  Moon  in  tbe  husband's  nativity  should 
be  in  the  same  position  lis  tlie  Sdd  in  the  wife's  nativity,  or  harmooi- 
oualy  configurated  with  that  position. 


f 


Chap,  v.]  PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  193 

But  if,  on  the  contrary,  the  malefics  bear  testimony  to 
such  discordant  disposition  of  the  luminaries,  a  dissolu- 
tion of  the  cohabitation  will  take  place,  accompanied  by 
scorn  and  injury.  Should  Mercury  alone  be  conjointed 
with  the  malefics,  it  will  be  effected  by  means  of  some 
public  inculpation ;  and  if  Venus  also  be  found  with 
them,  it  will  be  on  the  ground  of  adultery,  or  sorcery,  or 
some  similar  offence. 

There  are,  however,  other  varieties  in  the  married 
state,  which  are  to  be  contemplated  by  means  of  Venus, 
Mars,  and  Saturn.  And  should  these  planets  act  in 
familiarity  with  the  luminaries,  the  cohabitation  will  be 
appropriate  and  domestic,  and  authorised  by  law;  because 
Venus  holds  a  certain  affinity  both  to  Mars  and  Saturn : 
her  affinity  to  Mars,  for  instance,  consists  in  each  having 
exaltation  in  a  sign  belonging  to  the  other's  triplicity*, 
and  it  operates  in  the  cases  of  youthful  and  vigorous 
persons:  while  her  affinity  to  Saturn  arises  from  their 
respective  houses  being  in  signs,  again  also,  belonging  to 
each  other  8  triplicity "(",  and  relates  to  persons  of  more 
advanced  age. 

Hence,  if  Venus  be  in  concurrence  with  Mars,  she 
will  produce  entire  love  and  affection  in  the  cohabiting 
parties;  and  if  Mercury  also  coincide  with  the  said 
planets,  such  affection  will  become  publicly  notorious. 
Should  Venus  be  found  in  a  sign  mutually  common 
and  familiar,  such  as  Capricorn,  or  Pisces  J,  she  will 
effect  marriages  between  brothers  and  sisters  and 
kindred  by  blood  :    and,  provided   she  be  also  in  the 

The  exaltation  of  Venus  being  in  Pisces,  and  that  of  Mars  in 
Capricorn.     Vide  Chapters  21  and  22,  Book  1. 

t  Libra  being  Venas's  hoase,  and  in  Saturn's  triplicity ;  and  Capri- 
corn being  Saturn's  house,  and  in  Venus's  triplicity.  Vide  Chapters 
20  and  21.  Book  1. 

X  Vide  Note  *  above. 

O 


194  PTOLESIV'S    TETRABIBLCIS,  \H-uf,-  IV. 

presence  of  the  Moon,  when  the  native  may  be  male, 
she  will  eaiise  him  to  connect  himself  with  two  sisters, 
or  other  near  relatives;  but,  if  the  native  be  a  female, 
a  similar  contract  on  her  part,  with  two  brothers  or 
near  relatives,  will  be  inclicated,  when  Venus  may  be 
also  with  Jupiter". 

Again,  if  Venus  be  with  Saturn,  the  cohabitation  will 
be  eatablisher)  entirely  in  happiness  and  constancy;  and 
if  Mercury  be  present  with  them,  it  will  be  proHtaWe; 
but,  shoulil  Mars  be  present,  it  will  be  unsettlcit,  calami- 
tous, and  afflicted  by  jealousy.  And  if  Mara  be  eonfigar- 
ated  on  equal  terms  with  Venus,  Saturn,  and  Mercury,  he 
will  effect  marriage  between  persons  of  equal  age;  but, 
on  the  other  hand,  should  he  be  more  oriental,  marriage 
will  take  place  with  a  younger  man  or  woman ;  and,  if 
more  occidental,  with  an  older  person.  Should  Venus 
and  Saturn  be  found  in  signs  common  to  each  other,  thai 
is  to  say,  in  Capricorn  and  Libra -f-,  marriage  will  he  con- 
tracted between  persons  kindred  by  blood :  and,  when 
the  said  po.sition  may  happen  in  the  ascendant,  or  in  the 
mid-heaven,  provided  the  Moon  also  -should  present 
herself  there,  men  will  become  connecteil  with  their 
mothers,  or  maternal  aunts,  or  with  their  mothers  in  law; 
and  women  with  their  own  sons,  or  the  .sons  of  their 
brothers,  or  with  their  daughters'  husbands.  But  if, 
instead  of  the  Moon,  the  Sun  should  be  in  concurrence 
with  the  .said  position,  and  especially  should  it  also 
happen  that  the  planets  in  question  may  be  occidental, 
men  will  then  connect  themselves  with  their  daughters,  or 
tbe  wives  of  their  sons;  and  women  with  their  fatheia, 
or  paternal  uncles,  or  the  husbands  of  their  daughters. 

When    the    aforesaid    contigurationa^,   although    not 

'  loatud  v{  tim  Moon  +  Vide  Not«  t  in  |i.  198. 

;  of  the  planets  beforu  upedlied. 


I 


I  I 

.1 


Chap,  v.]  Ptolemy's  tetrabiblos.  195 

existing  in  signs  of  affinity  to  each  other*,  should  bi; 
found  in  feminine  places,  they  will  render  the  parties 
obscene,  lustful  and  shameless;  for  instance,  when  found 
in  the  anterior  and  hinder  parts  of  Aries,  and  near  the 
Hyades  of  Taurus,  about  the  urn  of  Aquarius,  in  the 
hinder  pdrts  of  Leo,  and  in  the  face  of  Capricorn.  And 
should  the  last  named  planets,  Venus  and  Saturn,  be 
posited  in  angles,  they  will  then,  if  posited  in  the  first 
two  angles,  the  eastern  and  southern,  produce  a  total 
exposure  of  the  passions,  and  cause  them  to  be  publicly 
canvassed ;  but,  if  in  the  last  two  angles,  the  western 
and  northern,  they  will  produce  eunuchs,  or  persons  un- 
prolific,  and  not  possessing  the  proper  channels  of  nature. 
The  passions,  liable  to  operate  in  males,  are  to  be  con- 
sidered by  observation  of  Mars:  for  should  he  be  separated 
from  Venus  and  Saturn,  but  yet,  at  the  same  time,  be 
supported  by  the  testimony  of  Jupiter,  he  will  maktr 
men  pure  and  decorous  in  sexual  intercourse,  and  inclini* 
them  to  natural  usages  only  :  and,  if  he  attach  himself 
to  Saturn  only,  he  will  render  them  cold  in  blood  and 
dull  in  appetite;  if,  however,  when  Saturn  and  Mars 
may  be  thus  connected  together,  Venus  and  Jupiter 
should  also  be  configurated  with  theu),  men  will  then 
become  easily  excited  and  eager  in  desire,  although  they 
will  still  be  continent,  and  restrain  themselves  in  order 
to  avoid  reproach.  But  should  Saturn  be  absent,  and 
Mars  be  with  Venus  alone,  or  even  although  Jupiter  also 
be  with  her,  men  will  become  highly  licentious,  and 
attempt  to  gratify  their  desires  in  every  mode-f-. — And 

*  These  are  such  signs  as  are  conned ed  with  each  other  in  any 
manner  similar  to  that  before  described,  as  connecting  Capricorn  with 
Pisces,  and  with  Libra;  or,  in  other  words,  si^ns  common  to  the 
planets  configurated. 

t  The  following  passage  also  occurs  here  :  *  Km  u  fit*  o  tit  rw  mn^tit 


19(i  PTDLEMY'H   TETRAblBLOS.  [Botil,-  IV, 

further,  if  Venus  be  fimnd  more  occidental,  ineu  will 
connect  themselves  with  low  women,  female  servants, 
and  aliens  or  vagabonds;  but,  sbonld  Mars  be  found 
occidental,  with  women  of  rank,  ami  gentlewomen ;  or 
with  women  living  wiih  their  husbands,  or  under  the 
protection  of  men. — Thus  far  with  regard  to  male». 

In  the  case  of  females,  Vemis  requires  attention:  for. 
if  she  be  configurated  with  Jupiter,  or  with  Mercury,  sh© 
will  cause  women  to  be  temperate  and  pure  in  sexual 
intercourse;  still,  however,  when  she  may  be  thus  con~ 
nected  with  Mercury,  if  Saturn  be  not  present  also,  she 
will  cause  them  lo  be  easily  excited  to  desire ;  allhongfa 
they  will  controul  their  desires,  and  avoid  reproaeb. 
But,  should  Venus  be  conjoined  or  configurated  with 
Mars  alone,  she  will  render  women  licentious  and  lustful; 
;ind  if,  to  both  these  planets,  when  thus  conjoined  or 
configurated,  Jupiter  also  present  himself,  Mars  being  at 
the  same  time  under  the  rays  of  the  Sun,  women  will 
then  mingle  in  intercourse  with  servants,  and  persons 
meaner  than  themselves,  or  with  aliens,  or  vagabonds: 
but,  should  it  happen  that  Venus  may  bo  under  the  rays 
of  the  Sun,  they  will  then  connect  themselves  with  their 
superiors  or  masters.  And,  further,  should  the  planets 
be  in  feminine  places,  or  configurated  femininely,  they 
will  be  content  with  their  passive  faculties  only*. 

Saturn,  in  being  conciliated  with  such  positions  as 
those  now  described,  tends  to  produce  greater  obscenity  ; 
Jupiter,  greater  decency ;  and  Mercury,  greater  publicity, 
and  greater  fickleness,  or  instability. 


l.u>i,-m 


n^ftri^   •. 


.<  }</«.« 


*  To  tbb  the  following 


^^ 


I      I 


■    I 


Chap,  VI.]         Ptolemy's  tetrabiblos.  197 


Orhaptcv  VI. 

Children. 

The  next  point  to  be  investigated  is  that  concerning 
children  :  and,  to  accomplish  this,  observation  must  be 
made  of  the  planets  posited  in,  ur  configurated  with  the 
place  on  the  zenith*,  or  its  succedent  house,  which  latter 
is  called  the  place  of  the  good  daemon  And  should  it 
happen  that  not  any  planets  may  be  present  in  the  said 
places,  nor  configurated  with  them,  it  will  then  be 
necessary  to  take  into  consideration  such  as  may  be  in 
opposition  thereto. 

Now  the  Moon,  Jupiter,  and  Venus  are  esteemed  as 
givers  of  offspring ;  but  the  Sun,  Mars,  and  Saturn  arc 
considered  as  denying  children  altogether,  or  as  allowing 
but  few  :  while  Mercury,  being  in  quality  common  to 
both  parties,  lends  co-operation  to  that  with  which  he 
may  be  configurated,  and  gives  off'spring,  when  oriental, 
but  withholds,  when  occidental. 

To  speak  briefly,  if  the  planets,  which  grant  progeny, 
be  so  posited  as  described"!*,  and  placed  singly,  the  gift  of 
progeny  will  be  single  only:]:;  but  should  they  be  in 
bicorporeal  or  in  feminine  signs,  they  will  grant  double 
offspring  § :  so  likewise  if  they  should  be  in  prolific  or 
seminal  signs,  such  as  Pisces,  Cancer  and  Scorpio,  they 
will  grant  twins,  or  even  more.  And  provided  they 
should  also  be  masculinely  constituted,  as  well  by  con- 
figuration with  the  Sun,  as  by  being  in  masculine  signs, 

*  The  angle  of  the  mid -heaven. 

t  I  he  meaning,  apparent  from  the  commencement  of  the  chapter, 
is  this  : — *  sliould  such  planets  be  in  the  mid-heaven  or  its  succedent 
''  house,  or  configurated  with  either." 

X  M«ya2ixi/v,  single,  or  one  at  birth. 

§  ^thufAtyttntt^,  double,  or  two  at  a  birth. 


19S  II'ULKMV'S   TETRAB1B1.0S.  [liiiol.-  1  \'. 

t.hey  will  grant  male  children;  but  otlierwiee,  if 
femininely  con^ttituted,  female. 

But,  alblinugh  the  said  planets,  even  if  beneath  the 
maietics  in  eievatiun,  or,  even  if  found  in  barren  places. 
lit  in  signs  snch  as  those  of  Leo  and  Vir^io,  will  still 
grant  children  ;  yet  such  chiHren,  thus  indicated,  will 
neither  be  healthy,  nor  continue  in  life.  Should  it 
happen,  however,  that  the  Sun  and  the  maletics  miy  be 
in  entire  po.session  of  the  placus  above  nientioncJ,  vix. 
that  on  the  zenith,  or  the  succedeut  house  allotted  to  the 
•;ood  dieiiiou;  and  provided  tliey  be,  at  the  same  Ume, 
in  masculine  or  barren  si^rns,  and  the  benetics  be  not  in 
lilevation  above  them,  a  total  privation  of  offspring  is 
thereby  indicated;  but,  should  they  be  in  feminine  or 
prolific  siLjns,  or  supported  by  the  tualiuiony  of  the 
beneHcs,  children  will  then  be  granted  ;  yet  they  will  b» 
liable  to  disea.se,  and  short-lived. 

If,  however,  [lianeta  of  each  condition  should  be  con- 
figurated with,  and  have  prerogative  in  prolific  signs, 
there  will  then  ensue  a  loss  of  either  all  the  children,  or 
only  few.  or  else  the  major  part  of  them;  in  the  same 
proportion  as  that  in  which  the  planets,  bearing  testi- 
mony to  either  condition,  may  preponderate  on  one  side 
rather  than  the  other;  by  excelling  in  number,  or  in 
influence,  in  consetjuenee  of  being  posited  more  onentally. 
more  genuinely  in  angles,  higher  in  elevation,  or  suc- 
cessively ascending. 

When  the  lords  of  the  aforesaid  signs*  may  be  such  as 
are  givers  of  offspring,  and  be  either  oriental,  or  in  places 
proper  to  themsel ve.s,  the  children  thus  granted  will 
become  eminent  and  illustrious:  but,  if  occidental,  or  in 
places  not  proper  to  themselves,  the  children  will  then 
become  undistinguished  and   abject,      Should   the  said 


*  That  on  the  mid -heaven,  aud  tliiit  uii  the  eleventh  hunse. 


I 

I 


Ghip.    VIL]  PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  199 

lords  also  be  in  concord  with  the  Part  of  Fortune,  and 
with  the  ascendant,  they  will  render  the  children 
amiable,  and  cause  them  to  be  beloved  by  their  parents, 
and  to  inherit  their  parents'  substance  :  but,  if  found 
inconjunct,  and  not  in  concord  with  the  said  parts,  the 
children  will  then  become  odious  and  mischievous  to 
their  parents,  and  will  forfeit  the  inheritance  of  their 
substance. 

Further,  should  the  planets  which  grant  progeny  be 
appropriately  configurated  with  each  other,  they  will 
promote  brotherly  love,  and  mutual  regard  and  affection 
jimong  the  children  ;  but,  if  inconjunct,  or  in  opposition, 
they  will  excite  in  them  mutual  hatred,  deceit,  and 
treachery. 

The  general  investigation  regarding  children  is  to  be 
conducted  in  the  foregoing  method  :  but,  in  order  to 
enquire  into  particular  circumstances  consequent  on  the 
above,  it  will  be  necessary  to  assume,  as  an  ascendant, 
the  position  of  each  planet  which  gives  offspring,  and  to 
observe  the  separate  schemes ;  drawing  inferences  there- 
from as  in  the  case  of  a  nativity. 

Chapter  VII. 

Friends  and  Enemies. 

With  respect  to  friendship  and  enmity,  it  may  be 
observed  that  great  and  lasting  familiarities,  or  disagree- 
ments, are  respectively  called  sympathies  and  enmities ; 
while  the  smaller,  such  as  arise  occasionally,  and  subsist 
for  a  short  time  only,  are  denominated  casual  intimacies 
and  strifes :  the  whole  are  to  be  contemplated  according 
to  the  following  rules. 

Indications  of  great  and  lasting  friendships,  or 
enmities,  may  be  perceived  by  observation  of  the  ruling 


200  ITULEIIV'S   TETliAHIBLOS.  [Boutr  IV. 

places,  exhibited  in  the  respective  nativities  of  both  the 
persona,  between  whom  the  friendship  or  enmity  niay 
subsist.  It  is  consequentiy  essential  to  observe  the 
places  of  the  Sun,  the  Moon,  the  ascendant,  and  the  Part 
of  Fortune;  for,  should  all  these  in  both  nativities  lie  in 
the  same  signs,  or  should  either  all  or  moat  of  them  be 
counterchanged  in  position  in  each  nativity,  and 
especially  should  the  two  aaeendaiits  be  within  the 
distance  of  seventeen  degrees  from  each  other*,  they 
will  create  Kxed  and  indissoluble  friendship.  On  the 
other  hand,  should  they  be  in  signs  inconjunct,  or  in 
opposition,  they  will  produce  great  and  lasting  enmity. 
If,  however,  they  be  not  constituted  in  either  of  the 
modes  above-mentioned,  but  merely  configurated  io 
signs+,  they  will  then  produce  minor  friendship;  pro- 
vided such  configuration  exist  by  trine  or  sextile;  but, 
if  by  quartite,  they  will  excite  minor  enmity,  so  oa  to 
take  effect  at  certain  particular  times,  in  which  the 
friendship  re_/naius,  as  it  were,  inactive  and  8ul>diied, 
while  the.malelics  transit  the  configuration;  and.  in  a 
similar  manner,  enmity  also  will  be  softened-and  atmi«d, 
when  the  benefics  may  enter  upon  the  configuration^. 

The  friendship  and  enmity,  which  men  b^ar  towardu 
each  other,  may  be  classed  under  three  general  heada. 
One  kind  is  suggested  by  spontaneous  wilfulness ; 
another,  by  the  idea  of  profit ;  and  another,  by  pain  and 
pleasure  mutually  excited. 

And,  therefore,  should  either  all  or  most  of  the 
aforesaid  places  be  in  familiarity  with  each  other,  friend- 
ship of  all  the  three  kinds  will  be  established:  so,  alao. 


*  Or,  re^ftnl  each  oUier  within  the  dixttince  of  gevenUMn  tl#|tre«> 
+  That  is  to  say:  if  the  placw  of  tho  Sun.  etc.  in  one  nativity  bo 

conligDrat«d  with  sucli  parts  of  the  iuxlinc  as  are  ocoupied  by  the  Sun, 

etc.  in  the  other  nativity. 
t  Of  any  of  the  tour  |>lace«  above  BpectKeil. 


■  I 

.  1  ■■ 

I  I 

;» 

1;! 


'1 


Ckap.  VII.]        Ptolemy's  tetrabiblos.  201 

should  the  places  be  entirely  without  familiarit3%  similar 
enmity  will  be  established.  If,  however,  familiarity,  or 
absence  of  familiarity,  (as  the  case  may  be)  exist  only  as 
regards  the  places  of  the  luminaries,  friendship  or  enmity 
will  then  be  established  by  spontaneous  will ;  and  friend- 
ship thus  produced  is  the  best  and  most  secure ;  while, 
on  the  other  hand,  enmity  so  arising  is,  in  like  manner 
the  worst  and  most  dangerous.  The  friendship,  or 
enmity,  consequent  on  the  familiarity  or  non-familiarity 
of  the  respective  parts  of  Fortune,  will  be  established 
on  the  idea  of  profit;  and  that,  consequent  on  a  similar 
disposition  of  the  respective  ascendants,  will  arise  from 
pain  or  pleasure  mutually  excited  between  the  parties. 

It  will,  however,  be  necessary  to  pay  still  further 
attention  to  the  places  in  question,  in  order  to  observe 
whether  any  and  what  planets  may  bo  in  elevation 
above  them,  or  in  aspect  to  them  ;  because,  among  all 
the  said  places,  that  particular  one,  to  which  any  planet 
in  elevation,  or  in  succession,  may  be  adjacent,  whether 
in  the  same  sign,  or  in  the  next,  will  possess  the  more 
powerful  influence  over  friendship  or  enmity :  and 
whichever  place  may  have  its  aspecting  planets  more 
powerfully  benetic,  will  operate  in  a  greater  <iegree*  to 
advantage  in  friendship,  and  to  the  relaxation  of  en- 
mity.— The  foregoing  instructions  are  applicable  to  such 
friendships  or  enmities  as  are  great  and  lasr.ing. 

But,  in  the  case  of  others,  which  subsist  only  occasion- 
ally, and  which  have  been  defined  as  casual  intimacies 
and  strifes,  it  is  essential  to  mnke  observation  of  the 
motions  of  the  planets,  as  exhibited  by  each  nativity  ; 
that  is  to  say,  the  times  are  to  be  calculated,  on  the  com- 
pletion of  which  the  motions  of  the  planets  of  one 
nativity  will  cause  them  to  enter  on  certain  places  of 

*  Than  the  rest  of  the  places. 


202  ITiil.KMV's   TETHAHlliL'lS.  [Book   IV. 


the  other  nativity;  far  it  is  at  such  periods  that  certain 
particular  friendships  and  etimiltes  occur,  coDlinuiD^;  (or 
a  short  time,  until  the  said  ingress  of  the  planets  shall 
have  passed  over. 

For  instance,  Saturn  and  Jupiter,  when  making  in- 
l^ess  upon  each  other's  places,  produce  friendship  by 
certain  airreenienbs,  or  engagements,  relating  cither  to 
floriculture  or  to  inheritance:  Saturn  and  Mars  create 
contention,  and  treiichery  spontaneously  entertained  : 
Saturn  and  Venus,  friendship  between  liindred  ;  liable, 
iiowever,  soon  to  grow  cool ;  Saturn  and  Mercury, 
friendship  on  account  of  business,  or  profit,  or  some 
secret  art  or  mystery. 

Jupiter  and  Mars  create  friendship  in  the  direction  of 
affairs,  and  by  iiienns  of  dignities ;  Jupiter  and  Venas 
also  create  friendship  by  means  of  female  persons,  or 
attendants  on  religion,  or  on  oracles :  Jupiter  and 
Mercury,  friendship  by  means  of  eloquence  and  science, 
and  philosophical  inclinations. 

Mars  and  Venu.s  cause  friendship  in  the  course  of 
amours, adultery  and  fornication:  Mars  and  Mercury  ex- 
cite hatred  and  strife  Ijy  offences  committed  in  business 
and  trade,  or  by  sorcery. 

And  Venus  and  Mercury  produce  communion  by 
means  of  the  arts  and  sciences,  by  a  mutual  interest  ia 
literature,  or  by  female  persons. 

It  is  in  this  manner  that  the  planets  operate  in 
producing  friendship  or  enmity.  And  their  comparative 
intensity  or  relaxation  of  vigour  is  to  be  distinguished 
by  the  situation  of  the  places,  which  they  occupy,  with 
regard  to  the  four  principal  and  ruling  places*:  for. 
should   they  be  posited  in  angles,  at  the  places  of  the 


,  Moon,  Aacenditnt,  and  Par 


Chap.    VIII.]         PTOLEMY'S   TETRABIBLOS.  203 

respective  parts  of  Fortune,  or  at  those  of  the  lumin- 
aries, they  will  render  the  casual  intimacies  or  strifes 
more  eminent  and  remarkable ;  but,  if  they  be  remote 
from  these  places,  their  effects  will  not  be  highly 
conspicuous.  The  comparative  degree  of  injury  or 
advantage,  liable  to  be  received,  is  to  be  discerned  by 
means  of  the  good  or  evil  properties  of  such  planets 
as  may  be  thus  in  aspect  to  the  aforesaid  places. 

With  respect  to  servants*,  the  sign  of  the  evil  daemon -f 
is  considered  as  the  place  to  which  the  disposition  ruling 
over  them  must  be  referred ;  and  it  is  to  be  observed 
what  planets  are  in  aspect  to  that  place,  both  at  the 
actual  time  of  nativity,  and  at  that  of  any  ingresses 
made  upon  it,  or  oppositions  to  it ;  and  also,  especially, 
whether  the  lords  of  the  said  sign  may  be  configurated 
in  familiarity  with  the  ruling  places  of  the  nativity,  or 
not  in  familiarity. 

Othaptcr  VIII. 

Travelling, 

The  circumstances  indicative  of  travel  are  to  be  con- 
sidered by  means  of  the  situation  held  by  both  the 
luminaries,  in  respect  to  the  angles,  and,  especially,  by 
means  of  that  held  by  the  Moon.  For,  should  she  be 
descending,  or  cadent  from  the  angles,  she  will  cause 
journeys  and  changes  of  residence :  Mars,  also,  if  descend- 
ing, or  cadent  from  the  zenith,  will  sometimes  do  the 
same,  provided  he  may  occupy  a  situation  in  quartile, 
or  in  opposition  to  the  luminaries.  And,  if  the  Part  of 
Fortune,  also,  should  happen  to  be  placed  in  signs  which 

*  —  *'and  the  atUchment,  or  disagreement,  subsisting  between 
"them  and  their  masters:" — so  Allatius,  ^nd  the  Latin  translation 
printed  at  Peragio 

t  The  twelfth  house. 


204 


FroLEMYS   TETRAlllBLns. 


[//.-/■    IV. 

jiroduce  travelling,  the  course  and  practice  of  tlie  whole 
life  will  be  engaged  in  foreign  lands.  And  further, 
provided  the  benefic-s  superintend  the  aforesaid  places, 
or  ascend  in  succession  to  them,  the  engagements  abroad 
will  be  honourable  and  lucrative,  and  the  return  home 
speedy  and  unobstructed:  but  if,  oh  the  contrary,  ihe 
lualehcs  superintend  or  ascend  in  succe.ssion  to  those 
places,  the  journey  outward  will  then  lead  to  peril  and 
misfortune,  and  the  return  will  be  replete  with  difficulty. 
But  it  is,  at  the  same  time,  necei^sary  in  all  cases  to  con- 
sider the  con  temperament  also,  and  to  ob-serve  such  of 
the  eicisting  contigii rations  as  are  more  predominant. 

It  most  usually  happens,  that,  if  the  luminaries  be 
|>0»ited  in  the  cadetit  houses  of  the  oriental  quadrants, 
the  travel  will  talte  place  in  the  eastern  or  southern 
quarters  of  the  world ;  and  that,  it  placed  in  wcatern 
>iituations,  or  in  an  occidental  ijiiadrant,  travel  will  be 
then  pro.secuted  in  the  northern  or  wtstern  parts.  And, 
xhould  the  signs,  which  operate  travel,  be  themselves 
single  in  form,  or  should  the  planets,  having  dominion 
of  them,  be  singly  posited,  the  journeys  will  then  take 
place  after  long  intervals,  and  occasionally  only:  bul,  if 
the  said  signs  be  bicorporeal,  or  double  in  form  or  figure, 
travel  will  be  constantly  repealed  and  continued, 

Thus,  when  Jupiter  and  Venus  may  be  in  dominion 
over  the  luminaries,  and  over  the  places  producing  travel, 
they  will  render  the  journeyN  agreeable,  as  well  as  free 
from  danger :  for  the  traveller  will  be  joyfully  forwarded 
on  his  way  by  the  magistrates  of  the  country,  and  by  the 
concurrent  assistance  of  friendly  persons ;  the  statt-  of  the 
atmosphere  will  also  be  favourable,  and  he  will  meet  with 
abundance  of  accouiiuodation.  And,  provided  Mercury 
also  be  present  with  the  planets  above -specified,  utility, 
profit,  presents  and  honours  will  likewise  be  derived  from 
the  journey. 


%«/).  VMI]      rroLEMT's  tutbauiiu/js. 


205 

Saturn  and  Mars,  if  controuling  the  luminaries,  and, 
especially,  if  placed  distantly  from  each  other*,  will  pro- 
duce great  dangers,  and  at  the  same  time  render  the 
journey  fruitless  and  unavailing.  Should  they  be  in 
watery  signs,  the  dangers  will  arise  by  shipwreck,  or 
iimong  deserts  and  wildernessas-f-;  if  in  fixed  signs,  by 
precipices,  and  adverse  blasts  of  wind ;  in  tropical  and 
equinoctial  signs,  by  want  of  food  and  other  necessaries, 
and  by  some  unwholesome  state  of  the  atmosphere;  in 
signs  of  human  form,  by  robbery,  treachery,  and  various 
depredations;  and,  if  in  terrestrial  signs,  by  the  attack 
of  wild  beasts,  or  from  earthquakes.  And,  ahould 
Mercury  also  lend  concurrence,  the  traveller  will  incur 
further  danger  from  accusations  made  against  hira,  a» 
well  as  from  reptiles  and  venomous  stings  or  bites. 

The  question,  whether  the  events  will  be  advantageous 
or  injurious  in  quality,  must,  however,  be  further  con- 
sidered by  observation  (made  in  the  forms  already 
detailed),  of  the  peculiar  properties  of  the  places,  in 
which  the  lords  of  employment,  of  wealth,  of  the  body, 
or  of  rank,  may  be  posited.  And  the  periods,  at  which 
travelling  will  take  place,  are  to  be  considered  by  the 
occasional  ingress  of  the  five  planetsj. 


*  The  probable  nieanini;  i-i,  "it  not  Mting  in  concert ;"  but  tlie 
Latin  of  Perugio  sajre,  "ti  tint  oppositi  mc'tndnm  longitvdbitru." 

t  There  aeeniB  a  misprint  here  in  the  uriginnl :  iutiiair,  "  fuuL 
"  vapours,"  instead  of  isnim,  "  wilderneuea." 

i  On  the  placeH  indicative  of  travelling, 


€liii;)tci-  IX. 

ThH  Kind  of  Dmth. 
It  now  renmina  to  treat  of  the  kind  and  species  of 
death. — It  is,  however,  first  to  be  determines),  by  tho 
rules  already  delivered  reijarding  the  duration  of  life*, 
whether  death  will  ensue  from  an  oriental  or  occidental 
position  of  the  predominating  influence.  And,  if  death 
ensue  from  some  oriental  position,  or  meeting  of  rays. 
the  place  of  such  meeting  must  be  observed,  and  by 
means  of  that  place  the  kind  of  death  is  to  l>e  dis- 
tinguished ;  if  from  the  descension,  or  setting,  of  the 
signifieator,  or  prorogator,  the  place  of  descension+  must 
be  considered;  because  death  is  to  be  expected  conform- 
able in  character  to  the  influences,  whatever  they  may 
be,  which  preside  over  the  said  places ;  or,  if  not  any 
infinencps  should  directly  preside,  it  will  then  be  con- 
formable to  the  influences,  of  whatever  kind,  which 
may  be  brought  first  in  succession  to  the  places  in 
question:  the  configuration  of  the  stars,  the  property 
of  the  aforesaid  anreretic  places,  and  the  nature  of 
the  signs  and  of  the  termsj,  are,  also,  all  of  theiii 
co-operative. 

Thus,  for  example,  if  the  dominion  of  death  be  vested 
in  Saturn,  he  will  produce  death  by  means  of  lingering 
diseases;  cough,  rheumatism,  tlux,  ague,  disorder  of  the 
.spleen,  dropsy,  cholic.  and  complaints  in  the  womb;  and, 
in  short,  by  all  such  di.seases  as  proceed  from  the  super- 
abundance of  cold, 

*  Vide  the  14th  Chapter  uf  the  :(il  Book  ;  on  the  nuJiiliKr  of  tlin 
luoilei  of  prorogation. 

t  ThHt  iH  to  say,  tlie  sign  and  degree  on  tlie  occidental  horizon. 

;See  a  Hulueifuenl  not«,  p.  208,  which  gives  on  instance  of  tha 
mode  in  which  Ptavidus  applied  the  power  of  the  i«rniK,  In  aa 
Aaii-retie  direction. 


I  I 
il  I 


I 


tl 


! 


Cluli).    IX.]  FI-OI.EMy's  TETKAHIIiLUS. 


Jupiter  ctfect^  death  by  qiiitisey.  iotiatnm&tion  of  the 
lungs,  apoplexy,  spasm,  pains  in  the  head,  morbid  per- 
formance uf  the  heart,  and  by  all  diseases  arising  from 
superabundance  of  air,  and  from  immoderate  and  imputK- 
respiration. 

Mars  causes  death  by  constant  fevers,  semi  tertians. 
sudden  and  Hpontaneous  wounds,  diseases  of  the  kidneys, 
expectoration  of  blood,  and  hfeniorrhages  uf  various 
kinds-  by  miscarriage,  or  abortion,  and  by  child-birtb, 
by  erysipelas,  and,  in  short,  by  nucb  diseases  as  proceeil 
from  abundant  and  immoderate  heat. 

Venus  produces  death  by  disorders  of  the  stomach, 
and  of  the  liver,  by  scurvy  and  dysentery  r  also  by 
consumption  or  wasting  away*,  and  by  fistula  and 
poison,  and  by  all  disea-ses  incident  on  the  super- 
abundance or  poverty  of  moisture,  and  its  corruption. 

La-stly,  Mercury  causes  death  to  proceed  from  fury, 
madness,  melancholy,  epilepsy,  falling  fits,  coughs,  and 
obstructions,  and  by  such  diseases  as  arise  from  super- 
abundant or  disproportionate  dryness. 

When  the  lords  of  death  may  fully  possess  their  own 
peculiar  and  natural  properties,  and  when  neither  of  the 
malefics  may  be  in  elevation  above  them,  death  will 
ensue  in  the  modes  above  detailed,  and  in  the  ordinary 
course  of  nature.  But  a  violent  and  remarkable  death 
will  occur  when  both  the  malefics,  either  in  conjunction, 
or  in  quartile  or  opposition  to  each  other,  may  be  lords 
of  the  anatretic  places ;  or  if  both,  or  only  one  of  the 
two,  should  attack  either  both  the  luminaries,  or  even 
only  the  Sun  or  the  Moon.  In  such  a  case,  the  evil 
character  of  the  death  will  proceed  from  the  concurrence 
of  the  malefic  influence,  and  its  magnitude  or  remarkable 


•  ^m  ni^iBi.    Perhsp»  more  properly,  piitriJity  or  rotltniies!..    The 
Peragio  Latin  tranaUtion  renders  it  by  "  cancer." 


20H  I-TOLKMT's    TETRABdlLOS.  [Boolc    I V. 

nature  Fro[ii  the  additional  tuMtiinony  of  the  limiinariM: 
its  quality,  alao,  will  be  known  by  means  of  the  rest 
of  the  planets  and  stars  in  configuration,  and  by  the 
signs  which  contain  the  malefic  influence". 

Hence,  if  it  happen  that  Saturn  be  in  fixed  si>{as,  and 
in  qiiartile  or  opposition  to  the  Snn.  and  contrary  in 
conditi'in,  he  will  produce  death  by  siiSWcation,  occa- 
sioned either  by  multitudes  of  people,  or  by  hanging  or 
strangulation:  so,  likewise.  Hhonld  he  be  occidental,  and 
the  Moon  be  xuccedent  to  him,  he  will  operate  the  same 
efl'ects.  If  he  be  posited  in  places  or  sijjna  of  bestial 
form,  the  native  will  be  destroyed  by  wild  beasts:  and, 
if  Jupiter  also  offer  testimony,  being  at  the  same  time 
badly  afflicted,  the  death  will  then  occur  in  public,  and 
by  day;  for  example,  by  being  exposed  to  combats  with 
wild  beasts.  If  Saturn  be  posited  in  opposition  to  either 
of  the  luminaries  in  the  a.-^cendanti-,  he  will  cause  death 
in  prison :  if  he  be  configurated  with  Mercury,  and 
especially  if  near  the  constellation  of  the  Serpent  in  the 
sphere,  and   in  terrestrial  .tigns  of   the  zodiac,  he  will 

•  Placidns,  in  treatinjf  of  tliu  imliviLy  of  Lewie,  CarJitiHl  Zochia, 
UM*  ihCRe  irord«  :  ''Thi»  example  aUo  teacliPN  n«  wliac  the  »eDii- 
"inenls  of  Ptolemy  were  conteming  a  violent  death;  when,  in  a 
"peremptory  place,  both  the  eDFniies  met  together,  it  ia  to  be 
"  anilerHtood,  iliat  \a  the  Daticity  the  violence  is  Bometinies  fint 
'■  pre-onlKined  from  tlie  anfortnoate  podicionof  the  Aphcla;  at  ot^ier 
*'iiiue»  quite  the  contrary.  Bnt,  becauBB  the  direct  direction 
"  happcnnl  to  be  in  the  termx  of  Mercury,  the  nickoeas  was  atl«i)ileil 
"  witli  a  delimm  and  letliargy,  bo  tlial  you  may  per<<eive  tliit<  to  have 
"been  liie  true  cauiw  of  the  native's  death."  (Cooper's  Trauslalion, 
pp.  198,  109.) 

tKili  attiftrtirttu  Wftr-n  Innli  TBt  firit^  whiuh  AllatinB  baa 
traoBJated,  "if  lie  ahunld  he  in  (lie  ascendant  opposed  to  either  of  the 
"Inrainaries"  («  in  horoKopa  alleri  luminiim  opponittur) ;  hut  the 
Latin  rnpy  of  Baale,  1.541,  an  well  as  Ihat  of  Perugio,  IfMii,  ^ve  the 
pa»s8f;e  aw  now  rendered.  Ami  it  appears  in  a  KubBeijuent  place, 
p  210  (where  the  word  ■>«>;>«•«»  occurs),  that  it  can  only  be  properly 
iranslaleil  "  in  oppotitian  to  thr  ascendant." 


I. 
It' 


1  ' 


I 


t     '■ 


Chaj'.   IX.]  nOLEMY's  TETRABIBLUS.  209 

produce  death  by  venoraoua  wounds  or  bites,  and  by 
reptiles  and  wild  beaatn.  And,  should  Venus  also  attach 
beiself  to  Saturn  and  Mercury  thus  combined,  death 
will  then  ensue  by  poison  or  female  treachery.  If 
Saturn  be  in  Virgo  or  Pisces,  or  watery  signs,  and 
configurated  with  the  Moon,  he  will  operate  death 
by  means  of  water,  by  drowning  and  suffocation ; 
and,  if  found  near  Argo,  by  shipwreck.  Should  he 
be  in  tropical  or  quadrupedal  signs,  and  the  Sun  be 
either  in  conjunction  with  him,  or  in  opposition ;  or 
if,  instead  of  the  Sun,  Mars  shouhi  so  present  him- 
self, death  will  be  caused  by  the  fall  of  houses  or 
buildings;  and,  if  posited  in  the  mid-heavon,  death 
will  happen  by  falla  from  heights  or  precipices.— These 
ate  the  various  effects  of  Saturn,  when  configurated 
as  described. 

Mars,  if  in  signs  of  human  form,  and  posited  in  quar- 
tile  or  in  opposition  to  the  Sun  or  Moon,  and  contrary 
in  condition,  will  operate  death  by  slaughter,  either  in 
civil  or  foreign  war,  or  by  suicide :  if  Venus  add  her 
testimony,  death  will  be  intlicted  by  women,  or  by 
assassins  in  the  employment  of  women  :  and,  should 
Mercury  also  be  con6gurated  with  them,  death  will 
happen  from  robbers,  thieves,  or  highwayman.  If  Mars 
be  in  mutilated  or  imperfect  signs,  or  near  the  Gorgon* 
of  Perseus,  he  will  produce  death  by  decapitation,  or  by 
mutilation  of  limb.  If  found  in  Scorpio  or  Taurus,  he 
will  cause  death  by  surgical  amputation,  burning  or 
searing,  or  also  by  spasms  or  convulsion.s.  Should  he  be 
found  in  the  mid-heaven,  either  above  or  below  the 
earth,  death  will  be  intlicted  either  by  crucifixion  or 
impalement,  and  especially  if  he  be  in  the  vicinity  of 
CepheuH  or  Andromeda.     If  descending,  or  in  opposition 


*  Caput  Meilosii 


PTOLEMY'S   TETRABIBLOS.  [Book    IV. 

to  the  aacendant*,  he  will  produce  death  by  fire:  and,  if 
in  quadrupedal  signs,  by  falls  and  fractures.  Should 
Jupiter,  however,  bear  testimony  to  Mars,  and  be  at  the 
same  time  afflicted,  death  will  ensue  from  the  wrath  of 
princes  and  kings,  and  from  Judicial  condemnation. 

If  it  happen  that  the  malefics  be  in  concurrence  with 
each  other  in  the  Hrst  instance,  and  afterwards  io 
mutual  opposition,  in  any  of  the  aforesaid  situations,  the 
evil  character  of  the  death  will  be  yet  further  aug- 
mented ;  but  its  species  or  quality,  and  its  dominion,  will 
depend  upon  that  one  which  may  be  in  occupation  of  the 
anseretic  place.  And,  if  both  the  malefics  claim  preroga- 
tive in  the  anntretic  places,  the  bodies  of  persons  wbo 
thus  die  will  be  cast  abroad  without  interment,  and  will 
be  devoured  by  beasts  and  birds:  these  circumstances 
will  especially  ensue,  when  the  malefics  may  be  Found  in 
signs  similar  in  form  to  beasts  and  birds  ;  and  provided 
not  any  one  of  the  benefica  should  offer  testimony  to  the 
place  below  the  eartht.  nor  to  the  anjeretic  places. 

Lastly,  death  will  occur  in  foreign  lands,  when  it  may 
happen  that  the  planets  controuling  the  ana3retic  places 
may  be  posited  in  cadent  houses;  especially  if  the  Moon 
be  present  in  the  said  places  al,so,  or  if  she  be  found  in 
quartile  or  in  opposition^. 


"  A>^.(.r..»..     Vide  note  '  in  p  208. 

t  That  is  to  say,  Che  lower  heaven,  or  imuia-c<^li.~WbaUey  h«> 
tranBlat«d  it,  "abi.i^e  the  earth,"  inetead  of  "  Mow :"  iiiUtaking  »-■ 
for  «»•.. 

t  On  this  chapter  Whalley  makeit  the  following  tiDontAtioDs  -. 
"  One  direction,  liow  malevolent  soever,  rarely  kills ;  and,  in  aimX 
"  nativilies,  there  ii  required  a  train  of  iiialevolent  Jirectionn  to 
"  rancnr  to  death  ;  where  several  malevolent  direi^lious  coot'ur  »o 
"  together,  without  the  aid  or  interveningB  of  the  benevolentB,  t*iey 
"  fail  not  to  destroy  life. 

'*  In  BQrb  trains  of  directions,  the  author  here  dieting ai»heth  be- 
"  tween  the  killint;  planet  and  the  causer  of  the  qutility  of  de«tli : 


I 


I    ' 


■: 


'I  : 
I  ; 
I    I 


I 


j 


Chap.   X.]     Ptolemy's  tetrabiblos.         211 

(Ehaptcr  X. 

The  periodical  Divisions  of  Time, 

In  addition  to  the  foregoing  brief  observations,  applic- 
able to  the  various  forms  of  death,  further  attention  is 
demanded  with  respect  to  the  division  of  time,  which 
requires  to  be  contemplated  in  its  natural  order  and 
succession. 

Now  as,  in  all  genethlialogical  cases,  a  certain  common 
and  general  arrangement,  affecting  the  region  or  country, 
and  the  race  or  generation,  is  pre-supposed  to  be  in 
operation,  to  which  arrangement  particular  inferences, 
relating  to  the  form  of  the  body,  the  properties  of  the 
mind,  and  national  habits  and  variations,  must  each 
be  subservient;  and  as,  in  these  respects,  certain 
causes  more  general  and  predominating  are  pre-supposed 
in  existence  before  particular  causes,  due  care  must 
consequently  be  taken,  in  order  to  make  an  inference 
consistent  with  the  course  of  nature,  to  observe  always 
the  original  and  predominating  cause,  and  never  to  lose 
sight  of  it ;  lest  some  similarity  in  nativities  (if  any  such 
should  exist)  might  induce  an  assertion,  when  the  original 
predominating  cause  proceeding  from  the  region  itself 


**  for  one  planet  doth  not  give  both.  The  foremost  of  the  malevolent 
**  train  is  the  killing  place,  and  shews  the  time  of  death ;  but  the 
"  following  directions,  though  benevolent,  shew  the  quality.  If  the 
**  train  fall  altogether,  and  none  follow,  for  the  quality  observe  those 
*' which  precede,  though  at  a  distance  and  benevolent  also;  for, 
**  though  the  benevolent  contribute  to  the  preservation  of  life,  yet 
"  they  frequently  {ipecify  the  disease  which  is  the  cause  of  death 
"  And  with  these,  our  author  tells  us,  concur  the  configurating  stars, 
**  the  quality  of  the  stars  and  signs,  and  the  terms  in  which  the  lords 
'*  happen.  In  violent  deaths,  the  genethliacal  positions  of  the  lights 
**  are  to  be  observed,  and  how  the  malefics  affect  them,  and  [how 
**  they]  are  also  concerned  by 'directions  in  the  quality  of  death." 
See  also  Chap.  14,  Book  3. 


•212  itulemt's  TETiiAiiint,o.s,  [Book  IV. 

has  beeu  overlooked,  that  the  natiwe  of  j^thiopia  will  be 
born  of  white  complexion,  and  with  long  and  straight 
hair;  or,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  native  of  Germany 
or  of  Gaul  will  be  black  in  complexion,  and  have  curled 
hair;  or,  that  the  said  nations  are  polished  in  mannera, 
and  cuUivate  learning,  but  that  the  people  of  Greece  are 
barbarous  and  illiterate:  and  so,  in  abort,  of  any  other 
countriLs; — withont  duly  considering  the  national  differ- 
ences and  variations  in  theit  several  courses  of  life. — So 
also,  with  regard  to  the  division  of  time,  it  is  in  the  samu 
manner  essential  to  consider  the  different  qualities  nf  the 
several  ages  of  life,  and  to  pre-determine  the  appropriate 
fitness  of  every  age  to  such  events  as  may  be  e.tpected  ; 
in  order  to  avoid  the  gross  error  which  might  arise  from 
a  merely  vague  consideration  of  the  subject,  by  attri- 
buting to  infancy  some  deed  or  circumstance  of  too 
complete  a  nature  and  belonging  rather  to  manhood,  or 
by  aHcribing  to  extreme  old  age  iho  procreation  of 
children,  or  some  other  action  belonging  to  youth;  and 
to  adapt,  on  the  contrary,  to  each  separate  age  such  cir- 
cumstances as  seem,  by  due  observation  of  the  periods, 
to  be  suitable  and  appropriate  thereto. 

The  mode  of  consideration  *  applicable  to  human 
nature,  is  universally  one  and  the  same;  and  it  is 
analogous  to  the  arrangement  cjF  the  sevi'n  planetary 
orbst.  It,  therefore,  duly  commencea  with  the  first  age 
of  human  life,  and  the  first  .sphere  next  above  tiie  earth, 
that  of  the  Uuon :  and  it  terminates  with  the  final  age 
of  man,  and  the  last  of  the  planetary  spheres,  which  Is 
that  of  Saturn;  and,  in  fact,  it  accordingly  happens  that 
the  appropriate  qualities  of  each  sphere  take  effi^ct  in  a 
corresponding  age  of  life, each  age  being  subjeclml  to  one 

•  With  respect  to  tlio  periiwlica'  diviaioiiB  of  time. 

t  It  will,  of  course,  be  renieruliered,  that  Ihs  Sun,  in  Ibe  FtolelBiie 

a^Ironomy,  U  counted  »■*  i>  lilmiatttry  orh. 


Chap.  X.]  Ptolemy's  teirabiblos.  213 

particular  sphere.  These  observations  are  necessary, 
because  the  general  divisions  of  time  must  be  considered 
by  means  of  the  spheres,  as  a  primary  arrangement; 
although  minor  distinctions  are  to  be  made  by  means  of 
the  existing  peculiarities  found  in  nativities. 

Hence,  the  first  age  of  infancy,  which  endures  for  four 
years,  agreeing  in  number  with  the  quadrennial  period 
of  the  Moon,  is  consequently  adapted  to  her ;  being  in 
its  nature  moist  and  incompact,  presenting  rapidity  of 
growth,  being  nourished  by  moist  things,  and  possessing 
a  highly  variable  habit.  Its  mental  incompleteness  is 
likewise  in  accordance  with  its  familiar  relation  to  the 
Moon,  and  her  operative  influence. 

The  age  after  this  continues  for  ten  years,  and  accom- 
modates itself  to  the  second  sphere,  that  of  Mercury.  In 
this  period,  the  intellectual  and  reasoning  faculties  of  the 
mind  begin  to  take  their  character,  imbibing  the  seeds 
of  learning,  and  developing,  as  it  were,  the  elements 
and  germs  of  the  genius  and  abilities,  and  their  peculiar 
quality.  The  mind  is  also  aroused  to  discipline  and  in- 
struction, and  to  its  first  exercises. 

Venus  corresponds  with  the  next  and  third  age,  which 
lasts  throughout  the  following  eight  years,  the  number 
of  her  own  period :  from  her,  the  movement  of  the 
seminal  vessels  originates,  as  well  as  an  unrestrained 
impetuosity  and  precipitancy  in  amours. 

The  fourth  and  adult  age  next  succeeds,  and  is  subject 
to  the  fourth  sphere,  that  of  the  Sun:  it  endures  for  nine- 
teen years,  according  to  the  Sun's  number.  Authority 
of  action  now  commences  in  the  mind,  the  career  of  life 
is  entered  upon,  distinction  and  glory  are  desired,  and 
puerile  irregularities  are  relinquished  for  more  orderly 
conduct,  and  the  pursuit  of  Honour. 

Mars,  next  after  the  Sun,  claims  the  fifth  age,  that  of 
manhood,  agreeing  in  duration  with  his  own  period,  viz. 


214  PTOLEMV'S    TETRAUIBUIS.  [Bool;    IV. 

fifteen  yoara.  He  induces  greater  austerity  of  life, 
together  with  vtxation,  care,  and  trouble. 

Jupiter  occupies  the  sixth  sphere,  aod  influences  the 
Tnaturer  age,  during  the  twelve  years  corresponding  to 
his  own  period.  He  operates  the  relinquishment  of 
labour,  of  hazardous  employment  and  tumult,  and 
produces  greater  gravity,  fore-sij^ht,  prudence,  and  saga- 
city, favouring  the  claim  to  honour,  respect,  and  privilege. 

Saturn,  moving  in  the  last  sphere,  regulates  the  final 
old  age,  as  agreeing  with  its  ehillness.  He  obstructs  the 
mental  movementa,  the  appetites  and  enjoyments; 
rendering  them  imbecile  and  dull,  in  conformity  with 
the  dullness  of  his  own  motion. 

The  common  properties  attributable  to  the  variou.s 
times  of  life  are  suliject,  in  a  general  manner,  tu  this 
previous  adaptation ;  but  there  are  particular  periodsi 
arising  from  the  respective  peculiarities  of  nativities, 
whicli  also  lequire  determination,  and  must  be  ascer- 
tained from  the  ruling  prorogations;  that  is  to  say,  from 
the  whole  of  them,  and  not  from  any  single  one  only,  as 
in  the  case  of  the  duration  of  lifu.  For  example,  proro- 
gation made  from  the  ascendant  is  to  be  applied  to 
events  affecting  the  body,  and  to  travelling,  or  change  of 
residence;  I  hat  from  the  Part  of  Fortune,  to  incidents 
affecting  the  substance  or  wealth  ;  that  from  the  Mood, 
to  nHections  of  the  mind,  and  to  communion*  and 
cohabitation  ;  that  from  the  Sun,  to  dignitias  and  glory ; 
and  tliat  from  the  mid-heaven,  to  other  particular 
circumstances  of  life,  such  as  employment,  friendship, 
and  the  pos.session  of  children.  So  that  thus,  at  one  and 
the  same  time,  any  single  planet,  whether  beneSc  or 
malefic,  will  not  possess  the  sole  dominion;  for  many 
conflicting  events  frequently  occur  at  the  same  period. 


'   Tlie  Lalin  copy  of  Basle.  1641,  aays,  ' 


i 


Chap,   X.]  PTOLEMY'S  TETRABIBLOS.  215 

and  a  person  may,  at  one  and  the  same  time,  lose  a 
kinsman,  yet  inherit  his  substance ;  or  be  at  once  ill  in 
health,  yet  prosperous  and  advantageously  established 
in  regard  to  fortune;  or  be  struggling  with  adversity 
and  in  want,  yet,  notwithstanding,  be  also  a  father  and 
beget  children;  or  he  may  experience  other  similar 
contrarieties:  because  individuals  are  subject  to  occur- 
rences which  may  affect  either  the  body,  the  mind,  the 
rank,  or  the  condition  of  wealth,  and  which  are  not 
altogether  fortunate  or  unfortunate  at  the  same  period. 
Something  of  the  kind  will,  however,  frequently  happen 
in  cases  of  perfect  good  fortune  or  distress,  when 
meetings  of  all  the  benefics  or  malefics  may  concur  in  all 
or  most  of  the  prorogations.  Still  such  cases  are  but 
rare,  because  human  nature  in  general  is  not  subjected  to 
the  extremity  either  of  good  or  evil,  but  rather  to  their 
moderate  alternation  and  counterchange. 

The  prorogatory  places  must,  therefore,  be  separately 
distinguished  in  the  mode  before  pointed  out;  and  the 
planets  meeting  the  prorogations  must  again  be  all  taken 
into  consideration :  not  only  those  which  may  be  anseretic 
(as  in  the  case  of  the  duration  of  life),  nor  those  only 
which  may  be  configurated  bodily*,  or  in  opposition  or 
quartile,  but  also  those  in  trine  or  sextile.  And,  first, 
the  times  in  each  prorogation  will  be  governed  by  the 
planet  occupying  or  configurated  with  the  actual  pro- 
rogatory degree  itself:  if,  however,  there  be  found  no 
planet  thus  constituted,  the  nearest  preceding  planet 
will  govern  the  times  until  another,  which  may  be  in 
aspect  to  the  degree  following  in  the  order  of  the  signs, 
shall  take  them;  and  this  one,  again,  will  do  the  same 
until  the  next  in  succession  shall  take  themi*.     The  like 

•  **  Bodily"  or  in  conjunction. 

+  On  this  passage,  Whalley  remarks,  **  we  are  to  observe  in  direc- 
tion, that  the  star  in  exact  ray  with  the  prorogator  shall  be  ruler 


216  ITOLEMY's   TETRABIBLOfS,  [Booir    IV, 

rule  obtains  with  respect  to  any  other  planetu  received 
into  dominion,  and  with  respect  to  those  in  occupation  of 
the  terms. 

Further,  in  prorogations  of  the  aacendant,  the  degrees 
of  distances  will  be  equal  in  number  to  the  ascensional 
times  of  the  particular  latitude;  but,  in  prorogation 
from  the  mid-heaven,  to  the  times  of  culmination ; 
and,  in  other  prorogations,  they  will  be  in  proportion 
to  the  ascensions,  or  descensiona,  or  culminations 
and  will  depend  on  their  proximity  to  the  angles ; 
as  has  been  already  said  in  treating  of  the  duration 
of  life-. 

The  arbiters  of  general  times  are  to  be  determined  by 
the  foregoing  method  ;  but  arbiters  of  annual  periods  as 
follows:  viz.  after  the  number  of  years  which  have 
elapsed  since  the  birth  has  been  ascertained,  the  amount 
ia  to  be  projected  from  each  place  of  prorogation,  in  the 
succession  of  the  signs,  at  the  rate  of  one  sign  for  a  jearf 

"  nntil  tlie  prorogaUirmeetsiinothGr  ray  ;  that  then  tlie  planet  wlioM 
"  ray  it  is  aball  tske  the  ilomiDion,  nnil  so  on.  But  if  no  plajiet 
"  aspei't  tlie  hyleg  (prorogator)  exat'tJy,  Ihut  which  ctuls  it*  rays 
"  before  the  prorogator  ia  to  be  taken  for  ruler  of  the  time,  till 
"  another  planet's  ra,y  comes  in  by  direotion.  And  the  lord  of  tbe 
"  term  in  which  the  direction  falls,  most  becoDHiitereda^auo-pBTUter 
"  in  this  dorainion." 

•  Vide  Chap.  14,  Book  3. 

tThe  Greek  is  simply  n,  rm  irt>u-a  ■■»  £«)»r^  bat  the  cont«Xt 
proves  that  the  entire  meaning  mnst  be  as  now  givun,  altliongh  the 
Latin  translation  of  Perugio  renders  il  "one  yesr  to  each  degrae." 
Whalte;  explains  that  by  annual  periods  "  the  niitbor  intends  pro- 
"  fections ;  for  the  taking  of  which,  for  every  year  (roro  the  bIrUi, 
"  add'  one  sign  to  the  sign  in  which  tlie  apbetira  are  at  birth,  and 
"  the  sign  which  endR  at  the  year  desired  ia  the  aigD  profectional  for 
"  that  year,  and  the  lard  of  that  sign  is  chronocratoT  larbiler)  for 
'■  that  year  j  so  far  as  the  ilegreea  of  that  sign  reach.  For  example, 
"  if  a  prorogator  at  birlli  be  in  l.'i  of  l^mini,  to  15*  of  Cancer  st-rrea 
"  th«  lint  year ;  bat  the  tirst  six  months  are  rulod  by  Mercury,  nnd 
"  ibe  last  six  by  the  Moon  nnd  Jupitor ;  and  so  on." 


}li 


I 


h 


i^iVi 


I" 


Chap.   X.]  ITOLEMV's  TETKAHIULOS.  217 

and  the  lord  of  the  laat  sign*  is  to  be  assumed  as  arbiter. 
And.  with  regard  to  periods  reckoned  by  months,  the 
same  rule  is  to  be  observed :  for  in  this  case  also,  the 
number  of  the  month,  as  counted  from  the  month  of  the 
nativity,  is  to  be  projected  from  such  places  as  possess 
the  dominion  of  the  year,  in  the  proportion  of  twenty- 
eight  days  per  si^n.  So,  likewise,  in  the  case  of 
periods  reckoned  by  days,  the  number  of  the  day, 
counted  from  the  day  of  birth,  must  be  projected  from 
the  monthly  places  of  dominion,  allowing  for  each  sign 
two  days  and  a  thirdt. 

It  is,  however,  necessary  to  notice  the  ingresses  made 
on  places  allotted  to  different  periods ;  for  they  take 
effect  in  no  small  degree  on  the  events  of  the  period. 
Thus,  the  ingresses  made  by  Saturn,  on  places  of  general 
periods,  require  special  observation ;  those  made  by 
Jupiter,  on  places  of  annual  periods  ;  those  made  by  the 
Sun,  Uars,  Venus,  and  Mercury,  on  monthly  places  ;  and 
the  Moon's  transit  over  daily  places.  It  must  also  be 
remembered,  that  arbiters  of  general  periods  are  chiefly 
paramount  over  the  events  ;  and  that,  to  their  intiuence, 
the  arbiter.^  of  particular  periods  (each  of  whom  acting 
by  its  own  proper  nature)  present  either  co-operation  or 
obstruction ;    and    that   the   ingresses   also   operate   on 

'The  Latin  IranslaLion  of  Basle,  1541,  sayH,  "Che  lord  of  Chat 
"  sign  in  wliich  the  oarnWr  xliall  tertninaU," 

1-Wlialley  aajB  here,  "Let  a  nign  bt  added  for  each  mouch  to 
"the  siga  of  the  year.  So,  in  the  example  before  proposed,  the 
"laat  13°  of  Gemini,  and  the  first  15"  of  Cancer,  ahall  teive  for 
"the  first  monch:  the  last  15'  of  Canoer  and  the  fl«t  I.i"  of 
"  Leo,  far  the  neiKind  month  ;  and  bo  on  And  for  days,  from  15' 
"  of  Gemini  to  IS'  of  Canuer,  rules  twodajs  and  eijjhc  lioarn  after 
"birth,  etc." 

Placidos  is  of  opinion,  "  that  Ptolemy,  spenking  of  annual  places, 
"is  to  be  understood  r>f  the  placea  of  secondary  directions  1  anil  thit 
"when  he  apeaks  of  Che  mensCrnal,  he  hints  at  the  places  of  pro- 
"gresMons."    (Cooper's  Translation,  pp.  25  and  .'57.1 


ITiiLEMY's  TErrRABIBLOS.  [Book   IV. 

events,  by   increasing   or  Himiniahing   their   force   and 
extent*. 

The  general  diaracterhtic  property,  and  the  duration 
of  the  period,  will  be  indicated  by  the  place  of  proroga- 
tion, a.'i  also  by  the  lord  of  the  general  times,  and  by 
the  pjantt  in  posstession  of  the  terras ;  by  means  of  the 
familiarity  subsisting,  from  the  actual  birth,  between 
each  planet,  and  the  places  of  which  they  may  have 
reapeciively  and  originally  taken  dominion.  The  arbi- 
ter.s  of  time  will  also  give  indication  whether  the  event 
will  be  good  or  evil,  by  mean.s  of  their  own  naturally 
benefic  or  maleHc  property  and  temperament,  and  by 
their  original  familiarity  or  variance  with  the  place  of 
which  they  have  become  lords.  But  the  period,  at 
which  the  event  will  become  more  strongly  evident,  is 
ishewn  by  the  relative  positions  of  the  annual  and 
monthly  -signs  towards  the  places  wherein  the  causes 
exist,  and  also  by  the  iiigre.sses  of  the  planetsf. 

'  Plaoidai  Buys,  Ihat  "autire  ingreaaes,  if  tliey  be  HimiUr  to  the 
"  pre-ordainvd  elfecte,  uause  theDi  to  tiiHuence;  if  dUBimiEar,  they 
"  eitlier  diminish  or  retard  ;  as  Ptolemy  han  it  in  the  IftBt  Chapter  of 
"  Hook  4."     (Cooper's  Translation,  p.  27.) 

t  Placidua  oUsertes,  that  "  the  primary  directions  of  the  aignilioa- 
"  tors  to  their  promittorK.  and  the  lonU  of  the  terms,  Ptolemy  (rails 
"  the  General  Arbiters  of  Times,  because  tliey  pre-onlaia  the  general 
"  times  of  thdr  cflci^ts :  which,  u  its  motion  is  slow  and  its  pene- 
"  verance  long,  discovers  its  efTeota  after  a  very  long  lime  ;  thai  ii, 
"after  months  and  years.  In  order  that  we  may  kaow,  in  this 
"  extent  of  time,  on  what  particular  month  and  day  the  eflecls  ap< 
"pear,  Ptnlemy  proposes  these  motions  for  olwervalioti,  wherein, 
"  vhen  the  majority  of  the  uausea  agree  together,  then  doubtless  the 
"  offset  is  aceomplished,  or  mo.it  clearly  manifests  ilaelf."  (Cooper's 
Translation,  p.  IIHt.)  And  he  says  afterwards,  in  speaking  of  secon- 
dory  directions,  progressions,  ingresses,  etc.  "  these  subsequent 
"motions  of  the  causes  demand  oor  greatest  att«nliou."  (lUd, 
p.  Ill)  )  In  the  Appendix  to  the  same  book,  at  p  438,  the  proper 
equation  of  time,  or  measurement  of  the  area  of  direction,  is  also 
treateil  of,  in  reference  to  the  16th  canon  of  Placidna,  which  is  as 
follows :— 


\  ■! 
ii 

5' 


! 


V 


'        il 


I 


Chap.    X.]  PTOI.EMV'S   TETRABI BLOS.  219 

The  mode  in  which  the  Sun  and  Moon  may  be  (li»- 
posed  in  reference  to  the  signs  relating  to  annual  and 
monthly  periods,  is  also  indicative.  For  example, should 
they,  from  the  date  of  the  nativity,  be  posited  in  con- 
cord with  the  operative  places,  and  keep  a  position  of 
concord  at  the  ingresses,  they  will  produce  good  ;  but,  if 
adversely  posited,  evil.  And  also,  if  they  be  not  in  con- 
cord with  the  said  places,  and  provided  they  be  contrary 
in  condition,  and  in  opposition  or  in  quartile,  to  the 
transits,  they  will  cause  evil :  should  they,  however,  not 
be  in  quartile,  nor  in  opposition,  but  otherwise  con- 
tigurated,  their  influence  then  will  not  be  equally 
malefic. 

Should  it  happen  that  the  same  planets  may  be 
lords  of  the  times*,  as  well  as  of  the  ingresses.  the 
effect  will  be  extreme  and  unalloyed,  it'  of  a  favour- 
able nature ;  and  more  particularly  unmitigated,  if 
evil.  And  should  the  said  planets  be  not  only  lords 
of  the  times,  but  likewise  hold  dominion  from  the 
date  of  the  nativity,  and  provided  also  that  all  the 
prorogations,  or  most  of  them,  should  tend  to,  or 
depend  on.  one  and  the  same  place,  or,  should  the 
prorogations  not  be  so  con.stituted,  yet  notwithstand- 
ing, if  the  meetings  occurring  at  the  periods  be  found 
to  be  either  all,  or  most  of  them,  benefic  or  iiialeKc, 
they  will  wholly  produce,  in  all  respects,  good  or  evil 
fortune,  respectively. 

"  Tti  equate  tkt  Arc  of  Direcliim.  Add  tbe  are  of  direction  U>  the 
"  rigbt  aacenatOD  of  tbu  natal  Sun ;  look  for  this  sam  in  the  table  of 
"  right  ascentiiona  under  the  euliplic,  and  take  llie  dej^ee  and  minute 

of  longitude  cotresponUing  with  that  Hum  ;  then,  in  the  best  ephe- 
"  mens,  reckon  in  how  many  days  and  honrs  tLe  Sun,  from  llie  day 
"  and  hour  of  hirth,  has  arrived  at  (bat  degree  and  ntinut«.  The 
"  namber  of  days  indicate  as  many  years  ;  every  two  lioura  over, 
"reckon  a  niontli."    (Ibid,  p,  nH.) 

'  Whether  general  or  annnal. 


220  PTOLEMY  S  TETRABIBLOS-  [Book   IV. 

It  13  in  thit)  method,  which  preserves  a  uatural  order 
and  succession,  that  times  and  seasons  require  to  be  con- 
templated. 


And  now,  in  adverting  to  the  scope  allotted  to  this 
work  in  its  commencement,  all  further  adaptation  of  the 
forms  of  events  liable  to  take  effect  at  particular  time.-i 
will  here  be  relinquished;  because  the  operative  influ- 
ences which  the  stars  exercise  in  all  events,  whether 
general  or  particular,  may  be  arranged  in  proper  order, 
if  care  be  taken  that  the  causes  set  forth  by  the  Rules  of 
Science,  and  the  causes  arising  from  any  existing  com- 
mixture, be  duly  combined  and  blended  together. 


J..ll 

!:!■■  ■ 

<:\  : 
■ 


1 

■  1- 
I 

i 


it* 

V  * 


11 

I. IT 

■Ml 


2XJ 


APPfiKBiK, 


No.  I. 


Almagest:  Book  Vlll,  Chap.  IV 

THE  various  constellations  of  the  fixed  start;  having 
now  been  duly  described,  their  aspects  remain  to  be 
in  ve8  tinted. 

Independently  of  the  atedfa^t  and  immutable  aspects 
which  the  said  stars  preserve  among  themselves,  either 
rectilinearly,  or  triangularly,  or  by  other  similar  forms*, 
they  have  also  certain  aspects  considered  as  referring 
exclusively  to  the  pjanets  and  the  Sun  and  Moon,  or 
parts  of  the  zodiac;  certain  others  lo  the  earth  only;  and 
others,  again,  to  the  earth,  the  planets  and  the  Sun  and 
Moon,  or  parts  of  the  zodiac,  combined. 

With  regard  to  the  planets  only,  and  parts  of  the 
zodiac,  aspects  are  properly  considered  as  made  to  them 
by  the  Hxed  stars,  when  the  said  planets  and  fixed  stars 
may  be  posited  on  one  and  the  same  of  those  circles 
which  are  drawn  through  the  poles  of  the  zodiac;  or, 
also,  if  they  be  posited  on  diHerent  circles,  provided  a 
trinal  or  sextilc  distance  between  them  may  be  preserved ; 
that  is  to  say,  a  distance  equal  to  a  right  angle  and  a 
third  part  more,  or  a  distance  equal  to  two  thirds  of  a 
right  angle;  and  provided,  also,  that  the  fixed  stars  be 
on  such  parts  of  the  circle  as  are  liable  to  be  transited  by 
any  one  of  the  planets.  These  parts  are  situated  within 
the    latitude    of    the    zodiac,    which    circumscribes   the 


•  That  ii  to  iay,  by  the  oppusitio 


222  API'KNDIX. 

planetary  motioiiii.  And  as  far  as  the  five  planets  i 
concerned,  the  aspects  of  the  fixed  stars  depend  upon 
the  visible  mutual  conjunctions,  or  configurations,  made 
in  the  forms  above  prescribed;  but.  with  respect  to  the 
Sun  and  Moon,  they  depend  on  occultations,  conjunctions, 
and  succedent  riainga  of  the  stars.  Occultation  is  when 
a  star  becomes  invisibie  by  being  carried  under  the  rays 
of  the  luminary;  conjunction,  when  it  is  placed  under 
the  himinary'a  centre;  and  succedent  rising,  when  it 
begins  to  re-appear  on  issuing  out  beyond  the  rays. 

In  regard  to  the  earth  only,  the  aspects  of  the  fixed 
stara  are  four  in  number,  and  are  known  by  the  common 
term  of  angles;  to  speak,  however,  more  particularly. 
they  are  the  oriental  horizon,  the  meridian  or  mid- 
heaven  above  the  earth,  the  occidental  horizon,  and  thc 
meridian  or  mid-heaven  below  the  earth.  And  in  that 
part  of  the  earth  where  the  equator  is  in  the  zenith,  the 
whole  of  the  fixed  stars  are  found  to  rise  and  set, 
and  to  be  above  as  well  as  below  the  earth,  once  in  each 
revolution  ;  because  the  situation  of  the  poles  of  the 
equator,  being  in  this  manner  on  the  plane  of  the  horizon, 
thereby  prevents  the  constant  visibility  or  invisibility  or 
any  one  of  the  parallel  circles.  But  in  other  parts  of 
the  earth,  where  the  pole  of  the  equator  is  in  the  zenith, 
the  fixed  stars  can  never  set  nor  rise ;  because  the 
equator  itself  is  then  on  the  plane  of  the  horizon,  and 
circumscribes  the  two  hemispheres  (which  it  thus  creates, 
one  above  and  the  other  below  the  earth)  in  such  a 
manner,  that  in  one  revolution  every  star  must  twice 
transit  the  meridian,  some  of  them  above,  others  below 
the  earth.  In  other  declinations,  however,  between  these 
extreme  positions  of  the  equator,  as  just  mentioned,  there 
are  certain  of  the  circles  always  visible,  and  others 
never  visible;  consequently,  the  stars  intercepted 
between    the  firat  of  such  circles    and    the  poles    can 


■SI 


!;  a  '1 ; 


'1 


i 


4: 


I  "I 


i 


APPENDIX,  229 

neither  rise  nor  set,  but  must,  in  the  course  of  one 
revolution,  twice  transit  the  mertdi&n ;  above  the 
earth,  if  the  said  stars  be  on  a  circle  always  visible  ; 
but  below  the  earth,  if  on  a  circle  never  visible. 
The  other  stars,  however,  situated  on  the  greater 
parallels,  both  rise  and  set,  and  are  found  in  each  re- 
volution once  on  the  meridian  above  the  earth,  and  once 
on  that  below  the  earth. ^In  all  theae  cases,  the  time 
occupied  in  proceeding  round  from  any  one  angle  to  the 
same  again,  must  be  everywhere  equal  in  its  duration^ 
for  it  i.s  marked  by  one  sensible  revolution ;  and  the 
time  occupied  in  passing  from  either  meridianal  angle  to 
the  angle  diametrically  opposite,  is  also  everywhere 
equal ;  because  it  is  marked  by  the  half  of  one  re- 
volution. So,  al.so,  the  passage  from  either  horizontal 
angle  to  its  opposite  angle  is  again  effected  in  the  same 
e<iual  portion  of  time,  wherever  the  equator  may  be  in 
the  zenith,  for  it  is  then  likewise  marked  by  the  half 
of  an  entire  revolution;  because  on  such  a  position  of 
the  equator,  all  the  parallels  are  then  divided,  as  well  by 
the  horizon  as  by  the  meridian,  into  two  equal  part^. 
But  in  all  other  declinations,  the  time  of  po-^sage  of 
a  semicircle  above  the  earth  is  not  equal  to  that  of 
its  passage  below  the  earth,  except  only  in  the  case 
of  the  equinoctial  circle  itself,  which,  in  an  oblique 
sphere,  ia  the  only  one  divided  by  the  horizon  into 
two  equal  parts,  all  others  (its  parallels)  being  bisected 
into  di.ssimilar  and  unequal  arcs.  It  follows,  accord- 
ingly, that  the  time  contained  in  the  space  between 
rising  or  setting,  and  either  meridian,  must  be  equal  to 
the  time  between  the  same  meridian  and  rising  or 
setting;  because  the  meridian  divides  equally  such 
portions  of  the  parallels  as  are  above  or  under  the  earth. 
But  in  proceeding  in  an  ohliqiie  sphere,  from  rising 
or  setting  to  either  meridian,  the  time  occupied  must  be 


224 


APPENDIX. 


unequal ;  and  in  a  right  sphere,  equal,  because  the  entire 
portions  above  tlie  earth  are,  in  a  i-ight  sphere  only, 
equal  to  those  below  tlie  earth  ;  whence,  for  instance,  in 
a.  right  sphere,  whatever  stars  may  be  together  on  the 
meridian  must  aUo  all  rise  and  set  together,  until  their 
pr.igress  becomes  perceptible  by  the  pules  of  the  zodiac; 
while,  on  the  other  hand,  in  an  oblique  sphere,  whatever 
stars  may  be  together  on  the  meridian  can  neither  all 
rise  togeiher  nor  set  together ;  for  the  more  southern 
stars  Qiusl  always  rise  later  than  those  which  are  more 
northern,  and  set  earlier*. 

The  aspecls  made  by  the  fixed  stars,  in  regard  to  the 
planets  or  parts  of  thu  zodiac,  and  the  earth  combined, 
are  considered,  in  a  general  manner,  by  the  rising,  or 
nieridianal  position,  or  setting  of  the  said  fixed  stars  in 
conjunction  with  any  planet  or  part  of  the  zodiac;  but 
their  aspects  are  properly  distinguishable,  by  means  of 
the  Sun,  in  the  nine  following  modes : — 

1.  The  first  is  called  matiitine  subsotar.  when  the  star 
is  found  together  with  the  Sun  in  the  oriental  horizon. 
Of  this  aspect,  one  species  is  called  the  oriental,  invisible, 
and  snccedent  rising ;  when  the  star,  at  the  commence- 
ment of  its  occultation,  rises  immediately  after  the  Son: 
another  is  called  the  precise  oriental  co-rising;  when  the 
star  is  found  in  partile  conjunction  with  the  Sun  in  the 
oriental  Iiorizoii :  another  is  the  oriental,  precedent,  and 
visible  rising;  when  the  star,  beginning  to  appear,  ri^es 
before  the  Sun. 

2.  The  second  aspect  is  termed  matutine  location  in 
the  mid-heaven;  when  the  star  is  found  on  the  meridian, 
either  above  or  below  the  earth,  while  the  Sun  is  on  the 
oriental  horizon.  And  of  this  aspect,  one  species  is  called 
a  succedent  and  oriental   location   in   the  mid-heaven, 


*  On  tliia  Hide  uf  the  equator. 


I 


APPENDIX.  225 

invisible ;  when,  immediately  after  the  Sun's  rising,  the 
star  shall  be  found  on  the  meridian  :  another  is  the  pre- 
cise oriental  location  in  the  mid -heaven ;  when,  exactly 
as  the  Sun  rises,  the  star  is  at  the  same  time  on  the 
meridian ;  another  is  the  oriental  precedent  location  in 
the  mid-heaven ;  when  the  star  first  shall  come  to  the 
meridian  above  the  earth,  and  the  Sun  may  then  im- 
mediately rise. 

3.  The  third,  called  matutine  setting,  is  when  the  Sun 
may  be  actually  in  the  oriental  horizon,  but  the  star  in 
occidental.  One  of  the  forms  of  this  aspect  is  called  the 
oriental,  succedent  setting,  invisible;  when  the  star  sets 
immediately  after  the  Sun's  rising:  another  is  the  precise 
oriental  co-setting,  when  the  star  sets  at  the  moment  of 
the  Sun's  rising:  another  is  the  oriental,  precedent,  and 
visible  setting,  when  the  Sun  does  not  rise  until  im- 
mediately after  the  setting  of  the  star. 

4.  The  fourth  aspect  is  named  meridianal  subsolar,  and 
takes  place  when  the  Sun  is  actually  on  the  meridian, 
but  the  star  on  the  oriental  horizon.  Of  this,  one  is 
diurnal  and  invisible ;  when  the  star  rises  while  the  Sun 
is  posited  on  the  meridian  above  the  earth  :  another  is 
nocturnal  and  visible ;  when  the  star  rises  while  the  Sun 
is  placed  on  the  meridian  below  the  earth. 

5.  The  fifth  is  called  meridianal  location  in  the  mid- 
heaven  ;  when  the  Sun,  as  well  as  the  star,  may  be  at 
the  same  time  on  the  meridian.  Of  this  aspect,  two  sorts 
are  diurnal  and  invisible ;  when  the  star  is  on  the  meri- 
dian above  the  earth,  together  with  the  Sun,  or  on  that 
below  the  earth,  diametrically  opposite  to  the  Sun.  Two 
also  are  nocturnal,  and  of  the.se,  one  is  invisible  ;  when 
the  star  is  on  the  meridian  under  the  earth,  together 
with  the  Sun :  the  other,  however,  is  visible ;  when  the 
star  is  on  the  meridian  above  the  earth,  diametrically 
opposite  to  the  Sun. 


0.  Tlie:^ixth  iametidianal  setting;  when  the  star  is  found 
on  the  occidental  horizon,  while  the  Sun  is  on  the  meridian. 
0£  this,  one  species  is  diurnal  and  invisible ;  when  the 
star  sets  while  the  Sun  is  above  the  earth  on  the  meridian  : 
the  other  is  nocturnal  and  visible;  when  the  star  seta 
while  the  Sun  ia  on  the  meridian  below  the  earth. 

7.  The  seventh  aspect  is  called  vespertine  subsolar; 
when  the  star  is  found  on  the  oriental  horizon,  while  the 
Sun  ia  posited  on  the  occidental  horizon,  One  form  of 
this  aspect  is  the  vespertine  succedent  rising,  visible: 
when  the  star  rises  immediately  afier  sunset:  another  is 
the  precise  vespertine  co-rising ;  when  the  star  rises  and 
the  Sun  sets  at  one  and  the  same  time:  another  is  the 
precedent,  vespertine  rising,  invisible ;  when  the  star 
rises  immediately  before  the  Hun  seta. 

8,  The  eighth  is  named  vespertine  location  in  the  mid- 
heaven  :  when  the  star  is  on  the  meridian,  either  above 
or  below  the  earth,  while  the  Sun  is  placed  on  the  occi- 
dental horizon.  Of  this  aspect,  one  kind  is  called  a  visible 
vespertine  location  in  the  mid-heaven,  when  the  atar  is 
found  there  immediately  after  sunset:  another  is  the  pre- 
(uae  vespertine  location  in  the  mid-heaven ;  when  the  star 
is  found  there  at  the  moment  of  sunset:  another  is  the 
vespertine  precedent  location  in  the  mid-heaven,  invisible; 
when  tlie  star  arrives  there  immediately  before  sunset. 

v.  The  ninth  aspect  is  called  vespertine  setting;  when 
the  star,  together  with  the  Sun,  is  on  the  occidental 
horizon.  One  form  of  this  aspect  ia  the  vespertine, 
succedent  and  visible  setting;  when  the  star,  at  the 
commencement  of  its  occultation,  sets  immediately  after 
the  Sun;  another  i.s  the  precise  vesperiine  setting;  when 
the  star  sets  at  the  same  moment  with  the  Sun:  another 
ia  the  precedent,  invinibte  setting;  when  the  atar.  before 
it  etaerges  from  its  occultation.  sets  before  the  Sun. 


■ji 

n 


■I 


n: 


I  t 


Km 
iui 


1 


APPENDIX.  227 


No.  II. 

Almagest;  Book  II.  Extract  from  Chap.  IX. 

Of  Circumstances  regulated  by  Ascensions. 

In  any  climate  whatever,  the  magnitude  of  a  given 
day  or  night  is  to  be  computed  by  the  number  of  ascen- 
sional times  proper  to  that  particular  climate.  For 
example,  the  magnitude  of  the  day  will  be  ascertained 
by  numbering  the  times  between  the  Sun's  zodiacal 
degree  and  the  degree  diametrically  opposite,  in  the 
succession  of  the  signs ;  and  that  of  the  night,  by 
numbering  the  times,  from  the  degree  diametrically 
opposite  to  the  Sun,  onwards,  in  the  order  of  the  signs, 
to  the  degree  actually  occupied  by  the  Sun:  because, 
by  dividing  the  respective  amounts  of  these  times 
so  obtained,  by  fifteen,  the  number  of  equatorial 
hours  belonging  to  each  space  will  be  exhibited ;  and 
if  the  division  be  made  by  twelve,  instead  of  fifteen* 
the  result  will  shew  the  numbers  of  degrees  equivalent 
to  one  temporal  hour  of  either  of  the  said  spaces 
respectively*. 


*  Thus  (according;  to  the  Table  inserted  at  p.  23.3),  in  the  climate 
or  latitude  of  Lower  .^gypt,  the  times  of  ascension  between  the  first 
point  of  Gemini  and  the  first  point  of  Sagittarius,  diametrically  oppo- 
sites  are  205°  18',  which,  being  divided  by  15,  give  13  hours  41  min- 
utes and  a  fraction  of  equatorial  time,  as  the  length  of  the  day  of 
the  first  point  of  Gemini.  And  the  same  number  of  times  of  af^cen- 
sion,  divided  by  12,  give  IT''  6'  and  a  fraction  of  the  equator,  as  the 
length  of  the  diurnal  temporal  hour.  In  the  latitude  of  Southein 
Britain,  the  times  of  ascension  between  the  same  points  as  above- 
mentioned  are  236"  2',  which,  divided  by  15,  give  15  hours  44 
minutes  and  a  fraction  of  equatorial  time  as  the  length  of  the  day 
of  the  first  point  of  Gemini ;  and,  if  divided  by  12,  they  produce 
lO''  40'  and  a  fraction  of  the  equator,  as  the  length  of  the  diurnal 
temporal  hour. 


22N 


The  magnitude  of  any  temporal  hour  may  be,  lioweva 
more  oasily  Cound  by  referring  to  the  annexed  TaT*lt- 
of  Ascensions,  and  taking  the  difference  between  the 
respective  aggregate  numbers,  inserted  therein  under  the 
heads  of  the  equinnctial  parallel  or  right  sphere,  and  of 
any  particular  climate  for  which  the  magnitude  of  the 
temporal  hour  is  required  ;  and,  if  the  said  hour  be  a 
diurnal  hour,  the  aggregate  times  as  stated  against  the 
zoitiacal  degree  occupied  by  the  Sun;  but,  if  nocturnal, 
thijse  stated  against  the  degree  diametrically  opposite, 
are  to  be  compared  ;  and  the  sixth  part  of  the  diflerence 
between  them  is  to  be  added,  if  the  said  degree  be  in  the 
northern  signs,  to  the  fifteen  times  of  an  equatorial  hour; 
but  aubstracted  therefrom,  if  in  the  southern  signs.  The 
amount  thuR  obtained  will  be  the  required  number  of 
degrees  of  the  temporal  hour  in  question*. 

And  if  it  be  required  to  reduce  the  temporal  hours 
of  any  given  day  or  night,  in  a  certain  climate,  into 
equatorial  hours,  they  must  be  multiplied  by  their 
proper  horary  times,  whether  diunial  or  nocturnal,  as 
the  case  may  be;  the  product  is  then  to  be  divided  by 
fifteen,  and  the  quotient  will  necessarily  be  the  number 
of  equatorial  hours  in  the  climate  in  question,  on  the 


'  Tbus,  the  aggrefftte  tinm  of  asceaMon,  in  a  riglit  sphere, 
of  the  first  point  of  Gemini  are  57"  ti';  aDd,  in  the  climate  of 
Lower  --Knypt,  45'  fl':  tlie  tixtb  part  of  the  ilifference  between 
them  is  2°  D'  and  a  fraction,  which,  added  to  19  ,  again  mates 
the  diurnal  Iciupural  hour  of  t'le  &nl  point  of  U«mini  equal 
to  IT'  t>'  and  a  fnu-tion  of  the  equator  In  Ihe  ulimHte  oF  Southern 
Britain,  the  agjiregate  times  of  asct^niiion  of  tlie  liret  puiiit  d( 
Gemini  are  W  43':  the  sixth  part  of  the  diflercixie  between  lluil 
RiiRi  and  57'  44'  of  riKht  aacenaion  in  4'  Vf  and  a.  fraction,  which, 
added  to  15°,  makes  tlie  diurnal  tempural  hour  of  the  liret  point 
of  Gemini,  la  South  Britaiu,  equal  Ui  19  -10'  nnd  a  frui^tinii  of 
the  equator,  as  before  tbeHii. 


If  .1 

I  I 


I 


il 


i  ! 


f! 


i'it> 


APPENDIX.  221) 

given  day  or  night*.  On  the  other  hand,  equatorial 
hours  are  also  to  be  reduced  into  temporal  hours  by 
being  multiplied  by  fifteen,  the  product  of  which  is  to 
be  divided  by  the  horary  times  proper  to  the  given 
day  or  night  in  the  said  climate. 

The  degree  ascending  in  the  ecliptic,  at  any  given 
temporal  hour,  may  also  be  ascertained  by  multiplying 
the  number  of  temporal  hours  since  sunrise,  if  the  given 
hour  be  diurnal,  but  if  nocturnal,  since  sunset,  by  their 
proper  horary  times;  and  the  product  is  to  be  added,  in 
the  succession  of  the  signs,  to  the  aggregate  number  (as 
shewn  by  the  ascensions  proper  to  the  climate)  of  the  Sun's 
degree,  if  the  given  hour  be  diurnal,  but,  if  nocturnal, 
to  that  of  the  degree  diametrically  opposite,  and  that 
particular  degree  of  the  ecliptic  which  shall  correspond 
with  the  total  number  thus  found  in  the  ascensions  of 
the  climate  will  be  the  degree  then  ascending f. 

•  For  example. 
Diurnal  horary  times  of  the  firnt  point  of  Gemini,  in  the 

latitude  of  Alexandria 17'    6'  3(r 

Number  of  temporal  hours       -        -        -        -        -        -  12 

ir))20o     18     0 

Diurnal  equatorial  hours  of  the  first  point  of  Gemini  in 

the  latitude  of  Alexandria 13    41    12 

Diurnal  horary  times  of  the  first  point  of  Gemini  in  the 

latitude  of  Southern  Britain 19"*  -HY  l(f 

Number  of  temporal  hours 12 

15)236      2     0 

Diurnal  equatorial  hours  of  the  first  point  of  Gemini  in 

the  latitude  of  Southern  Britain        -        -        -        -     15    44     8 


t  Let  the  first  point  of  Gemini  be  on  the  meridain  above  the  earth; 
the  number  of  temporal  hours  since  sunrise  will  then  be  0,  by  which 
IT  6'  3(r  are  to  be  multiplied.    The  product  will  be  102*'  39':  thif>, 


230  Al'1'E.VDIX, 

But.  in  order  to  ascertain  the  degree  on  the  meridian 
above  the  eartli,  the  oumher  of  temporal  hours  since  the 
preceding  noon  are  alwo  to  be  multiplied  by  their  pi-oper 
horary  times,  and  the  product  i»  to  be  added  to  the 
aggregate  number  of  the  Sun's  right  ascension;  and  that 
degree  uf  the  ecliptic,  with  which  the  total  number  as 
found  in  the  aggregate  times  of  right  ascension  shall 
correspond,  will  then  be  on  the  meridian  \  The  degree 
on  the  oriental  horiiton  will,  however,  al.so  shew  what 
degree  occupied  the  meridian;  for.  by  subtracling  90 
timea  (the  amount  of  the  quadrant)  from  the  aggregate 
number  ascribed  to  the  said  ascending  degree  in  the 
Table  proper  to  the  climate,  the  number  so  reduced  will 
be  found,  in  the  aggregate  times  of  the  Table  of  Right 
Aitcennions,  to  correspond  with  the  degree  on  the  meridian. 
And  again,  on  the  other  hand,  by  adding  90  to  the  aggre- 
)^te  times  ascribed  by  right  ascension  ti*  the  degree  on 
the  meridian  above  the  earth,  the  degree  ascending  may 
be  obtained,  for  it  will  be  that  degree  which  corresponds 
to  that  total  number,  aa  stated  in  the  Table  proper  to 
the  climate  t- 


ftdded  tu  45°  5',  Lbe  aggregate  auoiber  of  the  Grat  point  u(  Uemini  in 
the  Intitnde  of  AlennndrU,  will  give  147°  44',  wliiofa,  in  tlio  aweo- 
aioQs  of  the  cliniate  id  queelion,  will  corr.fiKiiid  to  tbe  3d  degree  tj  • 
Virgo,  hdJ  kIihw  Lliat  to  1w  tlio  ilej>reu  aacenJing.  In  tlie  lalitude  ot 
Soutlivru  Britain  tiie  total  number  Konld  ititl  ainuunt  to  tlie  «ame ; 
viK.  147"  44',  bitl  it  would  sliew  T  aud  about  30'  of  Virgo  lo  be 
iXBcending. 

■  Let  llie  liri-t  point  of  Cieniiui  be  three  temporal  hourB  past  the 
meridian  :  theiie  Lonrt  rednced  to  defjreen,  in  the  latitude  of  Alex 
andria,  will  give  ST  10',  wbieb,  added  to  the  rijiht  aacenaiou  of  the 
fint  point  of  Gemini,  make  l>;9'  3',  shewing  the  lath  degree  of  Can' 
cer  on  the  meridian.  In  the  lalitude  of  Southern  Britain,  these  honn 
would  produce  59%  which,  added  lo  tlio  right  awenniim,  would  make 
1  Id'  44',  and  shew  the  25lli  degree  of  Canuer  on  the  meridian 

-t  Thus,  in  the  latitude  uf  Alexandriii,  when  the  Hrat  point  of  Gemini 
is  three  temporal  hours  past  the  meridian,  the  llith  degre:  of  Libra 


I  ■; 


1 


i.l; 


.; 


«    I 


•1 


J 


-I 


I 


APPENDIX. 


231 


The  Sun  always  preserves  an  equal  distance  in  equa- 
torial hours  from  all  parts  of  the  same  meridian;  but  his 
distance  in  equatorial  hours  from  different  meridians 
varies  according  to  the  degrees  of  distance  between 
meridian  and  meridian. 


will  be  on  the  ascendant,  and  the  aggregate  times  of  ascension  of  that 
degree  in  the  said  latitude  are  199'  3' :  by  subtracting  90  from  this 
sum,  the  remainder  will  be  109"  3',  the  right  ascension  of  the  mid- 
heaven  answering  to  the  18th  degree  of  Cancer.  In  the  latitude  of 
Southern  Britain,  the  18th  degree  of  Libra  would  be  on  the  ascendant, 
of  which  degree  the  aggregate  times  of  ascension  in  that  latitude  are 
206"*  44',  from  which,  if  90  be  subtracted,  the  remainder  will  be  116* 
44',  the  right  ascension  of  the  mid-heaven  answering  to  the  25th 
degree  of  Cancer.  — The  converse  of  these  operations  seems  too  obvious 
to  need  explanation. 


[From  the  AlmE^^t.] 


^.,«rz>... 

^T.™. 

'  IBNIEST  PJY 

^r,^:. 

12        6 

0       0 

i    16     15 

60      15 

12      15 

4     15 

IG     30 

+51      35 

12      30 

8      25 

16     -45 

52      50 

12     45 

12      30 

17        0 

54        1 

13       0 

16     27 

17      15 

17      30 

55        0 

13     15 

20     14 

se     0 

13      30 

23     51 

17      45 

57  0 

58  0 

13      45 

27      40 

18        0 

■■ 

p 


I 


I 


:!l 


I.I 

i'  !■ 


Extinct  from  the  Table  of  Ascenuions  (contained  in  the 
Almagest),  calculated  for  every  tenth  Degree  of  the  Zwiiac. 


1«  -.  n-a 

",'.:z 

'V'r:'' 

'«;;;;; 

--'1'* 

^ 

^ 

'WHIBI 

1I  An, 

aiGNS. 

11M0.K4. 

'hi 

—■.. 

W  II  .-r 

.<.^„,j«iK 

T.wil/ 

Allll-<D"I- 

r.w.  u. 

Awrrwf 

■""""°" 

T..-.: 

'*'"'""" 

r..—. 

*'''"\ 

AriM 

10 

9.10 

"9.10 

6-48 

6-48 

'4.  "5 

'■4.  5 

20 

9.15 

18.25" 

G.55 

15.43 

^12 

8.17 

TfturuH 

30 

"io 

"9725" 
9.40 

27750' 

■     7-10 

20.53 
"28726 

4.51 
4.56 

12.48" 
17  44 

37-30 

^03" 

20 

9.58 

-4"7":28- 

8-  2 

"  3"672S 

■"5.54 

25.18 

lo 

10.16 

57.44 

8-37 

T5-r 

tS,25 

"  29.43" 

Gemini 

io 

TO.34" 

63.18 

9.17 

—54:22 

7.29 

"  37.12"" 

20 

10.47 

79.  5 

"10.  0 

64-22 

8.49 

46-  1 

30 

10.55 

90.  0 

"10:3B" 

75.  0 

10.14 

56-15 

Cancer 

10 

10.55 

100.55 

11:12 

86.12 

n.36" 

-67.51- 

20 

10.47 

111.42 

Tr34 

97.46 

12."45 

80.36 

JO 

"10.34 

122,16 

11-51 

109.37 

13.39 

94.15 

Leo 

10 

10.16 

132.32" 

TTSS 

121.32 

'14.  7 

"108.22 

20 

9.58 

142.30" 

11-54 

133.26" 

"15:22 

122-44 

30 

9.40 

152.10 

lL'17 

145.13 

14.24 

137.  8 

VifR,. 

lb 

9-25" 

16i:35 

Tl"-"4d" 

156.53 

IJ.19 

151.27 

20 

~9.15 

170.50 

11.35 

168. -j8 

14.18 

T65.4"5"" 

30 

9,10 

180,  0 

-11:32 

180.  0 

14.15 

X8b7  0 

Libra  

10 

—9, 10 

189.10 

11-32" 

191.32 

14.15 

I9"47r5" 

20 

9,15 

198.25 

11,35 

203.  7 

—4:18 

■2"08733" 

-30 

9.25" 

207.50 

ii-io 

214,47 

14.19 

222.52 

Scorpio 

10 

9.40 

217.  30 

uaT 

236.34 

14.24 

"257.16" 

20 

9.58 

227.28 

11-54 

238.28 

T4722 

"251.38 

30 

TO.lg" 

257-44" 

11.55 

250.23 

"147  7 

imw 

SagittariiiH  .    .. 

10 

10:34 

248.18 

"11-51  " 

262.14 

13,59" 

279.24 

"20 

"10.47 

259-  5 

275.48" 

12-45 

292.  9 

30" 

10,55 

270.  6 

n.12 

285.  0 

11.36 

305:4-5" 

TO" 

"10:5-5"- 

280-55 

10.3B 

295.38 

10.14 

515."5"9 

20 

30 

Ib."47- 

^1742 

10.  0 
9.17 

305.38 
514,55 

—8749- 
"■7,29 

"322748" 
550.17 

10.34 

^021:6" 

AqnsriiiH 

10" 

"10.16 

312:32" 

"  8.37- 

323.32 

-5:25 

336-42 

20 

9.58 

^322.30 

6.  2 

331,54 

5.34 

"342:16" 

30 

9.40 

332  10 

-7:33 

339.  7 

4,56 

'547,12" 

Pisce* 

"10 

"-9.25" 

341,35 

7:10 

346:1 7 

4.51 

551,43 

20 

"9.15 

350:50 

6.55 

353.12 

4.12 

355.55 

3"0" 

9.10 

360:  6 

6,48 

560.  0 

4.  5 

"560.  0 

234 


Al-i'END[X. 


^Tiie  fciregoinij  extracts  have  been  made  to  shew 
the  entire  agreement  lietween  the  astronomy  of  the 
Tetrabiblos  and  that  of  the  Almagest.  The  Tables 
herein  given  from  the  latter  work,  are,  of  course,  nnw 
in  some  degree  superseded  by  others  of  modern  cal- 
culation, infinitely  more  complete. 


The  Centitoquy,  or  Hvmdred  Apkariama  of  Cla%tdiv» 

Ptolemy*;  otherwief  called,  the  Fruit  of 

his  Four  Books. 

I.  Judgment  must  be  regulated  by  thyself,  as  well  as 
by  the  science;  for  it  is  not  possible  that  particular 
forms  of  events  should  be  declared  by  any  person, 
however  scientific;  since  the  understanding  conceives 
only  a  certain  general  idea  of  some  sensible  event,  and 
not  its  particular  form.  It  is.  therefore,  necessary  for 
him  who  practises  herein  to  adopt  inference.  They  only 
who  are  inspired  by  the  deity  can  predict  particulars. 

II.  When  an  inquirer  shall  make  mature  search  into 
an  expected  event,  there  will  be  found  no  material 
difference  between  the  event  itself  and  his  idea  of  it. 

'Moxon'n  MatheniaticHl  Dicliouiiry  tuys,  tliat  tlie  "  Ceatjloquium 
"U  a,  book  cuntAJning  one  liundred  a^lrologicul  apliorisms,  comtuonlf 
"  uw-ribed  to  Ploieiiiy,  an  its  autlior,  but  by  aome  to  Hermes  Trts- 
"  megistnti."  This  account,  however,  secniB  to  be  inaccar&te  ;  for 
tbe  C«Dtiloqay  iittribat«(l  to  Osirw'n  culeiapomry  aad  coansellor 
(enlogiseil  by  Lilly  as  having  been  "  one  of  the  wimst  of  all  mort&l 
"iiion,  and  aa  undent  as  Moyaes"),  in  verydiOerent  (mm  that  known 
hy  the  Dame  cif  the  Kii;r<i,  or  ■'  fruit  of  the  Tetmbiblos."  Wliether 
this  latter  Centiloquy  be  t«ally  the  work  of  Ptolemy  is  another 
qneElion :  it  ]in»  been  a^ually  edited  as  his,  but  some  of  the  apborisaiB 
BPem  tu  relate  to  horary  qnastiona  only,  which  are  not  adverted  to  in 
the  Tetrabjhins.  and  there  are  others  also  which  do  not  appear  t« 
result  from  the  doctrine  of  tiiat  book. 


11 


t 


i  t 


u 


•  ji  ;i 


APPENDIX.  235 

III.  Whosoever  may  be  adapted  to  any  particular 
event  or  pursuit,  will  assuredly  have  the  star  indicative 
thereof  very  potent  in  his  nativity. 

IV.  A  mind  apt  in  knowledge  will  discover  truth 
more  readily  than  one  practised  in  the  highest  branches 
of  science. 

V.  A  skilful  person,  acquainted  with  the  nature  of  the 
stars,  is  enabled  to  avert  many  of  their  effects,  and  to 
prepare  himself  for  those  effects  before  th^y  arrive. 

VI.  It  is  advantageous  to  make  choice  of  days  and 
hours  at  a  time  well  constituted  by  the  nativity.  Should 
the  time  be  adverse,  the  choice  will  in  no  respect  avail, 
however  favourable  an  issue  it  may  chance  to  promise. 

VII.  The  mingled  influences  of  the  stars  can  be 
understood  by  no  one  who  has  not  previously  acquired 
knowledge  of  the  combinations  and  varieties  existing  in 
nature. 

VIII.  A  sagacious  mind  improves  the  operation  of  the 
heavens,  as  a  skilful  farmer,  by  cultivation,  improves 
nature. 

IX.  In  their  generation  and  corruption  forms  are 
influenced  by  the  celestial  forms,  of  which  the  framers 
of  talismans  consequently  avail  themselves,  by  observing 
the  ingresses  of  the  stars  thereupon. 

X.  In  the  election  of  days  and  hours,  make  use  of  the 
maleflcs,  to  the  same  moderate  extent  as  the  skilful 
physician  would  use  poisons  in  order  to  perform  cures. 

XI.  A  day  and  hour  are  not  to  be  elected  until  the 
quality  of  the  object  proposed  shall  be  known. 

XII.  Love  and  hatred  prohibit  the  true  accomplishment 
of  judgments ;  and,  inasmuch  as  they  lessen  the  most  im- 
portant, so  likewise  they  magnify  the  most  trivial  things. 

XIII.  In  every  indication  made  by  the  constitution  of 
the  heavens,  secondary  stars,  whether  auxiliary  or  injur- 
ious thereto,  are  also  to  be  used. 


23G 


XIV.  The  astrologer  will  be  entangled  in  a  labyriDtb 
of  error,  when  the  seventh  house  and  ita  lord  shall  be 
afBicted, 

XV.  Signs  cadent  from  the  ascendant  of  any  kingdom 
are  the  ascendants  of  that  kingdom's  eneniie.s.  But  the 
angles  and  succedent  houses  are  the  ascendant.^  of  its 
friends.     It  is  the  same  in  all  doctrines  and  in-stitutiona. 

XVI.  When  the  benefics  may  be  controuled  in  the 
eighth  house,  they  bring  mischief  by  means  of  good 
men :  if.  on  the  other  hand,  they  be  well  affected,  tbey 
will  prevent  mischief. 

XVII.  Give  no  judgment  an  to  the  future  life  of  an 
aged  person,  until  the  number  of  year-s  he  may  live  shall 
have  been  reckoned. 

XVIII.  If,  while  a  benetic  raay  ascend,  both  the 
luminaries  should  be  in  the  same  minute",  the  native 
will  be  equally  and  highly  prosperous  in  all  things 
which  can  befall  him.  So,  likewise,  if  the  luminaries  be 
mutually  opposed  by  the  east  and  west.  But  the  con- 
trary edect  will  be  produced,  should  a  maleBc  be  on  tho 
ascendant. 

XIX.  The  efficacy  of  purgation  is  impeded  by  the 
Moon's  conjunction  with  Jupiter. 

XX.  Pierce  not  with  iron  that  part  of  the  body  which 
may  be  governed  by  the  sign  actually  occupied  by  the 
Moon. 

XXI.  When  the  Moon  may  be  in  Scorpio  or  Pisces, 
purgation  may  be  advantageously  used,  provided  the 
lord  of  the  ascendant  be  coupled  with  some  star  posited 
below  the  earth.  If  he  be  coupled  with  a  star  placed 
above  the  earth,  the  potion  swallowed  will  be  vomited  up. 

XXn.  Neither  put  on  nor  lay  aside  any  garment  for 
the  first  time,  when  the  Moon  may  be  located  in  Leo. 


e  degree  and  sign. 


APPENDIX.  237 

And  it  will  be  still  worse  to  do  so,  should  she  be  badly 
affected. 

XXIII.  Aspects  between  the  Moon  and  stars  give  the 
native  much  activity;  and,  if  the  stars  be  in  power,  they 
indicate  an  efficient,  but  if  weak  an  inert,  excitation  to 
action. 

XXIV.  An  eclipse  of  the  luminaries,  if  in  the  angles 
of  the  nativity,  or  of  an  annual  revolution,  is  noxious ; 
and  the  effects  take  place  according  to  the  space  be- 
tween the  ascendant  and  the  place  of  eclipse.  And 
a?,  in  a  solar  eclipse,  a  year  is  reckoned  for  an  hour, 
RO  likewise,  in  a  lunar  eclipse,  a  month  is  reckoned 
for  an  hour. 

XXV.  The  progression  of  a  significator,  posited  in  the 
raid-heaven,  is  to  be  made  by  right  ascension;  of  another 
posited  in  the  ascendant,  by  the  oblique  ascension  of  the 
particular  latitude. 

XXyi.  There  is  obvious  concealment  in  the  case,  if 
the  star  significance  of  any  particular  affair  be  in  con- 
junction with  the  Sun,  either  under  the  earth  or  in  a 
place  foreign  to  its  own  nature.  On  the  other  hand, 
there  is  manifestation,  should  the  star  be  raised  to 
elevation  out  of  its  depression,  and  be  located  in  its  own 
place. 

XXVII.  Venus  gives  pleasure  to  the  native  in  that 
part  of  the  body  which  may  be  ruled  by  the  sign  she 
occupies.     It  is  the  same  with  other  stars. 

XXVIII.  When  the  Moon  may  not  hold  a  familiarity 
with  two  planets,  as  is  desirable,  care  should  be  taken  to 
connect  her,  if  possible,  with  some  fixed  star  combining 
their  qualities. 

XXIX.  The  fixed  stars  grant  extremely  good  fortune, 
unconnected  with  the  understanding;  but  it  is  most 
commonly  marked  by  calamities,  unless  the  planets  also 
agree  in  the  felicity. 


23*5  ArPENPix. 

XXX.  Observe  the  creation  of  the  first  king  uf  any 
dynasty ;  for  if  the  ascendant  at  that  creation  should 
agree  with  the  ascendant  of  the  nativity  of  the  kiof^'s 
son,  he  will  succeed  his  father. 

XXXI.  When  the  atar  ruling  over  any  kingdom  shall 
enter  into  a  climacterial  place,  either  the  king,  or  some 
one  of  the  chief  men  of  his  kingdom,  will  die. 

XXXII.  Concord  between  two  persons  is  produced  by 
an  harmonious  figuration  of  the  stars,  indicative  of  the 
matter  whereby  good  will  is  constituted,  in  the  nativity 
of  either  person. 

XXXIII.  Love  and  hatred  are  discernible,  as  well 
from  the  concord  and  discord  of  the  luminaries,  as  from 
the  ascendants  of  both  nativities  :  but  obeying  si^s  in- 
crease good  will. 

XXXIV.  If  the  lord  of  the  place  of  the  new  Moon  be 
in  an  angle,  ho  is  indicative  of  the  events  liable  to 
happen  in  that  month. 

XXXV.  When  the  Sun  arrives  at  the  place  of 
any  star,  he  excites  the  influence  of  that  star  In  the 
atniosphere. 

XXXVI.  In  the  foundation  of  cities,  consider  the  fixed 
stars  which  may  seem  to  contribute  thereto;  but  in  the 
erection  of  houses,  observe  the  planets.  The  kings  of 
every  city  which  has  Mars  in  culmination  will  most 
commonly  perish  by  the  sword. 

XXXVII.  If  Virgo  or  Pisces  be  on  the  ascendant, 
the  native  will  create  his  own  dignity ;  but  if  Aries 
or  Libra  be  on  the  ascendant,  he  will  cause  his  own 
death.  The  other  signs  are  to  be  contemplated  in 
the  same  way. 

XXXVIII.  Mercury,  if  established  in  either  house  of 
Saturn,  and  in  power,  gives  the  native  a  speculative  and 
inquisitive  intellect :  if  in  a  house  of  Mars,  and  especially 
if  in  Aries,  he  gives  eloquence. 


li 


i! 


I 

L' 


i 


APPENDIX.  289 

XXXIX.  Affliction  of  the  eleventh  house,  in  the 
creation  of  a  king,  indicates  damage  in  his  household 
and  his  treasury:  affliction  of  the  second  house  denotes 
the  detriment  of  his  subjects'  wealth. 

XL.  When  the  ascendant  is  oppressed  by  the  malefics, 
the  native  will  delight  in  sordid  things,  and  approve  ill- 
flavoured  odours. 

XLI.  Beware  the  affliction  of  the  eighth  house  and 
its  lord,  at  a  time  of  departure ;  and  that  of  the  second 
house  and  its  lord,  at  a  time  of  return. 

XLII.  Should  a  disease  begin  when  the  Moon  may  be 
in  a  sign  occupied  at  the  birth  by  some  malefic,  or  in 
quartile  or  opposition  to  any  such  sign,  such  disease  will 
be  most  severe ;  and  if  the  malefic  also  behold  the  said 
sign,  it  will  be  dangerous.  On  the  other  hand,  there 
will  be  no  danger  if  the  Moon  be  in  a  place  held  at  the 
time  of  birth  by  some  benefic. 

XLIII.  The  malefic  figures  of  a  nation  are  strength- 
ened by  adverse  figurations  of  existing  times. 

XLIV.  It  is  an  evil  case  if  the  ascendant  of  a  sick 
person  resist  the  figuration  of  his  own  nativity  ;  and  if 
the  time  should  not  bring  up  any  benefic. 

XLV.  If  the  ascendant,  or  principal  significators,  be 
not  in  human  signs,  the  native  himself  will  be  also 
estranged  from  human  nature. 

XLVI.  In  nativities  much  happiness  is  conferred  by 
the  fixed  stars;  and  also  by  the  angles  of  the  new  Moon, 
and  by  the  places  of  a  kingdom's  Part  of  Fortune,  should 
the  ascendant  be  found  in  any  of  them. 

XL VII.  If  a  malefic  in  one  nativity  fall  on  the  place 
of  a  benefic  in  another  nativity,  he  who  has  the  benefic 
will  suffer  damage  from  him  who  has  the  malefic. 

XL VIII.  If  the  mid -heaven  of  a  prince  be  the  as- 
cendant of  his  subject,  or  if  their  respective  significators 
be  configurated  in  a  benevolent  form,  they  will  continue 


240 


long  inseparable.  It  will  be  the  same,  also,  should  the 
sixth  bouse  of  a  subject  or  servant  he  the  ascendant 
of  hiM  prince  or  masti^r. 

XLIX.  If  the  ascendant  ut'  a  servant  be  the  mid- 
heaven  in  his  master's  nativity,  the  master  will  place 
so  much  confidence  in  that  servant  as  to  be  ruled 
by  him. 

L.  Overlook  none  of  the  hundred  and  nineteen  con- 
junctions; for  on  them  depends  the  knowledge  of  worldly 
operations,  whether  of  generation  or  of  corruption. 

LI.  Make  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Moon  at  the  timt 
of  birth  the  sign  ascending  at  the  conception ;  and 
consider  that  in  which  she  may  be  posited  at  the  con- 
ception, or  the  opposite  one,  as  the  sign  ascending  at 
the  birth. 

LII.  Men  of  tali  .stature  have  their  lords  of  nativity 
in  elevation,  and  their  avcendantK  in  the  beginnings  of 
signs  ;  but  the  lords  of  men  of  short  stature  will  be 
found  in  declination*.  It  must  also  be  seen  whether  the 
signs  be  right  or  oblique. 

LIll.  The  lords  of  nativity  of  slight  or  thin  men  have 
no  latitude,  but  those  of  stout  or  fat  men  have ;  and,  if 
the  latitude  he  south,  the  native  will  be  active;  if  north, 
inactive. 

LIV.  In  the  construction  of  a  building,  the  principal 
rulers,  if  coupled  with  a  star  below  the  earth,  will  impede 
the  erection. 

LV.  Uars'  evil  influence  over  ships  is  diminished  if  he 
be  neither  in  the  mid-heaven  nor  in  the  eleventh  house; 
but  if  in  either  of  those  placfl.s,  he  renders  the  ship  liable 
to  be  captured  by  pirates.  And  if  the  ascendant  be 
afflicted  by  any  fixtid  star  of  the  nature  of  Mars,  the 
.ship  will  be  burned. 


*  Or  iti  oWare  Hltiwltons. 


1- 


APPENDIX.  241 

LVI.  While  the  Moon  is  in  her  first  quarter,  with- 
drawing from  her  conjunction  with  the  Sun,  the  bodily 
humours  expand  until  her  second  quarter  :  in  her  other 
other  quarters  they  decrease. 

LVII.  If,  during  a  sickness,  the  seventh  house  and  its 
lord  be  afflicted,  change  the  physician. 

LVIII.  Observe  the  place  of  an  aspect,  and  its  distance 
from  the  ascendant  of  the  year ;  for  the  event  will 
happen  when  the  profection  may  arrive  thither. 

LIX.  Before  pronouncing  that  an  absent  person  shall 
die,  observe  whether  he  may  not  become  intoxicated  ; 
before  declaring  that  he  shall  receive  a  wound,  see 
whether  he  may  not  be  let  blood  ;  and  before  saying 
that  he  shall  find  treasure,  examine  whether  he  may  not 
receive  his  own  deposit ;  for  the  figures  of  all  these 
things  may  be  similar. 

LX.  In  cases  of  sickness,  observe  the  critical  days, 
and  the  Moon's  progress  in  the  angles  of  a  figure 
of  sixteen  sides.  If  those  angles  be  well  affected,  it 
is  favourable  for  the  invalid;  if  they  be  afflicted, 
unfavourable. 

LXI.  The  Moon  is  significative  of  bodily  matters, 
which,  in  respect  of  motion,  resemble  her. 

LXII.  By  marking  exactly  the  beginning  of  a  con- 
junction*, judgment  may  be  made  of  the  variation  of 
the  weather,  in  the  ensuing  month.  It  will  depend 
upon  the  lord  of  the  angle  of  every  figure,  for  he 
controuls  the  nature  of  the  atmosphere;  assuming  also 
at  these  times  the  quality  of  the  existing  weather. 

LXIII.  In  the  conjunction  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter, 
pronounce  according  to  the  nature  of  that  one  which 
may  be  higher  in  elevation.  Follow  the  same  rule  with 
other  stars. 


•  Of  tlie  Sun  and  Moon. 
R 


242  APPENDIX. 

LXIV.  After  ascertaiDing  the  lord  of  the  enqnl 
see  what  power  he  may  have  in  the  annunl  revolution, 
or  in  the  ascendant  of  the  new  Moun  ;  and  pronounce 
accordingly, 

LXV.  In  the  least  conjunction,  the  difference  of  the 
luean  conjunction,  and  in  the  mean  conjunction,  the 
difference  of  the  greatest  conjunction*. 

LXVl.  Consider  no  profection  by  itself  alone,  but 
make  reference  s,\m  to  the  ciualiticatioiis  and  impedi- 
ment's of  the  ytars. 

LXVII.  Years  are  diminished  by  the  imbecility  of 
the  receiver, 

LXVIIl.  A  malefic,  when  matutine,  signifies  an  acci- 
dent ;  when  vespertine,  a  disease. 

LXIX.  The  Dative's  si^ht  will  be  impaired  if  the  Uoon 
be  opprjaed  to  the  Sun,  and  joined  with  nebulous  stars; 
and  it'  the  Moon  be  in  the  western  angle,  and  both  the 
malefic  stars  in  the  eastern  angle,  the  Sun  beio!{  in  an 
angle  also,  the  native  will  beccnje  blind. 

LXX.  Insanity  is  produced  if  the  Moon  have  no 
connection  with  Mercury; — and,  if  neither  of  thom 
be  connected  with  the  ascendant,  Saturn  being  in 
occupation  of  that  angle  by  night,  but  Man*  hy  day, 
especially  if  in  Cancer,  Virgo,  or  Pisces,  a  dtemonUo 
affection  will  be  produced. 

LXXI.  If  both  luminaries  may  be  in  masculine  signs, 
in  the  nativities  of  males,  their  actions  will  be  consonant 
with  nature ;  but  if  so  placed  in  the  nativitien  of  females, 
they  increase  their  action.  And  Mars  and  Venus,  if 
matutine,  incline  to  the  masculine  gender;  if  vespertine, 
to  the  feminine. 

LXXII.  Matters  of  oducatinn  are  tn  he  coniiidered  by 


•  On  tliia  aphoriTi  PiirtrMpe  liiut  wiH.  "  How  I'lolpmy  nmnnt,  It  U 
be  un<let8UK>d,  1  know  nut ;  uid  ho  I  le&vfl  it  " 


i    I 

1  _ 

!    \ 


APPENDIX.  243 

the  ascending  lords  i)t*  triplicity ;  matters  of  life,  by  the 
lords  of  the  conditionary  luminary's  triplicity. 

LXXIII.  If  the  Sun  be  found  with  the  Gorfjon's  head 
(Caput  MediLSca),  and  not  aspocted  by  any  benefic  star, 
and  if  there  be  no  beneiic  present  in  the  eighth  house, 
and  the  lord  of  the  conditionary  luminary  be  opposed  to 
Mars,  or  in  quartile  to  him,  the  native  will  be  beheaded. 
If  the  luminary  culminate,  his  body  will  be  maimed  or 
mangled ;  and  if  the  aspect  in  quartile  be  from  Gemini 
or  Pisces,  his  hands  and  feet  will  be  am[)utated. 

LXXIV.  Mars,  if  ascending,  uniformly  givej  a  scar  in 
the  face. 

LXXV.  If  the  Sun  be  in  conjunction  with  the  lord  of 
the  ascendant,  in  Leo,  and  Mars  have  no  prorogative  in 
the  ascendant,  and  if  there  be  no  benefic  in  the  eighth 
house,  the  native  will  be  burned. 

LXXVJ.  If  Saturn  hold  the  mid- heaven,  and  the  con- 
ditionary luminary  be  opposed  to  him,  the  native  will 
perish  in  the  ruins  of  buildings,  provided  the  sign  on  the 
lower  heaven  be  an  earthly  sign;  if  it  be  a  watery  sign, 
he  will  be  drowned  or  suffocated  by  water :  if  a  human 
sign,  he  will  be  strangled  by  men,  or  will  perish  by  the 
halter  or  the  scourge.  Should  there,  however,  be  a 
benefic  in  the  eighth  house,  he  will  not  suffer  death, 
although  he  will  be  brought  near  it. 

LXXVII.  Protection  of  the  ascendant  is  to  be  made 
for  matters  affecting  the  body  ;  of  the  Part  of  Fortune, 
for  extrinsic  circumstances;  of  the  Moon,  for  the  connec- 
tion between  the  body  and  the  spirit ;  and  of  the  mid- 
heaven,  for  the  employment  or  profession. 

LXXVIII.  A  star  often  dispenses  influence  in  a  place 
in  which  it  has  no  prerogative,  thus  bringing  unexpected 
advantage  to  the  native. 

LXXIX.  Whoever  has  Mars  in  the  eleventh  house, 
does  not  govern  his  master. 


24+ 


APPEKDIX. 


1  conJuricLiun  with  Saturn,  aad 
B  in  tho  suveutli  house,  the  native 


LXXX.  If  Venus  bu 
Iiave  any  lord  of  houst 
will  be  of  spurious  origin. 

LXXXI.  Times  are  reckoned  in  ueven  ways;  viz.  by 
the  apace  between  two  sisniticatoi-s ;  by  the  spaca  be- 
tween their  mutual  aspects;  by  the  approach  of  one  to 
the  other  ;  by  ihe  space  between  either  of  them  and  the 
place  appropriated  to  the  proposed  event;  by  the  deseen- 
siou  oE  a  star,  with  its  addition  or  diminuti<in  ;  by  the 
changin<r  of  a  siirniticator ;  and  by  the  approach  of  a 
planet  to  its  place. 

LXXXII.  When  a  tiffure  may  be  equipoised,  observe 
the  horoscope  (or  Bgure)  at  the  new  or  full  moon, 
and,  if  that  also  be  equipoised,  be  not  hasty  in  giving 
Judgment. 

LXXXIII.  The  time  of  obtaining  a  grant  indicate" 
the  affection  between  the  applicant  and  his  prince ;  but 
tlie  seat*  shews  the  nature  of  the  ofEce. 

LXXXIV.  And  it  Mars  be  lord  of  the  a^jeoudant  at 
the  time  of  entering  on  possession,  and  posited  in  the 
second  bouse,  or  coupled  with  the  lord  of  the  second,  he 
brings  much  mischief. 

LXXXV.  Should  the  lord  of  the  ascendant  be  configu- 
rated with  tlie  lord  of  the  second  bmse,  the  prince  will 
spontaneously  create  many  charges. 

LXXXVI.  The  Sun  is  the  source  of  the  vital  power ; 
the  Moon,  of  tha  natural  power. 

LXXXVII.  Monthly  revolutions  are  made  in  twenty- 
eight  days,  two  hours  and  about  eighleun  minutes. 
Judgment  is  also  made  by  some  persons  by  means  of  the 
Sun's  progress ;  that  is  to  say,  by  his  partjie  equations 
to  that  degree  and  minute  which  he  might  hol:^  at  the 


*  Ur  part  of  baavsD  iaJiuatiii({  tlie  grual 


it 


APPENDIX.  245 

LXXXVIll.  In  making  profection  of  the  Part  of 
Fortune  for  a  whole  annual  revolution,  a  space  equal  to 
that  between  the  Sun  and  Moon  is  to  be  reckoned  from 
the  ascendant. 

LXXXIX.  Consider  the  grandfather's  affairs  from  the 
seventh  house,  and  the  uncle's  from  the  sixth. 

XC.  Should  the  significator  be  in  aspect  to  the  ascen- 
dant, the  hidden  event  or  object  will  correspond  in  its 
nature  with  the  ascendant ;  but  if  the  ascendant  be  not 
so  aspected,  the  nature  of  the  event  will  accord  with 
that  of  the  place  in  which  the  significator  is  posited. 
The  lord  of  the  hour  shews  its  colour ;  the  place  of  the 
Moon  its  time ;  and,  if  above  the  earth,  it  will  be  a  novel 
thing ;  if  below,  old.  The  Part  of  Fortune  indicates  its 
quantity,  whether  long  or  short.  The  lords  of  the 
terms,  and  of  the  lower  heaven  and  mid-heaven,  and  of 
the  Moon,  shew  its  substance  or  value. 

XCI.  Should  the  ruler  of  a  sick  person  be  combust,  it 
is  an  evil  portent ;  and  especially  if  the  Part  of  Fortune 
be  afflicted. 

XCII.  Saturn,  if  oriental,  is  not  so  highly  noxious  to 
a  sick  person  ;  nor  Mars,  if  occidental. 

XCIII.  Judgment  is  not  to  be  drawn  from  any  figure 
until  the  next  conjunction  shall  have  been  considered  *. 
for  principles  are  varied  by  every  conjunction;  and  there- 
fore, to  avoid  error,  both  the  last  and  the  next  should  be 
combined. 

XCIV.  The  place  of  the  more  potent  significator 
indicates  the  thoughts  of  the  inquirer. 

XCV.  The  stars  rising  with  the  tenth  house  prove 
how  far  the  native  may  be  fitted  to  the  occupation 
which  he  follows. 

XCVI.  In  an  eclipse,  such  significations  as  are  made 
nearest  the  angles,  shew  the  events  decreed.  The  nature 
of  the  stars  in  accordance  with  the  eclipse,  planets  as  well 


24li 


ea  fixeil  stars,  and  also  the  appearances  co-ascending,  are 
likewise  to  be  considered,  and  judgment  is  to  be  given 
accordingly. 

XCVII.  The  event  inquired  about  will  be  speedily 
accomplished,  should  the  lord  of  the  new  or  full  Uoon  be 
in  an  angle. 

XCVIII.  Shooting  stars,  and  meteors  like  flowing  hair, 
bear  a  secondary  part  in  judgments. 

XCIX.  Shooting  stars  denote  the  dryness  of  the  air ; 
and,  if  they  are  projected  to  one  part  only,  they  indicate 
wind  therefrom  :  if  to  various  parts,  they  indicate  dimi- 
nution i>f  waters,  a  turbulent  atmosphere,  and  incursions 
of  armies. 

C.  If  comets,  whose  distance  is  eleven  signs  behind 
the  Sun,  appear  in  angles,  the  king  of  some  kingdom,  or 
one  of  the  princes  or  chief  men  of  a  kingdom,  will  die. 
If  in  a  succedent  house,  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom's 
treaaury  will  prosper,  but  the  governor  or  ruler  will  be 
chan^'cd.      If  in  a  cadent  house,  there  will  be  diseaaen 


«i^  The  attention  of  the  reader  is  directed  to  the  need 
of  a  few  alterations  in  the  Table  of  Contents. 
Being  printed  in  supplements,  the  Table  was 
given  in  an  early  number,  and  it  was  found 
impossible  to  keep  to  the  limits  intended,  or  to 
alter  without  considerable  diflSculty. 


1 


^  ■ 


i 


5 


y 


r 


1 1 


J  .. 


3   tiaS   QQS   h']&   Ijh 


STANFORD  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARIES 

CECIL  H.   GREEN   LIBRARY 

STANFORD.  CALIFORNIA  94305-6004 

(415)   723-1493 


All  books 


\y  be  recalled  offer  7  doys 
DATE   DUE 


fc/S  JUN 


W 


ioSB^ 


i 


KHu' 


JUN  2«>«0^ 


77 


J
