Hakluytus Posthumus, or Purchas His Pilgrimes, Vol. 9 (Samuel Purchas, 1625)
==========================================================
Purchas His Pilgrimes (1625) - the 17th century's great sequel to Hakluyt; the largest voyage collection of its age, preserving dozens of narratives otherwise lost. The 20-volume MacLehose reprint (Glasgow, 1905-07), the standard complete edition. Vol. 9 of 20.

Hakluytus  Posthumus

or

Purchas His Pilgrimes

In Twenty Volumes

Volume IX

GLASGOW
PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY
ROBERT MACLEHOSE &» COMPANY LTD. FOR
JAMES MACLEHOSE AND SONS, PUBLISHERS
TO THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW

MACMILLAN AND CO. LTD.
THE MACMILLAN CO.

MACMILLAN AND BOWES
DOUCLAS AND FOULIS

LONDON
NEW YORK

SIMPKIN. HAMILTON AND CO. LONDON

CAMBRIDGE
EDINBURGH

Hakluytus Posthumus

or

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning a History of the World

in Sea Voyages and Lande Travells

by Englishmen and others

By

SAMUEL PURCHAS, B.D.

VOLUME IX

Glasgow
James MacLehose and Sons

Publishers  to  the  University

MCMV

a.

■::

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs  in
the  ninth  Booke  of  the  First  part  of
Purchas  his  Pilgrims.

CHAP. VI.

A  Relation  of  a  Voyage  to  the  Easterne  India.  Observed
by  Edward  Terry,  Master  of  Arts  and  Student  of
Christ-Church  in  Oxford.  .....  I

§.  I.  Things remarkable  observed in his Voyage to the

Indies. Sea  fight  with  the  Portugals. ...  2

Pike  of  Teneriffe.  Turnadoes  and  unwholesome  showres.
Fight  with  a  Portugall  Carracke :  true  cause  and  case
of  such  fights.  Resolute  Commanders.  Their  fights
and  slaughter.  Meneses  undaunted  spirit.  Carracke
burnt.  Paper  well  sold.  The  Heart  best  musick  in
devotion.

§.  2. Description of  the Mogols Empire, and the most

remarkable  things  of  Nature  and  Art  therein.  .  1 3

Indostan  described.  Idol  Matta.  Tongue  sacrifice.  Victuals
plentie.  Portable  hearths.  Provisions  of  flesh,  fruits,
drinkes.  Raines,  thunders,  soyle.  Ganges  light  water.
Racke,  Cohha,  Betele,  Houses,  Cities,  Cotton.  Coynes.
Commodities,  discommodities  ;  Beasts  wild  and  tame.
Elephants  quantitie,  qualitie,  sensitive-reason,  grati-
tude, service.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters— Continued.  page

§.  3.  Of  the  people  of  Indostan,  their  stature,  colour,  habit,
dyct,  women,  language,  learning,  arts,  riding,  games,
markets,  armes,  valour,  Mahumetane  Mesquits,  burials,
opinions,  and  rites  of  Religion.  .....  29

People  of  Indostan  described.  Jewes  hated.  Attyre.
Salutations.  Indostan  tongue,  Arts,  Feasts  ;  The
Kings  house  and  houshold.  Their  Food,  Innes,
Coaches  and  Oxen,  Hunting,  Fowling,  Apes.
Courage.  Munition.  M.  Coryats  zeale  and  bold
attempt.  Prayer,  Beades,  Temperance ;  Mest,  Fasts,
Feasts,  Bookes.  Superstitious  devotion.  Adulterie
punished. Stewes,  Eunuchs,  Marriages.

§.  4.  Of  the  Gentiles  Sects,  Opinions,  Rites  ; Priests,  and

other  observations  of  Religion  and  State  in  those  parts.  42

Eare-rings,  Washings,  Spots,  Burning,  Widowes,  &c.
Courts  of  Justice.  Bribes,  Debts  ;  No  Inheritance,
Pensions,  Officers.  Great  Mogols  Letters,  Lescar,
Women,  Children,  Conditions.  Jesuite-Agent.  Chris-
tian Converts  constancie  tryed. Letter.

Sultan Achmet Chan, Sonne unto the Sultan Mehemet

Chan  most  invincible,  his  Letter  to  King  James. H.  53

CHAP. VII.

The  travels  of  Lewis  Barthema  or  Vertoman  into  Egypt,
Syria,  Arabia,  Persia,  and  India,  heretofore  published
in  English  by  R.  Eden,  and  here  corrected  according
to  Ramusios  Copie,  and  contracted.  .  .  .  55

£.  1. His  travell  thorow  the  Desart  of  Medina  and  Mecha,

and their  profane  holies.  .  .  .  .  m  r-

Barthcmas  observation  of  Damasco  and  the  Mamalukes.
Marwood  Mamalukes.  Damasco.  Arabian  theeves,
marcs,  houses.  Arabians,  Mamalukes.  Water  scarce.
A  conceit  of  Manna.  Medina  Talnabi.  Mahumets
Sepulchre,  his  Librarie.  False  deluding  miracles.
Fable  of  Mahomet.  Sea  of  Sand.  Sacrifice.  Mecha
I.  Deare  water.  Balsam.  Strange  baptisme.
Poorcs  poore  devotion. Cadies  Sermon. Devill  stoned.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  pace

§.  2.  Two  Unicornes.  His  passage  by  the  Red  Sea  to
Aden.  Imprisonment  and  counterfeiting  himselfe
mad.  Escape  and  visiting  other  parts  of  Arabia,
Zeila,  Cambaia. .  .  .  .  .  . .  73

Travellers  Straits  twixt  Curiositie  and  Conscience.  Coole
Zeale.  Gezan  Camaran  in  the  Red  Sea  :  Sana
Barthema  imprisoned.  Abassine  Souldiers.  Sheepe
and  Asse  Mahumetan  Martyrs.  Mad  holinesse.
Heremites.  Holy  Vow.  Holy  unholy  Saint.  Haire
homes.  Sana,  Taes,  Zibite,  Damar.  Aden.  Zeila.
Strange  Kine. Stranger  storie  of  a  Cambaian  King.

CHAP. VIII.

Collections  of  Asia,  especially  of  Arabia,  gathered  out  of
an  Arabike  booke  of  Geographie,  written  by  a  Nubian,
foure  hundred  and  seventie  yeeres  agoe,  and  translated
into  Latin  by  Gabriel  Sionita,  and  Johannes  Hefronita,
Maronites  of  Mount  Libanus,  the  one  Professor,  and
both  Interpreters  to  the  French  King,  of  the  Arabike
and  Syriake  Tongues. ......  90

Happie  Arabia.  Stations.  Saba.  Merbat,  and  Frankin-
cense. Pilgrim-tribute.  Arabian  High-waies.  Mecca
centre  of  Arabia.  Arabian  Cities  and  Waies.  Whirle-
pooles. The  Persian  and  Red  Seas.

CHAP. IX.

Collections  of  divers  Mahumetan  Authors  in  their  Arabicke
Bookes,  by  the  said  Maronites,  Gabriel  and  John,
touching  the  most  remarkeable  things  in  the  East,
especially  of  the  Mosleman  superstitions  and  rites,
and  the  places  of  chiefe  note.  ....  99

Arabia,  why  so  called.  Beduines  apparell.  Mahomets
sweat-drops.  Baghdad  a  famous  Universitie.  Avicen.
Damascus.  Muske.  Maronites.  Bells.  Meccas
whole-lie-Holies. Sacrifices. Balsam. Mohameds

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  PAGE

Hcgcra,  Wives  and  Children,  life,  death,  successors.
Mohamcds  Tombe  ;  Meschit-rites.  Of  men  and
women.  Turbants.  Rites  of  egestion  and  ingestion,
man  Creed  and  Precepts.  Clensings,  Washings,
Visiting  of  the  sickc,  Wils  and  burials.

CHAP. X.

Don  Dnart  dc  Menescs  the  Vice-roy,  his  tractate  of  the
Portugall  Indies,  containing  the  Lawes,  Customes,
Revenues,  Expenses,  and  other  matters  remarkable
therein: here  abbreviated. H. .  .  .  .118

ij.  1.  A  Register  or  Collection  of  the  Uses,  Lawes,  and
Customes  of  the  Canarins,  or  Inhabitants  of  this
Hand  of  Goa,  and  of  the  Towns  thereunto  belonging. 118

Bookc  of  Meneses.  The  ancient  Lawes  and  Customes  of
Goa.  Ancient  and  later  Lawes  of  the  Natives  of  Goa.
Order  for  Possessions.  Possessors,  Inheritors,  who  and
how.  Lawes  concerning  Claimes,  Lone,  Interest,
Witnesses,  Inheritance.  Lawes  for  goods  of  the
deccssed,  Inheritance  ;  Theft,  Fugitives,  &c.  Lawes
touching  Circumstances  and  Rites  of  Honour.

§.  2.  A  Copie  of  the  Order  that  the  Vice-roy  of  the  Estate
of  India  shall  hold  in  matters  of  Justice,  as  also  of
the  other  Magistrates,  in  the  divers  places  holden  by
the Portugals  in India. .  .  .  .  .  .135

Yicc-royes  Court,  Judiciall  Officers  and  proceeding.  Bills
of  Pardon,  Warrants,  taking  Accounts.  Fines.  Office  of
Examiner,  Chancellor,  and  Judge  of  Appeales.  Judges
of  Appeales,  of  Criminall  cases,  and  of  Civill.  Crowne
and  Exchequor  Office  and  Commissarie  for  decessed.
Commissioner  for  Orphans  and  parties  deceased,
r.-rolls.  Court  of  Relation.  Judges  and  Officers
of  Goa.  Appeales,  Justices  of  Borders.  Captaines
of  Fortresses.  Bills  of  Appeale  or  Complaint :  Judges
I  ■  es. Suspicion  punished.

1'hc  Receipt  of  the  Revenues  of  the  State  of  India  :
as  also  the  cxpences  publike  therein. .  ,  .160

viii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  paoi

Revenues  and  expenses  of  Portugal  Indies.  Customes  and
Rents  of  Sofala,  Ormus,  and  other  Portugall  Forts.
Revenues  and  Expenses  of  the Portugall Indies.

The  inclosing  of  all  the  Rent  of  the  Estate  of  India. .  . 165

A  Copie  of  all  the  ordinarie  expences  that  are  made  in  the

Citie  of  Goa,  at  His  Majesties  charges. .  .  .166

Officers  Wages. Vice-royes  Servants,  and  their  allowance.

Officers  belonging  to  Justice. .  .  .  .  .  .169

Expenses  on  Officers,  Judges,  Captaines  of  Castles,  &c.

Officers  belonging  to  the  Citie  of  Goa  ;  her  Fortresses  and

Pases,  or  Ports. .  .  .  .  . . .170

Expenses  on  Officers  wages,  Captaynes,  &c.  Offices  and
expences  of  the  Portugall-Indie-Navie.

The  Galleon  of  the  Trafficke  and  Voyage  of  Ceilaon,  hath

the  Officers  and  Men  as  followeth.  .  .  .176

Portugall  Expenses  on  the  Gallies ;  and  on  the  Ecclesiastikes
in  Goa.

Parishes  within  the  Citie  of  Goa.  . .  .  . .178

Parishes  that  are  in  this  Hand  of  Goa. . . .  .179

Ecclesiasticall  Expences  on  Parish  Churches  and  on  the
Jesuits.  Expences  on  Monasteries,  Hospitalls,  &c.
Expences  on  the  Inquisition  and  Fortresses.

Officers belonging  to  the  H.  Inquisition.  .  .  . 185

Expences  made  with  the  Fortresses  of  Sofala,  Mosambique,

and  Sena. .  . .  . .  .  . .186

Expenses  on  Jesuites,  Dominicans,  Bishops,  Vicars,  &c.

Ordinarie expences that are made in the Fortresse of

Ormus. .  .  .  .  . . . .  .188

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP. XI.

A  Letter  from  Don  Garcia  Silva  Figueroa  Ambassadour
from  Philip  the  third  King  of  Spaine  to  the  Persian,
written  at  Spahan,  or  Hispahan,  Anno  1619.  to  the
Marquesse  of  Bedmar,  touching  matters  of  Persia. . 190

Europaean  excellence.  Remaines  of  Persepolis  antiquities.
Antiquities  of  Persepolis.  Casbin,  Soltania,  &c.  Two
Comets.

CHAP. XII.

Collections  out  of  the  Voyage  and  Historie  of  Friar  Joano
dos  Sanctos  his  ^Ethiopia  Orientalis,  &  Varia  His-
toria,  and  out  of  other  Portugals,  for  the  better
knowledge  of  Africa  and  the  Christianitie  therein. . 197

§  1 .  The  Authors  Voyage  and  Acts  in  those  parts  ;  Sea
accidents,  Moorish  fooleries,  English  Ships  :  Of  Sofala,
the  Fort  ;  the  Fruits  and  Plants  of  those  parts. .  .197

Superstition  to  Corpo  Santo.  Children  of  the  Sunne.
Dominicans  Conversions.  English  ships  first  in  those
Seas. Resurrection-tree.

§  2.  Of  Quiteve  King  of  that  Countrey,  with  the  strange
customes  observed  in  those  parts,  in  Court,  Citie,  and
Countrey. ........ 203

Quiteves  Atheisme,  incest,  death,  succession.  King  elected
by  Women,  greater,  lesse  then  man  ;  Devillish
exequies.  Devill-oracle.  Godlesse  devotion.  Monky-
men.  Mad  titles.  Musike,  oathes,  gallantry,  attire,
trades,  riches,  hunting  of  Cafres.  Their  brewing,
divining,  justice,  marriages,  child-births,  funerals.
Cafres  Charitie  ;  white ;  Male-nurses  ;  Gold  how
gotten.  Barrets  acts.  Quiteves  custome.  Sofala
customes. Maroupe  hunting.

§  3.  Of  the  River  Cuama,  and  the  adjacent  Countrey  ;  the
Beasts,  Fowles,  Fishes  of  those  parts  :  the  Hills  of
Lupata; of the Mongas, Rufumba, Sena, Tete,

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Massapa,  and  of  the  Kingdome  of  Manamotapa  ;  Also

of  Ophir,  and  of  the  Golden  Mines  of  Fura. .  . 220

Sofala  Rivers  and  Hands.  River-horse  described  ;  how
taken.  The  wild  beasts,  strange  wormes,  Snakes,
Fowles,  about  Sofala.  Strange  Birds  and  Fishes.
Pearle-fishing.  Ambargrise  huge  pieces.  Crocodiles
described,  killed,  fed  ;  strange  herbe  and  springs.
Manamotapa  Marts.  Fura  supposed  Ophir.  Gold
and  silver  Mines. Ancient  buildings  and  Letters.

§  4.  Of  the  Manamotapa  his  customes  and  of  his  Vassalls  ;
and  of  the  adjoyning  Kingdomes,  (wherein  other
Authours  have  erred)  of  Mosambique,  Quiloa,  Mom-
baza,  Melinde,  Magadoxo  :  of  the  Mombos  and
Zimbas,  cruelties.  Of  Quilimane,  the  Hands  on  the
Coast  ; the Macuas, and other  African observations. 238

Manamotapa  Rites,  Queene,  speech.  Manamotapan  Rites.
Mumbos  humane-immane  butchery.  Portugals  dis-
grace. Zimbas  horrible  expedition.  Treason  rewarded.
Loranga  rights.  Lothsome  gallantry.  Quizungo
Marriage.  Feare,  Wisedome.  Mocambique  and  Hands.
Manna.  Plagues.  Elephants  taking  and  teeth.
Moores  Sea-rites.  Melinde.  Sorcery.  Huge  Birds.
Monster.

§  5.  The  Jesuites  gleanings  in  Africa  to  Christian  Religion,

gathered  out  of  their  owne  writings.  .  .  . . 255

Jesuites  Conversion  of  Cafres.  Manamotapa  baptised,  killeth
Consalvus.  Angola.  Black  Christianitie.  Wicked
Sodomie.  Cacongo.  Senaga.  Christned  Ethniks.
Ethnik-Christians.  Negro  Kings  baptised.  Cruell
superstition.  The  old  Serpent.  Poore  Soules,  rich
Carkasses. Stupid  superstition  to  and  of  Blocks.

§  6.  Relations  of  the  Christianitie  of  Africa,  and  especially

of  Barbarie,  and  Algier  ;  written  by  J.  B.  Gramaye. . 267

Christianitie  of  Barbary.  Algier  buildings  scite,  Compasse,
numbers.  Slaves,  Inhabitants,  Encrease,  Government,
Jewes,  Apparell.  Rites,  Women,  Sinnes,  Morabutes,
Speech,  Death,  Buriall,Riches.  Hel-tragaedies  really  acted
on  Algier  stage  by  men-devil  Turks.  Algier  Hels  Epi-
tome, Miseries  Ocean,  Christians  whirlepoole.  Tortures
Centre,  Hell  upon  Earth.  Devill-saints.  Pray,  pay.
xi

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP XIII.

Larger  observations  of  Master  Richard  Jobson,  touching  the
River  Gambra,  with  the  people,  merchandise,  and
creatures  of  those  parts,  then  in  his  Journall  is  con-
tayncd,  gathered  out  of  his  larger  notes. .  .  . 284

§  I.  Of  the  River  Gambra,  the  raines,  and  land-flouds,  the
cause  and  time  of  their  contagion  :  the  Beasts,  Fish,
and  Fowle  of  the  River  ;  of  the  Portugals,  Mandingos,
and  Fulbies  there  living. ...... 284

The  strange  seasons,  Beasts,  Fishes,  Fowles  about  Gambra.
Gambras  Irreligious  Portugals,  Beastiall  Fulbies.  Their
dyet,  townes,  houses,  fortifications,  armes,  Kings,  State.
Cotton-bushes.  Blacks  apparell  ;  Wives  pluralitie,
slaverie,  &c. Drunken  Negros.

§  2.  Of  their  Marybucks,  and  religion  :  Merchandize  ;
Fidlers,  Instruments,  Trades,  Husbandrie,  with  a
further  Historie  of  the  Creatures  in  those  parts. . 297

Sober  and  superstitious  Maribucks.  Fode  Bram.  Trade  of
Slaves  and  Salt.  Deformed  people.  Musicke,  &c.
Their  Trades,  barter,  husbandry,  graine,  wine,  trees  ;
the  Cola.  Lions  and  Jackalls.  Ounces  and  Leopards.
Civet-cats.  Unicornes.  Land  fowle.  Hanging  Birds.
Birds  with  foure  wings.

CHAP. XIIII.

A  Letter  contayning  the  admirable  escape  and  glorious
victorie  of  Nicholas  Roberts  Master,  Tristram  Stevens
his  Mate,  and  Robert  Sucksbich  Boatson  of  a  ship  of
Dover,  taken  by  Algier  Pyrates :  which  three  men
being  carried  as  slaves  by  eleven  Turkes  in  the  same
ship,  partly  killed,  and  partly  sold  them  all,  and
returned free  and  safe  home  into  England. .  . 311

Nicholas  Roberts  taken  by  Pyrates  of  Algier.  Turkish
Crueltie.  Christian  courage.  Brave  and  bold  attempt.
Two  English  overcome  eleven  Turkes.  God  helpes
the  Valorous.  Takers  sold  by  the  taken.  Mans  eye
evill  when  Gods  is  good,
xii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  pace

CHAP. XV.

The  Grand  Signiors  Seraglio  : written by  Master  Robert

Withers.  .  . .  .  . .  .  .322

§  I. Description of the place, partitions, and manifold

conveniences.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .322

Capoochee-Bashees.  Banquetting  houses.  Cypresse  walls.
Hospitall  with  Officers.  Kings  stable.  Horses,
Furniture. Great  Turkes  Bed-chamber  and  Hall.

§  2.  Of  the  Divan  Dayes,  Judges,  Session,  Judicature,  Dyet,

Accounts. .  .  .  .  . . . . 330

Divan  dayes  and  Officers.  The  manner  of  keeping  Courts.
Dinner  rites. Dyet.

§3.'  Of  Ambassadours  entertainment  and  audience. .  , 335

Ambassadors  entertainment.  Masters  of  the  Ceremonies,
&c. Vesting. Recompence.

§  4. Of  the  persons  which  live  in  the  Serraglio  :  and  first

of  the  Women  and  Virgins,  their  manner  of  life  there, 338

Slaves.  Virgins  made  Turkes.  The  Kings  women,  their
manner  of  life  :  Kings  comming  to  them.  Sultanaes
Jointure  and  rites,  Rights  of  the  G.  Signeors  Daughters.
The  Kings  women,  Apparell.  Their  Jewels.  Their
Arts.

§  5.  Of the Agiamoglans, how taken, distributed and

employed. ........ 348

Renegadoes  Children.  Circumcision.  Gardens  and  Houses.
Agiamoglans  how  used. Their  wages,  Government,  &c.

§  6.  The  choise  Agiamoglans,  severe  discipline  and  educa-
tion in  foure  Subordinate  Schooles,  and  their  after-
advancements.  .  .  .  .  .  .  -353

Severe  Discipline. Education. Advancements. Reverence.
Schooles,  Exercises, Arts,  Preferments, of  the  choise
Children. The  Turkes  Officers. Waiting. Turkes
Table. Presents  from  Great  persons,
xiii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§  7.  Of  inferior  persons,  as  Buffons,  Mutes,  Musicians  ;  of
white  Eunuchs,  and  of  the  grand  Officers  of  the
Serraglio.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  362

BufFons,  Mutes,White  Eunuches.  Chamberlaine.  Treasurer.
Master  of  the  Wardrobe,  &c.  Education,  and  imploy-
ment  of  the  Turkes  Eunuches.

§  8.  Of blacke Eunuchs and Black-Moore Girles and

Women  : Of  Physitians,  and  of  the  Kings  Children. 368

The  education  of  the  Turkes  Children,  male  and  female.

§  9.  Provisions  of  Victuals,  Cookes,  Kitchins,  Dyet  of  the
■ King, Queene,  and others, and of  their manner of

Service.  ......... 372

The  usuall  manner  of  the  Great  Turkes  diet,  and  services.
The  ordinarie  diet  of  the  Sultanas  and  Bashawes.  The
kinds  and  quantities  of  meates  provided  for  the  Turkes.
The  Turkes  Kitchin.

§  10.  Apparell,  Bedding,  Sicknesse,  Hospitalls,  Inheritance  ;
Kings  expences,  Recreations,  receiving  Petitions,
Stables; Ramazan Solemnities.  .  .  .  . 381

His  Bedding,  and  attendance  there.  Heires  of  their  Dead.
Great  charge  in  Vests,  &c.  The  Turkes  Stable,
Horses  and  Mules.  His  Lent.  Presents  given  and
taken.

§11.  The old Serraglio,  and  Womens  lives therein: Of

their  marriages  and  children,  slave-selling,  Witnesses. 389

The  old  Serraglio.  Buying  and  selling  of  Slaves.  Marriage.
Divorce. Turkes  perjurie.

§  12.  Of  their religion, opinions, persons, times, places,

and  rites  sacred. .  .  .  .  .  .  .394

Their  Faith,  and  their  Prophets.  The  Muftee,  and  other
inferiour  Church-ministers  in  Turkic  Turkish  praying-
rites,  Processions,  cursing,  Muftee,  Ramazan.  Sacrifices,
Beads,  Pilgrimes,  Circumcision,  Hospitals,  Moschees.
Turkish  sick-death-rites  ;  tombes ;  learning  ;  religious
Women.

xiv

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

A  Letter  sent  by  Sultan  Osman  the  late  murdered  Emperour,

to  His  Majestic,  by  Husein  Chiaus. .... 407

Turkish  Letters  translated  by  R.  Withers.

A  Letter  written  by  Halil  Bashaw,  chiefe  Vizir  and  Generall
in  the  Persian  Expedition,  at  his  returne,  in  Aprill,
1 61 8.  to  Sir  Paul  Pindar,  Ambassador  for  His  Majestic 409

A  Letter  from  Halil  Bashaw  to  Sir  Paul  Pinder,  &c.

CHAP. XVI.

Sundrie  the  personall  Voyages  performed  by  John  Sanderson
of  London  Merchant,  begun  in  October,  1584.  ended
in  October,  1602.  With  an  historicall  description  of
Constantinople. .  .  .  .  .  .  .412

§  1. His first  Voyage  to Constantinople, and thence to

Cairo,  and  to  Tripoli. .  .  .  .  .  .412

./Etnas  burning.  Buriall  of  Saint  Andrew  ;  and  of  Homer,
&c.  Alexandria  Conducts.  Cairo.  Mataraea.  Croco-
diles stone.  Rarities  of  Egges,  Doves,  Pyramides,
Momia,  blind  Sanctitie.  Foule-Fat-Foole-Saints.  Ship-
wrack.  Adams  and  Pharaos  figs.  Egyptian  Date  trees ;
Raine,  Nilus,  flyes,  dust,  Spowts.

§  2.  His  second  Voyage  to  Constantinople,  with  other  his

Travels.  .  . .  .  .  .  .  .425

Thebes.  A  Jarraf.  Turkish  Mutinie  and  Crueltie.  Master
Bartons  Journey.  Great  Turkes  Expedition  and
Returne.  Ambassadour  Bartons  respect.  Master
Sandersons  travels.

§  3.  The third Voyage of Master John Sanderson to

Constantinople. ....... 434

Old  Manuscript.  Jewish  Woman  and  her  Sonnes.  Spahies
tumult.  Turkish  Punishments.  Great  Executioner.
G.  Turkes  Caike.

xv

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

I A  Discourse  of  the  most  notable  things  of  the  famous

Citic  Constantinople  :  both  in  ancient  and  late  time. 441

Blind  Calcedon.  Byzantium  by  Constantinus  rebuilded.
A  Discourse  of  Constantinople  written  by  a  Jew
Libraric.  The  seven  Hills  and  Buildings  thereon.
Sancta  Sophia,  &c.  18000.  Turkish,  100.  Christian
Churches.  Obeliske  &  Piazza.  1000.  Pillars.  The
Bazar,  Naumachia,  Saddles,  Seraglioes.  The  25.  Gates
of  Constantinople. Pera. Sepulchres.

.  The  Pilgrimage  of  John  Sanderson  from  Constantinople,
to  the  Holy  Land,  and  so  to  Tripolie  in  Syria,  begun
the  fourteenth  day  of  May,  1601.  ended  the  four-
teenth of  August,  with  divers  Certificates  and  Letters. 456

Jewish  Bookes,  Almes,  Holies.  Jordans  motion.  Places  of
Jewish,  Turkish,  and  Christian  devotions,  &c.  Salomons
studie.  Jeremies  dungeon.  Virgin  Maries  Tombe,  Sec.
Absolons  Tombe.  Holy  Ornaments.  Ouarrell  with
Friers.  Holies  of  Bethlehem,  Greek  Caloieros  and
Nuns.  S.  George.  Eshcol  Grapes.  Hebron  Sepulchres.
Jacobs  Well,  &c.  Jewes  Bookes,  bones,  charitie.
Pleasant  playne.  Cedars  of  Libanus.  Jewish  dreams
and  blasphemies.  Difficult  entrance  to  Jerusalem.
Friers  treachery.  Patr.  of  Jerusalems  Testimonie.
Honest  Jew.  Jewes  Testimoniall.  Pat.  of  Alexandria
his  Letter  and  life. M.  Biddies  Letter.

CHAP. XVII.

A  Report  of  the  Voyage  of  Master  Henrie  Timberley  from

Cairo  in  Egypt,  to  Jerusalem,  in  fiftie  dayes,  1601. . 487

M.  Timberley  and  M.  Burrall.  Turkes  Castles  and  Customes.
Timberley  imprisoned.  Barennesse  and  wickednesse
of  Jerusalem. Dromedaries, &c.

CHAP. XVIII.

Two Letters  of  Master  John Nuberie, relating  his  third
and  last  Voyage  into  the  Easterne  parts  of  the  World  :
with three other Letters from Master Eldred, &c
xvi

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

concerning  the  same  affaires ;  found  amongst  the
Papers  of  Master  William  Hareborne,  Her  Majesties
Ambassadour  to  the  Grand  Signior  at  Constantinople,
communicated  to  mee  by  Master  John  Sanderson. . 493

Letters  of  M.  Newbery  from  Bagdet  and  Balsara. Letters
of  Master  Eldred. Divers  English  at  Bagdet.

Letters  of  Master  John  Eldred  and  William  Shales. .  . 496

Eldreds Letter. Commands to the Cadilesquier and
Beglerbie.

In  Balsara  the  two  and  twentieth  of  January,  1583. .  . 499

Commands  of  the  G.S.  to  the  Cadilesquire  of  Egypt.  . 501

To  the  Beglerbie  of  Cairo. .  .  .  .  .  .501

Turkes  Commands  in  favour  of  the  English.

To  the  Cadilesquire  of  Egypt.  .  .  .  .  .502

CHAP. XIX.

The  Voyage  of  Francois  Pyrard  de  Laval,  to  the  East
Indies  (an  English  man  being  Pilot)  and  especially
his  observations  of  the  Maldives,  where  being  ship-
wracked  hee  lived  five  yeeres.  Translated  out  of
French,  and  abbreviated.  ..... 503

French  Voyage.  Pyrards  wracke,  famine,  language,  kinde
entertainment.

§  2.  Description  of  the  Maldives,  their  thirteene  Cantons,
twelve  thousand  lies,  Sea-changes,  strange  Currents,
Monsons,  Maine-Inlets,  blacke  boyling  Sea,  Heate,
Seasons,  civilitie,  and  haire  ceremoniousnesse. .  . 507

Maldives  described  12000.  Hands.  The  Seas,  Sharkes,
Currall.  Bird-store.  Water-want.  Atollons.  Channels.
Shoalds,  &c.  Strange  sixe-moneths-currents,  and
entrances.  Blacke  Sea.  Seasons.  Civilitie,  devotion,
bathing,  oyling,  haire-rites  of  the  Maldives.  All  and
none,  Barbers.  Breast-beard-haire  curiositie.
xvii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  pack

§  3.  Their  Cocos  and  other  fruits  and  food,  their  Trades
and  trading,  creatures  profitable  and  Hurtful!.  Of
Male  the  principall  Hand.  Their  Houses,  Candou,
Languages, Apparell. .  .  .  .  .  .520

Meats.  Maldives  fruits.  Coco-commodities.  China  Cor-
morant, &c.  Ants,  Sharkes,  aire,  water,  ill ;  Victualls
cheape  in  Male.  Use  of  Candou  for  fire  and  water.
Speech,  Apparell,  Gallantry.  Lawes  and  Rites  of
Womens  ornaments  and  attire.

§  4.  Rites  of  Meate  and  Drinke,  Bathing,  superstitious
observations  :  Diseases,  Education  of  children.  Fish-
ing, Fashions, Lusts. .  .  .  .  .  .532

Rites  of  feeding,  neatnesse,  drinking,  Betele,  cookery,
butchery.  Superstitions  in  bathes,  winds,  characters,
barkes,  diseases.  Diseases,  Nurserie,  Writing,  Divina-
tions, Amies.  Varietie  of  fish  and  fishing.  Excesse
in  fleshly  lusts. Niceties  of  women.

§  5.  Their  government  described.  The  Judges,  Officers,
Gentrie,  Communaltie.  The  King  his  Palace,  Guard,
Nobilitie,  Robes,  Attire,  Attendance,  Exercises,  Riches;
slaine  by  the  Bengalans. ...... 544

State  Government.  Naybes  and  Pandrire.  Their  learned
Catechising;  Officers,  Suits,  Slaves.  Excommunication.
Criminall  punishments.  Kings  prerogative.  Diversified
degrees.  Kings  Counsailers,  Guard,  Souldiers,  sale  of
Offices,  &c.  Palace.  Kings  Presents,  Presence,  Attire,
Ornaments,  Exercises.  Oueenes  pomp,  bathing,
retirednes,  Kings  revenues.  Sea-Nuts.  Merchandising,
Money.

§  6.  A  larger  discourse  of  their  religion,  manifold  cere-
monies, and  absurd  opinions.  The  Authors  departure
and  returne. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .561

Moschees,  Lights,  Opinions.  Prayers,  Washing,  Feasts,
Service,  New-moones,  Fasting,  &c.  Lent,  New-
moones,  Offerings  and  Feasts.  Authors  dreame.
Bengalans.  Mogols  Conquest  of  Bengala.  English
prisoners. Pyrards  returne.

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

Master  Edward  Terry, .  . . . .16

Selim  Shah,  the  Great  Mogoll.  His  Woman  Slave.

Sultan  Corooan, . .  . . . .32

Hondius  his  Map  of  Guinea,  .... 264

THE  NINTH  VOLUME

OF

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning  Peregrinations  and  Travels  by  Land
into  the  Easterne Countries ; Collections  of
Asia  ;  Further  Collections  of  Africa  and
the  River  of  Gambra ; the  Grand
Turk's Seraglio ; and  observa-
tions of  the  Maldives  ;  by
Englishmen  and  others
Moderne  and
Ancient

Chap.  VI.
A Relation of  a Voyage to the Easterne India.
Observed by Edward Terry, Master of  Arts
and  Student  of  Christ-Church in Oxford.

To the Reader.

Aster  Terry  had  found  a  fitter  roome,  if  he
had  not  comne  late,  and  as  in  India,  so
here  also  had  attended  that  Honorable
Embassadour,  Sir  T.  Roe.  But  his
tardy  comming  hath  made  us  entertayne
him,  not  with  lesse  welcome  in  substance,
but with lesse convenience in Seat-

[II. ix. 1463.]

Those  that  goe
downe  to  the
Sea  in  Ships  :
that  doe  busi-
nesse  in  great
waters  :
These  see  the
ivories  of  the
Lord,  and  his
wonders  in  the
deepe.Ps.\oj.
Qui  nescit
orare,  discat
navigare.

ceremonie ;  being  forced  to  place  him  as  he  comes,  in  a
lower  messe,  but  with  equall  cheere.  Yea  himselfe  makes
good  cheere  by  his  presence,  and  presents  his  whole  messe,
and  all  the  Table  and  Attendants  with  rich  Cates  of  Sea
and  Land  varieties  farre  fetched  and  deere  bought  by  him,
and  here  imparted  gratis ;  whether  wee  understand  it  of
the  Author,  or  (as  I  undertake)  of  the  Readers.  How
many  Eare-rings  and  Breast-brooches  give  (that  which
they  take,  the)  place  to  Saint  Georges  Garter  worne  neere
the  utmost  and  lowest  confines  of  our  Microcosme.  Take
this  as  a  good  fare-well  draught  of  English-Indian  liquor.
And  as  contraries  set  neere  their  contraries  make  the  best
lustre,  so  this  our  Scholer-Christian-Preacher-Traveller,
having  (as  Travellers  wont)  lighted  into  companie  of  a
Jew  before ;  a  halfe-turkised  Christian,  with  divers  Turkes
following  immediatly  after ;  shineth  as  a  Gemme  in  the
darke,  and  as  a  Precious-stone  amongst  a  heape  of  stones.

IX

ad.  PURCHAS HTS PILGRIMES

1615.

Thus  here  although  some  of  his  rayes  are  by  the  Attirer
taken  away  to  prevent  reiterations  of  things  delivered  in  the
former  relations  of  Sir  Tho.  Roe,  or  others ;  Neither  doth
our  Author  come  here  altogether  unfitly  to  guide  us  from
Persia,  (where  wee  have  made  long  stay)  by  the  way  of
India  and  Arabia,  and  lastly,  with  a  Portugall  Vice-roy  wee
meane  to  ship  our  selves  homewards,  taking  some
Religious  in  companie  for  some  better  knowledge  of
Africa,  and  the  Christianitie  there.

§.  1.

Things  remarkable  observed  in  his  Voyage  to  the
Indies. Sea-fight  with the Portugals.

Pologies  very  often  call  Truth  into  question.
Having  therefore  nothing  for  to  countenance  these
my rude Relations  but the certaintie of them ;

I  omit  all  unnecessarie  introductions  :  using  no  further
Preface  then  this,  that  the  Reader  would  undoubtedly
beleeve,  what  the  Relator  doth  most  faithfully  deliver.

So  to  make  an  entrie  upon  the  first  beginning  of  our
Voyage,  the  third  of  Februarie,  161 5.  our  Fleete  (con-
sisting of  sixe  goodly  ships,  the  Charles,  Unicorne,  James,
Globe,  Swan,  and  Rose,  all  under  the  command  of
Captaine  Benjamin  Joseph)  fell  downe  from  Gravesend
into  Tilburie  Hope.

The  ninth  of  March  (after  a  long  and  tyring  expectation)
it  pleased  God  to  send  us  what  we  desired,  a  North-east
wind  :  which  day  wee  left  that  weary  Road,  and  set  sayle
for  East  India.  The  wind  was  favourable  to  us  till  the
sixteenth  day  at  night,  at  which  time  a  most  fearefull
storme  overtooke  us,  we  being  then  in  the  Bay  of
Portugall.  In  this  storme  wee  lost  sight  both  of  the
Globe,  and  Rose.  The  Globe  came  againe  into  our
Companie,  the  two  and  twentieth  following ;  but  the  Rose
was  no  more  heard  of,  till  her  arrive  at  Bantam,  about  sixe
Moneths  after.  This  storme  continued  violent  till  the
one  and  twentieth.

EDWARD TERRY

A.I).

iGjC.

Pico  de

Tcneriffa.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  we  had  sight  of  the  Grand
Canaries,  and  that  Mountaine  which  threatens  the  Skie,
in  the  Hand  of  TenerifFa,  commonly  called,  The  Peake,
which  by  reason  of  its  immense  height,  in  a  cleere  day
may  be  seene  more  then  fortie  leagues  at  Sea,  (as  the
Mariners  report.)  These  Hands  lie  in  eight  and  twentie
degrees  of  North  latitude.

The  one  and  thirtieth,  being  Easter  day,  we  passed
under  the  Tropick  of  Cancer ;  and  the  seventh  of  Aprill,
the  Sunne  was  our  Zenith.  From  that  day  untill  the
fourteene,  wee  were  becalmed  induring  extreme  heate.
The  sixteenth,  we  met  with  winds  which  the  Mariners
call,  The  Turnadoes,  so  variable  and  uncertaine,  that  some-  Tumadoes.
time  within  the  space  of  one  houre,  all  the  two  and  thirtie
severall  winds  will  blow.  These  winds  were  accompanied
with  much  thunder  and  lightning,  and  with  extreme  rayne,
so  noysome  that  it  makes  mens  clothes  presently  to  stinke
upon  their  backes.  The  water  likewise  of  these  slimy
unwholsome  showres,  wheresoever  it  stands,  will  in  short
time  bring  forth  many  offensive  creatures.  These  Turna-
does met  with  us  when  we  were  about  twelve  degrees  of
North  latitude,  and  kept  us  companie  ere  they  quitted  [II.ix.1464.]
us,  till  wee  were  two  degrees  South-ward  of  the
Equinoctiall,  under  which  wee  passed  the  eight  and
twentieth  of  Aprill.  The  nineteenth  of  May  being  Whit-
sunday, wee  passed  the  Tropicke  of  Capricorne.  So  that
we  were  seven  weekes  compleat  under  the  Torrid  Zone.

Betweene  the  Tropickes  we  saw  almost  every  day
different  kindes  of  fishes  in  greater  abundance  then  else-
where. As  the  great  Leviethan,  whom  God  hath  made
to  take  his  pastime  in  the  Seas.  Dolphins,  Boneetooes,
Albicores,  Flying  fishes,  and  many  others.  Some  Whales  Whales.
we  saw  of  an  exceeding  greatnesse,  who  in  calme  weather
often  arise  and  shew  themselves  above  the  water,  where
they  appeare  like  to  great  Rockes,  in  their  rising  spowting
up  into  the  Ayre  with  noyse  a  great  quantitie  of  water,
which  fals  downe  againe  about  them  like  a  showre.  The
Dolphin  is  a  fish  called  for  his  swiftnesse  the  arrow  of  the  Dolphhes.

3

A.D.
I6l6.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Boneetooes
and  Albicores,

Sea,  differing  from  many  other  in  that  hee  hath  teeth  upon
the  top  of  his  tongue,  he  is  pleasing  to  the  Eye,  smell,
and  tast,  of  a  changeable  colour,  fin'd  like  a  Roach,  covered
with  very  small  scales,  having  .a  fresh  delightsome  sent
above  other  fishes,  and  in  taste  as  good  as  any.  These
Dolphines  are  wont  often  to  follow  our  ships,  not  so  much
(I  thinke)  for  the  love  they  beare  unto  man  as  some  write)
as  to  feed  themselves  with  what  they  find  cast  over-board.
Whence  it  comes  to  passe,  that  many  times  they  feed  us,
for  when  they  swimme  close  to  our  ships,  we  strike  them
with  a  broad  Instrument,  full  of  Barbes,  called  an  Harping
Iron  fastened  to  a  Rope  by  which  we  hale  them  in.  This
beautifull  Dolphin  may  bee  a  fit  Embleme  of  a  Race  of
men,  who  under  sweet  countenances  carrie  sharpe  tongues.
Boneetooes  and  Albicores  are  in  colour,  shape,  and  taste
much  like  to  Mackerils,  but  grow  to  be  very  large.  The
Flying  fishes.  Flying  fishes  of  all  other  live  the  most  miserable  lives,
for  beeing  in  the  water,  the  Dolphines,  Boneetooes,  and
Albicores  persecute  them,  and  when  they  would  escape
by  their  flight,  are  oftentimes  taken  by  ravenous  fowles,
somewhat  like  our  Kites  which  hover  over  the  water.
These  flying  fishes  are  like  men,  professing  two  trades,  and
thrive  of  neither.

But  to  proceed  in  our  passage,  the  twelfth  of  June  early
in  the  morning,  wee  espyed  our  long  wished  for  Harbour,
the  Bay  of  Soldania,  about  twelve  leagues  short  of  the
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  wherein  we  came  happily  to  an
Anchor  that  fore-noone.  Heere  wee  found  one  of  the
Companies  ships,  called  the  Lion,  come  from  Surat,  and
bound  for  England,  who  having  a  faire  gale  put  to  Sea
the  fourteenth  day  at  night.

We  made  our  abode  in  this  Harbour  till  the  eight  and
twentieth  following,  on  which  day  we  being  well  watered
and  refreshed,  departed,  when  the  Swan  our  fift  ship
tooke  her  way  for  Bantam.  The  nine  and  twentieth,  we
doubled  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  whose  latitude  is  in
thirtie  five  degrees  South.  Off  this  Cape  there  setteth
continually  a  most  violent  Current  Westward,  whence  it

4

Soldania.

EDWARD TERRY  ajx

1616.

comes  to  passe,  that  when  a  strong  contrarie  wind  meets

it,  their  impetuous  opposition  makes  the  Sea  so  to  rage,

that some shippes have beene swallowed, but many

endangered  in  those  Mountaynes  of  water. Few  ships

passe  that  way  without  a  storme. The  two  and  twentieth

of  July,  we  discovered  the  great  Hand  of  Madagascar,

commonly  called  Saint  Laurence,  we  being  then  betwixt

it  and  the  Mayne  :  we  touched  not  at  it,  but  proceeding  in

our  course,  the  fift  of  August  following,  came  neere  to

the  little  Hands  of  Mohilia,  Gazidia,  Saint  John  de  Castro,

called  in  generall  the  Hands  of  Comora,  lying  about  twelve  liaofComora.

degrees  Southward  of  the  Equator.

The  sixt  early  in  the  morning,  our  men  looking  out
for  Land,  espyed  a  Sayle  about  three  or  foure  leagues  off,
which  stood  in  our  course  directly  before  us.  About
noone,  the  Globe  our  least  ship  (by  reason  of  her  nimble-
nesse,  sayling  better  then  her  fellowes)  came  up  with  her
on  the  broad  side  to  wind-ward,  and  according  to  the
custome  of  the  Sea  hailed  her,  asking  whence  she  was ;
She*  answered  indirectly,  of  the  Sea,  calling  our  men
Rogues,  Theeves,  Heretickes,  Devils,  and  the  conclusion
of  her  rude  complement  was  in  loud  Canon  Language,
discharging  seven  great  Peeces  of  Artillerie  at  our  Globe,
whereof  sixe  pierced  her  through  the  Hull,  mayming  some
of  her  men,  but  killing  none.  Our  Globe  replyed  in  the
same  voyce,  and  after  that  fell  off.

About three of the clocke in the after-noone, the

*  Fight  with  a  Portugall  Carracke,  mentioned  before  in  Sir  T.  Roe,
and  M.  Child  :  but  here  more  fully  delivered,  and  therefore  againe
expressed,  that  it  might  appeare  who  were  true  causers  of  the  quarrell,
as  also  that  it  was  a  private  quarrel  and  not  of  State,  or  Princes,  but
of  Meneles  and  Joseph  the  Captaines,  with  the  persons  under  their
commands  :  one  offering,  the  other  vindicating  wrong.  So  may  the
Reader  observe  of  former  fights  with  Beast,  Downton,  &c.  not  the
Spanish  King  warring  with  his  Majestie  of  England,  but  the  Portugall
Merchants  and  Commanders  in  the  Indies,  envying  to  others  that
Trade,  which  might  lessen  their  gaines  there  :  as  in  Magellans  Voyage
they  did  to  the  Spaniards,  which  also  you  have  seene  in  the  Dutch,
and  may  observe  of  men  of  the  same  Trade  in  every  street  of  London.
The old Verse of  Hesiod, Kai Kepafievs Kepafxit, &c shewes this

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PTLGRIMES

1616.

Charles  our  Admirall  came  up  with  her  so  neere,  that  we
were  within  Pistoll  shot.  Our  Commander  Captaine
Joseph  proceeded  religiously,  offering  Treatie  before  hee
thought  of  revenge.  So  we  saluted  her  with  our
Trumpets,  shee  us  with  her  wind  Instruments,  then  we
shewed  our  men  on  both  sides  aloft ;  this  done,  Captaine
Joseph  called  to  them  that  their  principall  Commander
might  come  aboard,  to  give  an  account  for  the  injurie
they  had  lately  before  offered  us ;  their  answere  was,  they
[II. ix.  1465.]  had  never  a  Boat,  our  Commander  replyed,  he  would  send
them  one,  and  immediately  caused  his  Barge  to  be  manned,
and  sent  off  to  them,  which  brought  backe  one  of  their
Officers,  and  two  other  meane  fellowes  with  this  bold
message  from  their  Captaine ;  that  he  had  promised  not
to  leave  his  ship,  and  therefore  forced  he  might,  but  never
would  be  commanded  out  of  her.

Captaine  Joseph  received  the  Message,  and  used  them
which  brought  it  civilly,  commanding  that  they  should  be
shewed,  how  we  were  prepared  for  to  vindicate  our  selves,
which  made  the  poore  Portugals  to  shake  more  then  an
Ague,  and  upon  it  desired  our  Commander  to  write  a  few
words  to  theirs,  which  with  their  perswasion  happily  might
make  him  come.  Captaine  Joseph  willing  to  preserve  his
honour,  and  to  prevent  bloud,  consented,  and  forth-with
caused  a  few  words  to  this  effect  to  be  wrote  unto  him.
That,  Whereas  he  the  Commander  of  the  Carrack,  had
offered  violence  to  our  ship,  they  sailed  peaceably  by  him,

quarrell  as  old  as  men,  at  least  as  the  old  man  of  Covetousnesse,  and
Ambition,  and  Envie  ;  the  cause  also  why  the  first-borne  of  Nature
slue  the  first  Brother  which  Nature  had  seene.  If  Portugals  hereby
led,  have  offered  wrong  to  the  English,  and  suffered  right  from  them,
it  is  but  as  in  cases  twixt  English  Gentlemen  or  Merchants  at  home,
saving  that  this  bodie  is  more  Giantly,  and  of  greater  consequence,
as  the  concurrence  of  more  private  purses  and  persons,  and  yet  no
State-warre  :  with  which  except  in  our  Prayer,  we  have  nothing  to
doe.  In  like  case  of  Trade,  I  suppose  the  Portugals  would  now
quarrell  with  the  Spaniards  in  their  East,  and  these  with  them  in
their  West.  I  am  sure  that  in  the  Indies,  Dutch  have  taken  Dutch,
and  English  other  English  (not  of  that  East-Indian  Company)  not-
withstanding subjection to  one  and  the  same  Crowne  or  State.

6

EDWARD TERRY  a.u.

1616.

he  willed  him  to  come  speedily,  and  give  reason  for  that

wrong ; or  else  at  his  perill,  &c. So  he  discharged  those

Portugals,  sending  one  of  our  Masters  Mates  backe  with

them,  with  those  Few  words  and  this  Message ; that  if  hee

refused  to  come  he  would  sinke  by  his  side,  but  that  hee

would  force  him  before  hee  left  him. (Morientium  verba

sunt  Prophetica,  his  words  came  to  passe,  for  he  himselfe

before  he  stird,  fell  by  a  great  shot  that  came  not  long

after from the Carracke side.) The Captaine of the

Carracke  (notwithstanding  all  this)  was  still  peremptorie

in  his  first  answere. So  our  men returning, Captaine

Joseph  himselfe  made  the  three  first  shot,  which  surely,

did  them  great  mischiefe,  as  we  imagined  by  the  loud

outcry  we  heard  from  them,  after  they  were  discharged.

This  done,  the  Bullets  began  to  flye  on  both  sides. Our

Captaine  cheering  his  company,  ascended  the  halfe  Decke,  Res°(ute

where  hee  had  not  beene  the  eight  part  of  an  houre,  and itnts  °* ,  ot

a  great  shot  from  the  Carrackes  Quarter,  deprived  him  of  Captaine

life  in  the  twinkling  of  an  Eye,  it  hit  him  on  the  brest,  Joseph  slaine.

beating  out  of  his  bodie  his  heart,  and  other  of  his  vitals,

which lay round about him scattered in his diffused

bloud. After  Captaine  Joseph  was  slaine,  the  Master  of

our  ship  continued  the  fight  about  halfe  an  houre,  then

knowing  that  there  was  another  to  be  admitted  into  that

prime  place  of  command,  the  night  approching,  for  that

time  gave  over ; putting  out  a  Flagge  of  Councell  to

call  the  Captaine  of  the  Vice-Admirall  (Captaine  Henry

Pepwell) who was to succeed, and the other Masters

aboard, for to consult about the prosecution of this

Encounter. The  night  beeing  come,  wee  now  proceeded

no farther. The Carracke stood still on her course,

putting  forth  a  light  at  her  Poope  for  us  to  follow  her,

and  about  midnight  came  to  an  Anchor  under  the  Hand

of  Mohilia,  which  when  wee  perceived  let  fall  our  Anchors

too.

The  seventh,  early  before  it  began  to  dawne,  we
prepared  for  a  new  assault,  first  commending  our  selves
to  God  by  Prayer.

7

AD.

l6l6.

Captaine  Pep-
well  tvounded,
with  the
Master  and
others.

Captaine  Pep-
well  dyeth  1 4.
moneths  after.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  morning  come,  we  found  the  Carracke  so  close  to
the  shoare,  and  the  neerest  of  our  ships  at  the  least  a
league  off,  that  we  held  our  hands  for  that  day,  expecting
when  shee  would  weigh  her  Anchors  and  stand  off  to  Sea
(a  fitter  place  to  deale  with  her.)  In  the  after-noone  we
chested  our  late  slaine  Commander,  and  without  any
ceremonie  of  shot,  usuall  upon  such  occasions  (because
our  Enemies  should  take  no  notice)  cast  him  over-boord
against  the  Hand  of  Mohilia.

A  little  before  night  the  Carracke  departed  to  Sea,  wee
all  loosed  our  Anchors,  opened  our  Sayles,  and  followed.
The  day  now  left  us,  and  our  proud  Enemie  (unwilling
as  it  should  seeme  to  escape)  put  forth  a  light  as  before,
for  us  to  follow  him  (as  afterward  we  did  to  purpose)  the
night  well  nigh  spent,  we  commended  againe  our  selves
and  cause  to  God.  This  done,  the  day  appeared  in  a  red
Mantle,  which  proved  bloudie  unto  many  that  beheld  it.
And  now  you  may  conceive  that  ourfoure  ships  are  resolved
to  take  their  turnes  one  after  the  other,  that  they  may
force  this  proud  Portugall,  either  to  bend  or  breake.  Our
Charles  playes  her  part  first,  and  ere  shee  had  beene  at
defiance  with  her  Adversary  halfe  an  houre,  there  came
another  shot  from  the  Enemie,  which  hitting  against  one
of  our  Iron  Peeces,  that  lay  on  the  halfe  Decke,
brake  into  shivers,  dangerously  wounding  our  new
Commander,  the  Master  of  our  ship,  and  three  other
of  the  Mariners  which  stood  by.  Captaine  Pepwels
left  eye  was  beaten  all  to  pieces ;  two  other  wounds  he
received  in  his  head  ;  a  third  in  his  legge,  a  ragged  piece
of  this  broken  shot  sticking  fast  in  the  bone  thereof,  which
seemed  by  his  complayning  to  afflict  him  more  then  all  the
rest.  The  Master  had  a  great  piece  of  the  brawne  of  his
arme  strooke  off,  which  made  him  likewise  unserviceable
tor  a  time.  Thus  was  our  new  Commander  welcommed  to
his  authoritie,  wee  all  thought  his  wounds  mortall,  but
hee  lived  till  about  fourteene  moneths  after,  when  hee  dyed
peaceably  on  his  bed,  in  his  returne  for  England.

The  Captaine  and  Master  both  thus  disabled,  deputed

8

EDWARD TERRY

their  authoritie  to  the  chiefe  Masters  Mate,  who  behaved
himselfe  resolutely,  and  wisely.  So  we  continued,  alternis
vicibus,  shooting  at  our  Adversary  as  at  a  Butte  ;  and  by
three  of  the  cloke  in  the  after-noone  had  beat  downe  her
mayn-mast,  her  Mizen-mast,  her  foretop-mast ;  and  more-
over, had  made  such  wounds  in  her  thick  sides,  that  her
case  was  so  desperate,  shee  must  either  yeeld  or  perish.
Her  Captaine  (called  Don  Emanuel  Meneses,  a  brave
resolute  man)  thus  distressed,  stood  in  for  the  shoare,
being  not  farre  from  the  Hand  of  Gazidia.  We  pursued
as  farre  as  we  durst  without  hazard  of  shipwracke,  then  we
sent  of  our  Barge  with  a  Flagge  of  Truce  to  speake  with
him,  hee  waved  us  with  another,  so  Master  Connocke  (our
chiefe  Merchant)  employed  in  that  businesse,  boldly  entred
his  ship,  and  delivered  these  words  to  him,  and  his  com-
pany ;  that  he  had  brought  them  life  and  peace  if  they
would  accept  it,  with  all  telling  Don  Emanuel,  hee  had
deserved  so  well  by  his  undaunted  valour,  that  if  he  would
put  himselfe  into  our  hands,  he  should  be  entertayned
with  as  much  honour  and  respect  as  ever  any  Captive  was.
But  (Duris  ut  Ilex  tonsa  bipennibus — ducit  opes  ani-
mumque  ferro)  Hee  as  an  Oke  gathered  strength  from  his
wounds,  contemning  the  miserie  hee  could  not  prevent,
answering  Master  Connocke  thus,  that  no  infelicitie  should
make  him  alter  his  first  resolution ;  how  that  hee  would
stand  off  to  Sea,  if  possibly  he  could,  and  encounter  with
us  againe,  and  then  if  fire  and  Sword  forced  him,  he  might
unhappily  be  taken,  but  he  would  never  yeeld,  and  if  we
tooke  him  alive,  he  hoped  that  he  should  find  the  respect
of  a  Gentleman,  and  till  then  we  had  our  Answere.

So  our  Messenger  was  discharged,  and  shortly  after  this
distressed  ship  wanting  her  wings,  was  forced  by  the  wind
and  waves  upon  the  adjacent  Hand  Gazidia,  where  she
stuck  fast  between  two  Rocks :  those  that  were  left  alive
in  her  by  their  Boats  gat  upon  the  shoare,  which  when
they  had  all  recovered,  willing  (it  should  seeme)  to  con-
sume what  they  could  not  keepe,  they  set  her  on  fire  to
make  her  a  coale,  rather  then  we  should  make  her  a  Prize.

A.n.

[II.ix.1466.]

Virtu:  .  I
laudanda.

Dm  Emanuel
Memat

valorous
resolution.

Carrack

burnt.
She  u

reported  of
:~.-:dible
zcealth,  both  in

-.:•::•;  .:::

commodities.

a.o.  PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

1616.

The  poore  Portugals  after  they  had  left  their  ship,  were

most inhumanely used by the  barbarous Ilanders, who

spoyled  them  of  all  they  brought  ashoare  for  their  succour  ;

some  of  them  beeing  slaine  in  the  opposition,  and  doubt-

lesse,  had  made  havocke  of  them  all,  had  they  not  beene

relieved  by  two  small  Arabian  ships  there  in  Trade,  which

in  hope  (I  suppose)  of  some  great  reward,  tooke  them

in,  and  conveyed  them  safely  to  their  owne  Citie  Goa.

In  this  combate  we  lost  out  of  our  foure  ships  but  five

men  (too  many  by  that  number)  three  out  of  our  Admirall,

and  two  out  of  the  James ; besides  we  had  some  twentie

in  our  whole  fleet  hurt,  which  afterward  recovered. But

of  seven  hundred  which  sayled  in  the  Carracke,  there  came

not  above  two  hundred  and  fiftie  to  Goa,  as  afterward  we

were  credibly  informed. In  this  fearefull  opposition,  our

Charles  made  at  her  Adversarie  three  hundred  seventie

and  five  great  shot  (as  our  Gunners  reported)  to  these  wee

had  one  hundred  Musquetiers,  that  played  their  parts  all

the  while. Neither  was  our  enemie  idle,  for  our  ship

received  at  the  least  one  hundred  great  shot  from  him,

and  many of them  dangerous ones through the Hull.

Our  Fore-mast  was  pierced  through  the  middest ; our

mayne-mast  hurt,  our  mayne-stay,  and  many  of  our  mayne

Shrouds  cut  in  sunder. But  I  have  dwelt  too  long  upon

a  sad  Discourse,  I  make  haste  to  refresh  my  selfe  upon

the  pleasant  Hand.

The  Hands After  we  saw  the  Carracke  fired  which  was  about  mid-

fertilitie. night,  wee  stood  off  and  on  till  morning,  to  see  if  we  might

find  any  thing  in  her  ashes  ;  of  which  when  wee  despayred,

wee  sought  about  for  succour  to  comfort  our  wounded  and

sicke  men  on the  shoare. The  Land  was  very high,

against  which  the  Sea  is  alwayes  deepe,  so  that  it  was  the

tenth  day  following  ere  wee  could  be  possessed  of  a  good

Harbour ; which enjoyed, we found the Hand very

pleasant,  full  of  goodly  Trees,  covered  all  over  with  a

greene Vesture and exceeding fruitfull, abounding in

Beeves, Kids, Poultry, Sugar-canes, Rice, Plantens,

Oranges,  Coquer-nuts,  and  many  other  wholesome  things ;

10

EDWARD  TERRY  a.d.

1616.

of  all  which  wee  had  sufficient  to  releeve  our  whole
company,  for  a  small  quantitie  of  white  Paper,  and  few  li  hlle  /,t7/l'r
glasse  Beades,  and  Penie  Knives.  For  instance  wee
bought  as  many  good  Oranges  as  would  fill  an  Hat,  for
halfe  a  quarter  of  a  sheet  of  white  Paper,  and  so  in  propor-
tion all  other  provision.  Much  of  their  Fruites  the
Ilanders  brought  unto  us  in  their  little  Canoes  (which
are  long  narrow  Boates  cut  like  Troughes  out  of  firme
Trees)  but  their  cattell  we  bought  on  shoare ;  where  I
observed  the  people  to  bee  streight,  well  limmed,  able
men,  their  colour  very  tawnie,  most  of  the  men  but  all
the  women  (I  saw)  unclothed  having  nothing  about  them
but  to  hide  their  shame.  Such  as  were  covered  had  long
Garments  like  to  the  Arabians,  whose  Language  they
speake,  and  of  whose  Religion  they  are,  Mahometans,
very  strict  as  it  should  seeme,  for  they  would  not  endure
us  to  come  nigh  their  Churches.  They  have  good
convenient  houses  for  their  living,  and  faire  Sepulchres
for  their  dead.  They  seeme  to  live  strictly  under  the
obedience  of  a  King,  whose  place  of  residence  was  some
few  miles  up  in  the  Countrey.  His  leave  by  Messengers
they  first  craved,  before  wee  had  libertie  to  buy  any
provision.  Their  King  advertized  of  our  arrivall,  bade
our  Commander  welcome  with  a  Present  of  Beeves,  and
Goats,  and  choice  Fruits  of  his  Countrey,  and  was  recom-
pensed, and  well  contented  againe  with  Paper,  and  some
other  English  Toyes.  Wee  saw  some  Spanish  money
amongst  them,  of  which  they  made  so  little  reckoning,  that
some  of  our  men  had  Rials  of  Eight  in  exchange  for  a
little  Paper  or  a  few  Beades.  What  they  did  with  our
Paper,  we  could  not  ghesse.

The  Coquer-nuts  (of  which  this  Hand  hath  abundance)
of  all  the  Trees  in  the  Forrest  (in  my  opinion)  may  have
preeminence,  for  meerely  with  it,  without  the  least  helpe
from  any  other,  a  man  may  build,  and  furnish  a  ship  to
Sea ;  for  the  heart  of  this  Tree  will  make  Plankes,
Timbers,  and  Masts,  a  Gumme  that  orowes  thereon,  will
serve  to  calke  our  ship. The  Rind  or  the  same  Tree  will

A.D.
I6l6.

[II. ix. 1467.]

Socotora.

Precise

Mahumctan
Apophthegmc.

Funeral!  for
Capt.  Joseph.

Water  of  the
Sea  in  this
place  akvay
white,  as  in
former
voyages  is
scene.

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

make  Cordage  and  Sailes,  and  the  large  Nut  thereof  beeing
kill  of  kernell,  and  pleasant  liquor,  will  for  a  need  serve
for  those  that  sayle  in  this  shippe  for  meate  and  drinke,
and  the  store  of  these  Nuts  for  Merchandize.

Now,  well  stored  with  these  Nuts,  and  other  good
provision,  after  sixe  dayes  abode  there,  the  breaches  our
ship  received  in  fight  being  repayred,  and  our  men  well
refreshed,  wee  put  againe  to  Sea  toward  East  India  the
sixteenth,  and  a  prosperous  winde  following  us,  passed
happily  under  the  Line  without  the  least  heate  to  offend
us,  the  foure  and  twentieth  day  ensuing.  Our  course  was
for  the  Hand  of  Succotora,  neere  to  the  mouth  of  the  Red
Sea,  from  whence  comes  our  Aloes  Succotrina,  but  an
adverse  gale  from  the  Arabian  shoare  kept  us  off,  that  wee
could  by  no  meanes  recover  it.  We  passed  by  it  the  first
of  September.  The  immediate  yeere  before  our  English
fleet  touching  at  this  Hand,  learned  this  Apothegme  from
the  petie  King  thereof,  who  comming  to  the  water  side,
and  hearing  some  of  our  winde  Instruments,  asked  if  they
played  Davids  Psalmes  (of  which,  being  a  Mahometan,
he  had  heard.)  Hee  was  answered  by  one  that  stood  by,
they  did  ;  He  replyed  thus,  That  it  was  an  ill  invention
of  him  that  first  mingled  Musicke  with  Religion  ;  for
before  (said  he)  God  was  worshipped  in  heart,  but  by  this
in  sound.  I  insert  not  this  relation  to  condemne  musick
in  Churches,  Let  him  that  bids  us  prayse  the  Lord  with
stringed  Instruments  and  Organs,  plead  the  Cause.

But  to  returne  to  my  discourse.  Missing  our  Port  at
Succotora,  wee  proceeded  on  our  voyage,  and  the  fourth
of  September  kept  a  solemne  funerall,  in  memorie  of  our
slaine  Commander,  when  after  a  Sermon,  the  small  shot
and  great  Ordnance,  made  a  loud  peale  to  his  remembrance.
The  sixt  of  September  at  night,  to  our  admiration  and
fcare,  the  water  of  the  Sea  seemed  as  white  as  milke,
others  of  our  Nation,  since  passing  on  that  course,  have
observed  the  like,  but  I  am  yet  to  learne  what  should  be
the  true  cause  thereof,  it  being  farre  from  any  shoare,
and so deepe, that wee could fetch no ground. The

12  V

EDWARD TERRY  ad.

1616.

twentie  one,  wee  discovered  the  mayne  Land  of  East
India :  and  the  twentie  two,  had  sight  of  Diu  and  Damon,
Cities  lying  in  the  skirts  thereof,  well  fortified  and
inhabited  by  Portugals.  The  twentie  five,  we  came
happily  to  an  Anchor  in  Swally  Road,  within  the  Bay  of
Cambaya,  the  harbour  for  our  fleet  while  they  make  their
stay  in  the  Easterne  India.  And  thus  in  a  tedious  Passage
have  I  brought  my  Reader  as  far  as  East  India,  let  him
now  bee  pleased  for  a  while  to  repose  himselfe  upon  the
Shoare,  there  to  take  a  view  of  the  populous  Court,  and
the  no  lesse  fruitful,  then  spacious  Territories  of  the  great
Mogol.

§.  11.

Description  of  the  Mogols  Empire,  and  the  most  Although yee
remarkable  things  of  Nature  and  Art  therein. have  this

0  description

He  large  Empire  of  the  great  Mogol  is  bounded  on  before,  pag.

the  East  with  the  Kingdome  of  Maug  :  West  with  578-  *j*  the

Persia,  and  the  mayne  Ocean Southerly: North  f0r  tle  diffir-

with  the  Mountaynes  of  Caucasus,  and  Tartaria, South  ing  method,

with  Decan  and  the  Gulfe  of  Bengala. Decan  lying  in  and  deering  of

the  skirts  of  Asia,  is  divided  between  three  Mahometan  s0"ie  thw&

Kings,  and  some  other  Indian  Rhajaes. This  spacious  dQU^tfun  j

Monarchic,  called  by  the  Inhabitants  Indostan,  dividing  it  nave  ner\

selfe  into  thirtie  and  seven  severall  and  large  Provinces,  added  this  also,

which  anciently  were  particular  Kingdomes  ; whose  names  abbreviating

with  their  principall  Cities,  and  Rivers, their  Situation,  tttnsomsuck

*  V  .  things  as  are

and  Borders,  their  extent  in  length  and  breadth, I  first  t^e  same  zv-lth

set  downe  beginning  at  the  North-west.  the  former,  to

First,  Candahor,  the  chiefe  Citie  so  called,  it  lyes  from  wh'uh  u  ma3

the  heart  of  all his  Territorie  North-west; it confines  bV" f"^"d  of

with  the  King  of  Persia,  and  was  a  Province  belonging  G/0SJ(.  as  ^r

to him. 2.  Cabul, the chiefe Citie so called, the  T.  Roes  Map

extreamest North-west part of this Emperours  to  both. The

former  seemed
imperfectly  written  in  the  number  of  the  corses  or  miles  which  here  seeme  more  exactly.  The
differing  names  may  also  helpe  to  further  knowledge  ;  of  which  I  had  sought  better  instruction
before  the  pr esse,  if  I  might,  as  I  there  signifie.

13

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PTLGRIMES

1616.

Dominions :  it  confineth  with  Tartaria ;  the  River
Nilab  hath  its  beginning  in  it,  whose  Current  is  Southerly,
till  it  discharge  it  selfe  in  Indus.  3.  Multan,  the  chiefe
Citie  so  called,  it  lyes  South  from  Cabul,  and  Candahor,
and  to  the  West  joynes  with  Persia.  4.  Hajacan,  the  King-
dome  of  the  Baloches  (a  stout  warlike  people)  it  hath  no
renowned  Citie.  The  famous  River  Indus  (called  by  the
Inhabitants  Skind)  borders  it  on  the  East ;  and  Lar  (a
Province  belonging  to  Sha-Abas,  the  present  King  of
Persia)  meetes  it  on  the  West.  5.  Buckor,  the  chiefe
Citie  called  Buckorsuccor.  The  River  Indus  makes  a
way  through  it,  greatly  enriching  it.  6.  Tatta,  the  chiefe
Citie  so  called.  The  River  Indus  makes  many  Hands  in
it,  exceeding  fruitfull  and  pleasant.  The  chiefe  Arme
meetes  with  the  Sea  at  Synde,  a  place  very  famous  for
curious  handi-crafts.  7.  Soret,  the  chiefe  Citie  is  called
Janagar.  It  is  a  little  Province  but  rich,  lyes  West  from
Guzarat,  and  hath  the  Ocean  to  the  South.  8.  Jeselmeere,
the  chiefe  Citie  so  called,  it  joyneth  with  Soret,  Buckor,
and  Tatta,  lying  to  the  West  of  it.  9.  Attack,  the  chiefe
Citie  so  called  :  it  lyeth  on  the  East  side  of  Indus,  which
parts  it  from  Hajacan.  10.  Penjab,  which  signifieth  five
Waters,  for  that  it  is  seated  among  five  Rivers,  all
tributaries  to  Indus,  which  somewhat  South  of  Lahor
make  but  one  Current :  it  is  a  great  Kingdome,  and  most
fruitfull,  &c.  Lahor  the  chiefe  Citie  is  well  built,  very
large,  populous,  and  rich ;  the  chiefe  Citie  of  Trade  in  all
India.  11.  Chishmeere,  the  chiefe  Citie  is  called  Siran-
akar,  the  River  Phat  passeth  through  it,  and  so  creeping
about  many  Hands  slides  to  Indus.  12.  Banchish,  the
chiefe  Citie  is  called  Bishur :  it  lyeth  East,  Southerly  from
Chishmeere,  from  which  it  is  divided  by  the  River  Indus.

13.  Jengapor,  the  chiefe  Citie  so  called,  it  lyeth  upon  the
River  Kaul,  one  of  the  five  Rivers  that  water  Penjab.

14.  Jenba, the  chiefe Citie so called, it lyeth East of
[II.ix.1468.]  Penjab. 15.  Delli, the chiefe Citie so called, it lyeth

twixt  Jenba  and  Agra,  the  River  Jemni  (which  runneth
through Agra, and falleth into Ganges) begins in it.

14

EDWARD TERRY  *.»•

1616.

Delli  is  an  ancient  great  Citie,  the  seate  of  the  Mogols
Ancestors,  where  most  of  them  lye  interred. 16. Bando,
the  chiefe  Citie  so  called,  it  confineth  Agra  on  the  West.
17. Malway,  a  very  fruitfull  Province,  Rantipore  is  the
chiefe  Citie. 18.  Chitor,  an  ancient  and  great  Kingdome,
the  chiefe  Citie  so  called. 19.  Guzarat,  a  goodly  King-
dome,  and  exceeding  rich,  inclosing  the  Bay  of  Cambaya.
The  River  Tapte  watereth  Surat,  it  trades  to  the  Red  Sea,  Surat.
to  Achin,  and  to  divers  other  places. 20.  Chandis,  the
chiefe  Citie  called  Brampoch,  which  is  large  and  populous.
Adjoyning to this Province, is a petie Prince, called
Partapsha,  tributarie  to  the  Mogol,  and  this  is  the  Souther-
most  part  of  all  his  Territories. 21.  Berar,  the  chiefe
Citie  is  called  Shapore,  the  Southermost  part  whereof  doth
likewise bound this Empire. 22.  Narvar, the chiefe
Citie  called  Gehud,  it  is  watered  by  a  faire  River,  which
emptieth it selfe in Ganges. 23.  Gwaliar, the chiefe
Citie  so  called,  where  the  King  hath  a  great  treasury  of
Bullion. In this Citie likewise there is an exceeding
strong Castle wherein the Kings prisoners are kept.
24.  Agra,  a  principall  and  great  Province,  the  chiefe  Citie
so  called. From  Agra  to  Lahor  (the  two  choise  Cities  of
this  Empire)  is  about  foure  hundred  English  miles,  the
Countrey  in  all  that  distance  even  without  a  Hill,  and
the  high  way  planted  on  both  sides  with  Trees,  like  to  a
delicate  walke. 25.  Sanbal,  the  chiefe  Citie  so  called,  the
River  Jemni  parts  it  from  Narvar,  and  after  at  the  Citie
Helabass falls into Ganges, called by the Inhabitants
Ganga. 26.  Bakar,  the  chiefe  Citie  called  Bikaneer,  it
lyeth  on  the  West  side  of  Ganges. 27.  Nagracutt,  the
chiefe  Citie  so  called,  in  which  there  is  a  Chappel  most
richly  set  forth,  both  seeled  and  paved  with  plate  of  pure
gold. In  this  place  they  keepe  an  Idoll,  which  they  call  I  doll  Matta.
Matta,  visited  yeerly  by  many  thousands  of  the  Indians,
who  out  of  devotion  cut  off  part  of  their  tongues,  to  make  Tongue
a  sacrifice  for  it. In  this  Province  there  is  likewise  another  samfice*
famous  Pilgrimage,  to  a  place  called  Jallamakae,  where  Pilgrimage.
out  of  cold  Springs  and  hard  Rocks,  there  are  dayly  to  be

'5

A.D.
I6l6.

Ganges.

Goez  his
journey  from
hence  to  China,
followeth  in  the
next  booke.
Mogo/s
greatnesse.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

seene  incessant  eruptions  of  fire,  before  which  the  Idola-
trous people  fall  downe  and  worship.  28.  Syba,  the  chiefe
Citie  is  called  Hardwair,  where  the  famous  River  Ganges
seemed  to  begin,  issuing  out  of  a  Rocke,  which  the
superstitious  Gentiles  imagine  to  bee  like  a  Cowes  head,
which  of  all  sensible  Creatures  they  love  best.  Thither
they  likewise  goe  in  troopes  daily  for  to  wash  their  bodies.

29.  Kakares,  the  principall  Cities  are  called  Dankalee  and
Purhola,  it  is  very  large  and  exceeding  mountaynous,
divided  from  Tartaria  by  the  Mountaynes  of  Caucases :
it  is  the  farthest  part  North,  under  the  Mogols  subjection.

30.  Gor,  the  chiefe  Citie  so  called,  it  is  full  of  Mountaynes.
The  River  Persilis  which  dischargeth  it  selfe  in  Ganges,
beginnes  in  it.  31.  Pitan,  the  chiefe  Citie  so  called ;
the  River  Kanda  waters  it,  and  falls  into  Ganges  in  the
Confines  thereof.  32.  Kanduana,  the  chiefe  Citie  is  called
Karhakatenka,  the  River  Sersilii  parts  it  from  Pitan ;  that
and  Gor  are  the  North-east  bounds  of  this  great  Mon-
archic. 33.  Patna,  the  chiefe  Citie  so  called;  the  River
Ganges  bounds  it  on  the  West,  Sersilii  on  the  East ;  it  is
a  very  fertile  Province.  34.  Jesual,  the  chiefe  Citie
called  Rajapore,  it  lyeth  East  of  Patna.  35.  Mevat,  the
chiefe  Citie  called  Narnol ;  it  is  very  mountaynous.
36.  Udessa,  the  chiefe  Citie  called  Jokanat ;  it  is  the
most  remote  part  East  of  all  this  Kingdome.  37.  Bengala,
a  most  spacious  and  fruitfull  Kingdome,  limited  by  the
Gulfe  of  the  same  name,  wherein  the  River  Ganges
divided  in  foure  great  Currents,  loseth  it  selfe.

And  here  a  great  errour  in  our  Geographers  must  not
escape  mee,  who  in  their  Globes  and  Maps,  make  India
and  China  Neighbours,  when  many  large  Countries  are
interposed  betwixt  them,  which  great  distance  will  appeare
by  the  long  travell  of  the  Indian  Merchants,  who  are
usually  in  their  journey  and  returne,  more  then  two  yeeres
from  Agra  to  the  walls  of  China.  The  length  of  those
forenamed  Provinces  is  North-west  to  South-east,  at  the
least  one  thousand  Courses,  every  Indian  Course  being
two  English  miles. North  and  South,  the  Extent  thereof,

16

[n  EUUOPE,AFRICK, ASIA  have  ]~<ouue

MASTER EDWARD TERRY

EDWARD TERRY  a.d.

1616.

is  about  fourteene  hundred  miles,  the  Southermost  part
lying  in  twentie  degrees  ;  the  Northernmost  in  fortie  three
of  North  latitude.  The  breadth  of  this  Empire  is  North-
east to  South-west,  about  fifteene  hundred  miles.

Now,  to  give  an  exact  account  of  all  those  forenamed
Provinces,  were  more  then  I  am  able  to  under-take,  yet
out  of  that  I  have  observed  in  some  few,  I  will  adventure
to  ghesse  at  all,  and  thinke  for  my  particular,  that  the
great  Mogol,  considering  his  Territories,  his  Wealth,  and
his  rich  Commodities,  is  the  greatest  knowne  King  of  the
East,  if  not  of  the  World.  To  make  my  owne  conjecture
more  apparent  to  others.  This  wide  Monarchic  is  very
rich  and  fertile,  so  much  abounding  in  all  necessaries  for
the  use  of  man,  as  that  it  is  able  to  subsist  and  flourish  of
it  selfe,  without  the  least  helpe  from  any  Neighbour.

To  speake  first  of  that  which  Nature  requires  most, Plentie  of
Foode  ; this  Land  abounds  in  singular  good  Wheate,  Rice,  vutua'i-
Barley,  and  divers  other  kindes  of  Graine  to  make  bread
(the  staffe  of  life)  their  Wheate  growes  like  ours,  but  the
Graine  of  it  is  somewhat  bigger  and  more  white,  of  which
the  Inhabitants  make  such  pure  well-relished  bread,  that  Fine  bread.
I  may  speake  that  of  it,  which  one  said  of  the  bread  in  the
Bishoprick of Leige, it is, Panis, pane melior. The
common  people  make  their  bread  up  in  Cakes,  and  bake  Cakes  Is  por-
it on small Iron hearths, which they  carry with them  hearths.

when  as  they  journey,  making  use  of  them  in  their  Tents,
it  should  seeme  an  ancient  custome,  as  may  appeare  by  [II.ix.1469.]
that  president  of  Sarah,  when  shee  entertayned  the  Angels,
Genes.  18. To  their  Bread  they  have  great  abundance  of
other  good  provision,  as  Butter,  and  Cheese,  by  reason  of  Butter  and
their  great  number  of  Kine,  Sheepe,  and  Goats. Besides,  Cheese.
they  have  a  beast  very large, having  a smooth thicke
skinne  without  haire,  called  a  Buffelo,  which  gives  good  Buffelo.
Milke : the flesh of them is like Beefe, but not so
wholsome. They have no want of  Venison of divers  Venison  and
kinds,  as  red  Deare,  fallow  Deare,  Elkes,  and  Antelops ;  free  Gam-
but  no  where  imparked :  the  whole  Kingdome  is  as  it  were
a  Forrest,  for  a  man  can  travell  no  way  but  he  shall  see
ix  17  B

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

them,  and  (except  it  bee  within  a  small  distance  off  the
King)  they  are  every  mans  Game.  To  these  they  have
great  stores  of  Hares,  and  further  to  furnish  out  their
Feasts,  varietie  of  Fish  and  Fowle ;  it  were  as  infinite  as
needlesse  to  relate  particulars.  To  write  of  their  Geese,
Duckes,  Pigeons,  Partridges,  Quailes,  Peacockes,  and
many  other  singular  good  Fowle,  all  which  are  bought  at
such  easie  rates,  as  that  I  have  seene  a  good  Mutton  sold
for  the  value  of  one  shilling,  foure  couple  of  Hennes  at  the
same  price,  one  Hare  for  the  value  of  a  penie,  three
Partridges  for  as  little,  and  so  in  proportion  all  the  rest.
There  are  no  Capons  amongst  them  but  men.

Beeves.  The  Beeves  of  that  Countrey  differ  from  ours,  in  that
they  have  each  of  them  a  great  Bunch  of  grisselly  flesh
which  growes  upon  the  meeting  of  their  shoulders. Their

Sheepe. Sheepe  exceed  ours  in  great  bob-tayles,  which  cut  off  are
very  ponderous,  their  wooll  is  generally  very  course,  but
the  flesh  of  them  both  is  altogether  as  good  as  ours.
Now,  to  season  this  good  provision,  there  is  great  store

Salt  and  Qf  Salt :  and  to  sweeten  all,  abundance  of  Sugar  growing

Sugar.  'm  £jje  Countrey,  which  after  it  is  well  refined,  may  be
bought  for  two  pence  the  pound,  or  under.

Fruits.  Their  Fruits  are  very  answerable  to  the  rest,  the  Coun-
trey full  of  Musk-melons,  Water-melons,  Pomegranats,
Pome-citrons,  Limons,  Oranges,  Dates,  Figs,  Grapes,
Plantans  (a  long  round  yellow  fruit,  in  taste  like  to  a
Norwich  Peare)  Mangoes,  in  shape  and  colour  like  to  our
Apricocks,  but  more  luscious,  and  (to  conclude  with  the
best  of  all)  the  Ananas  or  Pine  which  seemes  to  the  taster
to  be  a  pleasing  compound,  made  of  Strawberries,  Claret-
wine,  Rose-water,  and  Sugar,  well  tempered  together.  In
the  Northermost  parts  of  this  Empire  they  have  varietie
of  Apples  and  Peares.  Every  where  good  roots,  as
Carrets,  Potatoes,  and  others  like  them  as  pleasant.  They
have  Onions  and  Garlicke,  and  choyce  herbs  for  Salads.

Ginger.  And  in  the  Southermost  parts,  Ginger  growing  almost  in
every  place. And  here  I  cannot  choose  but  take  notice

Taddy. of  a  pleasant  cleere  liquor  called  Taddy,  issuing  from  a

18

EDWARD TERRY  a.d.

1616.

spongie  tree  that  growes  straight  and  tall,  without  bough
to  the  top,  and  there  spreads  out  in  branches  (somewhat
like  to  an  English  Colewort)  where  they  make  incisions  :
under  which  they  hang  small  earthen  Pots  to  preserve
the  influence.  That  which  distills  forth  in  the  night,  is
as  pleasing  to  the  taste  as  any  white  Wine,  if  drunke
betimes  in  the  morning.  But  in  the  heat  of  the  day  the
Sunne  alters  it  so,  as  that  it  becomes  heady,  ill  relished,
and  unwholsome.  It  is  a  piercing  medicinable  drinke,
if  taken  early,  and  moderately,  as  some  have  found
by  happie  experience,  thereby  eased  from  their  torture
inflicted  by  that  shame  of  Physicians,  and  Tyrant  of  all
maladies,  the  Stone.

At  Surat,  and  to  Agra  and  beyond,  it  never  raines  but  Raines  and
one  season  of  the  yeere,  which  begins  neere  the  time  that  Thundcrs-
the  Sunne  comes  to  the  Northerne  Tropicke,  and  so
continues  till  his  returne  backe  to  the  Line.  These  violent
Raines  are  ushered  in,  and  take  their  leave  with  most
fearefull  tempests  of  Thunder  and  Lightning,  more
terrible  then  I  can  expresse,  yet  seldome  doe  harme.  The
reason  in  Nature  may  be  the  subtiltie  of  the  Aire,  wherein
there  are  fewer  Thunder-stones  made,  then  in  such
Climates  where  the  Aire  is  grosse,  and  cloudy.  In  those
three  moneths  it  raines  every  day  more  or  lesse,  sometimes
one  whole  quarter  of  the  Moone  scarce  with  any  inter-
mission, which  aboundance  of  Raine  with  the  heat  of  the
Sunne  doth  so  enrich  the  ground  ;  (which  they  never  force)
as  that  like  Egypt  by  the  inundation  of  Nilus,  it  makes  it
fruitfull  all  the  yeere  after.  But  when  this  time  of  Raine
is  passed  over,  the  Skie  is  so  cleere,  as  that  scarcely  one
Cloud  is  seene  in  their  Hemisphere,  the  nine  moneths
after.

And  here  the  goodnesse  of  the  soyle  must  not  escape  Soy/e  and
my  Pen,  most  apparent  in  this,  for  when  the  ground  hath  ttl''W-
beene  destitute  of  Raine  nine  moneths,  and  lookes  like
to  barren  Sands,  within  seven  dayes  after  the  Raine  begins
to  fall,  it  puts  on  a  greene  Coate. And  further  to  confirme
this,  amongst  many  hundred  acres  of  Corne  I  have  beheld

19

a.d.
1616.

Townes  and
tillages  thick.

Tobacco.

Woods  and
Trees.

[II.ix.14.70.]

Indian  Jig-
tree,  See  of  it
my  Pi/g.  I.  1.
c.  3.

Flowers.

Rivers.

Ganges  water
lighter  then
others.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

in  those  Parts,  I  never  saw  any  but  came  up  as  thicke  as
the  Land  could  well  beare  it.  They  till  their  ground
with  Oxen,  and  foot-Ploughs.  Their  Seed-time  is  in
May,  and  the  beginning  of  June :  their  Harvest  in
November,  and  December,  the  most  temperate  moneths
in  all  their  yeere.  Their  ground  is  not  enclosed  unlesse
it  be  neere  Townes  and  Villages,  which  (though  not
expressed  in  the  Map  for  want  of  their  true  names)  stand
very  thicke.  They  mowe  not  their  Grasse  (as  we)  to  make
Hay,  but  cut  it  either  greene  or  withered  on  the  ground
as  they  have  occasion  to  use  it.  They  sowe  Tobacco  in
abundance,  but  know  not  how  to  cure  and  make  it  strong,
as  those  in  the  Westerne  India.

The  Countrey  is  beautified  with  many  Woods  and  great
varietie  of  faire  goodly  trees,  but  I  never  saw  any  there
of  those  kinds  which  England  affoords.  Their  Trees  in
generall  are  sappie,  which  I  ascribe  to  the  fatnesse  of  the
soyle :  some  of  them  have  Leaves  as  broad  as  Bucklers,
others  are  parted  small  as  Feme,  as  the  Tamarine  trees
which  beare  a  sowre  fruit  that  growes  somewhat  like  our
Beanes,  most  wholesome  for  to  coole  and  cleanse  the
bloud.  There  is  one  Tree  amongst  them  of  speciall
observation,  out  of  whose  branches  grow  little  sprigs
downeward  till  they  take  root,  and  so  at  length  prove
strong  supporters  unto  the  Armes  that  yeeld  them,  whence
it  comes  to  passe  that  these  Trees  in  time  grow  unto  a
great  height,  and  extend  themselves  to  an  incredible
bredth.  All  the  Trees  in  those  Southerne  parts  of  India
still  keepe  on  their  greene  Mantles.  For  their  Flowres
they  rather  delight  the  Eye  then  affect  the  Sense,  in  colour
admirable,  but  few  of  them,  unlesse  Roses,  and  one  or  two
kinds  more,  that  are  any  whit  fragrant.

This  Region  is  watered  with  many  goodly  Rivers,  the
two  principall  are  Indus  and  Ganges,  where  this  thing
remarkable  must  not  passe,  that  one  pinte  of  the  Water
of  Ganges  weigheth  lesse  by  an  ounce,  then  any  in  the
whole  Kingdome,  and  therefore  the  Mogol  wheresoever
hee  is, hath it  brought to  him that he  may  drinke  it.

EDWARD TERRY

Besides  their  Rivers,  they  have  store  of  Wells  fed  with
Springs,  upon  which  in  many  places  they  bestow  great
cost  in  stone-worke :  to  these  they  have  many  Ponds,
which  they  call  Tankes,  some  of  them  more  then  a  mile
or  two  in  compasse,  made  round  or  square,  girt  about  with
faire  stone-walls,  within  which  are  steps  of  well-squared
stone  which  encompasse  the  water,  for  men  every  way  to
goe  downe  and  take  it.  These  Tankes  are  filled  when  that
abundance  of  Raine  falls,  and  keepe  water  to  relieve  the
Inhabitants  that  dwell  farre  from  Springs  or  Rivers,  till  that
wet  season  come  againe.

This  ancient  drinke  of  the  World  is  the  common  drinke
of  India,  it  is  more  sweet  and  pleasant  then  ours,  and  in
those  hot  Countries,  agreeth  better  with  mens  bodies,  then
any  other  Liquor.  Some  small  quantitie  of  Wine,  but
not  common  is  made  among  them,  they  call  it  Rack,
distilled  from  Sugar  and  a  Spicie  rinde  of  a  Tree  called
Jagra.  It  is  very  wholsome  if  taken  moderately.  Many
of  the  people  who  are  strict  in  their  Religion  drinke  no
Wine  at  all.  They  use  a  Liquor  more  healthfull  then
pleasant,  they  call  Cohha ;  a  blacke  seed  boyled  in  water,
which  doth  little  alter  the  taste  of  the  water.  Notwith-
standing, it  is  very  good  to  helpe  digestion,  to  quicken
the  spirits,  and  to  dense  the  bloud.  There  is  yet  another
helpe  to  comfort  the  stomacke  for  such  as  forbeare  Wine,
an  herbe  called  Beetle  or  Paune  ;  it  is  in  shape  somewhat
like  an  Ivie  leafe  but  more  tender ;  they  chew  it  with  an
hard  Nut  some-what  like  a  Nut-megge,  and  a  little  pure
white  Lime  among  the  leaves,  and  when  they  have  sucked
out  the  Juyce,  put  forth  the  rest.  It  hath  many  rare
qualities,  for  it  preserves  the  teeth,  comforts  the  braine,
strengthens  the  stomacke,  and  cures  or  prevents  a  tainted
breath.

Their  buildings  are  generally  base,  except  it  be  in  their
Cities,  wherein  I  have  observed  many  faire  Piles.  Many
of  their  houses  are  built  high  and  flat  on  the  toppe,  from
whence  in  the  coole  seasons  of  the  day  they  take  in  fresh
ayre. They  have  no  Chimnies  to  their  houses,  for  they

A.D.
[( [( .

H'els  and
Tank  i.

Racke  and
Cohha.

Beetle  or
Betele.

Houses  and
streets.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

never  use  fire  but  to  dresse  their  nieate.  In  their  upper
roomes  they  have  many  lights  and  doores  to  let  in  the
No  Glasse.  Ayre,  but  use  no  Glasse.  The  materials  of  their  best
buildings  are  bricke  or  stone,  well  squared  and  composed,
which  I  have  observed  in  Amadavar  (that  one  instance  may
stand  for  all)  which  is  a  most  spacious  and  rich  Citie,  entred
by  twelve  raire  Gates,  and  compassed  about  with  a  firme
stone  wall.  Both  in  their  Villages  and  Cities,  are  usually
many  faire  Trees  among  their  houses,  which  are  a  great
defence  against  the  violence  of  the  Sunne.  They
commonly  stand  so  thicke  that  if  a  man  behold  a  Citie  or
Towne  from  some  conspicuous  place,  it  will  seeme  a  Wood
rather  then  a  Citie.
Indko  and  The  Staple  Commodities  of  this  Kingdome  are  Indico
cotton.  Of  an(j  Cotton-wooll.  For  Cotton-wooll  they  plant  seedes
in  Finches  which  grow  up  into  shrubs  like  unto  our  Rose-bushes.
Journal.  It  blowes  first  into  a  yellow  blossome,  which  falling  off,
there  remaynes  a  cod  about  the  bignesse  of  a  mans  thumbe,
in  which  the  substance  is  moyst  and  yellow,  but  as  it  ripens,
it  swels  bigger  till  it  breake  the  covering,  and  so  in  short
time  becomes  white  as  Snow,  and  then  they  gather  it.
These  shrubs  beare  three  or  foure  yeares  ere  they  supplant
them.  Of  this  Wooll  they  make  divers  sorts  of  pure
white  cloth,  some  of  which  I  have  seene  as  fine,  if  not
purer  then  our  best  Lawne.  Some  of  the  courser  sort  of
it  they  dye  into  Colours,  or  else  stayne  in  it  varietie  of
curious  Figures.

The  ship  that  usually  goeth  from  Surat  to  Moha,  is  of
an  exceeding  great  burthen.  Some  of  them  I  beleeve  at
the  least  fourteene  or  sixteene  hundred  tunnes,  but  ill
built,  and  though  they  have  good  Ordnance  cannot  well
defend  themselves.  In  these  ships  are  yeerely  abundance
of  Passengers :  for  instance  in  one  ship  returning  thence,
that  yeere  we  left  India,  came  seventeene  hundred,  the
most  of  which  number  goe  not  for  profit,  but  out  of
Devotion  to  visite  the  Sepulchre  of  Mahomet  at  Medina,
neere  Meche,  about  one  hundred  and  fiftie  leagues  from
Moha. Those  which have beene there, are  ever  after

J0DWARD TERRY  a.d.

1616.

called Hoggeis, or holy Men. The ship bound from

Surat  to  the  Red  Sea,  beginnes  her  Voyage  about the

twentieth  of  March,  and  finisheth  it  towards  the  end  of

September  following,  the  Voyage  is  but  short,  and  might

easily  bee  made  in  two  moneths,  but  in  the  long  season  of

raine, and a  little before, and after it, the winds are

commonly  so  violent,  that  there  is  no  comming,  but  with

great  hazard  into  the  Indian  Sea. The  ship  returning,  is

usually  worth  two  hundred  thousand  pounds  sterling,  most

of  it  in  Gold  and  Silver. Besides,  for  what  quantitie  of  lndia  the

Monies  comes  out  of  Europe,  by  other  meanes  into  India  Cj?fre,/  u
T  1  • T  r 1  <-"i  worlds  coyne.

1 cannot  answere, this  I  am sure  or, that  many  Silver

streames  runne  thither  as  all  Rivers  to  the  Sea,  and  there  [II.ix.1471.]

stay,  it  being  lawfull  for  any  Nation  to  bring  in  Silver

and  fetch  commodities,  but  a  Crime  not  lesse  then  Capitall,

to  carry  any  great  summe  thence. The  Coyne  or  Bullion

brought  thither  is  presently  melted,  and  refined,  and  then

the Mogols stampe (which is  his  Name  and Title in

Persian  Letters)  put  upon  it. This  Coyne  is  more  pure

then  any  I  know  made  of  perfect  Silver  without  any  allay,

so  that  in  the  Spanish  Riall  (the  purest  money  of  Europe)

there  is  some  losse.

They  call  their  Pieces  of  Money  Roopees,  of  which  Their  coynes,
there  are  some  of  divers  values,  the  meanest  worth  two  R°°Pea  °'
shillings,  and  the  best  about  two  shillings  and  nine  pence
sterling. By  these  they  account  their  Estates  and  Pay-
ments. There  is  a  Coyne  of  inferiour  value  in  Guzarat,
called  Mamoodies,  about  twelve  pence  sterling,  both  the  Mamoodies.
former  and  these  are  made  likewise  in  halfes  and  quarters,
so  that  three  pence  is  the  least  piece  of  silver  currant  in
the  Countrey. That  which  passeth  up  and  downe,  for
exchange  under  this  rate  is  brasse  money,  which  they  call
Pices,  whereof  three  or  thereabouts  countervaile  a  Peny.  Pices.
They  are  made  so  massie,  as  that  the  Brasse  in  them  put
to  other  uses,  is  well  worth  the  Silver  they  are  rated  at.
Their  Silver  Coyne  is  made  either  round  or  square,  but
so  thicke,  that  it  never  breakes  nor  weares  out.

Now  farther  for  commodities,  the  Countrey  yeelds  good

23

A.D.

i6i6.
Silke.

Gum-lac.

Gardens.

Discommo-
dities of  that
Countrey.

Scorpions
dangerous.

Flyes
troublesome.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

store  of  Silke,  which  they  weave  curiously,  sometimes
mingled  with  Silver  or  Gold.  They  make  Velvets,  Sattins,
and  Taffataes,  but  not  so  rich  as  those  of  Italy.  Many
Drugs  and  Gummes  are  found  amongst  them,  especially
Gum-lac,  with  which  they  make  their  hard  Wax.  The
earth  yeelds  good  Minerals  of  Lead,  Iron,  Copper,  and
Brasse,  and  they  say  of  Silver,  which,  if  true,  they  neede
not  open,  being  so  enriched  by  other  Nations.  The  Spices
they  have  come  from  other  places,  from  the  Hands  of
Sumatra,  Java,  and  the  Moluccoes.  For  places  of  pleasure
they  have  curious  Gardens,  planted  with  fruitfull  Trees
and  delightfull  Flowers,  to  which  Nature  daily  lends  such
a  supply  as  that  they  seeme  never  to  fade.  In  these
places  they  have  pleasant  Fountaynes  to  bathe  in,  and
other  delights  by  sundrie  conveyances  of  water,  whose
silent  murmure  helps  to  lay  their  senses  with  the  bonds  of
sleepe  in  the  hot  seasons  of  the  day.

But  lest  this  remote  Countrey  should  seeme  like  an
earthly  Paradise  without  any  discommodities :  I  must
needes  take  notice  there  of  many  Lions,  Tygres,  Wolves,
Jackals  (which  seeme  to  be  wild  Dogs)  and  many  other
harmefull  beasts.  In  their  Rivers  are  many  Crocodiles,
and  on  the  Land  over-growne  Snakes,  with  other  venimous
and  pernicious  Creatures.  In  our  houses  there  we  often
meete  with  Scorpions,  whose  stinging  is  most  sensible  and
deadly,  if  the  patient  have  not  presently  some  Oyle  that  is
made  of  them,  to  anoint  the  part  affected,  which  is  a
present  cure.  The  aboundance  of  Flyes  in  those  parts  doe
likewise  much  annoy  us,  for  in  the  heate  of  the  day  their
numberlesse  number  is  such  as  that  we  can  be  quiet  in  no
place  for  them,  they  are  ready  to  cover  our  meate  assoone
as  it  is  placed  on  the  Table,  and  therefore  wee  have  men
that  stand  on  purpose  with  Napkins  to  fright  them  away
when  as  wee  are  eating  :  in  the  night  likewise  we  are  much
disquieted  with  Musquatoes,  like  our  Gnats,  but  somewhat
lesse  :  and  in  their  great  Cities,  there  are  such  aboundance
of  bigge  hungrie  Rats,  that  they  often  bite  a  man  as  he
Iyeth  on  his  bed.

24

EDWARD  TERRY

The  Windes  in  those  parts,  which  they  call  the  Monson,
blow  constantly;  altering  hut  few  Points,  sixe  moneths
Southerly,  the  other  sixe  Northerly.  The  moneths  of
Aprill  and  May,  and  the  beginning  of  June  till  the  Rayne
fall,  are  so  extreme  hot,  as  that  the  Winde  blowing  but
gently  receives  such  heate  from  the  parched  ground,  that
it  much  offends  those  that  receive  the  breath  of  it.  But
God  doth  so  provide  for  those  parts  that  most  commonly
he  sends  such  a  strong  gale  as  well  tempers  the  hot  ayre.
Sometimes  the  winde  blowes  very  high  in  those  hot  and
drie  seasons,  raysing  up  thick  clouds  of  dust  and  sand,
which  appeare  like  darke  clouds  full  of  Rayne,  they  greatly
annoy  the  people  when  they  fall  amongst  them.  But  there
is  no  Countrey  without  some  discommodities,  for  therefore
the  wise  Disposer  of  all  things  hath  tempered  bitter  things
with  sweet,  to  teach  man  that  there  is  no  true  and  perfect
content  to  be  found  in  any  Kingdom,  but  that  of  God.

But  I  will  returne  againe  (whence  I  digressed)  and  looke
farther  into  the  qualitie  of  the  Countrey,  that  affords  very
good  Horses,  which  the  Inhabitants  know  well  to  manage.
Besides  their  owne,  they  have  many  of  the  Persian,
Tartarian,  and  Arabian  breede,  which  have  the  name  to  be
the  choise  ones  of  the  world  :  they  are  about  the  bignesse
of  ours,  and  valued  among  them  as  deare,  if  not  at  a
higher  rate  then  we  usually  esteeme  ours.  They  are  kept
daintily,  every  good  Horse  being  allowed  a  man  to  dresse
and  feede  him.  Their  Provender  a  kind  of  graine,  called
Donna,  somewhat  like  our  Pease,  which  they  boyle,  and
when  it  is  cold  give  them  mingled  with  course  Sugar  ;  and
twise  or  thrise  in  the  weeke  Butter  to  scoure  their  bodies.
Here  are  likewise  a  great  number  of  Camels,  Dromedaries,
Mules,  Asses,  and  some  Rhynocerots,  which  are  large
beasts  as  bigge  as  the  fayrest  Oxen  England  affords,  their
skins  lye  platted,  or  as  it  were  in  wrinkles  upon  their
backs.  They  have  many  Elephants,  the  King  for  his  owne
particular  being  Master  of  fourteene  thousand,  and  his
Nobles  and  all  men  of  Qualitie  in  the  Countrey,  have  more
or  lesse  of  them,  some  to  the  number  of  one  hundred.

25

1 6 1 6.

Monsons  or
Winde  s.

Horses  and
Provender.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

The  Elephants,  though  they  bee  the  largest  of  all  Creatures
the  Earth  brings  forth,  yet  are  so  tractable  (unlesse  at  times
[II.ix.1472.]  when  they  are  mad)  that  a  little  Boy  is  able  to  rule  the
biggest  of  them.  Some  of  them  I  have  seene  thirteene
foot  high,  but  there  are  amongst  them  (as  I  have  beene
often  told)  fifteene  at  the  least.  The  colour  of  them  all  is
black,  their  skins  thick  and  smooth  without  haire,  they
take  much  delight  to  bathe  themselves  in  water,  and  swim
better  then  any  beast  I  know ;  they  lye  downe  and  arise
againe  at  pleasure,  as  other  beasts  doe.  Their  pace  is  not
swift,  about  three  mile  an  houre,  but  of  all  Beasts  in  the
world  are  most  sure  of  foot,  for  they  never  fall  nor
stumble  to  endanger  their  Rider.  They  are  most  docile
Creatures,  and  of  all  those  we  account  meerely  sensible,
come  neerest  unto  Reason.  Lipsius  in  his  Epistles,
1.  Cent.  Epist.  50.  out  of  his  observations  from  others
writes  more  of  them  then  I  can  conflrme,  or  any  (I  per-
swade  my  selfe)  beleeve ;  yet  many  things  remarkable,
which  seeme  indeed  acts  of  reason,  rather  then  sence,  I
have  observed  in  them.  For  instance,  an  Elephant  will
doe  any  thing  almost,  that  his  Keeper  commands  him  :  as
if  he  would  have  him  affright  a  man,  he  will  make  towards
him  as  if  hee  would  tread  him  in  pieces,  and  when  he  is
come  at  him,  doe  him  no  hurt :  if  he  would  have  him  to
abuse  or  disgrace  a  man,  he  will  take  dirt,  or  kennell
water  in  his  trunke,  and  dash  it  in  his  face.  Their
Trunks  are  long  grisselly  snouts  hanging  downe  twixt  their
teeth,  by  some  called  their  Hand,  which  they  make  use  of
upon  all  occasions.

An  English  Merchant  of  good  credit,  upon  his  owne
knowledge  reported  this  of  a  great  Elephant  in  Adsmeere
(the  place  then  of  the  Mogols  residence)  who  being
brought  often  through  the  Bazar  or  Market  place ;  a
woman  who  sate  there  to  sell  herbs,  was  wont  usually  to
give  him  a  handfull,  as  he  passed  by.  This  Elephant
afterward  being  mad,  brake  his  fetters,  and  tooke  his  way
through  the  Market  place ;  the  people  all  affrighted  made
haste  to  secure  themselves,  amongst  whom  was  this  herbe-

26

EDWARD TERRY  a.d.

.  6 1  h.
woman,  who  for  feare  and  haste,  forgat  her  little  child.
The  Elephant  come  to  the  place  where  shee  usually  sate,
stopt,  and  seeing  a  child  lie  about  her  herbs,  tooke  it  up
gently  with  his  trunke,  not  doing  it  the  least  harme,  and
layed  it  upon  a  stall  under  a  house  not  farre  off,  and  then
proceeded in his furious course. Acosta (a travelling
Jesuite)  relates  the  like  of  an  Elephant  in  Goa,  from  his  Lmehoteu
owne  experience. Some  Elephants  the  King  keeps  for  h*th  ft,!
execution  of  Malefactors,  who  being  brought  to  suffer  p\a„ts  mre  u
death  by  that  mightie  beast,  if  his  Keeper  bid  him  dispatch  this  Worke,
the  Offender  speedily,  will  presently  with  his  foot  pash  and  in  my
him  into  pieces,  if  otherwise  he  would  have  him  tortured,  PllS-  «*•  5-
this  vast  creature  will  breake  his  joynts  by  degrees  one  cap'
after  the  other,  as  men  are  broken  upon  the  wheele.

The  Mogol  takes  much  delight  in  those  stately
creatures,  and  therefore  oft  when  hee  sits  forth  in  his
Majestie  calls  for  them,  especially  the  fairest,  who  are
taught  to  bend  to  him  as  it  were  in  reverence,  when  they
first  come  into  his  presence.  They  often  fight  before  him,
beginning  their  combat  like  Rams,  by  running  fiercely  one
at  the  other ;  after,  as  Boares  with  their  tusks,  they  fight
with  their  teeth  and  trunks  :  in  this  violent  opposition  they
are  each  so  carefull  to  preserve  his  Rider,  as  that  very  few
of  them  at  those  times  receive  hurt.  They  are  governed
with  an  hook  of  Steele,  made  like  the  Iron  end  of  a
Boat-hook  with  which  their  keepers  sitting  on  their  neckes
put  them  backe,  or  pricke  them  forward  at  their  pleasure.

The  King  traines  up  many  of  his  Elephants  for  the
warre,  who  carrie  each  of  them  one  Iron  Gunne  about  sixe
foot  long, lying  upon  a  square  strong  frame  of  wood,fastned
with  girts  or  ropes  upon  him,  which  like  an  Harquebuse
is  let  into  the  timber  with  a  loop  of  Iron  ;  at  the  foure
corners  of  this  frame  are  Banners  of  Silke  put  upon  short
Poles,  within  sits  a  Gunner  to  make  his  shot  according  to
his  occasion.  The  Peece  carrieth  a  Bullet  about  the  big-
nesse  of  a  little  Tennis-ball.  When  the  King  travels  he
hath  many  Elephants  thus  appointed  for  guard.  Hee
keeps  many  of  them  for  State  to  goe  before  him,  who

27

A.B.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

are  adorned  with  bosses  of  Brasse,  and  some  of  them  are
made  of  massie  Silver  or  Gold,  having  likewise  divers
Bells  about  them  in  which  they  delight.  They  have  faire
coverings  either  of  Cloth,  or  Velvet,  or  Cloth  of  silver  or
gold,  and  for  greater  state,  Banners  of  Silke  carried  before
them  in  which  is  the  Ensigne  of  their  great  King  (a  Lion
in  the  Sunne)  imprinted.  These  are  allowed  each  three  or
foure  men  at  the  least,  to  waite  upon  them.  Hee  makes
use  of  others  to  carrie  himselfe  or  his  women,  who  sit  in
pretie  convenient  receptacles  fastned  on  their  backes,  which
our  Painters  describe  like  to  Castles,  made  of  slight  turn'd
Pillars  richly  covered,  that  will  hold  foure  sitters.  Others
he  employes  for  carriage  of  his  necessaries.  Onely  he
hath  one  faire  Elephant  which  is  content  to  be  fettered,
but  would  never  indure  man  or  other  burthen  on  his
backe.

These  vast  beasts  though  the  Countrey  be  very  fruitfull
and  all  provision  cheape,  yet  by  reason  of  their  huge  bulke
are  very  chargeable  in  keeping,  for  such  as  are  well  fed,
stand  their  Masters  in  foure  or  five  shillings,  each  of  them
the  day.  They  are  kept  without  doores,  where  by  a  sollid
Chaine  upon  one  of  their  hind  legges,  they  fasten  them  to
a  Tree  or  some  strong  post.  As  they  stand  in  the  Sunne
the  Flyes  often  vex  them,  wherefore  with  their  feete  they
make  dust,  the  ground  being  very  dry,  and  with  their
Truncks  cast  it  about  their  bodies  to  drive  away  the  Flyes.
Whenas  they  are  mad  (as  usually  the  Males  are  once  a
yeare  for  their  Females,  when  they  are  lustie,  but  in  few
dayes  after,  come  againe  in  temper)  they  are  so  mischiev-
ous, that  they  will  strike  any  thing  but  their  Keeper  that
comes  in  their  way,  and  their  strength  is  such,  as  that  they
will  beate  an  Horse  or  Camell  dead  with  their  Truncke  at
[II.ix.1473.]  one  blow.  At  these  times  to  prevent  mischiefe,  they  are
kept  apart  from  company,  fettered  with  Chaines.  But  if
by  chance  in  their  phrensie  they  get  loose,  they  will  make
after  every  thing  they  see  stirre,  in  which  case  there  is  no
meanes  to  stop  them  in  their  violent  course,  but  by  lighting
of  wild-fire,  prepared  for  that  purpose,  whose  sparkling

2S

EDWARD TERRY  a.d.

i6i6.

and  cracking  makes  them  stand  still  and  tremble.  The
King  allowes  every  one  of  his  great  Elephants  toure
Females,  which  in  their  Language  they  call  Wives,  the
Males  Testicles  lye  about  his  fore-head,  the  Females  Teates
are  betwixt  her  fore-legges.  Shee  carrieth  her  young  one
whole  yeare  ere  she  bring  it  forth.  Thirtie  yeares  expire
ere  they  come  to  their  full  growth,  and  they  fulfill  the
accustomed  age  of  man  ere  they  dye.  Notwithstanding,
the  great  plentie  of  them,  they  are  valued  there  at
exceeding  great  rates,  some  of  them  prized  at  one  thousand
pounds  sterling  and  more.

§•  ni.

Of  the  people  of  Indostan,  their  Stature,  Colour,
Habit,  Dyet,  Women,  Language,  Learning,
Arts,  Riding,  Games,  Markets,  Armes,  Valour,
Mahumetane  Mesquits,  Burials,  Opinions,  and
Rites  of  Religion.

Ow,  for  the  Inhabitants  of  Indostan,  they  were
anciently  Gentiles,  or  notorious  Idolaters,  called
in generall Hindoos, but ever since they were

subdued  by  Tamberlaine,  have  beene  mixed  with
Mahometans.  There  are  besides  many  Persians  and
Tartars,  many  Abissines,  and  Armenians,  and  some  few
almost  of  every  people  in  Asia,  if  not  of  Europe,  that  have
residence  here.  Amongst  them  are  some  Jewes,  but  not  jewes  hated.
beloved,  for  their  very  name  is  a  Proverbe,  or  word  of
reproch.  For  the  stature  of  these  Easterne  Indians,  they
are  like  us,  but  generally  very  streight,  for  I  never  beheld
any  in  those  parts  crooked.  They  are  of  a  tawnie  or
Olive  colour,  their  haire  blacke  as  a  Raven,  but  not  curl'd.
They  love  not  a  man  or  woman,  that  is  very  white  or  White  in  bad
faire,  because  that  (as  they  say)  is  the  colour  of  Lepers  estmaUon-
common  amongst  them.  Most  of  the  Mahometans,  but
the  Moolaes  (which  are  their  Priests)  or  those  that  are  very
old  and  retyred,  keepe  their  chinnes  bare,  but  suffer  the
haire  on  their  upper  lip  to  grow  as  long  as  Nature  will

29

A.D.
I6l6.

Attire.

Salutations

Their  women.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

feed  it.  They  usually  shave  off  all  the  haire  from  their
heads,  reserving  onely  a  Locke  on  the  Crowne  for
Mahomet,  to  pull  them  into  Heaven.  Both  among  the
Mahometans  and  Gentiles  are  excellent  Barbers.  The
people  often  wash  their  bodies,  and  anoint  themselves
with  sweet  Oyles.

The  Habits  both  of  the  men  and  women  are  little
different,  made  for  the  most  part  of  white  Cotton-cloth.
For  the  fashion  they  are  close,  streight  to  the  middle,
hanging  loose  downward  below  the  knee,  they  weare  long
Breeches  underneath,  made  close  to  their  bodies  that  reach
to  their  ankles,  ruffling  like  boots  on  the  smal  of  their
legs.  Their  feet  are  bare  in  their  shooes,  which  most
commonly  they  weare  like  slippers,  that  they  may  the
more  readily  put  them  off  when  they  come  into  their
houses,  whose  floores  are  covered  with  excellent  Carpets
(made  in  that  Kingdom,  good  as  any  in  Turkie  or  Persia)
or  somwhat  else  (according  to  the  qualitie  of  the  man)
more  base,  upon  which  they  sit,  when  as  they  conferre  or
eate  like  Taylors  on  their  shop-boards.  The  mens  heads
are  covered  with  a  long  thinne  wreathe  of  Cloth,  white
or  coloured,  which  goes  many  times  about  them,  they  call
it  a  Shash.  They  uncover  not  their  heads  when  as  they
doe  reverence  to  their  Superiours,  but  in  stead  of  that
bow  their  bodies,  putting  their  right  hands  to  the  top  of
their  heads,  after  that  they  have  touched  the  Earth  with
them,  as  much  as  to  say,  the  partie  they  salute,  shall  if
he  please  tread  upon  them.  Those  that  bee  equals  take
one  the  other  by  the  Chinne  or  Beard,  as  Joab  did  Amasa,
2.  Sam.  20:  but  salute  in  Love,  not  Treacherie.  They
have  good  words  to  expresse  their  wel-wishes,  as  this,
Greeb-a  Nemoas,  that  is,  I  wish  the  Prayers  of  the  Poore,
and  many  other  like  these  most  significant.

The  Mahometan  women,  except  they  bee  dishonest  or
poore,  come  not  abroad.  They  are  very  well  favoured,
though  not  faire,  their  heads  covered  with  Veiles,  their
haire  hangs  downe  behind  them  twisted  with  Silke.
Those  of  qualitie  are  bedecked  with  many  Jewels,  about

3°

EDWARD TERRY

their  neckes  and  wrists,  round  about  their  Eares  are  holes
made  for  Pendants,  and  every  woman  hath  one  of  her
Nostrils  pierced,  that  there,  when  as  shee  please,  shee  may
weare  a  Ring  (it  should  seeme  an  ancient  ornament,
Es.  3.  21.)

The  women  in  those  parts  have  a  great  happinesse
above  all  I  know,  in  their  easie  bringing  forth  of
Children,  for  it  is  a  thing  common  there  for  women  great
with  Childe,  one  day  to  ride  carrying  their  Infants  in
their  bodies ;  the  next  day  to  ride  againe,  carrying  them
in  their  armes.

For  the  Language  of  this  Empire,  I  meane  the  vulgar,
it  is  called  Indostan,  a  smooth  tongue,  and  easie  to  be
pronounced,  which  they  write  as  wee  to  the  right  hand.
The  Learned  Tongues  are  Persian  and  Arabian,  which
they  write  backward,  as  the  Hebrewes  to  the  left.  There
is  little  Learning  among  them,  a  reason  whereof  may  be
their  penury  of  Bookes,  which  are  but  few,  and  they,
Manuscripts :  but  doubtlesse,  they  are  men  of  strong
capacities ;  and  were  there  literature  among  them,  would
be  the  Authors  of  many  excellent  Workes.

They  have  heard  of  Aristotle,  whom  they  call  Aplis,
and  have  some  of  his  Bookes  translated  into  Arabian,
Avicenna,  that  noble  Physician  was  borne  in  Samarcandia,
the  Countrey  of  Tamerlaine,  in  whose  Science  they  have
good  skill.  The  common  Diseases  of  the  Countrey  are
bloudie  Fluxes,  hot  Fevers  and  Calentures,  in  all  which
they  prescribe  fasting  as  a  principall  remedie :  that  filthy
Disease  the  consequence  of  Incontinencie  is  common
amongst  them.  The  people  in  generall  live  about  our
Ages,  but  they  have  more  old  men.  They  delight  much
in  Musicke,  and  have  many  stringed  and  wind  Instru-
ments, which  never  seemed  in  my  eare  to  bee  any  thing
but  discord.  They  write  many  wittie  Poems,  and
compose  Stories  or  Annals  of  their  owne  Countrey ;  and
professe  themselves  to  have  good  skill  in  Astrologie,  and
in  men  of  that  Profession,  the  King  puts  so  much  con-
fidence, that  hee  will  not  undertake  a  Journey,  nor  yet

31

A.U.
l6l6.

Easie
Childbirth.

[II.ix.1474.]

Language  and
writing.

Aristotle  and
A  vie  en.

Diseases.

Age.
Musicke.

Poems  and
Annals.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

doe  any  thing  of  the  least  consequence,  unlesse  his
Wizards  tell  him  tis  a  good  and  prosperous  houre.

Their  year e.  The  Gentiles  beginne  their  yeare  the  first  of  March.

The  Mahometans  theirs  at  the  very  instant  (as  the
Astrologers  ghesse)  that  the  Sunne  enters  into  Aries,  from
which  time  the  King  keepes  a  Feast  called  the  Noocos,
signifying  nine  dayes,  which  time  it  continues  (like  that
Ahasuerus  made  in  the  third  yeare  of  his  Raigne,  Ester

Of  this  see the  first)  where  all  his  Nobles  assemble  in  their  greatest

ejote  in  u  p0mpe5  presenting  him  with  Gifts,  hee  repaying  them
againe  with  Princely  Rewards,  at  which  time  being  in
his  presence,  I  beheld  most  immense  and  incredible  Riches
to  my  amazement  in  Gold,  Pearles,  Precious  Stones,
Jewels,  and  many  other  glittering  vanities.

This  Feast  I  tooke  notice  of  at  Mandoa,  where  the
Mogol  hath  a  most^  spacious  house  larger  then  any  I  have
seene,  in  which  many  excellent  Arches  and  Vaults,  speake
for  the  exquisite  skill  of  his  Subjects  in  Architecture.
At  Agra  hee  hath  a  Palace,  wherein  two  large  Towers,
the  least  ten  foot  square,  are  covered  with  plate  of  the
purest  Gold.

Hangings.  There  are  no  Hangings  on  the  walls  of  his  houses,  by

reason  of  the  heate ;  the  wals  are  either  painted  or  else
beautified  with  a  purer  white  Lime,  then  that  we  call
Spanish.  The  floores  paved  with  stone,  or  else  made
with  Lime  and  Sand  like  our  Playster  of  Paris,  are  spred

Kings  house,  with  rich  Carpets.  There  lodge  none  in  the  Kings  house
but  his  women  and  Eunuches,  and  some  little  Boyes  which
hee  keepes  about  him  for  a  wicked  use. Hee  alwayes  eates

[II.ix.1475.]  in  private  among  his  women,  upon  great  varietie  of
excellent  Dishes,  which  dressed  and  proved  by  the  Taster,
are  served  in  Vessels  of  Gold  (as  they  say)  covered  and
sealed  up,  and  so  by  Eunuchs  brought  to  the  King.  He
hath  meate  ready  at  all  houres,  and  calls  for  it  at  pleasure.

Their  dyet.  They  feede  not  freely  on  full  dishes  of  Beefe  and  Mutton
(as  we)  but  much  on  Rice  boyled  with  pieces  of  flesh,  or
dressed  many  other  wayes.  They  have  not  many  roast
or  baked meats,  but  stew  most  of  their  flesh. Among

32

SelimShab  the  Great  Mogg.

uvooaon uv^jnqr

EDWARD TERRY  ad.

i6i6l

many  Dishes  of  this  kinde,  He  take  notice  but  of  one
they  call  Deu  Pario,  made  of  Venison  cut  in  slices,  to
which  they  put  Onions  and  Herbs,  some  Rootes  with  a
little  Spice,  and  Butter,  the  most  savorie  meate  I  ever
tasted,  and  doe  almost  thinke  it  that  very  Dish  which
Tacob  made  ready  for  his  Father,  when  he  got  the
blessing.

In  this  Kingdome  there  are  no  Innes  to  entertaine  Inms.
Strangers,  onely  in  great  Townes  and  Cities  are  faire
houses  built  for  their  receit,  which  they  call  Sarray,  not
inhabited,  where  any  Passengers  may  have  roome  freely,
but  must  bring  with  him  his  Bedding,  his  Cooke,  and  other
necessaries  wherein  to  dresse  his  meate,  which  are  usually
carried  on  Camels,  or  else  in  Carts  drawne  with  Oxen,
wherein  they  have  Tents  to  pitch  when  they  meete  with
no  Sarras.

The  inferiour  sort  of  people  ride  on  Oxen,  Horses.  Riding.
Mules,  Camels,  or  Dromedaries ;  the  women  like  the
men,  or  else  in  slight  Coaches  with  two  Wheeles,  covered
on  the  top,  and  backe,  but  the  fore-part  and  sides  open,
unlesse  thev  carrie  women.  They  will  conveniently  hold
two  persons,  beside  the  Driver,  thev  are  drawne  bv  Oxen,
one  yoake  in  a  Coach,  suted  for  colour,  but  many  of  them
are  white,  not  very  large  :  they  are  guided  with  Cords,
which  goe  through  the  parting  of  their  Nostrils,  and  so
twixt  their  Homes  into  the  Coach-mens  hand.  They
dresse  and  keepe  them  clothed  as  their  Horses.  Thev  are
naturally  nimble,  to  which  use  makes  them  so  fitting  to
performe  that  labour,  as  that  they  will  goe  twentie  miles  a
day,  or  more  with  good  speed.  The  better  sort  ride  on
Elephants,  or  else  are  carried  upon  mens  shoulders  alone,
in  a  slight  thing  they  call  a  Palankee,  which  is  like  a
Couch,  or  standing  Pallat,  but  covered  with  a  Cannopie  :
This  should  seeme  an  ancient  effeminacie  sometimes  used
in  Rome,  Juvenal  thus  describing  a  fat  Lawyer  that  fil'd
one  of  them  :  Causidici  nova  cum  veniat  lectica  Mathonis
Plena  ipso —

For  Pastimes they delight in Hawking, hunting of  Pastir.a.

A.D.
I6l6.

Slie  Fowling.

Shooting.

Chesse,
Tables,
Cardn.

Mounte-
bankes.

Large  Apes.

Cunning
Birdes.

Markets  twice
a  day.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Hares,  Deere,  or  wilde  Beasts :  their  Dogs  for  Chase  are
made  somewhat  like  our  Gray-hounds,  but  much  lesse,
they  open  not  in  the  pursuite  of  the  game.  They  hunt
likewise  with  Leopards,  which  by  leaping  sease  on  that  they
pursue.  They  have  a  cunning  device  to  take  wildfowle,
where  a  fellow  goes  into  the  water  with  a  Fowle  of  that
kinde  he  desires  to  catch,  whose  skinne  is  stuffed  so  arti-
ficially,as  that  it  appeares  alive  :  He  keepes  all  hisbodybut
the  face  under  water,  on  which  he  layes  this  Counterfeit :
thus  comming  among  them,  plucks  them  by  the  legs  under
water.  They  shoote  for  pastime  much  in  Bowes,  which
are  made  curiously  in  the  Countrey  of  Buffeloes  homes,
glewed  together,  to  which  they  have  Arrowes  made  of
little  Canes,  excellently  headed  and  feathered  ;  in  these
they  are  so  skilfull,  that  they  will  kill  Birds  flying.  Others
take  delight  in  managing  their  Horses  on  which  they
ride,  or  else  are  otherwise  carried  though  they  have  not
one  quarter  of  a  mile  to  goe,  the  men  of  qualitie  holding
it  dishonorable  to  goe  on  foote.

In  their  houses  they  play  much  at  that  most  ingenious
game  we  call  Chesse,  or  else  at  Tables.  They  have  Cardes,
but  quite  different  from  ours.  Sometimes  they  make
themselves  merry  with  cunning  Jugglers,  or  Mounte-
bankes,  who  will  suffer  Snakes  they  keepe  in  Baskets,  to
bite  them  and  presently  cure  the  swelling  with  Powders ;
or  else  they  see  the  trickes  of  Apes  and  Monkeyes.

In  the  Southerne  parts  of  Indostan,  are  great  store  of
large  white  Apes,  some  I  dare  boldly  say,  as  tall  as  our
biggest  Gray-hounds  :  They  are  fearefull  as  it  should  seeme
to  Birds  that  make  their  Nests  in  Trees,  wherefore  nature
hath  taught  them  this  subtiltie  to  secure  themselves,  by
building  their  little  houses  on  the  twigs  of  the  utmost
boughs,  there  hanging  like  Purse-nets,  to  which  the  Apes
cannot  possibly  come.

Every  great  Towne  or  Citie  of  India,  hath  Markets
twice  a  day,  in  the  coole  season  presently  after  the  Sunne
is  risen,  and  a  little  before  his  setting.  They  sell  almost
every  thing  by  weight. In  the  heate  of  the  day  they

34

EDWARD TERRY  a.,

1616.

keepe  their  houses,  where  the  men  of  better  fashion  lying
on  Couches,  or  sitting  on  their  Carpets,  have  servants
stand  about  them,  who  beating  the  Ayre  with  broade
Fannes  of  stiffe  Leather,  or  the  like,  make  winde  to  coole
them  :  And  taking  thus  their  ease,  they  often  call  their
Barbers,  who  tenderly  gripe  and  smite  their  Armes  and
other  parts  of  their  bodies,  in  stead  of  exercise,  to  stirre
the  bloud.  It  is  a  pleasing  wantonnesse,  and  much  used
in  those  hot  Climes.

I  must  needes  commend  the  Mahumetans,  and  Gentiles,  Fideluie.
for  their  good  and  faithfull  Service,  amongst  whom  a
stranger  may  travell  alone  with  a  great  charge  of  money
or  goods,  quite  through  the  Countrey,  and  take  them  for
his  guard,  yet  never  bee  neglected  or  injured  by  them.
They  follow  their  Masters  on  foote,  carrying  swords  and
Bucklers,  or  Bowes  and  Arrowes  for  their  defence  :  and  by
reason  of  great  plentie  of  Provision  in  that  Kingdome,  a
man  may  hire  them  upon  easie  conditions,  for  they  will
not  desire  above  five  shillings  the  Moone,  paide  the  next
day  after  the  change,  Quibus  hinc  toga,  calceus  hinc  est,
Et  panis,  fumusque  domi. — to  provide  themselves  all
necessaries,  and  for  it  doe  most  diligent  service.  Such  is
their  Pietie  to  their  parents,  that  those  which  have  no  [II. ix.  1476.]
greater  meanes,  will  impart  halfe  of  it,  at  the  least,  to
releeve  their  necessities,  choosing  rather  for  to  famish
themselves,  then  to  see  them  want.

There  are  both  among  the  Mahumetans  and  Gentiles,  Courage  of
men  of  undaunted  courage,  those  of  note  among  the  iome'
Mahumetans  are  called  Baloches,  inhabiting  Hajacan,
adjoyning  to  the  Kingdome  of  Persia,  or  else  Patans,
taking  their  denomination  from  a  Province  in  the  King-
dome  of  Bengala.  These  will  looke  an  enemie  boldly  in
the  face,  and  maintaine  with  their  lives  their  reputation
of  valour.  Among  the  many  sects  of  Gentiles,  there  is
but  one  race  of  Fighters  called  Rashbootes,  a  number  of
which  live  by  spoyle,  who  in  troopes  surprize  poore  Pas-
sengers, cruelly  butchering  those  they  get  under  their
power,  those  excepted  ; all  the  rest  in  the  Countrey  are

35

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

in  general]  Pusilanimous,  and  had  rather  quarrell  then
fight,  having  such  poore  spirits  in  respect  of  us  Christians,
that  the  Mogol  is  pleased  often  to  use  this  Proverbe,  that
one  Portugal  will  beate  three  of  them,  and  one  English-
man three  Portugals.
Munition.  Touching  their  Munition  for  the  warre,  they  have  good

ertoman  tels  Ordnance,  made  (for  ought  I  could  gather)  very  anciently
fugitives,  m  tnose  parts.  Iron  Peeces  carried  upon  Elephants,  before
which  at  the  described,  and  lesser  Gunnes  made  for  Foot-men,  who  are
Portugals fint  somewhat  long  in  taking  their  ayme,  but  come  as  neere
commtng  ran t^e  marke  as  anv  \  ever  saw They  fire  all  their  Peeces

to  the  Indians, •  1 a  /r i_  e r>  j  1  1  j

and  tauzht Wltn Match,  as  i°r  Gun-powder  they  make  very  good.

them  this  Art.  They  use  Lances,  and  Swords,  and  Targets,  Bowes  and
Arrowes.  Their  Swords  are  made  crooked  like  a  Faul-
chion,  very  sharpe,  but  for  want  of  skill  in  those  that
temper  them,  will  breake  rather  then  bend,  and  therefore
wee  often  sell  our  Sword-blades  at  high  prices  that  will
bow,  and  become  streight  againe.  I  have  seene  Horse-
men there,  who  have  carried  whole  Armories  about  them
thus  appointed  ;  at  their  sides  good  Swords,  under  them
Sheves  of  Arrowes,  on  their  shoulders  Bucklers,  and  upon
their  backs  Guns  fastned  with  Belts,  at  the  left  side  Bowes
hanging  in  Cases,  and  Lances  about  two  yards  and  a  halfe
long,  having  excellent  Steele  heads,  which  they  carrie  in
their  hands  :  yet  for  all  this  Harnesse,  the  most  of  them
dare  not  resist  a  man  of  courage,  though  he  have  for  his
defence  but  the  worst  of  those  weapons.  The  Armies
in  those  Easterne  warres,  oftentimes  consist  of  incredible
multitudes,  they  talke  of  some  which  have  exceeded  that
mightie  Host  which  Zerah  King  of  Ethiopia,  brought
against  Asa,  2.  Chron.  14.  The  musicke  they  have  when
they  goe  to  battell,  is  from  Kittle-drums,  and  long  winde
Instruments.  The  Armies  on  both  sides  usually  beginne
with  most  furious  onsets,  but  in  short  time,  for  want  of
good  Discipline,  one  side  is  routed,  and  the  Controversie
not  without  much  slaughter  decided.

Mesauits.  The  Mahometans  have  faire  Churches,  which  they  call

Mesquits,  built  of  stone,  the  broade  side  towards  the  West

36

EDWARD TERRY  a.d.

1616.

is  made  up  close  like  a  Wall ;  that  towards  the  East  is
erected  on  Pillars,  so  that  the  length  of  them  is  North  and
South,  which  way  they  burie  their  dead  :  At  the  corners
of  their  great  Churches  which  stand  in  Cities  are  high
Pinacles,  to  whose  tops  the  Moolaas  ascend  certaine  times
of  the  day,  and  proclaime  their  Prophet  Mahomet  thus  in
Arabian  :  La  Alia,  ilia  Alia,  Mahomet  Resul-Alla :  that
is,  No  God  but  one  God,  and  Mahomet  the  Ambassadour
of  God.  This  in  stead  of  Bells  (which  they  endure  not  in
their  Temples)  put  the  most  religious  in  minde  of  their
devotion.  Which  words  Master  Coryat  often  hearing  in  Ciryats
Aora,  upon  a  certaine  time  got  up  into  a  Turret,  over  CrM^^-
against  the  Priest,  and  contradicted  him  thus  in  a  loude
vovce  :  La  Alia,  ilia  Alia,  Hazaret-Eesa  Ebn-Alla,  No  God
but  one  God,  and  Christ  the  Sonne  ot  God  ;  and  further
added,  that  Mahomet  was  an  Impostor,  which  bold  attempt
in  many  other  places  of  Asia,  where  Mahomet  is  more
zealously  professed,  had  forfetted  his  life  with  as  much
torture  as  Tyrannie  could  invent.  But  here  even*  man
hath  libertie  to  professe  his  owne  Religion  freely,  and  for
anv  restriction  I  ever  observed,  to  dispute  against  theirs
with  impunitie.

Now  concerning  their  burials  :  even*  Mahometan  ot  Bxriah  neere
Qualitie  in  his  life  time,  provides  a  faire  Sepulcher  for  him-  T-~-~-
selre  and  kindred,  encompassing  with  a  firme  wall  a  eood
circuit  ot  ground,  neere  some  Tanke  (about  which  thev
delight  tor  to  burie  their  dead)  or  else  in  a  place  nich
Springs  ot  Water,  that  may  make  pleasant  Fountavnes,
neere  which  hee  erects  a  Tombe  round  or  square,  vaulted
upon  Pillars,  or  else  made  close,  to  be  entred  with  Poores,
under  which  are  the  bodies  of  the  dead  interred.  The
rest  ot  the  ground  they  plant  with  Trees  and  Flowers,  as  if
they  would  make  Elysian  fields,  such  as  the  Poets  dreamed
of,  wherein  their  soules  might  take  their  reoose.  Thev
burie  not  within  their  Churches.  There  are  manv  goodly
Monuments  ot  this  kinde  richly  adorned,  built  to  the
memorie  oi  such  as  they  have  esteemed  Saints,  of  which  &****
they  have  a  large  Kalender. In  these  are  Lamps  continu-  K*k**r'

A.D.
l6l6.

Of  this  see
before  in  other
Journals,
Finch  &c.

Moolaas  or
Priests.

Religious.

[II.ix.1477.]
Prayer  in  un-
known tongue.

Beades.

Gesture  of
prayer.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ally  burning,  whither  men  transported  with  blinde  devotion
daily  resort,  there  to  contemplate  the  happines  these  Pieres
(for  so  they  call  them)  enjoy.  But  among  many  faire
Piles  there  dedicated  to  this  use,  the  most  excellent  is  at
Secandra,  a  Village  three  miles  from  Agra.  It  was  beganne
by  Achabar-sha,  this  Kings  Father,  who  there  lyes  buried,
and  finished  by  this  present  King,  who  meanes  to  lye
beside  him.

Their  Moolaas  imploy  much  of  their  time  like  Scriv-
eners, to  doe  businesse  for  others,  they  have  libertie  to
marrie  as  well  as  the  people,  from  whom  they  are  not
distinguished  in  habite.  Some  live  retyred,  that  spend
their  dayes  in  Meditation,  or  else  in  giving  good  morall
Precepts  unto  others,  there  are  of  high  esteeme,  and  so
are  another  sort  called  Seayds,  who  derive  themselves  from
Mahomet.  The  Priests  doe  neither  reade  nor  preach  in
their  Churches,  but  there  is  a  set  forme  of  prayer  in  the
Arabian  tongue,  not  understood  by  most  of  the  common
people,  yet  repeated  by  them  as  well  as  by  the  Moolaas.
They  likewise  rehearse  the  Names  of  God  and  Mahomet
certayne  times  every  day  upon  Beads,  like  the  misse-led
Papist,  who  seemes  to  regard  the  number,  rather  then  the
weight  of  Prayers.  Before  they  goe  into  their  Churches
they  wash  their  feete,  and  entring  in  put  off  their  shooes.
As  they  beginne  their  devotions  they  stop  their  Eares  and
fixe  their  Eyes,  that  nothing  may  divert  their  Thoughts ;
then  in  a  soft  and  still  voyce  they  utter  their  prayers,
wherein  are  many  words,  most  significantly  expressing
the  Omnipotencie,  Greatnesse,  Eternitie,  and  other  attri-
butes of  God.  Many  words  full  of  humiliation,  confessing
with  divers  submissive  gestures  their  owneunworthinesse  :
when  they  pray  casting  themselves  low  upon  their  faces
sundrie  times,  and  then  acknowledge  that  they  are  Burthens
to  the  Earth,  and  Poison  to  the  Aire,  and  the  like,
and  therefore  dare  not  so  much  as  looke  up  to  heaven,  but
at  last  comfort  themselves  in  the  Mercies  of  God  through
the  mediation  of  Mahomet ;  and  many  amongst  them,  to
the  shame  of  us  Christians,  what  impediment  soever  they

33

EDWARD TERRY  a.d.

1616.

have  either  by pleasure  or  profit,  pray  five  times  every

day,  at  six,  nine,  twelve,  three  and  six  of  the  clock. Bur

by the way, they distinguish their time in a different

manner  from  us, dividing  the  day into foure,  and the

night  into  as  many  parts,  which  they  call  Pores,  these  arc

againe  subdivided  each  into  eight  parts,  which  they  call

Grees,  measured  according  to  the  ancient  custome  by  water

dropping  out  of  one  little  vessell  into  another,  by  which

there  alwayes  stand  servants  appointed  for  that  purpose,

smiting  with  a  hammer  a  Concave  piece  of  pure  metall, Clepsydra

like  the  inner  part  of  an  ordinarie  platter,  hanging  by  the  c'°"f'

brim  on  a  wyre,  the  number  of  Grees  and  Pores  as  they

passe. For the temperance of many both among the Temperance.

Mahometans  and  Gentiles,  it  is  such,  as  that  they  will

rather  die,  like  the  Mother  and  her  seven  sonnes,  2.  Mac.

7.  then  eate  or  drinke  any  thing  their  Law  forbids. Such

meate  and  drinke  as  their  Law  allowes  they  use  onely  to

satisfie Nature, not Appetite ; hating Gluttonie, and

esteeming  Drunkennesse  (as  indeed  it  is)  a  second  Mad-

nesse,  and  therefore  have  but  one  word  in  their  language

(Mest)  for  a  Drunkard  and  a  Mad-man.  Mest.

They  keepe  a  solemne  Lent,  which  they  call  the  Ram-  Fast  and  feast.
Jan,  about  the  moneth  of  August,  which  continues  one
whole  Moone  ;  during  which  time,  those  that  bee  strict  in
their  Religion  forbeare  their  women,  and  will  take  neither
meate  nor  drinke  so  long  as  the  Sunne  is  above  their
Horizon,  but  after  He  is  set,  eate  at  pleasure.  Towards
the  end  of  this  Lent  they  consecrate  a  day  of  Mourning,
to  the  memorie  of  their  dead  friends,  when  I  have  beheld
divers  of  the  meaner  sort  make  bitter  lamentation.  (Beside
this  common  sadnesse,  there  are  many  foolish  women  who
often  in  the  yeere,  so  long  as  they  survive,  moysten  the
graves  of  their  husbands  or  children,  with  affectionate
teares.)  But  when  the  Night  begins  to  cover  the  Day  of
generall  mourning,  they  fire  an  innumerable  companie  of
Lamps  and  Lights,  which  they  set  on  the  sides  and  tops
of  their  houses,  and  all  other  most  conspicuous  places,  and
when  these  are  extinguished,  take  foode. The  Ram- Jan

39

A.D.
I6l6.

Bookes.

The  Maronite
which  trans-
lated the  Arab
Geographer,
alleadge  this
reason,  that
he  was  a
Christian,
because  he  calls
Christ  Lord:
which  yet  you
see  the  Mahu-
metans  doe.
Dervises  and
their  severe
strict  Rites.

PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

fully  ended,  the  most  devout  Mahometans  assemble  to
some  famous  Misquit,  where  by  a  Moola,  some  part  of  the
Alcoran  (which  they  will  not  touch  without  reverence)  is
publikely  read.  They  keepe  a  Feast  in  November,  called
Buccaree,  signifying  the  Ram-feast,  when  they  solemnely
kill  a  Ram,  and  roast  him  in  memorie  of  that  Ram  which
redeemed  Ishmael  (as  they  say)  when  Abraham  was  readie
to  make  him  a  sacrifice.  Many  other  feasts  they  have  in
memorie  of  Mahomet  and  their  Pieres.

They  have  the  bookes  of  Moses,  whom  they  call  Moosa
Carym-Alla,  Moses  the  righteous  of  God.  Ibrahim
Calim-Alla,  Abraham  the  faithfull  of  God.  So  Ishmael,
the  true  sacrifice  of  God.  Dahoode,  David  the  Prophet
of  God.  Selimon,  Salomon  the  wisedome  of  God,  all
expressed  as  the  former  in  short  Arabian  words  ;  to  whose
particular  remembrances  they  daily  sing  Ditties  :  and  more-
over, there  is  not  a  man  amongst  them,  but  those  of  the
ruder  sort,  that  at  any  time  mentions  the  Name  of  our
blessed  Saviour,  called  there  Hazaret-Eesa,  the  Lord
Christ,  without  reverence  and  respect,  saying,  that  he  was
a  good  man  and  a  just,  lived  without  sinne,  did  greater
miracles  then  ever  any  before  or  since  him ;  Nay  farther,
they  call  him  Rhahow-Alla,  the  breath  of  God,  but  how
he  should  be  the  Sonne  of  God  cannot  conceive,  and
therefore  will  not  beleeve.  Notwithstanding  this,  the
Mahometans  in  generall  thinke  us  Christians  so  uncleane,
they  will  not  eate  with  us,  nor  yet  of  any  thing  is  dressed
in  our  vessels.

Among  the  Mahometans  are  many  called  Dervises,
which  relinquish  the  World,  and  spend  their  dayes  in
solitude,  expecting  a  recompence  in  a  better  life  ;  whose
sharpe  and  strict  penances  they  voluntarily  under-take,
farre  exceede  all  those  the  Romanists  boast  of.  For
instance,  there  are  some  that  live  alone  upon  the  tops  of
Hills  remote  from  companie,  there  passing  their  time  in
contemplation,  and  will  rather  famish  then  move  from
these  retyred  Cells,  wherefore  the  people  that  dwell
neerest  to  them,  out  of  devotion  releeve  them. Some

40

EDWARD TERRY  ad

1616.

againc,  impose  long  times  of  fasting  upon  themselves  til

nature  be  almost  quite  decayed. There  are  many  other

among  them  they  call  religious  men,  who  weare  nothing

about  them  but  to  hide  their  shame,  and  these  like  the

Mendicant  Friars  begge  for  all  they  eate. Usually  they

live  in  the  Suburbs  of  great  Cities  or  Townes,  and  are  like

the  Man  our  blessed  Saviour  mentions,  about  the  Citie  of  Luk.  8.  27.

the  Gadarens,  which  had  Devils,  and  ware  no  clothes,

neither  abode  in  any  house  but  in  the  Tombes. They

make  little  fires  in  the  day,  sleeping  at  night  in  the  warme

ashes, with which they besmeare their bodies. These  [II.ix.1478.]

Ashmen  suffer  not  the  Rasor  at  any  time  to  come  upon

their  heads,  and  some  of  them  let  their  nayles  grow  like

Birds  clawes,  as  it  is  written  of  Nabuchadnezzar,  when Dan.  4.

hee  was  driven  out  from  the  societie  of  men. And  there

are  a  sort  among them, called Mendee, who like the

Priests  of  Baal,  often  cut  their  flesh  with  Knives  and 1.  King.  18.

Launcers. Others  I  have  seene  who  out  of  devotion  put

such  massie  Fetters  of  Iron  upon  their  Legs,  as  that  they

can  scarce  stirre  with  them,  and  so  as  fast  as  they  are  able,

goe  many  miles  in  pilgrimage  barefoote  upon  the  parching

ground,  to  visit  the  Sepulchres  of  their  deluding  Saints,

thus  taking  more  paines  to  goe  to  Hell  (Tantum  Relligio

potuit  suadere  malorum)  then  any  Christian  I  know  doth

to goe to Heaven. These marry not, such as doe,

Mahomet  allowes  foure  wives,  besides  they  take  libertie

to  keepe  as  many  women  as  they  are  able,  only  the  Priests

content  themselves  with  one.

Notwithstanding  this  Polygamic,  the  hot  jealousies  of
the  lustfull  Mahometans  are  such,  that  they  will  scarce
endure  the  Brothers  or  Fathers  of  their  beloved  Wives  or
Women,  to  have  speech  with  them,  except  in  their  pre-
sence :  and  Time,  by  this  restraint,  hath  made  it  odious
for  such  Women  as  have  the  reputation  of  honestie,  to
be  seene  at  any  time  by  strangers.  But  if  they  dishonour  Aduherie
their  Husbands  beds,  or  being  unmarried  are  found  Pumshed-
incontinent  professing  chastitie,  rather  then  they  shall  want
punishment, their  owne  Brothers  will  bee  their  Execu-

41

A.D.
I6l6.

Staves.
Eunuchs.

Marriages.

Gentiles,
eighty  and
foure  sects.

Those  I  sup-
pose which
our  stories  call
Brachmanes.
Pagodes.
Opinions.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

tioners,  who  for  such  unnaturall  acts  shall  be  commended,
rather  then  questioned.  Yet  there  is  toleration  for  impu-
dent Harlots,  who  are  as  little  ashamed  to  entertayne,  as
others,  openly  to  frequent  their  houses.  The  Women  of
better  fashion  have  Eunuchs  in  stead  of  men,  to  wait  upon
them,  who  in  their  minoritie  are  deprived  of  all  that  may
provoke  jealousie.

Their  Marriages  are  solemnized  in  great  pompe,  for
after  the  Moola  hath  joyned  their  hands  with  some  other
Ceremonie  and  Words  of  Benediction,  the  first  watch  of
the  night  they  begin  their  jollitie,  the  Man  on  horse-backe
be  he  poore  or  rich,  with  his  friends  about  him,  many
Cresset  lightly  before  him,  with  Drums  and  wind  Instru-
ments and  other  pastimes :  the  Woman  followes  with  her
friends  in  Coaches  covered,  and  after  they  have  thus  passed
the  most  eminent  places  of  the  Citie  or  Towne  they  live
in,  returne  home  and  there  part  with  a  Banquet,  the  men
and  women  separated.  They  marry  for  the  most  part  at
the  ages  of  twelve  or  thirteene,  their  Mothers  most
commonly  making  the  matches.

§.  mi.

Of  the  Gentiles,  Sects,  Opinions,  Rites;  Priests,
and  other  observations  of  Religion  and  State
in  those  parts.

Ow  more  particularly  of  the  Gentiles,  which  are
there  distracted  in  fourscore  and  foure  severall
Sects,  all  differing  mainly  in  opinion,  which  had

oftentimes  fild  me  with  wonder,  but  that  I  know  Satan  (the
father  of  division)  to  be  the  Seducer  of  them  all.  Their
illiterate  Priests  are  called  Bramins,  who  for  ought  I  could
ever  gather,  are  so  sottish  and  inconstant  in  their  grounds,
that  they  scarce  know  what  they  hold.  They  have  little
Churches,  which  they  call  Pagodes,  built  round,  in  which
are  Images  for  worship  made  in  monstrous  shapes.  Some
of  them  dreame  of  Elysian  fields,  to  which  their  soules
must  passe  over  a  Styx  or  Acharon,  and  there  take  new

42

EDWARD TERRY

bodies.  Others  hold,  that  ere  long  the  World  shall  have  a
period,  after  which  they  shall  live  here  againe  on  a  new
Earth.  Some  Bramins  have  told  me  how  that  they
acknowledge  one  God,  whom  they  describe  with  a  thou-
sand hands,  with  a  thousand  feete,  and  as  many  eyes,
thereby  expressing  his  power.  They  talke  of  foure  books,
which  about  six  thousand  yeeres  since  were  sent  them  from
God  by  their  Prophet  Ram,  whereof  two  were  sealed  up
and  might  not  be  opened  ;  the  other  to  be  read  onely  by
themselves.  They  say  that  there  are  seven  Orbes,  above
which  is  the  Seate  of  God  ;  that  God  knowes  not  petie
things,  or  if  he  doe  regards  them  not.  They  circumscribe
God  unto  Place,  saying,  that  he  may  be  scene,  but  as  in  a
Mist  afarre  off,  not  neere.  They  beleeve  that  there  are
Devils,  but  so  bound  in  chaines  that  they  cannot  hurt
them.  They  call  a  man  Adam,  from  our  first  father  Adam,
whose  wife  tempted  with  the  forbidden  fruit,  tooke  it  as
they  say  and  eate  it  downe,  but  as  her  husband  swallowed
it,  the  Hand  of  God  stopped  it  in  his  throat,  whence  man
hath  a  Bunch  there,  which  women  have  not,  called  by
them  Adams  Apple.  As  anciently  among  the  Jewes,  their
Priesthood  is  hereditarie ;  for  every  Bramins  sonne  is  a
Priest,  and  marries  a  Bramins  daughter ;  and  so  among
all  the  Gentiles,  the  men  take  the  daughters  of  those  to
bee  their  wives  which  are  of  their  Fathers  Tribe,  Sect,  and
Occupation.  For  instance,  a  Merchants  sonne  marries  a
Merchants  daughter.  And  every  mans  sonne  that  lives
by  his  labour,  marries  the  daughter  of  him  that  is  of  his
owne  profession,  by  which  meanes  they  never  advance
themselves.  These  Gentiles  take  but  one  wife,  of  which
they  are  not  so  fearefull  as  the  Mahometans  of  their  multi-
tude, for  they  suffer  them  to  goe  abroad.  They  are
married  yong,  at  six  or  seven  yeeres  old  (their  Parents
making  the  Contracts)  and  about  twelve  come  together.
Their  Nuptials,  as  those  of  the  Mahometans,  are  performed
with  much  pompe  and  jollitie.

For  their  Habit  it  differs  little  from  the  Mahometans,
but  many  of  the  women  weare  Rings  upon  their  Toes,

43

[I  i

Tradition  of
Adam.

Marrying  in
the  same  Tribe
and  Trade.

[II.ix.1479.]
Their  habit.

A.D.
I6l6.

Eares  and
Ear e- rings.

Washing.

Spots.

Burning.
Widomes.

PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

and  therefore  goe  barefoote.  They  have  likewise  broad
Rings  of  brasse  (or  better  Metall  according  to  the  qualitie
of  the  woman)  about  the  small  of  the  legges  to  take  off
and  on,  haply  such  as  the  Prophet  meant  by  the  tinkling
ornaments  about  the  feete,  or  the  ornaments  of  the  legs,
which  the  Jewish  women  were  wont  to  put  on,  Esay  3.
And  such  as  these  they  have  about  their  armes.  The  flaps
or  nether  part  of  their  eares  are  boared,  when  they  are
yong,  which  hole  daily  stretched  and  made  wider  by  things
kept  in  it  for  that  purpose,  at  last  becomes  so  large,  that  it
will  hold  a  Ring  (I  dare  boldly  say,  as  large  as  a  little
Sawcer)  made  hollow  on  the  sides  for  the  flesh  to  rest  in.
Both  men  and  women  wash  their  bodies  every  day  before
they  eate,  which  done,  they  keepe  off  their  clothes  but  the
covering  of  modestie,  till  they  have  fed.  This  outward
washing  appertaines,  as  they  thinke,  to  their  clensing  from
not  unlike  the  Pharisies,  who  would  not  eate  with

Manner  of
trices  burning
trith  their
husbands.

sinne

unwashen  hands,  Mar.  7.  Hence  they  ascribe  a  certaine
Divinitie  to  Rivers,  but  above  all,  to  Ganges,  daily  flocking
thither  in  Troopes,  and  there  throw  in  pieces  of  gold,  or
silver,  according  to  their  devotion  and  abilitie,  after  which
they  wash  their  bodies.  Both  men  and  women  paint  on
their  fore-heads  or  other  parts  of  their  faces  red  or  yellow
spots.

Now  farther  for  their  grosse  opinions,  they  beleeve  not
the  resurrection  of  flesh,  and  therefore  burne  the  bodies
of  their  dead  neere  some  River,  if  they  may  with  conveni-
ence, wherein  they  sowe  the  Ashes.  Their  Widowes
marrie  not,  but  after  the  losse  of  their  Husbands,  cut  their
haire,  and  spend  all  their  life  following,  as  neglected
Creatures,  whence  to  bee  free  from  shame.  Many  yong
women  are  ambitious  to  die  with  honor  (as  they  esteeme
it)  when  their  fiery  love  brings  them  to  the  flames,  as  they
thinke,  of  Martvrdome,  most  willingly  :  Following  their
dead  Husbands  unto  the  fire,  and  there  imbracing  are
burnt  with  them  ;  but  this  they  doe  voluntary,  not  com-
pelled. The  parents  and  friends  of  those  women  will  most
joyfully  accompanie  them,  and  when  the  wood  is  fitted

44

KI)\\  ARI) TERRY

A.D.

Gentiles

industr.:

.

for  this  hellish  Sacrifice,  and  begins  to  burne,  all  the  people
assembled  shoute  and  make  a  noyse,  that  the  screeches  of
this  tortured  creature  may  not  bee  heard.  Not  much
unlike  the  custome  of  the  Ammonites,  who  when  they
made  their  children  passe  through  the  fire  to  Moloch,
caused  certaine  Tabret,  or  Drums  to  sound,  that  their  cry
might  not  be  heard,  whence  the  place  was  called  Tophet,
a  Tabret,  2.  Kings  23.  10.  There  is  one  sect  among  the
Gentiles,  which  neither  burne  nor  interre  their  dead  (they
are  called  Parcees)  who  incircle  pieces  of  ground  with  high  Parceet
stone  walls,  remote  from  houses  or  Roade-wayes,  and
therein  lay  their  Carkasses  wrapped  in  Sheetes,  thus  having
no  other  Tombes  but  the  gorges  of  ravenous  Fowles.

The  Gentiles  for  the  most  part  are  very  industrious  :
They  till  the  ground  or  else  spend  their  time  otherwaies
diligently  in  their  vocations.  There  are  amongst  them
most  curious  Artificers,  who  are  the  best  Apes  for  imita-
tion in  the  world,  for  they  will  make  any  new  thing  by
patterne.  The  Mahometans  are  Generally  idle,  who  are
all  for  to  morrow  (a  word  common  in  their  mouthes)  they
live  upon  the  labours  of  the  Gentiles.  Some  of  which
poore  seduced  Infidels,  will  eate  of  nothing  that  hath  life,
and  these  live  upon  Herbs,  and  Milke,  and  Butter,  and
Cheese, and Sweet-meates, of  which they make divers

'  kindes,  whereof  the  most  wholsome  is  greene  Ginger,  as
well  preserved  there  as  in  any  part  of  the  world.  Others
will  eate  Fish,  and  no  living  thing  else.  The  Rashbootes
eate  Swines-flesh,  most  hatefull  to  the  Mahometans. Some

,  will  eate  of  one  kinde  of  flesh,  some  of  another ;  but  all
the  Gentiles  abstaine  from  Beefe,  out  of  the  excellent
esteeme  they  have  of  Kine,  and  therefore  give  the  King
yeerly  (beside  his  other  exactions)  great  summes  of  money
as  a  ransome  for  those  Creatures.  Whence  among  other
good  provision,  we  meete  there  but  with  little  Beefe.

Those  most  tender  hearted  Idolaters  are  called  Banians,  Bsr-jr:
who  hold  Pitha^oras  his  /j-e-re/j-ybir^axri^,  as  a  prime  Article
of  their  Faith. They  thinke  that  the  soules  of  the  best
men  and  women,  when  their  bodies  let  them  out  of  Prison,

45

!

A.D.
l6l6.

Foolish  pittie.
Charitable
zvorkes.
^Thursday
Sabbath :
Munday  to
Peguans,
Thursday  in
Guinea,
Friday  to
Moorcs, Satur-
day to  Jews,
Sunday  to
Christians.  In
Java  that  day
whereon  they
have  begun
some  great
worke.
[II.ix.1480.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

take  their  repose  in  Kine,  which  in  their  opinion  are  the
best  of  all  Creatures.  So  the  soules  of  the  wicked  goe
into  viler  beasts,  as  the  soules  of  Gluttons  and  Drunkards
into  Swine ;  the  soules  of  the  voluptuous  and  incontinent
into  Monkies,  and  Apes ;  the  soules  of  the  furious,  cruell,
and  revengefull,  into  Lyons,  Tygers,  and  Wolves  ;  the
soules  of  the  envious,  into  Serpents ;  and  so  into  other
Creatures  according  to  their  qualitie  and  disposition,
successively  from  one  to  another  of  the  same  kinde,  ad
infinitum  ;  by  consequence,  beleeving  the  immortalitie  of
the  world.  So  that  there  is  not  a  silly  Flie,  but  if  they
may  bee  credited,  carries  about  some  soules  (haply  they
thinke  of  light  women)  and  will  not  be  perswaded  out  of
these  grosse  opinions,  so  incorrigible  are  their  sottish
errours.  And  therefore  will  not  deprive  the  most  offensive
creatures  of  their  life,  not  Snakes  that  will  kill  them,
saying,  it  is  their  nature  to  doe  harme,  how  that  they  have
reason  to  shunne,  not  libertie  to  destroy  them.

For  their  workes  of  Charitie,  many  rich  men  build
Sarraas,  or  make  Wells,  or  Tankes  neere  to  High-wayes
that  are  much  travelled,  where  passengers  may  drinke,  or
else  allow  Pensions  unto  poore  men,  that  they  may  sit  by
the  High-way  sides  and  offer  water  unto  those  that  passe.

Their  day  of  rest  is  *  Thursday,  as  the  Mahometans
Friday.  Many  Festivals  they  have  which  they  keepe
solemne,  and  Pilprimap-es  whereof  the  most  famous  are
specified  in  the  briefe  descriptions  of  Negracut  and  Cyba,
where  people  out  of  devotion  cut  off  part  of  their  tongues,
which  (if  Master  Coryat  who  strictly  observed  it,  may  be
beleeved)  in  a  few  daies  became  whole  againe.  It  were
easie  to  enlarge,  but  I  will  not  cast  away  Inke  and  Paper
in  a  farther  description  of  their  stupid  Idolatries,  the
summe  is,  that  both  Mahometans  and  Gentiles  ground
their  opinions  upon  Tradition,  not  Reason,  and  are  con-
tent to  perish  with  their  Fore-fathers,  out  of  a  preposterous
zeale,  and  loving  perversenesse  never  ruminating  on  that
they  maintayne,  like  to  uncleane  beasts  which  chew  not
the  Cud.

46

EDWARD TERRY  m>.

1616.

Now  both  these  Mahometans  and  Gentiles  are  under

the  subjection  of  the  Great  Mogoll,  whose  name  signified)

a  circumcised  man,  and  therefore  he  is  called  the  Great

Mogoll,  as  much  to  say,  the  Chiefe  of  the  Circumcision.

He  in  lineally  descended  by  the  Father  from  that  famous

Conquerour  of  the  East,  called  in  our  Stories  Tamberlaine,

in  theirs  Temar,  who  towards  his  end  by  an  unhappie  fall

from  his  Horse,  which  made  him  halt  to  his  Grave,  was

called Temar-lang,* or Temar the lame. The present  *  Lang,  in  the

King  is  the  ninth  in  a  direct  Line  from that  his  great  pJn,iatT1  sl£"1
, o  to  fieth  Lame.

Ancestors.

The  Emperour  stiles  himselfe,  The  King  of  Justice,
the  light  of  the  Law  of  Mahomet,  the  Conquerour  of  the
World.  Himselfe  moderates  in  all  matters  of  consequence
which  happen  neere  his  Court,  for  the  most  part  judging,  ^ourU  °f
secundum  allegata  &  probata.  Tryals  are  quicke  and  so
are  Executions,  hangings,  beheading,  impaling,  killing
with  Dogges,  by  Elephants,  Serpents,  and  other  like
according  to  the  nature  of  the  Fact.  The  execution  is
commonly  done  in  the  Market  place.  The  Governours
in  Cities  and  Provinces  proceed  in  like  forme  of  Justice.
I  could  never  heare  of  Law  written  amongst  them  :  the
King  and  his  Substitutes  will  is  Law.  His  Vice-gerents
continue  not  long  in  a  place,  but  to  prevent  popularitie
receive  usually  a  remoove  yearely.  They  receive  his  Bribes.
Letters  with  great  respect :  They  looke  for  Presents  from
all  which  have  occasion  to  use  them  ;  and  if  they  be  not
often  visited  will  aske  for  them  ;  yea,  send  them  backe
for  better  exchange.  The  Cadee  will  imprison  Debtors  Debts.
and  Sureties,  bound  with  hand  and  Seale  :  and  men  of
power  for  payment  will  sell  their  persons,  wives,  and
children,  which  the  custome  of  the  Land  will  warrant.

The  King  shewes  himselfe  thrice  a  day ;  first  at  Sun-  The  Durbar.
rising  at  a  Bay-window  toward  the  East,  many  being  there
assembled  to  give  him  the  Salam,  and  crying,  Padsha
Salament,  that  is,  Live,  O  King :  At  noone  he  sees  his
Elephants  fight  or  other  pastimes.  A  little  before  Sun-
set, he  shewes  himselfe  at  a  window  to  the  West,  and  the

47

A.D.
I6l6.

No  Inheri-
tance.

The  Kings
Pensions.
See  before  in
Captaine
Hawkins.

Gen.  41.

Principall
Officers.

Blue,  mourn-
ful/ colour.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Sunne  being  set,  returneth  in  with  Drums  and  wind
Instruments,  the  peoples  acclamations  adding  to  the
consort.  At  any  of  these  three  times,  any  Sutor  holding
up  his  Petition  to  be  seene,  shall  be  heard.  Betwixt  seven
and  nine  he  sits  privately  attended  with  his  Nobles.

No  Subject  in  this  Empire  hath  Land  of  Inheritance,
nor  have  other  title  but  the  Kings  will,  which  makes  some
of  the  Grandes  to  live  at  the  height  of  their  meanes ;
Merchants  also  to  conceale  their  Riches  lest  they  should
be  made  Spunges.  Some  meane  meanes  the  King  allowes
the  Children  of  those  great  Ones,  which  they  exceed  not,
except  they  happily  succeed  in  their  fathers  favours.  His
Pensions  are  reckoned  by  Horse,  of  which  hee  payeth  a
Million  in  his  Empire,  for  every  Horse  allowing  five  and
twentie  pound  yearely,  raised  from  Lands  thereunto
designed.  There  are  some  twentie  in  his  Court  which
have  pay  of  five  thousand  Horse,  others  of  foure  thou-
sand or  three  thousand,  and  so  downward.  Hee  which
hath  pay  of  five  thousand,  is  bound  to  have  two  thousand
at  command,  and  so  in  like  proportion  others.  This
absolute  dependance  makes  them  dissolute  Parasites.
When  he  giveth  advancement,  he  addeth  a  new  name,  as
Pharao  did  to  Joseph,  and  those  pithily  significant,  as
Mahobet  Chan,  the  beloved  Lord ;  Chan  Jahaun,  the
Lord  of  my  Heart ;  Chan  Allau,  the  Lord  of  the  World,
&c.

The  Chiefe  Officers  of  State  are  his  Treasurer,  the
Master  of  his  Eunuches  (who  is  Steward  and  Comptroller
of  his  House)  his  Secretarie,  the  Master  of  his  Elephants,
the  Tent-master,  and  Keeper  of  his  Wardrobe.  These
are  subordinate  Titles  of  Honour,  as  Chan,  Mirza,
Umbra,  or  Captaine,  Haddee  (a  Souldier  or  Horseman.)
Gorgeous  Apparell  is  prohibited  by  the  Sunnes  heate,  the
King  himselfe  beinor  commonly  vested  with  a  Garment,  as
before  described,  of  pure  white  Calico  Lawne.  Blue  may
not  be  worne  in  his  presence  (the  colour  of  Mourners)  nor
the  name  of  death  sounded  in  his  eares ;  but  such  casually
is  mollified  by  tearmes  to  this  purpose ; Such  an  one  hath

48

EDWARD TERRY  a.d.

e6i6.

made  himselfe  a  Sacrifice  at  your  Majesties  feet. That

heate  of  the  Countrey  makes  little  sale  for  English  cloth,  Entfuh  doth.

most used there for coverings of Elephants, Horses,

Coaches. Yet  may  this  King  be  thought  to  exceed  any

other  in  glorious  Thrones  and  rich  Jewels. Hee  hath  a

Throne  in  his  Palace  at  Agra,  ascended  by  degrees,  on

the  top  whereof  are  foure  Lions  made  of  massie  Silver,

gilded,  set  with  Precious  Stones,  supporting  a  Canopie  of

massie  Gold. By  the  way  I  may  mention,  a  tame  Lion Tame  Lion.

living  in  his  Court  while  I  was  there,  going  up  and  downe

without  hurt  like  a  Dogge. His  Jewels  wherewith  hee

is  daily  adorned  about  his  head,  necke,  wrists,  and  hilts

of  his  Sword  and  Dagger,  are  invaluable. He  is  on  his

Birth-day  the  first  of  September,  (now  sixtie  times  renewed)  Borne  !  5^2-

yearely weighed, and account kept thereof by his ff' f //,■„' ""'

Physicians,  thereby  ghessing  at  his  bodily  estate. Part  of  therefore  here

two  Letters  to  his  Majestie  (one  you  have  before)  is  here  omitted,SirT.

translated out of Persian, sent by Sir Thomas Roe,  Roes  Journal!.

but  written,  one  a  yeare  before  the  other.

WHen  your  Majestie  shall  open  this  Letter,  let  your  [Ii.ix.1481.]
Royall  heart  be  as  fresh,  as  a  sweet  Garden  ;  let  *£Jfi£
all  people  make  reverence  at  your  Gate ;  let  your  Throne
be  advanced  higher  amongst  the  greatnesse  of  Kings  of
the  Prophet  Jesus ;  let  your  Majestie  be  the  greatest  of
all  Monarches,  who  may  derive  their  counsell  and  wise-
dome  from  your  brest  as  from  a  Fountayne,  that  the  Law
of  the  Majestie  of  Jesus  may  revive  and  flourish  under
your  protection.  The  Letters  of  Love  and  Friendship
which  you  sent  me,  and  the  Presents  (tokens  of  your
good  affection  toward  mee)  I  have  received  by  the  hands
of  your  Embassadour  Sir  Thomas  Roe,  who  well  deserveth
to  be  your  trusted  Servant ;  delivered  to  me  in  an  accept-
able and  happie  houre.  Upon  which  mine  eyes  were  so
fixed,  that  I  could  not  easily  remoove  them  to  any  other
Object,  and  have  accepted  them  with  great  joy,  &c.  The
last  Letter  hath  this  beginning.

ix  49  d

H

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

Ow  gracious  is  your  Majestie,  whose  greatnesse  God
preserve  r  As  upon  a  Rose  in  a  Garden,  so  are
mine  eyes  fixed  upon  you.  God  maintayne  your  Estate,
that  your  Monarchic  may  prosper  and  be  augmented,  and
that  you  may  obtayne  all  your  desires,  worthy  the  great-
nesse of  your  Renowme.  And  as  your  heart  is  noble  and
upright,  so  let  God  give  you  a  glorious  Raigne,  because
you  strongly  defend  the  Majestie  of  Jesus,  which  God
yet  made  more  flourishing,  because  it  was  confirmed  by
Miracles,  &c.

That  which  followeth  in  both  Letters,  is  to  testifie  his
care  and  love  toward  the  English.  These  Letters  being
written,  their  Copies  were  sent  to  the  Lord  Embassadour,
and the originals  rolled up  and  covered  with  cloth of

Searing  Gold,  and  sealed  up  at  both  ends  ;  which  is  the  Letter-
fashion  of  those  parts.

King's  Pro- \ye travelled two yeares with the Great Mogoll in

gnsse  ani  progresse,  in  the  temperate  moneths  twixt  October  and
April,  there  being  no  lesse  then  two  hundred  thousand
men,  women,  and  children  in  this  Leskar,  or  Campe  (I  am
hereof  confident)  besides  Elephants,  Horses,and  other  beasts
that  eate  Corne  :  all  which  notwithstanding,  wee  never
felt  want  of  any  provision,  no  not  in  our  nineteene  daves
travel!  from  Mandoa  to  Amadavar,  thorow  a  Wildernesse,
the  Road  being  cut  for  us  in  the  mayne  Woods. The

His  Tents.  Tents  were  of  divers  colours,  and  represented  a  spacious
and  specious  Citie  :  The  Kings  Tents  red,  reared  on  poles
very  high,  and  placed  in  the  midst  of  the  Campe,  covering
a  large  compasse,  incircled  with  Canats  (made  of  red
Calico  stiffened  with  Canes  at  even'  breadth,  standing
upright  about  nine  foot  high)  guarded  round  every  night
with  Souldiers.  He  remooved  ten  or  twelve  miles  a  day
more  or  lesse  according  to  the  convenience  of  water. His

His  tccmen.  Wives  and  Women  of  all  sorts  (which  are  one  thousand
at  least,  provided  for  in  his  Tents)  are  carryed  in  Palankas,
or  upon  Elephants,  or  else  in  Cradles,  hanging  on  the
sides of Dromedaries, covered close and attended bv

EDWARD TERRY  ad.

1616.

Eunuches.  In  wiving,  he  respects  fancie  more  then
honour,  not  seeking  affinitie  with  Neighbour  Princes,  but
to  please  his  eye  at  home.  Noore-Mahal  (the  name  of
his  best  Beloved)  signifieth  the  Light  of  the  Court :  Shee
hath  much  advanced  her  friends,  before  meane,  and  in
manner  commands  the  Commander  of  that  Empire  by
engrossing  his  affections.  The  King  and  his  Great  men
maintayne  their  women,  but  little  affect  them  after  thirtie
yeares  of  their  age.

This  multitude  of  women  notwithstanding,  the  Mogoll  Hit  children.
hath  but  sixe  Children,  five  Sonnes  and  a  Daughter.  All
his  Sonnes  are  called  Sultans,  or  Princes,  the  eldest  Sultan
Cursero,  the  second,  Sultan  Parneis,  Sultan  Caroon  the
third,  Sultan  Shahar  the  fourth,  the  last  is  Sultan  Tauct,
which  word  in  the  Persian  signifieth,  A  Throne  :  so  named
by  the  King,  who  the  first  houre  of  his  quiet  possessing
the  Throne,  had  newes  of  his  birth,  about  nineteene
yeares  since.  The  first  Sonne  by  any  of  his  marryed
Wives,  by  prerogative  of  birth  inherits :  the  elder  Brother
beeing  there  called  the  Great  Brother.  Although  the
younger  be  not  put  to  death,  as  with  the  Turkes,  yet  it  is
observed,  that  they  survive  not  long  their  Father,
employed  commonly  in  some  dangerous  expedition.
Achabar-sha  had  threatned  to  dis-herit  the  present  King
for  abuse  of  Anar-kalee,  (that  is,  Pomegranate  kernell)
his  most  beloved  Wife,  but  on  his  death-bed  repealed  it.
This  Achabars  death  is  thus  reported.  He  was  wont  Achabars
upon  displeasure  to  give  Pils  to  his  Grandes,  to  purge  death-
their  soules  from  their  bodies ;  which  intending  against
One,  and  having  another  Cordiall  Pill  for  himselre,  whiles
hee  entertayned  the  other  with  faire  flatteries,  by  a  happie-
unhappie  mistake  hee  tooke  the  Poyson  himselfe,  which
with  a  mortall  Fluxe  of  bloud  in  few  dayes  killed  him  :
Neque  enim  lex  justior  ulla  est.  Quam  necis  artifices
arte  perire  sua.

This  Kings  disposition  seemes  composed  of  extreames,  The  Mogplls
very  cruell,  and  otherwhiles  very  milde ; often  overcome  <*,sf>osttton-
with  Wine,  but  severely  punishing  that  fault  in  others.

51

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PTLGRIMES

1616.

His  Subjects  know  not  to  disobey,  Nature  forgetting
her  private  bonds  twixt  Father  and  Sonne  to  fulfill
that  publike.  He  daily  relieves  many  poore,  and  will
in  pietie  helpe  to  carrie  sometimes  his  Mother  in  a
Palanka  on  his  shoulders.  He  speakes  respectively
of  our  Saviour,  but  is  offended  at  his  Crosse  and
povertie,  thinking  them  incompetible  to  such  Majestie,
though  told  that  his  humilitie  was  to  subdue  the  Worlds
pride.
Respect  to  All  Religions  are  tolerated,  and  their  Priests  in  good

Priests.  esteeme. My  selfe  often  received  from  the  Mogoll  him-

selfe,  the  appellation  of  Father,  with  other  many  gracious
Jesuits  and words,  with  place  amongst  his  best  Nobles. The  Jesuites
Converts. have  not  only  admittance  into  his  presence,  but  incourage-
ments  from  him  by  many  gifts,  with  libertie  of  converting
to  them ; and  to  the  subject,  to  be  without  losse  of  favour
converted. He  made  tryall  of  one  Convert  with  many
[II.ix.14S2.]  threats  to  deterre  him  from  his  new  profession,  and  finding
him undauntedly  resolute, he assayed by flatteries and
promises  to  re-gaine him, but therein also failing, hee
bade  him  continue,  and  with  a  Reward  discharged  him  ;
having  told  him,  that  if  he  could  have  frayed  or  brought
him from his Religion, he would have made him an
Jesuite-Agent.  example for all Waverers. The chiefe Tesuite was
yaine  Franciscus Corsi a Florentine by birth, living at the

Mogolls  Court,  Agent  for  the  Portugals,  I  would  I  were
able  to  confirme  the  Reports  of  their  Conversions.  The
truth  is,  they  have  spilt  the  water  of  Baptisme  upon  some
faces  working  on  the  necessities  of  poore  men,  who  for
want  of  meanes,  which  they  give  them,  are  content  to
weare  Crucifixes  ;  but  for  want  of  instruction  are  only  in
name  Christians.  (I  observed  that  of  the  poore  there,
five  have  begged  in  the  name  of  Marie,  for  one  in  the
Name  of  Christ)  I  also  desired  to  put  my  hand  to  this
holy  Worke,  but  found  it  difficult,  both  by  Mahumetane
libertie  for  women,  and  the  debauched  lives  of  some
Christian-unchristian  men  amongst  them,  Per  quorum
latera  patitur  Evangelium. Hee  which  hath  the  Key  of

52

EDWARD TERRY  a.d.

r  [6.
David, open their eyes, and in his good time send
Labourers  into  this  Vineyard. Amen.

Because  you  have  the  transcripts  of  Letters  from  the
Great  Mogoll,  I  have  added  here  part  of  a  Letter  from
the  Great  Turke,  to  his  Majestic,  that  the  Reader  may
delight  himselfe  with  the  strangenesse  of  the  stile.

Sultan  Achmet Chan,  Sonne unto the  Sultan
Mehemet  Chan  most  invincible.

TO  the  most  glorious  of  the  great  Lords  that  follow
Jesus,  elected  by  the  great  and  mightie  of  the
Christian  Faith  :  Corrector  of  the  things  of  all  the  Nations
of  the  Nazaritanes ;  endued  with  the  brightnesse  of
Lordship,  Honour,  Majestie,  and  Glorie,  King  James  of
the  Kingdome  of  England,  &c.  whose  end  be  with  all
happinesse  and  felicitie.

At  the  comming  of  this  our  Imperiall  Letter  to  your
Majesties  hands,  with  our  Imperiall  signe,  you  shall
understand  of  the  arrivall  at  our  Port  (which  Port  is
indeed  the  refuge  of  Justice,  and  the  Gate  of  Honourable
succour,  yea,  the  principall  place  of  all  the  Kings  of  the
World)  of  one  of  your  Majesties  Honourable  and  accept-
able Gentlemen,  Thomas  Glover,  with  your  Majesties
most  friendly  and  most  sincere  Letter ;  the  tenour  whereof
is,  That  by  the  good  will  and  pleasure  of  the  sole  Creator
of  the  World,  your  Majestie  hath  not  only  taken  in
possession  the  Kingdom  of  England,  but  also  as  hereto-
fore the  deceased  Queene  of  England  hath  beene  in  sincere
and  mutuall  Friendship  and  Peace  with  our  sublime  and
most  happie  Port ;  so  your  Majestie  also  consequently
vouchsafeth  to  manifest  and  approove  the  same.  More-
over, your  Majestie  hath  given  us  to  understand,  that
your  will  and  pleasure  is,  that  the  Subjects  of  your
Majesties  Countries,  in  manner  as  heretofore  they  were
wont,  should  come  and  trafflque  in  these  our  guarded
Dominions,  and  so  to  the  end  accordingly  at  their
pleasures  might  continue  in  the  same.  Finally,  all  those
things  that  were  by  it  certified  unto  our  Imperiall  Great-

53

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

nesse,  we  have  sufficiently  comprehended  and  understood.
Now  your  Majestie  shall  understand,  that  it  being  from
the  time  of  our  Father  and  Grand-father,  of  most  happie
Memories,  alwaies  the  custome  and  use,  and  most  excel-
lent order,  to  hold  our  most  high  and  sublime  Port  open,
now  also  in  conformitie  thereof,  especially  we  being  by
the  Divine  grace  and  favour  seated  in  the  Throne  of
Justice,  it  is  not  any  way  prohibited  nor  forbidden  to  any
person  to  enter,  and  to  depart  from  the  same.  Especially
the  Queene  of  England  of  good  Memorie,  being  in
friendship,  from  the  time  of  our  Father  and  Grand-father
of  most  happie  Memorie,  it  hath  beene  alwaies  the  use
and  custome  to  shew  unto  her  Subjects,  who  trade  and
traffique  within  our  Musulmanicall  guarded  Dominions,
all  extraordinary  favour,  grace,  and  aide.  Now  by  the
great  favour  of  the  Omnipotent  God,  we  being  come
and  established  with  honour,  felicitie,  prosperitie  and
greatnesse  in  the  Seate  and  Throne  of  happinesse,  in
conformitie  of  the  above  said  favours,  before  it  was  on
your  Majesties  behalfe  requested  for  the  renovation  of
the  peace  and  entercourse,  which  is  betwixt  us,  wee  have
not  only  caused  to  renew  the  Capitulations  for  the  securitie
of  the  traffique  of  the  Merchants,  giving  the  same  into
the  hands  of  your  Majesties  Ambassadour,  but  also,  &c.
Written  the  last  day  of  the  Moone,  called  Giemasillenel,
and  of  the  Moones  of  the  yeare  of  the  transmigration  of
our  Prophet,  on  whom  the  grace  and  peace  of  the  highest
God  continue. 1013.

In  the  Residence  of  our  Excelse  Kingdome  of
Constantinople  guarded.

54

LEWIS BAKTHKMA

'5'-v

Chap. VII.

The  Travels  of  Lewis  Barthema  or  Vertoman
into  Egypt,  Syria,  Arabia,  Persia,  and  India,
heretofore  published  in  English  by  R.  Eden,
and  here  corrected  according  to  Ramusios
Copie,  and  contracted.

[II. ix.,

§.  I.

His Travell thorow  the
Mecha,  and  their

Eparting from

:\id

Cayro.

Desarts  of Medina
profane Holies.

Venice  with  prosperous
winds,  in  few  dayes  wee  arrived  at  the
Citie  of  Alexandria  in  Egypt :  where  the
desire  wee  had  to  know  things  more
strange  and  further  off,  would  not  permit
us  to  tarrie  long.  And  therefore  depart-
ing from  thence,  and  sayling  up  the  River
of  Nilus,  we  came  to  the  Citie  of  new  Babylon,  commonly
called,  Cayro.  It  seemed  to  mee  much  inferiour  to  the
report  and  fame  that  was  thereof :  for  the  greatnesse
thereof  seemed  nothing  agreeable  to  the  bruit,  and
appeared  no  more  in  circuit  then  the  Citie  of  Rome,
although  much  more  peopled,  and  better  inhabited.  But
the  large  fields  of  the  Suburbs  have  deceived  many,  being
dispersed  with  in  manner  innumerable  Villages,  which
some  have  thought  to  have  beene  part  of  the  Citie,  which
is  nothing  so.  For  those  Villages  and  dispersed  houses,
are  two  or  three  miles  from  the  Citie,  and  round  about  it
on  every  side.

Departing  from  Babylon,  and  returning  to  Alexandria,
where  we  againe  entred  into  our  Sea,  we  came  to  Barutti,
a  Citie  on  the  Sea-coast  of  Syria.  From  hence  wee  sayled
to  Tripoli.  From  thence  we  came  to  Aleppo.  Departing
from  thence,  we  came  to  Damasco,  in  ten  dayes  journey.  Damasco.
It  is  in  manner  incredible,  and  passeth  all  beliefe,  to

55

A.D.

!503-

Christians
Greekes.
A  strange
manner  to
demand  a
subsidie.

Their
Churches.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

thinke  how  faire  the  Citie  of  Damasco  is,  and  how  fertile
is  the  soyle.  And  therefore  allured  by  the  marvellous
beautie  of  the  Citie,  I  remayned  there  many  dayes,  that
learning  their  Language,  I  might  know  the  manners  of
the  People.  The  Inhabitants  are  Mahumetans,  and
Mamalukes,  with  many  Christians,  living  after  the
manner  of  the  Greekes.  When  it  pleaseth  the  Sultan  to
extort  a  certaine  summe  of  Gold  of  his  Noblemen  or
Merchants  (for  they  use  great  robberies  and  murthers  (for
the  Moores  are  under  the  Mamalukes,  as  Lambs  to  the
Wolfe)  he  sends  two  Letters  to  the  Captaine  of  the
Castle.  In  the  one  is  contayned,  that  with  an  Oration
he  invite  to  the  Castle  such  as  pleaseth  him.  In  the  other
is  declared  the  minde  of  the  Soldan,  what  hee  demandeth
of  his  Subjects.  When  the  Letters  bee  read,  with  all
expedition  they  accomplish  his  commandement,  bee  it
right  or  wrong,  without  respect.  This  meanes  the  Soldan
invented  to  extort  money.  Yet  sometimes  it  commeth
to  passe,  that  the  Noblemen  are  of  such  strength,  that
they  will  not  come  when  they  are  commanded,  knowing
that  the  Tyrant  will  offer  them  violence.  And  therefore
oftentimes  when  they  know  that  the  Captaine  of  the
Castle  will  call  them,  they  flee  into  the  Dominions  of  the
Turke.  This  have  we  gathered  as  touching  their
manners ;  wee  have  also  observed,  that  the  Watchmen  in
the  Towers,  doe  not  give  warning  to  the  Guard  with
lively  voyce,  but  with  Drummes,  the  one  answering  the
other  by  course.  But  if  any  of  the  Watchmen  be  so
sleepie,  that  in  a  Pater  noster  while  he  answere  not  to  the
sound  of  the  watch,  hee  is  immediatly  committed  to
prison  for  one  whole  yeere.  In  every  house  are  seene
Fountaines  of  curious  worke  embossed  and  graven.
Their  houses  outwardly  are  not  beautifull,  but  inwardly
marvelously  adorned  with  variable  workes  of  Marble  and
Porphyr.  Within  the  Towne  are  many  Temples  or
Churches,  which  they  call,  Moscheas.  But  that  which  is
most  beautifull  of  all  other,  is  builded  after  the  manner  of
Saint  Peters  Church  in  Rome,  if  you  respect  the  greatnesse,

56 '

LEWIS HARTHEMA

'503-
excepting  this,  that  in  the  middle  is  no  roofe  or  coverture,
but  is  all  open  : but  about  the  rest  of  the  Temple,  it  is
altogether  vaulted. There they  observe  religiously the
bodie  of  the  holy  Prophet  Zacharie. The  Temple  hath  The  bodie  vf
also  foure  great  double  gates  of  metall,  very  faire,  and  '!\c  '>roPhet
many  goodly  Fountaines  within  it.

The Mamalukes are that kind of men, which have  JAe  Mama-
forsaken our Faith, and as slaves are bought by the  <>  s'„  um
Governour. They  are  very  active,  and  brought  up  both  ten  \n  fa  enj
in learning  and  warlike  discipline, untill they  come to  of  the  former
great  perfection. As  well  the  little  as  the  great,  without  Booke.
respect, receive stipend of the Governour : which tor
every  moneth  amounteth  to  six  of  those  pieces  of  Gold
which  they  call  Saraphos,  beside  the  meat  and  drinke  for
himselfe  and  his  servant,  and  also  provision  for  his  Horse.
And  the  more  expert  they  be,  and  of  greater  activitie,
they  have the  greater wages. They walke not in the
Citie but by two or three together, for it is counted
dishonour  for  any  of  them  to  walke  without  a  companion.
And  if  by  the  way  they  chance  to  meet  with  two  or  three  [II.ix.1484.]
women  (for  they  lay  waite  to  tarrie  for  them  about  such  Ho™ , ,  a~

houses  whither  they  know  the  women  resort)  licence  is  „„„„,„„
/  /  women.

granted  them,  as  they  by  chance  first  meet  with  them,
to  bring  them  into  certaine  Tavernes,  where  they  abuse
them.  When  the  Mamalukes  attempt  to  discover  their
faces  (for  they  goe  with  their  faces  covered)  they  strive
with  them,  because  they  will  not  be  knowne  :  but  when
the  Mamalukes  persist  wantonly  to  discover  them,  they
say  thus  unto  them,  Is  it  not  enough  for  you,  that  you
have  abused  our  bodies  as  pleaseth  you,  but  that  you  will
also  discover  our  faces  ?  Then  the  Mamalukes  suffer
them  to  depart.  But  sometime  it  chanceth,  that  when
they  thinke  to  prostitute  the  daughter  of  some  Gentlemen
or  Noblemen,  they  commit  the  fact  with  their  owne
wives :  which  thing  chanced  whilest  I  was  there.  The
women  beautifie  and  garnish  themselves  as  much  as  any.  The  women  of
They  use  silken  apparell,  and  cover  them  with  cloth  of  Damasco.
Gossampine,  in  maner  as  fine  as  Silke. They  weare  white

57

A.D.

J503-

The  Mahume-
tans wives.

Goats  milke.

Mushroms.

Asia  the  lesse,
now  named
Natolia,  or
Turkia.

Christians  of
Damasco.

The  journey
from  Damasco
to  Mecha,  and
of  the  manners
of  the
Arabians.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Buskins,  and  Shooes  of  red  or  purple  colour.  They
garnish  their  heads  with  many  Jewels  and  Eare-rings,  and
weare  Rings  and  Bracelets.  They  marrie  as  often  as  them
listeth  :  for  when  they  are  wearie  of  their  first  marriage,
they  goe  to  the  Cady,  and  make  request  to  him  to  bee
divorced  from  their  first  marriage.  Some  thinke,  that  the
Mahumetans  have  five  or  sixe  wives  together,  which  I
have  not  observed  :  but  as  farre  as  I  could  perceive,  they
have  but  two  or  three.  They  eate  openly,  especially  in
their  Marts  or  Faires,  and  there  dresse  they  all  their
meates.  They  eate  Horses,  Camels,  Buffels,  Goats,  and
such  other  beasts.  They  have  great  abundance  of  fresh
Cheese.  They  that  sell  Milke,  drive  about  with  them,
fortie  or  fiftie  Goats,  which  they  bring  into  the  houses  of
them  that  will  buy  milke,  even  up  into  their  chambers,
although  they  bee  three  roofes  high,  and  there  milke  them,
to  have  it  fresh  and  new.  These  Goats  have  their  eares
a  span  long,  many  udders  or  paps,  and  are  very  fruitfull.
There  is  great  abundance  of  Mushroms,  for  sometimes
there  are  seene,  twentie  or  thirtie  Camels  laden  with
Mushroms,  and  yet  in  the  space  of  three  dayes  they  are
all  sold.  They  are  brought  from  the  Mountaines  of
Armenia,  and  from  Asia  the  lesse,  which  is  now  called,
Turkia  or  Natolia,  or  Anatolia.

The  Mahumetans  use  long  Vestures  and  loose,  both  of
Silke  and  Cloth.  The  most  part  use  Hose  of  Gossam-
pine  cloth,  and  white  Shooes.  When  any  of  the
Mahumetans  by  chance  meeteth  with  any  of  the  Mama-
lukes,  although  the  Mahumetan  be  the  worthier  person,
yet  giveth  he  place  and  reverence  to  the  Mamaluke,  who
otherwise  would  give  him  the  Bastonado,  and  beat  him
with  a  staffe.  The  Christians  also  keepe  there  many
Ware-houses  of  Merchandise,  where  they  have  divers
sorts  of  Silkes  and  Velvet :  but  the  Christians  are  there
evill  entreated.

In  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1503.  the  eighth  day  of  the
moneth  of  Aprill,  the  Caravan  being  readie  to  goe  to
Mecha,  I  entred  familiaritie  and  friendship  with  a  certaine

58

LEWIS BARTHEMA

1 503.

Captaine  Mamaluke,  of  them  that  had  forsaken  our  Faith,

with  whom  being  agreed  of  the  price, hee  prepared mc

apparell  like  unto  that  which  the  Mamalukes  use  to  wearc,

and  giving  me  also  a  good  Horse,  accompanied  me  with

the  other  Mamalukes. This  (as  I  have  said)  I  obtayned

with  great  cost,  and  many  gifts  which  I  gave  him. Thus

entring  to  the  journey,  after  the  space  of  three  dayes,  we

came to a certaine place named Mezerick, where we  Mezerik.

remayned  three  dayes, that the Merchants  which were

in our companie might provide things necessarie, as

specially Camels, and divers other things. There is a

certaine  Prince  whom  they  call  Zambei,  of  great  power f^e  Prince

in  the  Countrey  of  Arabia : he  had  three  brethren,  and  J1  ,cl  in

foure  children. He  nourisheth  fortie  thousand  Horses,

ten  thousand  Mares,  and  foure  thousand  Camels. The

Countrey  where  he  keepeth  the  herds  of  these  beasts,  is

large,  of  two  dayes  journey. This  Prince  Zambei,  is  of  Tfte  Pf'w  °J

so  great  power,  that  he  keepeth  warre  with  the  Soltan  of  d

Babylon,  the  Governours  of  Damasco,  and  of  Jerusalem.

In  the  time  of  Harvest  &  gathering  of  fruits,  hee  is  given  £  Princc  a

wholly to prey and robbing, and with great subtiltie "■'''

deceiveth  the  Arabians : for, when they thinke him to

bee  a  mile  or  two  off",  hee  is  with  them  suddenly  betimes

in  the  morning  :  and  invading  their  Lands,  carrieth  away

their  fruits,  Wheat,  and  Barley,  even  as  hee  findeth  it  in

the  sackes  :  and  so  liveth  continually  day  and  night  with

such incursions. When his Mares bee wearied with  Marcs.

continuall  running,  hee  resteth  a  while  : and to  refresh

them,  giveth  them  Camels  Milke  to  drinke,  to  coole  them

after their great labour. Those Mares are of such

marvellous  swiftnesse, that  when  I presently  saw  them,

they  seemed  rather  to  flye  then  to  runne. Note  also,  that

these  Arabians  ride  on  Horses  without  Saddles,  and  weare  ^  Arabians

none  other  vesture  then  onely  an  inward  Coat,  or  Peticoat, ffi.

,  . r  r  J  ,  . robbenc.

except  some  chiere  men  ;  tor  weapon,  they  use  a  certaine
long  Dart  of  Reeds,  of  the  length  of  ten  or  twelve  cubits,
pointed  with  Iron  (after  the  manner  of  Javelins)  and
fringed  with  Silke. When  they  attempt  any  incursions,

59

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1503.

they  march  in  such  order,  that  they  seeme  to  goe  in
troups :  they  are  of  despicable  and  little  stature,  and  of
colour  betweene  yellow  and  blacke.  They  have  the
voyces  of  women,  and  the  haire  of  their  head  long  and
blacke,  and  laid  out  at  large.  They  are  of  greater  multi-
tude then  a  man  would  beleeve,  and  are  among  themselves
at  continuall  strife  and  warre.  They  inhabite  the
Mountaines,  and  have  certaine  times  appointed  to
robberie :  for  this  purpose  they  observe  especially  the
time,  when  they  are  certaine  of  the  passage  of  the
Pilgrims,  and  other  that  journey  that  way  to  Mecha,  then
like  Theeves  they  lie  in  the  way  and  robbe  them.  When
they  make  these  theevish  invasions,  they  bring  with  them
their  Wives,  Children,  Families,  and  all  the  goods  they

[II. ix.  1485.]  nave# Their  Houses  they  put  upon  the  Camels  :  for  other
ouses orne ]-}ouses have they none, but live onely in Tents and

hackes.  Pavilions,  as  doe  our  Souldiers.

Tents  and  Such  Tabernacles  are  made  of  blacke  wooll,  and  that

Pavilions.  rough  and  filthie.  But  to  returne  to  our  Voyage.  The
eleventh  day  of  Aprill,  departed  from  Mezaribe  the
companie  of  Camels  (which  they  call  the  Caravan)  to  the

This  for  feare  number  of  five  and  thirtie  thousand,  with  fortie  thousand

°J  [  f .  men. But  wee  were  no  more  then  threescore  Mamalukes,

which  had  taken  the  charge  to  guide  and  guard  the
Caravan  ;  which  was  divided  into  three  parts,  some  in  the
front,  other  in  the  middest  of  the  Armie,  and  other  in

FromDamasco  the  reare.  Damasco  is  from  Mecha  fortie  dayes  and  fortie
nights  journey.  Departing  therefore  from  Mezaribe,  we
continued  our  journey  that  day,  untill  the  two  and
twentieth  houre  of  the  day.  Then  our  Captaine,  after
hee  had  given  the  watch-word  and  signe,  commanded  that
every  man  should  rest  and  remayne  in  the  place  where
the  signe  should  be  given  them.  Therefore  as  soone  as
they  heard  the  signe,  by  the  sound  of  a  Trumpet,  they
stayed,  and  after  they  had  unburdened  their  Camels,  spent

Perhaps  with tnere  two  houres  to  victuall  themselves  and  their  beasts :

the  sound  of  a .  .„,.  ..  .  .  .  ..

Horne  or then the Captaine giving a new signe, charging their
Trumpet. Camels againe, they departed speedily from thence.

60

LEWIS HA  in  HEM  A  a.d.

i  503.

Every  Camell  hath  at  one  feeding  five  Barley  loaves,  raw

and  not  baked,  as  big  as  a  Pomgranate. Taking  horse,

they  continued  that  journey  the  day  and  night  following,

untill  two  and  twentie  houres  of  the  day,  and  at  that  hourc

they  observe  the  order  which  we  have  spoken  off  here

before. Every  eighth  day  they  draw  water  by  digging  Water.

the  ground  or  sand  : by  the  way  neverthelesse  somwhere

are  found  Wells  and  Cisternes. After  every  eighth  day,

they  rest  their  Camels  one  or  two  dayes  to  recover  their

strength. The  Camels  are  laden  with  incredible  burdens,  The  burden  of

and  double  charge  : that  is  to  meane,  the  burden  of  two  the  Camels-

great Mules. They drinke but once in three dayes.

They  give  them  to  eate  five  Barley  loaves  as  big  as  a

Pomgranate.

When  they  tarrie  and  rest  them  at  the  waters  aforesaid,
they  are  ever  enforced  to  conflict  with  a  great  multitude
of the  Arabians : but the battell is for the most part
without bloudshed : for although we have oftentimes
fought  with  them,  yet  was  there  onely  one  man  slaine  on
our  part ; for  these  Arabians  are  so  weake  and  feeble,  The  feeble-
that  threescore  Mamalukes,  have  often  put  to  the  worst,  ne$se  °f the
fortie  or  fiftie  thousand  Arabians. For  no  Pagans  are  in  paRanSm
I  strength  or  force  of  Armes  to  be  compared  to  the  Mama-  The  activltie
:  lukes,  of  whose  activitie  I  have  seene  great  experience: of  the
••  among  the  which  this  is  one. A  certaine  Mamaluke  layed  Mama'ukes-
i  an  Apple  upon  the  head  of  his  servant,  and  at  the  distance
of  about  twelve  or  fourteene  paces,  strooke  it  off  from  his
head. I  saw  likewise  another,  who  riding  on  a  saddled
;  Horse  with  full  course  (for  they  use  Saddles  as  we  doe)
I  tooke  off  the  Saddle  from  the  Horse  still  running,  and
for  a  space  bearing  it  on  his  head,  put  it  againe  on  the
Horse  still  continuing  in  his  full  course.

Passing  the  journey  of  twelve  dayes,  we  came  to  the
Valley  of  Sodoma  and  Gomorrha,  where  we  found  it  to
be  true,  that  is  written  in  holy  Scripture  :  for  there  is
yet  to  be  seene,  how  they  were  destroyed  by  Miracle.  I
affirme  that  there  are  three  Cities.  There  is  yet  seene,
I  wot  not  what,  like  Bloud,  or  rather  like  red  Waxe  mixt

61

ad.  PURCHAS HTS PILGRIMES

1503.

with  Earth,  three  or  foure  yards  deepe.  It  is  easie  to
beleeve  that  those  men  were  infected  with  most  horrible
vices,  as  testifieth  the  barren  Region,  utterly  without
A ^conceit  of  wajer  _  Those  people  were  once  fed  with  Manna:  but
trarle  to  '  wnen  tney  abused  the  gift  of  God,  they  were  sore  plagued.
Scripture  Departing  twentie  miles  from  these  Cities,  about  thirtie
of  our  companie  perished  of  thirst,  and  divers  other  were
buried  in  the  sand,  not  yet  fully  dead.  Going  somewhat
further  forward,  wee  found  a  little  Mountaine,  at  the  foot
whereof  we  found  water,  and  therefore  made  our  abode
there.  The  day  following  early  in  the  morning,  came
unto  us  foure  and  twentie  thousand  Arabians,  asking
money  for  the  water  which  wee  had  taken.  Wee
answered,  that  wee  would  pay  nothing,  because  it  was
given  us  by  the  goodnesse  of  God.  Immediatly  we  came
to  hand-strokes.  Wee  gathering  our  selves  together  on
the  said  Mountaine,  as  in  the  safest  place,  used  our  Camels
in  the  stead  of  a  Bulwarke,  and  placed  the  Merchants  in
the  middest  of  the  Armie  (that  is)  in  the  middest  of  the
Camels,  while  we  fought  manfully  on  every  side.  The
battell  continued  so  long,  that  water  fayled  both  us  and
our  Enemies  in  the  space  of  two  dayes.  The  Arabians
compassed  about  the  Mountaine,  crying  and  threatning
that  they  would  breake  in  among  the  Camels :  at  the
length,  to  make  an  end  of  the  conflict,  our  Captaine
assembling  the  Merchants,  commanded  a  thousand  and
two  hundred  pieces  of  Gold  to  be  given  to  the  Arabians :
who  when  they  had  received  the  money,  said,  that  the
summe  of  ten  thousand  pieces  of  Gold  should  not  satisfie
them  for  the  water  which  we  had  drawne.  Whereby  we
perceived  that  they  began  further  to  quarrell  with  us,  and
to  demand  some  other  thing  then  money.  Whereupon
incontinent  our  Captaine  gave  commandement,  that  who-
soever in  all  our  companie  were  able  to  beare  Armes,
should  not  mount  upon  the  Camels,  but  should  with  all
expedition  prepare  themselves  to  fight.  The  day  follow-
ing in  the  morning,  sending  the  Camels  before,  and
enclosing our Armie, being about three hundred in

62

LEWIS BARTHEMA  aj>.

^503.
number,  we  met  with  the  Enemies,  and  gave  the  onset.
In  this  conflict,  we  lost  onely  a  man  and  a  woman,  and
had  none  other  damage :  we  slue  of  the  Arabians  a
thousand  and  five  hundred.  Whereof  you  need  not
marvel,  if  you  consider  that  they  are  unarmed,  and  weare
only  a  thin  loose  vesture,  and  are  beside  almost  naked  :
their  Horses  also  being  as  evill  furnished,  and  without
Saddles,  or  other  furniture.

In  the  space  of  eight  dayes,  wee  came  to  a  Mountayne  [II.iv.1486.]
which  containeth  in  circuit  ten  or  twelve  miles.  This  is
inhabited  with  Jewes,  to  the  number  of  five  thousand,  or  Jewes  Pigmei.
thereabout.  They  are  of  very  little  stature,  as  of  the
height  of  five  or  sixe  spannes,  and  some  much  lesse.
They  have  small  voyces  like  women,  and  of  blacke  colour,
yet  some  blacker  then  other :  They  feede  of  none  other
meate  then  Mutton.  They  are  circumcised,  and  deny  not
themselves  to  be  Jewes.  If  by  chance  any  Mahumetan
come  into  their  hands,  they  flay  him  alive.  At  the  foote
of  the  Mountayne,  we  found  a  certaine  hole,  wherein  the
Raine  water  was  received.  By  finding  this  opportunitie,
we  laded  sixteene  thousand  Camels,  which  thing  greatly
offended  the  Jewes.  They  wandred  in  that  Mountayne,
scattered  like  wilde  Goates  or  Prickets,  yet  durst  they  not
come  downe,  partly  for  feare,  and  partly  for  hatred  against
the  Mahumetans.  Beneath  the  Mountayne  are  seene
seven  or  eight  Thorne  trees,  very  faire,  and  in  them  wee
found  a  paire  of  Turtle  Doves,  which  seemed  to  us  in
manner  a  miracle,  having  before  journied  fifteen  dayes
and  nights,  and  saw  neither  Beast  nor  Fowle.  Then
proceeding  two  dayes  journey,  wee  came  to  a  certaine
Citie  named  Medina  Talnabi :  foure  miles  from  the  said  Medina
Citie,  we  found  a  Well.  And  remayning  here  one  dav,  Talnabl^hat
we  washed  our  selves,  and  changed  our  Shirts,  the  more  *£*  p_JJ3
freshly  to  enter  into  the  Citie :  it  is  well  peopled,  and
contayneth  about  three  hundred  houses,  the  Walls  are  like
Bulwarkes  of  earth,  and  the  houses  both  of  stone  and
bricke.  The  soyle  about  the  Citie  is  cursed  of  God,  and
is  utterly  barren,  except  that  about  two  stones  cast  from

63

A.D.
150J-

The  Tombe  or
Sepulchre  of
Mohamet.

letwoi
not  buried  in
Metka.

The  Sepulchre
of  Ma hu  met
and  his
fellotves.

Mahumets

Librarie.

PUHCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Citic,  arc  scene  about  fiftie  or  sixtie  Palme  trees  that
beare  Hates.  There,  by  a  certaine  Garden,  runneth  a
course  of  water,  tailing  into  a  lower  Plaine,  where  also
passengers  are  accustomed  to  water  their  Camels.  And
here  opportunitie  now  serveth  to  confute  the  opinion  of
them  which  thinke  that  the  Arke  or  Tombe  of  wicked
Mahumet  in  Mecha,  to  hang  in  the  Ayre,  not  borne  up
with  any  thing.  I  arhrme  this  neither  to  be  true,  nor  to
have  any  likenesse  of  truth,  I  presently  beheld  these
things,  and  saw  the  place  where  Mahumet  is  buried,  in
the  said  Citie  of  Medina  Talnabi :  for  we  tarryed  there
three  daies,  to  come  to  the  true  knowledge  of  all  these
things.  When  we  were  desirous  to  enter  into  their
Temple,  wee  could  not  be  suffered  to  enter,  without  a
companion,  little  or  great,  of  those  Moores.  They
taking  us  by  the  hand,  brought  us  to  the  place  where,
they  say,  Mahumet  is  buried.

His  Temple  is  square,  and  is  a  hundred  Paces  in  length,
and  fourescore  in  breadth  ;  the  entrie  into  it,  is  by  two
Gates ;  from  the  sides  it  is  covered  with  three  Vaults,  it
is  borne  up  with  foure  hundred  Columnes,  or  Pillars  of
white  Bricke,  there  are  seene  hanging  Lampes  about  the
number  of  three  thousand.  From  the  other  part  of  the
Temple,  in  the  first  place  of  the  Meschita,  is  seene  a
Tower  of  the  circuit  of  rive  Paces,  vaulted  on  every  side,
and  covered  with  a  cloth  of  silke,  and  is  borne  up  with
a  grate  of  Copper,  curiously  wrought,  and  distant  from
it  two  Paces  :  and  of  them  that  goe  thither,  is  seene,  as
it  were,  through  a  Lettice.  Toward  the  left  hand,  is  the
way  to  the  Tower,  and  when  you  come  thither,  you  must
enter  by  a  narrower  Gate.  On  every  side  of  those  Gates
or  Doores,  are  seene  many  bookes,  in  manner  of  a  Librarie,
on  the  one  side  twentie,  and  on  the  other  side  five  and
twentie,  which  are  of  Mahumet  and  his  fellowes  :  within
the  said  Gate  is  seene  a  Sepulchre,  that  is,  a  crave  under
the  earth,  where  Mahumet  was  buried.  There  are  also-
his  two  sonnes  in  law,  Hali  and  Othman  ;  Hali  was  his-
brothers  sonne,  and  tooke to  wife Fatina, the  dauohter-

64

LEWIS HAKTHEMA  a.u.

of  Mahumet.  There  are  also  his  two  fathers  in  law,
Bubecher  and  Homer.  These  foure  were  chiefe  Captai'
of  the  Armie  of  Mahumet.  Every  of  these  have  their
proper  bookes  of  their  facts  and  traditions.  And  hereof
proceedeth  the  great  dissention  and  discord  of  Religion
and  manners  among  this  kind  of  filthie  men,  while  some
confirme  one  Doctrine,  and  some  another,  by  reason  of
their  divers  sects  of  Patrons,  Doctors,  and  Saints,  as  they
call  them.  By  this  meanes  are  they  marvellously  divided
among  themselves,  and  like  beasts  kill  themselves,  for
such  quarrels  of  divers  opinions,  and  all  false.

For  declaration  of  the  sect  of  Mahumet,  understand
that  in  the  highest  part  of  the  Tower  aforesaid,  is  an  open
round  *  place.  Now  shall  you  understand  what  craft  they  *Cu/>o/a.
used  to  deceive  our  Caravan.  The  first  Evening  that  we
came  thither,  our  Captaine  sent  for  the  chiefe  Priest  of
the  Temple,  to  come  to  him  :  and  bid  him  shew  him  the
body  of  Nabi,  that  is,  the  Prophet,  and  that  he  would
give  three  thousand  Seraphins  of  gold.  Also  that  hee
had  no  Parents,  neither  Brothers,  Sisters,  Kinsfolke,
Children,  or  Wives,  neither  that  he  came  thither  to  buy
Merchandize,  as  Spices,  or  any  manner  of  precious  Jewels  :
but  onely  for  very  zeale  of  Religion,  and  salvation  of  his
soule,  and  was  therefore  greatly  desirous  to  see  the  bodie
of  the  Prophet.  To  whom  the  Priest  of  the  Temple,
with  proude  countenance,  made  answer  in  this  manner :
Darest  thou  with  those  eyes  with  the  which  thou  hast
committed  so  many  horrible  sinnes,  desire  to  see  him  by
whose  sight  God  hath  created  Heaven  and  Earth  ?  To
whom  againe  our  Captaine  answered,  thus  :  My  Lord,
you  have  said  truly ;  neverthelesse  I  pray  you  that  I  may
finde  so  much  favour  with  you,  that  T  may  see  the
Prophet :  whom  when  I  have  seene,  I  will  immediately
thrust  out  mine  eyes.  The  Side  answered  :  O  Sir,  I  will
open  all  things  unto  thee.  So  it  is,  that  no  man  can  denie
but  that  our  Prophet  dyed  here,  who  if  he  would,  might
have  dyed  at  Mecha  :  But  to  shew  in  himselfe  a  token  of
humilitie,  and  thereby  to  give  us  example  to  follow  him,
ix  65  E

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1503-

he  was  willing  rather  here  then  elsewhere  to  depart  out  of
The  Devill  he  this  world,  and  was  incontinent  of  Angels  borne  into
was'  Heaven,  and  abides  in  the  presence  of  God. Then  our

[II.ix.1487.]  Captaine  said  to  him  :  Where  is  Jesus  Christ  the  Sonne  of
Marie  ?  To  whom  the  Side  answered  :  At  the  feet  of
Mahumet.  Then  said  our  Captaine  againe  :  It  sufficeth,
it  sufficeth,  I  will  know  no  more.  After  this,  our  Cap-
taine comming  out  of  the  Temple,  and  turning  him  to
us,  said  :  See  (I  pray  you)  for  what  goodly  stuffe  I  would
have  paide  three  thousand  Seraphs  of  gold  ?  The  same
day  at  Evening,  at  almost  three  a  clocke  of  the  night,  ten
Old  men.  or  twelve  of  the  Elders  of  that  Sect  of  Mahumet,  entred
into  our  Caravan,  which  remained  not  past  a  stones  cast
from  the  Gate  of  the  Citie.  These  ran  hither  and  thither
crying  like  mad  men,  with  these  words,  Mahumet  the
messenger  of  God  shall  rise  againe.  O  Prophet,  O  God,
have  mercie  on  us.  Our  Captaine  and  wee  all  raised  with
this  crie,  tooke  weapon  with  all  expedition,  suspecting  that
the  Arabians  were  come  to  rob  our  Caravan  :  We  asked
what  was  the  cause  of  that  exclamation,  and  what  they
cryed  ?  for  they  cried  as  doe  the  Christians,  when  suddenly
any  marvellous  thing  chanceth.  The  Elders  answered  :
Fake  miracles  Saw  you  not  the  lightning  which  shone  out  of  the
Trillion  SePulchre  of  the  Prophet  Mahumet.  Our  Captaine
'  answered,  that  he  saw  nothing ;  and  we  also  being
demanded,  answered  in  like  manner.  Then  said  one  of
the  old  men,  Are  yee  slaves  ?  that  is  to  say,  bought  men :
meaning  thereby  Mamalukes.  Then  said  our  Captaine,
We  are  indeed  Mamalukes.  Then  againe  the  old  man
said,  You  my  Lords,  cannot  see  heavenly  things,  as  being
not  yet  confirmed  in  our  Religion.  To  this  our  Captaine
answered  againe,  O  yee  mad  and  insensate  beasts,  I  had
thought  to  have  given  you  three  thousand  pieces  of  gold,
but  now,  O  you  Dogs,  and  progenie  of  Dogs,  I  will  give
you  nothing.  It  is  therefore  to  be  understood,  that  none
other  shining  came  out  of  the  Sepulchre,  then  a  certaine
flame  which  the  Priests  caused  to  come  out  of  the  open
place  of  the  Tower  spoken  of  here  before,  whereby  they

66

LEWIS BARTHEMA

would  have  deceived  us.  And  therefore  our  Captaine
commanded  that  thereafter  none  of  us  should  enter  into
the  Temple.  Of  this  also  we  have  most  true  experience,
and  most  certainly  assure  you,  that  there  is  neither  Iron
or  Steele,  or  the  Magnes  stone  that  should  so  make  the
Tombe  of  Mahumet  to  hang  in  the  Ayre,  as  some  have
falsely  imagined  :  neither  is  there  any  Mountayne  neerer
then  foure  miles :  we  remayned  here  three  dayes  to
refresh  our  companie.  To  this  Citie  victuals  and  all  kind
of  Corne  is  brought  from  Arabia  Fcelix,  and  Babylon,  or
Alcayr,  and  also  from  Ethiopia,  by  the  Red  Sea,  which  is
from  this  Citie  but  foure  daies  journey.

After  that  we  were  wearied  with  the  trumperies  of  the
Religion  of  Mahumet,  we  determined  to  goe  forward  on
our  journey  :  and  that  by  guiding  of  a  Pilot,  who  directed
our  course  with  the  Mariners  Box,  or  Compasse  and
Card,  even  as  is  used  in  sayling  on  the  Sea.  And  thus
bending  our  journey  by  the  South,  wee  found  a  very  faire
Well  or  Fountayne,  from  the  which  flowed  abundance  of
water.  The  Inhabitants  affirme  that  Saint  Marke  the
Evangelist  was  the  Author  of  this  Fountaine,  by  a  miracle
of  God,  when  that  Region  was  in  manner  burned  with
incredible  drinesse.  Here  wee  and  our  Beasts  were
satisfied  with  drinke.  I  may  not  here  omit  to  speake  of
the  Sea  of  Sand,  and  of  the  dangers  thereof.  This  was
found  of  us  before  we  came  to  the  Mountayne  of  the
Jewes.  In  this  Sea  of  Sand  we  travelled  the  journey  of
five  daies,  and  five  nights  :  this  is  a  great  broad  Plaine,
all  covered  with  white  Sand,  in  manner  as  small  as  Floure  :
If  the  winde  had  blowne  from  the  South  (as  it  came  to
us  from  the  North)  we  had  beene  all  over-whelmed  with
Sand.  And  although  wee  had  prosperous  winde,  yet  wee
could  scarcely  see  the  one  the  other  ten  Paces  off.  And
therfore  the  Inhabitants  travelling  this  way,  are  inclosed
in  Cages  of  wood,  borne  with  Camels,  and  live  in  them,
so  passing  the  journey,  guided  by  Pilots  with  Mariners
Compasse  and  Card,  even  as  on  the  Sea,  as  we  have  said.
In  this  journey  also  many  perish  for  thirst,  and  many  by

67

A.D.
I503-

The  fable  that
Mahomets
Tombe

hangeth  in  the
Ayre.

The  journey  to
Mecha.

Journey  on  the
land  by  Card
and  Compasse
as  on  the  Sea.

The  Sea  of
Sand.

A.D.

I503-

Motn'ia.

Mount  Sinai.

The  den  where
Mahumet
lived  in
contemplation.

OfMecha,
and  why  the
Mahumetans
resort  thither.

The  Sultan  of
Mecha.

[II.ix.1488.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

drinking  too  much,  when  they  find  such  good  waters.  In
these  Sands  is  found  Momia,  which  is  the  flesh  of  such
men  as  are  drowned  in  these  Sands,  and  there  dried  by
the  heate  of  the  Sunne  :  So  that  those  bodies  are  preserved
from  putrifaction  by  the  drinesse  of  the  Sand  :  and  there-
fore that  dry  flesh  is  esteemed  medicinable.  When  the
wind  bloweth  from  the  North,  then  the  Sand  riseth,  and  is
driven  against  a  certaine  Mountayne,  which  is  an  arme  of
the  Mount  Sinai.  There  we  found  certaine  Pillars
artificially  wrought.  On  the  left  hand  of  the  said  Moun-
tayne, in  the  top  or  ridge  thereof  is  a  Den,  and  the  entrie
into  it  is  by  an  Iron  Gate.  Some  faine  that  in  that  place
Mahumet  lived  in  contemplation.  Here  wee  heard  a
certaine  horrible  noyse  and  crye :  for  passing  the  said
Mountayne,  wee  were  in  so  great  danger,  that  we  thought
never  to  have  escaped.  Departing  therefore  from  the
Fountayne,  we  continued  our  journey  for  the  space  of  ten
dayes  :  And  twice  in  the  way  fought  with  fiftie  thousand
Arabians,  and  so  at  the  length  came  to  the  Citie  of  Mecha,
where  all  things  were  troubled  by  reason  of  the  warres
betweene  two  brethren,  contending  which  of  them  should
possesse  the  Lordship  of  Mecha.

Now  the  time  requireth  to  speake  somewhat  of  the
famous  Citie  of  Mecha,  or  Mecca,  what  it  is,  how  it  is
situate,  and  by  whom  it  is  governed.  The  Citie  is  very
faire,  and  well  inhabited,  and  contayneth  in  Compasse  six
thousand  houses,  as  well  builded  as  ours,  and  some  that
cost  three  or  foure  thousand  Ducats  of  gold  :  it  hath  no
walls.  About  two  furlongs  from  the  Citie  is  a  Mount,
where  the  way  is  cut  out,  which  leadeth  to  aPlaine  beneath.
It  is  on  every  side  fortified  with  Mountaynes  in  the  stead  of
walls  or  Bulwarkes,  and  hath  foure  entries.  The  Gover-
nour  is  a  Sultan,  and  one  of  the  foure  brethren  of  the
Progenie  of  Mahumet,  and  is  subject  to  the  Sultan  of
Babylon,  of  whom  we  have  spoken  before  :  his  other  three
brethren  bee  at  continuall  warre  with  him.  The  eigh-
teenth day  of  May,  we  entred  into  the  Citie  by  the  North
side  : then  by  a  declining  way,  we  came  into  a  Plaine.

68

LEWIS HART  HEM  A

On  the  South  side  arc  two  Mountaynes,  the  one  very
neere  the  other,  distant  onely  by  a  little  Valley,  which  is
the  way  that  leadeth  to  the  date  of  Mecha.  On  the
East  side,  is  an  open  place  betweene  two  Mountaynes,  like
unto  a  Vally,  and  is  the  way  to  the  Mountayne  where  they
sacrifice  to  the  Patriarkes  Abroham  and  Isaac.  This
Mountayne  is  from  the  Citie  about  eight  or  ten  miles,
and  of  the  height  of  three  stones  cast :  it  is  of  stone  as
hard  as  Marble,  yet  no  Marble.  In  the  top  of  the  Moun-
tayne, is  a  Temple  or  Meschita,  made  after  their  fashion,
and  hath  three  wayes  to  enter  into  it.  At  the  foot  of  the
Mountayne  are  two  Cisternes,  which  conserve  waters
without  corruption :  of  these,  the  one  is  reserved  to
minister  water  to  the  Camels  of  the  Caravan  of  Babylon,
or  Alcayr ;  and  the  other,  for  them  of  Damasco.  It  is
raine  water,  and  is  derived  farre  off.

But  to  returne  to  speake  of  the  Citie :  for  as  touching
the  manner  of  sacrifice,  which  they  use  at  the  foote  of  the
Mountayne,  we  will  speake  hereafter.  Entring  therefore
into  the  Citie,  we  found  there  the  Caravan  of  Cayro,
which  prevented  us  eight  daies,  and  came  not  the  way  that
we  came.  This  Caravan  contained  threescore  and  foure
thousand  Camels,  and  a  hundred  Mamalucks  to  guide
them.  And  here  ought  you  to  consider,  that  by  the
opinion  of  all  men,  this  Citie  is  greatly  cursed  of  God,  as
appeareth  by  the  great  barrennesse  thereof,  for  it  is
destitute  of  all  manner  of  Fruits  and  Corne.  It  is
scorched  with  drynesse  for  lacke  of  water,  and  therefore
the  water  is  there  growne  to  such  price,  that  you  cannot
for  foure  Quatrini  buy  as  much  water  as  will  satisfie  your
thirst  for  one  day.  Now  therefore,  I  will  declare  what
provision  they  have  for  victuals.  The  most  part  is
brought  them  from  the  Citie  of  Cayros  ;  There  is  brought
by  the  Red  Sea,  from  a  certaine  Port,  named  Ziden,
distant  from  Mecha  fortie  miles.  The  rest  of  their  pro-
visions, is  brought  from  Arabia  Fcelix  (that  is)  the  happy
or  blessed  Arabia :  so  named  for  the  fruitfulnesse  thereof,
in  respect  of  the  other  two  Arabiaes,  called  Petrea,  and

69

A*D.

'  503.

Sacrifice  to
Abraham  and
Isaac.

Mecha  cursed
of  God.

Water  very
deare.

Ziden.
Arabia  Fcr/ix.

A.D.

I503-

Many

Pilgrims  and
Strangers  at
Mccha.

Why  so  many
Nations  resort
to  Mecha.

The  Temple  of
Mecha.
This  Temple
and  the  build-
ings are
altered  since
by  Soliman.
See  hereof,  and
of  these
Meccan  rites,
inf.  c.  9.

Mecca-
Pardons.

A  Turret  in
the  Temple  of
Mecha.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Deserta,  that  is,  Stonie  and  Desart.  They  have  also  much
Corne  from  Ethiopia.  Here  we  found  a  marvellous
number  of  strangers,  and  Peregrines  or  Pilgrims :  Of  the
which,  some  came  from  Syria,  some  from  Persia,  some
from  Ethiopia,  and  other  from  both  the  East  Indies,  the
greater  and  the  lesser.  I  never  saw  in  any  place  greater
aboundance  and  frequentation  of  people,  forasmuch  as  I
could  perceive  by  tarrying  there  the  space  of  twentie  daies.
These  people  resort  thither  for  divers  causes,  as  some  for
Merchandize,  some  to  observe  their  vow  of  Pilgrimage,
and  other  to  have  pardon  for  their  sinnes  :  as  touching  the
which,  wee  will  speake  more  hereafter.

In  the  middest  of  the  Citie  is  a  Temple,  in  fashion  like
unto  the  Colossus  of  Rome,  the  Amphitheatrum  I  meane,
like  unto  a  Stage,  yet  not  of  Marble  or  hewed  stones,  but
of  burnt  Bricks  :  For  this  Temple,  like  unto  an  Amphi-
theater, hath  fourescore  and  ten  or  an  hundred  Gates,  and
is  vaulted.  The  entrance  is  by  a  discent  of  twelve  stayres
or  degrees  on  every  part,  in  the  Church  porch  are  sold
onely  Jewels  and  precious  stones.  When  you  are  past
the  entrance  it  is  close  above,  and  the  gilded  walls  shine
on  every  side  with  incomparable  splendour.  In  the  lower
part  of  the  Temple  (that  is  under  the  vaulted  places)  is
seene  a  marvellous  multitude  of  men  :  for  there  are  five
or  six  thousand  men  that  sell  none  other  thing  then  sweet
Ointments,  and  especially  a  certaine  odoriferous  and  most
sweet  Powder,  wherewith  dead  bodies  are  enbalmed.
And  from  hence,  all  manner  of  sweet  savours  are  carried
in  manner,  into  the  Countries  of  all  the  Mahumetans.  It
passeth  all  beliefe  to  thinke  of  the  exceeding  sweetnesse
of  the  savours,  farre  surmounting  the  shops  of  the
Apothecaries.  The  three  and  twentieth  day  of  May,  the
Pardons  began  to  be  granted  in  the  Temple,  and  in  what
manner,  we  will  now  declare.  The  Temple  in  the  middest
is  open,  without  any  inclosing,  and  in  the  middest  also
thereof  there  is  a  Turret,  of  the  largenesse  of  six  paces  in
circuit,  and  involved  or  hanged  with  cloth  or  Tapestrie  of
silke,  and  passeth  not  the  height  of  a  man. They  enter

70

LEWIS KAKTIIKMA

into  the  Turret  by  a  Gate  of  Silver,  and  is  on  every  side
beset  with  vessels  full  of  Balme.  On  the  day  of  Pente-
cost, license  is  granted  to  all  men  to  see  these  things.
The  Inhabitants  affirme  that  Balme  or  Balsam,  to  bee  part
of  the  treasure  of  the  Sultan,  that  is  Lord  of  Mecha.  At
every  Vault  of  the  Turret,  are  fastned  grates  of  Iron,  to
let  in  light.  The  three  and  twentieth  day  of  May,  a
great  multitude  of  people  began  early  in  the  morning
before  day,  seven  times  to  walke  about  the  Turret,  kissing
every  corner  thereof,  oftentimes  feeling  and  handling
them.  From  this  Turret  about  ten  or  twelve  paces,  is
another  Turret,  like  a  Chappell,  builded  after  our  manner.
This  hath  three  or  foure  entries :  in  the  middest  thereof  is
a  Well  of  threescore  and  ten  Cubites  deepe  :  the  water  of
this  Well  is  infected  with  salt  Peter.  Eight  men  are
thereunto  appointed  to  draw  water  for  all  the  people  :  and
when  a  multitude  of  people  have  seven  times  gone  round
about  the  first  Turret,  they  come  to  this  Well ;  and
touching  the  mouth  or  brim  thereof,  they  say  thus :  Be
it  in  the  honor  of  God,  God  pardon  me,  and  forgive  me
my  sinnes.  When  these  words  are  said,  they  that  draw
the  water,  powre  three  Buckets  of  water  on  the  heads  of
every  one  of  them  that  stand  neere  about  the  Well,  and
wash  them  all  wet  from  the  head  to  the  foot,  although
they  be  apparelled  with  silke.  Then  the  doting  fooles
dreame  that  they  are  cleane  from  all  their  sinnes,  and  that
their  sinnes  are  forgiven  them.  They  say  furthermore,
that  the  first  Turret,  whereof  we  have  spoken,  was  the
first  house  that  ever  Abraham  builded :  and  therefore,
while  they  are  yet  all  wet  of  the  said  washing,  they  goe  to
the  Mountaine,  where  (as  we  have  said  before)  they  are
accustomed  to  sacrifice  to  Abraham.  And  remaining
there  two  daies,  they  make  the  said  Sacrifice  to  Abraham
at  the  foot  of  the  Mountaine.  When  they  intend
to  sacrifice,  some  of  them  kill  three  sheepe,  some
foure,  and  some  ten  :  So  that  the  Butcherie  sometime  so
floweth  with  bloud,  that  in  one  day  are  slaine  above  thirtie
thousand  sheepe. They  are  slaine  toward  the  rising  of

71

A.U.

»5°3-

A  (late  of
Silver,
liaham  ir
Halme.

A  Chappell
zvith  a  If 'el!
in  it,  in  the
Temple.

A  strange
bapti sine  for
remission  of
sins.

[II.ix.i4S9.]
The  house  of
Abraham.
Sacrifice  to
Abraham.
The  manner  of
sacrificing  at
Mecha.
Sacrifice  of
sheepe.

^oj.

Religion  for
povcrtie.

Cadi,  a
Preacher.
A  goodly
Sermon.

Souldicrs
trouble  the
Word  of  God.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Sunne,  and  shortly  after  are  distributed  to  the  poore
for  Gods  sake  :  for  I  saw  there  of  poore  people,  to  the
number  of  thirtie  or  fortie  thousand.  These  make  many
and  long  Ditches  in  the  Fields,  where  they  keepe  fire  with
Camels  dung,  and  roast  or  seethe  the  flesh  that  is  given
them,  and  eat  it  even  there.  I  beleeve  that  these  poore
people  come  thither  rather  for  hunger  then  for  devotion  :
which  I  thinke  by  this  conjecture,  that  great  abundance
of  Cucumbers  are  brought  thither  from  Arabia  Fcelix,
which  they  eate,  casting  away  the  parings  without  their
Houses  or  Tabernacles,  where  a  multitude  of  the  said
poore  people  gather  them  even  out  of  the  mire  and  sand,
and  eate  them,  and  are  so  greedie  of  these  parings,  that
they  fight  who  may  gather  most.  The  day  following,
their  Cadi  (which  are  in  place  with  them  as  with  us  the
Preachers  of  Gods  Word)  ascended  into  a  high  Moun-
taine,  to  preach  to  the  people  that  remayned  beneath :
and  preached  to  them  in  their  Language  the  space  of  an
houre.  The  summe  of  his  Sermon  was,  that  with  teares
they  should  bewaile  their  sinnes,  and  beate  their  brests
with  sio-hes  and  lamentation.  And  the  Preacher  himselfe
with  loud  voyce,  spake  these  words,  O  Abraham  beloved
of  God,  O  Isaac  chosen  of  God,  and  his  Friend,  pray  to
God  for  the  people  of  Nabi.  When  these  words  were
said,  suddenly  were  heard  lamenting  voices.  When  the
Sermon  was  done,  a  rumour  was  spred  that  a  great  Armie
of  Arabians,  to  the  number  of  twentie  thousand,  were
comming.  With  which  newes,  they  that  kept  the  Cara-
vans being  greatly  feared,  with  all  speed,  like  mad  men,
fled  into  the  Citie  of  Mecha,  and  we  againe  hearing  newes
of  the  Arabians  approch,  fled  also  into  the  Citie.  But
while  wee  were  in  the  mid-way  betweene  the  Mountaine
and  Mecha,  we  came  by  a  despicable  wall,  of  the  breadth
of  foure  Cubits :  The  people  passing  by  this  wall,  had
covered  the  way  with  stones,  the  cause  whereof,  they  say
to  be  this :  When  Abraham  was  commanded  to  sacrifice
his  Sonne,  he  willed  his  Sonne  Isaac  to  follow  him  to  the
place  where  he  should  execute  the  commandement  of  God.

72

LEWIS BARTHEMA

As  Isaac  went  to  follow  his  Father,  there  appeared  to  him
in  the  way  a  Devill,  in  likenesse  of  a  faire  and  friendly
person,  not  farre  from  the  said  wall, and  asked  him  friendly
whether  he  went.  Isaac  answered,  that  he  went  to  his
Father  who  tarried  for  him.  To  this  the  Enemie  of
Mankind  answered,  that  it  was  best  for  him  to  tarrie,  and
if  that  he  went  any  further,  his  Father  would  sacrifice  him.
But  Isaac  nothing  fearing  this  advertisement  of  the  Devill,
went  forward,  that  his  Father  on  him  might  execute  the
commandement  of  God :  and  with  this  answere  (as  they
say)  the  Devill  departed.  Yet  as  Isaac  went  forward,  the
Devill  appeared  to  him  againe  in  the  likenesse  of  another
friendly  person,  and  forbade  him  as  before.  Then  Isaac
taking  up  a  stone  in  that  place,  hurlde  it  at  the  Devill,
and  wounded  him  in  the  fore-head :  In  witnesse  and
remembrance  whereof,  the  people  passing  that  way,  when
they  come  neere  the  wall,  are  accustomed  to  cast  stones
against  it,  and  from  thence  goe  into  the  Citie.  As  we
went  this  way,  the  Aire  was  in  manner  darkened  with  a
multitude  of  stocke  Doves.  They  say  that  these  Doves,
are  of  the  Progenie  of  the  Dove  that  spake  in  the  eare  of
Mahumet,  in  likenesse  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  These  are
seene  every  where,  as  in  the  Villages,  Houses,  Tavernes,
and  Graniers  of  Corne  and  Rice,  and  are  so  tame,  that  one
can  scarcely  drive  them  away.  To  take  them  or  kill  them,
is  esteemed  a  thing  worthy  death  :  and  therefore  a  certaine
Pension  is  given  to  nourish  them  in  the  Temple.

to

§• II.

Two  Unicornes.  His  passage  by  the  Red  Sea
Aden.  Imprisonment  and  counterfeiting  him-
selfe  madde.  Escape  and  visiting  other  parts
of  Arabia,  Zeila,  Cambaia.

N  the  other  part  of  the  Temple  are  Parkes  or  places
inclosed,  where  are  seene  two  Unicornes,  and  are
there  shewed  to  the  people  for  a  wonder. The

A.D.

/ Devill

appearcth  to
Isaac,  or
rather  to
Ismacl,  after
their  Legend.

Isaac  wounded
the  Devill  in
the  fore-head.

one  of  them,  which  is  much  higher  then  the  other,  yet  not

73

Stocke  Doves
of  the  Progeny
of  the  Dove
which  s/>aie  in
Mahumets
eare.

The  only
report  that  I
have  found  in
any  credible
Author  of
Unicornes :
neither  in  1  20.
yeares  which
have  passed
since,  have  I
found  one
Relation  to
second  it.
Some  mention
Unicornes,  but
understand  the
Rhinoceros.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

^OS-
much unlike to  a  Colt  of  thirtie  moneths  or age ; in

the  fore-head  groweth  only  one  Home,  in  manner  right
*Braccia.  forth,  of  the  length  of  three  Cubits.*  The  other  is  much
younger,  and  like  a  young  Colt :  of  the  age  of  one  yeare  ;
the  home  of  this,  is  of  the  length  of  foure  spannes.  This
beast  is  of  the  colour  of  a  Horse  of  Weesell  colour,  and
hath  the  head  like  an  Hart,  but  no  long  necke,  a  thinne
mane  hanging  only  on  the  one  side :  their  legs  are  thinne
and  slender,  like  a  Fawne  or  Hind :  the  hoofes  of  the
fore-feet  are  divided  in  two,  much  like  the  feet  of  a  Goat,
the  outward  part  of  the  hinder  feet  is  very  full  of  haire.
This  beast  doubtlesse  seemeth  wild  and  fierce,  yet  tem-
pereth  that  flercenesse  with  a  certaine  comelinesse.  These
Unicornes  one  gave  to  the  Sultan  of  Mecha,  as  a  most
precious  and  rare  gift.  They  were  sent  him  out  of
Ethiopia  by  a  King  of  that  Countrey,  who  desired  by  that
present  to  gratifie  the  Sultan  of  Mecha.
[II. ix.  1 490.]  Whereas  my  Captaine  gave  me  charge  to  buy  certaine
things,  as  I  was  in  the  Market  place,  a  certaine  Mamaluke
knew  me  to  be  a  Christian.  And  therefore  in  his  owne
Language,  spake  unto  me  these  words,  Inte  mename :
That  is,  whence  art  thou?  To  whom  I  answered  that  I
was  a  Mahumetan.  But  he  said,  Thou  sayest  not  truly.
I  said  againe,  By  the  head  of  Mahumet,  I  am  a  Mahu-
metan. Then  he  said  againe,  Come  home  to  my  house.
I  followed  him  willingly.  When  we  were  there,  he  began
to  speake  to  me  in  the  Italian  Tongue,  and  asked  me
againe  from  whence  I  was,  affirming  that  he  knew  me,  and
that  I  was  no  Mahumetan  :  Also  that  he  had  bin  sometime
in  Genua  and  Venice.  And  that  his  words  might  be  the
better  beleeved,  rehearsed  many  things  which  testified  that
he  said  truth.  When  I  understood  this,  I  confessed
freely  that  I  was  a  Romane,  but  professed  to  the  Faith  of
Mahumet  in  the  Citie  of  Babylon,  and  there  made  one  of
the  Mamalukes.  Whereof  he  seemed  greatly  to  rejoyce,
and  therefore  used  me  honourably.  But  because  my
desire  was  yet  to  goe  further,  I  asked  the  Mahumetan
whether  that  Citie  of  Mecha  was  so  famous  as  all  the

74

LEWIS I5ARTHKMA  *J».

World  spake  of  it :  and  inquired  of  him  where  was  the
great  abundance  of  Pearles,  Precious  Stones,  Spices,  and
other  rich  Merchandise  that  the  bruit  went  or  to  be  in
that  Citie.  Then  he  began  with  more  attentive  minde,  in  Why  Mecha
order  to  declare  unto  me  the  cause  why  that  Mart  was  not  J/J^JjJ
so  greatly  frequented  as  it  had  beene  before,  and  laid  the  in  time  past.
only  fault  thereof  on  the  King  of  Portugall.  When  I
was  well  instructed  in  all  things,  1  spake  unto  him  friendly
these  words  in  the  Mahumets  Language,  Menaha  Menal-
habi :  That  is  to  say,  I  pray  you  assist  me.  He  asked
me  wherein.  To  helpe  mee  (said  I)  how  I  may  secretly
depart  hence  to  those  Kings  that  were  most  enemies  to
the  Christians  :  Affirming  furthermore,  that  I  would  give
place  to  no  man  in  making  of  all  manner  of  Gunnes  and
Artillerie.  Then  said  hee,  Praysed  be  Mahumet  who
sent  thee  hither,  to  doe  him  and  his  Moores  good  service  :
and  willed  me  to  remayne  secretly  in  his  house  with  his
wife,  and  required  mee  earnestly  to  obtayne  leave  of  our
Captaine,  that  under  his  name  hee  might  leade  from
Mecha  fifteene  Camels  laden  with  Spices,  without  paying
any  custome  :  for  they  ordinarily  pay  to  the  Sultan  thirtie  Paying  of
Saraphes  of  Gold,  for  transporting  of  such  Merchandises  c"stome  t0  ™e
for  the  charge  of  so  many  Camels.  I  put  him  in  good
hope  of  his  request,  although  he  would  aske  for  a  hun-
dred, affirming  that  that  might  easily  be  obtayned  by  the
Priviledges  of  the  Mamalukes  and  therefore  desired  him
that  I  might  safely  remayne  in  his  house.  Then  nothing
doubting  to  obtayne  his  request,  hee  greatly  rejoyced,  and
talking  with  me  yet  more  freely,  gave  me  further  instruc-
tions, and  counselled  me  to  repaire  to  a  certaine  King  of
the  greater  India,  in  the  Kingdome  and  Realme  of  Dechan.
Therefore  the  day  before  the  Caravan  departed  from
Mecha,  he  willed  me  to  lye  hid  in  the  most  secret  part  of
his  house.  The  day  following,  early  in  the  morning,  the
Trumpetter  of  the  Caravan  gave  warning  to  all  the
Mamalukes  to  make  readie  their  Horses,  to  direct  their
journey  toward  Syria,  with  Proclamation  of  death  to  all
that  should  refuse  so  to  doe. When  I  heard  the  sound

75

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

'503-

of  the  Trumpet,  and  was  advertized  of  the  streight  com-
mandement,  I  was  marvellously  troubled  in  minde,  and
with  heavie  countenance  desired  the  Mahumetans  wife
not  to  bewray  mee,  and  committed  my  selfe  to  the  mercie
of  God.  On  the  Tuesday  following,  our  Caravan  departed
from  Mecha,  and  I  remayned  in  the  Mahumetans  house
with  his  wife,  but  he  followed  the  Caravan.  Yet  before
he  departed,  he  gave  commandement  to  his  wife  to  bring
mee  to  the  Caravan,  which  should  depart  from  Ziden  the
Port  of  Mecha,  to  goe  into  India.  This  Port  is  distant
from  Mecha  fortie  miles.  Whilest  I  lay  thus  hid  in  the
Mahumetans  house,  I  cannot  expresse  how  friendly  his
wife  used  mee.  This  also  furthered  my  good  entertain-
ment that  there  was  in  the  house  a  faire  young  Maide,  the
Niece  of  the  Mahumetan,  who  was  greatly  in  love  with
me.  But  at  that  time,  in  the  middest  of  those  troubles
and  feares,  the  fire  of  Venus  was  almost  extinct  in  me  :
and  therefore  with  dalliance  of  faire  words  and  promises,
I  still  kept  my  selfe  in  her  favour.  Therefore  the  Friday
following,  about  noon-tyde  I  departed,  following  the
Caravan  of  India.  And  about  mid-night,  we  came  to  a
certaine  Village  of  the  Arabians,  and  there  remayned  the
rest  of  that  night,  and  the  next  day  till  noone.
The  Citie  From  hence  we  went  forward  on  our  journey  toward

Ziden.  Ziden,  and  came  thither  in  the  silence  of  the  night. This

Citie  hath  no  walls,  yet  faire  houses,  some-what  after  the
building  of  Italic  Heere  is  great  abundance  of  all  kind
of  Merchandises,  by  reason  of  resort  in  manner  of  all
Nations  thither,  except  Jewes  and  Christians,  to  whom  it
is  not  lawfull  to  come  thither.  Assoone  as  I  entred  into
the  Citie,  I  went  to  their  Temple,  or  Meschita,  where  I
Poore Pilgrims  saw  a  great  multitude  of  poore  people,  about  the  number

tMecha€^r0m  0<r  five"  and  twentie  tnousand,  attending  a  certaine  Pilot
who  should  bring  them  into  their  Countrey.  Here  I
suffered  much  trouble  and  affliction,  being  enforced  to
hide  my  selfe  among  these  poore  folkes,  faining  my  selfe
very  sicke,  to  the  end  that  none  should  be  inquisitive
what  I  was,  whence  I  came,  or  whither  I  would. The

76

LEWIS BARTHEMA  ad.

•503.
Lord  of  this  Citie  is  the  Sultan  of  Babylon,  Brother  to
the  Sultan  of  Mecha,  who  are  subject  to  the  great  Soldi n
of  Cairo.  The  Inhabitants  are  Mahumetans.  The  soylc
is  unfruitfull,  and  lacketh  fresh  water.  The  Sea  beateth
against  the  Towne.  There  is  neverthelesse  abundance  of
all  things :  but  brought  thither  from  other  places,  as  from
Cairo,  Arabia  Fcelix,  and  divers  other  places.  The  heate
is  here  so  great,  that  men  are  in  manner  dryed  up  there-
with. And  therefore  there  is  ever  a  great  number  of
sicke  folkes.  This  Citie  contayneth  about  five  hundred
houses.

After  fifteene  dayes  were  past,  I  covenanted  with  a  Pilot,  [}I-lx-i49'-J
.  ,  J ,  r  1  -r*  j From  Arabia

who  was  ready  to  depart  from  thence  into  rersia, and t0  persta,

agreed  on  the  price,  to  goe  with  him.  There  lay  at
Anchor  in  the  Haven  almost  a  hundred  Brigantines  and
Foysts,  with  divers  Boates  and  Barkes  of  sundry  sorts,
both  with  Oares  and  without  Oares.  Therefore  after
three  dayes,  giving  wind  to  our  sayles,  we  sailed  in  the
Red  Sea.

After  sixe  dayes  sayling,  we  came  to  a  Citie  named
Gezan.  It  hath  a  commodious  Port,  and  very  faire,  where
we  found  about  forty  five  Brigantines  and  Foysts  of
divers  Regions.  The  Citie  is  hard  by  the  Sea-side,  and
the  Prince  thereof,  is  a  Mahumetan.  The  soyle  is  fruit-
full,  like  unto  Italie  :  It  beareth  Pomegranates,  Quinces,
Peaches,  Apples  of  Assyria,  Pepons,  Melons,  Oranges,
Gourds,  and  divers  other  Fruits  :  Also  Roses,  and  sundry
sorts  of  Flowers,  the  fairest  that  ever  I  saw :  It  seemeth
an  earthly  Paradise.  The  most  part  of  the  Inhabitants
goe  naked.  In  other  things,  they  live  after  the  manner
of  the  Mahumetans.  There  is  also  great  abundance  of
Flesh,  Wheate,  Barley,  and  Graine  of  white  Millet  or
Hirse  (which  they  call  Dora)  whereof  they  make  very
sweet  Bread.  Departing  from  the  Citie  of  Gezan,  the  Badu'mes.
space  of  five  dayes,  sayling  toward  the  left  hand,  having
ever  the  Coast  of  the  Land  in  sight,  wee  came  to  the  sight
of  certayne  houses,  where  about  fourteene  of  us  went
a-land,  hoping  to  have  had  some  victuals  of  the  Inhabi-

77

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I5°3-

tants. But  we  lost  our  labour,  tor  in  the  stead  of  victuals,

they  cast  stones  at  us  with  Slings.  They  were  about  a
hundred  that  fought  with  our  men  for  the  space  of  an
houre.  Of  them  were  slaine  foure  and  twenty.  The  rest
were  driven  to  flight,  thev  were  naked,  and  had  none
other  Weapons  then  Slings.  After  their  flight,  we  brought
awav  with  us  certayne  Hennes  and  Calves  very  good.
Shortlv  after,  a  great  multitude  of  the  Inhabitants  shewed
themselves  to  the  number  of  five  or  sixe  hundred  :  but
we  departed  with  our  prey,  and  returned  to  the  ships.

The  same  day  sayllng  forward,  we  came  to  an  Hand
named  Camaran,  which  contayneth  ten  miles  in  circuit.
In  it  is  a  Towne  of  two  hundred  houses,  the  Inhabitants
are  Mahumetans  :  it  hath  abundance  of  fresh  water  and
flesh,  and  the  fairest  Salt  that  ever  I  saw.  The  Port  is
eight  miles  from  the  Continent,  it  is  subject  to  the  Sultan
of  Arabia  Fcelix.  After  wee  had  remayned  here  two
daves,  we  tooke  our  way  toward  the  mouth  of  the  Red
Sea  in  the  space  of  two  dayes  sayling.
The  Antim  The  day  after  our  arriving  at  Aden,  the  Mahumetans

taken  and  put took  me?  anj  pUt  shackles  on  my  legs,  which  came  by
occasion  of  a  certayn  Idolater  who  cryed  after  me,  saying,

0  Christian  Dog,  borne  of  Dogs.  When  the  Mahume-
tans heard  the  name  of  a  Christian,  incontinent  they  lavd
hands  on  mee,  and  brought  me  to  the  Lieutenant  of  the
Sultan  of  that  place,  who  assembling  his  Councel,  asked
their  opinion  if  I  should  be  put  to  death  as  a  Spye  of
the  Christians.  The  Sultan  himselfe  was  out  of  the  Citie,
and  therefore  his  Lieutenant,  who  had  yet  never  adjudged
any  man  to  death,  thought  it  not  o-ood  to  give  sentence
against  me,  betore  the  Sultan  should  bee  advertized  hereof.
And  therefore  I  escaped  this  present  danger,  and  remayned
in  custodie  fiftie  and  five  dayes,  with  an  Iron  of  eighteene
pound  weight  hanging  at  my  feet. The  second  dav  after

1  was  taken,  many  Mahumetans  in  great  rage  resorted  to
him,  whose  Office  was  to  make  Inquisition  of  Treason.
These  a  few  dayes  before,  by  swimming  hardly  escaped
the  hands  of  the  Portugals,  with  the  losse  of  their  Foysts

78

in  Prison.

LEWIS BARTHEMA  ad

and  Barkes,  and  therefore  desired  greatly  to  bee  revenged
of  the  Christians  :  affirming,  with  outragious  cry,  that  I
was  a  Spye  of  the  Portugals.  But  God  fayled  not  to
assist  me.  For  the  Master  of  the  Prison  perceiving  the
outrage  of  the  Mahumetans,  and  fearing  that  they  would
offer  me  violence,  made  fast  the  gates  of  the  Prison.
After  that  five  and  fiftie  dayes  were  past,  the  Sultan  com-
manded that  I  should  be  brought  before  him  :  and  so  set
upon  a  Camell  with  my  shackles,  I  came  in  eight  dayes
journey  to  the  place  where  the  Sultan  lay,  and  was  brought
to  his  presence  in  a  Citie  named  Rhada  :  for  there  the
Sultan  had  assembled  an  Armie  of  thirtie  thousand  men,
to  make  warre  against  the  Sultan  of  the  Citie  of  Sana,
which  is  three  dayes  journey  from  Rhada,  and  situate
partly  on  the  declining  of  a  Hill,  and  partly  in  a  Plaine,
very  faire  to  be  seene,  well  peopled,  and  having  plentie  of
all  things.  When  I  came  before  the  Sultan,  he  began  to
aske  me  what  I  was.  I  answered  that  I  was  a  Romane,
professed  a  Mamaluke  in  Babylon  of  Alcavr,  and  that  of
Religious  minde  to  discharge  my  conscience  of  a  Vow
which  I  had  made,  I  came  to  the  Citie  of  Medinathalhabi,
where  Nabi  (or  the  Prophet)  is  buried  and  after  to  Mecca.
And  that  in  all  Cities  and  Countries  by  the  wav,  I  heard
honourable  report  of  his  greatnesse,wisedome,and  singular
vertue,  and  therefore  ceased  not  untill  I  entred  his
Dominions,  most  desirous  to  see  his  face,  veelding  thankes
to  God  and  Nabi,  that  it  was  now  my  chance  to  be  pre-
sented before  him  :  trusting  that  the  equitie  of  his  wise-
dome,  would  thereby  consider  that  I  was  no  Spye  of  the
Christians,  but  a  true  Mahumetan,  and  his  servant  and
slave.  Then  said  the  Sultan,  Say  Leila  illala  Mahumet
resullala :  which  words  I  could  never  well  pronounce,
eyther  that  it  pleased  not  God,  or  that  for  feare  and  scruple
of  conscience,  I  durst  not.  Therefore  when  he  saw  me
hold  my  peace,  he  commited  me  againe  to  Prison,  com-
manding that  I  should  be  straightly  looked  unto,  where
sixteene  men  of  the  Citie  were  appointed,  every  day  foure,
to  watch  me  by  course. So  that  for  the  space  of  three

79

A.D.
I503-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Souldiers
Horsemen  of
Christian
Ethiopians.

moneths,  I  had  not  the  fruition  of  Heaven,  during;  which
miserable  time,  my  Dyet  was  every  day  a  Loafe  of  Millet,
so  little  that  seven  of  them  would  not  have  satisfied  my
[II.ix.1492.]  hunger  for  one  day:  But  if  I  might  have  had  my  fill  of
water,  I  would  have  thought  my  selfe  happy.  Within
three  daves  after  the  Sultan  marched  with  his  Armie,  in
which  were  foure  thousand  Horsemen,  to  besiege  the  Citie
of  Sana.  These  Horsemen  were  borne  of  Christian
Parents,  and  blacke  like  the  Ethiopians,  and  while  they
were  yet  very  young,  were  bought  in  the  Kingdome  of
Prester  John,  at  eight  or  nine  yeares  old.  They  are
brought  up  in  Discipline  of  Warre.  This  Sultan  hath
them  in  great  estimation,  for  they  are  the  guard  of  his
owne  person,  and  are  more  valued  then  foure  score  thou-
sand of  the  other ;  they  cover  their  body  with  a  sindon,
like  unto  a  cloke  or  cape,  putting  out  onely  one  arme,  and
are  beside  naked  without  any  other  apparell.  In  the
Warres  they  use  round  Targets  made  of  BufFels  Hydes,
with  certayne  little  barres  of  Iron  to  strengthen  them.
These  Targets  are  painted  very  faire  with  sundry  colours,
and  very  commodious  to  resist  Darts,  and  are  in  largenesse
as  much  as  the  mouth  of  a  Barrell :  the  handle  is  made  of
wood,  as  bigge  as  they  may  well  hold  in  their  hands,  and
made  fast  with  navies.  They  use  Darts  and  short  broad
Swords.  At  other  times,  they  use  also  Vestures  of  Linnen
cloth  of  sundry  colours.  In  the  Warres  every  man
beareth  with  him  a  Sling,  which  he  casteth,  first  shaking
it  often  about  his  head.  When  thev  come  to  forty  or
fifty  yeares  of  age,  they  make  them  homes,  by  wreathing
the  haire  of  their  heads,  so  bearing  two  homes  like  young
Goates.  When  they  proceed  to  the  Warres,  five  thou-
cand  Camels  follow  the  Army,  all  laden  with  Ropes  of
Bombasine.

Hard  by  the  Prison  was  a  long  entry  in  manner  of  a
Clovster,  where  sometime  we  were  permitted  to  walke.
Yee  shall  further  understand,  that  in  the  Sultans  place
remayned  one  of  his  three  Wives,  with  twelve  voung
Maids  to  waite  upon  her,  very  faire  and  comelv,  after

So

madnesse.

LEWIS BARTHEMA  a .d.

IS ■:■

their  manner,  and  of  colour  inclining  to  blackc.  The
favour  that  they  bore  me,  helped  me  very  much  :  for  I
with  two  other,  being  in  the  same  Prison,  agreed  that  one
of  us  should  counterfeit  himselfe  to  be  mad,  that  by  this  Counter/,
device,  one  of  us  might  helpe  an  other.  In  fine,  it  was
my  lot  to  take  upon  me  the  mad  mans  part,  and  therefore
it  stood  me  in  hand  to  doe  such  follies  as  pertayne  to
madnesse.  Also  the  opinion  which  they  have  of  mad
folkes,  made  greatly  for  my  purpose  :  for  they  take  mad
men  to  be  holy,  and  therefore  suffered  me  to  runne  more
at  large,  untill  the  Eremites  had  given  judgement  whether
I  were  holy,  or  raging  mad,  as  appeareth  hereafter.  But
the  first  three  dayes  in  which  I  began  to  shew  my  mad-
nesse, wearied  mee  so  much,  that  I  was  never  so  tyred  with
labour  or  grieved  with  paine,  for  the  Boyes  and  Rascall
people  sometime  to  the  number  of  fortie  or  fiftie,  hurled
stones  at  me  almost  without  ceasing,  while  in  the  meane
time  againe  I  paid  some  of  them  home  with  like  wages.
The  Boyes  cryed  ever  after  me,  calling  mee  mad  man.
And  to  shew  it  the  more,  I  carryed  alwayes  stones  with
mee  in  my  shirt,  for  other  apparell  had  I  none.  The
Queene  hearing  of  my  follies,  looked  oftentimes  out  of
the  windowes  to  see  me,  more  for  a  secret  love  she  bore
me,  then  for  the  pleasure  she  tooke  in  my  follies,  as
afterward  appeared.

Therefore  on  a  time,  when  some  of  them,  much  madder
then  I,  played  the  Knaves  with  me  in  the  sight  of  the
Queene  (whose  secret  favour  towards  mee  I  somewhat
perceived)  that  my  madnesse  might  seeme  more  manifest,
I  cast  off  my  shirt,  and  went  to  the  place  before  the
windowes,  where  the  Queene  might  see  me  all  naked  :
wherein  I  perceived  she  tooke  great  pleasure.  For  she
ever  found  some  occasion  that  I  might  not  goe  out  of  her
sight :  and  would  sometimes,  with  all  her  Damosels
wayting  on  her,  spend  almost  the  whole  day  in  behold-
ing me  :  and  in  the  meane  season  divers  times  sent  me
secretly  much  good  meate  by  her  Maidens,  and  when  she
saw  the  Boyes  or  other  doe  me  any  hurt,  she  bad  me  kill

IX  81  F

A.D.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Sheepe  with
exceeding
great  tayles.
A  sheepe  made
a  Mahumetan.

them,  and  spare  not,  reviling  them  also,  and  calling  them
dogges  and  beasts.  In  the  Palace  was  nourished  a  great
fat  sheepe :  whose  tayle  weighed  fortie  pound  weight.
Under  the  colour  of  madnesse,  I  laid  hand  on  this  sheepe,
saying,  Leila  illala  Mahumet  resullala :  which  words  the
Sultan  before,  when  I  was  brought  to  his  presence,  willed
me  to  say,  to  proove  whether  I  were  a  Mahumetan,  or  a
professed  Mamaluke.  But  the  beast  answering  nothing,  I
asked  him  if  he  were  a  Mahumetan,  Jew,  or  Christian.
And  willing  to  make  him  a  Mahumetan,  I  rehearsed  againe
the  said  words,  Leila  illala  Mahumet  resullala  (that  is  to
say)  there  is  one  God,  and  Mahumet  his  chiefe  Prophet :
which  are  the  words  which  they  speake  in  professing  their
Faith.  But  when  the  beast  yet  answered  nothing,  I  broke
his  legges  with  a  staffe.  The  Queene  tooke  great  pleasure
in  these  my  mad  follies,  and  commanded  the  flesh  of  the
sheepe  to  bee  given  mee  to  eate  :  I  never  ate  meate  with
more  pleasure,  or  better  appetite.  Also  three  dayes  after,
I  likewise  killed  an  Asse,  that  was  wont  to  bring  water
into  the  Palace,  because  he  refused  to  be  a  Mahumetan,
and  to  say  those  words.  The  same  time  also  I  handled  a
Jew  so  evill,  that  I  had  almost  killed  him,  one  in  the  meane
time  calling  mee  Christian  Dogge,  Dogge  borne.  With
which  words  beeing  very  angry,  I  cast  many  stones  at
him  :  but  he  againe  hurling  at  me,  gave  me  a  stroke  on
the  brest,  and  an  other  on  the  side,  which  grieved  me
very  sore.

And  because  I  could  not  follow  him  by  reason  of  my
shackles,  I  returned  to  the  Prison,  and  stopped  the  doore
with  a  heape  of  stones,  and  there  lived  in  great  paine  for
the  space  of  two  dayes  without  meate  or  drinke  :  And
therefore  the  Queene  and  other  thought  me  to  be  dead,
but  the  doore  was  opened  by  the  Queenes  Commande-
ment.  Then  these  Dogges  deriding  me,  gave  me  stones
in  the  stead  of  bread,  and  pieces  of  white  Marble,  saying,
[If. ix. 1493.]  that  it  was  Sugar:  other  gave  me  clusters  of  Grapes  full
of  sand.  But  partly,  that  they  should  not  suspect  that  I
counterfeited  madnesse,  I  ate  the  Grapes  as  they  gave  me

82

LEWIS BARTHEMA

A.U.

Madness
taken  for
holinesse.

Hetemitts.
Afahumetans.

them.  When  the  bruite  was  spred  that  I  lived  two  dayes
and  nights  without  meate  and  drinke  :  some  beganne  to
suspect  that  I  was  a  holy  man,  and  some  that  I  was  starke
mad.  And  thus  beeing  divided  into  divers  opinions,  they
consulted  to  send  for  certaine  men,  of  whom  they  have
such  opinion  of  holinesse, as  wee  have  of  Heremites  :  these
dwell  in  the  Mountaynes,  and  lead  a  contemplative  life.
When  they  came  unto  me,  to  give  their  judgement  what
manner  of  man  I  was,  certaine  Merchants  asked  them  it  I
were  a  holy  man,  or  a  mad  man.  These  were  also  of  divers
opinions,  some  affirming  one  thing,  and  some  another.
While  they  were  yet  debating  this  matter,  for  the  space  of
an  houre,  I  pissed  in  my  hands,  and  hurld  it  in  their
faces  :  whereby  they  agreed  that  I  was  no  Saint,  but  a
madde  man.  The  Queene  seeing  all  this  at  the  window,
laughed  well  thereat  among  her  Maidens,  and  said  thus
to  them,  By  the  goodnesse  of  God,  and  by  the  head  of
Mahumet,  this  is  a  good  man.  The  day  following,  when
in  the  morning  I  found  him  asleepe  that  had  so  sore  hurt
mee  with  stones,  I  tooke  him  by  the  haire  of  the  head
with  both  hands,  and  with  my  knee  so  punched  him  on
the  stomacke,  and  battered  his  face,  that  I  left  him  all
bloudie,  and  halfe  dead.  Which  thing  the  Queene  seeing,
cryed  unto  me,  saying,  kill  the  Beast,  kill  the  Dogge  :
whereupon,  hee  ranne  his  way,  and  came  no  more  in  sight.
When  the  President  of  the  Citie  heard  that  the  Queene
favoured  me,  and  tooke  pleasure  in  my  mad  sport,  thinking
also  that  I  was  not  madde,  commanded  that  I  should  goe
at  libertie  within  the  Palace,  only  wearing  my  shackles :
Yet  every  night  was  I  put  in  another  Prison  in  the  lower
part  of  the  Palace,  and  so  remayned  still  in  the  Court  for
the  space  of  twentie  dayes.  In  the  meane  time,  the
Queene  willed  mee  to  goe  a  hunting  with  her,  which  I
refused  not,  and  at  my  returne,  I  fained  me  to  be  sicke  for
wearinesse.  So  continuing  for  the  space  of  eight  dayes,
under  the  colour  of  sicknesse,  the  Queene  often  sent  to
me  to  know  how  I  did.  After  this,  finding  oportunitie,
I  declared  to  the  Queene  that  I  had  made  a  Vow  to  God  A  holy  Vote

83

A.D.
I503-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  Mahumet,  to  visit  a  certaine  holy  man  in  the  Citie  of
Aden,  and  desired  her  to  give  me  leave  to  goe  thither.
Whereunto  she  consented  :  and  commanded  immediately
a  Camell  and  twentie  five  Sarraphes  of  Gold  to  be
delivered  me.  Therefore  the  day  following,  I  tooke  my
journey,  and  in  the  space  of  eight  dayes,  came  to  the  Citie
of  Aden  :  and  shortly  after  my  comming,  visited  the  man
of  whom  was  so  great  report  of  holinesse,  and  whom  the
A  holy  Saint,  people  honoured  for  a  Saint.  And  this  onely,  because  he
had  ever  lived  in  great  povertie,  and  without  the  company
of  women.  When  I  had  performed  my  Vow,  I  fained
that  I  had  recovered  health  by  miracle  of  that  holy  man,
and  certified  the  Queene  thereof,  desiring  that  I  might
tarrie  ther  a  while,  to  visit  likewise  certaine  other  men  in
that  Countrey,  of  whom  was  the  like  fame  of  holinesse  :
which  excuse  I  devised,  because  the  fleet  of  India  would
not  yet  depart  from  thence  for  the  space  of  a  moneth.  In
the  meane  time,  I  secretly  agreed  with  a  certaine  Captaine
of  that  Navie  to  goe  with  him  into  India,  and  made  him
many  faire  promises  to  reward  him  largely.  Hee
answered,  that  hee  would  not  goe  into  India,  before  hee
had  first  beene  in  Persia :  whereunto  I  agreed.

The  day  following,  mounting  upon  a  Camell,  and
making  a  journey  of  five  and  twentie  miles,  I  came  to  a
certaine  Citie  named  Lagi,  situate  in  a  great  Plaine,  well
peopled,  having  abundance  of  Olives,  and  flesh,  with  also
great  plentie  of  Corne,  after  our  manner :  but  no  Vines,
great  scarcenesse  of  wood.  The  Inhabitants  are  uncivill
and  rusticall  people  of  the  Nation  of  Vagabond  and  field
Arabians,  and  therefore  but  poore.  Departing  from
hence  one  dayes  journey,  I  came  to  another  Citie  named
Ajaz,  situate  upon  two  hils,  with  a  great  Plaine  betweene
them,  and  hath  in  it  an  notable  Fountayne,  and  therefore
divers  Nations  resort  thither  as  to  a  famous  Mart.  The
Inhabitants  are  Mahumetans,  and  yet  greatly  differing;
in  opinion  of  their  Religion  :  insomuch  that  therefore  they
bee  at  great  enmitie  one  against  the  other,  and  keepe  sore
warre. The  cause  whereof  they  say  to  be  this  :  That  the

84

The  fleet  of
India.

Strife  and
hatred  for  Re-
ligion, and  all
worth  nought.

LEWIS BARTHEMA

people  of  the  North  Mountayne,  maintayne  the  Faith  and
Sect  of  Mahumet  and  his  fellowes,  of  whom  we  have
spoken  before  :  but  the  other  of  the  South  Mountayne
affirme,  that  Faith  should  be  given  onely  to  Mahumet
Haly,  saying,  the  other  to  be  false  Prophets.

I  departed  hence  to  Dante,  from  thence  to  Almacharan,
where  the  Aire  is  marvellous  temperate  and  holesome,
and  the  Citie  second  to  none  in  all  respects  :  the  colour  of
the  Inhabitants  is  rather  inclining  to  white,  then  any  other
colour.  And  to  speake  that  I  have  seene,  the  Sultan
reserveth  here  as  much  Gold  as  will  lade  a  hundred
Camels.

Reame  is  distant  two  dayes  journey  from  Almacaran.
The  colour  of  the  Inhabitants  is  inclining  to  blacke  :  and
they  are  great  Merchants.  The  soyle  is  fruitfull  of  all
things  saving  wood :  it  contayneth  in  the  circuit  two
thousand  houses  :  on  the  one  side  is  a  Mountayne  having
on  it  a  very  strong  Fortresse.  Here  I  saw  a  certaine  kind
of  sheepe  having  their  tailes  of  fortie  and  foure  pound
weight,  and  are  without  homes,  and  also  so  marvellous
fat,  that  they  can  scarcely  goe  for  fatnesse.  There  be  like-
wise certaine  Grapes  without  Graines,  the  sweetest  that
ever  I  eate,  and  all  manner  of  such  Fruits,  as  I  have  spoken
of  before.  It  is  of  marvellous  temperatenesse,  as  wit-
nesseth  the  long  life  of  men,  for  I  have  spoken  with  many
of  them  that  have  passed  the  age  of  a  hundred  five  and
twentie  yeares,  and  yet  verie  lustie  and  well  complexioned.
They  goe  for  the  most  part  naked,  wearing  only  shirts,  or
other  loose  and  thinne  apparell,  like  Mantles,  putting  out
one  arme  all  bare.  Almost  all  the  Arabians  make  them
homes  with  wreathing  of  their  owne  haire,  and  that  they
thinke  very  comely.

Departing  from  thence  three  dayes  journey,  I  came  to
a  Citie  named  Sana,*  situate  upon  a  very  high  Moun-
tayne, verie  strong  by  Art  and  Nature.  The  Sultan
besieged  this,  with  a  great  Armie  of  fourescore  thousand
men  for  the  space  of  three  moneths,  but  could  never  win
it. Yet  it  was  at  the  last  rendred  by  composition. The

85

A.U.

A  fort  us  Raly,
as  the  Persians
cal  him.

Grapes  with-
out graines.

Men  of  long
life  in  tempe-
rate Aire.

[II.ix.1494.]

*See  the  next

Chap.

An  Armie  of

80000.  men.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I5°3-
Strong  walls,  wals  are  of  eighteene  cubits  height,  and  twentie  in  bredth,

insomuch  that  eight  Camels  in  order  may  well  march  upon

them. The  Region  is  very  fruitfull  and  much  like  unto

ours,  and  hath  plentie  of  water. A  Sultan  is  Lord  of  the

Citie  :  hee  hath  twelve  Sonnes,  of  the  which  one  is  named

Mahumet,  who  by  a  certaine  naturall  tyrannie  and  mad-

nesse,  delighteth  to  eate  mans  flesh,  and  therefore  secretly

killeth  many  to  eate  them. He  is  of  large  and  strong

bodie  of  foure  Cubits  high,  and  of  the  colour  inclining  to

ashes. The  soyle  beareth  certayne  Spices  not  farre  from

the  Citie. It  contayneth  about  foure  thousand  houses.

The  houses  are  of  faire  building,  and  give  no  place  to

ours. The  Citie  is  so  large,  that  it  contayneth  within  the

wals,  Fields,  Gardens,  and  Medowes.

After three  daies  journey, I came to  a  Citie named

Taessa.  Taessa,  situate  upon  a  Mountaine,  and  very  faire  to  sight :

it  hath  plentie  of  all  delices,  and  especially  of  marvellous

Roses.  faire Roses, whereof they make Rose-water. It is an

ancient  Citie,  and  hath  in  it  a  Temple  built  after  the
fashion  of  Sancta  Maria  Rotunda  in  Rome.  The  houses
are  very  faire,  and  shew  yet  the  Monuments  of  antiquitie  :
innumerable  Merchants  resort  hither  for  the  trafficke  of
sundrie  Merchandize.  In  apparell  they  are  like  unto
other,  and  of  darkish  Ashe  colour  of  skinne,  enclining  to
blacke.  Three  daies  journey  from  thence,  I  came  to
another  Citie  named  Zibith,  very  faire  and  good,  distant
from  the  Red  Sea  onely  halfe  a  daies  journey :  there  is
great  abundance  of  Merchandize,  by  reason  of  the  neer-
nesse  of  the  Sea. It  aboundeth  with  many  goodly  things,

Sugar.  and  especially  with  most  white  Sugar,  and  sundry  kindes

of  pleasant  fruits.  It  is  situate  in  a  very  large  Plaine
within  two  Mountaynes  :  it  lacketh  walls,  and  is  one  of
the  chiefest  Marts  for  all  sorts  of  Spices.  The  Inhabi-
tants are  of  the  colour  of  them  aforesaid.  From  hence  in
one  daies  journey,  I  came  to  the  Citie  of  Damar :  It  is  a
fruitfull  soyle,  and  hath  great  exercise  of  Merchandize.
The  Inhabitants  are  Mahumetans,  in  apparel  and  colour
like  unto  the  other.

86

LEWIS BAKTHEMA  a .u.

1503-
These Cities whereof we have spoken here a little
before,  are  subject  to  a  Sultan  of  Arabia  Foelix,  named The  Sultan  °J
Sechamir: Secha  (by  interpretation)  signifieth  Holy,  and  taFalix

Amir, a Prince, named the holy Prince, because he
abhorreth  shedding  of  mans  bloud. At  the  time  of  my A  pUifull
being  there  in  Prison,  hee  nourished  sixteene  thousand  Pa&a"-
poore  men  and  Captives  in  Prison  condemned  to  death,
allowing  to  every  of  them  daily  for  their  diet,  sixe  of  their
pence  of  the  smallest  valure,  and  at  home  in  his  Palace A  great
entertayneth  as  many  blacke  slaves.  /ami  te.

Departing  from  hence,  I  returned  to  the  Citie  of  Aden
in  three  dayes  journey  :  in  the  midway,  I  found  an  exceed-
ing high  and  large  Mountaine,  where  is  great  plentie  of
wilde  beasts,  and  especially  of  Monkeyes,  which  runne  Monkeys  and
about  the  Mountaine  every  where. There  are  also  many tons'
Lions,  very  noysome  to  men  :  and  therefore  it  is  not  safe
to  journey  that  way,  but  when  a  multitude  of  men  goe
together,  at  the  least,  to  the  number  of  a  hundred. I
passed  this  way  with  a  great  companie,  and  yet  were  we
in  danger  of  the  Lions, and  other  wilde  beasts  which  Danger  of
followed  us :  for  we  were  sometimes  constrayned  to  fight  beasts.

with  them  with  Darts,  Slings,  and  Bowes,  using  also  the
helpe  of  Dogs,  and  yet  escaped  hardly.  When  I  came  to
the  Citie,  I  fayned  my  selfe  sicke  :  and  in  the  day  time
lurked  in  the  Temple,  and  went  forth  onely  in  the  night
to  speake  with  the  Pilot  of  the  ship  (of  whom  I  have  made
mention  before)  and  obtayned  of  him  a  Foist  or  Barke  to
depart  thence  secretly.

Committing  our  selves  to  the  Sea,  we  were  by  incon-  Tempest.
stant fortune and sundry tempests, deterred from that
Voyage  : for  whereas  we  were  now  sixe  dayes  sayling  on Tfie  Voyage
our  way  to  Persia,  a  sudden  contrary  tempest  drove  us  t0  Perste'
out  of  our  way,  and  cast  us  on  the  coast  of  Ethiope. Our  Ethiope.
Barkes  were  laden  with  Rubricke  (that  is,  a  certaine  red  Rubricke.
earth)  which  is  used  to  dye  Cloth : for  yeerely  from  the
Citie  of  Aden,  depart  fifteene  or  twentie  ships  laden  with
Rubricke,  which  is  brought  out  of  Arabia  Foelix. Being
therefore  thus  tossed  with  stormes,  we  were  driven  into

87

A.D.
1503.

Zeila.

Gold.

Black  slaves.

Presbyter
Johannes,
King  of
Jacobins  and
Abyssins.
Justice  and
good  lawes.
Sheepe  with
great  tayles.
Pakaria.

[II.ix.1495.]

Kine  with
Harts  hemes.

Kine  with
cnely  one
home.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

a  Port,  named  Zeila  : where  we  remayned  five  dayes  to
see  the  Citie,  and  tarried  untill  the  Sea  were  more  quiet.

In  this  Citie  is  great  frequentation  of  Merchandise,  as
in  a  most  famous  Mart.  There  is  marvellous  abundance
of  Gold  and  Ivorie,  and  an  innumerable  number  of  blacke
Slaves,  sold  for  a  small  price  :  these  are  taken  in  Warre  by
the  Mahumetan  Moores,  out  of  Ethiopia,  of  the  King-
dome  of  Presbyter  Johannes.  In  this  Citie  Justice  and
good  Lawes  are  observed  :  the  soyle  beareth  Wheat,  and
hath  abundance  of  Flesh,  and  divers  other  commodious
things.  It  hath  also  Oyle,  not  of  Olives  but  of  some
other  thing,  I  know  not  what.  There  is  also  plentie  of
Honey  and  Waxe  :  there  are  likewise  certaine  Sheepe,
having  their  tayles  of  the  weight  of  sixteene  pound,  and
exceeding  fat ;  the  head  and  necke  are  blacke,  and  all  the
rest  white.  There  are  also  Sheepe  altogether  white,
having  tayles  of  a  cubit  long,  hanging  downe  like  a  cluster
of  Grapes  :  and  have  also  great  laps  of  skin  hanging  from
their  throats,  as  have  Bulls  and  Oxen,  hanging  downe
almost  to  the  ground.  There  are  also  certaine  Kine  with
homes  like  unto  Harts  homes,  these  are  wilde :  and  when
they  be  taken,  are  given  to  the  Sultan  of  that  Citie  as  a
Kingly  present.  I  saw  there  also  certaine  Kine,  having
onely  one  home  in  the  middest  of  the  forehead,  about  a
span  and  halfe  of  length,  but  the  home  bendeth  back-
ward :  they  are  of  bright-shining  red  colour.  But  they
that  have  Harts  homes,  are  enclining  to  blacke  colour.
Coney  is  there  good  cheape.  The  Citie  hath  an  innumer-
able multitude  of  Merchants :  the  Walls  are  greatly
decayed,  and  the  Haven  rude  and  despicable.  The  King
or  Sultan  of  the  Citie  is  a  Mahumetan,  and  entertayneth
in  wages  a  great  multitude  of  Foot-men  and  Horse-men.
They  are  greatly  given  to  warres,  and  weare  onely  one
loose  single  vesture,  as  wee  have  said  before  of  other.
They  are  of  darke  ashie  colour,  enclining  to  blacke.  In
the  warres,  they  are  unarmed  :  and  are  of  the  Sect  of
Mahumet.

Atter  that  the  tempests  were  appeased,  we  gave  wind  to

LEWIS BARTHEMA  ad.

'503-

our  Sayles,  and  in  short  time  arrived  at  the  Hand  named

Barbara,  the  Prince  whereof  is  a  Mahumetan. The  Hand

is not great, but fruitfull, and well peopled : it hath

abundance of flesh. The Inhabitants are of colour

enclining  to  blacke. All  their  riches  is  in  herds  of  Cattell.

Wee  remayned here but one day, and departing from

hence,  sayled  into  Persia :  and  thence  to  Cambaia.

The  Sultan  of  Cambaia,  at  my  being  there,  was  named

Macamut, and had raigned fortie yeers, after he had

expulsed  the  King  of  Guzerat. They  thinke  it  not  law-  Banians.

full  to  kill  any  living  beast  to  eate,  or  to  eate  flesh. They

are  no  Mahumetans,  neither  Idolaters. As  touching  their

apparel,  some  of  them  goe  naked,  and  other  cover  onely

their  privities. On  their  heads  they  weare  fillets  of  purple

colour. They themselves are of darke yellow colour,

commonly called Leonell colour. This Sultan main- They  may

tayneth  an  Armie  of  twentie  thousand  Horse-men. Every  seem r

'  .  . .^  1  rr.  ..  J successor*  of

morning resort to his Palace, time men, sitting on  Darius  ari(i

Elephants. Their  office  is,  with  all  reverence  to  salute  Porus.

the  King  or  Sultan,  the  Elephants  also  kneeling  downe. The  great

In  the  morning  assoone  as  the  King  waketh,  is  heard  a  P°mPe  °fthc

great  noyse  of  Drummes,  Tambarts,  Timbrels,  Waits,  and  Qan\haia

also  Trumpets,  with  divers  other  Musicall  Instruments,  Elephants.

in  rejoycing that the  King  liveth. The  like doe they

while  he  is  at  dinner  :  &  then  also  the  men  sitting  on  the

Elephants,  make  him  the  like  reverence  as  before. Wee

will  in  due  place  speake  of  the  wit,  customes,  and  docilitie

of these beasts. The Sultan of this Citie, hath his

Mustachos  so  long  that  he  beareth  them  up  with  a  fillet,

as  women  doe  the  haire  of  their  heads :  his  beard  is  white

and  long,  even  unto  the  navell. He  is  so  accustomed  to  4  strange

poyson  from  his infancy, that  he  daily  eateth some to  H[storte  °fa

keepe  it  in  use. And  although  he  himselfe  feele  no  hurt  accustomed  to

thereof  by  reason  of  custome,  yet  doth  hee  thereby  so  eatepc\:

impoyson  himselfe,  that  he  is  poyson  to  other  : for  when

he  is  disposed  to  put  any  of  his  Noblemen  to  death,  he

causeth  him  to  be  brought  to  his  presence,  and  to  stand

naked  before  him. Incontinent  hee  eateth  certaine  fruits

89

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

J503.

(which  they  call  Chofolos)  like  unto  Nutmegs :  and  eateth

A  vcnlmous  also  the  leaves  of  herbes,  which  they  call  Tambolos,  adding
&'  also  thereto  the  powder  of  beaten  Oyster  shells. And  a

while  chawing  all  these  together  in  his  mouth,  he  spitteth
it  upon  him  whom  he  desireth  to  kill,  who  being  sparkled
therewith,  dieth  by  force  of  the  poyson  within  the  space  of
halfe  an  houre.  He  entertayneth  about  foure  thousand
Concubines :  for  whensoever  he  hath  lyen  with  any  of
them,  shee  with  whom  hee  hath  lyen,  is  dead  in  the
morning.  And  when  hee  changeth  his  shirt  or  other
apparell,  no  man  dare  weare  it :  and  for  this  cause  he  hath
great  change  of  apparell.  My  companion  enquired  dili-
gently of  the  Merchants,  by  what  meanes  hee  was  of  so
venimous  nature  ?  They  answered,  that  the  Sultan  his
father  brought  him  so  up  of  a  child  with  poyson  by  little
and  little,  with  preservatives  so  accustoming  him  thereto.

But  wee  will  follow  our  Author  no  further  into  India,
having  entertayned  him  for  an  Arabian  guide  :  But  for
our  Readers  satisfaction  will  adde  this  little  of  Arabia,
taken  from  an  Author  which  lived  long  since,  and  was  in
those  parts  better  travelled  :  to  which  wee  will  adde  Collec-
tions out  of  Arabike  Authors,  for  more  full  understanding
of  their  unholy  Holies.

Chap. VIII.

Collections  of  Asia,  especially  of  Arabia,  gathered
out  of  an  Arabike  Booke  of  Geographie,
written  by  a  Nubian,  foure  hundred  and
seventie  yeeres  agoe,  and  translated  into  Latine
by  Gabriel  Sionita,  and  Johannes  Hesronita,
Maronites  of  Mount  Libanus,  the  one  Pro-
fessor, and  both  Interpreters  to  the  French
King,  of  the  Arabike,  and  Syriake  Tongues.

THis  Author  is  unknowne  : by  some  passages  of  his
Booke  esteemed  by  the  Translators  a  Nubian  and  a
Christian  ;  by  learned  Casaubon  thought  to  be  an  Egyptian

90

COLLECTIONS OK ASIA

A.IJ.
(. 1155.

and  Mahometan,  to  which  later  opinion  I  should  rather
subscribe,  by  reason  of  his  weaker  Relations  of  Nubia,
and  the  next  Westerne  parts  of  Africa, (erring  in  the  course
of  Nilus  it  selfe)  then  of  others  :  and  though  he  calls
Christ  Lord;  and  the  Blessed  Virgin,  Ladie,  yet  his  [ll.ix.14r/;.]
phrase  and  stile-devotion  is  after  the  Mahumetan  manner,
and  his  Geographie  best  in  those  parts,  where  was  then
no  safe  travell  for  Christians,  as  in  Arabia,  Spaine,  &c.
His  method  is  by  the  Climats.  This  which  we  have  trans-
lated, is  out  of  the  first,  second,  and  third  Climate.  The
Mahumetans  also  call  Christ,  Lord  ;  (Nazaret  Eesa)  as  is
observed  before  in  Master  Terry.

Praise  be  to  God  the  Lord  of  the  Creatures.

He  Aloe  of  Socotra  exceedeth  in  goodnesse
that  which  is  gathered  in  Hadhramut  of
the  Land  of  Jaman,  in  Seger,  or  any
where  else.  This  Hand  is  reckoned
amongst  the  Regions  of  Jaman,a  and
belongs  to  it.  Over  against  itareMelinda,
and  Monbasa.  Alexander  having  con-
quered the  Indians,  returned  by  the  Indian  Sea  to  the  Sea
of  Jaman,  and  overcomming  those  Hands,  came  to  Socotra,
and  wrote  to  Aristotle  his  Master  thereof,  who  advised
him  to  people  it  with  Grecians.  Thus  (according  to  the
Moores  Tradition)  were  the  Natives  removed,  and  Greekes
there  planted,  which  is  the  reason  (in  our  Authors  conceit)
that  the  then  Inhabitants  were  for  the  most  part
Christians.

The  lies  Chartan  and  Martan  are  in  Giun  Alhascisc
(herbae  Sinu,  the  weedy  or  grassy  Bay)  over  against  the
Land  of  Seger,  in  which  Frankincense  groweth.  In  both
these  live  a  People  of  Arabs,  which  speake  a  Language
unknowne  to  the  Moderne.  Of  the  Regions  of  Jaman
is  the  Castle  Alherda,  the  Inhabitants  whereof  live  a  hard
life.  From  hence  to  the  Castle  Galafeca  are  foure
stations b  by  land.  It  is  neere  the  Haven  Zabid,  fiftie
miles distant. That Citie c Zabid is great and rich,

91

3  J 'anion  is
South  or  Hap-
pie  Arabia.

b  Stations  are
dayes  journeys
or  such  places
where
Travellers
and  Caravans
made  sta\.
c  Zabid.

A.D.

c.  1155.

'' Sanaa,  haply

that  which  is

now  the

Metropolis

Sinan  or

Zenan,  where

Sir  H.  Mid.

was.

c  Daiar-Dahes

now  Taies.

{Jden.

E  Mahgem,
now  perhaps
Moka  :for  the
pronunciation
of  letters
especially
gutter -a  Is,  cause
much
alteration.

hSaba,  I
suppose  he
meaneth  the
queen  of  Saba,
1.  Reg.  10.

1  Merbat  and
Frankincense.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

frequented  by  Merchants  of  Hagiaz,  Habascia,  and  Metsr
(or  Egypt)  which  passe  by  the  ships  of  Giodda.  The
-/Ethiopians  bring  thither  their  Merchandises,  and  thence
carrie  Spices,  and  China  Dishes.  It  is  situate  neere  a
small  River,  distant  one  hundred  thirtie  two  miles  from
the  Citie  Sanaa,  by  the  way  which  goeth  to  the  Land  of
Jaman.  From  Zabid  to  Gilan  is  sixe  and  thirtie  miles  ;
thence  to  Alhan,  two  and  fortie ;  to  Alholf ,  thirtie ;  and
then  to  Sanaa,  foure  and  twentie.  Those  are  small
Villages  and  Castles,  but  populous.  Sanaa  is  rich,  stored
with  buildings,  and  in  all  the  Land  of  Jaman,  the  most
ancient,  large,  and  populous ;  temperate  and  fertile.
Thence  to  Dhamar  a  small  Citie,  is  eight  and  fortie  miles ;
to  Aden  from  Sanaa  is  foure  and  twentie  miles ;  by  the
way  which  leads  to  Dajar-Dahes.e  Aden  f  is  a  small  Citie,
yet  of  note  as  a  Port  of  both  Seas  ;  from  whence  the  ships
of  Sinda,  India,  and  China  set  forth,  and  thither  are
brought  (Vasa  Sinica)  the  China  Dishes.

From  Aden  to  Mahgem  s  is  eight  Stations :  this  is  a
small  populous  Citie,  the  border  twixt  the  Government  of
Tahama  and  Jaman,  and  is  from  Sanaa  seven  stations.
From  Mahen  to  Habran  are  foure  stations.  From  Habran
to  Saada  are  eight  and  fortie  miles.  From  Aden  to  Abin
are  twelve  miles  Eastward  alongst  the  shoare  ;  the  Inhabi-
tants are  famous  Magicians.  It  is  distant  from  Laasa,  a
day  and  nights  sayling.  Betwixt  Laasa  and  Sciorama  (two
dayes  sayling  by  the  shoare  distant)  is  a  great  Towne,  and
therein  a  medicinable  hot  Bath.  These  two  Cities  are  in
the  Land  of  Hadhramut :  in  it  are  Sciabam  and  Tarim,
and  Mareb  now  ruined,  which  was  Saba,h  whence  was
Belcqis  the  wife  of  Salomon  sonne  of  David.  From
Hadhramut  to  Saada  are  two  hundred  and  fortie  miles.
Hadhramut  is  Eastward  from  Aden  five  stations.  In  it
are  wide  fields  of  Sands,  called  Ahcaf.  In  Saba  dwell  the
People  of  Jaman  and  Oman  ;  and  there  was  that  famous
wall  of  the  Arabians,  before  they  were  dispersed  thence.
From  Sciorama  to  the  Citie  Merbat  are  sixe  dayes  sayling.
Betwixt  them  is  Ghobbo-Icamar. In  the  Hills  of  Merbat '

92

COLLECTIONS OF ASIA  a.*.

c.  1 1  55-

grow  Trees  of  Frankincense,  which  is  thence  carried  to
the  East  and  West.  Merbat  is  foure  dayes  journey  by
Land  from  Hasec  (and  two  by  Sea)  against  which  are
Chartan  and  Marfan.

I  am  loth  to  follow  our  Author,  as  he  followeth  his
Climate  into  the  Indian  Sea,  called  Harchend,  where  he
findeth  the  famous  Hand  Sarandib  (which  I  take  to  be  that  Sarandib.
which  is  now  called  Zeilan,)  fourescore  leagues  long,  and  as
much  broad,  with  a  high  Hill,  called  Rahon,  where  are
many  precious  stones  and  Spices,  and  in  the  shoares  fishing
for  Pearles ;  the  King  whereof  hath  sixteene  Counsellors,
foure  of  that  Nation,  foure  Christians,  foure  Muslemans
or  Mahumetans,  and  foure  Jewes,  to  which  all  of  those
professions  resort  for  justice.  Thence  to  the  Hand  Alrami,
is  three  daies  saile,  which  is  said  to  be  seven  hundred
leagues  in  length.  (This  seemeth  Sumatra)  But  I  will  not
by  Moorish  and  now  obsolete  names  lose  my  selfe  in  these
Indian  Seas,  better  knowne  to  our  English  Sailers,  then
this  unknowne  Geographer.  Yet  in  Arabia  we  will  ascend
with  him  more  Northerly  in  that  part  of  Arabia,  placed  in
his  Second  Climate.  He  reckoneth  on  the  Red  Sea  Adhab,
whereto  adjoyneth  the  Desart,  travelled  by  the  course
of  the  Sunne  and  Starres :  the  Red  Sea  with  many
Hands  inhabited,  and  Desart ;  and  chiefe  Ports  Serrain,
Soquia,  Giodda,  Giohfa,  and  Algiar :  the  Mid-land
Regions,  Sanacan,  and  Mecca,  Taief,  Codaid,  Medina,  and
Adhab.  The  Mount  Mocatta  extends  from  Metser  by  Metser «
Sahra,  that  is,  the  Desart,  to  Asuan  :  Adhab  is  at  the  top  ^a\ro  or
of  the  Desart  by  the  Sea,  from  whence  they  goe  to  Gidda.  '

Adhab  is  victualled  by  the  Governour  under  the  King  of
Egypt,  and  by  another  under  the  King  of  Bega,  out  of  [II.ix.1497.]
Habascia,  which  two  divide  the  Revenues  thereof  betwixt
them. In our time they there exact tributes of the
Pilgrims  Moslemans,  which  come  from  the  West,  of  each Moskman  is  a
Poll  eight  pence  weight  of  gold. Nor  may  any  passe  n&ht  °1 ''th°-
over  to  Giodda,  without  this  "payment,  or  else  the  Ship-  ^xJf  l™*£
master  which sets him  over  shall pay for him. They  metam  call
therefore  shew  to  the  Master  this  their  tribute  before  hee  themselves.

93

A.D.

c.  1155.

*This  is  but
Mahumetan
ignorance,  for
the  Samari-
tans, or
C  tithe  an  s  are
another  sect :
of  iv hie h  see
my  Pi/g.  I.  2.
c.  8.
Medina.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

admits  them.  This  tribute  goeth  to  Alhasemi,  the  Lord
of  Mecca.  This  Sea  is  full  of  Sholds  and  Rocks,  and
some  Hands  thereof  in  winter  are  desolate.  Neaman  is
the  greatest  in  this  part.  Sameri  is  inhabited  by
Samaritan  Jewes,  whose  word  is  Lamesas,  if  they  have
offended  any,  by  which  they  are  knowne  to  descend  of
Samer,*  the  author  of  the  Calfe  in  the  time  of  Moses,  to
whom  bee  peace.  On  the  East  side  of  this  Sea  is  the
Tower  of  Hali,  a  little  Citie  whence  are  two  short  stations
to  the  Citie  Sancar.  Five  daies  from  Hali,  is  Serrain  on
the  shoare  :  three  stations  from  Serrain  in  the  Port  of
Socquia,  and  as  farre  from  Socquia  to  Giodda.  This  is  one
of  the  Ports  of  Mecca,  and  fortie  miles  distant  from  it.

From  Mecca  to  Medina,  that  is,  the  Citie  (the  name  of
it  is  Jathreb)  in  the  right  way  are  ten  stations :  from
Mecca,  to  Batn-Marri,  a  certaine  Inne  or  Cane,  in  which  is
a  Spring  of  water,  environed  with  Palme  trees  sixteene
miles :  thence  to  Offan  thirtie,  to  Codaid  foure  and
twentie  :  thence  to  Gioffa  (a  station  of  the  Pilgrims  of
Damasco)  six  and  twentie  :  thence  to  Alabua  seven  and
twentie  :  as  many  thence  to  Socquia,  thence  to  Rovait-
ham  six  and  thirtie,  to  Sabala  foure  and  thirtie,  to  Malal
seventeene,  to  Sogera  twelve,  to  Medina  six.  Hee
expresseth  another  way  from  Mecca  to  Medina,  by  the
Mountaines,  which  I  omit.  Medina  is  compassed  with
Palme  trees,  the  Dates  whereof  sustaine  the  Inhabitants,
wanting-  both  Corne  and  Cattell.  Their  drinke  is  out  of
a  small  River  which  Omar  brought  thither  from  a  great
Spring.  It  is  halfe  as  big  as  Mecca.  Betwixt  Medina
and  the  Sea  is  three  daies  journey,  and  Algiar  is  the  Port
thereof,  a  Towne  well  inhabited  :  one  station  from  Medina
to  Chosciob,  a  second  to  Ghoraib,  the  third  to  Algair.
From  Algiar  to  Giodda,  is  about  ten  daies  journey  by
land  neere  the  Coast :  the  wayes  hidden  by  Sands  moved
by  the  winds.

On  the  East  of  Mecca  sixtie  miles  distant  is  Taief,  the
way  by  Badid-almortafe,  which  is  populous,  and  there  are
wandring Arabians, then to Carn-almanazel, thence to

94

COLLECTIONS OF ASIA  ad.

C. I  155-

Taief.  This  is  the  habitation  of  *  Thacqifi  :  and  is  cele-  *4  (h}eJ
brated  for  Raisins,  and  most  part  of  the  fruits  of  Mecca  iectarte-
are  brought  thence.  Taief  is  seated  on  Mount  Ghazuan,
the  coldest  Mountaine  in  all  Hagiar,*  where  water  some-  *  Arabia.
time  freezeth  in  Summer.  To  Mecca  belongs  the  Castles
Naged-Altaief,  Nageran,  Carnalmanazel,  Acqis,  Ocadz,
Lia,  Tarba,  Maisa,  Caisa,  Gioras,  and  Sarat ;  and  in
Tehama,  Sancan,  Serain,  Socqia,  Ghasin,  Bais,  and  Aac.
The  Castles  of  Medina,  are  Taima,  Daumat-Algiandel,
Alfere,  Dhu-linorvat,Vadi-liqora,  Madian,  Chaibar,  Fadac,
Cqere-Arinae,  Vahida,  Sajara,  Rohba,  Sajala,  Sabana,
Rahett,  Adhab,  Achhal,  and  Hamia.  The  way  from
Mecca  to  Sanaa,  is  to  Serrain  Carn-almanazel,  then  to
Sofr,  Caze,  Rovaitha  (a  great  Towne)  Tabala,  Baisat,
Jactan,  Giasda,  Niab  (a  very  great  Towne  frequented  with
people  and  Palmes)  Singia,  Cassa,  Negem,  Sedum,  Rah.
This  is  a  great  towne  stored  with  Vineyards,  whence
Gioras  is  eight  miles,  a  Towne  as  big  as  Nageran,  and  in
them  both  are  shops  for  dressing  Skinnes  :  From  Sadum
also  to  Mahgera  is  as  farre ;  there  is  a  deepe  Well,  and  a
very  great  Tree,  called  Talhat-almalec,  the  border  betwixt
the  jurisdictions  of  Mecca  and  Jaman.  Thence  to  Adhia,
then  to  Saada,  where  are  dressed  the  best  Pelts,  carryed
to  many  places  of  Jaman  and  Hagian,  and  distant  one
hundred  and  eightie  miles  from  Sanaa  ;  thence  to  Amasia,
to  the  Citie  Gionva,  where  grow  huge  Grapes,  which  are
dryed,  and  carried  to  other  parts  farre  and  neere  :  seventie
two  miles  from  Sanaa  (to  the  west  hereof,)  is  the  land
of  the  Abadhites,  well  fortified  and  peopled,  thence  to
Anafeth,  to  Rabda  encompassed  with  Vineyards,  Fields,
and  Fountaynes  ;  the  Inhabitants  of  which  possesse  Droves
and  Camels.  This  hath  a  deepe  Well,  and  that  strong
house  or  Temple  memorable  amongst  writers  :  and  is  one
station  from  Sanaa.  The  whole  journey  is  made  by  Cara-
vans in  twentie  stations.  The  way  from  Mecca  to  Dhi-
Sohaim  of  the  land  of  Chaulan,  is  first  to  Maleca,  then  to
Jalamla,  to  Caina,  to  Darca,  and  Olbob,  to  Habascia,  to
Canona,  to  Baisat-Haran,  to  Hali  upon  the  Sea,  to  the

95

Seas

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1 1 55-

River  Sancan,  to  Baisat-Jartan,  to  Haran-Alcarin,  and  then
to  Chaulan-Dhi-sohaim.  All  these  Regions  are  in  the
Land  of  Tehama  (which  is  a  portion  of  Jaman)  the  limits
of  which  are  the  Red  Sea  on  the  West,  Mountaynes  on
the  East  which  runne  from  the  North  to  the  South,  on
which  East  side  are  Saada,  Haus,  and  Nagera  :  On  the
North  Mecca,  and  Giodda.  In  Tehama  are  wandring
Arabs  of  all  families.  Mecca  is  the  Centre  of  all  Arabia,
betwixt  the  Seas.  For  from  Mecca  to  Sanaa  is  twentie
stations,  as  much  to  Sobaid,  to  Jaman  twentie  one,  to
;'.  the  two  Damascus  thirtie,  to  Baharain  *  from  Mecca  five  and
twentie.

The  Regions  and  Provinces  of  note  in  the  sixt  part  of
the  second  Climate,  are  Gioras  and  Baisa,  Tabala,  Ocadh,
Nagera,  Olu-Jahseb,  Tehafar,  Mareb,  Seger,  Sofl-Jahseb,
Sceba,  Hadhramut,  Sur,  Calhat,  Mascat,  Sohar,  Ofor,  Soal,
Manea,  Sorooman,  Bathrun,  Hogera,  Hadhrama,  Caria-
tain,  Vagera,  Verema,  Maaden,  Alnocra,  Salamia,  Barca,
Assheh,  Hagiar,  Barman,  Hobal,  and  GilofFar.  And  on
the  part  of  the  Persian  Sea,  the  lies  Abron,  Heber,  Kis,
Ben-Caiian,  and  Dordur  ;  and  two  Mountaynes,  Cosair,  and
Oiiair.  In  this  part  also  are  of  the  Land  of  Kerman,
Senaiiain,  and  the  Mountaynes  Mascan.  Betwixt  Gioras
and  Honiia  are  foure  stations,  and  sixe  twixt  Honua  and
Nagera.  Tabala  is  foure  stations  from  Mecca.  From
[II.ix.14.98.]  Tabala  to  Ocadh  are  three:  here  are  Faires  every  Sunday
of  divers  Merchandizes.  Tdafar  is  the  cheefe  Citie
Jahseb  :  from  whence  to  Dhamar,are  sixe  and  thirtie  miles,
and  fortie  from  Dhamar  to  Sanaa  :  from  Choud  to  Sanaa,
one  hundred  and  fortie :  from  Tdafar  to  Mareb,  three
stations.  In  this  Towne  is  Salomons  Tower,  the  Sonne
Servah,  built  of  David,  to  whom  bee  peace,  called  Servah,  now  nothing
as  they  fable  Dut  niines.  Jn  the  same  Mareb,  is  the  Tower  Cascib,
Belcals  Wife  wmcn  was  tne  Tower  of  Belcqis,  the  Wife  of  Salomon,  to
whom  be  health.  There  was  also  the  Fortresse  famous
amongst  all  people,  called  Aarem.  The  Inhabitants  of
Mareb  were  a  certaine  Sect  of  the  Hamaraite  Arabians,
very  proud  ; they  had  a  strong  defence  against  the  course

96^

Belcqis  Wife
of  Sal.

COLLECTIONS OF ASIA  aj>.

c.  1 1 55.

of  the  water  of  admirable  structure,  and  each  Family  had

their  Conduit  pipes  for  their  fields  and  houses ; but  God c*odi  JudKe

sent  a  great  floud  whiles  they  were  asleepe,  which  over- '

threw  that  building  (hanging  over  the  Citie  as  a  Moun-

taine)  and  carried  away  the  whole  Citie  and  Suburbe  with

the  people.

In  Hadhramut  are  Teria,  and  Sceba  fourc  stations  from
Mareb,  a  strong  Tower  on  the  descent  of  Mount  Sceba,
a  steepe  hill,  whereon  you  shall  see  many  habitations,
fields,  and  water-courses.  Eastward  is  the  Land  of  Seger,
from  the  furthest  end  whereof  to  Aden,  are  three  hundred
miles.  To  the  North  of  Seger  is  Oman,  in  which  are  two
Cities,  Tsur,  and  a  station  thence  is  Cqelhat,  situate  on  the
Persian  Sea.  Betwixt  Tsur  and  the  Promontorie  Almah-
giame,  is  fifteene  daies  by  Land,  two  courses  (or  fortie
eight  houres)  sayling.  Neere  to  that  Promontorie  they
fish  for  Pearles.  From  Cqelhat  to  Sahar,  are  two  hundred
miles :  neere  it  is  Dhamar.  From  Maschatt  to  Sohar,  are
foure  hundred  and  fiftie  miles.  Sohar  is  the  ancientest
Citie  of  Oman,  on  the  Persian  Sea,  somtime  the  Port  for
the  China  Ships :  which  now  is  ceased,  because  in  the
midst  of  the  Persian  Sea  lyeth  the  Hand  Kis,  of  square  Kis.
forme  twelve  miles  over,  two  courses  from  Sohar,  and  on
the  Kerman  shoare  Tairuset  is  over  against  it.  Two  daies  Tahuset.
from  Sohar,  is  Soal  and  Ofor,  two  small  Cities,  made  Ports
by  the  River  Falg.  Halfe  a  daies  journey  thence  is  Mang,
at  the  foote  of  Mount  Sciorum,  from  whence  west-ward
to  Sorooman,  are  two  stations.  Falg  hath  on  it  many
Townes,  and  runneth  into  the  Sea  neere  Gioloffar.  Most
of  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Region  Oman  are  Schismatickes.
Betwixt  Naged  and  Oman,  are  great  Desarts.  From
Sohar  to  Bahrain,  are  about  twentie  stations.  The  way
from  Oman  to  Mecca,  is  very  difficult,  for  often  Desarts,
and  therefore  they  goe  by  Sea  to  Aden.  Like  difficulties
are  in  the  way  thence  to  Albahrain  North-wards,  for  the
invasions  of  Arabs.  North-west  to  Oman,  confineth  the
Land  Jamama,  Cities  whereof  are  Hagiar,  (now  ruined)
and  Barca  and  Salamia. The  way  from  Jamama  to  Mecca,

IX  97  g

A.D.

c.  1155.

*The  River

Astart,  on

which  River

are  seated

Monsarecha,

Vabara,

Cafa,  A 'bra,

Baasa,  Sal,

Ameria,

Nisan,Barcat-

Dhahec,

Salamia,

Taudheh,

Merca,

Megiara.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

is  to  *  Aardh,  to  Chodaia,  to  Thania,  to  Sofra,  to  Soda,  to
Cariatain,  to  Dama,  to  Tangia,  to  Sarfa,  to  Giadila,  to
Falcha,  to  Rocaiba,  to  Coba,  to  Maran,  to  Vagera,  to
Autas,  to  Dhaterc,  each  a  station,  to  Benamer,  and  thence
to  Mecca  another  station.  Maaden-alnocra  is  a  great
Towne,  where  the  families  of  Basra  and  Cufa  meete,  when
they  goe  on  Pilgrimage  to  Mecca.  The  Persian  Sea  is
annexed  to  the  Indians,  and  on  the  shoare  of  Jaman  hath
two  Mountaines,  Cosair  and  Ouair,  against  which  is
Dordur,  where  the  Sea  is  called  Ghazera.  Dordur  is  a
whirlepoole  which  swalloweth  ships,  on  the  South  of  the
He  Ben-Caiian,  which  is  from  Kis  fiftie  two  miles.  The
length  of  Ben-Caiian  is  fiftie  two  miles,  the  breadth
nine,  the  Inhabitants  schismaticall  Abatdhite.  Neere
it  is  Dordur,  a  narrow  place  nigh  to  the  Mountaines
Cosair  and  Ouair,  which  are  hidden  with  waters,  but  the
waters  breake  on  their  tops.  Three  such  whirlepooles  are
found,  this,  another  not  farre  from  the  Hand  Comar,  the
third  in  the  end  of  Sin  betwixt  Siraff,  and  the  Promon-
torie  called  Mascat  Saif.

But  to  returne  to  the  Red  Sea,  and  the  most  Northerly
parts  thereof.  In  Calzem  are  made  the  flat  bottomed
ships,  broad  and  shallow,  fit  for  great  burthen  and  the
Sholds  of  that  Sea.  From  Calzem  to  Faran-Ahron,  are
fortie  miles  ;  this  is  in  the  bottome  of  a  Bay,  whence  they
goe  to  Mount  Tur,  trending  along  by  the  Sea.  That
Mountaine  is  high,  and  is  ascended  by  steps,  and  hath  an
Oratorie  on  the  top,  with  a  pit  of  Spring-water.  From
Tur  to  Masdaf,a  pleasant  place  where  they  fish  for  pearles  :
from  Masdaf  to  Sciarm-Albait,  hence  to  Sciarm-Albir,
thence  to  Cape  Abi-Mohammed,  three  Ports  without
water :  and  here  beginneth  the  ascent  of  Ayla,  a  small
Citie  of  Arabs.  Then  to  Aumed  a  watery  Port,  over
against  the  He  Noman,  tenne  miles  from  the  Continent :
thence  to  Tanna,  to  Atuf,  to  Haura,  where  they  make
Pots,  transported  farre  and  neere.  Not  farre  thence  on
the  South,  is  Mount  Radhua,  where  grow  the  Whetstones
hence  carried  East  and  West :  thence  to  the  faire  Port  and

98

COLLECTIONS OF ASIA

River  Tsafra,  then  to  Caiiajaa,  to  Giar,  to  Giohfa,  Codaid,
Aasfan,  Giodda.  On  the  shoare  of  the  Red  Sea,  is  the
Citie  Madian,  and  the  Well  where  Moses,  to  whom  peace,
watered  the  flocke  of  Scioaib  :  from  Madian  to  Ayla,  are
five  stations,  from  Ayla  to  Giar  about  twentie.  From
Madian  to  Tabuc  by  Land  East-ward,  sixe  stations ;  it  is
seated  betwixt  Hagiar  and  the  beginning  of  Damascus.
Hagiar  is  from  Vadialiqora,  one  station  :  they  have  houses
in  the  Rockes.  But  the  waies  are  difficult,  and  will  leade
us  backe  to  the  hatefull  Mecca  and  Medina,  I  will  there-
fore commiserate  my  Reader  (such  as  are  more  studious,
may  resort  to  the  Author)  and  having  given  you  that  face
of  Arabia,  which  no  Christian  (to  my  knowledge)  doth  so
well,  or  almost  at  all,  could  to  any  purpose  describe,  we
will  stay  and  intertaine  our  selves  with  some  more  pleasing
spectacle,  the  Actors  being  other  Mahometans,  produced
on  this  stage  by  the  Maronites  our  Translators.

A.D.

c.  1155.

Chap. IX.

Collections  out  of  divers  Mahumetan  Authors  in
their  Arabicke  Bookes,  by  the  said  Maronites,
Gabriel  and  John,  touching  the  most  remark-
able things  in  the  East,  especially  of  the
Mosleman  superstitions  and  rites,  and  the
places  of  chiefe  note.

Rabia  hath  not  her  name  of  I  know  not
what  Arabus,  sonne  of  Apollo  and  Baby-
lonia, but  of  the  Region  Araba,  not  farre
from  Medina,  where  Ismael  Sonne  of
Abraham  dwelt :  and  that  of  Jaarob,  sonne
of  Cahhtan  or  Jectan,  sonne  of  Heber
(and  not  as  Jusef  Ben-Abdillatif  saith,  the

[II.ix.1499.]

great  grand-child  of  Abel)  who  (as  Mohamed  Ben-Jacub
Sirazita,  Author  of  the  Arabick  Dictionarie  affirmeth)  was
first  Inventor  of  the  Arabicke  tongue ;  which  Ismael  after
did  bring  to  more  elegance  and  perfection,  and  is  therefore

99

Of  J  rabia,
and  the
Arabians.
Gen.  10.  25.
Jerah  or
Jaarob  first
Arabian:  so
before  Ben.
Tudel.  cals  the
sonnes  of
Ghereb.

A.D.

c.  1155.

Beduois  or

Beduines

activity.

Their  Tribes
or  Families.

Their  food.

Foolish  and
blasphemous
Traditions.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

called,  the  Father  of  Arabicke  eloquence.  Some  of  the
Arabians  dwell  in  Cities,  some  in  the  Desarts  ;  those  better
civillized,  and  fit  for  Arts :  these  which  inhabite  the
Desarts,  are  called  Bedauyae,  or  Beduois,  that  is,  the  people
of  the  Desart ;  exceed  in  numbers,  and  wander  without
houses,  using  Tents  made  of  Cotton  Wooll,  or  of  Goats
and  Camels  haire,  alway  moving  and  removing,  as  water
and  pasture  move  them,  carrying  their  Wives,  Children,
and  Utensils  on  their  Camels.  Their  Horses  are  leane,
little,  swift,  laborious,  bold ;  and  the  Horsemen  active
beyond  beliefe,  darting  and  catching  with  their  hand  the
same  Dart  in  the  Horses  swiftest  race  before  it  commeth
at  the  ground ;  and  avoiding  a  Dart  throwne  at  them,  by
sleightie  winding  under  the  Horses  sides  or  belly  :  also
taking  up  Weapons  lying  on  the  ground  whiles  the  Horse
is  running,  &  in  like  swift  race  hit  the  smallest  marke  with
Arrow  or  sling.  Their  armes  are  arrowes,  Javelings  with
Iron  heads,  Swords  (which  they  use  not  to  thrusts  but
strokes)  Daggers,  Slings,  and  use  the  same  in  adverse  fight
or  in  averse  flight.  They  lye  in  waite  for  Caravans,  pray
upon  Travellers,  live  on  rapine  and  spoile,  and  often  make
themselves  the  great  Turks  Receivers  and  Treasurers,  and
raise  new  Imposts  on  all  such  as  they  can  enforce,  whether
Travellers  or  Cities ;  obeying  neither  the  Ottoman,  nor
any  other  Soveraigne,  but  being  divided  in  innumerable
families,  obey  the  heads  of  their  owne  Families  or  Tribes.
These  Tribes  are  distinguished  by  the  names  of  their  first
Parents,  as  Abi-helal,  Abi-Risce,  Abi-Zaid,  and  sixe  hun-
dred others,  all  esteemed  and  saluted  Gentle,  and  equall
in  rights.  Their  food  is  browne  Bread,  new  and  sowre
Milke,  Cheese,  Goats  and  Camels  flesh,  Pulse,  Hony,
Oyle  and  Butter.  Rice  is  esteemed  a  great  delicacie,  by
reason  of  their  Tradition,  that  it  came  of  Mahomets
sweat.  For,  say  they,  when  Mahomet  compassed  the
Throne  of  God  in  Paradise,  God  turned  and  looked  on
him,  which  made  the  modest  Prophet  sweate,  and  wiping
it  off  with  his  finger,  sixe  drops  fell  out  of  Paradise  :  one
whereof  produced  the  Rose  ; the  second,  Rice ; the  other

COLLECTIONS OF ARABIA  ajx

c.  1155.
foure,  his  fourc  Associats.  They  use  a  certaine  I  lodge-
podge,  or  Frumentie  of  boyled  Wheat,  laid  after  a  drying
in  the  Sun,  then  beaten  and  boyled  with  fat  flesh,  till  the
flesh  be  consumed.  This  they  call  Herise,  and  say  that
Gabriel  the  Angell  taught  it  Mahomet  for  strengthening
his  reines  ;  whereby  one  night  he  fought  against  fortie  men,
and  in  another  had  fortie  times  carnall  dealing  with
Women.  These  might  seeme  calumnies  devised  by  some
Mahumetan  adversarie,  if  the  former  Author  (both  learned
in,  and  zealous  of  the  Law  of  Mohamed)  had  not  related
the  same  in  a  Chapiter  of  the  choise  of  meats.  Mohamed
or  Mahomet,  commended  also  the  eating  of  Gourds,  and
of  the  Melongenoe,  affirming,  that  he  had  seene  this  Plant  Mclongena.
in  Paradise,  and  measured  the  quantitie  of  mens  wits,  by
their  eating  store  hereof.  When  he  was  once  in  prison
(saith  Ben-sidi  Aali)  the  Angell  Gabriel  came  downe  from
heaven,  and  carried  him  into  Gennet  Elenaam,  or  the
Garden  of  pleasures,  where  amongst  others  he  saw  this
shrub,  and  he  asking  why  it  grew  there,  the  Angell
answered,  because  it  hath  confessed  the  Unitie  of  God,
and  that  thou  art  a  true  Prophet.  Their  garments  are  Their
base,  a  Cotten  shirt  with  very  wide  sleeves,  an  upper  aPParc^-
garment  of  Wooll,  woven  with  white  and  blacke  lines  of
Goats  or  Camels  haire  ;  their  feet  are  bare.  Their  Nobler
sort  go  better  cloathed,  and  use  shooes,  a  red  leather
girdle,  a  white  Tulipan  of  Cotton  or  Linnen  of  few  folds.
Their  Women  go  almost  naked,  in  a  blew  smock  of
Cotton,  Linnen  head-tire,  and  face  vailed.  They  use
Eare-rings,  Chaines,  Brooches,  and  Rings  of  Glasse,  or
other  base  matter,  and  Dye  or  Paint  with  blew  markes
made  with  a  needle,  their  cheekes,  armes  and  lips.  Thus
much  of  the  Beduines.  Basdat

Baghdad  (which  is  also  called  Dar-assalam,  that  is,  The  *The  Devils
Citie  of  peace  *)  received  that  name  of  a  Monke  called  Jerusalem.
Baghdad, who as Ben-Casen writeth, served a Church  See  my  PilS- l-
builded  in  that  Medow. But  Abu-Giaphar  Almansur  the  li^tilll
second  Abassasan  Chalifa,  who  wanne  it,  A. Heg. 150.  conquest  is
named  it  Dar-assalam. It  is  the  Citie  Royall  of  Mesopo-  here  omitted.

A.D.
1155.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

tamia,  now  called  Diarbecr,  which  the  said  Almansur,
placed  in  a  large  Plaine  upon  Tigris,  and  divided  by  the
River  into  two  Cities,  joyned  by  a  Bridge  of  Boats.  This
Citie  built  in  this  place,  Almansur  ruled  many  yeeres,  and
after  him  other  Chalifas  till  the  339.  yeere  of  the  Hegira,
in  which  King  Aadhd-eddaule  and  Saif-eddaule  took  it,
who  with  their  Successors  enjoyed  it  till  Solymus  the
[II. ix.  1 500.]  Ottoman  Emperour  subdued,  and  is  now  ruled  by  a  Bascia,
with  many  Janizaries.  But  hereof  Ahmad  Abi  Bacr  of
Baghdad,  in  his  Annuals,  will  shew  you  more.  This  Citie
is  famous  for  Schooles  of  all  Sciences,  both  in  former  and
the  present  time.  Here  Ahmad  Assalami  a  famous  Poet
wrote  his  Verses.  Here  Alpharabius  the  renowned  Philo-
sopher and  Physician,  borne  at  Farab  in  Turcomannia,
professed  these  studies  publikely  with  great  applause,  and
leaving  many  of  his  Scholers  in  this  Citie  went  to  Harran
of  Mesopotamia,  where  finding  Aristotles  Booke,  De
Auditu,  hee  read  it  fortie  times,  and  wrote  upon  the  Booke,
that  hee  was  willing  againe  to  reade  it.  Hence  hee  went
to  Damascus,  and  there  died,  A.  H.*  339.  Thus  Ben-
Casern  in  his  Booke,  De  viridario  Electorum.

Bochara  is  an  ancient  Citie  upon  Euphrates,  in  a  Village
belonging  whereto  Honain  Ali  Bensina  (whom  the  Latines
call,  Avicenna)  was  borne,  A.  H.  370.  Hee  gave  himselfe
to  Physicke  very  young,  and  was  the  first  which  became
Physician  to  Kings  and  Princes,  who  before  in  that  Coun-
trey  used  y  no  Physicians.  He  published  neere  an  hundred
books,  many  of  Physick,  some  of  Philosophic,  a  Diction-
arie  of  Herbs  and  Stones,  Verses  of  the  Soule,  &c.  He
lived  eight  and  fiftie  yeeres,  and  died  in  Hamadan.  Hee
had  runne  thorow  all  Arts,  at  eighteene.  Thus  Ben-
Casern.  But  others  affirme,  that  a  certaine  Physician
flourishing  of  great  note,  upon  whom  no  praying  nor
paying  could  fasten  a  Disciple,  lest  the  secrets  of  his  Art
should  bee  made  common  :  the  mother  of  Avicenna  offers
her  sonne  to  doe  him  service  in  decoctions,  and  other
meaner  offices,  which  he  could  not  doe  himselfe,  nor  was
there  feare  of  danger  from  him  whom  nature  had  made

Aristotles
books  of
Physicks
admired.
*This  number
seemeth  false .
Bochara  the
Citie  of
Avicenna :
some  say  in
Bochara  neere
Samercand.
y  This  seemed
to  arise  of  their
opinion  of
Fate.

Avicenna.
His  dissimula-
tion.

102

COLLECTIONS OF ARABIA

deafe,  and  therefore  dumbe.  He  made  trials,  and  found
Avicenna  deafe,  as  he  thought,  and  entertayned  him,  who
watched  his  times,  and  transcribed  his  bookes  and  notes,
sending  them  closely  to  his  mother,  which  after  his  mothers
death  he  published  in  his  owne  name.

Damascus  is  called  of  the  Arabians,  Sciam,  and  Demasc,
of  the  Syrians  Darmsuc.  It  is  luxurious  in  fruits  of  all
kinds,  rich  in  Olives  and  Iron  of  excellent  temper  by
nature,  and  so  bettered  by  arte,  that  no  Helme  or  Shield
can  withstand  it.  It  is  seated  in  a  large  Plaine  at  the
roots  of  Libanus,  there  called  Hermon,  sixe  miles  in  com-
passe,  double  walled,  with  a  strong  square  Tower  in  the
midst,  built  by  a  Florentine,  beautified  with  Springs,
Market  places,  Publike  buildings,  Meskits,  Bathes,  Canes,
and  all  sorts  of  silke-weaving,  and  in  all  ancient  times  with
learning  and  learned  men.  Here  flourished  Saint
Damascen :  and  here  Almotannabbi  excelled  in  Arts  and
Armes,  emulous  of  Mahomet,  but  not  with  like  successe.
He  was  called  Nabion,  that  is,  The  Prophet ;  this  Motan-
nabbi,  that  is,Prophecying  :  he  wrote  the  Alcoran  elegantly
and  eloquently  ;  this  excelled  in  Prose  and  Verse  :  both
had  Followers,  but  this  mans  Disciples  after  his  death
were  disperst,  which  happened,  A.  H.  354.  Ben-Casern
also  relates,  that  Mohamed  Abi  Abdillah  professed  Philo-
sophic in  this  Citie,  and  to  dispute  with  all  commers,  and
wrote  a  huge  Booke,  De  imitate  existendi  principiorum.
He  died  there,  A.  H.  638.

Aleppo  is  called  of  the  Inhabitants,  Haleb,  the  chiefe
Mart  of  all  the  East,  frequented  by  Persians,  Indians,
Armenians,  and  all  Europaeans.  The  Port  is  Scanderone,
called  by  the  Inhabitants  Escanderuneh.  The  soyle  is
very  fertile,  and  nourisheth  abundance  of  Silke-wormes.
A.  H.  922.  Sultan  Selim  tooke  it,  and  found  therein
infinite  wealth.  Sciarfeddin  which  wrote  the  Victories  of
the  Othomans  in  two  Tomes,  sayth,  that  it  had  of  Gold
and  silver  coyned  1 150000.  and  a  mightie  masse  uncoyned  ;
Vests  of  cloth  of  Gold,  tissued  or  wrought  with  Gold,
Silke,  and  Scarlet  above  300000.  besides  abundance  of

103

A.D.

c.  1 1 55

Damascus.

Comparison  of
Mah.  and
Almotannabhi.

M.  Abi
Abdillah.

Aleppo.

Sciarfeddin  a

Turkish

Historian.

A.D.

c.  1155.

Muske  how
made.

Mount
Libanus.

Cedar
described.

Maronitcs.

IMTRCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Gems  and  Pearles.  And  besides  other  wealth  innumerable,
it  had  eight  Armories  well  furnished.  It  now  flourisheth
in  the  next  place  to  Constantinople  and  Cairo,  and  may
be  called,  Queene  of  the  East :  Here  are  store  of  Gems,
Ambar,  Bengeoin,  Lignum  Aloes,  and  Muske,  which  is
taken  from  a  little  reddish  beast,  beaten  with  many  blowes
on  one  place  that  the  bloud  may  all  come  thither.  Then
is  the  skin  so  swolne  and  full  of  bloud  bound  straight
that  the  bloud  may  not  issue :  and  put  into  one  or  more
bladders,  is  dried  on  a  beasts  backe  till  the  bladder  fall
off  of  it  selfe,  and  that  bloud  after  a  moneth  becomes
excellent  Muske.  At  Aleppo  was  borne  that  great  Gram-
marian Othoman  Abu  Homar,  surnamed  Ben-ellhhageb,
which  wrote  Cafia  and  Sciafia  of  Grammer,  and  died,
A.  H.  672.

Libanus  is  called  by  the  Arabians  Lobnan,  Lebnon  by
the  Syrians,  so  called  of  the  Syriake  word  Lbunto,  which
signifieth,  Frankincense.  It  contayneth  about  sixe  hun-
dred miles  compasse,  rich  in  Soyle,  Waters,  Groves,  Vines
(the  Wine  whereof  is  very  wholsome,  not  windie  ;  and
here  in  a  Village,  called  Sardania,  they  say,  Noa  planted  a
Vineyard)  and  hence  runne  Pharphar,Abana,  and  the  River
of  Tripolis.  On  this  Mountaine  grow  Cypresses,  Pines,
Boxes,  and  other  trees  plentie :  especially  Cedars ;  the
forme  whereof  from  our  owne  eyes  wee  will  here  relate.
It  groweth  on  the  top  of  the  Mount,  higher  then  the  Pine,
so  thicke  as  foure  or  five  men  can  joyntly  fadome  :  the
boughs  not  elevated  upwards,  but  stretched  out  acrosse
largely  diffused  and  striking  on  each  other,  thickly  enfolded
as  it  were  by  wonderfull  Art,  insomuch  as  we  have  seene
many  both  sit  and  lie  along  on  the  boughs.  The  leaves
are  thicke  and  frequent,  narrow  and  hard,  prickly  and
alway  greene.  The  wood  is  knotty  and  somewhat  wreathed,
hard,  incorruptible  and  sweet-smelling.  The  fruit  like
the  Cones  of  Cypresse,  gummie  and  marvellous  fragrant.
On  this  Mountaine  dwell  the  Maronites,  derived  from
Saint  Maron  the  holy  Abbot,  and  his  Disciples,  or  as  others
thinke  from  the  Land  Maronia  : uncertaine  whether,  but

104

COLLECTIONS OF ARABIA

most  certaine,  from  no  Hcretike  so  called,  as  some  will
have  it.  These  possesse  all  the  Mountaine,  and  besides
other  ordinary  tributes,  pay  great  summes  yeerely  to  the
Lord  of  the  Land,  that  no  man  of  other  Religion  be  per-
mitted to  dwell  with  them,  and  that  no  tribute  children  (as
amongst  the  Greekes)  be  taken  from  them.  They  onely
use  Bells,  which  are  prohibited  other  Nations,  because  in
the  beginning  of  Mahumetisme,  by  the  sound  of  a  Bell,
the  Christians  had  assembled  and  done  the  Moslemans
great  mischiefe.  The  Patriarch  of  the  Maronites  (which
is  also  of  Antiochia)  is  much  reverenced  of  the  people,
and  with  his  Clergie  acknowledged  the  Roman  Bishop.
Their  Liturgie  is  in  the  Syriake  Tongue.

Mecca  chiefe  Citie  of  Arabia  Deserta,  is  called  also  in
the  Alcoran,  Becca,  the  holy  Citie  of  the  Moslemans,  both
for  Mahomeds  revelations  there  had  ;  and  for  the  Temple
especially,  called  by  them  Kabe,  or,  The  square  House,
which  they  fable,  was  first  built  by  Angels,  and  often  visited
by  Adam  himselfe  :  and  lest  it  should  be  destroyed  by  the
Floud,  was  lifted  up  to  the  sixth  Heaven,  called  Dar-
assalam  (The  habitation  of  peace)  after  the  Floud  Abraham
built  another  house  like  to  the  former,  by  the  shadow
thereof  sent  from  heaven  to  him.  Thus  writeth  Jaacub
Ben-Sidi  Aali.  This  is  a  Chappell,  not  very  large,  of
square  figure,  open  with  foure  Gates,  by  one  of  which  the
Ministers  have  accesse ;  the  other  are  opened  but  once  in
the  yeere.  It  glittereth  all  with  Gold,  and  is  covered  with
vests  of  Gold,  and  encompassed  with  elegant  Iron-worke
to  keepe  off  neere  commers.  No  man  may  enter  it  but
certaine  Elders,  which  have  long  beards  to  their  breasts,
and  remayne  there  night  and  day.  Neere  to  this  Chapell
is  a  large  marble  Floore  adorned  about  with  eight  huge
Lights,  and  sixe  and  thirtie  Lamps  of  Gold,  perpetually
burning.  Three  pathes  leade  thereto  whereon  men  and
women  goe  bare-foot  to  the  Chapell,  which  they  compasse
seven  times  with  great  reverence,  mumbling  their  devo-
tions ;  kisse  the  corners,  sigh  and  implore  the  ayde  of
Abraham  and  Mohamed. Round  about  all  this  space  is

i°5

A.D.

••  "55-
[ll.ix.1501.]

Bells  why
forbidden  to
all  Christians
under  the
Mahumetans.
ThePatriarch.

Mecca  and  the
Temple.

Kabe  like  to
the  House  at
Lore t to  in
Angel-
legends.

1155-

The  blackc
stone.

Zam  Zam,
Ismaels  Well.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

a  stately  building  of  very  elegant  structure,  as  it  were  a
wall  ;  in  which  are  numbred  sixteene  principall  Gates  to
goe  in  and  out,  where  hang  innumerable  Lamps  and  Lights
of  incredible  greatnesse.  Within  this  space  betwixt  the
rowes  of  Pillars  are  shops  of  Sellers  of  Gemmes,  Spices,
Silkes,  in  incredible  store  from  India,  Arabia,  ^Ethiopia :
that  it  seemes  rather  the  Mart  of  the  World  then  a  Temple,
Here  doe  men  kisse  and  embrace  with  great  zeale  a  cer-
taine  stone  which  they  call  Hagiar  Alasuad,  or,  The  blacke
stone,  which  they  say,  is  a  Margarite  of  Paradise,  the
light  whereof  gave  lustre  to  all  the  Territorie  of  Mecca.
Before  this,  sayth  Jacub  Ben-Sidi  Aali,  Mohamed  com-
manded to  weepe,  to  aske  God  pardon  for  sinnes,  and  to
crie  with  sighs  and  teares  for  ayde  against  their  enemies.
After  they  have  visited  that  Chappell  and  the  stone,  they
goe  to  another  large  Chappell  within  the  Temple,  where
is  the  Well,  called  Zam  Zam  ;  which  is  (sayth  the  said
Author)  the  Well  which  flowed  from  the  feet  of  Ismael
when  he  was  thirstie  and  wept :  which  Hagar  first  seeing,
cried  out  Zam  Zam,  in  the  Coptite  or  old  Egyptian
Tongue  ;  that  is,  Stay,  stay.  There  are  many  which  draw
water  thence  and  give  to  the  Pilgrims,  who  are  commanded
to  wash  therewith  their  bodie  and  head  three  times,  to
drinke  thereof,  and  if  they  can,  to  carrie  some  of  it  with
them,  and  to  pray  God  for  health  and  pardon  of  sinnes.
To  this  building  is  added  a  Noble  Schoole  or  Universitie,
A.  H.  949.  by  Solyman  who  adorned  it  by  his  costs  by
marvellous  structure,  and  endowed  it  with  revenues.

After  these  visitations,  all  the  Pilgrims  goe  to  a  certaine
Temple  on  a  Hill,  ten  miles  from  the  Citie,  and  flocking
in  great  numbers  buy  according  to  their  abilitie,one  or  more
Mahumetan  Rammes  for  sacrifice.  And  because  some  are  of  opinion,
Sacrifices.  tHat  the  Mohamedans  have  no  sacrifices,  we  will  relate
what  Jacub  Ben-Sidi  Aali  hath  written  of  their  Ceremonies.
Dhahhia  (so  the  Arabs  call  a  Sacrifice)  is  a  killing  of  beasts
in  the  worship,  and  for  the  offering  of  God,  and  they  are
Lambs  of  sixe  or  seven  moneths  at  least ;  Camels  of  five
yeeres,  Bullockes  of  two  yeeres. The  males  are  to  be

106

COLLECTIONS OF ARABIA

chosen  before  females,  and  those  cleane,  white,  infected  by
no  naturall  or  violent  defect,  fat,  corpulent,  horned.  Every
man  must  kill  his  owne  Sacrifices,  and  rippe  them  with
his  owne  hands,  except  in  urgent  necessities,  and  then  he
may  substitute  others  to  doe  it  for  him.  For  every  one
before  they  eate  any  thing,  are  bound  to  eate  some  piece  of
the  Sacrifices;  the  rest,  if  they  can,  to  give  cheerfully  to
the  poore.  They  which  are  admitted  to  these  Oblations,
let  them  offer  one  Ramme  for  themselves,  another  for  the
soules  of  the  Dead,  another  for  Mohamed,  that  in  the  day
of  Judgement  he  deliver  them  from  calamities.  These
Sacrifices  are  offered  to  God  in  imitation  of  Abraham,
which  would  have  offered  his  sonne  Ismael  to  God  ;  who
going  out  of  the  Citie  with  him  to  a  certaine  Hill,  called
Mena,  where  he  would  have  offered  him  to  God  :  but
when  the  sword  could  not  cut  his  necke,  a  white  Ramme
appeared  betwixt  his  hands,  fat,  and  horned,  which  he
sacrificed  to  God  in  stead  of  his  sonne.

Whiles  the  Pilgrims  are  here  busied  in  their  sacrifices,
Beduine  Arabs  assault  the  Caravans,  and  robbing  them,
flee  to  the  Hils,  and  inaccessible  refuges,  so  swift  as  if
they  did  flic  And  although  all  armes  are  forbiden  in
the  territorie  of  Mecca  (which  containeth  on  the  East  six
miles,  on  the  North  twelve,  on  the  West  eighteene,  on  the
South  foure  and  twentie,  in  which  respect  Mecca  and
Medina  are  called  Atharamain)  yet  they  cease  not  to  infest,
and  Pilgrims  are  here  often  forced  to  armes.  This  Terri-
torie is  barren  for  want  of  water,  and  raine,  hath  very
few  Herbs  and  Plants,  or  other  pleasures  of  Groves,
Gardens,  Vines,  or  greene  objects  ;  but  is  roasted  with  the
Sunne,  both  land  and  people.  And  this  haply  is  the
cause  that  no  man  may  breake  a  bough  if  they  find  any
Tree.  Onely  the  shrubs  of  Balsam,  brought  hither  from
Cairo  thrive  well,  and  are  now  so  propagated,  that  all  the
sweet  liquor  of  Balsam  is  carried  onely  from  this  Citie,
thorow  all  Regions  in  great  plentie.  Here  are  store  of
Pigeons,  which  because  they  are  of  the  stocke  of  that
which  came  to  Mohameds  eare  (as  the  Moslemans  fable)

107

A.IJ.

'•  "53-

Lying

Tradition.

Territorie  of
Mecca.

Balsam
brought  from
Gil e ad  to
Cairo,  thence
to  Mecca.
[II.ix.1502.]

A.D.
C. II55-

Scerifof
Mecca.

Medina.

Mohameds
birth  and  life.

Computation
of  their
Hegira.

Not  for
reconciliation
thereof  with
Christian
account.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

no  man  may  take  or  scarre  them.  A  certaine  Scerif
enjoyeth  the  dominion  of  this  Citie,  and  all  the  Land  of
Medina  by  inheritance,  called  Alamam-Alhascemi,  that  is,
the  Captaine  or  chiefe  Hascemee,  descended  of  Hascem
great  Grandfather  of  Mohamed ;  Who  were  never
deprived  of  their  dominion  by  the  Ottoman  or  Soldan.
Yea,  the  Ottoman  calls  not  himselfe  the  Lord  of  Mecca
and  Medina,  but  the  humble  servant.  Yet  this  Scerif
notwithstanding  his  revenues  and  gifts  by  Pilgrims  and
Princes,  through  the  Beduines  spoiles,  and  his  kindreds
quarrels  seeking  the  Soveraigntie,  is  alway  poore.  There-
fore doth  the  Ottoman  bestow  the  third  part  of  the
revenues  of  Egypt,  and  to  protect  the  Pilgrims  from  the
invasions  of  the  Arabs.

Medina  is  called  The  Citie  by  Antonomasia,  and
Medinat  Alnabi,  that  is,  the  Citie  of  the  prophet :  because
Mohamed,  when  he  was  forced  to  forsake  his  Countrey
Mecca,  betooke  himselfe  to  this  Citie,  then  called  Jathreb,
and  was  made  Lord  thereof.  It  is  an  error  that  he  was
borne  here,  for  he  was  borne  and  brought  up  at  Mecca ;
and  in  the  fortieth  yeere  of  his  age,  and  as  Ben-Casern
hath,  in  the  nine  hundred  thirtie  three  of  Alexander  the
Great,  he  began  to  utter  his  Doctrine,  first  privily,  after
that  publikely ;  whereupon  he  was  banished  the  Citie  in
the  two  and  fiftieth  of  his  life  ;  or  according  to  Abdilatif
Ben-Jusof,  the  three  and  fiftieth,  and  fled  to  Jathreb,  from
which  flight,  which  they  stile  Hegeraton  or  Hegera,  which
happened,  An.  Dom.  622.  or  thereabouts.  And  although
this  yeere  1623.  be  to  them  1032.  Yet  because  they
reckon  according  to  the  yeeres  of  the  Moone,  which  they
say,  consist  of  three  hundred  fiftie  foure  daies,  the  Moones
course  hath  in  this  space  exceeded  that  of  the  Sunne,  some
Moneths  above  one  and  thirtie  yeers.  Whereupon  their
Moneths  are  uncertaine.  In  this  Citie  by  subtill  hypoc-
risies, Mohamed  became  Politicall  and  Ecclesiasticall
Prince  ;  and  began  to  procure  the  friendship  of  many,  and
to  promulgate  his  Lawes  by  degrees.  In  the  second  yeere
of  his  flight,  he  enacted  his  Lawes  of  fasting ;  in  the  third,

108

COLLECTIONS OF ARABIA

forbad  Wine  and  Swines-flesh  ;  and  so  proceeded  with  the
rest,  that  within  eight  yeeres,  he  brought  into  subjection
Mecca  (whence  hee  had  beene  expulsed)  and  Muna,  and
went  forward  with  his  Law  and  Conquest.  As  concerning
his  Wives,  Ben-Casem  saith,  hee  had  foure  :  he  is  also
reported  to  have  many  Harlots  and  Concubines  :  and  in
his  Chapiter,  Suratolbaqra  or  de  vacca,  he  bids  them  marry
one,  two,  three,  or  foure  wives  a  man,  and  to  take  as  many
Concubines  as  they  are  able  to  keepe.  Ben-Sidi  Aali  saith,
that  he  gloried  that  he  had  the  power  of  ten  Prophets  in
copulation  given  him  by  God  :  Yea,  he  ascribed  all  his
villanies  to  God,  by  ministerie  of  the  Angel  Gabriel.
His  first  wife  was  named  Codaige,  by  whom  he  had  two
sonnes,  and  foure  daughters,  Zainab,  Fatema,  (whom  Aali
married)  Om  Kalthum  the  third,  and  Rakja  the  fourth
(both  which  Abu-becr  married.)  His  second  wife  was
Aisce  Daughter  of  Abu-Beer,  the  first  Califa,  which  was
but  six  yeeres  old  (Ben-Casem  is  our  author)  when
Mohamed  tooke  her  to  wife  :  the  Moslemans  call  her  the
mother  of  the  faithfull :  who  besides  the  knowledge  of
tongues,  perused  diligently  the  Arabike  Histories,  loved
exceedingly  and  alway  praised  Mohamed.  The  third  was
named  Mary,  which  brought  forth  to  Mohamed,  Ebrahim,
surnamed  Casern  (whence  Mohamed  is  often  called  Abul-
casem)  though  Ben-Abdilatif  will  have  Ebrahim  to  be  one,
and  Casern  another ;  but  Ben-Casem  saith,  he  had  but
three  sons,  of  which  Ebrahim  Casern  dyed  at  eighteene
moneths,  and  Taiheb  and  Taher  his  sonnes  by  Codaige,
dyed  both  in  their  Cradles.  Mohameds  last  wife  was
Zainab,  whom  also  they  call  the  mother  of  the  faithfull,
before  the  wife  of  Zaidi  Ben-Harteb,  Mohameds  Master,
who  divorced  her,  whereupon  Mohamed  gladly  tooke  her
to  wife.

He  had  foure  Counsellers  or  Companions ;  the  first,
Abdollah,  or  Abu-Bacr,  his  sincerest  and  most  inward
friend,  a  man  very  rich  and  releever  of  Mohameds  neces-
sities, his  successor  after  his  death.  He  dyed  the  thirteenth
yeere  of  the  Hegira,  and  sixtie  three  of  his  age,  and  was

109

A.M.

c.  1 1 55

Mahomeds
filthinesse.

His  foure
wives  and  his
children.

Mother  of  the
Moslemans.

His  foure
Associates  or
Counsellors.
Abi-Bacr.

A.D.

c.  1155.
Homar.

Othman.

Aali.

[n.ix.i  50

Mohameds
death  and
Sepukher.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

buried  in  the  same  grave  with  Mohamed.  The  second
was  Homar  the  sonne  of  Chattab,  surnamed  Faruq,  who
succeeded  Abi-Bacr,  and  ruled  ten  yeeres  and  six
moneths.  He  was  the  first  which  was  called  King  of  the
faithfull,  and  writ  the  Annals  of  the  Moslemans,  and
brought  the  Alcoran  into  a  Volume,  and  caused  the  Rama-
dam  Fast  to  be  observed.  He  was  slaine  the  three  and
twentieth  of  the  Hegira,  and  buried  by  Abi-Bacr.  The
third  was  Othman,  who  in  his  twelve  yeeres  raigne  subdued
Cyprus,  Naisabur,  Maru,  Sarchas,  and  Mauritania,  and
died  A.  H.  35.  and  was  buried  in  the  buriall  place  of  the
Citie.  Aali  was  the  fourth,  who  is  called  also  Emir
Elmumenin,  that  is,  King  of  the  faithfull ;  he  was  slaine
A.  H.  40.  in  the  three  and  sixtieth  of  his  age,  and  was
buried  in  the  Citie  Kerbelai.  He  was  his  Uncles  sonne,
or  Cousin-german  to  Mohamed  and  his  sonne  in  law,  and
deare  familiar  from  his  youth,  and  received  the  Mosleman
Law  together  with  Mohamed  ;  whereupon  he  was  wont
to  say,  I  am  the  first  Mosleman.  And  therefore  the  Per-
sians detest  the  other  three  Chalifas,  as  Heretikes  ;  burne
their  Writings  wheresoever  they  finde  them,  and  persecute
their  Followers,  because  forsooth  thev  were  so  impudent,
to  preferre  themselves  before  Aali,  and  spovled  him  of  the
right  due  by  Testament.  Hence  are  Warres  and  hostile
cruelties  betwixt  them  and  the  Turkes,  and  Arabs.
Mohamed  the  false  Prophet,  in  the  eleventh  yeere  after
his  Hegira  or  flight,  and  the  three  and  sixtieth  of  his  age,
3-]  dyed  at  Medina  and  was  buried  there  in  the  Grave  of
Aaisee  his  wife.  Heere  is  a  stately  Temple  and  huge,
erected  with  elegant  and  munificent  structure,  daily
increased  and  adorned  by  the  costs  of  the  Othomans,  and
gifts  of  other  Princes.  Within  this  building  is  a  Chap-
pell  not  perfectly  square,  covered  with  a  goodly  Roofe,
under  which  is  the  Urne  of  stone,  called  Hagiar  Monaiiar,
sometimes  belonging  to  i\aisce  aforesaid.  This  is  all
covered  with  Gold  and  Silke,  and.  compassed  about  with
Iron  grates  gilded.  Within  this,  which  shineth  with  Gold
and  Gemmes, Mohameds  carkasse  was  placed, and not

COLLECTIONS OF ARABIA  <ld

c.  i  i  5  5-

lifted  up  by  force  of  Load-stone  or  other  Art ; but  that
stone-Urne  lyeth  on  the  ground.

The  Mosleman  Pilgrimes  after  their  returne  from
Mecca,  visit  this  Temple,  because  Mohamed  yet  living
was  wont  to  say,  that  he  would  for  him  which  should
visit  his  Tombe,  aswell  as  if  he  had  visited  him  living,
intercede  with  God  for  a  life  full  of  pleasures.  Therefore
doe  they  throng  hither,  and  with  great  Veneration  kisse
and  embrace  the  grates  (for  none  have  accesse  to  the
Urne  of  stone)  and  many  for  love  of  this  place  leave
their  Countrey,  yea,  some  madly  put  out  their,  eyes
to  see  no  worldly  thing  after,  and  there  spend  the  rest  of
their  dayes.

The  compasse  of  Medina  is  two  miles,  and  is  the
circuit  of  the  wall,  which  Aadhd  Addaule  King  of  Bagh-
dad built,  A.  H.  364.  The  Territorie  is  barren  scorched
Sands,  bringing  forth  nothing  but  a  few  Dates  and  Herbs.

Metsr  is  the  name  of  Cairo,  and  all  Egypt,  so  called  of  Cairo.
Mesraim  the  Sonne  of  Noa,  as  saith  Mohamed  Sarazita.
This Citie is governed by a Bascia, and five and
twentie thousand Spahies and Janizaries. It is rich
in Cassia Trees, Sugar-canes and Corne, many Lands
adjoyning yeelding Harvest twice a yeere, Hay
foure  times,  Herbs  and  Pulse  in  manner  alway  greene.
Adde  store  of  Salt  very  white,  the  water  of  Nilus  inclosed  Salt  o/Ni/ut.
in  Pits  and  by  the  only  heate  of  the  Sunne  in  three  dayes
beeing  turned  into  it. In  former  times  it  was  famous  for
Balsam  Plants  now  remooved  to  Mecca  by  command  of  Balsam.
the  Othomans ; and  none  are  found  in  all  Egypt,  but
seven  shrubs  *  in  the  Bassas  Garden,  kept  with  great  dili- 4^  Sandys
pence. The  leaves  are  like  to  wild  Marjoram,  the  iuyce  is , '
taken  by  a  little  incision  in  the  trunke  or  branch.  l.6.c.  S.§.  2.

Abu-Chalil-Ben-Aali  writes,  that  from  the  fifteenth  to
the  two  &  twentieth  of  Rabii  Athani  (June)  there  fals  a
dew  which  leaves  no  token  thereof  in  the  earth,  yet  by
vulgar* experience is found  by  weighing the sand or  *Vid.  sup.  p.
earth  of  Nilus  bankes,  and  is  an  evident  token  of  the ^'
increase of  Nilus. The Aire also is then made more

A.D.

c.  1 1  55.

*This  is  in
Syrue  and
ascribed  to  the
Suns  entrance
into  Leo.
Mescuites,  or
Moschees,  and
their  Cere-
monies in  them.

Mosleman
women
disrespected.
Hence  some
ascribe  to  the
Turkes  falsly,
that  women
have  no  souls.
Easteme
attire.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

wholsome  ; Plagues  and  Fevers  cease,  and  those  which
were  sicke  *  of  them  recover.

Touching  the  Easterne  Customes.  Bensidi  Aali  hath
written  of  the  structure  of  Mescuites.  Before  them  is  a
large  floore  paved  with  Marble,  in  the  midst  is  a  square
Laver,  where  they  which  come  to  pray  use  to  wash  them-
selves. After  this  is  a  great  Hall  without  Images  or
Pictures,  the  Walls  bare,  not  shining  with  Gold  or
Gemmes  :  the  Pavement  matted,  on  which  the  vulgar  sit ;
the  Rich  use  Carpets  spred  for  them  by  their  Slaves.
From  the  Roofe  hang  many  Lampes,  which  are  lighted  in
Praver  time,  and  that  beeing  ended,  are  put  out.  These
Churches  are  for  the  most  part  round  and  covered  with
lead  ;  and  have  adjovned  high  Towers  which  serve  for
Steeples  with  foure  Windowes  open  to  the  foure  winds ;
whereon  the  Priests  at  set-times  ascend,  and  with  a  strong
vovce  call  men  to  Prayers.  Which  being  ended,  and  their
Legall  washing  being  done,  all  of  them  leaving  their
Shooes  on  a  rew  at  the  threshold  of  the  Gate  or  Porch,
thev  enter  with  great  silence.  The  Priest  beginneth  the
Praver  and  all  follow,  and  whiles  hee  kneeleth  thev  doe  so,
and  rise  when  hee  stands  up,  and  imitate  him  in  the  eleva-
tion or  depression  of  the  voyce.  None  yanneth,  cougheth,
walketh  or  talketh,  but  in  great  silence  after  Prayers  thev
resume  their  Shooes  and  depart.  No  women  may  come  to
the  Mescuites  at  these  set  houres,  if  there  bee  any  men,
nor  mav  have  anv  societie  of  men  except  the  Priest,  which
directeth  and  goeth  before  them  with  his  voyce  in  their
manner  of  praying,  as  saith  the  said  Author.

They  are  permitted,  not  to  enter  the  Mescuites,  but  to
stand  at  the  doore,  and  must  bee  gone  quicklv  before  the
men  have  done  their  Pravers.  Hee  addes  that  the  womens
Church  is  the  inner  part  of  their  owne  house.  Such  is
their  dis-respect  of  women,  notwithstanding  Mohameds
promises  in  his  Alcoran,  that  many  say  they  enter  not
Paradise  but  may  stand  at  the  doore  with  Christians,  and
see  the  glorie  of  the  men.

The  Garments  of  the  East  are  commonlv  long-,  some

COLLECTIONS OF ARABIA  ad.

c.  1 1 5  5-

slit  on  the  right  and  left  hand,  some  whole. The  upper
Garment  hath  wide  sleeves. Their  head-tire  is  a  Tulipant
but differing, of Princes white and fine, artificially
wreathen,  rather  long  then  round  : of  their  Cadies  and
Mufeis  very  large  of  fiftie  or  sixtie  els  of  Calico  round
and  wreathed  ; of  Citizens  lesse,  of  Serifs  or  Mohameds
posteritie greene : of Souldiers and Servants long and
white. Christians  use not  white nor  round ones : the
Maronite  Patriarke  and his Suffragan Bishops  weare  a
huge  Tulipant,  round  and  blue,  with  a  blacke  hood  under
it : other  Priests  lesse  and  no  hood. The  women  are
pompous,  but  comming  abroad  weare  a  covering  made  of
Horse-haire  before  their  face,  that  they  may  see  and  not
be  knowne, not if  their  owne Husbands  meete them  ;
neither  if  they  did  know,  would  they  salute,  it  being  a
shame  for  a  woman to  be  seene speaking  wTith  a  man.
Their  Chaines,  Brooches  and  other  Ornaments  and  Paint-  [II.  ix.  1504.]
ings  of  their  eyes,  browes,  and  fingers  ends,  I  omit. Both
men  and  women  are  so  addicted  to  neatnesse,  that  they  are
very  carefull  lest  any  drop  of  urine  spot  their  clothes  in  4  mte  for
making  water  or  going  to  stoole,  and  would  then  thinke  tr*Vc
themselves  uncleane. They  therefore  then  sit  downe  (like  t0  p^ake
women)  and  wash  ; or  if  no  water  may  be  had,  wipe  with  them  zcith  our
three  stones,  or  a  three  cornered  stone,  as  Ben-Sidi  Aali  in  Biertie  in
his  Chapiter  of  washing  warneth. They  thinke  it  unlaw-  unne->  yc-->
full  to  spit  or  pisse  on  a  brute  creature. In  food  they  nuarrell  often
abstaine  from  strangled  and  bloud  ; and  Moslemans,  from  to  Chris:
Swines  flesh. They  love  Junckets  :  they  breake  bread  and
cut  it  not. Their  Table  is  a  round  piece  of  Leather,  to
which they come with washing and Pravers promised.
They  use not Forkes but Spoones  of  wood of  divers
colours,  and  where  they  need  not  them,  three  ringers  as
Ben-Sidi  Aali  warneth. Pewter  and  Porcelane  is  in  much
use,  but  other  Vessels  of  plate  or  Gold,saith  hee,Mohamed
forbade,  saying,  the  Devill  used  such,  the  common  drinke
is  water ; the  better  sort  adde  Sugar,  sometimes  Amber
and  Muske,  &c.  Easume

There  are  in  the  East  eight  principall  Languages,  the  Languages.

IX  II^I  H

A.D.

c.  1155.

Arabike
Authours.

Moskmans
Creed.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Arabike,  Persian,  Turkish,  Hebrew,  Chaldee,  Syriake
(which  little  differs  from  Chaldees)  Greeke,  and  Armenian.
The  Arabike  is  most  noble  and  usuall,  and  is  extended  as
farre  as  Mohameds  name  as  their  sacred  Language,
knowne  to  all  Moslemans  of  better  fashion.  In  this  is
their  Alcoran  and  their  publike  Prayers,  and  most  of  their
Lawes.  Yea,  saith  Zaheri,  the  blessed  in  Paradise  use  it.
In  this  also  are  written  their  Bookes  of  Physicke,  Astro-
logie,  Rhetorike.  The  Persian  hath  little  but  Poets  and
Historians,  the  Turkish  almost  nothing  :  the  Chaldee  and
Syriake  are  nigh  lost,  as  the  Greeke.  But  Averroes,
Algazeles,  Abu-Becer,  Alfarabius  (called  of  the  Mosle-
mans the  second  Philosopher)  Mohamed  Ben-Isaac,  and
Mohamed  Ben-Abdillah  adorned  the  Arabike :  besides
very  many  Astrologers,  Mathematicians,  Physicians,  and
Historians.  Ben-Sidi  Aali  reckons  one  hundred  and
flftie,  which  have  written  on  their  Law ;  Ben-Casern,
innumerable  Grammarians  and  Rhetoricians.

Now  for  the  Moselmans  Religion,  Ben-Sidi  Aali  expres-
seth  it  to  consist  herein,  that  they  beleeve  all  the  speeches
made  by  Gabriel  theAngell  to  our  Prophet,  when  hee  ques-
tioned him  of  the  things  to  be  beleeved  and  done  :  which
are  these,  to  beleeve  in  one  God  to  whom  none  is  equall
(this  against  Christians)  and  that  the  Angels  are  the  Servants
of  God,  to  beleeve  in  the  Scripture  sent  to  the  Apostles,
divided  in  their  opinion  into  one  hundred  and  foure
Bookes,  of  which  ten  were  sent  to  Adam,  fiftie  to  Set,
thirtie  to  Enoc  (called  Edris)  ten  to  Abraham,  the  Law
to  Moses,  the  Psalmes  to  David,  the  Gospell  to  Isa,  or
Jesus  Christ ;  lastly,  the  Alcoran  to  Mohamed.  That
they  hold  these  sent  for  mens  good  ;  and  beleeve  in  the
Resurrection  after  death,  and  that  some  are  predestined  to
fire,  some  to  Paradise  according  to  the  will  of  God  (for  it
is  said  in  the  Alcoran  ;  there  is  none  of  you  which  hath
not  his  place  in  Paradise,  and  a  place  determined  in  Hell)
that  they  beleeve  also  the  reward  of  the  good  and  punish-
ment of  the  bad ;  and  the  intercession  of  the  Saints.
Also  this  is  of  the  things  to  bee  holden,  that  they  firmely

114

COLLECTIONS OF ARABIA

beleeve  in  the  Divine  Pen,  which  was  created  by  the  finder
of  God.  This  Pen  was  made  of  Pearles,  of  that  length
and  space  that  a  swift  Horse  could  scarcely  passe  in  five
hundred  yeares.  It  performeth  that  office,  that  it  writes
all  things  past,  present  and  to  come  :  the  Inke  with  which
it  writes  is  of  light ;  the  tongue  by  which  it  writes  none
understandeth  but  the  Archangell  Seraphael.  That  they
beleeve  also  the  punishment  of  the  Sepulchres  ;  for  the
dead  are  used  often  to  be  punished  in  their  Graves,  as
happened  in  a  certaine  Sepulcher  betwixt  Mecca  and
Medina.

The  Precepts  of  the  Moslemans  are,  first  Circumcision,
not  on  the  eight  day  as  to  the  Jewes,  but  at  the  eight,
ninth,  tenth,  eleventh,  twelfth  yeare  that  they  may  know
what  they  doe,  and  may  professe  their  Faith  with  under-
standing. And  although  most  hold  women  free  there-
from, yet  in  Egypt  they  circumcise  women  at  thirteene,
fourteene,  or  fifteene  yeares  old  (many  of  them  till
then  goe  starke  naked)  and  Sidi-Ben  Aali  saith,  that
it  was  commanded  to  men,  but  is  used  to  women
for  honour.

The  second  Commandement  is  Prayers  hourely,  which
in  the  Church,  at  home,  or  abroad,  they  are  bound  to  per-
form, five  times  in  the  day  and  night :  first  at  break  of  day  ;
the  second  about  noon  ;  the  third  in  the  afternoon  ;  the
fourth  after  Sun-set,  when  the  stars  begin  to  appeare  :  the
last  in  the  first  watch,  or  before  mid-night  (for  after,  it  is
unlawfull  saith  Ben-Sidi  Aali)  neither  may  any  transgresse
these  houres  without  sinne ;  yea,  saith  hee,  if  one  were
cast  into  the  Sea  and  knew  the  houre  of  Prayer,  if  he  be
able  he  ought  to  doe  it ;  as  also  women  in  travell  must
hide  the  Infants  head  as  they  can  and  doe  it.  Travellers
when  they  perceive  that  houre  is  come,  goe  out  of  the  way
and  wash  ;  or  if  they  have  no  water ;  lightly  digge  the
Earth  and  make  shew  of  washing,  and  goe  not  thence  till
they  have  finished  their  Devotion.  Thirdly  Almes  is  also
commanded  ;  and  they  which  are  so  poore  that  they  cannot
give  to  Orphans  and  the  poore,  must  helpe  in  Hospitals,

115

A.M.

c.  1 1 55

Mosleman
Precepts  are ;
Circumcision.

Five  houres
Prayers.

Almes.

A.D.

c.  1 155.

Fast.

Pilgrimage.
Fighting.

[II.ix.1505.

Note.

W 'as kings.

Order  of
visiting  the
sick,  of  WHS,
Restitutions,
and  Burials.

PURCHAS HIS PTLGRIMES

and  high-wayes,  by  such  service  to  satisfie  God.  Fourthly,
Ramahdan  Fast  of  thirtie  dayes  is  commanded  from
morning  to  Sun-set  and  the  Starres  appearing  :  for  then
after  evening  Prayer  they  eate  any  food  (except  Wine)
with  Bacchanall  cheere  and  tumults.  Fiftly,  Pilgrimage
once  in  their  lives  to  Mecca  and  Medina  is  also  com-
mended ;  and  sixtly,  to  fight  against  the  enemies  of  their
Faith  is  no  lesse  commanded  ;  not  to  preach  by  the  Word
and  Meekenesse,  as  Christ,  but  by  the  Sword  and  Warre,
to  invade  and  revenge.  And  if  by  their  persons  and
bloud  they  cannot,  they  must  (saith  our  Author)  by  their
purse  and  goods  helpe  the  Prince  herein.  And  if  they
die  in  Warre,  the  sensuall  pleasures  of  Paradise,  Rivers  of
Milke  and  Honey,  beautifull  women  and  the  like  are  their
present  purchase.  Therefore  doe  they  give  to  Apostataes,
which  become  Moslemans,  an  Arrow  borne  up  by  their
fore-finger  ;  the  Arrow  signifying  Warre,  and  that  one
Finger  the  Unitie  of  the  Deitie.  Their  last  Commande-
ment  is  washing  with  water,  which  is  three-fold,  one  before
Prayers,  handled  in  three  Chapiters  by  Ben-Sidi  Aali,  thus
performed  ;  the  armes  stripped  naked  to  the  elbow,  they
wash  the  right  hand  and  arme,  then  the  left,  after  the
Nose,  Eares,  Face,  Necke,  Crowne,  Feet  to  the  joynts,  if
they  be  bare,  or  else  their  shooetops,  lastly  their  Privities ;
mean-while  mumbling  their  Devotions.  These  washings
they  thinke  to  wash  away  their  Veniall  and  lighter  sinnes  ;
for  their  greater  they  use  Bathes,  and  say  all  the  bodie  must
be  washed  to  wash  away  Crimes.  The  third  washing  is
of  their  secrets  by  themselves  or  their  Servants  after  the
Offices  of  Nature,  delivered  by  him  in  two  Chapiters,  too
foolish  and  filthy  to  be  related.  Adde  the  prohibition  of
Images  painted  or  carved,  Thefts,  Homicides,  Robberies,
Adulteries,  Swines  flesh,  Wine,  strangled  bloud,  and  things
dying  of  themselves,  and  all  uncleane  Creatures.

Hee  also  instructs  at  large  of  their  Testaments  and
Funerals.  The  Moslemans  beeing  sicke  presently  send
for  an  Abed,  Religious  man  or  Santone  to  strengthen
them  in  the  Faith  and  propound  heavenly  things  to  him,

116

COLLECTIONS OF A  RAIMA

A.U.

reciting  somewhat  out  of  the  Alcoran.  And  if  the
Disease  bee  very  dangerous,  they  wash  and  make  their
Testament ;  and  are  bound  to  restore  all  ill-gotten  goods,
giving  the  Creditors  a  Bill  of  their  hand.  And  if  they
know  not  to  whom  to  restore,  they  must  bequeath  a
summe  of  money  to  publike  uses,  Hospitals,  Mescuits,
Bathes,  the  poore  and  Religious  persons :  yea,  for  that
respect  they  set  Captives  at  libertie,  as  is  read  that
Avicenna  did  ;  some  give  Bookes  to  publike  uses ;  some,
other  things.  Ben-Sidi  Aali  saith,  it  is  Mohameds
precept  that  the  third  part  of  mens  goods  be  bestowed  on
publike  uses.  And  if  a  man  die  intestate,  they  say  other
dead  men  will  chide  him.  When  they  are  dead,  the  bodie
is  washed,  the  Nose,  Eyes,  Mouth,  and  Eares  stopped
with  Cotton  ;  better  apparell  is  put  on,  white  shirts  and
Tulipants.  Then  is  the  bodie  carryed  to  the  buriall  place
without  the  Citie  with  a  great  troupe ;  the  Santones  or
Religious  going  before  then  the  men  promiscuously,  after
the  Corps ;  followed  by  women  howling,  lamenting,
shrieking,  till  they  come  to  the  Grave.  There  are  those
Garments  taken  away,  and  the  Corps  shrowded  in  a  white
sheet,  and  put  into  the  Grave  with  the  face  to  the  South.
After  the  covering  with  Earth,  many  Prayers  are  made,
and  much  Almes  is  given  to  the  poore  to  doe  the  same.

The  Christians  in  those  part  in  like  case  take  the
Sacrament,  having  before  confessed  and  made  their  wils.
The  Priest  ceaseth  not  to  exort  them  to  hopes  of  a  better  ^^/
life  by  Faith  in  Christ.  Being  dead  Perfumes  are  burned
in  the  Chamber,  the  Corps  is  wrapped  in  a  white  sheet,
and  on  a  Herse  carried  by  foure  to  the  buriall  place,  men
accompanying  and  women  following.  The  neerer  Kindred
lament,  cast  ashes  on  their  head  and  face,  rent  their
Garments,  pull  off  their  haire,  smite  their  cheekes,  and
lift  up  horrible  cries  to  Heaven  without  ceasing.  When
they  are  comne  to  the  Grave,  they  bury  them  with  their
faces  to  the  East.  But  Priests  and  specially  Bishops  are
attyred  in  their  Priestly  Habits,  set  in  a  Chaire,  and  the
mouthes  of  the  Sepulchers  closed  with  a  stone. Then

117

1155.

Christians  in
the  East  their
death  £5

A.D.

c.  1 1 55-

[II.ix.1506.]

*  Of  this  name
Meneses  or
Menez.es,
Frier  John
Santos
reckoneth
foure  Vice-
roy e$:  two  of
zvhich  were
Duartes  or
Edwards.  One
An.  1  5  2 1 .
This  was
Earle  of
Tarouca,  and
sent  into
India,  An.
1584.  and
ruled  there
more  then
foure  yeares.
Note  also,  that
Don  John  de
Castro,  whose
R  utter  of  the

PURCHAS HIS PIL.GRIMES

upon  the  Graves  they  burne  Frankincense  and  make  many
Prayers.  After  this  the  women  goe  round  about  the
Grave  in  a  ranke  with  mournfull  laments,  strikes,  plaints,
and  piteous  Songs  in  prayse  of  the  dead  partie.  Service
is  after  celebrated  for  the  dead  ;  which  ended,  the  Priests,
many  Clerkes  and  Lay-men  by  the  Heires  are  invited  to
Dinner.  Whiles  they  are  set,  the  neerest  Kinsman  often
warnes  them  to  pray  for  rest  to  the  deceased,  and  they  with
a  loud  voice  answere,  God  have  mercy  on  him,  for  whose
sake  we  eate  these  meates.  After  Dinner  they  comfort
the  Heires,  and  praying  for  rest  to  the  deceased,  depart.

As  concerning  the  Moslemans  Beliefe  of  God  and
Christ,  the  Reader  may  reade  the  Dialogue,  published  by
my  learned  Friend  Master  Bedwell,  called  Mohameds
imposture,  as  also  my  Pilgrimage  and  the  quotations  there,
out  of  the  Alcoran.

Chap. X.

Don  Duart*  De  Meneses  the  Vice-roy,  his
tractate  of  the  Portugall  Indies,  containing
the  Lawes,  Customes,  Revenues,  Expenses,
and  other  matters  remarkable  therein  :  heere
abbreviated.

§.  1.

A  Register  or  Collection  of  Uses,  Lawes,  and
Customes  of  the  Canarins,  or  Inhabitants  of
this  Hand  of  Goa,  and  of  the  Townes  there-
unto belonging.

On  John  by  the  Grace  of  God,  King  of
Portugall  and  of  the  Algarves,  of  this  side
and  beyond  the  Seas,  Lord  of  Guinea,
and  of  the  Conquest,  Navigation,  and
Commerce  or  Trafficke  of  ^Ethiopia,
Arabia,  Persia,  and  India,  &c.  To  all
those  that  shall  see  this  our  Bill  of  Rites

and Customes, given to the Governors, Farmers and

11S

DON IMJART OK MENESES  a.d.

Inhabiters  of  the  iownes  and  Hands  of  our  Citie  of  Goa, Red  Sea  ye

greeting:. We let you understand, that by the good  have  in  the

j •  jt  i  u- l  t l seventh  Booke.

ordering,  diligences,  and  examinations,  which  were  to  bee  u,aj  yl(C

done  by  Justification,  and  Declaration  of  that  which  the  of  India,  An.

said  Farmers  were  bound  to  pay  unto us,  and  did  pay \<m.  famous

unto  the  Kings  and  Lords  of  the  Countrey  before  it  was  fa  arti  an<f

ours,  of  their  inheritances,  duties,  rights,  and  other  charges  : , *tSmm  ..  .

11  1  -i  1°  i-ii  7 1 '  mention  that

and  also  the  rights, uses  and  customes  which  they  had,  the  Reader
and  we  ought  to  command,  should  be  kept  unto  them,  may  observe
and  wee  found  by  the  Declaration  of  the  said  diligences,  our  care  **
that  they  are  bound  to  pay  unto  us  that  which  is  contained  j*1,"'
in  this  our  other  Bill  of  Customes  of  the  said  payments  c^use  the  ^es/
of  duties. And  also  wee  finde  that  they  ought  to  use
these  uses,  rights  and  customes,  in  manner  and  forme
following.

It  was  found,  that  every  Towne  of  the  said  Hands  have
certaine  Governors ;  some  more,  some  lesse,  according  to
their  custome,  and  as  the  Hands  and  the  Townes  are  in
bignesse,  and  that  the  said  name  Gancares  is  as  much  to
say,  as  Governor,  Ruler,  or  Benefactor,  &  it  was  thus
ordained.  In  old  time  there  went  foure  men  to  make
profit  of  an  Hand,  and  of  another  unprofitable  waste  place,
the  which  they  manured  and  fortified  in  such  manner,  and
so  well,  that  in  processe  of  time  it  came  to  such  increase,
that  it  became  very  populous.  And  these  Beginners,  for
their  good  government,  rule  and  trafficke,  were  called
Gancares ;  and  afterward  there  came  Lords  and  Con-
querors upon  them,  which  did  make  them  for  to  pay
tribute,  and  custome  for  to  let  them  dwell  quietly  in  their
Lands  or  Inheritances  and  Customes,  but  I  could  not  know
the  beginning  of  this.

In  this  Hand  of  Tisoare,  where  the  Citie  of  Goa  stands
situated,  there  are  two  and  thirtie  Townes  and  Villages,
as  followeth.  Nevra  the  great,  Gancin,  the  old  Goa,
Cogin,  Hella,  A.  Josin,  Carambolin,  Batin,  Teleigaon,
Bamolin,  Curqua,  Calapor,  Morabrin  the  great,  Talaulin,
Galimola,  Nevra  the  lesse,  Corlin,  Sirdaon,  Dugnari,
Murura,  Morabrin  the  lesse,  Chumbel,  Pannelin,  Solecer,

119

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1584.

Mandur, Murcundin, Agacarin, Horar, Gaudalin,
Renoari,  Banganin,  Foleiros.

The  Townes  or  Villages  of  Choram,  and  of  Juan,  and
of  Divar,  are  these  that  follow  :  Choran,  Cararin,  Juan,
the  Pescadores,  or  Fishers  of  Dabarin,  Malar,  Navelin,
Goltin,  Diva.

And  every  one  of  the  said  Townes,  is  bound  to  pay
unto  us  certaine  rent,  contained  and  declared  in  the  said
Register.  Heretofore  the  said  Governors  of  every  Towne
or  Village,  with  the  Notarie  of  the  same,  doth  divide  and
ceasse  upon  the  Farmers  or  persons,  that  within  the
bounds  of  every  Towne  hath  Lands  or  Inheritance,  and
this  according  to  the  condition  wherewith  it  is  given  them
for  their  uses  and  customes  :  and  the  said  are  bound  to
levie,  gather,  and  pay  the  said  rent,  whither  it  increase  or
decrease,  and  the  losse  or  encrease  shall  remaine  with
them  of  the  Towne,  that  the  persons  to  whom  it  doth
appertaine  by  their  custome,  may  pay  the  losse,  or  take  the
increase,  as  here  under  it  shall  be  declared,  except  the
losse  should  chance  to  come  by  warre,  for  then  they  shall
be  quit  of  that  which  shall  be  by  the  meanes  thereof
lost.

The said increase  or losse  of  every yeare, shall  bee
divided  according  to  every  ones  substance  equally,  so  that
every  one  doe  pay  the  rent  of  the  Lands  or  Rice-grounds
that  he  doth  occupie.
Which  are  75. Some Gardens and Palme- tree Groves, and Rice-
Rcys  every grounds,  are  bound  to  pay  every  yeare  certaine  Tangas  :
pence  farthinz  anc^  a^h°ugh  they'doe  sustaine  losses,  there  be  in  the  said
English.  Hands  other  Palme-tree  Groves,  and  Rice-grounds,  which

doe  not  pay  but  a  certaine  custome ;  and  besides,  they  are
bound  to  a  contribution  of  the  losses  when  there  be  any.
And  there  be  other  Lands  or  Inheritances  which  the  said
Governours  may  give  gratis  to  any  person  or  persons,
whom  they  shall  thinke  good,  without  custome  or  Obliga-
tion, to  pay  any  thing  to  the  contribution  of  the  losses.
[II.ix.1507.]  If  any  Towne  or  Village  be  so  decayed,  that  they  cannot
pay  their  custome  and  rent  that  appertaineth  to  us,  the

DON DUAJRT DE MBNBSES

1584.

Governors  and  Inhabitcrs  of  it,  shall  give  intelligence  of
it  to  the  chiefe  Master  of  the  Ports,  and  to  the  Notaric  of
the  Hand,  and  they  shall  goe  to  see  the  said  losse,  and
finding  it  for  good  truth  that  it  hath  such  a  losse ;  the
said  chiefe  Master  of  the  Ports  shall  command  the  chiefe
Governours  of  the  eight  principall  Townes  above
rehearsed,  and  then  there  may  come  to  this  other
Governours,  which  soever  they  shall  thinke  good,  although
the  matters  of  the  Hand  must  be  done  by  order  with
them  of  the  eight  principall  Townes,  and  altogether  with
the  said  chiefe  Master  of  the  Ports,  and  the  Notarie,  the
Inhabitants  of  the  decayed  towne  may  engage  or  morgage
their  Towne  unto  the  Governours,  because  they  are  bound
unto  it :  and  they  may  also  make  sale  of  it  in  the  presence
of  the  said  Officers,  and  it  shall  be  delivered  or  surrendred
to  him  that  will  give  most  for  it,  and  that  which  is  wanting
of  the  rent  and  custome  which  it  is  bound  to  pay,  in  that
which  is  given  for  the  Towne,  shall  bee  divided  and  levied
of  the  eight  principall  Townes,  or  of  all  the  Hand,  upon
those  Lands  which  are  bound  to  the  contribution  of  the
losses,  in  such  sort,  that  we  may  have  full  payment  of  the
Custome  of  the  said  Towne,  and  that  the  said  Hirer  or
Hirers  shall  be  bound  to  increase  better,  and  profit  the
Towne  or  Village :  and  with  this  condition  it  shall  be  let
or  set  unto  them.  And  the  said  Hirers  or  Farmers  of  the
said  Towne,  shall  have  the  voyces  of  Governours  during
the  time  of  their  Lease  or  Farme.

The  Governours  of  the  Towne  decayed,  doe  not  lose
their  Offices  by  that  which  is  spoken.  And  at  all  times
that  they  shall  aske,  or  demand,  the  Towne  paying  the
whole  rent  or  custome,  it  shall  be  delivered  unto  them,
and  the  said  Towne  shall  be  no  more  of  the  Farmers,
having  ended  their  time  or  lease.

The  Governours  by  authoritie  of  their  Offices,  and
because  they  were  Beginners,  and  also  because  the  said
Offices  or  charge  doth  come  to  them  by  descent,  they  doe
not  lose  them,  to  wit,  the  Governours  every  one  in  the
Towne  in  person  for  any  error  he  doth  commit : nor  the

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1584.

Clerke  of  Common  Councell,  which  also  commeth  to  him
by  inheritance  or  descent :  and  this  order  was  made  by  the
Governours  themselves,  onely  the  one  and  the  other  shall
have  for  the  errors  and  hurts  that  they  doe  commit,  the
penaltie  that  they  doe  deserve,  in  their  goods  and  bodie.
Notwithstanding,  such  an  error  they  may  doe,  that  they
may  dye  for  it :  or  it  shall  be  convenient  that  they  shall
not  serve  in  their  Offices,  and  in  such  case  it  shall  remaine
to  their  Sonnes  or  Heires ;  and  if  the  case  be  not  great,
the  chiefe  Master  of  the  Ports  shall  judge  it,  accounselling
himselfe  with  some  of  the  Governours.  And  if  the  facts
bee  greater,  the  said  chiefe  Master  of  the  Ports  shall  give
knowledge  of  it  to  our  Captaine  Generall,  and  Governour
of  India,  or  to  the  Captaine  of  our  Citie  of  Goa,  or  to  the
over-seer  of  our  goods,  if  the  matter  bee  thereunto
attaining,  for  to  provide  in  it  what  shall  bee  convenient
and  right.  And  also  the  Governours  of  the  said  Towne
have  the  said  Offices  by  inheritance  or  descent.  And  if
they  doe  commit  any  error,  they  shall  be  punished  as  these
other,  and  so  their  Offices  shall  remaine  to  their  Sonnes,
or  to  their  Heires.

The  Governors  may  give  such  fields  as  within  every
Towne  are  waste  or  unprofitable,  to  such  as  shall  aske  or
demand  them,  for  to  make  them  profitable  in  Gardens,  or
Palme-tree  Groves,  or  to  other  good  uses,  with  condition
that  they  shall  pay  a  certaine  rent,  or  custome,  as  shall
seeme  good  unto  them,  and  this  so  given,  shall  bee  for  the
space of  five  and twentie  yeeres ; for, from that time
forward,  they  shall  pay  according  to  the  order  and  custome,
which  is  every  Field  or  Plaine,  of  twelve  Paces  in  length
(which  is  the  space  betweene  Palme-tree  and  Palme-tree,
reckoning  one  hundred  Palme-trees  to  the  field)  some  of
Barganiistico  them to pay five Tangas, worth foure Barganis every
pence  halfe Tanga. And  after  this  rate,  the  greater  or  lesser  field  so
ins  and  a giyen  snaul  Pav- And  the  said  Governours  may  give  the
sixteenth  part  waste Fields and Plaines, for to be profited in
ofapenie. Palme-tree Groves, and Gardens, for lesse then five
Tangas, and they shall passe their Warrant for this,

DON 1)1  ART DE MENESES

according to their custome, notwithstanding they may
not  exceed  above.

When  they  shall  give  Fields  or  Plaines,  to  make  Rice
grounds,  they  shall  he  given  in  this  manner,  to  wit,  five
Cubits  in  length,  and  five  in  breadth,  which  is  the  space
betweene  one  rew  and  another,  reckoning  in  this  manner
one  hundred  rewes  to  every  Field.  And  any  Field  or
Plaine  of  them,  being  watered  with  Well  water,  they  shall
give  it  for  foure  Barganis,  every  yeeres  rent ;  and  if  they
be  watered  with  running  water,  their  rent  shall  be  six
Barganis  every  yeere ;  and  after  the  said  Gardens  bee  so
given  unto  them  by  the  Governours,  they  cannot  bee
taken  away  from  them,  for  they  remaine  to  their  Sonnes,
Grand-children,  and  Heires,  and  this  is  the  generall
custome.  Notwithstanding,  if  any  other  custome  be  used
besides  this  in  any  Towne,  or  Village,  it  shall  be  fulfilled.

The  Clerke  of  the  Councell  must  be  present  at  all  the
bargaines,  and  agreements  (which  amongst  themselves  they
call  Nemes)  that  shall  be  made  by  the  principall  Governours
of  all  the  Iland  with  the  Officers  of  it,  the  chiefe  Master
of  the  Ports,  a  Portugal  Notarie  with  him,  or  a  Bramane,
and  without  him  or  the  Clerke  of  the  Councell,  no
bargaines  nor  agreements  can  be  made,  because  they  doe
write  the  cases,  for  to  notifie  and  declare  the  debts  that
might  arise  in  time  to  come.  And  in  the  abovesaid
manner,  the  Scriveners  of  the  Townes  must  be  with  the
Governours  of  them,  in  all  matters  that  shall  passe  in  any
one  of  the  said  Townes.  And  the  Townes  of  all  this
Iland  of  Tisoare,  and  the  other  Townes  of  Divar,  and
Choran,  and  Junha,  are  guided  by  their  writings.

The  Governours  every  one  in  his  owne  Towne,  may
give  Fields,  or  Plaines,  freely  or  gratis,  for  to  profit  them  :
or  if  be  profitable  being  voide,  to  the  Officers  of  the  said
Townes,  to  wit,  to  the  *  Priest  of  the  *Pagode,  or  Church
of  the  Idoll,  and  to  the  Scrivener,  and  to  the  Porter,  and
to  the  Rent-gatherer,  and  to  the  Magnato  (which  is  a
washer  of  Cloth,  or  a  Laundresse)  and  to  the  Shoomaker,
and  Carpenter,  and  to  the  Smith,  and  to  the  Faras  (which

123

A. I).

I5«4-

Which  is

eleven  pence
farthing
English.

Which  is  a
kind  of  Priest
of  their  Idols.

[II.ix.1508.]

*  Which  is

called
Bramane.

*  Which  is
their  Temple.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1584.

is  a  servant  to  the  Pagode,  or  Church)  and  to  the  women
of  the  world  (which  are  common  women  or  Curtesans)
and  to  the  Jester.  And  to  those  persons  abovenamed,  the
Plaines,  or  Fields,  and  Gardens,  are  given  gratis,  for  to
serve  continually  in  the  said  Townes  :  And  after  they  be
given  unto  them,  they  may  not  be  taken  away,  nor  other
persons  be  set  in  their  place,  because  they  are  given  unto
them  tor  their  Sonnes,  Grand-children,  and  Heires.  And
every  Towne  may  have  no  more  Officers  then  above-
named,  to  whom  they  may  give  the  said  Lands  gratis.
Neither  may  they  give  them  any  more  Lands  without
Heires,  and  they  being  willing  to  leave  them,  they  shall
bee  given  to  other  Officers  of  their  Facultie,  and  the
Heires  of  the  same  Officers  are  bound  to  serve  in  the  said
Offices  also.

The  Governour  of  any  Towne,  may  not  give  any  Field,
or  Garden,  to  any  one  that  is  not  of  the  Towne,  gratis,
but  paying  tribute  ; except  they  have  an  order  for  it.

When  the  chiefe  Master  of  the  Ports  shall  send  for  the
Governours  of  all  the  Hand,  or  of  one  Towne,  they  are
bound  for  to  come,  or  to  make  an  assemblie,  for  to  choose
in  every  Towne  any  one  whom  they  thinke  meete,  for  to
send  to  the  said  calling ;  and  when  they  make  the  said
assemblie  (which  among  them  is  called  Gancaria,  or  an
assemblie  of  Governours)  if  any  Governour  be  wanting
of  them,  which  are  ordained  in  the  said  Towne,  there  can
nothing  be  done,  except  they  be  all  together,  and  if  there
be  any  Heire  of  that  Governour  that  is  wanting,  it  is
sufficient  for  the  said  Assemblie  or  meeting  to  be  made
with  him.  And  if  other  people  doe  not  come,  they  shall
incurre  the  penaltie  that  among  themselves  they  have
ordained.

If  any  Governour  or  any  other  person  is  willing  to  sell
any  lands  in  any  of  the  said  Townes,  they  may  not  doe  it
without  license  of  all  the  Governours  of  the  said  Towne,
and  also  no  person  may  buy  without  the  said  license.  And
if  any  person  shall  make  any  sale,  or  buy  any  land  without
the  license,  it  shall  be  in  it  selfe  of  no  effect,  and  at  any

124

DON 1)1  J  ART I)K MKXKSKS  '-

1584.

time  when  the  Governour  will,  it  shall  he  voidc  tor  the
benefit  of  the  duties  which  they  are  bound  to  pay  unto  us,
and  because  they  also  that  doe  buy,  may  bee  contented
and  acquainted  with  the  said  rights,  and  may  have  their
Letters  with  a  declaration  of  these  duties  which  they  are
to  pay.

When  any  Bill  of  sale  shall  be  made  of  any  Land  or
Inheritance,  it  shall  not  be  sufficient  to  be  signed  by  the
Letter,  but  also  it  must  bee  signed  by  all  the  Heires,  and
although  some  of  the  Heires  be  under  age,  declaration
shall  be  made,  that  some  other  person  that  did  appertaine
unto  him,  did  signe  for  him,  and  if  any  one  of  the  Heires
remaine  that  hath  not  signed,  the  said  sale  shall  at  any
time  be  of  no  effect,  taking  the  quantitie  that  it  was  sold
fpr,  and  if  the  buyer  shall  be  at  any  cost  or  charges  upon
the  said  Land,  he  shall  lose  it.

If  any  Governour  shall  goe  or  runne  away  because  he
will  not,  or  is  not  able  to  pay  us  the  rent  that  he  is  bound
to  pay,  the  other  Governours  of  the  said  Towne  shall
meete,  and  call  a  Court  about  this  matter,  and  shall
prefixe  a  time  wherein  he  may  come,  and  if  within  the
said  time  he  doth  not  come,  they  shall  require  the  Heires
of  the  said  Governour  so  fled,  to  take  the  said  Lands,  and
Governement,  so  as  they  be  bound  to  pay  unto  us  our
right,  and  the  debts  that  he  doth  owe  :  and  if  he  will  not
accept  it,  it  shall  remaine  to  the  said  Governours,  for  the
Obligation  that  they  have  to  pay  the  said  right  or  custome,
and  they  may  give  them  to  whom  they  shall  thinke  best,
paying  besides  our  right  all  the  debts  that  he  doth  owe.

If  a  Governour  or  any  other  person  shall  runne  away  for
debt,  or  any  other  matter,  no  man  shall  take  away  his
Lands,  and  his  Heires  shall  bee  demanded,  if  they  will
remaine  in  the  said  Lands,  and  be  bound  to  pay  his  debts,
and  our  right,  and  if  there  be  no  Heires,  or  being  any,  if
they  will  not  accept  it,  then  the  said  Lands  shall  remaine
to  the  said  Governours,  for  want  of  an  owner,  and  they
shall  pay  for  it  the  right  and  debts  that  they  doe  owe  unto
us, and they shall take the overplus of that which is

125

AD  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1584.

remayning,  and  if  anything  be  wanting,  they  shall  pay
that  which  it  amounteth  unto,  and  as  touching  the  move-
able goods,  they  shall  remaine  unto  us,  whensoever  the
Heires  shall  not  accept  of  the  Inheritance  or  Lands.

If  any  person,  Governour,  or  other,  doth  chance  to  die,
or  goeth  out  of  the  Countrey,  and  hath  no  Heires,  the
Lands  that  they  have  which  are  not  bound  to  any  tribute
or  custome,  shall  be  ours,  even  as  the  movables,  and  if
the  Lands  doe  owe  any  debts  or  legacies,  or  if  they  doe
not  owe  any  thing,  after  we  are  paid  ours,  of  the  remainder
shall  be  done  according  to  right.

The  Rice-lands  in  every  Towne  shall  be  let  every  yeere
by  the  voice  of  a  Crier,  to  them  that  will  give  most  for
them,  according  to  their  custome,  because  they  are  not
proper  of  any  one  man,  as  the  other  lands  are,  and  there-
fore they  must  be  given  to  such  men  as  will  give  most
for  them,  being  Inhabitants  or  dwellers  of  the  Townes,
[II. ix.  1 509.]  and  if  any  Towne  hath,  of,  or  by  custome  of  old  time  to
give  the  said  lands,  or  let  them  to  any  person  or  persons
out  of  the  Towne,  which  shall  give  more  for  them  then
the  men  of  the  said  Towne,  it  shall  be  accomplished
according  to  their  custome.

The  Governours  of  this  Hand  of  Tisoare,  and  of  the
other  Hands  of  Divar,  and  Choran,  and  Junha,  are  bound
to  give  among  the  Inhabiters  of  the  Towne  certaine
Called  *  labourers,  at  their  owne  cost  and  charges  every  yeere  for

iganns.  tQ  cjense  tne  waU5  ancj  tne  bottome  of  the  trenches  of  this
Citie,  of  the  Weedes  and  Bushes  that  grow  in  them,  or
also  for  other  needfull  or  hastie  services,  which  sometimes
doe  chance  as  neede  doth  require.

If  there  chance  to  bee  any  demand  or  controversie  in
any  of  the  said  Townes,  touching  any  Lands  or  Tene-
ments, they  may  not  demand  them  by  any  witnesses,  but
onely  by  writings,  or  bonds,  or  by  the  Townes  Register,
and  if  there  be  no  writings,  nor  bonds,  and  the  Register
of  the  Towne  should  chance  to  be  lost,  there  shall  another
bee  taken  of  the  demander  of  the  said  lands,  that  bv  it  he
shall  declare  that  which  shall  seeme  convenient  for  to  know

126

/.  Z.c.

DON DUART DK MENESES  aj».

1584.

the  truth. And  concerning  such  cases,  and  other  of  like
importance,  they  shall  sweare  upon  a  Pagode*  (which  is  *Ste  my  Ptig.
an  image  of  the  Devill)  which  swearing  is  called  Use  or
Custome.

If  any  person  shall  lend  another  money  upon  a  bond,
and  by  negligence  he  did  not  demand  it,  or  it  was  not
paide  unto  him  within  the  time  prefixed  in  the  said  bond,
in  such  manner  that  when  he  goeth  to  demand  the  said
money,  the  debtor  doth  denie  it,  in  such  a  case  there
shall  bee  an  oath  taken  of  him  that  hath  the  bond  or
obligation,  that  hee  tell  truth  of  the  case  how  it  standeth,
and  he  shall  sweare  upon  the  said  Pagode  (which  is  an
image  of  the  Devill.)

There  may  not  be  lent  to  any  man  above  fiftie  Tangas,
without  an  obligation  or  bond,  and  for  one  person  or
persons  to  demand  another  or  others,  to  the  quantitie  of
fiftie  Tangas,  the  demander  shall  shew  an  obligation  or
witnesses,  and  above  the  summe  of  fiftie  Tangas,  one
cannot  demand  of  another  without  an  obligation,  onely
the  parties  may  come  to  an  agreement,  putting  it  in
arbitration  of  two  such  sworne  men  as  they  shall  like,  the
which  shall  sweare  after  they  have  heard  them,  that  which
they  shall  find  to  be  equitie  and  right.

They  may  give  money  at  interest  in  this  manner,  that
for  every  six  Tangas,  they  may  receive  every  moneth  one
Bargani,  and  no  more,  and  if  any  person  shall  give  money
at  interest,  and  doth  not  demand  the  interest,  and  so  much
time  doth  passe  without  demanding  it,  that  the  interest
doth  amount  to  so  much  or  more  then  the  principall,
although  long  time  bee  past,  the  Debtor  shall  not  be  bound
to  pay  to  the  Creditor  but  the  principall  with  the  double.

The  persons  that  can  bee  witnesse  are  these,  to  wit,  a
youth  under  the  age  of  sixteene  yeares,  nor  a  Drunkard,
nor  a  Blinde  man,  nor  a  Dumbe  man,  nor  a  Moore,  nor  a
Deafe  man,  nor  a  Russian,  nor  a  Journey-man,  nor  a
Gardiner,  nor  a  Gamster,  nor  the  Daughter  of  a  Whore,
nor  an  infamous  person  by  Record,  nor  a  man  that  is  in
hatred  with  another,  cannot  beare  witnesse  against  him.

127

A.D.
I584.

Of  men
deceased,  and
how  they
inherit  one
after  another.

*  Which  is  a
Gyptian.

How  the  goods
of  men

deceased,  must
bee  sold  in  the
Towne  to  the
Governours,
and  they  shall
pay  the  debts,
being  due  and
lawful/.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Notwithstanding,  these  may  beare  witnesse  in  matters  of
small  importance.

If  a  man  doe  chance  to  dye  without  a  Sonne,  although
he  hath  a  Father,  or  other  heires  ascendant,  the  Inheritance
commeth  to  us,  except  the  said  Father  and  Sonne  deceased
hath  their  Inheritance  commixt,  or  both  in  one  Title  or
Custome  :  for  then  the  Father  doth  inherit  of  the  Sonne :
and  if  any  man  hath  foure  Sonnes,  or  more  or  lesse,  they
may  divide  the  Inheritance  in  his  life  time,  except  it  be  by
his  owne  good  will,  and  the  Father  contented  with  it,  they
shall  divide  it  brotherly  as  well  in  his  life  time,  as  after
his  death  ;  and  dividing  it  in  his  life  time,  the  Sonnes
shall  be  bound  to  maintaine  the  Father  with  all  things
necessary,  and  any  of  these  Brothers  dying  without  Heires
descendant,  the  division  of  the  brethren  shall  be  viewed,
either  at  the  death,  or  in  the  life  time  of  their  Father,  if  it
be  written  in  the  Towne-booke ;  and  being  written  in  the
said  Booke,  then  the  inheritance  of  every  Brother  so  dying
without  an  Heire  descendant  commeth  to  us,  and  if  he
dyeth  before  the  said  division  was  made  or  written,  then
the  Inheritance  commeth  to  the  Brethren,  if  they  have  no
Father :  and  if  the  said  Inheritance  be  not  of  forreine
Lands,  and  bound  to  the  rent  of  the  Towne,  then  the
Inheritance  of  a  man  so  deceased  shall  remaine  unto  us,
as  well  as  the  mooveable  without  any  contradiction.  And
if  any  of  these  Brethren  become  a  Turke,  a  Moore,  or  a
*  Jogue  (which  is  like  to  the  Gipsies  in  our  Kingdomes)  in
such  manner,  that  he  doth  alienate  himselfe  from  the
custome  of  his  house,  and  if  the  goods  be  divided  among
them,  his  moveable  goods  shall  remaine  unto  us,  and  his
Land  also,  except  it  be  forreine  Lands,  for  then  it  shall
be  sold  by  Obligation  to  pay  the  custome  due,  and  the
remainder  (the  debts  being  first  paid)  shall  remaine  unto
us,  as  here  is  contained.

At  the  time  of  the  decease  of  such  a  man,  whose
inheritance  appertaineth  to  us  in  such  manner  as  is  declared
already,  the  Governours  of  the  Towne  shall  bee  bound,
before  they  doe  burie  them,  or  burne  them  (according  to

128

DON IMJART I)K MENESES  a.d.

1584.
their  custome)  they  shall  make  it  knowne  to  our  Officers,
for  to  goe  thither  to  take  notice  of  the  goods,  and  to  set
them  downe  in  an  Inventorie,  and  make  sale  of  them  by
the  voyce  of  a  Cryer,  the  Governours  of  the  Towne  being
present :  and  they  shall  be  given  to  the  Governours  of  the
Towne,  or  to  any  of  their  kinred  that  shall  give  most  for
them,  and  not  to  any  person  out  of  the  Towne,  or  to  any
of  their  kinred,  notwithstanding  if  the  neerest  Kinsman
of  the  man  deceased,  or  any  other  of  his  Kinsmen  will
have  the  said  Inheritance,  with  the  customes  belonging
to  it,  which  the  Governours  doe  pay,  it  shall  be  given  him.  [II.ix.1510.]
And  suppose  it  should  happen  that  the  Kinsmen  of  the
deceased  did  not  come  at  the  selling  of  the  said  goods,  and
within  five  daies  after  they  shall  know  of  it,  shall  request
the  said  Inheritance  to  be  given  them  for  the  quantitie  it
was  sold  for,  it  shall  bee  given  unto  them  for  the  said
price.  And  the  said  five  daies  being  past,  they  not
requiring  it,  it  shall  not  after  bee  delivered  unto  them  ;
but  they  that  most  shall  give  for  it,  shall  possesse  it ;  and
the  duties  that  doe  arise  of  the  said  goods,  shall  be  for  us,
and  it  shall  bee  charged  upon  our  Factor,  and  there  shall
passe  a  Certificate  in  Farme  unto  the  Governours  for  their
1  discharge,  how  it  is  charged  upon  his  account,  and  thence
\  forward  may  they  not  bee  constrained,  or  oppressed  for
it,  and  therefore  the  lawfull  and  due  debts  that  the  said
:  deceased  doth  owe,  shall  of  the  said  goods  first  be  paid,
!  and  the  rest  that  remaineth,  shall  be  for  us,  as  aforesaid.

The  moveables  of  any  one  deceased  having  no  heirs

; ascendant,  or  descendant,  (as  is  alreadie  said)  are  without

any  difference  to  remaine  to  our  use,  and  they  shall  bee

sold  to  them  that  will  give  most  for  them,  either  be  he

Kinsman  or  not,  of  the  Towne,  or  out  of  it, notwith-

I standing  the  debts  shall  first  be  paid,  as  already  is  specified.

The  Inheritance  is  in  this  manner ; from  the  Father  it

i commeth  to  the  Sonne,  and  to  the  Grand-child,  &c.  and  to

) the  Father  and  Grand-father : so that  there  bee heires

ascendant  and  descendant,  to  whom  the  Inheritance  doth

appertaine,  so  that  the  said  Inheritance  come  by  the  Male,

ix  129  1

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

•1'--

and  by  the  Female  no  person  doth  inherit,  no  not  the
Daughter,  but  the  Brother  shall  possesse  her  goods  in  such
manner,  as  is  already  specified.

If  any  Thiefe  shall  goe  to  steale  any  Money,  or  any
other  thing,  and  is  taken  with  the  said  stealth,  in  such
case  it  shall  be  provided  according  to  our  Ordinances  and
Lawes ;  and  if  the  said  thing  so  stollen  hath  an  Owner,
it  shall  bee  given  him,  although  by  their  uses  and  customes
it  belongeth  unto  us,  and  this,  because  so  it  is  our  pleasure,
and  wee  thinke  it  good  to  shew  them  favour,  as  we  doe
unto  them  that  well  and  faithfully  doe  us  service,  as  we
hope  they  will  doe.

If  any  treasure  or  goods  be  found  or  discovered,  it
belongeth  and  appertaineth  to  us.

If  any  man  be  married  with  two  Wives,  and  have  foure
Sonnes  of  the  one  and  of  the  other,  or  more  or  lesse,
although  that  they  bee  not  in  number  equall,  whensoever
the  said  Sonnes  shall  divide  the  said  goods  of  the  Father,
they  shall  divide  it  in  the  middest,  and  the  one  Sonne
shall  have  as  much  as  the  other  foure,  and  the  goods  of
the  Father  and  of  the  Mother,  shall  not  bee  inherited  in
the  Daughter,  as  is  above  rehearsed.

The  Officers  placed  by  us,  and  by  our  Governors  and
Captaines,  and  over-seers  of  our  goods,  shall  not  take  any
bribes,  nor  Lands,  of,  or  at  the  hands  of  the  Governours
and Townes, neither may they use any Merchandize
-hin  the  compasse  of  their  Office. And  I  command,
that  if  at  any  time  they  or  he  shall  be  attainted  with  the
same  fault,  that  which  shall  be  found  he  hath  taken,  or
by  his  meanes  any  losse  was  sustained,  hee  shall  repay  it
againe, and the said quantitie so paid, shall remaine
unto  us.
Or  a  Cassock: If  the  Governors  shall  lay,  or  exact  any  demands  in  the
Paekertns  a Townes  for  Cabaga,  Pachorins,  or  whatsoever  profits  or
kmdefLtmn  commocjities  for  themselves,  or  for  to  give  to  the  Cap-
taines,  or  chiefe Master  of  the  Ports,  or  to  any  other
Officers, or  persons  whatsoever, every  Governour  of  a
Towne  so  convicted,  shall  pay  the  whole  summe  of  that,

*3°

DON DUART I)K MENKSKS  a.d.

»5  •-
which  they  have  levied  through  all  the  Townes ;  the  one
halfe  for  them  that  shall  accuse  them,  and  the  other  halfe
for  redemption  of  Captives  and  the  Scriveners,  or  Notaries
of  the  Townes,  shall  be  contributaries  with  them,  if  the
said  tribute,  subsidie,  or  tyrannie  was  raised,  or  levied
with  their  consent.

He  that  shall  convay,  or  purloyne  any  Merchandize,  of
whatsoever  sort  it  be,  without  paying  to  our  Officers  the
duties  belonging  to  us  as  they  are  bound  :  they  shall  pay
after  the  rate  of  eleven  for  one,  of  that  which  he  hath  so
convayed  and  purloyned,  being  thereof  convicted.

At  what  time  soever  that  the  chiefe  Master  of  the  Per--.
with  the  Clerkes  or  Clerke  of  his  charge  together,  or  everv
one  of  himselfe,  shall  goe  to  the  Iland  about  matters
concerning  our  affaires,  or  anv  one  whom  thev  shall  send
to  the  said  Iland,  or  to  the  Townes  of  the  same,  thev
shall  give  them  their  meat  according  to  their  use  and
custome.

And  also  to  our  Factor,  or  Officer  of  that  office  when
they  shall  goe  thither,  to  provide  in  any  matters  concerning
our  affaires,  or  the  Towne  ot  the  Hand.

Whatsoever Foot-man shall goe with anv message
pertaining  to  our  service,  or  to  the  recoverie  of  our  rents,
they shall give him everv day that he shall be there
without  dispatching,  two  measures  ot  Rice  for  his  mc
and  one  Leal  for  Betre,  which  is  an  hearb  that  thev  use  A  pece  of
t0  eate  *££?*""

It  any  Governours  ot  the  Hand  of  Choran,  or  ot  the  ^Z/f.,
other  Ilanders  annexed  to  the  same  of  Tisoare  shall  runne  herbe that tkrj
■way  to  the  Turkes  out  of  the  Land,  because  thev  would  ■«  •"
not  pay  the  rent,  as  it  is  aforesaid  alreadie,  it  hath  beene
done,  the  which  from  hence-forward  wee  hope  thev  will
not  doe,  they  shall  lose  their  mooveable  goods,  and  thev
shall  fall  unto  us,  and  their  Lands  and  Offices  shall  bee
given  unto  them  they  doe  appertaine  to,  and  will  give
most for them, being bound to pav the rights and
customes  that  the  said  Lands  are  bound  to  pav,  and  that
which  they  shall  give  over-plus  for  the  said Lands  and

»3>

A.D.
I584.

[II.lX.i5i  I.]

Which  is  a
piece  of  linnen
c  loath.

Which  is  a
piece  of  Mony
worth  300.
Reys.

Pachorins  a
piece  of  Linnen
c  loath.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Governourship, their custome reserved, shall bee to
our  use.

When  they  doe  make  any  feast  or  assembly,  wherein
they  are  to  take  Betre,  (which  is  an  Herbe)  or  Pachorins,
the  principall  Governour  of  every  Towne  shall  take  first
the  said  Betre,  Pachorins,  or  Jewell,  and  after  him  the  other
Governours  by  degrees,  according  to  their  authorities  and
customes.

When  any  assembly  or  convocation  is  to  be  made,  and
the  names  of  the  Governors  to  be  named  in  writing ;  first
shall  begin  in  the  name  of  the  principall  in  honour,  and
consequently  one  after  another  in  their  degrees.

When  in  the  end  of  any  Councell  that  they  make,  there
is  any  difference  or  doubt  in  setting  downe  that  which
they  have  agreed  upon,  it  shall  bee  written  by  the  Scrivener,
or  Notarie  of  the  Towne ;  and  having  written  it,  he
shall  say  with  an  high  voyce,  which  is  called  Nemo,
that  which  they  have  agreed  upon,  and  if  there  be
no  bodie  to  gainesay  that  which  he  hath  said,  and
declared  with  an  high  voyce,  it  shall  remaine  in  full
force  and  power.

When  the  Governours  of  the  Hand  do  meete  for  any
councell,  agreement,  or  decree,  the  said  decree  shall  be
set  downe  by  the  Clerke  of  the  Common  Councell  of  all
the  Hand,  and  the  voyce  that  shall  be  given  at  the  end  of
the  said  decree,  called  Nemo  (as  aforesaid)  shall  bee
spoken  by  the  most  principall  Governour  that  will  be
accepted,  the  said  Nemo  shall  be  made  by  the  Scrivener
or  Notarie  that  writ  it.

The  Towne  of  Teleigaon  hath  the  preheminence,  for
it  must  bee  the  first  that  beginneth  to  share  their  Rice,
and  the  Governours  of  it  must  come  every  yeare  with  a
sheafe  of  Rice,  to  present  it  before  the  high  Altar  of  the
Church,  and  the  Vicar  with  them  must  go  to  the  Store-
house where  our  Factor  is,  and  he  shall  have  bestowed
foure  Pardoas  in  Pachorins,  and  hee  shall  cast  them  about
the  neckes  of  the  Governours,  ordained  among  them,  that
they  may  receive  honour,  and  from thence  forward the

DON DUART DE MENESES  a.d.

1584.

other  Townes  may  reape,  or  share  their  Rice  as  hereafter
shall  be  declared.

In  the  time  of  Tillage,  the  first  Rice-ground  that  shall
be  ploughed,  and  in  the  time  of  Harvest  that  first  shall  be
reaped,  must  be  the  chiefe  Governours  field  of  every
Towne,  and  after  him  any  one  that  will  may  reape  his :
and  the  same  order  shall  be  used  in  the  covering,  or
thatching  of  their  houses  every  yeare,  the  which  Governour
of  the  Towne  shall  cover  his  house  first  with  Palme-tree
leaves,  and  after  him  all  the  other  people  of  the  same.

The  Men  or  Women  Dancers,  that  shall  come  to  feast
to  a  Towne,  they  shall  goe  first  to  feast  at  the  house  of
the  principall  Governour ; and  when  there  be  two  in  like
honour  it  stands  in  the  choyce  of  the  Dancers,  to  goe  to
which  of  them  they  thinke  best : and  these  Governours
so  in  one  degree  of  honour, shall  rise  together  to the
Betre,  or  to  any  other  honour,  when  they  are  to  receive  Which  is  an
estate,  with  their  armes  a  crosse,  the  right  arme  under  the  herbe  tfiey  u*e
left,  because  that  he  that  goeth  on  the  right  hand,  doth  *°  eate'
take  it  for  more  honour,  and  because  another  Governour
might  say,  that  he  which  did  take  the  present  with  the
left  hand  had  the  preheminence,  because  it  came  over  the
right  hand.

The  Governours  that  are  in  Common ; to  wit,  which  is

to  take  Betre,  (which  is  an  Herbe)  or  any  other  honour,

have  no  preheminence  the  one  of  the  other ; and  they  may

sell  the  said  honour  of  the  Betre,  or  Pachorins,  (which  are

certaine  Linnen  cloaths)  to  any  of  the  said  Governours

of the said Towne, every time that the said honour

chanceth  to  bee  given,  and  this  for  a  certaine  price,  and  it

must  be  divided  in  the  Towne: and  when  there  is  no  Toucha,a kind

objection  to  the  contrary,  then  the  Scrivener  of  the  Towne  °i  or .  ,

J  . . .  ...  ' 3  Lampe  carried

receiveth  the  said  honour.  ieforc  tJi£mm

No man may carrie Tocha, Andor, or Sombreiro,  Andor  is  a

without  our  liccense,  or  of  our  Governor,  except  it  come  Chaire.
to him by Inheritance from his Fathers, and those to imc' ™

whom  we  or  our  said  Governor  shall  give  the  said  license  hide  from  the

for  desert  of  his  services,  it  shall  bee  given  in  two  sorts ;  Statue.

i33

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1584.

the  one,  that  they  may  carrie  the  said  Sombreiro  and
Andor  with  his  Foot-men,  and  Tocha  with  the  Oyle  at
their  owne  charge  ;  and  the  other  is,  that  hee  doe  receive
of  us  the  said  Sombreiro  with  the  said  Foot-men,  and  the
Oyle  paid  at  our  charges,  and  the  said  light  also  may  bee
given  without  the  shadow,  and  the  shadow  without  the
said  light  or  Tocha,  every  thing  by  it  selfe,  or  altogether
in  any  of  the  manners  above  specified.  Therefore  also  we
notifie  it,  as  well  to  our  Captaine  Generall,  and  Governour
of  these  parts  of  India,  which  now  is,  or  hereafter  shall
bee :  and  also  to  the  Captaines  of  this  Citie,  Judges,
Justices,  and  Officers  of  the  same,  and  to  every  other
person  or  persons,  to  whom  this  our  Letter  shall  be
shewen,  and  the  knowledge  of  it  doth  appertaine  :  We
command,  that  in  all  things  they  keepe  and  fulfill  the  same,
and  cause  it  to  bee  kept  and  fulfilled,  as  in  it  is  contained,
for  our  meaning  is  the  same.  Given  in  the  Citie  of  Goa,
the  sixteenth  of  September,  the  King  commanded  it  by
Alfonso  Mexia,  Over-seer  of  the  goods  in  these  parts  of
India,  and  Anthonie  de  Campo  did  write  it,  in  the  yeare
of  1526.  Alfonso  Mexia.

Don  Philip  by  the  Grace  of  God,  King  of  Portugall,
and  of  the  Algarves,  on  this  side  and  that  side  the
Sea  in  Africa,  Lord  of  Guinea,  and  of  the  Conquest,
Navigation  and  Trafficke  of  ^Ethiopia,  Persia,  and  India,
&c.  Be  it  knowne  to  you,  that  I  seeing  how  much
the  good  government,  and  preserving  of  my  Estates
in  those  parts  of  India,  doth  import,  and  Justice  to  be
truly  administred  in  them  to  my  Subjects  and  Vassals,
and  desiring  that  in  my  time  it  may  bee  done  with  that
integritie,  libertie  and  brevitie  that  thereunto  belongeth  ;
[II.ix.1512.]  I  thought  meete  to  send  or  provide  after  I  had  succeeded
in  the  Crowne  of  those  Kingdoms,  Persons  of  con-
science and  learning,  to  the  most  of  the  Fortresses  of
those  parts,  that  should  administer  it,  to  the  which  we
gave  power  and  authoritie  according  to  their  governments
or  charges.  And  being  now  enformed  that  in  the  Citie
of  Goa,  principall  and  head  of  the  said  Estates,  the  Kings

i34

iter  Hall.

DON IMJART I)K MENESES  *.»■

.584.

my  Predecessors  of  glorious  memory,  did  ordayne  there

should  bee  an  house  of  Justice,  or  place  of  hearing,  wherein Ai  f^fJ/™,n'

some  Officers  by  them  chosen  (as  in  a  supreme  Tribunal!)

should  determine  the  Causes,  giving  them  for  that  purpose

at  sundry  times  divers  charges,  the  which  for  the  varietie

of  matters  ought  to  be  reformed,  and  I  being  willing  in

dutie  to  continue  with  the  same  intent,  and  command  to

provide  in  those  Causes,  which  at  this  present  were  most

necessarie  for  the  good  of  the  said  House,  commanded

for that effect, learned men of my Counsell, and of

experience that they should determine what might be

done  in  that  case,  as  well  in  the  ordering  and  governing

of  the  said  House,  as  in  the  multiplying  of  the  Ministers

belonging  to  it,  that  matters  of  Justice  might  with  more

ease  and  facilitie  be  prosecuted,  and  having  heard their

opinions,  and  necessary  diligences  being  used,  and  having

given  mee  relation  of  all  things  and  account,  I  thought

good  to  provide  for  them  in  manner  and  forme  following.

§•  11.

A  Copie  of  the  order  that  the  Vice-roy  of  the
Estate  of  India  shall  hold  in  matters  of
Justice,  as  also  of  the  other  Magistrates,  in
the  divers  places  holden  by  the  Portugals  in
India.

He  Vice-roy  shall  goe  to  the  house  of  Justice,  the
times  that  he  thinketh  good,  and  shal  give  no
voyce,  nor  assigne  or  pronounce  any  sentences,  but

he  shall  onely  use  the  offices  that  the  chiefe  Judge  doth
use  in  the  Court  of  Requests,  and  of  the  rest  which  in
extraordinary  matters  is  granted  unto  him  in  all  things
whereunto  his  charge  may  bee  applyed.

There  shall  be  in  the  said  House  or  Court  ten
Officers,  to  wit,  one  Chancellour,  the  which  shall  also
serve  for  a  Judge  of  the  Chancerie  :  one  chiefe  Judge
of  facts  and  causes  Criminall :  one  chiefe  Judge
of  matters  or  causes Civill, the  which notwithstanding

J35

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1584.

shall  serve  for  Judges  in  matters  of  complaint,  wherein

any  Judge  of  our  estate,  goods, or  revenues  hath not

given sentence, one Attorney for causes touching the

OraPrcfener  Crowne  goods,  or  revenues  :  and  one  Prometor  of  Justice,

°{ %r  s  the  which  shall  serve  also  for  a  Judge  of  complaints,  and

Supplications.  . ,  . . ~ •  a

wrongs  in  those  cases  wherein  he  is  not  Attorney  : one

chiefe  Judge  for  Wills  and  Testaments,  the  which  shall

serve  also  for  a  Judge  of  Complaints,  in  such  cases  as  he

hath  not  given  sentence.

Also  there  shall  be  in  the  said  house  three  extraordinarie
Judges,  the  which  shall  serve  in  absence,  and  for  any
hindrance  of  the  said  Judges  of  complaints  above  named,
and  for  the  other  Offices.  And  this  by  commission  of  the
Vice-roy,  and  in  his  absence  of  the  Chancellor,  or  of  the
most  ancient  Judge,  which  doth  serve  himselfe  as
Chancellor,  when  the  Chancellor  himselfe  is  absent,  and
they  shall  helpe  the  Judges  that  sit  on  the  Bench  to
dispatch  the  causes  then  depending,  and  not  in  any  matter
aforetime  past,  &c.

Every  day  before  they  sit  or  dispatch  any  matters,  there
shall  a  Masse  be  said  by  a  Chaplaine,  which  the  Vice-roy
shall  choose  for  that  purpose,  and  he  shall  be  paid  at  the
charges  and  expences  of  the  said  house,  and  the  Masse
being  ended,  they  shall  beginne  to  dispatch  such  matters
as  shall  be  brought  unto  them,  and  they  shall  be  foure
houres  at  the  least  in  dispatching  matters,  by  an  houre-
glasse,  which  shall  stand  upon  the  Table  where  the
Vice-roy  doth  sit.

The  Judges,  as  well  in  cases  Civill  as  Criminall,  shall
have  the  same  authoritie,  and  shall  keepe  the  same  order
that  is  given  unto  them,  whereof  the  Judges  of  the  Court
of  Requests  doe  also  use,  and  of  those  sentences  which
by  mine  Ordinances  I  command  account  be  given  unto
mee  before  they  be  put  in  execution,  the  said  account  shall
be  given  to  the  Vice-roy,  if  hee  have  not  beene  present  at
judgment,  or  if  he  be  not  absent  from  the  Citie  of  Goa :
for  if  he  be  absent,  the  account  shall  be  given  unto  him
that  ruleth  in  his  stead,  and  when  there  is  any  judgement

136

DON 1MJART OK MKXKSKS  ad.

1584.
Criminall  of  Importance,  as  is  to  put  some  person  of
qualitie  to  death,  or  other  judgement  of  importance  in
Civill  cases,  execution  shall  not  be  made  without  giving
account  to  the  Vice-roy  thereof,  although  he  be  absent,  or
out  of  the  Citie.

The  Vice-roy  and  Judges  may  in  the  house  of  Justice
supply  the  defects,  and  annihilating  of  the  acts,  when  he
shall  thinke  that  the  cause  doth  require  it,  for  the
performing  of  Justice.

And  the  said  Judges,  while  they  are  in  the  said  house
executing  their  Offices  with  the  Vice-roy,  shall  be  set  in
plaine  Chayres,  and  the  Vice-roy  shall  presently  command
them  to  be  covered,  and  not  to  sit  bare-headed.

The  said  Judges  shall  not  enter  into  the  said  house
with  any  weapons,  neither  shall  they  weare  any  garments
of  colour,  but  they  shall  be  apparelled  in  long  blacke
garments,  in  such  manner  as  it  may  represent  the  Authority
they  have.

The  Vice-roy  shall  have  a  particular  to  command  the  [II.ix.1513.]
Pensions  to  be  payd  to  the  said  Judges  at  their  due  times,
in  such  manner  as  they  may  bee  effectually  payd  every
quarter,  without  any  delay  to  the  contrarie,  and  their
payment  shall  be  given  or  payd  unto  them  in  the  said
house,  at  the  end  of  every  quarter.

The  Bills  of  pardons,  Bills  of  assurance,  legitimations,
and  suppliances  of  ages,  shall  be  given  to  the  Vice-roy
being  in  the  said  house,  and  he  with  the  said  Judges  shall
dispatch  them,  and  they  shall  be  such  as  he  for  that  purpose
shall  choose,  alwayes  the  Chancellor  being  one  of  them,
if  he  be  present,  with  the  Judge  of  the  cause,  and  to  the
dispatches  of  the  said  Petitions,  the  said  Judges  with  the
Vice-roy  shall  set  their  hands,  and  the  Bills  shall  passe  in
my  name,  with  the  accustomed  causes,  and  they  shall  be
signed  by  the  Vice-roy,  and  no  Bill  of  pardon  shall  be
taken  without  pardon  of  the  party  offended,  and  in  the
dispatches  of  the  said  causes  they  shall  alwayes  have  a  due
regard  and  consideration.

And  because  of  the  easie  granting  of  pardons,  which

i37

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PIJLGRIMES

1584.

the  Vice-roy  in  those  parts  doth  ordinarily  grant,  hath
sprung  that  the  faults  are  not  punished,  and  the  boldnesse
to  commit  new  hath  encreased ;  Wee  thought  it  meet  and
convenient,  that  no  pardons  should  bee  granted  in  matters
of  Apostacy,  Sodomie,  false  coyning,  treacherous  murder,
falshood  in  the  crime  of  any  of  the  Heads,  Lsesae
Majestatis,  wounding,  or  killing  of  any  Judge  or  Justice,
or  of  a  Captaine  of  any  Fortresse,  the  slaughter  of  a
Maior,  or  Bayliffe,  or  any  other  Officer  of  Justice,  except
any  cause  so  urgent  doth  concurre,  that  the  granting  of
the  said  pardon  of  the  said  cases,  doth  concerne  the  pre-
servation of  the  estate  of  India :  then  the  causes  shall  be
communicated  with  the  said  Judges,  as  is  already  declared,
and  when  any  of  these  cases  so  excepted  shall  happen,  the
Vice-roy  shall  take  the  said  cases  particularly  in  memorie,
and  shall  give  me  account  of  them  in  his  Letters,  by  the
first  Fleet  after  the  pardon  were  granted,  with  the  causes
that  moved  them  to  pardon  such  a  fault.

The  said  Vice-roy  from  hence  forward  shall  not  grant
any  Warrant,  that  the  money  of  Orphans  shall  be  given
to  any  Gentleman,  or  Captaine  of  any  Fortresse,  nor  to
any  other  persons  which  are  not  Merchants,  for  the  many
inconveniences  that  thereof  doe  proceed.

The  Vice-roy  of  India  in  the  providing  of  publike
Offices  of  Justice  in  those  parts,  shall  have  a  great  care
to  provide  in  my  servants  or  any  other  persons,  bene
meritos,  and  apt  for  the  said  Offices,  preferring  alwayes
my  servants,  when  they  have  equall  deserts  with  the  other,
and  he  shall  passe  no  Warrant  for  any  Captaine  of  a
Fortresse,  that  he  may  provide  the  said  Offices  that  are
voyde,  for  the  great  inconveniences  that  thereof  doth  arise,
and  because  it  is  provided  in  mine  Ordinances,  how  the
Offices  of  the  said  charges  must  be  provided  by  the
Justices,  and  Commissioners  of  those  Countries,  in  whose
place  being  absent,  the  Learned  men  that  I  have  sent  for
Judges  of  the  Fortresses  to  those  parts  doe  remayne.

The  said  Vice-roy  in  the  Warrants  of  Justice,  or  of
goods  that  he  passeth,  shall  not  command  in  an  Edict,

13S

DON IMJART I)E MENESES

1584.
that  they  may  not  passe  by  the  Chancerie,  for  the  many
inconveniences  that  thereof  doth  arise,  and  being  passed
in  any  other  forme,  they  shall  be  of  no  force,  and  the
persons  to  whom  they  shall  be  directed,  shall  not  keepe  nor
conceale  them,  except  the  Warrants  be  of  secresie,  or  of
matters  of  importance,  the  which  passing  by  the  Chancerie
would  take  no  effect ;  and  if  any  Warrant  that  the
Vice-roy  doth  grant,  doe  come  with  restraint  or  seizure
whatsoever,  the  said  restraint  or  seizure  shall  be  dispatched
ordinarily  in  the  house  of  Justice,  or  Hall  above  named,
by  the  Judges  to  whom  it  doth  appertaine.

All  the  Warrants  or  Letters  that  the  Vice-roy  maketh,
shall  be  written  or  subscribed  by  the  Secretarie  of  the
estate  of  India,  to  whom  it  pertayneth,  and  not  to  any
other  person  except  he  supply  the  place  of  a  Secretarie,
because  there  is  none  provided  by  me  for  that  effect.

The  Vice-roy  shall  command  an  *  account  to  bee  taken  Which  is
of  the  Captaines,  and  of  the  other  Officers  which  shall  €.^ .
deserve  in  them,  as  soone  as  their  time  is  expired,  the *
which  shall  be  done  by  the  Judges  of  the  Hall  or  Court
above  named,  which  he  shall  choose  for  that  purpose,  or
by  any  other  trusty  persons  notwithstanding  the  accounts,
or  regidencias  of  Ormus,  Malaqua,  and  Mosambique  shall
be  taken  by  the  Judges  themselves,  because  of  the  import-
ance of  them,  and  the  acts  or  examinations  of  the  said
accounts  or  regidencias  shall  be  dispatched  in the  said
House  or  Court  of  Relation,  and  the  sentences  which  upon
them  shall  be  given,  with  the  copie  of  the  said  acts  and
examinations,  the  Vice-roy  shall  cause  them  to  bee  to  the  Viz.  of
Realme  the  same  yeere  that  they  are  taken,  and  they  shall  Portugal-
be  delivered  to  the  Judge  of  India,  and  of  the  Myne,
that  he  may  deliver  unto  me  relation  of  them,  and  I  may
command  them  to  be  set  in  that  place  that  I  shall  thinke  to
be  most  meet.

The  condemnations  of  money  that  shall  be  made  in  the
House  or  Court  of  Relation,  shall  be  applied  for  the
expences  of  the  said  House,  and  the  Judges  of  the  said
House  or  Court  may  not  apply  them  to  any  other  use,  of

J39

A.D.
1584.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  which  forfeitures,  or  condemnations  there  shall  bee  a
Receiver,  and  a  Scrivener  of  the  receit,  and  expences  of
them,  and  the  said  expences  shall  be  made  by  order  of  the
Vice-roy,  for  the  which  there  shall  be  a  Booke  assigned
and  kept,  by  one  of  the  said  Judges,  to  whom  the  Vice-roy
shall  commit  it  in  keeping.

And  because  I  may  have  knowledge  of  all  causes  as  well
[II.  ix.  1 5 14.]  Criminall  as  Civill,  which  shall  be  dispatched  in  the  said
House  or  Court  of  Relation  in  every  yeere,  the  Vice-roy
shall  command  a  Roll  or  Register  of  all  the  said  cases
that  so  shall  bee  dispatched  to  bee  made,  and  also  of  those
which  remayned  to  be  dispatched,  the  which  Register  he
shall  send  unto  us  every  yeere.

The  Vice-roy  shall  nominate  every  three  yeeres,  one
Judge  of  great  confidence  and  trust,  that  may  take  the
Examinations  in  the  Citie  of  Goa,  of  the  Scriveners,
Advocates,  Rulers,  Bayliffes,  Tellers,  Inquisitors,  and  of
all  the  other  Ministers  of  Justice,  and  of  the  Revenues,
excepting  the  Justices  of  the  House  or  Court  of  Relation,
and  also  besides  the  Examinations  that  the  chiefe  Justice
of  Criminall  causes,  and  the  other  Officers  of  Justice  in
the  said  Citie  are  bound  to  make  every  yeere  according
to  their  Offices  or  Authoritie,  and  the  said  Judge  shall
proceed  against  the  faulty  according  to  Justice,  and  finally,
he  shall  dispatch  them  in  the  said  Court  of  relation,  with
the  Judges  that  the  Vice-roy  shall  nominate  unto  him.

And  the  Vice-roy  not  being  present  in  the  House  or
Court  of  relation,  or  being  absent  from  the  Citie  of  Goa,
the  Chancellor  shall  serve  in  his  place,  according  to  the
order  of  our  Decree.

The  Chancellor  shall  peruse  or  over-see  all  the  Bills  &
Sentences,  that  are  given  by  the  Judges  of  the  said  Court
or  House  of  relation,  and  in  the  passing  and  ingrossing
of  them,  he  shall  keepe  the  same  order  that  the  Chancellor
of  the  Court  of  Requests  doth  keepe,  by  authoritie  of  my
Ordinances  and  Warrants.

He  shall  take  notice  of  the  suspicions  that  are  to  the
Judges  of  the  said  House  or  Court  of  relation  of  India,

140

A  note  or  copy
of  the  autho-
ritie that  the
Chancel/or  of
the  House  or
Court  of
Relation  of
India  hath.

DON DUART DE MENESKS  ad

1584.

and  to  the  other  Officers  of  the  said  House,  the  which  he
shall  dispatch  in  the  said  House  or  Court  of  relation.

He  shall  take  notice  of  the  cases  and  errours  of  the  For  thcre.  u  a
Notaries  and  Scriveners,  and  other  Officers,  whereof  the  ^  f!""ne t
Judge  of  Chancerie  pertayning  to  the  Court  of  Requests  the  Court  of
may  take  Notice,  and  he  shall  passe  Bills  of  assurance  upon Requests.
the  said  cases  being  of  such  qualitie  that  it  may  bee  done,
and  no  other  Judge  shall  passe  them,  and  he  also  shall
take  notice  of  the  appeales  of  errours  committed  by  these
Officers  of  the  estate  of  India,  and  of  the  wrongs  past
before  the  Tellers  of  the  costs,  using  in  all  that  is  above
named  that  authoritie,  that  is  given  to  the  Judge  of  the
Chancerie  belonging  to  the  Court  of  requests.

And  for  so  much  as  in  the  said  parts  there  is  no  other
Chancellor  but  he  of  the  house  or  Court  of  relation,  it  is
my  will  and  pleasure,  that  all  those  matters  that  in  what-
soever manner  be  dispatcht  by  the  Vice-roy,  by  Letters,
Bills,  or  Warrants,  which  by  authoritie  of  my  Ordinances
should  passe  by  the  chiefe  Chancellor,  doe  passe  by  him,
and  in  the  passing  and  engrossing  of  the  said  matters,  he
shall  use  the  authoritie  or  the  chiefe  Chancellor,  and  the
Debts  that  are  due  in  the  engrossing  of  the  Warrants,
which  the  Vice-roy  shall  passe,  he  shall  determine  upon
them  with  three  of  the  said  Judges,  which  the  Vice-roy
shall  nominate  unto  him.

And  hee  shall  also  take  notice  of  the  suspicions  layd  to
the  Overseers  of  our  Revenues,  or  Exchequor,  and  to  the
Officers  thereof,  and  hee  shall  dispatch  them  according  to
the  authoritie  of  the  chiefe  Chancellor.

And  touching  the  valuation  of  the  Garrisons,  and
other  Offices  of  what  ought  to  bee  payd  in  the  Chancerie,
the  said  Chancellor  shall  use  the  same  order  contayned
in  the  Orders  of  the  estate  of  India,  whereof  hitherto
hath  beene  used,  the  which  he  shall  use  onely  in  this
behalfe.

The  Chancellor  shall  keepe  the  Courts  that  the  Judge
of  the  Chancerie  is  bound  to  doe,  in  the  dayes  ordayned
for  that  purpose,  and  the  Sentences  that  the  said  Chancellor

141

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1584.

doth  give,  shall  passe  by  the  Chancerie,  or  by  the  ancientest
Judge  of  the  Appeales.

And  when  the  Chancellor  chanceth  to  bee  absent,  or
busie  about  other  affaires,  in  such  sort  that  thereby  he
cannot  be  present,  the  Seales  shall  remayne  with  the
ancientest  Judge  of  Appeales  in  that  Office,  he  which  shall
take  notice  of  all  such  matters  as  the  said  Chancellor  might
take  notice  of.

And  in  all  the  rest  that  in  this  Register  is  not  declared,

the  said  Chancellor  shall  use  the  same  order  that  is  given

to  the  high  Chancellor,  or  to  the  Chancellor  of  the  Court

of  Requests, by  our  Ordinances  and  Decrees,  and this

shall  be  used  in  such  cases  as  they  well  may  be  applyed

unto.

J  note  or  copy There  appertavneth  to  the  Judges  of  the  Appeales,  to

ritiethat  °~ ta^e  not*ce  °^  tne  Appeales  of  the  Sentences  definitive,

belonged  to  the  tnat  tne  chiefe  Judge  of  the  Civill  cases,  and  the  chiefe

Judges  of Commissioner  of  the  deceased shall  pronounce  in such

Appeales. Civill  cases  as  are  not  contayned  in  their  Prerogative  or

Authoritie.

There  appertavneth  also  unto  them,  the  deciding  of  the
Appeales  of  Civill  cases  that  doth  passe  before  the  Judge
of  the  Citie  of  Goa,  and  before  the  ordinarie  Judges,  and
before  the  Judges  of  Orphants,  and  whatsoever  Judges  of
the  said  Citie,  and  also  of  the  Judges  of  the  Fortresses,  or
Garrisons  of  India,  and  of  the  Towneships  thereof,  and  of
those  Captaines  that  have  no  Judges,  the  which  doth  not
appertayne  to  anv  other  Judgement  bv  authoritie  of  my
Ordinances  or  Decrees.

All  the  cases  which  bv  authoritie  of  the  same  Decree
doth  appertaine  unto  them,  thev  shall  dispatch  them  by  a
pretence,  and  in  the  dispatching  of  them,  they  shall  keepe
the  order  that  I  have  given  by  mine  Ordinances  and
Decrees  to  the  Judges  of  the  Complaints,  and  Appeales  of
the  Court  of  Requests,  and  thev  shall  as  well  in  the
[II.ix.1515.]  dispatching  of  the  Sentences  definitives,  as  of  the  Inter-
locutorie,  Bills  of  complaint,  Petitions,  and  Examinations
of  Witnesses,  and  they  shall  have  the  same  authoritie  that

142

DON DUART DE MENESES

the  Judges  of  Appeales  of  the  said  House  or  Court  of
Requests  have.

And  the  Judges  of  Appeales  shall  take  notice  of  the
Petitions  of  the  injurie  that  is  done  in  cases  Criminall,
and  Civill,  of  all  the  Judges  that  are  resident  in  the  Citie
of  Goa,  and  five  leagues  round  about  the  same,  in  those
cases  wherein  appeale  or  complaint  may  be  made  by
Petition,  and  shall  dispatch  them  according  to  the  forme
of  our  Ordinances  and  Decrees.

And  notwithstanding,  that  according  to  the  Decree  in
the  Appeales,  the  account  surmounting  the  summe  of  ten
thousand  Reys,  three  voyces  agreeing  are  needfull  to
confirme  or  revoke ;  it  is  my  will  and  pleasure,  and  com-
mand that  two  voyces  agreeing  shall  suffice  to  confirme  or
disanull  the  summe  of  twentie  thousand  Reys,  and  in  the
Appeales  of  greater  summes,  the  forme  of  the  said  Decree
shall  be  kept  in  all  points.

And  in  all  the  rest  which  in  this  Processe  is  not
declared,  the  said  Judges  of  Appeales  shall  use  the  same
order  given  to  the  Judges  of  Appeales  of  the  Court  of
Requests,  by  my  Ordinances  and  Decrees,  and  this  in
those  cases  wherein  they  may  be  applied  according  to
Justice.

To  the  chiefe  Judge  of  Criminall  cases  appertayneth  to
take  notice  by  Ausaon  nova  of  all  the  Crimes  or  Facts  that
shall  be  committed  in  the  Citie  of  Goa,  or  five  leagues
round  about  it,  the  Vice-roy,  or  the  Court  of  Relation
being  in  the  said  Citie,  and  those  cases  that  shall  be
written  in  processe  in  his  Court,  he  shall  dispatch  them  in
the  Court  of  Relation.

Hee  shall  take  notice  also  of  all  the  Bills  of  complaint,
or  Bills  of  testimonie,  or  witnesses  :  and  of  all  Criminall
cases  remitted,  to  wit,  in  the  cases  wherein  it  may  be
remitted,  which  doe  come  from  whatsoever  part  of  the
State  of  India,  the  which  hee  shall  dispatch  in  the  Court
of  Hearing,  or  of  Relation,  if  the  Judgement  of  them
doth  not  appertaine  to  other  Judges  especially,  according;
to  my  Ordinances  and  Decrees.

A.D.
I584.

Which  is,  61.
$s.  sterling.

Which  is,  12 1.

10/.  sterling.

A  note  of  the
authoritie
belonging  to  the
chiefe  Judge  of
Criminall

Or,  in  matters
of  late  time.
Which  is  as
Westminster
Hal.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PTLGRIMES

1584.

Hee  shall  also  take  notice  by  Petition  of  all  Criminall
Appeales,  that  the  Parties  shall  bring  before  the  Judges,
and  the  Judge  of  the  Citie  of  Goa,  and  of  five  leagues
round  about  the  same,  the  which  he  shall  command  to  be
answered  by  himselfe  alone,  and  he  shall  dispatch  the  said
Appeales  in  the  Court  of  Relation,  and  the  parties  being
willing  to  appeale  directly  to  the  Court  of  Relation  by
Petition,  they  may  doe  it,  and  the  Judges  of  Appeales
shall  give  a  dispatch  in  the  said  Petitions,  according  to  the
forme  of  the  Ordinance  in  that  case  provided.
Or  in  matters  And  likewise  hee  shall  take  notice  by  Ausaon  nova,  and
of  late  time.  s^ajj  dispatch  by  himselfe  alone,  all  those  cases  that  the
Corregidor  of  the  Criminall  cases  of  the  Court  may  take
notice,  and  dispatch  by  himselfe  alone,  and  of  the  deter-
mination that  in  the  said  cases  may  be  appealed  by
Petition  to  the  Court  of  Relation,  in  such  manner  as  they
doe  appeale  from  the  Corregidor  of  the  Court  according
to  the  Ordinance  in  that  case  provided.

Hee  shall  give  Warrants  or  Letters  of  assurance  in  all
those  cases,  wherein  the  Corregidor  of  the  Court  may
passe  them  by  the  authoritie  of  his  Office,  and  in  passing
of  them  he  shall  keepe  the  forme  of  the  Ordinance  in
that  case  provided,  &c.

Hee  shall  have  a  particular  care,  that  as  soone  as  any
Facts  be  dispatched  of  any  man  condemned  to  die,  that
receiveth  wages  or  a  stipend  of  the  King,  or  is  banished,
to  cause  his  name  to  be  set  in  the  Register,  or  Check-
roll,  upon  these  Titles  within  ten  dayes,  whereunto
he  shall  joyne  a  Certificat  to  the  Fact  of  his  condemna-
tion.

Hee  shall  keepe  every  weeke  two  Court  dayes,  to  wit,
upon  Tuesday  and  Friday  in  the  afternoone.

Hee  may  also  pleade  by  Petition  the  Criminall  cases
that  doe  passe  before  the  Judges  of  the  Citie  of  Goa,
and  five  leagues  round  about  the  same,  and  hee  shall
receive  the  complaints  in  all  those  cases  wherein  the
Corregidor  of  the  Court  may  receive  them,  and  he
shall  use  in  all  such  cases  the  rule  or  authoritie  of  the

144

DON DUART I)E MENESES  *  .d.

1584.
said  Corregidor  of  the  Court,  in  all manner  of  matter.
whereunto  this  may  be  applied.

And  hee  shall  take  notice  of  the  Appeales  of  Criminall
cases  that  shall  come  from  any  part  of  the  Estate  of  India,
and  shall  dispatch  them  in  the  Court  of  Relation,  the
Judgement  of  them  not  appertayning  particularly  to  any
other  Judges,  according  to  the  Ordinances  and  Decrees,
and  in  the  dispatching  of  the  said  Appeales,  hee  shall
keepe  that  order,  which  I  have  given  to  the  Judges  of
Criminall  cases  of  the  Court  of  Requests  by  mine
Ordinances  and  Decrees.

There  shall  serve  with  him  two  Scriveners  or  Clerkes,
of  the  foure  belonging  to  the  chiefe  Judge,  according  to
the  Warrant  that  I  past,  in  the  division  that  I  commanded
to  be  made  of  the  Office  of  the  chiefe  Judge.

To  the  chiefe  Judge  of  Civill  cases  belongeth  by  Ausaon  A  note.  °fthe
nova  the  notice  of  the  cases  Civill  of  the  Citie  of  Goa, ,  , . .  ,,
and round about the same five leagues, the Court of  chiefe  Judge  of
Relation  being  in  the  said  Citie,  the  which  shall  be  written  Chill  cases.
in  Processe  in  his  owne  Court,  and  he  shall  dispatch  them
by  himselfe  alone,  giving  leave  to  appeale  in  those  matters
that  belong  not  to  his  Authoritie,  according  to  the  fbrme
of  the  Decree  provided  in  those  cases.

Also  there  appertayneth  to  him  to  passe  the  Certificats,
and  Letters  of  Justifications.

And  the  said  Auditor  shall  have  authoritie  by  himselfe  [II.ix.1516.]
alone  to  judge  in  matters  amounting  to  the  summe  of
fifteene  thousand  Reys,  which  is  nine  pounds  seven
shillings  sixe  pence  sterling,  in  landed  Goods ;  and  in
movable  Goods,  to  the  summe  of  twentie  thousand  Reys,
which  is  twelve  pounds  ten  shillings  sterling.

And  of  the  interlocutory  Sentences  that  the  said  Judge
shall  give,  the  parties  may  appeale  by  Petition  in  those
cases,  which  by  the  Ordinance  the  Corregidores  in  Civill
cases  of  the  Court  may  appeale.

And  he  shall  keepe  two  Courts  every  weeke,  to  wit,
upon  Monday,  and  upon  Thursday  in  the  afternoones.

And  in  all  the  rest  which  in  this  Processe  is  not  declared,
ix  145  K

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1584.

the  said  chiefe  Judge  of  Civill  cases  shall  use  the  order,
that  the  Corregidores  in  Civill  cases  of  the  Court  doe  use,
by  my  Ordinances  and  Decrees,  and  this  in  such  cases  as
they  may  be  applied  unto.

There  shall  serve  with  him  two  Scriveners,  or  Clerke  of
the  foure  that  served  in  the  chiefe  Judges  office,  according
to  the  Warrant  that  I  past  in  the  division  that  I  com-
manded to  be  made  in  the  said  Office.
A  note  of  the To the Judge of the Crowne Office, and of the
authoritie Exchequor appertayneth to take notice of all matters

bclonpiJiPto  the  •  1  ■■— »

Judge  of  the pertayning to the Crowne, or to the Exchequor by

Crown  Office,  Ausaon  nova,  and  by  Petition  of  Appeale  in  the  Citie  of

and  of  the Goa,  and  five  leagues  round  about  the  same,  the  Court

Exchequor. 0f  Relation  being  there,  and  out  of  Goa  he  shall  take

of  late  time n°tice  from  all  parts  of  India  by  Appeales,  or  by  Bill  of

Complaint,  or  by  Bills  of  Testimonie  of  all  the  said  cases,

although  it  be  betweene  partie  and  partie. And  also  he

shall  take  notice  of  all  the  other  cases,  whereof  the  Judge

of  matters  touching  the  Crowne  and  the  Exchequor  of

the  Court  of  Request,  may  take  notice  by  vertue  of  my

Ordinances,  and  he  shall  dispatch  the  same  cases  in  the

Court  of  Relation, according  to the  order  that I have

Note  that  there  given  by  my  Ordinances  and  Decrees  to  the  Judge,  of

is  a u  ge  of cases  touching-  the  Crowne  and  Revenues  of  the  Court  of
Lrowne  and -^  b

Exchequor Requests.

matters  in  the And  in  the  interlocutory  Sentences  that  he  shall  give

Court  of Dy  himselfe  alone,  in  whatsoever  cases,  there  may  bee  an

equests. Appeale  by  Petition  in  the  Court  of  Relation,  in  such

cases  as  by  vertue  of  the  Ordinances  may  be  appealed  of

by  Petition.

He  shall  goe  at  all  times  being  necessarie  to  the
Accounts,  where  hee  shall  proceed  according  to  the  rule
that  I  have  given  in  cases  belonging  to  the  Exchequor  of
the  Estate  of  India.

The  said  Judge  of  the  Crowne  and  Exchequor  shall
also  serve  for  Judge  of  the  Kings  Revenues,  and  he  shall
use  in  all  such  matters  that  order  that  I  have  given  to  the
Judge  of  the  Revenues,  which  is  resident  in  the  Court  of

146

DON IMJART I)K MENESES  a.d.

'5*4-
Requests,  and  also  in  all  other  matters  which  otherwise  I
shall  command  hereafter.

There  shall  be  two  Scriveners  or  Clerkes,  the  which
shall  write  by  their  turnes,  all  those  cases  that  shall  passe
before  the  said  Judge  of  the  Crowne  Office,  Exchequor,
and  Revenues.

The Attorney of matters touching the Crowne and A  note  of  the
Exchequor, ought to bee very diligent and know  nut/l0r,t,e  be-
particularly  of  all  the  cases  pertayning  to  the  Crowne  and ™f™rlJ  0/
Exchequor,  for  to  require  in  them  all  things  belonging  cases  touching
or  appertayning  to  the  true  performing  of  Justice,  for  the  the  Crowne,
which  he  shall  be  present  at  all  the  Courts  that  the  Judge  and  exche~
of  the  Crowne  Office,  and  of  the  Exchequor  doth  keepe,  qu0
and  also  at  all  other  Courts  that  shall  appertayne  to  my
Exchequor,  and  in  all  the  rest  hee  shall  accomplish  the  Or-
dinance that  I  have  given  to  my  Attorney  in  matters  of  the
Crowne  and  Exchequor,  in  mine  Ordinances  and  Decrees.

Also  in  those  cases  wherein  he  is  to  be  a  Preferrer,
either  in  the  behalfe  of  Justice,  or  of  the  Revenues,  he
shall  also  use  the  same  order  which  by  mine  Ordinance  I
have  given  to  the  Preferrer,  or  Informer  of  the  Court  of
Requests,  and  to  the  Attorney  of  the  Revenues.

There  appertayneth  to  the  chiefe  Commissioner  of  the  A  note.  °fthe

deceased  of  the  Estate  of  India,  to  take  notice  by  Ausaon  a,u,  orf/te

r  »  oelonTinstothe

nova,  in  the  Citie  of  Goa,  and  five  leagues  round  about  chiefe  Com-

the  same,  within  the  limit  of  which  five  leagues  shall  missioner  of
contayne  the  Territories  of  Bardes  and  Salcete,  although  the  Deceased.
some  of  them  be  without  the  said  five  leagues,  the  which rj in  matters
shall  dispatch  such  matters  as  shall  be  processed  in  his
Court  by  himselfe  alone,  giving  in  them  Appeales,  in  such
cases,  as  are  not  contayned  within  his  authoritie,  and  he
shall  use  that authoritie  which  by my Ordinances and
Decrees I have given to the Commissioners of the
Orphans,  and  of  the  Citie  of  Lisbone,  and  to  the  Com-
missioners of  the  Borders  or  limits  of  the  said  Kingdome,
in  such  matters  as  they  may  be  applyed  unto,  and  also  in  all
such matters as in this Ordinance are not especially
provided  for.

147

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1584.

The  said  chiefe  Commissioner  shall  have  authoritie  to

Which  is,  ill.  tne quantity of twentie thousand Reys in mooveabie

™,/I ! tns', goods,  and  in  Lands  or  Tenements  fifteene  thousand  Revs
Which  ts,  9/. &  . '  ..  a 1  1 1 11  1 •

is.  6d.  sterl. without  application,  or  appeale. And  he  shall  appeale  in

cases  appertayning  to  the  Orphans,  and  Captives  in  those
Sentences  that  he  shall  give,  and  are  not  contayned  within
the  compasse  of  his  Authoritie,  although  that  the  parties
doe  not  appeale  in  the  said  Sentences,  according  to  the
Decree  in  such  a  case  appertayning.

And because I understand by Information that the

Commissioners  of  the  Orphans,  and  of  the  men  deceased,

which  doe  serve  in  other  parts  of  India,  doe  give  every

Which  is, one assurance only of two hundred thousand Reys,

125/.  sterling,  according  to  the  Decree  and  Ordinance  that  hitherto  they

[II.ix.1517.]  did  use,  and  some  of  the  said  Commissioners  doe  receive

great  quantitie  of  money  of  the  men  so  dying,  the  which

when  the  parties  will  recover  they  cannot  doe  it,  by  reason

of  the  goods  which  the  said  Commissioners  have  not,  nor

by  the  assurance  which  was  of  a  very small quantitie.

And  I  being  willing  to  provide  in  this  matter. It  is  my

wil  &  pleasure  that  the  Commissioners  of  the  Fortresse

of  Sofola,  Mosambique,  Ormus,  Malaca,  and  Macao,  and

in  Bengala  before  they  come  to,  or  enter  in  their  Offices,

Which  h that  every  one  of  them  doe  give  assurance  of  five  thousand

1250.  pound Cruzadoes, and the other Commissioners of the said

Which  is  coo Fortresses  or  Townes,  shall  give  every  one  assurance  of

pound  sterling,  two  thousand  Cruzadoes.

There  shall  be  in  the  Court  of  the  chiefe  Commissioner,
a  Chest  with  three  Keyes,  of  the  which  the  said  chiefe
Commissioner  shall  have  one,  and  the  most  ancient
Scrivener  or  Clarke  of  his  Court  another,  and  the  Treasurer
of  the  said  Court  shall  have  the  other,  in  the  which  all  the
money  of  the  men  deceased  which  in  the  said  parts  is  to
be  had,  shall  be  deposited,  and  it  shall  be  set  downe,  or
entred  into  a  Booke,  with  the  number  or  summe  thereof,
according  to  the  order  of  the  Decree  to  that  Case  apper-
tayning, the  which  Booke  shall  also  be  layd  in  the  same
Chest,  the  which  shall  not  be  opened,  but  when  any  Money

148

DON I HJ ART DE MENESES  ajb.

15S4.
is  to  be  put  therein,  and  it  shall  bee  entree!  in  the  said
Booke,  all  the  three  Officers  being  present,  aswell  at  the
receit  as  at  the  expences  of  the  said  money,  and  the  said
money  which  in  the  said  Chest  shall  be  deposited,  and  all
the  rest  which  doth  appertaine  to  the  said  Orphans  or  men
deceased,  the  said  chiefe  Commissioner  shall  not  consent
to  the  taking  out  of  the  Chest,  neither  that  it  be  lent  to
any  person,  but  only  it  shall  bee  sent  unto  this  Realme, fix.  of
by  Letters  of  exchange  as  the  custome  is,  or  hee  shall  portugal-
command  it  to  be  delivered  in  India, to  the  parties  to
whom  by  right  it  doth  belong  or  appertaine.

And  because  I  am  enformed  that  some  persons  dying,  to
whom  there  is  no  certaine  knowne,  the  Vice-Royes  doe
give  the  goods  of  the  said  men  deceased  to  some  persons,
whereof  there  doth  arise  many  inconveniences,  and  I  being
willing  to  provide  in  the  said  case,  doe  thinke  it  meete,
and  doe  command  that  from  hence-forward  the  said  Vice-
Royes  shall  not  give  the  said  goods  to  any  person  with
assurance  or  without,  and  that  they  shall  command  them
to  be  kept  in  good  safeguard,  according  to  the  order  of
mine  owne  goods,  sending  them  to  the  Kingdome  directed
to  the  Treasurer  of  the  Receit  of  the  Captives,  according
to  the  order  given  in  this  Case,  that  from  his  hand  it  may
bee  given  to  whom  it  doth  appertaine,  or  to  remayne  in
the  House  of  Receit,  having  no  Heires  according  to  the
Decree.

The  said  chiefe  Commissioner  shall  have  a  particular
care  to  know  when  the  shippes  of  this  Realme  shall  come
to  the  Citie  of  Goa,  and  also  of  the  other  ships,  that  come
to  the  said  Citie  from  other  parts  of  the  Estate  of  India,
and  if  there  dyed  in  them  any  persons,  and  the  order  that
was  kept  and  observed  in  the  making  of  the  Inventory  of
their  goods,  causing  it  all  to  be  set  in  good  safeguard
according  to  his  authoritie,  and  the  dutie  of  his  Office.

And  likewise  in  the  same  manner,  he  shall  have  a
particular  care  to  send  every  yeare  by  Letter  of  Exchange
in  the  said  ships  of  this  Kingdome,  all  the  money  of  the
said  deceased  men,  that  is  in  his  Office  directed  to  the

149

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1584.

Officers  to  whom  it  appertayneth  to  bee  delivered  by
vertue  of  my  Decrees,  that  in  this  Citie  it  may  be  given,
and  delivered  to  the  persons  to  whom  of  right  it  doth
appertaine.

And  also  he  shall  have  a  speciall  care  to  make  a  discharge
of  the  generall  Register  of  India,  of  the  wages  that  the
said  men  so  deceased  did  receive,  because  that  also  there
may  bee  a  note  set  in  their  Toll,  or  Register,  how  they  are
dead,  and  of  the  day  wherein  they  dyed,  that  they  may
receive  no  more  wages  for  them  of  my  goods  from  that
day,  and  to  doe  this,  hee  shall  peruse  the  said  Register
some  dayes,  that  he  shall  thinke  convenient  for  to  doe  the
said  diligences,  because  they  doe  import  very  much  to  my
service,  and  for  this  cause  I  command  the  Scriveners  or
Clerkes  of  the  said  generall  Check-roll  of  India,  to  bee
very  diligent,  and  to  make  all  these  Discharges,  and  to  set
Notes  in  the  Check-rolls  of  the  said  men  deceased,  as  by
the  order  of  the  said  Register  it  is  commanded  them.

The  said  chiefe  Commissioner  shall  take  no  notice  of
the  Appeales  that  doe  come  from  the  Judges  of  the
Orphans  of  the  Citie  of  Goa,  and  of  the  other  Fortresses
of  the  Estate  of  India,  and  from  the  other  Commissioners,
but  they  shall  goe  directly  to  the  Court  of  Relation,  to
the  Judges  of  Appeales,  where  they  shall  be  dispatched
according  to  the  order  of  the  said  Judges  of  Appeales.
Neither  shall  he  take  notice  of  the  Appeales,  which  by
Bils,  or  Letters  of  Testimoniall  shall  come  from  the
Fortresses  of  India,  but  they  shall  goe  directly  to  the
Judges  of  Appeales,  to  whom  the  Judgement  doth  apper-
taine, as  in  their  Title  is  declared.

Of  the  Interlocutorie  Sentences,  whereof  by  my
Ordinances  may  bee  appealed  by  Petition,  or  by  a  Bill  of
Complaint,  the  parties  may  according  to  the  forme  of  my
Ordinances  and  Decrees  appeale  to  the  Court  of  Relation,
and  the  Appeales  that  doe  passe  before  the  Judges  of  the
Orphans  of  the  Citie  of  Goa,  and  five  leagues  round  about
the  same,  shall  goe  directly  to  the  Court  of  Relation,
according  to  the  Commandement  that  I  commanded  in  the

15°

DON DUART DE MENKSKS

new  reformation  of  Justice,  and  the  said  Commissioner
shall  every  three  yeares  give  and  yeeld  an  account  for  the
importance  that  belongeth  to  the  knowing  how  they  doe
serve  and  proceed  in  their  Offices,  and  charges  according
to  Equitie  and  Justice.

And  because  it  is  convenient  that  there  be  a  man  that
have  care  of  the  Deeds,  Petitions,  &  of  the  other  writings,
that  do  remain  in  the  said  house  where  the  said  Court
is  kept,  and  also  of  the  1'ables,  and  order  of  the  said
house ;  I  think  it  meet,  and  do  command  that  from  hence-
forward a  man  of  trust,  and  confidence  be  Keeper  of  the
said  house,  such  as  the  Vice-Roy  shal  think  meet  for  that
purpose,  the  which  also  shal  be  Distributor  of  all  Deeds,
aswel  Criminal  as  Civil,  that  shall  come  to  the  said  house  of
Relation,  according  to  that  order  which  by  mine  Ordi-
nances and  Decrees  I  have  given  to  the  Distributor  of
the  Court  of  Requests,  and  he  shall  use  that  order  which
I  have  given  to  the  Porter  of  the  said  house,  and  the  said
Keeper  shall  also  serve  for  Receiver  of  money  for
condemnations,  for  the  expences  of  the  said  house,  for
the  which  Receit  he  shall  give  account  every  yeare,  the
which  account  shall  be  taken  of  him  by  one  particular
Judge,  whom  the  Vice-Roy  shall  nominate  for  that
purpose,  and  the  Vice-Roy  shall  nominate  the  person  that
shall  serve  in  this  Office,  that  I  may  confirme  the  same,
and  command  a  Patent  to  be  made  to  the  said  person
during  his  life.

And  it  is  my  wil  and  pleasure,  and  I  do  command  that
all  that  which  is  contayned  in  this  Decree,  be  fully  and
wholy  executed,  as  in  it  is  contayned,  and  that  no  other
be  used,  whatsoever  Lawes,  Decrees,  Warrants,  Patents,
Uses,  and  Customes  to  the  contrarie  notwithstanding,  the
which  shall  be  written  in  a  Booke,  the  which  shall  bee
alwayes  upon  the  Table  in  the  said  house  of  Relation,
and  the  same  shall  be  put  in  a  Chest,  which  shall  bee  in
the  said  house  in  very  good  keeping.

The  Judge  of  the  Citie  of  Goa,  shall  take  notice  in  the
said  Citie,  and  within  the  libertie  thereof,  by  Ausaon  nova,

151

A.M.
I584.

[II.  ix.  1518.]
A  note  of  the
Keeper,
Receiver,  and
Distributers
charges  belong-
ing to  the
Court  of
Relation.

A  note  of  the
authoritie
belonging  to  the
Judge  of  the
Citie  of  Goa.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1584.

Or  in  matters  0f Cases Civill and Criminall, which especially doth

of  ate  time. not appcrtaine to any other Judgement, and he shall

grant  an  Appeale  in  those  Cases,  that  are  not  contayned

within  his  authoritie  directly  to  the  house  or  Court  of

Relation.

And  he  shall  take  no  notice  of  the  Appeales  and
Complaints  that  doe  passe  before  the  ordinary  Judges  of
the  said  Citie,  and  the  bounds  thereof,  forasmuch  as  I
have  provided  that  the  said  Appeales  should  goe  directly
to  the  house  or  Court  of  Relation.

The  said  Judge  shall  have  authoritie  in  Landed  goods,
Which  is  five to  the  summe  of  eight  thousand  Reys,  and  in  moveable

pound  sterling.  prOOCfs to  the  summe  of  twelve  thousand  Reys.
Whichisseven  ° A , . ,, .  .... ,  .  J  .  .

pound  ten  shi/- ^n(* in a^ ^e rest> which in this provision is not
lings  sterling, declared,  hee  shall  use  the  authoritie  that  the  Justices  of
Criminall  and  Civill  Cases  of  the  Citie  of  Lisbon,  doe
use  according  to  the  Decree  and  Law  of  the  Reformation
of  Justice.

And  he  shall  only  use  this  order,  and  not  that  which
is  given  to  the  Licentiate,  George  Monteyro,  nor  of  any
other.
A  note  of  the  The  Judge  of  the  Orphans  of  the  Citie  of  Goa,  shall
autnontie  be  a  learned  man,  and  hee  shall  use  in  all  matters  that  order
Judge  of  the  an(^  rule>  which  by  my  Ordinances  is  given  in  the  Title  of
Orphans  in  the  Judges  of  the  Orphans,  and  hee  shall  beare  a  white
the  Citie  of  Rodde,  as  the  Judges  of  the  Orphans  of  the  *  Kingdome
~™?' . . doe  beare.

Portuo-all  -A-11^  °f  tne  Sentences  that  the  said  Judge  doth  give,

which  are  not  contayned  within  his  authoritie,  there  shall

be  an  Appeale  to  the  Judges  of  the  Court  of  Relation,

and  of  the  complaints  which  doe  passe  before the  said

w,.  ,  ■ ■ Judge  of  the  Orphans, the  parties  may  appeale to  the

pound  five Court  of  Relation,  according  to  the  order  of  the  new  Law

shillings  made  for  the  reformation  of  Justice.

sterling.  And  the  said  Judge  of  the  Orphans  of  the  Citie  of  Goa,

jli shall  have  authoritie  to  judge  in  matters  touching  move-
shillings  R^e  goods  to  the  summe  of  tenne  thousand  Reys,  and  in

sterling.  landed  goods  sixe  thousand  Reys.

152

DON DUART I)E MENESES  a.d.

1584.

The  said  Judges  shall  take  notice  in  the  places  of  their  TieCfyktf

Jurisdiction  by  Ausaon  nova,  of  all  the  Causes,  Civill  and  the  'u/e  or

Criminall,  and  the  Civill  Causes  which  are  processed  in  ^  '[[^4

their Court or Office, they shall judge definitively by  judges  of

themselves  alone,  giving  Appeales  in  those  Cases  which  Mozambique,

are not contayned in their  authoritie to the Court of  c^m"''  ^f9*

Relation,  and  the  Bils  of  complaint,  or  Bils  of  testimonie  /,**?*?•

11  r  e  • JDamaon,

that shall passe before them, of the Interlocutone  Bazam  and
Sentences,  whereof  by  authoritie  of  my  Ordinances  may  Chaul.
bee  appealed, shall  bee  past  in the  Court  of  Relation, 0r  ln  mattcr
and  not  before  any  chiefe  Judge  as  hitherto  it  hath  beene
used.

And  the  said  Judges  shall  processe  the  Criminall  Cases,
till  they  doe  conclude  them  by  themselves  alone,  and  when
they  are  concluded,  they  shall  give  knowledge  to  the
Captaines,  for  to  appoint  a  day  or  houre  certaine,  wherein
they  may  meete  in  the  Chamber-house  of  the  Citie,  that
they  may  give  a  dispatch  in  them,  and  in  those  places
where  there  is  no  such  Chamber,  the  Judges  shall  meete
the  Captaines  in  the  Fortresses,  or  Castles,  and  the  said
Captaine  being  agreed  with  the  Judge,  the  Sentence  shall
be  written  by  the  Judge,  whereunto  both  shall  set  their
hands,  in  the  which  shall  be  used  due  execution,  if  it  be
contayned  within  his  authoritie,  and  being  of  sundry
opinions,  the  sentence  shall  not  passe,  and  they  shal  take
a  third  man  unto  them,  the  which  shall  be  the  Over-seer
of  the  Kings  goods,  and  if  hee  be  not  in  place,  then  the
Factor  of  the  said  Fortresse.  And  if  it  chance  that  the
Over-seer  of  the  goods,  nor  the  Factor  for  some  hinderance
cannot  be  present,  then  shall  serve  in  their  place,  the  eldest
ordinary  Judge  that  doth  serve  that  yeare,  and  according
to  that  which  two  persons  shall  agree  upon,  the  Sentence
shall  be  written,  whereat  all  three  shall  set  their  hands,  that
due  execution  shall  bee  used  according  to  the  Order  above
rehearsed.

And  the  Criminall  Cases  that  are  not  contayned  within  [II.ix.1519.]
the  compasse  of  the  authoritie  of  the  said  ordinary  Judges,
they  shall  dispatch  them  by  themselves  alone,  giving  an

i53

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1584.

Appeale,  according  to  the  tenour  of  my  Ordinances  to  the
Court  of  Relation,  where  the  chiefe  Judge  of  Criminall
Cases  shall  dispatch  them  according  to  Justice.

And  the  said  Judges  shall  take  notice  of  the  Appeales
that  doe  passe  before  the  ordinary  Judges,  of  Cities  and
Fortresses  where  they  are  Judges,  and  shall  dispatch  them
by  themselves  alone,  whereof  they  shall  give  an  Appeale
to  the  Court  of  Relation,  in  such  Cases  as  doe  not  contayne
within  their  authoritie.

And  the  said  Judges  shall  take  knowledge  of  the
Appeales  of  the  ordinary  Judges,  as  the  Justices  of  the
Borders  may  doe,  and  they  may  also  plead  such  Cases,  as
the  said  Justices  by  the  authoritie  of  their  Offices  may
plead,  and  in  all  the  rest,  they  shall  use  the  Orders  that  the
Justices  of  the  Borders  doe  use,  in  Cases  wherein  they  may
be  applyed.

Also  they  may  passe  Letters  of  Protection,  in  such
cases,  as  the  Justices  of  the  Borders  may  passe  them,  and
the  Captaines  of  the  Fortresses  may  not  passe  or  grant
them,  neither  may  they  intermeddle  in  the  same  by  no
manner  of  meanes,  and  the  said  Judges  shall  not  grant
any  Letter  of  Protection  in  cases  of  death,  nor  in  other
cases  which  are  reserved  for  the  chiefe  Judge  of  Criminall
cases,  which  useth  the  authoritie  of  the  Corrigidor  of  the
Court,  except  the  Judges  of  Masambique,  Ormus,  Malaca,
Moluco,  and  Macao,  for  these  may  passe  Schedules,  or  Bils
of  Securitie,  a  Protection  in  all  cases,  and  in  those  wherein
the  Corrigidor  of  the  Court  doth  passe,  or  grant  them  in
the  Court  of  Relation  according  to  his  authoritie,  the  said
Judges  shall  passe  them  with  the  opinion  of  the  Captayne,
and  the  Over-seer  of  the  Kings  goods  together,  and  if
there  be  no  Over-seer  of  the  goods,  they  shall  dispatch
them  with  the  Factor,  and  if  it  chanceth  so  that  neither
the  Over-seer  nor  the  Factor  can  be  there,  by  some  let  or
hinderance,  then  the  most  ancient  ordinary  Judge  that  doth
serve  that  yeare,  shall  be  in  their  stead,  and  it  shall  be
sufficient  that  two  of  them  doe  agree  in  the  granting  or
denying  the  said  Letters  of  Protection,  and  the  Bils  of

J54

DON DUART DE MENESES

1584.

Controversie,  of  those  persons  to  whom  they  doc  passe  or

grant  the  said  Letters  of  Protection  shall  passe  before  the

said  Judges,  the  which  thus  to  bee  done,  I  thinkc  it  nicetc

and  convenient,  having  a  respect  to  the  distance,  that  is,

from  these  parts,  to  the  Citie  of  Goa,  where  the  Court  of

Relation  is,  and  the  great  vexation  that  the  parties  would

receive  in  going  to  demand  Justice  to  places  so  distant  and

far  re.

The  said  Judges  shall  have  authoritie  in  Criminall  cases
to the quantitie of fortie thousand Reys in moveable Wtkk'utwe*-
goods,  and  in  Landed  goods  to  the  quantitie  of  thirtie  Jj^  Pound
thousand Reys, and the Judges of the Fortresses of S^\J'ls  ilx.
Mosambique,  Ormus,  Malaca,  Moluco,  and  Macao,  shall  teen  pound
have  authoritie  in  the  said  Cases  to  the  quantitie  of  eightie  fifteen  shil-
thousand  Reys  in moveable  goods,  and  Landed  goods,  h"&'  s!er^$'
seventie  thousand  Reys,  and  of  those  cases  which  shall  p^nditerlinl
surmount  the  said  summe,  they  shall  appeale  to  the  Court which  is  forty
of  Relation,  because  they  are  not  contayned  within  their  three  pound
authoritie.  fifteene  shif-

And  the  said  Judges  with  the  Captaines  shall  have  that  gs  sUrltnZ-
authoritie  in  Criminall  cases,  which  the  Captaynes  of  my
Townes  or  Castles,  on  the  other  side  the  Sea  have,  as  is
declared  in  the  order  of  the  twentieth  Booke  tituled  27.
aswell  over  the  Portugals,  as  over  the  men  of  that  Coun-
trey,  and  the  Sentences  that  they  shall  give  in  those  cases
which  are  contayned  within  their  authoritie,  according  to
this  Decree,  and  the  said  Ordinance  shall  bee  executed
effectually  according  to  Justice.

And  if  any  case  contayned  in  the  said  Ordinance  do
happen  or  chance,  so  that  by  the  authority  of  the  same,
the  said  Judges  have  commission  to  prosecute  it  unto
death,  they  shall  not  execute  those  Sentences,  which  in
any  of  the  said  cases  they  do  pronounce,  if  the  parties  so
condemned  be  Esquires,  or  Gentlemen  of  my  houshold,  or
of  greater  qualitie  :  for  before  they  doe  execute  the  said
Sentences,  they  shall  make  it  knowne  to  the  Vice-Roy,  that
with  his  opinion  execution  may  be  given  to  the  said
Sentences.

J55

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1584.

And  the  said  Judges  shall  not  apprehend  any  person  for
any  complaints  of  whatsoever  qualitie  they  be  of,  without
Information  of  Witnesses,  according  to  the  new  Law  of
Reformation  of  Justice,  the  which  Law  they  shall  in  this
and  in  all  other  matters  accomplish  according  to  the  tenure
thereof.

They  shall  keepe  the  Court  dayes  that  the  Justices  of
the  Borders  are  bound  to  keepe,  and  this  in  the  publike
accustomed  places,  where  the  Justices  are  wont  to  keepe
them,  and  they  shall  not  keepe  them  in  their  houses.

And  the  said  Judges  shall  examine  all  such  matters,  as
the  Justices  of  the  Borders  are  bound  to  examine,  by  the
authoritie  of  my  Ordinances,  Lawes,  and  Decrees  of  these
Kingdomes  under  the  penalties  in  them  declared,  in  such
cases  as  they  may  be  applyed  unto.

They  may  also  provide  the  places  for  the  Officers
belonging  to  the  Justices  which  are  void,  according  to  the
order  of  the  Decree,  untill  the  Vice-Royes  doe  provide
them,  and  the  Captaynes  may  in  no  wise  provide  them,
the  which  Services  or  Places  shall  bee  provided  to  my
Servants,  or  to  other  well  deserving  persons,  and  their
deserts  beeing  equall,  my  Servants  shall  be  preferred.
[II. ix.  1 520.]  And  the  said  Judges  shall  bee  bound  to  command  every
one  of  the  Scriveners,  or  Clerkes  of  their  Court  to  make
a  Booke  wherein  they  may  write  all  the  cases  as  well
Civill  as  Criminall,  and  other  Bils  of  Appeale  or  Com-
plaint, and  all  other  Matters  whereof  the  said  Judges  doth
take  notice,  and  every  one  of  them  setting  downe  that
which  is  committed  to  his  charge  only,  as  well  of  those
things  which  they  shall  write  in  processe  for  the  observing
of  Justice,  as  of  these  Matters  that  are  betweene  partie
and  partie.

And  every  one  of  the  said  Judges  shall  have  a  Booke
noted  and  signed  by  them,  wherein  they  may  cause  all  the
forfeitures  of  money  that  are  applyed  to  the  expences  of
Justice,  or  to  any  other  place  according  to  the  order  of  the
Decree  in  that  case  provided.

And  the  said  Judges  may  set  penalties,  and  condemne

156

DON DUART DE MENESKS  ad.

1584.

in  them  to  the  quantitie  of  two  thousand  Keys,  for  the
charges  of  the  said  Justice,  without  any  Appeale  or  Com-
plaint of  the  said  Sentence.  The  which  expences  shall
bee  made  by  the  commandement  of  the  said  Judges,  and
not  of  the  Captaines,  and  in  the  Accounts  or  Residencies
that  the  Judges  doe  give,  there  shall  an  Account  bee  taken
of  them  of  the  said  money,  and  of  the  expences  of  the
said  Forfeitures,  that  notice  may  be  had,  if  they  have
commanded  the  said  Forfeitures  to  be  delivered  to  those
places  or  parties  whereunto  they  were  applyed,  and  the
expences  which  by  their  commandement  were  made,  if
they  were  well  and  lawfully  commanded.

And  the  said  Judges  may  not  bee  imprisoned  nor  arrested
during  the  time  of  their  charges,  for  any  Matter  whatso-
ever, Criminall  or  Civill,  except  it  bee  by  the  commande-
ment of  the  Vice-Roy,  or  the  Court  of  Relation.

And  because  it  importeth  much  to  the  keeping  of  good
Justice,  and  the  Administration  thereof,  that  the  said  Judges
have  the  Authoritie,  that  belongeth  to  the  charges  whereof
wee  have  given  them  Commission,  and  because  that  they
beeing  subject  to  the  Captaynes,  did  arise  many  incon-
veniences, and  they  were  oppressed  in  such  manner,  that
they  could  not  performe  their  Duties  with  that  Integritie,
and  libertie  that  belongeth  to  the  Service  of  God,  and
mine ;  And  I  beeing  willing  to  provide  in  this  Case,  doe
thinke  it  meete,  and  doe  command  that  the  said  Captaynes
may  have  no  Jurisdiction,  nor  any  Superioritie  over  the
said  Judges,  and  that  they  doe  not  intermeddle  with  any
thing  pertayning  to  their  Offices  or  charges,  any  thing  to
the  contrarie  notwithstanding.

And  if  the  said  Judges  doe  commit  any  crimes  or
excesses,  so  that  it  seemes  to  the  Captaynes  that  they
ought  to  advertize  the  Vice-roy  thereof,  they  shall  doe
it  by  their  Letters,  the  which  the  Vice-Roy  shall  command
to  be  perused  in  the  Court  of  Relation,  that  they  may
proceed  against  them  according  to  Justice.

And  the  said  Judges  shall  take  such  Fees  for  their
Assignements  as  the  Justices  of  the  Borders  may  take,  by

r57

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1584.

the Authoritie of  their Offices, and according to my

Ordinances.

And  when  the  said  Judges  shall  bee  absent,  or  hindered,
so  that  by  themselves  they  cannot  serve,  they  may
nominate  a  person  to  serve  in  their  place,  and  if  hee
chance  to  dye,  after  hee  hath  nominated,  the  person  so
nominated  shall  serve  untill  the  Vice-Roy  doe  provide
another,  and  if  hee  dyeth  without  nominating  any  person
to  serve  in  his  place,  the  Factour  of  the  Kings  Revenues
shall  serve  the  place,  the  which  persons  shall  serve  the
same  place,  all  the  time  that  the  Vice-Roy  doth  not
nominate  or  provide,  as  it  is  alreadie  declared,  and  the
Vice-Roy  shall  provide  a  man  of  Learning  and  Qualitie,
in  whom  the  said  charge  may  well  bee  employed,  the  which
persons  in  all  things  shall  use  the  Order  of  this  Decree.

And  it  is  my  will  and  pleasure  that  touching  the  Suspi-
tions  that  shall  bee  layd  to  the  said  Judges  in  such  Cases
as  by  reason  of  their  Offices  they  may  take  notice  of,  they
shall  keepe  this  Order  following,  to  wit,  when  any
Suspition  shall  bee  intended  against  them  by  any  partie
of  what  Degree  or  Qualitie  soever  he  be,  the  Judge  not
yeelding  himselfe  guiltie  of  the  Suspition,  the  Acts  thereof
shall  be  committed  to  the  ancientest  ordinary  Judge  that
served  the  yeare  before,  the  which  Judge  shall  determine
of  the  same,  according  to  Justice,  and  the  said  Judge  shall
proceed  alwayes  in  the  cause  wherein  the  said  Suspition
was  layd  against  him,  untill  it  be  finally  determined,  taking
to  himselfe  for  an  Adjunct,  one  of  the  Justices  of  that
present  yeare,  which  doe  serve  in  the  said  Fortresse  or
Garrison  where  hee  is  Judge,  not  beeing  suspected,  but  if
hee  bee,  hee  shall  take  another  Justice,  and  beeing  both
suspected,  hee  shall  take  the  ancientest  Alderman,  and  the
same  beeing  so,  hee  shall  take  the  second,  and  if  hee  bee
suspected,  hee  shall  take  the  third,  to  the  which  no  suspi-
tion can  bee  layd,  and  the  Acts  that  they  two  shall  make,
It  is  my  will  and  pleasure  that  thev  bee  in  force  and  power,
as  if  the  suspition  had  not  beene  layd  unto  the  said  Judee,
and  beeing  judged  that  hee  is  not  suspective,  hee  alone

iq8

DON DUART DE MENESES  ad

1584.

shall  proceed  in  the  Case,  as  hee  should  have  done  it,  if
the  suspition  had  not  beene  intended  against  him.  And
being  judged  to  bee  suspective,  in  such  a  Case  hee  shall
proceed  no  further,  and  there  shall  be  a  Judge  set  in  his
place,  that  may  take  notice  of  the  said  Case  according  to
the  forme  of  my  Ordinances.

And  it  is  also  my  will  and  pleasure,  that  when  a  suspi-
tion is  thus  laid  to  the  said  Judges,  in  whatsoever  cases,  as
well Criminall as  Civill ; and the  partie that  doth lay
the  said  suspition,  is  not  contented  with  his  owne  deposi-  [II.iTc.1521.]
tion,  but  is  willing  to  give  other  proofe  ;  hee  shall  deposite
foure  Cruzados  before  any  hearing  be  given  to  the  proofe, WUA  it  one
the which he shall forfeit to the poore Prisoners of  W '"ring.
the Jayle of that Garrison where he serveth, if it be
judged that the said Judge is not guiltie of the said
suspition.

The  said  Judges  shall  have  200000.  Revs  ordinarie  ^WcJ  u
every  yeare  paid,  in  the  Factorships  of  the  Garrisons  where  lz\:  P°un  s
they  doe  serve  by  the  Factors  thereof,  at  every  quarter  of
the  yeare,  the  which  the  Factors  shall  pay  them  of  the  first
Money  they  receive,  in  such  sort,  that  they  alwaies  bee
well  paid,  and  this  with  a  Certificate  of  the  Scrivener  or
Clerke  of  his  charge,  how  he  hath  served  the  time  of  the
quarter,  and  with  the  said  Certificate,  and  the  Acquittance
of  every  one  of  the  Judges,  the  Money  for  the  said
quarteredges,  shall  be  received  in  account  of  the  said
Factors  that  shall  pay  it  them,  and  the  Copy  of  this
Chapter  shall  be  registred  in  the  Office  of  the  said
Factors,  by  the  Clerke  of  the  said  Office,  the  which
Ordinarie  the  learned  Judges  shall  onely  receive.

And  the  said  Judges  shall  receive  allowance  of  victuals
for  two  men  that  doth  accompany  them,  and  doth  serve
with  them  in  matters  of  Justice,  the  which  shall  bee  paid
unto  them  at  their  quarters,  at  the  charo-es  of  mv  revenues,
as  hitherto  it  hath  beene  done  by  a  Certificate  of  the  said
Clerkes  of  the  Factorshippes,  wherein  thev  shall  declare
how  the  said  Judges  have  the  said  men,  and  how  they  doe
serve  with  them  in  the  manner  above  rehearsed. There

r59

A.D.
I584.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

follow  like  Rules  for  the  Judge  of  Macao,  and  the  King-
dome  of  China,  which  for  brevitie  I  have  omitted.

Here  followed  a  Collection  of  the  Warrants  made  in  the
Viceroyes  name  to  the  Captaines  of  all  the  severall  Forts
and  Places  of  command  in  all  the  Portugall  Indies,  whereby
they  had  commission  to  execute  their  charges,  and  to
receive  their  Wages,  Priviledges  and  Rights,  in  manner
there  by  severall  Warrants  for  each  particular,  to  each
Captaine  expressed  :  but  it  is  a  pretie  large  Volume,  and
here  for  the  length  omitted,  there  being  no  lesse  then  three
and  twentie  severall  Warrants  to  George  Meneses,  Cap-
taine of  Mosambique  and  Sofala,  touching  his  charge,
power,  and  priviledges ; and  likewise  for  the  rest.

§■ HI.

The  Receipt  of  the  Revenues  of  the  State  of  India  :
as  also  the  Expenses  publike  therein.

His  Citie  of  Goa  yeeldeth  to  his  Majesties  revenues
235102.  Pardoas,  foure  Tangas,  thirteene  Reys,
which make 70530853. Reys,  which makes in

English  money  fortie  foure  thousand  and  eightie  one
pounds,  fifteene  shillings  seven  pence  halfe  peny  farthing,
two  tenth  parts  of  a  penie  : in  this  manner,

To  wit,  30000000.  of  Reys,  for  1 00000.  Xerafins  of  the
rent  of  the  Custome-house,  one  yeare  with  another,  which
is  eighteene  thousand  seven  hundred  and  fiftie  pounds
sterling.

3000000.  Reys  for  10000.  Xerafins,  of  the  rent  of  the
Annaon  is  an  provisions  and  Ansiaon,  which  is  applyed  to  the  expenses
Herbe  that  0f  tne  Hospitall,  and  is  one  thousand  ei°;ht  hundred
maketh  drunk. seyentie  fiye  pounds  sterling.

1950000.  Reys  for  6500.  Xerafins,  of  the  rent  of  the
*Whkh  is  a  *  Betre,  which  is  one  thousand  two  hundred  and  eighteene
kind  of  Herbe  p0uncJs  fifteene  shillings  sterling.

1920000.  Reys  for  6400.  Xerafins,  for  the  rent  of  the
Spices,  which  is  one  thousand  and  two  hundred  pounds
sterling.

160

DON DUART DK MENESES  ajx

1584.

900000.  Reys,  for  3000.  Xerafins,  of  the  rent  of  the Certain  I  lands
Norasquas,  which  is  five  hundred  sixtie  two  pounds  ten  i0  called-
shillings  sterling.

1920000.  Reys,  for  6400.  Xerafins,  for  the  rent  of  the  Which  are
Parades  de  Salcete,  and  Bardes,  which  is  one  thousand  and  ftt,ine  Lan

1  11  1  1  •  belonging  to

two  hundred  pounds  sterling.  Salcete  and

675000.  Reys,  for  2250.  Xerafins,  for  the  rent  of  the  Bardes.
cloathes  made  of  Cotton-wooll,  which is  foure  hundred
twentie one pounds seventeene shillings sixe pence
sterling.

204000.  Reys,  for  680.  Xerafins,  for  the  rent  of  the
*  Catualia,  which  is  one  hundred  twentie  seven  pounds  ten  *Or  Cattell.
shillings  sterling.

153000.  Reys,  for  510.  Xerafins,  for  the  rent  of  the
Oyle  Mils,  which  is  ninetie  five  pounds  twelve  shillings
sixe  pence  sterling.

1860000.  Reys,  for  6200.  Xerafins,  for  the  rent  of  the
Chancery,  which  is  one  thousand  one  hundred  sixtie  two
pounds  ten  shillings  sterling.

1500000.  Reys,  for  5000.  Xerafins,  for  the  Shops  that
sell  Silke  and  Chamblet,  which  is  ninetie  three  pounds
ten  shillings  sterling.

2319289.  Reys,  for  7730.  Xerafins,  foure  Tangas,  fortie
nine  Reys,  for  the  duties  of  this  Hand,  which  is  one  thou-
sand foure  hundred  fortie  nine  pounds,  eleven  shillings,
one  penie,  and  two  twentieth  parts  of  a  penie  sterling.

304500.  Reys,  for  10 15.  Xerafins,  for  the  rent  of  the  [II.ix.1522.]
Silke,  which  is  one  hundred  and  ninetie  pounds  sixe  shil-
lings three  pence  sterling.

20225064.  Reys,  for  67416.  foure  Tangas,  foure  and
twentie  Reys,  for  the  duties  of  Salcete  Xerafins,  and
Bardes,  which  is  twelve  thousand  sixe  hundred  fortie  one
pounds,  five  shillings,  nine  pence  halfe  penie,  and  two
twentie  parts  of  a  penie  sterling.

Here  is  no  mention  made  of  the  Customes  of  Horses :

for  after  that  Biznaga  was  lost  there  come  few  from  Ormus,

and  the  most  part  of  them  goe  to  Chaul,  where  declaration

is  made  of  what  they  may  yeeld,  and  those  that  doe  come

ix  161  l

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1584.

to  Goa,  now  Biznaga  is  lost,  may  import  10000.  Pardaos
of  Gold,  for  36000000.  Reys  sterling,  twentie  two  thou-
sand two  hundred  and  fiftie  pounds.

Sofala  Fortresse  hath  no  rent  for  his  Majestie,  but  some
Ivory  which  is  ransomed  there,  which  now  is  verie  little ;
and  when  it  is  ransomed,  it  is  spent  in  the  said  Fortresse,
having  ransomed  in  times  past  much  Gold  and  Ivorie  in
it,  whereof  the  said  Fortresse  was  provided,  and  also  the
Fortresse  of  Mosambique  :  This  Fortresse  is  separated,
and  is  a  governance  by  it  selfe.

Mosambique  Fortresse  hath  no  rent  for  his  Majestie,
and  some  ransome  of  Ivorie  from  Dio,  is  also  spent  in  the
said  Fortresse,  without  any  comming  thereof  to  India  for
the  Kings  revenue,  as  before  it  did,  it  was  sustained  with
the  provision  that  went  to  it  from  India ;  the  which  now
is  not  done,  because  these  yeares  past,  it  is  separated  from
the  government  of  India.

Ormus  Fortresse  yeeldeth  to  the  King  every  yeare
170000.  Pardaos  de  Tangas,  which  is  51000000.  of  Reys,
at  300.  Reys  the  Pardao,  and  is  thirtie  one  thousand  eight
hundred  seventie  five  pounds  sterling,  counting  one  yeare
with  another,  which  is  the  rent  of  the  Custome-house  that
was  given  to  his  Majestie,  with  some  other  duties  that  are
paid  to  him,  as  in  this  Title  is  declared,  &c.

Dio  Fortresse  yeeldeth  to  his  Majesties  revenues
1 00000.  Pardaos  of  Gold,  which  36000000.  of  Reys,  at
360.  Reys  the  Pardao,  &  is  twentie  two  thousand  five
hundred  pounds  sterling,  withall  the  rents  of  Bazar,  and
the  great  Custome-house,  and  of  Gogola,  and  the  Store-
house of  Damaon,  which  also  entreth  in  this  summe.

Damaon  Fortresse,  with  the  Countries  annexed  to  it,
doe  yeeld  to  the  King  my  Master  every  yeare  42933.
Pardaos  of  Gold,  which  is  15455880.  Reys,  and  is  nine
thousand  sixe  hundred  ninetie  nine  pounds  eighteene
shillings  sixe  pence  sterling.

Bacaim  Fortresse,  with  the  Lands  annexed  to  it,  yeeldeth
to  his  Majestie  every  yeare  11 5334.  Pardaos  of  Gold,
every  Pardao  containing  foure  Larins,  of  ninetie  Reys  per

162

DON DUAHT DE MENESES

Larin,  being  so  currant  in  the  Countrey,  which  makes
41520240.  Reys,  which  is  twentie  five  thousand  nine
hundred  and  fiftie  pounds  three  shillings  sterling.

The  Pragana  of  Manora  and  Aceri,  yeeldeth  to  the  King
every  yeare  3898.  Pardaos  of  Gold,  69.  Reys,  which  makes
1403349.  Reys,  which  is  eight  hundred  seventie  seven
pounds  one  shilling  ten  pence  farthing,  and  two  twentie
parts  of  a  penie  sterling.

Chaul  Fortresse  yeeldeth  to  his  Majestie  30629.  Par-
daos, one  Tanga,  which  is  9188760.  Reys,  and  is  five
thousand  seven  hundred  fortie  two  pounds  nineteen  shil-
lings six  pence  sterling  every  yeare.  To  wit,  7000.
Pardaos  of  tribute,  and  16000.  Pardaos  custome  of  Horses,
one  yeare  with  another  going  to  the  said  Fortresse,  and
7629.  Pardaos,  and  one  Tanga  for  rents,  and  this  besides
other  rent  of  the  Catunias  and  Neale  of  Cambaya  ;  and  of
some  goods  from  Ormus,  the  which  because  it  is  a  new
thing,  it  is  not  yet  knowne  what  it  may  be  worth.

Onor  in  the  contract  of  peace,  which  the  Vice-roy  Don
Luiz  de  Taide,  made  with  the  Queen  of  Garsopa,  whose
the  said  Fortresse  was,  she  bound  her  selfe  to  give  to  this
Estate  every  yeare,  five  hundred  Candil  of  Pepper,  con-
taining three  hundred  and  three  quarters  weight  every
Candill,  which  is  187500.  pounds  waight,  at  the  rate  of
five  and  twentie  Pardaos  of  Gold,  and  foure  Tangas  the
Candill,  which  is  9240.  Reys,  and  makes  in  all  4620000.
Reys,  which  is,  two  thousand  eight  hundred  eightie  seven
pounds  ten  shillings  sterling  every  yeare,  the  which
heretofore  was  not  paid,  because  of  the  warre  that  hath
beene  with  this  Estate  and  them.

This  Fortresse  yeeldeth  also  twentie  Fardaos  of  Rice,
of  some  Lands  and  Vargeas,  which  went  away  or  did  rebell
with  the  said  duties.

The  Chatins  of  Barcelor  doe  pay  to  his  Majestie  for
tribute,  five  hundred  Fardaos  of  Rice  every  yeare,  the  which
his  Majesties  Factor  doth  recover,  and  are  worth  120000.
Reys,  which  is  seventie  five  pounds  sterling.

The  Custome-house  of  Mangalor  Fortresse,  yeeldeth  one

163

A.D.

'5'4-

Pragana  is  a
Totune.

Which  are  a
kind  of
Pantados.

Or  Horse
loads.

Vargeas  are
plaineE  arable
grounds  by  the
Water  side.
Chatins  are
Merchants.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

(584.
Pagodcs,  a  yeare  with  others,  foure  hundred  Pagodes,  and  also  one
pkceofthat  hundred  sixtie  two  Fardaos  of  Rice,  which  the  King  of
them  with  an  Banguell  doth  pay,  and  are  recovered  of  Vargeas,  or
Image  of  the  Earable  grounds,  which  were  and  are  saved,  all  the  which
Devill  upon  it.  is  worth  218880.  Reyes,  which  is  one  hundred  thirtie  sixe
pounds  sixteene  shillings  sterling.

Cananor  Fortresse  yeeldeth  nothing  to  his  Majestie  :
they  gather  in  it  a  little  Ginger  for  the  ships  of  the  Realme,
although  now  it  is  very  little,  because  of  the  warres  of
Malavar  ;  notwithstanding,  it  is  gathered  for  such  persons,
as  doe  send  to  have  it  gathered.

The  Custome-house  of  the  Citie  Cochin  which  now  is

erected,  may  yeeld  to  his  Majestie  one  yeare  with  another

50000. Pardaos Xerafins, which maketh 1 5000000. of

Reys,  which  is  nine  thousand  three  hundred  seventie  five

pounds  sterling.

[II.ix.1523.] The  rent  of  the  Fortresse Manar,  is  worth 133460.

if  huh  are  30.  FailoeS5  which  are  4003800.  Reys,  the  which  his  Majestie

ong  hath  in  the  said  Hand,  and  in  other  Ports  neighbouring

there-about,  and  of  tribute  which  the  King  of  Jasanapatan,

and other Lords do pay, which is 2502  1. 7  s. 6  d.

sterling.

Seylan  the  Madune,  doth  pay  every  yeare  for  tribute  to
his  Majestie,  300.  Bares  of  Cynamon,  containing  300.
weight  the  Bare,  which  is  90000.  weight,  at  the  rate  of  ten
Pardaos  the  Bare,  which  is  900000.  Reys,  and  it  is  562  1.
10  s.  sterling.

Malaca  Fortresse  yeeldeth  to  his  Majestie  every  yeare,

60000.  Pardaos  of  Gold,  which  is  21600000.  Reys,  and

J  piece  of I35°°l-  sterling: and  this  is  understood  one  yeare  with

Mony  so  called,  another.

Fardo,  a  horse Maluco,  it  was  shewen  by  the  esteeme  or  valuation  of

'°a.  , .  the  rent,  that  this  Fortresse  did  pay  for  the  thirds  of  all  the

maluco  is  now ^,  1 • 1  1  t 1-  1 r  -i  1

possessed  by Cloves  that  is  brought  to  India; and  for  tribute,  that  it

the  Spanish was ioooo. Ollas,  and 500.  Fardos  of  Sagun,  which  is

and  Dutch. worth  300000.  Reys,  which  is  187  1.  10  s.  sterling.

164

DON DUART DE MENESES  a.d.

1584.

The  inclosing  of  all  the Rent  of  the  Estate
of  India.

THe  rent  of  the  State  of  India,  amounteth  to
27 1 86 1 762.  Reys,  as  by  the  receipts  appeareth,  which
is  1 699 1 3  1.  12  s.  10  d.  q  ;  .-*V  of  a  peny,  whereof  is  abated
24000000.  of  Reys,  which  is  15000.  1.  sterling,  that  may
bee  short  in  this  account,  of  all  the  Fortresses  of  the  State,
being  among  Heathen  people,  and  for  whatsoever  occasion
there  be,  there  are  breaches  and  losses  for  want  of  resorting
to  the  Custome-houses,  and  thereby  the  said  rents  are  not
fully  recovered.

And  there  remaines  cleere  all  charges  borne,  247861762.
Reys,  which  makes  in  Pardaos  Xerafins,  which  is  the  Money
that  is  currant  in  this  Citie  of  Goa,  after  the  rate  of  300
Reys,  per  Xerafin  826205.  Pardaos,  foure  Tangas,  twentie
two  Reys,  which  is  154913I.  12  s.  00  d.  q.  ;  -i-V  part  of  a
penie  sterling.

And  besides  the  rent  that  the  State  doth  yeeld  to  the
King  my  Master,  there  is  another  rent  arising  of  one  in
the  hundred,  and  of  Imposition,  of  provisions  of  the
Fortresses,  which  are  towards  the  North :  the  which
applyed  for  the  fortification  of  the  Fortresses  where  it  is
gathered,  which  may  amount  one  yeare  with  another,  to
80260.  Pardaos,  which  24078000.  Reys,  which  is  15048  1.
15  s.  sterling.

To  wit,  18000.  Pardaos  for  one  presentment  in  the
Custome-house  of  Ormus,  which  is  5400000.  Reys,  and
makes  3375  1.  sterling.

Item,  9700.  Pardaos,  which  is  2910000.  Reys,  arising
of  \  in  the  hundred  of  the  Custome-house  of  Dio,  which
is  1 8 18.  1.  15  s.  sterling.

Item,  13000.  Pardaos  of  one  in  the  hundred,  and
Imposition  of  the  provision  of  the  Fortresse  of  Damaon,
which  is  3900000.  Reys,  and  makes  2437  1.  10  s.  sterling.

Item,  1000.  Pardaos,  of  one  in  the  hundred,  and  the
Imposition  of  the  provision  of  the  Fortresse  of  Bacaim,
with  3000000.  and  makes  187  1.  10  s.  sterling.

165

A.D.
1584.

Every
Cruzado  is
$s.  sterl.
Which  is
100  /.  weight
every  Kintall.

Viz.  of
Portugal.
Which  is  1  3/.
gd.  nine  six-
tieth parts  of  a
peny  sterling.

Which  is
3000  pounds
sterl.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Item,  16560.  Pardaos,  of  one  in  the  hundred,  and  of
the  Imposition  of  the  provisions  of  the  Fortresse  of  Chaul,
which  is  4968000.  Reys,  and  makes  3105  1.

With  the  13000.  Pardaos,  of  the  one  in  the  hundred
of  the  Custome-house  of  this  Citie  of  Goa ;  which  is
3900000.  Reys,  as  it  did  appeare  by  the  accounts  of  the
Officers,  and  other  informations  thereunto  belonging,
which  is  2437  1.  10  s.  sterling.

A  Copie  of  all  the  ordinarie  expences  that  are  made
in  the  Citie  of  Goa,  at  his  Majesties  charges.

THe  Vice-roy  of  India,  hath  for  his  Ordinarie  by  War-
rants from  his  Majestie,  7339550.  Reys,  for  18348.
Cruzados,  350.  Reys,  which  is  4587  1.  4  s.  4  d.  ob.  at  the
rate  of  400.  Reys,  per  Cruzado  ;  to  wit,  8000.  Cruzados,
which  2000  1.  of  his  Ordinary  in  ready  Mony,  and  the
10348.  Cruzados,  350.  Reys,  that  the  600.  Kintals  of
Pepper  free,  and  without  waste,  being  sold  for  ready
Money,  are  worth  after  the  rate  of  40.  Cruzados  every
Kintall,  as  they  do  give  for  it  in  the  Realme  ;  and  they
doe  amount  to  12000.  Cruzados,  whereof  there  is  abated
660450.  Reys,  which  the  said  600.  Kintals  of  Pepper  are
worth,  which  must  bee  bought  for  his  owne  Money,  and
being  abated  after  the  rate  of  1000.  Reys,  f.  of  a  Rey  the
Kintall,  which  is  the  price  that  is  set  downe  in  the  Factor-
ship of  Cochin,  there  remaines  cleere  10348.  Cruzados,
350.  Reys  for  the  said  Pepper,  the  which  do  make  with
the  said  Ordinary  in  readie  Money  18348.  Cruzados,  350.
Reys,  which  doe  amount  to  the  said  7339550.  Reys,  other-
wise hee  shall  have  that  which  by  his  Warrants  is  granted
unto  him,  &c.

There  is  also  given  to  the  said  Vice-roy  1 2000.  Cruzados
every  yeare,  towards  the  Table  of  Gentlemen,  and  Pen-
sions of  old  Souldiers  which  have  served,  which  is  worth
4800000.  Reys,  as  the  Earle  Don  Lewis,  Don  Francisco
Mascarennas,  and  the  other  Vice-royes  and  Governours
heretofore  have  had,  &c.

The  Secretary  of  India  that  goeth  with  the  Vice-roy,

166

DON DUART DE MENESES  a.d.

.584.

hath  by  Warrant  from  his  Majestic  400000.  Kevs  Ordi-

narie, which is 250  1. sterling, by warrant from his

Majestie :  also  hee  hath  300000.  Reys  for  the  dispatch  of  [II.ix.15a4.]

the  Chests,  which  is  187  1.  10  s.  sterling,  and  30000.  Reys °  "•'',<>/

for  his  lodgings,  which  is  18.  1. 15  s.  and  is  in  all  456  1.

5  s.  sterling  a  yeare.

The  Ensigne  Generall  of  the  Kings  Standard,  which
also  goeth  with  the  said  Vice-roy,  hath  ordinary  40000.
Reys,  which  is  25  1.  sterling.

The  Captain  of  the  Guard  of  the  said  Vice-roy,  hath
84000.  Reys  ordinary,  which  is  52  1.  10  s.

And  also  144000.  Reys  for  his  lodging,  which  is  9  1.
which  is  in  all  61  1.  10  s.  sterling.

The  chiefe  Physician  which  goeth  with  the  said  Vice-
roy, hath  44800.  Reys  ordinary,  which  is  28  1.  sterling.

The  Apothecarie  that  goeth  with  the  said  Vice-roy,  and
doth  serve  in  his  Army  by  Sea  and  by  Land,  and  is  bound
to  make  and  provide  the  Armies  and  Fortresses  of  things
necessary  for  Phisicke,  hath  24000.  Reys,  which  is  1 5  1.
sterling.

The  Barber  that  goeth  with  the  said  Vice-roy,  and
serveth  in  the  Army  by  Sea,  and  by  Land,  hath  ordinary
19800.  Reys,  which  is  12  1.  7  s.  6  d.

Two  Chaplains  that  doe  serve  the  said  Vice-roy,  have
each  24000.  Reys,  which  is  30  1.  betweene  them.

The  Sergeant  of  the  Court  which  goeth  with  the  said
Vice-roy,  and  serveth  before  him,  hath  30000.  Reys,  which
is  1 8  1.  15  s.  sterling.

The  Interpreter  of  the  State,  hath  50000.  Reys  in  this
manner  36000.  which  he  had  before,  and  14000.  which
were  granted  him  by  the  Earle  Don  Lewis,  in  the  duties
belonging  to  the  Custome-house  for  an  Arabian  Horse,
which  is  3 1  1.  5  s.  sterling.

Also,  he  hath  by  another  Warrant  of  the  said  Earle
every  yeare  17280.  Reys,  for  a  Clerke  that  serveth  him,
which  is  10  1.  16  s.  and  is  in  all  42  1.  1  s.  sterling.

The  said  Vice-roy  hath  for  to  serve  and  accompany  him
in  his  Guard,  60.  men  Portugals,  to  the  which  are  payed

167

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

.584.

every  moneth  1200.  Reys  a  man,  which  is  15  s.  sterling:
to  wit,  60.  Reys  for  wages,  like  a  man  of  Armes,  and  600.
Reys  for  their  provision,  which  in  all  do  amount  unto
864000.  Reys,  which  is  45  1.  every  moneth  among  them
all,  and  makes  540  1.  ster.  every  yeare.

The  said  Vice-roy  hath  ten  Trumpetters  for  to  serve
with  him,  of  the  which  every  one  is  to  have  for  his  pro-
vision and  wages  21600.  Reys  per  Annum,  to  1200.  for  his
wages,  and  600.  for  his  provision  every  moneth,  which  is
13  1.  10  s.  sterling  ; and  is  in  all  135  1.  sterling.
Or  Kettle The  said  Vice-roy  hath  foure  Musicians ; to  wit,  one
or  Dumb- Master  Portugues,  and  three  Servants  of  his,  which  have
rayen every moneth as followeth ; the Master 500. Reys
wages,  or  whatsoever  else,  and 600.  Reys  for  his  pro-
vision and  his  Servants,  600.  Reys  every  moneth,  which
is  in  all  34800.  Reys,  and  makes  21  1.  15  s.  sterling.

There  is  moreover  given  for  allowance  of  the  said  men
of  Armes  for  his  Guard,  Trumpetters  and  Musicians
756820.  Reys  every  yeare,  after  the  rate  of  28.  Reys  a
day  to  every  one,  wherein  is  reckoned  the  Captaine  of  the
Guard,  at  84.  Reys  by  the  day ;  and  the  Sergeant  and  the
Appointer  at  $6.  Reys  by  the  day,  which  is  in  all  473  1.
3  d.  sterling,  besides  the  Captaine  Sergeant  and  Appointer,
which  amounteth  to  70560  Reys,  which  is  44 1.  2  s.  sterling.

There  is  also  given  every  yeare  for  the  apparelling  of
the  said  men  of  the  Guard,  Trumpetters  and  Musicians,
240000.  Reys,  which  is  1  50  1.  sterling.

The  chiefe  Ensigne-maker  which  now  is  in  this  State,
hath  by  a  Warrant  from  his  Majestie  320000.  Reys  ordi-
nary every  yeare,  which  is  200  1.  sterling.

There  is  given  by  Warrant  from  his  Majestie,  to
Augustin  de  Soto  Maior,  that  was  sent  to  these  parts  for
chiefe  Master  of  the  Mynes  360000.  Reys  ordinarie  every
yeare,  which  is  225  1.  sterling.

There  serveth  in  this  Court  at  this  present,  by  a  War-
rant of  the  Vice-roy,  a  Harbenger  of  the  Court,  which
hath  every  yeare  ordinary  30000.  Reys,  which  is  18  1.  15  s.
sterling.

168

DON DUAKT DE MENESES  a.,

i$84.

And  hec  serveth  also  for  a  Receiver  of  the  house  ot
Lodgings  of  the  said  Vice-roy,  for  the  which  he  hath
20000  Keys  ordinary  every  yeare,  which  is  12  1.  10  s.  and
in  all  is  3 1  1.  5  s.  ster.

The  ordinary  of  the  Vice-roy  and  Officers,  before
rehearsed,  amounteth  to  16083450.  Reys, which  is  10052  1.
3s.  id.  ob.  sterling.

Officers  belonging  to  Justice.

THe  Chancellor  of  India  hath  300000.  Reys  ordinary,
and  1 00000.  that  were  granted  him  by  a  Warrant
from  his  Majestie,  and  18000.  Reys  for  his  lodging,  which
amounteth  in  all  to  418000.  Reys,  which  is  261  1.  5  s.
sterling.

The  chiefe  Judge  of  Criminall  Causes,  hath  300000.
Reys  ordinary,  and  1 00000.  Reys  granted  him  by  his
Majesties  Letter,  and  30000  Reys  for  his  lodging,  which
in  all  amounteth  to  430000.  Reys,  which  is  268  1.  15  s.
sterling.

The  chiefe  Judge  of  Civill  Causes  hath  300000.  Reys
ordinary,  and  1 00000.  Reys  that  were  granted  him  by  his
Majesties  warrant,  and  18000.  Reys  for  his  lodging,  which
amounteth  in  all  to  418000.  Reys,  which  is  261  1.  5  s.
sterling.

The Judge of the Crowne matters, and of matters
touching  the  Kings  revenues,  hath  300000. Reys  ordinarie,  [II.ix.1525.]
and  1 00000.  reys  that  were  granted  him,  by  his  Majesties
warrant,  and  18000.  reys  for  his  Lodging,  which  is  in  all
418000.  reys,  and  is  261  1.  5  s.  ster.

The  chiefe  Judge  of  Wills  and  Testaments  of  India  ;
hath  ordinarie  every  yeere  of  his  Majesties  Revenues
150000.  reys,  and  1 00000.  reys  that  were  granted  him  by
his  Majesties  warrant,  and  also  18000.  reys  for  his  Lodg-
ings, and  the  other  150000.  reys  that  want  for  the  300000.
reys,  he  is  to  have  them  of  the  Goods  of  them  that  are
deceased,  and  if  it  doth  not  amount  to  so  much,  it  shall
be  accomplished  at  his  Majesties  charge,  shewing  how  he
is  not  satisfied,  and  it  amounteth  in  all  to  261  li.  5  s.  ster.

169

A.D.

1584.

Viz.  of

merchandise.
Which  are
gifts  or
presents.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  Kings  Atturney  hath  300000.  reys  ordinarie,  and
100000.  augmented  by  his  Majesties  warrant,  and  18000.
for  his  Lodgings,  which  is  261  1.  5  s.  ster.

There  serveth  at  this  present  in  the  Court  of  Releases
three  Judges,  to  wit,  the  Bachelor,  Andres  Fernandes  ;  the
Doctor,  Luiz  de  Gois  de  la  cerda ;  and  the  Bachelor,
Simon  Pereira ;  to  the  which  is  given  every  yeere
1  104000.  reys,  after  the  rate  of  368000.  reys  to  every
one,  which  is  690  1.  sterling  in  all,  1 00000.  reys  augmented
by  his  Majesties  warrant,  entring  in  this  account.

The  Judge  of  the  Citie  of  Goa  hath  1 00000.  reys  ordin-
arie, which  is  62  1.  10  s.  ster.

The  Bayliffe  of  this  Citie  hath  20000.  reys  ordinarie,
which  is  12  1.  10  s.  ster.

The  Serjeant  hath  20000.  reys  ordinarie,  which  is  12  1.
10  s.  ster.

The  Clerke  or  Notarie  of  the  Chancerie  hath  30000.
reys  ordinarie,  which  is  1 8  1.  1 5  s.  ster.

The  Kings  Sollicitor  hath  30000.  reys  ordinarie,  which
is  1 8  1.  15  s.  ster.

The  Jayler  hath  19200.  reys  ordinarie,  which  is  12  1.
ster.

The  Porter  of  the  Chancerie  hath  10800.  reys  for  his
wages  and  provision,  which  he  receiveth,  as  a  man  of
Armes,  and  is  6  1.  15  s.  ster.

The  Porter  and  Keeper  of  the  Court  of  Relation,  and
Distributer  of  the  Bills  of  Appeales,  hath  1 00000.  reys
ordinarie,  which  is  62  1.  ster.

The  Bayliffe  of  the  Suburbs  without  the  Citie,  hath
20000.  reys,  which  is  12  1.  10  s.  ster.

The  wages  of  the  Officers  above  written,  amounteth
to  3824000.  reyes,  which  is  2390  1.  ster.

Officers  belonging  to  the  Citie  of  Goa ; her  For-
tresses and  Pases,  or  Ports.

THe  Captayne  of  this  Citie  hath  600000.  reys  ordinarie
every  yeere,  and  also  86400.  reys  for  his  Lodgings,
and  also  622260.  reys,  in  satisfaction  of  the  Bares,  which

170

DON DUART DE MENKSKS  a.d.

1584.

before  they  had  by  Warrants  of  the  Vice-royes  and  Gover-
nours  of  this  Estate:  and  moreover,  there  is  given  him
150000.  reys  for  the  Chitos,  which  they  gave  to  the  Mares,
strangers,  which  summe  amounteth  all  to  1458660.  reys
by  the  yeere,  which  amounteth  to  91 1  1.  13  s.  3  d.  sterling
every  yeere.

The  chiefe  Baylife  of  this  citie  hath  1 00000.  reys
ordinarie  every  yeer,  which  makes  62  1.  10  s.

The  Master  of  the  Ports  of  the  Hand  of  Goa,  hath Vote  that  those
100000.  reys  ordinarie,  which  makes  62  1.  10  s.  sterling. r^^^e  cer-

The  Captayne  of  the  Castle  of  Pangin,  hath 50000. where  men  pay
reys  ordinarie,  which  is  3 1  1.  5  s.  ster.  a  certayne

The  Captayne  of  the  Castle  of  Maroa,  hath  40000.  reys  tribute  or  toll,
ordinarie,  which  is  25  1.  ster.  tiJport"

The  Captayne  of  the  Castle  of  the  Paso  sequo,  hath  Qr  jr-te  pace
40000.  reys  ordinarie,  which  is  25  1.  sterling.  or  Port.

The  Captayne  of  the  Castle  of  Benestarin,  hath  60000.
reys  ordinarie,  which  is  37  1.  10  s.  ster.

The  Portugal  Notarie  of  the  Hand  of  this  Citie,  hath
18000.  reys  ordinarie,  which  is 1 1  1.  5  s.  sterling.

The  Constable  of  this  Citie,  and  of  the  Powder  house
of  the  same,  hath  30200.  reys  ordinarie,  which  is  18  1.
17  s.  6  d.  ster.

In  the  said  Powder  house  there  be  three  Constables
which  have  their  wages  paid  them,  which  doth  amount  to
43200.  reys,  at  the  rate  of  14400.  reys  to  every  one,  by  a
warrant  of  the  Earle  Don  Francisco  Mascarennas,  which
is  to  every  one  9  1.  sterling,  and  is  in  all  27  1.  ster.

The  Armourer  which  is  bound  to  keepe  shop  in  this
Citie,  and  to  goe  in  the  Armie  with  the  Vice-roy  when  he
goeth  abroad,  hath  his  wages  and  provision  as  a  man  of
Armes,  or  a  Gunner,  which  is  14400.  reys,  and  it  is  9  1.
ster.

The  foure  Castles  of  Pangin,  Maroa,  Paso  sequo,  and
Benestarin,  hath  every  one  a  Constable,  which  shall  con-
tinue, and  watch  in  the  said  Castles,  and  they  have  their
wages  and  provision,  as  the  Gunners  have,  and  400.  reys
more  by  the  moneth  to  every  one  after  this  rate,  every  one

171

A.D.

1584.

Ports  or
Passages.
Note  that  he
maketh  here
mention  but
of  six,  and  in
the  summe  is
allozved  for
ten.

[II.ix.1526.]

*T he  particu-
lar Officers,
Clerkes,
Factors,
Receivers,
&c.  are  for
brevitie
omitted,  as
also  in  those
that  follow.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

hath  1600.  reys  every  moneth,  which  is  19200.  reys  to
every  one  a  yeere,  and  is  48  1.  sterling  in  all,  after  the  rate
of  12  1.  sterling  every  one.

There  bee  in  this  Hand  of  Goa  ten  Tandares  and  Clerkes,
for  to  keepe  the  passage  thereof,  to  whom  is  paid  the
wages  and  provision  of  a  man  at  Armes,  serving  the  said
Offices,  and  also  their  dwellings,  to  wit,  such  as  are  allowed
to  have  them,  the  which  are  these  that  follow.

The  Keeper'  of  the  pace  of  Pangin,  and  the  Clerke
thereof.  The  Keeper  of  the  pace  of  Rebandar,  and  the
Clerke  thereof.  The  Keeper  of  the  pace  of  Dangin,  and
the  Clerke  thereof.

The  Keeper  of  the  pace  of  Benestarin,  and  the  Clerke
thereof.  The  Keeper  of  the  Pace  of  Carambolim,  and
the  Clerke  thereof.  The  Keeper  of  the  Pace  of  Gacarim,
and  the  Clerke  of  the  same  pace.

The  which  doth  amount  to  120000.  reys,  making
account  to  every  one  at  the  rate  of  12000.  reys  by  the
yeere,  which  is  in  all  1 5  1.  sterling.  Note  that  the  Clerkes
are  contained  within  the  said  wages.

All  the  expences  that  is  made  with  the  Officers  of  the
Citie  of  Goa ;  her  Fortresses  and  Paces,  or  Ports,  as  are
above  set  downe,  amounteth  to  2151260.  reys,  which  is
1345  1.  3  s.  5  d.  sterling.

The  expences  laid  out  with  the  Officers  *  above  named,
belonging  to  the  Kings  Rents  and  Revenues,  is  2530200.
reys,  which  is  in  all  1581  1.  7  s.  6  d.  sterling.

All  the  expences  made  with  the  Officers  belonging  to
the  River  above-rehearsed,  1436960.  reys,  which  makes
898  1.  2  s.  ster.

All  the  expences  disbursed  on  the  Officers  of  Accounts
above-rehearsed,  amounteth  to  2581720.  reys,  which  is
1594  1.  10  s.  6  d.  ster.

All  the  expences  disbursed  in  the  custome  House,
commeth  to  970240.  reys,  which  is  606  1.  8  s.  sterling.

All  the  wages  and  dwellings,  which  are  paid  to  the  men
in  ordinarie  to  the  Vice-roy,  and  other  Officers  of  this
Estate,  with  the  Kinsmen  of  the  Captayne,  Commissioner

172

DON DUART DE MENESKS  a.i,

1584.

of  the  holy  b  Mercy,  and  one  Alderman,  which  are  Gentle-  ^Kote  that  the

men,  and  in  the  provision  of  the  Secretaries  and  Clerkes, 7.  *?*?  u
*  .  c ,  a  kind  of

amount  to  4127880.  reys,  at  the  rate  or  60000.  reys  every  /yro//j^^c^

Gentleman,  and 1 2000.  reys  to  the  other  Souldiers,  and  which  serveth

the provision for the Secretaries Clerkes, at thirteene  to  6uy  stuh  as

Tangas  every  moneth,  and  to  the  Sobralda  of  the  Pace  of  are  ila",e'

the  Castle  of  Naroa,  is  given 7200.  reys  by  the  yeere,  jrowned^and

which  enters  into  the  said  account,  and  is  in  all  2579  1.  not  knowne  or

1 8  s.  6  d.  ster.  have  no

Servants  allowed for  the service  of  the  Vice-roy  of  friends- lt "

India  his  house,  and  for  the  other  Officers  of  this  State, u .,  ,,  r
'  ' Hoipttall for

amount  in  all  to  95  1.  3  s.  6  d.  ster.  the  poore.

Servants allowed to the Over-seer of his Majesties  Or  gentlemen
goods,  arise  to  54540  reys,  which  makes  34  1. 1  s. 9  d.  °fthe  r°u»d.
sterling  every  yeere.

Servants  allowed  for  the  chiefe  Commissioner  of  the
accounts,  amounteth  to  54540.  reys,  which  makes  34  1.
is.  9  d.  sterling  every  yeere.

Servants  allowed  to  the  Captayne  of  this  Citie  of  Goa,
amount  to  12960.  reys  every  yeere,  which  makes  8  1.  2  s.
sterling,  the  which  expences  altogether  amounteth  to
68160.  reys,  which  is  42  1.  12  s.  sterling  every  yeere.

Other  servants  allowed  to  the  chiefe  Port,  to  the  Factor
of  Goa,  to  the  Treasurer,  &c.  particularly  mentioned  in
the  Booke,  here  for  brevitie  omitted,  amount  to  918  1.
and  5  s.  in  Goa,  in  Bardas  to  the  Officers  623  1.  18  s.  9  d.
in  Salcette  to  2016  1.  16  s.  ster.

The  Generals  that  are  allowed  in  this  State  of  India,
and  are  paid  at  his  Majesties  charges,  which  is,  of  the
Captaynes  of  his  Ships,  Barkes,  and  other  Officers  that
serve  in  these  parts.

The  Captayne  of  the  Indian  Sea  hath  1200000.  reys
ordinarie,  which  makes  750  1.  sterling  a  yeere.

The  chiefe  Captaine  of  the  Sea  of  Malaca  ;  when  there
is  any  provided  by  the  Vice-roy  of  this  State,  hath  200000.
reys  ordinarie,  without  any  hindrance  of  the  Decree,  which
is  125  1.  sterling  a  yeere.

The  Captaines  of  the  Carvels,  and  high  board  Ships  of

173

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1584.

this  burden,  hath  84000.  reys  a  yeere,  which  is  7000.  a
moneth  52  1.  10  s.

The  Captaynes  of  the  Galleys  Royall,  of  twentie  and
five,  and  twentie  Oares  of  a  side,  have  120000.  which  is
75  1.  sterling.

The  Captaynes  of  the  Galliottes  of  Chase,  which  are
from  twentie,  twentie  two  Oares  upward  of  a  side,  have
84000.  reys  a  yeere,  which  is  52  1.  10  s.  sterling.

The  Captaynes  of  the  Malavare  Galliotes,  bearing
twentie  Oares  or  more  of  a  side,  and  standing  Decks,  that
beareth  aforehead  a  Falcon  or  a  demy  Sacre,  and  of  the
other  like  of  this  burden,  have  60000.  reys  a  yeere,
which  is  5000.  reys  a  moneth,  and  amounts  to  31  1.  10  s.
ster.

The  Captaynes  of  the  Foysts,  and  Catures  of  his
Majestie,  have  1000.  reys  ordinarie  every  moneth,  besides
his  wages,  and  provision,  which  he  hath  as  a  man  of
armes,  which  may  amount  in  all  to  24000.  reys  every
yeere,  which  makes  1 5  1.  sterling.

The  Factors  of  the  Armies  which  the  Vice-roy  com-
mandeth  to  goe  out  in  such  Armies,  as  is  necessarie  to
have  a  Factor  provided  by  the  said  Vice-roy,  hath  50000.
reys  ordinarie,  which  is  3 1  1.  5  s.  sterling.

The  Clerke  of  the  said  Armies,  hath  30000.  reys  ordin-
arie, which  is  1 8  1.  15  s.  sterling  a  yeere.

The  Masters  of  the  Gallions  of  the  said  burden,  of  100.
Tun  upward,  and  of  his  Majesties  Ships,  have  40320.  reys
ordinarie  a  yeere,  which  is  3360.  reys  a  moneth,  and  makes
25  1.  4  s.  sterling.
[II.  ix.  1 527.]  The  Masters  of 'the  Carvels  and  Ships  of  this  burthen,
have  34320.  reys  a  yeere,  which  is  2860.  reys  a  moneth,
and  makes  in  all  21  1.  9  s.  6  d.  ster.

The  Commitres  of  the  Galleys  Royall,  have  42460.  reys

a  yeere,  which  is  26  1.  10  s.  6  d.  ster.

Which  are  The  Commitres  of  the  Galliotas  de  Aspelacaon,  and  of

swift.  Galleys. t^e  other  Malavare  Galliotas  of  standing  decks  of  twentie

Oares  of  a  side  or  upward,  and  beareth  a  Falcon,  or  demy

Sacre  afore,  have  34380 reys  every  yeere,  which  is  2865.

174

DON DUART DE MKXKSKS  **.

1584.
reys every moneth, and it amounts to 11  1. 9  s. 9  d.

sterling.

The  Pilots  of  the  Carvels  and  great  Ships  of  the  same
burthen,  have  34380.  reys  every  yeere,  which  is  21  1.  9  s.
9  d.  ster.

The  Clerkes  of  the  Voyages,  that  goe  with  charge  of  Pursers.
the  Factorship,  of  his  Majesties  goods,  as  are  those  of
Banda,  Malucco,  and  others  of  this  qualitie,  have  50000.
reys  ordinarie even*  yeere, because they serve  also for
Clerkes  of  the  said  Factorship,  which  is  31  1.  5  s.  ster.

The  Clerkes  or  Pursers  of  the  Galleons  and  Ships  of  his
Majestie,  have  18000.  revs  ordinarie  every  one,  which  is
nl.  5  s.  ster.

The  Clerkes  or  Pursers  of  the  Carvels,  when  they  are
provided  of  the  same,  have  15000.  reys  ordinarie  every
yeere,  which  is  9  1.  7  s.  6  d.  ster.

The  Stewards  of  the  Galleons,  Ships  and  Carvels,  have
12000.  reys  ordinarie  every  yeere,  wherein  is  contayned
the  provision  that  they  have.

The  Boatsones  of  the  Galleons  and  Ships  of  his
Majesties,  and  under  Comitters  of  the  Gallevs  Royall,
have  20568.  reys  ordinarie  everv  veere,  which  is  17 14.
revs  every  moneth,  which  is  in  all  12  1.  1  ~  s.  1  d.  -^u.  part
of  a  peny.

The  Constables  of  the  Galleons,  Gallevs,  Ships,  Carvels,
small  Ships  and  Galliots,  have  the  wages  of  a  Gunner,  and
their  provision,  and  400.  reys  everv  moneth  besides.
which  is  19200.  reys  a  veere,  which  comes  to  12  1.  ster.

The  said  Captaynes  and  Factors  of  the  Armies,  Pursers,
Stewards  and  Constables,  have  the  said  ordinaries,  at  such
times  as  they  doe  serve  at  Sea,  and  bv  the  warrants  that
they  have  of  their  providing,  with  a  Certificate  of  the  time
that  they  have  served,  the  said  Ordinaries  are  allowed
them,  else  not.

The  chiefe  Captaynes  of  the  other  Armies,  which  doe
goe  to  the  Straight  and  to  the  North  coast,  have  for  their
ordinarie,  that  which  the  Vice-rov  doth  set  downe  for
them.

i75

T

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1584.

There  is  no  summe  set  downe  of  these  Offices,  because
they  have  them  not  but  when  they  are  needfull,  and  it  is  a
thine:  uncertaine.

The  Galleon  of  the  Traffick  and  Voyage  of  Ceilaon,
hath  the  Officers  and  Men  as  followeth.

He  Captayne  of  the  said  Voyage,  hath  by  Warrant
of  his  Majestie  400000.  reys,  which  is  250  1.  sterling
every  yeere.

The  Purser  of  the  said  Voyage,  hath  50000.  reys  ordin-
ate, which  is  3 1  1.  5  s.  ster.

The  Master  hath  40300.  reys,  which  is  25  1.  3  s.  9  d.
sterling  every  yeere.

The  Pilot  hath  40300.  reys,  which  is  25  1.  3  s.  9  d.
sterling  every  yeere.

The  Boatsone  hath  20568.  reys,  which  is  12  1.  7  s.  1  d.
aV-  part  of  a  peny  sterling  every  yeere.

The  Steward  hath  12000.  reys  ordinarie,  which  is  7  1.
10  s.  sterling  every  yeere.

The  said  Galleon  hath  foure  Portugal  Mariners,  which
have  their  wages  and  provision,  at  the  rate  of  1 2000.  reys
every  yeere  apiece,  which  is  48000  reys  every  yeere,  and
amounts  to  30  1.  sterling  in  all  yeerly.

One  Constable  which  hath  wages  and  provision,  as  a
Gunner,  which  is  14400.  reys,  and  he  hath  besides  400.
reys  every  moneth,  which  is  19200.  reys  a  yeere,  which
amounts  to  12  1.  ster.

The  Gunners,  which  have  for  wages  and  provision
14400.  reys,  which  amounts  to  18  1.  sterling  in  all,  and
makes  28800.  reys  a  yeere.

The  said  Galleon  carrieth  twentie  Souldiers,  for  the
safeguard  and  defence  of  it,  which  have  1000.  reys  every
moneth  a  man,  which  is  in  all  120000.  reys,  which  makes
75  1.  sterling  in  all  for  the  six  moneths.

The said Galleon carrieth fortie Mariners with the

*Sarangueisa  *  Sarangue,  to  whom  is  paid  their  a  Muxaras,  at  the  rate

,  *  of  one  Pardao  of  gold  to  every  one  a  moneth,  and  two

Medidas  or  measures  of  Rice  every  day,  and  fiftie  reys  a

176

DON DUART DE MEXESES  a.d.

1584

moneth  for  fish  to  every  one,  which  amounts  to  1  14727.

reys,  and  the  Rice  is  reckoned  at  six  Xerafins,  and  the  fish

at  fiftie  reys,  all  this  for  five  moneths  while  the  Galleon

stayeth  in  the  Voyage,  and  is  71  1.  14  s.  id. Ar-  part  of  a

peny  sterling.

To  the  which  20.  Souldiers  and  Officers  is  given  their All  manner  of

provision  of  Bisquet,  Rice,  Conduto,  and  Butter,  according „ '  a*

1  j  c 1 tt  c 11 1 •  r i_  -j Pease, Beanes,

to  the  order  or  the  House,  tor  all  the  time  or  the  said  aj.0  B(UOn  or

Voyage,  which  amounteth  to  93067.  reys,  the  Bisquet  is  any  other

taken at  400. reys the Maon, and the Rice  at seven  meate.

Xerafins, which is 58  1. 3  s. 4  d. ^V- part of  a peny

sterling.

All  the  expences  of  the  Galleon  of  traffick  to  Ceilaon,
amounteth  to  986962.  reys,  accounting  to  the  Captayne
and  Pursers  their  ordinaries  for  the  Voyage,  and  the
Officers  and  Souldiers,  for  halfe  a  yeere,  and  their  allow-
ance as  is  before  rehearsed,  which  is  616  1.  17  s.  q.  ;  .^.
part  of  a  peny  sterling.

All  the  provision*  for  the  Gallion  of  the  Voyage  of  [II.ix.1528.]
Maluco,  amounteth  to  3292998.  Reys  going  and  com- The  parti-
ming,  which  commeth  to  2058  1.  2  s.  5  d.  ob.  -^.  part  of  ^-^J^W
a  peny  sterling.  _  may  6e' ' pr0_

All  the  expences  of  the  Gallion  of  Traffique  for  Mosam-  portioned  by
bique,  amounteth  to  1022834.  Reys,  which  is  639  1. t;  s.  the  former,  as
5  d.  A-  parts  of  a  peny  sterling.  ~  ?£%*..

The  Gallies  which  at  this  present  are  in  this  Estate,  and
the  Officers  that  serve  in  them,  the  Galley  Royall  hath  (not
accounting  the  provision  for  the  Galley  slaves)  339048.
Reys,  which  amount  to  211  1.  18  s.  1  d.  -575-.  part  of  a  peny
sterling.

The  Captayne  Galley  that  is  at  Malavar,  hath  315048.
Reys  (not  accounting  the  provision  of  the  Galley  slaves)
which  amounteth  to  196 1.  18s.  id.  i-  part  of  a  peny
sterling.

Another  Galley  that  goeth  in  company  with  the  Cap-
tayn  Galley  to  Malavar,  hath  315048.  Reys,  which
amounteth  to  196 1.  18s.  id.  \.  part  of  a  peny,  not
counting  the  provision  of  the  Galley  slaves  in  it.

ix  177  M

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1584.

Another  Galley  that  was  sent  of  succour  to  Seylaon,
amounts  to  315048  Reys,  which  is  196  1.  18  s.  1  d.  £.  of
a  peny  sterling,  not  accounting  the  provision  of  the  Galley
slaves  in  it,  and  all  the  other  Gallies  that  are  in  this  estate,
beeing  in  his  Majesties  service,  have  the  same  Officers,
with  whom  the  said  expence  is  made.

Ordinaries  or  Pensions  that  are  given  in  this  Citie  of
Goa,  at  his  Majesties  charge,  are  as  follow  :  First,  with  all
the  Clergie,  the  Archbishop  of  this  Estate  Don  Freyre
Vincent,  having  ordinary  every  one  a  yeare  6000.  Cruza-
dos,  in  this  manner,  1000.  of  Dowrie,  4000.  ordinarie,
and  the  1000.  that  his  Majestie  granted  unto  him  every
yeare,  for  the  space  of  five  yeares,  which  do  amount  to
2400000.  Reys,  which  is  1 500  1.  sterling.

The  expences  that  the  Clergie  of  the  said  Church,  or  Sea
doth  make  yearely,  amounteth  to  4696200.  Reys,  which
doth  make,  2935  1.  2  s.  6  d.  sterling.

Parishes  within  the  Citie  of  Goa.

THe  Parish  of  our  Ladie  of  the  Light  of  this  Citie  of
Goa,  hath  every  yeare  147680.  Reys,  which  is  92  1.
6  s.  sterling.

The  Parish  of  our  Ladie  of  the  Rosarie,  of  the  said
Citie  hath  also  147680.  Reys,  as  is  given  to  our  Ladie  of
the  Light,  and  in  the  same  manner  distributed,  as  is  before
rehearsed,  which  amounts  in  all  to  92  1.  6  s.  sterling.

Saint  Peters  Parish  hath  every  yeare  46320.  Reys,
which  is  28  1.  19  s.  sterling,  to  wit,  to  the  Vicar  30000.
Reys  every  yeare,  which  is  1 8  1.  15  s.  sterling.

The  Parish  of  Saint  Lucie  hath  46320.  Reys,  bestowed
in  the  manner  above  rehearsed,  which  is  28  1.  19  s.
sterling.

Saint  Thomas  Parish  hath  also  46320.  Reys,  bestowed
in  the  order  above  rehearsed,  which  is  28  1.  19  s.
sterling.

178

DON DUART DE MENKSKS  <u>-

1584.

Parishes  that  are  in  this  Hand  of  Goa.

THe  Parish  of  our  Ladie  of  Helpe,  hath  every  yeare
46320.  Reys,  which  is  28  1.  19  s.  ster.

The  Parish  of  our  Ladie  of  Conception,  which  is  Paingin
hath  other  46320.  Reys,  which  is  28  1.  19  s.  sterling.

The  Parish  of  Saint  Michael,  which  is  in  the  Towne  of
Taleigaon,  hath  46320.  Reys,  which  is  28  1.  19  s.  sterling.

The  Parish  of  the  holy  Crosse,  which  is  in  the  Towne
of  Calapar,  hath  46320.  Reys,  which  is  28  1.  19  s.  sterling.

The  Parish  of  Saint  Barbara,  which  is  in  the  Towne  of
Morabin,  hath  46320.  Reys,  which  is  28  1.  19  s.  sterling.

Saint  Mary  Magdalens  Parish,  which  is  in  the  Towne  Which  u  a
of  Sirdaon,  hath  46320.  Reys,  which  is  28  1.  19  s.  sterling,  ^f^f''

Saint  Annes  Parish,  which  is  in  the  Towne  of  Talawlin,  our  iaa-ie
hath  46320.  Reys,  which  is  28  1.  19  s.  sterling.  brought  from

The  Parish  of  our  Lady  Gaadalupe,  which  is  in  the  Heaven.
Towne  of  Bati,  hath  46320.  Reys,  which  is  28  1. 19  s.
sterling.

Saint  Lawrence  his  Parish,  which  is  the  passage  of
Gacaim,  hath  46320.  Reys,  which  is  28  1.  19  s.  sterling.

The  Parish  of  Saint  John  Evangelist,  which  is  in
the  Towne  of  Nevra  the  great,  hath  46320.  Reys,  which
is  28  1.  19  s.  sterling.

Saint  Matthews  Parish  which  is  in  the  Towne  of  Ajosin,
hath  46320.  Reys,  which  is  28  1.  19  s.  sterling.

The  Parish  of  Saint  John  Baptist,  which  is  in  the  Towne
of  Carambolim,  hath  46320.  Reys,  which  is  28  1.  19  s.
sterling.

The  Parish  of  Saint  James,  which  is  in  the  Towne  of  Passo  sequo.
Orar,  in  the  passage  of  Saint  James,  hath  46320.  Reys,
which  is  28  1.  19  s.  sterling.

The  Parish  of  Saint  Bias,  which  is  in  the  dry  passage  [Il.ix.i 529.]
hath  46320.  Reys,  which  is  28  1. 19  s.  sterling.

Saint  Joseph  his  Parish,  which  is  in  the  passage  of
Davgin,  hath  46320.  Reys,  which  is  28  1.  19  s.  sterling.

The  Parish  of  Saint  Stephen,  which  is  in  the  Hand  of
Juan,  hath  46320.  Reys,  which  is  28  1. 19  s.  sterling.

179

A.D.
I584.

That  is  of  the
five  wounds  of
Christ.

Which  are
Bond-men  or
Slaves.

The  three
Kings  of
Cull  en.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  Holy  Ghost  Parish,  which  is  in  the  passage  of
Naroa,  hath  46320.  Reys,  which  is  28  1. 19  s.  sterling.

The  Parish  of  our  Lady  of  Pitie,  which  is  in  the  Iland
of  Divar,  hath  46320.  Reys,  which  is  28  1.  19  s.  sterling.

Saint  Bartholomew  Parish,  which  is  in  the  Iland  of
Choran,  hath  46320.  Reys,  which  is  28  1.  19  s.  sterling.

The  Parish  of  the  Wounds,  which  is  by  the  Kings
River,  hath  every  yeare  30000.  Reys  for  the  Vicar,
expences  of  the  Vestrie,  and  because  they  are  bound  to
say  Masse  every  Sunday  and  Holy-day,  because  of  the
Officers,  that  doe  serve  in  the  said  River,  and  to  administer
the  Sacraments  to  his  Majesties  Bragas,  entring  in  the
said  account,  12000.  Reys  which  it  had  before,  when  it
was  but  a  Chappell  for  the  Masses,  that  of  dutie  it  was
bound  to  say  gratis,  which  is 1 8  1. 1 1  s. sterling.

All  the  expences,  that  is  made  with  the  Churches  and
Parishes  of  this  Citie  and  Iland  of  Goa,  amounteth  to
1390720.  Reys,  which  makes  869  1.  4  s.  sterling  every
yeare.

Parishes  which  at  this  present  are  in  the  Territories  of
Bardes.  The  Parish  of  the  three  Wisemen  of  the  East,
which  is  in  the  Fortresse  of  the  said  Territories  of  Saint
Thomas.  The  Parish  of  Saint  Anthonie,  Trinitie  Parish,
the  Parish  of  our  Ladie  of  Remedies,  the  Parish  of  Saint
Saviour,  and  the  Parish  of  our  Ladie  of  Hope.  With
the  Churches  there  is  spent  every  yeare,  974720.  Reys,
which  is  609  1.  4  s.  sterling.

The  Parishes  which  at  this  present  are  in  the  Territories
of  Salcete.  Our  Ladie  of  the  Snow,  a  Parish  which  is  in
the  Fortresse  of  Rachol.  Saint  Michaels  Parish,  which  is
in  the  Towne  of  Orlin.  The  Parish  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
which  is  in  the  Towne  Margaon.  The  holy  Crosse  Parish,
which  is  in  the  Towne  of  Vernan.  Saint  Andrewes  Parish,
which  is  in  the  Towne  of  Murmugao.  Saint  Philip  and
James  Parish,  which  is  in  the  Towne  of  Cortalim.  Saint
Saviours  Parish,  which  is  in  the  Towne  of  Lotolim.
Saint  John  Baptists  Parish,  which  is  in  the  Towne  of
Colva. Saint  Thomas  Parish,  which  is  in  the  Towne  of

1 80

DON DUART DE MENESES

Velsaon.  The  Parish  which  now  is  a  making  in  the
Fortresse  of  Cuculim.  All  the  which  Churches,  the
Jesuits  doe  minister,  and  to  them  their  Vicars,  and
Ministers  of  the  same,  is  given  476880.  Reys,  which
amounts  to  298  1. 1  s.  sterling  every  yeare.

It  pleased  his  Majestie  by  his  Warrant,  to  endue  the
Colledge,  which  the  Jesuites  did  erect  in  the  Territories  of
Salcete,  with  that  which  should  seeme  sufficient  for  the
Expences  of  the  said  Colledge,  and  the  Ministers  thereof,
of  the  Rents  that  were  of  the  Pagodes,*  of  the  said  Terri-
tories of  Bardes  and  Salcete,  for  the  benefit  of  the  which,
there  was  ordayned  for  the  said  Expences,  400000.  Reys,
for  1000.  Cruzados,  which  is  250  1.  sterling  every  yeare,
which  at  that  time  seemed  to  be  sufficient ;  there  was  also
given  certayne  Rice  grounds,  which  were  of  the  said
•  Pagodes,  in  the  which  there  was  made  Masa  of  the  Rents
of  three  yeares,  the  which  grounds  are  dismembred  from
the  Lands  and  Rents  of  the  said  Pagodes,  because  they
were  given  to  the  Jesuites  for  the  said  Colledge.

There  is  also  given  the  building  of  the  said  Churches
of  Salcete,  1 00000.  Reys  a  yeare,  at  the  rate  of  10000.
Reys  every  one,  which  amounts  to  62  1.  10  s.  sterling
amongst  them  all.

There  is  also  given  to  the  Catecumenos,*  of  the  Terri-
tories of  Salcete,  180000.  Reys,  for  500.  Pardaos  of  Gold,
which  amounteth  to  1 12  1.  10  s.  sterling,  which  is  delivered
to  the  Jesuits.

There  is  also  given  for  the  Catecumenos  of  this  Citie  of
Goa,  180000.  Reys,  which  is  1 12  1.  10  s.  sterling,  and  it  is
delivered  to  him  that  the  Archbishop  doth  appoint  for
that  purpose.

There  is  given  to  every  one  of  these  Churches,  by  the
information  of  the  Jesuites,  one  Interpreter  for  the
necessitie  that  they  have  of  one,  for  to  declare  to  the
Neophytes,  or  newly  converted,  the  Doctrine,  and  that
which  is  convenient,  for  the  remedie  of  their  soules,  and
other  things  necessary,  to  the  which  is  given  one  Pardao
of  Gold  every  moneth  to  every  one,  which  amounts  to

A. I).

1584.

Jesuilt

Parishes  2  9  -  /.
a  yeare.  Their
Colledges  at
Goa  and
Cordini  richly
endowed.

*Or  Idoll
Temples.

Which  is  an

authorized

sale.

*Or  such  as
are  catechized
and  instructed
in  the  grounds
of  Christian
Religion,  so  to
prepare  them
{being  of
Ethnike
Parentage)  to
holy  Christian
Baptisme.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1584.

43200.  Reys,  every  yeare  which  makes  27  1.  sterling  in
all.

There  was  given  for  the  expences  of  the  Hospitall  of
the  Christians  of  this  Countrey,  which  the  Jesuites  did
administer  unto  in  this  Citie  of  Goa ;  every  yeare  by
Warrant  from  his  Majestie  300.  Pardaos,  which  make
90000.  Reys,  and  is  56  1.  5  s.  sterling,  at  his  Majesties
owne  charges,  and  because  in  this  Citie  there  was  an
Hospitall  for  the  said  poore,  of  the  which  the  holy  Mercie
hath  the  care  and  administration,  the  said  Jesuits  did
passe  the  said  Hospitall  to  the  Territories  of  Salcete,
because  there  was  more  need  of  the  same  there,  for  the
many  sicke  and  poore  Christians,  that  are  there  without
any  remedie.

There  is  given  to  the  Jesuits  of  this  Citie  of  Goa,  everie
yeare  2000.  Cruzados,  100.  Candils  of  Rice,  five  Pipes
of  Wine  for  Masses,  and  one  quarter  of  Oyle  of  the
[II.ix.1530.]  Realme  of  Portugall,  which  in  all  amounteth  to  1 145000.
Reys,  which  are  assigned  for  them  in  certayne  Townes  of
the  Territories  of  Basaim,  and  in  the  Hand  of  Choram,  of
the  libertie  of  this  Citie  of  Goa,  which  were  given  to
them,  and  disjoyned,  or  separated  from  his  Majesties
goods,  because  it  was  his  pleasure,  as  appeared  by  the
Warrants  that  he  passed  to  the  said  Jesuites,  which  is
715  1.  12  s.  6  d.  sterling.

Also  there  is  given  them  600000.  for  their  Presents,

Savagates  are and Savagates which come to the Vice-Royes of this

Gtfts-  Estate,  which  amounts  to  375  1.  sterling,  but  the  King

commanded  that  they  should  not  have  the  said  600000.

Reys,  but  the  Savagates,  as  they  had  them  by  Warrant.

There  is  given  to  the  Company  of  Jesuits,  that  are
resident  in  the  Citie  of  Couchin,  by  Warrant  from  his
Majestie  1500.  Pardaos  of  Gold,  for  the  helpe  of  their
maintenance,  the  which  are  assigned  them  in  this  manner,
1377.  Pardaos  of  Gold,  &.  which  is  309  1.  18  s.  sterling,
of  the  Rents  of  the  Hand  of  Divar,  libertie  of  this  Citie
of  Goa;  and  the  122.  Pardaos,  |.  which  is  27  1.  10  s.
sterling,  in  the  duties  of  the  Territories  of  Bacaim,  which

182

DON DUART DE MENESES

in

all  ariseth  to  540000.  Reys,  which  amounteth  to
337  1.  10  s.  sterling.

There  is  given  to  the  Monastery  of  Saint  Francis,  of
this  Citie  or  Goa ;  every  yeare,  at  the  comming  of  the
ships  from  Portugall,  32.  Pipes  \.  of  Wine,  whereof  the
5.  are  Muskadine  for  Masses,  and  42.  Cantaros  of  Oyle
of  Portugall,  for  the  provision  of  the  said  Monasterie,  and
others  of  the  said  Order,  Ceylaon  excepted,  which  may
amount  at  the  price  which  now  it  is  worth,  to  981600.
Reys,  and  it  was  received  in  account  of  the  Factor  Belchior
Rois  Dandrade,  fol.  45.  of  the  recovery  of  his  account
which  is  613  1.  10  s.  sterling.

There  is  also  given  to  the  Friers  of  the  said  Covent
every  yeare,  10.  Candis  of  Wheate,  12.  Candis  of  Rice,
40.  Fardos  of  Giresall  Rice,  2.  Candis  of  Oyle  of  Coco-
nuts, 2.  Candis  of  Waxe,  10.  Corias  of  Cotunias,  3.  Fardos
of  Sugar,  one  Candill  of  Butter,  4.  Maons  of  Almonds,
and  6.  Boxes  of  Marmelade,  which  things  may  all  amount
to  229800.  Reys,  which  is  143  1. 12  s.  6  d.  sterling.

To  the  Covent  and  Monastery  of  Saint  Dominicke,  of
this  Citie  of  Goa,  is  given  every  yeare  800000.  Reys  for
the  sustenance,  and  Expences  of  the  Friers  of  the  said
Order,  by  a  Letter  that  his  Majestie  did  write  to  the
Vice-Roy  Don  Anthonie  de  Neyra,  Anno  1567.  if  he  did
thinke  it  meet,  and  finding  nothing  to  the  contrary,  which
is  500  1.  sterling.

There  is  given  also  to  the  said  Monastery  of  the  said
Citie,  7.  Pipes  of  Wine,  one  of  Muskadine,  the  other  as
they  are  to  be  found,  and  one  quarter  of  Oyle  of  Portugall,
which  amounteth  in  all  to  145500.  Reys,  accounting  the
Pipe  of  Muskadine  at  80.  Pardaos,  and  the  other  at  60.
Pardaos,  and  the  Oyle  at  5.  Xerafins  the  Cantaro,  the
which  Expences  amounteth  to  90  1.  1 8  s.  9  d.  sterling,
and  it  was  received  in  account  of  Belchior  Rois  Dandrade,
Factor  of  Goa,  by  Warrants  of  the  Vice-Royes  of  this
Estate,  and  this  is  besides  the  800000.  Reys  for  their
provision.

There  is  given  to  the  Friers  of  Saint  Augustine,  which

183

A.D.
I584.

Monasteries  of
Franciscans.

A  kind  of
Measure  so
called.

Or  Course
Rice.

Of  Domini-
cans.

If'hich  is  nine
Cantares.

Of  J  us  ten
Fryars.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1584.

are  in  the  Church  of  our  Ladie  of  Grace,  every  yeare
129000.  Reys  for  their  provision,  which  were  granted  to
them  by  a  Warrant  of  his  Majestie,  when  they  came  from
Portugall ;  which  summe  doth  amount  to  80  1.  12  s.  6  d.
sterling.

There  is  in  this  Citie  a  Father  of  the  Christians,  which
hath  60000.  Reys  ordinary,  which  is  37  1.  10  s.  sterling,
for  to  have  care  to  looke  unto  them,  and  know  how  they
live,  and  to  make  them  separate  themselves  from  the
conversation  of  the  Gentils,  and  to  deale  with  or  for  them
in  all  matters  touching  the  good  of  their  soules  and  lives,
and  to  visit  them  in  their  Townes  and  Parishes,  and  to
take  their  parts  in  all  their  differences,  and  to  direct  and
favour  them,  in  such  sort  that  they  may  perceive,  that  they
have  a  Defender  in  their  adversities  and  needs.

The  Father  of  the  Christians  hath  also  a  Sollicitor,
which  doth  sollicit  their  Cases,  and  hath  50.  Pardaos
ordinary,  which  amounts  to  15000.  Reys,  and  it  is
9  1.  7  s.  6  d.  sterling  every  yeere.

There  is  given  to the  Kings  Hospitall  of  this  City,

at  this  present  every  yeare  3000000.  of  Reys,  which  is

Anfion  is  a ioooo.  Xerafins,  because  the  rent  of  the  provision,  Anfion,

kind  of  herbe Bagne,  and  Sope  are  farmed  for  so  much,  the  which  is

drunk**" seperated  for  the  said  Hospitall,  that  it  may  have  all  the

Bagne'akindof  Rent it yeeldeth, for the provision of the sicke men,

Merchandize,  payment  of  Apothecary,  Physician,  Chirurgian,  and  the

other  Officers,  and  Servants  of  the  said  House,  and  for

the  Clothes  that  every  yeare  are  bought  for  the  comming

of  the  ships  from  Portugall,  for  the  releeving  of  the  sicke

men,  that  come  in  them,  and  also  for  Wine,  Oyle,  and

Vinegar  of  Portugall,  all  the  which  is  delivered  to  the

Purveyor,  and  Brethren  of  the  holy  Mercie,  of  the  same

City, as administers of the said Hospitall ; and the

expences  doe  runne  in  his  Majesties  Treasury,  and  if  it

chance  that  the  said  Money  doth  not  suffice  for  all  the

yeare,  the  said  Purveyor,  and  Brethren  shall  request  the

Vice-Roy, or the over-seer of his Majesties goods to

command  to  give  them  so  much,  as  necessitie  shall  require,

184

DON DU  ART DE MENESES

.5H4.

shewing  the  causes,  whereby  the  said  Money  was  not
sufficient,  in  the  which  quantity  entreth  the  wages  of  the
Clarke,  Over-seer,  he  that  tends  the  sicke  men,  the  Cater,
and  Porter  of  the  said  Hospitall,  the  which  summe
amounteth  to  1875  1.  sterlmg  every  yeare.

There  is  also  paid  to  the  Mercy  House  of  the  said
Citie  every  yeare  400000.  Reys  of  wages,  that  the  said
House  hath  of  Almes,  that  are  left  unto  it  because  his
Majesty  doth  command  it  so  by  his  Patents,  for  the
necessities  and  charitable  workes  of  the  said  House,  the
which  is  abated  out  of  the  generall  Check-roll  upon  their  [II.ix.1531.]
Titles,  and  is  250  1.  sterling.

There  is  also  given  to  the  said  Mercy  House  165600.
Reys  every  yeare,  which  is  552.  Pardaos  de  Tangas  for  the
reliefe,  which  the  said  house  doth  give  to  the  poore
Widdowes,  Orphans,  and  incurable  people,  at  the  rate  of
1 1 .  Pardaos  of  Tangas,  and  $.  every  weeke  of  the  yeare,
which  amounts  to  103  1.  10  s.  sterling.

All  the  expences  of  the  Churches  of  Salcete,  and  all  the
other  that  are  here  nominated  from  the  beginning  of  this
Title,  amounteth  to  1 1447020.  Reys,  which  is  7154 1.
7  s.  9  d.  sterling.

Officers  belonging  to  the  holy  *  Inquisition. As  they  terme

THe Inquisitor of the Table, hath 400000. Reys,  *Or  chlefe
ordinary, which amounts to 250 1. sterling every  Inquisitor.
yeare.

The  other  Inquisitor  which  is  a  Fryar  of  Saint
Dominicke,  hath  also  250  1.  sterling,  as  the  other.

The  Notarie  of  the  Inquisition  hath  50000.  Reys,
which  is  3 1  1.  5  s.  sterling  every  yeare.

The  Sergeant  of  the  Prison-house  of  the  Inquisition
hath  1 00000.  Reys,  which  is  62  1.  10  s.  sterling.

One  Keeper  that  doth  helpe  him  in  the  said  Prison,
hath  30000.  Reys,  which  is 18  1. 15  s.  sterling.

The  Penitentiarie  Sergeant  of  the  Inquisition,  and
Over-seer  of  the  Prisoners,  which  doth  give  them  meate,
hath  60000.  Reys,  which  is  37  1.  10  s.  sterling.

185

Gcnerall.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1584.

The  Sollicitor  of  the  Inquisition  hath  30000.  Reys,
which  is  18  1.  15  s.  sterling.

The  Treasuror  of  the  Inquisition  hath  150000.  Reys,
which  were  allowed  him  by  the  Vice-Roy,  Don  Antonio
de  Neyra ; and  is  93  1.  15  s.  sterling.

The  Clarke  of  the  said  Treasurer  hath 20000.  Reys,
which  is  12  1.  10  s.  sterling.
Or  Fiscale.  The  Judge,  accuser  hath  50000.  Reys,  which  is  3 1  1.  5  s.

sterling.
Or  Attourney Xhe Attourney accuser hath coooo. Revs, which is
3 1  1.  5  s.  sterling.

All  the  expences  that  the  Inquisition  doth  make  with
her  Officers,  is  1340000.  Reys,  which  amounteth  to
837  1.  10  s.  sterling  every  yeare.

Expences  made  with  the  Fortresses  of  Sofala,
Mosambique,  and  Sena.

THe  Captayne  of  the  said  Fortresse  hath  418000.  Reys
ordinary,  which  is  261  1.  5  s.  sterling  every  yeare.

The  chiefe  Bayliffe  and  Factor,  hath  120000.  Reys
ordinary,  which  is  75  1.  sterling  every  yeare,  and  18000.
Reys  for  his  provision,  which  is  ill.  5s.  sterling.

The  Clarke  of  the  said  Office  hath  82000.  Reys,  which
is  51  1.  5  s.  sterling  every  yeare.

The  Bayliffe  and  Keeper  of  the  said  Fortresse  hath
29000.  Reys,  which  also  serveth  for  Sergeant,  and  hath  a
man  allowed  for  that  purpose,  whose  expence  is  declared
hereafter,  his  ordinary  is  1 8  1.  2  s.  6  d.  sterling.

The  Constable  of  the  said  Fortresse  hath  38000.  Reys,
which  is  23  1. 15  s.  sterling  every  yeare.

The  Factor  hath  eight  men,  which  have  for  their  wages
and  provision  96000.  Reys,  which  is  60  1.  sterling  a  yeare.

The  Clarke  of  the  said  Fortresse  hath  his  mans  wages
and  provision  as  a  man  of  Armes,  that  is  12000.  Reys,
which  is  7  1.  10  s.  sterling.

The  Bayliffe  and  Keeper  of  the  said  Fortresse,  which
serveth  for  a  Sergeant  of  the  same,  hath  10800.  Reys  for

186

DON DCJAKT DE MENESES  ax>.

1584.

his  mans  wages  and  provision  at  the  rate  of  900. I<
a  moneth,  which  is  6  1.  15  s.  sterling  every  yeare.

There  is  allowed  one  Gunner  for  the  said  Fortresse,
which  hath  29000.  Keys,  which  is  18  1.  2  s.  6  d.  sterling
a  yeare.

There  is  allowed  to  the  said  Fortresse  six  Inhabitants,
which  have  for  wages  and  provision  12000.  Reys  every
one,  and  amounteth  to  72000.  Reys  every  yeare,  which  is
45  1.  sterling  in  all.

There  is  spent  in  the  said  Fortresse,  in  Presents  that
are  given  to  the  Lords  of  the  Countrey  120000.  Reys,
which  expences  shall  be  made  by  the  advice  of  the  said
Captayne,  which  is  75  1.  sterling  every  yeare,  and  being
necessary  there  is  more  spent,  according  to  the  Captaynes
direction.

To  the  which Officers  and  persons  ordayned for the
said  Fortresse,  besides  the  ordinary  wages  that  they  have,
there  is  allowed  to  every  one  of  them  halfe  a  Fardo  of  Which  uhalfe
Millet  every  moneth,  which  makes  161 208.  Reys  every  a  norse-mae-
yeare,  at  400.  Reys  to  every  one  a  moneth,  and  the  men
are  34.  which  is  92  1.  sterling.

There  is  spent  in  the  repaying,  and  covering  of  the  said
Fortresse,  and  about  the  Churches,  and  in  other  things  of
the  like  qualitie  60000.  Reys,  which  is  37  1.  10  s.  sterling
every  yeare.

The Vicar of the said Fortresse hath 34000. reys  [II.ix.1532.]
ordinary,  which  is  21  1. c  s.  sterling  every  yeare.  hxpences  t  at

m " . '  .  ".  * *  /» are  tnade  with

There  is  given  also  to  the  said  Vicar,  20000.  Reys,  for  t^e  church  of
the  Exempts  of  the  Vestry,  Wine,  Oyle,  Waxe,  Flowre  to  the  said
make  Wafers  of,  which  is  that,  that  was  accustomed  to  Fortresse.
bee  given,  which amounts to 12  1. 10  s. sterling  every
yeare.

There  is  also  given  to  the  said  Vicar  for  the  Masses,
which  he  sayth  for  the  Prince  Don  Henry,  2400.  Reys
every  yeare,  which  is  1  1. 10  s.  sterling.

There  is  ordayned  one  Chaplain  to  serve  with  the  said
Vicar,  which  hath  27400.  Reys,  which  is  17I.  12  s.  6  d.
sterling  every  yeare.

187

A.D.

I584.

*  The  parti-
culars are
mentioned,  but
here  for
brevitie
omitted.

Jesuites  and
Friars.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  expences  of  Sofala  comes  to  135 1800.  Reys,  which
is  844  1.  17  s.  6  d.  sterling.

All  the  expences  made  with  the  Fortresse  of  Mosam-
bique,  the  Church  and  the  Friars,  amounts  to  261 9661.
reys,  which  makes  1637  1.  5  s.  9  d.  -£$  part  of  a  peny.

All  the  expences  of  the  Fortresse  of  Sena,  amounteth
to  61 1600.  reys,  which  is  382  1.  5  s.  sterling  every  yeere.

Ordinarie  expences  that  are  made  in  the  For-
tresse of  Ormus.

THe  Captayne  of  the  said  Fortresse  of  Ormus,  hath
600000.  reys  ordinarie,  which  is  375  1.  sterling  every
yeere.  He  hath  also  1000.  Cruzados  for  a  reward  of  old
stipends,  which  is  250 1.  sterling.  He  hath  also  700
Xerafins,  in  the  customes  of  his  goods,  by  warrants  of  the
Vice-Royes,  with  210000.  reys,  which  is  131  1.  5  s.  which
is  in  all  1 210000.  reys,  that  is  756  1.  5  s.  sterling  :  and  he
hath  also  the  duties  of  ten  Horses,  free  every  yeere.

These  and  all  other  expences*  of  the  Fortresse,  Hospital
and  Ecclesiastikes  of  Ormus,  amounts  to  20323213.  reys,
which  is  1 2702  1.  1  d.  ob.  q  ;  .-£§.  part  of  a  peny  sterling
every  yeere.

All  the  expences  of  the  Fortresse  of  Dio,  amount  to
13818520.  reys,  which  is  8636  1.  11  s.  6  d.  sterling.

All  the  expences  that  are  made  with  the  Citie  of
Damaon,  and  her  Territories,  with  the  works  that  are  in
hand,  amounts  to  17251868  reys,  which  is  10782I.  8  s.  4d.
-§-•  parts  of  a  peny  sterling  every  yeere.  Whereof  the
Jesuites,  be  they  many  or  few,  have  236  1.  5  s.  revenue,  the
Dominicans  54  1.  15  s.  7  d.  the  Franciscans  1 8  1.  15  s.

All  the  expences  of  Bazaim,  amount  to  9084960.  reys,
which  is  5678  1.  2  s.  sterling  every  yeere  :  of  which  the
Jesuites  and  Franciscans  for  themselves  and  the  Christians
of  that  Countrey,  receive  682  1.  4  s.  ster.

All  the  expences  of  Aseri,  to  2795600.  reys,  which
makes  1747  1.  5  s.  ster.

The  expences  of  Manora,  come  to  4759712.  reys,  or
1099  1.  1 6  s.  4d.  ob.  q.  ;  .^.  peny  ster.

188

DON DUART DE MEXESES  a.d.

The  expences  of  Chaul,  are  5993240.  reys,  that  is,
3745  1.  15  s.  6  d.  ster.

The  expences  of  Onor,  are  141 1000.  reys,  882  1.  5  s.
ster.

Barcelor  the  Fortresse  and  Church  expend  1 1 19  1.  17  s.
6  d.  ster.

Mangalor  832  1.  17  s.  6  d.  Cananor  965  1.  us.  3d.
ster.

Cochin  hath  a  Bishop  with  500  1.  revenue,  with  many
Church  Officers,  Priests,  Friars,  the  Hospitall  which  with
the  Secular  expences  added,  amount  to  6953204.  reys,
which  is  4345  1.  15  s.  ob.  ^V-  pen.  ster.

Cranganor  the  Secular  and  Ecclesiastikes  receive  782  1.
is.  6  d.  ob.  -ru.  peny  ster.

Coulan  receiveth  annually  in  expences  570  1.  17  s.  ob.
to-  penv  sterling:  whereof  the  Jesuites  receive  125 1.
ster.

Manai  expences  Ecclesiasticall  and  Secular,  are  4597  1.
5  s.  ster.

Ceylan expendeth in Church and lay Offices 7402  1.

14  s.  7  d.

Malaca  hath  a  Bishop  500  reven.  the  Jesuites  receive
112  1. 10  s.  besides  spent  on  the  Jesuites  in  Japan  218  1.

15  s.  yeerly.  40  1.  to  the  Jesuites  in  Amboina.  90  1.  to  the
Jesuites  in  Maluco,  and  for  their  passage  to  Japan  1 1 2  1.
10  s.  the  Dominicans,  the  Church  Officers  and  the  Vestrie,
and  all  the  Secular  expences  in  Malacca,  are  12248  1.
9  s.  6  d.

The  expences  of  Maluco  amount  to  2200  1.  14  s.  6d,
Of  Amboyno  1  $}$  1.  4  s.  6  d.

The  Bishop  appointed  for  China,  hath  500 1.  reven.
The  Jesuites  67  1.  10  s.  These  with  the  Judge  and  other
Officers,  receive  annually  733  1.  6  s.

Idalxa,  Itecamana,  and  Maomet  Caon,  and  the  Portugal
stipendaries,  in  annuall  rewards  given  bv  the  Kings
bountie,  Cocket  free  for  the  Moguls  ship  (which  custome
comes  to  7500 1.)  in  all  10671I.  19  s.  ob.  q  ;  .^.  penv
ster.

189

A.D.

I584.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

All  the  ordinarie  annuall  expences  of  the  state  of  India,
are  2 1 47 1  8878.  reys,  which  is  1 34 199  1.  5  s.  1 1  d.  ob.  \.
peny  ster.

Other  Warrants,  Interrogatories  to  be  ministred  upon
Oathes  to  all  Officers,  Contracts  of  peace  with  Neighbour
Princes,  &c.  contayned  in  that  Booke  are  here  omitted.

And  now  I  might  easily  have  obtayned  this  Vice-royes
Warrant  to  the  Captaine  of  the  Forts  of  Mosambique  and
Sofala,  running  after  their  manner,  It  is  my  Will  and
Pleasure,  that  &c.  for  my  entertainment :  but  it  is  my  will
and  pleasure  rather  (as  like  will  to  like)  to  take  a  Preacher
and  Priest  along  with  me,  that  though  we  agree  not  other-
[II. ix.  1 533.]  wise  in  Doctrine,  yet  as  Travellers  we  wil  restraine  our
zeale,  and  without  feare  of  Inquisition,  march  like  good
Fellowes  together :  yea,  with  Jesuites  after,  without  feare
of  Treason.  Onely  first  I  will  present  unto  you  a  Letter
of  a  Spanish  Embassador,  relating  the  Antiquities  of
Persepolis,  and  some  things  by  him  observed  in  Persia.

Chap.  XL

A  Letter  from  Don  Garcia  Silva  Figueroa  Em-
bassador from  Philip  the  Third  King  of  Spaine
to  the  Persian,  written  at  Spahan,  or  Hispahan,
Anno  1 61 9.  to  the  Marquesse  of  Bedmar,
touching  matters  of  Persia.

Earied with travelling both by Sea and

Land,  but  otherwise  well,  I  came  at  length

from  Ormuz  into  Persia. Which  having

wandred  over  ;  at  the  Kings  appointment,

I  went  to  Hispahan  : where  I  endure  a

tedious  irkesome  delay,  being  even  tyred

with  so  unpleasant  a  life,  as  I  here  leade.

For  whatsoever  Writers  report  of  that  great  and  ancient

Monarchic  of  the  Achsemenides, this  is mine opinion ;

That  there  is  nothing  in  all  this  Countrey  to  be  found  so

good,  but  that  it  comes  short  of  the  least  commoditie  in

our  Europe. And  besides that  every  thing  here is  so

190

DON GARCIA SILVA FIGUEROA  aj>.

i  6  i  9.
crosse  to  our  fashions,  that  I  am  without  all  converse  with
men  ;  here  are  not  so  much  as  any  bookes  (the  reading
whereof  might  somewhat  refresh  a  mans  minde  in  so
great  solitarinesse)  except  a  few  Pamphlets  intreating  of
holy  Confession,  and  Navarr's  Summes,  which  the  Monkes
of  Saint  Augustine  use.

Hispahan  is  the  noblest  Citie  of  this  Kingdome  :  and,  HUpahan.
though  it  lye  but  in  one  and  thirtie  degrees  and  a  halfe
of  Northerly  latitude ;  yet,  by  reason  of  the  subtile
piercing  ayre,  the  cold  is  sharper,  then  by  the  climate  or
situation  one  would  imagine.  Now,  in  all  this  Kingdome
you  can  scarse  see  any  print  of  Antiquitie  :  all  the  houses  No  antiquities.
being  built  of  unburned  bricke,  or  earth  rammed  up
betweene  two  boards ;  too  slight  stuffe  to  last  many  dayes,
much  lesse  many  yeeres.

Notwithstanding,  there  are  yet  remayning  most  of
those  huge  wilde  buildings  of  the  Castle  and  Palace  of
Persepolis,  so  much  celebrated  in  the  monuments  of  P^r^P°^s  ond
ancient  Writers.  These  frames  doe  the  Arabians  and  '  remakes.
Persians  in  their  owne  language,  call  Chilminara  :  which
is  as  much  as  if  you  should  say  in  Spanish,  Quarenta
columnas,  or  Alcoranes :  for  so  they  call  those  high  narrow
round  steeples,  which  the  Arabians  have  in  their
Mesquites.  This  rare,  yea  and  onely  monument  of  the
World  (which  farre  exceedeth  all  the  rest  of  the  Worlds
miracles,  that  we  have  seene  or  heard  off)  sheweth  it  selfe
to  them  that  come  to  this  Citie  from  the  Towne  of  Xiria,
and  standeth  about  a  league  from  the  River  Bradamir,  in
times  past  called  Araxis  (not  that,  that  parteth  Media  from
the  greater  Armenia)  whereof  often  mention  is  made  by
Quintus  Curtius,  Diodorus  and  Plutarch  :  which  Authors
doe  point  us  out  the  situation  of  Persepolis,  and  doe
almost  leade  us  unto  it  by  the  hand.  The  largenesse,
fairnesse,  and  long-lasting  Matter  of  those  Pillars,
appeareth  by  the  twentie  which  are  yet  left,  of  alike
fashion ;  which  with  other  remaynders  of  those  stately
Piles,  doe  move  admiration  in  the  minde  of  beholders,
and  cannot,  but  with  much  labour,  and  at  leisure,  be  layed

191

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1619.

open.  But  since  it  is  your  Lordships  hap  to  live  now  at
Venice,  where  you  may  see  some  resemblance  of  the  things,
which  I  am  about  to  write  of,  I  will  briefly  tell  you,  that
most  of  the  Pictures  of  men,  that,  ingraven  in  marble,
doe  seele  the  front,  the  sides,  and  statelier  parts  of  this
building,  are  deckt  with  a  very  comely  cloathing,  and
clad  in  the  same  fashion,  which  the  Venetian  Magnifico's
goe  in  ;  that  is,  in  Gownes  downe  to  the  heeles,  with  wide
sleeves ;  with  round  flat  caps,  their  haire  spred  to  the
shoulders,  and  notable  long  beards.  Yee  may  see  in  these
Tables  some  men  sitting,  with  great  majestie,  in  certayne
loftier  chayres,  such  as  use  to  bee  with  us  in  the  Quires
and  Chapter-houses  of  Cathedrall  Churches,  appointed  for
the  seates  of  the  chiefe  Prelates  :  the  feete  being  supported
with  a  little  foote-stoole  neatly  made,  about  a  hand  high.
And,  which  is  very  worthy  of  wonder,  in  so  divers  dresses
of  so  many  men ;  as  are  ingraven  in  these  Tables,  none
commeth  neere  the  fashion  which  is  at  this  day,  or  hath
beene  these  many  Ages  past  in  use  through  all  Asia.  For
though  out  of  all  Antiquitie  we  can  gather  no  such
Arguments  of  the  cloathing  of  Assyrians,  Medes  and
Persians,  as  we  finde  many  of  the  Greekes  and  Romanes :
yet  it  appeareth  sufficiently,  that  they  used  garments  of
a  middle  size  for  length,  like  the  Punike  vest,  used  by
the  Turkes  and  Persians  at  this  day,  which  they  call
Aljuba,  and  these  Cavaja  :  and  Shashes  wound  about  their
heads,  distinguished  yet  both  by  fashion  and  colour  from
the  Cidaris,  which  is  the  Royall  Diademe.  Yet  verily
in  all  this  sculpture  (which  though  it  be  ancient,  yet  shineth
as  neatly,  as  if  it  were  but  new-done)  you  can  see  no
picture,  that  is  like  or  in  the  workmanship  resembleth  any
other,  which  the  memorie  of  man  could  yet  attayne  to
the  knowledge  of,  from  any  part  of  the  World  :  so  that
this  worke  may  seeme  to  exceede  all  Antiquitie.  Now,
Inscription  of  nothing  more  confirmeth  this,  then  one  notable  inscription
unknown  let-  cut  -m  a  JaSper-table,  with  Characters  still  so  fresh  and
tey,%DltaWn  ^re?  tnat  one  would  wonder,  how  it  could  scape  so
many Ages without touch of the least blemish. The

192

DON GARCIA SILVA FIGUEROA  <u>.

1619.

Letters  themselves  are  neither  Chaldacan,  nor  Hebrew,  nor
Greeke,  nor  Arallike,  nor  of  any  other  Nation,  which  was
ever  found  of  old,  or  at  this  day,  to  be  extant.  They  are
all  three-cornered,  but  somewhat  long,  of  the  forme  of  a  [II.ix.1534.]
Pyramide,  or  such  a  little  Obeliske,  as  I  have  set  in  the  A
margine :  so  that  in  nothing  doe  they  differ  one  from  ^-*
another,  but  in  their  placing  and  situation,  yet  so  con-
formed that  they  are  wondrous  plaine  distinct  and
perspicuous.  What  kinde  of  building  the  whole  was
(whether  Corinthian,  Ionick,  Dorick,  or  mixt)  cannot  bee
gathered  from  the  remaynder  of  these  ruines  :  which  is
otherwise  in  the  old  broken  walls  at  Rome,  by  which  that
may  easily  be  discerned.  Notwithstanding  the  wondrous
and  artificiall  exactnesse  of  the  worke,  the  beautie  and
elegancy  of  it,  shining  out  of  the  proportion  and  sym-
metric, doth  dazle  the  eyes  of  the  beholders.  But  nothing
amazed  me  more,  then  the  hardnesse  and  durablenesse  of
these  Marbles  and  Jaspers  :  for  in  many  places  there  are
Tables  so  solide,  and  so  curiously  wrought  and  polished,
that  yee  may  see  your  face  in  them,  as  in  a  glasse.
Besides  the  Authors,  by  me  alreadie  commended  ;  Arrianus
and  Justine  make  speciall  mention  of  this  Palace  :  and
they  report,  that  Alexander  the  Great  (at  the  instigation
of  Thais,  a  famous  Whore  of  Athens)  did  burne  it  downe.
But  most  delicately  of  all  doth  Diodorus  deliver  this
storie.

The  whole  Castle  was  encompassed  with  a  threefold  Castle.
circle  of  walls,  the  greater  part  whereof  hath  yeelded  to
the  violence  of  time  and  weather.  There  stand  also  the
Sepulchres  of  their  Kings, placed  on  the  side  of  that  Hill,at  Sepukher.
the  foote  whereof  the  Castle  it  selfe  is  built :  and  the  monu-
ments stand  just  so  farre  one  from  another,  as  Diodorus
reporteth.  In  a  word,  all  doth  so  agree  with  his  discourse
of  it,  that  he  that  hath  seene  this,  and  read  that,  cannot
possibly  be  deceived.  More  then  this,  there  remayne  not
any  markes  of  so  huge  a  Citie :  but  that  nigh  about  halfe
a  league  from  the  Castle,  there  stands  up  another  Pillar,  as
bigge  as  the  rest :  and  two  other  shorter  ones  too,  set  a
ix  193  N

A.D.
1619.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

little  farther  off :  and  in  them  did  my  Servants  see  some
horses  of  Marble,  large  like  a  Colossus,  and  some  men
also  of  Giantly  stature.  To  tell  you  true  (as  neere  as  it
was,  and  easily  done,  yet)  I  was  loath  to  goe  thither ;  both,
because  all  that  Plaine  was  cut  full  of  little  Brookes,
Ditches,  and  Sluses  drawne  out  of  the  River  Araxis  :  and
also,  because  I  would  be  held  there  no  longer,  having
alreadie  spent  two  dayes  in  beholding  the  things  which  I
have  described.  Now,  though  that  Plaine  be  very  fruit-
full,  and  (as  I  said)  all  watered  with  Water-courses ;
though  it  lye  open  every  way  above  ten  leagues,  that  it
might  well  maintayne  so  great  a  Citie,  as  Persepolis  some-
time was :  yet  now  it  is  taken  up  onely  with  one  small
Towne  of  some  foure  hundreth  houses  ;  compassed  about
with  fat  pastures,  fruitfull  Fields,  and  most  fertile  and
pleasant  Orchards  and  Closes,  and  furnished  with  all
manner  of  foode,  and  such  pure  wholsome  water  to
drinke,  that  I  doe  not  remember  that  ever  I  tasted  the  like

Margatean.  any  where  else.  This  Towne  is  called  Margatean,  and  is
a  little  distant  from  the  Castle.  As  for  the  King  him-
selfe,  I  had  beene  with  him  at  Casbin,  before  I  came
hither.

Casb'm.  Casbin  is  a  towne  some  three  hundred  leagues  distant

from  Ormuz ;  and  from  hence  one  hundreth  long  ones.
There  had  the  King  levied  a  mightie  armie  of  Horse  and
Foot  to  meete  the  Turkes  forces,  who,  as  enemies,  invaded
the  frontiers  of  the  Persian  Empire.  There  I  abode  there-
fore but  fortie  daies,  being  by  the  King  royally  entertained,
with  cheerefull  expressions  of  a  loving  minde. But  when

Sohania.  he  was  to  goe  to  Soltania  (some  fifteene  leagues  from
thence)  to  muster  his  companies,  which  were  there  met ;
he  let  me  plainely  understand,  that  before  his  departure
he  would  dispatch  mee  for  my  returne  to  Ormuz.  Soone
after,  having  suddenly  changed  his  mind,  hee  commanded
mee  to  retire  my  selfe  hither  :  whither  he  promised,  so
soone  as  the  warre  was  over,  to  come  himselfe,  and  to  send
me  away.  But  when  the  warre  was  quickly  ended  (which
I  foresaw  by  undoubted  signes  at  Casbin)  the  King  with-

194

DON GARCIA SILVA FIGUEROA

drew  himselfe  to  Farabat :  which  is  a  Towne  of  Hercania,
by  the  Caspian  Sea,  which  hee  loves  and  delights  in  much.
Hee  presently  sent  me  a  messenger  to  signifie  that  he
would  certainly  come  hither  in  the  spring,  to  celebrate  his
birth-day.  This  unwelcome  newes  troubled  mee  more
then  all  the  toyle  and  trouble  of  the  whole  voyage.  I
resolved  therefore  to  dispatch  to  him  one  of  my  Gentle-
men, with  the  Abbot  of  Saint  Augustines  :  who  if  they
should  perceive  that  his  comming  were  likely  to  be  delayed
long,  might  procure  my  dispatch ;  though  at  a  most
unseasonable  time  for  sailing,  and  at  my  great  perill  to
venter  upon  the  heate  at  Ormuz,  in  summer  insupportable.

Concerning  the  peace  or  truce  agreed  upon  by  these
Princes,  after  a  bloudy  field  fought  betweene  Tauris  and
Ardeuill,  it  is  to  no  purpose  to  report,  since  it  is  publike
and  divulged,  though  their  covenants  and  conditions  be
yet  kept  close.  If  the  State  were  at  more  quiet  in
Moscovie,  I  would  (goe  by  Astracan  and)  make  a  journey
through  that  Countrey,  in  my  returne.  But  it  is  strange,
what  miseries  and  calamities  afflict  that  Nation  :  which  in
ancient  time  hath  so  flourished  and  prevailed,  that  it
scattered  and  put  downe  the  Tartarians  of  the  East,  who
were  dreadful!  to  the  whole  world.  Of  which  miseries
and  destructions  the  ground  and  author  was  that  counter-
feit Demetrius,  who  having  by  plaine  cousenage  usurped
once  the  empire  of  the  Russians,  left  it  in  a  continued  line
to  six  other  false  tyrants  of  his  name  after  him.

The  conclusion  of  these  my  letters  shall  be  the  relation
of  two  Comets,  which  during  this  time  wee  beheld,  the
one,  on  the  tenth  of  November,  began  to  shine  two  houres
before  Sunne-rising ;  whose  appearing  was  observed
betweene  East  and  South.  The  colour  was  like  to  the
fume  which  ariseth  from  the  flame  of  the  finest  Gun-
powder. The  head  of  it  seemed  to  me  to  be  in  Scorpio :
the  bignesse,  as  much  as  would  containe  a  sixt  part  of  the
Zodiake :  the  forme  (as  some  imagined)  like  a  Cimiter ;
which  sort  the  Grecians  call  Xiphias,  boding  *  horrible
events. This Comet (me thought) resembled rather  a

i95

A.D.
1619.

Farabat.

Two  Comets
seene  also  here
1618.

*  As  we  have
seene  since  in
Turkie,
Poland,
Bohemia,
Germanie,
Grisons,
France,  &c.
and  still  see.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1619.

yeere-old  spring  of  Palme,  which  being  not  yet  spred  is  a

little  bowed  at  the  top  :  it  moved  toward  the  South.

Twelve  or  thirteene  daies  after  the  rising  of  this  Comet,

[II. ix.  1 535.]  another  appeared  with  hayrie  rayes,  of  an  ordinarie  fashion,

coloured like the  Planet Venus, and much about that

bignesse,  or  a  little  bigger. It  arose  directly  East. And

though  at  first  it  were  farre  lesse  then the  former,  yet

increasing  daily  more  and  more,  it  grew  almost  as  big

as  the  other. By  the  proper  motion  it moved it  selfe

with the  Primum Mobile, not farre from the  verticall

Line. Moreover,  three  or  foure  daies  after  the  arising

of  this,  that  other  vanished. Sure  they  had  both  of  them

a  very  short  period,  insomuch  as  the  latter  scarce  shewed

it  selfe  above  ten  daies. It  was  observed,  that  toward  the

Would  God end, it looked more red. Howsoever it be, if these

he  had  beene Comets portend mischiefe, the mischiefe (sure) cannot

or  may e  a ^  long-lasting,  like  others,  whereof  wee  may  see  store
true  presage.  b ,  . b'  '  '

in  the  world.

196

FRIAR  JOANNO DOS SANCTOS

A.D.

'597-

Chap. XII.

Collections  out  of  the  Voyage  and  Historie  of  Friar
Joao  dos  Sanctos  his  Ethiopia  Orientalis,  &
Varia  Historia,  and  out  of  other  Portugals,  for
the  better  knowledge  of  Africa  and  the  Chris-
tianitie  therein.

§.  i.

The  Authors  Voyage  and  Acts  in  those  parts  ;  Sea
accidents,  Moorish  fooleries,  English  Ships :  Of
Sofala,  the  Fort ;  the  Fruits  and  Plants  of  those
parts.

He  said  Friar  went  with  a  Fleet  from
Lisbon  in  Aprill  1586.  July  the  first,  they
came  before  the  Cape  of  good  hope,  and
had  such  faire  weather,  that  they  tooke
great  store  of  Fish,  till  a  faire  gale  set  them
onwards  for  Mozambique.  Being  against
Terra  do  Natal  (which  trends  betwixt
thirtie  two  and  thirtie  foure  degrees  South)  they  were
encountred  with  a  great  storme,  the  Windes  and  Waves
bellowing  and  billowing  (in  a  seeming)  conspiracie  to  their
ruine.  The  second  night  of  this  tempest,  the  ninth  of
July,  they  saw  on  their  maine  tops  a  Corpo  santo  in  figure
of  a  flame*  of  fire  bright  and  shining,  from  thence
remooving  to  the  Mizen-mast ;  and  the  Pilot  saluted  it,
saying,  Salve  Corpo  santo,  salve ;  Boa  viagem,  boa
viagem  :  Haile  Corpo  sancto,  haile,  a  good  voyage,  a  good
voyage.  And  most  of  the  people  with  many  teares  of
joy  made  the  same  answer,  Boa  viagem,  boa  viagem  :  the
light  having  there  long  continued,  vanished.  The
Mariners  beleeve  that  this  light  is  S.  Pero  Goncalves
Telmo  Naturall  of  Palencia  a  Citie  in  Castile,  a
Dominican, upon whom they ordinarily call

197

Jo.  dos  Sanctos
I.  z.  de  Var.
hist.  c.  18.

being

*Faisca.

A  Corpo  Santo
saluted,  and
fond  opinions
thereof. How
truly  is  it  said
of  such,  Jo.  4.
Tee  worship
yee  know  not
what?
*Oupot:

A.D.
1597-

Profit  of
Legends  of  lies
of  Saints.

Adoration  to
an  exhalation,
supposed  a
Saint:  and  to
a  Saint  as  to
God:  a  double
Idolatrie  in
the  Popish
opinion,  which
yet  lay  this
stumbling
blocke  before
the  blind  in
worship  of
creatures.

Terra  dos
Fumos.

Children  of
the  Sunne.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

endangered  in  tempests,  and  either  call  it  Saint  Peter
Goncalves,  or  S.  Telmo,  or  Corpo  Santo.  Many  times
it  appeareth,  and  so  long  they  hold  themselves  secure,
and  ordinarily  the  stormes  are  moderated  when  it
commeth,  as  it  happened  to  us  in  this  voyage ;  and  there-
fore they  held  it  in  much  devotion,  albee  it  be  but  naturall,
caused  by  exhalations  :  which  the  Mariners  denie,  saying,
that  somtimes  in  the  place  where  that  light  appeares,  they
have  found  greene  Wax,  like  that  of  a  Wax-candle.  And
in  the  life  of  that  Saint  is  rehearsed,  that  hee  sometimes
appeares  visible  to  Mariners  when  they  call  upon  him  in
tempests,  and  delivers  them  from  Sea  dangers.  Whiles
this  light  appeared,  a  Souldier  kneeling  downe  in  the  ship
before  it,  smote  his  breast,  saying,  with  many  teares.
Adorovos  meu  Snor  S.  Pero  Goncalvez,  vos  me  salvay
neste  perigo  por  vossa  misericordia ;  repeating  it  many
times.  I  adore  thee  my  Lord  Saint  Peter  Goncalvez,  O
save  me  in  this  danger  for  thy  mercie.  I  and  an  other
father  told  him,  this  adoration  was  due  only  to  God,  and
that  the  Saints  should  be  prayed  to  in  another  manner.
He  answered  worse  to  the  purpose.  My  God  shall  he
be  now  which  shall  deliver  me  from  this  danger.  We
then  left  him,  but  the  next  day  the  storme  being  past  he
confessed  his  fault.

On  the  seven  and  twentieth  they  came  to  Baixos  da
Judia  in  two  and  twentie  South,  and  the  thirteenth  of
August  came  to  Mozambique :  from  thence  by  the  Vicar
Generals  appointment,  I  and  another  Dominican  were  sent
for  Sofala,  one  hundred  and  sixtie  leagues  distant,  for
the  service  of  Christianitie  in  those  parts  in  November
following.  In  the  yeere  1588.  the  Saint  Thomas  having
passed  the  Cape,  was  wracked  neere  Terra  do  Natal,  and
some  of  the  companie  escaping,  went  on  shoare  in  Terra
dos  Fumos,  &  hapned  on  more  humane  Cafres  then  the
most  are  in  those  parts,  which  had  never  seene  white  man
before,  called  them  Children  of  the  Sunne,  and  gave  them
to  eate  and  drinke.  Stephen  Veyga  the  Captaine,  and
some  others  adventured  on  a  journey  thence  by  land  (above

198

FRIAR JOANNO DOS SANCTOS

A.D.

1597-

eightie  leagues)  to  Sofala,  where  they  gave  great  thankes
to  God  and  our  Ladie  for  their  deliverie.

Over  against  the  Fortresse  of  Sofala,  is  an  Hand  on  the  Inhanzato.
other  side  of  the  River  called  Inhanzato,  of  which  in
former  times  was  Lord  a  Moore,  called  Muynhe
Mafamede,  so  friendly  to  the  Portugals,  and  so  luke-  [II.ix.1536.]
warme  in  his  Religion,  that  with  them  he  would  both
eate  Swines  flesh  and  drinke  Wine.  Yet  was  hee  so
honoured,  that  after  his  death,  the  Moores  of  Sofala
erected  a  Mesquit  in  the  place  of  his  buriall,  and  before
the  Mariners  made  their  voyage,  would  make  prayers  to
him  (as  a  Saint)  for  their  successe.  I  set  this  Mesquit  on
fire,  to  the  discontent  of  those  Moores.  Fryar  John
Madeira  and  I,  remained  foure  yeeres  in  Sofala,  labouring
the  conversion  of  the  Moores  and  Gentiles,  of  which  we
baptized  1694.  persons.  After  that  time  the  Vicar
Generall  caused  us  to  returne  to  Mosambique.  In  the
way  the  Cafers  sent  us  victuals  and  Musicians  with  their
unmusicall  voices  and  Tabers  all  night,  entertaining  us
with  a  feast  worse  then  a  fast.  Having  thus  passed  the
Lordship  of  an  Encosse  under  the  Quiteves  dominion,  we
came  into  the  Countrey  of  Manamotapa,  where  in  the
night  passing  a  desart,  wee  heard  terrible  voices,  like  as
if  they  had  beene  of  men,  which  we  supposed  to  be  Cafar
theeves,  and  durst  not  speake  one  to  the  other,  lest  we
might  so  betray  our  lives.  The  next  Cafars  told  us  they
were  birds  bigger  then  Cocks,  which  in  the  day  time  hide  Strange  biro's
themselves,  and  in  the  night  flie,  chase  and  prey  on  other
fowles,  which  terrified  with  their  voices,  leave  their  roosts
and  so  become  a  prey.

They  came  to  the  River  of  Luabo  after  eighteene  daies.  Luabo.
In  this  River  are  many  great  Hands,  where  we  lay  in  the
nights,  and  sayled  by  day  because  of  the  Currents  and
Shelves.  The  two  and  twentieth  of  August  we  came  to
the  Fort  of  Sena,  where  the  two  Churches  of  those  Rivers
had  never  a  Priest,  and  therefore  wee  spent  two  and  thirtie
dayes  in  confessing,  baptizing,  massing :  and  thence  were
invited  to  Tete,  for  like  cause,  sixtie  leagues  distant. I

199

Quite ve  King
of  the
Countrey
about  Sofa/a.
Monomotapa.

Sena.

Tete.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1597*

went  and baptized there one hundred and seventeene.

Madeira  at  Sena  baptized  above  two  hundred  persons :

and  from  the  first  entrie  of  Dominicans,  they  had  in  that

River  Cuama  baptized  above  twentie  thousand. In  the

Port  of  Quilimane  were  foure  Pangayas  of  the  Captayne

of  Mozambique,  then  Don  Jorge  de  Menezes,  in  one  of

which  wee  embarked,  in  which  was  a  Chest  with  iooooo.

Cruzados  of  gold,  of  powder,  and  peeces,  which  hee  had

made  in  those  Rivers  with  Souso  Coutinho  the  Governour

of India : which gold is ordinarily  gathered  every six

moneths  by  the  Portugals  and  Captayne. In  the  yeere

1592.  I  was  sent  to  Quirimba. There  I  staid  two  yeeres,

and  made  six  hundred  nintie  foure  Christians,  and  untill

that yeere 1593. the Dominicans had baptized above

sixteene thousand in those lies. After which I was

recalled  to  Sofala,  and  in  1595.  to  Mozambique. In  the

Two  English yeere  1597,  two  English  ships  came  in  sight  of  Mosam-

sJfs' ,  bique  ; as  also  two  others  had  done  in  the  yeere 1 591 .

These  of  C. The  two  and  twentieth  of  August 1597. he  embarked

Raymond  and himselfe  for  India,  and  on  the  twentieth  of  September

Lancaster :  the  entred  the  Barre  of  Goa. But  let  us  take  view  of  Sofala,

°f„ , o and  the  parts  adioyning,  as  he  hath  described  them  in  the

Wood. See r  r r  1  •  1 °

sup. p.  no. "rst  Part  °*  ms  workes.

Sofala.  The Fortresse  of Sofala stands in 20. 30 Southerne

degrees,  situate  on  the  Coast  of  Easterne  Ethiopia,  neere
the  Sea,  and  just  by  a  River  a  league  in  the  mouth,  little
more or lesse, which  riseth  higher  above  one hundred

Mocarangue.  leagues,  arising  in  the  Countrey  called  Mocarangua,  and
passing  by  the  Citie  Zimbaoe  where  the  Quiteve  resides,
who  is  King  of  those  parts,  and  of  all  the  River  of  Sofala.
Up  that  River  the  Portugals  trade  to  Manica,  a  land  of
much  gold,  seated  within  the  land  above  sixtie  leagues.
Within  the  Fort  of  Sofala  is  a  Church,  to  which  belong
six  hundred  Communicants.  The  Inhabitants  usually  are
Merchants,  some  to  Manica  for  gold,  which  they  barter
for  Stuffes  and  Beades,  both  to  the  Captayne  and  them-
selves ;  others  to  the  River  of  Sabia,  and  the  lies  das
Bocicas,  and  other  neere  Rivers,  for  Ivorie,  Gergelim-spice,

FRIAR  JOANNO DOS SANCTOS  aj>.

*597«

Pulse,  Amber,  and  many  Slaves.  There  is  another
habitation  of  Moores  two  Caliver  shot  from  the  Castle,
poore  and  miserable,  which  live  by  serving  the  Portugals.
The  women  performe  there  the  offices  of  Tillage  and
Husbandry;  as  also  doe  the  Moores.  They  pay  their
Tithes  to  the  Dominicans  Church.  The  Fortresse  was
built  An.  1505.  by  Pero  da  Nhaya,  with  consent  of  the
Moorish  King  Zufe,  a  man  blinde  of  both  his  eyes  (in
both  senses,  externall  and  internall,  religious  and  politike)
who  too  late  repenting,  thought  to  supplant  it  with
trecherie,  which  they  returned  upon  himselfe  and  slew
him.  In  old  times  they  had  many  such  petty  Moorish
Kings  on  the  Coast,  few  of  which  now  remaine  by  reason
of  the  Portugal!  Captaynes  succeeding  in  their  places,  and
in  their  amitie  and  commerce  with  the  Quiteve  King  of
those  Countries.

In  those  Countries  of  Sofala  are  many  fruits,  as  Pome-
granat  trees  which  beare  all  the  yeere,  some  greene,  some
ripe,  some  in  flowers ;  they  have  also  Fig-trees,  which
yeeld  blacke  Figs  all  the  yeere  most  excellent ;  Oranges,
Limes,  Vines  which  beare  twice  a  yeere,  in  Januarie  and
July ;  Ananas,  Indian  Figs,  which  yeeld  great  branches
of  Figs  as  great  as  Cucumbers,  yellow  when  they  are  ripe,
and  sweet  of  sent,  sometimes  seventie  Figges  are  seene  on
one  cluster,  like  a  bunch  of  Grapes,  and  a  man  can
scarcely  lift  them  from  the  ground.  They  have  great
grounds  of  Sugar-canes  alongst  the  River,  husbanded  by
the  Cafres,  not  for  Sugar,  but  to  eate  (for  they  want
Ingenios)  and  are  a  great  part  of  their  sustenance.
They  have  many  and  great  Palme-trees  which  yeeld
infinite  Cocos  and  Wine.  They  have  store  of
Guinnie  Wheat,  and  Rice ;  many  Inhames  (a  very
great  roote  yeelding  broade  leaves,  and  better  in
taste  then  Potatoes)  Fitches,  and  other  Pulse  in  much
varietie.  In  the  fields  and  wild  unfilled  places  grow  store
of  Jasmins,  and  Mangericones  (very  sweet  plants)  and
they  make  oyle  of  Gergelim,  which  they  beate  in  woodden
Morters,  as  big  as  will  reach  to  a  mans  girdle,  and  then

A.D.

'597-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Another.

straine  out  the  Oyles,  and  eate  the  rest  with  their  Wheate
in  stead  of  Butter. Innumerable  Hens  very  good  and

fll.ix.1537.]  cheape ;  Hogs,  Goats,  Kine,  wild  Beasts,  Deere,  and  wild
Swine  are  there.  Ten  Hens  are  sold  for  two  Testons
(2s.  6d.)  and  up  in  the  Countrey  eighteene  at  the  price.
They  make  Oile  of  Cocos  which  burnes  cleerer  then  that
of  the  Olive.  In  the  Realtie  of  Manica  grow  little  Trees
on  the  tops  of  Hills  and  Rocks,  which  the  most  part  of
the  yeere  are  drie,  without  leafe  and  greennesse,  but  have
this  propertie,  that  if  one  cut  off  a  bough  &  put  it  into

A  strange  tree,  water,  in  the  space  of  ten  houres  it  springs  and  flourisheth
with  greene  leaves ;  but  draw  it  out  of  the  water,  as
soone  as  it  is  drie,  it  remaynes  again  as  it  was  before.  The
Cafres  say,  that  though  this  wood  bee  gathered  ten  yeeres,
yet  after  all  that  time  put  into  water,  it  will  flourish  and
continue  greene.  This  wood  being  ground,  and  given  to
drinke  in  water,  is  good  to  stanch  fluxes  of  bloud.  The
Cafres  call  it  Mungodao.  Another  wood  they  call
Matuui,  which  signifieth  the  Dung  of  a  Man,  having  the
name  of  that  sent,  so  noysome  that  none  can  endure  it.
The  same  is  in  India,  the  Tree  like  a  Thorne  tree.  They
say,  it  hath  vertues  against  the  Ayre  (or  Blastings)  and
therefore  many  persons  weare  it  in  strings  like  Beades,
tyed  to  the  arme  next  the  skin,  specially  children.  Alongst
the  River  of  Sofala  in  two  places  wilde  and  desart,  grow
Oranges  and  Limons,  which  every  one  may  gather  that
will :  wherewith  they  lade  Boats  and  sell  them  for  almost
nothing  to  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Fortresse,  which  fill
Barrels  and  Pots  with  the  juyce,  and  the  same  Limons
salted,  and  send  them  for  India,  where  they  are  much
esteemed,  and  eaten  with  Rice.  The  bread  ordinarily  in
Sofala  is  of  their  Wheate  and  Rice  mixt  together,  whereof
they  make  Cakes  which  they  call  Mocates :  tollerable
whiles  they  are  hot,  but  cold,  insufferable.  The  Portugals
drinke  commonly  Palme-wine,  the  Cafres  Wine  of  their
Wheate  (or  Mays)  which  they  make  strong  and  tipsie.

Bread  of
Mais,  or
Guimy,
Turkie,  Vir-
ginia Wheat,
feff.
Wine.

FRIAR  JOANNO DOS SANCTOS

A. I).

1597-

with the
parts,

in

§■  n.

Of  Quiteve King of that Countrey,
strange customes observed in those
Court,  Citie  and  Countrey.

He  King  of  these  parts  is  of  curled  haire,  a  Gentile,
which  worships  nothing,  nor  hath  any  knowledge
of  God ;  yea,  rather  hee  carries  himselfe  as  God  of
his  Countries,  and  so  is  holden  and  reverenced  of  his
Vassals.  Hee  is  called  Quiteve,  a  title  royall  and  no
proper  name,  which  they  exchange  for  this  so  soone  as
they  become  Kings.  The  Quiteve  hath  more  then  one
hundred  women  all  within  doores,  amongst  which  one  or
two  are  as  his  Queenes,  the  rest  as  Concubines :  many  of
them  are  his  owne  Aunts,  Cousins,  Sisters  and  Daughters,
which  he  no  lesse  useth,  saying,  that  his  sonnes  by  them
are  true  heires  of  the  Kingdome  without  mixture  of  other
bloud.  When  the  Quiteve  dyeth,  his  Queenes  must  die
with  him  to  doe  him  service  in  the  other  world,  who
accordingly  at  the  instant  of  his  death  take  a  poyson  (which
they  call  Lucasse)  and  die  therewith.  The  successor
succeedeth  as  well  to  the  women  as  the  state.  None  else
but  the  King  may  upon  paine  of  death  marry  his  Sister  or
Daughter.  This  Successor  is  commonly  one  of  the  eldest
Sonnes  of  the  decessed  King,  and  of  his  great  Women  or
Queenes ;  and  if  the  eldest  be  not  sufficient,  then  the
next,  or  if  none  of  them  be  fit,  his  Brother  of  whole  bloud.
The  King  commonly  whiles  hee  liveth  maketh  the  choise,
and  traines  up  him  to  affaires  of  State,  to  whom  he
destines  the  succession.  Whiles  I  lived  there,  saith
Sanctos,  the  King  had  above  thirtie  Sonnes,  and  yet  shewed
more  respect  to  his  Brother  a  wise  man,  then  to  any  of
them,  all  honoring  him  as  apparent  heire.

The  same  day  the  King  dies,  he  is  carried  to  a  Hill
where  all  the  Kings  are  interred,  and  early  the  next
morning,  hee  whom  the  decessed  had  named  his  Successor,
goeth  to  the  Kings  house  where  the  Kings  Women  abide

203

The  Quiteve
Manner  of
succession  and
coronation.

See  after  of
breaking  the
Boive.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1597-

in  expectation,  and  by  their  consent  hee  enters  the  house,
and  seates  himselfe  with  the  principall  of  them  in  a  publike
Hall,  where  the  King  was  wont  to  sit  to  heare  Causes,
in  a  place  drawne  with  curtens  or  covered  with  a  cloth,
that  none  may  see  the  King  nor  the  Women  with  him.
And  thence  he  sends  his  Officers,  which  goe  thorow  the
Citie  and  proclayme  Festivals  to  the  New  King,  who  is
now  quietly  possessed  of  the  Kings  House,  with  the
Women  of  the  King  decessed,  and  that  all  should  goe
and  acknowledge  him  for  their  King :  which  is  done  by  all
the  great  Men  then  in  Court,  and  the  Nobles  of  the  Citie,
who  goe  to  the  Palace  now  solemnely  guarded,  and  enter
into  the  Hall  by  licence  of  the  Officers,  where  the  new
King  abides  with  his  Women  ;  entring  some,  and  some,
creeping  on  the  ground  till  they  come  to  the  middle  of  the
Hall,  and  thence  speake  to  the  New  King,  giving  him
due  obeysance,  without  seeing  him  or  his  Women.  The
King  makes  answere  from  within,  and  accepts  their
service  :  and  after  that  drawes  the  Curtens,  and  shewes
himselfe  to  them ;  whereat  all  of  them  clap  their  hands,
and  then  turne  behind  the  Curtens,  and  goe  forth  creeping
on  the  ground  as  they  came  in ;  and  when  they  are  gone,
others  enter  and  doe  in  like  sort.  In  this  ceremonie  the
greatest  part  of  the  day  is  spent  with  feasting,  musick
and  dancing  thorow  the  Citie.  The  next  day,  the  King
sends  his  Officers  thorow  the  Kingdome  to  declare  this
his  succession,  and  that  all  should  come  to  the  Court  to
see  him  breake  the  Bowe.  Sometimes  there  are  many
[II. ix. 1 5 38.]  Competitors,  and  then  Hee  succeeds  whom  the  Women
Women-  admit  into  the  Kings  House  :  for  none  may  enter  by  Law

without  their  leave,  nor  can  bee  King  without  peaceable
entrance ;  forceable  entrie  forfeiting  his  Right  and  Title.
By  bribes  therefore  and  other  wayes,  they  seeke  to  make
the  Women  on  their  side.
The  Sedandas  Neere  the  Kingdome  of  Quiteve  is  another  of  Lawes
like  customes.  ancj  Customes  like  thereto,  where  the  Sedanda  raignes :
both  which  were  sometimes  but  one  Kingdome.  Whiles
I  was  in  Sofala,  the  Sedanda  being  incurably  sick  of  a

204

FRIAR  JOANNO DOS SANCTOS

AD.

!597'

leprosie,  declared  his  Successor,  and  poysoned  himselfe:
which  also  is  the  custome  there,  if  any  King  have  any
defbrmitie  in  his  person.  The  named  Successor  sought
admittance  of  the  Women,  but  they  much  distasting  him,
had  secretly  sent  by  night  for  another  Prince  whom  they
better  liked,  as  more  valiant  and  better  beloved  ;  whom
they  admitted,  and  assembled  themselves  with  him  in  the
publike  Hall,  and  caused  Proclamation  to  bee  made  to
the  people  of  his  succession.  The  other,  whom  they  had
rejected,  fled  for  feare  of  his  life,  and  being  mightie
assembled  a  great  power,  and  by  force  entred  the  Kings
House.  But  this  was  strange  to  all,  who  therefore  for-
sooke  him,  and  stuck  to  him  whom  the  Women  had
chosen  ;  whereupon  the  other  fled,  and  no  more  lifted  up
his  head.

Before  the  New  King  begins  to  governe,  he  sends  for Ceremome  of
all  the  chiefe  in  the  Kingdome,  to  come  to  the  Court  and  b™ktn&  the

o  '  Howe.

see  him  breake  the  Kings  Bowe,  which  is  all  one  with
taking  possession  of  the  Kingdome.  In  those  Courts  is  a
custome  then  also  to  kill  some  of  those  Lords  or  great
Men,  saying,  that  they  are  necessarie  for  the  service  of  Crue"
the  decessed  King :  whereupon  they  kill  those  of  whom
they  stand  in  feare  or  doubt,  or  whom  they  hate,  in  stead
of  whom  they  make  and  erect  new  Lords.  This  custome
causeth  such  as  feare  themselves  to  flee  the  Land.
Anciently  the  Kings  were  wont  to  drinke  poyson  in  any
grievous  disasters,  as  in  a  contagious  disease,  or  naturall
impotencie,  lamenesse,  the  losse  of  their  fore-teeth,  or
other  deformitie ;  saying,  that  Kings  ought  to  have  no
defect ;  which  if  it  happened,  it  was  honour  for  him  to
die,  and  goe  to  better  himselfe  in  that  better  life,  in  which
he  should  be  wholly  perfect.  But  the  Quiteve  which
raigned  whiles  I  was  there,  would  not  follow  his  pre-
decessors herein ;  but  having  lost  one  of  his  fore-teeth,
sent  to  proclaime  thorow  his  whole  Kingdome  that  one
of  his  teeth  were  fallen  out,  and  that  if  (that  they  might
not  be  ignorant  when  they  saw  him  want  it)  his
predecessors were such fooles, for such causes to kill

205

service.

Ill  custom  well
broken.

A.D.

IS97-

Great  obser-
vance: the
like  is  used  in
Japan,  to  lye
prostrate  and
not  looke  on
him.

Exequies  to
the  dead
Kings.

Pemberer,
somewhat
resembling
that  which
jEneas  per-
formed to
Anchises.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

themselves,  he  would  not  doe  so,  but  awaite  his  naturall
death,  holding  his  life  necessary  to  conserve  his  estate
against  his  enemies,  which  example  hee  would  commend
to  posteritie.

If  the  Cafars  have  a  suit,  and  seeke  to  speake  with  the
King,  they  creepe  to  the  place  where  hee  is,  having
prostrated  themselves  at  the  entrance,  and  looke  not  on
him  all  the  while  they  speake,  but  lying  on  one  side  clap
their  hands  all  the  time  (a  rite  of  obsequiousnesse  in  those
parts)  and  then  having  finished,  they  creepe  out  of  the
doores  as  they  came  in.  For  no  Cafar  may  enter  on  foot
to  speake  to  the  King,  nor  eye  him  in  speaking,  except
the  familiars  and  particular  friends  of  the  King.  The
Portugals  enter  on  their  feet,  but  unshod,  and  being  neere
the  King,  prostrate  themselves  lying  on  one  side  almost
sitting,  and  without  looking  on  him  speake  to  him,  at  every
fourth  word  clapping  their  hands  according  to  the  custome.
Both  Cafres  and  Portugals  are  entertained  by  him  with
wine  of  Mays,  or  their  wheate,  called  Pombe,  which  they
must  drinke,  although  against  stomacke,  not  to  contemne
the  Kings  bountie ;  whence  the  Portugals  have  had  some
trouble,  and  are  forced  to  stay  in  the  Towne  without  leave
to  returne  home,  with  great  expence  of  time  and  charges.

Every  September  the  Quiteve  at  the  change  of  the
Moone,  goeth  from  Zimbache  his  Citie  to  a  high  Hill  to
performe  Obits  or  Exequies  to  his  predecessors  there
buried,  with  great  troops  both  of  the  Citie  and  other  parts
of  the  Kingdomes  called  up  therefore.  As  soone  as  they
are  ascended,  they  eate  and  drinke  their  Pombe,  the  King
beginning,  till  they  be  all  drunke ;  continuing  that  eating
and  drinking  eight  dayes,  one  of  which  they  call  Pemberar
of  a  kind  of  Tilting  exercise  then  used.  In  this  feast  the
King  and  his  Nobles  clothe  themselves  in  their  best  Silkes
and  Cotten  clothes,  which  they  have  with  many  thrummes,
like  Carpet  fringes,  wrought  therein,  hanging  downe  on
the  eyes  and  face  as  a  horses  foretop ;  they  tie  about  the
head  a  large  Ribband ;  and  divided  into  two  parts,  they
runne  one  against  another  on  foot  with  Bowes  and  Arrowes

206

FRIAR  JOANNO DOS SANCTOS  *a

1 597-
in  their  hands,  which  they  shoote  upwards  that  none  be
hurt ;  and  thus  make  a  thousand  careeres  and  feates  till
they  be  tyred  and  cannot  stirre,  and  they  which  hold  out
longest  are  accounted  the  properest  valiantest  men,  and
are  therefore  rewarded  with  the  prize  propounded.  Gaspar
de  Mello  Captayne  of  Sofala  in  my  time,  caused  to  make  a
large  Ribband  with  great  fringes  of  silke  and  gold,  and
sent  it  with  other  pieces  of  price  to  the  Quiteve,  who
most  esteemed  that  Ribband  for  this  pembering  purpose.

After  this  eight  dayes  festivall,  they  spend  two  dayes  D^'lls

or  three  in  mourning ; and  then  the  Devill  enters  into  one  q^j*.  *

of  the  company,  saying,  he  is  the  soule  of  the  deceased

King,  father  of  the  present,  to  whom  those  Exequies  are

performed ; and  that  he  comes  to  speake  to  his  sonne.

The  Cafar  thus  possessed  falls  downe  on  the  ground  in  an

ill  plight  and  is  distracted,  the  Devill  speaking  by  his

mouth  all  the  strange  tongues  of  all  the  Cafar  Nations

about  them,  many  of  which  some  of  the  men  present

understand. And after this hee beginneth to behave

himselfe,  and  to  speake  like  the  King  pretended,  by  which  [II.ix.1539.]

signes the Cafars acknowledge the comming of the

deceased  Kings  soule. The  King  is  now  made  acquainted

herewith,  and  comes  with  his  Grandes  to  the  place  where

the  Demoniake  is,  and  doe  him  great  reverence. Then

all  the  rest  goe  aside,  and  the  King  remaynes  with  him

alone,  speaking  friendly  as  with  his  father  departed,  and

enquireth  if  hee  be  to  make  warres,  whether  hee  shall

overcome  his  enemies,  touching  dearth,  or  troubles  in  his

kingdom,  and  whatsoever  else  he  desireth  to  know :  And

the  Devil  answereth  his  questions,  and  adviseth  him  what

to  doe,  not  without  lies  altogether,  as  he  which is  the

enemie  of  mankind,  and  thinks  it  enough to hold  his

credit  with  them,  and  yeerely  to  be  consulted. After  all

this the Devill departeth from that bodie, leaving it

weary, and ever after ill apayd. The King returneth

home  with  great  applause,  so  graced  with  the  conference

of  the  deceased  Kings,  whom  they  hold  to  be  mighty  in

the  other  World,  and  able  to  grant  him  whatsoever  hee

207

A.D.

*597-

No  forme  of
Religion.

The  King  in

divine

reputation.

Musimos  holy
dayes  strictly
kept.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

desireth.  Some  Portugals  have  beene  eye-witnesses
hereof.  The  like  manner  the  Devill  useth  with  other
Gentiles  in  China,  and  the  Philippinas,  as  some  report.

I  beleeve  for  certaine  that  this  Caphar  Nation  is  the
most  brutish  and  barbarous  in  the  world,  neither  wor-
shipping God,  nor  any  Idoll,  nor  have  Image,  Church,
or  Sacrifice,  or  persons  dedicated  to  Religion,  and  are
hard  to  be  converted,  either  to  Christians  or  Moores.
They  hold  the  immortalitie  of  the  soule,  and  have  a
confused  knowledge  that  there  is  a  Great  God,  whom  they
call  Molungo,  but  they  pray  not  to  him,  nor  doe  commend
themselves  to  him.  When  they  suffer  any  necessitie  or
sterilitie,  they  have  recourse  to  their  King,  strongly
beleeving  that  hee  is  able  to  give  them  all  things  which
they  desire,  and  that  he  can  obtaine  all  things  of  the  dead,
his  predecessors  with  whom  he  seemeth  to  have  conference.
Whereupon  they  sue  to  the  King  for  raine,  if  they  want  it,
and  for  seasonable  harvest  times :  and  alway  when  they
thus  petition  him,  they  bring  him  great  Presents,  which
he  receiveth,  and  bids  them  returne  home  in  a  good
houre ;  for  hee  will  have  care  of  their  request  to  satisfie
the  same.  And  though  they  see  themselves  often
frustrated,  yet  continue  they  to  spend  time  and  costs  in
such  petitions,  till  raine  or  other  their  suits  happen,
thinking  that  though  he  granted  not  at  first,  yet  by  their
importunitie  (as  he  also  for  gaine  tells  them)  that  he  hath
done  it  at  last.

They  observe  certaine  festivals,  resting  from  labour
(except  dances)  appointed  by  the  King,  they  not  knowing
when,  or  why.  They  call  such  dayes  Musimos,  that  is,
Soules  of  Saints  departed,  in  whose  honour  they  keepe
them.  On  one  of  these  dayes  a  Portugall  in  that  Citie
Zimbaohe  (which  was  passing  to  Manicas  where  the  gold
Mines  are)  caused  a  Cow  to  bee  killed  at  his  house  for
food  to  his  slaves,  and  the  people  which  hee  had  with  him ;
whereof  the  Quiteve  hearing  by  one  of  his  Officers  (many
of  which  are  dispersed  in  the  Citie,  and  thorow  the  King-
dome)  he  commanded  the  Portugall  to  suffer  it  to  abide,

208

FRIAR JOANNO DOS SANCTOS  <u>-

I597«

and  not  meddle  any  more  withall,  for  violating  his
Musimos.  And  the  Portugall  had  no  remedie,  but  must
either  suffer  the  beast  to  stinke  and  putrifie  there,  or  pay
Empofia,  that  is,  The  Fine,  which  was  no  lesse  then  fiftie
Clothes,  after  he  had  in  stead  of  eating,  endured  much
stinke  many  dayes ;  which  to  avoide,  hee  would  have
gone  forth  of  his  house,  and  have  taken  another,  but  the
Quiteve  would  not  suffer  him  to  enforce  him  to  his
Empofia.

These Cafars know nothing of the Creation of the
World,  of  Man,  nor  of  Hell  for  the  bad,  or  Heaven  for
the  good  : onely  they  beleeve  the  soules  immortalitie  in
another  World,  and  that  they  shall  live  with  their  women
a  better  life  then  this,  but  they  cannot  tell  where,  in  some
earthly  Paradises  of  pleasure. They  confesse  that  there Opinions  of
is  a  Devill,  which  they  call,  Musuca,  and  that  he  doth  the  DemlL
much  harme  to  men. Every  new  Moone  is  a  Festivall
day : they  say  the  Sunne  when  he  can,  goeth  to  sleepe.
They  neither  write  nor  reade,  nor  have  bookes,  but  all
their  historie  is  Tradition. They  hold  that  Monkies  in Aborigines.
times  past  were  men  and  women,  and  call  them  in  their
language,  The  old  people.

The  Quiteve  hath  two  or  three  hundred  men  for  his
Guard, which  are his Officers  and  Executioners, called
Inficis,  and  goe  crying,  Inhama,  Inhama,  that  is,  Flesh,
Flesh. Hee  hath  another  sort,  called  Marombes,  Jesters, Marombes.
which  have  their  Songs  and  Prose  in  praise  of  the  King, ,  a]fs  or
whom  they  call,  Lord  of  the  Sunne  and  Moone,  King  of  poets
the  Land  and  of  Rivers,  Conqueror  of  his  Enemies,  in Strange
every  thing  Great,  great  Theefe,  great  Witch,  great  Lion  ; Titles  of
and  all  other  names  of  greatnesse  which  they  can  invent,  Sreatnesse-
whether  they  signifie  good  or  bad,  they  attribute  to  him.
When  the  King  goeth  out  of  doores,  these  Marombes  goe
round  about  him  with  great  cries  of  this  argument. Hee
hath  others  which  are  Musicians  in  his  Hall,  and  at  the  Musicians.
Court gates, with divers Instruments resounding his
praises. Their  best  Musicall  Instrument  is  called  Ambira,
much  like  to  our  Organs,  made  of  Pompions,  some  bigge,
ix  209  o

A.D.

1597-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRTMES

See  after,
c.  13.

some  slender,  for  difference  of  sounds,  with  a  mouth  in
the  side  nigh  the  bottome,  which  hath  a  hole  bigger  then
a  shilling,  with  a  glasse  in  the  bottome,  made  of  certaine
Copwebs  slender  and  strong.  On  the  mouthes  (which
are  equall,  set  in  a  rew)  is  a  rew  of  keyes  of  wood,  slender,
sustained  with  cords,  on  the  tops  whereof  they  play  with
stickes  like  drum  stickes,  which  have  buttons  or  balls  as
big  as  a  nut  in  the  points,  which  moving  the  Keyes,  make
a  sweet  sound,  which  may  be  heard  as  farre  as  Virginals.
Another  Instrument  they  have,  called  also  Ambira,  all  of
Iron  wedges,  flat  and  narrow,  a  span  long,  tempered  in
the  fire  to  differing  sounds.  They  are  but  nine  set  in  a
[II.ix.1540.]  rew,  with  the  ends  in  a  piece  of  wood  as  in  the  necke  of  a
viole,  and  hollow,  on  which  they  play  with  their  thumbe
nailes,  which  they  weare  long  therefore,  as  lightly  as  men
with  us  on  the  Virginals,  and  is  better  Musicke  then  the
former.  They  have  Cornets  of  a  wilde  beasts  home,  called
Paraparas,  having  a  terrible  sound,  and  Drummes  diversi-
fied in  sounds.  When  the  Quiteve  sends  Embassadours,
hee  sends  these  three  sorts  of  men,  crying,  playing,
dancing,  which  receive,  or  else  take  their  provision  by
force.

They  use  three  kinds  of  Oathes  in  Judgement  most
terrible,  in  accusations  wanting  just  evidence.  The  first
is  called,  Lucasse,  which  is  a  vessell  full  of  poison,  which
they  give  the  suspected,  with  words  importing  his  destruc-
tion, and  present  death  if  he  be  guilty ;  his  escape,  if
innocent :  the  terrour  whereof  makes  the  conscious
confesse  the  crime :  but  the  innocent  drinke  it  confidently
without  harme,  and  thereby  are  acquitted  of  the  crime ;
and  the  plaintiffe  is  condemned  to  him  whom  he  falsly
had  accused  ;  his  wife,  children,  and  goods  being  forfeited,
one  moitie  to  the  King,  and  the  other  to  the  defendant.
The  second  Oath  they  call,  Xoqua,  which  is  made  by  iron
heated  red  hot  in  the  fire,  causing  the  accused  to  lick  it
being  so  hot  with  his  tongue,  saying,  that  the  fire  shall
not  hurt  him  if  hee  bee  innocent ;  otherwise  it  shall  burne
his  tongue  and  his  mouth. This  is  more  common,  and

Oathes  dread-
full  and
terrible.  See
before  in  A.
Battell,  I.  7.
c.  3.  of  the
like  in  Loango,

FRIAR JOANNO DOS SANCTOS  ad

'597-
is  used  by  the  Cafres  and  the  Moores  in  those  parts ;
yea,  (which  worse  is)  some  Christians  give  the  same  Oath
to  their  slaves  suspected  of  stealth  ;  which  one  in  Sofala
caused,  on  suspicion  of  a  stollen  garment,  a  slave  to  doe
three  times  without  hurt.  The  third  Oath  they  call,
Calano,  which  is  a  vessell  of  water  made  bitter  with
certaine  herbs,  which  they  put  into  it,  whereof  they  give
the  accused  to  drinke,  saying,  that  if  he  be  innocent,  he
shall  drinke  it  all  off  at  one  gulp  without  any  stay,  and
cast  it  all  up  againe  at  once  without  any  harme  :  if  guilty,
he  shall  not  be  able  to  get  downe  one  drop  without
gargling  and  choaking.  There  have  beene  seene  many
experiments  of  all  these,  the  guilty  suffering  death  by  the
poison,  or  burning,  &c.  the  innocent  freed  ;  having  some
resemblance  by  Devillish  apish  imitation  to  the  cursed
water  of  jealousie  mentioned  in  Moses.  Once,  they  are  Num.  5.
notorious  and  well  knowne  in  Sofala.

The  Cafres  are  blacke  as  Pitch,  curled,  and  weare  their  Haire-fashton
head  full  of  homes  made  of  the  same  haire,  which  stand
up  like  a  Distaffe,  wearing  slender  pieces  of  wood  within
their  lockes  to  uphold  them  without  bending :  without,
they  tye  them  with  a  ribband  made  of  the  barke  of  an
herbe,  which  whiles  it  is  fresh  sticketh  like  glue,  and  dried
is  like  a  sticke  :  with  this  they  binde  their  haire  in  bundles
from  the  bottome  to  the  top ;  of  each  bundle  making  a
home,  holding  herein  great  pride  and  gallantrie ;  striving
to  excell  each  others ;  and  mocking  them  which  want  them,
saying,  they  are  like  women.  For,  as  the  male  wilde
beasts  have  homes  which  the  females  want ;  so  doe  these
savage  beasts  also.

The  Quiteve  hath  herein  a  fashion  which  none  may
imitate,  of  foure  homes,  one  of  a  spanne  long  on  the
mould  of  the  head,  like  an  Unicorne,  and  three  of  halfe  a
spanne,  one  on  the  necke,  at  each  eare  another,  all  upright
to  the  top.  For  their  homes  sakes  they  have  no  hats,  nor
head-coverings  amongst  them.  The  apparell  of  the  King
and  chiefe  men  is  fine  Cotton,  or  Silke,  girt  to  them,  and
hanging  almost  to  the  knees,  and  another  greater,  called

211

A.D.

*597

Occu:

The  Tartan
do  the  like :
and  the  Scots
also,  as  I  have
heard,  in  the
furthest  North
of  this  Hand.

*  As  Bacon
13  Martinmas
Beefe  in
England.
Houses  of
Casars,  hous-
hold  and  food.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Machiras,  which  the  Cafres  weave,  cast  over  the  shoulders
like  a  Cloke,  wherewith  they  goe  muffled,  letting  it  hang
on  the  left  hand  to  the  ground,  esteeming  great  Gravitie
and  Majestie  in  a  long  traine.  The  rest  of  the  bodie  is
naked  ;  they  goe  all  bare-foot :  and  the  vulgar  goe  naked
both  men  and  women  without  shame  ;  the  better  sort  of
them  wearing  a  Monkies  skinne,  hanging  downe  from  the
girdle  like  a  Smiths  Apron  ;  and  the  women  likewise.
But  the  Cafres  which  trade  with  the  Portugals  weare  a
covering  to  the  knees.  They  have  no  Occupations  but
Smiths,  which  make  Azagays,  Spades,  Hatchets,  Halfe-
swords :  Weavers  which  make  Cotton  clothes  for
Machiras.  The  women  make  them,  but  improperly,
their  office  being  ordinarily  to  digge,  and  weed,  and  sowe,
men  more  loving  their  lubberly  ease,  few  helping  their
wives  :  a  Spade  being  as  usuall  with  their  women,  as  a
Rocke  with  our  Spinsters ;  the  men  now  and  then  hunting
for  wilde  beasts,  other  whiles  dancing  and  singing,  and
therefore  poore.

The  Quiteve  makes  some  Royall  huntings,  with  three
or  foure  thousand  men,  in  the  Desarts  neere  the  Citie ;
encircling  all  the  beasts  in  that  compasse,  Tigres,  Lions,
Ounces,  Elephants,  Buffals,  Deere,  wilde  Swine,  and  the
rest,  driving  them  together,  and  then  setting  on  their
Dogs,  with  cries,  Arrowes,  and  Azagayes,  pursue  and
kill  what  they  can.  Then  may  they  kill  the  Lion,  which
at  other  times  by  the  Qiiiteves  prohibition  is  a  deadly
offence,  because  hee  is  entituled,  great  Lion.  After  this
they  eat  in  the  same  place  with  great  jollitie ;  but  the
most  they  carrie  home,  and  *hang  it  for  the  King,  and  for
themselves.

Their  houses  are  round,  of  unhewne  timber  covered
with  straw,  like  a  thatched  Countrey  house,  which  they
remove  at  pleasure.  Their  goods  is  a  Panne  in  which  thev
boyle  their  Wheat,  two  Spades  to  digge,  one  Bowe  and
Arrowes,  a  Mat  whereon  they  lie,  which  they  make  of
Rushes,  and  commonly  they  sleepe  on  the  ground  :  if  it
be  cold,  they  make  a  fire  in  the  midst  of  the  house,  lying

FRIAR  JOANNO DOS SANCTOS  <u*

■597-
all  about  it  like  Cats.  So  beggarly  and  brutish  is  the  life
(if  that  be  life)  of  the  Cafres.  Their  food  is  commonly
Mais,  Pulse,  Fruits,  Sugar-canes,  Fish,  and  all  kinds  of
Beasts  which  they  kill  in  the  Desarts,  as  Monkies,  Dogs,
Cats,  Rats,  Snakes,  Lizards,  Crocodiles,  all  flesh;  Rice  [II.ix.1541.]
they  sowe  rather  to  sell  the  Portugals  then  to  eate,  prefer-
ring their  Mais.  They  steepe  two  dayes  in  water  a  pecke  Mats  Wtme
or  thereabouts,  which  in  that  space  growes  forth  :  and  then
the  water  being  put  out,  they  let  it  drie  two  or  three
houres,  and  being  well  dried  they  stampe  it  till  it  settle
into  a  masse :  which  they  doe  in  a  great  Morter  as  high
as  a  mans  middle,  called  Cuni,  by  them,  by  the  Portugals,
Pilano.  After  this  they  set  a  great  earthen  vessell  on  the
fire  halfe  full  of  water,  whereon  when  it  seeths,  they  put  in
above  halfe  the  pecke  of  Mais-meale  by  little  and  little,
still  stirring  it,  as  when  men  make  pottage :  and  after  it
seeths  a  little,  they  take  the  vessell  off  the  fire,  and  put  in
the  rest  of  the  said  masse,  stirring  them  together  till  their
Pombe  be  made ;  which  is  let  stand  two  dayes,  and  then
they  drinke  it,  many  of  them  neither  eating  nor  drinking
ought  else,  but  living  onely  hereof.  If  it  stand  foure  or
five  dayes  it  becomes  Vinegar ;  and  the  sowrer,  the  more
tipsie ; they  say  that  it  makes  them  strong.

In  some  places  grow  certaine  Reeds,  which  every  second
or  third  yeere  have  great  eares  like  Rie,  of  which  they
gather  store,  and  is  good  sustenance.

In  all  Cafraria  there  growes  a  certaine  herbe  which  they
sowe,  called  Bangue,  the  straw  and  leaves  whereof  thev
cut,  and  being  well  dried,  stampe  them  to  powder.  And
hereof  they  eate  a  handfull,  and  then  drinke  water,  and  so
sustaine  themselves  many  dayes ;  and  if  they  eate  much,
it  makes  them  drunken,  like  to  Wine.

All  these  Cafres  before  they  goe  about  any  businesse  of
import,  as  journeying,  merchandise,  or  sowing,  they  cast
lots  to  divine  of  the  successe ; a  thing  used  likewise  to  Lots  and
enquire  of  things  stolne  or  lost,  and  in  all  doubtfull  cases,  dhnnattons.
and  thereto  give  credit  as  we  doe  to  the  Gospell. These
lots  are  little  round  stickes,  flat,  and  bored  thorow  the

213

1 597-

IVitches.

Punishments.

Marriages.

Brutish
travell.

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

midst,  lesse  then  Table-men,  called  Charatas,  alway  carried
about  them,  filed  on  a  string,  to  use  upon  any  occasion  of
doubt,  casting  them  like  Dice  so  many  times.  For  want
of  them,  they  divine  by  strokes  or  lines  which  they  draw
on  the  ground.  Some  are  great  Witches,  and  consult  with
the  Devill ;  so  prone  to  it,  that  they  are  prohibited  by  the
King,  that  none  should  use  this  witch-craft  without  his
licence,  in  paine  of  death,  and  confiscation  of  wife,  children,
and  goods,  halfe  to  the  King,  and  halfe  to  the  Informer  :
and  yet  many  are  such  secretly,  and  all  would  be  if  they
could.  The  same  penaltie  is  to  theeves  and  to  adulterers  :
it  being  lawfull  for  any  man  to  slay  any  of  these  three
sorts  taken  in  the  fact :  or  if  any  list  not  to  kill  him
which  by  witch-craft,  adulterie,  or  robberie  hath  wronged
him,  he  may  sell  him,  or  doe  with  him  what  he  pleaseth
as  his  owne  chattels,  and  they  call  the  condemned,
such  a  mans  Witch,  Theefe,  or  Adulterer.  The  losse
of  goods  to  the  King  is  common  for  any  fault
amongst  them.

The  Cafres  buy  of  the  parents  their  wives,  for  Kine,
Clothes,  or  otherwise  according  to  their  abilitie.  And
therefore  they  which  have  many  daughters  are  rich.  If
any  mislike  his  wife,  hee  may  returne  her  to  him  that  sold
her,  but  with  losse  of  the  price  payde  ;  and  the  parent  may
sell  her  againe  to  another  husband.  The  wife  hath  no
libertie  to  forsake  her  husband.  The  ceremonies  of  mar-
riage are  dances,  and  feastings  of  the  neighbours ;  every
invited  guest  bringing  his  present  of  Meale,  Mais,
Inhames,  Fitches,  or  other  victuall  for  that  dayes  expenses.
Hee  which  is  able,  may  have  two  wives,  but  few  are  able
to  maintayne  them,  except  the  great  men  which  have  many,
but  one  is  principall,  the  rest  as  hand-maids.  Some  of
them  live  like  wilde  beasts,  and  when  they  are  neere  time
of  travell,  they  goe  to  the  wildernesse  or  unfilled  places,
and  there  goe  up  and  downe  receiving  the  savour  of  that
wilde  place,  which  causeth  to  them  quicker  delivery.
They  after  their  delivery  wash  themselves  and  their  children
in  a  Lake  or  River,  and  then  returne  to  their  houses  with

214

FRIAR  JOANNO DOS SANCTOS  <u>.

1 507-

them  in  their  amies  without  swadling  them.  Neither  have
they  there  wherewithall  to  doe  it,  or  such  custome  :  nor
have  any  Bed  to  lie  on,  but  a  Mat,  or  locke  of  straw.

When  any  of  them  die,  the  kindred,  friends,  and  neigh-  Funerals.
hours  assemble,  and  bewaile  him  all  that  day  in  which  he
dieth,  and  the  same  day  lay  him  on  a  Mat,  or  Seat  where
hee  died;  and  if  he  had  any  cloth  or  garment,  bury  him
therein,  otherwise,  naked.  They  make  a  hole  in  the
Desart  (or  wilde  unfilled  place)  and  set  by  him  a  vessell  of
water  and  a  little  Mais,  to  eate  and  drinke  (they  say)  in
his  journey  to  the  other  life  ;  and  without  more  ceremonies
cover  him  with  earth,  and  lay  on  the  hole  the  Mat,  or  the
Chaire  in  which  he  was  brought  to  buriall,  where  they
consume  without  any  more  respect,  although  they  be  new.
For  they  hold  it  ominous  to  touch  that  Mat  or  Seat  in
which  one  died,  as  boding  death  or  some  ill.  The  kindred
and  friends  lament  him  eight  dayesfrom  morning  to  noone,  Lamentation! .
and  an  houre  at  Sunne-set :  which  mourning  they  per-
forme  with  dances  and  drerie  songs,  and  speeches,  all
together  on  foot  in  a  round  circle ;  and  now  and  then  one
of  the  standers  by  enters  into  the  middle  of  the  circle,  and
makes  a  turne  or  two,  and  then  takes  his  place  againe  :
and  after  the  mourning  finished,  they  all  sit  in  a  round  and
eate  and  drinke  for  the  soule  of  the  deceased  whom  they
mourne  for,  and  then  returne  home.  The  next  kindred
are  at  this  cost.

These  Cafars  are  cruell  and  inhumane  to  one  another. Inhumamtie,
If  any  of  them  bee  sicke,  and  have  no  wife,  kindred,  or  famw,  and
friends  to  looke  to  him,  no  other  Cafar  will  give  him  any eSSane-
thing,  but  let  him  starve  ; and  die  forlorne  without  taking
on  him  any  compassion,  although  he  see  him  readie  to
perish  with  hunger  ; of  which  sicknesse  most  of  them  die,
through  miserable  povertie  and  improvident  and  prodi-  [ll.ix.1542.]
gality. And  when  they  doe  the  most,  some  friend  takes
the  forlorne  man,  carries  him  to  the  wilde  uncultivated
place,  and  layes  him  at  some  bush,  or  at  the  foot  of  a
tree,  with  a  little  Vessell  of  water  to  drinke  and  a  little
Mais  to  eate  if  he  can  ; and  so  leaves  him  till  he  dyes

215

A.D.

1597-

White
Cafres.

'Numerous
issue,  y
strange
Nurses.

Moura.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

without  more  care  of  him :  And  although  some  Cafar
passe  by,  and  see  him  groane  or  lament,  yet  will  hee  give
him  no  helpe.  And  this  brutishnesse  is  so  naturall  to
them,  that  some,  when  they  feele  themselves  deadly  sicke,
take  order  to  bee  so  carryed  to  the  Wildernesse,  and  laid
at  the  foote  of  a  Bush,  and  there  dye  like  beasts.

In  Mocaranga  some  Parents  as  blacke  as  Pitch,  have
white  Goldi-locked  children  like  Flemmings.  Whiles  I
was  in  the  Countrey,  the  Quiteve  nourished  one  white
childe  in  the  Court,  as  a  strange  Prodigie.  The  Mana-
motapa  kept  two  other  white  Cafres  with  like  admiration.
The  Cafres  say  such  are  the  Children  of  the  Devill,
begotten  of  blacke  women  by  him  when  they  are  asleepe.
I  saw  at  Goa  a  white  Cafar  Wench  in  Dom.  Hieronimo
Continho  his  House,  given  him  by  the  Vice-Roy  Dom.
Francisco  da  Gama,  and  after  (he  returning  Captayne
Major  of  the  ships)  at  Saint  Helena  :  and  although  both
her  Parents  were  Negroes,  shee  was  so  white  that  her
Eyelids  were  also  of  that  colour.

In  the  River  Inhaguea  betwixt  Sofala  and  Luabo,  a
Negro  of  sixtie  yeares  brought  forth  and  suckled  a  Child.
Many  Cafres  have  two  or  three  children  at  a  Birth.  One
Peter  a  Christian  Cafar  at  Sofala,  his  Wife  dying  after
travell  of  a  Daughter,  nourished  the  same  with  Milke  of
his  owne  brests  a  whole  yeare,  at  the  end  whereof  it  dyed
of  Wormes,  and  then  the  Milke  dryed  up  in  his  brests.
He  told  mee,  that  pitie  of  the  Motherlesse  crying  Infant,
which  his  povertie  could  not  otherwise  releeve,  caused  him
to  seeke  to  still  it  with  laying  it  to  his  brest,  and  then  gave
it  somewhat  to  drinke,  which  having  continued  two  or
three  dayes  his  brest  began  to  yeeld  Milke.  Persons  of
credit  in  India  told  me  the  like  of  a  poore  Jew  of  Ormus,
which  nourished  his  Sonne  with  his  brests,  the  Mother
dying  when  it  was  young,  in  the  Castle.  A  Cafar  in  the
River  Quiilimane  had  brests  great,  and  bearing  out  like  a
woman  which  gives  suck,  but  had  no  Milke  therein.
After  my  returne  to  Portugall,  I  heard  by  eye-witnesses  of
a  poore  man  in  Moura,  which  being  sixtie  yeares  old,  had

216

FRIAR  JOANNO DOS SANCTOS

A.U.

1 597-

as  much  Milkc  as  a  woman  Nurse,  and  gave  sucke  to  two
children.

King Sebastian sent Francis Barret, with title of  BarrtU
Governour  and  Captayne  Gcncrall  of  a  great  Armada,  to  int'am"-
goe  to  Sofala,  to  conquer  the  Golden  Mines  in  the  King-
dome  of  Mocaranga, and  particularly those  of Manica.
In  the  Conquest  whereof  he  made  great  Warres  with  the
Quiteve, who reigneth over the Countrey in the way
from  Sofala  to  Manica,  the  Mines  beeing  in  the  Neigh-
bour Kingdome  of  Chicangua. In  these  passages  by  Land
or River, the Quiteve opposed himselfe with many
Battels ; who notwithstanding  pierced the  Countrey to
Zimbaohe,  and  made  the  Quiteve  flie  to  the  Mountaynes,
with  his  women  and  people. Hee  fired the  Citie  and
passed  two  dayes  further  without  opposition. Then  the
Chicanga  sent  him  provision  (whereof  he  had  great  want)  Chicanga.
intimating  his  joy  to  see  him  in  his  Kingdome ; which
hee  requited  with  a  Present,  and  came  to  his  Citie,  where
he  was  kindly  entertayned,  a  peace  concluded  with  grant
of free Merchandising. The Portugals had conceited
themselves  of  so  much  Gold,  that  they  thought  they  might
fill  sackes,  and  take  as  much  as  they  listed  ; but  when  they
saw  the  trouble,  difficultie  and  danger  of  life  which  the
Cafres  sustayned  to  get  it  forth  of  the  earth  and  stones,
their  minds  were  altered. They  get  it  three  wayes,  one  Three  wayes
by  making Mines (which sometime fall on them) and  °fzettin&
following  the  veines  which  they  know,  take  thence  the
Earth,  washing  the  same  in  bolls. Another,  after  Raines,
searching  the  Brookes  of  the  fields  and  hils  where  they  find
pieces  of  Gold  :  the  third,  out  of  certayne  stones  in  parti-
cular Mines,  which  have  veines  of  Gold,  which  they  breake
into  poulder,  and  wash  the  same  in  bolls,  where  the  rest
runneth  away  with  the  water,  the  Gold  remayning  in  the
bottome. This  third  they  call  Matuca,  and  is  the  basest, Matuca  and
the  other  Dahabo.  Dahabo.

Barret at his returne thought of  revenge upon the  Tribute  to  the
Quiteve,  which  he  prevented  with  courtesies  and  presents  : Q"Ifc':r-
and  agreement  was  made  betwixt  them,  that  the  Captayne

217

A.D.

'597-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Strange
Embassage

of  Sofala  should  yearely  give  the  Quiteve  two  hundred
Clothes  for  free  and  secure  passage  thorow  his  Countrey
to  Chicanga,  which  are  worth  at  Sofala  more  then  one
hundred  Cruzados,  and  amongst  the  Cafres,  above  one
hundred  thousand  Reys.  For  this  tribute  which  they  call
Curua,  the  Quiteve  sends  foure  Embassadors  yearely,
called  Mutumes ;  one  of  which  represents  his  Person,  and
he  alone  is  holden  in  like  respect  and  reverence  in  that
Journey  ;  the  second  is  called  the  Kings  Mouth,  whose
Office  is  to  deliver  the  Kings  Message  ;  the  third  they  call
the  Kings  Eye,  who  is  appointed  Over-seer  of  all  hee  sees
done,  to  relate  the  same  to  him  at  their  returne  ;  the
fourth  is  called  the  Kings  Eare,  and  is  to  heare  all  that  is
spoken  on  both  parts.  They  are  all  Lords,  and  sometimes
the  Kings  Sonnes,  he  especially  which  represents  his
person  ;  and  are  presented  by  the  Cafres  in  the  way  ;  and
bring  above  one  hundred  others  with  them  in  company
to  carrie  the  Curua  and  their  Gifts.  When  they  are  neere
Sofala,  the  Captayne  sends  principall  Moores  to  conduct
them  to  the  Castle.  Before  them  goe  Labourers,  and
Dancers  in  great  bravery,  their  heads  adorned  with  plumes
of  Cockes  tayles  :  next  follow  Cafres,  in  a  ranke  or  file,
and  after  them  the  Mutumes  in  their  order,  he  being  last
[II. ix. 1 543.]  which  represents  the  Quiteves  person,  and  with  him  the
Xeque  or  Principall  Moore.  The  Captayne  entertaynes
them  in  the  Hall,  accompanied  with  all  the  Portugals  in
the  Towne,  and  after  lodgeth  them  in  the  Moores  houses,
and  furnisheth  them  with  provision  seven  or  eight  dayes.
The  Captayne  sometimes  dischargeth  the  Ordnance  of
the  Castle  to  honour  them ;  but  they  desired  the  Quiteve,
being  afraid  of  that  Thunder,  to  send  to  the  Portugalls  to
hide  their  Inhuates  or  Gunnes,  when  they  came  to  demand
the  Curua ;  which  he  did  accordingly.  The  Cafres  pay
their  Tribute  to  the  Quiteve,  in  every  Village  or  Towne
making  one  great  heape  of  Mais  for  the  King ;  and  every
Inhabitant  being  further  bound  to  labour  in  the  Kings
Workes  certayne  dayes  of  the  yeare,  in  digging,  sowing,
&c. The  Merchants  pay  besides  three  of  twentie  of  their

218

Quiteves
Tribute  of  the
Cafres.

FRIAR  JOANNO DOS SANCTOS

Merchandise.  The  Portugals  which  trade  to  Maniea  pay
one  cloth  of  twentie,  and  so  of  other  wares.

The  Moores  of  Sofala  have  customes  no  lesse  barbarous .
If  one  of  them  marrie,  he  seekes  out  another  lustie  Moore
which  may  carrie  him  on  his  backe  on  the  Marriage  day
from  his  owne  house  to  the  Brides,  albeit  it  bee  halfe  a
league  off,  without  resting  by  the  way  :  for  if  hee  rests,
that  day  is  held  unluckie,  and  hee  must  seeke  a  stronger
to  performe  it  without  resting  on  another  day,  or  else  the
Marriage  is  marred  and  broken  off.  They  are  also  very
poore,  yet  will  have  a  fine  cloth  to  be  buried  in  ;  which
buriall  is  like  that  before  of  the  Cafres,  in  the  wild
unfilled  fields  or  woods ;  and  in  the  Grave  they  set  Rice,
Mais,  and  Water.  Upon  the  Grave  they  set  two  stones
one  at  the  head,  the  other  at  the  feet,  which  they  anoynt
with  Sanders  ground  and  smelling :  the  kindred  after
continuing  to  anoynt  the  stones  and  set  Rice  on  the  Grave.
The  Christians  there  were  as  scrupulous  of  the  Mats  or
Chaires  of  their  slaves  deceased  :  but  I  bestowed  them  on
the  fire  or  water  ;  and  they  besought  me  of  Charitie  to
forbeare,  lest  some  evils  should  befall  them  from  the  dead.
Both  Moores,  Cafres,  and  Christians  of  Sofala  are  much
addicted  to  Dreames,  and  give  much  credit  to  them,  not-
withstanding they  often  find  them  false,  and  are  otherwise
very  superstitious.

In  the  River  of  Sofala,  foure  leagues  from  the  Fort  is
the  Hand  Maroupe,  eight  leagues  long  and  a  league  and
halfe  broad.  The  Quiteve  gave  the  better  part  of  it  to
Roderigo  Lobo,  and  also  the  title  of  his  Wife,  a  fashion  of
courtesie  by  him  used  to  the  Portugals,  which  he  loves,
intimating  his  respect  no  lesse  to  them  then  to  his  Wife,
and  the  Cafres  do  much  honour  to  those  whom  hee  hon-
oured! with  that  Title.  That  Hand  hath  excellent  game
for  fishing  and  hunting  of  divers  beasts  which  they  take
divers  wayes  ;  by  digging  pits  three  yards  long,  halfe  that
breadth  at  the  top  and  straighter  at  the  bottome  of  a  mans
height  in  deepnesse  covered  with  stickes,  and  on  them
boughes or straw : another  way is  with multitudes to

219

A.D.

I

Moores  of
their

customes.

An  honorable
title  to  be
called  the
Kin«s  l/'i  e.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I597-

cncompasse  a  place  like  a  halfe  Moone  ;  and  then  put  in
Dogges  which  by  barking  scarre  the  beasts  to  the  River,
where  they  are  provided  with  Boats  and  Assagayes  for
that  purpose  :  a  third  way  is  when  the  River  over-floweth,
and  all  the  beasts  betake  them  to  some  higher  places  of
the  Hand,  where  they  are  easily  assailed  with  Arrowes  and
Assagaies  in  Boats.  And  there  stand  Elephants,  Lions,
Tygres,  Eunuches,  Deere,  wild  Kine,  Swine,  and  other
wild  beasts  together,  without  hurting  one  another,  as  they
did  in  Noahs  Arke,  all  awed  with  the  feare  of  the  waters.
It  hapned  that  the  said  Lobo  once  with  other  beasts  killed
a  Lion,  which  might  have  endangered  him  the  losse  of  the
He,  and  of  his  life,  had  he  beene  a  Cafar ;  neither  dare  or
will  the  Cafres  bee  silent.  Whereupon  hee  sent  the
Quiteve  a  Present  of  twentie  Clothes  and  the  Lion,  saying,
that  he  the  Kings  Wife  was  sowing  for  his  Husband,  and
that  Lion  came  and  assayled  him,  whereupon  he  struckehim
with  the  end  of  his  Spade  for  his  Husbands  honor,  and
hath  now  sent  him  dead  to  take  revenge  on  him  for  the
discourtesie  done  to  his  Wife.  His  Presents  and  present
wit  excused  him.  The  Cafres  most  of  them  have  bad  and
broken  teeth,  which  (they  say)  comes  by  the  wet  and
fennie  soile,  and  of  eating  parched  Pulse  hote.  Most  of
them  also  have  Ruptures,  some  so  much  that  thereby  they
cannot  o-oe.

§.  III.

Of  the  River  Cuama,  and  the  adjacent  Countrey ;
the  Beasts,  Fowles,  Fishes  of  those  parts  :  the
Hils  of  Lupata ;  of  the  Mongas,  Rusumba,
Sena,  Tere,  Massapa,  and  of  the  Kingdome  of
Manamotapa ;  Also  of  Ophir,  and  of  the
Golden  Mines  of  Fura.

Cuama  or
Zambeze  a
great  river
described.

He  River  Cuama  is  by  them  called  Zambeze  ; the
head  whereof  is  so  farre  within  Land  that  none
of  them  know  it,  but  by  tradition  of  their  Progeni-
tors say  it  comes  from  a  Lake  in  the  midst  of  the  Con-

KIUAR JOANNO DOS SANCTOS

A.IJ.

1 597-

tinent,  which  yeelds  also  other  great  Rivers,  divers  wayes

visiting  the  Sea. They  call  it  Zambeze,  of  a  Nation  of

Cafres  dwelling  neere  that  Lake,  which  are  so  called. It

hath  a  strong  current,  and  is  in  divers  places  more  then  a

league  broad. Twentie  leagues  before  it  enters  the  Sea,  [II.tx.1544.]

it  divides  it  selfe  into  two  armes,  each  Daughter  as  great

as the Mother, which thirtie leagues  distant pay their

Tribute  to  the  Father  of  waters. The  principal!  of  them

is called Luabo, which also divides it selfe into two

branches,  one  called  Old  Luabo,  the  other  OldCuama. The

other  lesse  principall  Arme  is  named  Quilimane,  (the  River

Dos  Bons  Sinaes  by  Vasco  di  Gama,  when  hee  discovered

India) for  the  good  newes  which there he  received of

Mosambique,  and  therefore  he  there  set  up  a  stone  Pillar  River  of  good

with  a  Crosse,  and  the  Armes  of  Portugall,  and  named  uS"ei-

the  Countrey  Terra  de  sancta  Raphael.) This  River  hath

also  another  great  arme  issuing  from  it,  called  the  River

of Linde : so that Zambeze enters the Sea with five

mouthes  or  Armes  very  great.

Luabo  is  sailed  all  the  yeere  long,  but  Quilimane  only
in  the  Winter.  They  saile  up  this  River  West  North-west
above  two  hundred  leagues,  to  the  Kingdome  of  Sacumbe,  Sacumbe Falls.
where  it  makes  a  great  Fall  from  Rockes,  beyond  which
they  goe  up  the  River  twentie  leagues  to  the  Kingdome
of  Chicova,  in  which  are  Mines  of  Silver,  which  cannot  Chicova.
be  sailed  by  reason  of  the  strong  current :  but  from
Chicova  upwards  it  is  Navigable,  but  how  farre  they  know
not.  Luabo  hath  its  name  of  an  Hand  so  called  in  the  Luaba  Hand.
Barre  thereof  in  nineteene  degrees,  which  Hand  divides
old  Luabo  on  the  South  from  Old  Cuama,  on  the  North  :
and  in  the  East  each  salutes  the  other  by  entercourse  of
a  streame  five  leagues  long,  which  is  the  length  and  breadth
of  the  Hand,  peopled  with  Moores  and  Cafres.  The
Pangayos  or  great  Barkes  of  Mosambique  here  discharge,
being  too  great  to  passe  higher,  and  carrie  their  goods  in  a
Fleet  of  small  Boates  to  the  Fort  of  Sena,  which  is  sixty
leagues.  The  Land  on  the  North-side  is  called  Bororo,
on  the  South  Botonga. In  the  midst  of  the  River  are

221

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*597-

many  Hands,  some  very  great ; the  biggest  and  best  is

Chbigoma. called  Chingoma ; at  the  end  whereof  Zambeze  divides
it  selfe  into  Luabo  and  Quilimane.

The  second  He  of  Note  is  Inhangoma,  neere  the  Fort
of  Sena,  tenne  leagues  long,  and  in  some  places  a  league
and  a  halfe  broad.  The  Portugals  saile  here  by  day,  and
fasten  themselves  to  the  Hands  by  nights,  by  reason  of  the
Currents  and  Shallowes.  The  Cafres  inhabiting  by  the
way,  come  with  their  Boats  and  sell  them  victuals,  whereof
the  overflowing  of  the  River  makes  the  Countrey  plenti-
ful!.  In  March  and  Aprill  the  fields  are  over-flowne  and
other  Rivers  filled  from  hence ;  and  yet  have  they  there  in
those  Moneths  no  raines,  nor  melting  of  any  Snowes,
whereby  it  appeares  that  those  Inundations  come  from
farre  Countries.  In  this  time  the  Countrey  is  sickly,  and
many  Cafres  dye  of  Diseases,  then  bred  by  the  grosse
Ayres,  caused  by  the  waters.
//  seemes  that  In  these  Rivers  are  many  Zovo  or  Zoo,  so  they  call  the
Cuama  and  River-horses,  greater  then  two  of  our  Horses  together,
Nilus  receives j^  thick  and  short  hinder-leg's,  having  five  clawes  on

?iot  thctv  .  J&

waters  from eacn  fore-foot,  and  foure  on  the  hinder-foot ; the  footing

the  same  large  as  it  were  of  an  Elephant ; the  mouth  wide  and  ful

Lake,  of  teeth,  foure  of  which  are  remarkable,  each  above  two

their  increase pa]mes  (or  spans)  long,  the  two  lower  straight  up,  and

ferine  Times tnose  above  turned  like  a  Bores  tusks,  all  foure  being

above  a  great  spanne  eminent  from  the  mouth. The  head

is  as  big  as  of  three  Oxen. I  saw  a  Skull  of  one  of  them

at  a  Cafres  doore  so  great  that  he  made  his  Sonne  (a  Boy

of  seven  or  eight  yeares  of  age)  to  sit  downe  in  the  mouth

upon  the  nether  jaw,  closing  the  jawes  together. They

live  commonly  in  the  waters,  but  feed  on  the  Land  on

grasse  and  boughes,  and  doe  much  hurt  to  sowed  fields  of

Mais  and  Rice,  both  with  feeding  and  treading. They

River-horse are  like  to  our  Horses  only  in  face,  eves,  eares,  and  after  a

sort  in  neighing. They  are  jealous,  and  two  Males  goe

not  together ; if  two  meete,  they  fight  and  sometimes  kill

each  other  :  A  drove  or  company  of  the  Females  have  but

one  Male,  as  a  Cocke  amongst  Hens,  the  lesse  fleeing

222

FRIAR  JOANNO DOS SANGTOS  **

'  597-
from  the  greater  :  and  when  the  Female  hath  a  Male  Colt,
she  keeps  alone  with  her  yongling,  lest  the  Sire  should
kill  it.  They  bring  forth  their  yong  on  Land,  and  having
licked  them  well,  returne  to  the  River,  and  there  nourish
them  with  Milke  of  their  teats  like  our  Mares.  Their
Hides  are  much  thicker  then  an  Oxe-hide,  all  of  one
colour,  ash-coloured  gray,  most  of  them  with  a  white
strake  on  the  face  all  quite  downe,  and  a  starre  in  the
fore-head,  haire  rough  ;  mane  little  and  short.  They  arc-
much  subject  to  the  falling  sicknesse,  in  which  they  beate
their  brests  with  their  left  fore-feet  very  strongly  bending
the  same  backe,  and  falling  thereon,  and  in  that  fit  are
often  seene  and  sometimes  slaine  by  the  Cafres.  They
are  very  bold  in  the  water,  and  very  fearefull  by  Land,  as
I  have  seene  by  experience.  The  Cafres  take  them  in  pits
which  they  digge  and  cover  with  boughes  and  grasse,
betwixt  the  River  and  the  Corne-fields,  where  being  falne
they  are  easily  killed  :  likewise  they  lay  in  their  Corne
grounds,  halfe  covered  with  earth,  thicke  boards  of  a  yard
long  full  of  sharpe  Harping  Irons ;  whereon  the  Horse
treading  cannot  free  his  foot,  nor  goe  away,  nor  breake  the
boards,  and  so  are  exposed  to  slaughter.  They  also  strike
them  in  their  Boats  with  Harping  Irons  fastned  to  the
Boate  by  a  Cord,  which  he  drawes  after  him,  and  after
with  Assagays  and  Arrowes,  being  tyred,  they  dispatch
him,  and  share  this  their  Venison  amongst  the  Hunters.
In  my  Journey  up  the  River  Luabo,  to  Sena,  I  saw  ten  or
twelve  Boats  in  this  Horse-chase.  The  Cafres  report  that
a  Lion  pursued  a  Deere  to  the  River,  where  he  without,
and  a  Crocodile  in  the  water,  seased  on  her,  as  two  Cham-
pions of  the  two  Elements,  in  so  equall  force  that  neither
prevayled,  and  at  (last)  many  Cafres  came,  and  with  noyse
parted  the  Fray  first,  and  then  the  prey.

Alongst  the  Bankes  runne  many  wilde  Beasts,  Lions,
Tygres, Ounces, Rhinocerotes, Elephants, Buffals very  [II.ix.1545.]
fierce,  wilde  Kine  (like  to  our  tame) wilde Horses, in Wilde  Horses.
Mane  and  Neighing  like  ours,  of  cleere  Chesnut  colour,
somewhat  dunne,  they  have  smoothe  streight  homes  like

223

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*597-

a  Deare  without  snags,  and  cloven  hoofes  like  an  Oxe.

Wilde  Asses.  The  Cafres  call  it  Empophos.  They  have  wilde  Asses  of
Russetish  colour,  with  homes  and  cloven  feete,  which  they
call  Merus,  the  flesh  as  good  as  of  Kine. They  have  great

Z.evra,  see varietie  of  Wormes,  and  many  Zevras  made  like  Mules,

SttP-  9  4-  anc|  ]jke  tnem  holding  their  heads  toward  their  fore-legs
when  they  runne,  cloven  footed,  with  strakes  over  all  their
body  of  white  and  blacke  two  fingers  broad,  the  haire  soft
and  smoothe.  They  have  many  Nondos  which  are  like
Galician  Hobbies,  of  darke  Chesnut  colour,  the  haire  soft
and  short,  the  backe  as  if  it  were  broken,  the  hinder  legs
shorter  then  the  former.  They  have  Deeres,  Hares,  many
Civet  Cats  ;  great  Apes  and  Monkeys  ;  the  female  Mon-
keys have  their  monethly  purgation  like  Women. There

Wilde  Dogs,  is  a  kind  of  Dogs,  called  Impumpes,  which  goe  a  companie
of  them  together  to  seeke  their  prey,  swift  Runners,  and
sure  Biters,  a  middle  kinde  of  Curre  which  barke  not,  red
on  the  backe  and  white  bellied,  running  away  from  men.
They  bite  on  the  Legs  and  Rumpes,  plucking  out  each
morsell,  till  with  weaknesse  and  wearinesse  the  prey  be

A  strange  their  owne.  They  have  a  kinde  of  Worme,  called  Inha-
zaras,  as  great  as  Hogs  and  fashioned  somewhat  like,  with
thin  and  blacke  haire,  five  finders  like  the  fingers  of  a  man
on  each  hinder  foot,  and  foure  on  the  fore-foot,  and  long
nailes  thereon.  They  live  in  holes  under  the  ground  like
Conie-berries,  with  two  or  three  entrances.  They  live
upon  Ants,  putting  their  tongues  (two  spans  and  a  halfe
long,  like  a  wax  candle)  into  the  Ant-holes  (which  they
scrape  with  their  clawes)  whereon  the  Ants  running  they
pull  it  in,  and  so  feed  and  fill  themselves.  One  of  our  slaves
killed  one  of  them  and  brought  it  home  ;  opened  it  and
found  no  dung  in  the  belly  but  winde,  and  some  have
thought  that  they  lived  onely  on  Aire,  and  they  are  often
found  gaping  against  the  winde.  The  flesh  of  them  is
good  to  eate,  tastes  like  Porke,  especially  the  inwards ;
but  without  fat.  The  snout  is  very  long  and  slender,  long
eares  like  a  Mule,  without  haire,  the  taile  thick  and  strait
of  a spanne  long,  fashioned  at  the  end  like  a  DistnrTe.

224

FRIAR JOANNO DOS SANCTOS

AM.

They  have  great  Lizards,  of  which  I  have  scene  one  dead
a  yard  and  a  halfe  long,  as  bigge  as  a  mans  thigh  : they
have  great  and  sharpe  teeth,  a  blacke  tongue,  harped  in  the
end. They bite venomously, but their poyson is not
deadly. There  are  Snakes  of  eighteene  or  twentie  spannes,
as  bigge  as  a  mans  legge ; they  kill  Sheepe,  Goats,  Swine,
Hens,  and  are  very  poysonfull. In  the  Kingdome  of  Biri
neere  Manica,  are  small  Snakes,  called  Ruca  Inhanga,  so
poysonfull  that  Trees  or  Herbes  which  they  bite,  wither  j
and  if  they  bite  a  quick  thing,  it  swels  like  a  Bottle,  and
in  foure  and  twentie  houres,  the  haires,  hoofes,  homes  and
teeth  fall  away  and  it  dyeth,  except  counter-poyson  bee
applyed. Of  these  Snakes  the  King  of  Biri  makes  a  con-
fection to  poyson  Arrowes,  which  drawing  bloud  cause  the
effects  aforesaid  :  no  Subject  is  permitted  to  use  the  same.
A  certayne  Cafre  bitten  by  one  of  these  Snakes,  got  it  in
his  hands,  and  bit  it  againe  so  angerly,  that  they  both
dyed  the  same  day. Their  Lions  are  dreadfull,  of  a  darke
gray  or  durtie  ash-colour, not spotted. The Ounce is
spotted,  bigger  then  a  Gray-hound  and  longer,  made  much
like  our  Cats,  and  prey  on  Cats,  and  Dogs,  and  Cattell,
which they therefore shut up every night. There are
innumerable  Wormes  like  Beetles,  whose  tailes  shine  in
the  night  like  burning  coales,  and  are  so  many  that  they
enlighten all the ayre. There are Rats whose bite is
venomous,  and  their  smell  very  sweet  of  Muske. Great  venemoui-
Bats  they  have  as  bigge  as  Pigeons,  which  the  Cafers  kill,
flay,  and  eate  as  savourly  as  Hens. They  have  in  the  wilde
fields  blacke  Tortoises,  as  bigge  as  Bucklers,  fleshy  and  fat,
which  they  boyle  and  rost  for  dainties. They  have  many
Zangaons,  Flies  of  a  strange  mixture. They  make  a  Ball Zangaons,  a
of  Clay,  which  they  fasten  on  the  Walls  or  Tiles  made  full  *«*¥**» »J
of  holes  like  a  Bee-hive  ; in  each  hole  they  put  a  little  ^tfl^e
Worme,  such  as  breed  in  holes,  some  white,  some  blacke,
some  greene,  or  gray,  of  divers  kindes,  whatsoever  they
finds ; and  then  stop  the  mouth  of  the  Ball  or  Hive  with
new  Clay. These  enclosed  Wormes  beget  Zangaons  with
legs  and  wings,  which  eate  thorow  the  Clay,  and  flie  our
ix  225  p

Muske  Rats

A.D.

*597-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Curuanes,
Birds  of  great
beaut'te.

and  breede,  so  that  of  divers  kindes  there  is  made  one
kinde  very  wonderfull.  They  have  divers  kindes  of  Birds,
some  of  faire  Colours  and  Notes,  brought  up  in  Cages  ;
Doves,  some  with  golden  wings  very  faire  ;  Geese  of  three
sorts,  one  greater  then  those  of  Portugal,  blacke  on  the
backe,  and  white  on  the  belly,  with  a  red  crest  on  the  head,
hard  and  sharpe  like  a  home  ;  many  Cranes  ;  Pelicans
as  bigge  as  Turky-cocks,  whitish,  with  feet  very  thick
and  short,  living  in  the  River  on  Fish  ;  Ravens  as  bigge
as  Peahens,  and  of  that  fashion,  but  the  wings  blackish,
without  feathers  on  the  necke  and  head,  covered  there  with  a
white  ragged  skin  full  of  Dandrow  ;  they  frequent  the  Coast
and  Dung-hill  for  Carrion,  and  for  mens  dung.  They  have
one  kinde  of  Fowles,  called  Curuanes,  as  bigge  as  Cranes,
but  more  beautifull,  the  back  like  black  Sattin,  exceeding
white  on  the  belly  and  breast :  the  neck  two  spannes  and
a  halfe  long,  covered  with  fine  white  feathers  like  silke,
which  are  excellent  for  plumes  :  upon  the  head  it  hath  a
Cap  of  blacke  feathers,  very  faire  (as  our  gold  Finches
have  red)  and  in  the  midst  thereof  a  crest  or  plume  almost
a  span  long,  of  white,  fine,  strait  feathers,  equall  on  the
top,  and  there  spreading  themselves  into  a  round  forme,
like  a  very  white  Mushrom  with  a  white  stalke,  and
resembling  a  Sombrero  de  Sol  (or  Indian  Canopee  to  keepe
off  the  Sunne.)  The  Cafars  call  this  the  King  of  Birds,
because  their  Kings  have  such  a  Sombreiro,  and  for  the
preatnesse  and  beautie  of  them.
[II.ix.1546.]  A  Portugall  in  Sofala  told  mee,  that  going  to  traffique
for  ivorie  in  the  firme  Land  of  Mambone,  over  against  the
lies  of  Bocicas,  hee  had  a  Monkie  in  a  chaine  fastened  to
a  Blocke  or  Clog  (which  weighed  ten  or  twelve  pounds)
who  one  day  being  abroad,  there  came  a  bird  of  prey  of  a
huge  bignesse,  and  seising  on  him  with  his  talons,  carried
him  away  together  with  his  Clog,  and  not  very  farre  off
did  eate  him,  the  Chaine  and  Clog  being  after  found.  In
those  parts,  hee  said,  are  many  of  them  which  doe  much
hurt,  carrying  away  Kids,  and  Pigs,  and  Hens.  There
is  a  kind  of  birds  like  Canarie  birds,  but  with  long  tailes,

226

Birds  of  great
force.

Birds  of  great
wit.

FRIAR JOANNO DOS SANCTOS

which  live  on  wax,  and  search  in  the  wild  unfilled  places
for  Bee-hives,  whereof  there  are  many  in  holes  in  the
ground,  and  in  hollow  trees,  and  finding  any,  they  goe  to
the  waies  to  shew  it  to  some  people  which  passe  by  (which
they  doe  by  going  before  them  crying  and  beating  their
wings  from  bough  to  bough,  till  they  finde  the  Hive  or
Bee-hole)  and  the  people  knowing  their  fashion  follow
them,  where  the  one  shares  the  Honie,  the  other  the  Wax,
and  the  dead  Bees  therein.  They  call  these  birds  Sazu.
I  have  seene  them  often  enter  into  our  Church  to  eate  the
Wax,  where  the  boyes  have  catched  some  of  them.  There
is  another  sort  which  lives  on  the  fruit  of  their  owne
labours  :  for  they  with  their  hard  bills  pecke  holes  on  the
tops  of  trees,  where  the  armes  begin  to  spread,  and  therein
put  a  stone  of  a  fruit  which  they  eate,  which  springs
within,  and  glues  it  selfe  like  a  new  grasse  of  that  Tree  (so
that  there  are  many  Trees  of  two  kindes,  by  reason  of  this
foster-plant  of  another  leafe  and  fruit)  and  of  the  fruit
thereof  the  Birds  sustayne  themselves  :  they  are  of  the
bignesse  and  fashion  of  Jack-dawes,  but  grayish.  There
is  a  Bird,  called  Minga,  greene  and  yellow  very  faire,  like
in  forme  to  Pigeons,  which  never  tread  on  the  ground,
their  feet  being  so  short  that  they  can  scarce  be  discerned.
They  settle  on  Trees  of  the  fruits  whereof  they  live  ;  and
when  they  will  flie,  they  fall  downe  with  their  wings  closed,
which  they  open  in  the  ayre  :  when  they  drinke  they  flie
on  the  tops  of  the  waters ;  and  if  they  fall  on  the  ground
they  cannot  rise  ;  they  are  fat  and  savourie.  There  are
said  to  be  of  those  Cincoes  there,  which  live  on  Dew,  like
those  in  Mexico,  of  whose  fine  curious  feathers  they  make
pictures.

In  the  River  of  Sofala  is  store  of  Fish  fat  and  savorie,
as  Mullets,  Needles,  Dolphins,  &c.  One  strange  fish  in
qualitie  is  common  in  those  Rivers,  which  the  Portugals
call  Tremedor,  and  the  Cafres,  Thinta,  of  such  nature  that
no  man  can  take  it  in  his  hand  whiles  it  is  alive,  for  it
filleth  the  hand  and  arme  with  paine,  as  if  every  joynt
would  goe  asunder ; but  being  dead  is  as  another  fish,

227

A. I).

Birds  of  great
providence.

Birds  proper
of  the  ayre.

O  vie  do  calls

them

Tomineios.

Historie  of
Fishes.
The  Torpedo
see  sup.  1 183
y  inf.  c.  13.
§.  2.

A.D.

I597-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Ta'tle  eating
Macone.

and  much  esteemed  for  good  meate.  The  Naturals  say,
that  the  skin  of  this  fish  is  used  to  sorceries.  It  is  medi-
cinable  against  the  Cholick,  rosted  and  ground  to  powder
and  drunke  in  Wine.  The  biggest  of  them  is  two  spannes
and  halfe  long,  the  skin  blackish,  rough  and  thick.

There  is  another  fish  bred  in  Lakes,  called  Macone,
somewhat  like  a  Lamprey  with  holes  in  the  neck,  and  in
shape  spotted  like  a  water  Snake.  In  Summer  when  the
Lakes  are  drie,  he  lyes  a  spanne  deepe  in  the  earth  with
his  taile  in  his  mouth,  which  he  sucketh  for  his  sustenance
till  the  raynes  come,  above  three  moneths.  In  this  manner
he  eates  most  of  his  taile,  which  growes  againe  as  before,
at  the  returne  of  the  waters.  The  Cafres  hunt  them,
digging  the  earth  of  the  Lakes  for  them,  and  there  finde
them  in  this  sort.  I  have  often  eaten  of  them.  The
Lakes  in  Winter  are  so  filled,  and  stored  from  the  River

RedHerr'mgs.  with  one  kinde,  called  Enxavos,  that  the  Hogs  feed  them-
selves therewith.  The  Memune  is  of  so  strong  a  sent
that  none  can  endure  it,  but  the  Cafres ;  and  they  eate
it,  getting  great  store  in  the  Winter,  and  smoke  them  for
the  whole  yeeres  provision.

Five  leagues  from  Sofala  are  the  lies  Bocicas  towards

Women  fishes,  the  South,  in  which  Sea  are  many  Women  fishes,  which  the
people  take  with  great  hookes  and  lines,  with  chaines  of
Iron  made  for  that  purpose ;  and  of  the  flesh  thereof  they
hang,  and  smoke  it  as  it  were  Bacon.  The  flesh  is  good
and  fat,  of  which  we  have  oft  eaten,  sodden  with  Cab-
bages and  dressed  with  its  owne  sawce.  From  the  belly  to
the  neck  it  is  very  like  a  Woman ;  the  Female  nourisheth
her  young  with  her  breasts  which  are  like  a  Womans.
From  the  belly  downward  it  hath  a  thick  and  long  taile
with  finnes  like  a  Dolphin  ;  the  skin  white  on  the  belly,
on  the  backe  rougher  then  a  Dolphins.  It  hath  armes
ending  from  the  elbowes  in  finnes,  and  hath  no  hands.
The  face  is  plaine,  round,  deformed,  bigger  then  a  mans,
without  humane  semblance,  wide  mouthed,  thick  hanging
lips  as  a  Hound,  foure  teeth  hanging  out  almost  a  span,
like  the  tuskes  of  a  Boare  (which  are  accounted  very  good

22S

Fish-sow
bacon.

FIUAH JOANNO DOS SANCTOS  a.d.

for  the  Piles,  and  against  fluxe  of  bloud)  their  Nostrils
are  like  a  Calfc.  There  are  many  Oysters  which  breedc  1>e<ulc
the  Pearle,  which  they  take  with  diving,  fastning  a  Cord  °J**
to  their  middle,  and  holding  stones  in  their  hands  (which
when  they  are  at  the  bottome  they  let  goe)  and  fill  a
Basket,  which  is  let  downe  from  the  Boat  with  a  Cord,
having  a  stone  in  it  to  make  it  sinke,  which  being  full  is
drawne  up  ;  and  then  to  it  againe.  They  are  so  used  to
it  that  they  will  continue  halfe  a  quarter  of  an  houre  under
the  water.

Ambargrice  is  said  to  grow  in  the  bottome  of  the  Sea,  Ambargrke.
and  with  the  moving  of  the  Sea  to  bee  broken  and  rise  to
the  top  ;  wherefore  after  great  Stormes  and  Tempests  the
Cafres  goe  seeking  for  it  by  the  Shoares,  and  find  many
peeces  which  they  sell  to  the  Moores  and  Portugals.
They  have  three  sorts  of  Ambar,  one  very  white,  called
Ambar  gris ;  the  second  gray,  called  Mexueyra ;  the
third  blacke  as  pitch,  which  is  often  found  soft,  of  ill
smell,  which  Whales  and  other  Fishes  eate.  The  Whales
doe  not  breede  it  and  vomit  it,  as  some  say,  for  peeces
have  there  beene  found  of  twentie  pound.  And  1596.  a  [II.ix.1547.]
piece  of  excellent  white  Ambar  was  found  neere  to  Brava,
so  great  and  high  that  set  in  the  midst  they  could  not  see
one  another,  which  were  on  the  opposite  sides.

The  Crocodile  is  five  and  twentie  spans  long,  and  The  Crocodile.
thicker  then  a  man  ;  they  are  cowardly  on  Land,  cruell  in
the  water,  greene  with  darke  yellow  spots,  and  gray,  and
blacke ;  they  have  many  rewes  of  Teeth,  no  Tongue.
The  Cafres  call  them  Goma.  They  lay  many  Egges  in  a
hole  in  the  Sand,  which  the  Sunne  hatcheth.  The  Cafres
oft  find  their  Egges.  They  first  drowne  and  then  eate
their  prey,  wetting  every  bit  in  water,  which  otherwise
they  cannot  swallow.  Their  Livers  are  Poyson  ;  and  the
Quiteve  prohibits  for  this  cause  to  kil  any  under  paine  of
death.  Some  Cafres  say,  that  one  Lobe  of  the  Liver  is
Poyson,  and  the  other  Counterpoyson.  They  lye  Morn-
ing and  Evening  on  the  Sands,  a  little  out  of  the  water
with  their  mouthes  open  against  the  Sunne  to  catch  Flyes,

229

A.D.

J597'

*T his  stinke  is
a  Muskie  sent:
see  Jobson.
Gabriell
Re  be  Ho  in  his
Tract  of  the
Ma/uccos,
writes  that
there  are  some
with  foure
eies,  two  in  the
Front,  and  two
in  the  Throat.
Miciriri  a
strange  her  be.

Lupata  Hi  Is.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

who  invited  thither  by  the  ill  sent,  sucke  away  the  filth,
which  stickes  on  their  eyes  and  nostrils,  and  devoured  for
their  labour  at  last  betweene  their  teeth.  The  old  ones
have  mosse  on  their  heads.  The  Cafres  catch  them  with
flesh  bayted  on  a  bigge  piece  of  wood  two  spans  long  and
strait,  hidden  in  the  flesh,  and  cast  into  the  water,  where
the  Crocodile  devoures  both :  the  Cafar  seing  his  line
stirre,  drawes  him  to  the  banke  with  his  mouth  open,  not
able  by  reason  of  the  wood  crossing  his  throat  to  shut  his
mouth,  or  byte  asunder  the  Cord ;  the  water  entring  into
his  mouth  chokes  him ;  which  done,  they  draw  him  to
Land  and  eate  him.  They  stinke  *  most  abominably ;
insomuch,  that  I  and  some  others  passing  the  River  from
Maroupe  to  Sofala,  were  faine  to  stop  our  Noses,  the
Cafars  laughing,  and  saying  it  was  the  ventositie  or  wind-
breaking  of  the  Crocodile  which  came  from  forth  the
waters,  and  yeelded  such  unsufferable  stinke  thorow  all
that  part  of  the  River.  Alongst  the  River  of  Sofala
growes  a  certayne  herbe  which  they  call  Miciriri,  where-
with the  Cafres  anoynt  themselves  when  they  go  a  fishing,
by  vertue  whereof  the  Crocodiles  cannot  hurt  them  ;  it
taking  away  from  the  teeth  their  power  and  dulling  them
as  if  they  were  of  Waxe.  And  for  proofe  before  they  use
it,  they  put  some  of  it  on  their  owne  heads,  and  if  it
disables  them  to  chew  any  thing,  they  account  it  good,
and  use  the  juyce,  not  daring  otherwise  to  enter  the  River
for  feare  of  Crocodiles.

Alongst  the  River  grow  Cottons  and  Sugar-canes,  which
they  sow  for  backe  and  belly.  In  the  Countrey  grow
many  medicinable  Plants,  especially  on  the  Hils  of
Lupata,  where  grow  wild  Douradinha,  or  guilt  Wood,
wilde  Aguila,  very  sweet,  Cannafistola,  and  another  Plant
with  which  the  Cafres  purge  themselves,  another  to  stanch
bloud,  another  to  cure  wounds  very  effectually,  another
to  provoke  mirth  and  jollitie.

These  hils  of  Lupata  are  mid-way  from  Sena,  to  Tete,
which  are  sixtie  leagues  distant  up  the  River,  ninetie
leagues  from  Sea,  very  high,  craggie,  of  large  extension,

230

FRIAR  JOANNO DOS SANCTOS  <">.

«597«

therefore  by  the  Cafres  called,  The  Backe-bonc  of  the
World.  The  River  Zambcze  forceth  their  stonie  heart  'Lambexe.
to  yeeld  him  passage  ;  in  some  places  as  affrighted  lifting
themselves  steepe  upright  in  the  Ayre,  in  others  with  beetle
overhanging  browes  expressing  their  frowning  indigna-
tion, as  if  they  would  fall  upon  that  pressing  and  piercing
Enemie,  which  yet  swiftly  flyeth  and  lightly  escapeth,  ever
continuing  that  breach  in  which  it  never  continueth.  Thus
with  menacing  looks,  they  face  &  threaten  the  waters,  and
with  strait  gripes  offer  in  vaine  to  stay  their  course  ;  which
hereby  indangered,  haste  away  ever  to  avoyde  that  which
they  ever  haste  to  obtayne ;  this  mutuall  strife  causing  a
dangerous  Current-combate,  not  so  much  to  each  other,
as  the  Boates  and  Merchants  which  passe  this  way,  often
feeling  the  furie  of  both  till  they  can  feele  neither  ;  both
men  and  goods  confiscated  to  their  furie.

These  Hils  traverse  the  Kingdome  of  a  King  called  Mongas.
Mongas,  which  hath  this  River  on  the  South,  and  reach
to  the  Lands  of  Manamotapa.  These  Mongas  are  the
most  warlike  Cafres,  which  confine  on  this  River,  and  have
often  fought  with  the  Portugals.  In  one  battell  they  had
an  old  Witch  which  came  before  them,  and  being  betwixt
both  Campes,  tooke  certayne  powders  out  of  a  Pompion
rinde  which  shee  had  brought  and  threw  them  into  the
Ayre  against  the  Portugalls,  but  in  the  midst  of  her
Sorceries  she  was  slaine  with  a  Falcon  shot,  which  successe
followed  the  other  Cafres  which  trusted  in  her,  and  peace
not  long  after  was  concluded  on  both  parts.

Beneath  these  Hils  is  a  goodly  Lake  called  Rufumba, Rufumba.
of  three  leagues  circuit,  with  an  Hand  in  the  midst  very
high,  in  which  is  a  great  Tamarind  or  Date  *  tree,  of  the  *Tomarin-
bignesse  and  fashion  of  a  Pine ; the  leaves  whereof  open  tieiro-
with  the  rising,  and  close  with  the  going  downe  of  the
Sunne. In  it  is  a  Grove  called  Chipanga,  accounted  sacred,
in  which  the  Neighbour  Cafres  bury  their  dead,  conceiv-
ing  that the soules departed enter into the Crocodiles  CrocodUe-
(whereof  there  are  great  store)  and  therefore  also  often  set  Pu'Jatory-
them  meate. There  is  in  this  Lake  a  Spring  which  swelleth

231

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*597-

out in five heads a yard distant from each other, of

differing  heate,and  one  unsufferable.  The  like  is  in  a  place
above  Tete,  neere  the  River  called  Empongo.  A  small
River  neere  Tete  is  of  Salt  water  like  the  Sea,  from  which
it  is  one  hundred  and  twentie  leagues  distant.  In  Moca-
ranga  are  many  such  Salt  Lakes  and  Rivers. In  the  great

Strange  River  Mangania,  is  a  Salt  Spring  two  hundred  leagues

Springs.  from  Sea,  which  turnes  also  all  the  Wood  throwne  in,  into

hard  stones.

In  Alenteio  a  Province  of  Portugall  at  Exuedall,  is  a
spring  which  runs  with  store  of  water  all  Summer,  making

[II.  i x.i  548.]  a  good  streame  which  waters  many  Gardens,  and  drives
many  Mills  from  Aprill  to  September ;  and  is  dry  in
Winter  ;  and  with  another  greater  wonder,  the  same  water
where  it  stands,  turnes  into  stone  like  Pumice,  which  ever
so  continueth,  and  puts  on  a  stonie  Coate  on  every  piece
of  wood,  which  is  throwne  into  the  Spring-head  or  running
streame,  and  makes  it  like  a  Cane  of  stone  :  as  it  doth  also
the  grasse  ;  and  every  yeare  they  must  cleere  the  passages
from  stone.

Sena.  Sena  is  a  Fort  of  Lime  and  Stone,  furnished  with  Artil-

lery ;  the  Captayne  is  placed  by  the  Captayne  of  Mosam-
bique.  There  were  in  my  time  eight  hundred  Christians,
of  which,  fiftie  Portugalls.  Seven  or  eight  leagues  from
hence  on  the  other  side  of  the  River,  is  the  high  Hill
Chiri,  which  may  be  seene  twentie  leagues  off,  the  Hill
and  Valleys  exceeding  fertile.  To  this  Factory  of  Sena,
they  come  from  Tete  to  buy  Merchandize  with  their
Gold.

Tete.  Tete  is  a  stone  Fort  sixtie  leagues  further  up  the  River

in  the  Kingdome  of  Inhabaze,  under  the  Manamotapa,
the  Captayne  is  placed  by  the  Captayne  of  Mosam-
bique.  In  this  place  were  in  my  time  sixe  hundred
Christians,  of  them  fortie  Portugalls.  These  one  hundred
and  twentie  leagues  the  Portugalls  goe  up  the  River,  and
from  thence  goe  by  Land  with  their  Merchandize.  The
Countrey  is  very  fertile,  and  Portugall  wares  are  here  sold
at  great  prizes. From  Tete  they  goe  with  their  wares

232

FRIAR .JOANNO DOS SANCTOS  a.d.

1 597-
thorow a great part of Manamotapa to three Marts,
Massapa,  Luanze,  MatlZOVO,  in  which  the  Inhabitants  of
Sena,  and  Tete  have  houses  and  Factories,  thence  to  store
all  the  Countrey.

Massapa  is  the  chicfe,  where  resides  a  Portugall  Cap-  Mauapa.
tayne,  presented  by  the  Portugalls,  and  confirmed  by  the
Manamotapa,  which  cals  him  his  Great  Wife,  a  name  of
honour,  as  before  is  observed.  This  Captayne  holds
jurisdiction  over  all  the  Cafres  without  Appeale,  as  also
over  the  Portugalls  in  that  Kingdome,  granted  by  the
Vice-Royes,  as  all  other  Captaynes  of  those  parts  have.
This  Captayne  of  Massapa  treats  all  businesse  with  the
Manamotapa,  whose  Customer  he  is  also,  taking  one  cloth
of  twentie,  in  which  respect  the  Countrey  is  free  to  them.
But  beyond  Massapa,  neerer  the  Manamotapa,  one  may
goe  without  license  from  the  King  or  the  Captayne.  The
Captayne  hath  an  Azagay  of  blacke  Wood  pointed  with
Gold,  for  his  Ensigne  or  Rod  of  Authoritie.  The  Cap-
tayne of  Mosambique  payes  at  his  entrance  to  the  Mana-
motapa, three  thousand  Cruzados  in  goods  for  the  three
yeares  of  his  Captayne-ship,  for  free  Trade  in  his  Coun-
treyes,  which  they  may  travell  securely  laden  with  Gold  ;
it  Seeing  never  knowne  that  Theeves  assaile  them,  or  any
without  the  Kings  authoritie.  He  sends  his  Mutumes
to  Sena  for  his  Curua,  in  the  same  manner  and  order  that
the  Quiteve  useth  at  Sofala ;  but  at  Sena  the  Captayne
delivers  it  to  a  Portugall  (whom  he  sends  as  Embassador
to  the  Manamotapa,  in  the  name  of  the  Captayne  of
Mosambique)  in  the  presence  of  the  Mutumes.

This  Kingdome  of  Manamotapa,  is  scituate  in  Moca- The  Kingdom
ranga,  which  in  times  past  was  wholly  of  the  Manamotapan  ofManamo-
Empire,  but  now  is  divided  into  foure  Kingdomes,  to  wit, a**a'
this  of  Manamotapa,  that  of  Quiteve,  the  third  of  Sedanda
and  the  fourth  of  Checanga. This  division  was  made  by
a  Manamotapan  Emperour,  who  not  willing  or  not  able  to
governe  so  remote  Countreyes,  sent  his  Sonne  Quiteve  to
governe  that  part  which  runnes  along  the  River  of  Sofala,
and  Sedanda  another  Sonne,  to  that  which  Sabia  washeth,

233

A.D.

'597-

Manamotapa
200.  leagues
square.

Trade  from
the  Atlanttke
to  the  East
Sea.

Manica,  how
bounded  and
rounded.

PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

a  River  which  visits  the  Sea  before  the  Bocicas :  and
Chicanga  a  third  Sonne  to  the  Lands  of  Manica.  These
three  after  their  Fathers  death  would  never  acknowledge
their  Brother  his  Successor :  and  the  same  not  without
yeerely  warring  with  each  other,  continues  to  their
Posteritie.  Yet  is  the  Kingdome  of  the  Manamotapa,
bigger  then  the  other  three  together.  The  Cafres  call
them  all  Mocarangas,  because  they  speake  the  Mocaranga
Tongue.

This  Kingdome  of  Manamotapa  is  above  two  hundred
leagues  long,  and  as  much  broad.  On  the  North-west
he  confines  with  the  Kingdome  of  Abutua  (the  King  and
Kingdome  have  the  same  name)  which  they  say,  stretcheth
thorow  the  Continent  to  the  borders  of  Angola.  I  have
seene  in  Sofala  a  Commoditie  bought  by  a  Portugall  in
Manica,  brought  thither  by  the  Carres  of  Abutua,  which
had  come  from  Portugall  by  the  way  of  Angola.  In  this
Kingdome  of  Abutua  is  much  fine  Gold,  but  the  Naturals
being  farre  from  the  Portugals,  doe  not  much  seeke  after
it,  but  rather  to  multiply  their  cattle  of  which  they  have
abundance.  On  the  East  Manamotapa  confineth  with  the
River  Zambeze,  which  the  Manamotapans  call  Empando,
which  signifieth  Rebelling  against  his  King  :  for  say  they,
were  it  not  for  the  River,  the  Manamotapa  would  bee
Lord  of  the  Countrey  on  the  other-side,  to  which  he
cannot  passe  his  Armie  for  want  of  Boats.  On  the
South-west  this  Kingdome  extendeth  to  the  Ocean,  into
which  it  enters  with  a  point  of  Land  of  ten  or  twelve
leagues  large,  from  the  River  Luabo,  to  that  of  Tandan-
culo.  The  rest  of  the  Lands  Southwards  to  the  River
Inhanabane,  and  devided  betwixt  the  three  Kings,  which
rebelled  as  is  said  :  from  Tendanculo  to  Sofala,  the Quiteve
reigneth  :  thence  to  the  South  is  the  Kingdome  of  Sabia,
under  the  Sedanda,  who  is  Lord  also  of  Botonga  to  the
Region  Inhambane  :  within  Land  at  the  head  of  both  these
Kingdomes  is  Manica  under  the  Chicanga,  who  is  on  the
North-west,  some  hundreths  of  leagues  remote  from  the
Sea. On  the  North  side  of  Manica,  is  Abutua,  and  on  the

23+

FRIAR  JOANNO DOS SANCTOS  a.d.

i597«

North-east  is  the  Manamotapa,  and  to  the  South  is  a  King

called  Biri.  Those  three  Kings  which  rebelled  arc  great,
but  the  Quiteve  is  the  greatest,  and  richest  by  trade  with
the  Portugals  for  Stuffes  and  Beades  (which  is  the  Cafres
wealth)  and  his  people  are  the  strongest  of  the  Mocar-
angas,  and  the  best  Archers,  and  most  expert  at  the
Azagay.

Neere  to  Massapa  is  a  great  high  Hill,  called  Fura,  [II.ix.1549.]
whence  may  bee  discerned  a  great  part  of  the  Kingdome  **T4  supposed
of  Manamotapa : for  which  cause  he  will  not  suffer  the  ^  '

Portugalls  to  goe  thither,  that  they  should  not  covet  his
great  Countrey  and  hidden  Mines.  On  the  toppe  of  that
Hill  are  yet  standing  pieces  of  old  wals,  and  ancient  ruines  Old  buildings
of  lime  and  stone,  which  testifie  that  there  have  beene  °fstone-
strong  buildings  :  a  thing  not  seene  in  all  Cafraria.  For
the  Kings  houses  are  of  wood,  daubed  with  clay,  and
covered  with  straw.  The  Natives,  and  specially  the
Moores  have  a  Tradition  from  their  Ancestors,  that  those
houses  belonged  to  the  Queene  of  Saba,  which  carryed  Q.  of  Saba.
much  Gold  thence  downe  the  Cuama  to  the  Sea,  and  so
along  the  Coast  of  ^Ethiopia  to  the  Red  Sea.  Others  say
that  those  Ruines  were  Salomons  Factorie,  and  that  this
Fura  or  Afura  is  no  other  then  Ophir,  the  name  not  much  Salomons  Ofir.
altered  in  so  long  time.  This  is  certayne,  that  round  about
that  hill,  there  is  much  and  fine  Gold.  The  Navigation
might  in  those  times  be  longer,  for  want  of  so  good  ships
and  Pilots  as  now  are  to  be  had,  and  by  reason  of  much
time  spent  in  trucking  with  the  Cafars,  wherein  even  at
this  time  the  Merchants  alway  spend  a  yeare  and  more  in
that  businesse,  although  the  Cafars  be  growne  more  covet-
ous of  our  Wares,  and  the  Mines  better  knowne.  They
are  so  lazie  to  gather  the  Gold  that  they  will  not  doe  it
till  necessitie  constrayne  them.  Much  time  is  also  spent
in  the  Voyage  by  the  Rivers,  and  by  that  Sea  which  hath
differing  Monsons,  and  can  be  sayled  but  by  two  winds,
which  blow  sixe  moneths  from  the  East,  and  as  many  from
the  West.  Salomons  fleet  had  besides  those  mentioned,
this  let,  that  the  Red  Sea  is  not  safely  Navigable,  but  in

235

A.D.

I597-

a  This  by

reason  their
ships  were
small,  as  that
infancie  of
Navigation
required:  and
besides  they
must  carry  the
timber  from
one  Sea  to  the
other  over
land  to  build
them:  Neither
were  Hirams
men  expert  in
that  Sea :  and
haply  two
Nations  did
not  well  agree
to  hasten  the
Voyage.
bSee  sup.  pag.
975.  store  of
Peacocks  wild
and  tame,  seen
by  A.  Battle,
up  within  the
Land.

Golden  fetters.
Riches  the
cause  of
povertie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  day,  by  reason  of  many  lies  and  shoalds ;  likewise  it
was  necessary  often  to  put  to  harbour  for  fresh  water  and
other  "  provisions,  and  to  take  in  new  Pilots  and  Mariners,
and  to  make  reparations :  which  considered  (with  their
creeping  by  shoare  for  want  of  the  Compasse  and  experi-
ence in  those  Seas,  and  their  Sabbath  rests,  and  their  trucke
with  the  Cafres)  might  extend  the  whole  Voyage  in  going,
staying,  and  returning,  to  three  yeares.  Further  the  Ivory,
Apes,  Gemmes,  and  precious  woods  (which  grow  in  the
wild  places  of  Tebe,  within  Sofala)  whence  they  make
Almadias  or  Canoas  twentie  yards  long  of  one  Timber ;
and  much  fine  blacke  wood  (Ebonie)  growes  in  that  Coast,
and  is  thence  carryed  to  India  and  Portugall :  all  these  may
make  the  matter  probable.  As  for  Peacockes  b  I  saw  none
there,  but  there  must  needs  be  some  within  Land  ;  for  I
have  seene  some  Cafers  weare  their  Plumes  on  their  heads.
And  as  there  is  store  of  fine  Gold,  so  also  is  there  fine
silver  in  Chicova  where  are  rich  Mines.

In  all  the  Regions  of  Manamotapa,  or  the  greatest  part
thereof,  are  many  Mines  of  Gold  ;  and  particularly  in
Chiroro,  where  is  the  most  and  most  fine.  They  gather
it  as  is  said  before,  of  Quiteve.  It  is  paine  of  death  for
any  Moore  which  discovers  a  Mine  to  take  away  any,
besides  his  goods  forfeited  to  the  King.  And  if  by
chance  any  find  a  Mine,  he  is  bound  to  cry  out  aloud,  that
some  other  Cafar  may  come  to  testifie  that  he  takes  none  :
and  both  are  then  to  cover  the  place  with  Earth,  and  set  a
great  bough  thereon,  to  give  warning  to  other  Cafares  to
avoyd  the  place.  For  if  they  should  come  there,  it  would
cost  them  their  lives,  although  there  be  no  proofe  that  he
tooke  any  thing.  This  severitie  is  used  to  keep  the
Mines  from  the  knowledge  of  the  Portugals,  lest  covetous
desire  thereof  might  cause  them  to  take  away  their  Coun-
trey.  It  is  found  in  poulder  like  sand  ;  in  graines  like
beads  ;  in  pieces  some  smooth  as  they  were  melted,  others
branched  with  snags,  others  mixed  so  with  Earth,  that
the  Earth  being  well  washed  from  them,  they  remayne
like  Honiecombes ; those  holes  before  full  of  red  Earth,

236

FRIAR JOANNO DOS SANCTOS  »a

'597-
seeming  as  though  they  were  also  to  be  turned  into  Gold.
As  for  that  in  stone,  we  have  alreadie  spoken.

In  the  Lands  confining  with  Manamotapa,on  the  North-
west is  the  Kingdome  or  Chicova,  famous  for  silver  Mines.  Chicova.
It  runs  alongst  the  River  Zambeze.  After  that  Francis
Barret  was  at  Sofala  to  conquer  the  Mines  of  Manica,  as
before  is  said,  he  passed  thence  with  his  company  to
Cuama,  to  conquer  the  Mines  of  Chicova,  and  beneath
the  hils  of  Lupata,  conquered  the  Mongas  ;  whereupon
other  Cafres  fled  into  the  Desarts  and  hid  themselves.
Thus  partly  by  the  River,  and  partly  by  Land,  he  came  to
Chicova,  and  set  downe  his  Campe,  and  much  desired  to
discover  some  Mines.  But  no  Cafar  durst  shew  him  for
feare  of  losing  their  Countrey,  which  now  they  had  aban-
doned to  them  ;  neither  could  they  take  any  whom  they
might  constraine  by  force,  or  induce  any  by  promises  to
that  designe.  Yet  one  cheating  fellow  having  gotten  two
stones  out  of  a  Mine,  buried  them  in  another  place,  and  s'^'er  Mines.
came  one  Evening  to  the  Governour  to  make  shew  of  this  c
Mine,  to  whom  having  made  that  shew,  and  received  a
Reward,  with  promise  to  returne  the  next  Morning,  hee
left  the  Portugals  in  the  lurch,  and  never  came  againe.
Thus  after  much  triumph,  for  false  hope  of  a  Mine,  hee
was  forced  to  leave  the  Countrey  for  want  of  Victuals,  and
returned  downe  the  River  to  Sena,  leaving  there  Antonio
Cardoso  d'Almeida,  and  two  hundred  men  with  provi-
sions, fortified  in  a  Trench  of  wood  to  procure  that
Discoverie.  The  Cafres  fained  a  peace  with  him  (by
Treacherie  to  betray  him)  and  after  a  League  confirmed
pretending  to  discover  the  Mine,  brought  them  into  an
Ambush,  where  the  most  were  slaine,  the  rest  forced  to
their  Fort,  and  there  besieged  and  slaine  every  Mothers
Sonne.  The  Governour  melted  those  two  stones,  and
found  them  to  hold  three  parts  silver,  and  but  one  of
drosse.  They  have  also  Mines  of  Copper,  and  of  very
good  Iron,  of  this  making  Instruments  of  Warre  and
Husbandry ; of that Bracelets and Braveries for their

armes  and  lees.

237

ad  PURCHAS HTS PILGRIMES

J597-
[II.ix.1550.]  I  will  adde  out  of  Barrius,  Dec.  1.  1.  10.  this  of  the
buildings  above-said.  There  are  in  the  Province  Toroa
(called  also  Butua)  the  oldest  Mines  in  those  parts.  In
the  midst  is  a  square  stone  Fort  well  wrought  of  great
stones ;  the  wall  is  five  and  twentie  spannes  large,  the
height  not  answerable.  Over  the  Gate  are  seene  strange
Letters  which  some  Learned  Moores  saw ;  but  could  not
tell  what  Letters  they  were.  And  about  the  same  building
are  some  others  somewhat  like  it.  The  Natives  call  them
Simbaoni,  that  is,  the  Court :  of  which  Palace  all  other  the
Kings  Houses  tooke  name  :  within  it  is  the  Simbacaio,  a
great  man  which  there  keepes  some  of  the  Manamotapas
women.  The  people  are  barbarous  and  know  not  who
was  the  Author  of  those  Buildings,  saying,  it  was  the
worke  of  the  Devill ;  for  (judging  other  men  by  them-
selves) they  thinke  them  impossible  to  Men.  The  Moores
said  that  our  Fort  of  Sofala  was  no  way  comparable.  It
is  from  Sofala  five  hundred  and  ten  miles,  betwixt  twentie
and  one  and  twentie  degrees  of  South  latitude.  In  all
that  Countrey  is  no  such  building,  and  it  seemed  to  the
Moores  very  ancient.  We  may  conjecture  (saith  Barrius)
that  this  is  Ptolemeys  Agysimba,  as  the  names  Simbaoni
and  Simbacaio,  seeme  to  import,  &c.

§.  mi.

Of  the  Manamotapa  his  customes  and  of  his  Vassals;
and  of  the  adjoyning  Kingdomes,  (wherein  other
Authours  have  erred)  Of  Mosambique,  Quiloa,
Mombaza,  Melinde,  Magadoxo  :  of  the  Mom-
bos  and  Zimbas  cruelties.  Of  Quilimane,  the
Hands  on  the  Coast ;  the  Macuas,  and  other
African  Observations.

Lthough the Manamotapa be greater then those
three mentioned, yet hath he not other Kings
Vassals  or  Tributaries  to  him  : only  some  of  his
subjects  called  Encosses  or  Fumos,  are  great  Lords,  and

23S

FKIAR JOANNO DOS SANCTOS

have  Tenants  subject  to  them.  Botcro  therefore  in  hi
Relations,  Gusman,  and  Osorius,  were  deceived  by  false-
information,  giving  to  the  Manamotapa,  so  large  a  Sea-
coast  with  tributary  Kings;  which,  I  doubt,  whether  ever
there  was  any  such  thing;  at  lest  there  is  now  no  memory
thereof.  Philip  Pigafetta  *  also  from  the  Relations  of
Lopez,  hath  falsly  described  these  Coasts  and  Kingdomes,
and  hath  told  a  long  Tale  of  Amazons  in  these  parts,
where  neither  are  such,  nor  any  memoriall  of  them.  They
tell  also  of  the  Royall  Ensignes,  a  Spade  of  Gold  with  an
Ivorie  head  to  intimate  his  Husbandry  ;  and  two  Arrowes,
the  notes  of  his  Justice  ;  and  that  he  alwayes  is  accom-
panyed  with  Souldiers  ;  but  in  all  they  deceive  and  are
deceived.  As  for  Bow  and  Arrowes,  it  is  as  ordinary  with
the  Cafres  as  with  the  Portugalls,  to  weare  a  Sword  in
their  Cities ;  none  of  them  going  out  of  doores  without
them.  And  in  like  manner  when  the  Manamotapa  goeth
forth,  hee  carries  in  his  hand  his  Bow  and  Arrowes,  as
likewise  doe  the  Cafres  which  accompany  him,  as  a  cus-
tome  and  not  as  Warriours.  Before  him  goeth  a  Cafre
beating  with  his  hand  on  a  *  great  Cushion,  to  give  notice
that  the  King  is  at  hand.  When  the  Manamotapa  will
not  carry  his  Bow,  an  Officer  called  Mascorira  (which  is  as
a  Page  of  the  Chamber)  carries  it ;  and  the  King  carrieth
in  his  hand  an  Azagay,  or  Javelin  of  blacke  wood  with  the
point  of  pure  Gold,  like  the  Iron  head  of  a  Lance,  or  three
pieces  of  wood,  called  Fimbos,  of  two  spannes  and  a  halfe,
wrought  and  slender.  And  when  hee  speakes  with  a
Cafre,  whom  he  will  have  dye,  he  lets  fall  one  of  these
Fimbos,  and  his  infices  (Executioners)  take  and  kill  him
with  an  Azagay ; and  so  dye  condemned  persons.

He  hath  many  women,  and  the  principall,  which  is  most
respected,  called  Mazarira,  is  his  entire  sister  a  great  friend
of  the  Portugals,  to  whom  when  they  give  the  King  his
Curua,  they  give  a  Present  of  Clothes.  No  man  speakes
with  the  King  or  with  this  Wife,  but  hee  brings  a  Present ;
the  Portugals  give  Beades,  the  Cafres  Kine,  or  Goats,  or
Clothes  :  and  when  they  are  able  to  give  nothing  else,  they

239

A.Ii.

'597-

*See  sup.  pag.
1022.  in
Lopez,  the
description  of
those  Coasts
after  his  forme.
Let  the
Reader  take
this  genera/1
rule  to
leleeve  our
Authors  in
that  which
they  saw;  in
other  things
received  by
Relations  (as
this  of  Lopez)
to  examine
them  with
eye-witnesses,
as  here. For
this  cause,  and
sometime  for
want  of  eye-
witnesses, we
have  brief y
inserted  such
Relations.
*Coixa.

The

Mazarira  or
Oueette.

A.D.

x597-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

As  Joseph  by
the  life  of
Pharao.

bring  a  Sacke  of  Earth  to  acknowledge  subjection,  or  a
bundle  of  straw  to  thatch  the  Kings  Houses ;  for  all  the
Houses  in  Cafraria  are  thatched.  The  Manamotapa
which  now  reignes,  is  called  Mambo,  and  his  subjects  use
to  sweare  by  his  life,  saying,  Xe  Mambo  ;  and  when  they
speake  with  him,  they  say  Xe  dico,  as  we,  Please  your
Majestie.  The  Kings  Children  are  called  Manambo.
Hee  hath  given  leave  to  our  Religious  men  in  his  King-
domes,  to  convert  and  to  build  Churches ;  of  which  they
have  built  three,  to  wit,  at  Massapa,  Luanze,  Bucutu,
where  live  many  Portugals.

They  speake  the  Mocaranga  Tongue,  the  best  Language
of  all  the  Cafres ;  and  whereas  the  Moores  of  Africa  and
Arabia,  draw  their  words  out  of  the  throat  as  if  they  would
vomite  ;  these  pronounce  their  words  with  the  end  of  the
tongue  and  the  lips,  that  they  speake  many  words  in  a
whistling  accent,  wherein  they  place  great  Elegance,  as  I
have  heard  the  Courtiers  of  Qyiteve,  and  Manamotapa
speake.  Their  stile  of  speaking  is  by  Metaphors  :  and
Similitudes  very  proper,  and  fitted  to  their  purpose.  The
Manamotapa  and  his  subjects,  weare  a  white  Periwinkle
in  the  fore-head  for  a  Jewell,  fastned  in  the  haire,  and  the
[II.ix.1551.]  King  hath  another  great  one  on  the  brest.  They  call  them
Andoros,  and  they  are  odious  to  the  Quiteve,  as  a  device
of  the  Manamotapan  distinction.  None  of  them  cut  the
haire  of  the  head  or  beard  ;  yet  are  there  very  few  long
beards,  for  their  haire  growes  little,  neither  doth  it  turne
white  till  they  are  very  old.  They  live  commonly  ninetie
or  an  hundred  yeares.  They  use  Auguries  and  Divina-
tions by  lots,  and  have  often  conference  with  the  Devill,
who  after  his  wont,  lyeth  often,  and  yet  holds  his  credit
with  them.  They  say  that  the  Manamotapa  hath  a  house,
wherein  are  hanged  condemned  persons,  from  whom  the
moysture  drops  downe  in  a  Vessel!,  till  they  cease  dropping,
and  then  they  are  buried.  Herewith  they  say  is  made  an
Oyntment,  which  he  useth  against  Witchcrafts  and  for  long
life.  They  have  many  other  Superstitions.  Dom.  George
Meneses,  sent  to  the  Manamotapa  a  faire  Grey-hound  ;

240

Their  speech
and  phrase.

Grey-hound

greatly

esteemed.

FRIAR JOANNO DOS SANCTOS  ad.

1 597-
which  he  much  loved  and  kept  about  him,  and  when  hec
dyed,  (as  it  were  by  Testament)  he  commanded  that  as
soone  as  they  saw  his  breath  departed,  they  should  kill
the  Grey-hound,  and  a  Cosset  Ramme  which  he  had
brought  up  by  hand,  to  doe  him  service  in  the  other
World :  which  was  done  accordingly,  his  Queene  also
drinking  poyson  (after  the  custome)  for  like  purpose.
The  most  of  the  Manamotapan  customes  are  the  same  that
are  mentioned  before  of  the  Quiteve,  and  therefore  need
no  further  Repetition.

About  Tete  are  eleven  Townes  of  Cafres  which  have  T/te  J^isdic-
each  their  Encosse,  or  Cafar  Captayne,  all  Vassals,  and
subject  to  the  Jurisdiction  of  the  Captayne  of  Tete. The
Manamotapa  having  conquered  those  parts,  distributed  to
diverse  divers  governments,  and  these  to  the  Captayne  of
Tete  and  his  Successors,  to  whom  they  are  subject  as  to
their  King,  asking  his  license  when  they  will  sow  their
grounds ; the  Encosse  comming  accompanied  with  some
of  his  Cafres, and  a  Present, when they  petition  him.
Before  Tete,  on  the  otherside  of  the  River  within  Land
to  the  East  and  North-east,  are  two  kinds  of  Man-eating
Cafres,  the  Mumbos  and  Zimbas  or  Muzimbas,  who  eate  Mumbos  and
those  they  take  in  warre,  and  their  slaves  also  when  they  ^tmbas^Mai
are  past  labour,  and sell  it  as  Beefe  or  Mutton. The  Aether  these
Captayne  of  Tete  with  his  eleven Encosses, and their zimba  bee
Companies  slue  sixe  hundred  of  the  Mumbos  in  a  Battell,  not  the
not  leaving  one  alive,  and  carried  away  their  Wives  and  dgistmba:.
Children  Captives. This  was  at  Chicoronga  a  Mumbos
Towne,  in  which  was  a  slaughter-house,  where  every  day
they  butchered  their  Captives ; neere  which  the  Portugals  Butcheries  of
found  many  Negroes,  men  and  women,  bound  hand  and  mam  fiesh-
foot,  destined  to  the  slaughter  for  the  next  dayes  food,
whom  with  many  others  they  freed. They  undertooke
this  Expedition  in  behalfe  of  a  friend  of  theirs,  against
whom  these  Mumbos  led  by  their  Captayne  Quizura  made
warre. All  the  ground  before  Qiiizuras  Gate  was  paved  Skull-paving.
with  mens  Skuls,  which  he  had  killed  in  that  war,  upon
which  they  must  passe  which  went  in  or  out ; a  thing  in
ix  241  Q

A.D.

'597-

Sena.
Muzimbus.

Zimbas-
stratagem
and  crucltie.

Religion.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRTMES

his  conceit  of  great  Majestie.  But  now  he  lost  himselfe
and  all  his.  These  Cafres  about  Tete  are  prone  to  warres,
saying,  If  they  dye  their  troubles  are  ended  ;  if  they  live,
they  shall  enjoy  spoyles.  Whiles  I  was  there,  the
Captayne  Pero  Fernandez  de  Chaves,  wanting  Timber  for
a  Church  Doores  and  Porch,  pretended  warre,  and  sum-
moned these  eleven  Encosses,  which  came  willingly,  but
were  diverted  to  this  Timber  businesse.

Whiles  I  was  at  Sena,  the  Muzimbas  warred  on  some
of  the  Portugals  friends,  and  did  eate  many  of  them,
who  besought  helpe  of  Andre  de  Santiago  Captayne  of
Sena  ;  who  went  and  set  upon  them  in  their  Fort,  which
they  had  fortified  round  with  a  wall  of  Wood,  with  wings
(revezes)  and  port-holes,  and  a  deepe  wide  ditch,  insomuch,
that  he  was  forced  to  send  to  Chaves  for  his  best  helpe,
who  came  with  above  one  hundred  Portugals  and  Misticos,
and  those  eleven  Encosses.  The  Muzimbas  by  their
Espials  had  Intelligence  of  their  comming  on  the  other-
side  the  River  without  order,  and  therefore  stole  out  of
the  Fort  by  night,  and  Embuscadoed  themselves,  and  set
upon  the  Portugals  (which  marched  halfe  a  league  before
the  Cafres)  suddenly  and  furiously ;  killed  them  every
one,  and  cut  off  their  armes  and  legges,  which  with  their
armes  they  carried  privily  to  their  Fortresse.  The  Cafres
arriving  at  the  Wood,  and  seeing  the  slaughter  returned
home  to  Tete,  and  related  the  late  Tragedie.  These
Zimbas  worship  no  God,  nor  Idol,  but  their  King,  who
(they  say)  is  God  of  the  Earth  :  and  if  it  raines  when  hee
would  not,  they  shoot  their  Arrowes  at  the  Skie  for  not
obeying  him  ;  and  he  only  eates  not  mans  flesh.  These
are  tall,  bigge,  strong ;  and  have  for  Armes,  small
Hatchets,  Arrowes,  Azagaies,  great  Bucklers,  with  which
they  cover  their  whole  bodies  of  light  wood,  lined  with
wild  beasts  skinnes.  They  eate  those  which  they  kill  in
warre  and  drink,  in  their  skuls.  If  any  of  their  owne
Cafres  be  sicke  or  wounded,  to  save  labour  of  cure  they
kill  and  eate  them.

They  feasted  with  great  jollitie  that  day  of  their  Victory,

242

FRIAR JOANNO DOS SANCTOS  a..,

1597-

and the night following ; and the next morning early

sallied  out  of  their  Fortresse,  the  Captayne  arrayed  in  a

Dominicans Casula, or Massing Vestment (Nicolas de

Rosario,  whom  they  had  taken  with the  Portugals,  and

carried  with  them,  and  put  to  a  cruell  death)  with  a  gilt

Chalice  in  his  left  hand,  and  an  Azagay  in  his  right ; and

all  the  other  Zimbas  with  the  quarters  of  the  Portugals  at

their  backes,  and  the  Captaynes  head  on  the  point  of  a

long  Lance  ; and  drumming  on  the  Drumme  which  they

had  taken,  they  presented  themselves  with  great  cryes  to

Santiago, and the Portugals, and after this muster

returned  to  their  Fort,  saying,  they  must  goe  eate  their

Tete  friends, Santiago  and  his  Portugals  (which stayed

wayting  for  Chaves,  and  knew  nothing)  now  terrified  with

this  Spectacle,  resolved  (if  feare  be  capable  of  that  word) nU °^u^s

to  haste  away  assoone  as  night  came,  and  passing  over  the  sMne.

River  was  perceived  by  the  Muzimbas,who  issued  out  upon  [II.ix.1552.]

them  with  great  force  and  slue  many  on  the  banke,  and

amongst  others  Santiago. Thus  of  Tete  and  Sena  were

one hundred and thirtie Portugals and Misticos, with

their  two  valiant Captaines slayne, with little  losse  on

their  part, comming  on them  with sudden advantage :

this  was  done  An.  1592. Don  Pedro  de  Sousa  Captaine

of Mozambique the next yeere, with two hundred

Portugals,  and  fifteene  hundred  Cafres  passed  the  River

Zambeze,  pitched  his  Tents  where Santiago had done,

battered  the  walls  of  their  Fort  with  his  Artillery ; but  to

no  purpose,  because  they  were  of  grosse  wood,  having  on Rl^lt:ulous

the  inside  much  earth  of  that  which  was  taken  out  of  the

ditch. Whereupon  he  resolved  to  stop  up  part  of  the

ditch,  which  with  much  labour  and  perill,  and  some  losse,

he  effected ; some  passed  with  hatchets  to  the  foot  of  the

trench,  and  began  to  cut ; but  the  Zimbas  from  the  walls

scalded  them  with  hot  water  and  Oyle,  specially  the  naked

Cafres, so  that none  durst  approch  againe, as  well for

scalding,  as  for  long  Iron  hookes  which  they  put  out  of

the  port-holes,  wherewith  they  wounded  the  assaylants,

and  held  them  fast,  pulling  them  to  the  holes,  and  killing

243

AD-  PT'RCHAS HIS PILGRTMES

J597-

them  :  so  that  they  were  forced  to  retire  to  their  Tents.
The  next  day  hee  caused  rods  to  be  gathered,  and  great
baskets  thereof  to  be  made  as  high  as  their  trenches,
which  were  carried  thither,  and  filled  with  earth,  for  the
Souldiours  to  stand  and  fight  upon  them,  that  the  Zimbas
might  not  issue  with  their  scalding  liquors.  Two  moneths
were  spent  in  this  warre,  when  some  of  the  Inhabitants  of
that  River  (which  liked  their  living  by  wares  better  then
to  endanger  dying  by  warres)  fained  Letters  from  Sena,
written  from  their  wives,  pretending  great  danger  from  a
Cafer,  which  came  to  robbe  them  in  the  Portugals  absence  ;
which  Sousa  beleeving  to  bee  true,  brake  up  the  siege,
and  passing  the  River  by  night  was  perceived  by  the
Zimbas ;  who  sallied  forth  with  a  great  crie,  assayled  the
Campe,  killed  some  which  were  behind,  tooke  the  most  of
the  spoiles  with  the  Artillerie.  Thus  returned  the
Portugals  with  disgrace,  and  the  Zimbas  grew  prouder,
and  after  made  peace  with  them  notwithstanding.
The  Zimbas  One  of  these  Zimbas  ambitious  of  that  honour,  which

j  e  t  , they  place  in  killing  and  eating  of  men,  to  get  himselfe

-.c.  \.  S.  V  a  name>  adjoyned  others  of  his  Nation  to  him,  and  went
which  some  Eastward,  killing  and  eating  every  living  thing,  Men,
unjustly  Women, Children, Dogs, Cats, Rats, Snakes, Lizards,

confound.  sparing  nothing  but  such  Cafres  as  adjoyned  themselves  to

their  companie  in  that  designe.  And  thus  five  thousand
of  them  were  assembled,  and  went  before  the  He  of
Quiloa ;  where  the  Sea  prohibiting  their  passage,  a  traiter-
ous  Moore  came  and  offered  his  service  to  guide  them
over  at  the  low  ebbes  of  spring  tides,  upon  condition  to
spare  his  kindred,  and  to  divide  the  spoyles  with  him.
The  Zimba  accepted  it,  and  effected  his  cruell  purpose,
slaying  and  taking  (for  future  dainties  to  eate  at  leasure)
Quiloa  taken,  three  thousand  Moores,  and  tooke  the  Citie  Quiloa,  with
great  riches,  the  people  escaping  by  hiding  themselves  in
the  wildernesse  till  the  Zimbas  were  gone  ;  then  returning
to  their  Citie  (antiently  the  royall  Seat  of  the  Kings  of
that  Coast)  and  to  this  day  are  seene  the  ruines  of  their
sumptuous  Mezquites  and  Houses. Now,  for  reward  of

244

FRIAR JOANNO DOS SANCTOS  tn

'5
the  Traytor,  he  sentenced  him  with  all  his  kindred  to  he Rev-aid  of

cast  into  the  Sea,  bound  hand  and  foot,  to  bee  food  for  the

c u  ^l  u u  I  rear.n .

nsnes  ; saying,  it  was  not  meet  that  one  should  remayne thi.  7 .

of  so  wicked  a  generation,  nor  would  he  eate  their  flesh, hated.

which  could  not  but  be  venomous.

After  this  he  passed  along  the  Coast,  till  he  came  against
the  He  of  Mombaza  ;  which  foure  Turkish  Galleyes  of
the  Red  Sea  defended,  and  slue  many  of  them  with  their
Artillery  :  but  Thome  de  Sousa  arriving  with  a  fleet  from
India  tooke  the  Turkes,  and  withall  destroyed  Mombaza  Mombaza
in  the  sight  of  the  Muzimbas.  The  Captaine  said  that  de$t,oyd-
the  Portugals  were  Gods  of  the  Sea,  and  hee  of  the  Land  ;
and  sent  an  Embassadour  to  Sousa,  professing  friendship
to  them,  and  requesting  that  seeing  they  had  honourably
ended  their  enterprise,  he  might  beginne  his,  namely,  to
kill  and  eate  every  living  thing  in  the  Hand,  which  by
their  consent  he  did  accordingly,  burning  the  Palme-trees
and  Woods  where  many  men  were  hidden,  whom  hee
tooke  and  eate  with  all  hee  could  get.

Thence  he  returned  to  the  Coast,  and  went  to  Melinde, Melinde.
where  Matthew  Mendez  with  thirty  Portugals  ayded  the
King, and three thousand warlike Cafres, called Mos- The
segueios,  came  also  to  his  succour,  which  came  suddenly  M-osseguem.
on  their  backes  when  they  had  gotten  up  the  wall,  and
were  almost  possessed  of  the  Bulwarke,  and  chased  them
with  such  a  furie,  that  only  the  Captaine  with  above  one
hundred others escaped ; having found none in three
hundred leagues march, which durst encounter them.
And  thus  much  of  the  Zimbas  (of  whom  wee  have  written The  JesaUes
more  in  our  Pilgrimage  out  of  the  Jesuites.)  call  them

Quilimane  is  an  arme  of  Zambeze,  shallow,  a  league  pij •  _
wide  in  the  mouth,  but  three  fathomes  deep  in  the  barre, Tm  B'-acas.
which  was  the  reason  of  the  losse  of  the  great  ship,  Saint
Luis. The  Land  adjoyning  is  playne  without  any  hill.
Within  the  barre  above  two  leagues  is  a  Port  of  good Port  ot
refreshing, where they rest themselves from the heats Qm'm':ne-
which  are  in  those  parts  extreme. Neere  it  is  a  Towne
of  Cafres,  and  poore  Moores,  subject  to  the  Portugals

245

A.D.

'597-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Mac  u  as
Cafrei.

Loranga
River.

Gallants

fashion.

Marriages.

which  dwell  at  the  Port.  All  the  Countrey  within  is
inhabited  by  Macuas,  Cafres  subject  to  King  Gallo,  a  poore
Prince,  whose  brother  becomming  a  Moore,  was  therefore
odious  to  the  Cafres,  which  thinke  basely  of  the  Moores,
and  more  easily  turne  Christians,  holding  of  them  a  more
[II. ix. 1 553.]  honourable  conceit.  They  are  blacke  and  curled,  and
worship  not  Idols.  Next  neighbours  to  these  are  the
Inhabitants  on  the  River  Loranga,  the  mouth  of  which  is
five  leagues  from  Quilimane  Eastward  ;  a  pleasant  River
with  a  turning  in,  and  a  good  barre,  stored  with  fish.
Many  of  these  Cafres  paint  or  rase  their  bodies  with  Iron,
and  bore  holes  in  their  cheekes  for  a  gallantry,  as  doe  those
of  Mocambique.  Bano  a  Cafre  is  Lord  of  these  parts.
They  worship  onely  one  God  in  Heaven,  beleeve  the
immortalitie  of  the  Soule,  the  Divine  providence,  that  all
good  comes  of  God,  that  there  are  Devils,  and  that  they
are  evill ;  and  all  this  notwithstanding  are  great  blas-
phemers, speaking  evill  of  God  when  things  crosse  them.
They  have  two  wives  (and  some  of  them  have  also
Concubines,  but  their  children  doe  not  inherite)  on  the
Marriage  day  two  or  three  women  in  the  morning  come
and  drumme,  sing,  dance  before  the  Brides  doore,  and
others  follow,  till  all  the  guests  come  with  their  offerings
of  Mais,  Panike,  Meale,  &c.  which  they  offer  to  the
Bride,  first  giving  a  handfull  to  the  dancers,  and  lay  Meale
on  one  cheeke  and  the  left  eye.  Thus  they  spend  the
day,  and  at  night  the  Bridegroome  takes  home  his  Bride,
and  this  is  the  Wedding  ceremonie.

They  have  Fasts,  all  day  eating  nothing,  but  drinke  all
the  next  day  and  night  of  their  Mais-wine,  and  of  the
Wine  of  a  fruit  called  Puto,  very  sweet,  like  Bacchus
servitors.  They  are  much  addicted  to  sorcerie,  and  when
they  will  enquire  of  things  lost,  they  meet  and  dance,
using  certaine  Charmes  till  some  of  the  companie  seeme
mad  and  possessed,  the  Devill  entring  into  them  and
revealing  the  thing  lost.  They  are  exceeding  full  of
complements,  in  which  they  spend  much  time  before  they
will  talke  of  the  businesse  they  come  about  to  their  neigh-

246

Divination.

FRIAR  JOANNO DOS SANCTOS  ajk

"5  •
bour.  They  use  pitifull  lamentation  for  the  dead,  who  i  ,  Funerals.
wound  (almost  after  our  fashion)  in  a  blacke  cloth,  tycd
with  many  lists  of  the  same,  and  buried  with  his  Armes
and  Victuals :  his  Mat  or  Bed,  and  Stoole  set  over  the
Grave,  and  his  House  burned  with  all  his  movables  (no
great  losse)  for  if  any  but  touch  any  thing  which  belonged
to  the  dead,  he  may  not  enter  into  his  house  till  he  have
first  purified  or  washed  himselfe  in  the  River.  The  ashes
and  brands  left  of  that  burning  they  lay  on  the  Grave.
They  mourne  eight  dayes,  beginning  at  midnight  for  an
houre  or  two,  one  beginning,  and  the  rest  following.  In
the  day  they  goe  to  the  Grave,  and  lay  Meale  on  one
cheeke  and  eye,  and  set  Mais  and  Victuals  thereon,  saying
certaine  words,  till  the  Meale  be  quite  gone,  never  washing
their  face ;  so  commending  their  tillage  (forsooth)  to  the
dead,  which  they  thinke  can  send  them  good  harvests.

From  Cuama  to  Mocambique  (which  are  one  hundred
and thirtie  leagues) there  is  in  all  the  Coast no King
potent,  howsoever  so  stiled  (as  are  also  some  poore  Moores)
in  and  of  the  places  where  they  dwell. But  within  Land
are  great  Kings  of  curled  Cafres,  most  of  them  Macuas  by
Nation. One  of  these  not  farre  from  Mozambique  is  the
Mauruca. These  Macuas  are  theeves,  the  most  barbarous  Mauruca
and  ill  disposed  Cafres  of  all  that  Coast. Their  speech  is  KtnS  °J  Ba'~
rough  and  high,  as  if  they  fought. They  file  their  teeth  b^Jnee°pU'
above  and  below  as  sharpe  as  Needles. They  cut  and  f,rat.£ry .  the
rase  their  flesh,  bore  holes  in  both  their  cheekes,  from  fittest  G/asse
the  tips  of  their  eares  almost  to  the  mouth,  with  three  or  fir  °ur
foure  holes  on  each  side,  each  bigge  enough  to  hold  a  Ga'iant^t0
finger,  thorow  which  their  gummes  are  seene  with  their  scjV£S  -n .
teeth,  the  spitle  slavering  forth. For  which,  and  for  the  whose  mindes
more  gallantry  they  weare  bungs  of  Wood,  one  in  each  are  more
hole ; and  he  which  can  have  them  of  Lead  is  a  complete [°/mtfj  Jr"
Gallant,  for  that  metall  is  much  esteemed. They  have  ^ ^-l£
also  two  holes  in  the  lips ; in  the  upper  of  which  they  put
little  pegs  of  wood  as  big  as  a  Hens  quill,  of  a  finger  long,
sticking  right  out  like  a  Naile ; in  the  lower  lip  they
weare  a  Leaden  bung,  so  close  and  heavy  that  the  lip  falls

247

A.D.

'597-

Ouizungo.  R.
*Matos  which
wee  translate
Wilder nesse,
is  the  unfilled
wilde  ground
neere  their
dwellings,  as
well  as  the
maineDesarts.

[II.ix.1554.]

Note.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  the  beard,  shewing  the  gummes  and  filed  teeth,  that
they  seeme  Devils.  They  weare  their  eares  also  bored
round  with  many  holes,  in  which  they  have  pegs  of  wood,
slender  like  knitting  needles,  a  finger  long,  which  makes
them  looke  like  Hedge-hogs.  This  their  gallantry ;  for
if  they  are  sad,  or  crossed  with  any  disaster,  they  leave
all  these  holes  open.

They  are  strong,  and  able  to  indure  labour.  They  goe
naked  both  men  and  women ;  and  when  they  are
apparelled,  it  is  with  a  Monkies  skinne,  or  of  some  other
beast,  from  the  waste  to  the  knees.  Their  customes  are
like  those  Cafres  of  Loranga.  Of  the  Macuas  of  the
River  Quizungo,  when  a  Maide  is  to  be  married,  shee
goeth  into  the  wildernesse*  a  whole  Moone  to  bewayle
her  virginitie,  visited  of  her  friends,  and  returning  home
every  night :  betimes  in  the  morning  going  to  her  wilde
taske  againe.  As  soone  as  the  new  Moone  appeares,  a
great  feast  is  made,  and  the  next  day  shee  is  delivered  to
her  husband  without  any  more  ceremonie.

This  Mauruca  used  such  cruelty  in  warring  upon,  and
eating  those  they  killed  or  tooke  in  those  parts,  that  they
easily  chased  away  the  antient  Macuas,  and  enjoyed  their
Countrey  :  and  giving  themselves  onely  to  rob,  and  not  to
till  the  grounds  (for  they  were  lazie  lubbers  though  strong
robbers)  about  An.  1585.  they  grew  injurious  to  the
Portugals,  cutting  downe  their  Palme  trees,  stealing,
begging,  burning,  killing,  eating,  as  they  saw  occasion.
Insomuch  that  Nuno  Velho  Pereira  sent  from  the  He
fortie  Portugals  and  others  to  the  number  of  foure
hundred,  which  came  suddenly  on  the  Towne  of  Mauruca
three  or  foure  leagues  distant,  destroyed  and  burnt  it.
But  the  Macuas,  which  escaped,  joyned  head,  and  lay  in
ambush  for  the  Portugals  in  their  returne,  which  was
secure  and  disordered,  and  slue  them  all,  two  or  three
Portugals,  and  a  few  Cafres  excepted,  which  hiding  them-
selves, two  or  three  dayes  after  escaped  to  Mocambique,
and  told  of  their  fellowes  disastre,  whom  the  Macuas  had
slaine  and  eaten. Many  such  chances  betide  the  Portugals

24S

FRIAR JOANNO DOS SANCTOS

1 597-

in  those  parts,  through  their  selfe-confidence,  and  little
accompt  of  the  Cafres.  The  warres  continued  long,  till
MaurCica  seeing  the  necessitie,  made  peace  with  the
Portugals,  forbad  eating  of  mans  flesh,  and  enjoyned  his
people  to  till  the  ground  ;  which  rather  tor  feare  of  him
they  observed,  then  any  wayes  thereto  enclined,  still  in
secret  using  that  forbidden  food,  as  I  have  knowne
particular  instances,  of  some,  which  when  they  had  stollen,
and  could  not  sell  at  their  price,  they  have  killed  and
eaten.

The  He  of  Mozambique  is  in  fifteene  degrees  to  the  Mofambique.
South  ;  above  halfe  a  league  long-,  and  but  a  quarter  broad. / f  .
At  the  point  and  entrie  of  the  Barre  is  the  Fort  with  a  lt  seesup*a*
Portugall Captaine and Garrison. It hath roure Bui- 716.
warkes,  two  to  the  Sea,  and  two  to  the  He,  with  faire  Peeces
of Artillery. Within is a Cisterne which holds two
thousand  Pipes  of  water,  into  which  the  raine  runneth  from
the  tiles  and  walls  by  Conduit-pipes. In  the  midst  is  a
Church. This  is  one  of  the  chiefe  Forts  of  India  ; built
by a good Architect, An. 1558. There is also an
Hospitall,  two  Hermitages,  a  Covent  of  Dominicans,  a
poore  Towne  of  Moores. The  Hand  is  drye,  and  without T:L  '■  Siemeab
wood  :  the  water  they  fetch  three  miles  without  the  Barre  z
from  a  Spring  in  a  Bay  called  Titangone,  which  serves  to
water  all  the  Indian  ships. Their  wood  they  fetch  from
the  Mayne-land,  in  which  they  have  Gardens  of  variety  of
fruits. It  was  at  first  sickly,  but  now  by  Gods  goodnesse
is  proved  healthfull.

The  lie  of  Quirimba  is  sixty  leagues  distant  along  the  Qummba^nd
Coast  on  the  Indian  side.  It  is  halfe  a  league  wide,  and  ot  er  '
a  league  long,  plaine,  without  hill,  all  sowed  with  Mais
and  other  grayne,  whereof  the  Hand  is  fertile.  It  hath  a
walled  Fort,  and  a  faire  Church  of  the  Dominicans,  which
serves  for  a  Parish  Church  to  the  He,  and  all  the  Coast  as
farre  as  Cape  Del  gado,  who  are  bound  there  to  confesse
and  communicate.  In  this  Coast  are  the  lies  of  Cabras,
Fumbo,  Quirimba,  Ibo,  Matemo,  which  still  sheweth  the
ruines  of  the  former  Moore-Inhabitants. Foure  leagues

-49

A.D.

'597-

Rolas.

BunchedKinc.

lndico.

Manna:  this
was  a  Miracle
in  Moses  time,
as  their
waters,
Quai/es,  Gar-
ments, &c.  not
by  procreation
of  new  kinds,
but  by
miraculous
disposition  ,•
that  it  should
follow  them;
breed  wormes,
and  yet  in  the
Tabernacle  be
everlasting,
not  fall  on  the
Sabbath,  &c.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

thence  is  Macaloe,  and  from  hence  as  farre  is  Xanga,  and
above  two  leagues  from  it  is  Malinde,  betwixt  which  and
that  or  Cabo  del  gado  are  two  little  ones. Others  there
are,  but  not  so  inhabited,  one  of  which  is  called,  Rolas,
for  the  store  of  those  birds  which  yeerely  breed  therein,
very  hurtfull  to  the  Corne-grounds ; and  therefore the
Ilanders  of  other  lies  goe  thither  to  destroy  their  egges
and young. These Ilands are very wholsome and of
subtile  aire,  and  therfore  subject  to  the  disease,  called  The
aire, which they cure with Elephants dung, Mustard,
Garleeke,  and  a  seed  called  Ingo,  fuming  him  therewith
three  or  foure  times  a  day,  &c. Their  Kine  have  a  bunch
on  the  shoulder  as  a  great  Pumpion,  which  falls  on  the
necke,  the  flesh  whereof  eats  like  a  Cowes  udder,  very
fat. There  are  store  of  Swine,  Goats  which  have  young
twice  a  yeere,  two  or  three  at  each  burthen,  Palme  trees
for  Wine  and  Cocos,  with  other  fruits,  fowles,  and  pro-
visions. There  growes  also  Anil  or lndico,  which the
Moores  use  to  dye  their  clothes,  of  which  they  weave
store  in  these  Ilands. In  the  wildernesses  of  the  He  Cabo
de  gado  is  store  of  Manna,  procreated  of  the  deaw  of
Heaven  falling  on  certaine  trees,  on  which  it  hardens  as  it
were  Sugar  candide,  sticking  to  the  wood  like  Rozin,  and
hanging  on  the  leaves,  gathered  and  sold  in  jarres  by  the
Inhabitants. It  tasts  sweet  as  Sugar ; in  India  they  use
to  purge  with  it. I  have  often  been  in  the  place,  and
gathered  it  with  my  hand. It  growes  only  on  one  kind,
although  there  be  many  other  trees  in  the  Iland. In  that
Coast  also  blacke  Corrall  growes  in  the  bottome  of  the  Sea
with  small  roots  or  beards,  whereby  it  seemeth  fastned.
A  Mariner  gave  mee  a  piece  two  spans  and  a  halfe  long.
When  it  comes  out  of  the  Sea  it  is  soft  and  pliable,  but  by
the  aire  hardned. In  those  lies  they  finde  Cocos  which
are  said  to  grow  in  the  Maldivas  on  short  trees  in  the  Sea
alway  covered  with  water,  falling  off  when  they  are  ripe,
and  rising  to  the  top,  carried  by  the  windes  and  currents
to  some  Coast. All  the  Continent  is  peopled  with  curled
Cafres,  some  Macuas,  others  not  using  rasing,  holes,  or

FRIAR  JOANNO DOS SANCTOS

15
homes,  but  all  shaven  on  the  head.  In  the  Countrey
within  the  Kingdome  of  Mongallo,  a  Lord  of  fertile
Countries,  and  of  many  Vassals.  The  He  of  Saint
Laurence  lyes  over  against  this  Coast,  three  hundred
leagues  long,  and  ninety  broad :  a  Straight  of  sixtie
leagues  running  betwixt.

In  Ethiopia  foure  generall  plagues  have  beene  observed  Foure scourge..
in  our  time,  the  Warre  of  the  Zimbas,  An.  1589.  the
Gras-hoppers,  which  covered  the  earth,  and  involved  the
aire  in  a  cloude  when  they  arose,  which  eate  up  all  their
labours  in  the  fields  and  gardens,  leaving  them  as  if  they
had  beene  burned,  the  trees  not  able  to  beare  fruit  till  two
yeeres  after,  whence  many  died  of  Famine  ;  and  this  was
the  third  plague  which  caused  them  to  sell  themselves
onely  for  sustenance ;  and  one  of  their  children  tor  a
pecke  of  Mais  :  The  fourth  plague  was  the  Small  poxe,
which  killed  many ;  a  disease  in  those  parts  like  the
plague,  killing  all  in  the  house  where  it  came ;  their
readiest  cure  being  to  let  bloud,  without  bleeding,  or  in
much  bleeding,  none  escaping.  The  plague  is  unknowne
and  unheard  of  amongst  them.  The  Negro  women  may
be  accounted  another  plague,  specially  the  Portugall  slaves,
which  conceiving  will  cause  abortion  with  a  certaine  herbe,
so  poysonfull  that  it  consumes  and  rots  them,  except  they
by  copulation  bestow  this  disease  on  some  man,  who  is
presently  payned  in  his  secrets,  and  hardly  escapes  death.
The  remedie  to  this  Entaca  (so  they  call  the  disease)  is  Entaca.
the  juyce  of  a  counterpoyson  herbe  taken  the  same  day ;
both  which  herbes  are  plentifull  and  well  knowne  in  those
parts.  Another  infirmitie,  but  without  payne,  befalls  both  [Ifix.1555.]
Portugals  and  Cafres  in  Mozambique,  which  is  blindnesse ,'s,

,  .°. , . .  * ' .  .  -11 blindnesse.

by  night,  beginning  at  bunne-set,  and  ceasing  with  the
Sunne-rising,  in  which  time  they  which  are  thus  taken,
see  nothing  though  the  Moone  shine  bright.  If  the
belly  or  head  ake,  the  Cafres  bind  the  part  affected  hard
with  a  Cord.

The  Cafres  will take  Elephants  both  in  pits (before
described)  covered  with  boughes  and  grasse  ;  and  watching

251

A.D.

'597-
Elephants
slcepe  not  by
Trees,  but  on
the  ground.

Arrobais  32/.
Skips.

*M'hichgrozvs
on  the  Coco.

Patigayos  and
Almadias.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

where  he  sleepes  (specially  by  Moone  light)  as  he  lyes  on
the  ground,  and  thrusting  into  his  belly  by  the  genitories
an  Assagay,  made  purposely  with  the  Iron  halfe  a  span
broad  and  two  spans  long.  They  may  steale  upon  them
napping,  because  they  steale  not  their  naps,  but  make  such
a  noyse  that  they  at  once  bewray  and  betray  themselves  to
the  Hunters,  which  having  wounded  the  Beast,  fled  away,
and  next  day  search  by  the  bloud  what  is  become  of  their
prey.  They  kill  them  for  the  teeth  and  to  eate  the  flesh.
Ivory  is  the  principall  commoditie  of  this  Coast,  above
three  thousand  Arrobas  being  yeerly  carried  to  the  Indies.
I  saw  in  Sofala  two  teeth  of  one  Elephant  which  weighed
sixteene  Arrobas,  eight  a  peece.

The  shipping  from  Cabo  das  Correntes  to  the  Straight
of  Mecca,  is  made  by  Moores  of  wood,  which  they  cleave
and  shave,  never  making  but  two  Boards  of  one  Timber,
when  if  they  could  sawe  they  might  make  many.  They
sew  them  with  threed  of  Cairo*  and  fasten  them  with
nayles  of  wood  :  their  Cordage  and  Cables  are  of  Cairo.
The  greatest  they  call  Ships,  the  middle  sort,  Pangayas ;
the  least  Almadias,  which  are  of  one  Timber  (as  the
Canoas.)  The  Sayles  are  made  of  the  leaves  of  Palme  or
wilde  Date  Trees.  The  Mariners  are  Moores,  blacke,
barbarous,  wine  bibbers,  having  nothing  of  Moores  but
the  name  and  circumcision,  not  knowing  nor  keeping  the
Law  of  Mahomet.  They  celebrate  each  new  Moone  with
a  drunken  feast ;  are  given  to  Divinations  ;  will  cast  out
nothing  in  a  storme  although  the  Vessell  be  surcharged,
saying,  the  Sea  is  insatiable  ;  when  they  want  Winde  they
whip  the  Ship  with  Cordes  on  the  Poope  and  Sides,  with
crying  and  chafing,  as  if  the  Ships  had  as  much  sense  as
themselves,  or  as  themselves  were  senselesse,  saying,  they
are  lazie  and  therefore  the  Winde  leaves  them  ;  and  they
mocked  me  for  reproving  this  their  foolerie.  Their  Wares
are  blacke  Clothes,  and  earthen  glased  Beades  of  all
colours.  The  Cafres  steale  children,  and  coozen  the  elder,
enticing  them  to  the  Shoares,  and  there  sell  them  to  the
Moores  and  Portugals. The  jurisdiction  of  the  Captaine

FRIAR JOANNO DOS SANCTOS

of  Mozambique  is  from  Cape  Corrcntcs  to  Cape  Dclgado,
three  hundred  leagues  of  Coast.

From  this  last  Cape  to  the  Line  is  the  Coast  of  Melindc,
which  is  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Captaine  of  Mombaca.
The  firme  Land  is  inhabited  by  Cafres,  differing  in
Language  and  Customes,  agreeing  in  barbarousnesse.
Along  the  Kingdome  of  Mongallo  runnes  to  the  North
the  Kingdome  of  Munimugi,  a  great  Cafre  which  confines
on  the  South  with  the  Lands  of  Mauruca  and  of  Embeoe,
and  on  the  North  with  the  Abyssine.  The  principall  Hand
of  this  Coast,  Quiloa,  hath  beene  in  times  past  the  Seat
Royall,  the  King  of  the  whole  Coast  residing  there,  who
is  now  a  pety  Prince ;  and  Mombaca  is  the  chiefe  He  and
Citie,  where  the  Portugals  have  a  Fort,  the  residence  of
the  Captaine  of  the  Coast  of  Melinde.  Pemba  is  an
Hand  about  eight  leagues  from  the  Shoare,  and  ten  long,
plentifull  of  Rice  and  Kine,  Fruits  and  Wood  :  sometimes
subject  to  the  Portugals  till  the  pride  and  lazinesse  of
some  made  the  people  rebell,  and  could  never  after  be
regayned.  In  the  He  of  Pate  are  Pate,  Sio  and  Ampaza,
three  Cities  governed  by  so  many  Kings,  tributarie  to
Portugal.  Ampaza  hath  beene  best  builded  of  any  Citie
in  those  parts,  but  destroyed  by  the  Portugals,  the  Citie
sacked  and  burnt  with  eight  thousand  Palme-trees,  which
grew  about  it,  cut  downe.  The  lie  of  Lamo  hath  great
Asses,  but  of  little  service.  This  Hand  was  chastised
when  Ampaza  was  destroyed,  and  Mombaca  also,  by
Martin  Alfonso  de  Mello.  The  King  of  Ampaza  was
slaine,  and  his  head  carried  on  a  Pole  at  Goa  in  triumph.
When  he  was  gone,  Mirale  Beque  the  Turke  came  with
foure  Galleys  out  of  the  Red  Sea,  and  infested  that  Coast,
till  the  Zimbas  and  the  Portugals  ended  the  businesse  with
a  new  Armada,  the  Portugals  captiving  and  spoyling,  the
Zimbas  eating  the  Turkes  and  Inhabitants.  The  King  of
Lamo  for  betraying  the  Portugals  to  the  Turkes  were
beheaded.  The  He  and  Citie  of  Mandra  which  had
denyed  the  Portugals  to  land,  saying,  the  Sunne  onelv
might  enter  there,  was  sacked  and  two  thousand  Palme-

253

A.fJ.

Coast  of
Melindc.

Munimugi.
Embeoe.

Mombaca.
Pemba.

Pate.

Ampaza.

Mandra.

A.D.

1597.

Mossegueyos
rustomes.

The  tokens,  as
Lin  sc  hot  en
saith  are  the
privities,  see
my  Pilg.  I.  7.
€.  7.  §.  4.
Brava.
Magadoxo.
Maracatos.

[II.ix.1556.]

Zanzibar.
Dez'illish

Etnas,  sotn-
zchat  like
Ostriches,  see
of  them  my
Pi/g./.$.c.  12.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

trees  cut  downe.  In  the  Coast  of  Melinde  they  are  great
Witches.  The  Mossegueyos  live  of  their  Kine,  which
they  oft  let  bloud  both  to  prevent  the  garget,  and  to  make
therewith  a  kinde  of  pottage  with  milke  and  fresh  dung
of  the  same  Kine,  which  mixed  together  and  heat  at  the
fire  they  drinke,  saying,  it  makes  them  strong.  The
Boyes  of  seven  or  eight  yeeres  weare  Clay  fastned  on  the
hayre  of  the  head,  and  still  renewed  with  new  Clay,  weigh-
ing sometimes  five  or  six  pounds.  Nor  may  they  be  free
hereof  till  in  Warre  or  lawfull  fight  hee  hath  killed  a  man,
and  shew  to  the  Captaine  some  tokens  of  that  fact ;  which
only  makes  them  free  and  Knights  of  their  cast.  Here-
upon they  grow  audacious,  and  prove  dreadfull  to  others.

Brava  is  a  small  Citie  but  strong,  inhabited  with
Moores,  Friends  and  Vassals  to  the  Portugals.  It  is  in
one  Degree  North,  and  very  hot.  Magadoxo  is  in  3.  30'.
Within  the  Land  are  the  Maracatos,  which  have  a  custome
to  sew  up  their  Females,  specially  their  Slaves  being  yong
to  make  them  unable  for  conception,  which  makes  these
Slaves  sell  dearer  both  for  their  chastitie,  and  for  better
confidence  which  their  Masters  put  in  them.  They  cut
also  their  Boyes  and  make  them  Eunuches.

In  the  He  of  Zanzibar  dwelt  one  Chande  a  great
Sorcerer,  which  caused  his  Pangayo,  which  the  Factor  had
taken  against  his  will,  to  stand  still  as  it  were  in  defiance
of  the  Winde,  till  the  Factor  had  satisfied  him,  and  then
to  flye  forth  the  River  after  her  fellowes  at  his  words.
Hee  made  that  a  Portugall  which  had  angred  him,  could
never  open  his  mouth  to  speake,  but  a  Cock  crowed  in
his  belly,  till  he  had  reconciled  himselfe  :  with  other  like
odious  sorceries.

From  Magadoxo  to  Sacotora  one  hundred  and  fiftie
leagues  is  a  desart  Coast,  and  dishabited  without  Rivers
In  which  Desarts  breed  the  great  birds,  called  Emas,
which  breed  on  the  Sands,  and  have  but  two  young  ones,
as  Pigeons.  Their  stomacks  will  consume  Iron  and
Stones,  and  flye  not  but  touch  the  ground  with  their  feet,
running  with  their  wings  spread,  as  lightly  as  other  Birds

254

FRIAR JOANNO DOS SANCTOS  a..,

i  560-16K

flye. They  are  white,  ash-coloured  ; their  egges  white,

holding  almost  three  pints. Heere  I  may  mention  also  a

Sea  monster,  which  we  saw  neere  the  River  Tendanculo,  Sea  Monster.

killed  by  the  Cafres,  found  by  Fisher-men  on  the  Shoalds.

Hee  was  ash-coloured  on  the  backe,  and white  on the

belly, hayrie like an Oxe but rougher : his head and

mouth  like  a  Tygre,  with  great  teeth,  white  Mustachos  a

span  long,  as  bigge  as  bristles  which Shoo-makers  use.

He  was  ten  spans  long,  thicker  then  a  man  ; his  tayle

thick,  a  span  long,  eares  of  a  Dog,  armes  like  a Man

without  haire,  and  at  the  elbowes  great  Finnes  like  a  fish  ;

two  short  feet  nigh  his  tayle,  plaine  like  a  great  Apes,

without  legs,  with  five  fingers  a  span  long  on  each  foot  and

hand,  covered  with  a  skin  like  a  Goose  foot,  the  hinder

feet  having  clawes  like  a  Tygres ; neere  his  tayle  were  the

signes  of  a  Male,  his  Liver,  Lights  and  Guts  like  a  Hogs.

The  Cafres  seeing  our  Slaves  slay  him,  fell  upon  him  and

eate  him  ; which  they  which  spare  nothing  had  not  done

before,  because  they  thought  him  (they  said)  the  sonne  of

the  Devill  (having  never  seene  the  like)  the  rather,  because

hee  made  a  noyse  which  might  be  heard  halfe  a  league  off.

In  the  same  journey  comming  to  the  River  Luabo  in  A  nest  of great
August  1590.  the  Mariners  going  ashoare  for  wood,  Binls-
brought  two  Birds  new  feathered,  whitish,  found  in  the
nest,  like  to  Eagles  in  the  eyes,  bill  and  talons,  but  much
greater  then  great  Eagles,  contayning  nine  spans  from  the
end  of  one  wing  to  the  end  of  the  other  (I  caused  them  to
be  measured)  wherby  it  appeares  that  in  their  full  maturitie
they  are  of  huge  greatnesse.  They  killed  them,  for  feare
the  old  ones  should  come.

§.  v.

The  Jesuites  gleanings  in  Africa  to  Christian  Re-
ligion, gathered  out  of  their  owne  writings.
Hat  the  Jesuites  have  done  for  the  advancing  of  L-  "/•  tt!f"f-
Christian  Religion  with  the  Abassines,  yee  have  jmta  tram
heard. In  the  yeere  1560.  Consalvus  Sylveria  a  fated  fo
Portugall  Jesuite  with  two  companions,  went  from  Goa  Maffeius.

255

A.D.
I560-l6lO.

The  Kingdom
oflnhambane.
Heseemeth  the
Sedan  da,  sup.
c.  1  2.  §.  3.  or
rather  some
Encosse  of  his.

* As  if  the
denyal  of  a
mans  selfe
were  in  regard
of  our  nature
which  is  of
God  and  not
of  our  vices
which  are  of
our  selves.
Thisfiesh(that
is,  naturall
corruption)
must  be  morti-
fied spiritu-
ally ;  not  the
body  bodily
killed,  or  dis-
abled by
immoderate
zeale  to  serve
the  Spirit.
*Santos  hath

PURCHAS HIS PTLGRIMES

for  Manamotapa,  a  Region  abounding  with  gold,  but
deare  bought  by  reason  of  the  Ayres  unwholsomnesse,  and
the  want  of  necessaries  for  food  and  health.  They  came
first  to  Inhambane,  and  there  fell  sicke,  but  recovering
proceeded  to  Tonge,  and  there  baptised  the  King,  his  Wife,
Sister,  Children,  Kindred,  and  great  Men,  with  most  of
the  People  in  few  dayes.  Thence  Consalvus  went  to
Manamotapa,  leaving  his  Fellowes  with  the  King,  which
built  the  Church  of  the  Assumption  :  one  of  them  by  want
of  health  was  forced  backe  to  India,  the  other  stayed  there
two  yeeres.  Consalvus  passed  by  Mozambique,  and  came
to  the  River  Mafuta  ninetie  leagues  from  thence,  where
escaping  a  dreadfull  tempest,  hee  went  on  shoare  with  his
folding  Altar,  and  said  Masse  on  the  Strand,  the  heate
being  so  vehement  that  the  Portugals  could  scarse  indure
to  tread  on  the  ground,  and  Consalvus  his  head  brake  out
with  pushes  as  he  was  in  his  Holies  :  which  when  they
would  have  medicined,  praeclaro  sui  ipsius*  odio  incensus,
hee  refused  all,  and  permitted  himselfe  to  the  cure  of
Nature  and  Time.  Thence  they  went  to  the  River  Coli-
mane,  and  were  well  entertayned  by  Mingoaxanes,  King
of  Giloa  a  Moore,  little  caring  for  his  Mahumetrie,  and
giving  them  leave  to  preach  in  his  Kingdom.  But  they
hasted  to  Manamotapa,  and' so  passed  to  Cuama,  and  then
gave  himselfe  to  private  devotions  eight  dayes,  onely  once
a  day  eating  a  handfull  of  parched  Corne  and  drinking  a
draught  of  Water.

From  Sena  he  sent  to  the  Manamotapa ;  meane  while
the  King  of  *  Inhanior  offered  himselfe  to  Christianitie,
but  he  comforted  him,  and  refused  till  he  had  first  beene
with  the  Manamotapa.  Antonie  Cajado  was  sent  for  him,
who  trussed  up  his  Holies,  carrying  them  on  his  shoulders.
When  he  was  comne,  the  Manamotapa  sent  him  Presents,
Gold,  Kine  and  Servants,  which  all  he  thankfully  refused.
When  he  came,  he  entertayned  him  as  never  any  man,
and  bringing  him  into  his  inner  roome,  caused  him to

told  you  that

hee  hath  no  tributar'ic  Kings,  this  was  but  an  Encosse  {as  it  seemeth)  which  yet  as  C&sars  foure
Kings  in  a  piece  of  Kent  had  that  name  given,  to  make  a  greater  sound  at  Rome.

256

THE JESUITS IN AFRICA

A. I).

1 560-1  6  10.

sit  on  the  Carpet  by  his  Mother.  Hee  offered  him  his
choise  of  Grounds,  Kine,  Gold,  Women  ;  Consalvus
answered,  that  hee  would  have  nothing  but  himselfe  ;  the
King  thereat  wondring  and  friendly  with  promises  dis-
missing him.  One  had  seene  on  the  Altar  a  fayre  picture
of  our  Lady, and  told  the  King  that  Consalvus  had  brought
with  him  a  beautifull  Lasse,  for  which  the  King  sent,  and  [H.ix.1557.]
he  carried  it  wrapped  in  a  precious  cloth,  and  tels  him  it  is
the  picture  of  the  Mother  of  God,  the  King  of  Kings.
He  worships  it  and  begs  it ;  Consalvus  grants,  and
placeth  it  in  the  Kings  house,  and  trimmes  up  as  it  were
a  Chappell  for  it.  Five  nights,  say  the  Portugals,  the
blessed  Virgin  appeared  to  the  King  in  that  forme  in  his
sleepe ;  and  five  and  twentie  dayes  after  his  comming,  the
King  was  baptised  by  the  name  of  Sebastian,  the  Queene
his  Mother  by  the  name  of  Marie.  The  same  day  he  sent
one  hundred  Kine  to  Consalvo,  which  were  distributed  by
Cajado  to  the  poore.  Three  hundred  of  his  chiefe  men
followed  his  example.  Much  victuall  was  sent  into  Con-
salvus, but  he  ate  no  flesh,  living  only  on  wild  fruits,
herbs,  and  boyled  Corne  in  small  quantitie.

But  foure  Moores  envying  these  proceedings,  and  being
gracious  with  the  King,  perswade  him  that  Consalvus  was
sent  from  India  to  betray  him,  and  to  make  way  for  the
Portugals  to  take  away  his  State ;  adding,  that  Consalvus
was  a  Sorcerer,  and  whomsoever  hee  washed  on  the  head
with  his  forme  of  words,  he  made  to  become  his.  And
if  Consalvus  went  away  in  safetie,  his  Subjects  would  kill
one  another  like  mad  men.  By  their  perswasions  the  King
caused  Consalvus  to  be  murthered,  his  strangled  body
being  throwne  into  the  River,  and  fiftie  others  were  slaine,
which  on  that  last  day  of  his  life  he  had  baptised.  Two
dayes  after  repenting  of  this  fact  he  slue  two  of  the
Moores,  the  other  two  being  fled.  Long  after,  no
Jesuites  (saith  Jarric)  were  sent  hither,  because  the  Jar.  I. 1 .  c.  1  o.
Dominicans  had  undertaken  the  Conversion  of  those  parts,
of  whose  labours  yee  have  heard  somewhat  before  in
Santos,  which  was  one  of  them. Jarric  hath  since  told  us

257  R

Treacherte  of
Moores.

Consalvus
martyred.

IX

A»  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1560-1610.

Pet.  Jarrk.  Qf  Petrus  Toarius  and  Ludovicus  Goez  (in  respect  of  these
Ties,  rerum  Detter  hopes)  sent  An.  1 C62.  and  to  them  was  ioyned
torn.  3.  Andrew  Fernandez  the  companion  of  Consalvus,  who  had

stayed  at  Inambane.  These  three  went  to  the  Mana-
motapa,  and  stayed  there  certayne  yeeres,  till  they  were
sent  for  back  to  India,  King  Sebastian  intending  to  warre
on  the  Manamotapa,  for  the  said  Consalvus  Sylverius  his
death  (being  the  sonne  of  the  Count  Sortellane)  and  for

Of  Bancts  other  causes.  Thus  after  their  returne  An.  100.  Francis
acts  in  those v>  •  1  1-.1  t_ i_ • j j r

*„.,  .,„  >  barret  was  sent  with  a  strong  rieet:  wno  being  dead  or
pat  ts  you  reaa  .  \t-<  1 •*  /r  11

before  in  poyson (with others) Fernand Monroy succeeded, who

Santos.  dying  soone  after,  the  Jesuites  then  in  the  Campe  could

doe  nothing.  An.  1608.  the  people  rebelling,  the  Mana-
motapa fled  to  the  parts  neere  Tete  a  Portugall  Fort,  and
by  helpe  of  the  Portugals  subdued  the  Rebels.  Where-
upon he  gave  the  King  of  Portugall  the  silver  Mines  of
Achicova,  Jacobus  Simonesius  taking  possession  in  his
name.  Hee  gave  them  leave  also  to  build  Forts  where
they  pleased.  The  Portugals  thinke  meete  not  to  forget
the  Jesuites  in  this  occasion,  and  Francis  Gonsalves  with
Paulus  Alexius  are  destined  to  that  designe,  the  whole
Kingdome  seeming  a  field  white  to  the  Christian  Harvest,
and  onely  wanting  Labourers.
Lib.  7.  c.  4.  Of  Angola  and  Congo  you  heard  before  :  the  state  of
Of  Angola, see  Angola  (tor  of  Congo  we  have  no  later  intelligence  then
•  7- c-  4-  5-  3-  (-hat  0f  Lopez)  after  the  death  of  Paul  Diaz  received  some
alteration.  It  is  the  manner  in  those  parts  that  the  Sobae
or  Governours  are  as  Princes  of  their  Provinces,  and  in
the  Kings  Court,  whom  they  acknowledge  their  supreme
Lord,  have  one  of  his  Grandes,  to  whom  they  have  recourse
in  all  difficulties  (like  the  Protectors  amongst  the  Cardinals)
who  in  some  manner  disposeth  them  and  their  states.
Thus  Diaz  appointed  over  the  Angolan  Sobae  by  him
subdued,  some  of  his  Portugall  Gentlemen,  sometimes
some  Jesuite  at  the  request  of  the  subdued,  seeing  in  what
respect  they  were  held  with  the  Generall.  But  some
Courtiers  in  Spaine  perswaded  the  Catholike  King,  that
this  dependance  of  mediate  Patrons  should  bee  taken  away

258

THE JESUITS IX AFRICA

from  them  all:  whereupon  ensued  commotions,  and  con-
tempt of  the  Portugall  name;  that  in  the  yeere  1600.
John  Rhoderick  Cotinius  being  sent  Governour,  of  one
hundred  and  fiftie  Sobae  stipendaries  before  to  the  Portugall
Crowne,  not  one  continued  his  allegeance.  Hee  reduced
some,  but  (with  many  others  running  like  Fates)  the
unwholsomnesse  of  the  ayre  killed  him  ;  the  Successor
being  named  in  a  Boxe  (the  key  whereof  was  kept  by
George  Pererius  a  Jesuite)  Emmanuel  Pererius.  Hee
overthrew  Cafucheus  the  chiefe  Soba  with  the  Cambam-
ban,  whose  Countrey  is  rich  in  Mines,  in  which  he  built  a
Fort  neere  the  River  Coaxa  seventie  leagues  from  Sea  (all
navigable  from  Loanda  thither  in  five  dayes)  and  placed
therein  two  hundred  and  fiftie  men,  being  but  thirteene
leagues  from  Dongo  the  seate  of  the  King  of  Angola,
who  confirmed  to  him  that  his  Conquest.  This  Conquest
of  Mines  make  hope  of  the  conquest  of  Mindes  to  the
Christian  Faith  (how  many  are  by  these  Thornes  choked,
and  reconquered  from  it?)  and  the  Jesuites  are  said  to
study  the  language  that  they  may  preach  the  Gospell  to
them.  In  the  He  of  Loanda  are  said  to  bee  twentie
thousand  Christians  of  the  Natives,  besides  the  Inhabitants
of  Saint  Paul  and  Massangaro.

Anno  1606.  Francis  Gois,  Edward  Vaz,  and  Antonie
Barrius  Jesuites,  were  sent  thither ;  their  Ship  was  taken
in  the  way  by  the  Hollanders,  who  set  them  in  the  Boat
which  brought  them  to  Loanda,  being  terrified  by  two
Whales  which  rising  neere  the  Boat,  yet  passed  without
hurt.  Now  were  new  missions  of  Jesuites ;  one  of
which  comming  to  the  next  Soba,  taught  their  children
their  prayers,  helping  their  memories  with  knots  tyed
in  cords.  There  were  in  that  Town  two  thousand
baptised,  persons  all  ignorant  of  the  Faith.  There  was
an  Idoll  Temple  with  Images  of  Men  and  Women ;
with  the  heads  of  Goats  and  Snailes,  and  the  feet
of  Elephants,  and  other  wilde  Beasts,  which  the  Jesuite
caused  to  be  burned,  the  people  being  before  made  beleeve
that  if  any  touched  them,  they  should  die  suddenly. He

250

[j  l6lO.

Castle  of
Camkamba.

New  Beads.
Many  bap-
tised,
Christians.

[II.

!>!>

8.]

A.D.
1560-161O.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Chibadi
Sodomites

baptised  thirtie  and  taught  the  rest  their  Catechise,  and
proceeded  to  the  next  Soba,  Lord  of  foure  other  Sobas,
who  had  beene  before  baptised  of  Secular  Priests,  yet  onely
had  the  bare  name  of  a  Christian.  This  Soba  had  three
hundred  wives  for  ostentation  of  his  greatnesse.  No  man
could  make  the  signe  of  the  Crosse.  And  when  the  Priest
would  build  a  Church  there,  the  Soba  said  he  would
consult  about  it,  but  gave  no  answer.  He  found  two
Idoll  Oratories,  but  no  Idols  in  them,  the  people  having
before  hidden  them  in  the  Woods,  lest  they  should  have
like  fiery  fortune  with  the  former.  Hee  found  here  also
certayne  Chibadi,  which  are  Men  attyred  like  Women,  and
behave  themselves  womanly,  ashamed  to  be  called  men ;
are  also  married  to  men,  and  esteeme  that  unnaturall
damnation  an  honor.

About  the  same  time,  an  Embassador  from  the  King  of
Cacongo  came  to  Loanda,  with  a  Present  to  the  Bishop
and  Request  from  the  King,  to  send  some  Jesuites  to
baptise  him,  and  all  his  Kingdome.  The  Captaine  there-
fore with  the  Bishop,  goe  to  the  Rector  of  our  Colledge,
and  obtayne  Gaspar  Azevered,  and  Francis  Gois  to  bee
sent  thither.  Cacongo  is  adjoyning  to  Congo,  and  to  the
great  Macoco  King  of  the  Anziqui,  having  also  the  Kings
of  Angola,  Bungo  and  Biango  Neighbours.  It  is  a  large
Kingdome,  and  by  the  Towne  of  Pinda  eightie  leagues
distant  from  Saint  Thome,  is  entrance  up  the  River  Zaire
in  foure  dayes  unto  it.  The  King  of  Loango  hath  also
sent  for  Jesuites,  to  bee  by  them  instructed  and  baptised  :
but  what  is  done  in  both  these  Kingdomes,  I  have  not
(saith  Jarric)  received  intelligence.

Now  concerning  Guinea,  that  name  is  given  to  all  the
Atlantike  Coast  of  Africa,  from  Senega,  called  by  the
Ancients  Stachiris,  in  sixteene  degrees  of  North  latitude,
to  Angola  in  thirteene  South  :  and  is  divided  into  the
Higher  from  Senega  to  Congo,  and  The  lower,  contayning
Congo  and  Angola.  Over  against  the  higher  Guinea  are
[II. ix.  1 559.]  the  Hands  of  Cape  Verd  (Ptolemie  calls  it  Arsinarium)
which  An. 1446.  the  Portuoals  first  inhabited,  twelve  in

Cacongus.

Guinea,
described  and
divided.

260

THE JESUITS IN AFRICA

number,  the  chiefe  that  of  Saint  James,  in  which  is  u
fortified  Citie,  chiefe  over  those  Forts  and  Habitations
which  the  Portugals  hold  in  that  higher  Guinea;  the
Bishop  thereof  subject  to  the  Archbishop  of  Lisbon.  It
is  in  fifteene  degrees  Mountaynous,  having  no  rayne  but
in  August,  September  and  October,  fertile  of  fruits,  hath
store  of  Pompons  (every  moneth)  Sugar  Canes,  Horses.

Saint  Thome  is  of  unwholsome  ayre,  and  Praja  unsafe
against  the  enemie.  In  all  the  Coast  of  Guinea  are
Tangos  maos,  or  Lancados,  of  Portugall  originall,  but
degenerated  into  barbarous  rites  and  customes,  which  trade
in  all  those  parts  for  Hides,  Ivory,  Wax,  Gold,  Gumme,
Ambargrise :  in  some  places  they  are  also  naked  and
raced  like  the  Savages.

King  Philip  the  third  procured  by  Letters  to  Aquavira,
the  Generall  of  the  Jesuites  A.  1604.  that  of  that  Order
should  be  sent  into  this  Guinea,  Balthasar  Barerius,
Emmanuel  Barrius,  Emmanuel  Fernandius.  These  came
to  Saint  James,  and  remedied  the  custome  of  visiting
Wisards  and  Sorcerers,  which  was  there  common,  and  the
wicked  abuse  of  Baptisme,  in  which  three  or  foure
hundred  sometimes  seven  hundred  of  their  Slaves  were
at  once  washed  without  any  Doctrine  of  Christian  dutie
premised,  and  presently  transported  to  Brasile  or  India,
ignorant  of  all  things.  Likewise  they  procured  libertie
to  many  Free-men,  which  had  beene  by  the  Tangos  maos
or  Guineans  stollen,  and  unjustly  sold,  they  intending
and  attending  such  preyes,  no  lesse  then  Hunters  and
Hawkers  their  game.  One  of  them  dyed  of  the  sicknesse
of  the  Countrey :  Barerius  was  sent  to  the  Continent,  and
writ  thence  to  Barrius  that  in  Januarie  hee  came  to  Bissan,
where  the  Kings  eldest  sonne  professed  his  willingnesse  to
be  a  Christian,  but  that  he  must  then  leave  off  his  gainfull
man-stealing.  Thence  they  sayled  to  Guinala,  where  the
King  was  sick  and  dyed.  The  manner  is  to  kill  Wives
and  Servants,  and  a  Royall  Horse  for  his  service  in  the
other  World,  which  Barerius  did  what  he  could  to  hinder.
Thence  they  set  sayle  to  Biguba  a  very  healthfull  place  ;

261

A.M.

l6lO.

Saint  J  ago.

Tangos  maos.

Jar.to.^.c.^.

IVash-icay
Baptisme.

Barerius  his

Letters.

Bissan.

Guinala.

Biguba  in
Beafarum
regno.

A.D.
I56o-l6lO.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Pagouo.

Tamarcna.
Bur  an.

but  sonic  Ethiopians  professing  Mahomet  were  hinder-
ance  to  him.

July  thirteene,  1605.  ne  came  to  Sierra  Leona,  and
arriving  at  Pagono,  the  petty  King  thereof  tributarie  to
Fatema,  imitated  in  all  things  the  Christian  Rites,  but
durst  not  be  such  (hee  said)  except  he  saw  Fatema  first.
The  Portugals  in  these  parts  lived  liker  Ethnikes  then
Christians,  neither  having  Sacraments  nor  Word  of  God  in
many  yeeres  past,  so  that  they  had  almost  quite  forgotten
them.  Passing  by  the  He  Tamarena,  he  came  to  the
Kingdome  of  Buran,  the  King  whereof  is  also  subject  to
Fatema  :  he  would  be  present  also  at  Masse,  and  name
Jesus,  was  desirous  of  Baptisme,  but  I  thought  fittest  to
begin  with  Fatema.  I  Confessed  some  Portugals  here,
which  in  ten,  twentie,  thirtie  yeeres  had  never  beene
Confessed,  the  Christians  there  little  differing  from
Ethnikes.

The  King  of  Sierra  Leona  desired  my  stay  there,  which
I  doing,  contrary  to  my  former  purpose,  he  sent  all  the
people  of  the  Towne  to  cut  timber  for  a  Church,  was
wonderfull  desirous  also  of  Baptisme,  whereto  I  told  him
the  multiplicitie  of  wives  was  impediment.  Hee  yeelded
to  this,  but  wished  he  had  knowne  it  sooner,  for  then
would  he  have  had  none  of  these,  but  another  which  he
sent  for.  I  hundred  not,  because  their  marriages  for  the
most  part  are  by  the  law  of  Nature  unlawfull.  When  the
maide  came,  her  friends  refused  the  conditions  of  our
Baptisme  and  rites  :  and  upon  his  importunitie,  the  King
was  baptised,  and  clothed  now  like  a  Portugal.  Hee
was  named  Philip,  and  is  called  Philip  Leonis,  for  his
Countrey.  I  baptised  also  the  daughter  of  another  King,
and  joyned  her  in  marriage  to  him.  His  brethren  also
An  Amazon,  and  children  were  baptised.  The  Kings  Aunt  is  of  great
authoritie,  and  in  manner  ruleth  all :  and  should  but  for
her  sexe  have  raigned.  Shee  leads  the  reare  when  they
goe  to  warres,  carrying  a  Bowe,  Quiver,  and  military  Club,
and  compells  them  to  keepe  their  rankes.  Philips  father
being  dead,  when  they  would  have  observed  the  Rite  of

262

Of  Sierra
Leona,  See
sup.  189.

THE  JESUITS IN AFRICA  aj>.

i  560-1610.

killing  some  of  his  wives  and  servants,  Philip  interceded,
and  tooke  away  those  infernal]  Exequies  :  The  King  of
Toras  sonne  was  present  at  Masse,  Baptisme,  and  Sermon,  Tora.
and  relating  the  same  to  his  father  ;  this  (said  he)  is  a
Father  indeed,  and  not  those  (Priests)  which  hitherto  have  Seandalioj
comne  into  these  parts  no  lesse  following  the  merchan-
dising of  Slaves  and  other  things  then  the  other  Portugals.
This  King  is  one  hundred  yeeres  old,  originally  of  the
Cumbae  (called  also  Manes)  which  conquered  these  parts ;
as  fresh  as  if  hee  were  but  fortie.  At  Christmas  he  was
present  at  our  solemnitie,  the  Altar  adorned  with  faire
clothes,  the  image  of  our  Lady  with  the  Child  Jesus  on
one  side,  the  Crucifixe  on  the  other,  foure  Candlestickes
with  Tapers,  the  wall  and  pavement  trimmed  with
boughes.  Moved  with  admiration  he  desired  Baptisme,
and  a  place  was  designed  for  building  a  Church.  Their  Their
building  of  houses  and  Churches  is  to  fasten  posts  in  the  ""'"""£•
ground  close  together,  fastning  them  with  timbers  layde
overthwart,  covered  with  clay,  and  then  laying  on  a
plaister  of  earth  white  as  milke  ;  the  roofe  is  thatch  and
leaves  of  Palmes.  I  have  two  of  his  sonnes,  and  two  of
Philips  my  perpetuall  companions,  whom  besides  the
Catechisme  I  teach  to  reade.  The  old  King  cleaves  only
to  one  of  his  wives  the  sister  of  Philip  ;  and  at  Easter  he
is  to  be  baptised.

The  King  of  Beni,  the  Lord  of  seven  Kingdomes  hath
written  to  mee  for  Baptisme : but  I  cannot  forsake  these
two  Kings  till  I  have  other  helpe. This  Countrey  is  as
healthfull  as  any  I  ever  came  in,  and  Sierra  Leona  would
be  a  fit  place  for  a  plantation  of  the  Society : for  which
King  Philip  wrote  to  the  Catholike  King,  offering  a  place
to  erect  a  Fort,  and  commending  the  largenesse,  whol-  [II.ix.1560.]
somnesse, and fertilitie of his Countrey. An. 1607.
Emanuel  Alvares and his Brother  went to Guinea, to
Bissan,  and  perswaded  the  King  to  forsake  his  China,  (so
they  call  God,  and  whatsoever  is  pretious  to  them)  to  wit, j  ^wrf&  0f
a  Fagot  of  stickes  bound  together,  which  they  worship  : fakes
likewise  to  leave  those  infernal  inferies  of  killing  at  the  worshipped.

263

A.D.
1560-161O.

Devillish
cruelty.

Three

Beafares
Kings.

Biiags.

Beni  or  Benin.

The  chiefe
Bexerine  is
thchighPriest,
or  Marybuck
of  the  Man-
dingas,  of
which  see
MastcrJobson.

PPRCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Grave  of  the  deceased,  Wives,  Friends,  Servants,  cutting
their  fingers  and  toes  in  pieces,  and  stamping  the  bones  in
a  Morter ;  leaving  the  bodies  meane  while  in  torture,  and
when  they  were  at  the  point  of  death  thrusting  a  stake
thorow  their  neckes,  others  looking  on  with  undaunted
countenance,  which  were  to  undergoe  the  same  butchery.
The  Kings  of  Bigub  and  Besegui  also  desired  Baptisme,
which  both  (as  hee  of  Guinala)  are  Beafares.  Bigub  hath
three  Kings  vassals,  Besequi  five,  and  the  Guinalan  seven,
although  the  Biiagi  have  taken  sixe  Kingdomes  from  him.
These  Biiags  are  fierce  people,  in  seventeene  Hands  over
against  these  Kingdomes,  alway  warring  with  the  Beafares
and  the  Portugals ;  with  their  boats  entring  the  frequent
Rivers,  and  spoyling  all.  These  Hands  are  rich  and
fertile,  pleasant  with  Trees  and  Rivers,  fruitfull  in  Palmes,
Wine,  Oyle  ;  stored  with  Cattell  great  and  small,  Ivorie,
Fish,  Rice,  Waxe,  Iron,  and  on  the  shoare  Ambergrise,
but  to  them  uncouth  and  unkissed  ;  long  Pepper  enough
to  lade  yeerely  two  ships.

The  King  of  Beni  hearing  of  Philip  and  Peter  (the
King  of  Tora)  that  they  were  baptised,  sent  his  best
beloved  sonne  to  be  instructed  and  baptised.  Hee  is  the
chiefe  King  of  all  that  Coast.  To  him  Barerius  travelled,
hardly  escaping  the  treachery  of  another  King  in  the  way ;
the  way  was  wooddy  Mountaines,  pleasant  Vallies,  an
Iron-coloured  earth,  the  Iron  exceeding  that  of  Europe.
The  King  entertayned  him  joyfully ;  and  first  at  his
perswasion  commanded  by  publike  Edict,  that  marriage-
able Virgins  should  hide  Natures  secrets.  Hee  was
present  (but  entreated  to  stay  without  the  Church)  when
Masse  was  celebrated,  and  heard  the  Sermon  (for  he  under-
stood the  Portugall  tongue)  made  great  shewes  of
Christianitie,  promised  to  burne  his  Idols ;  yea,  perswaded
his  Vassall-kings  to  Christianitie  ;  but  all  on  a  sudden  by
a  Mahumetan  was  altered,  pretended  to  feare  the  Concha
(chiefe  Emperour  of  the  Sousoe)  and  the  great  Bexerine
would  incite  him  to  warre  against  him.  The  King  is
said  to  have  received  of  him  certaine  Charmes,  whereby

264

vArfa Cruiae

■***?%

jTger

faf

lltmjn

Lybia  inteki
on

^Ul

1  Ca^agolzs

if

d

4*

XK

^Cafc

S 'terra T*tonS.

CdasTafma*

Haunta.

rParHn

Benin

arfd

H  d^tifi

r tf i/tf  a/ieiF(tarma \J

5?

&.

iJOff

^

rtrvat

la

J-,  dcTernanda  ,  \
t -  Tot  '[  \

\0j

}.de  Prlnci^es

^Xf

'M fc^P%:_  v  J  ^£~ .1-

unio

ctial

is Line;

77

Crtiir

GVINEA

i  o

Lahff  Je
i,opo  Oon
falvet

■r  g  g*B  1

u

5

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF GUINEA

THE JESUITS IX AFRICA

15'

to  bewitch  any  that  offended  him.  Barerius  also
him  stroking  a  Serpent  as  big  as  a  mans  thigh,  rolled
up  in  divers  gyres,  so  beautified  with  various  colours,  as
hee  never  had  seenc  any  creature  :  this  he  stroked  and
dalied  with.  They  call  this  the  King  of  Serpents,  and
make  much  account  of  it:  but  Barerius  thought  it  was
the  Devill  in  this  forme.  Thus  were  the  blossoms  of  his
hopes  blasted  ; and  he  hasted  away  to  his  former  friends.

It  will  not  be  amisse  to  relate  the  funerall  mournings  Numeruu
(worthie  mournings  and  funerall)  amongst  the  Manes.  lss'iel>y 'e<lsrj"
Farma  the  King  or  the  Logui,  had  seventie  two  sons  and  p0i\zam-u
fiftie  daughters,  so  that  his  progenie  (most  surviving)  was
above  three  thousand.  The  old  Grandsire  being  dead,
newes  is  sent  to  all  the  kindred  in  their  severall  habitations,
every  Village  mourning,  and  the  kindred  visit  the  corps
with  presents,  Gold,  Clothes,  and  what  they  can,  accom-
plishing all  with  lamentable  lamentations.  Part  of  the
presents  is  put  in  the  Grave,  another  part  goeth  to  the
King  of  the  place,  the  third  to  the  Heire  :  but  the  Kings  funerall rites.
themselves  are  buried  secretly  by  night,  with  a  few  friends
attending,  having  all  their  life  heaped  treasure  to  that
funerall  purpose,  and  are  therefore  buried  in  unknowne
places,  as  in  the  bottoms  of  Rivers,  turning  meanewhile
the  streame  on  the  other  side.  They  lose  much  Gold  this
way,  and  if  they  die  suddenly,  no  man  knowes  where  they
have  prepared  and  treasured  that  treasure.  That  the
wives  and  servants  are  added  to  the  Exequies,  we  need  not
repeat.  They  hope  to  finde  all  ready  to  serve  them  in
the  next  life.  Some  great  men  have  Houses  set  over
their  Grave  covered  with  Cloth,  and  other  things  there
left  to  waste  with  time,  and  hither  the  kindred  make
recourse  to  consult  with  the  dead,  and  acquaint  them  with
their  affaires.  The  funerall  ended,  they  returne  with  so
many  stalkes  of  straw  as  there  remayne  moneths  to  the
yeeres  end  :  against  which  time  they  provide  store  of  Rice,
Wine,  Hennes,  and  (if  the  deceased  were  rich)  of  Kine,
and  then  assemble  to  a  funerall  feast,  lasting  day  and  night
with  all  excesse  in  eating,  drinking,  dancing,  and  such  a

265

A.D.

I  560-161O.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

noise,  that  none  in  the  Village  can  sleepe.  For  which
cause  the  Jesuites  which  have  their  Churches  in  the
Villages,  have  their  houses  out  of  them.  Their  greatest
glorie  is  the  number  of  Meats  beyond  mouthes,  and  of
Drunkards  beyond  tale.  King  Peter  was  invited  to  one
of  these  riots,  yet  rioted  not,  but  by  his  modest  example
wanne  good  opinion  to  his  Religion.  They  had  sacrificed
a  maide,  and  certaine  Kine  with  Diabolicall  rites  to  their
Ancestors,  in  a  Wood  closely  before  hee  came.

Barerius  went  to  Fatema  the  King  of  the  Boulons,  and

Straw-torches,  was  lighted  to  him  by  night  with  Torches  of  straw,  which
they  use,  and  not  wax,  though  the  Countrey  have  store.
Hee  sent  after  him  a  gold  Chaine  which  he  refused.  An
Ethnike  Doctor,  and  King  Peters  sonne  were  converted
soone  after.  They  doe  not  beleeve  any  Hell,  but  thinke
that  the  deceased  goe  to  Gods  house,  and  there  live  and
use  the  same  things  they  did  here,  and  in  the  same  ranke
and  reputation.

This  King  Peter  was  of  the  Manes  or  Cumbae,  which
are  the  same  (sayth  the  Jesuite)  which  in  Congo  were
called  Giachae  (Jagges,)  in  Angola,  Gindae ;  that  they
were  the  same  with  the  Imbiae  or  Zimbae,  of  which  you
reade  in  Santos,  or  with  the  Gallae  amongst  the  Abassines,
he sayth, without my subscription. These left their

[II. ix.  1 561.]  Countries,  about  An.  1550.  and  pierced  to  these  parts
of  Sierra  Leona :  of  which  Man-eating  Nation  none  there
remayned  but  this  Peter,  who  now  became  a  Zealous
Christian,  and  procured  the  commission  of  others.  They
which  are  to  be  baptised  bring  first  their  Idols,  and  cast
them  in  the  fire.  Besides  which  Statues,  they  have  Chinas,
which  are  Pyramides  with  Cells  within,  wherein  are  kept

China  white  Ants  ; of  so  religious  esteeme  with  those  Guineans,

superstitions.  t|iat  wnen  they  buy  a  slave,  they  set  him  before  a  China-
pyramide,  having  offered  thereto  Wine  and  other  things,
praying  that  if  hee  runne  away  Tigres  and  Serpents  may
devoure  him.  Which  threats  fasten  them  to  the  cruellest
masters.  In  every  Countrey  they  have  a  place  sacred  to
the  Devill. That  which  King  Philip  had,  was  in  an  Hand,

266

The  Jagges  :
see  I.  7.  c.  3
§•3-

THE  JESUITS IN AFRICA

1 5'
where  they  offered  Rice,  Oyle,  or  what  they  carried,
casting  it  into  the  Sea.  No  man  durst  venture  on  the
Hand  for  feare  of  Camassono,  the  Devill-Idoll.  Once  a
yeere  the  King  went  and  sacrificed  Hennes,  and  Goats,
(which  there  lived  securely)  on  a  Rocke.  The  cruell
spectacle  of  the  Selfe-whippers  on  Mandy  thursday  was
terrible  to  the  Ethnikes,  thinking  them  (not  without
cause)  mad  so  to  rage  against  their  owne  flesh  ;  and
Christopher  sonne  of  King  Peter  would  not  be  behinde  the
rest  herein.  Another  thought  the  blood  had  beene  onely
the  red  Joyce  of  a  certaine  Tree.  These  are  the  Jesuiticall
Relations  till  the  yeere  1610.  with  other  like,  which  I
omit.

§. VI.

Relations  of  the  Christianitie  of  Africa,  and
especially  of  Barbarie,  and  Algier  ;  written  by
J.  B.  Gramaye.

Hus much have I related of the Jesuites and  Africa  lllus-
Dominicans later labours in Africa. Gramaye  trat,l'lwnxo-
hath  lately  published  ten  Bookes  or  Tractates  of
Africa : he sayth that there are some Relikes of the
antient  Christians  after  so  many  inundations  of  Heresie  Chrutianitu
and  Mahometisme,  both  in  Marocco,  Tunes,  and  Lybia,  °J uarDane-
which  use  the  Masse  of  the  Mozarabes  translated  into
Arabike  : there  are  also  Greekes,  and  Abassines,  and  of
divers  Nations  Merchants  with  free  use  of  their  conscience.
At  Tunes,  and  Tripolis,  Priests  in  Gownes,  Monkes  in
their Cowles, are permitted publike supplications and
funerals. In the Kingdome of Fesse their libertie is
greater. But  in  all  the Coast  of  Barbaria there  is no
securitie  of  the  publike  exercise  of  Christian  Religion,  nor
any  Monasteries :  but  at  Oram  &  in  the  places  subject  or
confederat  to  the  Spaniards. In  the  places  subject  to  the
Moors  &  Turks,  there  is  publike  permitted,  not  secured,
both  exercise,  Churches,  &  places  of  buriall  in  towns ;  som-
times  eclipsed  or  disturbed  by  the  Morabutes,  in  times  of

267

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 6 1 9.

drought,  at  which  times,  as  it  were,  to  appease  the  angry
Deitie,  they  spoile  Churches,  inhibite  Christian  Holies,
overthrow  Tavernes  (for  none  else  may  sell  Wine)  which
after  a  few  dayes  are  againe  permitted.  The  Christian
Church-yard,  or  rather  Buriall-place,  is  a  piece  of"  ground
without  the  Towne,  neere  the  Jewish  Buriall-place,  not
inclosed,  yea  (in  places)  bearing  Corne.  But  the  sandy
soyle  scarsly  secures  the  Corpses  from  Dogs.  Prayers
and  other  Rites  are  used  at  the  Graves,  but  not  at  Algier,
without  scoffes  and  injuries,  specially  from  Boyes.  Priests
administer  Sacraments  without  speciall  Cure,  or  certaine
Stipend,  or  Order  ;  yea,  some  without  Orders.  Baptisme
is  often  administred  by  the  Lay-people,  and  without  the
Ecclesiasticall  Ceremonies ;  and  whatsoever  requires
Episcopall  benediction  of  long  time  hath  there  wanted.
Seldom  is  there  Sermon,  never  Catechising,  Vespers,  or
Lauds,  till  our  Author  procured.

In  the  Kingdome  of  Argire  are  supposed  to  be  two
hundred  thousand  Christians,  of  which  the  most  are
Renegados  or  Apostatas,  which  professe  Mahometisme  :
some,  but  very  few,  of  their  owne  accord ;  some  by  force,
as  Boyes  which  they  take,  and  Infants  (neither  is  it  lawfull
for  any  to  be  freed  thence  till  hee  bee  fifteene  yeeres  old)
some  dissembling,  yet  hardly  escaping,  by  reason  of
certaine  death,  if  taken  in  the  attempt ;  some  by  rewards
of  riches  and  honour ;  others  by  feare  of  torture,  and
despaire  of  libertie.  Of  such  as  continue  Romish
Christians  are  in  that  Kingdome  supposed  to  be  two  and
thirty  thousand,  besides  those  of  the  Reformed  or  other
professions.  And  although  in  ten  yeeres  last  past  (till
An.  1 61 9.)  1200.  Spaniards  have  beene  freed,  yet  in  that
space  eight  thousand  have  succeeded  in  servitude,  besides
sixe  hundred  dead.  Some  of  which  are  in  the  Countrey
or  Gardens,  and  have  publike  Service  onely  when  they
come  to  the  Citie,  where  at  this  time  were  eight  captived
Priests,  not  at  all  Graduates,  and  two  onely  which  have
addicted  themselves  to  Divinitie.  There  are  foure
Churches  in the  Prisons, in the  Citie  and  Diocesse of

268

RELATIONS  OF  BABBARY  AND  ALGIEBS

Nippon  two,  in  that  of  Cirth  and  Tcslen  two.  They
have  an  Oratory  in  the  house  of  the  French  Consull.

Supplications  are  performed  in  their  times  with  devotion
and  store  of  Candles.  But  there  is  no  Font,  nor  holy
Oyle,  Chrisme ;  nor  are  the  Sacraments  (give  me  leave  to
use  our  Authours  words)  of  marriage,  Extreme  unction,
Orders,  or  Confirmation  administred  ;  Baptisme  is  done
with  simple  water,  Penance  by  any  Priest:  the  burial  1
place  not  consecrated.  The  Authour  being  there  captive.1.,
did  reforme  things  by  a  Visitation,  with  consent  and
request  of  those  Christians,  and  subjection  to  the  Pope
and  all  which  might  challenge  any  right  provided.

There  are  in  Barbary,  in  the  Kingdoms  of  Argier,  Tunes,
Tripoli,  Fesse,  one  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  Christian
captives :  there  are  eightie  six  Families  in  those  parts  of
Christian  Merchants,  Freemen ;  Of  Greeke  Christians,
one  hundred  seventy  nine  Families ;  Of  Jewes  which  have
trade  with  the  French,  are  one  hundred  fiftie  sixe  thousand
Families.  Romish  Priests  Captives  sixtie  two.  Churches
permitted  to  Christian  Holies  sixteene.  In  seven  and
twentie  yeares  past  (1619.)  there  hath  beene  no  Bishop,
but  the  Greeke  Patriarch  :  *  neither  is  there  any  Ecclesi-
asticall  Discipline,  that  not  one  of  a  hundred  lives  like  a
Christian,  the  Priests  living  of  Almes,  contenting  them-
selves with  their  Masse  without  cure  of  soules ;  their
paritie  also  making  them  carelesse  each  of  other ;  scarsly
any  thing  Christian-like  celebrated  but  the  *  Masse.

Gramaye  is  confident  that  Argier  is  that  Iol,  which  was
the  Seat  Royall  of  Juba,  by  his  Sonne  new  built,  and
called  Caesarea ;  a  Coyne  of  Claudius  is  inscribed  Iol
Caesarea  Jubae  Regia.  After  his  death  Caligula  brought
this  Kingdome  of  Mauritania,  (which  contayned  those  of
Argier,  Fesse,  Marocco,  and  part  of  Tunes)  into  two
Provinces,  Tingitana  and  Caesariensis.  Claudius  made
this  Caesarea  a  Colonie,  some  few  Antiquities  and  Inscrip-
tions yet  remayning.  Thirty  miles  from  the  Citie  is
Sarsella  where  is  infinite  Rubbish,  as  the  Grave,  with
Relikes  of  Fabrickes,  and  Aquaeducts,  as  the  bones  of  the

269

AM.

[61  ).

[II.ix.1562.]

Numbers  of
Christians  and
Jewes  in  a  part
of  Barbary.

*One  sent

thither  in
displeasure
from  Con-
stantinople.

*Pitifull
Christianitie.
Iol  seat  of
Juba.

Antiquities  of
Argier.

Sarsella.

A.D.
1619.

*Lib.  6.  c.  4.

Description  of
Argier  taken,
out  ofGra-
mayes  large
Tractate,  I.  7.

There  were
said  to  come
60000
Moores  at
their  last
ejection  to
Algier  from
Spaine.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Carkasses,  and  Inscriptions,  as  Epitaphs,  ancient  Coynes  as
Memorials  (of  which  many  were  given  him)  for  feare  of
suspition  hee  durst  not  make  search.  And  although  Alger,
Argel,  Algiers,  or  Argier  (the  very  name  breeds  confusion)
be  described  before  out  or  *Nicolay  ;  seeing  we  have  met
with  later  Intelligence  by  almost  seventie  yeares  then  the
former  (since  that  was  printed  in  our  sixth  Booke)  we
have  thought  good  to  adde  out  of  him  some  better  light
of  this  Hel-mouth,  the  Centre  of  Earthly  darknesse.

It  is  seated  on  the  mid-land  Sea,  on  the  side  of  a  hill,
whereby  one  house  hinders  not  the  prospect  of  the  next.
Cheridim  Barborossa,  rortified  it  with  the  Hand,  which  yet
Tempests  sometime  assault  with  great  hurt  to  the  ships  as
happened  this  yeare  16 19.  five  and  twentie  shippes  broken
in  the  Port.  The  forme  of  the  Citie  is  almost  Bow-
fashion.  The  circumference  of  the  old  Towne  is  three
thousand  foure  hundred  paces  :  Barbarossa  began  and  after
1573.  Arabamet  finished  a  Wall  about  the  Hand,  except
that  part  which  is  open  to  the  Port  and  Citie.  Lately
they  have  founded  a  five  cornered  Towre  to  secure  both.
The  Turrets,  Fortresses,  Bulwarkes,  I  omit.  The  houses
within  are  close  to  the  Wall ;  without,  is  a  Ditch  of
sixteene  paces,  scowred  by  Arabamet,  but  now  in  some
places  mired  up,  and  scarce  halfe  of  it  is  cleare.  Without
the  Towne  are  three  Castles  :  two  of  which  were  built,
Anno  1568.  1569.  the  third  before,  was  finished  1580.
Except  one  the  streets  are  very  narrow,  and  in  Winter
very  durty.  Out  of  their  Rate  or  Taxe-bookes,  I  find  of
late  yeares,  by  the  destroying  of  the  Suburbes,  for  feare
of  Don  John  of  Austria  1573.  and  since  the  Moores  were
expelled  last  from  Spaine,  it  is  very  much  increased  in
buildings,  not  like  the  descriptions  anciently  published,
which  leave  therein  open  and  vacant  places.  And
although  the  Houses  to  the  street  side  are  darke,yet  being
inwardly  built  with  square  Cloisters  as  it  were,  the  light  is
supplyed,  as  the  Roofes  serve  them  for  Galleries  and
Prospects  ;  in  the  midst  is  a  Well,  but  the  water  brackish.
They use no Chimneyes, but make fires of coales in

270

RELATIONS  OF  BARBARY  AND  ALGIERS a.d.

1619.

Earthen  Pannes  in  their  Porches  or  Roofes.  They  white
the  out-side  of  their  Houses  against  great  Feasts.  'I  he
Kings  Palace  and  great  mens  Houses  have  Courts  spacious,
with  specious  Pillers  about,  and  many  by-roomes  spred
with  Mats  or  Carpets ;  their  custome  beeing  to  put  off
their  shooes  when  they  enter.  Their  House-hold  Furni-
ture is  otherwise  meane,  the  vulgar  having  nothing  but  a
Mat,  Carpet,  Mattresse,  two  Vests  hanging,  Pots  and
Dishes  of  Earth,  and  long  woodden  Spoones,  with  a
woodden  Chest :  two  or  three  staves  fastned  to  the  Wals
covered  with  boards  serve  for  a  Bed,  sitting  and  lying-
more  commonly  on  the  floore  on  a  Mat  or  Carpet.  Their
Garments  hang  on  lines  over  the  Bed,  Pelts  are  their
Naperie,  Water  their  Drinke,Rice  their  Meate  with  Pulse,
Meale,  a  little  Flesh,  and  some  fruits,  whence  Victuals  are
cheape.  There  are  no  Conduits,  Sewers,  nor  Wels  of
sweet  water ;  five  Cisternes  from  without,  supplying  that
want,  together  with  that  which  is  fetched  on  mens
shoulders  out  of  the  fields,  by  above  one  thousand  Slaves
and  Moores.  There  are  seven  faire  Mosquets,  specially
the  greatest,  five  Colledges  of  Janizaries,  where  some  sixe
hundred  of  them  live  together  in  a  House  ;  one  Hospitall
built  by  Assan  Bassa,  foure  faire  Bathes,  being  Prisons  for
slaves ;  two  for  washing  with  hote  or  cold,  paved  with
Marble,  and  furnished  with  Chambers ;  and  Conduits  for
Arte-brought  waters,  used  by  the  Moores  and  Turkes  of
both  Sexes  almost  every  day  ;  and  the  two  Royall  Porches,
one  of  thirtie  sixe  foote  square  with  Columnes,  where  the
Duana  of  the  Janizaries  is  kept,  the  other  before  the
Palace.

Within  the  Wals  are  neere  thirteene  thousand  Houses,  \  $000 Jwuses.
many  of  which  are  inhabited  by  thirtie  Families ;  the
House  of  Jacob  Abum  in  the  lower  Jewrie  hath  three
hundred,  of  Abraham  Ralbin,  two  hundred  and  sixtie
Families,  and  others  likewise.  There  are  above  one
hundred  Mosquets,  each  having  three  Morabutes  Curats,
and  some  thirtie  or  fortie,  besides  the  Oratories  of  Here-
mites and Sepulchres ; sixty two Bathes, eighty sixe

271

A.D.
1619.

[Il.ix.i563.]

35ooo.C>^m-
t'tan  Slaves.

Moores
Freemen.

And  Foreners.
Mountayne  of
Couko  and
Labesan,
which  are
pettie
Kingdomes.
Those  Moores
Axuages  have
crosses  marked
in  their  hands.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Schooles  for  Children  to  learne  to  reade  and  write,  and  a
few  others  for  the  Alcoran ;  Suburb-gardens  fourteene
thousand  sixe  hundred  ninetie  eight,  each  having  one  or
more  Christians,  some  sixe  or  eight  to  keepe  them.  Nor
is  there  scarce  a  Family  in  the  Citie,  which  hath  not  one  or
more  Christian  slaves  of  both  Sexes,  some  a  great  multi-
tude, as  Faretbey,  seventy  two.  Ali-Mami,  one  hundred
thirty  two.  Ali  Pizilini,  sixty  three.  Aripagi,  thirty  eight.
Asan  Portuges,  forty.  Salomon  Reis,  thirtie  two.  And
in  the  Kings  Prison  are  commonly  two  thousand,  and  two
or  three  thousand  in  the  three  Gallies  and  seventie  two
ships  of  warre,  which  Anno  161 9.  were  there,  so  that  in  and
about  the  Citie  there  seeme  to  be  of  them  above  thirtie
five  thousand.

Haedo  which  lived  here  many  yeares,  reckons  of  the
Naturall  Moores  called  Baldis,  freed  from  Tribute  by
Barbarossa,  of  good  complexion  almost  white,  living  on
their  Lands,  Handycrafts  or  Merchandize,  two  thousand
five  hundred  Families.  Of  Moores  Cabaijales  or  For-
reners  from  the  Mountaynes  of  Couko  and  Labesan,
called  Azuages,  and  from  other  Mountaynes  seven  hun-
dred Families.  I  learned  that  there  were  above  three
thousand  Arabian  Beggers.  Of  the  Modajares,  which
were  expelled  out  of  the  Kingdomes  of  Granada,  and  the
Tagarines  out  of  Valentia  and  Arragon,  Haedo  numbreth
one  thousand  Families ;  I  adde  (saith  Gramay)  as  many
more,  which  have  brought  Trades  hither  to  the  great
increase  of  Argier.  Of  Turkes  out  of  Asia  and  Romania,
besides  Janizaries  are  sixteene  hundred  Families,  and
above  sixe  thousand  of  renied  Christians.  Of  Alcaids
(that  is  of  Commanders,  in  the  Towne  and  Forts)  one
hundred  thirty  sixe  Families,  above  three  hundred  Arraiz,
which  have  places  of  command  in  the  Navie  :  five  hundred
Families  of  Espaiis,  sixe  thousand  Genizaries,  eighty  sixe
green-headed  Xerifes  of  Mahomets  Kindred,  Agi  or
Mecca-saints  above  eight  hundred.  Haedo  reckons  three
thousand  Merchants  Families  of  divers  Nations,  and  two
thousand shops. The Handi-crafts cannot easily bee

272

RELATIONS  OF  BARBARY  AND  ALGIERS a-d.

[619.

reckoned  :  in  the  Smiths  street  are  eightie  Masters,  they
say  twelve  hundred  Taylors,  three  thousand  Weavers,
three  hundred  Butchers,  foure  hundred  Bakers,  &c.  The
Jewes  have  sixe  large  Synagogues,  not  able  to  contayne
their  multitudes,  reported  to  bee  above  eight  thousand
men.  All  these  in  the  Citie.  In  the  Countrey,  are  in
Garrisons  at  Tremesen,  Constantina,  and  the  rest  sixteene
thousand  Genezaries,  and  Souldiers.  Of  Arabians,  Anno
161 7.  when  there  was  rumour  of  the  Spaniards  comming,
sixe  Morabutes  offered  the  King  and  the  Duana  sixescore
thousand  Horse-men,  and  sixty  thousand  Foot-men.
Thus  Argier  which  an  old  Jew  of  ninety,  an  Eye-witnesse
reported  to  me,  when  Charles  the  Emperour  intended  the
siege,  had  scarsly  eight  hundred  men  fit  for  resistance
within  the  Walls,  and  a  great  part  of  the  Moore-citizens
were  forced  to  live  by  Husbandry  and  fishing,  is  now
encreased  principally  by  ejection  of  the  Moores  out  of
Spaine,  in  the  yeares  1492.  1567.  and  1607.  more  to  our
griefe  then  wonder.

For  the  Government,  the  King,  hath  a  kind  of  free-
dome,  yet  doth  nothing  of  import  without  the  Duana.
Hee  hath  his  Belerbei,  or  chiefe  Captayne,  wonted  to  bee
sent  with  the  Bassa  from  Constantinople,  but  many  yeeres
since  continued  among  the  Argerians ;  his  Califa  or
Chancellor,  who  represents  the  Kings  person  if  he  be
absent.  The  Cadi,  one  for  the  Moores,  another  for  the
Turkes  (to  whom  is  Appeale  from  the  former,  and  from
this  to  the  Aga)  are  sent  from  Constantinople,  with  their
Notaries  Assistants.  In  Civill  Cases  and  Criminall  they
are  used,  with  the  Mufties  or  Bishops,  a  Turke  and  a
Moore.  All  their  plea  is  by  Witnesses,  and  seldome  their
sentences  are  recorded,  and  when  they  are,  no  name  sub-
scribed but  a  seale  orOkeredstampe.  From  these  and  from  Two  Mufties
the  King  himselfe  lyeth  an  Appeale  to  the  Aga,  the  chiefe
of  the  Duana,  wherein  all  things  are  handled,  and  upon  the
rude  cryes  of  the  vulgar,  sentence  is  executed.  Rarely  is
a  Turke  put  to  death,  except  for  Mutinie  and  Rebellion
they  be  strangled  :  Adulteresses  are  drowned  ;  in  other
ix  273  s

a  Moore  and
a  Turke.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1619.

offences  they  are  fined  in  the  decrease  or  losse  of  pay  and
place,  or  blowes  given  them  with  a  Rope  or  Cudgell,  on
the  backe,  belly,  and  soles  of  the  feet.

JewesOfficers.  The  Jewes  have  also  their  Magistrates  and  Judges,  and
punish  theirs  according  to  the  Law  :  so  yet,  that  the  King
doth  inflict  punishments,  sometimes  for  imaginary  crimes
to  extort  reall  summes  from  them.  The  Christians  should
also  according  to  covenants  with  the  Christian  King,  have
judgement  of  their  owne  Consuls,  but  favour  procures  the

The  Aga.  contrary.  As  the  Aga  and  Cadi  in  the  Citie,  so  in  the
Countrey  the  Alcayde,  and  Makadi  exercise  like  jurisdic-
tion but  subject  to  the  former.  And  in  Villages  the
Xeque  doth  all  amongst  the  Arabs,  from  whom  seldome
is  recourse  to  the  King.  The  Sea-Common-wealth  is
exercised  by  the  Arraez  and  his  Balu-cobaxi.  One  of  the
Kings  Pages,  a  youth,  heareth  (sitting  on  a  stone  abroad
before  the  Kings  Palace)  the  causes  of  the  Whores,  and
inferiour  womens  brawles,  and  the  fine  returneth  to  him-
selfe.  The  Aga  is  chiefe  of  the  Janizaries,  and  possesseth
his  place  two  moneths,  and  sometimes  we  have  seene  foure
in  a  fortnight,  the  King  giving  so  many  silke  Gownes  to
them  after  the  custome  :  which  place  having  passed  he  is
free  from  Tribute,  and  lives  among  the  Espaiis  (of  whom
there  is  sixe  or  seven  hundred  Families.)  He  comes  no
more  at  the  Duana,  except  hee  bee  called  :  to  this,  they
arise  by  degrees,  every  Janizarie  being  capable  in  his
order.

The  Jewes  weare  a  distinction  in  their  clothes.  The
common  apparell  is,  drawers  not  to  hinder  them  in  making
water,  a  Wast-coate  with  wide  sleeves  not  to  hinder  their
washing  to  the  elbow,  a  broad  girdle,  with  goodly  great
Knives  in  a  sheath  on  the  left  hand ;  breeches  in  Winter
like  the  Spaniards,  Zapatas  or  coloured  shooes  to  put  on
and  off  without  touch  of  the  hand,  a  kind  of  gowne
uppermost.  Every  eight  day  they  shave  their  heads
except  on  the  crowne,  that  locke  being  left  to  draw  them  to
Paradise. The  head  is  alway  covered  (in  salutation  they

[II. ix.  1 564.] lay  the  hand  to  the  brest  and  bow  the  head)  with  a  Tur-

274

RELATIONS  OF  BARBARY  AND  ALGIERS *»■

bant,  or  a  coloured  cap  with  Linnet!  foure  or  five  times
wreathed  about.  They  all  weare  Rings  of  divers  matter.
The  womens  habit  differs  little  from  the  mens,  nor  could
a  woman  going  in  the  streets  be  knowne  but  by  her
woman-slave  attending.  They  sit  at  home  on  Mats  or
Carpets  prating  (few  except)  all  day  long,  except  when
they  goe  to  the  Bathes,  Heremites,  Wizards,  Sepulchres,
Gardens,  Feasts,  which  are  common  with  them.  They
delight  in  blacke  haire  which  they  procure  with  Medicines.
They  have  little  care  of  their  Children,  none  of  their
Familie ; too  much  of  Superstitions  and  Lusts.

These  Algerians  have  the  foolish  conceits  of  other  Opinions
Mahumetans,  some  also  more  proper,  that  Fooles  and  J°°  •».  •
Dwarfes  are  Saints,  their  Morabutes  to  be  inspired  and  to  ^/„>r
consult  with  God,  the  Viands  set  on  Sepulchres  weekly  to
be  eaten  by  the  soules  ;  and  if  sicke  persons  offer  there  any
thing  which  a  beast  eateth,  that  the  disease  is  derived  to
it ;  that  the  head-ach  is  lessened  with  rolling  a  Goats  or
sheeps  head  on  the  Roofe  ;  that  it  is  not  lawfull  to  buy  in
May,  nor  to  bring  in  at  doore  Garleeke  or  Broomes,  but
(if  there  be  need  of  them)  at  the  Roofe  ;  that  it  is  a  meri-
torious worke  to  prostitute  their  Wives  to  the  Morabutes,
and  that  the  same  men  bugger  with  beasts ;  that  shewing
pitie  to  beasts,  shaving,  washing  (though  in  the  Sea)
clenseth  sinnes  ;  that  (Sodomiticall)  sinnes  against  Nature  Mahometan
are  vertues.  But  to  bedew  the  Garment  in  making  urine,  Ji.s'er  !'nnes'
to  let  paper  lye  on  the  ground,  the  Alcoran  to  be  touched
or  seene  of  one  not  Mahumetan,  to  fart  in  Sala  (or  Prayer
time,)  or  then  to  defend  a  mans  selfe(as  Mulei  Abdelummi
assaulted  by  his  Brother  and  wounded  in  the  Church  1577.
would  not  stirre  till  Sala  was  done)  or  to  bleed,  or  neeze,
or  spit,  to  wipe  the  buttockes  except  with  the  left  finger,
to  drinke  out  of  a  smacking  narrow  mouthed  pot,  to  locke
the  Bed-chamber  by  night,  to  stampe  on  the  Earth  when
they  play  at  ball,  to  write  with  a  Pen  (for  they  use  Reeds)
to  eate  Snailes  taken  out  of  the  fields  (reputed  holy)  to
touch  money  before  they  have  said  their  Morning  Prayers,
to  hold  the  Alcoran  beneath  the  girdle,  to  have  printed

275

A.D

:: : ;.

Oftizs  iivin-

-.-■ I  ;■•-.-
.:-s .-!'-:■-■:.
c  W&tefir
tie  Txrke,  a
Block  Jer  tie
C ~-:ri--..  :■:■:

/-/■---.

Mtmming.

Pl'RCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Bookes,  or  Pictures  of  men  or  beasts ;  to  admit  Chris-
tians or  women  to  their  Mesquits,  to  use  Bels,  to  exchange
a  Christian  captive  for  a  Turke,  to  breech  children  with
Roc  _ whip  the  sole  of  the  foot  with  a  Whip)  these

are  all  sinnes  and  enormities  at  Algier.  They  beleeve
that  on  their  Easter  mid-nio-ht  all  waters  are  asleepe,  and
hee  which  can  get  that  sleepe  shall  be  a  happie  man.
With  their  Morabutes  you  are  safe  in  the  midst  of
Theeves.  It  is  unlawfull  to  goe  into  a  new  house,  under-
take a  Journey  or  begin  any  great  businesse  without
Sacrifice  of  a  sheepe  :  unluckie  to  sayle  without  consulting
the  Fortune-booke.  They  play  not  at  Dice  and  Cards,
nor  sweare,  nor  fight  one  with  another.  The  King  and
great  men  let  their  beards  grow,  others  shave  all  but  the
Mustachos  and  Crowne  ;  they  wash  before  worke,  Prayer,
and  Meales ;  and  have  a  certayne  Ceremonie  to  take  water
in  the  hollow  of  the  hand,  powring  it  to  the  elbow.

Here  and  in  all  the  East  they  use  with  Christians  the
Franke  Tongue,  composed  of  French,  Italian,  Spanish,
and  thereby  understand  them  all.  They  eate  not  bloud,
or  a  beast  killed  by  another  man :  and  kill  turning  the
head  to  the  Sunne  and  cutting  the  throate.  No  testament
is  available  unlesse  acknowledged  forty  dayes  before  the
Testators  death  before  the  Cadi.  All  the  Sonnes  and
Daughters  inherit  equally ;  if  they  be  Moores  the  King
hath  a  childes  part,  and  if  all  Daughters,  he  hath  all  of  a
Mc  3re,  and  halfe  of  a  Turke.  When  anv  is  sicke,  women
assist  women,  and  men  the  men,  praying  Eastward  ;  wash
the  dead  Corps  with  hote  water  and  Sope,  clothe  it  and
carrie  it  (having  obtayned  the  Alcavds  leave)  with  the
head  forward  to  buriall :  if  hee  depart  on  Fridav,  it  staveth
the  Prayer  time  in  the  Mesquit :  they  set  a  stone  at  the
head  of  the  grave,  and  another  at  the  feet  with  an  Epitaph
and  Sentence  out  of  the  Alcoran.  Thev  weare  no  mourn-
ing, save  that  the  women  are  a  few  dayes  veiled  in  blacke,
and  the  men  shave  not  for  a  monethes  space,  and  for  three
race  they  have  no  fire  in  their  house,  nor  eate  any
thing  boyled  ; in  that  space  they  visit  the  Sepulchre,  give

276

RELATIONS  OF  BARBARY  AND  ALGIERS a.d.

1619.

Almes,  and  gathering  stones  on  the  shoare,  tosse  them
from  the  right  hand  to  the  left,  and  throw  them  into  the
Grave,  saying,  Selan  Ala.  They  begin  the  Spring  on  the
fourteene  of  February,  and  end  it  on  the  eighteene  of
May  ;  they  call  the  raine  which  fals  from  Aprill  the  five
and  twentieth  to  May  the  fift  blessed  of  God,  and  keepe
it  religiously-  Their  Summer  continues  to  August  the
sixteenth,  and  is  very  hote,  and  sometimes  hath  pestilent
raines  which  kill  thousands.  Autumne  to  the  sixteenth
ot  November,  and  Winter  is  never  so  cold  that  they  need
a  fire.

The  Kin^s  Revenues  are  summed  by  Harega  at  toure The  rr-:
hundred  thousand  Duckets,  by  Haedo  toure  hundred  and
riftie  thousand  : and  payeth  nothing  to  the  Turke,  but  a
few  Boves  and  gifts  of  no  value,  with  some  feeling  to  the
Port  Bassas. Yet  would  his  Revenue  be  short  of  expe:
on  Officers  and  otherwise,  if  spoile  helped  not. Much
Gold  is  carryed  out  of  Christendome,  tor  redemption  of
slaves threescore thousand Duckets yearely, as much
perhaps  to  buv  spoyles,  of  which  little  or  none  returneth
to Christendome, they taking to Sea, Bisket, Water,
Tobacco,  Oyle  and  Dates,  and  laughing  at  our  E xssc
The  treasure  of  the  Duana  is  administred  by  three,  two  of
which  have  beene  Agas,  the  third  is  the  Hoga  or  Secretary,
who  if  the  King  payeth  not  the  Janizaries,  by  the  authoritv
of  the  Duana  thev  will  imprison  him  and  sequester  his
Rents; as it lately hapned to  Osain  Bassa  two
together.

The  Sepulchre  of  Morabute  Cid  Butic.:.  is  saluted  with
a  Peece  going  out  and  comming  in,  bv  whose  holv  pravers  [II.  ix.  1565.]
they  say,  Charles  prevayled  not  against  them  An.  1541.
In  a  hill  neere,  lieth  Caba  the  daughter  oi  Earle  Julian
which  Rodericus  King  of  Spaine  ravished,  revenged  bv
her  wicked  father,  with  treacherous  brino-ino-  t-e  V-  -.
into  Spaine.  The  Cids  Sepulchres  and  Chappels  are
visited  some  on  Munday,  some  on  Thursday,  :r  cm  Frida]  .
by  the  devout  superstitious  fooles,  speciallv  (perhaps  not-
devout)  women. Airier  is  environed  with  £oodlv  hills

-:-

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

1619.

and  dales,  attended  with  plentie  of  fruits  better  then
European.  Three  dayes  journey  towards  Bugia,  is  the
Hill  Couko,  the  King  whereof  Barbarossa  slue  An.  1 5 1 5.
and  sometimes  he  is  tributary,  sometimes  enclining  to  the
5 iniard.

A  _:er were altogether unworthy so long discourse,
were  not  the  unworthinesse  most  worthy  our  considera-
tion,  I meane the  cruell  abuse  of  the Christian name,
which let us for inciting our Zeale, and exciting our
Charitie,  and  Thankfulnes  more  deeply  weigh,  to  releeve
those there in miseries (as  we may) with our paynes,
prayers,  purses,  and  all  the  best  mediations. Thus  writes
he  which  saw  and  felt  his  part  in  those  miseries. Barbarie
£ -ets  cf and chiefly therein Algier, the whip of the Christian
World,  the  wall  of  the  Barbarian,  terror  of  Europe,  the
bridle  of  both  Hesperias  (Italy  and  Spaine)  Scourge  of  the
Hands, Den of Pyra:es, Theatre of all crueltie, and
Sanctuarie of Iniquitie, holdeth captive in miserable
servitude,  one  hundred  and  twentie  thousand  Christians,
almost  all  subjects  of  the  King  of  Spaine  :  of  which,  partly
by  the  Turkes  riches,  the  Pyrates  fortunes,  the  Janisaries
honors,  their  fellowes  flatteries  seduced ; partly  overcome
with  despaire  of  libertie  and  irksomnesse  of  daily  calami-
ties, every  yeere  above  five  hundred  become  Mahumetan
Apostataes ; besides,  ibout  fiftie  Boyes  yeerly  circumcised
against  their  wills. To  the  Redemption  of  Captives  by
the  Orders  of  the  Trinitie,  and  of  Saint  Marie  de  Mercede
"7 line  and  Italy,  are  yeerly  gathered  about  one  hundred
*Tit  Author arjd fiftie thousand Duckets. There is no general!  *
urith,  NmUms ordinarie  course  for  Redemption  of  Captives  of  England,
fa ::::.:- France,  Poland,  Hungarie,  Germanie,  and  the  Low  Coun-
:::t:  : whereby  men  of  those  parts  utterly  disconsolate,  to
£_  the  losse  and  shame  of  Christians,  Apostatise. And  to

private  friend;  stirre  up  compassion,  behold  Airier  Captivitie,  represented

;--: ■■'■-- from  his  eyes  to  ours.
::'"-"  '"  :'  First,  if  anv  Ship  comes  into  their  hands,  it  is  with  huge

r

bj  aOectim  w  Ch  ~Rsh  men  are  redeemed:  but  not  in  the  sense  he  spe~

ttat HeB centre A ■:':■:-  hied.

'278

RELATIONS  OF  BABBARY  AND  ALGIERS

1619.

clamors  presently  invaded  by  the  Pyrates,  and  it  it  be  an

Enemie,  spoyled  ; if  Confederate,  they  take  away  rheir

Armes,  fill  the  Poope  and  strongest  places  with  Souldi

search  the  lading,  take  meat  and  drinke  as  ir  ee,

send  the  Governours  aboard  their  owne  ship,  and  in  a

Pyratical  counsell  examine  them,  whether  they  have  any

Spanish  Wares  or  Men  ;  not  content  with  words  or  letters, Tm-turej  •/

they  force  the  Boyes  and  elder  Persons  by  infinite  beatings  fT***-

to  confesse  that  which  is  not,  and  to  promise  what  they a^^^^

have  not; and  one  mans  confession  is  enough  to  make  timtfwkmtu

prey. Sometimes gaping after the ships wealth, they  ■*-

throw  the  men  over-board,  and  so  possesse  the  ship,  saying,

her  men  had  forsaken  her. Otherwhiles  not  sal  ith

Truncheons,  and  Ropes  to  have  tortured  the  Wretches

backs,  binding  their  hands  and  feet,  they  draw  them  up

and  whip  them,  almost  stravne  out  their  braynes  with  a

knotty  Rope  plucked  about  the  head,  thrust  Nee -  s  in

their  fingers,  rost  their  feet  with  the  shooes  on  at  the  fire,

powre  forceably  salt  water  into  their  mouthes  to  fill  the  bod

and  then  treading  on  the  belly  with  their  feet,  force  them

to  belch  it  up  ; with  smoke  of  Brimstone  fill  the  mouth

and  eyes,  hang  them  up  racked  with  weights  at  their  feet

or  with  a  Rope  draw  them  thorow  the  Sea  under  the  ship.

The  end  of  these  torments  is  captivitie,  if  there  be  any

Enemie  in  the  ship,  and  hee  laden  with  Irons  and  Fettc-  s,

is  thrust  into  the  worst  part  of  the  ship,  and  scarslv  hath

moldy  Bisket  and  Water  to  sustayne  life. If  thev  rea

not  satisfaction  touching  the  men  and  Wares,  thev  reiterate

the  tortures  daily  ; Boyes  are  flattered  and  threatned,  .md

often  compelled  to  turne,  and  without  delav  presentlv  are

circumcised. And  such  is  the  course  with  their,  which  thev

take  in  the  Shoare  and  Hands,  chavned  together  or  heap.r.

and  thrust  up  like  Herrings  in  the  bottome  of  the  ship,

to  be  kept  for  the  Butcherie  or  Market.

When  they  come  home  to  the  Haven,  with  infinite  scoft-
ings,  the  wretches  are  led  foorth  in  triumph,  and  three  da ve s  *_, .
set  *  to  sale,  and  lastly  sold  to  him  which  will  crive  most.  „  tiJm*see
If  any  bee  Sea-sicke,  or  otherwise  wounded,  or  ill  at  ease,  np.  S90.

-79

A.D.

1 6 19.

[II.ix.i566.]

*Set  in  the
earth  to  the
neck,  and  then
stoned:  the
ganched  hang
on  the  hooke
divers  dayes
till  they  take
them  downe
and  stone
them.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

for  benionings  and  medicines  hee  heareth  blasphemies  and
revilings  ;  and  sooner  would  a  Turke  releeve  a  Dogge  that
is  sicke,  then  a  Christian  :  and  if  his  sicknesse  continue,
without  hope  of  recoverie,  they  throw  him  into  the  Sea,
or  by  Land  expose  him  to  the  Beasts.  In  the  Market  you
may  see  them  goe  up  and  downe  naked,  and  with  whips
compelled  to  runne  or  leape,  for  augmenting  the  price.
After  that  three  dayes  ended,  may  be  seene  a  miserable
spectacle,  Infants  and  Children  plucked  from  their  Parents
sight,  the  Husbands  violently  divorced  from  their  Wives,
Friends  separated,  with  infinite  howlings  and  lamenta-
tions :  some  sold  to  Moores  to  doe  their  drudgeries,  and
usually  agree  with  them  by  the  day  to  earne  so  much ;
some  sold  to  the  Numidians  and  Arabians  to  basest  servi-
tude, greased  with  fat,  made  to  draw  the  plow  with  Asses,
drawing  forth  with  back  and  belly  beating  a  miserable  life  ;
some  employed  to  the  Gallies  and  Ships,  there  kept  with
chaynes,  stripes,  a  little  moldy  Bisket  and  stinking  Water  :
When  they  come  on  shoare,  chayned  in  rewes,  laid  up  in
prisons,  sleeping  on  the  ground,  called  onely  Dogs.  If
winde  fayle,  or  crosse  them,  they  will  appease  it  with
branding  crosses  on  the  Christians  feet,  in  detestation  of
the  Christian  name ;  sometimes  they  will  burne  Arabike
Characters  on  the  cheekes,  or  cut  off  the  Nose  and  Eares ;
and  sometimes  death  is  inflicted  for  slight  suspicions.
Except  of  basest  labours,  revilings,  stripes,  injuries,  they
are  in  nothing  liberall  to  them ;  in  sleepe,  meate,  drinke,
clothing  more  then  penurious.  When  they  carry  dung
to  their  Gardens,  water  from  the  Springs,  and  goe  by  the
way,  every  third  word  they  must  crie,  Balec  sidi,  that  is,
Out  of  the  way,  or  by  your  leave,  Sir,  to  every  Barbarian,
or  there  he  shall  meet  with  new  Devils,  by  spittings, stones,
staves,  boxes,  thrustings,  throwings  downe,  scornes,  tor-
mented. If  a  Christian  commits  a  small  fault,  he  is
burned  alive,  or  stamped  in  the  earth  *  as  in  a  Mortar,  or
gaunched  (throwne  from  the  wall  on  a  hooke)  or  crucified,
or  flayed  alive  :  to  the  execution  of  which  tortures  they
take up any Christian they meet, to make them their

280

RELATIONS  OF  BARBARY  AND  ALGIERS a.d.

1619.

brethrens  tormentors; nor  doc  any  pertorme  baser  offii
but  Christians. Now  for  the  Sodomiticall  lusts  to  Boy<
and  their  damnable  services,  and  sending  them tor  Pre-
sents to  the  Turke  or  his  Bassas,  I  abhorre  to  mention.

If  any  Master  be  milde  and  gentle,  he  incurreth  sus-
picion of  favouring  the  Christians,  a  most  odious  crime-
in  Mahometisme ;  whereas  to  breake  covenant  with
Christians,  yea  leagues  (upon  advantage)  is  Mahumetan.
They  cast  their  Country-men  Embassadors  of  Tunes
into  bands  against  publike  faith,  the  French  Consuls  into
prison  many  moneths  condemned  them  to  the  Gallies,
beat  them  with  five  hundred  stripes,  and  burnt  them  alive  :
they  imprisoned  many  yeeres  in  a  lothsome  prison  the
Spanish  Redeemers,  and  reduced  to  slavery  one  hundred
and  fortie  redeemed  by  one  of  them.  They  suborne  false
witnesses  to  testifie  a  man  is  otherwise  then  hee  speaks,
making  a  Souldier  a  Captaine,  a  Mercenarie  a  Merchant,
to  heighten  the  price.  And  when  the  price  is  agreed  on,
they  will  upon  hope  of  more  gayne  flee  from  it.  Modestie
forbids  to  speake  of  the  Female  sexe  abused  to  naturall,
to  unnaturall  lusts,  their  children  soone  circumcised,  their
infancy  trayned  up  in  Turkish  blasphemie,  their  child-
hood in  lusts  passive,  and  youth  in  active,  their  riper  age
rotten  in  all  damnations.

Thus wee marvell not that in ten yeeres past, the 1609.  to
upper  and  lower  Germanie  have  yeelded  857.  Apostates, l6l9-  nnce
besides 300.  English, Hamburgers 138. Danes and 2jL^.j
Easterlings  160.  Poles,  Hungarians  and  Muscovites  250. tvorse,s/>aia//y
Low  Country  men  130.  besides  French  and  others. Take  to  English.
it  into  your  mercifull  consideration,  Kings  and  Princes,
Magistrates  and  People,  and  helpe,  Helpe  the  Lord  against
the  mip-htie.

If  a  circumcised  man  would  returne  to  Christ,  and  is
thereof  convicted,  hee  is  carried  about  oynted,  naked,  and
proclamation  made  before  him,  chayned  after  to  a  poste
and  burned,  often  beaten  or  dismembred  first.  Delin-
quents at  Sea,  are  shot,  dismembred,  pulled  apeeces  by
divers  ships  going  divers  wayes,  to  which  they  are  tyed,  set

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

1619.

upon  the  mouthes  of  the  Ordnance,  cut  in  peeces ;  to  be
sewed  up  in  Sacks  and  throwne  into  the  Sea,  is  a  favour.
To  lay  hand  on  a  janisarie,  imitate  his  habit  in  wearing
a  fringe  on  the  necke,  or  to  have  to  doe  with  a  Mahumetan
Woman,  is  death :  though  this  last  bee  negligently
executed,  all  Lust,  Sodomie  and  Adulterie  being  expiated
in  their  Bathes,  which  are  therefore  so  frequented.  Of
these,  of  other  kindes  of  terrible  executions  our  Author
hath  divers  examples,  which  I  for  tediousnesse  forbeare  :
God  make  us  thankefull  tor  our  selves,  charitable  to  our
Brethren.

An.  1607.  three  Townes  in  Calabria  were  spoyled  by
the  Algier  Pyrates,  one  thousand  and  foure  hundred  car-
ried away  captives:  An.  1608.  they  brought  two  and
fortie  ships  to  Algier,  and  eight  hundred  and  sixtie
captives,  besides  those  which  they  sold  elsewhere  :  the  next
yeere  six  and  thirtie  ships,  men  six  hundred  thirtie  and
two :  the  next,  twentie  three  ships,  three  hundred  and
eightie  foure  men  :  the  yeere  1 6 1 1 .  twentie  ships,  men
foure  hundred  and  sixtie  foure.  1612.  they  entred  Spaine,
and  carried  away  three  thousand  eight  hundred  and  foure,
in  one  moneth.  161 3.  they  tooke  sixteene  ships  and  two
hundred  and  thirtie  men  of  Italy  onely.  1614.  ships
thirtie  five,  captives  foure  hundred  and  sixtie  seven.  1616.
ships  thirtie  foure,  men  seven  hundred  sixtie  seven.  161 7.
six  and  twentie  ships,  men  one  thousand  seven  hundred
sixtie  three  ;  out  of  Porto  Santo  six  hundred  sixtie  and
three.  161 8.  nineteene  ships,  men  one  thousand  foure
hundred  sixtie  and  eight,  robbing  Lancerotta  and  Cays.
(And  since  mens  deficit,  vox  silet :  O  our  English  Ships
and  Mariners!  Curae  leves  loquuntur,  ingentes  stupent.)
As  for  our  Author,  a  Provost  Deane,  Archdeacon,  Coun-
sellor to  the  Archdukes,  and  the  Popes  Protonotarie,  hee
was  taken  in  a  ship  of  Marsiles,  notwithstanding  the  peace
and  league,  and  therefore  without  fight  the  ninth  of  May
1 6 1 9.  and  both  aboard  and  on  shoare  felt  his  part  of  the
premisses  for  six  moneths  space,  informing  himselfe  fur-
ther from  others  miserable  experience. Two  Boyes  were

282

RELATIONS  OF  HA  KHAR V  AND  ALGIERS a.».

1619.

forced  to  confesse  lyes,  a  Portugal!  condemned  to  three

hundred  blowes  to  make  him  confesse  ; himselfe  charged

to  be  Spaniard,  threatned  to  be  taught  to  speake  Spanish  ;

then  said  to  bee  a  Jew,  robbed  of  his  clothes  under  colour

of  search  whether  he  were  circumcised,  at  last  they  detayn-

ing  some,  sent  the  ship  to  Algier,  where  hoping  better

things, they will needs have Gramay a Spaniard and

imprison  him  ; after  that,  they  affirme  him  a  Knight  of

Malta. After  that, the  detayned  Portugall is  brought,

who  by  tortures  forced  made  a  false  confession,  that  some

of  the  goods  were  his,  and  that  Gramay  was  a  Bishop,  and

had  brought  with  him  a  Knight  of  Malta  and  a  Spaniard  ;

and  he  therefore  with  blowes  and  hard  usage  almost  killed,

his  meate  eaten  up  by  the  Bringers ; he  at  last  bribed  the

Keeper  to  let  him  come  into  the  light,  and  have  Paper  and

Inke  to  write  to  the  Consul,  so  that  at  a  deare  rate  he

obtayned  upon  caution  of  fortie  thousand  Duckets,  to  goe

to the Consuls house. Some of the prisoners lay in [II.ix.1567.]

Ditches  in  Water  up  to  the  middle,  and  otherwise  used  as

before  is  spoken.

He  hath  written  a  Diarie  of  occurrences  whiles  he  was

at  Algier,  out  of  which  a  word  or  two. In  June  Cid  Bud

a  Morabute,  at  noone  day  before  the  Church,  buggered  a

Mule,  all  applauding  it,  and  crying  out  that  it  might  be

luckie,  which  often  at  other  times  wee  have  sighed  to  see

in  Boyes. In  the  end  of  August. On  the  eight  a  ship

of  Spaine  laden  with Sugars, and  fortie  Captives, was

brought  in. John  Peers  a  Belgian  Boy  refusing  to  turne

Turke, was  beaten by Mami his Master till  he  dyed.

And  two  Spanish  ships  more  brought  in  from  the  sight  of

Lisbon. In  July  Letters  came  in  my  behalfe  from  Mar-

siles,  but  they  would  not  read  them  :  A  Holland  ship  was

taken and a French. In August two pledges of the

Catholike  King  taken  in  Cuko  (whose  King  was  lately

dead)  after  other  villanies,  were  condemned,  one  flayed

alive,  the  flesh  cut  at  the  small  of  the  leg  first,  and  blowne,

and  so  flayed  all  off,  and  the  bodie  lying  on  the  ground,

the  skin  stuffed  with  haire,  sewed  up,  and  layd  on  the

283

A.D.
1619.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

backe  of  a  Christian  which  they  met,  and  carried  in  pompe
thorow  the  Towne,  and  set  on  the  gate ;  the  other  was
tyed  to  the  Crosse  by  the  middle,  and  with  foure  nailes
thorow  his  hands  and  feet,  crucified  naked  (save  his  privi-
ties) and  lived  till  the  evening  the  next  day.  Seventy  and
two  Captives  were  brought  out  of  Gallicia.  Two  Holland
ships  complayned  of  breach  of  League,  the  men  of  one  of
their  ships,  and  three  French  cast  into  the  Sea.  But  I
am  loth  to  drowne  or  torture  the  Reader  any  longer  in
these  Tragicall  spectacles  ;  of  takings,  spoylings,  sellings,
killings  which  follow  in  our  Authour.  I  will  recreate
you  with  more  pleasing  spectacles  from  English  eyes,  and
send  you  home  in  an  English  bottome.

Chap. XIII.

Larger  Observations  of  Master  Richard  Jobson,
touching  the  River  Gambra,  with  the  People,
Merchandise,  and  Creatures  of  those  parts,
then  in  his  Journall  is  contayned,  gathered  out

of  his  larger  Notes.

§•  i-

Of  the  River  Gambra,  the  Raines,  and  Land-flouds,
the  cause  and  time  of  their  contagion  :  the
Beasts,  Fish,  and  Fowle  of  the  River  ;  of
the  Portugals, Mandingos,  and Fulbies there

living.

Gambra:  they
seemed  to  them-
selves to  trav  ell
South-east  to
8.  degr.  they
wanted  instru-
ments to  make
the  true
height.

Fie  River  Gamba,  Gambia,  or  Gambra,  is
in  13.  degrees  30.  minutes.  The  Inhabi-
tants (as  farre  as  I  could  learne  in  my
travell  up  the  same  three  hundred  and
twenty  leagues,  or  nine  hundred  and
sixtie  miles)  call  it  by  no  other  name  but
Gee,  a  generall  name  in  their  language  to
all  Rivers  and  waters.  It  hath  one  sole  entrance,  which
in the mouth is about foure leagues wide, and three

2S4

RICHARD JOBSON  a.i>.

1620-21.

fathome  water  in  the  channel!  without  any  barre. Fours

leagues  inward it  spreads  it  selfe  into  so  many Rivers,

Bayes,  and  Creekes,  that  for  thirtie  leagues  unto  Tancro-

vally  it  is  very  intricate  ; the  maine  Channcll  may  easily

be  discerned  except  in  that  limite. With  a  faire  streame

from  the  mouth  it  floweth  to  Baraconda,  or  some  little

above,  which  is  nigh  two  hundred  leagues  in  the  lowest  T'df  2°°-

season. The  Land-flouds  abridge  this  tide,  raysing  the if?'  .

,  .  r  . .  ,y>.  10/1 Houds  xo.foot

water  thirty  root  upright,  repelling  the  Seas  force,  and  h-  h

covering  the  flats  which  in  the  low  season  cause  impedi-
ment. These  Raines  alwaies  proceed  from  the  South-east,  The  rabies.
beginning  within  Land,  where  wee  abode  in  the  later  end
of  May,  and  at  the  Rivers  mouth  in  the  end  of  June  :
continuing  three  moneths  with  great  violence,  with  great
windes,  most  terrible  thunders  and  lightnings,  in  sudden
gusts  and  stormes ;  which  violence  being  overpassed,
the  people  continue  their  labour  of  tillage.  They  begin
and  goe  out  with  more  gentlenesse,  the  extremitie  being
from  the  middle  of  July  to  the  middle  of  August ;  in
September  equinoctiall  the  Sunne  clearing  :  and  thence  to
May  they  have  no  raine,  whereby  the  ground  is  hard  and
uncapable  of  tillage.  In  this  rainy  (unseasonable)  season
are  they  forced  therefore  to  exercise  their  husbandry  ;  as
also  to  prepare  their  habitations  secured  from  the
overflowings  of  the  River,  where  the  bankes  cannot
discipline  it.

And  hence  mav  the  unwholsomnesse  be  caused  ; what- Cause  of  the
soever venome commeth from Trees, Plants, Serpents  un™ms°m\
(whereof  are  many  kinds)  Toads  and  Scorpions,  contayned
and  continued  all  that  time  of  drought  in  the  dust  and  on
the  earth, and  washed  in  the  first  raines,  yeelding  venomous
vapours  to  the  Sunnes  strong  exhaling  facultie,  which  it
vomits  againe,  crude  and  undigested  in  the  next  raines  ;
and  so  the  former  raines  are  worse  then  the  later,  blistring
the  naked  bodies  whereon  they  fall,  breeding  wormes  in  [II.ix.1568.]
garments,  therewith  wetted  and  layd  by. It  were  there-
fore fit  to  be  provided  of  water  to  drinke  or  dresse  meat  Note  for
before  these  seasons  fall ;  and  to  prevent  the  hurt  by  keep-  hea'th-

285

A.D.
l620-2I.

River-horses,
and  Crocodile.

Feare  of  the
Crocodile.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ing  the  Wells  covered,  and  not  to  water  in  the  open  River,
as  the  Saint  Johns  men  did  in  the  first  Voyage  (thereby  the
last  to  the  most  of  them)  our  men  remayning  there  three
yeeres,  and  returning  sound,  freeing  the  Countrie  of  the
imputation.  The  River  encreased,  when  no  raine  is  seene
where  we  abode,  whereby  the  raines  falling  above,  and
further  passablenesse  of  the  River  appeares.  The  shoald
which  stayed  us  might  in  another  season  bee  prevented ;
yea,  with  fit  men  and  instruments  cut  thorow,  continuing
so  small  a  space  ;  promising  fairly  beyond,  so  farre  as  we
had  occasion  to  looke,  the  Sea-horses  and  store  of  Croco-
diles proclayming  deep  waters  upwards.  And  if  it  joyne
above  to  Senaga  (as  it  is  usually  described)  it  cannot  be
farre  above  that  place  where  we  were,  but  promiseth  a
farre  farther  streame,  whose  branches  are  so  great.  The
higher  we  went,  the  more  healthfull  we  found  our
bodies.

From  Baraconda  forward  wee  saw  no  Towne  or  Planta-
tion ;  onely  wee  found  two  or  three  bondles  of  Palmita
leaves  bound  up,  which  our  Negros  said  some  people  had
used  to  passe  the  River.  There  abound  in  this  River
Sea-horses  and  Crocodiles,  or  Alegators.  This  they  call
Bumbo,  whose  length  we  have  measured  in  the  impression
made  in  the  sand,  whence  we  have  driven  him,  three  and
thirty  foot,  so  feared  of  the  Natives  that  they  dare  not
wash  their  hands,  wade,  or  swimme  in  the  great  River,
telling  of  many  their  friends  by  this  enemie  devoured.
Neither  dare  they  passe  over  their  Cattell ;  but  when  they
passe  over  a  Beefe,  a  Canoe  goeth  before,  wherto  one
holds  him  close  with  a  rope  fastned  to  his  homes,  another
holds  up  his  tayle,  the  Priest  or  Marybuck  in  the  midst
praying  over  the  beast,  and  spitting  on  him,  by  whom
stands  another  with  Bowe  and  Arrowes  ready ;  and  thus
they  passe  them  one  by  one.  And  when  wee  were  forced
in  a  shallow  place  to  enter  the  water,  and  force  the  Boat
against  the  current,  the  Blackes  would  not  be  perswaded,
saying,  Bumbo  would  have  them  ;  till  at  last  on  better
consideration,  at  a  third  straight,  they  bethought  them-

286"

RICHARD JOBSON  a.».

[630-21.

selves  that  a  white  man  was  more  conspicuous  in  the  water,

and  therefore  adventured. Yet  did  I  never  finde  them  to

assault  us  in  all  this  way,  but  when  many  of  them  lay  on

the  sands,  they  would  avoide  us,  as  Snakes  use  the  noise

and  sight  of  men  with  us  ;  boldest  in  deepe  waters. Their

musky  sent  made  us  oft  to  stop  our  nostrils. It  made

both  the  water  and  fish  also  in  some  places  to  taste  and

rellish  of  them,  that  wee  could  not  eate  the  one,  nor  drinke

the  other. The  noise  of  them  in  that  place,  whereby  they

call  one  to  another  (resembling  the  sound  of  a  deepe  well)

might  be  heard  a  league.

The River-horse is in fashion of bodie a compleat  See  ^efore  in

Horse  ; hath  round  buttocks,  short  eares,  wagged  to  his ,a" ' ,' '■

,  ,  i-  • , , r  1  • 1  1  larger  descrtp-

mouth,  two  teeth  standing  right  before  on  his  lower  chap  t\orlm  where

great  &  dangerous,  neighing  directly  like  a  Horse,  foure  our  men  may

legs,  short,  the  foot  divided,  some  so  great  that  I  have  lcarnc  t0  talie

measured  a  print  twenty  inches  over. Hee  doth  hurt  in  , _'/  , 0Mr'

, -p,.  r 1 1 y  11 r 1  1  -i Elephant,

the Kice-grounds, but generally reeds on low mansh Crocodile  l3c.

grounds,  where  the  Sedge  is  greene  in  herds  by  night ;

bold in the  water, snorting, neighing, and tossing the

water  within  Pistoll  shot,  very  fearefull  of  fire,  as  might

appeare  by  a  Candles  end  (we  could  not  spare  them  any

shot)  set  on  a  piece  of  wood,  and  let  downe  the  streame

on them. They were most dangerous when they had

their  young  with  them,  which  sometimes  they  leave  on

the  shoare,  carried  in  the  water  by  the  female  on  her  backe.

I have seene the Sea-horse and Crocodile to swimme

together  without  disagreement.

There  is  store  of  Mullet  and  other  fish  :  amongst  others, Torpedo,
with  a  net  we  tooke  one  like  an  English  Breme,  but  of  ^OTft*r» 0T
great  thicknesse,  which  one  of  our  Saylers  putting  his  hand
to,  presently  cried  out  that  he  had  lost  the  use  of  his  hands
and  armes ;  another  bare-legged,  putting  thereto  his  foot,
lost  the  sense  of  his  leg  ;  their  sense  being  seene  to  returne,
the  Cooke  was  called  up,  and  bidden  to  dresse  it ; who
laying  both his  hands thereon, sunke presently on his  Embkme  of  a
hinder  parts,  making  grievous  moane  that  he  felt  not  his  fiattna-
hands. Sandy  a  Blacke  comming  with  his  Canoe  laughed,

287

A.D.
l620-2I.

Running  fish.

River  fowle.

Natives
fishing.

[II.ix.1569.]

Mandingos.

Portugals.
These  may  be
of  the  Tangos
maos  before
mentioned.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  told  us  that  they  much  feared  this  fish  in  the  water :
for  he  benummed  whatsoever  hee  touched,  which  he  used
to  doe,  stroking  himselfe  on  other  fish,  and  then  devouring
them  :  but  being  dead  he  was  good  meat.  At  that  place
(neere  Cassan)  the  people  would  come  boldly  into  the
water,  some  great  Marybuck  having  secured  them  from
the  Bumbo  by  his  blessing.  And  wee  might  see  many
on  the  other  side,  but  never  any  on  this.  One  little  fish
there  is  which  may  bee  called  the  Running  fish,  like  our
Roach,  with  a  red  tayle,  enforced  to  runne  a  great  way  on
the  top  of  the  water,  lightly  touching  it,  by  his  adversary
which  is  like  a  Trout,  whom  to  avoide  he  hath  run  some-
times into  our  Canoe.

There  is  store  of  fowle,  which  we  see  sit  on  the  bankes,
but  never  in  the  mayne  River  swimming  (it  seemes,  for
feare  of  the  Crocodile)  and  feeding  on  the  Marishes  and
Ponds ;  Geese  rather  bigger  then  our  tame  Goose,  with
a  spurre  on  each  pinion,  lara;e,  sharpe,  and  if  they  be  not
killed  dead,  ready  for  offence :  Ducke,  Mallard,  Hemes,
Curlews,  Storkes,  Plover,  and  the  like.  The  people  fish
their  Lakes,  and  Ponds  (which  are  many,  broad,  shallow)
going  a  whole  Towne  or  Plantation  together,  onely  the
men,  each  with  a  kinde  of  Basket  holding  the  open  mouth
downward,  close  one  by  another  overspreading  the  Pond,
clapping  downe  their  Baskets  before  them,  and  so  returne
most  of  them  laden.

To  speake  of  the  Inhabitants,  I  will  beginne  at  the
mouth  of  the  River,  where  dwell  the  Blacks,  called  Man-
dingos, which  speake  the  same  language,  fearfull  of  any
shipping,  because  many  have  beene  surprised  and  carried
away,  except  they  know  them  :  they  brought  to  us  abund-
ance of  Bonanos  (which  in  the  West  Indies  they  call
Plantanos)  with  Beeves,  Goats,  Hens,  Graine,  and  some
Hides.  Amongst  these  dwell,  or  lurke  rather,  a  certaine
way  up  the  River,  certaine  Portugals,  some  of  that  colour,
other  Molatos,  but  the  most,  blacke,  scattered  two  or  three
in  a  place,  begetting  children  of  the  Blacke  women  ;  but
have  neither  Church,  nor  Frier,  nor  any  other  Religious

288

aiCHARD JOBSON  <u>.

1620-21.

Order.  It  appeareth  that  they  are  Fugitives  or  Exiles  from
Portugall,  or  the  lies  of  that  government,  which  employ
themselves  in  buying  Commodities,  especially  Slaves.  A
few  of  them  have  used  one  time  of  the  yeere  to  goe  up  the
River  in  a  small  Barke  as  farre  as  Setico  to  trade,  whence
they  have  returned  much  Gold,  and  have  not  attempted
further,  which  is  not  halfe  the  way  we  have  gone  up.  They
say  that  those  *  which  committed  the  treachery  against  our  *Hector
men  are  banished,  as  detested  for  that  fact ; how  ever,  it  '  u,nef"' ,

r  ,  -  cr»t_ •  <•  «  1 which  under

is  not  safe  to  trust  them  too  rarre. I  heir  condition  under  coiOUr  of  trade
the  blacke  Kings  is  base,  who  after  their  death  seize  on  all  waited  their
without  respect  to  wife,  childe,  or  servant,  except  they  time  to  kill  the
have  before  provided ; as  wee  have  seene  of  their  poore  En&uh  and

r  . «  r  -r,  ,,  ,  '  take  their  ship,

postentie,  retayning  the  language  or  .Portugal!,  and  name  fomm  an/

of  Christians  loth  to  bee  called  Negros,  though  never  so  others  being  in

blacke. The better sort for feare of revenge have  their  trade  in

removed  their  dwellings  thence  ; the  Blackes  banishing  thc  £°untreh

,v  .1 i-r«  1  •„  1  1  1  others  onshore,

them  the lowne  where  it  was  done,  and  so  much  com-  and  dlveri

passionating  others  of  our  people  which  were  above  in  s\ck:  after

the  River  in  trade,  that  at  their  returne  they  fed  them,  much  love  and

and  convayed  them  to  the  next  with  their  commendations,  Prf^nded

giving  them  safe  conduct  and  guides  till  they  came  to

Cape  Verd,  where  the  French  have  continuall  trade,  which

might  ship  them  home  : their  commendation  from  one

King  to  another,  being the  losse  of  their ship  by the

treachery  of  Portugals,  and  their  entertaynment  good  in

all  places. What  Ferambra  did,  when  the  King  of  Nany  King  of  N any,

was  persuaded  by  the  Portugals  to  destroy  them  is  said  see  su^'

before. Others did animate our men, and promised

assistance  to  their  revenge,  which  their  paucity  refusing,

still these Natives beare a sullen disaffection to the

Portugall  notwithstanding.  T/ F  ,,.

There  is  another  People  dwelling  amongst  the  Man- j>/,ese  y^g

dingos,  called  Fulbies,  a  tawny  People  much  like  to  those  tawny,  and  the

vagrants  amongst  us,  called  Egyptians ; the  women  well  othcrs  blacke,

featured,  with  a  long  blacke  haire,  more  loose  then  that  of  sh"°et*  that
'  b  '  this  colour

comes  from  the  seed  which  takes  hold  on  the  Portugals  borne  of  Negro  women,  and  not  of

the  Sunne-burnd  Fulby,  in  the  same  place.

IX  289  T

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620-21.

the  Blacke  women,  neatly  apparelled  in  the  habite  of  the
Natives.  The  men  are  not  so  handsome,  by  reason  they
live  of  and  with  their  Cattell,  some  Goats,  but  herds  of
Beeves  in  abundance,  the  keeping  of  which  is  their  pro-
fession. In  some  places  they  have  setled  Townes,  mostly
wandring,  uniting  themselves  in  Kindreds,  and  driving
their  herds  together :  where  they  finde  good  pastures  they
aoree  with  the  King,  and  build  houses  as  the  season  serves,
during  the  raines  betaking  themselves  to  the  Mountaines
and  higher  grounds,  and  then  succeeding  the  River,  even
to  his  severer  bankes.  Their  toyle  is  continuall,  keeping
their  Cattell  in  the  day  from  straying,  and  from  the  Croco-
diles hants ;  in  the  night  bringing  them  neere  their
houses,  and  parting  them  in  severall  herds,  make  fires
about  them  ;  and  likewise  in  the  midst,  about  which  they
lie  themselves,  ready  against  the  roaring  assaylants. Thus

Beastly  life,  is  the  poore  Fulby  almost  growne  beastial,  and  when  we
have  gone  to  them  to  buy  a  Beefe,  he  hath  come  forth
from  his  beasts  with  his  face  and  hands  covered  with  flies,
as  thicke  as  here  they  use  to  sit  on  Horses  in  Summer,
and  the  same  kinde  of  flies ;  but  those  Fulbies  seeme
more  senselesse ;  not  removing  them,  as  we  were  fayne
with  a  bough  in  conference  to  doe,  and  as  our  beasts  use
whisking  of  their  tayles  and  other  motions.

Base  state.  They  live  in  great  subjection  to  the  Mandingos,  who
will  share  with  them  if  they  know  of  their  killing  of  a
Beefe,  and  in  their  Commodities :  that  when  they  traded
with  us,  they  would  draw  us  covertly  to  see  it,  lest  the
Negro  participate  in  his  returne.  Of  these  the  Countrey  is
full,  every  where  dispersed  ;  and  higher  up  they  are  in  one
part  principall,  holding  domination,  excluding  the  Blackes,
but  for  the  most  part  in  warre.  Their  language  is
different  from  the  Blackes.  Their  women  would  daily
bring  us  Milke,  Curds,  two  sorts  of  Butter  (one  new,  soft
and  white,  the  other  hard  and  of  an  excellent  colour,  as
good  as  any  we  have  here,  but  for  a  little  freshnesse)
brought  in  Goards  like  Dishes,  neate  and  cleanly  within
and  without,  therein  much  unlike  the  Irish  Calios,  how

290

RICHARD JOBSON  a.d.

1620-21.

ever  otherwise  resembling  their  course  of  life.  Their
returne  was  small  Beads  and  Knives  of  sixteene  pence  the
dozen,  with  other  trifles.  But  after  they  had  once  tasted
Ramdam  (so  they  call  our  Salt)  nothing  else  could  so  well
please  them,  were  this  never  so  little.  If  wee  denied
trade  one  day,  wee  should  not  have  their  companie  in  a
weeke ;  so  that  we  were  willing  to  please  them,  the  Blacke
not  applying  himselfe  to  Cattell.

The Mandingos themselves, which are the Naturall  T^  Mcndin-
Inhabitants,  are  perfectly  blacke,  living  a  most  idle  life,  g0i  idle  *&'
except  two  moneths  of  the  yeare,  in  their  Seed-time  and
harvest ; wandering  up  and  downe  at  other  times  from
one  to  another,  having  little  knowledge,  to  hunt,  fish,  or
fowle,  how  much  soever  both  Woods  and  Waters  abound
in  Game,  the  Beasts  and  Fowles  (as  Guinnie  Hens  and
Partridges)  resorting  to  their  very  doores. In  the  heate
of  the  day  they  passe  the  time  in  companies  chatting  under
the shady  Trees, having  one Game  with some thirtie
stones  and  holes  cut  in  a  piece  of  Wood,  performed  by  a
kind  of  counting. They  ordinarily  make  but  one  meale  Their  dice.
a  day,  specially  the  vulgar  and  younger  sort ; or  rather
none,  their  houre  of  meale  being  after  the  day  light  is  in ;
and  then  with  fires  of  Reeds,  without  the  doore,  they  sit
round  and  fall  to  their  Viands,  which  for  the  most  part  [II.ix.1570.]
are, Rice or some other Graine boyled, which being
brought  unto  them  in  Goards  by  the  women  hot,  they
put  in  their  hands,  roll  it  up  in  Bals,  and  cast  into  their
mouthes. Flesh,  or  fish  their  want  of  skill  to  get,  hath
made  Rarities ; their  Cockes,  and  Hennes  are  plentifull,
but  spared  to  barter  with  us  for  small  pieces  of  Iron,
Beads, and such Commodities. They hold it  unwhol-  Note  for  our
some  to eate  in the  heate  of  the  day, the  heate  and  mn$  &*•
moysture then exhaled to the  exteriour  parts, and the
inward  cooler  and  more  disabled  for  concoction  :  whereby
we  can  in  that  heate  easily  drinke,  yea  and  desire  it,  that
quantitie  of  Aquavitae,  or  hote  Drinkes,  which  here  would
kill  us ; and  there  wee  drinke  with more  Temperance
and satisfaction in lesse quantitie both Morning and

291

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620-21.

Evening.  And  in  my  opinion  it  were  fitter  for  us  to
eate  early,  and  againe,  after  the  heate  is  past,  in  those
parts.

Their  usuall  drinke  is  water,  yet  have  both  Wine  of
Trees,  as  also  their  Dullo,  of  Graine,  like  our  Ah. They

Their  Houses,  place  their  Habitations  round  together,  and  for  the  most
part  have  a  Wall  of  Reed  made  up  together  some  sixe
foot  high ;  (fortifying  them  against  ravenous  beasts,
which  yet  cause  often  alarmes  and  mighty  cryes)  compass-
ing their  Towne,  with  doores  of  the  same  shut  in  the
night.  Some  of  the  houses  within  are  made  of  the  same
Reeds,  but  the  better  sort  of  Lome,  reddish  and  remayning
very  hard,  likely  to  yeeld  the  best  Brick  in  the  World,
the  whole  Countrey  but  the  Mountaynes,  yeelding  the

Strange  Ant-  same  Earth.  The  Ant-hils  are  remarkable,  cast  up  in
those  parts  by  Pismires,  some  of  them  twentie  foot  in
height,  of  compasse  to  contayne  a  dozen  men,  with  the
heate  of  the  Sunne  baked  into  that  hardnesse,  that  we
used  to  hide  our  selves  in  the  ragged  toppes  of  them,
when  we  tooke  up  stands  to  shoot  at  Deere  or  wild
beasts.  The  forme  of  their  Houses  is  round,  and  covered
with  Reeds  tyed  fast  to  Rafts  that  they  may  endure  the  out-
ragious  gusts  and  raines.  Such  are  their  meaner  Townes
and  Villages  ; others  they  have  of  force  sutable  to  their

Fortifications.  Warres,  fortified  and  entrenched,  of  which  the  In-land
hath  store,  and  Cassan  (against  which  the  betrayed  ship
did  ride)  is  such.  It  is  the  seat  of  the  King,  seated  on  the
River,  enclosed  round  with  Hurdles  like  those  which  our
Sheepherds  use,  but  above  tenne  foote  high,  fastened  to
strong  Poles  which  are  higher  then  the  Hurdles.  On  the
in-side  in  divers  places  they  have  buildings  made  like
Turrets  whence  to  shoote  Arrowes  and  cast  Darts  against
the  Assailants  :  on  the  out-side  is  a  Ditch  or  Trench  of
great  breadth,  beyond  which  againe  the  Towne  is  circled
with  posts  and  pieces  of  Trees  set  close  and  fast  into  the
ground  some  five  foot  high,  so  thicke  that  except  in  stiles
and  places  made  purposely,  a  single  man  cannot  get
thorow  ; and  in  like  manner  a  small  distance  off  is  the

292

RICHARD JOBSON  ad.

1620-21.

like  defence,  which  they  say  is  to  keepe  oft  the  force  of
Horse.

Their  Armes  are  an  Azegay  or  Javelin,  with  which  in  Their  Arma.
their  hands  they  walke,  beeing  a  Reed  of  S1XC  foot,  with  Axegejs.
an  Iron-pike  artificially  made  and  dangerous ;  they  have
others  to  cast  like  Darts  with  barbed  heads.  About  the
necke  a  Bandelier  of  redde  or  yellow  cloth  with  a  Sword
hanging  of  some  two  foot  long  and  an  open  handle  ;  the
better  sort  carry  a  Bow  in  their  hand,  and  at  their  backe  BJW  and
a  Case  with  many  holes  holding  some  foure  and  twentie
Arrowes  of  Reed,  as  bigge  as  a  Swans  Quill,  two  foot
long,  headed  with  Iron  poysoned,  without  nocke  or
feather :  the  Bow  also  made  of  a  Reed,  with  a  flat  string
or  sticke  smoothed  and  fastened,  of  the  same  Wood,  and
to  a  Buffe  Jerkin  or  any  sleight  Garment  of  defence  is
little  offensive,  the  danger  being  in  the  Poyson.  We
have  seene  them  likewise  on  Horse-backe,  their  Horses
small,  bridled  and  sadled  after  the  Spanish  fashion,  each
man  having  an  Assegie,  and  a  broad  Buckler  hanging  on
the  right  side  of  his  Horse.  The  Kings  House  is  in  the
middle  of  the  Towne  enclosed  by  it  selfe,  with  his  W7ives
severall  Houses  about,  to  which  you  cannot  come,  but  by
a  Court  of  Guard,  passing  thorow  an  open  House  where
stands  his  Chaire  emptie,  in  which  none  but  himselfe  may
sit ;  by  which  hangs  his  Drummes,  which  every  night
they  use  to  drumme  on,  hooping,  singing,  and  making  a
wild  confused  noyse  till  day  breake,  with  fires  in  the
House  and  Yard :  which  noyse  they  use  in  meaner
Townes  also  to  scarre  away  wild  beasts.

I  saw  and  did  eate  and  drinke  with  sixe  of  their  Kings  Their  Kings.
or  Mansas,  which  have  reference  to  greater  Kings  living
further ;  all  the  South-side  of  the  River  as  wee  went,
beeing  subject  to  the  King  of  Cantore,  of  the  North-side
halfe  subject  to  the  King  of  Bursale,  the  rest  to  the  King
of  Woolley.  These  wee  saw  not,  and  they  say,  that  they
shew  not  themselves  abroad  but  in  pompe,  hunting  with  Their  State.
great  numbers  of  Horse,  as  our  men  saw  the  King  of
Bursall  (when  they  passed  to  Cape  Verde)  and  there  are

293

A.D.
l620-2I.

Devotion  in
salutation.

[II.ix.1571.]

Cotton  trees
or  bushes. In
other  parts  are
greater  Cotton
trees.
Their  apparel.

Gregories.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

warres  betwixt  one  side  of  the  River  and  the  other,  which
were  it  not,  Bursale  would  soone  with  his  Horse  subdue
a  great  part  of  the  Countrey,  or  if  he  had  meanes  of
transportation.  Before  these  which  we  saw,  the  people
present  themselves  kneeling,  and  comming  neerer  layes
his  hand  first  on  the  ground,  and  then  on  his  owne  head
covered,  some  laying  dust  thereon ;  which  Ceremonie  he
useth  twice  or  thrice  before  he  comes  at  him,  then  with
much  submission  laying  his  hand  on  the  Kings  thigh,  and
so  retyreth  backe.  And  if  a  Marybuck  be  present  in  any
company  which  thus  come  to  him,  after  their  salutation
they  all  kneele  downe,,  and  he  fals  to  praying  for  him  and
blessing  him ;  to  which  he  crossing  his  amies  (the  right
hand  over  the  left  shoulder,  and  the  left  to  the  right)
often  answers,  Amena,  Amena,  which  is  as  Amen,  with
us.  When  the  common  people  meet,  which  have  not
seene  each  other  in  long  time,  if  there  be  a  Marybucke
amongst  them,  before  salutation  they  put  themselves  in
a  Ring  and  kneele  to  Prayer.  The  King  answers  the
people  with  nodding  his  head.  His  habit  is  little  differ-
ing from  theirs,  the  Countrey  yeelding  only  Cotton  to
both,  whereof  they  plant  great  fields,  where  it  growes  like
Rose  Bushes,  yeelding  a  Cod  which  being  ripe  breakes
and  is  white.

Their  apparell  is  a  shirt  and  a  paire  of  breeches  :  the
shirt  downe  to  the  knees,  wide  like  a  Surplice,  with  great
sleeves,  which  he  rolleth  up  and  fastens  to  his  shoulder
when  hee  useth  his  armes :  the  breeches  made  with  so
much  stuffe  gathered  just  on  his  buttockes,  that  hee
seemeth  to  carry  a  Cushion,  and  they  make  him  straddle.
His  legs  are  bare ;  some  few  wearing  a  piece  of  Leather
under  the  foot,  buttoned  about  the  great  Toe,  and  againe
at  the  in-step.  They  are  for  the  most  part  bare-headed,
save  that  they  are  bedecked  with  Gregories,  which  are
things  of  great  esteeme,  usually  made  of  Leather  of
severall  fashions  wondrous  neatly,  seeming  hollow,  with
Writings  in  them  received  from  their  Marybuckes,  reputed
so  holy  that  no  evill  can  betyde  them  whiles  they  weare

294

RICHARD  JOBSON  aj>.

them.  On  their  heads  they  weare  them  in  manner  of  a
Crosse  from  the  fore-head  to  the  necke,  and  from  eare  to
eare :  about  their  neckes,  shoulders,  bodies,  armes  above
and  below  the  elbow,  round  their  middles,  seeming  laden
with  blessings  for  each  member,  both  men  and  women,
and  most  of  all  the  King.  Yea,  if  they  have  any  Maladie
or  Sore,  they  apply  thereto  these  Gregories  ;  neyther  could
I  perceive  amongst  them  any  other  Physicke.  Their
Horses  also  are  thus  blessed,  wearing  them  about  their
neckes,  and  their  Bowes.

The  King  for  greater  state  hath  many  times  two  of  his  Their  women.
Wives  sit  by  him,  laying  their  hands  on  his  naked  skinne
above  the  waste,  stroking,  and  gently  pulling  the  same.
He  hath  an  orderly  allowance  of  seven  Wives,  acknow-
ledged with  set  Ceremonie,  besides  Concubines  ;  sometimes  Prir.pcian
yet of  so many Wives not having one fit for carnall  $tallions-
knowledge. The cause whereof is their membrous
Montrosity,  the  woman  after  she  perceiveth  conception  not
admitting  further  knowledge,  lest  she  or  it  be  destroyed.
Custome  also  forbids  it  after  delivery  till  the  Child  be
weyned,  each  Mother  being  here  in  complete,  and  her
Childes  Nurse. Adultery  is  severely  punished,  the  man
and  woman  being  both  sold  (which  is  the  punishment  for
great  offences,  none  being  put  to  death)  the  Portugals  buy-
ing and  transporting  them  to  the  West  Indies. Other  men  Husbands  and
may  have  if  they  are  able  to  buy,  their  pluralitie  also,  first  Wlv"  bought.
compounding  with the  King  or  Governour  with some
gratification,  and  then  with  the  womans  friends : which
money,  they  say,  remaynes  in  banke  if  he  dyes,  for  her
better  mayntenance,  or  if  shee  please  to  buy  a  Husband.
For  as  the  Mayde  is  bought,  the  Widow  buyeth.

The  Wives  live  in  great  servitude ;  they  beate  their
Graine  in  Morters  with  staves  like  Cowle-staves ;  and
dresse  it  and  all  manner  of  victuall,  and  bring  and  set  it  on
the  Mat  before  them,  never  admitted  to  sit  and  eate  with
them ;  neyther  could  I  ever  intreat  that  favour  of  any  for  Admirable
the  best  accounted  Wife  (which  usually  they  have  one  most  5,l!jJcction-
conversant  with  the  Husband,  whom  we  called  the  Hand-

295

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620-21.

Wife)  but  even  she  also  how  ever  priviledged  from  some
other  labours,  may  not  eate  in  sight,  but  in  another  house.
One  shall  not  see  kissing  or  any  dalliance  used  betwixt  the
Husband  and  Wife,  nor  ever  heare  of  brawling  or  falling
out  (which  in  this  plurality  and  equality  is  strange)  amongst
themselves.  Each  woman  hath  her  private  Lodging  and
severall  House  for  the  night.  When  they  appeare  in  the
morning,  they  salute  him  kneeling,  laying  their  hands  on
his  thighe.  Her  apparell  is  loose,  parti-coloured,  blue  and
white  Cotton  Cloth,  from  the  waste  upwards  bare,  the
rather  to  shew  their  printed  rased  bodies,  whereof  they  are
not  a  little  proud,  turning  themselves  to  shew  it,  and
pleased  with  the  handling,  seeming  to  us  as  the  printed
lids  of  our  baked  meates.  Sometimes  they  cast  on  their
shoulders  such  another  Cloth  as  they  weare  below.  Most
of  them  are  nice  in  shewing  Natures  Secrets.
Manage-  The  Marriage  Solemnitie  is  this ;  the  man  gets  his
rites.  friends  with  whom,  and  the  younger  sort  he  comes  to  the
Towne  where  the  Mayde  is  dwelling,  in  the  beginning
of  a  Moone-shine  night.  These  by  violence,  as  it  were,
carrie  her  away  shriking  with  a  great  noyse,  seconded  by
the  young  Maydes  of  the  same  place  ;  whereupon  the
young  men  of  the  Towne  assemble  in  rescue,  the  other
notwithstanding,  with  great  shouts  and  jubilees,  carrying
her  away  to  the  Bridegroomes  abode  :  where  she  remayneth
for  a  certayne  time  unseene  ;  after  which  for  some  Moones
she  shewes  not  her  open  face,  but  with  a  cloth  covers  all
but  one  Eye.

Their  Kings  and  Grandes  stand  much  on  their
Generositie  and  Antiquitie,  whereof  wee  had  experience
in  a  quarrell  betwixt  Bo  John  and  the  Kings  Sonne,  in
Course  of  whose  Land  wee  then  resided.  Succession  is  not  to  the
succession.  Sonne  of  the  deceased,  but  to  his  Brethren  in  course,
and  then  to  the  Son  of  the  eldest,  the  other  Brethren
holding  some  place,  governed  meane-while.  Bo  John  is
the  title  of  the  yongest,  Ferambra  of  the  third,  Ferran  of
the  second,  and  the  eldest  is  stiled  Mansa,  or  King,  which
here  was  the  King  of  Cantore,  whom  we  saw  not. Their

296

RICHARD  JOBSON  4.0.

-21.

greatest  riches  is  the  number  of  slaves,  and  from  the  King
to  the  slave  they  would  all  begge  of  us ;  but  small  matt
might  serve,  except  Aquavitac,  for  which  they  would  sell
all,  the  Kings  also  drinking  drunke  :  and  the  Kings  lite
with  them  is  to  eate,  drinke,  sleepe,  and  company  with
their  women,  thus  consuming  their  time  till  time  consumes
them.  Our  salutation  to  the  King,  he  sitting  on  his  Mat,
was  without  mooving  the  Hat,  to  lay  the  hand  on  the  brest
bending  the  bodie  (as  hee  also  did)  and  then  both  take
hold  on  the  upper  part,  then  on  the  lower  part  of  each
others  hands,  and  the  third  time  joyne  full  hand  and  shake  [II.iz.1572.]
hands :  then  sitting  downe  by  him,  after  a  little  parley
touching  the  cause  of  our  comming  (the  King  for  state
still  speaking  by  another)  out  goeth  our  Bottle  of  Aqua-
vitas  and  Sacke,  and  calling  for  a  small  gourd  which  is  their
richest  Plate,  I  beginne  and  drinke  off  a  Cup,  then
presenting  both  Cup  and  Bottle  to  the  King,  after  whom
it  passeth  to  the  rest,  no  unkindnesse  taken  if  wee  refuse
to  drinke  any  more.  Before  hee  drinkes,  hee  wets  there-
with one  of  his  Gregories. They  leave  not  till  all  be  out.

§■  ii.

Of  their  Marybucks,  and  Religion  :  Merchandize  ;
Fidlers,  Instruments,  Trades,  Husbandry,  with
a  further  Historie  of  the  Creatures  in  those
parts.

Heir  Marybucks  or  Bassareas,  are  their  Priests  or  Marybucka,
Religious  persons,  separated  from  others  in  their  °[/™sts  °fa

1 1  -r  s  j  r \->  c  *-ni  11 r Mahumetan

habitations and course or lire. 1  hey tell or  Sect  ^/^r/-ff£r
Adam, Eve, Noah, with other things mentioned in  from  the
Scripture ; like the Leviticall Tribes, they  have their  common.
Townes  and  Lands  proper  to  themselves,  wherein  dwell
none of the Secular but their Slaves, whose Issue
is  their  Inheritance ; they  marry  also  in  their  owne  Tribe,
breeding all their Children to their owne profession ;
have  as  many  Wives  and  Women  as  the  rest  according  to
their  degree. In  every  Marybucke  Towne  they  have  a

297

A.U.
I620-2I.

Fodce  Br  am.
see  sup.  925.

//  seemes  they
speake  some
Arabike
words :  in
which  also
their  Law  is
written.

Slovenly
clenlinessc.

*To  Mecca
ward.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

principall ;  they  will  put  their  hands  to  worke,  and  may
be  hired  to  doe  service  as  well  as  others ;  wee  agreed  with
them  by  the  Moone.  Their  habit  is  as  that  of  the  vulgar.
I  visited  Fodee  Bram,  the  principall  in  his  sicknesse,  who
sate  on  his  Mat  or  Bed  supported  by  three  of  his  Wives,
to  each  of  which  I  gave  a  Pewter  Ring,  which  hee  tooke
kindly, and  caused  a  Dinner  to  be  provided,  and  sent  meea
Hide  and  an  Elephants  Tooth  in  recompense  of  a  Present
which  I  had  given  him,  which  here  cost  eighteene  pence.
They  worship  one  God  and  call  him  Alle,  acknowledge
Mahomet,  are  circumcised ;  observe  Friday  Sabbath,  but
have  no  Meskits  or  Mahumetan  Churches  or  other
Religious  place,  where  they  celebrate  the  same,  following
therein  their  occasions  without  intermission.  They  have
open  round  Houses  not  decently  swept,  in  which  they
teach  their  Children  to  write  and  reade ;  Paper  is  of  great
esteeme  with  them ;  their  Pen  is  a  kind  of  Pensill ;  their
Law  is  written  in  a  Language  differing  from  their  vulgar.
None  of  the  Temporall  people  have  any  use  of  Bookes  or
Letters.  We  thought  they  made  use  of  some  shadie  tree
in  the  fields  for  their  Assemblies  :  and  one  day  saw  a
Marybucke  comming  with  his  Slave  to  the  River-side  close
by  our  Wall,  hee  first  with  a  Gourd  full  of  water  washed
his  members,  without  any  nicety  of  our  seeing  him ;  then
washing  the  emptyed  Gourd,  his  slave  brought  him  other
water  wherewith  he  washed  his  hands,  and  after  that  a
third  for  his  face ;  after  all  which  making  a  low  reverence
with  his  body,  and  laying  his  hand  on  his  brest,  his  face
directed  toward  the  East,*  kneeled  downe  and  in  decent
forme  seemed  to  utter  certayne  Prayers ;  which  ended  he
kissed  the  ground,  rose  up,  turned  his  face  to  the  West,
and  performed  like  Ceremonies,  and  then  returned  to  his
Lodging.

When  Fodee  Bram  was  dead,  hee  was  laid  in  a  house
where  a  Grave  was  digged,  and  a  great  Pot  of  water  set
in  the  Roome,  and  after  the  Irish  manner  much  crying
(rather  then  mourning)  being  made,  he  was  laid  into  the
ground ; the  women  running  about  in  a  Lunatike  fashion,

298

RICHARD .JOJSSON  *J>.

1620-21.

with  their  armes  spread  made  a  terrible  Spectacle  of
sorrow.  The  Marybuckes  assembled  themselves  in  a
convenient  place  to  receive  the  multitude,  neere  the  Grave,
where  the  people  sitting  downe  in  a  Ring,  a  Marybucke
came  forth  in  the  midst,  who  betwixt  saying  and  singing,
seemed  to  reherse  certayne  Verses  in  the  prayse  ot  the
deceased,  the  people  interjecting  their  applauses,  clapping
hands  and  running  in  to  gratifie  their  Vates,  (Poet  or
Prophet)  with  a  Present.  Thus  one  after  another,  every  Marybuke
Marybucke  had  his  speech,  but  the  most  popular  Orator  Ortdm  or
carryed  only  the  Presents.  The  principall  might  also  take
of  the  Grave,  Earth,  and  Water  in  the  Pot  to  make  a
Relike-ball  thereof.  Some  dayes  being  thus  spent,  a  great
Solemnitie  was  made  for  the  installing  of  his  Sonne  in  the
Succession.

They  have  great  Bookes,  Manuscripts,  with  which  we  Their  Bookes
have  seene  some  of  them  laden.  As  the  vulgar  is  insatiate  abstin-
with  hote  Drinkes,  these  are  abstenious,  strictly  devoted  to
poore  pure  water,  as  also  their  Wives  and  Children ;  nor
would  endure  the  least  Infant  or  playing  Boy  to  tast  of
our  liquor,  or  Raisins,  Sugar,  Fruits,  or  any  sweet  thing.
Nor  can  the  greatest  Reasons  in  their  sicknesse  perswade
a  taste ;  insomuch  that  my  Marybucke  almost  drowned
once  in  a  Whirle-poole,  after  twice  sinking  recovered,
scarsly  had  any  sense  and  yet  shut  his  mouth  to  our  Rosa-
solis,  whereby  we  sought  to  revive  him,  benefited  no  doubt
by  the  sent ;  and  being  comne  to  himselfe,  he  asked  whether
any  had  entred,  saying,  hee  had  rather  have  dyed  then  any
should  have  come  within  him.  Hereby  they  are  easily
discerned  from  the  vulgar,  and  this  sobriety  makes  them
usefull  in  their  service  and  credible  in  their  reports.

They  dispose  themselves  generally  to  travell,  together  Marybucks
with  their  Families,  Bookes,  and  Boyes ; the  Countrey  traz'ellers-
being  open  to  them ;  renewing  (it  seemes)  their  provision
when  they  come  to some  principall  place: of  us  it  is  [n.ix.1573.]
most  certayne  they  will  begge,  and  a  Quire  of  Paper  is  a  pUS£ ': •*'
great  gift  to  a  whole  Company,  which  they  use  to  write  esnemed.S°  See
their  Gregories ;  and  when  wee  send  any  of  the  people  any  Sup.  1466.

299

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620-21.

whither,  he  will  looke  to  have  a  sheet  or  two  of  Paper
above  his  covenant,  to  buy  him  sustenance  in  the  way.
These  Mary-buckes  by  their  travels  are  experienced  in
divers  Countries :  and  how  ever  the  Countries  agree
or  have  Warres,  the  Mary-bucke  is  alway  a  priviledged
person,  with  both  sides ;  Yet  doe  they  use  Armes  as
well  as  others,  but  rather  I  thinke  for  defence  against
Mankinde-beasts,  then  beastly  unkinde  Men.  Two  Mary-
buckes  gave  us  much  intelligence  of  Gold  ;  one  of  which,
when  I  came  to  take  leave  of  him,  tooke  my  right  hand
betwixt  his,  uttering  over  the  same  certayne  unknowne
words,  and  would  ever  and  anon  sparingly  spettle  upon  it ;
and  the  like  he  did  over  my  right  shoulder.
Trade  of  The  Inhabitants  of  Setico  are  all  Mary-buckes,  and  have

Slaves  Is  Salt.  COntinuall  Trade  to  the  King  of  Bursall,  and  carry  Slaves
to  buy  Salt  which  is  there  by  the  Sea  side,  a  durtie  kind  :
like  Sea-coale  ashes.  This  they  make  little  use  of  among
themselves,  but  carrie  it  up  farre  into  the  Countrey ;  their
returne  is  Gold  and  Cola  Nuts.  The  Gold  is  sayd  to  bee
buryed  with  them,  or  by  themselves  hidden  secretly  in  the
Bloud-stone  ground  :  for  their  use  in  the  next  world.  They  buy  also
Trade.  Bloud-stones  long  and  square  of  the  Portugals,  which  their

Women  weare  about  their  middles,  to  preserve  them  from
bloudie  issues,  the  Mens  membrositie  seeming  to  give
thereto  much  occasion.  They  follow  this  Trade  with  great
numbers  of  Asses.  Bucker-sano  is  sayd  to  keepe  three
Caravans  of  hundred  Asses.  They  goe  in  Companies  together,  driving
Asses.  their  slow-paced  Asses  before  them,  beginning  their  dayes

journey  with  the  Sunne :  and  travell  three  houres,  the
heat  then  enforcing  their  rest ;  two  houres  before  Sun-set
setting  forth  againe,  and  holding  on  till  Night,  when  the
wilde  Beasts  forbid  further  travel!.  At  some  good  Townes
they  will  stay  and  make  shew  of  their  Wares,  in  a  kinde  of
Market ; they  carry  their  mattes  for  Beds  with  them.

Buckor-sanos  Sword  and  Wives  Bracelets  :  seeming  to
come  from  these  parts,  I  asked  whence  hee  had  them  ?
He  answered,  of  the  Arabecks,  which  he  described  to  bee
tawnie  Moores,  comming  in  Companies  with  Camels,  by

300

trade.

RICHARD JOBSON  <u>.

1620-21.

which  I  perceived  they  were  of  Barbaric.  Some  Women
which  had  never  seene  white  Men,  were  fcarcfull  of  us,  rill
the  gift  of  Beads  made  them  more  daring;  and  they
requited  us  with  neate  Tabacco-pipe  Canes  :  they  were  the
deepest  printed  that  ever  I  saw.  Their  Husbands  in
gallantrie  weare  Beasts  skinnes,  the  tayles  hanging  to
them  as  to  the  Beast,  betwixt  their  buttockes.  The
Women  weare  golden  Eare-rings ;  the  Language  was
differing,  yet  the  better  sort  could  speake  the  Mandingo.
Wee  observed  some  with  three  strakes  under  the  Eyes,  a
distinction  of  the  Subjects,  of  a  certayne  King  further  up
the  River.  A  Mary-bucke  told  us,  that  the  Salt  was  sold
to  a  people  not  farre  from  Jaye,  which  were  deformed,  their
nether  Lippe  hanging  downe  toward  the  breast  and
putrifying,  against  which  they  use  Salt  for  a  remedie  :  but
conscious  of  this  Deformitie,  trade  without  sight  or  con-  Deformed
ference  :  a  Day  being  set,  on  which  the  Merchants  bring  jyade  and
and  lay  downe  their  Commodities,  which  they  leave  there  Gold.  See  Sup.
one  whole  Day ;  and  then  returning,  finde  so  much  Gold  pag.  872.
layed  by  them  as  the  Deformed  will  give.  If  hee  likes
the  price,  he  takes  the  Gold  and  leaves  the  Wares ;  or  else
takes  them,  and  leaves  the  Gold,  when  the  price  contents
him  not.  This  is  reported  to  bee  the  Arabeckes  Trade
with  that  people.

No  people  is  more  adicted  to  Musicke,  the  Kings  or  Mjrifke  and

• 11  l •  -j -^i.  *.l • t jj'  Musicians.

pnncipall  persons  being  accompanied  with  their  Juddies  or
Fidlers. The most common Instrument is made of  a
great  Gourd,  and  a  Necke  therto  fastened,  in  some  sort
resembling  our Bandora, the strings meane, and unfit,
without  frets,  yet  with  Pinnes  wound  and  fitted  to  some
Harmonic With  this  they  have  a  little  Drum,  whereon
with  a  crooked  sticke  in  the  right  hand,  and  the  Fingers
on  the  left,  they  play  wringing  the  mouth  and  gaping  very
Deformedly. Their Ballards  are a foot  above ground,  Vie!,r  .
hollow  under,  with  some  seventeene  Keyes  on  the  top,  on  before  p
which  the  Player  strikes  sitting  on  the  ground,  with  two  025.  and  Sup.
stickes  a  foot  long,  with  Balls  fastned  on  the  end: the  c  \z.  the  like
sound  may  bee  heard  an  English  mile. This  Instrument  '"  Cafrana.

301

Circumcision ,
a  scale
righteousnesse
without  Faith.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620-21.

is  one  of  their  most  ingenious  Artifices.  To  every  one
of  these  Keyes  belongs  a  small  Iron  a  foot  long,  as  bigge  as
a  Quill,  upon  which  hangs  two  Gourds  under  the  hollow
like  bottles,  which  cause  the  sound.  There  are  few  of
them,  but  not  a  few  which  resort  to  them,  and  spend  whole
nights  in  Dancing,  each  person  Male  or  Female  single  :
giving  to  the  Musicians,  whereby  they  are  esteemed  Rich,
and  their  Wives  more  adorned  then  the  Kings  with  Bloud-
stone :  but  these,  if  any  licentious,  as  their  carriage
imports,  These  men  are  denyed  Buriall,  being  set  dead
in  a  Tree,  as  conceived  to  have  most  familiaritie  with
their  Ho-re  Devill,  and  are  accounted  Diviners.  Their
greatest  assembly  is  at  the  Circumcision,  which  is  a  set
time  yeerelv.  The  youths  which  are  Circumcised  have
Licence  permitted  to  filch  Hennes,  and  from  the  Fulbies
a  Beefe,  or  young  Cattle,  to  make  merry  with  in  the  time
of  their  sorenesse.  It  is  done  without  religious  Ceremonie,
and  hath  no  name  but  cutting  of  Prickes,  the  partie
stripped  naked  and  sitting  on  the  ground,  and  the  Butcher
pulling  the  skinne  over  very  farre,  and  cutting  it,  not
without  terrour  to  the  beholder.  This  is  done  in  the
greater  Townes,  to  which  the  smaller  send  their  Youth  for
this  purpose,  thev  being  all  kept  in  a  House  together :
some  Knave  never  fayling  to  play  the  Ho-re  at  this
meeting,  by  the  Mary-buckes  pollicie,  as  I  found  by
experience.  Thus  the  Devill  may  bee  belyed,  who  vet  is
an  Oracle  to  them,  as  appeared  bv  one  of  their  Juddies,
[II.ix.1574.]  wnicn  had  told  one  at  Pompetane  how  many  of  us,  and
at  what  houre  wee  should  arrive,  which  was  uncertayne  to
our  selves,  yet  fell  out  accordingly*.

There  are  amongst  them  three  principall  Trades,  the
Smith  which  of  Iron  brought  to  them  (for  else  they  have
none)  makes  their  Swords,  Assegav  heads,  Darts  and
Arrow  heads  barbed  ;  and  Instruments  of  Husbandrv,
without  which  thev  could  not  live.  Hee  hath  his  Bel-
lowes,  small  Anvill,  and  Cole  of  a  red  wood,  which  alone
will  give  the  true  heat  to  our  Iron  ;  who  thus  cut  out
Iron  for  us,  eight  inches  going  above  as  well  as  twelve

302

Their  Trades.
Smiths.

RICHARD JOBSOX  a.d.

1620-21.

inches  below,  at  ten  for  one  gaine. The  Smith  if  he  be
not  looked  too,  will  steale.

The  next  Trade  is  the  Sepatero,  or  Gregorie  maker,  GrfP™
made  artificially  in  all  shapes,  round  and  square  and
triangle,  so  as  Our  men  would  acknowledge  Art.  They
make  also  Bridles  and  Saddles,  of  which  I  have  seene
some  very  neat,  hardly  to  be  bettered  heere :  whereby
it  seemes  they  have  skill  to  dresse  and  dye  their  Deeres
skins  and  Goats  skins.

A  third  Profession  is  of  those  which  temper  the  Earth  Potters.
for  their  wals  and  pots  in  which  they  boyle  meats,  using
for  other  services  the  gourd. Their  Tabacco  Pipes  also  Tabacco pipes.
(without  which  few  or  none,  either  men  or  women  walke,
and  cannot of  all things  want) have their bowles  and
neckes  about  two  inches  long  of  Earth,  neatly  glased,  able
commonly  to  hold  halfe  an  ounce  of  Tabacco  : they  put
a  cane  about  a  yard  long  into  the  necke,  and  so  draw  the
smoake. These are  peculiar  Trades ; other things  are
common to all, Mats to eate, sit, sleepe  on, are their  Mats.
Staple commoditie, as at Mangegar Market, we saw
things  bought  and sold,  without  nominating  any  other
price  but  Mats  (How  many  Mats  shall  I  give  you  ?)  for
Coyne  they  have  none.

But  the  generall  Trade  from  which  none  but  the  Kin^s  Husbandry.
and  principall  persons  are  exempted,  is  Husbandry
whereto  the  Marybucke-priest,  the  people  of  all  sizes
after  their  abilitie  are  subject :  God  having  not  given  them
wisedome  to  serve  themselves  of  the  beasts  to  that  pur-
pose. They  make  furrowes  as  decently  as  we  doe,  but
with  handie  labour,  having  a  short  sticke  about  a  yard
long,  on  the  end  of  which  is  a  broad  Iron  like  to  that  of
our  Paddle-staves ;  with  which  Iron  set  into  the  ground,
one  leades  the  way  cutting  the  Earth  before  him,  others
following  in  the  same  tract  with  their  severall  Irons,  so
many  as  will  make  a  sufficient  furrow  thorow  the  length
of  a  spacious  field  :  and  when  they  are  at  the  end,  thev
begin  againe,  many  hands  making  lighter  riddance.  Thev
have  sixe  severall  graines  for  food,  of  which  we  know

303

A.D.
l620-2I.

*Paniie,
Millet,  &c.
No  Bread.

Palmita  trees
and  J  fine.

Dullo  Ale.
Gourds.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

none  here  by  name  but  Rice  :  the  *  other  seeme  Seeds
rather  then  Corne,  being  very  small.  Neither  do  they
make  any  bread,  but  boyling  the  graine,  roll  it  up  in
Bals,  as  before  is  said  :  in  like  sort  they  boyle  their  Rice
and  eate  it  warme.  This  they  set  first  in  low  Marish
grounds,  and  after  remoove  them  to  places  prepared  for
it,  where  it  yeelds  great  increase  :  the  other  seeds  they
sow,  and  spaddle  over  the  ground  with  their  Irons,  and
so  leave  it.  They  observe  their  seasons  for  Tabacco,
which  they  set  about  their  houses,  and  for  Cotton-seeds
with  which  they  set  whole  fields.  The  terriblenesse  of
their  seasons  doth  further  aggravate  the  miseries  of  their
Husbandry ;  which  might  learne  us  thankfulnesse  to
whom  God  hath  given  the  beasts  in  service,  the  Heavens
seasonable,  and  besides,  and  with  infinite  other  blessings,
his  owne  Sonne.

They  have  growing  neere  the  Rivers  mouth  Bononos,
as  delicious  and  great  as  any  in  the  West  Indies ;  like-
wise store  of  small  Limons  or  Limes,  and  Oranges  were
brought  us  farre  up  in  the  River.  Of  Palmita  trees  there
are  whole  grounds  or  groves,  whence  they  draw  a  sweete
Wine  and  wholsome,  by  cutting  holes  into  the  bodie  of
the  tree,  into  which  a  Cane  is  put,  which  receiveth  the  sap
and  conveyes  it  into  gourds.  The  vulgar  may  not  meddle
with  this  :  it  tastes  like  white  Wine  when  it  comes  first  over,
and  as  many  differences  are  thereof  :  but  will  not  last  above
foure  and  twentie  houres.  Some  of  them  beare  Apples
almost  like  Quinces,  which  the  common  people  will  eate.
When  they  make  Dullo,  the  King  or  some  principall  per-
son makes  a  Feast,  and  having  provided  three  or  foure  great
Gourds,  they  make  an  end  of  all  before  they  part.  The
Gourds  grow  like  our  Pompions,  in  that  manner  placed
and  carried  upon  their  wals,  of  unequall  quantities  from  an
Egge  to  a  Bushell,  yeelding  varietie  of  houshold  Vessell
to  eate,  drinke,  wash  clothes :  the  meat  is  bitter  and
throwne  away,  which  seasons  the  shell  so  that  it  must  bee
seasoned  before  it  is  fit  for  use.  They  have  Pompions
also  like  ours  in  nature  and  use. Thev  have  great  store

3°4

RICHARD  JOBSON

of  Locust  trees,  which  yeeld  clusters  of  cods,  ripe  in  May  ;
the  trees  bigge  and  high,  of  which  the  younger  sort  catc.
They  have  store  of  Honey  ;  for  which  they  place  baskets
on  great  trees  about  their  houses,  made  of  Reed  and
Sedge,  in  which  the  Bees  will  come  and  breed  :  so  many
in  some  trees  that  to  us  afarre  off,  they  seemed  as  the
fruit  thereof.  In  hollow  trees  also  are  store  of  Bees.
They  have  one  great  sort  of  trees,  which  on  a  long  stalke
yeeldeth  a  great  and  round  fruit,  with  a  pleasing  pith
therein,  whereon  the  Baboones  and  Monkies  feed.  Some
are  so  bigge  that  ten  men  can  hardly  fathome.  The  Cola
is  much  like  our  bigger  sort  of  Chesnut,  flat  on  both
sides,  yet  without  a  hard  shell,  the  taste  very  bitter,  yet
causing  that  which  is  taken  immediately  after  to  be  very
sweet,  water  tasting  like  white  Wine  and  Sugar,  Tabacco
also  having  thereby  an  admirable  sweetnesse.  The  elder
which  want  Teeth  to  chew  it,  have  morters  to  bruise  it.
Fiftie  of  these  m  presented  to  the  King  would  buy  a  Wife.
They  are  brought  from  some  other  parts.  I  would  have
brought  some  into  England,  but  they  would  not  last.
Amongst  their  Plants  one  is  most  admirable,  a  tree  or
bush  commonly  growing  on  the  Rivers  bank,  resembling
much  our  great  Bramble-bushes,  only  having  a  little
ragged  leafe  ;  whereof  the  gentlest  stealing  touch  of  a
leafe  n  betwixt  the  ringer  and  Thumbe,  would  cause  the
whole  bough  to  close  up  all  his  leaves,  as  sensible  of
offence ;  the  touch  of  a  sprigge,  would  cause  the  whole
Tree  to  shut  up  his  leaves.  It  bare  a  yellow  flowre  like
our  Hedge-roses.

They  have  many  Lions,  hardly  seene  by  day,  easily
knowne  by  night,  by  reason  of  his  Ushers  or  Fore-runners
the  Jackall,  sometimes  two  or  three,  which  is  a  little  blacke
shag-haired  beast,  of  the  bignesse  of  a  small  Spaniell ;
which  when  Eevening  comes  hunts  for  his  prey,  and  com-
ming  on  the  foote,  followes  the  scent  with  open  crie  :  to
which  the  Lion  as  Chiefe  Hunt,  gives  diligent  eare,
following  for  his  advantage.  If  the  Jackall  set  up  his
Chase  before  the  Lion  comes  in,  he  howles  out  maynly,
ix  305  u

:  tree  1.

Great  trees.
Cola  an
Embleme  of
the  Christians
Crosses.
'"Sup.pag.
qz^falsly
printed  500.
as  the  next
page  line  58.
Hill/or
Haven,  with
divers  other
faults,  in  which
respect,  as  also
for  better  and
fuller  intelli-
gence, this  is
added.
[II.ix.1575.]

n  Of  this  in  the
East  and  ff 'est
Indies.

Lions  and
Jackalls.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620-21.

Some  say,  that  and then the  Lion seiseth on  it, making  a  grumbling

if  the  Lion  noyse,  whiles  his  Servant  stands  by  barking  (as  we  not

atthfee"umps ont^  heard  of  the  Countrey  people,  but  might  heare  our

he  zvill  not '  selves  riding  at  Anchor  by  night  in  our  passing  up  the

further  toile River)  when  the  Lion  hath  done,  this  Attendant  feeds  on

himselfe.  tne  Relikes.

Ounce.  There  are  many  Ounces  and  Leopards,  the  prints  of

whose  feet  wee  might  often  see  in  the  mouthes  of  their
Dennes  or  Holes,  and  many  of  their  skinnes  were  brought
to  us.  The  Ounce  is  the  more  ravenous  :  I  saw  a  child
which  the  Mother  having  left  on  a  cloth  at  the  doore,
whiles  she  fetched  water,  an  Ounce  had  gotten  and
being  hotly  pursued,  let  fall  the  childe  out  of  the  cloth
which  he  carried  away.  Many  times  our  Dogge  hath
beene  driven  to  our  Bed-side  by  a  hole  he  had  thorow  our
straw  walls,  not  daring  with  any  animating  to  goe  forth,
till  we  with  Firebrands  have  scarred  away  the  Ounce.

Civet-cat  and  The  Civet-cat  and  the  Porcupine,  are  diligent  Purveyors

Porcupine. for  their  Poulterie>

These  are  night-walkers : By  day  you  may  see the
Elephants. Elephants,  of  which  the  Countrey  people  are  very  feare-
full : they  doe  much  harme  in  their  Corne  and  Cotton
grounds, going in companies together. They feed
amongst  the  Sedge,  halfe  their  bodies  appearing  over  the
same,  which  yet  is  higher  then  a  tall  man  can  well  reach ;
they  bruise  also  on  trees,  whereof  you  shall  flnde  many  in
the  Woods  by  them  pulled  downe  of  bigge  bodies,  with
their  two  great  Teeth  which  are  not  like  a  Bores  turning
upward  ; but  downward,  so  that  with  his  trunke  bending
the  top,  hee  hasps  over  his  two  Teeth  and  then  puis,  that
either  the  Tooth  or  Tree  must  yeeld ; whence  it  comes
that so many rift and broken Teeth, and pieces of
Shed  not  their  Teeth are to bee had. They shead not their Teeth
teeth.  as Stagges their Homes, but by  death loose together

themselves.  I  did  eate  of  the  flesh  at  Ferambras
house,  who  only  (that  wee  knew)  had  a  man  which
durst  kill  an  Elephant,  which  with  a  poysoned
Azagay  tenne  foote  long  (the  head  whereof  I  saw  bound

306

RICHARD JOBSON  ad.

1620-21.

up  in  a  cloth  with  poyson)  he  performed,  stealing  into  the
Reeds  behind  the  Elephant  feeding,  till  hee  might  thrust
his  Javelin  into  his  bodie,  there  leaving  it  and  fleeing
away  thorow  the  Reedes  :  the  Poyson  killing  the  beast,  the
people  about  from  Trees  watch,  and  when  hee  fals  come
and  cut  away  the  inflamed  flesh,  eating  the  rest.  It
seemed  to  mee  good  and  savourie  meate.  Thus  had  he
killed  so  many  as  he  shewed  me  tayles  hanged  up.  The
people  else-where  seeme  very  fearefull  of  them,  and  yet
they  seemed  as  fearefull  as  a  Forrest  Stagge  going  from  us
(which  adventured  on  them  as  wee  met  them)  with  a
swifter  pace  then  an  able  man  can  runne.  One  wee  shot
three  times  and  lost  him  ;  but  his  Teeth  were  after  brought
us  to  sell  by  those  which  had  found  him  dead.  There
are  wild  Buls,  and  huge  wilde  Boares,  of  a  darke  blue
colour,  armed  with  large  tuskes,  and  very  bold ;  walking
from  us  with  his  tayle  upright  in  a  scornfull  manner.
There  are  great  Antelopes,  Deere  of  all  sorts,  and  Beasts
unknowne.  They  brought  us  strange  Hides,  amongst
which,  one  fourteene  foot  long,  dunne,  and  streaked  with
white.

Their  Baboones  &  Monkeyes  may  deserve  mention  : Baboones  and
they  go  in  Herds,  the  Monkeyes  alwayes  by  themselves,  ^/JK*
as  the  Baboones  also ;  and  aswell  within  the  River  Hands,
to  which  they  swim,  contrary  to  some  mens  conceit ; I  greater  Lion
had  a  Monkey  which  both  swamme  and  dived  often  to  then  of  them:
escape  from  him  which  pursued  him. The  Baboones  goe  ^eir  height
three  or  foure  thousand  in  a  Herd,  marching  in  ranke,  mst
some  of  the  greater  being  Leaders  (their  greatest  are  as  admirable!
bigge  as  Lions)  the  smaller  following ; ever  and  anon  a
great  one  as  a  Commander ; inserted  :  the  Females  carrie
their  young  under  their  bellies,  and  if  they  have  two,  the
other  is  carried  above. In  the  Reare  comes  a  great  com-
pany of  the  bigger  sort,  as  a  Guard  against  Pursuers.
Thus  doe  they  march  along  and  are  very  bold. And  as
we  passe  in  the  River,  when  we  come  neere  their  troopes,
they  will  get  up  into  the  Trees,  and  stand  in  gaze  upon
us ; and  in  a  kind  of  cholericke  humour,  the  great  ones

3°7

He  told  me,  he
never  saw

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620-21.

will  shake  the  Trees,  and  with  their  hands  clatter  the
boughes,  with  greater  strength  then  a  man  is  able ;
barking  and  making  a  noyse  at  us,  as  much  offended  :
and  so  following  us,  in  the  night  when  we  ride  at  Anchor,
take  up  their  stands  on  the  Mountayne  tops  or  trees  above
us,  where  wee  might  heare  their  government.  For  often
in  the  night,  you  shall  heare  many  voyces  together,  when
instantly  one  great  voyce  exalts  it  selfe,  and  that  noyse  is
all  husht ;  that  we  were  wont  to  say,  Master  Constable
speakes.  On  shoare  when  we  suddenly  meet  with  these
troopes,  the  great  ones  will  come  forward  and  seeme  to
grinne  in  our  faces,  flying  on  the  first  offer  of  a  Game.
One  of  our  people  killed  one  with  a  Peece,  but  before  the
Boate  could  get  ashoare,  the  others  had  gotten  it  up,  and
carried  it  away.  The  Countrey  people  will  eat  them
heartily.  We  have  seene  in  Desert  haunts  of  theirs,
Trees  and  Plants  woond  and  wrought  together  in  that
[II.ix.1576.]  artificiall  manner,  thickly  folded  over  head  to  keepe  away
the  Sunne,  and  the  ground  so  smooth  and  beaten  below,
as  might  appeare  an  excellent  Arbour,  which  place  they
have  only  used  and  kept  for  their  Dancing  and  Disport.
No  man  living  which  should  see  the  place,  and  not  know
of  the  persons,  would  conceive  otherwise  of  it,  then  of
Mans  handie-worke  (which  wee  knew  it  could  not  bee.)

We  enquired  above  in  the  Countrey  if  they  had  any
knowledge  of  the  Unicorne  ;  and  they  have  told  me  that
higher  within  the  Land  is  a  beast  which  hath  one  home
only  in  his  fore-head,  but  describe  him  to  be  of  the  colour
and  bignesse  of  a  vallow  Deere,  and  the  home  to  be  about
the  length  of  their  arme,  and  no  otherwise  ;  not  like  that
which  we  have  described,  of  which  I  doubt,  whether  there
be  any  such.

For  their  Land  Fowle,  we  never  saw  any  *  Estriches,
nor  had  any  of  their  Feathers  brought  us  by  the  people.
The  greatest  we  saw  is  a  Stalker,  whose  long  legges  and
necke  makes  him  standing  upright  to  be  taller  then  a
man  ;  his  body  is  in  substance  more  then  an  indifferent
Lambe. Some of his Feathers are worne and well

308

Baboones

dancing

Schoole.

Unicornes.

Land  Fowle.
*Estriches  &
Ernes  use
sandieDeserts.

RICHARD JOBSON  a.d.

1620-21.
esteemed  here  at  home.  The  next  is  a  Wake,  which
makes  great  noyse  when  he  flyeth  ;  they  doe  much  spoylc
on  their  Rice  grounds:  they  are  of  great  stature,  good
food,  carrying  a  beautifull  shew  on  the  crowne  with  a
faire  tuft.  There  is  infinite  store  of  those  which  we  call
Guinnie-hennes,  as  bigge  and  beautifull  as  our  Pheasant,
his  Feathers  layd  over  him  like  eyes  :  wee  have  killed  eight
of  them  at  a  shoot,  excellent  meate.  Their  Partridges  arc
of  darke  feathers,  and  are  all  over  the  inhabited  parts,
remayning  neere  their  houses.  The  plentie  of  these  and
the  former,  shew  that  they  have  no  Foxes :  their  keeping
so  neere  the  houses,  is  to  preserve  them  from  the  Baboones
and  Monkeyes  which  are  no  night-walkers,  and  frequent
not  frequented  places  by  day.

There  are  store  of  Quailes  as  bigge  as  Woodcockes ;
and  of  Pidgeons,  of  which  I  have  killed  with  my  Stone-
bow,  twenty  in  two  houres.  There  are  Parrats,  but  none
good  but  the  dun  with  the  Red  tayle ;  of  Parakitos  there
are  very  faire,  some  which  come  to  perfection.  Of  small
Birds  are  many  pleasing  both  the  Eye  and  Eare.

One  strange  Bird  there  is  which  hath  no  legges,  but  HangingBinL
two strings by which he hangs with his head downe-
wards,  resembling  a  dead  leafe  hanging  on  the  tree,  and
is  directly  of  that  colour,  so  that  except  hee  light,  you
can hardly discover him. And hee seemes to take
pleasure  to  deceive  our  Eyes,  hanging  wondrous  steadie
without  motion,  till  you  bee  neere  the  touching. An-
other strange  Bird  there  is,  which  flyeth  with  foure  wings  : 4  Bird  with
wee  see  him  not  all  the  day,  but  an  houre  before  night.  Joure  U''"SS-
His foremost wings  are  largest ; the other two are a
prettie distance backward ; his bodie is borne up as
betwixt  foure.

It is remarkable, how Nature hath taught them to
secure  their  Nests  from  Baboones  and  Monkeyes,  the  pro-
fessed  Enemies of Fowles. In their  varietie of trees,  M>  trees  like
there  is  none  that  I  can  call  by  an  English  name,  as  beeing  ours'
of  any  of  our  kinds  ; but  one  there  is  full  of  prickles  in
the  bodie  and  boughes ; many  of  which  grow  on the

309

A.D.

l620-2I.

Cunning
building.

Hunting
Hatvkes.

Folding.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

River  bankes,  hanging  their  tops  over  the  water.  On
these  trees,  and  on  the  water-shading  side  doe  these  Birds
breed,  winding  their  Nests  with  a  hollow  necke  made  of
Reedes  and  Sedge,  so  that  the  whole  Neast  hangs  like  a
Bottle  fastned  by  the  necke ;  in  some  places  so  thicke
that  that  side  of  the  tree  seemes  covered  with  Thatch.

The  Parrat  speedes  not  so  well,  making  his  Neast  on  the
out-most  smallest  twigge  of  a  tree  on  the  Land,  winding
it  about  so  that  it  will  not  beare  that  bodie,  whose  wit
seeing  the  young  growne  (for  he  can  over-looke)  teacheth
him  to  sit  fast  on  his  hinder-feet,  and  taking  the  bough
as  neere  the  Neast  as  he  dares,  shakes  it  in  that  manner
with  his  hands,  that  the  young  fall  out  for  his  share.
Other  Birds  breed  in  holes,  made  in  the  over-hanging
bankes  of  the  River :  to  escape  both  those  beasts  and  the
Snakes.

There  are  Hawkes,  one  sort  as  large  as  our  Ger-falcon,
which  (the  people  say)  will  kill  of  themselves  a  Deere,
seizing  on  his  head,  hanging  fast  and  beating  with  his
wings  till  the  Deere  faints,  fals  to  his  prey.  There  are
small  bastard  Eagles,  Buzzards,  some  with  skinnes  smell-
ing like  the  Crocodile.  These  are  meanes  to  the  people
to  finde  out  Elephants,  or  other  beasts  dead,  which  become
often  sharers  with  these  Sharkes.  They  have  no  Ginnes
nor  Devices  to  take  Fowle,  but  when  the  King  meanes  to
make  a  Feast,  the  people  are  all  summoned,  and  placed  in
severall  fit  distances,  so  that  the  Ginnie-hennes  and  Part-
ridges are  pursued  without  rest,  till  wearinesse  deliver
them  to  their  Enemies  hands,  and  they  to  the  King.

310

NICHOLAS  ROBERTS  AND  THE  PIRATES

A. I.).
C. I*

Chap. XIIII.

A  Letter  contayning  the  admirable  escape  and
glorious  Victorie  of  Nicholas  *  Roberts  Master,
Tristram  Stevens  his  Mate,  and  Robert  Sucks-
bich  Boatson  of  a  Ship  of  Dover,  taken  by
Algier  Pyrates  :  which  three  men  being  carryed
as  Slaves  by  eleven  Turkes  in  the  same  Ship,
partly  killed,  and  partly  sold  them  all,  and
returned  free  and  safe  home  into  England.

Oving  Friend,  I  have  received  your
Letter,  &c.  You  desire  to  have  the
whole  proceedings  of  our  unfortunate
Voyage,  yet  fortunate  to  us,  who  are
heere  to  relate  what  the  Lord  hath  done
for  us :  the  which,  as  neere  as  God  shall
enable  mee,  I  will  make  knowne  unto
you.  First,  ten  leagues  to  the  Southward  of  the  North
Cape,  wee  were  chased  by  a  Turkish  man  of  Warre  :  of
foure  and  thirtie  Pieces  of  Ordnance,  and  being  not  farre
from  the  shoare,  it  pleased  God  wee  recovered  it  before  hee
could  fetch  us  up :  yet  hee  was  so  neere  to  us  before  hee
left  us,  that  he  was  within  shot  of  us,  and  seeing  that  wee
were  bent  to  runne  ashoare :  rather  then  to  come  into  his
hands,  hee  espied  ten  or  twelve  Boates  under  the  He  of
Dones,  Fisher-men,  where  wee  were  chased  in,  and  left
us,  and  put  out  his  Boate  full  of  small  Shot ;  and  some
of  them  hee  tooke,  and  some  got  away,  and  some  hee
chased  ashoare  upon  the  Hand ;  and  there  hee  landed  his
men  and  tooke  them  all  away,  to  the  number  of  five  and
fiftie  persons,  and  one  killed.  So  there  hee  kept  us  the
space  of  foure  dayes :  at  length  away  hee  goes,  and  the
next  day  wee  finding  the  winde  faire,  came  out  and  went
along  the  shoare  within  Musket  shot  all  the  way,  betwixt
that  and  the  lies  of  Bayone.

At  length  wee  espied  this  Sayle  comming  out  of  the

3"

[Il.ix..

*Theie  three
men  served
their  Appren-
tiihips  at
Dover,  but
wereWesternc
men  borne:
the  Mater  in
Cornwall,  the
other  two  in
Devonshire.  I
have  added
this  to  the
former,  as
pertaining  also
to  Africa;  and
this  with  the
former,  and  all
the  relations  of
Santos,  and  the
Jesuits  &  some
others,  and  so
to  the  end  of
this  Booke,  as
Appendix  to
the  first  Tome;
being  such
Relations  as  I
had  not  to
insert  in  their
due  place  but
later  come  into
my  hands.

A.D.

c.  1620.

*  Fore-foot  is
not  a  part  of  a
Ship,  but  when
two  ships  say  !e,

one  so  much  a
zveather  the
other,  that  slice
zvillgoe  a  head
of  the  other,  it
is  then  called
the  Fore-foot:
so  that  it  im-
plies one  Ships
say  ling  a  crossc
another  Ships
way.

*  Clewline,  is
to  the  top  top-
gallant and
sprit-sayle,
that  which  the
Clew-garnet
is  to  the  mayn-
sayle:  the
Clew  is  the
lower  corner
of  the  sayle
where  the
tackes  tff
sheats  are
made  fast :  the
Clezv-gamet,
a  rope  fast  to
the  Clew
running  thence
in  a  blocke  to
the  middle  of
the  yard,  to
which  it  hales
up  the  Clew,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Sea,  and  came  directly  in  with  the  lies  of  Bayone,  and
wee  being  so  neere  the  shoare  did  not  greatly  feare,
because  wee  thought  what  ever  he  was,  wee  should  get  the
shoare  before  him.  At  last  hee  comming  something
neere  to  us,  wee  saw  it  was  no  great  Sayle,  not  passing
one  hundred  Tunnes  or  thereabouts ;  and  that  there  was
no  hope  of  running  away,  but  that  wee  must  either  Fight
it  out,  or  runne  ashoare.  I  called  up  all  my  Company,
and  asked  them  what  they  would  doe,  whether  they  would
stand  by  mee  and  shew  themselves  like  men,  and  that  it
might  never  bee  said,  that  wee  should  runne  away  from
him,  being  not  much  bigger  then  wee,  although  hee  had
as  many  more  Ordnance  as  wee.  They  answered  all  with
one  consent,  that  they  would  live  and  dye  with  mee :
whereupon  our  Boate  standing  upon  the  upper  Decke,
wee  put  her  over-boord  and  fitted  our  selves ;  and  by
that  time  hee  was  come  within  shot  of  us  :  presently  wee
fired  a  Piece,  and  shot  crosse  his  Fore-foote  *  to  see  what
hee  was,  and  seeing  hee  would  not  strike,  wee  knew  then
that  hee  was  a  Turkish  man  of  Warre.  And  presently
wee  shot  two  more,  and  as  soone  as  they  were  off,  hee
held  up  his  Sprit-sayle  in  the  *  Clewline,  and  shot  two
at  us.

Then  wee  having  no  Portes  right  aft,  were  forced  to
bring  our  Ship  upon  a  winde,  to  bring  our  Pieces  to  beare
upon  him.  At  length  he  came  so  neere  that  hee  hald  us  :
I  being  upon  the  Poope,  they  let  flye  their  small  shot  so
fast,  that  there  was  no  staying.  For  at  last,  as  I  was
going  aft,  I  heard  the  Captayne  bid  them  stay  their  hands.
With  that  I  stayed  and  talked  with  him,  and  the  Cap-
tayne in  English  bad  mee  strike  my  Top-sayle,  and  hee
would  doe  me  no  hurt :  and  I  seeing  what  they  were,
told  him  that  they  were  Dogges,  and  that  I  would  not
strike  nor  trust  him,  but  hee  should  come  aboord  and
strike  it  himselfe.  They  hearing  mee  say  so,  let  flye  all
their  small  Shot  at  me,  and  shot  the  Ropes  a  sunder
besides,  and  yet  it  pleased  God,  hurt  not  me ;  so  being
upon  our  weather  quarter,  wee  freed  our  quarter  Piece,

312

NICHOLAS  ROBERTS  AND  THE  PIRATES <u>.

i .  1620.

and  had  our  Piece  haled  in  ready  to  put  at  that  Port  whiles

that  was  a  lading  againe  : hut  as  soone  as  that  Piece  was

shot off, he hald up his Sprit-sayle, and bore up his

Helme,  &  fired  his  two  chac'd  Pieces,  and  came  with  all

sayles  to  top  aboord  of  us,  and  carryed  over  our  ship  :

and shee  being  something tender  sided,  and our Ports

being  all  open,  our  Lee  *  Ports  were  all  under  water,  and  *<k*i  "  that

our  Chists  and  things  that  were  betwixt  our  Deckes  did  ■ff6*****

1 1 -n-  r  /^ 1  1  1 1  j •  site  to  the

swimme,  and  the  Piece  or  Ordnance  that  was  hald  in,  got  wi„jc:  c^ac>t

loose  and  fell  to  Leeward,  like  to  carrie  out  the  side  and  Pieces,  are

all. At  which mischance  our  men  being  much  discom-  those  which  lie

fited,  they  tooke  our  Ship  ; And  Richard  White,  which  right  forward,

11 1  • 1  m  •  -i  j  1  or  right  aft-

all  this  while  was  in  company  with  us,  and  so  neere  when  warjon.  fa
wee began that the Shot  flew  over  him  ; in the time  Decke  is  the
that  wee  strove  with  him  hee  got  into  Bayone.  floore  of

And  they  put  all  aboord  the  man  of  Warre,  and  so  wee  PlV'\s  °n ,
put  to  Sea,  and  our  Ship  after  us  as  fast  as  shee  could,  Q,.jna„ce  '
being  hardly  able  to  beare  any  sayle.  Yet  that  night  placed.
being  Munday  night,  and  the  foure  and  twentieth  of
March,  it  prooved  faire  weather,  and  they  began  to  rifle
us,  and  the  next  day  by  two  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-
noone,  they  had  taken  out  as  much  things  as  possible  could
bee  spared,  leaving  such  things  as  of  necessitie  must  bee
left  for  the  carriage  of  her  for  Sally  :  and  then  the  Cap-
tayne  sent  for  mee  to  come  aboord  our  owne  Ship.
Where  I  was  no  sooner  comne,  but  hee  caused  three  men
to  take  mee,  and  lay  me  upon  my  belly  upon  the  Deckes,  [II.ix.1578.]
and  two  of  them  to  lye  upon  my  legges,  and  one  to  sit
on  my  necke,  and  he  himselfe  with  a  Rope  did  give  me
so  many  blowes,  that  I  did  intreat  him  :  if  ever  hee  came
of  a  Woman,  not  to  use  mee  like  a  Dogge,  but  rather  that
hee  should  heave  me  over-boord  :  then  to  put  me  to  that
penurie.  His  answer  was  to  mee  againe,  after  that  hee
had  used  his  pleasure  to  me  ;  Thou  Dog,  if  I  doe  finde
any  thing  more  then  thou  hast  confest  to  mee,  I  will  give
thee  a  hundred  times  as  much,  and  when  I  have  done,  I
will  heave  thee  over-boord.  So  leaving:  mee  aboord  of
our  Ship  :  and  foure  of  our  Companie  and  seven  Turkes,

313

A.D.

l620.

Consultation
with  a
Wizard.

Eleven  Turkes
and  three
Christians.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

he  bad  us  stay  till  wee  heard  further  from  him.  At  last,
it  was  accorded  among  them  who  should  goe  our  Cap-
tayne  to  carry  us  for  Sally ;  and  that  was  a  Hamburger
a  Renegado,  one  that  could  speake  very  good  English.
As  soone  as  my  Mate  understood  that  hee  was  to  goe  our
Captayne,  hee  did  intreat  him  upon  his  knees  that  he
might  goe  with  him,  because  hee  did  alwayes  desire  that
hee  might  goe  with  mee  wheresoever  I  went :  and  one  of
the  Moores  seeing  of  him  intreating  so  hard  to  goe  with
him,  gave  him  two  or  three  blowes,  and  bad  him  get  him
downe  into  the  hold  againe.  But  the  Captayne  having
something  more  commiseration  on  him  then  the  other,
gave  him  his  Plate,  and  bad  him  goe  into  the  Boate ;  for
hee  should  goe  with  him.  And  they  having  a  Witch
aboord,  told  him  :  that  hee  should  take  but  three  that
could  doe  their  labour  well,  and  send  the  rest  aboord
the  man  of  Warre,  and  that  hee  should  have  an  especiall
care  to  keepe  the  Weapons  from  us ;  and  so  comming
aboord,  brought  my  Mate  with  him,  and  sent  three  of
them  away  of  our  company,  and  brought  three  Turkes
more  besides  himselfe  :  so  there  were  no  more  of  us  but
my  selfe,  and  my  Mate,  and  the  Boatson  ;  and  there  were
eleven  of  them.

They  presently  made  sayle  and  went  away,  and  the
man  of  Warre  stayed  there  behind.  Being  parted  from
the  man  of  Warre,  wee  agreed  together  to  see  if  it  pleased
God  to  worke  some  meanes  for  our  deliverie  :  for  our
usage  was  such  aboord  the  man  of  Warre,  that  wee  feared
it  would  bee  worse  if  they  got  us  where  they  would  have
us ;  and  therefore  did  resolve  by  Gods  helpe,  either  to
quite  our  selves  of  it,  or  to  end  our  misery  :  and  passing
the  time  from  Tuesday  to  Thursday  in  this  sorrowfull
manner,  in  that  time  wee  did  devise  the  best  meanes  that
God  did  enable  us  ;  which  was,  that  when  it  did  please
God  to  send  us  a  gale  of  winde  to  undergoe  our  businesse
withall,  that  they  should  alwayes  have  each  of  them  a
Wedge  in  their  pockets,  to  barre  fast  the  Cabbin  doore
where  the  Weapons  were,  because  then  two  did  alwayes

314

NICHOLAS  ROBERTS  AND  THE PIRATES

steere  halfe  the  Night.  But  they  would  never  suffer  mee
so  much  as  to  come  into  the  Steeredge,  (for  they  were
suspicious  of  us)  and  would  not  suffer  us  to  have  a  Knife  ;
or  if  wee  had  at  any  time  beene  betwixt  the  Deckes,  they
would  presently  have  searcht  the  Ship  from  one  end  to  the
other,  to  see  if  they  could  finde  any  thing  that  wee  had
layed  up.  But  I  alwayes  bad  them  have  a  care  that  they
should  lay  up  nothing,  but  onely  take  notice  where  it  lay  ;
For  there  was  nothing  to  trust  to,  but  onely  two  Pompe-
brakes,  and  they  stood  alwayes  an  end  in  the  Pompes
without  suspicion  of  any  of  them.  Other  thing  there  was
not  any,  save  one  peece  of  Ore  that  lay  upon  the  Poupe  :
for  they  would  not  leave  so  much  as  a  Hatchet,  but  as
soone  as  they  had  done  with  it,  would  straight  carrie  it
into  the  Cabbin  againe.

Thursday  night  being  come,  it  pleased  God  to  send  us
durtie  weather ;  but  wee  not  suspecting  that  wee  should
have  an  opportunitie  so  soone,  they  were  unprovided  of
their  Wedges  in  their  pockets.  And  at  last  there  arose  a
great  gust  of  winde  out  of  the  North-west,  and  yet  was
neither  of  our  mens  turnes  to  bee  at  the  Helme,  which
made  us  doubtfull  whether  wee  might  give  the  enter-
prise or  no.  At  last,  the  winde  did  increase  so  much,
that  I  did  intreat  the  Captayne  that  one  of  our  men  might
goe  to  the  Helme,  because  I  told  him :  I  thought  they
could  better  *  Conne  the  Ship  afore  the  Sea  then  his  men
could,  and  hee  was  very  willing  that  hee  should.  So  the
Boates-man  being  neerest  to  it,  stept  unto  the  steeredge
and  tooke  the  Helme,  and  hee  that  was  at  the  Helme
before :  sate  downe  in  the  steeredge  beside  him,  and  haled
the  Steeredge  doore  too,  and  made  it  fast  in  the  in-side.
Now  there  were  foure  of  them  upon  the  Decke  with  us,
the  Captayne  and  three  more,  and  foure  in  the  Cabbin
abaft  by  the  Weapons,  and  two  betwixt  the  Deckes,  and
one  in  the  Steeredge.  So  walking  upon  the  Decke  with
them,  at  last  wee  saw  our  opportunitie  that  all  the  Turkes
were  abaft  *  us,  and  wee  by  the  Maine-mast.

I  tooke  my  Coate  and  heaved  it  from  mee  for  a  signe  to

3i5

A.lJ.
'  . l620.

Steeredge  it
the  place
where  they
steere.

*To  C unite
the  Ship,  is  the
same  with
Conducere,  to
direct.

*Jft  and
abaft  hath
relation  from
any  part  of  the
Ship  to  things
done  or  placed
thence  to  the
Sternward.

A.D.

c  1620.

[II.ix.i579.]

Capstaine
barres  are
smal  pieces  of
timber  put
thorozv  the
barrel/  of the
Capstaine,  by
which  they
turne  it  about.
The  use  of  the

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

him,  and  so  wee  tooke  the  Pompe-brakes  and  runne  on
upon  them,  and  hee  with  one  blow,  and  I  with  another
killed  the  Captayne  out-right,  and  the  rest  were  not  long
a  dispatching :  onely  one  that  got  the  Poupe,  but  hee  was
not  long  there,  for  wee  got  him  downe ;  yet  hee  got  away
from  us  little  better  then  dead.  Now  for  the  Boatson
that  was  in  the  Steeredge,  when  the  word  was  given
(which  was  God  and  Saint  George)  putting  his  foot  against
the  Steeredge  doore,  thinking  it  would  flye  open,  the
Turke  had  made  it  so  fast  that  it  would  not :  and  the
Turke  was  so  busie  with  him  with  his  Knife,  that  hee
was  forced  to  strive  with  him  to  get  it  from  him.  And
in  the  meane  time  came  one  of  the  Turkes  that  was
betwixt  the  Deckes,  and  opened  the  Cabbin  doore  where
the  weapons  were,  and  one  of  them  with  a  Cutlaxe  ranne
him  into  the  side,  and  bore  him  up  against  the  Steeredge
doore,  and  meeting  with  two  ribbes  did  not  goe  cleane
through  his  body.  Hee  seeing  they  were  come  all  upon
him,  did  strive  to  get  the  Steeredge  doore  open,  and  at
last  did,  but  with  great  hurt,  having  sixe  or  seven  bleeding
wounds  upon  him :  and  the  doore  being  open,  the  Turkes
durst  not  for  all  their  Weapons  adventure  to  come  upon
the  Decke.  But  wee  being  in  the  heate  of  bloud,  assayed
twice  to  get  the  Steeredge  from  them,  but  could  not ;  for
they  ranne  us  through  the  cloathes  but  did  not  hurt  us.
Seeing  that  would  not  prevayle,  wee  got  a  Bucket  of
water  to  put  the  Candle  out  that  was  in  the  Bitakell,
which  they  perceiving  tooke  it  away  and  carried  it  into
the  Cabbin,  and  lighted  two  more.

Then  they  began  to  light  their  Matches  to  shoot  at
us,  which  as  soone  as  wee  perceived,  wee  got  our  Cap-
stone Barres,  and  made  fast  the  doore,  and  one  of  the
rough  trees  crosse  all  the  Bulke  head.  This  being  done,
we  tooke  the  men  that  were  dead :  and  layed  them  crosse
the  sight  of  the  steeredge  to  keepe  them  from  sight  of  us,
and  then  tooke  one  of  our  Hatches  and  opened  it,  and
went  downe  betwixt  the  Deckes  to  see  if  we  could  find
any  there. At  last,  it  being  very  darke,  I  felt  where  there

316

NICHOLAS  ROBERTS  AND  THE  PIRATES

c.  1620.
was  one  lay  under  a  Cabbin,  and  having  one  of  the  Turkes Capstaineis  to
Knives  in  my  hand,  I  stucke  it  into  his  side  as  farre  as  it ™eigh  anchor,
would  goe,  and  he  crying  out,  my  Mate  came,  thinking  thin^of^
to  strike  him,  and  strooke  mee  upon  the  hand,  which  did  weight.
mee  great  hurt ; for  after  that,  I  had  but  little  use  of  it
when  it  was  cold. But  to  proceed,  that  man  wee  killed,
and  seeking  for  more,  I  happened  with  another  ; which
as  soone  as  ever  I  did  but  touch  his  clothes,  thrust  his
Knife  at  me,  and  cut  me  crosse  the  thumbe,  and  ranne  it
into  my  hand  a  little  way,  and  so  got  away  that  we  could
find  him  no  more. Then  fearing  lest  they  would  come
all  downe  upon  us,  we  went  up  and  layed  our  Hatches,
and  tooke  the  other  rough  tree,*  and  made  them  all  fast. *Roofe  trees
Then  wee  cut  our  maine  Hall-yards,  and  let  our  Main-  are  Timbers  of

1  1  1  1  r  • 1 r  i- "8"*  wood-,

sayle  runne  downe  to  keepe  them  from  sight  or  us  when  it  that  roe  from

was  day :  and  just  as  we  had  made  all  things  fast,  it  was  theHalf-decke

light  day,  and  it  was  betwixt  twelve  and  one  when  we  to  the  Fore-

bep*an  castle,  and  are

When  it  was  day,  we  durst  not  come  upon  the  Decke  gra£n„ \$c
for  feare  of  their  Muskets,  but  went  continually  without  Buttoexpound
boord :  yet  they  shot  twice  at  me  upon  the  Poupe,  out  of  all  the  Mari-
the  Forecastle  through  the  Main-sayle  ; and  yet,  I  thanke  ners  termes  tn
God,  hurt  me  not. And  thus  we  continued  from  Thurs-  t0LumA
day  night  till  it  was  Saturday  morning :  and  I  askt  them ciosse  longer
if  they  would  steere  in  for  the  shoare,  and  save  their  lives  ;  then  the  Text.
or  else  they  should  presently  die. They  replied, they
would  not. Then  we  having  an  old  Axe,  I  was  minded
to  cut  a  hole  in  our  Bowe  above  the  lower  Decke  ; and
then  to  open  a  scuttle,  and  let  them  come  up  (and  so  wee
would  have  dispatcht  them  as  fast  as  they  had  come)  and
then  to  have  layd  her  by  the  Lee,  to  have  stopt  it  againe.
When  they  saw  that  was  my  resolution,  and  that  wee  had
made  a  beginning,  hee  told  mee  that  was  the  chiefe  of
them,  that  if  I  would  save  their  lives  they  would  doe
what I would have them. I bad them beare up the
Helme,  which  they  did,  and  gave  mee  a  Compasse  out,
and  I  set  them  their  course  to  steere  in  by.

At  last,  I  bad  them  give  mee  their  Muskets  out,  and

3J7

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1620.

hee  sware  by  the  Sunne,  that  they  had  heaved  them  over-
boord  (and  so  they  had)  and  then  I  bad  them  give  mee
their  weapons.  They  did  beginne  to  feare,  lest  when  we
had  got  them,  that  wee  would  have  killed  them ;  and  fell
downe  on  their  knees,  and  did  entreate  that  I  would  save
their  lives,  and  that  they  were  sorry  for  what  they  had
done  ;  thinking  that  they  had  killed  him  that  was  in  the
steeredge  with  them,  because  they  never  heard  him  speake,
all  the  time  (and  Indeed,  he  could  not  helpe  himselfe  but
as  he  was  lifted  by  us)  I  promised  them,  that  I  would  not
hurt  them,  and  then  they  gave  me  their  weapons,  and
fetcht  us  what  we  would  have.  So  by  twelve  of  the
The  Rocke  a  clocke  that  day  we  made  the  Rocke  :  and  fearing  to  beare
point  of  Land  jn  wjt^  j^  for  feare  Gf  Men  of  warre,  we  held  in  two  or
ate  tuning  ^ree  leagUes  to  the  Northward  of  it. Seeing  a  great

in  from  the  .0  .  & e>

Sea  towards Towne  by  the  waters  side,  we  were  in  hope  to  get  a  Boat

Lisbon.  aboord  before  night ; and  comming  with  it,  wee  went  as

neere  to  it  as  wee  could,  and  lay  by  the  lee,  and  put  out

a  weafe,  and  stayed  there  three  houres,  and  no  Boat  would

come  to  us.

Then  night  comming  on,  we  got  our  tackes  aboord,
and  steered  away  for  the  Rocke  againe,  and  the  wind
being  at  North-west,  we  were  fearefull  to  hale  off  farre
from  the  shoare  for  feare  of  Men  of  warre ;  but  steered
directly  for  the  Rocke,  and  went  not  above  halfe  a  mile
without  it,  because  the  wind  was  large  enough  :  and  as
soone  as  we  were  shot  to  the  South-ward  of  the  Rocke,
in  a  dye  of  raine  the  wind  came  to  the  West  South-west,
and  we  running  that  way  in  hope  to  carrie  it  away,  the
wind  Southwarded  still,  till  we  had  brought  our  selves  so
neere,  that  we  had  no  roome  to  beare  up,  and  having  no
After-sayle  to  make  our  ship  stay,  were  forst  (being  but
we  two)  to  put  our  Anchor  from  the  Bowe,  and  to  breake
open  a  Scuttle,  and  goe  downe  and  vered  to  a  whole
Cable,  and  brought  up  the  ship,  and  went  up  and  tooke  in
our  Sayles,  and  got  another  Anchor  from  the  Bowe,  and
made  three  or  foure  of  the  Turkes  cleere  the  Cable  to  us.
This  was  about  twelve  of  the  clocke  in  the  night,  and

318

NICHOLAS ROBERTS  AND  THE PIRATES *J>.

c.  1620.
when  the  day  came  on,  the  weather  did  beginnc  to  cncrcasc
much,  and  the  Sea  was  much  grownc,  being  so  necre  the
shoare  as  wee  were,  that  we  were  faine  to  cut  our  Ma
by  the  boord,  and  being  not  able  to  doe  it  of  our  selves
(being  but  two  of  us,  and  over-watcht  for  want  of  sleepe ;
for  from  Thursday  night  till  Sunday  night,  we  never
tooke  winke  of  sleepe)  I  went  to  the  Cabbin  doore,  and
bad  them  come  to  helpe  us.  They  told  mee  they  would
come,  but  made  no  great  haste ;  for  they  did  feare  that
we  would  have  killed  them.  At  last  perceiving  that  I
was  very  angrie  with  them,  as  I  was  cutting  at  our  Maine-
mast,  and  my  Mate  at  the  Fore-mast,  one  of  them  came
up,  and  fell  downe  on  his  knees  and  kist  me  by  the  foot,
and  begged  of  mee,  that  I  would  not  kill  him,  and  I  told
him  that  I  would  doe  none  of  them  any  hurt,  but  they
should  come  and  helpe  us  worke,  and  hee  went  and  told
his  consorts  what  I  had  said.  So  up  they  came  all  upon
the  Decke,  and  every  one  of  them  one  after  another  came
and  kist  us  by  the  feet,  as  well  hee  that  lay  hurt,  as  us  :
and  then  we  gave  them  the  Axes  to  cut  the  Masts,  but
wee  kept  the  weapons,  and  when  our  Mayne-mast  and
Fore-mast  were  cut  away,  the  ship  did  ride  pretie  easie,
and  then  wee  went  to  prayer,  the  Turkes  sitting  with  us :
and  I  having  no  more  Bookes  left  but  a  little  Prayer-booke
in  my  Pocket,  one  of  the  Turkes  went  to  his  Bagge  and
fetcht  mine  owne  Bible,  and  brought  it  to  me  ;  saying,
Master  here  is  a  bigger  Booke  for  you.

After  Prayer,  we  did  eate  and  drinke  together,  and  were
as  though  we  had  beene  altogether  consorts :  there  we
ridde  from  twelve  of  the  clocke  at  night,  till  two  of  the
clocke  in  the  after-noone  the  next  day,  and  all  this  time
there  came  not  a  Boat  to  us,  yet  wee  were  but  three  miles
from  Cast  Cales,  wee  were  not  halfe  a  mile  from  the  Point,  [II.  ix.  15  80.]
which  if  we  could  have  weathered,  we  might  have  gone
into  Lisboa  without  any  sayle,  but  it  was  not  Gods"  will
that  it  should  be  so.  Sunday  being  the  seventh  day  after
we  were  taken,  we  cut  our  Cables,  and  with  our  sprit-
sayle  and  spritsayle-topsayle  wee  ranne  into  a  flat  place,

319

A.D.

c.  1620.

Homo  homini
lupus:  homo
homini  dee mon.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

being  no  more  flat  places  there,  that  there  was  no  hope  of
ever  saving  our  lives  (for  the  Rockes  are  as  steepe  as  a
house)  and  so,  some  by  one  meanes,  and  some  by  another,
we  got  ashoare :  but  we  did  not  suffer  one  of  theTurkesto
goe  till  we  were  all  ashoare,  and  then  wee  went  to  a  little
Village  halfe  a  mile  from  the  place  where  we  came  ashoare,
and  there  we  caused  all  the  Turkes  to  be  pinyoned  (for
not  a  man  came  to  the  waters  side  all  this  time)  and  so
two  or  three  of  the  men  of  the  Village  went  with  us  to
Cast  Cales,  and  there  the  Turkes  were  put  in  prison,  and
we  were  very  well  used,  and  they  that  were  hurt  were
drest,  and  had  a  Chirurgeon  to  looke  to  us  for  the  space
of  two  dayes,  till  we  had  a  little  refresht  our  selves,  and
then  a  Boat  provided  for  us,  and  the  Turkes  to  carrie  us
to  Lisboa,  where  after  examination  both  of  us  and  them,
the  Governours  gave  them  freely  to  us,  and  told  us  we
did  deserve  a  great  deale  more.

Thus  have  I  related  unto  you  the  whole  truth  of  our
proceedings,  and  no  more  but  what  is  truth,  not  for  that
I  desire  to  bee  applauded  of  men,  but  that  whosoever  shall
heare  this  discourse,  may  not  thinke  that  of  our  owne
power  we  could  doe  this,  but  that  it  is  the  hand  of  the
Lord  hath  done  it :  and  the  Lord  grant  that  I  and  every
of  us  may  never  be  unmindfull  of  that  the  Lord  hath
done  for  us. Amen.

This  Letter  was  written  to  Master  John  Moulton,  to
whom  also  he  wrote  another,  which  I  have,  demanding
his  advice  about  that  which  seemed  to  mee  a  strange
immanitie  (that  I  say  not  inhumanitie  and  unchristianitie
alone)  of  men  ;  as  the  other  was  the  unspeakable  grace
and  bountie  of  God  :  namely,  that  the  owners  of  the  ship
so  taken  (being  also  the  Masters  kinsmen)  demanded,  and
by  Law  threatned  to  wring  from  him  part  of  the  Moneyes
which  they  made  by  sale  of  the  Turkes  at  Lisbon;  where
yet  they  were  not  in  their  possession,  but  as  the  Kings
slaves ;  and  the  Kings  Officers  (for  encouragement  of
others  in  like  case)  gave  them  that  money  as  Almes,  how-
soever it  was  reckoned  also  as  their  just  price. Neither

320

NICHOLAS  ROBERTS  AND  THE  PIRATES ajx

i  .  162  .

would  they  give  them  wages,  which  yet  demanded  this
money;  as  if  their  eye  had  beene  evil)  because  Gods  was
good  and  gracious,  like  Jonas  in  his  mad  anger  for  the
Ninivites  spared.  But  I  hope  they  better  bethought  them
afterwards,  or  else  I  would  here  name  them  to  their  ever-
lasting reproach :  which  I  now  forbeare,  as  David  did
Shimeis  punishment,  in  regard  of  so  great  and  present  an
escape,  victorie,  triumph,  which  even  then  had  happened.

ANd  because  these  Algier  Pirats  have  brought  us  into  A  Preface  to
the  thoughts  of  Turkish  power,  the  rather  observing  ^f  ensuing
that  last  Turkish  businesse,  rather  then  Christian  charitie  :
and  of  Turkie  we  have  delivered  already  divers  things
remarkable  ;  yet  having  since  met  with  a  piece  of  worth,
I  thought  good  also  to  communicate  it  unto  thee.  .It  is
a  Royall  present  worth  the  receiving :  namely,  to  set  thee  Sup.  I.  8.  &c
in  possession,  and  make  thee  Master  of  the  Grand  Sig-
niors  Serraglio  :  a  sight  hitherto  prohibited,  in  manner,
to  Christian  eyes.  I  doe  not  promise  thee  the  stones  and
edifices,  but  a  securer  and  quieter  Title  (for  how  lately
hath  the  Master  beene  dispossessed  of  them  and  his  life
together,  that  I  mention  not  the  instabilitie  of  the  present,
who  once  before  held,  and  after  was  holden  of  the  same  ?)
Here  thou  hast  the  Rarities  of  that  Great  Palace  for  the
Matter  and  Arte,  with  the  representation  of  the  Turkish
Court;  the  Rites  prophane  and  devout,  solemne  and  private
of  the  Grand  Sig-nior  and  all  his  Grandes  :  the  Sultanas,
the  Women  and  Virgins,  the  Sonnes  and  Daughters
Royall,  the  Great  Officers  of  State,  and  of  the  Houshold,
their  Courts,  their  admirable  Discipline,  with  other
Observations  such  as  I  thinke  (for  a  great  part  of  them)
have  not  yet  seene  the  publike  light  in  any  Language.
These  hath  Master  Robert  Withers  collected  :  after  his
ten  yeeres  observation  at  Constantinople,  where  he  was
educated  by  the  care  and  cost  of  that  late  Honourable
Embassadour  from  his  Majestie,  Sir  Paul  Pindar,  and
well  instructed  by  Turkish  Schoolemasters  in  the  Lan-
guage, and  admitted  also  to  further  sight  of  their  unholy
ix  321  x

The  situation.

a.d.  PIRCHAS HIS PILG  RIMES

c.  1620.

Holies  then  is  usuall.  But  why  doe  I  hold  thee  longer
from  the  Author  himselfe ;  yea,  from  this  promised
Serraglio  ?

Chap. XV.

The  Grand  Signiors  Serraglio  : written  by  Master
Robert  Withers.

§. I.

Description  of  the  place,  partitions,  and  manifold
conveniences.

He  Serraglio wherein the Grand Signior
dwelleth,  with  all  his  Court  of  Servants,
is  wonderfully  well  situated  ; being  built
directly in that place where Bizantium
stood,  upon  a  great  point  of  the  Mayne,
which  looketh  towards  the  mouth  of  the
Blacke  Sea,  and  is  in  forme  triangle  ;  two
sides  whereof  are  circumpassed  with  Mare  Egeum,  and
the  third  joyneth  to  the  rest  of  the  Citie  of  Constanti-
nople ; It  is  enclosed  with  a  very  high  and  strong  wall,
[II.ix.1581.]  upon which there are  divers  Watch-towers, and is by
The  compasse.  computation,  about  three  Italian  miles  in  compasse. It
Gates.  hath  many  Gates,  some  of  which  open  towards  the  Sea

side,  and  the  rest  into  the  Citie  ;  but  the  chiefest  Gate
(which  indeed  is  a  very  stately  one)  is  one  of  those  towards
the  Citie,  and  by  it  every  one  goeth  in  and  out  daily ;  the
others  being  kept  shut  till  such  times  as  the  King,  or  some
of  the  principal  Officers  of  the  Serraglio  shall  cause  any
of  them  to  bee  opened,  either  for  their  pleasure  to  sit  by
the  Sea  side  :  (where  they  have  a  very  dainty  prospect,  and
may  behold  the  ships  sayling  to  and  fro)  or  for  any  other
occasion  :  likewise,  if  any  other  of  the  Land-gates  be
opened,  it  is  either  when  the  King  sendeth  privatly  to
put  some  Great  man  to  death,  or  for  the  execution  of  some
other  secret  businesse ;  but  they  are  all  locked  fast  in  the
night  againe.

322

ROBERT WITHERS

The  aforesaid  chiefe  and  common  Gate,  is  in  the  day
time  guarded  by  a  great  companie  of  Capoochees,  which
change  their  watch  by  turnes ;  and  in  the  night  likewise
by  others ;  all  which  Capoochees  are  under  the  command
of  a  Capoochee-Bashee,  which  Capoochee-Bashces  being
sixe  in  number,  are  bound  that  every  weeke  one  of  them
lie  within  the  Serraglio,  for  the  securitie  and  safeguard  of
the  same.  And  without  the  Gate,  about  ten  or  twelve
paces  off,  there  stands  a  little  House  made  of  boords,
upon  wheeles,  in  which  every  night  a  Companie  of  Jani-
zaries doe  watch,  who  upon  any  occasion  are  ready  to
awake  those  within,  and  to  give  them  notice  of  whatsoever
sudden  accident  may  happen  without.

It  is  also  well  guarded,  by  the  Sea  side,  in  the  night,
for  in  the  Watch-towers  which  are  upon  the  wall  there
lies  divers  Agiamoglans,  which  are  to  watch,  and  see  that
none  come  neere  ;  and  lest  any  shipping  should  dare  to
attempt  some  mischiefe,  they  have  Ordnance  ready
charged,  and  the  Gunners  lying  hard  by  them.

In  this  Serraglio  there  are  many/  stately  Roomes,  being
appropriated  to  the  seasons  of  the  yeere  ;  the  greatest
part  whereof  are  built  upon  plaine  ground,  some  upon  the
hills  which  are  there  ;  and  some  also  upon  the  Sea  side,
which  are  called  Kiosks,  that  is,  Roomes  of  faire  prospect,
or  (as  we  terme  them)  banquetting  Houses,  into  which
the  King  oftentimes  goeth  alone,  but  most  commonly  with
his  Concubines,  for  his  recreation.

There  is  amongst  the  aforesaid  Roomes,  the  Chamber
into  which  the  Grand  Signior  repaireth,  when  he  is  to
give  audience  to  Ambassadors ;  to  the  Bashawes  on  the
dayes  of  publique  Divan,  and  to  those  who  beino-  to
depart  upon  any  weighty  service  or  employment,  are  to
take  their  leave  of  him ;  as  also  to  such  as  are  returned
from  their  places  of  government  and  charge  which  was
before  given  unto  them  :  This  Roome  standeth  in  a  fine
little  Court  adorned  with  many  very  delicate  Fountaines,
and  hath  within  it  a  Sofa  spread  with  very  sumptuous
Carpets of  Gold, and of  crimson Velvet embroydered

323

A.D.
C. I

Chiefe  date.

Capoochee
Bashees,  sixe.

Watch  house.

Agiamoglans.
Ordnance.

Set  roomes
suted  to  the
season.

Kiosks  or

Banquetting

houses.

Chamber  of
Audience.

Sofa  spird.

A.D.

c.  1620.

Leaves  and
Flowers:  con-
trary to  their
usuall  Carpet-
superstition.

Gardens.

Cypresse-
walkes.

Womens
Lodging.

Roomes  for
Officers.

Two  large;
the  Treasurie
(Hazirneh)
and  Ward-
robe.

Sealed  doore.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

with  very  costly  Pearles,  upon  which  the  Grand  Signior
sitteth  ;  and  about  the  Chamber  in  stead  of  hangings,  the
walls  are  covered  with  very  fine  white  stones,  which  having
divers  sorts  of  leaves  and  flowers  artificially  wrought  upon
them,  doe  make  a  glorious  shew.  There  is  also  a  little
Roome  adjoyning  unto  it,  the  whole  inside  whereof  is
covered  with  Silver  plate  hatcht  with  Gold,  and  the  ground
is  spread  with  very  rich  Persian  Carpets  of  Silke  and
Gold.

There  are  belonging  to  the  said  Roomes  and  Lodgings
of  the  King,  very  faire  Gardens  of  all  the  sorts  of  Flowers
and  Fruits  that  are  to  bee  found  in  those  parts ;  with
many  very  pleasant  Walkes,  enclosed  with  high  Cypresse
trees  on  each  side  ;  and  Fountaines  in  such  abundance
that  almost  in  every  Walke  there  are  some,  such  great
delight  doth  the  Grand  Signior,  and  all  Turkes  in
generall  take  in  them.

Besides  the  aforesaid  Roomes  (which  are  very  many  and
serve  onely  for  the  Kings  owne  person)  there  is  also  the
womens  lodging,  which  is  in  a  manner  like  a  Nunnerie,
wherein  the  Queene,  the  other  Sultanaes,  and  all  the  Kings
women  and  slaves  doe  dwell :  and  it  hath  within  it  all  the
commoditie  that  may  be,  of  Bed-chambers,  Dining-
roomes,  Withdrawing-roomes,  Bagnoes,  and  all  other
kinds  of  building,  necessarie  for  the  use  and  service  of  the
women  which  dwell  therein.

There  are  likewise  divers  Roomes  and  Lodgings  built
apart  from  all  those  afore-said,  which  serve  both  for  the
principall  Officers,  those  of  a  meane  degree,  and  also  for
the  baser  sort ;  and  are  so  well  furnished,  that  not  any
wanteth  whatsoever  is  fit  and  necessary.  Amongst  which
there  are  two  large  buildings  ;  one  of  which  is  the  Hazineh
or  private  Treasurie,  and  the  other  the  Kings  Wardrobe.
These  are  two  very  handsome  buildings,  and  secure,  by
reason  of  the  thicknesse  of  their  walls,  and  strong  Iron
windowes,  and  have  each  of  them  an  Iron  doore,  both
which  are  alwaies  kept  shut,  and  that  of  the  Hazineh
sealed  with  the  Kings  Seale.

324

ROBERT WITHERS

In  the  said  Scrraglio  there  are  Roomes  for  prayer,
Bagnoes,  Schooles,  Buttries,  Kitchins,  Stillatories,  swim-
ming places,  places  to  runne  Horses  in,  places  to  wrestle,
Buts  to  shoot  at,  and  to  conclude,  all  the  commoditie
that  may  be  had  in  a  Princes  Palace  for  things  of
that  nature.

At  the  first  entrance  into  the  Serraglio,  there  is  a  very
large  and  stately  Gate,  in  the  Porch  whereof,  there  is
alwaies  a  Guard  of  about  fiftie  men  with  their  weapons  by
them  ;  as  Peeces,  Bowes,  and  Swords  :  and  having  passed
this  Gate  (through  the  which  the  Bashawes,  and  other
Great  men  may  ride  on  horse-backe)  there  is  a  very
Spacious  Court-yard  about  a  quarter  of  an  Italian  mile  in
length,  and  almost  as  much  in  bredth  ;  and  on  the  left
hand  of  the  Court  neere  unto  the  gate  there  is  a  place  to
shelter  the  people  and  horses  in  raynie  weather :  and  on
the  right  hand  there  is  an  Hospital  for  such  as  fal  sick
in  the  Serraglio,  in  which  there  are  al  things  necessary,  and
it  is  kept  by  an  Eunuch,  who  hath  many  servants  under
him  to  attend  upon  the  diseased  :  And  likewise  on  the
other  side  on  the  left  hand,  there  is  a  very  large  place
where  they  keepe  Timber  and  Carts,  and  such  like  things,
to  have  them  neere  hand  for  the  use  and  service  of  the
Serraglio  ;  over  which  there  is  a  great  Hall,  where  are
hanged  up  many  Weapons  of  Antiquity,  as  Cimitars,
Javelins,  Bowes,  Head-peeces,  Gauntlets,  &c.  which  they
keepe  to  lend  the  Souldiers  and  others,  for  to  accompany
the  Grand  Signior,  or  the  Chiefe  Vizier,  when  they  make
any  solemne  entry  into  the  Citie  of  Constantinople.

And  having  passed  through  the  aforesaid  Court,  there
is  a  second  gate  (at  which  the  Bashawes  alight)  somewhat
lesse  then  the  former,  but  more  faire  and  costly  ;  under
which  there  is  also  a  stately  Porch,  where  there  is  likewise
a  guard  of  Capoochees,  provided  with  weapons  as  they
are  at  the  first  gate,  and  then  there  is  another  Court,  lesse
then  the  former,  but  farre  more  beautifull,  by  reason  of
the  delicate  Fountaynes, and  walkes  enclosed  with  Cipresse
Trees, and the fine  greene  grasse plots in which the

325

A.D.

c.  1620.
Roomes  for
many  other
uses.

First  Gate.
Porch  and
Guard.

Great  Court.
[II.ix.1582.]

Hospital!  ivith
Officers.

Store-house.

Second  gate.

Porch  and
guard.

Lesse  Court,
of  greater
beauty.

A.D.

c.  1620.
Gazells.

Galkrie.

Nine  Kitchins
with  their
Larders.

Kings  Stable.

Horses

Furniture

admirable.

Officers  of  the

Divan.

Divan-roome.

Outzvard

Hazineh.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Gazells  doe  feed  and  bring  forth  young ;  insomuch,  as  it
is  an  exceeding  pleasant  place  ;  and  in  this  Court  (the
Grand  Signior  only  excepted)  every  one  must  goe  on  foot :
On  both  sides  of  the  said  Gate,  there  is  an  open  Gallerie
under  set  with  very  stately  Pillars,  without  the  which  the
Chiaushes,  the  Janizaries,  and  the  Spahees,  doe  use  to
stand  all  along  in  rankes  very  wel  apparelled,  at  such  times
as  there  is  a  great  Divan  held  for  the  comming  of  any
Ambassador,  to  kisse  the  Grand  Signiors  hand.

In  the  said  Court  on  the  right  hand  are  all  the  Kitchins,
beeing  in  number  nine,  all  which  have  their  Larders,  and
severall  Officers  for  their  service.  The  first,  and  greatest
is  the  Kings  ;  The  second,  the  Queenes ;  The  third,  the
Sultanaes  ;  The  fourth,  the  Capi  Agha's  ;  The  fift,  for  the
Divan  ;  The  sixt,  for  the  Aghaes,  the  Kings  Gentlemen  ;
The  seventh,  for  the  meaner  sort  of  servants  ;  The  eighth,
for  the  women ;  The  ninth,  for  the  under  Officers  of  the
Divan,  and  such  as  attend  there  to  doe  what  belongeth
unto  them  in  their  several  callings.  And  on  the  left  side
of  the  Court,  there  is  the  Kings  Stable  of  about  thirtie,
or  thirtie  five  very  brave  Horses,  which  his  Highnesse
keepeth  for  his  exercise,  when  he  pleaseth  to  runne  or
sport  with  his  Gentlemen  the  Aghaes  in  the  Serraglio  :
over  which  Stable  there  is  a  row  of  Roomes,  wherein  is
kept  all  the  Furniture  of  the  Horses,  the  which  I  having
seene  I  can  affirme,  that  they  are  of  an  extraordinary
value  ;  for,  the  Bridles,  Pettoralls,  and  Cruppers,  are  set
so  thicke  with  Jewels  of  divers  sorts,  that  the  beholders
are  amazed  to  see  them,  they  doe  so  farre  exceed  all
imagination.

Neere  adjoyning  to  the  said  Stable,  are  certayne
buildings  for  the  service  of  the  Officers  of  the  Divan  ;
and  having  passed  two  thirds  of  the  Court,  there  is  the
Roome  wherein  the  Divan  is  kept ;  unto  which  joyneth
the  Hazineh,  called  the  outward  Hazineh,  the  which  the
Divan  being  ended,  is  sealed  with  the  chiefe  Viziers
Seale  :  And  even  with  the  Divan  but  somewhat  behind
it  towards  the  left  hand,  is  the  Gate  which  leadeth  into  the

326

ROBERT WITHERS

womens  Lodgings,  called  the  Queenes  gate,  which  is  kept
and  guarded  by  a  company  of  blacke  Eunuches.

The  aforesaid  Court  endeth  at  a  third  Gate,  called  the
Kings  Gate  which  leadeth  into  the  Roomes  and  Lodgings
kept  apart  for  himselfe,  and  such  Gentlemen  as  attend
upon  him  continually  ;  neither  may  any  one  enter  therein,
but  by  an  absolute  leave  from  the  Grand  Signior  (speak-
ing of  men  of  great  qualitie)  but  such  as  are  belonging  to
the  Butterie  or  Kitchin,  and  Phisicians,  Caters  and  Sewers,
may  goe  in  and  out  with  leave  only  of  the  Capi  Agha,
who  is  the  Chiefe  Chamberlaine  of  the  Serraglio,  and  to
him  is  committed  the  keeping  of  that  Gate ;  and  he  is
alwayes  at  hand  (by  reason  his  Lodging  is  neere)  with  a
Company  of  white  Eunuches  about  him  like  himselfe
So  that,  what  is  reported  of  things  within  this  Gate,  is
for  the  most  part  by  relation  ;  for,  either  one  may  not  see
them,  or  if  hee  doe  see  them,  it  must  bee  when  the  King
is  absent ;  and  hee  must  bee  brought  in  by  some  man  of
qualitie  and  command,  by  one  of  the  Gates  at  the  Sea
side  :  the  which  also  cannot  be  obtayned  but  with  great
difficultie,  and  some  charge  too,  for  a  gratification  to  the
guide ;  they  having  not  onely  great  respect  to  their  Kings
person,  but  also  to  his  roomes  in  his  absence.

And  having  passed  the  third  Gate  (the  which  hath  also
a  very  faire  Porch)  immediately  is  seene  the  aforesaid
Roome  appointed  for  publique  audience  ;  into  which  the
Grand  Signior  repaireth  to  give  audience  to  Ambassadors,
and  to  the  Bashaws  :  and  there  is  also  another  very  faire
Court,  paved  with  very  fine  Marble  wrought  with
Mosaicall  worke,  wherein  there  are  many  delicate  Foun-
taines,  and  sumptuous  Buildings  on  all  sides,  in  which
(commonly)  the  King  useth  to  eate,  and  passe  the  time  in
some  recreation.

It  happened,  that  I  taking  hold  of  a  fit  time,  the  King
being  abroad  a  hunting,  through  the  great  friendship
which  was  twixt  my  selfe  and  the  Kahiyah  of  the  Bustangi
Bashee ;  had  the  opportunitie  (he  being  my  guide)  to  goe
into  the  Serraglio,  entring  in  at  a  Gate  by  the  Sea  side ;

327

AM.
C. I'

Queenes  gate
and  guard  of
Blacke
Eunuches.
Third  {or
Kinys)  gate.
If 'ho  may
enter.

Capi  Agha,
chief  Cham-
berlaine.

White
Eunuches.

Audience
Chamber.

Faire  Court.

The  Authors
entry  into  the
Serraglio.

A.D.

c.  1620.

Summer
Roomes.
[II.ix.1583.]

Hall.
Lake.
Terrase.

Boate.

Mutes.

Grand

Signiors  Bed-
chamber
described.

Lions.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

where  he  shewed  me  many  of  the  Kings  backward  roomes,
divers  Bagnoes,  and  many  other  very  curious  and  delight-
full  things,  both  for  the  excellencie  of  their  gilding,  and
the  abundance  of  Fountaynes  that  were  in  them.  In
particular,  I  saw  a  row  of  Sommer  Roomes  built  upon
the  top  of  a  little  Hill,  so  well  contrived  with  Hals  and
Chambers,  and  so  pleasantly  seated  and  richly  furnished,
that  it  might  very  well  be  the  Habitation  of  so  great  a
Prince.  Amongst  which  there  was  a  Hall  that  was  open
towards  the  East,  but  under-set  with  very  faire  Pillars,
which  Hall  looked  into  an  artificiall  foure  square  Lake
(which  they  call  Hawooz)  proceeding  from  about  thirtie
Fountaynes  :  which  were  built  upon  a  kind  of  Terrase  or
high  foundation  of  very  fine  Marble,  which  compassed
the  said  Lake,  so  the  water  ranne  from  the  Fountaynes
above,  downe  into  the  Lake,  and  from  the  Lake  it  ranne
through  divers  Gutters  into  certayne  Gardens :  there
might  two  men  walke  abreast  upon  the  Terrase,  where
they  should  heare  the  continuall  and  sweet  Harmonie
which  the  Fountaynes  made  with  their  Leaden  Pipes,
insomuch  that  it  was  a  most  delightfull  place.  And  in
the  Lake  there  was  a  little  Boat,  the  which  (as  I  was
enformed)  the  Grand  Signior  did  oftentimes  goe  into  with
his  Mutes  and  Buffones,  to  make  them  row  up  and  downe,
and  to  sport  with  them,  making  them  leape  into  the
water  ;  and  many  times  as  he  walked  with  them  above
upon  the  sides  of  the  Lake,  he  would  throw  them  downe
into  it,  and  plunge  them  over  head  and  eares.

I  looked  also  through  a  window  which  was  in  the  wall
of  the  said  Hall,  and  saw  his  Highnesse  Bed-chamber ;
the  wals  whereof  were  covered  with  stones  of  the  finest
China  Metall,  spotted  with  flowers  of  divers  colours,
which  made  a  very  daintie  shew  :  The  Anteportaes  were
of  cloth  of  Gold  of  Bursia,  and  their  borders  of  Crimson
Velvet,  embroydered  with  Gold  and  Pearles  :  the  posts  of
the  Bed-stead  were  of  silver,  hollow ;  and  in  stead  of
knobs  on  the  tops  of  them  there  were  set  Lions  made  of
Chrystall ; the  Canopie  over  it  was  of  Cloth  of  Gold,  and

.128

ROBERT WITH EKS

A.D.
I  . l620.

Bason  and
Ewre  of  gold.

so  were  the  Bolsters  and  the  Mattresses.  The  floore  of
this  Chamber  (as  of  the  other  Roomes  also)  and  the  Sofaes,
were  covered  with  very  costly  Persian  Carpets  of  silke
and  Gold,  and  the  Pallets  to  sit  on,  with  the  Cushions  to
leane  upon,  were  of  very  rich  cloth  of  Gold.

There  was  hanging  in  the  middest  of  the  aforesaid  Hall
a  very  great  Lanthorne,  the  forme  whereof  was  round,  and  Lantkarnt
the  barres  of  silver  gilt,  and  set  very  thicke  with  Rubies,
Emeralds,  and  Turkesses ;  the  panes  likewise  were  of
very  fine  Chrystall,  which  made  a  very  splendent  shew.  I
saw  also  a  Bason  and  Ewre  to  wash  with,  of  massie  Gold,
set  with  Rubies  and  Turkesses,  which  did  beautifie  the
Roome  exceedingly.

Behind  the  Hall  there  was  a  place  to  shoot  in,  where  I  Shooting,
saw  many  very  stately  Bowes  and  Arrowes  ;  and  there
were  showne  unto  mee,  such  strange  passages  made  with
Arrowes  by  the  King  himselfe  through  Brasse  and  Iron,
that  me  thought  it  was  almost  unpossible  to  bee  done  by
the  arme  of  any  man.

The  Roome  which  is  called  the  publike  Divan,  hath
beene  built  of  late  yeeres ;  it  is  foure  square,  and  about
eight  or  nine  paces  every  way  from  side  to  side  ;  it  hath
behind  it  another  Roome  for  the  service  thereof,  and  one
also  at  the  comming  into  the  Divan,  on  the  right  hand,
divided  only  by  a  woodden  rayle,  with  many  other
Roomes  somewhat  distant  from  it,  which  serve  for  the
expedition  of  sundry  businesses :  This  Divan  is  called
publike,  because  any  kinde  of  person  whatsoever  pub-
liquely  and  indifferently,  may  have  free  accesse  unto  it
to  require  Justice,  to  procure  grants,  and  to  end  their
Causes  and  Controversies,  of  what  nature,  condition,  or
import  so  ever  they  bee.

PublikeDivan
described.

329

R.  n.

A.D.

c.  1620.

riJRCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Divan  dayes
fcf  Officers.
Vizirs.
Cadees  and
Cadilcschers.

Deftcrdars

and

Reiskitarob.

Secretaries  y
Gierke.

Chiaushes.

[II.ix.1584.]
Manner  of
Session  or
Court.

§.  11.

Of  the Divan Days,  Judges, Session, Indicature,
Dyes,  Accounts.

He  Divan  dayes  are  foure  in  the  Weeke;  viz.
Saturday,  Sunday,  Munday,  and  Tuesday,  upon
which  dayes,  the  Chiefe  Vizir,  with  all  the  rest  of
the  Vizirs ;  the  two  Cadileschers  of  Grsecia  and  Natolia
(which  are  the  Chiefe  over  all  the  Cadies  of  those  two
Provinces ;  which  Cadees  are  men  of  the  Law,  who  by
priviledge  doe  governe  in  all  places  and  Cities  of  the
Ottoman  Empire,  as  Justices  of  Peace  doe  with  us,  but
with  a  little  greater  domination)  the  three  Defterdars
(whose  charge  is  to  gather  in  the  Kings  Revenues,  and
likewise  to  pay  all  the  Souldiers,  and  others  which  have
any  stipend  due  unto  them : )  The  Reiskitarob  (which  is
the  Chancellor.)  The  Nishawngee,  (that  is,  hee  which
signeth  the  Commandements  and  Letters  with  the  Grand
Signiors  marke.)  The  Secretaries  of  all  the  Bashawes,
and  other  great  men ;  a  great  number  of  Clerkes  or
Scriveners,  which  are  alwayes  at  hand  attending  at  the
doore  of  the  Divan  ;  The  Chiaush  Bashee,  who  all  that
while  that  he  is  in  the  Serraglio,  carrieth  a  silver  staffe  in
his  hand ;  and  many  Chiaushes  also  to  attend,  that  at  the
command  of  the  Vizir  they  may  bee  readie  to  bee  dis-
patched with  such  order  as  shall  bee  given  them  by  him,
to  what  place,  or  to  whom  soever ;  For,  they  are  those
which  are  employed  in  Ambassies,  in  ordinary  Messages,
to  summon  men  to  appeare  before  the  Justice,  to  keepe
close  Prisoners,  and  in  fine  to  performe  all  businesses  of
that  nature.  All  which  aforesaid  Officers,  from  the  highest
to  the  lowest  are  to  be  at  the  Divan  by  breake  of  day.

The  Vizirs  being  come  into  Divan,  doe  sit  within  at
the  further  end  thereof,  with  their  faces  towards  the  doore,
upon  a  bench  which  joyneth  to  the  wall,  every  one  in  his
place  as  hee  is  in  degree,  sitting  all  at  the  right  hand  of
the  chiefe  Vizir  (for  with  them  the  left  is  counted  the

330

ROBERT WITHERS

c.  1620.
upper  hand)  and  on  his  left  hand  upon  the  same  bench  doe  Left  the  upper
sit  the  two  Cadileschers,  first  hee  of  Grecia,  as  being  the  hand-
more  noble  and  famous  Province,  and  then  hee  of  Natolia.
And  on  the  right  side  at  the  comming  in  at  the  doore  :
doe  sit  the  three  Defterdars,  who  have  behind  them  (in  the
aforesayd  roome  which  is  divided  with  a  woodden  rayle)
all  the  sayd  Clerkes  or  Scriveners  who  sit  upon  the  ground,
with  Paper  and  Pennes  in  their  hands, being  ready  to
write  whatsoever  is  commanded  them. And  on  the  other
side  (over  against  the  Defterdars)  doth  sit  the  Nishawngee,  Nishatcngee.
with  his  Pen  in  his  hand  :  having  his  Officers  round  about
him. And  in the  middest  of  the  roome  doe  stand  all
such  as  require  audience  of  the  Bench.

Now  being  all  come  together,  and  every  man  set  in  his
owne  place,  forthwith  the  Petitioners  begin  their  suites,
one  by  one  (who  have  no  need  of  Attorneyes,  for  every  No  Attorneys.
one  is  to  speake  for  himselfe)  referring  themselves  to  the
judgement  and  sentence  of  the  Chiefe  Vizir,  who  (if  hee  Chiefe  Vixirs
please) may end  all ; for the other Bashawes doe not  Potcer-
speake,  but  attend  till  such  time  as  hee  shall  referre  any
thing  to  their  arbitriment,  as  oftentimes  hee  doth,  for  hee
having  once  understood  the  substance  onely  of  the  Cause  ;
(to  free  himselfe  from  too  much  trouble)  remits  the  decid-  Manner  0/
ing  of  the  greatest  part  to  others  ; As  for  example,  if  it  «ecitimZ-
bee  appertayning  to  the  Civill  Law,  hee  remits  it  to  the
Cadeleschers. If  it  bee  of  Accounts,  to  the  Defterdars.
If  of  Falshood,  (as  counterfeiting  the  Marke  or  such  like)
to  the  Nishawngee. If  concerning  Merchants,  or  Mer-
chandizes (wherein  there  may  bee  any  great  difficultie)  to
some  one  of  the  other  Bashawes  which  sit  by  him  ; so
that  after  this  manner  he  doth  exceedingly  ease  himselfe
of  so  great  a  burthen,  which  otherwise  hee  alone  should
bee  enforced  to  undergoe ; reserving  onely  to  himselfe
that  which  hee  thinketh  to  bee  of  greatest  import  and
consequence. And on this wise they spend the time
untill  it  bee  Noone  : at  which  houre  (one  of  the  Sewers
being  appointed  to  bee there  present) the  Chiefe  Vizir
commands  that  the  Dinner  bee  brought  in,  and  immedi-  Dinner  rites.

33i

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1620.

ately  all  the  common  people  depart.  So  the  roome  being
free,  the  Tables  are  made  readie  after  this  manner  before
the  Chiefe  Vizir,  there  is  set  upon  a  stoole  a  thinne  round

Copper  plate,  plate  of  Copper  tinned,  about  the  bignesse  of  the  bottome
of  a  Barrell,  at  which  hee  with  one  or  two  at  the  most  of
the  other  Bashawes,  doe  eate ;  the  like  is  prepared  for  the
rest  of  the  Bashawes  which  doe  eate  together :  And
another  for  the  Cadileschers  ;  one  for  the  Defterdars  ;  and
one  likewise  for  the  Nishawngee. And  having  every  one

Napkin.  a  Napkin  spread  upon  his  knees  to  keepe  his  Garments

cleane ;  and  a  great  quantitie  of  Bread  being  layd  readie
round  about  the  sayd  Copper  plates,  immediately  the  Meate
is  brought  in,  and  set  before  them  upon  the  Plates  in  great
Dishes  (which  they  call  Tepsee)and  still  as  they  have  eaten
of  one  Dish,  the  Sewer  takes  off  that  and  sets  on  another.

Dyet.  Their dyet is ordinarily Mutton, Hennes, Pigeons,

Geese,  Lambe,  Chickens,  broath  of  Rice  and  Pulse,
dressed  in  divers  manners,  and  some  Tarts  or  such  like
at  the  last ;  so  in  very  short  space  they  make  an  end  of
their  Dinner. That  which  remayneth  of  the  sayd  Tables,

Officers.  the  Officers  of  the  Divan  doe  eate,  but  they  have  more

also  allowed  and  brought  them  from  their  Kitchin. The

Drinke.  Bashawes  and  other  Great  men,  have  Drinke  brought  unto

them,  which  is  Sherbet,  in  great  Porcelaine  Dishes ;  but
the  others  doe  either  not  drinke  at  all,  if  they  doe  drinke,
it  is  faire  Water  brought  them  from  the  Fountaines.  And
the  same  time,  when  the  Vizirs  of  the  Bench  and  others  of

Under-officen  the  Divan  are  at  Dinner,  the  under  Officers,  Waiters,  and

under-dyet.  Keepers,  doe  dine  also  ;  the  which  are  not  lesse  ordinarily
then  foure  or  five  hundred  persons,  but  their  food  is
nothing  but  Bread  and  Pottage,  which  they  call  Churva.

Dinner  being  ended,  the  chiefe  Vizir  attendeth  onely
publique  Affaires,  and  taking  Counsell  together  (if  hee
pleaseth  and  thinketh  it  fit)  with  the  other  Bashawes  ;  at
last,  he  determineth  and  resolveth  of  all  within  himselfe,
and  prepareth  to  goe  in  unto  the  King ;  It  being  the
ordinarie  custome  so  to  doe  in  two  of  the  foure  Divan
dayes,  that  is,  upon  Sunday,  and  upon  Tuesday ;  to  render

332

ROBERT WITHERS

an  account  unto  his  Majestie,  of  all  such  businesses  as  hee
hath  dispatched.  And  to  this  end  the  Grand  Signior
(after  hee  hath  dined  also)  repayreth  unto  his  Chamber  of
Audience,  and  being  set  downe  upon  a  Sofa,  sendeth  the
Capi  Agha  (which  hath  in  his  hand  a  Silver  staffe)  to  call
first  the  Cadileschers,  who  immediately  rise  up  out  of
their  places,  and  having  bowed  to  the  chiefe  Vizir,  they
depart,  being  accompanied  with  the  sayd  Capi  Agha,  and
Chiaush  Bashee,  who  goe  before  them  with  their  Silver
staves  in  their  hands,  and  so  they  goe  in  unto  the  King,
to  give  account  and  make  him  acquainted  with  what  hath
passed  concerning  their  Charge,  and  so  they  being  dis-
missed, (for  that  day)  they  goe  directly  home  to  their
owne  Houses.

Next  after  them  are  called  the  Defterdars,  who  in  the
same  manner  are  brought  unto  the  King,  and  having  dis-
patched, they  take  leave,  and  give  place  to  the  Vizirs  who
are  called  last  of  all,  and  goe  together  in  a  ranke  one  after
another,  the  Chiefe  Vizir  being  formost,  ushered  along
by  the  two  aforesayd  Silver  staves.  And  being  come
before  the  presence  of  the  Grand  Signior,  they  stand  with
their  hands  before  them,  holding  downe  their  heads,  in
token  of  Humilitie ;  and  so  none  but  the  Chiefe  Vizir
speaketh,  and  gives  an  account  of  what  hee  thinketh  fit,
delivering  his  Memorials  or  Arzes  one  by  one,  the  which
the  King  having  read,  the  Vizier  taketh  them,  and  having
put  them  into  a  little  crimson  Sattin  bagge,  hee  most
humbly  layeth  them  downe  againe  before  his  Majestie  :
and  so  if  the  Grand  Signior  demand  no  further  of  him
(the  other  Bashawes  not  having  spoken  one  word  all  this
while)  they  all  depart  and  take  horse  at  the  second  Gate  ;
and  being  accompanied  by  their  owne  people,  and  by  divers
others  (especially  the  chiefe  Vizier)  who  is  brought  even
into  his  owne  house  by  a  great  companie  of  Chiaushes
and  others  all  for  the  most  part  on  horse-backe)  they  goe
every  one  to  his  owne  Serraglio,  and  so  the  Divan  is
ended  for  that  day,  it  being  about  two  houres  after  noone.

It  is  to  be  noted  that  sometimes  also  the  Ap-ha  of  the

AD.

c  1620.
Giving

account  to  the
King.

By  the
Cadileichers.

By  the
Defterdars.

By  the  Vizirs.

Reverence.

[II.ix.1585.]

Departure.

333

A.D.

c.  1620.
Captaine
Bashaw.

Agha  of  the
Janizaries.

King's  private

awfull

window.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Janizaries,  and  the  Captaine  Bashaw  come  to  the  Divan,
when  they  are  at  home  in  Constantinople,  and  have  busi-
nesse  to  doe  there :  but  the  Captaine  Bashaw  onely  doth
goe  in  unto  the  King  (which  also  may  not  be  but  in
companie  of  the  other  Bashawes)  to  acquaint  his  High-
nesse  with  the  state  and  affaires  of  the  Arsenal  and
Armado  ;  his  place  in  the  Divan  is  upon  the  same  Bench,
but  yet  hee  sitteth  last  of  all  the  Bashawes,  unlesse  he
bee  one  of  the  Viziers  (as  it  is  often  seene)  and  then  hee
sitteth  second,  or  third,  as  he  is  in  degree  by  election  :  but
the  Agha  of  the  Janizaries  doth  not  sit  in  Divan,  but
sitteth  under  the  open  Gallerie  on  the  right  hand,  within
the  second  Gate ;  and  if  so  bee  it  so  fall  out,  upon  some
extraordinarie  businesse,  that  hee  be  to  goe  in  unto  the
King,  then  he  goeth  first  of  all  others ;  and  being  come
out  againe  from  him,  he  sitteth  downe  againe  in  his  place,
untill  the  Divan  be  ended  ;  and  he  is  the  last  that  departeth
of  all  the  great  men.

The  Grand  Signiors  Predecessors  were  alwaies  wont,
and  this  man  sometimes  commeth  privately  by  an  upper
way  to  a  certaine  little  window  which  looketh  into  the
Divan,  right  over  the  head  of  the  chiefe  Vizier,  and  there
sitteth  with  a  Lattice  before  him,  that  he  may  not  be
seene,  to  heare  and  see  what  is  done  in  the  Divan  ;  and
especially  at  such  times  when  he  is  to  give  audience  to
any  Ambassadour  from  a  great  Prince,  to  see  him  eate,
and  heare  him  reason  with  the  Bashawes :  and  by  this  his
comming  to  that  window,  the  chiefe  Vizier  (who  alwaies
standeth  in  jeopardy  of  losing  his  head,  upon  any  dis-
pleasure of  the  Grand  Signior)  is  enforced  to  carrie  him-
selfe  very  uprightly,  and  circumspectly  in  the  managing
of  his  affaires.

334

ROBERT WITHERS  a.d.

c.  1620.

§•  in.

Of  Ambassadours  entertaynment  and  audience.

Hen  it  falleth  out  that  an  Ambassadour  from  any  Ambassadors
great  King  is  to  kisse  the  Grand  Signiors  hand,  it  audience-
must  bee  either  upon  a  Sunday  or  upon  a  Tues-
day ;  for  those  are  the  dayes  appointed  for  his  Highnesse
to  give  audience,  to  the  end  he  may  not  bee  troubled
at  other  times :  and  then  the  Vizier  commandeth  that
there  be  a  great  Divan,  which  is,  by  calling  together  all
the  Great  men  of  the  Port,  all  the  Chiaushees,  all  the
Mutaferakaes,  all  the  Spahees,  and  all  the  Janizaries ;  who
are  every  one  of  them  commanded  by  their  Captaines  to
apparell  themselves  in  the  best  manner  that  they  are  able  ;
and  to  goe  every  one  to  his  ordinary  place  in  the  second
Court,  and  there  to  stand  in  orderly  rankes  ;  who  indeed
make  a  very  goodly  shew,  for  they  are  very  well  clothed,
and  are  most  of  them  of  comely  personage.

The  Divan  being  all  in  order  (in  which  at  that  time  Embassador
there  are  very  few  or  no  particular  causes  at  all  handled)  entertained  at
the  chiefe  Vizier  sendeth  the  Chiaush  Bashee,  with  many
of  his  Chiauches  on  horse-backe  to  fetch  the  Ambassadour,
who  being  come  to  the  Divan,  is  set  face  to  face  close
before  the  chiefe  Vizier  upon  a  stoole  covered  with  cloth
of  Gold ;  and  having  for  a  while  complimented  and  used
some  pleasant  discourse  together ;  the  Bashaw  com-
mandeth that  the  dinner  bee  brought,  the  which  is  done
after  the  aforesaid  manner,  (only  the  round  plate  Table,
on  which  the  meate  is  set  is  of  Silver,  and  the  victuals
are  more  delicate  and  in  greater  abundance.)  And  so  the
Ambassadour,  and  the  chiefe  Vizier,  with  one  or  two  of
the  other  Bashawes  doe  eate  together :  and  for  every  such
Banquet  at  such  times,  the  Grand  Signior  alloweth  the
Steward  a  thousand  Crownes  to  spend.

They  having  dined,  the  Vizier  entertayneth  the
Ambassadour :  with  some  discourse  till  such  time  as  the
Ambassadours people have also dined ; and then the

335

A.D.

c.  1620.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Master  of  the
Ceremonies.

His  admission
tothePresence.

Ambassadour  together  with  his  owne  attendants  retire
into  a  certaine  place  neere  the  Grand  Signiors  Gate,  where
hee  stayeth  till  such  time  as  all  the  orders  of  the  Divan
have  had  audience  of  the  King,  who  being  dismissed,  doe
all  depart  (except  the  Bashawes  onely,  who  for  the  Grand
Signiors  honour  are  to  stay  and  attend  in  the  Roome  upon
his  Majestic)  And  then  the  Ambassadour  is  called  by
the  Master  of  the  Ceremonies,  by  whom  hee  is  brought
to  the  Gate,  whereat  the  Capi  Agha  standeth  with  a  ranke
of  Eunuches,  which  Capi  Agha  leadeth  him  to  the  doore
of  the  Roome,  where  there  doe  stand  two  Capoochee
Bashees  ready,  who  take  the  Ambassadour,  the  one  by  one
arme,  and  the  other  by  the  other,  and  so  leade  him  to  kisse
his  Highnesse  hand,  which  he  having  done,  they  leade
him  backe  in  the  same  manner  to  the  wall  of  the  Roome,
where  hee  standeth  till  such  time  as  the  said  Capoochee
Bashees,  have  also  led  such  of  the  Ambassadours  Gentle-
[II.ix.1586.]  men  as  are  appointed  to  kisse  the  Kings  hand:  and  then
the  Druggaman  declareth  the  Ambassadours  Commission,
to  which  the  Grand  Signior  maketh  no  answer,  but  only
speaketh  a  word  or  two  to  the  chiefe  Vizir  to  licence  him ;
and  so  the  Ambassadour  departeth,  doing  reverence  to
the  King,  bowing  downe  his  head,  and  not  pulling  of  his
Hat  or  Cap  at  all.

This  one  particular  is  worthie  the  observation,  and
that  is  this ;  There  is  not  any  person  whatsoever,  as  well
Ambassadour  as  other,  which  being  to  kisse  the  Grand
Signiors  hand,  that  is  not  vested  with  a  Vest  given  him  by
the  Grand  Signior.  And  to  this  end,  before  the  Ambas-
sadour goeth  in  to  the  King,  the  chiefe  Vizir  sendeth  him
so  many  Vests  as  are  appointed  in  the  Canon,  for  him  and
his  Gentlemen,  who  put  them  on  the  place  where  the
Ambassadour  stayeth  till  the  King  sends  for  him  to  have
his  audience.  The  said  Vests  are  of  divers  sorts,  of  which
there  is  one  or  two  for  the  Ambassadors  owne  person  of
cloth  of  Gold  or  Bursia  ;  the  other  being  of  lowe  price
worth  little  or  nothing.  But  in  lieu  of  those  Vests,  there
is  not  any  Ambassadour  (which  is  to  goe  to  the  King  for

336

Departure.

Vesting.

ROBERT WITHERS  ad

c.  1620.
his  audience ;)  or  Bashaw  (which  at  his  returne  from  some
employment  abroad,  is  to  kisse  his  hand  ;)  but  they  pre-  Recommence.
sent  him  to  the  full  of  what  the  Canon  requireth,  inso-
much that  the  Grand  Signior  receiveth  farre  more  then  he
giveth.  Besides,  the  Bashawes  (over  and  above  the
ordinarie  Canon)  doe  give  him  exceeding  great  and  rich
Presents  ;  together  with  great  summes  of  money  ;  some-
times, to  the  end  they  may  continue  in  his  grace  and
favour.

Other  Ambassadours  which  come  from  petie  Princes  or
States,  howbeit  they  are  vested  also  with  Vests  given  them
by  the  Grand  Signior,  yet  they  goe  not  to  the  Divan  in
that  pompe,  neither  are  they  feasted  as  the  others  are,  but
goe  privatly,  carrying  their  Present  with  them  ;  howso-
ever they  are  lead  in  unto  the  King  after  the  aforesaid
manner.

It  is  to  be  noted,  that  all  Ambassadours  from  absolute All  Ambassa-
Princes,  as  well  ordinary  as  extraordinary,  (except  those °7S ut
from  the  Signioria  of  Venice,  to  whom  from  their  first  t^e  £•'
introduction  it  was  denied)  all,  I  say,  lie  at  the  charges  of  charge.
the  Grand  Signior ; for,  from  his  owne  store  they  have
allowed  them  Wheat,  Barlie,  Pulse,  Wood,  Coles,  Hay,
the  custome  of  their  Wine,  and  all  other  necessaries  to
spend  in  their  houses,  and  from  the  Defterdar  so  many
Aspars  per  diem ; which  provision,  though  now  of  late
it  be  somewhat  hard  to  be  gotten  in  ; yet  by  gifts  and
importunitie,  in  the  end  they  receive  the  greatest  part  of
it,  though  the  Officers  will  share  with  them.

Having  thus  farre  made  description  of  the  Serraglio,
and  the  Buildings  which  are  therein  ;  with  some  other
particulars  belonging  unto  it,  according  to  that  which  I
have  seene  and  heard  by  relation.  It  followeth  that  I
speake  somewhat  touching  those  which  dwell  in  it,  and
concerning  their  ministerie  and  functions.

[§. fill.

IX  337  Y

A.D.

c.  1620.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

§.  IIII.

Of  the  persons  which  live  in  the  Serraglio  :  and
first  of  the  Women  and  Virgins,  their  manner
of  life  there.

One  Lord,  the
rest  Slaves.

2000.  within
the  Kings  gate.

1 1.  or  1200.
women.

Virgins.

Irst,  I  say  that  all  they  which  are  in  the  Serraglio,
both  men  and  women,  are  the  Grand  Signiors
slaves,  and  so  are  all  they  which  are  subject  to  his
Empire :  for,  as  hee  is  their  onely  Soveraigne,  so  they
doe  all  of  them  acknowledge,  that  whatsoever  they  doe
possesse  or  enjoy,  proceedeth  meerely  and  simply  from
his  goodwill  and  favour.

This  Serraglio  may  rightly  bee  termed  the  Seminarie
or  Nurcerie  of  Subjects ;  for,  in  it  all  they  have  their
bringing  up,  which  afterward  become  the  principall
Officers,  and  subordinate  Rulers  of  the  state  and  affaires
of  the  whole  Empire.

They  which  are  within  the  third  Gate,  called  the  Kings
gate,  are  about  two  thousand  persons  men  and  women,
whereof  the  women  (old  and  young  one  with  another,
what  with  the  Kings  Concubines,  old  women,  and  women
servants)  may  bee  about  eleven  or  twelve  hundred.  Now,
those  which  are  kept  up  for  their  beauties,  are  all  young
Virgins  taken  and  stollen  from  forren  Nations,  who  after
they  have  beene  nurtured  in  good  manners,  and  can  play
on  Instruments,  sing,  dance,  and  sew  curiously,  they  are
given  to  the  Grand  Signior  as  Presents  of  exceeding  great
value  ;  and  the  number  of  these  encreaseth  daily,  accord-
ing as  they  are  sent  and  presented  by  the  Tartars,  by  the
Bashawes,  and  other  great  men,  to  the  King  and  Queene  :
they  doe  likewise  decrease  sometimes,  according  as  the
Grand  Signior  seeth  fit,  who  upon  some  occasions  and
accidents,  causeth  many  of  them  to  be  sent  out  of  this
Serraglio  into  the  old  Serraglio,  which  is  also  a  very
goodly  and  spacious  place,  as  hereafter  I  shall  take  occa-
sion to  make  mention  of.

These Virgins, immediatly  after their  comming into

338

ROBERT WITHERS

the  Serraglio  are  made  Turkes,  which  is  done  by  using
this  ceremonie  onely,  to  hold  up  their  fore-finger,  and  say,
Law  illaw-heh  il  Allawh  Muhamedresull  Allawh,  that  is,
there  is  no  God  but  God  alone,  and  Mahomet  is  the
Messenger  of  God  :  and  according  as  they  are  in  age  and
disposition,  (being  proved  and  examined  by  an  old  woman
called  Cahiyah  Cadun,  that  is,  as  wee  say,  the  Mother  of
the  Maides)  so  they  are  placed  in  a  Roome  with  the  others
of  the  same  age,  spirit,  and  inclination,  to  dwell  and  live
together.  Now,  in  the  Womens  lodgings,  they  live  just
as  the  Nunnes  doe  in  their  great  Monasteries ;  for,  these
Virgins  have  very  large  Roomes  to  live  in,  and  their
Bed-chambers  will  hold  almost  a  hundred  of  them  a
piece  :  they  sleepe  upon  Sofaes,  which  are  built  long  wise
on  both  sides  of  the  Roome,  so  that  there  is  a  large  space
in  the  midst  for  to  walke  in.  Their  Beds  are  very  course
and  hard,  and  by  every  ten  Virgins  there  lies  an  old
woman  :  and  all  the  night  long  there  are  many  lights
burning,  so  that  one  may  see  very  plainely  throughout
the  whole  Roome ;  which  doth  both  keepe  the  yong
Wenches  from  wantonnesse,  and  serve  upon  any  occasion
which  may  happen  in  the  night :  neere  unto  the  said  Bed-
chambers they  have  their  Bagnoes,  and  Kitchins  for  their
use  at  all  times,  with  a  great  abundance  of  Fountaines  of
which  they  are  served  with  water.  Above  over  the  said
Bed-chambers  there  are  divers  Roomes,  where  they  sit
and  sew,  and  keepe  their  Chists  in  which  they  lay  up
their  apparell.  They  feed  by  whole  Camaradaes,  and  are
served  and  waited  upon  by  other  women  ;  so  that  thev
doe  not  want  any  thing  whatsoever  which  is  necessary  for
them.  They  have  other  places  likewise  where  they  goe
to  schoole,  to  learne  to  speake  and  reade  the  Turkish
tongue,  to  sew,  and  play  on  Instruments ;  and  so  they
spend  the  day  with  their  Mistresses  which  are  ancient
women  :  some  houres  notwithstanding  being  allowed  them
for  their  recreation,  to  walke  in  their  Gardens,  and  use
such  sports  as  they  familiarly  exercise  themselves
withall.

A.D.

c.  1620.
Virgins  made
Turkes,  and
how.

KahiahCadun
the  Mother  of
the  Maides.

[II.ix.1587.]
Their  manner
of  life.
Chambers.

Beds

Bagnoes.

Sezving  and
Chists.

Schooling  and
Mistresses.

Recreations.

339

A.D.

c.  1620.
Kings  cam-
ming to  them.

Preparations.

Bed-chamber
rites.

Reward.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  King  doth  not  at  all  frequent  or  see  these  Virgins,
unlesse  it  be  at  the  instant  when  they  are  first  given  him,
or  else  in  case  that  he  desire  one  of  them  for  his  bed-
fellow, or  to  shew  him  some  pastime  with  Musike  and
tumbling  trickes :  and  then  hee  giveth  notice  to  the  afore-
said Cahiyah  Cadun  of  his  purpose,  who  immediatly
chooseth  out  such  as  shee  thinketh  to  bee  the  most  amiable
and  fairest,  and  having  placed  them  in  good  order  in  a
Roome,  in  two  rankes,  halfe  on  the  one  side  and  halfe  on
the  other,  shee  forthwith  brings  in  the  King,  who  walking
foure  or  five  turnes  in  the  midst  of  them,  and  having
viewed  them  well,  taketh  good  notice  of  her  which  he
best  liketh,  but  sayeth  nothing,  onely  as  he  goeth  out
againe,  he  throweth  a  Hand-kerchiefe  into  that  Virgins
hand,  by  which  shee  knoweth  that  shee  is  to  lie  with  him
that  night ;  and  she  being  wondrous  glad  of  so  good  a
fortune,  to  be  chosen  out  from  among  so  many  to  enjoy
the  societie  of  an  Emperour,  hath  all  the  art  that  possible
may  bee  shewen  upon  her  by  the  Cadun,  in  attiring,
painting,  and  perfuming  her,  and  so  at  night  shee  is
brought  to  sleepe  with  the  Grand  Signior  in  the  womens
lodgings :  (there  being  divers  Chambers  appropriated  for
that  businesse  onely:)  and  being  in  bed  they  have  two
great  Waxe  lights  burning  by  them  all  night,  one  at  the
beds  feet,  and  the  other  by  the  doore  ;  and  there  are
appointed  (by  the  Cadun)  divers  old  Blacke-moore
women,  which  watch  by  turnes  that  night  in  the  Chamber,
two  at  a  time,  one  to  sit  by  the  said  light  at  the  Beds  feet,
and  the  other  by  the  doore,  and  when  they  will  they
change,  and  other  two  supply  their  roomes,  without
making  the  least  noise  imaginable,  so  that  the  King  is  not
any  wise  disturbed.  And  in  the  morning  when  his  High-
nesse  riseth  (for  he  riseth  first)  he  changeth  all  his  apparell
from  top  to  toe,  leaving  those  which  hee  wore  to  her  that
he  lay  withall,  and  all  the  money  that  was  in  his  pockets
were  it  never  so  much  ;  and  so  departeth  to  his  owne
lodgings,  from  whence  also  he  sendeth  her  immediatly  a
Present  of  Jewels,  Vests  and  Money  of  great  value,  accord-

340

ROBERT WITHERS

ing  to  the  satisfaction  and  content  which  he  received
from  her  that  night :  in  the  same  manner  hee  is  to  deale
with  all  the  others  which  hee  maketh  use  of  in  that  kind,
but  with  some  he  continueth  longer,  and  enlargeth  hi
bounty  more  towards  some  then  to  others,  according  as
his  humour  and  affection  to  them  encreaseth  ;  by  their
fulfilling  his  lustfull  desires.  And  if  it  so  fall  out,  that
any  one  of  them  doe  conceive  by  him  and  bring  forth  his
first  begotten  child,  she  is  called  by  the  name  of  Sultana
Queene,  and  if  the  child  bee  a  sonne,  then  shee  is  con-
firmed and  established  by  great  Feasts  and  Solemnities  ;
and  hath  a  dwelling  apart  assigned  unto  her,  of  many
stately  Roomes  well  furnished,  and  many  servants  to
attend  upon  her :  The  King  likewise  alloweth  her  a  very
sufficient  Revenue,  that  shee  may  give  away  and  spend
at  her  pleasure,  in  whatsoever  shee  may  have  occasion  ;
and  all  they  of  the  Serraglio  doe  acknowledge  her  for
Queene,  shewing  all  the  respect  and  dutie  that  may  bee,
both  to  her  and  hers.

The  other  women  (howsoever  they  bring  forth  issue)
are  not  called  Queenes  ;  yet  they  are  called  Sultanaes,
because  they  have  had  carnall  commerce  with  the  King.
And  shee  onely  is  called  Queene,  which  is  the  Mother  of
the  first  begotten  Sonne,  Heire  to  the  Empire  :  the  which
Sultanaes  being  frequented  by  the  King  at  his  pleasure,
have  also  this  prerogative,  to  be  immediatly  removed
from  the  common  sort,  and  to  live  in  Roomes  apart,
exceeding  well  served  and  attended,  and  have  no  want
either  of  Money,  or  of  Apparell,  in  conformitie  of  their
degree.  All  these  Sultanaes  doe  resort  together  very
familiarly,  when  they  please  ;  but  not  without  great  dis-
simulation and  inward  malice,  fearing  lest  the  one  should
be  better  beloved  of  the  King  then  the  other ;  howbeit
in  outward  shew  they  use  all  kind  of  curtesie  one  towards
another.

And  if  it  happen  that  the  first  begotten  sonne  of  the
Queene  (Heire  to  the  Empire)  should  die,  and  another  of
the  Sultanaes  should  have  a  second  sonne ;  then  her  sonne

34i

A.D.

c.  1620.

Sultana
Queen.

Her

allowance.

Other
Sultanaes.

Queen

changed.

A.D.

c.  1620.

[II.ix.i588.]

Nuptial!  rites.

Joynture.

Guard  of

black

Eunuches.

Canvasse-
way.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

being  to  succeed  the  deceased  Heire,  shee  is  immediatly
made  Queene,  and  the  former  shall  remayne  a  Sultana
onely :  and  so  the  title  of  Queene  runneth  from  one
Sultana  to  another,  by  vertue  of  the  sonnes  succession.

Sometimes  the  Queene  was  wont  to  bee  wedded  to  the
King,  but  now  shee  passeth  without  the  Kebin,  that  is,
without  an  assignment  of  any  Joynture,  or  celebrating
the  Nuptiall  rites ;  which  is  nothing  else,  but  in  the
presence  of  the  Muftee,  to  give  each  of  them  their  assent
to  Matrimonie,  of  which  the  Muftee  maketh  Hoget,  that
is,  an  authenticall  Writing  or  Testification,  not  onely  of
the  Consent  of  the  two  parties  contracted,  but  also  of  the
Dowrie  which  the  King  is  to  allow  her.

The  reason  why  the  Queenes  are  not  now  (nor  have  not
beene  of  late)  espoused ;  is,  not  to  dismember  the  Kings
Patrimonie  of  five  hundred  thousand  Chicquins  a  yeere :
For,  Sultan  Selim  having  allowed  so  much  to  the  Empresse
his  Wife,  (to  the  end  she  might  spend  freely,  and  build
Churches  and  Hospitals,  so  that  by  all  meanes  she  might
bee  honoured  and  esteemed)  left  order  by  Canon,  that  all
his  Successours  should  doe  the  like,  if  so  bee  they  deter-
mined to  be  marryed  to  their  Queenes.  But  now  the  sayd
revenues  being  otherwise  imployed,  the  Bashawes  doe
what  in  them  lyeth  to  disswade  the  Grand  Signior  from
marrying  :  and  so  much  the  rather,  because  they  would
have  none  but  the  King  alone  to  rule  :  yet  howsoever,
(married  or  not  married)  the  Mother  of  the  Heyre  is  by
every  one  called  and  acknowledged  for  Queene,  and  pre-
sented with  rich  Presents  from  all  great  Personages,  and
hath  continually  at  her  Gate,  a  Guard  of  thirtie  or  fortie
blacke  Eunuches,  together  with  the  Kuzlar  Aga  their
Master,  whom  shee  commandeth  and  imployeth  in  all  her
occasions,  and  so  doe  all  the  other  Sultanaes,  the  which
never  stirre  out  of  the  Serraglio,  but  in  companie  of  the
King  himselfe,  who  oftentimes  carrieth  either  all  or  most
of  them,  abroad  by  water  to  his  other  Serraglio's  of
pleasure.  And  in  those  wayes  through  which  they  passe
to  goe  to  and  fro  their  Kaiks,  there  is  Canvasse  pitched  on

342

ROBERT WITHERS  ad.

c.  1620.
both  sides,  and  none  are  by  them  but  blacke  Eunuches,
till  they  are  setled  close  in  the  roome  at  the  sterne  of  the
Kaik ;  then  goe  in  the  Barge-men  :  so  that  in  fine,  they
are  never  seene  by  any  man,  but  onely  by  the  Grand
Signior  and  the  Eunuches.

The  Kings  Daughters,  Sisters,  and  Aunts,  have  their  Kings  Dau^h-
lodgings  also  in  the  same  Serraglio,  being  roially  served,  teri  and
and  sumptuously  Apparelled,  and  live  together  by  them-
selves in  continuall  pleasures ;  untill  such  time  as  the
King  shall  bee  pleased  to  give  them  in  Marriage,  and  then
they  come  out  of  that  Serraglio,  and  carry  each  of  them
along  with  them  a  Chest  which  the  King  gives  them,  full
of  Gownes  of  Cloath  of  Gold,  rich  Jewels,  and  Chicquins,
to  the  value  of  at  least  thirtie  thousand  pounds  sterling
per  Chest,  and  that  is  (as  wee  call  it)  their  Portion.  They  Portion-Chest.
carrie  likewise  along  with  them,  all  that  which  they  hid
from  time  to  time,  things  of  great  price  which  have  beene
given  them,  which  sometimes  amounteth  to  a  great  matter,
and  stands  them  in  stead  all  their  lives  time.  And  if  so
bee  that  the  Grand  Signior  loves  them,  and  is  willing  to
further  them,  and  deale  roially  with  them ;  then  they  are
suffered  to  carry  out  of  the  Serraglio,  as  many  Slaves  with  Slaves  and
them  as  they  will,  (provided  they  exceed  not  the  number  Eunuches-
of  twentie  a  piece)  and  such  Eunuches  as  they  like  best
for  their  service.  These  also  being  named  Sultanaes,
reserve  still  (during  their  lives)  the  stipend  which  they
had  within  the  Serraglio  some  a  thousand,  and  some  a
thousand  five  hundred  Aspers  per  Diem,  the  Slaves  also
and  the  Eunuches  doe  likewise  enjoy  their  former  allow-
ance. Their  Houses  are  furnished,  both  with  houshold-
stuffe  and  other  necessarie  provision  from  the  Kings
Hasineh  and  Begglick,  that  they  may  live  Alia  grande,
like  Sultanaes  ;  so  that  in  conclusion,  they  live  farre  better
without  the  Serraglio  then  they  did  within.

And  if  so  bee,  that  a  Bashaw  having  marryed  one  of
them,  bee  not  provided  of  a  House  fit  for  her,  then  the
King  giveth  her  one  of  his  (for  hee  hath  many)  that  her
House  may  bee  correspondent  with  her  Greatnesse  and

343

A.D.

c.  1620.

Bill  of
Dozvrie.

Privatnesse.

Visitings.

They  are  their
Husbands
masters.
TheirDagger.

Divorce.

What  becomes
of  the  other
Women.

[II.ix.1589.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

qualitie.  Now  for  the  Husbands  part,  hee  is  on  the  con-
trarie  to  make  her  a  Bill  of  Dowrie,  which  is  called  Kebin,
as  aforesayd,  of  at  least  a  hundred  thousand  Chicquins  in
money,  besides  Vests,  Jewels,  Brooches,  and  other  Orna-
ments, amounting  to  a  great  summe.  For  although  the
fashion  of  a  Sultanaes  habite  bee  common,  and  nothing
different  from  other  Womens,  yet  the  substance  is  farre
more  proud  and  costly  ;  the  which  redounds  to  the  great
charge  and  lose  of  their  Husbands.  They  being  thus
marryed,  doe  not  at  all  converse  with  any  men,  more  then
they  did  when  they  lived  in  the  Kings  Serraglio,  (except
with  their  owne  Husbands)  but  with  women  onely ;  and
that  is  commonly  when  theygoe  upon  visits  to  see  their  old
acquaintance  in  the  Serraglio :  but  having  themselves
come  foorth  of  the  same  (as  I  sayd  before)  they  may  not
come  in  againe  without  the  Grand  Signiors  leave  and
sufferance.

These  Sultanaes  (the  Bashawes  wives)  are  for  the  most
part  their  Husbands  Masters,  and  command  them  as  they
please  :  they  alwayes  weare  a  Haniar  (that  is,  a  Dagger)
set  with  rich  Stones,  in  token  of  their  predomination,  and
call  their  Husbands  Slaves,  doing  good  or  evill  for  them,
as  they  receive  content  &  satisfaction  from  them,  or  as
they  find  them  powerfull  with  the  King.  And  sometimes
they  put  their  Husbands  away  and  take  others,  but  not
without  the  Grand  Signiors  leave,  which  would  prove  to
bee  the  death  and  ruyne  of  the  poore  Husbands.

Now  the  other  women,  which  never  were  so  fortunate
as  to  bee  beloved  of  the  King,  live  together  and  dyet  with
the  rest,  wasting  their  youthfull  dayes  amongst  themselves
in  evill  thoughts,  (for  they  are  too  well  lookt  unto  to
offend  in  Act,)  and  when  they  are  growne  old,  they  serve
for  Mistresses  and  Over-seers  of  the  young  ones,  which
daily  are  brought  into  the  Serraglio  :  but  hold  it  their  best
fortune  (their  former  hopes  of  being  Bed-fellowes  to  an
Emperour  :  being  now  frustrated)  through  some  accident,
to  bee  sent  forth  from  thence  into  the  old  Serraglio,  for
from  thence  they  may  bee  married  (if  the  Mistresse  of

344

ROBERT WITHERS

A.D.

c. 1620.

Manner  of
their  pay.

C loathes  and
Jewels.

that  place  give  her  consent)  and  take  with  them  such
money,  as  they  through  their  frugallitie  have  saved  and
spared  of  their  former  allowance  in  the  Kings  Serraglio,
and  such  things  as  have  beene  given  them,  which  may
amount  to  a  reasonable  value.  For  in  the  Serraglio  the)
get  many  things  from  the  Sultanaes,  besides  their  currant
pay  out  of  the  Kings  Hazineh,  of  fifteene  or  twentie
Aspers  per  diem  for  the  middle  sort,  and  foure  or  five
for  the  baser  sort,  the  which  is  payed  at  every  three
moneths  end,  without  any  deferring  or  contradiction  :  In
that  manner  also  are  the  Sultanaes  paide,  viz.  quarterly,
having  for  their  allowance  from  a  thousand  to  a  thousand
five  hundred  Aspers  a  piece,  per  diem.  Besides,  as  many
cloathes  as  they  will,  and  Jewels  in  great  abundance,  given
them  from  the  Kings  owne  hands.

The  women  Servants  also  have  two  Gownes  of  Cloath
a  piece,  per  annum,  and  a  piece  of  fine  Linnen  for  Smocks,
of  twentie  Pikes  long,  and  a  piece  more  fine  for  Hanker-
chiefes,  of  ten  Pikes,  and  at  the  Byram  one  silke  Gowne  By  ram-gifts
a  piece,  and  somewhat  else,  according  to  the  pleasure  and
liberalitie  of  the  Grand  Signior,  who  at  that  time  hath
commonly  a  bountifull  hand  towards  the  Women.  And
giveth  to  the  Sultanaes,  Gownes  with  very  rich  Furres,
Eare-rings,  Brooches,  Bodkins,  Bracelets  for  their  armes
and  legges,  and  such  like  things  set  with  Stones  of  great
worth ;  of  which  the  King  hath  an  abundance,  by  reason
of  the  unspeakable  number  of  Presents  which  are  given
him.  The  Sultanaes  are  likewise  presented  at  such  times,
by  the  Bashawes  and  their  Wives  (that  by  their  meanes
they  may  continue  in  grace  and  favour  with  the  Grand
Signior)  with  most  stately  and  rich  Gifts,  and  with  money
also  which  indeed  is  more  acceptable  to  them  then  any
other  kinde  of  Present.  For,  they  being  very  covetous,
doe  hoord  up  and  spend  very  sparingly,  abandoning  all  Frugalitie
manner  of  prodigalitie  (in  what  may  concerne  their  owne
private  purses)  but  witilie  provide  against  disastrous  times
which  may  betide  them,  and  especially  against  the  Kings
death : for  then  (excepting  the  Queene  which  remayneth

345

Sultanaes
Presents.

A.D.

c.  1620.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

still  in  the  Serraglio,  Mother  to  the  succeeding  King)  all
the  other  poore  desolate  Ladies  (losing  the  title  of  Sul-
ci/*/ Seraglio,  tanaes)  are  immediatly  sent  to  the  old  Serraglio,  leaving
behind  them  their  Sonnes  and  Daughters  (if  they  have
any  living)  in  the  Kings  Serraglio,  there  to  bee  kept  under
the  government  of  other  Women  appointed  for  that  service.
And  in  such  case,  finding  themselves  wealthy,  they  may
Marrie  with  men  of  reasonable  good  qualitie,  according
to  the  measure  of  their  portion  or  estate,  and  according  to
the  good-will  of  the  Mistresse  of  the  old  Serraglio,  but
with  the  Grand  Signiors  consent.  Notwithstanding,  who
will  (for  the  most  part)  not  onely  know  the  condition  of
their  Husbands,  but  also  what  Dowrie  they  will  bee  con-
tent to  make  them  sure  of,  in  case  their  Husbands  should
put  them  away  without  their  consents,  or  otherwise  leave
them  Widdowes  :  So  that  by  meanes  of  their  being  turned
out  of  the  Kings  Serraglio,  it  is  often  seene,  that  though
the  Daughter  of  the  King  bee  married  to  a  Bashaw,  yet
the  Mother  of  that  Daughter  must  bee  content  with  a
Husband  of  small  account,  farre  unequall  and  much
inferiour,  both  in  Title,  wealth,  and  reputation,  to  her
Sonne  in  Law.

The  Sultanaes  have  leave  of  the  King,  that  certayne
Jewes  women  may  at  any  time  come  into  the  Serraglio
unto  them,  who  being  extraordinary  subtill  Queanes,  and
comming  in  under  colour  of  teaching  them  some  fine
Needle-worke,  or  to  shew  them  secrets  in  making  Waters,
Oiles  and  Painting  stuffes  for  their  Faces ;  (having  once
made  friendship  with  the  Eunuches  which  keepe  the
Doores,  by  often  bribing  them)  doe  make  themselves  by
their  craftie  insinuation, so  familiar  with  the  Kings  women,
that  they  rule  them  as  they  please,  and  doe  carrie  out  any
thing  to  sell  for  them,  or  buy  and  bring  in  whatsoever  the
Sultanaes  shall  have  a  will  to.  And  hence  it  is,  that  all
such  Jewes  women  as  frequent  the  Serraglio,  doe  become
very  rich.  For,  whatsoever  they  bring  in  they  buy  it
cheape,  and  sell  it  deare  to  them  ;  and  then  on  the  con-
trary, when  they  have  Jewels  to  sell  for  the Sultanaes,

346

Daughter  pre
ferred  to  the
Mother.

Jewish
women.

Their  Arts.

KOBEKT WITHERS

A. I).

c.  1620.

(which  are  to  bee  conveighed  out  by  stealth)  they  receive
their  true  value  for  them  of  Strangers,  and  then  tell  the
simple  Ladies  who  know  not  the  worth  of  them,  (and  are
afraid  to  bee  discovered)  that  they  sold  them  perad venture
for  halfe  that  which  they  had  for  them.

And  by  this  meanes,  there  come  things  of  great  price
out  of  the  Serraglio,  to  bee  sold  at  very  easie  rates  :  yet
in  the  end  the  Jewes  have  but  a  bad  market  of  it,  for  being  III  suaesse.
discovered  to  be  rich,  and  their  wealth  to  be  gotten  by
deceit,  they  oftentimes  lose  both  Goods  and  life  too.  The
Bashawes  and  Defterdar  altogether  ayming  at  such  as  they
are,  thinking  by  that  meanes  to  restore  to  the  Grand
Signior,  that  which  hath  beene  from  time  to  time  stollen
from  him,  and  the  rather  for  that  they  themselves,  seldome
want  their  shares  in  the  estates  of  such  delinquents.

The  Women  of  the  Serraglio,  are  punished  for  their  Punishments  of
faults  very  severely,  and  extreamely  beaten  by  their  Over-  the { omen-
seers : and if they prove disobedient, incorrigible and
insolent,  they  are  by  the  Kings  order  and  expresse  com-
mandment, turned  out  and  sent  into  the  old  Serraglio,  as
being  rejected  and  cast  off,  and  most  part  of  that  they
have  is  taken  from  them. But  if  they  shall  be  found
culpable  for  Witchcraft :  or  any  such  hainous  offence,  then
are  they  tyed  and  put  into  a  Sacke,  and  in  the  Night  cast  [II.ix.1590.]
into  the  Sea :  so  that  by  all  meanes  it  behooveth  them  to  ®eath-
bee  very  obedient, and  containe themselves  within the
bounds  of  honestie  and  modestie,  if  they  meane  to  come
to  a  good  end.

Now  it  is  not  lawfull  for  any  one  to  bring  ought  in
unto  them,  with  which  they  may  commit  the  deeds  of
beastly  uncleannesse ;  so  that  if  they  have  a  will  to  eate
Cucumbers,  Gourds,  or  such  like  meates,  they  are  sent
in  unto  them  sliced,  to  deprive  them  of  the  meanes  of
playing  the  wantons ;  for,  they  all  being  young,  lustie,
and  lascivious  Wenches,  and  wanting  the  societie  of  Men
(which  would  better  instruct  them)  are  doubtlesse  of  them-
selves inclined  to  that  which  is  naught,  and  will  be  possest
with  unchast  thoughts.

347

Prevention  of
Lust.

A.D.

c.  1620.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Agiamoglans
700.

Renegado
Children.
Hozv  taken.

Hozu  used.

Apparel/.

Election  of  the
best.

Circumcision.

§•  v.

Of  the Agiamoglans, how taken, distributed  and

employed.

jlAving  already  spoken  of  the  Women,  I  now  will  say
somewhat  of  the  Agiamoglans  which  serve  in  the
SerragliOj  and  of  their  employments.  They  are
in  number  about  seven  hundred,  from  twelve  to  five  and
twentie,  or  thirtie  yeeres  of  age  at  the  most,  being  all  of
them  Christian  Renegadoes,  as  all  Agiamoglans  are,
which  are  gathered  every  three  yeeres  in  Morea,  and  in  all
the  Provinces  of  Albania ;  the  which  tythe  Children  are
disposed  of  in  this  wise.  They  are  sometimes  more,  and
sometimes  fewer,  according  to  the  discretion  of  the  Capi-
chees,  appointed  for  that  service,  but  a  whole  harvest  of
them,  seldome  or  never  exceeds  the  summe  of  two  thou-
sand, and  are  taken  from  such  Families  as  are  thought  to
bee  of  a  more  warlike  disposition ;  they  may  not  bee
(when  they  are  gathered)  of  above  twelve  or  fourteene
yeeres  of  age,  least  they  should  bee  unfit  for  a  new  course,
and  too  well  setled  in  Christianitie  :  and  being  kept  fast
for  a  while  by  the  Capichees,  they  are  then  forthwith  sent
to  Constantinople,  to  bee  distributed  and  shared  out  as
folio  weth.

So  soone  as  they  are  arrived  at  the  Port,  they  are  all
cloathed  in  Salonichi  Cloath,  it  skilleth  not  of  what  colour,
and  yellow  Caps  of  Felt  on  their  heads,  in  the  forme  of  a
Sugar-loafe.  And  being  brought  before  the  Chiefe  Vizir
(who  at  that  time  is  accompanied  with  the  other  Bashawes
and  Officers  of  the  Serraglio)  hee  maketh  choise  of  as
many,  as  he  seeth  to  bee  well-favoured  and  judgeth  to
bee  likely  to  prove  Souldiers.  Then  this  choise  being
made,  the  Youthes  chosen  by  the  Chiefe  Vizir,  are  carried
by  the  Bustangee  Bashee  into  the  Kings  owne  Serraglio,
and  there  distributed  to  such  Companies  as  want  their
compleat  number  :  then  are  they  Circumcised  and  made
Turkes, and put to learne the Turkish Tongue ; and

348

ROBERT WITHERS

A.D.

c.  1620.

The  rest  how
disposed.

according  as  their  inclination  is  discovered  by  their  Over-
seers, so  are  they  encouraged,  and  suffered  to  proceed  (if
it  bee  in  goodnesse)  and  are  taught  to  Write  and  Read  :  Schooftng,
but  they  are  in  a  manner  all  of  them  taught  to  Wrestle,
to  Leape,  to  Runne,  to  shoote  in  a  Bow,  and  to  conclude,
all  such  Exercises,  as  are  beseeming  a  Souldier.

Now  part  of  the  residue  of  them  are  distributed  by
the  Chiefe  Vizir,  into  all  the  Grand  Signiors  Gardens  and
Houses  of  pleasure,  and  into  such  Ships  as  sayle  for  the
Kings  account,  and  which  goe  to  lade  Wood  and  such  like
provision  for  the  Serraglio ;  consigning  them  to  the
Masters  of  the  sayd  Vessels,  with  this  Condition,  to
restore  them  againe  when  hee  shall  require  them  :  And
so  hee  doth  with  the  chiefe  Arts-men  of  all  sorts  of  Occu-
pations, to  the  intent  the  Youths  may  learne  and  practice
the  sayd  Arts  in  their  Lodgings  at  home  ;  when  they  are
become  Janizaries,  or  else  if  they  please  abroad  at  the
Warres  also.  Hee  giveth  likewise  to  all  the  Bashawes,
and  Great  men  of  the  Court,  as  many  as  they  please,  to
serve  them  delivering  them  by  Name  unto  them,  and
writing  them  downe  in  a  Booke,  that  hee  may  have  them
againe  when  there  shall  be  occasion  to  make  them  Jani-
zaries. Now  these  which  are  given  to  the  Bashawes,  are
the  scumme  and  refusall  of  all  the  rest ;  and  are  employed
onely  in  the  service  of  Stables,  Kitchins,  and  such  base
Offices.  But  the  other  are  put  into  divers  Serraglio's,
under  the  custodie  and  discipline  of  certayne  Eunuches,
who  are  appointed  to  bee  their  Over-seers,  and  take  care
that  they  bee  brought  up  and  trayned  in  Militarie  exer-
cises, untill  such  time  as  they  become  fit  to  bee  accepted
into  the  number  of  the  Janizaries,  in  the  roomes  of  the
Dead,  or  of  Old  ones,  which  are  no  longer  fit  for  the
Warre,  but  are  made  Otooracks,  and  have  leave  to  stay  at
home.  So  that  I  may  say,  all  these  are  in  a  manner  kept
in  a  Seminarie,  to  serve  at  all  hands.  The  King,  Qiieene,
and  Chiefe  Vizir,  employing  them  also  many  times  in  their
Buildings,  and  other  very  laborious  Offices  without
exception.

349

Otooracks,

militer

Emeriti.

A.D.

c.  1620.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Booke  and
Pension.

These  Agiamoglans  being  thus  distributed,  the  Chiefe
Vizir  presents  a  Booke  of  all  their  Names  to  the  Grand
Signior,  who  having  seene  it,  appointeth  to  every  one  his
Pension,  according  to  the  ordinary  Canon,  which  is  of  two
or  three,  or  at  the  most,  five  Aspers  per  diem.  And  the
sayd  Booke  in  which  their  severall  Pensions  are  distinctly
set  downe,  being  under-written  by  the  Kings  owne  hand,
is  forth-with  consigned  into  the  custodie  of  the  Chiefe
Defterdar,  that  every  one  may  duely  receive  his  pay.
[II.ix.1591.]  Now  this  Defterdar  is  bound,  when  hee  giveth  out  their
pay,  (that  is,  once  in  three  moneths)  to  visit  them ;  enquir-
ing who  is  dead,  and  taking  good  notice  how  the  others
live  and  spend  their  times,  whither  they  profit  or  not  by
their  Tutors  and  Over-seers.

I  will  now  returne  to  speake  of  the  Agiamoglans  of  the
Serraglio,  having  not  thought  it  superfluous  to  have
digressed  a  little  ;  for  although  it  hath  not  beene  to  that
purpose,  yet  it  may  proove  delightsome  to  those  who  have
not  as  yet  heard  of  those  passages  so  distinctly.

These  Agiamoglans  of  the  Serraglio,  albeit  they  were
chosen  out  of  the  rest  by  the  Chiefe  Vizir,  yet  are  their
first  employments  but  very  base  and  slavish,  for  they
serve  in  the  Stables,  Kitchins,  Gardens,  for  digging,  for
cleaving  of  wood,  and  are  made  to  row  in  Kaiks,  and  to
lead  the  Grey-hounds  a  coursing ;  and  indeed  any  thing,
which  is  commanded  them  to  doe  by  their  Oda  Bashees,
who  are  Decurions  and  Centurions,  and  have  about
fifteene  Aspars  per  diem,  two  Vests  of  Cloth  per  annum,
two  pieces  of  Linnen  Cloth  for  Shirts  and  Handkerchiefes,
and  so  much  Satten  or  fine  Cloth,  as  may  make  each  of
them  a  paire  of  Chiakshirs,  or  Breeches  after  their  fashion
downe  to  the  heeles,  and  ruffled  in  the  small  of  the  legge
like  our  Boots :  Neverthelesse,  these  Oda  Bashees  are  all
under  command  of  the  Kahiyah,  who  is  the  Bustangee
Bashees  Steward ;  now  the  Bustangee  Bashee  himselfe
may  have  about  three  hundred  Aspars  per  diem,  for  hee  is
their  Patrone,  Judge,  and  Protector.  And  to  the  end
that  the  Oda  Bashees, and  Bulook  Bashees  may  bee  knowne

350

Agiamoglans
of  the  Serraglio
how  used.

Their  wages.

Government.

Governours.

ROBERT WITHERS  ad.

c.  1620.
from  the  common  sort  of  Agiamoglans ;  they  weare  great
broad  silken  Girdles  of  divers  colours  about  their  middles,
and  are  allowed  a  larger  stipend  ;  who  by  authoritie  given
them  from  the  Kahiyah,  doe  bring  the  Underlings  to  such
an  extraordinary  subjection  by  their  often  beating  them,  Slaverie.
that  they  doe  not  only,  not  refuse  all  manner  of  paines
taking,  but  patiently  undergoe  whatsoever  is  done  unto
them.

They  have  their  Tearmes  and  Prerogatives  amongst
themselves,  succeeding  or  preceding  one  another,  accord-
ing to  the  length  of  time  which  they  have  spent  in  the
Serraglio  ;  so  that  in  Processe  of  time  (if  they  still  con-
tinue there,  and  are  not  sent  out  upon  other  occasions)
they  may  aspire  to  the  degrees  of  Chiefe  Steward  to  the  Possibility  of
Bustangee  Bashee,  or  of  Bustangee  Bashee  himselfe,  which  PreJer
is  a  very  eminent  place  ;  for  hee  steeres  the  Kings  Kaick,
and  weareth  a  Terbent  upon  his  head  in  the  Serraglio,
although  he  were  but  lately  an  Agiamoglan,  and  did  weare
one  of  the  aforesaid  felt  Caps,  who  also  (if  the  King  love
him,  as  commonly  hee  doth)  may  rise  to  greater  dignities ;
as  to  be  Captaine  Bashaw,  &c.  nay,  sometimes  to  be  Chiefe
Vizir.

These  Agiamoglans  are  not  altogether  forbidden  to  goe
abroad,  but  may  upon  urgent  occasions  be  licensed  :  And
the  Bustangee  Bashee  alwayes  takes  good  store  of  them
along  with  him,  when  by  the  Kings  order  hee  goeth  to  see
some  great  man  put  to  death,  the  which  is  commonly  done
by  the  hands  of  three  or  foure  of  the  chiefest  and  strongest
of  the  said  Agiamoglans.

There  are  brought  in  amongst  them  sometimes,  (but
indeed  very  seldome)  naturall  borne  Turkes,  by  meanes  Some  Turkes.
made  to  the  Bustangee  Bashee,  who  therein  doth  greatly
pleasure  such  poore  folkes  as  are  willing  to  bee  rid  of  their
children  ;  but  it  must  first  bee  made  knowne  to  the  Grand
Signior,  and  done  with  his  consent.

Their  Roomes,  Bagno's,  and  Kitchins,  are  about  the Their  Roomcs.
wals  of  the  Serraglio,  on  the  out  side,  divided  severally
to  each  company  of  them,  and  built  for  the  more  com-

35i

A.D.

c.  1620.

Dyct.

Sleepe.

None  may  see
the  Kings
women.

Janizaries
made  of
Agiamoglans
in  other
Seminaries.
Other  uses  of
them.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

moditie  of  such  Offices  and  Services,  as  the  said  Agiamo-
glans are  appointed  unto.

And  as  for  their  Diet,  they  order  it  as  they  please,
having  their  flesh  and  Pulse  for  their  Pottage,  their
Bread  and  every  thing  for  Food,  delivered  them  every
day,  and  the  dressing  of  it  left  to  themselves  :  And  in
that  they  lye  neere  the  Sea-side  by  the  wals  of  the  Ser-
raglio,  they  take  good  store  of  fish,  part  of  which  they  sell,
and  rescue  the  rest  to  themselves.

They  sleepe  alwayes  in  their  clothes  (taking  only  off
their  uppermost  coat,  and  their  shooes)  according  to  the
ordinarie  custome  of  the  poorer  sort  of  Turkes,  betweene
a  couple  of  Rugges  in  the  Winter,  and  thinne  Blankets  in
Summer.  They  never  see  the  King,  unlesse  it  be  when  he
passeth  through  the  Gardens  to  some  Sport,  or  when  he
taketh  Boat,  or  else  when  he  goeth  a  hunting,  for  he  makes
them  serve  in  stead  of  Hounds  to  hunt  wild  beasts.

But  when  his  Highnesse  will  be  in  the  Gardens  to  take
his  pleasure  with  his  women,  all  the  Agiamoglans  being
warned  by  Helvet,  get  them  out  with  all  speed  at  the
Gates  by  the  Sea  side,  where  they  may  walke  upon  the
Bankes  and  Causeyes,  but  must  not  goe  in  againe  untill
the  King  be  departed  :  For  there  must  none  come  neere
the  women  but  himselfe,  and  his  blacke  Eunuches  :  Nay,
if  any  other  should  but  attempt  (by  some  tricke  in  con-
veighing  himselfe  into  some  private  corner)  to  see  the
women,  and  should  bee  discovered,  hee  should  immedi-
ately bee  put  to  death.  Every  one  therefore  (so  soone  as
they  have  notice  of  the  Kings  comming  into  the  Gardens
with  his  women)  runnes  out  of  sight,  as  farre  as  they  can,
to  bee  free  from  all  feare,  and  suspition.

Now  of  this  Ranke  of  Agiamoglans,  which  are  in  the
Kings  Serraglio,  they  doe  not  make  Janizaries,  as  they
doe  of  those  which  are  put  into  the  other  Serraglio's  and
Nurseries  to  bee  brought  up ;  and  of  such  as  are  lent  to
divers  of  the  Kings  subjects,  as  Tradesmen  and  such  like,
and  to  the  Bashawes.  But  his  Highnesse  turne  is  served
of  these,  to  bestow  upon  his  Gentlemen,  when  he  employes

352

ROBERT WITHERS  ■■«..,

c.  1620.
them  abroad  in  some  principal!  Government,  that  they
may  be  as  Assistants  unto  them  in  their  businesses;  who  [II.iz.1592.]
also  in  time  become  men  of  reasonable  estate  and  condi-
tion themselves.  The  Grand  Signior  likewise  maketh
use  of  them  when  he  intendeth  a  journey  to  any  place  ;
as  when  he  goeth  to  the  Wars,  or  any  whither  farre  from
Constantinople,  for  the  pitching  of  his  Tents,  for  remov-
ing and  carrying  of  Chists  and  Baskets,  and  many  other
such  like  Manuall  Services,  as  happen,  in  those  times.
For  which  employment  the  King  never  carrieth  with  him
lesse  then  foure  or  five  hundred.

§• VI.

The  choise  Agiamoglans,  severe  Discipline  and
Education  in  foure  Subordinate  Schooles,  and
their  after-advancements.

T  now  remayneth,  that  I  say  somewhat  of  those
Youths  which  are  kept  in  better  fashion  in  the
Serraglio,  for  the  King  and  Countreyes  Service,
brought  up  in  Learning,  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Lawes,
and  in  Military  Exercises,  that  they  may  bee  able  to  per-
forme  those  things  which  belong  to  the  Government  of
the  whole  Empire.  And  albeit  for  the  most  part  these
are  Christian  Captives  and  Renegado's,  yet  there  are  some
Naturall  borne  Turkes  amongst  them,  (youths  of  very
comely  aspect,  whose  out-sides  must  promise  a  great  deale
of  goodnesse ;)  brought  in  by  the  Capee  Agha's  meanes
(who  is  the  great  Chamberlaine)  with  the  Kings  consent ;
but  this  hapneth  but  very  seldome,  and  that  with  great
difficultie :  For,  the  ancient  Institution  was,  that  they  Turkes  hardly
should  alwayes  be  of  Christian  Renegado's,  of  the  most  c
Civill  and  Noblest  that  could  be  found.

And  when  in  the  Warres,  either  by  Sea  or  Land  it  shall
so  happen,  that  any  youth  bee  taken,  who  is  of  Noble  Noble
Parents, he is presently appointed and markt for the aPtn'es-
Grand  Signior,  and  is  instructed  in  matters  of  Govern-
ment, being  as  it  were  ordayned  for  great  Employments.
ix  353  z

A.D.

c.  1620.

Eunucha
cruell.

Mortification
Turkish.

Their  number.

Discipline  in
Religion  and
Civ  Hi  tie.

Foure  Oda'h
Schooles.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Now  such  are  of  great  esteeme,  for  the  Turkes  themselves
affirme,  that  Noblenesse  of  Birth  cannot  but  produce  the
most  vertuous  and  generous  spirits  ;  especially,  when  they
are  well  nurtured  and  tutered,  as  it  is  professed  in  the
Serraglio ;  where  there  is  great  severitie  used  in  all  the
Orders  of  Discipline,  the  Government  of  them  being  in
the  hands  of  the  Masters,  who  are  all  for  the  most  part
white  Eunuches,  which  are  very  rough  and  cruell  in  all
their  Actions ;  Insomuch,  that  their  Proverbe  saith,  that
when  one  commeth  out  of  that  Serraglio,  and  hath  runne
through  all  the  Orders  of  it,  he  is,  without  all  question,
the  most  mortified  and  patient  man  in  the  World.  For
the  blowes  which  they  suffer,  and  the  fastings  which  are
commanded  them  for  every  small  fault,  is  a  thing  of  great
admiration  :  Nay,  some  of  them  are  so  severely  handled,
that  although  their  time  of  being  in  the  Serraglio  be
almost  expired,  and  that  they  should  in  few  yeeres  come
forth  to  bee  made  great  men,  yet  not  being  able  to  suffer
such  crueltie  any  longer,  they  procure  to  bee  turned  out,
contenting  themselves  with  the  Title  and  small  pay  of  a
Spahee,  or  a  Mutaferaka,  rather  then  be  so  often  punished,
and  made  weary  of  their  lives.

The  number  of  these  youths  is  not  prefixed,  but  there
are  of  them  sometimes  more,  and  sometimes  lesse ;  for
the  King  entertaynes  very  willingly  all  such  as  are  given
him  of  the  aforesaid  qualitie  (if  so  be  that  they  be  young)
and  as  I  have  heard,  they  are  commonly  about  an  hundred.

The  course  that  is  taken  with  them,  so  soone  as  they
come  into  the  Serraglio,  is  admirable,  and  nothing
resembling  the  Barbarisme  of  Turkes,  but  beseeming
Subjects  of  singular  Vertue  and  Discipline.  For  they  are
exceeding  well  entred,  and  daily  taught  aswell  good
fashion  and  comely  behaviour,  as  they  are  instructed  in
the  Rites  and  Ceremonies  of  the  Mahometan  Law,  or  in
Military  Discipline.  And  for  this  purpose  they  have
Roomes,  which  the  Turkes  call  Oda's,  but  we  may  more
properly  (in  regard  of  the  use  they  are  put  unto)  call  them
Schooles  ;  of  which  there  are  foure,  the  one  taking  Degrees

354

ROBERT WITHERS

from  the  other.  Now  into  the  first  they  all  come,  when
they  are  but  children,  where  the  Primarie  Precept  they
learne  is  Silence ;  then  their  personall  Positures,  betoken-
ing singular  Reverence  to  the  King;  which  is,  that  they
hold  downe  their  heads  and  looke  downwards,  holding
their  hands  before  them  joyned  a  crosse.

They  are  seene  of  the  King,  and  registred  in  a  Booke
by  their  Turkish  Names,  and  the  Names  of  their  Native
Countreyes  set  downe  with  them  ;  they  receive  Pensions
from  the  Grand  Signior,  which  is  ordinarily  from  three  to
five  Aspars  per  diem.  The  Copie  of  the  Booke  is  sent  to
the  great  Defterdar,  that  every  one  of  them,  may  in  due
time  have  the  aforesaid  Pension  sent  unto  them.  Then
(by  a  white  Eunuch  who  is  chiefe  over  all  the  other
Masters  and  Ushers)  they  are  set  to  learne  to  write  and
reade,  and  to  practise  the  Turkish  Tongue ;  and  are
taught  their  Prayers,  with  all  Reverence  to  the  Religion
in  the  Arabian  Tongue.  And  in  this  Oda'h,  they  are
both  Morning  and  Eevening  so  diligently  followed,  and
carefully  lookt  unto,  that  by  report  it  is  a  thing  of  admira-
tion :  Now,  for  the  most  part,  they  all  stay  at  the  least
six  yeeres  in  this  Schoole,  and  such  as  are  dull  and  hard  of
apprehension  stay  longer.

From  this  Oda'h  they  are  removed  to  the  second,  where
(by  more  Learned  Tutors  then  the  former)  they  are  taught
the  Persian,  Arabian,  and  Tartarian  Tongues ;  and  take
great  paines  in  reading  divers  Authors,  that  they  may  be
the  better  able  to  speake  the  Turkish  Elegantly ;  which
cannot  be  done  without  some  knowledge  in  those  three
Tongues,  upon  which  the  Turkish  chiefly  doth  depend  :
So  that  there  is  found  a  great  difference  betweene  their
speech,  and  that  of  the  vulgar  sort.

Here  also  they  begin  to  learne  to  wrestle,  to  shoot  in
a  Bow,  to  throw  the  Mace,  to  tosse  the  Pike,  to  handle  their
Weapons,  to  runne,  &c.  And  in  these  Exercises  in  their
severall  Orders  and  severall  Places,  they  spend  whole
houres,  being  severely  punished  if  they  shall  in  any  wise
seeme  to  grow  negligent.

355

A.D.

c.  1620.

Silence  fir  it

Lesson.

2.  Reverence.

Booke  or
Check-roll.

3.  Grammer
and  Religion
to  write,  reade,
and  speake
Turkish  and
Arabian
Praiers.

Second  Schoole.
[II.ix.1593.]

4.  Rhetorike
£ff  Languages.
Persian,
Arabian
Tartarian.

5.  Bodily
Exercises.

A.D.

c.  1620.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

6.  Hon  man
ship  and
Activitie.

7.  Trades.

They  spend  other  five  or  sixe  yeere  likewise  in  this
Odah,  from  the  which  (being  become  men,  strong,  and

Third Schoole.  fit  for  any  thing)  they  are  removed  to  the  third  Odah,
where  (forgetting  nothing  of  what  they  have  learned
before  but  rather  bettering  themselves)  they  also  learne  to
sit  a  Horse,  and  to  be  quicke  and  nimble  in  the  Warres  :
Moreover,  every  one  of  them  (according  to  his  inclination
and  disposition)  shall  learne  a  Trade,  necessary  for  the
Service  of  the  Kings  person,  viz.  to  make  up  a  Terbent,
to  shave,  to  paire  nayles,  to  fold  up  Apparell  handsomely,
to  keepe  Land-spaniels,  to  keepe  Hawkes,  to  be  Sewers,
to  be  Quiries  of  the  Stable,  to  be  Target-bearers,  and  to
waite  at  the  Grand  Signiors  Table,  and  the  like  Services,
as  it  is  also  used  in  the  Courts  of  other  Kings  and  Emper-
ours.  So  that  having  beene  in  these  Offices  foure  or  five
yeeres,  they  become  men  able  to  teach  others.

And  whilst  they  are  in  these  three  Schooles,  they  are
but  indifferently  apparelled,  having  their  two  Vests  of
Cloth  per  annum,  somewhat  fine,  but  their  Linnen  is  such
as  the  others  weare,  and  so  they  must  be  contented  to  be
under  the  correction  of  their  Masters,  who  are  so  severe,
that  for  every  fault,  or  for  suspition  only  of  Dishonestie,
cause  them  to  bee  punished  with  an  hundred  blowes  on
the  soles  of  the  feet,  and  on  the  Buttocks,  insomuch  that
they  leave  them  oftentimes  for  dead.  Neither  are  they
permitted  whilst  they  remayne  in  these  three  Oda's,  to
bee  familiar  with  any  but  themselves,  and  that  with  great
modestie  too  :  so  that  it  is  a  matter  of  great  difficultie
for  any  Stranger  to  speake  with  them  or  see  them  ;  which  if
it  be  obtayned,  it  must  be  by  expresse  leave  from  the  Capee
Agha,  who  causeth  an  Eunuch  to  bee  there  present,  so
long  as  any  Stranger  shall  bee  in  the  company  of  any  of
the  said  youths.  Nay,  when  they  have  occasion  to  goe  to
the  Bagno,  or  the  like  necessary  businesse,  they  are  very
narrowly  lookt  unto  by  the  Eunuches,  to  keepe  them  by
all  meanes  from  any  filthy  Actions  :  And  if  they  shall  be
found guiltie, or  accused of any fault, they are most

Bed-chambers,  severely punished for it : And in their Bed-chambers

356

Punishments.

Closenesse.

ROBERT WITHERS

A.D.

c.  162,.

Leather, \£c.

Try  all  of
Religion.

(which  are  long  Roomes,  and  hold  about  fortie  or  fiftic
in  each  of  them  ;  for  they  sleepe  neere  one  another  upon
the  Sofas)  there  are  every  night  Lampes  lighted,  and
Eunuches  lying  by  them  to  keep  them  in  awe,  and  from
lewd  and  wanton  behaviour.

Some  of  them  also  doe  learne  Mechanicke  Arts,  as  Sewing  in
sewing  in  Leather  (which  is  in  great  esteeme  amongst  the
Turkes)  to  mend  Guns,  to  make  Bowes  and  Arrowes,  and
Quivers,  and  the  like  ;  from  which  Trades  they  often  have
both  their  Sir-name  and  their  Reputation  too  ;  For  they
are  exceedingly  beloved,  who  are  diligent  and  flye  Idle-
nesse.

And  the  Eunuches  make  great  tryall  of  their  constancie
in  Religion,  searching  (as  farre  as  in  them  lyes)  their  hearts,
to  see  how  they  stand  affected  to  Turcisme  :  For  the  time
growing  neere,  wherein  they  are  to  passe  to  the  fourth  FourthSchooU.
Odah,  which  is  the  chiefest  and  last,  and  from  which  they
are  called  to  businesse  of  great  import ;  they  would  not
then  have  them  at  all  remember  that  they  were  formerly
Christians,  or  to  have  any  desire  imaginable  to  turne  to
their  first  beliefe ;  least  they  should  by  some  stratagems
and  politike  carriage,  prove  disadvantageous  to  the
Turkish  Empire.  So  then,  all  possible  proofe  and  triall
being  made, and  they  found  to  bee  most  strongly  perswaded
in  themselves  of  the  truth  of  that  Religion,  they  then  are
preferred  to  the  fourth  Odah,  where  they  are  once  more
registred  :  For  all  they  which  are  of  the  third  Odah  are
not  translated  to  the  fourth  at  one  and  the  same  time,  but
only  such  as  have  gone  through  all  the  Degrees  in  the
three  former,  and  are  become  fit  for  Service  :  And  there  is
Account kept  apart of  them  which come into this

an

fourth  Odah,  for  they  are  immediately  ordayned  for  the  Preferments.
Grand  Signiors  owne  Service,  and  have  their  pay
encreased,  some  more  and  some  lesse,  unto  eight  Aspers
per  diem,  and  their  habits  changed  from  Cloth  to  Silke,
and  Cloth  of  Gold  of  great  price  :  but  continue  still  with
their  heads  and  beards  shaven,  only  they  suffer  some
lockes  to  grow  on  each  side  from  their  temples,  which

357

A.D.

c.  1620.

Neatnesse.

[II.ix.1594.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

hang  downe  below  their  eares,  for  a  signe  that  they  are
they  which  are  neerest  to  the  preferment  of  comming  into
the  Kings  Chamber.

They  must  be  very  cleanly  and  neat  in  their  Apparell
before  they  come  about  the  Grand  Signiors  person  ;  many
of  them  accompanying  him  ever  when  he  goeth  abroad
upon  pleasure  :  And  they  may  freely  converse  with  all
the  great  men  of  the  Serraglio,  and  with  the  Bashawes
also,  and  are  often  presented  with  great  gifts  by  men  of
great  qualitie,  to  keepe  in  their  favour,  hoping  that  they
may  become  men  of  great  command,  and  bee  able  to  stand
them  in  stead  upon  divers  occasions.  Now  out  of  these
young  men  (after  they  have  finished  the  appointed  terme
of  yeeres,  and  have  beene  well  instructed  in  all  things  as
aforesaid)  the  Grand  Signior  chooseth  his  Agha's,  which
are  his  Gentlemen  and  serve  him  only ;  whose  names  and
places  are  as  followeth.

And  first
The  Silihtar  Aga.
The  Chiohadar  Aga.
The  Rechiubtar  Aga.
The  Mataragee  Aga.
The  Telbentar  Aga.
The  Kemhasir  Aga.
The  Chesneghir  Bashee.
The  Keelergee  Bashee.
The  Dogangee  Bashee.
The  Zagargee  Bashee.
The  Muhasabegee  Bashee.
The  Turnakgee  Bashee.
The  Berber  Bashee.
The  Hamaromgee  Bashee.

The  Teskeregee  Bashee.

Gesture.

that  is,
The  Kings  Sword-bearer.
Hee  which  carrieth  his  Yagmoorlick.
Yeoman  of  the  Stirrope.
He  which  brings  him  water  to  wash.
He  which  brings  him  his  Turbant.
He  which  washeth  his  Linnen.
Chiefe  Sewer.
Chiefe  Butler.
Chiefe  Falconer.
Chiefe  Huntsman.
Chiefe  Accomptant.
He  which  pareth  his  nailes.
Chiefe  Barber.
Hee  which  washeth  the  King  in  the

Bath.
Chiefe  Secretarie  to  his  Majestic

All  which  are  of  the  eldest  sort  of  them ;  and  are
alwayes  in  his  Majesties  presence,  holding  downe  their
heads,  for  they  may  not  be  so  bold  as  to  looke  him  in  the
face,  and  standing  with  their  hands  acrosse  before  them,
in  token  of  the  greatest  Humilitie  and  Reverence  that

358

ROBERT WITHKKS

A.D.

c  1620.

Great  Turkes
Table.

may  bee  imagined  :  Neither  are  they  permitted  to  spc-ake
at  all  to  the  Grand  Signior,  nor  in  his  presence  to  one
another ;  but  if  the  King  shall  command  or  call  for  any
thing,  they  are  wonderfull  speedie,  and  readie  to  obey.
These  all  doe  execute  their  Offices  distinctly  as  aforesaid,  Waiting.
and  attend  in  places  appointed  for  them  ;  that  they  may
bee  the  better  able  to  performe  their  Services,  and  the
more  readie  to  obey  at  every  becke  ;  and  at  the  houres  of
Dinner  and  Supper  they  waite  in  the  Roome,  taking  the
meate  from  the  hands  of  the  Under-sewer  at  the  doore,
and  so  his  Majesties  Table  being  made  readie  (which  is
of  a  Bulgar  Hide)  upon  a  Sofa,  they  bring  in  the  meate
which  is  set  thereon  orderly,  dish  by  dish,  by  the  chiefe
Sewer  before  the  King,  and  is  taken  off  againe  as  his
Majestie  shall  appoint.

The  Grand  Signior  is  very  well  pleased,  and  takes  great  Exercises.
delight  in  their  Service  and  company,  making  them  ride  on
Horsebacke,  and  playing  with  them  at  severall  Sports,  at
such  time  as  hee  is  well  disposed,  ever  gracing  them  with
the  bestowing  gifts  on  them,  of  Vests,  Chicquines,  Swords,
and  other  such  like  Presents,  as  come  to  the  hands  of  the
King  before,  by  way  of  gift :  And  besides  those  favours,
his  Majestie  useth  to  bestow  upon  them  the  dispatching  of
Ambassies  for  other  Countries,  which  is  a  Merchandize
held  by  them  to  be  of  a  great  price,  and  bringeth  in  a  great
profit  with  it :  For  one  of  them  having  his  Commission
from  the  Grand  Signior,  for  such  or  such  a  Prince,  pre-
sently thinketh  with  himselfe,  what  that  Prince  usually
doth  present  the  Ambassadour  withall,  and  so  accordingly
agreeth  with  a  Chiaush,  or  one  of  such  like  qualitie,  to
undertake  the  Ambassie,  who  must  give  for  the  same  as
they  can  agree  betwixt  themselves,  either  in  readie  Money,
or  otherwise  at  his  returne,  as  he  shall  thinke  best  for  his
profit,  and  so  he  forthwith  giveth  expedition  to  the  partie
chosen.

These  sorts  of  Presents,  prove  wonderfull  beneficiall ;
for,  in  the  establishing  of  the  Princes  of  Valachia,  Bug-
dania,  Transilvania,  and  of  the  King  of  Tartarie  (to  ail

359

Gifts.

Embassages
conferred.

Vassall
Princes.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1620.

which  Princes  the  Grand  Signior,  sendeth  Ambassadors
for  confirming  their  Possession  of  the  said  Dominions)
they  reape  great  benefit,  it  being  specified  in  the  Canon,
how  much  every  one  is  to  disburse  for  being  honored  with
that  Solemnitie.

And  this  the  Grand  Signior  doth  of  policie,  to  the  end
his  Agha's  may  become  rich,  laying  up  Money  by  them
to  serve  for  necessary  Expenses  for  themselves,  furnishing
them  with  divers  things  by  that  meanes  against  such  time

Their  gohg as  they  shall  goe  forth  of  the  Serraglio  : which  is  only
forth  of  the when  his  Majestie  thinkes  fit,  and  that  most  commonly  on

chieff  Offices  a  sudden '■>  either  to  be  Generall  at  Sea,  Bashaw  of  Cairo,
Aleppo,  Damascus,  Babylon,  or  of  some  other  Provinces ;

Musahib.  giving  also  to  some  of  them  a  Musahib,  that  is,  as  it  were,
a  Companion,  who  hath  liberty  freely  to  talke  with  him,  and
to  goe  out  and  in  unto  him  when  he  pleaseth ;  The  which
Title  and  favour  (of  Musahib)  proves  to  be  of  so  great
Reputation,  that  it  is  esteemed  above  any  other  sort  of
employment,  for  it  is  very  rare,  and  only  bestowed  on  such
Subjects  as  have  deserved  well  of  the  Emperour.

And  this  hath  beene  a  course  used  of  old  by  the  Grand
Signiors  Progenitors,  that  so  they  may  have  some  trustie
Subjects  abroad,  that  may  give  notice  of  the  carriage  of
the  Bashawes  in  their  severall  Regiments,  or  of  any  other,
if  so  be  they  should  attempt  any  thing  that  might  bee
prejudicial  to  the  Crowne  ;  that  so  the  King  by  cutting
off  their  provision  and  the  like  meanes,  may  anticipate
their  Plots  and  Designes.  But  if  his  Majestie  be  not
pleased,  so  highly  to  exault  some  one  of  the  aforesaid
Agha's,  as  to  be  of  the  Degrees  alreadie  named ; he  then

Other  makes  him  Beglerbegh  of  Grecia,  or  of  Natolia  ; Agha

Officers.  0f  tne  Janizaries,  Spaheeler  Agasee,  which  is  Head  over

all  the  Spahees,  Imrohor  Bashee,  which  is  Master  of  the
Horse  ;  or  at  least  a  Capigee  Bashee,  which  is  Head  over
the  Capi^ees.

[II. ix.  1 595.]  Now,  the  Grand  Signior  having  bestowed  any  of  the
said  places  upon  them,  they  leave  the  Serraglio,  and  carrie
with  them  all  their  estates,  both  money  and  goods  : and

360

ROBERT WITHERS  a.d.

c.  162O1

oftentimes  other  young  men  of  the  other  Odhas,  which  are
let  goe  through  their  owne  hastinesse,  and  great  impor-
tunitie,  not  willing  to  stay  out  their  time ;  but  losing  the
Kings  favour  are  content  with  small  pay  and  lesser  reputa-
tion, to  goe  along  with  the  said  Aghas.

Such  as  goe  out  upon  the  greatest  employments,  arc
accompanied  forth  of  the  Serraglio  by  the  chiefe  Vizir,
who  also  presenteth  them,  and  giveth  them  entertaynment
for  three  or  foure  dayes  in  his  house,  untill  such  time  as
they  can  bee  provided  of  houses  of  their  owne,  whither
afterwards  they  repaire,  and  set  their  families  in  order,
taking  also  unto  them  such  as  are  come  out  of  the
Serraglio,  with  them  for  Assistants  and  Ministers  in  the
charge  assigned  unto  them  ;  they  also  accept  of  the  ser-
vice of  others  which  come  in  by  gifts,  which  likewise
redounds  to  the  benefit  and  advantage  of  the  great  ones.

Now,  they  which  succeed  in  preferment,  those  that  are  Order  in
gone  out  of  the  Serraglio  upon  the  aforesaid  employ-  stuc^5Sl0n-
ments  ;  are  (as  the  custome  commandeth)  such  as  are  next
in  yeeres  unto  them,  and  of  the  longest  standing ;  neither
can  this  course  be  altered,  unlesse  by  some  sinister  acci-
dent, or  evill  behaviour  they  faile  thereof :  So  that  it  is
alwaies  knowne  amongst  themselves,  who  is  next  capable
of  publique  employment ;  nay,  the  businesse  is  so  orderly
carried,  and  their  course  so  regular,  that  even  they  of  the
third  Odah  doe  know  what  their  future  fortunes  will  bee,
if  they  live  to  enjoy  them :  And  indeed  all  of  them  live
in  hope,  and  desire  that  the  Grand  Signior  would  often
be  pleased  to  send  them  abroad,  that  they  may  the  sooner
be  out  of  their  hard  service  in  the  Serraglio,  and  enter  into
the  state  of  ample  government.

They  are  most  commonly  of  five  and  thirtie,  or  fortie
yeeres  of  age  before  they  are  sent  abroad.  And  because
they  come  out  of  the  Serraglio  with  their  Beards  shaven,
they  are  faine  to  stay  within  doores  for  some  few  dayes
to  let  them  growe,  that  they  may  be  fit  to  come  amongst
other  great  men,  with  which  staying  at  home  they  are  very
well  contented,  for  that  in  that  time  they  receive  the  Pre-

361

A.D.

c.  1620.
Presents  jrom
great  persons
whiles  they
stay.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Comming
abroad,  and
visitings.

sents  which  are  sent  them  from  all  the  Sultanaes,  of  Vests,
Shirts,  Linnen-breeches,  and  Hand-kerchiefs  of  all  sorts
richly  wrought,  and  of  great  worth :  and  from  the
Bashawes  and  other  Great  men  ;  Horses,  Carpets,  Vests,
Slaves,  and  other  things  fit  for  the  erecting  of  a  House
and  Familie.  The  which  Presents  are  made  the  greater
and  richer,  by  so  much  the  more  as  the  partie  to  whom
they  are  given,  is  knowne  to  bee  favoured  and  beloved
of  the  King.  Now,  so  soone  as  their  beards  are  growne,
they  goe  abroad,  and  beginne  their  visits ;  First,  to  the
chiefe  Vizir,  and  then  in  order  to  the  other  Great  ones,
Capee  Agha.  till  they  have  beene  with  them  all,  and  last  of  all,  offer
their  service  to  the  Capee  Agha,  in  all  humble  manner,
acknowledging  that  all  their  best  fortunes  and  honours
have  beene  conferred  upon  them  by  his  meanes ;  and
promising  for  ever,  all  dutifull  respect  unto  him  for  the
same ;  but  this  complement  with  the  Capee  Agha  is
performed  without  that  Gate  on  the  Kings  side,  which  is
kept  by  the  Eunuches ;  for  they  may  not  come  no  more
within  that  Gate,  unlesse  they  be  called  for  by  the  King,
for  to  treate  of  things  belonging  to  their  employments
before  their  departure.

They  all  strive  to  gaine  the  love  of  the  Capee  Agha ;
that  he  may  bee  a  Protector  and  Patron  unto  them,  to
possesse  the  Grand  Signior  with  a  good  opinion  of  them
in  their  absence ;  he  being  the  chiefest  in  the  Serraglio,
and  alwaies  neerest  to  the  King.

§•  vii.

Of  inferiour  persons,  as  Buffons,  Mutes,  Musicians;
of  white  Eunuches,  and  of  the  Grand  Officers
of  the  Serraglio.

Buffons,
Mutes,  \3c

Esides  the  Women,  and  Ajamoglans  of  this  Ser-
raglio, and  the  aforesaid  Youths  last  spoken  of ;
there  are  many  and  divers  Ministers  for  all  manner
of  necessarie  services,  and  particular  functions  :  there  are
also Buffons of all sorts, and such as shew trickes,

362

ROBERT WITHERS  ad.

c.  1620.
Musicians,  Wrestlers,  many  dumbe  men  both  old  and
young,  who  have  libertie  to  goe  in  and  out  with  leave  of
the  Capee  Agha  ;  And  this  is  worthie  the  observation,  that
in  the  Serraglio,  both  the  King  and  others  can  reason  and
discourse  of  any  thing  as  well  and  as  distinctly,  alia  Discourse  by
mutesca,  by  nods  and  signes,  as  they  can  with  words  :  a  "&"*•
thing  well  befitting  the  gravitie  of  the  better  sort  of
Turkes,  who  care  not  for  much  babling.  The  same  is
also  used  amongst  the  Sultanaes,  and  other  the  Kings
Women  :  for  with  them  likewise  there  are  divers  dumbe
women,  both  old  and  young.  And  this  hath  beene  an
ancient  custome  in  the  Serraglio  :  wherefore  they  get  as
many  Mutes  as  they  can  possibly  find  :  and  chiefly  for  this
one  reason  ;  that  they  hold  it  not  a  thing  befitting  the
Grand  Signior.  Neither  stands  it  with  his  greatnesse,  to
speake  to  any  about  him  familiarly :  but  he  may  in  that
manner  more  tractably  and  domestically  jest  and  sport  with
the  Mutes,  then  with  others  that  are  about  him.

It  followeth  now,  that  I  speake  of  the  White  Eunuches  ;  White
who,  as  the  Blacke  ones  are  for  the  Service  and  Attendance  Eunucfls-
of  the  Sultanaes,  and  for  the  keeping  of  their  Gate  ; so
are  the  White  Eunuches  appointed  for  the  King  and  his  [II.  ix.i  596.]
Gate ; And  the  chiefe  and  most  ancient  of  these,  attend
only  the  most  trusty  and  important  employments,  both
about  the  Kings  Person  and  his  Houshold :  of  which  the
first  is  the  Capee  Agha,  for  he  is  the  Chiefe  of  all  the  The  Chiefe  of
Eunuches ; and  is  High  Chamberlaine. The  second,  is  tft*m  CaPee
the  Hazinehdar  Bashee,  who  is  the  Chiefe  Treasurer  for  chamher-
the  House. The  third,  is  the  Keelergee  Bashee,  who  is  idne.
the  Chiefe  Butler  and Master  of  the  Wardrobe. The  z-  Treasurer
fourth,  is  the  Serai  Agasee,  who  is  the  Keeper  of  the  °fthJ.  House-
Serraglio. Now of these foure olde Eunuches, the  t'he jf™,eJr0°{e
Capee Aga (as I said) is  principall in Authority, and  ±,  Keeper  of
in greatest esteeme with the Grand Signior, for,  the  House.
none  but  he  can  of  himselfe  speake  with  his  Majestie, CaPee  -dghas
neyther  can  any  Messages,  Writings,  or  Petitions,  be  sent n &cs'
in  (ordinarily)  but  by  his  hand  and  meanes ; He  likewise
doth  alwayes  accompany  the  Kings  person  whither  so  ever

363

A.D.

c.  1620.

Pension.

Presents.
Treasurer.

Treasure.

Outward
Treasurie.

Household-
Treasurers
Office.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

he  goeth,  both  without  and  within  the  Serraglio.  And
when  he  goeth  to  his  Women,  also  he  accompanieth  him
to  the  very  doore,  which  leadeth  in  unto  them,  and  there
he  stoppeth,  and  so  returnes  to  his  owne  Lodgings  againe  ;
alwayes  leaving  some  bodie  to  wayte  at  the  said  doore,
that  when  the  King  is  ready  to  come  away  againe,  they
may  call  him.  This  Capee  Agha  hath  for  his  ordinary
Pension  eight  Sultaneens  per  diem,  besides  Vests  and  other
necessaries  as  many  as  he  will ;  he  getteth  great  store  of
Money,  and  (indeed)  more  than  befits  a  man  that  hath  so
small  occasion  of  expence  as  he  hath,  by  vertue  of  his
place ;  for  that  both  they  of  the  Serraglio,  and  those
abroad  of  what  condition  or  degree  soever  they  bee,  to
obtayne  his  favour  and  furtherance  in  any  businesse,  doe
present  him  with  all  that  they  can  imagine  may  give  him
content,  whatsoever  it  cost.

The  second,  is  the  Hazinehdar  Bashee  ;  and  he  hath  the
charge  of  the  Treasurie,  which  is  within  the  Serraglio,  he
having  one  Key  of  it  and  the  King  another,  the  doore
being  likewise  sealed  with  the  Kings  Seale,  which  is  never
taken  off,  but  when  the  King  himselfe  gives  order  for  the
opening  of  the  same.  In  this  Hazineh  are  all  the  Trea-
sures which  havebeene  layd  up  by  the  deceased  Emperours  ;
and  into  this  commeth  no  other  Revenue  of  the  Crowne,
saving  that  from  Egypt  of  sixe  hundred  thousand  Crownes
per  annum  ;  all  the  other  Revenewes  going  into  the  out-
ward Hazineh,  out  of  which  all  Expences  are  borne,  both
ordinary  and  extraordinary.  But  there  is  not  any  thing
taken  out  of  the  aforesaid  inward  Hazineh,  unlesse  it  bee
upon  extreame  necessitie,  when  the  Grand  Signior  is  not
otherwise  provided,  to  appease  the  out-cries  of  the
Souldiers  for  their  pay ;  or  for  some  other  the  like  occa-
sion :  Notwithstanding,  it  is  done  with  this  Proviso,  that
the  Defterdar  bee  bound  to  make  it  good  againe  to  the
utmost  Aspar.  This  Agha's  charge  is  to  keepe  an  exact
Accompt  of  all  the  Treasure  that  is  brought  in  or  taken
out  of  the  same  :  nor  may  any  goe  into  the  said  Hazineh,
but  only  the  Hazinehdar,  and  such  as  hee  shall  take  in

364

ROBERT WITHERS  ad.

c.  r

with  him  when  occasion  shall  require.  And  when  there
is  any  Gold  or  Silver  taken  out,  it  is  all  put  into  Leather
Bags,  and  so  brought  before  the  King,  who  disposeth
thereof  as  he  thinketh  fit.  He  hath  also  the  charge  of  all
the  Kings  Jewels,  of  which  he  keepeth  a  Book  by  himselfe,
that  hee  may  know  what  Jewels  the  King  gives  away,
what  Jewels  are  given  to  the  King,  and  what  are  likewise
for  his  Majesties  owne  wearing  ;  And  the  Capee  Agha
dying,  hee  succeeds  him  in  his  place.

The  third,  which  is  the  Keelergee  Bashee,  keepes  the
account  of  the  Kings  Wardrobe  (viz.  of  all  his  Houshold-  Wardrobe.
stuffe.)  Into  which  Wardrobe  are  all  the  Presents
brought,  which  are  given  to  the  Grand  Signior,  as  Cloth
of  Gold,  Silkes,  Woollen  Clothes,  Furres  of  all  sorts,
Swords,  Feathers,  Raw  Silke,  Carpets,  and  whatsoever  else
may  serve  for  his  Majesties  owne  use.  Of  all  which
things  he  keepes  particular  Notes,  to  the  end  he  may  at  any
time  see  what  is  given  to  the  King,  and  what  the  King
gives  away  to  others  :  The  which  is  a  very  painfull  employ-  Busie  employ-
ment^ inasmuch  as  his  Majesty  doth  every  day,  aswell  take  "
as  give  a  great  number  of  Vests,  and  other  the  like  things  :
But  the  businesse  is  so  well  ordered  and  carefully  lookt
unto,  that  there  doth  not  follow  any  confusion  at  all.
This  Eunuch  hath  divers  Servants  under  him  ;  and  stayes
alwayes  (for  the  most  part)  within  the  Serraglio ;  his
Pension  is  a  thousand  Aspars  per  diem,  besides  Vests,  Pension.
and  other  such  Presents  which  are  given  him  in  abundance
from  time  to  time ;  he  also  is  much  favoured  and  graced
by  the  King,  for  that  he  is  to  succeed  the  Hazinehdar
Bashee,  in  case  hee  the  said  Hazinehdar  should  dye ;  and
is  well  esteemed  of  and  reverenced  by  all,  aswell  without
as  within  the  Serraglio.

The fourth, which is the Sarai Agasee (who is an  Keeper  of  the
Eunuch  as  the  former  are)  hath  the  care  and  looking  unto  Sefrai"°-
the  Serraglio,  nor  doth  he  ever  goe  out  of  it  in  the  Kings
absence  ;  but  is  very  vigilant,  not  only  in  seeing  all  things
readie  for  the  daily  Service  of  the  same ;  but  also  to  looke
over  all  the  Roomes  and  to  eye  the  Officers,  marking

365

A.D.

c.  1620.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Differing
Priviledges

whither  they  exercise  themselves  in  their  severall  Func-
tions, as  befits  them  to  doe. And  because  he  is  old,  and

RUingliberty.  his  businesse  great,  he  hath  liberty  to  ride  within  the  wals
of  the  Serraglio,  as  the  three  former  Agha's  are  also  per-
mitted to  doe ;  for  which  purpose  they  have  a  Stable  of
Horses  within  the  Garden  for  their  use  alone ;  his  Pension
is  eight  hundred  Aspars  per  diem,  besides  Vests  and
Furres,  as  many  as  hee  can  well  have  occasion  to  weare ;
and  is  to  succeed  the  Keelergee  Bashee,  and  so  cursively
the  Capee  Agha  if  he  out-live  the  rest.

And  although  all  these  foure  Eunuches  may  weare
Terbents  in  the  Serraglio,  and  ride,  (being  the  chiefe  next
the  King  himselfe  in  authoritie,  within  the  Serraglio)  and

[II.ix.1597.]  are  reverenced  and  respected  of  all  men  ;  yet  the  three  last
viz.  Hazinehdar  Bashee,  Keelergee  Bashee,  and  Sarai
Agasee,  may  not  of  themselves  speake  to  the  Grand
Signior,  but  onely  answer  when  any  thing  is  asked  of
them  :  howbeit  they  alwayes  attend  (with  the  Capee  Agha)
the  person  and  service  of  the  King,  with  all  the  other
Eunuches  under  them,  and  the  aforesayd  Aghas ;  And
they  foure  onely  governe  the  Kings  Houshold  affaires,
giving  order  for  all  things  needfull  and  necessarie,  as  well
for  the  Dayes  as  for  the  Nights  provision.

All  the  Eunuches  in  the  Serraglio  may  bee  about
hundred  in  number,  what  with  old  ones,  middle  aged,  and
young  ones  :  they  are  all  guelt  and  cut  cleane  off,  and  are
chosen  of  those  Renegado  youthes  which  are  presented
from  time  to  time  to  the  Grand  Signior  as  aforesayd  :  few
or  none  at  all  are  guelt  and  cut  against  their  will,  for  then
(as  the  Master  workman  in  that  businesse  sayth)  they
would  bee  in  great  danger  of  Death  ;  wherefore,  to  get
their  consent  thereto,  they  shew  unto  them  the  assurance
they  may  have  (in  time)  to  become  Great  men,  all  which
must  bee  done  at  their  first  comming  into  the  Serraglio,
for  it  is  a  worke  not  to  bee  wrought  upon  men  of  yeeres.

They  are  brought  up  with  the  others,  and  are  taken  out
by  turnes  of  the  fourth  Odah,  for  the  Grand  Signiors
service,  as  well  as  those  which  are  not  Eunuches.

366

Eunuches
guelding.

Education  in
the  foure
Odahs.

ROBERT WITHERS  aj>.

c.  1620.

His Majestie  also  employes  some  of  these  his  white  ()ther

Eunuches  in  the  government  of  all  the  other  Serraglioa  Semnar"s-

and  Nurseries  of  young  Lads,  as  well  in  Constantinople,

as  in  Adrianople,  Bursia,  and  in  divers  other  places,  (in

each  of  which  there  are  commonly  two  or  three  hundred

Schollers)  that  by  their  overlooking  them  (together  with

the  helpe  of  other  Ministers)  they  may  bee  brought  to  an

excellent  Discipline,  by  which they  may  prove  men  of

good  manners  and  reasonable  Learning.

And  it  so  falleth  out  oftentimes,  that  the  Grand  Signior  Thetr
/  1  1 • c •  j  t?  „u „ advancement.

(to  give  way  to  the  other  inreriour  and  younger  iiunucnes,

who  expect  that  they  shall  succeed  in  order  the  aforesayd
Officers)  sendeth  forth  some  of  the  ancientest  and  of  the
highest  ranke,  into  great  employments,  as  to  bee  Bashaw
of  Cairo,  or  of  some  Provinces  in  Asia,  and  sometimes
Vizirs  of  the  Port ;  for  the  Eunuches  generally  prove
Subjects  of  greatest  judgement  and  fidelitie ;  their
mindes  being  set  on  businesse  rather  then  pleasure.  And
for  that  they  are  more  trustie  then  any  other  servants  of  Fldelitie.
the  Serraglio,  the  Capee  Agha  committeth  such  things  as
the  Grand  Signior  would  have  kept  for  curiositie,  unto
their  custodie ;  who  for  that  end  have  places  made  of
purpose  to  lay  up  such  delicacies  as  are  presented  to  the
King ;  as  great  peeces  of  Amber  Greece,  sent  from  the
Bashawes  of  the  Morea,  Muske,  Treacle,  Mithridate  of
Cairo,  Terra  figillata,  Balsami,  Boloarmeno,  and  other
things  of  great  value ;  Cups  also  of  Agat,  Christall,  and
Jasper,  Turkesses,  and  other  precious  Stones ;  all  which
are  so  neatly  and  orderly  kept,  that  indeed  it  is  admir-
able ;  they  likewise  lay  up  his  Indian  Presents  of  Zeva
and  Civet,  of  all  which  things  his  Majestie  and  his  Sul-
tanaes  make  daily  use,  the  Eunuches  who  are  the  keepers
of  the  sayd  Dainties,  being  first  made  acquainted  there-
withall.

There  is  in  the  Serraglio  a  very  large  place,  in  which  are  Goods  °ftfie
kept  all  the  goods  which  fall  to  the  King,  as  well  by  them  Deceased-
which  are  put  to  death  as  by  those  which  dye  of  naturall
Diseases,  of  which  the  King  will  bee  Master. And  the

367

A.D.

c.  1620.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRTMES

goods  being  brought  into  the  sayd  place  by  the  chiefe
Defterdar  (whose  particular  charge  it  is  to  see  them
brought  thither)  and  the  King  in  presence  of  his  Assistants
having  seene  and  viewed  it  all ;  maketh  choise  of  what
he  thinkes  fit  to  reserve,  and  for  to  give  away  ;  the  rest  is
cryed  in  the  Serraglio,  to  the  end  if  any  one  there  have  a
will  to  buy,  hee  may  have  a  good  penniworth  :  and  the
The  Bezisteti.  surplusage  is  carried  into  the  publique  Bezisten,  a  place
somewhat  resembling  the  Paune  in  our  royall  Exchange :
where  it  is  cryed  up  and  downe,  the  Cryer  still  naming  the
most  that  hath  beene  alreadie  offered ;  and  is  at  last  sold
to  him  that  bids  most,  nor  may  hee  that  bids  money  goe
from  his  word,  at  least  if  hee  bee  able  to  performe  and
stand  to  it.  Now  the  money  is  delivered  to  the  Hazineh-
dar  Bashee,  and  is  put  into  the  outward  Hazineh  :  And
although  the  goods  did  come  from  out  of  the  Houses  of
such  as  dyed  but  the  day  before  of  the  Pestilence  ;  the
Turkes  neverthelesse  buy  them,  and  use  them  as  if  the
Disease  were  not  infectious  at  all ;  affirming  that  their  end
is  written  in  their  Forehead,  and  it  cannot  bee  avoyded  by
any  humaine  Rule  or  Policie.

§.  VIII.

Of  blacke  Eunuches  and  Black-moore  Girles  and
Women :  of  Physicians,  and  of  the  Kings
Children.

No  feare  of
Pestilence.

Their
Education.

Ow  as  concerning  the  Blacke  Eunuches,  and  Black-
moore  Wenches,  which  serve  the  Sultanaes  and  the
Kings  Women  ; It  is  to  bee  noted  that  the  Blacke
Eunuches,  whilst  they  are  Boyes,  are  for  the  most  part
kept  and  taught  among  the  other  youthes  of  the  Serraglio,
untill  they  bee  come  to  age  and  made  fit  for  service ; and
being taken from thence they are appointed for the
Women,  and  set  to  serve  with  others  at  the  Sultanaes
[II.  ix.  1 598.]  Gate  (all  under  command  of  the  Kuzlar  Agha,  that  is  to
KmdarAgha.  say ^  Master  0f  the  Virgins)  being  allowed  a  Pension
of  fiftie  or  sixtie  Aspers  per  Diem,  and  two  Vests  of  Silke

368

Pension.

ROBERT WITHERS  ad.

c.  1620.
per  Annum,  with  Linnen  and  other  necessaries  sufficient
for  their  use, besides  divers  gifts  they  receive  from  Women
strangers  at  such  times  as  they  let  them  goe  in  to  the
Kings  women  :  they  are  named  by  the  names  of  Flowers,  Names.
as  Hiacynth,  Narcissus,  Rose,  Gilly-flower,  and  the  like  ;
for  that,  serving  the  Women,  their  names  may  bee  answer-
able to  their  Virginitie,  sweet  and  undefiled.

The  Black-moore  Girls,  are  no  sooner  brought  into  the  Negro  Girles.
Serraglio  after  their  arrivall  at  Constantinople,  (for  they
come  by  Ship  from  Cairo  and  from  thereabouts)  but  they
are  carryed  to  the  Womens  lodgings,  where  they  are
brought  up  and  made  fit  for  all  services  ;  and  by  how  much
the  more  uglie  and  deformed  they  are,  by  so  much  the  ^5teem^ mst
more  they  are  esteemed  of,  by  the  Sultanaes  ;  wherefore  ^or
the  Bashaw  of  Cairo  (who  for  the  most  part  sends  them  all)
is  alwayes  diligent  to  get  the  most  il-favoured,  cole-blacke,
flat-nosed  Girles  that  may  bee  had  throughout  all  j^Egypt,
or  the  bordering  Countries,  to  send  them  for  Presents  to
the  Grand  Signior,  who  bestowes  them  upon  his  Women.
Now  after  their  comming,  if  they  shall  bee  disliked  by
reason  of  some  Infirmitie,  then  are  they  sent  into  the  old
Serraglio,  as  the  White  women  are,  when  they  are  unfit
for  service  or  misbehave  themselves  ;  all  which  is  done  by
the  Kings  order  and  consent.

The  aforesayd  blacke  Eunuches,  by  occasion  of  being
sent  with  Messages  to  the  Grand  Signior  from  the  Sul-
tanaes, may  passe  through  the  Mens  lodgings  to  carrie  Privileges.
little  notes  to  the  Capee  Agha,  that  hee  may  deliver  them
to  the  King ; or  for  to  fetch  any  thing  from  any  of  the
Officers  of  the  Serraglio,  or  to  speake  with  a  friend  at  the
Gate ; but  otherwise  they  may  not  goe  forth  of  the  Ser-
raglio  from the  Kuzlar  Agha,  without  expresse  licence
from  the  Queene. They  likewise  are  to  goe  about  and
doe  all  other  businesse  for  the  Sultanaes  in  the  Womens
lodgings, which  White  Eunuches cannot performe, for  No  White  man
they  are  not  permitted  to  come  there ; nor  any  man  that  ^m^  ^
is  White  (but  the  King  onely)  may  see  and  come  amongst  Women,
the  Women. Insomuch,  as  when  by  reason  of  some  one
ix  369  2  A

A.D.

c.  1620.
Physicians
visiting  the
side  icemen.

Physicke
meane.

The  Kings
Sonnes  by  the
Queene.

Mothers  care.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  them  being  fallen  sicke,  it  is  required  that  the  Hekim
Bashee  (who  is  the  Kings  Physician)  should  come  thither ;
they  must  necessarily  first  have  leave  of  the  King  for  his
entrance,  and  being  admitted  to  enter  by  the  Sultanaes
doore,  hee  seeth  none  but  the  Blacke  Eunuches  (all  the
other  Women  being  retired  into  some  withdrawing
roomes)  who  bring  him  into  the  Sicke  womans  Chamber ;
and  shee  being  closely  covered  from  head  to  foote  with
Quilts  and  Blankets,  holdeth  out  her  Arme  onely,  so  as
the  Doctor  may  touch  her  pulse,  who  when  hee  hath  given
order  what  shall  bee  done,  goes  his  way  immediatly  by
the  same  way  that  hee  came.

But  if  she  which  is  sicke  be  the  Queene  or  one  of  the
Sultanaes,  then  her  arme  and  hand  which  shee  holdeth  out
of  the  Bed  for  the  Physician  to  feele  her  pulse,  is  covered
with  a  fine  piece  of  white  Silke  or  taffata  Sarcenet,  for  her
flesh  may  not  be  seene  ;  neither  may  the  Doctor  say  any
thing  in  her  hearing,  but  being  gone  out  of  her  Chamber,
prescribeth  what  medicine  hee  thinkes  fit ;  which  for
the  most  part  (according  to  the  common  custome  of
the  Turkes)  is  but  onely  some  kinde  of  loosening  Sherbet,
for  they  seldome  use  any  other  Physicke  ;  neither  doe  I
hold  their  skill  sufficient  to  prepare  Medicines  for  every
Maladie.  But  in  case  that  shee  should  need  a  Chyrur-
geon,  shee  must  then  doe  as  shee  may  without  any
scruple  ;  for  there  is  no  remedie  to  conceale  her  skinne
from  him.  And  as  for  the  other  Women  which  are  not
Sultanaes,  or  at  least  which  are  not  well  beloved  of  the
Grand  Signior  for  some  peculiar  vertues  ;  they  needing
a  Chirurgion  are  sent  into  the  old  Serraglio  to  bee  cured.

The  Kings  Sonnes  which  are  borne  unto  him  by  his
Queene,  are  Nursed  and  brought  up  together  by  them-
selves, by  choise  Nurses  which  are  found  abroad  without
the  Serraglio  ;  But  if  hee  have  also  Sonnes  by  other  Sul-
tanaes (as  commonly  ever}7  Grand  Signior  hath)  then  those
are  brought  up  apart  and  not  with  the  Queenes,  so  that
every  Mother  careth  for  her  owne  Children,  and  that  with
great  jealousie ; yet  they  may  play  together  till  they  come

37°

ROBERT WITHERS  a.d.

c.  1620.

to  bee  of  sixe  or  seven  yeeres  of  Age  ; being  much  made

of,  sumptuously  maintayned,  and  Apparelled  all  alike  at

the  Kings  charge,  and  their  Nurses  are  well  rewarded  for

their  paines. They  live  among  the  Women  till  they  come

to  bee  of  nine  or  ten  yeeres  of  age  ; and  about  fourteene  Circuma.

they are Circumcised with a great deale of pompe  i0

(especially  the  eldest  Sonne)  and  solemnities  throughout

the whole Citie ; for the Circumcision of the Turkes

Children,  are  like  the  Christian  Weddings, there  being

used  at  them,  great  Feasting,  Banquetting,  Musicke,  and

bringing  of  Presents.

From  five  yeeres  of  age  untill  ten  (during  which  time
they  live  amongst  the  Women)  they  have  their  Hojah  Hojah  cr
(that  is,  their  Schoole-master)  appointed  them  by  the  King
to  teach  them  ;  which  Hojah  comes  into  the  Womens
Serraglio  every  day,  and  is  brought  into  a  Chamber  by
the  Blacke  Eunuches,  (without  ever  seeing  the  Women  at
all)  whither  the  Children  come  accompanied  with  two  old
Black-moore  women  Slaves,  and  are  taught  for  so  many
howers  as  their  Tutor  is  permitted  to  stay,  and  so  hee
departeth.

As  for  the  Daughters,  thev  are  but  sleightlv  looked  KtnSs
after  ;  nor  is  the  King  so  tender  over  them  ;  for,  as  they  aus  tfrs'
are  not  suspected  for  any  thing:  that  mav  concerne  the
State  in  future  times,  so  likewise  are  thev  not  much
respected ;  vet  thev  are  well  provided  for  bv  the  Grand
Sio-nior  their  Father,  in  case  thev  live  to  bee  fit  for
Husbands.

After  the  Prince  (next  Heire  to  the  Crowne)  is  circum-  [II.ix.1599.]
cised ; if  his  Father  thinke  it  unfit  to  keepe  him  anv
longer  with  him  at  home  in  the  Serraglio,  hee  provides  all
things  fitting  to  send  him  abroad  that  he  mav  see  the  The  Pnnce
World  the  better  to  enable  him  for  to  governe  the  Empire  un'  a  '
after  his  Fathers  decease  ; and  sends  along  with  him  one
of  his  principall  Eunuches  for  to  be  his  Over-seer  and  a
helpe  unto  him,  besides  manv  Servants  to  attend  upon
him,  all  which  hee  chuseth  out  of  his  owne  Serraglio  :
hee  allowes  him  likewise  sufficient  meanes  to  maintavne

37i

A.D.

c.  1620.

Magnesia  his
Residence.

His

Commission.

Victuals  and
Cookes.

Kings  Kitchin
and  meales.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

him  like  a  Prince  (as  he  doth  also  by  the  rest  of  his  Sonnes
if  he  have  a  purpose  to  send  any  of  them  abroad)  and  so
all  things  being  well  ordered  for  him,  having  taken  his
leave  of  his  Father  and  Mother  (who  present  him  with
many  gifts ;  as  also  the  Sultana's,  and  all  the  Bashawes,
and  great  men  of  the  Port  doe)  he  departs  for  Magnesia,
a  Citie  in  Asia,  there  to  reside  in  the  Government  of  that
Province ;  in  which  hee  hath  not  the  Supreame  Autho-
rise, but  governes  only  as  his  Fathers  Deputie.  And
should  hee  passe  the  limits  of  his  Commission,  hee  would
quickly  fall  into  disgrace,  and  suspition  of  Rebellion  ;  as
heretofore  it  hath  hapned  unto  divers :  wherefore  the
Eunuch  which  was  appointed  for  to  bee  his  Over-seer,  is
bound  to  give  continuall  advice  to  the  Grand  Signior  and
the  Vizirs,  of  all  Occurrences  according  to  the  Canon  :
and  likewise  to  receive  from  Constantinople  such  Com-
mandements  as  are  to  bee  obeyed  in  those  parts  where  the
Prince  resideth  ;  so  that  all  things  in  a  manner,  are  swayed
by  the  discretion  of  the  Eunuch.

§•  ix.

Provisions  of  Victuals,  Cookes,  Kitchins,  Diet  of
the  King,  Queene,  and  others,  and  of  their
manner  of  Service.

L  the  victuals  in  the  Serraglio,  (for  the  most  part)
are  dressed  by  Agiamoglans,  brought  up  to
Cookerie ;  howbeit  there  are  belonging  more  then
two  hundred  Under-cookes  and  Scullions  to  the  Kitchins
that  are  therein,  besides  their  principall  Officers,  as  Sewers,
Caters,  and  such  like  :  all  which  are  carefully  to  looke  to
their  severall  Kitchins,  and  not  any  one  to  trust  another
with  his  businesse.

The  Kings  Kitchin  beginnes  to  worke  ordinarily  before
day,  for,  his  Highnesse  rising  betimes,  there  must  be
alwayes  something  readie  for  him,  and  oftentimes  he
eateth  three  or  foure  times  a  day.  Hee  dines  commonly
at  ten  of  the  clocke  in  the  fore-noone,  and  sups  about  sixe

372

ROBERT WITHERS

at  night,  aswell  in  the  Summer  as  in  the  Winter.  Now
when  hee  hath  a  will  to  eate,  hee  tels  the  Capee-Agha  of  it,
who  forth-with  sends  an  Eunuch  to  give  notice  of  the  same
to  the  Chiefe  Sewer;  and  he  having  dished  the  meate,
brings  it  in  dish  by  dish  to  the  Kings  Table ;  and  so  his
Majestie  sits  downe  after  the  common  Turkish  fashion
with  his  legges  acrosse,  having  a  very  rich  embroydercd
Towell  cast  before  him  upon  his  knees  to  save  his  Clothes ;
and  another  hanging  upon  his  left  arme  which  he  useth
for  his  Napkin  to  wipe  his  mouth  and  fingers.  He  is  not
carved  unto,  as  other  Princes  are,  but  helps  himselfe  ;
having  before  him  upon  a  piece  of  Bulgar  leather  (which  is
in  stead  of  a  Table-cloth)  fine  white  Bread,  of  three  or
foure  sorts,  very  new  and  well  relished.  He  neither  useth
Knife  nor  Forke,  but  only  a  wooden  Spoone,  of  which
there  are  two  layed  before  him,  the  one  serving  him  to  eate
his  Pottage,  and  the  other  to  sup  up  certaine  delicate
Sirrups  withall ;  made  of  all  sorts  of  Fruits,  compounded
with  the  Juice  of  Limons  and  Sugar,  to  quench  his  thirst :
he  tasteth  of  his  dishes  one  by  one,  and  as  hee  hath  done
with  them,  they  are  taken  off  againe  ;  his  meate  is  so  tender
and  delicately  dressed,  that  (as  I  said  before)  he  needs  no
Knife,  but  puis  the  flesh  from  the  bones  very  easily  with
his  fingers  :  He  useth  no  Salt  at  his  Table,  neither  hath
he  any  Antipasto ;  but  immediately  fals  aboord  the  flesh,
and  concludes  with  a  Tart  or  some  such  like  thing :  And
so  his  Dinner  or  Supper  being  ended,  hee  washeth  his
hands  in  a  Bason  of  Gold,  with  the  Ewer  all  set  with
precious  stones.

His  Majesties  ordinary  Diet  (as  I  have  beene  told  by
some  of  the  Aschees)  is  halfe  a  score  rosted  Pidgeons  in
a  dish,  two  or  three  Geese  in  a  dish,  Lambe,  Hens,
Chickens,  Mutton,  and  sometimes  Wilde-fowle,  but  very
seldome  :  and  looke  what  hee  hath  rosted  for  him,  so  hee
hath  the  same  quantitie  boyled,  almost  of  every  thing ;
there  being  very  good  sawce  for  every  dish,  and  other
ingredients  very  pleasing  to  the  pallat.  He  hath  likewise
Broths  of  all  sorts,  and  divers  Purcelaine  dishes  of  Pre-

373

A.D.

c.  1620.

His  sitting  at
meate.

Not  carved.

No  Knife  nor

Forke.

Two  Spoones.

No  Salt  nor
Antipast.

His  diet.

A.D.

c.  1620.

Drinking

once.

No  words.

Mutes  and
Jests.

[II.ix.1600.]
His  favour.

Dishes  and

covers  of  Gold.

Yellow  Purce-
laine  for
Ramazan,  or
Lent.

Remainders.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

serves  and  Sirrups,  and  some  Tarts  and  Pyes,  after  their
fashion  made  of  flesh  :  and  having  made  an  end  of  eating,
hee  drinkes  one  draught  of  Sherbet,  (not  drinking  above
once  at  a  Meale)  which  is  brought  unto  him  in  a  deepe
Purcelaine  dish  covered,  standing  upon  a  flat  under  dish,
of  the  same  Metall.

All  the  while  that  he  is  at  Table,  he  very  seldome  or
never  speakes  to  any  man,  albeit  there  stand  afore  him
divers  Mutes  and  Jesters,  to  make  him  merrie,  playing
trickes  and  sporting  one  with  another  Alia  Mutescha,
which  the  King  understands  very  well,  for  by  signes  their
meaning  is  easily  conceived.  And  if  peradventure  he  doe
chance  to  speake  a  word  or  two  ;  it  is  to  grace  some  one
of  his  Agha's  standing  by  him  whom  hee  highly  favoureth,
throwing  him  a  Loafe  of  Bread  from  his  owne  Table,  and
this  is  held  for  a  singular  grace  and  speciall  favour  :  and  hee
dividing  it  amongst  his  companions,  they  accept  of  it  at
a  second  hand,  as  a  great  honour  done  unto  them,  in
regard  it  came  from  their  Lord  and  King.

The  dishes  for  his  Highnesse  Table  are  all  of  Gold,
and  so  likewise  are  their  covers  ;  they  are  in  the  custodie
of  the  Keelergee,  who  attends  at  the  Kitchin ;  and  so  are
all  the  yellow  Purcelaine  dishes  (which  are  very  costly  and
scarcely  to  bee  had  for  money)  in  which  the  King  eates  in
the  Ramazan  time,  which  is  their  Lent,  and  lasteth  a  whole
Moone,  and  the  Moneth  it  selfe  is  so  called  :  In  which
time  they  never  eate  in  the  day,  but  only  in  the  night,  not
making  any  difference  in  meates  (excepting  Swines  flesh
and  things  strangled,  of  which  they  are  forbidden  by  their
Law  to  eate  at  any  time.)  The  King  seldome  eates  fish,
unlesse  it  be  when  he  is  abroad  at  some  Garden  House  by
the  Sea-side  with  his  Women.

The  meate  which  remaynes  of  that  which  was  at  rhe
Grand  Signiors  Table,  is  immediately  carried  to  the
Agha's  Table  which  waite  upon  him ;  so  that  they  (what
with  that  and  their  own  diet  together)  are  wondrous  well
to  passe.  Now  whilst  the  Agha's  are  eating,  the  King
passeth  away  the  time  with  his  Mutes  and  Buffones,  not

37+

ROBERT WITHERS

speaking  (as  1  said)  at  all  with  his  Tongue,  but  only  by
signes  :  and  now  and  then  he  kicks  and  buffcteth  them
in  sport,  but  forth-with  makes  them  amends  by  giving
them  Money ;  for  which  purpose  his  pockets  are  alwayes
furnished.

In  the  meane  time  also  the  Capee  Agha  eates  in  a
Roome  apart,  such  meate  as  is  prepared  for  him  in  his
Kitchin,  being  farre  inferiour  to  the  Kings  diet,  and  with
him  doe  eate  the  Hazinehdar  Bashee,  the  Sarai  Agasee,
and  sometimes  some  of  the  Kings  Physicians,  whom  he
cals  in  for  to  beare  him  company ;  and  such  other
Eunuches  which  are  Keepers  of  the  Serraglioes  abroad,  as
doe  come  to  visit  him.  And  the  remainder  of  his  diet,
with  a  fresh  supply  from  the  Kitchins,  serves  Diman'  in
mano,  all  the  other  white  Eunuchs.

In  this  Interim  likewise,  is  meate  sent  to  all  the  other
Odahs,  for  the  youths  there ;  which  is  two  Loaves  apiece
per  diem,  and  a  little  boyled  Mutton,  and  Pottage  of  Rice
mingled  with  Butter  and  Honey,  which  consists  more  of
Broth  then  substance,  it  being  but  thinne  of  Rice,  and  so
little  flesh  put  in  it,  that  it  is  well  if  it  give  but  a  taste
thereof  when  they  soppe  their  bread  therein.

On  the  other  side  is  meate  carried  in  by  Blacke  Eunuchs,
to  the  Queene,  to  the  Sultanas,  and  to  all  the  other  women,
wherein  is  observed  the  same  order  as  is  aforesaid  with
the  King.  Insomuch  as  that  in  the  space  of  an  houre  and
halfe  all  is  dispatched.

The  Queenes  Service  is  in  Copper  dishes  tinned  over,
but  kept  very  bright  and  cleane,  and  some  also  of  white
Purcelaine  :  howsoever  it  is  to  bee  understood,  that  for
her  owne  mouth  shee  may  be  served  as  she  pleaseth,  and
so  questionlesse  may  all  the  Sultanas,  although  their
ordinarie  allowance  be  no  other  then  Copper.  For  often-
times the  King  is  amongst  them  a  whole  day  together,
eating,  sporting,  and  sleeping  ;  of  which  there  is  no  notice
taken,  nor  may  any  one  looke  into  his  actions ;  where
amongst  themselves  they  make  him  delicate  and  sumptu-
ous Banquets  (over  and  above  the  ordinarie  meales  of

375

A.D.

c.  1620.

Capee  Aghas
diet.

Diet  for  the
Odah  youths.

Queene  and
Sultanas  diet.

Queenes
Service  in
Copper.

King  with  his
women.

A.D.

c.  1620.

Snow  mixed
with  Sherbety
at  a  deere
rate.

Comfets  and
Cheese  not
used.

Order.

Bread  of  three
sorts.

Meale  from
Bursia.

Quantitie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Dinner  and  Supper)  of  sweet  Meats  and  Fruits  of  all
sorts ;  having  daily  an  abundance  presented  unto  them.
They  drinke  their  Sherbet  mingled  with  Snow  in  the
Summer,  of  which  there  is  a  great  quantitie  preserved
yeerely  for  to  serve  the  Serraglio,  but  at  a  very  great
charge.  For  the  Snow  doth  stand  the  Port  in  more  then
twentie  thousand  Chicquines  per  annum,  in  Gifts  and
Ceremonies,  and  other  Expenses,  at  the  fetching  it  in  from
the  Hils  ;  and  in  putting  it  under  ground  in  Houses  made
of  purpose  for  that  use.

They  doe  not  ordinarily  use  Comfets,  nor  Cheese,  for
the  Turkes  doe  hardly  know  how  to  make  them ;  especi-
ally Cheese  (which  although  they  doe  make  of  it)  it  never
prooves  good :  So  that  the  Sultanas,  and  all  great  Per-
sonages eate  none  but  Parmezan,  of  which  the  Bailo  of
Venice  doth  alwayes  furnish  them,  and  that  very  plenti-
fully, for  they  love  it  well,  and  eate  heartily  of  it  when
they  goe  abroad  upon  pleasure  or  a  hunting.

For  the  provision  of  the  said  Serraglio,  all  things  are
prepared  in  great  abundance,  and  every  particular  provi-
sion is  assigned  to  particular  persons  to  take  care  therefore,
so  that  there  is  never  any  want  of  things  necessary.

The  first  and  best  sort  of  Bread  (which  indeed  in  very
white  and  savourie)  is  for  the  King,  the  Sultanas,  the
Bashawes,  and  other  great  ones.  The  second  sort  for
them  of  a  middle  ranke.  The  third  and  last  sort  (which
indeed  is  very  blacke  and  course)  for  the  Agiamoglans  and
others  of  base  qualitie.

The  meale  whereof  the  best  sort  of  bread  is  made  for
the  Grand  Signior  and  the  Sultanas,  is  brought  from
Bursia,  made  of  the  Wheate  of  that  Province  of  Bithinia,
growing  in  the  Kings  owne  ground.  And  the  yeerely
provision  thereof  is  about  seven  or  eight  thousand
Keeloes,  which  makes  almost  so  many  Bushels  of  ours
here  in  London  :  the  which  Wheat  makes  the  best  flower
that  comes  to  Constantinople,  for  that  it  is  also  ground  at
Bursia,  and  those  Mils  are  far  better  then  any  that  are
neere  Stanbol.

376

KOHEHT WITHERS  a.d.

c.  1620.

Now  for  the  other  Wheate  which  they  spend,  it  all  Vok  wheat.
comes  (for  the  most  part)  from  Volo  in  Grecia,  where  there
is  a  great  deale  of  Land  belonging  to  the  Crowne  ;  a
great  part  of  which  Corne  is  yeerely  spent  in  the  Armado,  [ii.ix.r6oi.]
made  into  Bisket  at  Negroponti :  and  some  part  of  it  is
sold  to  the  Raguseans  and  others,  who  come  with  their
shipping  to  lade  it  thence,  but  they  must  bring  their
Authoritie  with  them  from  Constantinople.  There  is
likewise  brought  yeerly  to  Stanboll  of  the  aforesaid
Wheate,  thirtie  five,  or  fortie  thousand  Keeloes,  which  is  Quantitie.
laid  up  in  Magasins  that  serve  for  that  use,  and  is  after-
wards ground,  and  spent  in  the  Serraglio,  for  the  service
of  the  same.  Nor  is  it  any  wonder  that  the  Serraglio
consumes  so  much  Corne ;  for,  besides  the  Servants  as
aforesaid ;  all  the  Sultanas  and  great  Personages,  with
divers  others,  have  their  daily  allowance  of  bread  from  the
Keeler  (that  is)  the  Pantrie,  or  from  his  Highnesse  Bake-  Pantry
house ;  scilicet,  every  Sultana,  twentie  Loaves :  every  allowance-
Bashaw  ten :  to  the  Muftee  eight :  and  so  to  divers  others
a  severall  proportion,  even  to  one  Loafe  a  man.  All
which  is  by  the  Commandement  and  discretion  of  the
Chiefe  Vizir :  the  severall  allowances  beeing  set  downe  in
the  Chiefe  Butlers  Bookes,  or  else  in  his  who  is  the
Overseer  of  the  Bake-houses  :  Every  Loafe  being  as  bigge
as  three  penie  Loaves  of  ours  here  in  London,  but  very
light  and  spungie,  and  easie  of  digestion.

The  Rice  and  Lentils,  and  all  other  sorts  of  Pulse  (of  P^e,  Lentils,
which  there  is  a  great  quantitie  spent)  is  brought  yeerely  P"/sefrom
from  Alexandria  in  the  Galeons,  which  make  two  Voyages
per  annum,  and  bring  out  of  Egypt,  not  only  the  said
Pulse,  but  also  all  sorts  of  Spice  and  Sugar,  and  a  great  $Pice  and
quantitie of  Preserves, and pickled meates, which the  Stveet  meate$-
Turkes  much  delight  in. And  as  for  Sugar,  there  is  spent  Expence  of
an  unspeakeable  deale  in  making  of  Sherbets,  and  Tarts ; SuSar-
which  not  only  the  Serraglio  useth,  but  are  also  ordinary
Presents ; from  one Bashaw to another, and from one
friend to another ; insomuch that it is a thing to be
admired,  to  see  so  great  a  quantitie  so  suddenly  consumed.

377

A.D.

c.  1620.
Little  Spice.

1MJRCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Egyptian
fruits.

True  it  is,  that  there  is  but  little  Spice  spent  in  the
Serraglio,  nor  indeed  any  great  store  among  the  Turkes
(Pepper  only  excepted)  for  inasmuch  as  Wine  is  not  an
ordinary  drink  amongst  them,  they  therefore  avoide  such
things  as  provoke  a  desire  thereunto.  Howsoever  in  the
Store-houses  of  the  Port,  there  is  provision  of  all  sorts  of
Spices  and  Drugges  for  whatsoever  occasion  should
happen,  that  may  require  the  use  of  them.

There  likewise  comes  from  Egypt  great  store  of  Dates,
Prunes,  and  other  dryed  Plummes  of  divers  sorts,  which
the  Cookes  use  in  their  dressing  of  meate,  aswell  for  rost
as  boyled,  and  indeed  they  make  delicate  dishes  of  them.
Hony  whence.  The  Hony  (of  which  the  Port  spends  a  great  quantitie
both  in  their  Broths,  boyled  meates  and  Sherbets  also  for
the  common  sort  of  people)  is  brought  from  Valachia,
from  Transilvania,  and  from  Moldavia,  aswell  that  which
is  presented  to  the  King,  as  that  which  comes  for  parti-
cular mens  Accounts ;  yet  that  which  is  used  in  the  Kings
Kitchin  comes  from  Candie,  and  is  farre  better  and  purer
then  the  other.

The  Oyle  (of  which  there  is  an  unspeakable  consump-
tion made)  is  brought  from  Modon  and  Coron  in  Grecia,
the  Sanjackbegh  of  that  Province  being  bound  to  see
the  Port  sufficiently  furnished  therewith :  howbeit  that
which  is  spent  in  the  Kings  Kitchin  is  brought  from
Candie,  it  being  sweeter,  cleerer,  and  in  every  respect
better  then  that  of  the  Morea.

The  Butter  (of  which  there  is  also  spent  a  very  great
quantitie,  in  that  it  is  used  almost  in  all  their  meates ;
especially  in  Pillawe)  comes  out  of  the  Blacke  Sea,  from
Bogdania  and  from  Caffa,  being  put  into  great  Oxe-hides
and  Buffalo-hides,  and  so  laid  up  in  Magazines,  for  the
yeerely  provision  of  the  Kings  Court,  but  commonly  they
have  so  much  that  they  sell  part  of  it  into  the  Citie,  as
they  doe  likewise  the  Oyle,  Honey,  &c.  which  is  Beggleek
(that  is,  for  the  Grand  Signiors  Account)  when  they  have
more  of  them  then  they  thinke  they  shall  spend  ; and

The  Turkes  know  not  what
378

Oyle  of
Grecia.

Of  Candie.

Butter  jrom
Bogdania,

make  a  oreat  benefit  of  it.

ROBERT WITHERS  ad.

c.  1620.
belongs  to  fresh  Butter,  there  being  little  or  none  at  all  Ko  fresh
made  about  Constantinople; neither  doe  they  eate  much  futtf''M,<
Milke,  except  it  bee  made  sower,  which  they  call  Yoghurd,  caten_
for  that  it  being  so  turned  sower  it  doth  quench  the  thirst ;
and  of  that  both  they  and  the  Christians  doe  eate  a  great
quantitie. They  eate  also  some  store  of  Kaymack  (that
is,  clouted  or  cloded  Creame)  but  that  is  only  for  the  better
sort,  for  it  is  a  meate  of  too  high  a  price  for  the  vulgar.

Now  as  for  flesh,  every  yeere  in  the  Autumne,  Winter  Provision  of
drawing nigh ; the Bashaw causeth the Provision of  PCi
Basturma  to  be  made  for  the  Kings  Kitchins ; and  they
make  it  of  Kowes  great  with  Calfe,  for  then  say  they,  the  Kow  Beefe.
flesh  is  most  tender  and  savourie  :  they  use  it  in  the  same
manner  as Christians use Swines flesh, for they make
Puddings  and  Sauceages  of  it,  and  the  rest  they  boyle  and
dresse  after  other  fashions.

This sort  of  dryed  flesh, after that it is sufficiently  DlVd  and
dryed  with  hanging  a  moneth  or  better  in  a  Roome,  and &  '
little  or  no  Salt  used  about  it,  will  last  the  whole  yeare,
and  eate  very  savourly :  and  it  is  in  such  use  amongst  the
Turkes, that  there  is  scarce  a  house  of  any  fashion  or
account,  but  doth  yeerely  make  provision  of  it,  and  it  is
held  a  very  thriftie  and  sparing  course ; but  they  doe  not
all  make  their  Basturma  of  Kowes  great  with  Calfe,  for
there  are  some  which  love  the  other  better,  which  is  made
of  Oxen  and  Bullocks ;  and  they  can  buy  it  farre  cheaper.
The  Bashaw  hath  the  oversight  of  that  which  is  pre-
pared for  the  Kings  Kitchins ; and  there  are  ordinarily
spent foure hundred Kowes per annum, for the said
provision  of  Basturma. The  other  flesh  which  is  daily
spent  in  the  Kitchins  of  the  Serraglio  (as  I  was  told  by
one of the Aschees) is as followeth : Sheepe, 200.
Lambes,  or  Kids  when  they  are  in  season,  100. Calves,
10. Geese,  50. Hennes,  200. Chickens,  100. Pigeons,  [II.  ix.  1602.]
200. There  is  but  very  little  store  of  Fish  spent  in  the  Fish.
Serraglio  :  yet  sometimes  the  Aghaes  for  dainties  will  eate
some ; the  Seas  thereabouts  doe  exceedingly  abound  with
divers  kinds,  and  they  may  easily  take  as  many  as  they

379

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1620.

please :  but  the  Christians  are  well  served  with  Fish  in
the  Markets,  and  at  reasonable  prices ;  and  the  common
sort  of  Turkes  doe  beare  them  Companie.

The  Grand  Signior  (nor  any  of  the  Serraglio)  cannot
Fruits.  want  for  Fruit ;  there  being  in  time  of  yeere  so  many
Presents  thereof  brought  thither  continually  ;  besides  what
comes  from  the  Kings  owne  Gardens  (which  are  many,
and  neere  the  Citie)  every  morning  in  great  abundance,
and  excellent  good ;  the  Gardeners  selling  the  remainder
at  a  place  in  Constantinople,  where  onely  the  Kings  Fruit
is  sold  ;  and  bring  the  money  weekely  to  the  Bustangee
Bashee,  who  afterwards  gives  it  to  his  Majestie,  and  it  is
called  the  Kings  Pocket-money ;  for  he  gives  it  away  by
handfuls,  as  he  sees  occasion,  to  his  Mutes  and  Buffons.
Skullery.  The  furniture  of  the  Kitchins  in  the  Serraglio,  as
Ketles,  Cauldrons,  and  Skillets,  &c.  are  almost  all  of
Brasse,  and  they  are  so  neatly  kept,  and  of  such  a  large-
nesse,  that  there  cannot  bee  a  braver  sight  of  that  nature.
And  as  for  the  Dishes,  they  are  of  Copper  tinned  over,
but  so  often  new  forbished  and  trimmed,  that  (they  being
daily  used)  it  is  wonderfull  to  behold  their  continual!
brightnesse ;  and  of  these  they  have  a  great  number,  but
Losse  by  the  King  sustaynes  great  losse  by  them  :  for,  there  being
pilfering.  sucn  a  companie  of  people  served  daily  from  the  Kitchins
with  meate  both  within  and  without  (especially  upon  the
foure  Divan  dayes)  there  are  so  many  of  them  stolne,  that
the  Defterdars  (weighing  the  losse  and  charge  of  those
Dishes)  have  often  beene  almost  resolved  to  make  them  all
of  Silver,  and  so  to  consigne  them  to  the  custodie  of  the
Sewers  and  Butlers,  who  should  from  time  to  time  give
account  of  them,  and  looke  the  better  to  them :  but
finding  it  a  thing  so  costly,  not  any  Defterdar  (as  yet)  hath
performed  it,  nor  adventured  to  beginne.
Wood  and  The  Wood  which  is  spent  in  the  aforesaid  Kitchins  and
Fewell.  m  a}l  tke  Serraglio,  are  almost  an  infinite  number  of
weights,  (for  at  Constantinople  the  Wood  is  all  bought
and  sold  by  weight)  there  being  for  the  account  of  the
Serraglio (which they  call Begleek) above thirtie  great

380

ROBERT WITHERS

c.  1620.

Caramusals,  which  doe  nothing  else  at  one  time  of  the
yeere  but  sayle  into  the  Blacke  Sea,  there  to  lade  at  the
Kings  Woods  :  It  is  a  businesse  which  costs  but  little  (in
respect  of  the  worth  of  it)  for  they  have  it  for  the  cutting
downe ;  and  the  bringing  and  unlading  of  it  require-
little  or  no  charge  at  all ;  for  they  are  to  make  so  many
returnes  per  annum  for  the  King,  but  receive  no  fraight :
and  the  Masters  are  to  see  it  unladen  at  their  owne  costs
and  charges,  receiving  only  a  discharge,  but  no  recom-
pence  at  all.

§.  x.

Apparell,  Bedding,  Sicknesse,  Hospitals.  Inherit-
ance; Kings  expences,  Recreations,  receiving
Petitions,  Stables; Ramazan  Solemnities.

He  Grand  Signiors  Apparell,  is  nothing  different  Fashion  of
in  fashion  from  other  mens,  saving  in  the  length  Kt"Ss
of  his  Vests,  and  the  richnesse  thereof ; nor  are ***""
his  shooes  shod  with  Iron  at  the  heeles,  as  other  Turkes
weare them, but are  raised and painted like childrens
shooes,  with  knots  and  flowers.

And  as  for  his  Lodging ; he  sleepes  upon  Matteresses  His  bedding.
of  Velvet  and  Cloth  of  Gold  : In  the  Summer  in  Sheets
of  Shash  embroydered  with  Silke  sowen  to  the  quilts  :  and
in  the  Winter  betwixt  Coverlets  of  Lucernes  or  of  Sables,
wearing  all  night  a  little  Terbent  on  his  head ; And  when
he  lies  alone  in  his  owne  Lodgings,  he  is  alwaies  watched  Pages  watch.
by  his  Pages  of  his  Chamber,  by  two  and  two  at  a  time,
changing  every  three  houres ; one  of  them  standing  at  the
Chamber  doore,  and  the  other  by  the  Bed  side  to  cover
him,  in  case  the  clothes  should  slide  off,  and  to  be  neere
hand,  if  his  Majestie  should  want  any  thing  ;  And  in  the
same  Chamber  where  he  lies,  there  are  alwaies  two  women 7«'5  Torch-
that  attend  with  burning  Torches  in  their  hands  ; nor  may  zcomen-
they  put  them  out  till  such  time  as  the  King  is  risen  out
of  his  Bed.  _  Womens

The  habite  of  the  women  is  much  like  to  that  of  the  habit.

381

A.D.

c.  1620.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

No  Close
stooles.

No  Paper,  £jJV
Stipend!.

men  for  they  weare  Chacksirs,  and  Buskins,  and  have
their  Shooes  shod  with  Iron  at  the  heeles.  They  sleepe
as  the  men  doe,  in  linnen  Breeches,  and  in  quilted  Wast-
coats ;  having  thinne  and  light  ones  for  the  Summer,  and
more  thicke  and  warme  ones  for  the  Winter.

The  Turkes  never  have  any  Close-stooles,  or  such  like
inplements  in  their  Chambers  ;  but  having  a  will  to  that
businesse,  they  rise  and  goe  to  their  Privies,  made  in
places  apart,  where  there  doe  alwaies  stand  Water-pots
ready,  that  they  may  wash  when  they  have  done  ;  nor
may  they  use  Paper  in  that  service,  as  we  doe.

The  severall  stipends  which  the  Grand  Signior  alloweth
to  those  of  the  Serraglio,  (of  what  degree  or  condition
soever  they  be)  are  payd  out  of  the  outmost  Hazineh  ;
and  the  chiefe  Defterdar  (who  hath  a  Booke  as  well  of  the
names  of  the  Stipendaries,  as  of  their  stipends)  is  bound
[II. ix.  1 603.]  to  send  once  every  three  moneths,  to  all  the  Odahs  in
severall  bagges,  so  much  money  as  their  pay  imports,  and
there  they  share  it  amongst  them  :  The  like  he  doth  also
by  the  women,  and  the  Agiamoglans,  paying  them  in  good
money.  And  against  the  Biram,  which  is  their  Carneval,
hee  sends  them  their  Vests,  their  Linnen,  and  such  like
necessaries,  of  which  he  never  fayles  them ;  for,  they
wanting  them,  if  he  should  disappoint  them,  they  would  so
complaine  against  the  said  Defterdar,  that  it  would  bee
his  utter  overthrow ;  for  hee  should  bee  sure  (at  the
least)  to  lose  his  place.

When  any  one  dieth  in  the  Serraglio,  his  Chamber-
fellowes  are  made  his  Heires,  and  that  which  he  left  is
divided  amongst  them.  And  if  any  great  Eunuch  die,
all  comes  to  the  King ;  for  they  are  alwaies  very  rich,  by
reason  of  the  manifold  gifts  which  come  to  their  hands  :
But  if  any  Eunuch  of  the  Serraglios  abroad,  or  in  places  of
other  government  should  die,  then  two  thirds  of  his  estate
falls  to  the  King  by  Canon,  the  other  third  part  being  to
bee  disposed  of  according  to  the  Testators  will ;  and  that
is  onely  when  the  King  gives  way  unto  it,  and  will  not
out  of  his  supreme  authoritie  take  all  to  himselfe,  as  he

382

Serraglio
Heires.

Testaments.

ROBERT WITHERS  a.d.

c.  1620.
useth  to  doe  by  all  great  rich  ones,  the  Kings  person  being
held  the  principall  and  most  lawful]  Heire  of  all ; they
being  accounted  as  slaves  which  have  received  their  liveli-
hood,  goods, estates, and all that they have enjoyed,
meerly from his  greatnesse  and bountie. And to this
end  there  is  an  Officer,  called  the  Beytilmawlgee,  who  so  BeyHhaal-
soone  as  any  one  dies,  makes  inquisition  for  their  estates,  &"'
and  so  certifies  the  Defterdar  thereof,  leaving  the  execu-
tion to  him,  if  it  be  in  matters  of  import. But  the  Beytil-
malgee  for  his  owne  private  gayne,  doth  oftentimes  con-
ceale  a  great  part  of  the  estate  of  the  deceased,  parting
the  same  betwixt  the  kindred  and  himselfe.

When  any  ordinary  person  falls  sicke  in  the  Serraglio,
he  is  carried  from  his  Chamber  in  a  Cart  which  is  covered
and  drawne  with  hands ;  and  is  put  into  the  aforesaid
Hospitall  or  Lazaretta,  where  he  is  lookt  unto  after  the  Hospital/.
Turkish  fashion  ;  and  kept  so  closely,  that  none  may  come
to  the  speech  of  him  but  with  great  difficultie ;  and  grow-
ing well  againe,  he  is  carried  backe  in  the  same  manner  to
his  owne  chamber  where  he  was  at  the  first.

The  expences  of  the  Serraglio  are  very  great,  as  any  KinSs

one  may  gather  by  what  hath  beene  already  said ; besides,  exPences-

there  are  other  charges  of  great  consideration  which  the

King  is  at,  by  reason  of  the  Queene,  the  chiefe  Vizirs,  the

Generals  of  his  severall  forces,  and  the  great  Defterdars :

All  whom  he  doth  present  according  as  he  seeth  fit  upon

divers  occasions ; as  at  the  times  of  their  going  forth,

or  at  their  returnes  from  their  employments  abroad  ; The

which  Presents  are  of  Vests,  some  unlined,  and  some  lined

with very costly Furs ; Swords, Bowes, Plumes and

Brooches,  Girdles  all  set  with  rich  Stones,  and  in  fine  many

other  things  of  great  value ; and  some  but  of  lowe  price,

according  to  the  qualitie  and  desert  of  the  partie  to  whom

hee  is  pleased  to  shew  his  liberalise. Nay,  the  Hazi-  200000.

nehdar  Bashee  without (who  hath  the  keeping  of  the  Sultamnes

Cloth  of  gold  and  silver  of  Bursia)  doth  affirme,  that  in  ^f^/l  i*
1  b  1-  •  1 TT '  r 1  •  of  L  loth  of

that  one  commoditie,  to  make  Vests  or,  there  is  spent  g0id  and
yeerely  two  hundred  thousand  Sultanines ; besides  what  silver.

3*3

A.D.

c.  1620.

Ebbing  and
flowing  from
and  to  this
Ocean.
Queenes
expences.

Vizirs  Vests.

Kings  Kaik.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

he  disburseth  for  the  buying  of  Venetian  Silkes  and
Wollen  clothes,  of  which  the  Serraglio  consumes  a  great
quantitie,  they  not  wearing  (for  the  most  part)  any  other.

Neither  would  this  alone  serve  the  turne,  for  besides
all  this,  the  Gr.  Signior  gives  away  all  that  which  is  given
him  by  strangers,  and  a  great  part  of  that  which  comes  to
him  of  the  spoyle  of  the  dead,  of  which  he  is  Master,  as
hath  bene  shewed  before.  And  surely,  should  he  want
these  helps,  the  King  could  not  continue  in  that  humour
of  giving  Presents,  long,  as  he  doth,  to  his  wenches,  to
his  Bashawes,  and  to  all  such  as  are  at  any  time  to  kisse
his  hand.  Neverthelesse,  true  it  is  that  the  greatest  part
of  things  of  great  value,  in  time,  come  againe  to  his
hands ;  for,  his  Sultanaes,  Bashawes,  or  other  rich  men
dying,  hee  becomes  Master  of  all,  or  fat  least)  of  the
greatest  part  of  their  estate.  And  so  much  of  such  things,
there  is  a  continuall  ebbing  and  flowing  in  the  Serraglio.

The  Queene  also  gives  much  away ;  for,  as  shee  is
presented  by  many,  so  is  it  fit,  that  shee  should  in  part
make  some  compensation :  and  to  that  end,  shee  hath  an
allowance  of  Vests,  and  other  things  in  abundance ;
besides,  shee  hath  libertie  to  dispose  of  many  of  those
which  have  beene  worne  by  the  King.

The  chiefe  Vizir  is  likewise  a  giver,  as  well  whilest  hee
is  in  Constantinople,  as  when  he  is  upon  departure  as
Generall  of  the  Armie :  and  to  that  end,  before  he
departeth,  hee  hath  allowed  him  from  the  Hazinehdar
Bashee,  a  great  number  of  Vests  and  other  thing's,  that  he
may  be  provided  when  he  is  in  the  field  with  Presents ;
according  to  the  Turkish  custome,  which  (in  all  busi-
nesses, and  upon  every  occasion)  is,  to  give  and  take.

The  King  (if  he  please)  may  at  any  time  goe  abroad
either  by  water  or  by  land  :  when  hee  goes  by  water,  he  hath
his  Kaik  of  sixteene  or  eighteene  bankes ;  with  a  very
sumptuous  Poope,  covered  over  with  rich  embrovdered
crimson  Velvet,  under  which  he  himselfe  sits,  and  none
but  he,  on  cushions  of  Velvet  and  Cloth  of  gold  ;  his
Aghaes  standing  all  on  their  feete,  and  onely  the  Bustan-

384

ROBERT WITHERS  ad.

c.  1620.
gee  Bashee,  who  steeres  the  Kaik,  may  now  and  then  sit
downe,  that  he  may  handle  the  Helme  the  better. Now
the  Bustangee  Bashee,  by  reason  the  King  talkes  much  with
him  in  the  Barge,  (at  which  time,  least  any  one  should
heare  what  they  say,  the  Mutes  fall  a  howling  like  little  Mutei
Dogs)  may  benefit  or  prejudice  whom  he  pleaseth  ; the ' l"e'
King  being  ignorant  of  divers  passages,  and  apt  to  beleeve  [II.ix.1604.]
any  information,  either  with  or  against  any  Subject  what-
soever. His  Kaik  is  rowed  by  Agiamoglans,  which  are
brought  up  to  that  exercise,  and  indeed  they  manage  the
businesse  with  a  great  deale  of  dexteritie.

When he  goeth forth  by  land, hee  alwaies  rides  on  H"  g°ing out
horse-backe, and goes out (for the most part) at the y
greatest  Gate,  especially,  at  such  times  as  he  goes  to  the
Moschea  which  is  upon  the  Friday  (it  being  their  Sabboth)
and  is  accompanied  into  the  Citie  by  the  Bashawes,  and
other  great  men  of  the  Port,  besides  many  of  his  owne
servants  which  goe  by  his  stirrop,  and  divers  Solacks  with
their  Bowes  and  Arrowes,  for  his  Guard. And  as  he  rides
along  the  streets,  he  salutes  the  people  with  nodding  his
head,  who  againe  salute  him  with  loude  shouts  and  prayers  Gratu/a/iom
of  prosperitie  and  happinesse ; and  for  recompence,  hee  *"onsgra
oftentimes  puts  his  hand  into  his  Pocket,  and throwes
whole  handfuls  of  money  amongst  them.

Now,  they  of  the  Serraglio,  which  goe  by  his  stirrop,
have  charge  to  receive  such  Petitions  as  are  preferred  to  Petitions.
his  Majestie,  as  he  rides  along :  and  many  poore  folkes,
who  dare  not  to  approach  nigh  him,  stand  afarre  off  with
fire  upon  their  heads,  holding  up  their  Petitions  in  their
hands ;  the  which  the  King  seeing,  sends  immediatly  to
take  the  said  Petitions,  and  being  returned  home  into  his
Serraglio,  reades  them  all,  and  then  gives  order  for
redresse  as  he  thinks  fit.  By  reason  of  which  complaints,
the  King  oftentimes  takes  occasion  to  execute  Justice,  even
against  the  most  eminent  in  place,  before  they  are  aware,
without  taking  any  course  in  Law  against  them ;  but
causing  a  sudden  execution  of  what  punishment  he
pleaseth  upon  them. Which  makes  the  Bashawes  that

IX  385  2  B

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1620.

they  care  not  how  seldome  the  Grand  Signior  stirres
abroad  in  publike,  for  feare  least  in  that  manner  their
unjust  proceedings  and  bad  Justice  should  come  to  his
eare.  And  indeed,  they  alwaies  live  in  great  feare,
through  the  multiplicitie  of  businesse  that  passeth  through
their  hands,  and  in  danger  of  losing  their  lives  at  a  short
warning  ;  which  makes  them,  use  the  Proverbe  ;  that,  He
that  is  greatest  in  Office,  is  but  a  statue  of  Glasse.

His  great  yne  Grand  Signior,  for  the  use  of  his  houshold,  hath

in  Constantinople  neere  unto  the  Serraglio  an  exceeding
large  Stable  of  a  thousand  Horses  and  upward  :  And  the
Imrohor  Bashee,  which  is  Master  of  the  Horse,  hath  the
charge  of  them,  together  with  an  Under-Imrohor  for  his
assistant ;  besides  many  ordinary  Groomes,  which  are  to
looke  to  them  and  see  that  they  be  kept  in  good  case.
Now,  the  said  Imrohor  Bashee  and  his  Deputie,  are  to  see
the  Kings  servants  provided  of  Horses,  at  such  times  as
they  accompanie  his  Majestie  abroad,  either  a  hunting,
or  for  other  sports.

Other  Stables.  Besides  this  Stable,  hee  hath  divers  others  in  other
places,  for  his  owne  service,  and  for  the  use  of  his  Gentle-
men, at  such  times  as  he  or  they  shall  come  thither ;
namely,  at  his  Gardens,  and  Houses  of  pleasure  abroad
in  the  Countrey,  to  which  his  Majestie  useth  to  goe  very
often :  but  these  Stables  have  not  above  eight  or  ten
Horses  a  piece  in  them,  for  to  those  houses  hee  carrieth
but  few  followers  with  him.

Hee  hath  also  Stables  for  his  Stallions  for  race,  in
Bursia,  Adrianopoli,  and  in  divers  other  places ;  from
which  are  brought  very  stately  Horses ;  besides  such  as
are  continually  sent  him  for  Presents,  from  Cairo,  Bagdat,
Arabia,  and  from  other  places  from  the  Bashawes,  and  also
such  as  fall  to  his  share  by  the  death  of  great  persons ;
all  which  are  Horses  of  great  price,  and  kept  for  his  owne
use.  And  because  there  must  bee  a  great  number  of
Horses  for  ordinary  services  for  the  baser  sort  of  his  ser-
vants;  he  is  therefore  furnished  with  lowe  priced  Nags
out  of  Valachia.

386

ROBERT WITHERS  a.d.

c.  1620.

Besides  these  Stables  of  Horses,  the  Grand  Sipnior  is
provided  of  five  thousand  Mules  which  serve  to  carrie  Mules.
Pavilions,  Chists,  Water,  and  all  other  necessaries  for
travell :  but  because  the  Vizir  (going  out  Generall)
makes  use  of  a  great  part  of  them,  there  is  seldome  that
number  complete  at  home.  And  should  the  King  him-
selfe  goe  out  to  the  Warres,  his  very  houshold  would  use
a  thousand  of  them,  besides  their  riding  Horses ;  for,  the
Emperours  of  Turkie  are  alwaies  almost  as  well  accom-
modated in  their  Voyages  abroad,  as  they  are  at  home  in
the  Citie :  and  indeed,  the  generalitie  of  the  Turkes  are
very  well  fitted  against  such  times  as  they  are  to  goe
forth,  especially  for  long  journeyes.

The  Grand  Signior  is  bound  by  Canon  of  the  Empire,  P*M*k
that upon the first day of the Byram, which is their  a^u

^  11 1 -rk  1 •  1 i 1  • 1 • 1 • t  Ramazan.

Carnevall,  the  Ramazan  being  ended,  which  is  their  Lent,

hee  shew  himselfe  publikely,  and  let  all  the  great  men,  and

the better sort of his owne servants, kisse his Vest :

wherefore upon that day, early in the morning, being

richly  clad  and  set  forth  with  his  best  Jewels,  he  comes

out  at  his  Serraglio  Gate,  that  is,  out  of  the  Eunuches

Gate,  in  the  third  Court ; and  sets  him  downe  upon  a

Persian  Carpet  of  silke  and  gold,  in  a  certaine  place  (close

by  the  aforesaid  Gate)  which  is  onely  for  that  service,  and

doth  not  stirre  thence  untill  all  have  kissed  his  Vest  in

token of  their  reverence  and dutie ; The  chiefe Vizir

standing  close  by  him,  and  telling  him  the  names  of  such

as  hee  thinkes  fit,  to  the  end  the  Grand  Signior  may  take

notice  of  them :  Now,  to  some  of  the  Doctors  of  the  Law  Hts  honour  to

which  are  of  high  degree,  the  King  raiseth  himselfe  up  a  somr'

little, to honour and receive them ; and to some he

shewes  more  grace  and  affection,  then  to  other  some,  and

indeed  more  then  ordinary.

Now, this Ceremonie being ended he goeth to the  Going  to
Moschea  of  Santa  Sophia,  accompanied  by  them  all ; and anta °^  l
at  his  returne  taking  his  leave,  hee  retires  himselfe  to  his
owne  Lodgings,  where  he  dines  alone,  as  he  doth  upon  [II.ix.1605.]
other  dayes ; notwithstanding  upon  that  day  he  maketh

387

A.D.

c.  1620.

Gifts  to  the
Grandes.

Three  dayes
Solemnitie.

Fire  workes
and  Shetves.

Presents  to
him.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

a  very  solemne  Banquet  in  the  Divan  for  the  Bashawes
and  other  Great  ones ;  and  a  very  great  Dinner  in  the
Court  yard,  for  all  such  as  did  accompanie  him,  and  are
there  present.  Then  his  Majestie  observing  the  ordinarie
Custome,  sends  to  present  the  Chiefe  Vizir  with  a  very
rich  Vest,  lined  with  a  very  costly  Furre,  and  doing  the
like  by  the  other  great  ones  of  the  Port,  (though  with
Vests  of  farre  lower  price)  hee  also  extends  his  bountie
to  all  his  Aghas,  giving  them  Swords  and  such  like  things ;
and  to  the  Sultanaes  costly  Jewels,  and  other  Gifts  to
many  others  of  the  Serraglio,  giving  (as  wee  say)  New-
yeeres  Gifts,  to  all.

Every  night  during  the  three  dayes  of  the  Byram  (for
it  is  but  for  three  dayes  and  so  it  ends)  hee  causeth
Shewes  to  bee  made  of  Fire-workes,  and  such  like,  which
continue  untill  Morning,  and  that  the  Sultanaes  may  see
them,  the  King  comes  of  purpose  into  their  companie  to
be  merrie  with  them,  and  is  more  free  and  familiar  then
at  other  times ;  and  hee  gives  free  libertie  for  mirth  and
sports  Day  and  Night  throughout  the  Citie,  during  those
three  dayes.

To  these  Festivals,  all  the  Sultanaes  which  live  out  of
the  Serraglio,  are  also  invited,  who  both  give  Presents  to
the  King,  and  take  Presents  from  him.  Likewise  in
these  three  dayes  the  King  is  presented  by  the  Bashawes
and  Great  men,  and  indeed  with  Gifts  of  great  value,
for  every  one  strives  to  exceed  another,  thinking  thereby
to  winne  favour.  The  Sultanaes  also  are  not  behinde
hand,  for  they  present  him,  with  Shirts,  Handkirchiefes,
Linnen  breeches,  and  such  like  things  of  good  considera-
tion, the  which  the  Grand  Signior  afterwards  makes  use
of  for  his  owne  wearing.

The  same  Byram  of  three  dayes  is  kept  in  all  his'
Dominions,  and  throughout  the  Citie  of  Constantinople,
even  in  every  Turkes  house  ;  the  Streets  being  at  almost
every  corner  set  out  with  Devises,  and  Swings  of  divers
sorts  very  artificially  made  ;  where  old  and  young  are
solaced,  and  giving  two  or  three  Aspers  to  them  which

388

ROBERT WITHERS  ad.

c.  1620.
owe  the  Swings, they may  have  sport sufficient. But
during  this  Feast,  it  is  somewhat  dangerous  for  the  poore
Christians  and  Jewes  to  walke  the  streets  ; for,  the  Turkes  Christians
being  then  somewhat  insolent  and  full  of  Wine,  doe  put  awe  '
them  in  great  feare  of  doing  them some  mischiefe, if
they  deny  them  money  when  they  demand  it  of  them  ;
And so they  doe  likewise  in another Byram, which is
called  the  little  Byram,  and  comes  three  Moneths  after  Little  Byram.
the  other.

§•  XL

The  Old  Serraglio,  and  Womens  lives  therein  :  Of
their  Marriages  and  Children,  Slave-selling,
Witnesses.

Avinp-  oftentimes  mentioned  the  old  Serraglio,  The  Old
which  is  as  it  were  a  dependent  of  the  Kings  ierraSll°-
Serraglio.  it  will  not  bee  amisse  briefely  to  make

some  kinde  of  relation  of  it.

This  is  a  very  large  Serraglio,  immured  with  a  very  high
Wall ;  the  Buildings  are  faire,  it  hath  many  Inhabitants,
and  is  about  an  Italian  mile  in  Compasse,  being  seated  in
the  noblest  part  of  the  Citie.  It  was  the  first  Serraglio,
which  Mahomet  the  second  built  for  to  dwell  in  with  all  his
Court,  when  hee  tooke  Constantinople ;  It  hath  but  one
Gate  (which  is  of  Iron)  belonging  unto  it ;  the  which
Gate  is  kept  by  a  Companie  of  white  Eunuches,  and  no
men  may  come  in  thereat,  unlesse  it  bee  to  bring  in  such
necessaries  as  they  want,  at  which  times  they  cannot  see
any  of  the  Women.  Now  the  Women  which  are  therein,  Who  are
are  those  which  are  put  out  of  the  Kings  Serraglio,  viz.  tfierein-
such  Sultanaes  as  have  belonged  to  the  deceased  Grand
Signior,  those  Women  likewise  which  through  their  evill
behaviour  and  conditions  are  fallen  into  disgrace  with  the
King,  and  such  as  are  Infirme  or  Defective,  in  what
should  belong  to  Women  fit  for  the  companie  of  a  King ;
and  none  else  are  there,  but  for  some  of  the  aforesaid
causes. All  which  are  governed,  and  lookt  unto  by  an

389

A.D.

c.  1620.
Woman
Overseer.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

old  Woman  which  is  made  their  Over-seer,  and  taketh
care  to  see  them  used  according  to  the  Custome  of  the
House,  and  that  they  have  their  Food  and  Cloathing,
with  their  severall  stipends ;  all  which  is  farre  short  of
what  they  had  when  they  were  in  the  Kings  Serraglio  ;
howbeit  such  as  have  beene  Queenes  and  Sultanaes,  live
out  of  the  common  ranke  in  their  Lodgings  apart ;
and  although  they  are  out  of  the  Kings  sight  and
(as  it  were)  out  of  favour,  yet  they  are  reasonably
well served.

Now  the  greatest  part  of  the  sayd  Sultanaes  (Queenes
excepted)  if  they  bee  any  thing  rich,  may  (with  the  Kings
leave  by  the  old  Womans  solicitation)  goe  foorth  and
marrie,  and  carrie  with  them  all  that  which  they  have
kept  and  stollen.  For  at  their  comming  forth  of  the
Kings  Serraglio,  if  they  have  ought  of  any  great  worth
or  value  that  is  knowne,  the  Cadun  takes  it  from  them,
and  restores  it  to  the  Grand  Signior.  So  that  I  say,  if
they  have  any  thing  to  bestow  themselves  withall,  they
cunningly  make  it  knowne  abroad,  to  the  end  that  some
men  of  qualitie  may  become  Suitors  for  them,  and  make
them  a  good  Joynter.

In  the  said  Serraglio,  they  have  all  the  commoditie  of
necessaries  that  may  bee,  as  Gardens,  Fountaines,  and
faire  Bognoes,  and  the  King  hath  some  roomes  also
[II.ix.1606.]  therein  readie  furnished:  for  sometimes  hee  goeth  thither
to  visite  his  kindred,  as  his  Grandmother,  Mother,  Aunts,
Sisters,  &c.  who  for  some  of  the  aforesaid  occasions  were
put  out  of  his  Serraglio.

The  other  Women  of  this  old  Serraglio,  have  but
meane  allowance ;  and  had  they  not  somewhat  of  their
owne  to  helpe  sometimes,  they  would  passe  but  coursly ;
so  that  they  are  faine  to  betake  themselves  to  their
Needles,  by  which  they  reape  a  reasonable  benefite,  and
have  divers  Jewes  women  who  frequent  their  companies,
and  sell  their  labours  for  them.

A  Turke  (if  hee  please)  may  take  seven  Wives  at
Kebin  :  besides  hee  may  have  as  many  Slaves  as  hee  will,

39°

Conveniences
thereof.

Hard  state.

Seven  Wives,

Slaves

unlimited.

ROBERT WITHERS  ad.

C. I'.

and  the  Children  of  the  Slaves  are  held  as  truely  begot-
ten and  legitimate,  as  those  of  the  Wives,  and  have  as
much  right  to  the  Inheritance  of  what  the  Father  leaves
behind  him :  Nay,  a  Bashaw  having  married  a  Sister  or  a
Daughter  to  the  King,  and  having  Sonnes  by  them ;
those  Sonnes  may  not  rise  above  the  Degree  of  a  Sanjack  Bashau.es  Sons

Berrh  or  a  Capoogee  Bashee,  to  the  end  they  may  bee  kept  kefl  u"/j^'  V
j i.-iij  l r>  u  l • l ^ • ofroyalBloud.

under,  being  allyed  to  the  Crowne,  that  so  being  but  in J J

meane  places,  they  may  not  bee  apt  for  revolution. But

their  Brothers  which  their  Fathers  beget  of  Slaves,  may

come  to  bee  Bashawes,  for  they  are  free  from  suspition,  in

regard  they  are  not  of  the  Bloud  Royall : And  hence  it

is, that those Children which had a Sultana to their

Mother,  are  so  often  seene  to  bee  in  lower  Degree  then

the  others ; for  hee  which  is  borne  of  the  Slave,  is  above

him  which  is  borne  of  the  Sultana ;  yet  with  the  Children

of  the  other  Subjects  it  is  otherwise,  for  they  are  equals.

The  parties  Married,  may  upon  divers  occasions  speci-  Divorces.
fied  in  their  Law,  leave  one  another,  especially  when
they  cannot  agree  together.  And  if  the  man  put  away
the  Woman,  hee  is  bound  to  allow  her  the  Joynter  or
Dowrie,  which  hee  promised  her  when  they  were  Con-
tracted :  but  if  the  Woman  forsake  the  Man,  shee  can
recover  nothing,  but  departs  onely  with  a  small  Portion,
such  as  shee  brought  with  her  into  her  Husbands  house.

Now  in  case  a  Turke  take  Slaves  for  his  use,  hee  may  Slaves  sold  if
not  sell  them  againe,  but  they  become  members  of  the  barren.
Familie,  in  which  they  are  to  remaine  till  they  die ; but
if  they  proove  barren,  they  may  bee  sold  from  hand  to
hand,  as  often  as  their  fortune  so  betides  them.

The  Turkes  may  buy  of  all  sorts  of  Slaves  of  every
Religion,  and  use  them  as  they  please  (killing  onely
excepted)  which  the  Christians  and  Jewes  there  may  not
doe ;  for  they  have  libertie  onely  to  buy  Christians  and
Jewes.

There  is  for  this  purpose  in  Constantinople  a  Bezisten, Brdsten.
that  is,  a  common  publike  Market,  where  every  Wednes-
day there  are  bought  and  sold  Slaves  of  all  sorts,  and

39i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1620.

every  one  comes  freely,  to  buy  for  their  severall  uses  ;
some  for  Nurses,  some  for  Servants,  and  some  for  their
Lustfull  appetites ;  for  they  which  make  use  of  Slaves
for  their  sensualitie  cannot  bee  punished  by  the  Justice,
as  they  should  bee  if  they  were  taken  with  Free  women,
and  with  Turkish  women  especially.
Mmmertf  These  Slaves  are  bought  and  sold,  as  Beasts  and  Cattle

selling  Slaves.  ^^  .  ^ty  Demg  viewed  and  reviewed,  and  felt  all  about
their  Limmes  and  Bodies,  as  if  they  were  so  many  Horses,
then  they  are  examined  of  what  Countrey  they  are,  and
what  they  are  good  for ;  either  for  Sewing,  Spinning,
Weaving,  and  the  like :  buying  sometimes  the  Mother
with  the  Children,  and  sometimes  the  Children  without
the  Mother,  sometimes  two  or  three  Brothers  together,
and  againe,  sometimes  taking  the  one  and  leaving  the  rest,
using  no  tearmes  of  love,  regard,  or  honestie,  but  even  as
the  Buyer  or  the  Seller  shall  thinke,  will  best  turne  them
to  profit.  Now  when  there  is  a  Virgin  that  is  beautifull
and  faire,  shee  is  held  at  a  high  rate,  and  is  sold  for  farre
Restitution  if  more  then  any  other ;  and  for  securitie  of  her  Virginitie,
not  a  Virgin.  t]le  sel}er  [s  n0^  onely  bound  to  the  restitution  of  the
money  (if  she  prove  otherwise)  to  him  that  bought  her :
but  is  for  his  fraud  fined  at  a  summe  of  money.  In  the
Bezisten  there  sitteth  an  Emeen,  that  is,  a  Customer,  who
receives  Custome  of  the  buyers  and  sellers ;  which
amounteth  to  a  reasonable  summe  in  the  space  of  a  yeere.

The  Bashawes  and  other  Subjects,  though  by  Marriage

they  become  Uncles  Sonnes  in  law,  or  Cousens  to  the

No  benefit  by Grand Signior, may not by vertue of their Affinitie,

Affimtie  to  the  challenge any more familiaritie or freedome with his

Majestie,  then  if  there  were  no  such  matter  of  Kindred

betwixt  them,  but  onely  what  may  well  befit  their  Office

and  Dignitie,  they  remayning  still  Slaves  as  the  others

doe  : nay,  their  servitude  is  thereby  increased,  and  they

Losse  by  it. loose  a  great  part  of  their  former  Libertie  ; for  they  must

be very obsequious to the Sultanaes whom they have

Married,  and  turne  away  the  greatest  part  of  their  other

Women  and Slaves  (if  they  have  any)  and  must  with

392

ROBERT WITHERS

A.D.

c.  1620.

Rites  of
Marriage.

Who  may  bee
Witnesses.

patience  support  all  their  imperfections  :  so  that  for  this
reason,  few  Bashawes  of  worth  and  judgement  seeke  after
such  Marriages,  for  they  are  both  chargeable  and  bring
Discontent :  but  when  the  King  commands,  they  (as  his
Slaves)  must  submit  and  obey,  though  their  vexation  and
charge  increase  never  so  much  thereby.

The  Ceremonie  of  Turkish  Marrying,  is  nothing  else,
but  in  the  presence  of  the  Cadee  (who  is  the  Justice)  to
make  Hoget,  that  is,  a  Writing  expressing  the  Vow  and
good  liking  of  the  parties  to  bee  Married,  with  a  specifi-
cation of  the  Dowrie,  which  the  Husband  is  to  make  to
the  Wife  ;  all  which  is  done  in  presence  also  of  Witnesses,
which  are  true  and  honest,  and  not  to  bee  denyed.  For
in  Turkie  it  is  not  permitted  that  every  one  that  will,
should  beare  Witnesse ;  but  onely  such  men  as  are  Free,
of  a  good  Age,  that  can  say  the  Namaz,  and  have  some
knowledge  in  the  Law,  knowne  to  bee  men  of  civill  life,
and  which  drinke  no  Wine:  for  the  Witnesse  of  a  Turke  [II.iz.1607.]
which  drinkes  Wine  is  nothing  worth,  and  thus  their  Law
commandeth ;  But  for  all  this,  Corruption  is  so  crept  in
amongst  them,  that  now  in  Turkie  (especially  in  Con-
stantinople) there  are  (to  the  outward  appearance  Grave
and  Honest  men)  more  false  Witnesses,  then  in  any  other
part  of  the  world  besides ;  and  who  are  they  ?  (at  least
the  Chiefe  of  them)  but  a  certaine  sort  of  Emeers,  that  is,
such  as  pretend  to  come  of  the  Race  and  Stocke  of
Mahomet,  which  weare  greene  Terbents :  and  certayne
poore  Cadees  out  of  Office,  and  these  are  they  which  for
money  doe  use  that  detestable  Trade,  which  our  Knights
of  the  Post  doe  practise  heere  with  us.  And  hence  it  is
that  Ananias  are  so  commonly  framed,  for  they  can  stoutly
(and  that  with  ease)  outface  the  poore  Christians  and
Jewes :  nay,  for  a  Bribe  they  will  not  spare  their  owne
generation,  in  bearing  false  witnesse,  or  raysing  calumnies
against  them :  For  the  Turkes  being  naturally  given  to
Covetousnesse,  not  fearing  God,  but  altogether  inclined
to  Rapine  (although  without  question  there  are  many  very
honest  men  amongst  them)  when  they  meete  with  a  fit

393

Emirs  false
Witnesses.

Turkes
covetous  and
dangerous.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1620.

opportunitie,  they  will  play  the  Rogues  with  any  man,  bee
hee  of  what  condition  soever ;  wherefore  it  proves  danger-
ous to  have  any  dealing  with  them,  for  that  they  with
that  tricke  will  easily  free  themselves  from  any  Obligation
Force  of  Dr  Agreement  before  made ;  for,  Judgement  there,  con-
sists onely  of  the  force  of  proofe  by  Witnesses,  so  that  a
man  had  need  to  be  wondrous  circumspect  in  his  proceed-
ings with  Turkes,  especially  in  matters  of  Covenant.

§.  XII.

Of  their  Religion,  Opinions, Persons,  Times,
Places  and Rites  sacred.

Evidence.

He  Turkes  beleeve  in  Almightie  God,  that  hee  is
the  Creator  of  the  whole  Universe,  and  the  gra-
cious Redeemer  of  all  good  men  in  the  day  of
Judgement,  that  hee  is  in  the  highest  Heaven,  served  with
especiall  Angels,  having  from  the  beginning  cast  out  the
Disobedient  ones ;  for  whom  as  also  for  Wicked  men  hee
made  Hell.  And  as  they  affirme,  everlasting  Life  to  bee
in  these  two  places,  viz.  Heaven  and  Hell :  So  they  con-

Resurrection.  fesse  and  wayte  for  the  Resurrection  of  the  Bodie  to  bee
re-united  with  theSoule,at  such  time  as  the  fearefull  Trum-
pet shall  bee  sounded  by  Mahomet,  at  the  commandement
of  the  Great  God  of  the  Judgement.

Sensuall  They  beleeve  also,  that  Life  everlasting  in  Paradise,  is

Paiadise.  sucj1  a  happinesse,  that  it  consists  onely  in  the  delighting
and  pleasing  of  the  Sences ;  and  that  they  shall  have
there,  the  use  of  Naturall  things  in  all  perfection,  without
making  any  difference,  in  joying  perfect  health,  and  free
from  all  manner  of  trouble.  And  on  the  contrarie,  that
in  Hell,  the  use  of  the  aforesayd  things  shall  bee  in
unquenchable  Fire,  and  shall  have  a  most  bitter  and  loath-
some taste.  And  this  is  all  that  they  attribute  unto  them,
either  for  the  reward  of  the  Blessed,  or  the  punishment  of
the  Reprobate.

Fate.  They  say  moreover,  that  the  power  of  God  is  such,

that  having  at  Mans  Creation  prefixed  and  appointed  a

394

ROBERT WITHERS  ad.

c.  1620.
set  time  for  his  end,  it  is  impossible  that  the  wit  or  device
of  mortall  Man,  should  bee  able  to  divert  or  prevent  it.
Wherefore  in  the  warres,  or  in  other  occasions,  they  arc
so  much  the  more  bold,  resolute  and  couragious ;  saying,
that  their  End  is  written  in  their  Fore-heads,  and  it  is  not
for  them  to  goe  about  to  avoyd  it,  so  that  if  they  dye,  they
dye.

They  also  affirme  Gods  Power  to  bee  such,  that  after
mens  Bodies  are  risen  againe,  hee  will  give  them  such  an
agilitie,  that  they  shall  bee  able  in  a  moment  to  passe  from Agditie  in  the
one  Heaven  to  another,  even  to  the  farthest  parts  of  them,  next  Ltfe-
to  visite  and  imbrace  their  Wives,  Mothers,  Brothers,  and
others  of  their  Kindred,  the  Heavens  being  all  transparent,  Transparent
being  of  Diamonds,  Rubies,  Turkesses  and  Christall.  Heavens.

As  concerning  Gods  Throne  or  Seate  of  Majestie  ;  they  Gods  Throne.
affirme,  that  every  one  cannot  behold  it,  by  reason  of  the
brightnesse  of  the  beames  which  comes  from  his  Eyes,  and
by  reason  of  the  unspeakeable  splendour  proceeding  from
his  glorious  Face,  and  that  the  Angels  and  Prophets  onely,
have  the  grace  to  injoy  that  sight.

These  are  the  principall  foundations  of  their  Religion,
upon  which  they  build  the  course  of  this  their  present
temporall  Life,  and  by  which  they  hope  to  obtaine  a  Life
everlasting  and  happie ;  affirmed  by  their  Prophet,  to  bee
full  of  the  delights  and  pleasures  of  this  World,  but
enjoyed  in  all  perfection  and  excellencie,  in  a  Supernaturall
and  Incorruptible  manner.

They  say,  that  Almightie  God  sent  foure  Prophets  into  Toure
the  World,  to  instruct,  governe,  and  save  Mankind  ;  each  PJ.°^ets
of  them  being  holy,  pure,  and  undefiled,  to  wit,  Moses,
David,  Christ,  and  Mahomet ;  and  that  God  sent  to  every
one  of  them  by  his  Angell  Gabriell  a  Booke,  that  they
themselves  being  first  perfected,  might  the  better  know
how  to  instruct  the  people.  To  Moses  he  sent  the
Teurat,  that  is,  the  Old  Law ;  to  David  the  Zebur,  that
is,  the  Psalmes ;  to  Christ  the  Ingil,  that  is,  the  Gospell ;
and  to  Mahomet  the  Kurawn,  that  is,  the  Alcoran,  (as  wee
call  it.) And that the  three  first  Prophets  with their

395

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1620.

people,  did  faile  somewhat  in  the  Lawes  given  them  by
God :  But  Mahomet  comming  last,  brought  a  Law,  more
[II.  ix.  1 608.]  true,  plaine,  cleere,  and  sincere,  in  which  all  such  as
beleeve  should  obtayne  the  love  of  God ;  but  they  say
that  other  Nations  continue  still  in  their  errours,  and
having  sucked  of  their  Mothers  Milke,  doe  not  embrace
the  Truth ;  For  which  fault  being  (by  right)  deprived  of
Heaven,  they  have  no  other  meanes  to  recover,  and  to
come  thither  at  the  Day  of  Judgement,  but  by  Mahomets
protection,  who  is  the  only  Intercessor  and  Mediator  unto
the  Almightie  God :  And  standing  in  the  dreadfull  Day
of  Judgement  at  the  gate  of  Paradise,  he  shall  be  sought
unto  and  entreated  by  the  other  Prophets  to  save  their
people  also,  and  his  clemencie  shall  be  such,  as  to  make
Intercession  for  them,  so  that  the  good  Christians  and  the
good  Jewes  shall  by  his  meanes  obtayne  everlasting  Life,
with  perpetuitie  of  sensual!  delights  as  aforesaid,  but  in  a
place  apart  and  inferiour  to  the  Turkes,  they  being  beloved
of  God,  and  more  deare  unto  him  then  others.  The
Womens  women  also  shall  come  into  Heaven,  but  shall  be  in  a  place

Heaven.  farre  inferiour  to  men,  and  be  lesse  glorified.

All  the  Prophets  are  held  in  great  honour  amongst
them.  They  call  Moses,  Musahib  Alloh,  that  is,  a  talker
with  God  ;  and  Christ,  Meseeh,  Rooh-ulloh,  and  Haz-
rette  Isaw,  that  is,  Messias,  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  vener-
able Jesus :  and  Mahomet,  Resul  Alloh,  that  is,  the
Messenger  of  God.  When  they  talke  of  Christ  Jesus,
they  speake  very  reverently  of  him ;  and  confesse  that  the
Jewes  through  Envie  apprehended  him,  and  maliciously
condemned  him,  and  led  him  along  to  put  him  to  death ;
but  the  Angels  being  sent  from  God,  tooke  him  away  from
them  in  a  Cloud,  and  carried  him  into  Heaven,  at  which
the  Jewes  being  astonished  and  vexed,  tooke  one  that  was
there  present,  and  crucified  him  in  his  stead  ;  not  being
willing  to  have  it  knowne  that  Jesus  was  the  Messias ;
he  being  in  Heaven  in  company  of  his  Brethren  the
Prophets,  beloved  of  God,  and  serving  him,  as  the  other
Prophets  doe.

396

ROBERT WITHERS

A.D.

c.  1620.

Cadeeleschers.

Cadees  end
their  orders.

The  Ministerie  of  their  Religion  (or  rather  their  con-
fused Sect)  is  as  followeth.  They  have  first  a  Muftee,  that  The  .'
is  to  say,  an  Expounder  or  Declarer  of  Cases  in  Law ;  who
amongst  them  is  as  an  Archbishop  is  with  us,  for  he  is
also  the  Primate  over  the  Church  ;  and  must  be  a  man
very  expert  in  the  Lawes,  and  one  accustomed  to  Justice,
chosen  by  the  Grand  Signior  himselfe,  the  which  Muftees
charge  is  to  oversee,  and  heare  such  things  as  are  belong-
ing to  the  Law,  or  to  the  Church.  And  although  he  hath
not  an  absolute  command  over  the  Muftees  of  the  other
Provinces,  yet  with  his  subtiltie  he  prevailes  with  the  King,
and  effecteth  what  he  list,  especially  when  he  hath  the
Chiefe  Vizir  to  friend,  who  in  degree,  dignitie,  and  autho-
rise is  his  Superiour.  Under  the  said  Muftee  there  are
two  Cadeeleshers,  that  is  to  say,  Judges  of  the  Armies,
one  of  Grecia  and  the  other  of  Natolia,  who  also  being
men  of  the  Law,  and  thev  which  alwaves  succeed  the
Muftee,  have  the  oversight  of  all  the  other  Cadees,  who
are  Justices  ;  of  which  there  is  one  in  every  Citie  and
Towne,  to  doe  Justice  and  end  Controversies  betwixt  man
and  man,  and  to  punish  Offendors.  But  they  are  changed
every  three  yeeres,  and  others  put  into  their  places  by  the
Cadileschers,  with  order  from  the  Grand  Sig-nior.

Amongst  the  said  Cadees,  they  have  also  their  orders ;
scilicet,  those  of  the  first  ranke,  and  they  are  called
Meulaws,  which  signifieth  Lords,  and  they  are  employed
in  the  principall  Cities,  the  other  are  but  Cadees,  and  they
get  employment  as  they  can  by  their  vertues :  and  good
carriage  in  former  places.  Now  the  Cadeeleschers  have
Bookes  lying  by  them,  wherein  are  exactly  set  downe  the
Revenewes  of  every  Cadeelick,  so  that  bv  that  meanes
they  know  the  better  how  to  furnish  them ;  none  of  them
surmounting  above  five  hundred  Aspers  per  diem.

This  order  of  Turkes  amongst  the  rest,  hath  onlv  this
Priviledge,  which  is,  that  they  cannot  be  put  to  death  ;  Priciledgt.
so  that  if  anv  of  them  by  committing  some  notorious  crime
against  the  Law,  should  deserve  death,  it  must  be  done
by  absolute  command  from  the  Grand  Signior,  and  that

397

B:.  ies.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1620.

very  warily  and  secretly,  but  this  hapneth  very  seldome  or
never.

Their  Tne  Muftee  and  Cadeeleschers  are  changed  at  the  Kings

continuance.  pleasure  (for  there  is  no  Office  in  Turkie  during  life)
howbeit  their  ordinary  Residence  is  three  yeeres ;  their
chiefe  Fortune  depending  wholy  in  their  continuance  in
the  grace  and  favour  of  the  Chiefe  Vizir.

Turbants.  All  the  aforesaid  men  of  the  Law,  that  is,  the  Muftee,

the  Cadeeleschers,  Mulaes,  and  Cadees,  weare  their  Tur-
bants farre  bigger  then  any  other  Turkes,  and  made  up
after  another  fashion,  in  token  that  they  ought  to  be  rever-
enced above  others.  And  although  their  habit  be  in
fashion  like  other  mens :  yet  in  this  there  is  a  difference,
for  they  weare  much  while  Chamblet,  and  the  finest  cloth,
but  no  silke  at  all.

Muftees  office.  The  principall  charge  of  the  Muftee,  is  to  Answere  to
all  such  Propositions  as  are  made  unto  him,  of  matters  in
generall,  upon  Cases  concerning  conscience,  and  the  Rites
of  Turkish  Justice  and  Law,  the  which  Answeres  are  of
few  words,  very  briefe,  and  they  are  called  Fetfa's,  that  is,
Declarations,  or  Judgements  of  the  Muftee ;  with  which
he  may  compell  not  only  the  Cadees  and  Bashawes  to  the
performance  of  the  contents  thereof,  but  the  Kings  owne
person  is  also  bound  to  see  them  executed  ;  for  in  conclu-
sion, they  seeke  altogether  to  amplifie  their  Sect  in  honour
of  their  Prophet ;  the  Muftees  Fetfa  being  in  high  estima-
tion, in  asmuch  as  it  is  upheld  very  stoutly  by  the  whole
order  of  the  Cadees.

Priests  and  Then  next  they  have  a  Governour  of  the  Moscheas,

Clerkes.  called  the  Mootevelee,  and  Eemawms,  which  are  Parish

Priests,  and  next  to  them  Muyezins,  which  are  as  our
Church  Clerkes ;  all  which  are  employed  in  the  Service  of
the  Moscheas,  calling  the  people  to  Prayers,  burying  the

[II. ix.  1 609.]  dead,  reading  upon  the  graves  of  the  dead,  and  to  con-
clude, performing  all  such  Offices  as  are  any  way  belonging
to  the  Church,  for  the  good  of  the  people.
Prayers fve They  pray  five  times  a  day  (aswell  in  the  Moscheas,  as
in  their  Houses,  or  wheresoever  they  are)  that  is,  at  foure

398

times  a  day.

ROBERT WITHERS

of  the  clocke  in  the  morning ;  at  noone ;  betweenc  three
and  foure  in  the  afternoone ;  betweene  seven  and  eight
at  night ;  and  at  mid-night :  and  upon  the  Friday  which  is
their  Sabbath,  at  nine  of  the  clocke  in  the  fore-noone  also
which  makes  sixe  times,  and  upon  that  day  there  are  more
Muyezins  which  cry  in  the  Steeples,  then  upon  other
dayes :  for  at  all  those  houres,  in  stead  of  Bels,  the  people
are  called  to  Prayer  by  the  voice  of  one  or  two  men  in  the
Steeples  or  Turrets  adjoyning  to  the  Moscheas,  of  a
reasonable  height,  by  which  voices  they  are  stirred  up  to
the  prayse  of  God  and  Mahomet :  and  may  prepare  them-
selves for  their  Prayers.  And  because  the  Muyezins
which  cry,  can  heare  no  Clockes  (for  they  have  none  in
their  Churches)  they  use  Houre-glasses,  by  which  they
are  directed  aswell  in  this  Service,  as  in  other  ordinary
matters.

In  every  great  Moschea  there  are  Mudereeses,  which
are  Readers ;  that  teach  divers  Schollers  the  common
Prayers,  and  instruct  them  in  the  Service  belonging  to
the  Moscheas,  being  paid  for  their  paines  out  of  the
Revenues  of  the  said  Churches.

The  condition  of  them  which  are  to  pray,  is  only  to  be
corporally  cleane  ;  it  being  unlawfull  for  any  one  to  enter
into  the  Moscheas,  or  to  pray,  if  he  find  that  he  hath  any
naturall  pollution  or  carnall  uncleanenes  about  him,  be  it
of  what  condition  soever,  or  of  never  so  small  moment :
wherefore  for  their  clensing,  every  one  is  bound  either  to
wash  himselfe  in  the  Bagno,  if  it  bee  for  carnall  commerce,
or  else  for  other  sorts  of  uncleanenesse  with  cold  water,
every  Citie  and  place  abounding  with  Bagnoes,  both
publike  and  private,  and  every  Church-yard  with  very
faire  Fountaynes  for  the  use  of  the  common  sort.  Now
immediately  after  every  one  is  clensed  and  come  into  the
Moschea,  the  Eemawm,  which  is  the  Parish  Priest,
beginnes  to  pray,  and  all  they  which  are  present  imitate
him  in  gesture  :  for,  of  themselves  a  great  part  of  them
would  not  else  know  how  to  performe  that  businesse.
For their Prayers consist chiefly in rising up, falling

399

A.  I  J.

c.  1620.

Hoicer-

glasses.

Readers.

Cleanenesse
&  furijyings.

Manner  of
their  Prayers.

Their
gestures.

A.D.

c.  1620.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Preaching.

Procession  and
Cursing.

downe,  kissing  the  ground,  and  sometimes  sitting  still,
one  while  touching  their  eyes,  sometimes  their  faces,  then
their  beards,  then  their  heads ;  saying  some  few  words  in
the  prayse  of  God  and  Mahomet,  the  Churches  being  all
matted  under-foot,  and  in  some  places  there  are  Woollen
Carpets  spread  for  the  better  sort  of  people.
Their  length.  The  said  Prayers  according  to  the  houres,  are  divers ;
some  longer,  and  some  shorter,  none  of  them  being  above
an  houre  long,  only  that  Prayer  of  the  Evening  in  the
time  of  the  Ramazan,  which  is  their  Lent,  which  is  longer
then  the  other  Prayers  :  they  pray  after  their  Eemawm,
for  he  is  their  Guide,  and  esteemed  of  if  hee  have  a  good
voice,  as  wee  esteeme  of  our  Singing  men.  They  also
use  preaching  upon  every  Friday  in  the  Ramazan :  And
when  they  will  pray  for  any  good  successe  in  the  Warres,
or  curse  any  Rebell ;  they  have  a  custome  then  to  goe  a
Procession  along  the  streets  by  two  and  two,  but  without
any  Lights  or  any  such  thing  in  their  hands  ;  and  as  they
goe  along  they  prayse  the  Name  of  God,  and  reade  very
long  Prayers  which  they  have  for  those  purposes,  the
people  still  crying  Amen,  making-  one  whole  dayes  worke
of  it,  and  then  they  hold  that  Rebell  or  Enemie,  whoso-
ever he  be,  to  be  without  all  doubt,  accursed.

In  the  time  of  trouble  or  affliction,  They  publish  in  the
most  eminent  places  a  Convocation  of  all  the  chiefe  men
in  the  Citie  (and  of  the  common  people  also,  such  as  will
come,  may)  to  pray  in  the  fields  which  are  for  that  use,
therein  imitating  the  Jewes,  and  being  all  come  together,
divers  of  their  Santons  of  esteeme  for  their  Holinesse,
make  Sermons  of  exhortation,  to  Fortitude,  Patience,  and
to  the  love  and  feare  of  God  :  But  if  those  troubles  con-
tinue still,  they  then  use  the  Prayers  of  forty  houres,  and
of  fortie  dayes  in  the  chiefest  Moscheas  built  bv  the
Emperours ;  the  which  Prayers  are  made  by  a  company  of
men,  who  are  belonging  to  the  said  Moscheas.

The  Muftee  hath  his  Entrada  apart,  in  Land  of  about
sixe  thousand  Sultanines  per  annum  :  but  being  put  out
of  his  place,  falling  into  disgrace  with  the  King,  and  leav-

400

Other  Convo
cations  and
Prayers.

Muftees
Revenew.

ROBERT WITHERS  a.u.

c.  1620.
ing the  Entrada to his Successor, he hath then but a
thousand  Aspars  per  diem  pay  :  as  the  Cadeeleschers  have
when  they  are  in  Office.

All  the  Ceremonie  which  they  use  in  the  Ramazan,  *<"»az*»
which  is  their  Lent,  is  no  other  but  to  abstayne  from
eating  and  drinking  in  the  day  time,  they  having  leave  to
eate  all  the  night  long,  (that  is,  from  seven  a  clocke  at
night  to  foure  in  the  mourning)  and  what  they  please  with-
out making  any  difference  of  meates ;  At  twilight  they
light  the  Lampes  in  the  Steeples,  which  burne  till
morning :  the  Eemawm  of  every  Parish  taking  especiall
notice  who  is  often  wanting  from  Church,  especially  in  the
Evening,  and  who  drinkes  Wine,  or  eates  in  the  day  time  ;
for,  besides,  that  they  should  bee  held  dispisers  of  the
Law,  they  should  bee  most  severely  punished  if  they
were  found  in  any  such  fault.  I  remember  once  that
Nasooh  Bashaw  being  Vizir  Azam,  and  riding  through
the  streets  in  the  Ramazan,  espied  a  Turke  that  was  drunke
with  Wine ;  so  forthwith  he  caused  him  to  be  brought  Example  of
unto  him,  and  without  giving  him  any  respite  to  recover  *
his  wits  caused  a  Ladle  full  of  boyling  Lead  to  bee
powred  downe  his  throate ;  and  the  Wretch  perished
immediately.

The  King  useth  in  the  Ramazan  aswell  as  in  the  times  [II.1x.1610.]
of  troubles  and  afflictions,  and  so  doe  the  Bashawes  and
other  great  men,  to  sacrifice  divers  sorts  of  beasts,  aswell
at  the  Sepulchres  of  such  as  have  beene  holy  men,  as  at
the  Moscheas.  Now  some  were  wont  to  doe  it  privately,
but  the  Kings  have  still  commanded  that  their  Sacrifices
be  done  publikely  in  the  streets,  and  at  the  gates  of  the
Citie,  dividing  the  flesh  of  the  beasts  amongst  the  people,
giving  some  also  to  the  Bashawes  themselves,  and  to  the
other  great  men  of  the  Port.  The  said  Sacrifices  are  used
very  often,  for  by  that  meanes  they  thinke  to  appease  Gods
wrath,  and  regaine  his  love  and  favour.

Those  Turkes  which  are  professors  of  Humilitie  and  Beads.
Devotion,  have  their  Beades  longer  then  other  men,  and
carrie  them  in  their  hands  into  the  Moscheas,  and  as  they
ix  401  2  c

A.D.

c  1620.

Pilgrimage.

Mecca

Temple.

Circumcision

PURCHAS HTS PILGRIMES

walke  up  and  downe  the  streets  :  but  passe  them  over  very
quickly,  for,  whereas  the  Papists  say  the  Ave  Maria,  so
they  say  only  Subhawn  Alloh,  that  is,  God  is  pure  and
true,  and  sometimes  Alloh  Ekber,  that  is,  God  is  great.

They  goe  also  many  of  them  to  Meccha  on  Pilgrimage,
and  to  Hierusalem  also,  which  they  call,  Gudds'  il  Shereef,
to  Meccha,  to  visit  the  Temple  which  they  say  was  built
by  Abraham,  in  the  which  Temple  Mahomet  in  the  time
of  Idolatry  did  hide  himselfe  :  And  they  affirme,  that  when
he  was  almost  fortie  yeeres  of  age,  he  received  the  Alcoran
from  God,  and  that  from  that  time  the  Mussulmanlick
beganne,  that  is,  the  true  Beliefe  :  and  shortly  after  hee
dyed ;  and  his  Sepulchre  is  visited  by  all  such  as  goe  the
said  Pilgrimage.  And  when  they  goe  to  Jerusalem,  they
goe  not  to  visit  Christs  Sepulchre,  for,  they  say  hee  did
not  dye,  but  they  goe  only  to  see  the  places  which  he  most
frequented,  as  being  a  miraculous  Prophet,  who  raysed
the  dead  to  life,  healed  the  sicke,  and  wrought  such  like
Wonders.  They  goe  likewise  to  the  Valley  of  Jehosaphat,
for  they  say  that  in  that  place  shall  bee  the  Resurrection  at
the  Day  of  Judgement.  Now  such  as  have  gone  the  said
Pilgrimage,  and  returne  home  again  to  their  Houses,  are
ever  after  called  Hagees,  that  is,  Pilgrimes,  and  are  much
reverenced  and  esteemed  of.  There  are  also  divers  Turkes,
who  forsaking  the  World,  leave  all  that  they  have,  and  goe
to  live  neere  to  the  aforesaid  Valley  for  devotion,  and  for
that  they  would  be  the  neerer  to  the  place  of  Resurrection,
supposing  thereby  to  get  a  great  advantage  to  themselves
above  the  rest  at  that  day.

The  greatest  Ceremonie  (for  Pompe  and  Solemnitie)
which  is  used  amongst  the  Turkes,  is  that  of  the  circum-
cising their  children  ;  wherein  they  differ  from  the  Jewes
in  this  one  particular ;  for  the  Turkes  never  circumcise
them  till  they  be  past  ten  yeeres  of  age,  following  the
example  of  Ismael  whom  they  imitate,  allead^ing  that
Abraham  loved  and  esteemed  him  and  not  Isaac,  and
would  have  sacrificed  him.  This  Circumcision  is  done
without  the  Church,  because  of  the  shedding  of  bloud ;

402

ROBERT WITHERS

A.D.

c.  1620.

all  the  Kindred  and  Friends  being  invited  unto  it,  in  token
of  joy  and  gladnesse :  They  use  the  like  to  those  which
turne  from  any  other  Religion  and  become  Turkes,  who
in  token  that  they  imbrace  the  Religion  of  Mahomet,
hold  up  their  fore-finger,  saying  these  words,  La  illaheh  il
Alloh  Muhamet  resull  Alloh,  that  is,  there  is  but  onely
one  God,  and  Mahomet  is  his  Messenger.

There  are  in  the  Cities,  and  by  the  High-wayes  also,  in
most  places  of  the  Grand  Signiors  Dominions,  for  the
benefit  of  the  Inhabitants  and  Travellers,  divers  Hawnes
with  their  Fountaynes.  There  are  Hospitals  also  in  the
Cities,  and  Colledges  for  the  bringing  up  of  youth,  where
they  may  learne  to  reade  and  write,  all  the  Moscheas  built
by  the  Emperours,  and  other  great  Moscheas  also,  having  Moscheas  and

^  -n  r .u  * ■  r i.u  -A r \ Hospitals.

great  Revenewes  for  the  mayntayning  or the  said  Col-  Lif£iU(j

ledges  and  Hospitals :  For  the  Emperours  by  Canon  may
not  build  Moscheas,  but  in  memory  of  some  notable  Con-
quest, or  memorable  Enterprize,  by  which  the  Church  may
bee  provided  for ;  nor  Sultanas  neither,  unlesse  it  be  the
Mother  to  that  Emperour  who  reignes  at  that  time  when
shee  goes  about  it ;  for  the  building  of  which,  they  are
at  an  infinite  charge,  and  they  dedicate  them  with  great
Solemnities,  to  the  said  Enterprize,  be  it  what  it  will  be.

In  the  Moscheas  there  are  some  very  costly  pieces  of  Magnificence.
worke,  and  frames  of  great  beautie ;  aswell  for  the  large-
nesse  and  neatnesse  of  the  places  for  Prayer,  as  also  for  the
beautifull  Porches  and  large  paved  Courts  which  com-
passe  the  said  Moscheas ;  adorned  with  very  stately
Pillars,  and  Fountaynes  built  all  of  curious  Marble ;
besides  their  Colledges  and  Hospitals  to  which  belong
very  large  Revenewes ;  Insomuch  that  some  of  those
Moscheas  may  be  well  compared  with  the  richest  Churches
in  the  World  :  They  are  built  all  of  wonderfull  faire  stone,
with  their  Cabiloes  covered  all  over  with  Lead,  the  Pillers
being  of  Porphir  or  some  such  costly  stones,  and  the  Basis
thereof  all  whited :  the  Pillers  shine  extraordinarilv  in
time  of  Prayer,  by  reason  of  the  abundance  of  Lampes
which are burning ; the which Lampes are curiously

403

A  D.

c.  1620.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Sicknesse
fatal!,  and
death.

fastned  into  round  Iron  hoopes  in  compasse  as  bigge  as
the  hoope  of  a  But,  upon  which  there  are  divers  rounds
of  Lampes  one  above  another,  and  are  let  downe  by  Copper
chaines  from  the  Roofe  of  the  Church ;  and  in  every
Moschea  there  are  three  or  foure  such  clusters  of  Lampes,
according  to  the  greatnes  of  the  Church.

There  are  no  Benches,  nor  any  thing  to  sit  upon ;  only
a  little  place  raised  from  the  ground  for  the  Priest ;  and
another  right  over  against  it  (but  somewhat  lower)  for  the
King;  at  such  times  as  he  comes  to  Praver ;  all  the  rest
sitting  upon  the  ground,  as  ordinarily  they  use  to  sit  in
other  places  :  wherefore  the  Pavements  (although  they  are
[II.ix.161 1.]  of  very  bright  and  cleane  stone)  are  covered  with  very
fine  Cairo  Mats,  which  are  kept  very  cleane  :  for,  besides
the  Grand  Signior,  no  man  may  come  into  the  Church
with  his  shooes  on ;  but  must  leave  them  at  the  doore,  or
else  give  them  to  one  of  their  servants  to  keepe.

When  any  one  is  extremely  sicke,  and  as  they  thinke,
past  hope  of  recovery ;  then  the  Imawm  comes  to  use
comfortable  words  unto  him,  and  prayes  by  him  :  and
being;  dead,  thev  wash  him  all  over,  and  then  having-
wound  him  up  in  a  Sheete,  and  layed  him  in  his  Coffin
with  his  face  downward,  they  carrie  him  to  his  Grave,
with  his  head  foremost.  If  the  partie  bee  a  Man  or  a
Man-child,  thev  set  a  Turbant  upon  the  Coffin  :  and  if  it
bee  a  Woman,  then  they  set  a  Filiawn  takya  upon  the
Coffin,  that  is,  such  a  Cap  as  the  women  weare,  with  a
Brooch  and  Feather  in  it.  They  are  accompanied  to  the
Grave  by  the  Church-men,  and  their  owne  kindred,  (but
no  women)  using  no  lig-hts  at  all :  but  the  Muvezins  sing
all  along-  as  they  goe,  calling-  upon  the  Name  of  God,  and
their  Prophet  Mahomet,  and  pray  for  the  health  of  the
Soule  departed ;  and  at  their  returne  there  is  a  Banquet
made  for  the  companie  for  their  paines.

The  Tombes  of  the  Emperours  most  commonly  are
built  upon  the  ground,  close  by  their  Graves  which  are
covered  either  with  extraordinary  fine  Cloth,  or  with
Velvet ; having  Turbants  set  upon  them  of  the  fashion  of

404

Funerall.

Tombes  of  the
Emperours.

ROBERT WITHERS

those  which  the  Emperours  weare,  with  Brooches  and
sprigs  of  Feathers  in  them :  and  there  stand  Candlestickes
both  at  the  head  and  at  the  feet  of  the  said  Graves,  and
two  Lampes  burning  continually  both  day  and  night.
Now,  these  Tombes  are  for  the  most  part  built  in  little
Chappels  close  by,  but  not  adjoyning  to  the  Moscheas  of
the  said  Emperours.  And  in  the  said  Chappels  there  are
Muyezins,  who  by  turnes,  doe  continually  read  in  the
Alcoran,  and  pray  with  their  Beades,  for  the  glorie  of  the
Emperours  deceased.  The  Vizirs,  Bashawes,  and  other
Great  men  also  (imitating  the  Kings)  doe  the  like  ;  but
with  lesse  pompe  and  charge :  And  they  which  have  not
burying  places  neere  the  Moscheas,  may  make  them  neere
their  houses  and  be  buried  there,  or  else  in  any  part  of  the
Citie,  provided  that  the  ground  be  their  owne.

The  common  sort  are  carried  out  of  the  Citie,  and
buried  in  the  fields  which  serve  for  that  purpose ;  having
one  stone  set  up  on  end  at  the  one  end  of  their  Grave,
and  another  at  the  other  end  ;  upon  which  is  graven  the
Name,  Countrey,  and  Degree,  and  any  thing  else  that  they
please,  of  the  parties  deceased.

Amongst  the  Turkes  there  are  no  Religious  houses,  nor
Monasteries  :  onely  the  Teckehs  of  the  Meulevees,  (which
are  an  order  of  Derveeshees,  that  turne  round  with  Musike
in  their  Divine  Service  : )  for,  for  the  most  part,  they  are
all  bred  up  to  Armes,  and  very  few  can  reade  and  write :
Nay,  it  hath  beene  sometime  seene,  that  a  Bashaw  (which
had  not  his  education  in  the  Kings  Serraglio)  hath  sate
in  the  Deevan,  and  hath  not  knowne  either  to  write  or
reade ;  but  hath  beene  enforced  to  learne  to  write  a  few
words  of  course,  to  under-write  Commandements,  and  the
like.  And  amongst  the  Turkes,  he  that  can  but  reade  and
write,  is  held  a  learned  fellow,  and  esteemed  of  farre  above
others.

There  are  also  divers  which  professe  a  kinde  of  living,
out  of  the  common  custome  of  the  world ;  beine  clothed
wonderfull  poorely  and  raggedly,  with  a  kind  of  Felt
caps  on  their  heads ; they  begge  for  their  living,  and  lie

405

A.D.

C :  ■  ■ • :  ■
Tombes.

Rel:g\:us
Turkes.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

.  1620.

in  the  courts  of  the  Moscheas,  and  in  such  like  places ;
and  these  are  accounted  very  holy ;  for  they  pray  much
in  the  view  of  the  world,  and  live  alwaies  (in  outward
appearance)  in  the  love  of  honestie ;  preaching  this
doctrine,  that  it  is  unpossible  perfectly  to  arrive  unto  and
gayne  the  Love  of  God,  but  by  the  ladder  of  humane
Love  and  Innocency  :  and  for  this  cause  they  betake  them-
selves to  that  course  of  life,  that  they  may  be  in  charitie
with  all  the  world,  and  bee  accepted  for  it  of  God,  in
Heaven.  Under  which  colour  of  holinesse  they  live  at
ease,  and  deceive  the  World  (every  one  being  bountifull
unto  them)  and  play  the  Villaines  in  secret,  as  well  as  any
other.  Besides  them,  there  are  also  some,  who  like
Hermites,  live  in  solitary  places,  neglecting  the  World  ;
conceiving  that  course  of  life  to  excell  all  other,  for  Inno-
cency and  Holinesse.
Womens  As  for  the  women,  there  is  no  heed  or  reckoning  made
Religion.  Qf  tnen-  Religion  at  all ;  for  they  never  goe  to  Church  :
so  that,  if  they  happily  have  a  will  to  pray,  at  the  houre
of  Prayer,  they  doe  it  in  their  owne  houses.  But  their
honestie  is  much  looked  after,  the  Imawms  of  every  Parish
being  bound  to  hearken  diligently  after  their  deportment :
who  if  they  discover  any  thing  that  is  amisse,  they  must
reveale  it  to  their  Husbands,  that  they  may  put  them
away :  or  else,  to  their  Fathers  or  Kindred,  if  they  bee
unmarried,  that  they  may  take  some  course  for  their
amendment.

And  although  the  Women  may  not  bee  conversant  with
other  Men  then  with  their  Fathers,  Husbands,  or  Brothers  ;
and  live  in  Lodgings  apart  by  themselves,  and  goe  alwaies
with  their  faces  covered  :  yet,  they  being  extraordinarily
given  to  the  sport,  and  very  dishonest ;  taking  the  oppor-
tunitie  of  their  Husbands  absence  at  the  Warres,  or  in
some  long  Journey  ;  under  colour  of  going  to  the  Bagnoes,
and  going  covered  withall ;  they  goe  whither,  and  to
whom  they  list ;  knowing,  that  the  worst  of  it  is,  but  to
bee  put  away,  if  so  bee  it  should  bee  at  any  time
discovered.

406

LETTER FROM SULTAN OSMAM  ad.

c.  1620.

I have hereunto added a Letter, sent by Sultan  [ii.ix.1612.]
Osman the late murdered Lmperour, to nib
Majestie, by  ^Husein Chiaus ; and translated
into  English,  by  Master  Robert  Withers.

ALthough  in  this  transitorie  world,  the  King  or  the
Beggar  should  enjoy  the  longest  terme  of  life  that
might  bee,  and  obtayne  all  that  his  heart  could  wish  ;  yet
it  is  most  certaine,  that  in  the  end  hee  must  depart,  and
be  transported  to  the  World  eternall :  and  it  is  well  knowne
unto  the  Wise,  that  it  is  unpossible  for  Man  to  abide  for
ever  in  this  World.

The  occasion  of  this  Prologue  is,  that  the  immortal],
omnipotent,  and  onely  God,  hath  through  his  Divine  will
and  pleasure,  called  unto  himselfe  Our  glorious  Father  of
blessed  memorie,  Sultan  Achmet  Kan,  who  in  Life  was
happie,  and  in  Death  laudable,  and  departing  out  of  this
momentary  W7orld,  to  be  neere  the  mercifull  Creator,
being  changed  into  perfect  glorie  and  eternall  blisse  hath
his  habitation  on  high,  and  his  rest  in  Paradise.

This  paternall  Empire  and  Monarchicall  Kingdome  hath
almost  untill  this  present  blessed  time  beene  alwaies  here-
ditarie,  from  Grand-father  to  Father,  from  Father  to
Sonne,  and  so  cursively  in  that  manner :  but  having  regard
unto  the  age  and  yeeres  of  Our  Great  and  Noble  Uncle,
Sultan  Mustafa,  hee  wTas  preferred  and  honoured  to  sit  on
the  Ottoman  Throne,  and  being  settled  for  some  time,
tooke  care  for  the  affaires  of  the  Empire,  and  for  all  that
might  concerne  the  people  both  in  generall  and  particular.

But  he  having  beene  many  yeeres  retired  in  solitari-
nesse,  and  given  to  Devotion  and  Divine  obedience  ;  being
also  as  it  were  wearied  with  the  cares  of  the  Empire  ;  of
his  owne  accord  with-drew  himselfe  from  the  Govern-
ment :  for  that  the  Diadem  and  Scepter  of  the  Empire  of
the  seven  Climates,  was  the  true  Right  and  Inheritance  of
Our  most  Excellent  Majestie,  of  the  which  (with  the  meet-
ing and  consent  of  all  the  Vizirs,  and  other  Deputies  of

407

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1620.

State,  of  the  Primate  of  the  Mussulman  Law,  and  of  the
other  honourable  Doctors,  of  the  Souldiers,  and  of  all  Sub-
jects both  publike  and  private)  the  almightie  God  hath
made  a  high  Present  and  worthie  gift  unto  us.  And  in  the
happie  day  in  the  beginning  of  the  Moone  Rebea-il-evel,
of  this  present  yeere  1027.  in  an  expected  time,  and  in  an
acceptable  houre,  was  Our  blessed  and  happie  sitting
established  upon  the  most  fortunate  Ottoman  Throne  (the
Seate  and  Wisedome  of  Salomon)  In  the  Pulpits  of  all  the
Moschees  (the  Congregations  of  the  Faithfull,  and  devo-
tion of  the  Mussulmen)  throughout  all  our  Dominions,
is  read  to  Our  Imperiall  Name,  the  Hutbeh.  And  in  the
Mints  where  innumerable  summes  of  money  are  coyned,
as  well  upon  the  Silver  as  the  Gold,  Our  happie  name  and
marke  is  stamped.

And  Our  most  powerfull  Commandements  are  obeyed
in  all  the  Parts  and  Dominions  of  the  World  :  And  the
brightnesse  of  the  light  of  the  Sunne  of  Our  Justice  and
Equitie,  hath  caused  the  darkenesse  of  Injuries  and
Molestations  to  vanish  away.

Now,  seeing  it  hath  beene  an  ancient  custome  of  Our
most  famous  Predecessors  to  give  notice  of  the  same  to
such  Princes  as  are  in  sincere  friendship,  and  that  doe  con-
tinue it  with  the  House  of  great  Majestie,  and  our
Imperiall  Court :  Wee  also  have  written  these  our  Princely
Letters,  and  appointed  for  their  Bearer,  the  choyce  amongst
his  equals,  Husein  Chiaus,  (whose  power  be  great)  one  of
the  honoured  and  respected  Servants  of  Our  magnificent
Port,  the  refuge  of  the  World  ;  to  the  end  that  such
newes  might  cause  great  joy  of  Our  most  honourable
Assumption.  And  We  doe  hope,  that  when  they  shall
come  to  your  hands  (in  conformitie  of  the  well  grounded
friendship  upon  the  sure  League,  Articles,  and  Writings,
which  hath  beene  established  of  old  with  Our  most  Royall
Race,  and  permanent  Empire)  you  will  manifest  infinite
joy  and  gladnesse,  and  certifie  as  much  to  the  Rulers  and
Governours  of  the  Dominions  and  Countries  under  you,
that  they  may  know,  that  the  Articles  of  Peace  and  League,

408

LETTER FROM SULTAN OSMAX  am.

1618.

and  the  points  of  the  Oath  which  are  firme,  and  to  be
desired  on  both  parts,  from  the  time  of  Our  Grand-fathers
and  Predecessors  of  Royall  Stocke,  now  in  Paradise
(whose  soules  God  enlighten)  Undoubtedly  during  the
time  of  our  Raigne  shall  be  observed  with  all  respect.
And  let  there  not  be  the  least  imagination  of  any  want  of
due  observance  of  the  signes  of  friendship  on  Our  part,
or  by  any  manner  of  meanes  on  your  part,  for  the  violating
the  foundation  of  the  Peace  and  League.

The  ensuing  Letter  was  written  by  Halil  Bashaw,
Chiefe  Vizir  and  Generall  in  the  Persian  Ex-
pedition, at  his  returne  in  Aprill,  1618.  to  Sir
Paul  Pinder,  Ambassadour  for  his  Majestic
Englished  by  Master  Robert Withers.

TO  the  Courteous  Lord  of  the  Nation  of  the  Messias ;
both  Great  and  Honourable  among  the  people  of
Jesus,  and  the  true  Determiner  of  Christian  Affaires  :  Our
good  Friend  the  English  Ambassadour,  whose  latter  dayes
bee  with  all  felicitie,  to  whose  Noble  presence  (after  our
many  kinde  Salutations  tending  to  all  good  affection  and
manifestation  of  Joy,  worthy  and  beseeming  our  Friend-
ship : )  our  loving  advice  is  this.  That  if  you  desire  to
heare  of  our  State  and  beeing,  you  shall  understand,  that
after  wee  departed  from  the  happie  Port,  with  the  Armie
for  the  Warres  of  Asia,  wee  arrived  and  wintered  in  [II.ix.1613.]
Mesopotamia,  and  remooving  thence  in  the  Spring  with
all  the  Mussulman  Host  (alwayes  victorious)  wee  went  to
Van,  from  which  place  untill  wee  came  to  Tauris,  the
Mussulman  Armie  went  on  alwayes  sacking  and  destroy-
ing all  those  places  and  Townes  of  the  Persians,  which
wee  met  withall  by  the  way  in  those  parts,  where  were
burnt,  pillaged,  and  ruined,  some  thousands  of  Villages ;
and  tormenting  all  those  people  that  came  to  hand.  And
when  wee  were  come  neere  to  Tauris,  the  Generall  of  the
Persian  Forces  (of  perverse  Religion)  called  Carcighai  Han,
(the  accursed)  retyred  himselfe  into  the  sayd  Tauris,  where

409

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1618.

beating  up  his  Drummes  in  every  Quarter,  made  a  shew
that  hee  had  a  will  to  Fight ; so  wee  sent  a  little  before  us,
some  Tartars  and  others  of  our  Armie,  to  hearken  out
and  take  notice  of  the  Enemie,  who  meeting  with  seven  or
eight  hundred  Persians  of  note,  put  them  to  the  Sword,
very few escaping, and that with great difficultie and
hazard. By which, the sayd Generall  finding himselfe
unable  to  resist  the  power  and  furie  of  the  Mussulman
Host,  or  to  stay  any  longer  in  the  sayd  place ; the  very
same  day  that  wee  arrived  there,  the  sayd  Generall  having
spoyled  all  the  Citie,  fled  away ; So  wee  tooke  the  place,
ransackt  it,  and  burned  all  the  Buildings,  Towers,  Gardens,
and  whatsoever  else  wee  found  within  it :  And  thus  the
great  Citie  Tauris  by  Divine  favour  and  Grace  became
ours. Then  forthwith  wee  sent  after  the  Enemie,  the
Tartar, with some Beglerbeghs, who overtaking them
gave  them  Battell,  and  albeit  some  of  ours  did  fall,  yet  they
which  fell  of  the  Enemies  side  were  innumerable. And
so  going  forward  towards  Erdevil  (their  obscure  residence)
about  ten  dayes  Journey  of  Countrey,  wee  went  burning
and  spoyling  it,  and  killing  all  the  Persians  that  wee  met.
That  indeed  there  was  so  much  Honour  and  Glorie  wonne,
as  that  all  the  ancient  men  of  the  Countrey  doe  afHrme,
there  never  was  seene  the  like ; Insomuch,  that  from  the
Confines  unto  Erdevile,  twentie  dayes  Journey  of  Coun-
trey, was  on  that  manner  by  us  destroyed. Thus  after-
Of  these  Wars  ward,  the  King  caused  to  emptie  the  sayd  place  of  Erdevile,
see  before  in and  fled  into  a  place  called  Hulchal,  and  caused  his  Armie
Sir  Thomas to  g0e  t0  ^  t0p  Qf  a  high  Mountayne,  from  whence

having  sent  three  or  foure  times  Men  of  qualitie  unto  us,
seeking  and  intreating  for  Peace,  with  promise  to  give
yearely  to  our  Emperour,  a  hundred  Somes  of  Silke,  and
all  such  Places  as  are  upon  the  Confines,  made  in  the  time
of  Sultan  Solyman,  except  Der  ne,  and  Der  Tink  ;  and
wee  were  contented  with  the  Peace,  and  his  Ambassadour
is  upon  the  way  comming  toward  us.  And  so  wee
returning  the  same  way  againe  alwayes  spoyling,  wee  came
to  Erzerum. And  this  our  present  Letter  is  written  unto

410

Roe

TO THE READER  ad.

c.  1625.
you,  for  the  respect  and  preservation  of  our  Friendship  :
And  even  as  our  Amitie  hath  ever  beene  hitherto  sincere
and  firme,  so  likewise  by  the  Grace  of  God  at  our  arrivall
in  the  happie  Port,  it  shall  bee  in  like  manner  maintayned
and  continued,  that  more  cannot  possibly  bee.  And  so
God  keepe  you  in  health.

To  the Reader.

IHeere  present  thee,  Reader,  many  Voyages  and  Obser-
vations of  Master  John  Sanderson  Merchant ;  worthy
of  good  welcome,  though  not  in  so  due  place  as  wee  could
have  wished.  But  this,  and  the  former,  and  all  in  this
Booke  from  the  tenth  Chapter  forward  (enough  to  have
made  another  large  Booke)  thou  hast  as  I  could,  and  not
as  I  would ;  who  could  not  order  them  before  I  had  them.
I  have  therefore  presented  them  to  thee  as  an  Appendix
to  the  former  Worke,  and  a  Review  of  Africa  and  Asia,
(some  fresh  Drops  after  a  great  Shower,  and  faire  Gleanings
after  a  goodly  Harvest)  all  intended  to  entertaine  thee
with  varietie  of  Speculation  and  Discourse,  as  thou
returnest  thorow  those  long  Seas,  from  the  Indian  to  the
English  shoares.  In  which  respect  there  is  some  Methodi-
call  correspondence  hitherto,  and  especially  of  this  last  with
the  former,  both  having  Constantinople  for  their  Centre,
and  diversly  representing  the  same  to  thy  view :  that
giving  thee  the  Court,  this  the  Citie ;  that  the  Govern-
ment, this  the  Places  and  Countries  governed.  And  if
Jerusalem  come  often  in  our  way,  remember  our  intended
worke  is  of  Pilgrimes,  which  (bee  they  Jewes,  Turkes,  or
Christians,)  have  conspired  in  the  acknowledgement  of
her  Antiquities  and  Holies.  Neither  doe  wee  much
trouble  thee  with  repetitions  of  the  same  things  which
others  have  before  delivered ;  present  Pilgrime  by  reason
of  his  Jewish  Associates,  his  Greeke  Guides,  and  Quarrels
with  Father  Guardian  and  his  Popish  Friers,  presenting
many  notable  rarities.  I  have  not  shortned  him  (as  some
others)  both  for  his  request,  and  for  his  owne  brevitie  and
pithie  Passages. The  letters  following  will  (I  hope)  give

411

A.D.
I584.

[II.ix.i6i+.]

Wt  -ere
shecced  the
:.'ery
and  -.*:■;
adorned
Chappell;
a  decked
Altar;  and
the  golden
Image  of  Saint
Vincent,  which
::::-  :n  the
right  hand
below  the  steps
of  the  Altar.
About  f.z ; -
sixe  yeeres
after,  as  is
sayd,  Sir
Francis  Drake
did  th-

Image  over  the
Rocke.

b  Thenflamed,
and  since  I
have  divers
times  passed
by  it,  but  onely
now  the  smoke
is  seer.-:
top  of  that
Mount
Mcmgebella.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

thee  good  content,  as  the  testimonies  of  many  English
Travellers  in  those  parts,  some  of  which  thou  mayest  nnde
elsewhere  mentioned  in  this  Worke.

Chap. XVI.

By the  permission  of  Almightie God.

Sundrie  the  personall  Voyages  performed  by  John
Sanderson  of  London,  Merchant,  begun  in
October  1584.  Ended  in  October  1602.  With
an  historicall  Description  of  Constantinople.

§.  1.

His  first  Voyage  to  Constantinople,  and  thence  to
Cairo,  and  to  Tripoli.

N  the  good  Ship  called  the  Merchant
Royall,  wee  set  sayle  from  Gravesend
upon  Friday  the  ninth  day  of  October,
1584.  The  fifteenth  to  Harwich.  The
eighteenth  to  the  He  of  Wight.  The
fifteenth  of  November  wee  arrived  at
Cape  Saint  Vincent  in  Portugal!,  and
a  went  there  ashoare.  The  foure  and  twentieth,  wee
passed  the  Straights  of  Jeberalter,  at  the  Ingenies  wee
stayed  and  watered.  The  next  day  arrived  at  Grand
Maliga,  where  we  were  three  dayes.  The  nine  and
twentieth,  wee  passed  by  Motrill,  and  beheld  the  Moun-
tayne  Salabrenna,  which  is  continually  covered  with  Snow  :
of  the  same  they  carrie  to  Lishbourne  to  mixe  with  their
Wine,  which  Citie  is  esteemed  to  be  three  hundred  miles
from  thence.  The  thirteenth  of  November,  we  passed
Cape  de  Gate.  The  third  of  December,  wee  came  to
Cape  de  Faro ; heere  the  Ship  Charitie  overtooke  us.

The  tenth  of  December,  wee  came  to  Sardinia.  The
thirteenth,  wee  came  to  Maritina,  and  in  sight  of  Cape
Bona  in  Barbarie.  The  fifteenth  to  Sicilia,  wee  saw  Mount
Etna  and  Mongebella  b,  which  then  flamed  out  of  the  top,

412

JOHN SANDERSON

AD.

although  upon  the  same  was  also  Snow :  then  to  Cape
Passara.  The  foure  and  twentieth  of  December,  wee
arrived  at  Cefalonia,  and  stayed  there  three  dayes.  The
nine  and  twentieth,  wee  were  in  Zant  Road,  and  went
ashoare  the  first  of  Januarie.  The  seventh,  wee  put
from  thence,  and  the  eighth  at  mid-night  the  Ship
came  a  ground,  so  that  for  halfe  an  houre  we  were
in  great  danger.  The  twelfth,  wee  arrived  at  Petras  in
Morea,  where  wee  stayed  a  few  dayes ;  and  at  that  time
onely  I  noted  of  memorie  Saint  Andrews  Chappell,  wherein
the  Greekes  say,  his  Bodie  lyeth  buried.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  I  tooke  Shipping  in  theCharitie,
and  came  the  first  of  Februarie  backe  to  Cefalonia  : and
passed  Serigo  (where  faire  Hellen  was  borne)  and  Cape
Angelo. The fourth, the winde being contrarie, wee
anchored  betweene  the  Hands  of  Milo  and  Argentiera  :
set  sayle  and  with  contrarie  weather  and  calmes,  came  to  ^-4V
the  Hands  Pattynos. The  eleventh,  from  thence  driven  a  *i7fJT*£
little  backe  againe,  vet  we  arrived  in  c  Sio. The  tour-  \0<iir
teenth, there stayed foure dayes : the  weather  yet un-
prosperous, wee put into Port Dolphin, which is in  wrecked,  and
the same Hand three leagues distant from the Towne  [
of Sio,  there we went up to a Mountavne (hard by
a Towne called Gardamulo ;) where the Poet Homer
lyeth buried.

The  three  and  twentieth,  wee  put  out;  and  the  seve
and  twentieth,  wee  passed  by  old  Troy;  some  of  the
ruinated  Walls  yet  standing.  Then  wee  passed  two  grea:
Castles  which  are  called  the  d  Dardinelli,  a  little  within  t
them  is  a  very  old  ruine  of  a  Towne  called  Heritho,  which
is  reported  to  bee  the  place  where  the  Turkes  first  planted
themselves  in  Europe ;  then  to  Galipoli.  so  to  Rodesto  ;
and  the  ninth  day  of  March  wee  arrived  in  Constanti-
nople. •  T'-.c  D

nelR. 7
ttco  Castles,  our  Sc hollers  trill  have  to  bee  those  of  Hero  and  Leandc  ■'■£&*}

leagues,  before  sou  come  to  the  mouth  of  the  Black  Sea. These  cre  rn1  fruS  .  '  ^ih

built  Castles,  double  furnished  tcith  excellent  good  and  great  Ordnance,  the  one  standing  on  Troy
side,  the  other  right  opposite,  on  Europe  side,  the  passage  is  about  a  league,  little  more  or  lesse.

4*3

cSio  f:

pleasantnesse
is  called  the

that  Hand
are  many
tame  Pmr-

much  thicker

■  :

Mastic  I

the
tcorld,  but
those  or »

A.D.

1584.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

most cleanely ; It is
by water toward the

In  the  time  of  my  there  being,  I  went  to  see  the  chiefe
Monuments  which  are  described  at  large  in  a  Booke  I
translated  out  of  Italian,  presented  me  by  a  Jew  Doctor.
Amongst  the  Beasts  I  did  at  that  time  see  three  Elephants  :
also  the  Great  Turkes  Dogges,  and  manner  of  e  keeping
them  are  worth  the  sight,  for  they  have  their  severall
attendants  as  if  they  were  great  Horses,  and  have
their  clothing  of  cloth  of  Gold,  Velvet,  Scarlet,  and
other  colours  of  Cloth,  their  sundry  Couches,  and
the  place  where  they  are  kept,
in  Asia  some  foure  miles  off
Blacke Sea.

I  was  likewise  at  the  mouth  f  of  the  Blacke  Sea,  where
upon  a  Rocke  standeth  a  white  Marble  pillar,  as  is  reported,
set  up  by  Pompey.  On  the  mayne  on  Europe  side  within
little  of  the  sayd  Pillar  is  a  Lanthorne,  which  standeth
high  and  is  so  great,  that  fortie  men  may  stand  in  it :  it  is
Glased,  and  they  light  in  it  many  Lamps  every  night,  that
the  Shipping  bound  from  the  Blacke  Sea,  may  know  where
they  are.

In  a  Gallie  with  the  Beg  of  Alexandria,  I  departed  from
Constantinople  the  ninth  day  of  October,  1585.  we  put
into  Galipoli,  Troy,  Lemnos,  Mitelin,  Sio,  Samos,  and
divers  other  Hands  in  the  Archi-pelago,  and  came  g  to
Rhodes,  a  most  strong  place,  and  much  exceeding  great
Ordnance  there,  upon  the  two  Rocks  where  the  Collosses
(one  of  the  seven  Wonders)  stood,  are  now  two  high
Turrets ;  the  Towne  double  ditched,  and  triple  walled  on
the  land  side.

From  thence  we  crossed  the  Seas  in  sixe  dayes  very  pros-
perously, and  arrived  in  Alexandria  of  Egypt,  the  second
day  of  November.  That  Citie  and  Land  standeth  so  lowe,
that  were  it  not  for  the  Pharos,  and  some  sight  of  the  tops
of  Palme  trees,  you  may  bee  upon  it  before  you  bee
aware  ;  which  is  very  dangerous  for  the  ships  that  come
thither : for  in  my  time  divers  were  cast  away ; amongst

came  by  as  I  was  shifting,  Iff  laughingly  said,  that  now  God  had  washt  me;  because  I  would
not  wash  in  the  Banias  as  we  came  by  the  way.

414

0  My  Lord
Souch  when
hee  was  there,
as  Master
Barton  sayd,
did  like
exceeding  well
of  this  place
and  attendance
of  the  Dogs.
f  In  my  com-
pany at  that
time,  was  an
ancient
English
Gentleman,
called  Cap-
tayne  Juste  I.

[II.ix.1615.]
sJt  Rhodes  I
did  fall  over-
boor  d:  a
F lemming
taking  mee  by
the  hand,  out
of  a  little  shel-
boat,  a  Black-
moore  Sculler,
by  meanes  of
the  Turkes,
and  the  helpe
of  God,  I  was
taken  againe
into  the  Gaily,
after  I  had
beene  in  the
bottom  of  the
Sea.  The  Beg

JOHN SANDERSON  *.p.

1585.

other,  a  great  Argusie  of  Venice,  called  the  Gallion  Bon  h :  JW«  dwelt

and  an  other  Venetian ship  leaped  over  a Rocke, very  **  C<A^f

miraculously  escaped,  having  over-shot  the  Port  of  Alex-  Emnnuei

andria. That  said  ledge  of  Rockes  lieth  out  into  the  Sea  Serohut  who

a  little  beyond  Bickier.  ever  much

From  Alexandria  I  went  the  nineteenth,  and  came  to  J^Cl! at  f1 ,

Grand  Cairo  the  nine  and  twentieth  ; passing  by  land  a  mh"JdP0j-  ^

day and an halfe and a night to Rosetto ; and there  did  eate

embarked  up  the  River  Nilus,  our  Boat  being  drawne  Swires  flesh.-

along  the  shoare  by  the  Water-men  Moores,  we  passed  much  &we"  *

many  Towns  and  Villages. Very  pleasant  is  that  travell  ^ny' times

onely the heate troubleth, and some  feare of  Theeves  Uimg  t0  our

which  continually  robbe  on  that  River,  and  alike  on  the  house,  I  ques-

Land. Many  famous  matters  I  was  shewed  in  the  way,  ttonc£ him  °f
as  the  old  ruines  of  Conducts  of  Nilus  to  the  Citie  of " ''£^^

Alexandria : for,  there  are  no  Springs,  nor  provision  of  0j  Bacon;  he

fresh  water  but  what  commeth  from  Nilus,  which  I  say,  said,  that  hee

hath  in time  past  beene  conducted  five  and  twentie  or  ^^s  of  all

thirtie  miles  to  fill  the  Cisternes  under  the  Citie. For  JJfjJ"^

Alexandria  is  built  upon  admirable  marble  Pillars  all  entred
vaulted  underneath,  every  House  having  his  sundry  Cis-
ternes, the  water  formerly  having;  come  in  ;  and  now  is
upon  Camels  backs  in Leatherne Budgets  brought  thither:
they  fill  them  in  the  moneth  of  August,  when  Nilus  is  at
the  highest ;  and  that  water  they  drinke  of  all  the  yeere.

Heaven,  them
he  would  fol-
low. I  asked,
why  he  did  so
rejoyce  at  the
losses  and

The  same  remayneth,  though  standing,  yet  sweet,  one  crosses  of  other
whole  yeere : towards  the  end  of  the  yeere  it  is  heavier
then  at  the  first,  cleare  as  Crystall,  and  not  so  unwholsome
to  drinke,  as  when  it  is  but  few  moneths  old,  so  againe
towards  August  they  cleanse  their  Cisternes  to  take  in  60000
fresh. There  are  store  of  divers  Fruits  :  small  Fig-trees  Che1mns  tn
I  have  seene  not  above  a  foot  and  halfe  from  the  ground,  s°,°  f,-°,  f

,.-.._,.  1  tfie  tfllrd  bas-

naving  divers  ripe  .bigs  upon  them. There  are  also  some  tinado  upon
few  Cassia  trees,  Locusts,  and  Capers  ; but  very  many  my  fiet,  taken
about  Cairo  ; all  the  whole  Land  full  of  Date  trees. In  from  m  h  f/>*

Devil!  Basha,
after  the  decease  of  my  companion;  and  60000.  more,  if  I  had  so  many,  1  would  lose,  before
I  would  suffer  three  such  other  blozvs ;  and  better  then  Gold  it  is  to  my  heart,  when  I  heare
that  others  with  my  fortune  take  part.

415

men.  Why,
Signior  Gio-
vanni, sayth
he,  I  lost

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Alexandria  is  Saint '  Markes  Church,  a  Church  at  this  day
of  Christians,  and  there  is  a  noted  place  at  the  entrance  of
the  said  Church,  where  Saint  Marke  preached.  There  are
divers  Pillars  of  Name  within  and  without  the  Citie.
Within  the  walls  is  an  old  ruine  of  the  Castle  where  Cleo-
patra was  stung  to  death  :  there  is  also  a  ruine  of  a  high
Castle,  called  the  Pharos,  one  of  the  seven  Wonders.

In  the  way  as  I  passed,  wee  rode  over  the  Plaine  where
Pharo  pitched  his  Tent,  the  spaciousnesse  whereof  was
bound  with  his  admirable,  being  marked  out  to  this  day  with  foure  great
stones  :  eight  dayes  wee  were  going  up  Nilus,  and  arrived
at  Bollacco,  the  Port  Towne  of  Cairo  ;  which  is  k  a  mile
and  a  halfe  from  the  Citie,  from  whence  also  they  fetch  all
the  water  that  serveth  that  great  Citie.

Cairo  is  much  bigger  then  Constantinople  ;  many  things
notable  are  within  and  about  this  Citie,  which  others  no
doubt  report,  and  are  not  beleeved ; as  are  the  twelve

A.D.

I585.
1  There  lieth
one  John,  a
Christian,
which  the
Custies  do
make  account
of. Hee  was
long  since
carried  about
Cairo,  upon  a
Camels  backc,

armes  spred
abroad  upon  a
Crosse  of
wood;  and  on
the  top  of  his
shoulders
neere  his
necke,  were
two  Lamps

burning  in  his  Store-houses,  where  they  say,  Joseph  kept  the  Corne  the
seven  deare  Yeeres :  some  say,  the  same  was  reserved  in
the  Vaults  of  the  Pyramides.  I  went  twice  to  a  place  ten
miles  from  Cairo,  called  the  Matarea,  being  yet  solemnely
visited  by  Christians ;  it  is  where  Joseph  and  Mary
remayned  with  our  Saviour.  There  is  a  Spring  of  water,
which,  as  they  report,  hath  beene  ever  since  ;  and  likewise
a  plot  in  a  Garden,  where  growe  sprigs  that  yeeld  Balsam.
The  Papists  come  often  to  this  House  a  Massing,  in  great
devotion  ;  and  observe  a  place  like  a  Cupboord,  where
they  say  our  Saviour  was  laid,  and  alike  a  great  cros-bodied
wilde  Fig-tree  in  the  Garden,  with  the  water  wherein  our
Ladie  washed  our  Saviours  clouts.

At  Cairo  I  was  shewed  how,  and  of  what  sorts  of  Ser-
pents, the  Moores  doe  make  their  Treacle  : I  did  there

Custome-house  ^so  see  Dotri  wilde  and  tame  Gattie  Pardie  (Cats  of  Moun-

Alexandria. taine,  as  wee  call  them)  little  and  great  Monkies,  Bragons,

k  There  are

ever  Boyes  ready  with  Asses  to  let  for  Cairo ;  so  that,  wee  hire  them,  and  presently  pay  the

hire,  about  a  penic  matter :  and  zohen  we  come  to  Cairo,  turne  off  our  Asse  without  more  care ;

for  the  Asse  knows  his  place  and  home : the  like  we  doe  when  we  ride  to  the  Castle,  to  the

Bashazv  and  Cadielesquiers,  who  doe  thereabout  inhabit.

416

flesh,  yet  for
all  this  tor-
ment, he  all
the  way  cried,
Christos,
Christos,
Christos:  sum
Christiano,
y  moro
Christiano.
This  was  to
mee  related  by
an  old  Custie
Priest,  whose
name  was
Comous  ;  and
a  Serwan  also
hee  was  of  the

JOHN SANDERSON  a.d.

1586.

Muske  Kats, Gasels  (which  are  a  kind  of  Roe-bucke)  '  The  land

bodies  of  Momia,  and  live  Crocodiles  both  of  land'  and  ^^/r'

water,  which  have  beene  offered  at  my  gate  to  be  sold,  quarters  of  a

Some  I  have  bought  at  some  times  for  my  recreation  of  yard  in  length,

most of these sorts ; for there I remayned eighteene  scaly> ana>  °fa

moneths. Once  I  caused  a  m  Villaine  to  rippe  a  Crocodile,  fei?  Draions

...  -  ,  ,  r  \  .  colour.  Some

which  was  or  some  two  yards  and  a  quarter  long,  the  same  0rthe  Moores

was  a  female,  which  had  in  her  panch  above  an  hundred  doe  make

Egges  yellow  like  the  yelkes  of  Egges,  and  just  of  such  Pursses  of

bignesse  : out  of  the  said  Crocodile  he  tooke  a  piece  of  their  sktnnes>

thicke  round  skinne  about  the  bignesse  of  a  Cockes  stone  ;  jried  and

wished  mee  to  lay  the  same  up  untill  it  was  dry  ; which  I  rawed.

did,  and  the  dryer  it  was,  the  sweeter  it  savored;  no  Civet  [II. ix.  161 6.]

had  ever  better  smell: such  he  said  was  in  all  those  old  m/i *P00re

female  Crocodiles ; yet  being  flayed,  the  flesh  before  it  be  Q^s\^n  of

1  cold,  savoreth  badly. More  I  could  say  of  Beasts  and  Egypt,  called
Fowles  of  that  place,  but  I  will  not  talke  how  n  they  hatch  Hawat.
thousands  of  Chickens,  and  sell  them  by  measure  ; neither  n  Though

\  of  the  Doves  that  carrie  Letters  from  Alexandria  to  Cairo  ;  £egne  amon£
neither  of  the  Estridge  Henne,  when  she  layeth,  how  shee  tne  Ovens,
goeth  round  twice  or  thrice  looking  up  into  the  aire,  and  in  and  have  seene

la  moment  delivereth  her  Egge  : this  1°  did  see  in  the  that  manner  of
middest  of  the  Cadilesquiers  yard.  0atf  j'g'

tii  •  1  11 1  t  1  • 1  •  t •  /-> •  And  100.

There  is  a  place  called  lsbichia,  adjoyning  to  Cairo,  some  0thers,Turkes,
sixe  or  eight  acres  in  bignesse,  as  I  take  it ; it  hath  in  Moores,Jezves,
former  times  beene  compassed  with  very  faire  houses. The  and  Chris-
mere  that  I  was  there,  at  the  cutting  in  of  Nilus  (which  ******  wJe
was  in  August,  1586.)  it  is  overflowen  ; wherein  they  fish  tancc  0jr  in  a
the  first  two  moneths  or  more,  that  the  water  is  sinking  round  ring:
into the  ground  : then in the mudde they sowe their  the  Estridge
Wheate,  and  reape  it  at  three  or  foure  moneths  end  ;  then  l"  f'f"
groweth  it  with  Grasse,  wherewith  they  feed  their  cattell  ay  fa{ ner
three  moneths  : and  the  last  season  of  the  yeere,  untill  Egg,  and  did
they  againe  let  in  Nilus,  they  a  little  labour  it,  by  reason  presently  rise
of  making  channels for the  water ; and sowe  and set  UP  anf}  lefl
Radice,  Carrots,  Turnep,  Lettice,  and  such  like. They  ^cj^Js

taken  up,  and  presently  carried  to  the  Cadylesker,  and  delivered  to  him  in  his  Judgement  Hall:
he  sitting  on  his  banke  of  Judgement.

IX  417  2D

A.D.
1586.

PI  brought,  to
Tripoly  from
Cairo,  a
Libbct;  of
about  a  cubits
length  ;  for  a
muster  ;  but  in
time  of  my
sicknesse,  it
was  stolne from
mee.

q  The  two
Germane
Gentlemen
and  my  selfe,
did  in  sport
spread  our
selves  in  that
Tombe  at  that
time.

Sphinx.

PURCHAS HTS PTLGRIMES

reserve  of  the  water  for  the  last  encrease,  in  a  great  Well
which  is  built  in  the  middest  of  the  said  place.  This
should  bee  admirable  for  such  as  have  not  seene  nor  heard
of  the  like.

There  is  also  a  great  Plaine  of  sand,  going  to  the
Matarea,  (this  Matarea  is  the  place  where  Mary  and
Joseph  kept  the  Child  Jesus,  when  Herod  sought  his  life)
wherein  are  many  p  pieces  seeming  to  be  of  rotten  Wood,
as  of  wracked  Ships  or  Boats,  and  taking  them  up,  they  are
very  weighty  Stones,  which  also  is  marvellous.

The  eight  and  twentieth  of  Aprill,  1586.  I  went  to  see
the  Pyramides  and  Momia,  being  of  three  Gentlemen  of
Germanie  entreated  to  accompanie  them.  The  next  day
wee  returned.  These  Pyramides  (one  of  the  seven
Wonders)  are  divers,  but  especially  two  of  a  like  bignesse,
at  the  bottome  each  a  thousand  paces  about ;  one  of  them
open,  that  in  wee  went  with  Waxe-candles  lighted,  and  up
to  the  top,  where  standeth  in  a  square  roome,  a  Tombe
hewed  out  of  blacke  Marble  or  Jet,  wherein  they  report,
that  Pharo  should  have  beene  buried,  which  pursued  the
Children  of  Israel :  it  is  above  a  q  mans  length  and
uncovered :  I  say  the  Jet  Coffin.  The  roofe  of  the  said
Pyramides  is  of  five  stones,  five  and  twenty  foot  long  and
five  broad,  each  stone :  the  stones  on  each  side  are  of
admirable  greatnesse,  and  impossible  to  thinke  how  they
were  carried  up  so  high.  It  is  also  marvelous  in  the
foundations,  which  are  upon  mightie  Pillars,  they  are  well
called  one  of  the  seven  Wonders.  There  is  likewise  a
huge  Figure  r  of  a  Head  of  stone,  standing  upright  to  the
necke  out  of  the  ground.

The  Momia,  which  is  some  five  or  sixe  miles  beyond,  are
thousands  of  imbalmed  bodies ;  which  were  buried  thou-
sands of  yeeres  past  in  a  sandy  Cave ;  at  which  there
seemeth  to  have  bin  some  Citie  in  times  past :  we  were  let
downe  by  ropes,  as  into  a  Well,  with  Waxe  candles  burning
in  our  hands,  and  so  walked  upon  the  bodies  of  all  sorts
and  sizes,  great  and  small,  and  some  imbalmed  in  little
earthen  Pots,  which  never  had  forme  :  these  are  set  at  the

418

A.D.
I586.

JOHN SANDERSON

feet  of  the  greater  bodies :  they  gave  no  noysome  smell  at
all,  but  are  like  Pitch,  being  broken  ;  for  I  broke  of  all
the  parts  of  the  bodies  to  see  how  the  flesh  was  turned  to
drugge,  and  brought  home  divers  heads,  hands,  armes,  and
feet,  for  a  shew  :  wee  brought  also  600.  pounds  for  the
Turkie  Companie  in  Pieces  :  and  brought  into  England
in  the  Hercules  :  together  with  a  whole  s  body  :  they  are
lapped  in  above  an  hundred  double  of  cloth,  which  rotting
and  pilling  off,  you  may  see  the  skin,  flesh,  fingers  and
nayles  firme,  onely  altered  blacke.  One  little  hand  I
brought  into  England,  to  shew ;  and  presented  it  my
brother  l,  who  gave  the  same  to  a  Doctor  in  Oxford.

The  three  and  twentieth  of  September,  the  Emir  Hagge,
which  is  the  Captaine  of  the  Caravan,  goeth  out  of  Cairo
towards  Mecca,  with  very  great  shew ;  all  the  Citie  com-
ming  out  to  see  him  and  the  rich  covering  which  is  carried
with  great  pompe,  to  cover  the  Sepulchre  of  Mahumet
their  Prophet ;  all  or  most  of  the  Rogues  of  Cairo  (which
they  call  Saints  u)  attending  it  out  with  great  devotion,
and  some  goe  with  it  to  Medina ;  and  they  are  the  holiest
men  of  all,  who  have  beene  twice  or  thrice  there.

One  grave  old  man,  who  had  a  long  grey  beard,  I  saw
led  with  great  ceremonie  at  that  time  out  of  the  Citie,  who
had  but  one  eye  :  and  I  likewise  did  see  the  same  man
returne  backe  againe  with  the  aforesaid  Emire,  and  had
left  his  other  eye  there,  having  had  it  pluckt  out,  after  he
had  seene  their  Prophets  Sepulchre,  because  he  would  see
no  more  sinne.  Many  of  the  Turkes  and  Moores  Women,
and  other,  came  about  him,  to  bid  him  welcome,  rejoyc-
ing  of  his  returne  to  Cairo  ;  and  they  who  had  kissed  his
hand,  arme,  or  garment,  thought  themselves  very  happy.

Another  of  their  Saints  went  about  the  Citie  continu-
ally starke  naked,  covering  neither  head,  foot,  nor  any  part

of  his  foule  fat  body,  no  nor  his  most  filthie  foule  circum-

Apothecaries.
1 Doctor  Sanderson  Arch-deacon  of  Rochester. " [  These  Saints,  in  certaine  companies  doe  goe
before  the  Vesture,  in  a  round  ring,  leapingly  lifting  up  their  legs,  and  wagging  up  and
dotvne  their  heads,  crying,  Holloh,  Holloh,  Holloh,  Holloh,  even  till  their  mouthes  bee  of  a
whiter  fome,  with  breathing  out  only,  Holloh,  Holloh,  Holloh,  &c. Foul-foole  Saints.

419

*  A  whole  body
as  it  was  taken
up  from  the
other  bodies:
It  is  contra
banda,  to  sell
of  them,  but
by  friendship,
whichWilliam
Shales  had
amongst  the
Moores,  he
having  their
language  as
perfect  as
English,  with
words  and
money  the
Moors  Trill  be
entreated  to
any  thing.
This  body  of
Momia,  after
our  arrivall
was  carried  to
the  house  of
Sir  Edward
Osborne  in
Filpot  lane  in
London,  and
there  it  was
with  the  600.
pounds  till
they  were  sold
to  the  London

A.D.

I586.

[II.ix.l6i7.]

1  Mausoleum.
m  That  jolly
Turke  who
had  saved
himself  in  the
Boat  with  us.
As  we  were
going  up  Nilus
towards  Cairo,
talking  of  the
danger  which
we  had
escaped,  to  me
he  said,
Asserum  Asse-
rum  Chelibie :
twas  well  done
Gentleman,  I
heardyoupray
aloud,  but  you
saith  he,  to
William
Shales  oldie
were  halfe
dead,  why  said
I,  we  did  not
pray  as  you  did
to  Mahumet,
but  we  prayed
to  Christ,
Gusel,  Gusel,
Wei,  weltzvas
w el  done  {saith
he)  for  every

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

cised  member :  yet  have  I  seene  divers,  as  hee  passed
along,  at  divers  times  (yea  women)  kisse  his  naked  armes
and  hands.  On  a  time  at  Bullaco,  going  over  Nilus,  he
going  in  a  passage  Boat,  in  which  I  with  others  went  over ;
a  Moore  in  the  companie  seeing  him  come,  layed  him  a
piece  of  an  old  coat  to  sit  on  ;  but  when  he  felt  it  under
him,  he  layd  it  aside,  and  sate  on  the  bare  boords  :  so  hee
ever  did  on  the  stones,  earth,  and  sands.  This  man  was  in
Cairo  before  I  came  thither,  and  I  know  not  how  long  after.

This  great  fat  lubberly  beast  would  goe  through  the
streetes,  and  take  off  the  stalles  to  eate,  bread,  little  baked
meates,  and  fruit  and  roots,  and  no  bodie  denied  him,
but  counted  themselves  happie  that  he  would  so  doe.  He
would  not  touch  money  of  any  sort,  a  very  kinde  of
scorched  Bacon  hogge,  hee  was  as  fat  as  he  could  goe.
Other  of  those  Saints  of  Cairo  goe  but  halfe  naked,  and
some  of  them  very  leane  Rascals.

The  said  Caravan  of  some  foure  or  five  thousand
Camels,  meeteth  with  the  Caravan  of  Aleppo,  Damasco,
and  Jerusalem  ;  so  that  when  they  are  all  joyned,  it  is
thought  they  passe  above  twentie  thousand,  but  I  thinke
not  so.

The  last  day  of  May  I  departed  from  Cairo  to  Bullacco,
the  fourth  of  June  arrived  in  Rossetto,  and  the  sixt  in
Alexandria:  From  thence  the  tenth  of  August,  1586.
beeing  Tuesday,  we  had  fraighted  with  Wine,  Wood  and
other  Provision,  a  Barke  called  a  Jermi,  and  purposed  for
Cairo  by  Sea.  We  set  saile  and  came  in  sight  of  the
ruines  of  the  Mossolia.1  This  was  a  huge  Sepulchre,  built
by  a  great  Queene  for  her  Husband,  which  is  held  to  bee
one  of  the  Wonders  ;  then  to  Bichier,  where  are  the  ruines
of  a  Towne,  and  is  at  this  present  a  very  strong  Castle
planted  with  Brasse  Ordinance,  so  we  arrived  to  the  mouth
of  Rossetto,  where  Nilus  and  the  Sea  meeteth  together  and
mingleth,  raising  bankes  of  sand  under  water.  We
missed  m  the  channell  and  strooke  and  broke  our  Barke,  we
were  marvellously  saved,  holding  fast  by  the  Barkes  Boate  ;
leaping  into  the  same  after  a  Turke  had  cut  the  shippes

420

JOHN SANDERSON  a.d.

j  586.

shrouds (my selfe, my  companion William Shales, our  man  to  pray
Cooke  and  the  said  Turke  with  my  two  Roe  Buckes,  our  alou^  as
two  Janizaries,  and  our  other  Servant  a  Christian  swamme  ^th  tauzlt
to  shoare,  and  by  swimming  many  were  saved,  and  some  him,thisu-asa
upon  plankes  of  the  ships  and  chists,  five  only  drowned  : wel  mannered,
upon  the  Hand,  wet  as  we  were,  we  reposed badly  all  manbr  and
night. In the morning came to shoare divers of the  rn!  .  u[  c'
Turkes  luggage,  and  a  Sapetta  or  mine,  wherein  were  our  kindnesse  (for
Bookes,  and  my  Apparell  recovered  by  a  Moore  an  excel-  his  passage)
lent  Swimmer,  and  our  Wine  wee  saved  which  boyed  to  thankfully
the  shoare  some  seven  Buts,  all  else  whatsoever  lost. That  a,  * Jugfrr  J
morning  came  Barkes  out  of  Rossetto,  to  take  in  all  that  shipwrack  in
was  recovered,  so  to  Rossetto  wee  came,  housed  our  Wine  our  company.
to  be  sent  after  us  ; and  up  along  Nilus  to  Cairo  we  went,  n  William
where  we  arrived  the  eighteenth  day.  zf aJ. a

The  first  of  December  I  departed  from  Bullaco,  and  so  wai  sen)  w-lth
upon  an  arme  of  the  River  to  Damiatta,  where  I  arrived  those  goods.
the  third  day,  recovered  the  goods  which  was  sent  us  from  °Hippo-
Tripoly,  and  came  thence  the  fift  day  in  my  company  one  ^me'
n  Englishman,  and  my  Janizarie,  Drogman  Jew,  and  other  £)ami/(ta  joe
Attendants. That morning  comming  along by a  little  say,  that  these
Hand,  wee  espied  eight  Sea-horses,0  which  were  in  bignesse  Sea-horses  doe
like  great Swine,  rather  bigger ; headed  like  a  Horse,  for  a  seaion
only  their  eares  round  like  a  Camels,  they  arose  one  by  ^ ts  e™j  •
one  as  we  came  neere  them,  and  plunged  into  the  water,  the  night
A  Spahi,  which  is  a  Cavaliere  Turke,  tooke  his  Bow  and  time  doe  come
shot  at  them,  did  hit  one  upon  the  head,  and  he  snuffed  '"  and  eate  °f
up  out  of  the  water,  making  a  great  noyse. But  we  set r  t. °^fs'
eye  no  more  upon  them.  other  hearbes.

Other matter at Damiatta worth the noting, I  v  They  are
remember  not : only  that  there  are  great  gardens,  full  of  °fdinarily  sold
Adams  figs,  some  doe  so  call  them,  these"  are  also  called  m  Catro>  a"d

r.  tv  a  1 •  • •  1  11  zve  commonly

p  Mouses ; their  growing  is  upon  a  great  huge  stalke,  no  did  eat  of

wood  of  bodie,  but  the  fruit  comming  out  amongst  the  them,  as  of

leaves  in  great  bunches,  some  eighteene  or  twentie  more,  other  fruit

and  foure  on  a  short  stalke. These  figs  are  commonly  '- , ' or

r  1 1  ...^  , .■> rather  toward

five  or  sixe  inches  long,  joyning  close  to  one  another  in  the  end  of  our

the  bunch,  and  formed  like  a  little  Cowcumber  :  when  they  meales.

421

A.D.

1586.

q  Wood  in
Grand  Cairo
is  extraordin-
ary deere,  that
and  the  Wine
we  spent  stood
us  in  more
then  all  our
other
Expences,
and  house  rent,
Eff  Servants
wages.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

are  ripe  they  are  blackish  greene  on  the  out-side,  and
within  yellowish  mellow,  they  eate  like  a  kind  of  a  ripe
mellow  Peare,  but  more  lushious  and  a  little  drier,  not
Sugarie  sweet.  They  peele  easily,  the  leaves  are  of  divers
lengthes  and  bignesse ;  the  bigger  sort  longer  then  a  man,
and  about  a  yard  in  breadth  :  some  lesser  and  some  bigger  ;
this  is  very  true.

There  are  about  Cairo,  a  kind  of  tree  called  Pharohs
figge  trees,  the  hugest  sort  of  all  others  in  Egypt,  yet  yeeld
worst  fruit,  and  weighed  worth  nothing,  neither  for  q  firing
nor  other  to  my  remembrance,  though  some  of  the  trees
as  bigge,  and  more  spreading  then  our  English  Okes ;  the
figs  or  fruit  thereof  very  small  ones  and  wild  :  every  yeere
the  poore  Villaines  climbe  the  trees,  and  with  small  Knives
cut  every  figge  on  the  tops,  I  say  a  little  round  piece  away
when  they  are  greene,  so  afterward  becomming  ripe,  the
poore  people  eateth  of  them.  The  Cassia  tree  is  also  great
and  spreading,  and  very  goodly  to  behold,  those  long
blacke  Truncheons  among  the  greene  leaves,  aloft  the
Timber,  seemes  all  threddie,  as  it  were,  and  corkie ;  but
they  doe  lay  the  logs  at  length,  mingled  with  stone  for  the
strengthening  of  their  wals  and  buildings.

But  of  all  in  Egypt,  the  Palme  tree  is  to  be  preferred,
which  yeeldeth  Dates  to  eate  alone,  and  in  Cheeses,  as  it
were,  and  a  kind  of  drinke  that  they  call  Sherbet,  Sea-
fatches,  of  the  branches,  stalkes,  frames  to  lay  their  Beds
upon,  and  to  inclose  bailes  of  Spices  and  other  goods  in
stead  of  chists,  Serons,  and  Baskets  for  many  uses,  and
Fannes  to  coole  and  to  keepe  off  the  flyes  and  dust :  Mats,
Hoopes,  and  coards  of  divers  sorts,  timber,  straw  and
stubble.

The  Moores  in  those  Orchards  of  Date  Trees,  tye  a
Rope  about  the  bodie  of  the  Tree,  and  their  middle,  for  it
is  all  body  from  the  Root  to  the  toppe  branches.
(Knobbed  by  the  meanes  of  the  yeerely  breaking  off  of  the
old  branches,  except  the  branches  and  fruit  that  spring  at
the  top)  they  yeerely  goe  up  to  pare  and  breake  of  the
out-side  branches. The  fruit  being  young,  springeth  out

422

JOHN SANDERSON

in  a  long  codde,  at  opening  of  which,  the  Moores  takes  of
the  Male  Seedes,  and  puts  into  the  Females  ;  so  it  com-
meth  to  perfect  fruit :  otherwayes  of  themselves,  they  say,
they  yeeld  but  wild  Dates ;  this  I  have  beene  told,  and  I
doe  beleeve  it.  I  doe  beleeve  also  that  as  they  say,  the
Plague  comming  into  some  of  their  Orchards  of  Date
Trees,  that  one  infects  another :  and  many  doe  dye  of  the
Plague.

Nilus  water  I  thinke  also  to  be  the  profitablest  and
wholsomest  in  the  World,  by  being  both  Bread  and  Drinke
to  them :  for  Bread  there  could  be  none  without  it ;  no
Rayne  falling  in  Egypt  to  that  purpose :  yet  I  have  seene
it  rayne  there,  but  it  hath  beene  very  little,  as  it  were  a
small  showre,  at  a  time  this  River  doth  cover  the  Land,
and  fatten  it,  whereby  it  fructifieth  abundantly.  It
breedeth  no  manner  of  disease  in  the  bodie,  as  divers  other
waters  doe  :  it  hurteth  not  to  drinke  thereof  either  troubled
or  cleere ;  for  being  brought  to  our  Houses  one  mile  and
halfe  or  two  miles  off,  it  commeth  in  warmer  then  bloud,
and  troubled  seeming  sandy ;  standing  all  night  in  our
Jarres  of  Earth,  it  is  very  cleere  and  coole  in  the  morning,
and  so  continueth  in  the  House  be  the  weather  never  so
hot.

We  were  there  much  troubled,*  alike,  with  flyes  and
dust :  for  the  streets  of  Cairo  are  all  unpaved,  except  on
each  side  some  two  or  three  foot  broad  before  their
Houses  (the  middle  way  about  a  foot  lower  then  those
Pavements)  and  the  Horses,  Camels,  Asses,  Mules,  Men
and  Monsters,  make  such  a  stirre  passing  to  and  fro,  that
what  stranger  soever  commeth  thither,  in  short  time  will
wish  himselfe  further  off. So  much  by  the  way.

Now  I  say,  from  Damiatta,  I  arrived  againe  in  Cairo  the
thirteenth.  The  nineteenth,  I  went  being  invited  by  the
Venetian  Consul  once  more  to  the  Pyramides,  where  wee
were  feasted  and  returned  home  at  night.  The  twentieth
of  March  1586.  we  set  from  Cairo  being  three  English,
and  our  Servants,  a  Jew,  a  Turke,  and  Christians,  arrived
in  Rossetto  the  three  and  twentieth  ;  fraighted  a  Carmisale

423

A.D.
I5l

[II. ix. 1618.]

*Most  part  of
the  yeere  at
the  hottest
time,  wee  have
a  Servant  all
the  while  we
doe  sit  at
meate,  to  fan
away  the  Ji yes
from  the
dishes ,  and  our
Trenchers.

John  Sander-
sen.

mil.  Shales.
Will.
Lawnder.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1587.

the  eighteenth  of  Aprill  1587.  came  to  Bichier  the  eight
and  twentieth  of  Aprill.  I  went  to  Alexandria  to  see  what
newes  the  ship  Tiger  had  brought,  who  arrived  there  two
dayes  before.  Backe  to  our  Carmisale  I  returned  the  next
day.

We  set  sayle  the  seventh  of  May,  calmely  coasting  all
the  Palestine  Sea  ;  and  arrived  in  *  Tripoly,  the  thirteenth
being  Saturday.  The  ship  Hercules  arrived  the  twelfth  of
November,  being  Munday.  Three  dayes  we  were  in  a
great  storme,  and  like  to  have  perished  in  the  Bay.  To
Tripoly  we  came  againe  on  the  Friday.  On  Saturday  came
the  Tobie  of  London.  Friday  the  two  and  twentieth  of
December,  wee  departed  from  thence  in  company  with  the
Tobie :  wee  went  by  Cyprus  the  foure  and  twentieth.

The  three  and  twentieth  of  Januarie,  we  were  ashoare
at  an  Hand  by  Candie,  called  Christiana  ;  The  five  and
twentieth,  we  cast  Anchor  at  Caldarona.  The  eleventh
and  twelfth  of  February,  we  passed  betweene  Sicilia  and
Malta.  The  thirteenth,  to  Pantalerea.  The  fourteenth,
we  were  in  the  sight  of  Cape  Bon  on  Barbarie  side.  The
fifteenth,  we  saw  Goletta,  a  Rocke  a  little  off  of  Carthage.
The  last  of  February  we  arrived  in  Argier,  set  saile  from
thence  the  second  of  March.  The  sixt,  came  in  sight  of
Cape  de  Gat.  The  seventh,  at  night  we  passed  by  Gib-
beraltare,  and  so  through  the  Streights ;  From  Suta  wee
were  espied,  they  shot  twice ;  In  the  morning  wee  had
Cape  Sprat,  about  sixe  leagues  a  sterne. The  eleventh,

*  In  Tripoly  standing  upon  the  Tarras,  John  Eldred,  W.  Shales,
Nicholas  Salter,  Samuel  Stone,  W.  Lawnder,  Robert  Gold  and  others,
wee  did  at  two  sundry  times  see  two  spouts  :  one  of  them  appeared
at  first  sight  little  bigger  then  a  great  Conger,  but  comming  from  the
cloudes  downwards  did,  to  our  sight  appeare,  watering  as  through  a
spout  of  Glasse,  and  fel  with  great  force  upon  the  Sea  in  the  Ports
before  us  :  the  other  did  so  come  downe  and  suckt  up  the  sand  on
Tripoly  banke,  that  to  our  eyes  appeared  in  the  Skies  a  cloud  of  sand.
All  the  whole  time  of  ships  being  in  the  Port,  1  had  a  very  great  sick-
nesse,  &  departed  in  her  for  England,  before  I  had  thorowly  recovered.
Many  deceased  at  that  time  in  Tripoly,  as  I  have  elsewhere  at  large
related.  Where  we  found  such  a  fall,  that  staggerd  the  Mariners,
Master  and  all.

424

JOHN SANDERSON  ad.

i  590.

wee  were  as  high  as  Cape  Saint  Vincent.  The  nineteenth,
wee  were  even  with  Cape  Finister,  from  thence  caped  North
North-west.  The  two  and  twentieth  being  Friday,  we
came  to  the  Soundings,  threw  the  Lead  at  night  and  found
ninetie  two  fathome  ;  then  we  caped  North-east  and  by
East.  The  next  day  in  the  morning  we  found  seventie
fathome,  and  at  noone  fiftie  five.

The  next  day  we  fell  with  Portland,  which  was  the  first
of  England  we  had  sight  of,  then  to  the  Downes,  and  so
to  Gravesend,  from  thence  in  a  Wherrie  to  Black-wall,  so
by  land  to  London,  the  nine  and  twentieth  of  March,
1588.

§. II.

His  second  Voyage  to  Constantinople,  with  other
his  Travells.

He  fourth  of  June  being  Saturday,  I  departed  from
London  in  company  of  Deputie  Edgerton  and
others. Sunday  we  passed  from  Gravesend  in  a

Hamborough  Barke  fraighted  by  the  Ladie  Drurie,  who
in  the  same  was  bound  over  with  her  two  Daughters  and
divers  Attendants  to  Sir  William  Governour  of  Bargen
up  Zone.  Sir  Henry  Palmer  in  a  ship  of  the  Queenes
guarded  the  Barke  to  Flushing,  where  wee  arrived  upon
Munday ;  to  Middleborough  with  the  Deputie  and
others  went  presently,  and  two  dayes  after  had  a  Court
called  on  purpose  to  make  free  my  selfe  and  my  com-
panion Thomas  Calthorpe.  Upon  Thursday  we  departed
thence  and  came  to  Flushing ;  went  aboard  a  small  Barke
that  Evening.  And  in  the  Morning  were  at  Sandwidge,
lodged  at  Knowlton,  Master  Calthorpe  being  sicke,  yet
departed  in  the  morning,  and  were  in  London  on  Saturday
night.  Thus  were  wee  eight  dayes  on  this  Voyage,  and
eight  dayes  after  Thomas  Calthorpe  departed  this  life.

In  September, 1590.  we  set  sayle  in  the  Samaritan  of  [II.ix.1619.]
Dartmouth,  bound  for  the  East  India,  victualled  for  thir-
teene  moneths  at  the  least,  and  well  manned ; John  Davis

425

A.D.
1590.

'  A  little  rich
Reve,  Die/;
and  others  of
Dartmouth
were  Owners,
victualers,  iff
voluntaries,
were  Randall
Cotton,  Jo.
Arundell,
Thomas
Moore,
Edward
Rivers,  I  my
selfe  and
others,  who  all
came  home  by
crosse  and
losse,for  which
our  God
Almighties
mercies,  his
holy  Name  be
ever  magni-
fied.

1 A  strong  and
good  old  ship.

m  Off  and  on
1 1 .  dayes  at
the  mouth  of
the  S freights
of  Giberaltar
before  wee
could  enter.
The  next  yeere
after  a  younger
Master
making  more
speed,  imbayed
the  ship  \3
broke  her,  and
drowned  him-
selfe  with
griefs  and
anger.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Captayne  and  Pilot,  Edward  Reve  f  Master.  About  the
Maderas  we  were  overtaken  with  a  great  storme  ;  in  which
extremitie  we  lost  our  Pinnasse  consort,  but  afterward
met  with  an  English  ship  who  had  saved  our  men.  We
had  before  that  storme  been  in  divers  fights  with  Spaniards,
and  braved  by  a  couple  of  French  at  unawares ;  in  that
Voyage  of  one  hundred  and  five  men  and  boyes  we  lost
only  one  :  a  very  hot  fight  we  had  with  an  Armado  of
Spaine,  she  gave  us  seventeene  great  shot  over  night,  and
in  the  morning  fought  some  foure  or  five  houres,  shee  shot
downe  our  top-mast,  and  thorow  our  sailes  and  ships  fortie
times,  yet  no  hurt  to  any  of  us  in  person,  except  a  poore
fellow  which  was  touched  on  the  legge  with  a  great  stone
shot,  which  shot  rested  in  the  ship :  the  next  day  an  ill
Surgeon  cut  off  the  legge  above  the  knee,  in  which  tor-
ment of  cutting,  sawing  and  searing,  the  poore  Wretch
died  in  his  armes.  This  joly  Spaniard  left  us ;  for  if  he
had  durst  he  might  have  laid  us  aboord  :  with  this  fight
and  the  extreame  storme  we  had  before  passed,  our  Sam-
aritan was  so  crasie  and  leake,  that  all  in  generall  tooke  our
turnes  at  the  Pumpe,  made  foure  or  five  hundred  strokes
in  a  Glasse  for  many  dayes  and  nights  together.  With  the
said  water  we  watered  our  fish,  so  were  we  forced  to  returne
for  England,  where  at  Falmouth  we  arrived  in  February,
and  so  to  Dartmouth,  in  that  Voyage  we  went  ashoare
only  at  Safia,  Santa  Crus,  and  the  Maderas,  as  I  remember.
The  thirteenth  of  September,  1 59 1 .  I  went  out  in  the
1  Tobie,  the  first  of  October  to  Tilburie,  then  to  Lee.
The  fourth  to  Gorend,  wee  departed  thence  the  eighth,
and  arrived  at  Dartmouth,  Munday  the  eleventh.  From
thence  we  set  saile  the  sixteenth,  being  Saturday  the  last
day  of  October,  wee  arrived  at  the  Streights  mouth.  The
eleventh  of  November,  m  we  entred  the  Streights.  The
thirteenth  and  fourteenth,  we  saw  Grand  Maliga,  Velis
Maliga,  Salabrica,  Cape  Negro.  The  five  and  twentieth,
we  came  in  sight  of  Maritima,  the  next  day  of  Sicilia  and
Malta.  The  twentieth  of  December,  we  arrived  in  Cepha-
lania,  there  remayned  six  dayes,  and  came  to  Zant  the

426

JOHN SANDERSON  aj>.

i  591.

thirtieth. The  first  of  Januarie,  we  were  at  Patras  in  the

Moria,  thence  the  Tobie  went  the  thirteenth  to  Zant  for

her  lading. Thursday  the  foure  and  twentieth  of  Febru-

arie,  by  land  we  departed  Petras,  that  night  to  Postigia,

Sunday  Vasilago  and  n  Corinth. Tuesday  at  a  Casale,  and  "Corinth

so  to  Thebes,  which  they  now  call  Tiva.

There  grow abundance  of  Aniseeds, it hath a most  -f^  /

delectable  situation,  so  doth  Corinth  stand  most  gloriously  reai0n  0f  some

where  we  aboad  two  dayes : wee  also  were  in  sight  of  misrule  com-

Athens. Then wee came to Negroponto, where we  mated  going

fraighted  a  little  Turkish  Vessell,  imbarked  °  our  selves  y^l^l anj

and  goods,  and  on  Friday  departed  for  Constantinople,  that  place,-  by

sailed  by  Macedonia,  but  had  no  sight  of  the  Citie  Thessa-  Jeffer,  our

lonica,  it  is  up  in  the  Gulfe  now  called  Salonica,  it  was  the  Chaous,  R.

chiefe  Citie  of  Macedonian  Philip,  Father  of  Great  Alex-  Go!dth'?™'

j  1  ii-  t i i • i a 1  sul  and  Will

ander : then  we  passed  divers  Hands  in  the  Arches,  as  j/^r^e>  j

Taradano  and  others ; were  ashoare  at  Troy,  passed  two  went  before

great  Castles,  called  the  Dardanelli,  and  came  to  Galipoli,  with  the

the  seventh  of  March. Upon  Palme  Sunday  we  arrived  g^^M/eare

in  Constantinople,  where  then  I  remayned  sixe  or  seven  Jmd  was  -n '

yeeres,  in  which  time  I  had  the  view  of  many  Animals,  as  Corinth  Jive

Elephants,  tame  Lions,  tame  spotted  Cats  as  big  as  little  houres  before

Mastiffes,  great  and  small  Deere,  Ro-bucks  tame  ; but  ^0'  cami\,

these  are  brought  out  of  Egypt. The  admirablest  and  rMmM  gmrt  •  ,„

_.  o  to/  r  came  Jirst  into

fairest  beast  that  ever  I  saw,  was  a  JarrafF ,  as  tame  as  a  the  Carvasera

Domesticall  Deere,  and  of  a  reddish  Deere  colour,  white  with  his

brested  and  cloven  footed ; he  was  of  a  very  great  heigth,  Gtamberlake

his  fore-legges  longer  then  the  hinder,  a  very  long  necke,  */aJe/efne„

in  came  the  Chaouse  cut  in  the  arme  a  deepe  wound,  and  Will.  Aldridge  with  his  forehead
wounded;  which  in  the  said  William  was  dressed  for  the  present  by  a  Surgeon  of  Corinth,  so
with  some  satisfaction  to  the  Cadie,  we  were  permitted  to  passe  on  our  Voyage.  °  Consul  R.
Gold,  W.  Aldridge,  J  oh.  Sanderson,  our  goods,  our  Chaouse,  two  other  Seifants  Turkes,  and
two  or  three  Christians,  Greekes,  our  Attendants.  Memorandum,  that  many  Englishmen  old
and  young,  have  in  my  remembrance  turned  Turkes,  as  Benjamin  Bishop,  George  Butler,  John
Ambrose,  and  others,  but  to  turne  Greeke  I  never  heard  of  any  except  that  Consul  at  Petras,
who  did  cause  the  Greeke  Priests  newly  to  baptize  him,  which  they  performed,  and  did  name
him  John  Gold;  being  at  the  very  instant  demanded  {by  an  honest  Englishman)  his  meaning,  his
answere  was,  that  as  he  had  lived  in  credit  amongst  those  Greekes,  so  his  purpose  was  to  be
carried  to  his  Grave  with  credit,  a  very  notable  Whoremaster,  one  of  the  cutters  of  the
Cabina  in  Turkie.

427

A.D.
1591.

p  This  was  at
my  being  there
in  M.  Har-
bornes  time,
before  I  was
sent  to  Cairo.

[II.  ix.  1620.]
eOne  Master
Winchfield  an
ancient
English
Gentleman,
being  then  in
my  company
with  others.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  headed  like  a  Camell,  except  two  stumps  of  home  on
his  head.  This  fairest  Animall  was  sent  out  of  Ethiopia,
to  this  Great  Turkes  Father  for  a  Present ;  two  Turkes
the  keepers  of  him,  would  make  him  kneele,  but  not  before
any  Christian  for  any  money.  An  Elephant  that  stood
where  this  faire  beast  was,  the  keepers  would  make  to
stand  with  all  his  foure  legges,  his  feet  close  together  upon
a  round  stone,  and  alike  to  us  to  bend  his  fore-legges.
Many  things  passed  also  worth  the  noting,  as  the  depos-
ing and  placing  great  Rulers,  the  contention  of  the
Souldiers  many  times,  once  for  their  pay  which  the  Spahies
demanded  in  the  time  of  Sultan  Marrat,  who  not  being
answered,  as  they  desired,  made  an  uproare  in  the  Court,
that  the  Vice-Royes  were  glad  to  hide  themselves  in  the
Turkes  Lodgings  for  feare  of  their  lives  ;  and  most  of
the  Houshold  Servants  of  the  meaner  sort,  came  out  with
Spits,  Tongs,  and  other  Kitchin  tooles  to  end  the  fray,
who  cleered  the  Serraglio  of  the  Spahies :  at  that  broyle
were  slaine  of  all  sorts  p  some  two  hundred  or  more.  Not
long  before  they  had  the  Beglerbegs  head  (whom  the  Great
Turke  especially  loved)  given  them,  which  they  spurned
about  the  Court.

Other  strange  actions  I  could  speake  of,  and  of  their
cruelties,  but  I  am  loth  to  wearie  you  with  many  parti-
culars. Only  the  crueltie  of  that  government  may  be
marked  in  this,  for  at  this  Great  Turke  his  taking  posses-
sion of  the  Empire,  were  strangled  all  his  living  Brethren,
which  were  in  number  nineteene.  They  are  brought
one  by  one  before  him,  and  hee  seeth  them  both  alive  and
dead.  I  did  see  e  them  carried  to  buriall,  the  next  day
after  their  dead  Father.  That  Great  Turke  Sultan  Morat
left  also  foure  or  five  Women  with  Child,  two  of  which
brought  Sonnes ;  who  also  at  their  Birth  were  deprived
of  life ;  the  Daughters  all  live.  It  was  crediblie  reported,
that  hee  had  buried  thirtie  Children  in  his  Life  time,  and
had  at  his  Death  seven  and  twentie  Daughters  living,  so
it  appeareth  hee  was  Father  of  eightie  one  Children.

This  new  King  Sultan  Mahomet,  went  to  the  Warres  in

428

JOHN SANDERSON  **.

1591,

Hungarie  against  the  Christian  Emperour,  the  first  ycerc  of
his  Raigne,  our  Ambassadour  worthy  Edward  Barton,
attended  him  (with  also  an  ancient  Greeke,  a  Galatean
called  Signior  Matteo,  who  had  many  yeeres  beene  Ser-
vant and  chiefe  Interpreter  for  the  Emperours  Ambassa-
dours,)  to  whom  the  Great  Turke  had  before  his  going
presented  two  and  twentie  Christians,  which  had  layne  in
Prison  in  Constantinople  three  yeeres  :  they  were  the  late
Ambassadours  Houshold,  who  had  beene  resident  there
for  the  Christian  Emperour  when  the  Peace  was  broken.
The  Great  Turke  also  gave  Commandement  that  through
his  Countrey,  their  charges  should  bee  defrayed,  and  alike
allowed  foure  Coaches  and  a  Chaouse,  to  conduct  them  to
the  Emperours  Court.  The  chiefest  cause  of  our  Ambas-
sadour his  accompanying  the  Great  Turke,  was,  to  have
concluded  a  Peace  betwixt  those  two  Great  Potentates,  as
formerly  hee  had  done,  betweene  the  Poles  and  the  Great
Turke  deceased  ;  which  had  beene  most  easily  performed,
had  it  pleased  her  excellent  Majestie  so  to  have  com-
manded. The  Ambassadours  absence  was  sixe  moneths,
from  July  to  January,  which  space  I  remayned  his  Deputie
in  Constantinople.

After  the  Ambassadour  was  fully  resolved  to  goe  with
the  Grand  Signior,  some  few  dayes  before  his  departure,
hee  went  with  me  John  Sanderson  to  Hassan  Bassa,
Eunuch,  who  governed  the  Citie  of  Constantinople  in  the
Great  Turkes  absence.  And  taking  his  leave  of  the  sayd
Hassan  Bassa  Vice-roy,  hee  recommended  mee  unto  him,
as  his  Deputie ;  praying  him  so  to  respect  me  in  his
absence.  The  Vizier  promised  all  kinde  respect  and  regard
of  mee ;  saying,  Volo  volo  hosh  Gediet,  Welcome  wel-
come, Hosh  Geldie,  I  will,  I  will,  Elchee  Ambassiater,  and
so  I  kist  his  Hand,  and  then  the  Ambassadour  kist  his
hand,  and  wee  departed  his  presence.

When  the  Great  Turke  went  out  of  the  Citie  towards
the  warres,  it  was  with  wonderfull  great  solemnitie  and
notable  order,  too  long  to  describe  particularly ;  but  I
remember  a  great  number  of  Dogs  led  afore  him  well

429

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

8  Cloth  of manned, and in their  best  g  Apparell ; his  Hawkes  by
Gold  Velvet, Horsemen  also  carryed  in  great  number. Tame  Lyons

scarlet  and  1-1-1,  -ii-n^r  u

Purple  cloth.  ar>d  Elephants,  with  other  Beasts  of  many  sorts,  but  especi-
ally, the  Jarraff  before  spoken  of,  being  Prince  of  all  the
Beasts,  was  led  by  three  chaynes  of  three  sundry  men
stalking  before  him.  For  it  is  the  custome,  that  the  Great
Turke  in  person  going  on  Warfare,  most  or  all  in  generall,
the  chiefe  Men  and  Beasts,  attend  him  out  of  the  Citie :
and  at  his  returne,  it  is  lawfull  for  all  their  Women  both
of  high  and  low  degree,  meane  and  great,  to  meet  him

SeeSu/>.i.S.  without  the  Walls:  at  other  times  the  Women  of  any
account  or  credit,  never  come  in  multitudes  among  Men.
By  a  Letter  dated  in  October  1596.  the  Ambassadour
advised  me  of  all  passed  that  imported  the  taking  of  the
Citie  Agria,  and  after  overthrow  of  the  Christians  Campe.
Copie  of  which  Letter  I  sent  for  England,  to  the  Right
Honourable  her  Majesties  chiefe  Secretarie  Sir  Robert
Cecill.

The  Turke  returned  with  great  Triumph,  entred  at
Adrianople  Gate,  three  or  foure  miles  without  which  Gate,
and  so  along  within  the  Citie  to  the  Gate  of  the  Serraglio,
which  is  at  least  foure  or  five  miles  further,  all  on  both
sides  the  way  as  hee  should  passe  through,  the  people  his
Subjects  (Turkes,  Jewes,  and  Christians)  held  in  length
whole  peeces  of  cloath  of  Gold,  Velvet,  Sattin  and  Dam-
aske,  of  all  sorts  and  colours,  and  for  three  dayes  together
Feasted,  keeping  open  Shops  and  Houses  day  and  night,
in  Joy  of  his  Victories  and  safe  Returne.  Two  or  three
miles  before  his  entrance,  I  did  meete  our  Ambassadour
with  a  fresh  Horse,  and  about  twelve  or  thirteene  atten-
dants :  the  Ambassadour  by  Ebrehim  Bassa,  the  Vice-royes
appointment,  did  stay  in  the  way  to  take  his  leave  of  the
Grand  Signior,  which  was  thus  performed :  Sultan
Mahomet  made  a  stand  with  his  Horse,  and  upon  Horse-
backe,  Hee,  and  the  Ambassadour  saluted,  hee  sate  still,
our  Ambassadour  did  alight  and  kist  his  Hand  ;  then  got
upon  his  Horse,  hee  saluted  ;  the  Great  Turke  re-saluted
him,  saluted  me  also,  and  all  our  Ambassadours  trayne,

43°

JOHN SANDERSON  ad.

1596.

and  so  turned  his  Horse :  and  over  the  Fields  we  came  to
the  Vines  of  Pera,  before  he  was  come  into  Constantinople.
For  the  whole  full  and  fine  discourse  of  the  Citie
Constantinople,  I  referre  to  a  little  Pamphlet  that  was
presented  mee  by  a  Doctor  Jew  Poet,  which  sayd  Discourse
hee  gave  me  in  Italian,  I  immediatly  translated  the  same
into  English,  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  of  August,
1594.  I  gave  it  at  that  time  both  in  Italian  and  English
to  a  friend  Master  Edward  Rivers,  since  which,  the  Copies
have  beene  dispersed,  and  it  may  bee  some  fantasticall  will
attribute  it  to  himselfe  both  Author  and  translater.  For  five
yeeres  past,  one  in  England  required  it  of  mee,  but  I  had
left  the  Copie  amongst  my  papers  at  Constantinople,  where
at  my  last  beeing  I  found  that  scribled  originall  in  English,
but  the  Italian  was  common  amongst  them,  it  hath  begin-
ning on  this  manner.  Paussania  a  Captayne  of  the
Lacedimonians,  &c.  I  have  written  it  againe  in  the  end
of  this  Discourse,  and  alike  followeth  a  true  Relation  of
my  three  Moneths  travell,  from  Constantinople  to  the
Holy  Land,  and  backe  againe  to  Tripoli  Sirria,  over  the
highest  Mount  of  Libanon.  Many  worthy  things  passed  [II.ix.1621.]
in  this  my  long  abode  at  Constantinople.  Amongst  other
I  note  the  extraordinarie  esteeme  was  had  of  the  Ambassa-
dour  afore  named,  with  them  all  in  generall,  both  Chris-
tians, Turkes,  and  Jewes.  By  meanes  chiefly  of  the
Turkes  Mothers  favour,  and  some  money  :  hee  made  and
displaced  both  Princes  and  Patriarches,  befriended  Vice-
royes,  and  preferred  the  suites  of  Cadies  who  are  their
chiefe  Priests  and  spirituall  Justices.  The  Hoggie,  a  very
comely,  grave  and  wise  Turke,  who  was  Sultan  Mahomets
Schoole-master,  (and  I  may  well  say  Counseller)  was  a
very  true  friend,  and  an  assister  of  Master  Barton,  in  all
his  businesse  with  the  Grand  Signior,  and  had  a  Catholike
Roman  Christian  Corrupter  about  him,  a  Consull,  by  name
Paulo  Mariani,  who  was  hanged  by  the  necke  in  his  Con-
suls Robes  at  Grand  Cairo,  under  the  chiefe  Gate  of  the
Citie ;  upon  whom  the  Moores  in  the  morning  had  great
pitie. For  Monsieur  de  Brevis  the  French  Ambassadour,

43i

A.D.

J597-

e Natalia.
Caramania.
Si/icia.
Surria.

PTTRCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

had  procured  the  Execution  to  bee  performed  in  the  night,
to  prevent  the  Moores  who  ever  favoured  Mallem  Paulo
(Master  Paul)  as  they  commonly  called  him.

From  Constantinople,  I  departed  the  three  and  twentieth
of  September,  1597.  having  in  my  time  there  remayning,
beene  at  divers  notablest  places  within  the  Citie,  and  on
all  the  confines  of  the  same,  as  when  I  accompanied  the
Ambassadour  towards  the  Warres,  rid  on  the  way  with
him  some  thirtie  or  fortie  miles.  And  alike  was  often  at
the  Blacke  Sea,  which  is  eighteene  or  twentie  miles  off.
At  the  entrance  of  the  said  Sea,  are  remayning  ruines  of  the
old  Castles  Sestus  and  Abidus ;  but  the  Schollers  of  our
Age  affirme,  those  neere  Troy  ruines,  to  bee  they,  time
having  eaten  out  the  ruines  ;  and  so  the  true  remembrance
of  the  other  too  at  the  very  mouth  of  the  Blacke  Sea,
though  I  was  shewed  a  marke  of  a  peece  of  a  Rocke  upon
Asia  side,  where  the  Lover  was  Drowned  in  swimming
from  Europe  side  to  his  beloved.  And  then  I  say,  in
Anno  1585.  was  there  to  bee  seene  on  each  side,  some
very  old  appearance  of  Castles  foundation  walls,  though
in  a  kinde  as  it  were  covered  with  Earth  and  Grasse,  which
remembreth  to  us  the  Storie  of  Hero  and  Leander.  And
other  two  great  Castles  at  halfe  way,  one  esteemed  the
chiefe  Prison  in  Turkie,  except  the  seven  Towers  within
the  Citie  wall.  I  was  also  at  Colcos  He,  and  other  Hands
thereabout.  And  alike  divers  times  wee  went  over  into
Asia  to  Calcedon,  &c.  At  Calcedon  now  called  Scutari,6
my  selfe  and  attendants  being  five,  well  Horsed  and  a
sumpter  Horse,  there  wee  remayned  two  dayes,  at  Curtail
one,  Gibs  one,  Dill  one,  Giourkie  one,  Isnike  two,  Gini
Shar  two,  Auc  Biuke  one,  Bosuke  one,  Eschi  Sheer  one,
Sidie  Batal  one,  Bajat  one,  Bulvadin  two,  Auke  Shar  five,
Hgin  two,  Guarchi  one,  Casal  one,  Conia  (Iconiam  where
Barnabas  and  Paul  preached)  I  remayned  two  dayes,  Siml
one,  Caribonar  one,  Regli  one,  Uluckislia  one,  Caden-
gighen  one,  Sareshik  one,  Casale  di  Turkie  one,  Adina
two,  Missis,  Tharso  one,  where  Paul  was  borne ;  Court
Colacke  one,  Bellan  one,  Curdi  Casall  one,  Juni  one,  to

432

JOHN SANDERSON

Alepo  one.  Dayes  foure  and  fortie,  in  companie  of  Court
Vizeir,  who  went  to  Governe  in  Alepo,  where  I  remayned
some  three  moneths.  The  one  and  twentieth  of  Februaric,
wee  were  in  Antiochia,  where  wee  beheld  an  admirable
Wall,  edging  up  upon  the  Mountayne  having  very  many
Turrets,  some  say  as  many  as  there  are  dayes  in  the  yeere,
the  River  Orantes  is  at  the  bottome  of  this  Hill,  and  run-
neth close  along  the  nether  part  of  the  Citie  wall.
Entring  in  at  one  of  the  by  gates,  there  is  a  place  of
excellent  Spring  water,  where  many  were  Baptised  that
became  Christians  at  the  f  Apostles  Preaching.

The  fourteenth,  wee  came  to  Alexandretta,  there  are
the  mines  of  an  old  Citie  built  by  Great  Alexander,  the
Turkes  call  it  Scandarone.

The  three  and  twentieth,  wee  departed  thence  in  a  great
Venetian  Ship  called  Navi  Ragazoxa,  and  arrived  in  Ciprus
the  sixe  and  twentieth  of  the  said  February.  At  my  being
in  Ciprus,  I  went  to  the  chiefe  Cities,  Nicosia  which  is  in
the  middest  of  the  Hand,  and  Famagusta  a  very  strong
Citie  and  Port  for  their  Gallies :  before  a  Towne  called
Larnica,  we  rode  with  our  Ship.  At  the  Salinos,*  there  is
the  Church  that  Lazarus  built,  and  likewise  the  Greekes
say,  that  the  Mother  of  Constantine  lyeth  buried  in  a
Mountayne  in  that  Hand,  which  is  called  Santa  Elena.

The  tenth  of  Aprill,  1598.  wee  set  sayle  from  Ciprus  in
the  sayd  Ship,  and  arrived  in  Venice  the  two  and  twentieth
of  the  same.

The  foure  and  twentieth  of  May,  I  departed  from
Venice,  to  Trasino  Castle,  Franco,  Sismon,  Grinio,  Lienico,
Trent,  Alavis,  Enia,  Boldax,  Clusa,  Maols,  Luke  es  Bruke,
Sefield,  Patakerk,  Ambrega,  Sanga,  Lansberg,  Augusta,
now  called  Osburge,  Danower,  Fetling,  Dinkselspill,  Perte,
Herbtshouson,  Martigall,  Pissiche,  Miltiburgh,  River  of
Maine,  Valstat,  Ostum,  Pobohouson,  Franckford,  Ments,
Elfni,  an  Almes  house  Ervels.  Mistorne  a  little  Castle
upon  a  Rocke,  where  at  this  day  they  report  that  the  Bishop
of  Ments  was  devoured  of  Rats,  for  hoording  up  Corne
when  the  Poore  starved  with  want  thereof.  Snikwere,
ix  433  2E

A.D.

1598.

'  There  at  that
place,  some
affirme,  that
the  three
thousand  also,
at  Peters
Sermon,  were
converted  and
Christened  in
that  Spring
water.

*  Where  they

make  great

store  of  Salt.

Fine  white

salt.

Slavonia.

ltalie.

Germanie:

Friesland.

Brabant.

Holland.

Zealand.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1598.

Gesinan,  Rodersen,  Bubard,  Andernough,  Bon,  Cullen  the
thirteenth  of  June,  in  their  chiefe  Church  they  reserve  a
R There  they  Monument  of  the  g  Three  Kings,  so  much  talked  on.
adLbUhGrate  Sons>  Nues'  DruselthorP>  Keserswert,  Ruer  Wert,  Berk,
beyond  the  Wesell,  Emrick,  Sniks  Sconce,  Nemingham,  Tele,  Wer-
quier  behind  a  cam,  Kercam,  Dort,  Viana,  Camfire,  Mlddleborough,
battlement,  Flushing.  The  eight  and  twentieth,  from  thence  imbarked
w  ere  also  I -Jn  a  man  Q]p  Warre  a  Flushinger,  who  set  us  ashoare  in  the

did  see  the ^  ,  .  ,  • 1 r t  1  j

Picture  of Downes  the  nine  and  twentieth  or June,  the  same  day
Christ  " arrived  in  England,  and  so  from  Sandwich  to  London  by

drawne  Land.

naked,

stripped  so  K \\\

artificially  and

just  the  big- The  third  Voyage  of  Master  John  Sanderson  to

nesseofaman,  O -,., «*.».,«.:.,•«.  .VI  .=,

that  it  made  Constantinople.

n '  ?  7epe'  [JBSlRom  London  to  Gravesend,  the  eleventh  of  Feb-

Our  Lads  was Vi  ESftffi  r  .  .....

more  lower  in  EaBPl  ruarie3  lS9°-  *-  "e  fourteenth,  tooke  shipping  in
the  Church,  IKBI  the  Hector,  lay  at  Tilburie  two  dayes.  To  the
an  Image  in  a  Downes  the  seventeenth,  lay  there  eight  dayes,  came  to
bGowneattin  Dartmouth  the  tmr^  °f  March,  rid  there  foure  dayes,  and
ril.ix.1622  "I  came  to  Plimouth  the  eighth.  Set  sayle  three  or  foure
dayes  after,  and  in  May,  1599.  arrived  in  Alexandretta,
having  touched  at  Argier  and  Zant  by  the  way.  In  the
sayd  moneth  of  May  wee  departed,  coasted  all  along  the
North-side  of  Ciprus,  passed  close  by  the  seven  Capes,
came  and  cast  Anchor  at  Roades,  I  went  also  at  this  time
ashoare  there.  Thence  wee  went  and  came  with  the  Ship
a  ground  at  Samos,  the  Hand  where  Esop  was  borne ;  so
sayled  by  Sio  and  Metelin  ;  were  also  a  ground  about
Cape  Janesarie  in  some  danger,  and  with  much  adoe  wee
came  off  at  last,  pulling  the  Ship  off  with  our  Boate  and
skiff  e  at  the  sterne,  by  strength  and  labour  of  the  Marriners.
Having  doubled  that  Cape,  I  tooke  a  small  Barke  and
went  to  Galipoli,  and  thence  to  Constantinople,  where  the
Hector  arrived  about  the  fifth  of  September.  At  her
entrance  the  Port  in  tryumph  discharging  the  Ordnance,
they  lost  a  Man  who  was  parted  in  the  middle,  being  busie

434

JOHN SANDERSON

about  cleansing  a  Peece  in  the  fore-castle.  At  this  my
third  and  last  being  in  Constantinople,  of  one  of  theCoens,
an  ancient  and  very  learned  Jew  Priest,  I  did  with  much
intreatie  and  my  money,  get  a  very  old  Booke  ;  it  was  the
five  Bookes  of  Moses  in  foure  Languages.  I  presented
it  to  my  Brother,  Doctor  Sanderson,  hee  lent  it  Doctor
Barlow,  hee  to  Doctor  Andrewes,  hee  used  it  in  their
Translation  at  Cambridge,  and  did  returne  it  to  Bishop
Barlow.  The  Bishop  dyed,  and  I  thinke  one  Johnson  his
Sisters  sonne  hath  it,  who  as  I  heard  had  the  residue  of
the  Bishops  bookes.

I  went  to  visite  the  Sepulcher  of  that  fore-named  Master
Edward  Barton  late  Ambassadour,  who  lyeth  Interred
(according  to  his  alwayes  desire)  under  an  Olive  Tree,
before  the  entrance  into  the  Monasterie  on  the  top  of
Calcos  He  ;  a  Stone  of  white  Marble  is  layd  upon  him,
Letters  thereon  engraven  of  his  Title  and  Decease.  Other
places  I  went  to  also,  which  I  had  beene  at  in  former  times.
And  some  strange  actions,  other  then  formerly  the  like
had  happened  in  their  most  cruell  Executions,  I  note  not.

Yet  can  I  not  let  passe  to  relate,  that  a  Jewish  woman
of  the  greatest  credit  and  wealth  in  Constantinople,  was
brought  out  of  her  House  and  stabbed  to  Death  in  the
Vice-royes  yard,  thence  by  a  window  in  the  Serraglio  wall
where  the  Grand  Signior,  Sultan  Mahomet  stood  to  see  ;
shee  was  drawne  with  Ropes  to  the  publikest  place  in  the
Citie,  and  there  (betweene  a  Pyramed  piller  erected  by
Theodosius,  and  the  Brasen  tripled  Serpent)  layd  for  the
Dogges  to  eate,  who  did  devoure  her  all  save  her  bones,
sinewes  of  her  legges,  and  soales  of  her  feet.  Her  head  a
had  been  carryed  upon  a  pike  through  the  Citie,  and  alike
her  shamefull  part ;  also  many  small  peeces  of  her  Flesh,
which  the  Turkes  Janizaries  and  others  carried  about  tyed
in  a  little  Pack-thred,  shewing  to  the  Jewes  and  others,  and
in  derision  sayd,  Behold  the  Whoores  flesh ;  one  slice  of
her  I  did  so  see  passe  by  our  doore  in  Galata.  Her
b  eldest  Sonne  the  next  day  in  like  manner  cruelly  stabbed
and  murthered  in the  sayd  Vice-royes  court ; dragged

435

«599«

■  Master
Henry  Lillo,
the  Ambassa-
dour and  my
selfe  went  of
purpose  and
thus  did  see
these  two,
Mother  and
Sonne.
b  He  was  a
goodly  Gentle-
man Jew,  some
few  dayes
before,  I  had
shewed  him
our  Ship,  and
had  talked
with  him  at
his  Mothers
house,  and
Master  Paul
Pinder  and
my  selfe,  were
with  his
Mother,  to
whom  shee
delivered  for
the  Ambassa-
dour, to  send
the  Queen e  a
Stafana,  of
Rabines  from
the  Sultana,
and  another  of
Diamonds
from  her  selfe,
with  teares  in
her  eyes  I  well
remember.

A.D.
1599.

"The  Queene
Mother,  with
the  Grand
Sultana,  and
other  of  the
Grand  Sig-
niors  women,
walking  in
theirSerraglio,
espyed  a
number  of
Boates  upon
the  River
hurrying
together. The
Queene
Mother  sent  to
enquire  of  the

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

thence  and  layd  by  his  Mother,  but  was  so  fat  and  ranke
that  the  Dogges  would  not  seaze  upon  him,  or  else  they
were  satiate  with  the  Womans  flesh  the  day  before,  who
was  a  short  fat  trubkin.  So  together  with  his  Mothers
bones  the  next  day  was  this  body  burned  in  that  place.
Her  second  Sonne  became  Turke  to  save  his  life ;  so
would  his  dead  Brother,  if  hee  could  have  had  the  favour.
The  third  Sonne  a  young  youth,  their  wrath  being
appeased,  they  permitted  to  live.  This  was  an  act  of  the
Spahies  in  spite  of  the  Great  Turkes  Mother ;  for  by  the
hands  of  this  Jew  woman  shee  tooke  all  her  Bribes,  and
her  Sonnes  were  chiefe  Customers  of  Constantinople  ;  who
tooke  all  the  gainefull  businesse  into  their  owne  hands,
doing  what  they  listed.  The  Mother  and  Children  were
worth  Millions,  which  all  went  into  the  Great  Turkes
Cofers.  After  this  their  Mala  Pasqua,  for  it  was  at  their
time  of  Passeover,  the  chiefest  Feast  of  the  Jewes.

After  this,  the  Spahies  had  a  great  fling  at  the  Head  of
the  Capie  Agha,  who  was  the  Great  Turkes  chiefe  Servant
and  Favourite,  but  by  meanes  partly  of  the  Admirall
Sigallogli,  alias  Sinan  Bassa,  Vizeir,  and  fiftie  thousand
Duckets  of  money  amongst  them,  they  were  for  that  time
pacified.  But  since  my  comming  away  it  is  written  mee,
that  they  have  got  his  Head  and  the  Heads  of  one  two  or
three  more,  and  forced  the  Grand  Signior  to  come  foorth
and  see  the  Execution  done.  I  thinke  not  good  heere  as  I
said  before,  to  note  their  Crueltie  in  sundrie  sorts  of
Executions,  yet  some  I  cannot  let  passe.  Their  usuall
punishment  for  Adulterous  women,  is  binding  in  a  Sacke
and  so  throw  them  into  the  Sea.  Seven  I  have  seene  so
used  one  Morning,  in  the  time  that  the  Eunuch  Hassan
Bassa  governed  Constantinople,  when  the  Great  Turke  was
at  the  Warres.  But  for  such  crueltie  and  other  actions,
the  c  Queene  Mother  got  his  Head  at  her  Sonnes  returne.

matter;  who

was  told  that  the  Vizier  did  Justice  upon  cer tabic  Chabies,  that  is  Whoores.  Shee  taking
displeasure  sent  word,  and  advised  the  Eunuch  Bassa,  that  her  Sonne  had  left  him  to  Governe
the  Citie,  and  not  to  devoure  the  Women ;  commanding  him  to  looke  well  to  the  other  businesse,
and  not  to  meddle  any  more  with  the  Women,  till  his  Masters  returne.

436

JOHN SANDERSON  ad.

1599-

The  commonest  Death  for  men  is  Gaunshing  ; which  is,  [II.ix.K

to  be  stripped  into  their  Linnen  breeches,  with  their  hands
&  feet  bound  all  foure  together  at  their  backs,  and  so
drawne  up  with  a  rope  by  a  pullie  upon  the  Gallowes,  and
let  fall  upon  a  great  Iron  hooke  fastned  to  a  lower  crosse
Barre  of  the  Gallowes,  most  commonly  lighting  upon  their
flanke  and  so  through  their  thigh,  there  they  hang  some-
times talking  a  day  or  two  together,  but  if  they  bee
Gaunched  through  the  belly  and  backe,  then  are  they  dead
in  two  or  three  houres.  Thus  they  use  their  common
Theeves  at  Constantinople.  In  Cairo  and  other  parts,
they  doe  Stake  them,  a  most  cruell  Death,  yet  speedie  or
lingring  as  they  list  to  execute.  But  Hanging  by  the
necke  they  use  in  a  favour  to  any  offender  who  meriteth
Death,  yet  sometimes  cutting  downe  for  Dogges  to  eate.
They  strangle  with  a  Bow-string  their  Brethren,  Bassaes
and  other  Great  men.  But  for  their  Religious  men  false
Judges,  their  Law  is  to  pash  them  all  to  peeces  in  a  stone
Morter  with  woodden  Mallets.  And  for  their  false  Wit-
nesses, they  are  set  upon  an  Asse,  with  their  faces  towards
the  tayle  which  they  hold  in  their  hands,  and  the  Inwards
of  a  Bullocke,  powred  upon  and  bound  about  them,  and
so  ride  they  through  the  Citie.  And  for  any  found  Drunke
in  the  time  of  their  Ramasan  (which  is  a  Fast  they  have
one  whole  Moone  in  the  yeere)  their  Law  is,  to  melt  a
Ladle  full  of  Lead  and  powre  it  downe  their  throats ;
(Their  manner  of  Fast,  is  to  eate  nor  drinke  any  thing,
neither  Water  nor  other,  untill  they  see  a  Starre  appeare
in  the  Evening,  and  then  they  may  begin  and  eate  till
Morning.)  Any  chiefe  Officer  belonging  to  their  Artilerie
if  hee  bee  a  Thiefe,  is  bound  to  the  mouth  of  a  brasse  d  Tophana,  is
Piece  and  so  shot  into  the  Sea ;  thus  I  saw  one  used  d  at  t,et.r  r£ '
Tophana.  And  alike  in  my  time,  a  Jamoglaine,  found  where  is  a
Drunke  in  their  Fast,  was  used  as  I  have  reported.  I  did  great  Wharfe
see  upon  the  Gaunch  Ussine  Bassa,  the  Traytor  that  first  t0  take_  Boate
rose  in  Asia ;  but  hee  for  a  more  crueltie  had  from  each  f;  u  u
shoulder  bone  a  muskell  taken  out,  in  presence  of  the  Rapha?hmak
Bench  of  Vizeirs,  the  Great  Turke  also  looking  out  at  a  and  Garlata.

437

A.D.

*599-
c  To  see  this,
Master  Lillo
the  Ambassa-
dour,  and  my
selfe  went
purposely  and
did  see  him  on
the  Gaunch,
being  siarke
dead.

1 He  strangled
Ferrat  Bassa,
in  the  seven
Tozvers,  first,
after  hee  had
wakened  the
Bassa,  he
shewed  a  little
testimony  of
his  authoritie,
then  turnes  the
wrong  side  of
the  Carpet
upwards,  so
the  Bassa  sayes
his  Salah,  then
with  a  boxe  on
the  eare  hee
astonishes  him,
and  the
Jemoglans
come  in  pre-
sently and
strangle  him,
the  Bustangi
Bassi  found
but  sixtie
Chequins  in
his  pocket,  and
so  thence
departed.
SI  have  often
heard  them
upon  the
water,  now

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Lattice  over  their  heads.  By  reason  of  that  torment  he
died  presently  upon  the  Gaunch,  being  led  from  the  Ser-
raglio  halfe  a  mile  or  more  before  hee  was  put  thereon.6
Not  long  before  that,  a  Christian  Tributarie  Prince  called
Stephano  Vivoyda,  being  deposed  of  the  Great  Turke,
after  hee  had  enjoyed  the  Princedome  a  yeere ;  by  malice
of  some  Great  men  who  prevayled  with  the  Grand  Signior,
was  brought  to  the  Gaunch,  ledde  of  the  Bustangi  Bassi.

This  Bustangi  Bassi  is  a  man  of  account  about  the
Turke,  and  the  great,  but  not  the  common  Executioner
for  the  Turke  imployes  him  in  strangling  f  Vice-royes ;
throwing  by  night  rebellious  Souldiers  into  the  Sea,  and
such  like.  Chiefe  Gardner  is  his  Office,  having  thousands
Jamoglans  and  their  Governours  at  his  command  :  hee
keepeth  the  Caiks,  and  alwayes  steereth  when  the  Great
Turke  goeth  upon  the  water,  whose  Caikes  are  most  rich
and  beautifull  to  behold,  the  poope  all  Ivorie,  Ebonie,  or
Sea-horse  teeth,  mother  of  Pearle  and  Gold,  set  with  all
manner  of  precious  Stones.  To  row  him  hee  hath  eightie
chosen  men,  two  and  two  at  an  Oare,  twentie  Oares  on  a
side,  all  in  white  Shirts  and  red  Caps,  coloured  Cloath
shackshers  Breeches,  Cordivan  leather  coloured  shooes,  who
often  in  their  rowing  barke  like  g  Dogges  ;  the  reason  I
know  not,  except  it  bee  when  they  heare  him  talke  (to  the
Bustangi  Bassi  who  sits  at  the  rudder)  that  they  dare  not
hearken  to  his  talke.  His  Court  of  Dwarfes  and  Dumme
men,  alwayes  follow  (except  the  very  principall  who  are

with  him)  in  another  Caike ; and  many  times  also  his
Women.

Now  to  the  Prince  I  spoke  of ;  this  poore  Prince  in-
treated  for  life  at  the  place  of  Execution.  The  Bustangi
Bassi  told  him,  that  if  hee  would  become  Turke,  hee  should
see  what  hee  would  doe  for  him.  Whereupon  hee  turned,
and  uttered  to  such  effect  the  words  h ;  being  content
rather  then  dye,  to  bee  Turke ;  which  they  call  Mussul-
man. Which  done,  this  cruell  Dog  told  him,  that  hee  was

and  then  between  times,  many  of  them  say,  Bough,  boughwahe,  bough,  bough,  boughwahe,  &c.  and
then  pull  some  fete  strokes,  and  tut  againe. h  Allah,  allah,  ill  lalak,  &c. Being  a  Mussulman.

438

JOHN SANDERSON  a.d.

1602.

glad  hee  would  dye  in  the  right  Beliefe,  and  therefore,

whereas  hee  should  have  beene  Gaunched,  now  he  shall

bee  but  Hanged  by  the  necke. Whereat  the  poore  soulc

presently  repented,  and  cryed  often  and  aloud  upon  Christ,

and  bad  all  witnesse  that  hee  dyed  a  Christian.

Here  I  leave  them  to  their  cruelty.  Now,  the  four-
teenth of  May,  1 60 1.  I  departed  from  Sidon,  in  the  ship
Mermaid,  with  my  Voyage  to  Damascus,  and  the  holy
Land,  and  so  over  the  highest  Mount  of  Libanus,  to
Tripoly  ;  being  just  three  moneths.  I  leave  to  bee  seene  in
that  my  discourse :  At  Tripoly  for  passage  I  remayned
untill  the  sixteenth  of  Februarie ;  in  which  time  our
people  of  the  Trojan  passed  some  trouble  in  that  bad
governed  place.  Our  men  of  the  ship  Trojan,  were  most
of  them  imprisoned  in  Tripoly  Jayle  the  Castle ;  and  five
were  in  great  hazard  to  have  beene  executed :  for  the
Emiers  people  accused  them  to  have  robbed  a  Carami-
sall  of  the  Emers,  of  Sope  and  other  merchandise  :  but  as
God  would  have  it,  the  Cadie  of  Tripoly  being  a  Green-
head,  that  is  one  (a  holy  man)  of  the  Parentage  of
Mahomet  their  Prophet :  who  came  Passenger  with  me  to
Sidon  (in  the  Mermaid)  from  Constantinople,  he  and  his
having  beene  well  entreated  in  that  Voyage,  together  with
my  very  often  and  earnest  solicitation,  did  to  his  utmost
power  favour  our  people  so  effectually,  that  every  one  of
them  were  freed,  without  further  harme,  from  those  false
accusing  Moores.

The  tenth  day,  the  ship  Trojan  was  cast  away  upon
the  Rockes  in  the  Road  of  Tripoly  by  boysterous  billowes,
that  broke  her  anchors,  and  shov'd  her  on  the  shoare.
The  sixteenth  I  departed  in  the  Edward  Bonaventure,  came
to  Scandaron  the  nineteenth;  from  thence  the  fourteenth  [II. ix.  1624.]
of  May,  1602.  to  Limiso  in  Ciprus,  the  seven  and  twen-
tieth ;  the  one  and  thirtieth  wee  parlied  with  two  great
Ships  Spaniards,  and  two  Frigots ;  they  durst  not  fight,
but  said  they  were  of  Malta.  The  seventh  of  June,  we
espied  seven  Gallies,  which  we  imagined  to  be  Spaniards
bound  for  Scandaron  :  now,  we  were  as  high  as  the  seven

439

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1602.

Capes  the  eighth,  and  met  thereabouts  the  Samuel.  The
tenth,  wee  passed  by  Rhodes :  Scarpanto,  the  eleventh  :
Candia,  the  twelfth  :  Cape  Sapientia  in  the  Moria,  the  five
and  twentieth  :  Stranalia  an  Hand,  the  sixth  of  July  :  at
Zant  the  eighth  wee  arrived  :  from  thence  the  fifth  of
August  in  the  Cherubin,  to  Corfu  the  fourteenth  :  from
thence  the  sixe  and  twentieth  in  Istria :  the  one  and  thir-
tieth Ottrenta  :  the  seventh  of  September,  Rouina,  Pirensa,
Cittanova,  an  old  walled  Towne  at  the  end  of  the  Gulfe  :
the  eighth  of  September  in  Venice.

The  fifteenth,  I  departed  to  Castle  Franco,  Carpanet,
Grenio,  Burgo,  River  Trent,  Neus,  Nimarke,  passed
Ladise  the  River,  Bulsano,  Clusa,  Sterching,  Matara,
Churla,  River  Tine,  Mitebant,  Ambergam,  Sandar,  Stadell,
River  Ligh,  Osburgh,  alias  Augusta,  Susmerhausen,
Leibham,  Olme,  Getsingen,  Blochenu,  Stuchert,  Diefen-
brunt,  Almatingen,  Ratstat,  Litstinhal,  Strosburge,  Galsen-
burch,  Caufman,  Blanhenburch,  Luncuil,  Portadi,  Saint
Nicolo-Nantes,  Tull,  Saint  Tobin,  Barloducke,  Tanhuer,
Russemason,  Salon,  Fonte,  Effael,  Momil,  Butchier,
Fuerti,  Sant  Giovan,  Marne,  Meaw,  Paris.  Dico  Paris
the  nineteenth  of  October.  From  Paris  to  Saint
Denis,  to  Puntoys,  the  River  Alnais.  The  twen-
tieth, to  Maine,  Equie.  The  one  and  twentieth,  to
Roan,  to  Deepe,  the  two  and  twentieth.  The  three  and
twentieth,  from  thence  in  the  Vantgard  of  the  Queenes.
The  foure  and  twentieth,  to  Dover  ;  from  thence  at  eleven
a  clocke  in  the  night.  In  London  the  five  and  twentieth
being  Monday,  at  foure  a  clocke  in  the  after-noone.  For
all  which  the  Almightie  God  bee  magnified.

440

A DISCOURSE OF CONSTANTINOPLE  a.d.

1594.

§.  mi.

A  Discourse  of  the  most  notable  things  of  the
famous  Citie  Constantinople :  both  in  ancient
and  late  time.

Ausania  a  Captaine  of  the  Lacedemonians,  wandring  Read  hereof
through  the  world  with  his  people,  seeking  where  Strabo  lib.  7.
he  might  settle  himselfe,  of  the  Oracle  of  Apollo
in  Delfos  it  was  answered,  that  they  should  make  their
abode  over  against  the  blinde,  understanding  thereby  the
Magares,  who  had  not  the  fore-sight  to  take  so  faire  a
situation  as  they  had  in  Europe,  fertile  and  good ;  but
built  in  Asia  Calcedonia,  that  now  is  called  Scutari ;  heere
then  stayed  Pausania  with  his  Calcedonians,  663.  yeeres
before  the  comming  of  Christ,  (Tullio  Hostillio  remayn-
ing  in  Rome)  building  at  that  time  a  little  Citie,  which  hee
named  Bizantio  ;  whether  it  were  as  some  say,  for  the  two
Seas  it  hath,  or  according  to  others,  of  a  Captaine  so  named.
In  the  beginning,  this  was  a  very  small  thing,  as  others  of
small  time  were  wont  to  be,  subject  once  to  the  Lacede-
monians, founders  thereof ;  and  another  time  to  the
Athenians :  it  flourished  in  short  time  with  the  felicitie  of
the  Gountrey  in  such  sort,  that  Philip  King  of  Macedon,
Father  of  Alexander  the  Great,  being  in  love  with  her
beauty  and  riches,  resolved  with  himselfe  to  conquere  the
same  :  laying  siege  thereto  many  dayes,  and  could  not  take
it :  notwithstanding  that  hee  enterprised  it  with  a  great
and  chosen  Hoast ;  with  whom  encountred  Leon  Sophista,
a  man  of  Bizantio,  who  said  unto  him  :  Tell  mee,  Philip,
what  injurie  hast  thou  received  of  Bizantio,  that  in  such
fury  thou  art  moved  to  warre  against  it?  I  have  not
(answered  Philip)  of  thy  Citie  had  any  injurie  that  pro-
voketh  mee,  but  because  it  is  the  fairest  Citie  of  Thracia,
being  enamoured  therewith,  moved  me  to  conquere  it.
Those  that  be  in  love  (answered  Leon)  and  would  of  their
Beloved  bee  loved,  with  sweet  Musike,  Gifts,  and  such
like,  doe  seeke  to  obtayne ; and  not  with  their  Armies

441

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

1594.

and Warre to damnifie them. Philip in conclusion
departed  without  taking  it.

The  same  went  forward  prosperously,  and  in  processe
of  time  was  augmented  with  buildings  and  riches,  in  such
sort,  that  then  it  passed  all  the  Cities  of  Asia,  and  in
fertilitie  was  equall  to  the  fairest  of  Europe.  Amongst
the  beautifullest  things,  it  had  goodly  to  be  seene,  and
most  worthie  to  be  praised  were  the  walls,  the  stones
whereof  they  brought  from  Milesio,  not  any  of  which
were  carved  or  graven,  but  sawed  in  manner  of  plankes.
This  caused  that  the  walls  being  of  many  stones,  notwith-
standing appeared  to  be  but  one.  And  the  Citie  increased
untill  the  time  of  Severo  the  Emperour,  that  having  pos-
session thereof  the  Tyrant  Pesenio  (the  Blackmoore  his
mortall  enemie)  the  sayd  Emperour  was  moved  to  goe  and
besiege  it :  hee  kept  siege  thereto  three  yeeres,  in  the  end
they  were  constrayned  through  hunger  to  render  to  the
discretion  of  the  Romanes,  which  was  such,  that  after  they
had  slayne  all  the  Men  of  warre  and  Magistrates,  they
ruinated  the  famous  walls  from  the  top  to  the  bottome.

Constantme  \^  remayned  in  this  calamitie  untill  the  yeere  315.  that

Constantine  the  Emperour  (surnamed,  the  Great)  was
minded  to  transport  the  Seat  of  the  Empire  of  Rome  to
the  East,  to  the  end  that  with  the  more  facilitie  he  might

[II. ix. 1625.]  bridle  the  untamed  Persians  and  Parthians,  that  hourely
rebelled  :  and  for  that  Rome  was  so  farre  off,  the  Emper-
ours  could  not  come  so  speedily,  to  force  them  to  order.
After  they  had  searched  divers  places  to  this  effect,  and
in  some  began  to  build :  they  were  still  diswaded  by
dreames,  untill  in  the  end  they  came  to  Calcedonia  (which
as  before  I  have  said  is  Scutary)  who  having  now  chosen
and  designed  the  place,  certaine  Egles  (as  writeth  Zonora
a  Greeke  Author)  flying  thereabout  tooke  in  their  bills
pieces  of  the  wood  of  the  builders,  and  hovering  about
the  Streight  of  Hellispont :  they  let  them  fall  neere  to  the
ruinated  Bizantio,  of  the  which  Constantine  being  advised
translated  the  builders  from  Calcedonia :  and  taking-  it  to
be  the  will  of  the  Divine  power,  and  for  good  lucke,  well

442

A  DISCOURSE  OF  CONSTANTINOPLE  a.».

1594-

liking  also  the  marvellous  situation,  hee  compassed  and
enclosed  in  one  circuit  seven  most  pleasant  Hills,  imitating  Seven  Hits.
Rome  which  hath  so  many)  building  a  wall  about,  of
length,  thicknesse,  and  fairenesse,  one  of  the  famousest
in  the  world,  with  all  things  needfull,  adorned  and  fur-
nished like  unto  a  Fortresse ;  the  forme  thereof  Triangle,
two  parts  washed  on  with  the  Sea,  and  the  other  compassed
with  Land.

Hee  erected  also  many  high  Towers,  built  many
sumptuous  Temples,  and  adorned  it  with  infinite  other
magnificall  buildings  publike  and  private,  commanding  by
publike  Edict  all  Princes  of  the  Empire,  that  every  one
should  build  either  Palace,  or  some  sumptuous  and  splen-
dent other  Monument,  after  which  for  the  greater  adorn-
ment, hee  caused  to  bee  brought  from  Rome  divers
memorable  Antiquities,  and  amongst  the  rest  the  most
famous  Palladius  of  old  Troy,  which  hee  caused  to  be  set
in  an  open  place  that  was  called  Placote,  and  the  high
Piller  of  Porfido  (which  is  a  kinde  of  hard  Stone)  in  the
same  place  was  erected.  At  the  side  whereof  was  planted
an  Image  of  Brasse  in  likenesse  of  Apollo,  which  was  of
unmeasurable  greatnesse,  in  whose  stead  hee  would  have
his  name  written  thereon.  So  greatly  was  increased  the
adornment  and  beautie  therof,  that  not  without  merit  it
might  have  beene  called  another  Rome.  The  old  Writers
which  saw  it  in  the  flower,  rather  Judged  it  a  dwelling  for
the  Gods,  then  an  habitation  for  earthly  Emperours.

Constantine  named  it  New  Rome,  but  the  peoples  voyce  New  Rome.
prevayled,  which  called  it  alwayes  after  the  Emperours
name  Constantinople,  the  which  his  Successors  daily
adorned,  and  amongst  the  sightliest  Ornaments,  was  the
most  proud  Palace  of  the  publike  Librarie,  which  contayned
above  120000.  chosen  written  Bookes.  In  the  middest
of  which  Librarie,  there  was  the  Guts  of  a  Dragon  in  Librarie.
length  above  one  hundred  and  twentie  foote,  upon  them
written  in  Letters  of  Gold  Homers  Iliads.  There  were
many  other  worthy  things  in  divers  places  of  the  Citie ;
as  the  Nimphs  Grove,  the  Market-place  of  Metall,  with  Nimpfo  grove.

443

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1594.

infinite  others.  There  was  also  most  famous  Images,  as
of  Juno,  Samo,  Minerva,  Lindo,  Venus,  Gnido,  in  such
sort  that  all  Strangers  who  came  to  it,  full  of  admiration
were  astonied  at  the  beautie  thereof,  reputing  it  a
coelestiall  thing.

It  suffered  divers  fortunes  under  the  Greekish  Emper-
ours  many  yeeres,  insomuch  that  through  their  disgraces
it  went  by  little  &  little  declining ; so  that  it  came  to  be

Frankes.  subject  to  the  French  and  Venetian,  in  company,  the  space

of  five  and  fiftie  yeers,  and  in  the  end  by  the  Illustrious

Paka/ogie.  familiePalealogaGenouesi,  was  brought  out  of  their  hands.
Untill  long  after  by  a  long  Siege,  in  the  yeere  1453.  the
nine  and  twentieth  of  May,  it  came  into  the  hands  of  the

Ottaman.  most  mightie  House  of  Ottaman,  and  was  taken  by  the
Great  Sultan  Mahomet  the  second,  the  eight  Lord  of
Turkes,  1 1 90.  yeeres,  little  more  or  lesse  from  the  time
that  it  was  built  of  Great  Constantine.

It  is  observed  of  the  Writers,  that  the  first  founder  was
called  Constantine,  and  his  Mother  Hellen.  Likewise  hee
that  lost  it  Constantine,  the  Sonne  of  Hellen.  Within
the  which,  Time,  the  destroyer  with  his  true  Teeth,  one,
Mars  with  his  Sword  another,  the  ordinary  Pestilence  and
continuall  Fires,  divers  Earthquakes,  and  many  over-flow-
ings  which  it  hath  alwayes  had,  hath  brought  it  to  such  a
passe,  that  now  there  is  not  remayning  of  so  many  Antiqui-
ties, other  then  scarce  the  name  of  Constantinople.  And
for  conclusion,  to  say  thereof  that  which  remayneth,  the
Citie  is  scituate  in  the  Province  of  Thracia,  being  fertile
and  mightie  in  Armes.  Insomuch,  that  it  hath  of  Old
time  beene  called  the  Countrey  of  Mars.  It  is  in  the
Straight  of  Helespont  in  Europe,  which  is  distant  four-
teene  miles  from  Calcidonia  (now  Scutarie)  built  over
against  Asia.  At  the  Point  or  Sea  Euxina,  called  the
Great  or  Blacke  Sea,  where  Ovid  named  it  Port  of  the  two

Latitude  45. Seas, being  in  45. degrees  of  Latitude,  and  in 56. of

degrees  Longi-  Longitude.

The  mightie  Princes  of  the  House  of  Ottaman,  who
wanne  it  of  the  Greekes,  having  destroyed  all  the  Temples

444

A DISCOURSE OF CONSTANTINOPLE

A.D.
1594.

and  famous  Buildings,  with  their  Churches,  Sepulch-
&c.  They  have  given  it  another  sort  of  ornament  build-
ing them  on  the  top  of  the  seven  Hills  within  the  Citic.
On  the  first  Hill  is  to  bee  seene,  beginning  from  the  West  Pint  Hill.
towards  the  Port  of  Andranople,  a  fragment  standing  in
memorie  of  the  old  Emperiall  Palace  with  certayne
Galaries,  wast  roomes,  and  pillers  within  it  selfe,  doth  well
shew  the  great  power  of  Time,  the  destroyer  and  over-
thrower  or  all,  that  a  Prince  of  the  world,  his  Palace  is
now  become  a  Lodge  for  Elephants,  Panthars,  and  other
Beasts.  Hard  by  that  Gate  in  the  South  street,  is  a
Church  newly  built  by  the  Qyeene,  Mother  of  this  present
Sultan  Murat,  the  same  is  little  but  faire  and  finely  con-
trived.

On  the  second  Hill,  was  the  Temple  and  Palace  of  the  Second  Hill.
Patriarke  of  Constantinople,  a  thing  worthy  the  memorie,
where  was  buryed  in  Chests  of  fine  Marble,  most  of  the
Christian  Emperours  ;  but  about  foure  or  five  yeeres  since,
it  is  reduced  into  a  Church  as  now  may  be  seene.

The  third  and  highest  Hill,  hath  upon  it  the  Church
and  magnificate  Sepulcher  of  the  Great  Sultan  Mahomet
the  second,  that  tooke  the  Citie  from  the  last  and  unfortu-
nate Greeke  Constantine,  a  building  worthy  of  admiration
chiefly  at  these  times,  in  which  the  Turkes  are  more  prac-
tique,  then  in  those  times  when  matters  were  more  grosse
and  rusticall.  Marvellous  is  the  greatnesse  and  magnifi-
cence of  it  being  made  in  similitude  of  the  Sophia,  and
hath  about  it  one  hundred  Houses  covered  with  Lead  (of  a
round  cube  fashion)  ordayned  to  receive  Strangers  and
Travellers  of  what  Nation  or  Religion  soever  they  be,
where  they  may  rest  (as  alike  at  other  Churches)  with  their
Horses  and  Servants,  three  dayes  together  if  they  please,
and  have  their  charges  borne,  not  paying  any  thing  for
their  owne  and  servants  dyet.  Besides,  there  are  without
the  circuit  of  the  Church,  other  one  hundred  and  fiftie
Lodgings  for  the  poore  of  the  Citie,  unto  whom  they  give
to  eate,  and  to  every  one  of  them  in  money  one  Asper  a
day. It  hath  also  a  place  where  they  give  Sirrop  and

445

[II.ix.1626.]
Third  Hill.
Mahometi
Sepulchre  and
Hospital/.

A.D.
1594.

Fourth  Hill.

Fifth  Hill.

Sixth  Hill.

Seventh  Hill.
Temple  of
Sancta  Sophia
described.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Medicines  of  free  cost  to  all  that  demand,  &  another
for  government  of  the  Mad  people.  The  sayd  Sultan
Mahomet  left  for  the  maintenance  hereof  sixtie  thousand
Duckets  yeerely  rent  in  that  time,  which  now  doth  import
above  two  hundred  thousand,  for  they  have  allowance  of
the  rents  of  Sofia  ;  to  which  also  besides  other  revenue
belongeth  the  Basistans  and  in  a  manner  all  the  principall
shops  of  the  Citie,  even  untill  yee  come  to  the  Serraglio
of  the  Great  Turke,  which  payeth  Rent  thereto  1001.
Aspers  per  diem.

The  fourth  Hill  hath  upon  it  the  Church  and  Sepulchre
of  Sultan  Selim,  Father  of  Sultan  Soliman,  in  the  same
forme  and  order  as  the  others  are  ;  a  Building  rather  firmer
then  other  wayes.  The  fift  Hill  hath  the  Church  and
Sepulchre  of  Sultan  Bajazet,  Father  of  the  above  named
Selim,  with  a  great  Piaza  (a  void  place)  which  is  the
spaciousest  belonging  to  any  their  Churches,  and  most
frequented  by  the  Turkes.  The  sixt  Hill  hath  the  mar-
vellous Church  and  Sepulchre  of  the  Triumphant  and
Invincible  Sultan  Soliman,  a  Building  worthy  of  such  a
Monarch,  in  the  best  and  most  traffiqued  place  of  the  Citie  ;
which  passeth  in  greatnesse,  workmanship,  Marble  Pillars,
and  Riches  more  then  Kingly,  all  the  other  Churches  of
the  Emperours  his  Predecessors ;  a  Worke  which  meriteth
to  be  matched  with  the  seven  Wonders  of  the  World.

The  seventh  and  last  Hill  hath  the  sumptuous  Temple
of  Santa  Sophia,  founded  by  Justinian  the  fifteenth  Em-
perour  of  the  East,  in  the  yeere  five  hundred  and  thirtie.
It  was  a  Building  of  greatnesse,  workmanship,  beautie,
and  riches  incomparable,  which  it  is  said  hee  made  to  match
the  Building  of  the  Temple  of  Salomon.  In  time  past
this  tooke  a  great  part  of  the  Citie,  the  centre  of  which
Temple  is  made  round  in  a  Cube,  like  the  Pantheo  of
Rome,  which  Agrippa  built ;  as  that  was,  so  this  top  is
round,  but  much  more  large  and  high,  and  there  are  two
rankes  of  very  great  Marble  Pillars,  all  of  one  colour  and
of  such  thicknesse,  that  two  men  can  scarce  fathome  one.
Then  there  are  another  order  more  higher,  and  not  so  long

446

A DISCOURSE OF CONSTANTINOPLE  a.d.

*  594-
nor  thicke,  that  holdeth  up  the  Cube,  the  which  is  made
within  with  great  Art,  after  the  Mosaicall  resemblance
with  Gold  and  Azure,  the  inside  of  the  Temple  is  all
implastered,  and  over  wrought  with  great  Tables  of
Porfido,  Serpentino,  and  Marble  of  divers  colours ;  and
the  cloysters  round  about  are  of  like  vaulting  and
workmanship,  all  singular  faire,  and  beautifull,  more  then
ordinary,  but  of  the  Pictures  of  all  sorts  (as  the  painted
Images)  the  Turkes  have  scraped  out  the  eyes.  The
covering  on  the  out-side  is  of  Lead,  the  gates  (which  have
beene  the  fairest  in  the  World)  of  fine  Metall  of  Corinth.

It  was  in  the  time  of  the  Greekish  Emperors,  the  most  The  quondam
rich,  perfect,  and  sumptuous  Temple,  not  only  of  the  East,  s°rie'
but  of  all  the  World ; for  there  were  one  hundred  gates,
and  it  was  more  then  a  mile  about,  compassing  the  houses
of the Canons, Priests, and others ; it had 300000.
Duckets  yeerely  Rent. There  is  now  the  Sepulchre  of  Seltm
Sultan  Selim  the  Second,  Father  of  this  present  Sultan  %phfr^e  and
Morat,  his  Church  for  want  of  place  he  caused  to  be  made
in  Adrianopoli,  which  is  also  a  sumptuous  thing.

Upon  one  of  the  corners  of  the  Citie  (a  point  at  the
mouth  of  the  streight  that  divideth  Europe  and  Asia)  on
the Promontorio, called of the Ancients Christophori,
(which  is  as  much  to  say,  Lord  of  Gold)  a  name  that  who-
soever gave  it,  peradventure  did  foresee  as  much  as  now
is  inclosed  in  the  bosome  thereof,  and  of  the  Greekes  called
(Saint  Demetrio)  is  the  admirable  Habitation  (Seraglio) Seragh°-
of  the  Grand Signior, that hath  beene  in time past  a  f/r^ee  *  e
Monasterie  of  Monkes  of  the  said  Sophia,  and  is  foure  Treatise.
miles  about  compassed  round  with  a  high  Vault,  and  very
faire  Towres  built  by  great  Mahumet  the  Second,  ampli-
fied and  decked  by  all  his  Successors  ; it  is  so  replenished
with  brave  Palaces,  faire  Gardens,  Marble  Cisternes,  fine
Fountaynes,  sumptuous  Banias ; that  it  were  an  unwise
part  to  describe  them,  especially  in  regard  that  this  present
Sultan  Morat,  hath  begunne  so  magnifically  to  replenish
it,  for  he  alone  hath  built  therein  more  then  all  his  Pre-
decessors together,  and  particularly  he  hath  beautified  with

447

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1594.

two  faire  Lodgings,  or  as  we  may  say  Banqueting
Houses,  which  they  call  Chouskes,  the  top  coverings  of
Lead,  but  under  wrought  with  curious  Worke  of  Bossing,
Painting,  and  Gilding,  built  of  fine  Marble  Pillars  of
Porfido,  and  Serpentino,  richly  laid  with  Gold  and  inestim-
able expence.

Without  the  great  Seraglio,  neere  to  the  point  thereof
is  a  little  Fountayne,  but  rich,  of  white  Marble,  laid  on
with  Gold  of  very  fine  workmanship,  (abounding  with
excellent  water)  built  by  this  present  Sultan  Morat,  in
memory  that  there  he  went  a  Land  dismounting  the  Caike,

[II.ix.1627.]  when  he  came  to  take  possession  of  the  Empire;  as  may
be  read  thereupon  written  in  Turkish  Letters.  In  the
chiefest  place  of  the  Citie,  betweene  the  Piazza  of  Sultan
Bajazet,  and  that  of  Sultan  Solyman,  there  is  another
Seraglio  called  of  the  Turkes  Eschi  Serrai,  as  much  to  say,

Old  Seraglio,  the  old  Seraglio.  The  same  was  first  builded  and  in-
habited by  Great  Mahomet  the  Second  (I  meane  before
the  above  named)  it  was  two  thousand  paces  about,  before
that  the  triumphant  Sultan  Soliman  to  make  his  Church
tooke  away  the  halfe.  It  is  compassed  with  a  Vault  of
fifteene  yards  high  without  any  Turrets,  the  Virgins  of  the
Grand  Signiors  remayne  there.  Thither  hee  goeth  many
times  upon  pleasure,  for  within  it  are  faire  Lodgings,  great
Orchards,  many  Banies,  cleere  Fountaynes,  and  of  old  time
the  deceased  Emperours  were  wont  there  to  hunt.

Many  other  faire  Churches  are  dispersed  through  the
Citie  of  great  cost  and  goodly  prospect,  built  with  Royal!
magnificence,  as  that  which  Sultan  Soliman  caused  to  be
made  at  the  death  of  one  of  his  Sonnes,  called  Jegni  Sultan
Mehemet,  as  much  to  say,  as  new  Sultan  Mahomet,
(different  from  the  other  of  the  Great  abovesaid)  neere
thereby  are  Lodgings  of  the  Janizaries,  who  are  housed  in
manner  of  Friers,  Guimas,  Mosches.  And  other  places
for  Prayer  are  there  likewise  built  by  many  Bassaes,  and
other  great  Personages  (but  not  of  such  importance  as
those  afore  nominated)  as  that  of  Mahomet  Bassa,  Daunt
Bassa,  Rostan  Bassa,  Mahomet  Bassa,  and  of  Messih  Bassa

448

A DISCOURSE OF CONSTANTINOPLE;

the  Eunuch,  and  now  they  are  a  building  two  new  ones,
better  then  the  others,  one  for  the  excellent  Sinan  Bassa
neere  the  red  Pillar  which  is  by  the  Lodging  of  the  emper-
ours  Ambassadors,  the  other  very  faire  in  Aurat  Bazar
(hard  by  the  Pillar  which  they  say  to  bee  of  Pompey)  of
the  excellent  Girahe,  Maher  Bassa,  and  divers  others  very
many.

The  Jew  the  presenter  of  this  Pamphlet,  saith  without
number,  some  Turkes  to  me  have  named  the  number  to
be  18000.  great  and  small  Churches  of  Turkes.  The
Patriarch  of  Greekes,  Meleteo,  who  had  formerly  beene  of
Alexandria,  and  there  dyed,  told  me  that  there  is  in  Con-
stantinople one  hundred  Christian  Churches,  most  assuredly
within  the  Citie  and  Suburbs,  I  take  it  there  are  more :
For  at  Galata,  over  the  water,  as  may  bee  compared  to
Southwarke  from  London,  there  are  of  Popish  Churches
(wherein  are  graven  Images)  foure  or  five,  and  two  or  three
Monasteries  of  Romane  Friers ;  of  Greekish  Churches
and  Friers  many  more,  in  whose  Churches  are  no  graven
Images ;  yet  they  whip  themselves  there,  as  the  Papists
doe.  This  I  have  seene  upon  a  Good  Friday  as  I  remem-
ber :  Bels  m  the  Christians  are  not  permitted  to  have  in
their  Churches.  Thus  much  from  the  matter  of  the  Jewes
Discourse,  which  is  not  from  the  purpose  of  that  therein
handled.

The  greatest  and  most  famous  spacious  place  of  the
Citie  is  that  which  in  time  past  of  the  Greeks  was  called
Hippodromo,  and  now  of  the  Turkes  Atmaidan,  which  is
as  much  to  say,  both  in  the  one  and  the  other  Language,
running  of  Horses,  for  there  they  did  and  doe  runne  them.
In  time  past  it  hath  beene  much  more  greater,  but  the
many  Palaces  (that  divers  great  men  in  processe  of  time
have  built)  hath  lessened  it ;  as  the  Great  Ebrim  Bassa,
who  builded  in  the  time  of  Sultan  Soliman,  that  faire
Palace  which  is  to  bee  seene ;  now  the  Lodging  of  this
other  Ebrim  Bassa,  given  him  when  he  married  the
Emperours  Daughter.

Right  over  against  it  is  another  Seraglio,  that,  also  built
ix  449  2  F

A.D.

'594-

mIn  the
Monastery  at
Caleos  Hand
(where  Master
Edward
Barton  the
Ambassador
lies  buried,)  I
did  see,  which
they  use  to
knocke  upon,
with  a  barre
of  Iron  of  a
Cubit  length:
Tinge,  Tange;
First,  upon  one
side  then  on
the  other  side,
a  long  piece  of
fiat  Iron;  halfe
afoot  broad,
an  inch  and
halfe  thicke,
set  edgeling
one  yard  and
an  halfe  from
the  ground :
this  they  use  in
stead  of  a  Bell,
to  call  the
Friers  together
in  that
Greekish
Monasterie.

A.D.
1594.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  Verses
were  added,  so
imperfect,  that
I  thought  Jitter
to  omit  them.

in  my  time  by  the  excellent  Rostan  Bassa,  when  he  married
his  Daughter  unto  Ahmat  Bassa.  In  the  middest  of  this
great  Piazza  is  to  be  seene  raysed  upon  foure  Dice  of  fine
Metall,  a  very  faire  Pyramide  of  mingled  stone,  all  of  one
piece,  fiftie  Cubits  high,  carved  with  Heroycall  Letters,
resembling  the  Agulia  of  Rome,  in  whose  top  were  inclosed
the  ashes  of  the  unconquered  Julius  Caesar,  that  now  Pope
Sixtus  hath  reduced  into  the  middest  of  the  place  of
An  Obeliske.  Saint  Peter :  this  Monument  Theodosius  the  three  and
fortieth  Emperour  of  Rome,  (by  Nation  a  Spaniard)  and
eightie  of  Constantinople,  caused  to  bee  erected  in
memory,  that  he  had  conquered  the  Gothes,  the  Alani,  the
Hunnes,  and  so  many  Tyrants  that  usurped  the  Empires
of  the  East  and  West,  as  by  the  Greeke  and  Latine  Verses
there  ingraven,  yet  after  so  many  yeeres  is  to  be  read,
although  a  wheele  hath  carried  away  some  part  of  the
Latine  :  His  foot  that  is  double  in  the  foundation  which
is  two  Cubits  high,  is  carved  the  manner  and  way  they
tooke  to  set  up  this  Pyramide  or  Obeliske,  the  which  was
there  raysed  by  Theodosius  in  the  yeere  390.  so  that  it
passeth  1200.  yeeres,  since  it  was  erected;  now  that  it  is
in  the  yeere  1594.  and  seventie  sixe  yeeres  after  that  the
Great  Constantine  built  the  Citie.  In  the  second  founda-
tion which  is  foure  Cubits  high,  are  carved  the  Tyrants
round  about,  who  to  the  said  Emperour  Theodosius  (he
also  being  carved  in  the  middest)  on  every  side  bring
Presents  and  render  obedience.  This  Piazza  hath  also
another  Pillar  very  high  of  squared  stone  in  manner  all
lineated  with  the  time,  and  likewise  one  of  Brasse  made
with  marvellous  art  in  forme  of  three  Serpents  wreathed
together  with  their  mouthes  upwards,  which  is  said,  was
made  to  inchant  the  Serpents  that  on  a  time  molested  the
Citie.  There  was  betweene  the  Agulia  and  the  Brasse
Pillar,  foure  very  high  Pillars  equally  distant  with  their
foundation  and  top  ornament,  the  which  Sultan  Selim,
Father  of  this  present  Sultan  Morat,  removed  &  sent  to
Adrianople  for  the  Church  which  he  there  built.  This
place  had  also  before  the  place  of  Ebrim  Bassa  some  yeeres

45°

A DISCOURSE  OF CONSTANTINOPLE

"  594-
past  three  faire  Images  of  Brasse,  that  the  victorious  Sultan
Soliman,  after  he  had  taken  Buda,  brought  and  no  other
thing,  in  testimonie  of  his  Victorie  ;  they  were  of  the
great  Mathia  Corvino,  the  most  famous  King  of  Hungarie.
The  said  Image,  when  the  named  Ebrim  Bassa  was  slaine,
were  by  the  furie  of  the  people  throwne  to  the  ground.

At  the  end  of  this  place  towards  the  Sofia,  are  also  to  [II.ix.1628.]
be  seene  certaine  ruines  of  a  great  circle  of  a  Theator
which  was  there,  where  the  people  sate  to  see  the  Playes
and  Pastimes  that  there  were  shewed ;  now  it  is  a  place
wherein  the  Lions  and  other  Animals  of  the  Great  Turkes
are  kept,  one  thing  resteth  in  my  Judgement  to  be  mar-
velled at,  and  the  most  notable  in  this  place  which  is,  that
it  is  all  hollow  underneath,  and  holden  up  with  Pillars  of  Mmirabk
rich  Marble  with  their  foundation,  and  top  garnishing  all
wrought  in  branches.  They  are  said  to  passe  the  number
of  one  thousand,  and  underneath  it  is  light  and  fresh  water,
there  are  also  Instruments  or  great  wheeles  that  they  use
to  spinne  Silke  with,  and  not  only  under  this  void  place,
but  it  is  held  for  certayne  that  under  all  the  Citie  they
may  walke,  as  may  be  perceived  by  many  other  ruinated
places ;  this  was  very  faire  to  behold  some  yeeres  past,
when  the  present  Sultan  Morat  for  the  space  of  three  or
foure  moneths  made  there  in  Pastimes  at  the  Circumcision
of  his  first  begotten  Sonne  Sultan  Mahomet,  it  was  a
marvellous  incredible  thing,  the  Shewes  and  Playes  they
had  at  that  time.

In  another  large  and  spacious  place  farre  from  this
towards  the  Port  of  Selimbria,  called  by  the  Turkes  Aurat
Bazar  (which  is  as  much  to  say,  the  Market  place  of
women,  for  thither  they  come  to  sell  their  Workes  and
Wares)  is  to  be  seene  a  very  high  great  Pillar,  written
upon  round  about  on  the  out-side,  made  hollow  within,
which  they  commonly  call  of  Pompey,  perhaps,  because
it  resembleth  another  that  is  of  Pompey  in  Rome  of  the
like  Fashion ;  but  I  beleeve  that  neither  Pompey  nor
other  for  him,  ever  caused  this  to  be  set  up.  Another  high
Pillar  of  red  Marble  bound  about  with  Iron  hoopes,  is  to

45i

A.D.

1594.

PFUCEIAS HIS PILGRIMES

be  seene  neere  to  the  Lodging  of  the  Emperours  Am-
bassadour,  with  certayne  Greeke  Letters,  which  time  hath
consumed  and  often  fires  many  times  burned  it,  in  such
sort  that  they  cannot  be  understood  or  read.

There  are  to  bee  seene  also  in  the  Citie  of  Constanti-
nople certayne  very  great  places  of  the  Ancients  called
Naumachia.  Naumachia,  which  they  filled  with  water,  and  shewed
thereon  the  battailes  of  their  Navie  to  delight  the  people,
which  at  this  time  is  full  of  Orchards.  There  is  in  the
chiefest  places  for  TrafHque  of  the  Citie,  two  Basistans,
which  are  certayne  Buildings  foure  square  high,  and  made
round  at  the  top,  in  the  forme  of  great  Lodges  covered,
each  of  which  have  foure  Gates,  opening  upon  foure
stretes,  round  about  garnished,  with  shops  stuffed  with  all
rare  and  exquisite  Merchandize,  as  of  inestimable  value,
Precious  Stones  and  Pearles,  (Zebulini)  Sables,  and  other
rich  Furres  of  all  sorts,  Silkes  and  Cloth  of  Gold,  Bowes,
Arrowes,  Bucklers,  and  Swords  :  here  likewise  they  sell
many  Christian  Slaves  of  all  Sects  and  Ages,  in  manner  as
they  sell  their  Horses,  looking  them  in  the  eyes,  mouth
and  all  other  parts  ;  this  they  doe  every  forenoone,  except
Friday,  which  the  Turkes  hold  for  their  day  of  rest.

There  is  also  to  be  noted  the  Sarachiana,  which  is  a
street  of  Sadlers,  &  of  them  that  worke  in  Leather,  a  thing;
so  worthy  and  rich  that  the  more  part  of  strangers,  who
come  thither,  marvell  more  at  this  place  then  at  all  the  rest
of  the  most  worthy  and  rich  that  are  to  be  seene  in  Con-
stantinople. The  Citie  is  also  full  of  a  number  of  very
faire  Banias,  as  well  publike  as  private,  which  in  imitation
of  the  Ancient  Greekes  and  Romanes,  are  built  and  con-
trived with  great  industry,  sumptiousnesse  and  expence
almost  incredible,  besides  those  of  the  Great  Turkes
Seraglio,  his  women,  and  Bassaes,  the  most  of  the  common
sorts  are  beautified  with  Pillars,  Bankes  and  Pavements  of
divers  and  rare  coloured  Marble  :  faire  they  are  and  very
great  with  plentie  of  water.

I  let  passe  the  divers  Seraglioes,  faire  Houses  of  many
Vice-royes, old  and  new, so  great  and  compassed  with

452

Bathes.

Great  mens
Seraglioes.

A DISCOURSE OF CONSTANTINOPLE  am

such  high  wals,  that  they  rather  appeare  to  bee  Cities  then
Seraglioes,  which  without  make  no  beautifull  shew  ;  but
within  are  full  of  all  Riches  and  Pleasure  the  World
affords ;  for  the  Turkes  are  wont  to  say,  that  they  build
not  to  pleasure  the  sight  of  those  that  passe  by  the  way,
but  for  their  owne  commoditie :  deriding  the  goodly
shewes  that  our  Palaces  in  Christendome  make  outwardly,
and  that  within  they  are  not  agreeable  to  their  minds.

Heare  I  would  make  an  end,  but  I  cannot  forget  the
goodly  Arches  and  Conducts  of  water,  which  Sultan  Conducts.
Soliman  of  good  memory  brought  with  incredible  expences
so  many  miles  by  Land,  and  in  so  great  quantitie  ;  that
over  and  above  so  many  old  Fountaynes,  he  increased
many  more  with  faire  Marble  so  magnificall,  and  with  such
quantitie  of  water  that  is  most  notable ;  being  a  very
necessary  ornament  to  the  Citie.  There  are  so  many  that
there  is  not  in  a  manner  a  street  which  hath  not  one  of  his,
and  the  greatest  prayse  in  my  opinion  which  he  meriteth
for  so  worthy  a  worke,  is  that  setting  apart  the  expences
which  he  made  in  conducting  this  water,  and  in  making
the  Fountaynes ;  all  the  places  where  he  built,  he  caused
to  be  bought  with  ready  money  of  the  Ownors  without
forcing  any  ;  and  oftentimes  changed  the  places  appointed,
because  he  would  not  have  the  people  lament,  who  were
unwilling  to  sell  them,  and  tooke  not  one  Aspar  towards
the  charge.  Also  being  broken,  some  of  the  Conduits
after  they  were  finished,  Sultan  Soliman  said,  that  he
thanked  God  they  were  decayed  in  his  time,  that  he  might
repaire  them  without  exacting  on  the  people,  or  that  there
should  have  come  another  Prince  that  would  not  have
regarded  them.

The  Citie  of  Constantinople  in  time  past  had  eleven
Gates,  every  one  for  some  purpose  called  Aurea,  Pagea,
Roma,  Carthaseo,  Regia,  Caligaria,  Xilina,  Haringa,
Phara,  Theodosia,  and  Syliaca.  But  the  continuall  fires,
the  many  Earth-quakes,  and  particularly  that  which  hapned
in  the  time  of  Sultan  Bajazet  Father  of  Selim  the  moneth  [II.ix.1629.]
of  September,  Anno  1509.  which  lasted  eighteene  dayes

453

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

J594-

together  (letting  passe  the  other  Buildings  in  which  above

13000.  persons  perished)  it  overthrew  the  famous  ancient
wall ;  the  said  Sultan  Bajazet  gathered  together  more
Five  and  then  60000.  men  to  rebuild  it,  making  new  Gates  which
twentie  Gates.  are  at  t^ls  fay  five  ancj  twentie.  They  were  one  lesse,
but  the  Sultana,  Mother  of  this  Emperour  made  a  faire
publike  Bania,  few  yeeres  since,  and  for  the  more  magnifi-
cence opened  a  new  Gate ;  these  following  are  the  names
at  this  present,  beginning  at  the  East  Gate  of  the  Citie
hard  by  the  great  Seraglio.

The  first,  Giehud  Capasi.  The  Jewes  Gate,  for  there-
about they  dwell.

The  second,  Baluc  Bazar.  The  Fish  Gate,  for  there  they
sell  their  Fish.

The  third,  Yemis  Eschelessii.  The  Fruit  Gate,  for  to
that  Scale  comes  their  Fruit.

The  fourth,  Odun  Capi.  The  Wood  Gate,  there  they
weigh  and  sell  their  Wood.

The  fift,  Yegni  Capi. New  Gate.

The  sixt,  Un  Capan.  The  Corne  Gate,  there  they  sell
their  Corne.

The  seventh,  Giubali  Capi. The  Moone  Gate.

The  eighth,  Aya  Capi. The  Holy  Gate.

The  ninth,  Yegni  Capi.  New  Gate :  which  the  Em-
presse  caused  to  be  made.

The  tenth,  Petri  Capi, Saint  Peeters  Gate.

The  eleventh,  Tener  Capi.  The  Lanthorne  Gate,
where  Mahomet  the  Second  entred,  when  he  tooke  Con-
stantinople.

The  twelfth,  Balat  Capi.  The  Palace  Gate,  for  it  was
the  chiefe  Gate  in  time  of  the  Greekish  Emperours.

The  thirteenth,  Ayvansari  Capi.  Jobs  Gate,  for  there
they  say,  hee  lyeth  buried  :  it  is  a  little  Church,  to  which
the  Great  Turke  goeth  often  in  Devotion.

The  fourteenth,  Egri  Capi. The  Eye  Gate.

The  fifteenth,  ^Enderne  Capi.  The  Gate  of  Andra-
nople.

The  sixteenth,  Top  Capesi. The  Artillerie  Gate.

454

A  DISCOURSE OF CONSTANTINOPLE  ad.

1594.

The  seventeenth,  Celebri  Capi.  The  Gate  of  Selcm-
bria.

The  eighteenth,  Yegni  Capi. New  Gate.

The  nineteenth,  Yedi  Cula.  The  Gate  of  the  seven
Towres  :  for  so  many  there  are  together,  neere  thereunto,
built  of  the  Ottoman  Princes,  where  it  is  said,  they  have
in  time  past  put  their  Treasure.

The  twentieth,  Narli  Capi. Gate  of  the  Pomegranates.

The  one  and  twentieth  Semati  Capi.  Saint  Matthewes
Gate.

The  two  and  twentieth,  Yegni  Capi. New  Gate.

The  three  and  twentieth,  Cum  Capi,  Gate  of  the  Sands.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  Chiatladi  Capi.  The  cracked
Gate.

The  five  and  twentieth,  Ahircapi.  The  Gate  of  the
Stables,  where  the  Grand  Signiors  Horses  are  kept.

This  is  all  which  at  this  time  commeth  to  my  purpose  to
say  (A.  V.  S.  Illstre)  having  spoken  only  of  the  bodie  of
the  Citie  Constantinople,  with  the  most  brevitie  and
veritie  that  I  could  possible ;  not  touching  the  matters  of
the  Ayvansaria,  (where  the  Turkes  say,  is  buried  patient
Job)  and  where  are  many  Sepulchres  of  much  importance,  Sepulchres.
of  the  chiefest  Bassaes  and  other  great  men,  holden  of
them  for  holy  ground,  neither  touch  I  the  Citie  Pera  (a
Colonie  in  time  past  of  the  Genueses)  Tophana,  or
Scutari ;  for  it  would  bee  needfull  of  them  to  make  a  long
Discourse,  leaving  the  same  untill  some  other  occasion
that  you  please  to  command  me,  and  if  herein  be  any
errour ;  let  the  small  time  I  had  to  write  it  excuse  me,
and  supply  the  same  with  the  good  will  I  have  to  serve
you.  And  seeing  this  Discourse  accepted,  I  will  present
you  also  with  a  Summarie  of  the  Lives  and  Deeds  of  the
Ottoman  Princes ;  which  I  am  gathering  together  with
the  greatest  brevitie  and  veritie  that  I  can  possible.  At
Constantinople  presented  me,  written  by  a  Jew  Doctor,  an
ancient  dweller  in  that  Citie,  which  when  I  had  read,  I
presently  out  of  Italian  translated  it,  the  seventeenth  and
eighteenth  dayes  of  August,  1594.

455

A.D.
1 60 1.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

§.  v.

The  Pilgrimage  of  John  Sanderson  from  Constanti-
nople, to  the  Holy  Land,  and  so  to  Tripoly
in  Syria,  begunne  the  fourteenth  day  of  May,
1 60 1.  ended  the  fourteenth  of  August.

He  fourteenth  day  of  May,  1601.  we  set  saile  in  the
good  ship  called  the  Mermaid  from  Constantinople,
so  to  Galipoly,  Troy,  Sio,  Rhodes,  and  the  first  day
of  June  arrived  at  Zur,  which  is  Tyrus  :  passed  by  Sarfanta,
in  time  past  Sarepta,  anchored  and  went  ashoare  at  Sidon,
now  called  Saiet,  where  the  third  day  of  the  same  we

[II.ix.1630.]  visited  the  Sepulchre  of  Zebulon.  Sophani  the  Prophet,
and  Basaleel  which  built  the  Arke,  buried  halfe  a  dayes
journey  from  Sidon.

The  ninth,  I  departed  in  company  of  Jewes,  and  arrived
in  Damasco,  the  twelfth,  passing  by  Samcania,  Baruck,
Hermiston,  Libiton,  foure  Mountaynes  so  called.  The
nineteenth, I went to a  Towne within three miles of

Jobar  Asladi.  Damasco,  now  called  Jobar  Asladi,  where  Elias  did  anoint
Azael,  Jehu,  and  Elisha ;  the  Jewes  hold  that  like  as  in
Mount  Horeb,  so  heere  Elias  hid  himselfe  in  a  Rocke
from  Jesabel,  where  also  they  say  the  Ravens  fed  him.
Here is  built a Synagogue of  the  Jewes, in  which  is

Jewes  Books,  solemnely  reserved  their  chiefest  ancient  written  Books,
and  thither  they  go  to  worship  with  great  devotion.  The
sumptuousest  matter  to  be  noted  is  the  Church  which  hath
twelve  Gates  of  Brasse,  excellent  Corinthian  Metall,  (the
middle  one  of  each  three  being  bigger  and  higher  then  the
two  on  each  side)  curiously  wrought,  (it  is  now  called
Bedremon.)  Here  it  was  that  the  Idoll  Rimmon  was  wor-
shipped, it  is  just  square,  three  doores  on  each  side.  Any
man  may  passe  by  the  doores  (being  they  are  open  to  foure
publike  places)  but  not  any  enter  other  then  are  of  the
Mahumetan  Religion,  many  Pillars  there  are  but  two
especially  noted  above  the  rest  in  respect  of  some  past
matter. Hither  it  was  that  Naaman  the  Assyrian  desired

456

JOHN SANDERSON

the  Prophet  Elisha,  after  hee  had  beene  healed  of  his
Leprosie,  to  license  him  to  bring  from  Samaria,  which  at
this  day  is  called  Shomrom  (the  said  Prophets  Country)
two  Mules  laden  of  Holy  Land  to  build  an  Altar  unto
God  ;  which  the  Prophet  denied  him  not,  and  there  are
also  foure  Rivers  called  Barada,  Towra,  Yesed,  Canavat,
two  of  which  are  Abana  and  Pharpar  :  which  Naaman  said
(murmuring)  were  fairer  then  all  the  Rivers  of  Israel,
when  the  Prophet  bad  him  goe  wash  himselfe  in  Jordan,
to  heale  his  disease.

I  remayned  ten  dayes  in  Damasco,  by  reason  that  my
rich  Companion  Jew,  bespake  much  Merchandize  to  be
readie  at  his  returne,  left  there  tenne  or  twelve  thousand
Duckets  of  Gold ;  which  for  surer  conveyance  he  had
carried  quilted  in  his  owne  and  Servants  under-garments :
all  he  left  in  a  friends  hands,  except  two  or  three  thousand
which  he  spent  of  Almes,  and  disbursed  for  Bookes  in  the
Holy  Land  ;  that  money  he  reserved  still  in  their  quilted
Coats,  fearing  theeves  which  abound  in  these  Countries.

From  Damascus  to  Sasa,  the  two  and  twentieth,  so  to
Conetra,  neere  Mount  Hermon,  whose  Eastermost  part
confineth  the  Countries  of  Reuben  and  Gad,  then  to  Naube
the  Countrey,  where  was  borne  the  Virgin  Ebrew,  whom
Naaman  had  taken  Captive,  shee  counselled  that  her
Master  should  goe  and  be  cured  of  the  Prophet  in  Shom-
rom. Here  likewise  I  saw  the  Lake  I  could  not  be
certified  the  Name,  it  is  in  the  Country  of  the  Gergesites
where  the  Legion  of  Devils  entred  into  the  Swine.  Then
to  the  Bridge  upon  Jordan,  on  the  right  hand  is  the  little
Sea  Cadis,  on  the  left  Genazeret,  a  little  on  this  side  that
Bridge,  as  the  Jewes  to  mee  reported,  the  Angell  wrestled
with  Jacob,  had  passed  over  his  Wives,  Children,  Family,
and  Cattel,  fearefully  he  meeting  his  Brother  Esau,  who
received  him  kindly ;  then  wee  came  to  a  Mountayne
which  they  called  Mount  Canaan,  and  on  the  backe  side  of
that  Mountayne  towards  the  right  hand,  came  to  the  high
Countrey  of  Galilee,  passed  by  some  Townes,  and  so  to  a
Citie  called  Safet,  the  foure  and  twentieth  of  June  : here

457

A.D.
I  (tO  I.

Silke  Girdles,
Shashes,  Bod-
kins, Is!  c.  Jit
to  sell  in  Sio
and  Natolia.

T':::  Bridge

as  I  doe
remember,  is
strong  built  of
stone,  some
Bride, y
hath  set'en  or
eleren  Arches
as  I  remember.

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

the  Jewes  look  for  their  Messias  to  appeare  upon  a  most
high  Mountaineadjoyning,  which  as  I  remember  they  called
Mount  Caram.  Heere  on  this  Mount  Canan,  Mahaleel
a  Jew  Priest  that  had  beene  about  in  gathering  (he  told
me  he  had  got  but  five  hundred  Chequins  in  Gold,  and
had  them  about  him)  for  the  Jewes  of  the  Holy  Land  did
bid  mee  marke  the  current  of  the  River  Jordan,  which
seemed  to  stand  and  slowly  beare  towards  Tiberias  and
Sodome,  but  withall  a  forceable  current,  did  runne  in  the
middest  backe  againe  towards  the  Bridge,  and  so  to  fall
into  Cades,  toward  Jor  and  Dan,  from  whence  the  whole
River  of  Jordan  doth  take  his  increase.

In  this  Citie  of  Safet  are  all  the  most  learned  and  devout
Jewes :  and  here  are  sixe  Colledges  or  Schooles  of  Learn-
ing, this  they  call  the  House  of  God,  and  many  aged  goe
purposely  to  dye  there  :  this  is  Bethel  where  Jacob  slept
and  dreamed  in  the  way  he  went  to  serve  his  Uncle  Laban,
afterward  returned,  dwelt  there  and  built  an  Altar  to  the
Lord,  the  Citie  of  old  was  called  Lus.  Built  it  is  on  the
top  of  a  high  Mountayne ;  and  compassed  about  with
many  Mountaynes,  which  are  both  high  and  steepe,  but
the  highest  is  that  adjoyning,  where  I  say  (they  affirme)
the  Messias  wil  come ;  on  the  top  of  the  Mountain  where
this  Citie  is,  is  the  exceedingest  old  Castle  that  I  have
seene  or  heard  off,  except  a  part  of  that  at  Hebron,  and
alike  the  ruines  of  Tiberias,  where  I  was  at  my  returne
from  Jerusalem.  At  the  foot  of  the  said  Citie  Safet,  is
interred  the  Prophet  Osea,  Sonne  of  Beeri,  first  of  the
twelve  Prophets  (so  say  the  Jewes)  over  his  Sepulchre  is
built  a  Cube  not  very  old,  and  the  Jewes  now  doe  bury
their  dead  at  that  place.

Then  we  passed  by  a  little  Village,  where  dwelt  and  is

buried  the  Prophet  Abakuke,  so  said  the  Jewes,  and  that

the  Towne  was  called  Yeacoke ; thence  wee  came  to  a

At  Sefferhit- Village called Sefferhittim, where they say is buried

tim  we  reposed  Jethro  the  Father  in  Law  of  Moses : then  wee  came  to

^hJt^ll  °J Ajontosar  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Tabor,  on  the  top  of  which

Mount our Saviour Jesus Christ transfigured himselfe

458

that  day.

JOHN  SANDERSON

talking  with  Elias  and  Moses ;  with  him  was  Peter,  James
and  John  :  leaning  on  the  right  hand,  the  place  where  was
the  Warres  with  Sisera  and  Debora ;  and  on  the  left,  the
River  Chison :  Sisera  fled  to  Sefferhittim,  where  Jael
killed  him,  and  from  thence  by  a  Village  called  Zarni,  the
place  is  called  Isarel,  so  wee  passed  the  Valley  of  Jesserell ;
here  Jehu  fought  the  battell  with  Ahabs  sonne.  So  we
came  to  Jenin,  of  old  time  Ingenin,  interpreted,  is  Paradise
so  pleasant,  that  is  the  place  and  situation  that  well  may
be  called  Paradise ;  it  may  be  assuredly  compared  to  the
Citie  of  Palme  trees  spoken  of  in  Scripture,  so  pleasant
and  prospective,  it  is  with  also  Woods  of  very  many  Palme
trees  replenished.

The  twentie  sixe,  we  passed  by  Dotana,  in  Scripture
called  Dotan,  or  Dothan,  the  place  where  Josephs  brethren
cast  him  into  the  pit.  From  thence  wee  passed  the  Moun-
taines  of  Gilboa,  where  Saul  and  his  sonnes  were  slaine  :
on  the  right  hand  a  farre  off  wee  saw  the  Sea  Palestine,
thence  we  passed  a  place  now  called  Sabastia,  in  Scripture
Shomron,  that  is,  Samaria,  a  Citie  of  Ahab,  a  pleasant
situation  on  the  top  of  the  Mountaine,  but  not  very  high.
From  thence  toSichem  the  twentie  eight  of  the  same,  which
is  z  situate  betweene  two  Mountaines,  Mount  Gerezin,
that  is  the  Mount  of  Blessing,  and  Mount  Ebal,  that  is,
the  Mount  of  Cursing ;  even  betweene  these  two  Moun-
taines, a  little  before  wee  came  to  the  Citie,  is  a  great
Conduit  of  very  good  water,  twentie  paces  before,  which
is  a  piece  of  ground  marked  out  by  two  short  Pillers  of
plaine  white  Marble :  There  was  some  notable  thing  done
in  Moses  or  Josias  time,  else  I  suppose  there  stood  the
stone  whereon  the  seventie  heads  of  Gedeons  sonnes,
Abimelecks  brothers  were  piled.

Betweene  the  said  Mountaines  at  the  Easter-most  of
them  was  interred  Josephs  bones,  where  the  Jewes  prayed
as  alike  at  all  the  Sepulchers  they  went  to  visit,  and  about
five  miles  off,  neere  to  a  Village  called  Awarta,  are  buryed
upon  a  Hill  on  the  Mount,*  amongst  the  Mountaines  of
Ephraim,  the  two  sonnes  of  Aaron,  Eleazar  and  Ithamar,

459

A.D.
l60I.

[II.ix.l63,.]

But  thef alley

wherein
Damascus  is
built,  is  much
more  fairer  to
the  eye,
pleasanter  and
larger.

Samaria.

z  At  Sichem
wee  lodged
both  at  our
going,  and  at
our  returns
from
Jerusalem.

a  Here  all  the
Jewes  of  our
company
prayed  very
devoutly.

A.D.
l60I.

''  As  the  Jew
to  me  reported.

"Here  we
rested  two  or
three  houres.
Old  great
stony  mines  of
a  Citie.  No
Inhabitants
there,  and
many  other
ruined  places
wee  travelled
over,  where
had  beene
Tozunes,  but
now  were
cragged  stones,
and  here  and
there  some
plots  of  ground
where  they
sowed  Come:
bread  very
plcntie  and
cheape  in  the
Citie  of
Jerusalem,
and  all  places
that  we  came
at  in  the  holy
Land;  and
also  at  Damas-
cus and  all
Sirria  over.
lXJohn  Sander-
son in  com-
panie  of  the
J  ewes  his  fel-
low travellers.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  Phineas,  the  sonne  of  Eliazar  :  and  hard  by  upon  an-
other Hill  are  the  b  seventie  antients  buried  all  in  one  plot,
one  Cave,  one  Sepulcher,  these  ancients  of  Israel  are  spoken
of  in  Scripture.  Also  some  two  miles  further  neere  the
tops  of  one  of  the  highest  said  Mountains  of  Ephraim,
is  the  Sepulcher  of  Josua,  kept  by  the  Moores  as  the  others
are,  this  we  did  very  wel  discerne.  The  Jewes  at  all  pay
pole  pence,  some  more,  some  lesse  to  the  Moores,  before
they  be  permitted  to  say  their  Ceremonies.

The  thirtieth  of  June,  wee  came  to  Biera,c  in  Scripture
called  Beroth,  in  the  Countrie  of  Benjamin ;  this  Citie  is
five  miles  short  of  Jerusalem,  Rama  is  to  bee  discerned
three  or  foure  miles,  on  the  right  hand  going  to  Jerusalem.
This  day  we  arrived  in  Jerusalem ;  upon  high  ground  we
had  travelled  when  we  drew  neere  the  Citie,  though  most
of  the  way  were  rockie  and  stony,  yet  now  wee  might
evidently  see  a  signe  of  a  long  broad  high  way  all  cragged,
with  cornered  diffused  stones  that  no  beast  could  travell
over,  so  that  along  hard  by  the  said  way  through  the  fields
all  travellers  passe,  yet  that  also  very  stony  and  cragged,
but  they  are  not  so  big  as  those  on  the  foresaid  high
way.  Then  being  within  a  mile  we  had  sight  of  Jerusa-
lem, which  to  our  view  was  most  excellently  situated  on
Hills,  and  compassed  with  other  huge  Hils  round  about,
some  neere,  some  many  miles  off.  The  adornement  of
waters  it  wanteth,  for  there  are  not  any  beautifull  neere  it :
Jordan  onely  we  might  see  a  great  way  off,  which  Jordan
is  North-east  of  Jerusalem  about  nine  or  ten  miles.  The
neerest  part  Eastward  Jordan  passeth  the  Lake  of  Sodome
and  Gomorra,  and  so  commeth  along  towards  Jerusalem,
which  is  some  fifteene  or  sixteene  miles  off ;  so  we  entred
at  the  gate  opening  to  Damasco,  which  I  take  to  be  South,
and  to  the  Westward.

The  second  of  July,d  we  went  to  Rama,  to  the  Prophet
Samuel  his  house,  where  the  Jewes  say  he  was  buried ;
upon  the  top  of  the  said  house  is  the  place  where  the
children  of  Israel  had  their  haire  cut  off,  at  which  time  they
made  vowes,  gave  great  sums  to  the  Sanctorum : at  this

460

JOHN SANDERSON  am.

i  .

day  there  are  of  the  Jewes  that  vow  &  performe,  carrying
their  children  to  have  their  haire  cut  there  for  devotion  ;
on  the  right  hand  is  a  Well  which  is  called  Samuels  Well,

other  matters  here  I  observed not. Many  and sundry  -Tedious

ruinated  both  great  and  small  Townes,  I  passed  in  the  jwnuy  I

Holy  Land,  both  outward  and  backe  againe,  which  to  my  made^yaa

desire  I  could  not  be  informed  the  names  of :  as  may  bee  ai/ie  and

imagined  by  these  nominated  in  the  tedious  e  journey  I  dangerous

made.  journey ;  for

In  Jerusalem  is  a  little  part  of  the  wall  of  Salomons  hjb™'h*„bby

Temple  (so  say  the  Jewes)  under  the  said  piece  of  wall  is  Coen  the

the  place  where  the  high  Priest  went  to  wash  himselfe,  principalis,

within  is  a  stone  of  twentie  sixe  braces  long,  and  twelve  and  the  other

broad ; in  that  Temple  the  Greekes  say  the  Holy  Ghost  Jewes  a/f° ,

. ,1 a *i  • ,1  ..«  /"•! • •  t favoured  and

came  to  the  Apostles :  in  these  times  no  Christian  nor  Jew  much  regarded

is  suffered  to  enter  that  Church  on  paine  of  death  ; a  me:  I  had

broad  going  up  also  there  is  of  Marble  steps,  and  on  the  beene  singled

tops  or  the  stayres  two  white  Marble  pillars,  not  very  big  ;  ou*h  some

*. a.  I  J  ~~ a. T* i  J villanous

upon these steps none dare come except lurkes and  Moores  0f  our
Moores  of  the  best  account,  this  is  there  held  by  Christians  ozone  company,
of  the  place  to  bee  Salomons  Porch. The  mount  on  which  who  grudged
the Temple is built, is called in Greeke Thusia tou  at  me> and  at
Abram,  where  Abraham  would  have  sacrificed  his  sonne  : s, onf,  °{

...'  Tv/r-  i  i-it  •  -i tnem  tfiat  we

this  is  Mount  Mona ; where  to  this  day  1  say  is  curiously  naci  n-trej  our

kept part of Salomons Temple, the Turkes having  Mules  of,  did

bestowed  very  great  cost  in  re-building  and  leading  it  all  Pul,ch  at  me

over. It  is  formed,  one  part  a  round  Cube,  close  to  which  l .J  sta-»e>

7  r  revilins  tne

cube  goeth,  as  it  were  ascending  a  long  bridge  of  building  rV\tj}  b,.c

leaded,  comparable  to  the  Easter-most  part  of  Pauls,  but  hanzier

Gouer,  saying

that  I  had  beene  the  cause  that  Maronits,  the  Christians  of  Mount  Lib  anus  had  broke  the  head

of  a  Janizarie,  who  by  the  way  fell  into  our  company  having  beene  at  Mecca. Of  this

Janizarie  over  night  they  had  asked  a  little  gun-powder,  which  he  deeming,  they  met  him  on  the

Hill  in  the  morning  and  did  sore  wound  him :  the  Turkes  did  marke  that  those  Christians  had

been  kinde  to  me,  therefore  by  that  one  old  collericke  fellow  I  did  with  patience  pocket  some

abuse,  though  no  great  hurt. Abuse  for  the  present,  but  at  Tripoly  the  Jewes  so  handled

this  businesse,  putting  the  Moore  in  a  great  feare  that  I  would  complaine  to  the  Bassa;  so

that  in  their  presence  the  Moore  prayed  mee  of  pardon,  and  withall  did  bow  dozvne  and  kist

hand,  seeming  sorry  he  had  so  abused  me;  nay  very  sure  I  am  that  he  did  repent,  so  I  forgave

him,  and  hee  afterward  did  bring  me  a  present  of  fruit  and  flotvers.

461

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 60 1.

[II. ix. 1632.]  seemeth  somewhat  flatter  and  broad,  with  the  leads  more
cheverend  and  of  a  deeper  worke,  and  at  the  end  a  pro-
portionate forme  seeming  higher  then  the  rest  of  the  leaded
worke.

Jerusalem  hath  only  foure  gates,  at  one  of  which  is  the
Tower  of  David,  where  he  fell  enamoured  with  Bersheba,
as  those  fondlings  say.  Without  the  said  gate,  a  stones
cast  from  the  corner  of  the  wall  on  the  top  of  Mount  Sion
are  buried  David,  Salomon,  and  most  of  the  Kings
of  Juda ;  here  neither  Jewes  nor  Christians  are  suffered
to  enter,  neither  permitted  to  come  neere  the  walls
in  sight  of  Turkes  and  Moores  ;  such  as  peradventure  doe,
are  forced  to  pay  summes  of  money  to  their  uttermost
abilitie.  On  the  out-side  of  the  aforesaid  piece  of  the
Cities  wall  appeareth  a  part,  as  the  Jewes  to  mee  reported,
of  the  old  wall  of  the  studie  of  Salomon,  upon  one  of  the
stones  wherof  is  written  in  Hebrew  letters  carved  tu
that  is  Bitti,  which  interpreted  is  to  say,  my  house  :  here
for  two  dayes  I  left  the  company  of  my  great  companion
Jew,  and  had  attendant  on  mee  a  Coloiero,  a  Greekish
Priest,  which  the  Patriarke  commanded,  to  shew  me  all  the
notable  places  in  and  about  Jerusalem  and  Bethelem.  This
holy  Priest  had  continued  one  whole  yeere  in  the  Church
where  they  say  our  Saviour  was  buried,  and  for  that  space
never  came  out  night  nor  day,  so  doing  of  his  owne  will
onely  in  devotion  ;  he  chiefly  attended  me,  with  other
Greeke  Friers  at  my  pleasure  :  likewise  also  a  poore  Jew
of  Jerusalem  whom  I  hired  to  bee  still  with  mee,  partly
to  interprete,  for  the  Frier  Greekes  speake  but  meane
Italian,  and  my  selfe  understood  but  little  Greeke.

First,  the  Coloiero  went  and  shewed  mee  the  gate  where
our  Saviour  entred  when  they  cryed  Hosanna,  efsemati,
after  which  wee  viewed  Caiphas  Palace,  Pilats  Palace  (the
ruines  remaining  as  now  they  say)  and  alike  the  Marble
pillar  of  divers  colours  at  which  Christ  was  whipped ;  it
standeth  distant  from  the  house  :  over  the  way  wee  passe
through  somewhat  high,  a  place  neere  to  that  where  was  a
water  called  pronatichi,  colinithra,  a  marvellous  great  dry

462

JOHN SANDERSON  a.d.

i  60  i.

ditch  which  came  to  the  prison  or  deepe  durty  dungeon,

wherein  the  Jewes Princes  inZedechias  time  caused  Jeremie

the  Prophet  to  be  put. He  found  favour  of  the  Kings

chiefe  Eunuch  a  Blacke-moore,  who  drew  him  out,  hee

standing halfe way in the mud, as by the Scripture

appeareth : these Greekes hold that hee was throwne

amongst  Lions,  who  licked  him  in  stead  of  devouring,

and  that  at  last  the  Jewes  caused  him  to  be  sawed  in

sunder.

Then  went  wee  to  the  Virgin  Maries  Sepulchre,  a  space

without  the  walls  of  the  Citie,  in  a  little  Chappel  going

down  many  steps,  the  stayres  very  broad  ; on  the  right

hand,  as  it  were,  halfe  the  steps  down  lieth  buried  her

father  and  her  mother,  the  Virgin  below  in  a  roome  a  part,

wherin  were  only  seven  Lampes  burning ; her  stone  is  of  These  Lamps

streaked  Marble  of  divers  colours,  her  Tombe  not  so  high  , f"St

r  1  1 a  yr ^ 1 -r.  •  burning  over

as  a  mans  waste  from  the  ground.  My  Greeke  Priest  t^c  virnns
shewed  great  devotion  at  this  Sepulchre  (so  did  hee  at  the  tombe.
place  where  our  Saviour  sweat  water  and  bloud,  and  at
the  ascension  place  on  top  of  Mount  Olivet.)  A  Well  of
good  water  is  also  at  the  foot  of  the  stayres :  then  to  the
place  where  Saint  Steven  was  stoned ;  (the  Greekes  say
our  Saviour  had  made  him  an  Arch-deacon)  so  to  Jesami
where  Christ  was  in  a  bloudy  sweat  (here  I  prayed)  and
likewise  I  saw  the  place  where  the  Apostles  slept ;  then
to  the  place  where  hee  taught  his  disciples  the  Pater  noster,
the  Greekes  call  it  Pater  emos :  and  where  he  stood  when
hee  wept  over  Jerusalem,  and  the  place  where  hee  was
betrayed  by  that  reprobate  servant  Judas.

Then  walking  further  on  the  side  of  this  Mount  Olivet,
wee  saw  the  Garden  where  Mary  met  our  Saviour  after
his  resurrection.  From  this  part  of  the  Mountaine  is
seene  a  farre  off  the  Lake  of  Sodome,  through  the  which
runneth  the  River  Jordan.  Then  to  Orostoelo,  the  place
of  Christs  ascension,  which  is  on  the  very  top  of  this
Mount  Olivet,  a  stone  yet  remaining  wherein  is  the  print
of  a  foot :  all  those  Christians  hold  assuredly,  that  it  is  the
signe  of  our  Saviours  foot,  most  formall  and  proportion-

463

A.D.
l60I.

f Having  read
the  name  of
JefferieKerby,
upon  the  wall
written  by
himselfe  in
thatSepulcher,
for  he  had
been  a  thither
traveller  in
company  of
Edward
Abbot,  M.
Bidulfe  a
preacher,  and
one  Jesytient  a
Jezveller.

[II.ix.1633.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ably  it  is  to  bee  perceived,  but  worne  much  by  the  touching
and  kissing  of  Christians :  here  I  prayed  and  hope  my
Saviour  beheld  mee.  The  like  square  stone  white  Marble,
wherein  is  the  print  of  the  other  foot,  was  stolne  from
hence  and  carried  to  Rome ; so  say  these  Greekes.

Then  to  Bethfage,  the  Village  where  the  Colt  was  losed  ;
so  along  over  against  it  wee  came  to  Bethania,  the  Greekes
call  it  Vithania.  In  this  Towne  they  also  affirme,  that  our
Saviour  eate  the  Passeover  with  his  disciples ;  here  was
Lazarus  raised,  who  had  beene  dead  foure  dayes,  in  whose
Sepulchre  I  was,  wherein  I  writ  my  name  on  the  f  wall,
and  not  in  any  other  place  all  my  pilgrimage.  This
Lazarus,  as  the  Greekes  hold,  was  afterward  Bishop  of
Larnaca,  in  Cyprus  thirtie  three  yeeres,  where  at  a  Church
so  named,  they  say,  hee  lyeth  buried ;  truth  it  is  of  such
a  faire  Church  so  called  in  such  a  Towne  of  Cyprus,  where
foure  yeeres  past  I  was ;  but  of  the  bones  of  Lazarus  to
be  there  it  is  uncertaine  to  mee.  Also  the  Greekes
affirme,  that  Saint  Ellen,  the  mother  of  Constantine  the
Great,  is  likewise  buryed  in  the  said  Hand  of  Cyprus,  on
a  mountaine,  which  at  this  day  is  called  after  her  name  :
shee  was  erector  of  all  these  Churches,  alike  repairer  and
observer  of  all  these  holy  places  in  the  holy  Land.

Then  returned  we  backe  againe  to  the  water  of  Siloam,
where  our  Saviour  commanded  a  blind  man  to  wash  his
eyes,  after  hee  had  with  earth  and  spittle  touched  them,
this  is  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Sion.  Upon  the  side  of
Mount  Olivet  is  buried  Hulda  the  Prophetesse,  there  in
the  middest  of  Mount  Olivet  was  the  Altar  where  they
burnt  the  Red  Cow :  In  a  Cave  on  the  right  hand  are  the
Sepulchers  of  Haggi,  and  Malachi,  Zacharia  is  buryed
below.  Neere  to  the  Sepulchre  of  Zacharia  is  the  tombe
of  Absolom,  made  of  seven  stones,  and  a  sharpe  pinacle
on  the  top  :  at  which  Monument  the  Moores  of  the  Coun-
trie  when  they  passe  by  at  this  day,  throw  stones,  with
reviling  speeches  at  him  for  rebelling-  against  his  father.
Betweene  the  places  of  Zacharia  and  Absalom,  is  a  plot
where  in  old  time  they  put  the  uncleane  apart  to  purge

464

JOHN SANDERSON  ad

1601.

themselves; this  was  the  Poole  of  Bethesda,  into  which

the  Angell  descended  at  certaine  times  and  troubled  the

waters. The  Scripture  speaketh  of  five  Porches ; but  I

noted  not  when  I  was  there,  neither  to  me  by  my  Greekes

was  mentioned,  as  I  remember,  any  such  matter. And

there  is  the  Valley  of  Josaphat,  betweene  Mount  Morea  and

Mount  Olivet,  where  the  Jewes  say  the  world  must  bee

judged ; most  huge  stone  of  incredible  bignesse  is  here  to

be  seene,  out  of  some  of  which  are  carved  whole  houses,

two  or  three  I  did  see,  one  of  which  had  divers  parted

roomes  all  hewed  out  of  one  stone  :  these  in  respect  of  the

painfull  workemanship  I  thought  notable ;  as  alike  a  mile

off  from  Jerusalem  is  a  place  of  buriall,  out  of  a  rocke  of  zdt  this  day  a

one  Marble  stone  hewed,  with  foure  doores  to  foure  sundry  f>nson> '"  ihu

roomes,  and  foure  coffins  of  the  said  stone,  but  the  bodies  h™  j<}m_

turned  to  dust,  and  the  bones  not  any  remaining,  except  herly,  alias

very  small  pieces. This  place  or  rocke  is  called  Celbasabua  ;  CaptaineTim-

this  may  well  bee  the  Cave  wherein  the  five  Kings  hid berly  was,  as

themselves. Then went I to Esaia the Prophet his '? pat)'efe'

Sepulcher,  where  I  beheld  the  fig-tree,  under  which  the  appeareth,

Greekes  say  that  the  sonnes  of  Jeremie  slept  sixtie  three which  he  him-

yeeres  : their  names  were  Uaruh  and  Abdimeleck  ; this sfVe  recordeth

may  be  thought  a  fallacy  in  respect  of  the  fig-tree  which  V*  I^'f'f

cannot  be  of  that  age  ;  but  they  say,  it  is  and  hath  bin  ever  t^us  ^1UC^  j

since  replanted  of  the  branches  in  that  selfe  place.  had  copied

Then  went  I  to  the  Sepulcher  of  good  old  Simeon,  from  from  hls  owne
thence  to  a  place  (neere  unto  the  Church  and  Sepulcher f? M
where  the  Christians  affirme  the  bodie  of  our  Saviour  was Timberh
layd)  a  place,  I  say,  called  Anastasia,  where  Mary  met  our  relateth  that
Saviour  after  his  resurrection, saying, If  thou bee the  from  Grand
Gardener, tell mee  where thou hast layd him. Over  Cair0 10
against  the  Church  doore, in  a  place  where  Jesus  our  the b
Redeemer  and Saviour shed his most precious bloud,  land  he  per-
paying  the  ransome  of  our  sinnes  was  cruelly  crucified,  formed  thither,
I say  where the Crosse stood, is  at this  day  a  prison  an^}acke
s  in  the  Church,  whose  distance  is  twentie  or  twentie  five n*i->s-*~—

ai  r f  r  /">i • •  1  Laito  tn/ewer

paces,  are  divers  Altars  of  divers  sorts  of  Christians; but then fiftie
first  I  noted  in  the  Church  doore  two  great  holes,  at  which  dayes,
ix  465  2  G

A.D.

1 60 1,

PURCHAS HTS PILGRTMES

is  daily  given  in  the  victualls  to  all  the  sorts  of  religious

persons  which  keepe  continually  in  the  said  Church  ;  for

the  Turkes  never  open  the  doore,  except  for  some  Pil-

grime,  who  first  payeth  to  the  Cadie,  which  is  the  chiefe

Justice,  the  Great  Turkes  due,  upon  every  one  under  the

Popes  banner,  which  they  call  Franks,  nine  h  Chequins  in

gold,  and  Greekes  under  the  Patriarke  foure  and  a  halfe,

with  other  Christians  alike,  some  lesse. Six  officers  of

the  Turks  at  least  comes  to  open  the  doore,  which  house

being  opened,  all  Christians  that  are  of  that  sort  who  hath

payed, may enter the Church with that one, if it be

registred  that  they  formerly  had  payed ; but  Turkes  and

Moores  may  at  all  times  goe  in  when  the  doores  are  opened

Sepukher,  the  for  any  sort  Qf  Christian,  but  must  presently  come  out

Roman  Friers  agajne  .  the  Christian  for  whom  the  gate  was  opened,  may
and  others  fell & . \  .  ,. . -  fc ,  .r , . ,  J

in  anutroare,  at  ms  pleasure  lye  all  night,  or  two  or  three  nights  in  the

Church  if  he  will,  and  the  Turkes  Officers  returne  to  open

and  let  them  out.

Divers  little  Bell-strings  there  are  at  the  inside  of  their

doores,  which  rung  every  sort  of  Friers  to  come  downe  into

the  Church  to  receive  their  victuall,  or  take  out  pitchers  of

brabble  was  so  water  to  poore  folkes,  or  other  actions  that  may  happen.

J  Some  eight  or  nine  paces  in,  is  the  Sepukher  upon  which

they  have  made  a  formall  round  worke  of  twelve  white

Marble  Pillers,  two  and  two  together,  and  leaded  with  a

round  Cube  on  the  top  ; open  over  is  the  Church,  with  a

kind  of  round  building,  open  I  say  over  the  said  inward

proportionate  matter,  that  alike  is  leaded  on  the  outside

very  substantially  :  within  the  Church  I  say  about  that  part

where the Tombe is, are twelve other coloured great

Marble Pillers ; those Pillers  upon it formerly spoken

of, stand about a Brace from the ground, and a

Turkes  followed  to  he  are  the  matter,  one  old  Turke  came  &  earnestly  exhorted  me  to  become  a
Musselman  in  presence  of  the  Cady,  I  gave  him  the  hearing,  and  told  him  that  I  was  a  Chris-
tian, and  no  Jew  ;  then  he  said  in  the  hearing  of  all  the  J  ewes,  Turkes,  and  Christians,  let  him
bee  searcht :  but  the  Cadie,  before  zvhom  we  were  {being  a  very  discreet  man)  did  reprove  that
Turke,  y  also  the  Drugman  and  Friers  my  accusers,  and  so  did  dismisse  me;  but  {as  I  was
afterwards  told)  it  cost  my  adversaries  above  200.  Chequins,  I  spent  not  past  some  twentie
in  that  businesse.

466

hJ  had  paied
these  nine
Chequins,  and
had  by  the
Turkes  the
Church
doore  opened
for  me,  was
within,  y
entring  the

saying  that  I
was  a  Jew;
the  Turkes
bad  me  goe  in
in  despight  of
them,  but  the

returned  to  the
Cadie,  with
the  Friers:
the  Padre
Gardiano  sent
his  Drudge  -
man  and
accused  me  to
be  a  Jew,
because  I  came
in  company  of
J  ewes:  divers

JOHN SANDERSON

1601.

woodden  foot-pace  up  equall  with  it  some  five  paces
distant.  At  the  end  towards  the  Altars,  are  on  each
corner  one  white  little  Marble  stone  squared  smooth,
but  not  made  like  Pillers,  and  are  some  two  foot
high ;  in  the  middest  of  the  white  Marble  Pillers  over
the  Tombe  is  three  holes  made  of  stone,  out  of  which  once
a  yeere  the  Popish  Friers  make  artificiall  fire  to  appeare,
perswading  the  Christians  that  it  hath  beene  ever  since  the
bodie  of  Christ  was  there  layd.

Right  afore  up  in  the  Church  is  a  great  white  Canopie,
under  which  are  divers  pictures  and  lamps,  but  in  the
middest  hangs  a  most  stately  white  Crosse  of  silver  curi-
ously made  ;  the  Altars  are  more  up  in  the  Church  above
that  Canopy  :  many  Idolatrous  Christians  have  their  Altars
every  sort  apart,  to  say  an  Altar  for  the  Romanists,  for  the
Greekes,  for  the  Cufties  of  Cairo,  Georgians  about  the
Blacke  Sea,  Armenians  of  Persia,  Abbasies  of  Ethiopia,
Nestorians  of  Bagdat,  Jacobites  of  Aleppo,  Merdi,  and
Babylon,  Maronites  of  Mount  Libanus,  Shemsi  in  Siria
and  Cilicia  a  kind  of  Family  of  Love.  In  the  Sepulcher
these  sorts  of  Christians  have  their  Lamps  continually
burning,  to  the  number  (as  say  the  Greeke  Friers)  of  sixtie
sixe,  and  alike  have  their  superstitious  Crosses  apart ;  I
went  not  downe  into  the  Sepulchre,  by  reason  I  had  a  great
controversie  with  the  Popish  Friers,  but  might  have  done
in  their  despight,  had  I  not  beene  entreated  by  the  Greeke
Patriarke  and  others  to  avoyd  an  uproare  at  that  time ;  yet
made  I  those  foolish  Idolaters  spend  much  money,  and  at
last  they  sent  to  intreate  mee :  but  then  I  would  not,  hav-
ing to  my  content  seene  enough  when  the  doores  were
opened  for  mee,  and  alike  out  of  the  Patriarkes  house
which  joyneth  to  the  Church,  in  whose  possession  the  [Il.ix.  1634.]
whole  steeple  and  halfe  the  Tarras  is  (halfe  I  say  of  one
side  the  Church)  where  are  three  great  grates  of  Iron  open,
serving  to  give  light  into  the  Church,  and  where  they  let
downe  daily  baskets  of  victuals  for  the  Greeke  Friers  there
abiding ;  those  grates  are  above  a  mans  length,  and  five
or  sixe  foot  broad,  at  which  I  did  see  as  much  as  if  I  had

467

A.D.

I  60  I.

k  Of  these
Crosses  iff
Pater-noster
lieades,
Rosaries,  I  did
bring  from
thence,  and  at
my  returne
presented  my
brother  and
some  others,
having  onely
reserved  for
my  selfe  one
Crosse,  two
paire  of
Beads,  and
two  Girdles,
which  are  the
length  of  the
Sepulcher.
These  Crosses,
Beades,  and
Girdles  are
brought  to  us
by  poore
Christians  to
sel,  they  say-
ing that  they
are  holy  things,
for  that  they
had  been  put
into  the
Sepulcher : I,

PURCHAS HIS PTLGRIMES

stood  in  the  Church,  and  drew  with  my  pen  the  forme  of
the  inside,  and  alike  the  outside.  More  lower  in  a  roome,
at  a  window  out  of  the  Patriarkes  house,  I  stood  and  drew
the  forme  of  that  which  is  erected  right  over  the  Sepulchre,
as  I  have  described  it.

From  Jerusalem  halfe  way  toBethelem,is  a  Greeke  Chap-
pell  (built  by  Brittish  Hellen,  the  mother  of  Constantine  ;
who  found,  they  say,  the  Crosse  of  Christ ;  and  erected  all
the  Monuments  in  the  Holy  Land)  in  place  where  Elias
his  house  stood  ;  over  against  which  there  is  a  stone  in  the
high  way  that  sheweth  an  old  Monument  print  of  a  man
leaning  sleeping,  with  his  arme  under  his  head.  The
Greekes  afRrme  it  most  certainely  to  be  the  print  of  Elias
bodie,  when  the  Angel  bad  him  eate  and  make  himselfe
strong  to  goe  fortie  dayes  journey  to  Mount  Oreb,  where
for  a  time  hee  remained  fed  of  Ravens,  and  after  at  Gods
command  arose  and  went  to  Damasco  to  anoint  Hazael,
Jehu,  and  Elisha.  No  remembrance  at  this  place  of  the
Juniper  tree  the  Scripture  speakes  of,  but  a  Fig  tree  there
is  between  Jerusalem  and  Bethelem,  which  the  Friers
shewed  mee,  saying  that  the  Virgin  rested  her  selfe  against
it,  when  shee  fled  into  Egypt  with  the  child  Jesus,  and
her  husband  Joseph.  They  cut  thereof  little  pieces  for
relikes,  and  alike  in  devotion  they  at  this  day  make  many
formall  carved  Crosses  wherein  are  relikes,  and  Beads,k
they  make  Pater  nosters  as  they  call  them  of  the  Olive
trees  which  grow  upon  Mount  Olivet.  Likewise  there
they  told  mee  (an  unlikely  thing  it  was)  that  the  withered
Figge  tree  which  Christ  accursed,  is  yet  standing  upon
Mount  Olivet.

From  the  Figge  tree  before  spoken  of,  one  halfe  mile,
is  Rachels  Tombe1  in  the  middest  of  the  high  way,  in  sight
whereof  on  a  great  Banke  side,  is  finely  situate  a  prettv
Towne  on  the  right  hand  as  we  went  to  Bethelem,  and
two  miles  off  is  Bethelem,  being  on  a  Hill  side  situate  very

as  the  custome  was,  and  as  other  Christians  did,  did  buy  of  them  y  brought  from  thence.
1  When  I  was  there,  Anno  1601.  over  the  grave  of  Rachel,  there  was  a  Cube  raised  upon
foure  Fillers  made  of  stone  and  morter,  and  open  it  was  on  all  sides.

468

JOHN SANDERSON

pleasantly  :  the  high  way  and  land  cnaulkic  the  space  oi
halfe  a  mile  every  way  round  about  it.  A  Church  the
mother  of  Constantine  hath  built  over  the  place  where  our
Saviour  was  borne,  and  first  worshipped  of  the  Shepheards,
and  then  of  the  Wise-men,  before  Joseph  and  Mary  fled
with  him  into  F,gypt,  where  also  I  have  beene  some  seven-
teene  yeeres  since,  as  in  discourse  of  my  former  travells
is  recorded.  The  Romanist  Friers  have  a  Chappel  going
downe  under  this  Church,  where  they  have  continually
Masse,  and  ceremoniously  keepe  the  very  place  of  his
birth.  The  Church  hath  fortie  or  fiftie  very  faire  Marble
Pillers  all  of  one  forme  and  bignesse  (I  counted  them  m
not)  it  hath  beene  a  very  sumptuous  Church,  Greeke  pic-
tured Saints  yet  remayning  in  the  upper  end  of  it,  which  is
in  forme  round,  with  large  steps  to  goe  up  to  the  Altar,  and
on  both  sides  underneath  halfe  round  steps  to  goe  downe
to  the  Popes  Friers  persinqute,  who  have  the  custodie  of
the  very  place  of  birth,  and  where  the  Manger  stood.  By
a  gray-headed  Greeke  Priest  and  Frier  Gretian  my  atten-
dant, 1  was  brought  up  a  payre  of  stayres,  going  up  at  the
upper  end  of  this  great  Church  aloft  to  a  little  Chappell,
where  are  many  pictures  according  to  the  Greekes  manner,
but  especially  a  large  Saint  George  ;  before  whom  they
had  a  Lampe  burning,  expecting  of  mee  great  devotion,
they  unto  it  making  many  crosses,  and  told  me  he  was
Saint  George.  I  answered,  that  I  had  never  seene  a
bigger  :  they  fixed  earnest  lookes  upon  me  at  that  answere,
seeing  I  regarded  it  not,  and  the  old  man  told  the  other  in
Greeke  he  thought  I  was  no  Christian,  because  I  made  no
crosse  nor  reverence  neither,  as  hee  said,  to  our  Ladies,
Christs,  Saint  George,  or  to  other  Saints  pictures ;  his
fellow,  a  foolish  Frier,  told  him  that  those  of  my  countrey
were  Christians  of  the  worlds  end  :  I  presently  turned  them
both  out  of  their  talke,  by  hasting  to  bee  gone  thence.

But  they  led  me  up  to  the  top  of  the  Church  which  is
leaded,  &  many  Christians  had  there  ingraven  "their  names,
so  did  not  I,  then  they  offered  mee  kindly  to  stay  and  dine
with  them,  but  I  refused. The  old  Priest  required  of  me

469

A. I).

[601.

■  And  yet  it
comes  in  my
mind  that  1
did  tell  them,
and  I  thinke
they  were  in
number  fortie
ofverie  smooth
whitish
Marble,  the
upper  end  of
this  Church,
the  halfe
round  mount-
ing steps  1
meane,  are
much  like  those
at  the  Church
of  Rochester.
n  Amongst
which  names  I
did  see  Huet
Stapers,  who
{as  some  said)
had  travelled
from  Grand
Cairo  thither
in  Friers
weeds,  and  {as
I  have  heard)
was  made  a
Knight  of  the
Sepulcher,  by
the  Padre
Guardiano
and  the  other
Romish,  l5c
Those,  whoso-
ever English
or  others,  who
are  so

knighted,  are
made  to  take
a  mad  kind  of
oath.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 60 1.

almes  towards  their  Lamps,  which  I  did,  giving  to  them
foure  Chequins,  and  came  downe  the  same  way  I  went  up,
through  the  Chappell  full  of  painted  (most  sorts  and  sizes)
Saints.  In  which  Chappell  also  is  a  Well  where  ordinarily
the  Christians  draw  water,  and  it  is,  they  say,  the  best  in
Bethelem  :  they  draw  of  it  in  that  place,  being  neere  the
top  of  the  Church  :  but  that  within  the  Church  (it  stands
at  the  very  entrance  within)  I  take  to  be  the  Well  that
David  desired  to  drinke  of  from  the  hands  of  his  valiant
men  :  The  Papists  hold  neither  of  both,  but  say  it  is
another  neere  Bethelem.

So  we  returned  to  Jerusalem  the  same  afternoone,  and  in
Jerusalem  my  holy  Coloyro  led  mee  to  a  Monastery  of
Greeke  Nuns,  where  I  bestowed  some  mony  in  trifles  of
needle-worke  wrought  by  them,  and  there  the  Nuns
required  my  benevolence,  I  gave  them  seven  Chequins ;
then  presently  not  farre  from  that,  he  had  me  to  another
Monastery  of  Nuns,  where  I  saw  their  Chappell  full  of
very  fine  pictures,  and  they  told  me  that  a  man  comes  daily
to  doe  their  service ;  there  I  did  as  at  the  other,  and  more
I  bestowed  in  buying,  for  there  they  graced  me  with  the
sight  of  a  very  faire  young  Virgin  Nun,  that  so  much
beautie  and  youth  I  could  doe  no  lesse  then  praise,  and
pittie  her  estate  to  my  Coloyro,  who  was  readie  the  next
day  to  attend  mee  thither  againe,  if  so  had  beene  my
pleasure  to  have  bought  more  new  workes  of  the  old
Nuns,  &c.

W^ith  Gold  and  thankes  I  rewarded  his  passed  paines,

[II.ix.1635.]  leaving  him  at  that  time:  and  to  my  Pilgrime  mates  the
Jewes  I  returned ;  and  prosecuting  my  purpose  desired,
I  againe  further  traced  the  Holy  Land,  where  two  miles
from  Bethelem  are  to  bee  seene  two  Vallies,  then  Rivers,
now  Drie ;  which  the  Jewes  say  Salomon  digged  to  water
the  Woods.  A  little  way  off  on  the  left  hand  is  buryed
Gad,  one  of  the  twelve  Patriarchs,  and  halfe  a  mile  on  this

*r  l  >  side  Hebron  is  the  Valley  Escol,  where  the  twelve  Spies

Grates  still sent by Moses  were, they  returned with good newes.

great  bunches.  At  this  day  there  are  Grapes  *  in  that  Valley  growing,

470

JOHN  SANDERSON  ad.

1601,

one  bunch  of  them  weigh  eight  or  nine  Okes,  as  those  of
the  Countrey  affirmed,  which  may  be  of  our  weight
twentie  or  one  and  twentie  pound.  I  saw  none  such,
though  some  there  were  very  great  sprung  out,  but  not
neare  ripe.  This  was  the  fifth  of  July,  1601.  At  the
end  of  this  Valley  Escoll  is  Hebron  the  Citie,  the  Valley
is  a  long  mile  before  you  come  to  it,  all  planted  with  Vines
and  many  Trees.  In  this  Citie  is  the  Sepulcher  of  Abra-
ham, the  Jewes  hold  that  there  also  are  buryed  Adam  and
Eve,  Sara,  Isaac  and  Rebecca,  Jacob  and  Lea.  Into  this
Tombe  not  any  are  suffred  to  enter,  but  at  a  square  hole
through  a  thicke  wall :  they  may  discerne  a  little  light  of
a  Lampe.  The  Jewes  doe  their  Ceremonies  of  Prayer,
there  without.  The  Moores  and  Turkes  are  permitted
to  have  a  little  more  sight,  which  is  at  the  top  where  they
let  downe  the  Oyle  for  the  Lampe,  the  Lampe  is  a  very
great  one  continually  burning.  An  exceeding  old  Castle
(but  of  late  time  somewhat  repaired)  joyneth  to  it  on  the
one  side :  a  Moschea  that  is  a  Church  of  Moores  on  the
other,  and  it  seemeth  to  bee  within  part  of  the  Moschea.
At  the  right  ,side  of  Hebron  on  the  Mount,  is  the
Sepulcher  of  Jesse,  the  Father  of  David,  and  in  the  Citie
also  is  the  Tombe  of  Abner.  On  the  North  side  of
Hebron  is  the  Playne  of  Mamre,  where  hee  received  the
Angels  into  his  Tent.

This  we  went  not  to  but  might  perceive  it  a  pretie  way
off ;  and  riding  backe  to  Jerusalem  also  wee  saw  the  Lake
of  Sodom,  and  all  the  Countrey  thereabouts  :  but  thither
wee  went  not.  From  thence  the  length  of  the  River
Jordan,  most  pleasant  to  behold  in  the  way  wee  travelled
through  the  Countrey,  yet  was  I  not  that  I  know  of,  at
that  very  place  where  John  baptised  our  Saviour  Christ :
notwithstanding  I  washed  my  hands  and  head,  and  dranke
of  the  River  in  divers  places,  as  if  you  have  and  doe
marke  this  Discourse,  may  bee  perceived.

Upon  thursday  the  eight  of  July,  1601.  wee  departed
Jerusalem ;  came  backe  to  Beera  or  Beroth,  then  to
Sichem  the  ninth  day ; but  our  Horses,  Camels,  Mules

47i

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

and  Asses,  being  very  hot  and  wearie,  wee  stayed  and
*  Jacobs  Well refreshed  our  selves  and  them  at  Jacobs  *  Well,  which  is

ts  Just  s4uare>  about  halfe  or  three  quarters  of  a  mile  before  yee  come  to
about  foure 0. ,  _. T  ^  .  ,  , *

yards  even  ^icnem.  I  he  Jewes  are  there  also  somewhat  ceremoni-
al, built  of  ous,  the  water  is  excellent  good  &  abundant,  being  hard
some  squared  by  the  high-way.  There  it  was  that  our  Saviour  talked
s*nesjnd  not  with  the  Woman  of  Samaria.  In  sight  of  this  Well,  two
but  excellent  stones  casts  off,  are  Josephs  bones  buried,  where  I  had
deere  and  beene  with  the  Jewes  at  my  last  being  in  Sichem,  as  I
coole,  so  flat  at  went  to  Jerusalem.

the  top  that  we  The  eleventh,  wee  came  to  Jenin  Paradise.  The
forourealV  twelfth,  to  the  ancient  Citie  *  Tiberias,  this  is  built  close
recreation  and  by  the  shoare  side.  From  thence  wee  might  see  most
refreshment,  excellent  pleasantly,  appearing  above  the  tops  of  other
the  space  of  hjgh  Mountaynes,  the  Citie  Bethel  upon  his  Moun-
one  oure  tayne,  the  highest  Mountayne  neare  unto  it,  whereas  I
^M  say  they  affirme,  that  the  Messias  will  come ; those  for

dum,  that  my  tne  pleasurablest  Mountaynes  which  in  my  life  time  I
honourable  and  have  seene,  and  Libanus  for  the  hugest ;  over  top  of
most  honest  which  Libanus  I  have  passed,  (the  Playne  of  Baalgad  at
Jew,  in  a  kind  ^q  bottome  of  Mount  Libanus  towords  Damascus,  is
pleasure  was  t'le  spaciousest ;  but  the  Playne  wherein  Damascus  is
content  to  goe  built,  is  the  pleasantest  that  any  eye  can  in  earth  behold.)
out  of  the  The  Sea  Tiberias,  is  in  my  judgement  at  the  most  five
straight  way  or  s}xe  miies  *  over  in  the  broadest  place.  Heere  it  was
shew  me  the  ^at  our  Saviour  and  Peter  fished,  and  went  over  when
CitieTiberias,  bee  fed  the  five  thousand.  Wee  onely  remayned  heere
and  Caper-  foure  houres,  in  which  time  we  cast  crummes  of  Bread
naum  where  \nto  that  little  Sea,  and  divers  Fish  like  Carps  (but  like
Ithat  nifht  Carps  in  scales  and  of  colour,  but  they  were  somewhat
*A  d  tb  l°nger  and  thinner  bellied)  came  in  abundance  to  the
reason  of  the  shoare,  some  small,  some  great :  thence  wee  passed  for
very  high *  feare  of  Arabian  Theeves,  which  are  in  troupes  about

Land  on  the  those  Countries,  pitching  their  Tents  at  divers  times  in
other  side,  I

may  well  imagine  the  breadth  to  bee  three  or  foure  leagues.  *  And  yet  in  the  foure  houres  that
wee  there  reposed,  we  fell  to  the  provant  wee  brought,  and  we  got  foure  or  five  of  those  Fishes
fresh  out  of  that  River  Jordan,  and  did  broyle  them  upon  hot  coales,  that  of  wood  wee  had
quickly  made  for  that  purpose,  and  J  did  eate  my  part  of  them  so  broyled.

472

JOHN SANDERSON  a.d.

i  60  i.
divers  Playnes  and  fruitfull  places;  living  a  little  Com-
mon-wealth amongst  themselves,  subject  to  no  Law,
begetting  Children,  and  breeding  up  all  sorts  of  Cattle
for  their  use.  They  are  of  divers  Trades,  as  Smiths,
Shoomakers,  Weavers  and  such  like,  and  amongst  them
have  excellent  running  Horses,  wherewith  they  often  ride
a  Theeving.

We  came  to  Almenia,  which  hath  beene  a  great  Citie
also,  seven  or  eight  miles  off,  close  built  by  the  Sea  side,
along  through  which  runneth  a  Channell  of  Jordan  ;  this
undoubtedly  is  Capernaum,  for  that  it  is  over  the  point  of
the  Land,  there  wee  lodged.  So  riding  up  the  higher
part  of  the  Countrey,  wee  came  to  a  reasonable  great
Towne,  which  may  well  bee  Nazareth,  from  thence  to
Cana.  Wee  saw  the  River  Arnon,  so  called  as  some  sayd,
being  a  River  it  seemed  to  us  a  Poole,  apart  from  this
Jordan  ;  which  Jordan,  as  I  have  sayd  before,  runneth
through  the  Lake  of  Sodome,  and  alike  through  the  Sea
Tiberias,  which  is  Genezaret,  passeth  a  Bridge  and  falleth
into  another  little  Sea  or  rather  great  Poole  called  Cadis.
Then  progressed  we  through  another  excellent  scituation
where  had  beene  some  famous  Citie,  like  to  be  Gilgall  or
Nazaret.  For  the  Patriarch  *  of  Jerusalem  told  me,  that
comming  from  Damascus  ward,  we  must  needs  goe  [II.ix.1636.]
through  Nazaret.  So  that  I  say,  either  this  was  Nazareth,  *Ofthis
or  that  formerly  spoken  of ;  but  my  Jewes,  neither  Turkes,  Patrtarc^  I
could  directly  advise  me  which  it  was.

So  by  divers  Townes  wee  came  againe  to  Safet,  which  iov-tng  and
is  Bethel,  before  spoken  of, this  was  the thirteenth  of  kinde  enter-
July,  heere  the  Jewes  stayed  to  keepe  a  solemne  Sabbath,  taynment:  out
were  visited  of  all  the  Priests  in  generall  who  are  cloathed  °j  h" J*™' a' te
in  an  outward  habit  of  White,  but  made  of  Goates  hayre,  0/j  new  j<£s_
as  are  our  Grogerains,  and  some  of  them  in  White  Gro-  tament  Manu-
geraine. With  great  modestie  and  holy  shew  they  came  icriPf  Greeke,

for  which  I
gave  him  sixe  Chequins  in  Gold,  and  I  gave  it  to  my  brother  Doctor  Sanderson,  old  and  tome
as  it  was,  yet  they  the  Translaters  of  Pauls  Epistles  at  his  house  in  Saint  Laurence  Parish,
did  make  some  use  thereof  in  their  Translation,  D.  Barlo,  Bishop.  D.  Hutchinson.  D.  Spencer.
D.  Felton.  D.  Tighe.  Master  Rabbet.  Master  Fen  ton,  i$e.

473

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

one  by  one  to  salute,  imbracing  and  conferring  some  small
time,  and  so  departing. These  my  companions  stranger
Jewes,  bought  many  Bookes,  some  two  or  three  Mules
ladings,  which  were  holy  Bookes  of  the  declaration  of
their  Law. To  Christians  they  will  not  sell  of  some  of
them  for  any  money,  I  imagine  they  thinke  it  a  sinne  so  to
doe. Here  they  gave  almes,  much  money,  and  likewise
sod  meate,  great  Caldrons  full  for  the  Poore,  to  every  one
a  peece  at  a  time,  with  a  loafe  of  Bread  and  Pottage,
with  also  at  other  times  money  ; this  they  did  three  times
in the sixe  dayes  wee  there  remayned. I thinke they
spent,  I  say  the  chiefest  Jew  called  Abraham  Coen,  hee  I
say,  gave  away  heere  at  least  two  thousand  Dollers,  and
one  thousand  at  Jerusalem,  others  in  his  company  accord-
ing to  their  abilitie  reasonable  summes. This  all  to  the
poorer  sort  with  their  owne  hands ; but  to  the  greater
Doctors  and  Schooles,  they  allow  yeerely  stipend,  most  or
all  Jewes  of  abilitie  wheresoever  they  remayne,  although
they  goe  not  to  the  Holy  Land,  yet  such  as  have  beene
there  and  safely  returned,  give  great  voluntary  Almes.
3  Jewes  bones For  once  in  their  life  time,  the  Jewes  say,  they  are  bound
carded  to  the  by  the  Law  0f  Moses  to  goe  thither,  if  they  can  or  bee
b  °J an  ' able,  and  the  Bones  of  many  dead  a  Jewes  are  carryed  to
linz  betweene tne  ^°ty  Land  and  there  buryed. Wee  were  fraughted
Sasa  and with Wools from Constantinople to Sidon, in which
Conetra,  I Sackes  as  most  certaynly  was  told  to mee,  were  many
was  told  by Jewes  bones  put  into  little  Chests,  but  unknowne  to  any
about tkh  ver °^  t^ie  sn*P- The  Jewes  our  Merchants  told  mee  of  them
place  it  was at  mv  returne  from  Jerusalem  to  Saphet ; but  earnestly
where  Saint intreated  mee  not  to  tell  it,  for  feare  of  preventing  them
Paul  was another  time.

hV°Horsf~bft The  nmeteentn>  wee  came  to  b  Conetra,  the  twentieth

/  could  not  tell  to Sasa, and the one and twentieth wee arrived at

how  to  believe  Damasco ; entring  in at the Gate  called  Toma, which

them,  yet  sure  leadeth to Jobar. From Damascus the eleventh of

I  am,  that  wee  August,  going  out  of  the  Gate  called  Amara. Without
did  twice  passe , ° 1  ^ &  ■«  ,  r ,

over  that  very tne  sayd  Gate  are  two  great  Mountaynes,  one  or them

way.  wee  mounted,  it  is  called  Dohonet,  where  on  the  top  there

474

JOHN SANDERSON

is  under  a  Cube  not  leaded,  a  great  huge  Foote  of  stone
set  up,  in  signe  (as  the  Turkes  say)  that  Mahomet  was
there,  and  viewed  the  Valley  wherein  the  Citie  of  Damas-
cus is  built,  calling  it  Paradise,  most  assuredly  thence  to
see  the  same  all  along  the  Ily  plaine  Valley,  being  rarely
mixed  with  many  Trees,  most  glistering  silver  sided
shaking  leaves,  eye  cannot  behold  a  more  pleasanter  sight,
the  Citie  being  long  and  close  as  it  were  to  the  side  of
the  right  hand  Mountayne.  As  wee  came  towards  the
same  from  Sidon,  seemed  at  our  view  so  mingled  amongst
the  branches  all  alongst  the  Valley,  that  out  of  doubt
branched  Damaske  tooke  the  name  thereof,  if  not
patternd  by  it.  The  other  Mountayne  is  called  Dora,  so
wee  came  to  Seraglio  a  Village.

The  one  and  twentieth,  we  passed  the  Mountaynes  now
called  Haghbet  and  Romani,  in  Scripture  called  Halacke,
where  a  farre  off  wee  saw  the  end  of  Hermon.  Close
under  the  side  of  this  Mountayne  Halacke,  open  to  the
very  midst  of  the  Playne  which  is  betweene  it  and  the
Mountayne  Libanon,  is  a  very  great  and  most  ancient
Citie,  called  now  Balbarka,  in  which  at  this  day  standeth
a  row  of  very  great  Pillers,  set  up  as  is  said  in  Salomons
time.  This  Citie  in  Scripture  is  called  Baalgad,  old,
ruined  and  uninhabited  it  is  as  I  remember.  An  old
Piller  also  there  is  in  the  middest  of  the  Plaine  built  of
squared  Stones,  yet  doubtlesse  of  much  later  time  then
the  other  Pillers  that  wee  beheld  from  the  Citie.  This
surely  is  the  Valley  of  Gad.  The  flat  Playne  from  hill
to  hill,  may  bee  in  bredth  some  ten,  eleven  or  twelve
miles  ;  the  length  double  :  it  seemes  the  pleasantest  levell
(as  it  were  a  *  Sea  of  Land)  that  I  have  ever  seene,  it
farre  passeth  the  Playne  of  Antioch.

The  thirteenth,  wee  came  to  a  Village  called  Ainat,  at
the  foote  (or  rather  some  five  miles  ascended)  of  Mount
Libanus,  which  said  Mountaines  the  tediousest  and  I
thinke  the  highest  travelled  in  the  world :  being  the
hottest  time  of  the  yeere  wee  passed  the  very  highest  *
top,  the  foureteenth  day  of  August,  1601.  yet  some  Snow

475

A.D.
[60I .

I'lcasantnesse
of  Damascus.

Branched
Damaske.

*Sea  of  Land,
the  Hils  a
farre  off,
rising  above
this  Playne  to
our  appearance
as  if  zee  should
descrie  land,
we  sailing  as
it  were  upon
the  Sea,  the
Valley  is  so
very  plain  and
spacious,  most
pleasant  to
behold.
*  There  is  a
more  common
way  and  lower
road-way,  but
that  makes
more  miles
before  we  come
to  Tripoly.

A.D.

1 60 1.

Being  at
Tripoly,  in
Anno  1586./
went  divers
times  upon
pleasure  up
those  Lib  anus
Mountains
and  gathered
of  those  Cedar
branches
before  I  fell
sicke.

[II.1x.1637.]

Jewish  blas-
phemies, zvhich
yet  argue
that  they
beleeve  hee
wrought
Miracles,  &c.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

was  there  remayning,  and  so  extreame  cold  that  my  hands
were  benumd  and  seemed  white  all  over,  like  unto  a  kinde
of  Frost,  but  being  descended  three  or  foure  miles,  were
againe  revived  as  formerly.

At  after-noone,  wee  came  to  a  Village  some  seven  or
eight  miles  from  Tripoli,  called  Aigdel,  there  wee  reposed
halfe  an  houre,  and  so  passed  some  old  Townes,  among
the  which  is  Aeon,  a  very  strong  Fort  and  Castle  full  of
great  Ordnance,  heere  the  Emier  of  Tripoli  hath  his
abode.  And  then  wee  had  sight  of  one  plot  of  ground
in  those  Mountaines,  wherein  are  growing  divers  Cedar
c  Trees :  these  are  of  indifferent  bignesse  but  not  very
huge,  the  bodie  streight,  and  branches  spreading  of  very
excellent  shew,  the  broadest  row  of  them  lowest,  and  so
rowes  of  branches  going  up  narrower  &  narrower,  untill
at  the  top  they  do  seeme  in  a  manner  sharpe,  the  fruit
growing  upright,  upon  the  very  branches  (very  finely)
the  leaves  in  forme  of  Rosemary,  but  rather  slenderer  and
sharper,  yet  doe  they  grow  in  pretie  little  bunches  pert
upright  together  with  the  Fruit,  but  the  fruit  beareth  up
above  the  leaves,  with  a  very  small  wrie  stalke,  as  it  were
set  into  the  side  of  the  branch.  That  same  night  very
late  wee  came  to  Tripoly  safely,  the  Lord  bee  ever  praised.

Memorandum,  that,  I  noted  that  in  all  my  Pilgrimage,
the  graver  and  better  sort  of  Jewes,  in  whose  companie  I
travelled,  would  never  reason  with  mee  of  Christ,  for
offending  or  being  displeasant  unto  me,  for  without
scoffing  they  never  talke  of  him  or  his  followers.  Yet  one
day  I  had  from  the  mouthes  of  the  meaner  sort  (aged  men
who  professed  knowledge  in  their  Jewish  Religion)  an
Argument  wherein  is  consideration,  and  in  my  opinion  a
kinde  of  acknowledgement  and  confession.

They  said  that  there  was  a  Stone  in  the  Lords  House
at  Jerusalem,  in  the  middest  of  the  world,  called  Evena-
sediya,  upon  which  there  was  written  the  Name  of  God,
and  that  whosoever  could  get  in  thither,  and  returne  with
it  written,  might  have  what  he  required  and  doe  what  he
would. Which  they  said  Jesus,  Joseph  the  Carpenters

476

JOHN SANDERSON  a.d.

1601.

Sonne  by  extraordinary  meanes  got  unto,  and  wrote  it,
and  cutting  his  owne  thigh,  so  hid  it,  and  escaped  out  of
the  Temple  and  sayd,  Yea  afdoni  anni.  But  was  pre-
sently answered,  Mamzer  bemitadah.  Which  interpreted
as  the  Jewes  told  mee,  is  saith  Christ,  Let  the  people  serve
mee.  The  Oracle  answered,  After  death  not  in  life.
Then  say  they,  at  first  hee  began  to  flie,  and  make  of
Earth  Birds,  with  many  more  such  like  workes,  as  these
Jewes  to  mee  confessed,  in  an  opprobrious  and  very  scorn-
full  manner ;  adding  further,  that  they  marvelled  how
wee  Christians  could  bee  so  led,  by  one  Peter,  and  Paul,
John,  Marie,  &c.  Further  adding,  that  it  was  not  possible  Jewish  boast-
for  the  best  Learned  amongst  all  Christians,  to  expound  ^fj"1*
the  meaning  of  the  Letter  A.  and  that  their  Doctors  could,
onely  upon  that  first  letter  write  whole  Volumes,  to  be
studied  in  untill  the  end  of  the  world.  And  they  knew
they  said,  that  Jerusalem  should  bee  built  againe,  and
their  Messias  come  to  make  them  Princes,  as  they  have
beene  in  times  past :  but  then  to  Governe  all  the  world,
and  that  the  other  dispersed  Tribes  who  at  this  day  they
I  say,  doe  live  in  Ethiopia  but  cannot  come  out  thence,  by
I  reason  of  a  Sea  of  Sand,  which  parts  Egypt  and  Ethiopia,  Jewish
'  the  said  Sea  flowing;  and  is  continually  troubled,  except  dreams  .-them-
every  seventh  day,  (which  is  their  Sabbath)  so  that  they  5and-ie  Sea^
cannot  passe  it,  untill  the  time  appointed  by  Adonai  (God
Almightie.)  Many  other  opinions  they  have,  as  that
God  sends  their  soules  if  they  have  not  at  first  forgive-
nesse,  twice  more  into  other  new  Bodies  in  the  world,  to
amend  and  become  better,  and  then  either  receiveth  or  Tratumigra-
rejecteth  them  according  to  their  deserts ;  and  that  in  tton  °fSou/es.
what  part  soever  of  the  world  they  dye  and  are  buried,
their  Bodies  must  all  rise  to  Judgement  in  the  Holy
Land,  out  of  the  Valley  of  Jehosophat,  which  causeth
that  the  greater  and  richer  sort  of  them,  have  their  Bones
convayed  to  some  part  thereof  by  their  kindred  or  friends.
By  which  meanes,  they  are  freed  of  a  labour  to  scrape
thither  through  the  ground,  which  with  their  nayles  they
(say  they)  hold  they  must,  who  are  not  there  buried  or

477

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 60 1.

convayed  thither  by  others.  Other  talke  I  had  from  them,
offering  as  little  taste  of  truth,  as  this  last  reasonlesse
likelihood.  So  I  them  left  to  become  wiser  and  better,  if
Goodnesse  will,  who  in  all  bee  ever  glorified  ;  and  wee
Christians,  by  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  sancti-
fied and  saved,  our  sinnes  being  drowned  in  his  Blood,  by
the  spirit  of  true  Beliefe  in  his  powerfull  Predestination.
Glory,  glory,  glory,  for  ever  and  ever. Amen.

THus  have  I  given  thee  the  Voyages  of  Master  John
Sanderson.  Touching  the  difficulties  of  entrance
into  Jerusalem,  I  thought  good  to  adde  this  which  fol-
loweth  ;  the  rather  that  my  Countreymen  may  be  advised,
before  they  adventure  this  Jerosolymitan  Pilgrimage ;
Superstition  on  the  one  side  and  Tyrannie  on  the  other
endangering  the  best  Pilgrimage,  which  is  the  peace-
able way  of  a  good  Conscience  to  that  Jerusalem
which  is  above.  For  if  a  man  doth  not  give  content
to  the  Friers,  which  a  good  Conscience  cannot  doe  (except
some  of  their  Patrons  and  Benefactors  letters,  or  other
extraordinary  provision  helpe)  you  see  these  superstitious
Friers  to  prove  malicious  lyers,  as  here  they  slandred
Master  Sanderson  to  bee  a  Jew,  and  Master  Timberlie
to  bee  a  Spie  ;  that  I  mention  not  foure  other  English-
men not  long  before,  seene  to  enter  their  Monasterie  but
never  seene  to  come  foorth,  as  the  Patriarch  of  Jerusalem
confidently  affirmed  to  Master  Sanderson.  Hence  it  is  that
Master  Timberlie  affirmeth,  that  none  enter  the  Citie  but
protected  by  them,  which  others  having  otherwise  entred
by  extraordinary  course  disavow,  and  yet  may  that  speech
(understood  of  ordinarie  entrance)  bee  true.  For  Master
Timberlies  passage  wee  will  adde  it  to  the  end :  for
Master  Sanderson,  thus  hee  writeth.

Now  Master  Purchas,  take  a  memorandum  of  mee,
that  my  first  dayes  entertaynment  into  Jerusalem  was
somewhat  crosse,  in  that  I  crossed  two  Friers  which  came
to  bid  mee  welcome.  I  said  that  I  had  not  to  use  of  their
kindnesse, because I was  recommended to the  Greeke

478

JOHN SANDERSON

1 60 1.

Patriark,  so  in  some  colour  they  left  mee,  but  a  Turke
presently  after  came  in  the  Name  of  the  Bassa,  and  tooke
my  Sword  from  my  side,  which  had  cost  mee  thirtie
Dollers  in  Damasco,  alleadging  that  no  Christian  ought
to  enter  the  Citie  Gates,  with  his  Sword  girt  about  him,
but  that  I  might  have  borne  it  in  my  hand.  And  yet
their  Custome  is,  to  priviledge  the  Jewes  in  that  case.
Thus  I  lost  my  Sword  and  after  was  ledde  to  the  Caia  of
the  Bassa,  who  related  to  mee  the  errour  I  had  com-
mitted, and  further  demanded  of  me  a  Present  for  his
Master,  and  another  for  himselfe  :  then  I  shewed  him  the
Great  Turkes  Letter,  which  imported  a  command  to  use
mee  respectively  wheresoever  I  came  in  his  Dominions  :
he  read  the  Letter  with  great  regard,  and  said  that  he  had
not,  neither  would  he  offer  me  any  abuse,  nor  any  in
Hierusalem  should  doe  me  wrong,  and  that  he  would
passe  over  my  errour,  concerning  the  presumption  to  enter
the  Citie  Gate  with  my  Sword  by  my  side,  if  in  courtesie  [II.ix.1638.]
I  would  bestow  a  Vesture  of  Velvet  upon  the  Bassa  his
Master,  and  a  Garment  of  Satten  upon  himselfe :  which  I
denied  to  doe,  hee  then  presently  commited  me  to  the  Sub-
bassie  againe  and  grisly  Turke,  and  his  rascally  terrible
Attendants  to  bee  laid  in  Prison  :  but  the  Jewes  in  whose
company  I  had  travelled  fell  downe  at  his  feet,and  entreated
for  me,  often  kissing  his  hand  &  Garment,  praying  him
to  pardon  my  bold  behaviour  and  words  of  displeasure
with  much  whispering ;  they  agreed  for  mee  that  I  should
give  him  twelve  Chickquines  in  Gold ;  wherewith,
together  also  the  losse  of  my  Sword,  I  escaped  at  that
time.  But  two  dayes  after  the  Friers  set  upon  mee
againe,  and  feed  the  Turkes  lustily  and  largely,  thinking
to  doe  me  some  displeasure,  but  effected  not  their  pur-
pose, for  I  still  defied  them  and  their  Padre  Guardian,
which  in  a  manner  broke  their  very  galls,  only  they  did
put  mee  to  some  trouble  and  charge.  And  I  in  their
despight  kept  company  with  the  Patriarke  of  the  Greekes
and  his  Coloyros,  (I  meane  Priests  and  Friers)  and  I
went  not  at  all  to  the  Romish  Clergie,  nor  visited  their

479

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

Padre  Guardian  (though  the  poore  Greeke  Patriarke  did
very  much,  and  often  intreate  mee  to  it)  at  which  they
were  so  exceedingly  distempered,  that  that  my  scorne  of
them  was  written  of  to  Tripoly,  they  certifying  an  old
Frier  thereof,  all  past  on  my  part  in  Hierusalem,  which
Tripoly  Frier  at  my  comming  ducked  very  kindly,  and
came  to  our  House  to  bid  mee  welcome  from  the  Holy
Land  :  yet  he  with  a  Fowling-peece  shot  made  at  me
two  sundry  times,  out  of  an  Italians  House  where  he
kept,  I  being  trayned  abroad  by  a  Jew,  a  Broker  an  old
acquaintance  of  mine,  whose  name  was  Daniell  Gallana,
but  as  God  would  have  it,  missed  both  the  times  :  the  first
time  I  suspected  nothing,  although  the  Bullet  fell  within
my  length,  and  flapt  against  a  Tree  about  the  Root ;  the
Jew  taking  occasion  to  goe  somewhat  before  me ;  we
hearing  the  report,  I  told  him  how  neere  the  bullet  fell :
hee  said  that  it  was  Signior  Francisco,  shooting  at  some
Bird  from  the  Tarras,  or  out  of  the  Window,  and  I  then
imagined  no  other.  Some  few  dayes  after  walking  abroad
againe  the  second  time,  about  the  very  same  place,  another
bullet  whirlde  very  neere  before  me,  when  on  a  sudden
the  Jew  lingered  behind  me ;  then  I  mistrusted,  and
walked  no  more  that  way,  nor  at  all  againe  with  that
Jew,  And  praysed  God  in  my  heart  for  that  escape,  as  for
many  other  former  Deliverances,  from  Murthering,
Poysoning,  Shipwrack,  &c.  with  intolerable  agrievances
and  terrible  temptations,  in  the  course  of  my  Pilgrimage.

I  Have  in  my  hands  three  original!  Certificates  or
Letters  of  commendations  written  in  behalfe  of  the
said  Master  John  Sanderson,  two  in  Moderne  Greeke,
the  third  in  Talmudicall  Ebrew.  The  first  from  the
Patriarke  of  Constantinople,  to  the  Patriarke  of  Jerusa-
lem, comending  him  to  his  care  ;  the  second,  a  Testi-
monial! of  the  Patriarke  of  Jerusalem,  to  this  sense.

Sophronius  by  the  mercv  of  God,  Patriarke  of  the
holy  Citie  Jerusalem.  Master  John  Sanderson,  English-
man, hath  come  to  the  holy  Citie  of  Jerusalem,  hath  there

480

JOHN SANDERSON  ad.

1601.

done  his  Devotion,  hath  visited  the  Sepulchre,  Bethlehem,
and  Gethsemani,  Mount  Olivet,  the  Ascention,  Bethania,
the  Sepulchre  of  Lazarus,  Jordan,  Hebron,  and  the  rest
of  the  holy  places  where  Jesus  Christ  walked  :  and  this
present  Writing  is  made  to  testifie  the  truth.  Amen.
Dated  the  Yeere  of  the  World  7 1 1 1 .  The  eleventh  of
July.  Sophronius  by  the  mercie  of  God  Patriarke  of
Jerusalem.

This  was  written,  sayth  our  Author,  by  the  Patriarke
his  owne  hand.  Hee  was  a  grave  man  with  a  grey
beard,  had  eight  or  ten  Attendants :  at  the  first  meeting
in  his  Monasterie,  offered  his  hand  to  kisse  after  their
fashion ;  Master  Sanderson  using  his  owne,  kissing  his
hand,  and  touching  therewith  the  Patriarkes,  wherewith
he  seemed  well  pleased.  The  occasion  of  his  Jewish
societie  he  thus  delivereth.

When  it  was  determined,  that  Master  Best  the  Cap-
taine  and  Master  of  the  Mermaid,  at  our  arrivall  at  Sidon,
with  three  other  and  my  selfe  should  have  gone  for  Joppa,
and  so  to  Jerusalem,  but  the  Master,  by  danger  of  Rockes,
and  rising  of  Winde,  thought  not  good  to  leave  the  ship,
and  the  other  three  passingers  would  not ;  so  that  I  was
faine  (holding  my  determination)  to  post  alone  without
fellow  Christian,  in  company  of  Honourable  Jewes ;  in
which  journey  by  the  Principall,  named  Abraham  Coen,
who  went  to  accompany  his  Wifes  Father  to  Saphet,  which
is  at  Bethel ;  and  there  to  end  his  dayes,  after  two  thou-
sand Dollors  at  least  distributed  in  charity  to  those
Colledges  of  Jewes ;  We  went  to  Jerusalem,  and  in  our
returne  wee  tooke  Tiberias  and  Capernaum  in  our  way,
which  was  somewhat  out  of  the  way,  direct  to  Damascus.
But  this  my  companion  Jew  Merchant,  and  a  dweller  in
Sio  and  Smirna,  was  so  respective  kind  and  courteous,
that  never  in  any  Christians  company  of  what  degree
soever  I  ever  did  receive  better  content :  for  morall  car-
riage towards  all,  understanding  and  honestie  ;  this  Jew
was  without  company,  I  kept  his  company  three  moneths
together  by  reason  that  from  Sidon  wee  went  to  Damascus,

IX  481  2H

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

to  disburthen  him  and  some  of  his,  of  at  least  ten  thou-
sand Chequins,  which  he  left  there  to  be  employed  in
commodities  till  our  returne  thither  againe :  So  over
Libanus  to  Tripoly  wee  went,  and  there  the  Gentile  Jew
with  his  Damasco  commodities  and  Attendants,  departed
by  Sea  to  Sio,  not  without  moist  eyes  betweene  Jew  and
Christian,  when  wee  parted  company.  A  most  devout,
zealous,  and  soft  hearted  man  he  was  ;  I  cannot  speake  too
much  good  of  him  in  regard  of  his  great  humanitie  and
extraordinary  charitie,  his  measure  being  more  in  those
performances,  then  is  to  be  found  in  many  of  us
Christians.

The  Jewish  Testimonie  written  in  Hebrew,  and  sub-
scribed by  divers  Jewes,  I  have  here  added.

[II.ix.1639.]  rT™>Hese  are  to  declare  the  Journey  of  the  Worshipfull
1  have  &** t  ±_  Master  John  Sanderson  English  Gentleman,  who
Rabbinical™  came  hither  unto  Jerusalem  the  holy  Citie  (may  it  shortly
Hebrew,  with  bee  built)  with  the  Caravan  and  company  of  honourable
the  Jewish  Jewes,  upon  Tuesday  the  tenth  of  the  Moone  Tamas,
Subscriptions,  Anno  536 1.  of  the  Creation  of  the  World;  and  went
translation™  w^  them  unto  many  holy  places,  and  hath  brought  with
thereof.  him  also  Letters  of  favour  from  the  Patriarke  of  Con-

stantinople, for  the  Patriarke  of  this  place ;  and  he  hath
sent  together  with  him  of  his  men ;  and  they  have  shewed
him  all  the  places  of  their  Devotion,  and  they  brought
him  to  Bethelem.  And  to  declare  the  truth  I  have  written
and  under-written  this  with  my  owne  hand,  for  to  give
knowledge  thereof  unto  all  the  people  of  his  Citie,  &
the  Gentlemen  of  his  places :  and  all  the  places  which  he
went  to,  he  hath  kept  a  true  note  of  under  his  owne
*Subscrip-  hand.  I  that  write  this  in  Jerusalem  the  holy  Citie  (may
tions.  it  be  shortly  built)  The seventeenth  of  the nominated

*Thisandthe  Moone  and  Yeere.  I  Gedelia  Cordoero  (he  was  the
following  Hacham  *  or  Priest)  Abraham  Coen,  the  sonne  of  Isack

their  persons  Coen,  an  Inhabitant  in  Sio  (this  *  was  Rabbi  Abraham,  the
is  added  by  '  chiefe  Jew  of  the  company)  Salomon  Marabi,  an  Inhabi-
M.  Sanderson,  tant  of  Tirria. Jacob  the  sonne  of  David,  a  dweller  in

482

JOHN SANDERSON  ad.

1601.

Smirna,  Abram  Alvo,  a  dweller  in  Constantinople  ;  this
ancient  Jew  was  their  Cooke  all  the  journey.  Mose
Rasimo,  a  dweller  in  Damasco,  who  of  devotion  went
with  us  to  the  Holy  Land,  and  in  whose  House  in
Damasco,  wee  did  remayne  and  lodge  both  at  our  going
and  comming,  and  thence  we  went  to  Tripoly  over  the
highest  top  of  Libanus,  where  was  some  Snow  remayning,
though  it  were  in  the  heate  of  Summer,  namely,  the
fourteenth  day  of  August,  1601.  from  the  bottome  to
the  top,  they  accounted  it  to  be  at  the  least  eight  miles
up :  and  about  ten  miles  downe  to  the  Towne  of  Tripoly.
Salomon  di  Urbino,  a  dweller  in  Constantinople.  Isack  ;
he  was  the  sonne  of  the  above  named  Jacob,  he  was  of
yeeres  one  or  two  and  twentie,  and  yet  his  Father  had
much  feare  of  him ;  in  travelling  those  Sodomiticall
places,  because  as  he  said,  the  Boy  was  beardlesse.  The
old  Jew  Father  in  Law  to  Rabbi  Abraham,  we  left  to  die
at  Bethel ;  which  they  do  call  Saphet  Casa  di  Dios.  At
our  first  entrance  thither,  the  Jewish  women  cried  from
the  tops  of  their  Houses ;  Sei  ben  venito  a  la  casa  di  Dios
Rabbi  Abraham.

MEletus,  by  the  mercie  of  God,  Pope  and  Patriarke  Having  men-
of Alexandria: Most Illustrious Ambassador of  thned two
the  Renowned  Queene  of  England,  my  beloved  sonne,  p^triarkes
these  dayes  are  so  perverse  by  the  iniquitie  of  our  times,  Letters,  I
that  if  our  Lord  prevent  not,  there  is  no  hope  at  all  of  thought  Jit  to
any  good. The  Archbishop  of  Efasus,  hath  attempted  to  adde  thls
get  also  the  Archbishopricke  of  Smirna,  from  the  Bishop  l*0'Je°u*
that  holds  it,  hee  being  absent,  to  me  it  appeares  unjust,  subject.
neither  is  it  just,  and  it  is  also  prohibited  by  the  Univer-
sall  Councels, that  one  be  consecrated in two Chaires,
though  hee  should  be  worthy ; not  such  a  one  as  he  is.
The  matter  is  also  to  be  considered  of,  in  presence  of  the
other  both  Actor  and  accused ; it  appeares that these
Musselmen  Turkes  doe  the  contrary,  they  came  to  mee
that  I  should  under  write  a  matter  that  is  not  judged  of ;
a  thing  also  which  they  cannot  judge  of :  I  denied  once,

483

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

IOOI.

twice,  and  divers  times ;  even  now  a  gallant  fellow  came
to  me  with  the  same  writing,  and  said  that  your  Lord-
ships Neighbour  Signior  Mahomet  Aga,  by  one  of  his
Capogies  sent  also  a  command  that  I  should  under-write.
I  have  abstayned  purposing  to  come  this  Evening  for  to
have  likewise  the  opinion  of  your  most  Illustrious  Lord-
ship ;  for  I  am  resolved  to  depart  hence,  rather  then  to
have  to  doe  with  men  void  of  all  conscience.  Let  your
Lordships  write  unto  me,  and  if  you  find  the  distaste  of
this  miserable  time  of  ours ;  bewaile  you  also  that  wee
have  beene  borne  in  such  an  Age,  worse  then  the  World  of
Iron  stormie.

Our  Lord  blesse  you  and  save  you,  this  sixe  and  twen-
tieth of  May,  1593. From  the  Cell  of  the  Patriarke  of
Alexandria.
m  s. X  This  holy  Patriarke  Padre  Melete,  was  a  very  comely

report  ofP blacke  long  bearded  man. He  never  did  eate  any  sort
Melete.  of  flesh  in  all  his  life  time. He  often  frequented,  and

was  very  inward  with  our  Ambassadour  Master  Edward
Barton ;  I  have  heard  him  reason  often,  and  seene  him
pray  one  time,  in  the  Ambassadors  chamber  together
with  us :  he  spake  in  Greeke,  which  Master  Barton  did
little  understand ;  my  selfe  nothing  at  all  except  Theos,
&c.  When  he  hath  eaten  with  the  Ambassador,  our
Table  was  ever  furnished  with  the  best  fish,  and  not  the
weakest  Wine  ;  yet  ever  he  had  a  young  Priest  for  his
Taster  of  all  the  Wine  he  dranke ;  and  all  the  while  that
the  cup  was  at  the  Patriarkes  mouth,  the  sixe  other
Coloyros  that  waited  on  him  at  Meales,  did  ever  pray  in
a  soft  kind  of  voice.  This  man  was  very  meeke  in  the
shew  of  his  behaviour  towards  all  sorts  and  manner  of
men,  which  amongst  his  Greekes  made  him  to  be  much
respected  and  beloved.  Yet  did  he  aspire  and  got  by
Master  Bartons  meanes  and  his  money,  to  be  Patriarke
of  Constantinople,  which  soone  he  was  weary  of.  The
Turkes  Ministers  did  so  much  and  extraordinarily  exact
upon  him,  so  that  before  his  death  hee  resigned  it ;  and
went from Constantinople, and did decease at his old

484

JOHN SANDERSON  aj>.

1601.

Patriarkado  Alexandria,  and  there  lyeth  buried.  Of  all
these  Moderne  Greekes,  I  have  not  heard  of  a  better  man  ;
most  certainly  he  was  a  true  Christian  Professor,  although
the  times  permitted  not  that  he  might  declare  it,  except
in  private,  to  some  of  Learning  and  understanding.
Master  Edward  Barton  the  Ambassador,  as  Master  Henry
Lillo  did  tell  mee,  who  did  see  it,  said,  that  few  dayes
before  his  decease,  the  Patriarke  and  he  did  weepe  upon
one  anothers  neckes,  he  kissed  the  dying  man,  who  had
seriously  recommended  a  Kinsman,  and  other  his  Ser-
vants unto  him,  pretending  (that  of  the  monies  which  by
his  promises  he  was  behind  with  him)  his  desire  was  that
he  would  be  good  unto  his  said  Servants,  and  so  they
parted.

I  have  here  added  also  a  Letter  from  Master  Biddulphe,  [II.  ix.  1640.]
or  Biddle ;  dated,  Aleppo,  October  the  two  and  twentieth
Anno  Dom.  1601.  I  could  have  added  other  notes  with
Master  Sandersons  Charts  and  Delineations  of  the  Citie
and  Temple  of  Hierusalem ;  but  I  dare  not  be  too
tedious,  for  which  cause  I  also  omit  divers  Letters  written
in  those  parts  to  and  from  him.

IN  right  heartie  manner  I  commend  mee  unto  you  (good
friend  Master  Sanderson)  with  heartie  thankes  for  all
your  former  kindnesse  towards  mee,  and  lately  towards
my  poore  Brother  who  hath  written  to  me  of  your  kind-
nesse towards  him.  I  pray  you  impute  it  not  unto  mee
for  ungratefulnesse,  or  forgetfulnesse  that  I  have  not
saluted  you  with  my  Letters  all  this  time.  The  last
newes  I  heard  of  you  was,  that  you  were  gone  from
Tripoly  to  Cyprus,  and  from  thence  to  Zante,  otherwise
you  had  heard  from  me  sooner,  and  so  much  the  rather
because  we  have  both  commenced  Hogies  in  Hierusalem,
which  Degree  no  Universitie  in  the  World  can  give
besides.  But  if  your  Hogiship  hath  beene  as  charitable  to
you,  as  mine  hath  beene  to  mee,  you  will  take  as  little
delight  to  remember  it  as  I  doe,  for  mine  cost  mee  two
hundred  and  seventie  Dollers. And  at  my  returne  to

485

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 60 1.

Aleppo,  I  heard  of  the  losse  of  the  Rebecca,  wherein  I
had  a  bale  of  Nutmegs,  besides  a  Carpet,  and  other  Tokens
which  I  sent  to  my  friends.

I  have  beene  sundry  times  sorrie  that  ever  I  came  out
of  England,  or  that  I  had  not  gone  with  you  to  Con-
stantinople. For  I  have  had  here  no  profit  besides  my
bare  wages,  and  scarce  that.  But  great  discontentment
sundry  wayes,  especially  of  late  by  that  (  .)

Wherefore  as  you  have  beene  my  friend  ever  since  our
first  acquaintance  undeservedly,  so  I  pray  you  continue.
And  I,  although  I  bee  no  other  wayes  able  to  pleasure
you,  yet  I  will  not  be  unmindfull  of  you  in  my  Prayers,
that  God  would  grant  you  continuall  health,  long  life  and
much  happinesse  in  this  life,  and  everlasting  felicitie  in  the
life  to  come.

Yours  in  the  Lord  wholy  to  command,

William  Biddle.

I  pray  commend  me  to  Master  Timberley,  John  Broc-
hurst,  William  Pate,  &c.

AFter  so  often  mention  of  Master  Timberley,  I  have
here  given  you  some  Extracts  of  his  Journall,  (the
whole  the  Reader  may  see  printed)  Before  the  Impres-
sion I  writ  out  of  a  Manuscript  many  yeers  agoe.  The
whole  Journall,  of  which  thus  much  I  have  here  presented
in  memorie  of  him  and  Master  Burrell.

486

HENRY TIMHEKLEY

A.IJ.

*0r  Timber-
lake.

Chap. XVII.

A  Report  of  the  Voyage  of  Master  Henrie  Tim-
berley*  from  Cairo  in  Egypt,  to  Jerusalem  in
fiftie  dayes 1601.

Departed  from  Grand  Cairo,  the  ninth  of

March 1600.  which  day  I  came  to  the

place  where  the  Virgin  Mary  stayed  with

our  Saviour  when  shee  fledde  into  Egypt.

From thence with my fellow  Traveller

Master  Burrell  in  our  Pilgrimes  Weed,  M.  Burrell.

came that night to a Towne named

Canko,  where  wee  lodged  that  night  in  a  yard  upon  the
bare  ground,  wanting  no  Fleas  nor  Lice.  The  next  day
we  came  into  the  Land  of  Goshen,  and  here  we  found
company  of  the  Turkes  Jewes,  and  Christians,  about
seven  hundred  and  fiftie,  which  were  all  bound  over  the
Deserts  of  Arabia  for  Damasco.  Among  which  were
some  two  and  twentie  Greekes  and  Armenians,  bound  for
Hierusalem,  of  which  company  I  was  right  glad.  Here
at  this  Towne  wee  stayed  two  dayes  and  one  night,  called
in  their  Language  Philbits,  at  which  Towne  I  went  into
the  Houses  where  I  saw  the  secret  of  hatching  Chickens  m
by  heate  artificiall  in  greater  abundance  then  I  had  before
seene  at  Cairo.

The  thirteenth  of  March,  we  departed  from  Philbits,
and  travelled  all  night  in  company  of  the  Caravan  of
Damasco,  And  the  fourteenth,  at  nine  of  the  clocke  we
pitched  our  Tents  at  Bohaire,  in  the  Land  of  Goshen.
From  thence  that  night,  and  pitched  at  (  )  on

the  East  of  Goshen,  on  the  edge  of  the  Deserts.  Here
we  stayed  two  dayes  for  feare  of  the  wild  Arabians,
departed  the  seventeenth :  and  that  night  passed  over  a
great  Bridge,  under  the  which  the  salt  water  standeth.
This  water  commeth  out  of  the  Sea  from  the  parts  of
Damiata,  and  was  cut  out  of  that  place  by  mens  hand
some  one hundred and  fiftie miles into the  Land by

487

m  If  Thunder
or  troubled
Aire  happen,
all  die. They
all  have  a  claw
too  much  or  too
little. The
Hatcher  hath
the  tenth  for
his  Fornace  &
paines.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

Ptolomeus  King  of  Egypt,  intending  to  bring  the  Medi-
terranean and  Red  Seas  together :  but  foreseeing  hereby
the  drowning  of  all  the  Countrey,  hee  left  and  built  this
Bridge  which  is  the  parting  of  Egypt  and  Arabia.  We
were  no  sooner  past  this  place,  but  we  were  set  upon  by
the  Arabians.  Notwithstanding  we  were  above  1000.  wee
had  a  Camell  laden  with  Callicoes  taken  away,  and  foure
[II.ix.1641.]  men  Sore  hurt,  and  one  of  the  foure  mortally.  Thus
they  ranne  away  with  their  prey,  and  wee  could  not
remedie  it  because  it  was  in  the  night.  So  the  eigh-
teenth in  the  morning  we  pitched  at  a  Well  of  brackish
waters.  In  this  uprore  in  the  night  past  my  fellow
Master  Burrell  escaped  very  hardly.  Here  wee  reposed
our  selves  till  three  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone  called
Lazera.  For  the  Arabians  and  Egyptians  divide  the  day
but  into  foure  parts.  And  then  we  departed,  and  the
next  morning  pitched  at  a  Castle,  in  the  Deserts  called
Cattay.  This  is  one  of  the  fchree  Castles  which  the
Turkes  keepe  in  the  Deserts  to  defend  the  Travellers  from
the  Arabians,  and  therefore  here  we  pay  a  certayne  taxe,
that  is  to  say,  sixtie  pieces  of  silver,  and  two  pence  the
piece  for  the  head  of  man  or  boy,  and  seventie  sixe  for  a
laden  Camell,  and  fourteene  for  a  Mule.  Hence  we
departed  and  pitched  at  another  brackish  Well,  thence  at
another.  The  twentieth  of  March  at  the  second  Castle
called  Arris,  here  our  taxe  was  twentie  pieces  of  silver
by  the  head,  a  Camell  thirtie.  From  hence  with  many
Souldiers  to  conduct  us  to  the  third  Castle :  and  so
making  a  long  Journey  of  foure  and  twentie  houres,  we
arrived  at  a  Castle  called  Raphael,  here  we  payd  tenne
pieces  of  Silver,  and  a  beast  twentie.  In  the  one  and
twentieth  we  pitched  our  Tents  at  Gaza  in  Palestina,  a
goodly  fruitfull  Countrey,  beeing  now  cleere  of  the
Deserts.  Here  did  I  see  the  place,  as  they  say,  where
Samson  pulled  downe  the  two  Pillars.  Here  we  paid
two  and  twentie  for  the  beast,  and  tenne  for  the  head.
The  two  and  twentieth  we  pitched  at  a  place  called  of  the
Arabians,  Canvy,  of  the  Christians  Bersheba. Here  we

HENRY TIiMJJEKLEY  ad.

1600.

paid  two  for  the  head,  and  foure  for  the  beast.  The  three
and  twentieth  we  pitched  upon  a  Greene  under  the  wals
of  Ramoth  Gilead.  Hence  the  next  morning,  I  with  the
other  Christians  departed  toward  Hierusalem,  the  Cara-
van to  Damasco,  yet  we  pitcht  short  that  night  at  a  place
in  Arabia,  called  Cude  chelaneb,  being  fifteene  miles  from
Hebron,  from  Hierusalem  five  little  miles.  Hence  wee
departed  in  the  morning  being  our  Lady  day,  and  at  nine
of  the  clocke  I  saw  Hierusalem,  kneeling  said  the  Lords
Prayer,  singing  we  went  to  the  West  Gate,  and  then
stayed.  For  it  is  not  lawfull  for  any  Christian  to  enter
not  admitted.  Then  Master  Burrell  requested  mee  to  say
that  I  was  a  Greeke,  only  to  avoid  going  to  Masse  :  but  I
not  having  the  Greeke  Tongue,  refused  absolutely  so  to
doe ;  affirming  to  him,  even  at  the  Gates,  that  I  would
neither  deny  my  Countrey  nor  Religion,  so  that  when
they  asked  what  we  were,  Master  Burrell  answered  in
the  Greeke  Tongue  that  hee  was  a  Greeke,  and  I  an
Englishman,  so  hee  was  admitted  to  the  Greeke  Patriarch,
and  I  was  taken  and  cast  into  Prison,  after  that  I  had
stayed  an  houre  at  the  Gate,  for  the  Turkes  did  all  denie
that  they  had  heard  either  of  my  Queene  or  Countrey,  or
that  shee  paid  them  any  tribute.  Then  the  Pater
Guardian,  who  is  their  defender  of  all  the  Christians  Pil-
grimes,  and  the  principall  actor  of  my  imprisonment,
because  I  would  not  offer  my  selfe  under  his  protection,
but  said  I  would  rather  bee  protected  under  the  Turke
then  under  him,  made  the  Turke  so  much  my  foe,  that
they  supposed  I  was  a  spie,  and  so  would  not  let  mee  out
of  the  dungeon.  Now  for  my  deliverance  you  shall
understand,  that  being  at  Ramoth  Gilead  I  went  to  a
Fountaine  to  wash  my  foule  linnen,  in  which  time  one
came  and  called  me  by  my  name,  and  tooke  my  linnen
from  mee  to  helpe  me.  Whereat  I  marvelling :  What
Captaine,  quoth  hee,  in  the  Frank  tongue,  I  hope  you
have  not  forgotten  me.  It  is  not  yet  rortie  dayes  since
you  landed  mee  at  Alexandria  among  the  passengers,
which  you  brought  from  Argier  in  your  Ship  called  the

489

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

Trojan.  Here  is  also  another  that  you  brought.  I
asked  if  he  dwelt  there,  hee  answered  no,  but  that  hee  and
his  fellow  were  going  in  the  Caravan  to  Damasko,  which
they  call  Sham  :  and  from  thence  to  Bagdet,  which  wee
call  Babylon,  and  so  to  Mecha  to  make  a  Hadge,  for  so
they  are  called  when  they  have  beene  at  Mecha.  He  dwelt
in  Fez  in  Barbary.  After  better  view  I  somewhat  remem-
bred  him  to  have  beene  of  these  three  hundred  and  sixt'ie
I  brought  to  those  parts.  This  brought  me  to  the  other,
which  both  agreed  that  the  other  should  goe  in  the
Caravan,  and  this  with  me  to  Jerusalem.

This  Moore  accompanying  me,  when  he  saw  that  I
was  in  prison,  wept,  and  bid  me  be  of  good  comfort,  and
away  he  went  to  the  Bassa  of  the  Citie,  and  to  the  Saniack,
and  tooke  his  oath  that  I  was  a  Mariner  in  a  Ship  that
had  brought  two  hundred  and  fiftie,  or  three  hundred
Moores  into  Egypt,  from  Argeir  and  Tunis  which  came
to  go  for  Mecha.  The  Moore,  because  he  was  a  Mussel-
man  so  prevailed,  that  hee  came  that  night  to  the  prison
with  sixe  Turkes,  and  called  mee  to  the  doore,  and  there
told  me,  that  if  I  would  go  to  the  house  of  the  Pater
Guardian,  and  rest  in  his  protection,  I  should  onely  hold
a  Waxe  candle,  to  which  I  consented,  and  so  paying  the
charges  of  the  prison  departed,  and  went  to  the  Pater
Guardians  Monastery.  He  bad  mee  very  welcome,  and
said,  hee  marvelled  that  I  should  so  much  erre  from
Christianitie,  as  to  put  my  selfe  rather  under  the  Turkes
protection,  then  under  his.  I  told  him  I  did  it  because
I  would  not  goe  to  Masse ;  here  hath  beene,  saith  hee,
many  English,  but  Catholikes,  and  told  the  Turke  at  the
gate  they  were  French-men  or  Britons ;  for  the  Turke
understandeth  not  the  word  English-men.  About  twi-
light came  Master  Burrell,  although  hee  professed  himselfe
a  Greeke,  for  all  Christians  must  here  have  the  Popish
protection.  We  being  thus  together  in  the  Court  of  the
Monastery,  there  came  to  us  some  ten  or  twelve  fat  Friers,
with  each  a  Waxe  candle  burning,  and  two  to  spare  for
mee and M. Burrel. Then another Frier brought a

490

HENRY TIMlifiULfiY  ad.

i  60  i.
bason  of  hot  water,  with  Roses  and  other  flowers  therein,
and  so  there  was  a  carpet  spread,  and  chayres  set  with
cushions  in  them.  Then  the  Pater  Guardian  set  us  downe,
and  gave  each  of  us  a  candle  in  our  hands.  Then  came  [II.ix.1642.]
a  Frier  and  pulled  off  our  hose  and  set  the  water  on  the
carpet,  and  when  hee  began  to  wash  our  feet,  twelve  Friers
began  to  sing,  and  so  continued  till  our  feet  were  washed  :
then  they  altogether  brought  us  singing  to  a  Chappell  in
the  said  Monastery  :  where  one  preached  how  meritorious
a  thing  it  was  to  come  into  the  Holy  Land.  Hence  they
brought  us  into  a  chamber  to  supper,  which  we  for  feare
of  poyson  doubted  to  eat. Thence  to  bed.  His  observa-

The sixe and twentieth, we rose early, and having  turn  here  are
saluted  the  Pater  Guardian,  hee  appointed  us  seven  Friers  0™ttud>
and  a  Trudgeman,  and  forth  wee  went  to  see  the  holy  ^i^geh  out
places  within  the  Citie,  except  the  Sepulchre,  and  at  every  0f  others  given
place  where  wee  came  we  kneeled  downe  and  said  the  you  the  sight  of
Lords  Prayer,  &c.  these  holies-

To  conclude,  it  was  prophesied  that  Jerusalem  should
bee  an  heape  of  stones :  so  is  it  come  to  passe  that  I  could
see  no  ground  neere  to  the  Citie  by  fifteene  or  sixteene
miles,  the  Plaine  of  Jericho  excepted,  but  it  is  all  a  heape
of  stones,  in  such  abundance  as  may  bee  wondred  at  how
the  Inhabitants  can  live :  for  proofe,  we  being  within  five
miles  of  the  Citie  lodged  in  the  field.  I  sent  my  Moore
to  a  place  not  farre  hence  to  buy  some  bread,  who  returned
with  this  answere,  That  he  and  his  did  never  eat  bread  in
all  their  lives.  A  man  may  goe  twentie  miles  before  hee
finde  a  place  to  feed  a  horse  or  a  cow.  But  the  countries
about  Palestina,  Galilee,  and  Syria  are  all  goodly  plenti-
full  countries,  and  Jerusalem  it  selfe  is  the  most  barren
that  I  saw  in  all  my  travells,  the  desarts  excepted.  I
cannot  compare  any  place  in  England  to  it,  except  the
barrenest  place  in  Cornewal,  where  is  nothing  but  rocks
&  stones,  and  daily  by  the  report  of  the  Inhabitants,  the
stones  grow  more  and  more :  that  Jerusalem,  and  fifteene
miles  round  about  is  but  a  heape  of  stones,  and  I  am  of
opinion  that  it  is  quite  forsaken  of  God ; for  the  more

49 I

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

sort  of  Turkes  there  inhabiting  use  all  filthinesse,  that
the  Christians  are  forced  to  marry  their  children  very
young,  yea  even  at  tenne  yeeres  of  age  ;  boyes  they  keepe
openly,  and  shew  them  at  their  doores  which  hath  the
fairest.  Thus  having  my  Patent  sealed  with  the  great
seale  of  the  Guardian,  and  a  Letter  Patent  that  did  shew
I  had  washt  in  the  water  of  Jordan  :  the  thirty  one  of
March  I  departed  from  Jerusalem  in  my  Moores  com-
pany, the  same  night  I  came  to  Ram.  April  1.  to
Askalon,  so  to  Gaza,  where  I  hired  two  wilde  Arabians,
with  two  Dromedaries  to  carry  me  to  Cayro  ;  wee  rode
Dromedaries,  two  upon  a  beast :  by  the  breaking  away  of  one  of  our
Dromedaries  at  our  lighting,  being  left  alone  we  were
seazed  by  foure  other  Arabians,  who  would  have  made
prey  of  us,  had  not  the  other  their  fellow  theeves  returned.
I  had  nothing  to  lose  but  my  clothes,  but  promised  to  pay
them  twentie  foure  pieces  of  gold.  The  fourth,  at  night
we  came  to  these  theeves  Tents,  where  we  had  Camels
milke.  The  next  night  to  Salhia,  where  being  overshaken
I  hyred  horse.  The  Dromedarie  is  like  a  Camel,  but
that  his  head  is  lesse,  his  legs  longer,  and  a  very  small
necke,  the  difference  being  as  betweene  a  Grey-hound
and  a  Mastiffe.  In  this  foure  dayes  travell  I  never  saw
them  eat  nor  drinke,  from  which  they  say  they  will
abstaine  ten  dayes,  but  not  so  long  from  meat.  Yet  I
thinke  a  good  horse  will  runne  faster  but  not  continue  with
this  beast.  Their  pace  harder  then  a  trot.  I  paid  them,
gave  my  Moore  sixe  pieces  of  gold,  and  sent  him  to
Mecha  with  the  Caravan ;  so  I  came  to  Bolack,  to  Ros-
hetta,  thence  with  a  Janizarie  to  the  walls  of  Alexandria,
in  the  eleventh  of  April,  1601.  I  came  aboord  my  Ship,
having  ended  my  Pilgrimage  in  fiftie  dayes.

492

JOHN NEWBEHY  a.d.

1583.

Chap.  XVIII.

Two Letters of M.  John Nubery, relating his

third*  and  last  Voyage  into  the  Easterne  *8een#.t.$.
parts  of  the  World  :  with  three  other  Letters
from  M.  Eldred,  &c.  concerning  the  same
affaires;  found  amongst  the  papers  of  M.
William  Hareborne,  Her  Majesties  Embassa-
dour  to  the  Grand  Signior  at  Constantinople  :
communicated  to  mee  by  M.  John  Sanderson.

Ight  Worshipfull,  my  heartie  commenda-
tions premised,  &c.  My  last  I  sent  you
was  of  the  thirtieth  day  of  May  last  past
from  Aleppo,  and  the  next  day  after  came
from  thence.  And  the  ninteenth  day  of
the  last  moneth  arrived  at  Feloge,  the
which  is  one  dayes  journey  from  hence ;
notwithstanding  some  of  our  company  came  not  thither
untill  the  last  day  of  the  last  month,  which  was  for  want
of  camels  to  carry  our  goods,  &  since  the  goods  came
hither,  as  yet  have  found  but  small  sales ;  but  towardes
Winter  I  hope  it  will  be  better,  notwithstanding  if  I  had
mony  to  put  away  with  the  Carsie,  we  might  have  very
good  Spices,  for  with  mony  there  is  here  great  good  to  be
done,  and  without  mony  there  is  no  great  profit  made.
To  morrow  I  meane  to  goe,  with  Gods  helpe,  from  hence
to  Balsara,  and  so  to  Ormus,  but  my  going  to  Ormus
is  more  of  necessitie,  then  for  any  good  will  I  have  to
the  place :  for  I  want  a  man  to  goe  with  me  that  hath
the  Indian  tongue,  the  which  is  the  onely  cause  of  my
going  thither  for  to  take  one  there :  I  was  minded  to
have  gone  from  Balsara  by  Sea,  to  a  place  called  Abowsher,
and  from  thence  by  Land  into  the  Indies ;  but  the  want
of  one  to  speake  for  mee  forceth  me  to  leave  that  way.  riI  -a  l6  -■
In  Aleppo  I  hired  two  Nastraynes,  and  one  of  them  hath  TadNostranes
the  Indian  tongue,  and  hath  beene  twice  there,  but  hee  and  deceit/nil.

493

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583-

the  other  are  so  lewdly  given,  that  it  is  not  for  mee  to
trust  to  either  of  them  :  one  of  them  I  leave  here  with
Raphe  Aleyne  and  William  Skinner,  and  the  other  at
Balsara  with  John  Eldred  and  William  Shales,  and  forced
so  to  doe  for  that  here  is  no  other  to  be  had  ;  although  I
am  in  great  doubt  they  will  be  a  thousand  Crownes
hinderance  to  the  Voyage,  for  that  in  divers  matters  of
small  valew  they  have  manifestly  deceived  us,  but  wee
put  no  more  trust  in  them  saving  to  speake  for  us.  I
was  enforced  to  take  them  in  Aleppo  but  two  or  three
dayes  before  my  comming  from  thence,  or  to  have  had
none  at  all.  Here  followeth  the  prices  of  Spices,  as  they
are  worth  here  at  this  present ;  Cloves  and  Maces  the
Batman,  five  duckets  Synnamon,  sixe  duckets  and  none
to  be  had,  Nutmegs  fortie  five  Madynes,  Ginger  the  Bat-
man, one  ducket  Pepper  seventie  five  Madaynes,  and
Silke  which  is  much  better  then  that  which  commeth  out
of  Persia,  Duckets  eleven  and  a  halfe  the  Batman.  And
so  God  preserve  you.  In  Babylon  this  fifteenth  day  of
July,  1583.

Your  Worships  at  command,

John  Newbery.

Right  Worshipfull,  my  heartie  commendations  pre-
mised, &c.  My  last  I  sent  you  was  from  Bagdet  of
the  sixteenth  day  of  the  last  moneth,  and  the  two  &
twentieth  day  of  the  same  came  from  thence,  but  by
reason  that  our  Barke  was  great  and  the  water  very  low,
halfe  a  dayes  journey  from  thence  came  a  ground,  and  in
a  long  time  could  not  get  her  off  againe.  Whereupon
doubting  that  further  below  in  the  River  we  might  be
put  to  more  trouble,  I  returned  to  the  City,  and  hired
a  smaller  Boat,  and  the  twentie  seven  day  embarked  our
goods  in  the  same  Boat,  and  the  sixth  day  of  this  present
arrived  here :  since  which  time  I  have  hired  a  Barke  to
goe  to  Ormus,  and  within  a  day  or  two  I  mind  with  Gods
helpe  to  depart  from  hence. About  the  beginning  of  this

194

JOHN NEWBERY  ad.

1583.

moneth  arrived  here  foure  Venetians  from  Ormus,  whereof
three  are  for  the  account  of  Michaell  Stroopenny,  and  the
other  for  himselfe.  Their  Conducts  are  twentie  Bales  of
Turbith  Cloves,  and  Synnamon  and  Long-pepper,  and
Muske,  Pearles,  and  Feathers,  which  Feathers  come  from
a  Citie  called  Syndye,  about  one  hundred  and  sixtie  $>'»<#  on
leagues  from  Ormus,  and  are  very  much  esteemed  in
Italy.  The  Bashaw  here  hath  taken  away  of  their
Feathers  84000.  the  which  they  say  are  worth  a  thousand
duckets,  and  he  would  have  given  them  for  the  same
501.  duckets.  So  they  say  that  they  will  certifie  of  it  to
Constantinople,  and  hope  to  have  some  remedie  from
thence.  And  if  it  were  not  sometimes  for  this  kind  of
dealings  by  the  Bashaw  towards  the  Frankes,  here  were
in  these  Countries  verie  much  good  to  be  done :  for  the
exchange  from  Ormus  to  Aleppo  is  sixtie  per  cento,  and
commonly  they  make  their  voyage  in  five  or  sixe
moneths,  and  if  it  were  but  onely  for  the  profit  of  the
exchange  it  shall  bee  good  to  have  one  remaining  here,
and  one  at  Ormus,  and  another  at  Bagdett.  And  to  avoid
all  troubles  that  may  happen  either  here  or  at  Bagdett,
you  shall  doe  well  to  procure  a  commandement  from  the
Grand  Signior,  both  to  the  Bashaw  of  Bagdett,  and  the
Bashaw  of  this  place,  that  and  if  any  of  ourfolkes  should  die
in  this  Countrie  (the  which  God  forbid)  that  the  Bashaw,
neither  any  other  Officer  shall  meddle  with  the  goods,
but  that  it  may  be  kept  in  a  Magosine  within  some  Cave
or  Cravancera,  untill  such  time  as  the  owners  shall  send
for  it,  except  there  bee  more  in  company  to  take  charge
of  the  same :  for  here  hath  chanced  Venetians  to  dye ;
and  although  hee  were  one  that  had  nothing,  and  hee  bee
in  company  with  those  that  have  great  store  of  goods,
the  Bashaw  will  take  the  goods,  and  say  that  the  goods
did  belong  unto  him  that  is  dead,  and  by  this  meanes
they  shall  be  in  great  trouble,  and  leese  halfe  their  goods,
if  they  can  escape  so.  And  if  any  of  our  company  should
die  here,  as  God  defend,  the  rest  should  bee  in  great
trouble  about  it ;  as  also  that  it  may  be  in  your  commande-

495

a.d.  PUKCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

ment,  that  it  shall  not  be  lawfull  for  the  Bashaw,  or  any
other  for  to  take  away  from  us  any  of  our  goods,  except
hee  will  pay  for  the  same  to  our  content,  for  many  times
there  are  fine  things  brought  out  of  the  Indies,  and  the
Bashawes  man  sitteth  alwayes  in  the  Custome-house,
especially  at  the  comming  of  the  Frankes,  and  if  there  bee
any  thing  that  liketh  him  hee  taketh  it,  and  payeth  for  that
which  is  worth  a  hundred  pound,  ten  pound,  and  so  the
Bashaw  hath  dealt  with  many.  But  if  you  send  this
commandement,  that  it  may  bee  registred  both  heere  and
at  Bagdett,  it  will  for  ever  hereafter  prevent  those  troubles
that  now  wee  are  in  danger  of,  and  this  is  a  thing  very
needfull  to  be  sent  with  those  that  shall  next  come  hither.
At  this  time  There  is  as  yet  no  Spaniards  come  into  the  Indies,  and
not  settled  tic  ^Y  report  of  one  that  is  here,  who  came  from  Ormus,
there  was  a  Spaniard  sent  out  of  Spaine  to  Goa  to  have
had  some  authoritie  there,  and  the  Vice  Roy  caused  him
to  bee  put  to  death,  and  will  suffer  none  for  to  come
thither.  As  yet  they  alter  not  the  keeping  of  their
Christmasse,  as  the  Spaniards  and  others  have  done,  but
continue  in  keeping  of  their  old  reckoning  of  the  Feasts
and  Moneths,  neither  will  they  alter  untill  commande-
ment come  from  the  Pope  to  the  contrary.  And  so  I
commit  your  Worship  to  God.  From  Balsara  this
fifteenth  day  of  August,  1583.

Yours  ever  to  command,

John  Newbery.

[II.ix.1644.]  A  Letter  of  Master  John  Eldred,  to  G.  S. Written
in  Bagdet  the  foureteenth  day  of  July,  1583.

I  had  of  Mas-  \)  %nt  Worshipfull,  my  humble  and  heartie  Commenda-
ter  Sanderson  -I-V  tions  remembred,  wishing  your  health,  and  desiring
and  were  to  heare  of  your  prosperitie,  the  which  God  increase  and
found  amongst  ]ong  continue,  &c. My  last  to  you  was  in  Aleppo  the

arjr u nine  and  twentieth  of  May,  wherein  I  certified  our  arrivall

William  Har-  _.  1 1 1  • •  - .  .

borne (Ambas-  in  the  Tigre,  and  the  determining  or  this  Voyage,  how

sadourfrom there  was  appointed  to  take  at  Aleppo  for  the  summe  of

496

.JOHN ELDRED  a.d.

1583.

two  thousand  pounds  sterling,  in  Carsies,  Cloathes,  Tinne,  h'r  Majestic
and  other  Commodities,  and  with  the  same  Master  New-  J.^^Jr
berie,  Raph  Fitch,  Raph  Allen,  William  Skinner,  William  Jf™
Shales,  and  my  selfc,  to  goe  with  the  same  goods  to  this  endorsed  with
place, there to  leave two  and  part of  the  goods. At  the  said
Balsara  there  leave  two  and  part  of  the  goods,  and  Master  Ambassadour
Newberie  and  Raph  Fitch,  to  take  for  three  or  foure  hun-  ^^  faster
dred  pounds  sterling  at  Balsara  of  these  goods,  and  to  goe  Eldred yet

for  the  Indies.  lizcthta  grave,

Since  which time, it may please you to understand  r^handpnn-
wee  all  in  company  have  come  to  this  place,  and  heere  c^g  J^"'
arrived  the  nine  and  twentieth  day  of  the  last,  having  past  j,eere  men.
the  hands  of  many  bribing  Dogges,wee  arrived  heere  all  in  tioned  I  have
safetie  thankes  bee  to  God,  and  whereas  wee  had  thought  knowen  and
to  have  sold  in  this  place,  great  store  of  our  Commodities,  *  .  . 7.

„  1  &  1  1 1  • •  1  r with  of  these

wee  cannot  sell,  nor  have  not  sold  this  sixteene  dayes  tor  parts
thirtie  Duckets  nor  no  likelihood  of  sales  there  untill  the
Winter,  this  Towne  is  so  full  of  Carsies  and  Tinne,  most
bought  at  Aleppo  of  William  Baret,  which  were  the  Tinne
and  Cloath  that  came  in  the  Emanuel.  Tinne  is  heere  as
good  cheape  as  it  is  in  Aleppo,  and  Cloath  also,  God  send
it  to  mend,  or  otherwise  this  Voyage  of  ours  will  make
no  profit,  but  in  hope  wee  rest  the  same  will  mend.

Wee  have  at  this  present  imbaled  and  laden  aboard  a
Barke  for  Balsara,  one  hundred  and  twentie  peeces  of
Carsies  halfe,  some  Tinne,  three  Scarlets,  eight  &  twentie
Rotellos  of  this  place,  of  Tinne  and  Amber,  with  divers
small  Haberdash  wares,  which  is  for  the  summe  of  seven
hundred  sixtie  foure  pounds  sterling,  and  heere  wee  leave
the  rest,  which  is  about  one  thousand  pounds,  and  with
the  same  in  this  place  we  leave  William  Skinner,  and
Raph  Allen,  and  all  the  rest  of  us  goe  forward,  and  at
Balsara,  William  Shales  and  my  selfe,  doe  determine  to
stay  to  make  sales  and  imployment  as  the  Market  will
give  us  leave  :  and  Master  Newberie,  and  Raph  Fitch,
with  the  Jeweller  and  Painter,  are  determined  to  proceed
for  the  Indies,  and  out  of  this  wee  carrie  to  Balsara,  hee
will  take  out  his  foure  hundred  pounds  in  Commodities
ix  497  21

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

for  the  Indies.  Thus  the  Lord  blesse  our  doings,  and
send  us  a  merrie  meeting  in  our  Countrey  Norfolke ;  and
that  I  may  bee  your  Servant,  &c.

In Balsara  the  sixth of  November, 1583.

Right  Honourable,  our  humble  duties  considered,  &c.
Our  last  unto  your  Lordship  was  from  Babylon  of
the nineteenth  of  July, wherein  wee signified  our safe
arrivall  there,  and  evill  sales  which  wee  found,  that  in
twentie dayes staying there, we sold not for thirtie
Duckets. Insomuch  as  by  direction  of  Master  Newberie,
wee  tooke  of  our  Commodities  for  seven  hundred  pounds
sterling,  and  came  to  this  place  Balsara,  out  of  which,
Master  Newberie  tooke  for  the  value  of  foure  hundred
pounds,  and  departed  for  Ormus,  where  hee  arrived  the
fourth of September, and the ninth of  the same, was
committed  to  Prison  with  all  his  Company,  accused  for
Spies from  Don  Antonie, and  that his  Painter  was  to
draw  the  plats  of  Castles  and  Fortresses,  in  the  behalfe  of
Don  Antonie. Whereupon  the  Captayne  of  Ormus  hath
determined  to  send  them  with  the  remayner  of  their  goods
which  is  unspent,  Prisoners  to  Goa,  there  to  bee  at  the
will  and  pleasure  of  the  Vizrea,  what shall  become  of
them  God  knoweth. Hee  hath  written  to  our  worshipfull
Masters, to  procure  the  King  of  Spaine  his  Letters  to
the  Vizrea  of  Goa  for  his  deliverie,  which  Letters  wee
have  sent  by  messe  expresse  to  Aleppo. This  his  false
accusation  was  by  meanes  of  Venetians  Letters  written
from Aleppo, and directed to Michaell Stropennie in
Ormus,  who  as  Master  Newberie  writeth,  hath  beene  the
onely  cause  of  his  trouble. Concerning  our  estate,  wee
have  not  sold  neither  can  sell  of  all  our  Commodities  for
two  hundred  Duckets. Our  Carsies  heere  are  not  worne,
neither  come  there  any  Merchants  to  make  imployments
heere,  being  this  place  onely  as  a  thorowfare  for  Mer-
chants which  come  from  Ormus  to  discharge  their  goods
and  pay  Custome,  and  so  to  passe  for  Babylon. Before
wee  came  hither,  Master  Newberie  told  us,  wee  should

498

JOHN ELDRED  a.d.

1583.

finde  to  make  Bazar  for  any  kinde  of  Spices,  which  wee
have  found  cleane  contrarie,  for  neither  are  there  Mer-
chants resident  heere,  or  Commodities  to  bee  found  to
make  Bazar  for  two  hundred  Duckets,  they  which  come
from  Ormus  mindeth  never  to  make  Bazar  here,  but
departeth  presently  after  his  Custome  payd,  for  Babylon.
Wee  have  offered  to  give  our  Commodities  at  price  very
reasonable,  with  as  much  money  to  have  taken  up  the
same  by  Exchange  for  Aleppo,  but  no  man  would  deale
with  us.  Whereupon  wee  imbarked  our  goods  to  have
gone  for  Persia,  but  before  our  Ships  departure  there
arrived  heere  two  Venetians  with  divers  sorts  of  Spices,
who  had  taken  up  ten  thousand  Duckets,  by  exchange  to
bee  payed  heere  in  Balsara,  this  money  their  credits  will
not  serve  to  take  up  for  Babylon.  Insomuch  as  beeing
in  some  distresse  for  money,  they  offered  to  barter  with
us  halfe  money  halfe  commoditie,  whereupon  wee  have
disbarked  our  goods,  and  hope  within  these  few  dayes  to
make  Bazar  with  them.  Thus  humbly  taking  our  leaves,
we  cease  to  trouble  your  Lordship  any  further.

Your  Lordships  most  readie  at  Commandment,

John  Eldred. William  Shales.

In  Balsara  the  two  and  twentieth  of  Januarv, [ii.ix.1645.]

1583-

Right  Honourable,  our  duties  humbly  considered
unto  your  Lordship,  &c.  Our  last  was  of  the  tenth
of  November  sent  by  the  Cadie  of  this  place,  wherein  wee
signified  unto  your  Lordship  the  alteration  of  our  mindes
for  going  into  Persia,  and  how  wee  were  returned  with
our  goods  backe  againe  to  this  place.  Wee  also  wrote
you  the  hope  which  wee  had  to  make  Bazar  with  a  French-
man, which  was  at  that  time  newly  come  from  Ormus,
the  which  is  now  come  to  passe  and  finished,  although
with  some  trouble.  Wee  delivered  all  our  goods,  which
amounted  unto  2000.  Duckets,  and  gave  him  more  in
money  two  thousand  eight  hundred  and  thirtie  Duckets,

499

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

which  wee  tooke  up  by  exchange  for  Bagdet  at  fifteene
per  Cento,  and  to  pay  more  two  per  fiftie  per  Moneth,
during  the  time  of  our  staying  heere,  which  God  knoweth
how  long  it  will  bee,  the  way  betweene  this  place  and
Bagdet  is  full  of  Theeves,  and  no  Merchants  dare  venture
to  depart  till  the  wayes  be  cleare.  There  have  gone  no
Barkes  from  hence  this  foure  moneths  and  more.  We
have  imbaled  all  our  goods  for  Camels  being  of  them  as
followeth,  foure  somes  of  large  Cynamon,  foureteen  somes
and  an  halfe  of  middle  Cynamon,  three  somes  and  an  halfe
of  Nutmegs,  one  some  &  an  halfe  of  Ginger,  one  some
and  a  third  part  of  Cloves,  foure  somes  &  a  halfe  Fusses
of  Cloves,  197.  Turbands  fine,  and  one  Chest  of  oruilded
Pusillanes ;  all  these  goods  have  beene  in  readinesse  this
moneth  wishing  every  day  our  departure,  which  God
grant  may  be  shortly,  for  here  wee  spend,  and  our  money
eateth,  and  that  which  is  worse,  wee  feare  wee  shall  loose
our  passage  from  Bagdet  to  Aleppo,  except  wee  depart
very  sliortly.  We  received  no  Letters  from  Master
Newberie  since  the  first  newes  of  his  trouble  :  but  we
heare  by  others  that  hee  and  his  Companie  are  sent
Prisoners  to  Goa,  and  the  remayner  of  his  goods  is  left
in  the  hands  of  the  Kings  Factor.  Thus  not  having
others  to  trouble  your  Lordship  with  at  this  present,  wee
rest,  humbly  taking  our  leave,  and  commending  you  and
all  your  Lordships  affaires,  to  Gods  mightie  protection.

Your  Lordships  most  readie  at  commandment  till  death,

John  Eldred.
William  Shales.

Master  Hakluit  hath  delivered  Master  Fitches  Indian
Peregrination,  with  notes  also  of  Master  Eldred  and
Master  Barret,  to  whom  I  referre  the  more  desirous
Reader.  Linschoten  also  hath  mentioned  the  troubles  at
Goa  (whereof  he  was  eye-witnesse)  of  Master  Fitch
and  Master  Newberie.  I  have  added  hereto  three  Com-
mands from  the  Great  Turke,  in  behalfe  of  the  English.

500

COMMANDS FROM THE GREAT TURK  t un.

1583.

To the Cadilesquire  of  Egypt.

KNow  that  the  Ambassadour  for  the  Queenes  most
excellent  Majestie,  resident  in  our  most  famous
Port,  by  Supplication  certified,  how  that  our  Vice-roy
Ebrahim  Bassa,  then  Beglerbie  of  Egypt,  did  give  rhc
Custome  of  Cassia  to  a  certaine  Jew  called  Abraham
Ripollo,  with  expresse  and  straight  commandement,  that
whosoever  brought  Cassia  to  Cairo,  should  sell  it  to  him
and  none  other,  and  what  Merchant  soever  would  buy
Cassia,  should  buy  it  of  him  and  of  no  other.  Where-
upon certaine  of  the  English  Merchants,  buying  of  the
foresayd  Jew  three  and  thirtie  Kintals,  to  the  value  of
foure  hundred  and  fiftie  duckets  of  Gold,  and  having
before  justice  payd  to  the  said  Jew  the  whole  summe,
and  received  Hogetta  from  the  Cady,  the  Beglerbie  that
now  is  Synan  Bassa,  casting  the  said  Jew  in  Prison,  and
seazing  on  all  his  goods  in  the  behalfe  of  the  Grand
Signior,  did  also  take  from  the  English  Merchants  all  the
Cassia  they  had  bought  of  the  Jew,  and  for  which  they  had
fully  payed,  not  restoring  to  them  one  Asper,  and  thereby
did  them  great  harme  and  injurie.  Wherefore  wee
charge  thee,  that  this  our  Commandment  comming  to
thee,  thou  doe  examine  this  matter  according  to  Justice ;
that  if  the  English  Merchants  have  bought  of  the  sayd
Jew  so  much  Cassia,  and  have  payed  to  the  sayd  Jew  the
full  price,  and  have  received  thereupon  Hogetta  from  the
Cadie,  and  if  the  Beglerbie  have  taken  the  sayd  Cassia
into  his  hands,  that  then  you  cause  the  sayd  Cassia  to  be
restored  to  the  English  Merchants,  suffering  nothing  to
bee  done  against  Law  and  Justice.

To  the  Beglerbie  of  Cairo.

KNow  that  the  Ambassadour  for  the  Queenes  most
excellent  Majestie  of  England,  by  Supplication
certified  in  our  most  famous  Court,  that  for  default  of
their  Consull  in  Egypt,  the  French  Consull  that  there  is
Vento,  alledging  that  they  are  under  his  Banner,  doth

501

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

x583-

violently  usurpe  authoritie  over  them ;  and  that  hereto-
fore having  sent  our  Commandment  to  the  contrarie,  yet
hee  hath  not  abstayned,  nor  ceased  from  molesting  and
troubling  the  English  Nation.  Wherefore  know,  that  to
the  Queene  of  England  our  Priviledge  is  granted,  by
which  priviledge  it  is  by  no  meanes  permitted,  that  the
[II.ix.1646.]  French  should  bee  Consull  over  them,  or  intermeddle
with  them.  Wherefore  wee  Command,  that  against  our
Priviledge,  the  French  Consull  doe  them  no  injurie,  nor
usurpe  the  Consulship  over  them.  Wee  have  sent  our
Letters  to  the  Cadilesker  of  Egypt,  according  to  which,
and  contrarie  to  our  Priviledge,  wee  command  him  also,
that  the  French  beare  not  the  Consulship  over  the
English  Nation.

To  the  Cadilesquire  of  Egypt.

KNow  that  the  Ambassadour  for  the  Queenes  most
excellent  Majestie  of  England,  by  Supplication  cer-
tified us,  that  for  default  of  their  Consull  in  Egypt,  the
French  Consull  there  resident  called  Vento,  alledging  that
they  bee  under  his  banner,  doth  trouble  and  molest  the
English  men,  contrarie  to  our  priviledge  :  our  commande-
ment  was  formerly  given  that  hee  should  abstaine  from
molesting  the  English  Nation  but  hee  did  not  onely  not
leave  off,  but  did  more  arrogantly  persist  to  trouble  and
injurie  them.  And  therefore  the  Ambassadour  required
our  commandement,  that  according  to  their  Priviledge,
the  French  Consull  might  not  intermeddle  with  their
Nation,  nor  beare  the  office  of  Consull  over  them.  Know
thou  therefore  that  our  Priviledge  is  granted  to  the
Queene  of  England,  and  wee  command  thee,  that  the
French  Consull  resident  in  Egypt,  doe  not  hereafter  beare
the  office  of  Consull  over  them.  Wee  command  thee
againe,  that  our  commandement  comming  to  thee,  accord-
ing to  our  Priviledge  given  the  Queene  of  England,  and
this  our  commandement,  thou  never  permit  the  French,  to
exercise  the  office  of  Consull  over  the  English  Nation,  nor
suffer  them  by  the  French  to  bee  molested  or  troubled.

502

FRANCOIS PYRARD DE LAVAL

A.O.
I  60 1,

From  the  tenth
Chapter  to  the
end  0/  this
Booke,allis  of
later  Intelli-
gence, and
added  by  way
of  an
Appendix.

To the Reader.

OUr  Countrey-men,  in  love  with  the  wealth  of  India,
have  brought  us  (I  know  not  how)  backe  thorow
Turkie  to  Bagdet  and  Balsara ;  neither  can  wee  now
returne  without  some  review  of  India :  especially  of  the
parts  and  Ports  there  before  least  visited  ;  and  wherof
later  Intelligence  hath  come  to  our  hands.  Such  are  the
Maldives  Ilands,  of  which  hitherto  wee  have  taken  small
notice  in  our  multiforme  Peregrinations.  Loe  heere  there-
fore wee  present  you  them  in  a  French-English  Chart
(that  I  may  so  speake)  both  for  the  translation  from  the
French,  and  because  our  Author  was  Piloted  by  an  Eng-
lishman, whose  name  I  finde  not ;  who  seeking  to  escape
with  some  others  of  his  wracked  Companie,  was  done  to
death  by  the  Maldivans.  This  our  Author  learning  the
Language,  with  long  and  deare  experience  learned  this
which  heere  hee  freely  teacheth,  and  many  many  more
Observations  of  these  and  other  places  in  India  ;  out  of
which  I  have  gathered  what  I  deemed  fittest  for  our
purpose.

Chap. XIX.

The  Voyage  of  Francois  Pyrard  de  Laval,  to  the
East  Indies  (an  English-man  being  Pilot)  and
especially  his  Observations  of  the  Maldives,
where  being  Ship-wracked  hee  lived  five  yeares.
Translated  out  of  French,  and  abbreviated.

Company  of  Merchants  of  Saint  Malo,  ^n-  Dom-
Laval  and  Vitre,  in  the  yere  1601.  set  "  OI'
forth  two  ships  to  the  Indies ;  one  was
of  the  burthen  of  foure  hundred  tunne
called  the  Croissant,  the  other  of  two
hundred,  called  the  Corbin,  sent  under
the  command  of  the  Lord  of  Bardeliere
Burgesse  of  Saint  Malo  &  Francis  Grout,  Lord  of  Clos-
neuf,  Constable  of  Saint  Malo,  his  Lieutenant  or  Vice-

503

A.D.

1 60 1.

Canaries.

Flying  Fishes.

TheTernados.

Superstition.
[II.ix.1647.]

English  Pylot.
Anabon.

Trecherie  of
Portugals.

Saint  Helena.
The  Abroilles,
shelves  toward
Brasil.

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

admirall,  Captayne  of  the  Corbin.  Wee  set  sayle  from
Saint  Malo  with  a  North-east  winde  to  begin  our  Voyage
the  eighteenth  of  May,  1601.  Being  not  above  nine  or
ten  leagues  out  in  the  Sea,  our  Missen  mast  broke  and
split  in  the  middle  :  this  was  the  beginning  of  our  mis-
fortunes. The  third  of  June,  we  coasted  the  lies  of  the
Canaries.  The  twelfth  and  thirteenth  of  the  same  month,
wee  came  to  the  Hands  of  Cape  Verd.  The  nine  and
twentieth  of  June,  wee  found  our  selves  in  the  height  of
5.  degrees,  and  saw  the  North-starre  very  low  :  and  at
the  same  time,  wee  perceived  the  South-starre.  In  the
same  place  and  height,  we  saw  great  quantities  of  flying
Fishes,  with  wings  like  to  Bats.

The  foure  and  twentieth  of  August,  wee  passed  the
Equinoctiall  line,  where  are  very  violent  heates,  and
unconstant  weather,  in  an  instant  a  marvellous  calme,  and
halfe  an  houre  after  very  fearefull  Thundrings  and  Light-
nings, and  impetuous  windes.  Often  they  see  come
afarre  off  great  whirle-winds,  which  the  Marriners  call
Dragons  :  If  this  passeth  over  their  ship  it  bruiseth  them
and  overwhelmeth  them  in  the  waves.  When  the
Marriners  see  one  come  they  take  new  Swords  and  beate
one  against  the  other  in  a  crosse  upon  the  Prow,  or
toward  the  Coast  from  whence  this  storme  comes,  and
hold  that  this  hinders  it  from  comming  over  their  ship,
and  turneth  it  aside.

The  nine  and  twentieth  of  August,  our  Pilot  who  was
an  English-man,  from  the  tops  saw  land  ten  leagues  off :
this  was  the  lie  of  Anabon,  whither  we  came  the  day
following,  and  were  there  a  while  courteously  entertayned
by  the  Portugals  Lords  of  the  Hands,  but  after  had
treacherously  five  of  our  men  surprised  by  them,  and  one
slaine.  The  sixteenth  of  October,  we  went  out  of  the
road  of  this  He,  and  on  the  seventeenth  of  November,
came  to  the  Hand  of  Saint  Helena.  The  nine  and  twen-
tieth of  the  same  moneth,  wee  doubled  the  Abroilles.

The  seven  and  twentieth  of  December,  wee  passed  the
Cape of Good Hope. The nineteenth of Februarie,

5°4

FRANCOIS PYRARD DE LAVA  I,

1602.  wee  cast  anchor  in  the  Bay  of  Saint  Augustine,  in
the  He  of  Saint  Laurence,  where  we  abode  to  refresh  our
selves,  untill  the  fifteenth  of  May.  The  three  and
twentieth  of  the  same  moneth,  wee  came  to  the  lies  of
Comorro,  where  all  that  had  the  Scorbuto  or  other
diseases  recovered  their  health,  as  well  because  of  the  good
ayre,  as  of  good  water  and  fruits.

The  one  and  twentieth  of  June,  wee  passed  the  Equi-
noctiall  toward  the  North  Pole.  The  second  of  July  in
the  night,  wee  were  miserably  ship-wrackt  upon  the
Bankes  of  the  Maldives,  where  we  lay  till  the  day  follow-
ing, when  we  imbarked  our  selves  in  our  Gallion  :  having
taken  our  Swords,  Harquebushes,  and  halfe  Pikes,  to  goe
to  Land :  after  great  labour  wee  attayned  one  of  the  lies
called  Pouladou,  but  the  Inhabitants  would  not  let  us
land,  before  they  had  disarmed  us.

They  ledde  us  all  together  into  a  House  in  the  middest
of  the  He,  where  they  gave  us  Fruits,  Cocos,  and  Limons.
Then  the  Governour  of  the  He  came  to  us  called  Ibrahim,
who  seemed  very  aged,  he  could  speake  some  words  of
Portuguise,  by  the  meanes  whereof  he  asked  us  many
things :  after  his  people  rifled  us,  and  tooke  away  all  that
wee  brought,  saying  that  it  did  belong  unto  the  King.
Having  beene  in  this  Lodging  the  space  of  a  day,  they
tooke  the  Master  of  our  Ship  with  two  Marriners,  and
convayed  them  to  the  King  fortie  leagues  distant  in  the
Hand  of  Male.  The  King  sent  his  Brother  in  law  with
many  Souldiers  to  our  ship-wrackt  Vessell,  to  get  what
they  could.

The  Kings  Brother  in  law  when  hee  went  away,  ledde
me  and  two  others  into  the  Hand  of  Paindoue,  where  at
our  first  comming  the  Inhabitants  gave  us  a  little  food,
but  when  they  saw  that  our  companions  had  money  (this
money  was  about  five  hundred  Crownes,  which  we  tooke
while  wee  were  in  the  ship,  and  the  first  night  we  came
on  Land  we  buryed  in  the  ground,  which  they  after  digged
up  wanting  necessaries,  but  wee  that  were  in  the  He  of
Paindoue  had  none  of  it) they  tryed  by  extremitie  of

50S

A.D.
l602.

Saint
Laurence.

Isles  of
Comom.

Shipivrack  on
the  Maldives
Islands.

Pouladou.

Male  chiefe  of
the  Maldives.

Paindoue.

A.D.
l602.

Miserable
famine.

He  learnes  the
Language.

He  is  pre-
sented to  the
King.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

famine  to  make  us  to  give  them  some  also,  for  they
beleeved  we  had  some.  By  reason  of  this  evill  resolu-
tion of  the  Ilanders  to  give  us  nothing  without  money,
wee  were  brought  into  great  miserie.  All  that  wee  could
doe,  was  to  gather  Periwinckles  on  the  Sea  shoare  to  eate,
and  sometimes  to  meet  with  a  dead  Fish.  This  extremitie
endured  a  long  time,  till  that  the  Inhabitants  seeing  wee
had  no  money,  began  to  have  a  little  more  commiseration
on  us ;  we  offered  our  service  to  them,  to  doe  what  they
would  imploy  us  about.

I  went  often  with  them  to  the  neighbouring  Hands  to
get  Cocos,  and  sometimes  on  Fishing,  and  in  recompence
of  my  labour  they  gave  me  part  of  the  Fish  or  Cocos.
While  wee  lived  thus,  I  endeavoured  my  selfe  to  learne
the  Language,  which  my  companions  despised.  The
Commander  of  the  He  seeing  mee  so  studious  of  their
Language,  began  to  esteeme  and  favour  me.  Then  there
came  one  called  Assaul  Ocaounas  Calogue,  a  Grand
Signior,  to  fetch  the  rest  of  the  Lead  of  our  ship  and
some  Iron  Ordnance,  and  to  make  search  for  the  Money
which  the  inhabitants  of  the  Hands  had  of  our  men.  The
Signior  of  the  He  of  Paindoue  and  the  Catibe,  with  those
that  affectioned  me,  presented  me  to  this  Signior  that
came  from  the  King,  and  commended  me  to  him :  this
commendation  was  the  cause  that  the  Signior  began  to
favour  me  :  and  also  because  hee  saw  I  could  expresse
my  selfe  in  their  Language,  and  daily  studied  to  learne  it,
hee  tooke  me  with  him  to  carrie  me  to  the  King.

When  wee  arrived  at  Male,  hee  went  presently  to  the
King  to  render  him  an  account  of  the  Voyage,  and  among
other  things  failed  not  to  speake  of  mee  to  him.  In  the
evening  I  went  into  a  Court,  whither  the  King  was  come
to  see  that  which  was  brought  from  our  Ship.  I  saluted
him  in  the  Language,  and  after  the  fashion  of  the  Coun-
trey,  which  pleased  him,  and  gave  him  occasion  to  enquire
much  concerning  those  things  which  were  brought  from
the  Ship  :  hee  commanded  the  Signior  that  brought  me,
to  lodge  and  entertaine  me. The  day  following,  I  was

506

FRANCOIS PYRARD DE LAVAL  aj>.

1602,

busied  with  relating  to  the  King,  the  manners  and  fashions
of  our  people  of  Europe  and  of  France.  Hee  made  me
see  the  Queenes,  who  imployed  me  divers  dayes  in  giving
answers  to  that  which  they  asked  me ;  being  curious  to
understand  the  Habits,  Manners,  Marriages,  and  fashion
of  our  French  Dames.

I  was  about  foure  or  five  moneths  in  good  health,  and
wanted  nothing  but  the  exercise  of  my  Religion  and  my
libertie,  having  all  things  else  to  my  content.  After  this,
I  fell  sicke  of  a  hot  burning  Feaver.  There  passed  not  a
day  but  the  King  and  Queenes  sent  to  know  how  I  did,
and  every  houre  sent  mee  delicious  viands  to  eate,  and
thus  I  continued  a  great  while.  But  afterward  the  King
sent  me  to  the  He  or  Bandos  (a  little  He  in  sight  of  Male)  Bandos.
which  hath  a  better  ayre  then  Male,  where  an  experienced  [II.  ix.  164.8.
man  by  the  Kings  appointment  recovered  mee.  After-
ward the  King  gave  me  a  lodging  neere  him,  and  every
day  rise  out  of  his  owne  house,  and  necessarie  provisions
for  my  sustenance,  hee  gave  me  also  a  servant  and  money,
and  other  presents,  so  that  I  became  somewhat  wealthy
after  the  manner  of  the  Countrey.  While  I  thus  con-
tinued heere  (despairing  ever  to  returne  into  France)  I
was  diligent  to  enquire  of  the  people,  their  manners  and
customes,  which  heere  I  have  written  and  particularised.

§•  11.

Description  of  the  Maldives,  their  thirteene  Can-
tons, twelve  thousand  lies,  Sea-changes,  strange
Currents,  Monsons,  Maine-Inlets,  blacke  boyl-
ing  Sea,  Heate,  Seasons,  Civilitie,  and  haire
Ceremoniousnesse.

He  Hands  of  the  Maldives,  begin  in  eight  degrees  Scituation.
of  the  Equinoctial  line,  on  the  North-side  and
end  in  foure  degrees  on  the  South-side. They  are

of  an  extraordinarie  length,  about  two  hundred  leagues,
but  not  above  thirtie  or  five  &  thirtie  leagues  in  Latitude. fAeir
They  are  distant  from  the  firme  land,  that  is  to  say,  from  distance.

507

A.D.

l602.

Division  into
13.  Atollons.

Force  of  the
Sea.

12000.
Hands.

Kings  Title.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Cape  Comorin,  from  Covan  and  Cochin,  one  hundred  and
fiftie  leagues.  The  Portugals  reckon  that  there  are  foure
thousand  and  five  hundred  leagues  by  Sea,  to  goe  thither
from  Spaine.

They  are  divided  into  thirteene  Provinces,  which  they
call  Atollons,  which  is  a  naturall  partition  according  to  the
scituation  of  the  places.  Forasmuch  as  every  Atollon  is
seperated  from  others,  and  contaynes  in  it  selfe  a  great
multitude  of  small  lies ;  It  is  admirable  to  behold,  how
that  each  of  these  Atollons  are  invironed  round  with  a
huge  ledge  of  Rockes.  The  Atollons  are  all  after  a  sort
circular  or  ovall,  having  each  of  them  thirtie  leagues,  some
a  little  more,  some  a  little  lesse,  and  lye  all  one  at  the
end  of  the  other :  from  the  North  to  Susans,  they  almost
touch  one  another :  there  are  betweene  two  channels  of
the  Sea,  the  one  large  the  other  exceeding  narrow.  Being
in  the  middest  of  an  Atollon,  you  shall  see  about  you  a
great  ledge  of  Rockes  which  impale  and  defend  the  lies,
against  the  impetuousnesse  of  the  Sea.  But  it  is  a  very
fearefull  thing  even  to  the  most  couragious  to  approach
to  this  ledge,  and  see  the  waves  come  afarre  off  and  breake
furiously  on  every  side.  For  I  assure  you,  as  a  thing
which  I  have  seene  a  thousand  times,  that  the  surge  or
billow  is  greater  then  a  House,  and  as  white  as  Cotton  :
so  that  you  shall  view  round  about  you  as  it  were  a  very
white  Wall,  especially  when  the  Sea  is  loftie.

Now  within  each  of  these  Cantons,  is  almost  an  infinite
number  of  Hands,  both  smal  and  great.  The  Inhabitants
told  me,  that  there  are  about  twelve  thousand.  But  I
conjecture  that  there  appeare  not  so  many,  and  that  they
say  twelve  thousand,  to  note  an  incredible  number,  and
which  they  cannot  count.  It  is  true  that  there  are  an
innumerable  multitude  of  small  ones,  which  are  as  it  were
Hillockes  of  sand,  all  unpeopled.  And  moreover,  the
King  of  the  Maldives  puts  this  number  in  his  Titles,  for
hee  is  called  Sultan  Ibrahim  dolos  assa  raltera  Atholon  ;
that  is  to  say,  Ibrahim  Sultan,  King  of  thirteene  Provinces
and  twelve  thousand  lies.

508

FRANCOIS  PYRARD  DB  LAVAL

Which  notwithstanding,  the  currents  and  daily  flowing
of  the  Sea  diminish  that  number,  as  the  Inhabit
informed  me,  who  said  also  that  a  proportion  of  the
number  of  the  people  are  consumed,  and  that  there  are
not  so  many  as  were  accustomed  to  be  anciently.  Also
they  reported  that  within  one  of  the  Atollons,  all  the  little
lies  and  Sea  which  part  them,  was  one  continued  ground,
and  that  it  was  in  former  times  but  one  only  He,  cut  and
divided  after  into  many.  And  surely  they  which  navigate
neere  the  Maldives,  discerne  all  within  white,  by  reason
of  the  sand  which  is  of  this  colour,  upon  all  the  Flats  and
Rocks.  The  Sea  thereabouts  is  very  quiet  and  of  a
meane  depth,  insomuch  that  the  deepest  entrance  is  not
twentie  fathomes ;  and  yet  heere  are  very  few  entrances :
for  a  man  may  almost  see  the  bottome  every  where.

All  the  shallowes  are  stone,  Rocke  and  sand,  so  that
when  the  tide  is  out,  it  reacheth  not  to  ones  waste,  and  for
the  most  part  to  the  mid-legge  ;  so  that  it  were  very  easie
to  goe  without  a  Boate  throughout  all  the  lies  of  the  same
Atollon,  if  it  were  not  for  two  causes.  The  one  great
fishes  called  Paimones,  which  devoure  men  and  breake
their  legges  and  armes,  when  they  encounter  them  ;  the
other  is  that  the  depths  of  the  Sea  are  generally  very  keene
and  sharpe  Rockes  which  hurt  them  wonderfully  that  goe
into  it.  And  moreover,  they  meete  with  many  branches
of  a  certaine  thing  which  I  know  not  whether  to  terme
Tree  or  Rocke,  it  is  not  much  unlike  white  Corall,  which
is  also  branched  and  piercing,  but  altogether  polished  ;  on
the  contrary,  this  is  rugged,  all  hollow  and  pierced  with
little  holes  and  passages,  yet  abides  hard  and  ponderous
as  a  stone.  They  call  it  in  their  Language  Aquiry,  they
keepe  it  to  make  their  Honey  and  Sugar  of  Cocos,  having
bruised  them  with  little  stones,  and  putting  them  to  boyle
with  the  water  of  Cocos,  this  is  that  which  fashions  their
Honey  and  their  Sugar.  It  greatly  hinders  those  which
wash  themselves  in  the  Sea,  it  was  very  difficult  to  me  to
goe  so  from  He  to  He  without  a  Boate,  but  they  which  are
accustomed  goe  often.

5°9

A.D.
l602.

Sea  makes
daily  altera-
tion.

Danger  by
Sharkes  and
sharpe  stones.

A  kind  of
Currall.

A.D.

l602.

[II. ix. 1649.]

Many  of  the
Hands  are  not
inhabited.

Prodigious
numbers  of  the
PinguyFoivles.

Heat  of  sands.

Want  of
water.

Pits  how
made.

Hot  at  night
and  cold  at

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Amongst  these  Hands  there  are  very  many,  and  as  I
beleeve  the  greatest  number,  which  are  wholly  unhabited,
and  which  have  neither  Trees  nor  Herbs ;  others  which
have  no  greene  thing,  and  are  but  a  moveable  sand  :  yet
there  are  some  which  are  for  the  most  part  overflowne  at
spring  tides,  and  are  discovered  when  the  Sea  is  out,  the
residue  are  all  covered  with  great  Crabs  (which  they  call
Cacouve)  and  Cray-fishes.

There  are  great  store  of  Fowles  called  Pinguy,  which
heere  lay  and  hatch,  and  here  is  such  a  prodigious  multi-
tude of  them,  that  a  man  knowes  not  (I  have  often  made
triall)  where  to  set  his  foot  without  touching  their  Egges,
or  young  ones,  or  the  old  Birds,  which  flye  not  farre  when
they  see  men.  The  Ilanders  eate  them  not,  and  yet  they
are  very  good  meate,  and  as  bigge  as  Pidgeons,  their
Feathers  white  and  blacke.  These  lies  which  I  have  said
to  bee  unhabited,  appeare  afarre  off  white,  as  if  they  were
covered  with  Snow,  by  reason  of  the  great  whitenesse  of
the  Sand  which  is  fine  and  subtle,  as  that  of  an  Houre-
glasse,  and  so  hot  and  burning,  that  the  Egges  of  those
Birds  are  hatched  with  great  facilitie.

They  have  great  scarcitie  of  fresh  water,  some  Hands
are  well  woodded  and  inhabited  which  have  not  any ;
except  some  few,  whither  the  Inhabitants  are  constrayned
to  go  and  seeke  it  from  the  confining  lies  ;  also  they  have
inventions  to  receive  raine  water  :  and  although  they  have
water  in  the  lies,  they  are  not  like  one  another ;  being
better  in  one  respect  then  another.  All  their  Pit-water
is  neither  very  sweet  nor  wholsome.  They  make  their
Pits  in  this  manner,  digging  three  or  foure  foot  in  the
Earth,  a  little  more  or  lesse,  they  find  fresh-water  in
abundance,  and  (that  which  is  very  strange)  not  above
foure  feet  from  the  Sea-shore,  in  places  also  which  are
often  over-flowne.  I  have  observed  that  their  waters  are
very  cold  in  the  day,  principally  at  noone,  and  in  the  night
very  hot.

But  to  returne  to  the  thirteene  Atollons,  here  are  their
names  beginning  at  the  North  Point,  which  is  in  the  head,

510

FRANCOIS PYRAIU) DE LAVAL  **

I002.

which  the  Portugals  call  for  that  cause  Cabexadcl  las  ilhas,
and  in  the  Maldives  Tongue,  Tilla  dou  matis,  in  the  same
signification,  that  is  to  say,  the  high  Point,  which  is  under
eight  degrees  of  the  Line  on  the  North-side,  in  the  same
height  that  Cochin  is.  Now  the  first  Atollon  is  called  N/t^f",e
Tilla  dou  matis.  The  second  Milla  doue  madoue.  The
third,  Padypolo.  The  fourth,  Malos  madou.  The  fift,
Ariatollon.  The  sixt,  Male  Atollon,  which  is  the  princi-
pall  where  is  the  Hand  of  Mal6,  chiefe  over  the  others.
The  seventh,  Poulisdous.  The  eighth,  Molucque.  The
ninth,  Nillandous.  The  tenth,  Collo  madous.  The
eleventh,  Adou  matis.  The  twelfth,  Souadou.  The  thir-
teenth, Addou  and  Poua  Molucque,  which  are  dis-
tinguished into  two  little  ones,  and  separated,  as  the  others,
but  are  very  small,  and  therefore  are  accounted  as  one.
Notwithstanding,  Addou,  as  the  better,  gives  name  to  the
other.

Every  Atollon  is  separated  from  his  Neighbour  by  a
channell  of  the  Sea,  which  passeth  betweene  them.  But
although  they  cannot  passe  with  great  ships  without
perishing,  yet  there  are  foure  which  are  farre  larger  then  Foure  prina-
the  others,  and  may  easily  passe  for  great  ships,  notwith-  ?al
standing,  it  is  very  dangerous,  and  perillous  to  goe  here,
and  especially  in  the  night :  for  it  is  certaine  to  bee  ship-
wrackt  (as  we  were)  because  they  cease  not  to  encounter
certaine  Shoalds  and  Rockes,  which  they  ought  to  shunne.
I  have  seene  amongst  the  Maldives  many  Sea-cards,
where  these  were  exquisitely  deciphered.  These  people  Tie  Natives
also  are  marvellous  cunning  to  avoide  them,  and  to  saile  exterttte  h
through  passages  very  dangerous  without  perishing.  I
have  seene  them  often  passe  in  the  middle  of  the  Bankes,
Sands,  and  Rockes,  through  little  channels  so  narrow,  that
they  had  roome  only  for  their  Barke,  and  sometimes  so
evenly  that  they  grated  the  Rockes  on  both  sides ;  and
neverthelesse  they  went  securely  in  the  middest  of  those
perils,  and  with  a  high  saile.  Once  being  with  some  of
the  Ilanders  in  a  little  Boate,  which  was  not  above  foure
fathome  long,  the  Sea  was  higher  then  I  two  Pikes  length,

5"

A.D.

l602.

Numberlesse
number  of
Barkes.

No  say  ling  by
night.

Skoalds.

Good
Swimmers.

[II. ix. 1650.]

Strange  Sea-
currents.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  so  outragious  and  turbulent  as  could  not  be  more.  I
thought  every  moment  that  the  billow  would  have  carried
mee  out  of  the  Boat ;  where  I  had  great  labor  to  hold
my  selfe,  and  they  were  not  a  whit  perplexed,  nor  did  feare
any  thing.  For  they  feare  not  the  Sea,  and  are  very
skilfull  to  conduct  Barkes  and  Boats,  being  made  and
accustomed  to  this  from  their  youth,  aswell  the  Gentle-
men as  poore  people,  and  it  should  be  a  disgrace  to  them
to  be  ignorant  in  it.  For  this  cause  it  is  impossible  to
summe  up  the  number  of  Barkes  and  Boates  which  are
throughout  all  the  lies,  for  as  much  as  the  poorest  will
have  one,  the  rich  many.  They  never  saile  by  night,  but
take  Land  every  evening,  they  saile  not  neither  without
sight  of  Land  without  a  Compasse,  except  when  they  goe
out  of  their  lies,  and  goe  some  long  Voyage.  They  carrie
therefore  little  provision,  but  buy  daily  whatsoever  they
need  in  divers  Islands.

The  greatest  part  also  of  the  lies  which  are  within  the
circuite  of  one  Atollon,  are  surrounded  with  a  shoald,
and  there  are  but  one  or  two  open  places  which  are  very
strait  and  difficult  to  heed  :  wherefore  it  is  necessary  that
they  understand  well  the  manner  actively  to  guide  their
Barkes  :  otherwise  if  they  be  defective  the  least  thing  in
the  World,  their  Barke  will  bee  overwhelmed,  and  their
Merchandize  perish.  As  for  the  men  they  can  swimme
well,  which  in  those  parts  of  the  Sea  preserves  them  daily,
and  to  speake  truly,  they  are  as  it  were  halfe  fishes,  they
are  so  used  to  the  Sea,  whither  they  goe  daily  either
swimming,  or  roading  or  waling.  I  have  seene  them
many  times  within  the  ledge  of  Rockes  where  the  Sea  is
calme,  runne  swimming  after  the  fishes,  which  they  have
suddenly  perceived  bathing  themselves,  and  have  taken
them  in  their  course.  And  this  is  usuall.  And  yet  they
faile  not  often  to  lose  their  Barkes,  notwithstanding  all
their  dexteritie.

The  greatest  discommoditie  is  the  current  Pwarou,
which  run  aswell  to  the  East  as  the  West,  in  the  channels
of  the lies, and in divers in-draughts  of  the Sea, six

5J2

FRANCOIS PYRARI) I)R LAVAL

A.D.
l602.

moneths  on  one  Coast,  and  six  months  on  another ; yet

not  certainly,  but  sometimes  more,  sometimes  lesse. This

is that  which  deceives  them,  and ordinarily  casts  them

away. The  winds  are  aswel  fixed  as  the  currents,  from The  Monsons.

the  East  quarter  or  the  West,  but  they  vary  sometimes,

and  are  not  so  ruled,  fetching  their  Compasse  toward  the

North  or  the  South,  and  the  current  goes  perpetuall  his

accustomed course, till the season alter. It is a very

remarkable  thing,  that  whereas  the  Atollons  are  continued

one  at  the  end  of  the  other,  and  separated  by  channels  of

the  Sea  which  goe  thorow  them,  they  have  open  places

and  entrances  opposite  one  to  the  other  two  on  one  side,  1  "lets  opposite.

and  two  on  the  other,  by  which  meanes  men  may  goe  and

come  from  Atollon  to  Atollon,  and  alway  communicate

together. Wherein  may  be  observed  an effect  of  the

providence  of  God,  which  hath  left  nothing  unperfect.

For  if  there  were  but  two  open  places  in  every  Atollon,

that  is,  one  on  one  side,  and  another  on  the  other ; it

were  not  possible  to  passe  from  Atollon  to  Atollon,  nor

from  entrance  to  entrance,  because  of  the  boysterousnesse

of  the  currents ; which  runne  sixe  moneths  to  the  East,

and  sixe  to  the  West,  and  permit  not  to  crosse  over,  but

force  them  downe. And  when  the  two  entrances  are  not

adverse,  but  one  on  the  East  Coast,  the  other  on  the

West,  men  may  easily  enter,  but  not  returne,  except  the

sixe  monethes  are  ended,  and  the  current  changed. Now

as  these  entries  are  disposed,  men  may  notwithstanding

the  currents  goe  from  one  Atollon  to  another,  in  every

season,  and  Traffique,  and  Merchandize  freely  together,

as  they  doe ; for  as  much  as  every  Atollon  is  open  with

foure entrances which are in opposition to their two

Neighbours.

The  entrances  of  these  Atollons  are  unlike,  some  com-
petently broad,  others  very  narrow,  the  largest  is  not  more
then  two  hundred  paces  or  thereabouts ;  some  are  but
thirtie,  nay  lesse.  On  both  the  sides  of  each  of  these
passages  are  two  lies,  on  each  side  one ;  you  would  say
that  it  were  to  guard  the  comming  in,  which  surely  were

513

Forme  of  the
Entrances  and
their  danger.

IX

2  K

A.D.

l602.

The  first.

The  second,
third,  and
fourth.

No  Compasse
but  in  long
Voyages.

Sea  blacke  as
Inke  ;  the
water  not.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

easie  to  doe,  if  they  would,  with  Ordnance  hinder  the
ships  to  enter,  because  the  largest  hath  not  above  two
hundred  paces.  Now  concerning  the  channels  (which
they  call  Candou)  which  divide  the  Atollons,  foure  are
Navigable,  where  the  great  ships  may  goe  to  passe  through
the  Maldives,  many  strangers  ships  of  all  sorts  passe
often  there,  but  not  without  perill,  for  there  are  a  great
number  yeerely  cast  away.  It  is  not  that  they  affect  this
passage  (for  all  on  the  contrary  shunne  it,  as  much  as  may
be)  but  they  are  situated  in  such  sort  in  the  middest  of  the
Sea,  and  so  long,  that  it  is  not  easie  to  escape  them,
principally  the  currents  carrie  the  ships  thither  against
their  wils,  when  the  calmes  or  contrary  winds  take  them,
and  that  they  cannot  helpe  themselves  with  their  sailes,  to
make  way  against  the  currents.  The  first  beginnes  on
the  North-side,  and  is  that  where  wee  were  shipwrackt
at  the  entry  of  the  shelfe  of  the  Atollon  of  Malos  madou.
The  second  approacheth  very  neere  Male,  called  Caridou,
in  the  middest  whereof  is  the  greatest  of  all  the  lies,  so
hemmed  in  with  Rocks  as  I  have  said.  The  third,  is  by
Male,  stretching  towards  the  South,  and  is  called  Addou.
The  fourth,  is  called  Souadou,  which  is  directly  under  the
Equinoctiall  Line :  this  is  the  greatest  of  all,  having  more
then  twentie  leagues  in  widenesse.

The  Danders  going  by  the  lies  and  Atollons,  helpe  not
themselves  with  a  Compasse,  except  in  farre  Voyages,  but
when  they  passe  through  the  great  channell  they  use  it.
All  the  other  channels  betweene  the  Atollons  are  very
straite,  and  full  of  Rockes  and  Shoalds,  they  cannot  goe
but  in  small  Barkes,  and  yet  it  is  requisite  to  have  great
knowledge  of  the  places  to  saile  without  danger.  I
found  it  strange  sayling  with  the  Ilanders  in  the  channell,
which  separates  Male  and  Polisdou,  and  which  beares  the
name  of  Polisdou,  and  is  seven  leagues  broad  or  there-
abouts, that  the  Sea  appeares  there  blacke  as  Inke,  not-
withstanding beeing  taken  up  in  a  Pot,  it  differs  not  from
other  water  ;  I  saw  it  daily  boyle  in  bigge  blacke  billowes,
as  if  it  had  beene  water  on  the  fire. In  this  entrance  the

5*4

FRANCOIS PYRARD DE LAVAL  ad.

1602.

Sea  runnes  not  as  in  other  places,  which  is  fearcfull  to
behold :  I  thought  I  was  in  the  nethermost  depths  per-
ceiving not  that  the  water  mooved  on  one  side  or  the
other.  I  know  not  the  reason,  but  I  know  well  that  the
Natives  are  greatly  afraid  of  it :  they  very  often  encounter
such  tortures.

Seeing  these  lies  are  so  neere  the  Equinoctiall  on  both
sides,  it  may  bee  judged  what  is  the  qualitie  of  the  Aire,
which  is  very  intemperate,  and  the  heate  excessive. Not-  H'at-
withstanding  the  day  and  night  are  alwayes  equall,  the
nights  are  very  coole,  and  bring  abundance  of  dew. This  Deu-es.
coolenesse  is  a  cause  that  the  Countrey  may  bee  more
commodiously  inhabited,  and  that  the  Herbs  and  Trees
are fruitfull, notwithstanding the heate of the Sunne.
The  Winter  beginnes  in  the  moneth  of  Aprill,  and  con-  Winter.
tinues  six  monethes  and  the  Summer  in  the  moneth  of
October,  which  endures  sixe  other  moneths. The  Winter
is  without  Frost, but  alwayes  rainie. The  Winds  are  Winds.
violent  from  the  West  Coast ; on  the  contrary  the  East
is  extreame  hot,  and  never  causeth  raine.

They  affirme, that  the Maldives  have  beene  hereto-  Whence
fore  peopled  by  the  Cingala,  (so  they  call  the  Inhabitants  ^^
of  the  Hand  of  Ceylan.) But  I  finde  that  the  Maldives
resemble  not  at  all  the  Cingala,  which  are  blacke,  and  [II.ix.1651.]
very  evil!  featured,  and  these  are  well  shaped  and  pro-
portioned, and  little  differ  from  us,  except  their  colour,
which  is  Olive. But  it  is  out  of  doubt,  that  the  place
and  the  length  of  time  have  made  them  more  gracefull
then  those  which  first  inhabited  the  lies. Adde  also  that
there  are  seated  a  great  number  of  strangers  of  all  parts,
which  inhabit  there,  (besides  the  Indians)  who  from  time
to  time  have  been  shipwrackt  as  we  were. Wherefore  Cwthtteofthe
the  people  which  inhabit  Mate,  and  round  about  to  the  Northfaris-
North  point  are  found  more  orderly,  honest  and  civill :
and  they  which  are  on  the  South-side  toward  the  low  Soufj*
point,  are  more  rude  in  their  Language  and  Fashions,
and  not  so  well  featured ; and  blacker,  and  also  many
women  of  the  poorer  sort  are  naked  without  any  shame,

51S

A.D.
l602.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

Religion.

having  only  a  little  cloth  to  cover  their  Privities :  And
for  as  much  as  the  North-coast  is  daily  more  haunted  and
frequented  with  strangers  who  ordinarily  marrie  there :
Also  that  it  is  the  passage  of  all  the  ships,  which  enrich
the  Countrey,  and  civilize  it  more  and  more,  which  is  the
cause  that  persons  of  ranke  and  qualitie  seate  themselves
there  more  willingly,  and  not  toward  the  South,  whither
the  King  sends  in  Exile  those  which  he  will  punish  with
banishment.  And  yet  the  people  which  inhabit  the
South  parts,  are  not  inferiour  in  capacitie  or  Religion  to
the  others,  if  it  be  not  more  for  other  things,  but  all
their  Gentry  inhabit  on  the  North  Coast,  where  also  they
take  their  Souldiers.

The  people  are  very  Religious,  greatly  addicted  to
Manufactures  of  all  kindes  of  Workes,  wherein  they
excell,  also  in  Letters  and  Sciences  after  their  manner,
principally  in  Astrologie,  whereof  they  make  great
esteeme.  They  are  a  wise  and  circumspect  Nation,  very
fradulent  in  their  Merchandizing,  and  their  living  in  the
World.  They  are  valiant  and  hardie,  and  well  seene  in
Armes,  and  live  in  great  order  and  policie.  The  women
are  faire,  but  that  they  are  of  an  Olive  colour :  and  some
are  found  as  white  as  they  be  in  Europe,  yet  they  have  all
blacke  haire  :  but  they  esteeme  that  beautie,  and  many
make  it  to  come  so,  wherefore  they  keep  their  Daughters
heads  shaven,  till  the  age  of  eight  or  nine  yeeres,  not
leaving  them  till  then  any  haire  but  a  little  on  their  fore-
heads, to  distinguish  them  from  Boyes,  who  have  none
at  all,  yet  this  comes  not  lower  then  their  Eye-browes,  and
after  that  the  children  are  borne,  they  shave  them  from
eight  dayes  to  eight  dayes,  which  makes  their  haire  very
blacke,  that  would  not  be  so  else,  for  I  have  seene  little
children  with  halfe  flaxen  haire.

The  beautie  and  ornament  of  the  women  is  to  have
their  haire  very  long,  thicke,  and  blacke,  which  they
accommodate  and  wash  often,  and  purifie  with  water  and
Bathing  and  Lye  made  of  purpose  :  having  well  washed  and  clensed
their  heads  and haire, they  abide  in the  wind  all  dis-

516

Women.

Haire-

ceremonies.

Oy/ing.

FRANCOIS  PYRARD  DE  LAVAL ad.

1602.
hevelled,  but  within  the  compasse  of  their  house,  untill
it  bee  throughly  dry  ;  after  they  rub  and  oyle  their  haire
with  odoriferous  Oyle,  which  causeth  that  their  heads  are
alwayes  moyst  and  Oily.  For  they  never  wet  their  bodies
men  nor  women,  but  after  they  oyle  them,  two  or  three
times  in  the  weeke  for  their  haire,  but  for  their  bodie,
oftener  then  there  are  dayes.  As  for  their  haire  they  are
not  obliged  to  wash  it,  but  when  they  have  accompanied
together,  and  they  are  bound  particularly  every  Friday,
which  is  their  Sabbath,  and  in  all  their  great  Feasts ;  the
men  on  their  Fridayes,  the  women  on  their  severall
Feasts  only,  but  sleepe  after  it  when  they  shall  thinke
good  and  according  to  their  necessitie.  The  women  also
perfume  their  heads  for  a  little  reason  which  they  have,
and  so  washed,  oyled,  and  perfumed  they  attire  them-
selves, which  is  to  bring  all  their  haire  from  before  back-
ward, and  draw  it  out  as  much  as  may  be,  that  one  haire
may  not  move  nor  waver  this  way  nor  that  way :  after
they  tye  them  behind,  or  they  make  a  great  tuft  bound
on,  for  which  greatnesse,  they  have  a  counterfeite  Locke  of
mans  haire,  but  as  long  as  the  womens,  in  fashion  of  a
Horse  taile ;  and  to  hold  it,  they  garnish  it  at  the  great
end  after  the  manner  of  a  ( *  )  and  all  '  De  dex  a

the  rest  of  their  haire  is  put  in  order  :  after  the  (m  )  coudre-

of  Gold or Silver is  covered  with Pearles and Jewels z'
according  to  their  abilities :  and  some  weare  two  of  these
false  haires,  because  it  serveth  to  tye  their  haire  behind,
and  make  the  tuft  greater. They  put  also  odoriferous
flowers  of  the  Countrey,  which  is  not  thereof  defective.

It  is  not  permitted  the  men,  but  onely  the  Souldiers
and  Officers  of  the  King,  and  Gentlemen  to  weare  their
haire  long,  who  doe  so  for  the  most  part,  and  as  long  as
the  womens,  yea  take  as  much  paines  as  they  to  wash,
dense,  and  oyle  and  sweeten  it  with  flowers :  and  there  is
no  other  difTrence,  but  that  the  men  bind  their  haire  on
one  of  their  sides,  or  right  up,  or  upon  the  head,  and  not
behinde  as  the  women :  also  they  never  weare  any  false
Periwigs :  they  are  not  compelled  to  weare  their  haire  so,

5i7

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1602.

but  short  or  long,  as  they  thinke  good.  I  have  seene
the  King  and  the  Princes,  and  greatest  part  of  the  Grandes
and  Souldiers,  who  weare  their  haire  short,  and  they
which  weare  them  long,  for  the  most  part,  when  they  are
weary,  or  when  they  grow  no  more,  cut  them  off  to  give
or  sell  to  women,  for  they  have  no  counterfeit  haire,  but
mens,  because  they  never  shave  the  womens  haire  living
Increase  of  Gr  dead :  the  most  part  of  these  false  haires  come  from
haire.  the  Continent,  as  from  Cochin,  Calicut  and  all  the  Coast

of  Malabar,  where  all  the  men  weare  their  haire  long,
which  after  they  cut  and  sell  for  women,  as  wel  of  the
Countrey  as  Aliants. Their  haire  increaseth  there  a  great
deale  faster  then  here,  because,  as  I  conjecture,  they  so
often  wash  and  oyle  them,  also  by  reason  of  the  extra-
ordinary heate,  which  causeth  their  haire  to  be  thicker
and  harder, but  never  curled  as  with  us. Commonly
Hairie  on also  the  men  are  hairy  over  all  the  bodie,  yea  so  thicke  as
their  bodies. more  cannot  be  imagined ; hereof  they  boast,  as  if  it
[II.ix.1652.]  were  the  strength  of  nature; which  yet  they  finde  not
alwayes  true,  and  if  a  man  bee  not  so  hairy,  they  say,
that hee  rather  resembles  a  woman then a  man, and
despise  him  for  it :  but  the  women  are  not  so  hairy,  and
have  no  haire  but  in  ordinary  places.
J II  Barbers  There  is  no  common  Barbers,  but  every  one  hath  skill

and  none.  t0  shave,  as  well  men  as  women,  and  to  use  no  razor  for  it,
nor  any  combe ;  but  they  have  sizers  of  cast  copper,  and
looking-glasses  also  of  copper,  which  they  use  instead  of
razors  of  Steele,  but  not  made  as  ours.  They  shave
themselves  after  our  fashion :  for  the  King  and  Peeres,
there  are  men  which  account  themselves  honoured  to
serve  in  this  office,  not  for  gaine,  but  for  affection,  being
men  of  fashion ;  the  King  sends  them  presents  at  the
yeeres  end.  Also  throughout  all  the  Ilands  there  is
neither  man  nor  woman,  rich  nor  poore,  great  nor  little,
which  after  the  age  of  fifteene  yeeres  hath  not  all  their
furniture  and  instruments  so  to  order  their  head  :  and
they  are  very  curious  to  take  them  off  when  it  never  so
little  grieves  or  troubles  them.

518

FRANCOIS PYRARD DE LAVAL  a.d.

1602.

The  maidens  weare  no  coats  till  the  age  of  eight  or  Boja  and
nine  yeeres,  but  onely  a  cloth  which  reacheth  from  the  &rlei'
girdle  to  the  knee,  which  they  weare  from  the  time  they
begin  to  goe :  but  the  boyes  weare  nothing  till  they  are
seven  yeeres  olde  and  are  circumcised :  they  say  that  it  is
not  necessary  that  their  daughters  should  weare  any  other
robe  the  time  aforesaid,  for  that  then  their  breasts  begin  Shame  to  let
to  beare  out  &  increase,  and  it  is  needfull  to  cover  them,  the  breasts  be
as  a  thing  which  they  hold  as  great  a  shame  to  show,  as  here
their  privities ;  and  then  they  let  their  haire  increase
without  any  more  cutting,  but  adorne  and  trim  it,  being
then  in  the  time  to  finde  some  to  marry  with ;  for  before
that  they  hold  them  as  children,  and  permit  not  men  nor
boyes  to  speake  of  love  to  them,  for  that  they  are  not
acknowledged  nor  arrayed  as  maidens.  Now  the  men
being  very  old  and  covered  with  haire,  as  I  have  said,  and
not  clothing  their  bodies  from  the  girdle  upwards,  they
shave  not  the  haire  on  the  breast  and  stomacke,  but  in
such  a  fashion  as  they  cut  the  haire  in  one  place,  and
leave  it  in  another,  to  the  end  that  it  may  appeare  and
bee  like  the  fashion  of  a  cased  doublet.

The  men  weare  their  beards  in  two  fashions  :  one  which  Beards  of  two
is  permitted  to  the  Pandiares,  Naibes,  and  Catibes,  and  sorts'
other  Ecclesiasticall  persons,  and  those  which  have  gone
on  pilgrimage  to  Mecca,  and  Medinatalnaby  in  Arabia,
where  is  the  Sepulchre  of  Mahomet,  to  weare  their  beard
so  long  as  they  will,  and  not  to  shave  it  but  under  the
throat,  and  their  upper  and  lower  lips,  because  they  would
not  for  any  thing  being  eating  or  drinking  touch  a  haire,  Neat  super-
being  the  greatest  nastinesse  and  filthinesse  in  the  world : st^tl0n- . .
wherefore  they  have  no  haire  about  their  mouth ; and  I
have  often  seene  that  for  finding  onely  one  haire  in  a
platter  of  meat,  they  would  not  touch  it,  and  remained
rather  without  eating,  giving  it  to  the  birds  and  other
creatures,  except  any  bodie  would  have  it. The  other
sort  of  beards  for  the  rest  of  the  nation,  and  the  com-
monest is  to  weare  a  little  one  after  the  Spanish  custome,
shaven  about  their  mouth  and  under  their  throat,  but

519

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1602.

without  mustaches,  and  in  the  cheek.es  they  make  like
holes  and  fashions  with  the  sizers,  and  they  shave  them
very  close,  yet  so  that  it  may  appeare. Their  chin  as  we
use  now.
VeH  In  the  meane  while  they  curiously  keepe  the  shavings

niggards.  Qf  ^t[r  haire  and  nailes,  without  losing  or  letting  fall
any,  and  are  carefull  to  interre  it  in  their  Church-yards
with  a  little  water :  for  they  would  not  for  any  thing  in
the  world  goe  upon  it,  or  cast  the  lest  part  into  the  fire ;
because,  they  say,  being  part  of  the  bodie  it  requires
burying  as  wel  as  the  bodie ;  and  they  inclose  it  neatly  in
a  little  cotton,  and  the  most  of  them  wil  be  shaven  in
the  porches  of  their  temples  or  Moschees.  They  are
verie  hardie  and  insensible  in  all  this,  and  use  no  hot
water  in  shaving  them ;  their  razors  cut  verie  naughtily,
and  they  doe  nothing  but  poure  a  little  cold  water  upon
it ;  and  whatsoever  hurt  they  do,  they  complaine  not,
and  say  that  it  paines  them  not :  All  this  comes  of  cus-
tome  to  them,  for  else  they  would  be  as  sensible  as  we.

§.  in.

Their  Cocos  and  other  fruits  and  food,  their  Trades
and  trading,  Creatures  profitable  and  hurtfull.
Of  Male  the  principall  Hand.  Their  Houses,
Candou,  Languages,  Apparell.

He  Maldives  are  very  fertill,  fruit,  and  other  com-
modities necessarie  for  the  life  of  man.  They
have  abundance  of  Millet,  which  they  call  Pura,

Their  food

Millet.  also  0f  another  little  graine  called  Bimby,  which  is  like
to  Millet,  but  that  it  is  blacke  as  Rape-seed.  These
graines  sow  themselves,  and  are  reaped  twice  in  a  yeere.
They  make  a  kinde  of  meale,  whereof  they  make  pot-
tage with  milke  and  hony  of  Cocos,  and  also  of  Torteaux
and  Bignets,  and  many  other  sorts  of  food.  There  grow
also  rootes  of  many  kindes,  one  called  Itelpoul,  which
growes  in  abundance  without  sowing,  and  is  round,  and

520

FRANCOIS PYRARI) I)E LAVAL  ad.

1602.

two  handfulls  in  greatnesse,  little  more  or  lesse.  Now
they  bruise  it  by  rubbing  it  on  a  rugged  stone  :  after  they
lay  it  in  a  cloth  in  the  Sunne  to  dry,  this  is  like  our
Amidon  or  wheate-flower,  which  they  keepe  as  long  as
they  wil,  whereof  they  make  pottage,  and  Torteaux  and
Gullets,  which  is  a  verie  delicate  meat,  but  that  it  a  little
surchargeth  the  stomacke,  it  must  bee  eaten  while  it  is  [II.ix.1653.]
new.  They  have  plentie  of  another  sort  of  root,  called  Roots.
Alas,  of  a  very  good  taste,  which  they  sow  and  cultivate,
one  sort  red,  like  red-parsnip,  another  white  like  navews,
and  are  ordinarily  bigger  then  a  mans  thigh.  They
boile  and  dresse  them  in  divers  fashions,  and  keepe
them  a  great  part  of  the  yeere ;  also  they  order  them  with
hony  and  sugar  of  Cocos,  and  it  is  a  great  part  of  the
nourishment  of  these  people.  They  call  wheat  Godame
&  rice  Andove,  which  grows  not  there,  but  is  brought  in
great  quantitie  from  the  firme  land.  They  eat  and  pre-
pare it  in  divers  manners,  boyling  it  only  with  water,  and
eat  it  with  other  viands  in  stead  of  bread.  They  boyle  it
also,  after  dry  it  and  bray  it,  and  of  this  bran,  with  egges,
hony,  milke,  and  butter  of  Cocos,  they  make  Florentines,
and  verie  good  belly-timber.

Hearbes  and  trees  grow  plentifully  in  all  the  lies ;  Hearbs,  trees,
many  that  beare  fruit,  others  that  beare  none,  whereof  and  fruits.
notwithstanding  they  eate  the  leaves  which  are  sweet  and
daintie.  There  are  Citrons,  Pomgranets,  Orenges  in
abundance  ;  Bannanes,  which  the  Portugalls  call  figges  of
India,  and  the  Maldives  Quella,  which  is  a  great  fruit,
and  multiplies  exceedingly,  delicious  and  of  great
nourishment ;  so  that  they  nourish  their  infants  with  it
in  stead  of  broth.  There  is  none  more  profitable  then
the  Cocos  or  nut  of  India,  which  they  call  Roul,  and  the  Cocos.
fruit  Cate :  they  abound  more  in  the  Maldives  then  in
any  place  of  the  world :  this  onely  tree  serves  for  all
necessaries  of  life,  furnishing  them  in  great  quantitie  with
wine,  hony,  sugar,  milke,  and  butter ;  and  moreover  the
pith  or  kernell  serves  to  eate,  with  all  sorts  of  meate  in
stead  of  bread. Adde  also  the  wood,  barke,  leaves,  and

521

A.D.
l602.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

shells  make  the  greatest  parts  of  their  moveables  and
utensills.

There  is  such  store  of  fire-wood,  that  they  buy  it  not,
for  as  much  as  the  countrie  is  covered  with  all  sorts  of
Trees  common,  trees:  it  is  lawfull  to  goe  and  cut  those  trees  at  any  time
when  they  have  need,  which  serve  for  nothing  but  to
burne.  Also  there  are  whole  Hands  full,  whither  everie
one  send  their  servants  and  slaves  daily  to  fetch  for  their
use.  It  is  admirable  that  each  of  the  thirteene  Atollons
produce  sundry  fruits,  although  they  are  all  under  the
same  climate ;  yet  every  one  hath  not  that  which  is  neces-
sarie.  You  would  say,  that  God  would  that  these  people
should  visite  one  another,  here  is  such  diversitie :  for
what  is  plentiful!  in  one  place  is  rare  in  another.  Although
every  thing  growes  particularly  in  each  place,  yet  it  is
little,  and  not  so  good  and  naturall  as  that  which  comes
from  the  Atollons  and  lies  proper  to  it,  because  it  is
brought  from  other  places.

The  people  also  have  followed  in  their  habitations  a
Crafts  differ-  like  order,  for  the  crafts-men  are  assembled  in  lies  apart,
mg  with  the  as  tne  Weavers  in  one,  the  Gold-smiths  in  another,  and  so
all  the  rest.  In  briefe,  none  of  their  mechanick  Arts  are
mingled,  but  each  hath  his  He,  yet  they  communicate  one
with  another  in  this  sort :  they  have  close  boates,  with  a
little  deck,  and  goe  from  He  to  He  travelling  and  retayling
their  merchandize,  and  sometimes  are  more  then  a  yeere
before  they  returne  to  their  He  and  ordinarie  residence.
They  carrie  with  them  their  male  children,  from  foure
or  five  yeere  old,  to  learne  and  be  accustomed  to  it.  They
lye  alwayes  in  their  Barkes,  and  drinke  and  eate  there,
and  often  worke  also.  When  I  was  on  the  Maldives,
there  was  found  a  Bird  (which  landed  in  an  Hand)  of
prodigious  shape  and  greatnesse.  It  was  three  foot  high,
the  body  exceeding  great,  more  then  a  man  could  fathom  :
the  feathers  all  white  as  a  Swan,  the  feet  broad  like
Fowles  that  swim,  the  necke  halfe  a  fathom  long,  the
beake  halfe  an  ell ;  on  the  upper  part  at  the  end  a  kinde
of  crooked  claw,  underneth  larger  then  above,  whence

522

Hands.

FRANCOIS PYRAUI) DE LAVAL  aj>.

1602.

hung  a  very  great  and  capable  bagge  of  a  yellow  gilded
colour  resembling  parchment.  The  King  was  much
astonished  whence  this  creature  should  come,  and  what
was  the  nature  of  it :  and  enquiring  of  all  men  which
came  from  other  regions,  at  the  last  hee  happened  on
certaine  strangers,  who  told  him  that  this  creature  was
particular  to  China,  and  that  it  was  bred  no  where  else,
and  that  the  Chinois  use  them  to  take  fish,  for  this  crea-
ture swimmeth  on  the  water  as  other  river  Birds,  and
very  long.  It  takes  fish  with  great  dexteritie,  and  fills
the  great  purse  or  bagge  which  hangs  from  the  beake
underneath,  which  is  so  great  and  capable,  that  it  will  hold
many  fishes  each  two  feet  long,  which  the  King  handling
hard,  wondred  greatly  how  it  was  possible  that  this  Bird
should  come  so  alone  from  China,  being  distant  more
then  a  thousand  and  two  hundred  leagues.  The  King
made  triall,  causing  them  to  tye  and  fasten  his  throat,
onely  giving  it  leave  to  breath,  that  it  might  not  swallow
the  fish,  but  bring  up  the  poke  full.  I  have  seene  it
often  goe  so  on  the  Sea,  and  come  with  it  full  of  fish.  It
goeth  a  long  time  on  the  Sea,  and  tarries  there  sometimes
a  day,  which  makes  me  beleeve  that  it  is  not  impossible
that  it  should  come  from  China.

They  have  Hens  in  such  plentie,  that  it  is  strange,  and  Hens  w'tlde.
cost  them  nothing  but  the  taking,  for  they  are  wild : in
the  Market  they  sell  them  but  for  one  Sous  apiece,  and
thirtie  sixe  Egges  at  the  same  price ; this  is  the  meate
they  use  most  next  to  fish. They  have  store  of  Pidgeons, Other  Fowle.
of  Duckes,  of  Rayles,  and  of  certayne  Birds  which  alto-
gether  resemble Sparrow-hawkes, Muskets blacke and
gray,  which  live  not  of  prey,  but  of  fruits  and  many  other
differing kinds, all wilde and none domesticke. The
Crowes  greatly  indanger  the  Inhabitants ; for  they  are  so  Crowes  bold.
bold,  that  they  will  come  into  the  Houses ; and  take
any  thing,  although  men  be  present,  of  whom  they  are
not  awhit  afraid. At  the  first,  I  thought  they  had  been
tame  and  domesticall,  they  are  in  so  great  abundance  that
they  cannot  be  numbered,  because  they  kill  them  not. The

523

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1602.
Great  Bats.  Bats  are  as  great  as  Ravens.  They  are  greatly  annoyed
Muskitos,  by  the  Muskitos  or  Gnats,  which  pricke  very  sorely.  But
Rats,  Mice,  t£at  whjch  troubles  them  most  are  the  Rats,  Dormice,
[II.ix.z6u.i  anc*  Pisrrures  which  are  found  every  where,  with  other
Of  these  sorts  of  Creatures  and  Vermine  which  enter  into  their

creatures  see Houses, and eate and spoyle their Graine, Provision,
Lmschot.  C. Fruits,  and  tender  Commodities,  so  that  they  are  forced
rel'atcth  the ^or  to  res^st  tnem>  to  build  their  Lodges  and  Granaries  on
like  in  Goa. piles  in  the  Sea  two  and  three  hundred  paces  from  the
Land,  whither  they  goe  in  Boates,  and  there  lay  up  their
graine  and  fruits  to  keepe  them. The  most  part  of  the
Magazines  of  the  King  are  builded  after  this  manner.
Sea-snakes.  In  the  Sea  there  is  a  kinde  of  Snakes  which  are  very

dangerous.  There  are  great  store  of  Cats,  Foines,  and
Ferrets.  There  are  no  beasts  for  riding ;  there  are  few
great  beasts,  wilde  or  tame.  It  is  true  that  there  are  about
foure  or  five  hundred  Cowes  and  Bulls :  but  they  apper-
taine  to  the  King  onely  who  breeds  them  in  the  He  of
Male  :  whither  they  are  brought  from  the  firme  land  for
curiositie  to  multiply  to  that  number ;  They  eate  them
not,  but  in  foure  or  five  months  in  the  yeere,  and  at  great
feasts  when  the  King  causeth  to  kill  one,  and  sometimes
he  giveth  one  to  the  strangers  ships,  whom  hee  will
gratifie.  There  are  also  some  Weathers  which  are  the
Dogs  dreadful  Kings.  They  have  no  Dogges,  yea  are  greatly  afraid  of
andundeane.  them.  While  that  I  was  there,  the  Portugalls  of  Cochin
sent  two  to  the  King  for  a  raritie,  who  caused  them  incon-
tinently to  be  drowned.  If  any  touch  a  Dogge,  he
presently  goes  to  bath,  as  to  purifie  himselfe.
Fish.  The  Sea  is  very  full  of  fish,  of  all  sorts  great  and  small,

principally  because  it  is  shallow  and  calme  within  the
Atollons.  It  is  their  chiefe  sustenance,  either  fresh  with
Rice  or  other  meate,  or  fried  with  Oyle  of  Cocos,  or  sod
in  sea-water  and  dryed  to  keepe  it.  They  send  many
ships  daily  laden  to  Achen  in  Sumatra  and  other  places.
Sharkes.  There  is  one  great  kinde  of  fish  which  greatly  vexeth

them,  for  it  devoures  the  men  when  they  bath  or  go  a
fishing. I  escaped  very  hardly  from  being  devoured. A

524

FRANCOIS PYRARI) DE LAVA  I.  «a

1602.

man  may  see  a  great  number  of  persons  which  have  1
their  armes  or  legges,  or  otherwise  are  lamed  by  this  n
fortune. The  great  abundance  of  all  things  causeth  that  Cheape
victual]  costs  little,  and  that  every  thing  is  good  cheape.
Foure  hundred  Cocos  may  bee  bought  for  one  Larin,
which is  eight souses : five  hundred Bannanes  for  one
Larin  : in  like  manner  after  the  same  price  an  hundred
great  fishes,  or  a  dozen  of  good  Hens,  or  three  hundred
pound  of  Roots,  and  so  of  other  things  :  so  that  there  is
no  *  Country  in  India  where  strangers  grow  rich  so  soone,  *So/e.
because  trading  is  good,  and  victualls  cheape.

The  principall  Hand  is  called  Male,  which  gives  name  Male  the  pun-
to  all  others  : for  the  word  Dives  signifieth  a  number  of  a^a
small  lies  heaped  together : it  is  very  neere  the  middest
of  all  other  lies,  and  is  in  circuit  about  a  league  and  a
halfe. It  is  fruitfuller  then  all  the  rest,  and  the  Staple  and
Mart  of  them,  and  of  strangers  ; the  seat  of  the  King
and  of  the  Court. By  reason  whereof  it  is  best  peopled,
but  unhealthfullest ; there  dye  many,  whom  they  interre  Unhealthfull.
each  a  part,  so  that  all  the  lie  is  full ; the  Sunne,  which  is
very hot, draweth up noysome and pestilent vapours.
The  waters  also  are  naught,  the  King  therefore  is  compelled
to  send,  for  him  and  his  house,  to  another  He,  where  the
water  is  better,  and  where  they  bury  no  bodie ; so  doe  also
the  principall  and  men  of  abilitie  in  the  He. Through-
out all  the  Hands  they  have  no  enclosed  Townes,  no  not  in  No  called
the  He  of  Male. But  all  the  He  is  replenished  here  and  Toumes-
there  with houses  and  buildings, either  of  Lords  and
Gentlemen,  or  of  the  common  people,  and  also  of  others.
Notwithstanding  the  houses  are  distinguished  by  Streets
and  Wards, in  a  faire  order,  and  all  know  their  owne
division. The  houses  and  edifices  of  the  common  people  Their  houses.
are  of  Wood  of  the  Cocos,  which  they  cut  from  the  trunke
of  the  Tree,  they  cover  them  with  leaves  of  the  same
Tree,  sowed  double  one  within  another.

The  Signiors  and  rich  men  build  with  stone,  which  Sea-stones
they  draw  forth  of  the  Sea,  from  under  the  Shelf s  and  ^J™™'
Rockes,  where  they  find  as  much  as  they  will,  of  good

525

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1602.

length  and  greatnesse.  It  is  smooth  and  good  merchan-
dise, verie  white,  somewhat  hard  to  cut  and  fashion  :  but
assoone  as  it  raines  on  it,  it  loseth  its  naturall  hardnesse
and  whitenesse,  and  becomes  all  blacke  when  it  is  beaten
with  the  raine,  or  wet  with  fresh  water :  the  manner  of
drawing  them  forth  of  the  Sea  is  remarkable.  There
groweth  in  that  Countrey  a  kind  of  Wood  which  they
Candou  call  Candou,  which  is  as  great  as  the  Wall-nut  tree  here,

strange  wood.  jjke  jn  ^  shaking  leafe,  and  whitenesse,  but  wonderful!
soft.  It  beares  not  any  fruit,  and  is  fit  onely  to  burne :
being  dry  they  cut  it  into  Plankes,  which  they  use  as  we
doe  fire.  This  Wood  is  lighter  then  Corke.  Having
noted  the  stone  within  the  water  which  they  will  have,
they  fasten  it  with  a  great  Cable.  This  is  ordinary,  for  as
I  said  before,  they  are  halfe  fishes,  very  expert  in  swim-
ming, their  women  swim  as  well  or  better  then  the  men
of  these  parts :  so  that  they  will  goe  on  every  occasion  to
the  bottome  of  the  Sea,  fifteene  or  twenty  fathoms  deepe,
and  stay  there  a  long  time  and  marke  the  depths  very
often,  to  see  where  it  is  good  laying  their  anchor.  Some-
times also  in  stead  of  an  anchor  they  choose  some  great
rocke  in  the  bottome  of  the  Sea,  and  there  fasten  their
Cable.  Then  after  that  they  have  selected  the  stone,  which
they  will  draw  up,  &  that  they  have  bound  it  to  their
Cable,  they  take  a  piece  of  the  wood  of  Candou,  &  tie  or
thrust  through  (after  they  have  bored  it)  their  cable  right
opposite  to  the  stone,  and  after  aloft  adde  a  certaine  num-
ber of  these  pieces,  as  many  as  shall  be  necessary,  so  that
which  is  marvellous  light,  and  fleeting  above  the  water,
pulls  up  with  it  the  stone  and  draweth  it  aloft,  whatsoever
weightie  or  ponderous  a  thing  it  bee,  even  to  a  thousand
pounds.  The  Cannons  and  Anchors  of  our  overwhelmed
Ship  were  drawne  up  thus.  I  have  seene  that  the  Haven
of  the  He  of  Male,  being  full  of  great  Rocks,  so  that  the
Ships  could  not  ride  nor  anchor  in  safetie,  clensed  and
made  navigable  thus  in  lesse  then  five  dayes.
[II.ix.1655.]  They  use  also  to  take  five  or  sixe  great  pieces  of  this
kind  of  wood,  and  binde  them  fast  in  a  row,  and  above  set

526

FRANCOIS  PYRARD  DK  LAVAL

A.L).
l602.

Fire  how
kindled.

sawed  Plankes  of  the  same  Tree  after  the  fashion  of  a
Hurdle,  after  elevate  it  with  little  boords  round,  before,
and  behinde,  and  on  the  sides,  and  in  the  middle  to  sit.
This  serves  them  to  goe  to  Sea,  and  passe  from  He  to  He :
they  principally  fish  in  such,  every  man  hath  one,  for
they  need  but  one  to  guide  and  conduct  them.  Another
propertie  of  this  Tree  is,  that  rubbing  pieces  one  against
another,  fire  comes  forth,  and  this  is  their  kindling  of
fire.  For  chaulke  they  use  shells  found  on  the  Sea  side,
which  joynes  and  conglutinats  their  buildings  very  well
together.

They  have  two  languages  in  use.  The  first,  which  is  Languages.
particular  to  the  Maldives  and  is  very  ample.  The
second  is  the  Arabick,  which  they  greatly  esteeme  and
learne  as  wee  doe  Latine.  Also  it  serveth  them  daily  for
their  holies.  In  the  Atollon  of  Souadou,  and  toward  the
South  of  the  Maldives  they  speake  a  language  hard  to
understand,  and  very  clounish  and  rude.

They  apparell  themselves  thus.  First  the  men  tye
about  their  privities  a  great  swath-band  of  cloth,  which
comes  round  about  them,  for  feare  that  going  or  comming,
or  in  doing  any  worke,  they  might  be  discovered.  After
they  put  a  little  cloth  of  cotton  died  blew,  or  red,  or  some
other  colour,  which  goes  no  lower  then  their  knees.  Upon
that  they  put  a  great  piece  of  cloth  of  cotton  or  silk  (if
they  are  a  little  rich  and  wealthy)  which  reacheth  to  their
ankles,  and  gird  it  with  a  faire  square  handkerchiefe
imbroidered  with  gold  and  silke,  which  they  fold  in  three
corners,  and  spreading  it  upon  their  backes  make  it  fast
before ;  after  for  greater  ornament  they  adde  a  little  piece
of  silke  of  divers  colours,  transparent  as  cobweb  laune,
which  is  short  and  extends  no  further  then  the  middle  of
their  thighs :  and  after  all  that  they  incompasse  them-
selves in  a  great  girdle  of  silke,  which  is  like  to  their  Girdle.
turbant,  and  is  well  fringed  ;  they  let  the  ends  hang  before.
Within  this  girdle,  which  serves  them  for  a  purse,  they
put  their  money,  and  their  bettele  on  the  left  side ;  and
on the  right side they  weare their knife, which they

527

Their

apparell.

A.D.
l602.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Knife.

No  land-bone
worm.

No  Armei
ordinarie.

esteeme  very  honourable,  and  there  is  no  bodie  but  weares
one,  no  not  the  King.  These  knives  are  very  well  made,
all  of  excellent  Steele,  for  they  have  no  invention  to
mingle  yron  with  Steele.  They  which  have  any  meanes,
weare  the  haft  and  sheath  all  of  silver  wrought  and
fashioned.  In  the  end  of  the  sheath  on  the  top  they
have  a  buckle  of  silver,  whereat  hangs  a  little  chaine  also
of  silver,  whereto  are  tyed  their  tooth-pickers  and  eare-
pickers,  and  other  little  instruments.  Others,  which  have
not  meanes  to  have  them  so  costly,  weare  the  sheath  of
wood  wrought,  the  haft  of  a  fishes  bone,  as  of  a  Whale  or
other  Sea  creature,  for  they  will  not  weare  bone  of  any
Land  creature.  They  are  very  curious  of  their  knives,
and  thinke  themselves  not  well  clothed,  except  they  have
them  at  their  girdle.

They  are  not  suffered  to  carry  other  Armes,  except  the
Souldiers  and  Officers  of  the  King,  and  they  onely  while
they  are  in  service  of  the  King  in  the  He  of  Male,  or  else-
where sent  by  him.  They  have  commonly  at  their  side
a  waved  dagger,  which  they  call  a  Cris ;  they  come  from
Achen,  Java,  and  China.  And  moreover  when  they  goe
in  the  street,  they  alwayes  carry  their  sword  naked  in  one
hand,  and  their  buckler  in  the  other,  or  else  a  javelin.
Their  principall  braverie,  is  to  weare  about  their  girdle
Silver  chaines.  many  chaines  of  silver.  There  is  not  one  man  nor
woman,  boy  nor  girle,  little  or  great,  which  will  not  have
of  them  according  to  the  proportion  of  their  goods  and
substance.  Thereon  they  put  their  Treasure,  and  ordi-
narily designe  it  to  defray  the  expences  of  their  Funerals.
But  none  except  the  Grand  Lords  and  Strangers  weare
them  upon  their  clothes  to  be  seene :  the  other  weare
them  hid  underneath  :  and  yet  they  will  have  them  to
speake  of  them,  and  shew  privately.  The  residue  of
their  bodie  from  the  Girdle  upward  is  naked  ;  I  under-
stand of  the  common  people,  for  the  Signiors  of  qualitie
are  not  so.  Yet  in  their  Feast  dayes  they  cover  themselves
with  Jerkins  and  Cassocks  of  Cotton  or  Silke  which  they
fasten  with  Buttons  of  Gilt  Copper. These  Jerkins  are

528

Nakedncsse.

Jerkins.

FRANCOIS PYRAIU) I)K LAVAL

A.D.
l602.

of  all  sorts  of  colours,  but  the  edges  are  welted  with  white
and  blue.  The  sleeves  come  but  to  their  elbow ;  they
say,  if  they  should  descend  to  the  wrist,  as  ours,  they
should  not  have  the  free  mannaging  of  their  armes.  They
put  on  also  coloured  linings,  which  are  very  strait,  and
reach  from  the  ankles  to  the  wast,  which  they  fasten  also
on  the  bottome  with  gilded  buttons.

The  chiefe  men  array  themselves  ordinarily  with  Jerkins
and  Cassockes.  A  great  number  on  Feast  dayes  use  an-
other kinde  of  gallantry :  they  bruise  Sanders  and  Cam-
phire  on  very  slicke  and  smooth  stones  (which  they  bring
from  the  firme  Land)  and  sometimes  other  sorts  of
odoriferous  wood ;  after  they  compound  it  with  water
distilled  of  flowres,  and  overspread  their  bodies  with  this
paste,  from  the  Girdle  upwards,  adding  many  formes  with  Past-garment,
their  finger,  such  as  they  imagine :  it  is  somewhat  like  cut
and  pinked  Doublets,  and  of  an  excellent  savour.  Some-
times they  bind  together  faire  flowres,  and  of  the  best
sent.  They  dresse  their  Wives  or  Lemmons  in  this  sort,
and  make  upon  their  backes  workes  and  shadowes,  as  they  Skin-prints.
please.  This  is  one  kind  of  bravery  which  is  much  used,
but  they  dare  not  present  themselves  so  trimmed  before
the  King,  nor  within  the  Palace.  Upon  their  heads  they
weare  red  Turbants,  or  diversified  into  various  colours,
the  richer  sort  of  Silke,  the  poorer  of  fine  Cotton.  The
Souldiers  and  Officers  of  the  King  attire  themselves  after
one  fashion,  which  is  not  permitted  to  others,  putting
often  on  their  heads  imbroydered  Hand-kerchiefes,  which
others  may  not.  All  the  people  goe  naked  on  their  feet,
and  often  on  their  legges,  yet  within  their  Houses  they
use  a  kind  of  Slippers  or  Sandals  made  of  wood,  but  when
any  of  their  Superiours  come  to  visit  them,  they  pull  off
their  Sandals,  and  remaine  with  bare  feet.

The  women  have  a  great  cloth  of  Cotton,  or  of  coloured
Silke  which  comes  about  them  from  their  middle  to  their
ankles,  and  serves  them  for  a  Coate.  Upon  that  they
put  a  Robe  of  Taffata,  or  very  light  Cotton,  but  very
long :  It  descends  to  their  feet,  the  borders  are  blue  and

IX  529  2L

Souldiers  and
Officers  attire.

Barefeet.
[II.ix.1656.]

Womens
habit.

A.D.
l602.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Bracelet:
heav'ie.

Chaines.

white ;  it  is  very  like  the  Smocks  which  women  weare  in
these  parts.  It  is  a  little  open  on  the  necke,  and  fastned
with  two  little  gilded  Buttons,  and  so  before  in  the
Throate,  without  any  more  opening  in  the  bosome :  so
that  when  they  will  give  their  children  sucke,  they  are
constrayned  to  pull  up  their  Garments,  yet  without  any
indecencie,  by  reason  of  the  cloth  which  they  use  in  stead
of  a  Coate.  Their  Armes  are  laden  with  great  Bracelets
of  Silver,  sometimes  from  the  wrist  to  the  elbow ;  the
poorer  sort  weare  them  mixed  with  Brasse,  others  of  fine
and  massie  Silver,  so  that  there  are  some  found  with  three
or  foure  pound  of  Silver  on  their  Armes :  and  moreover
they  have  Chaines  of  Silver  on  their  Girdles  under  their
clothes,  which  are  not  seene,  but  sometimes  when  their
Garments  are  very  lightsome.  They  have  many  Chaines
of  Gold  about  their  neckes  if  they  be  women  of  ranke
and  fashion,  or  they  knit  together  pieces  of  Gold  Coine,
which  comes  thither  from  Arabia,  or  elsewhere  from  the
Continent.  In  their  eares  they  weare  very  rich  pendants
according  to  their  wealth,  but  they  weare  them  not  after
the  same  fashion  we  doe  heere.  For  the  Mothers  pierce
the  eares  of  their  Daughters  when  they  are  young,  not
only  in  the  lap  or  fat  of  the  eare,  but  all  along  the  gristle
Eare-Hres.  in  many  places,  and  put  there  threeds  of  Cotton  to  encrease
and  keepe  the  holes,  that  they  may  put  when  they  are
greater  little  gilded  nailes,  to  the  number  of  twentie  foure
in  both  eares.  The  head  of  the  naile  is  commonly
adorned  with  a  precious  Stone  or  Pearle,  also  in  the  lap  of
the  eare  they  have  an  earing  fashioned  after  their  manner.
When  the  women  goe  in  the  streets  either  in  the  night  or
day,  (although  they  go  seldome  in  the  day)  they  weare  a
Veile  upon  their  heads  ;  but  they  put  it  downe  going  with
the  Queenes  or  great  Ladies,  or  with  their  betters,  but
not  at  all  before  men,  no,  not  before  the  King ;  but  on  the
contrary  they  will  hide  themselves  more  when  they
imagine  that  men  eye  them.

It  is  observable,  that  none  neither  man nor  woman,
except  the  Prince  or  Grand  Signior  dare  weare  any  Rings

530

FRANCOIS PYRARD DE LAVAL  ad.

1602.

set  with  Stones,  nor  Jewels,  nor  Bracelets,  Carkancts,  or
Earings,  nor  Chaines  of  Gold  without  permission  from  the
King,  if  they  bee  men,  or  from  the  Queenes,  if  they  bee
women.  This  permission  they  buy,  except  they  conferre
this  benefit  on  them,  as  they  doe  often  to  the  women.

None,  neither  Queenes  nor  Princesses  may  weare  Gold
Bracelets  and  Rings  of  Gold  on  their  Armes  and  Legs :  ^n
but  for  any  other  ornament  it  is  permitted  them  to  have
Gold ;  but  although  the  Rings  of  their  Feet  and  Legges
are  of  Silver,  they  may  not  weare  what  quantitie  they
will,  if  they  be  not  of  great  Birth  and  Originall,  nor  put
Rings  on  their  fore-fingers,  except  the  Queenes,  the  Prin-
cesses and  great  Ladies  on  the  middle-fingers ;  all  other
women  with  permission  on  the  two  other  fingers,  the
men  only  on  their  thumbe.  So  every  one  knowes  his
ranke  and  degree,  and  what  ornaments  he  must  have
aswell  for  himselfe  as  his  Wife,  and  there  is  no  confusion
in  it,  If  the  Wife  of  any  one  which  hath  not  accustomed
to  goe  brave  before,  beginne  to  goe  more  gay,  or  if  a  man
weare  Rings  set  with  Jewels  on  his  finger,  although  in  so
doing  hee  exceeds  not  that  which  is  permitted  him  ;  yet
they  impose  on  him  a  greater  Taxe  for  this :  except  the
Officers  of  the  King  and  of  the  Queenes,  which  pay  no
Taxes,  nor  the  Inhabitants  of  the  He  of  Male,  yet  they
are  burthened  with  other  charges,  and  pay  many  extra-
ordinary expences.  The  Strangers  and  their  Wives  have  Strangers
priviledge  to  attire  themselves  as  they  wil,  to  weare  what  Prtvtled&ed-
ornaments  and  costlinesse  they  will,  without  permission,
even  as  the  great  Princes,  or  the  King  himselfe.  In
briefe  I  observed,  that  the  Strangers  have  more  Privi-
ledges  and  Immunities  then  the  Naturals.  Also  the
Pandiare,  the  Naybes  and  Catibes  of  the  He  of  Male,  and
other  Hands  may  dresse  and  array  themselves  as  they
please,  without  being  bound  to  the  Lawes  for  this  thing
as  others.

The  women  are  curious  to  tricke  and  trimme  them-  Women*
selves  handsomely.  They  have  a  custome  to  make  the  cnstomes-
nailes  of  their  feet  and  hands  red. This  is  the  beautie  of

53i

A.D.
l602.

[II. ix. 1657.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Countrey :  they  make  it  with  the  juice  and  moysture
of  a  certayne  Tree,  and  it  endures  as  long  as  their  nailes.
Certainly  they  appeare  very  faire  and  beautifull,  aswell
because  they  attire  themselves  neatly,  as  because  they  are
wel-favoured,  of  a  good  proportion,  and  very  prettie.

§•  nil.

Rites  of  Meate  and  Drinke,  Bathing,  Superstitious
Observations:  Diseases.  Education  of  Children.
Fishing,  Fashions,  Lusts.

Hey  never  eate  together,  but  with  men  of  their
owne  Ranke  and  Qualitie ;  counting  it  a  dis-
honour  to eate  with their inferiour : Also they

feast  seldome,  except  at  their  Festivals  and  Solemnities.
If  they  wil  at  other  times  entertaine  their  friends,  they
prepare  a  Service  of  many  Dishes,  and  set  it  on  a  great
round  Table  covered  with  Taffata,  and  send  it  into  his
House  whom  they  will  feast :  which  they  hold  a  great
honour.  Being  in  their  owne  house  they  love  not  the
others  should  see  them  eate,  and  goe  therefore  to  the
furthest  side  of  their  house,  letting  downe  all  the  clothes
and  Tapistrie  which  are  before  them,  that  so  they  may
be  unseene.  Before  they  eate,  they  say  their  Prayers.
They  have  no  other  Table  then  the  floore  of  their  Lodg-
ings, which  is  covered  with  a  little  fine  Mat,  whereon  they
sit  crosse-legged.  They  use  no  Naperie,  but  for  feare
of  wasting  their  Mats  they  use  great  leaves  of  the  Ban-
nanes  whereon  they  set  their  Dishes,  and  others  before
them  in  stead  of  Trenchers :  they  are  so  neat  in  their
feeding,  that  they  shed  nothing  in  the  place  where  they
eate,  no  not  one  drop  of  water,  although  they  wash  their
mouth  before  and  after  their  repast.  Their  dishes  are  of
Earth,  figured  after  the  maner  of  the  Country,  and  come
from  Cambaya ;  as  good  as  China  Porcelane,  and  so
common  that  all  use  them.  But  they  have  no  Platter  of
Earth  or  Porcelane,  which  is  not  after  the  fashion  of  a
Box  round,  varnished  and  nealed,  and  a  cover  of  the  same

532

FRANCOIS  PYRARD  DE  LAVAL ad.

1602.
matter. The  poorer  sort  have  covered  Platters  in  stead
of  these  Boxes,  which  cost  little. The  reason  is  because  Pismires
of  the  Ants,  which  in  great  numbers  fill  every  place,  so  troubltiome-
that  it  is  very  difficult  to  keepe  any  thing  without  a  cover.

They  are  also  so  nice  in  their  Diet,  that  they  will  not  Nketie.
taste  of  any  meate  wherein  hath  fallen  a  Flye  or  an  Emit,
or  any  little  creature,  or  the  least  filthinesse,  so  that  they
will  give  it  to  the  Birds  when  they  come :  for  they  have
no  minde  to  give  it  to  the  poore,  to  whom  they  never
give  any  thing  which  they  would  not  have,  or  which  is  not
aswell  dressed  as  for  themselves. Wherefore  when the  Charitie.
poore  come  to  their  doores,  they  make  them  come  in,  and
make  them  as  good  cheere  as  for  themselves ;  saying,  that
they  are  the  Servants  of  God  aswell  as  themselves. The
Grand  Signiors  and  rich  men  have  no  other  Vessels  then  No  Plate.
other  men,  although  they  might  have  them  of  Gold  and
Silver,  yet  their  Law  forbids  it. If  a  dish  happen  to  be
a  little  riven  or  crackt,  they  eate  no  more  in  it ; saying,
that  it  is  polluted. They  use  no  Spoones  neither  to  eate Finger-spoons.
Rice  nor  Honey, nor  any  liquid thing,  but take  them
with their  fingers, which they  doe neatly  and nimbly
without  losing  any  thing,  for  they  account  it  the  greatest
incivilitie  in  the  World  to  let  any  thing  fall  in  eating. In
the  meane  while  also,  none  dare  spit  nor  cough,  but  must
rise  and  goe  forth. In  eating  they  never  use  the  left
hand,  because  therewith  they  wash  their  Privities. They
willingly  eate  at  the  beginning  of  their  feeding  a  Cocos  Dexteritie.
halfe  ripe,  and  drinke  the  water  of  it ; saying,  that  it  is
healthfull,  and  looseth  their  belly. They  eate  all  greedily  Qukke  at
and  in  haste,  holding  it  mannerlinesse  not  to  be  long  in  meate-
eating :  and  in  the  meane  while,  though  they  be  in  com-
pany, they  speake  not  a  word.

To  drinke  while  they  are  eating,  is  reckond  clownish-  Drinking
nesse, but  after  they  have  eaten  their  fill, they  drinke  *****'
once. Their  drinke  is  commonly  of  water,  or  of  Wine
of  Cocos  drawne  forth  the  same  day :  they  have  also  other
sorts  of  drinkes  for  the  King  and  Nobles,  or  at  their  great
Solemnities. They  drinke  in  Copper  Cups  well  wrought,

533

A.D.

l602.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Bettell.

Butcher-rites.

with  covers  on  them.  After  their  repast,  and  when  they
have  washed,  they  present  a  Platter  of  Bettell,  in  stead  of
sweet  meates.  For  the  most  part  they  have  no  ordinarie
houre  of  eating,  but  eate  at  all  houres  when  they  are
No  man  cooke.  hungry.  Their  Wives  and  Daughters  prepare  and  dresse
their  meate,  and  not  men.  It  is  the  greatest  injurie  that
a  man  can  doe  to  one,  to  call  him  Cisday,  that  is  to  say
Cooke :  and  if  any  bee  found  to  addict  themselves  to  this,
they  are  mocked  and  despised  every  where,  in  such  sort
that  they  esteeme  them  not  for  men  but  women  :  and  they
dare  not  accompany  with  any  but  women,  nor  doe  any
other  exercise ;  also  they  make  it  no  difficultie  to  leave
them  with  them.

When  they  kill  any  creature  for  their  food,  they  have
many  Mysteries.  They  cut  the  throat  turning  themselves
toward  Mahomets  Sepulchre,  and  say  their  Prayers,  and
all  speedily  let  it  goe,  or  goe  forth,  not  touching  it  till  it
be  thoroughly  dead.  If  any  touch  it  before,  they  cast
away  the  flesh,  and  eate  it  not.  Also  they  cut  it  not
every-where,  but  in  a  certaine  place  of  the  throat,  other-
wise they  eat  it  not,  and  every  one  understands  not  this,
but  principally  their  Priests  or  Mondius  know  it :  they
which  enterprize  it  must  bee  ancient  and  not  yong,  and
such  as  have  had  children.  In  all  their  actions  they  are
very  scrupulous  and  superstitious.  After  they  have  slept,
whether  in  the  night  or  day,  they  faile  not  presently  after
they  are  awake,  to  wash  their  eyes  and  face,  and  rub  them
with  Oyle,  and  put  also  a  certaine  blacknesse  upon  their
eye-lids  and  eye-browes :  they  dare  not  speake  nor  bid
any  good  morrow  till  they  have  done  thus ;  they  are
carefull  to  rub  their  Teeth,  and  to  wash  and  dense  them,
saying  furthermore,  that  the  Red  colour  of  Bettell  and
Arecka,  which  they  chawe  continually  takes  the  better :
so  that  they  have  all  red  Teeth,  by  reason  of  champing  of
Bettell,  &  they  account  this  braverie.  They  carrie  it  also
alwaies  about  in  the  pleats  of  their  Girdle,  and  it  should
be  a  dishonor  to  be  found  without  it ;  it  is  the  custome
when  they  encounter  one  another  by  the  way  interchange-

534

Superstition.

[II.ix.1658.]
Bettell  and
Arecka.

FRANCOIS PYRARD I)K LAVAL

A.D.

i6o2«

Bathing.

ably  each  to  give  the  other  some  of  his. They  bathe

often  in  the  day,  not  only  for  pleasure  and  commoditie,

but for Religion, or entrance into the Mosche : they

wash  their  Extreems  after  they  have  made  urine,  or  done

their  necessities,  they  wash  their  Privities  with  the  left

hand,  or  they  wash  all  their  bodie,  which  they  call  Junan,

according  to  their  Feasts  with  diversities  of  formes  and

ceremonies. So  that  when  they  wash  in  publike,  as  they

doe,  a  man  may  know  wherefore  they  bathe,  as  if  they

have  accompanied  with  their  Wives  whether  by  night  or

by  day,  they  plunge  their  head  three  times  under  the

water. When  they  are  to  goe  any  Voyage,  they  desire

not  to  meet  or  touch  any  body,  and  if  any  disastrous  thing

chance  to  them,  they  attribute  it  to  him  who  toucht  them.

Above  al  when  they  goe  on  fishing,  they  must  not  salute  Superstitions

any,  nor  bid  them  good  morrow. From  the  going  downe

of  the  Sunne  on  Thursday  in  the  Evening,  till  the  day

following  about  three  or  foure  of  the  clocke,  they  will  not

permit any thing to be  carried out of their Houses,

although  their  deerest  Love,  or  their  Father  would  borrow

any  thing,  they  would  not  give  it  them,  neither  will  they

render  that  which  shall  be  sent  for,  although  it  bee  not

theirs : yet  they  will  receive  any  thing,  and  let  it  enter

into  their  houses  in  the  meane-while  without  any  scruple.

They  wrangle  not  nor  quarrell  together,  although  there

be enmitie betweene them ; above all take heed of

reproaching.

In  sailing,  if  they  be  surprized  with  contrarie  winds,
of  calmes,  or  stormes,  they  make  Vowes  to  him  which
commands  the  winds,  whom  they  call  not  God,  but  King.
There  is  no  He  where  is  not  found  a  Siare,  as  they  call  it,
which  is  a  place  dedicated  to  the  winds,  in  a  desolate
corner  of  the  He,  where  they  which  have  escaped  danger,
make  Offerings  daily  of  little  Boates  and  ships  made
purposely,  full  of  Perfumes,  Gummes,  Flowres,  and
odoriferous  Woods.  They  burne  the  Perfumes,  and  cast
the  little  Boats  into  the  Sea  which  goe  floting  till  they  be
burned,  for  they  put  fire  in  them ; to  the  end,  they  say,

535

Their  ^Eolus-
rites.

A.D.

l602.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

that  the  King  of  the  Winds  may  accept  them.  Also  they
set  not  willingly  their  ships  and  Gallies  afloate,  but  they
kill  Hens  and  Cockes,  and  cast  them  in  the  Sea  before  the
ship  or  Boat  which  they  will  use.  They  beleeve  also  that
there  is  a  King  of  the  Sea,  to  whom  in  like  sort  they  make
Praiers  and  Ceremonies  in  their  Navigation,  and  when
theygoe  on  fishing,  fearing  upon  everie  errour  and  offence,
the  Kings  of  the  Winds  and  of  the  Sea.  So  that  being
on  the  Sea  they  dare  not  spit  on  the  windie  side,  nor  cast
any  thing  overboord,  for  feare  that  they  should  be  angrie
with  them :  also  they  never  looke  behind  them.  All  the
Boates,  Barkes,  and  ships  are  devoted  to  the  powers  of
the  Winds  and  of  the  Sea :  and  surely  they  respect  them
as  if  they  were  their  Temple,  keeping  them  neate,  and
never  committing  any  filthy  and  dishonest  thing  in  them.
They  have  also  the  Kings  of  the  other  Elements  (as  they
call  them)  and  especially  that  of  Warre,  but  all  with  great
Ceremonies.

They  greatly  esteeme  certaine  Characters,  which  they
call  Tavide,  which  they  weare  under  their  Garments,
inclosed  in  little  Boxes,  which  the  Rich  make  of  Gold  or
Silver.  They  weare  them  often  on  their  armes,  on  their
necke,  or  at  their  Girdle,  or  else  at  their  foot,  according  to
the  subject  of  the  Disease ;  for  they  weare  them  for  all
things  as  well  offensive  as  defensive,  that  they  should  love
or  be  loved,  or  hate,  or  to  heale  or  cure  any  Maladie.
The  Magicians  and  Sorcerers  sell  them  these  for  monie,
and  tell  them  that  it  brings  them  good  lucke,  and  heales
their  Diseases.  They  have  few  remedies  for  their  Mala-
dies, but  have  recourse  to  the  Magicians  and  Sorcerers,
who  are  their  only  Physicians.  They  beleeve  also  that  all
their  evill  is  caused  by  the  Devill  to  vexe  them,  who  is
Devilinvoked.  the  only  cause  of  their  Deaths  and  Diseases.  Therefore
they  call  upon  him,  and  offer  Flowres  to  him,  and  pre-
pare Banquets  of  all  sorts  of  Viands  and  Beverages,  which
they  set  in  a  certaine  secret  place,  where  they  let  them
consume,  if  no  poore  people  happen  to  take  them  away.
For  the  same  purpose  they  kill  Cockes  or  Hennes,  turning

536

Superstitious
neatnesse.

Characters.
See  the  like  in
Jobsons  Notes
of  Gambra.

Magicians.

FRANCOIS PYRARD I)E LAVAL  w

1602.

them  towards  the  Sepulchre  of  Mahomet,  after  leaving
them  there,  praying  the  Devill  to  accept  of  them.

The  Fever  is  common  among  them,  but  most  danger- Fevers.
ous  to  strangers. From  ten  yeeres  to  ten  yeeres,  here
comes  a  Disease  called  Curivadiri,  for  which  they  abandon  Decennial/
one  another,  as  if  it  were  the  Plague. It  is  like  the  small  Dtseaie-
Pockes,  and  kils  many. The  diseases  of  the  Eyes  are
very  common,  I  have  seene  a  great  number  blind,  and  the  Blindneae.
most  part  have  little  Eyes. It  happens  also  often  that
having  beene  long  in  the  Sunne  in  the  height  of  the  day,
after  the  Sunne  is  downe,  they  see  not  at  all,  whatsoever
fire  or  light  be  put  neere  them,  although  it  were  a  hundred
Torches,  yet  without  feeling  any  other  evill. To  heale  it,
they  boyle  the  Liver  of  a  Cocke,  and  write  words  and
Charmes,  and  set  it  toward  the  point  of  the  setting  of  the
Sunne. My  Companions  and  I  were  sometimes  vexed  with
this  Maladie  :  but  having  learned  theReceit,wee  tooke  the
Liver  of  a  Cocke,  rejecting  their  Charmes,  to  see  if  that
would  serve,  and  wee  found  that  it  healed  us  as  well  as
them,  without  observing  their  Sorceries. They  are  much
subject  to  the  Itch,  which  they  heale  with  Oyle  of  Cocos.
Remedilesse  Tetters  terrifie  them  much  :  some  have  almost  Tetters.
their  whole  bodies  over-runne  with  them. These  evils
come  by  reason  of  the  quantitie  of  Salt-fish  which  they  [II.ix.1659.]
eate,  and  also  because  they  seldome  salt  their  meates,  but
powre  Sea-water  to  it.

In  the  Winter,  although  the  Raines  are  continuall,  yet
they goe bare-foot, they have under their feet and  Bare-foot.
betweene  their  toes,  a  kind  of  hand-worme,  which  breeds  Feet  tuormes.
in  the  filth,  it  maketh  Wheales  and  Pushes  full  of  water,
which  after  they  increase  ingender  Ulcers,  which  greatly
hinders  their  going. They  are  also  troubled  all  over  the
bodie with these Wormes. They have all commonly
great  Spleenes,  and  are  subject  to  obstructions,  and  endure
much  evill. They  have  some  Receits  and  Compositions  Splenctike.
of  Herbes  and  Drugges  for  divers  Maladies,  and  princi-
pally for  wounds,  which  they  heale  very  cunningly.
They  use  no  bindings  nor  linnen  to  their  Soares,  but

537

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Europeans

called

Frankes.

No  Toothache.

Hardinesse.

only  Ointments.  Cathaires  and  Fluxes  sometimes  trouble
them,  and  aches  in  the  bones.  The  Neapolitan  disease  is
not  very  frequent :  they  heale  it  with  China  wood,  with-
out sweating  or  any  other  thing,  they  call  it  Farangui
Baesrour,  this  Maladie  came  from  Europe,  whose  Inhabi-
tants they  call  Farangui  or  Frangui.  They  are  never
troubled  with  the  Tooth-ache ;  it  seemes  their  ordinary
chawing  of  Bettell  is  the  cause  hereof.  As  soone  as  their
Infants  are  borne,  they  wash  them  in  cold  water  sixe
times  a  day,  and  after  they  chafe  them  with  Oyle,  and
continue  this  washing  a  great  while  :  and  moreover,  when
they  make  Urine,  or  doe  Natures  Office,  they  wash  their
Privities  with  water.

The  Mothers  nourish  their  owne  Children,  and  dare
not  put  them  forth  to  nurse  to  others,  no  not  the  Queenes,
saying  ordinarily  that  the  beasts  bring  up  their  young,
but  they  have  Servants  to  tend,  carrie,  and  governe  them.
Besides  the  breast  they  make  a  kind  of  Pappe,  of  Rice  or
Honey,  brayed  and  macerated,  after  boiled  with  Milke  and
Sugar  of  Cocos.  The  most  part  (especially  the  poorest)
give  them  Bananes.  They  never  swaddle  their  Children,
but  let  them  goe  free,  and  yet  I  never  saw  any  deformed.
Now  their  Couch  hangs  in  the  Aire,  within  little  Beds  of
coard,  or  little  Chaires,  where  they  shogge  and  rocke  them.
At  the  age  of  nine  moneths  they  begin  to  goe.

At  nine  yeeres  old  they  bring  them  up  in  the  studies  and
exercises  of  the  Countrey.  These  studies  are  to  learne  to
write  and  to  reade,  and  to  understand  their  Alcoran,  and
know  what  they  are  bound  to  doe.  Their  Letters  are  of
divers  sorts,  the  Arabicke  with  some  Letters  and  Points
which  they  have  added  to  expresse  their  Language  :  another
whereof  the  Character  is  peculiar  to  the  Language  of  the
Maldives,  and  moreover,  a  third  which  is  the  vulgar  of
Ceylan,and  of  the  greatest  part  of  the  Indies.  They  write
their  Lessons  on  little  Tables  of  wood,  which  are  white,
and  when  they  can  say  their  Lesson  by  heart,  they  blot
it  out,  and  white  it  againe.  If  the  writing  bee  to  abide
and remaine perpetually, they write upon Parchment

538

FRANCOIS  PYRARD  DE  LAVAL

A.D.
l602.

Leafe
Parchment.

New  Kindred
of  Teachers.

which  is  made  of  the  leafe  of  the  Tree  called  Macore
Queau,  which  is  a  fathome  and  an  halfe  in  length,  and  a
foot  broad.  To  teach  their  Children  to  write,  they  have
Boards  made  of  wood  purposely,  very  smooth  and  plaine,
whereon  they  spread  very  fine  and  thinne  Sand,  after  with
a  Bodkin  they  make  the  Letters,  and  make  them  imitate
them,  blotting  out  the  Rule  which  they  have  written,  and
never  use  herein  any  Paper.

They  carrie  as  great  respect  and  reverence  to  their
Tutors  as  to  their  Fathers :  so  that  they  may  not  contract
Marriage  together,  as  being  allied  in  Affinitie.  There  are
some  found  among  them  who  follow  their  studies,  who
are  very  skilfull  in  the  Alcoran,  and  Ceremonies  of  their
Law  ;  they  are  principally  the  Modins,  Catibes,  or  Naybes.
These  two  Offices  are  compatible,  for  a  Catibe  may  be  a
Naybe,  and  a  Naybe  a  Catibe.

The  Mathematickes  are  there  taught,  and  are  greatly
esteemed,  especially  Astrologie,  which  many  studie ;  for  Jstro/ogie.
they  consult  with  the  Astrologers  about  every  thing :
They  will  enterprize  nothing  without  their  advice.  They
will  not  only  know  their  Nativities  and  time  of  their
Births,  but  also  if  they  build,  whether  with  wood  or  stone,
they  must  enquire  of  the  Astrologer,  what  houre  will  bee  Divinations
best  to  beginne,  that  it  may  bee  under  a  good  Constella-
tion :  or  if  they  employ  a  Boate,  although  they  doe  it
diversly,  taking  a  different  day  or  houre  for  a  ship  of
Warre,  or  of  Merchandize,  or  a  fishing  Barke.  If  they
undertake  any  Voyage,  or  any  thing  else,  they  enquire  of
the  Astrologer  what  shall  be  the  issue,  and  whether  the
day  bee  good  or  evill,  if  the  Planet  be  favourable  or  unfor-
tunate. Whatsoever  sinister  accident  happens  to  them,
they  attribute  the  cause  to  the  day,  and  take  it  patiently,
saying,  it  is  the  will  of  God  that  hath  brought  it  to  passe.

The  Ilanders  are  much  exercised  in  Armes,  either  to  Armes.
serve  with  a  Sword  and  Buckler,  or  readily  to  bend  the
Bow,  or  use  the  Harquebuse,  or  mannage  the  Pike :  they
have  Schooles,  the  Masters  whereof  are  greatly  honoured
and  respected,  and  ordinarily  the  Grand  Signiors  use  this

539

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1602.

exercise.  They  have  no  plaies  but  the  Ball  and  Tennice,
which  they  receive  and  cast  forth  with  great  agilitie,
although  it  be  not  but  with  their  feet.

Fishing.  Their  greatest  exercise  is  fishing,  which  all  in  all  places

of  the  Maldives  use  indifferently,  without  having  any  (as
in  other  places)  certaine  persons  of  this  vocation,  or  cer-
taine  places  proper  to  it,  which  are  not  publike.  This
exercise  they  account  honest  and  honorable  wherein  also
the  Gentlemen  exercise  themselves  as  they  doe  heere  in
hunting.  The  King  hath  twelve  persons  appointed  to
guide  and  conduct  his  Boat  when  he  goeth  on  fishing,  and
to  prepare  all  things  necessarie  for  it.

[II. ix.  1660.]  They  have  an  admirable  quantitie  of  great  Fish,  as
Bonitos,  Albachores,  guilt-heads  and  others  which  are  very
like  one  another,  and  of  the  same  taste,  and  have  no  more

Strange Jormes  skales  then  the  Mackrell. They  take  them  in  the  deepe

of  ta  ingfish.  gea^  on  ^^  fashionj  witn  a  line  of  a  fathom  and  a  halfe  of
great  round  Cotton  thred  made  fast  to  a  great  Cane.
Their  hooke,  is  not  so  much  bowed  as  ours,  but  more
stretched  out,  &  is  pointed  in  the  end  like  a  Pin,  without
having  any  other  beard  or  tongue.  They  fasten  not  on
their  Bait,  but  the  day  before  provide  a  quantitie  of  small
Fish,  as  great  as  our  little  Bleaks,  or  Roches,  which  they
find  in  great  number  on  the  Bankes  and  Sands,  and  keep
them  alive  inclosed  in  little  pursnets  (made  of  the  Thred
of  Cocos)  with  little  Mashes,  and  let  them  hang  in  the  Sea
at  the  Sterne  of  their  Barkes.  When  they  come  into  the
deepe  Sea,  they  sow  about  their  little  Fishes,  and  let  their
Line  hang  downe.  The  great  Fish  seeing  the  little  Fish,
which  is  not  frequent  in  the  deepe  Sea,  runne  together  in
great  shoales,  and  by  the  same  meanes  they  fastem  them
to  their  hookes,  which  they  white  and  trim  over ;  so  that
being  a  ravenous  and  foolish  Fish,  it  takes  the  whited
Hook,  thinking  it  is  a  white  little  Fish.  They  doe  nothing
but  lift  their  Line  into  their  Boat,  and  the  Fish  falls  off
presently  (being  not  strongly  fastened)  and  then  they  put
it  into  the  Sea  againe ;  thus  they  take  a  strange  quantitie,
so  that  in three  or  foure  houres  their  Boates  are  in  a

54°

FRANCOIS  PYRARD  DE  LAVAL ad.

1002.

manner  full ;  and  that  which  is  remarkable,  they  go  alwayes
with  full  sayle.  The  Fish  which  they  take  thus  they  gene-
rally cal  in  their  language  Cobolly  Masse,  that  is  to  say,
the  Blacke  Fish,  for  they  are  all  blacke.

They  have  another  sort  of  fishing  on  their  bankes,  when
the  Moone  is  in  the  change,  and  when  it  is  at  the  full,  three
daies  each  time.  This  they  doe  on  Rafts  made  of  the
Wood,  called  Camdou.  They  have  great  Lines  of  fiftie  or
sixtie  fathome  pitched  over.  In  the  end  they  hang  hookes
wheron  they  fasten  the  baite  as  we  doe,  and  thus  take  great
quantitie  of  fish,  one  kinde  very  delicious,  which  they
call  the  King  of  the  Sea.  They  have  all  sorts  of  Nets  King  of  the
and  Toiles  made  of  Cotton  twine,  Weeles  and  other  Instru-
ments of  fishing.  Neere  the  Sea  shoare,  and  where  it  is
shallow,  they  passe  their  time,  and  take  delight  in  fishing
for  small  fish,  like  Pilchards  with  casting  Nets.  Twice  in
the  Yeere  at  the  Equinoctials,  they  make  a  generall  fishing,  ^e"eral1
a  great  number  of  persons  assemble  together  in  certaine  ™  tn^'
indraughts  of  the  Sea.  The  Sea  at  that  time  ariseth
higher  then  all  the  times  of  the  Yeere,  and  passeth  the
limits  of  other  Tides,  the  Ebbe  after  the  same  proportion
recoiles  and  retires,  discovering  the  Rockes  and  Shoalds,
which  at  other  times  appeare  not.  In  these  places  while
the  Sea  is  going  out,  they  observe  some  fit  corner,  and  set
about  it  great  stones,  one  upon  another  to  a  great  height,
so  that  it  resembles  a  round  Wall  or  Raveling.  This
inclosure  hath  fortie  paces  in  circuit  or  compasse :  but  the
entrance  is  but  two  or  three  paces  large.  They  gather  to-
gether thirtie  or  fortie  men,  and  every  one  carrieth  fiftie
or  sixie  fathome  of  great  coard  of  Cocos,  where  from
fathome  to  fathome  they  tie  a  piece  of  the  Barke  of  dried
Cocos,  to  make  it  float  on  the  water,  as  we  use  Corke  :
after,  they  tye  them  together,  and  stretch  them  out  in  a
round  upon  the  flats.  It  is  strange,  that  all  the  fish  which
is  within  the  coard,  finding  themselves  taken,  although
there  bee  no  other  Nets  nor  Instruments,  but  the  Coard
which  swimmeth  on  the  water,  but  the  fish  fearing  the
Line  and  shadow  of  the  Line ;  so  that  they  dare  not  passe

54i

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1602.

under  to  escape,  but  flye  from  the  Line,  thinking  that  it
hath  a  Net  underneath  :  The  men  goe  all  driving  them  to
the  inclosure  of  stone,  drawing  up  the  coard  by  little  and
little  some  in  Boates,  and  some  in  the  water  (for  upon  these
flats  the  Sea  is  shallow,  and  not  above  necke  high  for  the
most  part  lesse)  so  moderately  drawing  up  the  Line,  the
fish  flye  from  it,  and  are  locked  up  in  the  inclosure,  so
that  in  the  end  the  Line  being  all  drawne  up,  all  the  fishes
enter  in  :  and  they  speedily  stop  the  entry  with  Faggots
of  boughes  and  leaves  of  Cocos,  bound  end  to  end,  twentie
or  thirtie  fathome,  and  compacted  together  about  the
greatnesse  of  a  man,  and  so  when  the  Sea  is  out,  the  fish
remaine  taken  on  the  dry  Land.  They  often  take  thus  of
all  sorts  ten  and  twelve  thousand  or  more.  This  fishing
they  make  but  once  in  sixe  monethes,  upon  every  flat,
and  every  time  continues  five  daies,  and  they  change  daily
their  divisions,  and  returne  not  often  into  the  same  place
to  fish  in  this  manner,  except  at  another  Equinoctiall.

The  people  are  above  measure  superstitious,  and  addicted
to  their  Religion :  but  yet  extreamly  given  to  women,
wanton  and  riotous.  There  is  nothing  commoner  then
Adulteries,  Incest  and  Sodomie,  notwithstanding  the
rigour  of  their  Lawes  and  Penalties  :  As  for  simple  Forni-
cation, there  is  nothing  more  ordinarie  :  they  count  it  not
a  sinne,  neither  their  Wives,  nor  Daughters  which  are  not
married,  make  it  no  great  matter  to  yeeld  themselves  to
their  Friends,  and  after  (which  is  very  execrable)  to
evacuate  their  Fruit  by  making  an  abortion,  or  destroy

Lecherk.  their  children  which  are  not  legitimate.  The  women  are
strangely  impudent,  and  the  men  are  not  lesse  vitious  (but
they  cannot  be  more)  and  very  effeminate.  All  their
desire  is  to  procure  (if  they  can)  some  Receit,  that  they
may  better  content  their  Wives,  and  be  more  strong  to
exercise  their  Fornications.  I  thinke  they  spend  all  their
goods  on  this ;  hereof  they  continually  speake,  and  are
very  dissolute  in  their  words,  and  almost  never  stirre  from
their  Wives,  of  whom  they  have  pluralitie,  to  three,  which
is  the  cause  that  they  cannot  satisfie  each  of  them  :  also  the

542

FRANCOIS  PYRARD  DB  LAVAL

A.D.

ifj'.'JL.

Aire  of  the  Countrey  is  hot,  and  exhales  part  of  their
spirits  and  courage:  and  also  their  continually  softening
their  flesh  in  the  water,  and  that  the  most  part  eate  Opium,
or  Aphion,  as  they  call  it,  which  tipples,  intoxicates  and  [II.ix.i66i.]
duls  them.  The  women  (as  I  have  said)  carefully  hide
their  brests :  to  speake  of  them,  they  account  very  las-  jJ"JJ?  m't0
civious  and  dishonest.  To  kisse,  they  make  as  great  a  'e  if>0
matter  as  to  lye  together,  although  they  be  dissolute  in
their  conversation,  yet  they  containe  themselves  before
their  Parents,  and  respect  their  presence.  But  if  a  man
happen  to  speake  a  word  (such  as  I  have  said)  to  a  woman
before  one  or  any  of  her  Kindred,  they  will  goe  hide
themselves,  and  be  greatly  offended  against  him  ;  he  must
therefore  make  them  excuses,  and  say  that  hee  knew  not
that  they  were  neere  of  kin  ;  otherwise  they  will  thinke
that  he  did  purposely,  and  therefore  complaine  to  the  Jus-
tice, that  hee  may  manifest  which  said  these  lascivious
words  in  their  presence,  that  he  holds  them  for  good  and
honest  people.  A  man  dare  not  enter  into  the  place
where  a  woman  bathes  her  selfe,  or  where  she  is  retired
(her  Robe  being  off)  although  they  never  take  off  the
cloth  which  environs  them,  and  serves  them  for  a  Coat ;
but  (as  I  have  said)  they  esteeme  the  brests  as  shamefull
parts.

When  a  man  and  woman  is  together,  and  another  person
meet  with  him,  hee  must  not  demand  of  this  man  if  she
be  his  Wife,  or  Daughter,  or  Sister :  for  if  it  were  his
Daughter,  and  hee  should  aske  if  it  were  his  Wife,  he
should  offend  as  if  he  accused  him  of  Incest ;  only  he
must  demand  if  she  be  his  Kinswoman,  &  he  tels  the
degree  of  Parentage  or  Affinitie.  As  long  as  the  woman
have  their  tearmes,  they  bathe  not,  and  wash  only  their
hands  and  mouth,  they  change  not  their  Garments,  nor  lie
with  their  Husbands,  nor  eate  nor  converse  with  any
bodie.  When  the  women  goe  a  visiting  in  the  night,  they  Visitation.
must  have  a  man  to  accompany  them  who  goeth  before,
and  when  hee  perceives  that  any  body  comes,  hee  saith
three  times  Gas,  that  is,  take  heede :  the  men  advertised

543

A.D.

l602.

The  King.

Naybe.

Catibe.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

by  this,  quite  the  side  of  the  way  where  the  woman  goes,
making  no  semblance  of  seeing  them,  nor  of  knowing
them,  with  great  respect :  and  if  they  bee  other  women,
they  take  each  her  side  of  the  way,  and  salute  not,  except
they  bee  very  familiar.  They  never  knocke  at  the  Gate
(for  there  is  no  Ring  or  Hammer)  nor  call  to  bee  let  into
the  house,  for  the  great  Gate  of  the  Court  is  alwayes  open
till  eleven  of  the  clocke  in  the  evening :  wherefore  they
enter  into  the  Court,  which  is  neere  the  doore  of  the  house,
which  is  also  open  and  spread  onely  with  Tapestrie  of
Cotton  cloth,  or  other  stuffe,  and  as  they  approach  to  this
Gate,  they  cough  once,  which  they  hearing  within,  go
forth  and  see  if  any  one  would  speake  with  them.  Also
the  men  going  in  the  night  through  the  street,  cough
often  determinately,  that  they  may  advertise  one  the  other,
for  feare  of  hurting,  or  wounding,  for  they  carry  their
weapons  naked ;  I  understand  the  Souldiers  and  Officers
of  the  King  in  the  He  of  Male.

§.  v.

Their  Government  described.  The  Judges,  Officers,
Gentry,  Communaltie.  The  King  his  Palace,
Guard,  Nobilitie,  Robes,  Attire,  Attendance,
Exercises,  Riches ;  slaine  by  the  Bengalans.

He  government  of  the  estate  of  the  Maldives  is
royall  and  very  absolute  and  ancient ;  the  King  is
feared  and  reverenced,  and  all  depend  of  him. In

each  of  the  thirteene  Cantons  is  one  principall,  whom  they
call  Naybe.  These  Naybes  or  principalis  of  the  Provinces
are  Priests  and  Doctors  of  their  Law,  and  have  the  over-
sight of  all  that  concernes  Religion,  and  instruction  of  the
people  therein,  and  exercise  of  Justice,  and  command  the
Priests  which  are  under  them.  These  Atollons  are  sub-
divided into  many  Hands,  in  each  of  which,  where  there  is
not  above  fortie  and  one  men,  is  a  Doctor  called  Catibe,
superior  in  the  Religion  of  that  He,  who  hath  under  him
the  particular  Priests  of  the  Moschees,  all  which  have  care

544

FRANCOIS PYRARI) DE LAVAL

to  nourish  and  instruct  the  people  in  the  Law ;  and  live
of  a  certaine  portion  of  fruits  which  every  one  is  bound
to  give  them,  and  of  certaine  rents  which  the  King  pves
them  according  to  their  degree.  But  particularly  the
Naybes,  besides  the  exercise  of  Religion,  and  authoritie
which  they  have,  are  instituted  to  execute  and  doe  justice,
each  in  his  government.  They  are  the  onely  Judges  of
the  Country  as  well  in  matters  civill  as  criminall,  and  if
any  one  will  have  justice  hee  must  goe  finde  out  the
Naybe,  or  attend  his  comming  to  the  place.  For  the
Naybes  foure  times  in  the  yeere,  go  in  circuit  about  the
Hands,  each  in  his  Jurisdiction,  and  make  Visitations,  as
wel  for  the  religion  of  the  Priests,  as  for  justice.  This  is
their  greatest  revenue,  for  then  their  duties  are  paid
them  :  moreover  they  receive  store  of  Presents  from  many
persons,  whereof  they  are  very  greedie.  In  all  the
Maldives  there  are  no  Judges  but  the  thirteene  Naybes ;
for  the  Catibes  of  the  Hands,  and  the  Priests  of  the
Moschees  are  but  for  a  shew.

Over  these  Naybes  there  is  a  superior,  which  resides  in
the  He  of  Male  (and  is  ever  neere  his  person)  which  is
called  Pandiare ;  who  is  not  onely  chiefe  of  the  Religion
throughout  all  the  Realme,  but  also  soveraigne  Judge.
So  that  after  they  have  pleaded  before  the  Naybe,  if  they
will  not  stand  to  his  sentence,  whether  in  matters  civill  or
criminall,  they  may  appeale  to  the  Pandiare  :  who  discides
all  affaires  that  offer  themselves,  taking  advise  of  some
Naybes  which  are  neere  him,  of  the  Catibes,  grave  men
called  Moucouris,  that  is  Doctors  and  experienced  men,
which  are  not  Officers :  they  give  no  judgement  if  they
be  not  assisted  with  foure  or  five  of  these  persons  at  the
least.  These  Moucouries  can  say  all  the  Alcoran  by  heart
(and  all  the  others  read  it  onely)  besides  divers  other
Sciences  which  they  know.  They  solemnely  invite  them
to  all  their  Feasts,  Sermons,  and  Ceremonies  ;  and  are
greatly  honoured  and  respected  by  all.  There  are  not
above  fifteene  of  them  in  all  the  Hands.  The  Pandiare  is
called  Cady  in  the  Arabick  language.

A.D.

l602.

Their
maintenance.

The  thirteene
Naybes.
Visitation  and
Circuit.

The  Pandiare
or  chiefe
Judge.

[II.  ix.  1 662.]

Moucouries
learned  n:cn.

IX

545

2M

A.D.

l602.

The  King.
Sixe  Councel-
lours  of  State.

Severe
Catechising.

Treasurer.

A  v ares.

Sergeants.

Writs.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Also  after  the  judgement  of  the  Pandiare,  one  may
complaine  to  the  King,  who  commands,  and  makes  justice
to  be  executed  :  and  this  is  by  six  Signiors  his  principall
Officers,  who  manage  the  most  importune  affaires  of  state.
The  Pandiare  being  assisted  with  two  Catibes  of  the  He  of
Male,  and  by  Naybe  of  the  Attollon,  besides  some  of  those
Doctors,  goeth  also  to  make  his  visitation  through  the  He
of  Male,  as  every  Naybe  in  his  Atollon ;  and  hee  is
attended  with  his  Officers  which  carry  a  long  whip  to
correct  delinquents.  Hee  makes  all  (without  exception)
that  meet  him,  to  say  their  creed,  and  some  prayers  in  the
Arabick  tongue,  and  after  demands  the  interpretation  in
the  Maldive  language ;  and  if  they  are  ignorant,  he
causeth  them  to  be  whipt  and  scourged  in  the  open  field
by  his  Officers.  The  women  dare  not  shew  themselves
when  hee  goeth  through  the  street,  and  if  hee  encounter
any  unvailed,  hee  causeth  her  haire  to  be  shaven.

Besides  the  Naybes,  there  is  in  every  Atollon  a  man
delegated  and  appointed  by  the  King  to  receive  and  levie
his  rents  and  revenues.  All  the  lies  have  each  their  order
by  Division  and  Cantons,  as  that  of  Male ;  there  are  five
divisions  which  they  call  Avares,  and  each  hath  a  principall
called  Mouscouly  Avare  :  the  ancient  of  the  division,  and
nothing  is  done  there  for  the  King  or  the  people,  but  they
come  to  him.  Justice  (which  they  call  in  their  language
Sacouest)  is  exercised  in  the  house  of  the  Naybe,  or  else
in  the  He  of  Male  in  the  house  of  the  Pandiare,  and  some-
times in  the  Kings  Palace  when  the  matter  is  of  weight
or  moment.  When  they  will  begin  a  suit,  they  goe  to  the
Judge  or  Naybe,  who  sends  one  of  the  Sergeants  (of  whom
there  are  a  certaine  number,  called  Devanits)  to  make  the
accused  partie  come ;  and  if  he  bee  in  the  same  Hand,
hee  must  have  to  make  him  come,  a  letter  of  the  Naybe,
by  the  meanes  whereof  he  must  notifie  the  place  where  he
is,  seeing  that  he  is  in  the  Jurisdiction  of  the  Naybe.  Or
else  if  hee  be  of  another  Jurisdiction,  the  Naybe  can  doe
nothing,  but  in  this  case  he  must  have  letters  of  the  Pan-
diare,  who  can make him  come from any  part of  the

546

FRANCOIS  PYRARD  DE  LAVAL

A.D.
l602.

Excommuni-
cation.

No  Advocates.
Cases  de  facto
13  de  jure.

Realme  into  the  Kings  Hand,  where  he  abideth.  Now
they  give  this  letter  to  the  Catibe,  superior  of  the  He,  who
in  presence  of  them  all  gives  it  to  the  partie  accused,
expresly  charging  him  to  goe  thither  :  hereof  they  dare
not  faile,  for  they  which  disobey  this  justice,  cannot  asso-
ciate with  any,  nor  goe  to  the  Mosche,  nor  eate  nor  drinke
with  them,  and  they  hold  them  not  of  their  Law.  If  it
bee  so  that  any  will  not  obey,  or  if  hee  be  some  Grande,
the  King  sends  his  Souldiers  to  constraine  him  to  come.
But  if  hee  will  not  plead  before  the  Naybe,  either  because
hee  beares  him  ill  will,  or  because  that  his  partie  hath  too
much  favour  against  him,  then  the  plaintiffe  or  the  defen-
dant who  is  accused,  goeth  to  find  out  the  King,  who
commands  that  hee  doe  Justice  by  Judges  not  suspected.
This  they  execute  in  the  Kings  house,  in  the  presence  of
all  the  chiefe  of  the  Hand.  The  parties  plead  their  owne
causes  themselves.  If  the  cause  bee  of  fact,  each  bring
three  witnesses,  and  if  they  have  them  not,  the  defendant
is  beleeved  on  his  oath  only,  which  they  take  in  touching
with  the  hand  the  book  of  their  law,  which  the  Judge
presents ;  and  then  the  plaintiffe  if  hee  bee  a  little  versed
in  affaires,  markes  scrupulously  if  the  party  touched  the
booke  really,  and  the  place  where  he  did  it.  If  the  differ-
ence bee  in  matter  of  right,  they  are  judged  by  the  Law.

The  Judges  take  nothing  for  their  judgements,  for
nothing  is  due,  except  that  the  Devonits  or  Sergeants  have
the  twelfth  part  of  that  which  is  due  or  adjudged.  The
Slaves  cannot  bee  witnesses,  nor  plead,  nor  make  triall  in
judgement ;  likewise  in  such  a  cause  they  receive  three
women  for  one  man.  The  Slaves  are  such  as  make  them-
selves so,  or  such  as  they  bring  from  other  places  and  sell ;
for  shipwrackt  strangers  lose  not  the  libertie  which  they
had ;  if  they  were  Slaves  they  remaine  so.  The  Slaves
which  they  call  Alio,  are  of  worst  conditions.  They  can
have  but  one  wife  although  all  others  have  three.  Beating
of  a  Slave  is  punished  with  halfe  that  which  they  inflict
for  beating  a  Free-man.  Debtors  are  constrained,  if  they  Debtors
have  nothing  to  pay,  to  yeeld  themselves  Servants  and  not

547

Slaves.

A.D.

l602.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Children.

Slaves,  and  are  not  used  as  such,  but  as  naturalls  of  the
Countrie,  and  serve  onely  their  Creditors  or  other  persons
which  lend  them  mony  to  discharge  them,  these  are  called
Pemousere,  which  is  to  say,  servant  by  borrowing,  and
they  continue  thus  till  they  are  acquitted,  yea  their
children  are  Slaves  perpetually  if  they  pay  it  not.  Yet
when  they  are  ill  intreated,  they  may  discharge  them,
ingaging  themselves  in  the  same  sort  to  another,  that  lends
it  them  :  for  all  their  service  they  are  nourished  and  main-
tained, and  when  they  die  their  Masters  takes  all  that  they
had,  and  if  there  be  not  enough  to  satisfie  him,  the
children  must  serve  till  hee  bee  paid.  There  are  many
which  seeke  (to  bee  these  Pemoussere)  to  great  persons
and  men  of  authoritie,  to  have  support  and  favour  :  for
when  they  belong  to  no  body,  they  are  troubled  by  one  or
other.

The  wife  cannot  pursue  in  justice  the  death  of  her
husband  :  but  onely  the  children  or  the  kindred.  If  the
children  be  young,  they  stay  till  they  be  sixteene  yeeres
old,  to  know  if  they  will  revenge  the  death  of  their  father.
While  they  thus  stay,  the  Judge  commands  him  which  is
[II.ix.1663.]  appeached  of  murther  to  bring  up  the  children  of  the
deceased,  and  teach  them  some  Trade  or  Mysterie.
When  they  are  come  to  age,  they  demand  Justice,  or  remit
and  pardon  the  Murtherer,  without  any  after  examina-
tion. In  matters  of  injury  committed  on  the  person  of
any  particular,  the  wronged  must  complaine  ;  or  other-
wise the  crime  is  abolished  :  except  the  King  will  make
justice  to  be  executed,  without  the  other  partie,  but  this  is
seldome.

The  ordinary  punishments  are  banishment  into  the
desart  Hands  towards  the  South  ;  cutting  off  a  principall
member ;  or  the  whip,  which  is  the  commonest  punish-
ment, but  extraordinarily  cruell.  They  are  thongs  of  great
thicke  leather,  a  fathom  in  length,  foure  fingers  in  breadth,
and  two  in  thicknesse  :  hereof  there  are  five  or  sixe  tied
together,  in  a  stocke  and  handle  of  Wood.  With  this
they  chastice  malefactors,  and  beat  them  so  severely  that

548

Punishments.

Terrible
whips.

FRANCOIS  PYRARI)  DE  LAVAL ad.

1602.
they  die  often.  This  is  the  ordinary  punishment  (tor  the
most  part)  of  the  greatest  crimes,  as  Sodomy,  Incest,  and
Adultery.  Besides  this  punishment,  they  cut  off  the
womens  hayre  that  are  taken  in  adultery.  False  wit-  Adulterj.
nesses,  and  perjured  persons  are  thus  punished,  and  more-
over condemned  in  a  pecuniary  mulct,  which  is  disposed  of
to  the  poore.  A  rape  is  punished  as  adultery,  and  (for  Rape.
the  most  part)  the  ravisher  is  condemned  to  endow  the
woman  or  mayd.  The  stealing  of  any  thing  of  valew,  Theft.
with  the  cutting  off  the  hand.  If  they  commit  any  thing
against  the  Law,  they  must  make  a  kinde  of  publike  pen-
ance. They  thinke  they  shall  never  come  in  Paradice  if
they  pay  not,  and  accomplish  that  which  the  Law  hath
appointed.  For  the  execution  and  chastising  of  male-
factors, they  have  no  hangmen,  but  the  Devanits  or
Sergeants  doe  it.  For  punishment  with  death,  although  Few  executed.
their  Law  ordaines  it  for  Homicide,  yet  the  Judges  never
condemne  them  to  it.  All  the  while  I  was  in  the  Maldives
I  saw  none  condemned  to  death  by  the  ordinary  Judges  :
they  dare  not  doe  it,  except  the  King  expresly  commands
it,  which  is  seldome.  They  say  commonly,  that  they  must
not  put  men  to  death  so  ;  and  if  they  should  execute  all
that  merit  death,  it  would  bee  a  long  time  before  the
Hands  should  bee  inhabited.  Yet  the  King  sends  his
Souldiers,  and  condemnes  and  executes  those  as  have
deserved  it.  For  although  justice  be  in  the  power
of  the  Doctors  of  the  Law,  yet  the  King  is  the  onely
arbitrator,  and  alone  hath  power  of  life  and  death.  Among
others  the  King  useth  one  particular  punishment  on  those
which  have  offended  him ;  hee  maketh  them  lye  on  the
ground  upon  their  belly,  and  their  armes  and  legges  to
bee  held  by  foure  men,  and  after  to  be  beaten  on  their
backe,  with  a  staffe  or  kinde  of  cane,  called  Rotan,  which
comes  from  Bengala ;  this  pulls  off  the  skin,  and  the  marke
or  brand  endures  perpetually.

They  never  put  in  writing  their  suits  and  differences,  No  writings
nor  their  accusations,  nor  depositions,  nor  judgements,  for  et'^er!ce-
for  they  are  all  very  readie  and  compendious :  neither  in

549

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1602.

civill  matters,  except  it  be  about  grounds  of  inheritance,
or  Cocos  trees  which  are  immoveable,  and  that  the  Pan-
diare  or  Naybes  give  judgement.  For  in  this  case,  they
give  their  letters  sealed  with  their  seale  of  Inke,  for  I
never  saw  them  use  any  Waxe,  and  this  serves  for  a
testimony  to  their  offspring,  that  hereafter,  neither  hee
which  hath  obtained  the  cause,  nor  his  heyres  may  be
disquieted.
Degrees  and  There  are  foure  sorts  of  persons  :  in  the  first  is  compre-
sorts  of  men.  hended  the  King  called  Rasquan,  and  the  Queene  called
e-uisttlF  S  Renequillague,  with  those  which  are  of  their  race,  and
precedent  King,  Jrnnces,  called  Calans,  Jrrmcesses  or
Camenaz,  and  Grand  Signiors.  The  second  order  is  that
of  Dignities,  Offices,  and  Degrees,  which  the  King  distri-
butes, wherein  likewise  the  rankes  is  very  carefully
observed.  The  third  is  the  Gentrie.  The  fourth,  the
common  People.  I  will  begin  at  the  third,  which  is  the
ranke  which  birth  gives  to  every  one  separate  from  the
common  people.  There  are  many  Noble  men  dispersed
heere  and  there  among  the  lies.  They  which  are  not
Nobles  dare  not  sit  with  them,  nor  in  their  presence,
although  it  bee  at  the  further  end,  and  as  farre  as  they  see
a  greater  then  they  comming  behind,  they  must  attend
and  let  him  goe  before.  If  also  they  have  any  piece  of
cloath  upon  their  shoulder,  or  any  thing,  they  put  it
downe.  The  Noble  women,  although  they  marrie  with
men  of  inferiour  condition  and  not  Noble,  loose  not  their
ranke.  Yea  the  Children  which  issue  from  them  are
Noble,  by  reason  of  the  Mother.  Also  the  women  of  low
estate  marrying  to  Noble  men,  are  not  ennobled  by  their
Husbands,  but  retayne  their  first  ranke.  Besides  the
Nobles  by  birth,  the  King  ennobles  whom  hee  will.  Then
when  this  happens,  the  King  besides  his  Letters  where-
with hee  priviledgeth  him,  sends  one  of  his  Officers
appointed  for  this,  who  makes  publication  throughout  all
the  He,  or  sounds  a  kinde  of  Bell  which  is  of  cast  mettall,
whereon  hee  strikes  with  a  Hammer.  After  the  King,  are
the  Princes  of  the  bloud,  and  they  which  are  descended  of

55°

FRANCOIS  PYRARD  DB  LAVAL a.d.

1602.
other  Kings  his  predecessours,  who  although  they  be  of
divers  Houses,  yet  are  all  much  honoured  and  respected.

Next  are  the  great  Officers  of  the  Kingdome  :  that  is  to  &"&  Lieu~
say,  the  Quilague,  which  wee  may  call  the  Kings  Lieu-  ten?nt ?"*
tenant  generall :  because  next  to  the  King  and  in  his
absence,  hee  is  most  mightie  in  the  Government  of  the
State,  so  that  nothing  is  done  without  his  advise.  Also
if  the  King  will  have  any  thing  observed  or  executed,  hee
is  the  first  whom  the  King  deputes,  and  to  whom  hee
addresseth  his  commands.  Next  him,  another  called
Parenas  which  is  of  great  authoritie :  An  Endequery,
whose  Office  is  to  bee  alwayes  neere  the  King,  and  to
counsell  him  in  all  his  occasions  and  affaires.  Another
hath  charge  of  Sea  matters,  which  wee  may  tearme
Admirall,  hee  is  called  Velannas,  hee  lookes  to  the  Ships
which  arrive,  and  their  Merchandize ;  and  hath  care  of
entertaining  Strangers  and  soliciting  for  them,  hee  useth
to  come  to  the  ships  which  arrive,  even  the  smallest  Barkes,  [II.  ix.  1664.]
although  they  bee  of  the  Countrey,  and  takes  away  the
rudder,  and  causeth  it  to  bee  carried  into  the  Kings  house,
for  feare  they  should  goe  away  without  taking  leave.  He
hath  under  him  two  Sergeants  which  looke  to  the  Ships
that  arrive,  and  make  him  account,  and  obey  his  behests.
There  is  a  Generall  over  the  Souldiers,  called  Dorimenaz,
who  hath  also  a  Lieutenant,  called  Acouraz.  Moreover
there  is  a  Chanceller,  called  Manpas,  who  sets  to  all  letters
the  Kings  seale,  which  is  nothing  else  but  his  name  in
Arabick,  ingraven  in  Silver,  which  hee  dips  in  Inke  and
imprints  on  the  paper.  The  Secretarie  is  called  Carans,  the
Controller  of  the  Exchequer  Musbandery,  and  the  Trea-
surer Ransbandery  :  with  divers  other  lesser  Officers.  All
these  Grandes  abovenamed  are  often  called  to  p-ive  the
King  counsell  when  he  pleaseth,  with  sixe  ancient  and
experienced  men,  called  Mouscoulis.  Besides  the  rents
and  revenues  of  certaine  Hands  given  to  these  Officers,
the  King  gives  them  Rice  for  their  provision,  as  also  to
the  Souldiers,  with  Tributes  and  Tolls  of  Barkes  and  Ships
which  come  to  trafficke  in  the  Maldives. All  the  honour

55i

A.D.

l602.

Souldiers  and
Gentlemen.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

in  this  Countrie  is  to  eate  of  the  Kings  Rice,  and  be  of
the  number  of  his  Officers :  without  this  a  man  is  not
esteemed  noble,  although  he  be.

Next  to  the  Officers  the  Souldiers  are  most  esteemed
and  priviledged,  and  they  make  little  account  of  a  Gentle-
man if  hee  bee  not  inrolled  in  the  Souldierie.  The  Soul-
dierie  consists  of  Souldiers  of  the  Kings  Guard  which  are
six  hundred,  divided  into  sixe  companies,  commanded  by
the  Mouscoulis.  There  are  ten  other  great  Companies
gathered  together,  each  whereof  hath  a  Captayne  of  the
Grand  Signiors  of  the  Realme.  These  guard  not,  but
serve  the  King,  when  hee  hath  any  affaires,  not  onely  as
Souldiers  to  march  and  fight,  but  to  doe  all  that  hee
commands,  as  to  lanch  a  Ship,  to  draw  it  on  dry  land,  or
to  doe  such  great  worke  where  there  is  neede  of  men  to
build  his  Palace,  if  it  bee  needfull,  or  to  make  any  worke
or  edifice  for  him.  They  call  them  and  gather  them
together  with  the  sound  of  a  certayne  Bell.  They  divide
them  into  parts,  for  there  are  five  Companies  which  are
more  honourable,  wherein  they  admit  none  but  Gentle-
men, and  other  five  Companies  meaner,  of  all  sorts  of
persons.

None  can  bee  entred  into  the  Companies,  before  they
have  permission  of  the  King,  and  moreover  it  costs  him
for  his  entrance  sixtie  Larins,  twentie  to  the  King  for  his
permission,  and  fortie  to  distribute  to  the  Companie
whereof  hee  ought  to  bee.  The  Slaves  therefore  cannot
bee  inrolled,  nor  they  which  get  their  living  and  substance
from  the  Coco  Trees,  nor  any  mechanicall  and  base  people,
and  generally  those  which  cannot  write  and  reade,  nor
those  which  serve  others.  Moreover  they  buy  for  the
most  part  all  Offices  of  the  King,  and  they  are  greatly
sought  after  by  rich  men,  because  of  Honour,  Authoritie,
and  Power,  which  they  have  over  others ;  but  they  may
not  sell,  leave,  nor  resigne  them.

All  the  Ilanders  have  but  one  name,  without  any  sir-
name  or  name  of  the  familie,  and  use  frequently  these
names, Mahomet, Haly,  Hussum,  Assan, Ibrahim,  and

552

Palace.

FRANCOIS PYRARD Dfi LAVA  I.  ajj.

1602.

such  others, but to  know  them, they  distinguish them
by  their  qualitie,  which  they  adde  in the  end  of  their
name  as  they  that  are  of  Noble  race  adde  to  their  name
Tacourou,  and  their  Wives  Bybis : Moreover  they  put  Tides.
also  the  lie  which  is  theirs. Those  which  are  not  Noble,
but  by  their  Office  or  qualitie,  call  themselves  Callogucs,
and  their  Wives  and  Daughters,  Camullogues. Not  those
onely  which  I  have  named  use  these,  but  others  obtayning
of  the  King  vacant  functions,  to  bee  separated  from  the
Plebeians. They  buy  this  dearely  of  the  King,  because
the  Names  and  Titles  are  limited  to  a  certayne  number.
The  common  people  are  called  with  their  proper  Callo,  and  Common
adde  also  the  trade  and  condition  whereof  they  are,  their  PeoP'e-
Wives  and  Daughters  Camulo.

The  Palace  of  the  King  is  built  of  Stone,  composed  of  The  Kings
many  handsome  mansions  and  well  built,  yet  without  any
ornament  of  Architecture,  and  of  one  storie.  Round
about  it  are  Yardlands  and  Gardens,  where  are  Fountaines
and  Cisternes  of  water,  enclosed  with  walles  and  paved  on
the  bottome  with  great  smooth  stones.  These  places  are
guarded  continually  by  men  appointed  for  it,  because  the
King  and  Queenes  wash  themselves  there,  all  others  being
straitly  prohibited  from  washing  there.  In  the  inclosure
of  the  Palace  (called  in  their  Language  Gandoyre,  which
is  very  large)  are  many  Lodgings  and  Courts,  which  have
all  in  the  midst  a  Well  garnished  with  faire  white  stones.
In  one  of  these  Courts,  are  two  Magasins  of  the  King  :
in  one  he  puts  his  Ordnance,  in  the  other  all  other  sorts  of
Munition.

At  the  entrance  of  the  Palace  is  a  Corps  de  guard,  where  Guard.
are  many  Pieces  of  Ordnance,  and  other  kindes  of  Armes.
The  Portall  is  made  like  a  square  Tower,  upon  the  top
whereof  on  Feast  dayes,  players  of  Instruments  play  and
sing.  From  thence  they  come  to  the  first  Hall,  where  the  Two  Halls.
Souldiers  wayte  :  a  little  further  is  another  great  Hall  for
the  Signiors,  Gentlemen,  and  persons  of  fashion.  For
none  neither  Signiors,  nor  Plebeian,  man,  woman,  nor
childe,  dare  goe  further,  except  the  domesticall  Officers  of

553

A.D.

l602.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  King  and  Queenes,  and  their  Slaves  and  Servitors.
The  pavement  of  these  Hals  are  elevated  three  foot  above
the  ground,  and  neatly  boarded  with  wood  well  playned.
It  is  thus  raised  up  because  of  the  Ants.  Then  the  floore
is  after  all  covered  with  a  little  Matte,  which  they  make  in
the  lies,  interlaced  in  various  colours,  with  Characters  and
other  workes  very  finely  contrived.  The  walls  are  hanged
with  Tapistrie  of  Silke ;  also  upon  the  plat-fonds,  it  is
covered  with  tapestrie  of  silke,  from  which  hangs  round
about  faire  fringes  as  a  Curtaine.  The  King  made  the
great  Ensigne  and  Banner  of  our  ship  which  was  blue,
[II.ix.1665.]  where  the  Armes  of  France  were  well  made,  to  bee  dis-
played in  the  Souldiers  and  Strangers  hall.

In  these  Halls  before  the  place  where  the  King  sits,
there  is  another  forme  of  Curtaines  very  rich,  under  which
is  a  large  place  elevated  two  foot,  covered  with  a  great
Tapestrie,  hereon  they  sit  crosse-legged,  for  they  use  no
other  seats.  Upon  these  Mattes  throughout  all  the  hall,
the  Nobles  which  come  to  assemble  together  sit  downe.
In  this  sitting  they  observe  exactly  the  order  of  their
Dignities :  for  they  which  are  of  lower  degree,  stay  at
the  lower  end,  if  the  King  or  his  Grandes  which  are  there
in  his  absence,  bid  them  not  sit.  For  the  Gentlemen  of
the  He  of  Male,  and  ordinarie  Courtiers,  which  are  bound
to  come  and  salute  the  King  everie  day  after  noone,  stay
and  sit  in  the  second  Hall,  and  may  goe  no  further,  wayt-
ing  till  the  King  come  foorth,  or  that  they  see  some
domesticke  Officer,  by  whom  they  send  the  King  word
that  they  are  come  to  salute  him.  Sometimes  the  King
sends  them  while  they  are  thus  sitting,  platters  full  of
Bettell  and  Fruits,  which  they  hold  a  great  honour.  The
Gentrie  of  the  other  Hands  come  also  and  observe  the  same
customes  that  they  doe  of  the  He  of  Male :  but  they  come
not  without  Presents,  for  none  is  permitted  to  salute  the
King,  neither  Noble-man  nor  Merchant,  without  one.

The  Chambers  and  inner  Lodgings  are  well  adorned,
hanged  with  Tapestrie  of  silke,  inriched  with  flowers,
boughes  and  branches  of  Gold, and  of  divers colours.

554

Presents.

Chambers  and
Tapestrie.

FRANCOIS  PYRARD  DE  LAVAL

A.D.
l602.

Beds.

The  people  use  tapestrie  of  Cotton,  which  is  composed  of
many  pieces  of  cloath  of  Cotton  of  all  colours.  Their
Beds  are  hanged  in  the  ayre  by  foure  cords  to  a  barre  which
is  sustained  with  two  pillers.  They  make  the  beds  of  the
King  and  rich  men  in  this  sort,  because  they  may  rocke
and  shogge  them  more  easily.  They  are  accustomed  when
they  are  layd  downe  to  make  their  folke  touch  and  moove
their  bodie,  and  chafe  them  easily,  strike  them  little  blowes
with  both  their  hands  together,  saying  that  is  good  against
the  Spleene,  and  makes  their  griefe  cease ;  also  that  it
makes  them  sleepe  soundly,  and  makes  them  forget  the
griefe  of  the  member  beaten  and  rubbed.

The  ordinarie  habillement  of  the  King,  is  a  white  fine  Kings  Robes
Robe  of  Cotton,  or  rather  a  Cassoque,  descending  to  the
girdle  or  a  little  lower,  edged  with  white  and  blue,  made
fast  before  with  massie  buttons  of  Gold.  With  this  he
weares  a  piece  of  red  imbroydered  Taffetie,  which  reacheth
from  the  girdle  to  the  heele.  This  Taffetie  is  girded  with
a  long  large  girdle  of  Silke  fringed  with  Gold,  and  a  great
chayne  of  Gold  before,  whereat  hangs  a  great  Jewell  as
big  as  a  hand,  of  exquisite  stones  which  may  bee  seene.
Hee  weares  also  a  knife  after  the  manner  of  the  Countrey,
but  more  richly  wrought.  Upon  his  head  hee  hath  a
Bonnet  of  red  Scarlet,  which  is  much  esteemed  in  this
Countrey,  and  permitted  to  none  but  the  King  :  this  bonnet
is  laced  with  Gold,  and  on  the  top  it  hath  a  great  button
of  massie  Gold  with  a  precious  Stone ;  and  although  the
Grandes  and  Souldiers  weare  their  hayre  long,  yet  hee
hath  his  shaven  every  weeke.  Hee  useth  to  have  his
legges  alwayes  bare  as  others,  and  weares  only  on  his  feet
Pantoffles  of  guilded  Copper,  brought  out  of  Arabia  and
made  like  sandals.  Of  which  sort  none  but  the  Queenes
and  Princesses  his  kinswomen  may  weare.  When  the
King  goeth  foorth,  hee  hath  a  Sun-shadow  or  white
Parosel,  which  is  the  principall  Ensigne  of  Majestie,
carryed  over  him.  This  is  permitted  to  none  but
Strangers  who  may  have  what  they  will :  alwayes  there  is
one  Page  neere  the  King  which  carries  a  fanne,  another  the

555

His  bonnet  end
attire.

Shaving.
Bare  legges.

Ensignes  of
Majestie.

A.D.

l602.

His  Doctor.

Exercises.

Workes.

Respect  of
Arts.

Guard  and
pompous  going
abroad.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Kings  Sword  and  Buckler,  another  a  boxe  full  of  Bettell
and  Arecqua,  which  hee  chawes  every  houre.  A  Doctor
of  the  Law  alwayes  followes  him,  and  never  looseth  sight
of  him,  reading  a  Booke  in  his  presence,  and  admonishing
him  of  his  Religion.

His  exercises  and  ordinarie  pastimes  are  not  to  goe  out
and  fish  as  his  predecessors  used  to  doe,  but  to  remayne
for  the  most  immured  in  his  Palace,  to  court  his  Queenes,
see  his  Courtiers,  and  many  Mechanickes  and  Artificers
worke,  as  Painters,  Goldsmiths,  Imbroiderers,  Cutlers,
Joyners,  Turners,  Armorers,  and  others  sorts  which  hee
keepes  in  his  Palace,  and  furnisheth  them  with  matter  to
worke.  Hee  workes  himselfe,  and  saith  frequently  that
it  is  a  sinne  to  bee  idle.  Hee  hath  a  quicke  and  vive
apprehension,  and  hath  skill  to  worke  in  many  Crafts  and
Mysteries,  and  is  daily  curious  to  learne :  hee  seekes  out
those  which  are  excellent  in  any  thing ;  if  hee  meet  with
any  stranger  that  knowes  that  which  he  nor  his  Ilanders
know  not,  he  makes  very  much  of  him,  that  he  may  shew
him  his  Art.

Going  out  of  his  Palace,  hee  is  accompanied  with  his
Souldiers,  whereof  hee  hath  a  hundred  every  day  for  his
Guard.  On  Friday  he  goeth  to  the  Mosche,  in  a  faire
order  and  kind  of  pompe,  for  the  Souldiers  goe  in  rankes,
some  before  and  some  behinde,  and  so  his  ordinarie
Officers  :  the  Drums,  Flutes,  Trumpets,  make  good  agree-
able musicke.  After  service  is  done,  hee  returnes  in  the
same  order,  the  Souldiers  going  with  the  sound  of  Instru-
ments playing  among  them  and  leaping  before  the  King
with  their  armes,  and  striking  blowes  with  their  Swords  on
one  anothers  Bucklers :  shewing  their  agilitie,  yet  not
all  together,  to  avoyde  confusion  but  two  at  a  time  onely,
and  so  one  after  another  without  ceasing.  The  people  of
the  He  which  are  present  goe  home  with  him,  and  it  should
bee  a  shame  to  any  one  not  to  goe.  Then  the  Pandiare,
Naybes,  Catibes  and  Moiidins,  and  principall  Signiors,
Gentlemen  and  Souldiers,  which  hee  chooseth  diversly,
dine  with  him,  and  after  dinner  hee  imployes  himselfe  in

556

FRANCOIS PVRARI) I)E LAVAL

doing  Justice.  Moreover,  when  the  King  goeth  foorth
hee  is  alwayes  on  foot  (for  in  these  Hands  is  neither  I  lone
nor  any  Beast  to  ride  on)  except  hee  bee  carried  in  a
Chayre  on  his  Slaves  shoulders :  but  this  is  seldome,
because  he  is  strong  and  lustie  &  had  rather  go  on  foot.
When  they  speake  to  the  King,  or  Queenes,  and  their
Children  and  Princes  of  their  bloud,  or  else  if  they  speake
of  them  to  others,  it  is  in  other  termes  which  they  use  not
but  for  this,  and  dare  not  apply  them  to  others.  As  if
they  say  of  a  man  hee  sleepeth,  if  it  bee  of  the  King,  they
say,  he  slumbreth  or  takes  his  rest,  which  they  never  say
but  speaking  of  the  King.

The  Queenes  are  attired  as  other  women  formerly
described,  but  in  more  costly  manner.  The  Ladies,  Wives
and  Daughters  of  the  Grand  Signiors  of  the  He,  are  bound
to  come  see  them  in  the  evening,  to  passe  the  time  with
them.  They  goe  sometimes  forth,  but  it  is  very  rare  :
and  then  there  are  women  and  slaves  which  goe  a  great
way  before,  to  advertise  the  men  that  they  retire  and
appeare  not  in  the  way,  but  onely  the  women,  who  assemble
by  their  quarters  and  divisions,  and  come  to  meet  them
with  Presents  of  Flowers  and  Fruits.  There  are  foure
principall  women  which  carry  over  the  Queenes  head  a
white  Curtine  of  Silke  reaching  to  the  ground,  so  that
they  cannot  be  seene.  They  goe  often  to  bath  in  the  Sea,
as  all  other  women  :  for  it  is  the  custome  of  the  Country,
and  they  hold  it  very  healthfull ;  for  this  cause  therefore
they  have  prepared  in  the  Sea  a  little  inclosure,  covered
round  with  Cotton  cloth,  where  the  Queenes  and  great
women  bath  :  after  they  come  out  they  have  another  little
house  also  made  purposely  where  they  bath  againe  in
Fresh-water.  Within  the  chambers  of  the  Queenes,
Princesses,  and  great  Ladies  they  never  see  day,  nor  have
any  other  light  but  of  Lamps,  which  burne  continually.
They  retyre  themselves  into  a  part  of  the  chamber,  being
enclosed  with  foure  or  five  rowes  of  Tapistry,  which  they
must  lift  up  before  they  come  where  they  are  :  but  none
neither  man  nor  woman,  domesticall  nor  others  dare  lift

557

A.U.
l602.

No  Be  ait  to
ride  on.

[II.ix.1666.]

Complement.

Queenes,  and
their  pompe.

Bathing  in  the
salt  and  fresh-
water.

Perpetuall
night.

A.D.

l602.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

A l  paid  in
kind.

up  the  hindmost,  although  they  are  not  laid,  nor  eating,
in  briefe  although  they  be  idle.  They  must  first  cough,
and  tell  who  they  be,  and  then  they  call  them  or  send
them  whither  they  thinke  good.  Neither  women  nor
maids  pull  off  the  cloth  which  goes  about  their  middle,
but  only  their  robe :  the  men  doe  so  also,  and  dare  not
doe  otherwise.

Revenues.  The Kings revenewes consists in his Crownelands,

which  are  many  Hands ;  and  the  duties  which  his  subjects
pay  of  the  fruits  which  grow  in  the  Countrie,  that  is  to
say,  the  fifth  part  of  the  graines  which  they  sow,  they  give
the  King  a  portion  of  their  Cocos  and  Limons,  they  com-
pound also  throughout  all  the  yeere  for  a  certaine
quantitie  of  Hony  or  fruit.  Besides  these  duties  the  King
imposeth  an  ordinary  taxe  on  his  subjects,  according  to
their  meanes,  which  consists  in  cords  of  Cocos,  in  shells
called  Boly,  and  dryed  Fish.  For  they  give  him  no  mony
for  his  Taxes  and  Rents,  but  onely  when  they  buy  Titles
and  Offices,  and  have  permission  to  weare  their  braveries.
Also  hee  chargeth  the  Inhabitants  of  the  lies  to  make  and

Cotton  clothes,  furnish  him  yeerely  Cotton  clothes,  which  serveth  him
for  his  Souldiers,  to  whom  hee  gives  thrice  a  yeere  Cloth,
besides  their  pay. The  revenew  of  the  King  consists  also

Merchandise,  in  merchandise  :  For  all  the  Ships  which  arrive  there,  first
goe  to  him,  and  declare  what  they  have  brought,  after
they  agree  to  a  certaine  price  for  that  which  hee  will  have,
which  is  very  often  the  better  part :  after  the  people  buy
it  at  a  dearer  rate  then  the  King ;  and  then  the  King  sends
to  distribute  his  merchandise  throughout  the  lies  to  the
richest,  at  what  price  hee  will ;  although  they  have  no
use  of  it,  taking  in  exchange  such  merchandise,  as  hee  hath
need  of,  at  a  better  price  by  halfe  then  it  is  worth.  He
sends  often  also  Ships  laden  with  merchandise  of  his  lie
to  other  Countries. The  King  hath  also  besides  these

Wraches.  Royalties,  whatsoever  is  found  on  the  Sea  shoare,  and  no
man  dare  touch  it  to  detaine  it,  but  is  bound  to  take  it  up
and  bring  it  him,  whether  it  bee  pieces  of  shipwrackt  Ships,
pieces of  Wood, Coffers, or other things : or Amber

558

FRANCOIS  PYRARD  DE  LAVAL *•»•

1002.

Greece,  which  they  call  Gomen,  hereof  is  the  greatest
quantitie  in  the  Indies,  and  none  dare  keepe  it  on  paine  of
having  his  hand  cut  off.

Also  there  is  a  certaine  Nut,  which  the  Sea  sometimes  Sea  Nun.
casts  up,  which  is  as  great  as  a  mans  head  : they  call  it
Tauarcarre,  and  suppose  that  it  commeth  of  certaine  trees
that  are  under  the  sea : the  Portugals  call  them  Cocos  of
the  Maldives. It  is  a  thing  very  medicinable  &  of  great
price. Also  the  fishing  for  Blacke  Corrall  appertaines  to
the  King,  who  hath  many  men  to  make  this  fishing. The
mony  of  the  Kingdome  is  onely  Silver,  and  of  one  kind.  Coyne.
These  are  pieces  of  Silver  which  they  call  Larins,  of  the
valew  of  eight  Sols  or  thereabouts  of  our  mony,  long  as  a
finger,  but  much  folded. The  King  coynes  them  in  his
Hand,  and  imprints  on  them  his  name  in  Arabick  letters.
The other monyes are  Exotick coynes, and there goe
currant,  but  they  take  them  not  but  at  just  value,  and  at
equall  weights,  and  onely  the  Gold  or  Silver,  all  other
sorts  of  coyne  which  are  not  of  the  Countrie  they  reject.
For  in  India,  as  there  are  many  Realmes  and  Signiories,
so  great  diversitie  of  mony,  of  stampe  and  character,  not
onely  of  Gold  and  Silver,  but  also  of  an  other  mettall
called  Calin,  which  is  white  like  Tin,  and  very  hard,  pure,
and  beautifull,  whereof  they  make  great  esteeme  in  the
Indies ; they  have  also Iron mony. But  this  kind  of
mony  goeth  onely  in  the  Dominions  of  the  Prince  that
coynes  it. The  Gold  and  Silver  of  whatsoever  stampe
and character it  be, is currant through all Kingdomes
according  to  the  just  valew,  which  is  of  different  valew
from  ours,  because  Silver  is  deerer  then  here,  and  Gold
baser. The  King  makes  no  lesser  coynes  then  the  Larin  : Buying.
so  that  to  effect  their  merchandise,  they  cut  the  Silver  and
give  in  weight  according  to  the  valew  of  the  merchandise  :
which is not  without losse, for in cutting  of  a Larin
they  lose  the  twelfth  part. They  take  no  piece  of  Silver
which  they  have  not  weighed,  and  put  in  the  fire  to  try
the  goodnesse : every  one  hath  weights  in  his  house  for
this  purpose. Also  in  stead  of  little  and  base  mony  they

559

A.D.

l602.

[II.ix.l667.]

Bartering.

Merchants.

Merchandise.

Coco

commodities.

Shell  money.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

use  shells,  whereof  12000.  goe  at  the  valew  of  a  Larin.
All  their  Gold  and  Silver  come  from  forraine  places,  for
they  have  no  coine  in  these  lies.  In  all  their  publique
markets  and  particuler  bargainings,  they  use  to  exchange
very  often  one  thing  for  another.

The  Maldives  are  very  well  frequented  with  Merchants
of  many  Countries,  as  of  the  Malabares,  of  Barcelor,
Onor,  Bacalor,  Cananor,  Calecut,  Tananor,  Cochin,
Coulam,  Cael :  of  the  Guzerattes,  of  Cambaia,  Surate,  and
Chaule  of  the  Arabs,  Persians,  of  those  of  Bengale,  Saint
Thomae  and  Masulipatan,  Ceylan  and  Sumatra ;  which
bring  Merchandise  whereof  the  Ilanders  have  need  and
esteeme,  and  in  recompence  carrie  away  those  things
wherewith  the  Hands  abound.  First  of  the  Cocos  tree,
they  make  many  kindes  of  things,  which  the  strangers
seeke  after,  as  Cordage,  wherewith  they  trim  all  the  Ships
of  the  Indies  :  they  lade  yeerely  more  then  one  hundred
ships  of  the  fruit  of  the  Cocos,  which  they  carry  into  the
Coasts  of  Arabia,  Malabar,  and  throughout  all  India,  also
Oyle  and  Honey  of  the  same  Tree :  and  weaving  the
Leaves  of  this  tree  serve  them  to  make  Sayles.

There  is  another  sort  of  riches  in  the  Hands :  These  are
little  shells  wherein  there  is  a  little  creature,  as  great  as
the  end  of  the  little  finger,  all  white,  very  smooth  and
glistering,  which  they  fish  for  but  twice  a  moneth,  three
dayes  before,  and  three  dayes  after  the  new  Moone,  and
likewise  the  Full,  and  finde  them  at  no  other  season.  The
women  gather  them  upon  the  sands  and  flats  of  the  Sea,
being  in  the  water  to  the  girdle.  They  transport  great
quantities  of  them  to  other  Countries,  insomuch  that  I
have  seene  yeerely  thirtie  or  fortie  ships  laden  without
any  other  commoditie.  They  goe  all  into  Bengala :  for
there  onely  they  buy  them  at  great  prices,  and  in  great
quantitie.  They  of  Bengala  make  such  esteeme  of  them,
that  they  use  them  as  common  money,  although  they  have
Gold  and  Silver,  and  enough  of  other  mettals :  and  that
which  is  more  marvellous,  the  Kings  and  Nobles  build
places  to  lay  them  up  in,  and  account  them  part  of  their

560

FRANCOIS  PYRARD  DB  LAVAL

A.D.
l602.

1 Coquettes.

Treasure. They  give  twentie  *  measures  of  Rice  for  one

fardel]  of  Shels. For  all  these  Bolys  are  put  up  by  fardels

of  twelve  thousand  together  in  little  baskets  made  of  the

Cocos  leafe,  garnished within with cloath made  of the

same  Tree, for  feare the  shells  should fall out. They

much esteeme in India  Tortois shells, which they call Tortoyi  shells.

Cambe. This sort of  Tortois is found no where but

there,  and  in  the  Philippinas :  it  is  faire,  very  smooth,  all

blacke,  with  very  naturall  figures. They  sell  them  best  in

Cambaia  where  they  make  (besides  bracelets  for  women)

faire  Coffers  and  Cabbinets inlayed  with silver. They

make  heere  very  fine  mattes  of  Reed  of  divers  colours,  and

inrich them with ornaments and ciphers very neatly.

They  have  also  faire  cloaths  of  Cotton  and  Silke.

In  counter-change  of  these  the  Merchants  bring  them
Rice,  white  Cotton  clothes,  and  cloath  of  Silke :  Oyle
which  is  made  of  an  odoriferous  Graine,  wherewith  they
use  to  rub  their  bodies  when  they  have  bathed,  Arecqua,
Iron  and  Steele,  Spices,  Porcelane,  and  whatsoever  they
have  need  of :  and  yet  every  thing  is  very  cheape  by
reason  of  the  abundance,  and  ordinarie  arrivall  of  Ships.
They  bring  also  Gold  and  Silver,  which  never  goeth  foorth
againe  :  for  they  give  it  not  for  any  thing  to  Strangers,  but
put  it  among  the  Treasure  and  Jewels  of  their  Wives.

Exotike
wares.

A

§•  VI.

larger  discourse  of  their  Religion,  manifold
Ceremonies,  and  absurd  opinions.  The  Authors
departure  and  returne.

Heir  Religion is Mahometan, their  Temples or
Moschees are builded square of hewen stone.  Moschees.
They  have  three  doores,  and  at  the  entrie  of  each

doore  on  the  outside,  there  is  a  large  Well  whereinto  they
descend  by  degrees,  the  bottomes  and  sides  are  garnished
with  polished  stone,  in  these  they  use  to  bathe  themselves.
The  Temple  is  elevated  nine  or  ten  greeces ;  the  floore
of  it  is  covered  with  Mattes  and  Tapistrie :  they  are  very

IX

561

2  N

A.D.

l602.

Order.

Lights  and
darkenesse.

Their  beliefs
of  the  world,
the  Devill  and
their  Prayers.

[II.ix.1668.]

Five  times  a
day  praying.

Women-
recusants.

Washing  rites.

Diversified
devotions.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRJMES

curious  to  keepe  them  neate  and  handsome ;  they  dare
not  spit  in  them,  nor  blow  their  nose,  but  if  they  bring  no
handkerchiffe  with  them,  if  they  have  any  necessitie,  they
must  goe  foorth.  The  roofe  is  of  wood,  of  excellent  Car-
penters worke,  the  wall  waynscotted,  whereon  hang
Tables  of  wood  or  stone,  engraven  with  letters  and  writ-
ings in  Arabicke.  There  are  separations  of  certaine  places
appointed  to  certaine  persons,  yet  not  to  one  particuler
person,  but  for  those  which  are  of  one  order,  estate,  age,
or  qualitie,  and  none  dare  place  himselfe  in  a  place  not
appointed  for  his  condition.  Within  the  Temples  are
Lamps  light  continually.  Every  Mosche  hath  a  Moudin
or  Priest.  Each  day  in  the  weeke,  they  goe  at  the  breake
of  day  to  the  Mosche,  and  there  make  a  prayer  according
to  their  beliefe,  that  is  to  say,  that  the  world  is  flat  and
not  round,  and  that  there  is  a  wall  of  Copper  about  it,
which  hinders  the  world  from  being  overwhelmed  with
the  waters  which  invirone  it,  and  that  the  Devill  the  enemy
of  Mankinde,  seekes  every  night  to  pierce  thorow  and
undermine  this  wall,  and  by  day  breake  hee  wants  very
little  to  have  made  a  hole  thorow ;  for  this  cause  all  the
men  from  fifteene  yeeres  old,  goe  at  the  point  of  day  to
their  Moschees,  to  make  prayers,  saying  that  without  their
prayers  all  the  world  would  perish.

They  goe  foure  other  times  in  a  day  to  the  Mosche  :  at
mid-day,  three  houres  after,  at  Sun-set,  and  ten  a  clocke
in  the  evening,  and  tarie  each  time  halfe  an  houre.  The
Women  never  enter  into  their  Temples,  but  abide  in  their
houses,  and  there  make  Prayers.  Yet  if  they  goe  not  to
their  Temples  the  ordinarie  dayes  of  the  weeke,  they
make  their  Prayers  and  Ceremonies  in  their  houses  or
else-where :  and  although  they  constraine  none  to  doe
thus ;  yet  if  they  know  of  any  that  neglects  it,  they  will
neither  eate  nor  communicate  with  them.  Before  they
enter  into  the  Temple,  they  wash  their  feete,  hands,  eares,
mouth,  and  eyes,  making  also  certaine  Ceremonies,  and
pronouncing  prayers,  which  are  divers  according  to  the
houres,  feasts,  occasions,  for  which  they  wash. If  they

562

FRANCOIS  PYRARD  DE  LAVAL

A.D.

l602.

Circumcision.
Females.

make  urine,  or  doe  their  necessities,  or  touch  their  privities,
they  wash  and  say  their  prayers  destined  for  that :  If  they
have  accompanied  with  a  woman,  they  must  bath  and  say
their  Prayers  of  another  sort ;  if  with  their  owne  wife,
of  another  sort.  They  wash  and  bath  in  publike  and  say
their  prayers  so  loude,  that  by  the  diversitie  of  prayers
according  to  the  occasions,  a  man  may  know  what  they
have  done  in  secret,  and  when  they  have  lyen  with  their
wives,  or  else  with  others.

They  are  all  Circumcised,  the  males  at  seven  yeere  old.
Before  an  Infant  is  Circumcised,  they  say  hee  is  an  Inno-
cent, and  cannot  sinne.  For  their  Daughters,  they  make
no  feasts  nor  ceremonies,  but  for  their  Circumcision  draw
two  or  three  drops  of  blood  from  their  nature,  then  when
they  come  to  the  age  of  ten  yeeres  old.  All  the  yeere  long
they  celebrate  many  Feasts.  First  everie  weeke  they  Feasts.
solemnize  Friday.  On  Thursday  in  the  evening,
some  make  prayers  for  their  health,  others  for  the
deceased :  and  therefore  they  prepare  to  eate  and
drinke,  and  send  to  their  Priests  or  Moudins  neere  the
place  where  their  dead  are  interred,  to  pray  to  God  for
them :  or  else  they  invite  them  to  their  houses,  and  there
entertaine  them.  On  Friday  morning  one  goeth  through
the  He  carrying  in  his  hand  a  kind  of  cast  Bell,  much  Bells.
resembling  the  cover  of  a  Limbeck,  with  a  hammer  of
wood,  wherewith  hee  beates  it :  and  at  the  end  of  everie
street  hee  stayes,  and  admonisheth  the  people,  that  is  their
feast  Oucourou  or  Friday.  Hee  is  assisted  with  three
persons  which  have  straight  Trumpets,  wherewith  they  Trumpets
often  sound.  The  people  being  thus  warned  cease  from
their  worke,  and  bathe  and  wash  themselves,  saying  their
Prayers.  And  each  of  them  cloathes  himselfe  in  his  best
attire,  and  all  from  the  age  of  fifteene  yeeres  are  bound  to
bee  there.  In  the  meane  while  on  the  portall  of  the  Kings
Palace,  are  players  of  divers  Instruments.  Then  the  Kings
foure  Moudins  all  together  ascend  an  Edifice  or  stone,  high
erected,  joyning  to  the  Mosche,  putting  their  hands  to
their  eares,  crying  thrice  with  all  their  might  with  a  most

563

Hobday  sute
and  service.

A.D.
l602.

Their  Office  or
rites  of  service.

Divers
gestures  and
postures.

Service  by
heart.

New  Moone
rites.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

fearefull  voice  all  together  in  the  Arabicke  language,  Alas,
alas  Aquebar,  that  is  to  say,  Great  God :  and  then  they
adde  something  of  Mahomet.

Then  they  goe  to  the  Kings  Palace ;  and  the  King,  if
hee  will  bee  found,  as  hee  is  seldome  defective,  sends  a
Carpet  of  silke  to  spread  in  the  place  where  he  will  sit :  if
hee  doth  not,  it  is  a  certaine  signe  hee  will  not  bee  found.
When  all  the  companie  is  assembled  (and  the  King  is  come
and  hath  made  his  prayers)  the  Catibe  ascends  a  raised  place
of  wood  sixe  or  seven  steppes  high.  There  hee  holds  a
naked  Sword  in  his  hand,  with  the  point  downward,  which
hee  often  flourished!  this  way  and  that  way,  and  recites  his
prayers.  All  this  time  the  people  pray  without  ceasing,
putting  themselves  in  divers  postures,  sitting,  standing
upright,  kneeling,  their  face  grovelling  to  the  earth,  their
hands  lifted  up  and  cast  downe,  then  crossed,  turning  their
head  and  eyes  hither  and  thither :  it  were  very  difficult  to
represent  all  the  gestures  and  apish  tricks  which  they  doe
in  this  time  :  then  they  put  off  their  weapons,  and  their
knives,  and  dare  have  nothing  about  them  but  their
cloathes,  and  they  also  must  bee  very  neate.  The  Catibe
changeth  his  prayers  every  Friday  to  the  end  of  the  yeere,
and  then  begins  againe.  Hee  saith  all  by  heart,  and  in
the  meane  time  one  of  the  Moudins  holds  the  Booke,  and
if  it  chanceth  that  hee  faileth  in  one  word,  sillable,  or  letter,
the  Moudine  reprehends  him  with  a  loud  voyce  and  with-
out dissembling :  for  they  say,  if  hee  should  faile  in  one
point,  the  Feast  should  bee  nullified,  and  worth  nothing.

On  the  dayes  of  their  New  Moone  all  the  yeere  long,
they  make  the  like  Feast,  and  rejoyce  when  they  see  the
new  Moone  :  then  they  make  cleane  their  Houses,  Courts,
and  all  their  streets  and  the  waves  to  the  Mosches,  and  all
the  gates  of  their  houses  as  well  without  as  within,  and
they  set  on  both  sides  Cocos  shells  cut  in  the  middle,  like
woodden  dishes,  and  fill  them  with  white  sand,  and  burning
coales  upon  it,  scarce  ceasing  all  the  night  to  burne  Aroma-
ticke  gummes,  and  odoriferous  woods  and  perfumes :
likewise  within  in  their  Houses,  at  the  corners  of  their

564

FRANCOIS  PYRARD  DE  LAVAL ad.

.2.

Beds  and  else-where,  they  besmeare  and  fashion  all  their

doores  and  housholdstuffe  at  their  feasts,  with Sanders,

and  other sweet smelling odours beaten and tempered  Sweet  smells.

together  ;  but  above  all,  they  solemnise  foure  New  Moones

in  the  yeere  more  then  the  others.

In  the  moneth  of  December  or  thereabouts  at  the  New Foure  princi-
Moone,  they  observe  a  feast  called  in  Arabicke  Ramedan  :  ^f! f w
this  begins  at  the  new  Moone,  and  ends  at  the  new  Moone  Ramejan-
following. This  night  the  men  and  the  women  each  by
themselves visite one another, and feast, and rejoyce
together  with  banquets,  dances  and  merriments,  so  that  it
is  neere  day  before  they  retire. The  day  before, they
bathe  and  make  particuler  ceremonies,  cleanse  and  wash
their  teeth,  and  leave  their  Bettell,  and  thence  forward
fast  till  night  although  the  day  be  long,  with  such  super-  Severe
stition,  that  they  will  not  only  not  taste  any  thing,  but  faitwS-
also  not  wash  their  mouth,  nor  put  their  fingers  in  it,  nor  [II.ix.1669.]
yet  swallow  their  spittle. This  causeth  them  often  to  spit,
and diseaseth them much, especially at their Mesquit,
where  it  is  not  lawfull  for  them  to  spit,  but  ever  and  anone
they  must  goe  forth  for  that  purpose. The  men  may
wash  themselves*  but  not  plunge  their  heads  in  water,  *S.  Augustin
lest  some  drop  should  enter  their  mouthes  or  eares  :  but  intiwersP^s
the  women  dare  not,  lest  the  water  should  enter  at  their  c^stjans  0f
lower  parts. Halfe  an  houre  before  Sunne-set,  all  which  those  parts  of
are  fifteene  yeeres  old  and  upwards  goe  to  the  Temple,  Africa  in  his
that  they  may  in  that  halfe  houres  space  cleanse  their  tme^ot
mouthes  and  picke  their  teeth  very  exactly ; to  which  ™j£ p*ft  wen
purpose  the  Moudins  furnish  themselves  all  the  Lent  with  £nded.
Pick-tooths,  and  other  instruments  of  neatnesse,  made  of
the  Coco  wood. This  done,  the  Moudin  makes  his  crie
three  times,  and  enters  the  Temple ; all  the  People  are
behinde  him ; thus  they  make  their  Prayers  there,  and
the  women  in  their  houses  ;  which  ended,  they  make  good
cheere  with  their  friends,  and  feast  each  other  by  course,
having  made  provision  long  before  to  that  end  ;  the  poorest
sparing  before  hand  that  they  may  have  to  feast  during  Feast-fasts.
the  Ramedan. The  King  makes  severall  entertainments,

S65

A.D.

l602.

Ridiculous
Fast-breaches
and  making
amends.

Daily
Sermons.

Love-moneth.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

one  day  feasting  his  Nobles,  another  his  Souldiers,  a  third
the  Pandeare,  Moudins  and  Religious  persons ;  and  all
the  people  of  the  lie  in  their  differing  rankes.  The
Nobles  observe  the  like  custome  for  their  friends  and
equals ;  for  they  religiously  observe  this,  not  to  eate  with
men  of  differing  ranke  and  qualitie.  Men  and  Boyes
feast  thus,  the  Women  goe  not,  but  send  Presents  and
Viands  one  to  another,  and  bathe  themselves  in  the  even-
ing, at  which  time,  men  may  not  bee  admitted  to  bathe.
In  the  day-time  the  men  neither  marrie  nor  touch  their
women  :  and  during  the  Ramedan  they  are  more  carefull
to  avoide  sinne  then  at  other  times.  And  if  any  by  occa-
sion breakes  any  of  the  Fasting-dayes,  hee  fasteth  as  many
after ;  which  often  happeneth  by  reason  of  their  supersti-
tion, supposing  their  Fast  defective,  if  they  happe  to
bleed  in  any  part.  They  will  not  in  this  moneth  worke,
be  they  never  so  poore,  nor  travell  or  send  out  of  their
He.

The  Pandiare  (whom  the  Arabs  call  the  Cadi)  every  day
preacheth  at  the  Kings  Palace,  or  at  the  Temple,  or  at  his
House,  beginning  at  three  after  noone,  and  holding  on
two  houres ;  and  all  the  Inhabitants  of  the  He  of  Male
assemble  thither  :  this  commonly  in  the  vulgar  Language,
and  sometimes  in  Arabike,  which  hee  after  interpreteth.
They  employ  themselves  the  rest  of  the  time  in  exercise
of  Armes  and  divers  playes,  as  at  the  Ball,  in  severall  com-
panies, with  their  feet :  the  women  and  daughters  also
have  their  visitations  and  petie  sports.  The  youths  also
and  maidens  court  and  make  love  to  each  other  more  in
that  moneth  then  at  other  times  ;  send  each  other  Songs,
Sonnets,  and  Verses  written  in  Coco  leaves  (which  are  as
white  as  Paper)  inscribed  or  graven  with  Bodkins ;  and
send  Garlands  of  the  fairest  and  sweetest  flowers  to  their
Sweet-hearts.  All  devise  pastimes  to  entertaine  that
moneth.  The  women  and  maidens  for  their  flowers  sake
must  fast  eight  dayes  more  then  the  men,  after  the  Rame-
dan is  ended.

Three  dayes  before  it  ends,  the  Coly  warneth  all  from

566

FRANCOIS PYRARD DP: LAVAL  ad.

1607.
the  top  of  the  Steeple  to  send  their  names  to  the  Pandiare
of  Male,  as  in  other  Hands  to  the  Naybe,  to  pay  their
offerings  (halfe  a  Larin  for  each  person)  or  else  man  and  HalfeaLarin,
boy,  woman  and  maide  have  lost  the  merite  of  their  fasting,  a  &" era
saying  it  is  their  Tribute  to  God  and  Mahomet. They  jZ^ls  hSe  a
which  have  it  not  may  borrow,  for  the  King  and  the  richer  shekel  amongst
sort  will  pay  for  all  that  aske ; but  if  any  will  not  indure  the  Israelites.
the  shame  that  another  should  pay  for  him,  his  name  is
recorded  neverthelesse,  and  he  makes  it  his  debt,  to  pay
after  the  feast. Parents  pay  for  their  children  till  they  be
married  and  dwell  from  them,  as  also  for  their  slaves.
This  money  is  after  divided  into  three  parts  : and  foure
Receivers  are  appointed, one  on behalfe of  the  King,
another  for  the  Church-men,  the  third  for  New  Converts,
the  fourth  for  the  Poore :  there  are  eight  Registers  which
record  the  offerings. It  is  after  shared  one  part  to  the
Priests, as the Pandiare, Naybes, Catibes, Moudins,
Devanits,  and  others  of  their  Church  :  The  second  to  the
Converts,  the  third  to  the  Poore. On  the  last  day  of  the
Fast  is  celebrated  a  great  Feast  called  Ydu. The  day  is  No  New  moon
no  more  certaine  then  the  beginning:  of  the  Ramedan,  -w'  certatnj'

.  00  ' £  fjgu  ascend

which  is  when  they  first  see  the  New  Moone,  as  in  all  high  places
their  Moon-feasts,  not  at  the  change  but  at  the  appearance,  purposely
which  is  therefore  sooner  or  later  in  one  Hand  then  another,  te*ng
as  it  hath  had  cleerer  weather  or  sooner  sight. Their  May  ambltl0US
Ydu,  a  three  dayes  solemnitie ; and  their  Poycacan  at  the  her  first  si/ht.
Full  Moone  about  Aprill  or  May ; and  their  Dida,  or
All-Soules  feast  in  June,  when  they  visit  the  Sepulchres
and  there  set  viands ; and  their  Candis  Cacan  in  August ;
and  Maulude  or  Night-feast  in  October  (the  night  that
Mahomet  died)  with  the  severall  ceremonies  thereof,  as
also  of  their  Marriages  and  Funerals,  I  dare  not  present
you  for  feare  of  tediousnesse.

Wee  will  therefore  returne  with  our  Authour,  and  free  Bengalan
you  also  from  the  Maldives. Tenne  dayes  before  his  Fleet-
libertie  he  had  a  dreame  that  hee  was  free  and  in  Christen- ,  ™**7*
dome,  whereat  hee  much  rejoyced,  and  awaking  made  a
Vow  to  make  a  Voyage  to  S.  James  of  Galicia,  to  give  God

567

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1607.

thankes. Two nights after the King was told of an

Armada  of  sixteene  Gallies  or  Galliots  comming  thither.

The  King  commanded  to  rigge  his  seven  Gallies  with  other

Ships,  Barkes  and  Boates. This  was  attempted  with  all

industrie,  but  could  not  be  effected  before  the  Enemies

Fleet  came  in  sight. Thereupon  he  charged  that  all  his

[II. ix.  1 670.]  best  goods  should  be  embarqued,  so  to  save  himselfe  and

his  women  in  the  Southerne  lies. He  forsooke  his  Palace,

and  fled  with  his  three  Queenes,  each  of  them  carried  in

armes by Gentlemen, as Nurses carrie their Infants ;

covered  with  Vailes  and  Taffataes  of  divers  colours. The

streets  were  full  of  cries  of  women  and  infants. He  was

forced  to  leave  great  part  of  his  goods  and  all  his  Armes

and  Ordnance  behind  for  want  of  time ; and  with  much

lamentation  set  sayle  for  the  South,  to  the  Atollons  of

Souadou. But  the  winde  fayled,  and  the  Enemie  sent

eight  Gallies  after  him,  in  fight  with  whom  the  King  was

slaine,  and  his  wives  and  goods  taken. The  other  eight

entred  on  land,  and  theAuthour  yeelded  to  them,  and  being

Bengalans found  not  to  be  a  Portugall,  was  spared. They  stayd  ten

hate  the  dayes  to  lade  their  Gallies  with the  goods  which they

'  u&a  s found,  and  with  five  or  sixe  score  peeces  of  Ordnance  great

and  small  (a  principall  cause  of  their  Voyage)  and  then

departed,  leaving  the  Queenes  and  all  the  people  in  libertie,

except  the  brother  of  the  Chiefe  Queene  and  the  Kings

brother  in  law. His  arrivall  in  Malicut  a  small  He,  and

the  lies  Divandurou  thirty  leagues  thence,  and  at  last  at

Chatigan  in Bengala, I omit. At his departure  from

Mogols  Bengala,  the  Mogol  had  denounced  warre  to  the  chiefe

conquest  of King  of  Bengala,  who  prepared  to  entertaine  him  with

in"capt ££ above  a  million  of  men  and  ten  thousand  Elephants. The

Hawkins  and Kings  of  Aracan  and  Chaul,  and  other  great  Lords,  Mahu-

S.  Thomas metans  and  Gentiles  were  his  Tributaries,  and  were  bound

Roe-  to  finde  him  a  certaine  number  of  men  and  horses. The

successe  is  related  by  others,  and  other  things  many  of

many  other  Indian  Regions  are  related  by  the  Authour,

whom  wee  are  willing  now  to  dismisse,  having  entertained

him  only  for  a  Maldivan  Guide  and  Pilot.

568

FRANCOIS PYRARD I)E LAVAL

The  particulars  of  his  returne  he  relateth  at  lar^/e  :  first
his  passage  from  Bengala  to  Movtingue,  governed  by  a
petie  Prince,  a  Nairo,  subject  to  the  Samory  of  Calecut.
It  is  seated  betwixt  Cananor  and  Calecut,  and  is  a  Port  of
the  Malabar  Pirats.  He  was  here  much  amazed  to  see
so  many  in  Armes,  borne  by  all  from  ten  or  twelve  yeeres.
There  are  ten  other  neere  Ports  within  ten  small  leagues
of  each  other,  Chombais,  Badara,  &c.  But  Moutingu6  is
the  best.  Thence  he  went  to  Calicut  and  waiting  eight
moneths  for  a  Holland  ship  in  vaine,  he  was  perswaded
by  Jesuites  to  goe  to  Cochin,  where  he  was  imprisoned  for
a  Spie.  At  Goa  also  hee  was  prisoner  with  those  which
remained  of  the  seventeene  Englishmen  taken  at  the  Barre
of  Surrat.  The  Jesuits  had  brought  one  Master  Richard
and  foure  other  Englishmen  from  the  Mogols  Court ;
some  Hollanders  also  were  there :  and  they  all  were
prisoners  together.  But  the  Jesuites  undertooke  for  them,
and  procured  their  libertie ;  namely  Thomas  Stevens  an
Englishman,  Rector  of  Margon  Colledge  in  Salsete,  and
Nicolas  Trigaut  a  Wallon,  and  Steven  Crosse  a  Frenchman
of  Roan,  with  Gaspar  Aleman  a  Spaniard.  The  said
Thomas  Stevens  procured  the  libertie  of  the  Englishmen
also,  foure  of  which  became  Catholike-Romanists,  and
two  of  them  died  there.  Don  Loys  Lorencio  d'Establa
arrived  at  Goa  with  the  title  of  Vice-roy,  to  the  peoples
great  griefe,  which  more  desired  Don  Andre  Furtado.
Ten  moneths  after  his  comming,  foure  great  Caracks
arrived,  contayning  each  about  two  thousand  tunnes.
Five  had  departed  from  Lisbon,  but  they  knew  not  what
was  becomne  of  the  fift,  separated  by  tempest  at  the  Cape.
In  each  were  embarqued  a  thousand  persons,  Souldiers,
Mariners,  Jesuites,  and  other  Church-men,  with  Merchants
and  Gentlemen.  But  when  they  arrived  at  Goa,  there
were  not  above  three  hundred  in  each,  by  reason  of  sick-
nesse  and  miseries  endured  eight  moneths  at  Sea,  without
sight  of  Land.  These  brought  an  Edict  from  the  King,
forbidding  English,  French,  or  Dutch  commerce,  and  if
there  were  any  such  there,  to  packe  them  away  upon  perill

569

A.D.

Movtingue.

See  sup.  in
Hawkins  and
Fitches

Voyages,  pagg.
207.  420.

Thomas
Stevens  an
English]  esuite
which  had  long
continued
there.

Kings  Edict
(in  effect)  to
roote  out  the
Portugalsfrcm
the  Indies,
enjoining  and
not  enabling
to  warre  with
others.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

of  their  lives. On  the  sixe  and  twentieth  of  December,

1609.  He returned for Lisbon. March the fifteenth,

1 6 10,  they  arrived  at  the  He  of  Diego  Rodrigue,  in  20.
Southerne  degrees,  about  forty  leagues  East  from  Saint

Laurence. After  a  cruell storme there five  dayes

together,  they  attained  the  Cape,  Saint  Helena,

Brasill,  the  Acores,  the  Berlings,  and  having

payed his vow to Saint James in

Galicia, he arrived at Rochell,

the  sixteenth  of  Februarie,

1611.

The  end  of  the  ninth  Booke.

END OF VOLUME IX.

HUblUN  ruouii-  lidi

3  9999  06663  983  0
